A.S. Bogomolov 


History 
of Ancient 
Philosophy 

Greece and Rome 


Progress Publishers 
Moscow 








Translated from the Russian by Vladimir Stankevich 
Designed by Yuri Samsonov 


A. C. BoroMOJioe 

HCTOPMH JJPEBHEfl <DHJIOCO<t>MM TPEUMH PMM 

Ha (1H2JIUUCK0M R3blKe 


© M3flaTejibCTB0 «riporpecc», 1985 

English translation © Progress Publishers 1985 
Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 


„ 0302010000-730.. __ 

B-- 77? -10 —oO 


014(01) —85 






CONTENTS 


Page 

Publishers’ Note. 5 

Part One. EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY . 7 


Chapter 1. FIRST PHILOSOPHICAL DOCTRINES. 7 

1. History of Philosophy: Its Subject-Matter and Method . 7 

2. Birth of Philosophy: Social Background. 12 

3. Prephilosophic Forms of Consciousness and Philosophy . . 20 

Chapter 2. IONIC PHILOSOPHY. 34 

4. General. 34 

5. The Milesian School. 38 

6. Heraclitus. 52 


Chapter 3. ITALIAN PHILOSOPHY. 64 

7. Pythagoras and Pythagoreans: Science, Religion, Philosophy 64 

8. Xenophanes of Colophon. 77 

9. The Eleatic School from Parmenides to Melissus .... 82 

Chapter 4. THE “PHYSIOLOGERS” OF THE FIFTH CENTURY 96 

10. Empedocles’s Cosmic Cycle. 96 

11. Birth of Philosophy in Athens. Anaxagoras. 103 

Chapter 5. PHILOSOPHICAL FERMENT IN THE SECOND HALF 
OF THE FIFTH CENTURY. THE SOPHISTS, SOCRATES AND 
SOCRATIC SCHOOLS.115 

12. Sophistic Philosophy.115 

13. Socrates.129 

14. Socratic Schools.136 


Part Two. CLASSICAL GREEK PHILOSOPHY 
In Lieu of Introduction. 


Chapter 1 . ANCIENT ATOMISM: FROM LEUCIPPUS TO NAU- 
SIPHANES 


1 

2 . 

3. 


Historical Tradition and Sources 
Atomistics and the 11 World-Order” 
Determinism: Necessity and Chance 
tosophy. 


in Democritus’s Phi 


147 

147 

151 

151 

153 

157 


3 


























4. Soul and the Theory of Knowledge. 160 

5. Man, Society, Ethics and Religion 162 

6. The Democriteans. . 168 

Chapter 2. PLATO. 172 

7. Life and Work. 172 

8. From Criticism of Sensuous Knowledge to the Theory of 

Ideas. 176 

9. From the Theory of Ideas to Cosmology. 184 

10. The Soul, the Ethical Ideal, the State. 189 

11. Criticism of the “Naive" Theory of Ideas and the Doctrine 

of the one. 197 

12. Plato’s School: Ancient Academy.202 

Chapter 3. ARISTOTLE.207 

13. Life and Work. 207 

14. Logic and Scientific Method.211 

15. First Philosophy. The Doctrine of First Principles and 

Causes of Being and Knowledge. 218 

16. Physics. World, Life and Man.225 

17. Society. Ethics and Politics. 234 

18. Aristotle’s School (the Peripatetics). 240 

Part Three. GRECO ROMAN PHILOSOPHY. 251 

1. Hellenism and Its Philosophy. 251 

Chapter 1. EPICURUS AND EPICUREANISM. 259 

2. Epicurus’s Canonic and Physics. 260 

3. From Physics to Ethics and “Theology". 266 

4. Roman Epicureanism. 272 

Chapter 2. STOICISM. 279 

5. History of Stoicism. 279 

6. Stoic Logic and Theory of Knowledge. 282 

7. Natural Philosophy (Physics) of Stoicism. 286 

8. Stoic Ethical Theory. 291 

9. Roman Stoicism. 295 

Chapter 3. SCEPTICISM . 305 

10. Early Pyrrhonism and “Academic” Scepticism .... 305 

11. Later Pyrrhonism. 313 

Chapter 4. DECLINE OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY. 319 

12. From Philosophical Eclecticism to Philosophico-Religious 

Syncretism. 319 

13. Judaism and Greek Philosophy. Philo of Alexandria 327 

14. Neo-Platonism: Alexandrian-Roman School. 332 

15. The Syrian and Athenian Schools of Neo-Platonism 344 



































Publishers’ Note 


This book is primarily intended for students of the humani¬ 
ties, but will also be found helpful in self-education. 

It consists of three parts, each serving the common purpose 
of providing a systematic exposition of ancient philosophers’ 
teachings. 

Part I outlines the history of the early period of Greek phi¬ 
losophy. Part II familiarises the reader with its classical peri¬ 
od, Part III gives a brief survey of the Hellenic Roman phi¬ 
losophy. 

The founders of Marxism have repeatedly pointed out the 
outstanding historical role of ancient culture in general and 
ancient philosophy in particular. “The Greeks will for ever re¬ 
main our'teachers...” 1 “Recent philosophy has only'continued 
the work begun by Heraclitus and Aristotle.” 2 Marx and En¬ 
gels continually underlined the creative'originality of ancient 
Greek philosophy whu h had been the^first to rise to the level 
of the rational world'outlook. The main fervour of its materi¬ 
alist trend was invariably directed towards explaining'nature 
from nature itself, from the^laws inherent inf matter. 

The historical importance of Greek philosophy algo derives 
from its unique contribution to the development of'dialectics. 
The first naivp form of ^materialism was simultaneously 
a spontaneous'dialectical concept of the world. 

The Greeks’ own history of philosophical ideas illustrates 
the profound revolutionary role of materialism. This history 
which has provided classical examples ofJantagonism between 
/—;- 

Karl Marx, “Notebooks on Epicurean Philosophy”, in: Karl Marx, 
trederick Engels, Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow. Vol. 1, 
1976, p. 500. 

Karl Marx, “The Leading Article in No. 179 of the Kolnische Zeitung", 
ln: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 1, p. 201. 






V 


<materialism and idealism clearly revealed the inevitability of 
the^plit of all philosophers in a class society inte» two/big 
camps. Speaking of the age-old struggle between the'/two 
philosophical lines.and/underlining a class, partisan character 
of the ideological ,A battles in Greek philosophy! Lenin asked: 
“Could the struggle between materialism and idealism, the 
struggle between the tendencies or lines of Plato and Democri¬ 
tus in philosophy ... have become antiquated during the two 
thousand years of the development of philosophy ?” 1 

Greek philosophy is a grand monument of human culture. 
Its manifold forms, wrotefEngels, “contain in embryo, in the 
nascen t state , almost all later modes of'outlook on the world .” 2 


4 - 


1 V. I. Lenin, “Materialism and Empirio-Criticism”, Collected Works, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, Vol. 14, 1977, p. 130. 

2 Frederick Engels, Dialectics of Nature, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 
1982, p. 46. 






PART ONE 


EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 

Chapter 1 

First Philosophical Doctrines 

I. History of Philosophy: Its Subject-Matter and Method 

The subject-matter of the history of philosophy is philoso¬ 
phy in its historical development. Ancient philosophy tra¬ 
versed a long and difficult path from/“physics” or a doctrine of 
nature in the specific sense of the word to a system of theore¬ 
tical 1 sciences including, alongside physics, also/logic and 
ethics. Concrete analysis- shows that the structure of philo¬ 
sophical knowledge in«individual systems turns out to be 
even more'complex. We shall therefore try to give a general 
and abstract'definition of philosophy which would make the 
idea of this science more/acourate and specific and thereby 
help’sift the material to be'studied. 

Philosophy as a product of historical development belongs 
to the sphere of human culture and is closely connected with 
its different fields. It is born of theininteraction and their in¬ 
ternal contradictions and, in turn, exerts^/a' reciprocal influ¬ 
ence upon^them. By culture we mean the/dynamic totality of 
the results of human activity aimed atmaastering the world 
and represented in different forms, fronPmaterial production 
to v art. According to materialist philosophy —and this book is 
intended to expound the'viewpoint of/nistorical and dialectical 
materialism-^'material production is the most important form ' 
of humanmctivity, whereas all other forms, including artistic, 
religious and theoretical, are^econdary and subordinate to it. 
That does not mean, of course, that theyjfnerely reflect man’s 
material, practical activity. Arising from/practice, they 
themselves become/part and parcel of objective reality and 
make a powerful impact on all aspects of/social life tending 
to hamper or stimulate its progress and thus^merging in 
a single flow of cultural/development. 

Marx distinguished between material- practical (produc- 
.tlYe) and practical-spiritual (artistic and jreligious) appro- 


priation (Aneignung) of thefworld on the one hand and its 
^theoretical comprehension, on the' other. The object of the 
theoretical comprehension of the world, of a theoretical atti 
tude to it “remains'outside the intellect and independent of 
it”, whereas it must'“always be envisaged ... as the pre-con 
dition of'comprehension.” The subject of a theoretical atti¬ 
tude to the world is essentially a cognising/individual for 
whom “the comprehended world as.such is the only*real 
world.” 1 - Philosophy emerged as the’first historical form of 
the theoretical comprehension of the world within the frame¬ 
work of which human/thinking appropriated the objective 
world andvreproduced it as “spiritually concrete” in'concept, 
in thought and in word. 

The difference between theoretical and practical attitudes 
to the world is relative. It arises in the process oftsocial deve¬ 
lopment a^d isteliminated in the same process when philoso¬ 
phy, onceicontemplative, turns into an important’spiritual tool 
for’transforming the world. “The philosophers have only in¬ 
terpreted the world in various ways; the point is tdrchange it,” 
statedAlarx in the eleventh thesi|^on J^qarb^ach . 2 Identified 
traditionally with the theoretical contemplation of the world 
and representing a world'outlook, philosophwhas always been 
potentially an instrument for the practical!transformation of 
society and'man. This is only too natural in view of its intellec¬ 
tual'function—to express man’s understanding of theAvorld, 
of his own place in'it and of ^himself. Claiming to speak on be¬ 
half of humanity, the philosopher in fact represents but the 
^ culture of his/time, hisfpeople, his'class. The world outlook 
he expounds includes of necessity not onlyfcognitive, but also 
/axiological , and thereforefideological, attitude Unreality in the 
C form offsocial, political, aesthetic and ethic4ympathies or'an- 
: tipathies. He approves or disapproves, justifies or denounces— 
■,5 but always from the position ofireason, theoretical'thought. 
The history ot philosophy is not the land of wisdom flowers — 
rather, it is.a/battleground where different trends and schools 
cross their'principles. Being a theoretical world outlook, phi¬ 
losophy does not view itstsubject-matter, i.e. man’s natural 
and social world, inVquantitative terms. Even if it is not infi¬ 
nite, it is tooflarge for thought to encompass it and account for 

- I 

' Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1977. pp. 206-207. 

2 Karl Marx. “Theses on Feuerbach”, in: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, 
Collected Works, Vol. 5, 1976, p. 5. 







/ 

all its 1 forms and qualities, philosophy, therefore, has only one 
path to follow —to try to^comprehendfchis world not in the 
diversity of its phenomena, but in the*unity of its essence, in 
‘'principle. 

For theoretical thinking, this task presents itself in the 
form of one crucial choice: to recognise the man’s world as 
the reflection of some objective reality existing outside 
and independent of man’s mind, or to identify it with the 
already existing world of ideas constructed by theoretical 
thinking itself. Put it another way, everylthinker finds him¬ 
self confronted with the great basic question of philosophy, 
that of the/relation of/thinking and being, of the^primacy of 
matter or*spirit. 

This question which assumed different forms and acquired 
ever greater significance in the history of philosophy became 
a watershed betv/een'materialism and idealism. “The answers 
which the philosophers gave to this question,” wroteiTlng^ls, 
“split them into two great»camps. Those who asserted theVpri- 
macy of spirit to*'nature ... comprised the camp of’idealism. 
The others, who regarded nature as/primary, belong to the 
various schools of/materialism.” 1 It is only the’materialist so¬ 
lution of the basic questiqn of philosophy that accords with 
the nature of theoretical ^cognition in which the subject op¬ 
poses himself/to the/world and reproduces it in a^system of 
concepts as"independent of his consciousness and of the 
process of ^cognition. 

Yet the weak spot, the heel of Achilles of materialism had 
always been, till the evolution of its highest dialectical form, 
the problem of the origin of theoretical consciousness and, for 
that matter, consciousness in general. Idealism has in fact dis¬ 
carded this problem asbion-existent. From its viewpoint, the 
world of concepts evolved b/ the'mind is the only real world 
’created by Objective Spiritqthe Absolute, God, Creator, etc.) 
i>rior to any physical’objects. 

This approach relates philosophical idealism with^religion 
and accounts for their common/epistemological roots and very, 
similar^social and ideological’functions. 

Now, positing the primacy of thought and absolute reason, 
the idealist has to account for the’origin of the material world 
and explaimwhy the reason created'nature, i.e. something low- 

i f j 

Frederick Engels, “Ludwig Feuerbach and the.End of Classical German 
■ hilosophy”. in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works in 3 vol¬ 
umes, Vol. 3, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976, p. 346. 






f 

: i 



< 

K* > 


er and less rational thai/itself. The idealist here has only one 
way open to him to'transpose the probleny onto the plane of P 
humanmelations and to plead creation as ai/act of human acti £ 
vity which/divo^eed from the universal chain of causal/relat- v. 
ions, starts withfthought and leads to anmction and its*result.' P - 
^■The essence of idealism is thus'an thropo morphism. ascription 
of human characteristics to all that^exists. 

The history of philosophy pivots on the struggle between L 
materialism and idealism which is waged not only between, 
but also within the antagonistic/trends. This uncompromising , 
struggle, however, is a highlyrcreative process which consti- 5 
tutes the' motive force/ofrprogress in philosophy and accounts % 
for the specificity of diistorico-philosophical research and'ex- 
position. 

The study of the history of philosophy calls for a harmoni- 
ous combination of historical inquiry intended to reproduce,'^ 
wherever possible, the real development of thought in all ‘ 
its richness and multiformity, with logical investigation aimed 
at disclosing its laws. The former is'necessary in order not to 
schematise history by presenting ''consecutive philosophical t ' 
systems as imperfect embodiments of a'single absolutely true ^ 
system, allegedly their'common ideal, and the latter raerives ^ 
from the very nature of historico-philosophicaninvestigation. 
Indeed, whereas reducing the historico-philosophical proc- 
ess to logic would/deprive philosophical thought of its spe j * 
cific historically conditioned'inquiries, conflicts, error# antFHi* 
findings which alone make itKipkjue and constitute the'exter- 
nal chance prerequisites for the'internal necessity of law, fai¬ 
lure to view the process in the light of a'single philosophical . 
doctrine would reduce it to a heap oh irrelevant conception^ £ 
and y theories. In point of fact, .the history of philosophy is the 
only philosophical disciplinefstudying all philosophical prob-v 
lems that have ever been raised and it cannot undertake the i 
examination of^hese problems on a purely'empirical basis wi- 3 
'thouta certaiiUguiding principle derived from the very history^; 
of philosophyntself. ~ 

There is yet another aspect to the historicity of philosophy ^ 
as a form of intellectual culture and an expression of man’s “ 
theoretical mastery of the world: the very subject of philoso- 3 
phy, men and society, also undergoes constant change. Marx-^ 
ist historians usually defineifive basic stages of the develop- ^ 
ment of society,^called socio-economic formations: primi tive 
communal , slav e, feudal, capitalis t and communist. EacTf for- ^ 


10 







mation develops its ownAvorld view which reflects, in the final 
analysis, the social being and the social consciousness of the 
epoch. The world view/df primitive communal society was 
mainly represented bv*mythology;*philosophy comes into be- 
'ing in slave-owningVsociety. 

The methodology of historico-philosophical research tak¬ 
ing account of the development of philosophy and intellectu¬ 
al culture at large derives from a twofold dependence of phi 
losophy on society, namely, on the level of social development 
which makes philosophy, according to Hegel, an epoch con¬ 
ceived in thought, and on the level of this epoch’s self-con¬ 
sciousness, i.e. on its knowledge of the world and of itself. This 
twofold determination of philosophy calls for a simultaneous 
analysis of its 1 social (class) and epistemological roots. 

The methodology of the history of philosophy based on ma¬ 
terialist dialectics demands that philosophy as the ultimate 
expression of intellectual culture and its theoretical nucleus 
should be treated, first, as a product of society’s entire cul¬ 
tural development, secon d, as a unity of internal contradic¬ 
tions (opposite views) which constitute the motive force of 
its development and,J,hjrd, as a creative process of qualitati¬ 
ve changes including^negation, the negation of negation, and 
breaks in continuity during transition from one system of 
views to ajnother. In terms <>/ methodology this approach calls, 
first , forrhistoricity, i.e. theunvestigation of each philosophical 
system in connection with the concrete conditions of its 
emergence and existence as a unique phenomenon constitut 
ing at the same time aflink in the general chain of’cause-effect 
relations and, second, for partisanship/Which demands of 
a historian of philosophy to occupy afclear-cut social and 
philosophical position in assessing every phenomenon under 
investigation in the light of struggle betweennnaterialism and 
’ idealism. 

The history of philosophy in Ancient Greece and Rome 
which is outlined in this book covers the period from the late 
part of the" / seyenth century B.C. till the beginning (the first 
third) of the^sixth/Century A.D. Proceeding from the histori- 
caPdivision of the<slave formation which is the socLO-econom- 
icfoundation of ancient philosophy we distinguish'three main 
periods in its development: early Greek philosophy ' (the 
seventh-fifth centuries B.CL), classical Greek philosophy 
(the'fourth century) and'Greco-Roman philosophy. This 
pattern somewhandeparts from the generally adopted classifi- 



11 







cation in which the philosophyx>f'antiquity is treated under 
the headings i l 'Pre-Socratics”,(“Plato and Aristotle”,/“Post- 
Aristotelian philosophy” and ^“Hellenic philosophy”. In 
contrast with the traditional view, we are inclined to think 
that Socrates cannot be regarded'as marking thefend of the in¬ 
fancy and the beginning of the»maturity of philosophy in An¬ 
cient Greece, as his thought fell within the framework of the 
>'early period and was but a'stepping stone to thiS*maturity. On 
the other hand, it was (none other than Democritus, commonly 
ranked among the'pre/Socratics, who created a complete and 
consistent doctrine onatomistic materialism, a classical system 
which can well compare, in terms of'maturity, with the sys¬ 
tems of Plato and Aristotle. Chronologically, too, the lifetime 
of Socrates falls within theffifth century, whereas Democri¬ 
tus’s activity extends wellrbeyond it. Finally, the very term 
pre-Socratics coined in the ^nineteenth century suggests 
something transitory, auxiliary and'insignificant, thus induc¬ 
ing various authors merely tcFskim through this theoretically 
important period in their handbooks off philosophy. 

It should also be noted that the Greco-Roman period, 
the longest in the history of ancient philosophy, is also not 
infrequently underestimated and treated as the “decline” of 
ancient thought. By contrast,'Marx wrote in his theses for 
ad)octor’s degree: “It seems to me that though the,earlier sys¬ 
tems are more significant and interesting for thencontent, the 
post-Aristotelean ones, and primarily the cycle of the Epicu 
rean, Stoic an<F Sceptic schools, are more’significant and inter¬ 
esting for the y subjective forqa, the character of Greek'philoso 
phy. But it is precisely the^subjective form, the spiritual car¬ 
rier of the phiLosophicaWsystems, which has until now been al¬ 
most entirely'ignored (in favour of theirfmetaphysical charac¬ 
teristics.” 1 

2. Birth of Philosophy: Social Background 

The first steps of philosophy in Ancient Greece pose a num¬ 
ber of complex scientific problems controversial till nowa¬ 
days. Their complexity is (traceable to three main reasons. 
Fi,rst fc it appears impossible to establish the^exact time of phi¬ 
losophy’s birth, though its emergence brought about a radical 


1 Karl Marx, “Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Phi 
losophy of Nature", in: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Collected Works, 
Vol. t.‘ d. 36. 








'change in the history of^thought and was a real spirituaBrevo- 
lution. The early, philosophical teachings are not easy to di¬ 
stinguish from /non-philosophical products of human intel¬ 
lect— mythological, religious, artistic, scientific—containing 
world-outlook'elements. In view of their obvious continuity 
the researchers are often inclined tordeny any lines of demar¬ 
cation between tfiem. Second, the matter is complicated by the 
almost completeness of early philosophers’'works. The surviv¬ 
ing fragments torn out of the original logical context give 
grounds formndless controversies regarding their/interpreta- 
tion and assessment asVphilosophical or otherwise. JOuidj. the 
It- different stands taken by historians of''philosophy are partly 
accountable for/ by their different understanding of the'sub 
jrct-matter of'philosophy. 

The first world-view systems which may be termed philo- 
sophical emerged almost simultaneously in three centres — 
Ancient Greece in the late seventh-early sixth centuries 
JC B C., India in the sixth century B.C., and China in the sixth 
tf fifth centuries B.C.' Thi» chronological coincidence, nota- 
hie as it is, recedes to afsecondary plan as compared to the 
A* c “social s imultaneity ” of the inception of philosophy. Both 
^~Yhe West ancTThe East were passing at that time from early 
jji slave-owning/society, distinguished by/the presence of strong 
social and economic survivals of t fie/old gentile organisation 
and permeatejd through with itsi ideology, to a developed 
slave-owningtsoeiety. It was a^transition from the patriar 
chal system of slavery providing the<slave-owners with the 
means pf bare subsistence to a system^based on the produc¬ 
tion of'surplus value. The entire social structure was under¬ 
going radical 'transformation: cities were rapidly turning 
into centres of'economic and political''activity, trade was 
'flourishing and the 1 metal money born of its needs exer¬ 
cised a powerful influence towards its further^expansion, 
the/private/property in land and mortgage bonds were all 
becoming (characteristic features of ancient society. All 
these changes made for the spread ofslavery and heightened 
the struggle between/landed aristocracy and'warlords on the 
'one hand, and the free population of/cities, on the'other. 


/ 


The prominent Indian scientist, S. Radhakrishnan, dates the birth and 
early development of Indian philosophy to the/period of 600 B.C -200 A.D. 

he com/nonly recognised founder of Chinese philosophy/Confucius, lived 
between!551 and 479 B.C. (See S. Radhakrishnan, Indian Philosophy, Vol. V, 
George Alien & Unwin Ltd., London, 1948, p. 57.) 


13 




The fundamental ^contradiction underlying all social de¬ 
velopments, however, was the'class antagonism between the 
" slave-owners and the^slaves. 

Such was the background for the emergence of philosophy, 
a long and complex procjess extending over the'sixth-fifth 
centuries B.C. in Greece,fsixth-third centuries B.C. in India 
and China (incidentally, source's attest to very similar social 
and ideological conditions in^Mexico just on the eve of the 
Spanish conquest). All these facts testify/against current con¬ 
cepts of a strong influence allegedly exerted by Ancient 
Greece on India or even China or, on the ^contrary, of 
these countries’ influence on Greece. Such concepts based 
on obvious similarities between the so-called Western and 
Eastern teachings have long been circulated in historico- 
philosophical literature by the champions of the t so- 
called Eurocentric or Asiacentric origin of 'philosophy. The 
truth is that real contacts between Greece and India started 
in the much later'Hellenic period as is attested to by the 
Buddhist Milinda Panha (Milinda’s Questions), a philo¬ 
sophical monument describing a talk between preacher 
Nagasena and Greek king Menander (Milinda) ruling over 
'one of the regions of North-West Italy between approxi¬ 
mately 125-95 B.C. 

Controversy over the impact of Middle Eastern teachings 
on early Greek philosophy has flourished for many centu¬ 
ries. In the Hellenic period, it was commonly believed that 
the Greeks had borrowed their philosophy either from the 
Egyptians or from the Hebrews. This view was traceable to 
the Alexandrian scientists who had carried out a^comparative 
study of Greek and Egyptian cultures, as well,as of the cor¬ 
responding interpretation of ancient Egyptian^myths and the 
Hebrew Old Testament. Numenius (the second century A.D.), 
HoPoneTcontenied tTTat Pythagoras and Plato had extensively 
''borrowed from the brahmins, magi, Egyptians and Hebrews, 
and calledtpiato a “Moses speaking Attic”. Similar concepts, 
though somewhatftoned down, are also current in our^days. 
Special ejnphasis^is^being placed on Persian/mythology (the 
“gift of tn&'tta^f*)' ^as, fop'instance, by British philologist 
and historian of pKilosophy'M. West who has devoted a special 
work to this problem. 1 However, the factual*material at his 
disposal intended to'prove “active Iranian influence” is very 

v' 1 See M. L. West, Early Greek Philosophy and the Orient, Clarendon 
Press, Oxford, 1971. 




/scanty and his arguments .in fact do not amount to anything 
more than statements of' probability. 

Historians of philosophy coming out in defence of the 
originality of Greek thought have already adduced language 
difficulties: it is hard to imagine any exchange of opinions 
on complex world view problems through an interpreter, and 
there is no evidence to prove that any Greek philosopher 
in the pre-Hellenic period knew languages spoken in the Mid 
die East, or that Middle-Eastern priests knew Greek. The 
mere fact that the Greeksmorrowed some of their/mathemati¬ 
cal, astronomical and other concepts from the' Middle East 
cannot be regarded as /proof of the oriental origin of 
their'philosophy. 

The argument from the language, significant as it is, 
should be viewed, however, as secondary to a far more 
important consideration of general conceptual character. Like 
any other philosophy, Greek philosophy is essentially different 
from’mythology, no matter what the/traces of oriental influ¬ 
ence. Mythological reminiscences are included here/in a new 
context which is so unique that they completely Hose their 
original meaning and become integrated in an entirely diffe- 
rentftrain of thought. Our task is torexplain this phenomenon 
proceeding from the Greeks’ own/intellectual history. We 
are by no means trying to' belittle the importance of 
Eastern culture -such accusations are often levelled aga 
inst the/defenders of the originality of Greek philoso 
phy, sometimes not/without good reason. Yet it is our firm 
conviction that the emergence and development of ideologies 
cannot be understood in terms of /‘borrowing”, as ideology 
is rooted in the l material and spiritual life of thp" people 
which/developed it, whatever the interaction of''cultures. 

Ancient philosophy is the philosophy of slave-owning 
society. The pivotal contradiction of this society is one 
between/domination and slavery, the/slave-owner and the 
’ slave. It is an expression of man’s /alienation, since slave 
is reduced to, a/thing. According to/Marx, one part of this 
society, the 4lave-owners, treats the other part as a'means 
of production and of its/own-reproduction. The slave is in no 
5 *ay related to the objective conditions of diis labour being 
''ranked with other natural forces, such asGivestock. 1 

1 K. Marx, Grundrisse der Krilik der politischen Okonomie (Rohenl 
u>urff) t 1857-1858, Verlag fur fremdsprachige Literatur, Moskau, 1939, 


15 






Significantly, the degree to which slave labour accounts 
for social production or the share of slaves in the total 
number of the population does not play a decisive role in 
determining the^jijake-un of slave-owning society. The slave- 
master relation pertrfeates through the entire life of socie¬ 
ty and cannot but tell on the relations between its< free 
members. In principle, any of them cantiose his personality 
and turn into a slave a '“thing”,/“body”, /“speaking tool”: 
he can be taken ^prisoner, go'bankrupt and find himself in 
^nondage, fallen ^poverty and become a defenceless, though 
“free”, hiredilabourer who can be easily turned into a^slave 
by any influential member of thelcommunity. Even the immor¬ 
tal gods are/not ''immune from such a fate. Recall, for in¬ 
stance, how f Neptune repainds Apollo of the time when on 
Zeus’s orders they both (served the Troyan king Laomedon: 

“...the ruffian king refused 
The promised wages, and dismissed us both 
With menaces; to bind thee hand and foot 
He threatened, and to sell thee as a slave 
In distant isles, and to cut off the ears 
Of both of us...” 

(The Iliad of Homer, Houghton, Mifflin 
and Company, Boston, 1870, pp. 250, 251) 

That means that man has no inalienable rights or any 
special non-natural properties: he is an integral part of 
nature. Conversely, nature proves'animate and even humane. 
Much water had flown under the bridges before^man under 
stood his principalrdistinction from the rest of'nature. This 
new viewpoint found its expression, on the one hand, in the 
'('separation of soul from/body, the latter being understood 
as the former’s 'prison, and on the other hand,/in the anti¬ 
thesis of nature and law (prescription, art) as<representing 
different modes of Existence of nature, society and''man. 

The seventh fifth centuries B.C. were marked by a rad 
ical change in the life of society. The development of pro 
ductive forces/opened up a possibility for a transition to 
a new type of^slave labour —from household slavery intended 
to serve directly the needs of the .slave-owner’s family, to 
slave ^labour as a means of profit) extraction. This brought 
about an essential shift in social'relations and, even to a 
greater extent, in''ideology. Early slave-owning society is 
still characterised by numerous' remnants of the primitive 


16 





u /»* f ‘V, ^ ■ - 

^ ' 1 / . * fT. *f. 

Vv- Vt-'-Vl-^'V *-' W ' 


/ O-'lAJb 


A- iU^J- &■ t^y^C iX^ 

'.'+t A C^tO,/^# 





V 


r 


> 


communal system. Aristotle’s Politica testifies to the fact 
that in thefseventh century B.C. the 1 agricultural commune 
was still the basic structural unit in'"Attica. However, it 
was rapidly deteriorating owing to the/growing concentration 
of land in the hands of the gentile'aristocracy — the euga- 
trids. Their lands were cultivated by poor/sharecroppers, 
whose renj, evidently amounted to dive sixths of the crop 
and whofautomatically turned into'slaves if they failed to 
payfit. The debtor or his/family members could also/fall 
into bondage or befsold into slavery if they failed tofrepay 
a loan. Between the eupatrids on the one hand and the depend¬ 
ent sharecroppers and slaves, on the other, ranked'small 
peasants (geomores) and (handicraftsmen (demiurges) who 
were gradually losing their/connection with land. A special 
place in society^.-was occupied by4iewcpmerS or aliens (me- 
teks) who werefpersonally free, but did’not enjoy any political 
frights. Thejr property rights weretcuTtailed too: for instance, 
they cou Idmeither have any land in'Attica nor buy amouse in 
( Athens. 

The transformation of social relations, as attested by 
Aristotle, was characterised by several tendencies. The first 
tendency consisted.in the growingfstratification of the “free” 
population which ^undermined the traditional communal sys¬ 
tem and led to thelaggravatioif of contradictions between the 
’ classes emerging within thisfsystem. The class strugglp un¬ 
thinkable in the old gentile organisation now slowedmown, 
now ^accelerated this procesy of ^stratification. As a result 
of general unrest and popularmprising, Solon who was elected 
archon (chief magistrate) of Athens in 594 B.C. carried out 
an importantjreform. According to Aristotle, SolonHreed the 
people and ^prohibited .personal bondage as/security for a 
loan. Then he issued/laws and cancelled all^debts (Arist. 
Athen Polit. IV. 6, 1). The,Athenians who hpd fallen into 
slavery through debts were4ansomed by the^state. 

These measures, however, could not prevent the growth 
of contradictions within the “free” Athenian society, stim¬ 
ulating at the same time what was the second tendency — the 
development offslavery. In contrast with patriarchal slavery 
which satisfied 1 internal (household needs 1 and enabled the 


4 



1 Domestic slave labour included the/hardest chores: corn threshing and 
grindings oil squeezing, attending to livestock, making dairy products, 
cooking/procurement of firewood and water, spinning and weaving, care of 
children, etc. 


2 I l.'ilt 


17 








master to applymimself to more honourable and^hnportant ag¬ 
ricultural jobs calling for greater personal' interest, de¬ 
veloped slavery expanded the sphere of application of^slave 
labour. The number of slaves in handicrafts, mining industry, 
construction, and later in agriculture was steadily growing. 
Free wealthy citizens no longep'forced to take part in prod¬ 
uction processes turned to /politics, trade, art, .science, 
ideology, and this could not butdower the prestigy ofrphysi- 
cal labour. On the other hand, the importance ofdntellectual 
qualities was constantly rising in popular esteem and'know- 
ledge was beginning to y -play an ever increasing role in'social 
production and socialfrelations. 

The third tendency consisted in the change of the slaves’ 
social position. The slave had, started bringing profit 
and was therefore turning into aunaterial value which was to 
be used to’ ad vantage^/ As a result, the slaves’ living condi¬ 
tions were somewhat' improved, particularly in Attica. This 
improvement, however, did not extend to all' slaves, since 
those working in/mines and quarries had to suffer far greater 
hardships than other/categories. In Athens cruel treatment of 
slaves was condemned and the.murder of a slave was pun¬ 
ishable bylaw. It became current practice to free slaves for a 
ransom, or make their emancipation conditional on the fulfil¬ 
ment of certain onerous duties. All this brought about a cer¬ 
tain change in the attitude of society to the slaves who had be 
corhe the main source of their masters’twelfare and, which was 
even more important, raised their own/self -appraisal/ His¬ 
torical sources are full of complaints about the slaves’/“arro- 
gance” which was the result of their increasing independence 
from their ^masters. 

The transition to developed slavery led to important 
changes in the life of society and, first and foremost, 
emancipated the individual to a degree unthinkable under 
the early slave-owning system. These changes were particu¬ 
larly manifest in'colonies. Colonisation was carried out by 
^the most active_^elejgnenis of Gregk polises . often by those 
'who wefe rdTssatisfied with the conservative order in the 
/metropoly. Greek colony-cities, particularly those in Asia 
Minor (Ephesus, Miletus, Clazomenae, Colophon And others) 
were notable for the rapid development of variousjhandicrafts, 
seafaring and trade which, in turn, stimulated/shipbuilding 
and metallurgy.. As regards the colonies in Greece itself 
and in Italy, the main branch of their economy was'agricul- 


18 







ture, its produce being intended foi/export. The-development 
of handicrafts and trade calling for greater/specialisation 
and division of labour contributed to the establishment of 
closer relations with neighbouring'peoples, expanded the 
ancient GreeksVgeographic and social horizons andfloosened 
the set stereotypes of culture, behaviour, social relations 
and'thinking. The constitutions of new colonies no longer 
followed the old pattern —tradition gave way to conscious 
approach. Old standards were replaced by new ones in the 
process of sharp struggle causing/conflicts in all spheres of 
social' life. 

All these transformations dealt a death blow to the already 
outdated illusions of the “naturalness” of traditional society 
based on the gentile organisation. Greek civilisation was the 
product of glaring i contradictions. It “has accomplished 
things with which the old gentile society was totally 
unable to cops'. But it accomplished them by playing on the 
most sordid /instincts and passions of mars, and by de¬ 
veloping them at the expense of all his otherfaculties. Naked 
/greed has been the moving spirit of ^civilisation from the 
/first day of its existence to the present ^tfme; wealth, more 
wealth and wealth again; wealth, not off society, but of this 
shabby individual was its sole and determining’aim.” 1 The 
development of Greek civilisation was bound to be promp¬ 
tly reflected in social /consciousness, representing the views 
of different strata of Greek 1 society. Ancient literature abo¬ 
unds in^reflections on changing times and morals, onVcala- 
mities and vicissitudes of'fate, wealth and poverty, domina¬ 
tion and slavery, war and political/events. 

Economic, political, social and legal changes call for 
ideological interpretation —justification or criticism, le- 
gitimisation or condemnation. The struggle of theseropposite 
^tendencies representing the interests of different social 
•strata and classes constitutes the' background of the -de¬ 
velopment of philosophy as rational comprehension of themew 
, world, dynamic and internally/contradictory. Hence the non¬ 
uniformity and contradictoriness of philosophical thinking 
/tself. The ambivalence of philosophy symbolised by the 
•images of “weeping” Heraclitus and “laughing” Democritus 


Frederick Engels. “The Origin of the Family, Private Property 
an ° the State", in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works in 
three volumes. Vol. 3, pp. 332-333. 



19 





represents the scientist’s primary desire/‘to hear both sides”, 
evolve a comprehensive logical theory and provide a rational 
substantiation for aWlefinite stand in matters both ^earthly 
and heavenly. 

Social development provides the necessary conditions 
for the emergence of a new, rational ideology in general and 
philosophy in particular, setting the task of the legitima 
tion of social relations, their materialisation and consoli¬ 
dation in the shape of various social and state institutions. 
Unlike early slave-owning society which sanctified such insti¬ 
tutions mainly by tracing ^the /genealogy of aristocratic 
“noble” families directly to/gods and/heroes, the developed 
system of slavery legitimised them r ideologically: first, by 
alleging their “natural’’/origin, then by deducing them from 
'“law” and “custom”. 

The substance of emerging philosophy was largely de¬ 
termined by the existing thought material. This prehistoric 
substance was not only assimilated and preserved, but also 
given a new, different'interpretation. 

3. Prephilosophic Forms of Consciousness and 
Philosophy 

Historical science maintains that mythology was the orig¬ 
inal form of social consciousness, the ideology/of gentile 
and early slave-owning society. The birth of/science and 
philosophy understood as a single, integral form of the theo¬ 
retical comprehension of the world is usually expressed by the 
formulaT“from myth to Logos.” 1 Important and valuable as > 
it is, this formula, however, suggests a certain “lipearity”^' 
of the process under consideration concealing th ^dialectics 
of early philosophicabdevelopment. In other words,, it leaves 
in the shade the contradictory tendencies, the •''“struggle * 
of the opposites” in the comprehension of the •'universe. 
Though the consciousness of mature slave-owning society was 
indeed developing frojn myth to Logos, i.e. to/theoretical 
thinking (reason), we'propose a different formula for this pro¬ 
cess. According to this, formula, philosophy comes into being 
as a resolution of the^contradiction between myth on the one 
hand, and the initial empirical knowledge of mature and socie¬ 
ty, scientific knowledge in its'first historical form, on the other 
hand. 


1 See W. Nestle, Vom Mythos zum Logos. Die Selbstentfaltung des 
griechischen Denkens , 2. Aiiflage, Stuttgart, 1975. 


20 



During the inception of philosophy and in its early period, 
social consciousness was dominated by myth. Being the pro¬ 
duct of the primitive communal organisation with its/sponta- 
neons, unconscious collectivism, ^myth extended the “natu¬ 
ral” relations of the gentile community and tended to treat 
society as a specific consanguine family of fantastidcreatures, 
each havingdefinite cosmic, social ajid productive functions to 
/perform. Reality as represented in'myth is taken by man for 
granted, without any/criticism, no, matter how' improbable 
it may be. Myth is, for him, the reanworld, perhaps even more 
real than the physical/reality he deals with in everyday life. 
Yet at the same time it is an^lienated world estranged from 
’V reality, ft is simultaneously something tangible, sensually 
given-And magic, miraculo^ J^nt^stjc ; It is both indivi¬ 
dually concrete and abstract, sensufiuslv authentic, real and 
tran scendenta l. The main function of/myth is to regulate 
social life; it is lifeiitself, with all its social, productive, ideolo- 
t gical and even physiologicabaspects. 1 In other words, mytho- 
4-' logy is a form of practical-spiritual/assimilation of the world 
which/“subdues, controls and fashions the forces of nature 
the 1 imagination and through imagination; it^disap- 


.v 


in 


pears therefore when real control over these forces is/esta¬ 
blished.” 2 


Even now, in the epoch of breath-taking achievements of 
science and technology, we cannot speak of man’s real control 
over the elements. It is not surprising, therefore, that/my- 
y thology never completely lost its grip on thef ancient mind —in 
\ point of fact, it continues to/exist in our days, though in 
"5 different forms. It develops, changes and passes into other 
forms of social consciousness. This process which was 
S particularly manifest in Ancient Greece started from 
V- J'Pos — heroic in Homer, didactic in Hesiod’s Work and 
$ Days and Theogony , and also in fragments of otfier authors 
t dealing with the genealogy of the’gods. The general traits of 
^•Greek mythology are well/known. The universe, i.e. the earth, 
Jthe heaven and the sea, is controlled by the Olympian gods 
under the direct oversight oRZeus. It is the third generation of 
vjgods descending, according to Homer, from Oceanos and his 
, wife Tethys or, according to Hesiod, from Chaos. Ocean is the 

1 It is only this complete fusion of different aspects and components of 
mythological consciousness that accounts for the so-called magic influence 
of various rites on primitive man, e.g. for the^ Lethal effect of some taboos 
^ described in numerous ethnographicMvorks. 

Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, p. 216. 

21 




personified cause, “father of the gods.” Chaos is the non-per- 
sonified cause; it is a yawning abyss between^heaven and 
earth. Unlike Homer who does not give an orderly picture 
of the theogonic process, Hesiod presents it in a systematic 
■ form. The first to emerge was Chaos, then came (but not from 
Chaos) Gaia (Earth), dreary Tartaros (the underground 
kingdom) and Eros (Love), “the fairest of the gods.” After 
that Gaia and her son and simultaneously husband Uranus 
(Heaven) begot the Titans with Cronus at the head. Having 
overthrown Uranus, Cronus and his wife Rheia begot the 
Olympian gods. Zeus, one of them, overthrew Cronus and 
became their chief. Alongside theranthropomorphic gods, the 
' theogonic process produces monsters—the hundred-handed 
Hecatonhaires, Typhoes and Echidna, Gorgons, Sirens, Scylla 
and Charybdis, etp., as well as various deities directly 
embodying certain , l)iological and social functions. Such are, 
for instance, Thanatos (natural death), Moros (violent 
death), Hypnos (sleep), goddesses of fate/Ker and Moirai, 
goddess of vengeance Nemesis personifyingTetributive justice, 
and others. Liaisons between gods and goddesses on the one 
hand and thevmortals on the other produced the^ heroes. 

In the Works and Days, Hesiod describes human society 
as passing, through four epochs: golden, silver, copper, and 
iron. The first generation of people living in each epoch is 
created by ( god (Cronus in the golden epoch, Zeus in the 
others), whereas the last generation is “covered with earth,” 
i.e.‘perishes. The causes of thenlestruction of the people who 
lived in the golden epoch are noUknown. The silver epoch 
came to an end because people did not worship theVgods, nor 
did theyr ‘sacrifice on the sacred altars of the blessed ones,” 
whereas the people of the copper epoch perished in the 
inte^tine'war. As regards the present iron epoch, it is the time 
ofi'anxiety and discord, envy and (violence... 

The characteristic features of this mythology immediately 
preceding the emergence of (philosophy can be summed up 
as follows. 

First, it is an orderly semantic system providing a specific 
framework for the accumulation and storage of practical 
experience in the sphere oftproduction and social life, as well 
as foiYcausal explanations of all natural and social phenomena 


1 The Iliad of Homer .Translated by William Cullen Bryant, Houghton, ‘ 
Mifflin and Company, Boston, 1870, Vol. II, p. 46, Book IV, pp. 242-243. 


22 





attributed to the^activity of fantastic omnipptentZcreatures. 
Relying on their assistance which can be/secured by the 
corresponding rituals, invocations and prayers, man hopes to 
achieve his aims in all hisiundertakings. For instance, the 
success in a/military expedition depends on the help from 
Ares, in/farming—from Demeter, etc. 

Secon d, this mythology is presented in the epic form and 
is a literary production, a work of art. Hence the figurativeness 
which causes the reader—and not only the contemporary 
one —to identify, for instance, young radiant “pink-finger 
i. ed” goddess Eos with morning dawn.. Significantly, the 
relations between the gods are treated in'/mythology so much 
like the most/ordinary, even trivial relations between/the 
mortals that the ancients sometimes felt it necessary to’sub¬ 
limate their myths, i.e. to give a special refined/interpcetation 
<1 of certain scenes thaj are incompatible with the godsYdignity. 
Sufficf .1 to recall, for instance, the pages in the Odyssey de¬ 
voted to poet Demodokos’s story and the subsequent scandal 
on Olympus: 

“...Demodokos struck the lyre and began singing well 
the story about the love of Ares and sweet garlanded Aphro¬ 
dite, how they first lay together in the house of Hephaistos 
secretly, he gave her much and fouled the marriage and bed 
of the lord Hephaistos; to him there came as messenger Helios, 
the sun, who had seen them lying in love together.” 1 

Third, the formal orderliness of later mythology that 
reached a high degree of perfection in epos and theogonies, 
testifies to the fact that the days of the primordial myth 
with its universal “determinism” (anything may come from 
anything) were over. With the increasing regimentation of 
the Olympus and ever stricter regulation of the gods’ funct¬ 
ions and mutual relations the spontaneoustpluralism of early 
mythology gives way to a relativelyVmonistic hierarchy of 
'divinities. Pallas Athena, for instance, who was formerly 
assigned any^functions, becomes the goddess of war, the arts, 
Hie industries of peace and well organised patriarchal 
. ’community. She is noAonger an owl or^i serpent, both now 
becoming her attributes. Zeus, too, is nouonger a mere thund¬ 
erbolt with lightning. He is a guardian of the heroic legal 
order, the thunderbolt and lightning being his^symbols, 
kpic poems contain a wealth of material pertaining to prod 

The Odyssey oj Homer. Translated by Richmond Lattimore, Harper & 
Row. New York, Evanston, and London, 1967. p. 128. 


23 







rm 5 


'Tr O-'V- ; " 




uction, war, trade, piracy and ever increasing knowledge of 
physiology, medicine, geography, history and other disci¬ 
plines. Homer’s poems, for one, mention onlytonce the magic 
formulae used to stop/bleeding in all other gases they give 
quite rational recommendations for wound/treatment. The 
description of Troias’ topography by Homer which called for 
considerable<skill enabled Heinrich Schliemann to find the 
palace where the city had been/situated. The plough making 
/technology described in the Works and Days could have been 
found quite up toAiate even in/the nineteenth century A.D. 
Examples of this kind can be'continued. 

One cannot help noting, however, that the empirical 
material, technological processes and production techniques 
described in Hesiod’s poem seem to be in perfect agreement 
with magic practices and prayers; their natural, matter- 
of fact merger 1 creates the impression of a very/unstable 
5 equilibrium which is bound toecollapse. Indeed* the eighth- 

sixth centuries B.C. witness the process of myth^isintegration 
as attested to by numerous literary sources. The authors 
of written fiction that/briginated in that period treat myth¬ 
ological material as idiots unfolding them with the help of 
special methods —allegory, metaphor, typisation. The broad 
use of allegory, for instance, permits presenting a myth as 
a figurative story, The events described being symbolic and 
having, in fact, a^different meaning. Allegory was born as a 
i peculiar method of literary criticism aimed atraefending one 

or another poet against various charges. Tradition ascribes 
its invention to Theagenes of Rhegium (the early sixth cen¬ 
tury B.C.). Seeking to justify Homer accused of using obscene 
\ language in relation to gods and heroes, Theagenes pre- 

/ 

1 Hesiod says: 

“Make your prayers to Zeus of the ground 
and holy Demeter 

that the sacred yield of Demeter may grow complete, 
and be heavy. 

Do this when you begin your first planting, when, 
gripping the handle 

in one hand, you come down hard with the goad 

on the backs of your oxen 

as they lean into the pin of the straps. 

Have a small boy helping you 

by following and making hard work for the birds 

with a mattock covering the seed over...’’ 

(Hesiod, The^Works and Days, 465-471,/The University of Michigan 
Press, 1959, pp. 73 75.) 


24 








sents^ Homer’s gods as the embodiment of opposite elements 
or mental qualities. In his.opinion, by Apollo, Helios and 
Hephaestus Homer mearvHfire, by Poseidon and Scamader — 
water, by Artemis — the'moon, by Hera—'air, etc. Similarly, he 
sometimes gave the names of gods to Omental qualities — 
the name of Athena to reason, of Ares to recklessness, of 
Aphrodite to passion, of Hermes to speech (DK 8 A 2). 

What was with Theagenes a method of investigation and 
defence of Homer’s works turns in historical and philosophical 
literature into the rationalistic interpretation of /'myths as 
stories of real historical events (for instance, the mythical 
king Geryon, whose cows were allegedly stolen by Heracles, 
was regarded by later commentators as the Ambrakian king 
who had been conquered by Heracles with the help of the 
Aegean army). This process of myth “rationalisation” termi¬ 
nated in euhemerism — the theory held by Euhemerus (the 
fourth-centurv-B.C.) according to which the gods of mytholo¬ 
gy were but/deified political leaders apd the mythological 
stories were distorted descriptions of /real events that had 
occurred in their lifetime. 

Though this interpretation stripped the myths of all their 
poetic charm and replaced the original verve by quite prosaic 
and largely arbitrary stories, the new trend testified to the 
/break-up of the old world outlook and helped clear the way for 
a new system of’views. 

Symbolic interpretation of myth opened up yet another 
path to philosophy. Symbol is more than a simple allegory 
that substitutes an abstract notion for a mythological name or 
event, e.g. recklessness for/Ares, and far more than rationa¬ 
lisation whereby a myth isfreduced to the so-called real event. 
Symbol in art and religion is a unity of image and meaning, 
but it is unity that has a*^iew reference. In religion it denotes 
things preternatural and represents extralimital.^transcen-v 
* .dent” reality. In Ancient Greece where the complete merger 
of mythology and religion was only characteristic of a few 
„ esoteric cults, religious communities and local mysteries, 
an important role belonged to a trend called^orphism after 
• the legendary poet and musiciant'Orpheus. This trend dating 
•’ presumably from the/seventh to sixth centuries B.C., but 
v known from later sources, was notable for broad symbolic 
interpretation offmyth. For instance, in orphic tradition Zeus 
js identified with life (zoe ), Kronos with Chronos (time), Pan 
is understood as the symbol of everything (to pan), and 


IN* 

£ 

VN. 


25 









Demeter, as the “mother of earth” (ge meter-Demeter) This 
is not the a llegoris ation mentioned above. Zeus is not a meta¬ 
phorical name for life, but life itself, a symbol of the unity 
of living process and its divine principle—the beginning, 
the end and the middle of all that'exists. “One Zeus only, 
one Helios, one Dionisus,mne god in everything. How should 
we call each one separately?” asks an orphic (OF, fr. 239b). 
This is no longer a simple claim to interpret the divine 
name, but a fundamental transformation of the entire mytho¬ 
logical heritage based on the r faith in the suprase-nsuous 
world and, consequently, on the contrast Jmtween the'teliever 
and the object of his'Taith, absolutely^alien to mythology. 

Various orphic theogonies and cosmogonies are mainly 
traceable tp Hesiod, but also include other elements that 
may haveroriginated in the Middle East. Here is one of the 
variants of such a theocosmogony known from Athenagoras: 
The beginning of the Whole was Water; from Water came 
Mud, and from both came a Serpent, Heracles or Time (ac¬ 
cording to another version of the same theogony, Water and 
Earth produced a Serpent having the heads of a bull and a lion 
with the face of a god in between; it had wings and was called 
Ageless Time or Unchanging Heracles). This Heracles pro¬ 
duced a huge Egg, which, overfilled with the strength of the 
one who produced it, split into two because of friction. Its 


upper part became' r Ouranos (Heaven), and the lower /part, 
Vfcle (Earth). Simultaneously he produced a god without/body. 
Heaven united with Earth and produced the female)'Fates and 
male Giants and Cyclopes. Upon learning that he would be 
deprived of power by his children, Ouranos, i.e. Heaven, 
shackled the males and flung them into Tartarus, whereat 
Earth in anger produced the Titans. 1 

A similar, though somewhat different in details, theo- 
cosmogonic picture is presented by Pherecydes of Syros be¬ 
lieved to be Pythagoras’s teacher. According to Diogenes 
Laertius (I. 119), a'book surviving from Pherecydes of Syros 
began with these words: “Zas (Zeus) and Time existed 
always, and Chthonie; but Chthonie acquired the name Ge, 
since Zas gives eacth to her as a gift of honour” 2 (the end of 
this fragment is a*play on words: ge means earth, geras means 


1 Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers. A complete translation of the 
Fragments in Diels, Fragmenle der Vorsokratiker by Kathleen Freeman. 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1948, p. 3. 

2 Ibid.) pp. 13-14. 


26 








gift). Expounding further Pherecydes’s teaching, Damascius 
says that Chronos produced fire, wind and water from his own 
seed (air, breathing). These distributed by Chronos anjong 
five nooks (mychoi) in the bowels of the earth produced*new 
.generations of gods. The book also included a story about the 
marriage of Zeus and Chthonie and told of war of Kronos 
(Chronos) and his forces against serpent Onhioneus and his 
brood. Their struggle was likened to the /war of the gods 
against the titans and giants in Greek’mythology, or of Hera 
against Seth, in Egyptian’mythology. 

Both Pherecydes and the orphics recognised the immor¬ 
tality of soul and believed in its wanderings in the next 
world. Though we do not know if Pherecydes was connected 
with any existing cult (this possibility cannot beVexcluded 
as there did exist a temple of Zeus, Kronos and Ge, Phere¬ 
cydes’s principal trio), his narrative provides a good example 
of a’religious concept with personified deities represent¬ 
ing the primary cause of all that ’exists. This concept is 
simultaneously a specific prephilosophic dpctrine attesting 
to the*'process of transition to philosophy’’proper. 

The eighth-fifth centuries B.C. notable for the trans¬ 
formations of myth witnessed the emergence of science as a 
relatively independent sphere of knowledge. It is commonly 
believed thaf'scientific knowledge, primarily mathematics, 
wa^ 1 borrowed by the Greeks from the^Middle East. Yet mathe¬ 
matics in the Middle East of that period was of a markedly utiji 
litarian character and took the form of practical ’ rules of 
thumb for various’calculations. These rules were expounded 
in a dogmatic manner without anyvsubstantiation and served, 
for instance, for determining the’quqntity of corn or beer in a 
/vessel, the number of Bricks, the''area of a crop field, the 
earnings or the share to be’inherited from a deceased by each 
member of his family,' etc. Such rules were known in Greece as 
’“logistics” and they indeed may have been borrowed'ready¬ 
made. The Greeks, however, were the first to turn them into 
an abstract science that concentrated on regular relation¬ 
ships/between various mathematical propositions and provid¬ 
ed a/theoretical basis for transition ^from one proposition to 
another in the form of a system of’proofs. 

As regards the theoretical (speculative) science of nature, 
the ancients developed it within the framework of philosophy 
(the first Greek philosophers were called “physics” or “phy- 
siologers”). This science was not based on the observation 







27 














e < 

r 


'VC 


of natural phenomena, though it did contain certain notions 
regarding natural processes and the workings of nature’s 
mechanisms. It should be noted in this connection 
that the current concept of early Greek thinkers’ philosophy 
(“physics”) as initial undivided scientific knowledge can 
hardly be considereduenable. We have good reason to regard 
the science of antiquity, limited and historically immature 
though it was, as independent of philosophy inasmuch as it 
took the shape of concrete'knowledge based on experience and 
observation and enabled man to solve certain typical problems 
of practicaMife. This knowledge can well be distinguished 
both fron/myth and from philosophy, as it no longer invoked 
preternatural forces for/explanation of natural phenomena 
'and did not/ offer any I’non-empirical generalisations of the 
world-view'character. 

Early scientific notions, even when they are interspersed 
among philosophical world-view teachings are relatively 
independent if they are based on structural descriptions and 
causal explanations that can be confirmed by direct observa¬ 
tion and supported by obvious analogies, and yet do not deal 
with the ultimate nature jwf the world. This is precisely 
where we have the lin^/of/demarcation between science and 
fancifukimagination orlmyth on the one hand, and philosophy, 
on the*other. In contrast with philosophical notions, scien¬ 
tific propositions derive from' 1 concrete facts and relationships 
and leave alone ultimate constituents ofvreallty. Very illustra¬ 
tive in this respect are the examples of/ancient medicine 
and historical'science. The Hippocratic accounts reflecting 
the condition of medicine in the fifth-fourth centuries B.C. 
reveal , two approaches to health and illness. One which can 
be termed philosophical regards man as a “microcosm” 
(small world) with interacting elemental forces and invokes 
a disturbed balance between them as a cause of illness. 
The other approach, the^gientific one, demands that illnesses 
be traced to directly observable/cause and that treatment 
be based on /experience. Practical medicine /rejects the 
assertions of natural philosophy that man is air, or fire, 
or water, or earth or something else that does not appear 
as‘self-evident (Hipp. De nat. horn. I, I). It maintains that 
in explaining an illness and prescribing a treatment it is 
necessary to proceed from the physical nature of man/revealed 
in the body’s components —blood, mucus and bile (white 
and black). This reliance on practical experience, observation 


28 





of visible symptoms and tested methods treatment (blood¬ 
letting, bile-expplling, etc.) is a characteristic feature 
of an empirical/physician distinguishing himfrom a natural 
(philosopher. Hence the proud conviction of the author of trea¬ 
tise On Ancient Medicine that this science possesses every¬ 
thing necessary to achieve its aims: it has found both the 
^source and the method, made many important/discoveries and 
assured success for those already ^killed in the art who 
are willing to apply themselves to/research (Hipp. De vet. 
med. 1 ). 

No less independent in Ancient Greece was historical 
science. In the sixth-fourth centuries B.C. it was more and 
more turning into a rational investigation. The authors were 
making increasing use of such historical/documents as the 
lists of various officials, priests and priestesses, winners 
of Olympian games and other contests, records and verbal 
stories of travellers, merchants, participants in military 
'expeditions. Events were recorded in a'chronological order. 

4 Hecataeus of Miletus, Charon of Lampsacus, Hellanicus 
^ of MytUene developed^ the jjenreg. of historical chronicles 
M ^aniThistorico-eTFindgraphic/description. The Lampsacus Tab 
,A les of Charon, Atthides (Chronicles of Attic History), Lesbi- 
aka, Persika and Scythica of Hellanicus paved the way for 
the History of Herodotus. 

Herodotus (between 485-425 B.C.) was called the “father 
of history” even in ancient times. Using the forms and 
methods of historical narration developed by his'predecessors 
he collected and recorded various historical/data “so that 
the events of the past were not buried in oblivion and that 
the great and astonishing deeds of the Hellenes and the 
barbarians did not remain /unknown, particularly why they 
waged wars against each/other” (Herod. 1. 1). The historian’s 
mission, according to Herodotus, was to record the testimony 
of those who were* impartial in their attitude to historical 
personages and events (I. 95). To be sure, Herodotus 
had many/weaknesses. For one, he took historical sources for 
granted and paid no attention even to obvious /contradic¬ 
tions. striving at best to reconcile the data they contained 
with com/hontsense. Yet his writings already rested on a 
scientific'foundation. 


The principal feature of ancient historiography was the 
etiolo gical approach, the attempt to give a causal explana¬ 
tion to historical events. The etiological function of my- 






</*- 


c/ 


V 


t 


29 









• hi 



> *1 

{ 0 \ 
1 p A 

>4 





] 




thology is^obvious. Yet the explanation it provides is ba-£ 
sicallyvuntenable since the invocation of a deity as the cause}*, 
of events in interest is in fact a tautplogy/vhich does not gi f ’ 
beyond the s emanti c framework of the •'myth. By contrast,? 
scientific explanation breaks the vicious circle and leads^ 
to reality, Unobjective observable phenomena and processes^ 
Here empirical certainty takes the place of the “certainty’ 
of myth rooted in tradition. The emancipation of the Greek, 
mind from the mythological fetters wasHacilitated owing top, 
the fact that Greece had no special cast of/priests as the~r 
social carrier of tradition, nor a system of unified’dogmata. 
For a Greek of that period, even a religious one, the object 
of faith /had to bet' plausible —he could no longer accept 
fantastic''mythological stories. 

The spirit of empiricism which clearly manifested it- ^ 


| 

1 

9 

1 


self in medicine and history already in the fifth century 
B.C. but had undoubtedly crept into Greek thought much ear¬ 
lier was incompatible with the entire pattern of mythological 
thinking. It called for real knowledge that accorded with 
everyday 'experience, was open to layman, lent itself to 
verification and causal explanation and had nothing to do 
with fanciful i hypotheses. Yet the fragmentary scientific 
knowledge of the early Greek thinkers who sought/to give 
concrete explanations to concrete phenomena could'not pro¬ 
vide a basis for the world-view. This function could no longer 
be performed by/myth either, as it had already lost its 
sway over people’s 1 minds. The resulting ideological vacuum 
was filled by philosophy which bridged the, gap between my¬ 
thology and early science and provided a*dialectical synthe¬ 
sis of the general world outlook with the rational explana¬ 
tion of observable 1 phenomena. 

Besides myth or divine revelation and science or human 
knowledge there existed yet another form of the intellectual 
comprehension of social reality —folk wisdom. In Ancient 
Greece it was represented by the apophthegms of the “Seven 
Sages”. Historical sources, however, mention seventeen names 
of which constant references are made to onlyvfour: Thales 
of Miletus, Bias of Priene, Pittacus and Solon. Here is an 
example of the most current, apop hthegm s, as attested to by 
Diogenes Laertius: *. K 

...Moderation is best —Cleobulus of Lindus 


...Rashness has its perils —Periander the son of 

Cypselus, born at Corinth 


30 







...Know thine opportunity... “What is agreeable?" 

“Time” —Pittacus of Mitylene... 

...Most men are bad — Bias of Priene... 

...To Thales (of Miletus) belongs the proverb “Know 

thyself”... 

...Be led by reason... “Nothing too much” 

— Solon, born at Salamis 1 

The apophthegms ascribed by tradition to “the Seven” 
provided a basis for numerous tales, poems, proverbs and say¬ 
ings. Representing the wisdom of the masses, they became, as 
' it were, part of Greeks’ popular' philosophy. Its viability, 
common sense and the rationalistic interpretation of the 
motives of human conduct are/irresistible. What is more, H 
was not “divine” wisdom coming from myth, but wisdom^y 
and for the people. Nevertheless, the moral maxims, political 
precepts and the down-to-earth wisdom of the man of the 
world did not become a comprehensive theoretical system with 
the/Greeks. The only exception was, evidently, Thales who 
was not by chance ranked simultaneously among the “Seven 
Sages” and the first .philosophers: he is justly credited with 
having enormouslyfexpanded the Greeks’ intellectual horizon 
by linking their practical wisdom with cosmological v j>roblemsj > 

It appears that early philosophy represented a peculiar' 
combination of two very different elements:'myth and science. 
Gravitating on the whole towards the scientific explanation 
of theAvorld, it used myth in its interests as a source of 
material for ''analysis and for subsequent reassessment of 
reality, and also as a method of/thinking sanctified by tra 
dition. Appealing to scientific knowledge which not infre¬ 
quently he himself procured, the philosopher at the same 
time denounced the one-sidedness of empirical science lack¬ 
ing the integrity of trutf wisdom and turned to myth in order 
to fill the gaps in his' knowledge and form a complete pic¬ 
ture of the/universe. However, this alliance of myth and 
science could only be but a temporary solution, as myth in 
fact referred the/unknown, which was subject to explanation, 
to what was the unknowable in principle, namely to a deity 
or deities/ thereby imposing upon man a system of notions 
entirely* alien to reality. The progress of concrete scien¬ 
tific knowledge deriving from practical experience of man 


& 

* * 

& 

fV 


Diogenes Laertius, Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, 
The Loeb Classical Library, London, William Heinemann Ltd., Harvard 
University Press MCMXXXVIII, Cambridge, Mass. 


31 


















and therefore capable, in turn, of providing guidance to 
his practical activity was more and njnre calling in question 
the mythological world view and K undermining its unity. 

Under the conditions when mythology had already outlived 
itself and science was not yet in a position to take its place, 
philosophy served as a link between the unconscious tendency 
towards a comprehensive world view and the rationalistic 
approach to reality/based on causal explanation, observation 
and analogy. In other words, philosophy provided the ideo¬ 
logical foundation for social consciousness and gave the 
individual a general orientation rooted in the^scientific 
rather than mythological attitude to the world. 

Philosophy came into existence as a combination of “wis¬ 
dom” and knowledge. Tradition presented its birth as follows: 
“The first to use the term [philosophy], and to call himself 
a philosopher or lover of wisdom, was Pythagoras; for, 
said he, no man is wise, but God alone... All too quickly 
the study was called wisdom and its professor a sage, 
to denote his attainment of mental perfection; while the 
student who took it up was a philosopher or lover of 
wisdom.” 1 

The synthetic character of philosophy which was essen¬ 
tially different from myth and science, from the average Gre¬ 
ek’s everyday notions and religion, called for a radical trans¬ 
formation of thinking which could not but tell on the language 
too. The specific language of philosophy was formed by 
two different methods. First, the meanings of conventional 
words ust*d in everyday life underwent subtle changes —words 
becam (/terms and the philosophical language acquired logical 
precision and stability. From the viewpoint of philology it 
means that a word used in everyday/language was placed in a 
/different lexica] environment and ardifferent meaning was im¬ 
parted to it. Viewed philosophically, this process consisted 
in that a philosophising Hellene explored the possibilities 
of a conventional word, revealed all its semantic richness 
and usfed it, by way of experimenting on the language, to ex- 
press'different shades of philosophical thought. Second, philo¬ 
sophy assimilated, transformed and gave a'differend interpre¬ 
tation to the language of myth, religion and rites, even 
to the very names of the gods. We shall later see how the 
names of the gods were converted into allegories and sym 
bols of elements and how the analysis of the semantics of 

1 Diogenes Laertius, op. cit., Vol. 1, p. 13. 


32 







these names turns into a ''philosophical investigation of 
the elements themselves. At this point it will be suffici¬ 
ent to note that the semantic richness and diversity of the 
ancient Greek language was highly instrumental in achieving 
the flexibility, mobility and versatility of ancient f dialec¬ 
tical thought. 

This ferment of the language element reflecting the 
progress of philosophy and simultaneously exercising a retro 
active influence upon it calls for special investigation which 
is beyond the scope of this work. One should be aware 
of the fact, however, that the linguistic changes led to 
considerable instability and ambiguity of terms .dn early 
Greek philosophy and, accordingly, to serious ^difficulties 
in the translation and interpretation of philosophical texts 
of that period. It is not to be wondered, for one, at the 
hypothetic nature, generally objectionable in a textbook, 
of many of the anciept philosophers’ views discussed in 
this work. These difficulties also account for the need to 
cite occasionally thevoriginal terms used by one or another 
thinker in the fragments referred to. 










I 


Chapter 2 

I onic Philosophy 


4. General 


By Ionic philosophy is meant a group of specific phi¬ 
losophical teachings that came into being in Ionia, a region 
on the West Coast of C\sia Minor inhabited by Greek 
tribes. In the seventh-sixth centuries B.C. Ionia was the 
richest and most advanced region of the Greek world in terms 
of ^culture and socio-economic relations. Mild climate and 
fertile soil created excellent conditions for the development 
of agriculture, whereas the geographic position of the country 
situated on the great land and sea routes stimulated 
the growth of commerce and handictafts. The proximity to 
ancient civilisations of the r Near East, too, was an important 
factor in the rapid intellectual advancement of talented 
Greek population. The general cultural atmosphere in Ionia 
proved highly conducive to the development of not only heroic 
epos, lyrical poetry (Archilochus, Mimnermus, Gallinus, 
Hipponax, Anacreon) and the prose of “logographs,” but 
also of philosophy. The Ionian thinkers did not confine 
their activity to Ionia alone: Xenophanes of Colophon was 
'< travelling over Greece, Italy and Sicily; Pythagoras of 

, Samos founded his school at Croton, in Magna Graecia; 

Archelaus of Miletus and Anaxagoras of Clazomenae became 
famous in Athens... However, the Ionian school proper is 
traditionally associated with the three philosophers of 
Miletus Thales, Anaximander and Anaximenes, Heraclitus 
of Ephesus, and the late .Ionians —Hipponax of Regia, Idaeus 
of Himera and Diogenes of Apollonia. 

Ionic philosophy was born in a difficult and troubled 
period of the country’s history. Torn by internal contradic 
tions and acute struggle between aristocracy and democracy 
with its constant tendency towards tyranny, Ionian society 
was simultaneously threatened with foreign invasion. 


34 







This threat came first from Lydia, and then from Persia 
which conquered Lydia in 546 B.C. The subsequent conquest 
of Ionian cities by Persia undermined to a considerable 
extent their commerce and handicrafts, since mediatory trade 
was almost completely monopolised by the Phoenicians who 
enjoyed Persia’s patronage, and the Greeks’ own trade 
with Egypt and their economic links with cities on the 
Black Sea coast were weakened. The popular uprising against 
Persia which broke out in 499 ended in failure after a 
few years of bitter struggle: the insurgents were defeated 
by Persia’s superior forces. In 494 B.C, Miletus fell and 
was destroyed, its inhabitants were /partly killed and 
partly driven into slavery. By the summer of 493 B.C. the 
Persians had seized the last insurgent cities. Ionia’s 
prosperity came to an end and, though the country was 
later liberated as a result of the Greco-Persian wars 
(500-449 B.C.), it could not recover its previous position 
and never again played an importanUpolitical or cultural 
role in the Creek world. 

It was the turbulent sixth century that marked the 
rise of Ionic philosophy. The Ionian thinkers went down in 
history under the name of physici or physiologi , i.e. peo¬ 
ple who wrote “of nature” (peri physeds). According to 
Aristotle, “of the first philosophers, then, most thought 
the principles which were of the nature of matter were the 
only principles of all things. That of which all things 
that are consist, the first from which they come to be, 
the last into which they are resolved (the substance remain¬ 
ing, but changing in its modifications) this they say is the 
element and/this the principle of things, and therefore 
they think/nothing is either generated or destroyed...” 1 
Of course, it would be rash to infer from this that these 
early philosophers professed materialism: first, in charac¬ 
terising their views Aristotle uses his own terminology and his 
concept of matter has a peculiar “Aristotelian” meaning; 
second, the views of Aristotle’s predecessors from Thales 
to Anaxagoras and Empedocles were not identical and under¬ 
went essential transformations from one thinker to another. 
Yet in the main Aristotle was right: the “principle” of all 
things with the early philosophers was not a deity, nor was 
a deity derived from it. Moreover, their approach was fun- 

1 The Basic Works of Aristotle, Ed. by Richard Me Keon, Random House, 
New York, 1941, pp. 693-694. 


35 













damentally different from the mythological mode of thought: 
the beings that came from Chaos did not “consist” of it and, 
naturally enough, did not “resolve” into it upon completion 
of their cycle. Gaia, Tartaros and Eros, the descendants of 
Gaia and Uranus and other immortals could not be conceived 
as coming from, consisting of and resolving into Chaos. 

The very understanding /of gods by the earliest phi¬ 
losophers shows a radical' departure from the traditional 
mythological views: the gods are regarded in the naturalistic 
terms, associated with the physical world and are, in fact, 
relegated to a'secondary plan. Moreover, in contrast to the 
mythologist who speaks on behalf of the gods and pretends 
to divine wisdojn and absolute truth, the philosopher speaks 
of the love of''wisdom and quest for knowledge. As distinct 
from utilitarian knowledge aimed at achieving direct results 
such as human welfare or personal fame, philosophy was 
believed to spring from curiosity and represent disinterested 
knowledge untarnished by any practical considerations. 
Illusory as it was, this view reflected the objective position 
of a thinker in a society where mental work had just 
started singling out as an independent kind of human activity 
opposed to other forms of socially useful labour. Having 
come into/existence, philosophy began to develop its own 
methods-^“dialectics” as the art of dispute and debate 
aimed at establishing the truth, and “theory” (thedria) 
as disinterested contemplation of the truth leading to 
“contemplative life” (bios theoretikos) which purportedly 
distinguished a philosopher from ordinary people. 

As has been pointed out, the earliest philosophers’ 
interest focused on “nature” (physis). Coming from the 
verb phyo which means to produce, to grow, and the like, 
this word and its derivatives, as well as the expressions 
in which they are used have a dual meaning, denoting both 
a process (birth, generation) and its results (properties, 
external appearance, “breed”). Thus in Homer, Theognis and 
Piudar the words phya and phye denote noble appearance, 
stature and beauty usually associated with noble birth. 
This meaning of physis reflects the mythological mode of 
thinking. By contrast, in those fields of concrete knowledge 
which, unlike ancient speculative physiology, gravitate to 
observation and experimental investigation by physis is 
usually meant the'structure or composition of a body as the 
observable result of its genesis. 









As regards philosophy, physis as the object of phi¬ 
losophical investigation was conceived in antiquity as a unity 
of two approaches: the investigation into the origin 
of things, their ultimate substance, inducing the philosopher 
to go beyond the bounds of observable objects, and the 
investigation of phenomena / accessible to senses. The 
first philosophers viewing physis in terms of the “nature 
of things” had to overstep the bounds of these things. 
Under the conditions of undivided sway of mythological 
and religious ideology in ancient society it was tantamount 
to an appeal to the “divine” properties of nature, to the 
“eternal and everlasting” in it. Yet the very nature of 
philosophy relying on human reason for explanation of the 
visible world demanded that it shouldlabandon mythological 
solutions and effect a logical transition, if only in principle, 
from the universal to the/particular and the individual, 
providing an “empirical” explication of the general world 
view principle. 

This accounts for the fact that the concept of physis 
or nature was bound to become an arena of acute 
ideological struggle. The first philosophers regarded nature 
as a universal dynamic self-moving whole spontaneously 
producing its component parts or individual things. The 
idea of “matter” as the ultimate substance of all things 
is organically united in this concept with the idea of genesis, 
development. For the Greek philosophers, matter was 
therefore a living self-sufficient entity, causa sui, which 
did not need any’external forces for its explanation. It 
was, according to Engels, a “primitive, naive but intrinsically 
'’correct conception of the world”. 1 However, being the 
result of direct contemplation, tjijs spontaneous, intuitive 
outlook on the world was obviouslyinadequate for explaining 
particulars as was clearly revealed in the course of subsequent 
philosophical development. 

This inadequacy of the general world outlook contained in 
embryo the possibility of philosophy’s splitting into 
opposite trends. Analysing the teachings of his predecessors, 
Plato wrote that the exponents of their views 
considered fire, water, earth and air to be the cause of all 
things and called them nature (Leges, X, p. 891). These 
elements w ere not simply the “material” of things, but also 

Frederick Engels, Anti-Duhring, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1978. 

p. 30. 


37 














the active creative forces, the''cause of their emergence 
and dissolution. To this concept Plato counterposed 
the concept of the primacy of soul (ibid., p. 892). Hence, 
it was Plato who clearly defined the world outlook of the 
early philosophers as materialistic and ranked them with 
the trend that considered material substance,^matter to be 
the primary cause of the world. 

The analysis of the ancient concept of “nature” thus 
brings us to the fundamental problem of philosophy. The 
direct result of its evolution was the emergence of two 
schools associated with the names of Democritus and Plato 
and representing, for the/first time in the history of philo¬ 
sophy, materialism and idealism as such. As regards nascent 
philosophy which was making but its first steps, we can only 
speak of tendencies which could be predominantly 
materialist or idealist. With the “physicists” who regarded 
“nature” as a living and self-developing whole generating and 
destroying its own component parts the materialist tendency 
was undoubtedly prevalent. 

5. The Milesian School 

Under this heading come three thinkers from Miletus: 
Thales, his pupil Anaximander and Anaximander’s pupil 
Anaximenes. The term “school” is traditionally applied to 
them not only because schools or corporations^uniting phy¬ 
sicians (the Asclepiades, then the rival schools at Cos 
and Cnides), singers, painters, philosophers (the Milesians, 
the Pythagoreans, the Eleates), etc. on the basis of kinship 
or fellow-citizenship were common in Ancient Greece. Far 
more important was an affinity of views which in the 
case of the Milesian philosophers manifested itself in their 
interest in “physicos” and natural studies. 

(1) Thales. Thales of Miletus, son of Examyas and 
Cleobulina was evidently of Phoenician descent. According to 
most evidence, he lived between the 35th and 58th Olympiads, 
i.e. between 640 and 545 B.C. Tradition assumes 625-547 
B.C. as the most likely dates for his life. Thales was known to 
have travelled in Egypt., probably on business, and become 
acquainted there withKmathematics. He was also credited 
with expert knowledge of Babylonian astronomy which he 
may have learnt through Phoenicia, thefnative land of his 
ancestors, as well as through Lydia. According to credible 
testimony of Herodotus (I, 74) and a number of other authors, 


:« 






Thales made anr'exact prediction of a full solar eclipse of 585 
B.C. To Thales was also ascribed the calculation of the 
time of solstices and equinoxes, the discovery of the annual 
movement of the Sun against the background of the stars, 
the establishment of the year length at 365 days, etc. 
Thales shares with Pythagoras the fame of the founder of 
scientific mathematics: he was believed to be the ffirst to 
inscribe a triangle into a circle, to establish the equality 
of the opposite angles and the angles at the base of an isosceles 
triangle, to define the parts of a circle divided by its diameter, 
etc. Thales thefgeographer explained the floods of the Nile by 
the trade-winds opposing in summer the river flow. He 
enjoyed a reputation for practical statesmanship and sources 
give him the credit for wise advice that he gave the Milesians 
on two occasions: to set up a common centre of government in 
Teos in order to coordinate the efforts of the Ionian cities in 
the face of the Persian threat and to refrain from anti- 
Persian alliance with Croesus. His advice vMtfs accepted and, 
according to Diogenes Laertius (I, 35),''saved the city.” 

It is not surprising that all these exploits brought Thales 
the fame of a “sage,” even the foremost of the glorious 
“seven.” Tradition credits him with many dicta that 
went down in history. Some of them do not differ from those 
ascribed to other sages, yet there are several aphorisms among 
them that have a truly unique character. Here they are, in 
Plutarch’s rendition: “Which is the oldest? — God, 
because he was not born. Which is the largest? —Space, 
because it encompasses the whole world with all things. 
Which is the finest? —The world, because all that is fine 
is part of it. Which is the wisest? —Time: it has already 
produced one and will produce another. Which is common 
to all? Hope: it is available even to those who have nothing 
else. Which isthe most useful? Virtue, because everything 
else can find an application and become useful through 
it. Which is the most harmful? —Vice, because almost 
everything rots in its presence. Which is the strongest? —Ne¬ 
cessity, because it is irresistible. Which is the easiest? —That 
which corresponds to nature, because even enjoyment often 
wearies” (Plut. Sept, sapient, conv. 9, 153 cd). 

These utterances show a clear transition from ordinary 
practical wisdom to fundamental and profound world views 
with a marked vein of rationalist approach to problems —no 
wonder they are ascribed to Thales. Tradition also holds him 


39 











to be the author of some doctrines which can already be 
rated as philosophical in the proper sense of the word. Regret¬ 
tably, we do not possess any writings from the pen of Thales 
himself. Though he is credited with several treatises, 
including the philosophical one entitled “On First Principles” 
(and referred to by Seneca, Plutarch and Galen), the 
evidence is far from being reliable. As regards the style of 
the excerpts quoted by different authors, it betrays a much 
later origin of the treatise which cannot have been composed 
before the beginning of the Christian era. Nevertheless, 
we possess sufficiently credible testimony from Aristotle and, 
perhaps, Hippias, regarding Thales’s philosophical views. 
According to this testimony, Thales was the author of two 
fundamental ideas: one regarding water as the first principle 
of all things, and the other regarding the “soul complex”. 

Having characterised the views of the earliest philosophers 
on the principles of all things, Aristotle adds: “Yet they 
do not all agree as to the number and the nature of these 
principles. Thales, the founder of this type of philosophy, 
says the principle is water (for which reason he declared 
that the earth rests on water).” 1 Striving to reproduce the 
reasoning of Thales, Aristotle continues: “His supposition 
may have arisen from the observation that the nourishment of 
all creatures is moist, and that warmth itself is generated from 
moisture and lives by it; and that from which all things come 
to be is their principle. Besides this, another reason for his 
supposition would be that the semina of all things have a moist 
nature, and water is for moist things the origin of their 
nature.” 2 

The brevity of this excerpt, quoted also in other sources, 
opens the possibility for a broad spectrum of interpretations. 
Indisputable, however, is the naturalistic tendency of the 
philosopher seeking to trace all things to natural causes 
and drawf'clear analogies between the world of nature and the 
life of animals. If the semina and the nourishment of all 
things have a moist nature, if they cannot live without water 
and dry up after death, if warmth itself is the “animal heat” 
of the warm-blooded, and the fire of heavenly bodies and of the 
Sun feeds on water vapoup (see Aetius, DD, 276), it is only 
too natural to suppose that'moisture (water) is the “principle” 
of all being and the “element” of all things. 

The Basic Works..., p. 694. 

2 Ibid., p. 983. 


40 




The idea that the earth rests on water noted by Aristotle 
as characteristic of Thales’s views is evidently traceable 
to the Egyptian mythology in which the Earth was likened 
to a flat dish floating on water, whereas the Sun was 
described as floating across the sky in a boat. In all probabili¬ 
ty, it was not only and not so much a myth as a common, 
^everyday notion of the Egyptians. It must have been also 
quite accessible to an alien familiarising himself with the 
country’s customs, particularly if that alien came from 
such a seafaring people as the Ionians. At this point, 
however, another problem arises. As we saw, Aristotle ascribes 
to all “physiologers” the idea that all things and, consequent¬ 
ly, all elements (elemental forces) came from one primary 
substance. Are we to infer from this that Thales derived air, 
fire and earth from water? Aristotle does not assert that Thales 
held this particular view, but in later doxographer Hippoly- 
tus we find: “He [Thales] said that water is the beginning 
and the end of everything, as through thickening and evapo¬ 
ration it makes up and maintains everything with resul¬ 
tant vacillation of earth, vortices and movement of lumina 
ries, so that everything is carried along and flows in accor¬ 
dance with the nature of the ultimate substance of all things” 
(DD, 5551. 

This testimony deriving from Theophrastus deserves 
credibility. In any case, we have sufficient grounds to presume 
that Thales was the first to develop a doctrine, by way 
of conjecture not yet raised to the level of a general principle, 
of/the emergence of all things and elemental forces from 
a ^primary substance and of their subsequent dissolution into 
it. These passages, however, may also be construed as repres¬ 
enting a different, more primitive view: the earth emerges 
from water in the sense that it was originally covered by it and 
then comes out as the primordial moisture (sea) evaporates. 
This latter view was not infrequently expressed by later 
philosophers (Anaximander, Diogenes of Apollonia). 

The second idea associated with the name of Thales is the 
“soul complex”. Here again we have two different opinions. 
On the one hand, “Aristotle and Hippias affirm that, ar¬ 
guing from the magnet and from amber, he [Thales] 
attributed a soul or life even to inanimate objects...” 
(Diog. L. I, 24). 

Indeed, in Aristotle we read: “...Thales, too, to judge from 
what is recorded about him, seems to have held soul to be 


41 










a'motive force, since he said that the magnet has a soul in it 
because it moves the iron.” 1 

On the other hand, none other than Aristotle writes: 
“Certain thinkers say that soul is intermingled in the 
whole universe, and it is perhaps for that reason that Thales 
came to the opinion, that all things are full of gods.” 2 

Hence, the world appeared to Thales as animated, 
full of life. It was typical hylozoism (hyle — matter, zoe —life) 
rooted in mythology. In Thales, however, it acquired a new 
meaning, essentially different from mythological. Nature as 
a single and living whole possesses, according to Thales, an 
inner principle of motion, a “motive element” which he 
denoted by the habitual terms “soul” and “gods.” This 
concept/represented a step towards naturalistic pantheism 
which ^dissolves god in nature and makes him but a principle 
of its spontaneous motion. 

Thales’s teaching viewed as a whole clearly reveals 
two soured, two different trends merging in a single world 
outlook J myth and science. Their synthesis, i.e. the radical 
restructuring of mythological stories on the basis of initial 
scientific knowledge and rational thinking produced the first 
philosophical doctrine in the/history of ancient philosophy. 
The next step on this path was made by Thales’s followers. 

(2) Anaximander. Anaximander (c. 610 546 B.C.), the 
son of Praxiades of Miletus, was a pupil, a follower and, 
according to some evidence, a relative of Thales. He wrote 
in prose a philosophical treatise On Nature one of the excerpts 
of which has come down to us in the rendition of Theophra¬ 
stus. The account of Anaximander’s views given b> 
Simplicius, in large part from Theophrastus (Phys. 24. 13, 
DK, A 9 and B 1), runs as follows: “Anaximander named the 
arche and element of existing things ‘the boundless’, being 
the first to introduce this name for the arche. He says that 
it is neither water nor any other of the so-called elements, 
but a different substance which is boundless, from which there 
come into being all the heavens and the worlds within them. 
Things perish into those things out of which they have their 
being, as is due; for they make just recompense to one another 
for their injustice according to the ordinance of time — so 
he puts it in somewhat poetical terms. It is clear that when 
he observed how the four elements change into each other, 


1 The Basic Works..., p. 541. 

2 Ibid., p. 553. 


42 









he/did noi ,hink it reasonable to conceive of one of these 
asiunderlying the rest, but posited something else. Moreover 
he does not account for/genesis by a qualitative alteration 
of the element, but by a'separation of the opposites caused by 
the eternal motion.” (I)K 12 A 9, B 1). 

This passage from Theophrastus quoted by Simplicius 
in his commentary to Aristotle’s Physics and containing an 
authentic sentence from Anaximander’s work has given rise to 
much controversy among philologists and philosophers 
regarding thettrue meaning of the author’s words. However, 
even if we proceed from what is generally recognised as 
Theophrastus’s representation of Anaximander’s actual 
clause —“for they make just recompense to one another for 
their injustice according to the ordinance of time,” and 
regard the first sentence of the above extract as Aristotle’s 
standard description of physiologers’ philosophical views, 
we are bound to admit that Theophrastus gave us very 
valuable information, namely: 

(1) Anaximander recognises “the primary substance 
(arche) and element” as something single and boundless 
(infinite, indefinite), i.e. as “apeiron.” He may have intro¬ 
duced the word himself, though a possibility cannot be 
excluded that it was coined later by Anaximander’s 
doxographers.' 

(2) The clause “things perish into those things out of 
which they have their being, as is due” is undoubtedly 
authentic, representing Anaximander’s ^genuine idea, if not 
his wording. Theophrastus, rating Anaximander among the 
monists would have written “that thing” instead of “those 
things” (ex hon ... eis tayta). The subsequent explanation 
shows that the plural refers to the “opposites.” 

(3) Anaximander's reference to “the boundless” is 
interesting in that to apeiron can be understood both as 
indefinite in a qualitative sense and as infinite in a quantitative 
sense. We have conflicting evidence regarding Thales. 
Thus in one of the extracts Simplicius says that Thales 
considered his primary substance, water, as finite (pepera- 
smenon), whereas in another fragment he writes that those 
who made one element the primary substance regarded 

1 To apeiron is a substantivised neuter adjective, its antonyms being 
peperasmenon (limited, definite, finite) and to peras (limit, end, border, 
edge, fulfilment and even purpose). As we see, the word is'polysemantic and 
therefore very difficult to translate. 


43 













it as the one infinite body like Thales regarded water 
(see DK 11 A 13). Aristotle, for his part, contended that 
“none of the physicists made fire or earth the one infinite 
body, but either water or air or what is intermedite between 
them...” (Phys. III. 5, 205a). Hence, in his first testimony 
Simplicius speaks about the definiteness of Thales’s “princi¬ 
ple” in the qualitative sense, and in the second testimony, 
about its quantitative infiniteness, which is just what the do- 
xographer says. As regards Anaximander, his apeiron is both 
qualitatively indefinite and quantitatively infinite. The emer¬ 
gence of things from it is their/qualitative determination 
and quantitative limitation. 

(4) The “boundless” is sometimes identified with my¬ 
thological Chaos. Such an understanding, however, does not 
consort with Anaximander’s recognition of the temporal 
orderliness of both genesis and destruction, this orderliness 
beingMissentially necessary. 

According to another opinion, Anaximander’s “boundless" 
is boundless in general, resulting from the abstraction of 
everything that is concrete. However, Aristotle specially 
indicated that it was'not so. The notion of the limitless 
or infinite as such was characteristic of the Pythagoreans and 
Plato, whereas “the physicists, ... all of them, always 
regard the infinite as an attribute to a substance which 
is different from it and belongs to the class of the so-called 
elements —water or air or what is intermediate between them” 
(Phys. III. 4, 203a). This evidently applies to Anaximander 
too and the “substance” that has the infinite as its attribute 
must be somehow specified. Regarding the meaning of 
apeiron, the most common opinions are as follows: first, 
apeiron is indeterminate nature which does not lend itself to 
any qualitative determination in principle; second, it is what 
Plato and Aristotle later called/'matter" (hyle) encompassing 
all things in a potential state; third, it is a mechanical mixture 
of all things or elements from which things separate; fourth, 
it is something intermediate between them (metaxy). 


Each of these notions resting on certain testimony has its 
weak points. The notion of indeterminacy providesmo solution 
at all as it is purely negative. It does not accord, as we shall see 
later, with Anaximander’s specific determinations of the 
substance of the boundless. The same applies to “matter” 
as understood by Plato and Aristotle wfio characterised it 
as non-being or pure possibility. By contrast, Anaximander’s 


44 








/ 

boundless is anfactive, creative force, the closest to which is 
Plato’s idea or Aristotle’s form. The notion of “mixture” with 
regard to the ultimate substance is traceable to the 
fifth-century physiologers, in particular, to Anaxagoras. 
However, even if primary mixture is understood as 
a homogeneous indistinguishable mass, it cannot by any 
means be conceived as a living organic whole, as the “nature” 
of the early Greek philosophers. The fourth notion is perhaps 
the closest approximation to what Anaximander meant by his 
apeiron, but even here evidence is by no means conclusive. 
Aristotle, for one, characterising the views of various thinkers 
and not infrequently referring to the apeiron as something 
intermediate between fire and air or air and water, never 
mentions the author (authors) by name. Though in all such 
cases the context is suggestive of Anaximander, it seems to be 
rather a shaky ground for a definite conclusion and the 
question remains open. 

Nevertheless, there are certain “properties” of Anaxi¬ 
mander’s primary substance which can be considered well 
authenticated. As Aristotle writes in' his Physics, the 
“boundless” does not come into existence, nor can it be 
destroyed; “there is no principle of this, but it is this which 
is held to be the principle of other things, and to encompass 
all and to steer all, as those assert, who do not recognise, 
alongside the infinite, other causes, such as Mind and Friend¬ 
ship. Further they identify it with the Divine, for it is ‘ dea 
thless and imperishable’ as Anaximander says, with the majo¬ 
rity of the physicists.” 1 According to Hippolylus who gives 
a slightly different wording, the non-limited everlasting 
and ageless.” 2 Plutarch, for his part, wrote that Anaximander, 
the friend of Thales’s, regarded the boundless as the cause 
of universal genesis and destruction. The passage from 
Plutarch reads as follows: “He says that at the birth of 
this cosmos a germ of hot and cold was separated off from the 
eternal substance, and out of this a sphere of flame grew out, 
the vapour surrounding the earth like the bark around the 
tree. When this was torn away and shut off in certain rings, 
the sun, moon and stars came into existence” (DK 12 A 10). 

Proceeding from this evidence we can conceive of the 
following process by which the “boundless” produces all 
things: the everlasting, ageless and indestructible nature, 

1 The Basic Works..., p. 259. 

2 DK 12 A 11. Ancilla..., p. 19. 

45 







the apeiron, separates out a “germ” (genimon) of the op¬ 
posites—the hot and the cold, the dry and the wet which, 
in turn, produce all things. Regrettably, we can only make 
guesses at the relationship between the opposites described by 
Anaximander in terms of “injustice” and “recompense,” 1 
though it clearly points to the conflict of the opposites, 
the/dialectics of their struggle which was to be later 
unfolded by Heraclitus. 

Analysis of Anaximander’s philosophical teaching shows 
that he defined the most important features of the primary 
substance or arche (the term may have been introduced 
by Anaximander himself, though the validity of Theophras¬ 
tus’s testimony is now called in question): its universal, 
creative and generative character; its immortality and indes 
tructibility as opposed to finite, emerging and perishing 
things and “worlds”; its boundlessness in time and space, as 
well as its eternal motion; its inherent necessity and 
self-sufficiency; consequently, its /divinity as the highest 
axiological characteristic. Finally, though the apeiron in 
Anaximander can hardly be conceived as constituting the 
substance of all things, it is indisputable that “all come 
into being from it and/into it all perish.” Hence, Anaxi¬ 
mander departs from 'myth even farther than Thales and 
makes yet another step towards a scientific cosmology. His 
world view was largely a result of his concrete natural studies. 

Anaximander is said to have invented a sun dial with 
upright rod, drawn up the first geographical map in the 
Greek world and given a systematic account of geometrical 
knowledge. Far more important, however, were histcosmology 
and cosmogony as they emerge from the evidence of ancient 
doxo graphers. >> 

Anaximander’s picture of the world can roughly be 
presented as follows. The earth is cylindrical in shape 
like the drum of a column with a depth three times its 
breadth. It hangs freely in the centre of the world “owing 
to its equal distance from everything” (A 11). It is not clear 
whether the earth evolved from the boundless or existed 

1 This obscure phrase has evoked much controversy the interpretations 
ranging from mythological (the “injustice” consists in an encroachment of 
elements belonging to definite deities and distributed among different realms 
upon one another) to meteorological (change of cold and wet winter into dry 
and warm summer) and even sociological (the conflict of the opposites as the 
reflection and metaphoric description of rivalry between gentes and the 
restoration of justice). 


46 







at all times. During the formation of heaven there appeared 
water and air shells, and then a shell ofrfire enclosing the 
space round the earth like bark round a tree. The sphere of fire 
breaks into several rings or circles encased in tubes of 
mist or dense air. The apertures in the surrounding envelopes 
of the ring of fire appear to us as heavenly bodies. The 
sun eclipses and the phases of the moon are due to alternate 
contracting and opening of the apertures in the tubes of 
mist. The circle of the sun is situated highest of all, next 
comes the circle of the moon, and beneath them the rings of 
the stars. This unusual o^er of heavenly bodies coincides 
with what we find in the 1 Persian mythology of the Avesta, 
the sacred books of the ancient Zoroastrian religion. The 
worlds are innumerable, yet it is not clear from the extant 
evidence if theyvreplace one another in their eternal rotation 
or exist simultaneously. 

According to Anaximander, the earth was originally 
covered with water. It gradually evaporated and that which 
remained in low places on the earth surface formed a sea. 
Drying up from excess heat or getting soaked as a result of 
heavy rains the earth cracks up and air penetrating into the 
crevices causes it to displace—hence the earthquakes. The 
first living creatures arose from the moist element (the sea) 
and were covered with thorny scale. When they grew older, 
they began to come out ashore and finally gave rise to land 
animals and men. 

Like in all early philosophical teachings, Anaximan¬ 
der’s cosmology is a/ curious combination of fantastic no 
tions borrowed fromunythology with a rationalist approach to 
the world, representing an attempt to account for the uni- 
verse in naturalistic, even mathematical, terms. The world¬ 
view resulting f/om this synthesis is a unique intellectual 
product which'"cannot be reduced to any of its original 
components. 

(3). Anaximenes. Anaximenes, known as Anaximander’s 
friend and pupil, lived in the most critical period of 
Miletus’s history. It is evidently for this reason that our 
knowledge of him is very meagre. The dates of his life 
are assumed 588 525 B.C., but he may have lived long enough 
to witness the fall of Miletus in 494. His book written, accord¬ 
ing to Diogenes Laertius, in a “simple and economical 
style” was treated by time no better than that of his teacher, 
but Anaximenes’s views have come down to us in far 


47 












more detail. Here is an evidence of Simplicius which goes 
back to Theophrastus: “Anaximenes of Miletus, son of 
Eurustratus, the companion of Anaximander, also posits a 
single infinite underlying substance of things, not, however, 
indefinite in character like Anaximander’s but determinate, 
for he calls it air and says that it differs in rarity and density 
according to the different substances. Rarefied, it becomes 
fire; condensed, it becomes first wind, then cloud, and when 
condensed still further water, then earth and stones. 
Everything else is made of these. He too postulated eternal 
motion, which is indeed the cause of the change” (DK 13 A 5). 

Why did Anaximenes go back from his teacher’s concep¬ 
tion of apeiron, the boundless, to an apparently cruder 
idea of air as primary substance, one of the familiar forms 
of matter? This retrogression was evidently a result of the 
Milesian philosophical tradition seeking to explain the 
world order in terms of ^natural causes known from ex¬ 
perience. Anaximander’s notion of the boundless as that 
from which all things come into being and into which all 
perish must have appeared too abstract for the Milesian 
thought as it could not account foip the subsequent genera¬ 
tion of things except by a purelynmaginary process of the 
separation of opposites. Anaximenes’s choice of air as 
the ultimate substance brought his doctrine in line with 
the traditional conceptions of his time and enabled him to 
invoke the empirically verifiable process of condensation 
and rarefaction for rexplanation of change in the world. 

Identifying the transformation of matter with the 
change of air from one state to another, Anaximenes empha¬ 
sises the universal mutability of his primary substance. 
Indeed, isn’t wind but condensed air and the cloud that 
follows in its wake but condensed wind? And aren’t the op¬ 
posites of the warm and the cold the result of a change in 
the state of air? In his account of Anaximenes’s teaching 
Plutarch wrote: “What is compacted and condensed, he 
says, is cold, but what is rare and loose ... is hot. Hence, 
he said, there is something in the saying that a man blows 
both hot and cold with his mouth, for the breath is cooled 
when the lips press and condense it, but when it issues from 
an open mouth it is rarefied and becomes warm” (DK 13 A 1). 
It would not be correct to think that Anaximenes conceived 
air as the physical substance we breathe. Though the 
available evidence is not completely unanimous, we have 


48 





good reason to believe that he identified it with/soul 
and considered a creative vital principle that animates all 
things. 

It is not to be wondered that Anaximenes equated air 
we breathe with life itself since his general naive mate¬ 
rialistic conception of the universe was rooted in the 
ancient mythological idea of breath-soul as a specific 
principle of living and thinking bodies. “As our soul,” he 
says, “being air, holds' us together, so do breath and air 
surround the whole universe” (DK 13 B 2). Anaximenes 
clearly derives the “soul” from “air” regarding it, together 
with Anaximander, Anaxagoras and Archelaus, as being “air 
like.” Moreover, on the evidence of St. ^ngustine Anaximenes 
contended that the gods too had theirthrigin from air (A 10). 
According to Cicero and Aetius who evidently expressed 
this idea in a more adequate form, Anaximenes held that 
the^air is god and that divine forces are present in ele¬ 
ments or in bodies. The latter statement attested to by 
Aetius seems to suggest ihat the Milesian thinker formu¬ 
lated the central ide'a ofr^antheism the identity of god with 
nature or, in that particular case, with “air” which 
is the nature of all that exists. However another of his 
statements, vouched for by Cicero, namely/'that gods and 
divine things came from air, warrants a more'cautious apprais¬ 
al of Anaximenes’s views. Evidently, he showed but a tenden 
cy towards the pantheistic identification of god with being 
and applied the descriptive attribute “divine” to air, 
like Anaximander to the boundless, merely by way of quali¬ 
fying the/primary substance as immortal and indestructible. 

Anaximenes’s cosmology was relatively simple and in 
some ways even primitive as compared with Anaximander’s 
broad vision of the universe marked by great power of rea¬ 
soning and bold imagination. Considering the earth to be 
flat, Anaximenes held that it is riding upon the air like the 
sun, the moon and the planets. As distinct from the immovable 
earth, heavenly bodies are actuated by the cosmic wind, 
whereas the /stars are attached to a crystalline heavenly 
dome whichnurns around the earth. The sun’s and moon's 
eclipses, as well as the moon’s phases were accounted for 
by the fact that the heavenly bodies turn to the earth/al¬ 
ternately with their light and dark sides. Following Thales, 
he believed the heavenly bodies to have originated from the 
earth. Some of them came from evaporating moisture which 


4-039 


49 











rarefied into fire, others (by which he may have meant the 
planets) “enclose certain earthy bodies also which revolve 
together with them and are not seen” (AM4). Anaximenes 
somewhat improved on Anaximander by'abandoning the lat¬ 
ter’s views traceable to the Persian sources that the stars are 
nearer to the earth than are the moon and the sun. 

Anaximenes’s choice of air as the primary substance 
accounts for his special interest in meteorological pheno¬ 
mena, such as rain, hail, snow, etc. Hail for him is frozen 
water falling from clouds, admixture of air in water results 
in the formation of lighter snow, rain falls from condensed 
air, lightning and thunder are the effect of wind splitting 
a cloud, the rainbow is the effect of the sun’s (sometimes 
moon’s) rays falling on a compacted cloud so that one 
part of it becomes heated and the other remains dark, etc. 
Like Anaximander, he accounts for earthquakes by earth 
cracking in droughts or falling apart in heavy rains. 

The philosophical teaching of Anaximenes represents 
a consistent embodiment of the central idea of the “physio- 
logers": that out of which all existing things come to be 
is what they all perish into after completing their cycle. 
It was the culmination of the Milesians’ spontaneous sen¬ 
sual materialism and the highest expression of their con¬ 
ception of‘''eternal motion of living and breathing air that 
permeates the entire universe. 

(4) Later “physiologers." The Milesian school had 
exhausted its possibilities for explaining the world by the 
end of the fifth century B.C. Its closing period is associat¬ 
ed with several names of no great fame and indeed far less 
original than their predecessors. Nevertheless, it would 
hardly be correct to pass over in silence the last Milesi¬ 
an thinkers if only for the fact that the theories they pro¬ 
fessed reflected the/philosophical thought of their period. 

Hippon of Samos is khown from a play by Cratinus, 
his contemporary, who died in 422 B.C. The dates of the 
philosopher’s life cannot be fixed exactly. Sources say that 
he posited water (also called “the cold”) and fire (“the 
hot”) as two primary elements. Water produced fire which 
then overmastered its parent to form the cosmos. Hippon iden 
tified the soul with the brain which was also called 
water or moisture. The brain comes from the semen or marrow 
(DK 38 A 3). Hence, the natural moisture or water is, ac¬ 
cording to Hippon, the primary substance and the source of 




50 








life and sensations: “When this moisture [s in its proper 
condition, the living creature is healthy, but when the 
moisture dries up, it loses sense and dies. This is the reason 
why old men arb dry and enfeebled in their senses, namely 
that they areGvithout moisture” (A 11). 

Hippon is said to have been labelled an “atheist” as 
he did not consider his primary substance to be of divine 
character. The single fragment of Hippon’s writing j,hat we 
possess is related to natural science and says that sweet water 
comes from the sea. The ancient evidence for Hippon’s 
teaching is largely confined to his physiological views 
(the nature of semen, fecundation, the formation and 
development of the foetus, etc.) and seems Ao show that 
he mainly concerned himself with concrete •'scientific prob¬ 
lems and did not specify their relationship to the concept 
of primary substance. 

Among Anaximenes’s followers who shared his views 
concerning a single determinate element were Idaeus of Hime- 
ra and Diogenes of Apollonia, Anaxagoras’s younger contem¬ 
porary. Here is a fragment from the latter’s book On Nature-. 
“And it seems to me that that which has Intelligence is that 
which is called Air by mankind; and further, that by this 
all creatures are guided^./and that it rules everything; 
for this in itself seems to'me to be God and to reach every¬ 
where and to arrange everything and to be in everything. 
And there is nothing which has no share of it; but the 
share of each thing is not the same as that of any other, 
but on the contrary there are many forms both of the Air 
itself and of Intelligence; for it is manifold in form: hotter 
and colder and dryer and wetter and more stationary 
or having a swifter motion... Also in all animals the Soul 
is the same thing (namely) Air, warmer than that out¬ 
side in which we are, but much colder than that nearer the 
sun. This degree of warmth is not the same in any of the 
animals (and indeed, it is not the same among different 
human beings), but it differs not greatly, but so as to 
be similar... Since therefore change is manifold, animals 
also are manifold and many, and not like one another either 
in form or in way of life or in intelligence, because of the 
large number of (the results of) changes. Nevertheless, 
all things live, see and hear by the same thing r(Air), and 
all have the rest of Intelligence also from the same” 
(DK 64 B 5). 


51 










This passage, as well as many others show that Dio¬ 
genes took a different course from Hippon: having posited 
air as the ultimate substance, he then set out to demonst¬ 
rate that the universe owes its orderliness to Intelligence 
inherent in this substance: “Such a distribution would not 
have been possible without Intelligence, (namely) that all 
things should have their measure: winter and summer and 
night and day and rains.and winds and periods of fine 
weather; other things also, if one will study them closely, 
will be found to have the best possible arrangement” (B 3). 
Diogenes, therefore, should be regarded as a philosopher 
whose views marked a /turn from spontaneous materialist 
“physiology” to the idealistic conception of universal 
Intelligence. In his teaching the naive materialism of the 
Milesian school gives way to a Arising idealist tendency. 
6. Heraclitus 


Heraclitus of Ephesus, the son of Blosson, was born 
c. 544 B.G. and died c. 483 B.C. The obscurity of his style 
caused him to be designated in antiquity as Heraclitus the 
Obscure, whereas his reputation for melancholy earned 
him the title of the Weeping Philosopher: he was said to 
weep each time he went out of his home and saw around him 
so many people living in misery and dying in anguish (DK 68 
A 21). He is believed to have written a book called The 
Muses or On Various Ways of Life. Its traditional title was 
On Nature. It is very likely, however, that the book had 
no title at all. According to Diogenes Laertius (IX, 5), 
Heraclitus’s work “is divided into discourses, one on the 
universe, another on politics, and the third on theology.” 
According to Diels-Kranz, we possess 145 fragments of 
Heraclitus (those after fragment 126 are disputable), but 
it is/commonly held now that more than 35 of them should 
be /excluded completely or partially either as later count¬ 
erfeits or as unsatisfactory paraphrases of Heraclitus’s 
genuine statements. 

The fragments that came down to us leave one with 
a very peculiar impression: whereas some of them are indeed 
obscure and hard to grasp owing to their aphoristic and 
often oracular form, others are distinguished by brilliant 
clarity. The difficulties involved in the interpretation of 
the few extant passages are also aggravated by the cor¬ 
rupting effect of the dqxographic tradition^ particularly 
the stoic infiuences which not infrequently' distorted the 

52 









fragments themselves or the context pf which they are used. 
Not the least in importance is the/dialectical style of He¬ 
raclitus who regards every phenomenon as a unity of con 
tradictions and treats it in terms of self-negation. 

The reconstruction of Heraclitus’s teaching calls for 
a detailed analysis of his remains, their classification 
into several groups on the subject principle and a sub¬ 
sequent synthesis into a single doctrine. These main groups 
are Heraclitus’s statements on fire as primary element, 
on logos or law, on opposites (dialectics), on the soul, on 
the gods (“theology”), on ethics and on politics. 

Heraclitus’s cosmological views are presented in a nutshell 
in fragment DK 22 B 30: “This ordered universe (cosmos), 
which is the same for all, was not created by any one of 
the gods or of mankind, but it was ever and is and shall 
be ever-living Fire, kindled in measure and quenched in 
measure.” This is a clearly stated central idea of mature 
Ionian philosophy: the universe represents manifesta¬ 
tions of the single primary substance altering its forms in 
a regular manner. Heraclitus’s principle is “ever living 
Fire”, something not unlike the universal equivalent in com¬ 
modity exchange: “all things for Fire and Fire for all things, 
like goods for gold and gold for goods” (B 90). 
This sociomorphic statement, seemingly an echo of mytholo¬ 
gical concepts, is in fact free in this case from anyrmytholo¬ 
gical background representing only an analogy to the natural 
and social processes. 

Like in other Ionians, the alterations of the primary 
substance in Heraclitus are not disorderly. Describing his 
views, Diogenes Laertius wrote: “Change he called a pathway 
up and down, and this determines the birth of the world. 
For fire by contracting turns into moisture, and by condens¬ 
ing turns into water; water again when congealed turns into 
earth. This process he calls the/downward path. Then 
again garth is liquefied, and thus gives rise to water, and 
from/water the rest of the series is derived. He reduces 
nearly everything to exhalation from the sea. This process 
is the /upward path” (IX, 8 9). Fire as conceived by 
Heraclitus is characterised by its own Logos. This 
idea shared by Heraclitus with the Milesians is expressed 
in fragment 66: “Fire, having come upon them, will judge 
and seize upon (condemn) all things.” Heraclitus also iden¬ 
tified fire with reason and said that it was the cause of 


53 











the world order: “The thunderbolt (i.e.-Fire) steers the 
universe” (fragment 64). Fragment 65 savs that Heraclitus 
called fire “need and satiety,” i.e. the ^renewal and the 
conflagration of the world. 

Here we clearly have the principle of cosmic circula¬ 
tion. The eternal world process is divided into cycles or 
periods by universal conflagrations, during which the world 
is destroyed and then brought into being again. The length 
of each period is 10,800 years (A 13). The universe “kindled 
in measure and quenched in measure” is eternal, i.e. infinite 
in time but evidently limited in space (see A 5). 

The law underlying the world process is referred to by 
Heraclitus as Logos. Although this Logos Sexists forever, 
“men are always incapable of understanding it, both before 
they hear it and when they have heard it for the first time. 
For though all things come into being in accordance with this 
Law, men seem as if they had never met with it, when they 
meet with words (theories) and actions (processes) such as I 
expound, separating each thing according to its nature 
and explaining how it is made. As for the rest of mankind, 
they are unaware of what they are doing after they wake, 
just as they forget what they did while asleep” (B I). 
Believing himself to have come into possession of an 
absolute truth, Heraclitus feels contempt for mosf .people 
who are incapable of grasping the/central idea of his 
teaching, namely, that the world is''ordered by the Logos 
which is universal and all-pervading. The Logos speaks, 
as it were, to man revealing ritself in words and deeds, 
in phenomena perceived by senses and comprehended 
by mind. However, “though men associate with it (the Logos) 
most closely, yet they are •''separated from it, and those 
things which they encounter daily seem to them strange” 
(B 72). 

Now the word Logos currently used in the time of 
Heraclitus was polysemantic, i.e. covered a broad range of 
notions which were closely linked in the Greek’s mind, and 
therefore needs different words to be 1 translated into modern 
English depending on the context in which it is used. For 
instance, Logos can mean “word,” “speech,” “story,” “narra¬ 
tion,” “argument,” “teaching,” “count,” “calculation,” 
“relationship,” “proportion,” etc. The philosophical meaning 
of Logos as used by Her&clitus and other ancients can best be 
expressed by the word^’law” understood as an inner essential 
connection of things and phenomena. It is not fortuitous 


54 











that Logos as the law of being is related to the social 
sphere: “If we speak with intelligence, we must base our 
strength on that which is common to all [i.e. Logos], as the 
city on the Law (nomos), and even more strongly. For all 
human laws are nourished by one, which is divine. For it 
governs as far as it will, and is sufficient for all, and 
more than enough... Therefore ^/fie must follow the univer¬ 
sal Law, namely that which is’common to all. But although 
the Law is universal, the majority live as if they had 
understanding peculiar to themselves” (B 114, B 2). Herac¬ 
litus’s “fire —gold” and “logos —city law” siijailes clearly 
show that he understood fire and Logos asrTwo different 
aspects of reality: fire represents its qualitative and vari¬ 
able natur^, Logos, its structural stability, the former 
stands for’'exchange, the latter, for its (proportion (though 
not yet expressed quantitatively). 

As we see, the Logos in Heraclitus is the rational neces¬ 
sity of being (fire) which is, in fact, identical with it. 
At the same time it is Fate, but in an entirely new 
guise. In contrast with the blind irrational force or chance 
personified by goddess Tyche (Fortuna in Rome), the 
Logos in Heraclitus is intelligence, nature’s “word” addres¬ 
sed to man, though he may be too'stupid to understand it. 
But what does nature say? “When you have listened, not to 
me but to the Law (Logos), it is wise to agree, that all 
things are one” (B 50). The unity of nature with all its 
diverse manifestations does not lie on the surface [“Nature 
likes to hide” (B 123)], bufiit is there. 

Heraclitus makes an important advance on the Mile¬ 
sians in differentiating two aspects of reality: the out¬ 
ward appearance of things and their true nature. The rela¬ 
tionship of these aspects is expressed in the conception 
of harmony, even two harmonies J the hidden and the visible 
ones. Moreover, “the hidden harmony is stronger than the 
visible” (B 54). Harmony, however, is always the unity 
of opposites * it is the sphere of dialectics. 

The very fact that the largest group of Heraclitus’s 
pronouncements deals with opposites testifies to the pivotal 
character of this problem in his teaching. Being is con¬ 
ceived by Heraclitus as dynamic harmony, as unity and 
struggle of opposites. This runity of opposites Heraclitus, 
as is evidenced from his fragments, was never weary of trac¬ 
ing out. Nature produces organic life not of the combina- 


55 









- 


tion of likes, but of the male and female elements, art imi¬ 
tating nature creates harmonious effects by the contrast of 
colours, musical harmony is the mixture of different voices. 
Heraclitus says: “Joints: whole and not whole, connect¬ 
ed-separate, consonant—dissonant” (B 10). Apparent 
harmony, according to Heraclitus, is a precarious balance 
of contrary forces: “harmony consists of opposing tension, 
like that of the bow and the lyre” (B 51). The same idea 
is expressed in fragment 8 which is commonly believed now 
to be a paraphrase of fragment 51, but with an important ad¬ 
dition:/^everything comes into being by way of strife.” 

Heraclitus’s assertion of the identity of opposites was 
regarded by his ancient interpreters as an enigmatic 
one and, for that matter, continues to appear as such to ma¬ 
ny modern commentators. This profound dialectical idea was 
indeed difficult to grasp despite the numerous illustra¬ 
tions given by Heraclitus to make it more digestible. The 
identity of good and bad is illustrated by Heraclitus in 
these words: “For instance, physicians, who cut and burn, 
demand payment of a fee, though undeserving, since they pro¬ 
duce the same (pains as the disease)” (B 58). In other 
fragments of this type he says: “The way up and down is 
one and the same” (B 60); “And what is in us is the same 
thing: living and dead, awake and sleeping, as well as 
young and old; for the latter (of each pair of opposites) 
having changed becomes the former, and this again having 
changed becomes the latter” (B 88). All these utterances 
reveal the remarkable flexibility of Heraclitus’s thought, 
the “fluid” character and richness of his ''spontaneous dia¬ 
lectical notions. Characteristic of Heraclitus’s mode of 
thinking was ihe untiring search for ^opposites as consti¬ 
tuting the essence of every phenomenon. The obvious con¬ 
sequence of this conception of reality was his doctrine 
of struggle or war as the source, motive power and/“insti~ 
gator” (aitia) of any world process: “War is both king of 
all and father of all, and it has revealed some as gods, 
others as men; some it has made slaves, others free” 
(B 53). 

The idea of universal conflict had already been ex¬ 
pressed by the Milesians and constituted, for instance, 
an important element in Anaximander’s doctrine. However, 
in contrast with Anaximander who regarded the struggle of 
opposites in terms of wrongdoing and retribution (“things 


06 





give justice and make just recompence to one another for their 
injustice”), Heraclitus taught: “One should know that war 
is general (universal) and jurisdiction is strife, and every¬ 
thing comes about by way of strife and necessity” (B 80J. 
The last words of this pronouncement sound almost like a 
quotation from Anaximander’s book. 1 

The doctrine of the universal character of strife leads 
to a conclusion that there is no permanence in the universe, 
everything moves on and is in a flux. The concep¬ 
tion of the universality of change was accepted in antiqui¬ 
ty as Heraclitus’s credo and the image of the “fluid” think¬ 
er has always been associated in the history of philosophy 
with the catch phrase “Panta rhei” (everything is in a 
flux) though it was never found in his genuine fragments. 
His own words were: “It is not possible to step twice in¬ 
to the .same river” (B 91). However, Heraclitus’s teaching 
doesKnot boil down to the conception of continuous motion 
and change, however important it may be. He is a r dialectician 
and does not regard the process of change in an unregulated 
and disorderly way. In the changing and the fluid he 
sees the stable, in “exchange” —a proportion, in the rela¬ 
tive ^the absolute. The language resources in the time of 
Heraclitus were pathetically inadequate for expressing fle¬ 
xible notions in an abstract way and he was compelled to 
use polysemantic words, metaphoric expressions and symbols 
with^vdrious associations and implications. In many cases 
their'meaning was irretrievably lost. 

Heraclitus did not know the term “opposites” which 
was introduced later by Aristotle. Instead, he used such 
words as diapheromenon, diapheronton (B 51, B 8) which 
mean “diverging/” and to antizoyn meaning “hostile,” i.e. 
words of generahdescriptive character. Descriptive and image¬ 
bearing are also the words ex-pressing such notions as move¬ 
ment (stream, flux), change (exchange, turn). Even the 
word “Logos” which is the central notion of his philosophy 
means not only law, but also fire, mind, unit... It is for 
this reason that Heraclitus’s teaching is not an abstract 
theory, but a “revelation/’ a single doctrine of the world 
apprehended largely by 1 intuition where concrete sensuous 

An opinion has recently been voiced that 22 B 126 (“Cold things grow 
hot, hot things grow cold, the wet dries^the parched is moistened") is in fact 
a passage from Anaximander's treatise preceding the words “according to the 
arrangement of Time.” (See W. Brocker, Heraklit zitiert Anaximander 
In: Urn die Begriffswelt der Vorsokratiker, Darmstadt, 1968, S. 88-94). 


57 









“living” opposites merge into one another. Though reminis¬ 
cent of the mythological thought manipulating similar oppo¬ 
sites, this doctrine represents a tremendous step forward in 
view of its rationalised, well considered and often clearly 
defined character. 

No philosophy can avoid the problem of human consci¬ 
ousness and knowledge. Like the Milesians, Heraclitus links 
it with the activity of “soul,” which, in turn, is connect¬ 
ed with some/natural element. Heraclitus taught that 
“souls... are vaporised from what is wet” (B 12). He said: “To 
souls, it is death to become water; to water, it is death 
to become earth. From earth comes water, and from water, 
soul” (B 36). Relevant to this is also fragment B 76 (1): 
“Fire lives the death of earth, and air lives the death of 
fire; water lives tlje death of air, earth — that of water.” 
From these pronouncements we can gather that Heraclitus 
conceived soul as'air or thin and movable vapour. The quali 
ties of the soul depend on the extent to which it succumbs to 
the influence of moisture: “A dry (desiccated) soul is the 
wisest and best” (B 118), whereas “a man, when he gets 
drunk, is led stumbling along by an immature boy, not 
knowing where he is going, having his soul wet” (B 117). 

On the evidence that we have, Heraclitus conceived the 
“airy” souls of men and animals as closely related to cosmic 
air which was in this connection calledv'‘divine reason.” 
He taught that we inhale the Logos by breathing. When man 
is asleep, his reason departs, and when he wakes up it re¬ 
turns so that his soul is like coals or embers which glow 
brighter when brought near the fire and fade when removed 
from it. This affinity of the soul not only to evaporation, 
but also to the Logos and fire identified with life and 
knowledge is very characteristic. The soul is conceived as 
a modification of single living “nature.” Drawing in, as it 
were, its Logos, the soul communicates with this “nature” 
and cognises it to the extent to which it assimilates to 
its Logos. 

Knowledge is obtained through the agency of the senses 
and reason which are closely connected. Heraclitus is 
quoted as saying that he honoured most “those things of which 
there is sight, hearing, knowledge” (B 55), i.e. those that 
can be perceived by theKsenses and comprehended by the 
mind. It is presumably for this reason that he did not counter¬ 
pose, contrary to the almost unanimous opinion of his com 


58 





mentators, ‘learning” and “intelligence”: though “much 
learning does not teach one to have intelligence” (B 40), 
“men who love wisdom must be inquirers into very many 
things indeed” (B.35). Learning and intelligence (wisdom, 
insight, sense) are^wo opposites making a harmonious whole. 
Heraclitus does not call in question the close relationship of 
the soul and body comparing them to a spider and cobweb: 
just like a spider feels where his thread is damaged and runs to 
the spot where a fly got entangled, so a man’s soul 
rushes to where the body suffered an injury as if unable to 
bear it. At the same time the soul is not confined within the 
body: “You could not in your going find the end of the soul, 
though you travelled the whole way: so deep is its Law 
(Logos)” (B 45). As has already been indicated, the soul 
in Heraclitus is a part of ther'universe which is everlasting 
fire and Logos. 

The interpretation of Heraclitus’s teaching has always 
been under a strong influence of theological tradition that 
tended to use his utterances in support of the doctrine of 
immortality and even corporeal resurrection. However, un¬ 
biased approach to Heraclitus’s extant fragments shows that 
his doctrine of god did not fall /Within the traditional reli¬ 
gious-mythological scheme, but' represented an early philo¬ 
sophical conception. The soul, according to Heraclitus, was 
not immortal. Life and death were conceived by him as natural 
opposites and he wrote that people “when they are born, they 
are willing to live and accept their fate (death); and they 
leave behind children to become victims of fate” (B 20). 
Though this clear statement seems to be overshadowed by 
mystifying fragment 27 (“there await men after they are dead 
things which they do not expect or imagine”), the most likely 
meaning of this obscure pronouncement is that the soul after 
«Jeath dissolves in the all-embracing living nature only to be 
/reborn again. 

Comparing “mortal” people with “immortal” gods, Herac¬ 
litus says: “Immortals are mortal, mortals are immortal: 
[each] lives the death of the other, and dies their life” (B 62). 
It is not easy to interpret such aphoris»ms, but this one 
is clearly indicative of a tendency to /bridge the mytho¬ 
logical gap between people and gods. Heraclitus rejects tra¬ 
ditional polytheistic beliefs and takes a firm stand’against 
sacrifice, religious processions and Bacchic rites. The only 
deity which he knows and recognises is thertosmos itself, 


59 







the everlasting living Logos-fire. It is ubiquitous and no 
one can hide from it. It steers everything and sways the des¬ 
tinies. “That which alone is wise is one; it is willing and 
unwilling to be called by the name of Zeus" (B 32). It is 
willing because the Logos-fire is no less omnipotent than 
Zeus, the source of life; it is not willing, because it re¬ 
veals itself to man not in the anthropomorphic guise of the 
Thunderer, but in the struggle and war, in Truth and.Strife, 
in the’cosmic harmony of opposites. 

Of course, it cannot be said that Heraclitus’s teaching 
was free from mythological views as such. Besides Zeus, He¬ 
raclitus speaks of Hades the god of death and Dionysus the 
god of life—“Hades is the same as Dionysus, in whose honour 
they rave and perform the Bacchic revels” (B 15), the Eriny¬ 
es—“The sun will not transgress his measures; otherwise 
the Furies (Erinyes), ministers of Justice, will find him 
out” (B 94), the Sibyl “with raving mouth, uttering her 
unlaughing, unadorned, unincensed words” (B 92) and “the 
lord whose oracle is that at Delphi” (B 93). All these quota¬ 
tions sound today very dark as.the associations Heraclitus 
wanted to bring to his listeners’/fninds have been largely lost. 
The interpretations given by antique commentators of various 
periods are far-fetched allegories or symbols. It is very like¬ 
ly that the meaning of these phrases was indeed presented 
by Heraclitus in the form of allegories and metaphors which 
were used in a definite context and intended to elucidate 
his dicta; now, however, being the remnants of an extinct 
culture they can do nothing but''obscure his thought. 

Tradition presents Heraclitus as a solitary thinker, a 
nobleman by birth and manners who kept himself aloof from 
his fellow-citizens and held most of mankind in^reat con¬ 
tempt. According to Diogenes Laertius (IX, 3), “he was lofty- 
minded beyond all other men, and other meaning... Final¬ 
ly, he became a hater of his kind and wandered on the moun¬ 
tains, and there he continued to live, making his diet of 
grass and herbs.” To support such opinions, the commentators 
usually adduced Heraclitus’s own pronouncements purported¬ 
ly showing the hatred and scorn of this gloomy bilious aristoc¬ 
rat for his countrymen. The fragments we possess indeed con¬ 
tain utterances which may give cause for accusations of this 
sort but, like many of Heraclitus’s other .statements, they are 
not single valued and attest to the 'dialectical character 
of his thought: in the cosmos governed by the wise Logos, 


tiO 












dead life and ignoble death await those who do not follow its 
prescriptions and/boast of their ignorance. They are wil¬ 
ful and arrogant —and “one should quench arrogance rather 
than a conflagration” (B 43). On the other hand, “the think 
ing faculty is common to all” (B 113) and “all men have the 
capacity of knowing themselves and acting with moderation” 
(B 116). The Logos is “common” and everybody can grasp it 
and attain wisdom —however, according to fragment 2, “most 
men live as if they had a/private understanding of their 
own.” 

The account of Heraclitus’s ethical views presents a 
special problem, as the obscurity of his style combines in 
this field with the meagreness of unquestionably genuine 
passages. Fragment 119, which has been the object of much 
dispute, says: character (ethos) for man is destiny ( daimon). 
The difficulty in the interpretation of this passage stems 
largely from the ambiguity of the key words ethos and daimon 
which had/more than one use eacly. It is most likely that 
Heraclitus’s statement is directed /against the mythological 
belief in a daimon supposed to look after an individual man in 
the manner of a guardian and emphasises man’s own respon¬ 
sibility for his destiny. Commenting on this saying, Ephicar- 
mus was later to paraphrase it as follows: “Character for 
man is good destiny but for some men, bad also” 
(DK 23 B 17). Heraclitus left us in the dark as to whether 
ethos is innate or subject to change (for the worse or for the 
better), but we do know his categorical statement: “One man 
to me is [worth] ten thousand,Of he is best” (DK 22 B 49). 
Given Heraclitus’s pessimism about the ability of most people 
to grasp the Logos, one can only wonder why he should 
take pains to advance his principles, make speeches, preach 
against ignorance and wrongdoing and “weep” over wretched 
human life. 

Heraclitus’s fragments 85 (“It is hard to fight against 
impulse; whatever it wishes, it buys at the expense of the 
soul”) and 110 (“It is not better for men to obtain all that 
they wish”) seem to fall in line with the general ethical prin¬ 
ciples of his time and express advice to/restrain one’s de¬ 
sires and put the “soul” first. 

Early Greek morality is directly linked with and merges 
into politics. Coming from a royal clan at Ephesus, Heracli¬ 
tus was openly hostile , to trade and industrial oligarchy 
that had come to/power in his native city and established 

iil 



















-'J'y tJU) 

l/u <- ■£?<*£ ~-tc- i 

YULj^***\ , 


a tyranny. Sources give us the name of the tyrant, Heracli¬ 
tus’s contemporary Melanehrus. Censuring the wilfulness of 
the rich, Heraclitus contrasts it with human dignity which he 
associates with*noble descent, wisdom and moral integrity. 
His denunciation of wealth [“may wealth not fail you men of 
Ephesus, so that you may be convicted of your wickedness!” 
(B 125a) ] was combined with undisguised contempt for dem¬ 
ocratic tendencies and egalitarian ideas after the fashion of 
aristocratic poets Alcaeus and Theognis whovfuriously con¬ 
demned wealth and all kinds of “novelties.” At the same time 
Heraclitus exalts law which should be defended by right- 
minded people as “their city’s walls” (B 44) so far as it is 
in accord with the one divine law governing the world, the 
Logos. 

Heraclitu^s universal “strife” was undoubtedly a reflec¬ 
tion of therdass struggle which unremittingly flares up and 
subsides in an antagonistic society. The truth, according 
to Heraclitus, is that peace and rest which seem-to people a 
desirable order of things are not based on a harmony^f agree¬ 
ment, but on an equilibrium of/tension, on an r incessant 
struggle of opposing forces. This'dialectical idea of universal 
strife as the real harmony of the world, the conviction that 
war is the father of all things and of the true peace is the 
essence and the tragic fervour of Heraclitus’s philosophy. 

Heraclitus had no orthodox followers. Though ancient 
sources often speak of the “Heraoliteans,” they usually mean 
those who seized upon the Ephesian’s doctrine of flux and 
brought it into a one-sided prominence. Such philosophers 
ironically referred to by Plato as “eternally flowing” held 
that ever changing and contradictory reality does not lend 
itself to any determination so that mo statement regarding it 
can be true. This conclusion carried the Heraclitean doctrine 
of the flux of everything to an extreme and finally degraded 
it to sophistry. According to Aristotle, “it was this belief 
that blossomed into the most extreme of the views above 
mentioned, that of the professed Heracliteans, such as was 
held by Cratylus, who finally did not think it right to say any¬ 
thing but only moved his finger, and criticised Heraclitus for 
saying that it is impossible to step twice into the same river; 
for he thought one could not do it even once” (Arist. Met. IV, 
5, 1010a). 

The profound influence of Heraclitus’s teaching runs 
through centuries and clearly shows up in the philosophical 


62 








works of'different periods, e.g. in Parmenides’s poem, Pla 
to’s dialogues, in the works of Aristotle, the stoics and 
the sceptics, in Christian theologians and the “fathers of 
the Church.” According to Diogenes Laertius, “the com¬ 
mentators on his work are very numerous, including as they 
do Antisthenes and Heraclides of Pontus, Cleanthes and 
Sphaerus the Stoic and again Pausanias who was called the 
imitator of Heraclitus, Nicomedes, Dionysius, and, among the 
grammarians, Diodotus... Hieronymus tells us that Scythinus, 
the satirical poet, undertook to put the discourse of Heraclitus 
into verse” (IX, 15). The answers given by Heraclitus to the 
fundamental problems of philosophy two and a half millennia 
ago have not lost their significance in modern times and he 
is as/popular nowadays as in antiquity. It would not be an 
exaggeration to say that of all early philosophers Heraclitus 
is the most deserving of the title/6f theCfounder of objec¬ 
tive dialectics. Its essence, the /doctrine of the struggle 
and unity of opposites will be forever linked with his 
name. 












Chapter 3 

Italian Philosophy 



7. Pythagoras and Pythagoreans: Science, Religion, Philosophy 

Italian philosophy which includes the Pythagorean and 
Eleatic thought had its start some time after the emergence of 
the Ionian School and partly owed its existence to the Ionian 
influence. It originated in Magna Graecia, i.e. in the Greek co¬ 
lonies in South Italy round about the end of the sixth century 
B.C. The Greeks started planting their colonies in South Italy 
and Sicily in the late eighth and in the seventh centuries. To 
wards the end of the eighth century the Chalcidians, Mega 
reans and Corinthians setup the cities of Naxos, Catana, Leon 
tini on the eastern coast of Sicily. The Corinthians founded 
Syracuse which was to become later one of themchest cities of 
Sicily. The seventh century saw the foundation of Acragas 
(Agrigentum). In the late eighth century colonies were also 
planted in South Italy: Cumae on the western coast, Spartan 
colony Tarentum and Achaean colonies Sybaris and Croton, 
then Metapontum and Poseidonia (Pestum), in the east. Sy¬ 
baris, Croton and their Achaean dependencies formed an 
Achaean confederation with Hera’s sanctuary near Croton as 
their common ^religious centre. In the sixth century B.C. the 
Phocaeans who had earlier planted Massalia (Marseilles), 
^Alalia in Corsica and other colonies began to settle on the 
i western coast of Italy and set up Elea which became the centre 
of immigration from the Phocean cities after their fall before 
the Persians in 542 B.C. Croton, Acragas, Leontini, Metapon¬ 
tum and E(e*d became the motherland or the home of a whole 
galaxy of "outstanding thinkers and left a profound trace in 
the history of philosophy. 

Having arisen as agricultural colonies and possessing con 
venient harbours, these cities rapidly developed into large tra¬ 
de centres. Their prosperity depended on crop growing, animal 

t>4 







husbandry and export of agricultural produce (wheat, barley, 
spelt and other cereals, cattle and therefore meat and hides, 
wines, oil, etc.). 

The sources we/lepend upon for our information on the po¬ 
litical system of*Greek colonies do not warrant its accurate 
assessment. They explicitly show, however, that there was no 
uniformity in the constitution of city states. For instance, the 
Spartan colonies tended to preserve thennonarchical traditions 
of their mother-country. By contrast, the Achaean colonies 
gravitated towards fslave-owning democracy and were the 
scene of acute struggle between aristocratic and democratic 
factions. The Ionian colonies continued developing the y ad- 
vanced social and economic relations of their metropolises. 
The history of Magna Graecia of that period was characterised 
by comparatively peaceful development and it was only in the 
fourth and third centuries B.C. that it was terminated by 
Roman expansion (the Naples fell in 327, Syracuse in 211). 
In the absence of any threat of foreign invasion the relations of 
Greek colonies were chiefly dominated by conflicts which 
flared up not only between the Dorian and Achaean (Taren- 
tuin and Sybaris) polises, but also between kindred city 
states, such as Croton and Sybaris. Of no small importance 
was also internal strife which often came to the forefront in 
the Apolitical life of Greek cities. 

The predominantly agricultural character of Italian coloni¬ 
es, as well as the expanding contacts with culturally underde¬ 
veloped surrounding peoples accounted for the prevalence of 
/religious cults, particularly the cult of Dionysus. Merging 
with the religious and mythological conceptions constituting 
the foundation of such cults, the incipient rational thought 
brought from Ionia produced peculiar philosophical doctrines 
reflecting the influence offreligious and mythical outlook and 
gravitating towards idealism. 

In other words, religious problems played a far more impor¬ 
tant role in the teachings of the Italian philosophers as com¬ 
pared with the Ionians, inducing the former to develop elabo- 
ratp'doctrines of god, soul, its mortality and immortality, and 
tofdeline the relations between god and the world, god and the 
man. It was a new trend that advanced efew philosophical 
problems, reassessed traditional ones and>shifted the focus of 
attention from nature to man. The new path opened up by the 
Italian philosophers wasmircuitous and highly contradictory: 
a revival of the prerational mythological outlook was to be 


5-(K«i 


65 






combined with its sharp criticism. The Pythagoreans were the 
first to embark on this path. 

The history of Pythagoreanism can only be presented in the 
form of a general outline. The Pythagorean theoretical doc¬ 
trine as a religious, scientific and philosophical teaching took 
shape at the end of the sixth century B.C. during the lifetime 
of Pythagoras, the founder of the school, and his pupils. 
The religious community founded by Pythagoras attained 
great/political influence and even ascended to power in 
Croton, Metapontum and Tarentum. However, as a result of 
a revolt which embraced the whole country the Pythagorean 
brotherhood as a political organisation was'smashed and its 
members were either killed (according to ancient evidence, 
they were usually burnt alive with the houses where they 
gathered to discuss state affairs) or banished. In the second 
half of the fifth century B.C. Pythagoreanism was mainly 
represented by its philosophical teaching as expounded by 
Philolaus. In the late fifth and early fourth centuries 
B.C. Pythagorean philosophy grows into and merges with 
Platonism in the activity of the ancient Academy. These 
stages in the external history of the school are represented 
respectively by early (the later third of the sixth and first 
half of the fifth centuries), middle (the later decades of the 
fifth century) and late Pythagoreanism. In view of the 
predominantly Platonic character of late Pythagoreanism we 
^hall confine our survey of the Pythagorean thought to its 
first two periods as .best representing the spirit of this trend. 

A. Pythagoras and early Pythagoreanism. Pythagoras, the 
the son of Mnesarchus of Samos, is said to have studied in 
Egypt and probably in Babylonia where he acquired the 
knowledge of'mathematics and astronomy. In about 532 B.C., 
Pythagoras left Samos to escape life under the tyranny of 
Polycrates and settled in Croton where he established his 
brotherhood. His life was surrounded by a haze of legend: he 
was said to be a son of Apollo or Hermes, to have a golden 
thigh and to retain memories of his soul’s past transmigra 
tions. Stories were told that he had first been Hermes’s son 
Aethalides, then Euphorbus whfVwas wounded by Menelaus, 
then Hermotimus, Pyrrhus and'finally was born as Pythago¬ 
ras. In Croton, he preached a new way of life which, according 
to Plato, was handed down by him to posterity so that his 
followers “are to this day conspicuous among others by what 
they term the Pythagorean way of life” (Platon. Resp. 












X, 600b). Pythagoras’s teaching was a great success and the 
rapidly growing numbers of his puptils and followers included 
politicians, scientists, Dhysicians and ... women, which was 
in itself something quite out of the ordinary in that period. 

Pythagoras did not hold any official positions but enjoyed 
the reputation of a wise counsellor. His political influence may 
be illustrated by the following fact. In about 510 B.C., Telys, 
the leader of tke popular party at Sybaris, banished five hun¬ 
dred of its ' richest citizens who took refuge at Croton. 
When Telys demanded that they be given up Pythagoras 
intervened and persuaded the^Crotonian assembly to protect 
them. As a result of the war. that followed the Sybaritean 
army was defeated and thet'city itself was destroyed. This 
event must have given the Pythagoreans real political power 
which they held till the outburst of popular discontent at the 
end of the ceptury as a result of which Pythagoras was 
compelled toneave Croton and take refuge at Metapontum 
where he soon died. 

The Pythagorean community or brotherhood w*rs an aris¬ 
tocratic political organisation which sought tokconcentrate 
power in the hands of the “best few." The aim of Pythagoras 
was not to reanimate the old landed aristocracy which had 
already lost its political and ideological influence, but to 
create a new “aristocracy of spirit” in the person of his pupils, 
“the best” from the viewpoint of ethics, i.e/religion, science 
and philosophy, who, according to Diogenes Laertius, govern¬ 
ed the state so well “that its constitution was in effect a true 
aristocracy (government by the best)” (Diog. L. VIII, 3). 

The Pythagorean way of life was described in detail by 
Aristotle’s pupil Aristoxenus whose evidence merits a high 
degree of trust. According to Aristoxenus, it was based on the 
conviction that anarchy constituted the greatest evil for man 
as his well-being could not be attained with/no authority 
above him (Jambl. V. P. 175). The supreme power belongs to 
god. Speaking of Pythagoras and his followers, Aristoxenus 
says: “Every distinction they lay down as to what should be 
done or not done aims at conformity with the divine. This is 
their starting-point; their whole life is ordered with a view 
to following God, and it is the*governing principle of their phi¬ 
losophy” (ibid., 137)/Supreme justice comes from the power 
of the gods which is’not to be challenged by anyone. Next in 
authority after the gods are demons (creatures like Pythago¬ 
ras), then come the rulers, the parents and the elders, as well 


67 








as the law. The Pythagorean way of life also laid down various 
rules of Jfehaviour for different groups of people depending 
on their* ocial status, gave medical and eugenic prescriptions, 
demanded the fulfilment of various physical and musical 
exercises, etc. The apcient sources offer no rational explana¬ 
tion of Pythagoras’s'moral code invariably invoking the will 
of the gods. The purpose of this code, however, seems to be 
clear enough— to subject man to the authority of divine rule 
and extol contemplative “theoretical” life free from any 
i practical interests. Its injunctions, however, were in marked 
contrast with the actual participation of the Pythagoreans in 
thelpolitical life of Greek city states. Pythagoreanism appears 
toTiave been the first^hilosophical school to fix a gulf between 
‘'Theory and practic^< the “book” and life which is so characte¬ 
ristic of a society* oased on the exploitation of man by man. 

Despite the fact that the Pythagorean ethical ideal contains 
a number of moral injunctions of general human value, not to 
speak of the practical rules of everyday communal life, it 
clearly reveals the underlying flexible socio-poWtical concep 
tion that could he used to advantage by variou^fruling sections 
of antique society. Based on divine authority and law, it de¬ 
manded, according to Jarnblichus,^adherence to the tradi¬ 
tional customs and laws, even if they were not perfect, as it 
did not befit a man to reject the existing laws in favour of 
dubious innovations (Jambl. V. P. 176). 

The religious and philosophical teaching of early Pythago 
reanism took two forms according to the natural talents of the 
disciples: acusmnta or sayings and mathemata or knowledge 
proper. The philosophy of the first form consisted of undem¬ 
onstrated sayings, without argument, which were intended 
to be preserved by the pupils asrdivine revelations. They 
included definitions allegedly disclosing the essence of things, 
and various moral precepts and recommendations, for 
instance: What are the islands of the blessed? —The Sun and 
the Moon. What is the Delphian Oracle? — The number four, 
i.e. the harmony of Sirens (the music of the spheres). What 
is the most just? —Making a sacrifice. What is the most 
beautiful? — Harmony. It was prescribed not to steer the fire 
with a knife, not to sit on a bushel-measure, to roll up one’s 
bedclothes on rising and smooth out the imprint of the 
body, to rub out the mark of a pot in the ashes, not to eat 
the heart, to put on the right shoe first, to wash the left foot 
first, etc. All these curious precepts had a mythological ring 


08 











and were supposed tc/possess magic power. Despite the at¬ 
tempts of later interpreters to rationalise some of the injunc¬ 
tions (for instance, Diogenes Laertius says: “By not eating 
yonr heart he meant not wasting your life in troubles and 
pains" [Diog;. L. VIII, 18]), they clearly reveal the primitive 
magical belief in universal kinship or sympathy which 
assumes, for instance, a close relationship between a man 
and the imprint of his body in a bed and implies a possibility 
of causing him harm by exerting evil influence on what is 
associated wiDt him. Hence the numerous Pythagorean taboos 
intended totprotect a man from witchcraft. Some of these 
ancient prescriptions, however, sound quite modern: for 
instance, on Aristotl^s evidence the Pythagoreans demanded 
from their disciple^mot to hurt their wives who were depend¬ 
ent on them. 

As regards knowledge proper, i.e. mathemata , Pythagoras 
is credited with important contributions to geometry, such as 
the famous theorem about the square of the hypotenuse of a 
right-angled triangle, the discovery of incommensurability, 
the theory of five correct bodies, and to arithmetics—the theo¬ 
ry of even and odd numbers, the fundamentals of the geomet¬ 
ric interpretation of numbers, the application of arithmetics 
to music, etc. There was evidently a close affinity between the 
doctrines of nature developed by the early Pythagoreans and 
the lonians. On the evidence of Aetius, Heraclitus and Hippa- 
sus of Metapontum considered the universe to be one, in^eter- 
nal motion and limited, its principle being fire (DK 18 A 7). 
A similar testimony, without any comment, is given by Aristo¬ 
tle (Met. 984a 7) and Simplicius who quotes Theophrastus 
(A 7). Our sources give US'neither details nor substantiation 
of this doctrine. 

We are definitely more lucky with the Pythagorean teach¬ 
ing of soul. Pythagoras must have adopted the orphic con¬ 
ception of the immortality and transmigration of souls. Men¬ 
tion has^already been made of the incarnations of his own 
soul-Pythagoras purportedly remembered all of them: 
“...And then he told of the wanderings of his soul, how it 
migrated hither and thither, into how many plants and 
animals it had come, and all that it underwent in Hades, and 
all that the other souls there have to endure” (Diog. L. 
VIII, 4). Again, no details of this teaching are known to us. 
i’he extant fragments alleged!^ taken from some book by 
Hippasus come in fact from anater Neopythagorean treatise 


69 




and represent an obvious'modernisation of the philosopher’s 
views. No more credible is the testimony of Neoplatonist 
Jamblichus according to which Hippasus linked soul with 
r number and considered the latter to be the Creator’s organ of 
thought and the first model of creation (A 11). 

B. Middle Pythagoreanism. Describing the views of “those 
who are called Pythagoreans,” Aristotle devoted special atten¬ 
tion to their famous doctrine of opposites in its developed form 
associated with the name of Alcmaeon of Croton (list¬ 
ing the ten Pythagorean pairs of opposites, Aristotle notes: 
“Alcmaeon of Croton appears to have spoken in the same way, 
and either he took this doctrine from them or they from him; 
for as to his period, he lived in the old age of Pythagoras”). 
Both Plato in Philebus and Aristotle in Metaphysics , Book 1, 
refer to what appears the pearliest version of this doctrine. 
According to Plato, “the ancients, who were our betters and 
nearer to gods than we are, handed down the tradition, 
that whatever things are said to be are composed of one and 
many, and have the finite and infinite implanted in them” 
(Phil. 16c). Aristotle’s comment is r slightly different: 
“Evidently, then, these thinkers also consider that number is 
the principle both as matter for things and as forming both 
their modifications and/their permanent states, and hold 
that the elements of •''number are the even and the odd, 
and that of these the latter is limited, and the former 
unlimited, and that the One proceeds from both of these 
(for it is both even and odd), and number from the One; 
and that the whole heaven, as has been said, is numbers” 
(Arist. Met. 1.5.986a 17). Hence, the Pythagorean conception 
of the opposites whose relationships constitute the basis of all 
reality can be^schematically presented as follows: 

According to Plato According to Aristotle 

One Plurality Limit—Unlimited 

Limit—Unlimited Odd—Even 

(their accretion or Unit 

mingling) Number 

Being Numbers=Universe 

Both versions of the Pythagorean conception, though 
slightly different in detail, represent one and the same scheme 
of the evolution of the world the emergence of all things 
through the interaction of one and many, the limited and the 
unlimited. In other words, the Pythagorean conception, 


70 









whether it originated in the early period of the school or is 
a product of two stages of middle Pythagoreanism, represents 
reality not as a simple totality of different combinations of the 
unlimited or “primary substance,” but as a/unity of the 
limited and the unlimited, as an orderly cosmos, a complete 
whole. In physical terms, the evolution of the world, i.e. the 
emergence of things is conceived as the “limitation of the 
unlimited”: the endless, the incomplete is drawn, so to speak, 
into the process of world formation. Commenting on this 
conception, Aristotle wrote: “The Pythagoreans, too, held 
that void exists and that it enters the heaven itself, which as it 
were inhales it, from the infinite air. Further it is the void 
which distinguishes the natures of things, as if it were like 
what separates and distinguishes the term^of a series. This 
holds primarily in the numbers, for the* / void distinguishes 
their nature” (Arist. Phys. IV, 6, 213b). 

The cosmology and cosmogony of the Pythagoreans are 
based on their conception of the limited asi'order and perfec¬ 
tion. The universe as a unity of the limited and the unlimited 
is a sphere evolving in ^limitless void by breathing it in, 
expanding and differentiating. This is- how cosmic space, 
celestial bodies, movement and time •'come into being. The 
centre of the universe is occupied by fire referred to, according 
to Philolaus, as Hestia (the goddess of the hearth), the home 
of Zeus, the sustainer and measure of nature. The nearest to 
the centre is the counter-earth, then come earth, moon, sun, 
the five planets, and lastly the sphere of the fixed stars. 
The counter-earth washnvented to bring the number of celes¬ 
tial bodies up to ten. It was used to explain lunar eclipses. The 
celestial bodies arise from the central fire and revolve around 
it being fastened to crystal spheres. All planets, the earth 
including, revolve from west to east facing the central fire 
always with one and the same side which explains why we 
■■never see it. Our hemisphere is heated with the rays of the 
central fire reflected by the sun. There is yet another fire, 
presumably identified with unlimited breath which occupies 
the highest position and encompasses the universe. 

The cosmology of the Pythagoreans which had much in 
common with the Milesian, particularly Anaximander’s pic¬ 
ture of the world was a remarkable step forward. The 
rejection by the Pythagoreans of the traditional geocentric 
views, the postulate of the spherical shape of the earth and its 
revolution about the central fire within a period of 24 hours, 


71 






the explanation of solar eclipses by the passage of the moon 
between the sun and the earth and of the change of seasons 
on the earth by the inclination of its orbit to that of the sun 
was a brilliant conjecture thirt anticipated the truth and 
contributed to the subsequentKdevelopment of the heliocentric 
theory. The Pythagoreans also advanced a unique conception 
of the harmonious movement of heavenly spheres which 
caught the imagination of many succeeding generations of 
poets and philosophers: according to the Pythagoreans, the 
speeds of the heavenly bodies are in the ratios to musical 
intervals making up a complete octave so that the sound of the 
bodies as they revolve is concordant. 

The Pythagoreans did not confine themselves to the elabo¬ 
ration of the physical picture of the world largely based on 
earlier philosophical notions. They went further and linked 
it with a definite logical system correlated, in turn, with ethi¬ 
cal values. This aspect of the Pythagorean world outlook is 
represented in their teaching of opposites that has already 
been referred to. Immediately after the passage about the 
opposition of one and many, the limited and the unlimited Ari¬ 
stotle continues (Met. 986a 22): “Others of this same school 
say that there are ten principles, which they arrange in twin 
columns, namely: 


limit—unlimited 
odd —even 
one —plurality 
right —left 
male —female 


at rest —moving 
straigh t — crooked 
light —darkness 
good —bad 
square —oblong” 


As is evidenced from this table, the Pythagoreans brought 
the limited and the unlimited in line with good and bad re¬ 
spectively. This in fact was the central idea of their ethical 
theory rooted in the wisdom of the “Seven Sages” and their 
prescriptions to observe measure and limit. Commenting on 
this theory, Aristotle wrote: “...Evil belongs to the class of 
the unlimited, as the Pythagoreans conjectured, and good 
to that of the limited” (Eth. Nic. B. 5, 1106b). It is significant, 
however, that the Pythagorean conception of opposites is.very 
different from the Heraclitean one and is essentially meta¬ 
physical: the opposites are not mutually repellent and^do not 
make a unity of identity and difference, but rather a'unity of 
mixture. Characterising Pythagoras as a moral reformer, 
Jamblichus quoted him as saying: “no existing thing is pure, 
everything is mixed, earth with fire, fire with water, air with 


72 













both and they with air, even the fair with the ugly and the 
just with the unjust” (Jambl. V. Pyth. 130). This integrated 
physical, ethic and aesthetic approach is highly characteristic 
of the Pythagorean'moral theory and brings us to another 
important doctrine of the Pythagoreans—that of harmony. 

Generally speaking, the doctrinje-of harmony is one of the 
key elements of Pythagoreanism/underlying both its cosmolo¬ 
gy and the teaching of the soul. For one thing, according to the 
Pythagoreans,, the whole cosmos owes its perfection to the 
harmony ofrhumbers which constitute its ultimate elements. 
Sources quote Pythagoras and Philolaus as calling the soul 
a harmony and refer to Alcmaeon of Croton, a physician of the 
early fifth century B.C., as one of the expounders of this theo¬ 
ry. Alcmaeon is said to have been specially interested in medi¬ 
cine and physiology and regarded all things, particularly the 
human body, as the/product of the mixture of opposites, their 
harmonious combinations. According to Alcmaeon, “health is 
equality ( isonomia ) between the powers— moist and dry, cold 
and hot, bitter and sweet and the rest, and the prevalence 
( monarchia) of one of them produces disease, for the^preval- 
ence of either is destructive... Health on the other hand is the 
blending (symmetra krasis) of the qualities in proper 
measure” (DK 24 B 4). It was just thi&^'blending in proper 
measure” that the Pythagoreans called harmonia” and made 
one of the central notions of their teaching. 

To describe the relationship between opposite forces in the 
human body Alcmaeon uses political terms isonomia (equality 
of rights) and monarchia. This terminology betrays his socio- 
morphic approach to nature and throws light on the source of 
his natural and social conceptions. In point of fact, Alcmae- 
on’s teaching represents a clear tendency to spread social and 
ethical notions to the sphere of natural phenomena and thus to 
bolster up, in the face of growing/class contradictions, the idea 
of social harmony by making it the basis of the world outlook. 

The development of the Pythagorean thought in the middle 
period seems to have been summed up by Philolaus who was 
active in the second half of the fifth century. The anti- 
Pythagorean uprising caused him to emigrate to Thebes, then 
he returned to Italy and settled at Tarentum, probably 
his native city. Philolaus was the teacher- of Archytas who 
later formed a lasting friendship with^Tlato and brought 
him into direct contact with Pythagoreanism. Philolaus, too, 
may have met Plato. Diogenes Laertius informs us, with re- 


73 











ference to Demetrius, that Philolaus “was the first to publish 
the Pythagorean treatises to which he gave the title On 
Nature ” (Diog. L. VIII, 85). It means that Pythagoreanism 
by that time had already lost its character of a^ecret sect 
or community. 1 It is difficult to say if the book attributed 
to Philolaus represented a genuine Pythagorean treatise that 
had been kept K secret, or was a commentary on conceptions 
taught orally. In all likelihood, it was his own work ascribed, 
according to tradition, to the Teacher. Philolaus is also 
credited with the authorship of Bacchae, On the Soul and 
On Rhythm and Metre. The extant fragments of these books 
are now/believed to be forgeries. 

It should be noted, that the authenticity of the treatise On 
Nature has also been called ija question, partly or completely, 
on linguistic grounds, the'main objection being their close 
affinity with Aristotle’s works on the Pythagoreans. Though 
the arguments are serious enough, there is no reason to discard 
Philolaus as a source of valuable information on the logical 
tendencies of middle Pythagoreanism and its link with 
Archytas. Our chief aim being to reconstitute the logic of the 
Pythagorean development, the real authorship of Philolaus’s 
fragments is of secondary importance to our purpose, since 
these fragments are indicative of the Continuity of Pythago¬ 
rean thought and contain a number off important ideas fully in 
line with its traditions. Among them, first and foremost, is 
the idea of synthesis of the limited and the unlimited which 
underlies the generation of things: “All existing things must 
necessarily be either Limiting, or Non-Limited, or both Lim¬ 
iting and Non-Limited... Clearly then the universe and its 
contents were fitted together from^Doth the Limiting and the 
Non-Limited” (DK 44 B 2). A body cannot be only non¬ 
limited or only limiting: “There could not even be an object 
set before knowledge to begin with, if all things were Non- 
Limited” (B 3). We can add here that if all things were limit¬ 
ing they would have nothing to limit. 

Accepting the view expressed in the cited passage from Pla¬ 
to’s Philebus, Philolaus elaborates it further by adding the 


1 Hippasus. an early Pythagorean, is said to have been heavily'punished 
for revealing to the world some secrets of the Pythagorean teaching. Accord¬ 
ing to Jamblichus, he was not only expelled from the brotherhood for divulg¬ 
ing the nature of proportion and incommensurability to the uninitiated, but 
a tomb was raised to him as if dead (Jambl. V. P. 246). 


74 












idea of odd and even (the unlimited and the limited respec¬ 
tively) as two forms of number: “Actually, Number has two 
distinct forms, odd and even, and a third compounded of both, 
the even-odd; each of these two forms has many aspects, which 
each separate object demonstrates in itself” (B 5). Number, 
according to Philol^us, is what defines a thing and makes it 
cognisable: “Actually, everything that can be known has a 
number; for it is'impossible to grasp anything with the mind 
or to recognise it with this” (B 4). / 

Now, the world and everything in it evolves as a'mixture of 
opposites, yet such an evolution would be impossible without 
a harmony underlying it: “It would be impossible for a uni¬ 
verse to be created with them unless a harmony was added, in 
which way this (harmony) 'mid come into being. Now the 
things which were like and related needed no harmony; but 
the things which were unlike and unrelated and unequally ar¬ 
ranged are necessarilyrfastened together by such a harmony, 
through which they are destined to endure in the universe” 
(B 6). In other words, things can only emerge if their constit¬ 
uent opposites are subjected to some external influence, 
namely, to the effect of a ratio, proportion which does not 
derive from them, but is imposed, as it were, from the 
nutside in order to arrange, harmonise the dissimilar and the 
unrelated. 

Here we come to the central doctrine of Pythagorean phi¬ 
losophy which is summed up in the statement that ‘things 
are numbers.” The root of the doctrine was evidently a very 
concrete “material” notion of numbers as something extended 
in space, perceived by the senses and making up all objects of 
the sensuous world. They were conceived as the first principle 
of the universe in the Ionian sense. The geometrical inter¬ 
pretation of numbers leads to the understanding of the unity 
as appoint; two points make a line and three points, a plane. 
Hence the notions of “triangular,” “square” and “rectang¬ 
ular” numbers: 

L1+2+3 ...-)- n = ^—ill— triangular number (1) 

1 + 3+5 . . . + rc — 1 = n 2 — square number (2) 

2+4+6 . . . +2n = n (rc + 1) — rectangular number (3) 

Represented in the form of geometrical patterns which was 
regular Pythagorean practice these figures would look as fol¬ 
lows: 


75 












Patterns (2) and (3) are obtained with the help of a gno¬ 
mon an instrument which takes its name from the carpen¬ 
ter’s set square or the upright pointer on a sundial. Applying 
a gnomon produces the same pattern, but of a larger size. The 
applicatipfi of gnomons made up of an odd number of units 
gives a^square, those of even numbers, a rectangle. 

Triangles form pyramids, squares make cubes, etc. Subse¬ 
quently the Pythagoreans related geometrical figures to ele¬ 
ments: fire particles were supposed to be pyramidal in shape, 
earth particles represented cubes, air particles octahedrons, 
and water particles—icosahedrons. This trend, however, was 
already characteristic of late Pythagoreanism and may even 
have taken its start from Plato who developed Pythagoreanism 
along the lines of mathematical symbolism. 

The conception according to which numbers were the ele¬ 
ments of things and almost the material from which all things 
are made constituted the basis of the teaching of Eurytus who 
held that things were determined by the number of similar 
pebbles which he arranged in the appropriate way to form the 
outline of man, animal or plant. This theory derived from the 
conviction that a body consists of a certain number of material 
dots. As a result of devastating criticism by the Eleatics the 
original formula "things are numbers” was changed to 
“things imitate numbers,” which they do by^reproducing 
their properties and relations. As regards numbers, they were 
^reduced in status to ideal models of things. According to 
Archytas, magnitude and number are “the two primary forms 
of being” (DK 47 B 1, 8). 

Finishing up with the genesis of Pythagoreanism, we may 
just add that Philolaus was credited with an elaborate theory 
of the'4mmortality of the soul. One of the sources ascribes to 
him the following words: “The ancient theologians and seers 
also bear witness that because of certain punishments the soul 
is yoked to the body and buried in it as in a tomb” (DK 44 
B 11). Aristotle considered, however, that the Pythagoreans 
had at leasPfour different conceptions of the soul. According 
to one of them, “any soul could be clothed upon with any 


76 









body” (De anima 1. 3, 407b), another held that it was 
a harmony of opposites in the body, a third one regarded 
it as a modification of number, whereas in the fourth variant 
some Pythagoreans declared the souls to be motes in the air, 
and others insisted that the soul was what moved them: 
“these motes were referred to because they are seen always 
in movement, even in a complete calm” (ibid., I. 2, 404a). 

Vigwed as a whole, the Pythagorean philosophy reflected 
the^quantitative aspect of things that revealed itself to the 
astonished Italian thinkers the spatial world of geometrical 
proportions, the,orderly movement of celestial bodies govern¬ 
ed by mathematical laws, the quantitative formulae of 
musical harmony and scores of othen discoveries. However, 
in their excitement over thj? power of human reason they 
absolutised quantity and'''ignored entirely the qualitative 
aspect of things. Describing the Pythagorean method, Aristot¬ 
le wrote: “Since, then, all other things seemed in their 
whole nature to be modelled on numbers, and numbers seemed 
to be the first things in the whole of nature, they supposed 
the elements of numbers to be the elements of all things, 
and the whole heaven to be a musical scale and a number. 
And all the properties of numbers and scales which they 
could show to agree with the attributes and parts and the 
whole arrangement of the heavens, theypcollected and fitted 
into their scheme; and if there was a gap anywhere, they 
readily made'additions so as to make their whole theory 
coherent” (Arist. Met. I, 5, 985b). 

In his comments on Pythagoreanism Aristotle confines 
himself to the analysis of itsf'abstract philosophical doctrines. 
In real ideological life, however, the Pythagorean teaching 
represented an extremely complex, even grotesque combina¬ 
tion of scientific notions sound even from the modern point 
of view, with religious prejudice, magic precepts and mystic¬ 
ism of numbers believed to be'instruments of divine powers. 
The inadequacy of Pythagorean mathematical philosophy 
soon became obvious and compelled the Pythagoreans them¬ 
selves, even the early ones, to turn to Ionian philosophy 
with its naturalist trend and emphasis on the*' qualitative 
aspect of reality. Hence the conceptions of fire and limitless 
air in Hippasus, his organic analogies in the understanding of 
cosmos. The problems of one and many, motion and harmony 
of opposites that loomed large before the Pythagoreans could 
•'not be solved on the basis of their theory of numbers. They 








called for a different approach, and it was 6ffered by the Elea 
tic school. 

8. Xenophanes of Colophon 

Xenophanes, the son of Dexius or Orthomenes of the Ioni¬ 
an city of Colophon, depicts in his poem a well-fed compla¬ 
cent citizen who, lying on a soft couch by the fire-side in 
the winter season, sipping sweet wine and nibbling peas in 
quires of a stranger: “Who are you among men, and where 
from? How old are you, my good friend? What age were you 
when the Mede came?” The answer is Xenophanes’s own 
story: “By now seven-and-sixty years have been tossing my 
carefilled heart over the land of Hellas. From my birth till 
then [that is, till his exile], there were twenty-five years 
to be added to these if indeed I am able to tell correctly of 
these matters” (DK 21 B 22, 8). Proceeding from this passage 
and knowing that Persian conqueror Harpagus the Mede 
seized Colophon approximately 540 B.C., we may put his birth 
about 565 B.C. He is known to have been still alive at the age 
of ninety-two, i.e. in 473. Having left Colophon, Xenophanes 
lived first in Zancle (Messina) in Sicily, then in Catana and 
Syracuse. He is known to have visited the islands of Paros 
and Malta, as well as the Lipari Islands. He wrote an epic 
poem called The Settlement of a Colony at Elea in Italy , yet 
it is not known if it was devoted to the foundation of Elea 
like his poem The Founding of Colophon, or described his own 
settlement there during his wonderings “over the land of 
Hellas.” Xenophanes also wrote elegies and poems ofefnockery 
(silloi) and is considered to be the founder of the satyrical 
genre. He is also credited with a philosophical poem called 
traditionally On Nature of which we have about 20 fragments. 
The total number of the extant fragments of his poems runs to 
about forty. 

Tradition holds Xenophanes as a witty and caustic man 
who loved freedom and hated tyranny and oppression. He 
recommends speaking with a tyrant as little as possible or as 
sweetly as possible, advises the Egyptians not to mourn over 
Osiris, if he is an immortal god, and not to offer him sacrifice 
if he is mortal, ridicules the exaggerated athleticism of the 
day and cautions his countrymen against the preference of 
muscle to brains a^'wisdom is better than the strength of men 
or of horses” (B 2), castigates vainglorious foppery, etc. 

There is hardly a more resolute Opponent of tradition, 


78 














3 

k 

primarily religious and mythological, in the history of ancient 
philosophy than Xenophanes. Homer was the basis of educa¬ 
tion in Greece in that period, yet, according to Xenophanes, 
“both Homer and Hesiod have attributed to the gods all things 
that are shameful and a reproach among mankind: theft, adul¬ 
tery, and mutual deception” (B 11). Indeed, Hermes’s 
/trickery exalted in one of Homer’s hymns, gods’ amorous 
adventures, the notorious love affair of Hephaestus’s wife 
Aphrodite and Ares described in the eighth book of Odyssey, 
the stories of Chronos who emasculated his farther Onranos 
and of Zeus who overthrew his farther Chronos, etc.,tcannot 
serve as examples to be followed. Yet Xenophanes was more 
than a moralising literary critic. The real target of his attacks 
on the old beliefs and dubious stories about the gods was the 
frank anthropomorphism of popular theology. Among the 
extant evidence are these fragments from his poems: “But 
mortals believe the gods-to be created by birth, and to have 
theirVown (mortals’) raiment, voice and body... Aethiopians 
have gods with snub noses and black hair, Thracians have 
gods with grey eyes and red hair... But if oxen (and horses) 
and lions had hands or could draw with hands and create 
works of art like those made by men, horses would draw 
v C( pictures of gods like horses, and oxen of gods like oxen, and 
they would make the bodies (of their gods) in accordance 
with the form that^each species itself possesses” (B 14, 16, 
vf 15). 

These passages preserved by Clement of Alexandria not 
only disclose the mainrweakness of polytheism; but represent 
one of the most important arguments of^atheism against 
any religion: the assertion that the true creators of gods are 
fpeople who shape them in their own image, but not vice versa. 
This does not mean, however, that Xenophanes was an athe- 
ss. ist. To popular polytheism he counterposed the philosophical 
conception of god which later became known asl*pantheism 
% Cr. pan meaning “all” and theos meaning “god”). y 

Characterising Xenophanes’s understanding of god, f Aris- 
\ totle wrote: “With reference to the whole material universe he 
says the One is/God” (Met. 1 5 986 b). Xenophanes himself 
describes the'nature of god as follows: “There is one god, 
among gods and men the greatest, not at all like mortals in 
'body or in mind... And he always remains^ n the same place, 
not/moving at all, nor is it fitting for him to’change his position 
at different times... But without toil he sets everything in mo- 


79 









tion, by thetthought of his mind... He sees as a whole thinks 
as a whole, and hears as a whole” (B 23, 26, 25, 24). 

This understanding of god comes very near to the Ionian 
conception of living nature which is the cause of its ^Wn mo 
tion and change. In fact, Xenophanes identifies god mot with 
the spirit, but with the world, i.e. his pantheism is natural¬ 
istic. His search for a single determinate substance was very 
much in the Ionian tradition, but the ancient evidence about 
its naturj/is conflicting. Aetius asserts that Xenophanes con¬ 
sidered dearth to be the source of everything: “For everything 
comes from earth and everything goes back to earth at last” 
(B 27). On the other hand, Sextus Empiricus, having cited a 
similar passage from Xenophanes, hastens to add another quo¬ 
tation from his poem: “We all have our origin from earth and 
water” (B 33; confer Sext. Adv. Mathem. X 314). That water 
played an important role in the cosmology of Xenophanes is 
also attested to by the fact that he derived all meteorologi 
cal phenomena frormwater (sea): “The sea is the source of wa¬ 
ter, and the source of wind. ...The mighty main (sea) is the 
begetter of clouds and winds and rivers” (B 30). Xenophanes 
held that the sun' and the heavenly bodies consist of luminous 
clouds and arefi-enewed daily, being quenched in the daytime 
and rekindled at night. The mooh is a felted cloud. The phe¬ 
nomenon of Dioscures known among the Greeks as St. Elmo’s 
fire is “little clouds glimmering in virtue of the kind of 
motion that they have” (A 38-A 46). 

Borrowing from the Ionians, Xenophanes did not identify 
himself with them. For all his adherence to “sea” and “water” 
as the originating cause of things, in contrast with Thales, 
he stressed the 1 primacy of earth. He knew that it sometimes 
immerses in water as evidenced by shells found in mountains 
or imprints of fishes and seals discovered in the Syracuse 
quarry, etc., but his eapth does not float on the surface of 
the sea like in Thales ' it has no bounds: “This is the upper 
limit of the earth thart we see at our feet, in contact with 
the air; but the part^beneath goes down to infinity” (B 28). 
On the evidence of Macrobius, Xenophanes believed the soul 
to consist of>earth and water (A 50). He was familiar with the 
orphico-Pythagorean theory of the transmigration of souls 
and clearly showed his attitude to it in this gibe at Pythago¬ 
ras: 

“They say that, passing a belaboured whelp, 

He, full of pity, spake these words of dole: 











‘Stay, smile not: ‘Tis a friend, a human soul; 

1 knew him straight whenas I heard him yelp’.” 

(Diog. L. VIII, 36). 

Xenophanes was the first among the Greek philosophers to 
castmoubt upon the possibilities of human knowledge. Having 
discarded the anthropomorphic gods, he declared man’s own 
needs to be thelguide to knowledge: “Truly the gods have not 
revealed to mortals all things from the beginning but mortals 
by long seeking^discover what is better” (B 18). However, 
one should not be too optimistic about'man’s ability to grasp 
absolute truth: “And as for certain truth, no man has seen it 
nor will there ever be a man who knows about the gods and 
about all the things I mention. For if he succeeds to the full in 
^dying what is completely true, he himself is nevertheless 
unaware of it; and Opinion (seeming) is fixed by fate upon 
all things” (B 34). As distinct from Heraclitus who claimed to 
speak on behalf of the Logos, Xenophanes must have extended 
his scepticism to his own pronouncements: “Let these things 
be stated as conjectural only, similar to the reality” (B 35). 
It is not surprising, therefore, that the ►'sceptics of later 
periods regarded Xenophanes as one of the founders of their 
philosophy. 

What is then the true significance of Xenophanes’s philo¬ 
sophical heritage? Are we to regard him as a pantheist or a 
sceptic, a monist convinced that God is One, or a dualist in¬ 
sisting that everything derives from earth and water? Did he 
believe in the progress of human knowledge or consider it 
unable to overstep the bounds of opinion? The conclusion that 
suggests itself after studying the ancient evidence for his 
views is that it would not be correct to treat his conflicting 
statements as elaborate conceptions and to attempt a flat 
answer to these questions. Xenophanes’s utterances testify 
to the embryonic state of his philosophy/plastic and ambiva¬ 
lent like any nascent system. Its potentialities were y realised 
in the fifth century B.C. by the Eleatic school and in the 
fourth third centuries B.C. by the scepticism of Pyrrho and 
Timon of Phi ius. 

A similar attitude should evidently be adopted to attempts 
to affiliate him with a definite trend of thought and choose 
between the Ionian “physiologers” writing on nature in the 
Milesian tradition or the/dialecticians” who launched the 
investigation into the contradictory nature of logical notions. 


( 131 ) 


81 









We have already shown his affinity with the former. On the 
other hand, ancient.sources provide convincing evidence that 
he was one of thetfounders of subjective dialectics, the teach¬ 
ing of thinking or logic. 

Aristotle is known to have written a treatise On Xenophanes 
which was later lost. Instead, we have a small treatise 
On Xenophanes, Zeno and Gorgias which, as the philological 
investigation in the eighteenth-nineteenth centuries showed 
should be called On Melissus, Xenophanes and Gorgias. Its 
author was an unknown peripatetic commentator of the first 
century A.D. who may have used Aristotle’s genuine work 
when writing the section on Xenophanes. Though this section 
can by no means be relied upon for accurate exposition of 
Xenophanes’s arguments, it gives certain valuable informa¬ 
tion which is worth quoting. According to its author, Xeno 
phanes maintained that the one eternal, uniform and spherical 
god, the cosmos, could be neither unlimited nor limited, 
neither moving nor motionless. Indeed, the One Being must be 
either unlimited, infinite, or limited, finite. If it is unlimited, 
it does not exist, since in order to exist it must be determined 
by something, i.e.’limited. If it is finite and limited, it cannot 
be One (single), as it must/have something which limits it, 
which is Other. So, being ismot One but Many. The problem of 
motion is treated in aXnnilar manner. The motionless is in fact 
identical with the mon-existent, since neither anything can 
come to it, nor can it come to anything. On the other hand, 
if anything rryfives, it must move relative to something else 
which implieslplurality, many —as a result, the unity of being, 
its singleness is lost again. The conclusion is that the One is 
neither at rest, nor moving, as it isrneither non-being nor 
Many (De MXG HI 977b 16; cf. DK 21 A 28). 

How does this conception agree with Xenophanes's panthe¬ 
ism mentioned above? There may be two w^ays to explain this 
apparent contradiction. First, one may proceed from the as¬ 
sumption that Xenophanes attempted to give a logical analysis 
of the conception of the one all-embracing being identified by 
him with god. In that case the treatise On Melissus, Xenopha¬ 
nes and Gorgias should be regarded as a collection of aporias 
or logical paradoxes connected with the problem of One Being 
that w'ere outlined by Xenophanes, modernised in the spirit of 
late Plato’s dialectics and expounded in terms of the Aristo 
telian logic. Second, the treatise may be viewed as an exposi¬ 
tion of Xenophanes’s later doctrine evolved by him under the 


82 









influence of Parmenides and indicative of a strong tendency 
towards scepticism. On the evidence that we have the first ex¬ 
planation appears more convincing. 

However that may be, Xenophanes was the first philosopher 
to advance the conception of One Being which was to become 
central to the Eleatic school. 


9. The Eleatie School from Parmenides to Melissus 

(1) Parmenides. Parmenides, a native of Elea, son of Pyres, 
came from an aristocratic family and took an active part in 
the political life of his city. His floruit (the age of 40) is 
put either at 500, or (by Plato) at 475 B.C. He is said to have 
been a legislator and given Elea some of its laws. Later, 
under the influence of Pythagorean Ameinias, he abandoned 
political activity and devoted his life to contemplation. 
According to Aristotle and Theophrastus, he was the pupil of 
Xenophanes but tradition holds that he did not become his 
follower (see Diog. L.IX, 21). Nevertheless, a close affinity 
between their views is obvious: Parmenides, like Xenophanes, 
focused on the relationship of One Being and the plurality of 
existing things. Parmenides is known to have written a poem 
called traditionally On Nature, large extracts of which came 
down to us from Sextus Empiricus, Simplicius and some other 
doxographers. The extreme complexity of the extant frag¬ 
ments, particularly the allegoric prologue to his poem, as 
well as the glaring discrepancies between different 
manuscripts account for great divergence of opinion regarding 
the true meaning of Parmenides’s views. In point of fact, the 
interpretations of his philosophy range between a religious 
revelation and a purely deductive logical scheme. 

The most ancient doxographic tradition is expressed by 
Theophrastus in his Physical Opinions, Book I. It claims 
that Parmenides asserted the eternity of the universe and at 
the same time sought to explain how it came into being. 
He maintained that only the One exists, immutable, 
immovable and spherical, but, catering of the opinions of the 
mob that believes in change accounted for it by adopting 
“two principles, fire and earth, one serving as matter, the 
other as cause and maker” (DK 28 A 7). This passage from 
Theophrastus quoted by Alexander Aphrodisiensis gives us 
a glimpse into the problem of two ways of inquiry brought up 
by Parmenides: one true, and the other false. The first way 
leads to the apprehension of the one eternal self complete 


83 







being, the second, to what seems to ignorant mortals. 

The way to truth, according to Parmenides, is “the one 
that it is and that it is impossible for it not to be” (DK 28 
B 2, 9). Here we have in fact the first statement of the logi 
cal law of identity in its ontological interpretation. Indeed, 
having discovered or, rather, guessed a logical law according 
to which the thought-content of a notion must not change in 
the course of reasoning. Parmenides draws from it an ontologi¬ 
cal conclusion. His argument runs as follows: (1) What is, is. 
(2) What is not, is not. (3) What is cannot come into being 
from what is not, nor can it perish into what is not as the 
latter does not exist. (4) Space (void) and time (distinction 
between past and present) are non-existent. (5) Being is full. 
(6) Being has no parts, it is indivisible. (7) Being is one, 
as there is nothing apart from it. (8) Being is complete (hence 
finite) and perfect. (9) Motion does not exist as there is 
nowhere for being to move. 

As is evidenced from this abstract scheme of reasoning 
which claims to solve the philosophical problem of true being, 
Parmenides conceives “being” as fullness of everything, 
something like mass filling the universe. Being neither evolves 
nor dissolves, it is indivisible, continuous, immovable and self- 
complete. It is like a round ball beyond which there is pure 
nothingness. This is ostensibly very close to the materialist 
world outlook and Parmenides’s philosophy was sometimes 
construed as a kind of materialist or its prototype on the 
grounds that he understood reality as primary motionless 
corporeal substance extended in space and therefore “mate¬ 
rial;” with nothing existing apart from it.' 

Such a view, however, can hardly be accepted. Parmenides 
contends that “to think is the same as the thought that it is; 
for you will not find thinking without Being” (B 8, 34) or, 
even more plainly, that “it is the same thing to think and to 
be” (B 3). That means that thinking is conceived by him not 
as a criterion of being, but as being itself. The starting point 
for Parmenides, the axiom he considered impossible to reject, 
was not the material world, but the thought of it which he 
identified with being. The idealist trend in Parmenides’s her¬ 
itage was therefore at least as much pronounced as the mate- 


1 See J. Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy , London, A. & C. Black, 1975, 

p. 182. 


84 













rialist one. The Eleatic school in its genesis paved the way 
both for Democritus and Plato. 

Contrasting the “way of opinion” to the “way of truth,” 
Parmenides writes: 

“The one, that it is and that it is impossible for it not 
to be is the path of Persuasion... The other, that it is not, and 
that it must necessarily not be, that I declare a wholly in 
discernible track; for thou couldst not know what is not—that 
is impossible — nor declare it, for it is the same thing that 
can be thought and can be... What can be spoken and thought 
of must be, for it is possible for it to be, but impossible for 
nothing to be. This I bid thee consider, for this way of inquiry 
is the first from which I (hold thee back). But also from 
this one, on which mortals, knowing nothing, wander 
two-headed; for helplessness in their own breasts guides their 
erring mind. They are borne along, both deaf and blind, 
mazed, hordes with no judgement, who believe that to be and 
not to be are the same and not the same, and the path of 
everything is one that turns back upon itself” (B 2, 3-6; B 6). 

Analysis of these quotations shows that Parmenides, in 
fact, describes three ways: (1) “the way of truth,” i.e. the 
conviction that “it is”; (2) a false way leading nowhere, i.e. 
the denial of being and the assertion that only non-being 
exists; (3) a confusion between being and non-being both of 
which are believed to exist. The third way, in turn, admits of 
three variants of the relationship of being and non-being: first, 
being and non-being are the same; this variant is practically 
equivalent to the second way and can be identified with the 
“nihilistic” position of Gorgias of Leontini, Parmenides’s 
younger contemporary; second, being and non-being are the 
same and not the same; the reference to the “two-headed 
mortals” who believe that things come into being and perish 
and that the “path of everything is one that turns back upon 
itself” clearly points to Heraclitus. Third, there are being and 
non-being as independent and opposite entities which do not 
pass into each other. This is the doctrine of the Pythagoreans 
which underlies the opinion of “ignorant mortals.” All other 
ways are dismissed as unacceptable. 

Proceeding to the world of appearance, Parmenides pre¬ 
serves only one pair of Pythagorean opposites—“light —night 
(darkness).” To this, however, he adds contraries borrowed 
from Anaximenes, namely, the “rare —dense” and the 
warm—cold.” The antithesis of “warm —cold” cannot but 


85 








remind one of Alc.maeon. Aristotle says that Parmenides 
posited hot and cold meaning fire and earth, the former 
corresponding to being and the latter, to non-being. In 
his account of appearances Parmenides fully conscious of 
the impassable gulf between true being and the false world 
of opinion, puts aside the logical incompatibility of being 
and non-being and brings back the real opposites well 
known from Ionian physiology. The world of opinion, i.e. of 
sense experience, is contradictory, but Parmenides does not 
flinch from it. The way of seeming, false as it is, is the one 
followed by common mortals who cannot but conceive reality 
in terms of plurality, changefulness, generation and perishing 
of things. These properties of the sensuous world can be ex¬ 
plained in physical terms, with the help of the above contra¬ 
ries and their combinations, but they can also be dismissed al¬ 
together if we embark on the true way of inquiry and go 
beyond the bounds of sense perceptions to the world conceived 
only by reason. 

It is worth noting that Parmenides does not follow Xeno¬ 
phanes who regards this world of absolute knowledge as god. 
Parmenides leaves no room for god in his conception of being 
and the goddess in the prologue to his poem who instructs him 
in the ways of scientific inquiry is a literary personage, a tri¬ 
bute to tradition, rather than a deity in the proper sense of the 
word. As regards the sensuous world as described by Parme¬ 
nides, the nearest to his understanding of it comes the Hegeli 
an conception of “objective appearance” implying the need for 
the seeming, the appearance, since essence can only be 
grasped by man to the extent to which it reveals itself in 
phenomena. 

Parmenides did not evidently concern himself with the 
problem of transition from the world of opinion to the world of 
truth. This problem was to be formulated and solved at a later 
stage of philosophical development. It was not Parmenides 
who discovered the distinction between sensuous and rational 
knowledge, yet he was the first to realise the full import of 
contradictions between the evidence of senses and reason and 
to show that reason can sometimes grasp the truth in defiance 
of sensual experience. 

Parmenides’s faith in reason and its superiority over senses 
was so great that he in fact “ontologised” thought and 
identified it with being regardless of sense data. He rejected 
unstable, vague and constantly changing evidence of senses as 


86 





the world of “appearance,” “opinion” in favour of the true 
world of eternal and motionless being which can only be con¬ 
ceived in thought. It was the first step towards objective 
idealism. 

The cosmological views of Parmenides expounded by him in 
accordance with the opinions of mortals do not lend them¬ 
selves to reconstruction within an orderly “physiological” 
system. The central idea of his cosmology described in detail 
by Aetius (A 37) consists in the generation of the sensuous 
world from a mixture of “light” (fire) and “night” (darkness 
or earth). This description is partly confirmed by fragment 
B 12. The single world is encompassed by ether beneath which 
“is ranged that fiery part which we call heaven,” then comes 
what surrounds the earth—a number of circular rings or 
bands, one inside the other. Some bands are fiery, others 
are dark, and those between them are filled with fire but 
partly. “And in the centre of these is the goddess who 
guides everything; for throughout she rules over cruel Birth 
and Mating, sending the female to mate with the male, and 
conversely again the male with the female” (B 12). According 
to Aetius, Parmenides also called her “steering goddess and 
keyholder and Justice and Necessity.” 

Parmenides’s“circular bands” are highly reminiscent of 
the “rings” of Anaximander, particularly when we learn that 
“the sun and the circle of the Milky Way are exhalations of 
fire,” his central fire reveals a close affinity to Pythago¬ 
rean Hestia or the goddess of hearth, etc. The origin of life, 
as well as sensation and thinking, was evidently attributed by 
Parmenides to the interaction of earth and fire (cold and hot): 
“Thought varies according to whether the hot or the cold pre¬ 
vails, but that which is due to the hot is better and purer” 
(A 46). Sensation is caused by the similar (A 46). Speaking 
of the propagation of animals and human beings, Parmenides 
maintains that women are warmer (evidently, they are better 
and purer, though he is not quite explicit about the matter) 
than men; the birth of a male or female depends on which of 
the parents prevails and on the location of the foetus in the 
womb: “on the right, boys, on the left, girls...” (B 17). 

(2) Zeno of Elea. Zeno, son of Teleutagoras, was adopted 
by Parmenides. According to Plato, he was some twenty-five 
years younger than his foster-father and Apollodorus in¬ 
creases this difference to about forty years. Tradition holds 
him as a courageous political leader who fell victim in the 


87 








struggle against an Elean tyrant (the name of the tyrant 
varies). According to one story, the philosopher who headed 
a conspiracy against tyranny was seized and put to the 
torture. However, he did not give away his friends, but 
defamed the tyrant’s confidants. Being unable to endure the 
torture, he said he would whisper their names into the tyrant’s 
ear and, when the tyrant bent to him, Zeno dug his teeth 
into his enemy’s ear and was killed by his servants. In another 
version, he bit off his own tongue and spat it into the 
tyrant’s face, whereupon he was thrown into a large mortar 
and ground to death. 

According to Diogenes Laertius (IX, 29), “his views 
are as follows. There are worlds, but there is no empty space. 
The substance of all things came from hot and cold, and 
dry and moist, which change into one another. The generation 
of man proceeds from earth, and the soul is formed by a union 
of all the foregoing, so blended that no one element predomi¬ 
nates.” If Diogenes did not confuse Zeno with somebody else, 
we have reason to believe that the Elean deemed it necessary 
to expound not only the “truth,” but also the “opinion,” as 
was the case with his teacher Parmenides. Zeno is mainly 
known through his acute attempts to substantiate Par¬ 
menides’s doctrine by the dialectical refutation of his op¬ 
ponents. The method he used was based on the rule of 
contraries and consisted in adopting his opponent’s position 
as a premise and showing that it leads to absurdity. Ancient 
sources ascribe to Zeno forty arguments “against plurality,” 
i.e. in defence of the conception of one being, and five 
arguments “against motion,” in defence of the immobility 
of reality. These arguments are called “aporias” or insoluble 
problems. Among the aporias that came down to us some are 
directed against motion and four against plurality, dealing 
with the numerical and spatial aspects. They were aimed 
simultaneously against sensuous knowledge in general. 

In his aporias Zeno investigates the logical structure of 
the “world of opinion” which is dominated by number and 
motion and demonstrates by inductive inferences that these 
concepts are contradictory and should therefore be rejected. 
In other words, the very fact that the basic conceptions 
of ancient philosophy, mathematics and everyday conscious¬ 
ness turn out to be contradictory so that contrary conclusions 
can be drawn from identical premises is regarded by Zeno 
as sufficient reason for eliminating them from the realm of 


88 











true knowledge. Zeno’s “negative dialectics” is in fact based 
on the application of the laws of formal logic to the 
concept of the unity of reality. We cannot say with certainty 
who formulated these laws and in what form they were 
used by the Eleatics, yet there is no doubt that Parmenides 
consciously applied the laws of identity and non-contradic¬ 
tion, and Zeno also used the law of the excluded middle. 
His aporias clearly proceed from the assumption that if we 
have simultaneously A and non A and if non-A proves 
contradictory, it is bound to be false and A is bound to be 
true in accordance with the law of the excluded middle. 
Such is the logical structure of all Zeno’s aporias irrespective 
of their content. 

Aporias against the idea of plurality. “If things are 
Many, they must be both small and great: so small as to have 
no size, so large as to be infinite” (DK 29 B 1). This con 
elusion, revealing the self-contradictory nature of the notion 
of plurality was apparently aimed at the Pythagorean concep¬ 
tion of things as consisting of a number of corporeal elements 
(dots). Zeno's argument runs like this (Lee, 9 and 10, DK, 
fragments 1 and 2): 

(a) Infinitely large. If a thing has size and depth, one 
part of it must be separate from another. [Obviously the parts 
cannot occupy the same space.] Now one part of it must be 
the outer surface, which limits it, and lies beyond the inner 
part. If it is merely a geometrical surface (i.e. with no 
depth), it is not a part of a solid body at all, in fact it 
is nothing, and the object has no limiting surface; but if it 
has depth (i.e. is a solid body itself), then it too must have 
an outer part or surface and an inner part, and so on ad 
infinitum. 

(b) Infinitely small. The only alternative is that the 
parts of each thing have no magnitude: but an infinite num¬ 
ber of parts of no magnitude can never add up to a magnitude. 

Viewed from the quantitative aspect, the same argument 
runs as follows (Lee, 11; DK, fragment 3)T if there is 
a plurality, it must contain a finite number of components, 
because they must be neither more nor less than they are; 
on the other hand, it must contain an infinite number of 
components, because if they are separate at all, then, 
however close together they are, there will always be others 
between them, and yet others between those, and so on ad 
infinitum. In other words, a plurality must contain both 


89 









p 


a finite and an infinite number of components which is 
absurd. 

Aporias against space and sense perceptions. To dispose 
of the notion of space, Zeno puts forward the following argu 
ment: if a thing occupies a space, this space must be en 
closed in another space, and so on ad infinitum. Yet an infinite 
plurality of spaces is absurd, therefore space does not exist 
at all. 

To discredit sensation, Zeno uses a somewhat different 
argument which deals with the relation of part to whole and 
is known as the “millet seed.” Zeno asks his opponent if a 
single seed makes a sound in falling. If the opponent replies 
in the affirmative, Zeno asks whether half a seed makes a 
sound, and so on. To the negative reply he rejoins that there 
will be no such thing as sound since a sum of zeroes is still 
zero. In this way he supports Parmenides’s view that senses 
are not to be trusted (Lee, 37 and 38; DK A 29). 

The aporias against the notion of plurality testified to 
a crisis of ancient theoretical knowledge, the first of its 
kind. Its resolution in mathematics called for a substan¬ 
tive system of general axioms developed by Euclides. In phi¬ 
losophy the problem of being which turned out to be fraught 
with paradoxes was solved by ancient atomism. 

Aporias against the idea of motion. Zeno’s general argument 
is very simple: if a thing moves it must move either in the 
place where it is or in the place where it is not. The latter 
is impossible (nothing can act or be acted upon where it 
isn’t), and where a thing is, it must be at rest. Hence, “that 
which moves, moves neither in the place in which it is, nor 
in that in which it is not” (B 4). His second paradox known 
as “The dichotomy” says that an object which moves from 
one point to another will never reach its destination: it must 
first pass through half the distance, but before it can do this, 
it must traverse the half of the half, and so on ad infinitum. 
It means that motion can neither end nor begin. According 
to the third aporia known as “Achilles and the tortoise” 
the fleet-footed Achilles will never overtake a tortoise, 
because, while he is reaching what in any moment is the 
tortoise’s starting point, the tortoise will have moved further. 
As Achilles always must reach first the position previously 
occupied by the tortoise, he will never be able to catch up 
with it. In the fourth aporia, known as “The flying arrow” 
Zeno argues that an arrow which appears to be flying 


90 










is really stationary because at any moment of its flight it 
must occupy a space equal to itself: it can move neither 
in its place nor in the place where it is not. The fifth aporia 
called “The stadium” is as follows. In the stadium there are 
three rows, each containing an equal number of equal-sized 
objects arranged initially as follows: 

(a) AAAA 
BBBB -* 

cecc 

The A row is stationary, the B and C rows begin to move 
in opposite directions with equal velocity until all three 
rows are opposite each other: 

(b) AAAA 
BBBB 
CCCC 

The B row has passed half the A row, while the C row has 
passed the whole of the B row. Now, rows moving with equal 
velocity must take the same time to pass an equal distance. AH 
the rows are equal, but it takes row C as much time to pass 
row B , as it takes row B to pass only one half of row A. Hence, 
half a given time is equal to the whole, which is absurd. This, 
according to Zeno, again shows that motion is unreal (DK 
A 28). 

Analysing these puzzles, a modern reader will have no 
difficulty in solving them. Indeed, the aporias against the 
notion of plurality are based on the fallacious axiom of the 
ancients that a sum of an infinite number of magnitudes is 
bound to be infinite. It is well known to us that there exist 
infinite convergent series. We can accurately calculate when 
and in what point of the path Achilles will catch up with the 
tortoise. Suffice it to recall the elementary psychological 
notion of the threshold of perception and we shall stop mulling 
over the “millet seed.” Again, the author of the “stadium” 
puzzle appears very naive indeed in the light of the rule of 
the composition of velocities... Nevertheless, Zeno’s argu¬ 
ments continue exercising the minds of philosophers, logi¬ 
cians and mathematicians even in our days. Their historical 
significance consists in that they revealed the difficulties of 
the formation of scientific concepts of space, time and motion 
rooted in their dialectical nature and posed the problem 
of expressing their objective contradictoriness in logical 
forms. 

It is this contradictoriness alone that Zeno is interested 

91 



in: he proceeds from the assumption that what is contra¬ 
dictory cannot be thinkable and, consequently, cannot exist. 
The conclusion is that being can only be conceived as one mo¬ 
tionless and immutable reality. The untenability of Zeno’s 
conclusion is obvious. First, he does not see that the concept of 
one immutable being involves no less contradictory conse¬ 
quences as was already shown by Plato. Second, Zeno is not 
aware of the fact that thinking itself is subject to change and 
genesis, and that therefore what we cannot express in to-day’s 
concepts will make no problem for the logic of to-morrow. 
Third, he is still unable to accept the idea of the objective 
contradictoriness of reality contradictoriness to him is in¬ 
compatible with being. Nevertheless, Zeno’s arguments em¬ 
phasised, though in the negative form, the dialectical nature 
of motion. The real question that was posed before scientific 
thought was not whether there is motion, but how to express 
it in the logic of concepts. 1 

(3) Melissus. Melissus of Samos, son of Ithaegenes is 
known to have been elected admiral during the war with 
Athens and to have defeated the Athenian fleet in 441 B.C. 
Later, however, Pericles won a victory over the Samians and 
took the city after a nine-month seige. He rased the city walls, 
seized the ships and imposed a heavy indemnity on the citi¬ 
zens. Ancient sources give us no information on Melissus’s 
further fate. 

As a philosopher, Melissus remained firmly in-the Eleatic 
tradition and was called a follower of Parmenides. We possess 
ten fragments of his book On Nature or What Is, two of which 
being of considerable length. What with the extensive com¬ 
mentaries of the doxographers and the exposition of his teach¬ 
ing in the treatise On Melissus, Xenophanes and Gorgias 
(MXG) mentioned earlier, we can form a fairly accurate idea 
of his views. Melissus elaborated the arguments of Parmenides 


' The problem of the dialectics of motion has given rise to enormous 
literature. The classical solution of this problem in Marxist philosophy 
was given by Engels: "Motion itself is a contradiction: even simple 
mechanical change of position can only come about through a body being 
at one and the same moment of time both ... in one and the same place and 
also not in it” (Frederick Engels, Anti-Diihring, p. 148). This quotation 
boils down to a statement that motion cannot be expressed non-contradict- 
orily in static notions describing a moving body as opcupying a series of 
time-space positions. See also A.S. Bogomolov. “Dialectical Contradiction 
and Its Solution”, in: Philosophy in the USSR. Problems of Dialectical 
Materialism, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1977. 


92 












and Zeno in the light of the problems of ancient physiology 
and the doctrines of his contemporary Empedocles and. 
possibly Leucippus. A characteristic feature of his arguments 
consists in that he applied the Parmenidean thesis “what is, 
is” not only to being as a whole, but also to individual things. 
Denying plurality and all sensible objects and properties, 
Melissus asserts that if they existed, each would be such as it 
appeared to us at first, and not change nor become different, 
but each must always be as it is. However, “it seems to us that 
the hot becomes cold and the cold hot, and the hard soft 
and the soft hard, and that the living thing dies and comes 
into being from what is not living, and that all things 
change, and that what was and what now is are not at all the 
same, but iron which is hard is worn away by contact with the 
finger, and gold and stone and whatever seems to be entirely 
strong (is worn away); and that from water, earth and stone 
come into being. So that it comes about that we neither see nor 
know existing things” (B 8 [3]). 

The extension of the law of identity beyond the sphere 
of abstract being and its application to individual things 
reveals at once the fallacy of the reasoning whereby the prop¬ 
erties of sensible objects are derived from the notions of 
them, i.e. from thinking. Indeed, so long as we regard the 
speculative “essence” as something lying beyond “phenome¬ 
na,” we may still attempt to maintain a theory of its basic 
difference from appearance and contend that essence can only 
be discerned by reason owing to their contiguity. Yet as soon 
as we pass to sensible objects and declare them essentially 
immutable, we challenge elementary common sense and clear¬ 
ly reveal the untenability of the “physical” interpretation of 
being as motionless and changeless. 

For all his adherence to the Eleatic tradition, Melis¬ 
sus does not blindly follow all its tenets and makes a number 
of important improvements to the basic conception of being. 
First, he defines being as infinite (apeiron) both in space 
and time because it is eternal and immutable and therefore 
cannot have either beginning or end. Second, he considers 
being and its parts (individual objects) motionless in space 
begause there is no emptiness (“for the Empty is Nothing; and 
so that which is Nothing cannot be” [DK 30 B 7]) and they 
have nowhere to withdraw to. This argument was evidently 
directed against the atomistic doctrine which was based on the 
assumption of void. Melissus thus links reality with space 


93 



thereby emphasising its material character. Third, Melissus 
deprives being of anthropomorphic characteristics asserting 
that it feels neither pain nor grief, and, contrary to Xeno¬ 
phanes, does not see, hear or think... The term God used by 
Melissus as a synonym of reality has nothing in common 
with the traditional idea of God in Greek mythology. It is in 
fact the god of philosophy, the universal concept of the world. 
Finally, Melissus substantiates and elaborates Parmenides’s 
implicit principle Ex nihilo nihil fit (out of nothing comes 
nothing) which placed an extremely important part in Greek 
philosophy. 

The general trend of Melissus’s thought confined within 
the framework of Eleaticism suggests an obvious inclination 
towards materialism. The extant fragments of his book give no 
evidence for his adherence to the idea of identity of thought 
and being. His recognition of infinite reality gave Aristotle 
cause to assert that Melissus, in contrast to Parmenides, spoke 
of one reality “in relation to matter” (Met. I, 5, 986b), but 
not in relation to notion. This view was evidently shared 
by Galen (A 6). 

It is interesting that Melissus attacking the idea of 
plurality opens the way to atomism: “If Things were Many, 
they would have to be of the same kind as I say the One is” 
(B 8, 6). Yet this is precisely what the atomists averred: the 
world consists of a plurality of atoms, each possessing the 
properties of the Eleatics’s Being —it is one, indivisible, 
ungenerated and unperishable... 

* * * 


To conclude, the Eleatics made an important step forward 
in the philosophical cognition of the world by focusing on 
reason and thinking. They opened new horizons in philosophy 
and turned it from cosmological speculations to an examina¬ 
tion of the logic of thought. The Eleatics advanced the prob 
lem of distinction, even contrast, between being and appear¬ 
ance, essence and phenomena, truth and arbitrary opinion of 
the mortals. Parmenides and his followers in the fifth centu¬ 
ry B.C. made a great advance upon the Ionian concept of 
“existing things” and rose to a much higher level of 
philosophical generalisation, yet they were still unable to 
develop a full-fledged abstract notion of being as such in the 
Platonian sense. 


94 








Eleaticism was an important stage in the self-determina¬ 
tion of philosophy and had profound and highly contradictory 
consequences. First, it exploded the initial unity of Greek 
thought naive in its pristine simplicity but representing the 
royal road of philosophical development. Second, it put an 
end to the unity of the ancient world outlook, as much naive 
and based on direct contemplation. On turning into “Being” 
nature as unity in diversity became One as opposed to Many: 
"physis” was divorced from “metaphysis.” Third, the living 
and changing dialectical reality gave way to immutable and 
motionless metaphysical “being,” supranatural and antidia 
lectical, while intuitive comprehension, immediately valid, 
pictorial and contradictory was superseded by discursive 
and conclusive reasoning. 

This latter circumstance was of enormous importance for 
philosophical progress. The Eleatics revealed a new world, 
the world of concepts and ideas, and laid it open for explora 
tion. The paradoxes of ancient thought discovered by them 
induced the philosophers to focus on their origin —in mathe¬ 
matics, logic, epistemology and to look more closely into 
man’s position in the world and society and his attitude to the 
gods. Contradictions in thought could not be tolerated and 
the Eleatics’ negative dialectics was bound to bring about a 
positive dialectics in the shape of the logic and epistemology 
of Greek classical philosophy. The impact of the Eleatic 
school, however, was not confined to the field of logic —its 
doctrines led, on the one hand, to a revival of “physiology” 
or natural science and, on the other, to the problem of man 
and society. 











Chapter 4 

The “Physiologers” of the Fifth Century 

The Eleatic conception of being was based on a hypotheti¬ 
cal statement: if being is one, no motion is possible. It never 
occurred to the Eleatic philosophers to call in question the 
premise itself, and this is precisely what was done by the 
“physiologers” of the fifth century B.C., Empedocles, Anaxa 
goras and Archelaus. Taking motion for granted as a self-evi¬ 
dent fact and following the Eleatics’ logic which they consid 
ered infallible, these thinkers rejected the unity of the world 
as expounded by Parmenides, Melissus, the Milesians and 
Heraclitus and arrived at a concept of plurality of primary 
entities or elements. 

The “pluralists” as they were hailed by the contemporary 
historians of ancient philosophy averred that reality is Many, 
and not One. Echoing the Eleatics, they professed the ultimate 
permanence of the world and agreed that nothing could come 
out of nothing, yet they were also keenly aware of universal 
change and mobility of being. To reconcile both factors, they 
attributed permanence to the elements themselves, and 
change to their varying relations. Their great problem was to 
account for motion and show how generation and change 
were possible. They could no longer confine themselves to a 
mere postulate of motion it was necessary to explain its 
nature, reveal its sources and indicate the necessary condi¬ 
tions. 

10. Empedocles's Cosmic Cycle 

Empedocles (c. 490-430 B.C.) of Acragas (Sicily) came of a 
wealthy and prominent family. His father Meton enjoyed the 
reputation of a champion of democracy and his grandfather 
was known to have won a horse-race in the 71st Olympiad. 
Tradition describes him at once as poet and philosopher, 


96 









democratic reformer and mystic, physician and wonder-work 
er. He is said to, have thwarted an oligarchic conspiracy 
aiming to restore tyranny in Acragas, persuaded his fellow- 
citizens to abandon party strife and cultivate political equal¬ 
ity, and for his own part to have refused the offer of a king- 
ship. 

Stories of Empedocles are illustrative of his fame as a 
wonder-worker. One of them tells of an epidemic in the city of 
Selinus caused by pollution of the. nearby river. The plague 
was stopped by Empedocles, who diverted two neighbouring 
streams into the river and cleared its waters. According to 
another story, he kept a woman alive for thirty days without 
breath or pulse and brought her back to normal. It did not 
come down to us what reanimation techniques he had used, 
but the accounts of his feats caused him to be regarded by his 
superstitious contemporaries as a possessor of almost super¬ 
natural powers. His death is shrouded in mystery. According 
to one of the tales, he leapt into Etna in the midst of the 
celebration of his victory over plague when the grateful 
Selinuntines were paying his divine honours as he wanted 
them to believe in his ascension to Heaven and forever worship 
him as a god. According to another story, he made this 
sacrifice after the woman’s revival, but the volcano did not 
accept it and threw back his sandal... This latter version has 
a strong flavour of malicious slander likely to be circulated by 
Empedocles’s political opponents, the more so as other sources 
give a very plausible cause of his death: on the way to some 
public festival in Messina he fell, broke his thigh and the 
complication proved fatal. His tomb is in Megaris (Diog. 
L. VIII, 67 73). 

The essence of Empedocles’s teaching, according to 
Diogenes Laertius, consists in the following: “there are four 
elements, fire, water, earth, and air, besides friendship by 
which these are united, and strife by which they are 
separated” (Diog. L. VIII, 76). Empedocles wrote two poems 
entitled On Nature and Purifications. The first one was in two 
books (rolls) and comprised about 2000 lines, and the latter, 
religious in content and purpose, was in one. The surviving 
portions of both poems are very small, amounting to about 
340 and 100 lines respectively. Some sources also ascribe to 
Empedocles a poem called The Invasion of Xerxes , a Hymn 
to Apollo , and some other writings but they are of secondary 
importance from the philosophical viewpoint. 


7 039 


97 







The starting point of Empedocles’s reasoning is the recog¬ 
nition of motion and multiplicity in the world as attested to 
by senses and reason. Here he disagrees with Parmenides 
whom he may have heard together with Zeno. Yet he accepts 
Parmenides’s proof of the non-existence of emptiness or 
not being. This leaves him only one possibility to account for 
motion, generation and perishing, on the one hand, and for the 
plurality of the sensible world, on the other: the parts of 
reality might conceivably change their position with reference 
to one another, and plurality might be conceived as varying 
combinations of the four mingled elements. 

Hence, the difference between things derives from the 
correlation of elements that can be expressed in terms of 
mathematical proportions. As regards the One of Parmenides, 
it remains intact as one of the stages of the world process. 

Announcing the new order, based on four elements or 
“roots” —fire, earth, air, and water Empedocles gives them 
divine names: “shining Zeus and life bringing Hera, 
Aidoneus and Nestis, who lets flow from her tears the source 
of mortal life” (DK 31 B 6). They fill the universe and are 
in constant motion mingling with and separating from one 
another. They are eternal and immutable. The notion of these 
deities is not prompted by the anthropomorphic tradition: 
the elements precede gods and are gods themselves (A 40). 
In other words, the divine names are purely allegorical and 
do not in the least attest to mythological thinking. 

It is significant that Empedocles conceives the elements 
as immovable entities. Despite biomorphism which manifests 
itself in the very term “roots” and suggests the emergence of 
things in the manner of plants growing out of their roots, he 
understands genesis “like the putting together of a wall out of 
bricks and stones” (A 43). Hence another important cons¬ 
equence: nature ( physis ) is no longer regarded as the 
source of all things. In point of fact, Empedocles rejects 
the very idea of generation and destruction. “There is no 
coming into being of aught that perishes, nor any end for it in 
woeful death, but only mingling, and separation of what has 
been mingled.” “When the elements have been mingled..., 
then men say that (things) come into being; and when they 
are separated, they call that, as is the custom, woeful death” 
(B 8). 

True, Empedocles’s discourse is not entirely free from 
biological analogies. He says, for instance: “At a certain time 


98 












One alone grew out of Many, and at another it grew apart to be 
Many out of One” (B 26); “...Thus in that they have learned 
to grow one from many, and as the one is divided turn into 
many again...” (B 17, 1-2). On the whole, however, the idea 
of “mingling” predominates and it is only by way of “comply¬ 
ing with custom” that the philosopher uses the words “birth” 
and “death.” Things are conceived by Empedocles as combi¬ 
nations of elements mixed in definite proportions and he goes 
on to explain that flesh and blood contain equal quantities of 
all elements, bone is made up of two parts of water, two parts 
of earth and four parts of fire, etc. 

Having discarded the Ionian doctrine of hylosoism or uni¬ 
versally animated matter and facing the problem of motion, 
Empedocles is led to postulate, in addition to his four ele¬ 
ments, two contrary forces, Love and Strife, as motive causes. 
These movers are also understood as material agents possess¬ 
ing physical properties. Love, for instance, is “equal in length 
and breadth” to the elements and pervades the universe, 
s.e. is regarded as extended in space. Speaking of “cementing 
Love” and “baneful Strife,” Empedocles associates them 
respectively with moisture and fire, i.e. physical elements. 
On the other hand, however, they are anthropo- and socio- 
morphic forces, Love being also referred to as Amity, 
Harmony or Aphrodite, Strife, as hatred, war, or Ares. 
Empedocles thus brought together, as it were, the Italian 
and Ionian Muses—Heraclitean Strife and Pythagorean harm 
ony. The result was that the living harmony of opposites, 
the union of contrasts inherent in reality gave way to 
a cyclic change in time. 

The cosmic process described by Empedocles in terms of 
mixing and separation is an endless alternation of two opposite 
movements. When Love rules unopposed, all elements are 
fused into a unity and make a sphere, whereas Strife is held at 
its periphery. Then Strife enters the Sphere and begins to 
drive Love to the centre and separate the elements until it 
takes full possession. After this the reverse movement begins, 
Love reasserts itself and brings the separated elements 
together, restoring the sphere. This succession goes on for 
ever. Empedocles describes it in the following words: “I shall 
tell of a double (process); at one time it increased so as to be 
a single One out of Many; at another time again it grew 
apart so as to be Many out of One. There is a double creation 
of mortals and a double decline; the union of all things 







causes the birth and destruction of the one (race of mortals), 
the other is reared as the elements grow apart, and then flies 
asunder...” (DK 31 B 17). 

The nature of the process is thus contradictory: Love 
not only unites, but also separates and destroys, just like 
Strife which kills things by rearing them. 

Empedocles’s depiction of the cosmic cycle reveals a weak 
point in his concept of genesis. If nothing can come out of 
nothing, how can we explain the emergence of bone and flesh, 
wood and stone from the “roots”? His reference to definite 
proportions in the combinations of elements does not account 
for the fundamental difference between a mechanical 
aggregate of components and their structural combination in 
which components undergo qualitative changes and the 
“mixture” itself cannot be reduced to the sum of its ingredi¬ 
ents. Aristotle who attached great importance to this 
distinction pointed out that the real principle was something 
“higher” than a simple mixture or even a harmonious mingl¬ 
ing of elements in accordance with a certain law. He called it 
“entity,” “nature,” “form,” “idea” and contrasted it to matter 
and its combinations. 

Following other physiologers, Empedocles explained the 
emergence of the sun, the moon and other cosmic bodies by the 
operation of mechanical forces. He saw the cause of eclipses in 
that the light from one celestial body is obscured by another, 
e.g. the sun is eclipsed when the moon passes beneath it, and 
accounted for thunder and lightning by the collision of clouds. 

Of special interest is Empedocles’s unique theory of animal 
life. The Sicilian thinker distinguishes four stages of this 
process on the earth. In the first stage marked by the advance 
of Love “many foreheads without necks sprang forth, and 
arms wandered unattached, bereft of shoulders,'and eyes 
strayed about alone, needing brows” (B 57). In the second 
stage when Love was triumphant the limbs and organs 
combined at random to give rise to all sorts of monst¬ 
ers—“oxen with heads of men and men with heads of 
oxen.” They were unable to survive and produce viable 
posterity and therefore perished. The third stage resulting 
from the tidal reversal of the cosmic forces brought about 
“whole-natured” creatures without limbs, organs or distinc¬ 
tion of sex. The fourth stage, the one we live in, is characteris¬ 
ed by the continuing advance of Strife and growing discrimi 
nation. It is the familiar world of self-reproducing male and 


100 











female creatures divided into fishes, birds and land animals. 

Describing Empedocles’s conception of an organic evolu¬ 
tion, Aristotle writes: “Wherever then all the parts came 
about just what they would have been if they had come to be 
for an end, such things survived, being organized spotane- 
ously in a fitting way; whereas those which grew otherwise 
perished and continue to perish as Empedocles says his 
‘man-faced ox-progeny’ did...” (Arist. Phys. II, 8, 198b). 

For all the fancifulness of this conception which bears 
a very superficial resemblance to Darwin’s theory of evolution, 
it reveals a clear naturalistic trend. The Sicilian philosopher 
was the first to try to account for the purposeful constitution 
of living creatures without resorting to supernatural powers 
and divine providence. 

Empedocles’s doctrine combines with attempts to give 
a scientific explanation of psychic processes taking place in 
a living organism. Understanding “soul” as a harmonious 
and proportional constitution, Empedocles compares breath 
ing to the operation of a clepsydra (a device for lifting 
liquid from one vessel and releasing it into another), the 
inspired air corresponding to the water in the clepsydra, and 
the blood to the retreating air (B 100). Sensation, too, is 
explained as a purely physical process: the effluences which 
issue from all things enter pores in human bodies and are 
perceived by like: “For by earth, he says, we see earth, by 
water water, by ether godlike ether, by fire wasting fire, love 
by love, and strife by gloomy strife...” (Arist. Met. Ill, 4, 
1000b). 

In contrast with those who sang the praises of infallible 
reason, Empedocles gives priority to senses: “Use whatever 
way of perception makes each thing clear...” (B 3 12). Yet he 
does not shut his eyes to the difficulties confronting man on 
the path to knowledge and is well aware of the “miseries that 
blunt thought,” the fallibility of senses, the brevity of human 
life, the inadequacy of experience, etc. According to Sextus 
Empiricus, Empedocles believed the truth to be attainable so 
far as the reason of man could reach and maintained that 
“the thing perceived by each sense is trustworthy, as the 
reason is in control of them...” (Sext. Adv. math. VII, 124). 

The main problem in the interpretation of Empedocles's 
heritage consists in the apparently glaring inconsistencies 
between his two poems. The one that we have been consid¬ 
ering so far (On Nature) presents a scientific picture of 


101 







reality and aims at a rational explanation of the world, 
whereas the other called Purifications treats of the immortali 
ty and transmigration of souls, describes the wanderings of 
the spirit banished for its sins from the realm of the blessed 
and doomed by gods to undergo a cycle of woeful incarnations 
in various forms of earthly life, speaks of prophecies and 
purification by magic rites, abstention from meat, etc. What 
is more, in the second poem the author himself turns into an 
immortal god and, conscious of his superiority, addresses 
common mortals with lofty arrogance. Of course, one might 
try to account for this transformation by an inconsistency of 
an ambitious philosopher proud of the awe and reverence he 
inspires in common folk: “I go about you an immortal god, no 
more a mortal, so honoured of all, as is meet, crowned with 
fillets and flowery garlands. Straightway as soon as I enter 
with these, men and women, into flourishing towns, I am 
reverenced and tens of thousands follow, to learn-where is 
the path which leads to welfare, some desirous of oracles, 
others suffering from all kinds of disease, desiring to hear 
a message of healing” (Diog. L. VII, 62). 

Such an explanation, however, hardly seems convincing. 
Nor can we accept the opinion (e.g. Zeller’s) that the two 
poems were written quite independently of each other or that 
they represented different periods of philosopher’s life, as 
there is no evidence for any chronological conclusion. We are 
rather inclined to agree with Jaeger in that the understand¬ 
ing. of Empedocles’s philosophy requires an insight into the 
intellectual world of a Sicilian Greek of the fifth century 
B.C. In Jaeger’s opinion, it clearly revealed the internal 
heterogeneity resulting from different cultural influences in 
Sicily and Magna Graecia, and at the same time showed the 
affinity of the two neighbouring centres of Western Greek 
colonisation. The spirit of this geographical region manifested 
itself in the dualism of Empedocles’s philosophy. 1 Empedocles 
synthesised, as it were, the naturalistic “enlightenment” 
coming from Ionia and first represented by Xenophanes 
with the local Orphic tradition. His “physics” which has very 
little in common with science in the modern sense of the 
word is in fact a philosophical system aimed at explaining the 
world and man in naturalistic terms, predominantly by 
allegorising the traditional polytheistic religion, and based 

1 W. Jaeger, Die Theologie der ruhen griechischen Denker, 
Kohlhammer, Stuttgart; 1964, S. 151. 

102 










on the concept of an all-embracing spherical deity very 
much after the fashion of the One God of Xenophanes: “For he 
is not equipped with a human head on his body, nor from 
his back do two branches start; [he has] no feet, no swift 
knees, no hairy genital organs; but he is Mind, holy and 
ineffable, and only Mind, which darts through the whole 
universe with its swift thoughts” (B 134). As distinct from 
the poem On Nature concerned with the outside physical 
world and the physiology of living beings, the Purifications 
concentrates on man’s intellectual and ethical world and 
treats the subject predominantly from the idealistic and 
religious viewpoint. The problems of conduct and morality, 
for one, are intimately bound up by Empedocles with 
religious ideas and practices, though Jaeger, in our opinion, 
somewhat overestimates the general importance of Orphic 
mysticism and religious ethics in Empedocles’s philosophy as 
a whole. 

The religious doctrine expounded in the Purifications 
is complementary to Empedocles’s “physical” conceptions 
expressing his philosophical views in the language of tradi¬ 
tional beliefs and images. Though the surviving portion of the 
Purifications is too small to reproduce its logic, it clearly 
reveals important parallels between the two poems attesting to 
their affinity and interdependence. One of the many examples 
of their close relationship is the cosmic era of Love or divine 
Sphere in the poem On Nature which is echoed in the Purifica¬ 
tions describing the initial state of human society as the reign 
of Cypris of Love: “...There was no god Ares, nor Battle-Din, 
nor Zeus the King, nor Cronos nor Poseidon, but only Cypris 
the Queen. These men sought to please her with pious 
gifts...” (B 128). 

It should be noted, however, that this “adaptation” of 
philosophical ideas to contemporary mentality had to be paid 
dearly for, as it opened the door wide to unrestrained religious 
imagination and gave occasion to later commentators to 
interpret the doctrine of the Purifications in terms of original 
sin, fall and expiation. 1 Such interpretations, however, can 
hardly be considered tenable in view of their obvious 
arbitrariness. 


1 Cf. G. S. Kirk, J. E. Raven, The Presocratic Philosophers, pp. 348-355. 


103 








II. Birth of Philosophy in Athens. Anaxagoras 

Anaxagoras of Clazomenae (c. 500-428 B.C.) came from 
a wealthy and influential family, but showed no interest in 
practical matters, gave up his inheritance and devoted himself 
exclusively to the contemplation of nature. He taught philos¬ 
ophy, astronomy, geometry and was known as an interpreter 
of Homer. According to Diogenes Laertius, he declared that 
the sun was not a god but a mass of red hot metal, that 
the moon was similar to the earth and there were dwellings, 
hills and ravines on it. He also taught that comets were 
a conjunction of planets emitting flames and shooting stars 
were a sort of sparks thrown off by the air, that thunder was 
a clashing together of the clouds, lightning their violent 
friction, and insisted that the whole firmament was made of 
stones, the rapidity of rotation caused it to cohere and that if 
this were relaxed it would fall. 1 

Anaxagoras was the first to start teaching philosophy in 
Athens and the first to be prosecuted and condemned for it. 
According to one of the accounts ascribed to the fourth centu 
ry B.C. historian Ephorus, at the beginning of the Peloponne¬ 
sian War (c. 431 B.C.) well-known religious fanatic Diopei 
thes introduced a bill against those who did not acknowledge 
divine things or who gave instruction about celestial 
phenomena, with the particular aim of discrediting Pericles 
through Anaxagoras. Fearing for Anaxagoras, Pericles 
arranged for his friend’s flight from Athens (DK 59 A 17). 
Other accounts tell us that the philosopher was tried and 
sentenced to a fine of five talents and to exile. Some sources 
give a third version in which Anaxagoras was sentenced to 
death in his absence. Be that as it may, his persecution was 
undoubtedly due to ideological and political reasons and led 
to his exile. Anaxagoras ended his days at Lampsacus, a trade 
city on the shore of Hellespont. 

Among Anaxagoras’s pupils tradition lists Pericles, Euripi¬ 
des, philosophers Archelaus of Athens and Metrodorus of 
Lampsacus. He wrote as least one treatise which was widely 
known in Athens and, as Socrates says in the Apology, 
anybody could buy his works in the book market for one 
drachma at most (Platon. Apol. 26e). 

We possess 23 fragments of Anaxagoras’s treatise which 
were widely commented on. Despite considerable difficulties 


1 Diogenes Laertius, op. cit., Vol. 1, pp. 137-143. 


104 






involved in the interpretation of the philosopher’s doctrine, 
the extant quotations make it possible to reconstruct his views 
with a fair degree of authenticity. 

It will not be sinning against the truth to say that Ana¬ 
xagoras’s philosophy centred around the problem of 
becoming. The surrounding world gives us irrefutable 
evidence of constant change: things come into being and 
perish, change their shape and colour, temperature and taste, 
density and smell. On the other hand, there is no doubt 
that becoming and perishing are impossible and “nothing can 
come from nothing.” Anaxagoras presents the problem in 
this concrete form: “How can hair come from not hair, and 
flesh from not-flesh?” (B 10). For the Ionian philosophers 
the answer was clear: everlasting and living nature is endowed 
with unlimited productive power and all things are brought to 
birth and again dissolved into it. The Eleatics held that 
becoming and perishing, motion and change simply do not 
exist in the world of truth. Birth and death for Empedocles 
were “only mixture and separation of what has been mixed,” 
yet the problem remains open as it is not clear how bone 
and flesh, wood and hair can come from water and earth, 
air and fire. Clearly, they were not contained in the “roots” 
and could not come into being out of “what is not”... 

Anaxagoras gives the following answer: all things come 
from like, i.e. from particles of a definite quality or “seeds.” 
The quality of a thing as a whole depends on the quantitative 
predominance of particles of one or another kind. At the same 
time “there is a portion of everything in everything,” but the 
particles present in a smaller quantity are not perceived by the 
senses and a thing is named after the quality that is the most 
conspicuous. Anaxagoras, in fact, distinguishes here between 
the quantitative and qualitative aspects of reality identifying 
qualitative definiteness with the quantitative prevalence of 
qualitative particles of one or another kind. This conception, 
however crude and contradictory, as will be shown later, 
represents the first attempt to tackle the problem of dia¬ 
lectical unity of quantity and quality. 

The interpretation of Anaxagoras’s theory of genesis has 
given rise to much controversy. According to Aristotle, 
Anaxagoras constructs a world by separation from a mixture 
which includes “the homoeomers 1 and the opposites” as 

1 The word meaning “things of like parts” was introduced by Aristotle as 
synonymous with Anaxagoras’s “seeds.” Though the term “homoeomer” 


105 








elements (Arist. l’ltys. I, 4, 187a). The extant fragments from 
Anaxagoras’s treatise describing the components of the 
original mixture seem to be rather ambiguous. On the one 
hand, Anaxagoras speaks of substances infinite in number and 
smallness, as well as of universally dominating aether and air 
(and, probably, other elements which are not mentioned in the 
fragment cited), on the other hand, he refers to seeds which 
are also infinite in number and not at all like one another, and 
names such constituents of the mixture as “moist and dry, hot 
and cold, bright and dark,” as well as “a great quantity of 
earth” (DK 59 B 1 and DK 59 B 4, respectively). 

This evidence prompted a conclusion that Anaxagoras, 
contrary to his own premises, conceived the elements (aether, 
air, water, earth, and fire) not as essentially combinations of 
various seeds (panspermia ), but as “quality-things,” direct 
combinations of qualities, and that the specificity of each 
separate element was determined by the quantitative 
predominance of some of these qualities over their opposites, 
whereas seeds floated, as it were, among the elements 
combining into things. 

This interpretation which has gained wide currency in the 
relevant literature meets with one serious objection: bow can 
elements evolve from opposites, i.e. not-elements? How can 
aether come from not-aether, and fire from not-fire? What is 
more, it is contradicted by other doxographic evidence with 
a sufficiently ancient tradition behind it. For instance, 
describing Anaxagoras’s theory and evidently relying on 
Theophrastus, Lucretius quotes Anaxagoras as saying that fire 
comes from fire and moisture from moisture (1.835), i.e. 
that elements are built up from their seeds. This testimony 
is borne out by Simplicius ascribing to Anaxagoras these 
words: “...all homoeomers as, for instance, water or fire or 
gold...” (A 41). 

Anaxagoras’s views, complex as they are, should not be 
overcomplicated. He firmly adhered to the principle that all 
substances and all things came from like, i.e. from infinitely 
divisible particles or seeds. 1 However, to maintain this 
fundamental principle which amounts, in fact, to the ex 

was mil used by Xnaxagoras tiiniseif, il aptly conveys the “mechanistic" 
essence of his doctrine: when homoeomers are “sorted out,” like combines 
with like. 

1 As regards the opposites or contraries mentioned in the fragments and 
often commented on by doxographers, they are evidently traceable to the 
Ionian philosophical legacy where they played an important constructive 
role. Anaxagoras’s understanding of opposites (dry and moist, bright and 

106 















nihilo nihil (nothing from nothing) formula throughout his 
doctrine, Anaxagoras was compelled to introduce two more 
postulates: “there is a portion of everything in everything” 
and “everything comes from everything.” 

Indeed, describing the initial state of the universe, Anaxa¬ 
goras says: “All Things were together, infinite in number 
and in smallness. For the Small also was infinite. And since all 
were together, nothing was distinguishable because of its 
smallness. For Air and Aether dominated all things, both of 
them being infinite. For these are the most important (Ele¬ 
ments) in the total mixture, both in number and in size” 
(B l). 1 Here the principle of “everything in everything” is 
formulated in its “weaker” sense, i.e. in relation to the total 
mixture or the initial state of the world. Fragment B 6 gives 
the definition of the principle in the “stronger” sense, because 
everything has a portion of everything: “...And since there 
are equal (quantitative) parts of Great and Small, so too simi¬ 
larly in everything there must be everything. It is not pos¬ 
sible [for them | to exist apart, but all things contain a por¬ 
tion of everything. Since it is not possible for the Least to 
exist, it cannot be isolated, nor come into being by itself; but 
as it was in the beginning, so now all things are together. 
In all things there are many things, and of the things sepa¬ 
rated off, there are equal numbers in [the categories] Great 
and Small” (B 6). 2 

Anaxagoras’s argument in this fragment can be put thus: 
(1) everything is not only infinitely divisible, but also is 
actually divided, therefore it is not possible for the Least to 
exist; (2) particles of matter, even infinitesimally small, 
cannot be regarded as having no magnitude at all, since in 
this case they would be “not-being” which is impossible; 
(3) insofar as things are actually divided, the large and the 
small have equal number of components; (4) in view of the 
above, things cannot be increased or decreased in relation to 
the number of their parts; (5) since there is no “smallest,” 
particles of matter can penetrate into any space however small 
it may be, i.e. into other particles. 

dark, etc.) is indicative of a transition from the concept of “things” which 
may “separate-off” from the total mixture to the concept of qualities 
inherent in the combination of seeds, i.e. “things.” At any rate, Aristotle 
who considered the evolution of elements from the opposites to be the basic 
world building process (see De gen.etcorr. II. 3) never ascribed this concep 
non to Anaxagoras. 

' Ancilla..., DK 59 Bl„ p. 83. 

Ibid., p. 84. 


107 






It is significant that Anaxagoras's and Zeno s arguments 
seem to represent the same train of thought echoing 
one another. Compare, for instance, the following statements: 


Anaxagoras: 

Each thing is to itself 
both great and small (B 3) 
These things being thus 
separated off, one must 
understand that all things 
are in no wise less or more 
(for it is not possible for 
them to be more than All), 
but all things are forever 
equal (in quantity) (B 5) 


Zeno: 

If Things are Many, they 
must be both small and 
great: so small as to have no 
size, so large as to be 
infinite (DK 29 B 1) 

If Things are Many, they 
must be as many as they are 
and neither more nor less 
than this. But if they are as 
many as they are, they must 
be finite (in number). If 
Things are Many, they are 
infinite in number (DK 29 
B 3) 


The polemical resonance of these statements is unmistak¬ 
able and we seem to have better reason to suppose that Zeno 
was challenging Anaxagoras than the other way round, since 
the latter’s argument appears to be too paradoxical to be 
opposed to Zeno’s reasoning ostensibly based on common sen¬ 
se but leading, nevertheless, to absurdities. It is obvious that if 
Zeno’s logic proves correct, Anaxagoras’s argument based on 
the principle “everything contains everything” is to be 
rejected, and vice versa. Now let us express Anaxagoras’s 
assertions in a mathematical form: 


[a,, b, c, d, e, f] + a = [a, b, c, d, e, /]; 

A + A = A ; 

M - A=M = M + A, 

where [ | is the set symbol; a, b, c, d etc. are set members; A 

is the derived set and M is the infinite set. Once we do so it be¬ 
comes clear that Anaxagoras’s statements are in accord with 
the set theory, whereas Zeno’s reasoning reflects the notions of 
ancient arithmetics based on the assumption that the sum of 
an infinite number of magnitudes is infinitely large. Indeed, 
B 3 formulates a well-known property of infinite sets equipo- 
tence of a whole and its part (e.g. of a point set of line 
segment and its portion, of natural number series and even 
number series), whereas B 5 expresses the principle of the 
composition of sets: if a set is defined as “all”, e.g. a set of 


108 









mammals living at present on the earth, we cannot increase it 
by adding one more mammal as it has already been taken into 
account by the set definition. Nor can we “subtract” 
anything from an infinite set, i.e. diminish it in number. 

Of course, Anaxagoras’s idea of the infinitesimal, paradox 
ical as it was from the viewpoint of ancient mathematics, did 
not amount to the formulation of the set theory. Nevertheless, 
it opened up new prospects for the development of mathemat¬ 
ics and served as an important instrument for the substan¬ 
tiation of his “physical” system. 

It should be noted that Anaxagoras’s doctrine of matter 
had certain weak points which were evident even to ancient 
thinkers. Indeed, if a body is made up of “seeds” or homo- 
eomers, it is nothing but an aggregate which can be divided 
into an infinite number of parts and these (or their like) can 
be again put together. Now suppose we try to divide a ... 
human being. The man will be inevitably destroyed even 
if we “divide” him in only two parts, say, the head and the 
body, not to speak of dividing him into thousands of parts 
as was the case with Zeno who is said to have been crushed in 
a mortar. No matter how hard we may subsequently try to join 
his parts again, we shall never succeed in restoring him to the 
initial condition. To do so, it is necessary not only to join the 
particles of matter, but also impart to them the human “form” 
which alone, 'according to Aristotle, can fuse them into 
a single object and give them the unity of the organism. 

Another weakness of the doctrine consisted in the 
following: if a hair cannot come from a not hair, and flesh 
cannot come from not flesh, how can we account, for instance, 
for the genesis of a raven from a not raven (raven’s flesh 
and bones)? To be consistent, we would have to conceive 
“seeds” not only as minute particles of bone, flesh, etc., but 
also as minute ravens, human beings, etc. This would bring 
us right to the preformationist theory which dominated 
biology in the seventeenth century and maintained that the 
embryo of an animal or a plant was completely like the mature 
organism except that it was very small... 

Though Anaxagoras himself did not arrive at such a conclu 
sion, his principle of “everything in everything” clearly leads 
to a mechanistic conception of the whole and to a denial of the 
dialectical unity of the whole and its parts. 

If there is a portion of everything in everything, everything 
may evolve from everything. The principle of “everything 


109 






from everything” is a characteristic feature of the mythologi 
cal mode of thinking according to which anything can turn 
into anything else and acquire any properties and qualities. 
Anaxagoras, however, gives an entirely different interpreta¬ 
tion to this principle. “Everything from everything” in 
his doctrine, being just a paraphrase of the “everything in 
everything" principle,Is an inference from a rational scientific 
proposition which has nothing to do with mythology. At the 
same time it is directed against the Ionian philosophers 
whose doctrines centered around a primary substance, “the 
principle and the element,” out of which all things come and 
into which they all perish. Anaxagoras, according to Simplici¬ 
us, “saw that everything comes to be out of everything, if not 
directly then serially (as air from fire, water from air, earth 
from water, stone from earth, and fire again from stone)” 
and explained it in this way: “...Before these things were 
separated off, all things were together” (A 45). 

Though the principle “everything from everything” is 
indeed universal (what is, for instance,“fire again from 
stone”? Just strike a stone with a piece of iron or another 
stone and see...), its main sphere of application is cosmogony. 
At first, all things were “together,” i.e. matter was a uniform 
mass. Since this mass contains predominating quantities of 
aether (fire) and air, and also because its component parts 
are infinitely small, the aether-air mixture appears to be 
qualitatively indefinite, though in fact each of its particles 
represents a certain quality. 

By contrast with the primary substance of the Ionians who 
did not know immovable “matter,” the main characteristic 
feature of the original mixture or world’s initial state in 
Anaxagoras’s system is immobility. The nearest to his 
conception is the One of the Eleatics or the Sphere of 
Empedocles. Yet unlike the former which remains motionless, 
and the latter which differentiates under the effect of Strife, 
the initial mixture in Anaxagoras is set in motion by Mind or 
Nous ( Noys ). Anaxagoras’s understanding of Mind caused 
lengthy debates among his commentators: some held he 
conceived it as intelligence, others, as some kind of matter. 
However, such a separation was alien to Anaxagoras himself 
who could not yet counterpose matter and immaterial spirit 
and still viewed nature as a whole in accordance with the an¬ 
cient conception of the world. This opposition was a pro 
duct of the later philosophical development and did not exer 








cise the philosophers’ minds till at least Plato. The problem 
that faced Anaxagoras was different: could the “natural” fac 
tors account for all phenomena in the world and for the cos 
mic process at large, or was it necessary to seek for some 
immaterial agency to explain harmony and order in the 
universe? This problem could not in fact arise before Parmeni¬ 
des and the Eleatics, as the all-generating “nature” ( pkysis ) 
of the ancients did not need any supernatural agents. 
Parmenides’s abstraction of the one immutable and motionless 
being had one important consequence: those who wished to 
account for motion after him needed an outside source that 
had things moving. 

According to Aristotle, the conception of Mind was a tre 
mendous step forward: “...When one man said, then, that 
reason was present as in animals, so throughout nature—as 
the cause of order and of all arrangement, he seemed like 
a sober man in contrast with the random talk of his prede¬ 
cessors. We know that Anaxagoras certainly adopted these 
views” (Arist. Met. I, 3, 984 b). 1 Analysis of extant 
fragments shows that Anaxagoras conceived Nous as having 
all knowledge of everything, greatest power, ability to steer 
all things and “purity” in the physical (and, probably, moral) 
sense: “Other things all contain a part of everything, but 
Mind is infinite and self-ruling, and is mixed with no Thing, 
but is alone by itself. If it were not by itself, but were mixed 
with anything else, it would have had a share of all Things, 
if it were mixed with anything; for in everything there is 
a portion of everything, as I have said before. And the things 
mixed (with Mind) would have prevented it, so that it could 
not rule over any Thing in the same way as it can being alone 
by itself. For it is the finest of all Things, and the purest, and 
has complete understanding of everything, and has the 
greatest power. All things which have life, both the greater 
and the less, are ruled by Mind”(B 12). 2 

Having thus endowed Nous with every imaginable divine 
quality, Anaxagoras seems to have stopped at a loss not 
knowing what to do with it. According to Alexander of Aphro 
disias, a well-known commentator of Aristotle in later ant¬ 
iquity, Anaxagoras conceived Mind only as the cause of mot 
ion, since “when Mind began the motion, there was a separat 
ing-off from all that was being moved; and all that Mind set 


The Basic Works..., pp. 695-696. 
•' Ancilla..., p. 84, DK 4 59 B 12. 


Ill 





in motion was separated (internally); and as things were mov 
ing and separating off (internally), the revolution greatly 
increased this (internal) separation” (B 13). In other words, 
Anaxagoras confined the action of Mind to setting in motion 
the original inert mass and explained the rest of the process 
by a vortex which separates all substances from one another 
and divides them into smaller fractions before combining them 
in whole things in an orderly manner. Just as Xenophanes is 
the first pantheist in the history of Greek philosophy, so Ana¬ 
xagoras is the first deist who allowed cosmic Mind to givd 
the world the “initial push” and then let it take care of itself 
as best it could following natural laws. 

As regards generation and perishing, Anaxagoras’s views 
are very similar to those of Empedocles: “The Greeks have an 
incorrect belief concerning Coming into Being and Passing 
Away. No Thing comes into being or passes away, but it is mi¬ 
xed together or separated from existing Things. Thus they 
would be correct if they called coming into being ‘mixing,’ and 
passing away ‘separation-off’...” (B 17). Unfortunately, we 
have no description of the mechanism whereby “seeds” joined 
into bodies. In all likelihood, Anaxagoras understood the pro¬ 
cess as essentially a mechanical combination of minute partic¬ 
les of matter into orderly things, a sort of “docking” of 
“seeds.” On the other hand, the infinite divisibility of seeds 
suggests a more intimate process and leads one to suppose 
that the philosopher conceived it as a real fusion. The par¬ 
ticles of matter or seeds combining in a body and forming its 
individual organs and tissues penetrate, as if by diffusion (in 
accordance with the “everything in everything” principle), 
all other organs and tissues and the body itself is connected in 
a similar manner with the entire universe. 

Anaxagoras’s doctrine viewed as a whole reveals a glaring 
contradiction. On the one hand, he introduced Mind (Nous) to 
account for the order in the universe. On the other, he restrict¬ 
ed the function of Mind to the act of the initiating motion in 
primary substance and made no use of it to explain the causes 
of particular events and phenomena. Speaking of Anaxago¬ 
ras’s conception of Mind, Plato wrote: “I found my philoso 
pher altogether forsaking mind and making no appeal to any 
other principle of order, but having recourse to air, and ether, 
and water and many other eccentricities (Platon, Phaed. 
98b). Echoing Plato, Aristotle caustically remarked that 
“Anaxagoras uses reason as a deus ex machina for the making 


(12 









of the world, and when he is at a loss to tell from what cause 
something necessarily is, then he drags reason in, but in all 
other cases ascribes events to anything rather than to reason” 
(Met. I. 4, 985a). This opinion was on the whole correct. Ana¬ 
xagoras indeed resorted to Nous only in those cases when the 
natural factors, such as separation off and division, combina¬ 
tion and disintegration, movement and speed did not work. In 
point of fact, his idealism stepped in to fill the gaps in his 
crude reductionist explanations which were regarded as the 
most consistent expression of materialism. 

It should be noted at this point that Anaxagoras evidently 
placed Mind in a special relation to the organic world and al¬ 
lowed it to retain there some form of control even after the 
prime impulse. Thus, in fragment 12 he says: “All things 
which have life, both the greater and the less, are ruled by 
Mind. Mind took command of the universal revolution, so as to 
make [things] revolve at the outspt” (DK 59 B 12). The 
philosopher is compelled to appeal to Intellection for help in 
his attempt to explain harmony and order in the world. Nous 
after all is the moving cause separated from matter moved, it 
is the principle of cosmic order separated from cosmos itself. 
The split of a single “nature” indivisible, homogeneous and 
everlasting, into the prime cause and the inert matter was pure 
idealism and a step back from the real world, yet it was at the 
same time a prerequisite for the study of Mind that made pos¬ 
sible the science of logic. 

Anaxagoras’s doctrine which was the first philosophical 
teaching in Attica and reflected conflicting tendencies in the 
development of Greek thought had a tremendous impact on 
the subsequent intellectual history of the Hellenic world. It 
mainly manifested itself in the all-round growth of scientific 
and philosophical knowledge, glorification of reason and dec¬ 
line of old beliefs and traditions. The influence of Anaxago¬ 
ras’s philosophical conceptions as such was less conspicuous: 
in times when the intellectual life of society centred upon 
humanistic problems, “physics” was inevitably relegated to a 
secondary plan. Ethical problems did not fall within the sphe¬ 
re of Anaxagoras’s interests, though it cannot be said that he 
ignored them altogether. 1 In some of his dicta Anaxagoras 

' Something of an exception is fragment 4 with its rather obscure re¬ 
ference to another world inhabited by people similar to those living on the 
earth, having similar cities, and moon and sun and celestial bodies, the earth 
growing all sorts of produce for them. It is hard to say if the fragment speaks 
of the multitude of inhabited worlds or just of a peculiar microworld similar 


8-039 


113 





exalted the life of contemplation and learning which opens the 
way to freedom. Anaxagoras did not associate happiness with 
wealth and power saying thata blissful man would look ridicu¬ 
lous to the crowd. When asked why to be born was better than 
not to be born, be replied that a man would choose to be born 
“in order to study the heavens and the whole universe” (A30). 

Ethical matters, the problems of man and society received 
much greater prominence in the works of Anaxagoras’s pupil 
Archelaus who was called the last of the physical philosophers 
of the fifth century in Athens. Our knowledge of his teaching 
is very meagre and fragmentary. According to Diogenes Laer¬ 
tius (II, 16), “he philosophised about laws and things fair 
and just.” Suda (DK 60 A 2) adds that in his opinion “what is 
just and what is base depends not upon nature but upon con¬ 
vention.” However, the antithesis between nature and conven¬ 
tion was common to numerous ethical theories of the late fifth 
century and we can only guess if Archelaus was its originator. 
In his “physics” he combines Anaxagoras’s theory of “seeds” 
with the teachings of Anaximenes and Diogenes of Apollonia 
about air as the primary substance of things. He appears to 
have shared the latter’s view that air possesses reason and 
therefore performs the function of the Prime Mover. However, 
according to Hippolytus, Archelaus believed that movement 
started with the separation out of the hot and the cold from 
the original mixture, the hot moving and the cold staying still 
(A 18). The only fragment that came down to us from Arche¬ 
laus, “coldness is the bond [ desmos ] of the earth,” 
survived in a corrupt theological context. 

In contrast with Anaxagoras, Archelaus understood mind as 
a mixture of special “seeds.” His conception of the origin of 
life was also different from that of Anaxagoras: animals’ seeds 
did not fall on the earth with rain as was stated by his teacher, 
but the animals were born from the earth when it was warm, 
and it sent up an ooze resembling milk to serve as nour¬ 
ishment, and it was only later on that they were engendered 
from one another. The cosmologies of both philosophers, 
naturally, were different in details. 

Archelaus terminated the early stage in the development of 
ancient “physics.” Now natural philosophy takes up its place 
in the same rank with other philosophical disciplines, next to 
logic and ethics. 


to ours. It is also possible that Anaxagoras here ventures a hypothesis that 
a world like ours can emerge in any part of the universe given the correspond¬ 
ing conditions. 





Chapter 5 


Philosophical Ferment in the Second Half of the Fifth 
Century. The Sophists, Socrates and Socratic Schools 

12. Sophistic philosophy 

In the second half of the fifth century B.C. Ancient Greece 
was at the height of its fame and power. The Persian wars end¬ 
ed in the magnificent victory of joined Greek forces over 
their formidable enemy and the Hellenic polises united in two 
military coalitions under Athens and Sparta held undivided 
sway over the Mediterranean. The threat of foreign invasion 
was averted and the Greek world was consolidating its posi 
tions vigorously planting new colonies. The thriving handi 
crafts and agriculture, profitable both in Central Greece due to 
the proximity to densely populated urban areas and on fertile 
colonial lands, the expanding trade linking Greek polises with 
one another and Hellas with other countries of the Mediterra¬ 
nean and the Black Sea, as well as the extensive construction 
activities in cities stimulated economic growth and provided 
jobs for rapidly increasing population. Yet this apparent pros¬ 
perity did not bring peace to the country. Greek city states had 
widely diverse political systems and occupied different posi¬ 
tions in the hierarchical structures of the two belligerent coa¬ 
litions the Athenian alliance and the Peloponnesian league 
headed by Sparta. The sharpening rivalry between them cul¬ 
minated in devastating Peloponnesian wars. 

Social and political turmoil could not but affect every aspect 
of the Greek citizen’s life. Borning issues were carried to the 
city square, sharp controversies flared up in the assembly and 
law-courts. The assembly had to hold frequent sessions and 
engage in protracted debate, the courts were jampacked with 
suits for high ‘treason and embezzlement, nonpayment of 








debts and corruption, larceny and blasphemy... To recapture 
the spirit of the epoch, one only needs to read Aristophanes’s 
comedy The Wasps which gives a vivid picture of the Atheni¬ 
an society of that time, with all its bustle, everyday cares and 
conflicting tendencies. 

Social and political changes called for new skills and abili¬ 
ties. Anyone aspiring for a political career needed an insight 
into the psychology of individuals and the crowd so as to be 
able to use to advantage people’s traditional beliefs and weak¬ 
nesses. The indispensable qualification of a politician was the 
ability to speak persuasively in public, to evoke sympathy 
with himself and stir hostility or even hatred for his opponent, 
to seize upon any loophole in laws and decrees. The social and 
political conditions in the fifth century, the collapse of tradi¬ 
tional morals based on unthinking custom proved highly fa¬ 
vourable for the emergence of such personages as professional 
informers and professional defenders, ready to take any side 
and denounce or justify any action with equal success. No 
wonder that the fifth century saw the birth of rhetoric and so¬ 
phistics as the arts of citizenship. Rhetoric, according to Aris¬ 
totle, was necessary for everybody, as “all men attempt to dis¬ 
cuss statements and to maintain them, to defend themselves 
and to attack others. Ordinary people do this either at random 
or through practice and from acquired habit” (Arist. Rhet. I, 
1, 1354a). 

The fundamentals of rhetoric were expounded by sophists, 
professional “teachers of wisdom” who trained their pupils for 
fees in the art of clear thinking and eloquence. Till the middle 
of the fifth century the word “sophist” was synonymous with 
“sage,” but later it degenerated in popular use and even be¬ 
came a term of opprobrium. This change is traceable to 
a number of reasons, not least of which being the propaganda 
campaign against the sophists waged by their opponents and 
rivals, Socrates, Xenophon, Plato, Aristophanes. The latter’s 
attitude was in fact an expression of the slave society’s 
characteristic scorn for paid labour, the more bitter as this 
labour was intellectual. According to Xenophon, Socrates 
considered it below his dignity to accept money for his talks as 
he wanted to be free to enjoy the society of anyone he liked 
and called the sophists public prostitutes as selling one’s mind 
was not better than selling one's body (Xenoph. Memorab. 
I, 6, 13). 

There was yet another, a more fundamental reason for the 


116 










Athenian public’s hostility towards the sophists. They taught 
the art of thinking and strove to develop in their pupils the 
habit to rely on reason and their own judgement instead of 
tradition and old customs. The entire system of new educa¬ 
tion associated with the sophistic movement was regarded 
as an apparent menace to public security. The leader of 
Athenian democracy Cleon held that education breads conceit 
and gives men wild notions undermining the foundation of 
democracy: “...Ordinary men usually manage public affairs 
better than their more gifted fellows. The latter are always 
wanting to appear wiser than the laws, and to overrule every 
proposition brought forward, thinking that they can find no 
more important field for their intelligence, and by such 
behaviour too often ruin their country...” 1 The conservative 
upholder of tradition Aristophanes, for his part, refers to the 
sophistic art under the allegorical name of “Unjust Disc¬ 
ourse” making it boast in this way: “If I am called the 
Weaker Reasoning in the schools, ’tis precisely because I was 
the first before all others to discover the means to confute 
the laws and the decrees of justice. To invoke solely the 
weaker arguments and yet triumph is a talent worth more than 
a hundred thousand drachmae..." 2 

In modern historico-philosophical literature the sophists 
are commonly regarded as representatives of the Age of En¬ 
lightenment in Ancient Greece—a movement in thought di¬ 
rected towards freeing man from.the grip of dead customs and 
traditions and opening the way for intellectual progress. The 
programme of this movement was freedom in religion and 
morals, politics and science, the arts and culture proclaimed 
on behalf of reason. It was an outgrowth of the social and poli¬ 
tical conditions of the latter half of the fifth century and 
could well have taken as its motto Euripides’s proud 
words: “The god is our reason in each one of us” (fr. 1018). 
Understandably, the ideas of Greek enlightenment were far 
from universal as they did not go beyond a narrow circle of 
free citizens capable of paying stiff fees for their education. 
As regards the enlightener himself, he either had to barter 
his freedom for livelihood or to drag out a miserable existence. 
Hence a glaring contradiction: enlightenment as a socio¬ 
political trend was a product of Greek democracy that could 

1 Thucydides, The History of Peloponnesian War, Book III, fr. 37. Ox 
ford University Press. London, New York, Toronto, 1946, p. 160. 

2 Aristophanes, The Eleven Comedies, Horace Liveright, New York, 1932, 
pp. 353-354. 







only be used by the wealthy and was therefore objectively 
detrimental to the political system that had engendered it. 
What is more, the aristocrats, the moneybags and the poor 
were all unanimous in their dislike of the sophists* though 
for different reasons: some of them envied their fees (not 
infrequently rather fat), others scorned their modest status 
(most of the sophists were foreigners who came to Athens 
from provincial cities), still others resented their mental 
superiority; 

The ideology of Greek enlighteners who had to adjust them¬ 
selves to the existing political system and customs was charac¬ 
terised by inconsistency, vacillation between different social 
tendencies and shapelessness —very much in the manner of 
clouds made by Aristophanes the symbol of the sophistic 
movement. It was permeated with scepticism in relation to 
traditional beliefs, narrow rationalism and individualism so 
typical in any enlightenment, the more so as it came into being 
as a result of the crisis of ancient philosophical thought lost 
in the tangle of cosmological speculations. The physiologers’ 
brilliant hypotheses might look quite convincing when con¬ 
sidered separately. However, contradicting one another, they 
testified to their fallacy and, presumably, to the inability of 
human reason to penetrate the mysteries of being. The natural 
consequence was all-round scepticism. 

Not least in importance was also the Greeks' acquaintance 
with different social systems and customs in “barbarian” 
lands. The new experience tended to undermine faith in the 
traditional foundations of society, called in question the di¬ 
vine origin of law and justice and stimulated interest in 
human nature and society as the chief object of philosophical 
inquiry. The quest for knowledge for its own sake was not the 
sophists’ aim, they regarded it rather as a means for self- 
assertion and for achieving practical ends. Their theoretical 
interests centred around the process of reasoning and persua¬ 
sion, the logic of argument and methods of proof. 

The history of the sophistic movement is usually divided 
into two periods covering, respectively, the activity of “older 
sophists” —Protagoras of Abdera (c. 481-411), Gorgias of 
Leontini (c. 483-375), Hippias of Elis, Prodicus of Ceos, An¬ 
tiphon; and “younger sophists”—Gorgias’s pupils Alcidamas, 
Lycophron and Polus, Thrasymacus of Chalcedon, Athenian 
Critias, and others The sophists’ attention was mainly focused 
on the problems of society and cognition. 


118 











(1) Society. The problems of society came to the foreground 
in the Sophistic age as a natural product of the Greek world’s 
historical development. The nature of human society, its foun¬ 
dations and destinies, the principles of man’s conduct in gen¬ 
eral and its moral canons in particular came to be regarded in 
terms of one general antithesis —nature and convention. 

The history of this antithesis dates from the time of Hesiod 
when Greek poets and philosophers concentrated on the rela¬ 
tion of physis to nomos, i.e. the natural to the human, 
the natural order of things to the artificial curbs imposed on 
man and society. As time went by, this antithesis acquired 
new aspects and new shades of meaning, but the basic 
opposition remained unchanged — nomos was always identified 
with convention that was not part of the immutable order of 
things and could be altered, be it law, custom, opinion or the 
like. Gradually new terms came into use and nature was 
contrasted first with thesis (something that is adopted by way 
of convention), and then with techne (art) which, however, 
remained within the framework of the original distinction. 
Its essence was well expounded by sophist Antiphon who, 
according to Aristotle, “points out that if you planted a bed 
and the rotting wood acquired the power of sending up a shoot, 
it would not be a bed that would come up, but wood —which 
shows that the arrangement in accordance with the rules of 
the art is merely an incidental attribute, whereas the real na¬ 
ture is the other” (Arist. Phys. II, 1, 193a), i.e. the real 
nature of a be.d is tree, which exists by physis. 

The physis-nomos antithesis covers three fields: language, 
cognition and human society, the latter both in the politi¬ 
cal and physical sense. In his dialogue Protagoras Plato 
ascribes the doctrine of the artificial origin of language to 
Protagoras (322a). In the Cratylus it is expounded by 
Protagoras’s pupil Hermogenes. This view was evidently shar¬ 
ed by Prodicus who paid much attention to synonymies and 
different shades of words’ meanings. Antiphon, too, regarded 
names (words) as products of human creative activity. 
According to the sophists, the artificial origin of language is 
attested to by such linguistic phenomena as synonymy 
(words having the same or nearly the same meaning), homo¬ 
nymy (words having the same pronunciation but different in 
meaning), existence of different languages, change of names, 
etc. The sophistic conception of language was subjected 
to criticism by Plato who maintained that “things have names 


119 








by nature, and that not every man is an artificer of names, but 
he only who looks to the name which each thing by nature has, 
and is able to express this name in letters and syllables” 
(Platon. Crat. 390e). 

The sophists’ views regarding cognition will be given spe¬ 
cial consideration later in this chapter, and here we shall 
briefly discuss their attitude to society. Plato describes the 
sophistic conception of the state and legislation in the follow¬ 
ing words: “they say that politics co-operates with nature, 
but very slightly, and has more of art; and so that legislation 
is entirely a work of art, and is based on assumptions which 
are not true” (Laws. X, 889d). The universal antithesis of 
“physis” and “art” or convention in the sphere of society is 
treated by the sophists from three angles: the emergence of 
society and the state; legislation; faith in gods and religion. 

According to Plato describing Protagoras’s teaching of soci¬ 
ety in one of his dialogues, the sophist narrated the following 
myth to show how it came into being. Epimetheus who had 
been charged to distribute among the animals all the qualities 
necessary for life forgot about man and left him unprovided— 
“man was naked and shoeless, and had neither bed nor arms of 
defence. The appointed hour was approaching when man in 
his turn was to emerge from earth into the light of day.” See¬ 
ing his helplessness, Prometheus “stole the mechanical 
parts of Hephaestus and Athene, and fire with them ... and 
gave them to man” thereby causing people to honour gods, 
invent articulate speech and names, construct houses and 
clothes and shoes and beds, and draw sustenance from the 
earth. Fighting against the wild beasts, people began to unite 
and help one another. Yet they had no art of government and 
“were again in process of dispersion and destruction.” Fearing 
that the entire race would be exterminated, Zeus “sent 
Hermes to them, bearing reverence and justice to be the order¬ 
ing principle of cities and the bonds of friendship and 
conciliation” (see Platon. Protag. 320c-322d). 

In his “myth” Protagoras combines two different convic¬ 
tions: on the one hand, he maintains that art is a “divine” gift 
distinguishing man from other beasts; on the other, art itself is 
capable of transforming people’s life. This peculiar compro¬ 
mise between the "divine” (natural) and the “artificial” was 
used by Protagoras to justify the principle underlying Atheni¬ 
an democracy as a system under which the citizens lend an at¬ 
tentive ear to the advice of experts on matters requiring 


120 















special skill, as for instance carpentry. “But when they meet 
to deliberate about political virtue, which proceeds only 
by way of justice and wisdom, they are patient enough of any 
man who speaks of them, as is also natural, because they 
think that every man ought to share in this sort of virtue, 
and that states could not exist if this were otherwise” 
(Protag. 323a). However, Protagoras’s conviction that we 
cannot know anything about the gods reduces his story to 
mere fiction and brings to nought the would-be compromise. 
His story in fact boils down to the distinction, characteristic 
of the sophists, between the technical and craftsman’s arts 
on the one hand, and the art of politics, on the othfcr. Unlike 
the former which are acquired by training and restricted to 
selected individuals, the latter, i.e. justice and reverence, are 
shared by all; life can be conducted on a principle of division 
of labour with one being a doctor, another a musician, etc., 
but, according to Protagoras, there could never be cities if 
only a few shared in political virtues. 

A different and more consistent viewpoint was advanced by 
Antiphon. Agreeing with Protagoras that social life is a prod¬ 
uct of a political art, he was far from idealising laws which 
were always contrary to “human nature.” Justice, in his opin¬ 
ion, “is not to transgress that which is the law of the city in 
which one is a citizen. A man therefore can best conduct him¬ 
self in harmony with justice, if when in the company of wit¬ 
nesses he upholds the laws, and when alone without witnesses 
he upholds the edicts of nature. For the edicts of the laws 
are imposed artificially, but those of nature are compul¬ 
sory. And the edicts of the laws are arrived at by consent, not 
by natural growth, whereas those of nature are not a matter of 
consent” (DK 87 B 44, fr. A, col. 1). 

Only a superficial observer might infer from this passage 
that Antiphon was preaching immorality and hypocrisy. His 
true thought consisted in that the current politics and common 
moral principles rest on legal prescriptions basically hostile 
to human nature: “the advantages laid down by the laws are 
chains upon nature, but those laid down by nature are free” 
(ibid., col. 4). The laws run counter to real justice which con¬ 
sists in inflicting no injurv on another unless first injured one¬ 
self. Therefore, bearing witness about one another which is 
considered just by law is in fact not just, since the witness, 
even if truthful, inflicts injury on the man against whom he 
testifies, though that man has not injured him, and incurs his 


121 









hatred in return. The conclusion is that obedience to law in¬ 
volves wrong on both sides and preference therefore should be 
given to the “natural” unity of thought based on a mutual 
agreement of equally thinking individuals neither to inflict 
nor to suffer injury. 

This is, of course, a utopian idea reflecting the realisation 
of existing social injustice and the quest for “natural,” and 
therefore universal, justice and morality. Here again we see an 
essential difference between Protagoras and Antiphon. The 
former believes that justice derives from the common opinion 
of citizens: “whatever appears to each state to be just and fair, 
so long as it is regarded as such, is just and fair to it” (Platon. 
Theaet. 167c) .Justice is law expressingthecity’sopinion —this 
is the thesis of Protagoras idealising and defending Athenian 
democracy of the Periclean age. By contrast, Antiphon witnes¬ 
sing the crisis of this democracy after the lost Peloponnesian 
war identifies justice with “nature” and “natural” interests 
of man, with what is useful for him. Since, however, people’s 
needs and interests are identical “by nature,” the obvious con¬ 
clusion is that “we are all by nature born the same in every 
way, both barbarians and Hellenes” (DK 87 B 44, fr. B, col. 
2). This thought was further developed by Lycophron who 
was notable for his challenge to aristocracy and disparage¬ 
ment of noble birth. Hippias, according to Plato, declared that 
all men were “kinsmen and friends and fellow citizens, by na¬ 
ture and not by law; for nature like is akin to like, whereas law 
is the tyrant of mankind, and often compels us to do many 
things which are against nature” (Platon. Protag. 337a). 

Thrasymachus used similar arguments to prove the opposite 
thesis. According to Plato, he defined justice as the right of the 
stronger. His view was shared by Callicles who contended that 
the better is “by nature” superior to the worse, and the more 
powerful to the less powerful. Levelling his shafts against 
democracy, Callicles declares that the laws are established by 
the weaker, that is, the majority, in order to thwart the 
purpose of nature that the strong man should prevail. 

However one chooses to understand natural justice —be it 
equality or otherwise —the principle of the opposition of 
nature and convention (“arts”) leads inevitably to one con¬ 
clusion: if laws are established by convention, they can be 
changed. Thrasymachus says: “The different forms of 
government make laws democratical, aristocratical, tyran¬ 
nical, with a view of their several interests; and thereby 


122 













proclaim that what is advantageous to themselves is justice 
for those ruled; and him who transgresses this principle 
they punish as a breaker of the law, and unjust. ” “In 
all states there is the same principle of justice, which is 
the interest of the established government” (Platon. Rep., I, 
338e>. 

Here we have true dialectics of social life: starting with 
the “law of nature,” one ends up with the law of the tyrant. It 
was precisely this dialectics that served as a basis for the 
sophists’ doctrine of the relativity of any knowledge. 

The'attack on religion was another aspect of the sophistic 
enlightenment that evoked resentment of the reactionary up¬ 
holders of tradition. The atheistic views of the sophists can 
well be exemplified by Critias’s tragedy Sisyphus where 
he presents a vivid picture of the emergence of religion. 

According to Sisyphus, the main character of the play, 
there was a time when the life of man was disorderly and 
beastlike. Then men laid down laws, but these could only 
prevent open deeds of violence and men continued to commit 
them in secret. A way out was found by a shrewd and 
subtle legislator who “introduced the Divine (religion), 
saying that there is a God flourishing with immortal life, 
hearing and seeing with his mind, and thinking of everything 
and caring about these things, and having divine nature, 
who will hear everything said among mortals, and will 
be able to see all that is done. And even if you plan anything 
evil in secret, you will not escape the gods in this” (DK 88 
B 25, 16-24). Hence, religious belief is depicted as a deliberate 
imposture intended to ensure the good behaviour of citizens by 
fear of punishment. The clever legislator gave the gods the 
heaven for a dwelling—the place whence, as he knew, mortals 
expect retribution and help. 

The theory of the “artificial” origin of gods was also pro 
fessed by Prodicus who wrote that “things from which benefits 
to human life have been derived have come to be considered 
deities, such as Demeter and Dionysus” (DK 84 B 5). 

As we see, the antithesis of nature and convention (custom, 
law, the arts) provides a basis for the doctrine of the muta¬ 
bility of social institutions, laws, customs, and, consequently, 
for the justification of their change. The same antithesis, 
however, also underlies the concept of relativity of human 
knowledge. 

(2) Cognition. Hegel wrote that sophistic had embarked on 


123 











the path of free thinking which was to lead it beyond the 
bounds of existing morals and naive religious faith. 1 It was 
the road of criticism and doubt described by Protagoras 
who “was the first to maintain that there are two sides to 
every question, opposed to each other” (Diog. L. IX, 51). 
This thesis which amounts to saying that contradictory 
statements about the same thing are simultaneously true 
and that it is impossible to contradict appeared absurd 
to Plato who commented upon it thus: “I have always 
thought it an amazing doctrine, suicidal as well as de¬ 
structive” (Platon. Euthyd. 286b). Aristotle unequivocally 
rejected this thesis as incompatible with the law of contradic¬ 
tion. Conflicting testimonies make it impossible to restore 
Protagoras’s authentic words, but we can recapture the 
meaning of his principle from context. Our purpose can 
best be served by well-known sophism Euathlus. 

According to Diogenes Laertius, Protagoras made a deal 
with his disciple Euathlus whereby the latter was to pay him 
the fee after winning his first case in a law court. The 
disciple, however, was in no hurry to get a case and the 
teacher threatened to sue him. Puzzled Euathlus replied 
that he had not won a case yet and had received no fee. 
“Nay,” said Protagoras, “if I win this case against you, 
I must have the fee, for winning it; if you win, I must 
have it, because you win it” (Diog. L. IX, 56). The sophist’s 
worthy pupil retorted: “If I lose, I shall not pay because I 
shall be the loser; if I win, I shall not pay either, as I shall 
be the winner” (see Gell. V, 10). 

Here we have a genuine paradox: Protagoras must receive 
his fee only if he is not entitled to it; on the other hand, 
Euathlus must pay his teacher only if he is not due to pay. 
This contradiction could only be eliminated if it were 
prohibited to apply the terms of the contract between 
Protagoras and Euathlus to a fee case involving both of them. 
Yet the grounds for such a restriction are not obvious and 
it takes a serious logical investigation to trace the contradic¬ 
tion to its source. Such investigations were only undertaken 
in the late nineteenth-early twentieth centuries in connec¬ 
tion with the logical analysis of the foundations of mathemat¬ 
ics. As regards the sophists, the paradoxes of this kind 
were an excellent means to confuse an issue, “to make 

1 See Hegel, Vorlesungen uber die Geschichte der Philosophie, Band 1, 
Verlag Philipp Reclam jun., Leipzig, 1971, S. 536. 


124 












the weaker argument the stronger” and vice versa. It was not 
fortuitous therefore that Protagoras maintained the thesis of 
the impossibility of contradiction and contended that there are 
two opposite, but equally tenable arguments on every subject. 
From this it followed that there was no other criterion of truth 
than man himself. 

This view is aptly expressed in Protagoras's famous phrase 
“Man is the measure of all things” (DK 80 B 1). Historico- 
philosophical tradition traceable to Plato's Theaetetus regards 
this thesis as an expression of sensualism and relativism. Plato 
in fact interpreted Protagoras’s thesis as the contention that 
knowledge is perception. The phrase “Man is the measure of 
all things” means that what seems to me is for me, and what 
seems to you is for you: if the wind is cold to me who feels 
it cold, and is warm to you who feels it warm, we cannot 
say that it is cold or warm in itself. 

Such arguments, of course, sound to us quite naive. We can 
measure the ambient temperature and get its objective charac¬ 
teristic independent of subjective perceptions. Yet in time 
when the warm and the cold, the dry and the moist, the bitter 
and the sweet were regarded as objective qualities of things or 
even peculiar “things” themselves, it was no small achieve¬ 
ment to emphasise a close relationship between sensually 
perceived qualities and the perceiving individual. Protagoras 
comes to a conclusion that being is mutable and that men 
“apprehend different things at different times owing to 
their differing dispositions; for he who is in a natural state 
apprehends those things subsisting in matter which are able 
to appear to those in a natural state, and those who are in a 
non-natural state the things which can appear to those in a 
non-natural state” (Sext. Pyrrh. I, 218). 

On the evidence of Sextus Protagoras accepted dogmatic¬ 
ally the doctrine that matter is in flux and relied upon it to 
account for subjective appearance of things. Hence, his 
relativism was limited and did not amount to scepticism. 
Moreover, the founder of sophistic in fact contended that 
sensation cannot be at fault. If food appears bitter to a sick 
man and sweet to a man in good health, if a man wearing 
rags feels cold and another one in warm clothes feels warm, 
it does not mean at all that one of them is right, and the 
other is wrong. It simply means that “one state requires 
to be changed into the other, the worse into the better” 
(Platon. Theaet. 167a). Protagoras, as we see, abandons the 


125 








standard of truth in favour of the pragmatic standard of 
better or worse: “some appearances are better than others, 
though none is truer” (ibid., 167b). Being warm is better than 
being cold, health is better than ailment—hence, help the 
freezing man to get warm and heel the sick one. Such is the 
prescription of the sophist. 

I would not be correct to regard Protagoras as a pure sen¬ 
sualist and relativist. His attempt to link the problem of truth 
with man’s practical activity was an important step towards a 
consistent materialist theory of cognition considering practice 
the criterion of truth. Understandably, it was only one of the 
first steps on a long and thorny path. This path may also bring 
one to pragmatism identifying truth with what “works” now 
and here, i.e. appears practically useful for a given purpose 
and a given individual. 

There has been much dispute over Protagoras’s conception 
of man in his famous man-measure statement, the opinions 
dividing between man as an individual and man as mankind. 
The former view seems to be predominant and Protagoras is 
qualified by most historians as an extreme individualist. It 
appears, however, that “man” in Protagoras can be both an 
individual, like in the case of the cold and the warm, 
and a corporate body, e.g. a city assembly called upon 
to decide on what is good and bad for the citizens. The 
choice is determined by concrete circumstances, depending on 
whether the issue concerns "one or many. In Protagoras’s 
doctrine truth, as it were, is “democratised,” being no longer 
the sage's monopoly. 

Protagoras’s general line of thought was this: if things 
are subject to constant change and it is only the transient 
that can be apprehended, the true form of being is relativity 
and all opinions varying with the change of state of both mat¬ 
ter and man cannot but be relative, fluid and mutable. This 
apparently extreme relativism is modified by Protagoras’s 
distinction between the “better” and the “worse,” i.e. between 
what conforms to and conflicts with the dictates of nature 

The doctrine of the relativity of knowledge interpreted in 
a subjectivist manner lies at the root of sophistry as the art of 
false reasoning. In the heat of an argument the disputants 
seeking to corner their opponent not infrequently resort to 
sophisms, i.e. to the subjective application of objectively 
flexible and contradictory notions. Protagoras seems to have 
been well aware of the difference between the subjective and 


126 



















objective use of notions, as Plato puts into his mouth the 
following statement: “Injustice it is when one does not 
converse differently in disputation and in serious discussion: 
the disputer may trip up his opponent as often as he likes, 
and make fun; but the dialectician will be in earnest and only 
correct his interlocutor when necessary” (Theaet. 167e). 

Proceeding from the doctrine of relativity and subjectivism 
some of the sophists, for instance, Xeniades and Gorgias, car¬ 
ried Protagoras’s arguments to extremes and landed up in ab¬ 
solute scepticism. As distinct from Protagoras who contended 
that “it is impossible to contradict” and everything is 
therefore possible, sophist Xeniades made himself famous 
by his assertion that “all things are false, and every 
impression and opinion is false... The fact that all things 
are false and therefore inapprehensible is proved by disparag¬ 
ement of the senses” (Sext. Adv. math. VII, 53-54). He 
bolstered his thesis by this argument: “All that becomes 
becomes out of the non-existent, and all that perishes 
perishes into the non-existent” (ibid., 53). Hence, the Eleatic 
absolute immutable being based on the denial of any change in 
the world and its reduction to pure illusion is eliminated by 
Xeniades in favour of absolute non-being. 

Gorgias, a native of Sicily, develops his doctrine along 
similar lines. His main treatise On the Non-Existent, or on Na¬ 
ture has not survived, but we possess a fairly detailed para¬ 
phrase of its arguments in Sextus Empiricus and in the work 
On Melissus, Xenophanes and Gorgias traditionally ascribed 
to Aristotle. His other remains are two speeches Encomium on 
Helen and Defence of Palamedes and about thirty fragments 
of his works. Both speeches, though corrupt and incomplete, 
are a good illustration of sophistic argument. 

In his treatise Gorgias sought to prove, first, that nothing 
exists, second, that if anything exists it cannot be known or 
thought of by man, and, finally, that even if it can be ap¬ 
prehended, it cannot be communicated to anyone else. Parody¬ 
ing the Eleatics’ reasoning, Gorgias shows with mock solemn¬ 
ity that the non-existent does not exist, then he takes up the 
same line with regard to the existent and proceeds thus: 
if the existent exists, it must be either eternal or generated 
or both; it cannot be eternal since if it were it would 
have to be infinite which it is not (here his argument 
is based on the deliberate confusion of temporal and spatial 
infinity); it cannot be generated since if it were, it would 


127 








have had to be generated either from what is or from 
what is not; however, both are impossible: the existent 
already exists and cannot generate itself, i.e. being, and the 
non-existent (not-being) cannot generate anything. Hence, 
the existent does not exist. 

Similar logic is used to disprove the plurality of being: it 
cannot be either many (as was argued by Zeno), or one. Gor- 
gias shows that the Eleatics’ uncritical conception of eternal, 
immutable and single being is no less contradictory than its 
opposite—the conception of being which is generated, muta¬ 
ble and multitudinous. This conclusion was an important step 
towards Plato’s dialectics of being developed in the Par¬ 
menides and expressed in the following statement: “whether 
one is or is not, one and the others in relation to themselves 
and one another, all of them, in every way, are and 
are not, and appear to be and appear not to be” (Platon. 
Parm. 166c). 

Maintaining his second thesis, i.e. incognizability of being, 
Gorgias points out that thought is not identical with being: we 
can think of things both real and unreal, as, for instance, char¬ 
iots crossing the sea or flying men. Since what we think does 
not necessarily exist and we have no means of distinguishing 
real things from unreal ones (senses being deceitful and 
reason unreliable), the conclusion is that the existent is not 
thought, i.e. is not known. Gorgias’s argument is clearly 
directed against Parmenides’s identification of thought with 
its object. 

The proof of the thesis rests on the contention that 
knowledge is expressed in words and communicated in speech 
which is not identical with external objects: “Speech is not the 
real and existent things; therefore we do not indicate to our 
neighbours the existent things but speech, which is other than 
the existing realities” (Sext. Adv. math. VII, 84). Conversely, 
what exists cannot become our speech, and without becoming 
speech it cannot be communicated to another. 

Gorgias’s idea of cognition is, so to speak, the negative 
of Protagoras’s: everything is false for the former and true for 
the latter. The relativism of Protagoras and the nihilism of 
Gorgias were the culmination of the one-sided, subjectivist 
approach to the flexibility, fluidity and internal contradic¬ 
toriness of notions reflecting the changing and contradictory 
objective world. In contrast with the early sophists expressing 
the enlightened thought of Greek slave-owning democracy 


128 













and having to their credit a number of interesting observat 
ions and important achievements in logic, rhetoric and lin¬ 
guistics, their successors not infrequently turned real logical 
problems into a means of tripping and disparaging their op¬ 
ponents in an argument. For instance, unlike Protagoras who 
emphasised the difference between an argument and a serious 
philosophical discussion, Gorgias instructed his pupils: “One 
must destroy one’s adversaries’ seriousness with laughter, and 
their laughter with seriousness” (DK 82 B 12). 

The degeneration of the sophistic movement can well be 
illustrated by an anonymous essay Twofold Arguments 
written after the end of the Peloponnesian war (c. 400 B.C.) 
and designed to show that there are two contrary but equally 
maintainable arguments on every subject. The author sets out 
two opposite views about good and evil, or justice and 
injustice, fair and foul, truth and falsehood, takes one view 
himself and argues that they are either the same or 
different as the case may be (DK 90 I 17). The final 
word of sophistic enlightenment was the doctrine of absolute 
relativism. What is good for one man is bad for another, 
what appears beautiful for one looks ugly to another, 
truth when stated by one man becomes falsehood when 
stated by another. This doctrine was resolutely opposed by So¬ 
crates who undertook to show “by deed if not by word” 
the difference between justice and injustice (see Xenoph. 
Memorab. IV, 4, 10). 


13. Socrates 

Socrates (469-399) is one of the most enigmatic characters 
in the history of philosophy. He is said to have been the son 
of Athenian sculptor or stone-mason Sophroniscus and mid 
wife Phaenarete. His primary education consisted in the tradi 
tional lessons of music, philology (reading, writing, learning 
by heart and interpreting classical texts), arithmetics and the 
foundations of geometry. Physical fitness enabled him to take 
part in several military campaigns and he earned a reputation 
for coolness, bravery and remarkable powers of endurance. He 
was active in public life and not once refused to be 
intimidated into acting contrary to his convictions in the city 
Assembly and law-court in the face of popular clamour. 
Such behaviour took a great deal of courage and Socrates 
accounted for his disagreement with the majority by respect 
for law and devotion to justice. In 399 B.C. he was brought 


'► o:r.» 


129 









to trial on charges of impiety and corruption of the youth. 
The indictment read: “Socrates is guilty of refusing 
to recognise the gods recognised by the state, and of 
introducing other new divinities. He is also guilty of 
corrupting the youth. The penalty demanded is death” 
(Diog. L. II, 40). Out of 500 judges 361 voted for the death 
penalty and Socrates drank his cup of hemlock. 

The three most important historical sources of our infor¬ 
mation on Socrates—Aristophanes’s Clouds, Xenophon’s Me 
morabilia and Plato’s dialogues present three entirely diffe¬ 
rent individuals with widely diverging, even opposing views. 
This may be due to the fact that they reflect three stages of 
his philosophical development, or that so diverse writers could 
not but interpret Socrates’s teaching differently (the latter is 
particularly true of Xenophon and Plato). The historicity of 
Socrates, however, can hardly be called in question if only 
for the fact that his thought has brought to life and inspired 
a number of philosophical schools traditionally known as 
“Socratic”. 

Socrates never put down his views in writing expounding 
them in talks with his friends and disputes with his opponents. 
According to Aristophanes who ridiculed the intellectual 
vogue of his contemporaries —sophistic enlightenment and 
education, sophistic rhetoric and art of persuasion, Socrates 
was a sophist, an astrologer and a “physic.” Owning a “think¬ 
ing shop,” he “traverses the air and contemplates the sun “ly 
ing” suspended up in a basket, and “mingles the subtle essen 
ce of his mind with this air, which is of the like nature, in order 
to clearly penetrate the things of heaven” (Aristo¬ 
phanes, The Clouds, p. 311). Xenophon’s account of Socrates 
presents a very prosaic, even somewhat mediocre character 
notable for his loyalty to the state, faith in the traditional 
values of Athenian society and salutary influence on the 
interlocutors. In reading his Memorabilia, one cannot escape 
the impression that the writer was often simply incapable of 
grasping the profound philosophical thought of his contem¬ 
porary. Plato, by contrast, creates the image of a brilliant 
polemicist, an ideal philosopher and a profound thinker 
expounding ... Plato’s own ideas. If anything, the logical 
conclusions from Socrates’s arguments as reproduced in 
Plato’s dialogues could hardly be known to Socrates him¬ 
self. 

Despite the obvious difficulties that face the historians in 


130 











reconstructing the genuine views of Socrates we may safely 
credit him with two important contributions to philosophy. 
The first is the development and elaboration of dialectics as a 
method of inquiry. Though Socrates was not the author of this 
method and gave no theoretical exposition of dialectics, he 
followed a clear-cut pattern of dialectical reasoning and laid 
bare his logic for later philosophers to formalise. The second 
is that Socrates placed dialectics at the service of ethics and 
undertook to give a general definition of virtue as a basis for 
the rational transformation of morals. 

On the formal side, Socrates’s dialectics consists of iro 
ny and maieutics or intellectual midwifery, and on the sub¬ 
stantive side, of induction and definition. His irony which con¬ 
sists in asking questions in sham ignorance and refuting all 
answers is in fact identical with the sophistic method of argu¬ 
ment intended to disclose contradictions in the opponent’s 
statements or views. Yet in contrast with Gorgias who seeks to 
prove that knowledge is impossible in principle, Socrates only 
comes out against false knowledge. Demonstrating confusion 
in his interlocutor’s mind, Socrates confesses his own inap¬ 
titude and invites him to join in a common search for truth. 
The ultimate goal of Socrates’s irony is to expose false claims 
to wisdom and lay bare human ignorance so as to clear the way 
for true knowledge which is expressed in the formula: “Know 
thyself.’’ According to Socrates, there is no point in studying 
the physical world as man’s power of cognition is far too lim¬ 
ited to penetrate the design of the gods. The true subject of 
philosophy is the knowledge of man’s own nature. Here 
knowledge is not only possible, but necessary. His irony is the¬ 
refore closely linked with induction which consists in the ana¬ 
lysis of different notions of a subject with the aim of arriving 
at its true definition. Helping his pupils in their intellectual 
birth pangs, Socrates likens himself to a midwife (a transpar 
ent allusion to the maieutic skill inherited by him from his 
mother: as a result of their discussion his interlocutor must 
give birth to wisdom. 

Xenophon and Plato give numerous examples of Socrates’s 
dialectics. Inducing his companion Aristippus to bring out a 
general definition of duty, Socrates says: “...The same thing 
may be both good and evil; for I can easily suppose, that which 
is good in the case of hunger, may be evil in a fever; since 
what would prove a cure for the one, will certainly increase 
the malignity of the other; and in the same manner will beauty 


131 






in the wrestler change to deformity in him who runneth. For 
whatsoever is suited to the end intended, with respect to that 
end it is good and fair; and contrariwise, must be deemed evil 
and deformed, when it defeats the purpose it was designed to 
promote... The same disposition of the body which is beautiful 
in him who runs, is not beautiful in the wrestler; and while 
the beauty of the shield is to cover him well who wears it, 
that of the dart is to be swift and piercing” (Xenoph. Memo- 
rab. Ill, 8). 

This reasoning as rendered by Xenophon appears to be very 
similar to sophistic arguments intended'to prove the relativi¬ 
ty of our concerts and, in this particular case, to identify 
the beautiful with the useful. Actually, however, the conclu¬ 
sion to which Socrates leads his interlocutors is entirely dif¬ 
ferent: the beautiful as such is not fiction, it does exist, yet 
it should not be sought among material things. On Aristotle’s 
evidence, “Socrates did not make the universals or the de¬ 
finitions exist apart...” (Arist. Met. XIII, 4, 1078b), there¬ 
fore there is good reason to suppose that he did not find the 
objective status of the beautiful as such or, for that matter, 
any other definitions of ethical notions. Indeed, all his at¬ 
tempts to determine beauty, virtue and courage came to 
nought and the definitions Socrates gives do not go beyond 
superficial platitudes. Thus justice, according to Xenophon, 
is defined by Socrates as what agrees with the laws, and beau¬ 
tiful is identified with useful and suitable for a given purpose. 
Plato’s Socrates states that it is difficult to define the beauti¬ 
ful and, discussing with Crito the possibility of violating an 
unjust verdict, says: “It is enotlgh then, Crito. Let us fulfil 
the will of God, and follow whither He leads” (Platon. Crito. 
54e). 

It should be noted that there is a pronounced strain of 
mysticism in Socrates’s conversations. Frequent appeals to the 
gods and allusions to various occult forces come natural in 
his discourse and represent Socrates’s profound religious con¬ 
victions. The gods’ will cannot be unravelled through man s 
intellectual endeavour, it reveals itself in prophetic signs 
after much praying and appropriate sacrifice. Socrates takes 
his cue from the Delphic oracle 1 and priestess Diotime en- 


According to Plato's Apology, the Delphic oracle announced Socrates 
the wisest of mankind. Since Delphi was one of the centres of political reac 

132 









lightens him in the same way as he enlightens his listeners. 
Yet it is far more than mere irrationalism and tribute to the 
orphic tradition. Socrates’s “demon” or the inner voice that 
speaks to him now and then and guides him in his course of 
conduct is in fact the manifestation of the intense and 
continuous labour of his thought. As regards Socrates’s 
references to Eros, man’s best guide in his aspiration for 
beauty as such (cf. Plato’s Symposium ), or to the immortal 
soul’s reminiscences of the once contemplated ultimate truth 
of all being ( Meno ), they can well be construed as an anticipa¬ 
tion in a religious form of the Platonic theory of ideas. 

Coming back to the dialectical method of Socrates, we may 
characterise its positive content on the formal side as a cry¬ 
stallisation of sophistic arguments, ancient rhetoric and the 
oratory of the law-courts. This method was still lacking a 
theoretical foundation and Socrates applied it primarily to 
ethical problems. It set off, as it were, an avalanche of epis¬ 
temological doctrines and had a powerful impact on the subse¬ 
quent development of Greek philosophy. On the substantive 
side, Socratic dialectics showed that a general concept could 
only be arrived at as a result of hard intellectual labour and 
that the path of knowledge leading to definitions was not an 
easy one. Alongside this, the conviction that universals are 
only open to the mind caused Socrates to regard them as pro¬ 
ducts of thought and to concentrate on man’s inner world. 
This was the epistemological aspect of his famous dictum 
“know thyself.” 

The dialectical method was mainly applied by Socrates to 
moral problems and he is traditionally regarded as the founder 
of scientific ethics. Since no moral assessment seemed to be 
possible without a reliable criterion, Socrates focused his at¬ 
tention on the general notion of virtue and defined it as knowl¬ 
edge. He taught that it consisted in knowing what is good 
and acting in accordance with this knowledge. For instance, 
bravery presupposes the knowledge of how to face danger, 
justice the knowledge of what to do in relation to the indi- 

tion in Greece in Socrates's days, this circumstance seems to be pointing to 
his political sympathies. No less important is the fact that Pythia’s prophecies 
were passed by Socrates for divine wisdom as opposed to the feebleness of 
human mind: “But the truth is, 0 men of Athens, that God only is wise; and 
by his answer he intends to show that tihe wisdom of men is worth little or 
nothing; although speaking of Socrates, he is only using my name by way of 
illustrations, as if he said. He, O men, is the wisest, who, like Socrates, knows 
that his wisdom is in truth worth nothing...” (Platon. Apol. 23ab). 


133 






viduals and the state, piety, the knowledge of how to behave 
towards the gods, etc. 

Here we come to the crucial question: what is this knowl¬ 
edge and how must one act in order to be brave, just, etc.? 
According to Xenophon, Socrates taught that goodness and 
justice consist in obedience to the laws; to be just is to observe 
the law. By contrast, Plato’s Socrates is convinced that the 
good derives from unconditional universal divine intelligence 
and that human reason must be in full agreement with it. The 
human laws are based on the divine law, but may deviate from 
their ultimate purpose owing to the imperfection of human be¬ 
ings. Therefore the divine law is superior to the human law: 
a violation of the latter is not always and not necessarily 
punishable, whereas any break of the former results in inevi¬ 
table retribution. By violating the divine law of goodness we 
give ourselves up to evil and incur God’s punishment. 

Socrates evidently did not make a clear distinction between 
these two ways and never pressed his argument to a logi¬ 
cal conclusion on either of them. The first way was clearly a 
conformist one and if Socrates had really chosen it (as Xeno¬ 
phon strove to make out), his views would have hardly endan 
gered the existing social system. The second way invoking 
divine intelligence led to the justification of the philosopher’s 
own stand: traditional institutions can and must be brought 
before the judgement-seat of reason to justify their existence. 
Socrates did not oppose the existing forms of social life: he 
recognised the importance of social institutions, stressed the 
need for citizens to participate in the affairs of the state, de¬ 
manded that they should do their duties to the fatherland and 
the gods of tradition, taught that justice consisted in abiding 
by the law, etc. However, he appealed to reason as the supreme 
judge of everything and this was tantamount to calling in 
question all the customary forms of social life and worship. 
Reason and tradition never get along together, and the chief 
cause of Socrates’s conflict with Athenian slave-owning de¬ 
mocracy was not so much his philosophical convictions, as the 
political implications of his teaching. 

Socrates’s ethical doctrine owes its great attraction to the 
belief in the power of reason, to the underlying faith in the 
possibility and even necessity of the harmony of knowl¬ 
edge and conduct. Socrates is convinced that one cannot be 
evil-minded if he knows the good. His delusion stems not only 
and not so much from the sheer disregard of everyday human 


134 






experience attesting to the opposite (which' Aristotle was 
quick to note), as from the idealistic assumption that the ills 
of society could be cured by the spread of knowledge and the 
dissemination of the ideas of goodness and justice. History 
shows that any society divided into antagonistic classes 
abounds in ethical paradoxes. A moral action in such a society 
often produces an immoral result which explodes the very con¬ 
ception of morality. Such paradoxes are insoluble within the 
hounds of pure knowledge —their solution calls for restructur¬ 
ing the social relations that bring them into being. Socra¬ 
tes in fact contented himself with a call for the self perfection 
of an individual reducing at that this perfection to the knowl¬ 
edge of what is good. Moreover, regarding the knowledge of 
goodness as the necessary and sufficient condition of being 
virtuous, Socrates not only ignored, according to Aristotle, 
man’s “non-thinking” part, his weaknesses and inclinations, 
customs and habits he seems to have been totally unaware of 
the fact that he himself did not possess the knowledge of good¬ 
ness he was talking about and was even unable to give its de¬ 
finition. 

One might argue that the notions of virtues preached by 
Socrates, such as temperance, courage, justice and others are 
sufficiently lucid and can be grasped intuitively. However, 
Socrates’s own “irony” has shown that it is far from being the 
case: these notions do not lend themselves to a simple defini¬ 
tion. Socrates did not open a new epoch either in logic or in 
ethics. He went down in the history of philosophy as a pro¬ 
found thinker who took great pains to dispel the false notions 
of his contemporaries, gave a powerful impetus to further phil¬ 
osophical inquiry but offered no positive answers on the plea 
of ignorance. Though Socrates’s philosophy was mainly con¬ 
fined to ethics and his concrete solutions were often one-sided 
and even reactionary, he left a deep mark in the history of 
human thought. The appeal of his personality lies in its 
striking integrity, the unity of teaching and behaviour, knowl¬ 
edge and convictions, words and deeds. 

14. Socratic Schools 

Under this heading traditionally come four more or less 
distinct philosophical schools which arose after the death of 
Socrates and traced to him their origin: the Cynics, Cyrenaics, 
Megarians and Elians-Eritreans (the latter being very close 


135 







to the Megarians). They were influential during the whole of 
the fourth century B.C. figuring prominently in the controver 
sy between Plato and Aristotle, continued well into the Helle¬ 
nistic period and played an important part in the formation 
of stoicism and- / sceptieism. The logic of their philosophical 
reasoning, however, had so much in common with sophistics 
on the one hand and Socraticism on the other that it can hard 
ly be understood without them. Viewed in a broad historico 
philosophical perspective, Socraticism was a dialectical ne¬ 
gation of sophistics, superseding and preserving it as a mo¬ 
ment of “irony” within the framework of a broader docrine of 
absolute ethical truth. Striving to define the ideal “good” 
and thus indicate the purpose of human life which their teach¬ 
er himself failed to do, the Socratics synthesised, as it were, 
Socraticism and sophistics. Terminating the logical develop¬ 
ment of ancient Greek Enlightenment, they proposed sophistic 
solutions to Socratic problems and developed whimsical one¬ 
sided theories overemphasising and exaggerating various as¬ 
pects of the process of cognition, man’s nature and morality. 

(1) The Cynics. The school was founded by Antisthenes 
(c. 444-368 B.C.) who was a pupil of Gorgias and later became 
an ardent admirer of Socrates. Being the son of an Athenian 
and a Thracian slave, he was not entitled to Athenian citi 
zenship. After death of Socrates he founded a school in the 
gymnasium of Cynosarges which was supposed to be under 
the patronage of Heracles. Antisthenes’s most prominent pupil 
and follower was Diogenes of Sinope, a wandering preacher of 
cynicism, later a slave pedagogue. The date of his birth is not 
known, hut he died in Corinth in approximately 323. His 
followers were Crates of Thebes and his wife Hipparchia. In 
the third century B.C. the Cynic teaching exercised a strong 
influence on Menedemus, Bion of Boristhenes and Teles. In 
the second and first centuries B.C. cynicism gradually merged 
into stoicism with its very similar ethical views, but in the 
first-third centuries A.D. it went through a period of tempora¬ 
ry revival. The influence of the Cynics is traceable in a number 
of philosophical teachings: in Epictetus’s stoicism, in the Let¬ 
ters of the Cynics and other ancient literary sources, in Dion of 
Chrysostomus, etc. 

The central idea of the Cynics consisted in that philos¬ 
ophy is worldly wisdom which has no use for abstract thought. 
Underscoring the primacy of sense perceptions in knowl 
edge and the changefulness of all existing things, they saw 


136 






the function of reason in registering “what was or is” (Mul 
lachus II, Antisth. fr. 48). This resulted in the one-sided 
sensualism and empiricism of the Cynics reducing knowledge 
to description of things. Aristotle wrote that according to the 
followers of Antisthenes it was impossible to determine the 
essence of a thing—one could only say what it looked like. For 
instance, it is actually impossible to explain what silver is, but 
it is possible to say that it is like tin (see Arist. Met. VIII, 3, 
1043b). Hence the rejection of logic as “useless”. On these 
grounds the Cynics sharply criticised Plato’s theory of ideas 
contending that they could see a man or a horse, but not 
manness or horseness (Mullachus, II, fr. 44). They taught 
that a general notion has no objective content and that each 
thing must have its own name denoting this thing alone. 

This shows, first, that the Cynics regarded experience 
and sense perceptions as the only source of knowledge. It is 
hard to say if their views were akin to materialism which also 
regards sense perceptions and experience as the starting point 
of cognition, but the anti-idealist trend of the Cynic school is 
obvious enough. Second, the Cynics showed a strong tendency 
to relativism. Following Protagoras, the adherents of 
Antisthenes contended that “there could be no contradiction, 
and almost there could be no error” (Arist. Met. IV, 29. 
1024b). Third, they were opposed to applying a general 
notion to any individual thing as it allegedly led to a logical 
contradiction. In their opinion, it was wrong to say “the man 
is kind,” since kindness is kindness and man is man... This 
clearly demonstrates the narrowness of Cynic sensationalism 
which denies the meaningfulness of general concepts and is 
incapable of grasping the unity of the general, the particular, 
and the individual. 

It is not hard to see that these views underlay the ethical 
doctrine of cynicism which was primarily a moral philosophy: 
if the true essence of a thing is represented by “its own 
name,” the true goodness is the “own goodness” of every 
separate individual. This was the central idea of the Cynic 
school which led to far-reaching consequences. 

All writers on cynicism agree that its representatives 
belonged to the lower strata of society by birth or by force 
of circumstances. Antisthenes was an illegitimate, Diogenes 
was exiled from Sinope for coining false money. Crates 
exchanged his wealth for poverty “impregnable to fate,” 
Hipparchia rejected her dandy suitors in favour of Crates and 


137 







left her rich house, Bion, the son of a freedman and 
a prostitute, was sold into slavery together with his family 
and got freedom by sheer luck: his owner made him heir 
before death. All of them saw their task in castigating vice 
and preaching virtue. Yet in a society where social classes 
have antagonistic interests the concepts of virtue and vice are 
always ambivalent. “Morality has always been class morality; 
it has either justified the domination and the interests 
of the ruling class, or, ever since the oppressed class became 
powerful enough, it has represented its indignation against 
this domination and the future interests of the oppressed.” 1 

The Cynics, in fact, expressed the indignation of the 
oppressed and downtrodden, but could not propose any ways 
to improve their position as there was no future for them in 
slave society. 

In its ethical teaching the Cynic school contended that 
man’s “own good,” his happiness consists in the maximum 
possible independence from the chances of the outer world 
constantly threatening his property, health, freedom and life 
itself. Man’s true goodness is inner freedom and self-suffi¬ 
ciency which can only be attained by suppressing desires and 
becoming indifferent to sufferings. Together with the sophists 
the Cynics contrasted “nature” to law and custom. They 
taught that all social institutions are artificial and conven¬ 
tional, opinions are false and lead away from true happiness, 
virtue and vice in the conventional sense are but empty words. 
Nature has defined man’s true needs and his life can only be 
virtuous if he satisfies them and strips off all his social 
qualities. The Cynics resolutely came out against wealth, 
luxury and extravagance, preaching simple living 
and moderate toil conducive to the peace of mind and to the 
strength of body and soul, and honest poverty. They equally 
rejected the traditional religious teachings and asserted the 
existence of only one god, the world’s mind, regarding all 
other gods as the product of “custom.” 

However, the Cynics pressed their appeal to “nature” too 
far. Together with extravagance and artificial wants detrimen¬ 
tal to both body and soul they also threw overboard man’s 
real needs distinguishing him as a civilised member of society 
and attesting to historical progress of mankind, and even tried 
to rid themselves of all social bonds whatsoever, common 


1 Frederick Engels, Anti-Duhring, p. 117. 


38 








decency inclusive. Diogenes (“the Dog”) was not shy of re¬ 
lieving nature in sight of a crowd and, according to Diogenes 
Laertius, had a “habit to do everything in public, the works of 
Demeter and of Aphrodite alike” (Diog. L. VI, 69). Crates and 
Hipparchia scandalised their fellow-citizens by openly 
making love in the city square. The Cynics took pride in their 
freedom from society and contempt of all conventions, held 
a sharp tongue in high esteem and were not slow to resort to 
foul language and cast abuse at anybody —the reason why the 
word “cynic” has acquired a definitely negative meaning in all 
European languages. Yet the same Diogenes bitterly resented 
the existing social order under which people competed in 
pushing one another into a ditch instead of competing in 
goodness and kindness. He ridiculed noble descent and glory 
calling them a cover of vice. He sacrificed to the gods a lou¬ 
se -the only benefit he received from them... He was a tender, 
considerate and tactful tutor of the children in his charge 
who returned him great love and affection. Crates was said 
to be a “kind soul” and an “opener of all doors,” enjoyed the 
reputation of a “philanthropist,” a lover of people. 

To account for these seemingly incompatible qualities, we 
must take into consideration the social standing of the Cynics 
and bear in mind that cynicism was essentially the philosophy 
of the lower strata of society. The Cynic was in fact an outcast 
who had no place in society and, for his part, turned his 
back on it. The fruits of civilisation and enlightenment were 
not for him. He made a virtue of necessity and returned to 
a state of nature, living like a savage or an animal. The Cynics 
had no future and the sum total of their life was universal 
nihilism. In this connection one cannot but draw a parallel 
between cynicism and certain ideological trends of the twen¬ 
tieth century brought to the surface by the crisis of modern 
capitalism. Indeed, the past few decades provided a number 
of striking illustrations to the stock phrase “extremes meet”: 
righteous indignation against bourgeois civilisation has not 
infrequently assumed outrageous forms, such as vagrancy, 
parasitism, debauchery, addiction to drugs, terrorism, and 
become no less destructive and anti-humanistic, than the evils 
of capitalism it is directed against. There may well be new 
Diogeneses, Crateses and Hipparchias among the modern 
extremists... Their fervours lead nowhere and are as sterile as 
the ostentations bravado of the ancient Cynics. 

The Cynic school came into being in the epoch when it was 


139 






still impossible to overstep the bounds of slave-owning soci¬ 
ety. A slave regaining his freedom, be it even through a sue 
cessful uprising, could only become a slave-owner; by 
a stroke of ill luck a free man could always become a slave, as 
was the case with Diogenes, captured by the pirates. There 
was no way out of this vicious circle except in the realm of the 
spirit. Yet under the contemporary social conditions intellec¬ 
tual freedom could not but turn into clowning pauperism. 
In point of fact, the universal nihilism of the Cynics made it 
very easy for all sorts of vulgarisers to pass from lofty ideals 
to sordid profligacy, from inner freedom to the freedom from 
social duties and human bonds in general, from the contempt 
of laws and customs to unrestricted animal individualism. 

Nevertheless, the philosophy of Cynicism had a strong and 
lasting appeal to the oppressed classes of the Hellenic states 
and of the Roman Empire. 

(2) The Cyrenaics. The Cyrenaic school got its name from 
Cyrene in North Africa, the native town of its founder Aris¬ 
tippus (born c. 435 B.C.) and his followers. Like the 
Cynics, the Cyrenaics denied the need for theoretical knowl 
edge, but in their practical philosophy they proceeded from 
the principle of pleasure or hedone (whence the term 
hedonism). The Cyrenaic school was represented, besides 
Ariktippus, by his pupil Antipater, Aristippus’s daughter 
Arete and her son Aristippus junior, as well as by Antipater’s 
pupils Hegesias and Anniceris, and Aristippus junior’s pupil 
Theodorus the Atheist. 

The Cyrenaics were active in the fourth and third 
centuries B.C. It is practically impossible to determine the 
contribution of individual philosophers to the general doctrine 
of the school, yet there is good reason to believe that 
cyrenaicism owes to Aristippus the idea that men, like the 
citizens of a besieged city, are constantly harassed by their 
sensations of affections which only reflect man’s inner states, 
but not external objects. According to Sextus Empiricus, the 
Cyrenaics asserted that the affections alone were apprehended 
and were infallible, but of the things that had caused the affec¬ 
tions none was apprehensible or infallible —“just as the 
sufferer from vertigo of jaundice receives a yellowish impres¬ 
sion from everything, and the sufferer from ophthalmia sees 
things red, and he who pushes his eye sideways gets as it were 
a double impression... And in this way, whereas we are all 
unerring about our own affections, as regards the external real 


140 










object we all err; and whereas the former are apprehensible, 
the latter is non-apprehensible, the soul being far too week to 
discern it” (Adv. Math. VII, 190-195). 

Later, however, the Cyrenaics modified this view and linked 
sensations with the inner motion of the one who experiences 
them: even and calm motion gives pleasure, jerky and 
rough motion causes suffering, whereas the absence of any mo 
tion or very slow motion gives neither pleasure, nor pain. Men 
seek pleasure and strive to avoid suffering —this is the criteri¬ 
on of their behaviour. However, the Cyrenaics did not con¬ 
sider the pursuit of pleasure to be the goal of man’s life, as 
this would turn man into a slave of his own desires. The state 
of true happiness can only be attained by a wise man who does 
not let himself be swept away by the rush of his passion and 
knows how to control it. Wisdom thus consists in winning 
pleasures while standing above enjoyment as its master. Ac¬ 
cording to Diogenes Laertius, Aristippus “enjoyed the favours 
of Lais... To those who censured him his defence was, I have 
Lais, not she me; and it is not abstinence from pleasures that 
is best, but mastery over them without ever being worsted...” 
(Diog. L. II, 75). A wise man should thus take the world as he 
finds it, taking up such pleasures as come across and enjoying 
good things in life, but never being at their mercy. Diogenes 
Laertius wrote that Aristippus “bore with Dionysus when he 
spat on him, and to one who took him to task he replied. If the 
fishermen let themselves to be drenched with sea-water in or¬ 
der to catch a gudgeon, ought I not to endure to be wetted with 
negus in order to take a blenny?” (Diog. L. II, 67). 

As we see, Cyrenaic liberty, “equally remote from sover¬ 
eignty and servitude” and exalted as “the surest road to hap¬ 
piness” (Xenoph. Memor. II, 1, 11) turns out to be a road of 
opportunist wisdom leading to open conformism and accept 
ance of any powers that be and any conditions of life. The later 
Cyrenaics elaborating the doctrine of pleasure arrived at very 
different conclusions. Theodorus the Atheist, for instance, 
taught that the basis of moral behaviour is not the enjoy¬ 
ment of individual pleasures, but a stable feeling of glad¬ 
ness: the good and the evil are not pleasure and suffering, 
but joy and sorrow. Joy is brought about by wisdom, 
and sorrow by lack of judgement. Pleasures and sufferings 
as such are something indifferent. The joyful unscrupulous¬ 
ness of Aristippus gives way here to calculating sober- 
mindedness with its rather dubious implications. Thus 


141 





Theodorus was quoted as saying that all moral prescripts 
are based on common opinion which is nothing else than 
the consent of fools. There is nothing laudable or dis¬ 
graceful as such: a wise man, according to Theodorus, 
may steal and commit adultery and sacrilege, if such 
acts are conducive to his joy. Here the Cyrenaic ethics 
comes very close to the moral theory of the Cynics. The 
atheism of Theodorus was evidently of the same grain 
and boiled down to rejecting traditional polytheism and 
ridiculing the believers. 

The dialectics of hedonism brought the Cyrenaics to the 
direct negation of the initial postulate of their philosophy. 
Pressing the doctrine of pleasure to its logical conclusion, 
Hegesias denied life any value and ended up in open 
pessimism: since perfect happiness is unattainable as the 
body is given to suffering and the soul cannot but share it, 
life appears a good thing to a fool only; the wise man is 
indifferent to it. Hegesias concentrated on the attractions 
of painless death and earned himself the reputation of an 
advocate of suicide. 

(3) The Megarians. The Megarian school was founded 
by Euclides of Megara, a friend and follower of Socrates. 
During the war between Athens and his native city the 
Megarians were prohibited to visit Athens on pain of death, 
and Euclides, disguised as a hetaera, would steal at night 
into the city to listen to Socrates. After the death of the 
teacher many of his Athenian disciples moved to Megara. 
The most prominent of Euclides’s followers were Eubulides, 
Diodorus Cronus, and Stilpo. The Megarian school was 
active till the middle of the third century B.C. and gradually 
dissolved in scepticism. 

The philosophical views of the Megarians were influenced 
not only by Socrates, but also by the Eleatics and sophist 
Gorgias. The Megarians were stigmatised as squabblers and 
dialecticians because of the fondness for eristic arguments. 
In their teaching they combined the Socratic demand for the 
knowledge of the general with the Eleatic contrast between 
the sensuous and the rational, the plurality of “opinion” and 
the unity and indivisibility of Being. Following Parmenides, 
Euclides held that being was one, ungenerated, unperishable 
and motionless. However, being a disciple of Socrates and 
focusing his attention on the nature of the good, Euclides 
identified the good with being and declared “that the good 


142 
















was one, though called by many names, sometimes wisdom, 
sometimes God, and again mind (nous) and so on” (Diog. L. 
II, 106). Carrying on the spirit of Socrates’s teaching, 
Euclides maintained that nothing existed besides the One 
Good and that evil opposed to it was non-existent. 

As regards the plurality of names denoting the good, Euc¬ 
lides was opposed to the use of parallel concepts on the 
grounds that if they were similar it was better to deal with 
the original subject, the goodness, rather than with what 
resembled it, and if they were dissimilar, the comparison 
was altogether irrelevant and misleading. This particular 
instance exemplified the general negative attitude of Euc¬ 
lides to comparison as the argument from similarity (see 
Diog. L. II, 107). 

The Megarians were famous in antiquity as the authors 
of numerous paradoxes. Some of them were essentially 
identical with Zeno’s puzzles —such are the aporias against 
motion, the paradoxes of “The Heap” (one grain does not 
make a heap; adding one grain does not make it either —hence, 
a grain heap is impossible) and “The Bald Head” (pulling 
out a man’s hair does not make him bald, so baldness is 
impossible). Others were rather cheap logical quibbles 
intended to deceive and confuse their opponents in a dispute, 
such as, for instance, the sophism “The Horned One”: 
having accepted the premise that one possesses what one has 
not lost and having denied any loss of horns, a disputant 
is baffled by his opponent’s conclusion that he is a horned 
one. The argument here is based on a deliberate distortion 
of the premise relating only to something already possessed. 
A number of ancient paradoxes are in fact examples of false 
reasoning violating the laws of logic. 

Of far greater significance, however, are true logical 
puzzles, such as “The Liar” or “The Veiled Figure” credited 
to Eubulides: the first one requires a definite answer to the 
question whether the man who says “I am lying” is speaking 
the truth or not. A positive answer would contradict the 
meaning of the man’s statement who confesses that he is 
lying. The negative answer would again be wrong since the 
man admitting that he is telling a lie is in fact speaking the 
truth. Hence, the puzzle appears to be insoluble. A similar 
difficulty arises in the second paradox. Electra knows her 
brother Orestes, but does not know that the veiled man in 
front of her is Orestes—so, she does not know what she 


143 






knows. Such logical or semantic puzzles reflecting hidden 
contradictions in the very pattern of human thought exercised 
the minds of many philosophers ever since the ancient times. 
The true investigation into their nature did not start till the 
end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth 
centuries when the set theory revealed antinomies which 
tended to undermine the very foundation of mathematics' and 
were similar to the “Megarian” paradoxes. 

Speaking of the “sophisms” of ancient thinkers, we in fact 
mean three different kinds of statements: 

(1) Dialectical contradictions in the concepts of motion, 
unity and multiplicity, indivisibility and divisibility expressed 
in the aporias of the Eleatic school and used by the sophists 
and the Megarians in argument. 

(2) Logical and semantic paradoxes containing latent con 
tradictions which are to be resolved. These paradoxes (anti 
nomies) are inevitable in the development of any theory and 
their emergence calls for a serious revision of its principles 
and even rejection of some premises that seemed at first 
incontestable. 

(3) Sophisms proper, i.e. subtle fallacies intended to 
deceive. In his treatise On Sophistical Refutations Aristotle 
showed that sophisms are based either on a wrong use of 
verbal expressions (homonyms, amphibologies, incorrect 
combination or separation of words, ambiguities in pronunci¬ 
ation and grammatical forms), or on the violation of the rules 
of logic (see Arist. De soph, elench. 180ab). 

Sophistry in the broad sense, therefore, can be described as 
a deliberate manipulation of logically fallacious arguments, 
logical and semantic paradoxes and dialectical contradictions 
designed to force the opponent into adopting an obvious 
absurdity. Theoretically, it is based on a subjective, one-sided 
application of the dialectical flexibility of concepts. In the 
narrow sense, sophistry consists in the use of logically 
defective, reasoning intended to confuse the opponent in 
a dispute and gain the upper hand over him by any means 
that seem suitable. Such disputes in ancient Greece were 
anything but academic and the resort to ridicule and crude 
jokes with a large grain of “Attic salt,” often far from 
harmless, was common practice. Tradition holds, for 


1 See A. Fraenkel, Y. Bar-Hillel, Foundations of Set Theory, North 
Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1958, Ch. 1. 


144 








instance, that Diodorus Cronus died of frustration after 
being outargued by Stilpo and derided by the mob. 

From the epistemological viewpoint sophistic arguments 
often perform the function of a peculiar logical experiment 
designed to test current concepts for soundness, reveal their 
weaknesses and stimulate their clarification and improvement. 
Referring to the concept of possibility which plays an impor 
taut role in his system, Aristotle pointed out that the Megari- 
ans rejected this concept on the grounds that “a thing can act 
only when it is acting, and when it is not acting, it cannot act” 
(Met. IX, 3, 1046b). This quotation from Aristotle is in fact 
a paraphrase of the famous sophism of Diodorus Cronus which 
was intended to prove that nothing is ever possible except 
what actually happens. 1 By contrast, Philon of Megara 
identified possibility with the inner capability of a thing and 
completely disregarded the external conditions considering 
any development possible if it was in accord with the thing’s 
potentialities. 

Stilpo, the last prominent representative of the Megarian 
school showed close affinity wih Antiphon in his analysis of 
thought and also held that it was erroneous to predicate one 
thing of another. Hence, he considered it inadmissible to say 
“man is kind” or “the man is a general,” but only “man is 
man,” “kind is kind” and “general is general” (Plut. Adv. 
Colot. 23, 1119). However, contrary to the Cynic who 
rejected the general in favour of the individual, the Megarian 
asserted the general and denied the individual. 

As regards the Elian-Eritreian school (Phaedon of Elis, 
Menedemus of Eritrea) and orthodox Socratics Xenophon and 
Aeschines (the former known as the historian and the author 
of such Socratic treatises as Memorabilia and Apology of 
Socrates) they were not distinguished for originality and 
made no significant contribution to the history of philosophy. 

* * * 

The sophists, Socrates and the Socratics marked the end 
of the early period of Greek philosophy (the Socratics logic¬ 
ally, if not chronologically). On the negative side of its 
achievements was the growing conviction of the inadequacy 


1 See E. Zeller, Die Philosophic der Griechen, Vierte Auflage II 1 
Leipzig, 1889, S. 270. 


KM), - }!) 


145 






of the physiologers’ “principles” of the universe as qualitati¬ 
vely determinate substances. The mistrust of such principles 
grew in proportion to their increasing number and diversity, 
so that both the philosophers and the public finally came 
to regard them as products of rich imagination very much in 
the manner of myths rather than as sound scientific notions. 
The prevailing attitude to the positive philosophical doctrines 
of the time was epitomised in Aristophanes’s immortal 
comedy Clouds. 

However, the scepticism that followed fifth-century 
enlightenment was not a blind alley, but a stepping stone to 
a new rise of philosophical thought. The problems facing 
philosophy could be tackled along two lines. One- the 
materialist line-was represented by Democritus who 
construed the world as an infinite multitude of atoms stripped 
of all qualitative characteristics and eternally moving in 
empty space. The other —the idealistic line was represented 
hv Plato who dialectical I v transcended the contradictions of 
the previous physical doctrines by introducing the concept of 
“idea” as the essence, principle and law of a class of similar 
sensuous objects. With Democritus and Plato we enter the 
period of classical Greek philosophy. 














PART TWO 

CLASSICAL GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


In Lieu of Introduction 

The heyday of Greek thought, its classical period justly 
regarded as one of the most glorious epochs in the entire 
history of philosophy falls on the fourth century B.C. which 
is marked by a profound crisis of the polis system and collapse 
of Greek political and social life. The end of the Peloponnesian 
war did not bring peace to Hellas. The country was drained 
of blood by endless military expeditions sent to subdue 
dissentient or simply disgruntled “allies” and devastated by 
the Corinthian, Elean, Social and Sacred wars. The relations 
between Hellas and foreign states were extremely unstable 
due to the participation of ten thousand Greek mercenaries in 
Cyrus’s campaign and their subsequent retreat across Asia 
Minor, the expedition of Agesilaus, the Persian interference 
in Greek affairs resulting in the imposition of the King’s Peace 
and a new subjugation of Greek colonies in Asia Minor. The 
formation and rapid dissolution of ever new leagues 
(Chalcidian, Boeotian,. Thessalian, the Second Athenian 
Confederacy) attested to an increasing tendency towards uni¬ 
fication which however proved unable to prevail over the 
separatism of individual polises. This internecine military, 
political and diplomatic “war of all against all could not 
but end in a disaster for independent Greek states: in 337 
the Macedonian king Philip established his hegemony over 
the Hellenic alliance. 

No less significant was the internal strife in Greek city- 
states. Frequent changes of democratic and oligarchic 
governments resulting largely from the alternating predo- 







minant influence of democratic Athens or oligarchic Sparta 
and depending on the geographic proximity of this or that 
state to these centres of attraction in the Greek world kept 
the cities under constant strain. The acute social conflicts 
culminating, as a rule, in the slaughter or banishment of 
political opponents unfolded against the background of the 
economic plight of the masses and not infrequently led to the 
establishment of a tyranny that became a typical form of 
government in the fourth century. Sicily was the first to 
succumb to the rule of tyrants who soon began to dominate 
the political scene in the whole of Greece. The tyranny of the 
fourth century known in history as “the Age of the Tyrants’’ 
was brought about by the disintegration of the polis system 
and the contradictions of mature slave-owning society: the 
propertied classes strove to use it in order to curb the poor 
and retain their wealth and privileged social position, 
whereas the poor looked forward to a strong man who 
would help them in the struggle against the rich for their 
economic and social rights. The tyrants, often professional 
soldiers, banked on the mercenaries and played on the 
contradictions between the leagues of city-states siding now 
with one of them, now with another or even resorting to the 
patronage of Persia or Macedon. 

The tyrannies of Dionysius 1 and Dionysius II in Sicily, 
Jason of Pherae in Thessaly, the coups in Phocis and Locris, 
Euboea, Corinth and Sicyon, the tyranny of Plato’s pupil 
Clearchus in Heraclea Pontica which was maintained by his 
descendants till 289 B.C. provided a vivid illustration to the 
corruption of traditional political forms in Greece, whereas the 
so-called barbarian monarchies in Cyprus and Caria in 
South-West Asia Minor foreshadowed in a way the later 
Hellenistic states in the ancient Near East. 

The Peloponnesian war and the ensuing social and 
political unrest sharpened the internal contradictions of Greek 
slave-owning society and widened the gap between the rich 
and the poor. Attica was laid waste by the Peloponnesian 
war, Peloponnesus by the Corinthian war and expeditions of 
Epaminondas and Pelopidas, Boeotia was ravaged by 
numerous incursions of the Spartiates, etc. The peasants were 
ruined and the fields lay desolate. The situation was further 
aggravated by the return of former exiles and the flow of 
colonists banished from their lands by their political op 
ponents and left without any livelihood. The position of free 


148 




artisans, too, was steadily deteriorating, as they were unable 
to stand competition with large slave-owning enterprises that 
began to emerge at the turn of the fourth century B.C. 

The impoverishment of the peasants and handicraftsmen 
and the decrease of the purchasing power of the masses went 
side by side with the unprecedented accumulation of capital 
in the hands of the wealthy all kinds of suppliers and 
contractors, arms manufacturers, ship-owtH'is. state officials, 
and the like. This process of wealth concentration was partly 
attributable to the influx of precious metals that literally 
flooded the Greek market: the Persian subsidies were said 
to have amounted to an enormous sum of 5000 talents (about 
180 tons of gold), the Athenian own resourses were about 6000 
talents and the allies paid annually 1000 talents in taxes. 
On top of that in 356 the Focians seized the countless 
treasures of the temple of Apollo at Delphi and melted down 
many of its valuables. Needless to say, all these funds 
concentrated in the hands of a few and gave a powerful 
impetus to slave, land and grain trade, banking and insurance 
business, mortgaging, etc. 

The continuous growth of productive forces which was only 
retarded but not stopped by the raging wars called for 
expansion of commercial and political ties between states 
which felt more than ever before constricted by the narrow 
confines of their territories. The Greek world was entering 
the stage of developed slavery and showed a clear trend 
towards larger and more powerful economic and political 
alliances. Slave labour became the decisive factor in Greek 
economy and slave-trade acquired enormous proportions. 
Thousands upon thousands of skilled labourers from various 
Greek cities were taken prisoner and sold into slavery during 
internal strife. Together with the “barbarian” slaves (Carians, 
Thracians, Scythians), they were used in handicrafts and 
construction, worked in mines, etc. The “free”, but poor 
sections of the population had practically no choice in life: 
the young able-bodied men joined the mercenary force and 
left their homes in search of fortune, the aged ones and the 
women hired themselves out in order not to starve. Appraising 
the social conditions in Greek states of his epoch, Plato wrote: 
“Each will contain not less than two divisions, one the city 
of the poor, the other of the rich, each at war with one another; 
end within each there are many smaller divisions...” 
(Resp. 423a). 


149 






Despite the constant wars and general economic and poli¬ 
tical instability the concentration of immense wealth in the 
hands of a few and the state provided a material base for the 
progress of Greek culture and is largely accountable for the 
flowering of the arts and philosophy. The fourth century 
known as the heyday of architecture was notable for the 
building of new and restoration of destroyed cities, e.g. 
Megalopolis with its famous Thersilion (assembly hall) for 
10,000 people, Messene, Mantinea, the construction of stone 
theatres including the largest one in Epidaurus, the 
Mausoleum at Helicarnassus, the temple of Artemis (Diana) 
at Ephesus, etc. The rise of sculpture was connected with 
the names of Praxiteles, Scopas, Leucippus, painting gained 
a new dimension in the activity of the Athenian and Sicyonian 
schools. Greek drama at the beginning of the fourth century 
was represented by great ancient playwright Aristophanes, 
whose comedies The Ecclesiazusae (Women in Parliament) 
and The Plutus (Wealth) vividly reflected the contradictions 
of the epoch. The progress in literary prose was attested 
to by Xenophon’s Anabasis mentioned earlier and historical 
novel Cyropaedia describing the career of Cyrus the Great of 
Persia, as well as by the oratory and political pamphlets 
of Lysis, Isocrates and Demosphenes. Yet the greatest 
contribution of Greek genius to world culture in the fourth 
century was perhaps in the field of thought. Indeed, Greek 
classical philosophy represented by Democritus, Plato and 
Aristotle not only testified to the intellectual achievements of 
that small but highly gifted people “whose universal talents 
and activity assured it a place in the history of human 
development that no other people can ever claim,” 1 but also 
for the first time clearly defined the two main trends in 
philosophy, idealism and materialism, referred to by Lenin as 
the “tendencies or lines of Plato and Democritus in philos¬ 
ophy.” 2 Plato’s clear-cut statement of the basic question of 
philosophy as that concerning the relation of the material and 
the spiritual, the primacy of nature to spirit or vice versa 
attested to the maturity of philosophy, whereas the compre¬ 
hensive system of philosophical knowledge developed by 
Aristotle opened broad prospects for all round development 
of human thought. 

1 Frederick Engels, Dialectics of Nature, p. 46. 

2 V. I. Lenin, “Materialism and Einpirio-Critir.ism", Collected Works, 
Vol. 14, p. 130. 

150 






Chapter 1 

Ancient Atomism: from Leucippus to Nausiphanes 
1. Historical Tradition and Sources 

Atomism is one of the world's most congruent, consistent 
and widely spread philosophical doctrines. Posidonius the 
Stoic and the neo-Platonic Jamblichus refer to early Phoenici¬ 
an philosopher Mochus who lived "before the Trojan War," 
i.e. in time immemorial, as the founder of this philosophy. The 
atomistic theory of matter is known to be a component part 
of the Vaisesika philosophical teaching in Ancient India. 
For all its originality, the substantiation of the arguments ad¬ 
vanced by the Greek atomists, and this circumstance, together 
with the fact that the Vaisesika teaching is hardly older 
than the third century B.C. is accountable for some scholars' 
conception of their mutual influence. However, the ancient 
evidence we possess is too slender to permit a definite 
conclusion as to who borrowed from whom. Atomism as a 
doctrine was accepted in the middle ages by some Arab 
philosophical schools. In modern times it became a scientific 
theory that took shape in the nineteenth century and 
remains till nowadays, though in an updated form, an 
important element of the scientific picture of the world. 

Whatever the results of the debate about the foreign 
sources of atomism, one can state incontrovertibly that the 
atomism of the ancient Greeks was not only an original 
product of Greek thought but also the culmination of a long¬ 
standing philosophical tradition and a synthesis of a number 
of typically Greek philosophical trends and intellectual pos¬ 
tulates. In the atomistic doctrine we find the answers to 


151 









numerous questions posed at earlier stages. Its roots go deep 
into the Ionian physics and Pythagoreanism, as well as into 
the speculations of the Eleatic school and the physics of 
the fifth century. Atomism was concerned with the problems 
of being and void, existence and emergence, unity and 
diversity, divisibility and quality, i.e. all the problems 
raised by the previous schools. The synthetic nature of 
Democritus’s atomism, not infrequently left out of account 
without any good reason, imperatively demands of the histori¬ 
ans of philosophy to reassess the significance of the atomistic 
doctrine in the development of Greek thought and regard it 
as the first system of classical Greek philosophy. 

Tradition credits the Greek theory of atomic elements to 
Leucippus and Democritus. However, already in the fourth 
century B.C. the works of these two philosophers came to be 
regarded as a single body and their differentiation presents 
now practically insuperable difficulties. We possess only one 
fragment of Leucippus’s book On Mind which can be ascribed 
to him with certainty. All others are credited to both 
philosophers and the references to them in sources invariably 
begin with the words “According to Leucippus and Democri¬ 
tus...,” “Democritus and Leucippus with their pupils 
taught...,” and the like. 

Leucippus, a contemporary of Empedocles and Anaxagoras, 
was a pupil of Zeno of Elea and the teacher of Democritus. 
The dates of his life cannot be fixed exactly and are roughly 
put at 500-440 B.C. His native city may have been Elea, 
Abdera or Miletus. We know practically nothing about his 
life. As regards Democritus of Abdera (c. 460-370), “he was 
a pupil of certain Magians and Chaldeans. For when King 
Xerxes was entertained by the father of Democritus he left 
men in charge ... and from these men, while still a boy, he 
learned theology and astronomy. Afterwards he met 
Leucippus” (Diog. L. IX, 34). On some evidence he travelled 
to Egypt, Persia and even to Ethiopia and India. After his 
return he led a modest and solitary life engaging in scientific 
studies and valuing them so highly that, according to extant 
evidence, he “would rather discover one cause than gain the 
kingdom of Persia” (L. LVIII). He died at an old age. 

Numerous testimonies and legends describe Democritus 
as a “laughing" philosopher who refused to take seriously 
what was commonly believed to be serious (L. LXII). Ancient 
sources portray him as a man of great practical wisdom. 


152 







learning and power of observation. Referring to bibliographer 
Thrasyllus, Diogenes Laertius gives the names of more than 
60 works by Democritus, among them such important treatises 
as Great World-Order (sometimes credited to Leucippus), 
Small World-Order , and On Logic or The Canon. Of these only 
a few fragments survived, mixed at that, as was mentioned 
above, with the fragments and paraphrases of Leucippus. On 
the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, “Aristoxenus in his His¬ 
torical Notes affirms that Plato wished to burn all the writings 
of Democritus that he could collect, but that Amyclas and 
Clinias the Pythagoreans prevented him, saying that there 
was no advantage in doing so, for already the books were 
widely circulated” (Diog. L. IX, 40). 

On the face of it, the doctrine of atomic elements is very 
simple: the elements of all that exists are indivisible material 
particles or atoms moving in empty space. Nothing ever comes 
into being out of or perishes into the non-existent. Combina¬ 
tion of atoms produces things, while their dissolution brings 
about the end of things. All things arise of necessity which 
in fact is a vortex bringing the atoms together. The vortex 
results from the random movements of the atoms oscillating 
in all directions. External objects emit thin shells (copies 
or images) of themselves which react on the senses. The soul 
is only a combination of particular atoms which are the tiniest 
and smoothest of all. Man’s final goal is a welfare of soul, i.e. 
its peace and balance undisturbed by fear, prejudice or 
passion. 

What lies behind this seeming simplicity? Why was the 
teaching of Democritus so vigorously opposed by Plato and 
his followers, not to speak of the later Christian theologicians? 


2. Atomistics and the “World-Order” 

The basic postulate of the atomists was that reality only 
consists of atoms and the void. An infinite multitude of indi¬ 
visible particles of matter move eternally in infinite empty 
space, impinging on one another and coming together to form 
physical objects. The atoms differ from one another only in the 
shape, arrangement and position. These three modes of differ 
ence were illustrated by Aristotle with the examples of A 
and N, AN and NA, Z and N respectively. The question natu¬ 
rally arises: why did the atomists have to postulate indi¬ 
visible particles and could not assume the infinite divisibility 
of matter? 


153 






Being a pupil of.Zeno, Leucippus must have been well 
aware of both the strong and weak points in his master’s 
reasoning and pondered, like Democritus some time later, over 
the aporias against multitude: if a body is divided into an 
infinitely large number of parts, they will either have no size 
at all and their aggregate, i.e. the original body, will dwindle 
into nothingness, or, if they have any size, the body will be 
infinitely large. Hence, in both cases the postulation of infinite 
divisibility leads to absurdity. However, the atomists realised 
that the contradiction could be avoided by setting a limit to 
divisibility, i.e. by assuming minute indivisible particles or 
atoms (Cr. “indivisible”). This assumption had an additional 
advantage in that it tallied closely with everyday experience. 
Indeed, even simple observation provides convincing evidence 
that matter can he divided into parts so small as to escape 
our senses. Giving an account of the principles of atomism in 
Democritus, Aristotle quotes his comparison of the atoms to 
specks of dust dancing in a sunbeam. 

The atomistic theory bridged the gap between the one im 
movable and indivisible Being of Parmenides and the real 
physical world of senses with its mutable and divisible objects. 
It offered at once the solution of two problems that harassed 
the Eleatics: those of one and many, and motion. 

Indeed, any object could now be split into a finite number 
of particles and restored to its initial shape, and the existence 
of void alongside atoms accounted for their motion. The pat 
tern of the Eieatic Eleing remained intact since the atoms were 
conceived as indivisible and unperishable entities, but many 
was substituted for One. The postulation of void made reality 
both pluralistic and movable and reconciled Eieatic logic 
with the senses. 

Aristotle is known to have interpreted the atomistic theory 
as an answer to the Eieatic denial of change and movement. 
The atomists accepted the Eieatic proposition that without 
void motion is impossible. Yet contrary to the Eleatics who de¬ 
nied the existence of the void, the atomists maintained that not 
only being or the atoms, hut also not-being or the void are 
real. Interpreting the atomists’ arguments in favour of the 
existence of the void, Aristotle wrote: “...it is maintained that 
motion would seem not to exist, if there were no void, since 
what is full cannot contain anything more... They reason from 
the fact that some things are observed to contract and be 
compressed ... which implies that the compressed body 







contracts into the voids present in it...” (Arist. Phys. IV, 6, 
213 ab). The void is absolutely homogeneous and can exist 
irrespective of whether it is occupied by physical objects. It 
separates whole bodies and particles of composite bodies. 
Atoms alone contain no void and are therefore absolutely 
dense leaving no room for a blade that might cut or split 
them apart. 

The admission of void also eliminated the difficulties facing 
the Pythagoreans and “saved” their doctrine of number as the 
principle of the universe. In point of fact, the Pythagoreans 
also spoke of void, but understood it in a crude way, identi¬ 
fying it with air. Aristotle was keen to note a certain affinity 
between the two teachings, since any material object is con¬ 
ceived by an atomist as a finite plurality of atoms and, 
therefore, as a definite number. Yet Leucippus and Democri¬ 
tus evidently showed no tendency to subscribe to so-called 
mathematical atomism in the manner of Pythagorean Eurytus 
and made no attempt to account for properties of things by 
the numbers of their atoms, the more so as Democritus allowed 
differences in the size of the atoms and even suggested the 
possibility of an atom as large as the cosmos (L. 207). 

Democritus postulated an infinite multitude of atoms and, 
accordingly, an infinite vacuum, since a finite vacuum cannot 
accommodate an infinite number of atoms and an infinite num¬ 
ber of worlds composed of atoms. It is hard to say which of the 
two assumptions was primary, since both stem from one and 
the same conception of infinity which also underlies Democri¬ 
tus’s postulation of the infinite variety of atom shapes. 

The infinity of the world in space presupposes its infinity in 
time, as well as the eternity (infinity) of motion. According to 
Aristotle, “Democritus of Abdera says that there is no begin¬ 
ning of the infinite, that a cause is an origin and what is ever¬ 
lasting is infinite; therefore to ask ‘why’ in a case like this is 
to look for an origin for the infinite” (Arist. De gen. anim. 
742b). This is a very important statement and we shall later 
discuss it in more detail, hut at this point it will be sufficient 
for our purpose to note that the universe, according to the ato 
mists, is eternal and infinite in space, and that the number of 
the atoms and of the worlds composed of them is infinite. This 
fundamental materialist proposition was at once countered by 
the atomists’ opponents with an argument that it postulated 
something more infinite than infinity (L. 141). Indeed,accord 
ing to the atomistic doctrine, the number of the worlds is in 








finite and, as each of the worlds maintains a very large number 
of atoms, the number of atoms is larger than the number of 
the worlds, i.e. than infinity, which is absurd. None of the ex¬ 
tant evidence throws light on how Democritus met this diffi 
culty. The only way out open to him at that time appears to 
have been provided by Anaxagoras’s theory that “in Great 
there is always a Greater. And it is equal in number to the 
small, but each thing is to itself both great and small” 
(DK 59 B 3). However, Democritus could not resort to this 
argument as it implied the infinite divisibility of matter. 
Modern mathematics has- long since discarded this problem 
by showing that the infinite set of worlds, each consisting 
of a finite set of atoms, contains a countable (equal in 
power to a numerical series) set of atoms. As regards other 
paradoxes arising in the cosmology of innumerable worlds 
(such as photometric, gravitational, thermodynamic), they 
were still far ahead and did not trouble ancient science. 

The atomistic concept of motion was countered by Zeno’s 
paradoxes “against movement”. There is good reason to be¬ 
lieve that Leucippus and Democritus avoided these paradoxes 
by resorting to the notions of indivisible fractions of space, 
time and movement. These notions, incomprehensible from 
the viewpoint of ancient science, come very close to the 
modern concepts of quantised space, time and motion. 

Democritus was bound to make some attempt to account 
for the differences of fire, air, water and earth in terms of their 
atomic composition, since the conception of the four 
“elements” was deeply rooted in Greek philosophical tradi 
tion. Describing the atomists’ views, Aristotle wrote: “But 
they have never explained in detail the shapes of the various 
elements, except so far as to allot the sphere to fire. Air, water 
and the rest they distinguished by the relative size of the 
atom” (De Caelo, III. 4, 303a). According to other evidence, 
Democritus explained the mobility of the atoms of fire by their 
smallness and roundness. The atoms of air, water and earth 
are cubic in shape, their different sizes accounting for 
distinctions between the elements. The atoms do not turn 
into one another, but evolve from a large heterogeneous 
mass as separate elements, e.g. earth and air from water, 
giving the illusion of mutual transformations. 

As we see, in constructing the universe Democritus does not 
seem to need anything but atoms and motion. Moving atoms 
draw together, set up an eddy and begin to be sorted out in 


l r >6 



void, like to like. As a result, they form a separate “world” 
enclosed within its separate “sky.” Worlds and all objects are 
formed from atoms and dissolve into them. According to 
Hippolytus, Democritus taught that “there are innumerable 
worlds of different sizes. In some there is neither sun nor 
moon, in others they are larger than in ours and others have 
more than one. These worlds are at irregular distances, more 
in one direction and less in another, and some are flourishing, 
others declining. Here they come into being, there they die 
and they are destroyed by collision with one another. Some 
of the worlds have no animal or vegetable life nor any 
water” (L. 349). While reading these lines a modern reader 
may easily mistake them for an extract from some nineteenth- 
century popular book on astronomy... 

3. Determinism: Necessity and Chance in Democritus’s Philosophy 

Democritus was the first in ancient Greek philosophy to in¬ 
troduce the concept of cause and to develop a system of deter 
minism. For one thing, no one before him had used the word 
aitia with its purely anthropomorphic meaning “originator” or 
“instigator” in the broad sense of “cause”. 

The general statement of the principle of causality is credit¬ 
ed to Leucippus who was quoted as saying: “Nothing occurs 
at random, but everything for a reason and by necessity” (L. 
22). This utterance alone clearly shows the advance made by 
the atomists on the previous understanding of the relationship 
between the preceding and subsequent states of things. Prior 
to Democritus Greek philosophers in fact deemed it sufficient 
to indicate the primary substance from which all things came. 
This led to the Eleatic denial of genesis and change in general: 
if “nothing can come from nothing,” generation of things be¬ 
comes inexplicable and hWce, in the eyes of the Eleatics, im¬ 
possible. The way out proposed by Anaxagoras consisted in 
postulating qualitatively determinate and immutable seeds 
constituting the substance of all things and not differing quali 
tatively from their components. Leucippus and Democritus 
approached the problem of genesis from a different direction: 
by asserting that nothing can generate without cause, “at ran¬ 
dom.” In other words, they preserved the conception of prima 
ry substance from which all things come into being, but distin 
guished from it the cause of their generation and change. 

Since the works of Democritus and Leucippus have come 
down to us in fragments only, the reconstruction of their 


ir>7 


determinism presents considerable difficulties. Indeed, what 
was their conception of the mechanism of causality? The most 
probable version comes from the pen of Aetius who quotes 
Democritus as referring to the “repercussion, motion and 
blow of matter” (L. 25). Aetius interprets it as a statement of 
“necessity,” yet “cause” is the obvious connotation to it: 
Democritus clearly identifies cause with necessity, and this 
leads to several important consequences. 

The first and the most significant of them is the denial by 
materialist determinism of any intelligence that moves the 
world. According to Aetius, all philosophers believed the 
world to be animate and governed by Providence, whereas 
Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus and other adherents of the 
atomistic theory held that it was inanimate and governed by 
some blind force (L. 23). Despite the obvious inaccuracy of 
Aetius about the unanimous recognition of preternatural 
powers by all Democritus’s predecessors, his testimony is very 
valuable: Democritus, as well as other atonnsts, contrasts de¬ 
terminism to the religious doctrine of divine reason governing 
the world. In other words, the determinism of the atomists is 
inseparably linked with, atheism. 

The second consequence was the denial of chance and the 
resulting fatalistic trend of ancient determinism. According to 
the atomists, the purpose of science was to reveal the cause of 
an event, i.e. to show its necessity. Since everything occurs 
by necessity, there is no such thing as chance in an objective 
sense, i.e. as something that has no cause. Chance is a subjec¬ 
tive notion used merely to denote an event we do not know the 
cause of, i.e. nothing else than an expression of human igno¬ 
rance. 

Most commentators on the philosophy of Democritus cen¬ 
tred upon the first consequence which became the primary ob¬ 
ject of their attacks against the atomistic doctrine. The main 
argument of its opponents was that (his doctrine could not ex¬ 
plain orderliness in the world. Denouncing determinism, 
Christian theologian and mystic philosopher Saint Augustine 
wrote: “One may concede to Democritus and Epicurus the 
existence of atoms, even their random collisions and the 
resulting movement by impact. But how can one accept the 
view that the atoms crowding together can create some object, 
change its shape and modify configuration, making it smooth, 
proportionate and adorning with colour?” The examples of 
such criticism can be multiplied, but all of them consciously or 







unconsciously ignore the fact that Democritus did not recog¬ 
nise accidental movement of the atoms and their “random” 
combination into orderly objects, but held that they were sub¬ 
ject to the law of attraction of like to like. 

This conception was well known to the philosophical pre¬ 
cursors of Democritus, but he gave it a new interpretation. On 
the evidence of Sextus Empiricus, Democritus taught that 
“living creatures consort with their kind, as doves with doves, 
and cranes with cranes, and similarly with the rest of the ani 
rnal world. So it is with inanimate things, as one can see with 
the sieving of seeds and with the pebbles on beaches. In the 
former, through the circulation of the sieve, beans are separat 
ed and ranged with beans, barley-grains with barley, and 
wheat with wheat; in the latter, with the motion of the wave, 
oval pebbles are driven to the same place as oval, and round to 
round, as if the similarity in these things had a sort of power 
over them which had brought them together” (DK 68 B 164). 
Similar evidence for Democritus’s views, if only not so colour 
ful, we have from Theophrastus, Diogenes Laertius, Hippoly 
ins and Alexander. As regards the formation of orderly 
inorganic bodies, Democritus was far ahead of his time and his 
doctrine might well have ranked with some mechanistic con 
cepts of the nineteenth century, as, for instance, the “law of 
agregation” in Spencer’s theory of evolution of which it is 
highly reminiscent. 1 

The picture of the universe painted by Democritus exempli 
lies a simple juxtaposition of necessity and chance: orderly 
bodies come about by necessity as a result of haphazard colli 
sions and recoils of the atoms. If his vision of the world were 
to be described in terms of modern science, the law of statisti¬ 
cal regularity would probably he the closest approximation. 
However, proceeding from his mechanistic theory of causality 
with its rigid alternative of chance or necessity, Democritus 
rejected the former in favour of the latter. Contrary to dialec¬ 
tical determinism with its conception of chance as a form of 
manifestation of necessity and as its complement, the one¬ 
sided and “wooden” determinism of Democritus absolutised 
necessity, thereby turning it into its opposite and reducing to 
the status of chance. Indeed, the universe at large is conceived 
by the atomists as having been produced by chance, whereas 
“our world” has no other explanation but the law of causality. 


Sim* II. Spoil cor. First Principles, (Hi. XXI. 







The rejection of chance and the identification of causality 
with necessity that created for Democritus serious problems in 
cosmology and cosmogony also led him to deny any freedom in 
human activity. The problem of freedom underlying any ethi¬ 
cal theory lay at the root of disagreement between Democritus 
and his follower Epicurus who was to develop further the doc¬ 
trine of atomistic determinism. 

4. Soul and the Theory of Knowledge 

The atomists gave a purely materialist account of soul and 
the process of cognition. Following the deeply rooted tradi¬ 
tion of Greek philosophy, Democritus together with the Ionian 
philosophers attributed the mental activity of human beings to 
a specific life force present in the body and called soul or 
psyche and regarded it both as the source of motion and the 
seat of sensations and thought. As regards its first function, 
his reasoning was simple: what is motionless cannot impart 
movement to another body, therefore, in order to move the 
body, the soul must be corporeal and movable. Democritus 
maintained that the soul consists of spherical atoms and is like 
fire because, according to Aristotle, “shapes of this kind are 
best able to slip through anything and to move other things by 
their own movement” (Arist. De anima I, 3, 403b). The indi¬ 
vidual soul is mortal since its atoms are dispersed after death 
of the body. Yet all things, according to Democritus, “share in 
some sort of soul, even dead bodies, because they plainly retain 
some portion of warmthandsensitivity when mostof ithas been 
breathed out” (L. 448). Hence, Democritus’s concept of soul 
in its primary function of imparting motive power is a com¬ 
bination of mechanistic atomism and the hylozoistic doctrine. 

The second function of the soul, that of providing sensation 
and thought, was more difficult to account for on the princi¬ 
ples of the atomistic theory. Sextus Empiricus quotes De 
mocritus as saying: “By convention is sweet, by convention 
bitter, by convention hot, by convention cold, by convention 
colour; but by verity atoms and void” (Sext. Adv. math. VII, 
135). This view expressed in modern terms amounts to an as¬ 
sertion of the subjective character of such sensible qualities as 
taste, heat and cold because all of them come only from the 
shape, arrangement and position of the atoms. Hence the ge¬ 
neral conclusion about the inadequacy of sensible knowledge 
incapable of grasping the truth for the simple reason that the 
atoms lie beyond the possibilities of the senses: “We in 


160 








reality comprehend nothing invariable, but what shifts about 
according to the disposition of the body and of the things 
which oppose it” (ibid. 136). 

However, though the same object can produce different sen¬ 
sations depending on the state of man’s body (honey tastes 
bitter to a man suffering from jaundice and sweet to a healthy 
one), they are secondary in relation to objective reality, name¬ 
ly, to the shape of the atoms. According to Democritus, heat 
is akin to fire because both are the effects of round and mobile 
atoms, white and black result respectively from smooth and 
rough atoms, sound comes from a condensed stream of atoms 
(the difference in the tones being evidently a function of con¬ 
densation. The atoms producing bitterness are small, round 
and smooth but with irregularities; pungency, small with an¬ 
gles and bends; sweetness, round and large, etc. Much dep¬ 
ends on the position of the atoms and on the angle of vision: 
thus, the sun-beam falling on the neck of a pigeon produces 
very different effects in accordance with the position of the 
observer’s eye: some see the neck dark-green, others gold, 
still others black, etc. (L. 434). 

Democritus taught that sensation involves direct physical 
contact between an external object and a sense organ. The in¬ 
teraction between the two was easy to account for in the case 
of auditory, tactile and gustatory sensations, but vision re¬ 
quired a more sophisticated explanation. To overcome difficul¬ 
ties, Democritus elaborated the Empedoclean theory of efflu 
ences according to which external objects constantly cast off, 
as it were, films of atoms retaining the form of their surfaces. 
These “images” as they were called by Democritus enter the 
eye and produce the corresponding visual sensation. 

According to ancient evidence, Democritus maintained 
that there are two forms of cognition, one through the senses 
or “bastard”, and the other through the intellect or “genu¬ 
ine”. “Whenever the bastard kind is unable any longer to see 
what has become too small, or to hear or smell or taste or per¬ 
ceive it by touch, [one must have recourse to] another and 
finer [instrument]” (Sext. Adv. Math. VII, 139). 

As is seen from the above, Democritus assigned an im¬ 
portant role to the senses and regarded sensible experience 
as a stepping stone to rational thought. Thus, in substantiat¬ 
ing the atomistic doctrine he passes from the image of a 
particle to the conception of indivisibility of atoms. Accord¬ 
ing to Democritus, rational cognition is impossible without 


I I -030 


161 







sensory experience. On the evidence of Galen, Democritus 
after denouncing the senses as giving but a false picture 
of reality makes them say to the mind: “Wretched mind, do 
you take your evidence from us and then throw us down? That 
throw is your overthrow” (L. 79-80). 

Significant as it is, the idea of Democritus about the unity 
of sensory and rational knowledge was destined to remain 
but a conjecture, since we do not possess any of his logical 
writings devoted to theoretical investigation into the process 
of ascent from one level of cognition to the other (his treatise 
On Logic or The Canon is known to have been lost). Demo¬ 
critus widely used abstraction as a means of reflecting 
objective reality and, according to the testimony of Aris¬ 
totle, was the first to tackle the problem of definition. There 
is good reason to believe that he gave a powerful impetus to 
the Epicureans in their further epistemological studies. Nev¬ 
ertheless, the foundation of formal logic as a science of cor¬ 
rect thinking is justly credited by tradition to Aristotle. 

For all its weak points, the theory of knowledge expound¬ 
ed by Democritus was an important advance on his predeces¬ 
sors. It contained a number of fruitful ideas anticipating 
in a way the future development of philosophical thought. 
Among the most important of them was the doctrine of the 
objective or “primary” (extension, size, shape, etc.) and the 
subjective or “secondary” (colour, taste, smell) qualities 
which occupied the minds of philosophers from Galileo’s time 
till the nineteenth century and is still alive today, the teaching 
of effluence which was in fact a prototype of the corpuscular 
theory of light, and the idea of logical transition from pheno 
mena to essence (from bastard to genuine knowledge) which 
provided thefoundation forthe development of inductive logic. 
5. Man, Society, Ethics and Religion 

Like all Greek philosophers, Democritus devoted much 
attention to the problems of origin of living beings. He taught 
that they came out of earth and moisture and did not owe 
their origin to any creator or intelligent purpose (L. 514). 
According to Democritus, the first men may also have arisen 
from earth, but it is also possible that they came from other 
animals as a result of natural changes and survived in the 
process of something like “natural selection.” These views 
on the origin of living beings and mankind are not original 
and can be traced to earlier philosophical doctrines and even 
still older mythological notions. 


162 






Far more realistic was the evolutionary conception of 
society credited to Democritus. According to Diodorus Sicu¬ 
lus, Democritus maintained that the first men led a disorder¬ 
ly life like animals feeding on grass and fruits. Their life 
being in constant jeopardy from wild beasts, they learned 
to herd together in order to survive. They had no clothes 
and could not use fire or build houses. Lacking the habit of 
laying in food for the winter, they often died of starvation and 
cold. As time went by, they learned to take refuge in 
caves and lay aside fruits suitable for storage. Then they 
learned to produce fire by friction and the rudiments of the 
arts came into being. Galen quotes Democritus as saying that 
“experience and vicissitudes have taught men this, and it is 
from their wealth of experience that men have learned to per¬ 
form the things they do.” 1 

Other sources ascribe to Democritus the view that the 
arts were a result of simulation: “We are pupils of the ani¬ 
mals in the most important things; the spider for spinning and 
mending, the swallow for building, and the songsters, swan 
and nightingale, for singing, by way of imitation” (L. 559). 

Elaborating on the evolutionary conception of society. 
Democritus proceeded from the sophistic nomos-physis an¬ 
tithesis, i.e. the distinction between what was contrived ar¬ 
tificially or came into being by human consent and what is 
natural (arose by necessity). He maintained that language 
is an artificial product of developing society: first, men 
uttered but confused sounds, then gradually they began to 
articulate words and agreed among themselves on expressions 
for every object thereby making communication possible. 
Each group of people composed its own words, and different 
languages arose in different places. In contrast to Pythagoras 
who was believed to profess the doctrine of the “natural” ori¬ 
gin of words, Democritus maintained that names came into be¬ 
ing by mutual consent, and adduced homonymy, polynomy, 
arbitrary change of names and differences in the methods of 
word coinage in support of his theory (see L. 563). 

Similar views were held by Democritus regarding the state 
and the laws. According to Diogenes Laertius, Democritus 
asserted that the laws existed only by nomos (conventional¬ 
ly), whereas “in nature there is nothing but atoms and void” 

Galen on Medical Experience, First edition of the Arabic version 
with English introduction and notes, London, 1944, IX, 5, p. 145b. 


165 







(IX, 45). This is a very important statement leading directly 
to a conclusion that since the laws are established by men, 
men are entitled to change them: “The law wishes to be¬ 
nefit men’s life; and it is able to do so, when they them¬ 
selves wish to receive benefit; for it shows to those who 
obey it in their own particular virtue” (L. 608). Hence, jus¬ 
tice is what conforms to nature and injustice is what con¬ 
tradicts it. Contrary to Antiphon, Democritus does not regard 
the laws as necessarily contradicting nature: “The laws 
would not prevent each man from living according to his 
inclination, unless individuals harmed each other” (L. 570). 

As might be expected, the solution to the problem of 
freedom offered by Democritus is also closely linked with 
his understanding of the relationship between what exists 
“by nature” and what came about “by convention.” The rigor 
ous necessity of all natural phenomena advocated by De¬ 
mocritus was apparently incompatible with the conception 
of freedom of man’s behaviour and ruled out any responsi 
bility for his actions. The opponents of the atomistic theory 
sensed its fatalistic strain and came out in defence 
of chance as the foundation of the doctrine of freedom 
and free will advanced in the Hellenistic period and parti¬ 
cularly in Christian literature. Taking exception to the 
Democritean view of absolute necessity, Aristotle wrote: 
“If ... all that is or takes place is the outcome of necessi¬ 
ty, there would be no need to deliberate or to take trouble” 
(De interpr. IX, 18b). It should be noted, however, that the 
criticism of atomistic determinism was usually blatantly 
biassed and not infrequently wide of the mark. 

Indeed, Democritus held that a conscious act was possible 
even if no such thing as chance existed. This, in fact, 
is the jist of his famous statement: “Men have fashioned an 
image of Chance as an excuse for their own stupidity. For 
chance rarely conflicts with Intelligence, and most things 
in life can be set in order by an intelligent sharp-sighted¬ 
ness” (L. 32). In other words, men speak of chance when 
they do not know the concatenation of events and thus 
deprive themselves of the possibility of acting reasonably. 
Reasonable conduct must be always based on knowledge. 

In the light of this statement the notion of chance 
(tyche) acquires a new meaning. The ancient Greeks spoke of 
tyche mainly in connection with human acts using the word 
in the sense of fortune or misfortune as distinct from fate. 


164 




According to Democritus, reliance upon it was tantamount to 
dependence on chance (in the English sense of the word) in¬ 
stead of one’s own conscious and free activity. Such activi¬ 
ty is made possible not only by the events occurring “by na¬ 
ture,” but also by the events resulting from “convention,” 
i.e. the arts, customs, general agreement, etc., or, using 
the modern language, from social processes based on, but 
not reducible to, the laws of nature. When Democritus count¬ 
erposes Intelligence to Chance understood as an excuse for 
man’s stupidity he opens the way for the dialectical con¬ 
cept of necessity. 

Dialectic defines freedom as “the capacity to make deci¬ 
sions with knowledge oi tne subject.” 1 By “an intelligent 
sharp sightedness” Democritus in fact means a man who un¬ 
derstands necessity and knows how to use it. The philosopher 
is well aware of the fact that it is difficult to foresee every¬ 
thing, as even a good helmsman may be shipwrecked, and a 
valorous man may suffer a setback (L. 33). Yet even in this 
case knowledge and skill will help us: “for instance, deep 
water is useful for many purposes, and yet again harm¬ 
ful, for there is danger of being drowned. A technique has 
therefore been invented, instruction in swimming” (ibid.). 

To be sure, Democritus is still far from conceiving 
freedom as recognised necessity. He only exhibits a trend 
towards the dialectical solution of the problem and his views 
on the role of reason in human life do not yet go beyond 
conjectures, common sense and general, sometimes trivial, 
considerations. Nevertheless, the Democritean conception of 
freedom paved the way for a more profound understanding of 
the nature of human activity and enabled the Epicureans to 
make another step in the investigation of the chance-necessity 
antithesis. 

The naturalistic view of the origin of society and the refusal 
to accept the theory of divine ordinance led Democritus 
to a peculiar conception of religious beliefs. In his opinion, the 
gods were invented by men: “When the men of old time 
beheld the disasters in the heavens, such as thunderings and 
lightnings, and thunderbolts and collision between stars, and 
eclipses of sun and moon, they were affrighted, imagining 
the gods to be the causes of these things” (Sext. Adv. 
math. IX, 24). However, these false beliefs were not entirely 


1 Frederick Engels, Anti-Duhring, p. 141. 


165 


groundless being caused by material images (“effluences”). 
On the evidence of Sextus Empiricus, “Democritus says 
that certain images impinge on men, and of these some are 
beneficent, others maleficent (whence also he prayed that 
he might have ‘propitious images’), and these images...signify 
the future to men beforehand, as they are visible and utter 
sounds. Hence the ancients, on receiving a presentation 
of these images, supposed that God exists” (ibid., IX, 19). 
The conception of images revealing the future and giving 
rise to the belief in gods, rather vague in Democritus, was 
to be later elaborated by Epicurus and Lucretius. 

Democritus is credited with yet another explanation of 
beliefs in gods based on the interpretation, in the manner of 
the Euhemerus, of certain myths as traditional accounts 
of historical events and human experience. For instance, 
interpreting the myth about Athena “Tritogeneia” (born 
thrice) Democritus maintained that the goddess was a 
personification of wisdom with its three abilities, to think 
well, to speak well and to act well (see L. 822). A similar 
explanation was given by Democritus to the conception of 
chance which, according to Aristotle, was viewed by him as 
a cause obscure to human understanding and therefore divine 
and miraculous (Phys. II, 4, 196b). Significantly, the Greek 
pantheon is known to have included, among other deities, 
the goddess of fortune Tyche. 

Proceeding from his general philosophical convictions, 
Democritus denied divine providence, the resuscitation of 
the dead, posthumous retribution and requital, prophecy, 
ghosts, etc. It is not surprising, therefore, that his views 
on religion and gods were often distorted and misin¬ 
terpreted. Among the examples are the identification of his 
“images” with Christian angels and the fire atoms with 
“God” allegedly worshipped by Democritus. 

The problems of ethics are treated by Democritus in a 
similar atheistic vein. Central to his moral prescriptions 
that came down to us is the idea of humaneness in the rela¬ 
tions among people. Needless to say, one would vainly seek 
any direct link between his physical system and the moral 
theory which obviously relates to what exists “by conven¬ 
tion” and cannot be deduced from the atomistic doctrine. 
However, the ethical thought of Democritus could spring 
from no other source but his basic philosophical principles. 
They are expounded, first and foremost, in his teaching 


166 












of criteria as rendered by Sextus Empiricus: “According 
to Democritus there are three criteria —namely, the cri¬ 
terion of the apprehension of things non-evident, which is 
the things apparent; for, as Anaxagoras says (and Democritus 
commends him for it), the things apparent are the vision 
of the things non-evident; and the criterion of investiga¬ 
tion, which is the conception ... and the criterion of choice' 
and aversion, which is the affections —for that which we 
feel is congenial to us is choiceworthy, but that which we 
feel is alien is to be regarded with aversion” (Sext. Adv. math. 
VII, 140). The latter criterion determines the moral conduct 
of man, since pleasure in congenial to him, whereas suffer¬ 
ing is alien. However, the hedonism of Democritus does not 
boil down to the preference of pleasures, since the goal 
of living is contentment (eythymia ), “a state in which the 
soul continues calm and strong, undisturbed by any fear 
or superstition or any other emotion” (Diog. L. IX, 45). 
Contentment can only be achieved by moderation in enjoy¬ 
ment and observance of measure. Pleasures should be neither 
lacking nor excessive: “If one oversteps the due measure, the 
most pleasurable things become most unpleasant” (L. 739, 
753). Observance of measure, according to Democritus, calls 
for balance between one’s abilities and conduct and is impossi¬ 
ble without knowledge and intelligence. The ethical theory of 
Democritus links hedonism with rationalism accounting for 
wrong-doing by lack of knowledge. 

Democritus’s chief contribution to ethics was the devel¬ 
opment of such moral categories as conscience understood 
as aversion to doing wrong, duty and justice. He is credited 
with well-known maxim “refrain from crimes not through fear 
but through duty” (L. 605, 789). 

The ethical principles of Democritus do not make an 
elaborate reasoned system as they came down to us mainly 
in the form of separate maxims. There are grounds to believe 
that they are but corrupted fragments of lost writings where 
Democritus may have given a continuous exposition of 
his ethical theory. However that may be, these fragments 
throw additional light on his political teaching outlining 
the structure of an ideal democratic state: “The well-run 
State is the greatest protection, and contains all in itself; 
when this is safe, all is safe, when this is destroyed, all is 
destroyed” (L. 595). However, in public affairs, like in 
private life, Democritus remains true to his principle of 


167 







contentment or well-being and recommends avoiding the 
extremes—submission of individual to the needs of the 
state on the one hand and neglect of public affairs, on the 
other: “To good men, it is not advantageous that they should 
neglect their own affairs for other things; for their private 
affairs suffer. But if a man neglects public affairs, he is 
ill spoken of, even if he steals nothing and does no wrong” 
(L. 737). Consequently, the right way to achieve contentment 
is not to avoid participation in public or private affairs, but 
rather to observe measure and keep well within one’s powers. 

Living in turbulent times, Democritus regarded participa¬ 
tion in public affairs, punishments, contradictions between 
the rich and the poor, the masters and the slaves as unavoid¬ 
able evils and recommended dealing with them on the princi¬ 
ple of the golden mean which he also considered applicable to 
such moral categories as friendship, mutual assistance, de¬ 
votion, and the like. The Democritean ethical theory safely 
evades both the sophistic immorality and the Socratic abso- 
lutisation of moral prescriptions clearly demonstrating 
the most characteristic feature of all ancient philosophy, 
its contemplativeness. Exalting well-being and cheerfulness 
as the goal of living and seeking to keep emotional distur¬ 
bance to a minimum, Democritus did not see in philosophy 
a means of changing the existing society —his aim was only 
to explain it. 

6. The Democriteans 

By tradition, most textbooks of philosophy proceed from 
Democritus directly to Epicurus ignoring the activity of 
the “Democriteans.” In fact, Democritus was the founder of 
a whole philosophical school in the antique sense of a 
succession of philosophers of whom one was the disciple of 
the other. Though our knowledge of the Democriteans is rath¬ 
er limited, the very fact that they are constantly mentioned 
in ancient sources expounding the views of the founders of 
atomism testifies to the important role they played in the 
history of philosophy. 

According to reliable sources, among the pupils of Democ¬ 
ritus were Protagoras who later joined the sophists, and 
Nessas who taught Metrodorus of Chios (on some evi¬ 
dence the latter was a pupil of Democritus himself). Metrodo¬ 
rus taught Diogenes of Smyrna whose pupil Anaxarchus was 
the teacher of Pyrrho, the founder of the Sceptic school. 


168 










Pyrrho taught Nausiphanes who returned to the Democritean 
doctrine. Other Democriteans mentioned by early doxo- 
graphers were Hecataeus of Abdera, Apollodorus of Cyzicus, 
Diotimus of Tyre and Bion of Abdera who “was the first 
to affirm that there are places where the night lasts 
for six months and the day for six months” (Diog. 
L. IV, 58). 

The most prominent representative of the school of De¬ 
mocritus was Metrodorus. He accepted the basic thesis of 
his teacher about the atoms and void and taught that the 
universe is eternal as it could not come from nothing. On 
the evidence of Aetius, Metrodorus said that it was as un¬ 
likely that a single world should arise in infinite space 
as that one single ear of corn should grow on a large plain. 
That worlds are innumerable follows from the infinite num¬ 
ber of causes of their origin. Indeed, if a single world is limit¬ 
ed and the number of causes of its generation is unlimited, the 
number of worlds must be unlimited too, since an infinite 
number of causes, i.e. atoms or elements, bring about an infi¬ 
nite number of results (DK 70 A 6). 

Metrodorus offered his own explanations of celestial 
phenomena, earthquakes, formation of clouds, trade-winds, 
bitterness of sea water, etc. Contrary to the principles from 
which he proceeded in these explanations, Metrodorus revised 
the theory of knowledge of Democritus strengthening its trend 
towards scepticism. For instance, Sextus Empiricus quotes 
as Metrodorus',s own words this statement: “We know noth¬ 
ing, nor do we even know the very fact that we know noth¬ 
ing” (Sext. Adv. math VII, 88). This view proved to be the 
starting point of Pyrrho's doctrine of complete pessimism re¬ 
garding the possibility of authentic knowledge. 

Besides the treatise On Natural Science where Metrodorus 
expounded his “physical” and epistemological views, he also 
wrote The Trojan War , a kind of commentary on Homer, and 
The History of Ionia. 

Anaxarchus of Abdera is known to have been a court philo¬ 
sopher and something like a jester of Alexander of Macedon. 
Owing to his status at the court he was not afraid of speaking 
the truth and is mainly known as a teller of risky anecdotes. 
Tradition says that Anaxarchus’s eloquent and heartfelt de¬ 
scription of innumerable worlds once drove his regal 
interlocutor to tears over his inability to conquer even one of 
them. On the evidence that we have, Anaxarchus did not stop 


169 



short at the mockery of Alexander the Great hold 
ing up to ridicule the attempts to deify him. When the king 
happened to fall ill and his physician prescribed some bever 
age with flour for his malady, Anaxarchus burst out laughing 
and said that his god’s hope was in the cup with slops... 

Anaxarchus evidently carried his scepticism to an extreme, 
as, on the evidence of Sextus Empiricus, he “likened existing 
things to a scene-painting and supposed them to resemble the 
impressions experienced in sleep or madness” (ibid.). His 
ethical views were essentially eudaemonistic as he recognised 
happiness or well-being to be the goal of living. However, 
his eudaemonism was closely linked with scepticism: 
happiness, according to Anaxarchus, could only be attained 
through complete indifference to life (apathy). 

Hecataeus of Abdera is known for his commentaries on 
Homer and Hesiod, works on the Hyperboreans, a legendary 
people in the far north, and on the mythology of the Magi 
and Egyptians. His book On the Philosophy of the Egyptians 
came down to us in the rendition of Diogenes Laertius 
(I, 9-11) and Diodorus Siculus. Hecataeus held that the 
supreme goal in life is autarky, i.e. internal freedom and 
complacency of the individual. In this he differed from another 
follower of Democritus, Nausiphanes, who saw it in fearless¬ 
ness. His Tripod devoted to the three faculties of wisdom 
(good thinking, good speaking, and good acting) is based on 
the belief in the priority of “physis” over “rhetoric”. Accord 
ing to the testimony of Philodemus, a disciple of- Epicurus, 
Nausiphanes was seriously engaged in the studies of logical 
problems and maintained that consistency and coherence in 
speech could only be achieved if the speaker proceeded from 
the knowledge of the whole and combined the “physical” 
study of objects inaccessible to senses (i.e. of their atomic 
structure) with the rational interpretation of obtained results, 
i.e. “calculation of the future from the known facts” (DK 75 
B 2). This clearly points to the general trend of Nausiphanes’s 
logical theory towards a synthesis of the inductive and 
deductive reasoning. 


* * * 

The works of Democritus constituted an encyclopaedia of 
knowledge based on the atomistic hypothesis and well-rea 
soned epistemological principles. The materialist character 


170 







and enormous philosophical significance of his ideas are 
obvious. However, no less obvious was its challenge both to 
the traditional religious-mythological world-view and to 
developing idealism. The gauntlet was picked up by Plato 
whose system of objective idealism represented an immediate 
ideological reaction to the atomistic doctrine of Democritus. 
Though Plato never mentioned the great atomist by name, it 
was clear already to the ancients that the reason for this 
omission was not only the hostility of Plato towards materia¬ 
lism, but also the understanding that “he would have to 
match himself against the prince of philosophers” (Diog. 
L. IX, 40). Modern investigations show that Plato’s main 
dialogues reflected his hidden polemic with Democritus 
and at the same time contained borrowings from his 
opponent’s doctrines regarding secondary issues. This polemic 
which surfaced in the works of Aristotle marked the beginning 
of open struggle, conscious and uncompromising, between 
materialism and idealism, determinism and teleology, atheism 
and religion. Plato’s philosophy to which we are now passing 
provided the theoretical foundation of idealism and became 
its banner in this struggle. 





Chapter 2 

Plato 

7. Life and Work 

Plato was born about 427 B.C. in a prominent but not rich 
Athenian family that settled in Aegina. His father Ariston 
was of noble birth, tracing his descent from Attica’s last king 
Codrus, and the family of his mother Perictione came from 
a kinsman and friend of Solon, the famous Athenian lawgiver. 
Plato’s real name was Aristocles and he owed the name 
by which he went down in history to his athletic built (platys 
means broadshouldered or stout). His family and other 
Athenians were later driven out of Aegina by the Spartans 
and returned to Athens. 

Plato’s education, like any other noble Athenian’s, was 
both physical and mental and included gymnastic, grammar 
and music. He is known to have made an early acquaintance 
of Heraclitean philosophy, presumably owing it to the 
influence of sophist Callicles whom he later made a character 
in one of his dialogues. He must have thoroughly studied the 
doctrines of Parmenides, Zeno and the Pythagoreans. There is 
good reason to believe that he had a thorough knowledge of 
the atomistic theory. Plato is also known to have devoted 
much time to poetry and is credited with numerous epical 
and lyrical works, as well as with tragedies and comedies. 
His literary heritage that came down to us also includes 
25 miniature poems written in the form of epigrams. However, 
according to some ancient sources, his acquaintance with 
Socrates made such a profound impression on the young poet 
that he burned a tragedy he had written and gave himself 
up wholly to philosophy. 

Plato first met Socrates about 407 and this meeting turned 
his life. For eight years he was one of the most devoted pupils 
of Socrates and left Athens after his master’s execution. For 
about a year he lived in Megara and, after a short stay in his 
native city, made several trips abroad. In 389-387 Plato vi- 







with Dion, a brother-in-law of Dionysus I, the famous tyrant 
of Syracuse. However, for an unknown reason the tyrant got 
so angry with the philosopher that sold him into slavery. Plato 
was brought to Aegina and bought by a Cyrenean Anniceris. 
When Plato’s friends collected the necessary sum and offered 
it to Anniceris, the latter refused to take the ransom and let 
Plato free. Tradition holds that Plato used the money collect¬ 
ed by his friends to buy a site with a grove of trees outside the 
walls of Athens and founded there his school, the famous 
Academy, called after Athenian hero Academus. Later, the 
name came to denote scientific institutions of high repute. 

In 367, after the death of Dionysus I, Plato made another 
trip to Sicily on the invitation of the former ruler’s son Diony¬ 
sus II. Like on his first visit, the philosopher hoped to realise 
his ideal of enlightened ruler, but his hopes were again rudely 
shattered. In 361-360 Plato made his third trip to Italy and 
it also proved futile. According to ancient evidence, Dionysus 
showered him with gifts, but Plato rejected them. The rela¬ 
tions between the tyrant and the philosopher became very 
strained and Plato had to leave the inhospitable island. His 
mishaps were partly attributable to friendship with Dion who 
strove to overthrow Dionysus II and establish an oligarchic 
government in Syracuse. 

The philosopher died in 347 B.C. 

Plato’s heritage includes the Apology of Socrates, 23 genu¬ 
ine and 11 disputable dialogues, as well as 13 letters, some of 
them incontestably authentic. The dates of Plato’s works can¬ 
not be fixed exactly. By and large, his creative activity can be 
roughly divided into four periods. The first or early period 
started after Plato had made the acquaintance of Socrates and 
ended with his trip to Sicily. It includes the Apology of Socra¬ 
tes, Crito, Euthyphro, Laches, Lysis, Charmides, Protagoras 
and the first book of his Republic. These dialogues are notable 
for a broad use of the Socratic method of analysis of concepts. 
The second or transitional period (the eighties of the fourth 
century) is keynoted by the emergence of the theory of ideas. 
It includes dialogues Meno, Gorgias, Euthydemus, Cratylus, 
Lesser Hippias, Greater Hippias, Ion, and Menexenus (the ge¬ 
nuineness of the latter three is disputable). The third period 
of maturity (the seventies and the sixties) is represented by 
dialogues Phaedo, Symposium, Phaedrus and books II-X of 
the Republic where Plato develops the classical form of his 


173 








theory of ideas as the substance of reality, i.e. the idealist 
trend as such, as well as by dialogues Theaetetus, Parmenides, 
Sophist, Statesman, Timaeus, and Critias which reveal Plato’s 
growing interest in the theory of knowledge and cosmology, 
on the one hand, and are indicative of his attempts to revise 
the early form of the theory of ideas, on the other. The fourth 
or late period includes Laws, a very long dialogue which is 
already free from any influence of Socratic ideas. 

Besides the works listed above, as well as letters, Plato’s 
collections traditionally include the Epinomis, probably writ¬ 
ten by his pupil Philippus of Opus, doubtful dialogues Alci- 
biades (first), Hipparchus, Clitophon, Minos; patently spuri¬ 
ous dialogues Demodocus, Sicyphus, Alcyon, Eryxias, On 
Justice, On Virtue; a minor work Horoi (The Limits) which 
gives 185 definitions of ancient philosophical concepts, and 
the treatise On the Soul of the Universe and Nature which is 
in fact an exposition of Plato’s Timaeus ascribed to Timaeus 
of Italian Locri, but actually belonging to the pen of an 
unknown writer. All these works classified as Platonean under 
a long-standing tradition are undoubtedly illuminating in 
the studies of Platonism, but need hardly be considered in a 
book of ancient philosophy like this one. Neither shall we go, 
for the same reason, into the problem of Plato’s “unwritten 
doctrines.” 1 

In assessing Plato’s philosophy as a whole, one must never 
lose sight of its central objective —to provide a theoretical jus¬ 
tification of the contemporary polis system of ancient Greece 
which was undergoing in his time a profound crisis. The Peric- 
lean age, the heyday of an independent city-state had gone 
never to return, and the fourth century bore witness to the 
growing might of coalitions tending towards the future Hel¬ 
lenic empires of the semi-oriental type. Yet the polis system 
was still alive and feught intense ideological battles for survi- 

1 This problem is connected with attempts of some scholars to reconst 
ruct, from the scattered remains of Plato’s pupils and some hints in Aristotle, 
the content of Plato’s oral teaching claimed, not unreasonably, to be essen 
tially different from his written dialogues. In recent years the subject has 
come into prominence and given rise to extensive literature (see J.N. Findlay, 
Plato. The Written and Unwritten Doctrines, Routledge and Paul, London, 
1974). We are inclined to think, though, that the importance of Plato’s 
esoteric doctrine, even if he had one and revealed it only to his closest 
disciples in the Academy, need not be overestimated: being notable mainly 
for a trend towards mathematical presentation of philosophical concepts, 
it could hardly have departed from the basic principles of his philosophy 
explicitly stated in the dialogues. 


174 









val. The war of ideas at that time centred around the problems 
of religion and ethics. 

The social system of ancient Greece was so closely linked 
with religion that the Hellenic mind could not but conceive 
them as a single whole. Religious holidays were events of 
state importance and the deities regarded as city protectors 
(e.g. Athena in Athens) were identified with the city itself — 
religion merged with patriotism. The city laws were enforced 
in the name of the patronising deity and the semi-divine law¬ 
giver was regarded as the mouthpiece of the gods. No less rigid 
were moral prescriptions sanctified by state and religion. With 
the growth of class contradictions in slave-owning society 
the religious dogmas and moral principles, as well as the once 
indisputable authority of the city law, became the objects of 
rational analysis and more and more frequently were called in 
question. The ideological advocates of the past (e.g. Aristo¬ 
phanes) openly came out against the attempts of contempo¬ 
rary “physiologers” to account for natural phenomena in na¬ 
turalistic terms, even though they did not banish the gods 
from their systems. Far greater was the “sin” of Democritus 
and the sophists: the former in his atomistic theory dispensed 
with the gods altogether, whereas the latter reduced religion 
to a trick specially invented in order to dupe the believers and 
hold them in leash... In their eyes the laws were no longer 
the divine gift of Providence: being a human creation, they 
were subject to change by human beings. 

Besides the openly atheistic doctrines, the orthodox spirit of 
the traditional city-state religion was seriously undermined 
by the spread of various individualistic religious teachings 
concerned with a concrete human soul rather than with the 
problems of the state. 

The tragedy of Plato as man and philosopher consisted in a 
glaring contradiction between his philosophical and artistic 
genius on the one hand and the hopelessness of his attempts 
to revive the dead past, on the other. On the objective side, 
Plato’s philosophical system, reactionary as it was, synthe¬ 
sised the dialectical achievements of previous Greek thought 
and represented an important stage in the development of 
ancient philosophy. 

Speaking of the sources of Platonism, one should name the 
Heraclitean doctrine of constant flux and its sophistic inter¬ 
pretations, the Eleatic conception of One Being, the dialectics 
of Socrates, and Pythagoreanism. Plato accepts the Herac- 


175 






litean view that all things are in a constant process of change, 
but regards it only applicable to the sensible world with its 
constant motion and instability. Since true knowledge can 
only be the knowledge of the stable and the universal, Plato 
turns his attention to the arguments of the Eleatic school 
which advanced the doctrine of being as the single, motionless 
and universal object of knowledge revealing itself to thought 
only and being thought itself. Socrates who set himself 
the task of evolving general concepts and was specifically con¬ 
cerned with universal ethical definitions and axiological de¬ 
terminations of being, such as Truth, Goodness, Beauty, gives 
Plato his “dialectics.” Finally, Pythagoreanism enables Plato 
to bridge the gap between the general and the individual and 
to effect a passage, through the agency of numerical relation¬ 
ships, from universal definitions to the sensible world of Hera- 
clitean flux. 

Plato’s philosophy should not be construed as a mechani¬ 
cal aggregate of his predecessors’ doctrines. Even if we could 
trace every aspect of Platonism to previous and contemporary 
thought (which is far from being the case!), it would not de¬ 
tract from its originality. Platonism mainly owes its unique 
character and integrity to the theory of Ideas' whereby it is 
a classical doctrine of objective idealism. 


8. From Criticism of Sensuous Knowledge to the Theory of Ideas 

In his dialogue Theaetetus Plato asks, through the mouth 
of Socrates: What is knowledge? He points out that knowl¬ 
edge cannot be reduced to sensory experience as sensations are 
unstable, individual and subject to constant change thereby 
contradicting the very notion of knowledge always directed to 
the constant and the universal. Sensuous knowledge has no 
other criterion but the man himself who thus becomes “the 
measure of all things” like in Protagoras. Now why should it 

1 The word “idea” in English denotes a subjective image which does not 
exist outside the mind, whereas in Ancient Greece its primary meaning was 
"appearance”, even “external appearance”, i.e. the visible image of an 
object, and it is in this sense that the related words eidos and idea were also 
used by Plato. Yet in his philosophical doctrine they have at least three 
different meanings: the external appearance, the essence of an object open to 
the mind only, and its teleological principle. These meanings can only coin¬ 
cide in a concrete notion as understood in dialectical logic which denotes 
it by the old term “idea”. In the historico-philosophical literature of 
English-speaking countries the term “idea" is frequently replaced by the 
term “form”, which has its advantages though may sometimes be misleading: 


176 





be a man and not a pig or a cynocephalus, a mythical creature 
with the body of a man and the head of a dog? Besides, true 
knowledge implies understanding which cannot be provided 
by the senses: hearing a foreign language without understand¬ 
ing it cannot be called knowledge. 

The only way out appears to be the conclusion that true 
knowledge can only be rational, i.e. obtainable by the mind 
and related to intelligible objects. In other words, the 
true objects of rational knowledge are not sensible things, 
but ideas that represent true being. 

The concept of ideas is expounded with utmost clarity 
in Greater Hippias. Socrates asks sophist Hippias: Is it not 
by justice that the just are just? Again, is it not by wisdom 
that the wise are wise, and by goodness that all things are 
good? Then aren’t all beautiful things beautiful by beauty? 
The simple-minded sophist unaware of the trap answers in 
the affirmative. Then comes the next question: What is this 
thing, beauty, whereby all beautiful things become beauti¬ 
ful? Hippias answers by giving an example: a beautiful maid¬ 
en is a beauty. Socrates retorts: Isn’t a beautiful mare 
a beauty? Must we not say that the mare, too, or at least a 
beautiful one is a beauty? What about the beautiful pot? 
Isn’t that a beauty? Bringing thus in the problem of the 
relativity of beauty, Socrates continues: “Sir, you do not 
grasp the truth of Heraclitus saying that the most beauti¬ 
ful of apes is ugly compared with the human race; and the 
most beautiful of pots is ugly when grouped with maidens... 
But if maidens are grouped with gods, will not the result 
be the same as when pots were grouped with maidens? Will 
not the most beautiful maiden appear ugly? Does not Heracl 
itus, whom we adduce, employ these very words, ‘The wisest 
of men, when compared to a god, will appear hut an ape in 
wisdom and beauty and all else?’ Shall we admit, Hippias, that 

“form” was usually employed by Aristotle who practically identified it 
with morphe, whereas Plato usually abstained from using morphe in the sense 
of “idea”. Proceeding from this consideration and relying on the precedents, 
we shall use the term “Idea” with capital “I" to indicate that it is to be 
understood in the Platonean sense, the more so as it is not unfamiliar to the 
English reader (cf. W.K.S. Guthrie, The Greek Philosophers: From Thales 
to Plato, p. 89: “We say that we have an idea of goodness or equality, 
which enables us to mean the same thing when we talk of good wine or 
a good cricketer, equal triangles and equal chances, although there may 
seem to be little shared in common between wine and cricketers, triangles 
and chances”). 


12 !»:«) 


177 





the most beautiful maiden is ugly in comparison with the 
race of gods?” 

Socrates demands an absolute definition of beauty and 
Hippias makes another attempt: “Beauty is nothing else but 
gold... For I suppose we all know that if anything has gold 
added to it, it will appear beautiful.” 

To this Socrates replies that “Pheidias ... did not give 
his Athena eyes of gold or use gold for the rest of her face 
... he made them of ivory;” besides, if we are to choose be¬ 
tween the two ladles, one of wood and the other of gold, we 
should undoubtedly prefer the former as more appropriate to 
the soup and the pot” (Hipp. Maj. 289d). 

Hippias is unable to define beautiful as such and Socra¬ 
tes concludes the discussion in these words: “All that is 
beautiful is difficult” (ibid. 304 c, p. 595). Elsewhere Soc¬ 
rates states, “Nothing makes a thing beautiful but the pres¬ 
ence or participation of beauty in whatever way or manner 
obtained... I stoutly contend that by beauty all beautiful 
things become beautiful. This appears to me to be the safest 
answer which 1 can give, either to myself or to another” 
(Phaedo, 100 d). 

Plato’s answer is indeed absolutely “safe”, because it 
boils down to a simple tautology: things are beautiful because 
they are related to beauty as such. Plato in fact strives 
to explain the beautiful with the help of his theory of ideas 
which hypostatises or turns into a separate reality the most 
general concepts used by man and those grammatical forms 
that are needed to qualify them. The underlying principle of 
the naive theory of ideas consists in the assumption that the 
individual objects grasped by our senses must have their 
counterparts which can only be contemplated by the mind. 

Hippias (like the interlocutors of Socrates in the Theae- 
tetus) rashly accepts the premise that the source of the beau¬ 
tiful is beauty as such, whereupon he cannot escape the con¬ 
clusions forced upon him by Plato. But is the premise real 
ly valid? Emphatically not! The world around us (all its 
objects and phenomena) is a unity of the individual, the parti¬ 
cular and the universal, and it is only through abstraction 
that we can divorce them from one another. Beauty does not 
exist outside a beautiful maiden, a beautiful mare, pot, statue, 
etc. Yet it is not a mere sum total of these individual 
objects or the particulars, such as gold, ivory, etc. “The 
individual exists only in the connection that leads to the 


178 










universal. The universal exists only in the individual and 
through the individual. Every individual is (in one way or 
another) a universal. Every universal is (a fragment, or an 
aspect, or the essence of) an individual. Every universal 
only approximately embraces all the individual objects. Every 
individual enters incompletely into the universal, etc., etc. 
Every individual is connected by thousands of transitions 
with other kinds of individuals (things, phenomena, proc¬ 
esses), etc.” 1 The universal torn out of this dialectical unity 
becomes an “Idea” that has its existence in the extraempir- 
ical world. 

The theory of cognition shows that.the universal exists 
in the individual and the particular, the stable in the va¬ 
riable and mutable, the law in the diversity of phenomena. 
The universal (unity) can only be grasped as a result of ab¬ 
straction, i.e. mental isolation of properties of the object 
or connections between its properties, though both the uni¬ 
versal and the individual (diversity) are inherent in the ob¬ 
jects and events of the real world representing objective as¬ 
pects of reality. According to Lenin, “the dichotomy of human 
knowledge and the possibility of idealism (=religion) are 
given already in the first, elementary abstraction ‘house’ 
in general and particular houses.” 2 The formation of an ab¬ 
stract notion is a complex act which includes in it the pos¬ 
sibility of the flight of fantasy from life and, consequently, 
of the transformation of the abstract concept into a particular 
being. The world of Ideas thus turns into the realm of 
supra-sensuous objects which is regarded as primary in 
relation to the physical world. 

The possibility of idealism is also rooted in language, 
as words, the “matter” of language, express only the univer¬ 
sal. Primitive linguistics proceeds from the assumption that 
every word represents a definite object due to some mystic 
affinity between them, and being unable to find the analogues 
of abstract words in the physical world comes to the conclu¬ 
sion that they must exist elsewhere, in the world of univer¬ 
sal concepts or “ideas”. 

It should be noted that modern analytical philosophy 
tends to regard the basic premise of Plato’s theory of Ideas 
merely as a result of the confusion of the grammatical and 

1 V I. l^nin, “On the Question of Dialectics”, Collected Works, Vol. 
38, 1980, p. 359. 

2 V.I. Lenin, “Conspectus of Aristotle’s Book Metaphysics ", ibid., p. 370. 


179 






ontological predication which can well be exemplified by the 
famous “ontological argument” for the existence of God 
(God is perfect, perfection entails existence as its predicate, 
hence, God exists). Indeed, “God” and “exists” being but 
the grammatical subject and predicate and pertaining only to 
thoughts, it is incorrect to predicate physical, objective 
existence of God. Similarly, such statements as “Unpunc¬ 
tuality is reprehensible” and “Virtue is its own reward” 
seemingly dealing with universals (“unpunctuality” and 
“virtue”) do not imply their existence in the ontological 
sense. 1 

However, Plato would hardly rank among great philoso¬ 
phers if his idealism were but a fallacious doctrine based on an 
incorrect predication. Having abstracted the “world of 
Ideas” as a special object of philosophical investigation, 
Plato laid the foundation for the analysis of ideal and 
idealised objects, i.e. concepts as such, irrespective of 
how they were obtained and in what relation they stood to 
the objects of the physical world. This preliminary investi¬ 
gation was a stepping stone to the Aristotelian formal logic 
and Archimedean physico-mathematical description of objects 
isolated, as it were, from nature and treated in their 
ideal form free from any chance influences. Yet the “ration¬ 
al kernel” of Plato’s theory of Ideas was not only over¬ 
shadowed, but also distorted by his idealism. We shall later 
discuss this question in more detail and turn now to Plato’s 
conception of knowledge and to the functions of Ideas in the 
world. 

Since Ideas are conceived by Plato as specific objects 
of knowledge discernible only by reason and abiding in a 
transcendent world, learning can be nothing but their con¬ 
templation. This presupposes the soul’s immortality and its 
ability, upon return to earth and incarnation as a man, to 
recollect the vision of true being. Such a doctrine inevitably 
leads to a religious world outlook, basically mythologi¬ 
cal and centring around the notions of deity and immortali¬ 
ty of soul. 

Plato is aware of the difficulties involved in the proc 
ess of recollection ( anamnesis ). The soul is liable to forget 
realities and needs either to be reminded of them by a 
sage, or made to perform complex logical operations. The lat- 

1 See Gilbert Ryle, “Systematically Misleading Expressions", in: Logic 
and Language, First Series, Blackwell, Oxford, 1988, pp. 11 22. 


180 








ter case is illustrated in Meno by the example of an ignorant 
slave boy who was made by Socrates to “recollect” some 
geometrical propositions he had never studied. 

Commenting on the answers of the slave, Plato makes 
this conclusion through the mouth of Socrates: “There are 
always to be true notions in him, both while he is and 
while he is not a man, which only need to be awakened into 
knowledge by putting questions to him, his soul must remain 
always possessed of this knowledge; for he must always 
either be or not be a man” (Meno, 86a). 

This statement is clearly untenable: even a most igno¬ 
rant person possesses, in virtue of his humanity, certain 
mathematical knowledge and is capable of fomulating simple 
scientific propositions under expert guidance. The story of 
Socrates and an untutored slave is simply an example of a 
good teacher and a clever pupil, but not of soul’s “recollec 
tion” of the world of eternal truth. 

Plato’s investigation of “Ideas” brought him face to face 
with the problems of logic and resulted in an exposition of the 
methods of rational thinking or “dialectic.” Plato used the 
term in two different meanings: first, as the ability to ask and 
answer questions (Cratylus, 390c), i.e. in the Socratic sense 
in which it is widely represented in his dialogues, and, second, 
as the ability to divide concepts according to their kinds 
and embrace each one under a single idea. Dialectic in this 
sense is based on two logical procedures called collection 
and division: (a) “To take a synoptic view and bring widely 
scattered things under one idea, so that one may make clear 
by definition whatever it is that one wants to expound at the 
time”, and (b) “To be able to cut it up at the natural 
joints, not hacking at any part like an incompetent butcher” 
(Phaedr. 265c-e). 

Plato thus conceives dialectic as the ascent of the mind 
directly to the essence of things “by the light of reason only, 
and without, any assistance of sense.” As a result, the 
dialectician “finds himself at the end of the intellectual 
worlds, as in the case of sight at the end of the visible” 
(Rep. 532ab). Yet Plato’s concept of dialectic extends bey¬ 
ond the process of cognition ( episteme) and reasoning 
(dianoia), including also faith and analogy. The two latter 
faculties taken together constitute opinion (doxa), the two 
former ones, science or true knowledge (episteme) 
(Rep. 534a). 


181 





The division of knowledge into science and opinion is of 
major significance in Plato’s doctrine, since the former relates 
to Ideas and is the philosopher’s prime concern, whereas the 
latter pertains to the senses. Science gives us the truth, whe¬ 
reas opinion does not go beyond the sensible world. Even 
mathematical sciences cannot grasp the whole truth as long 
as they adhere to their own principles and are incapable of 
apprehending them, i.e. linking them with the knowledge of 
Ideas. The only source of certitude is the knowledge of Ideas. 

Plato’s logical doctrine is very contradictory. Unlike the 
method of “division” of a generic concept into specific ones , 
which is presented with sufficient clarity, “collection” is 
vague, if not altogether mystic. The philosopher describes 
it as a “release” of the soul from something like “barbarian 
quagmire,” as direct insight into the essence of being. 
“The soul views some things by herself” (Theaet. 185e) 
without the use of senses. In the Symposium Plato explains 
the ability of man to rise to the apprehension of the Idea 
by the power of Love (Eros) which leads him from the beauty 
in an individual body to the beauty of morals, institutions, 
and then to beauty as such. “He who has been instructed 
thus far in the things of love, and who has learned to see 
the beautiful in due order and succession, when he comes 
toward the end will suddenly perceive a nature of wondrous 
beauty ... a nature w^hich in the first place is everlasting, 
knowing not birth or death, growth or decay; secondly, not 
fair in one point of view and foul in another ... but beauty 
absolute, separate, simple and everlasting, which is imparted 
to the ever growing and perishing beauties of all other 
beautiful things, without itself suffering diminution, or 
increase, or any change...” (Sympos. 210e 211ab). 

This ascent to knowledge as described by Plato is not 
a rational process; the mind grasps the Idea by irrational 
intuition, direct insight into the nature of things. Mystic 
though it may seem, this conception represents the real course 
of human knowledge which begins with the living, sensory 
contemplation of reality. It is only on the basis of accumu¬ 
lated sense experience consolidated in social consciousness 
and social forms of practical activity, i.e. in production, 
technology, art and language, that man can advance more or 
less broad hypotheses which are tested, corrected and accept 
ed or rejected thereby contributing to the progress of know¬ 
ledge. This process of cognition or ascent to ever more pro- 


182 








found and comprehensive knowledge was intuitively grasped 
by Plato and represented by him in a mystified, distorted form. 

Plato was the first thinker in the history of philosophy 
who consciously formulated the basic question of philosophy, 
the one of the relationship of thinking and being. Some phi 
losophers, he wrote, “obstinately maintain that only the 
things which can be touched or handled have being, because 
they define being (reality) and body as one... Their oppo¬ 
nents contend that true reality consists of certain intelli¬ 
gible and incorporeal Ideas” and assert that the bodies are 
“not being, but generation and motion. Between the two ar 
mies, ... there is always an endless conflict raging 
concerning these matters” (Soph. 246a-c). In the Laws Plato 
poses the same question in a slightly different form contras¬ 
ting idealism to the materialism of the ancient “physiolo- 
gers.” The latter, according to Plato, “say that fire and wa¬ 
ter, and earth and air, all exist by nature and chance, and 
none of them by art” and that the soul derives from them, 
whereas their opponents hold the opposite view: “If the soul 
turns out to be the primordial element, and not fire and 
air, then in the truest sense and beyond other things the 
soul may be said to exist by nature” (ibid. 892c). 

Plato asserts the primacy of the soul on the grounds 
that it was the first to come into being as self-moving and 
the cause of all other motion: “If, as most of these philoso¬ 
phers have the audacity to affirm, all things were at rest 
in one mass, which of the above-mentioned principles of mo¬ 
tion must necessarily be the first to spring up among them? 
Clearly the self moving” (ibid. 895a). According to Plato, 
the soul “directs all things in heaven, and earth, and sea 
by her movements, and these are described by the terms will, 
consideration, attention, deliberation, opinion true and 
false, joy and sorrow, confidence, fear, hatred, love, and 
other primary motions akin to these” (ibid. 897a). Owing to 
all these and other qualities, as well as to the divine mind 
she receives, the soul “disciples all things rightly to their 
happiness; but when she is in companion of folly, she does 
the very contrary of all this” (ibid. 897ab). 

Here Plato’s philosophical idealism openly links with 
religion and mythology reconstructed on a rational basis. 

From the viewpoint of logic, Plato’s reasoning is practical¬ 
ly irreproachable. The fundamental fallacy of Platonism lies 
in the premises. The atomistic theory accepting eternal move- 


183 





ment as a given fact eliminates the problem of the first cause 
and rejects Plato’s postulate of eternal soul as the principle of 
movement. Determinism explains the world from itself dis¬ 
carding the hypothesis of god as unnecessary and confusing. 

9. From the Theory of Ideas to Cosmology 

The eternal and immutable World of Ideas is no longer 
the One Being of Parmenides, but an orderly hierarchical 
structure with the Idea of good ranking the highest. 
Characterising this Idea, Plato writes: “Now, that which 
imparts truth to the known and the power of knowing to the 
knower is, as I would have you say, the Idea of good, and this 
Idea, which is the cause of science and of truth, you are to 
conceive as being apprehended by knowledge, and yet, fair as 
both truth and knowledge are, you will be right to esteem it is 
different from these and even fairer’’ (Rep. VI, 508e). Like 
the sun which “is not only the author of visibility in all visible 
things, but of generation and nourishment and growth, ... the 
good not only infuses the power of being known into all things 
known, but also bestows upon them their being and existence, 
and yet the good is not existence, but lies far beyond it in 
dignity and power” (ibid. 509b). 

The Idea of good is difficult to grasp, but it reveals itself in 
Beauty and Truth: “If we are not able to hunt the good with 
one idea only, with three we may catch our prey; beauty, sym¬ 
metry, truth are the three” (Phileb. 64e-65a). According to 
the original, “naive” theory of Ideas, they are ungenerated, 
everlasting and immutable. The relation between the Ideas 
and things is characterised by three notions: imitation (mime¬ 
sis), participation ( metexis, koinnnia) and presence (paroy 
sia ). In other words, a thing comes into being (or is created by 
the gods) as the closest possible imitation of its Idea. 
Having emerged, the thing is related to or “participates” in 
the Idea. Finally, the Idea itself resides in a sensible thing, 
the latter resembling the Idea pnly because of this presence. 
Plato does not explain how it is possible. 

Proceeding from Plato’s conception of Idea we are bound 
to conclude that the number of Ideas must be equal to the 
number of classes of similar things, and that lands us on the 
rocks. Indeed, how are we to account, for instance, for the 
“participation” of one and the same thing in different “Ideas”, 
say, Socrates in “man” and “Greek”? Again, Plato’s Ideas 
relate to Goodness, Beauty, Truth, admitting of no imperfec- 

184 







tion. Yet how are we to explain, from his viewpoint, evil, ugly 
and false things? Clearly, they cannot exist without the 
corresponding ideas... It should be noted that Plato himself 
was not unaware of these difficulties and subsequently revised 
his doctrine, making an important step towards the dialectics 
of concepts. His new approach will be discussed later in the 
chapter. 

As we see, Plato conceived Ideas as (1) models or para¬ 
digms; (2) universals, i.e. generic or specific characteristics 
of a class of similar things; (3) causes of things understood 
as their final purpose. It is this latter function of Ideas that 
lies at the root of the pronounced teleological strain in his 
system of objective idealism. 

Plato’s teleology was aimed directly against the determin¬ 
ism of the atomistic theory. In contrast with the atomists who 
recognised the efficient causes only, i.e. eternal motion and 
mutual collision of atoms, Plato conceived the relation be¬ 
tween sensible things and Ideas as the tendency of the former 
to approximate to the latter. His teleology is essentially 
transcendent, i.e. external to the physical world, since the 
Ideas are separated from the things. As has been shown earli¬ 
er, it stems from the anthropomorphic conception of the cos¬ 
mos endowed with a “soul” that controls the physical world 
in the manner the human soul controls the body. 

The problems of cosmology and cosmogony are treated by 
Plato in the Timaeus where he expounds his physical theory 
and makes an attempt to bridge the gap between the sensible 
world of change and the immutable eternal Ideas. Basic to 
Plato’s physics in this dialogue is the notion of Reason as 
the demiurge or creator of the cosmos. This notion is a clear 
echo of Anaxagoras’s Nous except that Anaxagoras regarded 
it only as the motive force of the primary elements of matter, 
whereas in Plato it is the creator of the world (not from 
nothing!) and its “Father.” Their relations appear to be very 
complex and hard for the ancient mind to grasp. For one, the 
conception of god as the demiurge (and in Plato demiurge is 
nothing but god) implying the possibility of creation from 
nothing was entirely alien to Greek thought and it was not 
until much later that the Platonic doctrine, under the 
influence of Judaism and Christianity, received a monotheistic 
interpretation. Besides, the name of “demiurge,” denoting in 
Greek a skillful artisan engaged in manual labour, did not 
tally with the notion of “father,” since Plato described him as 


185 





the builder of the cosmos after the blueprints of Ideas in the 
manner of a carpenter building a house or a joiner making 
a bed 1 (this curious analogy clearly reveals the origin of the 
concept of God). 

As Plato presents it in the Timaeus, the ultimates of the 
cosmos are the Ideas or the models of things, Matter or the 
unformed material from which they are made, and the 
Demiurge or God which shapes them in accordance with 
eternal Ideas. On the evidence of Plato himself, he had great 
difficulties in explaining his concept of matter. Indeed, he 
says (30a) that God found the whole visible sphere not at rest 
but moving in an irregular and disorderly fashion and “out of 
disorder he brought order,” then (50a) he compares it to gold 
which a gold-smith fashions into many different shapes, and 
further (61a) he speaks of matter as being “invisible and 
shapeless, receiving ail things, partaking in some most 
bewildering way of the intelligible,” as “matter,” “nurse” 
and “receptacle” of things produced in it by ideas. Sometimes 
he refers to the receptacle as space and sums up by stating that 
it existed, like being and generation, even before the world 
was born (52d). 

The creation of the cosmos as presented by Plato in the 
Timaeus is a complex process. Out of a mixture of Ideas and 
Matter the Demiurge makes the world’s soul and distributes 
it throughout the space assigned for the visible universe. The 
mixture is divided into four elements: fire, air, water, and 
earth. Having set it in rotary motion, the Demiurge fashions 
the cosmos into a sphere, the best of all shapes, and assigns 
orbits to planets and the heaven to stationary stars in 
accordance with harmonious mathematical relationships 
displaying due proportion and measure. So by God’s 
providence the cosmos is created as a living being endowed 
with reason. It is unique since it resembles in every way its 
unique model, the Idea. 

In order to be complete, the cosmos must contain other 
living creatures and the Demiurge makes them. They are the 
race of gods, the race of birds, the watery species, and the land 
creatures (40a). Plato does not take it upon himself to account 
for the birth of the gods and refers the reader for their geneal 

1 Iri the Republic (X 597b) Plato asserts that God is the creator of the 
Ideas themselves: "Beds, then are of three kinds, and there are three artists 
who superintend them: God, the maker of the bed, and the painter." This is 
vet another inconsistency of Plato’s idealistic doctrine. 


186 









ogy to traditional Greek mythology in the manner of Hesiod. 
The Demiurge then makes a new soul-mixture from the in¬ 
gredients he formerly mixed in creating the world’s soul and 
divides it into separate souls in accordance with the number 
of the stationary stars. “Now of the divine he himself was the 
creator, but the creation of the mortal he committed to his off 
spring. And they imitating him, received from him the immor¬ 
tal principle of the soul; and around this they proceeded to fa 
shion a mortal body” (69c). The souls of the mortals are im 
planted in bodies and, depending on their behaviour, either 
return to a blessed life on the appointed star (whence the link 
of Platonism with astrology), or become incarnated in another 
mortal body, first in a woman, then in a beast which is the 
nearest to the soul’s vicious nature (42c). With an obvious 
touch of humour Plato explains that the souls of harmless 
smatterers who “thought it enough to study the heavens with 
eyes alone” transmigrate into birds, those of men subdued by 
their animal desires move into quadrupeds and reptiles, 
whereas fishes harbour the souls of the stupidest. 

The idea of the transmigration of souls and of their emanci¬ 
pation from the endless chain of reincarnations may have been 
borrowed by Plato from Orphic religion. The fates of souls are 
described by Plato differently. In the Timaeus (41e) he writes 
that “their first birth would be one and the same for all —no 
one should suffer a disadvantage at his hands,” whereas in 
the Phaedrus the imperfect soul is said to lose her wings while 
still in the heavens and fall onto earth where she cannot be 
incarnated in any living being during her first life. 

Plato’s description of creation is openly teleological. Man's 
head is made spherical as this shape is best suited for the di¬ 
vine part of his body; to save it from rolling on the ground 
with its hillocks and pits, it has been provided with a body and 
extremities; the eyes have a fiery (luminous) nature that they 
may see, etc. However, Plato cannot completely discard the 
notion of necessity and finds the way out in subjecting neces¬ 
sity to the mind: “for the creation of this world is the com¬ 
bined work of necessity and mind. Mind, the ruling power, 
persuaded necessity to bring the greater part of created things 
to perfection” (Tim. 48a). This synthesis enables Plato to 
use both causal and teleological explanations and creates a 
possibility for the integration of some naturalistic concepts 
into his essentially idealist system. 

Unlike Plato’s cosmological teachings dominated by mytho- 


187 






logical fancies, his doctrine of matter and laws of its motion, 
i.e. “physics,” is based on a combination of Pythagoreanism 
and atomism. This might be expected, since the simplest way 
of accounting for the relationship between ideas and 
particular objects was to assume that the latter embody the 
mathematical structure of the former. Indeed, since the world 
is the creation of the mind, its ultimate elements must display 
measure and proportion represented in numbers. Plato 
therefore postulates the geometrical structure of matter which 
is based on regular bodies derived from triangles. In this 
scheme fire is presented as consisting of pyramids (tetra¬ 
hedrons), the most mobile and sharpest of all regular solids, 
air as consisting of icosahedrons, water of octahedrons, and 
earth of cubes. The fifth regular solid, dodecahedron, repres¬ 
ents the model of the cosmos or, according to the Epinomis, 
ether. The transition from one element to another is account¬ 
ed for by Plato as the realisation of mathematical proportions 
representing the comparative volumes of regular solids: one 
octahedron is equal to two tetrahedrons, one icosahedron is 
equal to five tetrahedrons, two icosahedrons are equal to five 
octahedrons. 

As we see, in his attempt to reveal mathematical relation¬ 
ships underlying the structure of substances Plato in fact 
reduced physics to geometry. This method which had far- 
reaching consequences was to play an extremely important 
role in the subsequent development of natural science, 
particularly in modern history. Besides, it enabled Plato to 
harness the Democritean atomistic doctrine and fit the idea of 
the eternal motion of atoms into his picture of the world. For 
instance, likening the process of the separation of the elements 
to the shaking and winnowing of grain (Tim. 52e-53a), Plato 
in fact gives a paraphrase of Democritus (L 316). However, in 
Plato’s system the disorderly motion in the manner of 
Democritus was but a preliminary process preceding the crea¬ 
tion of the world’s soul which was, so to speak, to take over 
and put the matter in order through the agency of images and 
numbers. 

Time, according to Plato, was created by the Demiurge to¬ 
gether with the cosmos. Plato writes: “There were no days and 
nights and months and years before the heaven was created, 
but when he constructed the heaven he created them also” 
(37d). By introducing measure into chaotic motions, the De¬ 
miurge brought time into being, i.e. effected “a moving image 


188 






of eternity,” that which we call “time.” Time is “moving” 
because it was identified with circular motions of heavenly 
bodies producing the recurrence of day and night —in order to 
create time god had to create the heavenly bodies and put 
them in their orbits. Time is also but an “image” because its 
archetype, the idea of time, is eternal and can be expressed in 
motion only inadequately. This typically mythological view is 
curiously combined by Plato with an entirely different concept 
of time understood as the duration of movement of heavenly 
bodies which revolve “according to a law of number” (38a). 

The general picture of the world emerging from Plato’s 
description is as follows. The one finite spherical cosmos with 
spherical earth in the centre is sensible God which is the image 
of supra-sensible God. The stars fastened to spheres and cir¬ 
cling the earth along spiral orbits are also rational and blessed 
“visible deities.” Their rotation determines the world’s cycles: 
the return of the stars to their initial position marks the end 
of the “cosmic year,” i.e. ten thousand terrestrial years. 

Plato himself did not think much of his picture of the sen¬ 
sible world regarding it as merely plausible. The study of na 
ture does not lead man to the understanding of real truth, on 
the contrary, it takes him away from it. According to Plato, 
“the instrument of knowledge can only by the movement of 
the whole soul be turned from the world of becoming to that 
of being, and learn by degrees to endure the sight of being” 
(Rep. 518c). This statement is tantamount to sheer obscuran¬ 
tism, since Plato not only rejects man’s attempts to cognise 
nature as futile, but even qualifies them as harmful. However, 
Plato’s subjective denial of the world of senses in favour of the 
“world of ideas” objectively opened new ways to scientific 
cognition. The disparagement of nature and concentration on 
numbers and mathematical relationships marked a new turn 
in philosophy and gave a powerful impetus to the theoretical 
investigation of the physical world, since numerical propor¬ 
tions were in fact nothing but the reflection of the laws 
of nature. 

10. The Soul, the Ethical Ideal, the State 

Plato’s philosophy, like that of his teacher Socrates, centres 
upon moral problems which are treated on the basis of his the¬ 
ory of Ideas, as well as cosmological and psychological con 
ceptions. Since virtue resides in the soul which communicates 






I 


with the world of Ideas. Plato prefaces his moral theory with 
the teaching of soul. We have earlier shown the role assigned 
by Plato to the world's and individual man’s souls in the cos¬ 
mos at large. Now let us look at the functions of man’s soul in 
his life. 

Plato starts philosophical discourse in the Phaedo with the 
assertion of the soul’s immortality and develops a system of 
arguments to prove his thesis. 

(1) The argument from the alternation of opposites. If 
death did not pass into life, life would ultimately cease. Since 
it is not the case, the soul must be assumed to survive the body. 

(2) The argument from recollection. Men’s inherent no¬ 
tions of beauty, goodness, justice, equality, etc. which cannot 
be obtained through senses testify to the fact that learning 
is nothing but the recollection of what the soul knew previ¬ 
ously, i.e. acquired before birth. 

(3) The argument from the immutability of the soul. Un¬ 
like individual objects, the soul is always equal to itself in 
view of its affinity with the divine and the eternal. 

(4) The argument from causality. The soul is the true cause 
of all things, therefore it is the end in view, the idea or the life 
of the body. However, being the life of the body, it is incompa 
tible with its death and, consequently, is immortal (Phaed. 
70c-107b). 

It is not difficult to prove that Plato’s arguments are logical¬ 
ly untenable. Indeed, argument (1) is based on the confusion 
of logical possibility which only exists in thought and actuali¬ 
ty which relates to the physical world. The passing on of one 
opposite into the other may be possible logically, but its reali¬ 
sation is yet to be proved. In point of fact, Plato did not pro 
vide such proof. Moreover, his theory of creation backfires and 
can be used as an argument against the immortality of the 
soul. Argument (2) is a vicious circle, because the pos¬ 
sibility of knowledge is derived from the pre-existence of the 
soul (in the Meno), whereas the pre-existence of the soul is 
derived from the possibility of knowledge (in the Phaedo). 
Besides, it is rooted in mythological notions which have no 
demonstrative value whatsoever. Argument (3) is also based 
on a myth and on the postulate of soul’s eternal identity and 
immutability. Again, being the product of creation, an 
individual soul must be finite, i.e. mortal. Argument (4) is 
based on the assumption that the individual can be explained 
through the agency of the general, i.e. through the idea or the 


190 














end in view which belongs to the world of intelligence and 
cannot precede an individual object ontologically. So. all 
Plato’s arguments rest on the shaky foundation of faith and 
sin against elementary logic. 

The doctrine of soul’s immortality is used by Plato as the 
foundation for his ethical theory. His reasoning is as follows: 
Tf death had only been the end of all, dying would have been 
a godsend to the wicked... But now, inasmuch as the soul is 
manifestly immortal, there is for her no release or salvation 
from evil except the attainment of highest virtue and wisdom. 
For the soul when on her progress to the world below takes 
nothing with her but nurture and education; and these are said 
greatly to benefit or greatly to injure the departed, at the very 
beginning of his journey thither” (Phaedo 107cd). After 
a man’s death his soul sets off, under the guidance of the “ge¬ 
nius” assigned to her during the man’s lifetime, to a place of 
judgement and then to her habitation. A corrupted soul wan¬ 
ders alone “in extremity of distress until certain times are 
fulfilled, and when they are fulfilled, she is borne irresistibly 
to her own fitting habitation; as every pure and just soul 
which has passed through life in the company and under the 
guidance of the gods has also her own proper home” (ibid. 
108c). 

In this way, threatening the wrongdoers with punishment 
in the next world and promising rewards for merits, Plato 
intends to force men into the ways of righteousness and 
sets out to develop the principles of moral behaviour, i.e. 
the doctrine of good. This doctrine did not remain 
unaffected by Plato’s philosophical genesis. In the Protagoras, 
one of his earlier dialogues, Plato adhered to the principles 
of rational eudaeinonism 1 and maintained that goodness 
was the unity of virtue and happiness, the beautiful and 
the useful, the morally good and the pleasant. Later (e.g. 
in the Gorgias) Plato advanced the principle of absolute 
morality opposing it to happiness, benefit and pleasure. 
In the Theaetetus, Phaedo and Republic (Books VI and 
VII) he already fixed an unbridgeable gulf between the ideal 
of absolute goodness on the one hand and man’s sensual 
ity and striving for pleasures and happiness, on the other. 
This evolution was evidently the result of Plato’s growing dis¬ 
illusionment about the Athenian society and the increasing 

A system of ethics that defines and enforces moral obligation by its re¬ 
lation to happiness or personal wellbeing. — Tr. 

191 











religious strain in his philosophy. Goodness being utterly 
alien to this world wallowing in sin, the only way of achieving 
the moral ideal appeared to be the rejection of all bodily plea¬ 
sures. Hence the asceticism of Plato’s teaching and his call for 
the purification of the soul. 

The most important role in this purification is assigned by 
Plato to philosophy which is designed to free the soul from the 
tyranny of the body, to rid it of passions, base desires and vice. 
However, ultimate freedom can only be attained through 
death, therefore philosophy is conceived by Plato as prepara¬ 
tion for death and as ability to die: “It is characteristic of the 
philosopher to despise the body; his soul runs away from his 
body and desires to be alone and by herself” (Phaedo 65d). 

Later in the Laws Plato returns to his initial conception of 
morality and preaches a virtuous life as the most pleasant and 
happiest one in which the aspiration for supreme goodness 
can be combined with ordinary virtue. The individual soul, 
according to Plato, consists of three parts: rational (wherein 
wisdom resides), forceful (which is the seat of courage), and 
desirous (whose virtue is self-control or temperance). The 
common virtue of the soul harmonising, as it were, all the 
three faculties is what Plato calls justice. It consists in 
the right coordination of the soul’s powers: the mind makes 
decisions and rules, the will fulfils its orders, and the desires 
comply with the rule of temperance and obey. 

This scheme provides the basis for Plato’s social philosophy 
and doctrine of the state which are mainly expounded in three 
dialogues: the Politicus, Republic, and Laws. In the Politicus , 
Plato gives a brief outline of the “history of society” starting 
with the “age of Cronus.” To each tribe of animals, including 
mankind, God assigned a lower deity, kind of a herdsman, to 
supervise it personally. There were no states, no prop¬ 
erty, no need to toil as earth yielded food untilled. There was 
no marriage or begetting as all were born from the earth. 
When the fabled golden age ended and the earth-born tribe 
was annihilated, the cosmos settled down and assumed con¬ 
trol over the new generations along the lines laid down by the 
Maker. However, due to the imperfections inherent in the cor¬ 
poreal world harmony was disturbed and disorder set in. Men 
became a prey to wild beasts and had no skills to get the suste 
nance they had formerly found free. They were saved from 
extinction by the divine gifts: fire from Prometheus, various 
arts from Hephaestus, seeds and plants from other gods. How 


192 








ever, mankind was left to manage its own affairs without di¬ 
vine care as best it could and needed rulers (statesmen and 
kings) to fulfil the functions of the former “herdsmen.” 

Now, in contrast to God and divine shepherds kings are only 
human and therefore liable to err. Here lies the possibility 
of perversion and overall degradation of government. In ge¬ 
neral, there are three types of government based on law. Ar¬ 
ranged in decreasing order of perfection, they are monarchy, 
aristocracy and democracy. To these correspond the forms 
based on lawlessness: tyranny, oligarchy and the lowest form 
which, according to Plato, has no special name. Plato’s clas¬ 
sification of the forms of government provided the foundation 
of his political theory and was later developed by Aristotle in 
his doctrine of the state. 

In the Republic Plato makes an attempt to construct a new 
model of ideal society. The state (polis) arises due to the ina¬ 
bility of individual men to satisfy their requirements without 
outside help. The need to procure food, build houses, make 
clothes and meet people’s other vital requirements accounts 
for the existence of farmers, artisans, merchants, etc. They 
constitute the lower class of society and shoulder the burden 
of providing the material goods. The defence of the state 
against its internal and external enemies is the responsibility 
of the warrior class. Finally, there are the rulers whose funct¬ 
ion is to co-ordinate the activity of all the classes and govern 
the state. These are “philosophers” skilled in the “royal art,” 
devoted to the ideals of justice and goodness, and possessed of 
wisdom. 

This economic and political substantiation of the state 
structure is bolstered up by a psychological analogy between 
the classes of the state and the faculties of" man’s soul which 
must be in harmonious unity. Man’s position and weight 
in the social hierarchy depend on the prevalence of one 
of his soul’s virtues: wisdom, courage or temperance. The 
members of the lower class (which on the whole receives little 
attention from Plato) are allowed to have private property and 
individual families. These, however, tend to foster self-inter¬ 
est, jealousy and inequality. As a result, a special external 
force is required to keep the labourers under control. To pre¬ 
vent the extremes of wealth and poverty, the higher classes are 
denied the right to private property and family. The state’s 
population is reproduced under the strict supervision of speci¬ 
ally appointed officials who carefully select thp mating cou- 


i:s trm 


193 






pies. Children are taken away from their parents at birth, 
examined for physical fitness and disposed of if found imper¬ 
fect. The survivors are subjected to a rigid system of state edu¬ 
cation under the supervision of guardians and special care is 
taken to ensure that the children and their parents do not 
know each other. Boys and girls are brought up under the 
same conditions and both sexes are equally capable of military 
and political activity. 

It is worth noting that in some modern writings Plato is 
made out to be a precursor of socialism and the state system 
described by him in the Republic is dished out as “socialist” to 
scare gullible people. Actually, however, his utopia is nothing 
but an idealised picture of the archaic Spartan state, an obso¬ 
lete and reactionary caste system with certain traits of primit¬ 
ive communism. A precursor he certainly is, but not of social¬ 
ism: he may well be considered the ideologist of such feudal 
organisations as monastic societies and knightly fraternities. 

Of all the dismal features of Plato’s utopia that might repel 
the modern reader the most depressing is perhaps the com¬ 
plete subjugation of the individual by the state, the dissolu¬ 
tion of the individual in the social whole. Proceeding from the 
conviction that men cannot be trusted to know their true inter¬ 
ests and follow the dictates of reason, Plato viewed the state as 
an aggregate of impersonal beings, without individual needs, 
desires and aspirations, whose only purpose was to fulfil the 
social functions assigned to them. The true reason is embodied 
in the state; its claims must come first and everything must 
bow to what is supposed to be the good of the whole. Such 
a state does not recognise art or science, poetry, songs, fairy 
tales, games, or individual love... To put the finishing touch to 
this cheerless picture, Plato vividly describes the blood-curdl¬ 
ing punishments awaiting disobedient subjects in the next 
world. Speaking through the mouth of Er, son of Armenius, 
who was killed in battle and came back to life twelve days lat¬ 
er on the funeral pyre, the philosopher recounts the story of 
his soul’s adventures and dwells with obvious relish on the 
tortures applied to the sinners. By contrast, his account of the 
exalted happiness of the virtuous is rather insipid and lacks 
inspiration... (Rep. X, 616b-620). 

Of course, Plato understood that his ideal had but little 
chance of being translated into reality in the contemporary tu¬ 
multous world. In the Laws he offered a more realistic 
project. This work, consisting of twelve books, begins with 


194 






an introductory discourse on legislation. According to Plato, 
man is something like a doll in God’s hands and does not know 
if he is intended to be a mere plaything, or has a more impor¬ 
tant function to perform. Indeed, God’s purpose is the good of 
the whole and man is nothing but a means to ultimate good¬ 
ness. 

However, man is endowed with a soul which is the princi¬ 
ple of self-motion and has therefore a certain amount of free¬ 
dom. Motivated by his passions, desires and inclinations, he 
strives for happiness. Man’s desires stem from hunger, thirst 
and sexual urge, the instrument of self-reproduction, and 
therefore he loves himself the most: “The excessive love of self 
is in reality the source to each man of all offences” (Leges, 
731e). Taking into account this complex psychological nature 
of man, Plato deemed it necessary to introduce the strictest 
possible regimentation of all social relations as a basis for new 
society. He conceived his state as a small agricultural polis, 
a community of 5040 households, each with its separate allot¬ 
ment of land. This amounted to 10,000-12,000 male citizens 
and a total citizenship of 40,000 to 48,000. In addition, there 
was to be 7,000-8,000 metics and about 30,000 slaves. Land 
was to be divided into holdings of equal value and each house¬ 
holder was to be granted two plots, one in or near the city and 
the other near the frontier. Landholdings could not be sold or 
otherwise disposed of outside the family. All were to live di¬ 
rectly off the land, but the citizens were not supposed to do me¬ 
nial work: it was to be left to the slaves whose function cons¬ 
isted in providing their masters with everything necessary. 

All population was to be divided into four property classes 
and no one was allowed to possess wealth exceeding four times 
the value of the plot. Private individuals were not to have any 
gold and silver which were to be replaced by a token currency. 
No citizen was to be allowed to engage in trade or handicrafts 
which were to be left in the hands of foreigners. The citizens 
found guilty of violating this prescription were to be punished. 
Any surplus was to be handed over to the state, and the neces¬ 
sity produce was to be divided into three parts. Two parts were 
to be consumed respectively by the free members of society 
and by the slaves, and the third part was to be exchanged for 
handicraft goods. The merchants’ profits were to be limited by 
the state and each handicraftsman could ply only one craft. 

Plato’s ideal city was conceived as an aristocratic or, to be 
more precise, oligarchic republic. Its governing bodies, rec- 


195 






ruited by election, included an Areopagas of 37 members, 
a Council of 350 members, military leaders (strategists), tem¬ 
ple trustees, priests and priestesses, market wardens, city 
magistrates and other officials supervising the state finances 
and agriculture. The courts, though also formed on an elector¬ 
al basis, were to be watched over by a special board—the Noc¬ 
turnal Council consisting of ten law guardians. The Coun¬ 
cil’s business was to promote virtue and human excellence, 
oversee the observance of the laws and choose-younger mem¬ 
bers of outstanding natural gifts and powers of observation to 
act as “its eyes and ears” (961d). 

Plato’s Republic and particularly Laws show that he made 
a careful study of the constitutions of oligarchic states and was 
fully prepared to instruct the rulers in the use of various 
crafty methods devised to keep men under control and mani¬ 
pulate public opinion. Plato is firmly convinced that all means 
are good to preserve status quo: fraud “for the public weal,” 
electoral qualifications, representation of poor sections by rich 
citizens, open ballot, forgery and bribery, political murdpr... 
Of special importance is the undivided ideological sway of the 
oligarchs. Performance of religious rites is absolutely manda¬ 
tory. Atheism, i.e. the denial of god’s existence or its influence 
on the lives of men, as well as the conviction that the gods can 
be propitiated by magic, is punishable by death or imprison¬ 
ment. The arts are to be under strict supervision, all music and 
poetry are to be prohibited unless they exhibit a clear moral 
tendency in the Platonic sense, i.e. are aimed at subjugating 
man to the will of the state embodied in the immediate superi¬ 
or. According to Plato, “the great principle of all is that no one 
of either sex should be without a commander; nor should the 
mind of anyone be accustomed to do anything, either in jest or 
earnest, of his own motion, but in war and in peace he should 
look to and follow his leader, even in the least things being 
under his guidance.. And we ought in time of peace from 
youth upwards to practise this habit of commanding others, 
and of being commanded by others; anarchy should have no 
place in the life of man or of the beasts who are subject to 
man” (Leges XII, 942ac). This statement hardly needs any 
comment. The modern analogy to Plato’s ideal state as de¬ 
scribed in the Laws is not socialism or communism, but 
fascism. 

There is only one rational explanation of Plato’s totalitarian 
ethic. He is determined to preserve at all costs the ancient po¬ 


me 





lis undergoing profound political and economic crisis and 
hopes to check its progressing deterioration which he identi¬ 
fies with “anarchy.” Plato’s ideal state based on unquestion¬ 
ing obedience, suppression of democracy, restriction of private 
property and meticulous regimentation of all human activity 
is in fact nothing else than a manifestation of his ultra-con¬ 
servatism and grief for the “golden age” of Greek slave soci¬ 
ety. 

It. Criticism of the “Naive” Theory of Ideas and the Doctrine of the One 

As has been shown earlier, Plato’s initial, ‘naive” theory of 
Ideas proved vulnerable in many respects. This became clear 
to Plato himself and he subjected it to a fundamental reap 
praisal. His criticism was so uncompromising that many later 
commentators called in question the authenticity of his dia¬ 
logue Parmenides where the arguments against the theory of 
Ideas were presented in the most explicit form. Plato indeed 
put his finger on practically all the weak spots of his earlier 
doctrine devoting special attention to what was its chief draw¬ 
back, dualism —the impassable gulf between the true world 
of eternal, immutable and indivisible Ideas, and the sensible 
world of changeful multitudinous things. As a matter of fact, 
the main object of Plato’s criticism was apparently the Mega- 
rian doctrine of being based on a dualistic interpretation of his 
theory of Ideas. Striving to dissociate himself from this doc¬ 
trine Plato, naturally, could not pass over his own earlier 
views in silence. 

The obvious absurdities ensuing from the “naive” theory 
of Ideas called for an entirely new approach, and it is expo¬ 
unded by Plato in the Parmenides and Sophist. Upon a thoro¬ 
ugh scrutiny of his former conceptions Plato comes to a con¬ 
clusion that various determinations of being, i.e. what he 
understood as Ideas, are not absolute entities independent of 
one another. On the contrary, they presuppose one another 
and pass into one another. This was a major advance that gave 
a new turn to philosophical thought: ideas became a unity of 
opposites (one and many, being and not-being, rest and mot¬ 
ion) constituting the source of any change and any motion. 
The theory of Ideas turned into a doctrine of idealist dialectic. 

Alongside the dialectical doctrine of Ideas Plato develops 
further the conception of the One. Summing up the hitherto 
scattered views of the One as the supreme category of being, 


197 









he shapes them into an elaborate theory of the primary cause 
and the highest principle of reality that produces the world of 
Ideas and determines its structure. 

In the Parmenides, speaking through the mouth of the Ele- 
an philosopher, Plato strives to combine the arguments of the 
Eleatics, identifying the One and being, with Gorgias’s convic¬ 
tion that being is non-existent. The truth of this relationship 
is the movement of the corresponding notions. Plato contends 
that the assertion of one absolute being irrespective of any¬ 
thing else, “the other,” is bound to lekd to a conclusion that 
such being can neither exist nor be cognised. Indeed, it cannot 
be compared to or qualified by anything. Conceived as One, 
being passes into its opposite —not-being, or nothing. 

However, if we posit one Being, i.e. assume that the One is 
or “exists,” we shall see that besides the one Being there also 
exists “is,” i.e. something different, other. Plato puts it thus: 
“Then the one will have being, but its being will not be the 
same with the one; for if the same, it would not be the being 
of the one; nor would the one have participated in being, for 
the proposition that one is would have been identical with the 
proposition that one is one; but our hypothesis is not ‘If one is 
one, what will follow,’ but ‘If one is’...” (Parm. 142bc). 
Hence, the one and being are two, i.e. the one and something 
else. Following this line which is anything but straight Plato 
comes to the conclusion that the one implies many and can 
neither exist nor be comprehended in thought without it. 
Though the Parmenides, like many other dialogues, lacks cla¬ 
rity, Plato’s thought is not difficult to grasp. It consists in that 
the concept of the one contains all the other determinations 
of being unfolded in the dialectical process of transition from 
one concept to another, its opposite: the one and other, being 
and not-being, identity and distinction, part and whole, eter¬ 
nity and temporal finitude, etc. 

Expounding the dialectic of being and not-being in the So¬ 
phist, Plato treats the subject from a different angle (236c 
259c). He criticises the sophistic thesis that everything is true 
and falsehood is impossible (Protagoras) or that everything 
is false (Gorgias). The sophists, according to Plato, do not 
distinguish between truth and falsehood or, which is the same, 
between their objects, being and not-being. They posit truth 
and falsehood, being and not-being as independent notions 
placing them, as it were, next to each other. Passing on to 
Parmenides’s doctrine of one being, immutable, motionless 


198 









and spherical, Plato points out that if being and one are iden¬ 
tical, we do not need two words for them. If they are different, 
they are two and, consequently, being cannot be one. Nor 
can it be indivisible, since a whole breaks up into parts of 
necessity, the more so as it is a sphere. The doctrine of one 
being proves logically untenable. 

Now, being is inconceivable as motionless and immutable 
either, since if it were such it would be beyond the mind’s 
grasp: “If knowing is a kind of action, it necessarily follows 
that being known is an affection. And on this view reality, in 
so far as it is known, is acted upon by knowledge, and is there¬ 
fore a motion; for that which is in a state of rest cannot be 
acted upon, as we affirm... And, O heavens, can we ever be 
made to believe that motion and life and soul and mind are not 
present with perfect being? Can we imagine that being is 
devoid of life and mind, and exists in solemn unmeaningness 
and everlasting fixture?” (Soph. 249e). To be sure, the answer 
to this rhetorical question can only be in the negative. 

Plato singles out five categories: being, rest, motion, then 
sameness (identity) and distinction “recognised as the great¬ 
est” (254c) and sets out to examine their interrelationship, 
i.e. their ability to combine or “mix” with one another. Strict¬ 
ly speaking, it is a question of logical association or compati 
bility of concepts. Plato says: “...we are agreed that some 
classes have a communion with one another, and others not, 
and some have communion with a few and others with many, 
and that there is no reason why some should not have univer¬ 
sal communion with all” (ibid. 254c). Motion and rest will 
not mix, but being mixes with both, for both are (exist). 
Further, sameness and distinction are not compatible, but 
associate with the first three which share in both of them. For 
instance, mixing with being, motion becomes both identical 
with and different from it. The same applies to rest. 

As is evidenced from the above, Plato no longer recognises 
rigid, immutable and single-valued concepts. His philosophic¬ 
al categories, for one, are conceived as flexible, changeful and 
essentially contradictory. They are involved in a complex sys¬ 
tem of mutual ambivalent relations combining with some and 
standing apart from others. Yet the most notable feature of 
Plato’s new theory of Ideas was his special emphasis on the 
unity of opposites. Very characteristic in this respect are the 
closing lines of his Parmenides .“Whether one is or is not, one 
and the others in relation to themselves and one another, all of 


199 






them, in every way, are and are not, and appear to be and ap 
pear not to be” (166c). In other words, the analysis of any de¬ 
termination taken separately and in relation to other deter¬ 
minations shows that each of them passes into its opposite. 
Each higher concept splits into contraries which, in turn, 
exclude each other and resolve into a more general concept. In 
contrast to the sophists, Plato understands that the develop 
ment of a concept is not an arbitrary transition from one deter 
mination to any other determination. Each of the opposites im¬ 
plies its own counterpart, its “other self:” being is inseparable 
from not-being, one from many, rest from motion, identity 
from distinction. 

Groping after the laws of logic, Plato also came very near 
to what later was to be known as the law of contradiction. He 
in fact formulated this law in the Phaedo (103b) drawing a 
distinction between the opposites themselves and the things 
which possess them. The opposites cannot change into each 
other: “If change is between opposites or intermediate states... 
there must be a substratum which changes to the opposite con¬ 
dition, for the opposites do not change. And this substratum 
remains, but the opposite does not.” As we have seen, later in 
the Parmenides Plato changed this view restricting the sphere 
of the law of contradiction. Probably, he believed it to be 
“inoperative” in relation to a notion and, ontologically, to an 
Idea which can change into its opposite. However it may be, 
neither in the Parmenides, nor in the Sophist Plato clarified 
his views on the status of the law of contradiction and its 
relation to the movement of concepts. 

Here comes another important aspect of Platonism. The dia¬ 
lectic of the One and Other unfolded in the Parmenides is di 
rectly related to Plato’s doctrine of Ideas as the true sources 
of individual objects. It is fundamentally different from the 
teaching of ancient philosophers about the ontological, exi¬ 
stential generation of things from primary substance, as it is 
concerned with their ideal generation in the bosom of Idea. In 
his first variant of the theory of Ideas Plato, without specify¬ 
ing the relation of Ideas to individual objects, ventured a hy¬ 
pothesis that particulars might “share in” Ideas or Ideas 
might “be present in” or “associate with” particulars. Now the 
analysis of the Ideas themselves brought him to the conclusion 
that Ideas were also multiple and, consequently, needed some 
higher principle. This principle is the One (to hen). 

In point of fact, most Plato’s dialogues, particularly the 






Republic, Phaedrus and Phaedo refer to the One as the supre¬ 
me Idea. It is the foundation of all being. However, in con 
trast with the earlier dialogues in which the One is identified 
with Goodness, Beauty and Truth, i.e. is conceived in axiologi¬ 
cal terms, the later dialogues show an increasing tendency to 
focus on its logical and ontological significance. The One 
generates by a dialectical process all other categories and, on 
the ontological side, both of its hypostases or realms—the 
mind and the soul. This triad characteristic of all ancient cos¬ 
mologies was later developed by neo-Platonism which pres¬ 
ented the One, Nous (the Mind) and the Soul as the successive 
stages of the emanation of being. 

To sum up then. Plato as the father of idealism occupies a 
unique place in the history of philosophy. His impact on the 
world’s philosophical thought was enormous, yet it was by no 
means simple. Its ambivalence derives from the dual nature of 
his teaching. On the one hand, Plato’s thought exemplifies 
untiring quest for truth and is sustained by an overmastering 
desire to improve the world. His philosophy comes from an 
irresistible drive towards beauty and perfection. On the other 
hand, all his efforts are directed towards restoring the hope¬ 
lessly outdated communal system and inspired by the will-o’- 
the-wisp of the idealised Spartan aristocratic state in its con 
trast to corrupt Athenian slave-owning democracy. Plato’s 
ideals came in tragic conflict with reality and this was bound 
to leave a mark of profound pessimism and foreboding of an 
impending catastrophe on his entire philosophy. 

Plato’s fundamental error consists in the conviction that 
reality can be changed with the help of ideas, be they con¬ 
ceived as human thoughts inspiring action, or transcendent 
Ideas allegedly shaping reality. “Ideas can never lead beyond 
an old world order but only beyond the ideas of the old world 
order. Ideas cannot carry out anything at all. In order to carry 
out ideas men are needed who can exert practical force .” 1 
Moreover, it is only the ideas reflecting the real progressive 
tendencies of social life that are worth materialising and are 
indeed materialised. Plato’s ideas were not this kind. They for¬ 
med a rigid immutable system of absolute values which, once 
translated into reality, would have emerged as a despotic and 


1 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, “The Holy Family", in: Karl Marx, 
Frederick Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 4, 1975, p. 119. 


201 









heartless social structure. We have got a glimpse of it in Pla 
to’s Laws. 

In his Ideas Plato hypostatised the concepts of the dialecti 
cal mind and strove to array them in a complex system repre¬ 
senting the model of the universe with all its diversity. 
Abstracted from the world, they became the object of a very 
thorough philosophical scrutiny. However, absolutised and di¬ 
vorced from reality, they were turned into independent intel¬ 
ligible entities of the divine kingdom and became the founda¬ 
tion of most reactionary religious and mythological world out¬ 
looks. The strength of Platonism went side by side with its 
weakness. 


12. Plato’s School: Ancient Academy 

Plato founded his school in about 387 B.C. and remained 
in its charge till the end of his life. His successors were 
Speusippus who guided the school from 347 till 339 B.C., 
Xenocrates of Chalcedon (c. 339 315), Polemo and Crates. 
After the death of Crates, which occurred about 265 B.C., the 
Academy succumbed to the influence of scepticism. The 
period of the first century B.C.-second century A.D. was 
marked by persistent attempts to revive the doctrines of its 
founder along the lines of Stoicism and Aristotelianism. In the 
third-fifth centuries A.D. the school dissolved in neo-Pla- 
tonism. 

The extant remains of Plato’s school, meagre and fragmen¬ 
tary as they are, show the first signs of the erosion' of Pla¬ 
tonism that reflected the new social conditions of the oncom¬ 
ing Hellenistic age. Already Speusippus departed from the 
Platonic understanding of particular objects as mere reflec¬ 
tions of ideas devoid of independent existence. He seems to 
have been quite sure that the sensible world was no less real 
than the world of ideas and that both of them could be the 
objects of scientific investigation, but required different means 
for their cognition. According to Sextus Empiricus, “Speu¬ 
sippus declared that, since some things are sensible, others 
intelligible, the cognitive reason is the criterion of things 
intelligible and the cognitive sense of things sensible. And 
cognitive sense he conceived as being that which shares in 
rational truth” (Sext. Adv. math. VII, 145-146). Speusippus 
believed that the art of scientific perception could be learned 
in the manner a flutist learns not only to extract various 


202 






sounds from his instrument hut also to perceive and differen¬ 
tiate harmonious and discordant notes. 

In contrast to Plato who posited only ideas and mathemati¬ 
cal objects, Speusippus “made still more kinds of substances, 
beginning with the One, and assuming principles for each 
kind of substance, one for numbers, another for spatial 
magnitudes, and then another for the soul; and by going on 
in this way he multiplies the kinds of substance” (Arist. 
Meth. VII, 2, 1028b). As a result, Speusippus did not identify 
God with the One and the Good. On the evidence of Stobaeus, 
Speusippus maintained that God was different from both the 
One and the Good, “but of a nature peculiar to himself” 
(Mul. Ill, Speusippi fragmenta, 200). 

Hence, in Speusippus the One and the Good are some¬ 
what deprived of their divine connotation whereas the divine 
Mind turns into an independent principle approximating to 
the world’s Soul of Plato. Following this line of thought, 
Speusippus in fact breaks off with the world of Ideas and the 
Platonic conception of Beauty and Goodness as the primary 
causes or principles of the universe. 

Criticising such views from the standpoint of his teleologi¬ 
cal doctrine of being, Aristotle wrote: “Those who suppose, 
as the Pythagoreans and Speusippus do, that supreme beauty 
and goodness are not present in the beginning, because the 
beginnings both of plants and of animals are causes, but 
beauty and completeness are in the effects of these, are 
wrong in their opinion” (Arist. Met. XII, 7, 1072b). 

Our sources indicate that Speusippus abandoned the Pla¬ 
tonic Ideas replacing them with mathematical numbers. 
Aristotle and Jamblichus, for instance, quote him as saying 
that numbers are the only reality and that the One itself is 
their first principle or starting point. 

Speusippus showed little interest in physics, and his 
contribution to it did not go beyond positing the fifth element, 
“ether.” In ethics he mainly followed Plato but held that 
pleasure was just as bad as pain, both being contrasting evils 
(see Arist. Eth. Nicom. VII, 13, 1153b). 

Xenocrates, the next head of the Academy, made important 
changes in the Platonic theory of knowledge. He posited three 
levels of cognition — thinking, sense perceptions, and opinion, 
and held them to correspond to three forms of being. 
According to Sextus Empiricus, “Xenocrates says that there 
are three forms of existence —the sensible, the intelligible, 


203 







and the composite and opinable; and of these the sensible is 
that which exists within the Heaven, and the intelligible that 
which belongs to all things outside the Heaven, and the 
opinable and composite, that of the Heaven itself; for it is 
visible by sense but intelligible by means of astronomy” 
(Sext. Adv. math. VII, 147). To these three forms of existence 
correspond three deities known from Hesiod as Fates: Atropos 
(Inevitable) for the intelligible, Lachesis (Chance) for the 
sensible and Klotho (Spinning) for the composite and opi¬ 
nable. Then come three kinds of living beings: gods, daemons 
and mortals. Philosophy, too, was to consist of three parts — 
logic, physics, and ethics (the standard division which came 
down to us from antiquity and evidently owes its origin to 
Xenocrates). 

A characteristic feature of Xenocrates’s teaching is a fusion 
of philosophy and mythology. Unlike Plato who resorted to 
mythology as a convenient instrument for expressing his 
philosophical notions, particularly in “physics,” his pupil 
turned it into a separate object of philosophical inquiry. 
He starts with Zeus as the One, i.e. the first principle and 
the absolute form of all being. Next comes the world’s soul, no 
longer the motive force of the sensible world but kind of 
Zeus’s wife and Mother of the Gods and all things in the 
universe. Tending to view everything in mythological terms, 
Xenocrates devoted much attention to the origin of evil 
in the world. He relieved the gods of any responsibility for 
it and lay the blame exclusively on the bad daemons. 

Xenocrates’s conception of the Soul, both cosmic and 
human, reveals a strong influence of Pythagoreanism. Having 
accepted Plato’s understanding of the Soul as a self-moving 
entity, he specified it as a self-moving number (Mul. Ill, 
Xenocrates, fr. 29). This definition is reiterated by numerous 
ancient authors, e.g. Aristotle, Plutarchus, Alexander of 
Aphrodisias, Philoponus, Themistus, Simplicius (fragments 
30-46). The Soul’s numerical structure accounts for its men¬ 
tal as well as motive powers though the Soul itself is 
incorporeal. This ensues both from its numerical character 
and from the fact that unlike any living being it does not need 
any sustenance (fr. 52). 

The soul-body antithesis underlies the ethical theory of 
Xenocrates who believes that the goal of man’s life is the 
emancipation of the soul from the fetters of the body. 
According to Xenocrates. the divine principle in man’s soul 








must overpower the titanic principle through the agency of 
right actions. On the evidence of Sextus Empiricus, Xenorra- 
tes classified everything as either good or bad or neither. 
This classification was to play a very important part in the 
subsequent development of Hellenistic philosophy, particular¬ 
ly Stoicism, laying the foundation of its doctrine of “indiffer- 
ents.” 

Under the general head of “good” Xenocrates included the 
good of the soul, i.e. virtues {arete), the good of the body, 
i.e. pleasure, and external goods, such as wealth, power, 
honour, etc. Though virtue plays a decisive role in attaining 
a blissful life and securing the soul’s emancipation, Xenocra¬ 
tes does not deny the importance of bodily pleasures and 
external goods for man’s happiness. According to Aristotle, 
Xenocrates held that a happy life and a virtuous life are 
identical since both are given preference over all other modes 
of life (Top. VII, 1, 152a). Commenting on this statement, 
Aristotle points out the logical fallacy of Xenocrates’s 
inference from preference to identity and contends that 
happiness should be subordinate to virtue. Concluding the 
review of Xenocrates’s ethical teaching, it is perhaps worth 
mentioning his distinction between theoretical and practical 
wisdom: happiness can only be attained if the knowledge of 
first causes and intelligibles (theoretical wisdom) is com¬ 
plemented by the knowledge of practical matters (practical 
wisdom). 

The works and pedagogical activity of Polemo and Grantor 
testify to the growing trend of the Academy towards ethical 
problems. On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius young 
Polemo was distinguished hy unrestrained behaviour and wild 
temper: “One day, by agreement with his young friends, he 
burst into the school of Xenocrates quite drunk, with a gar¬ 
land on his head. Xenocrates, however, without being at all 
disturbed, went on with his discourse as before, the subject 
being temperance. The lad as he listened, by degrees was 
taken in the toils. He became so industrious as to surpass all 
the other scholars and rose to be himself head of the school 
in the 116th Olympiad” (IV, 16). Polemo is said to have ad¬ 
vocated strict morals and “used to say that we should exer¬ 
cise ourselves with facts and not with mere logical specula¬ 
tions” (Diog. L. IV, 18). 

Xenocrates’s and Pplemo’s pupil Grantor went down in the 
history of philosophy as the author of a commentary to 


205 







Plato’s Timaeus, one of the first works in this genre. He 
was also the founder of another philosophical genre, known 
as “consolations.” 1 His contribution to ethics consisted in the 
assertion that we owe our passions to nature and therefore 
they are not to be suppressed, but only kept under control. 
Setting various goods of life against one another in an 
imaginary all Hellenic contest, Crantor presents them in this 
hierarchical order: virtue (arete), health, pleasure, wealth. 

Tradition ranks with the Ancient Academy also Heraclides 
of Pontus and Eudoxus 0 / Cnidus. In contrast with the Pla- 
tonists proper, they paid much more attention to the study of 
nature. Heraclides’s greatest contribution was to astronomy 
which owed him the hypothesis anticipating the heliocentric 
theory of Copernicus: according to Heraclides, the Earth ro¬ 
tates on its axis and Venus and Mercury revolve around the 
Sun. Contrary to Plato who reg-arded the stars as deities, 
Heraclides believed them to be heavenly bodies similar to the 
Earth —whence, perhaps, his conviction that the souls await 
ing their incarnation on the Earth reside in the Milky 
Way. In physics, Heraclides professed a peculiar atomistic 
theory. He maintained that there exist fragments or “lumps” 
( onkos) not being particles of any element in particular but 
making up all things. 2 Presumably, he was opposed to the 
concept of a purposeless mechanical combination of lumps and 
believed them to merge with one another in the manner of 
separate musical tones making a single melody. 

As regards Eudoxus, he restored Anaxagoras’s teaching of 
homoeomers in physics and returned to the hedonism of 
Aristippus in ethics. 

Such, in short, is the history of the Ancient Academy. 


1 Writings of this kind, rather popular in subsequent centuries contrasted 
man's wretched existence in this world with the bliss awaiting his soul in 
heaven. Tr 

2 See Zeller (Ed.), Die Philosophie der Griecken ,11 Theil, 1. Ahtheilung. 
Auflage, Flies, Leipzig, 1889. S. 1035. 







Chapter 3 

Aristotle 

13. Life and Work 

Aristotle, the greatest of all philosophers of Ancient Greece, 
a pupil and a resolute opponent of Plato, was born in 
384 B.C. at Stagira, a town on the north-eastern coast of 
the Aegean Sea. His father Nichomachus came from a long 
line of Asclepiades (claiming their descent from Asclepias, the 
god of healing) and was a court physician to king Amyntas 
III of Macedon. At the age of seventeen Aristotle came to 
Athens in order to join Plato’s Academy and remained its 
member for eighteen years. After Plato’s death he left Athens 
for Asia Minor together with Xenocrates, one of the probable 
reasons, according to ancient sources, being his strained re¬ 
lations with Speusippus, the new head of the Academy. In 355 
B.C. Aristotle settled at Assos with several other Platonists 
under protection of Hermias, the ruler of a small Anatolian 
kingdom and the tyrant of Atarneus, its capital, who patro¬ 
nised philosophers and gave them everything necessary to 
pursue their studies. Three years later Aristotle moved to 
Mytilene (the island of Lesbos) on the invitation of his 
friend and loyal disciple Theophrastus. This event took 
place shortly before the death of Hermias who was treach¬ 
erously captured by the Persians and said to be crucified. 

In 343 B.C. Aristotle accepted the offer of king Philip of 
Macedon to be tutor to his son Alexander, the future great 
conqueror. After Philip had defeated the Greek army in the 
battle at Chaeronea, Aristotle returned to Athens. There 
he founded his own school in the Lyceum, a grove with 
covered walks ( paripatos) near the temple of Apollo Lykeios. 
The school known as Lyceum was also called Peripatetic 
(its members being referred to as peripatetics) due to 
Aristotle’s practice of walking up and down while discussing 
philosophy with his pupils. During his second period in 


207 









Athens which lasted for twelve years Aristotle gave oral 
tuition in the Lyceum which attracted large audiences, 
continued scientific researches and elaborated his system. 

The death of Alexander the Great in 323 B.C. set off 
a general revolt against the Macedonian rule and the Athenian 
assembly voted on war with Antipater, Alexander’s regent in 
Greece. Aristotle, known for his Macedonian sympathies, was 
immune against political charges, as he was not an Athenian 
citizen and had no right to participate in the city’s public 
life. However, he remained liable to prosecution on religious 
grounds and a charge of impiety was promptly brought up 
against him, the pretext being his poem in honour of 
pro-Macedonian Hermias in the form of a hymn that was 
alleged to befit only a god, and the quatrain on the monument 
to Hermias set up at Delphi. Aristotle was compelled to go 
into voluntary exile and retreated to Chalsis in the island of 
Euboea, where he had some property. The next year, in the 
summer of 322 B.C., he died. 

Aristotle’s surviving works mainly belong to the Lyceum 
period, though they contain ideas and authentic fragments 
of his earlier writings. We also possess a number of fragments 
dated to the Platonic period. Generally speaking, it is 
extremely difficult to pin down Aristotle’s works to an exact 
date and establish their chronological sequence, as almost 
all of them show unmistakable traces of different periods 
of his intellectual progress. Nevertheless, the earlier works 
clearly reveal a strong influence of Platonism. For instance, 
the Eudemus, an early dialogue that came down to us 
in fragments contains Platonic arguments for the soul's im¬ 
mortality. Following Plato, Aristotle declares the soul to be 
a form (Eidos) and commends those who call the soul 
receptive of ideas (cf. De an. Ill, 492a). In full agreement 
with Plato Aristotle thought of it as existing naturally 
outside the body, whereas life in bodies is unnatural and 
“like disease.” 

Another large work written by Aristotle in his early period 
is the Protrepticus (Exortation) that also survived in 
fragments, largely in the composition of neo-Platonic 
Jamblichus under the same name. It represents what was later 
to become rather a common genre of philosophical essays 
inviting the reader to philosophical studies and exalting the 
life of contemplation. Still in the wake of Plato’s theory of 
ideas, Aristotle speaks highly of philosophy as being the 


208 









noblest of all occupations, free from any material interest, 
and extols “thinking” (phronesis) as the greatest boon. He 
uses the word in its Platonic sense as the penetration of the 
philosophical mind into the highest reality, the world of 
Ideas. Characteristically, the same word was later to be used 
by Aristotle as synonymous with practical wisdom. 

It is only in the dialogue On Philosophy dated by some 
critics to Aristotle’s second period that the philosopher 
shows essential progress from the Platonic dogmas. Taking 
exception to the theory of ideas Aristotle, like Speusippus, 
reduces them to mathematical numbers and notes that if they 
meant something else they would be completely beyond our 
understanding. He criticises the Pythagorean and Platonic 
views and contends that incorporeal points cannot produce 
a line, let alone a body. 

Treating at length the origin of religious beliefs, Aristotle 
attributes them to two causes, one being the inspiration 
descending on the human soul in dreams, and the other, 
the orderliness of celestial motions. Very indicative in this 
respect is the attitude of Aristotle to Plato’s poetic image 
of an underground cave with chained prisoners intended 
as an allegorical picture of our world (Rep. VII, 514a- 
517c). According to Plato, the prisoners cannot move and 
do not know anything about the real world seeing only the 
shadows of its Ideas. Using this image, Aristotle turns the 
tables and says that if the imaginary race of men born in the 
bowels of the earth were allowed to come to the surface 
and see the wonders of our world, they would straightaway 
believe that there are gods who wrought them. Truth, ac¬ 
cording to Aristotle, resides in the world around us and is 
to be sought not by contemplating transcendent Ideas, but by 
observing living nature. 

This approach was fundamentally different from Plato’s 
conception of the physical cosmos as something secondary, 
a kind of reflection of a higher realm of ideal entities. Contrary 
to Plato, Aristotle is convinced of the reality of this world 
which needs only to be explained. 

Aristotle’s mature works making up the Coprus Aristoteli- 
cum, can be divided on the subject principle into eight groups: 

1. Logic (the Organon): Categories; On Interpretation; 
Prior Analytics and Posterior Analytics; Topics; On Sophisti¬ 
cal Refutations. 

2. Philosophy of nature: Physics or Lectures on Physics 


It 03!) 


209 






(eight books); On the Heavens (four books); On Generation 
and Corruption (two books); Meteorologica (four books, the 
last one being evidently non-authentic). This group also 
includes the pseudo-Aristotelian treatise On the World 
commonly dated to the first century B.C. 

3. Psychology: On the Soul (three books) and Short 
Natural Treatises (Parva Naturalia) consisting of the 
following works: On Perception and the Perceived, On 
Memory and Reminiscence, On Dreams, On Insomnia, On 
Prophesying by Dreams, On Duration and Brevity of Life, On 
Life and Death, On Respiration. Included in this group is also 
the sham treatise On Spirit believed to be written round about 
the middle of the third century B.C. 

4. Biology: History of Animals (ten books); On the Parts 
of Animals; On the Generation of Animals (five books). 
Besides these authentic works of Aristotle, classical editions 
also include a number of treatises written in the Lyceum by 
anonymous authors. The most important of them is the 
Problems treating various questions of mathematics, optics, 
music, physiology and medicine. 

5. First philosophy: Metaphysics consisting of fourteen 
books. In Bekker’s edition this work is preceded by the 
treatise On Melissus, Xenophanes and Gorgias (MXG). 

6. Ethics: Nichomachean Ethics (ten books); Magna Mora- 
lia (Large Ethics) (two books); Eudemian Ethics," its books 
4 to 6 coinciding with books 5 to 7 of the Nichomachean 
Ethics. Chapters 13 to 15 of hook 7 are sometimes published 
as Book 8 of the Eudemian Ethics. Two books of the Magna 
Moralia are regarded as quasi-Aristotelian, just as the treatise 
On the Virtues and Vices written between the first century 
B.C. and the first century A.I). 

7. Politics and economics: Politics (eight books); Econo¬ 
mics (three books). The genuineness of this latter work is 
generally denied and its third book is only available in the 
Latin translation. Aristotle’s school is credited with as many 
as 158 politeias which outline the history of Greek states and 
describe their political systems. An important addition to this 
corpus was the papyrus Athenian Politics discovered in 1890. 

8. Rhetorics and poetics: Rhetorics (three books), 
followed by pseudo-Aristotelian treatise Rhetorics Against 
Alexander (an early peripatetic work), and Poetics. 

It would not be an exaggeration to say that Aristotle’s 
works survived by a miracle. After his death they passed to 


210 











Theophrastus, and then to his pupil Neleus. They remained in 
an underground depository till the first century A.D. when 
they were taken to the library of Apellicon of Teos in Athens. 
After that they were brought to Rome and published by 
Andronicus of Rhodes, the head of the peripatetics. Referen¬ 
ces to Aristotle’s works are usually made by the Bekker 
edition of 1831. 

The list of Aristotle’s works alone testifies to the encyclopa¬ 
edic scope of his genius. He not only embraced all the fields of 
contemporary knowledge, but also gave their primary 
classification. It is to Aristotle that we owe the demarcation 
between philosophy and science, and between one science 
and another. The pre-Aristotelian philosophers did not 
distinguish between individual subjects and treated the whole 
field of knowledge as one domain. True, they divided their 
material into separate sections in order to construct after 
wards a single philosophical system, but they did not do so 
consciously on a definite principle. 1 

Aristotle classifies all knowledge on the principles of 
purpose and subject. According to this classification, knowl¬ 
edge can be either theoretical pursued for its own sake, or 
practical instrumental in ruling society, or creative intended 
to bring material benefits and help realise the ideal of beauty. 
Theoretical knowledge includes philosophy, mathematics, and 
physics; practical knowledge —ethics, economics, and politics; 
creative knowledge —poetics, rhetorics, and the arts or skills 
( techne). The necessary preliminary to all sciences is logic 
understood by Aristotle.as their common method or instru¬ 
ment (organon) and therefore not included by him in the fo¬ 
regoing classification. This scheme naturally suggests logic as 
the starting point for exposition of Aristotle’s philosophical 
system. 

14. Logic and Scientific Method 

Aristotle is the universally recognised founder of formal 
logic 2 or the science of correct thinking which he called 
analytics. His exposition was so exhaustive and well reasoned 

1 The only exception appears to be the philosophy of Democritus. 
However, though the names of his numerous works attest to its obvious 
differentiation, the fragmentary nature of the great atomist’s heritage 
makes it impossible to trace out the guiding principles of his classification. 

2 The term “logic” was put into circulation some five hundred years 
■Utcr Aristotle's time by his commentator Alexander of Aphrodisias. 








that in its special field logic had remained practically un 
changed till the nineteenth century and, according to Kant, 
“has not been able to advance a single step and is thus to 
all appearance a closed and completed body of doctrine.” 1 
Indeed, Aristotle succeeded in developing a paradigm of lo¬ 
gical investigations that held on for over two thousand years 
and was challenged only after the application of dialectics 
and mathematical methods in this field of knowledge. 

The sequence of Aristotle’s logical works listed above 
in the order of their complexity reflects the didactic structure 
of logic which is traditionally divided into three departments: 
concepts, propositions and inferences. The categories deal 
with unrelated single words or terms which, according to 
Aristotle, fall into ten classes or categories (from kategoreo 
which means to harangue, assert). Aristotle enumerates ten 
categories which seem to cover various aspects of being: 
substance, quantity, quality, relation, place, time, position, 
state, action or affection (see Categ. lb-2a). This classification 
must have been regarded by Aristotle as but a tentative one, 
since in Metaphysics he either reduced the number of 
categories to three (substance, quality and relations-see 
XIV, 2, 1089b) or included the last four under the heading of 
motion. 

One can hardly proceed to the analysis of categories 
without understanding their nature. Were they conceived by 
Aristotle as classes of being, forms of thought or merely as 
linguistic elements, names? Each of these alternatives 
advanced in historico-philosophical literature was not 
unfounded as it reflected one of the aspects of Aristotle’s 
categories (it is not accidental therefore that the discussions 
of the proposed interpretations were never confined within the 
province of pure logic). The truth is that Aristotle himself 
made no distinction between them as his doctrine sprang from 
the study of different modes of one and the same being. In 
his eyes, the categories could only be true to the extent to 
which they reflected them, i.e. represented a combination of 
the ontological, logical and linguistic aspects of reality. 
Their separation was a matter of distant future. 

The first in the list of categories is substance (oysia) 
which stands apart from the rest. It is, according to Aristotle, 
the individual: “Substance, in the truest and primary and 
most definite sense of the word, is that which is neither 

' Kanl. Kritik der reinen Vernunft, 2 Auflagp. Higa, 1787. S. VIII. 






predicable of a subject nor present in a subject; for instance, 
the individual man or horse” (Categ. 5, 2a). Individual 
things as subjects may have various determinations as 
their predicates, e.g. Smith is a man, the horse is white, 
etc. Aristotle’s conception of substance, i.e. true reality 
seems paradoxical, since both for him and Plato reality can 
only be grasped by thought which deals with the universal 
and not individual. Indeed, concrete objects are in constant 
flux of birth and decay, whereas substance is immutable and 
everlasting and therefore open only to the mind. 

Firmly holding on to the sensual world, but being unable 
to solve the dialectical contradiction of the individual and the 
universal, Aristotle posits, by way of compromise, secondary 
substances — genera and species, i.e. universals deriving 
their existence from individuals as independent primary 
substances. Thus the category of substance on the ontological 
side acquires the most general character denoting all 
independently existing things, and on the logical side, 
reflecting the relations within the hierarchy of the individual, 
the particular and the universal, occupies simultaneously 
the uppermost and the lowermost positions' including both 
the genera and the individuals. 

The Categories is presumably one of Aristotle’s early works 
written in the initial period in the Lyceum. Having divined 
and, in fact, expressed the dialectics of the individual, 
the particular and the universal in the “primary substances”, 
Aristotle failed to develop his brilliant conjecture into 
a consistent theory and later revised his views coming to 
regard the universals (genera and species, i.e. substances) 
as forms ( morphe, idea), i.e. as conceptual characteristics 
inherent in individual objects. “By form I mean the essence of 
each thing and its primary substance,” writes Aristotle in 
Metaphysics (VII, 7, 1032b). Though this definition 

apparently asserts the identity of the form or essence with 
independently existing individuals (ibid., VI, 6, 1031b), the 
Platonist tradition weighing heavily on Aristotle caused him 
to turn to the universal, the “form” or “idea” as the “essence 
of being.” On the one hand, he is firmly convinced that the 
only reality is the individual which alone can be called the 
substance and essence of being. On the other hand, each 
individual is a compound of form and matter and therefore 

1 Cf. Porphyry's Tree discussed later. 







cannot be substance and essence which must be simple. 
Aristotle, accoding to Lenin, “gets into a muddle precisely 
over the dialectics of the universal and the particular, of 
concept and sensation, etc., of essence and phenomenon, etc.” 1 

In On Interpretation Aristotle turns to propositions 
consisting of terms and stating different relations between 
the subject and the predicate which may be true or false 
(Socrates is sitting, the man is running). Depending on 
quantity (universal and particular) and quality (affirmative 
and negative), propositions (premises) fall into four types: 
A universal affirmative (all S are P), I -particular 
affirmative (some S are P), E —universal negative (none of 
S is P), and 0—particular negative (some S are not P). The 
relations between the four types of premises are graphically 
illustrated by the so-called square of opposition proposed 
in the sixteenth century as a mnemonic device by Julius 
Pacius, translator and commentator of Aristotle. 



Discussing the modality of propositions, Aristotle divides 
them into necessary (apodeictic), possible (problematic) and 
real (assertoric) and proceeds to the analysis of their logical 
relations within the framework of inference. 

The relations between propositions (judgements) are 
determined by the principles or laws of thinking: the law of 
identity, according to which every concept must be used in 
reasoning in the same meaning (A=A), the law of, 
non-contradiction, according to which two propositions 
negating each other cannot be simultaneously true (A4= 
non-A) and the law of the excluded middle, according 
to which either A or non-A is true and no middle is possible. 

V.I. Lenin. “Conspectus of Aristotle’s Book Metaphysics ", Collected 
Works, Vol. 38, p. 367. 






Hence, in a discourse terms and propositions must not 
contradict one another, the truth of an affirmative proposition 
is the falsity of the negative one, etc. These principles 
constitute the foundation of inference or reasoning from 
premises presented by Aristotle in the form of a syllogistic 
system. 

A detailed analysis of syllogism is given by Aristotle in 
the Prior Analytics opening up with this definition: “A syl 
logism is discourse in which, certain things being stated, 
something other than what is stated follows of necessity 
from their being so” (Arist. Anal. pr. I, 1, 24b). Thus, from 
the statements “All men are mortal” and “Socrates is a man” 
follows of necessity that Socrates is mortal. 

Aristotle distinguished three figures of syllogism (the 
fourth figure was added by his followers), each including 16 
moods. In his eyes only the first-figure syllogisms were perfect 
and only four moods of them were correct. The syllogisms 
of the second and third figures were regarded by him as 
“imperfect” since their conclusions are not valid for every 
case. 1 

In a syllogism as a form of reasoning the two extreme 
terms (S and P) are related to each other through the agency 
of the middle term (M) common to both premises. If there 
is no middle term or if it is used in different meanings 
(four-term fallacy), the syllogism breaks up. It expresses the 
axiom known as dictum de omni et nullo (L): whatever is 
affirmed (denied) of an entire class may be affirmed (denied) 
of any object included in this class. We do not propose to go 
into syllogistic which is expounded in detail in any manual of 
logic, yet it is worth noting that syllogism is essentially 
a method of unfolding the knowledge we already possess: the 
content of the conclusion is implicit in the premises. There¬ 
fore, syllogism cannot be identified with demonstration in 
general. Aristotle himself was not unaware of the possibility 
of direct inference by converting a premise: from the 
statement “some politicians are liars” we infer “some liars are 
politicians.” He also wrote about the so-called dialectical 

1 According to Aristotle, the perfect syllogism consists of a major 
premise, a minor premise and a conclusion containing three terms which 
are so related to one another that the last is contained in the middle as in a 
whole, and the middle is either contained in, or excluded from, the first as in 
or from a whole” (Anal. pr. 1. 3. 25b). Its four moods are the following: 
\1aP-SaM = SaP(Barbara); MeP-SaM = SeP(Celarent); MaP-SiM = SiP 
(Darii); and MeP-SiM = SoP(Ferio). 




syllogism describing it as a procedure “whereby w r e shall 
be able to reason from opinions that are generally accepted 
about every problem propounded to us, and also shall 
ourselves, when standing up to an argument, avoid saying 
anything that will obstruct us” (Arist. Top. I, 1, 100a). 

This method is the subject of the Topics, i.e. arguments 
used in a theoretical debate. The treatise describing more 
than 300 “topics” was intended as a reference book to be kept 
close at hand in an argument. Analysing the pattern of Plato’s 
dialogues and formulating the “topics,” Aristotle in fact 
intended to develop a method of reasoning not only from apo- 
deictic, but also from possible propositions conforming to 
currently held opinions. The Topics teaches a disputant to 
ascend from “verisimilar” to “true and primary” things 
“which are believed on the strength not of anything else but 
of themselves” (Arist. Top. 1, 1, 10()b). This aim, according to 
Aristotle, can be achieved through the use of various “topics.” 
For instance, the topics pertaining to polysemy are instru¬ 
mental in attaining the truth if different words are synony¬ 
mous, and misleading if the words are homonymous. Thus 
medicine can be defined both as the knowledge of health (in 
accordance with its purpose) and as the knowledge of the 
correct mode of life (in accordance with the means used to 
achieve a state of health). On the other hand, the use of the 
word "bat” as a mammal and a wooden implement in one and 
the same argument is bound to lead to confusion. 1 

Alongside the examination of individual “topics,” Aristotle 
develops their system showing that a dialogue must include 
five main components: (1) statement of a problem; (2) means 
for ensuring correct inference, such as the rules for adoption 
of premises, analysis of different meanings of each term, 
detection of resemblances and differences; Q) rules of 
inference —inductive (from the individual to the universal) 
or syllogistic; (4) interrogator’s strategy; (5) respondent’s 
strategy. 

The “dialectical” (dialogical) method is regarded by 
Aristotle as the way to the first principles of every science. 
In fact, like all Aristotelian logic, it is a theory of 
demonstration by reasoning upwards, to certain basic proposi¬ 
tions, or downwards, by reasoning from them. These are 

1 See W. K. C. Guthrie, Vol. VI. p. 205. Aristotle's own example of 
homonymy is xA-ets which meant both the key of a door and the 
shoulder-blade. 

210 








regarded as self-evident or axiomatic, applicable to special 
sciences and to knowledge in general. There can be no such 
thing as the logic of discovery. The undemonstrable prior 
truths lie outside the province of logic. They fall within the 
scope of “first philosophy” (metaphysics) and are grasped by 
the mind which comprehends the essence of things, their 
form and substance. 

Characteristically, even induction is regarded by Aristotle 
as demonstration of a general thesis, as the advance from 
particulars to universals: it is a specific syllogism in which the 
major premise (the universal) is demonstrated from the minor 
premise (premises). Unlike the conventional syllogism in 
which we infer the mortality of Socrates from the mortality of 
all men, in induction we infer the mortality of man (men) 
from the mortality of Socrates, Plato, Callicles. Strictly 
speaking, there is no inference in the proper sense of the 
word, as we cannot examine every human being and state 
that all of them are mortal. This is merely a restatement 
of the general thesis. An apodeictic general statement can 
only be provided by so-called perfect induction in which every 
relevant individual is subjected to examination. Needless to 
say, inductive arguments used in actual debate are very far 
from this ideal. 

The closing section of Aristotle’s logic is an analysis 
of logical errors committed by man deliberately or uninten 
tionally. In his last logical treatise called On Sophistic 
Refutations and sometimes regarded as the last (ninth) book 
of the Topics, the Stagirite shows that all fallacies are in fact 
nothing but syllogistic errors. These are divided into verbal 
errors (ambiguity in terms or homonymy and ambiguity in 
grammatical construction or amphiboly; incorrect composi¬ 
tion or divisions of propositions, wrong accentuation and 
incorrect substitution of grammatical forms) and logical 
errors (confusing the accidental with the essential or the 
absolute with the relative, arguing erroneously from a general 
rule to a particular case or vice versa, a fallacy of the 
consequent or arguing from a consequent to its condition, 
arguing in a circle, a fallacy of incorrectly assuming an 
antecedent as the cause of a consequent, i.e. post hoc ergo 
propter hoc, a fallacy of many questions wherein several 
questions are incorrectly combined in one). 

The classical system of Aristotelian logic outlined above 
came into being as a theoretical descipline and was used for 


217 







didactic purposes for more than two thousand years. It repre 
serited the forms of thought in a definite hierarchical structure 
which was an objective result of the historical process of their 
cognition. However, owing to the dialectics of the logical and 
the historical, a logical presentation of the results of a deve¬ 
lopment is of necessity the reverse of the actual process. 
Historically, the inquiry into the methodology of scientific 
thinking started from the analysis of Plato’s dialogical 
discourse (Topics), proceeded to the abstract forms of 
inference ( Analytics) and concluded with judgements or 
propositions (On Interpretation) and terms or concepts 
(Categories). 

This explains why the Categories should be regarded as the 
last logical and the first “metaphysical” treatise. The concepts 
examined there are indeed congenial to the “principles 
and causes” that are the object of Aristotle’s “first philo¬ 
sophy.” 

15. First Philosophy. The Doctrine of First 
Principles and Causes of Being and Knowledge 

The first philosophy as a science concerned with the prima¬ 
ry principles and causes of being was expounded by Aristotle 
in a fundamental work that was later called Metaphysics.' 
As time went on, metaphysics came to denote the doctrine 
of transempirical, supra-sensible principles of reality as 
opposed to physics dealing with the manifestation of these 
principles in the world of sensible objects. 

Comparing the first philosophy with other disciplines, 
Aristotle wrote that the “physicist” concerns himself with all 
the active and passive properties of bodies, the mathematician 
deals with them as inseparable from bodies by an effort of 
abstraction, and the First Philosopher or metaphysician 
studies them “where they are separate both in fact and in 
thought” (De an. I, 1, 403b). This statement seems to have a 
Platonic ring and suggests the conception of metaphysical 
properties as principles and causes divorced from physical 
objects and therefore essentially identical with incorporeal 
Ideas. Such a conclusion, however, would be an oversimplifi 
cation of Aristotle’s views. 

As we have seen earlier, Plato understood mathematical 

' The work owes its name to Aristotle’s commentator Andronicus of 
Rhodes (first century B.C.) who placed it in his edition after the works on 
nature under the heading Meta to phyxika. 


218 







objects or numbers as separable and in fact separated from 
matter and the material world. In contrast with his teacher, 
Aristotle conceived them as properties belonging to bodies 
but separable from them “by an effort of abstraction.” This is 
a different view incompatible with the Pythagorean and 
Platonic conceptions of numbers as Ideas separate from bodies 
and of Ideas as numbers. Plato’s doctrine was in fact the 
only rational explanation of the relationship between Ideas 
and material objects, and Aristotle’s departure from it was 
a challenge to one of the basic tenets of Platonism. 

According to Aristotle, the objects of the first philosophy 
have no existence outside the sensible world; yet they do exist 
in it and can be thought of both as inseparable and as separate 
from bodies. Their detection and investigation call for greater 
mental efforts and a higher degree of abstraction than are 
needed in purely mathematical research. 

The Metaphysics in its traditional form 1 starts with a defini¬ 
tion of philosophy (wisdom) and proceeds to a critical analy¬ 
sis of previous doctrines, its aim being to pave the way for 
Aristotle’s own conceptions and give them preliminary sub¬ 
stantiation. In a brief historical survey Aristotle points out 
that the first philosophers considered matter (hyle) as the 
primary cause of all things, whereas Empedocles and Anaxa¬ 
goras introduced the efficient cause which in Anaxagoras 
assumed the form of Reason “as the cause of order and of all 
arrangement” (Met, I, 3, 984b). After that the Pythagoreans 
evolved the concept of cause as “substance and essence of 
being” by stating “that finitude and infinity were not attribu¬ 
tes..., but that infinity itself and unity itself were the 
substance of the things of which they are predicated” and 
that therefore “number was the substance of all things” (ibid., 
I, 5, 987a). Finally, to Plato philosophy owes the concept 
of the formal and final causes: “Plato ... held that the problem 
applied not to sensible things, but to entities of another kind — 
for this reason, that the common definition could not be a 
definition of any sensible thing, as they were always changing. 

1 The entire work consists of separate treatises (books) written or re 
corded at different times and contains numerous repetitions. According to 
Werner Jaeger, the Metaphysics in a coherent form would include books I 
(chapters 1-7), 111, IV, VI. VII. VIII, IX, XIII. X and XII (less 
chapter 8). All other books and chapters are repetitive. An interesting 
attempt to reconstruct the Metaphysics was also undertaken by Adolf Lasson 
(see Aristoleles, Metaphysik. Ins Deutsche ubertragen von Adolf Lasson, 
Diederichs. Jena. 1907). 


219 








Things of this other sort, then, he called Ideas, and sensible 
things, he said, were all named after these, and in virtue of a 
relation to these; for the many existed by participation in the 
Ideas that have the same name as they...” (ibid., I, 6, 987b). 
It is at this point, however, that Aristotle’s reaction against 
Plato appears at its strongest. His criticism of the theory of 
Ideas, which was to a certain extent the former Platonist’s 
self-criticism is mainly unfolded in chapters 4 and 5 of 
Book XIII. 

Aristotle’s objections to the doctrine of Ideas were as 
follows: (1) It merely doubled the sensible world without 
explaining it as if a greater number of entities were easier 
to comprehend than a smaller one. (2) None of the arguments 
for the existence of Ideas could achieve its end. (3) To explain 
the relation of the ideas to the sensibles one needed an inter 
mediary, so that between man in general and an individual 
there was to be the “third man,” just as between man and a 
Greek, a Greek and Plato, and so on ad infinitum. (4) Motion¬ 
less Ideas alleged to be causes could not effect motion or any 
change in the sensibles, i.e. provide the effective force in cau¬ 
sality. (5) The relation between an object and an Idea 
described as communion, participation or presence “is empty 
talk and poetic metaphor.” (6) In general, the essence or Idea 
of a thing cannot be separate from the thing itself: “It would 
seem impossible that substance and that whose substance it is 
exist apart” (Met. XIII, 5, 1079b). Similar objections were 
raised by Aristotle against the Pythagorean notion of mathe¬ 
matical objects allegedly having a separate existence from 
material things: “The objects of mathematics are not substan¬ 
ces in a higher degree than bodies are, and ... they are not 
prior to sensibles in being, but only in definition” (ibid., XIII, 
3, 1077b). 

Aristotle starts unfolding his doctrine of causes with a state¬ 
ment of the law of non contradiction which in the Metaphysics 
turns into the foundation of being. This “most certain of all 
axioms” says: “The same attribute cannot at the same time 
belong and not belong to the same subject and in the same 
respect” (Arist. Met. IV, 3, 1005b). Again, “It is impossible 
for any one to believe the same things to be and not to be, as 
some think Heraclitus says” (ibid., p. 737). 

In contrast to Heraclitus, Aristotle asserts that a thing can¬ 
not be simultaneously the same and not the same, exist and 
not exist since it is only the stable, the permanent that lends 


220 









itself to a definition. Hence, Aristotle not only substitutes 
formal logic for dialectics, but declares all reality to be non- 
contradictory and therefore essentially immutable. The 
upshot is that Aristotle’s “metaphysics” turns into a doctrine 
of the immutable essence of the world different from the world 
itself. Nevertheless, the Stagirite cannot close his eyes to the 
movement and changefulness of all things. Attempting to 
explain them, he gets entangled in a host of contradictions. 

Aristotle’s main hitch was the dialectics of the univer¬ 
sal and the particular. His criticism of Plato’s theory of Ideas 
testifies to an inclination to regard individual things as the 
only reality and this is exactly how he solved the problem of 
the “primary substance” in the Categories. From this view¬ 
port, the “secondary substance,” i.e. the universal should 
be conceived as one throughout the many, but not apart 
from the many. Yet the Stagirite inherited from Plato the 
conviction that without the universal, knowledge is im¬ 
possible. Being the object of knowledge, the universal as such 
becomes for Aristotle something primary and more authentic 
than the individual, and this idea runs right through his 
doctrine of causes. 

According to the Stagirite, “causes are spoken in four 
senses. In one of these we mean the substance, i.e. the 
essence (for the ‘why’ is reducible finally to the definition, and 
the ultimate ‘why’ as a cause and principle); in another the 
matter of substratum, in a third the source of the change, and 
in a fourth the cause opposed to this, the purpose and the good 
(for this is the end of all generation and change)” (Met. I. 3, 
983a). Hence, all causes can be classified, using Aristotle’s 
later terminology, under four headings: formal, material, 
efficient, and final. They have been described separately by 
previous philosophers and constitute the nucleus of Aristotle’s 
first philosophy. 

In his analysis of causes Aristotle proceeds from the pattern 
of human activity since artificial products provide a good il¬ 
lustration of all the four causes. Take, for instance, the beauti 
ful pot referred to by Socrates in his conversation with 
Hippias. Its formal cause is the shape, the external appearance 
which gives it a definite configuration; it is a concept without 
which the potter will not be able to manufacture it. The 
material cause of the pot is clay, a passive substratum which 
is a pot in potency. Its efficient cause is the potter who molded 
the pot to the required shape in accordance with its concept or 




form. Lastly, its final cause is the purpose of the pot, its goal 
to be a vessel suitable for various uses. 

Proceeding from the pattern of human activity as a univer¬ 
sal model, Aristotle applies it to the world at large and ex¬ 
plains natural phenomena in terms of the self-realisation of 
forms. Significantly, his favourite simile is that of physician 
and nature: just as the physician is the efficient cause of 
health in a sick man, so nature always acts with an eye to the 
best and is its own doctor. 

A question naturally arises, which of the causes is to be 
regarded as primary. 

Aristotle points out that the four causes can be reduced 
to two —Form and Matter, since the formal, efficient and 
final causes tend to coalesce in one. Matter or the material 
cause cannot be primary, as it is inert, shapeless and liable to 
assume any form that may enter into it thus serving merely as 
the material of individual objects. Nor can a separate body 
representing a unity of form and matter be regarded as 
primary in view of its composite character. This leaves Form 
as the sole pretender to the title of primary cause or essence of 
being which is promptly conferred upon it by Aristotle. 
Having thus set out to overcome Plato’s “naive” theory of 
Ideas, the Stagirite lands in the same idealist quagmire with 
but a slightly modified theory: his primary forms conceived 
as the concept or “essence” of things are practically as 
immutable, eternal and universal as the Ideas of his former 
master. 

Aristotle reasons thus: everything that comes to be arises 
from something due to some motive force shaping it on a 
certain model. For instance, a bronze ball is made of bronze. 
Yet to make a bronze ball does not mean to make the form of 
the “spherical” which must pre-exist in order to be the cause 
of the ball: “Obviously then the form also, or whatever we 
ought to call the shape present in the sensible thing, is not 
produced, nor is there any production of it, nor is the 
essence produced; for this is that which is made to be in 
something else [the substratum, matter] either by art or by 
nature or by some faculty” (Met. VII, 8, 1033b). Nor does 
matter as the material of all things come into being it is 
eternal, changing from one state to another under the effect of 
lhe form. 

Despite Aristotle’s own contention that there is no matter 
without form nor form without matter, he now comes out with 



a concept of prime matter unrelated to forms, and a prime 
form (“form of forms”) unrelated to matter. His definition of 
prime matter runs thus: “By matter I mean that which in 
itself is neither a particular thing nor of a certain quantity nor 
assigned to any other of the categories by which being is deter 
mined” (Met. VII, 3, 1029a). 

This categorical statement brings Aristotle face to face with 
the old Eleatic problem: if true Being (i.e. matter and form) 
is ungenerated, how are we to account for the origin, develop¬ 
ment and decay of individual objects? Aristotle’s first answer 
was that they owed their genesis to the formation of matter, 
the union, as it were, of form and matter. However, if matter 
and form (except the “prime matter” and the “form of 
forms”) do not exist separately, how can they come together? 
In order to avoid the Parmenidian solution of the problem 
denying the reality of the changeful sensible world, Aristotle 
has but one way out —to introduce two new important notions: 
potentiality ( dynamis , potentia) and actuality (energeia, 
act). 

The notions of potential and actual being are closely linked 
by Aristotle with the notions of matter and form. Matter is 
conceived as potentiality since it is not what it can be. By 
contrast, form is identified with actuality. Describing their 
relationship, Aristotle expounds a peculiar dialectics of matter 
and form, potentiality and actuality. With the exception of 
“prime matter,” no material can be conceived as absolutely 
unformed, but only as a compound of matter and form 
performing at one and the same time different functions in 
relation to other compounds. For instance, brick being the 
form for clay is simultaneously the matter for a house built 
from brick. Therefore brick is potentially a house and clay is 
potentially brick. Brick is the actuality of clay, and a house is 
the actuality of brick. Again, the actuality of a child (form) is 
the potentiality of a man (matter), etc. Any change is thus 
the actualisation of potency. 

Aristotle’s doctrine of potentiality and actuality was an im¬ 
portant advance in philosophy. First, it provided a rational 
explanation of the phenomenon of genesis. Things do not 
come into being “from nothing,” but originate as the actuali¬ 
sation of potency which is no longer conceived as “everything 
from everything,” i.e. from a mechanical combination of ma¬ 
terial particles, such as homoeomers, roots or atoms. Second, 
it gave a more realistic account of the source of motion. 


.J.v } 






retrieving it from the Platonic supra-sensuous world and 
bringing it back to earth as one of the aspects of nature. Final¬ 
ly, it placed the four causes in a new perspective enabling 
them, due to the interpretation of motion as actualisation, to 
be viewed as dynamic forces, different from what they looked 
like in the analysis of matter and form. 

It should be noted that Aristotle’s interpretation of form as 
actuality evidently intended as elaboration and substantiation 
of his doctrine of causes led in fact to a duplication of causal 
relations and tautology of terms. Indeed, the interpretation of 
form as actuality implies that the cause of one or another phe¬ 
nomenon is different from the phenomenon itself. Yet if a 
change is understood as transition from potency to actuality 
due to the actuality of form, it cannot involve any new ele¬ 
ments since the form itself pre-exists and is not subject to any 
alteration. Hence the proverbial hollowness of medieval 
pseudo-Aristotelian scholasticism. 

Aristotle’s first philosophy culminates in a concept of God, 
a natural corollary to his teleological conviction that nature 
makes nothing without a purpose and that everything in the 
world converges towards one goal. Positing God as the first 
principle and cause of the universe, the Stagirite calls him the 
“form of forms” when he speaks of the matter-form relation¬ 
ship, the “prime mover” or “unmoved mover” 1 when he 
describes motion and change, and the “thought of thought” 2 
when he refers to his activity. 

The concept of Unmoved Mover is internally contradictory. 
As we have seen earlier, Aristotle himself censured Plato 
for assuming unmoved Ideas as the source of motion. 
Confronted with the same problem, the Stagirite declares God 
as the Prime Mover to be the goal of the universe: perfect 
reality or the Good is at the same time the ultimate goal 
of the entire universe and every individual thing in it. This 
is nothing but the same idealistic teleology, slightly modified: 
what was with Plato the transcendent, extralimital goal 
residing in the intelligible world becomes the immanent goal 
of the world of nature. 

This teleology, as we have already seen, derived from 
\ristotle’s tendency, basically anthropomorphic, to project 


1 The Prime Mover must move without being moved, otherwise we 
should have to assume another mover that moves it, and so on ad infinitum. 

2 tiod’s activity, according to Aristotle, is thought, and he must think 
only of what is the highest, i.e. of himself, wherein lies his bliss. 


224 







the pattern of human activity onto causal relationships in na 
ture. To this must be added the crucial change he introduced 
in the traditional understanding of matter: it is no longer 
the living and eternally mutable “physis” of the first *phi 
losophers with its own immanent source of motion, but an 
inert, motionless and indeterminate mass. This lifeless 
concept dominated the philosophers’ minds for two thousand 
years and was largely accountable for inconsistencies of 
materialism and advantages of the idealistic world outlook. It 
was all the more erroneous that matter was presented not only 
as an unformed substratum, a mere potentiality, but as. a 
source of natural necessity and chance restricting the purpose- 
oriented activity of man and nature. In other words, matter 
came to be regarded as a source of all kinds of imperfection in 
the world, and this, in turn, caused natural processes 
to be appraised in ethical terms and led to a further distortion 
of the world’s picture. 

It should be noted, however, that Aristotle’s own concept 
of matter as potentiality allowed for a considerable freedom 
of interpretation and was by no means as lean and lifeless 
as it was made later by his scholastic commentators. In point 
of fact, Aristotle understood potency not only as the ability 
to yield to a form, but also as resistance to alien influence 
and therefore as a principle of individuality of things: “If a 
thing exists in potency, it is not the potency of anything and 
everything. Different things come from different things” 
(Met. 1069b 28). Hence, a thing is not indifferent to the agent 
which acts upon it and itself possesses a motive principle, an 
internal source of motion, suffering change only from a suit¬ 
able external agent. 

Here we again see. the living germs of dialectics, this 
time in the concepts of matter and form, potentiality and ac¬ 
tuality. Aristotle wavers between idealism and materialism on 
a number of issues, but the idealist trend is generally 
prevalent. 

16. Physics. World, Life and Man 

In contrast with Aristotle’s “first philosophy” which 
treats of immutable and motionless substances, the object of 
his natural philosophy or physics is moving and changing bo¬ 
dies. These, according to Aristotle, “present a feature in which 
they differ from things which are not constituted by nature. 
Kach of them has within itself a principle of motion and of 


1 


22 r i 






stationariness (in respect of place, or of growth and decrease, 
or by way of alteration)” (Phys. II, 1, 192b). Physics is not 
yet separated from the first philosophy. In books I and II of 
the Physics Aristotle discusses the four causes of all being 
known to us from his Metaphysics, and in book VIII, the last 
one, returns to the problem of god as the prime mover which, 
according to Aristotle, is the ultimate cause of motion in the 
universe. The problems of physics in the modern sense of the 
word are discussed by him in such special scientific treatises 
as the Meteorologica, Problems, and others. 

The concept of motion comes to the foreground only in 
book III where Aristotle defines it as “entelechy,” 1 i.e. as 
“the fulfilment of what is potential when it is already 
fully real and operates not as itself but a movable, that is 
motion” (Phys. Ill, 1, 201a) and as “the fulfilment of this 
potentiality, and by the action of that which has the power 
of causing motion” (ibid., 202a). Entelechy in Aristotle is 
essentially identical with actuality (energeia) except that it 
suggests greater emphasis on the completion of an end direct¬ 
ed process. Paraphrasing Aristotle, we may therefore define 
entelechy as possibility made real or potentiality actualised. 

In Aristotle’s eyes, things exist either as an entelechy, 
i.e. as something actualised and completed, or as a potency, 
i.e. as a possibility, or as a potency and an entelechy simul¬ 
taneously. It is this latter relationship where the problem of 
motion steps in. Indeed, a moving body exhibits both a capa 
city for change and a tendency towards completion which is 
its inherent goal and motive force. Thus any change, accord¬ 
ing to Aristotle, implies the ability to undergo it, the goal 
towards which the change is directed, and the entelechy as the 
actualisation of the goal immanent in the body itself. Using 
a cybernetic term, entelechy can be defined as the 
“programme” of change. The goal and the “programme” of an 
artistic creation are outside the object itself existing in the 
mind of the artist and representing the pattern and the end of 
his activity, whereas natural objects possess them inherently 
to the extent to which they carry in themselves their source of 
motion, i.e. are capable of self movement. Developing his 


1 "Entelechy" derives from the Greek to enteles echein which means 
“to possess the peifect, the complete" or, in other words, to he endowed with 
an immanent purpose. So a child as a man in potency carries in itself its 
entelechy, man in actuality. Aristotle often makes no distinction between 
energy and entelechy using them as full synonyms. 


226 













doctrine of entelechy, Aristotle strove to take full account of 
the previous philosophical development and preserve the idea 
of spontaneous movement. However, having deprived the 
material cause or “matter” of the capacity for spontaneous 
movement, he was compelled to revise the notion of nature 
itself by distinguishing the static, inert and indeterminate 
element, i.e. the material cause, from the dynamic and 
determining element, i.e. the form. In contrast with Plato who 
assigned them to different “kingdoms,” those of being or Ideas 
and not-being or Matter, the Stagirite referred them both to 
“nature” which therefore retained its capacity for self 
movement but owed it entirely to its ideal immanent force, 
entelechy, responsible for the purposiveness of natural 
processes. Hence Aristotle’s idealism, particularly in 
the conception of the “soul” as the “principle of 
motion.” 

Aristotle distinguished four kinds of change: (1) becom¬ 
ing and perishing; (2) qualitative change, i.e. the change of 
a property; (3) quantitative change, i.e. increase and decrease 
(or, rather, growth or diminution since Aristotle mainly took 
his examples from biology); (4) locomotion, i.e. change of 
place. By motion proper he understood changes (2), (3) and 
(4), regarding (1) rather as passing of one thing into 
another: “In respect of Substance there is no motion, because 
Substance has no contrary among things that are” (Arist. 
Phys. V, 2, 225b). Generation and decay understood as 
motion would be coming into being from nothing and fading 
back into nothing, which is impossible. 

The analysis of change (1) brings Aristotle to the old 
paradox of becoming, resolved by him, as we have already 
seen, by introducing the concepts of potentiality and actuali¬ 
ty: something arises only owing to the actuality inherent in 
the initial substance. Hence, becoming is always the perishing 
of something else, and perishing always the becoming of other 
(see De Caelo, I, 3). 

Understandably, the analysis of motion calls for a closer 
examination of the categories involved in the process of 
change: unlike quality and quantity which can be grasped in¬ 
tuitively, the category of place is subjected by Aristotle to a 
thorough scrutiny. Having rejected the concept of void main¬ 
tained by the atomists, he linked the notion of place with the 
notion of body and defined place as the boundary of a spaceous 
thing: “Place is coincident with the thing, for boundaries 


227 





are coincident with the bounded” (Fhys. IV, 4, 212a). This 
approach paved the way for the attributive understanding of 
space which came to be regarded not as a substance, but 
as an attribute of things. 

The problem of time is treated by Aristotle in a simi¬ 
lar manner except that he links it not with the existence of 
bodies, but with motion. Time is not the same as motion, but 
motion and time do not exist apart: “Time is just this— 
number of motion in respect of ‘before’ and ‘after’ ” (Phys. 
IV, 11, 219b). Whereas the place of the world is finite being 
limited by the firmament (which accounts for the possibility 
of absolute, i.e. relative to the “heaven,” movement and rest, 
as well as for the existence of the absolute top and bottom), 
time is infinite since, in contrast with particular processes 
possessing a limited “number of motion,” the universe is 
unique and eternal and its everlasting movement measured 
by the rotation of the firmament is circular locomotion as no 
other kind of movement can be continuous. 

Now, having defined time as number of motion, Aristotle 
directly links it with the concept of soul: “But if nothing but 
soul, or in soul reason, is qualified to count, there would not 
be time unless there were soul, but only that of which time is 
an attribute,” i.e. motion (ibid., IV, 14, 223a). So the mate¬ 
rialist understanding of number which does not exist, accord¬ 
ing to Aristotle, outside the mind leads the philosopher in a 
curious way to the idealistic conception of time regarded as an 
attribute of the soul, the cosmic principle and first cause of 
any motion in the world. 

On the other hand, understanding space (“place”) and time 
mainly in the attributive sense (as properties of matter and 
motion respectively) and relating them to each other, 
Aristotle simultaneously treats space which accommodates the 
unique and finite world as a kind of substance, i.e. as an 
independently existing receptacle of all material things. This 
dialectical approach was an important advance in the 
understanding of the complex nature of space and time. 

Much attention was devoted by Aristotle to the genesis 
of material bodies of different nature. His doctrine of genesis 
is based on the concept of “prime matter.” Characterised as 
“privation” (steresis) of form and pure potentiality, it is not 
to be understood as the absolute negation of all properties, 
because it retains the ability to be qualified by tfie approp¬ 
riate form and to change from opposite to opposite (forms 


228 






were conceived by Aristotle as pairs of opposites). 1 Owing to 
the basic opposites potentially inherent in matter, i.e. hot and 
cold, dry and moist, matter generates four elements: hot and 
dry combine into fire, hot and moist into air, cold and moist 
into water and cold and dry into earth. Each of the elements 
has its own “natural location.’’ “Fire and Air are forms of the 
body moving towards the ‘limit,’ while Earth and Water are 
forms of the body which moves towards the ‘centre.’ Fire and 
Earth, moreover, are extremes and purest: Water and Air, 
on the contrary, are intermediates and more like blends” 
(Arist. De gen. et Corr. II, 3, 330b-331a). 

Proceeding from the notion of “natural location,” Aris¬ 
totle attempts to account for the upward movement of fire 
(flame) and warm air on the one hand, and the downward 
movement of water and earth, on the other hand. This essen¬ 
tially tautological explanation (fire is the highest because its 
natural location is at the top) became a characteristic feature 
of later scholastic science and was intended to substantiate 
the geocentric doctrine of the world: the central or downmost 
position is occupied by the earth, then follow in succession 
water, air and fire. The fifth element, ether, is uncreated, in¬ 
destructible and subject to no change. It makes the substance 
of spheres which carry heavenly bodies, and of the bodies 
themselves. The outermost sphere is the heaven of stationary 
stars, then come the sun, the planets and the moon, one body 
per sphere. Since ether and its formations are eternal, their 
motion can only be circular as in it alone the beginning and 
the end coincide. 

Fire, air, water and earth make the sublunary world where 
more complex bodies are generated. Thus the elements com¬ 
bine into homoeomers which produce all other things. In 
contrast with the “physics” from Anaxagoras down to 
Democritus, Aristotle understands the genesis of complex 
bodies not as a mixing of their components, but as their real 
fusion. Moreover, he maintains that a natural body carrying 
within itself its “form” or “entelechy” is qualitatively 
different from its parts. Here, again, an attempt at a dialectical 
development of a concept, this time of genesis, results in its 
idealistic perversion: the irreducibility of a whole to the sum 
of its parts is ascribed to a mystical force allegedly residing in 

1 According to Aristotle, matter lends itself not to any, but only to 
a particular form that corresponds to its proper function. Hence his somewhat 
puzzling statement that steresis itself could be viewed as a form. 


229 








the whole. This general tendency traceable in the final 
analysis to the theoretical immaturity of Greek thought and 
its inability to express the objective contradictoriness of 
reality in a system of concepts is particularly conspicuous in 
Aristotle’s doctrine of soul. 

Turning to living creatures, Aristotle also treats them 
in terms of the matter-form relationship. The form which is 
the principle of an organism is called the soul, and its matter 
the body. More accurately, the soul is the first entelechy 
of an organic body (De an. II, 1, 412b), i.e. its first 
cause and motive force. According to Aristotle, natural bodies 
of plants and animals are instruments of the soul and exist for 
its sake (ibid., 415b), therefore living beings exhibit with 
utmost clarity the purpose-oriented activity of nature. In 
accordance with its functions, the soul may be nutritive or 
vegetative, capable of self-nourishment and reproduction of 
its kind, sensitive or animal possessing the capacity for 
sensation and motion, and rational characterised by the power 
of reason or thought and belonging only to man. The functions 
of the soul are ranked in a rising scale on the principle that 
a higher faculty and, accordingly, a higher soul cannot exist 
without the lower ones, but not they without it. 

Showing no special interest in plants (the title of the 
“father of botany” justly belongs to his pupil Theophrastus), 
Aristotle devoted much attention to the animal kingdom. He 
held that the animal body is composed of homoeomers and at¬ 
tached special importance to “flesh” regarding it as the seat of 
sensation (the function of nerves was not yet known to him). 
The direct carrier of the soul is pneuma understood as the 
source of natural heat in a living body. It is akin to ether 
and passes from father to child with the former’s semen. The 
master organ of pneuma, its focus and centre is the heart, 
producing blood from nutrients and supplying it to all bodily 
organs. Aristotle’s scientific heritage also includes a detailed 
classification of animals, a description of embryonic devel¬ 
opment, investigations into various methods of the gener¬ 
ation of animal life (spontaneous generation inclusive), 
etc. 

Being endowed with reason, man occupies a higher posi¬ 
tion in the ladder of life than other animals and, accordingly, 
has a more advanced soul and body. Their conformity to the 
unconscious teleology of nature, i.e. to the goal of completion 
and perfection, finds its expression in man’s erect carriage. 


230 








organs of work and speech, higher brain-to-body volume 
ratio, greater “living heat,” etc. 

Cognition in biological terms is conceived by Aristotle 
as the activity of the sensitive and rational soul. Sensation 
or perception (aistesis) is described as a change effected in 
the soul by the perceiving body. Sensation, according to Aris¬ 
totle, is a power of receiving form without matter, as wax 
receives the shape of a signet-ring without its material. 
Each sense can only perceive its special object (as colour 
is the special object of sight, and sound of hearing) in respect 
of which there can be no error. Common objects of sense, 
such as motion, rest, shape, etc. are perceived not by one, 
but by all senses. The “common sense” resulting from their 
interaction is not a simple sum of individual perceptions, but 
an act of the psyche which compares and differentiates indi¬ 
vidual perceptions, relates perceptions to their objects, com 
prehends the relation of a perception to the subject, i.e. to the 
perceiving individual, etc. The common sense deals with one 
and many, size, shape, type, rest and motion of objects. It 
can be true or false. 

Perceptions are the direct effect of sensible objects on the 
organs of sense. However, if the excitement in the organs 
caused by such effect does not die down after the objects are 
withdrawn bringing back their image, we have what Aristotle 
calls “phantasia” or imagination. If it retains or recovers the 
original perception, we have a memory image or a 
reminiscence. The functions of the sensitive soul, besides 
those mentioned above, also include sleep, pleasure or 
displeasure, desire and aversion, etc. The rational soul of 
human beings adds to them intellectual intuition (noys). 
The ability to think as potentiality precedes actual thinking 
which accounts for the common notion of the mind as a blank 
sheet filled with the records of the mind’s toil. Aristotle 
maintains that thinking is always attended by sensible images 
and therefore distinguishes two aspects of the mind, active 
and passive, or creative and receptive (see De an. Ill, 5, 
430a). The creative reason calls all things into being and “is a 
sort of positive state like light; for in a sense light makes 
potential colours into actual colours” (ibid.), whereas the 
receptive reason is acted on by the objects of thought and 
“becomes all things.” In other words, the receptive reason is 
matter and potentiality, and the creative reason is form, 
actuality and entelechy. 


231 







This leaves open one important question, that of the immor 
tality of soul. Aristotle leaves no doubt regarding the fate of 
the vegetative (nutritive) and animal (sensitive)-souls: they 
decompose together with the body. The receptive reason 
apparently perishes too. As regards the creative reason, 
he states explicitly that it is immortal and eternal. Are we to 
infer from this that the individual soul is immortal too? 
Aristotle evades the answer. On the one hand, the inability of 
the superior soul to exist without the inferior ones seems to 
point to its ultimate mortality. On the other hand, Aristotle 
asserts the possibility of the mind existing without the body 
and points out that the creative reason is the entelechy of its 
receptive counterpart, but not of the body: certain parts of the 
soul “may be separable because they are not the actualities of 
any body at all” (ibid., II, 1, 413a). And even more explicitly: 
“while the faculty of sensatmn is dependent upon the body, 
mind is separable from it” (ibid., Ill, 4, 429b). 

The obscurity of Aristotle’s doctrine of the creative reason 
and the sketchiness of his notes allowing for widely divergent 
interpretations gave rise to a long controversy that has run for 
many centuries without much appreciable result. However, 
the general trend of Aristotle’s thought appears to be suffici¬ 
ently lucid. Taking the concept of the eternal creative reason 
as a premise, Aristotle infers the existence of God or Divine 
Mind. His reasoning runs thus: “Without the soul the facul¬ 
ties of knowledge and sensation are potentially these objects, 
the one what is knowable, the other what is sensible. They 
must be either the things themselves or their forms. The for¬ 
mer alternative is of course impossible: it is not the stone 
which is present in the soul but its form. 

“It follows that the soul is analogous to the hand; for as the 
hand is a tool of tools, so the mind is the form of forms and 
sense the form of sensible things” (ibid., Ill, 8, 431b-432a). 

Hence, the creative reason whose object and content are 
forms alone is not only free and independent of real objects, 
but precedes them logically. It “creates” objects by thinking 
them. Similarly, the world is the creation of God as his 
thought. However, Aristotle’s God does not precede the world 
in time coexisting with it. It is separable from the world only 
in the sense in which the form (border) of a thing is separable 
from the thing itself. In fact, the eternity of the world implies 
this inseparability, since without it the world would cease to 
exist. 


232 








In “physical'' terms it means that god is the “prime un¬ 
moved mover.” We are bound to recognise its existence to 
avoid the infinite regression of causes (the cause of one 
phenomenon is the consequence of another that precedes it in 
time, and so on ad infinitum) which in Aristotle’s eyes is 
irrational. The prime mover is the cause of generation, 
perishing and eternal change of things. It consists, as it were, 
of two parts, one moving and stationary, the other movable 
and performing eternal circular motion. 

Hence, in the first philosophy and in physics God plays 
different parts and performs different functions, posing as 
the “form of forms” and the first cause in the former, and as 
the prime mover in the latter. In Aristotle’s concept it is 
obviously God which is predicated of the prime mover, but not 
vice versa: the universe is actuated by the prime mover which 
therefore deserves the name of god. The prime mover is the 
“god of Philosophers,” but not a popular deity; it is faceless 
and indifferent to man. 1 As Martin Heidegger was to say 
2300 years later, one could not kneel in prayer or make a 
sacrifice to such a god, nor hop and prance before him like 
king David before the ark... In Heidegger’s mouth these words 
sounded as a reproach to philosophers, yet for us they are a 
testimony to the superiority of philosophical thought disclos¬ 
ing, even in the context of the Aristotelian doctrine of the 
divine unmoved mover, the true source of religion and faith 
in god and thereby contributing to the collapse of the 
religious world outlook. 

The physical teaching of Aristotle abounding, as it was, 
in accurate and detailed descriptions of various natural 
phenomena did not show, even in his time, the best insight 
into their causes. Warning against the infinite regression in 
causal explanations and pointing out that “one must stop 
somewhere” (Met. 107a, 4), Aristotle himself thought of 
nothing better than to end up in the innate ideal cause or 
entelechy identical, in the world of nature, with the 
potentiality or tendency towards the realisation of the form 
inherent in every natural object. As a result, causal explana¬ 
tion became tautological: every object was conceived as the 
realisation of some potentiality essentially identical with the 
object in actuality. It is not fortuitous, therefore, that 


1 See W.K.C. Guthrie, The Greek Philosophers. From Thales to Aristotle, 
Harper, New York, 1975, pp. 10-11. 


233 









1 


Aristotle’s philosophy distorted by clericalism was made the 
theoretical basis of medieval scholasticism. In order to shatter 
the dictatorship of the Church over men’s minds it was 
necessary not only to abandon the obsolete physical views 
but, first and foremost, to develop a new paradigm of causal 
explanation. The result was that the Aristotelian explanation 
from “potentiality" gave way in modern science to the 
explanation from law. In contrast with Aristotle who regarded 
motion as the effect of a mover and rejected the possibility 
of movement which was not maintained by an external 
force, the scientist of the new epoch applied himself to the 
investigation of the laws of mechanical movement and 
promptly discovered that the effect of the action of an external 
force was accelerated motion. If a body is not acted on, it is 
either motionless or moves rectilinearly and uniformly. Hence 
the notion of inertia which brought about a revolution in the 
doctrine of mechanical movement. 

Both the first (metaphysics) and the second (physics) phi¬ 
losophies of Aristotle were rooted in the conviction that the 
form dominates over matter, the soul over the body, the mind 
over the senses and passions. This conviction carried to the so¬ 
cial sphere constituted the basis of Aristotle’s ethics and poli¬ 
tics which he treated under the heading of the philosophy of 
human life. 

17. Society. Ethics and Politics 

According to all Greek philosophers, Aristotle inclusive, the 
final goal of all human activities was the attainment of what 
is good for man. Proceeding from this general view in his ethi¬ 
cal doctrine, Aristotle declares that theses activities concerned 
with the highest and the noblest must be governed by reason. 
The purpose of human life is not enjoyment or happiness, but 
the fulfilment of the dictates of reason. However, Aristotle is 
fully aware of the duality of human activity, theoretical and 
practical. To be sure, “the act of contemplation is what is most 
pleasant and best” (Met. XII, 7, 1072b), but no man can sur¬ 
render himself wholly to contemplation as he cannot pursue 
theoretical studies without caring for the necessities of life. 
This approach accounts for a greater viability of Aristotelian 
ethics as compared with Plato’s impractical ideal of virtuous 
life. 

Happiness, according to Aristotle, can only be achieved in 


234 












a complete life. A child which is man only in potency cannot 
know it, as true happiness implies the fulfilment of man’s 
functions in accordance with moral virtues. This, in turn, de¬ 
mands certain external conditions. Poverty, illness and mis¬ 
fortune are not conducive to happiness which goes hand in 
hand with wealth, good fortune and bodily powers. Regarding 
the external conditions of life as “matter” and the good as the 
“form” (goal) of perfect life, Aristotle singles out internal 
dignity and virtue (arete) as the key element of a happy and 
blessed life. Happiness comes as a result of rational and moral 
activity which is the virtue and proper function of man. 
Hence, Aristotle’s solution to the classical problem of the 
relationship between pleasure and reason in a happy and 
virtuous life is based on a compromise: pleasure ensuing from 
rational, i.e. virtuous life is itself the good. 

The upshot of this theory is that goodness is not a tran 
scendent ideal in the manner of Plato and the Megarians, but 
a practical goal attainable in the sensible world. Aristotle’s 
concept of virtue, clearly more realistic than that of Plato, 
rests on the conviction that virtue is not an innate quality but 
rather a matter of habit. Contrary to Plato’s conviction that 
virtues could not be taught, Aristotle believed in potential vir¬ 
tues actualised by good habits and advanced a doctrine of the 
golden mean: “Virtue, then, is a state of character concerned 
with choice, lying in a mean, i.e. the mean relative to us, this 
being determined by a rational principle, and by that principle 
by which the man of practical wisdom would determine it. 
Now it is a mean between two vices, that which depends on ex 
cess and that which depends on defect” (Eth. II, 6, 1107a). 
This doctrine of virtue understood as the preservation of due 
measure and the avoidance of extremes was in fact rooted in 
the famous principle “nothing too much” that runs right 
through Greek ancient thought. 

Aristotle gives a detailed analysis of various virtuous mid 
dies and the corresponding extremes or vices. Speaking, for 
instance, of magnanimity, he contrasts it with conceit 
(excess) on the one hand, and with pusillanimity (deficien¬ 
cy), on the other. In like-manner, courage lies between reck¬ 
lessness and cowardice, liberality between prodigality and 
avarice, etc. 

Now, just as we distinguish between the non-rational 
(nutritive and sensitive) and rational souls, so all virtues be¬ 
ing acquired by the soul are divided into moral and intellectu- 


235 















al: “Virtue,then being of two kinds, intellectual and moral, in¬ 
tellectual virtue in the main owes both its birth and its growth 
to teaching (for which reason it requires experience and 
time), while moral virtue comes about as a result of habit, 
whence also its name ethike is one that is formed by a slight 
variation from the word ethos (habit)” (ibid., II, 1, 1103a). 
Moral virtues are essentially active. Indeed, we become just by 
acting justly, modest by acting modestly and courageous by 
acting courageously. Nevertheless, intellectual values 
(wisdom and good sense), though based on knowledge, are 
directed not towards knowledge itself, but towards good 
behaviour, practical deeds. Hence the definition of ethics as 
“practical philosophy.” 

Since a moral action should be governed by reason, it im 
plies a freedom of choice between good and evil: “It chooses or 
endures things because it is noble to do so, or because it is base 
not to do so” (Eth. Ill, 7, 1116a). Having brought in the no¬ 
tion of free choice (proairesis ), Aristotle turned on the first 
page of the history of the age-old philosophical controversy 
over the freedom of will. To be sure, the Stagirite has no doubt 
about man’s freedom in making a choice and therefore does 
not view the situation as in any way disputable, yet the pre¬ 
requisites for a philosophical problem are already there. 

Giving a detailed survey of virtues in the context of the 
communal life of ancient society, Aristotle focuses his 
attention on justice. He defines it as a mean between two 
extremes —breaking the law and partiality in the attitude to 
the equals: “The just is intermediate and the unjust is what 
violates the proportion; for the proportional is intermediate, 
and the just is proportional... This, then, is what the just is— 
the proportional; the unjust is that violates the proportion” 
(Eth. V, 2, 1131b). Now, since the law prescribes virtuous 
behaviour, e.g. courage in battle, justice is the highest virtue 
which covers all others. 

Comparing justice with the law and equality, Aristotle dis 
tinguishes two main varieties of justice —corrective and distri¬ 
butive. The aim of the former is to promote equality in 
exchange of goods belonging to individuals in accordance 
with the amount and quality of labour contained therein, 
whereas the latter is employed in the distribution of common 
funds and other benefits in accordance with the social worth 
(rank) of the parties concerned. 

Aristotle’s division of the virtue of justice into two kinds 


236 









was highly illustrative of the social conditions in slave society 
with legal inequality of its members and hereditary privileges 
of the few on the one hand, and the equalising influence of 
commodity and money relations, on the other. Aristotle’s con¬ 
ception of justice leads directly to and merges with his 
doctrine of the state. 

The Stagirite does not make distinctions between society 
and the state, and one should never lose sight of this circum¬ 
stance when reading his Politics. For one, Aristotle’s defini¬ 
tion of man as a political animal regarded outside the general 
context of his views may have two different meanings depend¬ 
ing on whether it is related to society or to the state. The 
difference is not one to be disregarded, as society can exist 
without the state. The Stagirite, however, could not conceive 
society without the state and viewed the latter as the natural 
and necessary mode of human existence: “A state is not a 
community of living beings only, but a community of equals, 
aiming at the best life possible” (Polit. VII, 8, 1328a). To 
attain this goal, the citizens must exercise virtue and study 
the arts that go with pleasure (philosophy in the first place), 
enjoy wealth, power and good health, promote such social 
qualities as justice, courage, etc. The state, according to 
Aristotle, may include only free men who enjoy equal rights. 
Yet even among them, Aristotle declares, there are second- 
rate citizens who are not “self-sufficing” and lead the ignoble 
life of mechanics, tradesmen or husbandmen... According to 
Aristotle, no man can practice virtue if he has no leisure. 

Being a realistic thinker, Aristotle could not disregard the 
importance of private property in Greek city states and was 
but too well aware of the fact that the position of man in con¬ 
temporary society was mainly determined by the amount of 
his wealth. Private property appeared to him, and indeed 
was in his time, the only possible and progressive form of 
property. Aristotle censured Plato for banning it among the 
upper classes of his ideal state and declared that collective 
property fostered discontent and dissension among people, 
deprived them of personal material incentives for labour, 
acted against man’s natural proprietary instinct, etc. 
However, understanding the importance of unity in the face 
of the threat coming from the slaves, Aristotle stressed the 
need for generosity, exhorted the rich to help the poor and 
declared “friendship”, i.e. the solidarity of freemen to be the 
highest virtue of the state. 


237 










The aim of all these restrictions on private property was 
to prevent the freemen from splitting into two antagonistic 
camps, as this would put in jeopardy the very existence of 
slave society: its preservation depended entirely on whether 
the state would be capable of keeping in check the forces that 
strove to destroy it. 

The same consideration underlies Aristotle’s doctrine of the 
forms of government. Proceeding from his philosophical con¬ 
ception of form as the entelechy and actuality of the state, Ari¬ 
stotle classifies the existing forms of government on two prin¬ 
ciples: the number of those who rule and the ethical aim they 
pursue. As a result, we have three sound forms of govern¬ 
ment— monarchy, aristocracy and polity, which aim at the 
common interest, and three perverted forms tyranny, oli¬ 
garchy and democracy, in which the rulers have their own 
advantages in view. 

Aristotle’s assessment of the above forms varies. In the 
Nicomachean Ethics he declared monarchy to be the best and 
polity (based on the proprietary differentiation of citizens) the 
worst of the sound forms, whereas in the Politics he regarded 
polity to be the best. Though monarchy appeared to be 
superior to all and the most divine, it had, according to 
Aristotle, no chance of success in his time. In book 4 of his 
Politics the Stagirite linked the form of government with 
its “principle;” “the principle of an aristocracy is virtue, as 
wealth is of an oligarchy, and freedom of a democracy” 
(Polit. IV, 8, 1294a). Polity, according to Aristotle, should 
combine these three elements and be regarded as true 
aristocracy —the government of the best, catering to the 
interests of both the wealthy and the poor. 

Elsewhere Aristotle contends that all the forms of govern¬ 
ment can be reduced to democracy and oligarchy, the two ba¬ 
sic ones: “The form of government is a democracy when the 
free, who are also poor and the majority, govern, and an oli¬ 
garchy when the rich and the noble govern, they being at the 
same time few in number” (ibid., IV, 3, 1290b). 

As is evidenced from the above, Aristotle viewed the prob¬ 
lems of the stratification of class society in terms of wealth and 
poverty and his terminology became a source of political voca¬ 
bulary for many centuries to come. Yet the Stagirite, 
according to Marx, expressed the essence of none other 
than the Greek city state. “Strictly, Aristotle’s definition is 
that man is by nature a town-citizen. This is quite as charac- 


238 








teristic of ancient classical society as Franklin’s definition of 
man as a tool-making animal is characteristic of Yankee- 
dom.” 1 The truth of this observation stands out with 
particular clarity when Aristotle turns to the analysis of social 
relations within a state. 

Aristotle avers that historically society develops from fami¬ 
ly to community (settlement) and further to state (polis). Yet 
logically the state is primary, since it represents the entele- 
chy of society. Alongside the relations between the ruler and 
the ruled characteristic of the state as such, it also preserves 
the relations existing within a family (between the husband 
and the wife, the parents and the children, the master and the 
slave). This extra-historical pattern derives from the concept 
of domination and submission as the “natural” form of human 
relations constituting the basis of slave society. It is this con 
cept, too, that underlies Aristotle’s apology of slavery. 

According to Aristotle, slavery exists “by nature” as some 
people are destined to rule, and others to submit. To substan 
tiate his theory, he uses the doctrine of the body-soul anti¬ 
thesis and asserts that the people who differ from others as the 
soul differs from the body or men from animals “are by nature 
slaves, and it is better for them as for all inferiors that they 
should be under the rule of a master” (Polit. I, 5, 1254b). 
This applies, first and foremost, to barbarians who are differ¬ 
ent from their masters by their body suited for coarse physi¬ 
cal labour and by the “slave” soul. A slave, according to Aris¬ 
totle, is an instrument, a living possession of his master having 
the soul and the body of a man. A slave has no rights and no 
injustice can be done to him. However, Aristotle makes one 
characteristic qualification: there can be no friendship with 
a slave as such, but a slave can be a friend in so far as he is 
a man. 

On closer examination Aristotle’s conception of slavery “by 
nature” reveals inherent weaknesses and appears to run coun¬ 
ter to his own convictions: Aristotle, for one, held that the 
slaves performed a necessary social function of relieving the 
citizens of the need to provide the necessities of life and that 
this function could also be performed by other categories of 
people, e.g. by penests in Thessaly or helots in Sparta. True, 
in Aristotle’s eyes they were slaves, but then a “free” but 
self-sufficing artisan earning his living with his own hands 


1 Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1974, p. 309. 


239 












was actually a slave too, though not by nature. 

Curiously enough, Aristotle himself appears to have put 
his finger on what could terminate the fatal master-slave re¬ 
lationship: “If, in like manner, the shuttle would weave and 
the plectrum touch the lyre without a hand to guide them, 
chief workmen would not want servants, nor masters slaves” 
(ibid., I, 4, 1253b). Suppose now this stream of thought car¬ 
ries us further and we fancy a society with high labour 
productivity which makes slavery less rigorous and then 
altogether redundant... This possibility, later translated into 
reality by history, must have never occurred to Aristotle. 

Aristotle’s theory of society and state viewed as a whole 
lacked scope and vision to become a tool of social prognostica¬ 
tion, though it was undoubtedly an objective reflection of con¬ 
temporary social realities. The soul-body and form-matter 
conceptions underlying this theory could indeed pass in those 
times for a more or less adequate scientific explanation of the 
world of nature with its comparative stability, but once they 
were applied to rapidly changing society their inability to dis¬ 
close the laws of its development could not but become only 
too obvious. The doctrine of society and state developed by 
Aristotle was in fact a descriptive science intended as a practi¬ 
cal guide for the ruling class in its efforts to consolidate the 
existing political institutions and the state as a whole. Realis¬ 
tic and down-to-earth though Aristotle’s political theory 
may have been, it was anything but revolutionary and could 
never have inspired a thinker or a political leader to overstep 
the bounds of the existing social system. 

The philosophy of Aristotle was the summit of ancient 
Greek thought and it took the future generations over fifteen 
hundred years to assimilate his philosophical and scientific 
heritage. The first step on this long and often circuitous way 
was made within the walls of Aristotle’s own school, the Ly¬ 
ceum. 


18. Aristotle’s School (The Peripatetics) 

In 223 B.C., on the eve of his last emigration from Athens, 
Aristotle appointed his pupil Theophrastus (370-285 B.C.) 
as head of the Lyceum. The years of his presidency were the 
heyday of the peripatetic school whose total membership was 
the highest and in some years ran into two thousand. In 287, 
Theophrastus was succeeded bv Strato of Lampsacus who 


240 






headed the school for eighteen years, whereupon it was taken 
over by Lyco distinguished only for his neat clothes and bent 
for sports. The Lyceum rapidly fell into decay interrupted 
only in the first century B.C. when Andronicus of Rhodes pub¬ 
lished Aristotle’s works and the school regained its fame. In 
subsequent centuries, though the peripatetic school enjoyed 
a high renown, its contribution to the development of philoso¬ 
phy was insignificant. The peripatetics were mainly concerned 
with commenting and interpreting the works of their great 
teacher. The most prominent of the commentators was 
Alexander of Aphrodisias (the late second the early third 
centuries A.D.). The final period of the Lyceum was marked 
by a growing tendency towards eclecticism. 

(1) Theophrastus. Tyrtamus of Erebus in Lesbos, nick¬ 
named Theophrastus by Aristotle for his eloquence died soon 
after designating Strato as head of his school. According to 
Diogenes Laertius, “so long as Theophrastus laboured he was 
sound of limb, but when released from toil his limbs failed him 
and he died” (Diog. L. V, 40), which is yet another testimony 
to the importance of toil for man’s moral and physical health. 
As to Theophrastus, he could not be reproached for idleness. 
On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, the total volume of his 
heritage amounted to 232,808 lines. His remains comprise two 
botanical works, several smaller treatises on physics, frag¬ 
ments of the Metaphysical Aporias, On the Opinions of Phy¬ 
sical Philosophers, and of some other treatises including log 
ical ones. Among his extant writings is also the famous Cha¬ 
racters dealing with different moral types and extensively 
used by writers of later centuries as a model for their own 
literary works. 

Together with Eudemus of Rhodes, another pupil of Aris¬ 
totle, Theophrastus is credited with introducing a number of 
reconstructions and improvements into his teacher’s logic. Of 
special importance for the theory of proposition was his antici¬ 
pation of the necessity to quantify in some cases not only the 
subject, but also the predicate of a proposition. Eudemus in his 
studies of interrogative propositions distinguished between 
questions relating to property, substance and selection of the 
mutually exclusive propositions (see Mul. Ill, Eudem. 113). 
Theophrastus is known to have brought to light the logical 
distinction between a proposition relating to truth and falsity 
on the one hand, and a premise relating to affirmation and de¬ 
nial, on the other (given the identical content). Another of his 


it; 






innovations consisted in a differentiation between logic and 
grammar and, accordingly, between concepts (logos) and 
words (lexis). 

The most significant changes were made, however, by Theo¬ 
phrastus and Eudemus in syllogistic. They are said to have ad¬ 
ded five new moods to the first figure of the assertoric syllo¬ 
gism and carried out successful investigation into the prob¬ 
lems of hypothetical, disjunctive and so-called mixed syllo¬ 
gisms, i.e. those having hypothetical propositions as their 
premises and an assertoric proposition as the conclusion. The 
peripatetics made an important advance on the Aristotelian 
syllogistic which dealt with classes or terms and paved the 
way for the Stoic logic of propositions, the next and the high¬ 
est stage in the development of the ancient logical doctrine. 

Though on the whole Theophrastus wrote within the frame¬ 
work of Aristotle’s philosophical system, he cannot be 
denied originality and independence of thought. The Meta¬ 
physics by Theophrastus that came down to us only in frag 
ments provides convincing evidence for his critical approach 
to many of the Aristotelian basic concepts and for a general 
tendency to strengthen the empirical strain of his master’s 
teaching and tone down its transcendentalism. Even the 
methods employed by the master and his pupil in dealing with 
the matters of the first philosophy show a characteristic diffe¬ 
rence of their attitudes. 

In contrast with Aristotle who usually started the exposi¬ 
tion of metaphysical problems with a statement of aporias or 
difficulties involved as if inviting the reader to join in their 
analysis and subsequent resolution (particularly illustrative 
in this respect is hook 3 of his Metaphysics ), Theophrastus 
appears to have focused his attention on the aporias mainly to 
demonstrate the contradictions in his teacher’s doctrines and 
to call in question the very possibility of reconciling them. 
Here is just one example. Aristotle, it may be recalled, practi¬ 
cally identified metaphysics and theology regarding them as 
having a common object of study. Expounding his master’s 
conception of God and first causes, Theophrastus gives this 
comment: “It is necessary, presumably, to recognize them by 
some power and some superiority to other things, as if it were 
God that we were apprehending; for the ruling principle of all 
things,through which all things both are and endure, is divine. 
Now it is, perhaps, easy to describe them thus, but difficult 
to do so more clearly or more convincingly” (Theophr. Met. I, 


• 2-12 










4, 4b). There are good reasons to doubt Theophrastus’s inter 
est in this problem, as well as his ardour in the matters of 
faith in general, if only for the fact that the later writers, e.g. 
Cicero, accused him of atheism and attempts to ascribe divine 
powers now to the Mind, now to Heaven... 

Theophrastus was quick to notice the difficulties springing 
from Aristotle’s concept of God as transcendent prime mover. 
If the mover is one, why do the heavenly spheres move differ¬ 
ently? If the movers are many, how are we to explain their 
relations to one God and the harmony of heavenly movements? 
Again, how can we know if something occurs for a purpose, by 
chance, or by necessity? If we cannot, shouldn’t we look for 
the cause of motion within the cosmos itself rather than out¬ 
side it? “Even among first things we evidently observed many 
events that happen at random, e.g. the facts that have been 
named, connected with the changes of the earth; for we see 
here neither the better nor that which is for the sake of an end, 
but such things seem to follow, if anything, some necessary 
law; and there are many things of this sort in the air too, and 
elsewhere” (Theophr. Met. IX, 34). 

However, despite his dissatisfaction with Aristotle’s uni¬ 
versal teleology, Theophrastus did not go so far as to chal¬ 
lenge it as a philosophical theory. Being essentially a natural¬ 
ist philosopher, he rejected the teleological explanation of 
some natural phenomena, but did not call it in question as an 
abstract principle of the first philosophy. In his Physics 
Theophrastus in fact dismissed the concept of the unmoved 
mover and came to regard the heat of the sun as the formal 
cause of motion. Matter to him was a combination of three ele¬ 
ments: earth, water, and air. Fire differed from other elements 
in that it could not exist without flammable materials. Here 
again he focuses on aporias. If fire is not self-sufficient, how 
can it be an element? Hadn’t we better posit two types of fire — 
one pure “prime fire” residing in the above-lunar sphere and 
the other “mixed,” residing in the sub-lunar world? But 
then, what is their relationship? Raising all these problems, 
Theophrastus calls in question not only the Empedoclean fa¬ 
mous theory of “roots,” but also its Aristotelian version. 

Much attention was devoted by Theophrastus to the defence 
of the objectivity of such sensible qualities as cold and hot, 
sweet and bitter, etc. Levelling his criticism mainly against 
the Democriteans, Theophrastus indicated that these qualities 
must be objective if they depend on the properties of the 


243 









atoms. He dismissed their arguments for the subjectivity of 
secondary qualities on the grounds that the senses may err in 
relation to both primary and secondary qualities and that such 
errors result from particular circumstances and are not inher¬ 
ent in the senses themselves. 

Discussing the nature of motion in his Physics, Theophrast¬ 
us asserts that each category has a corresponding kind of mo 
tion. To the four kinds of motion adopted by Aristotle he adds 
six more referring to relation, position, time, possession, action 
and passion (passivity). Contrary to Aristotle who conceived 
motion (change) as a gradual process passing through a num¬ 
ber of intermediate stages, Theophrastus believed that all 
parts of an object could also alter simultaneously and that the 
entire quality or property of an object could undergo an ab¬ 
rupt change. He reconstructed the Aristotelian conception of 
space reducing it to the order and position of bodies. 

In small physical treatises called On Winds, On Stones, On 
Smells, On Tiredness, On Dizziness, On Paralysis, and others 
Theophrastus gave apt descriptions of the phenomena under 
investigation. In contrast with the traditional Aristotelian 
praise to the deductive method of reasoning (the only excep¬ 
tion being Aristotle’s famous laudation of empiricism in his 
treatise On Parts of Animals, I, 5, 644b-645a), Theophrastus 
affirms that all knowledge of natural phenomena is founded 
on experience. In his Enquiry into Plants he specially empha¬ 
sises the need for observation and refers to valuable informa¬ 
tion received from gardeners, wood-cutters, farmers and other 
people concerned with plants. In his opinion, in natural stud¬ 
ies an investigator should start with individual things and as¬ 
cend to general principles by inductive reasoning. 

Important departures were also exhibited by Theophrastus 
in his teaching of man. Unlike Aristotle who considered the 
soul to be the originator of movement in the body (see De an. 
I, 3, 406a), Theophrastus identified thinking with movement, 
thus closely linking the spiritual and the physical. Subscrib¬ 
ing to the Aristotelian differentiation between the active and 
the passive mind, Theophrastus noted the difficulties resulting 
from this distinction. 

In ethics Theophrastus emphasised the importance of exter 
nal goods and described in detail such moral categories as 
friendship, love and happiness. Special mention should be 
made of the ethic and aesthetic value of his Characters giving 
a very vivid and realistic description of the types characterist- 









ic of ancient society: The Grumbler, The Flatterer, The Liar, 
The Man of Petty Ambition, etc. 

(2) Eudemus of Rhodes, another prominent’pupil of Aris¬ 
totle, is said to have helped his master in writing the Meta¬ 
physics and to have formulated the objection to Plato’s theory 
of ideas known as “the third man” (see Mul. Ill, Eudem. 
fr. 115). He owes his fame to the commentary on Aristotle, 
particularly the Physics, and is not distinguished by any orig¬ 
inality of thought. Simplicius, for one, invariably accompani¬ 
ed his extensive quotations from the commentary of Eudemus 
by such phrases as “following Aristotle” or “paraphrasing 
Aristotle,” etc. The only departure of Eudemus from Aristot¬ 
le’s physical doctrine appears to be the introduction of two 
more categories, “whole” and “motion,” bordering, as it were, 
on the first philosophy. Commenting on Aristotle’s unmoved 
mover which alone can be the cause of continuous motion (see 
Arist. Phys. VIII, 10, 267b), Eudemus pointed out the inter¬ 
nal contradictoriness of this notion, as the incorporeal divine 
mover (see Mul. Ill, fr. 82) cannot have any physical contact 
with what it moves. Eudemus did not attempt to offer any so¬ 
lution to this aporia which indeed appears to be insoluble. 

The Aristotelian corpus includes the Eudemian Ethics com¬ 
monly believed to be the lectures of Eudemus. They expound 
Aristotle’s teaching but contain certain departures from his 
principles. The main of them consists in that contrary to Ari¬ 
stotle who proceeded in his ethical teaching from man’s natu¬ 
ral inclinations and functions, Eudemus closely links man’s 
actions with the concept of God. Just as a physician needs a 
criterion for distinguishing a curable illness from an incur¬ 
able one, so a moral individual needs a criterion for a choice 
between a moral and an immoral action. Some hold that this 
criterion is reason, yet reason alone, according to Eudemus, 
is not sufficient. In his opinion, a man must look for guidance 
to God in the manner a slave looks for orders to his master and 
every substance is oriented on its ruling principle (Eth. Eud. 
VII, 15, 1249a). God, however, does not govern imperiously, 
but through the agency of reason: God is like health, whereas 
reason is like medicine. 

The ethical ideal for Eudemus is the unity of the beautiful, 
the perfect and the virtuous resulting from the contemplation 
of God as ultimate goodness. This unity is the core of man’s 
moral nature inducing him to act virtuously not merely for 
attainment of external goods (which it not reprehensible), but 


245 












for the sake of the good as such: “In order, however, that 
a man may be simply good and worthy, it is requisite that he 
should choose what is beautiful in conduct for its own sake, 
and not on account of those goods which are not beautiful. For 
of all goods there are ends, which are themselves eligible for 
their own sakes. But of these, all such as are beautiful on their 
own account are laudable” (ibid., 1248b). The conception of 
morality developed by Eudemus betrays strong Platonic influ 
ence and may have been inspired by Aristotle’s early works. 

Similarly to Theophrastus who gave a detailed account of 
the opinions of physical philosophers, Eudemus wrote a num¬ 
ber of works on the history of science: mathematics (arithme¬ 
tic and geometry), astronomy, as well as theology. The extant 
fragments of the work under the hypothetic title On the Gods 
ascribed by Diogenes Laertius to Theophrastus expound the 
theocosmogonies of Acusilaus, Epimenides, Pherecydes, the 
Orphics, the Persian magi and the Phoenicians. The fragments 
also contain data on the mythology of Homer, Hesiod and the 
Egyptians (see Mul. III. Eudem. fr. 117, 118). 

(3) Aristoxenus of Tarentum came to the Lyceum after ex¬ 
tensive studies of Pythagoreanism which must have accounted 
for his interest in music and musical theory. However, in cont 
rast with the abstract mathematical approach to music char¬ 
acteristic of the Pythagoreans, Aristoxenus considered musi¬ 
cal harmony to be based on the perceptions of human voice 
and maintained that the notes of the scale are to be judged not 
by numbers, but by the ear. Besides musical treatises, he 
wrote on ethics. Taking his cue from the Pythagorean concep¬ 
tion of the soul as harmony, Aristozenus goes further and 
declares it a corporeal harmony. According to Cicero, “Aristo¬ 
xenus, a musician and a philosopher, conceived the soul as 
kind of internal strain akin to what is called harmony in sing 
ing and playing string instruments” (Wehrli II, fr. 120a). 
Even a more explicit comment came down to us from the pen 
of Lactantius Firmianus, a Christian writer of the late third 
and early fourth centuries A.D. who described Aristoxenus as 
a thinker denying the existence of any soul, even in a living 
body: “Just as the tension of strings in a string instrument 
produces concordant sounds and music which the musicians 
call harmony, so the combination of tissues and the living 
force in the limbs produces the ability for sensation” (ibid., fr. 
120c). The extant ethical fragments of Aristoxenus show 
a strong vein of the Pythagorean normative ethics of duty. 


246 










Apart from musical and ethical treatises, Aristoxenus is 
known for his works on the laws of education and politics, as 
well as for the biographies of Pythagoras, Arhytas, Socrates 
and Plato. 

(4) Dicaearchus of Messene in Sicily developed a doctrine 
of the soul similar to that of Aristoxenus. According to Cicero, 
Dicaearchus taught that “there is no such thing as soul in real 
ity and that the word itself is empty and misleading as it only 
denotes a living being. Neither a man, nor an animal has any 
spirit or soul, but the force which makes us capable of move¬ 
ment and sensations is present equally in all living bodies. It is 
inseparable from the body as it is nothing without it. There is 
no existence apart from the body which lives and feels by vir¬ 
tue of elements naturally mixing together” (Wehrli I, fr. 7). 
On the same evidence, Dicaearchus asserted that what we call 
the soul is in fact a harmonious mixture of four elements in the 
body hot and cold, dry and moist (see fr. ll-12a-d) and 
that the body and the soul decompose together (see fr. lOa-b). 

Dicaearchus’s doctrine of the sou 1 was an obvious regression 
to the views of earlier “physiologers,” a reaction, as it were, to 
the idealism and teleology of Aristotle. Its extension to the 
sphere of ethics resulted in a cardinal reappraisal of the moral 
theory propounded by Theophrastus and led him to a convic¬ 
tion that practical activity was far more important than con¬ 
templation (theoretical activity). Identifying the latter with 
abstract speculation and comparing contemporary thought 
with the wisdom of the ancients, he grieved over the degrada¬ 
tion of philosophy which, in his opinion, had degenerated into 
the art of rhetoric catering to the low tastes of the mob (ibid., 
fr. 31). 

Dicaearchus is known to have written much on the history 
and political systems of Greek states, and ancient sources 
credit him with treatises devoted to Sparta, Pella, Corinth 
and probably Athens. He attempted to give a broad outline of 
the development of human society from its “natural,” i.e. 
primitive state to civilisation and devoted much attention to 
the interaction of Hellenic and Oriental cultures. In his Tri- 
politikos Dicaearchus compared the relative merits and de¬ 
merits of monarchy, aristocracy and democracy and advanced 
the ideal of mixed government foreshadowing Cicero and 
Polybius the historian. 

(5) Strato of Lampsacus, a pupil of Theophrastus, con¬ 
cerned himself with logic, ethics, politics, psychology, physio- 


247 


logy and medicine, but owes his place in the history of philos¬ 
ophy mainly to physical doctrines which he ranked foremost 
in his studies. Central to his teaching was the idea that the 
world must be explained from itself, without invoking any 
divine agency. 

Characterising the most prominent followers of Aristotle, 
Cicero wrote: “The inconsistency of Theophrastus is simply 
intolerable: he ascribes divine priority now to the Mind, now 
to the Heaven, now to heavenly stars and constellations. Nor 
should one heed his pupil Strato called the Physicist. He holds 
that all divine power is present in nature which contains the 
causes of generation, growth, diminution, but is devoid of any 
sense and form” (Cicero De deorum natura I, 13; cf. Wehrli 
IV, fr. 33). 

Elsewhere Cicero indicates' that, according to Strato, all 
things came into being by the action of nature and can be 
explained by natural gravitation and motion. Strato therefore 
“relieved god of hard toil, and myself of fear [of him]” 
(ibid., fr. 32). Strato maintained that natural causes them 
selves were swayed by spontaneity and conceived nature as 
spontaneous activity. 

Strato’s opposition to the doctrine of divine powers gave the 
ancients cause to align him with Democritus. Indeed, striving 
to explain the world in terms of what was inherent in nature 
itself. Strato like the atomists removed god from any par 
ticipation in the affairs of nature and man. His atheistic views 
were in fact similar to those of Epicurus, his contemporary, 
who developed them further and made an important contrib¬ 
ution to the materialist doctrine of atomism. The affinity 
between peripatetic Strato and the atomists attests to the fact 
that the theoretical foundation of ancient atheism could be 
espoused not only by the atomists. 

In contrast with the quantitative approach of the atomists, 
Strato developed a qualitative doctrine of physics regarding 
qualities as the ultimates. By qualities he meant the hot and 
the cold, the former being the active power. According to 
Cicero. “Strato of Lampsacus called the hot substance the 
cause of all being” (ibid., fr. 48). At this point, however, the 
ancient sources are not unanimous. Strato is known to have 
conceived qualities as inherent in certain substrata, namely, 
the cold is related to water and the hot to fire. Yet on some 
evidence Strato maintained that movement is inherent not 
only in what moves but is that out of which all existing 









things come to be, where they reside and into which they are 
resolved in the end (ibid., fr. 72). It is not clear how this con¬ 
viction tallied with the concept of the hot as the prime ele¬ 
ment perhaps Strato’s views represented the first step to¬ 
wards the later doctrine of heat as motion. 

In cosmology Strato shared the view that the world was 
finite. He denied the existence of empty space outside the 
world but accepted it as possible within the universe, e.g. as 
pores in objects accounting for the ability of light to pass, for 
instance, through water. It was an obvious compromise be¬ 
tween Democritus whose concept of innumerable worlds pre¬ 
supposed the existence of void external to them, and Aristotle 
who defined space as the border of corporeal objects. As a 
result, Strato gravitated towards the Platonics who under¬ 
stood space as receptacle (diastema) capable of accommodat¬ 
ing a body. 

Of special interest are the objections of Strato to Aristotle’s 
conception of time as the number of motion. According to 
Strato, the very nature of a number expressing a discrete value 
is incompatible with the notions of time and movement which 
are continuous. Advancing his own conception of time, Strato 
defined it “as a measure of every motion and rest in so far as it 
is equivalent to all that moves when it keeps moving and to al I 
that is at rest when it remains stationary, and therefore all 
events occur in time” (ibid., fr. 79a). 

Strato differentiated between time and what occurs in time. 
Hence, a day, a night, a year are not parts of time but real 
processes, whereas time is only their duration. 

Strato treated the activity of the sonl in terms of motion and 
regarded sensation and thinking as movements. On the evi 
dence of Sextus Empiricus, he reduced reason to sensations, 
whereas Plutarch affirmed that in Strato’s opinion thinking 
is different from sensations since the latter do not enter a 
man’s consciousness if his mind is occupied (cf. fr. 109 and 
112). The second testimony is evidently nearer the truth, as 
Strato underscored the importance of the central organ of 
mental activity located “between the eyebrows,” i.e. in the 
brain. According to Strato, it was the seat of breath (pneuma) 
spreading from the central part of the body to its periphery 
along the nerves (this curious detail was evidently an echo of 
the discovery made by physicians Herophilus and Erasistra- 
tus). Strato made no basic distinction between the human and 
animal souls and held thaPthe soul does not survive the body. 








The meagreness of the ancient evidence for Strata’s views 
makes it hardly possible to reconstruct his ethics as a complete 
doctrine. However, we seem to have fairly good reason to 
believe that he proceeded from a definite understanding of 
human nature and subscribed to the Aristotelian conception 
of man’s activity as an instrument for transforming potential¬ 
ity into actuality (see fr. 132). This is not much and we can 
only lament together with Wehrli: “If only we could know 
how far Strata went in pursuing Aristotle’s anthropologic 
trend” (Wehrli IV, fr. 77). 

Strata was the last original representative of the peri¬ 
patetic school endowed with a capacity for creative thought. 
Though the school gradually lost its fame and faded into ob¬ 
scurity, Aristotle’s doctrines, both from his own pen and in the 
interpretation of his pupils, continued exercising powerful 
influence on the subsequent development of Greco-Roman 
philosophy and were adopted in very different philosophical 
systems, ranging from Stoicism to neo-Platonism. 







PART THREE 

GRECO ROMAN PHILOSOPHY 


1. Hellenism and Its Philosophy 

The epoch of Hellenism lasting from the end of the fourth 
century B.C. till the fifth century A.D. was the longest in 
the history of ancient society. These eight centuries were filled 
with endless wars and military campaigns, devastating 
uprisings and great political upheavals. In terms of political 
history the age of Hellenism covers the period from the con¬ 
quests of Alexander the Great to the subjugation of Egypt by 
the Romans, though these dates are largely a matter of con¬ 
vention. From the culturological viewpoint, however, Hel¬ 
lenism 1 is a much broader term denoting Greek civilisation 
at large. The Hellenisation of vast territories in the Mediter¬ 
ranean, the Near East and North Africa with populations pos¬ 
sessing their own developed cultures resulted in the synthesis 
of Greek and Oriental elements and produced a new culture 
based on the Greek language and characterised by a unique 
combination of the common standards of life, philosophical 
thought and the arts. 

The states that constituted the political framework of the 
Hellenistic world arose either as a result of the conquest of 
various tribes and territories by the Greeks (Macedonians), or 
conversely, due to the subjugation of the Greek population by 
local dynasties (e.g. in Caria and Black Sea regions) and 
later by the Romans. The political domination of Rome over 
the Greek world was peculiarly combined with the pre 
valence of Hellenic culture in Rome itself. This phe 
nomenon was partly attributable to the affinity of Greek and 
Latin mythologies and religions which had a powerful grip on 
the ancient mind. Already the absorption of Magna Graecia 
by Rome in the third century B.C. gave a strong impetus to 

1 From the Greek hellenizo which meant “tospeak Greek” or “to act like 
a Greek.” 


251 










the Hellenisation of Roman culture and enabled the con¬ 
querors to share in the treasures of Greek literature, philos 
ophy and art. The expression “Greco-Roman culture” aptly 
conveys the essence of the new civilisation representing a con¬ 
tradictory unity of its components. Indeed, having absorbed 
the Greek-speaking countries, the Romans themselves suc¬ 
cumbed to the influence of Hellenistic culture and set out to 
spread it in the Western Mediterranean. To be sure, Helle¬ 
nisation was a lengthy process: Etruscan culture with its an¬ 
cient tradition and deep historical roots held undivided sway 
till the fourth century B.C. and it was only after stubborn 
and protracted resistance that it finally gave way. 

It is notable, however, that the triumph of Hellenistic cul¬ 
ture did not bring about any fundamental change in the atti¬ 
tude of the Romans to the subjugated peoples: owing to the 
hegemonistic traditions firmly rooted in public consciousness 
the conquerors treated Greek culture with something like 
scornful condescension. Added to this was the indisputable 
lead of Rome in the matters of law. Roman law accurately 
reflecting the specificity of contemporary social relations 
proved to be, according to Engels, the completest elaboration 
of norms based on private property which we know.' It is not 
fortuitous therefore that the legal system formalised in the 
Justinian Code (534 A.D.) determined the progress of legal 
institutions aimed at safeguarding private property for many 
centuries to come. 

Of no little importance was also the fact that the ideology of 
Roman society was centred upon the rigorous ideal of citizen 
modelled after the characters of Mucius Scaevola, the Gracchi, 
Cato the Elder with his famous “Carthage must be destroyed” 
and Cato the Younger, who committed suicide after the down¬ 
fall of the republic, Brutus and Cassius, Julius Caesar, and 
Augustus Gaius Octavius... These images epitomised very spe¬ 
cific social experience —the experience of abstract statehood 
associated with the triumphal march of the Roman legions first 
through Italy, and then through the entire world known then 
to the ancients. The word “citizen” had a glorious ring in the 
Roman republic and no one in antiquity pronounced it with 
a greater pride than a Roman. The medal however had its re¬ 
verse side. The cold impersonal power of the state over¬ 
whelmed the individual turning him into an obedient tool of 
beundless hegemonistic ambitions and subjecting to all-round 

1 See Frederick Engels, Anti-Diihring, p. 128. 








regimentation. The submission of a citizen to the state went 
side by side with his tyranny over the family, let alone the 
' slaves. 1 

The economic life of Hellenistic states was based on the 
relations of mature slavery. The decline of the ancient polis 
and the emergence of enormous military and administrative 
empires, starting from the Macedonian Empire of Alexander 
the Great and ending with the Roman Empire were traceable, 
in the final analysis, to the changes in the basis of slave-own¬ 
ing society which showed a clear tendency towards ever larger 
land estates and handicraft economies using slave labour. The 
characteristic features of the epoch were the expanding slave 
force in all spheres of production, vast trade markets with 
developed money circulation and powerful monarchies with 
huge bureaucratic apparatus and trained professionals needed 
to maintain the political power and military efficiency of the 
state. 

As a result of the collapse of the polis system the centre of 
cultural life shifted from a small sovereign Greek community 
to the newly founded capital of a large monarchy. Such were 
Pergama, Alexandria and then Rome, the “eternal city.” 
Since the population of new cities was ethnically heteroge¬ 
neous and even the Hellenes themselves did not make a single 
people, native dialects were gradually replaced by the com 
mon Greek language (koine) based on the Attic dialect. It 
became the standard literary language and provided necessary 
conditions for the development of cultural links and for the 
spread of cosmopolitan Hellenistic civilisation. Even such eso¬ 
teric culture as Judaic could not avoid the effect of Hellenisa- 
tion as is attested to by the traces of Greek philosophical 
thought in the later (non-canonical) books of the Rible and by 
the translation of the latter into Greek. 

The universal Greek language adopted throughout the Hel 
lenistic world made accessible Greek literature, science 
and philosophy to the non-Geek population. Even more 
important, however, was the spread of Greek technical skills, 
particularly in such fields as construction, shipbuilding, siege 
machines and fortifications, money coining techniques, etc. 
The Hellenistic age is characterised by the flourishing of 

Roman legislator'Titus Manlius Torquatus passed a law allowing a 
father to sell his son into slavery three times, i.e. giving him greater powers 
over his sons than over slaves: a slave sold by his master and freed was no 
longer dependent on his (Dionisii Halicarnasei antiquitates Romani, II, 
27, 1, 2). 


253 














science notable for high intellectual level and practically free 
from the fetters of religion. The achievements of mathematics 
in that period are epitomised in Euclid’s Elements and in the 
doctrine of intersections of a cone developed by Menaechmus, 
Archimedes and Apollonius of Perga, the progress in mechan¬ 
ics culminated in the Archimedean system, astronomy was 
enriched by the heliocentric system of Aristarchus of Samos 
and the determinations of the length of the solar year, the 
distances from the Earth to the Sun and the Moon, the sizes of 
heavenly bodies, etc. Of great practical value was the inven¬ 
tion of an astrolabe and other astronomical instruments, as 
well as Ptolemy’s mathematical elaboration of the geocentric 
system which made it possible to define the geometrical pa¬ 
rameters of the planetary orbits and improve the observation 
and orientation techniques. Military expeditions, long jour¬ 
neys to distant lands and growing trade relations led to new 
geographical discoveries and expanded the bounds of the 
known world as is evidenced from the map with a network of 
latitudes and longitudes credited to Eratosthenes of Cyrene in 
Africa and from the geographical works of Strabo of Amasya 
in Pontus. 

Technical achievements in the Hellenistic age were mainly 
connected with city development projects, construction of 
ports and lighthouses, creation of huge siege machines and 
shipbuilding. It was at that time that the world saw its first 
high-rise construction the famous Pharos of Alexandria 
considered to be the prototype of all lighthouses in the world 
which rose to a height of about 135 m and was numbered 
among the Seven Wonders of the world. Numerous majestic 
structures from the Hellenistic and Roman times still arouse 
our admiration and testify to the perfect sense of proportion 
and high engineering level of ancient architecture. 

Paying a tribute of respect to these remarkable achieve¬ 
ments, one should not be forgetful, however, of what they cost. 
In the absence of any qualitatively new sources of energy the 
chief reliance of ancient architects and engineers was the 
physical force of animals and human beings, the slaves in the 
first place. Figuratively speaking, the world’s wonders were 
built on their bones. Besides, there was yet another aspect to 
the advances of engineering in the Hellenistic world, closely 
linked with its social and political conditions, as well as his¬ 
torical traditions. The cult of grandeur and pomposity inherit¬ 
ed from the World Empire of Alexander the Great and ex- 


254 











r 


pressed in a gigantomania, a tendency towards colossal forms 
was to a large extent accountable for such prodigies as the 
famous vessel of Ptolemy Philopator powered by four thou¬ 
sand oarsmen, or the siege machine of Demetrius Poliorcetes 
which needed 3400 soldiers to attend to it. Being in fact ty¬ 
rant’s toys rather than practical weapons, they proved but of 
little use to the Hellenistic states in their struggle against the 
Romans whose military equipment was far less sophisticated 
but more practical. 

Hellenistic art occupies a unique place in the history of 
Western culture in terms of both the abundance of its remains 
and the diversity of styles and genres. Magnificent buildings, 
statues, mosaics and paintings were created at a rate paral¬ 
leled only by the rapid accumulation of wealth in Hellenistic 
and later Roman cities. The famous altar of Zeus in Perga- 
mum, the colossus of Helios in Rhodes over 30 m high and the 
Coliseum are just a few examples. The “Victory” of Samo 
thrace, the “Dying Gaull,” the “Bull of Farnese,” the “Lao- 
coon,” the “Aphrodite” of Melos, the portraits of Faiyum will 
forever remain in the history of culture as great works of art. 
The immense literature of the epoch gives a sweeping pano¬ 
rama of the life of contemporary society. It overwhelms one 
with the multitude of characters ranging from pseudo-classi- 
I cal heroes of traditional mythological stories reconstructed in 
1 accordance with new times to peasants, rough soldiers and 

women of easy virtue and displays a broad spectrum of genres 
so wide apart as a high tragedy with its profound psycho¬ 
logical insight and an idyl describing pastoral scenes. 

The most characteristic feature of Hellenistic literature 
and art indicative of the ideological climate of the epoch was 
a growing interest in the individual. The hero of the classical 
period had been first and foremost a personification of the pol- 
is. Man was a direct participant in the affairs of the state and 
did not conceive his existence apart from it. He might be a 
political figure, a military leader, a farmer, a shepherd or a sol¬ 
dier, yet he completely identified himself with his city-state, 
its joys and sorrows. He was one with the social functions that 
circumstances forced upon him, and that made the backbone 
of his moral character. The man of the Hellenistic age was 
very different. Being a toy in the hands of an omnipotent alien 
power of the state embodied in the person of a deified monarch, 
he sharply contrasts his inner and outer worlds and differen¬ 
tiates his real self from the roles he is assigned. According 

255 


I 






to Epictetus, one of the founders of Stoicism, a man is but an 
actor in a play written by an unknown author; whatever his 
role, be it a cripple, a ruler or an ordinary man, his job is to 
play it well and leave the choice to fate... (Epictet. Ench. 17). 

This attitude lay at the root of a strong individualistic trend 
that manifested itself not only in the social psychology of the 
epoch, but also in its culture. Man’s consciousness, divided 
between the general and the individual, gravitated towards 
the latter, and this showed in his practical deeds —military 
campaigns, seizure and exploitation of slaves, commercial and 
industrial activities —no less than in poetry, religion, science 
and philosophy. The extremes met: submission to the ruth¬ 
less and impersonal power of the state and resignation to 
fate coexisted with absolute inner freedom and primitive self- 
sufficiency making two sides of one and the same individual 
consciousness... 

In literature and art, this contradiction was reflected in the 
combination of ostentatious pomposity of official monu¬ 
ments and very realistic, profoundly human portrayal of the 
individual, in political science—in a somewhat artificial unity 
of universal statehood and man’s individualism, in philoso¬ 
phy—in a fateful antithesis Of natural and social necessity, on 
the one hand, and chance and personal liberty, on the other. 
This antithesis, however, gave no grounds for optimism, 
as man was considered to be powerless before wayward and 
inscrutable fate. 

The Hellenistic epoch covers a long period of ancient 
history and tradition distinguishes between early Hellenism 
of the last three centuries B.C. and late Hellenism usually 
identified with the Greco-Roman civilisation of the Imperial 
Age. Early Hellenism terminated in the formation of the 
Roman Empire and on the political side was characterised by 
the emergence of vast monarchies that replaced minor slave¬ 
owning polises. On the economic side, it was a period of de¬ 
veloped slavery with ever increasing proportion of slave popu 
lation. The number of slaves was constantly growing as a re 
suit of predatory wars and plunder of conquered territories. 
On the cultural and ideological side Hellenism represented a 
peculiar blend of universality and individualism, the former 
being externally predominant. Philosophy was pervaded with 
a spirit of disappointment and resignation: “In the face of 
the dark chaos of reality impending over man and threatening 
to engulf him the Stoic sage is tranquil and serene, the Epi 


256 







curian is lost in reverie in the depth of his exquisite garden, 
and the Sceptic shows no inclination to say yes or no of any¬ 
thing or anybody. There is something funereal about these 
naive, but profound and even sublime images of a sage, as if 
their creators mourned over what could but did not materi¬ 
alise...” 1 

Profound social, political and cultural changes in the Ro¬ 
man Empire characteristic of Late Hellenism awoke man to 
reality. However, slave-owning society was already doomed 
and all attempts to envigorate and consolidate it could not but 
end in failure. The economic foundation of the Roman Empire 
more and more revealed its inability to meet the increasing 
demands of life and powerful forces set to work preparing 
transition to feudalism. The growth of production and the 
sophistication of the instruments of labour called for skilled 
and ingenious workmen but slaves were not interested in the 
results of their work and had no incentives to develop such 
qualities. The productivity of their labour dropped, and so did 
the profits of large estates. The slave-owners began to divide 
them into small plots for lease to peasants and slaves who 
thus turned into coloni — half-free labourers paying the pro¬ 
prietor a big proportion of their produce. The colonatus and 
the increasing proportion of freedmen in cities were incom¬ 
patible with the economic relations of the slave system, as 
well as with its political and ideological superstructure, and 
testified to the fact that slavery had already outlived itself and 
that new relations of production were gradually taking root 
in the heart of the old system. Under such conditions the re 
ligious and philosophical scepticism and liberalism character¬ 
istic of early Hellenism and accountable for the secularisa¬ 
tion of philosophy and its relative freedom from religion gave 
way to the opposite trend the consecration of philosophy 
which was assigned the function to bolster up ideologically 
the Empire, also consecrated. Any consecration, however, 
is deadly to philosophy. 

This is not to say, of course, that the translation of phi¬ 
losophy into the language of religion and the interpretation 
of its concepts in religious terms directly leads to the decline 
of philosophical thought. This translation consisting in the 
idealisation of society, state and man of the epoch, i.e. 
in turning them into the mind’s concepts, at first enables 

1 A.F. Losev, History of Ancient Aesthetics. Early Hellenism, p. 42 (in 
Russian). 


17 Oli'.l 


257 









philosophy to consider the objects of such concepts in the 
abstract form within the framework of their dialectical 
relations. Religion is in fact nothing else than a fantastic 
reflection of reality in people’s minds and theology as the 
self-consciousness of the epoch coincides with sociology, 
political science and anthropology. Yet the ascription of dia¬ 
lectics to an illusory object, a deity, fundamentally distorts 
the perspective of philosophical inquiry and, as the history 
of thought shows, is highly detrimental to philosophy. The 
majestic edifice of neo-Platonism that arose at the end of the 
Hellenistic age was bound to collapse for the simple reason 
that it failed to stand the test of time and satisfy the inquisitive 
human mind. 

The Greco-Roman period is often described, not unreason¬ 
ably, as the decline of ancient philosophy, its gradual degra¬ 
dation and extinction. Indeed, in “physics” it retrogresses to 
the doctrines of pre-Socratic philosophers, in ethics, to the 
Socratic schools, whereas neo-Platonism bogs down in myth¬ 
ology and downwright occultism. This process, however, 
was inevitable and, from the viewpoint of dialectics, illustra¬ 
tive of the operation of the law of the negation of negation in 
the sphere of ideology. The ideas of the classics were not 
merely negated in the post-Aristotelian doctrines, but, as it 
were, sublated, i.e. negated and preserved simultaneously, 
only to be again sublated in the endless spiral process of 
cognition: 

Assessing the general significance of Hellenistic philoso¬ 
phy, Marx wrote: “To be sure, it is a commonplace that 
birth, flowering and decline constitute the iron circle in which 
everything human is enclosed, through which it must pass. 
Thus it would not have been surprising if Greek philosophy, 
after having reached its zenith in Aristotle, should then have 
withered. But the death of the hero resembles the setting of 
the sun, not the bursting of an inflated frog.” 1 

This profound appraisal hardly needs any elaboration. 


1 Karl Marx, “Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Phi 
losophy of Nature,” in: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Collected Works, 
Vol. 1, p. 35. 


258 









Chapter / 

Epicurus and Epicureanism 

Epicurus (341 270 B.C.), an eminent exponent of the 
atomistic doctrine in ancient philosophy was born of Athenian 
parents on the island of Samos. Later he moved to Asia Minor 
and at the age of 32 founded his own school of philosophy. 
He taught first in Mytilene, and then in Lampsacus. In 306 
he settled in Athens and continued his lessons in his garden 
which gave the name to the school. In keeping with tradition, 
he had its motto inscribed on the garden gate: “Friend, here 
it will be well for you to abide; here pleasure is the highest 
good.” Epicurus bequeathed the garden to the school and, 
when dying, urged his pupils to remain loyal to their faith. 

Epicurus wrote over 300 works, including Of Nature 
in 37 books, Of Atoms and Void, Of Love, On Choice and 
Avoidance, On the Gods, Of Kingship, and others. Thanks to 
Diogenes Laertius we possess the text of three letters of 
Epicurus containing the jist of his doctrine and the Cardinal 
Tenets (a series of forty ethical aphorisms) apparently 
intended by Epicurus as a guide for his pupils. The letters are: 
to Herodotus on nature, to Pythocles on meteorology and 
astronomy, and to Menoeceus on ethics. Another textual 
source is a fourteenth-century manuscript in the Vatican 
library which was found (in 1888) to contain a series of 81 
aphorisms of Epicurus, some of them identical- with the 
Cardinal Tenents, and separate statements of Epicurus’s 
pupils Metrodorus of Lampsacus and Hermarchus of Mytilene. 
We also have numerous fragments of Epicurus’s works and 
letters and valuable evidence for his views in polemical works 
of Plutarch, Cicero, Sextus Empiricus and Church Fathers. 

The Epicurean school flourished for several centuries. 
Among the immediate disciples of Epicurus the most distin¬ 
guished were Metrodorus of Lampsacus who died before his 
master, Polyaenus of Lampsacus, Hermarchus of Mytilene 



259 





who became the scholarch after Epicurus, Leonteus of 
Lampsacus and his wife Themista, Colotes and Idomeneus. 
Hermarchus was succeeded by Polystratus, whose successors 
were Dionysius and Basilides. Diogenes also mentions 
Apollodorus, who is said to have written more that 400 books, 
two Ptolemaei of Alexandria, Zeno of Sidon, teacher of Cicero, 
Demetrius the Laconian, famous for his grammatical and 
mathematical studies, Diogenes of Tarsus and Orion. In Italy, 
Epicureanism was represented by Philodemus of Gadara 
whose works De natura deorum (On the Gods), De vitii (On 
Holiness), Rhetocir (Rhetorics), De musica (On Music) and 
others, as well as his logical treatise On Methods of Inference 
were largely reconstructed on the basis of extensive passages 
from the enormous philosophical library (about 1800 rolls) 
discovered in the ruins of Herculaneum at the end of the 
eighteenth century. An important discovery of the “Oinoanda 
Stones” in 1884 brought to us the fragments of late Epicurean 
Diogenes inscribed on a portico wall in the second or third 
century A.D. Yet the summit of Epicureanism was, of course, 
De rerum natura (On the Nature of Things) of Roman poet 
and philosopher Titus Lucretius Carus. 

In accordance with traditional Hellenistic classification 
of philosophical knowledge Epicurus divided his system into 
physics, canonic (theory of knowledge) and ethics. 

2. Epicurus’s Canonic and Physics 

Epicurus taught that knowledge consists in naming objects, 
i.e. in establishing a clear relationship between words and 
things. Each word should have an unambiguous reference: 
“That is true which is in the state in which it is said to be,” 
and “False is that which is not in the state in which it is 
said to be” (Sext. Adv. math. VIII, 9). The criterion of the 
correspondence between a word and an object and, hence, the 
criterion of truth is sense experience. Sensations are ir¬ 
rational and do not depend on reason; being immune from re¬ 
futation, they are themselves “true.” Indeed, “all our notions 
are derived from perceptions, either by actual contact or by 
analogy, or resemblance, or composition, with some slight 
aid from reasoning” (Diog. L. X, 32). 

So, all knowledge arises from sense perceptions. Re¬ 
peated perceptions retained by memory take the shape of 
images and give rise to anticipations (prolepsis) or notions. 
These make possible the use of language: the word “man” or 













“horse” comes to denote the anticipation of a very definite 
complex of perceptions. “Anticipation” as understood by 
Epicurus is in fact the unity of perceptions which fuses them, 
as it were, into a single image. 

It deserves mention that in speaking of sensations as 
the criterion of truth Epicurus singles out feelings and also 
calls them a “criterion.” To be sure, all feelings are sensations 
as they originate in sense organs; however, distinguishing 
between feelings (pleasure and pain) and sensations, Epicu¬ 
rus opens a new aspect of the problem of truth, viewing it, so 
to speak, from a practical angle in terms of preferences and 
avoidances. Indeed, deciding on a course of action we consult, 
according to Epicurus, our feelings and choose the road of 
“natural” life that leads us towards pleasures and tranquility 
instead of that of unnatural and troubled existence that leads 
to pain and unreasonable suffering. 

Perceptions result from the penetration of the “images” of 
things into the organs of the senses. These images, “like in 
shape to the solid bodies, far surpassing perceptible things 
in their subtlety of texture” (Ep. ad Herod., 46a) 
continuously separate from the surfaces of things and radiate 
in all directions with the speed of thought. Entering the sense 
organs, they produce true perceptions, whereas their penetra¬ 
tion into the pores of the body creates fantastic impressions. 
As we see, Epicurus elaborates and slightly modifies the 
theory of “imageness” that goes back to Democritus. In 
contrast to Democritus who regarded the sensuous qualities of 
things, colour, taste and smell as owing their existence 
exclusively to the sense organs and therefore as subjective, 
Epicurus considers them to be objective on the grounds that 
an “image” consists of particles exciting the corresponding 
organ. A sensation (perception) never deceives us and errors 
can only originate in the mind, in its judgements: “Now 
falsehood and error always lie in the addition of opinion with 
regard to (what is waiting) to be confirmed or not contradict¬ 
ed, and then it is not confirmed (or is contradicted)” 
(ibid., 50). 

At this point we come back to “anticipations.” Being 
formed by the mind which combines perceptions into a single 
image, they are by no means its arbitrary product. The mind, 
in fact, retrieves from its “store” those impressions that 
w«re laid there by the senses as its recollections. Without 
“anticipations” enabling us to identify current perceptions 








with our previous experience no knowledge would be possible. 
For instance, we would not be able to answer even such a sim 
pie question as “Is it a horse or a cow?”, since this question 
presupposes our knowledge of their outward appearance. 

Stressing the sensual nature or “anticipations," Epicurus 
distinguishes them from logical concepts which he identi¬ 
fies with words: “It is essential that the first mental image 
associated with each word should be regarded, and there 
should be no need of explanation if we are really to have a 
standard to which to refer a problem of investigation or 
reflection or a mental inference...” (ibid., 38). Errors result 
from the absense of such “first mental images” or from their 
wrong association with words. Hence the Epicurean theory of 
induction concerned with the establishment of the meaning 
of words and the Epicurean theory of signs expounded in 
Philodemus’s treatise. 

Epicurus maintains that people are capable of developing 
correct and clear notions relating to basic physical and moral 
problems. As regards specific questions of natural science, 
such as the mechanisms of celestial phenomena, identical 
sense experience in this field may have different interpreta 
tions. Recognising the hypothetic character of our knowledge 
of particular natural phenomena, Epicurus at the same time 
insists on the absolute certainty of the universal principles 
of the world. 

These universal principles expounded by Epicurus in his 
letter to Herodotus are as follows: (1) Nothing comes from 
nothing, and nothing returns to nothing; (2) The universe 
has always been and will always be the same as it is now, 
because nothing else exists into which it could change; 
(3) The universe consists of bodies and void; the existence 
of bodies is confirmed by the evidence of the senses and the 
existence of void is inferred from their motion; (4) Bodies are 
either compounds or the components of compounds, i.e. 
indivisible and unchangeable particles (atoms); (5) The 
universe is infinite both in the extent of void and in the 
number of its components compounds and atoms. The 
number of the worlds is also innumerable. 

So far the picture drawn by Epicurus remains within 
the Democritean framework. The differences begin when the 
philosopher turns to the properties of atoms and their motion. 
In contrast with Democritus who held atoms to be distinguish 
able by shape, arrangement and position, in Epicurus they 


262 











possess shape, size, weight and some other properties connect¬ 
ed with shape (Epicurus does not specify them). Like hfs pre¬ 
decessor, Epicurus speaks of atoms as having different shapes, 
but he insists that the number of shapes is finite (though 
incomprehensibly large). Contrary to Democritus who was 
said to believe that an atom could be as large as the cosmos, 
Epicurus claimed that atoms differed in size within rather 
narrow limits remaining so small as to be invisible. If that 
were not so, “some atoms would be bound to come within our 
ken and be visible; but this is never seen to be the case, nor 
is it possible to imagine how an atom could become visible” 
(ibid., 56). 

We have earlier noted that Epicurus, in contrast with 
Democritus, recognises the objectivity of sensible qualities. 
If anything, they are attested to by the senses which, accord 
ing to Epicurus, are never at fault. In order to overcome the 
scepticism of his predecessor and account for these qualities 
as inherent in bodies, Epicurus had apparently only one way 
open to him —to reduce them to the basic properties of their 
components, i.e. to the size, shape and weight of atoms. How¬ 
ever, the philosopher offers a different solution to the prob 
lem. He declares that a body is not a mere aggregate of atoms 
but a qualitatively new whole with its own distinguishing 
features. Though it is subject to change and bound to perish, 
its existence in the physical world is no less real than the 
existence of atoms, its permanent components, just as its 
qualities are as real as the qualities of the atoms themselves. 
Shape, colour, taste, smell, size, weight, etc. are objective 
properties in so far as they are perceived by the senses. How¬ 
ever, they belong not to atoms themselves, but to changing 
objects and are inseparable from their existence. According to 
Epicurus, “all these properties have their own peculiar means 
of being perceived and distinguished, provided always that the 
aggregate body goes along with them and is never wrested 
from them, but in virtue of its comprehension as an aggregate 
of qualities acquires the predicate of body” (ibid., 69). 

The problem of primary and secondary qualities is treated 
by Epicurus in a similar materialist vein. In his eyes, the 
primary qualities are those that are permanent and essential 
to the existence of an object, whereas the secondary qualities 
may come and go without affecting its nature: “we make it 
clear that accidents have neither the nature of the whole, 
which we comprehend in its aggregate and call body, nor that 


26 s 















of the qualities which permanently accompany it, without 
which a given body cannot be conceived” (ibid., 70). 
Nevertheless, they are recognisable by sense-perceptions and 
are therefore also objective. 

Epicurus makes an advance on Democritus in the under¬ 
standing of space and time. The conception of space (void) in 
Epicurus is directly linked with motion movement of the 
atoms and bodies requires empty space. However, the qualifi¬ 
cations of space depend on its relations with matter: “accord¬ 
ing to Epicurus, of the intangible nature one part is named 
‘void,’ another ‘place,’ another ‘room,’ the names being 
varied according to the different applications, since the same 
nature is termed ‘void’ when destitute of any body, and 
is called ‘place’ when occupied by a body, and becomes 
‘room’ when bodies pass through it” (Sext. Adv. math. X, 2). 
As regards time, Epicurus considers it a secondary quality 
of moving and changing things, yet insists on distinguishing 
it from other secondary qualities. He avers that time is an 
accident of events which are themselves secondary qualities 
of people and places and is therefore a secondary quality of 
secondary qualities. In his opinion, in trying to comprehend 
time we should not attempt to form a notion of it as we do in 
respect of other qualities, “but we must take the direct intu¬ 
ition, in accordance with which we speak of ‘a long time’ 
or ‘a short time,’ and examine it, applying our intuition to 
time as we do to other things... For indeed this requires 
no demonstration, but only reflection, to show that it is with 
days and nights and their divisions that we associate it, 
and likewise also with internal feelings or absence of feeling, 
and with movements and states of rest; in connection with 
these last again we think of this very perception as a pecu¬ 
liar kind of accident, and in virtue of this we call it time” 
(Ep. ad. Herod. 72, 73). 

The most important distinction of Epicurus from Democri¬ 
tus is the conception of the atom’s weight as the cause of 
its motion. Atoms, according to Epicurus, are carried down¬ 
wards by their weight and travel parallel to one another at a 
uniform speed. 1 

1 Explaining his doctrine, Epicurus warns against understanding “np” 
and ‘‘down’' in the absolute sense as though there existed higher and lower 
points in the universe. These words only relate to us as observers and 
only to the earth as the centre of our world and have no meaning in respect 
of infinite space. 













Now, if all the atoms were raining downwards at a con 
stant speed, there would be no world as the atoms could never 
meet and form composite bodies. Since the world does exist as 
attested to by our senses, Epicurus posits declination of atoms 
from their regular course, kind of a spontaneous minute 
“swerve” that accounts for the crossing of their paths and 
eventual collisions. This was an important departure from 
the rigid-and fatalistic teaching of Democritus that marked 
a new step forward in the doctrine of ancient atomistic materi¬ 
alism and had far reaching consequences. 

The critics of Epicureanism and many historians of philos¬ 
ophy usually regarded the declination of the atoms merely as 
a trick for an ad hoc explanation of the formation of composite 
bodies. Young Marx was the first to discern the significance 
of this concept which is in fact central to the teaching of 
Epicurus. According to Marx, “ the declination of the atom 
from the straight line, is, namely, not a particular determi¬ 
nation which appears accidentally in Epicurean physics. On 
the contrary, the law which it expresses goes through the 
whole Epicurean philosophy, in such a way, however, that, as 
goes without, saying, the determination of its appearance 
depends on the domiiin in which it is applied."' In physics, 
this law was directed against the rigorous mechanistic 
determinism of Democritus with its identification of cause and 
necessity. The idea of the spontaneous swerve of the atom, 
i.e. the possibility of random atomic behaviour was 
tantamount to the recognition of chance and necessity in the 
explanation of natural phenomena. Chance, according to 
Epicurus, is by no means the absence of cause: if this were so, 
the swerve would run counter to the first principle of natural 
philosophy —the postulate “nothing out of nothing,” i.e. 
nothing without a cause. The declination in Epicurus does 
have a cause, but it is not external as with collision of atoms, 
but internal, inherent, like the force of gravity, in the very 
essence of the atom. “The Epicurean declination of the atom 
thus changed the whole inner structure of the domain of the 
atoms....’” 

Epicurus stresses that chance should not be indentified 
with what we do not know the cause of. It is objective in 

1 Karl Marx, “Difference Between the Deniocritean and Epicurean 
Philosophy of Nature”, in: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Collected 
Works, Vol. 1, p. 50. 

2 Ibid., p. 53. 


265 






the sense that natural processes result not from necessity, but 
rather from probability. Epicurus thus opens a way for a more 
flexible understanding of the law governing the universe 
that approximates the modern conception. However, it was not 
more than a conjecture, the more so as it was not indicative of 
any trend towards a mathematical expression of probabilistic 
processes. 

The idea of fortuitous declination also manifests itself in 
Epicurus’s explanation of natural processes, particularly 
heavenly phenomena. Since declination of atoms is a result of 
their spontaneous activity, their internal determinateness, 
natural phenomena consisting essentially in the movement of 
atoms and their coming together cannot be adequately 
accounted for if we disregard the interaction of multiple 
causes (this thesis receives special substantiation in 
Epicurus’s letter to Pythocles). The multiplicity of causes 
and, accordingly, of possible explanations of celestial 
phenomena brings Epicurus to a conclusion that true science 
is incompatible with one-sidedness: “But when one accepts 
one theory and rejects another, which harmonises just as well 
with the phenomenon, it is obvious that he altogether leaves 
the path of scientific inquiry and has recourse to myth” 
(Ep. ad Pyth. 87). 

According to Epicurus, both celestial and terrestrial 
phenomena have a common nature and are based on natural 
laws though the latter lend themselves to direct observation, 
whereas the former are inaccessible to the senses. Epicurus 
writes: “Now we can obtain indications of what happens above 
from some of the phenomena in the sky... Yet we must never 
desert the appearance of each of these phenomena, and 
further, as regards what is associated with it, must distinguish 
those things whose production in several ways is not contra¬ 
dicted by phenomena on earth” (ibid., 88). Epicurus’s cosmol¬ 
ogy, according to Marx, reveals the soul of his philosophy 
of nature. It shows that there is nothing on the earth or in 
heaven that is beyond the grasp of the mind and can 
disturb man’s tranquillity and happiness. 

3. From Physics to Ethics and “Theology ” 

Canonic and physics play but an auxiliary part in Epicu¬ 
rus’s teaching. The ultimate purpose of philosophy as he sees 
it is not to seek for the hidden truth of things or to explore the 
possibilities of the mind, though the scientific explanation of 
the universe is absolutely indispensable, but to contribute to 


L'lih 









human happiness and bring that repose and contented acqui 
escence which constitute the true end of life. Exalting philo¬ 
sophical knowledge, Epicurus writes: “Let no one when 
young delay to study philosophy, nor when he is old grow 
weary of his study. For no one can come too early or too 
late to secure the health of his soul. And the man who 
says that the age for philosophy has either not yet come or 
has gone by is like the man who says that the age for 
happiness is not yet come to him, or has passed away...” 
(Ep. ad Men 122). By providing scientific explanation for 
natural phenomena in the world philosophy sweeps aside 
all fears that torment and degrade man’s consciousness the 
fears of gods, death, punishment in another world, etc.—and 
prevent him from being happy. 

Happiness, according to Epicurus, is that which yields 
pleasure or relief from suffering. This ethical principle derives 
from the Epicurean theory that man naturally strives for 
pleasure and avoids suffering. “And for this cause we call 
pleasure the beginning and end of the blessed life. For we 
recognise pleasure as the first good innate in us, and from 
pleasure we begin every act of choice and avoidance, and to 
pleasure we return again, using the feeling as the standard by 
which we judge every good” (ibid., 128 129). This extract, 
if considered out of its setting and irrespective of Epicurean 
philosophy as a whole, might well give cause to reproach 
Epicurus of one-sidedness and advocacy of base instincts, 
particularly if we add to it another famous passage from his 
treatise On the End of Life: “I know not how I can conceive 
the good, if I withdraw the pleasures of taste, and-withdraw 
the pleasures of love, and withdraw the pleasures of hearing, 
and withdraw the pleasurable emotions caused to sight by 
beautiful form” (fr. 10). This indeed looks like frank 
advocacy of ordinary voluptuousness. 

However, such reproach would be entirely undeserved — 
and not only because the statements quoted above may have 
been made in the heat of an argument or intended to play up to 
the tastes of the crowd. Far more important is the interpreta¬ 
tion of pleasure, the central notion in the moral doctrine of 
Epicurean Garden, which has nothing in common with coarse¬ 
ness and vulgarity not infrequently ascribed to it. According 
to Epicurus, “it is not possible to live pleasantly without 
living prudently and honourably and justly (nor again to live 
a life of prudence, honour, and justice) without living 


267 




pleasantly” (Sent. V). True pleasure which is the criterion of 
moral behaviour is inseparable from reason and justice. 
Though man seeks pleasure, “we must consider that of desires 
some are natural, others vain, and of the natural some are 
necessary and others merely natural; and of the necessary 
some are necessary for happiness, others for the repose of the 
body, and others for very life. The right understanding of 
these facts enables us to refer all choice and avoidance to the 
health of the body and (the soul’s) freedom from 
disturbance, since this is the aim of the life of blessedness” 
(Ep. ad Men. 128). 

As a matter of fact, this conception of man’s needs and 
desires was rooted in ancient ethical tradition and shared 
by both “immoral” Epicureanism and “moral” Stoicism. Yet 
in contrast with other ancient moralists, the approach of the 
Garden Philosophers was free from any traces of hypocrisy. 
According to Epicurus, desires are to be controlled by the 
mind for the simple reason that immoderate pleasure inevitab¬ 
ly turns into suffering. Pleasure as the ultimate end of life 
implies “freedom from pain in the body and from trouble 
in the mind. For it is not continuous drinkings and revellings, 
nor the satisfaction of lusts, nor the enjoyment of fish and 
other luxuries of the wealthy table, which produce a pleasant 
life, but sober reasoning, searching out the motives for all 
choice and avoidance” (ibid., 131 132). Indeed, questionable 
delights of luxury and extravagance are bound to bring evils 
in their wake... 

Insistence on moderation in enjoyment was charasteristic 
of all ancient ethics. The distinguishing feature of the 
Epicurean ethical thought was a resolute break with religion 
which was in Epicurus’s eyes the bitterest enemy of human 
happiness. Indeed, man’s happiness is incompatible with the 
“opinions to which are due the greatest disturbance of the 
spirit” (ibid., 132)—the diseased fancies of gods which 
continually interfere in men’s lives, harass the mortals on the 
earth and torture them after their death. The idea of im¬ 
mortality with its implications of punishments and rewards is 
utterly baseless. Man’s soul perishes with the body and death 
is the end of everything —so why should man fear it? It can 
bring him no evil, because where death comes man is no more. 

Invoking science as an instrument for combating religion 
and dispelling man’s fears and vain hopes, Epicurus reasoned 
along two lines. 


268 










First, he set himself against the deification of heavenly 
phenomena so characteristic of ancient philosophy. Epicurus 
maintained that all heavenly events consecrated by mythology 
are actually brought about by natural causes. Attaching 
much importance to the scientific view of the world, Epicurus 
laid no special stress on the details of his natural expla¬ 
nations. He held that phenomena admitted of several inter¬ 
pretations in view of the multiplicity of their causes and did 
not seem to be very particular over which of them was adopted 
so long as it ruled out the supernatural. This view not infre 
quently gave cause for accusing Epicurus of lacking in the 
scientific ferver and being rather easy-going about the natural 
foundation of his ethical theory. This viewpoint can hardly 
be regarded as tenable. Far from underestimating positive 
science, Epicurus was against groundless claims to the 
knowledge of absolute truth bordering on myth and tending 
to turn into a dogma. 

Second, Epicurus rejected the idea of divine providence and 
denied any influence of gods on men’s affairs. Curiously, 
Epicurus conceded the existence of gods as his theory of 
knowledge demanded an objective cause of people’s belief 
in them in the shape of film or images falling off from real 
objects, yet he lodged them in the spaces between worlds and 
denied them any influence on nature or human society. 
According to Epicurus, “the blessed and immortal nature 
knows no trouble itself nor causes trouble to any other, so 
that it is never constrained by anger or favour. For all such 
things exist only in the weak” (Sent. I). On the evidence of 
Lactantius (fr. 374 Usener), Epicurus argued the indifference 
of gods to human affairs from presence of evil in the world. 
God, according to Epicurus, is either willing to abolish evil 
but is incapable of doing so, or, having the potency, is not 
willing, or is both unwilling and incapable, or both willing 
and capable. In the first case he is powerless which runs 
counter to the concept of god, in the second, he is envious 
which is equally absurd, in the third he is both envious 
and powerless, and in the fourth, his idleness is inexplicable. 

Divine providence, according to Epicurus, is nothing else 
than a crude invention of the crowd. The gods leading the 
life of blessed happiness have no good reason to concern 
themselves with the world’s troubles. If they did, they would 
not enjoy perfect tranquillity and repose as they ought to. 
The gods are immortal, totally untroubled and reside in the 
intermundia, their bodies being made of fine atoms of fiery 


269 










substance. It is useless to propitiate the gods and expect 
any benefits from them —yet men must venerate them out of 
the sheer intellectual delight in their excellence, immortal¬ 
ity and blessful happiness. “And yet these gods are no fiction 
of Epicurus. They did exist. They are the plastic gods of 
Greek art”'— the archetypes of those masterpieces that 
embody till nowadays the ideal of beauty. However, the 
aesthetic essence of the Epicurean gods was the total denial of 
their religious essence. 

The moral theory of Epicurus not only denies religious 
ethics, but asserts man’s freedom as the indispensable prere¬ 
quisite for the attainment of happiness, i.e. the calm of mind 
and imperturbability in the face of the vicissitudes of life. Man 
in this sense is the master of his own destiny. Hence the 
resolute opposition of Epicurus not only to the religious idea 
of divine providence, but also to the fatalism of natural 
scientists hypostatising necessity. According to Epicurus, 
“with us lies the chief power in determining events, some of 
which happen by necessity and some are within our control” 
(Ep. ad Men. 133). While necessity cannot be called to 
account, a wise man “sees that chance is inconstant, but that 
which is in our control is subject to no master, and to it are 
naturally attached praise and blame” (ibid.). 

The possibility of man’s choice of a course of action derives, 
according to Epicurus, from the multiplicity of causes of 
both natural and social processes. Whereas Epicurus raised 
his objections against the natural explanations of the “physi¬ 
cists” (Ep. ad Men. 134), his follower Diogenes of Oinoanda 
levelled his criticism directly at Democritus contending that 
the belief in rigid necessity and predestination is incompatible 
with exhortation, blame or even punishment of criminals 
(1. 39). Epicurus went even so far in his denunciation of 
mechanistic necessity as to make this statement: “It were 
better to follow the myths about the gods than to become 
a slave to the destiny of the natural philosophers” (Ep. ad. 
Men. 134). 

As regards chance, the wise man, according to Epicurus, 
“does not regard it as a god as most men do (for in a god’s 
acts there is no disorder), nor as an uncertain cause (of all 
things): for he does not believe that good and evil are given 
by chance to man for the framing of a blessed life, but that 


1 Karl Marx, “Difference Between the Democritian and Epicurean 
Bhylosophy of Nature," ibid., p. 51.’ 


270 












opportunities for great good and great evil are afforded by 
it” (ibid.). Hence, chance is nothing else than the opportu¬ 
nity for a free choice. It should be noted, however, that the 
Epicureans could not discern the possibilities for explaining 
the freedom of choice present in Democritus’s system, there¬ 
fore their criticism of the views of the founder of atomism 
was one-sided. 

The division of all phenomena into those independent of 
and dependent on man’s will is very characteristic of 
Hellenism. 1 Epicurus maintains that wisdom and happiness 
consist in attaining complete independence from everything 
that disturbs the soul’s tranquillity —the bustle of the world, 
ambitions, frets, vain desires. This contented acquiescence and 
inward peace ( ataraxia) is achieved through long training and 
exercise ( askesis ). The Epicurean askesis, however, is very 
different from the mortification of the flesh advocated by 
various religious trends, and is understood as the education 
of man in preparation for a happy life free from the pain of 
body and trouble of spirit. 

The attainment of ataraxia calls for freedom from the fear 
of death. Epicurus is convinced that the soul is mortal as it 
consists of atoms: “The soul is a body of fine particles 
distributed throughout the whole structure, and most 
resembling wind with a certain admixture of heat, and in some 
respects like to one of these and in some to the other... If the 
whole structure is dissolved, the soul is dispersed and no 
longer has the same powers nor performs its movements, so 
that it does not possess sensation either” (Ep. ad Herod. 63, 
65). That being so, “death is nothing to us: for that which is 
dissolved is without sensation; and that which lacks sensation 
is nothing to us” (Sent. II). One of the principal objects of 
philosophy was, according to Epicurus, to free men from 
ignorance and the fear of death which are the sources of their 
faith in god. 

Epicurus’s ethics is the foundation of his social theory. 
Society in his view is an aggregate of individuals who should 
not interfere with one another in their pursuit of pleasure. 
Epicurus exalts friendship which is valued for the safety and 


1 The acute awareness of the power of chance that reigns supreme and 
confounds the affairs of men was already characteristic of the literature 
of early Hellenism. For instance, in Menander’s comedies chance is often 
used as the mainspring of the plot personifying wilful and crotchety goddess 
Tyche. 









tranquillity of the soul it affords. Justice based on the agree¬ 
ment of men not to do harm to one another derives from the 
principle of pleasure: “In its general aspect justice is the 
same for all, for it is a kind of mutual advantage in the 
dealings of men with one another: but with reference to the 
individual peculiarities of a country or any other circum 
stances the same thing does not turn out to be just for all” 
(ibid., XXXVI). 

4. Roman Epicureanism 

The spread of Epicureanism in Rome in the Republican, 
and then in the Imperial period was the result of its appeal to 
certain sections of Roman society and often - went side by side 
with the distortion of its doctrine in the spirit of crude Hedo¬ 
nism. Pseudo-Epicureanism of the upper strata of Roman soci¬ 
ety is of no special interest in terms of philosophy, being in 
fact nothing else than the vulgarisation of materialist views. 
Yet Roman Epicureanism that developed further the teaching 
of Epicurus was an important ideological factor. In the first 
century B.C. it was represented by an Epicurean school set up 
near Naples and was headed by Syronus and Philodemus. 

Special interest attaches to the logical theory of Philodemus 
of Gadara (110 40 B.C.) expounded by him in a treatise under 
the non-authentic name On Methods of Inference' This 
treatise much corrupted by time describes the controversy of 
the Epicureans against the Stoics over the problems of induc¬ 
tive logic and develops a conception of signs making it possi¬ 
ble to reason from the observable phenomena to what is bey¬ 
ond observation (e.g. scar is the sign of a healed wound, from 
smoke we infer to fire, from sweat to pores in the skin, etc.). 
The basis of a reliable inference is experience. According to 
Philodemus, we should not rely on chance phenomena only. 
By comparing numerous similar and dissimilar phenomena 
and using our general experience we should reveal the 
inherent properties of each phenomenon and infer from them 
to the others. For instance, if we find out that men differ in 
all respects but one, there is no reason why we should not 
safely assert, recalling all men we have known personally 
and those we have heard about, that all people are liable 
to old age and death (Philod. XX, 34-XXI, 12). 

As is evidenced from the above, Philodemus does not 


1 See Philodemus, On Methods of Inference , ed. by Ph. H. De Lacy and 
E. A. De Lacy, Philadelphia, Penn., 1941. 





identify induction as a method for obtaining general authentic 
conclusions with induction based on simple enumeration 
true inductive reasoning must deal with necessary and 
stable properties of objects. 

The high level of Epicurean logic is attested to by the fact 
that the Epicureans were familiar with the method of sole 
similarity, reduced induction to the inference from one partic 
ular to another (analogy) and came near to the recognition of 
the uniform operation of natural laws as the foundation of 
inductive inferences. 

According to Philodemus, the empirical inductive method 
is a characteristic feature of all arts and sciences based 
on general principles. It is also applicable to ethics in which 
the definitions of good and evil are to be confirmed by 
inductive conclusions. In his treatise On the Gods he inferr¬ 
ed to the existence of the gods from men’s experience and 
maintained that the gods are similar to human beings in 
appearance since only the human beings and the gods have 
a capability for thought. 

Philodemus also occupies an important place in the history 
of aesthetics and is known as a poet. Most of the poems that 
came down to us (their number exceeds 30) are love lyrics. 

The next stage in the history of Epicureanism is connected 
with Lucretius who made an important step forward in the 
development of its doctrine. We have practically no evidence 
for his life story, but Cicero’s letter of February 54 B.C. gives 
a hint on the date of his famous poem. He was born about 99 
B.C. and is known to have committed suicide at the age of 43, 
which puts his'death at approximately 51 B.C. According to 
other sources, he died in 55 B.C. The deplorable lack of data 
on Lucretius’s personality and external circumstances is more 
than offset by the magnificence and depth of his great poem, 
a true encyclopaedia of Epicureanism. It consists of six books 
of which books I and II deal with the fundamentals of 
Epicurean physics in comparison with the views of earlier 
philosophers, book III expounds the views of Epicurus on the 
soul and its properties, book IV outlines his “image” theory 
of knowledge and physiology of man, book V treats of the gods 
and the origin of living beings, man and society, whereas book 
VI describes climatic phenomena, rivers and hot springs, 
explains earthquakes, volcanic activity and causes of various 
diseases and ends in a description of the horrors of the 430 
B.C. epidemic in Athens. His entire poem is pervaded with 


I S ll3Jt 


273 










the spirit of atheism and displays an obvious ethical disposit¬ 
ion. In point of fact, Lucretius’s moral theory rests on 
a solid foundation of his materialist atheistic convictions and 
the discussion of nearly all scientific questions tackled in the 
poem is intended to substantiate his views. 

One would vainly try to preserve the richness and flavour of 
the poem in its rendition —it must be read as a philosophical 
treatise and as a masterpiece of poetical art. On the formal 
side, The Nature of Things expounds the teaching of 
Epicurus and reproduces his arguments, which is in itself an 
invaluable contribution to the history of philosophy as the 
poem often serves as the only extant evidence for Epicurus’s 
authentic views. Its true significance, however, is far greater. 
Recent investigations of Soviet scholars have shown that the 
“mechanistic” picture of the world in Democritus and 
Epicurus was transformed by Lucretius into a poetical image 
of living nature which exerts a profound emotional and 
aesthetic influence on the reader even in our days. In contrast 
with Democritus and Epicurus who needed only two factors 
to account for the nature of things, the atoms with their 
properties and the void accommodating them, Lucretius sees 
the world rather as ever-living, colourful, generative nature 
very much in the manner of earlier Greek thinkers. This 
explains why he prefers biomorphic analogies, e.g. “birth” 
and “growth” over technomorphic, mechanistic ones, such as 
“sorting out” in Anaxagoras and Democritus. The same 
“biological” attitude is expressed in Lucretius’s terminology; 
having no Latin equivalent for Greek “atom” (indivisible), 
he uses Anaxagoras’s term “seeds” to denote the first causes or 
primary bodies of the universe. 

Expounding the fundamental principle of atomism, Lucreti¬ 
us formulates it as follows: “Nothing is ever gotten out of 
nothing by divine power” (Lucr. I, 251). The substantiation 
of this thesis by Lucretius shows that he understands it, first, 
as an expression of determinism (nothing comes into being 
without a cause), second, as an expression of substantialism 
(a thing can only be generated from other things, in the end 
from “primary bodies,” i.e. matter), and third, as a reflection 
of a biological process: things are generated not through 
mechanical combination, but by birth, like living organisms. 
The “nothing out of nothing” (ex nihilo nihil) principle is 
an uncompromising denial of any divine interference in the 
affairs of nature. 







Lucretius’s conception of the atom is different from that 
of Democritus and Epicurus. Of course, for him it is also the 
“limit of division” (redditia finis), but this limit, in his 
opinion, is a pure abstraction, and the “indivisible,” using the 
term of modern science, is an “ideal body.” The relevant 
passage runs thus: “That point [the atom] sure enough is 
without parts and consists of a least nature and never has 
existed apart by itself and will not be able in future so to 
exist, since it is in itself a part of that other; and so a first and 
single part and then the other similar parts in succession 
fill up in close serried mass the nature of the first body” (Lucr. 
I, 601-606). As regards the real physical body, it is always 
a part of a larger whole, of “nature creatress of things” and 
even of “begetting matter” (genitalis materies ) (Lucr. 
I, 627). 

Lucretius is not explicit about the properties of matter 
that account for its generative power. In the passage referred 
to he lists such properties as weight, movement and impacts 
“by means of which things severally go on” (Lucr. I, 634). 

These are the properties of atoms, quite sufficient, in 
the opinion of Epicurus, to explain the emergence of things. 
By contrast, his follower constantly underlines the creative, 
generative power of matter and speaks of the specific material 
which “begets” things. Similarly to the seed, this material 
contains the cause and principle of the thing, something like 
its “genetic code.” In order to express this idea of generation, 
Lucretius was constantly forced to resort to poetic images and 
buttress, as it were, abstract propositions by concrete pictures 
as the notions of classical ancient atomism were hardly 
suitable for his purpose. 

The poem abounds in passages where Lucretius personifies 
Nature as life-giver and invokes it as Venus, Mother of Gods 
or Great Mother, describes the marriage of Mother-Earth and 
Father-Ether as the source of life in the world, speaks of the 
loving embrace of Venus and Mars, etc. These poetic adorn¬ 
ments have sometimes been interpreted by commentators as 
Lucretius’s return to mythology, which appears to us com¬ 
pletely untenable. First, references to mythological deities 
are contained in not more than 15 per cent of the poem’s 
text and these include openly atheistic and anti-mytho¬ 
logical passages. Second, Lucretius stressed that he used 
"the Muses’ charm” only to elucidate his “dark subject” 
(Lucr. IV, 8-22), like a physician who offers a sick child the 
beneficial cup of medicine edged with honey (see IV, 8-22). 


275 










Third, the mythological images are clearly allegorical which 
is often confirmed by Lucretius himself. Such is the case, for 
instance, with Great Mother which was traditionally identified 
with the Earth as the source of all life. Explaining his attitude 
to such allegories, Lucretius says: “And here if any one thinks 
proper to call the sea Neptune and corn Ceres and chooses 
rather to misuse the name of Bacchus than to utter the term 
that belongs to that liquor, let us allow him to declare that the 
earth is mother of the gods, if he only forbear in earnest to 
stain his mind with foul religion” (Lucr. II, 655-659, 680). 

The obviouly allegorical interpretation of mythological 
deities in the poem attests to the fact that Lucretius subscribed 
to the traditional attitude of Hellenistic science to religion. 
His poem also reflects a popular literary tradition represent¬ 
ed, for instance, by Callimachus who strove to expose the 
falsity of Greek mythology by skilfully using the poetic 
devices of old Ionian epos. Yet unlike Callimachus seeking 
after a new mythology, Lucretius focuses his attention on 
natural philosophy, “physics” in the ancient sense, which 
accounts for the major part of his poem. 

In contrast with Epicurus whose physical theory was in 
tended to provide the foundation for his ethics, Lucretius 
treats physics as an entirely independent object of philoso¬ 
phical enquiry and seeks to develop a rational conception of 
the world. His tendency towards the contemplation of nature, 
as well as the epistemological differentiation between “open” 
things with their sensual qualities and properties and “hid¬ 
den” ones that can only be accessible to thought, causes 
him to adopt the attitude of philosophical enlightenment 
which demands a complete restructuring of human consci¬ 
ousness and self-consciousness. According to Lucretius, 
nature itself “by its aspect and its law” must purge man’s 
soul from all superstitions and all fears brought by religion 
in its train (I, 148; II, 61; VI, 41). 

The traditional problems of ancient atomism are treated 
by Lucretius in the light of his biomorphic conception of 
matter which substitutes for the purely mechanistic theory. 
We have already spoken about his interpretation of the ex 
nihilo nihil principle. Explaining further the atomistic struc¬ 
ture of matter, the Homan thinker uses two arguments to 
prove it. First, he asserts that things consist of invisible partic¬ 
les adducing the examples of wind, water, smells and sounds: 
“The dripping from the eaves hollows a stone, the bent 
ploughshare of iron imperceptibly decreases in the fields and 


276 





we behold a stone-paved street worn down by the feet of 
multitude; the brass statues too at the gates show their right 
hands to be wasted by the touch of numerous passers by, who 
greet them” (Lucr. I, 313-318). Then he argues the invisibili¬ 
ty of such particles from the rule of contraries, repeating in 
fact the reasoning of Zeno of Elea: if things are infinitely 
divisible, “between the sum of things what difference will 
there be?” (Lucr. I, 619). 

Arguing the existence of void, Lucretius infers it, like 
Epicurus, from motion, divisibility of compounds, different 
densities of substance, etc. He links the conception of motion 
with weight and distinguishes two kinds of movement of 
atoms: downward fall as a result of weight and rebound due 
to collisions. Speaking of the atom’s swerve in the orthodox 
Epicurean tradition, Lucretius regards it, however, as a mani¬ 
festation of the creative power of matter. At the same time he 
returns to a more consistent determinism of Democritus, again 
on the biomorphic basis, contending that “where each thing 
can grow and abide, is fixed and ordained” (Lucr. Ill, 787; 
V. 731). 

A similar reversion to Democritus is also exhibited by Luc¬ 
retius in his understanding of society. Its progress is described 
essentially along the Democritean lines (Book V, 926-1457), 
but there is a marked difference in tone, if not in substance. 
The time of Lucretius was characterised by an acute social 
and political crisis that plagued the Hellenistic world and 
precipitated the creation of the Roman Empire; it could not 
but affect the mood of the Roman philosopher and his whole 
world outlook. Though Lucretius’s poem is practically free 
from concrete social and political observations and conclusi¬ 
ons, it reflects this crisis by disclosing the contradictoriness of 
social progress which can only be achieved through 
back-breaking toil, wars and annihilation of one’s own kind 
and goes side by side with increasing social inequality, 
growing contrast between the rich and the poor, moral 
degradation, crime, superstitions, fear of the gods and death. 
Ignorance and baseless fears that lie at the root of religious 
beliefs are, according to Lucretius, the most characteristic 
features of human existence. Man’s only hope is the Epicurean 
philosophy of wisdom which alone can sweep aside the relig 
ious chimeras that harass mankind, and bring it inward peace 
and happiness. 

Lucretius is an implacable opponent of the existing “foul” 
religion and traditional mythology which make a permanent 


277 






object of his scathing sarcasm, condemnation and ridicule. 
Born of ignorance and fear and pretending to the role of the 
guardian of public morals, official religion engenders impiety 
and crime, being responsible, for instance, for such godless 
acts as the sacrifice of Aethegenus “that thus a happy and 
prosperous departure might be granted to the fleet” (Lucr. I, 
100). Interpreting the myths in naturalistic terms, Lucretius 
traces their origin to physical and social causes (V, 396-410, 
III, 984-1023). 

History shows that anti-religious views need not necessarily 
be equivalent to outright atheism, and that was just the case 
with Lucretius. The Greeks and Romans did regard him as 
an atheist, because he came out against the gods of popular 
religion, let alone the religion of the state. Yet despite his 
vigorous attacks against the chimeras of popular beliefs pro¬ 
duced by ignorance and superstitions, Lucretius, following 
Epicurus, conceded the existence of gods in the interspaces, 
completely unruffled and therefore absolutely passive, having 
no concern for man’s life and exerting no influence on nature 
or human affairs. According to Lucretius, “the fine nature of 
the gods far withdrawn from our senses is hardly seen by the 
thought of the mind” (Lucr. V, 148-149). These gods are very 
different from the gods of the traditional religion and have 
none of their functions: they do not create or order things, 
do not exercise their power of predestination, do not respond 
to prayer or gratitude, can neither punish the wrongdoers nor 
reward the virtuous. Useless is the worship of such gods and 
vain are all attempts to propitiate them. Consequently, “no act 
is of piety to be often seen with veiled head to turn to a stone 
and approach every altar and fall prostrate on the ground ... 
but rather to be able to look on all the things with a mind in 
peace” (Lucr. V, 1198-1199, 1203). 

The gods of Lucretius are even more divorced from the 
world than the gods of Epicurus and seem to serve no other 
purpose than to embody the ideal of perfect life and provide 
an object of aesthetic contemplation. 

In ethics Lucretius mainly follows in the wake of Epicurus 
except that the moral theory of the Roman philosopher is 
markedly more naturalistic and more deterministic. Accord 
ing to Lucretius, the ultimate principle of man’s behaviour is 
the desire for sensual pleasure which determines his actions 
and is independent of his consciousness. In Lucretius’s eyes 
man is the child of living and creative nature and embodies its 
powers and abilities. 











Chapter 2 

Stoicism 

5. History ot Stoicism 

The Stoics were another Hellenistic school of philosophy 
that developed in parallel with Epicureanism. It was founded 
at the end of the fourth century B.C. and existed till the 
early part of the sixth century A.D. when it was closed by 
emperor Justinian’s edict (529). The founder of the school 
was Zeno of Citium, a half-Greek and half-Phoenician colony 
in Cyprus. Sources put the dates of his life at about 336-264 
B.C. He is said to have come from a merchant’s family and was 
a merchant himself, but went bankrupt after a shipwreck and 
settled in Athens. After studying under Crates the Cynic, 
Stilpo the Megarian and Xenocrates, in 300 B.C. he started 
his own school that got its name from Stoa Poikile (Painted 
Porch) where he gave his lectures. The porch was decorated 
with Polygnotus’s frescoes and favoured by poets. 

On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius his death occurred 
as a result of a minor incident that the philosopher construed 
as an expression of God’s will. While walking home after his 
lessons, he tripped on the road and broke his toe. Lying there, 
he struck the ground and quoted a line from Niobe (a poem of 
Timotheus that has not survived): “I come, I come, why dost 
thou call for me?” (Diog. L. VII, 28). Then he held his breath 
and died on the spot. According to other sources, he killed 
himself by abstaining from food. 

Among the works ascribed to him by Diogenes Laertius are 
the Republic, written in the spirit of Cynic philosophy, Of Life 
According to Nature, Of Impulse, or Human Nature, Of 
Emotions, Of Duty, Of Law, Of Greek Education, Of Vision, 
Of the Whole World, Of Signs (SVF, I, p. 72-73). All 
that has survived is a meagre selection of isolated fragments. 

Zeno’s successor Cleanthes of Assus (c. 331-232 B.C.) 
a former pugilist, exhibited little originality and followed 
in the wake of his teacher. He came to Athens with only four 


279 











drachmas in his pocket and became Zeno’s pupil, doing 
odd jobs to earn his living: “...while by night he used to draw 
water in gardens, by day he exercised himself in arguments” 
(Diog. L. VII, 168). He is credited with a number of treatises, 
including Of Time, On Zeno’s Natural Philosophy, Interpreta¬ 
tions of Heraclitus, Of Senses, Of Duty, Of Knowledge, On the 
Thesis that Virtue Is the Same in Man and in Woman, Of 
Pleasure, On Properties, On Insoluble Problems, Of Dialectic, 
and others. They also survived only in fragments (see SVF, I, 
p. 137 139, indicating 57 titles of Cleanthes’s works). 

The third and most prominent representative of the Early 
Stoa was Cleanthes’s successor Chrysippus from Soli in Cilicia 
(c. 280 205 B.C.). Tradition says that he was originally an 
athlete (runner) and credits him with 705 books, of which 
more than 300 were devoted to logic. According to Diogenes 
Eaertius, “so renowned was he for dialectic that most people 
thought, if the gods took to dialectic, they would adopt no 
other system than that of Chrysippus” (Diog. L. VII, 180). 
His importance for Stoic philosophy was acknowledged in the 
saying “Had there been no Chrysippus, there would be no 
Stoa.” All that has survived of his original writings are 
isolated fragments of 66 of his books (See SVF, III, pp. 
194-205). 

Other members of the Early Stoa were Zeno’s pupils Aris- 
ton, Herillus, Persaeus, and others, as well as Zeno’s and 
Cleanthes’s pupil Sphaerus of Bosporus. Of Chrysippus’s fol¬ 
lowers mention should be made of Diogenes the Babylonian of 
Selucia and Antipater of Tarsus, who were known as the first 
teachers of Stoicism in Rome. 

Already the early Stoics divided their philosophical system 
into three main parts: logic, physics and ethics. They likened 
philosophy to an egg in which the yolk is ethics, the white is 
physics and the shell is logic, or to an animal’s organism with 
the bones and sinews corresponding to logic, the flesh to ethics 
and the soul to physics. Unlike Zeno who started the exposi¬ 
tion of his system from logic and passed to physics and to 
ethics, Chrysippus proceeded from logic to ethics, and then to 
physics. Whatever the sequence, all the Stoics held that these 
divisions constituted an integral whole, logic binding the sys¬ 
tem and protecting physics and ethics, physics revealing the 
structure of the universe, and ethics teaching true wisdom 
identical with virtue and based on the dictates of nature. 

As distinct from the original philosophy of the Early Stoa, 
the Middle Stoa represented by Panaetius of Rhodes and 


2811 







Posidonius is largely eclectic, displaying a strong influence 
of Aristotle and particularly Plato. In point of fact, the 
influence of Platonism in the teachings of Panaetius and 
Posidonius is so conspicuous that there is good reason to 
classify them as “Stoic Platonism.” 

The Late Stoa or Roman Stoicism which flourished in the 
first and second centuries A.D. and is represented by the 
names of Epictetus, Seneca and Marcus Aurelius, restricts 
philosophy to ethics and is mainly concerned with practical 
problems. The decline of interest in logic, theory of knowledge 
and physics in the later Stoicism of Roman times goes side by 
side with the increasing tendency towards idealism and 
religion. 

Such is the external history of Stoicism as a philosophical 
teaching. Speaking of its social nature, one cannot overlook 
the fact that the Early Stoa was founded by representatives of 
the declassed strata of Hellenistic society—an impoverished 
merchant, a day labourer, a man dispossessed of his here¬ 
ditary property in favour of Emperor’s treasury (this is 
how Diogenes Laertius described Chrysippus’s circumstan¬ 
ces). Roman Stoicism is represented by a slave, subsequent¬ 
ly a freedman, Epictetus, a consul Seneca and an Emperor 
Marcus Aurelius. Equally broad was the Stoics’ audience — 
from an Emperor to a beggar and a slave... Stoicism had 
a strong appeal to all strata of Hellenistic society and to very 
different, emotionally and intellectually, individuals, and 
therefore had to express the general mood of the epoch—the 
widely spread feeling of uncertainty in the face of changeful 
and hostile reality, worthlessness of man’s life and omni¬ 
potence of unpredictable fate. In the early Hellenistic period 
practically every individual, from king to labourer, lived 
under a constant threat to his well-being, freedom and life 
itself. We already know the reaction of Epicurus to the 
conditions of the epoch his doctrine of the undisturbed peace 
of mind ( ataraxia) and enjoyment of pleasures seemed to 
offer freedom from fear and pain to the sage who rose to the 
heights of spiritual emancipation. Yet this philosophy was 
only suitable for the elite, for those who could afford to 
retire to the Epicurean garden. Stoicism had a much broader 
appeal and addressed every class in Hellenistic society, its 
ideal suited both a sage who had withdrawn from the world, 
and a politician who was a plaything of forces beyond his cont 
rol. The true Stoic is a man who has resigned to fate with cou¬ 
rage and dignity, understanding the hopelessness of any resis- 


2HI 
















tan ce — volentem ducunt fata, nolentem trahunt (fate leads 
the willing and drags the unwilling). 

The ethical ideal of Stoicism is thus very contradictory- 
on the one hand, the belief in the inevitability of universal 
doom apparently leads to pessimism and passivity, on the 
other hand, the exaltation of man’s dignity and heroic indiffer¬ 
ence to fate raises the Stoic above circumstances and defies 
fate itself, turning submissiveness into inner freedom. This 
solution, illusory as it was, cannot be denied the nobleness of 
spirit and proud acquiescence in the face of tragic necessity. 
It accounts for a strong and lasting influence of Stoicism 
which held its grip on the Hellenic mind for five centuries— 
from Zeno the Stoic till Marcus Aurelius. 


6. Stoic Logic and Theory of Knowledge 

The logical teaching of Stoicism was shaped under a strong 
influence of the Megarians— Diodorus Cronus, Stilpo and 
Philo of Megara. Yet in contrast with the Megarian “dialectic” 
which was hardly distinguishable from sophistics, the Stoics 
pursued the Aristotelian line and aimed at developing a theory 
of correct thinking. In point of fact, the logic of Aristotle 
dominated the philosophical thought of the epoch and was 
bound to affect the evolution of the Stoic logical conceptions, 
just as it affected rhetoric and the judicial procedure with 
its sophisticated methods of argumentation. 

The most characteristic feature of Stoic logic is its special 
interest in the language as a means of expressing thought. 
This feature reveals itself already in the structure of logic 
which is divided by the Stoics into dialectic concerned with 
the rules of consistent reasoning, and rhetoric as a science of 
talk, i.e. asking and answering questions. The inclusion of 
these two disciplines under the heading of logic is indicative 
of the Stoics’ awareness of the inseparability of thought and 
word indeed, both were known as logos. Dialectic, in turn, 
is divided into logic proper dealing with thought or the 
“signified,” and grammar dealing with word or the “signi¬ 
fying.” Since the Stoics do not exclude the real object as 
the source of knowledge from the act of cognition, they 
arrive at what may be called a “triangle:” a word signifies 
a thought, which, in turn, is related to an object. 1 


1 The Stoics, in fact, anticipated the “triangle of reference” lying at the 
root of the empirical theory of.meaning of Charles Ogden and Ivor Richards. 


2H2 








Dialectic understood by the Stoics as a science of the 
“signified” (thought) studies both its content and form, i.e. 
caterogies, notions, propositions, syllogism, logical errors and 
sophisms, whilst as grammar it is concerned with the 
linguistic means of expressing thought, i.e. with parts of 
speech and grammatical forms, as well as with the physiology 
of sound, theory of poetry and music. 

Special importance in Stoic logic attaches to the conception 
of lekton, i.e. the meaning of a linguistic sign. According to 
Sextus Empiricus, “the Stoics ... said that ‘three things are 
linked together, the thing signified and the thing signifying 
and the thing existing’; and of these the thing signifying is the 
sound (‘Dion,’ for instance); and the thing signified is the 
actual thing indicated thereby and which we apprehend 
as existing in dependence on our intellect, whereas the 
barbarians although hearing the sound do not understand it; 
and the thing existing is the external real object, such as Dion 
himself. And of these, two are bodies —that is the sound and 
the existing thing—and one is incorporeal, namely the thing 
signified and expressible, and this too is true or false” (Sext. 
Adv. math. VIII, 11-12). As is evidenced from the above, 
lekton is understood as a verbal expression of thought, i.e. 
as a thought represented by a linguistic sound or sign. The 
specific feature of lekton is that it does not exist outside 
its form (sound and sign) just as the word is a meaningless 
sound without the lekton. 

The Stoic teaching of lekton is the first version of the 
theory of meaning of words and expressions in a language. It 
can be correctly interpreted, however, only in the context of 
the Stoic epistemology which regards sensations as the source 
of all knowledge. The Stoics taught that the soul of a new- 
borne child is like a clean papyrus ready to receive every 
thought, and the first method for recording thoughts is 
through sensation (SVF, II, fr. 83). Sensations are retained in 
consciousness by memory, the accumulation of images in 
memory gives experience. The material provided by the senses 
is processed, as it were, by the associations existing in the 
mind. Though the notion of association was not yet available 
to the Stoics, they already knew all the kinds of associations 
the later philosophers were to concern themselves with. 
The Stoics taught that “General notions ... are gained in the 

In this triangle a word symbolises a thought and denotes an object or refe¬ 
rent, whereas the thought refers to the referent. See C. K. Ogden, I. A. Ri¬ 
chards, The Meaning of Meaning , London, 1930 p. 11. 


283 



















following ways: some by direct contact, some by resemblance, 
some by analogy, some by transposition, some by composi¬ 
tion, and some by contrariety. By incidence or direct contact 
have come our notions of sensible things; by resemblance 
notions whose origin is something before us, as the notion of 
Socrates which we get from his bust; while under notions 
derived from analogy come those which we get (1) by way of 
enlargement, like that of Tityos or the Cyclops, or (2) by way 
of diminution, like that of the Pygmy. And thus, too, the cent¬ 
re of the earth was originally conceived on the analogy of 
smaller spheres. Of notions obtained by transposition, crea¬ 
tures with eyes on the chest would be an instance, while the 
centaur exemplifies those reached by composition, and death 
those due to contrariety” (Diog. L. VII, 52-53). 

Zeno and Cleanthes took the view that an object impresses 
itself upon the soul as a signet ring is impressed into wax. 
Chrysippus rejected this simile as misleading, arguing that if 
the soul were like a piece of wax it could not receive more 
than one impression at a time and even that would be obli¬ 
terated by new impressions which is not the case. He contend¬ 
ed that the soul affected by an external object undergoes 
a change or a modification and offered their classification 
According to Chrysippus, first comes direct perception or 
“phantasia” which is true as it is produced directly by an 
object, then follows “phantastikon” or a mind picture pro¬ 
duced by imagination and, finally, “phantasm” or wild fancy 
arising in the mind in a state of insanity or frenzy (SVF, fr. 
54). 

According to the Stoics, sensations and presentations or 
impressions are common to both human beings and animals, 
yet the former have also concerts which are defined as 
presentations formed by the reasoning of a rational animal (fr. 
83). A concept is thus an image of an object based on its 
impression in the soul, or, according to Chrysippus, on the 
corresponding modification of the soul. As is evidenced from 
the abode, the Stoics conceived cognition as an active process: 
given free rein imagination may run wild. The objectivity of 
a perception implies the individual’s “consent” and the act of 
cognition including such “consent” or apprehension was 
called by them katalepsis. Hence, kataleptic phantasia or 
apprehensive perception identified as such by its clarity 
became for the Stoics the criterion of truth: it derives from an 
external object causing a change in the individual’s soul and 
is readily accepted by him as authentic Significantly, in the 


284 










opinion of the Stoics the process of cognition requires an 
active effort on the part of the cognising individual and it is 
precisely this mental effort that makes the concept (ennoia) 
superior to a simple perception and presentation. What is 
more, the formation of a concept presupposes the apprehen¬ 
sion of reality in logical terms, and this makes it possible to 
pass in thought from what has been perceived to what has not 
but can be perceived. As we see, the Stoics were more consis¬ 
tent empiricists than the Epicureans who regarded a logical 
conclusion as an instrument for transcending the limits 
of perceptibility and apprehending the imperceptible (e.g. 
infinitesimal atoms). In contrast with the Epicureans, the 
Stoics believed that knowledge starting from sense per¬ 
ceptions and ascending to logical apprehension must return 
to perceptions since what cannot be perceived is non-existent, 
a sheer fancy. 

According to the Stoics, concepts are formed by two differ¬ 
ent methods. Everyday concepts (koinai ennoiai) arise with¬ 
out a conscious mental effort, on the basis of elementary sense 
perceptions. Functionally, they are anticipations of scientific 
concepts ( technikai ennoiai) and are called prolepses. How¬ 
ever, whereas the Epicureans conceived prolepsis as the 
integrating capacity of the mind, the Stoics identified it with 
common notions preceding scientific knowledge. Their very 
presence in man's mind attests to the existence of the 
corresponding external objects which are then subjected to 
scientific study. For instance, men’s general consent regarding 
the existence of gods testifies to their reality and is a challenge 
to philosophy. 

As distinct from everyday concepts, scientific concepts are 
acquired through training, education and verification. The 
highest among them are categories, i.e. the most general 
concepts. They are essentially different from the.Aristotelian 
ones both in content and in status. Unlike Aristotle who did 
not distinguish between the logical, grammatical and 
ontological aspects of categories, the Stoics are keenly aware 
of their differences. The first of the Stoic categories, substra¬ 
tum (to hypokeimenon) is a logical subject, a grammatical 
subject and the ontological substance. The second category, 
quality or essential attribute (to poion hypokeimenon) is 
logically and grammatically a predicate. The third category 
is state or accidental condition, and the fourth the relation of 
substratum to its own quality (SVF II, fr. 369, 371). 

As distinct from Aristotle’s categories denoting ten highest 















and independent genera of entities, the Stoics’ four categories 
are interconnected so that each of them restricts and contains 
the preceding one. 

The highest category in Stoic philosophy is substance 
conceived as indeterminate substratum. Being modified by 
qualities, it divides, as it were, into individual substances or 
objects, each having its own individual existence and essential 
attribute. Besides, each thing is related to other things which 
modify its essential attribute and thus determine its accidental 
qualities. For instance, in the Stoics’ view, John’s essential 
attribute is being a man and accidental quality is being 
a father. His accidental quality implies Peter’s accidental 
quality of being his son, so that both John and Peter as 
particular substances endow each other with accidental 
qualities. 

This example shows that the Stoics conceived categories 
as logical and grammatical genera, i.e. as general types of 
statements concerning external objects. As regards the onto- 
logical status of their categories, it has not been clearly 
defined, though Plotinus’s criticism of the Stoic teaching 
(see Enn. VI, 1) suggests its essentially materialist character. 
Viewed in the broader context of the Stoics’ theory of knowl¬ 
edge their categories express the basic properties of things 
that have no independent existence; they represent steps or 
degrees in the logical and grammatical, but not ontological de¬ 
termination of things. This conclusion is also borne out by the 
physics of the Stoa. 


7. Natural Philosophy (Physics) of Stoicism 

As might be expected, the Stoics offered a rational ac 
count of the universe with a strong materialist tendency. They 
maintained that all things are bodies and denied the indepen 
dent existence of incorporeal entities. In their view, lekton 
can only exist in relation to thought and word, place and time 
in relation to matter and its states, whereas void is not be 
ing. Categories therefore are applicable to bodies only. The 
matter of every individual body is a part of universal primor- | 
dial matter or substance (substratum). Each particular sub¬ 
stance or body has a peculiar quality which makes it what it is. 
The main qualities which give the body its specific nature are 
hot and cold, dry and moist. They are corporeal like every 
thing that exists and constitute breath or pneuma which uni 


286 








fies the whole material universe and qualifies or determines all 
bodies giving them their form. 

The Stoics recognise four basic elements out of which all 
bodies are composed: fire, air, water, and earth. Their for¬ 
mation was the intermediate stage in the conversion of pri¬ 
mary unqualified substratum into the universe. The Stoics 
adopted Heraclitus’s view that the first cause of the universe 
is fire. According to Chrysippus, fire is the basic element 
out of which all things generate and into which they all dis¬ 
solve (SVF, II, fr. 413). Yet in contrast with Heraclitus’s 
living, mutable and self-moving nature, the primordial matter 
of the Stoics needs an external mover—it is the Logos or God. 
On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, “they hold that there 
are two principles in the universe, the active principle and 
the passive. The passive principle, then, is a substance without 
quality, i.e. matter, whereas the active is the reason inherent 
in this substance, that is God. For he is everlasting and is 
the artificer of each several thing throughout the whole extent 
of matter” (Diog. L. VII, 134). 

This passage has a clear Aristotelian ring, though the 
contrast of matter and form does not by any means follow from 
the Stoic logic. Indeed, the Stoic “God” is a changeful sub 
stance very different from man. It is creative fire (pyr techni- 
kon) present in primordial matter and mixed with it so 
that it cannot be separated from it except only in thought. 
The Stoics would have been more consistent if they had taken 
a firm pantheistic stand and rejected the opposition of the 
passive (matter) and active (God) principles. 

The monistic tendency of Stoicism clearly reveals itself 
in their teaching of logos. God is not only creative fire, 
but also the reason (logos) and semen (germ) of the world. 
It is therefore “the seminal reason of the universe” (Diog. L. 
VII, 136), i.e. the semen of the universe as a whole, the 
source of the semina of individual things and the universal 
law. 

It appears that the blend of “physics” and theology in 
natural philosophy led the Stoics to a peculiar conception 
of the world genesis which is regarded, as it were, in two 
aspects: physical and theological. In the physical aspect the 
generation of the cosmos is explained in terms of the conden¬ 
sation and rarefaction of primordial matter resulting in the 
formation of elements. Air and fire combine into warmth- 
maintaining pneuma which binds water and earth unifying 
the world and holding its parts together. As a result of the 


287 













interaction of the elements there appears a kind of tension 
generated by the pneuma and pervading all matter. This 
tension is the direct source of individual things manifesting 
itself as their property ( exis ), their nature and soul. The 
world development is governed by necessity and strictly 
determined by natural processes binding all things in a single 
system of cause-effect relationships. Nothing in the world 
occurs without a cause and, consequently, everything is 
necessary. The Stoics are much more consistent than the 
Epicureans in their determinism bringing it to fatalism. 

The world is finite in time, having the beginning and the 
end. More accurately, the universe changes periodically into 
fiery ether which contains the seeds of another universe. It 
is a doctrine of eternal return, ever recurring cycles of 
conflagrations and regenerations. 

The genesis of the universe viewed from the theological 
angle looks very different. In creating the world, God turns a 
part of its substance, the divine air-fire mixture, into air 
and water. It stays in these elements as “seminal logos” and 
causes a part of water to turn into earth. Another part remains 
water and a third one becomes air. The rarefied air ignites 
and becomes fire, this time as an element, but not as the first 
cause. Pervading this “world body” as its pneuma or creative 
fire, God is the world’s soul (psyche), spirit or reason 
(noys), and simultaneously providence and fate. 

Just as the ruling or governing part of the soul has its 
seat (the heart) in the human body, so the world soul has its 
residence in the centre of the universe or on the Sun whence 
it spreads all over the world. The distinction of the world 
soul from the world body is not permanent: having arisen in 
time, it disappears when Zeus accepts the world and dissolves 
it in itself (this is the theological equivalent of the world 
conflagration). 

Whether it is law or fate that governs the world, genera¬ 
tions and conflagrations follow one another in endless suc¬ 
cession of recurrent cycles. Since all events in the universe 
are determined by necessity (fate) and by the law (logos), the 
world emerges as an endless succession of causes and conse¬ 
quences and every new world is not a bit different from the 
previous one. To this must be added that the Stoics adopted 
Plato’s view of the world as a rational animal: “Thus, then, 
the whole world is a living being, endowed with soul and rea¬ 
son, and having ether for its ruling principle... The world, 
they say, is one and finite, having a spherical shape, such 


288 












a shape being the most suitable for motion... Outside of the 
world is diffused the infinite void, which is incorporeal. By 
incorporeal is meant that which, though capable of being oc¬ 
cupied by body, is not so occupied. The world has no empty 
space within it, but forms one united whole. This is a neces¬ 
sary result of the sympathy and tension which binds together 
things in heaven and earth” (Diog. L. VII, 139, 140). 

As we see, the Stoics’ picture of the universe testifies 
to their rich imagination, but can hardly be called scien¬ 
tific. This was only to be expected as their cosmos represented 
in fact a synthesis of the naive but essentially correct dialec¬ 
tical world view of the early philosophers and the metaphysics 
of Plato and Aristotle. To be sure, the problems raised in 
classical Greek philosophy could not be settled by a simple 
return to the pre-Socratics and the application of later and 
more advanced concepts to early physics was bound to lead to 
contradictions. 

The natural philosophy of the Stoics also includes a teach¬ 
ing of soul and a theological doctrine which we shall now 
consider in a brief survey. 

The Stoics consider natural beings with their inner prin¬ 
ciple of existence as the manifestation of pneumatic tensions. 
Non-organic bodies exist owing to their simple properties 
or states (exis), plants—due to their capacity for birth 
and growth, animals—owing to their animal soul, and human 
beings—owing to a rational soul. Naturally, each of the prin¬ 
ciples of lower beings is present in higher beings, but the 
specificity of one or another being is determined by its in¬ 
dividuating quality. This individuating quality which distin¬ 
guishes man from every other individual substance is the ra¬ 
tional soul. 

The starting point of the Stoic doctrine of soul is mater¬ 
ialist. Soul is conceived as a special body, which is “warm 
and fiery pneuma” (SVF, II, fr. 773). According to Nemesius, 
Zeno the Stoic distinguished eight parts of the soul, the 
ruling part (hegemonikon ), the five senses, the voice and the 
power of procreation (spermatikon) (SVF, I, fr. 143). The 
ruling or governing part of the body possesses the qualities of 
presentation, ascent, impulse, and reason. This ruling element 
of the soul directs the “pneuma” to the sense organs and re¬ 
ceives from them the “reports” about external objects which 
make “impressions” on the soul or produce in it the 
corresponding “alterations” or “modifications.” Expounding 
the Stoics’ views, Diogenes Laertius writes: “They hold that 




2*9 













we see when the light between the visual organ and the object 
stretches in the form of a cone... The apex of the cone in the air 
is at the eye, the base at the object seen. Thus the thing seen 
is reported to us by the medium of the air stretching out 
towards it, as if by a stick... We hear when the air between the 
sonant body and the organ of hearing suffers concussion, 
a vibration which spreads spherically and then forms waves 
and strikes upon the ears, just as the water in a reservoir forms 
wavy circles when a stone is thrown into it... They consider 
that the passions are caused by the variations of the vital 
breath” (Diog. L. VII, 157, 158). 

Such views seem to suggest that the Stoics recognised the 
mortality of the soul dispersing or evaporating after death. 
Yet their conception of soul as a body led them to a different 
conclusion. On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, “the soul is 
a nature capable of perception. And they regard it as the 
breath of life, congenital with us; from which they infer first 
that it is a body and secondly that it survives death. Yet it is 
perishable, though the soul of the universe, of which the 
individual souls of animals are parts, is indestructible... 
Cleanthes indeed holds that all souls continue to exist until 
the general conflagration; but Chrysippus says that only the 
souls of the wise do so” (Diog. L. VII, 156-157). 

This passage gives us a glimpse of the contradictions the 
Stoics vainly sought to reconcile in their doctrine of soul: 
material by nature, the soul survives the death of the body; 
though divine, the individual soul is mortal whereas, again, 
the soul of the universe is indestructible... 

Equally great are the difficulties besetting Stoic theology. 
Dissolved, after the pantheistic fashion, in the universe 
and mixed with matter, God turns out to be alien to the world, 
as it survives the conflagration. Being immortal and eternal, 
God is at the same time mutable. Called Zeus, it is in fact 
nothing but an allegory —like, for that matter, all other gods... 
On the evidence of Philodemus, Chrysippus maintained 
that the gods are nothing else than allegorical characters, 
yet the Stoics recognised the existence of gods adducing the 
argument from general consent. Seeking to substantiate this 
argument, Zeno discoursed thus: “One may reasonably 
honour the Gods; but those who are nonexistent one may 
not reasonably honour; therefore Gods exist” (Sext. Adv. 
math. IX, 133). Cleanthes, for his part, argues the existence 
of god from degrees of perfection: “If one nature is better 
than another, there will be some best nature... God therefore 


2MII 










exists” (Sext. Adv. math. IX, 88-91). This “proof” was to be 
repeated later by Augustine and Anselm of Canterbury 
who anticipated Thomas Aquinas’s fourth method of proving 
the existence of God. 1 

The theoretical arguments are followed by Cleanthes’s fa¬ 
mous Hymn to Zeus contrasting God Creator and its creation. 
This train of thought was later brought to a logical conclu¬ 
sion by Christian theologists who used Stoicism as one of the 
sources of Christianity. 

Stoicism was the originator of the teleological doctrine 
of the world. According to Chrysippus, the gods have made 
men for the sake of themselves and one another, and animals, 
for the service of man: the horse to go to war with, the dog to 
hunt with, ounces, bears and lions, to practise courage upon 
(SVF II, fr. 1152). This teleology is followed by theodicy or 
vindication of the justice of God in permitting evil to exist. 
To exonerate the gods from guilt for human suffering, 
diseases and injuries, Chrysippus offered a number of ex¬ 
planations. His arguments boiled down to the contention that 
all evils viewed from a broad perspective are beneficial for 
the universe as a whole and for mankind (ibid., fr. 1184). 
Evil thus turns into a part of divine providence which made 
this world the best of all possible worlds. The religious 
doctrine of the Stoics provides the foundation for all sorts 
of superstitions, including spiritualist practices, demonology, 
magic, etc. 

8. Stoic Ethical Theory 

Like every ancient philosopher, the Stoic asks himself a 
question: what is the highest good? The answer, as befits a 
true sage, is, of course, happiness (eydaimonia). Yet what is 
happiness for the Stoic? Is it the assimilation to god, as in 
Plato? The life of contemplation of a man who avails himself 
of various corporeal and external benefits as in Aristotle? 
The enjoyment of the Cyrenaics or Epicureans? No, the high¬ 
est good for the Stoic is “life in agreement with nature... 
which is the same as a virtuous life, virtue being the goal to¬ 
wards which nature guides us” (Diog. L. VII, 87). 

Now the “nature” of the Stoics, it may be recalled, is gov¬ 
erned by necessity or fate. If this is so and man’s every 

1 See F. CoplestOD, A History of Philosophy, Vol. II, part 2, Image, 
Gardeu City, 1962, p. 62. 














action and every event in his life are determined by necessi¬ 
ty, how is it possible to live contrary to the dictates of na¬ 
ture or, for that matter, to assess man’s actions in moral 
terms? 1 Stoicism finds the way out in the axiological ap¬ 
proach to social phenomena. What is the law of necessity in 
nature becomes the norm in society, i.e. the prescript of 
reason. Every natural being strives, not for pleasure, but for 
safety and is guided, first and foremost, by the instinct of self- 
preservation. The rational being is guided by reason which is 
primarily concerned with the good. The virtue of reason is 
the knowledge of what is good and what is bad, its vice is 
ignorance. Hence, virtuous life is life according to reason. 

The good, according to the Stoics, consists of four basic 
virtues: prudence, temperance, justice, and courage, whereas 
evil is their opposites—imprudence, lack of restraint, injus¬ 
tice, and cowardice. Everything else—life and death, fame 
and infamy, hard labour and enjoyment, wealth and poverty, 
infirmity and good health are not for man to choose and there¬ 
fore have nothing to do with ethics, are morally indifferent. 
Virtue and vice alone come within the sphere of morality, as 
they depend on man and are chosen by him of his own free 
will. 

Here lies the great paradox of the Stoic moral teaching. 
How can one choose freely in the face of rigorous necessity 
reigning in the Stoic world? Man can change neither things, 
nor the course of events, nor even his own concepts of the ex¬ 
ternal world —he can only change his attitude to them. Hence 
freedom in Stoicism does not extend to man’s practical activi¬ 
ty and is confined exclusively to his theoretical and emotional 
attitude to the world and to himself. 

The Stoics starting from Zeno distinguished four groups 
of negative emotions: grief, fear, desire, and enjoyment, 
and three groups of positive emotions —gladness or rational 
excitement as opposed to enjoyment, discretion as opposed to 
fear, and will as opposed to desire. Each of the groups falls 
into several species (see Diog. L. VII, 110-116). Wisdom 
consists in freedom from any emotions which is the 
final end of life or happiness attainable only by a sage. 

The early Stoic ideal of the wise man turned out to be 
too stern for an ordinary man to follow as it made no allowance 


1 According to Diogenes Laertius (VII. 23), Zeno “was once chastising 
a slave for stealing, and when the latter pleaded that it was his fate to steal, 
‘Yes, and to be beaten too,’ said Zeno.” 


292 








for the frailty of human nature. According to Cleanthes, there 
is no middle between virtue and vice (SVF I, fr. 566). 
Despite the natural inclination of all men towards the good, 
the virtuous are bound to remain virtuous and the vicious are 
bound to remain vicious. This doctrine in fact rejected the 
possibility of any gradual progress towards perfection and 
divided all people into two classes,the few sages and the 
vast majority of fools. It was aimed against the peripatetics 
who believed in a possibility of man’s gradual perfection or 
degradation. 

As time went on, the Stoics had to modify the asperity of 
their original attitude because the ideal sage was no longer a 
human being. Exalting his perfection, the Stoics in fact played 
into their opponents’ hands, since the failure of the average 
Stoic to live up to the set standards became only two obvious, 
and this ran counter to the practical purpose of any moral 
theory which always aims at man’s improvement or, at least, 
at teaching him to differentiate between the good and the bad. 
The rigorous adherence to the initial ethic principles threat¬ 
ened to undermine the influence of Stoicism (as well as 
Cynicism). 

Having realised this danger, the Stoics made considerable 
changes in their teaching. First of all, they revised their 
conception of the morally indifferent things (adiaphora) 
by dividing them into those according with nature and those 
running counter to its demands, i.e. into the “preferable” 
and “not preferable.” For instance, though wealth and pover¬ 
ty, good health and illness are indifferent in moral terms, it is 
better to be wealthy and healthy than poor and sick. As a 
result, the Stoics no longer condemned men’s interest in the 
“preferables” provided their actions were guided by moral 
motives. 

This explains why the later Stoics insisted on the assess¬ 
ment of man’s motives and began to distinguish not only be¬ 
tween virtuous and vicious, but also between “proper” and 
obligatory actions (kathekonta). Man’s obligations ensue 
from the law, but a proper action is virtuous only if it is 
prompted by moral considerations. The assessment of an 
action which has not been performed because of external 
interference depends on the presence or absence of a moral 
motive. Hence, in the Stoics’ opinion, the actions of a truly 
wise man are always moral, whereas the actions of a “fool' 
are merely “proper.” 


293 










Finally, contrary to their teaching of the unbridgeable gulf 
between virtue and vice, the sage and the fool, the Stoics in¬ 
troduced the concept of perfection or progress and conceded 
various degrees of excellence attainable, however,only by few. 

For all the attempts of the Stoics to moderate their extreme 
views and cater to common sense, their moral philosophy 
abounds in contradictions. For instance, the knowledge of 
virtue comes to man “by nature,” but it can also be acquired 
from experience. Reason can generalise from particular in¬ 
stances to the good as a whole and profit by experience, yet 
there is a gulf between the virtuous and the vicious. This gulf 
is unbridgeable, yet the Stoics assert the equality of people 
(including the equality of men and women) who have similar 
virtues and vices. Contrary to Cleanthes who regards virtue as 
an inherent quality of man, Chrysippus asserts that it can be 
lost through insanity or drunkenness... 

All these conflicting views cannot be reconciled, but are 
easily accountable for. They reflect the universal but hope 
less protest of the lower strata of Hellenistic slave-owning 
society in the face of blind social forces threatening every 
individual and making his existence senseless. This, inciden¬ 
tally, is one of the reasons why Stoic natural philosophy can 
not be reduced to the physics of the pre-Socratic thinkers de 
spite their obvious affinity. The impotence of logos, its 
inability to change the preordained destiny of man led the 
Stoics to the identification of logos with its opposite, the 
inscrutable fate, and was in fact nothing but the expression 
of man’s wretchedness and despondency. Yet the way out 
proposed by the Stoics had little in common with the 
Epicurean ataraxia or escape from the world. The Stoic 
imperturbability of soul irrespective of what may happen to 
the body was based on a different conception of nature which, 
in turn, led to a different understanding of man’s place in 
society. Contrary to commonly held views, the Stoics did 
not preach apathy in the face of blind forces, but stressed 
the need for a man to fulfil his duty under any circumstances 
accepting with dignity whatever the fate has in store for him. 

As distinct from the Epicureans who regarded the universe 
as an interplay of senseless atoms and a man as a free agent 
bound by no obligations to anyone and concerned only with 
himself and his humble ideal of pleasure, the Stoics conceived 
the world as an organic whole with its own logos and were in 
dined, by reason of their pantheistic determinism, to view 










society as a product of nature. In the Stoics’ eyes social in¬ 
stitutions were therefore a part of the universal scheme 
sanctioned by logos and man was inseparably linked with soci¬ 
ety and the state by universal law. In contrast with Epicurus 
who maintained that the sage must not take part in politics 
unless he is compelled to, Chrysippus taught “that the wise 
man will take part in politics, if nothing hinders him ... since 
thus he will restrain vice and promote virtue” (Diog. L. VII, 
121). “Not yet will the wise man live in solitude; for he is 
naturally made for society and action” (ibid., VII, 123). 
Hence the Stoic cosmopolitanism and the increasing tendency 
to adopt the attitude of at least nominal acceptance of 
existing customs and institutions and justify conventional 
morality and religion. 

9. Roman Stoicism 

Stoicism became the most influential philosophical trend 
in the last period of the Roman Republic and its prestige grew 
even higher in the Imperial times. The reason for it was the 
obvious affinity of the Stoic ideal of sage to the rigorous 
image of Roman citizen. It is not accidental therefore that 
the Scipios, Cato Uticensis, Brutus and other Romans regard¬ 
ed by tradition as ideal citizens were adherents of Stoic 
philosophy. 

Stoicism was brought to Rome in the middle of the second 
century B.C. by Chrysippus’s pupils Diogenes of Selucia 
and Antipater of Tarsus and further developed on the Roman 
soil by the representatives of the Middle Stoa Panaetius and 
Posidonius. In Rome, Panaetius’s pupil and friend was Scipio 
the Younger, whereas Posidonius who opened his school on 
the island of Rhodes taught Pompeius and Cicero. Both Pana¬ 
etius and Posidonius displayed a strong influence of Platonism 
and Aristotelianism. For instance, Panaetius rejected the Sto¬ 
ic idea of world conflagration and asserted the eternity and 
indestructibility of the universe. He also denied the inter¬ 
connection of cosmic phenomena based on the “sympathy” of 
all parts of the cosmos, gave no credence to astrology on the 
grounds that remote stars could not affect men’s destinies and 
called in question the value of prophecy. Panaetius was close 
to Aristotle in his doctrine of soul, and both to Plato and Aris¬ 
totle in his teaching of innate distinctions between people. He 
asserted the existence of individual traits in the character 
of every man and showed special interest in the individual. 












Posidonius, for his part, returned to some ideas of the 
Early Stoa. He attempted to restore faith in prophecy, fortune¬ 
telling and astrology which led him logically to the revival 
of the idea of cosmic “sympathy.” In his natural philosophy 
Posidonius in fact subscribed to the doctrine of Plato expound¬ 
ed in the Timaeus but reshaped it within the framework of the 
Stoic teaching of fiery pneuma as the world’s “material.” 

The views of Panaetius and Posidonius characteristic of 
the transition from Greek to Roman Stoicism marked the be¬ 
ginning of the Platonic and Aristotelian influence on the Ro¬ 
man Stoic tradition. 

(1) Lucius Annaeus Seneca (6 B.C.-65 A.D.) was born into 
the family of a prominent rhetor. He started as a lawyer, then 
began to study philosophy and went in for politics. In 41 A.D. 
he was exiled to Corsica. Returning to Rome 8 years later, he 
became Nero’s tutor and, when in 54 A.D. his pupil was pro¬ 
claimed Emperor, became for a while the actual ruler of the 
Empire. In 57 A.D. he became a consul and his personal 
fortune, sizable as it was, increased to a fabulous sum of 
300 million sesterces. In 65 A.D. Seneca was charged with 
conspiracy against Nero, sentenced to death and committed 
suicide by opening his veins. 

Seneca is credited with a number of philosophical treatises 
including the Moral Letters to Lucilium (Ad Lucilium 
epistulae morales) and the Scientific Questions (Quaestionum 
naturalium). He was also a well-known writer, the author of 
10 tragedies, many epigrams and a satire ridiculing the 
deification of Emperor Claudius. 

Seneca’s philosophy is mainly centred around ethical 
issues. Following Posidonius, Seneca asserts that "free 
sciences,” important as they are for attainment of virtue, 
cannot by themselves make man virtuous; “you cannot attain 
virtue without food, either; and yet food has nothing to do 
with virtue” (Ep. 88, 31). Nevertheless, he does not shun 
scientific problems and recognises, together with the Stoics, 
the active and passive principles of nature, i.e. “cause” and 
“matter.” In his Letters (65, 2-3) he writes: “Our Stoic 
philosophers, as you know, declare that there are two things 
in the universe which are the sources of everything, namely, 
cause and matter. Matter lies sluggish, and substance ready 
for any use, but sure to remain unemployed if no one sets it 
into motion. Cause, however, by which we mean reason, 
moulds matter and turns it in whatever direction it will, 













producing thereby various concrete results... All art is 
but imitation of nature; therefore let me apply these 
statements of general principles to the things which have to 
be made by man. A statue, for example, has afforded matter 
which was to undergo treatment of the hands of the artist, and 
has had an artist who was to give form to the matter” 
(Ep. 65, 2-3). 

Seneca reproduced here the Aristotelian conception of 
causes reflecting the pattern of human activity. Yet in con¬ 
trast with the Stagirite who reduced all causes to matter and 
form, the Stoic restricts them to the material and efficient 
ones. He rejects the doctrine of four causes, not to speak of 
the Platonic idea (“model”) “because they ‘embrace’ either 
too much or too little. For if they regard as ‘causes’ of an 
object that is to be made everything without which the object 
can be made, they have named too few. Time must also be in¬ 
cluded among the causes... They must also include space... 
And motion too... Now, however, I am searching for the first, 
the general cause... It is surely Creative Reason in other 
words, God. For those elements to which you referred are not 
a great series of independent causes; they all hinge on one 
alone, and that will be the creative cause” (ibid., 65, 11-12). 
Explaining the nature of this God or creative cause, Seneca 
declares that one can rightfully call it Fate, Providence, 
Nature or the World (Sen. Nat. quaest. Ill, 13). 

This is nothing else than pantheism (Seneca, it will be 
noted, is not consistent here, as the matter-cause antithesis 
leads logically to the recognition of personal god, i.e. to 
theism). The postulate of ungenerated and everlasting matter 
having its own source of motion aligns Seneca’s natural 
philosophy with the “physics” of the early Greek thinkers. 
The naturalistic world outlook seems to leave no room for god 
and Seneca indeed rejects the traditional religion: in his view, 
the deities worshipped by the crowd are mere symbols and 
allegorical images. Yet moral considerations cause him to 
resort to theology. Attempting to account for the moral 
behaviour of man, Seneca adduces the theory of art as the 
imitation of nature and infers, by analogy with the effective 
and material causes of a work of art, to man’s moral reason 
from the reason (soul) of nature, i.e. god. As a result, instead 
of bolstering up his moral theory, Seneca gives an antropo- 
morphic interpretation of the world. 

Utterly inconsistent, but prompted by the same ethical 














considerations, is Seneca’s teaching of soul borrowed by him 
from Plato. Numerous passages in Ad Lucilium epistulae 
morales, De consolatione ad Marciam and even in Quaestio- 
num naturalium testify to his faith in the immortality of the 
soul. In Seneca’s view, it is man’s best, divine part. “ ‘All the 
years,’ says the soul, ‘are mine; no epoch is closed to great 
minds; all Time is open to the progress of thought. When the 
day comes to separate the heavenly from its earthly blend, I 
shall leave the body here, where 1 found it, and shall of my 
own volition betake myself to the gods. I am not apart from 
them now, but am merely detained in a heavy and earthly 
prison.’ This sluggish mortal age is only a prologue' to the 
better and prolonged life... A different beginning, a different 
condition, await us” (Ep. 102, 22-23). 

Yet Seneca is again tormented by doubt and sometimes even 
seems to be inclined to accept the Epicurean view that death 
is “a release from all suffering, a boundary, beyond which our 
ills cannot pass” (Sen. Ad Marciam, 19, 5). At the end of the 
65th letter to Lucilium Seneca writes: “And what is death? 
It is either the end, or a transition. 1 have no fear of ceasing to 
exist; it is the same as not having begun. Nor do I shrink from 
transition into another state, because I shall, under no condi¬ 
tions, be as crampled as 1 am now.” In both cases, according 
to Seneca, his freedom of spirit will remain unaffected... 

The conception of spiritual freedom is central to Seneca’s 
moral philosophy. In the face of iron necessity or fate govern 
ing the world such freedom can be nothing else than the re¬ 
cognition of and submission to it. To be sure, necessity and fate 
must be understood in that case not as the blind and inhuman 
law of inert matter, but as the rational, beneficient, omniscient 
and ubiquitous cosmic force inherent also in every human 
being. Seneca’s freedom thus presupposes necessity as the ex¬ 
pression of reason, otherwise it turns into outright slavery. 

Since moral behaviour consists in the submission to divine 
necessity or fate, special importance attaches to the impertur¬ 
bability of the soul. This typically Stoic imperative is modi 
tied in Seneca by a doctrine of conscience which rewards 
virtues and punishes vices. As distinct from the Cynics who 
exerted a strong influence on the ethical theory of Greek 
Stoicism, Seneca asserts the “natural” character of justice. 
Polemicising on this point with Epicurus Seneca writes: “Let 
us agree with his on the other [point]—that bad deeds are 
lashed by the conscience, and that conscience is tortured to 











the greatest degree because unending anxiety drives and 
whips it on... For this, Epicurus, is the very proof that we are 
by nature reluctant to commit crime, beoause even in 
circumstances of safety there is no one who does not feel fear” 
(Ep. 97, 15). In accordance with this view, Seneca comes out 
as a champion of existing customs and ethical norms thereby 
departing from the earlier Stoic conceptions. 

Adherence to ethical norms had always been an important 
feature of the Roman republican tradition. It stemmed from 
the recognition of civil society and the state as the seat of 
moral values. The absolute and despotic rule of the Emperors 
undermined this unity of the demands of the state and moral 
imperatives, and Seneca turns to universal human values. In 
his view, it is not the state as such, but fellowship that “has 
given to him [man] dominion over all creatures; fellow¬ 
ship, though he was begotten upon the land, has extended his 
sovereignty to an element not his own, and has bidden him to 
be lord upon the sea... Take away this fellowship, and you 
will sever the unity of the human race on which its existence 
depends” (Sen. De benef. IV, 18, 3). 

Hence, human society is a single whole. The motherland of 
a human soul cannot be “pitiful Ephesus or cramped Alexan¬ 
dria.” This whole is sustained by mutual love and compassion, 
therefore even the slaves should be treated as human beings. 
“They are slaves, people declare. Nay, rather they are men. 
‘Slaves!’ No, comraides, ‘Slaves.’ No, they are our fellow- 
slaves, if one reflects that Fortune has equal rights over slaves 
and free men alike” (Ep. 47, 1). Though we are unable to 
change the existing pattern of human relations, the best way 
to put them in order is to adhere to the golden rule: “Treat 
your inferiors as you would be treated by your superiors” 
(ibid., 47, 11). 

As we see, Seneca’s “spiritual” abolition of slavery con¬ 
sists in the discovery that every man, on the one hand, is a 
slave of fate and on the other, that his mind is free: “It is 
a mistake for everyone to believe that condition of slavery 
penetrates into the whole being of a man. The better part of 
him is exempt. Only the body is at the mercy and disposition 
of a master; but the mind is its own master, and is so free 
and unshackled that not even this prison of the body, in which 
it is confined, can restrain it from using its own powers, 
following.mighty aims, and escaping into the infinite to keep 
the company with the stars... All that issues from this is 


29U 













free” (Sen. De benef. Ill, 20, 1). Yet man cannot be content 
with such freedom. Genuine freedom is the freedom of action 
implying the freedom of spirit, but not limited to it. 

In contrast with Seneca who viewed society from the posi¬ 
tion of a wealthy man denying himself nothing (and then los¬ 
ing everything together with his life), Epictetus had no good 
things of life at all. Whereas Seneca comforted others, 
Epictetus, comforting others, was also comforting himself. 
This accounts for a much greater warmth, humaneness and 
intimate kindness of the philosopher’s consolations, as well 
as for his absolute resignation to fate. 

(2) Epictetus (c. 50-138 A.D.) was brought to Rome as 
a slave and, while still a slave, attended philosophical les¬ 
sons of Roman Stoic Musonius Rufus. Sources do not tell us 
how he got freedom from his cruel master who himself was a 
freedman and Nero’s bodyguard, but it is known that he 
devoted himself to philosophy. In 89 A.D. when the 
philosophical schools in Rome were closed by Emperor 
Domitian’s edict, Epictetus moved to Nicopolis in Epirus and 
started giving oral lessons in a school. His talks were recorded 
by Flavius Arrian and survived in the form of the Manual 
(Encheiridion ), four of the eight books of the Dissertationes 
and fragments of the Discourses of Epictetus. We also possess 
some doxographic material. 

Epictetus brought to a logical conclusion the tendency of 
Roman Stoicism to reduce philosophy to ethics. The division 
of philosophy into ethics, logic and physics is for Epictetus a 
purely formal delimitation. “The first and most necessary di- | 
vision in philosophy is that which has to do with the applica¬ 
tion of the principles, as, for example, Do not lie. The se¬ 
cond deals with the demonstration, as, for example, How came 
it that we ought not to lie? The third confirms and discrimi¬ 
nates between these processes, as, for example, How does it 
come that this is a proof? For what is it a proof, what is 
logical consequence, what contradiction, what truth, what 
falsehood? Therefore the third division is necessary because 
of the second, and the second because of the first; while the 
most necessary of all, and the one in which we ought to rest, 
is the first. But we do the opposite; for we spend our time 
in the third division and utterly neglect the first. Therefore, 
we lie, indeed, but are ready with the arguments which prove I 
that one ought not to lie” (Epict. Ench. 52). 

Proceeding from this view, Epictetus does not concern 









himself with either logic or physics except that he treats the 
latter as a doctrine of the first cause, i.e. god. He shares the 
old Stoic thesis about the rational nature of the world and 
contends that it is a single cosmic state consisting of a single 
substance and that things constantly come into being and 
perish, decomposing into their elements. He also subscribes 
to the doctrine of creation: “God has made all the things in 
the universe and the universe itself completely free from 
hindrance and perfect, and ‘the parts of it for the use of the 
whole” (Diss. IV, 7, 6). This whole, in turn, is not only the 
cosmos, but god which is both Creator and Providence. 

God in Epictetus (the philosopher sometimes speaks of the 
gods) is not modelled on man and can hardly be regarded as 
personal. Yet the moral behaviour is determined by god 
(or the gods) since “in piety to the gods, I would have you 
know, the chief element is this, to have right opinions about 
them as existing and as administering the universe well and 
justly—and to have set yourself to obey them and to submit 
to everything that happens, and to follow it voluntarily, 
in the belief that it is being fulfilled by the highest 
intelligence” (Ench. 31). God also possesses the highest 
knowledge so that “it is not possible to conceal from him our 
acts, or even our intentions and thoughts” (Diss. II, 14, 11). 

This apparently leaves but one function to philosophy — 
to induce man to adopt the right moral attitude to the world, 
i.e. to submit to the will of the gods. Since it is beyond the 
power of man to change the course of events, he ought to 
change his attitude to them, and here the old Stoic idea comes 
in handy: “Some things are under our control, while others 
are not under our control. Under our control are conception, 
choice, desire, aversion, and, in a word, everything what is our 
own doing; not under our control are our body, our pnJjierty, 
reputation, office, and, in a word, everything that is not our 
own doing. Furthermore, the things under our control are by 
nature free, unhindered and unimpeded; while the things 
not under our control are weak, servile, subject to hindrance, 
and not our own” (Ench. 1). A man should therefore rely 
only on those things that are under his control, “then no one 
will ever be able to exert compulsion upon you, no one will 
hinder you, you will blame no one, will find fault with no 
one, will do absolutely nothing against your will, you will 
have no personal enemy, no one will harm you, for neither is 
there any harm that can touch you” (ibid.). 

















The conduct based on this principle depends, according 
to Epictetus, on man’s ability to act of his own free will. 
The capacity for free choice is granted us by god for our 
happiness. 

The idea of free will thus introduced by Epictetus was to 
play an important role in the subsequent history of ethical 
theories. As we see, the possibility of free choice derives 
from god’s will to ensure the happiness of man. This concep¬ 
tion is extremely narrow and is in fact restricted to the 
“freedom” to suffer and endure. Epictetus unequivocally rules 
out the possibility of real freedom, i.e. the freedom of action, 
particularly that based on the knowledge of natural and social 
necessity. If we be allowed to draw a parallel between Epicte 
tus’s moral theory and the theory of games, Epictetus exhorts 
us to play a life drama written without our participation, the 
roles and the rules of acting being thrust upon us... One can 
hardly imagine a more alienated and alienating view of man 
and his place in society. What is more, Epictetus even 
deprives the believers —and it is only a believer that can 
accept his teaching of the last hope, that of the immortality 
of the soul and a reward in the other world... Expressing the 
helplessness of the individual in the face of social evil, 
Epictetus at the same time sanctifies and perpetuates this 
helplessness. His last word is non resistance to evil which 
aligns Roman stoicism with Christianity. 

(3) Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. Roman Emperor Marcus 
Aurelius (121-180 A.D.) was brought up in the spirit of Stoic 
philosophy adopting in his youth the basic principles of 
Epictetus’s teaching. His only work written in Greek in a 
military campaign (c. 171 A.D.) is called the Meditations. It 
consists of l2 books and is keynoted by the feeling of sad¬ 
ness and weariness of life. 

The author says nothing about logic but sets a number of 
tasks before “physics.” First and foremost, it must help man 
to take a sober view of surrounding things, by stripping awa> 
their false ornaments. Indeed, “this Falernian [wine] is only 
a little grape juice, and this purple robe some sheep’s wool 
dyed with the blood of a shell-fish ... such then are these 
impressions and they reach the things themselves and 
penetrate them, and so we see what kind of things they are” 
(VI, 13). Knowing the true value of things, we shall not 
attach to them the importance they do not deserve. The second 
task of physics is to show the universal changefulness and 









fluidity of being, constituting at the same time a single whole: 

Through the universal substance as through a furious torrent 
all bodies are carried, being by their nature united with and 
cooperating with the whole, as the parts of our body with 
one another” (VII, 19). All this is Heraclitean flux. What 
attitude should be adopted to it? This is the main problem. 

Expounding his views, Marcus Aurelius asserts that change 
is necessary: nothing can be generated without change and 
all useful things come about by way of change: “And canst 
thou be nourished, unless the food undergoes the change?” 
(VII, 18). Yet he is more attracted by the idea of universal 
destruction than that of eternal life. “Of human life the time 
is a point, and the substance is in a flux, and the perception 
dull, and the composition of the whole body subject to puri¬ 
fication, and the soul a whirl, and fortune hard to divine, and 
fame a thing devoid of judgement. And, to say all in a word, 
everything which belongs to the body is a stream, and what 
belongs to the soul is a dream, a vapour, and life is a warfare 
and a stranger’s sojourn, and after-fame is oblivion” (II, 17). 
The soul’s only refuge and consolation is philosophy. 

The third task of physics is to provide a basis for such 
a consolation, i.e. to show that the world is rational and 
purpose oriented. It has, according to the philosopher- 
Emperor, matter, cause and purpose forming a single whole. 
Man is a part of this whole or, more accurately, its member. 
The unity, rationality and purposefulness of the world process 
are not derated by imperfection — it is unavoidable just as 
chips and shavings in the carpenter’s workshop. The universe 
as a whole is divine and governed by reason. 

Whatever we may think of the world at large is, however, 
but of little consequence for our practical purpose—to define 
the right attitude to it. “Either there is fatal necessity and 
invincible order, or a kind Providence, or a confusion without 
a purpose and without a director. If then there is an invin¬ 
cible necessity, why dost then resist? But if there is a Provi¬ 
dence, which allows itself to be propitiated, make thyself 
worthy of the help of the divinity. But if there is confusion 
without governor, be content that in such a tempest thou hast 
in thyself a certain ruling intelligence” (XII, 14). Of course, 
the philosopher accepts divine Providence and the inevi¬ 
tability of fate —the former calls for moral perfection, the lat¬ 
ter for submissiveness. 

Marcus Aurelius’s teaching of man, as well as his ethics, 

•'Os 















is not marked by originality. His starting point is the familiar 
dualism of the soul and the body elaborated in the doctrine 
of man's three components: the body, the soul ( pneuma ), 
and the ruling principle (hegemonikon) or spirit. The body 
is characterised by sensations, the soul by aspirations and 
the spirit by dogmata (see III, 17). Man’s spirit represents 
his divine component so that god may contemplate man irres¬ 
pective of his body. After the death of the body man’s spirit 
disperses and reunifies with god. There is one feature in 
Marcus Aurelius’s teaching of the end of man’s life that sets 
him apart from other Stoics. A political figure of exalted rank, 
he insists on a high moral mission of man that of fulfilling 
his duty: “The end of rational animals is to follow 
the reason and the law of the most ancient city and 
polity” (II, 16). However, man can always retire from the 
world, withdraw into himself and rest content with the sense 
of duty fulfilled. 

Stoicism in the Roman Empire was not only an expression 
of the universal public sentiment of the epoch, but also served 
as an instrument for shaping a peculiar ideological theory, 
rather unusual for the ancient world. According to this 
theory, neither noble birth, nor exalted position, nor wealth 
can guarantee blessful existences in the other world (if one 
believes in it). On the contrary, these external advantages 
militate against it. The blessed, rather, are those who are 
pure, kind, ingenuous and gentle, i.e. predominantly the 
lower strata of Roman society. Historical studies of their 
ideology show that such views were widely spread in the Im¬ 
perial period and attest to the powerful impact of contempo¬ 
rary moral philosophy on their formation —however, not 
through abstract treatises with their logical subtleties. The 
ethical theories of the Stoics and later Cynics, not 
infrequently indistinguishable, were given currency by 
itinerant philosophers who wandered from city to city, from 
one province to another, advocating various moral principles 
and simultaneously working “miracles” by way of 
demonstrating their rightness and favours they enjoyed with 
the gods. These theories, vulgarised and reduced to the 
intellectual level of the masses, gradually degenerated into 
religious teachings and merged in the religious tide that was 
rising in the Roman Empire. .The general transition of later 
Stoicism from an ethical to a religious basis could not 
but affect Hellenistic philosophy as a whole. 





Chapter 3 

Scepticism 


10. Early Pyrrhonism and “Academic” Scepticism 

Scepticism as a trend of thought in Hellenistic Roman 
philosophy denied the possibility of objective knowledge of 
nature and social processes. This general attitude manifested 
itself in a demand to “suspend judgement” ( epoche ) in theor¬ 
etical matters and to strive for serenity and peace of mind 
(ataraxia) in practical life. The school got its name from 
Greek skeptikos or zetetikos, and in philosophy the word 
“scepticism” gradually came to denote the opposite of 
dogmatism as uncritical acceptance and application of 
principles. 

Generally speaking, scepticism in the original sense of 
the Greek term is characteristic of all philosophy in so far 
as it calls in question commonly held opinions and, in quest 
of truth, examines the attained knowledge. It reveals the 
difficulties involved in the process of cognition, unravels 
puzzles and solves the mysteries of being. An investigator is 
bound to be inquisitive or “sceptical” when he comes up 
against an insoluble problem within the framework of a 
system claiming absolute knowledge. In other words, every 
philosophical theory is of necessity doubtful and critical and 
therefore includes scepticism as its moment. Hegel had every 
reason to speak of “thinking scepticism” and assert that 
“positive philosophy has the negative to scepticism in itself; 
thus it does not oppose, nor is it outside of it, for scepticism is 
a moment in it.” 1 

This sceptical moment is bound to be negated, dialecti¬ 
cally “sublated,” as it were, if philosophy strives to attain 


1 Hegel, Vorlesungen iiber die Geschichte der Philosophie, Band. II, 
Reclam, Leipzig, 1971, S. 402. 


10 ") 








real knowledge and is not content to hog down in total scepti¬ 
cism, i.e. if it is “positive” and does not turn the “moment” 
into its principle and conclusion as was the case with 
Pyrrhonism. 

(1) Pyrrho of Elis (c. 360-270 B.C.) is known to have 
been a mediocre painter who went in for philosophy after 
hearing the lectures of Megarian Bryson and Democritus’s 
follower Anaxarchus. Tradition tells us that he travelled with 
Alexander’s armies into India where he was influenced 
by the ascetic “Gymnosophists” (naked philosophers). Ac¬ 
cording to Diogenes Laertius, “this led him to adopt a most 
noble philosophy ... taking the form of agnosticism, and 
suspension of judgement. He denied that anything was 
honourable or dishonourable, just or unjust. And so, univer¬ 
sally, he held that there is nothing really existent, but custom 
and convention govern human action; for no single thing is in 
itself any more this than that” (Diog. L. IX, 61). On the same 
evidence, Pyrrho was entirely heedless of his surroundings 
to the extent that he would not look where he was going and 
it was only due to his friends’ care that he did not get killed or 
maimed in an accident. According to other sources, however, 
heroic indifference to external circumstances preached by 
Pyrrho in theory was not his standard in practical life. 

Pyrrho appears to have written nothing and we owe our 
knowledge of his views to Timon of Phlius, Pyrrho’s pupil. 
On his evidence, Pyrrho taught that a man wishing to be hap¬ 
py should know the answers to three questions: first, how 
things are constituted; second, what attitude we should adopt 
to them; and third, how we can profit by such attitude. 
Regarding the first question, he held that things are 
inexpressible, indistinguishable, and unstable. Our sensations 
of things are mutually contradictory and we cannot know the 
true from the false ones. We know but the appearances of 
things, and opinions are not to be trusted. The answer to the 
second question ensues from the answer to the first one. A wise 
man should refrain from judgements, since all knowledge 
claims are equally probable. As a result of such silence or 
aphasia he will be no longer frustrated over insoluble 
problems and attain the state of complete imperturbability or 
happiness. This is the answer to the third question (Vog. Ill, 
1087a). 

Hence, the goal of life is ataraxia, serene contentment, and 
the means is the suspension of any judgement and aphasia. 












Pyrrho offers no positive ethical doctrine and limits himself 
to the denial of all moral judgements as dogmatic. 

Diogenes Laertius (IX, 74) ascribes two famous sayings 
to the early Sceptics: “Not more [one thing than another]” 
and “Every saying has its corresponding opposite.” They are 
clearly traceable to Democritus’s principle of isonomy or equal 
probability (evidently via Metrodorus of Chios or Ana 
xarchus) and to Protagoras who asserted, it will be recalled, 
that every question may be argued equally well on either 
side. Yet in contrast with Democritus who drew definite 
conclusions from isonomy (e.g. about the infinite number of 
atoms) and Protagoras who believed man to be the measure of 
all things, the Sceptics rejected the possibility of any judge¬ 
ment whatsoever. 

It is not known for sure if Pyrrho and his direct follow¬ 
ers specified the relationship between sensation and thinking 
and, in particular, if they believed in the absolute authentici¬ 
ty of sensations. Most likely they did not, as Sextus Empiricus 
says: “Pyrrho forces the things we have already perceived 
clearly to revert into obscurity” (Adv. math. I, 305). On the 
theoretical side, this attitude is tantamount to a complete de¬ 
nial of man’s cognitive abilities, whereas on the practical side 
it leads to the rejection of any moral standards. Quoting Po¬ 
sidonius, Diogenes Laertius tells us this story of Pyrrho: 
“When his fellow-passengers on board a ship were all un¬ 
nerved by a storm, he kept calm and confident, pointing to a 
little pig in the ship that went on eating, and telling them that 
such was the unperturbed state in which the wise man should 
keep himself” (Diog. L. IX, 68). This story is presented by 
tradition as attesting to Pyrrho’s view that indifference such 
as that displayed by a pig is the surest way to happiness. As 
regards the morality ensuing from Pyrrhonism, tradition says 
that Pyrrho once passed by his teacher Anaxarchus who fell 
into a slough without giving him any help (ibid.). 

If we carry Scepticism with its “indifference” to a logical 
conclusion and deny the possibility of any objective knowl¬ 
edge, we are bound also to throw overboard Socratic ethic 
and are to choose between the “natural” behaviour reducing 
man to an animal, 1 and the behaviour in accordance with “law 
and custom.” 


1 Fortunately, a man in his right mind cannot be a consistent sceptic: 
on the evidence of the same Diogenes Laertius “once he [Pyrrho] got 


307 


















Sources, it may be recalled, attest to both possibilities. The 
real thrust of the Sceptics’ arguments, however, seems to 
have been in favour of the latter alternative, and this clearly 
reveals the conformist nature of their doctrine and evidently 
accounts for its relative unpopularity over the next two 
centuries. 

(2) Academic Scepticism. The Academy represents a differ¬ 
ent trend of sceptical thought. Arcesilaus (c. 315-c. 240 B.C.), 
its first representative, developed his doctrine in the polemic 
against the Stoics. Seeking to refute their arguments, he 
resorted to Socratic and Megarian dialectic combining it with 
Platonism. It is not accidental that Diogenes Laertius speaks 
of him as Platonic at the front, Pyrrhonean from behind and 
Diodorean in the middle (VI, 33). 

Arcesilaus’s views marked a turning point in the history 
of the Academy, since his retrogression to the “dialectic” of 
Socrates and the Megarians was tantamount to the absolutisa- 
tion of the criticial fervour of Plato’s dialogues and the denial 
of the positive content of Platonism. However, Arcesilaus was 
not an orthodox Pyrrhonist, because he did not regard atara 
xia as the goal and suspension of judgement as the instrument. 
On the contrary, "he ... says that the end is suspension —which 
is accompanied, as we have said, by ‘quietude.’ He declares, 
too, that suspension regarding particular objects is good, but 
assent regarding particulars bad” (Sext. Pyrrh. I, 232-233). 
In other words, in Arcesilaus’s opinion, suspension of judge¬ 
ment, though accompanied by imperturbability, is important 
in itself. 

As we see, “academic” Scepticism is primarily epistemolo¬ 
gical and its extension to ethics is secondary. It was born in 
the polemic against Stoicism, particularly its doctrine of 
kataleptic representations and “assent” as the criterion of 
truth. The Stoics, we recall, taught that there are three sour¬ 
ces of knowledge: science, opinion, and the mediating appre¬ 
hension. Science is the infallible apprehension by reason, 
opinion is false assent, and apprehension results from true 
presentation, i.e. kataleptic phantasia. Science is only 
accessible to the wise, opinion is the lot of the fools, and 
apprehension is common to both. Directing his attacks against 
this doctrine, Arcesilaus pointed out that the apprehension 

enraged in his sister's cause ... and he told the man who blamed him that 
it was not over a weak woman that one should display indifference" 
(ibid., IX, 66). 


308 











common to wise men and fools cannot produce both science 
and opinion, and contended that there is no criterion for 
distinguishing between vague and clear or kataleptic presen¬ 
tations and therefore between falsehood and truth. Hence, the 
wise man should abstain from judgement. As regards the wise 
man’s behaviour, he should be guided, according to 
Arcesilaus, not by the Stoic dual criterion of “acceptability” 
and moral justifiability, but only by the principle of “reason¬ 
ableness” (to eulogon). Those who abide by this principle 
are prosperous, therefore reasonable behaviour is both 
acceptable and morally justifiable. 

According to Arcesilaus, an act is “reasonable” if it is 
based on understanding or sound judgement ( phronesis ) 
which, in turn, is expressed in the achievement of the desired 
end. This is an important statement since Arcesilaus oversteps 
here the bounds of a purely logical concept of understanding 
and turns to an outside criterion of truth. He finds it in the 
success of practical activity. 

Carneades of Cyrene (c. 214-c. 129 B.C.) who represent¬ 
ed the Third or New Academy is said to have shown remark¬ 
able zeal for philosophy. Tradition holds that his absorption in 
theoretical studies was so great that he had no time to cut 
his fingernails or hair. In theory he professed contempt of 
death and used to say: “Nature which framed this whole will 
also destroy it” (Diog. L. IV, 64). Yet in practice his attitude 
appears to have been different. According to Diogenes Laerti¬ 
us, “when he learnt that Antipater [Carneades’s Stoic oppo¬ 
nent] committed suicide by drinking a potion, he was greatly 
moved by the constancy with which he met the end, and ex¬ 
claimed, ‘Give it then to me also.’ And when those about him 
asked ‘What?’ ‘A honeyed draught,’ said he” (ibid.). This, 
however, may have been nothing but a sardonic joke of the 
convinced sceptic... 

In 155 B.C. Carneades went on a diplomatic mission to 
Rome with two other philosophers, Diogenes the Stoic and 
Critolaus Peripatetic, and delivered a brilliant oration in 
defence of justice, thereby winning a hearty approval of Cato 
Maior, a champion of old Roman standards of Morality. The 
next day, however, he delivered another oratory against jus¬ 
tice, no less persuasive, reducing its concept to mere utility 
and demonstrating the inadequacy of all dogmatic beliefs. The 
enraged single-hearted Roman demanded that the Greek 
philosophers be expelled from Rome as their trifling with 










truth constituted grave danger to the Roman youth and to 
the Republic in general. 

Like Arcesilaus, Carneades criticised the Stoic doctrine 
of kataleptic phantasia, contending that every perception or 
presentation, however true it may appear, can be countered 
with its opposite, no less clear and persuasive. In his opinion, 
we are deceived both by our senses, since we mistake non¬ 
existent things for real ones as in a dream or hallucination, 
and by our reason which gets lost in various aporias. Using 
extensively the doctrines of the Sophists and the Megarians 
and advancing numerous arguments against the possibility of 
true knowledge, Carneades defends his non-committal 
attitude. On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, he “studied 
carefully the writings of the Stoics and particularly those of 
Chrysippus, and by combating these successfully he became 
so famous that he would often say: Without Chrysippus 
where should I have been?” (Diog. L. IV, 62). 

It should be noted that Carneades’s scepticism is somewhat 
mitigated as compared with that of the Pyrrhonists and even 
Arcesilaus. Defending academic Scepticism against the 
attacks of the Stoics who accused the Academy of paralysing 
men’s practical and moral action,Carneades drew a demarca 
tion between judgements pertaining to practical matters and 
those dogmatically asserting “the absolute truth.” The 
demand to refrain from judgement should apply, according 
to Carneades, only to this latter kind, and a wise man need 
not withhold his views in everyday life provided they appear 
plausible to him. 

This probabilistic approach is in fact a further elabora¬ 
tion of Arcesilaus’s doctrine of “reasonableness” since Greek 
eylogon also denotes a reasonable probability. Carneades 
complements this doctrine by bringing in the empirical 
criterion for distinguishing between probable and false 
presentations. He denies the existence of kataleptic, i.e. 
apprehending, presentations recognised by the Stoics and 
contends, following the Cyrenaics, that all our knowledge is 
restricted to sensations and that we do not know what lies 
behind them. Yet some presentations may be probable, others 
improbable: “And respecting the probable impressions they 
[the Academics] make distinctions: some they regard as just 
simply probable, others as probable and tested, others as 
probable, tested and irreversible” (Sext. Pyrrh. I, 227). 
Thus a man in a darkened room can mistake a rope for a 
snake; having checked his presentation (impression) by relat- 

310 










ing it to other presentations, i.e. having satisfied himself that 
the object does not move, makes no noise, etc., he obtains 
a probable and tested presentation. It will become probable, 
tested and “irreversible” only after the man makes sure that 
he is in his right mind, not sleeping or hallucinating, not 
deceived by an optical illusion, etc. In practical life we prefer 
the highest possible degree of probability, yet it must never be 
forgotten that we deal with probabilities only, but not with 
objective truth. 

Here lies the main difference between the Pyrrhonists and 
the academic Sceptics: whereas the former recommend 
compliance with customs and traditions, the latter insist on 
the probability of the highest attainable degree as the guiding 
principle of man’s behaviour. Significantly, the Academics 
understood probability ( pithanotes) in purely qualitative 
terms as expressing the degree of our subjective confidence 
of the authenticity of the knowledge we possessed. The objec¬ 
tive basis for the doctrine of probable knowledge could only be 
provided by the quantitative expression of probability, and 
that was not yet known to antiquity. 

By introducing the degrees of probability, Carneades 
smoothed down the contrast between the Stoic “kataleptic 
presentation” and the Sceptic “irreversible impression,” yet 
he could not bridge the gulf between the phenomenalist trend 
of the Sceptics and the objectivism of the Stoics: the latter 
seek for truth, whereas the former are content with conviction. 

Carneades also levelled his criticial shafts against Stoic 
theology. He seems to have recognised the existence of gods 
within the framework of his conception of probability. Yet 
conceding the need to venerate the gods, he dismissed the 
“dogmatic” arguments of his opponents the Stoics, thereby 
undermining in fact the foundation of every religion. Sextus 
Empiricus tells us: “Those, then, who maintain that Gods 
exist try to establish their thesis by four modes, arguing, first¬ 
ly, from the universal agreement of mankind; secondly, from 
the orderly arrangement of the Universe; thirdly, from the ab¬ 
surd consequences of the denial of the existence of deity; 
fourthly and lastly, by undermining the opposing arguments” 
(Adv. math. IX, 60). None of these arguments seems convinc¬ 
ing to Carneades. Indeed, there are atheists and there are 
tribes we know nothing about. Besides, we cannot prove 
anything by arguing from a belief in a thing to its existence. 
Again, one cannot infer to the reason and divinity of the 



















cosmos from the recognition of its orderly arrangement. As 
regards the regularity of processes adduced as a proof of their 
divine nature, why don’t we qualify, for instance, malaria as 
divine for its recurrent fits? The last two arguments echo the 
dominant motif of the sceptical doctrine: both the denial and 
the assertion of the existence of god are equally senseless, and 
the agruments for the existence of god are just as confound- 
able as the arguments against it. 

The Carneadean criticism of Stoic theology and religious 
beliefs in general is based on a logical analysis of arguments 
for the existence of god (gods). Here is one example: “If, 
however, God exists, he is an animal. If he is an animal, he 
has sensation, for the animal differs from the not-animal 
by nothing else than by sensation. But if he has sensation, he 
hears and sees and smells and touches. And if so, there are 
certain things in connection with each sense which are conge¬ 
nial or repellent to him... But if so there are certain 
things vexatious to God; and if there are certain things vexa¬ 
tious to God, God is subject to change for the worse, and thus 
also to decay. Therefore God is perishable. But this is con¬ 
trary to the general conception of him. Therefore the Divine 
does not exist” (Sext. Adv. math. IX, 142-143). Proceeding in 
a similar manner, Carneades reveals contradictions in the 
Stoic teaching of the corporeality of god, god’s blissful 
life, etc. 

Carneades also rejects the Stoic (and all other) notions 
of oracle, prophetic dreams and miracles on the ground that 
all of them can be explained by natural causes, coincidence, 
etc. 

In sociology and ethics, Carneades shared the view that 
all laws and norms come about by convention as the notions of 
justice and injustice, good and evil are formed by people in 
accordance with their interests. On the evidence of Christian 
writer Lactantius, Carneades held that men had established 
the law for their own benefit which is proved by difference 
in the existing customs and by the fact that laws are liable 
to change with time. He also said that all conquerors including 
the Romans themselves who had seized power over the whole 
world would have to return to shacks and live in poverty if 
they decided to be just, i.e. to part with what did not belong 
to them (Vog. Ill, 1126). 

It appears impossible to reconstruct Carneades’s own ethi¬ 
cal teaching, yet he is known to have recognised free will as 


312 






an independent factor in the chain of causal relations and 
criticised Stoic fatalism. 

Carneades like Arcesilaus, left no written works and 
all we know about him comes from the pen of his pupil 
Clitomachus (Hasdrubal) of Carthage (c. 175-c. 110 B.C.). 
He expounded his predecessor’s views in great detail and 
wrote more than 400 books of which we possess only minor 
isolated fragments incorporated in doxographers’ writings. 

11. Later Pyrrhonism 

According to Diogenes Laertius, the Sceptical school 
fell into decay after the death of Pyrrho’s student Timon and 
regained its fame in the first century B.C. in Alexandria, 
attracting numerous pupils from all the civilised countries 
of the Mediterranean area. Its revival is credited to Aenesi- 
demus of Cnossus, the compiler of eight books of Pyrrhonean 
Discourses that came down to us in the rendition of Photius 
the patriarch. Other evidences for his views are the writings 
of Diogenes Laertius who expounded Aenesidemus’s argu¬ 
ments in a special book on the Sceptics, and of Sextus Empiri¬ 
cus. His life is practically unknown to us. 

Aenesidemus owes his place in philosophy mainly to his 
ten “tropes” or modes of sceptical reasoning. According to 
Sextus Empiricus, “they are these: the first, based on the 
variety in animals; the second, on the differences in human 
beings; the third, on the different structures of the organs of 
sense; the fourth, on the circumstantial conditions; the fifth, 
on positions and intervals and locations; the sixth, on 
intermixtures; the seventh, on the quantities and formations 
of the underlying objects; the eighth, on the fact of relativity; 
the ninth, on the frequency or rarity of occurrence; the 
tenth, on the disciplines and customs and laws, the legendary 
beliefs and the dogmatic convictions” (Sext. Pyrrh. I, 36-37). 

This brief exposition or, rather, enumeration of the 
“tropes,” each illustrating the need to suspend judgement 
about claims to knowledge, is further discussed in more detail. 
Thus, living beings perceive things differently: “seawater is 
a disagreeable and poisonous potion for men, but fish drink 
and enjoy it. Pigs, too, enjoy wallowing in the most stinking 
mire rather than in clear and clean water (ibid., 55-56), 
men’s senses and notions are also different as attested to by the 
difference of their perceptions and judgements about the same 
things; different senses give different presentations of the same 


313 














objects, e.g. honey appears pleasant to taste, but unpleasant 
to the eye; a picture is smooth to touch, but not to the eye; 
men’s perceptions change with their state and depend on 
whether a man is asleep or awake, hungry or satisfied, drunk 
or sober, etc.; again, the same objects seem different at 
different distances, etc. The tenth trope, directly related to 
social and ethical problems emphasises the subjective 
character of man’s judgements: “since by means of this Mode 
also so much divergency is shown to exist in objects, we shall 
not be able to state what character belongs to the object in 
respect of its real essence, but only what belongs to it in 
respect of this particular rule of conduct, or law, or habit, and 
so on with each of the rest” (ibid., I, 163). 

As is evidenced from the above, all Aenesidemus’s argu¬ 
ments against claims to objective truth invoke the relativity 
of human knowledge. His scepticism is therefore essentially 
relativistic. 

Besides the sceptical argumentation, the Pyrrhonean 
Discourses deals with a number of other problems. For 
instance, the first book shows the difference between the 
academic Sceptics and the Pyrrhonists by comparing their 
criteria of probability and conventionality, the second reveals 
internal contradictions in the notions of movement and 
change, genesis and destruction, the third sets forth the 
aporias of thinking and sense perceptions, as well as the 
doctrines of signs and inferences. The fourth book challenges 
claims to the knowledge of nature and gods, the fifth presents 
a logical analysis of the conception of causality, and the last 
three investigate the contradictions of basic logical concepts. 

The arguments of Aenesidemus as expounded by Sextus 
Empiricus reveal a certain affinity of his views with those of 
Heraclitus. Sextus, for one, traces common points in their 
conceptions of soul and the criterion of truth understood as 
general consent, in the treatment of the part whole problem, 
etc. Yet the irregularity of the author’s references to 
Aenesidemus’s views and the identity of their arguments 
makes it impossible to define clearly the bounds of consensus 
between Heraclitus and Aenesidemus. In all likelihood, the 
latter makes but occasional borrowings from Heraclitean 
reasoning to substantiate his own stand. 

Take, for instance, the relationship between the part and 
the whole. On the evidence of Sextus Empiricus, “Aeneside¬ 
mus, ‘according to Heraclitus,’ says that the part is both other 












than the whole and the same; for substance is both whole and 
part, whole in the Universe, but part in the nature of this 
particular animal" (Sext. Adv. math. IX, 337). Yet in 
contrast with Heraclitus who focused his attention on the 
dialectical contradiction and then reasoned upward to Logos 
as the law of all being, Aenesidemus draws from this state¬ 
ment an entirely different conclusion in full accord with 
Sceptical tradition as is seen from the next few lines obviously 
reproducing his own words: “And if so, we must declare that 
no whole exists. From which it follows that no part, either, 
exists. For each of these is a relative, and when one of a pair of 
relatives is abolished, the other also is abolished with it” 
(Sext. Adv. math. IX, 357.). 

Sceptic Agrippa known only from a mention in Diogenes 
Laertius (Sextus Empiricus speaks impersonally of the “La¬ 
test Sceptics”) introduced five more tropes (modes) casting 
doubt on the possibility of knowledge and “resulting 
respectively from disagreement, extension ad infinitum, 
relativity, hypothesis and reciprocal inference” (Diog. L. IX, 
88). The first trope refers to dissent among philosophers, 
the second invokes infinite regress of premises and proofs (to 
prove a conclusion we need premises, these themselves 
require proofs, and so on ad infinitum). The third is based on 
the assertion that every object can only be perceived in 
conjunction with others and is therefore incognisable by 
itself, the trope “from hypothesis” is directed against those 
who wish to avoid infinite regress and “take the most 
elementary of things as of themselves entitled to credence ... 
which is useless, because some one else will adopt the 
contrary hypothesis” (ibid., IX, 89). The last trope “from 
reciprocal inference” pertains to arguing in a circle as y^hen, 
for instance, one infers to the existence of channels in the 
sense organs from the effluences allegedly coming from 
external objects, whereas the effluences are argued from 
the existence of channels. 

Even this short recital shows that Agrippa’s tropes 
partially coincide with those analysed by Aenesidemus. The 
distinction lies in their logical character, since the last five 
tropes deal not so much with things and their perceptions as 
with judgements about them and the relations between these 
judgements. They are based, however, on the same relativism, 
though differently demonstrated. 

The last stage of ancient Scepticism is connected with 


315 
















the activities of Menodotus, Sextus Empiricus and Saturninus, 
all medical doctors, who attempted to combine theoretical 
Scepticism with the methodology of ancient empirical 
medicine. It may be recalled that the latter’s characteristic 
feature was to avoid abstract speculations regarding the 
cause of diseases and to concentrate on their actual manifesta¬ 
tions. As distinct from the early period of ancient Greek 
medicine when it had to resist the encroachments of natural 
philosophy, the conflicting tendencies in the later period were 
represented by two schools within the medical profession 
itself: the “empiricists” and the “logicians.” According to 
Galen, a famous Greek physician and philosopher, the empiri¬ 
cal school started from Philonos of Cos (second century B.C.) 
and Serapion of Alexandria who were followed by Menodotus 
and Sextus Empiricus. Available to us are only two works of 
Sextus Empiricus which have already been mentioned: one 
Against the Logicians (Adversus Mathematicos) , consisting 
of 11 bopks, and the other Outlines of Pyrrhonism (Pyrrho- 
niarum Hypotyposes) , consisting of 3 books. 

Both these works present a detailed exposition of the 
doctrines of earlier philosophical schools and subject them 
to scrupulous analysis and criticism from the Sceptical 
position. The arguments of Sextus may not have been his own, 
in fact there is good reason to think that he merely summa¬ 
rised and systematised the practice of his predecessors. He 
always speaks on behalf of the Sceptics and often gives 
interesting descriptions of the empirical views in contempo 
rary science contrasting them with the doctrines of the 
“dogmatists.” Characterising the general method of 
empiricism in book VIII of the Against the Logicians, Sextus 
writes: “while there is no rule of the art concerned with other 
cases, of the art which deals with things apparent there is a 
special rule; for [this art] affects the framing of its rules by 
means of things frequently observed or investigated; and the 
things frequently observed and investigated are peculiar to 
those who have made the most frequent observations, and 
are not the common property of all” (Sext. Adv. math. 
VIII, 291). 

Viewing the empirical method with obvious sympathy, 
Sextus nevertheless stresses that it does not give us the 
knowledge of the real nature of things, but only of their 
appearance: “although I shall be able to say what the nature 
of each of the underlying objects appears to me to be, I shall 


(16 






be compelled, for the reasons stated above, to suspend judge¬ 
ment as to its real nature” (Sext. Pyrrh. I, 78). The Sceptic 
neither denies phenomena, nor withholds his opinion about 
them: “Adhering, then, to appearances we live in accordance 
with the normal rules of life; undogmatically, seeing that we 
cannot remain wholly inactive. And it would seem that this 
regulation of life is fourfold, and that one part of it lies in the 
guidance of Nature, another in the constraint of the passions, 
another in the tradition of laws and customs, another in the 
instruction of the arts” (ibid., I, 23). And further: “Nature’s 
guidance is that by which we are naturally capable of sensa¬ 
tion and thought; constraint of the passions is that whereby 
hunger drives us to food and thirst to drink; tradition of 
customs and laws, that whereby we regard piety in the 
conduct of life as good, but impiety as evil; instruction of the 
arts, that whereby we are not inactive in such arts as we adopt. 
But we make all these statements undogmatically” (ibid., 
p. 17). 

Hence, Sextus reiterates Pyrrho’s advice to adhere to appe¬ 
arances, i.e. to live in accordance <vith sense perceptions, 
physical needs and one’s country’s laws and traditions 
without further dogmatic ado. However, he insists on the need 
to rely on common sense and empirical knowledge, thereby 
underscoring the practical certainty of our knowledge based 
on experience and drawing closer to the probabilism of 
Carneades. 

Scepticism was one of the three great philosophical schools 
of the Hellenistic epoch that arose on the ruins of the 
slave-owning polis system. Suspense of judgement in theory 
and adherence to convention and common sense or probability 
and reasonableness in practice aptly expressed the corrupting 
influence of social conditions in Hellenistic states on the once 
harmonious Greek character. In the classical period of Greek 
history, the Greek’s ideal was to know and act accordingly. 
In the Hellenistic age, the Epicurean proclaimed the motto 
“to know and evade,” and the Stoic, "to know and acquiesce.” 
The Sceptic, bringing this trend to a logical conclusion, 
waives all claims to objective knowledge, admits his ignorance 
and makes up his mind to live as best as he can by suspending 
judgement and adhering to custom, common sense or practical 
experience. 

None of these philosophical schools, however, could meet 
the social and ideological demands of the Roman Empire. The 

UT 












hegemonistic ambitions and state universalism of this colossal 
organisation combined with a highly developed principle of 
individuality in social and cultural spheres called for a new 
world-view synthesis and a new conception of the relationship 
between the universal and the individual, knowledge and 
action. An attempt at such a broad synthesis based on 
a philosophical interpretation of myth was undertaken in late 
Hellenistic philosophy. 






Chapter 4 

Decline of Ancient Philosophy 


12. From Philosophical Eclecticism to Philosophico-Religious Syncretism 

The last century of the pre-Christian era was notable in 
philosophy for the emergence of eclecticism 1 by which is un¬ 
derstood the practice of selecting solutions from different 
philosophical systems believed to be the “best” or, preferably, 
common to conflicting theories. Lacking a single principle, 
eclecticism is essentially incoherent, as different systems 
based on different premises cannot be mechanically integrated 
into a single whole. Pure eclecticism, or eclecticism “as such” 
is therefore impossible; every concrete eclectic system centres 
around some pivotal doctrine which serves for the philosopher 
as a criterion for his “selection.” 

Eclecticism is an obvious sign of decline in philosophical 
thought. It usually comes on the scene when the leading 
schools and trends have exhausted their possibilities, bogged 
down in insoluble contradictions and lost their grip on men’s 
minds. The first century B.C. was just such a period of phil¬ 
osophical twilight. It bore a certain resemblance to the crisis 
in early Greek philosophy when numerous “physical” systems 
had entered into a conflict with one another and completely 
discredited themselves. Philosophy in that period had opened 
up new vistas and turned to man, to the problems of ethics and 
principles of knowledge. The epoch under consideration, 
however, offered no such possibilities —the only way out 
proved to be Scepticism. Yet its negative answer to the 
problem of knowledge could not satisfy the “philosophical 
hunger” that arises each time society embarks on a road of 
great changes and those were the times of the collapse of 
age-old republican institutions and transition to the principate 
followed by the establishment of the Empire. A temporary 
solution was found in eclecticism. 


1 From the Greek eklego, meaning “to select.” 


319 












The eclectic theories that arose in that period were based 
on various systems of classical and Hellenistic philosophy — 
Platonism, Aristotelianism, Stoicism and “academic Sceptic¬ 
ism.” They could find no sustenance only in the consistent 
materialism of the Epicureans and in the hopeless scepticism 
of the Pyrrhonists. Particularly important was the part 
played by Platonic and Pythagorean ideas which greatly 
contributed to the final degeneration of philosophy into philo- 
sophico-religious syncretism. 

Varying degrees of eclecticism were already in evidence 
in the teachings of the Middle Stoa. For instance, Boethus 
of Sidon (middle of the second century B.C.) combined 
Stoicism with Aristotelianism, separating god from the world 
and lodging him, in the Aristotelian manner, in the region of 
fixed stars. Panaetius and Poseidonius, whose teachings, as we 
have seen, exhibited strong Platonic and Aristotelian influen¬ 
ces are also traditionally ranked among the eclectics. The 
emergence of eclectic systems within the Stoic tradition may 
have been the result of the criticism levelled by the Academy, 
particularly Carneades, against the Stoics. Yet the later Aca¬ 
demics themselves began to revise their sceptical views 
looking back to Plato for positive doctrines. 

The return of the Academy to the Platonic tradition which 
looked like the revival of its founder’s views was accompanied 
by gradual departure from the scepticism of the second and 
third Academies. According to Sextus Empiricus, the head of 
the “Fourth Academy” Philo of Larissa (c. 150-c. 79 B.C.) 
accentuated in his teaching the positive elements in the doc¬ 
trine of the early academic Sceptics: “Philo asserts that 
objects are inapprehensible so far as concerns the Stoic crite¬ 
rion, that is to say apprehensive impression,’ but are appre¬ 
hensible so far as concerns the real nature of the objects 
themselves” (Sext. Pyrrh. I, 235). This is already a much 
“stronger” thesis than Carneades’s principle of probability: 
Philo unequivocally states that the absolute denial of the 
possibility of knowing things runs counter to the obvious fact 
of the existence of true knowledge. The same idea has been 
advocated, even with greater persistence, by Antiochus of 
Ascalon (died about 68 B.C.) who succeeded Philo as head 
of the Academy. 

In contrast with the Sceptics, Antiochus held that proba¬ 
bility is inconceivable without truth, as its very notion logi¬ 
cally implies a reference which is nothing but authenticity. 







The existence of truth is the necessary condition of proba¬ 
bility, not to speak of certainty. According to Antiochus, in 
practice Scepticism is refuted by the fact that success in life 
and compliance with the dictates of reason are impossible 
without authentic knowledge. At the same time his doctrine 
of perception is not free from the traces of Scepticism: “So 
then, just as light shows both itself and all things within 
it, so also presentation, which is the primary factor im the 
cogniiion of the living creature, must, like light, both reveal 
itself and be indicative of the evident object which produced 
it. But since it does not always indicate the true object, 
but often deceives, and, like bad messengers, misreports 
those who dispatched it, it has necessarily resulted that we 
cannot admit every presentation as a criterion of truth, but if 
any—only that which is true” (Sext. Adv. math. VII, 163). 
This reasoning lands us in a logical circle: the criterion of 
truth appears to be true presentation... 

The Stoic elements of Antiochus’s teaching are represented 
by the conception of the active (fire and air) and passive 
(water and earth) principles and by the orthodox Stoic 
doctrine of the world Reason, whereas his understanding of 
matter as the potentiality and substrate of things is firmly 
rooted in the Aristotelian tradition. 

A characteristic example of eclecticism is pseudo-Aristoteli¬ 
an treatise On the World (first century B.C.) based on 
Aristotle’s conception of the Prime Mover which is detached 
from the world and constitutes the efficient and final causes 
of the cosmos. The author of the treatise also subscribes to 
Stoic pantheism reflecting a peculiar interpretation of the 
Heraclitean harmony of opposites, the Stoic conception of the 
identity of necessity, fate and God, and the Platonic idea of the 
Demiurge holding in his hand “the beginning, the end and 
the middle” of everything... 

Under the heading of eclectics tradition also rates famous 
Roman orator, statesman and philosopher Marcus Tullius 
Cicero (106-43 B.C.) who was the most prominent represent 
ative of this trend of thought and whose major works have 
come down to us complete. His chief contribution to philoso¬ 
phy was the popularisation and transmission of Greek thought 
to Rome. We owe to him our knowledge of numerous philos¬ 
ophical ideas of ancient Greece which are reproduced 
and dicussed in his works On the Nature of Gods (De Natura 
Deorum ), On Fate (De Fato), Tusculan Talks (Tusculanae 


2 I 030 


321 











Disputationes ), Academic Discourse ( Academica) and many 
others. Cicero’s aim was to extract from them the “best,” 
i.e. the “truth.” He shows deference even to those teachings 
he does not approve (e.g. Epicureanism) and in his rendition 
preserves both their ideas and arguments. However, expound¬ 
ing the views of Greek thinkers, Cicero does not confine 
himself to their reproduction in Latin—in fact he interprets 
them in accordance with the world outlook of a Roman citizen. 
Thus he gives special prominence to the Stoic conception of 
the “proper” which is by no means crucial for Stoic philoso 
phjrand turns it into “duty” (officium) focusing his attention 
on the duties and norms of behaviour of a “worthy citizen.” 

Cicero regarded philosophical studies as “the food of the 
young, the diversion of the old, an adornment to success, 
a refuge for consolation in adversity.” In his opinion, philoso 
phy achieves these ends by different methods and it is 
important that we know the ways proposed by different 
thinkers and schools. For instance, consolation can be 
achieved by showing that evil does not exist, as claimed by 
Cleanthes, or that it is not considerable as contended by the 
peripatetics; the Epicureans propose to turn attention to the 
good and disregard evil, the Cyrenaics teach to take pain as 
a matter of course, whereas Chrysippus believes that grief can 
be relieved by persuading its victims that indulgence in it 
does not accord with man’s dignity and fulfilment of his 
proper duties. Still others seek to combine various methods 
since different people respond to different therapies—and so, 
Cicero concludes, he also offers a single consolation joining 
together all methods (Cic. Tusc. Ill, 31). 

Similar attitude is adopted by Cicero towards other philo¬ 
sophical problems, as he believes together with the peripa¬ 
tetics and academics that “all things should be viewed from 
opposite sides” (ibid., II, 3). Naturally, with this approach 
he could not but fall in with the probability principle of the 
academic Sceptics combining it, however, with the Stoic 
conceptions of nature and with rather dogmatic ethical 
principles—traceable, again, to the influence of Stoicism. In 
Cicero’s eyes nature is a great harmonious whole purposefully 
arranged and pervaded with reason. He subscribes to Plato’s 
doctrine of immortal soul on the grounds that a self moving 
cause cannot cease to exist: “Since the soul is always active 
and has no source of motion because it is itself self-moving, 
its motion will have no end” (Cic. De Senect. XXI, 78). To 


322 









support this view, he adduces Plato’s arguments. 

Cicero is well aware that the Stoic motifs in his philosophy, 
as well as the borrowings from Platonic, Aristotelian and 
other doctrines do not consort with the views of the New 
Academy which appealed to him the most, therefore he waters 
down the caustic scepticism of the Academy and even jokingly 
begs it to be lenient “for if it should attack what we think 
we have constructed and arranged so beautifully, it would 
play too great havoc with it; at the same time I should like 
to win over this school, and so do not dare to banish it from 
the discussion” (Cic. Legg. I, XIII, 38, 39). In his treatise 
On Duties (II, 7-8) he frankly ranks himself with those 
“whose mind wanders in darkness and never knows which 
doctrine to follow.” Finally he sides up with the 
Academy preferring probability as the guide for sound 
judgement and justifying in his way the contradictoriness of 
his views. 

For space considerations we shall not discuss Cicero’s 
philosophy in greater detail, though this brief survey gives 
but a very general outline of his world outlook. Cicero was 
not an original thinker, yet even a cursory analysis of his 
views shows inadequacy of the one-sided assessment of eclecti¬ 
cism as a purely negative phenomenon in philosophy, a kind 
of hopeless mixture of heterogeneous and incompatible scraps 
of different theories. On the subjective side, eclecticism always 
testifies to a need for an integrated approach and a tendency 
towards a synthetic doctrine, though objectively such a doctri¬ 
ne can seldom be developed by selecting “the best” —the very 
principle of such selection militates against the successful 
accomplishment of this task. 

The situation may be different when an eclectic system 
is pivoted on a rigid philosophical principle, e.g. a religious 
idea, as was the case with the neo-Pythagorean and Platonic 
doctrines in the period from the first century B.C. to the 
second century A.D. These doctrines gradually turned into 
philosophico-religious teachings that paved the way for neo¬ 
platonism. 

For more than two centuries, from Aristoxenus of Tarentum 
till at least the beginning of the first century B.C., neo-Pytha 
goreanism did not show up in philosophical literature, and it 
was only at the end of this period that the first pseudo-Pytha 
gorean works came to light. The earliest evidence for the 
revival of Pythagoreanism is Alexander Polyhistor’s account 












of the Pythagorean Memoirs preserved by Diogenes Laertius. 
The account starts with a statement of the “ arche ” or Pytha 
gorean credo: “The principle of all things is the monad or 
unit; arising from the monad the undefined dyad or two serves 
as material substratum to the monad, which is cause; from the 
monad and the undefined dyad spring numbers; from numbers 
points, from points, lines; from lines, plane figures; from plane 
figures, solid figures; from solid figures, sensible bodies, the 
elements of which are four, fire, water, earth and air; these 
elements interchange and turn into one another completely, 
and combine to produce a universe animate, intelligent, 
spherical, with the earth at its centre, the earth itself too being 
spherical and inhabited round about. There are also antipodes, 
and our ‘down’ is their ‘up’...” (Diog. L. VIII, 25). All reality 
is based on the relation of opposites: light and dark, cold and 
hot, dry and moist. The predominance of one of them deter 
mines the season: the hot gives summer, the cold winter, the 
dry—spring and the moist—autumn. In turn, spring brings 
health, autumn —illness, morning leads to flowering, evening 
to decay, etc. 

As is evidenced from the very first lines of this passage, 
neo-Pythagoreanism differs from the ancient Pythagorean 
doctrine with its table of opposites by a strong monistic 
tendency. Proclaiming the monad or unit to be the primary 
cause, the neo-Pythagoreans exhibit an obvious influence of 
later Plato, as well as of Stoic “Heracliteanism” and the idea 
of the balance of opposites which they may have learned from 
Alcmaeon by way of Plato. The. neo-Pythagoreans understood 
life as heat, yet not all living organisms, in their opinion, are 
endowed with the soul: “Soul is distinct from life; it is 
immortal, since that from which it is detached [the ether] is 
immortal” (Diog. L. VIII, 28). “The soul of man,... is divided 
into three parts, intelligence, reason, and passion. Intelligence 
and passion are possessed by other animals as well, but reason 
by man alone” (Diog. L. VIII, p. 30). Expounding further 
the neo-Pythagorean doctrine of the soul, Alexander Polyhis- 
tor says: “The soul draws nourishment from the blood; the 
faculties of the soul are winds, for they as well as the soul are 
invisible, just as the aether is invisible... When cast out upon 
the earth, it wanders in the air like the body. Hermes is the 
steward of souls ... it is he who brings in the souls from their 
bodies both by land and sea; and the pure are taken into the 
uppermost region, but the impure are not permitted to ap- 


m 








proach the pure or each other, but are bound by the Furies in 
bonds unbreakable. The whole air is full of souls which are 
called genii or heroes; these are they who send men dreams 
and signs of future ... and it is to them that purifications 
and lustrations, all divination, omens and the like, have 
reference” (Diog. L. VIII, 31-32). 

An attentive reader will have traced here the influences of 
most diverse philosophical doctrines, both antecedent to and 
contemporary with neo-Pythagoreanism. It is arrant eclectic¬ 
ism, yet the religious idea moulds it into a single whole. The 
neo-Pythagoreanists link the divine with heat and the “upper¬ 
most air” (ether): “the uppermost air is ever-moved and pure 
and healthy, and all within it is immortal and consequently 
divine. The sun, the moon and the other stars are gods; for, 
in them, there is a preponderance of heat, and heat is the 
cause of life... Gods and men are akin, inasmuch as man 
partakes of heat; therefore God takes thought for man” (Diog. 
L. VIII, 26-27). The orderliness of the world as a whole is 
attributed to fate. 

Thus the neo-Pythagorean conception of gods and their 
relations to man is a clear reflection of Stoic pantheism. 
God does not stand apart from the world and men are possess 
ed of reason by virtue of their partaking of the divine sub 
stance—‘uppermost air” or “ether.” 

We know, largely by name only, about 90 various neo- 
Pythagorean treatises. 1 Their content is in the main identical 
with what we have from Alexander Polyhistor, except that 
different authors give different combinations of views 
borrowed from the same sources. For instance, Ocelli Lucani 
in his treatise On the Nature of the Universe (De universi 
natura) concentrates on the Aristotelian idea of the ungene¬ 
rated and everlasting world and closely follows Aristotle in 
describing particular processes of genesis and decay, conclud¬ 
ing his work with a passage from Aristotle’s On Generation 
and Corruption (see Ocelli Lucani, De universi 
natura, II, 3-6. Mul I, pp. 386-406). From Xenocrates and the 
Stoics (evidently Poseidonius) Ocelli borrows the doctrine of 
three parts of the universe —the heaven, the earth and the 
above-earth space ( metarsion ), and divides, accordingly, all 
beings into gods, men, and demons (ibid., Ill, 3). 

1 See E. Zeller, Die Philosophic der Griechen , Band III, 2. Teil. 
A number of texts are reproduced by Mullachus: Fragmenta philosophorum 
graecorum , Vol. I, pp. 383-575, Vol. II, pp. 9-129. 


325 















" The understanding of the divine cause as the creator (De¬ 
miurge) and the moving principle of the cosmos (creation 
itself following a pre-existing form) represents, as it were, 
a stepping stone to the Demiurge of Plato’s Timaeus, Aristot 
le’s Prime Mover and the One of the neo-Platonics. The first 
conception was expounded in detail in the treatise On the Soul 
of the World and on Nature (De anima mundi) ascribed to 
Timaeus of Locri, whereas the third one was delineated by 
Moderatus of Gades, Nero’s contemporary. His views are 
known to us from fragments preserved by Stobay and Simpli¬ 
cius and from Porphyry’s description in The Life of Pythago¬ 
ras. According to Porphyry, Moderatus gave the following 
account of the Pythagorean teaching: the prototypes and 
primary causes cannot be expressed in words and are 
therefore denoted by numbers. The “unity” (henotes) or 
“unit” stands for unity, identity, equality, the cause of una¬ 
nimity, etc., i.e. all that makes things what they are. It is 
present in every whole that consists of parts and joins them 
together as it shares in the primary cause (Porph. V. Pyth. 
49). By contrast, difference, inequality, divisibility, etc. are 
produced by the dyad. So, the unit (monad) is the symbol of 
unity, the dyad, of diversity. The unity is the principle of 
everything. 

Numerous investigators have repeatedly called in question 
the authenticity of Moderatus’s rendition as reproduced by 
Porphyry suspecting the latter of having read into Moderatus 
his own neo-Platonic conceptions. Even more dubious appears 
the evidence of Simplicius who ascribed to Moderatus the 
following exposition of Plato’s teaching: the Highest Unity is 
the primary cause which is above all being. The second stage 
is ideas; the third, the soul; the fourth, the world of nature 
open to sense perceptions (see Vog. Ill, fr. 1285b). This 
doctrine already has an unmistakable neo-Platonic ring about 
it —yet why cannot it be at the same time a genuine conception 
of Moderatus foreshadowing, however in a crude form, the 
neo-Platonic system and reconstructed by neo Platonic Sim¬ 
plicius in accordance with his views? 

The ethical theory of neo-Pythagoreanism is expounded by 
Alexander Polyhistor (Diog. L. VIII, 32-35). In his opinion, 
“the most momentous thing in human life is the art of winning 
the soul to good or to evil. Blessed are the men who acquire 
a good soul... Virtue is harmony, and so are health and all 
good and God himself.” The main prescriptions are to venerate 


326 










the gods, heroes, the parents and relatives, to abstain from 
prohibited food, to purify oneself by washing and sprinkling, 
etc. The fulfilment of all prescriptions brings immortality, 
i.e. divinity which is the reward of virtuous man. The reli¬ 
gious trend of neo-Pythagoreanism culminates in the teaching 
of Apollonius of Tyana (first century A.D.). The life of this 
half legendary “saint” adorned with numerous stories of all 
sorts of myracles he worked not by magic, but through gods’ ^ 
favours and divine wisdom was colourfully described by 
Philostratus in his novel Life of Apollonius of Tyana. Accord 
ing to Philostratus, Apollonius considered it his mission in 
life to worship the gods and comprehend their nature. He 
identified philosophy with a true religion and regarded 
philosopher as a prophet, a god’s servant and an intermediary 
between man and god. The truest religion, in his opinion, was 
the one that recognises one God. 

Yet it was mainly to Philo Judaeus of Alexandria that 
Hellenistic philosophy owed the real impact of monotheism. 

13. Judaism and Greek Philosophy. Philo of Alexandria 

It was not accidental that the tendency towards the in¬ 
tegration of various philosophico-religious systems displayed 
in eclecticism took the most conspicuous form at Alexandria, 
the largest economic, cultural and political centre of the Near 
East, where the Oriental influence represented by Judaism 
met with Greco Roman Stoicism, Platonism and Pythago- 
reanism. The objective need for broad economic, political and 
cultural contacts between the Jewish colonists and the 
gentiles tended to modify the sectarian views of the Diaspora 
and to expand the narrow limits of their traditional world 
outlook. The Hellenistic tendencies resulted in the inevitable 
spread of the Greek language which gradually replaced 
Hebrew in everyday life. This, in turn, induced the Jews to 
translate into Greek the Mosaic Scriptures of the Pentateuch 
and then the other Hebrew Scriptures and apocrypha compris¬ 
ing the Old Testament. The translation that was accomplished 
in the third or second centuries B.C. is known as the 
Septuagint (so named from the legend of its composition by 
72 translators allegedly inspired by divine providence to use 
identical words and expressions). 

The translation itself marked an important change in 
Judaism. For one, the proper name Yahweh was rendered in 














Greek by the common noun Lord (kyrios) which strengthened 
the monotheistic trend of the Judaic religion that had not yet 
prevailed by the third century B.C. The later books of the 
Old Testament that survived only in Greek bear unmistakable 
signs of the influence of Greek philosophy. For instance, the 
Wisdom of Solomon contains a statement that the world was 
created by God from formless matter (11, 18) and expounds 
the doctrine of the immortality of soul and of it being 
handicapped by the body (see 8, 13; 9, 14-15). The assertion 
of man’s ignorance (9, 16) bears a strong resemblance to the 
argument of Socrates and the Cynics, whereas the reference to 
God who “arranged everything by measure, number and 
weight” (11, 21) may well have been borrowed from 
a Pythagorean treatise. 

The impact of Greek culture on the Hebrew traditions of 
the Diaspora is attested to by Aristobulus’s commentary on 
the Pentateuch dedicated to Ptolemy Philometor (181-145). 
As is evidenced from the fragments of this work 
preserved by Clement of Alexandria and Eusebius, Aristobu- 
lus insisted on a close affinity of ancient Greek philosophy to 
the Jewish Law and adduced the examples of Pythagorean and 
Platonic doctrines, as well as sham poems of Orpheus, Linos, 
Homer and Hesiod in support of his view. At the same time he 
substituted allegoric interpretations in the spirit of Stoic 
“natural explanations” for anthropomorphic conceptions of 
the Old Testament. For instance, the “light” which comes 
first in the sequence of God’s creations was interpreted by 
him as divine wisdom (sophia), the seven days of creation 
were associated with mysterious number seven deified by 
the Pythagoreans, etc. 

The most systematic attempt to integrate Greek philosoph¬ 
ical conceptions with Jewish doctrines was made by Philo 
(c. 20 B.C.-c. 40 A.D.), a man of great Greek and Jewish 
learning and the most prominent of all the Jewish philo¬ 
sophers of the Alexandrian school. In his numerous works 
written in classical Greek he strove to combine the Old 
Testament with the ideas of Greek philosophy, particularly 
Platonism and Stoicism, displaying originality of thought and 
great ingenuity. His system, though eclectic and abounding in 
inconsistencies is centred around a religious idea which 
gives relative unity to his views. 

The inherent and insoluble contradiction of Philo’s sys¬ 
tem is between the idea of absolute personal god or “Lord” 


328 








of the Jewish Scriptures (the Septuagint) conceived as 
incorporeal and external to the world, and the traditional 
concepts of Hellenistic philosophy whereby Philo seeks 
to express god’s nature. This philosophy, even its most 
idealistic systems, is so firmly rooted in the general “corpo¬ 
reality” of the Greek world outlook that his attempt could not 
but end in failure. 

The starting point of Philo’s teaching is the conception of 
god. Being defined in accordance with the Scriptures, he is 
the Existent, the only true being. Therefore “those who have 
entered into comradeship with knowledge to desire to see the 
Existent if they may, (ought), if they cannot, to see at any 
rate his image, the most holy Word, and after the Word its 
most perfect work of all that our senses know, even this 
world” (Philo Conf. ling. 97). In other words, the aim of 
philosophy appears to be the contemplation and knowledge 
of god. Now the Scriptures assert that God is unknowable, 
because man has no special organ for his cognition: God is 
suprasensual and has no qualities, he can only be apprehended 
through revelation. This scriptural doctrine runs counter to 
all philosophical tradition of ancient Greece —even the most 
mystical trends in Greek philosophy always regarded Reason 
as divine identifying it with Truth, Goodness and Beauty. 

Things do not seem to be better with the old Testament: 
in contrast with the Jews who have always revered it as a prod¬ 
uct of god’s inspiration, the Greeks, even in their religious 
teachings, have never known a single indisputable authority. 

In order to overcome these apparently insuperable difficul¬ 
ties, Philo resorts to what was in fact nothing but a trick: 
taking advantage of the polysemy of the Greek term “Logos” 
meaning both law and word, he identifies the rational princi¬ 
ple of the universe, its law, with the revelatory thought of 
God. As a result, the law of nature becomes God’s Word enabl¬ 
ing Philo to reconcile, as if by magic, the Scriptures and Hel¬ 
lenistic philosophy, mystic revelation and inquisitive thought. 

Indeed, logos is interpreted by Philo in terms of both 
the Hebrew Old Testament and Greek philosophical doctrines. 
God created the world by his Word, therefore his wisdom or 
logos is the cause and model of creation or, according to 
the Wisdom of Solomon (7, 26), the reflection of eternal light, 
the mirror of God’s act and the image of his benignity. 
Since all things are created by God’s wisdom, the divine logos 
is akin to God and itself constitutes a creative principle. 

329 


j 










At the same time it is God’s “first-born son,” supreme archan¬ 
gel, God’s pontiff, etc. All these predicates make logos 
a personal deity, created and creative, and therefore perform¬ 
ing the function of an intermediary between God and his 
creation, i.e. the world and man. 1 

However, in line with the Stoic tradition, Philo also de¬ 
scribes logos as the inherent law and the “soul” of the world, 
as the universal reason that governs the cosmos in the same 
way as man’s mind controls the movement of the body. The 
world and man are respectively the macrocosmos and micro¬ 
cosmos. By his rational soul man assimilates to divine logos, 
and by his body consisting of elements, to the cosmos as the 
abode or body of logos. Borrowing liberally from Stoicism, 
Philo asserts that every man carries a particle of the divine 
logos (see Philo De of. m. VI, 146) and that the logos moves 
in a circle called fate by most people (Quod dens immut. 
XXVI, 176). In his description Philo does not omit even such 
Stoic characteristics of logos as “seminal and generative.” Se¬ 
lecting freely from Hellenistic philosophy whatever concepts 
he deemed reasonable, Philo, however, showed great caution 
when it came to the conception of God, central to the scriptur¬ 
al tradition. For instance, in opposition to the Stoics who iden¬ 
tified the world with God, Philo adheres to the idea of creation 
and turns for support to Platonism. In his opinion, god knew 
that a good world could not be created without an archetype, 
therefore he first produced the intelligible world of Ideas 
incorporeal and divine. The Ideas existed from eternity as 
thoughts of god and occupied no space—very much like the 
image of a city to be built that the architect first sees with 1 is 
mind’s eye. So, god models the sensible world upon the world 
of Ideas in accordance with Plato, yet contrary to Plato the 
world of Ideas is created by god too—this time in accordance 
with the Scriptures. 

Another big problem that faced Philo was how to account 
for the generation of the corporeal from the divine, the imper¬ 
fect and temporal from the perfect and eternal. Seeking to 
reconcile the scriptural dogma of creation from nothing with 
the deep-rooted Greek conception of pre-existing matter (even 


1 Describing logos, Philo now identifies it with wisdom, now calls 
wisdom its “mother” which naturally suggests God as its father. Logos is 
divine ( theos ), yet it is not a god (ho theos ), etc. All these inconsistencies 
result from the “fluidity" of the monotheistic doctrine undergoing the 
process of formation. 


330 








in the eyes of “divine” Plato god was but a Demiurge giving 
shape to formless substratum), Philo is compelled to ascribe 
to Moses the Stoic doctrine of the two world principles—one 
active, identified with the efficient cause and the universal 
reason, and the other passive, the inert and motionless mass 
animated and shaped by the Reason into perfection, i.e. our 
sensible world. 

In order to integrate these doctrines, as well as other 
biblical dogmas and myths with philosophy and common 
sense, Philo resorts to the tested method of allegorical inter 
pretation relying on the age-old Hebrew tradition in the 
exegesis of the Bible. This tradition that had arisen long 
before Philo was born of the need to distinguish between the 
direct, literal sense of words in the Bible and their “spiritual” 
sense. By Philo’s time this need had become absolutely 
imperative as the Scriptures could no longer be taken at their 
face value. The literal sense had to be excluded, first, when it 
was detrimental to God’s dignity (as in the cases of any 
limitation of God’s power, ascription to him of sensible 
properties, passions, etc.), second, when an allegory was obvi¬ 
ous (as in the case of the proverbial tree of knowledge) and, 
finally, when it was necessary to eliminate a discrepancy or 
a contradiction. Following the established practice and being 
firmly convinced, together with all Jewish commentators, that 
the Scriptures have been inspired by God and are therefore 
infallible and free from any inconsistencies, Philo treats all 
dubious passages in the biblical texts as having a symbolic 
meaning. 

Philo’s allegories derive from two sources the Judaic 
exegesis of the Scriptures and the Stoic rationalisation of 
Greek myth. What with the rich imagination of the Alexandri¬ 
an philosopher, their integration based on far fetched and 
often phantastic associations have produced very curious 
results. What strikes one most of all is the arbitrariness of 
Philo’s interpretations. He seems to be always inclined to read 
between lines suspecting hidden meaning behind every proper 
name, image, inconsistency and even plain error. In view of 
the absence of any principles and rules of translation this 
subjective approach coupled with Philo’s worship of the Holy 
Scripture and every letter in it results in waywardness and 
gives free rein to the philosopher’s imagination restricted 
only by his doctrinal considerations. 

The allegorism of Philo became one of the chief sources of 


331 












the medieval process of exegesis falling into three stages: 
etymological analysis, analogy and symbolism. 

Philo’s doctrine of the universe based on Stoic and Py¬ 
thagorean conceptions and complemented by the biblical 
image of God as creator and providence leads to a trinomial 
structure of being. Supreme God evolves both the ideal world 
(kosmos noetos) rationalised in divine logos and consisting of 
ideas numbers and the sensible world, which relate to one 
another as model and image, cause and consequence. Whereas 
the conception of transcendent God-creator and his son Logos 
was a way to Christianity (Philo, according to Engels, being 
its “father”),' the idea of a three-element being led straight to 
neo Platonism, the more so as Philo complemented the triadic 
structure by a doctrine of “enthusiasm” or “sober intoxica¬ 
tion” that overwhelms man’s soul during direct contemplation 
of God. This latter doctrine substituting “enthusiasm” or 
mystical feeling for rational thought turns the former into 
a mediator between the members of the trinity on the one 
hand, and between, god and man on the other. However, it 
was only two centuries later that Hellenistic philosophy 
represented by neo-Platonism finally surrendered to 
mysticism. 

14. Neo-Platonism: Alexandrian-Roman School 

The two centuries that separated Philo from the neo-Plato- 
nics were marked by the increasing influence of Platonism as 
the leading trend in the eclectic philosophy of the period. 
A typical representative of such philosophy based on Stoic, 
neo-Pythagorean and peripatetic elements was Plutarch of 
Chaeronea (c. 46-c. 127 A.D.) known also as a biographer and 
a moralist who violently denounced Epicureanism and 
attacked, somewhat less bitterly, the Stoics. OSering his 
interpretation of the Platonic doctrine of the World Soul, he 
contended that God did not make the body impermeable, nor 
the soul capable of perceiving and thinking. Both these 
principles existed from eternity but were in a chaotic state in 
darkness and disorderliness, devoid of perfection and measure. 
God put them in order and harmonised in accordance 
with numerical relationships, thereby creating the living and 
moving cosmos, the most perfect of all creations. 

1 Friedrich Engels, “Bruno Bauer und das Urchristentum”, in: Karl 
Marx, Friedrich Engels, Werke , Band 19, Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1962, S. 298. 


332 







Plutarch’s big problem was the origin of evil. It could 
not arise from formless matter devoid of any qualities, nor 
could it be traced to God by virtue of its concept. The only 
way to account for it was to ascribe evil to that part of the 
world soul that did not accept divine reason and harmony. 
Hence the theodicy: God is not responsible for evil plaguing 
the world, its source is the World Soul. 

Yet central to his philosophy was not the conception of the 
universal principles, matter, soul and God, but their religious- 
mythological interpretation. In accordance with the geogra 
phy of the worship expressing “true” religion, he gives his 
supreme deities the names of Zeus, Osiris and Ormazd. 
Matter in his system is Isis for Egyptian religion, Peneios 
'poverty) for the Platonic myth (see Symp. 203b-e) or 
divine mother in general. The evil World Soul is Egyptian 
Typhon, Persian Ahriman or Hades of Greek mythology. In 
other words, the Stoic allegorism based on the rationalisation 
of the names of mythological deities in terms of natural 
philosophy is replaced in Plutarch by its opposite—the 
“translation” of philosophical concepts into the language of 
myth and religion. 

To form a link between God and the world, Plutarch bor¬ 
rows (evidently from academic Xenocrates) the idea of good 
and bad demons abiding in the “sub-lunar world” and devel¬ 
ops a detailed demonology endowing demons with qualities 
he obviously does not dare to ascribe to the supreme deity: 
demons interfere in the lives of men punishing them for 
various offences and crimes. This enables him to “explain” 
and justify all sorts of superstitious beliefs, including 
fortune-telling, prophecies and miracles. 

A similar eclectic combination of Platonic, Pythagorean, 
Stoic and peripatetic elements is characteristic of Maximus 
of Tyrus, Lucius Apuleius who, besides the well known 
Metamorphoses or The Golden Ass, also wrote On Plato and 
His Teaching (De Platone et eius Dogmate), On the World 
(De Mundo), On Interpretation, as well as of Albinus and 
Atticus. Eclectic Platonist Aulus Cornelius Celsus (second 
century A.D.) used the doctrine of demons in his attacks 
against Christianity attributing the growing influence of the 
Christians to their knowledge of the demons’ names and abili¬ 
ty to use them in theurgy. 

Numenius of Apamea (second century A.D.), one of the 
forerunners of neo-Platonism, attempts to assimilate Platon- 


333 










ism to Judaism and, presumably taking his cue from Philo, 
declares Plato to be “Moses speaking Attic.” He develops a 
hierarchy of three gods (the first similar to Plato’s Idea of the 
Good, the second identical with his Demiurge and the 
third the sensible world) which anticipates to a certain 
extent the Plotinian scale of being, and borrows certain 
conceptions from Persian, Egyptian and Hindu (Brahman) 
religious teachings. In the third century A.D. these concep 
tions, duly rationalised along Platonic lines, were developed 
into the neo-Platonic system. 

The foundation of neo-Platonism is traditionally attributed 
to Ammonius Saccas (died c. 242 A.D.) It is known that he 
was brought up in Christian faith but then returned to 
paganism and that he earned his living as time-labourer 
(Sakkas means sack carrier). Ammonius left no writings, 
but Hierocles and Nemesius (fifth century A.D.) credit him 
with developing the basic principles of neo-Platonism, 
namely, the idea of integration of Platonic philosophy and 
Aristotelianism, the criticism of the Stoic doctrine of corporeal 
soul, and the doctrine of unity of intelligence which divides 
only by descending into mortal bodies without, however, 
diminishing or losing its identity. 

Yet, the first mature system of neo-Platonism is universally 
ascribed to Plotinus. 

(1) Plotinus was born about 204 A.D. in Lykopolis, Upper 
Egypt, and was a pupil of Ammonius in Alexandria for 11 
years. He left his teacher to take part in an expedition of 
Emperor Gordianus against Persia where he hoped to acquire 
firsthand knowledge of the magi’s philosophy. After the death 
of Gordianus in Persia in 244 he moved to Rome and founded 
there a school of philosophy. At first he taught his pupils 
orally and then began writing. He gave no names to his 
treatises, but tradition classifies them under such titles as On 
the Beautiful, On Immortality of Soul, On Intelligence, Ideas 
and Being, On the Good and the One, etc. Plotinus died in 
270 A.D. 

All the heritage of Plotinus was divided by his pupil 
and editor Porphyry into six sections, each of nine treatises 
(hence their name Enneads, groups of nine). 1 

Plotinus’s philosophical system is very complex and its 

1 In our references to Plotinus’s works we shall indicate the number of 
the ennead by Roman numeral, the treatise and the chapter, by arabic 
numerals. 


334 








detailed analysis entails considerable difficulties, not the 
least being the obscurity of his writings: the philosopher’s 
eyesight and handwriting were bad and he did not correct nor 
apparently re-read anything he had written. Nevertheless, the 
general pattern of his system emerges from his numerous 
works with sufficient clarity to permit an insight into the 
philosopher’s mind and make possible the general exegeses of 
his doctrine. 

Reality is conceived by Plotinus as a hierarchy of three 
substances or hypostases: the One, the Nous (Intelligence) 
and the Soul. The One is the highest: it is a perfect and 
complete entity, without any limits, forms and qualities. It 
is the principle of everything and is therefore completely 
indeterminate and undifferentiated. Plotinus repeatedly states 
that it is entirely free from multiplicity. It is above the Nous 
which is a two (dyad), because every intelligence goes 
together with an intelligible, knowledge as the subject is 
impossible without the knowledgeable, i.e. the object. The one 
is above all knowledge. Since cognition presupposes the duali¬ 
ty of object and subject, the One is ignorant even of itself, 
yet its ignorance is not of the ordinary kind: there is noth¬ 
ing of which the One is cognisant and nothing of which it is 
ignorant (VI, 9, 6). Having no determinations, the One cannot 
be expressed. Trying to describe it, we in fact negate what it 
is not rather than assert what it is. We may sometimes share 
in it, but we are unable to express it this is the case with 
people in ecstasy who feel in themselves the presence of some 
higher power but are unable to give a coherent account of 
their mystical experience (V, 3, 14). The One is the 
Good, the highest principle. It needs nothing, otherwise it 
would not be the first. It makes itself in the sense that it, and 
its willing of itself, are one (VI, 8, 13). Producing all things, 
the One is not any of them. Hence, it is neither quality, nor 
quantity, nor soul, nor spirit. It is neither in motion, nor at 
rest, it is not in space or time (VI, 9, 3). Nor does the One 
need things it produces, it is the same after generating them 
as before (V, 5, 12). “The One, being perfect, by not seeking 
anything, or having anything, or needing anything, overflows 
as it were, and its superabundance makes another” (V, 2, 1). 
What is produced by the One turns to it, gets filled with it 
and contemplates it. Thus the One generates the Nous, the 
second hypostasis. 

The Nous is true being and true knowledge, a unity between 


335 













knowledge and its object. Knowledge always strives towards 
identity and the more identical the knower and the known, i.e. 
the subject and the object, the truer the knowledge. The Nous 
is a self-identity of knowledge, the knower-known. According 
to Plotinus, “the theorea must be the same as contemplated, 
and the Intelligence the same as the intelligible. For, if they 
were not the same, there would be no truth” (V, 3, 5). As 
knowledge implies duality, the Nous generates the Soul and, 
apparently through its agency, the sensible world thereby 
bringing in multiplicity. Hence, the Nous is conceived as a 
unity of one and many, i.e. as the one-many (V, 1, 8). 

In Plotinus’s system the Nous roughly corresponds to Pla¬ 
to’s true being, i.e. the world of Ideas. However, in contrast 
with Plato who understood them as self-sufficient entities, 
Plotinus interprets Ideas as Intelligibles that do not exist 
outside the Intelligence (V, 9, 5), i.e. as thoughts of the 
supreme deity, and lays special stress on the hierarchy of 
reality. 

The third hypostasis in Plotinus’s world is the realm of 
the Soul, generated by the Nous in virtue of its perfection: 
as the Nous is perfect, it must generate (V, 1, 7). In turn, 
the Soul generates multiplicity of individual souls, it is in 
itself one and many. The one soul as the principle of life con¬ 
tains all souls (V, 4, 14) and there seem to be no hard and 
fast distinctions between the World Soul and individual souls. 
Some of the individual souls may remain unembodied, others 
produce celestial and terrestrial bodies, the latter including 
plants, fishes, animals, human beings. In producing the cos¬ 
mos the souls turn to matter and give it their forms projecting, 
as it were, their interior part into the bodies. The Soul is 
immortal and, descending into enormous mass of inert matter 
penetrates and illuminates it as the Sun illuminates a dark 
cloud thereby giving it meaning, value and beauty. Without 
the Soul matter is nothing else than dark abyss, absolute evil 
and non-being (II, 5, 4; II, 5, 2), something “which even 
the gods abhor” (V, 1, 2). Ordering matter, the Soul generates 
the sensible world; the latter is a descent from the Nous 
towards matter, and the Soul or, more accurately, the World 
Soul is its being. 

The being of Plotinus can be presented diagrammatically 
as two concentric circles, their centre being the One. The Nous 
makes the first circle, the Soul, the second. The Soul itself 
consists, as it were, of two parts, the higher or heavenly, and 





the lower or terrestrial; the former contemplates the Nous and 
is enlightened by it, the latter is involved in matter and 
reveals itself as the instinct of animals, the vegetative and 
nutrient principles and the mechanical forces of nature. 

The hypostases are assimilated by Plotinus to the gods of 
the ancient Greek pantheon: the One to Uranus, the Nous to 
Cronus, and the Soul to Zeus. Yet in terms of love and beauty 
the Soul -is referred to as Aphrodite, its superior part being 
called Heavenly Aphrodite, and the inferior part, Terrestrial 
Aphrodite. The ideas present in the Nous, as well as the stars 
are also gods. The Nous is simultaneously conceived as an 
ordered totality of ideas, and the Soul, first as a totality 
of incorporeal ideas, and then, in the capacity of Terrestrial 
Aphrodite, as a totality of incarnated souls. The radii of the 
Soul circle represent individual beings: through the higher 
part of its soul each being communicates with the divine world 
of the One, and through its lower part, with the world of senses 
descending upon and shaped by the Soul (see V, 1, 11). 
After the death of the body, the Soul ascends from the lower 
to the higher world passing first to the incorporeal state, 
then to the idea of the Nous and finally merging with the One. 



The relations of the hypostases are viewed by Plotinus 
in terms of logical concepts and physical realities. Logically, 
being is conceived as a hierarchy of notions. The Nous 
generated by the indeterminate One includes numbers and 


2 2-039 


337 









ideas, prominent among which are Platonic categories— 
being, motion, rest, identity and difference. These are “the 
first genera” (prota gene) which produce all others. Beauty, 
knowledge and virtue are called energies or movements of 
being. Goodness is defined as activity directed towards the 
One. Proceeding from his conception of the sensible world as 
an image of the intelligible world, as its reflection, Plotinus 
censures Aristotle for failing to include with his categories the 
sensual and the intelligible. In Plotinus’s system the five 
“first genera” of the intelligible world have their counterparts 
in the sensible world which are Aristotelian substance, i.e. 
matter, form and their unity in existing things, relation, e.g. 
cause or element, accident, e.g. quality and quantity, space 
and time as the receptacles of substance and, finally, action 
and passion as the movements of substance (see VI, 3, 3). In 
contrast with Aristotle’s essentially formal theory of 
categories understood as different modes of being, Plotinus 
viewed them as logically deducible from one another in a 
process of dialectical development. This process, however, was 
conceived by him not as a reflection of the sensible world by 
the mind, but as a spontaneous evolution of self-sufficient 
thought, i.e. on a purely idealistic basis. 

In physical terms, the hypostases and their determinations 
are characterised by the notion of “overflowing” which was 
repeatedly used by Plotinus in relation of the One and the 
Nous and gave cause to interpret his teaching as the doctrine 
of emanation from the One. The idea of emanation bringing to 
mind the image of the Sun as the source of light is frequently 
used by Plotinus to explain generation of things (Plotinus 
believed that the Sun did not diminish due to the emission as 
he identified generation with contemplation involving no 
change in what contemplates). The investigations carried out 
over the past few decades have shown that Plotinus’s emana 
tion should not be construed as only material, corporeal 
effluence. Being applicable both to the intelligible and 
sensible worlds, the concept of emanation is central to the 
interaction of hypostases and very aptly conveys the nature of 
the extreme idealism of the Plotinian doctrine dissolving all 
being in the One. Paradoxically, it is precisely because of this 
idealism that the One representing pure indeterminate 
thought turns out to be logically bound up with its opposite, 
matter: every determination of the One leading to the 
plurality of the Universe is conceived as the descent of the 


338 







ideal to the material, as its objectification and degradation 
into “matter.” Conversely, the “de-objectification” 1 of the 
ideal is understood as its ascent to the One. Here lies the basic 
fallacy of any idealist philosophy which turns things upside 
down, transforming real processes, both in nature and society, 
into faded copies of ideal processes and passing for progress 
what is in fact the retracing of the so-called degradation. 

On the ideological side, the concept of emanation provides 
a basis for disparagement of man’s creative genius —in the 
eyes of the neo Platonic all human endeavours do not amount 
to anything more than a pitiable attempt to imitate divine 
creation. No wonder, the One of Plotinus was in fact an ideo¬ 
logical reflection of the omnipotent monarchical state personi¬ 
fied in the image of the divine Roman Emperor. The concept of 
the One transforms princeps (ruler) into principium (princi¬ 
ple). The abstract, ideal worthlessness of man in the face of 
the One expressed in terms of Plotinian philosophy reflects 
his real worthlessness in the face of the deified Empire 
and the divine Emperor. 

The rest of Plotinus’s system is relatively simple. The 
philosopher in fact shows little interest in the “physical” 
aspect of the interaction of hypostases implied in the idea of 
overflowing. The sensual world is conceived as the realm of 
multiplicity and separation, as a distorted picture of the ideal 
world. It is a mixture of the Nous and necessity and, in 
ethical terms, of the good and evil. The good results from 
the Nous and the bad comes from formless matter. The source 
of evil is neither God nor man. It antidates the latter and is 
therefore eternal (I, 8, 7). It is the lack of being (me on), 
relative not-being: just as matter is devoid of any determi¬ 
nations, even the determination of being (me einai), so evil 
is completely devoid of the good, it is pure want and insuffi¬ 
ciency. There is no evil in the world as something opposed 
to the good; all reality is good and perfect, and a thing is evil 
to the extent to which it fails to partake of reality, to par¬ 
ticipate in perfection. Evil gets control of a man against his 
good will and is overpowered by the immaterial principle 
inherent in him—reason, knowledge and truth. Yet it is only 
the gods, particularly the incorporeal ones, who can be 
entirely free from evil. The visible gods possessing matter 


1 This term used in the philosophy of German idealism is also applicable 
to the Plotinian doctrine. 


339 









dominate over evil, whereas the incorporeal ones have nothing 
in common with it. Such is Plotinus’s theodicy. 

The Plotinian theory of knowledge is based on the concep¬ 
tion of man’s dual nature. Man’s “divine” soul, being the 
opposite of his “animal” body, would be unable to perceive 
other bodies if there were no mediator between them, i.e. 
the animated organ of sense perceptions. In virtue of its 
corporeality this organ can be acted upon by external bodies 
and, being animated, can perceive them. Perception consists 
in the assimilation of the sense organs to an object rather 
than in receiving its impression in the Aristotelian manner. 
In Plotinus’s opinion, the eye would not see the sun if it did 
not become sunlike, and would not admire light if it could not 
become similar to it. Arguing against Aristotle, he contends 
that the soul cannot be affected by an external object and 
therefore cannot receive its shape like wax. 

Plotinus, this time together with Aristotle, distinguishes 
between the five external senses and the internal sense liken¬ 
ing them respectively to the radii and the centre of a circle. 
The middle position between the senses and reason is occupied 
by memory which is related to time. It represents the Soul’s 
permanence in contrast with the body’s movement, changeful¬ 
ness and fluidity, i.e. with what the poets call Lethe or oblivi¬ 
on. Memory is divided by Plotinus into sensuous and intellec¬ 
tual and described as the Soul’s tension that slackens with 
time but can be braced up by the effort of will. Combining 
Plato and Aristotle, Plotinus describes intellectual memory as 
the Soul’s faculty of retaining the intelligibles and “recalling” 
them by turning potentiality into actuality. 

Intellectual knowledge is the result of man’s affinity with 
the Nous: the higher part of his Soul abides in the intelligible 
world in close and inseparable unity with intelligence (Nous), 
whereas the lower part represents the body and nature. 
Hence, the Soul is like a man standing knee-deep in water. 
The Nous enlightens the Soul by filling it with ideas, the 
higher part of the Soul transfers them to the lower part which, 
in turn, gives matter the corresponding form. Consisting, as it 
were, of three parts, with one of them prevailing and sharing 
at the same time in the One, man’s Soul is capable of ascend 
ing from sense perceptions to discursive thought, then to in 
tellect (Nous, reason) and further to the One. When the 
“radius of the Soul” returns to the central point and identifies 
itself with it the Soul attains absolute simplicity and mystical 


340 







unity with the One. This immediate contact or union of 
intellect with itself, also described by Plotinus as self¬ 
surrender of the Soul and the goal of the Soul’s ascent can 
only be attained in a state of ecstasy. 

In terms of the theory of knowledge it means, first, that 
rational knowledge relates not to things, but ideas. Accord¬ 
ing to Plotinus, we attain true knowledge only when we pass 
beyond sense perceptions and discursive reasoning restricted 
to the sphere of multiplicity and finite determinations, and 
rise to the realm of absolute intelligence which is true real 
ity, i.e. when our reason discovers that the truth of all being 
is intellect, or, put it another way, when it rediscovers itself. 
Human reason, Plotinus tells us, is only an interpreter of 
the highest, speaking, as it were, to discern the traces of the 
Nous and conform to them. Becoming thus an image of the 
Nous, it must always look to it as its archetype (V, 3, 6). 
Second, in Plotinus’s view, rational knowledge, passive in 
relation to the ideas it comprehends, is active and formative 
in relation to the external world —that is why Plotinus calls 
it practical reason. Apprehending, through the agency of the 
senses, the images of bodies, practical reason combines and 
differentiates them. Comparing them with ideas, it reveals the 
general in the individual; just as the One reveals itself 
through emanation in the ideas of the Nous which then 
manifest themselves in the World Soul’s logos, so human 
thought unfolds the idea in a number of individual concepts. 
This is what the dialectic of thinking consists in —it is, accord¬ 
ing to Plotinus, the ability to define each thing in logos, i.e. 
both verbally and in thought, by stating what it is and indicat¬ 
ing by what it differs from other things and what it has in 
common with them (I, 3, 4). In this process, however, the 
individual reveals itself as the general and this enables reason 
to retrace its “descent" and rise from the particular to the 
general. 

This is an important and profound idea: the primary con¬ 
templation of the general calls for its logical partition and 
analysis of the inner structure in order to permit its subse¬ 
quent reproduction as the concrete universal.' However, this 
way to knowledge was closed to Plotinus on account of his 


1 The doctrine of ascent from the abstract to the concrete was first 
expounded by Hegel and then, on the materialist basis, by Marx. See 
K. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der Politischen Okonomie (Rohentwurf), 
Berlin, 1974, S. 21 29. 


.341 










idealism. The ascent from the individual to the particular and 
further to the universal was for him not the path of “subla 
tion,” i.e. simultaneous negation and preservation of the 
individual in the universal, but a path of its dissolution and 
oblivion. Plato’s dialectic became for Plotinus a stepping 
stone to mysticism: the final goal for him is irrational (he 
believes it to be suprarational) ecstasy in which all thought 
disappears and man’s soul loses its identity melting into the 
One. Porphyry tells us in his Life of Plotinus that the 
philosopher attained to such ecstasy four times and regarded 
the mystical union with the Absolute to be the climax of 
man’s life. Yet mystical intuition is the opposite of rational 
thought. Insisting, according to Hegel, on the need to discard 
reason in ord^r to attain to truth' and claiming irrationality 
to be the highest form of cognition, mysticism is the death of 
any philosophy. 

(2) Porphyry, Plotinus’s pupil and follower, was born 
c. 232 and died c. 304 A.D. He is said to have written 77 
treatises of which only 18 survived. Their philosophical value 
is considerable and Porphyry is traditionally ranked among 
the founders of neo-Platonism. In the so-called Sententiae ad 
intelligib ilia ducentes (Aids to the Study of the Intelligi- 
bles) he presents a summary of the Plotinian teaching streng¬ 
thening its monistic tendency and emphasising, in particular, 
the absolute reality of the One at the expense of the reality of 
individuals. Concentrating on the ethical consequences of the 
doctrine of the One and regarding the health of the soul as 
the goal of ethical activity, Porphyry divides all virtues 
into four groups: (1) civic, which curb passions; (2) purifi¬ 
catory, whereby the soul rids itself of everything earthly 
and attains tranquillity; (3) contemplative, which induce the 
soul to revert to the primary cause thus complementing its 
purification; (4) paradigmatic, which provide the model or 
paradigm of all virtues. The first two groups are called by 
Porphyry the virtues of the soul, the last two, the virtues 
of the intellect. All the groups make a hierarchy correspond 
ing to the steps in the soul’s ascent to the intelligible world. 

Porphyry is also known as the author of logical treatises— 
the Introduction to Aristotle’s Categories (Isagoge) and a 
commentary on the same work which left, perhaps, the deepest 

Hegel, Werke. Band VI, Berlin, 1840, S. 160 (Enz. 32, Zusatz). 


342 





trace in the history of philosophy and were the object of much 
debate in later centuries. 

Raising the question of the ontological status of genera 
and species expressed in the form of general notions and 
wondering if they have independent existence or are present 
only in thought (Porph. Is. I, la), Porphyry in fact foreshad¬ 
owed the medieval controversy over universals that divided 
the philosophers into the nominalists and realists (the former 
believed the universals to be mere names, whereas the latter 
asserted their objective existence). 

Porphyry does not answer the ontological question, but 
restores the Aristotelian doctrine of categories rejected by 
Plotinus and focuses his attention on the logical relation 
between genera and species analysing the terms (“five 
words”) essential to the understanding of Aristotle’s 
Categories: genus, species, specific difference (differentia ), 
essential attribute ( proprium ) and separable accident. He 
describes the genus as relating to the many and different 
and asserts it to be their substance. The genus is predicated 
of species (a living being is a genus in relation of oxen, 
horses, etc.) and of individuals (every ox is a living 
being), whereas the species is predicated of individuals. In 
turn, a differentia is predicable of both species and individuals. 
The result of this analysis was presented by Porphyry in the 
form of a pyramid of notions (“The Tree of Porphyry”): 



Socrates, Plato and other individuals. 


It is a graphic illustration to the subordination and coordi¬ 
nation of concepts, as well as to the classical procedure 


343 







of dichotomy, a form of logical division. Viewed in the oppo¬ 
site direction, it represents a scheme of generalisation by 
cancelling attributes. 

Porphyry is known to have been a bitter enemy of Christi 
anity. In his work Adversus Christianos (Against the Chris¬ 
tians) which was later burnt by the clergymen but partially 
survived in fragments cited by his critics he argued for 
polytheism on the grounds that the one god of a monotheistic 
religion is like a monarch having no subjects similar to 
himself. The true monarch, according to Porphyry, is not the 
one who stays alone, hut who reigns over his like. Hence, god 
cannot be called a monarch unless he rules over other gods. 

Porphyry came out with a host of arguments against the 
Christian New Testament, exposing its inconsistencies and 
contradictions. Yet his own alternative was a doctrine of 
intermediaries between man and the One — a multitude of good 
and bad demons and gods—which led him to the recognition of 
miracles and justification of all sorts of superstitions, e.g. 
beliefs in religious sacrifice, prayer, magic, oracles, etc. 
As is evidenced from Porphyry’s letter to Anebo, all these 
external manifestations of faith were regarded by him as 
expressions of “true” religion subject to allegorical interpre¬ 
tation. A vivid example of such interpretation is Porphyry’s 
work De antro nympharum (On the Cave of the Nymphs) in 
which he discloses the “hidden meaning” of Homer’s descrip¬ 
tion of a cave (The Odyssey, XIII, 102-112). 


15. The Syrian and Athenian Schools of Neo-Platonism 

The teaching of Jamblichus of Chalcis (died s. 330 A.D.) 
centres around the doctrine of gods. In his works Life of 
Pythagoras (De Vita Pythagorica) and The Summary of 
Pythagorean Doctrines (De Vita Pythagorica liber), as well 
as in the Exhortation (Protrepticus) he describes Pytha- 
goreanism as divine philosophy and calls himself a Pythago¬ 
rean, believing mathematics to be a preparation for the study 
of gods. His own teaching, however, is typical neo Platonism. 

Jamblichus proceeds from the Plotinian doctrine of three 
hypostases, the One, the Nous (Reason, Intelligence) and the 
Soul, yet he differentiates them further on the basis of 
Plotinus’s principle of mediation starting the line of a very 
detailed systematisation of neo-Platonism. 

Having placed an intermediary between the One and the 
Nous in the form of a self-sufficient and self-emanating god 


344 



(see Vog. Ill, fr. 1449c), he divides the second hypostasis 
into Intellect qua intelligible, i.e. objects of thought (Being) 
and Intellect qua intellectual, i.e. action of thought 
(Intelligence). Each of them, in turn, is broken up into three 
elements making a triad, and each member of each triad is 
declared a deity in its own right and an independent 
substance. Passing on to the Soul and performing on it 
a similar operation, Jamblichus gets a whole pantheon of gods 
external to the world which are followed by internal gods of 
three categories: 12 heavenly gods which break up into 36 
deities and these into 360; 72 orders of subheavenly gods 
and then 42 orders of generating gods (theoi genesioyrgoi ), 
corresponding to 21 ruling gods. Next come angels, then 
demons and heroes. 

All these numbers are in fact nothing else than the astro¬ 
logical calculus based on sheer fancy. Polemicising against 
Porphyry in his De Mysteriis (On Mysteries) over the relative 
values of theurgy and the intellect, Jamblichus gives 
preference to the former on the grounds that magical practices 
reflect and represent the impact of a higher principle on the 
lower with a view to achieving the unity with God, i.e. 
salvation. It is not accidental therefore that tradition describes 
Jamblichus as “divine” and “inspired”: contending that 
religious rites as active service to God are higher than the 
intellectual contemplation of the Absolute, he placed religion 
above philosophy and priest above thinker. 

The school of Jamblichus which played an important part in 
the religious corruption of neo-Platonism by substituting 
theurgy and magic for rationalism was rather numerous, but 
we possess only scanty evidence for the views of its members. 
Tradition ranks among them Emperor Julian the Apostate 
who openly declared himself a pagan after accession to the 
throne in 361 A.D. and made an attempt to restore the 
Hellenistic religion. The views of Jamblichus were evidently 
shared by Hypatia of Alexandria, a neo-Platonist woman- 
philosopher who was hacked to death in 415 A.D. by a fanatic 
mob of Christians. 

After the death of Jamblichus the centre of neo-Platonic 
thought seems to have moved to Athens. The Athenian school 
continued along the same neo-Platonic line of transition from 
philosophy to theology, yet it displayed a much greater 
interest in theoretical problems. It was founded by Proclus 
(410-485 A.D.) who succeeded in turning Plato’s Academy 



Plotinian and gave a more systematic and canonical shape to 
the main tenets of neo-Platonism. His teachers were Plutarch 
of Athens and Syrianus of Alexandria, the first heads of the 
Academy who openly professed the teaching of Plotinus. 

Proclus’s heritage includes numerous commentaries on 
Plato’s dialogues (Republic, Parmenides, Timaeus, Alcibi- 
ades /), as well as his original works Elements of Theology 
and Fundamentals of Physics (Institutio physica) . Of the 
last two the latter is in fact a reproduction of Aristotle’s 
Physics whereas the former consists in the exposition of the 
basic principles of neo-Platonic philosophy and theology 
which are hard to distinguish. The enormous Platonic Theolo¬ 
gy has come down to us entire, yet it was published only once 
(in 1618 in Latin) and its English translation dates back to 
1816. His other works are commentaries on Euclid’s Book I, 
philosophical treatises On Providence and Fate, Ten Ques¬ 
tions on Providence and The Existence of Evils available in 
Latin translations; we also have his treatises on mathematics 
and astronomy, as well as essays on the art of writing. 

Proclus preserves the outline of the neo-Platonic scheme 
and remains true to the doctrine of three hypostases—the 
One, the Nous and the Soul, yet the starting point of his 
discourse is not the One as such, but the dialectic of one and 
many. Any plurality participates in the One, it derives from it 
and is secondary to it. The One, on its part, may participate in 
many, yet the “One as such” does not share in any multiplicity 
as it is absolutely the first. Since “all that is capable of genera 
tion is superior to the nature of the generated” (Procl. Elem. 
theol. 7), many cannot be equal to One. The One is goodness 
and everything related to it is good, though not as good as 
the One itself. 

Here Proclus, first, reveals the idealist essence of his theory 
by recognising the One, i.e. the general and the good, as 
primary and, second, expounds the doctrine of emanation, 
implicit in Plotinus, by describing in detail the “mechanism” 
of the generation of one from many. The downward movement 
characteristic of the emanative process is followed by the 
upward movement whereby multiplicity is again integrated 
into the One. The starting point of the emanative process 
coincides with the terminal point of a reversion, a return to 
the One. 

It should be noted that this cyclic “change” of all being 
described by Proclus is hardly a change at all, as it is 


346 







conceived h y him as a process of differentiation and integra 
tion of Intelligence within its own sphere representing noth¬ 
ing else than the logical relationship of the concrete and the 
abstract, the latter being understood not as a common quality 
or property of individual objects in the sense of formal logic, 
but as the essence and substance of a plurality of individuals, 
as unity in diversity. 

This profound and extremely fruitful dialectical idea was 
utterly emasculated within the framework of Proclus’s neo- 
Platonic system which turned the logical priority of the whole 
and the universal into the ontological priority of being. 
Idealism is incompatible with the real dialectics of the indi¬ 
vidual, the particular and the universal which is based on 
the recognition of their equal validity, since the universal 
exists only in and through the individual, and vice versa. The 
abstract philosophical doctrine of Proclus emphasising the 
priority of the universal (the One) and depreciating the 
particular and the individual objectively justified the 
submission of an individual to the state and reflected 
his impotence against the arbitrary rule of the Homan 
Empire. 

Describing in detail the process of emanation and turning 
the world into a great hierarchy, of souls gods, angels, 
demons, heroes and men —Proclus gives free rein to his 
imagination within the general scheme laid down by 
Jamblichus. However, there are some important features in his 
system that distinguish him from his predecessors. 

First, he regards matter as the emanation of one of the 
triads formed by the indeterminate, the determined and the 
mixture of the two. Matter is no longer conceived as evil, it is 
“indifferent.” As regards evil, Proclus adopts the Stoic view 
(also expressed by late Platonists) and asserts that it results 
from inevitable conflicts between good entities generated by 
the highest power. It is a by-product of contradictions 
necessary for their existence (see Procl. In Remp. 358ff., Dec. 
dubit. 123 ff.). 

Second, Proclus conceives the process of emanation as 
a descent of the One into many followed by the return of many 
into the One and interprets every step of this process as 
a triad of moments: what is emanated remains in the emanat 
ing as it participates in it and is similar to it, separates from 
the emanating as it is different from its cause and returns to 
it seeking for reunion. This process (identity-emanation-re 


347 












turn) described as assimilation to the cause and as “partici 
pation” of the inferior in the superior is, in fact, a general 
pattern of the cognitive process, mystified and distorted by 
Proclean idealism. Extricated from the obscurities of Proclus’s 
philosophy, it marked an important step forward in the de¬ 
velopment of idealist dialectics. However, the philosopher 
himself hardly realised the significance of his doctrine, as his 
attention seemed to be focused not on the laws of thinking 
underlying the dialectics of categories, but on how to accom¬ 
modate the gods of the traditional heathen religion to the 
triadic form of development. Similarly to Jamblichus, Proclus 
puts religion above philosophy and theurgy or the “making 
of gods” above “theory” or the contemplation of the universe. 
Extending this principle to ethics and taking his cue from 
Jamblichus, Proclus adds yet another group of virtues to 
Porphyry’s list of four—the hieratic (priestly) or “unifying” 
virtues which, in his opinion, can alone bring man to unity 
with God. 

Proclus was the last original representative of ancient 
philosophy. Of his followers we shall mention only two —Da- 
mascius and Simplicius. 

Damascius (fifth-sixth centuries A.D.) is credited with 
a large work entitled Problems and Solutions About the First 
Principles (Dubitationes et solutiones de primis principiis 
in Platonis Parmenides). In short, these problems result from 
the gulf between the incomprehensible and ineffable first 
principle of the neo-Platonists and its derivatives accessible 
to Reason and Soul. The first principle, according to Damasci¬ 
us, is not only above Reason, but also above the One. It has no 
predicates and the only possible attitude to it is silence 
and admission of complete ignorance. Therefore the process of 
transition from the first principle to substance does not lend 
itself to any rational description: neither the triads 
“identity —emanation —return” and “unity —potentiality — 
actuality,” nor the cause-effect relationship can represent it 
in adequate terms as they are mere analogies. 

Damascius makes an attempt to bridge the gap by increas¬ 
ing the number of intermediate links between the first 
principle and Reason, whereupon he returns to the trail 
blazed by Proclus. Though his teaching contains a number of 
interesting ideas, e.g. a distinction between kinds of emana¬ 
tion, original conceptions of eternity and time, whole and 
parts, etc., it is on the whole indicative of the insolubility of 


348 






the main contradiction of neo-Platonism — the opposition of 
the absolute unity of the first cause and the multiplicity of 
the world generated from it. 

Simplicius (died 549 A.D.) went down in the history of 
philosophy as Aristotle’s commentator. His works are an inva¬ 
luable source of information on ancient philosophy, particu¬ 
larly the pre-Socratics. 

In 529 A.D. Emperor Justinian known for his persecution 
of Christian “heresies” prohibited the teaching of Hellenic 
philosophy and closed the Academy at Athens by a special 
edict. Its last seven teachers, including Damascius and Sim¬ 
plicius went to Persia on the invitation of king Khosrau 
Anushirvan who professed to be a lover of Greek culture. 

The period of ancient philosophy came to an end. The 
immediate future belonged to Christianity. 


* * * 

The neo-Platonic epoch in the history of world philosophy 
reflected a tremendous social upheaval—the collapse of 
a whole socio-economic formation that had a thousand-year 
history behind it and could boast colossal achievements in the 
material, social and cultural spheres. The breakdown of the 
slave system was not an instant catastrophe; it extended over 
a period of several centuries and was marked by a gradual 
decline of its economy and steady growth of feudal relations 
within the political framework of the Roman Empire. Neo- 
Platonism, the leading and most influential trend of this 
epoch sensed the spirit of the time and reflected the social 
experience of contemporary man and society in terms of 
abstract philosophical doctrines. This experience was highly 
contradictory on both sides: a man was helpless, miserable 
and pitiful in his illusory freedom, yet omnipotent in the 
person of the “divine” Emperor, whereas society or, rather, 
the Empire representing the estranged nature of social man 
was capable both of idolising and annihilating every 
individual. 

This profound contradictoriness lies at the root of the 
constant search for the ineffable One and its links with 
the material world and every individual. Hence the absolutisa 
tion of the One, the conviction that all individuals “participate 
in” or “partake of” it and the return, reversion to myth, the 
philosophical restructuring of mythological thinking based on 


349 











the assumption that all being derives from a personal 
principle and the world is essentially divine and demonic. 

The end of the slave-owning system and the downfall of 
the “eternal” Roman Empire were reflected in the conscious¬ 
ness of the epoch as the end of philosophy, though it was only 
a temporary impasse. 

The teachings of ancient philosophers the Milesians and 
Pythagoreans, Heraclitus and the Eleatics, the atomists and 
Plato, Aristotle and the Stoics, Sceptics and neo-Platonists 
will remain forever in the gold fund of world civilisation as 
grand monuments of the philosophical thought of their time. 

According to Marx, a historical epoch cannot be judged 
exclusively by its consciousness —yet it cannot be judged 
without knowing its consciousness either, and it is philosophy 
in the first place that reflects it. Even more important, 
however, is the assimilation of ancient doctrines in the 
philosophical systems of later periods, their impact on the 
thought of subsequent generations and their ability to be 
instrumental in the solution of problems the ancients could 
not even dream of. 











REQUEST TO READERS 

Progress Publishers would be glad to have 
your opinion of this book, its translation and 
design and any suggestions you may have for 
future publications. 

Please send all your comments to 17, Zubovsky 
Boulevard, Moscow, USSR. 







