Pie = 
LISBON LIBRARY ASSOCIATION. 


1. All books must be returned on or before the lst Mon- 
days of March, May, July, September and November, and 
the second Tuesday of January in each year. 

2. For not returning each book as above, a fine of ten cents, 
and each day thereafter, one cent. 

3. For any injury done to books, a fine at the discretion 
of the Executive Committee. 

4, For lending books to a person not a member of the 
Association, a fine of 50 cts. 


THE UNIVERSITY 
OF ILLINOIS 
LIBRARY 


ee 


cAn 
84 


Return this book on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 


University of Illinois Library 


Ll61—H41 


JOHN GILLIES, Leia 


Fhiladelphia, Published by 7 Wardle [5 Mme ait 
1841 


1) on wi, ae EES EDITION o 


4 F = = 
PA 
ç IH 3 orm pnis a 


> en eo 
A 


Eee. 
i 


a ne a Ke i ami 
i} i i a mt 
Ze aha l N i 


ie 


ih Il 
o 


= 
Se a 
See A me 
Ses = \ 


= iS 


Phile dewphie tle teed 4 ' Wade Mena at 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2016 with funding from 
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Alternates 


https://archive.org/details/historyofancientOOgill 


THE 


HISTORY 


OF 


ANCIENT GREECE, 


ITS 


Tolonies any Coiuquests, 


FROM 


THE EARLIEST ACCOUNTS TILL THE DIVISION OF THE MACEDONIAN 
EMPIRE IN THE EAST: 


THE HISTORY 
OF 
LITERATURE, PHILOSOPHY, AND THE FINE ARTS. 
——~-9@@--—— 


BY JOHN GILLIES, LL.D. F.A.S8. 


PHILADELPHIA: 
PUBLISHED BY THOMAS WARDLE. 


1841. 


we 


Yi 1; = 


i 4 ‘ 
1 
1 
l 


-an 
5 
Sh AG 


T. K. & P. G. COLLINS, PRINTERS, PHILA. 


Í 


> 
gi 


OF Wn ng we, 


S TO THE KING. 


SIR, 

TuE History of Greece exposes the dangerous turbulence of Democracy, and arraigns 
the despotism of Tyrants. By describing the incurable evils inherent in every form of Re- 
publican policy, it evinces the inestimable benefits, resulting to Liberty itself, from the lawful 
dominion of hereditary Kings, and the steady operation of well-regulated Monarchy. With 
singular propriety, therefore, the present Work may be respectfully offered to your Majesty, as 
Sovereign of the freest nation upon earth; and that Sovereign, through whose discerning mu- 
nificence, the interest of those liberal arts, which distinguished and ennobled Greece beyond 
all other countries of antiquity, has been more successfully promoted in Your Majesty’s do- 
minions, than during any former period in the British annals. That Your Majesty may long 
reign the illustrious Guardian of public freedom, and the unrivalled Patron of useful learning, 
is the fervent prayer of 


YOUR MAJESTY’S 
Most dutiful Subject and Servant, 


JOHN GILLIES. 


LONDON, ? 
Feb. 10, 1786. 


PREFACE. 


Tae following History commences with the infancy of Greece, and describes its gradual 
advancement towards civilization and power. But the main design of my Work is confined 
to the space of seven centurics, which elapsed from the settlement of the Ionians in Asia 
Minor till the establishment of the Macedonian empire in the East; during which memo- 
rable period, the arts and arms of the Greeks, conspiring to excite the admiration and 
terror of the ancient world, justly merit the attentive study of the present age, and pos- 
terity. In the general revolutions of their national confederacy, which, though always 
loose and imperfect, was never altogether dissolved, I have interwoven the description and 

rincipal transactions of each independent republic, however small or inconsiderable; and, 

hy comparing authors seldom read, and not frequently consulted for historical materials, 
fave endeavoured to trace the intricate series, and to explain the secret connection, of 
seemingly detached events, in order to reduce the scattered members of Grecian story into 
one perpetual unbroken narrative; a design difficult indeed, and new, yet evidently well 
calculated to promote the great purposes of pleasure and utility. 


In the view which I have taken of my subject, the fluctuation of public affairs, and 
the vicissitudes of war and fortune, appears scarcely the most splendid, and surely not the 
most interesting portion of Grecian history. By genius and fancy, not less than by 
patriotism and prowess, the Greeks are honourably distinguished among the nations of 
the earth. by the Greeks, and by them alone, Literature, Philosophy, and the Fine Arts, 
were treated as important concerns of state, and employed as powerful engines of policy. 
From their literary glory not only their civil, but even their military transactions, derive 
their chief importance and dignity. To complete, therefore, my present undertaking, it 
seemed necessary to unite the history of arts with that of empire, and to combine with 
the external revolutions of war and government, the intellectual improvements of men, and 
the ever-varying picture of human opinions and manners. 


In the execution of this extensive plan, might I assume any merit to myself, it would 
be that of having diligently studied the Greek writers, without adopting their prejudices, 
or copying their narratives with servility. Many events, highly interesting to the citizens 
of Athens or of Sparta, now interest no more; concerning many important transactions, 
anciently too familiar to be explained, the Modern Reader will reasonably expect intorma- 
tion. On some occasions, therefore, I found it ncccssary to concentrate and abridge; on 
others, to dilate and expatiate; but have never sacrificed that due relation of parts to the 
whole, and to each other, or violated that unity of design which I was ambitious to attain 
in the present History, by condescending to copy or translate.: In the Work throughout, 


I have ventured to think for myself; and my opinions, whether well or ill founded, are, at 
least, my own. 


vi PREFACE. 


The present History was undertaken, and a considerable part of it written, many years 
ago, hy the advice of some persons of taste and learning; who, having read my historical 
Introduction to the Orations of Lysias and Isocrates, wished to see the whole series of 
Grecian story, treated on the same plan. My situation, and my lejsure, enabled me to 
meet their wish; but before my manuscript was prepared for the Press, my studies were 
interrupted by the only employment, not enjoined by some positive duty, which I should 
have allowed (such are the sanguine hopes of authors!) to suspend my literary labours. 
During that long interval, different portions of Grecian history have been ably treated in 
English, as well as in *foreign languages. Yet, as most of those works still remain 
incomplete, and as none of them embrace the whole extent of my subject, or at all pre- 
occupy my plan, I venture to offer the present History, deeply sensible as I am of its 
imperfections, to the indulgence of the Public. 


> Among the foreign works, I distinguish with pleasure those of Mr. Meiners of Gottingen. To the author 
of this History it would be very flattering to find the opinions which he hazarded in his introduction to Lysias, 
confirmed in a subsequent work of such an admired scholar as Mr. Meiners (see his Geschichte des Luxus der 
Athenienser, Lemgo, 17&2,) were it not extremely natural that writers, who draw from the same sources, should 
advance the same facts, and deduce similar conclusions. In the following History, my views of the Pythagorean 
band, and of the Platonic philosophy, though sufficiently remote from vulgar opinion, nearly coincide with those 
of Mr. Meiners in his Geschichte des Ursprungs, Fortgangs, und Verfalls der Wissenschaften in Griechenland ; 
that is, “the History of the Origin, Progress, and Decay of Philosophy in Greece;’’ a work not yet completed, 
but which, as far as it extends, I will venture to recommend as one of the most valuable and accurate treasuries 
of Greek learning contained in any modern tongue. 


—<—— m 


CONTENTS. 


8 O hene 


CHAP. I. 


View of the Progress of Civilization and Power in 
Greece, preceding the Trojan War—History of 


that War—lts consequences - Pagell 
CHAP. I. 

Religion—Government—Arts—Manners, and Cha- 

racter >o 27o ā o Æ 


` 


CHAP. HI. 
Distracted State of Greece—The Heraclidæ conduct 
the Dorians into Peloponnesus—Divide their Con- 
quests in that Peninsula—The Eolic, Fonic, and 
Doric Migrations—Establishment of Colonies in 
‘Thrace, Macedon, Africa, and Magna Grecia—In- 
fluence of the Ionic Colonies in Asia onthe Affairs 
of the Mother Country—The Abolition of Mo- 
narchy in Greece—New Disorders in that Coun- 
try—Four Institutions which tended to remove 
them—The Amphictyonic Council—The Oracle 
of Delphi—The Olympic Games—The Spartan 
Laws : . : : 5 : o 32 
CHAP. IV. 


State of Greece after the Abolition of Royalty—De- 
scription of Laconia and Messenia—Causes of the 
War between those States—Invasion of Messenia 
—Distress of the Messenians—The horrid Means 
by which they endeavour to remedy it—They ob- 
tain assistance from Argos and Arcadia—Their 

: Capital taken bythe Spartans—Issue of the first 

Messenian War—State of Greece—The Colony 
of Tarentum founded—The second Messenian 
War—Character and Exploits of Aristomenes— 
The Distress of the Spartans—They obtain Assist- 
ance from Athens—The Poet Tyrteus—Subjuga- 
tion of Messenia—Futu re Fortunes of its Citizens— 
Their Establishment in Sicily . 4 
CHAP. V. 

State of the Peloponnesus after the Conquest of Mes- 
senia—Of the Northern Republics of Greece—Of 
the Grecian Colonics--Revolutions in Govern- 
ment—Military Transactions—The first Sacred 
War—Destruction of the Crissean Republic-—Res- 
toration of the Pythian Games—Description of the 
Gymnastic and Equestrian Exercises—History of 
Grecian Music os : ; . 6l 

CHAP. VI. 

The Grecian Bards—Heroic Poctry—Change of 
Manners—lambic or Satire—Elegy—T yrtexus, Cal- 
linus, Mimnermus—Life of Archilochus—Terpan- 
der—Lyric Poetry—The Nine Lyric Poets— 
Sappho, Alexus, Anacreon, Myrtis, Corinna, Pin- 
dar—Effects of the Sacred Games—Streneth— 
Courage—Contempt of Prejudices—Taste—Moral 
Principle—Intellectual Powers—Genius 71 


CHARL. VII 


State of the Grecian Colonics—The Tonians flourish 
in Arts and Arms—Their Wars with the Lydians 
—The Asiatic Greeks subdued by Crasus—Splen- 
dour of the Lydian Court—Foundation of the Per- 
sian Nionarchy—Causes of its rapid Grandeur— 
Which alarms Crasus—Ifis Alliauce with the 
Lacedemouians—l{e invades the Persian Domin- 
ious—Measures of his Allies—Crosus defeated by 
Cyrus—End of the Lydian Mouarchy 81} 


CHAP. VII. 


Cyrus threatens the Asiatic Colonies—Their Mea- 
sures—The Spartans remonstrate against his De- 
sign—Conquests of Harpagus—Migerations of the 
vanquished Greeks—Cyrus takes Babylon—Cam- 
byses subdues Egypt—Receives Tribute from the 
African Grecks—Reign of Darius—Final Settle- 
ment of the Persian Empire—Degeneracy of Man- 
ners—Revolt of lonia—State of Greece—The Ioni- 
an revolt abetted by the Athenians and Eretrians— 
who buru Sardis—The Asiatic Greeks defeated 
by Sca and Land—Their Condition under the 
Persian Government. 5 : : > 91 


CHAP. 1X. 


Resentment of Darius against Greece—Maritime Ex- 
pedition of Mardonius—Invasion of Greece by Da- 
tis and Artaphernes—Battle of Marathon—Trans- 
actions in the Interval between that Battle and 
Xerxes’s Invasion—The Invasion of Xerxes—Bat- 
tle of Thermopyle 104 


CHAP. X. 


Sea Fight off Artemisium—Xerxes ravages Phocis— 
Enters Attica—Magnanimity of the Athenians— 
Sea Fight off Salamis—Xerxes leaves Greece—His 
miserable Retreat—Campaign of Mardonius—Bat- 
tles of Platwa and Mycalé—Issue of the Persian 
Invasion : : 7 120 

CHAP. XI. 

Military Glory of Greece—Enemies to whom that 
Country was exposed—Foundation and Growth of 
Carthage—The flourishing Condition of Magna 
Grecia—Excites the Jealousy of the Carthaginians 
—Who enter into a League with Xerxes—The 
Object of this Alliance—Causes of the singular 
Prosperity of Magna Grecia—lIlistory of Pythago- 
ras, and of his Philosophy—The Carthaginians 
invade Sicily—Thceir Disasters—Glory of Gelon— 
His Treaty with the Carthaginians—Causes of the 
Decay of Magna Grecia ae 136 


CHAP. XII. 


Glory of Athens—Military Success of the Confede- 
rates—Athens rebuilt and fortified—Extent of its 
walls and Harbours—The Confederates take By- 
zantium—Conspiracy of Pausanias—Banishment 
of 'Yhemistocles—Virtue of Aristides—Cimon as- 
sumes the Command—flis illustrious Merit and 
Success—Revolt of Egypt—War in Cyprus— 
Peace with Persia—Domestic Transactious of 
Greece—The Athenian Greatness—Envy of Spar- 
ta, Thebes, and Argos—Earthquake in Sparta— 
Revolt of the Helots—War between the Ehans 
and Pisans—The Temple and Statue of Olympian 
Jupiter—Dissensions in Argolis—Revolt in Beotia 
Truce of Thirty Years—Character of Pericles— 
Subjection of the Atheuian Allies and Colonies— 
Spirit of the Athenian Governnient 147 


CHAP. XIIL. 


Transition: to the internal State of Athens—Laws 
of Draco—Solon—Pisistratus—Clisthenes—Aris- 
tides—Pericles—Final Settlement of the Athenian 
Goverument—View of the Athenian Empire—The 
combined Effect of external Prosperity and demo- 
cratic government on manners—Arts—Luxury— 


vii CONTENTS. 


History of Grecian Literati and Philosophy— 
Singular Contrast and Balance of Virtues and 
Vices—The sublime Philosophy of Anaxagoras 
and Socrates—The unprincipled Captiousness of 
the Sophists—The moral Tragedies of Sophocles 


and Euripides—The licentious Buffoonery of Aris- |: 


tophanes—The imitative Arts employed to the 
noblest Purposes—and abused to the most infa- 
mous—Magnificence of public Festivals—Simplici- 
ty in private Life— Modest Reserve of Athenian 
Women—Voluptuousness, Impudence, and Arti- 
fices of the School of Aspasia . : . Jol 


CHAP. XIV. 


History of the Arts of Design—Superiority of the 
Greeks in those Arts—Causes of that Superiority — 
Among the Asiatic Greeks—Who communicated 
their Inventions to Europe—Bathycles the Magne- 
sian—Dipenus and Scillis—Imitated in Greece, 
Italy, and Sicily—The Athenians surpass their 
Masters—Sublime Style of Art—W orks of Phidias, 
Polygnotus, &c.—Characteristic Excellence of 
Grecian Art—-Different Impressions made by 
Painters and Poets—Depended on the Nature of 
their respective Arts . i : ; . 176 


CHAP. XV. 


Causes of the Peloponnesian War—Rupture between 
Corinth and its Colony Corcyra—Sea Fights—In- 
solence and Cruelty of the Corcyreans—They pro- 
voke the Resentment of the Peloponnesians—Ob- 
tain the Protection of Athens—are defeated by the 
Corinthians—Who dread the Resentment of 
Athens—Their Scheme for rendering it impotent 
—Description ofthe Macedonian Coast. It revolts 
from Athens—Siege of Potidea—General Con- 
federacy against Athens—Peloponnesian Embassy 
—Its Demands firmly answered by Pericles—His 
Speech to the Athenians—The Thebans surprise 
Platea—Preparations for War on both Sides—In- 
vasion of Attica—Operations of the Athenian Fleet 
—Plague in Athens—Calamitous Situation of that 

‘Republic—Magnanimity of Pericles—Firmness of 
his last Advice—His Death and Character . 18] 


CHAP. XVI. 


Subsequent Events of the War—Platea taken—Re- 
volt of Lesbos—Description and History of that 
Island—Nature of its political Connection with 
Athens—Address of Lesbos—Its Capital besieged 
by the Athenians—Measures of the Peloponnesians 
for relieving it—Mitylené surrenders—Delibera- 
tions in Athens concerning the Treatment of the 
Prisoners—Resettlement of the Affairs of Lesbos 
—The Corinthians foment Factions in Corcyra— 
Sedition in that Island—The contending Factions 
respectively supported by the Athenians and Pelo- 
ponnesians—Progress, Termination, and Conse- 
quences of the Sedition 2 : : . 194 


CHAP. XVII. 


Physical Calamities conspire with the Evils of War 
—Athenian Expedition into A.tolia—Victories of 
Demosthenes—He fortifies Pylus—Blocks up the 
Spartans in Sphacteria—The Spartans solicit 
Peace—Artifices and Impudence of Cleon—His 
unmerited Success—Ridiculed by Aristophanes— 
Athenian Conquests—Battle of Delium—Commo- 
tions in Thrace—Expedition of Brasidas—Truce 
for a Year—The War renewed—Baitle of Am- 
phipolis—Peace of Nicias—Dissatisfaction of the 
Spartan Allies . ; : : . 203 
CHAP. XVIII. 
Discontents fomented by the Corinthians—The Ar- 
give Alliance—To which Athens accedes—Birth 
and Education of Alcibiades—His Friendship with 
Socrates—His Character—And Views—Which 
are favoured by the State of Greece—He deceive: 


CHAP. XIX. 


Alcibiades promotes the Sicilian Expedition—Revo- 


lutions in that Island—Embassy to Athens—Ex- 
travagant Views of Alcibiades—Opposed by Nicias 
—The Athenians prepare to invade Sicily—Their 
“Armament beheld with Suspicion by the Italian 
States—Deliberations concerning the Mode of 
carrying on the War—A\lcibiades takes Catana by 
Stratagem—His Intrigues in Messené—He is un- 
seasonably recalled to Athens—Charged with Trea- 
son and Impiety—Escapes to Sparta—Nicias de- 
termines to attack Syracuse—Description of that 
City—The Athenians prevail in a Battle—Return 
to Catana and Naxos . ; o : 219 


CHAP. XX. 


Preparations for the ensuing Campaign—The Athe- 


nians begin the Siege with Vigour—Distress and 
Sedition in Syracuse— Arrival of Gylippus—Who 
defeats the Athenians—Transactions in Greece—A 
second Armament arrives at Syracuse—Its first 
operations successful—The Athenians defeated— 
Prépare to raise the Siege—Naval Engagement in 
the Great Harbour—Despondency of the Atheni- 
ans—Stratagem of Hermocrates—The Athenians 
raise their Camp—Melancholy Firmness of Nicias 
—Demosthenes capitulates—Nicias surrenders— 
Cruel Treatment of the Athenian Captives—Singu- 
lar Exception ; 28 


CHAP. XXI. 


Consequences of the Athenian Misfortunes in Sicily 


—Formidable Confederacy against Athens—Pecu- 
liar Resources of free Governments—Naval Opera- 
tions—Battle of Miletus—Intrigues of Alcibiades— 
The Athenian Democracy subverted—Tyrannical 
Government of the Four Hundred—Battle of 
Eretria—Democracy re-established in Athens— 
Naval Success of the Athenians—Triumphant Re- 
turn of Alcibiades—The Eleusinian Mysteries— 
and Plynteria . 


CHAP. XXII. 


Character of Lysander—His Conference with Cyrus 


—He defeats the Athenian Fleet—Disgrace of Al- 
cibiades—Lysander succeeded by Callicratidas— 
His Transactions with tle Persians—with the 
Spartaa Allies—Battle of Arginusse—Trial of the 
Athenian Admirals—Eteonicus checks a Mutiny 
of the Peloponnesian Troops—Lysander resumes 
the Command—Battle of Ægos Potamos—Spartan 
Empire in Asia—Siege and Surrender of Athens— 
Humiliation of the Athenians 3 A b 25l 


CHAP. XXIII. 


Rapacity and Cruelty of the Spartan Government— 


The Thirty Tyrants in Athens—Persecution of 
Lysias and his Family—Theramenes opposes the 
Tyrants—Sanguinary Speech of Critias—Death of 
Theramenes—Persecution and Death of Alcibia- 
des—Thrasybulus seizes Phylé—Defeats the Ty- 
rants—Memorable Speech of Thrasybulus—Oath 
of Amnesty—not faithfully observed . > cue 


CHAP. XXIV. 


Accusation of Socrates—Artifices of his Accusers— 


His Defence—Condemnation—Address to the 
Judges—His Conversation in Prison—and Death 
—Transient Persecution of his Disciples—Writings 
of Cebes—Æschines—State of Philosophy—Of 
the Fine Arts—Of Literature—Herodotus—Thu- 
cydides—Xenophon—Transition to the public 
Transactions of Greece—The Spartans invade 
Elis—The Messenians driven from Greece—His- 
tory of Cyrene—Of Sicily—War with Carthage— 
Siege of Agrigentum—Reign of Dionysius—Sicily 
the first Province of Rome . : : . 269 
CHAP. XXY. 


the Spartan Ambassadors—Renewal of the Pelo- | Death of Darius Nothus—Cyrus disputes the Succes- 


ponnesian War—Battle of Mantinea—Tumults in 
Argos—Massacre of the Scioneans—Cruel Con- 
quest of Melos . S : : : - 2 


sion with his elder Brother Artaxerxes—Character 
of Cyrus—State of Lower Asia under his Adminis- 
tration—His Strength and Resources—His expe- 


CONTENTS. 


dition into Upper Asia—Descries the vast Army of 
his Brother—Battle of Canaxa—Death of Cyrus— 
His Grecian Auxiliaries victorious—Their ‘Treaty 
with Tissaphernes—Perfidious Assassination of 
the Grecian Generals—Artaxerxes sends to the 
Greeks to demand their Arms—Conference on that 
Subject 7 y ; a 281 
CHAP. XXVI. 
| Consternation of the Greeks—Manly Advice of 
Xenophon—Their Retreat—Difficulties attending 
it—Surmounted by their Skill and Perseverance— 
Their Sufferings among the Carduchian Moun- 
tains-—-They traverse Armenia—First behold the 
Sea from Mount Theches—Defeat the Colclians— 
Description of the southern Shore of the Euxine— 
Transactions with the Greek Colonies there—The 
Greeks arrive at Byzantium—Enter into the-Service 
of Seuthes—His History—Conjunct Expeditions 
of the Greeks and Thracians—The Greeks return 
to the Service of their Country . s . 289 


CHAP. XXVII. 


y 


Tissaphernes makes War on the Greeks, by Order 


of Artaxerxes— Attacks the Æolian Cities—Expedi- 
tion of Thimbron—He is succeeded by Dercylli- 
das—His Treaty with Tissaphernes—Agesilaus 
King of Sparta—Cinadon’s Conspiracy—Agesilaus 
Commander of the Grecian Forces in Asia—His 
Success—Tissaphernes succeeded by Tithraustes 
—Great Views of Agesilaus—War rekindled in 
Greece—League against Sparta—Campaign of Ly- 
sander in Beotia—His Death . : o A 
CHAP. XXVII. 


Recal of Agesilaus from the East—He invades Bæotia 
—Views of Evagoras king of Cyprus—His Friend- 
ship with Conon—The latter entrusted with the 
Persian Fleet—He defeats the Lacedemonians— 
Battle of Coronea—The Corinthian War—Conon 
rebuilds the Walls and Harbours of Athens—Con- 
quests of Conon and Thrasybulus—Peace of An- 
talcidas , : : : ; . 305 
é CHAP. XXIX. À 
eflections upon the Peace of Antalcidas—Ambi- 
tious Views of Sparta—State of Arcadia—Siege 
of Mantinea—Olynthian Confederacy—The Spar- 
tans make War on Olynthus—Submission of that 
Republic—Pella becomes the Capital of Macedon 
—Phebidas seizes the Theban Citadel—The Mea- 
sure approved by Agesilaus—Conspiracy of the 
Theban Exiles—The Theban Democracy re- 
stored . . 3 5 ° “ . . 313 
CHAP. XXX. 

The Beotian War—Unsuccessful Attempt of Spho- 
drias against the Pireus—Doubts concerning 
Xenophon’s Account of that Transaction—Agesi- 
laus invades Beeotia—Military Success of the The- 
bans—Naval Success of the Athenians—Congress 
for Peace under the Mediation of Artaxerxes— 
Epaminondas, Deputy from Thebes—Cleombrotus 
invades Beeotia—Battle of Leuctra—State of Greece 
—Jason of Thessaly—His Character and Views— 
Assassinated in the midst of his Projects 321 


CHAP. XXXI. 


Tumults in the Peloponnesus—Invasion of Laconia 
— Epaminondas rebuilds Messené—Foundation of 
Megalopolis—Archidamus restorcs the Fortune of 
Sparta--Affairs of Thessaly and Macedon—Nego- 
tiations for Peace—The Pretensions of Thebes re- 
jected—Epaminondas invades the Peloponnesus 
~~Revolutions in Achaia—Speech of Archidamus 
in the Spartan Council—Designs of Thebes—Dis- 
concerted by Athens—Pelopidas’s Expedition into 
Thessaly—The Arcadians seize the Olympic Trea- 
sure—Battle of Mantinza—Agesilaus’s Expedition 
into Egypt . : . 332 


k 
$ 


CIIAP. XXXII. 


State of Greece after the Battle of Mantinga—The 
Amphictyonic ie Prosperity of 


ix 


Athens--Vices resulting from its Government-- 
Abuses of the judiciary Power—Of the Theatre—- ' 
Degeneracy of Grecian Music--Extreme Profli- 
gacy of the Athenians—Tle Vices of Chares ren- 
der him the Idol of the Multitude—The Social 
War—Banishment of Timotheus and Iphicrates— 
Disgraceful Issue of the War—Philosophy—Statu- 
ary—Praxiteles--The Cnidian Venus—Painting—— 
Pamphilus, Nicias, Zeuxis—Literature-~Xenophon 
—His Military Expeditions—Religious and Liter- 
ary Retreat—Lysias—Isocrates-—Plato--His Tra- 
vels—He settles in the Academy—His great 
Views---Theology—-Cosmogony—-Doctrine of 
Ideas—Of the Human Understanding--The Pas- 
sions— Virtues—State of Retribution—Genius and 
Character : : : 351 
CHAP. XXXII. 
History of Macedon—Reign of Archelaús—Series 
of Usurpations and Revolutions-—Perdiceas defeat- 
ed by the Illyrians—Distracted State of Macedon 
--First Transactions of Philip—State of Thrace 
and Peonia—Philip defeats Argeus and the Athe- 
nians—His Treatment of the Prisoners—His mili- 
tary Arrangements—He defeats the Illyrians—His 
Designs against Amphipolis—He prevents an Alli- 
ance between Athens and Olynthus—Amuses the 
Athenians—Takes Amphipolis—His Conquests in 
Thrace—The Mines of Crenide—Philip marries 
Olympias—His Letter to Aristotle . 365 


CHAP. XXXIV. 


Philips Prosperity—Imprudent Measures of the 
Amphictyonic Council--The Phocian, or Sacred 
War—Philomelus seizes the Temple of Delphi— 
Takes the Field against the Thebans and their 
Allies—Defeat and Death of Philomelus—Affairs 
of Thrace, Macedon, and Attica—Onemarchus 
takes the Command of the Phocians—Encounters 
Philip in Thessaly—He is defeated and slain— 
Philip’s Designs against Olynthus and Byzantium 
—Traversed by the Athenians—Phayllus takes the 
Command of the Phocians—Philip marches to- 
wards Thermopyle—Anticipated by the Athenians 

ae ysthenes’s first Philippic—Philip’s Occupa- 
tidns.at Pella—His Vices and Policy. . . 374 
F CHAP. XXXV. 


Negligence and Licentiousness of the Athenians— 
~ Philip’s Int n Eubcea—Phocion defeats the 
Macedonians “and Eubceans—Philip invades the 
Olynthian Territory—Demosthenes’s Orations in 
favour of the Olynthians—Expedition of Chares— 
Philip takes Olynthus--Celebrates the Festival of 
the Muses at Dium-—-Commits naval Depredations 
on Attica—His Embassy to Athens—The Atheni- 
an Embassy to Philip--Character of the Ambassa- 
dors—Their Conference with the King—Differ- 
ently reported to the Senate and Assembly— 
Philip’s Conquests in Thrace—The Phocian War 
—Negotiations—Philip’s Intrigues-—-Decree of the 
Amphictyons against Phocis—Executed by Philip 
— Macedon acknowledged the principal Member 
of the Amphictyonic Council ‘ . 383 


CHAP. XXXVI. 


Foundation of Philippopolis and Cabyla—Philip’s 
Expedition to Illyria— Alexander reccives the Per- 
sian Ambassadors—Affairs of Greece—Demosthe- 
nes unmasks the Designs of Philip’s Expedition to 
the Peloponncsus—to Epirus—to Thrace—Dio- 
peithes opposes him with Vigour—The Athenians 
recover [ubozea—Siege of Perinthus—Philip’s Let- 
ter to the Athenians—Expedition of Chares—of 
Phocion—who retrieves the Athenian Affairs in 
Thrace—Philip’s Scythian Expedition—The In- 
cendiary Antiphon—Philip’s Intrigues embroil the 
Affairs of Greece—The third Sacred War—Philip 
General of the Amphictyons—Confederacy against 
that Princc—He scizes Elatea—Battle of Chero- 
nza—Ilis Moderation in Victory—Demosthenes’s 
Oration in Honour ofthe Slain... 


x CONTENTS. 


CHAP. XXXVII. 


Liberal Spirit of the Macedonian Government—Philip 
appointed General of the Greeks—Rebellion of 
Illyria—Assassination of Philip—His Character— 
Accession of Alexander—His Expedition against 
the Hlyrians and Triballi—He passes the Danube— 
Rebellion in Greece—Destruction of Thebes— 
Heroism of Timoclea—Alexander crosses the 
Hellespont—State of the Persian Empire—Battle 
of the Granicus—Siege of Miletus and Halicarnas- 
sus—Bold Adventure of two Macedonian Soldiers 
—Alexander’s judicious Plan of War—Arts by 
which he secured his Conquests—The Battle of 
Issus—The Virtues of Alexander expand with his 
Prosperity . 421 


CHAP. XXXVII. > 


Siege of Tyre—Desperate Resistance of Gaza—Easy 
Conquest of Egypt—Foundation of Alexandria— 
Alexander visits the Temple of Jupiter Ammon— 
Marches into Assyria—Battle of Gaugamela—Da- 
rius betrayed and slain—Alexander pursues the 
Murderers of Darius—Bactrian and Scythian War 
—Siege of the Sogdian’ Fortress—Surrender of 
Chorienes—Commotions in Greece—Checked by 
Antipatér—The Cause of Ctesiphon and Demos- 
thenes—Æschines banished—State of Greece dur- 
ing Alexander’s Reign ous. “ses too 


CHAP. XXXIX. 
Alexander’s Indian Expedition—Route pursued by 


the Army—Aornos taken—Nysa and Mount Me- 
ros—Alexander passes the Indus and Hydaspes— 
Defeats Porus—Founds Niceza and Bucephalia— 
Passes the Acesines and Hydraotes—Sangala 
taken—Eastern Boundary of Alexanders Con- 
quests—He sails down the Hydaspes—Takes the 
Mallian Fortress—His March through the Gedro- 
sian Desert—Voyage of Nearchus—Alexander im- 
proves the internal State of his Conquests—Incor- 
porates the Barbarian Levies with the Greeks and 
Macedonians—Intermarriages of the Europeans 
and Asiatics—Artifices to prevent Alexander’s Re- 
turn to Babylon—His Death and Character—Divi- 
sion of his Conquests—Subsequent History of 
Egypt and Syria—The Western Division of Alex- 
ander’s Empire conquered by the Romans—State 
of Greece after the age of Alexander . 448 


CHAP. XL. 


State of Literature in the Age of Alexander—Poetry 


—Music—Arts of Design—Geography—Astrono- 
my—Natural History—Works of Aristotle—Phi- 
losophical Sects established at Athens—Decline 
of Genius—Tenets of the different Sects—Peripa- 
tetic Philosophy—Estimate of that Philosophy—Its 
Fate in the World—Coincidence in the Opinions 
of Zeno and Epicurus—The Stoic Philosophy— 
Estimate of that Philosophy—The Epicurean 
Philosophy—Character of Epicurus—Philosophy 
of Pyrrho—Conclusion . « <r ™ 405 


| 
ol 
HISTORY OF GRU uy F 
> n y < Pi ad 


View of the Progress of Civilisation anc Pow 


N the infancy of society, men ‘re occupied 
with the business of the present Lour, for- 
getful of the past, ənd c reless of tLe future. 
‘hey possess neither aljılıty “or inclination to 
ntemplate their public tran actions in the im- 
tial light of history, far le s to treasure and 
them. Their recent victories over 
es a celebrated in the artless song,! 
iofated by the rude monument ; but 
e ally regular series of connected 
: esigi which they enjoy not the 

e.erute, scarcely the capacity to com- 


smple and obscure adventures, which 
unremembered by themselves, rarely 
pe inquisitive curiosity of their more 
iva ed neighbours. In remote ages of the 
d, one people became an object of attention 
another, only as they became considerable ; 


aent, the most polished nations of antiquity 
ttempted not to investigate the nature and 
vers of man in the untutored efforts of sa- 
ife. The daring spirit, and fierce incur- 
f the barbarians in the east of Europe, 
terror and consternation among the 
vilized and more effeminate inhabitants 
f Lesser Asia ;? but the luxurious pride of the 
satter never condescended to examine the origin 
and history of the people who were occasionally 
the object of their fears. The only circum- 
stantial information concerning both the Asiatics 
and the Europeans, must be derived from the 
early historians of Greece; and when we reflect 
on the innumerable causes which conspire to 
bury in oblivion the exploits of rising commu- 
nities, there is reason to wonder that we should 
know so much concerning the ancient state of 
that country, rather than to regret that our 
owledge is imperfect. 
lt must be allowed, however, that our mate- 
als for the first portion of Grecian history, are 
ther copious than consistent. The subject, 


l Tacit. Annal. l. iv. c. 43. 
4 2 The Lydians, Phrygians, &e. History and fable attest 
‘the early civilization, the wealth, and wickedness, of those 
ations. See particularly Herodotus, |. i. c. 93. & seq. and 
Strabo, l. xi. p. 532. & seq. and l. xii. & xiii. p. 572. 
3 It is sufficient to read Thucydides’s introduction to his 
admired history of the Peloponnesian war, to perceive how 
Bittle correce information could be obtained by that diligent 


= 


CHAM Se I. 


ia Greece, preceding the Trojan War—History 


of that War—1ts Consequences. 
ld s 


indeed, is such, as a very cautious writer would 
choose entirely to avoid, since, whatever au- 
thorities he follows, his narrative must, in some 
parts, be liable to objection.4 Yet it seems es- 


inquirer into the antiquities of his country. If we admit 
the common chronology, there is reason to believe that the 
scattered fragments of Grecian history were preserved du- 
ring thirteen centuries by oral tradition. The tales or 
thapsodies of the «01301, or bards, were succeeded by those 
of the Cyclic poets, of whom an account is given in Casauy- 
bon Atheneum, 1. vii.c.4. Salmas. in Solin. et Schwarzius 
Altdorf in Diss. de Poetis Cyclicis. Composition in prose 
began with the use of alphabetic writing about six centu- 
ries before Christ. Plin. Nat. Hist. 1. v. c. 29. The first 
prose writers, or more propetly the first writers, were, 
Pherecydes of Syros; Acusilaus of Argos; Hellanicus of 
Lesbos; Hecateus and Dionysius, both of Miletus; the 
last of whom flourished in the 65th Olymp. 520. B. C. and 
immediately preceded Herodotus. From the work of He- 
rodotus, ‘which forms, as it were, the shade between Epic 
Poetry and History, we may judge of the writings of his 
predecessors; from whom, together with the Cyclic poets, 
Anaximenes of Lampsacus, who lived in the time of Alex- 
ander the Great, and Diodorus Siculus, who lived in the 
time of Julius Cæsar, compiled the first books of their 
very extensive but inaccurate collections. Apollodorus, 
Hyginus (and many others, whose works are now lost,) 
combined the more ancient records, whether in prose or 
verse, with the additions and embellishments of the lyric 
and tragic poets. When the Greek learning became 
known to the Romans, this compound of history and fable 
furnished the subject and the incidents of innumerable tra- 
gedies to Ennius, Accius, Livius Andronicus, &c. After the 
downfall of Rome, learning took refuge in the eastern 
world. The antiquities and early history of Greece again 
became objects of study among the natives of that coun- 
try; but the heterogeneous mass of truth and fiction was 
rather amalgamated, than purified, by Malala, Cedrenus, 
Tzetza, Constantinus Manasses, and other Greeks of the 
middle ages. See Heine, Not. ad Atneid. IT. and Vossius 
de Historic. Grecis. With few exceptions, the Greek wri- 
ters may be pronounced extremely careless in matters of 
chronology. Herodotus, who has been emphatically styled 
the father of profane history, commonly reckons by the ages 
of men. The accurate histories of Thucydides and Xeno- 
phon, where the time of each event is precisely ascertained, 
comprehend no more than a period of seventy years. Even 
in their time, chronology seems not to have been cultivated 
as a science, since the first specimen of that kind is said to 
have been given by Demetrius Phalerins, in his cexovray 
evayexoy, about the middle of the fourth century before 
Christ. T'he labours of Demetrius were corrected and ex- 
tended by Philochorus in his Ar9ss. The historian Timeus, 
who flourished in the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, first 
arranged his narrative in the order of Olympiads, which 
began 776 B. C. His contemporary Sasibius gave a work, 
entitled Xeovwv Avzyexoy; Apollodor.sa wrote the cvvtæžig 
%eovexns and on such chronologers rests the credit of ail 
later compilers, as well as of the Arundelian marbles, 
which were enmposed only 254 years before Christ. 

4 What Strabo (l. ix.) says of the first historians of 
Attica, “that they differed widely from each other (7oAA@ 
Sieouvouvtes,)” may be applied to all profane histories of 
these early times. j 


12 HISTORY OF GREECE. 


t] 

sential to the integrif -y of the present work, to 
explain from what ( somaing of nations the 
Greeks were fermed} and by what fortunate 
steps they arrived, fi sm feeble beginnings, to 
that condition of ma% jers and society in which 
they are described © Homer; whose immor- 
tal poems, like = ~ rin the gloom of 
night, brighten the 0. scur antiquities of his 
country. 

The traditions of the (:Weks agree with the 
authentic records of sicred hisstory, in repre- 
senting the countries af 
names of Thrace, Macedon, and Gasca a 


portion of the western world. Th: es)» ~ 
corner of Europe, comprehended betwee * 
thirty-sixth and forty-first degrees of latitu 
bordering on Epirus and Macedonia towaruc 
the north, and on other sides surrounded by 
the sea, was inhabited, above eighteen centuries 
before the christian æra, by many small tribes 
of hunters and shepherds, among whom the 
Pelasgi and Hellenes were the most numerous 
and powerful.! The barbarous Pelasgi vene- 
rated Inachus, as their founder; and for a simi- 
lar reason, the more humane Hellenes respected 
Deucalion, From his son Hellen, they derived 
their general appellation, which originally de- 
noted a small tribe in Thessaly ;? and from 
Dorus, Eolus, and Ion, his more remote de- 
scendants, they were discriminated by the 
names of Dorians, Eolians, and Ionians.4 The 
Dorians took possession of that mountainous 
district of Greece, afterwards called Doris; the 
Ionians, whose name was in some measure lost 
in the illustrious appellation of Athenians, 
settled in the less barren parts of Attica; and 
the Eolians peopled Elis and Arcadia, the 
western and inland regions of the Pelopon- 
nesus. Notwithstanding many partial migra- 
tions, these three original® divisions of the Hel- 
lenes generally entertained an affection for the 
establishments which had been preferred by the 
wisdom or caprice of their respective ancestors; 
a circumstance which remarkably distinguished 
the Hellenic from the Pelasgic race. While the 
former discovered a degree of attachment to 
their native land, seldom found in barbarians, 
who live by hunting or pasturage, the latter 
disdaining fixed habitations, wandered in large 
bodies over Greece, or transported themselves 
into the neighbouring islands; and the most 
considerable portion of them gradually re- 
moving to the coasts of Italy and Thrace, the 
remainder melted away into the Doric and 
Ionic tribes. At the distance of twelve centu- 
ries, obscure traces of the Pelasgi occurred in 
several Grecian cities; a district of Thessaly 
always retained their name; their colonies con- 
tinued, in the fifth century before Christ, to in- 
habit the-southern coast of Italy, and the shores 
of the Hellespont: and in those widely sepa- 
rated countries, their ancient affinity was re- 
cognised in the uniformity of their rude dialect 
and barbarous manners, extremely dissimilar to 


1 Marm. Oxon. epoch. 6. Apollodor. Biblioth. 1. ii. 
2 Thucydid. l. i. c. 28. 

3 Strabo, l. viii. p. 383. 

4 Herodot. l. i. c. 56. and l. vii. €. 94. 

5 Diodor. Siculus, l. v. 

6 Heraclid. Pont. apud Atheneum, |. xiv. 


afcerwards K¥own by the | narrow extent of sea from Egypt and Syria 
| situate within reach of those parts of the 
peopled at an earlier period than any wat £ which were anciently most flourishing and 


_ 


L~s- 


the customs and language of their Gredan 
neighbours.7 . 

Greece, when delivered from the turbulence 
of a rugged race of men, who never attai 
much consideration, either in the territories 
where they originally dwelt, or in those to 
which they afterwards removed, was not left to 
be slowly civilized by the progressive ingenuity 
of the Hellenic tribes. The happy position of 
a country, which, forming as it were the fron 
tier of Europe with Asia, is divided only by è 


ulous, naturally invited the visits of travel- 
s, and attracted the establishment of colo- 
niese, ‘hese transient visits, or temporary set- 
tlemen s, were marked by many signal benefit, 
the mensgry of which was long preserved 
the gratitule of Greece, and their merit 
bably exagge:ated by her fondness for pané 
gyric. Even those 4zrecian communities,which 
justly claimed the thonour of superior anti 
quity, acknowledged themselves indebted | 
strangers for the most Mey ortant discoveri 
not only in religion, but in &priculture and t 
arts; and contented themselyés with gla 
of having diffused a borrowed ight OF 
melancholy gloom of ignorance «inich ov 
spread their neighbours§ But nt adi] van 
at length produced a material cd inge in 
tradition. When the refined des®endants 
the rude Greeks viewed with complai; 
own superiority in arts and arms “ 
tions around them, they began to sus} ec 
the gods alone were worthy to have re. rex 
infancy of a people, who eminently excel) 
the rest of mankind. To the gods they tram 
ferred the merit of the many useful invention 
communicated by the generous humanity o 
their ancient visitants; an ostentatious fictior 
coloured by a faint semblance of truth, since 
theeworship of several divinities was introduceéé 
at the same time, and by the same persons,$ 
who made known the arts most subservient t 
the purposes of human life.!0 
While fable thus disguised the benefits confer 
red by the first transitory voyages into Greece, 
history preserved the memory of four succes- _ 
sive establishments erected there by foreigners 
From the middle of the sixteenth, to the mid- 
dle of the fourteenth century before Christ, an 
inundation of Egyptians, Phenicians, and 
Phrygians, overflowed the Hellenic coasts. The 
causes assigned for these emigrations are ex 
tremely consonant to the manners of remot 
antiquity, as described by sacred and profane 
authors: hatred of a rival, impatience of a 
superior, in one instance the persecution of a 
brother and an enemy, and, in general, tha 
uneasy restlessness of disposition, which uni 
versally prevails among men, who have becomeg, 
sensible of their own powers, without having 
sufficiently learned to direct them to the happy 
pursuits of arts and industry. The principal 


7 Herodot. l.i. Dionys. Halicarn. 1. i. Pausan. L viii. a 
8 Isocrat. Panegyr. passim. 
9 The Tytans, Idæi Dactyli, Triptolemus, &c. Compare 
Diodor. Sicul. |. v. and Isocrat. Panegyr. A 
10 Diodor. Sicul. |. v. Isocrat. Panegyr. 
11 Isocrat. Hellen. sub. initio. Pind. Olymp. 1. b 
a 


Pie) r 
lonies were conducted, by Cecrops,? and 
c Danaus, Egyptians, who respectively 
"<" settled in Athens and Argos; Cadmus,!? 
a a Phenician, who founded Thebes in 
; e Beotia, and Pelops, a Phrygian,!4 whose 
=p, descendants, intermarrying with those 
»™ of Danaus, king of Argos, and Tynda- 
sus, king of Lacedemon or Sparta, acquired, 
n the person of Agamemnon, so powerful an 
ascendant in the Peloponnesus.!5 The family 
of Deucalion still reigned in Thessaly; but 
Thebes, Athens, Argos, and Sparta, which in 
ll ages were regarded as the principal cities of 
reece, thus fell under the dominion of four 
preign lines of princes, whose exploits, and 
ory, and misfortunes, are immortalised by the 
st and noblest productions of Grecian genius.!6 
The countries, which these adventurers aban- 
ined, had not, according to modern ideas, at- 
ined a very high degree of maturity in laws 
id government. Yet it cannot be doubted, 
at the natives of Egypt and the east were 
juainted with many improvements unknown 
the Hellenic tribes, Conjectures are not to 
placed in the rank of facts; yet, in matters 
ancient and obscure, we may be allowed to 
njecture from the only facts on record, that 
2 invaders of Greece introduced into that 
untry the knowledge of the Phenician alpha- 
t; improved the practice of agriculture ; 
plied the rites of religion; discovered to 
> Greeks several uses of the metals; but, on 
e other hand, gradually adopted, in their turn, 
he Grecian language, and generally conformed 
ñ the Grecian customs and institutions.!7 
The introduction of the Phenician alphabet 
as an i ement too delicate and refined to 
be immediately attended with any important 
Bonsequences. The gross understandings of 
he Hellenes could not easily comprehend the 
itility of such an ingenious invention. The 
nowledge of it was acquired and preserved 
hy a few individuals!8 of more enlightened 
minds: but the far greater part of the nation 
long contented themselves with the ancient 
mode of picture-writing, which, however 
limited in its application, seemed sufficient to 
express the simplicity of their rude ideas. 

The Phenicians were well acquainted with 
the precious metals as the medium of ex- 


12 Strabo, l. ix. and Plut. in Theseo. 
13 Strabo, Ibid. and Isocrat. Hellen. 
J4 Isocrat. Panathen. Thucydid.}.i. Diodor. 1. 4. 
15 Thucyd. l.i. Diodor. 1.4. Isocrat. Panathen. 
16 The works of Homer and Pindar, and the writings of 
he Greek tragedians. In these, and scarcely any where 
Ise, the stories of Cadmus, Semele, Bacehus, Amphitryon, 
ercules, Œdipus, &c. may be read with pleasure and ad- 
antage ; for, as Strabo, |.ix says, ‘ All there is monstrous 
nd tragic land.” 

17 Compare Herodotus, l. v. c. 59. 1. vii. passim. Mont- 
faucon, Paleograph. Gree. |. ii. Plin. 1. v. c. 56 and 57. 
yginus, Fab. 274. and Ephorus apud Diodor. l. v. 

18 Herodotus mentions three inscriptions on thee tripods, 
sonsecrated in the temple of Ismenian Apollo. The first, 
of Amphitryon ; the second, of the son of Hippocoon; the 
third, of Laodamus the son of Eteocles. ‘The inscriptions 
in the shields of the heroes who besieged the capital of 
iteocles, are noticed by /Eschylus, in his tragedy entitled, 
‘The Seven against Thebes.” Yet we know froin Homer 

ind vi. that when Pratus sent Bellerophon to the king of 
Lye a, he gave him, not a written letter, but cye2t% Avy en, 

ournful signs. Writing could not be common till many 
perituties afterwards, since the first written laws were given 
Greece only six centuries before Christ. Herodot. |. ii. 
Strabo, l. vi. 
r 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 13 


change. But the uniform transactions of the 
Greeks, as yet required not any such nicety of 
refinement. Even during the Trojan war, 
cattle, being the commodity of most general 
demand, was universally regarded as the most 
convenient measure of value.!9 It is not easy 
to determine whether gold or iron be more ad- 
vantageous to man, the one by exciting his in- 
dustry, the other by seconding that industry in 
all the variety of useful arts. The discovery 
of iron in Greece afforded the necessary im- 
plements of agriculture, the gradual extension 
of which alike improved the sterility of the 
soil, and the rudeness of the inhabitants. Be- 
fore the arrival of Egyptian colonies, the culti- 
vation of the ground might occasionally em- 
ploy the divided industry of scattered families; 
but this valuable art was not considered as an 
object of general concern. Cecrops first en- 
gaged the wandering hunters or shepherds of 
Attica to unite in villages of husbandmen. 
Corn, wine, and oil, rewarded their useful la- 
bours ;20 and these productions being acquired 
by common toil, were regarded, with the 
ground itself, as a common property.?! 

-The idea of an exclusive and permanent 
right to all the uses of a piece of land, whether 
belonging to communities or to individuals, is 
one of the most important steps in the progress 
of society. In Greece, this valuable right was 
immediately followed by such institutions as 
tended to secure its enjoyment, and to check 
the injustice of man, who is seldom willing to 
acquire, by slow labour, what he can ravish by 
sudden violence. The salutary influence of 
religion was employed on this necessary occa- 
sion. We are told by several writers, that the 
practice of agriculture, and the rites of religion, 
were introduced at the same time.22 But the 
same authors inform us, that their pretended 
founders of religious worship abolished the use 
of living sacrifices ;23 a custom, which evi- 


19 In a well known passage, Homer, after mentioning 
other articles, with which the Grecks purehased wine, adds, 
zuroiri koser, “with oxen themselves.” Some seholiasts 
and commentators have imagined, that the 6245 of Homer 
was a coin stamped with the figure of an ox, said to have 
been introduced by ‘Theseus. Vid. Plut. in Theseo. But 
were it allowed, which is very improbable, that Theseus 
had a mint, it would still be irnprobable that Homer meant 
such a coin; for in the episode of Glaucus and Diomed, he 
says, that the former gave his golden armour, worth a hun- 
dred oxen, for the brazen armour of the latter, worth only 
nine. Now we know from Pollux Onomast, l. ix. c. 7. that 
the coin cvs, at whatsoever time it was introduced, con- 
tinued to be valued at two drachmas. Diomed’s arms 
thercfore, upon the supposition of the scholiasts, must have 
been worth about nine shillings; and Glaucus’s, which 
were of massy gold, worth only nine pounds. Talents of 
gold are often mentioned by Homer. ‘They were proposed 
as prizes to combatants, and offered as dedieations in tem- 
ples, but too valuable to serve as current specie. Homer 
and Iterodot. passim. Nousrex, money, is derived from 
vozos, law, because, as Aristotle sunys, ov Guest, wAAw 
vogw sors, “the origin of money is not natural, but con- 
ventional and arbitrary.” But in Homer’s time, the word 
voos Was used in a qnite different sense: vo“ieue must 
therefore have becn derived from it at a later period. Com. 
Hiad. l. xx. v. 249. and Aristot. Ethic Nicoin. I. v. c. 5. 

20 Pausan. |. iii. Aschyl. Enmen. 

21 The revevoc, or cut of ground so often mentioned in 
Homer, a8 bestowed by general consent on admired kings 
and ehiefs, might have suggested this observation, which 
seems to have escaped notice, thongh attended, as we shall 
find, with very important consequences. 

22 Diodor. Pausan. Apollod. 

23 Orovs xvemots wyarrsiv Cre py oiveroas. Porph. de 
Abstinent. 


& 


14 


dently supposes the prior establishment of an 
ancient and more bloody superstition. Yet in 
this humane prohibition, we may perhaps dis- 
cern a laudable attempt to correct the barbarity 
of the Greeks, and to raise the new profession 
of agriculture above the ancient employment 
of hunting. 

Before and during the time that the Hellenic 
tribes received continual accessions of popula- 
tion from distant countries, they were no less 
diligent in sending forth their own colonies. 
As they originally subsisted by hunting, fish- 
ing, and pasturage, a large extent of territory 
was requisite to supply them with the necessa- 
ries of life. They were not afflicted by the 
oppressive terrors of despotism; they were 
long unacquainted with the gentle, but power- 
ful, operation of regular government; and 
without being subject to the one or the other, 
it is scarcely possible for men to live together 
in large societies. When any of their commu- 
nities seemed inconveniently numerous, they 
divided it into several portions, of w hich the 
principal kept possession of their original seats, 
while the others occupied and peopled the sur- 
rounding territories. It was thus the Eolians 
dispersed through many parts of the Pelopon- 
nesus ; the unfortunate Sisyphus,'! who found- 
ed the city of Corinth, being a descendant of 
Eolus, and the ancestors of the wise Nestor, 
who reigned in sandy Pylos, being sprung from 
the same Eolic race.2 A considerable division 
of the Ionians settled along the southern shores 
of the Corinthian gulf, in the province which, 
eighty years after the Trojan war, changed the 
name of Ionia for that of Achaia.2 The ter- 
ritory beyond the Corinthian isthmus was par- 
celled out among innumerable subdivisions of 
the Hellenic tribes.4 When the continent of 
Greece seemed sufficiently populous, the Athe- 
nians gave inhabitants to the isle of Eubea; 
and many centuries before the famous establish- 
ments formed by the Greeks on the coasts of 
Asia Minor, of Italy, and of Thrace, the Do- 
rians had sent a colony to Crete, and the 
Eolians, under the conduct of Dardani had 
planted the eastern banks of the Hellespont.6 
During the Trojan war, the inhabitants of those 
various and widely separated countries spoke the 
same language that was used among the Hel- 
lenes, and acknowledged the general influence 
of the same principles and manners. Unless it 
is supposed, therefore, that not only the Phry- 
gians, but the Phenicians and Egyptians ori- 
ginally spoke the same Hellenic tongue, it 
seems reasonable to conjecture that the colonies 
conducted by Cecrops, Cadmus, and Danaus, 
gradually adopted the language of the abori- 
gines of Greece.’ 


1 Kz: EiruÇov esoesdov xoxtegm æhysz exovTe. Homer 
Odyss. 

2 Pausan. in Corinth. et Messen. 

4 Id. ib. Pausan. et Diodor. 

5 Diodor. ibid. Strabo, l. vii. p. 496. 

6 Servius in Æneìid. JI. 

7 Herodotus, l. v. c. 58. says, that the colony of Cadmus 
changed their speech, being surrounded by the Ionians, a 
Hellenic tribe. He says further, that together with their 
language, they changed the power of some of their letters. 
He acknowledges that the Cadmeians, or Phenicians, com- 
municated to the Jonians the use of letters ; but the Jonians, 
ho says, adapted the Phenician alphabet to the sounds of 


3 Strabo, l. vii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


-9 


[Caar. 


A single reflection appears sufficient te 
prove, that they likewise conformed to the 
Grecian institutions of government. The im 
flexible rigour of despotism, which has in al 
ages prevailed in Egypt’ and the east, was u 
known to the conquerors of Troy. Since th 
absolute power of kings was not acknowledget 
during a long period of war and danger, re. 
quiring the strictest military subordination íi 
and since the Greeks preserved their freedom, 
after the increasing wealth of many centuries 
had a tendency to prepare them for servitude; 
it cannot reasonably be imagined, that an ori- 
ental system of oppression should have pre- 
vailed in the more early ages of poverty and 
independence.?9 

The Phenicians being considered as the prin; 
cipal navigators and merchants. of the ancien 
world, it is commonly believed that the exam 
ple of the Phenician colonies first taught th 
Greeks to brave the dangers of the sea,a 
to maintain a commercial intercourse witl 
each other, as well as with foreign natior 
But it is sufficient to throw a glance on th 
geography of Greece, to perceive how naturall 
commerce, without ‘foreign aid, might hay 
arisen spontaneously in that highly favoure 
country. The continent itself, washed on thre 
sides by the sea, is surrounded by innumerab! 
islands, abounding i in excellent harbours. Th 
variety of soils and productions is greater, pé 
haps, than in any other part of the world, of a 
equal extent. All the shores of the Mediter 
ranean, comprehending the most beautiful, andi 
anciently, the most flourishing part of the earth 
are more accessible to Greece than to any 
neighbouring country. Yet it appears from the 
light of history, that the Greeks did not early 
avail themselves of their fortunate situation, or 
of the supposed lessons of their Phenician in- 
structers. 

’ Many circumstances conspired to prolong the 
infancy of their nation, and to retard, during 
several centuries, their improvement in com- 
merce, as well as in agriculture, and the other 
useful arts. The surface of Greece is more in 
dented by creeks and rivers, and more r - 
ened by mountains and promontories, than that 
of any other part of Europe. These natural 
divisions kept the different communities in a 


their own language. The eastern tongues are in general 
extremely deficient in vowels. Iti is, or rather was, much 
disputed whether the ancient Orientals used any charot 
to express them. Their languages, therefore, had an i 
flexible thickness of sound, extremely different from tl 
vocal harmony of the Greek, which abounds not only i 
vowels but in diphthongs. The circumstance denotes, į 
the Greeks, organs of perception more acute, elegant, ar 
discerning. They felt such faint variations of liquid sounds, 
as escaped the dulness of Asiatic ears, and invented mar 3 
to express them. They distinguished, in this manner, not 
only their articulation, but their quantity, and afterw an 
their musical intonation, as shall be explained hereafter, in 
treating of the Grecian music and poetry. 

& The government of the Egyptians, as well as the 
Asiatics, is uniformly represented in scripture as an abso 
lute monarchy. Herodotus and Diodorus mention som 
laws of the Egyptians, which seem to cirenmscribe thé 
power of their kings. But these laws, if well examined 
will confirm the observation in the text. They we 
established, not in favour of the nation at large, but of thé 
priests and ‘soldiers. The throne of Egypt was supported 
by the altar, and defended by the sword; and what despits 


tism can be upheld but by the same ns? k 
9 See the principles established p de Mor.German 


1. 


ee of separation and hostihty. The ideas of 
their aneient consanguinity and common origin 
were weakened or effaced by the recent confiu- 
nce of foreigners. They could not travel be- 
yond their own narrow districts without being 
exposed to the insults of enemies. These in- 
sults excited resentment; mutual injuries were 
offered and retorted ; each city was at war with 
all its neighbours: thus did the smallness of the 
Grecian states, a circumstance which, during 
the happy ages that form the subject of the 
present history, tended to break the force of 
custom and opinion, and to encourage that 
noble emulation so favourable to the progress 
of virtue and science, produce, in less fortunate 
imes, an effect of the most opposite nature, 
thoke the seeds of order, and repress the feeble 
hoots and humanity. 

The metals, originally destined to promote 
we peaceful labours of man, were converted 
nto powerful instruments of destruction ; and 
vhile the land was ravaged by the sword, the 
ea was covered with pirates. The Phenicians, 
he Garians, and the inhabitants of the Greek 
slands in general, considered navigation, not as 
he means of uniting nations by mutual inter- 
ourse and commerce, but as a happy expedient 
or enabling the poor and the brave to plunder 
he rich territories of their less warlike neigh- 
ours. The coasts of Greece, though in early 
imes their bleak forbidding aspect might have 
spelled the avarice of freebooters, yet on ac- 
Sount of the proximity of their situation, and 
the valuable cargoes of hardy slaves in which 
they abounded, were continually infested by 
, naval depredations. The unfortified places near 
the shore surrendered without resistance; the 
fruits of their painful industry were plundered 
or destroyed, and the most valuable portion of 
their inhabitants dragged into captivity. The 
practice of piracy and invasion was not a tem- 
porary resource of war, prompted by necessity, 
or a just revenge; it grew into an ordinary pro- 
fession, which was so far from being deemed 
dishonourable, that it conferred much glory and 
renown on those who exercised it with skill and 

very.!0 

uring this disordered state of society, the 

rts of peace were almost entirely neglected, 
and Greece was ready to be plunged into the 
grossest barbarism, by its domestic dissentions. 
The irruptions of the Thracians, Amazons, and 
other northern savages, threatened to acceler- 
ate this melancholy event, and to complete the 
ruin of the unhappy Hellenes.!! But it may be 
observed in the affairs of human life, that any 
extraordinary measure of good or evil com- 
monly leads men to dread, or to expect, a sud- 
den revolution of fortune; a natural sentiment 
which, though liable to be abused by credulity 
and superstition, is founded on the firm basis 
of experience. The rudiments of the most 
useful designs are suggested always by neces- 
sity, often by calamity. The inroads of the 


10 Thucydid. 1. i. ois xoruos xarws rovro ezv. The 
explanatien in the text seems more consonant to Grecian 
manners, in those ages, than that of the scholiast, which is 
translated by Mr. Rochford, “Chez qui la piraterie étoit 
@xercée avec une certaine probité.” M. de l'Acad. v. 39. 

11 Lysias Orat. Funeb, 

i 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 15 


wild mountaineers of Thrace, and of other bar- 
barians more remote, whose destructive cruelty 
may be understood by the unexampled ravages 
with which even the feebler sex!? carried on the 
ravages of war, occasioned the first institution 
which restored some degree of present tranquil- 
lity to Greece, and laid the foundation of its 
future grandeur. 

The northern districts of Thessaly being pe- 
culiarly exposed to the dangerous fury of in- 
vaders, the petty princes of that province enter- 
ed into a confederacy for their mutual defence. !* 
They assembled in spring and autumn at T'her- 
mopyle, a place afterwards so illustrious, and 
then governed by Amphictyon, a descendant of 
Deucalion, whose name is immortalized in the 
Amphictyonic council. The advantages which 
the confederates derived from this measure, 
were soon perceived by their neighbours. The 
central states gradually acceded to their alli- 
ance; and, about the middle of the fourteenth 
century before Christ, Acrisius king of Argos, 
and other princes of ihe Peloponnesus, were 
allowed to share the benefits and security of 
their useful association. 

After this event, the Amphictyons ap- 

1963, Pear to have long confined themselves to 
` the original purpose of their institution. 
The states, whose measures were directed by 
this assembly, found sufficient occupation in 
defending their own territories; and near a cen- 
tury elapsed, before they undertook, hy common 
consent, any distant expedition. But it was not 
to be expected that their restless activity could 
be always exhausted in defensive war. The 
establishment of the Amphictyons brought to- 
gether the chiefs most distinguished by birth 
and bravery. Glory and emulation prompted 
them to arms, and revenge directed those arms 
against the barbarians. Jason, Admetus, and 
other chieftains of Thessaly,'4 having equipped 
a small fleet in the neighbouring harbour of 
Iolcus, and particularly the ship Argos, of su- 
perior size and construction to any before 
known, were animated with a desire to visit 
foreign lands, to plant colonies in those parts 
of them that appeared most delightful, and to 
retort on their inhabitants the injuries which 
Greece had suffered from strangers.'5 The prin- 
ces of the north having proclaimed this spirited 
design over the central and southern provinces, 
the standard of enterprise and glory was speed- 
ily surrounded by the flower of the Grecian 
youth,!6 who eagerly embraced this honourable 
opportunity to signalize their manly valour. 
Peleus, Tydeus, Telamon, and, in general, the 
fathers of those heroic chiefs, who in the suc- 
ceeding age, shone with distinguished lustre in 
the plains of Troy, are numbered among the 
leaders of the Argonauts. Tley were accom- 
panied by the chosen warriors, and by the vene- 


12 The Amazons. See Lysias Orat. Funch. and Hero- 
dotus passim. Yet the existence of these warlike females 
was doubted as early as the days of the emperor Hadrian, 
as we learn from Arrian: but what is said by that judicious 
and manly historian, seems sufficient to dispel the doubt. 
See Arrian Expedit. Alexand. |. vii. p. 156. 

13 Marm. Oxen. B. 5. d 

14 Their names are mentioned by Apollodorus, Diod. 
Siculus, Pindar, Apollonius, &c. 

15 Herodot. l.i. Diodor. Sicul. | iv 

16 Pindar, Pythic. iv. 


16 


rable prophets, of their respective tribes; by an 
Esculapius, the admired father of the healing 
art, and by the divine Orpheus,' whose subiime 
genius was worthy to celebrate the amazing 
series of their adventures. 

-These adventures, however, have been too 
much adorned by the graces of poetry, to be the 
proper subjects of historical composition. The 
designs of the Argonauts are veiled under the 
allegorical, or at least doubtful, phrase, “of 
carrying off the golden fleece;” which, though 
easily explained, if we admit the report that the 
inhabitants of the eastern banks of the Euxine 
extended fleeces of wool, in order to collect the 
golden particles which were carried down by 
the torrents from Mount Caucasus,? is yet de- 
scribed in such various language by ancient 
writers, that almost every modern who exam- 
ines the subject, thinks himself entitled to offer, 
by way of explanation, some new conjecture of 
his own. But in opposition to the most ap- 
, proved of these conjectures, we may venture to 
affirm, that the voyage to Colchis was not un- 
dertaken with a view to establish extensive 
plans of commerce,’ or to search for mines of 
gold, far less to learn the imaginary art of con- 
verting other substances into that precious 
metal;4 all such motives supposing a degree of 
speculation and refinement unknown in that 
age to the gallant but uninstructed youth of 
Thessaly. The real object of the expedition 
may be discovered by its consequences. The 
Argonauts fought, conquered, and plundered ;* 
they settled a colony on the shores of the 
Euxine; and carried into Greece a daughter 
of the king of Colchis, the celebrated Medea,’ 
a princess of Egyptian extraction, whose crimes 
and enchantments are condemned to eternal 
infamy in the immortal lines of Euripides. 

Notwithstanding many romantic fictions that 
disfigure the story of the Argonauts, their un- 
dertaking appears to have been attended with a 
considerable and a happy effect on the manners 
and character of the Greeks. From the era of 
this celebrated expedition, we may discover not 


only a more daring and more enlarged spirit of 


enterprise, but a more decisive and rapid pro- 
gress towards civilization and humanity. The 
sullen and unsociable chiefs, whose acquaint- 
ance with each other most commonly arose 
from acts of mutual hostility, hitherto gave full 
scope to the sanguinary passions which charac- 
terize barbarians. Strength and courage were 
almost the only qualities which they admired: 
they fought and plundered at the head of their 
respective tribes, while the inhabitants of the 
neighbouring districts were regarded as fit ob- 
jects only to excite their rage, and gratify their 


1 The testimony of Plato de Repub. |. x. of Isocrates in 
Busirid. sufficiently attest the poetical fame of Orpheus. 
The Argonautica, aud other works ascribed to him, are 
collected by Eschenbachius, and published at Nuremberg, 
1702. That these, however, are the productions of a much 
later age, appears from innumerable circumstances, some 
a which are mentioned by Fabricius, Bib. Grace. vol. i. p. 
120. 
2 Strabo, l. xi. p. 499. 3 Eustach. in Homer. 

4 Suidas, Memoires de l’Academ. v.9. Exped. Argon. 

5 Diodor. ibid. 6 Xenoph. Anabas. 

7 Euripid. Med. 

This was the brazen age described hy Hesiod. Oper. et 
Di. i. i. p. 142-155. and by Plutarch in the life of Theseus. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Cnap. 
[Oi 


rapacity. But these gloomy warriors, having 
exerted their joint valour in a remote expedi- 
tion, learned the necessity of acquiring more 
amiable virtues, as well as of adopting more 
liberal notions of the public interest, if the 
pretended to deserve the esteem of their equals. 
Military courage and address might alone pro- 
cure them the respect of their immediate fol- 
lowers, since the safety of the little community 
often depended on the warlike abilities of the 
chieftain ; but when several tribes had combined 
in a common enterprize, there was less depen- 
dence on the prowess of any single leader. 
Emulation and interest naturally rendered all 
these leaders as jealous of each other, as de- 
sirous of the public applause; and, in order to 
acquire this applause, it was necessary ta 
brighten the lustre of martial spirit by the more 
valuable? virtues of justice and humanity. 

When this glorious field first opened to thë 
ambition of the Greeks, they cultivated it with 
a degree of industry equally ardent and suc- 
cessful. Innumerable were the exploits of Her 
cules, of Theseus, and of the divine sons o 
Leda,'0 and undertaken with infinite toil an 
danger, to promote the interest and safety, no 
of their particular tribes, but of the genera 
confederacy. The Grecian woods and moun 
tains abounded in lions, boars, and other fierce 
animals,!! that often roamed from their haunts 
and spread terror and desolation through th 
adjoining valleys. The valleys themselve 
teemed with men of brutal strength and cour 
age, who availed themselves of the weakness 
of government to perpetrate horrid deeds of 
violence and cruelty. The first worthies of 
Greece, animated rather with the daring and 
useful, than with the romantic spirit of chival- 
ry, set themselves with one accord to remedy 
evils which threatened the existence of society. 
Their adventures have, doubtless, been em- 
bellished by the elegant fancy of poets and ora- 
tors; but they will remain eternal monuments 
of generous magnanimity, which sacrifices the 
instinctive love of ease and pleasure to the ac- 
quired taste for glory and renown.!? 


9 Hesiod marks this change of manners. It happened 
between the expedition of the Argonauts and the siege of 
Thebes, since the latter was the first exploit in which his 
new race of men, yevos Sixwsoregov xai aeesov were en- 
gaged. See Hesiod Oper. et Di. l. i. v. 155—165. 

10 “In order to obtain the immortal fruits of merit,” says 
Aristotle, in his beautiful Ode to Virtue, 

o diog HexxAns, 
Andes TE xoveot, TOAAG wvETARroY, 
Eoyois Tav ayesvovres duvapiy? 
Doig Se xoGoig AXIAAEUS, 
Atas T’? Aizo oxov naĝoyv. 


This ode, which is preserved in Diogen. Laert. in Aristot. 
and in Athenæus, l. xv. c. 16. proves the mind of the Sta- 
gyrite to have been as lofty as capacious: and while it 
comprchended the whole circle of science, capable of reach- 
ing, in lyric poetry, the highest flights of Pindar and Horace. 
The latter, probably had Aristotle in view in ode 3. b. 3. 
Hac arte Pollux, et vagus Hercules 
Innixus, arces attigit igneas. 
But in the order of his names, he is not so faithful to chro- 
nology. 
` 11 In the shield of Hercules, Hesiod describes a .boar 
fighting with a lion, and almost prevailng in the combat. 
That animal was no less terrible on the opposite const of 
Asia than in Greece, as we learn from Herodotus, l. i. c. 


34. ct seq. 
12 Pausan. l. i. Isocrat. Hellen. Encom. et Panegyr. 


Lysias et Demosthen. Orat. Funeb. 


The laws of war and peace gradually 
improved with the progress of humani- 
ty ; and the first general enterprise, which 
succeeded the expedition of the Argonauts, 
proves that whole communities, as weil as in- 
d ividuals, had begun to respect the virtues most 
essential to public happiness. The war of 
Thebes has deserved, therefore, to be recorded ; 
while the more ancient hostilities between the 
Hellenic tribes, of which justice was not even 
the pretence, but lust or avarice the only cause, 
and wealth or beauty the only prize, are uni- 
versally condemned to oblivion. Contempt of 
an ancient oracle, the involuntary crimes of 
Cidipus, and the unnatural cruelty of his sous, 
involved the royal family of Thebes in that 
maze of calamities, appropriated in all ages, 
from Sophocles!’ to Voltaire, as favourite sub- 
jects of the Tragic Muse. Eteocles and Poly- 


1 25. 


pus) having hastened the death, and drawn 
down the maledictions, of their unhappy father, 
agreed to sway, by turns, the Theban sceptre. 
Eteocles, the elder brother, reigned during the 
irst year; but his ans temper, corrupted 
y the honours of royalty, refused to resign the 
hrone at the appointed term of his command. 
dis rival, Polynices, married the daughter of 
drastus, king of Argos, who enabled his son- 
i-law to assert, by force of arms, his just pre- 
ensions to the alternate inheritance. Thc allied 
rinces, reinforced by Tydeus, Capaneus, and 
three other chiefs, marched to Thebes at the 
head of seven bands of armed followers, who 
invested the seven gates of the city. The 
Thebans, impatient of confinement within the 
walls of a place ill provided in supplies, yielded 
. to the martial ardour of Eteocles, and repelled 
the assailants by a vigorous sally, iz which the 
most illustrious combatants fel) ~a Loth sides, 
and the wretched brothers pexished oy mutual 
wounds. The cause of the wer bumg removed 
by this horrid catastr.phe, thz Argives craved 
leave to bury their dead; Lut tue Thebans, ex- 
asperated against tne daring invaders of their 
country, returned them an answer, which, ac- 
cording to the principles of that age, bid defi- 
ance to the dictates of nature, and the preccpts 
of eligion. In this extremity, Adrastus, the 
only chief who survived the battle, had re- 
course to the humane piety of the Athenians, 
who, uninfluenced by motives of ambition or 
interest, took arms in defence of public justice, 
and compelled the cruel obstinacy of the The- 
bans to grant the last melancholy honours to 
the ashes of their deceased enemies. At the 
distance of ten years, the more fortunate sons 
of the chiefs who had fallen before the Theban 
walls, resented, with the fury of rcligious rage, 
the indignities that had becn impiously offered 
to the manes of their fathers. They again laid 
siege to the guilty city, destroyed the lives and 
property of many of the inhabitants, dragged 
many into captivity, and compelled the re- 


13 I might have said Æschylus whose “t Seven against 
Thebes” is founded on the history related in the text. But 
the name of Sophocles will bring to the mind of every reader 
of taste and humanity, the Gsdipus Tyrannus, and particu- 
larly the O&dipus Coloneus. 

14 Lysias Orat. Funeb. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


ices (these were the miserable sons of Qidi- | 


17 


mainder to acknowledge, as thcir king, the in- 
fant son of the injured Polynices.!5 

In their progress towards civilization, the 
Greeks perceived the advantage of political 
confederacy, before they became fully sensible 
of the benefits of civil union. The necessity 
of providing for defence against the assaults 
of foreign enemies, and the natural dictates 
of interest and ambition, unfolded the idea of a 
federal association between different communi- 
ties, before the members of any one state had 
been sufficiently united in the system of do- 
inestic policy. Various clusters of towns and 
villages, situate in winding valleys, divided vy 
lofty mountains, acknowledged the authority 
of kings or chieftains, who led forth their war- 
hike youth to glory and danger. Summoned 
to arins against foreign enemies, they readily 
flocked to the standard of their king, and re- 
ceived, with implicit submission, his commands 
in the field: but when no common cause roused 
their emulation, or excited their valour, the 
inhabitants of each little township aspired at 
independent jurisdiction, and the nomina! sub- 
jects of the same prince often terminated their 
differences by the decision of the sword.!6 

To cement such disorderly communities by 
laws and government, required an acquaint- 
ance with some more civilized people, among 
whom the effects of this happy unign visibly 
prevailed. Such an example fortunately oc- 
curred in the wise institutions and policy of 
the Cretans, which are represented not only 
as the most ancient, but the best regulations, 
that ever were éstablished j in any portion of the 
Grecian territory.!7 The celebrated island, 
which fable has dignified with the imaginary 
honour of giving birth to some of the gods!8 of 
Greece, possessed the real merit of communi- 
cating to that country many useful improve- 
ments. It had been early planted, as we had 
occasion already to observe, by a colony of 
Dorians. This colony, which received various’? 
accessions from Greece, enjoyed two advan- 
tages above their brethren on the continent, 
Their insular situation left them exposed, in- 
decd, to naval depredations, but delivered them 
from those fierce incursions by land, which 
often disfigured and desolated the. mother 
country. A favourable gale wafted the un- 
skilful mariners of antiquity from the shores 
of Crete to the capital of Egypt. The facility 
of conmunication thus introduced between the 
two countries an habitual intercourse, from 
which the barbarous islanders had nothing 
to lose, and every thing to gain. Rhadaman- 
thus,?9 and others of their early kings or chief- 
tains, whom interest or curiosity carried into 
Egypt and the East, appear to have had saga- 
city to observe, and dexterity to employ, several 
of the inventions and institutions of those 


15 Confer. Homer. l. iv. v. 337. et passim. Hesiod. Op 
et Di. Aischyl. Septem contra Thebas. Lysias Orat. Funeb 
Statins Thebaid. Apollod. |. iii. Diodor l. iv. Pausan. in 
Brotier. 

16 Thneydid. 1. i. Plut. in Theseo. 

17 Plat. de Leg. ctin Minoe. Aristot. Pol. l ii. 
Lycurg. 

‘18 Hesiod. Theog. 

19 Homer Diad. 1. xix. v 172, &e. 

20 Strabo, } x. p. 480 


Plut. in 


18 


powerful and civilized kingdoms, for the useful 
purpose of confirming their own authority, and 
bridling the fierce passions of their country- 
men. 

The elder Minosis peculiarly distinguished for 
promoting this beneficial design. The doubtful 
appellation of Son of the Ocean, which, per- 
haps, he might derive from his numerous voye 
ages, leaves it uncertain whether he was a na- 
tive Cretan, or a foreigner. In the countries 
which he had visited, he observed certain fami- 
lies invested, from time immemorial, with un- 
bounded honours, as the immediate vicegerents 
of the divinity. The uncultivated, but freeborn 
genius of Greece, always rejected this odious 
profanation; yet it seemed possible to Minos 
to acquire that respect for his office, which he 
would have vainly solicited for his person. We 
are not informed by what virtues, civil or mili- 
tary, he acquired, before the establishment of 
his laws, an extraordinary influence among the 
Cretans. But as slaves multipled to such aj 
degree in the island during his reign, that agri- 
culture and the mechanic arts were exercised 
by them alone, there is reason to conjecture 
that he had been extremely successful in war 
against his neighbours, and no less equitable 
in dividing the booty among the various Cretan 
tribes who followed the fortune of his arms. 
However this may be, it appears from the 
general evidence of antiquity, that Minos had | 
address to persuade men, prone to wonder and | 
to believe, among whom, whatever dazzled the 
imagination announced the presence of a di- 
vinity. that their favourite hero was admitted 
to the familiarity of the gods.! From them he | 
pretended to derive an invaluable system of 

| 


laws, which he was enjoined to engrave on 
tables of brass. From Jupiter he received the 
regal sceptre, which entitled him to administer 
these laws, but obliged him to respect them. 
By command of the same god, he founded the 
cities of Cnossus. Cydonia, and Phestus, and 
united the distant subjects of his wide-extended 
domain, by such regulations as served alike to 
support the authority of the prince, and to 
maintain the rights of the people.? 

The beautiful arrangement of this political 
edifice struck the discerning ere of Theseus. 
the illustrious son of Ægeus, king of 
1234 Athens. in his celebrated expedition to 

` Crete, during the reign of the second 
Minos. The last-mentioned prince joined the 
splendour of military renown to the famed 
wisdom of his revered ancestor. His maritime 
force exceeded the united strength of his neigh- 
bours; he subdued several of the circumjacent 
isles; and while he permitted his own subjects 
to ravage the coasts of Greece, under pretence 
of lawful war, he effectually checked the pirati- 
cal depredations of the Carians. Lycians. and 
Pheenicians, which had hitherto proved so fre- 
quent and so destructive. Athens experienced 
the effects of his power and ambition. and re- 
luctantly submitted to a disgraceful tribute of 


ATC. 


I Aio; peyarsyu cagsotzs. Odyss. l. xix. v. 179. which 
Horace translates, 
Jovis arcanis Minos admissus. L. i. Ode 28. 


2 Strabo, l. x. p. 450. Plato in Minoe. Diod. l. v. 
3 Thucydid. l. i. 


Å [Ă— am c 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| forth free from a contribution equally cruel and 


[Cuar 


seven youths, and as many virgins,’ which we 
cruelly exacted by a nation who subsisted t 
the labour of slaves. The tributary captive 
were drawn by lot from the body of the people 
who treinbled at the annual return of the Cre- 
tan vessel. Discontents arose against the go- 
vernment of “geus, who seemed to bear the 
indignity with too much tameness; when his 
heroic son, with a patriotism congenial to his 
character, generously offered his life in the 
service of his country. The fame of Theseus 
had already reached the ears of Minos, who 
respected his virtues; and this respect was con- 
verted into admiration, on beholding the Athe- 
nian prince a voluntary captive. Minos treated? 
him with the affectionate kindness of ancient 
hospitality; gave him his daughter Ariadne 1 
marriage; and declared the Athenians thence- 


ignominious. Theseus reaped great glory fro 
this transaction. The vessel, in which h 
sailed, continued to be annually sent,-for more 
than eight centuries afterwards, to return 
thanks to Apollo, in his favourite island of, 
Dellos; and the fortunate voyage to Crete wa 
celebrated by sacrifices, and other ceremonie 
handed down to the latest times of the Athenian 
republic.? : 

Many extraordinary circumstances, inventé 
by the poets, disfigure events, which are othe 
wise sufficiently authenticated. The unnatur 
amours of the abominable Pasiphae, and 
bloody feasts of the monstrous Minotaur,’ havi 
been faithfully transcribed, from one age to 
another, in the tiresome compilations of inju- 
dicious mythologists; but it seems not to have 
occurred to those writers, that the expedition to 
Crete laid the foundation of the improvements 
afterwards introduced by Theseus into the 
Athenian government. The institutions and 
manners of that island presented a picture of 
more regular composition. and more harmoni- 
ous colouring. than could be seen in any part 
of the Grecian continent. Various societies 
of freemen, all united under one government, 
all equal among themselves, and all served by 
slaves; no private property in land; the men 
eating at public tables, and the families sub- 
sisting from the common stock; the youth 
regularly trained to the gymnastic exercises, 
navigation. and war; a severe morality enforced 
by law; honour the reward of age and merit; 
and the whole community acknowledging the 
prerogative of a hereditary king, who derived 
his authority from Jupiter, but who was no 
longer entitled to the divine protection than he 
continued to observe justice, and to maintain 
the unalienable privileges of his subjects.” Im- 
pressed with the salutary institutions which he 


= 


4 Odyss. l. xi. v. 320. et Virgil, Æn. 6. 
Tum pendere penas 
Cecropid® jussi, miserum! septena quotannis 
Corpora natorum. š 
5 Ipse suum Theseus pro caris corpus Athenis 
Projicere optavit.— Catullus. 


6 Plato. Phædo. 7 Plut in Theseo. 
8 Hic crudelis amor tauri, suppostaque farto 
Pasiphae, &c. 


The judicious Virgil places these strange stories in the 
sculptured porch of an ancient temple. 
9 Aristot. Polit. 1. it. c. 9, &c. Strabo, ibid. Plato de leg. 


L] 


beheld in this flourishing island, T'heseus, upon j 


his accession to the throne of his father, was 
ambitious to introduce them into his native 
country. The rudeness of the Athenians, in- 
deed, admitted not the introduction of written 
laws. But the scattered villages of Attica 
were persuaded to embrace the regulations of 
the capital;!0 to unite in common ceremonies 
of religion; to acknowledge the reciprocal obli- 
gations of subjects; and, while they asserted 
the right of citizens, to respect, during peace and 
war, the sacred prerogative of royal majesty. 

The improvements in domestic policy, thus 
introduced into Attica by the example of Crete, 
and the wisdom of Theseus, were gradually 
adopted by the neighbouring provinces.!!_ At 
the commencement of the Trojan war, all the 
Grecian states had embraced one uniform sys- 
tem of government, uniting the independent 
spirit of European freedom with the respectful 
veneration of Egyptian and Asiatic supersti- 
tion.12 This singular frame of policy, com- 
posed of materials seemingly incapable of al- 
hance, was peculiarly well adapted to great and 
generous undertakings; and unless the divine, 
though limited authority of kings, had fortiiied 
the other institutions which served to tame the 
ferocity of the Greeks, there is reason to doubt 
whether their leaders could have engaged above 
a hundred thousand stubborn barbarians to un- 
dertake a distant and difficult enterprise, much 
less have detained their reluctant impatience 
during ten years in the siege of Troy. 

Before we examine the causes and incidents 
of this celebrated siege, to which the exploits 
hitherto related seem but unworthy preludes, 
it may be proper to take a short view of the 
strength and resources of the two nations, who 
were eager to shock in a conflict, that totally de- 
stroyed the one, and proved extremely ruinous 
to the other. Exclusive of the provinces of 
Epirus and Macedonia, which long remained 
barbarous and uncultivated, the continental 
possessions of the Greeks were nearly equal 
to Scotland in extent, marked .with still bolder 
features, aud blessed with a warmer sun. In 
its length; the whole country is almost equally 
s divided by two opposite gulfs, compressing 
> between them a mountainous neck of land, to 
the breadth of only five miles, into the penin- 
sula of Peloponnesus, and the territory extend- 
ing northwards, from the extremity of the Co- 
rinthian isthmus to the southern frontier of 
Macedonia.'3 The Peloponnesns, a- hundred 
and sixty miles in length, and scarcely one 
hundred in breadth, is every where intersected 
by mountains, particularly the towering ridges 
of Zarex and Taygetus. During the flourish- 
ing ages of Grecce, this small peninsula con- 
tamed seven independent communities, of un- 
equal power and fame, which ranked in the 
following order: The comparatively large, and 
highly diversified territory of Laconia; the 
fruitful vale of Argos; the extensive coast of 
Achaia; the narrow but commercial isthmus 
of Corinth; the central and mountainous re- 
gion of Arcadia; together with the more level 


10 Thucydid. l. ii. Plut. in Thesco. 
11 Dionys. Halae. l. v. 


12 Tomer passim. 
13 Strabo, l. vii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


19 


countries of Elis and Messinia, which are 
throughout better adapted to tillage than any 
other provinces of the Peloponnesus,!4 The 
Grecian possessions beyond the Corinthian 
isthmus were more considerable, extending 
above two hundred miles from east to west, 
and one hundred and fifty from north to south. 
They were naturally divided, by the long and 
intricate ridges of Olympus, Pindus, Oeta, and 
Ossa, into nine separate provinces; which, 
during the celebrated ages of Grecian freedom, 
were occupied by nine independent republics, 
They comprehended the extensive and fertile 
plains of Thessaly and Beotia, both of which 
were, in early times, much exposed to inunda- 
tions; and the latter, abounding in subterra- 
nean caverns, was peculiarly subject to earth- 
quakes; the less fertile, but more secure terri- 
tory of Attica; the western provinces of AXtolia 
and Acarnania, encompassed on one side by 
dangerous seas, and confined on the other by 
almost impassable mountains; and the four 
small rocky districts of Phocis, Doris, Locris, 
and Megara.!5 

It has been observed, that these names and 
divisions, which remained to the latest times, 
are pretty accurately marked by Homer, whose 
poems continued, through succeeding ages, to 
be the approved standard and legal code, to 
which neighbouring communities appealed, in 
adjusting their disputed boundaries.!6 This 
observation, however, must be qualified chiefly 
by two exceptions. During the Trojan war, 
the extensive province of Thessaly sent forth 
above a fourth part of the whole Grecian 
strength, and was divided among many war- 
like leaders. It might naturally be expected, 
while agriculture and pasturage were the 
principal occupations subservient to human 
life, that a country, abounding in plains and 
meadows, should excel in population and in 
power.!7 When commerce, navigation, and 
the mechanic arts enriched and adorned the 
middle and southern divisions of Greece, the 
northern district of Thessaly lost its ancient 
pre-eminence. The second exception arose 
from the extensive power of the house of Pe- 
lops, which, as already mentioned, had, by for- 
tunate marriages and rich successions, acquired 
dominion over the northern and eastern parts 
of the Peloponnesus, formerly containing seve- 
ral independent principalities, and, after the 
misfortunes of Agamemnon and his family, 
again divided into the immortal republics of 
Sparta, Argos, Corinth, and Achaia. 

From this general view of the country, it 
will not appear remarkable, that, in an age 
when every able-bodied man was a soldier, 
Greece should have raised an army of a hun- 
dred and two thousand men. The Acarna- 
nians alone, for reasons unknown, sent no 
forces to Troy. But the continent was assisted 
by the generous efforts of Crete, of Rhodes, 
and of many smaller islands, which were sub- 
ject to their respective princes, or governed by 
the wide-extended dominion of Agamemnon. 
The vessels collected sor transporting these 


14 Strabo, ibid. et Pausan. Messen. 
15 Strabo, |. vii. 
17 Plato in Menon. 


16 Plut. in Solon. 


20 HISTOR OF GREECE. 


forces to Asia amounted to twelve hundred 
sail. They were equipped at little expense. 
and built with little ingenuity, moved by only 
one bank of oars, and entirely unprovided with 
decks or anchors. Their complement varied 
in different vessels ; some contained a hundred 
and twenty, others only fifty men, who appear 
to have been equally acquainted with the mili- 
tary art, as practised in that remote age, and 
with the rude simplicity of ancient navigation.! 


The celebrated kingdom of Priam, against | gods.8 


horses of a superior breed. His successor 
Tros, communicated his name to the ter 
ritory, which was often called Troas, and to 
the celebrated city Ilion, which his son Nus, 
having removed his residence from the moun- 
tain, built on the adjoining plain. Laomedon, 
the successor of Ilus, fortified the town of 
Ilion, or Troy, with walls of such uncommon 
strength, that, in the language and belief of 
the times, they were deemed the work of the 
Whether he defrauded his supposed 


which this armanent was directed, occupied | auxiliaries of their promised rewards and sacri- 
the eastern banks of the Hellespont, the south- | fices, or supplied the expense of this under- 


ern coast of the Propontis, and the northern 
shores of the Ægean. From the river Esepus 
to the promontory of Lectum, the Trojan do- 
minions extended in Jengih two hundred miles; 
but their breadth was far less considerable, be- 
ing irregularly compressed between three seas, 
and the lofty ridges of mount Ida. This de- 
lightful and picturesque country, which excelled 
Greece in fruitfulness of soil and softness of 
climate,? was distinguished by the epithet of 
Hellespontian, from the large inland province, 
which bore the common name of Phrygia.’ 
The Lesser, or Hellespontian Phrygia, was 
planted, according to a tradition, by a Grecian 
colony, about two hundred years before the 
Trojan war. The similarity of religion, lan- 
guage, and manners, sufficiently justified that 
opinion, and seems to have induced the most 
diligent inquirers of antiquity to regard not 
only the Trojans, but the Lycians and Pam- 
phylians, as scattered branches of the Hellenic 
nation,! which distance of place had gradually 
cut of from all conmunication with the trunk. 
The Asiatic Greeks were exposed to none of 
those unfavourable cirumstances already men- 
tioned, which long retarded the improvement 
of their brethren in Europe. The fertile and 
extensive plains of Asia offered them tne ma- 
terials of more powerful kingdoms than Greece 
could afford; and, instead of being harassed 
and endangered by the continual incursions of 
northern savages, they enjoyed the vicinity of 
the Phrygians and Lydians, nations described 
as flourishing in wealth and peace from the re- 
motest antiquity. From the prevalence of 
the Grecian language and customs on the one 
hand, and the name of the country on the 
other, it is not unreasonable to suppose, that 
the Trojans were a mingled race of Greeks 
and Phrygians, collected by Dardanus, ances- 
tor fifth in degree to old Priam. 

This adventurer, whose parentage Homer 
leaves uncertain, by calling him son of Jupiter,® 
founded a city on one of the many western 
branches of mount Ida, commanding a beau- 
tiful and fertile plain, and watered by the 
immortal rivers Simois and Scamander.’ 
The new settlement flourished under his son, 
the wealthy Erichthonius, who, by the judi- 
cious management of his mares and stallions, 
supplied the neighbouring kingdoms with 


1 Thucydid. ibid. Homer, passim. 

2 Hippocrat. de Loc. 

4 Herodot. |. vii. Strabo, l. xiv. 

5 Herodot. 1. i. Dionys. Halic. 1. i. Suidas in voc. 
Avvaxog. 

6 Diad, xx v. 215. x 

7 Ibid. xx. v. 216, &c. Strabo lziin 


3 Strabo, |. xiii. 


taking by despoiling their sacred shrines, it is 
certain that the guilt of Laomedon was believ- 
ed to entail calamity on his unhappy descend- 
ants. 

His son Priam, however, long enjoyed the 
deceitful gifts of fortune, before he was over- 
taken by the vengeance of heaven. Having 
attained old age in the undisturbed possession 
of a throne, he was surrounded by a numerous 
and flourishing family, beloved by his subjects, 
and respected by his neighbours. Yet this 
amiable, but too indulgent prince, was destined 
to feel the sharpest pangs of human misery. 

Hereditary feuds subsisted between the an- 
cestors of Priam and those of Agamemnon, 
when the latter quitted their establishments in 
Asia, to seek new settlements in Greece. 
insult offered to Ganymede. a beautiful Trojan 
youth, by the brutal fury of Tantalus.? was re- 
torted on Menelaus, the fourth in descent from 
this infamous prince, by the rape and detention 
of his queen, the celebrated Helen. Paris, the 
ill-fated son of Priam, was the author of this 
new injury. But resentment for the wrongs 
of his house formed not the only motive which 
engaged the youthful levity of Paris to disho- 
nour the sister-in-law of Agamemnon. Helen 
was the daughter of Tyndareus, king of Sparta. 
The illustrious honours of her family were 
adorned by the generous magnanimity of her 
brothers, Castor and Polydeuces, whose ex- 
ploits shone conspicuous in al] the military ex- 
peditions of that gallant age. But the native 
lustre of Helen needed not the aid of foreign 
ornament. Even in the tender age of child- 
hood, her opening charms had inflamed the 
heart of Theseus.!0 the most admired and the 
most virtuous of the Grecian chiefs. The 
fame of her beauty increased with her ripening 
age, and her person became an object of eager 
contention among those who, by birth or merit, 
were entitled to aspire at the invaluable prize. 
Tyndareus, solicitous to prevent the violence 
of a second lover (for, agreeably to the man- 
ners of his age, Theseus had carried her off by 
force,) bound the various suitors by an oath to 
defend the honour of his daughter, and to se- 
cure the possession of her charms to the man 
who should be honoured with her choice.!! 
The princely mien and insinuatmg manners 
ee 

& Homer, Iliad, xx. v. 216, &e. Strabo, Ixiii. 

9 It has been observed, that the story of Tantalus, father 
of Pelops, was probablythe invention of a later age. Itis 
certain that, whatever might prevail in Phrygia, the unna- 
tural passion, which disgraced the later times of Greece, 
was unknown in that country during the heroic ages 


Natal. Com. l. ix. c. 13. f b 
10 Plut in Theseo 11 Thucydid. 1. i. c. 9. 


| CHae. » 


The 


; 


L] 


of Menelaus, were preferred to the more solid 
qualities of his numerous competitors. Hav- 
ing married the heiress of Tyndareus, he suc- 
ceeded, in her right, to the Spartan throne.!? 
The graceful pair had not long enjoyed the 
honours of royalty, and the sweets of conjugal 
union, when their happiness was interrupted by 
the arrival of the son of Priam, the handsomest 
man of his age, and singularly adorned with 
the frivolous accomplishments that often cap- 
tivate the weakness of a female mind. Though 
a soldier of no great renown, Paris had strongly 
imbibed the romantic spirit of gallantry which 
prevailed!3 in the heroic ages, and was distin- 
guished by an ardent passion for beauty, which, 
notwithstanding the general softness of his 
unwarlike character, prompted him to brave 
every danger in pursuit of his favourite ob- 
ject. Animated by the hope of beholding the 
inimitable model of what he most adored, he 
seized the opportunity afforded him by a voy- 
age of Menelaus into Crete, visited the domi- 
nions of his hereditary enemies, and solicited 
the rights of hospitality at the Spartan court. 

His person, his accomplishments, his address, 
and still more the voluntary hardships which 
he had endured for her sake, seduced the incon- 
stant affections of the Grecian queen. Ena- 
moured of the elegant stranger, she abandoned 
her country and her husband, and having trans- 
ported her most valuable treasure within the 
Trojan walls, defied the resentment of Greece, 
and the vengeance of heaven. 

It was now tle time for Menelaus to crave 
the stipulated assistance of his ancient rivals. 
His demand was enforced by the authority of 
Agamemnon.!4 At the summons of the two 
brothers, the confederates assembled at Ægium, 
the capital of Achila; confirmed the obliga- 
tion of their former promise; settled the pro- 
portion of troops to be raised by each prince; 
determined the time and place of their de- 
parture; and named Agamemnon, the most 
powerful among them, to the chief command, 
in an expedition which so deeply concerned 
the honour of his family. 

Aulis, a sea port of Bæotia, was appointed 
for the place of rendezvous and embarkation.!5 
Before the whole armament sailed from thence, 
Ulysses king of Ithaca, and, what may seem 
extraordinary, the injured Menelaus, undertook 
a solemn embassy to Troy, in order to demand 
restitution and reparation ; but returned highly 
disgusted with their reception and treatment. 
Some members of the Trojan council had the 
barbarity to propose putting them to death. 
Their just indignation increased the warlike 
ardour of their associates. But contrary winds 
long retarded their departure. The Trojans 
had time to strengthen their ramparts, to col- 
lect arms and provisions, and to summon the 
assistance of their distant allies. The martial 


12 Pausan. Lacon. 

13 Perseus had carried off the African Medusa; Jason, 
Medea of Colchis; ‘Theseus, the Amazon Antiope; Her- 
cules, Megara, Iole, Deaneira, &e. The historical poets of 
the heroic ages might have said, with Ariosto, 

Le donne, i cavelier, Parme, gli amori, 
Le eortesie, Paudaci imprese io canto. 
14 Thucydid. 1. i. c. 9. 
15 Hesiod, Oper. et Dies. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


21 
spirit of the age, together with a sense of com- 
mon danger, brought many powerful auxilia- 
ries to Priam. His cause was defended by the 
hardy mountaineers who covered the back of 
his kingdom; by the Carians, Lycians, and 
other nations of Asia Minor, extending from 
the mouth of the river Halys to the southern 
extremity of Cilicia; and by the Pelasgi, Thra- 
cians, and Peonians, fierce barbarians who in- 
habited the European side of the Hellespont 
and Propontis, Confiding, however, rather in 
their domestic strength, than in foreign assist- 
ance, the Trojans determined to defend their 
native shores against hostile invasion. The de- 
barkation of the Greeks was purchased by much 
blood. Having effected a descent, they encamp- 
ed on the Trojan plains, but lost the only oppor- 
tunity which they enjoyed during many years, 
of crushing at once the power of their enemies; 
who immediately shut themselves up within 
their impenetrable walls, leaving the city open 
only on the side of mount Ida, from which 
they received corn, cattle, and other necessary 
supplies. 

Agamemnon, as there was reason to expect 
from the manners of his age, had been more 
industrious in collecting a great army, than pro- 
vident in contriving means by which it might 
keep the field. The provisions, transported 
from Greece, were speedily consumed, while 
the operations of the siege promised little hope 
of success, the Greeks being unacquainted with 
any military engines fitted to make an impres- 
sion on the Trojan walls. With such a nume- 
rous army, they might have converted the siege 
into a blockade; but scarcity of supplies com- 
pelled the greater part of them, to quit the 
camp. The resource of ravaging the adjacent 
country soon exhausted itself. Many betook 
themselves to cultivating the rich vales of the 
Chersonesus, wliose industrious inhabitants had 
recently been expelled, or destroyed, by the 
fierce incursions of the barbarous Thracians.!6 
Others had recourse to piracy, scoured the 
neighbouring seas, ravaged the unprotected 
coasts of the Hellespont and Ægean, and plun- 
dered or demolished such unfortified places as 
acknowledged the dominion, or assisted the 
arms of Troy.” These ravages excited the 
rage of the Asiatics, and rendered them more 
hearty in the cause of their confederates. In 
this manner nine summers and winters elapsed, 
without affording the nearer prospect of a de- 
cision to the contest; but,in the tenth year of 
the war, the seeming misfortunes of the Greeks 
precipitated the downfal of the proud city of 
Priam. A dreadful pestilence invaded the camp 
of the besiegers, and long continued to rage 
with unabating fury. ‘This calamity was fol- 
lowed by the well-known quarrel betwcen Aga- 
memnon and Achilles, which deprived the Gre- 
clan army of its principal strength and orna- 
ment. The Trojans derived new spirits from 
the misfortunes of their enemies; they ventured 
to abandon the protection of their walls, boldly 
assailed the Grecian camp, and risked several 
engagements, in most of which they were vic- 
torious. In the last of these, the beloved friend 


16 Thucydid.1. i. 17 Homer, passim. 


we 
of Achilles was slain by the arm of Hector, the 
bravest and most generous of the Trojan race. 
This event, which was infinitely more dreadful 
than death to the affectionate ardour of the 
Grecian chief, stifled his hitherto inexorable re- 
sentment against the proud tyranny of Aga- 
memnon. His return to the camp restored the 
declining fortune of the Greeks; and the indig- 
nant fury of his rage was quenched in the de- 
tested blood of Hector, whose patriotic valour 
had long been the firmest bulwark of his father’s 
kingdom. The destruction of Troy! soon fol- 
lowed the death of her darling hero. The city, 
whether taken by storm or by surprise, was set 
on fire during night; most of the citizens pe- 
rished by the sword, or were dragged into cap- 
tivity ; and only a miserable remnant escaped 
through the confused horror of raging flames 
and expiring kinsmen. 

The burning of Troy happened eleven hun- 
dred and eighty-four years before the christian 
era. Neither the city nor territory ever assum- 
ed in any succeeding age, the dignity of inde- 
pendent government.” The sea-coast was plant- 
ed, eighty years after the Trojan war, by new 
colonies from Greece; and the inland parts sub- 
mitted to the growing power of the Lydians, 
whose arms overspread and conquered all the 
finest provinces of lesser Asia.? 

The Greeks had recovered possession of the 


> 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


admired beauty of Helen; they had taken com- 
plete vengeance on the family and? nation of 
her unhappy seducer; but the misfortunes, 
which were the natural consequence of the 
Trojan expedition, left them little reason to 
boast of their victory. Of five Boeotian com- 
manders, only one remained, and the siege had 
been proportionably fatal to the leaders of other 
tribes, as well as to their warlike followers. 
Those who lived to divide the rich spoils of 
Troy, were impatient to set sail with their 
newly-acquired treasure, notwithstanding the 
threatening appearance of the skies. Many of 
them perished by shipwreck; the rest were long 
tossed on unknown seas; and when they ex- 
pected to find in their native country the end 
of their calamities, they were exposed to suffer 
greater calamities there, than any which they 
had yet endured. The thrones of several of 
the absent princes had been usurped by violence 
and ambition; the lands of various communi- 
ties had been occupied by the invasion of hos- 
tile tribes: even the least unfortunate of those 
adventurers found their domains uncultivated, 


or their territories laid waste; their families * 


torn by discord, or their cities shaken by sedi- 
tion. And thus the most celebrated enterprise 
of combined Greece tended to plunge that de- 
lightful and once happy country into barbarism 
and misery.® 


CHAPTER II. 


Religion—Government—Arts—Manners, and Character. 


HE ancient Greeks had strongly imbibed | nity, by an unfortunate abuse of power, while 


an opinion, that the country in which they 
lived was peculiarly favourable to the dignity 
of human nature. The voluptuous climates of 
Asia produced invention and ingenuity, but 
softened the tempers of men into a fitness for 
servitude. The rigorous severity of European 
skies gave strength and agility to the limbs, 
and hardy boldness to the mind, but chilled 
the fancy, and benumbed the finer feelings of 
the soul. The inhabitants of the east and south 
were degraded below the condition of huma- 


1 We shonld probably know something more of the his- 
tory of the Trojan war, if the works of Pisander remained. 
Macrobius, in speaking of the plagiarisms of the Romans 
from Greek writers, has the following passage: “ Que Vir- 
gilius traxit a Grecis, dicturumne me putetis, que vulyo 
nota sunt? . . . vel quod eversionem Troje cum Sinone 
suo et eqno ligneo, ceterisque omnibus, que librum secun- 
dum facinnt, a Pisandro pene ad verbum Cor npon qui 
inter Græcos poetas eminct,” &c. Macrob. l. v. c. 

2 [have carefully examined the evidence given by Bo- 
ehart (Epist. num Æneas unquam fnit in Italia,) and by 
Mr. Wood (Essay on the original Genius of Homer,) to 
prove that the descendants of Æneas reigned in Troy. But 
notwithstanding the learned ingenuity ofa profound, and 
the plausible criticism of an elegant scholar, the matter 
seems still too doubtful to warrant contradicting the popular 
opinion. 

3 Herod. 1.ii. Thucyd.1.i. Justin, l. xviii. Strabo, |. iii. 

4 I dwell not on a subject w hich has been handled by 
the great masters of the passions. See Virgil: 

Forsitan ct Priami fuerint que fata reqniras, &e. 


the turbulent sons of the north and west were 
incapable, from ignorance and indocility, of 
submitting to any regular system of govern- 
ment. The Greeks alone, possessing an inter- 
mediate situation between the extremes of cold 
and heat, united courage and capacity; tem- 
pered the stern and manly, with the gentler vir- 
tues; and enjoyed the double advantage of 
liberty and laws.® 

This splendid observation is too flattering to 
the dictates of national vanity to be hastily 
adopted by a cautious inquirer into truth, who 
will be apt to ascribe the superior lustre of 
Grecian manners, rather to the elegant imagi- 
nation of authors, than to the intrinsic merit of 
their subject. Yetit must be acknowledged, 
several circumstances would lead us to believe, 
that the great poet to whom we owe our prin- 
cipal information concerning the ancient state of 
Greece, copied from nature only. The majesty 
of Virgil, the splendour of Tasso, and the sub- 
limity of Milton, are not sufficient to conceal 
an effort in those noble writers to maintain the 
tone which they have assumed; a desire to em- 
bellish the manners which they describe; an 


Thucyd. l. i. p. 9. 
Isocrat. Govern. Athen 


5 Plato de Leg. I. iii. 
6 Aristot. Politic. l. vii. c. 7. 
Pancgyric. et Panathen 


` 
E 


L| 


ambition to elevate and to adorn their poems 
by the use of a marvellous machinery, which 
had notits foundation in the experience, and 
(as to Virgil and Tasso) scarcely in the belief 
of their own age. In Homer there is neithcr 
embellishment, nor effort, nor disguise of any 
kind; he relates.what he has seen and heard 
with unaffccted simplicity ; his ideas and sen- 
timents are not only clothed in the graces of 
poetry, but arrayed in the charms of truth; and 
an amazing diversity of characters, preserving 
amidst innumcrable shades of discrimination a 
general air of resemblance, distinguish the Iliad 
and Odyssey above other poctical compositions, 
and prove them to have been copied, not from 
the limited combinations of human invention, 
but from the wide variety of impressions in the 
rich store-house of nature. In some descrip- 
tive parts of his poem, Homer doubtless yielded 
to the pleasing dictates of his inimitable fancy; 
but it seems plain from intcrnal cvidence only, 
that he delineates with minute accuracy the 
geography, mythology, history, and manners 
of Greece; and that his observations concern- 
ing all these subjects are perfectly agreeable to 
the opinions and belief which universally pre- 
vailed among his countrymen. If this matter 
required the aid of foreign evidence, it might 
be fully confirmed by the testimony of the 
Greek historians, who support in every in- 
stance the veracity of the poet; asserting not 
only the authenticity of the facts which he re- 
lates, but the influence of the causes to which 
he ascribes them.’ 

It may be observed, however, by those who 
would repress the ebullitions of Grecian vanity, 
that admitting the poems of Homer as com- 
plete evidence concerning the ancient state of 
his country, all the advantage that could follow 
from this supposition is, that the Greeks have 
been accurately described at an earlier period 
of their society than most other nations; but 
the silence of those nations cannot reasonably 
be interpreted as a proof of their inferiority to 
the Greeks in manners or in policy. The mas- 
terly description of a philosophic historian has 
rescued the antiquities of one other people from 
oblivion; and the generous spirit of their sim- 
ple but manly institutions, as painted by his ex- 
pressive pencil, is scarcely disgraced by a com- 
parison with the boasted customs of the heroic 
ages. 

In the preference of military glory to all other 
advantages, in the freedom of debate in the 
public assemblies, and inthe protection afford- 
ed to the rights and liberties of the meanest citi- 


7 The nature and transactions of the gods, which justly 
shock the feelings of the modern rcader, are perfectly con- 
formable to the belief of the Greeks. The continual inter- 
position of thesc cthereal beings in the affairs of human life, 
is justified by Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, and all 
succceding writers. Herodotus, |. i. c. 131. explains the 
reagon why the Persians erected neither temples, nor im- 
ages, nor altars, by saying, oT: ovx avGewroguens evomsrny 
Tous souc, xxtxze0 ot EAAyves esvas, “because they did 
not, hke as the Grecks, believe the gods to partake of a 
human nature, or form.” That the gods often appeared in 
a human shape, is taken for granted by Pausanias in Ar- 
cad. and Plutarch, de Musica. The same opinion was 
firmly maintained by Julian, an orthodox pagan, in a later 
age. See Gibbon, vol. II. Many instances will occur in 
the following history, to prove the cxact conformity of Ho- 
mer’s descriptions to the general belief of his country. 


HISTORY @F GREECE. 


23 


zen, the treatise of Tacitus will equally apply 
to the Germans and to the Greeks. But there 
is one material circumstance wanting in the 
German which adds peculiar beauty to the 
Grecian character. Among the rude inhabit- 
ants of ancient Germany, the. oflices of priest 
and king were not united in the same person. 
The rites of religion were administered by a 
particular order of men, who might abuse the 
superstitious fears of the multitude to promote 
their own selfish designs; and the dread of su- 
perior powers, though sometimes employed to 
enforce the dictates of naturc, and to promote 
the operations of government, might also, with 
equal success, be employed to weaken the im- 
pressions of the one, and to resist the authority 
of the othcr. Besides this unfavourable circum- 
stance, the superstition of the Germans was of 
a dark and gloomy kind, little connected with 
the ordinary duties of society, recommending 
principally the practice of courage, the only 
virtue which there was not any occasion to re- 
commend; and promising as the reward of 
what was deemed thc highest excellence in life, 
the enjoyment of an infamous paradise of im- 
mortal drunkenness after death.8 

The mythology of the Greeks was of a more 
agreeable, and of a far more useful nature. The 
sceptre, which denoted the connection of civil 
power with sacred protection, was conferred on 
those who, while they continued the humble 
ministers of the gods, werc appointed to be the 
chief, but accountable guardians of the pcople.® 
The same voice that summoned the warriors to 
arms, or that decided, in time of peace, their do- 
mestic contentions, conducted the order of their 
religious worship, and presided in the prayers 
and hymns addressed to the divinity. These 
prayers and hymns, together with the import- 
ant rite of sacrifice (which likewise was pcr- 
formed by royal hands,) formed the ceremonial 
part of the Grecian religion. The moral was 
far more extensive, including the principal 
offices of life, and the noblest virtues of the 
mind. The useful quality of courage was pe- 
culiarly acceptable to the stern god of war; bu 
the virtues of charity and hospitality were s 
more pleasing to the morc amiable divinities. 
The submission of subjects to their prince, the 
duty of a prince to preserve inviolate the right 
of his subjects,!! the obedience of children to 
their parents,!? the rcspeet of the young for the 
aged, the sacred laws of truth, justicc, honour, 
and decency, were inculcated and maintained 
by the awful authority of religion. Even the 
most ordinary transactions of private life were 
consecrated by the piety of the Greeks. They 
ventured not to undertake a voyage or a jour- 
ney, without soliciting the propitious aid of their 
heavenly protectors. Every meal (and there 


8 Tacit. dc Morib. German. 
pire. 
Q Iesueves rawy. 
10 meos yre Dios shorty wravTss 
Eesvos TE TTwHOb TE 
Atl strangers and beggars come from Jove. 
Odyss. xiv. 56. 


Mr. Gibbon’s Roman Em 


11 Tliad, xvi. v. 385. 

12 It is not humanity, but the fear of the gods, that is 
mentioned as the reason by Telemachus for not sending 
away his mother. Odyss. 2. 


24 


were three! in a day) was accompanied with 
a sacrifice and libation. The common forms of 
politeness, the customary dities of civility, 
were not decided by the varying taste of indi- 
viduals, but defined by the precise voice of the 
gods.? 

It would have served little purpose to oppose 
salutary laws to the capricious license of bar- 
barians, without guarding those laws by very 
powerful sanctions. Whether these sanctions 
be founded on opinion or on fact, is, with re- 
spect to their influence on the mind, a matter 
of little moment. / The dread vengeance of 
imaginary powers may be equally effectual 
with the fear of the axe and halter. The cer- 
tainty of this vengeance was firmly established 
in the Grecian creed; and its operation was 
supposed to be so immediate and palpable, that 
it was impossible for the inattention of men to 
overlook, or for their address to elude its 
force.3) The daring violations of the sacred 
law? were speedily overtaken by manifest marks 
of the Divine displeasure. “ The insolence and 
violence of the corrupted youths,” says Ho- 
mer,> “cried aloud to heaven, whose decrees 
wete soon executed by the avenging hands of 
Ulysses.” The judgments inflicted on guilty 
communities were so familiar to the minds of 
men, that the poet introduces them by way of 
similies;° and it is evident from his writings 
throughout, that every important event, pros- 
perous or adverse, which happened either to 
individuals or to nations, appeared to the pious 
resignation of the Greeks, the reward of their 
religion and virtue, or the punishment of their 
irreligion and vice.” The merit of the father 
was often acknowledged in the protection of 
the son; and the crimes of a guilty progenitor 
were often visited on his descendants to the 
thira and fourth generation.§ 


? 

1 Agicroy Seszvov So0706. 

2 The king of the Phzacians does not detain Ulysses 
fonger than he chooses, lest he should offend the gods, 
Odyss. viii. See also the behaviour of Ulysses and Tele- 
machus, in the cottage of Eumzus, Odyss. xiv. and xvi. 

3 See the first book of Hesiod’s poem “ Of Works and 
Days,” throughout: and particular!y 

Q Isery ov d2xous duxns unde voesv ocearas, from v. 110 
to v. 242: and again, 

Tovde yze avigwworrs voxov deerxze Kooyswy, from v. 
274 to v. 291. 

4 @eusirrzs A105, Homer, passim. 5 Odyss. 1. 

6 See a beautiful example of this, Uiad, xvi. v. 385. The 
expression of Hesiod is remarkable: 

Tlzvrz sdwv Atos OGÉZAUIŞ, LZE wavTe VONTZŞ 
Kus vu rade xixe sheduos, exsdsgxerzs, &e. 


“The eye of Jove, that beholds all, and observes all, looks 
upon these transactions, when he pleases; nor does it 
escupe his notice what kind of justice is rendered in the 
City.” 

7 The success of the Greeks against Troy proves both 
parts of the proposition. All the misfortunes of the Grecian 
chiefs were inflicted as punishments. Oilean Ajax was 
slain for his presumption, by Neptune (Odyss. iv.;) and 
Ajax, the son of Telamon, was a memorable example of 
the same vice. When Minerva offered him her assistance, 
he desired her to go to others, for the enemy would never 
attempt to penetrate where Ajax fought. Before his de- 
parture for Trey, Telamon prayed that the gods would 

* give valour to his son; when the proud son aspiring above 
the condition of humanity, said, That any man might be 
brave and victorious by the assistance of the gods; for his 
nart, he expected to obtain glory by his own merit; the 
gods punished him with madness, and, after exposing him 
to the ridicule of his enemies, made him fall by his own 
hands. See the Ajax of Sophocles, from v. 760 to v. 800. 

8 Minerva protected Telemachus on account of his 
father’s merit. Odys. passim. The misfortunes of the 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[CHar. 


These observations are confirmed, not only 
by the writings of Homer and Hesiod through- 
out, but by almost every page of Herodotus, of 
Pindar, as well as of the Greek tragedians and 
historians ; and yet they seem to have escaped 
the notice of some of the most ingenious inqui- 
rers into the opinions of antiquity. The au- 
thority of Greek writers strongly opposes two 
systems, which have been supported with great 
ability, and which have gained considerable 
credit in the world. The first, that the religion 
of the ancients had little or no connection with 
morality: the second, that the governments 
of Greece could not have been supported with- 
out the doctrine of a future state.2 The con- 
nection between religion and morality is clearly 
asserted in the various passages to whieh we 
have had occasion to allude; and the belief of 
a future state of retribution cannot, according 
to the principles of the learned author of the 
Divine Legation of Moses, be reckoned neces- 
sary to the government of men, who are fully 
persuaded of the actual and immediate inter- 
position of Divine wisdom and justice, to regu- 
late, by temporal rewards and punishments, 
the affairs of the present life.10 

As this persuasion had such general and 
happy effects on the manners of the Greeks, it 
may be proper to consider its origin, and to de- 
scribe more particularly the nature and genius 
of the superstition to which it gave birth: a 
superstition which, two thousand years after 
losing its imaginary authority over the useful 
occupations of men, still preserves a real power 
over their most elegant amusements. 

It belongs not to the design of this work to 
search for the mythological tenets of Greece 
in the opinions of other nations: a subject of 
inquiry upon which much learned conjecture 
and much laborious ingenuity have already 
been very laudably, but I fear not very success- 
fully, employed.!! By the dim light of etymo- 


royal families of Thebes and Argos, described in the many 
tragedies of /Eschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, abun- 
dantlv prove the truth of the last observation. 

9 See Hume’s Natural History of Religion, and War- 
burton’s Divine Legation of Moses. The eleventh book of 
the Odyssey, which the ancients called the Nexeouzvresz, 
is the obscurest, and, in my opinion, the least agreeable 
part of Homer. The ghosts are all condemned to a melan- 
choly and dreary state; even the greatest heroes are very 
miserable and dejected; and there is not any mention of 
the place of reward for the virtuous. Homer speaks of the 
Elysian fields but once (Odyssey iv. ver. 563.) Proteus tells 
Menelaus, that he is not destined to die at Argos, and that 
the gods would send him £i Havcsov wedsov xzs weseuts 
7815; so that, if the language is not metaphorical, Ho- 
mer’s Elysium was only a delicious spot on this earth, and 
situated, according to Strabo’s conjecture, on the southern 
coasts of Spain. Strabo, |. iti. Ulysses (Odys. ii. ver. 600.) 
sees the image of Hercu!es in Tartarus, but the hero him- 
self, as the poet informs us, was feasting with the immortal 
zods. J have never met with any intelligible explanation 
of this passage, the absurdity of which appeared a proper 
subject of ridicule to Lucian, in Diogen. and Hercul.— 
Hesiod’s Elysium is more agreeable. 

10 The gods, indeed, are sometimes engaged in very un- 
warrantable transactions; but these are only means to com- 
pass some wise and just end, which the will of providence, 
the Aros Sovan, or fate, had previously determined. Ex- 
amples also may be brought from Homer, of men attempt- 
ing to obtain, by costly sacrifices, the assistance of the gods 
in acts of injustice and cruelty. This must be allowed to 
be an inconsistency in Grecian superstition, or rather in the 
passions which gave it birth. h 

11 Bochart’s Geograph. Bryant's New Analysis. Four 
mant, Le Clerc, de la Pluche, &c. Their doctrine is op- 
posed in the extraordinary work of Vico Neapolitano, en- 


= 


IL.) 


logy and tradition, and the deceitful glare of 
legend and fable, inquisitive men have endea- 
voured to trace the ‘vrrupted streams of Pagan 
worship to the pure fountain of the Jewish dis- 
pensation.!2 But the majesty of Jehovah is 
very feebly represented by the united power 
of Homer’s divinities: and the mythology of 
the Greeks is of such a peculiar texture, that, 
whencesoever originally derived, it must have 
undergone a particular modification in the 
Grecian soil; nor is it easy to concur with the 
opinion of writers who bring it immediatcly 
from Egypt, Chaldea, or Lesser Asia, when we 
consider that there is not the smallest vestige 
in Homer of the judicial astrology which pre- 
vailed so strongly in the two first,!3 or of the 
worshipping of idols, which almost universally 
predominated in the last. 

The difficulty of giving such an historical 
deduction of the Grecian faith as would not 
be exposed to innumerable objections, obliges 
us to trace its origin in the natural passions of 
the human heart, the hopes, the fears, the 
wants, the misery of man, which have in all 
ages rendered him a prey to the terrors of su- 
perstition.15 This miserable passion, which, 
in the civilized countries of modern Europe, 
operates only at distant intervals, and chiefly 
in the unfortunate moments of disease and 
danger, maintains a constant and uninterrupted 
power over the minds of barbarians. The dis- 
proportionate force of the same principle 
among rude and among civilized men, is 
ascribed by a common proverb to the gross 
ignorance of the former; but it may, with 
more propriety perhaps, be deduced from their 
precarious and unhappy manner of life,the con- 


tinual dangers to which their existence is ex-. 


posed, and the dreadful calamities in which the 
whole society is too frequently involved.16 
Even among polished nations, the power of 
reason and philosophy, however highly it may 
be extolled when the gentle current of life flows 
with placid tranquillity, always proves too 
feeble to resist the mountain torrent and the 
storm of winter. Under the pressure of sudden 
or inextricable calamity, all those, who are not 
more or less than men, have recourse to the 
immediate assistance of invisible powers; and 
in the splendid abodes of wealth and power, as 
well as in the American village or Tartar 
horde, the era of a famine, a pestilence, or an 
earthquake, is marked by sincere expressions 
of faith, and commemorated by signal monu- 
ments of piety.!7 


titled “ Principi di Scienza nuova d’intorno alla comunc 
Natura delle Nazione.” The third edition of this work 
was published at Naples, in 1744. 

12 The general doctrine of providence, the rebellion in 
heaven, the state of innocence, the fall of man, atonement 
by sacrifice, a future state of retribution, for which the pre- 
sent life is only preparatory: all, or some of these tencts, 
are found in the traditions of all nations, Greeks and Bar- 
barians. See Hesiod Oper. et Di. ver. 110 and ver. 165. 
and Theog. ver. 725. and ver. 220. 

13 Diodorus Sicul. |. ii. Exod. chap. vi. 

14 The Old Testament, passim. 

15 Mavres Se Gewv exreours ovjeoroi— All men stand 
in need of the gods.” Hom. Odyssey, iii. 

16 Avoruxins exitaric nat TATAIA ANMOYVVTIG EVLA 
bswv. Schol.in Homer. Tum precipuus votorum locus 
est, cum spei nulles est. Plin. 1. viii. c. 16. 

17 In most men, true religion itself must, from the nature 
of human passions, hava the greatest, because an undi- 


Plin. l. xxx. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 25 


The great pillar of superstition, raised by 
the anxious passions of men, was fortified in 
Greece by a circumstance incidental to all na- 
tions at a certain stage of their political pro- 
gress. There is a period when nations emerg- 
ing from barbarity, but not yet corrupted by 
the narrow pursuits of avarice, nor yet softened 
by the mean pleasures of luxury, or contracted 
by the dangerous refinements of a selfish phi- 
losophy, enjoy a peculiar sensibility of charac- 
ter, which exerts itself in the ardour of social 
affection, and strengthens, by a thousand asso- 
ciations, their belief of invisible and intelligent 
powers. , To men, thus disposed to wonder 
and to believe, whatever dazzles the imagina- 
tion, announces the presence of a deity; 
dreams and celestial appearances are deemed 
sacred and infallible admonitions; the silence 
and thick shade of a forest fills the soul with 
religious awe; and persons, distinguished by 
justice and piety, easily persuade themselves 
and others, that, as the beloved favourites of 
heaven, they are frequently honoured with holy 
inspirations, and sometimes indulged with the 
visible presence and happy intercourse of their 
Divine protectors.!8 Not only the religion but 
the ancient language and manners of Greece, 
sufficiently attest the existence of this exces- 
sive sensibility, which, in those early times, 
gave an easy victory to the indulgent powers 
of fancy, over the severe dictates of reason. 

The nature, the characters, and the occupa- 
tions of the gods, were suggested by the lively 
feelings of an ardent, rather than by the regu- 
lar invention of a cultivated, mind. These 
celestial beings were subject to the blind pas- 
sions which govern unhappy mortals. Their 
wants, as well as their desires, were similar to 
to those of men. They required not the gross 
nourishment of meat and wine, but they had 
occasion to repair the waste of their ethereal 
bodies by nectar and ambrosia; and they de- 
lighted in the steam of the sacrifices, which 
equally gratified their senses and flattered their 
vanity.!9 The refreshment of sleep was ne- 
cessary to restore their exhausted strength,20 
and with the addition of a superior, but limited 
degree of power, and wisdom, and goodness, 
the gods of the héroic ages were nothing more 
than immortal men. 

What was wanting in the dignity and per- 
fection, was supplied by the number of the 


= 


vided, influence over the mind, in seasons of inextricable 
calamity. 

18 Pausan. (in Arcad.) calls them Zevos xxi ouoroæregor, 
gucsts and companions at the same table. Plutarch, in his 
Treatise on Music, cites as authoritics Anticles and Istros, 
two ancient authors, who wrote concerning the apparitions 
of the gods. All that has reached the present times re- 
specting this curious subject, is collected in a dissertation 
of John Gottlob Nimptsch (Leipsic, 1720,) in which he 
treats of the number of the divinitics who appeared most 
commonly to men; of the form under which they appeared ; 
the usual time, and general causes, of their appearing, and 
the ordinary circumstances accompanying it. See also 
Memoires de l'Academie, vol. ix. Mem. sur les Meurs 
des Siecles Heroiques. 

19 These observations naturally result from Homer; but 
the doctrine of sacrifices, as expiations for crimes, so 
universally diffused over the ancient and modern world, 
would perhaps still merit the examination of an able, di- 
vine. 

20 Mercury says to Calypso, he would not have fatigued 
himself by travelling over such a length of sea and land, 
without a very powerful reason. Odyss. 


26 HISTORY OF GREECE. 


gods.! Homer only describes the principal 
and reigning divinities; but Hesiod, who gives 
the genealogical history of this fanciful hie- 
rarchy, makes the whole number amount to 
thirty thousand. Among these, every virtue 
had its protector, every quality of extensive 


power in human life had its patron, and every 


grove and mountain and river its favourite in- 
habitants. Twelve divinities? of superior rank 
presided over the active principles of the uni- 
verse, and the leading virtues of the mind: 
but even these distinguished beings were sub- 
ject to the unrelenting power of vengeance? 
and the fates, © who pursue the crimes of men 
and gods, and never cease from their wrath till 
they have inflicted just punishment on the 
guilty sons of earth and heaven. ”4 

The materials which fancy had created, 
poetry formed into beauty, and policy im- 
proved into use. The creed of the Greeks, 
thus adorned and enlarged, became the hap- 
piest antidote against the furious resentment, 
the savage cruelty, and the fierce spirit of sul- 
len independence, which usually characterize 
the manners of barbarians.5 Yet these dread- 
ful passions sometimes forced their way through 
every mound which wisdom had erected in 
order to oppose their course. Laws,sacred and 
profane, were feeble barriers against the impe- 
tuosity of their rage. The black vengeance 
of the heart was exerted in deeds of horror. 
The death of an enemy could not satisfy their 
inhuman cruelty. They burned with desire to 
drink his hated blood, to devour his quivering 
limbs, and to expose his mangled remains to 
indignities equally odious and abominable in 
the sight of gods and men. The powerful 
influence of religion was directed against the 
wild excesses of this sanguinary temper. The 
brave Tydeus lost for ever the protection of his 
adored Minerva by a single act of savage fero- 
city. Humanity was inculcated by every pre- 
cept of reason, and enforced by the strongest 
motives of hope and fear. It was a firm 
article of belief, that hands stained with blood, 
even in the exercise of honourable war, were 
unworthy, till purified by lustration, to be em- 
ployed in the most ordinary functions of sacred 
worship.’ 

It would require a volume completely to 
illustrate the salutary effects of this ancient 
and venerable superstition, which was distin- 
quished above most other false religions, by 
the uncommon merit of doing much good, 
without seemingly occasioning any consider- 
able harm to society. The Grecian tenets, 


1 Fragilis et laboriosa, mortalitas in partes ista digessit, 
infirmitatus suæ memor, ut portionibus quisquis coleret, 
quo maxime indigeret. Plin. ii. 7. 

2 The Roman religion was mere plagiarism, so that En- 
nius might well translate two lines of an ancient Greek 
poet, which includes the names of the principal divinities 
of Greece and Italy: 

Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars, 
Mercurius, Jovi, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo. 
Ennius apud Apuleium. 
3 Nexecis. 4 Hesiod. Theog. 
5 Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer, 
Negans jura sibi facta, nihil non arrogans armis— 
fi HoRaT. 
will be found the general character of all barbarous nations. 

6 See Iliad, iv. ver. 35. Ibid. xxii. ver. 347. Ibid. xxiv. 

ver. 212 7 Homer, passim. 


[Cuar 


while they incyleated profound respect to the 
gods, tended not to break the spirit, or to re- 
press the courage, of theu warlike votaries. 
The ancient heroes addressed their heavenly 
protectors in an erect posture, with the un- 
feigned sincerity of manly freedom. They 
expected to avert the calamities threatened by 
the anger of their divinities, not by inflicting 
on themselves such tortures as could be accep- 
table only to the mean resentment of weak and 
wicked beings, but by repairing the wrongs 
which they had committed against their fellow- 
citizens, or compensating, by new attentions, 
for the neglect shown to the ceremonies of 
their national worship. In their estimation, the 
doing of injuries to men, and the omitting of 
prayer to the gods, were the principal causes of 
the divine displeasure ; the incurring of which, 
being justly considered as infinitely greater 
than all other misfortunes, they were so..citous 
to avert it, not ouly by an exact performance 
of external rites, but by a diligent practice of 
moral duties. The dangerous power of oracles, 
the abused privileges of asylums, the wild rap- 
tures of prophetic enthusiasm, the abominable 
ceremonies of the Bacchanalia, and the horrid 
practice of human sacrifice, circumstances 
which cover with deserved infamy the later 
periods of paganism, were all unknown to the 
good sense and purity of the heroic ages; nor 
is there to be discovered the smallest vestige 
of any of these wild or wicked inventions 
either in the writings of Homer, or of his con- 
temporary Hesiod. $ 

The amiable simplicity of their religious sys- 
tem was communicated to the civil and military 
institutions of the Greeks, to the laws of na- 
tions as well as to the regulations of internal 
policy, and to the various duties of domestic as 
well as of social life. The sentiments of na- 
tural reason, supported by the supposed sanc- 
tion of Divine authority, generally directed the 
conduct of men in the wide variety of these 
complicated relations; and from one great and 
luminous principle, deeply impressed on the 
mind, there resulted a uniform system of unaf- 
fected propriety of conduct, the contemplation 
of which will always be agreeable to every 
taste that is not perverted by the false delicacy 
of artificial manners, or the illiberal prejudices 
of national vanity. In order to give the clearer 
explanation of the several parts of this beauti- 
ful system, we shall examine the political, the 
civil, and the domestic condition of the Greeks; 
that is, the relation of the governors to the 
governed, and of the governed to one another, 
whether considered as subjects of the same 
state, or as branches of the same family. We 
shall combine the effect of these relations with 
that of the ordinary occupations and favourite 
amusements of this celebrated people, and 
from the whole endeavour to deduce the gene- 
ral estimate of their virtues and defects, of 
their happiness and misery. 

The common observation, that power fol- 
lows property, though not altogether correct,® 


* 


8 The same property possessed by one, or by a few, con- 
fers much greater political consideration and influence, than 
it would confer if diffused among the multitude. 


If] 


affords perhaps the best succédaneum to written 
laws, for determining the real strength and in- 
fluence of the different members of society. 
If we examine by this rule the policies of the 
heroic ages, we shall find that they deserve the 
title of republics, rather than that of monar- 
chies. When a warlike tribe sallied from its 
woods and mountains, to take possession of a 
more fertile territory, the soldiers fought and 
conquered, not for their leaders, but for them- 
selves.? The land acquired by their united 
valour was considered as a common property. 
It was cultivated by the joint labour and assi- 
cuity of all the members of the tribe, who as- 
sembled at a public table, celebrated together 
their religious rites, and, at the end of harvest, 
received their due shares of the annual produce 
of the ground, for the maintenance of their re- 
spective families.!0 Superior opulence gave not 
to one a title to despise another, nor was there 
any distinction known among them, but what 
was occasioned by the difference of personal 
merit aud abilities. This difference, however, 
had naturally raised a chief or leader tothe head 
of every society; the frequent necessity of em- 
ploying his valour, or his wisdom, rendered 
his merit more conspicuous and more useful; 
and his superior usefulness was rewarded, by 
the gratitude of his tribe, with a valuable por- 
tion of ground,!! separated from the common 
property. This was cultivated, not by the 
hands of his martial followers, who laboured 
only for the community, but ‘by the captives 
taken in war, of whom a considerable number 
were always bestowed on the general.!'? Being 
accustomed to command in the field, and to 
direct the measures, as well as to decide the 
quarrels, of his associates, he naturally became 
the judge of their civil differences; and as the 
peculiar favour of the gods always attended on 
superior virtue, he was also invested with the 
honourable office of presiding in their religious 
solemnities. These important functions of 
priest, judge, and general, which had naturally 
been conferred on the best and bravest charac- 
ter of each particular tribe, were upon the union 
of several tribes into one state or nation, con- 
ferred on the best and bravest of all the differ- 
ent leaders. Before the various states of Greece 
had united in a general confederacy, the re- 
sources derived from the domains appropriated 
to the prince (which, unless there was some 
particular reason to the contrary, were trans- 
mitted to his descendants,) had enabled the 
several kings and leaders to extend their influ- 
ence and authority. Their comparative power 
and splendour did not entirely arise from the 
merit of personal abilities, but was determined 
in part by the extent and value of their posses- 
sions: and Agamemnon was appointed to the 
command of combined Greece, as mucli on ac- 


9 The Odyssey furnishes innumerable proofs of the limited 
power of kings. Ulysses, on most occasions, puts himself 
on an equal footing with his followers. Jt is commonly 
decided by lot, whether he shall be one of those who under- 
take any adventure attended with fatigue and danger. 
Odyss. passim. 

JO Isocrat. in Archidam. 

11 Iliad, 1. xii. ver. 310. 

12 In the description of the shield of Achilles, Homer 
clearly distinguishes the domain of the king from the land 
ofthe community. Iliad, xviii. ver. 542. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


—_. 


a 


count of his superior opulence, as of his many 
princely qualities.'? But whether we examine 
the pre-eminence that Agamemnon enjoyed 
over the other princes of the confederacy, which 
is fully explained in the Iliad, or the authority 
with which each prince was invested in his 
own dominions, which is clearly illustrated in 
the Odyssey, or the influence of a warlike chief 
over the several members of his tribe, which 
eavoured to delineate, we 
shall every where discover the limited power 
of kings, and the mild moderation of mixed 
government. As in the general confederacy, 
the councils!‘ ef princes controlled the resolves 
of the monarch, and the voice of the assembly!5 
was superior to that of the council; so in each 
particular kingdom, the decisions of the senate 
prevailed over the will of the prince, and: the 
acknowledged majesty of the people! governed 
the decisions of the senate.” If we descend 
still lower, we shall find the same distribution 
of power in every particular village,!8 which 
afforded a picture, in miniature, of a kingdom, 
while a kingdom itself afforded a similar pic- 
ture of the whole confederacy. 

The same simplicity which regulated the 
political system, maintained the civil rights of 
the Greeks. As the price of submitting to the 
restraints of society, a man was secured in the 
enjoyment of his life and property ;'9 his move- 
ables were equally divided, at his death, among 
his descendants; and the unnatural right of 
primogeniture, which, in order to enrich the 
eldest son, reduces the rest of the family to 
want and misery, was altogether unknown to 
the equal spirit of the Grecian institutions.20 
Causes respecting property were decided by 
the first magistrate, or by judges of delegated 
authority. The prosecution of murderers be- 
longed to the relations of the deceased; they 
might accept a compensation in money for the 
loss which the family had sustained ;?! but if 
this was not tendered them by the criminal, or 
if their resentment was too violent to admit of 
any such composition, they were entitled to the 
assistance of all the members of their tribe, who 
either punished the murderer by death, or com- 
pelled him to leave the society.22 These usages, 
doubtless, prove the ideas of the Greeks, con- 
cerning criminal jurisdiction, to have been very 


13 Thucydid. 1. i. 

]4 In matters of importance, Agamemnon is generally 
determined by the council of chiefs, many of whom, on 
various occasions, treat him with little respect. 

15 It is referred to the general assembly, whether it would 
be better to return to Greece, or to prosecute the siege of 
Troy. iad, ii. ver. 110. Sce also Aristot. Ethic. l iii. c. 5. 

16 Several of the nobles of Ithaca even aspired to the 
crown. Odyss. 21. 

17 In the Odyssey, Telemachus threatens to appeal to 
the public assembly, of the injustice of the suitors, among 
whom were the principal nobles of Ithaca. 

18 Plutarch in Thesen. Odyss. ibid. 

19 Tiad, xii. Pind. Pyth. Ode iv. i 

20 Odyss. xiv. If there were no children, the nearest re- 
lations, by the father’s side, divided the meveable property: 
urophiusvov Os ta nTyTiv SarsovTar xyewrtes. Hesiod 
Theogon. The same observation is made by Homer, Iliad, 
v.; but there is no mention of succession to land or movea- 
ble property. 

21 Iliad, ix. Ajax blames the obstinacy of Achilles, who 
refuses such compensation for an affront, as a man some- 
times accepted for the murder of a son or a brother. 

22 There are examples of this in the 14th, 15th, and 23d 
Diad. 


28 


rude and imperfect: but this disadvantage was 
in some measure compensated by their igno- 
rance of those legal cruelties, which in civilized 
nations are too frequently exercised, under the 
specious pretence of justice. “In later times,” 


says Thucydides, “ punishments became more 


severe, but crimes were not, on this account, 
less frequent.” The powerful or wealthy of- 
fender (he might have added) frequently eluded 
the vengeance of those e laws; whereas 
in the heroic ages, there was not any respect 
of persons, princes themselves being subject to 
the same moderate penalties,! which were just- 
ly inflicted on their offending subjects. 

The perfection of civil and political institu- 
tions, which was produced in Greece by the 
influence of religion, is found in most countries 
to be proportional to their improvements in arts, 
and their attainments in knowledge; while the 
happy effects of domestic union are frequently 
most numerous and most considerable among 
the rudest and least cultivated nations. The 
reciprocal duties of the governor and governed, 
as well as the mutual obligations of subjects, 
are gradually unfolded and enlarged by the 
progressive ideas of utility; but the tender con- 
nections of husband and wife, of father and son, 
of brothers and kinsmen, excite without reflec- 
tion, the warmest feelings of the heart, and at 
once inspire the affectionate sentiments of love 
and friendship, of kindness and gratitude. The 
dictates of nature alone sufficiently maintain 
the duties which correspond to the several re- 
lations of blood; her voice is strong and posi- 
tive, in asserting their obligation; and there is 
greater danger that these sacred ties should be 
weakened, or perverted, by the artificial refine- 
ments of polished life, than that their influence 
should continue altogether unknown, or be 
feebly felt, in the early periods of society. 

Agreeably to these observations, we find in the 
history of the heroic ages, the most interesting 
pictures of conjugal love, of parental affection, 
and of filial duty. These sentiments, suggested 
by nature, and confirmed by reason, were still 
farther strengthened by the precepts of religion ; 
and their force, thus augmented, became so 
strong and irresistible, that it can scarcely be 
conceived by men, among whom fashion, and 
vanity, and interest, have usurped the place of 
more generous ard manly principles. 

The comforts ofa family were anciently con- 
sidered as equal to the benefits derived from 
social union. To be destitute of the one, was 
deemed no less miserable than to be deprived 
of the other. And the total baseness of a man’s 
character was expressed by saying, that he de- 
served not to enjoy the rights of a citizen, the 
protection of a subject, or the happiness of do- 
mestie life.? 

Marriage was a necessary step in order to at- 
tain this happiness, and the institution of mar- 
riage was ascribed by remote tradition to the 


1 Thus Midon, the brother of Ajax, was obliged to fly to 
Phylace, Il. xv. Patroclus, for a similar offence, took 
refuge with the father of Achilles, I]. 23. Pausanias (in 
Eliac.) gives examples of the same kind in two kings of the 
/Etolians ; and these facts are agreeable to the nature of the 
kingly office in the heroic ages, as described by Dionysius 
of Halicarnassus, 1. ii. Hist. Rom. 

DAgentwe afspirtoç averrics core exesvec. Diad, passim. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Crar. 


bounty of the gods. The Greeks of the heroic 
ages, am whom the rights of weakness and 
beauty e as much respected as they after- 
Wards were despised by their degenerate de- 
scendants, celebrated the conjugal union with 
all the pomp of religious festivity. The joyous 
band, carrying the nuptial torches, marched in 
pomp through the city, to the sound of the 
hymeneal song ;? the lustral waters were drawn 
from the sacred fountain Calliroe, and many 
revered ceremonies rendered the connection 
of husband and wife equally respectable and 
binding.4 

Adultery was considered as a crime of the 
biackest dye, and is always mentioned with the 
same horror as murder. Persons guilty of these 
atrocious enormities purchased impunity, and 
more frequently escaped death, by voluntary 
banishment; but in many cases they were 
punished by the united vengeance of the tribe 
which had received the injury. Second nuptials 
were not absolutely forbidden; but so strong and 
sacred was the matrimonial tie, that even the 
death of one of the parties was scarcely thought 
sufficient to dissolve it; and the survivor, by 
entering into a new connection, suffered a 
diminution of fame, and submitted to a con- 
siderable degradation of character.6 

Two circumstances chiefly have rendered it 
difficult to explain the rank and condition of 
women in the heroic ages. The Greek word 
denoting a wife, is borrowed from a quality 
which equally applies to a concubine, and the 
same term is used indifferently to express both. 
But the women who in ancient Greece submit- 
ted to the infamy of prostitution, were gener- 
ally captives taken in war, who were reduced 
by the cruel right of arms to the miserable con- 
dition of servitude. Hence it has been errone- 
ously inferred, that in ancient Greece, wives 
as well as concubines were the slaves of their 
husbands. This mistaken notion, it has been 
attempted to confirm, not only by insisting on 
the humiliating condition of the fair sex in the 
later ages of Greece, but by expressly asserting, 
that, in ancient times, they were purchased by 
their husbands.’ But this is to support one 
error by another. Before entering into the 
state of wedlock, it was customary for a man 
to make a mutual exchange of presents with his 
intended father-in-law. The Greeks had par- 
ticular terms to express the present which he 
bestowed, as well as that which he received.$ 
The former, which has no corresponding term 
in the modern languages, is translated by the 
more general word “price,” which has given 
rise to the false notion of the purchase and 
servitude of women; but the latter which may 
with propriety be translated “dower,”? was 
given as a provision for the wife, both during 
marriage and after its dissolution,'? and was 


3 Niad, l. xxiii. 

4 Thucydides, l. ii. Meursius Ferie Grece, and the au 
thors there cited. 5 Odyss. viii. 

6 Penelope was restrained from marrying a second hus 
band: ttSOmEvEY, suvMy TOTINIG, Syucto re çuuiv, Tl. xv. 

7 Lord Kaime's Sketches, Thomas sur la Condition des 
Femmes, &c. 

& E}ve. 9 Iigord, 

10 Odyss. ii. Telemachus says, that if lis mother should 
be sent from the house, he would be obliged to return het 
dower to her father Icarius. 


IL] 


sufficient to deliver her from that supposed 
state of dependence on the husband, which 
never had any existence but in the imagination 
of the systematic writers of the present age. 

In the modern countries of Europe, women 
are generally excluded from the serious occu- 
pations of life, but admitted to an equal share 
in its gayest amusements. During the heroic 
ages, they were not absolutely debarred from 
the former, although it was impossible to asso- 
ciate their natural delicacy and timidity to the 
warlike labours and pleasures which formed 
the principal employments of their husbands. 
The intercourse between the sexes, therefore, 
was less frequent and general, than would suit 
the refined softness of modern manners, 

The attention of women was chiefly confined 
to domestic cares, or to the practice of such 
arts as required neither strength, nor courage, 
nor wisdom, but only the patient exertions of 
mechanical dexterity.!! Our natural respect 
for the honour of the sex is offended at hear- 
ing them as much extolled for their skill in the 
labours of the loom, as for their beauty and 
' virtue; but it deserves to be considered, that 
weaving and enrbroidery being, like all other 
arts, less extensively diffused in Greece than 
in improved commercial countries, were on this 
account more highly valued, and therefore bet- 
ter adapted to confer distinction on those who 
excelled in them. They were practised by 
ladies of the highest rank, and even by queens, 
who also thought it an honour to be entrusted 
with the education of their children, till they 
became fit for the society of their fathers.!2 
Besides these employments, the women were 
permitted to join in the celebration of religious 
rites and ceremonies, and many of them were 
consecrated to the service of particular divini- 
ties.!3 In the seasons of public festivity, they 
mixed more freely than on ordinary occasions 
in the society of the other sex. This was 
sometimes attended with such inconveniences 
as might naturally be expected to arise in con- 
sequence of the usual restraints imposed on 
their behaviour. % The beautiful Polyinela,” 
says Homer,!4 “dancing in the chorus of Diana, 
was embraced by Mercury; but she had no 
sooner brought forth a son, than one of the 
principal citizens offered her his hand.” The 
institutions of the heroic ages promoted, with 
admirable propriety, the modest reserve of 
women, while they permitted not one ex- 
cusable error to cover an amiable character 
with indelible infamy. The crime of having 
too tender a heart was not deemed inexpiable ; 
and, as the consequences of female weakness 
were imputed to the affectionate ardour of 
some amorous divinity, they were so far from 
obscuring the charms of beauty, that they 
adorned it with new graces and more con- 
spicuous splendour. 

The simplicity of the ancient Greeks was 
equally remote from the cruel tyranny of sa- 


11 Homer, passim. 

12 Thus, Thetis educated Achilles. Hesiod says poeti- 
cally, that in the age of silver, the children continued, 
during an infancy of a hundred years, under the care of 
their mothers. 

13 Theano was priestess of Vulcan, &c. Iliad. 

14 Iliad, xvi. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


29 


vages, which condemns women to servitude, 
and the interested refinement of luxury and 
vice, which regards them as mere instruments 
of pleasure. The natural equality between 
the sexes suggested by the voice of sentiment, 
asserted by the dictates of reason, and confirm- 
ed by the precepts of religion, produced the 
most delicate affections that can inspire a sus- 
ceptible heart: hence those moving scenes so 
admirably delineated by Homer, which retrace 
the most perfect image of domestic felicity ; 
hence those pleasing pains, those anxious soli- 
citudes of tenderness and love, which frequent- 
ly degenerate into melancholy presages of the 
loss of a union to which nothing was wanting 
but that it should prove immortal.!5 

The sentiments of parental affection were 
proportionably strong and ardent with those 
of conjugal love. The mutual tenderness of 
the husband and wife was communicated to 
their offspring; while the father viewed in his 
child the charms of its mother, and the mother 
perceived in it the manly graces of its father. 
Independently of the delicacy of sentiments, 
there are, doubtless, in all countries, savage 
and civilized, innumerable instances of paternal 
kindness, which, indeed, is the most simple and 
natural expansion of self-love. But in the 
heroic ages alone, we find sincere and complete 
returns of filial duty. In the lowest state of 
savage life men are, for the most part, little ac- 
quainted with this respectful affection: they 
fear and obey, but without any mixture of love, 
those who are wiser and stronger than them- 
selves. When they become wise and strong 
in their turn, they disregard the trembling hand 
that reared their tender years, or if any faint 
emotions of gratitude are feebly felt, they dis- 
cover them in the preposterous kindness of de- 
livering their aged parents from what appears 
to their own juvenile impatience the wretched 
load of life.!7 Among nations, on the other 
hand, who are sunk in the corruptions incident 
to excessive luxury and refinement, the ties of 
nature are perverted or effaced; the young 
despise the admonitions, and avoid the com- 
pany of the aged; and the duties, as well as 
the business of society, are degraded into a 
miserable traffic of interest or pleasure. But 
as the Greeks had emerged from the, melan- 
choly gloom of the first situation, and had not 
yet declined into the foul vapours of the 
second, they displayed the meridian splendour 
of the domestic virtues.!7? The reverence of 
children for their parents approached their ve- 
neration for the gods. The most violent and 
impetuous heroes submitted, without reluc- 
tance, to the severest dictates of paternal au- 
thority. In such delicate concerns as might 
seem to affect themselves alone, they relin- 
quished their favourite inclinations, disavow- 
ed any will of their own, and committed their 
dearest concerns to the experienced wisdom 


15 See the interview with Hector and Andromache, and 
other examples. Iliad, ix. and Odyss. vi. 

16 Voyage du Pere Charlevoix. Laftan Mceurs des 
Sauvages. 

17 There is, perhaps, no other language that can expfess, 
without a circumlocution, what the Greeks meant by 
§eexre, the obligations of children to repay the mainte- 
nance, the education, and the tender cares of their parents, 


30 


and known goodness of their fathers. The 
amiable expressionsof filial respect were extend- 
ed into a more general sentiment of regard for 
the infirm and aged. Even among brothers who 
were nearly of the same age, the younger was 
obliged to yield in every instance to the elder ; 
and it was an acknowledged principle of reli- 
gion, that the Furies defended, by their stern 
authority, the sacred nee of superior yeazs,! 

The occupations of the ancient Greeks, 
whether of war or peace, were, for the most 
part, directed by the same sacred influence 
which governed their behaviour in the various 
relations of domestic and social life. War was 
their principal employment; and in the field 
they both displayed their noblest qualities, and 
discovered the greatest defects of their charac- 
ter. They were unacquainted with those dis- 
ciplined evolutions which give harmony and 
concert to numerous bodies of men, and enable 
whole armies to move with the activity and 
address of single combatants. What was 
wanting in skill they supplied by courage. 
They marched to the field in a deep phalanx, 
rushed impetuously to the attack, and bravely 
closed with their enemies. Each warrior was 
firmly buckled with his antagonist, and com- 
pelled by necessity to the same exertions of 
valour, as if the fortune of the day had de- 
pended upon his single arm. Their principal 
weapon was the spear, resembling the Roman 
pilum, which, thrown by the nervous and well- 
directed vigour of a steady hand, often pene- 
trated the firmest shields and bucklers. When 
they missed their aim, or when the stroke 
proved ineffectual through want of force, they 
drew their swords, and, summoning their ut- 
most resolution, darted impetuously on the foe. 
This mode of war was common to the soldiers 
and generals, the latter being as much distin- 
guished in the day of action by their strength 
and courage, as by their skill and conduct. 
The Greeks had bows, and slings, and darts, 
intended for the practice of distant hostility ; 
but the use of these weapons, which were 
much employed in the military pastimes of the 
heroic ages, was confined in the fiela to war- 
riors of inferior renown.2 Their defensive 
armour was remarkably complete: a bright 
helmet, adorned with plumes, covered the head 
and face, a firm corslet defended the breast, 
greaves of brass descended to the feet, and an 
ample shield loosely attached to the shoulders 
turned in all directions, and opposed its firm 
resistance to every hostile assault. 

The close compact combats of the Greeks 
were fitted to excite the most furious passions 
of the heart, and to embitter national animosity 
by personal hatred and revenge. A battle 
consisted of so many duels, which exasperated 
to the utmost the hostility of the contending 
parties; each soldier knew the antagonist from 
whom he had received, or on whom he had in- 
flicted the severest injuries. They fought witb 
all the keenness of resentment, and often sul- 
lied the honours of victory by those licentious 
cruelties which are too natural to men in the 


1 Mescoureesss resvvuss assy exovrxs, Homer, passim. 
2 Teucer is more than once upbraided in the Iliad as 
vain archer. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


giddy moment of triumph over a detested ad- 
versary. 

It is partly to this unfortunate circumstance, 
and partly to the ancient mode of appropriating 
the warlike plunder to those who first acquired 
it, that we are to ascribe the shocking enormi- 
ties which were sometimes committed by the 
bravest and most generous of the Grecian chiefs. 

That the severities exercised towards the 
conquered proceeded not from the barbarism 
of the age, and an ignorance of the rights of 
humanity, is plain from the observances deem- 
ed necessary, in order to obtain the favour of 
the gods, in carrying on any military expedi- 
tion, or in enjoying the fruits of victory. 
These observances, which were confirmed by 
the laws of nations among the Greeks, were 
practised betore the commencement of hostili- 
ties, during their continuance, and after their 
conclusion. Before any war could be lawtully 
undertaken, it was necessary to despatch am- 
bassadors, who might explain the injury that 
had been done, demand immediate and com- 
plete satisfaction, and if this was refused, de- 
nounce in form the resolution of their commu- 
nity, to prosecute its claim by force of arms.? 
After they had begun to execute their fatal 
purpose, the characters of heralds, those sacred 
ministers of kings, were equally respected by 
friends and foes. They travelled in safety 
through the midst of embattled hosts, pro- 
claimed to the silent warriors the commissions 
with which they were intrusted, or demanded 
a truce for burying the dead, which could not 
be refused without the most enormous im- 
piety.4 The use of poisoned weapons®> was 
forbidden, under pain of the divine displea- 
sure. It was agreeable to the will of the gods 
that the life should be spared, when a sufficient 
ransom was promised. And after a treaty of 
peace was concluded between hostile nations, 
without any apparent ratification but. the ho- 
nour of the contracting parties, the perfidious 
wretches who betrayed the sanctity of their 
engagements, were devoted, amidst solemn sa- 
crifices and libations, to the fury of the terri- 
ble goddesses.” 

From the arts of peace, the Greeks had 
acquired the necessaries, and procured the 
accommodations, but had not obtained the 
luxuries of life. Pasturage and agriculture 
supplied them with the most indispensable 
articles of food, and with the principal mate- 
rials of clothing. The implements of hus- 
bandry were extremely imperfect; the plough 
itself, the most useful of them all, being com- 
posed entirely of wood,’ which arose rather 
from the scarcity of iron, than from any defect 
of mechanical ingenuity.2 They employed, in 
the time of Hesiod, the invention of shears, 
for depriving the sheep of their wool, having 
formerly waited the season of its annual sepa- 
ration by nature.'0 Barley was the principal 


4 


3 See chap. i. p. 43. 4 Homer, passim. 
5 Tilus refused Ulysses poisoned arrows, since he revered 


the immortal gods, 
Erei vewersZero Geous mity EOVTAŞ. 
6 Tliad, i. Ibid. vi. 24. 
& Hesiod, Oper. et Dies. 
10 Hesiod ibid 


Odyss. 
7 Niad, iii. 
9 Homer, passim. 


íL] 


produce of their fields, and furnished the or- 


dinary food both of men and of horses. The 


invention of mills was unknown, and the grain 
underwent several tedious operations, in order 


to facilitate the bruising of it between two 
large stones with the hand.!! Although the 


Greeks cultivated the olive, they were unac- 


quainted with the benefit derived from the 


fruit of this plant, so well adapted to cheer the 
The Grecian 


soil was naturally favourable to the grape; but 


melancholy gloom of night.}2 


the long and operose process by which the 
Juice of it was separated and preparcd, ren- 
dered wine scarce and dear.!3 

Of the mechanic arts, weaving was the best 
understood; yet this, as well as all the other 
professions which are qualified by the appel- 
lation of sedentary, were practised by the 
Greeks standing upright!4 which seems to indi- 
cate an imperfect state of improvement. 
hatchet, wimble, plane, and level, are the tools 
mentioned by Homer, who appears to have 
been unacquainted with the saw, the square, 
and the compass.!5 The art of cutting marble, 
which afterwards furnished Grecian ingenuity 
with the materials of those inimitable produc- 
tions which are still the wonder of the world, 
Was as yet undiscovered; nor did the polished 
lustre of this valuable stone adorn the habita- 
tions of the Greeks.16 

Homer mentions not the orders of architect- 
ure, which were invented in a later age; and 
pillars are the only ornaments assigned to the 
edifices which he describes. The houses of the 
great were surrounded by a wall, that consisted 
of two floors: the lower of which was distri- 
buted into four apartments, which we have 
translated by the names of hall,!” portico, anti- 
chamber, and bedchamber, which express the 
same relative situation, rather than any other 
point of resemblance. The roofs were flat, and 
the doors opened towards the surrounding 
wall, while the gates of the wall itself opened 
towards the road or street.!8 The invention 
of enamelling metals had been cultivated with 
singular success : and though painting, properly 
so called, was rude and unformed during the 
age of Homer, the genius of the divine poet has 
described the rudiments of his kindred art with 
such graces as would adorn!9 its most refined 


11 Plin. |. xviii. c. xiv. 

12 The Greeks had not discovered any other contrivance 
for that purpose, than the burning of great fires of wood. 
The torches ment'oned by Homer consisted of branches of 
any resinous tree, split at the end, and lighted at the fire. 
Odves. l. vi. ver. 307. 1. xviii. ver. 306. et ver. 309. 

13 Odvas. l. vii. ver. 122, 

14 Eustach. in liad, i. ver. 31. 

15 Odvss. l. v, ver. 234, &c. 

_16 In the palace of Alcinous, which shone with gold, 
silver, brass, and amber, there is no mention of marble. 
Odvsa. |. iv. ver. 72. 

17 H ræčiç ours; eexog megio mugi, mere Ss TO soxiov 
ZuAy, METH HV, Zt3ourz, 0 rendomos, zgi OxAxuos. Pollux 
Onomast. 

18 Odyss. l. i. ver. 441. 

19 The nobler kinds of painting are all illustrated in the 
shield of Achilles; and each picture discovers a wonderful 
degree of invention, expression, and composition, Iliad, 
xviii. Perrault and Terrasson, who thought it impossible 
to place so many pictures in the circuinference of a shield, 
were answered bv Boivin, who supposed a great many con- 
centric circles. This opinion was adopted by Pope, who 
pretends that all the branches of painting, even aerial per- 
spective, may be found in Homer’s shield. ‘That he was 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Thea 


3i 


state of perfection. Music was much practised 
ainong the early Greeks. It was not of the 
learned kind, and therefore the better adapted 
to touch the heart. The effects ascribed to it 
are wonderful, but not incredible, because the 
ancient music was not merely an agreeable suc- 
cession ¢f melodious, unmcaning sounds, but 
an imitation and a heightening of the simple, 
natural, and pathetic tones and cadences of a 
beautiful and expressive language. 70 

In the heroic ages men had neither leisure 
nor inclination to attend to the speculative sci- 
ences. All the knowledge that they possessed 
or esteemed was of the practical kind. From 
arithmetic they learned such simple calcula- 
tions as suited the narrow sphere of their trans- 
actions. Astronomy taught them to observe 
the constellations most nccessary to direct the 
adventurous course of the marincr: but thcir 
navigation was still so imperfect that they sel- 
dom abandoned the coast; and the only stars 
mentioned by Homer are the Great and Little 
Bear, the Pleiades, the Hyades, Orion, and the 
Dog star. The metaphysics, ethics, and politics 
of the ancient Greeks have been explained 
under the article of rcligion, from which they 
were originally derived, and with which they 
long continued to be inseparably connected. 
The main objects proposed in the education of 
the young warriors, were, that they should 
learn to excel in the military exercises of the 
age, especially those of throwing the lance and 
of driving the chariot, and tocommand the at- 
tention of the senate, or assembly, by deliver- 
ing their opinion in a perspicuous, elegant, and 
manly style.2! 

It was not only in the council and in the field 
that these superior accomplishments solicited 
and obtained their well-merited rewards. Each 
community presented, in time of peace, the 
picture of a large family. The Greeks lived 
in continual society with their equals, enjoyed 
common pleasures and amusements, and had 
daily opportunities of displaying their useful 
talents in the sight of their fellow-citizens. The 
frequent disputes between individvals occa- 
sioned litigations and trials, which furnished 
employment for the eloquence and abilities of 
men, in the necessary defence of their friends. 
The funeral games, and those celebrated in 
commemoration of several important events, 
both of a civil and sacred kind, opened a con- 
tinual source of entertainment. There the 


no stranger to aeriel perspective, appears from his expressly 
marking the distance from object to object,” &c. But this 
observation only proves that Pope, who practised painting, 
was little acquainted with the theory of that art; since 
aerial perspective has nothing to do with the diminution of 
objects in proportion to their distance, and relates entirely 
to the chungingand weakening of colours, according to the 
condition of the medinm through which they areseen. The 
objections of Perrault and Terrasson, and the concentric cir- 
cles of Boivin, are equally frivolous. The shield of Homer 
contains, in fact, but ten pictures. The enumeration by 
the particles xsv and ô: fixes the number. But the poet not 
only describes these ten pictures actually represented on the 
shield, but also mentions their antecedents and consequents. 
This is the chief superiority of poctical imitation above 
painting, that it can describe, in a few pages, what many 
galleries of pictures could not represent. But of this more 
hereafter. 

20 Odyss. iii. ver. 267, et passim. This subject will be 
treated fully hereafter. 

21 Muĝwv Ts eyreg’ smevas wenxtHee TI Seyur. 


52 


young and vigorous contended in the rapid 
race; wielded the massy cæstus or ponderous 
quoit; and exerted equal efforts of strength 
and skill in the other manly exercises which 
conirm the vigour of the body, and the forti- 
tude of the mind. Nor were the aged and in- 
firm allowed to languish for want of proper ob- 
jects to rouse’ their emulation, to flatter their 
pride, and to employ their remaining activity. 
It belonged to them to offer their wise coun- 
sels, to interpose their respected authority, and 
to decide the quarrels, as well as to determine 
the merit, of the young candidates for fame. 
The applause and rewards bestowed on him 
whose counsels and decisions were most gene- 
rally approved, consoled the weakness of his 
declining years, while his rivals, though disap- 
pointed for the present, expected, on some fu- 
ture occasion, to obtain the same honourable 
marks of the public esteem.! 

After this general review of the Grecian man- 
ners and institutions, should we endeavour to 
estimate their value, they would probably rise 
in our esteem, by being compared, either with 
the rude customs of savage life, or with the 
artificial refinements of polished society. The 
Greeks had advanced beyond that uniform insi- 
pidity of deportment,thatsullen ferocity of man- 
ners, and that hardened insensibility of heart, 
which universally characterise the savage state. 
They still possessed, however, that patient in- 
trepidity, that noble spirit of independence, 
that ardent attachment to their friends, and 
that generous contempt of pain and danger and 
death, which render the description of the wild 
tribes of America so interesting to a philosophic 
mind. Of two principal enjoyments of life, 
study and conversation, they were little ac- 
quainted, indeed, with the consolations and 
pleasure of the first, the want of which was 
compensated by the sincerity, the confidence, 
the charms of the second. Their social affec- 
tions were less comprehensive in their objects, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


but more powerful in their effects, than those 
of polished nations. A generous chief rushes 
to certain death, to revenge the cause of his 
friend; yet refuses to the prayers of an aged 
parent the melancholy consolation of interring 
the remains of his favourite son; till the cor- 
responding image of his own father strikes his 
mind, ani at once melts him to pity.? The 
imaginary wants and artificial passions which 
are so necessary to urge the hand of industry 

and to vary the pursuits of men, in improved 
commercial societies, were supplied to the 
Greeks by that excessive sensibility, which in- 
terested them so deeply in the affairs of their 
community, their tribe, their family, and their 
friends, and which connected them by the feel- 
ings of gratitude even with the inanimate ob- 
jects of nature. As they were not acquainted 
with the same diversity of employments, so 
neither were they fatigued with the same giddy 
round of dissipated pleasures which augment 
the splendid misery of later times. Though 
ignorant of innumerable arts which adorn the 
present age, they had discovered one of in- 
estimable value, to render the great duties of 
life its most entertaining amusement. It will 
not, perhaps, be easy to point out a nation who 
united a more complete subordination to es- 
tablished authority with a higher sense of per- 
sonal independence, and a more respectful re- 
gard to the dictates of religion with a more ar- 
dent spirit of martial enterprise. The generous 
equality of their political establishments, and 
their imagined intercourse with the gods, con- 
spired to raise them to a certain elevation of 
character which will be for ever remembered 
and admired. This character was rendered 
permanent, in Sparta, by the famous laws com- 
monly ascribed to the invention of Lycurgus. 
but which, as will appear in the subsequent 
chapter, were almost exact copies of the cus- 
toms and institutions that universally prevailed 
in Greece during the heroic ages, 


CHAPTER III. 


J 


Distracted State of Greece—The Heracleide conduct the Dorians into Peloponnesus—Divide 
their conquests in that Peninsula—The Eolic, Ionic, and Doric Migrations—Establishment 
of Colonies in Thrace, Macedon, Africa, and Magna. Grecia—Influence of the Ionic Colonies 
in Asia on the Affairs of the Mother Country—The Abolition of Monarchy in Greece—New 
Disorders in that Country—Four Institutions which tended to remove them—The Amphictyo- 
nic Council—The Oracle of Delphi—The Olympic Games—The Spartan Laws. 


GREECE triumphed over Troy, but it was 

a melancholy triumph. The calamities of 
war were followed by disasters at sea, by dis- 
cord among the chiefs, by ruin to the confede- 
racy; yet these evils were less afflicting than 
the intestine animosities and sedition excited 
by the license of the people, and fomented by 
the ambition of the nobles during the long and 
unfortunate absence of their kings. The vic- 


1 Niad, xviii. Ibid. xxiii 


torious Agamemnon had scarce set foot on his 
native land, when he was cut off by an adulte- 
rous spouse and a perfidious assassin.? His son 
Orestes found protection in Athens against the 
resentment of an usurpe™. In the eighth year 
of his exile he returned with his partisans, and 
took just vengeance on the abominable Egys- 
theus and Clytemnestra.4 He reigned in Ar- 
ee 

2 Iliad, xxiv. 3 Odyss. l. i. ver. 29. 

4 Odyss. l. iii. ver. 196. and ver. 305, et Seq. 


HL) 


gos, but with far less glory than his father; nor 
did that kingdom ever thenceforth assume its 
ancient pre-eminence. 

The wanderings and woes of Ulysses are too 
well known to be described. His patient for- 
titude regained the kingdom of Ithaca, but not 
without wading through the blood of his most 

" illustrious subjects.6 If his- 
Pa an i tory a recorded the 
i g domestic feuds which pre- 
vailed in other states, it would probably exhibit 
a disgusting picture of fraud and cruelty, anda 
continual repetition of similar crimes and cala- 
mities would equally fatigue the attention, and | 
offend the humanity, of the modern reader. 
But though it would be neither entertaining 
nor useful to describe the particular and transi- | 
tory consequences of these disorders, it is of 
importance to remark their general and lasting 
tendency to prolong the weakness of Greece; 
whose obscure transactions, during the four fol- 
lowing centuries, ill correspond with the splen- 
dour of the Trojan, or even of the Argonautic 
expedition. 

The history of this long period is very con- | 
fusedly and imperfectly related by ancient au- 
thors, and the chronology is throughout very 
inaccurately ascertained; yet such events as | 
are either interesting in themselves, or had any 
permanent influence on the memorable ages of | 
Greece, which form the subject of the present 

| 


work, may be clearly explained, and reduced 
to a narrow compass. In order to preserve an 
unbroken narrative, we must consider three 
series of events, which naturally followed each 
other, and which all tended to the same goal. 
In this view, we shall first examine the migra- 
tions of different tribes or communities within 
the narrow bounds of Greece; secondly, the 
establishment of new colonies in many distant 
parts of Europe as well as of Asia and Africa ; 
and thirdly, the internal changes produced in 
the several states, by their adopting, almost 
universally, the republican, instead of the mo- 
narchical, form of government.’ In the fluc- 
tuation of these commotions we must, then, 
seek for the seeds of order and stability, and 
endeavour to trace, amidst extensive migra- 
tions, general revolutions, and unceasing hos- 
tilities, the origin and improvemeut of those 
singular institutions which tended to unite, to 
polish, and to adorn the scattered and still 
spreading branches of the Grecian race through 
every part of the world. 

“he migrations, which soon followed the 
Trojan expedition, are mentioned, but not ex- 
plained, by historians. Their general cause 
may be discovered in Homer, whose poems, no 
less instructive than agreeable, can alone enable 
us to travelswith equal security and pleasure in 
the dark regions of Grecian antiquity. Do- 
mestic dissension, and, still more, tle unsettled 
tenure of landed property, as described by that 
immortal poet, naturally engaged the Grecian 
tribes, notwithstanding their acquaintance with 
agriculture, often to change their respective 


5 Odyss. passim. 
6 Odyss. l. xxii. ver. 290, et seq. 
7 Velleius Patercul. |. i 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


33 


habitations. ‘The idea of a separate property 
in land is the principal tie which binds men to 
particular districts. The avarice of individuals 


is unwilling to relinquish the fields, which it has 


been the great object of their industry to culti- 
vate and to adorn, and their pride is averse toa 
separation from their hereditary establishments. 
These passious, which cover the black heaths 
and inhospitable mountains of the north with 
fair and populous cities, while far more inviting 
regions of the earth still remain destitute of in- 
habitants, could not have much influence on a 
people, who regarded land as the property of 
the public, rather than of individuals. In such 
a nation, men are connected with the 
1124. territory which they inhabit, only as 
~“* members of a particular community; and 
when exposed to any slight inconvenience at 
home, or allured by fairer prospects from 
abroad, they issue forth with one accord to 
acquire by their united valour, more secure or 
more agreeable settlements. Governed by mo- 
tives of this kind, a tribe of Beotians, soon after 
the Trojan war, seized the rich vale of Thes- 
salian Arne. The same restless spirit urged a 
warlike band of Thessalians to quit the seats 
of their ancestors. The new emigrants poured 
down with irresistible violence on the unpre- 
pared Beotians, who were thus reluctantly 
compelled, sixty years after the taking of Troy, 
to rejoin their brethren in the ancient kingdom 
of Cadmus.8 
Twenty years after this event, a more ex- 
tensive migration totally changed the affairs 
of the Peloponnesus; and in its consequences, 
gave new inhabitants to the whole western 
A.C, Coast of Asia Minor. The rival families 
1104. of Perseus and Pelops anciently con- 
* tended for the dominion of the Grecian 
peninsula. The fortune of the Pelopide pre- 
vailed; but their superiority led them rather to 
persecute, than to forgive, their enemies. The 
descendants and partisans of the great Hercules, 
the most illustrious hero of the Perseid line, 
were divested of their possessions, and driven 
into banishment. The exiles were first received 
by the Athenians, whose more humane, or more 
enlarged policy, rendered Attica, ever since the 
reign of Theseus, the ordinary resource of the 
miserable. Their leader Hyllus was after- 
wards adopted by Epalius, the aged king of 
Doris; and the death of their benefactor soon 
made the Heracleide masters of that moun- 
tainous province.!0 But the wilds of Gita and 
Parnassus were little fitted to satisfy men, 
whose ancestors had enjoyed far more valuable 
possessions. Their natural ambition was long 
repressed by tlie growing greatness of the Pelo- 
pidw, and the glory of Agamemnon. After the 
unexpected disasters of that prince, they twice 
attempted, unsuccessfully, to break through the 
Corinthian isthmus, and to recover their ancient 
dominion in Argos and Lacedemon.!! 
Instructed by past miscarriages, Temenus, 
Cresphontes, and Aristodemus, descendants in 


8 Thucydid. 1. i. p. 9. et 10. Diodor. 1. iv. 
p. 630. Pausan. l. ix. c. xl. 

9 Lysias Orat. Funeh. 

10 Strabo, l. ix. p. 427. 

11 Herodot. l. ix. c. xxvi. Apollodor. l. iii. c. v. et vi. 


e 


Strabo, I. ix 


34 
the fifth degree from Hercules, finally aban- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


Before this important revolution, Argos ard 


doned the hopeless design of entering the Pelo- | Lacedæmon were subject to Tisamenus, grand- 


ponnesus by land. But determining to use 
every exertion for regaining their hereditary 
establishments, they set themselves, with great 
industry, to prepare transports in a convenient 


harbour, at the northern extremity of the Co- ' 


rinthian gulf, which, in c 
transaction, received, and thenceforth retained, 
the name of Naupactus. The warlike and 
rapacious Atolians, whose leader Oxylus was 
nearly related to the family of Hercules, readily 
assisted their labours, with a view to share the 
booty that might accrue from the expedition. 
The Dorians, who inhabited the neighbour- 


equerce of this 


hood of mount Pindus, cheerfully deserted the. 


gloomy solitude of their woods, in order to seek 
possessions in a more agreeable and better 
cultivated country. 
forcements, the Heracleide redoubled their 
diligence. All necessary preparations were 
made for the invasion; yet their confidence in 
arms excluded not the use of artifice. By 
secret intrigues they gained a party in Lace- 
demon; and, before setting sail, they prudently 
detached a body of light armed troops, whose 
appearance at the Isthmus drew the strength 
of the enemy towards that quarter.! Mean- 
while their armament was carried by a favoura- 


Animated by these rein- | 


thought them secure. 


son of Agamemnon; Messenia was governed 
by Melanthus, a descendant of the celebrated 
Nestor. These princes had not so far dege 
nerated from the glory of their ancestors, as to 
submit to become subjects in the countries 
where they kad long reigned. On the first 
false alarm of invasion occasioned by the ap 
pearance of light troops at the isthmus, Tisa 
menus and Melanthus had taken the field with 
the flower of the Argive and Messenian nations. 
But while they prepared to repel the expected 
inroads from the north, they received the me- 
lancholy intelligence tat their kingdoms had 
been attacked on another side, on which they 
Instead of returning 
southward to dispossess the Heracleide, an 
enterprise too daring to afford any prospect of 
success, Tisamenus turned his arms against the 
Ionians, who inhabited the southern shore of 


| the Corinthian gulf. An obstinate battle was 


ble gale towards the eastern coast of the Pelo- | 


A. œ. Ponnesus. The Heracleidæ landed their 
1104. followers without opposition, and assail- 

* ed the defenceless territories, to which 
they had long laid claim, comprehending the 
whole peninsula, except the central province 
of Arcadia, and the maritime district of Achaia. 
The five other provinces were conquered at the 
same time, though by different means. Laconia 


was betrayed to the invaders;? Argos acknow- | 


ledged their authority ; Corinth, Elis, and Mes- 
senia submitted totheirarms. The revolution 
was complete, and effected with little blood- 
shed, but not without great oppression of the 
ancient inhabitants, many of whom emigrated, 
and many were reduced to slavery. 

The Heracleide, agreeably to the custom of 
that age, divided their new acquisitions by lot. 
The kingdom of Argos fell to the share of Te- 
menus; Cresphontes obtained Messenia; and as 
Aristodemus then happened to die, Laconia 
was set apart for his infant sons, the twin-bro- 
thers, Eurysthenes and Procles. Corinth was 
bestowed on their kinsman Aletes; and Elis 
given to Oxylus, their brave #tolian ally.‘ 
This distribution, however, referred only to the 
royal dignity, then extremely limited, and to an 
appropriated domain to the several princes in 
their respective allotments. The rest of the 
territory was divided among the warlike Do- 
rians and tolians, who had conquered for 
themselves, not for their leaders;> and who, 
having over-run, without opposition, the finest 
provinces of the Peloponnesus, could not wil- 
lingly return to lead a life of hardship and 
misery on their native mountains. 


1 Pausan. |. ii. e. xviii. 

2 Strabo, l. viii. p. 365. 

3 Herodot. l. vi. c. lii. Polyb. l. ii. p. 172. Strabo, l. viii. 
p- 383. Pausan. Argolic. & Isocrat. Pinan 

4 Pauean. ibid. 9 Isocrat. in Archidam. 


| fought, which proved fatal to Tisamenus; but 
| his followers obtained a decisive victory, and, 


having expelled or enslaved the ancient in- 
habitants, took® possession of that valuable 
province, so famous in later times under the 
name of Achaia. Melanthus enjéyed better 
fortune. Accompanied by his faithful Mes- 
senians, he resorted to Attica, then engaged in 
war with the neighbouring kingdom of Beotia. 


The Beotian prince proposed to decide the 


contest by single combat. Thymetes, though 
descended from the heroic Theseus, declined 
the challenge. Melanthus accepted it, prevailed 


| in the conflict, and the sceptre of the deposed 


seamen 


Thymetes was his reward.” 

The fermentation occasioned in Greece by 
so many expulsions and migrations, expanded 
itself through the islands and coasts of Asia 
Minor. Many Feioponnesian fugitives who 


| beheld with indignation the calamities inflicted 


on their country, flocked to the standard of 
Penthilus,8 a younger brother of Tisamenus, 
who had taken refuge in Eubæa. Others fol- 
lowed the banners of Cleues and Malaus.? also 
descendants of Agamemnon. The partizans 
of all these princes having unsuccessfully tra- 
versed the northern parts of Greece in quest 
of new settlements, finally yielded to the dic- 


| tates of their enterprising spirit, crossed the 


Hellespont eighty-eight years after the taking 
of Troy, and established themselves along the 
shore of the ancient kingdom of Priam. They 
gradually diffused their colonies from Cyziĉus 
on the Propontis to the mouth of the river 
Hermus;!? which delightful country, together 
with the isle of Lesbos, thenceforth received 
the names of Eolis or Eolia, to denote that its 
inhabitants belonged to the Eolian branch of 
the Hellenic race.!! 

Consequences still more important resulted 
from the expulsion of the Acheans by the fol- 
lowers of Tisamenus. The ancient inhabitants 


6 Pausan and Strabo, ibid. 

Strabo, l. ix. p- 393, Herodot. l. v. c. lxv. 
& Strabo, J. ix. p. 402. 
9 Idem, 1. xiii. p. 553, et seq. 

10 Idem, ibid. et Herodot. I. i. c. eli. 

11 Herodot. 1. i. c. cli. 


Ld 


hi 


HL] 


of Achaia, being themselves Ionians,took refuge 
with their kinsmen in Attica. The Messenian 
fugitives under Melanthus had sought protec- 
tion in the same country. The Athenians readi- 
ly accepted these new accessions of strength, 
being inspired with a well-founded jealousy of 
the Dorian conquerors of Peloponnesus, whose 
ambition early produced that memorable rival- 
ship between the Doric and Ionic race, which 
subsisted to the latest times of the Gre- 
1089. cian republics.!? In the reign of Codrus, 
son of Melanthus, the Dorians had al- 
ready encroached on the Athenian frontier, and 
seized the territory of Megara, on the northern 
coast of the Saronic gulf.!3 Issuing from 
their strong holds in that rocky district, from 
which it was long impossible to dislodge them, 
they harassed the Athenians in a cruel war, 
concerning which a superstitious rumour pre- 
vailed, that they should finally remain con- 
querors, provided they abstained from injuring 
the person of the Athenian king. Codrus, 
hearing the report, wasinspired with the spirit 
of heroism congenial to his family. Disguising 
himself in the habit of a peasant, he proceeded 
to the quarters of the enemy; insulted a Do- 
rian soldier; a combat ensued; Codrus fell;!4 
his body was recognised; and the superstitious 
Peloponnesians, now despairing of success, sus- 
pended their hostilities. The inimitable merit 
of a prince, who had devoted himself to death 
AG for the safety of his country, furnished 
1068. the Athenians with a pretence for abo- 
* lishing the royal authority. None of the 
human race, they declared, was worthy to suc- 
ceed Codrus; and none but Jupiter should 
thenceforth reign in Athens.!5 Medon, the 
eldest son of tltat admired prince, was appoint- 
ed first magistrate of the republic, under the 
hunibler title of archon. His brothers Neleus 
and Androclus, probably dissatisfied with these 
transactions, determined to leave their country. 
Their design was approved by the Achæan 
A. œ. and Messenian refugees, and by many 
1055 Athenian citizens, who complained that 
* Attica was too narrow and barren to 
maintain the increasing numbers of its inhabit- 
ants. The restless spirits in Phocis,. Beotia, 
and other neighbouring provinces, eagerly join- 
ed the emigrants. They sailed to Asia Minor, 
expelled the ancient inhabitants, a mixed race 
of Lydians, Carians, and Pelasgi, and seized 
the central and most beautiful portion of the 
Asiatic coast.!6 Their colonies were gradually 
diffused from the banks of the Hermus to the 
promontory of Posideion, ‘They afterwards 
took possession of Chios and Samos; and all 
these countries were united by the common 
name of, Jonia, to denote that the Tonians 
composed the most numerous division of the 
colony.!7 
During the same turbulent ages, intestine se- 
dition, foreign invasion, or the restless spirit of 
adventure and rapine, occasioned other import- 


— SS 


12 Herodot. et Thucydid. passim. 
13 Strabo, l. ix. p. 393. 
14 Pausan. l. vii. €. xxv. 
15 Pausan. l. vii. c. ii. 
16 Herodot. l. i. c. exlii. 
17 Strabo, |. xiv. p. 632. et seq. Pausan. 1. vii. e. ii. 


Justin. l. ii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


35 


ant extensions of Grecian colonization, The 
most numerous colonies occupied the isles of 
the Ionian and Ægean seas, the southern coast 
of Italy almost intersected by the former, and 
the winding shores of Asia Minor’8 so beau- 
tifully diversified by the latter. The larger 
islands of Sicily, Sardinia, and Cyprus, were 
very anciently planted by Greeks. While the 
Hellenic stock pushed forth these vigorous 
shoots towards the east and west, very consi- 
derable branches extended towards the north 
and south. The maritime parts of Epirus, 
Macedonia, and Thrace, themselves abounding 
in Greek settlements, poured forth new colo- 
nies along the European shores of the Pro- 
pontis and Euxine:!9 and emigrants from Pe- 
loponnesus having early established themselves 
on the opposite coast of Africa, were gradually 
diffused from the confines of Egypt to the Syr- 
ticgulf.20 The history ofall these colonies, some 
of which rivalled in arts, and others in arms, 
the glory of the mother country, will merit our 
attention, in proportion as they emerge from 
obscurity, and take a station in the general 
system of Grecian politics. 

The Asiatic Greeks, whose affairs first be- 
A. œ, came intimately connected with those 

994, of the mother country, received a con- 
* siderable accession of strength in conse- 
quence of the renewal of hostilities between 
the Athenians and Dorians. The latter were 
finally expelled from many of their strong holds 
in Megara. Disdaining after this misfortune 
to return into the Peloponnesus, many of them 
sailed to the islands of Rhodes and Crete, 
already peopled by Doric tribes; while others 
transported themselves to the peninsula of Ca- 
ria, Which, in honour of their mother country, 
received the name of Doris.?! 

In consequence of this establishment, which 
was formed two hundred and forty years after 
the Trojan war, the western coast of Asia Mi- 
nor was planted by the Eolians in the north, 
the Ionians in the middle, and the Dorians in 
the south. These original divisions of the Hel- 
lenic race retained in their new settlements the 
peculiarities of accent and dialect, by which 
they had been respectively distinguished in 
Europe ;22 and which, at the time of their seve- 
ral emigrations, prevailed in Beotia, Attica, 
and Lacedemon. The Beotians and Lacede- 
monians, who claimed the first honours, the 
one of the Eolic, and the other of the Dorian 
name, adhered, with little variation, to their 
ancient dialects: but the Athenians, more in- 
genious, or fonder of novelty, made such con- 
siderable alterations in their writing and pro- 
nuncjation, as remarkably distinguished them 
from their Ionian brethren; and thus the same 
language came to be inodified into four subdi- 
visions,?3 or dialects, which may be still recog- 
nised in the invaluable remains of Grecian 
literature, 

Of all these innumerable colonies, the Ionians 


18 Thucydid. 1. i. et. Strabo, passim. 

19 Herodot. 1. ii. et L 4. 

20 Herodot. |. iv. e. exlvii. Strabo, |. x. et 1. vvil 
21 Strabo, et Pausan.et Herodot. 1. viti. c. ixxi 
22 Herachid. Pont. apud Atheneum, |. xiv. 

23 Strabo, |. viii. 


36 


will demand our earliest and most studious at- 
tention. They settled in a country of great ex- 
tent and fertility, enjoying the most delicious 
climate, and peculiarly adapted toa commer- 
cial intercourse with the most improved nations 
of antiquity. Favoured by so many advan- 
tages, they silently flourished in peace and 
prosperity, till their growing wealth and num- 
bers excited the avarice or the jealousy of the 
powers of Asia. They were successively con- 
Neat by the Lydians and Persians, but never 

_ thoroughly subdued. Having imbibed the prin- 
ciples of European liberty, they spurned the 
yoke of Asiatic bondage. In their glorious 
struggles to re-assume the character of frce- 
men, they soliciteu and obtained the assistance 
of their Athenian ancestors, and occasioned 
that memorable rivalship between the Greeks 
and Persians, which, having lasted two centu- 
ries, ended in the destruction of the Persian 
empire. In this illustrious contest, the first 
successor of the Greeks against enemies far 
more powerful, and incomparably more nu- 
merous than themselves, inspired them with 
an enthusiasm of valour. Their exploits merit- 
ed not only praise, but wonder,! and seemed 
fit subjects for that historical romance, which, 
in the progress of literature, naturally succeeds 
to epic poetry. 

The writers who undertook to record and to 
adorn the trophies of Marathon and Platæa, 
had occasion to look back to the transactions 
of more remote times. But in taking this rc- 
trospect, they discovered, or at, least we may 
discover by their works, that their inquiries 
began too late to afford much authentic infor- 
mation on that important subject. Yet, imper- 
fect as their relations necessarily are, they serve 
to explain by what concurrence of favourable 
circumstances and causes the Greeks adopted 
those singular institutions, acquired that sense 
of national honour, and attained those virtues 
of policy and prowess, which enabled them, by 
the most splendid series of exploits recorded in 
history, first to resist, then to invade, and 
finally to subdue the monarchy of Cyrus. 

During the prevalence of those generous, 
though romantic opinions, which characterised 
the heroic ages, the authority of kings was 
founded on religion, supported by gratitude, 
and confirmed by utility. While they ap- 
proved themselves worthy ministers of Heaven, 
they were entitled to due and hereditary hon- 
ours;? but in the exercise of the regal office, 
they were bound to respect the rights, the sen- 
timents, and even the prejudices of their 
subjects. The fatal dictates of ambition and 
avarice led them to transgress the prescribed 
limits, and to trample on those laws which 
their predecessors had held sacred. The mi- 
nute division of landed property, which had 
already taken place, not only, as above men- 
tioned, in the Peloponnesus, but in the north- 


1 Tz ceya ueyarg azi Geuueorrs, Herodot. p. 1. The 
exploits which he relates, still more than his manner of re- 
lating them, render the work of Herodotus the intermediate 
shade between poetry and history, between Homer and 
Thucydides. 

Q Ers eyTois yreari warpiaxs Baristas, Thucydid. Li. 

3 Thucyd. l. i. p. 10. 


HISTORY OF GREECE 


[Cuae. 


ern provinces of Greece, rendered the nobles 
and people more sensible of these encroach- 
ments, which they must at once boldly resist, 
or submit for ever to the yoke of oppression. 
Reduced to this alternative, the Greeks were 
inclined by disposition, and enabled by situa 
tion, to prefer and to maintain the most hon 
ourable part. The prerogatives of royalty 
were not as yet supported by the exclusive 
right of the sword, by which a particular class. 
of men might intimidate and control the reso 
lutions of their fellow-subjects. The more in- 
dependent and illustrious citizens, who had 
been accustomed from the earliest times to 
come armed to the council or assembly, com- 
municated their grievances, and took proper 
means to remove them.? Miltas, the fourth 
Argive prince in succession to Temenus, was 
condemned to death for usurping absolute 
power. Monarchy expired more honourably 
in Attica; it perished still more disgraccfully 
in Arcadia, but was gradually abolished in 
every province of Greece, except Sparta alone, 
from the southern extremity of Peloponnesus 
to the northern frontier of Thessaly. 

The important, though remote consequences 
of this revolution, will be explained in the se- 
quel. Its immediate tendency served only to 
multiply the evils which it was designed to 
remedy. Greece, oppressed by its kings, was 
still more oppressed by its archons, or magis- 
trates ;° and, already too much divided under 
the ancient government, was still more subdi- 
vided under the new form of polity. Many 
inferior cities disdained the jurisdiction of their 
respective capitals. Several of them affected 
separate and independent sovereignty. Each 
town, each district, maintained war with its 
neighbours; and the fanciful state of nature, 
according to the philosophy of Hobbes, was 
actually realized in that distracted country.” 

From these accumulated disorders, which 
seemed scarcely capable of augmentation, it 
is time to turn our view to those events and 
causes which operated in a contrary direction, 
and gradually introduced union and happiness. 
The Dorian conquest of Peloponnesus, other- 
wise productive of much confusion and blood- 
shed in that peninsula, greatly extended, how- 
ever, the salutary influence of the Amphic- 
tyonic council. In the northern parts of 
Greece, this institution, which had been ori- 
ginally intended to prevent foreign invasion, 
had been found equally useful in promoting 
domestic concord. The Dorians being con 
stituent members of the council, continued to 
attend its meetings after they had settled be- 
yond the mountainous isthmus of Corinth. All 
the provinces which they conquered gradually 
assumed the same privilege. The Amphic- 
tyons thus became a representative assembly of 
the whole Grecian name, consisting not only 
of the three original tribes of Tonians, Dorians, 
and Eolians, but of the several subdivisions of 
these tribes, and of the various communities 


4 Aristot. Polit. 1. iv. c. 13. 

5 Thueydid. l.i. p. 10. 

6 Aristot. Polit. 1. iv. c. 13. Plut. in Solon. 
7 Thucydid. ibid. 


HL] a 


formed from their promiscuous combination.8 
Each independent state had a right to send 
two members, the Pylagoras? and Hieromne- 
mon,!0 respectively entrusted with the civil and 
religious concerns of their constituents. The 
abolition of royalty rendering the independent 
communities more numerous, increased the 
number of Amphictyons to about a hundred 
persons.!! The central city of Delphi, so fa- 
mous from causes that will be immediately 
explained, was chosen as a convenient place 
for holding their vernal assembly; the au- 
tumnal was still held at Thermopyle. An 
oath, guarded by the most solemn impreca- 
cations, was administered to each member, 
“that he would never subvert any Amphic- 
tyonic city, nor stop the courses of its running 
water, but punish to the utmost of his power 
those who committed such outrages.”!? Their 
constituents, however, discovered, on innu- 
merable occasions, that they thought them- 
selves but imperfectly bound by this sacred 
promise. Every excess of animosity prevailed 
among the Grecian republics, notwithstanding 
the interposition of the Amphictyons. Yet it 
cannot be doubted that their authority tended 
sometimes to appease, sometimes to moderate 
contention; and that this respected tribunal, 
though deficient in coercive power, had a con- 
siderable effect to suppress discord, and restrain 
the barbarities of war.}8. 

The Amphictyons gained much considera- 
tion, by declaring themselves protectors of the 
Delphic oracle, which had been growing to 
importance since the Dorian conquest, and 
which thenceforth gradually acquired a singu- 
lar influence on the affairs of Greece. It is 
seldom possible to explain the rise of institu- 
tions derived from the natural passions of men, 
or founded on prejudices as ancient as the world. 
The most probable information concerning the 
origin of Grecian oracles was conveyed to 
Herodotus,'4 in-a thin allegorical veil, by the 
priests of Dodona, and explained to that in- 
quisitive and ingenious traveller by the priests 
of Jupiter in Egypt. In the fanciful style of 
antiquity, a black pigeon flew from the temple 
of Egyptian Thebes, to Thesprotia in Epirus, 
perched on a spreading oak, proclaimed with a 
human voice, that an oracle of Jupiter should 
be established; and the inhabitants of the 


8 The principle divisions were,—1, Ionians, among whom 
the Athenians held the first rank.—2, The Dorians, among 
whom the Lacedemonians held the first rank.—3, The 
Eolians, among whom the Beotians held the first rank.— 
4, Thessalians.—5, Magnetes.—6, Achwans.—7, Phthio- 
tes.—8, Phocians—9, Malians—10, Ænians or Œtians.— 
11, Dolopians.—12, Locrians. Confer Pausan. in Phocic. 
et Machin. de Falsa Legat. 

9 Demosth. de Coron. sect. 51. 

10 Snides, ad voc. 

11 Thirty-one Amphictyonic cities undertook the defence 
of Greece in the Persian war. (Plutarch. in Themistocl.) 
The one half of Greece, on that memorable occasion, re- 
mained neutral, or sided with the enemy. (Ierodot. et 
Diodor.) If each city sent two members to the Amphic- 
tyons, the whole would amount to one hundred and twenty- 
four. Bunt as some cities enjoyed the right of being repre- 
sented in that council only in conjunction with others, this 
might diminish the number of members to that mentioned 
in the text. 

12. Æschin. de Falsa Legat. sect. 35 

13 Plut. in Cimon. 

14 Herodot. l ii. c. 54 


HISTORY OF GREECE. $ 


37 


neighbouring hamlet of Dodona obeyed the 
divine admonition. In plainer language, a female 
attendant belonging to the temple of Thebes on 
the Nile, was transported to Epirus by Pheni- 
cian pirates, and there sold as a slave. Her 
Egyptian complexion deserved the epithet of 
black among the mountaineers of Thesprotia, 
bordering on the Illyric hordes, who were re- 
marked by the Greek historians for their 
blooming complexions, active vigour, and lon- 
gevity.! She was said to speak the language 
of birds, before she understood the Grecian 
tongue, often distinguished by the appellation 
of human speech.!6 The enterprising female, 
though reduced to captivity among those 
whom she must have regarded as barbarians, 
did not yield to despair, but dexterously avail- 
ed herself of the advantages which she derived 
from her education and her country. In 
Egypt, superstition had been already reduced 
into system; and a pretension to prophecy 
was one of the most successful artifices by 
which the priests of Thebes long governed the 
opinions and resolutions of prince and people. 
Her attendance on the temple had taught her 
some of the arts by which this pretension was 
maintained. She chose the dark shade of a 
venerable oak; delivered mysterious answers 
to the admiring multitude; her reputation in- 
creased ; success gained her associates; a tem- 
ple rose to Jupiter, and was surrounded by 
houses for his ministers. 

This singular institution was imitated, at a 
very early period, in many provinces of Greece. 
The various and inconsistent accounts of simi- 
lar establishments abundantly contirm the an- 
tiquity of their origin, and the multiplicity of 
temples, groves, grottos, and caverns, in which 
the favourites of innumerable divinities de- 
clared their will to men, proves them no less 
universal than ancient.’ During the heroic 
ages, indeed, as illustrious and pious men be- 
lieved themselves, on important occasions, 
honoured with the immediate presence and 
advice of their heavenly protectors, the se- 
condary information of priests and oracles was 
less generally regarded and esteemed. But in 
proportion as the belief ceased that the gods 
appeared in a human form, or the supposed 
visits at least of these celestial beings seemed 
less frequent and familiar, the office of priest 
became more important and respectable, and the 
confidence in oracles gradually gained ground. 
At length,these admired institutions, being con- 
sidered as the chief and almost only mode of 
communication with supernatural powers, ac- 
quired a degree of influence capable to control 
every other principle of authority, whether 
civil or sacred.!8 

But these various oracles, though alike 
founded on ignorance, and raised by deceit, 
were not equally supported by power and 
policy. The crafty Cretans (apt scholars of 
Egypt,) who instituted the worship of the Del- , 
phian Apollo,!9 gradually procured the credit 


15 Lucian in Macrob. 16 Womer, passim. 

17 Strabo, l. viii. p. 352. et p. 418. et Strabo ct Pansan. 
passim. 

18 Herodot. Thucydid. et Xenoph. passim. 

19 Homer, Hyinn. ad Apollin. 


38 


of superior veracity to the predictions of the 
god whom they served. Favourable circum- 
stances concurred; the central situation of 
Delphi; the vernal session of the Amphictyons; 
the lustre derived from the immediate protec- 
tion of that assembly; above all, the uncom- 
mon and awful aspect of the place itself, fitted 
to excite wonder in ages less addicted to super- 
stition. 

That branch of the celebrated mount Par- 
nassus, which divides the districts of Phocis 
and Locris, contained, towards its southern ex- 
tremity, a profound cavern, the crevices of 
which emitted a sulphureous vapour, that, 
powerfully affecting the brain, was deemed 
capable of inspiring those who breathed it with 
religious frenzy, and prophetic enthusiasm.! 
Around the principal mouth of the chasm, the 
city of Delphi arose in the form of a theatre, 
upon the winding declivity of Parnassus, whose 
fantastic tops overshadowed it, like a canopy, 
on the north, while two immense rocks render- 
ed it inaccessible on the east and west, and the 
rugged and shapeless niount Cirphis defended 
it on the south.2 The foot of the last-named 
mountain is washed by the rapid Plistus, which 
discharges itself into the sea at the distance of 
only a few leagues from the sacred city. This 
inaccessible and romantic situation, from which 
the place derived the name of Delphi,? was 
rendered still more striking, by the innumera- 
ble echoes which multiplied every sound, and 
increased the ignorant veneration of visitants 
for the god of the oracle. The artful minis- 
ters of Apollo gradually collected such objects 
in the groves and temple, as were fitted to 
astonish the senses of the admiring multitude. 
The splendour of marble, the magic of paint- 
ing, the invaluable statues of gold and silver, 
represented (to use the language of antiquity) 
not the resemblance of any earthly habitation, 
but rather expressed the image of Olympus, 
adorned.and enlightened by the actual presence 
of the gods. During the age of Homer, the 
rich magnificence of Delphi was already pro- 


verbial;? and when Xerxes undertook his me- | 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


CHAP- 


expression, were the original proprietors of the 
oracle, always continued to direct the religious 
ceremonies, and to conduct the important busi- 
ness of prophecy. It was their province alone 
to determine at what time, and on what occa- 
sion, the Pythia should mount the sacred 
tripod, to receive the prophetic steams, by 
which she communicated with Apollo. When 
overflowing with the heavenly inspiration, she 
uttered the confused words, or rather frantic 
sounds, irregularly suggested by the impulse 
of the god; the Delphians’ collected these 
sounds, reduced them into order, animated 
them with sense. and adorned them with har- 
mony. The Pythia, appointed and dismissed 
at pleasure, was a mere instrument in the hands 
of those artful ministers, whose character be- 
came so venerable and sacred, that they were 
finally regarded, not merely as attendants and 
worshippers, but as the peculiar family of the 
god. Their number was considerable, and 
never exactly ascertained, since all the princi- 
pal inhabitants of Delphi, claiming an imme- 
diate relation to Apollo, were entitled to officiate 
in the rites of his sanctuary ; and even the in- 
ferior ranks, belonging to that sacred city, were 
continually employed in dances, festivals, pro- 
cessions, and in displaying all the gay pageantry 
of an airy and elegant superstition. 

The subsequent history of Greece attests the 
important and salutary influence of the Del- 
phic oracle, which no sooner attained splen- 
dour, than it confirmed, by its awful sanction, 
two institutions, the first religious, the second 
civil, and both accompanied with very extraor- 
dinary consequences. The Olympic games, 
and Spartan laws, were respectively establish- 
ed by Iphitus and Lycurgus, contemporaries,9 
friends, both animated by the true spirit of pa- 
triotism, and unquestionably the most illustri- 
ous characters of the age in which they lived ;'0 
yet the roads which they pursued for reaching 
the same goal, the safety of their respective 
territories, were so widely different, that while 
the Olympic games rendered Elis the most 
pacific, the laws of Lycurgus made Sparta the 


morable expedition against Greece. the dedica- | most warlike, of all the Grecian communities, 


tions in this pious treasury,accumulated from the 


It was held an ancient and sacred custom, 


superstition and vanity of Greeks and Barba- | in the heroic ages, to celebrate the funerals of 
rians, were held equivalent’ to the revenues of | illustrious men by such shows and ceremonies 


the monarch of Asia, who covered the broad 
Ægian with his fleet. and transported into Eu- 
rope two millions of armed men. 

The pretection and superintendence of this 
precious depository of riches and superstition 
belonged to the Amphictyons. But the in- 
habitants of Delphi, who, if we may use the 


. 1 Diodor. Sicul. l. xvi. c. 26. et Strab. l. ix. p. 419. 
2 Homer has rather painted than described the situation 
of Pytho, Apollo’s temple, at Delphi: 
Avrae uregisv 
ergy umtxesuaras, 226hy 3d umisE Setus Brora, ete. 


Hymn. ad Apollin. 


3 Acagos is explained in the glossaries by synonymous 
words, signifying solitary, alone. 
3 025? oera AxiVSS GUDSS BOYTIOIS EVTES Eley EL. 

See Dissert. sur |Oracle de Delph. par. Mr. Hardion, 
Mem. de l'’Academ. The comparison was, doubtless, an 
exaggeration of the wealth of Delphi, which was little 
known till later times, when the Phocians plundered the 
temple of near a million sterling, without exhausting its 
treasures. But of this more hereafter. 


| See Pausan. v. 


as seemed most pleasing to their shades. The 
tombs, around which the melancholy manes 
were supposed to hover, naturally became the 
scene of such solemnities. There the fleeting 
ghosts of departed heroes were entertained and 
honoured by exhibitions of bodily strength and 
address ;!!1 while the gods, though inhabiting 


6 Strabo, l. ix. 7 Strabo, I. ix. p. 419. 

8 Lucian Phaler. 

9 Phlegon apud Euseb. Chronic. et Aristot apud Plu- 
tarch. in Lycurg. 

10 Lycurgus and Iphitus are commonly supposed to have 
instituted the Olympic games 108 years before the period to 
which the Olympiads could be regularly traced. This was 
776 years before pre, when Corebus won in the foot-race. 
Sir Isaac Newton considers the chrono- 
logy preceding the victory of Corebus as so extremely un- 
certain, that he proposes striking off the imaginary interval 
between him and Iphitus; which appears the more rea- 
sonable, because history is totally silent with regard to any 
occurrences that must have happened in the intermediate 
space of 108 years. 

11 Iliad, l. xxiii. 


D 


a 


the broad expanse!! of heaven, were yet pe- 
culiarly worshipped by prayers and sacrifices, 
in the several places, whiclı sometimes the wild- 
ness, and sometimes the elegance of fancy, 
had assigued for their favourite, though tem- 
porary, residence on earth. The lofty chain 
of Olympus separating the barbarous kingdom 


of Macedon from the fertile plains of Thessaly, 


is distinguished by several circumstances, 
which seemed justly to entitle it to that honour. 
This long and lofty ridge ascends above the 
regions of storms and tempests. Its winding 
sides are diversified by woods, and intersected 
by torrents. Its fantastic tops, towering above 
the clouds, reflect, during day, the rays of the 
sun, and sometimes brighten the gloom of 
night, with the lambent splendours of the 
aurora borealis.!2 Olympus came, therefore, 
to be naturally regarded as the principal ter- 
restrial habitation of the gods; along the re- 
cesses of this mountain!’ each divinity had his 
appropriate palace; on its highest summit Ju- 
piter often assembled the heavenly council ; 
and from thence, veiled in a white gleam, the 
protectors of mankind descended, and were 
‘visibly manifested to mortal eyes.!4 

While Olympus was considered as the ge- 
aeral rendezvous of these fanciful beings, it 
was natural to imagine that the partiality of 
particular divinities might select other favourite 
spots of the earth for their separate abode. 
The singular aspect of Delphi, or Pytho, which 
recommended it as the seat of the oracle of 
Apollo, and afterwards of the Pythian games, 
has ‘already been described. The Corinthian 
territory was particularly consecrated to Nsp- 
tune ;!5 for where could the god of the sea ve 
more properly worshipped, than on the narrow 
isthmus, whose shores were adorned by grate- 
ful monuments of delivered mariners, and 
which had continued, from early times, the 
principal centre of Grecian navigation ? 

A tradition prevailed, that even before the 
Dorian conquest, the fruitful and picturesque 
banks of the Alpheus, in the province of Elis, 
or Eleia, had been consecrated to Jupiter.16 It 
is certain that athletic sports, similar to those 
described by Homer at the funeral of Patro- 
clus, had been on many occasions exhibited in 
Elis, by assembled chiefs, with more than or- 
dinary solemnity.” The Dorian conquerors 
are said: to have renewed the consecration of 
that delightful province. But the wars which 
early prevailed between them and the Athe- 
nians, and the jealousies and hostilities which 
afterwards broke out among  themselves,'8 
totally interrupted the religious ceremonies and 
exhibitions with which they had been accus- 
tomed to honour their common gods and heroes. 
Amidst the calamities which afflicted or threat- 
ened the Peloponnesus, Iphitus, a descendant 


11 Ovexvos sveve. Homer, passim. 

12 See the inimitable description in the 6th book of the 
Odyssey, ver. 42. 

13 Kræ mruxaş Odvesroso. Along the foldings of 
Olympus. 

14 Homer, passim ; and particularly Iliad, l. xix. ver. 40. 

15 Pausan. Corinth. et Strabo, p. 382. 

16 Pausan. l. v. passim, et l. vi. p. 456. 

17 Iliad, ii. ver. 697, et Iliad, ix. ver. 623. 

18 Pausan. l. v. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


39 


of Oxylus, to whom the province of Eleia had 
fallen in the general partition of the peninsula, 
applied to the Delphic oracle. The priests of 
Apollo, ever disposed to favour the views of 
kings and legislators, answered agreeably to 
his wish, that the festivals anciently celebrated 
at Olympia, on the Alpheus, must be renewed, 
and an armistice proclaimed for all the states 
willing to partake of them, and desirous to 
avert the vengeance of heaven.'® Fortified 
by this authority, and assisted by the advice of 
Lycurgus, Iphitus took measures, not only for 
restoring the Olympic solemnity, but for ren- 
dering it perpetual. The imjunction of the 
oracle was speedily diffused through the re- 
motest parts of Greece, by the numerous vota- 
ries who frequented the sacred shrine. The 
armistice was proclaimed in Peloponnesus, and 
preparations were made in Eleia, for exhibiting 
shows and performing sacrifices. In the heroic 
ages, feats of bodily strength and address were 
destined to the honour of deceased warriors ; 
hymns and sacrifices were reserved for the 
gods. But the flexible texture of Grecian su- 
perstition, easily confounding the expressions 
of respectful gratitude and pious veneration, 
enabled Iphitus to unite both in his new insti- 
tution. 

The festival, which lasted five days, began 
and ended with a sacrifice to Olympian Jove. 
The intermediate time was chiefly filled up by 
the gymnastic exercises, in which all freemen 
of Grecian extraction were invited to contend, 
provided they had been born in lawful wedlock, 
and had lived untainted by any infamous im- 
moral stain. The preparation for this part of 
the entertainment was made in the gymnasium 
of Elis, a spacious edifice, surrounded by a 
double range of pillars, with an open area in 
the middle. Adjoining were various apart- 
ments, containing baths, and other conve- 
niences for the combatants. The neighbour- 
ing country was gradually adorned with porti- 
coes, shady walks and groves, interspersed with 
seats and benches, the whole originally destined 
to relieve the fatigues and anxiety of the can- 
didates for Olympic fame; and frequented, in 
later times, by sophists and philosophers, who 
were fond to contemplate wisdom, and com- 
municate knowledge, in those delightful re- 
treats. The order of the athletic exercises, or 
combats, was established by Lycurgus, and cor- 
responded almost exactly to that described by 
Homer, in the twenty-third book of the Iliad, 
and eighth of the Odyssey. Iphitus, we are 
told, appointed the other ceremonies and enter- 
tainments; settled the regular return of the 
festival at the end of every fourth year, in the 
month of July; and gave to the whole so- 
lemnity that form and arrangement, which it 
preserved with little variation above a thousand 
years; a period exceeding the duration of the 
most famous kingdoms and republics of anti 
quity.20 

Such isthe account of Grecian writers, who 
have, doubtless, often ascribed to positive in- 
stitution many inventions and usages naturally 


19 Phlegon. apud Euseb. 
20 See the authors cited by West, in his Dissertation on 
the Olympic Ganies. 


49 


resulting from the progressive manners of so- 
ciety. When we come to examine the Elian 
games in their more improved state, together 
with the innumerable imitations of them in 
other provinces of Greece, there will occur 
reasons for believing, that many regulations 
referred, by an easy solution, to the, legislative 
wisdom of Iphitus or Lycurgus, were intro- 
duced by time or accident, continued through 
custom, improved by repeated trials, and con- 
firmed by a sense of their utility. Yet such 
an institution as the Olympiad, even in its least 
perfect form, must have been attended with 
manifest advantages to society. Itis sufficient 
barely to mention the suspension of hostilities 
which took place, not only during the celebra- 
tion of the festival, but a considerable time 
both before and after it. Considered as a re- 
ligious ceremony, at which the whole Grecian 
name were invited, and even enjoined, to 
assist, it was well adapted to facilitate inter- 
course, to promote knowledge, to soften preju- 
dice, and to hasten the progress of civilization 
and humanity. Greece, and particularly Pe- 
loponnesus, was the centre from which the ad- 
venturous spirit of its inhabitants had diffused 
innumerable colonies through the surrounding 
nations. To these widely separated commu- 
nities, which, notwithstanding their common 
origin, seem to have lost all connection and 
correspondence, the Olympiad served as a 
common bond of alliance, and point of reunion. 
The celebrity of this festival continually at- 
tracted to it the characters most distinguished! 
for genius and enterprise, whose fame would 
have otherwise been unknown and lost in the 
boundless extent of Grecian territory. The 
remote inhabitants, not only of European 
Greece, but of Asia and Africa, being assem- 
bled to the worship of common gods, were 
formed to the sense of a general interest, and 


excited to the pursuit of national honour and | 


prosperity. Strangers of similar dispositions 
might confirm in Elis the sacred and indissolu- 
ble ties of hospitality. If their communities 
were endangered by any barbarous power, 
they might here solicit assistance from their 
Grecian brethren. On other occasions they 
might explain the benefits which, in peace or 
war, their respective countries were best quali- 
fied to communicate. And the Olympic festi- 
val might thus serve the purpose of resident 
ambassadors, and other institutions alike un- 
known to antiquity. 

Iphitus did not, probably, foresee the mani- 
fold advantages dvstined to result from his 
plan. His main aim was to protect the small 
principality of Elis against the dreaded inva- 
sion of more powerful neighbours. This he 
effectually accomplished by fencing it round 
with a wall of sanctity, while his more daring 
associate fortified Sparta with disciplined 
valour. Yet Lycurgus had further ends in 
view, when he proposed those celebrated laws, 
which were universally admired, but never 
imitated. Greece in that unfortunate age pre- 
sented a gloomy picture of domestic discord. 
The elevated, though romantic, sentiments of 


1 Pindar, passim. 


J 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


antiquity had ceased to prevail; the heroic 
character was effaced; and the generous, but 
often destructive expeditions into foreign lands, 
were interrupted by less daring, but still more 
fatal undertakings. The introduction of se- 
parate wealth had introduced inequality and 
ambition. Each petty prince was.desirous to 
exalt his prerogative, and to extend his domi- 
nions. The passions of neighbouring princes 
balanced his desire of conquest. The resist- 
ance of his subjects counteracted his usurpa- 
tions. Every kingdom, almost every city, was 
torn by a double conflict; dangers threatened 
on all sides; subjects expelled their kiugs, and 
kings became tyrants.? 

During these tumultuary scenes, I-ycurgus, 
of the line of Procles, and commonly reckoned 
the tenth in descent from Hercules, received 
the Spartan sceptre upon the death of his 
elder brother Polydectes; but the widow of Po- 
lydectes declaring herself pregnant, he resign- 
ed the crown, and assumed the title of pro- 
tector. This delicate attention to justice, rare 
in that turbulent age, excited just admiration 
for Lycurgus, which was enhanced by contrast. 
The ambitious princess, more solicitous to pre- 

serve the honours of a queen than desirous to 

know the tender cares of a mother, secretly in- 
timated to the protector, that, if he consented 
|to marry her, she would engage that no 
posthumous son of his brother should disap- 
point his hopes of the succession. Lycurgus 
feigned to enter into this unnatural project, but 
exhorted her not to endanger her health by 
procuring an abortion. When her delivery 
| drew near, he sent trusty persons to attend 
her, with orders that if she brought forth a 
| son, the infant should be immediately carried 
to him. This command was obeyed, while he 
supped with the principal magistrates of the 
republic. He received the child in his arms, 
saying, “ Spartans,a king is born to you!” Joy- 
ous congratulations followed, to commemorate 
which, the infant was named Chaerelaus, “the 
people’s joy.” Notwithstanding the fame re- 
dounding to Lycurgus from this transaction, 
the intrigues of the slighted queen raised a 
powerful faction against him. He withdrew 
himself from the gathering storm; and, being 
yet in early manhood, indulged his inclination 
for visiting foreign countries; an inclination 
strongest in liberal minds, and most com- 
mendable in ages of rudeness and ignorance, 
when the faint rays of knowledge must be 
collected from an extensive surface. 

The renowned Island of Crete, which had 
given birth to the gods and governments of 
Greece, first attracted his regard. The Cre- 
tans still partially adhered to the laws of 
Minos; but their island never resumed its 
pristine lustre after the fatal war of Troy. 
From Crete he sailed to Egypt, and carefully 
examined the civil and religious polity of that 
ancient kingdom. Despising the terrors of the 
sea, as well as the fatigues and dangers of un- 
explored journeys through barbarous or desert 
countries, he is said to have reached the popu- 
lous and flourishing kingdoms of the east. 


2 Thucyd. l.i. Plut, in Lycurg. 


. 


H.] 


nor, could we trust the partial evidence of his 
countryman Aristocrates,? did the remote pro- 
vinces of India escape his observation. He 
returned by the coast of Asia Minor, and ob- 
served, with equal astonishment and satisfac- 
tion, the numerous Greek colonies that had 
risen with such sudden splendour on the wes- 
tern coast of that valuable peninsula. The 
numerous advantages derived from this exten- 
sive view of men and manners, moulded by 
such a wide variety of religious, political, and 
military institutions, were all eclipsed by one 
discovery—the immortal poems of Homer, un- 
known to the Dorian conquerors of Pelopon- 
nesus, but carefully preserved among the 
Eolians and lonians, whose ancestors they 
celebrated. Lycurgus collected these invalu- 
able compositions ; arranged the several parts; 
transcribed and transported them to Sparta,4 
where, after two centuries of wars and revolu- 
tions, the customs as well as the sentiments 
described by the divine poet had been oblite- 
rated and forgotten. 

Neither the astonishing invention of Homcr, 
nor his inimitable fancy, nor the unrivalled 
copiousness, energy, and harmony of his style, 
so powerfully excited the discerning admiration 
of Lycurgus, as the treasures of his political 
and moral knowledge, which, being copied 
from the bright originals of a heroic age, might 
be employed to reform the abuses of a degenc- 
rate indeed, but not totally corrupted, nation. 
By restoring, in particular, the moderate spirit 
of policy which prevailed in happier times, the 
Spartan legislator might avert the most immi- 
nent dangers that threatened his family and his 
country. The royal families of Argos, Athens, 
and Thebes, had been reluctantly expelled by 
the resentment or caution of their injured or 
jealous subjects, who regretted that the regal 
power was so apt to degenerate into a system 
of oppression. The misfortunes which had 
abolished the honours, and almost extinguished 
the race of Atreus, O“dipus, Theseus, and so 
many other kings and heroes of antiquity, must 
pursue, and might soon overtake, the descend- 
ants of Hercules, whom the seasonable laws 
of Lycurgus maintained, during seven centu- 
ries, on the Spartan throne. The accumulation 
of private wealth, together with the natural 
progress of arts and luxury, would gradually 
tender the possessions of the Greeks more 
tempting prizes to rapacity and ambition, in 
proportion to the decay of that courage and 
discipline, which were requisite to their de- 
fence. The fertile plains of Laconia might 


3 Apud Plutareh. in Lycurg. 

4 This fact is generally acknowledged ; yet Plutarch tells 
us, that some writers were absurd enough to relate that Ly- 
curgus lived soon after Homer, and others, that he had ae- 
tually seen the divine poet. Homer describes the Pelopon- 
nesus with sueh accuracy, that the geographer Strabo 
follows him, as it were, step by step, through that peninsula. 
It is incredible, therefore, that he, who was so perfectly 
aequainted with that part of Greece, should have been 
totally forgotten there soon after his own times. Homer, 
it has been often observed, preserves a remarkable silence 
about himself; yet his antiquity, were it not sufficiently 
evident from the internal proofs above mentioned, might be 
proved from Odyss. l. i. ver. 351. and particularly from 
Iliad l. xx. ver. 308. He flourished before the return of the 
Heracleida, eighty years after the taking of Troy; a revo- 
lution which, had it happened before his time, could not 
bave escaped his notice. 


F 


HISLORY OF GREECE. 


41 


again be ravaged by the arms of some unculti- 
vated, but warlike tribe; Sparta might suffer 
similar calamities to those which she afterwards 
inflicted on Messene, and the alternative of do- 
minion or servitude depended en the carly in- 
stitutions that should be respectively embraced 
by so many neighbouring and independent, 
and therefore rival, communities. 

The sagacity of Lycurgus thus contemplating 
the relations and interests of his country and 
his family, regarded martial spirit and politi- 
cal liberty as the great ends of his legislation. 
These important objects had been attained by 
the primitive institutions so faithfully described 
by Homer. Lycurgus determined to imitate the 
simple beauty of that illustrious model; and, 
to the end that the Spartan constitution might 
enjoy a degree of permanence and stability 
which the herote policies had not possessed, he 
resolved to avoid the rocks on which they had 
shipwrecked, to cxtinguish the ambition of dis- 
tant or extensive conquest, to level the inc- 
quality of fortune, to crush the baneful effects 
of wealth and luxury; in one word, to arrest 
the progress of what is called the refinement, 
but what scemed to the manly discernment 
of this legislator, the corruption, of human 
society. 

To form such a design was the work of no 
vulgar mind; to carry it into exccution re- 
quired the most strenuous exertions of perse- 
verance andcourage. Yet, even at this distance 
of time, we may discover several favourable 
circumstances, which seasonably conspired with 
the views of Lycurgus; we may discover in the 
gradual display of his system, how the first 
institutions naturally paved the way for those 
which succeeded them; and while we admire 
the genius and the virtue, we must also ac- 
knowledge the dexterity and the fortune, of 


‘the Spartan legislator. 


The experience of history (and particularly 
the history which we have undcrtaken to record) 
attests the extraordinary revolution which one 
bold, wise, and disinterested man may produce 
in the affairs of the community of which he is 
amembcr. The domestic disorders which mul- 
tiplied in Sparta after the departure of Lycur- 
gus, obliged all ranks of men to look up to his 
abilities for protection. The animated decla- 
mations of Thales, a poet whom he had carried 
with him from Crete, and who relicarsed, with 
rapturous ecstasy, the verses of Homer and his 
own, singularly disposed the minds of men for 
adopting his proposed regulations. 

But neither these propitious circumstances, 
nor the merit of ten years travel in pursuit of 
moral knowledge and improvement, nor the tics 
of blood, of friendship, and of gratitude, which 
confirmed the influence of Lycurgus among 
the princival inhabitants of Sparta, could have 
enabled this great man to establish his plan of 
government, without the friendly co-operation 
of the Delphic oracle; which, since the decay 
of the heroic opinions and belief, had become 
the sovercign umpire of Greece. ‘The Pythia 
addressed him in terms of the highest respect; 
hesitated whether to call him a god cr a man, 
but rather deemed him a divinity ; approved the 
general spirit of the institutions which he pro- 


42 


posed to establish; and promised to furnish 
him, as occasion might require, with such ad- 
ditional regulations, as (when adopted by the 
Spartans) would render their republic happy 
and immortal. Fortified by this authority, Ly- 
curgus proceeded with a daring yet skilful hand, 
first, to new-model the government; secondly, 
to regulate wealth and possessions ; thirdly, to 
reform education and manners: judiciously 
pursuing this natural order of legislation, be- 
cause men are less jealous of power than tena- 
cious of property, and less tenacious of pro- 
perty itself, than of their ancient usages and 
customs. ! 

The first rhetra,? or laws which he establish- 
ed, tended to restore the mild moderation of 
mixed government, which distinguished the 
heroic ages. They confirmed the hereditary 
honours, but abolished the despotism,? of kings: 
they enforced the dutiful obedience, but vindi- 
cated the liberty, of subjects. Of the reigning 
princes, Cherelaus owed to Lycurgus his throne 
and his life, and Archelaus deemed it dangerous 
to oppose his projects. Instructed by the fatal 
experience of neighbouring tyrants, they were 
both easily prevailed on to prefer a secure, 
though limited, to an absolute, but precarious 
reign, The superstition of the people could 
not decline the authority of the legislator, when 
confirmed by the respected command of Apollo; 
and the interest of the nobles engaged them 
unanimously to promote his measures. With 
this illustrious body, consisting of twenty-eight 
chiefs, the most distinguished in the tribes and 
cities of Lyconia, Lycurgus consulted by what 
means to prevent the political dissensions from 
settling in the despotism of kings, or in the in- 
solence of democracy. By his new regulations 
the ancient honours of the nobility were con- 
firmed and extended. They were formed into a 
permanent council, or senate, which examined 
all matters of government before they were pro- 
posed to the deliberation of the people. The 
kings were entitled, as in the heroic ages, to be 
the hereditary presidents of this national tribu- 
nal; which, as in all important questions, it 
possessed a negative before debate; as the 
members were chosen for life; and as, on the 
decease of any senator, his son or nearest kins- 
man was naturally substituted in his stead, 
might have soon arrogated to itself the whole 
legislative as well as executive authority. 

In order to counteract this dangerous tenden- 
cy, Lycurgus instituted the ephori,‘ five annual 
magistrates, invested with a temporary power 
to inspect and control the administration of go- 
vernment, and to maintain the spirit and vigour 
of the established constitution. To the ephori 


1 The only dangerous opposition that he met with, was 
occasioned by his laws respecting these objects. A tumult 
being excited, the insolent Alcander wounded him in the 
face, by which Lycurgus Jost the sight of an eye. But the 
persuasive eloquence of the legislator quelled the sedition, 
and his moderation converted Alcander from a violent op- 
poser to a strenuous partisan. Plut. in Lycurg. 

2 The word is synonymous with oracula, fata; by which 
names his laws were distinguished as the immedlate dic- 
tates and inspirations of heaven. 

3 The difference between the GactAcexs, or royalties of 
the heroic ages, and the Tvexvviôss of succeeding times, is 
explained by Aristot. Politic. et Xenoph. Repub. Spart. 

4 Their name, denoting overseers, or inspectors, properly 
deecribes their office. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


it belonged to convoke, prorogue, and dissolve 
the greater and lesser assemblies of the people, 
the tormer composed of nine thousand Spartans, 
inhabitants of the capital, the latter of thirty 
thousand Lacedemonians, inhabitants of the 
inferior towns and villages. By frequently 
convening such numerous bodies of men, who 
had arms in their hands, they rendered them 
sensible of their own strength. The Lacede- 
monians felt themselves entitled not only to 
execute the just, but to thwart the unjust, orders 
of the senate. Nor was their liberty endangered 
by the limited prerogative of the kings, who 
monthly exchanged with the ephori solemn 
oaths; the former swearing for themselves to 
observe the laws of Sparta, the latter> for the 
people whom they represented, to maintain the 
hereditary honours of the Herculean race, to 
respect them as ministers of religion, to obey 
them as judges in peace, and to follow them as 
leaders in war. 

This equitable distribution of power was ac- 
companied, we are told, with an exact division 
of property. At the distance of five centuries 
it was the current tradition in Greece, that 
Lycurgus had totally altered the situation and 
circumstances of his countrymen, by the intro- 
duction of an agrarian law, similar to that which 
has been so often, but always so ineffectually, 
proposed in other republics, as the surest foun- 
dation of liberty and happiness. Yet the equal 
division of lands, or, in other words, the com- 
munity of landed property, and the annual par- 
tition of the harvest, took place among the ori- 
ginal inhabitants of Greece, as well as among 
the freeborn warriors of ancient Germany. It 
may be supposed therefore, with a high degree 
of probability, that the Spartans, in the time 
of Lycurgus, still preserved some traces of their 
primitive institutions, and that their minds were 
comparatively untainted with the vices of ava- 
rice and luxury. To bring them back, however, 
to the perfect simplicity of the heroic ages, and 
to prevent their future degeneracy, the territory 
of Laconia was divided into thirty-nine thou- 
sand portions, each producing eighty-two me- 
dimni, or bushels, of barley, with a proportional 
measure of fruits, wine, and oil. The rich pas- 
ture ground was probably left in common. The 
kings, as in the age of Homer, enjoyed their 
separate’ domain, conferred by the voluntary 
gratitude of their subjects. ‘The senators, con- 
tented with an increase of power and honour, 
neither obtained nor desired any pre-eminence 
of fortune. Their moderation in this respect 
afforded a salutary example to the people, the 
greater part of whom would naturally be gain- 
ers by the agrarian law, while the few who were 
rich, for that relative term always implies the 


5 The authority of Herodotus, |. i. and of Xenophon de 
Repub. Spart. refutes Aristot. Polit. l. ii.c. 5. and Plutarch, 
in Lycurg. The last mentioned writers refer the institution 
of the ephori to Theopompus, who lived 130 years after 
Lycurgus. But this assertion only proves that neither 
Aristotle nor Plutarch had sufficiently entered into the 
views of the Spartan legislator. The ephori, as it appears 
from Xenophon and Herodotus, and from the whole transac- 
tions of Sparta, formec an essential part of his plan. 

6 Xenoph. ibid. ° 

7 The Tsusvoçs. Xenophon tells us, that it was always 
well watered; it probably consisted, as in Homer’s time, 
quraking xæ: aeovess, of plantations and corn land. 


1L) 


smalier zumber, submitted without resistance 
to the wisdom of Lycurgus, and the authority 
of Apollo. 

The equal division of land seemed not alone 
sufficient to introduce an equality in the man- 
ner of life, and to banish the seeds of luxury. 
The accumulation of moveable, or what the 
Greeks called invisible property, might enable 
the rich tocommand the labour of the poor, and, 
according to the natural progress of wants and 
inventions, must encourage the dangerous pur- 
suit of elegance and pleasure. The precious 
metals had long been the ordinary measures 
of exchange in Sparta, and, could we credit a 
very doubtful tradition, had greatly accumu- 
‘ated in private hands. Lycurgus withdrew 
trom farther circulation all this gold and silver, 
a considerable part of which probably repaid 
his gratitude to the Delphic oracle, while the 
remainder increased the splendour of the Lace- 
dzimonian temples. Instead of these precious 
metals, the Spartans received pieces of iron, 
which had been heated red in the fire, and 
afterwards quenched in vinegar, in order to 
render them brittle, and useless for every other 
purpose but that of serving as the current 
specie. 

Astonishing, say Xenophon and Plutarch, 
were the effects of this operation. With the 
banishment of gold and silver were banished all 
the pernicious appetites which they excite, and 
all the frivolous arts which they introduce and 
nourish. Neither fortune-teller, nor physician, 
nor sophist, were longer to be seen in Sparta; 
gaudy trinkets and toys, and all useless finery 
in dress and furniture, at once disappeared; and 
the innocence and dignity of Spartan manners 
corresponded with the primitive simplicity of 
the iron money. But to reduce to the standard 
of truth or probability this very fanciful de- 
scription, it may be observed, that the useful- 
ness and scarcity of iron rendered it, in early 
times, a very ordinary and convenient measure 
of exchange. As such it was frequently em- 
ployed in the heroic ages ;9 as such it long 
continued at Byzantium,!0 and other Grecian 
cities.!! The necessity of cooling it in acid, in 
order to diminish its worth, indicates its high 
value even in the time of Lycurgus. The 
alteration of the specie, therefore, probably ap- 
peared not so violent a measure as later writers 
were inclined to represent it; nor could the 
abolition of gold and silver abolish such ele- 
gances and refinements as surely had no exist- 
ence in Greece, during the age of the Spartan 
legislator. But it may reasonably be believed, 
that the use of iron money, which continued 
permanent in Sparta alone, after the vices of 
wealth and luxury had polluted the rest of 
Greece, necessarily repelled from the republic 
of Lycurgus the votaries of pleasure, as well as 
the slaves of gain, and all the miserable retinue 
of vanity and folly. 

That wealth is little to be coveted, even by 
the most selfish, which neither gratifies vanity, 
nor flatters the desire of power, nor promises 


8 Ovetz apavas. See Lysias, passim. 
9 Homer, passim. 

10 Aristoph. Nubes. 

11 Plut. in Lysand. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


43 


the means of pleasure. Upon the smallest ab- 
straction, if avarice were at all capable of ab- 
straction, the most sordid might sympathize 
with the contempt for superfluous riches, which 
could never be applied to any purpose, either 
useful or agreeable. What effort could the 
generosity of that people require (if the indif- 
ference of the Spartans deserve the name of 
generosity,) among whom all valuable objects 
were equally divided, or enjoyed in com- 
mon?!2_-among whom it was enjoined by the 
laws and deemed honourable by the citizens, 
freely to communicate their arms, horses, in- 
struments of agriculture and hunting; to eat 
together at common and frugal tables, agreea- 
bly to the institutions of Crete, as well as the 
practice of the heroic ages; to disregard every 
distinction but that of personal merit; to de- 
spise every luxury but that of temperance; and 
to disdain every acquisition but that of the 
public esteem ? 

The general and firm assent to the divine 
mission of Lycurgus might excite the most 
generous and manly sentiments in the minds 
of his countrymen. The persuasive force of 
his eloquence, assisted by the lyric genius of 
Thales, a poet worthy of Apollo and his mis- 
sionary,!3 might enable the legislator to com- 
plete his beneficial and extensive plan. But 
there was reason to apprehend lest the system 
of Lycurgus, like most schemes of reformation, 
should evaporate with the enthusiasm which 
produced it, unless the mortifications which it 
enjoined were rendered habitual to practice, 
and familiar to fancy. His laws were few and 
short; for the sake of memory they were con- 
ceived in verse; they were not consigned to 
writing, but treasured in the hearts of his dis- 
ciples as the immediate dictates of heaven. 
The Lacedemonians were severely prohibited 
from the contagious intercourse of strangers, 
except at the stated returns of religious so- 
lemnities. Lycurgus, who had assisted Iphitus 
in restoring the Olympic games, instituted 
similar, though less splendid, festivals in his 
native country. When unemployed in the se- 
rious business of war, the Laced#monians 
were continually engaged in assemblies for 
conversation and the gymnastic exercises, or 
in religious and military amusements. Agri- 
culture and the mechanic arts were left to the 
servile hands of the Helots, under which ap- 
pellation were comprehended (as will be ex- 
plained hereafter) various hostile communities 
that successively fell under the dominion of 
Sparta,and whose personal iabour was regard- 
ed as the common property of the public.!4 
The sciences of war and government were re- 
commended by the laws of Lycurgus, as the 
only pursuits deserving the attention of free- 
men. 

In the knowledge and practice of war, the 
Lacedemonians (if we believe Xenophon, who 
had fought with and against them) far excel- 
led all Greeks and barbarians. Courage, the 


12 Xenoph. in Lysand. c. vi. 

13 Plut. in Lycurg. 

l4 Kus roorov rive Symorsovus erxov dovdovus, * And in 
some measure, they,” the Lacedrmonians, ‘had public 
slaves” Strabo. See likewise Aristot. Repub. 1. ii. c. 5. 


44 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


first quality of a soldier, was enlivened by] king sacrificed anew ; 


[CHap. 


the music struck up; 


every motive that can operate most powerfully | and the soldiers advanced with a slow and 


on the mind, while cowardice was branded as 
the most odious and destructive of crimes, on 
the principle that it tended,not like many other 
vices, merely to the hurt of individuals, but to 
the servitude and ruin of the community. The 
Spartans preserved the use of the same wea- 
pons and defensive armour that had been 
adopted in the heroic ages; shortening only 
the length, and thereby improving the form 
of the sword, which was two-edged, pointed, 
massy, and fitted either by cutting or thrusting 
to inflict a dangerous wound.! Their troops 
were divided into regiments, consisting of five 
hundred and twelve men, subdivided into four 
companies, and each of these into smaller 
divisions, commanded by their respective 
officers; for it was peculiar to the Lacedemo- 
nian armies to contain, comparatively, few men 
not entrusted with some share of subordinate 
command.? The soldiers were attended by a 
multitude of artisans and slaves, who furnish- 
ed them with all necessary supplies, and ac- 
companied by a long train of priests and poets, 
who flattered their hopes, and animated their 
valour. A body of cavalry always preceded 
their march; sensible of the weakness of angles, 
they encamped in a circular form: the order 
of their guards and watches was highly judi- 
cious; they employed, for their security, out- 
sentries and videttes; and regularly, every 
morning and evening, performed their custo- 
mary exercises. Xenophon has described with 
what facility they wheeled in all directions ; 
converted the column of march into an order 
of battle; and by skilful and rapid evolutions, 
presented the strength’ of the line to an unex- 
pected assault. When they found it prudent 
to attack, the king, who usually rose before 
dawn, to anticipate, by early prayer and sacri- 
fice,4 the favour of the gods, communicated his 
orders to charge in a full line, or in columns, 
according to the nature of the ground, and the 
numbers and disposition of the enemy. In the 
day of battle, the Spartans assumed an unu- 
sual gayety of aspect; and displayed, in their 
dress and ornaments, more than their wonted 
splendour. Their long hair was arranged 
with simple elegance; their scarlet uniforms, 
and brazen armour, diffused a lustre around 
them. As they approached the enemy, the 


1 Vid. Pollux, voc. ZuxAcv, 

2 Thucydides, who remarks this peculiarity, l. v. p. 390. 
assigns the reason of it, that the care of the execution 
might pertain to many. The whole Lacedemonian army, 
except a few, consisted, he says, in eexovres xexovTay, 
xxi TO NE rou so WOKKOSS WROTAKES, It is ne- 
cessary to observe, that the account given by Thucydides, 
in this passage, of the composition of the Lacedæmonian 
armies, differs materially from that of Xenophon. Ihave 
preferred the latter, first, because Xenophon writes expres sly 
on the subject, of which Thucydides speaks incidentally in 
describing a particular battle : secondly, because the obser- 
vations of Xenophon relate to the age of Lycurgus, those 
of Thucydides to the time of the Peloponnesian war: 
thirdly, because, as will appear in the sequel, Xenophon 
had a better opportunity than any other stranger, of being 
thoroughly acquainted with the affairs of Lacedemon. 

3 The Lacedemonian tactics will be explained more 
particularly hereafter. ` 

4 Ov yen mxvvu%iov suðsiv Sourngosov avigw 

Oi Anos exirerex@eTas Kab TOTTE EUAS. 
Lycurgus, never losing sight of Homer, converted his ad- 
vices into laws. 


steady pace, and with a cheerful but deliberate 
countenance, to what they were taught to re- 
gard as the noblest employment of man. Pro- 
per officers were appointed to receive the pri- 
soners, to divide the spoil, and to decide the 
coutested prizes of valour. Both before and 
after, as well as during, the action, every mea- 
sure was conducted with such order and cele- 
rity, that a great captain declares, that when 
he considered the discipline of the Spartans, 
all other nations appeared but children in the 
art of war. 

But that continual exercise in arms, which 
improved the skill and confirmed the valour, 
must gradually have exhausted the strength of 
Sparta, unless the care of population had 
formed an object of principal concern in the 
system of Lycurgus. Marriage was directly 
enjoined by some very singular institutions ;6 
but still more powerfully encouraged by extir- 
pating its greatest enemies, luxury and vanity. 
But Lycurgus, not contented with maintaining 
the populousness of Sparta, endeavoured to 
supply the past generation with a nobler and 
more warlike race, and to enlarge and elevate 
the bodies and minds of men to that full pro- 
portion of which their nature is susceptible. 
The credulous love of wonder has always been 
eager to assert, what the vanity of every age 
has been unwilling to believe, that the ancient 
inhabitants of the world possessed a measure 
of size and strength, as well as of courage and 
virtue, unattainable and unknown amidst the 
corruptions and degeneracy of later times. 
The frequent repetition of the same romantic 
tale renders giants and heroes familiar and in- 
sipid personages in the remote history of al- 
most every people: but from the general mass 
of fable, a just discernment will separate the 
genuine ore of Homer and Lycurgus. The 
laws of the latter brought back the heroic 
manners which the former had described; and 
their effects, being not less permanent than 
salutary, are, at the distance of many centuries, 
attested by eye-witnesses, whose unimpeached 
veracity declares the Spartans superior to other 
men in the excellences of mind and body.’ 

Of this extraordinary circumstance, the evi- 
dence of contemporary writers could scarcely 
convince us, if they had barely mentioned the 
fact, without explaining its cause. But in de- 
scribing the system of Lycurgus, they have 
not omitted his important regulations concern- 
ing the intercourse between the sexes, women, 
marriage, and children, whose welfare was, 
even before their birth, a concern to the repub- 
lic. The generous and brave, it is said, pro- 
duce the brave and good; but the physical 
qualities of children still more depend on the 
constitution of their parents. In other coun- 


5 Xenoph. de Repub. Spart. 

6 Bachelors were debarred from assisting at the female 
dances. They were compelled to walk naked through the 
streets in the winter solstice, singing a ludicrous song, 
which confessed the justice of their punishment. 

7 As to the mind, the Spartans were, sa Xenophon, 
EUTELGETTERCL, KE wanena te TN xxi WEL EYRExTET~ 
teeos. Ib. c. ili, And as to the body, Sieeegovras xas 
ANTM psyeloc uni KAT% 1oHuv asdens ev ETAPTA OTETI” 
Anger, Ib 


Ill. ] 


tries of Greece, the men were liberally formed 
by war, hunting, and the gymnastic exercises ; 
but the women were universally condemned to 
drudge in sedentary and ignoble occupations, 
which enfeebled the mind and body. Their 
chief employment was to superintend, more 
frequently to perform, the meanest oiflices of 
domestic economy, and to prepare, by the la- 
bour of their hands, food and raiment for 
themselves and families, ‘Their diet was coarse 
and sparing; they abstained from the use of 
wine; they were deprived of liberal education, 
and debarred from fashionable amusements. 
Women, thus degraded by servility, appeared 
incapable of giving good sons to the republic, 
which Lycurgus regarded as the principal duty 
of the Lacedemonian females. By the insti- 
tutions of Sparta, therefore, the working of 
wool, the labours of the loom and needle, and 
other mean mechanical arts, were generally 
committed to servile hands. The free-born 
women enjoyed and practised those liberal ex- 
ercises and amusements, which were elsewhere 
considered as the peculiar privilege of men; 
they assisted at the public solemnities, min- 
gled in general conversation, and dispensed 
that applause and reproach, which dispensed 
by them, are always most effectual.8 Hence 
they became not only the companions but the 
judges of the other sex; and, except that their 
natural delicacy was not associated to the ho- 
nours of war, they enjoyed the benefit, with- 
out feeling the restraint, of the Spartan laws. 

The restoration of the natural rights of wo- 
men restored moderation and modesty in the 
intercourse between the sexes. Marriage, 
though enjoined as a duty, could only be con- 
tracted in the full vigour of age; and these 
simple institutions had a more salutary influ- 
ence on the physical improvement of the Spar- 
tans, than either the doubtful expedient, which 
prevailed among them to the latest times, of 
adorning the women’s apartments with. the 
finest statues of gods and heroes, that, by fre- 
quently contemplating these graceful images, 
they might produce fairer offspring; or the 
unnatural and detestable cruelty of exposing | 
delicate or deformed children, a practice 
strongly recommended by Lycurgus, and si- 
lently approved, or faintly blamed, by the 
greatest philosophers of antiquity. 

Even in a moral view, the character of Spar- 
tan mothers must have been highly beneficial 
to their sons; since much of the happiness of 
life depends on the first impressions of our 
tender years. When boys were emancipated 
from the jurisdiction of women, they were 
not entrusted, as in other parts of Greece, to 
the mercenary tuition of slaves, who might 
degrade their sentiments, and corrupt their 
morals, ‘The education of youth, as an office 
of the highest confidence, was committed to 
those who had enjoyed, or who were entitled 
to enjoy, the most splendid dignities of the 


a 


8 This, likewise, was the business of women in the heroic 
ages. 
AALS Made ivo 
Aiðiouai Tewes xai Towadas EAXETITETAOVNG, 
Aijt, Kanos ws, VOTPIY wAVEKaCw TOAEROID, 
Il. 1. vi. ver. 443. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


45 


republic; after the example of ancient times, 
when Phenix educated Achilles, and when 
it was reasonably required that the master 
should himself possess the virtues with which 
he undertook to inspire his disciples. The 
Spartan youth were taught music and draw- 
ing: the former of which comprehended the 
science not only of sounds, but of number and 
quantity : they were taught to read and speak 
their own language with graceful propriety ; 
to compose in prose and in verse; above all, to 
think, and in whatever they said, even during 
the flow of unguarded conversation, to accom- 
modate the expression to the sentiment.9 
Their sedentary studies were relieved by the 
orchestric and gymnastic exercises, the early 
practice of which might qualify them for the 
martial labours of the field. For this most 
important business of their manhood, they 
were still further prepared, by being inured, 
even in their tender years, to a life of hardship 
and severity. They wore the same garment, 
summer and winter; they walked bare-footed 
in all seasons ; their diet was plain and frugal, 
and for the most part so sparing, that they lost 
no opportunity to supply the defect. What 
they were unable to ravish by force, they ac- 
quired by fraud. When their theft (if theft 
can be practised where separate property is al- 
most unknown) was discovered, they were se- 
verely punished ; but if their dexterous deceit 
escaped observation, they were allowed to boast 
of their success, and met with due applause 
for their activity, vigilance, and caution; which 
indicated a character well fitted to excel in the 
useful stratagems of war.!0 

After attaining the ordinary branches of edu- 
cation, youth are frequently left the masters of 
their own actions, Of all practical errors, 
Lycurgus deemed this the most dangerous. 
His discernment perceived the value of that 
mast important period of life, which intervenes 
between childhood and virility; and the whole 
force of his discipline was applied to its direc- 
tion and improvement. Instead of being loosen- 
ed from the usual ties of authority, the Spar- 
tans, at the age of adolescence, were subjected 
to a more rigorous restraint; and the most 
extraordinary expedients were employed to 
moderate the love of pleasure, to correct the 
insolence of inexperience, and to control the 
headstrong impetuosity of other youthful pas- 
sions. ‘Their bodies were early familiarized to 
fatigue, hunger, and watching; their minds 
were early accustomed to difficulty and danger. 


|The laborious exercise of the chase formed 


their principal amuseinent; at stated times, the 
magistrates took an account of their actions, 
and carefully examined their appearance. If 
the seeds of their vicious appetites had not been 
thoroughly eradicated by a life of habitual toil 
and temperance, they were subjected to corpo- 
ral punishment, which it was their custom to 
endure with patient fortitude. The maxims 


9 In the smart pithy sentences, or apophthegms, for 
which the Spartans were famous, the thought is sometimes 
elegant, and sometimes ingenious; but their merit depends 
for the most part on the observance of the rule in the text. 
Sce Plut. Apoph. 

10 Besides Xenophon and Plutarch, see, for the Spartan 
education, Plato in Protagor. 


46 


of honour were instilled by precept, and en- 
forced by example. The public tables, which 
were frequented by all ages, served as so many 
schools of wisdom and virtue, where, on ordi- 
nary occasions, but more particularly on days 
of festivity, the old related their ancient ex- 
ploits, and boasted their past prowess; those 
in the vigour of life displayed the sentiments 
which their manly courage inspired; and the 
young expressed a modest confidence that, by 
stedfastly adhering to the precepts of Lycur- 
gus, they might be enabled in due tinie to equal, 
perhaps to surpass, the glory of both. 

But the desire of emulating the fame of their 
illustrious ancestors was not the most ardent 
principle that animated the minds of the rising 
generation. They were taught to vie with each 
other in every agreeable and useful accomplish- 
ment. As they were publicly educated in 
separate classes, according to their respective 
ages of childhood, adolescence, and puberty,! 
their characters were exactly ascertained and 
fully known; and the rewards and honours 
gradually bestowed on them, were apportioned 
to the various degrees of excellence which they 
had previously discovered. When they attained 
the verge of manhood, three youths of superior 
merit were named by the ephori, that they 
might respectively choose, cach a hundred of 
their companions, who should be entitled to the 
honourable distinction of serving in the cavalry. 
The reasons of preference and rejection were 
openly explained; and the youths who had 
been set aside, became, from that moment, the 
rivals and opponents both of the electors and 
of the elected. At home and abroad, in the 
assemblies for conversation and exercise, in the 
gymnastic and musical contests, in their mili- 
tary expeditions, as well as their martial amuse- 
ments, the two parties displayed the utmost 
emulation and ardour, the one to regain the 
equality which they had lost, the other to main- 
tain their ascendant. They seldom rencountred 
in the streets or walks, without discovering their 
animosity in mutual reproaches, and sometimes 
in blows. But these quarrels were not danger- 
ous, either to the safety of the public, or to the 
persons of individuals, because the combatants 
were obliged to separate (under the pain of 
punishment and disgrace) at the peaceful sum- 
mons of every by-stander; and the respected 
admonitions of age controlled, on such occa- 
sions, the youthful fermentation of turbulent 
passions, a 

The reverence of aged wisdom, which formed 
the prevailing sentiment of the heroic times, 
was restored by the legislation of Lycurgus, 
and employed as a main pillar of his political 
edifice. The renovation of limited government, 
the equal partition of lands, and the abolition 
of wealth and luxury, had removed the artifi- 
cial sources of half the miseries and disgrace 
of human kind. But Lycurgus considered his 
system as incomplete, until he levelled not only 
the artificial, but many of the natural inequali- 
ties, in the condition of his fellow-citizens. 


1 I have chosen these words to express the successive ages 
of the wats, wecexxsov, cubos. They continued »Bxwures 
till 46, which was reckoned by the Greeks and Romans the 
beginning of old age. Vid. Cic. de Senectute. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


{Cuar. 


The fears and infirmities of the old were com- 
pensated by honour and respect; the hopes and 
vigour of the young were balanced by obedi- 
ence and restraint. The difference of years 
thus occas. ~ed little disproportion of enjoy- 
ment; the ha, ‘ness of every age depended on 
the practice of jirtue; and as all adventitious 
and accidental distinctions were removed, men 
perceived the importance of personal merit, and 
of its reward, the public esteem, and eagerly 
grasped the advantages which glory confers; 
the only exclusive advantages which the laws 
of Lycurgus permitted them to enjoy. The 
paternal authority,? which maintained the dis- 
cipline, and promoted the grandeur of Rome, 
was firmly established at Sparta, where every 
father might exercise an unlimited power, over 
not only his own, but the children of others, 
who were all alike regarded as the common 
sons of the republic, This domestic superiority 
naturally prepared the way for civil pre-emi- 
nence; the elective dignities of the state were 
obtained only by men of experienced wisdom; 
and it required sixty years of laborious virtue 
ta be entitled to a seat in the senate-house, the 
hignest ambition of the Spartan chiefs. Such 
regulations, of which it is impossible to mistake 
the spirit, had a direct tendency to produce 
moderation and firmness in the public councils, 
to control the too impetuous ardour of a war- 
like people, to allay the ferment of domestic 
faction, and to check the dangerous ambition 
of foreign conquest. The power of the magis- 
trate was confounded with the authority of the 
parent; they mutually assisted and strengthened 
each other, and their united influence long 
upheld the unshaken fabric of the Spartan 
laws, which the old felt it their interest to 
maintain, and the young deemed it their glory 
to obey. > 

Such were the celebrated institutions or xy- 
curgus, which are eminently distinguished by 
the simplicity of their design, the exact adapta- 
tion of their parts, and the uniform consistence 
of the whole, from the political establishments 
of other countries, which are commonly the 
irregular and motley production of time and 
accident. Without a careful examination of 
the whole system, it is impossible to seize the 
spirit of particular laws. But if the whole be 
attentively considered, we shall perceive that 
they contain nothing so original or so singular 
as is generally believed. From the innumera- 
ble coincidences that have been remarked be- 
tween the heroic and the Spartan discipline, 
there seems sufficient ground to conclude that 
the one was borrowed from the other; and if 
we accurately contemplate the genius of both, 
we may discern that they tended, not (as has 
been often said) to stop and interrupt, but only 
to divert, the natural current of human pro- 
pensities and passions. The desire of wealth 
and of power, of effeminate ease, of frivolous 
amusements, and of all the artificial advantages 
and enjoyments of society, are only so many 
ramifications of the love of action and of plea- 
sure; passions which it would be impossible to 
eradicate without destroying the whole vigour 


ET 


2 The “ patria potestas.” 


~ 


UL] 


of the mind. Yet these propensities, which it 
is often the vain boast of philosophy to subdue, 
policy may direct to new and more exalted ob- 
jects. For the sordid occupations of interest, 
may be substituted the manly pursuits of ho- 
nour; the love of virtuous praise may control 
the desire of vicious indulgence; and the im- 
pressions of early institution, confirmed by 
example and habit, may render the great duties 
of life its principal employment and pleasure. 
Such a condition of society seems the highest 
elevation and grandeur to which human nature 
can aspire. The Spartans attained, and long 
preserved, this state of exaltation; but several 
circumstances and events, which the wisdom of 
Lycurgus? had foreseen, but which no human 
power could prevent, undermined the founda- 
tion of their greatness and felicity. Their mili- 
tary prowess gave them victory, slaves, and 
wealth; and though individuals could feel only 
the pride of virtue, and enjoy only the luxury 
of glory, the public imbibed the spirit of rapa- 
city and the ambition of conquest. As in other 
countries the vices of individuals corrupt the 
community, in Laconia the vices of the public 
corrupted individuals. This unfortunate ten- 
dency was increased by the inequality of the 
cities originally subject to the Lacedemonian 
laws. Sparta, the capital, contained nearly a 
fourth part of the inhabitants of the whole ter- 
ritory; the rest were divided among thirty, and 
afterwards eighteen, subordinate towns.4 The 
superior numbers of the Spartans enlarged 
their sphere of competition, and increased their 
ardour of emulation. They soon surpassed their 
neighbours, not only in valour and address, but 
in dignity and in power. All matters of im- 
portance were decided in the lesser assembly ; 
the greater was seldom summoned; and the 
members of the former, instead of continuing 
the equals, became the masters, and at length 
the tyrants, of their Lacedemonian brethren. 
The usurpation of power fomented their desire 
of wealth; several lots were accumulated by the 
same persons as early as the Persian war;5 and 
the necessity of defending their possessions, 
and their authority, against men who had arms 
in their hands and resentment in their hearts, 
rendered their government uncommonly rigid 


3 Lycurgus had formed Sparta for defence, not for con- 
quest. He expressly forbade them to pursue a flying enemy; 
he forbade them to engage frequently in war with the same 


people. Both injunctions were violated in the Messenian 
wars. 
4 Strabo, l. viii. 


5 Demaratus told Xerxes that there were but eight thou- 
sand Spartan lots, (Herodot.) and about a century afterwards 
their number was reduced to one thousand. Arist. Polit. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


47 


and severe. The slaves, the freedmen,® the 
tenants of the Laconic territory, and even such 
of the inhabitants of the capital as, on account 
of their poverty, cowardice, or any other dis- 
graceful circumstance, were debarred from the 
dignities of the republic,’ testified the keenest 
animosity against the stern pride of the Spar- 
tan magistrates, and, to use the lively but in- 
delicate expression of Xenophon, would have 
devoured them raw.8 The Spartans, however, 
still maintained their superiority by force or by 
fraud, by seasonable compliance, or by prompt 
and judicious severity. By dividing the strength 
they disarmed the fury of their enemies, and the 
flames of domestic discord were eclipsed by the 
splendour of foreign conquest, by which both 
the magistrates and the subjects were enriched 
and corrupted: yet, amidst civil discord and 
political degeneracy, they still preserved their 
religious and military institutions, as well as 
their invaluable plan of education; and their 
transactions, even in the latest ages of Greece, 
will furnish an ample and honourable commen- 
tary on the laws of Lycurgus. 

Concerning this extraordinary man, only one 
farther? circumstance is recorded with any ap- 
pearance of authenticity ; a circumstance highly 
descriptive both of his own character, and of 
that of the age in which he lived. Having 
beheld the harmony of the political machine, 
which he had so skilfully contrived, he sum- 
moned an assembly, and declared, that now he 
had but one new regulation to propose, upon 
which, however, it was first necessary to con- 
sult the oracle of Delphi; that, meanwhile, his 
countrymen, who had seen the success of his 
labours, would engage that no alterations should 
take place before his return. The kings, the 
senate, and the people, ratified the engagement 
by a solemn oath. Lycurgus undertook his 
journey; the oracle predicted the happiness 
which the Spartans should enjoy under his 
admirable laws; the response was transmitted 
to his country, where Lycurgus himself de- 
termined never more to return, convinced that 
the duration of the government which he had 
established would be better secured by the 
eternal sanctity of an oath, than by the tempo- 
rary influence of his own personal presence. 


6 So I have translated the word veodzpwdets, an the 
authority of Thucydides, l. v. duvxrac de to veodapwdss 
sàsuĝsgov yoy sivas. The resentment even of the freetimen 
proves the intolerahle severity of the government. 

7 They were called vzoecoves, inferiors, in opposition to 
the 0/0102, or peers. 

8 Xenophon Hellen. 1. iii. 

9 Some contradictory traditions concerning his death are 
preserved in Plut. in Lycurg. et Justin. |. iii. 


48 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


CHAPTER IV. . 


Stale of Greece after the Abolition of Royalty—Description of Laconia and Messenia—Causes 
of the War between those States—Invasion of Messenia—Distress of the Messenians—The 
horrid means by which they endeavour to remedy it—They obtain assistance from Argos. and 
Arcadia—Their Capital taken by the Spartans—lIssue of the first Messeniun War—State of 
Greece—The Colony of Tarentum founded—The second Messenian War—Character and 
exploits of Aristomenes—The distress of the Spurtans—They obtain assistance from Athens— 
The Poet Tyrteus—Subjugation of Messenia—Future fortunes of its Citizens—Their Esta- 


blishment in Sicily. 


HAP the Greeks remained subject to kings, 

it is probable that they would have con- 
tinued longer to exert their united valour 
against the surrounding barbarians. The suc- 
cessful adventures of the Argonauts, the glo- 
rious, though fatal expedition against Troy, 
would have animated the emulation and the 
hopes of succeeding candidates for fame; and 
the whole nation, being frequently employed in 
distant and general enterprises, would, through 
the habits of mutual intercourse, and the na- 
tural tendency of military subordination, have 
been gradually moulded into one powerful 
monarchy. This revolution would have given 
immediate tranquillity to Greece, but destroyed 
the prospect of its future grandeur. The hon- 
ourable competitions of rival provinces must 
have ceased with their political independence; 
nor would the Greeks have enjoyed an oppor- 
tunity of acquiring, by a long and severe ap- 
prenticeship in arms, that disciplined valour 
which eminently distinguished them above 
other nations of antiquity. In most countries 
it has been observed, that before the introduc- 
tion of regular troops, the militia of the borders 
far excel those of the central provinces. Greece, 
even under its kings, was divided into so many 
independent states, that it might be regarded as 
consisting entirely of frontier. Under the re- 
publican form of government, it was still more 
subdivided; and motives of private ambition 
now co-operating with reasons of national ani- 
mosity, wars became more frequent, and battles 
more bloody and more obstinate. It is little to 
be regretted that scarcely any materials remain 
for describing the perpetual hostilities between 
the Thebans and the Athenians; between the 
latter and the Peloponnesians; between the 
Phocians and Thessalians; and, in general, be- 
tween each community and its neighbours. 
The long and spirited contest between the 
Lacedemonians and Messenians, is the only 
war of that age which produced permanent 
effects. The relation of this obstinate struggle 
has happily come down to us, accompanied 
with such circumstances as paint the condition 
of the times, and answer the main ends of 
history. 

The territories of Laconia and Messenia oc- 
cupied the southern regions of the Pelopon- 
nesus. The shores of Laconia were washed 
by the eastern, or the Ægean; those of Mes- 
senia,! by the Western, or the Ionian, sea. The 
former country extended forty miles from east 


1 Isocrat. in Archidam. calls the country Messene; Pau- 
eanias, Messenia. 


, 


to west, and sixty from north to south. The 
ground, though roughened by mountains, like 
the rest of the Peloponnesus, abounded in rich 
and fertile valleys, equally adapted to the pur- 
poses of cultivation and pasture. The whole 
country was anciently called Hecatonpolis,? 
from its hundred cities. They were reduced 
to the number of thirty,’ as early as the time of 
Lycurgus. The decay or destruction of Helos, 
Amycle, Pharis, and Geronthe, and other less 
considerable towns, gradually increased the 
populousness of Sparta, the capital, situate 
near the centre of Laconia, and almost sur- 
rounded by the Eurotas. The other inland 
places of most note were Gerenea, Thurium, 
and Sellasia. The sea-ports were Prasiae, 
Cyphanta, Zarax; Limera, famous for its vines; 
and Gythium, whose capacious harbour was, 
in all ages, more than sufficient to contain the 


naval strength of Sparta.4 In the time of Ly- 
ccurgus, the freemen, of full age, amounted to 


thirty-nine thousand. Those of full age are 
generally reckoned the fourth part of the whole; 
so that the free inhabitants of Laconia may be 
computed at one hundred and fifty-six thou- 
sand; and the slaves, as will appear hereafter 
probably exceeded four times that number. 

Messenia was less extensive, but more fertile, 
than Laconia; and the former country, in an- 
cient times, was proportionably more populous. 
Both kingdoms were principally supported by 
agriculture and pasturage, their subjects never 
having attained any high degree of improve- 
ment in arts, manufactures, or commerce. Mes- 
senia was, however, adorned by the seaports 
of Corone, Pylus, Methone, and Cyparyssus. 
The most considerable inland towns were An- 
dania, the ancient capital; the strong fortress 
of Eira; the frontier town of Ampheia; and the 
celebrated Ithome, near to the ruins of which 
was erected, by Epaminondas, the compara- 
tively modern city of Messenc.® 

As the countries of Laconia and Messenia 
were both governed by kings of the family of 
Hercules, and both inhabited by subjects of the 
same Doric race, it might have been imagined 
that such powerful connections would have 
disposed them to continue in a state of mutual 
friendship; or, if the ties of blood could not 
excite neighbouring states to a reciprocation of 
good offices, that they would at least have 


2 Strabo, l. viii. p. 362. mentions this only as a hearsay ; 
but it has been always repeated. 

3 Strabo says, “ about thirty,” and calls them woArxyvas, 
oppidula, little towns. i 

4 Strabo, l. viii. p. 363, etc. et Pausan. in Lacon. 

5 Plut. in Lycurg. fa 

6 Pausan. in Messen. et Strabo, l. viii. p. 360, etc. 


IV.] 


engaged them to maintain an inoffensive tran- 
quillity. The different branches of the family 
of Hercules were induced by interest, as weil 
as persuaded by affection, mutually to support 
each other. When the prerogative was invaded 
in any particular kingdom, it was natural for 
the neighbouring princes to defend the cause 
of royalty;7 and we find that, on several occa- 
sions, they had engaged to assist each other in 
repressing the factious turbulence of the nobles, 
and tle seditious spirit of the people. But 
when the influence of the family of Hercules 
declined with the abolition of monarchy in 
most countries of Greece, the capital of each 
little principality, which always enjoyed a pre- 
eminence in the national assemblies, began to 
usurp an unlimited authority over the neigh- 
bouring cities, and to control, by its municipal 
jurisdiction, the general resolves of the com- 
munity. Sparta had, in this manner, extended 
her power over the smaller towns of Laconia. 
The walls of Helos, whose inhabitants had 
pertinaciously resisted this usurpation, were 
levelled with the ground, the citizens reduced 
to the most miserable slavery, and a law enacted 
by the Spartan council, which forbade, under 
severe penalties, the emancipation of the Helots, 
or the selling of them into foreign countries, 
where they might entertain the flattering hopes 
of regaining their lost liberty. The same ty- 
rannical spirit which governed the measures 
of the Spartans, had taken possession of their 
neighbours the Messenians, and liad urged tie 
inhabitants of the capital to invade, conquer, 
and enslave several of the smaller cities. 
While such ambitious principles prevailed 
with both nations, it was scarcely to be ima- 
gined that the more powerful should not exert 
its utmost strength to obtain dominion, and the 
weaker its utmost courage and activity to pre- 
serve independence. Besides this general cause 
of animosity, the rich fields of Messenia offered 
a tempting prize to the avarice of the Spartans; 
a circumstance continually alleged by the Mes- 
senians, as the principal motive which had in- 
duced their enemies to commence an unjust 
and unprovoked war. The Spartans, however, 
by no means admitted this reproach. 
natural, indeed, that such differences should 
arise between the subjects of rival states, as 
might furnish either party with a plausible 
pretence for taking arms. These differences it 
will be proper briefly to relate, after premising, 
that. although the Greek historians mention 
three Messenian wars, the third bad little re- 


It was | 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


semblance, either in its object, or in its cffects, | 


to the first and second. These were the gener- | 


ous struggles of a warlixe people for preserving 
their hereditary freedom and renown, while the 
third, though dignified with the same appela- 
tion, was only an unsuccessful revolt of slaves 
from their masters. 

On the confines of Messenia and Lacedemon 
stood an ancient temple of Diana, which, being 
erected at the common expense, was open to 
the prayers and sacrifices of the two nations. 
Hither, according to annual custom, repaired a 
select band of Spartan virgins to solemnize the 


7 Yeocrat. in Archidam 


49 


chaste rites of their favourite divinity. A com- 
pany of Messenian youths arrived at the saine 
time to perform their customary devotion, and to 
implore the protection of the warlike goddess. 
inflamed by the beauty of the Spartan ladies, 
the Messenians equally disregarded the sanctity 
of the place and the modest character of Diana, 
whose worship they came to celebrate. The 
licentious youths, after vainly attempting, by 
the most ardent prayers and vows, to move the 
stern inflexibility of Spartan virtue, had re- 
course to brutal violence in order to consum- 
mate their fatal designs; fatal to themselves, to 
their country, and to the unhappy victims of 
their fury, who, unwilling to survive so in- 
tolerable a disgrace, perished miserably by their 
own hands.8 

To this atrocious injury, on the part of the 
Messenians, succeeded another, of a more pri- 
vate nature, on that of. the Lacedemonians. 
A.c, Polychares was a Messenian of noble 

’., birth, of great wealth, conspicuous for th 
744, birth, of g , conspicuous for the 
virtues of public and private life, and re- 
nowned for lis victories in the Olympic games, 
The property of Polychares, like that of the 
most opulent of his countrymen, chiefly con- 
sisted in numerous herds of cattle; part of which 
he entrusted to a Lacedemonian, of the name of 
Euephnus, who undertook, for a stipulated re- 
ward, to feed them on the rich meadows which ` 
he possessed on the Lacedemonian coast. The 
avarice of Eueplinus was not restrained by the 
sense of duty, the principles of honour, or the 
sacred ties of hospitality. Having sold the cat- 
tle to foreigners, who often came to purchase 
that article in Laconia, he travelled to the Mes- 
senian capital, and visiting his friend Poly- 
chares, lamented the less of his property by the 
incursion of pirates. 

The frequency of such events would, proba- 
bly, have concealed the fraud; but a slave, 
whom Euecphnus sold along with the cattle, 
having escaped the vigilance of his new mas- 
ters, arrived in time to undeceive the generous 
credulity of Polychares. The perfidious Lace- 
demonian, secing his contrivance thus unex- 
pectedly disconcerted, endeavoured to depre- 
cate the just resentment of his friend, by the 
most humiliating confession of his guilt, and by 
insisting on the temptation of gain, the frailty 
of nature, the sincerity of his repentance, and 
his earnest desire of making immediate restitu- 
tion. Unfortunately, indeed, he had not any 
considerable sum of money in his possession ; 
but if Polychares would allow his son to accom- 
pany him to Lacedemon, he would put into 
the hands of the youth the full price which he 
had received for his father’s property. On this 
occasion it is easier to pity the misfortune, than 
excuse the weakness, of the Messenian. The 
youth had no sooner set foot on the Lacede- 
monian territory, than the traitor Kuephnus 
stabbed him to the heart. 


8 Pausan. in Messen. p. 222. The Messenians denicd 
thie whole transaction, and substituted a more improbable 
story in its stead. Pausan. ibid. 

9 Ev yuo Ty wviewmsvy Curel, 42i MAAWY, EO ots Bigo- 
Mean adexce yoverIns, TH KECIY MEYSOTHY MY eyYKHY EXE, 

i PAUSAN. 
Et l'interet enfin pére de tous les crimes. 
HENRIADE. 


20 


and followers, travelled to Sparta, and implored 
the just vengeance of the laws against the ac- 
cumulated guilt of peridy and murder. In vain | 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 
The afflicted father, assembling his ee 


[Cuar 


protection against the Spartan cruelty; and a 
miserable remnant escaped to diffuse the me- 
lancholy tidings of their unexpected calamity. 

On this important emergency Euphaes, who 


he repeatediy addressed himself to the kings, had succeeded to the throne of his father An- 


to the ephori, to the senate, and to the assem- 
bly. The money, the eloquence, the intrigues 
of Euephnus, and, above all, his character of 
Spartan, prevailed over the impotent solicita- 
tions of a Messenian stranger. Polychares, 


provoked by the cruel disregard of the Lace- 


dzmonians to his just demands, determined to | 


return home; but having lost his understanding 
through rage’ and despair, he assaulted and 
slew several Spartan citizens whom he met on 
the road; and after thus quenching his reseut- 
ment against the guilty in the blood of the inno- 
cent, he was conducted by the assistance of his 
friends to his native country. 

He had not long returned to Andania, when 
ambassadors arrived from the Spartan senate, | 


demanding the person of such an atrocious and | 
i settled in such of their towns as were best forti- 


open offender. The Messenians assembled to 
deliberate on this request; and Androcles and 


Antiochus, who were jointly invested with the | 


regal power, having differed, as usually hap- 
pened, in their opinions, each prince was sup- 
ported by the strength of a numerous faction. | 
The debate was decided by an expedient often 
adopted in such tumultuary assemblies. Both 
parties had recourse to arms, and the sedition 
being fatal to Androcles, the opinion of Anti- 
ochus prevailed, who declared against deliver- 
ing Polychares into the power of his enraged 
enemies. But Antiochus, though he denied the 
unreasonable demand of the Spartan ambas- 
sadors, dismissed them with a proposal, which 
left them no room to complain of. injustice. 
He offered, in the name of the Messenian as- 
sembly, to refer all the differences between the 
two nations to the respected council of the 
Amphictyons. This equitable proposal, which 
ill suited the ambitious designs of Sparta, was 
not honoured with an answer from that repub- 
lic, who, desirous to acquire the rich fields of 
Messenia, prepared for taking arms; and, 
having completed her preparations, bound her 
citizens by oath, never to desist from hostility 
till they had effected their purpose.! 
A.C Without an open declaration of war 
743 (for ambition had extinguished every 
"sentiment of piety) they invaded the 
Messenian frontier, and attacked the small town 
of Ampheia, which, from its advantageous 
situation on a rock, seemed equally proper for 
infesting the enemy, and securing their own 
retreat.? The time chosen for the assault was 
the dead of night, when the unsuspecting in- 
habitants reposed in full confidence of their ac- 
customed security. There was neither sentinel, 
at the gates, nor garrison within the place. 
The alarm was immediately followed by exe- 
cution. Many Ampheians were assassinated 
in their beds; several fled to the altars of the 
gods, the sanctity of which proved a feeble 


1 Strabo expresses this oath strongly, but oddly, ‘Ou:rzv- 
TES MA TEITEROY EruVESELY OIKRDS, TeLY 4 Meconvay xv:hsiv 
n mavt zassavesv. “Having sworn not to return home 
before that they either took Messene, or that they all died.” | 

2 Opuntnesoy sxitydesov.—PAUSAN. 


tiochus, summoned a general assembly of his 
countrymen to the plain of Stenyclara; where, 
after hearing the opinion of others concerning 
the critical situation of their affairs, he declared 
his own sentiments, which were full of honour 
and magnanimity: “ That the final event of the 
war was not to be conjectured by its unfortu- 
nate beginning; the Messenians, though less 
inured to arms than their warlike opponents, 
would acquire both skill and courage in pur- 
suing the measures of a just defence; and the 
gods, protectors of innocence, would make the 
struggles of virtuous liberty prevail over the 
rude assaults of violence and ambition.” The 
discourse of Euphaes was received with shouts 
of applause; and the Messenians, by advice of 
their king, abandoned the open country, and 


fied by art or nature, leaving the remainder to 
the invasion of an enemy, with whose bravery 
and numbers their own weakness was yet una- 
ble to contend. But while they kept within their 
walls, they continued to exercise themselves in 
arms, and to acquire such vigour and discipline, 
as might enable them to oppose the Spartans in 
the field. Four years elapsed from the taking 
of Ampheia before they ventured to embrace 
this dangerous measure. During all that time, 
the Spartans made annual incursions into their 
country, destroying their harvests, and carry- 
ing into captivity such straggling parties as 
they happened to surprise. They took care, 
however, not to demolish the houses, to cut 
down the wood, or otherwise to disfigure or 
desolate a country, which they already regard- 
ed as their own. 

A.C The Messenians on the other hand, as 
“A, their courage continued to increase, were 
* not contented with defending their own 
walls, but detached in small parties, the boldest 
of their warriors to ravage the sea-coast of La- 
conia. Encouraged by the success of these 
predatory expeditions, Euphaes determined to 
take the field with the flower of the Messenian 
nation. The army of freemen was attended by 
an innumerable crowd of slaves, carrying wood 
and other materials necessary for encampment. 
Thus prepared, they put themselves in motion, 
and, before they reached the frontier, were seen 
by the Spartan garrison of Ampheia, who im- 
mediately sounded the alarm of an approach- ` 
ing enemy. The Spartans flew to arms with 
more than their wonted alacrity, delighted with 
the opportunity, for which they had so long 
wished in vain, of deciding, at one blow, the 
event of a tedious war. The hostile armies 
approached with a celerity proportioned to the 
fury of their resentment, and arrived, with high 
expectations, at the intermediate plain which 
overspread the confines of the two kingdoms. 
But there the martial ardour of the troops re- 
ceived a check. which had not been foreseen 
by their commanders. The nvulet, intersect- 
ing the plain, was swelled by the rains into a 


| torrent, This circumstance prevented a general 


IV.] 


engagement. The cavalry alone (amounting on 
either side to about five hundred horse) passed 
near the head of the ravine, and contended in 
an indecisive skirmish; while the fury of the 
infantry evaporated in empty boasts and una- 
vailing insults. Night insensibly came on, 
during which the Messenians fortified their 
camp with so much skiil, that the enemy, rather 
than venture to storm it, preferred to return 
home, after an expedition, which, considering 
their superiority in numbers, appeared no less 
inglorious than ineffectual. 

The pusillanimous behaviour of the Spartan 
army deserved not the approbation of the 
senate. The severe fathers of the republic up- 
braided the degeneracy of the youth, who no 
longer paid regard to the sanctity of the oath 
which they had taken, never to lay down their 
arms until they had completely subdued the 
Messenians. The spirit of the senate was soon 
diffused through the community; and it was 
determined, in the general assembly of the na- 
tion, to prepare for carrying on a more fierce 
war than the enemy had yet experienced. At 
the approach of autumn, the season always pre- 
ferred for the predatory expeditions of those 
early times, all the Spartans of military age, 
as well as the inhabitants of the subordinate 
towns of Laconia, known by the general name 
of Lacedemonians, were ready to take the field. 
After leaving a sufficient body of troops for the 
internal safety of the country, the number that 
might be spared abroad, probably amounted to 
about twenty thousand men. This powerful 
army was still farther increased by the conflu- 
ence of strangers, particularly the Assinians 
and Dryopians, who fled from the cruel tyran- 
ny of Argos, a republic no less blameable than 
Sparta, for oppressive severity towards her 
weaker neighbours. Besides this reinforce- 
ment, the Spartans hired a considerable body 
of archers from Crete, to oppose the horse and 
light infantry of the Messenians. The manage- 
ment of the expedition was entrusted to the 
Spartan kings Theopompus and Polydorus; 
the former of whom commanded the right, 
and the latter the left wing, while the central 
division was committed to the discretion and 
valour of Euryleon, who, though born in 
Sparta, was descended of the royal race of 
Theban Cadmus. 

Ancient writers have neglected to mention 
the scene of this second engagement, which 
A.C. Pausanias has, with more diffusiveness 
7 than accuracy, described in his historical 

journey through Messenia ; but it is rea- 
sonable to conjecture, from this omission, that 
both the first and second battles happened near 
the same place, on the extensive plain which 
connects the frontiers of the two kingdoms. 

The Messenians were inferior, both in num- 
bers and in discipline, but ardent in the cause 
of every thing most dear to them. Euphaes 
headed their left wing, which opposed the 
division of Theopompus; Pytharatus led the 
right; and Cleonnis commanded the centre. 
Before the signal was given for charge, the 
commanders addressed their respective troops. 
Theopompus, with Laconic brevity, “ reminded 
the Spartans of their oath, and of the glory 


HISTORY-OF GREECE. 51 


which their ancestors had acquired by subduing 
the territories of their neighbours.” Euphaes, 
at greater length, animated his soldiers to vic- 
tory, by describing the fatal consequences of a 
defeat. “ Their lands and fortunes were not 
the only objects of contention: they had already 
experienced the Spartan cruelty in the unhappy 
fate of Ampheia, where all the men of a mili- 
tary age had been put to the sword; the wo- 
men, as well as the children, with their aged 
parents, subjected to an ignominious servitude; 
their temples burnt or plundered; the city 
levelled with the ground; and the country 
desolated. The calamities, hitherto confined 
to that little district, would be diffused over the 
whole of their beautiful territory, unless the 
active bravery of Messenia should now, by a 
noble effort of patriotism, overcome the num- 
bers and discipline of Sparta.” Encouraged 
by the ardour of their prince, the, Messenians 
rather ran than marched to the battle. As they 
approached the enemy, they threatened them 
with their eyes and gestures, reproaching them 
with an insatiable avidity for wealth and power, 
an unnatural disregard to the ties of blood, an 
impious contempt for their common gods, and 
particularly for the revered name of Hercules, 
the acknowledged founder and patron of both 
kingdoms. From words of reproach they made 
an easy transition to deeds of violence. Many 
quitted their ranks, and assailed the embattled 
phalanx of the Spartans. The wounded spent 
the last exertions? of their strength in signal 
acts of vengeance, or employed their last breath 
in conjuring their companions to imitate the 
example of their bravery ; and to maintain, by 
an honourable death, the sefety and renown of 
their country. To the ger rous ardour of the 
Messenians, Sparta opposed the assured intre- 
pidity of disciplined valour. Her citizens, 
inured to the use of arms, closed their ranks, 
and remained firm in their respective posts. 
Where the enemy in any part gave way, they 
followed them with an undisturbed progress ; 
and endeavoured, by the continuance of regular 
exertion, to overcome the desultory efforts of 
rage, fury, and despair.* 

Such were the principal differences in the 
sentiments and conduct of two armies, both 
of which were alike animated by the love of 
glory and the desire of vengeance; passions 
which they carried to such a length, that there 
was no example, on either side, of a soldier 
who deigned to seek for quarter, or who at- 
tempted to sooth, by tlie promise of a large ran- 
som, the unrelenting cruelty of the victors. 
Emulation and avarice conspired in despoiling 
the bodies of the slain. Amidst this barbarous 
employment, which custom only rendered hon- 
ourable, many met with an untimely fate; for 
while they stripped the dead with the rashness 
of blind avidity, they often exposed their own 
persons to the darts and swords of their ene- 


3 Agreenbly to the raelancholy firmness of the advice 
afterwards given by Tyrtieus to the Spartans, 
Kus Tig QTOJVyTLwV veret’ excyTrioero, 
Tyrre«us, edit. Glas. p. 4. ver. 5. 
4 The modo of fighting in that age is forcibly described 
by Tyrtwus, p. 7. edit. Glasg. AAAw Tiç su Sixtus waver 
mors xuroreeoirs, to the end of the poem. 


Q 


mies; and sometimes the dying, by a fortunate 
wound, soothed the agonies of the present mo- 
ment, and retaliated their past sufferings on 
their unguarded despoilers. 

The kings, who had hitherto been satisfied 
with leading their troops to action, and sharing 
the common danger, longed, as the battle began 
to warm, to signalize their valour in single com- 
bat. With this design Theopompus, listening 
only to his courage, first marched towards 
Euphaes, who, seeing him approach, cried out 
to his companions, * Does not Theopompus 
well imitate the bloody-minded Polynices, who. 
at the head of an army of strangers, levied war 
against his native country, and, with his own 
hand, slew a brother, by whom, at the same 
instant, he himself was siain? In like manner 
does Theopompus, with unnatural hatred, per- 
secute his kinsmen of the race of Hercules; but 
I trust he shall meet the punishment due to his 
impiety.” At sight of this interesting specta- 
cle, the troops were inspired with new ardour, 
and the battle raged with redoubled fary. The 
chosen bands, who respectively watched the 
safety of the contending princes, became insen- 
sible to personal danger, and only solicitous to 
preserve the sacred persons of their kings. The 
strength of Sparta, at length, began to yield to 
the activity of her rivals. The troops of Theo- 
pompus were broken and thrown into disorder; 
and the reluctant prince was himself compelled 
to retire. At the same time the right wing of 
the Messenians, having lost their leader Pytha- 
ratus, yielded to the exertions of Polydorus 
and his Spartans: but neither this general, nor 
king Euphaes, thought proper to pursuc the 
flying enemy. It seemed more expedient to 
strengthen, with their victorious troops, the 
central divisions of their respective armies, 
which still continued to fight with obstinate 
valour, and doubtful success. Night at length 
put an end to the engagement, which had 
proved extremely humiliating to both parties; 
for next morning neither offered to renew the 
battle, neither ventured to erect a trophy of 
victory, while both craved a suspension of 
arms, for the purpose of interring the dead; a 
demand generally construed as an acknowledg- 
ment of defeat. 

Although the immediate effects of the battle 
were alike destructive to the Spartans and to 
the Messenians, its remote consequences were 
peculiarly ruinous to the latter. They were 
less rich and less numerous than their oppo- 
nents; their army could not be recruited with 
the same facility; many of their slaves were 
bribed into the enemy's service; and a pesti- 
lential distemper, concurring with other mis- 
fortunes, reduced them to the last extremity 
of distress. The Spartans, mean while, carried 
on their annual incursions with more than 
usual cruelty, involving the husbandman, with 
his labours, in undistinguished ruin, and de- 
stroying by fire and sword the wretched inha- 
bitants of the unfortified cities. The miserable 
ravages to which these cities were continually 
exposed, obliged the Messenians to abandon 
them, and to seek refuge among the almost in- 
accessible mountains of Ithome ; a place which. 
though situate near the frontiers of Laconia, 


52 HISTORY OF GREECE: 


[Cuar. 


afforded them the securest retreat amidst their 
present calamities, being strongly fortified by 
nature, and surrounded by a wall, which bid 
defiance to the battering engines known in that 
early age. 

The Messenians, thus defended against ex- 
ternal assaults, were still exposed to the danger 
of perishing by famine. The apprehension of 
this new calamity gave additional poignancy 
to the feelings of their unhappy situation, and 
increased the horrors of the pestilence which 
razed more fiercely than ever among men 
cooped up within a narrow fortress. Under 
the pressure of present, and the dread of future 
evil, their minds were favourably disposed for 
admitting the terrors of superstition. A mes- 
senger was sent to Delphi to inquire by what 
sacrifice they might appease the resentment of 
the angry gods. On his return to Ithome, he 
declared the stern answer of the god, which 
demanded the innocent blood of a virgin of the 
royal race. The Messenians prepared, in full 
assembly, to obey the horrid mandate. The 
lots were cast, and the daughter of Lyciscus 
was declared worthy of atoning, by her blood, 
for the sins of the prince and people: but the 
father. who was only a distant branch of the 
royal family, allowed his paternal affection to 
prevail over the dictates of both his patriotism 
and his piety. By his advice, Ephebolus, a di- 
viner, opposed the sacrifice, asserting that the 
pretended princess was not what she appeared, 
but a supposititious child, whom the artifice of 
the wife of Lyciscus had adopted to conceal 
her barrenness. While the remonstrances of 
the diviner engaged the attention of the assem- 
bly, Lyciscus privately withdrew his daughter ; 
and, escaping unobserved through the gates of 
Ithome, sought protection, against the cruelty 
of fortune and of his friends, among the unre- 
lenting enemies of his country. 

He had already made considerable progress 
in his journey towards Sparta, when the dis- 
covery of his departure threw the Messenians 
into great consternation ; nor is it easy to de- 
termine what might have been the effect of 
their superstitious terrors, had not Aristode- 
mus, another branch of the Herculean stock, 
and still less distinguished by birth than merit, 
voluntarily offered to devote his own child for 
the public safety. But,this sacrifice was like- 
wise opposed by a youth. who, passionately in 
love with the intended victim, cried out, that 
the voung lady had been betrothed to him, and 
that it belonged to her destined husband, not 
to her inhuman father, to dispose of her life and 
fortune. When his noisy clamours were little 
regarded by the assembly. he had the effrontery 
to assert, that the daughter of Aristodemus 
could not answer the condition required by the 
oracle ; that, even before the nuptial rites had 
heen consummated, she had pitied the violence 
of his passion, and that now she carried in her 
womb the fruit of their unhappy loves. Aristo- 
demus, hearing this declaration, was seized with 
rage and indignation at the unmerited disgrace 
thrown on his family. “Jt then appeared,” 
says an ancient author,) “ with what ease des- 


1 Pausanias, p. 222. This might satisfy the superstition 


IV.] 


tiny tarnishes the feeble virtues of men, as the 
slime of a river does the shining ornaments 
which cover its humid bed.” The angry father 
plunged his dagger into the breast of his un- 
fortunate daughter, and, with horrid barbarity, 
opening her womb in the presence of the 
amazed assembly, demanded justice on the in- 
famous impostor who had traduced her virtue. 
The Messenians were still farther irritated 
against the youth, in consequence of the opi- 
nion of Ephebolus, who declared that another 
victim must be sought to appease the anger of 
the gods, because Aristodemus had sacrificed 
his daughter, not in obedience to the oracle, but 
to gratify the impetuous passion of his own 
ungovernable soul. The rage of the assembly 
would have speedily sent the lover to attend 
the shade of his mistress; but fortunately he 
was beloved and pitied by king Euphaes, whose 
authority controlled, on this occasion, the au- 
dacious insolence of a priest, and checked the 
wild fury of the populace. The king asserted 
that Apollo had no reason to complain of their 
disobedience: the god demanded the blood of a 
virgin, a virgin had been slain; but neither did 
the Pythia determine, nor belonged it to them 
to inquire, by whose hands, or from what mo- 
tive, the victim should be put to death. 

The oracle, thus favourably interpreted by 
the wisdom of the prince, not only allayed the 
frantic rage, but restored the fainting hopes, 
of the people. They determined to defend their 
capital to the last extremity ; and this generous 
resolution, which they maintained inviolate 
during the course of several years, was justi- 
fied by obstinate exertions of valour. 

The spirited and persevering efforts of the 
Messenians, as well as the proud tyranny of 
Sparta, tended to procure, to the weaker state, 
several useful alliances among the neighbour- 
ing republics. Of all the communities inhabit- 
ing the Peloponnesus, the Corinthians alone, 
as a maritime and commercial people, enter- 
tained little jealousy of the Spartans; while 
the Argives and Arcadians, from proximity of 
situation, as well as interference of interest 
and ambition, held the disciples of Lycurgus in 
peculiar detestation. By the assistance of these 
powerful allies, the Messenians gained con- 
siderable advantages in two general engage- 
ments; in the former of which their king Eu- 
phaes, betrayed by the ardour of success into 
an unequal combat, was overpowered by num- 
bers, and slain in the action. The valour of 
Aristodemus was called by the voice of the 
people to fill the vacant throne; and his conduct 
in war justified the high opinion entertained 
of him by his countrymen. For five years he 
baffled the aspiring hopes of the Spartans; de- 
feated them in several desultory rencounters ; 
and, in a pitched battle, fought near the walls 
of Ithome, overcame the principal strength 
of their republic, assisted by that of the Co- 
rinthians, 

This victory, though obtained by stratagem 
rather than by superiority of courage or disci- 
pline, threw the Spartan senate into the great- 


rer 


of antiquity, but will appear, in modern times, a poor ex- 
cuse for such a shocking barbarity 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


53 


est perplexity, and deprived them of the expec- 
tation of putting a speedy, or even a fortunate, 
end to the war. In their distress they had re- 
course to the same oracle, which had relieved 
the aiflictions of the Messenians. As the policy 
of the god seldom sent away, in ill humour, the 
votaries of his shrine, the destruction of Ithome 
was announced with prophetic obscurity. The 
Spartans, with revived hopes, again took the 
field; and their new ardour was successful in 
several skirmishes with the Messenians, who, 
harassed by an open, were still more fatally 
oppressed by a secret, foe. ‘The people were 
again seized with superstitious terrors. Dreams, 
visions, and other prodigies confirmed the me- 
lancholy prediction of Apollo. The impatient 
temper of Aristodemus made him withdraw, 
by a voluntary death, from the evils which 
threatened his country. The other leaders of 
greatest renown had perished in the field. 
lthome, deprived of its principal support, and 

invested more closely than before, was 
"9 n í compelled, after a siege of five months, 

to submit to the slow but irresistible im- 
pressions of famine. Such of its inhabitants as 
were entitled to the benefit of hospitality in 
Sicyon, Argos, or Arcadia, travelled with all 
possible expedition into those countries. The 
sacred families, who were attached to the min- 
istry of Ceres, sought a secure refuge among 
the venerable priests of Eleusis, in Attica. The 
greater part of the people dispersed themselves 
through the interior towns and villages, en- 
deavouring, in the obscurity of their ancient 
habitations, to elude the industrious ‘search of 
an unrelenting enemy.? 

The Lacedamonians, having thus obtained 
possession of the Messenian capital, discovered 
signal gratitude to their gods, fidelity to their 
allies, and cruelty to their enemies. Ithome 
was demolished to the foundation. Of its spoil, 
three tripods were consecrated to Amyclean 
Apollo. The first was adorned with the image 
of Venus, the second with that of Diana, and 
the third with the figures of Ceres and Proser- 
pine. To the Assinians, who had assisted them 
with peculiar alacrity in the war, the Spartans 
gave that beautiful portion of the Messenian 
coast, which assumed, and long retained, the 
name of its new inhabitants. They rewarded 
the good intentions of the Messenian Androcles, 
who, at the commencement of the war, had 
discovered his partiality for Sparta, by bestow- 
ing on his descendants the fertile district of 
Hyamia. The rest of the Messenian nation 
were treated with all the rigour of Spartan 
policy. They were obliged to take an oath 
of allegiance to their proud victors, to present 
them every year with half the produce of their 
soil, and, under pain of the severest punish- 
ment, to appear in mourning habits, at the 
funerals of the Spartan kings and magistrates,3 

After the close of the first Messenian war, 
Greece appears, for several years, to have en- 
joyed an unusual degree of tranquillity. Peace 
promoted population; and the inhabitants of 
Peloponnesus continued to diffuse their nu- 


2 Pansan. Messen. et Strabo, I. viii. 
3 Pausan. ibid, 


54 


merous colonies over the islands of Sicily and 
Corcyra, as well as over the southern division 
of Italy, afterwards known by the name of 
Magna Grecia.! In this delicious country 
two considerable establishments were formed, 
about the same time, the one at Rhegium, and 
the other at Tarentum. Rhegium, situate on 
the southern extremity of the continent, soon 
acquired the ascendant over the neighbouring 
cities; and Tarentum, having become the most 
powerful community on the eastern coast, had 
the honour of giving name to the spacious bay, 
which penetrates so deeply into Italy, that it 
almost unites the Tuscan and the Ionian seas. 

The particular causes which occasioned, or 
the various consequences which attended, these 
several migrations, are not related in ancient 
history ; the Lacedemonian establishment at 
Tarentum was alone marked by such circum- 
stances as have merited, on account of their 
singularity, to be handed down to succeeding 
ages. 

During the second expedition? of tle Spar- 
tans against Messenia, the army, consisting of 
the greater part of the citizens who had at- 
tained the military age, bound themselves, by 
oath, not to return home until they had sub- 
dued their enemies. This engagement de- 
tained them several years in the field, during 
which Sparta, inhabited only by women, chil- 
dren, and helpless old men, produced no suc- 
ceeding generation to support the future glories 
of the republic. Sensible of this inconve- 
nience, which, in a warlike and ambitious state, 
surrounded by warlike and ambitious rivals, 
might have been productive of the most dan- 
gerous consequences, the senate recalled such 
young men as, having left their country before 


they had attained the military age, were not un- | 


der any obligation to keep the field; and enjoin- 
ed them to associate promiscuously with the 
married women, that the city might thus be pre- 
served from decay and desolation. The children 
born of these useful, though irregular connec- 
tions, were distinguished by the name of Par- 
thenia; probably denoting the condition of 
their mothers.2- They had no certain father ; 
nor were they entitled, though citizens of 
Sparta, to any private inheritance. These cir- 
cumstances kept tlem a distinct body, the 
members of which were attached by the strict- 
est friendship to each other, and hostile to the 
rest of the community. 

This dangerous disposition was still further 
` increased by the imprudent behaviour of the 
Spartans, who, on their return from the con- 
quest of Messenia, treated the Partheniea with 
the most supercilious contempt. The young 


1 This name, as will be proved hereafter, denoted the 
Greek settlements both in Italy and Sicily. The colonies 
there became, in progress of time, perhaps more consider- 
able than the mother country. Their proceedings will be 
fully related in the following work; but not until their 
transactions enter into the general system of Grecian pe- 
lities. 

2 They had taken the same oath in the first expedition: 
but it appears from Pausanias, that they did not observe it. 
The senators upbraided the youth with cowardice and con 
tempt of their oath, SesaAsav xas rou ogxov uregodsav, 
Pausan. p. 228. A 

3Iizebevers. Filius natus ex ea, que quum duceretur, 
virgo non erat. ARISTOT. Polit. l. v. c. 7. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


men could endure poverty and misfortune, but 
could not brook disgrace. Their unhappy 
situation, and the impatience with which they 
submitted to it, naturally connected them with 
the Helots, those miserable slaves whose just 
indignation ever prompted them to revolt from 
the cruel tyranny of their masters. A con- 
spiracy was formed ; the day, place, and signal 
were determined, upon which the Partheniæ 
and Helots, armed with concealed daggers, and 
with the most hostile fury, should retaliate, in 
the public assembly, their past sufferings and 
insults on the unsuspecting superiority of the 
proud lords of Sparta. The time approached, 
and the design was ripe for execution, when 
the president of the assembly ordered the crier 
to proclaim, That none present should throw 
up his cap (for that had been the signal ap- 
pointed by the conspirators;) and thus clearly 
intimated that the plot had been discovered, 
and that the Spartans were prepared to meet 
and to overcome the dangerous treachery of 
their dependents. We are not informed of the 
punishment inflicted on the Helots, or whether, 
as the conspiracy had been laid open by one 
of their number, the merit of an individual 
was allowed to atone for the guilt of the so- 
ciety. The Partheniæ, however, were treated 
with a remarkable degree of lenity, suggested, 
probably, by the fears, rather than by the hu- 
manity of Sparta.4 They were not only al- 
lowed to escape unpunished from their native 
country, but furnished with every thing neces- 
sary for uudertaking a successful expedition 
against the neighbouring coasts; and thus 
enabled to establish themselves under their 
leader Phalantus, in the delightful recesses of 
the Tarentine gulf.5 

The Spartans, when delivered from the 
danger of this formidable conspiracy, enjoyed, 
above thirty years, domestic as well as publie 
peace, until again disturbed by the revolt of 
the Messenians. The dishonourable condi 
tions imposed on that people, the toilsome la- 
bours to which most of them were necessarily 
condemned, in order to produce the expected 
tribute; the natural fertility of the soil, aug- 
mented by industry, and augmenting in its 
turn the populousness of the country; all these 
causes conspired to sharpen their resentment, 
to embitter their hostility, and to determine 
them, at every hazard, to expose their fortune 
to the decision of the sword. The negligence 
of Sparta was favourable to the progress of 
rebellion. While she degraded tlie Messeni- 
ans by the most humiliating marks of servi- 
tude, she allowed them, however, to rebuild 
their cities, to assemble in the public places, 
and to communicate to cach other their mu- 
tual grievances and complaints. To reward 
the services of Androcles, the Messeniap king, 
she had bestowed on his family the rich pro- 
vince of Hyamia; but the descendants of that 
prince preferring the duties of patriotism to the 
dictates of gratitude, countenanced and en- 
couraged the warlike dispositions of his coun 
trymen. The young men of Andania longed 
to take up arms. They were headed by Aris- 


4 Ephor. apud Strab. l. vi. 5 Pausan. Phoe. 


1v.) 


A. œ, tomenes, a youth descended from the 
685. ancient line of Messenian kings, adorn- 

ed with the most extraordinary qualities 
of mind and body, and whose exploits, if in- 
stead of being sung by Rhianus, and related 
by Pausanias, they had been described by Xe- 
noplion, or celebrated by Homer, would place 
him in the first rank of Grecian heroes. 

In entering upon this memorable war the 
Messenians consulted the dictates of prudence, 
at the same time that they indulged the mo- 
tives of animosity and ambition. Before dis- 
covering their intention to take up arms, they 
despatched messengers to the Arcadians and 
Argives, intimating their inclination to throw 
off the yoke of Sparta, provided they could 
depend on the hearty assistance of their an- 
cient allies. The Argives and Arcadians were 
naturally enemies to their warlike and ambi- 
tious neighbours ; and, at this particular junc- 
ture, the enmity of the former towards Sparta 
was, by recent injuries, kindled into resent- 
ment. Both nations confirmed, by the most 
flattering promises, the resolution of the Mes- 
senians, who, with uncommon unanimity and 
concert, sought deliverance from the oppressive 
severity of their tyrants. 

The first engagement was fought at Dere, a 
village of Messenia. The soldiers on both 
sides behaved with equal bravery; the victory 
was doubtful; but Aristomenes, the Messe- 
nian, acquired unrivalled glory and renown. 
On the field of battle he was saluted king by 
the admiring gratitude of his countrymen. 
He declined, however, the dangerons honours 
of royalty, declaring himself satisfied with the 
appellation of general, which, in that age, im- 
plied a superiority in martial exercises, as well 
asin the knowledge of war, and in the expe- 
rience of command. The Messenian excelled 
in all these, and possessed, besides, a degree of 
military enthusiasm, which as it was employed 
to retrieve the desperate affairs of his country, 
deserves to be for ever remembered and ad- 
mired, Sensible how much depended on the 
auspicious beginning of the war, he imme- 
diately marched to Sparta; entered the city, 
which was neither walled nor lighted, during 
night; and suspended in the temple of Mi- 
nerva a buckler, inscribed with his name, as a 
monument of his success against the enemy, 
and an offering to procure the good-will of 
that warlike goddess. 

The hardiness of this exploit was rivalled 
by the singular intrepidity of his companions 
Panormous and Gonippus. While the Lace- 
demonians celebrated, in their camp, the fes- 
tival of their heroes Castor and Pollux, the 
two youths of Andania, mounted on fiery 
steeds, with lances in their hands, and a purple 
mantle flowing over their white vestments, 
presented themselves in the midst of the joy- 
ous assembly. The superstitious crowd, dis- 
solved in mirth and wine, imagined that their 
heavenly protectors had appeared in a human 
form, in order to grace the festival established 
in their honour.6 As they approached, un- 


6 Pausanias, p. 266. However surprising this credulity 
may appear in the nresent age, it is attested by the most 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


55 


armed, to pay their obeisance to the divine 
brothers of Helen, the young Messenians 
couched their spears, attacked the multitude 
with irresistible fury, slew them with their 
weapons, or trod them down with their horses, 
and before the assembly recovered from its sur- 
prise and consternation, set out, in triumph, on 
their return to Andania. 

These exploits, and others of a similar kind, 
which are not particularly recorded, were suf- 
ficient to alarm the fears of the Spartans, and 
to make tlem seek the advice of Apollo. The 
oracle, when consulted by what means they 
might change the success of the war, ordered 
them to demand a general from Athens; a 
A. œ, response highly mortifying to the high 
623, Spartan spirit, as their own kings, de- 
* scended from Hercules, were the con- 
stitutional commanders of their armies. In 
compliance, however, with the mandate of the 
god, the haughtiness of Sparta was obliged to 
make a request which the jealousy of Athens 
durst not venture to refuse. The Athenians, 
when informed of the oracle, immediately des- 
patched to Sparta, Tyrteus, a man who, like 
every Athenian citizen, had, indeed, borne 
arms, but who had never been distinguished 
by any rank in the army. He was chiefly 
known to his fellow-citizens as a poet; a cha- 
racter in which he has been justly admired by 
succeeding ages.” Among the Spartans, how- 
ever, he was regarded as the sacred messenger 
of the divinity ; and his verses were supposed 
to convey the instructions and sentiments in- 
spired by his heavenly protector. 

The heroic valour of Aristomenes long con- 
tinued to prevail against the force of the ora- 
cle, as well as against all the other enemies of 
Messenia. He defeated the Spartans in tliree 
successive engagements, the circumstances of 
which are so similar, that they have frequently 
been confounded with each other. They were 
all fought in the plain of Stenyclara, and the 
most remarkable at a place called the Boar’s 
Monument, from a tradition that Hercules had 
anciently sacrificed there an animal of that 
species. The Messenians were reinforced by 
the assistance of their allies of Elis and Sicyon, 
as well as of Argos and Arcadia. The Spar- 
tans were followed by the Corinthians, their 
ancient confederates, and by the citizens of 
Leprea, who chose to seek the protection of 
Sparta, rather than submit to the government 
of Elis, The combined army was commanded 
by Anaxander the Spartan king, whose influ- 
ence, however, was rivalled by the authority 
of Hecateus the diviner, and of Tyrteus the 
poet. The Messenians had not a poet worthy 
of being opposed to Tyrteus ; but the predic- 
tions of their diviner Theocles were able, on 
some occasions, to promote or to restrain the 
ardour of Aristomenes himself. 


unquestionable evidence. Striking instances of it will oc- 
cur in later periods of the Geeek history. 
7 Insignis Homerus, 

Tyrtrusque marcs animos in martia bella, 

Versibns exacuit. Hor. 
Three pocms of Tyrtmus, containing the praise of valour, 
are preserved in Stobæus; a fourth on the same subject, ir 
the only oration now remaining of Lycurgus, the Athenian 
orator, the friend and rival of Demosthenes. A few de- 
tached couplets may also be read in Strabo and Pausanias. 


56 


The success of the engagement was chiefly 
owing to the spirited exertion of the Messe- 
nian general. At the head of a small band of 
chosen companions, he charged the principal 
division of the Spartan army, commanded by 
the king in person. The resistance was obsti- 
nate, and lasted for several hours. When the 
Spartans began to give way, Aristomenes or- 
dered a new body of troops, to complete his 
success, torout and pursue the enemy. He, 
with his little but determined band, attacked 
a second division of the Lacedemonians, which 
still continued firm in its post. Having com- 
pelled these also to retreat, he, with amazing 
rapidity, turned the valour of his troops against 
a third, and then against a fourth brigade,! 
both of which giving ground, the whole army 
was put to flight, and pursued with great 
slaughter. The merit of these achievements 
was, on the return of Aristomenes, celebrated 
with great pomp at Andania. The men re- 
ceived their favourite hero with joyous accla- 
mations; and the women, strewing his way 
with flowers, sung in his praise a stanza that 
has reached modern times, expressing, with 
elegant simplicity, the glorious victory obtain- 
ed over the Lacedemonians. 

The tribute of just applause paid to the vir- 
tues of Aristomenes, inspired him with a ge- 
nerous ambition to deserve the sincerest grati- 
tude of his countrymen. With unremitting 
activity he continued, with his little band of 
faithful adherents, to overrun the hostile ter- 
ritory, to destroy the defenceless villages, and 
to carry the inhabitants into servitude. The 
towns of Phare, Carya, and Egila, successively 
experienced the fatal effects of his ravages. 
In the first, he found a considerable booty, in 
money and commodities; in the second, he 
found a booty still more precious, the daugh- 
ters of the principal inhabitants dancing in the 
chorus of Diana, whom he honourably pro- 
tected against the licentious violence of his fol- 
lowers, and restored, uninjured, for the ran- 
som offered by their parents. After attacking 
Egila, Aristomenes met with an unexpected 
check from the enthusiasm of the Spartan 
matrons, who were offering sacrifice to Ceres 
in a neighbouring temple, long held in peculiar 
veneration. As scon as they perceived the 
approach of the enemy, the women, who, ac- 
cording to the institutions of Lycurgus, had 
been trained to all the manly exercises of the 
other sex, issued forth from the temple, and 
assailing the Messenians with knives, hatchets, 
burning torches, and the other instruments of 
sacrifice, threw them into disorder, wounded 


several of the soldiers, and seized the person 


of their commander. Next day, however, 
Aristomenes was delivered from captivity, 
through the good offices of Archidamea, priest- 
ess of Ceres, whose susceptible heart had long 
admired and loved the nierit and renown of the 
brave Messenian. 

The amazing success of the Messenians, 


1 Pausanias acknowledges that the exploits of Aristo- 
menes, in this engagement, almost exceed belief. Pausan. 
Messen. There is a remarkable coincidence in the cha- 
racter and exploits, as well as in the situation, of Aristome- 
neg, and those of the celebrated Scottish patriot Wallace. 
Vid. Buchan. Hist. Scot. L viii. passim. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| Cuar. 


which, in the course of three years, had been 
interrupted only by this inconsiderable acci- 
dent, disposed the Spartan kings to abandon 
the war, and to allow their enemies to enjoy 
the honour and advantages which they had so 
bravely earned. This resolution was approved 
by the senate and assembly. The allies of 
Sparta readily adopted the same opinion. 
Tyrtzus alone opposed the disgraceful mea- 
sure, with all the force of his authority. The 
sacred character of the bard, with the divine in- 
fluence of his poetry, prevailed ; and the Spar- 
tans again entered Messenia with an army, as 
numerous and powerful as any they had before 
collected. But at sight of the Messenian troops, 
headed by Aristomenes, they were thrown into 
new consternation. The dreaded prowess of their 
heroic antagonist, which they had so often and 
so fatally experienced, continually presented 
itself to their minds; and tle inspired arts of 
Tyrteus were again necessary to resist the in- 
creasing panic. A second time he revived 
their drooping courage, while he expatiated on 
the glory of ancient warriors; the magnani- 
mity of despising fortune; the praise and ho- 
nours of valour ; the joys and rewards of vic- 
tory.2 These sentiments, dictated by the true 
spirit of heroism, fired their minds with martial 
ardour. Disregarding the sweets of life, they 
longed for an honourable death. One consider- 
ation only (such was the superstition of ancient 
times) damped the generous warmth that ani- 
mated their souls. In an engagement, which 
there was every reason to believe would be 
fought with the most obstinate valour on both 
sides, what crowds of warriors must fall, whose 
bodies, heaped together in horrid confusion, 
could not be recognised by their friends, or ob- 
tain, with due solemnity, the sacred rights of 
funeral! This melancholy thought, which 
chilled the boldest heart with religious horror, 
might have formed an insurmountable obsta- 
cle to their success, had not their terrors been 
removed by the prudent missionary of Apollo. 
By the advice of Tyrteus, each soldier tied a 
token,inscribed with his name and designation, 
round his right arm, by means of which his 
body, however disfigured,? might be known to 
his friends and kindred. Thus fortified against 
the only illusion that could alarm the minds 
of men who preferred death to a defeat, they 
rushed forward to attack their dreaded, and 
hitherto victorious, foes. 

The Messenian general had drawn up his 
forces at a place called the Great Ditch, from 
which this engagement has been called the 
battle of the Trenches. The national strength 
was reinforced by a considerable body of Arca- 
dian troops, commanded by their king Aristo- 
crates, to whose treachery, as much as to their 
own valour, the Spartans were indebted for 
the victory. 

The Spartans, though possessed of little pri- 
vate wealth.had a considerable public treasure, 
with which they early began to bribe those 
whom they despaired to conquer. With this, 
perhaps, on many former occasions, they had 


2 Tyrtæus, p. 2 and 3. edit. Glasg. A 
3 Confusa corporum lineamenta. Justin. 
4 Polybius, l. iv Strabo, l. viii. 


IV.] 


empted the avarice of Aristocrates, who, from 


want of opportunity rather than of inclination 
to betray, had hitherto maintained his fidelity 
inviolate. But when he perceived the unusual 
ardour whicli animated the enemy ; and reflect- 
ed, that if, without his concurrence, victory 
should declare itself on their side, he might 
for ever be deprived of an occasion to earn the 
wages of his intended iniquity, he determined 
to abandon his ancient allies, and to ensure 
success to the Lacedemonians. In sight of the 
two armies he explained and exaggerated to 
his troops the advantageous position of the 
Spartans; the difficulty of a retreat, in case 
they themselves were obliged to give ground ; 
and the inauspicious omens which threatened 
destruction to Messene. In order to avoid the 
ruin ready,to overtake the allies, he command- 
ed his men to be prepared to follow him on the 
first signal for the engagement. When the 
charge was sounded, and the Messenians were 
preparing to resist the first onset of the enemy, 
Aristocrates led off his Arcadians; and, to 
make his defection more apparent, crossed the 
whole Messenian army. The Messenians, 


confounded with a treachery so bold and ma-. 


nifest, almost forgot that they were contending 
against the Spartans. Many forsook their 
ranks, and ran after the Arcadians, sometimes 
conjuring them to return to their duty, and 
sometimes reproaching them with their perfi- 
dious ingratitude. Their entreaties and insults 
were ahke vain; their army was surrounded 
almost on every side; the little band of Aris- 
tomenes alone, with pertinacious valour, re- 
sisting the efforts, and breaking through the 
embattled squadrons of the enemy. Their 
example encouraged others of their country- 
men to effect an escape by equal bravery ; but, 
in attempting this dangerous measure, the 
greater part of the soldiers perished, as well 
as the generals Androcles, Phintas, and Phanas, 
persons descended from the ancient stock of 
Messenian nobility, and who, next to Aristo- 
menes, formed the principal ornament and de- 
fence of their declining country. 

Among the republics of ancient Greece, the 
fate of a nation often depended on the event 
of a battle. The contention was not between 
mercenary troops, who regarded war as a trade, 
which they carried on merely from interest, 
without emulation or resentment. The citi- 
zens of free communities fought for their liber- 
ties and fortunes, fheir wives and children, and 
for every object held dear or valuable among 
men. In such a struggle they exerted the ut- 
most efforts of their animosity as well as of 
their strength; nor did the conflict cease, till 
the one party had reduced the other to extre- 
mity. It was not extraordinary, therefore, 
that after the bloody battle of the Trenches, 
the Messenians should be unable to keep the 
field. Aristomenes, however, determined, while 
he preserved his life, to maintain his indepen- 
dence. With this view he collected the mise- 
rable remains of his unfortunate troops; as- 
sembled the scattered inhabitants of the open 
country ; abandoned the cities and villages on 
the plain, to the mercy of the victors; and 
seized with his little army. the strong fortress 


H 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


el 


of Eira, situate among the mountains which 
rise along the southern shore of Messenia, de- 
fended on the north by the river Neda, and 
open only on the south towards the harbours 
of Pylus and Methone, which offered it a plen- 
tiful supply of corn, fish, and other necessary 
provisons. 
A.C In this situation the gallant Mes- 
682-671, Seman resisted, for cleven years, 
the efforts of the Spartans, who 
endeavoured, with unremitting industry, to be- 
come masters of the fortress. Nar was he sa- 
tisfied with defending the place; on various 
occasions he made vigorous and successful sal- 
lies against the besiegers. With a body of 
three hundred Messenians, of tried valour and 


| fidelity, he, at different times, over-ran the 


Spartan territories, and plundered such cities 
as were either weakly garrisoned or negligently 
defended. In order to put a stop to incursions 
equally dishonourable and destructive, the 
Spartans ordered their frontier to be laid waste, 
and thus rendered incapable of affording sub- 
sistence to the enemy. But they themselves 
were the first to feel the inconveniency of this 
measure. As the lands towards that frontier 
were the most fertile in the province, and the 
crops in other parts had failed through the in- 
clemency of the season, the Spartans were 
threatened with all the calamities of famine; 
to which the proprietors of the wasted grounds, 
deprived of their harvests by a rigorous injunc- 
tion of the state, were prepared to add the hor- 
rors of a sedition. Tyrtæus displayed, on this 
occasion, the wonderful power of his art, by 
appeasing the angry tumult, and teaching the 
Spartans patiently to bear, in the service of 
their country, the loss of fortune, as well as 
of life. 

While the enemy were disturbed by these 
commotions, Aristomenes set out from Eira, 
with his favourite band, and, marching all 
night, arrived by day-break at Amycle, a La- 
cedémonian city, situate on the banks of the 
Eurotas,at the distance of a few miles from the 
capital. Having entered the place without re- 
sistance, he carried off a considerable booty in 
slaves and merchandise, and returned to his 
mountains, before the Spartans, though ap- 
prised of his incursion, could arrive to the as- 
sistance of their neighbours. 

A continued series of such exploits, carried 
on with equal success, inspired into the Messe- 
nians a degree of confidence, which had almost 
proved fatal to their cause. Neglecting that 
celerity, and those precautions, to which they 
owed their past advantages, they began to con- 
tinue so long in the field, that the Spartans 
found an opportunity to intercept their return. 
The little band of Aristomenes behaved with 
its usual gallantry, and long defended itself 
against far superior numbers, headed by the 
two kings of Sparta. The commander, after 
receiving many wounds, was taken prisoner ; 
and, with fifty of his bravest companions, car- 
ried in chains to the Lacedawmonian capital. 
The resentment of that .epublic against those 
who had inflicted on her such dreadful calami- 
ties, was not to be gratified by an ordinary 
punishment. After much deliberation, the pri- 


587 
soners were thrown, alive, into the Ceada; a 
profound cavern, which was commonly em- 
ployed as a receptacle for the most atrocious 
criminals. 
were killed by the fall; he alone was preserved 
by an accident, which though natural enough 
in itself, has been disfigured by many fabulous 
circumstances.'! The Spartans, who loved va- 


lour even in an enemy, permitted him, at his | 


earnest desire, to be buried with lis shield; a 
weapon of defence held in peculiar veneration 
by the Grecian soldiers. As he descended into 
the deep cavity, the edge or boss of his ample 
buckler, striking against the sides of the pit, 
broke the force of the fall, and saved his life. 
Two days he continued in this miserable dun- 
geon, amidst the stench and horror of dead 
bodies, his face covered with his cloak, waiting 
the slow approaches of certain death. The 
third day (at day-break) he heard a noise, and 
looking up, perceived a fox devouring the 
mangled remains of his companions. He al- 
lowed the animal to approach him, and catch- 
ing hold of it with one hand, while he defend- 
ed himself against its bite with the other, he 
determined to follow wherever it should con- 
duct him. The fox drew, towards a chink in 
the rock, by which he had entered the cavity, 
and through which he intended to get out. 
Aristomenes then gave liberty to his guide, 
whom he followed with much difficulty, 
scrambling through the passage which had 
been opened for his deliverance. He imme- 
diately took the road of Eira, and was received 
with pleasing astonishment among his trans- 
ported companions, 

The news of his wonderful escape was soon 
tonveyed to Sparta by some Messenian de- 
serters, whose information on such a subject 
was not more credited, than if they had brought 
intelligence of one risen from the dead. But, 
in the space of a few days, the exploits of Aris- 
tomenes convinced the incredulity of the Spar- 
tans. He was informed by his scouts, that the 
Corinthians had sent a powerful reinforcement 
to the besiegers; that these troops were still on 
their march, observing no order or discipline in 
the day, and encamping during night without 
guards or sentinels. A general less active and 
less enterprising, would not have neglected so 
favourable an occasion of annoying the enemy. 
But Aristomenes alone was capable of effecting 
this purpose by the means which were now em- 
ployed. That no appearance of danger might 
alarm the negligence of the Corinthians, he set 
out unattended,” waited their approach in con- 
eealment, attacked the camp in tlie dead of 
night, marked his route with blood, and re- 
turning loaded with spoils to Eira, offered to 
Messenian Jove the Hecatomphonica ; a sacrifice 
of a hundred victims, which he alone was en- 
titled to perform, who with his own hand had 
killed a hundred of his enemies. This was the 


1 An eagle, it is said, flew to his relief, which arose from 
his having a spread eagle on his shield. Pausanias says, 
he saw the shield, which was preserved in the subterraneous 
chapel of Trophonius, at Labedea. 

2 The exploits of Aristomenes often oblige us to remem- 
ber the expression in Pausanias, p. 244: Agteroperny de 
eye Cues azosi grizti mAESY Ti x vez Eve Eix5; wv. 
‘t That he did more than seemed possible for any one man.” 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


All the companions of Aristomenes | 


[Cuar. 


third time the Messenian hero had celebrated 
the same tremendous rite. 

Eleven years had the vigorous and perse- 
vering efforts of a single man prolonged the 
destiny of Eira. Aristomenes might have still 
withstood the impetuous ardour of the Spar- 
tans, but he couid not withstand the unerring 
oracles of Apollo, which predicted the fall of 
the devoted city. The purpose of the gods, 
however, was accomplished, not by open iorce, 
but by the secret treachery of a Lacedemonian 
adulterer. This Lacedemonian was the slave 
of Emperamus, a Spartan, who in the field 
yielded the post of honour only to the kings. 
The perfidious slave had escaped to the enemy 
with his master’s property, and had formed an 
intrigue with a Messenian woman whom he 
visited as often as her husband was called in 
his turn to guard the citadel. Amidst the 
miserable joys of their infamous commerce the 
lovers were one night disturbed by the hus- 
band, who loudly claimed admittance, which 
however he did not obtain till his wife had 
concealed the adulterer. When the wife with 
the most insidious flattery, inquiring by what 
excess of good fortune she was blessed with 
her husband’s unexpected return, the simple 
Messenian related, that the inclemency of the 
weather had driven the soldiers from their 
posts, the wind and thunder and rain being se 
violent that it was scarcely possible for them tq 
continue any longer uncovered on the high 
grounds; nor could their desertion be attended 
with any bad consequences either to themselves 
or to their country, as Aristomenes was pre- 
vented by a recent wound from walking the 
rounds as usual; and as it could not be ex- 
pected that the Spartans should venture an 
attack against the citadel during the obscurity 
and horror of a tempest. The Lacedemonian 
slave overheard this recital, and thus obtained a 
piece of intelligence, which he well knew might 
not only atone for his past crimes, but entitle 
him to gratitude from his ancient master. He 
cautiously escaped from his concealment, and 
sought with the utmost celerity the Spartan 
camp. Neither of the kings being then present, 
the command belonged to Emperamus, who 
readily pardoned the fortunate treachery of a 
servant that had afforded him the means of 
obtaining the highest object of his ambition. 
Notwithstanding the slipperiness of the steep 
ascent, the Spartans, by the direction of the 
slave, mounted the unguarded citadel, and 
obtained possession of all the principal posts 
before the Messenians became sensible of their 
danger. 

As soon as it was known that the enemy 
had entered into the city, Aristomenes, accom- 
panied by the warlike prophet Theocles, toge- 
ther with their respective sons Gorgus and 
Manticles, endeavoured to animate the despair 
of their fellow citizens. and to make them de- 
fend to the last extremity, the little spot of 
ground to which they could yet apply the en- 
dearing name of country. Such however were 
the terrors and confusion of the night" (the 
darkness, thunder, and tempest, being rendered 
still more dreadful by the presence of an armed 
cnemy,) that it was impossible to form the 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


5S 


Messenians into such an order of bat- | menes determined never to despair of the for- 


IV.] 

Olymp. 
xxvii 2. concert or effect. When the morning 
“i d th the d : 
671. appeared they saw the danger more 


distinctly than before, and the impos- 
sibility of any other assistance than what may 
be derived from despair. They determined, 
at every hazard, to attack and penetrate the 
Spartan battalions. Even the women armed 
themselves with tiles, with stones, with every 
weapon that presented itself to their fury. 
They lamented that the violence of the wind 
prevented them from mounting to the roofs of 
the houses, which they had purposed to throw 
down on the enemy; and declared that they 
would rather be buried under the ruins of their 
country, than dragged in captivity to Sparta. 
Such generous resolutions ought to have re- 
tarded the fate of Messene; but it was impossi- 
ble to fight against superior numbers, aided by 
the elements and by the manifest partiality of 
the gods; for the thunder happening on the 
right of the Spartans, afforded them an auspi- 
cious omen of future victory, and presented to 
the Messenians the sad prospect of impending 
calamities, 

These circumstances, so favourable to the 
Spartans, were improved by the prudence of 
Hecatus the diviner, who advised that the 
soldiers who composed the last ranks, as they 
could not be brought up to the attack, should 
be remanded to the camp; and after refreshing 
themselves with sleep and nourishment, re- 
called to the assistance of their countrymen. 
Thus, without depriving themselves of present 
strength, the Spartans provided for a future 
supply of fresh troops; while tlle Messenians, 
engaged in continual action with the assail- 
ants, were obliged at the same time to combat 
cold, sleep, fatigue, and hunger. For three 
days and nights they withstood the combined 
force of these finally irresistible enemies; and 
when at length they began to give way, the 
diviner Theocles threw himself into the midst 
of the Spartans, crying out, “ That they were 
not always to be victorious, nor the Messenians 
always to be their slaves. Such was the will 
of the gods! who commanded him to perish in 


its remaining citizens. 


tle as might enable tlem to act with | tune, or to forsake the interests of his country. 


Although he perceived, therefore, that it was 
now hecome necessary to relinquish Ejra, he 
did not, on this account, abandon the safety of 
In order to preserve 
them, the only expedicnt that could be em- 
ployed, with any hopes of success, was the 
sounding a retreat, and the collecting into one 
body such of his soldiers as were not already 
too far engaged with the Spartans. Having 
accomplished this measure, he placed the wo- 
men and children in the centre of the battalion, 
and committed the command of the rear to 
Gorgus and Manticles. He himself conducted 
the van, and marching towards the enemy with 
his spear equally poised, and with well-regu- 
lated valour, showed, by his mien and counte- 
nance, that he was resolved to defend to the last 
extremity the little remnant of the Messenian 
state. The Spartans, as directed by Hecatus 
the diviner, opened their ranks, and allowed 
them to pass unhurt, judiciously avoiding to 
irritate their despair. The Messenians aban- 
doned their city, and in mournful silence 
marched towards Arcadia. 

As the wars of the Grecian republics were 
more bloody and destructive than those of 
modern times, so were their alliances more 
generous and sincere. When the Arcadians 
were informed of the taking of Eira, they 
travelled in great numbers towards the fron- 
tiers of their kingdom, carrying with them 
victuals, clothing, and all things necessary to 
the relief of the unfortunate fugitives; whom 
having met at mount Lycea, they invited into 
their cities, offered to divide with them their 
lands, and to give them their daughters in 
marriage. 

The generous sympathy of the Arcadians 
animated Aristomenes to an exploit, the bold- 
ness of which little corresponded with the de- 
pression incident to his present fortune. He 
had only five hundred soldiers whose activity 
and strength were still equal to their valour: 
and these he commanded, in the presence of 
his allies, to march straightway to Sparta, 
Three hundred Arcadians desired to share the 


the wreck of a country, which, in a future age, | glory of this spirited enterprize; and it was 


was destined to rise from its ruins.” 

It might have been expected that the patriot- 
ism of Aristomenes would have chosen the 
same honourable occasion of expiring with the 
freedom of his republic. But the general pre- 
ferred life for the sake of defending the small 
remnant of a community, which, he flattered 
himself, would be immortal, not only from the 
prediction of Theocles, but from another cir- 
cumstance equally important. When the down- 
fal of Kira was forctold by the oracle of Apollo, 
the prudent chief had removed to a place of 
security some sacred pledges believed to con- 
tain the fate of Messene. These mysterious 
securities consisted of thin plates of lead, rolled 
up in the form of a volume, on whicli was en- 
graved an account of the history and worship 
of the goddesses Ceres and Proserpine. Having 
concealed in mount Ithome this invaluable 
monument, which had been delivered down in 
veneration from the remotest antiquity, Aristo- | 


| 


hoped, that as the greater part of the Lacede- 
monians were employed in plundering Eira, 
this small but valiant body of men might make 
a deep impression on a city deprived of its 
usunal defence. The arrangements for this 
purpose were taken with the Arcadian king 
Aristocrates, whose behaviour at the battle of 
the Trenches had occasioned the defeat of the 


| Messenians, and whose artifice had since per- 


suaded them, that his shameful behaviour on 
that day was the effect of panic terror, not of 
perfidious intention. A sccond time the trea- 
cherous Arcadian betrayed the cause of his 
country and its allies. Having retarded the 
exccution of Aristomenes’s project, 


ly 
meee on pretence that the appearance of 
A C 671 the entrails was unfavourable, he 


despatched a confidential slave to 
Sparta, who discovered the imminent danger 


3 Polyb. I. iv 


60 


threatening that republic to Anaxander the La- 
cedemonian king. The slave was intercepted 
on his return, carrying a letter from that prince, 
in which he acknowledged the faithful services 
of his ancient benefactor. Upon the discovery 
of this letter, which totally disconcerted the 
intended enterprize against Sparta, the Arca- 
dians, frantic with disappointment and rage, 
stoned to death the perfidious traitor who dis- 
graced the name of king. The Messenians 
joined not in the execution of this substantial 
act of justice. Watching the countenance of 
Aristomenes, whose authority was equall 
powerful in the council and in the field, they 
observed, that instead of being agitated by re- 
sentment, it was softened by grief. The hero 
was affected with the deepest melancholy, on 
reflecting that the only design was now ren- 
dered abortive, by which he could soon hope 
to avenge the wrongs of his country. Both 
nations testified the most signal detestation of 
the character of Aristocrates. The Arcadians 
extinguished his name, and extirpated his whole 
race. The Messenians erected a column near 
the temple of Lycean Apollo (so named from 
mount Lycæa, on the confines of Arcadia,) 
with an inscription, setting forth his crime and 
punishment; asserting the impossibility of con- 
cealing treacherous baseness from the investi- 
gation of Time, and the penetrating mind of 
Jove; and praying the god to defend and bless 
the land of Arcadia.! 

Thus ended the second Messenian war, in 
the autumn of the year six hundred and seven- 
ty-one before Christ. The fugitive Messenians 
experienced Various fortunes. The aged and 
infirm were treated by the Arcadians, among 
whom they continued to reside, with all the 
cordial attention of ancient hospitality. The 
young and enterprising took leave of their 
benefactors, and under the conduct of Aristo- 
menes repaired to Cyllene, a harbour 


= oe belonging to the Eleans. Agreeably 
a a 670 to the information which they had 


received, they found in that place 
their countrymen of Pylus and Methone, with 
whom they consulted about the means of ac- 
quiring new establishments. It was determined, 
by the advice of their Elean friends, not to un- 
dertake any expedition for this purpose until 
the return of spring, when they should again 
convene in full assembly, finally to conclude 
this important deliberation. Having met at 
the tıme appointed, they agreed unanimously 
to commit their future fortunes to the wisdom 
and paternal care of Aristomenes, who declared 
his opinion for establishing a distant colony, 
but declined the honour of conducting it in 
person, and named for this office the brave 
Messenian youths Gorgus and Manticles. The 
former of these inheriting his father’s hatred 
against Sparta, advised his countrymen to take 
possession of the island of Zacynthus, which, 


from its situation in the Ionian Sea, lay con- | 
veniently for harassing the maritime parts of 
Manticles proposed a different opi- 
nion, observing that the island of Sardinia, 


Laconia. 


1 The inscription is preserved by Polybius, l. iv. and by 


Pausanias, Messen. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


though less advantageously situated for the 
purposes of revenge, was far better adapted to 
supply the necessary comforts of life; and that 
the Messenians, if once settled in that large 
and beautiful island, would soon forget the 
calamities which Sparta had inflicted on them. 
It is uncertain whether motives of vengeance 
or utility would have prevailed with the Mes- 
senians; for before any resolution was taken 
on this important subject, a messenger arrived 
from Rhegium, then governed by Anaxilas, a 
prince descended from the royal House of Mes- 
senia, who invited his wandering countrymen 
to a safe and honourable retreat in his domi- 
nions. When, agreeably to this invitation, they 
arrived at Rhegium, Anaxilas informed them, 
that his subjects were continually harassed by 
the piratical depredations of the Zancleans, an 
Eolian colony,? who possessed a delightful 
territory on the opposite coast. With the as- 
sistance of the Messenians it would be easy 
(he observed) to destroy that nest of pirates; a 
measure by which the city of Rhegium would 
be delivered from very troublesome neighbours, 
and the Messenians enabled to establish them- 
selves in the most delicious situation of the 
whole Sicilian coast. The proposal was re- 
ceived with alacrity; the armament sailed for 
Sicily; the Zancleans were besieged by sea 
and land. When they perceived that part of 
their wall was destroyed, and that they could 


‘derive no advantage from continuing in arms, 


they took refuge in the temples of their gods. 
Even from these respected asylums the re- 
sentment of Anaxilas was ready to tear them; 
but he was restrained by the humanity of the 
Messenians, who had learned from their own 
calamities to pity the unfortunate. The Zan- 
cleans, thus delivered from the sword and from 
servitude, the ordinary consequences of unsuc- 
cessful war, swore eternal gratitude to their 
generous protectors. ‘The Messenians returned 
this friendly sentiment with an increase of 
bounty; they allowed the Zancleans either to 
leave the place, or to remain in the honourable 
condition of citizens; the two nations gradu- 
ally coalesced into one community; and Zan- 
cle, in memory of the conquest, changed its 
name to Messene,? a name which may still be 
recognized after the revolution of twenty-five 
centuries. 

It has been already observed, that Aristome- 
nes declined the honour of conducting the 
colony. His subsequent fortune is differently 
related by ancient writers.4 Pausanias, to 
whom we are indebted for the fullest account 
of the Messenian hero, informs us, that he sailed 


2 Thucydid. l. vi. 

3 Such is the account of Pausanias, or rather of the an- 
cient authors whom he follows. But it must not be dissem- 
bled, that Herodotus, lib. vi. e. 23. Thucydides, p. 114. and 
Diodorus, lib. xi. place Anaxilas, king of Rhegium, much 
later than the second Messenian war. It deserves to be con 
sidered, that Pausanias, writing expressly on the subject, is 
entitled to more credit than authors who only speak of it 
incidentally. But when we reflect that these authors are 
Herodotus and Thucydides, there seems no way of solving 
the difficulty, but by supposing two princes of the name of 
Anaxilas, to the latter of whom his countrymen, by a spe- 


| cies of flattery not uncommon in Greece, ascribed the trans- 


actions of the first. i i 
4 Confer. Pausan. Messen. et Plin. l. xi. cap. 70. Val. 


Maxim. hb. i. cap. 8. 


VJ 


to the isle of Rhodes with Demagetes, the 
king of the city and territory of Ialysus in that 
island, who being advised by the oracle of 
Apollo to marry the daughter of the most illus- 
trious character in-Greecé, had without hesi- 
tation preferred the daughter of Aristomenes. 
From Rhodes he sailed to Ionia, and thence 
travelled to Sardis, with an intention of being 
presented to Ardys- king of the Lydians, pro- 
bably to propose some enterprize to the ambi- 
tion of that prince, which might finally be pro- 
ductive of benefit to Messene. But upon his 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


61 


arrival at Sardis he was seized with a distemper 
which put an end to his life. Other generals 
have defended their country with better suc- 
cess, but none with greater glory; other charac- 
ters are more fully delineated in ancient his- 
tory, but none more deserving of immortal 
fame ; since whatever 1s known of Aristomenes 
tends to prove, that according to the ideas of 
his age and country, he united, in singular per- 
fection, the merits of the citizen and of the sol- 
dier, the powers of the understanding and the 
virtues of the heart. 


CHAPTER V. 


State of the Peloponnesus after the Conquest of Messenia—Of the Northern Republics of 
Greece—Of the Grecian Colonies—Revolutions in Government—Military Transactions—The 
Jirsi Sacred War— Destruction of the Crissean Republic—Restoration of the Pythian Games— 
Description of the Gymnastic and Equestrian Exercises—History of Grecian Music. 


ITHE conquest of Messenia rendered Sparta 

the most considerable power in Greece. 
The Peloponnesus, formerly comprehending 
seven, now contained only six independent 
states. The subjects of Sparta alone occupied 
two-fifths of the whole peninsula. The re- 
mainder was unequally divided among the Co- 
rinthians, Achæans, Eleans, Arca- 


CMa 5 dians, and Argives. In a narrow 
rw x 68 extent of territory, these small com- 


munities exhibited a wonderful 
variety of character and manners. The cen- 
tral district of Arcadia, consisting of one con- 
tinued cluster of mountains, was inhabited by a 
hardy race of herdsmen, proud of their ances- 
try, and confident in their own courage and the 
strength of their country. Their Eolian extrac- 
tion, their jealousy, and their pride, made them 
disdain connection with the Dorians, by whose 
possessions they were on all sides surrounded. 
Careless of the arts of peace, they were en- 
gaged in unceasing hostilities with their neigh- 
bours, by whom they were despised as barba- 
rians,and whom they contemned as upstarts; 
since, amidst all the revolutions of Peloponne- 
sus, the Arcadians alone had ever maintained 
their original establishments.5 

The industrious and wealthy Corinthians 
presented a very different spectacle. Inhabiting 
the mountainous isthmus, which, towering be- 
tween two seas, connects the Peloponnesus with 
the north of Greece, the Corinthians long form- 
ed the principal centre of inland communica- 
tion and foreign commerce. Towards the 
southern extremity of the isthmus, and at the 
foot of their impregnable fortress Acro-Corin- 
thus, they had built a fair and spacious city, 
extending its branches, on either side, to the 
Saronic and Corinthian gulfs, whose opposite 
waves vainly assailed their narrow but lofty 


5 Pausan. Arcad. Strabo, l. viii. p. 388. 
6. Pausan. Corinth. c. iv. 


territory.” Their harbours and their commerce 
gave them colonies and a naval power. They 
are said to have improved the very inconve- 
nient ships, or rather long-boats, used in early 
times, into the more capacious form of triremes 


7 Strabo, l. viii. v. 379. 

8 The triremes, quadriremes, quinqueremes of the an~ 
cients, were so denominated from the number of the ranks, 
or tires, of oars on each side the vessel ; which number con- 
stituted what we may call the rate of the ancient ships of 
war. It was long a desideratum in the science of antiqui- 
ties to determine the manner of arranging these ranks of 
oars, as well as to ascertain the position of the rowers. The 
bulk of commentators and antiquaries placed the sedilia, or 
seats, in rows, immediately above each other, upon the 
sides of the vessel, which they supposed perpendicular to 
the surface ofthe water. But the least knowledge of naval 
architecture destroys that supposition. The rowers, thus 
placed, must have obstructed each other; they must have 
occupied too large a space, and rowed with too unfavour- 
able an angle on the ship’s side; above all, the length and 
weight of the oars required for the upper tires, must have 
rendered the working of them totally impracticable, espe- 
cially as we know from ancient writers, that there was but 
one man to each oar. These inconveniences were pointed out 
by many; but the ingenuity of lieutenant-general Melville 
explained how to remedy them. He conjectured that the 
waste parts of the ancient gallies, at the distance of a few 
feet above the water’s edge, rose obliquely, with an angle ` 
of 45°, or near it; that upon the inner sides of this waste 
part, the seats of the rowers, each about two feet in length, 
were fixed, horizontally, in rows, with no more space be- 
tween each seat, and those on all sides of it, than should be 
found necessary for the free movements of men when row- 
ing together. The quincunx, or chequer order, would afford 
this advantage in the highest degree possible; and, in con- 
sequence of the combination of two obliquities, the incon- 
veniences ahove-mentioned totally disappear. In 1773 the 
genern! caused the fifth part of the waist of a quinqueremis 
to be erected in the hack yard of his house in Great Pulte- 
ney street. This model contained, with snfficient ease, in a 
very small space, thirty rowers, in five tires of six men in 
each, lengthways, making one-fifth part of the rowers on 
each side of a quingueremis, according to Polybius, who 
assigns three hundred for the whole complement, hesides 
one liundred and twenty fighting men. ‘This construction, 
the advantages of which appeared evident to those who 
examined it, serves to explain many difficult passages of 
the Greek and Roman writers concerning naval matters. 
The general’s discovery is confirmed by ancient monu- 
ments. On several pieces of sculpture, particularly at 
Rome, he found the figures of war gallies, or parts of them, 
with the oars represented as coming down from oar holes 
disposed chequerwise. In the Capo di Monte Palace at 


Ca 


gallies.! Their sea-fight against their rebel- 
lious colony, Corcyra, is the first naval en- 
gagement recorded in history.? It was fought 
six hundred and fifty years before 


a Christ, at which time the Corinthians 
till 585 (as the ideas of wealth and luxury are 


relative) were already: regarded by 
their neighbours as a wealthy and luxurious 
people. The influence of wealth to produce 
servitude prevailed over that of commerce, 
which is favourable to liberty. Their govern- 
ment, after the abolition of monarchy, was 
usurped by a numerous branch of the royal 
family, styled Bacchiade.? This oligarchy 
was destroyed by Cypselus, a mild and gentle 
ruler, whose family governed Corinth till the 
year five hundred and eighty-five before Christ. 

The contrast between Arcadia and Corinth 
was not more striking than that between Ar- 
golis and Achaia. The citizens of Argos, hav- 
ing expelled their kings, were seized with an 
ambition to reduce and domineer over the in- 
ferior towns in the province. Tlie insolence 
of the capital provoked the indignation of the 
country. Mycenæ, Trezene, Epidaurus, and 
other places of less note, were often conquer- 
ed, but never thoroughly subdued. Interest 
taught them to unite; and union enabled them 
to set at defiance the power of Argos, by which 
they were branded as rebellious, and which 
they reproached as tyrannical.’ The fortunate 
district of Achaia, having successfully resisted 
the oppression of Ogygus, an unworthy de- 
scendant of Agamemnon, established, at a very 
early period, a democratical form of policy.é 
Twelve cities, each of which retained its mu- 
nicipal jurisdiction, united on a foot of perfect 
equality and freedom. This equitable confe- 
deracy prepared the way for the Achzan laws, 
so celebrated in latter times, when the cause of 
Greece, shamefully abandoned by more pow- 
erful guardians, was defended by the feeble 
communities of Achaia.’ 

We have already had occasion to explain the 
important institutions of Iphitus and Lycur- 
gus. The very opposite systems adopted by 
these great legislators, respectively suited the 
weakness of Elis and the strength of Sparta,and 
occasioned a remarkable contrast between the 
peaceful tranquillity of the former republics 
and the warlike ambition of the Jatter, the lines 
of whose national character grew more bold 
and decisive after the Messenian conquest. 
The piteous remnant of the Messenians, who 
had defended their freedom with the most per- 


Naples, the reverse of a large medaglionc of Gordianus has 
the figure of a triremis, with three tires, each of fourteen or 
fifteen oars, issuing chequcrwise from the oblique side. 
The collection at Portici contains ancient paintings of seve- 
ral gallies, one or two of which, by presenting the stern part, 
show both the obliquity of the sides, and the rows of oars 
reaching to the water.—The substance of this note ts already 
published in Governor Pownall’s Antiquities. The go- 
vernor, however, speaks of a gallery for the rowers, which 
I did not observe in the general’s model; nor do I appre- 
hend that such a gallery could be necessary, as the purpose 
for which it is supposed to have been intended, is com- 
plctely answered by the waist part of the vessel. 

1 Thucydid. 1. i. c. xiii. 2 Ibid. 

3 Pausan. Corinth. 4 Aristot. Polit. l. v. c. xii. 

5 Pausan. L vi. c. xxi. Diodor. Sicul. l. xi. p. 275. 

6 Pausan. Achaic. Strabo, l viii. p. 383, et seq. 

7 Polyb 1. ii. 8 Pausan. Iliac, et Strabo. }. viii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


severing bravery, was reduced toa erueland 
ignominious servitude. Confounded with the 
iniserable mass of Helots, those wretched vic- 
tims of Spartan cruelty, they were condemned 
to laborious drudgery, exposed to daily insult, 
and compelled (still more intolerable !) to tend 
their own flocks, and cultivate their own fields, 
for the benefit of unrelenting tyrants.2 The 
haughty temper of the Spartans became con- 
tinually more presumptuous. They totally 
disdained such arts and employments as they 
usually saw practised by the industry of slaves. 
War, and hunting as the image of war, were 
the only occupations which it suited their dig- 
nity to pursue; and this constant exercise in 
arms, directed by the military code of Lycur- 
gus, rendered them superior in the field of bat- 
tle, not only to the neighbouring states of Pelo- 
ponnesus, but to the bravest and most renown- 
ed republics beyond the Corinthian isthmus, 
While the Grecian peninsula was agitated 
by the stubborn conflict between the Spartans 
and Messenians, the northern states had been 
disturbed by petty wars, and torn by domestic 
discord.'!0. The Greek settlements in Thrace, 
in Africa, and Magna Grecia, were yet too 
feeble to attract the regard of history. But, 
during the period now under review, the Asiatic 
colonies, as shall be explained in a subsequent 
chapter, far surpassed their European brethren 
in splendour and prosperity. 
- Having abolished the regal office, the Athe- 
nians, whose political revolutions were follow- 
ed with remarkable uniformity by neighbour- 
ing states, submitted the chief administration 
of their affairs to a magistrate entitled Archon, 
or ruler. The authority of the Archon long 
A.C continued hereditary : it became after- 
75 4 * wards decennial: at length nine annual 
* Archons were appointed by the power- 
ARG ful class of nobility, consisting not only 
634 of the descendants of such foreign princes 
* as had taken refuge in Athens, but of 
those Athenian families which time and acci- 
dent had raised to opulence and distinction. 
The great body of the people gained nothing 
by these revolutions. The equestrian order, so 
called from their fighting on horseback, which 
before the improvement of tactics, rendered 
them superior in every rencounter with the dis- 
orderly rabble, enjoyed all authority, religious, 
A.C civil, and military.!! The Athenian 
594, Populace were reduced to a condition 
* of miserable servitude; nor did they 
recover their ancient and hereditary freedom 
until the admired institutions of Theseus were 
restored and improved by Solon, towards the 
beginning of the sixth century before Christ. 
The domestic dissensions which prevailed in 
every state beyond the isthmus s only in- 
terrupted by foreign hostilities. Interference of 
interestoccasionedinnumerable contests between 
the Phocians and Thebans, the Dorians 


Xy and Thessalians,the Locrians and Æ to- 
na C lians. Their various inroads, battles, 
600. and sieges, which were begun with pas- 


sion, carried on without prudence, and 


9 Pausanias Messeniac. 10 Thucydid. 1. i. 


11 Aristot. Politic. 1. iv.c. xiii. 


Vv. 


concluded without producing any permanent 
effect, have been consigned by ancient historians 
to a just oblivion. But the first sacred war is 
recommended to our attention, both on account 
of the cause from which it arose, and the con- 
sequences with which it was attended. This 
memorable enterprize was occasioned by an 
injury committed against the oracle of Delphi; 
it was undertaken by order of the Amphic- 
tyons; it ended in the total destruction of the 
cities accused of sacrilegious outrage; and its 
successful conclusion was celebrated by the 
Pythian games and festival, which, of all Gre- 
cian institutions, had the most direct as well as 
most powerful tendency to refine rudeness and 
soften barbarity. 

The territory of the Crisseans, lying to the 
south of Delphi, comprehended, in an extent 
of about twenty-four miles in length and fif- 
teen in breadth, three large and flourishing 
cities; Crissa, the capital, which gave name to 
the province ; Cirrha, advantageously situated 
for commerce on the western side of a creek of 
the Corinthian gulf; and Anticirrha, on the 
eastern side of the same creek, celebrated for 
the production of hellebore, as well as for the 
skill with which the natives prepared that me- 
dicinal plant, the virtues of which were so 
much extolled and exaggerated by credulous 
antiquity. !2 

The Crisseans possessed all the means of 
happiness, but knew not how to enjoy them. 
Their territory, though small, was fertile; and 
as its value was enhanced by the comparative 
sterility of the greatest part of Phocis,!? it ac- 
quired and deserved the epithet of happy. 
Their harbour was frequented by the vessels, 
not only of Greece, but of Italy and Sicily; 
they carried on an extensive foreign commerce, 
considering the limited communication between 
distant countries in that early age; and the 
neighbourhood of Delphi, at which it was im- 
possible to arrive without passing through their 
dominions, brought them considerable acces- 
sions of wealth,!} as well as of dignity and re- 
spect. But these advantages, instead of satis- 
fying, increased the natural avidity of the Cris- 
seans. They began to exact vexatious and 
exorbitant duties from the merchants who 
came to expose their wares in the sacred city, 
which, on account of the great concourse of 
profligate pilgrims from every quarter, soon 
became the seat, not of devotion only, but of 
_iissipation, vanity, and licentious pleasure. It 
Was in vain for the merchants to exclaim 
Against these unexampled impositions; the 
taxes were continually increased ; the evil ad- 
mitted not the expectation of cither remedy or 
relief; and the strangers, accustomed to it by 
long habit, podi to submit without murmur; 
and perhaps endured the hardship with the 
greater patience, when they perceived that they 
drew back the tax in the increased price of 
their commodities. Encouraged by this ac- 
quiescence in their tyranny, the Crisscans levied 
a severe impost on the pilgrims, whether Greeks 
or Barbarians, who visited the temple of Apollo; 
a measure directly inconsistent with a decree 


12 Strabo and Pliny. 


13 Strabo, p. 323, et seq. 
14 Pausan. in Phocic. 


v 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


63 


of the Amphictyons, which declared that all 
men should have free access to the oracle,!5 as 
well as extremely hurtful to the interest of the 
Delphians, who soon felt a gradual diminution 
of their profits arising from the holy shrine. 
It was natural for these who sustained a loss, 
either of gain or of authority, to remonstrate 
against the extortions of the Crisseans; but 
their remonstrances, instead of producing any 
happy alteration of behaviour, only exaspe- 
rated men grown insolent through prosperity. 
In the time of profound peace, the Crisseans, 
provoked by useful admonitions, which they 
proudly called threats, entered with an armed 
force the territories of their neighbours; de- 
stroyed every thing that opposed them, with 
fire and sword; laid the defenceless cities un- 
der heavy contributions, and carried many of 
the inhabitants into servitude.'6 Delphi itself, 
however much it was revered in Greece, and 
respected even by the most distant nations, ap- 
peared to the sacrilegious invaders an object 
better fitted to gratify the desire of plunder, 
than to excite tle emotions of piety. Neigh- 
bourhood had rendered them familiar with the 
woods, the temples, and the grottos of the 
presiding divinity ; with the manners and cha- 
racter of many of his ministers they were pro- 
bably too well acquainted to hold them in 
much reverence; and having deserved their 
resentment by what they had already done, 
they resolved to render it impotent by what 
they should next accomplish. 

The design of plundering Delphi was no 
sooner formed than executed. The imagina- 
tions of men were not prepared for such an 
event; nor had any measures been taken to 
prevent such an unexpected and abominable 
profanation. The enemy meeting with no re- 
sistance, became masters of the temple, and 
seized the rich votive offerings accumulated by 
the pious generosity of ages. Thence they 
passed into the sacred wood, and rendered fu- 
rious through pride or guilt, attacked, plunder- 
ed, and murdered the promiscuous crowd, who 
were employed in the usual exercise of their 
devotions. The young were violated with a 
licentious rage which bid defiance to decency 
and nature. Even a deputation of the Am- 
phictyons, clothed in the venerable garb and 
bearing the respected ens*zns of their office, 
were repelled with blows and insults, while 
they vainly attempted to stop the fatal progress 
of these frantic and impious outrages, com- 
mitted against every thing held sacred among 
men.!? 

The Amphictyonic council, to whom it be- 
longed to judge and to punish the atrocious 
enormities of the Crisseans, experienced, in an 
uncommon degree, those inconveniences to 
which all numerous assemblies are in some 
measure liable. Their proceedings were re- 
tarded by formality, warped by prejudice, and 
disturbed by dissension. Notwithstanding the 
ageravated crimes of the Crisseans, it was not 
without encountering many difficulties and 
much opposition, that Solon, one of the Athe- 
nian representatives, roused lis associates to 


15 Strabo, 1. ix. p. 418. 16 Aéschin. in Ctesiphont. 


17 Pausan. in Phocic. 


64 HISTORY OF GREECE. 


the resolution of avenging the offended ma- 
jesty of religion, the violated laws of nature, 
and their own personal injuries. When at 
length they agreed to this useful and pious de- 
sign, the measures pursued on the present oc- 
casion, as well as in all the future wars under- 
taken by their authority, ver equally slow and 
indecisive. The forces which they at first 
brought into the field were by no means equal 
to the enterprize for which they were designed. 
After various reinforcements, they attempted 
ineffectually, during nine summers and win- 
ters, to reduce the towns of Crissa and Cirrha, 
which finally submitted, in the tenth year of 
the war, rather to the art than to the power of 
the besiegers. 

The events of the preceding years strongly 
paint the ignorance, the superstition, and the 
rude manners .of the times. The Crisseans 
had no sooner plundered, than they abandoned 
the temple of Apollo. Thither, by the advice 
of Solon, the Amphictyons sent messengers, to 
consult the oracle concerning the proper means 
as well as the just measure of their vengeance. 
They were commanded instantly to levy war 
on the Crisseans; to persecute them to the 
last extremity; to demolish their towns, to 
desolate their country, and after consccrating 
it to Apollo, Diana, Latona, and Minerva, to 
prevent it from ever thenceforth being culti- 
vated for the service of man.! In obedience to 
this peremptory injunction of the god, the Am- 
phictyons returned to their several republics, 
in order to collect troops, and to animate the 
exertions of their countrymen in the common 
cause. The Greeks, however, were too deeply 
engaged in domestic dissensions, to make 
effectual efforts for the glory of Apollo. Few 
adventurers repaired to the holy standard; and 
the war, neither supported by vigour of execu- 
tion, nor directed by wisdom of deliberation, 
languished for several years under different 
generals. At length Eurylochus, a Thessalian 
prince, of great valour and activity, was en- 
trusted with the command of the Amphictyonic 
army.2 The new general waited till the time 
of harvest, to ravage the open country, to de- 
stroy the villages by fire and sword, and to de- 
solate the happy Crissean plain. 

On several occasions he defcated the army 
of the Crisseans, who made frequent and vigor- 
ous sallies in order to defend their possessions. 
But when he attempted to make an impression 
on the fortified strength of Crissa, its thick 
walls, its lofty towers, and above all, the acti- 
vity and courage of its citizens, presented ob- 
stacles which it was impossible to surmount. 
The art of besieging towns still continucd in a 
state of grcat imperfection. The battering- 
rams, and other engines employed in this opera- 
tion of war, were of too rude a construction to 
make such a breach in the walls as might not 
easily be repaired. It was in vain that Eurylo- 
thus attempted by blockade to reduce the 
slace. The enemy were furnished with all 
aecessaries in great abundance, from the well- 
Yequented port of Cirrha. Years thus passed 


1 Aéschin. ibid. 


2 Plut. in Solon Strabo, l. ix. Platwenus, l. vi. c. xv. 


[Cuar 


away, and nothing decisive was effected. The 
besiegers, fatigued with labour, and uneasy at 
disappointment, had often abandoned their 
camp, and cantoned themselves on the borders 
of the Crissean territory, where they expected 
more salutary supplies of provisions. 

When they again returned to their duty, they 
were afflicted, in the ninth year of the war, 
with a pestilential or epidemic disorder, occa- 
sioned either by the want of wholesome food, 
the great numbers of men cooped up during the 
warm season within a narrow space, or by some 
unknown malignity of the atmosphere. A great 
part of the army fell a prey to the increasing 
contagion. Anxious for the public safety the 
Amphictyons had recourse to the wisdom of 
Apollo, who, instead of recommending to them 
the aid of an able physician, exhorted them to 
bring from the isle of Cos the fawn with gold. 
Ambassadors were immediately despatched to 
that island, in order to unravel the meaning of 
the god, thus wrapped up in its customary veil 
of mystic obscurity. They had no sooner ex- 
plained their commission in the Coan assembly, 
than an eminent citizen, named Nebros, rising 
up, declared the sense of the oracle. ‘Jam 
the fawn,” said he, “ pointed out by Apollo,” 
(for Nebros in Greek signifies a fawn,) “and 
my son Chrysos” (which is the Greek word for 
gold) “has carried off the prize of strength, 
courage, and beauty, from all his competitors.” 
The person who thus spoke is justly celebrated, 
on account of his ancestor Esculapius, of his 
descendant Hippocrates,? and of his own un- 
rivalled proficiency in the healing art. The 
knowledge of physic was become the heredi- 
tary honour, and almost the appropriated pos- 
session, of his family, by which it had been cul- 
tivated for many ages, and to which it is sup- 
posed, in a great measure, to owe its present 
improvement and perfection. Nebros obeyed 
with alacrity the injunction of Apollo, the 
peculiar patron of the science in which he ex- 
celled. At his own expense he equipped a ves- 
sel of fifty oars, loaded with valuable medicines 
as well as with warlike stores, and accompanied 
by his son Chrysos, set sail with the Am- 
phictyonic ambassadors, in order to cure the 
confederates, and to conquer the Crisseans. 

His advice, his prudence, and his assiduity, 
restored the decaying health of the army. 
Thcir numbers, however, were already so much 
diminished, that it seemed impossible by open 
force to put a successful end to the war. On 
this occasion the artful Coan employed a strata- 
gem, which would have appeared entirely in- 
consistent with the laws of arms which had 
long been established in Greece, if it had not 
seemed to be the dictate of a di admonition. 
The horse of Eurylochus we observed for 
several days to roll on the sar and to strike 
his foot with great violence against a particular 
spot of ground. In digging under this ground, 


3 We owe, almost entirely, the history recorded in tho 
text, to an oration of Thessalus, son of Hippocrates, ad- 
dressed to the Athenians. Itis published among the let- 
ters of his father. Vid. Hippocrat. Opera, ex edit. Fæsii, v. 
ii. p. 1291. There are some learned dissertations on the sub- 
ject in the 5th and 7th volumes of the Memoirs of the Aca- 
demy of Belles Lettres. 


Vv. 


‘a wooden pipe was discovered, which supplied 

Crissa with water. The extraordinary means 
by which this discovery was made, convinced 
the ignorant credulity of the Greeks, that some 
important advantage might be derived from it ; 
and upon mature deliberation it was con- 
cluded, that Apollo had thus suggested a con- 
trivance for destroying his own and their ene- 
mies. Complying therefore with the heavenly 
intimation, Nebros poisoned the conduit of 
water; and the effect of this detestable artifice 
was soon discernible in the languid efforts and 
diminished resistance of the besieged. The 
besiegers, on tlie other hand,encouraged by the 
evident partiality of the gods, carried on their 
operations with redoubled vigour. A reward 
was proposed for the man who should first 
mount the walls, an honour obtained by the 
youthful ardour of Chrysos. The city was 
thus taken by assault; the fortifications were 
demolished, the houses burnt, and the inhabit- 
ants treated with a severity proportioned to 
the atrocious enormity of their own crimes, and 
the exasperated resentment of the victors. 

The command of Apollo, however, was not 
completely executed by the destruction of the 
Crissean capital. Part of that impious com- 
munity still subsisted in the maritime town of 
Cirrha, the reduction of which must have pre- 
sented great difficulties to the Amphictyons, 
since it was necessary for them a third time to 
have recourse to the oracle. The answer de- 
livered on this occasion was involved in two- 
fold obscurity. The words of the god, at all 
times dark and doubtful, now seemed abso- 
lutely unintelligible, since he made the taking 
of Cirrha, an event which there was every rea- 
son to expect, depend on a circumstance that 
appeared at first sight impossible. “ You shall 
not overturn,” said he, “the lofty towers of 
Cirrha, until the foaming billows of blue-eyed 
Amphitrité beat against the resounding shores 
of the Holy Land.” How could the sea be 
conveyed for several leagues over rocks and 
mountains, so that its waves might dash against 
the craggy precipices which surround the sacred 
groves of Delphi? This was an enigma which 
the oldest and most experienced members of 
the Amphictyonic council acknowledged them- 
selves unable to explain. The condition on 
which success was promised them secmed in- 
capable of being fulfilled; the inhabitants of 
Cirrha flattered themselves with hopes of un- 
alterable security; and the wisest of the Am- 
phictyons gave their opinion, that there was 
good reason to abandon an enterprise which 
seemed disagreeable to Apollo, by whose ad- 
vicc the war had been originally undertaken. 

_ While th ntiments universally prevailed 
in both ar Solon, the Athenian, alone 
ventured tc bose an advice more advan- 
tageous for tuc confederates, as well as more 
honourable for the holy shrine. His superior 
wisdom taught him the impiety of supposing 
that the god should require an impossibility, as 
the condition of happily terminating a war, the 
first measures of which he had himself sugpest- 
edand approved. It exceeded, indeed, human 
power to extend the sea to the boundary of the 
Holy Land; but by removing this boundary, 
l 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


69 


it was possible to make the Holy Land com- 
municate with the sea. This might easily be 
accomplished, since it sufficed for that purpose 
to consecrate the intermediate space with the 
same ceremonies which had been formerly em- 
ployed in dedicating the Delphian territory.‘ 

The opinion of Solon, proposed with much 
solemn gravity, was honoured with the unani- 
mous approbation of his associates. Every one 
now wondered that he himself should not have 
thought of an expedicnt which seemed so na- 
tural and so obvious. The preparations were 
immediately made for carrying it into execu- 
tion; and the property of the Cirrhean plain 
was surrendered to the god with the most 
pompous formality; the Amphictyons, either 
not considering that they bestowed on Apollo, 
what, as it was not their own, they had not a 
right to give away; or, if this idca occurred, 
easily persuaded themselves that the piety of 
the application would atone for the defect of 
the title. 

When the senators had performed the con- 
secration, the soldiers assailed the walls of 
Cirrha with the increasing activity of re-ani- 
mated hope. That place, as well as the de- 
pendent town of Anticirrha, situate on the 


opposite side of the creek, soon submitted to 


their arms. The impious and devoted citizens 
were either put to the sword, or dragged into 
captivity. The Crissean community, formerly 
so rich and so flourishing, was for ever extir- 
pated. Their. lands were laid waste, their 
cities demolished, the proud monuments of 
their victories levelled with the ground; and 
the port of Cirrha, which was allowed to re- 
main as a convenicnt harbour for Delphi, sub- 
sisted as the only vestige of their ancient 
grandeur. The territory, as it had been con- 
demned by the divine will to perpetual sterility, 
long continued uncultivated ; for the Delphians 
were not obliged to labour the ground in order 
to acquire the necessaries, the accommoda- 
tions, and even the highest luxuries of life. 
The superstition of the age, furnished an 
abundant resource to supply their wants; the 
granaries of Apollo filled spontaneously ; and, 
to use the figurative style of an ancient author, 
the land, unploughed and unsown by the in- 
dustry of man, flourished in the richest luxu- 
riance under the culture of the god.§ 

The successful event of a war begun, carried 
on, and concluded under the respectable sanc- 
tion of the Amphictyonic council, was cele- 
brated with all the pomp and festivity congenial 
to the Grecian character. According 


l : Sd anaes 
oa to an ancient and sacred institution, 
A C the several republics were accustom- 
590 * ed, by public shows, to commemorate 


their respective victories, When dif- 
ferent communities had employed their joint 
efforts in the same glorious enterprise, the 
grateful triumph was exhibited with a propor- 
tional increase of magnificence ; but the for- 
tunate exploits of gods and heroes, which had 
extensively benefited the whole Grecian name, 


4 Plutarch. in Solon. Pausan. in Phoc. 
5 AUschin. in Ctesiphont. 
G Equsro r wavre ume yenoyw Tm sw 
Lucian. Phalar. ii. 


66 


were distinguished by such peculiar and trans- 
cendent honours as eclipsed the splendour of 
all other solemnities. While each republic paid 
the tribute of provincial festivals to the memory 
of its particular benefactors, the whole nation 
were concerned in acknowledging the bounti- 
ful goodness of Jupiter, the protecting aid of 
Neptune, the unerring wisdom of Apollo, and 
the unrivalled labours of Hercules. Hence the 
Olympian, Isthmian, Pythian, and Nemean 
games, which, though alike founded on the 
same principle of pious gratitude, were from 
their first establishment, distinguished by differ- 
ent ceremonies, and respectively consecrated to 
separate divinities. 

The Amphictyons were principally indebted 
to the prudent admonitions of Apollo for the 
fortunate issue of a war undertaken by his au- 
thority ; it therefore became them, while they 
rejoiced in the happy success of their arms, to 
“ offer respectful thanks to the god. These ob- 
jects might easily be conjoined in the pleasing 
texture of ancient superstition, since the cele- 
bration of the Pythian games, which had been 
interrupted by a long train of wars and calami- 
ties, would form an entertainment not less 
agreeable to the supposed dictates of piety, 
than adapted to the natural demands of plea- 
sure. 

The festival re-established on this memora- 
ble occasion in honour of Apollo, is mentioned 
by ancient historians, on account of two re- 
markable circumstances by which it was dis- 
tinguished. Instead of the scanty rewards 
usually distributed among the gymnastic com- 
batants at other public solemnities, the Am- 
phictyons bestowed on the victors the most 
precious spoils of the cities Crissa and Cirrha. 
The exhibitions of poetry and music had 
hitherto been united in all the Grecian festi- 
vals, and the laurel crown had been adjudged 
to the poet-musician, who enlivened the com- 
position of his genius by the sound of his lyre. 
The Amphictyons for the first time separated 
the kindred arts; proposed prizes of instru- 
mental music unaccompanied with poetry, and 
thus afforded an opportunity to the candidates 
for fame to display their superior merit in their 
respective professions. 

These are the only particulars concerning 
the re-establishment of the Pythian games 
which seemed worthy the observation of Gre- 
cian authors, avhose works were addressed to 
men who knew by experience and observation 
the nature and tendency of their domestic in- 
stitutions. But a more copious explanation is 
required to satisfy the curiosity of the modern 
reader. The sacred games of Greece cannot 
be illustrated by a comparison with any thing 
similar in the present age; they were intimately 
connected with the whole system of ancient 
polity, whether civil or religious; they were 
attended with very extraordinary effects, both 
of a natural and moral kind; and on all these 
accounts they merit particular attention in a 
work which professes to unite the history of 
arts to that of arms, and to contemplate the 

varying picture of human manners, as well as 
the transient revolutions of war and empire. 

In their most perfect form the sacred games 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


consisted in the exhibitions of the Stadium and 
Hippodrome, accompanied by the more refined 
entertainments of music and poetry. The 
Olyimpic Stadium took its name from the mea- 
sure of length most commonly employed by 
the Greeks, consisting of the eighth part of a 
Grecian mile, or six hundred and thirty English 
feet. The Stadium, still remaining at Athens, 
has been aceurately measured by our travellers, 
and is a hundred and twenty-five geometrical 
paces in length, and twenty-seven in breadth: 
it forms a long and lofty terrace on the banks 
of the Illyssus, and its sides were anciently 
built of white marble. That of Olympia was 
probably of the same dimensions, but far less 
magnificent, being entirely composed of earth. 
The one extremity contained an elevated 
throne, appropriated for the judges of the 
games, and a marble altar, on which the priest- 
ess of Ceres, and other privileged virgins, sat 
to behold a solemnity from which the rest of 
their sex were rigorously excluded. At the 
other extremity was the tomb of Endymion, 
the favourite of chaste Diana. The Stadium 
was divided by pillars into two courses. The 
five gymnastic exercises, so much celebrated 
by all the writers of antiquity, and so aecu- 
rately described by Homer, Pindar, Sophocles, 
and Pausanias, began with the foot race, which 
is supposed to have been the most ancient, and 
which always retained the prerogative of dis- 
tinguishing the Olympiads by the name of the 
victorious racer. The exercise at first consist- 
ed in running naked from one end of the Sta- 
dium to the other. The course was afterwards 
doubled, and at length the competitors were 
required to pass the goal three, six, and even 
twelve times, before they could be entitled to 
the prize. Motives of utility introduced the 
race of men loaded with heavy armour, whieh ` 
rendered this exercise a contest of strength as 
well as of swiftness. 2. The second trial of 
agility consisted in leaping ; the competitors en- 
deavouring to surpass each other in the length, 
without regard to the height of their leap. 
They carried in their hands weights of lead, 
through the perforations of which their fingers 
passed as through the handle of a shield, and 
by these they poised, and impelled forwards, 
their bodies. The perfection attained in th’s 
exercise must have far exceeded the experience 
of modern times, if we can believe that Phau- 
lus of Crotona! leaped fifty-two feet. 3. The 
wrestling of the ancients required equal strength 
and agility. It was chiefly remarkable on ac- 
count of the oil and sand with which they rub- 
bed their bodies, in order to supple their joints, 
to prevent excessive perspiration, and to elude 


the grasp of their antagonist e wrestlers 
were matched by lot, and ize was ad- 
judged to him who had thrice@™rown his ad- 


versary on the ground. 4. The two following 
exercises tried chiefly the strength of the arms. 
The first consisted in throwing a huge mass of 
polished iron, brass, or stone, of a circular form, 
resembling a shield, but without handle or 
thong. It was called the disk, and thrown 
under the hand as the quoit is in England. 


1 Pausanias, p. 624. 


v.) 


The object of the competitors was to surpass 
each other in the length of the cast. Akin to 
this was the art of darting the javelin, which, 
as that weapon was directed at a mark, required 
steadiness of eye as well as dexterity of hand. 
5. The last of the gymnastic exercises both in 
order and in esteem, was that of boxing. It 
was sometimes performed by the naked fist, 
and sometimes with the formidable cestus, 
composed of raw hides lined with metal. Be- 
fore the victory could be decided, it was neces- 
sary, from the nature of that exercise, that one 
of the combatants should acknowledge his de- 
feat; a condition which seemed so inconsistent 
with the obstinacy of Grecian valour, that few 
ventured to contend in this dangerous amuse- 
ment. - The laws of Sparta absolutely prohi- 
bited her citizens from ever engaging in it, 
because a Spartan was taught to disdain saving 
his life by yielding to an opponent. Another 
reason, no less remarkable, tended still more 
to degrade the exercise of boxing. Besides 
strength and agility, the success of the boxer 
depended on a certain ponderous fleshiness of 
arm, which unfitted him to engage in any other 
contest. The regimen required for keeping 
up his corpulency, so necessary for the defence 
of his bones against the weight of blows, was 
altogether incompatible with the life of a sol- 
dier; a life of hardship and inequality, and 


continually exposed to the want of rest, of pro“ 


visions, and of sleep. 

These were the five gymnastic exercises in 
which the Grecian youth were trained with so 
much care, and to which they applied with so 
much emulation. But besides these simple 
sports, there were two others formed of their 
various combination; the Panecratium, which 
consisted of wrestling and boxing; and the 
Pentathlon, in which all the five were united; 
and to excel in such complicated exercises re- 
quired an education and way of living not ne- 
cessary to be observed by those who contended 
in the simple feats of strength and agility, and 
which was scarcely compatible with the study 
of any other than the athletic profession. 

The Hippodrome, or ground allotted for the 
horse races, was twice as long as the Stadium,? 
and sufficiently spacious to allow forty chariots 
to drive abreast. The chariot race was insti- 
tuted at Olympia about a hundred years after 
the regular celebration of the games, and that 
of riding horses twenty years later. These 
warlike sports followed the same progress with 
the military art, of which they were the image, 
and in which the use of chariots long preceded 
that of cavalry. The cars of the Greeks, as 
evidently appears from their medals, were low, 
open behind, furnished with only two wheels, 
aud unprovided with any seat for the driver, who 
stood, with much, difficulty in the body of his 
vehicle, while he commanded four horses, which 
were not paired but formed on one line. Not- 
withstanding this inconvenient posture they 
performed six and sometimes twelve rounds of 
the Hippodrome, amounting to six Grecian 
miles of eight hundred paces each, of which 
an English mile contains one thousand five 


2 Hesychius. 3 Pausan. l. vi. p. 382, et 390. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


hundred and fifty. The Grecian heroes ex- 
celled, during the heroic ages, in this danger- 
ous exercise; but in later times the owners of 
the horses were allowed to employ a charioteer, 


67 


which enlarged the sphere of candidates for 
the Olympic prize, by admitting many foreign 
princes, as well as the wealthy ladies of Mace- 
don and Laconia, who could not appear in per- 
son at this important solemnity. Though riding- 


horses were not so early employed as chariots, 


either at the games, or in war, yet we cannot 
believe, with a fanciful writer,4 that this cir- 


cumstance should have been occasioned by the 
timidity of the Greeks to mount on horseback ; 


for we learn from Homer, that, even in the 
most ancient times, they were acquainted with 
all the feats of dexterity performed by our most 
accomplished jockies. But before the Persian 
war, the poverty of the Greeks prevented them 
from importing foreign horses, and their do- 
mestic breed was naturally of an inferior kind 
to those of Asia and Africa. The Spartans 
first employed them in battle during their wars 
with the Messenians. In the Persian expedi- 
tion, Xerxes tried the mettle of the Persian, 
against the Thessalian horses, and the former 
carried off the palm in every contest. For a 
considerable time after the shameful retreat of 
that haughty monarch, the Athenians, who 
then formed the most powerful community of 
Greece, had a squadron of only three hundred 
horsemen: and it was not till that ambitious 
republic had begun to extend her dominion 
over the inferior states, that she seriously ap- 
plied to the improvement of her cavalry. 
While the Greeks thus acquired the accom- 
plishments of the body, and displayed at Olym- 
pia their skill in horsemanship, and their 
vigour in the gymnastic exercises, the more re- 
fined entertainments of the fancy were not ne- 
glected; and the agreeable productions of 
music and poetry added lustre and elegance to 
every Grecian solemnity. It is well observed 
by the only ancient writer to whom we are 
indebted for a historical account of Grecian 
music, that the arts of peace, as they are more 
agreeable and more useful than those of war, 
demand, in a superior degree, the regard of the 
historian. If this had been the general opinion 
of authors, the study of their works would be 
equally entertaining and instructive. The 
writer of history would explain the various dis- 
coveries which happily tend to improve and to 
embellish social life; by introducing scenes of 
gayety and pleasure, he would diversify the 
eternal theme of human misery; and while he 
expatiated on the crimes and calamities of men, 
he would not neglect to point out the means 
best adapted to prevent the perpetration of the 
one, and to sooth the suffering of the other. 
But the Greek historians have not attempted 
to afford us this important information ; they 
enlarge copiously on such topics as are adapted 
to the use of their countrymen; and they pre- 
serve the most mortifying silence concerning 
those subjects which deservedly excite the cu- 
riosity of later ages. Of all the arts cultivated 
by the ingenuity of their contemporaries, music 


SS 
4 The Chevalier Folard. 5 Iliad xv. ver. 679 


68 


was the most connected with religion, govern- 
ment, and manners; and the effects ascribed 
to Grecian music are numbercd among the 
Most singular as well as the most authentic of 
all recorded events ;! yet as to the nature, the 
origin, the progress, the perfection, in one word, 
the history of this art, we can know little more 
than what we learn from the musical treatise 
of Plutarch, to which we have above alluded, 
which is extremely short and imperfect, ob- 
scure throughout, and in many parts unintelli- 
gible.? 

Without much historical information, how- 
ever, we may venture to explain the introduc- 
tion of musical entertainments at the four pub- 
lic solemnities. These grand spectacles were 
destined to exhibit an embellished representa- 
tion of the ordinary transactions of real life, 
and while the gymnastic and equestrian exer- 
cises represented the image of war, the most 
serious occupation of the Greeks, music re- 
called the memory of religion and love, their 
most agreeable amusements. Besides this, as 
music in those early times was closely connect- 
ed with poetry,3 and as the use of prose com- 
position was not known in Greece till the time 
of Pherecydes of Syros, and Cadmus of Mile- 
tus, who flourished only five hundred and forty- 
four years before Christ,4 the name of music 
naturally comprehended all the learning of the 
age; and to obtain the prize in the musical 
contests, was equivalent to the glory of being 
declared superior to the rest of mankind in 
mental abilities and endowments. 

These abilities and endowments were an- 
ciently regarded in proportion to their utility. 
Before the practice of writing was introduced, 
the history of past events could be preserved 
only by tradition; and tradition was rendered 
more sure and permanent, by being committed 
to the safe protection of harmonious numbers. 
The customary offices of religion were cele- 
brated in poetical composition, and the various 
hymns appropriated to the worship of parti- 
cular divinities, were retained by the faithful 
memory of their respective votaries. The 
tuneful tribe, who were thus employed to extol 
the bounty of the gods, to exalt the glory of 
heroes, and to record and perpetuate the accu- 
mulated wisdom of antiquity, condescended 
also to regulate the duties, and to improve the 
pleasures, of private life. The same bards who 
taught the men to be brave, exhorted the wo- 
men to be chaste.6 Poetry, together with the 


1 The continual complaints of Plato and Aristotle prove 
that the music of their age had greatly degenerated from 
its ancient dignity. It afterwards continued, like all the 
other arts, gradually to decline; yet, in the second century 
before Christ, the grave, judicious, and well-informed Po- 
lybius ascribes the most extraordinary effects to the Grecian 
music. Polybius, l. iv. c. xx. et seq. 

2 Mr. Burette, a French physician, has translated this 
treatise in the tenth volume of the Memoirs of the Acade- 
my, &c. He finds fewer difficulties in it, than present 
themselves to men far better acquainted with the theory 
and practice of this elegant art. See Burney on Music, 
vol. i. p. 36. 

3 T'he same wordssignified a song and a poem, a musician 
and a poet; woes, ATUATE; wIos, wdsx0s, KOb005, Hesych. 

4 Strabo, l. i. 

5 ido de simsiv o melos oyo xararssuxrusvos Mine 
TOU TOLYTIXLOU LTTE WEWTITTA YLE N TOIATILY XATUTZEVN 
wenrbev siç TO peecov. Srrago,]l i. 

6 Of this we have an example in Homer's Demodicus. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


sister arts of music and dancing, are elegantly 
caled by Homer the chief ornaments of the 
feast. The poet musician quelled seditions in 
states,’ and maintained the domestic quiet of 
families; while he published laws of the most 
extensive influence over the whole community, 
he disdained not to animate the humble but 
necessary labours of the mechanic: every pro 
fession in society, even the meanest and most 
vulgar, was encouraged and adorned by its 
particular song ;8 and the most ordinary trans- 
actions of common life, however trivial and 
low, and uninteresting in themselves, were 
heightened and ennobled by the combined 
charm of music and poetry. 

The degree of perfection in which these arts 
are found in any country, depends on the lan- 
guage and character of the people by whom 
they are cultivated. Of this there is abundant 
proof in the history of ancient, as well as in that 
of modern nations. The melancholy, stern, 
atrocious, and unrelenting temper of the Egyp- 
tians (the supposed instructers of Greece) dis- 
qualified that nation either for improving or for 
relishing the beauties of harmony. The harsh 
dissonance of the eastern languages, their defi- 
ciency in vowcls, and the inflexible thickness 
of their sounds, rendered them but little sus- 
ceptiple of musical composition. The music 
of the Egyptians and Orientals therefore de- 
pended rather on the quantity than the quality 
of sound; and the principal object of their art 
was rather to rouse the attention by noise, than 
to charm the soul by melody. 

The language and manners of the Greeks 
were of a different and a far superior kind, to 
those of the neighbouring nations. Hence may 
be deduced the origin and peculiar excellence 
of their music, which, though injudiciously!9 
ascribed to the invention of Thracians, Mysians, 
and other barbarous strangers, must have been 
the natural production of Grecian genius, since 
the three most ancient modes of music were 
the Dorian, Ionian, and Eolian, corresponding 
with the three great divisions of the Hellenic 
race, and the three principal distinctions of the 
Hellenic tongue.!! 

The perfection of language, as well as of 
music, depends on the melody of its sounds; 
their measure or rhythm; their variety; and 
thcir suitableness to the subject which they are 


Dee nn eee aa 


7 See what is said above of Tyrtzus, p. 56. 

8 See Athenzeus passim, and the discourses on the Greek 
songs, in the third volume of the excellent selection of the 
Memoirs of the Academy. i 

9 The nature of the government furnishes another reason 
for the imperfection of Egyptian music. Homer character- 
ises Egypt by the epithet 7:xeos, bitter, to denote the rigid 
severity of the laws. Among that grave and formal peo- 
ple, the hours of amusement, as well as of business, were 
prescribed by law. There was a particular time of the day, 
not only for attending the courts of justice, but for walking, 
bathing, and even for performing the duties of matrimony. 
Diodor. Siculus. Poetry, music, sculpture, and all other 
arts, were regulated by express statute; and if we may be- 
lieve Plato, continued invariable for meny thousand years 
Plato de Legibus. The austerity and restraints of despot- 
ism are inconsistent with that flowing freedom of genius 
necessary to the perfection of poetry. ‘ 

10 While detraction referred the discovery of music to 
strangers, vanity referred it to the gods; and both accounts 
serve to prove the great antiquity of the art, Plut. de Music. 

11 We owe the knowledge of this important circumstance 
to Heraclides of Pontus, the contemporary and scholar of 
Plato. His words are cited by Athenzus, l. xiv. 


Vv.) 


meant to describe or to express. The circum- 
stances of the Greeks in the earliest periods of 
their society,!? rendered them peculiarly atten- 
tive toall these objects. They lived continually 
in crowds; all matters of consequence were 
decided by the voice of the assembly; and, next 
to the force of his arm, every warrior felt him- 
self indebted to the persuasive accents of his 
tongue. The perpetual necessity of employing 
the power of eloquence during the infancy of 
their political state, made them retain the origi- 
nal tones and cadences by which men, as yet 
unpractised in the use of arbitrary signs, had 
made known their affections and their wants. 
These tones and cadences, imitating the lan- 
guage of action (the first and most natural 
language of solitary savages,) possessed a de- 
gree of energy and of warmth which can never 
be attained by the mere artifice of articulate 
sounds.!3 By uniting them to these sounds, 
the Greeks gave all the force of a natural, to 
an arbitrary sign. Music and action were in- 
corporated in the substance of their speech; and 
the descriptive power of words was extended 
to all those objects which can be characterized 
by sound and motion, or which the various 
modifications of these qualities can suggest to 
the mind of man. 

A language thus founded on the broad basis 
of nature, contained within itself the fruitful 
seeds of the imitative arts, and the rich mate- 
rials of all that is beautiful and grand in literary 
composition.!4 It is a subject of equal curiosity 
and importance, to examine how these materials 
were wrought up, and how these seeds were 
unfolded. In attempting, with much diffidence, 
to give some account of this delicate and re- 
fined operation, we shall observe the division 
above mentioned, and consider the melody, 
measure, variety, and expression of the Gre- 
cian poetry and music; arts once deemed so 
intimately connected, that their disjunction at 
the Pythian games, of which we have already 
taken notice, was emphatically compared by 
ancient writers to the separation of the soul 
and body. 

The pleasure arising from the agreeable suc- 
cession of sounds depends either on the combi- 
nation of letters, or on that of musical tones.!5 
The attention which the Greeks paid to the 
former, is evident from the whole structure of 
their language. Wherever propriety permits,!6 
they always employ full, open, and magnifi- 
cent? sounds ; innumerable rules of flexion and 
derivation are founded merely on the pleasure 
of the ear; and the great principle of the fine 


12 See above, chap. ii. 

13 See an excellent discourse of the Abbé Arnaut, on the 
Greek accents, in the third volume of the Choix de Memoirs. 

14 These words very inadequately express the ndus and 
the xxos of Dionysius, de Struct. Orat. ‘The ingenious 
and philosophical critic ranges under two heads, the quali- 
ties of style fitted to please the ear and the imagination. 
These are the sweet, and the fair. Under the first are 
contained smoothness, beanty, grace, persuasion, &c. Un- 
der the second, dignity, weight, magnificence, and force. 
The two kinds of style have a similar relation to each 
other, which the pleasures of the taste, expressed by the 
word Sus, have to those of the eye, expressed by xxAoc. 

15 Dionysius comprehends both under the word meros, 
melody. 

16 The to weswov, Dionysius observes, may sometimes 
require harsh, close, and disagreeable sounds. 

17 The wryaroresrss of Dionysius. 

é 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


69 


arts, to move and affect, without fatiguing the 
senses, cannot be better illustrated than by the 
inimitable composition!’ of elements which cha- 
racterizes the general texture of tue Grecian 
tongue, Whether the ancient poet§ and orators 
discovered this composition by investigation, 
or only preferred it from taste, is a question 
that may be easily answered, if we reflect, that 
such a discovery by investigation supposes an 
acquaintance with the most abstruse principles 
of philosophy, principles altogether unknown 
in that early age, during which the composition 
of elemental sounds attained its highest beauty 
and perfection. We may therefore without 
temerity conclude, that ser.timent first directed 
to the practice of those rules which reason 
afterwards approved; and that this progress 
equally obtained in the articulation of voice, 
and the intonation of sound. 

The latter, the agreeable composition of 
which is properly styled melody, was improved 
to such an extraordinary degree about the time 
of Homer, as rendered the productions of 
Olympus, and otier ancient poet-musicians, 
the admiration of all succeeding ages. Unfor- 
tunately for the history of the arts, we have not 
any such analysis of the music of Olympus, as 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus has left us of the 
poetry of Homer. We are informed, however, 
that the ancient melody was not only divided, 
like the modern, by tones and semi-tones, but 
also distinguished by the diesis, or quarter-tone ; 
an interval of which modern musicians rarely 
make use. The genus of music, regulated hy 
this interval, a genus to which the most pow- 
erful effects are ascribed by ancient writers, 
was known by the name of the enharmonic; 
the genus, proceeding by semitoues, was called 
the chromatic; and the diatonic, which denotes 
a progression by tones and semitones, expressed 
a musical scale nearly resembling that of the 
modern nations of Europe.!9 

These observations will give the reader an 
idea of the intervals in the different genera, 
which is all that we can learn on this subject 
from the learned collection of Meibomius. In 
none of the musical treatises in that collection 
do we find any specimen of ancient melody; 
nor are we enabled, by any circumstance men- 
tioned in them, to ascertain the qualities which 
formed its principal merit. ‘The invention of 
the enharmonic genus is ascribed by Plutarch 
to Olympus, who, happening to skip certain 
intervals in the diatonic scale, observed the 
beauty of the effect, and the peculiar force and 
character which the regular omission of the 
same intervals bestowed on the melody. Upon 
this observation, he is said to have founded a 
new genus of music remarkable for simplicity, 
gravity, and grandeur. These qualities might, 
doubtless, be produced by the happy discovery, 


18 As all languages are relative to the organs of speech, 


j they may all be analvzed into about twenty-fonr letters, or 


elemental sounds, the combination of which forms the 
wonderful variety of language; a variety resniting from the 
respective characters and circumstances of different nations, 

19 It is sufficient to explain the things signified by the 
enharmonic and diatonic. When, or why, these names 
were bestowed on the two kinds of music which they 
respectively denote, is disputed by philologists; and I have 
not met with any thing on the subject that scemed worthy 
of being transcribed, 


ayy 


to them, perhaps, we may refer the enthusiasm 
and sublimity by which his compositions were 
distinguished. The employing of the greater 
intervals supported the dignity and character, 
while the use of the diesis chiefly contributed 
to the refinement and delicacy, of Grecian 
music. The bold separation of notes expressed 
the firmer feelings, and described the stronger 
emotions of the soul; while the more insensible 
distinctions of sound painted the innumerable 
shades and faint fluctuations of passion; as 
when the voice, gradually ascended through the 
smallest perceptible divisions, it would admira- 
bly express the progress of a respectful but 
ardent affection, unable to hide, yet afraid to 
reveal its force, and striving by repeated efforts 
to overcome its natural timidity. 

But by whatever conjectures we may explain 
the powers of ancient enharmonic, it appears 
from the universal consent of Greek writers, 
that the melody of music and of language 
differed only in degree, not in kind. The 
variations of accent, for that is the proper word 
to express the melody of language, seldom 
exceeded, in common discourse, the difference 
of three notes and a half; which makes Dio- 
nysius observe, that it never exceeds the com- 
pass of one interval, the diapente, or fifth. He 
pretends not, however, that in rhetorical decla- 


mation, the flexions of the voice were so nar- | 


rowly circumscribed ; and it is probable that in 


poetry, their range was always more extensive | 


than in the most animated prose. When the 
poet therefore composed his verse, he was 
obliged to pay an equal attention to accent 
and to quantity: the acuteness and gravity of 
sounds, as well as the length and shortness of 
syllables, contributed to the effect of his art; 
and each particular word having not only its 
determined duration, but its appropriated tones, 
obtained that place in the verse which was felt 
to be most agreeable to the ear, and best 
adapted to the subject. The poet therefore 
naturally performed the office of the musician, 
and clothed his own thoughts and sentiments 
with that combination of sounds, which ren- 
dered them most beautiful and expressive. 

As accent regulated the melody, quantity 
regulated the rhythm of ancient music. The 
most melodious succession of tones, however 
flattering to the ear, must soon become tire- 
some and disagreeable, when continued with- 
out interruption or pause, and undistinguished 
by such proportions of duration, as are readily 
seized and measured by the senses. This truth 
the Greeks illustrated by a comparison. The 
most brilliant composition of colours is nothing 
better, they observed, than a gaudy show, daz- 
zling the sight for a moment, but passing after- 
wards disregarded and unobserved. But to 
this showy colouring let the painter add the 
solid beauties of design, and he will convert an 
empty amusement of the eye. into an elegant 
entertainment to the fancy. What design is to 
colouring, measure is to melody. It is measure 
that animates the song, and which, combined 
with the inimitable charms of Grecian verse, 
produced those extraordinary effects, which the 
ignorance and credulity of early ages weakly 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 
seconded by the lofty genius of Olympus; and. 


w 


[Cuar. 


deemed miraculous. On measure principally 
depended the different modes of music, by which 
the most opposite passions were alternately ex- 
cited in the mind ; and courage, pride, timidity, 
love, anger, resentment, successively diffused 
through a numerous assembly, at the will of a 
skilful composer. The difference of modes, 
indeed, arose also, in some measure, from the 
difference of key ; and the same succession of 
sounds, pronounced with various degrees of 
acuteness or gravity, may doubtless produce 
effects more or less powerful; but dissimilar 
effects it never can produce; so that the 
grandeur of the Doric, the polished elegance 
of the Ionic, the soothing sweetness of the Eolic 
mode,! must have resulted from the rhythm 
or measure, which governing the movement of 
the verse, thereby determined its expression. 
Besides these three modes, formerly men- 
tioned asrthe original invention of Greece, the 
natives of that country gradually adopted seve- 
ral others that had been discovered by the 
neighbouring nations; particularly the Phry- 
gian, consecrated to religious ceremonies, and 
the Lydian, appropriated to the expression of 
complaint or sorrow. The variety, indeed, at 
length became greater than can be easily con- 
ceived by such as are unacquainted with the 
mechanism of ancient languages. Every spe- 
cies of verse (and of verse there were above a 
hundred different kinds) occasioned a change 
of musical measure, and introduced what, in 
musical language, may be called a different 
time. These measures were only to be em- 
ployed agreeably to the rules of propriety and 
decorum, which had been discovered in those 
great principles of nature, to which all rules of 
art must ultimately be referred. A slow suc- 
cession of lengthened tones expressed modera- 
tion and firmness; a rapid inequality of verse 
betrayed disorderly and ignoble passions; the 
mind was transported by sudden transitions, 
and roused by impetuous reiterations of sound ; 
a gradual ascent of notes accorded with all 
those affections which warm and expand the 
heart; and the contrary movement naturally 
coincided with such sentiments as depress the 
spirits, and extinguish the generous ardour of 
the soul. Having fixed, with the most accurate 
precision, the wide variety of modes and genera, 
the Greeks seldom confounded them with the 
same piece, and never applied them to any 
subject which they had not been originally des- 
tined to express. The natural perceptions of 
taste were gradualiy strengthened by habit; the 
principles of music were clearly ascertained, 
and universally understood; and possessing 
the warmth and energy of the language of na- 
ture, they acquired the perspicuity and extent 
of the language of convention. This is justly 
deemed the height of musical perfection,? and 
to this height the Greeks had attained, in the 
beginning of the sixth century before Christ. 


1 Lucian. Harmon. sub initio, et Heraclid. apud Athe- 
neum, l. xiv. 

2 The question, whether the Greeks knew music in parts, 
has been carefully examined by Mr. Burette (Memoires de 
l'Academie des Inscriptions ;) by Rousseau (Dictionarie de 
Musique;) and by Dr. Burney (History of Music, vol. i. p 
146, et seq.) These writers who are so well entitled to 


v 


VL] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


71 


CHAPTER VI. 


The Grecian Bards—Heroic Poetry—Change of Manners—lIambic or Satire—Elegy—Tyrteus, 
Callinus Mimnermus—Life of <Archilochus—Terpander—Lyric Poetry—The Nine Lyrie 
Poets—Sappho, Alceus, Anacreon, Myrtis, Corinna, Pindar—Effects of the Sacred Games— 
Strength—Courage—Contempt of Prejudices—Taste—Moral Principle—Intellectual Powers— 


Genius. 


POETRY has described the wonderful ef- 
fects of Grecian music; and the inimitable 
excellence of ancient poets can alone render the 
description credible. Yet the early perfection 
of these elegant arts, asserted by the gravest 
writers of antiquity, seems extremely incon- 
sistent with the received doctrines concerning 
the progress of civil society. Both in the ancient 
and inodern world, the great system of practi- 
cal knowledge, subservient to the useful pur- 
poses of human life, appears to have been 
slowly raised, and gradually extended, by suc- 
cessive trials, and reiterated efforts. Among 
savages, scarcely any distinction of professions 
takes place; the activity of each individual 
supplies his own wants. During the inter- 
mediate stages of society, men are still con- 
demned to a wide variety of occupations; and 
their attention being distracted by a multipli- 
city of pursuits, it is impossible that, in any one 
art, they should reach proficiency, or even as- 
pire to excellence. But, contrary to this ob- 
servation, the Grecian music and poetry are 
represented as most perfect in their united 
state; the immortal fathers of verse excelled 
alike, it is said, in all the various kinds of poeti- 
cal composition ;3 and their inimitable produc- 
tions were so far from advancing, by a gradual 
progress, to perfection, that the most ancient 
are, by universal consent, entitled to a just 
preference.‘ 

The history of these admired authors is, un- 
fortunately, as uncertain, as their merit was 
illustrious. The Greeks possessing much tra- 
ditionary and little recorded information con- 
cerning the antiquities of their country, the 
great inventors of arts, and generous benefac- 
tors of society, have been deprived of their 
merited fame and well-earned honours. Their 
names indeed, like firm rocks resisting the as- 
saults of the ocean, bid defiance to the depre- 


decide on this subject, pronounce the Grecks to have been 
unacquainted with counterpoint. But that their ignorance 
in this respect did not detract from the perfection, or di- 
minish the effects of their music, may he credited on the 
uususpicious testimony of an ingenious Italian. © [] contra 
punto, essendo composito di varie parti, Puna acuta, l’altera 
grave, questa di andamento presto, quella di tardo, que 
hanno a trovarsi insieme, et ferir l'orecchie ad un tempo, 
come potrebbe egli muovere mell’ animo nostro, una tal de- 
terminata passione, la quale, di sua natura, rechiede un de- 
terminato moto, et un determinato tuono?’ Algorotti, 
Saggio sopra l’Opera in Musica. 

3 We are told by Aristotle, in the 4th chapter of his 
Poetics, that Homer wrote an iambic poem, entitled Mar- 
gites, hearing the same relation to comedy and satire, that 
the Tiliad bears to tragedy and panegyric. Notwithstanding 
the express testimony of the great critic, two very elegant 
scholars have said, that the hexameter was the only kind 
of verse known in the time of Homer; the Abbé Arnaut, in 
his excellent discourse on the Greek accents, and Mr. Bu- 
rette, in his Commentary on Plut. de Music. 

4 Grecorum antiquissima queque scripta vel optima. 
Horat. Epist. l. ii. Ep. 1. 


dations of time; but of Linus, Orpheus, Mu- 
sæus, and Melampus, little else than the names 
remain; and to determine the time in which 
they flourished, was a matter of as much difti- 


j culty two thousand years ago,’ as it remains in 


the present age. 

Since even the chronology of the ancient 
bards is so extremely uncertain,‘ it cannot be 
expected that we should be able to give a cir- 
cumstantial account of their life and writings. 
Instead of considering minutely, therefore, the 
private history of individuals, a task which 
suits neither the design of the present work, 
nor the incredulity of the present age, we shall 
endeavour to explain the general nature and 
tendency of their profession, as well as the cir- 
cumstances which conspired to raise it to that 
rank and dignity which it long held in society. 
During the heroic ages, the Grecian poets had 
one uniform character; and if we may depend 
on the positive assertions of antiquity, the same 
individual was alike successful in the various 
branches of his divine art.” The earliest poets, 
therefore, may be represented in one picture, 
and delineated by the same strokes, until their 
profession came to be separated into different 
departments. We shall then distinguish the 
heroic, iambic, lyric, elegiac, and other kinds 
of poetical composition; offer some account of 
the improvers of each particular species; and 


5 Herodotus, who reads his history at the Olympic 
games 444 years B. C. expresses himself as follows: ‘ Ho- 
mer and Hesiod lived about four hundred years ago; not 
more; and these are the poets who composed a Theogony 
for the Greeks: who assigned to the gods their respective 
appellations and epithets; distinguished their several forms ; 
and defined the arts in which they excelled, and the honours 
to which they were entitled. As to the poets who are sup- 
posed to have preceded them,I am of opinion that they 
flourished in a later age.” According to Herodotus, there- 
fore, the age of Homer is fifty years later than it is placed 
by the marbles of Paros. But on this subject we have surer - 
evidence than any monuments of marble, or even the testi- 
mony of Herodotus can afford. The circumstantial minute- 
ness, ahd infinite variety, which characterise the Iliad and 
Odyssey, prove their inimitable author to have lived near 
the times which he describes. He conversed in his youth 
with those who had seen the heroes of the Trojan war, 
and, in the vigour of his age, beheld the grandchildren of 
Æneas, Ulysses, Achilles, and Agamemnon. 


Nov de dy Aveo yevos TEWETTI wvarces 
Kus wxideg musdwy TOs KEV METOMITİE YEVWVTZI 
xx. ver. 306. 


The learned reader may consult the note on the passage in 
Clark's Homer, where Dionysius of Halicarnassus is 
quote, to prove that the poet says nothing inconsistent 
with Æneas’ voyage into Italy. It is to be observed, that 
the force of the criticism evaporates in Mr. Pope’s transla- 
tion. 

6 The preceding note proves the ignorance of Herodotus, 
and his contemporaries, concerning the history of their an- 
cient bards; since of these venerable fathers of the Grecian 
religion and policy, two are mentioned by Homer himself; 
Linus, in the description of the shield of Achilles, Il. xviii.: 
Melampus, in the 11th book of the Odyssey, ver. 15. 

7 There are not any two kinds of poetry more differen 
than those ascribed to Homer by Aristotle, Poetic. chap. iv 


Nliad. 


72 


sxamine such fragments of their works as de- 
serve attention, not merely on account of their 
own intrinsic merit, but as genuine and authen- 
tic, and indeed the only genuine and authentic 
transcripts of the manners of that early age in 
which they were composed. 

In ancient Greece, the favourites of fortune 
were often the favourites of the muses. There 
remain not, indeed, the works of any Grecian 
king; but we are told by Homer, that Achilles 
sung to his lyre the glory of heroes ; Amphion, 
to whose musical powers such wonderful! ef- 
fects are ascribed, reigned in Thebes; the poet 
Mclampus obtained royal authority in Argos; 
and Chiron, the wise Centaur,? though de- 
scended of the most illustrious ancestors, and 
entitled to the first rank among the Thessalian 
princes, preferred to the enjoyment of power, 
the cultivation of poetry, and retired, with 
his favourite muses, to a solitary cavern at the 
foot of mount Pelion, which was soon rendered, 
by the fame of his abilities, the most celebrated 
school of antiquity.® 


The musical arts were not only deemed! 


worthy the ambition of princes, but thought 
capable of elevating ordinary men to the first 
ranks in society. By excelling in such ac- 
complishments, Anthes of Beotia, Olen of 
Lycia, Olympus of Phrygia,‘ obtained the 
highest pre-eminence. Nor was it during their 
life-time only that they enjoyed the happy fruits 
of their elegant labours. They were regarded 
as peculiarly deserving of a dopble immortali- 
ty; living for ever in the memory of men, and 
being admitted, according to the belicf of an- 
tiquity, to the most distinguished honours in 
the celestial regions.5 

It has been already observed, that the tex- 
ture of the Grecian tongue was singularly well 
adapted to the improvement of poetry; and 
this favourable circumstance was admirably 
seconded by the political condition of the 
Greeks in the early periods of their society. Re- 
ligion then formed the sole principle of govern- 
ment; and the belief of religion was chiefly 
supported by the Theogonies,® while its cere- 
monies were principally adorned by the hymns 
of the bards. These two kinds of poetry, 
doubtless the most ancient and the most vene- 
rable, formed the main pillars of the political 
edifice; and the essential parts of this edifice 
consisting in the praise of the gods, its brightest 
ornaments were composed of the glory of he- 
roes. The hymns maintained the power of 
religion, the song animated to valour; and 


1 Movet Amphion lapides canendo Hor. 

- 2 Most of the heroes of the Trojan war were his disci- 
ples. Xenoph. de Venat. sub initio. 

3 Xenoph. de Venat. sub initio. 

4 Mr. Burette has collected the most interesting particu- 
lars concerning these bards, in his Commentary on Plut. de 
Music. 

5 Museum ante omnes. Virg. Æn. vi. It is not easy 
to discover the reason why Virgil, in his Elysium, has 
placed Musieus before all the rest. This venerable bard, 
by some called the son, by others the disciple of Orpheus, 
is universally allowed to have been a native of Attica. 
The admirer of Grecian eloquence (Orabant caussas me- 
lius) intended, perhaps, to compliment the country of Mu- 
seus. 

6 A Theogony is a poem explaining, not merely, as the 
name denotes, the generation, but also the history of the 
gods. Most of the ancient poets nientioned in the text 
wrote 'heogonics. Piod. lii. Plut. de Music. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


both powerfully affected that peculiar sensibi- 
lity of temper, and that romantic turn of fancy, 
the prevailing characteristics of Greece duiing 
the heroic ages. 

Neither the Riners of the north, nor the 
Troubadours of Provence, nor the Bards of 
Germany, nor even the Druids of Gaul and 
Britain, possessed more distinguished autho- 
rity than the Aoidoi, or Rhapsodists, of the 
Greeks. The first requisite of their profession 
was, to know many soothing tales;7 and it was 
the daily object of their art, to delight gods 
and men.8 The piety of the pricst, and the 
inspiration of the prophet, were intimately 
connected with the enthusiasm of poetry ; and 
poets, who had celebrated the glory of the 
past, were naturally employed to rear the hopes 
of the future generation.2 It is probable, 
however, that the ancient bards had frequent 
avocations from their literary labours. The cu- 
riosity, natural to men of genius, would fre- 
quently tempt them to visit distant countries. 
The admiration paid to their abilities could 
only be upheld by novelty. Both inclination 
and interest, therefore, would prompt them to 
sail to foreign lands, to examine their civil and 
religious institutions, and to converse with 
their priests and poets, from whom thcy might 
derive such information as would enable them, 
on their return home, to surprise, entertain, 
and instruct their fellow-citizens. 

Of all nations, the Greeks enjoyed most ad- 
vantages for travelling; and of all Grecian 
professions, that of the bard. The general 
diffusion of their national language and colo- 
nies,as well as the sacred character with which 
they were invested, entitled this venerable class 
of men to expect a secure retreat among the 
most inhospitable barbarians. Whatever coun- 
try they visited, the elegant entertainment de- 
rived from thcir art procured them a welcome 
reception at religious festivals, and all public 
solemnities, Amidst the most dreadful cala- 
mities which afflict mankind, the bards alone 
were exempted from the common danger. 
They could behold, in safety, the tumult of the 
battle; they could witness, undisturbed, the 
horror of a city taken by storm; calm and 
serene themselves, they might contemplate the 
furious conflicts,and wild agitations, of the pas- 
sions. It belonged to them only, and to the sa- 
cred character of the herald, to observe and 
examine, without personal danger, the natural 
expressions of fear, rage, or despair, in the 
countenances and gestures of the vanquished, 
as well as the insolent triumph of success, the 
fury of resentment, the avidity of gain, and 
the thirst of blood, in the wild aspect and mad 
demeanour of the victors. Having considered 
at full leisure the most striking peculiarities of 
those agitated and distressful scenes, the poet 
might retire to his cavern, or grotto, and there 
delineate, in secure tranquillity, such a warm 
and expressive picture of the manners and mis- 


7 Ibaga Geaxtyoex. HOMER. 

B Osor xei ævÍewrotri wetoety, HomeER. 

9 In early ages, the education of youth was entrusted only 
to the first ranks in society. This profession was practised 
in Greece by Homer, as we learn from his life, falsely ascri- 
bed to Herodotns, yet certainly very ancient. In Gaul it 
belonged to the Druids Vid. Cæsar de Bello Gallico, l. vi. 


= 


VL] 


fortunes of men, as should astonish his contem- 
poraries, and excite the sympathetic terror and 
pity of the most distant posterity. 

If the Grecian bards were fortunate in ob- 
- serving such events of their own age as were 
most susceptible of the ornaments of poetical 
imitation, they were still more fortunate in 
living at a period which afforded a wonderful 
variety of such events. Amidst the unsettled 
turbulence of rising states, the foundation and 
destruction of cities, the perpetual wars and 
negotiations of neighbouring communities, they 
were daily presented with subjects worthy the 
grandeur of the heroic muse. The establish- 
ment of colonies, the origin of new supersti- 
tions, as well as the imaginary legends which 
supported the old, furnished copious materials 
for many a wondrous song. ‘These materials, 
being eagerly embraced by the choice, were 
embellished by the fancy of the early bards; 
who, continually rehearsing them to thcir con- 
temporaries, had an opportunity of remarking, 
in their approbation or dislike, the cireum- 
stances necessary to be added, taken away, or 
altered, in order to give their productions the 
happiest effect, and the highest degree of 
strength and beauty. As writing was little prac- 
tised for the purpose of communicating know- 
ledge, succeeding poets learned to repeat the 
verses of their predecessors ; and, having trea- 
sured them in their memory, they adopted them 
as their own. 
with such careful observations as were natural 
to men whose character depended on the suc- 
cess of their art, led to new alterations and 
amendments ;!0 and their performances, thus 
improving by degrees, acquired that just mea- 
sure of perfection, to which nothing could with 
propriety be added, and from which nothing 
could with propriety be taken away. In this 
manner, perhaps, the Iliad and Odyssey received 
the last polish; the harmonious animation of 
poetry was admired as the language of the 
gods; and poets, originally the ministers of 
heaven, the instructors of youth, and the re- 
warders of merit, were finally regarded as 
the great authors of religion, the principal 
benefactors of mankind, and, as shall be ex- 
plained hereafter, the wise legislators of na- 
tions. 

As the singular manners and events of the 
heroic ages naturally produced the lofty strains 
of the epic muse, so the state of society in 
Greece, during the immediately succeeding 
periods, highly favoured the introduction of 
other kinds of poetry. The abolition of the 
royal governments gave free scope to the acti- 
vity and turbulence of democracy; and the 
rivalships and enmities of neighbouring states, 
rankling in the minds of their citizens, prepared 
the imaginations of men for taking a malignant 
pleasure in works of invective and reproach. 
The innumerable causes of alienation, hatred, 
and disgust, which operated also within the 
bosom of each little republic, opened an inex- 
haustible source of satire. The competitions 
for civil offices, for military command, and for 


10 Eyévyyouy TND TOLYTEALHV Ek TWV CUTOTHESELTETOV, 
Aristot. Poet. c. iv. 
K 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Frequent repetition, attended | 


73 


other places of trust, profit, or honour, all of 
which were conferred by the free suffrages of 
the people, occasioned irreconcilable variance 
between the ambitious members of the same 
community, and subjected the characters of 
men to mutual serutiny and remark. The sen- 
timents of the Greeks, not being perverted by 
the habits of slavery, nor restrained by the 
terrors of a despot, they boldly expressed what 
they freely thought; they might openly declare 
a just contempt; and, while they extolled in 
the lofty ode and swelling panegyric tlie heroes 
and patriots whom they admired, they lashed 
the cowards and traitors whom they despised, 
with all the severity of satire. 

The ode and satire may be successfully cul- 
tivated by imitators in the worst of times; but 
they could scarcely liave been invented and per- 
fected under any other than a popular govern- 
ment. The plaintive elegy, on the other hand, 
which describes the torments of unsuccessful 
love, or which paints the affliction of a misera- 
ble parent, an affectionate son, a disconsolate 
wife, or a faithful friend, for the loss of the se- 
veral objects most dear to their hearts, seems 
to be the spontaneous production of every soil, 
and hardly to receive any change of impres- 
sion from the fluctuating forms of society. 
The particular purposes, however, to which 
the Greeks principally applied this species of 
poetry, appear to have been suggested by their 
peculiar circumstances at the time of its origin. 
During the violence and disorder occasioned 
by the political revolutions, the frequent mi- 
grations, and the almost uninterrupted hostili- 
ties which succeeded and increased the calami- 
ties of the Trojan war, it was natural for those 
who reasoned concerning the affairs of men, to 
form, according to the original bent of their 
minds, two opposite theories for the best im- 
prevement of human life. Men of a firm tex- 
ture of soul would prepare for the misery 
which awaited them, by strengthening their 
natural hardiness, and fortifying their natural 
intrepidity. The contempt of pain, and dan- 
ger, and death, would be the great principle of 
their lives, and the perpetual subject of their 
song; and while they described the inevitable 
disgrace of weakness and cowardice, they 
would extol, with the most lively sensibility, 
the glory of valour, the triumphs of success, 
and the joys of victory. Such themes might 
delight the martial muse of Tyrtzeus and Cal- 
linus, but could offer no charms to the effemi- 
nate softness of Mimnermus, or the licentious 
debauchery of Archilochus. To persons of 
their character, the calamities of the times, in- 
stead of appearing an argument for virtue, 
would prove an incitement to pleasure. The 
precarious condition of their lives and fortunes, 
while it depreciated all other objects, would 
increase the value of present enjoyment. In 
the agreeable amusements of the fleeting hour, 
they would seek refuge against the melancholy 
prospect of futurity. The pleasures of the 
table, the delights of love, the charm of the 
elegant arts and of conversation, would be per- 
petually studied in their lives, and perpetually 
recommended in their poetry. 

The precious remains of their writings, and 


74 
Orm still more the authentic circumstances 
JMP- related concerning the characters of 
Fi È the ancient poets, sufficiently confirm 
“18 * the truth of these observations. Next 


to Homer, Archilochus is the earliest 

Greek writer, whose life is recorded so mi- 
nutely as may serve to throw any considerable 
light on the history of his country. We are 
told by Herodotus,! that he flourished in the 
time of Gyges, king of Lydia, who mounted 
the throne seven hundred and eighteen years 
before Christ. He was a native of the isle of 
Paros, one of the Cyclades, which had already 
become wealthy and populous. His father, 
Telesicles, must have been a person of distinc- 
tion, since he was employed to head a deputa- 
tion of his countrymen to the oracle of Apollo. 
The object of the Parians was to obtain a fa- 
vourable answer from the god concerning an 
enterprise, which they had long meditated, of 
settling a colony in the valuable island of 
Thasos, opposite to the coast of Thrace. The 
oracle approved the design, and in order to 
reward the respectful behaviour, and to re- 
pay the rich presents delivered to the holy 
shrine by Telesicles, who had unfortunately 
disgraced the dignity of his rank by an un- 
equal marriage with a beautiful slave named 
Enipo, declared that the fame of Archilochus, 
the glorious fruit of this dishonourable connec- 
tion, should descend to the latest ages of the 
world. 

The prophecy would naturally contribute to 

its own accomplishment; especially as Archi- 
lochus descended from a fami'y,in which the 
dove of poetry was a hereditary passion. Tellis, 
his grandfather, accompanied the priestess of 
Ceres, in order to establish the Eleusinian mys- 
teries in the isle of Thasos, an employment, 
which, like the sacred commission of Telesicles 
at the city of Apollo, could not have been ex- 
ercised by any other than a favourite of the 
Muses. Enjoying the example of such ances- 
tors, and encouraged by the admonition of the 
god, it was to be expected that the young poet 
should second the gifts of nature by the efforts 
of industry; and that his juvenile productions 
should soon have been distinguished above 
those of his contemporaries, by dignity of sen- 
timent, force of éxpression, and beauty of 
imagery. 

In that martial age, no superiority of genius, 
rank, or fortune could exempt its possessor 
from the duty of serving his country in the 
exercise of arms.? The Parian colony in Tha- 
sos, having ineffectually endeavoured by itsown 
strength to establish a settlement in Thrace, 
was obliged, in order to accomplish this design, 
to have recourse to the assistance of the parent 
isle. Archilochus served in this expedition, 
which, though finally successful, was chequered 
with a great variety of fortune. During an 
engagement with the barbarous Thracians, in 
which his countrymen were defeated and put 


to flight, he saved his life by throwing away 


1 Lib. i. cap. 12. 

2 This was not the case in the heroic ages; the bards, 
though called ‘Hess, as being of the first rank in society, 
were exempted from the fatigues of war. Hom. Odyss. 
passim. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


his shield; an action so extremely inconsistent 
with the military prejudices of the age, that all 
his eloquence and ingenuity were incapable of 
extenuating its infamy. 

On his return home, he renewed his ad- 
dresses to a Parian damsel named Neobulé. 
Her father Lycambes, who had at first granted, 
afterwards refused his consent, whether dis- 
gusted by the unwarlike and therefore con- 
temptible character of Archilochus, or tempted 
by the alluring offers of a richer rival. If we 
believe the poet, it was avarice alone that cor- 
rupted the sordid mind of Lycambes; and both 
he and his daughter, regardless of their plighted 
faith and repeated oaths, sacrificed their senti- 
ments and character to the mean gratification 
of this ignoble passion. 

This assertion he maintained by his poetical 
invectives, full of indignation and resentment 
against the whole family of the supposed trai- 
tors. His verses were rehearsed at the public 
games, where the force and vivacity of the 
satire were universally admired. Calumny, 
however, seems to have joined her poisoned 
darts to the more fair and equitable weapons 
employed by the anger of disappointed love. 
Neobulé and her sisters were accused of every 
vice most inconsistent with the modest dignity 
of the female character. Yet such an accusa- 
tion is extremely improbable, considering the 
reserved circumspection of Neobulé herself, 
during the ardent solicitations of Archilochus 
a behaviour which naturally increased the fire 
of his passion, and sharpened the edge of his 
satire. 

His reproach and calumny, however ill- 
grounded and unreasonable, gained an easy 
credit among the rivals and enemies of Ly- 
cambes; and the bitter taunts and invectives, 
which the malice of the poet had invented, the 
scornful contempt of the Parians too faithfully 
retained. An old poem was no sooner in dan- 
ger of being forgotten, than it was succeeded 
by new verses, ccuched in the liveliest turns 
of ingenious satire. The perpetual strokes of 
malevolence, darted against the family of Ly- 
cambes by the persevering cruelty of the poet, 
rendered their characters suspicious to the pub- 
lic, and their lives painful to themselves. They 
determined to withdraw from a scene which 
seemed a constant variation of misery, and 
died in despair by their own hands. 

The poems which produced this melancholy 
effect, and of which some scattered remains 
have reached the present times, were written 
in iambic? verse of six and four feet. When 
the lines were of the same length throughout, 
the piece was entitled an iambic; but when 
short and long verses alternately succeeded 
each other, it was called, from this circum- 
stance, an epode,4 a name which Horace has 


3 The term iambic is synonymous in Greek with the 
words reproachful, satirical. Arist. Poet. 

4 This word, concerning the meaning of which there 
have been innumerable disputes, simply denotes the succes- 
sion of verses or stanzas of different length or structure. an 
the first sense it is explained in the text; in the second it 
will be explained in speaking of the ode, of which the epode 
regularly formed the third stanza, as we learn from Hephes- 
tion, Terentianus Maurns, Marius Victorinus, and other 
ancient grammarians and philologists. 


Vi] 


given to those performances in which he imi- 
tated the poetry and spirit of Archilochus, not 
copying, with servility, his sentiments and ex- 
` pression.5 

Though iambic was the favourites pursuit 
of Archilochus, his genius was not entirely 
confined to that species of writing. Endowed 
with an extreme sensibility of heart, he was 
inclined to gratitude and friendship, as well as 
to enmity and resentment. Animated by the 
former sentiments, he lamented the death of a 
kinsman and friend, who had unfortunately 
perished by shipwreck. The piece consisted 
of alternate hexameter and pentameter verses, 
and abounded in elegiac strains, which were 
admired by the greatest critics of antiquity. 
The sublime Longinus, in particular, extols the 
affecting description of the shipwreck; and 
Pluta-ch’ has preserved the conclusion of the 
piece, in which the poet having asserted the 
hurtfulness of sorrow to the living, and its 
inutility to the dead, determines thenceforth to 
abstain from unavailing lamentations, and to 
seek relief for his affliction in wine, love, and 
other sensual pleasures. 

These sentiments of Archilochus seem to 
prove, that whatever may have been the 
poetical merit of his elegy, the tender passions 
were less fitted than the irascible, to make a 
durable impression on his heart. He soon for- 
sook the elegiac muse; and his natual disposi- 
tion, as well as the fame which he had already 
acquired by his satires, led him to pursue that 
species of writing with unabating ardour. The 
perpetual rivalships and competitions among 
the principal Parian citizens, who aspired at 
the first offices of government, frequently de- 


generating into hatred, malice, and revenge, | 


they observed, with infinite delight, the asper- 
sions, however foul and false, that were cast on 
their opponents. The malignity of the public 
thus nourislied and exasperated the venom of 
the poet; but there was a degree of virulence 
beyond which it could not proceed. After 
making the circle of the whole society, and 
equally offending friends and foes by his ex- 
cessive and indiscriminate reproach, Archilo- 
chus came to be regarded as a public enemy. 
The licentious impunity of his manners, which 
bid defiance to every law of decency and of 
nature, heightened the detestation of his cha- 
racter, and he was compelled to fly in disgrace 
from his native island, to which his genius 
would have been an ornament, had his be- 
haviour been more modest and inoffensive.8 
Banished from the isle of Paros, the poet 
sought protection in the Thasian colony, to 
the establishment of which the services of his 
father had so eminently contributed; but, un- 
fortunately for his repose, the fame of his 
satires had gone before him, and the disgrace 
of having lost his shield in the Thracian expe- 
dition was a stain not easily wiped off. His 
reception among the Thasians, therefore, an- 


Parios ego primus iambos 

Ostendi Latio, numeros animosque secutis 

Archilochi, non res, et agentia verba Lycamben. 
Fpist. lib. i. 19. 

Archilochum proprio rabies armavit iambo. 

De audiend. Poet. 

Critias apud Ælian. Hist. l. ix. c. xiii. 


5 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


75 


swered neither his own expectations, nor the 
liberal spirit of ancient hospitality. He soon 
quitted a place in which his company was so 
little acceptable, yet not before he had lam- 
pooned the principal citizens of Thasos, and 
endeavoured, by a singular and absurd excess 
of resentment, to satirise the narrowness and 
sterility of the island itself. 

The wandering poet was not more fortunate 
in several other districts of Greece in which 
he took refuge. The warlike Spartans would 
scarcely admit into their city, a writer who had 
said that it was better for a soldier to lose his 
shield than his life, because he might purchase 
new armour, but could not acquire a new 
existence. Archilochus, thus abandoned, per- 
secuted, and contemned, made one spirited 
effort for recovering his ancient character, and 
regaining the public esteem. The time ap- 
proached for celebrating the Olympic festival. 
The irregularity of his manners, the general 
detestation of his behaviour, and, above all, his 
vindication of cowardice, would, according to 
general rules, have excluded him from assisting 
at that solemnity: but having removed the pre- 
judices which the citizens of Elis had naturally 
conceived against him, by displaying his won- 
derful talents for music and poetry, he took 
care to insinuate that he was possessed of an 
ode in praise of Hercules, which, if rehearsed 
before the public assembly, would equally en- 
tertain the fancy, and improve the piety of the 
spectators. The interest of religion being ma- 
terially concerned in this proposal, the judges 
of the games thought proper to comply with it. 
Archilochus appeared on the appointed day 
among the Olympic bards. After his competi- 
tors had given specimens of their art in such 
musical compositions as the audience were ac- 
customed to hear, he began the song in honour 
of. Hercules, accompanied with the sound of 
his lyre, and written with such new variations 
of verse, as necessarily occasioned new modu- 
lations of melody. It is probable that, on 
this occasion, he first practised the invention 
ascribed to him by Plutarch, of passing, with 
a rapidity, from one rhythm, or measure, to 
another of a different kind. The novelty, the 
beauty, and the grandeur of his composition 
ravished the senses, and elevated the souls of 
his hearers. The demerit of the performer was 
obliterated in the perfection of hissong. The 
unanimous applause of the assembly declared 
his superiority to every rival, and he was im- 
mediately rewarded by the prize, and adorned 
with the crown, of victory.!0 

Having acquired such distinguished renown 
in the public theatre of assembled states, Archi- 
lochus returned, with exultation, to his native 
country, the glory of which had been pro- 
claimed at Olympia, in consequence of the 
successful merit of a banished citizen. This 
proclamation being deemed the highest honour 
which an individual could procure for his com- 


9 De Music. 

10 We learn from Pindar and his scholiast, Ode Olymp. 
ix. that this celebrated poem of Archilochus long continued 
to be sung at the Olympic games, in order to grace the 
coronation of those victors who eithor could not afford, or 
who did not incline, to purchase an ode in their particular 
honour. 


16 


munity, the hatred and resentment formerly 
entertained against the poet was converted into 
gratitude and admiration. The renewed rc- 
spect of his country occasioned many ebulli- 
tions of poetical vanity, which evaporated in 
some verses that have reached the present 
times.! When death put an end to his labours, 
it could not extinguish his fame. His obse- 
quies were distinguished by every sad circum- 
stance of funeral pomp; and his memory was 
celebrated by a festival, established by the 
gratitude of his countrymen, and adopted by 
the general admiration of the Greeks, during 
which the verses of Archilochus were sung 
alternately with the poems of Homer:? and 
thus, by a fatality frequently attending men of 
genius, he spent a life of misery, and acquired 
honour after death. Reproach, ignominy, con- 
tempt, poverty, and persecution were the ordi- 
nary companions of his person; admiration, 
glory, respect, splendour, and magnificence, 
were the melancholy attendants of his shade. 

Archilochus was the principal improver, not 
only of the iambic, but of the graver kind of 
lyric poetry ; and Terpander, who flourished 
in the same age, was, as far as we can trace 
the history of the arts, the chief promoter of 
the gay and festive kinds of lyric composition. 
This agrecable poet was a native of Lesbos. 
Iie obtained the musical prize in the Carnean 
festival at Sparta; and in the beginning of the 
seventh century before Christ, gaincd four suc- 
cessive prizes at Delphi, as appeared by a cor- 
rect register of the conquerors in the Pythian 
games, preserved in the time of Plutarch.3 
These advantages procured him the respect of 
his contemporaries; but he was honoured by 
posterity chiefly for his improvement of the lyre, 
and for the new varieties of measure which he 
introduced into the Grecian poetry. 

The example of Archilochus and Terpander$ 
was followed by the nine Lyric poets, who, in 
the course of two centuries, flourished almost 
in regular succession,and maintained the poetic 
fame of their country. Of the two most an- 
cient, Aleman and Stesichorus, we have only a 
few imperfect remains: of Sappho there are 
two complete odes; her followers Alcæus, 
Simonides, Ibycus, and Bacchilides are known 
by a few mutilated fragments, and by the re- 
marks of ancient critics; but we still possess 
many inimitable odes of Pindar, and many 
pleasant songs of Anacreon. ' 

As to the Grecian lyrists in general, it is 
worthy of observation, that except Alcman of 
Sardis, who on account of his merit was natu- 
ralised at Sparta, Pindar of Thebes in Beotia, 
and Stesichorus of Aimera in Sicily, all the rest 
were born on the Asiatic coast, or in the islands 
of the Ægean sea. These enchanting climates 
were the best adapted to inspire the raptures 


I Athenæus, l. xiv. Pausaniąs, l. x. Stobæus, serm. 123. 
2 Anthol. p. 212. Aristot. Rhetor. l. ii. 

3 De Music. 

4 Euclid. Harmon. Strabo, l. xiii. 


5 Ilivðæzgoç Cyriy oTi Twv rxoiwv perwy Tepravigos. 


svertns eors. Plut. de Music. “Pindar says, that Terpan- 
der invented the Scholia,” which, according to Pollux and 
Hesychius, properly denote the drinking songs of the Greeks; 
but, in a more general sense, signify every kind of lyric 
poetry not aspiring to the dignity of the ode. — 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


peculiar to the ode, as well as to excite that vo- 
luptuous gayety characteristic of the Grecian 
song.6 Amidst the romantic scenes of Ionia, 
was “elt with uncommon sensibility the force 
of that pleasing painful passion, which, uniting 
grief, joy, and enthusiasm, contains the fruitful 
seeds of whatever is most perfect in music and 
poetry.’ Here the celebrated Sappho breathed 
the amorous flames by which she was con- 
sumed; while her countryman and lover Al 

ceus declared the warmth of his attachment, 
excited less perhaps by the beauty of her person, 
than by the bewitching charms of her voice. 
But neither Alczeus, who flourished in the be- 
ginning of the sixth, nor Anacreon, who flour- 
ished in the beginning of the fifth century 
before Christ, allowed the natural vivacity of 
their tempers to be overcome by the severities 
of a passion which they considered chiefly as 
an instrument of pleasure. When unfortunate 
in love, they had recourse to wine; and their 
lively invitations to this enjoyment com- 
posed the favourite airs of antiquity.8 Of 
Alceus it isusual to judge by the scattered re- 
mains of his works preserved in Plutarch? and 
Athenæus, and by the high commendations 
bestowed on him by Horace and Quintilian. 
The Latin poet, however, seems on many oc- 
casions to have so exactly imitated, or rather 
translated the Greek, that the copy will per- 
haps best enable us to form a complete idea of 
the original.!! 

Alceus, though he chiefly indulged in the 
gay and sportive strains of poetry, was yet 
qualified to undertake more lofty!? themes; 
but the whole soul of Anacreon was of that ef- 
feminate texture which fitted him only to sing 
of love and pleasure.!? Venus, Bacchus, Cupid, 
and the Graces were the peculiar divinities 
whom he adored; and the presents which he 
offered at their shrine were the most acceptable 
that any mortal could bestow. He not only 
observed the external rites and ceremonies 
which they commanded, but proved that his 
heart and mind had imbibed the genuine spirit 
of their worship. Throughout the whole of 
his works now remaining,!4 there reign the 
most inimitable simplicity, purity, and sweet- 
ness of diction : his verses flow with a smooth 
volubility; his images, sentiments, and reason- 


6 Tippocrat. de locis, vol. ii. p. 346. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 
7 Agreeably to the principles established by Theophras 
tus in Plutarch’s Symposium. 
8 Give us a song of Alewusor Anacreon, was a common 
saving in the age of Socrates. Athenus, l. x. c. viii. 
9 Sympos. e. vi. 10 Lib. x. 
11 Mydev aaro curevens weorsgov Savdgov oyersAov.— 
ALC. 
Nullam, Vare, sacra vite, prius severis arborem. 
Other translations, equally literal, may be discovered by 
carefully examining the fragments in Athensus I. x. 
12 In lusus et amores descendit, majoribus tamen aptior 
Qein. l. x.c. i. 
13 A Gaptitos Se xoeðzig 
Eewtæ povvov nes Anac. Od. i. 
14 The works of Anacreon are sajd, by Petrus Alcyonius 
de exilio, to have been burned by the Greek priests of Con- 
stantinople, from which some learned men, destitute of 
taste, have absurdlv concluded, that the works ascribed to 
the old poet are spurious. It cannot, surely, be said of those 
poems, “ Etsi excitant animos nostrornm hominum ad fla- 
grantiorem religionis cultum, non tamen verborum Attico- 
rum proprietatem et linguæ Græcæ elegantiam docent;” 
which is the character that Petrus Alcyonius gives of the 
compositions snbstituted by the priests in their place. 


V1. 


ings (if what in him seems intuitive conviction 
can be called reasonings) are copied from the 
warmest impressions of nature. Yet in these 
poems, otherwise so beautiful and so perfect, 
there may be discovered an extreme licentious- 
ness of manners, and a singular voluptuous- 
ness of fancy, extending beyond the senses, 
and tainting the soul itself. 

The dissolute gayety of Anaereon, the deli- 
cate sensibility, of Sappho, and the tearful com- 
plaints of Simonides,! were all expressed in 
that easy equable flow of uninterrupted har- 
mony, which, in the opinion of the most learn- 
ed of their countrymen,!® possesses more grace 
than strength, and more beauty than grandeur. 
The majestic muse of Stesichorus soared to a 
loftier pitch. Disdaining the subjects to which 
the other lyrists descended, he sung of war and 
heroes, and supported, by his harp, the whole 
weight and dignity of epic poetry.” Such, at 
least, are the sentiments of a celebrated critic, 
who had read his works, of which we are at 
present entitled to judge only by their resem- 
blance to those of Pindar, who possessed a 
similar turn of genius, and treated the same 
lofty themes. . 

The honours bestowed on Pindar by his con- 
temporaries, as well as the admiration in which 
his name was uniformly held by the most im- 
proved nations of antiquity, render both his 
person and his works objects of a very natural 
curiosity. He was born five hundred and 
twenty years hefore Christ, and his long life 
almost completed the full revolution of a cen- 
tury. His age, therefore, extended beyond the 
period of history now under our review; yet 


the works of his predecessors having perished | 


by the ravages of time and barbarism, it is 
necessary to examine, in this place, the nature 
and character of the writings of Pindar, as the 
only materials remaining that can enable us to 
form a general notion of the performances re- 
cited by the lyric poets at the principal Gre- 
cian solemnities. Pindar, from his earliest 
years, was carefully trained by his father (him- 
self a musician) to the studies of music and 
poetry. His genius, naturally wild and luxu- 
riant, was corrected by the lessons of his fair 
countrywomen, Myrtis and Corinna,!8 whose 
poetical productions had acquired unrivalled 
fame, not only in Thebes, but among all the 
neighbouring cities.!9 His first efforts for 
equalling their renown were displayed at the 
musical contests celebrated in his native coun- 
try; where, after conquering Myrtis, he was 
five times overcome by Corinna, who, could we 
believe the voice of scandal, owed her repeated 
victories more to the charms of her beauty than 
to the superiority of her genius.29 But in the 
four public assemblies of Greece, where females 
were not admitted to contend, Pindar carried 
off the prize from every competitor. The glory, 
in particular, which his poetry both acquired 
and bestowed at Olympia, made the greatest 


15 Mestius lachrymis Simonideis. Catull, 

16 Dionysius Halicarn. 

17 Epici carminis onera lyr sustinentem. Quint. 
18 Pausanias, I. ix. c. xxii. 

19 Lucian. Ælian. Var. Hist. 


20 Pausanias, |. ix. ¢. xxii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


77 


generals and statesmen of the age court the 
friendship of his muse. To the temples of the 
gods, and especially to the celebrated temple 
of Delphi, his hymns and peans drew an extra- 
ordinary concourse of Greeks and strangers. 
The priests, prophets, and other ministers of 
Apollo, sensible of the benefits which they de- 
rived from his musical fame, repaid the merit 
of his services by erecting his statue in the 
most conspicuous part of the temple, and de- 
clared by their organ the Pythia, that Pindar 
should be honoured with one half of the first- 
fruit offerings annually presented by the devout 
retainers of the Delphian shrine.?! Pindar was 
thus, during his lifetime, associated to the 
honours of the gods; and after his death, his 
memory was adorned by every mark of respect 
that public admiration can bestow. The beauty 
of the monument, erected to him by his fellow- 
citizens in the Hippodrome of Thebes, was ad- 
mired after the revolution of six centuries.22 
At the T'heoxenian festival, a portion of the 
sacred victim was appropriated, even as late as 
the time of Plutarch, to the descendants of the 
poet. The inveterate hostility of the Spartans, 
when they destroyed the capital of their ancient 
and cruellest enemies, spared the house of Pin- 
dar, which was equally respected in a future 
age by the warlike and impetuous son of Phi- 
lip, and the giddy triumph of his Macedonian 
captains.23 ; 

Pindar, we are told, acquired unrivalled fame 
by his hymns to Jupiter, his peans to Apollo, 
and his dithyrambics to Bacchus. But as all 
these works have perished, as well as his 
love verses, his elegies, and his Parthenia,?4 we 
are unfortunately obliged to confine our obser- 
vations to the odes, which were rehearsed at 
the sacred games, in praise of the conquerors in 
the gymnastic and equestrian contests. "These 
conquerors being persons of the first distinction 
in Greece, the poet takes occasion to celebrate 
the splendour of their past lives, the dignity of 
their character, the fame of their ancestors, 
and the glory of their several republics. The 
tutelary deities, to whom they owed their feli- 
city, are not forgotten ; and hence, by an easy 
transition, the poet passes to the worship of the 
god in whose honour the games were establish- 
ed; to the adoration of the heroes who had 
appointed them; and to innumerable other epi- 
sodes, which are often more interesting and 
more beautiful than the original subject. 

Such, most commonly, are the materials of 
the ode; and its form usually consisted of three 
stanzas, of which the two first were of an equal 
length, and either of them longer than the. 
third. This arrangement was introduced as 
most suitable to the occasion of the poem, as 
well as to the scene on which it was rehearsed. 
The occasion was the solemn sacrifice, ac- 
companied by a public entertainment, given to 
the spectators by the friends of the successful 
candidate for Olynipic fame. Grateful ac- 
knowledgments to the gods formed a principal 
part of the ceremony, which could not, without 
impiety, be omitted by the victor, who had 


21 Pausan. Phocic. 
22 Pausan. Bæotic. 23 Polyb. Histor. 
24 Sung, as the word denotes, by a chorus of virgins 


a 


78 


obtaincd so honourable a prize through the as- 
sistance of his protecting divinity. On the altar 
of this divinity the sacrifice was performed; 
and in his temple was sung the panegyrical 
poem, containing the united praises of the 
beneficent god, and of his favoured votary. 
The chorus waited, as usual, to begin the song, 
till preparations were made for the feast. They 
repeated the first stanza, properly called stro- 
phé, while they gracefully danced, towards the 
right, round the well-replenished altar ; return- 
ing, in an opposite direction, to the place from 
which they set out, they recited the second 
stanza, therefore called antistrophé; then stand- 
ing motionless before the altar, and, as it were, 
in the immediate presence of the divinity, with 
whose statue it was adorned, they sung the 
concluding stanza, with a richer exuberance, 
and more complicated variations, of melody.! 
The ode, therefore, was distinguished from 
other pieces of poetry, not by being set to mu- 
sic,? (for this was common to them all,) but by 
being sung by achorus, who accompanied the 
various inflections of the voice with suitable 
attitudes and movements of the body. 

The lyric poetry of the Greeks thus united 
the pleasures of the ear, of the eye, and of the 
understanding. In the various nature of the 
entertainment consisted_its essential merit and 
perfection; and he only could be entitled the 
prince of lyric poets, whose verses happily con- 
spired with the general tendency of this com- 
plicated exhibition. By the universal consent 
of antiquity, this poet is Pindar, whom, ever 
since the eulogium of Horace, critics have ex- 
tolled for the brilliancy of his imagination, the 


figurative boldness of his diction, and the fire, | 


animation, and enthusiasm of his genius. The 
panegyrics bestowed on him, have generally 
more of the wildness of the ode, than of the 
coolness of criticism; so that the peculiar na- 
ture of his excellcnces may still deserve to be 
explained. It will be allowcd by every one 
who reads his works with attention, that, great 
as his ideas are, Pindar is less distinguished by 
the sublimity of his thoughts and sentiments, 
than by the grandeur of his language and ex- 
pression; and that his inimitable? excellence 
consists in the energy, propriety, and magnifi- 
cence of his style, so singularly fitted to asso- 
ciate with the lengthened tones of niusic, and 
the figured movements of the dance. The uni- 
form cadence, the smooth volubility, and the 
light unimportance of ordinary composition, 
are extremely ill adapted to this association, 
which, bringing every single word into notice, 
and subjecting it to observation and remark, 
must expose its natural meanness, insignifi- 
cance, and poverty. But as mucli as the lan- 
guage of ordinary writers would lose, that of 
Pindar would gain, by such an examination. 
His words and phrases are chosen with an 
habitual care, and possess a certain weight and 
dignity, which, the more they are contemplated, 


1 Marius Victorinus de Gram. and the Scholia on He- 
phestion. 

2 This error runs through the whole of the otherwise very 
sensible discourse of Mr. Charbanon on lyric poetry, in the 
Memoirs de I’ Academie. 

3 Pindarum quisquis studet emulari, &e 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


must be the more admired. It is this magnifi- 
cence of diction, those compound epithets, and 
those glowing expressions (which the coldness 
of criticism has sometimes condemned as extra- 
vagant) that form the transcendent merit of 
the Pindaric style, and distinguish it even 
more than the general flow of the versification, 
which is commonly so natural, free, and unre- 
strained, that it bears less resemblance to poe- 
try, than to a beautiful and harmonious prose. 
It is not meant, however, that this great poet 
paid more attention to the choice, than to the. 
arrangement, of words. The majesty of the 
composition equalled, and, in the opinion of a 
great critic, even surpassed the value of the 
materials. Dionysius, the critic to whom I 
allude, has explained by what.admirable refine- 
ments of art, Pindar gave to his words a certain 
firmness and solidity of consistence, separated 
them at wide intervals, placed them on a broad 
base, and raised them to a lofty eminence, from 
which they darted those irradiations of splen- 
dour, that astonished the most distant be- 
holders. 

But the most exalted fame cannot extend 
with equal facility to distance of time and dis- 
tance of place. The poems of Pindar are now 
deprived of their accompaniments of music and 
dancing, by which they were formerly ennobled 
and adorned. They are now read in the re- 
tirement of the closet, without personal interest 
and without patriotic emotion. They were an- 
ciently sung to large assemblies of men, who 
believed the religion which they described, 
knew the characters whom they celebrated, and 
felt the influence of that piety and patriotism 
which they were admirably calculated to up- 
hold. Such passages as may appear most 
exceptionable in the cool moments of solitary 
study, would obtain the highest applause amidst 
the joyous animation of social triumph, when 
men are naturally disposed to admire every 
happy boldness of expression, and to behold, 
with unusual rapture, those lofty and danger- 
ous flights which elevate the daring muse of 
Pindar. 

In examining the effect of the games, as in- 
stitutions for bodily exercise and mental im- 
provement, it is necessary to reflect, not only 
on the universality of their establishment, but 
on the frequency of thcir repetition. Besides 
the public solemnities already described, innu- 
merable provincial festivals wcre celebrated in 
each particular republic. The Athenians em- 
ployed near a third part of the year in such 
amuscments; and if we may be allowed to 
conjecture, that those communities which insti- 
tuted most festivals, would most cxcel in the 
arts and exercises displayed in them, we may 
conclude, from the national designations of the 
Olympic victors preserved in ancient authors, 
that the number of the Athenian festivals was 
rivalled by that of several other states. 

For these warlike and elegant amusements, 
the youth were carcfully trained by the disci- 
pline of the gymnasia, in which they learned 
whatever can give strength and agility to the 
limbs, ease and grace to the motions, force and 
beauty to the genius. Bodily strength and 
agility were accompanied by health and vigour 


VL] = 
of constitution. 
and heat. 


games,) they received, bareheaded, the direct 
rays of the sun. And the firm organization, 
acquired by perpetual exercise, counteracted 
that fatal propensity to vicious indulgence, too 
natural to their voluptuous climate, and pro- 
duced those inimitable models of strength and 
beauty, which are so deservedly admired in the 
precious remains of Grecian statuary. 

These corporeal advantages were followed by 
a train of excellences to which they are nearly 
allied. There is a courage depending on nerves 
and blood, which was improved to the highest 
pitch among the Greeks. They delight, says 
Lucian, to behold the combats of bold and 
generous animals; and their own contentions 
are still more animated. In the memorable 
war with Persia, they showed the superiority 
of their national courage; and it is worthy of 
observation, that the most signal exploits were 
performed in the field of battle by those who 
had been previously adorned with the Olympic 
crown. It was a general boast, that one Gre- 
cian could conquer ten Persians;6 and the 
suggestions of reason tend to confirm the evi- 
dence of history. In the battles of the Greeks 
and Persians, victory was not obtained, by the 
mechanical exertions of distant hostility. The 
contest was decided by the point of the sword 
and spear. The use of these weapons requires 
activity of the limbs, steadiness of the eye, and 
dexterity of the hand. It improves the courage 
as well as the vigour of the soldier; and both 
qualities were admirably promoted by the 
habitual exercises of the gymnasia, which in- 
spired not only the spirit to undertake, but the 
ability to execute, the most dangerous and 
difficult enterprises. 

The gymnastic arts encouraged other excel- 
lences still more important than bodily accom- 
plishments and courage. Chiefly by their in- 
fluence, the love of pleasure and the love of 
action, the two most powerful principles in the 
human breast, were directed to purposes not 
only innocent but useful. The desire of an 
Olympic crown restrained alike those weak- 
nesses which form the disgrace, and those vices 
which form the guilt and misery of undisci- 
plined minds; and an object of earthly and per- 
ishable ambition led to the same external purity 
and temperance, that is recommended by the 
precepts, and enforced by the sanctions, of a 
divine and immutable religion. The oil, the 
crown, the robes, and the palms, compose not 
the only resemblance between the Christian and 
the Olympic victors. These visible images have 
been borrowed indeed by the sacred writers, 
to assist our imperfect conception of divine 
truths ;’7 but they have been borrowed from 
an institution which resembles Christianity, not 
in the honours and rewards which it proposed, 
but in the efforts and duties which it required. 
The ambition of honest fame taught men to 


4 Lucian, Solon. 

5 In Solon. 

6 Herodot. |. viii. 

7 1 Corinth. 9th chapter, four last verses. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Their athletic hardiness bore, 
without inconvenience, the vicissitudes of cold 
Even in the scorching warmth! of 
July (for that was the season of the Olympic 


79 


control the appetites of the body by the affec- 
tions of the soul; the springs of emulation 
repressed the allurements of sensuality; one 
dangerous passion combated another still more 
dangerous; and a train of useful prejudices 
supported the cause, and maintained the ascend- 
ant of virtue. 

Many of the peculiarities which distinguish 
the Greeks from the mass of ancient and mo- 
dern nations, seem to have derived their origin 
from the same useful institutions ; particularly 
the custom of going unarmed, and their per- 
petual contempt for the capricious notions con- 
cerning the point of honour. These unpolished 
republicans were accustomed, in the private 
gymnasia, as well as at the public entertain- 
ments, to inflict and to suffer the most pro- 
voking indignities. A barbarous Scythian, 
who witnessed a spectacle that seemed to him 
as shocking and intolerable as it would appear 
to a punctilious modern gentleman, declared to 
his Athenian conductor, that if any person 
should offer the same insults to him, which the 
Athenian youths were continually offering to 
each other, he would soon convince the assem- 
bly, that his sword was not an empty orna- 
ment of his person, but a useful guardian of his 
honour. Such were the sentiments of the 
Scythian; and history proves, that such are 
the sentiments of all uncultivated minds. An 
untutored barbarian sets no bounds to his re- 
sentment. The smallest injury renders his 
anger implacable; his indignation against the 
offender is proportioned, not to the nature of 
his offence, but to his own pride, which is 
boundless. The slightest fault requires the 
severest atonement; and not only a blow, but 
a word, or a look, may inflict a stain on the 
delicacy of his supposed honour, which can 
only be washed out by the blood of the aggres- 
sor. The excesses of this sanguinary temper, 
before they were corrected by the refinements 
of Grecian philosophy, were repressed by the 
habitual practice of the gymnastic exercises. 
In the schools appropriated to the advancement 
of these manly arts, the Greeks learned the 
valuable lesson of repelling injuries by others 
of a similar kind, of proportioning the punish- 
ment to the offence, and of tlus preventing a 
slight occasion of animosity from degenerating 
into a solid ground of revenge. If any citizen 
of those warlike republics had worn armour in 
time of peace, he must have been regarded 
either as a madman or as an assassin; for to 
the chastised principles of Grecian discipline, 
it would have appeared altogether absurd that 
the sword or dagger should be thought neces- 
sary to retaliate the reproaches of the tongue, 
or even the nore daring insults of the arm. 

The entertainments of the public festivals 
thus tended to eradicate the wild excesses of 
resentment, and to improve the mild and gentle 
virtues; but considered in another view, the 
same entertainments were calculated to pro- 
mote ardour, emulation, friendship, patriotigm, 
and all the animated principles and contGntions 


8 Qui studet optatam cursu contingere meta 
Multa tulit fecitque pner sudavit et alsit 
Abstinuit venere et vino. 

9 Lucian Anacharsis. i 


60 


of active life. The rewards bestowed on the 
conquerors were the most flattering which in 
that age could be proposed. Odes were sung 
in their praise ; statues were erected to them 
on the scene of victory; the names of their 
parents and country were jointly celcbrated 
with their own; they were entitled to the first 
seats at all public entertainments; maintained 
at the expense of their respective communities; 
and in their native cities, rewarded not only 
With monuments and inscriptions, but some- 
times with altars and temples. Of these 
honours and rewards, the appropriated sym- 
bols were the olive, the pine, the parsley, and 
the laurel crowns ; which were respectively dis- 
tributed at the several solemnities of Olympia, 
the Isthmus, Nemea, and Delphi. Observing 
the small value of these badges of distinction, 
without adverting to the solid benefits which 
they conferred, the Persian Tigranes would 
have dissuaded his master from going to war 
with a people, who, insensible to interest, 
fought only for glory.! But had Tigranes 
been more completely informed concerning the 
institutions of Greece, he would have under- 
stood, that both interest and glory operated 
most powerfully upon the candidates for Olym- 
pic fame, and not only their personal interests, 
but those of their friends, their parents, and 
their country, who, being associated to their 
honours, were regarded by them with that love 
and affection which men naturally feel for the 
objects of their protection and bounty. 

In explaining the influence of the Grecian 
solemnities, we must not forget the musical 
and poetical exhibitions, which, from being 
employed to reward the victors in the gym- 
nastic exercises, came to bc themselves thought 
worthy of reward. The martial lessons of 
Tyrteus and Callinus admirably conspired 
with the effects which have already been de- 
scribed,encouraging the firm and manly virtues 
both by the enthusiasm with which their pre- 
cepts were conveyed, and by the lively impres- 
sions which they gave of those objects for 
which it is important to contend. The cour- 
age depending on blood and nerves is uncer- 
tain and transitory in its existence; and even 
while it exists, may be indifferently employed 
to purposes beneficial or destructive. It be- 
longed to the martial bards to determine its 
doubtful nature, to fix and illustrate its genuine 
motives, and to direct it to the proper objects 
of its pursuit. 

The musical entertainments thus strength- 
ened, refined, and exalted the manly principles 
inspired by all the customs and institutions of 
that- warlike age. But as bravery is a hardy 
plant that grows in every soil, the most bene- 
ficial consequence of the arts consisted in in- 
fusing a proper mixture of softness and sensi- 
bility into the Grecian character. This is well 


1The word is «esrys in the original; but here means the 
reward of Virtue. Vid. Herodot. 1. viii. c. 26. 


> 


! 
i 
d 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


known to be their eff 
they are allowed to 
a peculiar manner, re 
nor could it have been 
without the happy influence 
trol the barbarity naturally occasi 
constant employment in war, t 
introduced by the practi 
tude, and that unrelent 

which seems essentially 
of democratical gover 


and application necess 
in the pursuits of genius, . 
to gentle amusements an 
The honours and reward 
cessful candidates for lite m 
them to seek happiness an in t 
ful shade of retirement, as Vv on the con- 
tentious theatre of active life; and the observa- 
tions and discoveries occasionally suggested by 
the free communication of sentiment, strength- 
ened and confirmed those happy prejudices 
which combat on the side of virtue, and en- 
force the practice of such rules of behaviour as 
are most useful and agreeable in society. 

If the musical and literary entertainments 
acquired such a happy influence over the mora} 
dispositions of the heart, they produced a still 
more cansiderable effect on the intellectual fa- 
culties of the mind. It is almost impossible, in 
the present age, to conceive the full extent of 
their efficacy in improving the 


10ry, ani- 
mating the imagination, and correcting the 
judgment. As to the memory, indeed, there 
is a period in the progress of society preceding 
the introduction of writing, when the energies 
of this faculty have been exerted among many 
nations with a wonderful degree of force. 
Even among the barbarous Celtic inhabitants 
of our own island, the Druids could repeat an 
incredible number of verses, containing the 
knowledge of their history, laws, and religion , 
and a period of twenty years was required to 
complete thc poetical studies of a candidate for 
the priesthood. 

But if the Greeks were equalled by other 
nations in the exercise of the memory, they 
have always been unrivalled in the delieacy of 
their taste, and the inimitable charms of their 
fancy. These excellences, whether originally 
produced by natural or moral causes, or more 
probably by a combination of both, were, 
doubtless, extended and improved by emula- 
tion and habitual exercise. To this exercise 
the public solemnities afforded a proper field; 
and, in the contests of music and poetry, were 
displayed the opening blossoms of Grecian 
genius, blossoms which afterwards ripened into 
those fruits of philosophy and eloquence, that 
will form the admiration and delight of the 
last ages of the world. 


2 Ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes, 
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros. S 
3 Cæsar, de bello Gallico, l. vi. 


d years have elapsed 
ed, to the honour of Eu- 
Greeks,having esta- 
ia and Africa, contin- 


they perceived, it is said, 
ightest comparison, the su- 
ra jority of thei ligion, lan- 
A. C. 709, Pemiority of their own religion, lan 

“i guage, institutions, and manners; 
and the dignity of their character and senti- 
ments eminently distinguished them from the 
general mass of nations whose territories they 
invaded, and whom they justly denominated 
Barbarians.5 Yet these honourable advantages, 
instead of conciliating good-will, tended only 
to exasperate hostility. The northern Greeks 
arassed by the fierce inroads 


of the T : the southern were endan- 
gered b united strength of Egypt and 
Lybia. ies in Magna Græcia, lav- 
ing easily the rude, though warlike na- 


tives of'that country, were called to contend 
with the more formidable power of Carthage. 
But the consequences of all these wars, which 
shall be described in due time, extended not 
beyond the countries in which they first arose. 
The memorable conflict between the Greek 
colonies in the east, and the great nations of 
Asia, forms a subject more vast and more in- 
teresting. Not confined to the extremities, it 
reached and shook the centre of Greece. It 
recoiled with more destructive violence on 
Persia; its duration comprehends the most 
illustrious period in the history of both coun- 
tries; and its extent embraces all the great 
nations of antiquity, together with the scat- 
tered communities of Grecian extraction in 
every part of the world. 

In the third century after their establish- 
ment in the east, and above seven hundred 
years before the Christian era, the Greeks of 
Asia, and particularly the Ionians, far surpass- 
ed their European ancestors in splendour and 
prosperity.6 While ancient Greece was ha- 
rassed by intestine dissensions, and its northern 
frontier exposed to the hostility of neighbour- 
ing Barbarians, the eastern colonies enjoyed 
profound peace, and flourished in the vicinity 
of Phrygia and Lydia, the best cultivated and 
most wealthy provinces of Lower Asia,’ and 
perhaps of the ancient world. History and 
poetry alike extol the golden treasures of the 
Phrygian and Lydian kings. Their subjects 
ES 


4 Hippocrat. vol. i. p. 350. Edit. Lugdun. 1763. 
ý Isocrat. Panegyr. passim. 
6 Herodot. passim. Plin. 1. v. et Senec. ad Helv. 
7 Strabo, l. xii. et l. xiii. 
8 Idem, p. 623 et 621. Edit. Paris. 

L 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


21 


CHAPTER VII. 


onies—The Ionians flourish in Arts and Arms—Their Wars with the 
Greeks subdued by Čræsus—Splendour of the Lydian Court— Founda- 
Monarchy—Causes of its rapid Grandeur—Which alarms Cresus—His 
—He invades the Persian ‘Dominions—Measures of his 
s—End of the Lydian Monarchy. 


wrought mines of gold, melted the ore, mould- 
ed figures in bronze, dyed wool, cultivated 
music, enjoyed the amusements of leisure, and 
indulged the demands of luxury. when the 
neighbouring countries of Cappadocia and Ar- 
menia remained equally ignorant of laws and 
arts, and when the Medes and Persians, destined 
successively to obtain the empire of Asia, lived 
in scattered villages, subsisted by hunting, 
pasturage, or robbery, and were clothed with 
the skins of wild beasts.!0 

Yet the Lydians and Phrygians, satisfied 
with their domestic advantages, seem never to 
have directed their attention towards foreign 
commerce,!! When the voluptuousness or os- 
tentation of their kings and nobility made 
them covet the conveniences and luxuries 
of distant countries, they were contented to 
owe these new gratifications, first to the Phe- 


nician merchants, and afterwards to the Greck 


settlements established on their coasts. Through 
the supine neglect of their neighbours respect- 
ing maritime affairs, the Asiatic Greeks ac- 
quired without contest, and enjoyed without ~ 
molestation, besides several valuable islands, 
the whole western coast of the continent, ex- 
tending, in a waving line, above six hundred 
miles in length, beautifully diversified by hill 
and dale, intersected by rivers, broken by bays 
and promontories, and adorned by the noblest 
prospects and finest climate in the world. The 
face of that delightful country will be more 
particularly described, when it becomes the 
unhappy scene of military operations. It is 
sufficient at present to observe, that its Ionian 
inhabitants, possessing the mouths of great 
rivers, having convenient and capacious har- 
bours before them, and behind, the wealthy 
and populous nations of Asia, whose commerce 
they enjoyed and engrossed, attained such early 
and rapid proficiency in the arts of navigation 
and traffic, as raised the cities of Miletus,!2 
Colophon,'? and Phocea,!4 to an extraordinary 
pitch of opulence and grandeur. Their popu- 
lation increasing with their prosperity, they 


diffused new colonies every where around them. 

9 Herodot. l. i. c. xciv. Plin. l. vi. c. Ivi. 

10 Herod. J. i. c. Ixxi. 

]1 The Lydians and Phrygians are mentioned, in Castor’s 
Epochs, among the seventeen nations, who, according to 
that careless and ignorant compiler, successively became 
masters of the Mediterranean sea; but the extravagant 
dreams of this fabulons writer are at variance with the 
whole tenor of arcicut history. It is extraordinary that 
those who ever looked into Herodotus should pay any re- 
gard to the unwarranted assertions of Castor; yet this 
fabulist has been generally followed by modern chronolo- 
ger: and compilers. See Buarr’s Tables, &c. 

12 Athenaus, l. xii. p.523. Comparing their ancient and 
actual state, the Greek proverb said, Iuagi more yoav 
“dxtwor Midyoeoss Once, but long ago, the Milesians were 
powerful. 

13 Athen. l. xiv. p. 643. 


11 Strabo, p. 582 ot p. 647. Herodot. I. iv. c. clii. - 


oe 


Having obtained footing in Egypt,' in the 
eighth century before Christ, they acquired, 
and thenceforth preserved, the exclusive com- 
merce of that ancient and powerful kingdom. 
Their territories, though in their greatest breadth 
compressed between the sea and the dominions 
of Lydia to the extent of scarce forty miles, 
became not only flourishing in peace, but for- 
midable in war,? and bore something of a 
similar relation to the powerful kingdoms of 
Egypt, Lydia, and Assyria, which had hither- 
to swayed the politics of the ancient world, 
that the small but industrious republics of Italy 
had to the rest of Europe in the thirteenth and 
fourteenth centuries; or, to describe their con- 
dition still more exactly, that the Netherlands, 
three hundred years ago, had to the extensive 
countries of France, England, and Germany. 

Such multiplied advantages could not lan- 
guish in the hands of men, who, as we shall 
soon learn from their history, had genius to 
conceive, and courage to execute, the most ar- 
duous designs. With the utmost industry and 
perseverance they improved and ennobled the 
useful or elegant arts, which they found al- 
ready practised among the Phrygians and Ly- 
dians. They incorporated the music of those 
nations with their own. Their poetry, as above 
described, far excelled whatever Pagan anti- 
quity could boast most precious.3 They rival- 
led the skill of their neighbours in moulding 
clay, and casting brass. They appear to have 
been the first people who made statues of mar- 
ble. The Doric and Ionic orders of architec- 
ture perpetuate, in their names, the honour of 
their inventors. Painting was first reduced to 
rule, and practised with success among the 
Greeks; and we may be assured that, during 
the seventh century before Christ, the Ionians 
surpassed all their neighbours, and even the 
Phenicians, in the arts of design, since the 
magnificent presents which the far-famed ora- 
cle of Delphi received from the ostentation or 
piety of the Lydian kings, were chiefly the pro- 
ductions of Ionian artists.4 In the following 
century Ionia gave birth to philosophy; and 
we shall have occasion to explain hereafter by 
what means both science and taste were dif- 
fused from that country over Greece, Italy, and 
Sicily. But our present subject recals us from 
the history of arts to that of arms. 

The first formidable enemies with whom the 
Asiatic Greeks had to contend, were the bar- 
barous Cimmerians, who, being driven from 
the banks of the Euxine, by a Scythian horde 
still fiercer than themselves, overflowed, with 
irresistible violence, the finest provinces of 
Asia Minor. But the invasion of the Cim- 
merians is described as a predatory incursion,® 
not as a regular plan of enterprise directed to 
the purposes of conquest and settlement. The 


1 Herodot. I. ii. c. xxxii. 

2 Idem, ibid. et Aristot. de Civitat. l. iv. c. iv. 

3 See chap. vi. 4 Herodot. 1. i 

5 Strabo, p. 292, says, that the Cimmerians were called 
Cimbri by the Romans. He speaks frequently of them, 
particularly p. 108. 193. 292. 494. Their impetuous and 
destructive incursions are well expressed by the elegiac 
poet Callinus, cited in Strabo, p. 648. 

Nov ’'eri Kippseiwv CTEZTOŞ EEXETHE Omer mosoywr. 

6 Ov RATUOTLOOH EyEVETO Twv TOAiwy ZAAL EŠ smides- 
MAS CETLY N» HERODOT. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


hurricane soon spent its force ; the Greeks re- 
covered from the terror inspired by these de- 
sultory ravagers, and, within a few years after 
their departure, the Ionian and Eolian colonies, 
who seem to have carried their ancient enmity 
into their new acquisitions, totally forgot their 
recent and common danger, and engaged in 
cruel domestic wars. 

These unnatural dissensions were quieted by 
the growing power of the Lydians, which ex- 
tending itself on all sides, finally reduced the 
greatest part of Lesser Asia, a country once 
affording the materials of many rich and flour- 
ishing kingdoms, but now reduced to beggary 
and barbarism under the oppressive yoke of 
Turkish tyranny. The territory of Lydia, 
which extended its name with its authority 
from the river Halys to the Ægean, and from 
the southern shore of the Euxine to the northern 
coast of the Mediterranean, was anciently con- 
fined to that delightful district situate at the 
back of Ionia, watered on the north by the 
river Pactolus, famous for the golden particles? 
intermixed with its sand, and on the south by 
Cayster, whose banks, frequented by swans. 
ave afforded one of the most beautiful com 
parisons in the Iliad.8 The kingdom of Ly- 
dia was anciently subject to a race of princes,® 
styled Atyatide, from the heroic Atys, the great 
founder of their house. To the family of Atys 
succeeded that of Hercules, which had obtained 
the government before the war of Troy, and 
continued to reign five hundred and five years, 
till their honours expired in the unhappy Can- 
daules. The story of Candaules, of his beau- 
tiful wife, and of his fortunate servant, has 
been adorned by the father of history with the 
inimitable charms of his Ionic fancy. The 
vain, credulous prince, injudiciously displaying 
the beauty, offended the modesty, of his injured 
spouse. Gyges,!0 the most favoured of her 
husband’s attendants, to whom his weak mas- 
ter had prostituted the sight of her naked 
charms, was involuntarily employed as the in- 
strument of her resentment. Asa 


ee * reward for taking away the life of 
A C 718 Candaules, he was honoured with 


‘+= the hand of the queen, and from 
the rank of captain of the guards, advanced to 
the throne of Lydia. 

This revolution, which happened seven hun- 
dred and eighteen years before Christ, was felt 
by the neighbouring nations, who soon dis- 
covered in the enterprising character of Gyges, 
the difference between adventurers who ac- 
quire, and princes who inherit, a crown. The 
Ionian cities of Asia offered a tempting prize to 
the valour of Gyges, and the valuable mines? 
discovered between the cities Atarneus and 


7 They were washed down from Mount Tmolus, the 
gold of which was exhausted in tle time of Strabo. Vid. 
Strab. l. xiii. 

8 Kzurreiou auos pesdex, &c. Iliad, ii. ver. 460. and 
Pope. ver. 540. 

9 Herodotus, |. i. throughout, and Dionysius of Hali- 
earnassus, |. i. c. 27. et seq. furnish the principal materials 
for the history of Lydia. 

10 Herodotus was unacquainted with the wonderful story 
of Gyges’s ring, which had the power of rendering him in- 
visible; by means of which he was enabled to kill his mas 
ter, and usurp his throne. Plato, l. ii. de Repub. 

11 Strabo, l. xiii. p. 625 


VILJ] 


Pergamos, as well as the gold obtained from | 
the river Pactolus," enabled him to hire such a 
number of troops as seemed ne- 


. 


Qip E” j cessary to accomplish his ambitious | 
e 680 designs. The citizens of Miletus 


and Smyrna were harassed by a 
long war; but of all the Ionic settlements, Co- 
lophon alone submitted to his arms. 
Ardys his successor, following the military 
Olymp. example of Gyges, stormed the city 
a of Priené, and invaded the terri- 
Aw 619 tories of the Milesians. He trans- 
oo" mitted his enmity, against that peo- 
ple, to his son Sadyattes, from whom it de- 
scended to his more warlike grandson. Aly- 
attes, grandson of Ardys, annually invaded the 
country of Miletus, cut down the trees, burnt 
the standing corn, ravaged and desolated the 
whole territory. The houses he allowed to re- 
main entire, that the Milesians, governed by 
that powerful attachment which binds men to 
their ancient habitations, might return thither 
after his departure, and again apply to the 
sowing and cultivation of the ground, the fruits 
of which he was determined next harvest to 
destroy. In this manner he continued, during 
eleven years, to harass, but was unable to 
conquer, the Milesians. The inhabitants of the 
country retired at his approach, and shut them- 
selves up in their capital, the walls of which 
bid defiance to his assaults; nor was it possi- 
ble to reduce by blockade a city that had long 
been, and still continued mistress of the sea. 
But Alyattes persisted in distressing those 
whom it scemed impossible to subdue; and he 
was carrying on his twelfth autumnal incur- 
sion with fire and sword, when an unforeseen 
accident occasioned a speedy termination of the | 
war. 


The beautiful territory of Mile- 


Olymp. tus was, according to annual cus- 
xliii. 2. tom, thrown tte a blaze, and the 
A. C. 607. y : 


flames of the standing corn, impel- 
led by the violence of the wind, communicated 
with the temple of Assesian Minerva. That 
sacred edifice was burnt to the ground. Aly- 
attes, who was attended on his march by pipes, 
harps, and flutes, adapted to the voice both 
of men and of women, did not immediately 
consider, amidst the noise of festivity, and the 
parade of military triumph, the fatal conse- 
quences of this enormous impiety. But sicken- 
ing soon after at Sardis, he had leisure, during 
the quict and solitude of his distemper, to re- 
flect on the horror of his crime; and prying 
into futurity with that anxious solicitude which 
usually attends guilt, he despatched messen- 
gers to the temple of Delphi, to consult the 
Grecian god concerning the means of mitiga- 
ting the distress of his present state of mind. 
Apollo refused giving an answer to his peti- 
tion, until he had rebuilt the temple of Mi- 
nerva. The Lydian prepared to comply with 
this condition, and immediately sent ambassa- 
dors to Miletus, to propose a suspension of 


10 Strabo, p. 680. The wealth of Gyges was proverbial 
in the time of Anacreon: 
Ou wos meres Tupac 
Tov Lxediwy eventos, &e. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


83 


Pd 


arms, until the great work should be completed. 
That city was then governed by Thrasybulus, 
who, by one of those revolutions not unfre- 
quent in the Grecian republics, liad attained 
the rank of tyrant,!! as it was then called, in a 
state usually governed as a democratical com- 
munity. Similarity of views and disposi- 
tions had introduced a friendly connection be- 
tween Thrasybulus and the celebrated Perian- 
der of Corinth, who was no sodher acquainted 
with the advice of Apollo, than he sent imme- 
diate intimation of it to the Milesian prince, 
counselling him at the same time to avail him- 
self of the present conjuncture to promote the 
interest of his country. In compliance with 
this advice; Thrasybulus employed an expe- 
dient equally singular and successful. _When 
the Lydian ambassadors arrived at Miletus, 
they expected to behold a city in distress, not 
only destitute of the accommodations and luxu- 
ries, but ill provided with the chief necessaries 
of life. But their surprise was extreme, to ob- 
serve vast magazines of corn open to public 
view, to perceive an extraordinary abundance 
of all the other fruits of the ground; and to 
behold the inhabitants revelling in fulness and 
festivity, as if their country had never suffered 
the cruel ravages of an invader. This appear- 
ance of ease and plenty was exhibited by the 
contrivance of ‘Thrasybulus, by whose com- 
mand the corn and other provisions had been 
carried from private magazines into the street, 
that the Lydians, returning to Sardis, the usual 
residence of their prince, might acquaint him 
with the prosperous condition of a people, 
whom it had becn the great object of his reign to 
afflict and to annoy. Alyattes was much affect- 
ed by the intelligence, and at length consented 
to a peace with the Milesians on honourable 
terms. To compensate for his past injuries and 
impiety, he promised to dedicate to Minerva 


‘two new edifices, the magnificence of which 


should far eclipse the splendour of her ancient 
temple. The promise was performed, the new 
temples were consecrated, Alyattes recovered 
from his distemper, and peace subsisted for a 
short time between the two nations. 

The long reign of Alyattes, which, if we may 
credit the doubtful evidence of ancient authors 
in matters of chronology,lasted fifty-two years 
after the treaty with Miletus, was not chequer- 
ed with any great variety of fortune. He con- 
quered, indeed, the city and small territory of 
Smyrna, a Grecian settlement then in its in- 
fancy, but which was destined afterwards to 
become, by its happy situation for commerce, 
the most wealthy and populous establishment 
in those parts, and to be styled, in the pompous 
language of inscription, the ornament of Ionia, 
the first and chief city of the Asiatic coast.!2 
His arms were equally successful in repelling 


11 In tho strict sense, rvexyvos means him who has ac- 
quired sovereignty in a free republic. The word has no re- 
lation to the abuse of power, as in the modern acceptation. 
Thrasybulus of Miletus, Periander of Corinth, Pisistratus 
of Athens, Polycrates of Simos, Alexander of Pherm, and 
Dionysius of Syracuse, were all called tvezvvos, though 
their characters were as widely diffcrent as those of Titus 
and Domitian, the extremes of virtue and vice. 

12 Marm. Oxon. 


84 


the destructive invasions of the Scythian 
hordes, who ravaged the northern parts of his 
dominions, and in resisting the dangerous am- 
bition of the Medes, the most powerful nation 
of Upper Asia. Satisfied with these advan- 
tages, Alyattes became unwilling to commit his 
future fortune to the vicissitudes of war. Fixed 
in this purpose, he spent his remaining days 
amidst the happiness of his wealth and gran- 
deur, in contemplating the various stages of 
his prosperity, in listening to the flattery of his 
courtiers, in receiving the grateful homage of 
his subjects, and in enjoying that pomp and 
pleasure which usually surround an eastern 
throne. 

This fortunate prince was suceed- 


K ly oi ed five hundred and sixty-two years 
AC i 562 before Christ, by his son Creesus, 


* whose uninterrupted prosperity, in 
the first years of his reign, far eclipsed the glory 
of all his predecessors. But the splendour of 
Cræsus was that of a passing meteor, which 
dazzles for a moment, and disappears for ever. 
Of all the kings of Lydia, he was the greatest 
conqueror, but he was also the last king of that 
country,! as well as the last prince of his 
family. Under various unjust pretences he at- 
tacked the Grecian cities of Asia Minor, which 
being undisturbed by foreign war, had un- 
fortunately engaged in domestic dissensions. 
While jealousy hindered the Greeks, ignorance 
prevented the barbarians, from forming a con- 
federacy sufficient to resist the Lydian power. 
The Carians, Mysians, and Phrygians, fighting 
singly, were successively subdued; and the 
whole peninsula of Lesser Asia (excepting only 
the little territory of the Lycians and Cilicians,) 
extending eastward as far as the river Halys, 
and inhabited by three nations of Grecian, and 
eleven of barbarian extraction,? finally acknow- 
ledged the power of Croesus, and tamely re- 
ceived his commands. 

Having met with such extraordinary suc- 
cess by land, the Lydian prince determined to 
render his power equally conspicuous by sea. 
For this purpose he thought seriously of equip- 
ping a fleet, with which he proposed to invade 
and conquer the Grecian islands directly front- 
ing his dominions. But this design, which, 
considering the slow progress in maritime 
power among the nations most diligent to at- 
tain it, would probably have failed of success, 
was prevented by the advice of a philosophical 
traveller, conveyed in such a lively turn of wit, 
as easily changed the resolution of the king. 
Bias of Priené, in Ionia, some say Pittacus of 
Mitylene, in the isle of Lesbos, while he travel- 
led, after the Grecian custom, from curiosity 
and a love of knowledge, was presented to 
Creesus at the Lydian court; and being asked 
by that prince, what news from Greece? he 
answered with a republican freedom, that the 
islanders had collected powerful squadrons of 
cavalry, with an intention of invading Lydia. 
“May the gods grant,” said Croesus, “ that the 


1 Lydia descended to the rank of 2 province, as will ap- 
pear below. ‘ 
2 The Phrygians, Mysians, Mariandvnians, Chalvbians, 


Lydians, Paphiagonians, Thracians, Bithynians, Carian, | 


and Pamphylians. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


Greeks, who are unacquainted with horseman- 
ship, should attack the disciplined valour of the 
Lydian cavalry; there wculd soon be an end 
to’ the contest.” ‘In the same manner,” re- 
plied Bias, * as if the Lydians, who are totally 
unexperienced in naval affairs, should invade 
the Grecians by sea.” Struck by the acute- 
ness of this unexpected observation, Croesus 
desisted from his intended expedition against 
the islands; and instead of employing new 
means for extending his conquests, determined 
peaceably to enjoy the laurels which he had 
won, and to display the grandeur which he had 
attained. 

His court was the gayest and most splendid 
of any in that age; and the Asiatic Greeks, 
whatever dishonour they incurred, sustained 
not, perhaps, any real loss by their easy sub- 
mission to a vain and weak man, but a magni- 
ficent and liberal prince,? who was extremely 
partial to their country. They acknowledged 
the conqueror, indeed, by a very moderate tri- 
bute, but they enjoyed their ancient laws, and 
administered without control their domestic 
concerns and government.’ Creesus spoke their 
language, encouraged their arts, admired their 
poets and sophists. lonia, perhaps, was® never 
more happy than under the eye of thisindulgent 
master, whose protection nourished the tender 
shoot of philosophy, which had begun to spring 
up shortly before his reign. Thales of Mile- 
tus, Pittacus of Mitylene, Bias of Priené, Cleo- 
bulus of Lindus ‘and the other wise men, as 
they are emphatically styled, who lived in that 
age, not only gave advice and assistance to 
their countrymen in particular emergencies, 
but restrained their vices by wholesome laws, 
improved their manners by useful lessons of 
morality, and extended their knowledge by im- 
portant and difficult discoveries. We shall 
have occasion hereafter to consider more fully 
the improvements made by those ancient sages, 
who are said to have maintained a correspond- 
ence with each other as well as with Chilon of 
Sparta, Periander of Corinth, and Solon of 
Athens, men who acquired sueh reputation by 
their practical wisdom, as rendered them the 
oracles of their respective countries. Most of 
these, as well as Æsop the fabulist, and the ele- 
gant Greek poets of the times, were bountifully 
received at the court of Cresus. There is still 
on record a memorable conversation between 
that prince and Solon, which seemed to predict 
the subsequent events of his reign, and which 
had a late, but important influence on the 
character and fortune of the Lydian king. 

Cresus having entertained his Athenian 
guest, according to the ancient fashion, for se- 
veral days, before he asked him any questions, 
ostentatiously showed him the magnificence of 
his palace, and particularly the riches of his 
treasury. After all had been displayed to the 
best advantage, the king complimented Solon 


3 Such is the character which results from considering 
the conduct of Cresus. The transactions of his reign will 
not warrant our adopting the admirable panegyric of him 
by Pindar (Pyth. i.:) 

Ov obives Kooirou Csrotouy æpsTa, &c. 
He was taught wisdom late, and only by adversity. 

4 Herodot. 5 Thucydid. 


VIL] 


upon his curiosity and love of knowledge ; and 
asked him, as a man who had scen many coun- 
tries, and refiected with much judgment upon 
what he had seen, whom ofall men he esteem- 
ed most happy? By the particular occasion, as 
well as the triumphant air with which the 
question was proposed, the king made it evi- 
dent that he expected flattery rather than in- 
formation. But Solon’s character had not been 
enervated by the debilitating air of a court, and 
he replied with a manly freedom, “ Tellus, the 
Athenian.” Croesus, who had scarcely learned 
to distinguish, even in imagination, between 
wealth and happiness, inquired with a tone of 
surprise, why this preference to Tellus? ‘*Tel- 
lus,” rejoined Solon, “ was not conspicuous for 
his riches, or his grandeur, being only a simple 
citizen of Athens; but he was descended from 
parents who deserved the first honours of the 
republic. He was equally fortunate in his 
children, who obtained universal esteem by 
their probity, patriotism, and every useful 
quality of the mind or body; and as to him- 
self, he died fighting gallantly in the service of 
his country, which his valour rendered victo- 
rious in a doubtful combat; on which account 
the Athenians buried him on the spot where he 
fell,and distinguished him by every honour which 
public gratitude can confer on illustrious merit.” 

Cresus had little encouragement, after this 
answer, to ask Solon, in the second place, 
whom, next to Tellus, he deemed most happy? 
Such, however, is the illusion of vanity, that 
he still ventured to make this demand, and 
still, as we are informed by the most circum- 
stantial of historians,entertained hopes of being 
favourably answered. But Solon replied with 
the same freedom as before, “ The brothers 
Cleobis and Biton; two youths of Argos, whose 
strength and address were crowned with repeat- 
ed victory at the Olympic games ; who deserv- 
ed the affection of their parents, the gratitude 
of their country, the admiration of Greece ; 
and who, having ended their lives with pecu- 
liar felicity, were commemorated by the most 
signal monuments of immortal fame.” And 
is the happiness of a king, then,” said Creesus, 
* so little regarded, O Grecian stranger! that 
you prefer to it the mean condition of an Athe- 
nian or Argive citizen?” The reply of Solon 
sufficiently justified his reputation for wisdom. 
“ The life of man,” said he, “consists of seventy 
years, which make twenty-six thousandtwohun- 
dred and fifty days; an immense number, yet in 
the longest life, the events of any one day will 
not be found exactly alike to those of another. 
The affairs of men are liable to perpetual vicis- 
situdes ; the Divinity who presides over our 
fate is envious of too much prosperity; and all 
human life, if not condemned to calamity, is at 
least liable to accident.” Whoever has uninter- 
ruptedly enjoyed a prosperous tide of success 
may justly be called fortunate: but he cannot be- 
fore his death be entitled to the epithet of happy.” 

The events which soon followed this conver- 
sation, prove how little satisfaction is derived 


G Tereuty rov Giov agrrry extyevero. EHerodot.|].i.c. 31. 

7 Ourw ov w Keosrs maç erri avlewros wucoey. The 
last word is improperly explained in all the translations that 
T have met with. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


85 


from the possession of a throne. Victorinus in 
war, unrivalled in wealth, supreme in power, 
Cresus felt and acknowledged his unhappi- 
ness. The warmest affections of his soul cen- 
tred in his son Atys, a youth of the most pro- 
mising hopes, who had often fought and con- 
quered by his side. The strength of his at 
tachment was accompanied with an excess of 
paternal care, and the anxiety of his waking 
hours disturbed the tranquillity of his rest. 
He dreamed that his beloved son was slain 
by a dart; and the solicitude with which he 
watched his safety, preventing the youth from 
his usual occupations and amusements, and 
thereby rendering him too eager to enjoy them, 
most probably exposed him to the much-dread- 
ed misfortune. Reluctantly permitted to en- 
gage in a party of hunting, the juvenile ardour 
of Atys, increased by the impatience of long 
restraint, made him neglect the precautions 
necessary in that manly amusement. He was 
slain by a dart, aimed at a wild. boar of mon- 
strous size, which had long spread terror over 
the country of the Mysians. The weapon 
came from the hand of Adrastus, a Phrygian 
prince and fugitive, whom Creesus had purified 
from the involuntary guilt of a brother’s blood, 
and long distinguished by peculiar marks of 
bounty. To the grateful protection of the 
Phrygian, Croesus recommended, at parting, 
the safety of his beloved son. A mournful 
procession of Lydians brought to Sardis the 
dead body of Atys. The ill-fated murderer 
followed behind. When they approached the 
royal presence, Adrastus stepped forward, and 
intreated Croesus to put him to death; thinking 
life no longer to be endured after killing first his 
own brother, and then the son of his benefactor. 
But the Lydian king, notwithstanding the ex- 
cess of his affliction, acknowledged the inno- 
cence of Adrastus, and the power of fate 
« Stranger, your action is blameless, being com 
mitted without design. I know that my son 
was destined to a premature deatli.” Adras- 
tus, though pardoned by Cresus, could not 
pardon himself. When the mourners were re- 
moved, he privately returned, and perished by 
his own hand on the tomb of Atys. 

Two years Creesus remained disconsolate for 
the loss of his son, and might have continued 
to indulge his unavailing affliction during the 
remainder of life, had not the growing great- 
ness of Persia, which threatened the safety of 
his dominions, roused him from his dream of 
misery. That country was anciently confined 
to a small part of the immense region at pre- 
sent known by the Persian name. Its inhabit- 
ants had recently become formidable, and, in 
the course of a few years, under the elder 
Cyrus, they extended their name and conquests 
over Upper Asia, overturned the power of 
Creesus, enslaved the Greeks of Asia Minor, 
and, for the first time, threatened Europe with 
the terrors of Asiatic despotism. This memo- 
rable revolution deserves not only to be ex- 
amined in its consequences, but traced to its 
source, because the Grecian wars and transac- 
tions, during the space of above two centuries, 
with the Persian empire, form an important 
object of attention in the present history. 


&6 


Thg first Assyrian monarchy extended its 
dominion in Upper Asia, from the northern de- 
serts of Scythia, to the Southern or Indian 
Ocean. On the west it was separated by the 
river Halys from the dominions of Lydia. The 
river Indus formed its eastern boundary. The 
conquerors of the east have assumed, in all 
ages, the title of King of Kings; a title ex- 
pressive of the nature, as well as of the great- 
ness of their power. The various provinces 
which they conquered, though acknowledging 
their universal dependence on the emperor, 
were yet subject to their particular princes, 
who, while they paid their appointed tribute 
during peace, and furnished their contingent 
of troops in time of war, were permitted, in 
their ancient territories, to retain the power, and 
to display the pomp of royalty. This system 
of government is more favourable to the ex- 
tension than to the permanence of empire. The 
different members of this unwieldly body were 
so feebly connected with each other, that to 
secure their united submission required almost 
as much genius as to achieve their conquest. 
When the spirit which animated the immense 
mass was withdrawn, the different parts fell 
asunder ; revolutions were no less rapid than 
frequent; and, by one of those events.familiar 
in the history of thé east, the warlike sceptre 
of Ninus and Semiramis was wrested ‘rom the 
effeminate hands of Sardanapalus. In the 
year seven hundred and forty-six before Christ, 
the provincial governors of Babylonia and 
Media, disdaining to receive orders from this 
enervated shadow of their ancient lords, re- 
jected his contemptible authority,and establish- 
ed two new dynasties, which, having governed 
Asia for two centuries, were again reunited by 
the fortunate valour of Cyrus. 

This extraordinary man, who raised the Per- 
sian glory on the ruins of the Medes and Ba- 
bylonians, was the son of Cambyses, the tribu- 
tary prince of Persia: on the mother’s side 
he derived a more honourable descent from 
Mandana, daughter of Astyages, the supreme 
lord of Media, and many kingdoms of the east. 
The powerful monarchy erected by Cyrus was 
distinguished by the name of his native pro- 
vince, as the preceding empires had been de- 
nominated after the provinces of their respec- 
tive conquerors, although all of them, compre- 
liending the same nations, were bounded by 
nearly the same limits, Cyrus alone having ex- 
tended his empire to the Grecian sea. 

The territory of Persia, to the name of which 
we allude, is situated on the southern frontiers 
of Media, and reaches to the Persian gulf. 
The mountainous nature of the country ren- 
ders it improper for cavalry, but it formerly pro- 
duced a bold and hardy race of men, who, un- 
corrupted by the effeminacy of the Asiatic 
plains, required only the directing genius of 
a commander to conduct them to war and vic- 
tory. Such a commander they found in Cyrus, 
whose mind, bursting through the shackles im- 
posed on virtues and abilities by the manners 
and climate of the east,! extended the name 
and conquests of Persia from the Tigris to the 


1 See his panegyric in Xenophon’s Cyropedia, and in 
ZEschylus’s Perse. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


Indus, and from the Caspian sea to the Ocean, 
a name which, after the revolution of so many 
ages and empires, is still retained by that spa- 
cious region of the earth. 

As it is natural to account, by extraordinary 
causes, for extraordinary events, historians have 
ascribed institutions and customs to the Per- 
sians worthy of rendering them the masters of 
the world. The philosophical Xenophon, em- 
bellishing and disguising with wonderful art 
the most admired, and the most admirable, 
branches of Grecian discipline, has bestowed 
them with too lavish a generosity on the foun- 
ders of a nation, who became the unrelenting 
enemies of his country. But, notwithstanding 
all the refinements of his ingenious and well- 
cultivated invention, it is not impossible to see 
through the laboured artifice of the disguise ; 
and, as truth only is consistent, we may discern 
very material contradictions in the only remain- 
ing accounts of the ancient manners of the 
Persians, 

Their early education consisted, if we may 
credit both Xenophon and Herodotus, in learn- 
ing to manage the horse, to shoot with the bow, 
and to speak truth. Yet it is necessary to ob- 
serve that the first of those arts, how well 
soever it miglit be understood in later times by 
the Persian nobility, must have been very little 
known to their ancestors in the time of Cyrus. 
The craggy mountains which they inhabited 
were unfavourable to the rearing of horses, and 
the poverty of their circumstances was ill 
adapted to maintain them. While all the other 
nations of Upper Asia, except the Scythians, 
fought on horseback, the Persian armies were 
composed chiefly of infantry : and when it is 
considered, that the Grecians under Alexander, 
the Romans under the republic, as well as the 
northern barbarians who overran and subdued 
the countries of the east and west, became 
masters of the world chiefly through the firm 
intrepidity of their infantry, there is reason to 
assign, as the main cause of the Persian con 
quests, not their acquaintance with horseman 
ship, but rather their ignorance of that art 
which obliged them to employ the determined 
valour of foot soldiers against the desultory 
assaults of horsemen. The Persians were com- 
monly armed with swords and lances, instead 
of bows and darts, the usual weapons of the 
people of Asia. This distinction was occa- 
sioned by their want of cavalry. While their 
neighbours, trusting to the mettle and swiftness 
of their steeds, employed the harmless efforts 
of distant hostility, the Persians fought hand 
to hand, each man buckling closely to his foe. 
If defeated, they had no means of escape; but 
it was not to be expected that, practising such 
a superior style of war, under the conduct of 
an accomplished general, they should ever 
meet with a defeat; and indeed Cyrus always 
proved victorious over the civilized nations of 
Asia; nor was the career of his triumph inter- 
rupted, till contending against the barbarous 
Scythians, who joined the Persian arms and 
discipline to their own irresistible fury, he lost 
at once his army and his life.? 


2 In the history of Cyrus, the plain relation of Herodotus 
is to be preferred to the moral embellishments of Xenophon 


VIL] 
A.C But before experiencing this fatal 
559—529, reverse of fortune, he was destined, 


in the course of thirty years, to act 
a distinguished part on the theatre of the world, 
which long retained the marks, and will always 
preserve the memory, of his reign. Among the 
first conquests of Cyrus were the territories of 
Armenia and Chaldea, which had openly re- 
volted against established authority. If we 
believe Xenophon, Cyrus was sent against 
these rebellious countries as the lieutcnant of 
his grandfather Astyages, who from his palace 
in Ecbatan diffused his sovereign mandates 
over many provinces of Upper Asia. The 
relation of Herodotus makes it probable, that 
Cyrus had before this time assumed the govern- 
ment of Media, over which the cruelty, injus- 
tice, and superstitious fears of Astyages, ren- 
dered him unworthy to reign, even in the 
opinion of his most trusty subjects. 
However that may be (for it af- 


La me fects not the design of the present 
A. C. 549. narrative,) it was natural to expect 


that the Persian success in Arme- 
nia, a province situate so near to the Lydian 
dominions, should alarm the fears of Creesus, 
and determine that prince to resist the en- 
croachments of a power which endangered the 
permanence of his own. In taking this reso- 
lution, which might probably be attended with 
the most important consequences, he was de- 
sirous to learn the will of heaven concerning 
the issue of the war. The principal oracles 
which he consulted were those of Branchis in 
Ionia, of Hammon in Libya, and of Delphi in 
Greece. Among these respected shrines, the 
oracle of Delphi maintained its ascendant, as 
the most faithful interpreter of fate. Croesus 
was fully persuaded of its veracity; and desi- 
rous generously to compensate for the trouble 
which he had already given, and still meant to 
give the priests of Apollo, he sacrificed three 
thousand oxen to the god, and adorned his 
shrine with dedications, equally valuable for 
the workmanship and for the materials; pre- 
cious vessels of silver, ewers of iron beautifully 
inlaid and enamelled; various ornaments of 
pure gold, particularly a golden lion, weighing 
ten talent~, and a female figure, three cubits, or 
near five feet high. In return for these mag- 
nificent presents, the oracle, in ambiguous lan- 
guage, flattered Croesus, with obtaining an easy 
victory over his enemies, and with enjoying a 
long life and a prosperous reign. The god at 
the same time enjoined him to contract an alli- 
ance with the most powerful of the Grecian 
states. 
Ol Elevated’ with these favourable 
ymp. — 
kr predictions of Apollo, Cræsus pre- 
A. C. 548 pared to yield a ready obcdience to 
aii * the only condition required on his 
part, for the accomplishment of his aspiring 
purpose. Not deeming himself sufficiently ac- 
quainted with the affairs of Greece, to know 
what particular republic was meant by the ora- 
cle, he made particular inquiry of those best 
informed concerning the state of Europe, and 


except when the accounts of tho latter are confirmed by 
the authority of scripture. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


87 


discovered, that among all the members of the 
Grecian confederacy, the Athenians and Lace- 
denionians were justly entitled to the pre-emi- 
nence. In order to learn which of these com- 
munities deserved the epithet of most powerful, 
it was necessary to send ambassadors into 
Greece. The Lydians dispatched with this 
important commission soon discovered that the 
Athenians, after having been long harassed by 
internal dissensions, were actually governed by 
the tyrant Pisistratus. The Spartans, on the 
other hand, though anciently the worst regu- 
lated of all the Grecian communities, had en- 
joyed domestic peace and foreign prosperity, 
ever since they had adopted the wise institu- 
tions of Lycurgus. After that memorable 
period, they had repeatedly conquered the 
warlike Argives, triumphed over the hardy 
Arcadians, and, notwithstanding the heroic ex- 
ploits of Aristomenes, subdued and enslaved 
their unfortunate rivals of Messcne. To the 
Lydian ambassadors, therefore, the Spartan re- 
public appeared to be pointed out by the oracle, 
as the community whose alliance they were 
enjoined to solicit. Having repaired accord- 
ingly to Sparta, they were introduced not only 
to the kings and senate, but, as the importance 
of the negociation required, to the general as- 
sembly of the Lacedemonians, to whom they, 
in few words, declared the object of their com- 
mission: “ We are sent, O Lacedemonians! by 
Cresus, king of the Lydians and of many other 
nations, who being commanded by the oracle of 
Apollo to seek the friendship of the most pow- 
erful people of Greece, now summons you, 
who justly merit that epithet, to become his 
faithful allies, in obedience to the will of the 
god whose authority you acknowledge.” The 
Lacedemonians, pleased with the alliance of a 
warlike king, and still more with the fame of 
their valour, readily accepted the proposal. To 
the strict connection of an offensive and defen- 
sive league, they joined the more respected ties 
of sacred hospitality. A few ycars before this 
transaction, they had sent to purchase gold at 
Sardis, for making a statue of Apollo. Croesus 
had on that occasion gratuitously supplied their 
want. Remembering this gencrosity, they gave 
the Lydian ambassadors, at their departure, as 
a present for their master, a vessel of brass, 
containing three hundred amphoras (above 
twelve hogsheads,) and beautifully carved on 
the outside with various forms of animals. 

Cresus, having thus happily accomplished 
the design recommended by the oracle, was 
eager to sct out upon his intended expedition. 
He had formerly entered into alliance with 
Amasis king of Egypt, and Labynetus king of 
Babylon. He had now obtained the friendship 
of the most warlike nation of Europe. The 
newly-raised power of Cyrus and the Persians 
seemed incapable of resisting such a formidable 
confederacy. 

Elevated with these flattering ideas of his 
own invincible greatness, Croesus 


= cay waited not to attack the Persian do- 
A C 548 minions until he had collected the 


strength of his allies. The sanguine 
impetuosity of his temper, unexperienced in 
adversity, unfortunately precipitated him into 


85 >» 


measures no less ruinous than daring. Attended 
only by the arms of Lydia, and a numerous 
band of mercenaries, whom his immense wealth 
enabled him at any time to cail into his service, 
he marched towards the river Halys, and hav- 
ing crossed, with much difficulty, that deep and 
broad stream, entered the province of Cappa- 
docia, which formed the western frontier of the 
Median dominions. That unfortunate country 
soon experienced all the calamities of invasion. 
The Pterian plain, the most beautiful and the 
most fertile district of Cappadocia was laid 
waste; the ports of the Euxine, as well as 
several inland cities, were plundered; and the 
inoffensive inhabitants were either put to the 
sword, or dragged into captivity. Encouraged 
by the unresisting softness of the natives of 
those parts, Cresus was eager to push for- 
wards; and if Cyrus did not previously meet 
him in the field, he had determined to proceed 
in triumph to the mountains of Persia. Against 
this dangerous resolution he was in vain ex- 
horted by a Lydian, named Sandanis, who, 
when asked his opinion of the war, declared it 
with that freedom which the princes of the 
East have in every age permitted, amidst all 
the pride and caprices of despotic power, to men 
distinguished by the gifts of nature or educa- 
tion. ‘You are preparing, O king, to march 
against a people who lead a laborious and a 
miserable life; whose daily subsistence is often 
denied them, and is always scanty and preca- 
rious; who drink only water, and who are 
clothed with the skins of wild beasts. What 
can the Lydians gain by the conquest of Persia; 
they who enjoy all the advantages of which the 
Persians are destitute? For my part, I deem ita 
blessing of the gods, that they have not excited 
the warlike poverty of these miserable bar- 
barians to invade and plunder the luxurious 
wealth of Lydia.”! The moderation of this 
advice was rejected by the fatal presumption 
of Croesus, who confounding the dictates of ex- 
perienced wisdom with the mean suggestions 
of pusillanimity, dismissed the counsellor with 
contempt. 

Mean while, the approach of Cyrus, who was 
not of a temper to permit his dominions to be 
ravaged with impunity, afforded the Lydian 
king an opportunity of bringing the war to a 
more speedy issue, than by his intended ex- 
pedition into Persia. The army of Cyrus 
gradually augmented on his march, the tribu- 
tary princes cheerfully contributing with their 
united strength towards the assistance of a 
master whose valour and generosity they ad- 
mired, and who now took arms to protect the 
safety of his subjects, as well as to support the 
grandeur of his throne. Such was the rapidity 
of his movement, especially after being in- 
formed of the destructive ravages of the enemy 
in Cappadocia, that he arrived from the shores 
of the Caspian at those of the Euxine Sea, 
before the army of Cresus had provided the 
necessaries for their journey. That prince, 
when apprised of the neighbourhood of the 
Persians, encamped on the Pterian plain; Cy- 
rus likewise encamped at no great distance; 


1 Herodot. 1. i. c. Ixxi. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


frequent skirmishes happened between the 
light troops; and at length a genera: engage- 
ment was fought with equal fury and perse- 
verance, and only terminated by the darkness 
of night. The loss on both sides hindered a 
renewal of tne battle. The numbers, as well 
as the courage of the Persians, much exceeded 
the expectation of Cræsus. As they discovered 
not any intention to harass his retreat, he de- 
termined to move back towards Sardis, to spend 
the winter in the amusements of his palace, 
and after summoning his numerous allies to his 
standard, to take the field early in the spring, 
with such an increase of farce as seemed sufli- 
cient to overpower the Persians.? 

But this design was defeated by the careful 
vigilance of Cyrus. That experienced leader 
allowed the enemy to retire without molesta- 
tion; carefully informing himself of every step 
which they took, and of every measure which . 
they seemed determined to pursue. Patiently - 
watching the opportunity of a just revenge, he 
waited until Cræsus had re-entered his capital. 
and had disbanded the foreign mercenaries, 
who composed the most numerous division of 
his army. It then seemed the proper time for 
Cyrus to put his Persians in motion; and such 
was his celerity, that he brought the first news 
of his own arrival in the plain of Sardis.3 
Croesus, whose firmness might well have been 
shaken by the imminence of this unforeseen 
danger, was not wanting, on the present occa- 
sion, to the duties which he owed to his own 
fame, and the lustre of the Lydian throne. 
Though his mercenaries were disbanded, his 
own subjects, who served him from attachment, 
who had been long accustomed to victory, and 
who were animated with a high sense of na- 
tional honour, burned with a desire of enjoying 
an opportunity to check the daring insolence ot 
the invaders. Croesus indulged and encouraged 
this generous ardour. The Lydians, in that age, 
fought on horseback, armed with long spears; 
the strength of the Persians consisted in infan- 
try. They were so little accustomed to the use 
of horses, that camels were almost the only 
animals which they employed as beasts of bur- 
den. This circumstance suggested to a Mede, 
by name Harpagus, a stratagem, which, being 
communicated to Cyrus, was immediately 
adopted with approbation by that prince.4 
Harpagus, having observed that horses had a 
strong aversion to the shape and smell of 
camels, advised the Persian army to be drawn 
up in the following order:—All the camels, 
which had been employed to carry baggage 
and provisions, were collected into one body, 
arranged in a long line, fronting the Lydian 
cavalry. The foot soldiers of the Persians were 
posted immediately behind the line, and placed 
at a due distance. The Median horse (for a 
few squadrons of these followed the standard 
of Cyrus) formed the rear of the army. As the 
troops on both sides approached to join battle, 
the Lydian cavalry, terrified at the unusual 
appearance of the camels, mounted with men 


9 Herodot. l. i. c. Ixxvii. 

3 Autos ayytdos Keoirw sAnAudeve 
messenger to Creesus.”’ 

4 Herod. l. i. c. lxxx. 


“ He came his owp 


VIL] 


in arms, were thrown into disorder, and turn- 
ing their heads, endeavoured to escape from 
the field. Cræsus, who perceived the confu- 
sion, was ready to despair of his fortune; but 
the Lydians, abandoning their horses, prepared 
with uncommon bravery to attack the enemy 
on foot. Their courage deserved a better fate ; 
but unaccustomed as they were to this mode of 
fighting, they were received and repelled by 
the experienced valour of the Persian infantry, 
and obliged to take refuge within the fortified 
strength of Sardis, where they imagined them- 
selves secure. The walls of that city bid de- 
fiance to the rude art of attack, as then prac- 
tised by the most warlike nations. Ifthe Per- 
sian army should invest it, the Lydians were 
provided with provisions for several years; and 
there was reason to expect, that in a few 
months, and even weeks, they would receive 
such assistance from Egypt, Babylonia, and 
Greece (to which countries they had already 
sent ambassadors,) as would oblige the' Persians 
to raise the siege. 

The Lydian ministers dispatched into Greece 
met with great sympathy from the Spartans. 
That people were particularly observant of the 
faith of treaties; and while they punished their 
enemies with unexampled severity, they be- 
haved with generous compassion towards those 
whom they had once accepted for allies. The 
benevolent principles of their nature were ac- 
tually warmed and elevated by the triumph of 
a successful expedition against the most formi- 
dable of their domestic foes. They had main- 
tained a long and bloody war with the Argives, 
for the small, but valuable district of Thyrea, 
lying on the frontiers of the rival states. The 
Spartans at length obtained possession of it ; 
but the Argives advanced with an army more 
powerful than any that they had ever led into 
the field, in order to make ‘good their ancient 
pretensions. The wars of the Greeks were not 
merely undertaken from the dictates of interest 
and ambition, but considered as trials of skill, 
and contests of honour. When a conference, 
therefore, was proposed, we know not by 
which of the parties, it was agreed, in order to 
prevent a greater effusion of blood, that three 


hundred combatants on the Spartan, and an. 


equal number on the Argive side, should de- 
termine, by the success of their arms, the dis- 
puted title to Thyrea, as well as the warlike 
pre-eminence of their respective republics. 
Three hundred champions being selected for 
this purpose from either army, it seemed ne- 
cessary that the remainder of both nations 
should retire; for the Argive and Spartan citi- 
zens, who felt with a republican sensibility for 
the interest of their communities, could not 
have remained tame spectators of the battle. 
The combatants fought with an obstinate va- 
lour, of which there are few examples in history. 
Each soldier behaved as if the success of the 
day had been committed to his single spear; 
and each was eager to sacrifice his own life to 
the preservation of his country’s fame. These 
generous sentiments were fully proved by the 
issue of the battle. At the approach of night, 


5 Herodot. |. 1. c. lxxx. 


M 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


89 


only three combatants survived, two Argives, 
and the Spartan Othryades. The Argives, 
either through neglect or pity, spared the life 
of their single opponent, and returned home 
with the melancholy tidings of their. bloody 
victory. Othryades still kept the field, collect- 
ing the spoil, and carrying into his own camp 
the arms of the enemy, which he erected into 
the usual trophy of military success. Next day 
the two armies, consisting of a great proportion 
of the citizens capable of bearing arms, arrived 
at the scene of action. The surprise of the Ar- 
gives is not to be expressed, when they saw the 
appearance of the field. Notwithstanding the 
Spartan trophy, they still insisted, that as two 
of their champions, and only one of the ene- 
my’s, had survived, they were justly entitled to 
the glory of the day; but, seemingly with more 
reason, the Spartans maintained that this hon- 
our belonged to Othryades. From verbal alter- 
cation, carried on with that warmth which the 
importance of the dispute naturally inspired, 
they made an easy transition to acts of vio- 
lence.6 The conflict was long, fierce, and 
bloody ; but the superior discipline of Sparta 
finally prevailed. The Argives lamented their 
defeat, as the greatest calamity that had ever 
befallen them. The inward feelings of their 
hearts were expressed by external demonstra- 
tions of sorrow. Like most of the Grecian na- 
tions, they had hitherto adorned their long hair, 
to iucrease the gracefulness of manly beauty, 
and to render their appearance more terrible to 
their enemies. But in remembrance of this 
disaster, they shaved their heads,’ deprived the 
Argive women of their golden ornaments, and 
bound themselves by a dreadful imprecation 
never more to assume their wonted appearance, 
until they had recovered possession of Thyrea. 
The Spartans, on the other hand, celebrated 
their victory with the liveliest expressions of 
national triumph. Othryades alone partook 
not the general joy. Ashamed of returning to 
Sparta a solitary monument of three hundred 
brave men, he, with a generous despair, sacri- 
ficed his own life to the manes of his warlike 
companions. Such were the circumstances of 
the Lacedemonian republic, when the ambas- 
sadors of Croesus came to demand their assist- 
ance. The prosperity of their own situation 
naturally heightened, by contrast, the melan- 
choly condition of their unfortunate ally, be- 
sieged, as they learned, in his capital, by a vic- 
torious army. They immediately resolved to 
send him z speedy and effectual relief; and for 
this purpose assembled their troops, made 
ready their vessels, and prepared every thing 
necessary for the expedition. 


6 Terodot. l. i. c. Ixxxii. 

7 At funerals, the Greeks cut off their hair, to be con- 
sumed in the funeral pile with the bodies of their friends, 
Thus at the interment of Patroclus, Achilles 

Erg; eruvevse ruens Savbyuv ÆTEXELPLTO YEITAVI 
Tyv ox Ersexsiw worsen TESQE THAEGOWOAY. 


In the Orestes of Euripides, Holen is blamed for sparing 
her locks, and cutting off only the ends. ‘She is,” says 
Electra, “4 marzen yuvy, the same coquette as ever.” Ly- 
sias, speaking of a great national calamity, says metaphori- 
cally, “ It becomes Greece to shave her head.” Lysias, 
Orat. Funeb. The Argives, as a community, realised the 
metaphor. 


20 


Olymp. The valour of the Spartans might 
Iviii. 1. perhaps have upheld the sinking 
A.C. 548. empire of Lydia, but before their 

armament could set sail, Croesus 
was no longer a sovereign. Notwithstanding 
the strength of Sardis, that city had been taken 
by storm, on the twentieth day of the siege; 
the walls having been scaled in a quarter, 
which, appearing altogether inaccessible, was 
too carelessly guarded. This was effected by 
the enterprise of Hyreades a Mede, who acci- 
dentally observed a sentinel descend part of the 
rock in order to recover his helmet. Hyreades 
was a native of the mountainous province of 
Mardia, and being accustomed to clamber over 
the dangerous precipices of his native country, 
resolved to try his activity in passing the rock 
upon which he had discovered the Lydian. 
The design was more easily accomplished than 
he had reason to expect; emulation and suc- 
cess encouraged the bravest of the Persians to 
follow his example; these were supported by 
greater numbers of their countrymen; the gar- 
rison of Sardis was surprised; the citadel 
stormed; and the rich capital of lower Asia 
subjected to the vengeful rapacity of an indig- 
nant victor.! 

The Persians were accustomed, like other 
nations of the ancient world, to exercise 
the rights of conquest, without respecting 
the laws of humanity. Though they fought, 
and conquered, and plundered, only for the 
benefit of their prince, whose slaves and pro- 
perty they themselves were, yet in the first 
emotions of military success they discovered all 
the eagerness of avarice, and all the fury of re- 
sentment; acting as if they had been called to 
punish, not the enemies of their king, but their 
own personal foes; and as if each man had 
been entitled to reap the full fruits of his rapa- 
cious cruelty. 

The Lydian prince, delivered, as we are told, 
by an extraordinary accident from the blind 
rage of the soldiery,? seemed to be raserved for 
a harder fate. Dragged into the presence of 
his conqueror, he was loaded with irons; and 
the stern, unrelenting Cyrus, of whose humane 
temper of mind we have so beautiful, but so 
flattering a picture in the philosophical romance 
of Xenophon, ordered him, with the melancholy 
train of his Lydian attendants, to be committed 
to the flames. An immense pile of wood and 
other combustibles, was erected in the most 
spacious part of the city. The miserable vic- 
tims bound hand and foot, were placed on the 
top of the pyre. Cyrus, surrounded by his 
generals, witnessed the dreadful spectacle, 
either from an abominable principle of super- 
stition, if he had bound himself by a vow to 
sacrifice Cræsus as the first fruits of his Lydian 
victory, or from a motive of curiosity, equally 
cruel and impious, to try whether Creesus, who 
had so magnificently adorned the temples and 


1 Herodot. l. i. c. Ixxxiv. 

2 Herod. p. 36. Cræsus had a dumb son, who seeing a 
Persian rush against his father, whose misfortunes had ren- 
dered him careless of life, first spoke on this occasion: 
Avéewxe wy xreive Keotrov, The learned in physiology 
will decide, whether certain impediments of speech may 
sometimes be conquered by the impetuous violence of some 
strong passion. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


U 


[Cuar 


enriched the ministers of the gods, would be 
helped in time of need by the miraculous inter- 
position of his much honoured protectors.3 

Meanwhile the unfortunate Lydian, oppress- 
ed and confounded. by the intolerable weight 
of his present calamity, compared with the se- 
curity and splendour of his former state, recol- 
lected his memorable conversation with the 
Athenian sage, and uttered with a deep groan 
the name of Solon. Cyrus asked by an inter- 
preter, “ Whose name he invoked?” “ His,” 
replied Cresus, emboldened by the prospect of 
certain death, ©“ whose words ought ever to 
speak to the heart of kings.” This reply not 
being satisfactory, he was commanded to ex- 
plain at full length the subject of his thoughts. 
Accordingly he related the important discourse 
which had passed between himself and the 
Athenian, of which it was the great moral, that 
no man could be called happy till his death.4 

The words of a dying man are fitted to make 
a strong impression on the heart. Those of 
Cresus deeply affected the mind of Cyrus. 
The Persian considered the speech of Solon 
as addressed to himself. He repented of his in- 
tended cruelty towards an unfortunate prince, 
who had formerly enjoyed all the pomp of pros- 
perity ; and dreading the concealed vengeance 
that might lurk in the bosom of fate, gave 
orders that the pyre should be extinguished. 
But the workmen who had been employed to 
prepare it, had performed their task with so 
much care, that the order could not speedily 
be obeyed. At that moment, Cresus calling 
on Apollo, whose favourite shrine.of Delphi 
had experienced his generous munificence, and 
whose perfidious oracle had made him so un- 
grateful a return, the god, it is said, sent a 
plentiful shower to extinguish the pyre. This 
event, which saved the life, and which suff- 
ciently attested the piety of Cresus, strongly 
recommended him to the credulity of his con- 
queror. It seemed impossible to pay too much 
respect to a man who was evidently the favour- 
ite of heaven. Cyrus gave orders that he 
should be seated by his side, and thenceforth 
treated as a king; a revolution of fortune 
equally sudden and unexpected. But the mind 
of Cresus had undergone a still more impor- 
tant revolution; for, tutored in the useful 
school of adversity, he learned to think with 
patience, and to act with prudence; to govern 
his own passions by the dictates of reason, and 
to repay by wholesome advice the generous 
behaviour of his Persian master.‘ 

The first advantage which he derived from 
the change in Cyrus’s disposition towards him, 
was the permission of sending his fetters to the 
temple of Delphian Apollo, whose flattering 
oracles had encouraged him to wage war with 
the Persians. “Behold,” were his messengers 
instructed to say, “the trophies of our promised 
success! behold the monuments of the uner- 
ring veracity of the god!” The Pythia heard 
their reproach with a smile of contemptuous 
indignation, and answered it with that solemn 
gravity which she was so carefully taught to 


3 Iden. J. i. €. Ixxxvi. 


4 See p. 85. 
5 Herodot. |. i. c. Ixxxix. 


VIIL] ` 


assume: “ The gods themselves cannot avoid 
their own destiny, much less avert, however 
they may retard, the determined fates of men. 
Creesus, has suffered, and justly suffered, for 
the crime of his ancestor Gyges, who, entrust- 
ed, as chief of the guards, with the person of 
Candaules, the last king of the race of Hercu- 
les, was seduced by an impious woman to mur- 
der his master, to defile his bed, and to ‘usurp 
his royal dignity. For this complicated guilt 
of Gyges the misfortunes of Croesus have 
atoned; but know, that, through the favour of 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


91 


Apollo, these misfortunes have happened three 
years later than the fates crdained.”6 The 
Pythia then proceeded to explain her answers 
concerning the event of the war against Cyrus, 
and proved, to the conviction of the Lydians, 
that her words,if properly understood, portend- 
ed destruction, not of the Persians, but of the 
Lydian empire. Cre@sus heard with resigna- 
tion the report of his messengers, and acknow- 


ledged the justice of the Delphian oracle, which 
maintained and increased the lustre of its an- 
cient fame. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Cyrus threatens the Asiatic Colonies—Their Measures—The Spartans remonstrate against his 
Design—Conquests of Harpagus—Migrations of the vanquished Greeks—Cyrus takes Babylon 
—Cambyses subdues Egypi—Receives tribute from the African Greeks—Reign of Darius— 
Final settlement of the Persian Empire—Degeneracy of Manners—Revolt of Ionia—State of 
Greece—The lonian Revolt abetted by the Athenians and Eretrians—Who burn Sardis—The 
Asiatic Greeks defeated by sea and land—Their condition under the Persian Government. 


URING the reign of Croesus, and his four 
warlike predecessors, the Asiatic Greeks 
sometimes enjoyed their favourite form of re- 
publican government, sometimes submitted to 
domestic tyrants, alternately recovered and lost 
their national independence. The 


i amp success of the ambitious Cyrus was 
AC 547. not likely to improve the condition 


* of the Ionians, who, during the de- 
pendence of his fortune, had repeatedly ne- 
glected opportunities to deserve his gratitude. 
Before invading Lower Asia, he earnestly en- 
treated them to share the glory of his arms; 
but they preferred heir allegiance to Cresus, 
before the friendship of a less known, and per- 
haps severer, tyrant. When the fortune of 
War, or rather the superiority of his own ge- 
nius, had given Cyrus possession of all the 
neighbouring provinces, the Ionians were for- 
ward to declare, by embassy, their acceptance 
of his proffered alliance; or, if that should 
now be refused, to request his protection on the 
same terms required by his Lydian predecessor. 
This submissive proposal only inflamed the 
ambition of the Persian; and his celebrated 
answer,’ on this occasion, clearly announced to 
the Greeks,that if they would escape the rigour 
of servitude, they must owe their safety to the 
strenuous exertions of a brave defence, not to 
the clemency of Cyrus. 

When his hostile intentions were made 
known in Ionia, the inhabitants of that delight- 
ful country assembled in the Panionian grove, 
their ordinary rendezvous in general and im- 
portant deliberations. This place, which, to- 
gether with the adjoining promontory of My- 


6 Idem. l. i. c. xci. et seq. 

7 After the oriental fashion, he answered them by an 
apologue. A piper seeing a great swarm of fishes in the 
sea, began to play, in order to allure them toland. But as 
they disregarded his music, he employed a net with better 
success. When caught, the fishes jurnped about in the 
net. But he told them, “It is unnecessary now to dance, 
since I have ceased to play.” Herodot.l. i c. cxli. 


calé, was solemnly consecrated to Neptune, 
formed the centre of the Ionic coast. Towards 
the north extended the spacious bay of Ephe- 
sus, beyond which the beautiful peninsula of 
Clazomené stretched a hundred miles into the 
Ægean. On the south, the territory of Miletus 
occupied sixty-two miles of the winding shore. 
But the Milesians sent not their deputies to the 
present convention; for having been the con- 
federates, not the subjects of Croesus, they were 
admitted into the Persian alliance on terms of, 
equality and independence. The Grecian inë 
terest in Asia, thus ungenerously abandoned by 
the principal member of the confederacy, was 
supported with usual spirit and unanimity by 
all the inferior communities, Representatives 
immediately appeared from Myus and Priené, 
which were situate, like Miletus, on the coast 
of Caria; from Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedus, 
Teos, Clazomené, Erythre, Phocæa, and 
Smyrna, which formed the maritime part of 
Lydia; and from the isles of Chios and Samos, 
which completed the whole number of the Ionic 
settlements. 

Meanwhile the Eolians, alarmed by the same 
danger, convened in their ancient capital of 
Cymé. Their inferior towns were Larissa, 
Neontichus, Tenus, Cilla, Notion, Æginoessa, 
Pitané, Ægæa, Myrina, and Greneia. Their 
territory was more extensive and more fertile 
than that of their Ionian rivals, but their cli- 
mate less temperate, their harbours less com- 
modious, and their cities far less considerable in 
power and fame. 


8 Herodotus’s encomium on the climate of Ionia is re- 
markable: O: ĝe Iwves ovTot, Twy xzs TO lzviwvsov sors, 
TOU usv ouvoxyov xai Twy Ovetwy, EV TW XLAALT TO TUY XY xVOV 
sSeurzpmavos woAsas, wavtwy aviewarwy Twy nusis somev? 
“These Tonians, to whom Panionium belongs, have built 
cities in the finest climate, and in the most beautiful situa- 
tions, of all men whom we know.” He then proceeds to 
observe, that the countries on all sides of Ionia were op- 
pressed by cold and humidity on the one hand, or heat and 
drought on the other. Herod. l. i. c. exlii. 


92 


It may seem extraordinary that the Dorians, 
especially those inhabiting the peninsula of 
Caria, who were likewise destined to feel the 
Persian power, should not have joined in mea- 
sures necessary for the common defence. But 
this circumstance it is still possible to explain. 
Of the six Doric republics, who annually as- 
sembled at Triopium to celebrate the festival 
of Apollo,! four were encouraged, by their in- 
sular situation, to contemn the threats of Cyrus. 
Cnidus, as will appear hereafter, hoped to de- 
rive from art the same advantages which its 
confederates, Cos, Lindus, Jalissus, and Cami- 
rus, enjoyed by nature. And Halicarnassus, 
the sixth Dorian state, as we are informed with 
a laudable impartiality, by a native of that city, 
had been recently excluded from the Triopian 
festival. This disgrace was occasioned by the 
sordid avarice of Agasicles the Halicarnassian, 
who having conquered in the Triopian games, 
carried away the tripod, which was the prize 
of his victory; whereas, according to an es- 
tablished rule, he ought to have consecrated it 
in the temple of Apollo. His sacrilege de- 
prived his country of the common benefits of 
the Dorian name.? 

To enliven the dryness of geographical de- 
scription, essential, however, to the perspicuity 
of the present narrative, we should in vain 
turn our thoughts to the actual condition of 
the Asiatic shore. Few vestiges remain of the 
Doric and Eolic cities; and even the Ionic, 
which far surpassed them in magnificence and 
splendour, can scarcely be recognized by the 
learned and curious traveller. Nothing now 
remains but the indelible impressions of nature; 
the works of men have perished with them- 
selves. The physical advantages of Lower 
Asia continue nearly? the same now, as two 
thousand years ago; but the moral condition 
of that country, compared to what it once was, 
is the silent obscurity of the grave, contrasted 
with the vivid lustre of active life. 

The Asiatic Greeks, having examined the 
state of their affairs, were fully sensible of their 
own weakness, compared with the strength of 
the enemy. In forming their establishments 
in Asia, they had confined themselves to a long 
and narrow line on the coast, look- 
$. ing with a wishful eye towards the 
lviii. & 3 
A. È. 540. Mother-country, from which, in 

5 every calamity, they expected as- 
sistance and protection. The result, therefore, 
of the present deliberation was to send an em- 
bassy into Greece, in order to explain the dan- 
ger to which they were exposed, and to show 
the necessity of powerful and timely aid. It 
might have been expected that Attica, the na- 
tive country of the Ionians, should have re- 
ceived the first visit of the ambassadors; but 
Athens was then governed by the tyrant Pisis- 
tratus, who, it was supposed, would be averse 
to take arms against a tyrant like himself. 
Sparta, though a republic of greater power and 
renown, was little connected, either by com- 


Olymp. 


1 Three in the isle of Rhodes, one in Cos. 

2 Herodot. l. i. c. exliv. 

3 The changes in the face of the country, produced 
chiefly by the receding of the sea, may be seen In the splen- 
did work of Mons. Choiseuil Goufficr, Le Voyage pittores- 
que de la Greece, &c. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[CHap 


merce or affinity, with the Greeks of Asia. 
The proposals of the Asiatic ambassadors, there- 
fore, were very coolly received by the Spartan 
senate. On such occasions, however, it -was 
customary to take the opinions also of the 
people. In the assembly convened for this 
purpose, Pythermus, a Phocean, clothed with 
purple, asa mark of his consideration in his 
native country, spoke for himself and his col- 
leagues. But the beauties of his Ionic dialect 
were unable to move the resolution of the La- 
cedemonians, who, mindful of the ancient en 
mity between the Ionic and the Doric race, 
declined sending any forces into Asia, to resist 
the arms of Cyrus. Though their generosity 
furnished no public assistance, their caution 
privately dispatched several Spartan citizens 
to observe the operations of the war. When 
these men arrived in Ionia,they were easily per 
suaded to exceed the bounds of their commis 
sion. They appointed Lacrines, the most con 
siderable of their number, to trave! to the 
Lydian capital, in order to acquaint Cyrus, 
that if he committed hostilities against any of 
the Grecian cities, the Lacedemonian republic 
would know how to punish his injustice. 
Cyrus, astonished at such an insolent message 
from a people altogether unknown to him, 
asked the Greeks present (for there was al- 
ways a great number of Grecian fugitives in 
the armies of their neighbours,) who the La 
cedæmonians were ?4 and what number of men 
they could bring into the field? When in 
formed of these particulars, he replied to the 
Spartan ambassador, “ That he never should 
fear men who had a square in the midst of 
their city, in which they met together to prac- 
tise mutual falsehood and deception; and that 
if he continued to enjoy the blessings of health, 
he hoped to afford the Spartans more domestic 
reasons of complaint, than his military prepa- 
rations against the Greeks of Asia.” 


Ol The interview with Lacrines 
ie as happened among the last public 
A. C. 539, transactions during Cyrus’s resi- 


dence at Sardis. Having reduced 
Cræsus into captivity, the only enemy in those 
parts who seemed worthy of his arms, he was 
eager to return towards the East, in order to 
complete his conquests in Upper Asia. The 
Grecians he knew to be a warlike people ; but 
as their numbers were inconsiderable, their 
cities small, and ill fortified, he thought proper 
to attempt in person enterprises of greater re- 
nown, and to commit the Grecian war to the 
skill of his lieutenant, Harpagus.6 

In the course of a few months, this general 
made himself master of all the countries of 
Lower Asia, possessed by either Greeks or 
Barbarians. Having the command of men 
and labour, he caused mounds of earth to be 
thrown up, adjacent to the Grecian walls. In 


4 Herodotus Icaves it uncertain whether this ignorance 
was not affected, the better to mark his contempt. 

5 Cyrus alludes to the market-places, or public squares, 
common in all Grecian cities, with the use of which the 
Asiaties were totally nnacquainted, “being destitute,” as 
Herodotus says, “of all places of public resort.” 

6 His predecessor, Mazares, died almost immediately 
after he had taken Priené and Magnesia, and sold the in- 
habitants for slaves. Herodot. |. i. c. lxi. 


VIIL] 


this service, immense numbers must have 
perished by the darts of the enemy; but the 
work was no sooner completed, than the Per- 
sians, running up the mounds, got possession 
of the walls, drove the Greeks from their bat- 
tlements, overpowered them from their own 
fortifications, entered, and sacked their towns.’ 
When we consider the fury with 


ae which the wars of the ancients 
i G. 539. Were carried on, and reflect, that 


the immediate consequences of a 
defeat were servitude or death, we have reason 
to believe that the Greeks would make a reso- 
lute and bloody defence. This indeed suf- 
ficiently appears, by the evidence of a few 
scattered facts preserved in history. The first 
place which Harpagus attacked was the cele- 
brated capital of the Phoceans, the most 
northern city of Ionia. The inhabitants, as 
already mentioned, were famous for their long 
and successful navigations, in the course of 
which they had often visited the coasts of 
Spain, the Mexico and Peru of the ancient 
world. ‘The money derived from that country 
had enabled them to build the best fortification 
that was to be seen in all those parts; yet they 
entertained not any hopes of resisting the Per- 
sian invaders. Such, however, was their love 
of liberty, and their dread of seeing in their 
streets the army of a conqueror, that they re- 
solved on a measure which has been often pro- 
posed, but seldom executed. When Harpagus 
sent them his commands, they begged the fa- 
vour of a day’s pause for deliberation. In all 
probability they had already taken many ne- 
cessary measures for eftecting their escape; for 
during that short interval, their ships were pre- 
pared, their money and goods put on board, 
their wives and families embarked, and the 
whole community was floating on the waves, 
when the Persians arrived to take possession 
of desolated dwellings and empty walls. The 
advantageous situation of Phocea, and the 
pains which had been taken to improve and to 
embellish it, make this resolution appear the 
more extraordinary; if any thing, at least, can 
add to the wonder, that a whole people should 
unanimously abandon their temples, thcir altars, 
and what in ancient times seemed not less sa- 
cred, the tombs of their ancestors; should to- 
tally divest themselves of every right to a coun- 
try which they had been accustomed to call 
their own; and set sail with their wives and 
children, ignorant whither to direct their course, 
or in what friendly port they might expect pro- 
tection or repose.8 

The Phocean fleet, consisting of more than 
two hundred sail, made for the isle of Chios, 
which, of all the Ionic settlements, seemed 
most secure against the Persian arms. Having 
arrived there, they endeavoured to purchase 
from the Chians the small Oenussian islands: 
but the Chians, jealous of their commerce, and 
knowing the adventurous spirit of the fugitives, 
denied their request. The Phocwans, thus 
cruelly rejected by men of the same race and 
language with themselves, set sail on a much 
longer voyage, for the isle of Cynus, or Corsica, 


7 Herodot. lib. i cap. elxii, clxiii, et seq. 
8 Herodot. l. i. c. clxiv. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


93 


where, about twenty years before, they had 
formed a small establishment. As they coasted, 
in the night, along the solitary shore of their 
ancient city, a few ships, manned with enter- 
prising crews, landed in the harbour, surprised 
the Persian garrison, and put every man to the 
sword. After applauding this memorable act 
of revenge, the whole fleet, transported with 
fury against the Persians, bound themselves by 
mutual oaths never to return to Phocea, until 
a burning ball of iron, which they threw into 
the sea, should again emerge unextinguished.9 
Yet such is the powerful attachment of men to 
their ancient habitations, that in a few hours, 
more than one half the fleet, unable to resist 
the alluring prospect of their native shore, dis- ` 
regarded their oaths, and sailed for the well- 
known harbour. The destruction of the Per- 
sian garrison removed the only obstacle in the 
way of immediate possession; and the blame of 
this massacre might be thrown on their coun- 
trymen who fled, while those who returned to 
Phocea might prove their innocence, by speed- 
ily submitting to every burden imposed on 
them. Mean while, the best and bravest portion 
of the Phocean republic arrived with safety at 
the island of Corsica; where, their subsequent 
adventures not being immediately connected 
with our present subject, will merit attention 
in another part of this history.!0 

The Phoceans were not the only people of 
Asiatic Greece who deserted their country, 
rather than abandon their liberty. The Teians 
who inhabited the southern shore of the Ionic 
peninsula, had not yet been softened into cow- 
ardice by the effeminate muse of Anacreon. 
They followed the generous example which 
the inhabitants of Phocea had set; forsook a 
city in which they could no longer 


a remain free, and sought refuge in 
A. C. 539. Abdera, an ancient colony of Cla- 


zomené, on the coast of Thrace, 
and near the mouth of the river Nessus.!! The 
city of Clazomené, now mentioned, was built 
on the continent; but on the present occasion, 
the inhabitants, to avoid slavery, settled in 
eight small islands, at a little distance from the 
shore, on which they founded a new city, the 
model of that of Venice. The advantage which 
the Clazontenians enjoyed by nature, the Cni- 
dians endeavoured to procure by art. They 
occupied the extremity of the Carian penin- 
sula; and their city being joined to the conti- 
nent by an isthmus of only half a mile broad, 
they attempted, by means of a ditch, to detach 
themselves entirely from the main land. If 
this could be effected, they might despise the 
power of their enemies, who not having as yet 
subdued the Pheenicians, possessed not any 
naval force sufficient to conquer the Grecian 
isles. But the approach of the Persians, and 
still more their own superstitions fears, inter- 
rupted this useful undertaking; and the city 
of Cnidas, as well as all others on the Asiatic 
coast, Miletus alone excepted, were reduced 
to unconditional submission under the Persian 
yoke. 


9 Idem, l. i. c. elxv. 
10 Herodot. 1. i. c. elxv. 
11 Herodot. l. i. c. Ixviii. et c. elxviii. 


While the arms of Harpagus were 


k Te thus successful on the western 
A. C 539 shore, those of Cyrus acquired still 
“oo greater glory in the central parts 
of Asia.! With amazing rapidity his victori- 


ous troops over-ran the rich countries between 
the Mediterranean and the Tigris. Every thing 
gave way before their valour and their fortune. 
The city of Babylon alone, the ancient and 
proud capital of the Assyrian empire, opposed 
its lofty and impenetrable walls to the ambi- 
tion of the conqueror. When all the countries 
round were reduced into obedience, it might 
seem absurd in the inhabitants of one place to 
think of resisting the Persian arms. But when 
we consider the singular resources of this place, 
we shall perceive, that a design which would 
have been obstinate folly in any other citizens, 
was no more than proper firmness in the Baby- 
,aonians. Their capital, which was celebrated 
for its magnificence, wealth, and magnitude, 
when nothing deserving the name of capital 
existed elsewhere in the world, was situated in 
a spacious plain, surrounded on all sides by 
broad and rapid rivers. The outward wall 
was of a firm quadrangular form, three hundred 
feet high, seventy-five broad, extending sixty 
miles in circumference, and surrounded by a 
deep ditch, continually supplied with water. 
Behind this extraordinary bulwark, of whose 
existence the wall of China and the pyramids 
of Egypt can alone serve to convince modern 
incredulity, was another of almost equal di- 
mensions; and besides both these general for- 
tifications, each division of the city had its 
appropriated mounds and defences. It is un- 
necessary to describe the towers, temples, and 
gardens, which by their singular greatness evi- 
dently announced the seat of a mighty empire. 
These magnificent monuments tended, indeed, 
to adorn, but others, less splendid, served to 
defend Babylon.2 These were magazines of 
corn and provisions, capable of maintaining 
the inhabitants for twenty years; and arsenals, 
which supplied with arms such a number of 
fighting men as seemed equa! to the conquest 
or defence of a powerful monarchy. It was to 
be expected that Babylon would exert its ut- 
most strength, being then governed by Laby- 
netus, or Belthazar, whose despotism, injustice, 
and impiety, exceeded even the crimes of his 
father Nebuchadnezzar, and left him no room 
to expect forgiveness from the clemency of 
Cyrus. 
Olymip. During two years Cyrus blocked 
Ix. 3, up the city, without attaining any 
A. C. 538, 2e@rer prospect of success than 
T * when he first approached its walls. 
The events of this memorable siege are not 
related by ancient writers. We only know, 
that the efforts of the Persians proved fruitless, 
until strength was directed by stratagem. The 
river Euphrates entered, by a deep channel, the 
northern walls of Babylon, and issuing forth 
from the opposite side, almost equally bisected 


1 Xenophon’s Cyropædia, and Herodotus, contain the 
materials for the reign of Cvrus, as far as it is connected 
with the history of Greece. It is foreign to the subject of 
the present work, to examine the differences between these 
authors. 

2 Herodot. l. i. c. clxxix. et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


the city. Of this circumstance Cyrus availed 
himself to become master of the place. He 
employed his numerous army in digging a pro- 
found cavern adjacent to the lofty mound which 
confined the course of the river. This work 
being completed, he patiently waited an oppor- 
tunity for cutting the mound, and thus turning 
the waters of the Euphrates into the prepared 
cavern; since, if this could be done without 
being perceived by the enemy, his troops, sta- 
tioned at the two passages of the Euphrates, in 
and out of the city, might enter Babylon by the 
channel which the river had abandoned. This 
design was happily executed, when the Baby- 
lonians, who had long despised the impotent 
efforts of the besiegers, were employed in cele- 
brating a festival with every circumstance of 
the most licentious security. The mound of 
the Euphrates being divided, the highest waters 
deserted their channel, the river became forda- 
ble, and the troops of Cyrus, who, had not the 
| Babylonians been sunk in riot and debauchery 


| might have been confined within the walls, and 


overwhelmed by darts from the battlements, 
made their entrance unperceived into the place; 
cut to pieces the unarmed inhabitants; and 
having punished an impious king and his 
voluptuous courtiers, took possession of the 
greatest and richest city of the ancient world.3 
This memorable event rendered 


i ly we Cyrus sole master of those valuable 
AC 599 countries around the Tigris and 


Euphrates, which, from time im- 
memorial, had been the seat of despotism and 
luxury, wealth and wickedness. The active 
ambition of this great prince was adopted by 
the emulation of his immediate successors. 
His son Cambyses received the sub- 


e mission of Tyre and Cyprus, and 
a Y oe j effected the important conquest of 


Egypt, in the consequences of 
which the Greek colonies in that country, and 
on the adjoining coast of Africa, were involved. 

In the eighth century before the Christian 
era, the adventurous colonies in Ionia and 
Caria had, amidst other commercial, or rather 
piratical expeditions, undertaken a voyage to 
Egypt. Their brazen armour,’ their courage, 
and their activity, were beheld with amazement 
and terror by the Egyptians, then divided by 
faction, and torn by sedition. Psammetichus, 
one of the many pretenders to the throne, en- 
gaged the Greeks in his service. Through 
their valour and discipline he became master 
of Egypt. His rewards and promises prevailed 
on them to settle in that country. They up- 
held the throne of his successors, until Apries, 
the fourth in descent from Psammetichus, hav- 
ing undertaken an unfortunate expedition 
against the Greek colony of Cyrene, was de- 
throned by Amasis, the contemporary and ally 
of Creesus.§ 

Amasis rivalled the Lydian prince, in his 
partiality for the language and manners of the 
Greeks. He raised a Cyrenian woman to the 
honours of his bed. The Greeks who had 


served his predecessors, and who, in conse- 


3 Herodot. 1. i. ¢. elxxvili.—e. excii. 
4 Herodot. l. ii. c. clii. et seq. è A 
5 Herodot. ibid. et Diodor. Sicul. 1. i. c. xlvi 


VIIL] 


quence of the Egyptian law, obliging the son 
to follow the profession of his father, now 
amounted to near thirty thousand, he re- 
moved to Memphis, his capital, and employed 
them as his body guard. He encouraged the 
correspondence of this colony with the mother 
country; invited new inhabitants from Greece 
into Egypt; promoted the commercial inter- 
course between the two nations; and assigned 
to the Greek merchants for their residence the 
town and district of Naucratis, on the Nile, 
where they enjoyed the free exercise of their 
religious processions and solemnities, and where 
the industry of the little island of Ægina in 
Europe, and the opulence of several Greek 
cities in Asia, erected temples after the fashion 
of their respective countries.® 

This able prince was succeeded 


a ame i by his son Psammenitus, soon after 
A G 595 Cambyses mounted the throne of 


Persia. While Cambyses made 
preparations for invading Egypt, Psammenitus 
imprudently excited the resentment of Phanes,’ 
a Halicarnassean by birth, and an officer of 
much authority inthe Grecian guards. Phanes 
having dexterously effected his escape from 
Egypt, offered his services to Cambyses, who 
by this time had collected the Grecian and 
Pheenician fleets. This armament, however, 
seemed unequal to the conquest of Egypt; and 
to conduct an army thither by land, was an 
undertaking of extreme difficulty. The main 
obstacle was overcome by the experience of 
Phanes. He advised Cambyses to purchase the 
friendship of an Arabian chief, who agreed to 
transport on camels a sufficient quantity of 
water for the use of the Persians in their pas- 
sage through the desert. With the punctuality 
peculiar’ to his nation, the Arabian fulfilled 
his engagement. The Persian army joined the 
fleet before Pelusium; that place, regarded as 
the key of Egypt, surrendered after a short 
siege; Psammenitus was defeated in a great 
battle; and the whole kingdom submitted to a 
haughty conqueror,? whom prosperity rendered 
incapable of pity or remorse, 

His cruel, outrageous, and almost frantic 
behaviour in Egypt, alarmed the neighbouring 
Africans, who sought to avert the tempest from 
themselves by speedy offers of submission and 
tribute. This prudent measure was adopted 
even by the Greek inhabitants of Cyrenaica, 
who had braved the united power of Egypt and 
Lybia. The African Greeks were a colony of 
Thera, the most southern island of the Hgean, 
and itself a colony of the Lacedemonians,!0 
Daring the heroic ages, but it is uncertain at 
what precise era, the adventurous islanders set- 
tled in that part of the Synus Syrticus, which 
derived its name from the principal city, Cy- 
rene, and which is now lost in the desert of 
Barca. Descended from Lacedemon, the Cy- 
renians naturally preserved the regal form of 
government. Under Battus, the third prince 
of that name, their territory was well cultivat- 
ed, and their cities populous and flourishing. 


6 Herodot. |. ii. c. clii. et seq. 
7 Herodot. l. iii. c. iv. &e. 

8 Herodot. l. iii. c. iv. 

10 Herodot. |. iv. c. clix. et seq. 


9 Idem, ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


95 


Six centuries before the Christian era, they re- 
ceived a considerable accession of inhabitants 
from the mother country. Emboldened by 
this reinforcement, they attacked the neigh- 
bouring Libyans,!! and seized on their posses- 
sions. The injured craved assistance from 
Apries king of Egypt.'2 A confederacy was 
thus formed, in order to repress the incursions, 
and to chastise the audacity of the European 
invaders. But the valour and discipline of 
Greece, though they yet feared to encounter 
the power of Cambyses, and the renown of 
Persia, always triumphed over the numbers 
and the ferocity of Africa :!3 nor did Cyrene 
become tributary to Egypt, till Egypt itself had 
been subdued by a Grecian king, and the 
sceptre of the Pharaohs, and of Sesostris had 
passed into the hands of the Ptolemies.!4 

Cambyses is said to have died 


. y on by an accidental wound from his 
A C 521 own sword, Darius Hystaspes, the 


third in succession to the empire 
(for the short reign of the priest Smerdis, de- 
serves only to be mentioned in the history of 
of the palace,) possessed the political abilities, 
but reached uot the magnanimity, of Cyrus. 
His ambition was unbounded, and his avarice 
still greater than his ambition. To discriminate 
the characters of the three first and most illus- 
trious of their monarchs, the Persians, in the 
expressive language of the East, styled Cyrus 
the father, Cambyses the master, or tyrant, and 
Darius the broker, of the empire. The last 
mentioned prince added the wealthy, but un 

warlike, nations of India to his dominions. 
This important acquisition, which closed the 
long series of Persian conquests in Asia, was 
formed into the twentieth satrapy, or great di- 
vision, of the empire. The other military en- 
terprises of this prince (as we shall soon have 
occasion to relate) were less successful. But 
his reign is chiefly remarkable, as the supposed 
era at which the religious and civil polity of 
the Persians received that form which they 
afterwards invariably retained. 

Yet it must be acknowledged, that the great- 
est learning and ingenuity have failed in the 
arduous task of ascertaining the age, and still 
more of explaining the doctrines, of Zoro- 
aster. At whatever period he lived, he cer- 
tainly did for the Persians, what Homer and 
Hesiod are said to have done for the Greeks.!5 
His theogony,'® as the Greeks would have 
called it, consisted in the extravagant doctrine 
of the two principles, in some moral precepts, 
and innumerable absurd ceremonies. The 
magi, or priests, who probably derived some 
share of their influence from practising those 
occult sciences afterwards distinguished by 
their name, were strongly protected by the au- 
thority of the prophet. ‘ Though your good 
works,” says the Sadder, “exceed the sands on 
the sea shore, or the stars of heaven, they will 
all be unprofitable, unless accepted by the 
priest; to whom you must pay tithes of all 


31 Herodot. l. iv. c. elix. 

12 Herodot. ibid. Diodor. Sicul. l. i. c. xlvi. 
13 IFerodot. ibid. et 1. iil. c. elxi. 

14 Strabo, |. ii. et l. xvii. p. 836. Pausan. l. i. 
15 See p. 71. 

16 Herodot. l. 1. c€. CXxxil. 


96 


you possess, of your goods, of your lands, and 
of yourmoney. The priests are the teachers 
of religion, they know all things, and deliver 
all men.” Next to the priests, the royal family, 
and particularly the reigning prince, was the 
peculiar care of Zoroaster. In their prayers 
and sacrifices, the Persians were not allowed to 
solicit individually for themselves the protec- 
tion of heaven, but only for the great king, and 
for the nation at large. In celebrating their 
religious worship, they employed neither altars, 
nor images, nor temples; they even derided 
the folly of such practices in others, probably 
(says Herodotus) not believing, like the Greeks, 
the nature of the gods to resemble that of men. 
On the summits of the highest mountains they 
sacrificed to the divinity ; and the whole circle 
of the heavens they called God. They sacri- 
ficed, besides, to the elements, particularly fire, 
which they considered as the purest symbol, 
and most powerful agent, of the divine nature. 
They borrowed, however, the worship of some 
other divinities from the Assyrians and Ara- 
bians; for of all ancient nations, the Persians, 
according to Herodotus, were the most disposed 
to adopt the customs of their neighbours. 
They soon preferred the dress, and as an es- 
sential part of dress, the arms of the Medes to 
their own. When they became acquainted 
with the Greeks, they learned the wérst and 
most unnatural of their vices. There was 
scarcely any absurdity, or any wickedness, which 
they might not imbibe, from the licentious ca- 
price, the universal corruption, and the exces- 
sive depravity of Babylon. The hardy and 
intrepid warriors, who had conquered Asia, 
were themselves subdued by the vices of that 
luxurious city. In the space of fifty-two years, 
which intervened between the taking of Baby- 
lon, and the disgraceful defeat at Marathon, the 
sentiments, as well as the manners of the Per- 
sians, underwent a total change; and, notwith- 
standing the boasted simplicity of their reli- 
gious worship, we shall find them thenceforth 
oppressed by the double yoke of despotism and 
superstition, whose eombined influence extin- 
guished every generous feeling, and checked 
every manly impulse of the soul,! 

The tendency towards this internal decay 
was not perceived during the reign of Cyrus, 
whose extraordinary abilities enabled him to 
soften the rigours of despotism, without en- 
dangering his authority. He committed not 
the whole weight of government to the inso- 
lence of satraps, those proud substitutes of des- 
potism, who were ever ready to betray their 
trust, and abuse their power. The inferior 
governors of towns and districts were appoint- 
ed and removed by himself, to whom only they 
were accountable. By an institution, some- 
what resembling the modern post, he provided 
for exact and ready information concerning the 
public occurrences in every part of his domi- 
nions. The vigilant shepherd of his people, 
he was always ready to hear their petitions, to 
redress their grievances, and to reward their 
merit. Nor did the love of ease or pleasure 
ever interfere with the discharge of his duty, 


1 Xenoph. de Inst. Cyrii, 1. iii. p. 238—2143. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


in which he placed the greatest glory and hap- 
piness of his reign.? 
His successors were universally 
l distinguished by an exorbitant am- 
XV. 4. z : : 
A. C. 517. bition, nourished by the immense 
resources of their empire, which 
under Darius amounted to fourteen thousand 
five hundred and sixty Eubeic talents, a sum 
equal to three millions six hundred and seven- 
ty-five thousand pounds sterling. Of this vast 
revenue, which, considering the value of money 
in ancient times, exceeded thirty millions at 
present, the Greek cities on the coast, together 
with the Carians, Lycians, and several other 
nations of Asia Minor, paid only the thirty- 
sixth part, a little more than a hundred thou- 
sand pounds. Besides this stated income, Da- 
rius might on every necessary occasion demand 
the money and services of his subjects. His 
predecessors were contented with voluntary 
contributions, and a militia. «This prince es- 
tablished taxes, and a standing army. The 
number of his troops equalled the resources 
of his treasury ; and both corresponded to the 
extent of his dominions, which comprehended 
the greatest and most populous nations of the 
earth. The barbarity of the northern Scy- 
thians, and the pertinacious spirit of the Eu 
ropean Greeks, the only enemies whom it 
remained for him to conquer, seemed feeble 
barriers against the progress of universal mo- 
narchy. In the extensive regions of Asia, 
every head bowed to the tiara of the great 
king, who in an annual progress through the 
central parts of his empire, spent the winter in 
the warm plains of Babylon; enjoyed the 
happy temperature of spring in the city of 
Susa, which adorned the flowery banks of the 
Euleus; and avoided the summer heats in his 
spacious palace at Ecbatan, fanned by the re- 
feshing breezes of the Median mountains.3 
Ol But Darius could not enjoy the 
Dene lendour of his present greatness 
lxvi. 4. °F i : pr g oa 
A. C. 513. while a single nation had merited 
Í his resentment, without feeling the 
weight of his revenge. The wandering hordes 
of Scythia have been, in all ages, formidable to 
the civilized kingdoms of the East. Thrice 
before the reign of Darius, the inhabitants of 
that frozen region had overrun the finest pro- 
vinces of Asia. Fighting against these barba- 
rians, the founder of the Persian empire had 
lost his army and his life. It belonged to his 
warlike successor to punish the ferocity of that 
rude and uncultivated, but bold and high-mind- 
ed people. With an army, it is said, of seven 
hundred thousand men, Darius traversed Asia 
Minor, crossed the Thracian Bosphorus, ra- 
vaged Thrace, and arrived on the banks of 
the Danube. Meanwhile a fleet of six hun- 
dred sail left the Asiatic coast, and passing the 
narrow seas which join the Ægean to the 
Euxine, coasted in a northern direction the 
shores of the latter, entered the mouth of the 
Danube, and sailed along that river until they 
joined the army. The Danube was passed by 
the usual expedient of a bridge of boats, which 


2 Xenoph. ibid. p. 230. _ i 
3 Xenoph. ibid. et Herodot. |. iii. c. Ixxix. et seq. 


VIIL] 


was built by the assistance of the fleet com- 
posed chiefly of Grecians, who were left to 
guard the work of their hands against the dan- 
gers of the elements, and the destructive rage 
of the barbarians.‘ 

This formidable army, collected from so 
mauy distant provinces, boldly entered the 
vast uncultivated wilds of Scythia, in which 
they continued for five months, continually ex- 
posed to hunger and thirst, and the darts of 
the flying enemy. When they prepared to re- 
turn from an expedition in which they had 
already lost the best part of their strength, 
their good fortune, rather than their prudence, 
saved them from immediate destruction. It 
had been agitated among the Greeks, whether 
they ought not to demolish the bridge; a mea- 
sure strongly recommended to them by the 
Scythian tribes, who having ravaged all the 
adjacent country, expected to revenge the in- 
vasion of the Persians, by the confining them, 
without resource, in an inhospitable desert. 
Miltiades, an Athenian, descended from the 
heroic Ajax, eagerly embraced this proposal. 
He was king, or tyrant of the city of Cardia, 
situate near the neck of the Thracian Cherso- 
nesus. There his uncle, of the same name, 
planted a Grecian colony, which uniting with 
the barbarous natives, formed a small commu- 
nity, the government of which descended to 
the son of his brother Cimon, who increased 
the population of the rising state by new in- 
habitants from Athens. The generous son of 
Cimon, though, like all the princes of those 
parts, he held his authority under the protection 
of Darius, preferred the recovery of national 
independence to the preservation of personal 
dignity. The other chiefs of the Grecian cities 
listened with apparent pleasure to his argu- 
ments for destroying the bridge, and thus de- 
livering themselves for ever from the yoke of 
Persia. Fiistieus, tyrant of Miletus, was alone 
averse to this bold resolution. He observed to 
the little tyrants of the Asiatic Greeks, “That 
their own interest was intimately connected 
with the safety of Darius and his Persians. 
Under the auspicious influence of that powerful 
people, they each of them enjoyed royalty in 
their respective commonwealths: but should 
the empire of the Persians fall (and what less 
could be expected from the destruction of Da- 
rius and his army,) the Greeks would imme- 
diately discover their partiality for republican 
government, banish their kings, and reassume 
liberty.” The opinion of Histieus prevailed; 
Olymp the Persians repassed the Danube : 
Ea a but Miltiad es, dreading their resent- 
A. C. 513, Ment: had previously retired to 

"~*~" Athens, where, twenty-three years 
after the Scythian expedition, he enjoyed a 
more favourable opportunity of displaying 
nis attachment to the cause of liberty, in the 
ever memorable battle of Marathon.§ 

If the public-spirited Athenians excited the 
hatred and revenge, the selfish tyrant of Mile- 
tus deserved the gratitude and the rewards of 
Darius. To continue the sovereign of his na- 


4 Herodot. l. iv. c. i. et seq. 
5 Ibid. 


- N 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


97 


tive city seemed a station below his merit; he 
was taken into the confidence of Darius, and 
accompanying him to Sardis, and afterwards to 
Susa, became the friend, counsellor, and fa- 
vourite of the great king. While Histiæus 
acted such a distinguished part at the Persian 
court, his nephew Aristagoras, to whom he had 
committed the government of Miletus, incurred 
the displeasure of Artaphernes,® the brother of 
Darius, and the governor of Sardis. The re- 
presentations of that minister, he well knew, 
would be sufficient to ruin him, both with his 
uncle and with Darius, by whom he might be 
deprived not only of his authority, but of his 
life. Governed by these considerations, Aris- 
tagoras meditated a revolt,’ when a messenger 
unexpectedly arrived from Histiæus, exhorting 
him to that measure. The crafty Milesian, 
who disliked the restraint of a court, and the 
uncouth manner of the Persians, languished 
for an honourable pretence to return to lis na- 
tive country; and he saw not any means more 
proper for affording such an opportunity, than 
the tumults of the Greeks, which as lieutenant 
of Darius, he would probably be sent to quell. 
His message confirmed the resolu- 


Olymp. tion of Aristagoras, who, as the 
Iba 3: fi a g r , : 
A. C. 502, Brst act of rebellion against the 


Persians, formally renounced all 
power over his fellow-citizens.8 After giving 
this seemingly disinterested proof of his regard 
for the public, he erected the standard of free- 
dom, which was soon surrounded by the flower 
of the Ionian youth; by whose assistance, tra- 
versing the whole coast, he abolished in every 
city the authority of kings, and proclaimed to 
all worthy to acquire it, the double blessing of 
civil liberty and national independence.? 

The revolt thus happily effected, could not 
however be maintained without more powerful 
resources than the strength, the bravery, and 
the enthusiasm of the Asiatic Greeks. In order 
to resist the force of the Persian empire, which, 
it was easy to foresee, would soon be exerted 
in crushing their rebellion, it was necessary for 
the Jonians to obtain the protection and co- 
operation of their brethren in Europe. This 
important .object was committed to the pru- 
dence and activity of Aristagoras, who having 
settled the affairs of the East, undertook, for 
the public service, an embassy into Greece. 

Lacedemon still continued, rather in name, 
however, than in reality, the most powerful 
state in that country. Though their govern- 
ment was, in strict language, of the republican 
kind, yet the Spartans sometimes bestowed an 
extraordinary authority on their kings. This 
degree of pre-eminence, more honourable than 
any that birth or fortune can bestow, the pub- 
lic esteem had conferred on Cleomenes. To 
him therefore Aristagoras, after arriving at 
Sparta, found it necessary to apply ;!0 and in 
order to effect the object of his commission, he 


6 Aristagoras had quarrelled with Megabates the kins- 
man of Artaphernes (since both were of the blood royal,) 
during a fruitless expedition, in which they seem to have 
enjoyed a joint command, against the island of Naxos, one 
of the Cyclades. Herodot. L ii. e. xxviii. et seq. 

7 Herodot. l. v. e. xxxvi. xxxvii. 

8 Ibid. 

10 Herodot. l. v.c. xlix. et seq. 


9 Ibid. c. xxxviii. 


95 


described to the Spartan king the immense 
wealth of the Persians, which they had neither 
virtue to enjoy, nor valour to defend. He 
painted in the warmest colours, the love of 
liberty which animated the Jonians, and their 
firm expectation that the Spartans would ena- 
ble them to maintain that political indepen- 
dence, which their own laws taught them to 
consider as the most valuable of all human 
possessions. Their interest and their glory, he 
observed, were on this occasion most fortu- 
nately united: for how much greater glory 
might be acquired by conquering Asia, than by 
ravaging Greece? and how much easier would 
it be to defeat the Persian archers, than to sub- 
due the Arcadians or Argives, who knew, as 
well as the Spartans themselves, the use of the 
spear and buckler? Their journey to Susa, the 
rich capital of the Persian dominions, would be 
not only safe but delightful. To prove this, 
he showed the Spartan a brazen tablet, on 
which, it is said, were engraved all the coun- 
tries, seas, and rivers, of the ancient world. 
Pointing to the coast of Asia Minor, and the 
cities of the TIonians, with which Cleomenes 
was already acquainted, he showed him adjoin- 
ing to these, the beautiful and rich country of 
Lydia. Next to the celebrated kingdom of 
Creesus (he observed) extend the fertile fields 
of Phrygia, equally adapted to agriculture and 
pasturage. Beyond Phrygia lie the territories 
of the Cappadocians, whom the Greeks call 
Syrians. Farther towards the east dwell the 
wealthy Cilicians, who pay an annual tribute 
of five hundred talents to the king; next to 
them live the Armenians, abounding in cattle ; 
and last of all the Matienians, bordering on the 
province of Cissa, and the flowery banks of 
the Choaspes,! containing the superh city of 
Susa, and the invaluable treasury of Darius. 
This immense space is filled by well-inhabited 
countries, intersected by excellent roads, and 
supplied at proper distances with convenient 
places of refreshment and accommodation, even 
for a great army. Cleomenes having patiently 
listened to the verbose description of the Mile- 
sian, answered him with Laconic brevity, * In 
three days I will decide concerning the pro- 
priety of your demand.”? At the expiration 
of that time, Aristagoras failed not to repair to 
the place appointed, where he was soon met 
by the Spartan king, who asked him, In how 
many days they might march to Susa? Here 
the usual prudence of Aristagoras forsook him; 
for he ought not to have told the true distance, 
says Herodotus, if he had wished to engage 
the Spartans to accompany him. But he re- 
plied unguardedly, That travelling at the rate 
of about eighteen miles a day, they might reach 
Susa in three months. Upon this Cleomenes 
exclaimed with indignation, “ Milesian stran- 
ger, you must be gone from Sparta before the 
setting of the sun; for you have made a very 
inauspicious and a very dangerous proposal, in 
advising the Spartans to undertake a journey 
of three months from the Grecian sea.” With 
this severe reprimand he left Aristagoras, and 


1 Otherwise called the Enlæus, as above, p. 96. 
2 Herodot. I. v. c. xlix. et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


immediately returned home. The artful Mile- 
sian, however, was not to be disconcerted by a _ 
first refusal. According to the custom of an- 
cient times, when men endeavoured to paint to 
the eye the feelings of the heart, he clothed 
himself in the garment of a supplicant, and 
sought protection in the house of Cleomenes. 
Having obtained the favour of a third audi- 
ence, he attempted to effect by money what he 
could not accomplish by argument. But he 
found it as difficult to bribe, as it had been to 
persuade the Spartan ; and although he tempt- 
ed him with the offer of above five thousand 
pounds (an immense sum in Greece in those 
days,) it was impossible to render Cleomenes 
propitious to his design.’ 

Aristagoras, thus ungenerously dismissed 
from Sparta, had recourse to the Athenians, 
from whom he had reason to expect a more 
favourable reception. Athens was the mother 
country of the lonians, who formed the great- 
est and most distinguished portion of the Asia- 
tic Greeks. The Athenians, as a maritime 
state, had always maintained a closer connec- 
tion than the Spartans with their distant colo- 
nies; and as they possessed, for that early age, 
a very considerable naval strength, they were 
not averse to a distant expedition. Besides 
these reasons, which at all times 
must have had no small influence 
A, C. 594, 0” their councils, the present situa- 

on * tion of their republic was peculiarly 
favourable to the cause of Aristagoras. The 
free form of government, gradually introduced 
by the progressive spirit of liberty, had been 
defined by the laws of Solon, and confirmed by 
the unanimous approbation of the whole peo- 
ple. The public assembly, consisting of all citi- 
zens who had attained the age of manhood, 
was invested with the executive, as well as the 
legislative powers of government. The nine 
archons were rather the ministers, than, as 
their name denotes, the governors of the repub- 
lic. The senate, consisting first of four, and 
afterwards of five hundred members, was con- 
stituted by lot, the most popular mode of ap- 
pointment. The court of the Areopagus, ori- 
ginally entrusted with the criminal jurisdiction, 
assumed an extensive power in regulating the 
behaviour and manners of the citizens. It con- 
sisted only of such magistrates as had dis- 
charged with approbation the duties of their re- 
spective offices. The members were named for 
life; and as, from the nature of the institution, 
they were persons of a mature age, of an ex- 
tensive experience, and who having already at- 
tained the aim, had scen the vanity of ambition, 
their characters admirably fitted them for re- 
straining the impetuous passions of the multi- 
tude, and for stemming the torrent of popular 
frenzy. Such was the government! enjoyed 


Olymp. 
xlvi. 3. 


3 Herodot. l. v. c. li. 

4 Iforbear treating fully of the Athenian government and 
laws, until the establishment of what was called the Athe- 
nian empire. During more than sixty years that republie 
maintained dominion over many hundred cities and colo- 
nies. The fate of all these, as well as the measures of in- 
dependent and hostile states, depended on the proceedings 
of the Athenians. Then, and not till then, a thorough ac- 
quaintance with the internal constitution and state of 
Athens will become necessary for explaining the historical 
transactions which we shall have occasion to record. 


VI. ] 
by the Athenians, which they fondly regarded as 


the most perfect of all human institutions, and 
which was peculiarly endeared to them at pre- 
sent, by the recent discovery of freedom, after 
a long, though, in general, not a cruel tyranny. 

The danger of tyranny is an evil 
13 necessarily attending every demo- 
A c 578 cratical republic, in which, as there 

a ` is not a proper separation between 
the legislative and executive powers, the assem- 
bly must often intrust to one man those func- 
tions of government, which the collective body 
of the people are sometimes unable, and always 
ill qualified to exercise; and in which, there- 
fore, the splendour of wealth may dazzle, the 
charms of eloquence may seduce, and the 
combined power of policy and prowess may in- 
timidate and subdue the unsteady minds of 
the ignorant vulgar. The fame of his Olympic 
victories could not procure for Cylon® the sove- 
reignty of Athens; and it is probable that 
many other unsuccessful candidates had aspired 
at this high object of ambition, before the arts 
and eloquence of Pisistratus, who, though born 
an Athenian citizen, was descended of the 
blood of ancient kings, obtained possession of 
the dangerous prize, which proved fatal to his 
family. 

What his enterprising ability had acquired, 
his firmness, his wisdom, and his moderation‘ | 
enabled him long to maintain. So 


Olymp. 


mg completely was his authority esta- 
A C 510 blished, that on his death the go- 


vernment descended, as a private 
inheritance, to his son. Resentment ofa per- 
sonal injury’ delivered the Athenians from the 
mild tyranny’ of Hipparchus ; though his mur- 
derers, Hermodius and Aristogeiton, were 
afterwards celebrated by the Athenians, not as 
the avengers of a private quarrel, but as the re- 
storers of public freedom.2 His brother Hip- 
pias succeeding to the throne, treated his coun- 
trymen with a degree of severity which they 
had not hitherto experienced: his person and 
his government became alike odious; he was 
A.C expelled, by the assistance of the 

Laccdemonians, and the general 
578—510. 7 T Wi 

indignation of an injured people, 

after his family had, with various interruptions, 
governed Athens sixty-eight years. 

The power of Athens was great in ancient 
times; but it became incomparably greater 
after the re-establishment of democracy.’ So 


ö Thucyd. l.i. c. exxvi. Plut in. Solon. 

6 Plato in Hipparch. Herodot. Thucydid. i. 20. Aristot. 
Polit. l. v. c. xii. 

7 In this cireumstance Plato agrees with Thucydides, 
whose arcount of the transaction diffors widely from that 
of most other ancient writers. Thneydid. 1. vi. 

8 Plato, p. 234. The orators Andocides and Isocrates 
agree with the philosopher. Meursius had made a eareful 
collection of all the passages relating to the Pisistratida, in 
his Pisistratus. 

Q Ates row XAEOG EGoerets XAT’ woe 
Diarars Aoucdse xas Agsrroyetrwy 
Ors TOV Tuezvvoy xTeVETOU 


Trovomoug T’? Ayves exosyrurov. ALCRUS. 


“ Yonr glory shall last for ever, most beloved Harmodins 
and Aristogeiton, beeause you slew the tyrant, and pro- 
cured equa] laws for Athens.” 

10 This observation, which is literally translated, haa 
weight from such an old and honest historian as Herodotus. 
His words are still stronger in another passage: Anos 40 
OU K4TH EV MOVOY HAAN MuYT AY Y HITHYCEILM wo COT! XEMX 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


99 


advantageous to the powers of the human mind 
A.C is the enjoyment of liberty, even in 
510—50 4 its least perfect form, that in a few 
* years after the expulsion of Hip- 

pias, the Athenians acquired an ascendant in 
Greece, which was fatal to their enemies, pain- 
ful to thcir rivals, and even dangerous to them- 
selves. They chastised the insolence of the 
islanders of Eubæa and Ægina, who contended 
with them in naval power;. and humbled the 
pride of Thebes, which rivalled them in mili- 
tary glory. Favoured, as they fondly believed, 
by the protection of their tutelary Minerva, 
and animated as they strongly felt, by the pos- 
session of an equal freedom, they adorned their 
capital with the richest spoils of their van- 
quished enemies. Their influence soon ex- 
tended over the northern parts of Greece; and 
the fame of their power, still greater than their 
power itself, alarmed the fears and jealousy 
of the Peloponnesians. The Spartans, in par- 
ticular, who had assisted them in restoring the 
democracy, now perceived the error of which 
they had been guilty, in promoting the great- 
ness of an ambitious rival. In order to pre- 
vent!! the dangerous consequences of their 
folly, they summoned to a congress all their 
allies in Peloponnesus, that their united wisdom. 
might concert proper measures for resisting, 
ere it was too late, the encroachments of the 
A. C. 504 Athenians, which threatened the 
“sa ` liberties of all Greece. Their allies 
readily obeyed the welcome summons, and the 
deputies of the several states having assembled 
in the Spartan forum, eagerly listened to the 
speakers appointed to explain the intentions 
of that republic. The Lacedemonian orators 
acknowledged the mistaken policy of their 
country, in expelling from Athens the family 
of Pisistratus, and delivering the government 
of that city into the hands of a most ungrateful 
populace, who had since treated them with 
much indignity. “But why (they proceeded) 


orous eso, es xor Alyvaros tTueavvevopevos MEV, oudapewy 
TWV TOEG TECLOLKEOVTWY toes MMELVOUS, MTHAARYIEVTES de 
TUeaVYMWY, paxgw wewTos EyevovTo. Herodot. l.v. e. lxxviii 

11 Besides this prineipal reason, the Spartans, and par- 
ticularly their king Cleomenes, had private grounds for 
quarrel with the Athenians. The Alcmæonid®æ, a powerful 
family, and rivals of the Pisistratidæ, had been banished 
Athens during the usurpation of the latter. Having repeat- 
edly tried, without success, to return by force, they at length 
had recourse to stratagem. The temple of Delphi having 
been destroyed by fire, they contracted with the Amphictyons 
for rebuilding it; and instead of employing Porine stone, 
agreeably to their contract, they built the whole front of 
Parian marble. This generosity gained them the good-will 
of the Amphietyons; bribery procured them the favour of 
the Pythia, or rather of the directors of the oracle; and the 
Laeedwmonians were commanded by Apollo to deliver 
Athens from tyrants. This was effected by Cleomenes, 
who, upon discovering the fraud, was moved with great 
resentment against Clisthenes, the prineipal of the Alemæ- 
onidæ, by whom he and his country had been so shamefully 
deceived. He therefore united with Isagoras, the rival of 
Clisthenes. The latter, together with his partisans, were 
again banished from Athens. But the Athenians perceiving 
it to be the intention of the prevailing faction to establish 
an oligarchy, flew to arms. Cleomenes and Isagoras took 
refuge in the citadel. On the third day they surrendered on 
capitulation. The Laecdemonians were allowed to retire 
in safety. Isagoras was banished; many of his partisans 
executed; and the Alemwonide, headed by Clisthenes, 
again returned in trinmph. From this time democracy, in 
the strict sense of the word, continued, with short inter- 
ruptions, to prevail in Athens. Vferodat. l. v. c. Ixv. et seq. 
Thucyd. |. vi. c. lviii. 


100 
should we relate private injuries? Have they 
not insulted all their neighbours? Does not 


their pride daily increase with their power? 


And is there not reason to dread, that their 


growing ambition may endanger, and at length 


destroy, the public safety? In order to prevent 


this evil, we have recalled Hippias from banish- 
ment. And let us, therefore, by our united 
efforts, reinstate the son of Pisistratus in that 
power and authority of which we most injudi- 
ciously deprived him.” 

The speech of the Lacedemonians produced 
not the intended effect. The Peloponnesians, 
however jealous of the Athenian greatness, 
were still more jealous of the power of tyrants; 
and many of them, who had experienced the 
haughtiness of Sparta, were not dissatisfied 
with beholding a rival to that republic in the 
northern division of Greece. The other depu- 
ties expressed their dissent by silent disappro- 
bation; but Sosicles, the Corinthian, declared 
his sentiments at great length, in a speech 
which alike marks the manly character of the 
age, and the youthful vigour of Grecian elo- 
quence. “ Then surely, Lacedemonians, will 
the heavens sink below the earth, and the earth 
rise sublime in the air; men will inhabit the 
depths of the sea, and fishes will take posses- 
sion of the land, when you, formerly the bul- 
warks of liberty, shall demolish the popular 
governments of Greece, and establish tyrannies 
in their room, than which nothing can be more 
unjust, or more pernicious.” After this pomp- 
ous exordium, the Corinthian proceeded to 
describe and exaggerate the calamities which 
his own countrymen had suffered from the 
usurpation of Cypselus, and his son Periander. 
Having related, at great length, the proud, 
cruel, and despotic actions of those princes, 
* Such,” added he, “are the genuine fruits of 
absolute power; but I adjure you by the Gre- 
cian gods! attempt not to re-establish it in 
Athens. The Corinthians were seized with 
astonishment, when they heard that you had 
sent for Hippias; I myself was amazed at be- 
holding him in this assembly; yet we never 
suspected that you purposed to restore him, in 
triumph, to his much injured city. If you still 
persist in this fatal resolution, know that the 
Corinthians disavow all part in a design equally 
unjust and impious.”! The other deputies 
listened with pleasure to the boldness of Sosi- 
cles, who expressed the sentiments which they 
themselves felt, but which their respect for the 

Lacedemonians obliged them to 
A. C. 504. conceal. Hippias Sone opposed 
the general voice of the assembly, attesting the 
same gods which his opponent had invoked, 
and prophesying, that at some future time the 
Corinthians would repent their present con- 
duct, and regret their cruel injustice to the son 
of Pisistratus, when their own citizens, as well 
as the rest of Greece, should fatally experience 
the dangerous ambition of Athens. This re- 
monstrance, which was so fully justified in the 
sequel, produced no immediate effect in the 
assembly; the Lacedemonians finally yielded 
to the general request of their confederates, and 


1 Herodot. I. v. c. xcii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. ' 


[Cuar. 


abstained from their intended innovation in the 
government of a Grecian city. 

The dethroned prince, finding his 
cause universally abandoned by the 
A. C. 501 Greeks, sought the protection of 

as * Artaphernes, the Persian governor 
of Sardis. Having acquired the confidence ot 
this magistrate, he represented to him the in 
solence, ingratitude, and perfidy of his country- 
men, and the severest reproaches with which 
he loaded their character, gained ready belief 
with the Persian. The Athenians, who were 
informed of these intrigues, sent ambassadors 
to Sardis, in order to counteract them: but the 
resolution of Artaphernes was already taken 
and he told the ambassadors, that if they con 
sulted their safety, and would avoid the resent- 
ment of Persia, they must reinstate Hippias in 
the throne of his father. His answer had been 
reported to the Athenians, and the assembly 
had finally resolved to oppose the power of the 
greatest empire upon earth, rather than admit 
within their walls the declared enemy of their 
liberties.? 


Olymp. 


Ixix. 4. 


Precisely at this juncture Arista- 


“ o goras arrived at Athens, explained 
AC "500 the revolt of the Asiatic Greeks from 


* the government of Artaphernes, and 
solicited the assistance of the Athenians, in 
defending their own colonies against the op- 
pressive violence of the common foe. Many 
arguments were not necessary to make the 
people of Athens adopt a measure which 
gratified their own passions. The eloquent 
Milesian, however, described the wealth and 
extent of Persia, the grandeur and populous- 
ness of its cities, and, above all, the slothful 
effeminacy and pusillanimous weakness of their 
inhabitants, who, unable to support the pon- 
derous shield, or to poise the manly lance, in- 
vited, as an easy prey, the victorious arms of a 
more warlike invader. The speech of Arista- 
goras was well fitted to excite the ambition and 
avarice of Athens. The assembly immediately 
decreed that assistance should be sent to Ionia. 
Twenty ships were fitted out with all con- 
venient speed, which, reinforced by fjve more 
belonging to Eretria, a town of Eubcea, ren- 
dezvoused in the harbour of Miletus.’ 

Aristagoras spent not long time 


oer i in his embassy to the other states of 
A. C. 500. Greece, and soon met his Athenian 


allies at the place appointed. It was 
here determined, that while the commander in 
chief regulated the civil affairs of the Ionians, 
his brother Charopinus should conduct a mili- 
tary expedition against the wealthy capital of 
Lydia. The Athenians, desirous of testifying 
their resentment against the common enemy, 
and still more desirous of plunder, eagerly en- 
gaged in this undertaking. The united fleets 
left the harbour of Miletus, and sailed to Ephe- 
sus, where the troops were disembarked; and 
in three days, accomplishing a journey of 
seventy miles, appeared before the walls of 
Sardis. The Persian governor little expected 
such a visit; his soldiers were not prepared to 
take the field; and the extensive walls of the 


Q Ibid. c. xevi 3 Ibid. c. xevii. 


£ 


s 


VIIL] 


city could not be defended, on all sides, against 
the besiegers. Artaphernes, therefore, con- 
tented himself with defending the citadel; 
while the Greeks, without opposition, entered 
Sardis, in order to plunder the accumulated 
wealth of that ancient capital. But an accident 
prevented them from reaping the fruits of their 
success. The resentment of a rapacious soldier, 
disappointed of his prey, set fire to the house 
of a Lydian, situate on the skirts of the town, 
which consisted, for the most part, of very com- 
bustible materials, the houses being all roofed, 
and many of them walled with cane; a inode 
of building doubly dangerous in that adust cli- 
mate. The flames readily communicated from 
one house to another; and, in a short time, 
the whole circumference of the place was sur- 
rounded with a wall of fire. Sardis was built 
in the Grecian, not in the eastern fashion,’ 
having, on the banks of the Pactolus, which 
intersected the town, a spacious square, which 
commonly served for the market-place.5 Thi- 
ther the Persians, driven from the extremities, 
betook themselves for refuge against the fury 
of the flames. 

Arms formed part of the dress of Barbarians,§ 
and the Persians, who had assembled in the 
square without any intention of making de- 
fence, discovered their own strength to be more 
than sufficient to resist the enemy. Mean while 
the flames of Sardis brought the inhabitants 
from all parts of Lydia to their assistance. 
The Greeks were attacked, repelled, obliged to 
abandon their booty; and it was not without 
much difficulty that they effected their escape. 
Their retreat from Sardis was still more rapid 
than their march thither. It then appeared, 
that the taking and burning of the Lydian 
capital was no more than a stroke of military 
address, which succeeded, because unforeseen, 
‘and of which the Greeks had not sufficient 
strength to avail themselves. The enemy 
collecting their whole force, pursued them to 
Ephesus, and defeated them with great slaugh- 
ter, notwithstanding the vigorous resistance of 
the Athenians. The Eubean auxiliaries also 
behaved with uncommon spirit, headed by 
their countryman Eualcides, whose Olympic 
victories had been highly extolled in the verses 
of Simonides, and whose death on this occa- 
sion was long and deeply regretted. 

Bad fortune is commonly attended with dis- 
sensions in a confederate army. The allies 
threw the blame on each other, and the Athe- 
nians returned home in disgust, determined no 
longer to endanger’ themselves for the sako of 
men who employed so little wisdom or valour 
in their own defence. The Jonians, though 
deserted by their allies, and defeated by the 
eneniy at land, carried on the war vigorously 
by sea. Sailing northwards, they reduccd By- 
zantium, and all the neighbouring cities on the 
Hellespont, or Propontis. Their fleet then di- 
rected its course to Caria, and having become 
master of the most considerable portion of that 
coast, defeated the Phenicians off the isle of 


4 We have already observed, that the Persians had not 
any Forum, or place of public resort. 
5 Herodat. l. v. c. ci. et seq. 


6 Thucydid. in proem. 7 Herodot. ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


101 


Cyprus. The military success of the Persians 
engaged them, on the other hand, to prosecute 
the war by land; and their subsequent opera- 
tions discovered such a degree of prudence and 
courage, as they seem never to have exerted 
on any future occasion. In order the more 
speedily to quash the hopes of the insurgents, 
they formed their numerous army into three 
divisions, allotting to each its particular de- 
partment. After these separate brigades had 
reduced the smaller cities of the Eolians, Do- 
rians, and Jonians, the three great branches of 
the Hellenic race, it was concerted, that they 
should re-assemble in one body, to attack 
Miletus, which was regarded as the centre of 
rebellion ; and which, though properly an Ionic 
city, was considered, on account of its great 
strength and importance, rather as the metro- 
polis of the whole country, than as the capital 
of a particular province. This plan, so judi- 
ciously concerted, was carried into execution 
by three sons-in-law of Darius, Hymees, Dau- 
rises, and Otanes; the first of whom reduced 
the Eolian cities; the second conquered the 
Dorians, as well as the other inhabitants of 
Caria, while Otanes, assisted by the counsels 
and bravery of Artaphernes, overran the Ionic 
coast, burning and destroying all before him. 
The miserable natives were put to the sword, 
or dragged into captivity; the more fortunate 


escaped these calamities, by flying to their 


ships, or taking refuge within the lofty walls 
of Miletus.’ 

The time now approached for attacking that 
place, which, as its harbour commanded the 
om coast, it was necessary to invest by 
| ymP- sea and land. We might, on this 
XXI. 3. . . 

A. C. 494, 0CCasion, expect to find Aristagoras, 

the prime mover of the rebellion, 
displaying the fertile resources of his genius; 
but before Miletus was besieged, Aristagoras 
was no more. The perfidious Ionian, who had 
persuaded, not only his own countrymen, but 
all the Asiatic, and many of the European 
Greeks, that the public safety was the sole 
object of his concern, had never probably any 
other end in view but the success of his own 
selfish designs. When Cymé and Clazomené, 
two neighbouring towns of Ionia, had surren- 
dered to the Persians, he thought it time to 
provide, by a spcedy retreat, for his personal 
safety; and abandoning, in its greatest need, a 
country which he had involved in all the cala- 
mities of war, he fled, with his numerous par- 
tisans, to an obscure corner of Thrace, situated 
beyond the reach, both of the Persians, from 
whom he had revolted, and of the Grecians 
whom he had betrayed. But while he endea- 
voured to secure his establishment there, he 
provoked, by his cruelty, the despair of the na- 
tives, and together with tlic companions of his 
perfidy, perished miserably by the hands of 
those ficrce barbarians, who thus revenged 
what happened to be, for once, the common 
cause of Greece and Persia.!0 


8 After the conquest seemed complete, Daurises was sur- 
prised and slain by Heraclides, a general of the Carians 
But this disaster had no effect on the general fortune of the 
war. Herod. l. v.c. evi. 

9 Herodot. 1. v. c. evi. cvii. et seq. 

10 Herodot. l. v. c. exxiv. cxxv. cxxvi. 


102 


About this time Histizus, the Milesian, the 
kinsman and friend of Aristagoras, arrived 
from Susa, commissioned by Darius to direct, 
by his experienced wisdom and perfect know- 
ledge of the country, the valour and activity 
of the Persian generals. The birth, the educa- 
tion, the manners of this singular man, together 
with the strong partiality of every Greek in 
favour of his native land, might have afforded 
good reason to the Persian king to suspect his 
fidelity: he indeed suspected it; but the art- 
ful address, the warm professions, the subtle 
insinuation of Histiæus, easily overcame every 
prejudice which his situation and character 
made it natural to conceive against him. He 
was sent to assist the army of Darius, his be- 
nefactor, in crushing the Grecian rebellion; 
but his real intention was to take upon himself 
the conduct of that rebellion, and to raise his 
own greatness on the ruias of the Persian pow- 
er. Ashe passed to the coast of Asia Minor, 
his intrigues produced a conspiracy at apts, 
which, being discovered by the vigilance of 
Artaphernes, ended in the destruction of his 
accomplices. Histiæus made a seasonable re- 
treat to theslonian shore,! where he hoped to 
be received with open arms by his ancient 
friends. But the Milesians, remembering his 
former tyranny, and the recent baseness of his 
nephew Aristagoras, shut their gates against 
him. He sought admission into Chios, but 
without better success. The Lesbians, with 
much difficulty, lent him eight vessels, which 
he employed against the enemy in the Euxine; 
but he was taken by the Persians, and crucified 
at Sardis, having performed nothing sufficient 
to change the fortune of a war, which had 
been undertaken by his advice, and fomented 
by his ambition.? ‘sy 

Meanwhile the Persian fleet and army sur- 
rounded the walls of Miletus. We are not 
informed of the exact number of their land 
forces, which, consisting of all the united gar- 
risons in those parts, must have greatly exceed- 
ed any strength which the much exhausted 
Greeks could bring into the field. Their fleet, 
composed of Phoenicians, Cilicians, and Egyp- 
tians, amounted to six hundred sail; besides a 
considerable naval force belonging to the isle 
of Cyprus, which, having co-operated during 
one year with the Ionian insurgents, had re- 
cently submitted to Darius. In order to deli- 
berate concerning the means of opposing this 
mighty armament, the Grecians assembled in 
the Panionian council, where it was unani- 
mously resolved, that no attempt should be 
made to resist the Persians by land: the citi- 
zens of Miletus alone were exhorted to defend 
their walls to the last extremity, under the 
conduct of Pythagoras, a person of great rank 
and eminence in that republic. While every 
effort should be exerted for maintaining this 
strong hold of Ionia, it was determined that 
the Grecian fleet, the last and only hope of the 
nation, should assemble at the small island of | 
Ladé, lying off the harbour of Miletus, and 
offer battle to that of the Persians.2 When all | 


1 Herodot. l. vi. c. ii. et seq. 2 Ibid. 


3 Herodot. l. vi. c. vi. et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


their forces were collected at the appointed 
rendezvous, they amounted to three hundred 
and fifty-three ships, which, containing, each at 
a medium, a complement of above two hun- 
dred men, made the whole amount to a num- 
ber sufficientiy respectable, and which, had 
they all remained firm and unanimous in the 
common cause, might, perhaps, have still ren- 
dered them victorious. Such, at least, was the 
opinion of the Persian commanders, who, when 
informed of the strength of the Grecian fleet, 
despaired of conquering it by open force, and 
endeavoured to effect by policy, what they 
could-not accomplish by valovr. Calling to- 
gether the Ionian tyrants, who, after being ex- 
pelled their dominions by Aristagoras, had 
taken refuge with the Medes, and actually fol- 
lowed the standard of Darius, they represented 
to those banished princes, that now was th 
time to show their attachment to the service of ` 
the great king. For this purpose they were 
instructed, each of them, to persuade, by mes- 
sage or a personal interview, the subjects whom 
he had formerly commanded, to desert the 
Grecian confederacy; to acquaint them, that 
if they complied with this proposal, their 
houses and temples should be spared, while 
those óf their more obstinate allies would be 
destroyed by the flames; that their republics 
should be treated with great.lenity, and even 


received into favour, while their countrymen 


who resisted, would inevitably be reduced into 
servitude; their youth disgraced by castra- 
tion; their virgins transported to Bactria, 
to satisfy the lust of barbarians; and their 
country, which contained every thing once dear 
to them, their temples, their statues, their 
oracles, and the tombs of their ancestors, be- 
stowed on some more deserving and less rebel- 
lious people. 

These insidious representations, howe’ 
produced not any immediate effect. Eac 
munity, believing that they alone were solici 
to abandon the common cause, scorned 
account of their private advantage, to desert 
the general interest of the confederacy, and 
next day they called a council of war, to con- 
sider of the ineans proper, not for appeasing the 
wrath, but for resisting the arms, of the Persians. 

In this council, where no distinction of per 
sons prevailed, every individual had full liberty 
to propose his opinion. That of Dionysius, a 
Phocean, met with the approbation of the 
assembly. “ Our fortunes,” said he, “O Ioni- 
ans! stand on a needle’s point. We must 
either vindicate our liberty, or suffer the igno- 
minious punishment of fugitive slaves. If we 
refuse present labour and danger, we shall be 
exposed to eternal disgrace; but the toils of a 
few days will be compensated by a life of free- 
dom, of glory, and of happiness. Submit, 
therefore, to my direction, and I will pledge 
my life, that, if the gods declare not against 
us, the enemy will either decline the engage- 
ment, or, engaging, be shamefully defeated.” 
The Greeks, consenting to submit to the disci- 
pline of Dionysius, he, every day, arranged 
the fleet in three divisions: towards the east 
extended the right wing, consisting of eight 
ships of the Milesians, twelve belonging to 


VIIL] 


Priené, and three, which formed the whole 
strength of the small republic of Myus. The 
centre consisted of a hundred prime sailors, 
furnished by the Chians, seventy from Lesbos, 
and a few ships, sent by the little cities of 
Erythrea, Phocwa, and Teios. The Samians 
alone, with sixty sail, formed the left wing to 
the westward. 

In ancient times the success of a naval en- 
gagement principally depended on the activity 
of the rowers, and the skill of the pilots, whose 
object it always was to dart, with great vio- 
lence, the sharp beak or prow of their own 
ships, against the sides of the enemy. Some- 
times at one stroke, more frequently by re- 
peated assaults, while they themselves, with 
wonderful dexterity, eluded such a shock, they 
shattered or sunk the vessel of their opponents. 
By their continual exercise in navigation, the 

' Greeks had acquired such proficiency in ma- 
naging their gallies, that their movement de- 
pending, not on the external impulse of the 
wind, but on the active principle within, re- 
sembled the rapid motion of a fish in its native 
element. Coustant practice,however, was neces- 
sary to maintain this superiority, and still more 
to preserve their bodics in a capacity for labour, 
which, on account of the softness of the cli- 
mate and the hcat of the season, were ready to 
melt away in sloth and debility. The prudent 
Phocæan, therefore, commanded them often to 
change their stations, habituating the sailors 
to the labour of the oar, and the restraints of 
discipline, which he assured them would, by 
habit, become easy and agreeable. For seven 
days they cheerfully obeyed his commands : 
but, at length, the warmth of the season ren- 
dered their exertions too great for their strength. 
Distempers broke out in the fleet. The Greeks, 
always averse to every shadow of absolute au- 
Aya complained at first in secret murmurs, 
erwards in licentious clamours, of the 
rable hardships to which they were ex- 
pd by the severity of an insolent Phocæan, 
who, though he brought only three ships to 
the common defence, had assumed an arbitrary 
direction in all their affairs. Governed by 
these sentiments, they refused any longer to 
obey his commands, landed on the shore of 
Ladé, formed a camp in the island, and, sitting 
under the shade of their tents, disdained the 
useful labours to which they had hitherto sub- 
mitted. 

The Samians, who saw and dreaded the 
consequence of this general disorder, privately 
accepted the proposal which had been made 
them by the Persians. Their perfidy brought 
destruction on the common cause; for in the 
engagement, which followed soon after, they 
hoisted sail and deserted the line. The Les- 
bians followed their example. Among those, 
however, who obtained signal honour, by Vik 
hering to the cause of Greece, were eleven 
captains of Samian vessels, who detested the 
treachery of their companions, and despised 
the signs of their admirals; on which account 


i 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


103 


they were rewarded, at their return, by the 
community of Samos, with a pillar and inscrip- 
tion, transmitting their names, with immortal 
renown, to posterity. But of all the Greeks, 
the Chians acquired greatest glory on that me- 
morable day: notwithstanding their inferior 
str ength, they defcnded themselves to the last 
extreinity, and rendered the victory late and 
dear to the Persians. The naval defeat was 
soon followed by the taking of Miletus, which 
surrendered in the sixth year from tlic com- 
mencement of the revolt. The Persians made 
good the threats which they had denounced 
against the obstinacy of their ene- 


n P i mics. Samos alone, at the price of 
AC 494 its perfidy, obtained the safety of 


its houses arid temples, Those of 
all the other communities were burnt to the 
ground, The women and children were drag- 
ged into captivity. Such of the Milesian citi- 
zens as escaped not by flight, were either put 
to the sword, or carried into the heart of Asia, 
and finally settled in the territory of Ampé, 
near the mouth of the Tygris. In other places, 
men of a timid or melancholy complexion con- 
tinued to brood over the ruins of their ancient 
seats. The more enterprising sailed to Greece, 
to the coast of Italy and Sicily, and to the 
Greek colonies in Africa. Probably not a few 
betook themselves to piracy, among whom was 
Dionysius the Phocean, who plundcred the Tus- 
can and Carthaginian vessels, always sparing 
the Grecian. The Persian flect wintered at 
Miletus, and next spring subducd the islands 
of Chios, Lesbos, and Tenedos. Thus were the 
Asiatic Greeks conquered for the third time, 
once by the Lydians, and twice by the Persians, 

But notwithstanding these repeated shocks, 
which subjected the inhabitants of Ionia to such 
dreadful ‘calamities, that dclightful country 
soon recovered its ancient populousness and 
splendour. The Persian government, having 
sufficicntly punished the rebellion, began gra- 
dually to relent. The Jonians became an ob- 
ject of care and protection to Darius. Useful 
regulations were made for maintaining the pub- 
lic peace, as well as for securing the lives and 
properties of individuals. The face of the coun- 
try began once more to smile; the cities, being 
built of slignt materials, were casily repaired, 
while the exuberant fertility of the soil, the at- 
tractive beauties of the prospect, the charms 
of the climate, and the convenicnce of the har- 
bours (an advantage of which the Persians 
knew not to avail themselves,) speedily col- 
lected the Greeks into thcir ancicnt habita- 
tions. Even those places which had becn de- 
serted or destroyed, emerged from the gloom 
of desolation, and assumed the chcerful appear- 
ance of industrious activity. And such was 
the attachment of the Greeks to their native 
land, and such their ambition to adorn it, that 
the labour of a few ycars repaired the destruc- 
tive ravages of the Barbarians. 


4 Hcrodot. l. vi. c. xxxi. ot Boq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


CHAPTER IX. 


Reseniment of Darius against Greece—Marilime Expedition of Mardonius— Invasion of Greece 
by Dalis and Artaphernes—Baitle of Marathon—Transactions in the interval between that 
Battle and Xerxes’ Invasion—The Invasion of Xerxes—Battle of Thermopylæ. 


p attempting to give the reader a general, 
but tolerably complete, view of the ancient 
history of Greece, it was often necessary to 
have recourse to very obscure materials; to 
arrange and combine the mutilated fragments 
of poets and mythologists; and to trace, by 
the established principles of critical conjecture, 
and the certain, because uniform, current of 
human passions, those events and transactions 
which seem most curious and important. In 
this subsequent part of my work, the difficulty 
consists not in discovering, but in selecting, the 
materials; for the magnificent preparations, 
the splendid commencement, and the unex- 
pected issue, of the Persian war, have been re- 
lated with the utmost accuracy of description, 
and adorned by the brightest charms of elo- 
quence. The Grecian poets, historians, and 
orators, dwell with complacence on a theme, 
not less important than extensive, and equally 
adapted to display their own abilities, and to 
flatter the pride of theircountry. The variety 
of their inimitable performances, generally 
known and studied in every country conversant 
with literature, renders the subject familiar to 
the reader, and difficult to the writer. Yet does 
the merit of those performances, however justly 
and universally admired, fall short of the ex- 
traordinary exploits which they describe; ex- 
ploits which, though ancient, still preserve a 
fresh and unfading lustre, and will remain to 
the latest ages, precious monuments of that 
generous magnanimity, which cherishes the 
seeds of virtue, inspires the love of liberty, and 
animates the fire of patriotism. 
The memorable tragedy (to adopt 


ee: on this occasion an apt allusion of 
Ar C. 490. Plutarch,) which ended in the eter- 


nal disgrace of the Persian name, 
may be divided, with propriety, into three prin- 
cipal acts. The first contains the invasion of 
Greece by Darius’s generals, Da- 


ye tis and Artaphernes, who were de- 
x C. 480 feated in the battle of Marathon. 


* The second consists in the expedi- 
tion undertaken ten years afterwards by Xer- 
xes, the son and successor of Darius, who fled 
iini: precipitately from Greece, after the 
Ixxy, 2, of his fleet near the isle of Sa- 
A. C. 479 lamis. The third, and concluding 

ccd * act,is the destruction of the Persian 
armies in the bloody fields of Mycalé and Pla- 
tea; events which happened on the same day, 
and nearly two years after Xerxes’s triumphal 
entry into Greece. 

The complete reduction of the insurgents on 
the Asiatic coast, prompted Darius to take ven- 
geance on such Greeks as had encouraged and 
assisted:the unsuccessful rebellion of his sub- 
jects. The proud monarch of the East, when 
informed that the citizens of Athens had co- 
operated with the Jonians in the taking and 


burning of Sardis, discovered evident marks 
of the most furious resentment; shootiny an 
arrow into the air, lie prayed that heaven might 
assist him in punishing the audacious insolence 
of that republic; and every time he sat down 
to table, an attendant reminded him of the 
Athenians, lest the delights of eastern luxury 
should seduce him from his fell purpose of re- 
venge.! 

The execution of his design was 


Rag) entrusted to Mardonius, a Persian 
ie 193 nobleman of the first rank, whose 


personal, as well as hereditary ad- 
vantages, had entitled him to the marriage of 
Artazostra daughter of Darius; and whose 
youth and inexperience were compensated, in 
the opinion of his master. by his superior 
genius for war, and innate love of glory. In 
the second spring after the cruel punishment 
of the Ionians, Mardonius approached the 
European coast with an armament suflicient to 
inspire terror into Greece. The rich island of 
Thasus, whose golden mines yielded a revenue 
of near three hundred talents, submitted to his 
fleet; while his land-forces added the barba- 
rous province of Macedon to the Persian em- 
pire. But having steered southward from Tha- 
sus, the whole armament was overtaken, and 
almost destroyed, by a violent storm, while en- 
deavouring to double the promontory of mount 
Athos, which is connected with the Macedo- 
nian shore by a low and narrow neck of land, 
but forms along and lofty ridge in the sea. 
Three hundred vessels were dashed against the 
rocks; twenty thousand men perished in the 
waves. This disaster totally defeated the de- 
sign of the expedition; and Mardonius having 
recovered the shattered remains of the fleet 
and army, returned to the court of Persia, 
where, by flattering the pride, he averted the 
resentment of Darius; while he represented, 
that the Persian forces, invincible by the power 
of man, had yielded to the fury of the ele- 
ments; and while he described and exagger- 
ated, to the astonishment and terror of his 
countrymen, the excessive cold, the violent 
tempests, the monstrous marine animals, which 
distinguish and render formidable those distant 
and unknown seas.? 

The address of Mardonius res- 


Olymp. cued him from punishment; but 
lxxii, 3. his misfortunes removed him from 
A. C. 490. 


the command of Lower Asia. Two 
generals were appointed in his room, of whom 
Datis, a Mede, was the more distinguished by 
his age and experience, while Artaphernes, a 
Persian, was the more conspicuous for his rank 
and nobility, being descended of the royal 
blood, and son to Artaphernes, governor of 


1 Herodot. l. v. c. cv. et seq. 
2 Herodot. |. vi. c. xliii. et seq. 


IX.] 


Sardis, whose name has frequently occurred in 
the present history. That his lieutenants might 
appear with a degree of splendour suitable to 
the majesty of Persia, Darius assembled an 
army of five hundred thousand men,? consist- 
ing of the flower of the provincial troops of 
his extensive empire. The preparation of an 
adequate number of transports and ships of 
war, occasioned but a short delay. The mari- 
time provinces of the empire, Egypt, Pheenicia, 
and the coasts of the Euxine and Egean seas, 
were commanded to fit out, with all possible 
expedition, their whole naval strength; the 
old vessels were repaired, many new ones were 
built, and in the course of the same year in 
which the preparations commenced, a fleet of 
six hundred sail was ready to put to sea. This 
immense armament the Persian generals were 
ordered to employ, in extending their con- 
quests on the side of Europe, in subduing the 
republics of Greece, and more particularly in 
chastising the insolence of the Eretrians and 
Athenians, the only nations which had con- 
spired with the revolt of the Joniaus, and as- 
sisted that rebellious people in the destruction 
of Sardis. With respect to the other nations 
which might be reduced by his arms, the orders 
of Darius were general, and the particular 
treatment of the vanquished was left to the 
discretion of his lieutenants; but concerning 
the Athenians and Eretrians, he gave the most 
positive commands, that their territories should 
be laid waste, their houses and temples burned 
or demolished, and their persons carried in 
captivity to the eastern extremities of his em- 
pire. Secure of effecting their purpose, his 
generals were furnished with a great number 
of chains for confining the Grecian prisoners ; 
a haughty presumption (to use the language 
of antiquity) in the superiority of man over the 
power of fortune, which on this, as on other 
occasions, was punished by the just vengeance 
of heaven. 

The Persian fleet enjoyed a prosperous voy- 
age to the isle of Samos, from whence they 
were ready to proceed to the Athenian coast. 
The late disaster which befel the armament 
commanded by Mardonius, deterred them from 
pursuing a direct course along the shores of 
Thrace and Macedonia: they determined to 
steer in an oblique line through the Cyclades, 
a cluster of seventeen small islands, lying oppo- 
site to the territories of Argos and Attica. The 
approach of such an innumerable host, whose 
transports darkened the broad surface of the 
Egean, struck terror into the unwarlike inha- 
bitants of those delightful islands. The Naxians 
took refuge in their inaccessible mountains ; 
the natives of Delos, the favourite residence of 
Latona and her divine children, abandoned 
the awful majesty of their temple, which was 
overshadowed by the rough and lofty mount 
Cynthus. Paros,’ famous for its marble; 


3 Besides Herodotns, Plutarch, and Diodorus Sieulns, 
this expedition is related by Lysias, Orat. Funeb. Isocrat. 
Panegyr. Plato, Menex. Pausan. Í. x.e. xx. Justin. l ii. 
o w. Corn. Nepos, in Milt. 

4 The marble of Paros was superior in whiteness, and 
thv fineness of its grain, to the hard sparkling veins of mount 
Pentelicus in Attica; which. from the size and brilliancy 


O 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


105 


Andros,’ celebrated for its vines; Ceos, the 
birth-place of the plaintive Simonides; Syros, 
the native country of the ingenious and philo- 
sophic Pherecydes; Ios, the tomb of Homer ;6 
the industrious Amorgos;’ as well as all the 
other? islands which surrounded the once sacred 
shores of Delos, either spontaneously offered 
the usual acknowledgment of earth and water, 
as a testimony of their friendship, or submit- 
ted, after a feeble resistance, to the Persian — 
arms.9 

The invaders next proceeded westward to 
the isle of Eubæa, where, after almost a con- 
tinued engagement of six days, their strength 
and numbers, assisted by the perfidy of two 
traitors, finally prevailed over the valour and 
obstinacy of the Eretrians.!0 

Hitherto every thing was prosperous; and had 
the expedition ended with the events already 
related, it would have afforded just matter of 
triumph. But a more difficult task remained, 
in the execution of which the Persians (happily 
for Europe) experienced a fatal reverse of for- 
tune. After the reduction of Eubcea, the Athe- 
nian coasts, separated from that island only by 
the narrow strait of Euripus, seemed to invite 
the generals of Darius to an easy conquest. 
They readily accepted the invitation, as the 
punishment of Athens was the main object 
which their master had in view when he fitted 
out his seemingly invincible armament. The 
measures which they adopted for accomplish- 
ing this design appear abundantly judicious; 
the greater part of the army was left to guard 
the islands which they had subdued; the use- 
less multitude of attendants were transported 
to the coast of Asia; with a hundred thousand 
chosen infantry, and a due proportion of horse, 
the Persian generals set sail from Eubæa, and 
safely arrived on the Marathonian shore, a dis- 
trict of Attica about thirty miles from the 
capital, consisting chiefly of level ground, and 
therefore admitting the operations of cavalry, 
which formed the main strength of the Bar- 
barian army, and with which the Greeks were 
very poorly provided. Here the Persians pitch- 
ed their camp, by the advice of Hippias, the 


of its component partieles, somewhat resembling salt, is 
ealled by the Italians Marmo salino. These two kinds cf 
marble were always the most valued by the Greeks; but 
the marble of Paros was preferred by artists, as yielding 
more easily to the graving tool, and, on aecovat of the ho- 
mogeneousness of its parts, less apt to sparkle, and give 
false lights to the statue. ‘The works of Parian marble, in 
the Farnesian palace at Rome, are mentioned by Winkel- 
mann, Gesehielite der kunst des Alterthumsg, 1. i. e. 2. 

5 The wines of Andros and Naxos were compared to 
neetar. See Athenæns, l. i. 

6 Strabo, l. x. et Plin. 1. iv. Pausanias (in Phocie.) says, 
that Climenes, the mother of Homer, was a native of the 
isle of Fos; and Aulus Gellins, 1. iii. asserts, on the anthio- 
rity of Aristotle, that this island was the birth-plaee of 
Homer himself. 

7 Amorgos was long famous for the robes made there, 
and distinguished by its name. Suid.ad voc. They were 
dyed red, with a species of lichen, which abounds in that 
island, and which was formerly used by tho English and 
French in dying scarlet. i 

8 IHerodot. l. vi. e. 94. 9 Tpþid. e. 101. et seq. 

10 The present deplorable state of these onee fortunate 
islands may ho seen in Tonrnefort, the most learned of 
travellers. Despotism, a double superstition, (tho Grecian 
and Mahommedun,) pirates, banditti, and pestilence, have 
not yet depopulated the Cyclades, which respectively con- 
tain three, five, ten, and the largest, twenty thousand in- 
habitants. 


106 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


banished king of Athens,’ whose perfect know- | would have enabled a small number of men to 
edge of the country, and intimate acquaintance | make an obstinate, and perhaps a successful 
with the affairs of Greece, rendered his opinion | defence, against a superior but less determined 


on all occasions respectable. 

Mean while the Athenians had raised an 
army, and appointed ten generals, with equal | 
power, chosen, as usual, from the ten tribes, into | 
which the citizens were divided. Their obsti- 
nate and almost continual hostilities with the | 
Phocians, the Thebans, and their other northern 
neighbours, prevented them from entertaining 
any hopes of assistance from that quarter: but, 
on the first appearance of the Persian fleet, 
they sent a messenger to Sparta, to acquaint | 
the senate of that republic with the immediate 
danger which threatened them, and to explain 
how much it concerned the interest, as well as 
the honour of the Spartans, who had acquired 
just pre-eminence among the Grecian states, 
not to permit the destruction of the most an- 
cient and the most splendid of the Grecian 
cities. The senate and assembly approved the 
justice of this demand, they collected their 
troops, and seemed ready to afford their rivals, 
whose danger now converted them into allies, 
a speedy and effectual relief. But it was only 
the ninth day of the month; and an ancient, 
unaccountable, and therefore the more respect- 
ed, superstition prevented the Spartans from 
taking the field, before the full of the moon.? 
‘vnen that period should arrive, they promised 
to march, with the utmost expedition, to the 
plains of Marathon. 

Mean while the Athenians had been rein- 
forced by a thousand chosen warriors from 
Platæa, a small city of Bæotia, distant only 
nine miles from Thebes. The independant 
spirit of the: Plateans rendered them as desi- 
rous of preserving their freedom, as they were 
unable to defend it against the Theban power. 
But that invaluable possession, which their 
own weakness would have made it necessary 
for them to surrender, the protection of Athens 
enabled them to maintain, and, in return for this 
inestimable favour, they discovered towards 
their benefactors, on the present as well as on 
every future occasion, the sincerest proofs of 
gratitude and respect. The Athenian army, 
now ready to take the field, consisted of about 
ten thousand freemen, and of probably a still 
greater number of armed slaves. The generals 
might certainly have collected a larger body of 
troops; but they seem to have been averse to 
commit the safety of the state to the fortune 
of a single engagement; neither would it have 
been prudent to leave the walls of Athens, and 
the other fortresses of Attica, altogether naked 
and defenceless. It had been a matter of de- 
liberation in the assembly, whether they ought 
not to stand a siege rather than venture a bat- 
tle. The Athenian fortifications, indeed, had 
not attained that strength which they after- 
wards acquired, yet they might have long re- 
sisted the artless assaults of the Persians; or 
had the latter got possession of the walls, the 
long, narrow, and winding streets? of Athens 


1 Thucyd. l. vi. c. lix. Herodot. ubi supra. 

2 Strabo, l. ix. p. G11; aud Herodot. ibid. 

3 Aristotle informs us, that this was the ancient mode 
of building in all thë cities of Greece. Arist. Polit. 


enemy. But all hopes from this mode of re- 
sistance were damped by the consideration, 
that an immense host of Persians might sur- 
round their city on every side, intercept their 
supplies, and instead of conquering them by 
assault, reduce them by famine. At the same 
time Miltiades, one of the ten generals, whose 
patriotism and love of liberty we have already 
had occasion to applaud, animated his coun- 
trymen with the desire of victory and glory. 
This experienced commander knew the Per- 
sians; he knew his fellow-citizens; and his dis- 
cerning sagacity had formed a proper estimate 
of both. 

The Athenians were few in number, but 
chosen men; their daily practice in the gym- 
nastic had given them agility of limbs, dexterity 
of hand, and an unusual degree of vigour both 
of mind and body. ‘Their constant exercise in 
war had inured them to hardship and fatigue. 


accustomed them to the useful restraints of dis- 
cipline, and familiarized them to those skilful . 


evolutions which commonly decide the fortune 
of the field. Their defensive as well as offen- 
sive armour was remarkably complete; and an 
acknowledged pre-eminence over their neigh- 
bours, had inspired them with a military en- 
thusiasm, which on this occasion was doubly 
animated, in defence of their freedom and of 
their country. In their pertinacious struggles 
with each other, for whatever men hold most 
precious, the Greeks, and the Athenians in 
particular, had adopted a mode of military 
arrangement which cannot be too highly ex- 
tolled. Drawn up in a close and firm phalanx, 
commonly sixteen deep, the impetuous vigour 
of the most robust youth held the first ranks; 
the last were closed by the steady courage of 
experienced veterans, whose resentment against 
cowardice seemed more terrible to their com- 
panions than the arms of an enemy. As the 
safety of the last ranks depended on the ac- 
tivity of the first, their united assaults were 
rendered alike furious and persevering, and 
hardly to be resisted by any superiority of 
numbers.4 


4 The attention given by the Greeks to the relative dis 
position of the ranks, according to the respective qualities 
of the men who composed them, introduced certain rules in 
ancient tactics which would be unnecessary in the modern 
To convert the rear into the front, a modern army has only 
to face about, because it is not very material in what order 
the ranks are placed. But we learn from the tactics of 
Arrian, that the Greeks had contrived three other ways of 
performing this evolution, in all of which the same front 
was uniformly presented to the cnemy.—The first was called 
the Macedonian. In this evolution the file-leader faced to 
the right-about, without stirring from his place; the other 
men in the file passed behind him, and, after a certain num 
ber of paces, also faced about, and found themselves in 
their respective places.—The eecond was called the Cretan. 
In this the file-leader not onlv faced about, but paced over 
the depth of the phalanx. The rest followed him, and the 
whole found themselves in the same place as before, the 
ranks ouly reversed.—The third was called the Lacede- 
monian, which was precisely the reverse of the first. In the 
Lacedemonian evolution the first bringer-up, or last man 
in each file, whom the Greeks called ovexyes, faced about, 
then halted. ‘The file-leader faced about, and paced over 
twice the depth of the phalanx, the rest following him; the 
wholc thus found themselves with the same front towards 
the cnemy, thc ranks only reversed. The difference between 
these three evolutions consisted in this, that the Macedonian, 


——>—— ll 


IX.] 


The Persians (for under the name of Per- 
sians are comprehended the various nations 
which followed the standard of Datis and 
Artaphernes) were not deficient in martial ap- 


pearance, nor perhaps entirely destitute of | 


valour, being selected with care from the flower 
of the Asiatic provinces. But, compared with 
the regularity of the Greek battalions, they 
may be regarded as a promiscuous crowd, 
armed in each division with the peculiar 
weapons of their respective countrics, incapa- 
hle of being harmonized by general movements, 
pr united into any uniform system of military 
rangement. Darts and arrows were their 
tsual instruments of attack; and even the most 
‘ompletely armed trusted to some species of 
vissie weapon. They carried in their left 
icands light targets of reed or osier, and their 
bodies were sometimes covered with thin plates 
ol scaly metal ; but they had not any defensive 
amour worthy of being compared with the 
finn corselets, the brazen greaves, the massy 
bucklers of their Athenian opponents. The 
bravest of the Barbarians fought on horseback; 
but in all ages the long Grecian spear has 
proved tbe curest defence against the attack of 
cavalry, wsomuch that even the Romans, in 
fighting ayeinst the Numidian horsemen, pre- 
ferred the strength of the phalanx to the 
activity of the legion. The inferiority of their 
armour and of their discipline, was not the 
only defect of the Persians; they wanted that 
ardour and emulation which, in the close and 
desperate engagements of ancicnt times, were 
necessary to animate the courage of a soldier. 
Their spirits were breker under the yoke of a 
double servitude, imposed by the blind super- 
stition of the Magi, and tho capricious tyranny 
of Darius; with them their native country was 
an empty name; and their minds, degraded by 
the mean vices of wealth and luxury, were in- 
sensible to the netive charins, as well as to the 
immortal reward of manly virtue. 

Miltiades allowed not, however, his contempt 
of the enemy, or his confidence in lis own 
troops, to seduce him into a fatal security. 
Nothing on his part was neglected; and the 
only obstacle to success was fortunately re- 
moved by the disinterested moderation of his 
colleagues. The continual dread of tyrants 
had taught the jealous republicans of Greece to 
blend, on every occasion, their civil with their 
military institutions. Governed by this princi- 
ple, the Athenians, as we already had occasion 
to observe, elected ten generals, who were 
invested, each in his turn, with the supreme 
command. This regulation was extremely un- 
favourable to that unity of design which ought 
to pervade all the successive operations of an 
army; an inconvenience which struck the dis- 
cerning mind of Aristides, who on tliis occasion 


where the file-leader stood still, and the rest went behind 
him, had the appearance of a retreat; since the whole line 
receded by the depth of the phalanx from the enemy; inthe 
Cretan, the men preserved the same gronnd which they had 
originally occupied; bnt the Lacedemonian carried the 
whole line, by the depth of the phalanx, forward on the 
enemy. Among the first military changes introduced by 
Philip of Macedon, historians mention his having adopted 
the Lacedmonian evolution, for changing the front, in pre- 
ference to that formerly used by his own countrymen. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


107 


displayed the first openings of his illustrious 
character. ‘The day approaching when it be- 
longed to him to assume the successive com- 
mand, he generously yielded his authority® to 
the approved valour and experience of Mil- 
tiades. The other generals followed this mag- 
nanimous example, sacrificing the dictates of 
private ambition to the interest and glory of 
their country ; and the commander in chief thus 
enjoyed an opportunity of exerting, uncon- 
trolled, the utmost vigour of his genius. 

Lest he should be surrounded by a superior 
force, he chose for his camp the declivity of a 
hill, distant about a mile from the encampment 
of the enemy. The intermediate space he 
caused to be strewed in the night with the 
branches and trunks of trees, in order to inter- 
rupt the motion, and break the order of the 
Persian cavalry, which in consequence of this 
precaution seem to have been rendered incapa- 
ble of acting in the engagement. In the morn- 
ing his troops were drawn up in battle array, 
in a long and full line; the bravest of the Athe- 
nians on the right, on the left the warriors of 
Platæa, and in the middle the slaves, who had 
been admitted on this occasion to the honour 
of bearing arms. By weakening his centre, the 
least valuable part, he extended his front equal 
to that of the enemy: his rear was defended 
by the hill above mentioned, which, verging 
round to meet the sea, likewise covered his 
right; his left was flanked by a lake or marsh. 
Datis, although he perceived the skilful dispo- 
sition of the Greeks, was yet too confident in 
the vast superiority of his numbers to decline 
the engagement, especially as he now enjoyed 
an opportunity of deciding the contest before 
the expected auxiliaries -could arrive from Pe- 
loponnesus. When the Athenians saw the 
enemy in motion, they ran down the hill, with 
unusual ardour, to encounter them; a circum- 
stance which proceeded, perhaps, from their 
cagerness to engage, but which must have been 
attended with the good consequence of short- 
ening the time of their exposure to the slings 
and darts of the Barbarians. 

The two armies closed; the battle was rather 
fierce than long. The Persian sword and Scy- 
thian hatchet penetrated, or cut down, the cen- 
tre of the Athenians; but the two 


7 TA wings, which composed the main 
a T strength ofthe Grecian army, broke, 


routed, and put to flight the cor- 
responding divisions of the enemy. Instead 
of pursuing the vanquished, they closed their 
extremities, and attacked the Barbarians who 
had penetrated their centre. The Grecian 
spear overcame all opposition : the bravest of 
the Persians perished in the field ; the remain- 
der were pursued with great slaughter; and 
such was their terror and surprise, that they 
sought for refuge, not in their camp, but in 
their ships. ‘The banished tyrant of Athens 
fell in the engagement: two Athenian gencrals, 


5 Plutarch, in Aristid. tom. ii. p. 489. 

6 There is not any historian, indeed, who makes mention 
of this arrangement, although, by comparing the accounts 
of the havoc made in the centre, with the small number of 
Athenian citizens who were slain, it is evident that tho 
slaves must have been the greatest sufferers in the action, 
and therefore posted, as is said in the'text. 


9 


108 


and about two hundred citizens, were found 
among the slain : the Persians left six thousand 
of their best troops on the scene of action. 
Probably, a still greater number were killed in 
the pursuit. The Greeks followed them to the 
shore; but the lightness of the Barbarian ar- 
mour favoured their escape. Seven ships were 
taken; the rest sailed with a favourable gale, 
doubled the cape of Sunium ; and, after a fruit- 
less attempt to surprise the harbour of Athens, 
returned to the coast of Asia.} 

The loss and disgrace of the Persians on this 
memorable occasion, was compensated by only 
one consolation. They had been defeated in 
the engagement, compelled to abandon their 
camp, and driven ignominiously to their ships ; 
but they carried with them to Asia the Ere- 
trian prisoners, who, in obedience to the orders 
of Darius, were safely conducted to Susa. 
These unhappy men had every reason to dread 
being treated as victims of royal resentment ; 
but when they were conducted in chains to the 
presence of the great king, their reception was 
very different from what their fears naturally 
led them to expect. Whether reflection sug- 
gested to Darius the pleasure which he might 
derive in peace, and the assistance which he 
might receive in war, from the arts and arms 
of the Eretrians, or that a ray of magnanimity 
for once enlightened the soul of a despot, he 
ordered the Greeks to be immediately released 
from captivity, and soon afterwards assigned 
them for their habitation the fertile district 
of Anderica, lying in the province of Cissia, in 
Susiana, at the distance of only forty miles 
from the capital. There the colony remained 
in the time of Herodotus, preserving their Gre- 
cian language and institutions; and after a 
revolution of six centuries, their descendants 
were visited by Apollonius Tyaneus,? the cele- 
brated Pythagorean philosopher, and were still 
distinguished from the surrounding nations by 
the indubitable marks of European extraction. 

When any. disaster befell the Persian arms, 
the great, and once independent, powers of the 
empire were ever ready to revolt. The neces- 
sity of watching the first symptoms of those 
formidable rebellions gradually drew the 
troops of Darius from the coast of Lesser Asia; 
whose inhabitants, delivered from the oppres- 
sion of foreign mercenaries, resumed their 
wonted spirit and activity; and except in pay- 
ing, conjunctly with several neighbouring pro- 
vinces, an annual contribution of about a hun- 
dred thousand pounds, the Asiatic Greeks were 
scarcely subjected to any proof of dependence. 
Disputes concerning the succession to the uni- 
versal empire of the east, the revolt of Egypt, 
and the death of Darius, retarded for ten years 
the resolution formed by that prince, and adopt- 
ed by hisson and successor Xerxes, of restoring 
the lustre of the Persian arms, not only by 
taking vengeance on the pertinacious obstinacy 
of the Athenians, but by effecting the complete 
conquest of Europe.? We shall have occasion 
fully to describe the immense preparations 
which were made for this purpose; but it is 


1 Herodot. 1. vi. c. cxi. et seq. 
2 Philostrat. in Vit. Apollon. 
3 Herodot. l. vii. c. i. et. ti 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[| CuHap. 


necessary first to examine the transactions of 
the Greeks, during the important interval be- 
tween the battle of Marathon and the expedi- 
tion of Xerxes; and to explain the principal 
circumstances which enabled a country, neither 
wealthy nor populous, to resist the most for- 
midable invasion recorded in history. 

The joy excited among the Athenians by a 


victory, Which not only delivered them from: 


the dread of their enemies, but raised them to 
distinguished pre-eminence among their rivals 
and allies, is evident from a remarkable inci- 
dent which happened immediately after the 
battle. As soon as fortune had visibly declared 
in their favour, a soldier was dispatched from the 
army to convey the welcome news to the capital. 
He ran with incredible velocity, and appeared, 
covered with dust and blood, in the presence 
of the senators. Excess of fatigue conspired 
with the transports of enthusiasm to exhaust 
the vigour of his frame. He had only time to 
exclaim, in two words, Rejoice with the victors,* 
and immediately expired. 

It is probable that the same spirit which ani- 
mated this nameless patriot, was speedily dif- 
fused through the whole community; and the 
Athenian institutions were well calculated to 
keep alive the generous ardour which success 
had inspired. Part of the spoil was gratefully 
dedicated to the gods; the remainder was ap- 
propriated as the just reward of merit. The 
obsequies of the dead were celebrated with 
solemn pomp; and according to an ancient and 
sacred custom, their fame was commemorated 
by annual returns of festive magnificence.’ 
The honours bestowed on those who had fallen 
in the field, reflected ‘additional lustre on their 
companions who survived the victory. In ex- 
tensive kingdoms, the praise of successful va- 
lour is weakened by diffusion ; and such too is 
the inequality between the dignity of the gene- 
ral and the meanness of the soldier, that the 
latter can seldom hope to attain, however well 
he may deserve, his just proportion of military 
fame.6 But the Grecian republics were small; 
a perpetual rivalship subsisted among them; 
and when any particular state eclipsed the 
glory of its neighbours, the superiority was 
sensibly felt by every member of the common- 
wealth. 

That pre-eminence, which by the battle of 
Marathon, Athens acquired in Greece, Mil- 
tiades, by his peculiar merit in that battle, at- 
tained in Athens. His valour and conduct 
were celebrated by the artless praises of the 
vulgar, as well as by the more elaborate enco- 
miums of the learned. Before the era of this 
celebrated engagement, tragedy, the unrivalled 
distinction of Athenian literature, had been in- 
vented and cultivated by the successful labours 
of Thespis, Phrynicus, and Æschylus. The 
last, who is justly regarded as the great im- 
prover of the Grecian drama, spl in the 
battle of Marathon the same martial ardour 
which still breathes in his poetry. We may 


4 XziesTts yxiecusy, 


5 Diodor. Sic. |. xi. Herodot. ubi supra. 


6 Plutarch. in Cimon. p. 187. et Æschin. advers. Ctesi- _ 


phont. p. 301. furnish us with examples of the jealousy of 
the Greeks, lest the fame due to their troops in general 
should be engrossed by the commanders. 


y r 


O_O A 


IX.] 


reasonably imagine that he would employ the 
highest flights of his fancy in extolling the 
glory of exploits in which he had himself 
borne so distinguished a part; and particularly 
that he would exert all the powers of his lofty 
genius in celebrating the hero and patriot, 
whose enthusiasm had animated the battle, and 
whose superior talents had insured the victory. 
The name of the conqueror at Marathon re- 
echoed through the spacious theatres of Athens, 
which, though they had not yet acquired that 
solid and durable composition still discernible in 
the ruins of ancient grandeur, were already built 
in a form sufficiently capacious to contain the 
largest proportion of the citizens. The mag- 
nificent encomiums bestowed on Miltiades in 
the presence of his assembled countrymen, by 
whose consenting voice they were repeated 
and approved, fired with emulation the young 
candidates for fame, while they enabled the 
general to obtain that mark of public confi- 
dence and esteem which was the utmost am- 
bition of all the Grecian leaders. 

These leaders, while they remained within 
the territories of their respective states, were 
entrusted (as we already had occasion to ob- 
serve) with only that moderate authority which 
suited the equal condition of freedom. But 
when they were appointed to the command of 
the fleet in foreign parts, they obtained almost 
unlimited power, and might acquire immense 
riches. To this exalted station Miltiades was 
advanced by the general suffrage of his coun- 
try; and having sailed with a fleet of seventy 
gallies, the whole naval strength of the repub- 
lic, he determined to expel the Persian garri- 
sons from the isles of the Augean ; to reduce the 
smaller communities to the obedience of Athens, 
and to subject the more wealthy and powerful 
to heavy contributions. 

The first operations of the Athenian arma- 
ment were crowned with success: several 
islands were subdued, considerable sums of 
money were collected. But the fleet arriving 
before Paros, every thing proved adverse to the 
Athenians. Miltiades, who had received a 
personal injury from Tisagoras, a man of great 
authority in that island, yielded to the dictates 
of private resentment, and confounding the in- 
nocent with the guilty, demanded from the Pa- 
rians the sum of a hundred talents (near twenty 
thousand pounds sterling.) Ifthe money were 
not immediately paid, he threatened to lay 
waste their territory, to burn their city, and to 
teach them by cruel experience the stern rights 
of a conqueror. The exorbitancy of the de- 
mand rendered compliance with it impossible ; 
the Parians prepared for their defence, guided 
however by the motives of a generous despair, 
rather than by any well-grounded hope of re- 
sisting the invaders. For twenty-six days they 
maintained possession of the capital of the 
island Which the Athenians, after ravaging all 
the adjacent country, besieged by sca and land. 
The time now approached when Paros must 
have surrendered to a superior force; but it 
was the good fortune of the islanders that an 
extensive grove, which happened to be set on 
fire in one of the Sporades, was believed by 
the besiegers to indicate the approach of a Per- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


109 


sian fleet. ‘The same opinion gained ground: 
among the Parians, who determined, by their 
utmost efforts, to preserve the place, until they 
should be relieved by the assistance of their 
protectors. Miltiades had received a danger- 
ous wound during the siege; and the weakness 
of his body impairing the faculties of his mind, 
and rendering him too sensible to the impres- 
sions of fear, he gave orders to draw off his 
victorious troops, and returned with the whole 
fleet to Athens. 

His conduct in the present expedition ill 
corresponded to his former fame; and he soon 
experienced the instability of popular favour. 
The Athenian citizens, and particularly the 
more eminent and illustrious, had universally 
their rivals and enemies. The competitions 
for civil offices, or military command, occa- 
sioned eternal animosities among those jealous 
republicans. Xantippus, a person of great dis- 
tinction, and father of the celebrated Pericles, 
who in the succeeding age obtained the first 
rank in the Athenian government, eagerly 
seized an opportunity of depressing the cha- 
racter of a man which had so long overtopped 
that of every competitor. Miltiades was ac- 
cused of being corrupted by a Persian bribe to 
raise the siege of Paros; the precipitancy with 
which he abandoned the place, so unlike to the 
general firmness of his manly behaviour, gave 
a probable colour to the accusation; and the 
continual terror which, ever since the usurpa- 
tion of Pisistratus, the Athenians entertained 
of arbitrary power, disposed them to condemn, 
upon very slight evidence, a man whose abili- 
ties and renown seemed to endanger the safety 
of the commonwealth. The crime laid to his 
charge inferred death, a punishment which his 
accuser insisted ought to be immediately in- 
flicted on him. But his judges were content- 
ed with fining him the sum of fifty talents, 
(near ten thousand pounds sterling,) which 
being unable to pay, he was thrown into pri- 
son, where he soon after died of his wounds. 

But the glory of Miltiades survived him; 
and the Athenians, however unjust to his per- 
son, were not unmindful of his fame. At the 
distance of half a century, when the battle of 
Marathon was painted by order of the state, 
they directed the figure of Miltiades to be 
placed in the fore-ground, animating the troops 
to victory : a reward which, during the virtuous 
simplicity of the ancient commonwealth, con- 
ferred more real honour, than all that magnifi- 
cent profusion of crowns and statues,’ which in 
the later times of the republic were rather ex- 
torted by general fear, than bestowed by pub- 
lic admiration. 

The jealousies, resentments, dangers, and ca- 
lamities, which often attend power and pre- 
eminence, have never yet proved sufficient to 
detcr an ambitious mind from the pursuit of 
greatness. The rivals of Miltiades were ani- 
mated by the glory of his elevation, not de- 
pressed by the example of his fall. His accuser 
Xantippus, though he had acted the principal 
part in removing this favourite of the people, 
was not deemed worthy to succecd him. Two 


7 Æschin. p. 301, et Polybius passim 


110 


candidates appeared for the public confidence 
and esteem, who alternately outstripped each 
other in the race of ambition, and whose cha- 
racters deserve attention even in general his- 
tory, as they had a powerful influence on the 
fortune, not of Athens only, but of all Greece. 

Aristides and Themistocles were nearly of 
the same age, and equally noble, being born in 
the first rank of citizens, though not of royal 
descent, like Solon and Pisistratus, Isagoras 
and Clisthenes, Xantippus and Miltiades, who 
had hitherto successively assumed the chief 
administration of the Athenian republic. Both 
had been named among the generals who com- 
manded in the battle of Marathon. The disin- 
terestcd behaviour of Aristides on this memo- 
rable occasion has been already mentioned. It 
afforded a promise of his future fame. But his 
dawning glories were still eclipsed by the me- 
ridian lustre of Miltiades. After the death of 
this great man, Aristides ought naturally to 
have succeeded to his influence, as he was 
eminently distinguished by valour and mode- 
ration, the two great virtucs of a republican. 
Formed in such schools of moral and political 
knowledge as then flourished in Athens, he had 
learned to prefer glory to pleasure ; the interests 
of his country to his own personal glory ; and 
the dictates of justice and humanity, even to 
the interests of his country. His ambition was 
rather to deserve, than to acquire, the admira- 
tion of his fellow citizens; and while he en- 
joyed the inward satisfaction, he was little 
anxious. about the external rewards of virtue. 
The character of Themistocles was of a more 
doubtful kind. The trophy, which Miltiades 
had raised at Marathon, disturbed his rest. He 
was inflamed with a desire to emulate the glory 
of this exploit; and while he enabled Athens 
to maintain a superiority in Greece, he was 
ambitious to acquire for himself a superiority 
in Athens. His talents were well adapted to 
accomplish both these purposes; eloquent, ac- 
tive, enterprising, he had strengthened his na- 
tural endowments by all the force of education 
and habit. Laws, government, revenue, and 
arms, every branch of political and military 
knowledge, were the great objects of his study. 
In the courts of justice he successfully display- 
ed his abilities in defence of his private friends, 
or in accusing the enemies of the state. He 
was forward to give his opinion upon every 
matter of public deliberation; and his advice, 
founded in wisdom, and supported by elo- 
quence, commonly prevailed in the assem- 
bly. Yet with all these great qualities, his 
mind was less smit with the native charms of 
virtue, than captivated with her splendid orna- 
ments. Glory was the idol which he adored. 
He could injure, without remorse, the general 
cause of the confederacy, in order to promote 
the grandeur of Athens;! and history still 
leaves it as doubtful, as did his own conduct, 
whether, had an opportunity offered, he would 
not have sacrificed the happiness of his country 
to his private interest and ambition. 

The discernment of Aristides perceived the 
danger of allowing a man of such equivocal 


1 Plutarch. in Themistocle et Aristide. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


merit to be entrusted with the sole government 
of the republic; and on this account, rather 
than from any motives of personal animosity, 
he opposed every measure that might contri- 
bute to his elevation. In this patriotic view, he 
frequently solicited the same honours which 
were ambitiously courted by Themistocles, es- 
pecially when no other candidate appeared 
capable of balancing the credit of the latter. A 
rivalship thus began, and long continued be- 
tween them ;? and the whole people of Athens 
could alone decide the much contested pre- 
eminence. The interest of Themistocles so far 
prevailed over the authority of his opponent, 
that he procured his own nomination to the 
command of the fleet; with which he effected 
the conquest of the small islands in the Ægean, 
and thus completed the design undertaken by 
Miltiades. While he acquired fame and fortune 
abroad, Aristides increased his popularity at 
home. The opposition to his power, arising 


from the splendid eloquence and popular man- 


ners of his rival, was now fortunately rernoved, 
and he became the chief leader of the people. 
His opinion gave law to the courts of justice, 
or rather such was the effect of his equity and 
discernment, he alone became sovereign um- 
pire in Athens, In all important differences , 
he was chosen arbitrator, and the ordinary 


judges were deprived of the dignity and ad- 


vantages formerly resulting from their office. 
This consequence of his authority, offending 
the pride of the Athenian magistrates, was 
sufficient to excite their resentment, which, of 
itself, might have effected the ruin of any indi- 
vidual. 

But their views on this occasion 
exit; were powerfully promoted by the 
xıill. 3. . . 

A. C. 486. triumphant return of Themistocles 

from his naval expedition. The 
admiral had acquired considerable riches ; but 
wealth he despised, except as an instrument of 
ambition. The spoils of the conquered islanders 
were profusely lavished in shows, festivals, 
dances, and theatrical entertainments, exhi- 
bited for the public amusement. His generous 
manners and flowing affability were contrasted 
with the stern dignity of his rival; and the re- 
sult of the comparison added great force to his 
insinuation, that, since his own necessary ab- 
sence in the service of the republic, Aristides 
had acquired a degree of influence inconsistent 
with the constitution; and, by arrogating to 
himself a universal and unexampled jurisdic- 
tion in the state, had established a silent ty- 
ranny, Without pomp or guards, over the minds 
of his fellow citizens. Aristides, trusting to 
the innocence and integrity of his own heart, 
disdained to employ any unworthy means, 
either for gaining the favour, or for averting the 
resentment, of the multitude. The contest, 
therefore, ended in his banishment for ten 
years, by a law entitled the Ostracism (from 
the name of the materials? on which votes 
were marked,) by which the majority of the 
Athenian assembly might expel any citizen, 
however inoffensive or meritorious had been 


Olymp. 


2 Plutarch. ibid. Herodot. l. viii. c. xxix. 
3 Ocrexxoy, a shell, 


1X.] 


his past conduct, who, by his present power and 
greatness, seemed capable of disturbing the 
equality of republican government. This sin- 
gular institution, which had been established 
soon aftcr the Athenians lad delivered them- 
selves from the tyranny of Hippias, the son of 
Pisistratus, was evidently intended to prevent 
any person in future from attaining the same 
unlawful authority. At Athens, even virtue 
was proscribed, when it seemed to endanger 
the public freedom; and only four years after 


the battle of Marathon, in which he had dis- 


played equal valour and wisdom, Aristides, the 
justest and most respectable of the Greeks, 
became the victim of popular jealousy ;4 an 
example of cruel rigour, which will for ever 
brand the spirit of democratical policy. 

The banishment of Aristides exposed the 
Athenians still more than formerly to the dan- 
ger which they hoped to avoid by this severe 
measure. The removal of such a formidable 
opponent enabled Themistocles to govern with- 
out control, Army, navy, and revenue, all 
were submitted to his inspection. It happened, 
indeed, most fortunately for the fame of this 
great man, as well as for the liberty of Athens, 
that his active ambition was called to the glo- 
rious task of subduing the enemies of his coun- 
try. The smaller islands in the Ægean werc 
already reduced to obedience, but the posses- 
sion of them was uncertain while the fleet of 
Ægina covered the sea, and bid defiance to 
that of the Athenians. This small island, or 
rather this rock, inhabited time immemorial by 
merchants and pirates, and situate in the Sa- 
ronic gulf, which divides the territories of At- 
tica from the northern shores of Peloponnesus, 
was a formidable enemy to the republic; the 
jealousy of commerce and naval power embit- 
tered their mutual hostility ; and as the inha- 
bitants of gina, who were governed by a few 
leading men, had entered into an alliance with 
the Persians, there was every circumstance 
united which could provoke, to the utmost, the 
hatred and resentment of the Athenians. 

A motive less powerful than the excess of 
republican antipathy, could not probably have 
prevailed on them to embrace the measure 
which they now adopted by the advice of The- 
rnistecles. There was a considerable revenue 
arising from the silver mines of Mount Lau- 
rium, which had been hitherto employed in 
relieving the private wants of the citizens, or 
dissipated in their public amusements. This 
annual income Themistocles persuaded them 
to destine to the useful purpose of building 
ships of war, by which they might seize or de- 
stroy the fleet of Ægina. The proposal was 
approved; a hundred galleys were equipped; 
the naval strength of Ægina was broken, and 
success animated the Athcnians to aspire at 
obtaini ie unrivalled empire of the sea. 
Coneyra foraned the only remaining obstacle to 
their ambition. This island which, under the 
name of Pheeacia, is celebrated by Homer for 
its amazing riches and fertility, had bcen still 
further improved by a colony of Corinthians. 
It extends a hundred miles along the western 


4 Plutarch et Herodot. J. viii. c. Ixxix. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


it 


shores of Epirus; and the natural abundance 
of its productions, the convenience of its har- 
bours, and the adventurous spirit of its new 
inhabitants, gave them an undisputed advan- 
tage over their neighbours, in navigation and 
commerce. They became successively the 
rivals, the enemies, and the superiors of Co- 
rinth, their mother country; and their suc- 
cessful cruisers infested the coasts, and disturb- 
ed the communication of the islands and con- 
tinent of Greece. It belonged to Athens, who 
had so lately punished the perfidy of Ægina, 
to chastise ‘the insolence of the Corcyreans, 
The naval depredations of these islanders 
madesthem be regarded as common enemies; 
and Themistocles, when, by seizing part of 
their flcet, he broke the sinews of their power, 
not only gratificd the ambition of his republic, 
but performed a signal service to the whole 
Gr°cian confedcracy. 

Victorious by sea and land against Greeks 
ana Barbarians, Athens might now seem enti- 
tled to enjoy the fruits of a glorious sccurity. 
It was generally believed in Grecce, that the 
late disaster of the Persians would detcr them 
from invading, a second time, the coasts of 
Europe. But Themistocles, who, in the words 
of a most accomplished historian,® was no less 
sagacious in foresecing the future, than skilful 
in managing the present, regarded the battle 
of Marathon, not as the end of the war, but as 
the prelude to new and morc glorious combats. 
He continually exhorted his fellow citizens to 
keep themselves in readiness for action ; above 
all, to increase, with unremitting assiduity, the 
strength of their fleet; and, in consequence of 
this judicious advice, the Athenians were 
enabled to oppose the immense armaments of 
Xerxes, of which the most formidable tidings 
soon arrived from every quarter, with two hun- 
dred galleys, of a superior size and construction 
to any hitherto known in Greece.’ 

This fleet proved the safety of Greece, and 
prevented a country, from which the know- 
ledge of laws, learning, and civility, was des- 
tined to flow over Europe, from becoming a 
province of the Persian empire, and being con- 
founded with the mass of barbarous nations. 
While the Athenians were led, by the circum- 
stances which we have endeavoured to explain, 
to prepare this useful cngine of defence, the 
other Grecian states afford, in their unimpor- 
tant transactions, few materials for history.8 
The Spartans had long preserved an unrivalled 
ascendant in Pcloponnesus; and their pre- 
eminence was still farther confirmed by the un- 
equal and unfortunate opposition of the Ar- 
gives. Many bloody and desperate cngage- 
ments had been fought bctwcen these warlike 
and high-spirited rivals: but, before the Per- 
sian invasion, the strength of Argos was much 
exhausted by repeated defeats, particularly by 
the destructive battle of Thyra, in which she 
lost six thousand of her bravest citizeus. The 
Spartans also carried on occasional hostilities 


5 Plutarch in Themist. Thucydid. lib. i. Corn. Nopos. in 
Themist. 

6 Thucydides, ibid. 

7 Plato, l. iii. de Leg. 

8 Herod. l. vii. Diodor. l. xi. 


112 


against the Corinthians and Achæans, the 
inhabitants of Elis and Arcadia; and these 
several republics frequently decided their pre- 
tensions in the field; but neither their contests 
with each other, nor their wars with Sparta, 
were attended with any considerable or perma- 
nent effects. Their perpetual hostilities with 
foreign states ought to have given internal 
quiet to the Spartans; yet the jealousy of 
power, or the opposition of character, occasion- 
ed incurable dissension between the two first 
magistrates of the republic, Cleomenes and 
Demaratus. By the intrigues of the former, 
his rival was unjustly deposed from the royai 
dignity. Leotychides, his kinsman and suc- 
cessor in the throne, insulted his misfortunes ; 
and Demaratus, unable to endure contempt in 
a country where he had enjoyed a crown, 
sought for that protection which was denied 
him in Greece, from the power and resentment 
of Persia. Cleomenes soon afterwards died by 
his own hand, after vainly struggling against 
the stings of remorse, which persecuted his un- 
generous treatment of a worthy colleague.! He 
was succeeded by the heroic Leonidas, whose 
death (as shall be related) at Thermopyle, was 
still more illustrious and happy than that of 
Cleomenes was wretched and infamous. Dur- 
ing the domestic disturbances of Sparta, the 
other states of Peloponnesus enjoyed a relaxa- 
tion from the toils of war. The Arcadians and 
Argives tended their flocks, and cultivated their 
soil. Elis was contented with the superin- 
tendence of the Olympic games: the Corin- 
thians increased and abused the wealth which 
they had already acquired by their fortunate 
situation between two seas, and by long con- 
tinuing the centre of the internal commerce of 
Greece. Of the republics beyond the isthmus, 
the Phocians wished to enjoy, in tranquillity, 
the splendour and riches which their whole ter- 
ritory derived from the celebrated temple of 
Delphi. They were frequently disturbed, how- 
ever, by invasions from Thessaly ; the inhabi- 
tants of which, though numerous and warlike, 
yet being situated at the extremity of Greece, 
still continued, like the Etolians, barbarous 
and uncultivated.2 The Thebans maintained 
and extended their usurpations over the smaller 
cities of Beotia, and rejoiced that the ambition 
of the Athenians, directed to the command of 
the sea, and the conquest of distant islands, 
prevented that aspiring people from giving the 
same minute attention as usual to the affairs 
of the continent. The other republics were 
inconsiderable, and commonly followed the for- 
tunes of their more powerful neighbours. The 
Asiatic colonies were reduced under the Per- 
sian yoke ; the Greek establishments in Thrace 
and Macedon paid tribute to Xerxes; but the 
African Greeks bravely maintained their inde- 
pendence ; and the flourishing settlements in 
Italy and Sicily were now acting a part which 
will be explained hereafter, and which rivalled, 
perhaps surpassed, the glory of Athens and 
Sparta in the Persian war.3 


1 Herodot. v. 75. 
2 Thucydid. |. i. 
3 Diodor. }. xi. c. xvi. ot xvii 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


—l et 
nS = 


[Cuar. 
Meanwhile the reduction of re- 
x EA volted provinces had given employ- 


A. C. 481, ment and lustre to the Persian 

co O arms. Nine years after the battle 
of Marathon, and in the fourth year of his 
reign, Xerxes found himself uncontrolled mas- 
ter of the East, and in possession of such a fleet 
and army as flattered him with the hopes of 
universal empire. The three last years of 
Darius were spent in preparing for the Grecian 
expedition. Xerxes, who succeeded to his 
sceptre and to his revenge, dedicated four years 
more to the same hostile purpose. Amidst his 
various wars and pleasures, he took care that 
the artisans of Egypt and Phænicia, as well as 
of all the maritime provinces of Lower Asia, 
should labour, with unremitting diligence, in 
fitting out an armament adequate to the extent 
of his ambition. Twelve hundred ships of 
war, and three thousand ships of burden, were 
at length ready to receive his commands. The 
former were of a larger size and firmer con- 
struction than any hitherto seen in the ancient 
world: they carried on board, at a medium, 
two hundred seamen, and thirty Persians who 
served as marines. The ships of burden con- 
tained, in general, eighty men, fewer being 
found incapable of rowing them. The whole 
amounted to four thousand two hundred ships, 
and about five hundred thousand men, who 
were ordered to rendezvous in the most secure 
roads and harbours of Ionia. We are not 
exactly informed of the number of the land 
forces, which were assembled at Susa. It is 
certain, however, that they were extremely 
numerous, and it is probable that they would 
continually increase on the march from Susa to 
Sardis, by the confluence of many tributary 
nations, to the imperial standard of Xerxes. 

When the army had attained its perfect com- 
plement, we are told that it consisted of seven- 
teen hundred thousand infantry, and four hun- 
dred thousand cavalry; which, joined to the 
fleet above mentioned, made the whole forces 
amount to near two millions of fighting men. 
An immense crowd of women and eunuchs 
followed the camp of an effeminate people. 
These instruments of pleasure and luxury, 
together with the slaves necessary in trans- 
porting the baggage and provisions, equalled, 
perhaps exceeded,* the number of soldiers; so 
that, according to the universal testimony of 
ancient historians, the army of Xerxes appears 
the greatest that was ever collected.5 

But many circumstances serve to prove that 
its strength by no means corresponded to its 
magnitude. The various nations which com- 
posed it, were not divided into regular bodies, 


4 A military friend has favoured me with the actual re- 
turn of an army serving under British officers in the East : 
Officers and troops, - 7 
Servants and followers, - 19,779 
5 Herodot. l. vii. e. Ixxxix. et seq. enters into circum- 
stantial detail of the Persian forces. His a nt is con 
firmed, with less difference than usual in such cases, by 
Lysias Orat. Funeb. Isocrat. Panegyr. Diodor. l. xi. p. 
244. He repeatedly expresses his astonishment at the im- 
mensity of the Barbarian hosts. He appears fully sensible 
of the difficulties with which they had to struggle, in order 
to procure provisions. His account of the Ggecian fleet 
and army is acknowledged to be faithful and exact in the 
highest degree; circumstances which all strongly confirm 
the credibility of his evidence. 


° 


1X.] 


properly disciplined and officered. Their mus- 
ter-roll was taken in a manner that is remark- 
able for its simplicity. Ten thousand men 
were separated from the rest, formed into a 
compact body, and surrounded by a palisade. 
[he whole army passed successively into this 
‘nclosure, and were thus numbered, like cattle, 
without the formality of placing them in ranks, 
or of calling their names. 

Xerxes, having wintered at Sardis, sent am- 
bassadors early in the spring to demand earth 
and water, as a mark of submission, from the 
several Grecian republics. With 


ee: regard to Athens and Sparta, he 
oe ign thought it unnecessary to observe 


this ceremony, as they had treated, 
with the most inhuman cruelty, and in direct 
contradiction to their own laws of war, the mes- 
sengers intrusted with a similar commission by 
his father Darius. The slow march of his im- 
mense army, and, still more, its tedious trans- 
portation across the seas which separate Eu- 
rope and Asia, ill suited the rapid violence of 
his revenge. Xerxes therefore ordered a bridge 
of boats to be raised on the Hellespont, which, 
in the narrowest part, is only seven stadia; or 
seven eighths of a mile in breadth. Here the 
bridge was formed with great labour; but 
whether owing to the awkwardness of its con- 
struction, or to the violence of a succeeding 
tempest, it was no sooner built than destroyed. 
The great king ordered the directors of the 


work to be beheaded ; and, proud of his tyran- 


nic power over feeble man, displayed an impo- 
tent rage against the elements. In all the 
madness of despotism, he commanded the Hel- 
lespont to be punished with three hundred 
stripes, and a pair of fetters to be dropped into 
the sea, adding these frantic and ridiculous ex- 
pressions: “Jt is thus, thou salt and bitter 
water, that thy master punishes thy unprovoked 
injury, and he is determined to pass thy treach- 
erous streams notwithstanding all the insolence 
of thy malice.”6 After this absurd ceremony, 
a new bridge was made of a double range of 
vessels, fixed by strong anchors on both sides, 
and joined together by cables of hemp and 
reed, fastened to immense beams driven into 
the opposite shores. The decks of the ves- 
sels, which exceeded six hundred in number, 
were strewed with trunks of trees and earth, 
and their surface was still further smoothed by 
a covering of planks. The sides were then 
railed with wicker work, to prevent the fear 
and impatience of the horses; and upon this sin- 
gular edifice the main strength of the army pas- 
sed in seven days and nights, from the Asiatic 
city of Abydos to that of Sestus in Europe.’ 
But before this general transportation, a con- 
siderable part of the forces had been already 
sent to the coast of Macedonia, in order to dig 
across the isthmus which joins to that coast the 
high promontory of Athos, The disaster which 
befell the fleet commanded by Mardonius, in 
doubling the cape of this celebrated peninsula, 
was still present to the mind of Xerxes. The 
neck of land, only a mile and a half in breadth, 
was adorned by the Grecian city of Sana; and 


6 Herodot. vii. > 7 Herodot. l. vii.c. Ivi. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


113 


the promontory being rich and fertile, was well 
inhabited by both Greeks and Barbarians. The 
cutting of this narrow isthmus, by a canal of 
sufficient width to allow two gallies to sail 
abreast, was a matter not beyond the power of 
a potentate who commanded the labour of so 
many myriads ;8 but it is observed by Herodo- 
tus, to have been a work of more ostentation 
than utility, as the vessels might, according to 
the custom of the age, have been conveyed 
over land with greater expedition, and with 
less trouble and expense. The eastern work- 
men were in general so extremely unacquaint- 
ed with operations of this kind, that they made 
the opening at the surface of the ground of 
the same breadth with that necessary at the 
bottom of the channel. In order to excite 
their diligence by national emulation, a parti- 
cular portion of the ground was assigned to 
each distinction of people engaged in this un- 
dertaking. The Pheenicians alone, by giving 
a proper width at the top, avoided the inconve- 
nience of submitting to a double labour. In 
performing this, and every other task, the sol- 
diers of Xerxes were kept to their work by 
stripes and blows; a circumstance which gives 
us aS mean an opinion of their spirit and acti- 
vity, as all that has been already related, gives | 
us of their skill and discipline. 

The Persian forces were now safely conduct- 
ed into Europe; and the chief obstacle to the 
easy navigation of their fleet along the coasts 
of Thrace, Macedon, and Thessaly, to the cen- 
tre of the Grecian states, was removed by the 
dividing of mount Athos. Through the fertile 
plains of Lesser Asia the whole army had kept 
in 2 body; but the difficulty of supplies obliged 
them to separate into three divisions in their 
march through the less cultivated countries of 
Europe. Before this separation took place, the 
whole fleet ard army were reviewed by Xerxes, 
near Doriscus, a city of Thrace, at the mouth 
of the river Hebrus. Such an immense collec- 
tion of men assembled in arms, and attended 
with every circumstance of material magnifi- 
cence, gave an opportunity for seeing, or at least 
for supposing, many affecting scenes. The 
ambition of the great king had torn him from 
his palace of Susa, but it could not tear him 
from the objects of his affection, and the minis- 
ters of his pleasure. He was followed by his 
women, and by his flatterers,? and all the ef- 


8 Herodot. l vii. c. xxi. et seq. et Diodor. |. xi. c. ii. It 
is difficult to say, whether we ought most to condemn 
the swelling exaggeration with which Lysias, Tsocrates, 
and other writers, speak of these operations of Xerxes, 
which they call, “navigating the land, and walking the 
sea,” or the impudent incredulity of Juvenal: 
creditur olim - 

Velificatus Athos, et quidquid Grecia mendax, ~ 

Audet in historia; constratum classibus ‘lisdem 

Suppositumque rotis solidum mare. 
Nothing is better fitted to perpetuate error than Wetman 
sentence of a satirist. A line of the same Juvenal has 
branded Ciccro as a bad poet, though that universal literary 
genius left admirable verses bebind him, which have been 
transmitted to modern times. The digging of the canal of 
Athos is supported by the uniform testimony of all anti- 
quity, and might. be credited on the single evidence of Thu- 
cydides (l. iv. c. cix.) the most faithful, accurate, and im- 


partial of all historians, ancient or modern; and who 
himself lived long in the neighbourhood of Athos, where 
he bad an estate, nud was director of the Athenian mines 


in Thrace; as will appear hereafter. 
9 Plato de Legibus, I. ii. p. 536. 


114 


feminate pride of a court was blended with the 
pomp of war. While the great body of the 
army lay every night in the open air, Xerxes 
and his attendants were provided with mag- 
nificent tents. The splendour of his chariots, 
the mettle of his horses, which far excelled the 
swiftest racers of Thessaly, the unexampled 
number of his troops, and above all, the bra- 
very of the immortal band, a body of ten thou- 
sand Persian cavalry, so named because their 
number was constantly maintained from the 
flower of the whole army, seemed sufficient, to 
the admiring crowd, to raise the glory of their 
sovereign above the condition of humanity ; 
especially since, among so many thousands of 
men as passed in review, none could be com- 
pared to Xerxes in strength, in beauty, or in 
stature.! 

But amidst this splendour of external great- 
ness, Xerxes felt himself unhappy. Having 
ascended an eminence to view his camp and 
fleet, his pride was humbled with the reflec- 
tion, that no one of all the innumerable host 
could survive a hundred years. The haughty 
monarch of Asia was melted into tears. The 
conversation of his kinsman and counsellor, 
Artabanus, was ill calculated to console his 
melancholy. That respectable old man, whose 
wisdom had often moderated the youthful ar- 
dour of Xerxes, and who had been as assiduous 
to prevent, as Mardonius had been to promote, 
the Grecian war, took notice that the misery 
of human life was an object far more lamenta- 
ble than its shortness. “In the narrow space 
allotted them, has not every one of these in our 
presence, and indeed the whole human race, 
often wished rather to die than to live? The 
tumult of passions disturbs the best of our days; 
diseases and weakness accompany old age; and 
death so vainly dreaded, is the sure and hos- 
pitable refuge of wretched mortals.” 

Xerxes was not of a disposition steadily to 
contemplate the dictates of experience and the 
maxims of philosophy. He endeavoured to 
divert those gloomy reflections which he could 
not remove, by amusing his fancy with horse- 
races, mock-battles, and other favourite enter- 
tainments. In the intervals of these diversions, 
he sometimes conversed with Demaratus, the 
banished king of Sparta, who, as we have 
already mentioned, had sought refuge in the 
Persian court, from the persecution of his 
countrymen. A memorable interview between 
them is described by Herodotus. The Persian, 
displaying ostentatiously the magnitude of his 
power, asked the royal fugitive, whether he 
suspected the Greeks would yet venture to 
take the field, in order to oppose the progress 
of his arms? Demaratus replied, that if he 
might speak without giving offence, he was of 
opinion that the Persians would meet with a 
very vigorous resistance. “ Greece had been 
trained in the severe, but useful school of ne- 
cessity ; poverty was her nurse and her mother; 
she had acquired patience and valour by the 
early application of disciplme; and she was 
habituated to the practice of virtue by the 

watchful attention of the law. All the Greeks 


1 Herodot. |. vii. c. clxxxiv. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


were warlike, but the Spartans were peculiarly 
brave. It was unnecessary to ask their num- 
ber, for if they exceeded not a thousand men, 
they would defend their country and their free- 
dom against the assembled myriads of Asia.”2 

Xerxes was rather amused than instructed 
by this discourse. His hopes of success seemed 
built on too solid principles to be shaken by the 
opinion of a prejudiced Greek. Every day 
messengers arrived with the submission of new 
nations. The inhabitants of the rocky country 
of Doris, many tribes of Thessaly, the moun- 
taineers of Pindus, Ossa, Pelion, and Olympus, 
which like a lofty rampart surround that 
country, offered the usual present of earth and 
water, as the symbol of surrendering their ter- 
ritories to a power which it seemed vain to re- 
sist. These districts‘formed only the northern 
frontier of Greece. But what gave peculiar 
pleasure to Xerxes, the Thebans who inhabited 
the central parts, and all the cities of Beotia, 
except Thespie and Platæa, privately sent am- 
bassadors to testify their good-will to his cause, 
and to request the honour of his friendship. 

Mean while those Grecians, who, unmoved 
by the terrors of invasion, obeyed the voice of 
liberty and their country, had sent deputies to 
the isthmus of Corinth, to deliberate about the 
common interest. They consisted of representa- 
tives from the several states of Peloponnesus, 
and from the most considerable republics be- 
yond that peninsula. By common consent, 
they suspended their domestic animosities, re- 
called their fugitives, consulted their oracles, 
and despatched ambassadors, in the name of 
united Greece, to demand assistance from the 
islands of Crete, Cyprus, and Corcyra, as well 
as from the Grecian colonies on the coasts of 
Italy and Sicily. All their measures were 
carried on with great appearance of unanimity 
and concord. Even the Thebans, careful to 
conceal their treachery, had sent representa- 
tives to the common council. The general 
danger seemed to unite and harmonize the 
most discordant members; and although the 
perpetual dissensions between rival states fre- 
quently weakened the authority of the Amphic- 
tyonic confederacy, it appeared on the present, 
as on many other occasions, that the Greeks 
acknowledged the obligation of a tacit alliance 
to defend each other against domestic tyrants 
and foreign barbarians. z 

Before they had an opportunity of learning 
the will of the gods, or of discovering the in- 
tentions of their distant allies, ambassadors 
arrived from those communities of Thessaly 
which still adhered to the interest of Greece, 
praying a speedy and effectual assistance to 
guard the narrow passes which lead into their 
country. There is a valley near the coast of 
the Egecan, between the lofty mountains of Ossa 
and Olympus, which afforded the most con- 
venient passage from Macedon into Thessaly. 
This singular spot, commonly called the valley 
of Tempé, is about five miles in length, and, 
where narrowest, scarcely a hundred paces in 
breadth; but is adorned by the hand of nature 
with every object that can gratify the senses or 


2 Iferodot. J. vii. c. cii. et seq. 


w] 


delight the fancy. The gently-flowing Peneus? 
intersects the middle of the plain. Its waters 
are increased by perennial cascades from the 
green mountains, and thus rendered of sufñ- 
cient depth for vessels of considerable burden. 
The rocks are every where planted with vines 
and olives, and the banks of the river, and even 
the river itself, are overshadowed with lofty 
forest trees, which defend those who sail upon 
it from the sun’s meridian ardour. The innu- 
merable grottos and arbours carelessly scat- 
tered over this delightful scene, and watered 
by fountains of peculiar freshness and salubrity, 
invite the weary traveller to repose; while the 
musical warbling of birds conspires with the 
fragrant odour of plants to soothe his senses, 
and to heighten the pleasure which the eye 
and fancy derive from viewing the charming 
variety of this enchanting landscape; from ex- 
amining the happy intermixture of hill and 
dale, wood and water; and from contemplating 
the diversified beauty and majestic grandeur 
of Nature under her most blooming and benc- 
ficent aspects. 

This delicious valley, which an ancient 
writer, by a bold figure of speech, calls “a fes- 
tival for the eyes,” and which the bounty of the 
gods had formed for happy scenes of love, in- 
nocence, and tranquillity, the destructive am- 
bition of man was ready to convert into a field 
of bloodshed and horror. It was natural for the 
Thessalians to expect that the troops of Xerxes 
would pass by this inlet into their territories ; 
and hither their ambassadors entreated the 
allied Greeks to send an army. ‘The proposal 
seemed just and useful; ships wcre prepared 
at the Isthmus; and a body of ten thousand 
men were embarked under the command of 
Themistocles, with orders to sail through the 
narrow Euripus, to land in the harbours of 
Tempé, and to remain there in order to guard 
that important pass. 

They had not continued in those parts many 
days, when a messenger arrived from Alexan- 
der, son of Amyntas, tributary prince of Mace- 
donia, advising them to depart from that post, 
unless they eant to be trodden under foot by 
the Persian cavalry. It is not probable, how- 
ever, that this menace could have changed 
their resolution. But they had already learned 
that there was another passage into Thessaly, 
through the territory of the Perebians, near 
the city Gonnus in Upper Macedonia. Their 
army was insufficient to guard both; and the 
defending of one only, could not be of essential 
advantage to themselves, to the Thessalians, or 
to the common cause. 

Mean time, the dangers which thickened over 
their respective republics, rendered it necessary 
to return southward. Their distant colonics, 
particularly those of Sicily, which were the 
most numerous and powerful, could not afford 
them any assistance, being themselves threat- 


3 I know not why Ovid says, 


Peneus ab imo 
Effusus Pindo spumosis volvitur undis. 
Metam. l. i. ver. 570. 
fElian (from whom the description in the text is taken) 
says, that the Pencus flows 


Dixny eduiou, smooth as oil 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


115 


encd with a formidable invasion from the Car- 
thaginians, the cause and consequences of 
which we shall have occasion fully to explain. 
The oracles were doubtful, or terrifying. To 
the Spartans they announced, as the only 
means of safety, the voluntary death of a king 
of the race of Hercules. The Athenians were 
commanded to seek refuge within their wooden 
walls. The responses given to the other states 
are not particularly recorded; but it appears 
in general, that all were dark, ambiguous, or 
frightful. The Grecian army returned there- 
fore to their ships, repasscd the Euripus, and 
arrived in safety at Corinth; while the Thes- 
salians, thus abandoned by their allies, reluc- 
tantly submitted to the common enemy. 

The terror inspired by the critical situation 
of affairs, rendered the presence of the leaders 
necessary in their respective communities. 
Themistocles found the Athenians divided 
about the meaning of the oracle, the greater 
part asserting, that by wooden walls was un- 
derstood the inclosure of the citadel, which 
had been formerly surrounded by a palisa 
Others gave the words a different constru 1 
and each according to his fears or his interest; 
but Themistocles asserted that all of them had 
mistaken the advice of the god, who desired 
them to trust for safety to their fleet. This 
opinion, supported by all the force of his elo- 
quence, and the weight of his authority, at 
length prevailed in the assembly, although Epi- 
cides, a demagogue of great influence among 
the lower ranks of people, opposed it with the 
utmost vehemence; and seizing this opportu- 
nity to traduce the character of Themistocles, 
insisted that he himself should be appointed 
general in his room. But the prudent Athe- 
nian knew the weakness of his adversary; his 
great passion was avarice; and a seasonable 
bribe immediately silenced his clamorous op- 
position. The Athenian gallies were fitted 
out with all convenient speed, and being joined 
with those of Eubea, Ægina, Corinth, and the 
maritime allies of Peloponnesus, amounted to 
a flect of three hundred sail. They proceeded 
to the narrow sea which divides the northern 
shore of Eubæa from the coast of Thessaly, 
rendezvoused at the promontory of Artemi- 
sium, and patiently expected the arrival of the 
Barbarians. 

Besides the force necessary for manning this 
fleet, the confederates could raise an army of 
about sixty thousand freemen, besides a still 
greater proportion of armed slaves. As the 
passes leading from Thessaly to the territories 
of Phocis and Locris were still narrower and 
more difficult of access than those from Mace- 
don into Thessaly, it seems extraordinary that 
they did not immediately direct their whole 
military strength towards that quarter: but 
this neglect may be explained by thcir super- 
stitious veneration for oracles, the necessity of 
celebrating their accustomed festivals, and the 
dangerous delays and inactivity inherent in the 
nature of a republican confederacy. As they 
were acquainted with only one pass, by which 
the Persians could arrive from Thessaly, they 
thought that a body of eight thousand pike- 
men might be equally capable with a larger 


116 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


proportion of troops, to defend it against every | the most entertaining; for hitherto the Persian 
invader, This narrow defile was called the | expedition was rather a journey of pleasure, 


Straits of Thermopyle, in allusion to the warm 
springs in that neighbourhood, and was deem- 


1 


| 


than an undertaking of fatigue or danger. 
Xerxes examined at leisure such objects of na- 


ed the gate or entrance into Greece. It was ture or art as appeared most interesting and 


bounded on the west by high and inaccessible 
precipices, which join the lofty ridge of mount 
(Eta; and on the east terminated by an imprac- 
ticable morass, bordered by the sea. Near the 
plain of the Thessalian city Trachis, the pas- 
sage was fifty feet broad; but at Alpené, there 
was not room for one chariot to pass another. 
Even these passes were defended by walls, for- 
merly built by the Phocians to protect them 
against the incursions of their enemies in Thes- 
saly, and strengthened, on this occasion, with 
as much care as time would allow. The troops 
sent to Thermopyle, which was only fifteen 
miles distant from the station of the Grecian 
fleet at Artemisium, consisted chiefly of Pelo- 
ponnesians, commanded by Leonidas the Spar- 
tan king, who was prepared, in obedience to 
the oracle, to devote his life for the safety of 


hiscountry. 
fore the Grecian confederates adopted 


e vigorous measures for their own defence, 
the Persian army had marched, in three divi- 
sions, from Thracian Doriscus. They were 
accompanied by the fleet, which coasting about 
two hundred miles along the shores of Thrace, 
Macedon, and Thessaly, at length reached 
Cape Sepias, which is twenty miles north of 
Artemisium. As they advanced southward, 
they laid under contribution Abdera,! Thasus, 
and Eion, the principal Grecian colonies in 
Thrace, as well as the cities of Torona, Olyn- 
thus, Potidæa, and other places of smaller note 
on the coast of Macedonia. The whole fleet 
anchored, after performing the most tedious 
and dangerous part of the voyage, near the en- 
trance of the rivers Axius and Lydius, which 
flow into the Thermaic gulf; and, after quitting 
these harbours, speut eleven days in sailing 
eighty miles, along a smooth unbroken coast, 
from the northern extremity of this gulf to the 
general rendezvous near Cape Sepias. 

The fleet was commanded by Achæmines 
and Areabignes, sons of Darius. Xerxes, in 
person, headed his army, which made a con- 
siderable halt during the march at the Mace- 
donian towns of Therma and Pella, and 
encamped in the Thracian plains on each side 
of the above-mentioned rivers Axius and Ly- 
dius. From hence they proceeded in three 
bodies; the division nearest the shore was 
commanded by Mardonius and Masistes. Ser- 
gis, an experienced general, conducted the 
march through the higher parts of the country; 
and the great king, accompanied by Smerdones 
and Megabyzus, who occasionally relieved him 
from the trouble of command, chose the middle 
passage as the safest, the most convenient, ard 


1 The places on the road prepared not only vast maga- 
zines of corn and other provisions for the troops, but sump- 
tuous entertainments for Xerxes and his attendants. 
saying of Megacreon of Abdera expressed the devouring ra- 
pacity of the invaders: “ That the Abderites ought to 
thank the gods, that Xerxes feasted but once a day; it 
would ruin Abdera te furnish him with both a dinner and a 
supper.” —— 


eee e eee o aai 


en e—a o 


curious. His fancy was amused, as he passed 
the various scenes of superstition, with the le- 
gendary tales carefully related by his con- 
ductors. He viewed, with pleasure, the wide 
plains of Thessaly, which bore indubitable 
marks of being once an extensive lake; and 
contemplated, with wonder, the lofty moun- 
tains which separated that country from the 
rest of Greece, and which evidently appear to 
be rent asunder, and to have received their pre- 
sent form, from the terrible operation of volca- 
nos and earthquakes. After fully satisfying 
his curiosity, he joined, with the division more 
immediately under his command, the remainder 
of the army, assembled and encamped on the 
wide plains of Trachis, about forty miles in cir 
cumference, stretching along the shore of Thes 
saly, opposite to the station of the Persian fleet, 
and adjacent to the Straits of Thermopyle.? 
For more than twelve months, Xerxes had 
never seen the face of an enemy. He had tra- 
versed, without resistance, the wide regions of 
Asia, and the countries which in ancient times 
were deemed most warlike in Europe. All the 
territories beyond Trachis acknowledged his 
power ; and the districts of Greece, which still 
presented a scene of action to his invincible 
arms, were less extensive than the meanest of 
his provinces. Yet it is probable that he heard, 
not without emotion, that an army of Greeks, 
headed by the Spartan king, had taken post at 
Thermopyle, in order to dispute his passage. 
What he had been told by Demaratus con- 
cerning the character and principles of that 
heroic people, he might now, when the danger 
drew near, be the more inclined to believe, 
from the suggestions of his own memory and 
experience. In the warmth of generous indig- 
nation, the Spartans, as we have already ob- 
served, had put to death the Persian heralds, 
sent to demand their submission; but upon 
cool reflection, they were prompted, chiefly in- 
deed by superstitious motives, to make atone- 
ment for a violation of the sacred law of nations. 
When proclamation was made in the assembly, 
“who would die for Sparta?” two citizens, of 
great rank and eminence, offered themselves as 
willing sacrifices for the good of the commu- 
nity. Sperthies and Bulis (for these were their 
names) set out for Susa on this singular errand, 
As they passed through Lesser Asia, they were 
entertained by Hydarnes, the governor of that 
province, who actually accompanied Xerxes, as 


‘commander of the immortal band, to which 


dignity he had been raised on account of his 
superior merit. Hydarnes, among other dis- 
course with the Spartans, testified his surprise, 
that their republic should be so averse to the 
friendship of the king his master, who, he ob- 
served, as they might learn by his own example, 
well understood the value of brave men. That 
if they complied with the desires of Xerxes, he 
would appoint them governors over the other 


2 Herodot. Diodor. Plutarch. ibid. 


1X.] HISTORY OF GREECE. 117 


cities of Greece. The Spartans coolly replied, 
“ That he talked of a matter of which he was 
not a competent judge. With the condition and 
rewards of servitude he was indeed sufficiently 
acquainted; but as to the enjoyments of liberty, 
he had never proved how sweet they were ; for 
if he had once made that experiment he would 
advise them to defend their freedom not only 
with lances, but with hatchets.’’8 

The same magnanimity distinguished their 
behaviour at Susa. The guards told them, 
that, when admitted into the presence of Xerxes, 
they must observe the usual ceremony of pros- 
trating themselves on the ground. But the 
Spartans declared,“ That no degree of violence 
could make them submit to such mean adula- 
tion: that they were not accustomed to adore a 
man, and came not thither for such an impious 
purpose.” They approached Xerxes, there- 
fore, in an erect posture, and told him with 
firmness, they were sent to submit to any pu- 
nishment which he might think proper to inflict 
on them, as an atonement for the death of his 
heralds. Xerxes admiring their virtue, replied, 
“« That he certainly shoula not repeat the error 
of the Greeks,nor, by sacrificing the individuals, 
deliver the state from the guilt of murder and 
impiety.” The Spartans having received this 
answer, returned home, persuaded that they 
had done their duty in offering private satis- 
faction; which, though not accepted, ought 
sufficiently to atone for the public crime. 

The example of these distinguished patriots 
probably gave Xerxes a very favourable idea 
of the general character of their community. 
As he had not any particular quarrel with the 
Spartans, whose opposition, though it could 
not prevent, would certainly retard, his intend- 
ed punishment of Athens, he sent messengers 
to desire them to lay down their arms; to 
which they replied, “ Let him come, and take 
them.” The messengers then offered them 
lands, on condition of their becoming allies to 
the great king: but they answered, “ That it 
was the custom of their republic to conquer 
lands by valour, not to acquire them by trea- 
chery.” Except making these smart replies, 
they took not the smallest notice of the Per- 
sians; but continued to employ themselves as 
before their arrival, contending in the gymnas- 
tic exercises, entertaining themselves with mu- 
sic and conversation, or adjusting their leng 
hair to appear more terrible to their enemies. 
The messengers of Xerxes, equally astonished 
at what they saw and heard, returned to the 
Persian camp, and described the unexpected 
event of their commission, as well as the ex- 
traordinary behaviour of the Spartans; of 
which Xerxes desired an explanation from their 
countryman Demaratus.5 The latter declared 
in general, that their whole carriage and de- 
meanour announced a determined resolution to 
fight to the last extremity; but he found it 
difficult to make the Persian conceive the mo- 
tives of men, who sought, at the certain price 
of their own lives, to purchase immortal 


3 Herodot. l. vii. c. exxxv. 
4 Ibid. l. vii. c. cxxxiv. et seq. 
5 Ibid. c. ecix. et. seq. 


renown for their country.—That a few in- 
dividuals should be animated, on some ex- 
traordinary occasions, with this patriotic mag- 
nanimity, may easily be understood. Of this, 
history in all ages furnishes illustrious ex- 
amples; but that a whole nation should be 
habitually impressed with the same generosity 
of character, cannot readily be believed, without 
reflecting on the institutions and manners of 
the Spartans. The laws of that celebrated 
people prohibiting, as it has been already ob- 
served, the introduction of wealth and luxu- 
ry, and rigidly confining each individual to 
the rank in which he was born, had ex- 
tinguished the great motives of private ambi- 
tion, and left scarcely any other scope to the 
active principles of men, but the glory of pro- 
moting the interests of their republic. Their 
extraordinary military success, the natural fruit 
of their temperance and activity, had given them 
a permanent sense of their superiority in war, 
which it became their chief point of honour to 
Maintain and to confirm; and as the law which 
commanded them to die, rather than break 
their ranks, or abandon their posts in battle, was, 
like all the ordinances of Lycurgus, conceived 
to be of divine authority, the influence of su- 
perstition happily conspired with the ardour of 
patriotism and the enthusiasm of valour, in pre- 
paring them to meet certain death in the ser- 
vice of the public. 

Xerxes could not be made to enter into these 
motives, or to believe, as Herodotus observes 
with inimitable simplicity, “that the Grecians 
were come to Thermopylæ only as men dc- 
sirous to die, and to destroy as many of their 
enemies, as they could, though nothing was 
more true.” He therefore waited four days, 
continually expecting they would either retreat 
into their own country, or surrender their arms, 
agreeably to his message. But as they still 
continued to guard the passage, he ascribed 
this conduct to obstinacy or folly; and on the 
fifth day determined to chastise their insolent 
opposition, 

The Medes and Cissians, who, next to the 
Sace and Persians, formed the bravest part of 
his army, were commanded to attack these ob- 
stinate Greeks, and to bring them alive into 
his presence. The Barbarians marehed with 
confidence to the engagement, but were re- 
pulsed with great slaughter. The places of 
those who fell, were incessantly supplied with 
fresh troops, but they could not make the 
smallest impression on the firm battalions of 
the Greeks; and the great loss which they sus- 
tained in the attempt, proved to all, and par- 
ticularly to the king, that he had indecd many 
men, but few soldiers. The Sace, armed with 
their hatchets, next marched to the attack, but 
without better success; and last of all, the 
chosen band of Persians, headed by Hydarnes, 
deigned to display their valour in what appear- 
ed to them a very unequal contest. But they 
soon changed their opinion when they came to 
close with the enemy; for, says Herodotus, 
their numbers were useless, as they fought in a 
narrow pass, and their short-pointed weapons 


6 Sce above, c. iii. p. 32. 


118 


were ill calculated to contend with the length 
of the Grecian spear. The Greeks had the 
advantage still more in the superiority of their 
discipline, than in the excellence of their ar- 
mour. Tired with destroying, they retreated 
in close order, and when pursued unguardedly 
by the Barbarians, they faced about on a sud- 
den, and killed an incredible number of the 
Persians, with scarcely any loss to themselves. 
Xerxes, who was seated on an eminence to be- 
hold the battle, frequently started in wild emo- 
tion from his throne; and fearing lest he should 
be deprived of the flower of his army, he order- 
ed them to be drawn off from the attack. But 
as the Grecian numbers were so extremely in- 
considerable, and as it seemed probable that 
the greatest part of them must have suffered 
much injury in these repeated assaults, he de- 
“termined next day to renew the engagement. 
Next day he fought without better success than 
before; and after vainly endeavouring to force 
the pass, both in separate bodies, and with the 
collected vigour of their troops, the Persians 
were compeiled to abandon the enterprise, and 
disgracefully to retire to their camp. 

It was a spectacle which the world had never 
seen before, and which it was never again to 
behold, the persevering intrepidity of eight 
thousand men resisting the impetuous fury of 
an army composed of millions. The pertina- 
cious valour of Leonidas, and of his little troop, 
opposed, and might have long retarded, the 
progress of the Barbarians. But it was the 
fate of Greece always to be conquered rather 
by the treachery of false friends, than by the 
force of open enemies. When Xerxes knew 
not what measures to pursue in order to effect 
his purpose, and felt the inconvenience of re- 
maining long in the same quarters with such 
an immense number of men, a perfidious Greek, 
induced by the hopes of reward, offered to re- 
move his difficulties.! The name of the traitor 
was Epialtes, and he was a native of the ob- 
scure district of Meelis, which separates the 
frontiers of Thessaly and Phocis. His expe- 
rience of the country made him acquainted 
with a passage through the mountains of (Eta, 
several miles to the west of that guarded by 
Leonidas. Over this unfrequented path he 
undertook to conduct a body of twenty thou- 
sand Persians, who might assault the enemy in 
rear, while the main body attacked them in 
front. By this means, whatever prodigies of 
valour the Greeks might perform, they must be 
finally compelled to surrender, as they would 
be inclosed on all sides among barren rocks and 
inhospitable deserts. 

The plan so judiciously concerted, was car- 
ried into immediate execution. On the even- 
ing of the seventh day after Xerxes arrived at 
the Straits, twenty thousand chosen men left 
the Persian camp, commanded by Hydarnes, 
and conducted by Epialtes. All night they 
marched through the thick forests of oak which 
abound in those parts; and by day-break they 
had advanced near to the top of the hill. But 
how much were they surprised to see the first 
rays of the morning reflected by the glittering 


1 Herodot. l. vii: c. cexii. et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


[Caar, 


surfaces of Grecian spears and helmets! Hy- 
darnes was afraid that this guard, which seem- 


-ed at no great distance, had been also composed 


of Lacedæmonians; but a nearer approach 
showed that they consisted of a thousand Pho- 
cians, whom the foresight of Leonidas had sent 
to defend this important but unknown pass, 
which chance or treachery might discover to 
the Persians. The thick shade of the trees 
long concealed the enemy from the Greeks; at 
length the rustling of the leaves, and the tu- 
mult occasioned by the motion of twenty thou- 
sand men, discovered the imminence of danger, 
the Phocians, with great intrepidity flew to 
their arms, and prepared, if they should not 
conquer, at least to die gallantly. The com- 
pact firmness of their ranks, which might have 
resisted the regular onset of the enemy,exposed 
them to suffer much from the immense shower 
of darts which the Persians poured upon them. 
To avoid this danger, they too rashly abandon- 
ed the pass which they had been sent to guard, 
and retired to the most elevated part of the 
mountain, not doubting that the enemy, whose 
strength so much exceeded ‘their own, would 
follow them thither. But in this they were 
disappointed ; for the Persians prudently omit- 
ting the pursuit of this inconsiderable party, 
whom to defeat they considered as a matter of 
little moment, immediately seized the passage, 
and marched down the mountain with the ut- 
most expedition, in order to accomplish the de- 
sign suggested by Epialtes. 

Mean while obscure intimations from the 
gods had darkly announced some dreadful 
calamity impending on the Greeks at Ther- 
mopyle. The appearance of the entrails, 
which were carefully inspected by the augur 
Magistias, threatened the Spartans with death ; 
but when, or by what means, it did not clearly 
appear, until a Grecian deserter, a native of the 
city of Cymé, in Ionia, named Tyrastiades, arri- 
ved with information of the intended march of 
the Persians across the mountain. Animated by 
the love of his country, this generous fugitive 
had no sooner discovered the treacherous de- 
sign of Epialtes, than he determined, at the risk 
of his life, and still more at the risk of being 
subjected to the most excruciating tortures, to 
communicate his discovery to the Spartan king 2 
Zeal for the safety of Greece gave swiftness to 
his steps, and he appeared in the Grecian camp 
a few hours after the Persians, conducted by 
Epialtes, had left the plains of Trachis. Le- 
onidas immediately called a council of war, to 
deliberate upon the measures necessary to be 
taken in consequence of this information, 
equally important and alarming. All the con- 
federates of Peloponnesus, except the Spartans, 
declared their opinion, that it was necessary to 
abandon a post, which, after the double attack 
announced to them should take place, it would 
be impossible with any hopes of success to 
maintain. As their exertions could not be of 
any avail to the public cause, it was prudent to 
consult their private safety; and while time 
was yet allowed them, to retire to the isthmus 
of Corinth, where, joining the rest of the auxi- 


O o OMH 
2 Herodot. l. vii. c. ccxix. et seq. 


1X.] ` 


liaries, they might be ready to defend the Gre- 
cian peninsula against the fury of the Barba- 
rians. It belonged to Leonidas to explain the 
sentiments of the Spartans. The other in- 
habitants cf Peloponnesus, he observed, might 
follow the dictates of expediency, and return 
to the isthmus, in order to defend their respec- 
tive territories; but glory was the only voice 
which the Spartans had learned to obey. 
Placed in the first rank by the general consent 
of their country, they would rather die than 
abandon that post of honour; and they were 
determined, therefore, at the price of their lives, 
to purchase immortal renown, to confirm the 
pre-eminence of Sparta, and to give an exam- 
ple of patriotism, worthy of being admired, if 
it should not be imitated, by posterity. ° 
The dread of unavoidable and immediate 
death deterred the other allies from concurring 
with this magnanimous resolution. The Thes- 
pians alone, amounting to seven hundred men, 
declared they would never forsake Leonidas. 
They were conducted by tlie aged wisdom of 
Demophilus, and the youthful valour of Dithy- 
rambus. Their republic was united in the 
strictest alliance with Sparta, by which they 
had often been defended against the usurpa- 
tion and tyranny of the Thebans. These cir- 
cumstances added force to their natural gene- 
“osity of sentiment, and determined them, on 
this occasion, to adhere with steadfast intre- 
pidity to the measures of their Spartan allies. 
As the Thespians remained at Thermopylæ, 
from inclination, and from principles of distin- 
guished bravery, the Thebans were detained 
by the particular desire of Leonidas, who was 
not unacquainted with the intended treachery 
of their republic. The four hundred men 
whom that perfidious community had sent to 
accompany his expedition, he regarded rather 
as hostages than auxiliaries; nor was he un- 
willing to employ their doubtful fidelity in a 
desperate service. He thought that they 
might be compelled by force, or stimulated by 
a sense of shame, to encounter the same dan- 
gers to which the Spartans and Thespians 
voluntarily submitted; and without discover- 
ing his suspicion of their treachery, he had a 
sufficient pretence for retaining them, while he 
dismissed his allies of Peloponnesus, because 
he Theban territories, lying on the north side 
of the isthmus of Corinth, would necessarily 
be exposed to hostility and devastation, when- 
ever the Barbarians should pass the straits of 
Thermopylæ. Besides the Thespians? and 
Thebans, the troops who remained with Leoni- 
das, consisted of three hundred Spartans, all 
chosen men, and fathers of sons. This valiant 
band, with unanimous conseut, solicited their 
general to dedicate to the glory of Greece, and 
their own, the important interval yet allowed 


3 From the narrative of Herodotus, it would seem that 
the Thespians alone voluntarily remained with Leonidas 
and the Spartans. Yet the inscription which lie cites 
makes the whole number who fought at Thermopylæ, 
ainount to four thousand. 


Mugizorsy wore TyO8 TEIKLOTIRIG EME ZOVTO 
Ex TleAowovvyrov xtAsndes weToees. 


Isocrates likewise (p. 164.) says, that some Pcloponnesians 
remained to fight. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


119 


them, before they were surrounded by the Per 
sians. The ardour of Leonidas happily con- 
spired with the ready zeal of the soldiers. He 
therefore commanded them to prepare the last 
meal of their lives, and to sup like men who 
should to-morrow dine in Elysium. His own 
example confirmed the propriety of the com- 
mand, for he took an abundant repast, in order 
to furnish strength and spirits for a long con- 
tinuance of toil and danger. 

It was now the dead of night, when the 
Spartans, headed by Leonidas, marched in a 
close battalion towards the Persian camp, with 
resentment heightened by despair.4 Their fury 
was terrible; and rendered still more destruc- 
tive through the defect of Barbarian discipline ; 
for the Persians having neither advanced 
guards, nor a watch-word, nor confidence in 
each other, were incapable of adopting such 
measures for defence as the sudden emergency 
required. Many fell by the Grecian spear, 
but much greater multitudes by the mistaken 
rage of their own troops, by whom, in the 
midst of this blind confusion, they could not 
be distinguished from enemies. The Greeks, 
wearied with slaughter, penetrated to the royal 
pavilion; but there the first alarm of noise had 
been readily perceived, amidst the profound 
silence and tranquillity which usually reigned 
in the tent of Xerxes; the great king had im- 
mediately escaped, with his favourite attend- 
ants, to the farther extremity of the encamp- 
ment. Even there, all was tumult, and horror, 
and despair; the obscurity of night increasing 
the terror of the Persians, who no longer doubt- 
ed that the detachment conducted by Epialtes 
had been betrayed by that perfidious Greek ; 
and that the enemy, reinforced by new num- 
bers, now co-operated with the traitor, and 
scized the opportunity of assailing their camp, 
after it had been deprived of the division of 
Hydarnes, its principal ornament and defence. 

The approach of day discovered to the Per- 
sians a dreadful scene of carnage; but it also 
discovered to them that their fears had multi- 
plied the number of the enemy, who now re- 
treated in close order to the straits of Ther- 
mopyle. Xerxes, stimulated by the fury of 
revenge, gave orders to pursue them; and his: 
terrified troops were rather driven than led to 
the attack, by the officers who marched behind 
the several divisions, and compelled them to 
advance by menaces, stripes, and blows. The 
Grecians, animated by their late success, and 
persuaded that they could not possibly escape 
death on the arrival of those who approached 
by way of the mountain, bravely halted in the 
widest part of the pass, to receive the charge 
of the enemy. The shock was dreadful, and 
the battle was maintained on the side of the 
Greeks with persevering intrepidity and despe- 
rate valour. After their spears were blunted 
or broken, they attacked sword in hand, and 


4 Diodor. l. xi. p. 247. The nocturnal assault, omitted 
by Tlerodetus, is mentioned uot only by Diodorus, but by 
Plutarch, Justin, and most other writers. ‘The general 
panegyric of Plato (in Menex.) of T.ysias (Orat. Funceb.) 
and of [socrates (Panegyr.) required not their descending 
into such particulars. Yet, notwithstanding these circum- 
stances, I should have omitted this incident, if it had ap- 
peared inconsistent with the honest narrative of Herodotus 


120 


their short, but massy and well-tempered wea- 
pons, made an incredible havoc. Their pro- 
gress was marked by a line of blood, when a 
Barbarian dart pierced the heart of Leonidas. 
The contest was no longer for victory and 
glory, but for the sacred remains of their king. 
Four times they dispelled the thickest globes 
of Persians; but as their unexampled valour 
was carrying off the inestimable prize, the 
hostile battalions were seen descending the hill, 
under the conduct of Epialtes. It was now 
time to: prepare for the last effort of generous 
despair. With close order and resolute minds, 
the Greeks, all collected in themselves, re- 
tired to the narrowest part of the strait, and 
took post behind the Phocian wall, on a rising 
ground, where a lion of stone was afterwards 
erected in honour of Leonidas. As they per- 
formed this movement, fortune, willing to 
afford every occasion to display thvir illustrious 
merit, obliged them to contend at once against 
open force and secret treachery. The The- 
bans, whom fear had hitherto restrained from 
defection, seized the present opportunity to 
revolt; and approaching the Persians with out- 
stretched arms, declared that they had always 
been their friends; that ikeir republic had sent 
earth and water, as an acknowledgment of 
their submission to Xerxes; and that it was 
with the utmost reluctance they had been com- 
pelled by necessity to resist the progress of his 
arms. As they approached to surrender them- 
selves, many perished by the darts of the Bar- 
barians; the remainder saved a perishing life, 
by submitting to eternal infamy. Meanwhile 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


the Lacedemonians and Thespians were as- 
saulted on allsides. The nearest of the enemy 
beat down the wall, and entered by the breach- 
es. Their temerity was punished by instant 
death. In this last struggle every Grecian 
showed the most heroic courage; yet if we. 
believe the unanimous report of some Thes- 
salians, and others who survived the engage- 
ment, the Spartan Dioneces deserved the prize 
of valour. When it was observed to him, that 
the Persian arrows were so numerous, that they 
intercepted the light of the sun, he said it was 
a favourable circumstance, because the Greeks 
now fought in the shade. The brothers Al- 
pheus and Maron are likewise particularized 
for their generous contempt of death, and for 
their- distinguished valour and activity in the 
service of their country. What these, and 
other virtues, could accomplish, the Greeks, 
both as individuals, and in a body, had already 
performed ; but it became impossible for them 
longer to resist the impetuosity and weight of 
the darts, and arrows, and other missile wea- 
pons, which were continually poured upon 
them; and they were finally not destroyed or 
conquered, but buried under a trophy of Per- 
sian arms. Two monuments were afterwards 
erected near the spot where they fell; the in- - 
scription of the first announced the valour of 
a handful of Greeks,! who had resisted three 
millions of Barbarians; the second was pecu- 
liar to the Spartans, and contained these me- 
mcorable words: “ Go, stranger, and declare to 
the Lacedemonians, that we died here in obe- 
dience to their divine laws.’’? 


CHAPTER X. 


Sea Fight off Artemisium—Xerxes ravages Phocis— Enters Attica—Magnanimity of the Athe- 
nians—Sea Fight off Salamis—Xerzes leaves Greece—His miserable Retreat—Campaign of 
Mardonius—Battles of Plætæa and Mycalé—Issue of the Persian Invasion. 


JURIN G the military operations at Ther- 

mopylæ, the Grecian fleet was stationed 
in the harbour of Artemisium, the northern 
promontory of Eubæa. That of the Persians, 
too numerous for any harbour to contain, had 
anchored in the road that extends between the 
city of Castanæa and the promontory of Se- 
pias, on the coast of Thessaly. Here tlis for- 
midable armada suffered the calamities foretold 
by the wisdom of Artabanus. In a conversa- 
tion with Xerxes, that prudent old man had 
warned him against two enemies, the sea and 


1 Isocrates, p. 164. makes the Spartans who fought at 
Thermopylæ amount to one thousand. Diodorus, l. xi. p. 
410. agrees with Herodotus, whose narrative is followed in 
the text. According to the most probable accounts, the 
Thespians were twice as numerous as the Spartans; al- 
though the latter have carried away all the glory of this 
singular exploit. 

QO Eeives yy ytihov AnxeSuspoviots ore Ty dE 

Krips rose xstvwv eypexos wesSouevos, 
Herodot. c. exxviii. 


the land, from whom his own rash inexpe- 
rience seemed not to apprehend any danger. 
Yet both these enemies occasioned dreadful 
misfortunes to the Persians, whose numbers 
first exposed them to be destroyed at sea by a 
tempest, and afterwards to perish on land by a 
famine. The first line of their fleet was shel- 
tered by the coast of Thessaly; but the other 
lines, to the number of seven, rode at anchor, 
at small intervals, with the prows of the ves- 
sels turned tothe sea. When they adopted this 
arrangement, the waters were smooth, the sky 
clear, the weather calm and serene; but on the 
morning of the second day after their arrival 
on the coast, the sky began to lower, and the 
appearance of the heavens grew threatening 
and terrible. A dreadful storm of rain and 
thunder succeeded; and, what was more alarm- 
ing, the billows began to rise to an amazing 
height, occasioned by a violent Helespontin, or 
northeast wind, which, when it once begins to 


X.] 


blow in those seas with any considerable force, 
seldom seases for several days. The nearest 
vessels were saved by hauling under the shore : 
of the more remote many were driven from 
their anchors; some foundered at sea, others 
split on the promontory.of Sepias, and several 
bulged on tiie shallows of Melibæa. Three 
days the tempest raged with unabating fury. 
Four hundred galleys were destroyed by its 
violence, besides such a number of storeships 
and transports, that the Persian commanders, 
suspecting this disaster might occasion the re- 
volt of the Thessalians, fortified themselves 
with a rampart of considerable height, entirely 
composed of the shattered fragments of the 
wreck. 

This bulwark was sufficient to protect them 
against the irruptions of the Greeks; but it 
could not defend them against the more dan- 
gerous fury of the waves. In a short time, 
therefore, they quitted their insecure station at 
Sepias, and with eight hundred ships of war, 
besides innumerable vessels of burden, sailed 
into the Pegasian bay, and anchored in the 
road of Apheté, which, at the distance of a few 
miles, lies directly opposite to the harbour of 
Artemisium. 

The Grecians had posted sentinels on the 
heights of Eubcea to observe the consequences 
of the storm, and to watch the motions of the 
enemy. When informed of the dreadful disas- 
ter which had befallen them, they poured out 
a joyous libation, and sacrificed, with pious 
gratitude, to “ Neptune the deliverer ;” but the 
near approach of such a superior force soon 
damped their transports of religious festivity. 
Neptune had favoured them in the storm, yet 
he might assist their enemies in the engage- 
ment. In the council of war, called to deli- 
berate on this important subject, it was the 
general opinion of the commanders, that they 
ought immediately to retire southward. The 
Eubeans, whose coasts must have thus been 
abandoned to the fury of invaders, were pecu- 
liarly interested in opposing this pusillanimous 
resolution. The passage into the continent of 
Greece, they observed, was still guarded by the 
magnanimity of Leonidas, and the bravery of 
the Spartans. Following this generous ex- 
ample, the Grecian fleet, however inferior in 
strength, ought to resist the Persians, and to 
protect the estates and families of a rich and 
populous island.4 This remonstranee had not 
any effect on the determined purpose of Euri- 
biades the Spartan, who, on account of the 
ancient pre-eminence of his republic, was en- 
trusted with the command of the fleet; an 
honour rather due to the personal merit of 
Themistocles, and the naval superiority of 
Athens. 

To the Athenian commander the Eubcans 
secretly applied, and, by a present of thirty 
talents, engaged him to use his influence to re- 
tain the Grecian armament for the defence of 
their coasts. Themistocles was well pleased 
at being bribed into a measure which his good 
sense and discernment approved. By a proper 


3 Herodot. l. vii. c. clxxxviii. et seq. Diodor. Sicul. I. xi. 
c. xii. 
4 Herodot. |. viii. c. ii. et seq. ‘ 


Q 


r] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


121 


distribution of only eight talents, he brought 
over the other captains to his opinion, and thus 
effectually promoted the interest, aud secured 
the good will, of the Eubæans, while he retain- 
ed for himself an immense sum of money, 
which might be usefully employed, on many 
future occasions, in fixing, bhy largesses and 
expensive exhibitions, the fluctuating favour 
of his fellow citizens. 

Meanwhile the Persians, having recovered 
from the terrors of the storm, prepared for the 
engagement. As they entertained not the 
smallest doubt of victory, they determined not 
to begin the attack, until they had sent two 
hundred of their best sailing vessels around the 
isle of Eubea, to intercept the expected flight 
of the enemy through the narrow Euripus. In 
order to conceal this design, they ordered the 
detached ships to stand out to sea until they 
lost sight of the eastern coast of Eubea, sailing 
behind the little island of Sciathus, and after- 
wards shaping their course by the promonto- 
ries of Caphaneus and Gerestus. The strata- 
gem, concerted with more than usual prudence, 
was, however, discovered to the Greeks by 
Scyllias, a native of Scioné, now serving in the 
Persian fleet, but who had long languished for 
an opportunity of deserting to his countrymen, 
While the attention of the Barbarians was em- 
ployed in the preparations necessary for their 
new arrangement, Scyllias availed himself of 
his dexterity in diving, to swim, unperceived, 
to a boat which had been prepared at a suff- 
cient distance, in which he fortunately escaped 
to Artemisium. He immediately gained ad- 
mittance to the Grecian council, where the 
boldness of his enterprise gave persuasion to 
his words. In consequence of lis seasonable 
and important information, the Greeks deter- 
mined to continue till midnight in the harbour, 
and then weighing anchor, to sail in quest of 
the fleet which had been sent out to prevent 
their escape. But this stratagem, by which 
they would have met the art of the enemy 
with similar address, was not carried into exe- 
cution. The advice boats, which had been im- 
mediately despatched to observe the progress 
of the Persians, returned before evening, with- 
out having seen any ships approaching in that 
direction. 

This intelligence was welcome to the Greeks, 
who were unwilling, without evident necessity, 
to abandon their present situation. The enemy, 
who liad lately suffered so severely in the 
storm, were now further weakened by a consi- 
derable diminution of their fleet. The strength 
of the adverse parties being thus reduced nearer 
to an equality, the weaker seized the opportu- 
nity to display their courage in fight, and their 
superior skill in naval action. About sunset 
they approached ina line, and offered battle to 
the Persians. The latter did not decline the 
engagement, as their ships were still sufficiently 
numerous to surround those of their opponents, 
At the first signal the Greeks formed into a 
circle, at the second they began the fight. 
Though crowded into a narrow compass, and 
having the enemy on every side, they soon 
took thirty of their ships, and sunk many more. 


| Night came on, accompanied with an impetu- 


122 


ous storm of rain and thunder; the Greeks 
retired into the harbour of Artemisium ; the 
enemy were driven to the coast of Thessaly. 
As the wind blew from the south, the dead 
bodies and wrecks dashed with violence against 
the sides of their ships, and disturbed the mo- 
tion of their oars. The Barbarians were seized 
with consternation and despair; for scarcely 
had they time to breathe, after the former 
storm and shipwreck near Mount Pelion, when 
they were compelled to a dangerous sea-fight ; 
after darkness put an end to the- battle, they 
were again involved in the gloom and horrors 
of a nocturnal tempest. By good fortune, 
rather than by design, the greatest part of the 
fleet escaped immediate destruction, and gain- 
ed the Pegasean bay. Their calamities were 
great and unexpected; but the ships ordered to 
sail round Eubea met with a still more dread- 
ful disaster. They were overtaken by the 
storm, after they had adventured further from 
the shore than was usual with the wary mari- 
ners of antiquity. Clouds soon intercepted the 
stars, by which alone they directed their course. 
They were driven they knew not whither by 
the force of the winds, or impelled by the im- 
petuosity of currents. In addition to these 
misfortunes, they were terrified by the thunder, 
and overwhelmed by the deluge; and after 
continuing during the greatest part of the night, 
the sport of the elements, they all perished! 
miserably amidst the shoals and rocks of an 
unknown coast. 

The morning arose with different prospects 
and hopes to the Persians and Greeks. To the 
former it discovered the extent of their misfor- 
tunes; to the latter it brought a reinforcement 
of fifty-three Athenian ships. Encouraged by 
this favourable circumstance, they determined 
again to attack the enemy, at the same hour as 
on the preceding day, because their knowledge 
of the coast, and their skill in fighting their 
ships, rendered the dusk peculiarly propitious 
to their designs. At the appointed time, they 
sailed towards the road of Apheté, and having 
cut off the Cilician squadron from the rest, 
totally destroyed it;and returned at night to 
Artemisium. l 

The Persian commanders being deeply affect- 
ed with their repeated disasters, but still more 
alarmed at the much dreaded resentment of 
their king, they determined to make one vjgor- 
ous effort, for restoring the glory of their arms. 
By art and stratagem, and under favour of the 
night, the Greeks had hitherto gained many 
important advantages. It now belonged to the 
Persians to choose the time for action. On the 
third day at noon, they sailed forth in the form 
of a crescent, which was still sufficiently exten- 
sive to infold the Grecian line. The Greeks, 
animated by former success, were averse to 
decline any offer of battle; yet it is probable 
that their admirals, and particularly Themis- 
tocles, would much rather have delayed it to a 
more favourable opportunity. Rage, resent- 
ment, and indignation, supplied the defect of 
the Barbarians in skill and courage. The bat- 
tle was longer, and more doubtful, than on any 


—= 


1 Herodot. l. viii. c. xiii. Diodor. l. xi. c. xiii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


z 


[Cuap. 


former occasion; many Grecian vessels were 
destroyed, five were taken by the Egyptians, 
who particularly signalized themselves on the 
side of the Barbarians, as the Athenians did on 
that of the Greeks. The persevering valour of 
the latter at length prevailed, the enemy re- 
tiring, aud acknowledging their superiority, by 
leaving them in possession of the dead and the 
wreck. But the victory cost them dear ; since 
their vessels, particularly those of the Athe- 
nians, were reduced to a very shattered condi- 
tion ; and their great inferiority in the number 
and size of their ships, made them feel more 
sensibly every diminution of strength. 

This circumstance was sufficient to make 
them think of retiring (while they might yet 
retire in safety) to the shores of the Corinthian 
Isthmus. The inclination to this measure re- 
ceived additional force from considering, that 
the Persians, however unfortunate by sea, had 
still an immense army; whereas the principal 
hope of Greece centered in its fleet. While the 
commanders were occupied with these reflec- 
tions, Abronycus, an Athenian, who had been 
entrusted with a galley of thirty oars, to cruise 
in the Malian bay, and to watch the event of 
the battle of Thermopylæ, arrived with an ac- 
count of the glorious death of Leonidas. The 
engagements by sea and land had been fought 


on the same day. In both the Greeks defended 


a narrow pass, against a superior power; and 
in both the Persians had, with very different 
success, attempted, by surrounding, to conquer 
them. The intelligence brought by Abronycus 
confirmed their resolution of sailing southward; 
for it seemed of very little importance to de- 
fend the shores, after the enemy had obtained 
possession of the centre of the northern territo- 
ries. Having passed the narrow Euripus, they 
coasted along the shore of Attica, and anchored 
in the sirait of the Saronic Gulf, which sepa- 
rates the island of Salamis from the harbours 
of Athens.? 

Before they left Artemisium, Themistocles, 
ever watchful to promote the interest of his 
country, endeavoured to alienate? from the 
great king the affections of his bravest auxilia- 
ries. Contrary tothe advice of the prudent 
Artabanus, Xerxes had conducted the Asiatic 
Greeks to an unnatural expedition against their 
mother-country. His wise kinsman in vain 
persuaded him to send them back, because it 
appeared equally dishonourable and dangerous 
to depend on the service of men, which could 
only be employed in his favour at the expense 
of every principle of duty, and of every senti- 
ment of virtue, By hope and fear, by threats 
and promises, and chiefly by honouring them 
with marks of distinguished preference, Xerxes 
had hitherto preserved their reluctant fidelity. 
In order at once to destroy a connection, which 
of its own accord seemed ready to dissolve. 
Themistocles engraved on the rocks, near the 
watering-place of Artemisium, the following 
words: “ Men of Ionia, your conduct is most 
unjust in fighting against your ancestors, and 
in attempting to enslave Greece; resolve, there- 
fore, while it is yet in your power, to repair the 


2 Herodot. l. viii. c. xxi. 3 Ibid. c. xxii. 


X] 


injury.—If you cannot immediately desert from 
the Persian fleet, yet it will be easy for you to | 
accomplish this design when we comc to an 
engagement. You ought to remember, that 
yourselves gave occasion to the quarrel be- 
tween us and the Barbarians; and further, that 
the same duties which children owe to their 
parents, colonies owe to their mother-country.””4 

When news arrived that the Grecian fleet 
had abandoned Artemisium, Xerxes regarded 
this retreat of the enemy as equal to a victory. 
He therefore issucd orders, that his naval force, | 
after ravaging the coasts of Eubea, should pro- | 
ceed to take possession of the harbours of 
Athens; while, at the head of his irresistible 
army, he intended to make a victorious pro- 
cession, rather than a march, into the Attic ter- 
ritory. The road thither from Thermopylæ 
passed through the countries of Phocis and 
Beotia, the latter of which had already ac- 
-Anowledged his authority. Thc Phocians ad- 
hered to the cause of Greece; and were still 
further confirmed in their allegiance, after the 
Thessalians, their inveterate enemics, had em- 
braced the party of Xerxes, Such were the 
violent animosities which divided these hostile 
states, that, in the opinion of Herodotus, which- 
ever side the Thessalians had taken, the Pho- 
cians would still have opposed them. He 
might perhaps have extended the observation 
to the other principal republics. The enthu- 
siasm of Athens and Sparta in defending the | 
cause of Greece, rendered the rival states of | 
Thebes and Argos zealous in the service of | 
Persia; and it is to be remembered, to the im- | 
mortal glory of the friends of liberty and their | 
country, that they had to struggle with domcs- 
tic sedition, while they opposed and defeated a 
foreign invasion. 

Having entered the territory of Phocis, the 
Persian army separated into two divisions, with 
a view to obtain more plentiful supplies of the 
necessaries of life, and to destroy more com- 
pletely the possessions of their cnemies. The 
most numerous division followed the course of 
the river Cephissus, which flows from the Thes- 
salian mountains, to the lake Copais in Beeotia. | 
The fertile banks of the Cephissus were adorn- 
ed by Charadra, Neon, Elatæa, and other 
populous cities, all of which were burned or 
demolished by the fury of Xerxes, and the re- 
scntment of thc Thessalians. Historians par- 
ticularly regret the destruction of the sacred | 
walls of Abé, a city held in peculiar respect on 
account of the temple of Apollo, famcd for its 
unerring oracles, and enriched from the earliest 
times by the pious donations of superstition. 
The inhabitants had in general abandoned their 
towns, and taken refuge in the most inaccessible 
retreats of mount Parnassus. But the natives 
of Abé, vainly confiding for safety in the sanc- 
tity of the place, became a prey to an undis- 
tinguishing rage, which cqually disregarded 
things sacred and profane. The men perished 
by the sword, the women by the brutal lust of 
the Barbarians. 


4 This sentimentie the dictate of nature, and occurs often | 
in the Roman as well as the Greek writers. “ Que liberi 
parentibus ea coloni antique patriw debent.” T. Livius. | 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


123 


After committing these dreadful ravages, the 
principal division of the army marched into 
Bæotia,by the way of Orchomenus. The smaller 
part (if either portion of such an immense host 
may be distinguished by that epithet) stretched 
to the right, along the western skirts of mount 
Parnassus, and traced a line of devastation 
from the banks of the Cephissus to the temple of 
Delphi. Such was the fame of the immense 
riches collected in this sacred edifice, that 
Xerxes is said to have been as well acquainted 
with their amount as with that of his own 
treasury; and, to believe the adulation of his 
followers, he alone was worthy to possess that 
invaluable depository. The Delphians having 
learned, by the unhappy fate of Abé, that their 
rcligious employment could not afford protec- 
tion, either to their property or to their persons, 
consulted the oracle, © Whether they should 
hide thcir treasures under ground, or transport 
them to some neighbouring country?” The 
Pythia replied, “ That the arms of Apollo were 
sufficient for the defence of his shrine.” The 
Delphians, therefore, confined their attention to 
the means necessary for their personal safety. 
The women and children were transported by 
sea to Achia; the men climbed to the craggy 
tops of mount Cirphis, or descended to the 
deep caverns of Parnassus. Only sixty persons, 
the immediate ministers of Apollo, kept pos- 
session of the sacred city. But, could we credit 
the testimony of ancient historians, it soon ap 
peared that the gods had not abandoned 
Delphi: scarcely had the Persians reached the 
temple of Minerva the Provident, situated at 
a little distance from town, when the air 
thickened into an unusual darkness. A violent 
storm arose; the thunder and lightning were 
terrible. At length the tempest burst on mount 
Parnassus, and separated from its sides two im- 
mense rocks, which rolling down with increased 
violence, overwhelmed the nearest ranks of the 
Persians. The shattered fragments of the 
mountain, which long remained in the grove of 
Minerva, were regarded by the credulity of the 
Greeks as a standing proof of the miracle. But 
without supposing any supernatural intcrven- 
tion, we may believe, that an cxtraordinary 
event, happening on an extraordinary occasion, 
would produce great terror and consternation in 
the Barbarian army, since many of the nations 
which composed it acknowledged the divinity 
of Apollo, and must thercfore have been sensi- 
ble of their intended impiety, in despoiling his 
temple. The awful solemnity of the place con- 
spired with the horrors of the tempest, and the 
guilty feelings of their own consciences. These 
united terrors were sufficient to disturb all the 
rational principles of their minds, and even to 
confound the elcarest perceptions of their senses, 
They imagined, that they heard many sounds, 
which they did not hear; and that they saw 
many phantoms, which they did not sec. A 
universal panic seized them; at first they re- 
mained motionless, in silent amazement; they 
afterwards fled with disordered steps and wild 
despair. The Delphians, who perceived their 
confusion, and who bclieved that the gods, by 
the most manifest signs, defended their favour- 
ite abode, rushed impetuously from their fast- 


124 


nesses, and destroyed great numbers of the 
terrified and unresisting enemy.! The remain- 
der took the road of Beotia, in order to join 
the main body under Xerxes, which having 
already destroyed the hostile cities of Thespie 
and Platæa, was marching with full expectation 
to inflict complete vengeance on the Athenians. 

The united army arrived in the Attic terri- 
tory three months after their passage over the 
Hellespont. They laid waste the country, 
burned the cities, and levelled the temples with 
the ground. At length they took possession of 
the capital; but the inhabitants, by a retreat no 
less prudent than magnanimous, had withdrawn 
from the fury of their resentment. 

It was impossible for the Athenians at once 
to oppose the Persian army, which marched 
from Beotia, and to defend the western coasts 
of Greece against the ravages of a numerous 
fleet. The inhabitants of Peloponnesus, des- 
pairing of being able to resist the enemy in the 
open field, had begun to build a wall across 
the isthmus of Corinth, as their only security 
on the side of the land against the Barbaric in- 
vasion. In these circumstances, the Athenians, 
by the advice of Themistocles, embraced a re- 
solution which eclipsed the glory of all their 
former exploits. They abandoned to the Per- 
sian rage their villages, their territory, their 
walls, their city itself, with the revered tombs 
of their ancestors; their wives and children, 
and aged parents, were transported to the isles 
of Salamis and Ægina, and to the generous 
city of Trezoné, on the Argolic coast, which, 
notwithstanding the defection of Argos, the 
capital of that province, steadfastly adhered to 
the maxims of patriotism, and the duties of 
friendship. The embarkation was made with 
such haste, that the inhabitants were obliged to 
leave behind them their household furniture, 
their statues and pictures, and in general the 
most valuable part of their property. But they 
were willing to relinquish all for the sake of 
their country, which they well knew consisted 
not in their houses, lands, and effects,? but in 
that equal constitution of government, which 
they had received from their ancestors, and 
which it was their duty to transmit unimpaired 
to posterity. This constitution it was impos- 
sible for them to defend, unless they deter- 
mined, at the risk of their lives, and of every 
thing dear to them, to maintain the general in- 
dependence of the Grecian confederacy ; the 
interest of which became doubly precious, by 
being thus inseparably connected with their 
own. 

The Athenians capable of bearing arms or 
of handling an oar, embarked on board the 
fleet stationed at Salamis. The ships equipped 
and manned by them alone, exceéded in num- 
ber those of all their allies together, although 
the combined force was considerably augmented 
by the naval strength of Epirus and Arcanania, 


1 Herodot. l. viii. c. xxxvii. et seq. et. Diodor. l. xi. p. 250. 


2 Ov rAsGor, oufe Sure oue 
Teyvy TexTOovwy ws TOAEIG EITIV, 
Add?’ orou mor’ av wriv ANOPES 
Avrous cwesv esdorec, 
Evravin TEXY XXI TOAEIÇ, 
ALCÆUS, apud Aristid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[CnaP 


which, formerly doubtful and irresolute, had 
been determined to the side of Greece by the 
fortunate issue of the engagements at Arte- 
misium. The whole Grecian armament, thus 
increased, amounted to three hundred and 
eighty vessels. That of the Persians, which 
now took possession of the Athenian harbours, 
lying to the south of the strait occupied by the 
Greeks, had also received a powerful reinforce- 
ment. The Locrians, Bæotians, and in general 
every people who had submitted to their arms, 
readily supplying them with ships; and several 
of the Egean islands having at length prepared 
the quota which they had formerly been com- 
manded to furnish. We are not exactly in- 
formed of the number or strength of the addi- 
tional squadron; but it was supposed fully to 
compensate the loss occasioned by storms and 
sea-fights, and to restore the Persian flcet to its 
original complement of twelve hundred sail.3 
Trusting to the immense superiority ef his 
armament, Xerxes was still desirous to make 
trial of his fortune at sea, notwithstanding his 
former disasters on that element. But before 
he came to a final resolution, he summoned a 
council of war, in order to hear the opinion of 
his maritime subjects or allies. The tributary 
kings of Tyre and Sidon, the leaders of the 
Egyptians, Cyprians, and Cilicians, ever ready 
to flatter the passions of their sovereign, offered 
many frivolous reasons in favour of the alter- 
native to which they perceived him inclined. 
But in the fleet of Xerxes there was a Grecian 
queen named Artemisia, widow of the prince — 
of Halicarnassus, and who had assumed the 
government of that city and territory for the 
benefit of her infant son. Compelled by the 
order of Xerxes, or perhaps irritated against 
the Athenians for some reasons which history 
does not record, she not only fitted out five 
ships to attend the Persian expedition, but took 
upon herself the command of her little squad- 
ron, and on every occasion conducted it with 
equal skill and bravery. Such vigour of mind, 
united with so delicate a form, deserved to 
excite admiration in every part of the world; 
but the manly spirit of Artemisia becomes still 
more admirable, when we consider the severe 
restraints which have been in all ages imposed 
on the female sex, by the manners and climate 
of Asia. Her superior genius recommended 
her to the peculiar favour of Xerxes, who was 
obliged to esteem in a woman the virtues which 
he himself wanted spirit to practise. Trusting 
to his advantageous opinion of her courage and 
fidelity, Artemisia dissented from the general 
voice of the allies, and even opposed the incli- 
nation of the prince. “ Her former exploits on 
the coast of Eubea afforded sufficient proof 
that her present advice was not the child of 
timidity. She had been ever forward to ex- 
pose her person and her fame in the service 
of the great king; but it was impossible to dis- 
semble the manifest superiority of the Greeks 
in naval affairs. Yet, were the two armaments 
as much on a foot of equality in point of brave- 
ry and experience, as they were unequal in 
numbers, what motive could induce Xerxes to 


3 Herodot. Diodor. ubi supra; et Plut. in Thémistocle. 


x] 


venture another engagement at sea? Was he 
not already in possession of Athens, the great 
object of the war? The Spartans, who had op- 
posed his progress at Thermopylæ, had reaped 
the just fruits of their temerity : those assem- 
bled at the isthmus of Corinth might easily be 
involved in a similar fate. The Peloponnesus 
might then be laid waste by fire and sword, 
which would complete the destruction of 
Greece. Instead of proceeding immediately 
to that peninsula, should Xerxes choose to eon- 
tinue only a few weeks in the Attic territory, 
four hundred Grecian ships could uot long be 
supplied with provisions from the barren rocks 
of Salamis. Necessity must compel them to 
surrender, or drive them to their respective 
cities, where they would become an easy prey 
to the Persian arms.” These judicious obser- 
vations were heard without approbation; the 
worst opinion prevailed, being the best adapted 
to flatter the vanity of Xerxes. 

When the Grecian commanders observed 
that the enemy prepared to venture another 
engagement at sea, they likewise assembled to 
deliberate whether they should continue in the 
strait between Salamis and Attica, or proceed 
further up the gulf, towards the Corinthian 
isthmus. The latter proposal was generally 
approved by the confederates of Peloponnesus, 
who anxiously desired, in the present emer- 
gency, to approach as near as possible to their 
respective cities. Some hastened to their ships, 
and hoisted sail, in order to depart; and it 
seemed likely that their example would be 
soon followed by the whole fleet. On board 
the ship of Themistocles was Mnesiphilus, for- 
merly mentioned as the instructor of his youth, 
and who now accompanied him as his counsel- 
lor and friend. The experienced wisdom of 
Mnesiphilus readily discerned, that should the 
Greeks sail from Salamis, it would be impossi- 
ble to prevent the general dispersion of their 
armament. He therefore exhorted Themisto- 
cles, to endeavour, by all means possible, to 
prevent this fatal measure; and particularly to 
persuade the Spartan admiral, Euribiades, to 
alter his present intention. 

Themistocles readily embraced the opinion 
of his friend. Having waited on Euribiades, 
he obtained his consent to summon a second 
assembly of the confederates. After they were 
fully convened, the Athenian began to call their 
attention to the state of their affairs; but his 
discourse was insolently interrupted by Adi- 
mantus, the commander of the Corinthians, 
who had constantly discovered a particular 
solicitude for returning to the isthmus. The- 
mistocles, no less prudent than brave, answered 
his reproaches with calmness, and then ad- 
dressing himself to Euribiades, “The fate of 
Greece,” said he, “depends on the decision of 
the present moment, and that decision on you; 
if you resolve to sail to the isthmus, we must 
abandon Salamis, Megara, and Ægina; we 
shall be compelled to fight in an open sea, 
where the enemy may fully avail themselves 
of their superior numbers; and as the Persian 
army will certainly attend the motions of their 
fleet, we shal] draw their combined strength to- 
wards the Grecian peninsula, our last and only 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


125 


retreat. But if you determine to retain the 
ships in their present station, the Persians will 
find it impossible, in a narrow channel, to 
attack us at once with their whole force: we 
shall preserve Megara and Salamis, and we 
shall effectually defend Peloponnesus; for the 
Barbarians being, as I firmly trust, defeated in 
a naval engagement, will not penetrate further 
than Attica, but return home with disgrace.” 
He had scarcely ended his words, when Adi- 
mantus broke forth into new invectives, affect- 
ing surprise that Euribiades should listen to a 
man who, since the taking of Athens, had not 
any city to defend: that the Athenians ought 
then to have a voice in the council when they 
could say they had a home. Themistocles re- 
plied, “that the Athenians had indeed under- 
valued their private estates and possessions, in 
comparison of their political independence, and 
the general safety of Greece, and gloriously 
abandoned their city in defence of their country. 
But notwithstanding this sacrifice for the public 
good, they had still a home far more valuable 
than Corinth, two hundred ships of war well 
armed and manned, which no nation of Greece 
could resist. That should the confederates per- 
sist in their present dangerous resolution, the 
Athenians wculd in these ships embark their 
wives and families; desert a country, which 
had first forsaken itself; and repair to the coast 
of Italy, where it was foretold by ancient ora- 
cles, that Atheris should, in some future time, 
form a great and flourishing settlement. That 
the Greeks would then remember and regret 
the advice of Themistocles, when, abandoned by 
the most considerable part of their allies, they 
became an easy prey to the Barbarian invader.” 
The firmness of this discourse shook the reso- 
lution of the confederates; and it was deter- 
mined by the majority to continue at Salamis. 
Between this important resolve and the en- 
gagement, there intervened a moment of the 
most anxious solicitude. The minds of men, 
impressed with the awful idea of the events 
about to be transacted, were thrown off their 
ordinary bias; and as the operations of nature, 
and the agency of invisible beings, are always 
fondly connected in the imagination with the 
momentous concerns of buman life, the Greeks 
felt, or believed they felt, extraordinary con- 
vulsions of the elements; they saw, or fancied 
they saw, hideous spectres in the air; and 
heard, or imagined they heard, the most terri- 
ble and threatening voices.‘ But all these 
strange and supernatural appearances, which 
would otherwise have been doubtful or alarm- 
ing, were proved, by a clear and explicit oracle, 
to foretel the destruction of the Barbarians. 
Notwithstanding this favourable intimation 
of the divine will, which was carefully improved 
by the wisdom and eloquence of Themistocles, 
the Peloponnesians were ready to return to 
their first determination. A vessel arriving 
from the Isthmus, brought advice that the for- 
tifications there were almost completed ; if the 
fleet retired to the neighbouring shore,- the 
sailors might, even after a defeat at sea, take 
refuge behind their walls; but if conquered 


4 Lysias Fun. Orat. Herodot. ibid. 


126 


near the coasts of Salamis, they would be for 
ever separated from their families and friends, 
and confined, without hope or resource, within 
the narrow limits of a barren island. In im- 
portant alternatives, when the arguments on 
each side are almost equally persuasive, the 
party which we have embraced often appears 
the worst, merely because we have embraced 
it. Any new circumstance or consideration is 
always capable of changing the balance, and we 
hastily approve what we rejected after much 
deliberation. Lest this propensity should, as 
there was much reason to fear, again discon- 
cert his measures, Themistocles determined to 
prevent the Greeks from the possibility of grati- 
fying it. There commonly lived in his family 
a man named Sicinus, who at present accom- 
panied him. He was originally a slave, and 
employed in the education of his children ; but 
by the generosity of his patron, had acquired 
the rank of citizen, with considerable riches. 
The firmness and fidelity of this man rendered 
him a proper instrument for executing a strata- 
gem, which concealed, under the mask of trea- 
chery, the enthusiasm of public virtue. Hav- 
ing received his instructions from Themistocles, 
he privately sailed to the Persian fleet, and ob- 
taining admission into the presence of Xerxes, 
declared, “That he had been sent by the cap- 
tain of the Athenians, who could no longer 
endure the insolence of his countrymen, to 
acquaint the great king, that the Greeks, seized 
with consternation at the near approach of 
danger, had determined to make their escape 
under cover of the night: that now was the 
time for the Persians to achieve the most glori- 
ous of all their exploits, and, by intercepting 
the flight of their enemies, accomplish their 
destruction at once.! The deceit was believed; 
the whole day, and the greatest part of the 
succeeding night, the Persians employed in se- 
curing the several passages between the islands 
and the adjacent coast; and that nothing might 
be neglected that could contribute to their suc- 
cess, they filled the little isle, or rather rock, 
of Psyttalea, lying between Salamis and the 
continent, with the flower of the Persian in- 
fantry, in order to intercept the miserable rem- 
nant of the Greeks, who, after the expected 
defeat, would fly thither for refuge. 

The first intelligence of these operations was 
brought to the Grecian fleet by Aristides the 
Athenian, who seems not to have availed him- 
self of the general act of indemnity to return 
from banishment, but who readily embraced 
every opportunity to serve his country. Hav- 
ing with difficulty escaped in a small vessel 
from the isle of Ægina, the generous patriot 
immediately communicated an account of what 
he had seen there to his rival and enemy, The- 
mistocles, who, meeting his generosity with 
equal frankness, made him the confidant of his 
secret. Their interview was as memorable as 
the occasion; and, after a continued life of op- 
position and hatred, they now first agreed to 
suspend their private animosities, in order to 
promote the common interest of their country. 
As the Peloponnesian commanders were either 


1 Herodot. l. viii. c. Ixxv. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


wavering and irresolute, or had determined to 
set sail, Aristides was deşired to inform them 
of the arrangement which he had seen; the 
consideration of his country however rendered 
bis evidence suspected, and it was imagined 
that he meant to sacrifice the general interest 
of the confederates to the safety of the Athe- 
nian families in Salamis. But the arrival of a 
vessel belonging to the isle of Tenos confirmed 
the veracity of his report, and the Pelopon- 
nesians resolved to fight, because it was impos- 
sible to fly.2 

Before the dawn of the day the Grecian ships 
were drawn up in order of battle; and the Per- 
sians, who had been surprised at not finding 
them attempt to escape during night, were stil 
more surprised whe morning discovered thet 
close and regular arrangement. The Greeks 
began with the light their sacred hymns and 
peeans, which preceded their triumphant songs 
of war, accompanied by the animating sound 
of the trumpet. The shores of Attica re-echoed 
to the rocks of Salamis and Psyttalea. The 
Grecian acclamations filled the sky. Neither 
their appearance nor their words betokened 
flight or fear, but rather determined intrepidity, 
and invincible courage. Yet was their valour 
tempered with wisdom. Themistocles delay- 
ed the attack until the ordinary breeze should 
spring up, which was no less favourable to the 
experience of the Grecian mariners, than dan- 
gerous to the lofty unwieldiness of the Persian 
ships.3 The signal was then given for the 
Athenian line to bear down against that of the 
Phenicians, which rode on the west, off the 
coast of Eleusis; while the Peloponnesians ad- 
vanced against the enemy’s left wing stationed 
on the east, near the harbour of the Piræus. 
The Persians, confiding in their number, and 
secure of victory, did not decline the fight. 
A Phenician galley, of uncommon size and 
strength, was distinguished in the front of their 
line by every circumstance of naval pomp. In 
the eagerness to engage, she far outstripped 
her companions; but her career was checked 
midway between the two fleets by an Athenian 
galley which had sailed forth to meet her. 
The first shock shattered her sculptured prow, 
the second buried her in the waves. The 
Athenians, encouraged by this auspicious pre- 
lude, proceeded with their whole force, animat- 
ing each other to the combat by a martial song: 
« Advance, ye sons of Athens, save your coun- 
try, defend your wives and children, deliver the 
temples of your gods, regain the sacred tombs 
of your renowned forefathers; this day, the 
common cause of Greece demands your va- 
lour.” The battle was bloody and destructive, 
and disputed on the side of the Persians with 
more obstinate resistance than on any former 
occasion; for, from the Attic coast, seated on 
a lofty throne on the top of mount Agialos, 
Xerxes observed the scene of action, and atten- 
tively remarked, with a view to reward and 
punish, the various behaviour of his subjects. 
The presence of their prince operated on their 
hopes, and still more powerfully on their fears. 


2 Herodot. I. viii. c. Ixxix. et seq. 
3 Ibid. l. viii. c. Ixxix. et seq. 


X.] 


But neither the hope of acquiriug the favour, 
nor the fear of incurring tlie displeasure of a 
despot, could furnish principles of action wor- 
thy of being compared with the patriotism and 
love of liberty which actuated the Greeks. To 
the dignity of their motives, as much as to the 
superiority of their skill, the latter owed their 
unexampled success in this memorable engage- 
ment. The foremost ships of the Phcsnicians 
were dispersed or sunk. Amidst the terror 
and confusion occasioned by their repulse, they 
ran foul of those which had been drawn up in 
two lines behind them. The Athenians skil- 
fully encircled them around, compressed them 
into a narrower space, and increased their dis- 
order; they were at length entangled in each 
other, deprived of all power of action, and, to 
use the humble, but expressive figure of an 
eye-witness, “ caught and destroyed like fish in 
anet.”4 Such was the fate of the right wing; 
while the Ionians, who, on the left, opposed the 
fleets of Peloponnesus and Ægina, furnished 
them with an opportunity to complete the vic- 
tory. Many of the Asiatic Greeks, mindful 
of the advice given by Themistocles, abandon- 
ed the interest of the great king, and openly 
declared for their countrymen; others declined 
the engagement; the remainder were sunk and 
put to flight. Among those which escaped was 
the ship of queen Artemisia, who in the battle 
of Salamis, displayed superior courage and con- 
duct: she was closely- pursued by an Athenian 
galley, commanded by Amenias, brother of the 
poet Aischylus. In this extremity she employ- 
ed a successful, but very unwarrantable strata- 
gem. The nearest Persian vessel was com- 
manded by Damasithymus, a tributary prince 
of Calynda in Lycia, a man with whom Arte- 
mesia was at variance. With great dexterity 
she darted the beak of her galley against the 
Lycian vessel. Damasithymus was buried in 
the waves; and Amenias, deceived by this 
measure, equally artful and audacious, believed 
the vessel of Artemisia one of those which had 
deserted the Persian interest. The Pheenician 
and onian squadrons (for that of the Egyp- 
tians had been exceedingly weakened by the 
action on the coast of Eubea) formed the 
main strength of the Persian armament; after 
these were defeated, the ships at a distance 
ventured not to advance, but hastily changing 
sail, measured back their course to the Athe- 
nian and other neighbouring harbours. The 
victors, disdaining to pursue them, dragged the 
most valuable part of the wreck to the coasts | 
of Psyttalea and Salamis. 
were covered with floating carcasses of the 
dead, among whom were few Greeks; as even 
those who lost their ships in the engagement, 
saved their lives by swimming, an art which 
they universally learned as a necessary branch 
of education, and with which the Barbarians 
were totally unacquainted.5 

Xerxes had scarcely time to consider and 
deplore thg destruction and disgrace of his 


(J 


4 Æschylus Perse. 
5 Before this period it was a law at Athens and other 
Btates, Tous musdzg Sidurnerius TPWTOV VEIY TS xti yoru- 


mzta; that boys first learn reading and swimming. Sam. 
Petit. de Leg. Att. p. 11. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


The narrow seas; 


127 


fleet, when a new spectacle, not less mournful, 
offered itself to his sight. ‘Tne flower of the 
Persian infantry had taken post, as we have 
already observed, on the rocky isle of Psyt- 
talea, in order to receive the shattered remains 
of the Grecian armament, which, after its ex- 
pected defeat, would naturally take refuge on 
that barren coast. But equally fallacious and 
fatal was their conjecture concerning the event 
of the battle. The Greeks, disembarking from 
their ships, attacked, in the cnthusiasin of vic- 
tory, those astonished troops, who, unable to 
resist, and finding it impossible to fly, were cut 
down to a man. As Xerxes beheld this dread- 
ful havoc, he started in wild agitation froin 
his silver throne, rent his royal robes, and, in 
the first moment of his returning tranquillity, 
commanded the main body of his forces, posted 
along the Athenian coast, to return to their 
respective camps. 

From that moment he resolved to return 
with all possible expedition into Asia. Yet did 
his fears and his policy conceal, for a few days, 
the design, not only from the Grecian but from 
the Persian generals. Mardonius alone was 
too well acquainted with the genius of his mas- 
ter, to believe that his concern for the safety 
of his illustrious person would allow him to 
remain longer than necessary, in a country 
which had been the scene of so many calami- 
ties. The artful courtier availed himself of 
the important secret, to divert the storm of 
royal resentment which threatened the principal 
author of this inglorious undertaking. In his 
first interview with Xerxes, he exhorted him, 
“ not to be too deeply affected by the defeat of 
his fleet: that he had come to fight against the 
Greeks, not with rafts of wood, but with sol- 
diers and horses: that the valour of the Per- 
sians had opposed all resistance, and their in- 
vincible sovereign was now master of Athens, 
the main object of his ambition: that having 
accomplished the principal end of the enter- 
prise, it was time for the great king to return 
from the fatigues of war to the cares of govern- 
ment, for with three hundred thousand chosen 
men le would undertake to prosecute his de- 
signs, and to complete his victory.” Such is 
the language of adulation, too often held to 
princes. The other courtiers confirmed, by 
their approbation, the advice of Mardonius; 
and the Persian monarch, while he obeyed the 
dictates of his own pusillanimity, seemed to 
leave Greece in reluctant compliance with the 
anxious solicitude of his subjects. 

The remains of the Persign flect, frightened 
from the coast of Greece, returned to the har- 
bours of Asia Minor, and afterwards assembled 
and rendezvoused, during the ensuing winter, 
in the port of Cymé. The transports were or- 
dered to the Hellespont, on the banks of which 
Xerxes arrived with lis troops in forty-five 
days, after intolerable hardships and fatigue. 
Famine and pestilence filled up the measure of 
their calamities; and, excepting the three hun. 
dred thousand chosen men committed to Mar 
donius, a detachment of whom guarded the 
royal person to the coast, scarcely a remnant 
was left of so many millions.6 The bridgo 


6 Ovdsev pigos we esas, says Herodotus emphatically. 


128 


have presented, had it remained entire, a mor- 
tifying monument of past ggeatness. But this 
magnificent fabric had been destroyed by a 
tempest: and such is the obscurity with which 
Xerxes returned from Greece, compared with 
the blaze of grandeur in which he arrived 
there, that it is uncertain whether he crossed 
the channel in a Phenician ship of war, or 
only in a fishing-boat.! Having returned to 
Sardis, he endeavoured to compensate for the 
disappointment of ambition by the gratification 
of sensuality, and buried himself in pleasures 
more infamous and degrading, and not less 
frightfully criminal, than all the disgrace which 
his pride had incurred, and all the calamities 
which his subjects had either inflicted or suf- 
fered.2 

When the Greeks had leisure to examine the 
extent and completeness of their success, they 
determined in the first emotions of triumph 
and resentment, to pursue the shattered re- 
mains, of the enemy. That no Barbarian 
might escape, they purposed immediately to 
sail northward, to destroy the Persian bridge 
over the Hellespont, and thus to intercept their 
return. This design was recommended, and 
chiefly supported by the Athenians, who having 
experienced the greatest share of the danger, 
felt most sensibly the joys of deliverance. But 
upon more mature deliberation, it occurred that 
the Persians were still sufficiently numerous to 
afford just grounds of terror. To their cow- 
ardice and inexperience, not to their want of 
strength, the Greeks owed all their advantages 
over them; but should the impossibility of re- 
treat be added to their other calamities, they 
might derive courage from despair, and, by 
efforts hitherto unexerted, repair the conse- 
quences of their past errors aud misfortunes. 
These considerations, first suggested, it is said, 
by Euribiades the Spartan, were adopted by 
Themistocles, who convinced his countrymen 
that the jealousy of the Grecian gods, unwilling 
that one man should be lord of Europe and 
Asia, rather than their own prowess, had given 
them the victory over Xerxes; a prince of such 
folly and madness, that he had treated with 
equal irreverence things human and divine, 
destroyed the sacred temples, overthrown the 
venerable altars and images, and impiously in- 
sulted the gods of the Hellespont with stripes 
and fetters. That it was the duty of the Athe- 
nians, after having gloriously repelled the com- 
mon enemy, to provide for the subsistence of 
their wives and families, to sow their lands, 
rebuild their houses, and thus to repair, by the 
most industrious activity, the dreadful ravages 
committed in their territories.? 

Themistocles had no sooner persuaded the 
Athenians to embrace his opinion, than he 
secretly despatched his confidant Sicinus to 
acquaint the great king with the danger which 
he had so nearly escaped, and to advise him to 
pursue his journey with all possible expedi- 
tion. Xerxes readily believed a piece of infor- 
mation, which agreed with the suggestions of 


1 Confer. Herod. Justin. Corn. Nepos. 
2 Herodot. et Diodor. ibid. 
3 Herodot l. viii. c. cviii. et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


ostentatiously erected on the Hellespont would 


[Cuap. 


his own timidity. The rapidity of his march 
conspired with other circumstances above 
mentioned, in proving fatal to the lives of his 
followers; and the crafty Athenian, who 
knowing the unstable affections of the multi, 
tude, wished to deserve the gratitude of a 
king, gained the double advantage of dispel- 
ling sooner than could otherwise have happen- 
ed, that destructive cloud of Barbarians which 
hovered over his country, and of convincing 
their leader, that he was in part indebted for 
his safety to that very man whose counsels, 
rather than the arms of Greece, had occasioned 
his affliction and disgrace. 

The victory at Salamis terminated the se- 
cond act of the Persian expedition, which has, 
with much propriety, been compared to a tra- 
gedy. ‘The Greeks soon understood that, not- 
withstanding the return of Xerxes, three hun- 
dred thousand men, commanded by Mardonius, 
were cantoned for the winter in Thrace, Mace- 
don, and Thessaly, with a design to take the 
teld early in the spring, and again to try the 
fortune of war. This intelligence deterred the 
Athenians from bringing home their wives and 
children, as they originally intended, from Tre- 
zené, Salamis, and Ægina, because they had 
reason to dread that their country would ex- 
perience new effects of Barbarian resentment 
It appears, however, that a few citizens, more 
sanguine in their hopes than the rest, returned 
to their ancient habitations; while the greater 
part continued on board the fleet, or went to re- 
side with their friends in the Peloponnesus. 

According to modern ideas, it would be na- 
tural to expect, that under the apprehension of 
another formidable invasion, the Greeks should 
have employed the winter in raising contribu- 
tions, levying and disciplining troops, and con- 
certing proper measures for the public defence. 
But such preparations were in some degree 
unnecessary, because in the Grecian republics 
almost every citizen was a soldier; and the 
different states were at all times too weakly 
united, to agree in any uniform plan of opera- 
tions. Besides, the customs and prejudices of 
that early age obliged them to observe many 
forms and ceremonies, which interfered with 
employments seemingly more useful, on such 
an important emergency. We find, accord- 
ingly, that instead of increasing or improving 
their military establishment, the Greeks spent 
the winter‘ in dividing the spcil; assigning to 
the different commanders the prizes of conduct 
and valour; performing the last offices to the 
dead ; celebrating their games and festivals; 
and displaying, both in the multitude of their 
prayers, and in the magnificence of their offer- 
ings, the warmest gratitude to their protecting 
divinities. The dedications to the gods were 
intrinsically valuable. The rewards bestowed 
on their generals were simple tokens of public 
esteem. The first consisted in vases, statues, 
and other ornaments of gold and silver; the 
second in a wreath of pine, laurel, or olive: a 
circumstance which made Tigranes the Persian, 
exclaim, “ Heavens! against what men have 
we come to contend? insensible to interest, 
they fight only for glory !” 


4 Herodot. l. viii. c. cxxi. et seq. 


X.J 


It is not surprising, that the institutions of 
Greece should have deeeived an untutored 
Barbarian, when we consider that even the 
modern philosopher and historian have been too 
often dazzled by their splendour. Yet notwith- 
standing what Tigranes believed, and what, 
from the fond admiration of antiquity, many 
modern writers have asserted, the indiscrimi- 
nate praise of disinterestedness by no means 
velonged to the Grecians. When the eom- 
manders of their several ships and squadrons 
assembled to regulate the distribution of naval 
and military rewards, each captain, with a sel- 
fishness equally indelieate and unjust, arro- 
gated to himself the first prize of merit; though 
most of them acknowledged the desert of 
Themistoeles as second to their own.’ This 
general assignment of the seeond, while all 
alike assumed the frst place, was equivalent to 
a publie deelaration in favour of the Athenian: 
and the honours whieh were eonferred on him, 
both in his own country and in Sparta, suffi- 
ciently eonfirmed the decision. The usual 
marks of the publie esteem were not indeed 
attended with any immediate profit; but their 
consequenees were extremely benefieial. Sup- 
ported by the favourable opinion of his eoun- 
trymen, a eommander by sea or land frequently 
attained an authority, the exereise of whieh 
was equally adapted to flatter pride and to 
gratify avarice. The behaviour of Themisto- 
cles, after he had aequired suffieient merit with 
the publie to justify his ranacity, affords one 
memorable example of this kind; and we shall 
meet with many more, in examining the sub- 
sequent events of the Grecian history. Instead 
of remaining at home, in order to eoneert a 
plan for repelling the danger which threatened 
his country, the Athenian eommander sailed 
with a little squadron to the Cyelades, laid 
these unfortunate islands under a heavy eon- 
tribution, and without the partieipation, or even 
+r 8 of his colleagues in eommand, en- 
riehed himself and his favourites.§ 

On the approaeh of spring, Mardonius pre- 
pared to take the field. His army eonsisted of 
the Medes, Persians, Scythians, and Indians; 
and though reduced from the millions whieh 
followed Xerxes to about three hundred thou- 
sand men, it was thereby rather delivered trom 
an useless encumbrance, than deprived of any 
real strength. Before marehing from Thes- 
saly, his superstition engaged him to eonsult 
the Greeian oracles, and moved probably by 
an erroneous explanation of their ainbiguous 
~esponses, he determined to try the effeet of 
aegoeiation, before he had recourse to arms. 
He might treat either with individuals, or with 
communities, By the former method, the The- 
bans assured him, that he might become master 
of Greeee, without hazarding a battle. “You 
have only,” said they, “to send money to the 
leading men in the several republics. In this 
manner you will divide eaeh state into fac- 
tions; engage them in a civil war; and, when 
exhausted by mutual hostilities, they will rea- 
dily submit to your demands.” Mardonius, 
instead of pursuing this judicious system, whieh 


3 Herodot. l. viii. c. xxiii. 
6 Herodot. ibid. c. Ixxv. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


129 


would probably have been suceessful, sent 
Alexander, king of Maeedon, to treat with such 
Athenians as had returned to their city. This 
illustrious ambassador, who boasted an Argive 
extraction, was the tributary prince of a barba- 
rous country; but of a eountry destined, in a 
future age, to attain empire and renown, by 
the arts of Philip and the arms of his immortal 
son. The first Alexander was peeuliarly well 
qualified for executing the offiee with which 
Mardonius had entrusted him, beeause his 
family had long been eonnected with the re- 
publie of Athens, by the saered ties of hospi- 
tality. But his eommission was as unwelcome 
as his visit was acceptable. The Athenians, 
therefore, delayed ealling an assembly to hear 
and answer his discourse, until the Spartans 
(who were apprised of the intention of Mardo- 
nius) should sénd ambassadors to assist at the 
deliberation. When all parties were eonvened, 
Alexander declared, ** That he was sent on the 
part of Mardonius, who had reeeived a message 
from the great king, intimating his will to for- 
give their past injuries, to reinstate them in 
their possessions, to rebuild their houses and 
temples, and to reeeive them into the number 
of his friends and confederates.” Mardonius 
then spoke for himself: “ What madness, O 
Athenians, ean impel you to maintain war 
against a monareli whom you cannot expeet 
ever to eonquer, nor hope always to resist ? You 
are’ aequainted with the number and prowess 
of the troops under my command, which, for- 
midable as they are, make but a small part of 
the unbounded resources of Xerxes. Every 
year he ean invade you with an inereasing 
superiority of strength; submit, therefore, to a 
power whieh it is impossible to oppose ; profit 
ere it be too late, of the disposition of the great 
king, and aeeept the offer of an alliance which 
folly alone, not fortitude and firmness, can en- 
gage you to decline.” Alexander endeavoured 
to add weight to these eonsiderations, by ob- 
serving, “ That his past eonduet had uniformly 
proved the sineerity of his attachment to the 
Athenians; and that he was firmly eonvineed 
of the expediency, and even necessity of the 
measures now in agitation, otherwise he should 
not have undertaken to propose them. He 
therefore exhorted them to refleet on the ad- 
vantages whieh would aeerue to them from 
being alone, of all the Greeks, admitted into 
the allianee of Xerxes; to refleet also on the 
dreadful eonsequenees whieh would attend 
their refusal, sinee their eountry, placed as a 
prize between the contending parties, would 
thereby be exposed to inevitable destruetion.”” 

As soon as Alexander had ended his dis- 
eourse, the Laeedæmonian ambassadors repre- 
sented to the assembly, “ That they had been 
sent on the part of their republic, to thwart the 
measures of the Barbarians, with whom, in 
order to resent the quarrel of her Athenian 
allies, Sparta had engaged in a bloody and de- 
structive war. Could tle Athenians then, for 
whose sake alone the war whieh now extended 
over all Greece was originally undertaken, 
abandon their friends and eoufederates, whose 


7 Herodot. l. viiti. €. ox). 


139 


services they had every reason to approve ? 
Could they associate with Barbarians, whose 
hostilities they had every reason to resent? 
Sparta affectionately sympathized with their 
sufferings, in the loss of their houses and their 
harvests; yet the confederates in general had 
endeavoured to prevent or repair the unhappy 
consequences of their loss : they had maintain- 
ed their wives and families, supported and 
educated their helpless children, cherished 
and sustained the declining years of their 
parents. Their generosity was not yet ex- 
hausted; if the Athenians should be compelled 
again to abandon their country, they would 
again find the same hospitable reception in 
Peloponnesus ; and their families, if it became 
necessary, Would be maintained at the common 
expense, during the continuance of the war. 
Let them not, therefore, be deceived by the 
specious words of the tyrant Alexander, who, 
at the expense of truth, endeavoured to pro- 
mote the interest of a tyrant like himself. The 
Athenians ought to remember, that neither 
justice, nor honour, nor fidelity, can be expect- 
ed from tyrants and Barbarians.”! Having 
thus spoken, the Lacedemonians, as well as 
Alexander, withdrew ; and the Athenians, after 
a short deliberation, answered both parties by 
the voice of Aristides, who, as archon, or chief 
magistrate, presided in the assembly: first, to 
the Macedonian they replied, “ That as they 
were sufficiently acquainted with the strength 
of Xerxes, he might have spared them the in- 
sult of describing its vast superiority to their 
own. Yet, in defence of liberty, there was no 
power too great to oppose. Return then, and 
tell Mardonius, that the Athenians will never 
make peace with Xerxes, while the sun per- 
forms his annual course in the heavens; but 
that, trusting to the assistance of the gods and 
heroes, whose temples and images the tyrant 
has impiously destroyed, we will resist him to 
the last extremity. To conclude: come not a 
second time to Athens with such messages, the 
insolence of which may make us forget that 
you are our friend, and connected with us by 
the sacred ties of reciprocal hospitality.” The 
answer given to the Lacedemonian ambassa- 
sadors was delivered in a still higher strain of 
patriotism: “ That the Barbarians, or even the 
peasants of Laconia, should suppose us capable 
of coming to an accommodation with the Per- 
sians, does not surprise us; but it is indeed 
surprising, that you, citizens of Sparta, should 
entertain the same groundless fears ; you, who 
have so often heard by report, and who, on so 
many occasions, have yourselves witnessed the 
disinterested magnanimity of our republic. 
Know then, that the richest possessions on 
earth, that all the treasures of the great king, 
are not sufficient to seduce our unalterable at- 
tachment to Greece. The laws of God and 
man equally forbid our ingratitude; or if all 
ties of duty were dissolved, our resentment 
against the Persians would restrain us. We 
must avenge our plundered altars, our pros- 
trate images, our desolated temples. We must 
avenge the cause of our allies, and our own; 


1 Herodot. J. viii. c. cxlii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


for all the Greeks have the same religion, lan- 
guage, lineage, and manners; and, while an 
Athenian survives, will never, with his consent, 
make peace with the Barbarians. We acknow- 
ledge with gratitude your proffered kindness 
to our families; but henceforth we hope to 
provide for them, without giving the confede- 
rates any trouble on their account. What we 
request of you is, that your army march with 
all possible expedition towards Bæotia, that 
our united resistance may stop the progress of 
the Barbarian, who, as soon as he is apprised 
of our determined hostility, will not fail to pro- 
ceed southward, to invade Attica a second 
time.”2 

This conjecture was justified by the event. 
The Persians within a few weeks marched into 
Beotia, but the Athenians looked in vain for 
the expected arrival of their Spartan auzilia- 
ries. To have witnessed the proceedings just 
described in the Athenian assembly, we should 
have imagined that there was a generous con- 
test of patriotism between the two republics; 
and that the happiness and glory of Greece, 
not the interest of their particular communities, 
was thc great object of their ambition. But 
the Greeks had often much patriotism in their 
speeches, when there was little in their hearts ; 
and the Spartans, who had lately employed 
such powerful arguments to engage Athens in 
defence of the common cause, totally abandon- 
ed their principles whenever it suited their con- 
venience.’ Instead of issuing forth in order to 
support their allies in Bæotia, they remained 
within the isthmus, and endeavoured to fortify 
that inlet into their territory with such addi- 
tional walls and bulwarks as might render it 
impenetrable. The work was now complete; 
and the Peloponnesians, secure, as they ima- 
gined, behind this solid rampart, equally disre- 
garded the safety, and despised the resentment, 
of their northern allies. ' 

The Athenians, a second time forsaken by 
their confederates, were obliged again to desert 
their country. They had scarcely sailed to 
their families in Salamis, when Attica was in- 
vaded by the Persians. While the fugitives 
continued in that island, they received another 
embassy from Mardonius, offering them the 
same terms which they had formerly rejected. 
They still persisted in rejecting them; in con- 
sequence of which, they beheld, without appa- 
rent uneasiness, from the shores of Salamis, 
their territories? again laid waste ; their cities, 
and villas, and temples, devoured by the flames; 
and every thing that had escaped the fury of 
the first invasion, destroyed or consumed by 
the second. After committing these ravages, 
which as he had already obtained complete 
possession of the country, deserve to be con- 
sidered only as the effect of a childish resent- 
ment, Mardonius returned into Beotia, that his 
troops might be supplied with provisions; and 
that, should the enemy offer them battle, they 
miglit engage in a country better adapted than 
Attica to the operations of cavalry. 


2 Herodot. l. viii. c. cxl. et seq. 
3 Lysias, Orat. Funeb. 
4 Herodot. I. ix. c. i. et seq. 


X] 


The Athenians, who had been sent from Sa- 
lainis to remonstrate with the Spartan council 
against the delays or desertion of the Pelo- 
ponnesians, were aceompanied by the ambassa- 
dors of Platæa and Megara, who confirmed 
their arguments and complaints. With the 
indignation of disappointed confidence, they 
upbraided the indifference and lukewarmness 
of the Spartans in the common cause; senti- 
ments which ill corresponded with their own 
generous ardour. They contrasted the base 
treachery of Sparta, formerly the honour, now 
the disgrace of Greece, with the patriotic mag- 
nanimity of Athens. The latter, they observed, 
compelled by necessity, ar urged by resentment 
of the shameful dereliction on the part of her 
allies, would doubtless accept the terms offered 
by Mardonius, and then the Peloponnesians 
must become sensible, when it was too late, 
that the wall across the isthmus formed but a 
partial and feeble defence; and however it 
might secure them from inroads on the side of 
the land, would ill protect their coasts against 
the descents of the Persian, reinforced by the 
Athenian fleet.5 

Whether the eloquence of the ambassadors, 
or the returning sense of public utility, over- 
came the pusillanimous resolutions formerly 
embraced by the Spartans, it is certain that they 
now first determined to take the field. Five 
thousand Spartan pike-men were accompanied 
by thirty-five thousand Helots. Their Pelo- 
ponnesian allies sent their respective contin- 
gents; so that the heavy-armed men raised in 
the peninsula exceeded twenty thousand, com- 
manded by Pausanias, the guardian and kins- 
man of Plistarchus, son of Leonidas. Having 
marched beyond the isthmus, they were joined 
by Aristides, at the hcad of eight thousand 
Athenians, and by a superior number of their 
allies of Megara, Thespiæ, Platæa, Salamis, 
Eubea, and Ægina. The whole heavy-armed 
troops amounted to nearly forty thousand ; the 
light-armed were the thirty-five thousand, He- 
lots, attendants on the Spartans, and about as 
many more, one to each soldicr, attended the 
other divisions of the army.® 

Mardonius having marched into Beotia, en- 
camped on the banks of the Æsopus. His army 
of three hundred thousand men, while they 
waited the enemy’s approach, of which thcy 
were secretly informed by the Argives, were 
employed in building a square fortification, 
about five quarters of a milc in front; a work 
of little utility, since it could only defend a 
smal] portion of a camp which extended many 
miles, from the Theban town of Jirythrea, to 
the territory of the Platwans. The Grceks 
having arrived in those parts, took post at the 
foot of mount Citheron, dircctly opposite to the 
enemy. 

The hostile armies remained eleven days in 
their cncampments, during whieh several inei- 
dents happened, which tend to display the man- 
ners and character of those great bodies of men, 
who weresoon toattempt the destruction of each 


5 Lysias, Orat. Funeb. 
6 Herodot. l. ix. c. i. et eeg. Diodor. Sicul. 1. xi. et Plut. 
in Aristid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


131 


other. Of the Grecians inhabiting the countries 
north of Attica, the Phocians, as we have al- 
ready had occasion to observe, were the least 
disposed to embrace the cause of Mardonius. 
Yet as all their neighbours had submitted to 
his arms, they reluctantly sent to his camp a 
thousand soldiers, well armed, and commanded 
by Harmocydes, a citizen of great influence and 
authority. They had not continued many days 
in the Persian army, when an order came from 
Mardonius (the reason was unknown,) for the 
Phocians to be detached from the rest, and en- 
camped in a separate body on the plain. They 
had no sooner obeyed his command, than the 
whole Persian cavalry appeared in sight, and 
soon formed themselves in hostile array. It 
immediately occurred to the Phocians, and 
particularly to their prudent commander, that 
Mardonius, suspecting their fidelity, or yielding 
to the solicitations of their inveterate enemies 
the Thessalians, had determined their destruc- 
tion. Harmocydes therefore, pointing to the 
cavalry, called to his companions, * You see 
those men, who come with an evident intention 
to destroy us: but let us die like Grecians, and 
exert ourselves with all the fury of a desperate 
defence, rather than tamcly submit to a dis- 
honourable fate.” While he yet spoke, the 
Phocians seized thcir arms, arranged them- 
selves in order of battle, and supporting each 
other in redoubled ranks, presented on every 
side a firm circle of protended lances. Their 
warlike appearance struck tcrror into the sur- 
rounding cloud of Barbarians, who advanced 
brandishing, and a few of the nearest throwing, 
their javelins: but farther they ventured not to 
proceed; the determined countenance of the 
Greeks sufficed to repel them; they retired in 
haste to the Persian camp. A herald was then 
sent by Mardonius, “ desiring the Phocians to 
take courage, nor to dread farther hostilities ; 
that they had shown themselves to be brave 
men, contrary to the account which he had re- 
ceived of them; and, if they displayed their 
valour in the Persian cause, they should find it 
impossible to conquer either Xerxes or himself 
in good offices.””” 

The above relation tends to prove, that none 
of the Grecks, not even those who joined the 
encmy, were deficient in conrage. Another in- 
cident related by the same historian proves, 
that notwithstanding the cxtreme folly of their 
commanders, the Persians were not universally 
deficient in wisdom. While they were en- 
camped on the Æsopus; a wealthy Theban, 
nained Attaginns, invited Mardonius, with fifty 
of his most distinguished oflicers, to a magnifi- 
cent entertainment. The feast was given at 
Thebes, and an equal number of Beotians were 
called to it. Among tlicse was Thersander, a 
native of Orchomenus, and a person of the 
highest distinction in that city. Two of the 
guests were placed on each couch; and, as 
Thersander himself related to Herodotus, his 
Persian companion, after supper, entering into 
conversation in the Greek tonguc, testified, 
under the scal of secrecy, his gloomy apprehen- 
sions concerning the event of the present war. 


a = m ae aaa- a e e aa 


7 Horodot. 1. ix. c. i. et seq, 


132 


He did not even hesitate to declare his firm 
persuasion, that few Persians would survive an 
engagement. When asked by the Theban, 
Why he did not communicate his opinion to 
his general? he said, that men of plain sense 
and honesty had seldom much influence with 
the great. It appeared from the whole tenor 
of his discourse, that there were many people 
in the Persian army, who, like himself, la- 
mented the mad ambition of Xerxes, and the 
fatal rashness of Mardonius; and who, while 
they respected their stations and dreaded their 
power, despised their characters, and condemned 
their conduct.! This observation it is proper 
to make for the honour of human nature. In 
absolute governments, it is said that men obey, 
like a flock of sheep, the voice of a despot; yet 
it may be said with equal truth, that amidst the 
obedience extorted by fear, they often see and 
regret the folly of their shepherd. 

In this situation, it was scarcely to be ex- 
pected that the hostile camps should remain 
without frequent skirmishes. These preludes 
to the general engagement ended favourably 
for the Grecians. Three thousand soldiers, 
furnished by the rocky district of Megara, were 
posted on the side most exposed to the enemy’s 
cavalry, by whose incursions they had been so 
much harassed, that they determined to aban- 
don that difficult station. Before executing 
their design, they sent a herald to the Grecian 
generals, intimating the resolution they had 
taken from necessity, and at the same time 
hinting the injustice of detaining them, from 
the time of the first encampment, in a post of 
peculiar danger, which though they had hither- 
to indeed maintained with singular constancy 
and fortitude, they now found themselves una- 
ble longer to defend. Pausanias addressed him- 
self successively to the whole army, to know 
whether any division was willing to change 
posts with the Megarians. All were silent, or 
declined the proposal on frivolous pretences. 
The Athenians alone, actuated by that love of 
pre-eminence which they did not more ar- 
dently desire than they justly deserved, volun- 
tarily offered their services on this trying 
occasion. They had not long occupied the im- 
portant post, when the enemy’s cavalry began 
to assault them. The assault they repelled 
with vigour, and Masistius the Persian gene- 
ral fell in the action. A terrible conflict en- 
sued, according to ancient custom, around the 
body of the dead. The Athenians at length 
gained possession of it; though they began to 
give way before the general attack of the horse, 
yet upon being supported by a reinforcement 
from the main body, they again recovered their 
ground, and compelled the Persians to retire. 
When the first unwelcome messengers arrived 
in the camp with an account of their own de- 
feat, and the death of the general, Mardonius 
and his attendants burst into tears; their la- 
mentations were soon communicated to the 
troops, and diffused over the army, whose 
plaintive cries filled the whole land of Beotia. 
The Persians tore their hair, disfigured their 


1 Herodot. I. ix. €. xv. 


i HISTORY OF GREECE. 


ı, and displayed every symptom of intole- 


| Cuar. 


rable wo; for they had lost Masistius, who in 
comeliness and stature was the first of their 
generals, and in military courage and address 
only second to Mardonius.? 

The Grecians having thus bravely delivered 
theinselves from the incursions of the Persian 
cavalry, were now exposed to a still greater in- 
convenience, the scarcity of fresh water, which 
soon obliged them to decamp. Their fate suc- 
cess afforded a favourable moment for executing 
this dangerous measure. They proceeded in 
arms along the foot of mount Citheron, pre- 
pared to repel the attack of the enemy, by con- 
verting the column of march into an order 
of battle. They arrived without opposition 
at the place appointed. This was a plain 
near the village of Hysia, in the territory of 
Platæa, interspersed with many gentle emi- 
nences, adorned with a grove and temple 
sacred to the genius of the place, and enriched 
by the copious fountain Gargaphia; a neces- 
sary resource to the Greeks, as the enemy, by 
means of their cavalry and archers, commanded 
both sides of the Æsopus. 

It might be expected, that men prepared to 
defend every thing most dear to them, should 
have preserved in the field perfect agreenient 
and unanimity ; especially as the Greeks, on 
some occasions at least, seemed sensible that 
mutual union was necessary for the general 
safety. When the allies on both sides the 
isthmus had assembled in Attica, they vowed 
with common consent to the gods, and bound 
themselves by the most tremendous oaths, to 
maintain with steadfast adherence an unshaken 
fidelity to Greece, to prefer liberty to life, to 
obey the command of their leaders, and to bury 
their companions slain in battle. Should for- 
tune render them victorious (which to their 
present ardour seemed scarcely a matter of 
doubt,) they swore never to demolish any city 
whose inhabitants had concurred with the general 
voice on this important occasion, and never to 
rebuild the temples defaced by the Barbarians, 
but to leave them to the most distant posterity, 
as a monument of sacrilegious rage, and 
an incitement to honourable revenge. They 
swore also to institute an annual festival de- 
nominated the Common Liberty,’ and to con- 
secrate public games and sacrifices to the 
goddess, the great author of their union, and 
the venerable object of their worship. But 
these public-spirited sentiments continued not 
long to actuate them. We have already had 
occasion to remark several symptoms of ap- 
proaching animosity. Their dissensions soon 
broke out into an open rupture, and prevailed, 
even on the eve of a battle, not only betwecn 
rival republics, but in the bosom of almost every 
community. 

The first contest arose between the Athe- 
nians and Tegeans, about the command of the 
left wing. Both parties yielded the right, as 
the place of greatest honour to the Spartans. 
But the citizens of Tegea, in number three 
thousand, had been long deemed the best sol- 
diers in Arcadia; and in all the conjunct ex- 


2 Herodot. c. cexxiv. 
3 Ibid. I. ix. c. viii. et seq. 


X] 


peditions of the Peloponnesians, they had 
always obtained, unrivalled, the second hon- 
ours of the field. These they professed them- 
selves unwilling to relinquish, alleging the 
heroic exploits of their ancient kings; and 
asserting, “that the actions of the Athenians, 
performed either during their royal or demo- 
cratical government, could not bear a compari- 
son with their own: they appealed on this 
subject to the Lacedemonians, in conjunction 
with whom they had often fought and con- 
quered, and whose decision in their favour 
they rather claimed than requested.” This 
bold pretension the Athenians easily repelled, 
by the lustre of their usual eloquence. ‘ We 
know,” said they, “that the Greeks are here 
assembled, not to dispute about precedency, 
but to fight the Barbarian. Yet, as the Tegeans 
have mentioned their ancestors, it becomes us 
to maintain the immortal renown of our own. 
Need we niention their ancient victories over 
the impious Thebans; their chastisement of the 
insolent Eurystheus; their generous protection 
of the unfortunate sons of Hercules? When 
Greece was invaded by the warlike Amazons, 
and afterwards by the fiercer savages of Scythia 
and Thrace, the Athenians resisted and over- 
came the common enemy. What people fought 
with more bravery than they in the war of 
Troy? But perhaps we, who now address you, 
have degenerated from the glory of our ances- 
tors. Let the battle of Marathon efface the 
foul suspicion. There, unaided and alone, we 
defended the general safety, maintained the 
glory of Greece, and raised, by the prowess of 
our single republic, a trophy over forty nations, 
This exploit, had we no other to allege, en- 
titles us to the rank claimed by the Tegeans, 
and to far higher honours. But the present is 
not a time for such contests; place us there- 
fore, O Spartans! in whatever station you 
think fit; there, we will behave like brave 
mēn.” Their words were scarcely ended, when 
the whole army of the Lacedemonians cried 
out with one consent, “That the Athenians 
were far more worthy than the Tegeans, or any 
nation of Arcadia, to stand at the head of the 
left wing ;” accordingly they assumed that im- 
portant post.4 

Mean time the Barbarian army approached. 
The Medes and Persians encamped on the 
plain, fronting the Spartans: the Grecian auxi- 
liaries were placed in direct opposition to the 
Athenians. It is easy to perceive, even at this 
distance of time, the reason of such an arrange- 
ment. The Persians avoided to encounter the 
Athenian bravery, which they had already 
fatally experienced in the field of Marathon; 
and asthe Thebans were the most powerful 
and the warmest of their foreign allies, as well 
as the inveterate enemies of Athens, it was 
thought proper to oppose them to that side on 
which the Athenians were posted. Ambiguous 
oracles, attended by unfavourable omens and 
prophecies, had hitherto deterred Mardonius 
from venturing a general engagement; and he 
was at length determined to this measure, not 
from any auspicious change in the admoni- 


4 Horodot. l. ix. c. xxvi. et seq. Plut. in Aristid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


133 


tions of heaven,’ but from the apparent timi- 
dity oecasioned by the real dissensions of the 
Greeks. 

The same reasons which made Mardonius 
desire to preserve, made Pausanias wish to 
alter, the relative disposition of their respective 
camps. Excepting in the glorious contest at 
Thermopyla, in which they devoted themselves 
to death for the safety of their country, the 
Spartans had never contended with the Medes; 
but they had often fought and conquered the 
Beotians. Pausanias therefore desired (for, 
though dignified with the title of general, he 
could not command) the Athenians to change 
places with his countrymen. This request was 
cheerfully complied with; but other circum- 
stances sowed dissension in the Athenian 
camp. The quiet likewise of the Lacedemo- 
nians was disturbed by the quarrels between 
Pausanias and Anompharetus, the Spartan 
next in command; and conspiring with these 
internal animosities, the Persian horse beat up 
their quarters, intercepted their convoys, and, 
by an unexpected incursion, destroyed their 
watering-place. It thus became necessary again 
to decamp. The obscurity of midnight was 
chosen as the most convenient time for effect- 
ing this purpose; and the destined place of re- 
treat was a narrow slip of ground lying towards 
the source of the /Esopus, and confined between 
that river and mount Citheron. This post was 
at least preferred by the majority; for the 
Greeks were by no means unanimous: so that 
when the march was ordered, many of the 
allies abandoned their leaders; others took 
refuge in the neighbouring temples, to elude 
the pursuit of the horse; while Anompharectus 
the Spartan declared, “That neither he, nor 
the division under his command, should ever 
fly from the enemy :” and in consequence of its 
dispersion in so many different directions, the 
Grecian army presented next morning the ap- 
pearance, not of a regular march, but of a 
flight or rout. 

Mardonius was apprised that the Greeks had 
changed their order of battle. He was now 
informed, that they had abandoned their camp. 
Not doubting that fear had precipitated their 
retreat, he ordered his soldiers to pursue the 
fugitives, and to complete the victory. The 
Lacedemonians and Athenians were still within 
his reach; the former near the foot of the moun- 
tain, the latter in the middle of the plain. Hav- 
ing sent his Grecian auxiliaries, amounting to 
fifty thousand, against tho Athenians, he ad- 
vanced with the bravest of the Persian troops 
against that portion of the enemy which had 
shown an anxious solicitude to avoid his arms. 
Never did the contrast appear greater, than in 
the opposite appearance and behaviour of the 
hostile armies on this occasion. The Barbari- 
ans, ill armed, and totally ignorant of discipline, 


5 The prophets consulted were Greeks, who perhaps 
secretly served the cause of their country. Mardonins re- 
solved to engage the enemy, as we learn from Herodotna, 
without regnrding their predictions. Alexander of Macedon 
came in the night to the Greeian camp, to give intimation 
of that resolution: yet Mardonius seems to have been im: 
mediately determined to attack, by the circumstances men 
tioned in the text. 

6 Plutarch in Aristid. 


134 


advanced without order, and with a loud in- 
sulting noise. The Lacedemonians, carefully 
covered with their shields, observed in silence 
the result of their sacrifices. While the heavenly 
admonitions were unfavourable, they patiently 
received the darts and javelins which the ene- 
my threw upon them. But as soon as Pausa- 
nias, casting his eyes towards a reighbouring 
temple of Junc, ind devoutly entreating the 
protection of the goddess, had obtained, in the 
changing aspect of the victims, a propitious 
answer to his prayer, they proceeded with in- 
trepidity to close with their opponents.! The 
Persians, reinforced with the Sacw, a Scythian 
tribe, sustained the attack with great bravery. 
Immense numbers were slain; but new num- 
bers succeeded, crowding together in tumultu- 
ous disorder, and making a hideous outcry, as 
if they had intended to tear in pieces and to 
devour the enemy. Mardonius, mounted on a 
white steed of uncommon strength and swift- 
ness, was distinguished in every part of the 
battle by the splendour of his appearance, but 
still more by deeds of signal valour. He was 
attended by a thousand horsemen, consisting 
of the flower of the Persian nobility, all alike 
ambitious to imitate the example, and to emu- 
late the fame, of their leader. Had their skill 
been equal to their courage, or had they previ- 
ously bestowed as much pains in disciplining 
their troops, as in improving their own agility 
and address, either the Greeks must have been 
conquered, or the battle must have remained 
doubtful. But the Barbarians acted without 
union or concert; and as they fought singly, 
were successively defeated. It is the nature, 
and the greatest disadvantage of cavalry, not 
to increase in force in proportion to the redu- 
plication of their ranks. The Grecian phalanx, 
on the other hand, received an accession of 
strength from every addition to its depth; the 
ranks behind supported those before; no power 
Was misspent or unexerted; and the effect might 
be continually augmented, till it became irre- 
sistible. Availing themselves of this circum- 
stance, the Lacedemonians thickened their 
ranks, extended their spears, sustained the 
shock, and penetrated the depth, of the brave 
Persian squadron. Mardonius fell by the for- 
tunate arm of the Spartan Aieimnestus.2_ The 
death of the general was immediately followed 
by the defeat of the Persians, and the defeat 
of the Persians by the flight of the Barbarian 
army. Artabazus, the Parthian chief, had from 
the beginning condemned the rash measures 
of Mardonius. He commanded forty thousand 
men, who were prepared on every occasion to 
follow the example of their leader. As soon as 
he perceived the confusion of the Persians, he 
made the signal for his troops to quit the field. 
He conducted them through the territory of 
the Phocians, and arriving by hasty marches at 
the Hellespont, before the news of the defeat 


1 Herodot. 1. ix. c. lxii. et seq. 

2 Composed of two Greek words, which may be translated 
“of immortal memory :” an instance, among many, that the 
Greeks frequently gave names characteristic of persons; a 
custom which likewise prevailed much among the Jews. 
See Michaclis’s Translation and Annotations on Genesis, 
p. 37. et passim. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[ Cuar. 


and death of Mardonius, returned in safety to 
the Asiatic coast, with the forces entrusted to 
his care.3 

The remainder of the discomfited Barbarians 
sought refuge in their camp, which, as we have 
already mentioned, had been strengthened by 
a considerable fortification. The Spartans pur- 
sued them with great ardour, but were unable 
to force their encampment. The Tegeans and 
other troops seconded the attack, but no im- 
pression could be made on the wall, till the 
arrival of the Athenians. ‘These generous de- 
fenders of the cause of liberty had repulsed the 
Grecian auxiliaries, who impiously assisted the 
enemies of their country. The behaviour of 
the greater part of the traitors furnished the 
occasion of an easy victory; for, unable to meet 
the just reproaches and indignant looks of their 
countrymen, they soon betook themselves to 
flight, which, in the present case, seemed more 
honourable than resistance. The Thebans 
alone opposed with great perseverance the 
Athenian valour; they did not desist from 
hostility, till several hundreds were slain; and 
when compelled to quit the field, they fled to- 
wards Beotia, and shut themselves up within 
the strong walls of their city. Instead of pur- 
suing these fugitives, though their domestic and 
inveterate foes, the Athenians, with a laudable 
moderation and prudence, probably inspired by 
Aristides, then one of their generals, directed 
their march towards the Lacedemonian forces, 
which had already engaged and put to flight 
the main strength of the enemy. The Athe- 
nians, however, came in time to complete the 
glory of that memorable day. They attacked 
with redoubled vigour the fortification, which 
had been in vain assailed by their allies; and 
having effected a breach in the wall, entered 
the Persian camp. They were followed by the 
brave soldiers of Tegea, and afterwards by the 
Spartans. The Barbarians were seized with 
consternation at seeing so many myriads con- 
fined within a narrow space. The means of 
their expected safety became the principal 
cause of their destruction. Fear hindered them 
to fight; the wall hindered them to fly; the 
great number of the enemy made it dangerous 
for the victors to give quarter; resentment of 
past injuries prompted them to revenge; of 
near two hundred thousand Barbarians, not 
two thousand escaped the fury of the Grecian 
spear.4 

The event of this bloody cngagement not 
only delivered the Greeks from the danger of 
servitude, but gave them posscssion of greater 
wealth than they could ever have expected to 
possess. In his precipitate retreat from Greece, 
Xerxes left behind him all his riches and mag- 
nificence. His most valuable effects were be- 
stowed on Mardonius, the flatterer of his incli- 
nations, and the unfortunate minister of his 
revenge. The rest was divided among his nfe- 
rior favourites; and independent of the bounty 
of the prince, the tents of the Persian nobles 
furnished a wide profusion of elegance and 
splendour. Couches magnificently embroider- 
ed; tables of gold and silver; bowls and goblets 


3 Hcrodot. l. ix. c. Ixv. 4 Ibid. 1. ix. cap. c. 


X.J 


of gold; stalls and mangers of brass, curiously 
wrought and ornamented; chains, bracelets, 
scimetars, some of solid gold, otliers adorned 
with precious stones; and, to crown all, many 
chesis of Persian money, which began at that 
time, and continued long afterwards, to be 
current in Greece. Among the common mass 
of spoil, Herodotus reckons a great many Per- 
sian women, besides innumerable horses and 
camels. The whole being collected into one 
place, the tenth was consecrated to the gods. 
A tenth of the remainder was bestowed on the 
general. Peculiar presents were offered to the 
temples of Olympian Jove, Isthmian Neptune, 
and Delphian Apollo, the favourite divinities 
of the whole Grecian name; nor did the Athe- 
nians forget to show particular gratitude to 
their adored Minerva. Prizes were afterwards 
distributed among the bravest of the surviving 
warriors; for though the victory had been ob- 
tained with little blood, yet several hundreds 
had fallen, especially of the most generous and 
daring; among whom, were ninety-one Spar- 
tans, fifty-two Athenians and sixteen men of 
Tegea. Callicrattides, a Spartan, the bravest 
and most beautiful of the Greeks, was slain by 
an arrow, before Pausanias, who had not yet 
finished the sacrifice, had given the signal of 
engagement. As he fell, he said to those around 
him, that he was contented to die for Greece, 
but regretted dying ingloriously, having per- 
formed nothing worthy of himself or the com- 
mon cause. But in the battle itself none of 
the warriors behaved with such distinguished 
bravery as Aristodemus, who alone of three 
hundred Spartans survived the action at Ther- 
mopyle. This circumstance had rendered him 
contemptible in the eyes of his countrymen. 
He was continually upbraided with the base 
desertion of his companions. The most heroic 
deeds could not restore him to the good opinion 
of the public; and it was asserted by the Spar- 
tans, that even on the present occasion, as he 
had determined to seek a voluntary death in 
order to efface the stain of his former infamy, 
he was not entitled to any of those honours 
which are deservedly bestowed on the genuine 
efforts of spontaneous valour.§ 

The Greeks buried their dead with every cir- 
cumstance of funeral pomp, erected in the field 
of battle conspicuous trophies of their renown, 
and appropriated about twenty thousand 
pounds for dedicating temples and statues to 
the tutelary deities of Platæa, the illustrious 
scene of victory. A few days were spent in 
these transactions; after which it was deter- 
mined, by universal consent, to march into 
Beeotia, in order to chastise the perfidy of the 
Thebans. On the eleventh day after the 
battle they arrived in the neighbourhood of 
Thebes, ravaged the territory, and made ap- 
proaches to the walls. The citizens, who were 
not all equally guilty or equally obnoxious, 
escaped general destruction by surrendering 
the leaders of the faction which abetted the in- 
terest of the Medes. The traitors were carried 
to Corinth, condemned without trial, and sacri- 
ficed to the manes of their countrymen who 


ö Herodot. i. ix. c. lxx. 


HISTORY OF CREECE. 


135 


had fallen at Marathon, Salamis, and Platæa, 
in defence of political liberty and national in- 
dependence.® 

The battle of Platæa was fought the twenty- 
second of September; and on tle same day 
another battle, not less glorious or less decisive, 
was fought between the same nations at the 
promontory of Mycalé in Ionia, opposite to the 
isle of Samos. The shattered remnant of the 
Persian feet, which had escaped destruction on 
the fatal twentieth of October of the preceding a 
year, took refuge in the friendly ports of Asia 
Minor. The victorious armament had suffered 
too much in repeated shocks with a superior 
force, to engage at that late season in the pur- 
suit of an enemy, whose strength, amounting 
to above four hundred vessels, was still nearly 
the double of their own. The little squadron 
of Themistocles, averse to inactivity, found 
occupation, as we already had occasion to no- 
tice, in laying the islands of the /{gean under 
contribution. The great body of the fleet ren- 
dezvoused in the harbours of Ægina. There 
the Grecians continued during the winter, and 
before the season for action approached, the 
command was bestowed on Xantippus the 
Athenian, and on Leotychides the Spartan king. 
To these commanders, whose abilities and in- 
fluence in their respective republics we for- 
merly had an opportunity to mention, there 
arrived early in the spring a secret deputation 
from several cities of Jonia, intreating that the 
valour of the European Greeks, which had 
been so successfully employed in their own de- 
fence, might be still further exerted in deliver- 
ing from bondage their brethren in Asia. In 
consequence of this invitation the fleet sailed 
eastward, and had scarcely reached the coast 
of Delos, when a second embassy came from 
the Samians, propdsing the same measures as 
the first, and further adding, that the Persian 
fleet, now lying in the harbour of Samos, 
might be attacked and defeated without danger 
or difficulty. The Grecians seized with eager- 
ness the favourable opportunity of terminating 
the war; but before they arrived at Samos, the 
enemy suspecting their motions, and unwilling 
to hazard another engagement at sea, had re- 
tired to the Ionic coast, and according to the 
custom of that age, not only drawn their ships 
on shore, but surrounded them with a ditch 
and palisade, and even a stone wall of consi- 
derable strength. The vessels thus secured, 
the sailors amounting to forty thousand, com- 
manded by Artayndes, formed a camp along the 
shore. They were reinforced by the Persian 
army under Tigranes, computed at sixty thou- 
sand. It appears not whether this powerful body 
of men made any attempt to disturb the landing 
of the Greeks, who at the highest computation 
could not amount to a fourth part of their num- 
ber. It seems most probable that they disdain- 
ed this measure, and though they acknow- 
ledged their inferiority at sea, determined to 
hazard at land a general engagement, in which 
the isles and Hellespont, as well as the flourish- 
ing cities of the Asiatic coast should form the 
important prize of victory. 


6 Herodot. I. ix. c. Ixxxv. 


136 HISTORY OF GREECE. 


The Greeks did not decline the battle. Xan- 
tippus is said to have made use of a similar 
contrivance with that employed by Themisto- 
cles at Artemisium, for depriving the enemy of 
their Grecian auxiliaries.: A more probable 
stratagem is ascribed to Leotychides, who, in 
order to encourage his troops, is said to have 
industriously spread a report that their coun- 
trymen had obtained a signal victory at Platæa. 
This report, by whatever means? it was raised 
and circulated, had doubtless a considerable 
effect in deciding the fortune ofthe day. Other 
circumstances, not less powerful, were, the 
general revolt of the Asiatic Greeks, and the 
silent contest of honour between the Spartans 
and Athenians. Among the Barbarian troops 
the Persians behaved with uncommon bravery ; 
and on the side of the Grecians, the battle of 
Mycalé was more bloody than any other fought 
in the course of the war. It deserves attention, 
that, in all these memorable actions, tle Greeks 
had no resource but in victory. But the Bar- 
barians had provided probable means of safety, 
even in case of a defeat. On the present occa- 
sion they had endeavoured not only to secure a 
retreat within a strongly fortified camp, but to 
acquire an undisturbed passage through the 


[ Cuar. 


narrow defiles of Mycalé. Yet all these pre- 
cautions were ineffectual against the valour 
and fortune of the Greeks. The Milesians, 
posted by the enemy to guard the passes of 
the mountain, prevented, instead of promoting, 
their escape.’ The Spartans pursued them 
with great slaughter in that difection; while 
the Athenians, assisted by the allies of Corinth, 
Sicyon, and Trezené, advanced with undaunt- 
ed bravery to attack their camp. The Asiatic 
Greeks, who at all times acknowledged the 
warlike pre-eminence of their European bre- 
thren, emulated, in the present engagement 
alone, in which they fought for every thing 
dear to them, the admired valour of their an- 
cestors. Above forty thousand Persians perish- 
ed in the field; many fell in the pursuit, or 
in defending their entrenchments; the re- 
mainder fled in disorder, nor thought them- 
selves secure till they had reached the walls of 
Sardis. Their ships, their camp, the freedom 
of Ionia, and the undisturbed possession of 
the Asiatic coast, formed the inestimable prize 
of the victors; and thus the expedition of 
Xerxes, undertaken with a view to enslave 
Europe, restored liberty to the fairest portion 
of Asia.3 


we 


CHAPTER XI. 


Military Glory of Greece—Enemies to whom that Country was exposed—Foundation and Growth 
of Carthage—The flourishing Condition of Magna Grecia-—Excites the Jealousy of the Car- 
thaginians—Who enter into a League with Xerxes—The object of this Alliance—Causes of 
the singular Prosperity of Magna Grecia—History of Pythagoras, and of his Philosophy— 
The Carthaginians invade Sicily—Their Disasters—Glory of Gelon—His Treaty with the 
Carthaginians—Causes of the Decay of Magna Grecia. 


THE beginning of the: fifth century before 
Christ forms the most glorious era in the 
history of Greece. While the republics of 
Ol Athens and Sparta humbled the 
ymp- pride of Asia, the flourishing set- 
er z tlements on the Hellespont and 
- C. 480. the Hadriatic overawed the fierce 
Barbarians of Europe;4 and the southern 
colony of Cyrené restrained, within their native 
limits, the savage ferocity of the Libyans. 
The north, south, and east thus acknowledging 
the ascendant of the Grecian valour and 
genius, Rome still contended in the west, with 
the obstinacy of the Volsci, for the rude vil- 
lages of Latium: yet on this side, from which 
the stream of conquest was destined, in a fu- 
ture age, to flow over the world, the Greeks 


1 The story is improbable, because the Asiatic Greeks 
had already declared their intention to revolt. It was not 
the interest of Xantippus, therefore, to make the Persians 
suspect their fidelity, since treacherous friends are always 
more dangerous than open enemies. 

2 Herodotus, (l. ix. c. c.) and Diodorus (l. xi. ¢. XXXv.) 
differ in their accounts. 

3 Herodot. l. ix. €. xc.—c. cxiv. Diodorus Siculus, l. xi. 

xxxiv.—c. xxxviii. 

4 Herodot. l. vi. Thucydid. l. i. 


5 Strabo, l. xvii. 6 Diodor. l. xi. 


had already most danger to apprehend, and 
most laurels to acquire; not, however, from 
Rome, but from the implacable” enemy of the 
Roman name, 

The foundation and growth of Carthage, 
which have been so successfully adorned by 
poetical fiction, are very imperfectly explained 
in history. It is known, that at least eight hun- 
dred and ninety years8 before the Christian 
era, a Phænician colony settled on that fertile 
projecture of the African coast, which boldly 
advances into the Mediterranean, to meet, as it 
were, and to defy the shores of Sicily and Italy, 
planted in the following century by Greeks, 


7 With what energy does Virgil express the eternal en- 
mity between Rome and Carthage ? 


Littora littoribus contraria, fluctibus undas, 
Imprecor, arma armis; pugnent ipsique nepotes. — 
Æneid. l. iv. 


8 B. C.891. Petav. de Doctr. Temporum. Yet, as there 
is a gap in the Carthaginian history of several centuries, 
every man of taste will he desirous of extending the duration 
of this dark and unknown period, to have the pleasure of 
believing that Æneas and Dido were contemporaries: an 
opinion more probable than that of Sir Isaac Newton, who 
would bring down the time of Æneas and the era of the 
Trojan war to the age of Dido and the foundation of Car 
thage. 


XL] 


with whom the republic of Carthage, long be- 
fore the age of her great Hannibal, waged many 
cruel and bloody wars. For three centuries after 
their establishment, the Carthaginians seem to 
have silently but successfully availed them- 
selves of the natural fertility of their soil, the 
conveniency of their harbours, the skill and 
dexterity of their artisans, the adventurous 
spirit of their mariners; above all, of the pro- 
found wisdom of their government, which had 
been established on such admirable principles, 
that, from the foundation of their city till the 
age of the philosopher Aristotle,’ no tyrant had 
oppressed the freedom, no sedition had dis- 
turbed the tranquillity of Carthage.10 

From this peaceful and happy obscurity, the 
Carthaginians first emerged into notice in con- 
sequence of their opposition to the naval en- 
terprises of the Asiatic Greeks, who, about the 
middle of the sixth century before Christ, fly- 
ing the oppressive domination of Persia, threw 
themselves on the western shores and islands 
of the Mediterranean. As a maritime and en- 
terprising nation the Greeks were naturally 
the rivals of the Carthaginians ; and the Pho- 
ceans, who had left the coast of Ionia to avoid 
the cruel tyranny of the satrap Harpagus, had 
landed at, or perhaps founded, Aleria in the 
isle of Corsica, before they finally settled at 
Velia!! in Italy, and Marseilles in Gaul.!2 The 
Carthaginians, who had already formed esta- 
blishments in Corsica, regarded the whole 
island as a dependency of their republic, and 
set themselves to oppose with vigour the Gre- 
cian invaders. From a similar motive the Tus- 
cans embraced the same design; and the most 
ancient naval engagement, distinctly recorded 
in history, was fought in the Sardinian sea, 
between the Phoceans with sixty sail on the 
one side, against the Tuscans and Carthagi- 
nians with double that number on the other.!3 
The Greeks had the whole glory of the battle; 
they destroyed forty of the enemy’s ships, and 
compelled the rest to fly. But the smallness 
of their numbers, greatly diminished by their 
desperate efforts in defence of the honour of 
their nation against a superior force, obliged 
them to abandon the project of settling in 
Corsica. 

Though the issue of this memorable sea- 
fight tends to dispel the cloud of fiction con- 
cerning the remote voyages and 


Olymp. ancient naval power of the Car- 
Ixx. 1. thaginians, yet it cannot be doubt 
A. C. 500, ‘haginians, y o fol. 


ed, that in the beginning of the fol- 
lowing century, and before the invasion of 
Xerxes, they were the most powerful commer- 
cial nation in the world. The proud centre of 
their empire was surrounded by a cluster of 
colonies and tributary cities, which extended 


9 Aristot. de Ropub. 1. ii. c. xi. 

10 If Dido laid the foundation of so much prosperity 
and happiness, she might boast, with becoming diguily, of 
having secured immortal fame: 


Vixi, et quem dederat cursum fortuna peregi, 
Urbem præclaram statui, mea mmnia vidi: 
Et nunc magna mei sub terris ibit imago. 
ViRGIL ibid. 
11 Diodor. 1. v. and Cluverius Sicil. Ant. p. 507. 
12 Thucydid. 1. i. 
13 Thucydid. l. i. et Herodot. 1l. vi. 


S 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


137 


above a thousand miles! along the coast of 
Africa. They were masters of Sardinia and 
the northern coast of Sicily. They had 
established colonies not only in Corsica, but in 
Malta and the Balerian isles. They often 
visited the Casseterides. They probably first 
discovered the Canaries, whose equable and 
happy temperature entitled them to the epithet 
of Fortunate. They had appropriated the gold 
mines of Spain, the Peru and Mexico of the 
ancient world ;!6 and all these advantages be- 
ing directed by the prudent enterprise of the 
magistrates, consisting chiefly of merchants,” 
and improved by the patient industry of the 
people, who knew that by gaining wealth they 
must attain respect, rendered Carthage the 
centre of general commerce. From Egypt 
they imported linen and the papyrus; the 
coasts of the Red Sea furnished them with 
spices, perfumes, gold, pearls, and precious 
stones.!8 The rich carpets of Persia adorned 
the palaces of the Carthaginian magistrates. 
From Spain they drew the precious metals 
necessary to facilitate their cominerce; and 
from Britain and other provinces of the north, 
they derived iron, lead, tin, and copper, equally 
necessary to second all the efforts of their in- 
dustry. The Carthaginian exports consisted 
partly in the produce of their fertile soil, but 
chiefly in the ingenious labours of their arti- 
ficers; grains, fruits, honey, leather, and flax 
of a superior kind ;!9 naval stores, particu- 
larly ropes made of a species of broom called 
spartum; household furniture, toys, and the 
materials of the highly valued Punicean co- 
lour. Their mechanic arts had attained a de- 
gree of perfection which was acknowledged 
and admired by their enemies 320 but the libe- 
ral arts,and particularly poetry and eloquence,?! 


14 From the western boundary of Cyrenaica to the Straits 
of Gibraltar, Shaw reckons 1420 geographical miles; but 
this was the extent of the Carthaginian dominion in the 
greatest splendour of the republic. Shaw’s Travels, p. 150. 

15 Polyb. l. iii. c. xxii. 

16 Auctor. apud Hendreich Respub. Carthag. 1. i. 

17 In this respect the government of Carthage was very 
different from that of Crete, and particularly of Sparta, 
with both which Aristotle compares it. Isocrates (ad Ni- 
coclem) says, that in civil affairs the Carthaginian govern- 
ment was aristocratical; in military, royal: this probably 
was the case in the earliest times. ‘The chief magistrates 
were called Suffetes, which, in the Hebrew language, sig- 
nifies judges (Bochart, Canaan,) and might therefore be 
naturally translated by the word SxctAess, in Greek. But 
it appears from Aristotle, that these judges or kings, who 
were two in number, were nothing more than annual ma- 
gistrates, who convoked the scnate, and presided in that 
assembly. When the senate and suffetes were of one mind, 
the people had no vote in the management of public affairs; 
but when their opinions were different, it belonged to the 
people to decide. Aristotle regards this as an imperfection 
in thcir constitution; and time justified his opinion. Ina 
commercial republic, where the people gradually become 
more rich aud more licentious, such a regulation naturally 
tended to throw too much power into their hands. During 
the century which elapsed from Aristotle to Hannibal, tho 
people of Carthage became more powerful than the senate; 
at Rome the senate were more powerful than the people: 
and to these circumstances chiefly, the most judicious an- 
thor of antiquity ascribes tho very ditlerent fortune of the 
two nations in the ever ncmorablo wars waged between 
them. Polyb. I. vi. 

18 Pliny, l. xxxviii. c. vii. tells ns, that carbuncles were 
so common in Carthage, that they were generally known 
by the name of Carthaginian. 

19 Xenophon, de Venatione. 

20 Cato do Re Rustica, et Valerius Maximus, l. vii. 

21 The great Hannibal was a lover of Greek learning, and 
composed several books in that language. Cornelius Ne- 


138 HISTORY OF GREECE. 


seem never to have flourished or taken root in 

\their republic: a circumstance more fatal to 
the renown of Carthage than all the destruc- 
tive ravages of the Romans, whose immortal 
hate would have found it more difficult to abo- 
lish the elegant inventions of genius, than to 
extinguish the most splendid monuments of 
wealth and grandeur. 

Few individuals are able to enjoy, without 
abusing, the gifts of fortune ;.and no nation 
ever possessed power, without aspiring at con- 
quest. But the commercial ambition of the 
Carthaginians was distinguished by an exclu- 
sive and jealous spirit, which sought to stifle 
the activity and improvements of every people 
that might ever become their rival. In the 
end of the sixth century before Christ, and 
twenty-eight years before the invasion of 
Xerxes, they concluded a treaty with Rome, 
recently delivered from the tyranny of its 
ings, which marks the utmost solicitude to 
prevent the new republic from ever enter- 
ing into correspondence, or ever gaining ac- 
quaintance! with the dependencies of Car- 
thage. The Greek colonies in Italy and Si- 
cily, which, within the course of sixty years, 
had (for reasons that will immediately be ex- 
plained) received such accessions of strength 
and splendour, as entitled those countries to 
the appellation of Magna Grecia,? more justly 
alarmed the jealousy, and provoked the en- 
vious resentment of the Carthaginian magis- 
trates. The Greeks were already masters of 
the eastern isles and shores of the Mediterra- 
nean. They were not only a warlike, but an 
ingenious and commercial nation. The naval 
force of the Phoczans alone had defied and 
disgraced the united fleets of the Tuscans and 
Carthaginians. The latter therefore beheld, 
with the utmost satisfaction, the continual 
sparks of hostility that broke out between the 
Greeks and Persians. They learned, with ad- 
miration and delight, the mighty preparations 
of Xerxes; but were still more delighted when 
the great king, who had been accustomed to 
receive the presents and the adulation of the 
tributary princes of Asia, condescended to de- 
mand an equal alliance with their republic ; 
probably granted them subsidies to raise troops 
in Spain, Gaul, and the northern parts of Italy; 
and only required them to join their efforts 
with his own, to punish, and if possible, to ex- 
tirpate the natural enemies of both. The 
crafty Africans greedily accepted proposi- 
tions, seemingly so favourable to their interest; 
and, after three years preparations, had col- 
lected an armament of two thousand ships 


pos in Hannibal.—Silenus, another Carthaginian, wrote 
history in Greek. Cicer. de Divinat.—Sallust speaks of 
Punic books in his history of the Jugurthine war; and we 
know that Mago’s Treatise of Rural Economy, in twenty- 
eight books, was translated by order of the Roman senate, 
although the elder Cato had previously handled that im- 

ortant subject. I mention not the spurious voyage of 

anno, since better proofs of the Carthaginian literature 
may be found in the second and eighteenth books of Pliny. 
But two observations naturally present themselves, which 
justify what is said in the text; first, that the Carthaginians 
wrote rather on the useful than ornamental arts; and se- 
condly, that their greatest writers preferred the Greek to the 
Punic language. 

1 Polyb. l. iii. c. xxii. 

2 Strabo, |. viii. p. 389. 


[Cuar. 


of war, gnd three thousand transports to con- 
vey an army of three hundred thousand men 
into Magna Grecia. It was determined be- 
tween the confederates, that while Xerxes 
poured his millions into the centre of Greece, 
and rooted out the original stock of the devoted 
nation, the Carthaginians should cut off its 
flourishing branches in Italy and Sicily. The 
terms of the agreement were carefully ob- 
served; the combined attack was made at the 
time appointed; and Europe is interested in 
knowing to what particular causes must be 
ascribed the failure of expeditions, which, if 
successful, would probably have inverted her 
destiny, and deprived her of the boasted supe- 
riority which she thenceforth maintained over 
the other quarters of the world. 

Whoever has observed the desolate barbarity 
of Calabria, or reflected on the narrow extent 
and present weakness of Sicily, cannot hear, 
without a mixture of surprise and incredulity, 
that five centuries before Christ, those countries 
contained above twenty warlike communities, 
several of whom could send into the field a 
hundred thousand fighting men. The hasty 
glance of impatient ignorance will confidently 
reject, on this subject, the evidence of anti- 
quity, as contrary to probability and experience; 
the contemplative visionary will admit the fact, 
and deduce from it many gloomy reflections on 
the old age and decay of the world; but the 
more practical philosopher will attempt to dis- 
cover the causes of the ancient and actual state 
of Magna Grecia, in the history and institu- 
tions of that country during the respective 
periods of time which are the objects of his 
research. 

The establishment of Eubean Cume, the 
mother of Parthenopé, or Naples, and the foun- 
dation of a few other Grecian cities in Italy 
and Sicily, remounts, as already mentioned, to 
the heroic ages; but by far the greater number 
of Greek colonies in those parts were planted 
during the eighth century before the Christian 
era,’ and chiefly, 1. by the Eubcans, whose 
principal city, Chalcis, usually furnishing the 
conductor of the colony, gave the epithet of 
Chalcidian to the new settlements; 2. by the 
Achæans of Peloponnesus, who were of the 
Eolian tongue and lineage; and, 3. by the Do- 
rian states of that peninsula, especially Corinth; 
to which city may be applied the observation 
of ancient republicans concerning the fathers 
of Cato’ and Brutus, that as children often de- 
rived lustre from the merit of their parents, so 
Corinth acquired renown from the splendour 
and prosperity of its children. Besides their 
powerful colonies in Corcyra, Leucas, Anac- 
torium, Ambracia, whose transactions form 
on such an important part of the his- 
xi y H tory of ancient Greece, the Corin- 
A. C "09 thians founded Syracuse, which 

sve "=<" soon became, and long continued, 
the capital of Sicily. Seventy years after their 
establishment there, the inhabitants of Syra- 
cuse built Acras, and afterwards, at an equal 
distance of time, Camerina. Many other cities 


3 Herodot. l. vii. et Diodor. 1. xi. 
4 Between the 10th and 30th Olympiads, and the yeara 
737 and 777 D. C. 


XL] 


of less note owed their birth to the same me- 
tropolis; so that in the sixth century before 
Christ, the Syracusans had extended their set- 
tlements over all the southern coast of the 
island.5 We had already an opportunity to 
mention on what occasion the Lacedsemonians 
founded the city of Tarentum in 
i2 Italy; thirty-nine years afterwards, 
res 707 Rhegium was built by the Messe- 

ei * nians and Chalcidians, the former 
of whom (as we have related above) had al- 
ready settled at Messene, on the opposite shore 
of Sicily. The citizens of Tarentum founded 
Heraclea, situated on the Tarentine gulf, and 
perhaps gave an accession of inhabitants to 
Locri, which, though originally planted by the 
Lolians, seems early to have used the Doric 
dialect. The Rhodians, who were also of the 
Dorie race, built the city of Gela in Sicily, 
forty-five years after the foundation of Syra- 
cuse ; and Gela planted the flou- 


Olymp. 


a aa *  rishingcolony of Agrigentum,which 
A C 592, Soon surpassed the splendour of its 


metropolis, and became the second 
city ın the island. 

By means of these powerful establishments, 
the Dorians acquired, and always maintained 
an ascendant in Sicily ; but the Achzan colo- 
nies, who were of the Eolian blood and lan- 
guage,’ commanded the Italian shore. Crotona, 
the most considerable city of the Achæans, and 
of all Italy in ancient times, was built seven 
hundred and ten years before Christ. Sybaris, 
its rival, was founded about the saine time, and 
by the same nation. The former sent colonies 
to Tirina, Caulonia, and Padosia; the latter 
built Laus, Metapontum, and Posidonia, or 
Pestum,? whose admired ruins attest the an- 
cient wealth and grandeur of the Greck cities 
of Italy. 

In this deduction, had we followed the order 
of time, we ought to have mentioned, first of 
all, the Ionian colonies, who came from the isle 
of Eubæœa. The inhabitants of that island 
built Naxus in Sicily, a year before the foun- 
dation of Syracuse ;!0 but neither that,nor their 
settlements at Catana, Egesta, Leontium, ever 
attained considerable populousness or splen- 
dour. And it deserves to be particularly re- 
marked, that, for reasons which will appear in 
the sequel of this work, the Ionians, who set- 
tled chiefly near the eastern shore of Sicily, 
never rivalled the power\and fame of their 
Dorian and Eolian neighbours, but fell short 
of those nations in Magna Grecia, as much as 
they surpassed them in the shorcs and islands 
of Asia. 

Instead of fatiguing the memory of our read- 
ers with the names of less considerable states or 
cities, which had little influence on the general 
affairs of the whole country,!! it is of more im- 


5 Scymnus, v. 293. Thucyd. 1. vi. et Herodot. |. vin. 

6 Thucyd. l. vi. 

7 Strabo, l. viii. p. 513. assures us of tho latter circum- 
stance, which is of more importance than tho uncertain 
genealogy of the ancient Grecian tribes. 

8 Dionys. Halicarn. 1. ii. 

9 Scymnus, v. 245. 10 Thucyd. 

11 The Magna Græcia, which I always nse in the sense 
of Strabo, cited above, to denote the Greck settlements in 
Sicily as well as Italy, being the most accessiblo part. of the 
Grecian dominions, has been more fully described by the 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


139 


portance to examine the circumstances to which 
the inhabitants of Magna Græcia owed their 
flourishing situation at the period of time of 
which we write, when (it may be 


2 symp. boldly affirmed) these colonies 
i C. 500 equalled, and exceeded, the wealth 


and power of the mother country. 
We shall not insist on the well-known physical 
and moral causes which usually contribute to 
the rapid growth of newly-establishcd colonies, 
It is evident, that amidst the cquality of for- 
tune, and simplicity of manners, which com- 
monly prevail in such communities, men who 
have a wide country before them must natu- 
rally multiply far beyond the proportion of na- 
tions corrupted and weakened by the vices of 
wealth, luxury, and above all, of vanity, which 
perhaps is the greatest encmy to the increase 
of the human species. It is sufficient barely to 
mention the natural fertility of Magna Grecia, 
and particularly of Sicily, which in many s 
produced a hundred fold.!2 The Greeks v 


sailed thither from Peloponnesus, carried with ~~ 


them the knowledge and practice of agricul- 
ture, which had early attained a high degree of 
perfection in their peninsula; and the exuberant 
soil of Sicily, improved by cultivation, soon cx- 
hibited a picture of that rich abundance, which, 
in later times, made that beautiful island be 
entitled the granary of Rome. 

The peculiar situation of the Achwans and 
Dorians, from whom, chiefly, the colonies in 
Magna Grecia derived their origin, had a con- 
siderable influence in accelerating the popula- 
tion and grandeur of these new establishments. 
The Achæans, whose republic became so fa- 
mous in later times, and that in consequence 
of circumstances which it is necessary at prce- 
sent to describe, originally inhabited a long, but 
narrow strip of ground, not more fertile than 
extensive, along the Corinthian gulf, whose 
rocky shores were destitute of good harbours, 
But the impartial and generous spirit of the 
Achæan laws early compensated the natural 
defects of their territory. They were the first, 
and long the only republic of Greece, who ad- 
mitted strangers into their community on equal 
terms with the ancient citizens.) In their truly 
free country, no powerful capital, like Thebes in 
Beeotia, or Athens in Attica, dominecred over 
the inferior towns and villages. Twelve cities, 
which had common laws and iustitutions, and 
afterwards common weights and measures,!6 
sent deputies to Helicé, which is distinguished 
by Homer!7 as the most considerable town of 
Achaia. That place being destroyed by au 
carthquake!8 three hundred and seventy three 


moderns than any other. The immense collection of the 
"Thesaurus Siculus, and particularly vols. i. iv. vil. viii. and 
xiii. afford useful materials, as well as Cluveris Sicil. An- 
tiqua, and Fazellus de Rebns Siculis, and the excellent 
work of Gio. Balt. Caruso, Meworie istoriche di quanto e 
accaduto in Sicilia dal tempo dé suoi primi habitanti fino 
ai Norinanni. 

12 Strabo, l. viii. 

14 Plutareh, in Arato, p. 1031. 

15 Polybius, l. ii. p. 178. 

16 Polybius, ibid. mentions this cirenmstance, to show 
how distrous they were to have every thiug common and 
equal among them. 17 IL. ii. in the catalogue. 

13 Strabo, l. viii. p. 589. says, the earthquake happened 
two years before the battle of Leucra, which war tought 
371 years before Christ. 


13 Diodorus I. xvi. 


r 


140 HISTORY OF GREECE. [Cuar. 


years before Christ, gx became the scat of 
the general congress, which regulated public 
affairs, and appointed annual magistrates and 
generals to execute théir resolutions, who were 
accountable to the congress, or council, as the 
members of the council themselves were to the 
cities by which they had been named and con- 
stituted.! This excellent system of govern- 
ment, which checked the ambition, while it 
maintdined the independence of Achaia,? de- 
fended that fortunate country against the con- 
vulsions which shook and overwhelmed the 
most powerful republics of Greece. It was 
A.C. 231 then that the Achzans, who during 
— o s had enjoyed their i- 
many ages had enjoy equi 
table laws in silence, emerged from obscurity ; 
and communicating their government on equal 
terms to the neighbouring cities of Pelopon- 
nesus, preserved the feeble spark of liberty, 
every where extinguished around them, for one 
hundred and thirty-six years, till they finally 
yielded to the power and policy of Rome. 
This short period of war and tumult has been 
minutely described in history, while the many 
happy centuries that preceded it are but occa- 
sionally glanced at by ancient writers: and 
were it not for the defeats and calamities which 
the Achæans suffered in later times, we should, 
perhaps, be ignorant that their ancestors an- 
ciently possessed an equitable and generous 
policy, which being transported with them into 
Magna Grecia, could not fail to promcte the 
happiness and prosperity of that delightful 
country.4 
The condition of the Dorians at the time 
when they planted colonies in Italy and Sicily, 
is not less worthy of remark. The Dorian 
states of Peloponnesus were then universally 
subject to the gentle government of limited but 
hereditary princes, or to magistrates chosen 
from the descendants of their ancient royal 
families, and who, thus adorned by birth, 
were sometimes still more ennobled by wisdom 
and virtue.6 Itisthe nature of colonies to prc- 
serve with affectionate respect the institutions 
of the mother country, which often improve by 
transplantation, and thrive and flourish in 
foreign lands, when they have withered and 
perished in the soil which originally produced 
and propagated them. Time and accident, and 
the various causes which have been explained 
in the course of this history, tended to cnange 
the ancient constitution, and to diminish the 
strength of the Grecian states on both sides the 


1 Polybius, l. ii. p. 178. 

2 Schook. Achaia, apud Gronov. Thes. t. v. 

3 Polyb. Excerpt. Legat. et Titus Livius, l. xxxviii. et 
XXXİX. 

4 Xenophon, in his Greek history, speaks of the excel- 
lence of the Achæan laws, in treating a passage of history 
which will be related in the sequel. Polybius was evidently 
engaged to enter deeper into this subject, by the reasou as- 
signed in the text. 

5 These were properly the only nobility in Greece; they 
were called suzzte:dz+, and long held sway in all the Gre- 
cian states. S. Petitus has collected the most important 
passages concerning them in his commentary on the ancient 
Athenian law, “ Tous, Evmæreidzs yivørzsiy tx Stig, nas 
WHEERELY BOKOVTLS, xxl vOuwy SsdzrexAsus Eivægi, x%t 
Oriwy x24 tsowy ežayaTtzi. That the Eupatridæ, or no- 
bility, administer the rites of religion, fill the offices of ma- 
gistracy, interpret the laws, aud explain all sacred and 
divine matters.” 

6 Thucydid. 1. i. 


Corinthian Isthmus. While fierce and frequent 
wars cxhausted thcir population, the exclusive 
spirit of republican jealousy, which sternly re- 
fused’ strangers any participation in their go- 
vernment, or any protection from their laws, 
naturally repressed their vigour and stunted 
their growth. The colonies in Magna Grecia, 
enjoying a wide territory before them, had not 
the same interference of interest, and found 
sufficient employment in subduing the original 
inhabitants of that country, without com- 
mencing hostilities against each other. Nor 
were they more ambitious to subdue the barba- 
rous natives, than solicitous to incorporate them 
into their own communities. The kings, or 
nobility, of Magna Grecia, secure of thcir own 
pre-eminence, felt? nothing of the republican 
jealousies which prevailed in the mother coun- 
try. They received with pleasure new citizens, 
or rather subjects, from whatever quarter they 
might come. The Barbarians adopted the lan- 
guage and manners of the nation to whom they 
were associated; their children received a Gre- 
cian education; and the states of Italy and 
Sicily thus increasing by degrces, could soon 
boast, the former of Crotona, Tarentum, Syba- 
ris, Rhegium; the latter of Syracuse, Agri- 
gentum, Messene, Himera, and several other 
cities, which rivalled or surpassed the wealth 
of Athens or Corinth, and the populousness of 7 
Thebes, Argos, or Sparta. 7 

The wars, conquests, or oppressions, but 
above all, the civil dissensions, which in the 
sixth century before Christ disturbed and de- 
formed the coast of Ionia, and the other Gre- 
cian colonies in the islands and continent of 
Asia, broughi frequent accessions of inhabitants 
to the shores of Magna Grecia. In that age 
the Asiatic Greeks had attained greater pro- 
ficiency, both in the useful and in the agreeable 4 
arts, than any other portion of the Grecian 
name; but they had also sunk deeper in volup- 
tuousness and luxury. Their a 
still remains, alike attests the re of 
their taste, and the corruption of their morals. 
The effeminate vices, for which the [onians 
were thenceforth in all ages infamous,’ seem to 
have taken deep root in that century; and it is 
probable, that along with their poetry, music, 
and painting, they communicated also their dis- 
solute and artificial appetites to the Greeks of g” 
Italy and Sicily. 

But whether this be admitted, or whether we 
suppose that, according to the ordinary course 
of events, the inhabitants of Magna Grecia 
having attained opulence by industry, dissipated 
it in idleness and licentiousness, it is acknow- 
ledged by all writers on this part of history, 
that the Greck cities of Italy, and particularly 
Sybaris and Crotona, had degenerated from 
their ancient maxims, and fallen a prey to the 
most dangerous errors and vices, when Pytha- 
goras came to thcir relief, about five hundred 
and fifty years before the Christian era. 


7 The same policy was practised by Macedon; and, as 
we shall have occasion to relate, was the primary cause of 
the Macedonian greatness. ‘ 

8 Motus doceri gaudet Jonicos 
Matura virgo, et fingitur artibus 
Jam nunc, et incestos amores 
Ne tenero meditatur ungue. HORACE 


XL] 


The philosophy of Pythagoras forms an im- 
portant object in the history of the human mind: 
and if we admit the concurring testimony of 
ancient authors, the philosophy, or rather the 
legislation, of this extraordinary man, reformed 
and improved the manners and policy of Magna 
Grecia, and contributed in an eminent degree, 
not only to the quiet and happiness, but to the 
industry, power, and splendour, of that cele- 
brated country. Lest this influence should 
appear too great, and even incredible, in a stran- 
ger, who is known to have studiously declined 
all public offices and authority, the occasion re- 
quires that we should explain the means by 
which such extraordinary effects were produced. 
Pythagoras was born at Samos,!0 


p pe when Samos was the richest and 
oia. most flourishing of all the Grecian 


isles. His father, Mnesarchus, be- 
ing a person of distinction in his country,!! the 
promising youth was carefully instructed in 
the learning known or valued in that early age. 
Music, poetry, and the gymnastic exercises, 
formed the principal part of his education ; but 
the young philosopher, if we may anticipate 
that name, was not indifferent!? to the discove- 
ries of Thales, the first Grecian who nearly 
calculated an eclipse of the sun; and he early 
set himself to rival the Milesian sage in his fa- 
vourite studies. It is recorded, that he learned 
eloquence from Pherecydes of Syros,!3 who re- 
sided a considerable time in the isle of Samos, 
and who is famous in the literary history of 
Greece, as the first author in prose.l4 Pittacus 
of Lesvos, Bias of Prené, and the other sophists, 
or wise men (as they were emphatically styled 
b contemporaries) who then flourished 
| ic Greece, and whose abilities and vir- 
sed them, in troubled times, to the 
of the several communities of which they 
Bbectivaly members, excited the kindred 
ambition of Pythagoras, who appears to have 
een early animated with the desire of acquiring 
renown, by promoting public happiness. 
s eighteenth year he visited the continent 
of Greece, and gained the prize ofjwrestling at 
the Olympic games,!5 where his vigour, address, 
and beauty, were beheld with admiration by 
the multitude; while the opening virtucs of his 
S d were still more admired by men of sense 
and discernment. In conformity with the prac- 
tice of an age when the feeble rays of know- 
ledge were scattered over a wide surface, and 
rauch pains were requisite to collect them, he 


———— aoa 


9 Particularly Aristoxenus, the learned disciple of Aris- 
totle (apud Stobeum, Serm. xli.;) various ancient authors 
cited hy Jamblicus and Porphyry, as well as by Diogenes 
Laertius, l. viii; to which add Justin, 1. xx. and Cicero, 
Trsce. Quest. de Amicitia, et de Oratoro. “ Pythagoras 
exornavit eam Greciam que Magna dicta est, et privatim 
et publice, prestantissimis ct institutis ct artibus.” Cicero 
de Amicitia. 

10 Isocrates in Busiri. Titus Livius, |. i.c.xviii. Lucian. 
Lexiphanes. To these authorities we may add, that Pytha- 
goras is represented on scveral Samian coins. Fabric. 
Bibl. Græca, t. i. p. 455. 

1} Mnesarchus was sent from Samos to consult the oracle 
4 Dabi, probably on some public occasion. Jam. in Vit. 

thag. 

2 Apollon. apud Jamblichum. 

13 Diogenes apud Porph. 

14 Plin. N. H. 1. vii. c. lvi 

15 Jambi. Porph. &c 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


141 


withdrew himself from the applauses of his 
countrymen, and for a longer time than was 
usual with the Grecian travellers. This cir- 
cumstance gave occasion to many fables con- 
cerning the extent and variety of his voyages.16 
But it is certain that he resided several years in 
the ancient kingdom of Egypt, which had 


16 The travels of the Greek philosopher were spoken of 
in vague terms, and magnified even by great writers. Ulti- 
mas terras lustrasse Pythagoram, Democritum, Platonem 
accepimus. Cicero de Finibus, l. iv. c. xix. Wemay well 
believe then, that such men as Hermippus (apud Joseph. 
advers. Apionem,) Apollonius, Jamblichus, &c. would 
carry their exaggerations to the highest degree of incredi- 
bility on this fertile subject. The chief source of these 
fables, and of the supposed learning of the Magi, Chaldzans, 
Indians, &c. may be found in the credulous or lying writers 
who accompanied Alexander in his eastern expedition. 
At their return to Greece, they magnified the learning, as 
well as the power and wealth, of the nations conquered by 
their patron; they were solicitous to persuade their coun- 
trymen, that their ancestors had learned their philosophy 
from people whose names they had never before hear 
their own vanity was flattered by having visited, a 
miliarly known those fancied instructors of man 
Clearchus, Onesicritus, and Callisthenes, were the most 
celebrated of these writers, of whom Diogenes Laertius, or 
rather a far superior man whom he cites, says, Azvéavoues 
Ss gutovg re trwy EAAyvwv xataodwpare BueSaeors mgo- 
camtoytes, “They are mistaken, when they refer the 
Grecian discoveries to the Barbarians.”’ It was natural for 
the eastern nations, when they had adopted the languago 
and learning of the Greeks, to avail themselves of Grecian 
authorities, to prove how much that celebrated nation 
owed to people whom they proudly denominated Barba- 
rians. Hence the fables of Berosus the Chaldean, of Ma- 
netho the Egyptian, of Sanchoniathon the Phenician. We 
except from this class of fabulists the Jew, Josephus, the 
antiquity of whose nation rests on evidence which it would 
be irreverent to name in suchcompany. Had Pythagoras 
or Thales been acquainted with the Jewish religion, they 
would have learned far nobler notions of the Deity, than 
those which it appears they entertained. Anaxagoras, sur- 
named o vous, the preceptor of the great Pericles, was the 
first Grecian philosopher who saw, by the light of reason, 
the natural and moral attributes of God, so sublimely 
described in the Psalms of David. Yet it never was said, 
that Anaxagoras had seen the Psalms, the Bocks of Moses, 
or any part of the sacred writings ; and it may be remarked, 
that Josephus himself, in his first book (cont. Ap.,) how- 
ever zealous to prove, that the Greeks derived their know- 
ledge from the East, can cite no author in favour of this 
opinion, who lived before the age of Alexander. 

17 There is a famous passage in Isocrates’s panegyric 
of Busiris, which might secm to contradict what is said in 
the preceding note, if we did not reflect, that the rules of 
pancgyric require not always a strict adherence to historical 
truth. In speaking of the ancient wisdom and jlicty of the 
Egyptians, and particularly of the sacerdotal order, he says, 
that he himself is not the first who perecived and acknow- 
ledgced their merit; that many philosophers had done this 
before him, and particularly Pythagoras the Samian. Os 
woseomevos sig Atyumtov, xs padara exesvarv yivopsvos, 
Tyv TE CAAYY OLACTOOL4y mTEWTOG Stg TOUS EnAnvns EXOMIOE, 
KOE TH wees THO Suotag TE AMS TOS Mp saTetas TMG Ev TOS 
IEOS ETIDUVETTEBOY TWY ZAA WV ET TOUÒATEV, nyoupsvoc, ES 
Kab MAIEV euTW Öt TUTL TAELOV YiyVOLTE TEPE THY Gewy, 
BAAS Teer yS TOIS #VÕEwWTOIÇ Ex TOUTWY MAAITTE V EUO- 
xipyTrEiv. ormege #uTw xai ruvsby, TorouToy yap Evdotin 
TOUS MBAAOUS #mævTzç umegeburev, WOTS AOL TOUS VEWTEOOUS 
amavTæç extjuuely auTou padytag esves, uxt TOUS TEETGU- 
TELOUS YOLOV ogv TOUG wWaihaeg TOUS HUTWY ExstvW TUPyI- 
YVomEvous y Tow otzsiwv exsuzrovusvouc. “ Who coming 
to Egypt, and being instructed by the priests of that country, 
first introduced other kinds of learning into Greece, and 
particularly a more accurate knowledge of religious rites 
and ceremonies,” (Ihave gencralized the expression Jurige 
Kei epterereg ev TOLG tee08c,) “of which he was a careful 
observer, thinking that although he were entitled to no pe- 
culiar favour on that account from the gods, he would 
thereby, at least, pracure esteem aniong men, which also 
happened to him; for he so far eclipsed the glory of all 
other philosophers, thit all the young desired to becomo his 
disciples, and the old were better jileased to see their sons 
in tho company af Pythagoras, than engaged in the most 
lucrative or honourable pursuits.” If what is said in my 
accaunt of the life and writings of Tsocrates be considered 
with attention, this passage will only serve to confirm the 
observations in the text. 


142 


been long familiarly known to the Grecian 
mariners, and where the son of Mnesarchus 
might probably enjoy the protection of many 
hereditary friends. In that country he proba- 
bly made some additions to his knowledge in 
arithmetic and geometry ; he certainly learned 
many traditions concerning the gods, and the 
human soul: but what particularly deserved 
his attention was, the secret symbolice wri- 
ting of the priests, and the singular institu- 
tions and policy of the sacerdotal order, by 
which that body of men had long been enabled 
to govern prince and people.! At his return 
from Egypt and the East, Pytha- 


a mp. goras found his native country go- 
Moai verned, or rather insulted, by the 


artful and long fortunate Poly- 
crates; a tyrant whose power seemed so firmly 
established, that there remained no hopes to 
subvert it, and under whose jealous eye the 
f Mnesarchus could neither display his ta- 
, hor enjoy personal security : he therefore 
returned to European Greece, and againassisted 
at the Olympic games; where being saluted by 
the then honoured name of Sophist, he mo- 
destly declined that distinction for the humbler 
title of Philosopher; and when asked what he 
precisely meant by this new appellation, he is 
said to have replied, “© That, in the same man- 
ner as at the Olympic assembly, some men 
came to contend for crowns and honours, others 
to sell their merchandize, and a third class 
merely to sec and examine every thing which 
passed in that celebrated convention; so, on 
the greater theatre of the world, while many 
struggled for the glory of a name, and many for 
the advantages of fortune, a few, and but a 
few, neither covetous of money, nor ambitious 
of fame, were contented with beholding the 
wonders of so magnificent a spectacle.”2 This 
definition has been often cited, because it well 
agrees with the contemplative notions generally 
entertained of the Pythagcrean school; but it 
will appear in the sequel, that the philosophy 
of Pythagoras was of a more practical kind. 
From Olympia and the republic of Elis, he 
travelled to the neighbouring territory of Spar- 
ta,3 and spent a considerable time in that capi- 
tal, diligently studying the laws and institutions 
of Lycurgus, and observing the manners and 
genius of the best governed, inost virtuous, and 
most prosperous of all the Grecian states. Here 
he beheld a constitution of government (the 
wisdom of which had bcen long approved by 
experience) founded on a system of education; 
and combining, in his clear capacious mind, 
the Spartan laws and discipline with a mixture 
of the Egyptian craft and policy, he framed that 
sublime plan of legislation, which was to be far 
more extensive than the laws of Lycurgus; and 
which, at first fixing its root in a small sect at 
Crotona, was destined, in twenty or thirty 
years, to diffuse its flourishing branclies over 
Italy and Sicily. 


1 Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, passim; and Strabo, 
I. x. p. 482. 

2 Cicero (Tusc. Quest. v. 3.) has translated a passage 
to this purpose from Heraclides Ponticus, the scholar of 
Plato; and the original passage of Heractitus is still pre- 
served in Jamblichus. 

3 Porphyr. Jambi. et Justin. l. xx. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


: [Cuar 


Pythagoras arrived at the capital of Italian 
Greece in his fortieth year, in the full vigour 
of mind and body. His fame, doubtless, pre- 
ceded him; since, whoever had honourably dis- 
tinguished himself in the general convention at 
Olympia, was speedily known and celebrated 
in the remotest provinces of Greece. His per- 
sonal acquaintances among the Italian Greeks, 
whose esteem, or rather respect, he had ac- 
quired in that august assembly, would natu- 
rally be loud in his praises; and the manners 
of the age, in which men lived together in 
crowds, and enjoyed their pastimes, or trans- 
acted their serious business with undisguised 
freedom, in temples and gymnasia, contributed 
to the rapid increase of his friends and ad- 
mirers. Upon his arrival at Crotona, he ap- 
peared in the public places displaying his dex- 
terity in those exercises and accomplishments, 
which were the fashionable objects of pursuit, 
and the principal sources of honour. His skill 
in music and medicine, sciences which were far 
better understood in his native country than in 
Magna Græcia, procured him particular re- 
gard; nor can we hesitate to believe, that his 
mathematical and natural knowledge would be 
highly admired by the Greeks of Italy, who, 
having recently received the first tincture of 
arts and sciences from the Asiatics, cultivated 
them with that ardour which novelty inspires; 
and who seem hitherto to have gained in point 
of knowledge and civility, in proportion as 
they had lost in purity of life and manners, by 
an acquaintance with their Eastern brethren. 

Neither the voluptuousness nor the refine- 
ment of the inhabitants of Magna Græcia, were 
incompatible with the hopes and fears of the 
most puerile superstition; and Pythagoras, who 
had seen and examined the rites and ceremo- 
nies employed by remote nations, celebrated 
for their antiquity and their wisdom, to avert 
the displeasure, or to gain the good-will of their 


invisible protectors, called forth the whole force e 


of this powerful, yet dangerous instrument of 
policy, to excite respect for his person, and 
reverence for his instructions. He carefully 
frequented, at an early hour, the temples of the 
gods; his regular purifications and sacrifices 
announced superior sanctity of character; his 
food was of the purest kind, that no corporeal 


stain might interrupt his fancied communica- " 


tion with his celestial friends; and he was 
clothed in the linen of Egypt, which was the 
dress5 of the sacerdotal order in that native 
land of superstition, as well as of the Athenian 
magistrates and nobles, in the early and pious 
times of their republic.6 The respect excited 
by such artifices Gf we may degrade by that 
name the means used to deceive men into their 
duty and happiness) was enhanced by the high 
renown, the long travels, the venerable aspect, 
the harmonious voice, the animated and affect- 
ing eloquence, of the Samian philosopher. His 
hearers sometimes amounted to two thousand 
of the principal citizens of Crotona; and the 
magistrates of that republic erected, soon after 
his arrival among them, an elegant and spa- 
cious edifice, which was appropriated to the 


4 Aristoxen. apud Jambl. 5 Diodorus, 


6 Thucyd. l. i. 


= 


XL] 


virtuous lessons of this admired stranger, who 
pleased their taste, and gratified their fancy, 
while he condemned their manners, and re- 
proached their vices. Equally rapid and as- 
tonishing, and not more astonishing than ad- 
vantageous, if we may credit the general voice 
of antiquity, was the reformation produced at 
Crotona in persons of every age, and of either 
sex, by this singular man. The women laid 
aside their ornaments, and resumed their mo- 
desty ; the youth preferred their duty to their 
pleasures; the old improved their understand- 
ing, and almost neglected to improve their for- 
tunes. 

Yet this revolution of manners was not 
surely so instantaneous, as the concurring ex- 
aggerations of wonder and credulity were na- 
turally inclined to represent it. The same 
writers, who would thus magnify the fame 
of Pythagoras, acknowledge, that soon after 
coming to Crotona, he chose a select number 
of his most assiduous disciples, and those chiefly 
persons of weight in the republic, whose tem- 
per, character, and views, best suited his own. 
These were formed into an association, or 
separate order of men, into which none were 
admitted who possessed not qualities and en- 
dowments worthy of that honour. In order to 
confirm this association, as well as to obtain 
the purposes for which it had been instituted, 
Pythagoras employed the cypher, or symbolic 
writing, and other secrets, which he had learned 
from the wisdom, or rather cunning, of the 
Egyptian priests: his scholars were taught 
certain signs or words, by which they might 
know each other; they could correspond, when 
separated by place, in an unknown character; 
and strangers of all countries, Greeks and Bar- 
barians, were promiscuously admitted into the 
society, after undergoing a due probation as to 
their dispositions and understanding. In a few 
years, three hundred men, all Pythagoreans, 
held the sovereignty of Crotona; the influence 
of the new sect extended with rapidity over 
Locri, Rhegium, Catana, and other cities of 
Italy and Sicily; the disciples of 


‘Pee Pythagoras were diffused over an- 
A C 550 cient Greece, and the isles of the 


* Ægean sea; and it seemed as if the 
sage of Samos, whose nobler ambition declined 
and disdained any particular office of power 
and dignity, had conceived the sublime idea 
of forming a school, or rather an association 


of men, who might govern the world, while | 


they were themselves governed by wisdom and 
virtue. 
Pythagoras was deeply persuaded, that the 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


a e Š 


| 


happiness of nations depends chiefly on the | 


government under which they live; and the 
experience of his own times, and of his own 
island in particular, might teach him the dan- 
gerous tendency of democratic turbulence on 
the one hand, and jealous tyranny on the 
other.’ He preferred, therefore, to all govern- 


7 A striking cxample of this appeared at that time in Si- 
cily, if we credit Jamblicus, who places the reign of Pha- 
daris, at Agrigentum, in the age of Pythagoras. The doubt- 
ful, or rather incredible, history of this tyrant, may be com- 
prised in few words. His reign, of ahout sixtecn ycars, 


143 


ments, a moderate aristocracy; which seems, 
without exception, to have been the well- 
founded opinion of the greatest men of anti- 
quity, since, under the administration of a 
senate, the republics of Greece, of Rome, and 
of Carthage, attained their highest prosperity 
and splendour. Yet he was extremely averse 
to arbitrary power, whatever shape it might 
assume: and the main aim of his institution 
was, to prevent oppression in the magistrates 
and licentiousness in the people. The dead 
letter of the law could never, he thought, effect 
that salutary purpose, until men were so trained 
by education and discipline, as to regard the 
great duties of life as its most agreeable amuse- 
ment, and to consider the esteem of their fel- 
low-citizens, and their own, as the chief source 
of their enjoyment. Magistrates, thus formed, 
would command a willing obedience, and the 
inhabitants of Magna Grecia must soon attain 
the most perfect state of which political society 
is susceptible. 

To explain at large the system of Pythago- 
ras, would be to write a treatise of sublime, yet 
practical morality, since his conclusions are 
strictly founded on the nature of man. Be- 
sides the propensities common to us witli infe- 
rior natures, and besides the selfish and arti- 
ficial passions of avarice and ambition, he 
found in the human breast the seeds of nobler 
faculties, fitted to yield an incomparably more 
durable, more perfect, and more certain grati- 
fication. The chief happiness of the mind 


to direct, sometimes abused, and somctimcs eat, boys. Pha- 
laris, together with his mother and friends, (could such a 
monster have fricnds?) were burned, by the long-injured 
Agrigentines, in his own bull. This is the abominable ry- 
rant, whose spurious letters furnished an opportunity to Dr. 
Bentley to display his profound erudition (sce his Dissert. 
upon Phalaris.) But that very learncd man seems not to 
suspect, that the history of Phalaris is as spurious as his 
epistles. It was a common artifice among Greck poets 
and orators (sce p. 100. speech of Sosicles the Corinthian,) 
to exaggerate the vices of bad princes. Of this we shall 
find many examples in the following parts of this work. 
This practice began early; for Pindar says, 


Tov Ss ravem YLAXLEw xxUT HO VAES VOOY 


Exen Durnerv xarTexet mavre Garis, 
Pyt. i. Ezwd. xwA, te, 


Aristotle mentions, To weet Durawety Acyomevoy, the hearsay 
about Phalaris, which Aspasius explains, *O ds ®xarxers 
Asyeras Qoyery Tov eevtov zasde. Phalaris is said to 
have eat his own son. In the same chapter (c. v. l vi. 
Ethic. Nicom.) speaking of brutal passions, Aristotle in- 
stances Phalaris sometimes devouring boys, sometimes using 
them as instruments of an absurd venereal pleasure: t Iipos 
agpadiasov eroroy ydovyv.” ‘The philosopher does not say, 
that he believes these monstrous fictions, any more than 
Cicero, “Ile nobilis taurus, quem‘ crudelissimus omnium 
tyrannorum Phalaris habuisse dicitur ;” liv. in Verrem, c. 
xxxiii. Timæus, the historian of Sicily, who was more 
likely than any other writer to be well informed concerning 
the transactions in his own island, represents the story of 
Phalaris’s bull as a mere fable. Polyb. Excerp. ver. 3. p. 47. 
Polybius, indeed, attempts to refute Timwus, but I think, 
as to the main point, with little success. Nor is it surpris- 
ing that this judicious writer should be carried along by 
the torrent. The repnblicans of Greece and Rome delight- 
ed in blackening the characters of tyrants; Texywdouvres 
Se TUV wmeoTnTe TOV TEOTWV Keb THY aOECSIaY TWV TEL- 
Zewv: tt exaggerating, after the manner of tragedians, tho 
ficreeness of their manners, and the impiety of their ac- 
tions.” For this reason, the absurd fictions concerning Dio- 
nysius of Syracuse, Alexander of Phere, &c. are related 
by many respectable writers. For this reason Hicronymus 
was described in the blackest colours, vido Exeerp. ex 
Polyb. l. vii. p. 10. And for this reason the enormaus cru- 
elties af Phalaris, which no natian, and far less the Sici- 


was distinguished by intolerable atrocitics. TIe burned hia | lians in that age, could have tolerated, reccive countenance 
enemies in a brazen bull; and, as just or cruelty happencd * from some of the highest authorities of antiquity. 


144 


must be sought in itself, in the enjoyment of 
intellectual and moral pleasure. Our thoughts 
are ever, and intimately present with us; and 
although the bustle of external objects, and the 
tumult of passion, may sometimes divert their 
current, they can never dry up their source. 
The reflections on our own conduct will be 
continually occurring to our fancy, whatever 
pains we inay take to exclude them; nor can 
voluptuous enjoyment, or ambitious activity, 
ever so totally occupy the mind of a Persian 
satrap, or a Grecian demagogue, but that their 
principal happiness or misery, in the whole 
course of life, must chiefly depend upon the 
nature of their reflections on the past, and 
upon their hopes and fears about futurity. To 
strengthen this great groundwork of morality, 
Pythagoras employed the whole force of edu- 
cation and habit. Rules were laid down, to 
which the members of his respected order 
bound themselves to conform, and from which 
none could swerve, without being excluded from 
a society of which they proved themselves un- 
worthy. The different periods of life had each 
its appropriated employment. The youth were 
carefully instructed in the gymnastic exercises, 
in literature,! and in science, and especially in 
the laws and constitution of their country. 
Their time was so diversified by successive 
study, exercise, and repose, that no leisure re- 
mained for the premature growth of dangerous 
passions ; and it was an important maxim of 
the Pythagorean school, that many things were 
best learned late,? especially love ; from which, 
if possible, the youth should be restrained till 
their twentieth year, and after that period 
should rarely, and with many precautions, in- 
dulge a passion, always hurtful to the weak, 
and which, when injudiciously indulged, en- 
feebled the most vigorous. He required in 
those who had attained the age of manhood, 
that they should no Jonger live for themselves, 
but for the business of the community of which 
they were members. They were to employ 
the greatest part of the day in the duties of 
public spirit and patriotism ; in the laborious 
or dangerous offices committed to their charge ; 
and to derive their chief reward from reading, 
in the eyes of their admiring countrymen, the 
history of their generous exploits; and from 
beholding the happy effects of their probity, 
beneficence, and fortitude. 

The Pythagoreans were strictly enjoined, as 
their earliest and latest work, to review the ac- 
tions of the past, and, if time permitted, of 
many preceding, days. In the morning they 


1 So I have translated Ev yexupzcrs xzi Tois wAAOES 
exbyyers,of Aristoxenus apud Stobeum, Serm. xli. The 
learned reader will perceive, that I comprehend under the 
name of youth, the two different periods of life, or yAsxsxs, 
which the Greeks denoted by the words ma:s and vexvirxos, 
boy, and young man. I have done this, because it was not 
the intention of Aristoxenus to say, that the young men 
were not still to be employed in literature and science, or 
that the boys were to be kept ignorant of the laws and con- 
stitution. The rules of the Pythagorean school, and the 
laws of Lycurgus, often explain each other. Sce p. 41, et 
seqq. It may be worthy of remark, that Jean Jacques 
Rousseau has borrowed what is rational and practical in 
his system of education, from these two great sources. 

2 Aristoxen. apud Stobeum, Serm. Ixix. This is the 
great principle of Rousseau in his Emile. The passage of 
Aristoxenus concerning love, is almost literally translated in 
that ingenious but fanciful work. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| Cuar. 


repaired alone to the temples, to solitary moun . 
tains and forests; and after there conversing 
with themselves, joined in the conversation of 
their fricnds, with whom they assembled, in, 
smal] companies, to an early and frugal meal, 
discussed different subjects of philosophy or 
politics, regulated their conduct for the ensu- 
ing day, and by the mutual strength and en- 
couragement acquired in this select society, 
prepared for the tumultuous bustle of the 
world, and tke contentions of active life. The 
evening was spent as the morning, with this 
difference, that they then indulged in the mo- 
derate use of flesh and wine, from which they 
rigidly abstained during the day; and the 
whole concluded with that self-examination, 
which was the capital precept of the Pytha- 
gorean school. 

To enter more fully into the principles of 
this association, would be repeating what has 
been formerly observed concerning the laws of 
Lycurgus. It is sufficient barely to mention, 
that, like the legislator of Sparta, Pythagoras 
enjoined the highest respect for age; that, like 
him, he raised the weaker sex from that state 
of inferiority in which they were ungenerously 
kept in all other countries of Greecc; that lic 
inured his disciples to temperance and sobriety 
by the same means employed by Lycurgus; 
and that both these great men regarded health 
and vigour of body as the first principle of 
mental soundness and energy; that the proba- 
tionary silence of the Pythagoreans, which cre- 
dulity has so much exaggerated, was nothing 
more than that prudent, recollected behaviour, 
required by Lycurgus, who prized higher the 
caution of silence than the readiness of speech ;3 
and that the intimacy of the Spartan and Py- 
thagorean friendships, and almost the commu- 
nity of goods, naturally flowed from the ge- 
neral spirit and genius of their respective sys- 
tems ;* so that the rules of the Pythagorean 
order were little more than a transcript of the 
Spartan laws, as these laws themselves were 
only a refinement on the generous and manly 
institutions of the heroic ages. 5" 

In the history of a man who entertained such 
just notions of human life, as did the founder 
of the Pythagorean school, we may at once 
reject, as fabulous, the tales related by the vain, 
lying Greeks, who lived in and after the age 
of Alexander, when their nation seems to have 
lost their love of truth along with their liberty, 
as well as the ridiculous wonders of the later 
Platonists, those contemplative visionaries, 
who, during the first centuries of the Chris- 
tian era, degraded ancient philosophers, by 
describing their active and useful lives, as 
if they had resembled their own speculative 
tranquillity. Yet, after all, should the least 
extraordinary account of the Pythagorean 
order still seem incredible, it need only be ob- 
served, that modern history, and even our own 
observation, may have made us acquainted 
with orders of another kind, of which the rules 
are more difficult to be observed than those of 
the Pythagoreans: and it is equally unreason- 
able and ungcnerous to suppose, that what our 


4 See p. 43. 


3 Plut. in Lycurg. 
3 Diodor. }. xii. p. 77, &e, 


E 


XL] 


own experience teaches us may be done by the 
illiberal spirit of superstition, could not, in a 
happier age, be effected by the love of glory, 
of virtue, and of mankind. . 

The eoncurring testimony of historians as- 
sures us, that the school of Pythagoras had 
flourished above forty years, to the unspeaka- 
ble benefit of Magna Grecia, when a war arose 
between Crotona and Sybaris, the latter of 
which had ever contemptuously rejected the 
Pythagorean institutions. The city of Sybaris 
was founded (as above mentioned) by the 
Achzans, on the confluence of the river Sy- 
baris, from whieh the eity derives its name, 
and the winding stream of Crathis, whieh de- 
seends from the Lucanian mountains. The 
fertility of the soil, the happy temperature of 
the climate, the resources of fishing, naviga- 
tion, manufaetures, and commerce, conspired, 
with the salutary effeet of the Achean laws, 
wonderfully to inerease,in the course of two 
centuries, the strength and populousness or 
Sybaris, which was surrounded by walls nine 
miles in extent, commanded twenty-five subor- 
dinate cities, and, could we eredit the evidence 
of writers often prone to exaggeration, brought 
three hundred thousand men into the field.6 
Riches and luxury proved fatal to the Syba- 
rites, whose effeminaey passed into a pro- 
verb,’ which has been transmitted to modern 


Ol times. In a decisive battle, they 
i ea were defeated by the eitizens of 
rer 509 Crotona, under the command of 


Milo, a favourite disciple of Py- 
thagoras, who had already obtained universal 
renowndy his Olympie victories.8 
But the destruetion of Sybaris was almost 
alike fatal to Crotona. The inferior ranks of 
men in that eity, intoxicated with prosperity, 
and instigated by the artful and ambitious 
Cylon, whose turbulent manners had exeluded 
him from the order of Pythagoras, into whieh 
he had repeatedly attempted to enter, became 
clamorous for an equal partition of the eon- 
quered territory of Sybaris; which being de- 
nied, as inconsistent with the nature of aristo- 
cratical government, they secretly conspired 
against their magistrates, attacked them by sur- 
prise in the senate-house, put many to death, 
and drove the rest from their country. Pytha- 
goras himself died soon afterwards, in extreme 
old age, at Metapontum in Lucania.9 His dis- 
ciples were scattered over Magna Greeia, and 
particularly Sicily, which at the time of the 
Carthaginian invasion, was governed by men 
who had imbibed the sublime spirit of their 
illustrious master. 
Gelon, who, eleven years before 
£ ies that event, had K mia the throne 
xxv. 1. : 
A. C. 480. of Syracuse, was entitled, by the 
unanimous suffrage of his subjeets, 
to the glorious, though often prostituted, ap- 
pellation, of Father of his Country.'0 The mild- 
ness of his government restored the felicity of 
the heroic ages, whose equitable institutions 


6 Strabo, 1. vi. p. 263. Diodor. ibid. 

7 Athenwusg, l. xii. p. 518. 

8 Strabo, ibid. Pausanias, l. v. p. 369. 
9 Aristoxenus. 


10 Ælian. Var. Hist. l. xiii. c. xxxvii. Plut. in Timol. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


145 


had mueh affinity (as above observed) with the 
political system of Pythagoras. This virtuous 
prince had cemented an alliance with Theron, 
king of Agrigentum, by aceepting his daughter 
in marriage; and the confederacy of the two 
prineipal states of Sieily seemed to have 
diffused seeurity and happiness over the 
whole island, when the immense armament of 
Carthage was beheld off the northern eoast. 
Though not absolutely destitute of naval 
strength, the Sicilians had nothing by whieh 
they could oppose a fleet of two thousand gal- 
leys. The enemy landed without opposition 
in the spacious harbour, or rather bay, of Pa- 
normus, whose name may be still reeognised in 
the modern eapital Palermo, where the Car- 
thaginians had planted one of their most an- 
cient colonies. Their forces were commanded 
by Hamilcar, who was deemed a brave and 
experienced leader. The first care of this 
general was, to fortify two eamps; the one 
destined for his fleet, which, aeeording to the 
practice of that age, was drawn on shore; the 
other intended as a safe retreat for his army, 
which immediately prepared to form the siege 
of Himera, ‘Theron used proper measures to 
defend the second eity in his dominions, until 
his kinsman, the intrepid Gelon, should arrive 
to his assistance, at the head of an army of 
fifty thousand foot and five thousand horse. 
While this numerous army advaneed, by rapid 
marches, towards Himera, they reneountered a 
foraging party of the enemy, and took ten 
thousand prisoners. But what appeared a still 
more important booty to the discernment of 
Gelon, they seized a messenger from Seli- 
nus, a city in the neighbourhood of Agrigen- 
tum, whieh had entered into a treaeherous 
eorrespondence with the Carthaginians. The 
prisoner conveyed a letter to Hamilcar, ae- 
quainting him, that the Selinuntines would not 
fail to send the cavalry demanded from them 
at the appointed time, which was likewise par- 
ticularly specified. Upon this diseovery, Gelon 
founded a stratagem, not more daring than 
suecessful. He commanded a chosen body of 
troops to advance in the night towards the Car- 
thaginian eamp, and by day-break to present 
themselves to Hamilear, as his Selinuntine 
auxiliaries; and when admitted, by this arti- 
fice, within the rampart, to assassinate the ge- 
neral, and sct fire to the fleet.!! 

It happened on the fatal day, that Hamilear 
offercd a solemn saerifiee to the bloody divinity 
of Carthage, who delighted in human victims. 
While he performed this abominable rite, the 
soldiers surrounded him unarmed, in the 
gloomy silenee of their detested superstition, 
with which their minds were totally penetrated. 
The Sieilian eavalry being admitted without 
suspicion, thus found no diflieulty to exeeute 
their audacious design. Hamilear, while he 
sacrificed an innocent and noble youth to the 
abhorred genius of Superstition, was himself 
despatched with a dagger; and next moment 
the Carthaginian ships were in a blaze. A 
chain of Sicilian sentinels, posted on the neigh- 
bouring eminences, intimated to Gelon the 


JI Diodor. 1 ix. sect. 25, et segg. Polyen. 1. i. c. xxvii. 


146 


happy success of his stratagem; of which, in 


order fully to avail himself, that gallant com- | 


mander immediately conducted the main body 
of his troops to the Carthaginian army, while 
it was yet agitated by surprise and terror at 
the sudden conflagration. The furious onset 
of the Sicilians made a dreadful havoc among 
the astonished Barbarians, who, recovering, 
however, their faculties, began to defend them- 
selveS with vigour; when the melancholy 
tidings, that their ships were all burnt, and 
their general slain, drove them to despait and 
flight. Gelon commanded his troops not to 
give quarter to an enemy, who, though defeat- 
ed, still seemed formidable by their numbers. 
It is reported, that a hundred and fifty thou- 
sand perished in the battle and the pursuit. 
The remainder seized an eminence, where they 
could not long maifitain themselves, for want 
of water and provisions. In the language of 
an ancient historian, all Africa seemed to be 
taken captive in Sicily. Gelon distributed the 
prisoners among the Sicilian cities, in propor- 
tion to the contingents of troops which they 
had respectively raised for this memorable ser- 
vice. The grcater,part falling to the share of 
Syracuse and Agrigentum, were employed in 
beautifying and enlarging those capitals,! 
whose magnificent monuments, still conspicu- 
ous jn their ruins, are supposed with great 
probability, to be the effect of Carthaginian 
labour. 

The melancholy tidings affected Carthage 
, with consternation and despair. The inhabit- 
ants of that city, ever shamefully depressed 
by bad fortune, in proportion as they were im- 
moderately elated by the deceitful gifts of 
prosperity, dreaded every moment to behold 
the victorious enemy in their harbour. To 
ward off this calamity, their ambassadors were 
sent to crave a suspension of hostilities on any 
terms the victorious Greeks might think proper 
to impose. Gelon received them with such 
moderation as marked the superiority of his 
character, and told them, that he would desist 
from every purpose of revenge, on condition 
that the Carthaginians paid two thousand 
talents of silver, to be distributed among the 
cities of Sicily, which had incurred trouble and 
expense by the war; that they thenceforth ab- 
stained from the abominable practice of insult- 
ing the gods by human victims; that they 
erected two temples, one in Carthage, another 
in Syracuse, to preserve the memory of the 
war, and the articles of the peace.? 
This honourable treaty was a 


= seid prelude to that still more famous, 
A.C i 449 concluded thirty years afterwards 

= °” between the Athenians and the 
Persians. It marked a nation superior to its 


enemies not only in valour but humanity, and 
conferred more true glory than could be ac- 
quired by the most splendid series of victories. 


1 Cicero, Orat. iv. in Verrem. 
2 Diodor. Sicul. ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


It might be expected, liowever, and seems much 
to have been desired, that a people so advan- 
tageously distinguished as were the Greeks 
during that age in arts and arms; a people 
A. C. 504 who had repelled, defeated, and 

E " disgraced the most l d 

g ost populous an 
powerful nations, and who were alike prompted, 
by ambition and revenge, to the attainment of 
distant conquest, should have united their 
efforts against the enemies who still made war 
on them, and, advancing in a rapid career of 
victory, have diffused, along with their domi- 
nion, their manners, knowledge, and civility, - 
over the eastern world. But various events 
and causes, which we shall have occasion after- 
wards to explain, tended to detach the colonies 
of Magna Grecia from the affairs of the mo- 
ther country, as well as to disunite the two 
most powerful republics of that country by in- 
testine discord. 

While the fortune of Athens raised her to 
such power as threatened the liberty of Sicily 
and Greece, the kings of Syracuse and Agri- 
gentum contented themselves with the humbler 
glory of embellishing their capitals with bar- 
baric spoils, and producing those wonders of 
art, which, in the time of Cicero and Verres, 
were esteemed among the most precious monu- 
ments of antiquity.3 The golden medals of 
Gelon, still preserved and of the highest 
beauty,? justify the glowing expressions of 
the Roman orator. 

In Italy, the citizens of Crotona had too 
soon cause to lament their insurrection against 
their magistrates, and their forsaking the disci- 
pline of Pythagoras. They who had hitherto 
defeated superior numbers, who had furnished 
so many victors in the Olympic contest, and 
whose country was distinguished by the epi- 
thet of healthy, on a supposition that the vigor- 
ous bodies of its inhabitants proceeded from 
an effect of the climate, were now totally rout- 
ed and put to flight at the river Sagra, with an 
army of a hundred and thirty thousand men, 
by the Locrians and Rhegians, whose forces 
were far less numerous. The other Greek 
cities of Italy, which are said to have imitated 
the fatal example of Crotona, were harassed 
by wars against each other, or against their 
barbarous neighbours. In consequence of 
these misfortunes, the Pythagoreans again re- 
covered their credit; and about sixty years 
after the death of the great founder of their 
order, Zaleucus and Charondas, the first in 
Locri, the second in Thurium, endeavoured to 
revive the Pythagorean institutions, which, 
perhaps, were too perfect for the condition of 
the times. In less than forty years, a new per- 
secution entirely drove the Pythagoreans from 
Italy, and completed, according to Polybius, 
the confusion and misery of that once happy 
country.° 


3 Cicero in Verrem, passim. 
4 Mem. de Trevoux, Lann. 1727, p. 1449. 
5 Polybius, i. 203. 


XI] 


CHAPTER XII. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


147 


L] 


Glory of Athens—Military Success of the Confederates—Athens Rebuilt and Fortified—Extent 
of its Walls and Harbours—The Confederates take Byzantium—Consptracy of Pausanias— 
Banishment of Themistocles—Virtue of Aristides—Cimon assumes the Command—His illus- 
trious Merit and Success—Revolt of Egypt—War in Cyprus—Peace with Persia—Domestic 
Transactions of Greece—The Athenian Greatness—Envy of Sparta, T hebes, and Argos— 
Earthquake in Sparta—Revolt of the Helots—War between the Elians and Pisans—The Tem- 
ple and Statue of Olympian Jupiter—Dissensions in Argolis—Revolt in Beotia—Truce of 
Thirty Years—Character of Pericles—Subjection of the Athenian Allies and Colonies—Spiri: 


of the Athenian Government. 


ROM the battles of Mycalé and Platæa, to 
the memorable war of Peloponnesus, elapsed 
half a century, the most illustrious in the Gre- 
“A.C. 479 cian annals. A single republic, one 
E 431 of sixteen states, whose united pos- 
s sessions hardly equalled the extent 
of Scotland, and whose particular territory is 
scarcely visible in a map of the world, carried 
on an offensive war against the Persian em- 
pire, and, though surrounded by jealous allies 
or open enemies, prosecuted this extraordinary 
enterprise with unexampled success ; at length, 
granting such conditions of peace as the pride 
of victory may dictate, and the weight of ac- 
cumulated disasters condescended to solicit or 
accept. In that narrow space of time tlicsame 
republic erected, on the feeble basis of her 
scanty population and diminutive territory, a 
mighty mass of empire; established and con- 
firmed her authority over the extent of a thou- 
sand miles of the Asiatic coast, from Cyprus to 
the Thracian Bosphorus; took possession of 
forty intermediate islands, together with the 
important straits which join the Euxine and the 
Ægean ; conquered and colonized the winding 
shores of Macedon and Thrace; commanded 
the coast of the Euxine from Pontus to the 
Chersonesus Taurica, or Crim Tartary; and, 
overawing the barbarous natives by the expe- 
rienced terrors of her fleet,’ protected against 
their injustice and violence, but at the same 
> time converted, to the purposes of her own am- 
bition and interest, the numerous but scattered 
colonies which Miletus, and other Greck cities 
of Asia, had at various times established in 
those remote regions. Our wonder will be 
justly increased, if we consider that Athens ob- 
tained those immortal trophies, not over igno- 
rant savages or effeminate slaves, but over men 
who had the same language and 1: ws, tlle same 
blood and lineage, the same arts ed arms, in | 
short, every thing common with the victors but 
their audacity and fortune. 

Bat it is the peculiar glory of the earns 
that, during this rapid series of military aud 
naval triumphs, they cultivated, with a genc- 
rous euthusiasm, the arts which adorn peace 
as well as war, and improved tlicse decorations 
of polished life into such perfection as few na- 


6 Several of these islands had been formerly conquered 


by Athenian commanders, partienlarly Milti ades, as we 
Nare related above; but having rebelled agaiust the severe 
government of Athens, they were finally subdued by Peri- 
cles. 


7 Plut. in Pericle. 
8 Strabo, Geograph. passim. 


tions have been able to imitate, and none have 
found it possible to surpass. During the ad 

ministration of a single man, more works of 
elegance and splendour, more magnificent tem- 
ples, theatres, and porticoes were erected within - 
the walls of Athens, than could be raised during 
many centuries in Rome, though mistress of the 
world, by the wealth and labour of tributary 
provinces.? In the same period of time sculp- 
ture attamed a sublimity, from which that 
noble art could never afterwards but descend 
and degenerate; and a republic hitherto infe- 
rior in works of invention and genius to several 
of her neighbours, and even of her own colo. 
nies, produced, in the single lifetime of Pericles, 
those inestimable models of poetry, eloquence. 
and philosophy,! which, in every succeeding 
age, the enlightencd portion of mankind hath 
invariably regarded as the best standards, not 
merely of composition and style, but of taste 
and reason. The name of Greek seemed 
thenceforth to be sunk in that of Athenian; 
Athenian writers aré our surest and alinost 
only guides in relating the subsequent transac- 
tions of the whole nation;!! and from them we 
learn what is yet the most extraordinary cir- 
cumstance respecting the Athenian empire, 


i that it had been built on such stable founda- 


tions, and reared with such art and skill, as 
might have long defied the hostile jealousy 
of (teece and Persia, confederate in arms and 
resentment, if various causes, which human 
prudence could neither foresce nor prevent, 
had not shaken its firmness, and prccipitated 
its downfall.!2 

Such is the subject which I have undertaken 
to treat in this and the two following chapters; 
a subject worthy to animate the diligence, and 
call forth the vigour of a historian: but, if he 
| truly descrves that respected name, he will re- 
| member that it is less his duty to amuse the 
fancy by general description, than to explain, 
with precision and perspicuity, the various 
transactious of this interesting and splendid 
theme; to give the reader a full aud distinct 
view of the complicated matter which it in- 
volves; and to remove every adventitious cir- 
cumstance that might distract or dazzle the 


9 Plutarch. in Pericle. 


JO Pericles moy be considered as the contemporary of 
Socrates, Sophocles, 1 uripides, Thucydides, &c. since, 
| although be died before tnem ol the plagne, these and other 
great men flonrished during his administration. 
HT mean TMineydides mid Xe nophon, together with the 
Athenian orators, philosophers, and pocts. 
$2 Thneydid l. vii ct viii. passim. 


148 HISTORY OF GREECE. 


attention, as astronomers, in viewing the sun, 
are careful to ward off its surrounding splen- 
dour. 

The military success of the “Athenians! 
(which naturally forms the first branch of the 
subject, because it not only supplied the mate- 
rials of future improvements, but awakened 
that energy requisite to cultivate and complete 
them) includes three separate actions which 
were carried on at the same time, and conspired 
to the same end, yet cannot be related in one 
perpetual narrative, without occasioning some 
confusion of ideas, alike destructive of the 
pleasure and of the use of history. While we 
endeavour to keep each series of events un- 
broken and distinct, we must be careful to 
point out its influence on the simultaneous or 
succeeding transactions of the times, that our 
relation may be at once satisfactory and faith- 
ful. In such a delineation the trophies of the 
Persian war justly claim the first and most 
conspicuous place; the hostile animosity of 
rival states, which continually envied and op- 
posed, but, for reasons that will be fully ex- 
plained, could neither prevent nor retard the 
growing superiority of Athens, shall occupy 
the middle of the picture; and we shall throw 
into the back ground the successive usurpa- 
tions of that fortunate republic over her allies, 
colonies, and neighbours. 

The common fears which, notwithstanding 
innumerable sources of animosity, had formed, 
and hitherto upheld a partial confederacy of 
the Greeks, were removed by the decisive vic- 
Olymp tories of Platæa and Mycalé. After 
ie o these memorable events, it was the 
A. C. 479 first care of the Athenians to bring 

“a * home their wives, children, and 
most valuable effects from the isles of Ægina 
and Salamis. In the latter island they cele- 
brated their good fortune by a national solem- 
nity. The sublime Soplocles joined in the 
chorus of boys which danced, in exultation, 
around the Barbarian spoils ;? the valour of his 
predecessor, Æschylus, had contributed to the 
victories by which they were obtained ; and his 
rival, the tender Euripides, was born in the isle 
Salamis,’ on that important day which proved 
alike glorious to Greece, and fatal to Persia. 
But an attention to domestic concerns prevent- 
ed not the Athenians from pushing the war with 
vigour, though deserted by the Spartans and 
other Peloponnesians, who sailed home before 
winter. The Asiatic colonies, animated by the 
recent recovery of freedom, seconded the A the- 
nian ardour; and the confederates, having suc- 
cessfully infested the tcrritories of the great 
king, besieged and took the rich city of Sestos 
in the Chersonesus of Thrace, the only place of 
strength which adhered to the Persian interest 
in that fertile peninsula.4 

During the two following years the war 


1 The chief materials for this portion of history consist in 
the first and second books of Thucydides; the eleventh and 
twelfth of Diodorus Siculus; Plutarch’s lives of Themisto- 
cles, Aristides, Cimon, Pericles; Pausanias’s Description 
of Greece, and Pliny’s Natural History : scattered facts are 
supplied by other ancient writers, whose works will be 


carefully cited. 
3 Vita Euripid. 


2 Atheneus, I. i. è l 
4 Herodot. |. ix. c. cvi. Diodor. l. xi. c. xxxvii. 


[Cuar 


languished abroad, while the symptoms of 
jealousy and discord, which had already ap- 
peared in the separation of the Athenian and 
Spartan fleets, broke out with more virulence 
Olymp. a apne fa Athea began the 
iay 3 aborious task of rebuilding their 
A.C. 47g, Tuined city, which the Persian 
et 477, Spoils might contribute to enrich 
: with uncommon magnificence, and 
which the acquaintance gained in the course 
of the war, the graceful forms of Ionic and 
Doric architecture, might enable them to adorn 
with more beauty and elegance than had yet 
been displayed in Europe. But the weighty 
advice of Themistocles prevailed on them to 
suspend this noble undertaking, and engaged 
them, instead of decorating their capital with 
temples, theatres, and gymnasia, to fortify it by 
walls of such strength and solidity as might 
thenceforth bid defiance to every enemy, 
whether foreign or domestic. In an age when 
the art of attack was so rude and imperfect, 
that the smallest fortress formed an ovject of 
importance, such a design could not fail of ex- 
citing jealousy in the neighbouring republics. 
The measure was scarcely determined when an 
embassy arrived from Sparta, remonistrating 
against a design peculiarly dangerous and 
alarming to those who owed their safety to the 
weakness of their cities. “Ifthe Greeks,” it was 
said, “had possessed any town of impregna- 
ble strength, they must have found it impossi- 
ble to expel the Barbarians from their country. 
The Athenians therefore, who had hitherto so 
generously maintained the cause of the con- 
federacy, ought not only to desist from raising 
walls and fortifications, but even to prevent a 
similar design in any republic beyond the isth- 
mus; the Peloponnesus was alone sufficient to 
afford, in time of danger, a secure refuge to the 
whole Grecian name.” 

Themistocles easily unveiled the suspicion 
and hatred concealed under this specious mask 
of public utility, and encouraged his country- 
men to elude the Spartan artifice by similar 
address. Tle senate of the five hundred, who 
gave audience to foreign ambassadors, declared 
that Athens woald adopt no measure incon- 
sistent with the public interest, and promised 
speedily to send an embassy, in their turn, 
which would remove all groundless apprehen- 
sions entertained on that subject. The La- 
cedemonians having returned with this tem- 
porising answer, Themistocles was immediately 
despatched to Sparta, and expected, as he had 
previously concerted matters with his country- 
men, to be followed, at a proper time, by 
Aristides, the most respected character of his 
age; and by Lisicles, an able orator in the 
senate and assembly. Mean while the Athe- 
nian walls arose with unexampled celerity. 
Not only slaves, artificers by profession, and 
the poorer classes of citizens,-but magistrates 
of the first rank, the venerable fathers of the 
republic, wrought with their own hands, and 
with unceasing industry. The feeble efforts 
of women and children contributed to the use- 
ful labour. The most superstitious of men 


5 Idem ibid. et in Them. Lys. Orat. Fun. et cont. Alcib. 


Š) 


neglected their accustomed solemnities, and no 
longer acknowledged the distinction of days or 
seasons : nor did even the silent tranquillity of 
night abate the ardour of their diligence. The 
ruins of their city happily supplied them with 
a rich variety of material; no edifice was 
spared, public or private, sacred or profane ; 
the rude sculpture of ancient temples, even the 
mutilated tombs of their ancestors, were con- 
founded in the common mass; and, at the 
distance of near a century, the singular appear- 
ance of the wall, composed of stones rough 
and unpolished, of various colours and une- 
qual size, attested the rapid exertions by which 
the work had been constructed.§ 

Themistocles had hitherto, under various 
pretences, avoided declaring his commission be- 
fore the Spartan senate. When urged to this 
measure by some of the magistrates, who began 
to suspect his silence, he still alleged the ab- 
sence of his colleagues as a sufficient reason 
for delay. But a company of travellers, who 
had recently visited Athens, gave intelligence 


of the extraordinary works carrying on in that. 


city. This information, and the resentment of 
the Spartans which it occasioned, must have 
disconcerted a man who possessed less cool 
boldness than the commander at Salamis and 
Artemisium. But Themistocles, with the ad- 
dress congenial to his character, asserted, that 
it was unworthy the gravity of Sparta to regard 
the vague rumours of obscure men; and that 
before lightly suspecting the approved fidelity 
of their allies, she ought to bestow some pains 
in discovering the truth. This declaration was 
enforced, it is said, by seasonable bribes to the 
most popular of the Ephori; and the Spartans, 
deluded or corrupted, agreed to despatch a 
second embassy to Athens, consisting of some 
of their most respcctable citizens. These men 
had no sooner arrived at their destination, than 
they were taken*into custody, as pledges for 
the safe return of Themistocles and his col- 
leagues, who by this time had brought him the 
welcome news, that the walls were completed. 
The Athenian ambassadors were now prepared 
to throw off the mask. They appeared in the 
Lacedemonian assembly; and Themistocles, 
speaking for the rest, declared, that his coun- 
trymen needed not to learn from their con- 
federates, what measurcs were honourable to 
themselves, and beneficial to the common cause; 
that, by his advice, they had firmly defended 
their city against the assaults of open enemies 
and jealous friends; and that if Sparta enter- 
tained any resentment of this measure, which 
was evidently not less conducive to the public 
interest, than, perhaps, displeasing to private 
ambition, her anger would be equally unjust and 
impotent, since her own citizens must remain 
as hostages at Athens, till his colleagues and 
himself should be restored in safety to thcir 
country.” Whatever secret indignation this 
speech might excite, the Spartans thought 
proper to suppress their animosity. They 
allowed the ambassadors to return home; but 
the conduct of Themistocles laid the foundation 


6 Thucydid. 1. i. c, Ixxxix. et. seq. 
7 Plut. &e. ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


149 


of that unrelenting hatred with which he was 
persecuted by Sparta, whose intrigues engaged 
all Greece, not excepting Athens herself, in the 
destruction of this illustrious citizen. Yet his 
eminent services, before they were interrupted 
by the storm of persecution, gave an opportu- 
nity to his unworthy country to display more 
fully her signal ingratitude.® 

The ancient Athenian harbour 


ly an of Phalericum was small, narrow, 
AG 477 and inconvenient. To supply its 


defects, Themistocles, even before 
the Persian invasion, had recommended the 
Piræus, a place five miles distant from the cita- 
del, furnished with three natural basins, which, 
if properly fortified, might form a far more 
commodious and secure station for the Athe- 
nian navy. The foundations were laid, and 
the walls began to rise, when the cruel ravages 
of the Barbarians interrupted the undertaking. 
Having in the preceding year fortified the city, 
Themistocles thought the present a proper time 
to finish the new harbour.2 His address, his 
eloquence, and his bribes, were seasonably ap- 
plied to divert the resentment of Sparta, who, 
though thenceforth less jealous of the naval 
than military power of her rival, threatened, on 
this occasion, to enter Attica with an armed 
force. But the artful Athenian had the skill to 
persuade the Spartans and their allies, that the 
procuring a strong and capacious harbour was 
a matter essentially requisite to the common 
interest of the Grecian confederacy. The 
work, mean time, was carried on at Athens 
with much spirit and activity, and, in less than 
a twelvemonth, brought to such a prosperous 
conclusion, as could scarcely be credited, but 
on the testimony of a contemporary historian 
of the most approved diligence and fidelity.!0 
The new walls were sufficiently broad to admit 
two carriages abreast; the stones composing 
them were of an immense size, strongly united 
by bars of iron, which were fastcned hy melted 
lead. The Piræus soon grew into a town, con- 
taining many thousand inhabitants. It was 
joined to the city by walls begun by Cimon, 
but finished by Pericles, twenty years after the 
harbour itself had been erected. The new 

buildings of Cimon and Pericles 
A. C. 457. are often mentioned in history un- 
der the name of the Long Walls. They ex- 
tended forty stadia on either side; and when 
added to the circumference of the ancient city 
(about sixty stadia) give us for the whole cir- 
cuit of the Athenian fortifications an extent of 
nearly eighteen English miles.!! 

The altercations and animosities excited by 
such undertakings among the confederates at 
home, prevented not their united arms frora 
assaulting the dominions of the great king. 
Thirty Athenian, and fifty Peloponnesian ships, 
had been employed to expel the Persian garri- 
sons from the sea-ports which they still occu- 
pied in the Hellespont, the Propontis, and the 
/Egean isles. The European flect, being sca- 


8 Diodor. 1. xi. p. 437. 

9 Thucyd. |. i. c. xcii. Plut. in Themist. Diodor. xi. 436. 

10 Thucydid. ubi supra. 

11 Pausanias, p. 20, et seq. Strabo, p. 391, et seq. Plut. 
in Cimon. 


150 


sonably joined by various squadrons from the 
Greek cities of Asia, scoured the eastern shores 
of the Mediterranean, and delivered from op- 
pression the long enslaved island of Cyprus. 
Their next operation must have been at a con- 
siderable distance of time, since they had to 
return near two hundred leagues westward, 
Olymp and then to proceed almost as far 
iv i towards the north, and the Bos- 
A C 456 phorus of Thrace. At the entrance 

w * of this celebrated canal, which 
joins the Euxine and Propontis, the city of 
Byzantium, destined in future ages to become 
the seat of empire, and long to remain the 
chief emporium of Europe and of Asia, had 
been first founded by a feeble colony of Mega- 
reans, which had gradually become populous, 
flourishing, and independent, but which was 
actually commapded and insulted by armed 
Barbarians. Itis not probable that Xerxes, or 
his ministers, perceived the peculiar security 
of Byzantium, situate between the Bosphorus 
and the Hellespont, two straits, which it might 
occasionally shut to a hostile navy, or open to 
the fleets of commerce. But had they been 
sensible of this advantage, the misfortunes 
hitherto attending all their maritime enter- 
prises must have rendered it impossible to en- 
courage their seamen to resist a victorious 
enemy. They discovered, however, more than 
their usual vigour, in defending, by land, a 
place which they regarded as the centre of very 
valuable possessions. The adjacent coast of 
Thrace forms a striking contrast with the in- 
land parts of that country. Instead of bleak 
heaths, and snowy mountains, which deform 
the inhospitable regions of Hemus and Rho- 
dopé, the maritime provinces produce in abun- 
dance, vines, olives, the most useful grains, and 
the most delicious fruits. The climate vies 
with the delightful softness of the Asiatic 
plains; and the soil had been long cultivated 
by Greek colonies, who had widely extended 
themselves on both sides of Byzantium. The 
Barbarians strengthened the garrison of the 
place, which was well supplied with provi- 
sions, and commanded by Persians of the first 
distinction, among whom were several kinsmen 
of the great king. The siege was obstinate, 
but the events of it are not described in history. 
It is only known, that the walls were stormed, 
and that an immense booty, together with many 
Persian princes and nobles, fell into the hands 
of the victors.! 

Here the glory of Pausanias, who still com- 
manded the forces of the confederacy; a man 
whose fame would rival the most illustrious 
names of antiquity, had he fallen in the siege 
of Byzantium. The rich spoils of Platæa, of 
which the tenth was allotted to him, as general, 
raised him above the equality required by the 
republican institutions of his country. His 
recent conquest still farther augmented his 
wealth and his ambition; a continual flow of 
prosperity, which is dangerous to the best re- 
gulated minds, proved fatal to the aspiring tem- 
per of Pausanias. As he conceived himself too 


1 Plut. in Aristid. Thucydid. l. i. 95, et seq. Diodor. l. 
xi. 44—46. 


6 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


great to remain a subject, he was willing to 
become a sovereign, through the assistance of 
Xerxes, the inveterate enemy of his country. 
To this prince he made application, by means 
of Gongylus the Eretrian, a fit instrument for 
any kind of villany. To such an associate 
Pausanias had entrusted the noble Persians 
taken in Byzantium. This man escaped with 
lis prisoners across the Bosphorus, and con- 
veyed a letter to the great king, in which the 
Spartan general, having mentioned, as in- 
dubitable proof of his sincerity, the restoring 
his captive kinsmen, proposed to enter into 
strict amity with Xerxes, to take his daughter 
in marriage, to second his efforts in conquering 
Greece, and to hold that country as a depend- 
ent province of the Persian empire. The Per- 
sian is said to have highly relished these pro- 
posals, the subjugation of Greece being the 
great object of his reign. It is certain that he 
speedily sent Artabazus, a nobleman of con- 
fidence, to confer and co-operate with the 
traitor. 

But Pausanias himself acted with the preci- 
pitancy and inconsistency of a man, who had 
either been deluded into treason by bad ad- 
vice, or totally intoxicated by the dangerous 
vapours of ambition that floated in his distem- 
pered brain. Instead of dissembling his de- 
signs until they were ripe for execution, he 
assumed at once the tone of a master and the 
manners of a tyrant. He became difficult of 
access to his colleagues in command; disdain- 
ed their advice in concerting measures which 
they were ordered to execute; he was sur- 
rounded by guards, chosen from the conquered 
Barbarians; and he punished the slightest 
offence in the allied troops with a rigour 
hitherto unknown to the Grecian discipline. 
He still managed, indeed, the fierce spirits of 
the Spartans, but without any degree of pru- 
dence, since the distinctions which he demand- 
ed for them, tended only to irritate and inflame 
their confederates, who were not allowed to 
forage, to draw water, to cut down straw for 
their beds, until the countrymen of Pausanias 
had been previously furnished with all these 
articles. 

This intolerable insolence dis- 


ve = gusted and provoked the army in 
rae: F 5 general, but especially the lonians, 


who lamented that they had been 
no sooner delivered from the shackles of Per- 
sian despotism, than they were bent under the 
severer and more odious yoke of Sparta. By 
common consent, they repaired to the Athenian 
Aristides, and his colleague Cimon, the son of 
Miltiades, a youth of the fairest hopes, who had 
signalized his patriotism and valour in all the 
glorious scenes of the war. Their designs. 
being approved by the Athenian admirals, 
Uliades and Antagoras, who respectively com- 
manded the fleets of Samos and Chios, the 
bravest of all the maritime allies, seized the 
first opportunity to insult the galley of Pau- 
sanias; and when reproached and threatened 
by the Spartan, they desired him to thank 
Fortune, who had favoured him at Platæa, the 
memory of which victory alone sayed him from 
the immediate punishment of his arrogance 


XIL] 


and cruelty. These words speedily re-echoed 
through the whole flect, and served, as soon as 
they were heard, for the signal of general re- 
volt. The different squadrons of Asia and the 
Hellespont sailed from their stations, joined 
the ships of Uliades and Antagoras, loudly de- 
clared against the insolent ambition of Pausa- 
nias, abjured the proud tyranny of Sparta, and 
for ever ranged themselves under the vic- 
torious colours of Athens, whose generous 
magnanimity seemed best fitted to command 
the willing obedience of freemen.? 

This revolution had immediate 


a ae and important effects, which we 
F. C ATS shall proceed to explain, when we 


have punished and dismissed the 
unworthy Pausanias. Apprised of his malver- 
sation and treachery, the Spartan senate recall- 
ed him, to stand trial for his life. But his im- 
mense wealth enabling him to corrupt the 
integrity of his judges, he escaped without far- 
ther punishment than degradation from his 
office, and paying a heavy fine. In his stead, 
the Spartans substituted, not one admiral, 
but several captains, with divided authority, 
thereby to remove the odium and resentment 
which the insolence of unlimited command had 
excited among their confederates. Pausanias, 
though divested of his public character, having 
accompanied these officers to the Hellespont, in 
a vessel fitted out at his private expense, began 
to display more arrogance than ever. He dis- 
dained not only the manners and behaviour, 
but the dress and appearanee of a Greek; car- 
ried on, almost openly, his treacherous eorres- 
pondence with Artabazus; increased the num- 
ber of his Barbarian guards and attendants ; 
trampled with contempt on the most revered 
institutions of his country ; and assumed that 
provoking pomp of powcr, and that offensive 
ostentation of vice, which disgraced the profli- 
gate lives of the Persian satraps.3 

When the Spartan magistrates received a fuil 
account of his pride and folly, they were ap- 
prehensive lest he might refuse to return home 
on an ordinary summons, and therefore em- 
ployed the form of the scytalé, a form reserved 
for the most solemn oceasions. The scytalé 
(for opinion can give importance to any thing) 
was only a narrow seroll of parchment, which 
had been rolled on a picee of wood, and then 
stamped with the decree of the republic. Every 
Spartan, invested with authority at home or 
abroad, possessed a tally exaetly eorresponding 
to the red on which the parehment had been 
first rolled. By applying his tally, the words 
of the scytalé neeessarily arranged themselves 
in their original form, and attested the authen- 
tie command of the magistrate. As tutor to 
the infant king of Sparta, Pausanias had been 
furnished with an instrument of this kind; and 
such is the effect of legal formality, that a man 
who would probably have despised the injunc- 
tion of a simple letter, returned without delay 
to a eountry which he liad betrayed, when 
recalled by this frivolous, but respceted cere- 
mony. 


2 Nepos in Pausan. Plutarch. in Aristid. 
3 Thucydid. i. 95 et 128. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


15] 


The external professions, and hypoeritical 
pedantry, of Spartan virtue, were most shame- 
fully detected and exposed in the whole affair 
of Pausanias. Though convicted of the most 
odious tyranny, extortion, and profligacy, he 
was still allowed to cnjoy the benefit of per- 
sonal freedom; to correspond by frequent mes- 
sages with his accomplice Artabazus; and, at 
length, to tamper with the Helots and Messe- 
nians, those oppressed slaves, who were ever 
ready to rebel against the unrelenting tyranny 
of their masters. But as it exceeded even the 
opulence and effrontery of Pausanias, to cor- 
rupt and influence the whole republic, those 
who had either escaped the general contagion 
of venality, or who were offended at not 
sharing his bribes, accused him, a third time, 
of treason to Grecce, in consequence of an 
event which enabled them in the fullest manner 
to make good the charge. An unhappy youth, 
who lived with Pausanias as the infamous 
minister of his pleasure, was destined by that 
monster to become the victim of his ambition. 
He was charged with a letter from his master 
to Artabazus, in which, after cxplaining the 
actual state of his affairs, Pausanias hinted to 
him, as had been his usual practice, to destroy 
the bearer. The suspicious youth, who had ob- 
served that none of those sent on such errands 
ever returned to their country, broke open the 
letter, and read his own fate. Fired with re- 
sentment, he instantly earried the writing to the 
enemics of Pausanias, who prudently advised 
the messenger to take refuge in the temple of 
Neptune, expecting that his master would soon 
follow him. Mean while they practised a con- 
cealment in the wall of the temple, and having 
acquainted the Ephori, and other chief magis- 
trates, with their contrivance for convicting the 
traitor by his own words, they obtained a de- 
putation to accompany them, to remain con- 
cealed with them in the temple, and to over- 
hear the mutual reproaches of Pausanias and 
his messenger. Yet the superstition of the 
Spartans permitted them not to seize the cri- 
minal in that sacred edifice. He was allowed 
to retire in safety; and when the senate had 
at length determined to lay hold of him, he 
was privately admonished of.his danger by 
some members of that venal assembly. Upon 
this intelligence, he took refuge in the temple 
of Minerva, from which it being unlawful to 
drag him, that asylum was surrounded by 
guards, all necessaries were denied the prisoner, 
and he thus perished by hunger. 

The late punishment of this de- 


poe testable traitor could not repair 
A. C. 475. the ruinous effects of his miscon- 


duct and villany. Not only the 
Tonians, who had first begun the revolt, but 
the foreign confederates in general, loudly re- 
jected the pretensions of Dorcus and other 
captains whom the Spartans appointed to 
command them. <A few eommunitics of Pelo- 
ponnesus still followed the Laecdemonian 
standard; but the islanders and Asiatics una- 
nimously applied to Aristides, to whose ap- 


¢ 


4 Thucyd. 1. 1. c. cxxviii. et seq. Diodor. l. xi. c. xliv 
ct Nepos in Pausan 


152 


proved wisdom and virtue they not only en- 
trusted the operations of the combined arma- 
ment, but voluntarily submitted their more par- 
ticular concerns; and experience soon justified 
their prudent choice. Pay was not yet intro- 
duced into the Grecian service, because the cha- 
racter of soldier was not separated from that of 
citizen. I had been usual, however, to raise an- 
nually a certain proportion of supplies among 
the several confederates, in order to purchase 
arms, to equip and victual the galleys, and to 
provide such engines of war as proved requisite 
in storming the fortified towns belonging to 
the common enemy.! By unanimous suffrage, 
Aristides was appointed to new-model and 
apply this necessary tax, which had been im- 
posed and exacted by the Spartans without 
sufficient attention to the respective faculties 
of the contributaries. The honest Athenian 
executed this delicate office with no less judg- 
ment than equity. The whole annual impo- 
sition amounted to four hundred and sixty 
talents,about ninety thousand pounds sterling ; 
which was proportioned with such nice accu- 
racy, that no state found the smallest reason to 
complain of partiality or injustice. The com- 
mon treasure was kept in the central and sa- 
cred island of Delos; and, though entrusted to 
the personal discretion of the Athenian com- 
mander, was soon conceived to lie at the dis- 
position of his republic.? 

While the merit of Aristides thus procured 
his countrymen the management of the na- 
tional treasury of Greece, Themistocles was 
equally successful in improving the internal 
resources of the state. By yielding more pro- 
tection to strangers than they enjoyed in 
neighbouring cities, he augmented not only the 
populousness, but the wealth of Athens, as that 
description of men paid an annual contribu- 
tion in return for their security.2 This, to- 
gether with other branches of the revenue, he 
employed in building annually about sixty 
galleys, the addition of which to the Athenian 
navy abundantly compensated such losses as 
were sustained by the accidents of the sea in 
foreign parts. Notwithstanding the envy and 
malice of worthless demagogues, who infested 
the Athenian assembly and courts of justice, 
Themistocles was fast advancing to the attain- 
ment of the same authority at home, which 
Aristides enjoyed abroad, when complaints ar- 
rived from Sparta, that he had conspired with 
Pausanias to betray the public liberty. The 
known resentment of the Spartans against this 
extraordinary man, sufficiently explains the 
reason why they, who were so dilatory in their 
proceedings against Pausanias himself, should 
be so eager to bring to punishment his sup- 
posed accomplice. But it was not easy to con- 
ceive, how the Athenians could admit such an 
accusation against a citizen, whose singular 
valour and conduct had gained tlhe decisive 
victory at Salamis; whose counsels and ad- 
dress had fortified their city with impregnable 
strength; whose foresight and activity had 


1 Plut. in Aristid. p. 532, et seq. 
2 Ibid. p. 534. Thucyd. l. i. c. xevi. Diodor. p. 440. 
3 Lysias adv. Philon. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


procured them a fleet which no nation in the 
world could resist; and whose abilities and 
patriotism had not only saved his country from 
the most formidable invasion recorded in histo- 
ry, and which was principally directed against 
Athens, but amidst the terrors of this invasion, 
the treachery of false friends, and the violence 
of open enemies, had so eminently contributed 
to raise his republic to the first rank in the 
Grecian confederacy. Yet such, on the one 
hand, was the effect cf that envy which, in re- 
publics, always accompanies excellence; and 
such, on the other, the influence of Spartan 
bribery and intrigues, that Themistocles was 
banished by the ostracism, a punishment in- 
flicted on men whose aspiring ambition seemed 
dangerous to freedom, which required not the 
proof of any particular delinquency, and which 
had effect only during a term of years.4 

It is probable, that the illustrious 


D ly w exile would have been recalled be- 
A 473, fore the expiration of the appointed 


time; but the persecution of Sparta 
allowed not his countrymen leisure to repent 
of their severity. Having punished Pausanias, 
they acquainted the Athenians, “ That from 
the papers of that notorious traitor, complete 
evidence appeared of the guilt of Themistocles; 
that it was not sufficient, therefore, to have ex- 
pelled him for a few years from Athens, by an 
indulgent decree, which the assembly might 
revoke at pleasure; that crimes against the 
general confederacy of Greece ought to be 
judged by the Amphictyonic council, and pu- 
nished by death, or perpetual banishment.” 
The Athenians shamefully complied with this 
demand. It appeared, indeed, that Themisto- 
cles had corresponded with Pausanias,and been 
privy to his designs; but he persisted in affirm- 
ing that he never had approved them. The 
rivalship and enmity subsisting between Sparta 
and Argos, had induced him to choose the lat- 
ter as the place of his retreat. There he re- 
ceived the news of his condemnation; after 
which, not thinking himself secure in any city 
of Peloponnesus, he sailed to Corcyra. But 
his enemies still continuing to pursue him, he 
fled to the opposite coast of Epirus, and sought 
refuge among the barbarous Molossians. Soon 
afterwards he escaped into Persia, where his 
wonderful versatility of genius, in acquiring 
the language and manners of that country, re- 
commended him to the new king Artaxerxes, 
who had lately succeeded the unfortunate in- 
vader of Greece. The suspicion 


eee of treason throws a dark shade on 
A. C. 479, the eminent lustre of his abilities ; 


‘nor does the disinterestedness of 
“is private character tend to remove the impu- 

tion. Though he carried with him to Persia 
his most valuable effects, yet the estimate of 
the property which he left belrind in Athens, 
amounted to a hundred talents (above twenty 
thousand pounds sterling,) an immense sum, 
when estimated by the value of money in that 
age. The whole was confiscated to the exche- 
quer; and the eagerness of the populace to 
seize this rich booty, serves to explain the ala- 


4 Diodor. p. 445, et seq. Plut. ibid. 


XIL] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


153 


crity with which ail parties agreed to his de- | long baffling the efforts of the besiegers, by 


struction. A report prevailed in Greece, that 
Themistocles could never forgive the ingrati- 
tude of the Athenians, which he had deter- 
mined to revenge at the head of a powerful 
army, raised by Artaxerxes. But perceiving the 
unexampled success of Cimon on the Asiatic 
coast, he despaired of being able to accomplish 
his design; and, in a melancholy hour, ended his 
life by poison, at the age of sixty-five, in Mag- 
nesia, a town of Lydia, which had been be- 
stowed on him by the liberality of the Persian 
monarch.5 . 

It is worthy of observation, that 


a ay 2 the three great commanders who 
bars 471 had resisted and disgraced the arms 


* of Xerxes, quitted the scene almost 
at the same time. While Pausanias and The- 
mistocles suffered the punishment of their real 
or pretended crimes, Aristides died of old age, 
universally regretted by the affectionate admi- 
ration of his country. He, who had long 
managed the common treasury of Greece, left 
not a sufficient sum to defray the expense of 
his funeral. His son Lysimachus received a 
present of three hundred pounds from the 
public, to enable him to pursue and finish his 
education. His daughters were maintained 
and portioned at the expense of the treasury. 
This honourable poverty well corresponded 
with the manly elevation of his character, 
whose pure and unsullied splendour, in the 
opinion of a good judge of meriti far eclipses 
the doubtful fame of his daring, but unfortu- 
nate rival. 

By the death of Aristides, the conduct of the 
Persian war devolved on his colleague Cimon, 
who united the integrity of that great man to 
the valour of Miltiades and the decisive bold- 
ness of Themistocles. But as he felt an ambi- 
tion for eminence which disdains bare imita- 
tion, he not only reflected the most distinguish- 
ed excellences of his predecessors, but improved 
and adorned them by an elegant liberality of 
manners, an indulgent humanity, and candid 
condescension ; virtues which long secured him 
the affections of his fellow citizens, while his 
military talents and authority, always directed 
by moderation and justice, maintained an ab- 
solute ascendant over the allies of the republic. 
His first operations were employed against the 
coast of Thrace which the taking 


Olymp. of Byzantium seemed to render an 


lxxvii. 2. 


A. C. 471, &2sy conquest. The only places in | 


that country fitted to make an ob- 
stinate resistance, were the towns of Eion and 
Amphipolis, both situate on the river Strymon; 
the former near its junction with the Strymo- 
nic gulf, the latter more remote from the shore, 
but entirely surrounded by an arm of the gulf, 
and the principal branches of that copious 
river. Amphipolis, however, was taken, and 
planted by a numerous colony of Athenians. 
But Eion still opposed a vigorous resistance ; 


Boges, the Persian governor, having deter- 


After 


mined rather to perish than surrender. 


5 Plut. et Nepos in Themist. 
Thucyd. i. 135, et seq. 
6 Plato apud Plutarch. in Aristid. 
U 


‘ 


Diodor. l. xi. c. liv—lix. 


such persevering courage and activity as none 
of his countrymen had displayed in the course 
of the war, this fierce Barbarian was at length 
not tamed, but exasperated by hunger. His 
companions and attendants, equally desperate 
with their leader, followed his intrepid exam- 
ple; and mounting the ramparts with one ac- 
cord, threw into the middle stream of the Stry- 
mon their gold, silver, and other precious 
effects. After thus attesting their implacable 
hatred to the assailants, they calmly descended, 
lighted a funeral pile, butchered their wives 
and children, and again mounting the walls, 
precipitated themselves with fury into the 


| thickest of the flames.” 


With this signal act of despair ended the 
Persian dominion over the coast of Europe, 
which finally submitted to the vic- 


ae torious arms of Cimon; a general, 
A. C. 470 who knew alike how to conquer, 


and how to use the victory. The 
Athenians were eager to prolong the authority 
of a man, who seemed ambitious to acquire 
wealth by valour, only that by wealth he might 
purchase the public esteem; and whose affable 
condescension, and generous liberality, con- 
tinually increased his fame and his influence 
both at home and abroad. The reinforce- 
ments with which he was speedily furnished 
by the republic, enabled him to pursue the 
enemy into Asia, without allowing them time 
to breathe, or recover strength, after their re- 
peated defeats. The intermediate islands am- 
bitiously courted his protection and friendship ; 
and their feeble aid, together with the more 
powerful assistance of the Ionian coast, 
speedily increased his fleet to the number of 
three hundred sail. 

With this formidable armament he stretched 
towards the coast of Caria, where his approach 
served for the signal of liberty to the numerous 
Greek cities in that valuable province. Se- 
conded by the ardour of tle natives, he suc- 
cessively besieged and reduced the walled 
towns and fortresses, several of which were 
filled with powerful garrisons; and, in the 
course of a few months, totally expelled the 
Persians from all their strong holds in Caria. 
The victorious armament then proceeded east- 
ward to Lycia, and received the submission of 
that extensive coast. The citizens of Phaselis 
alone, defended by strong walls, and a numer- 
ous garrison, refused to admit the Grecian 
fleet, or to betray their Persian master. Their 
resistance was the more formidable, because 
their ancient connection with the Chians, who 
actually served under the colours of Cimon, 
enabled them to enter into a treacherous cor- 
respondence with the enemy. After other 
means of intercourse had been cut off, the 
Chians still shot arrows over the walls, and 
thus conveyed intelligence into the place of 
all the measures adopted by the assailants. 
Wherever the attack was made, the townsmen 
and garrison were prepared to resist: the be- 
siegers were long bafiled in their attempts ; but 
the perseverance of Cimon finally overcame 


7 Plut. in Cimon. Diodor. l. xi. 


154 


the obstinacy of his enemies. Their vigorous 
resistance was not distinguished by any me- 
morable punishment; the mediation of the 
Chians, who were justly esteemed among the 
best sailors in the Athenian fleet, easily pre- 
vailing on the lenity of Cimon to grant them 
a capitulation, on condition that they imme- 
diately paid ten talents, and augmented the 
Grecian armament by their whole naval 
strength.! 

The distracted state of Persia, the intrigues 
of the court, the discord of the palace, and the 
civil wars which raised to the throne of Xerxes 
his third son Artaxerxes, distinguished by the 
epithet of Longimanus, prevented that vast but 
unwieldy empire from making any vigorous 
effort to resist the European invasion. But 
after Artaxerxes had at length crushed the un- 
fortunate ambition of his competitors, and ac- 
quired firm possession of the reins of* govern- 
ment, which he continued to hold for half a 
century,? he naturally concerted proper mea- 
sures to defend his remaining dominions in Asia 

ə Minor. Haying re-established the 
a i Persian authority in the isle of 
3 Cyprus, he considered that Pam- 
phylia, being the next province to Lycia, would 
probably receive a speedy visit from the victo- 
rious Greeks. That he might meet them there 
with becoming vigour, he assembled a power- 
ful army on the fertile banks of the Euryme- 
don. A fleet likewise of four hundred sail, 
was collected, chiefly from Cilicia, and Pheni- 
cia, and was commanded to rendezvous near 
the mouth of that river. 

The Greeks, conducted by the activity of Ci- 
mon, delayed not to undertake the enterprise 
which the prudence of Artaxerxes 


ere 3 had foreseen. Their fleet, amount- 
A.C ` 470 ing to two hundred and fifty gallies, 


fell in with the Persian squadrons 
off the coast of Cyprus. The Barbarians, 
vainly confident in their superior numbers, did 
not decline the engagement, which was obsti- 
nate, fierce, and bloody. Many of their ships 
were sunk; a hundred were taken; the rest 
fled in disorder towards the shore of Cyprus; 
but, being speedily pursued by a powerful de- 
tachment of the Grecian fleet, were abandoned 
by the terror of their crews, to the victors ; and 
thus the mighty preparations, which the great 
king had raised with such flattering hopes, 
strengthened in one day, with about three hun- 
dred sail, the hostile navy of Greece.’ 

The vigorous mind of Cimon, instead of be- 
ing intoxicated with this flow of prosperity, 
was less elevated with good fortune, than soli- 
citous to improve it. The captured vessels con- 
tained above twenty thousand Persians. The 
soldiers encamped on the Eurymedon were 
still ignorant of the battle. These circum- 
stances instantly suggested to the quick dis- 
cernment of Cimon a stratagem for surprising 
the Persian camp, which was executed on the 


1 Plut. et Diodor. ibid. 

2 Compare Thucydid. 1. i. c. exxxvii. and Usher Chronol. 
See also Petav. de Doctrin. Temp. l. x. c. xxv. who endea- 
vours to reconcile the chronological differences between 
Thucydides and Plutarch in Themist. 

3 Thucydid. Plut. Diod. ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


evening of the same glorious day with unex- 
ampled success. The prisoners were stripped 
of their eastern attire; the bravest of the Greeks 
condescended to assume the tiara and scimetar, 
and thus disguised, embarked in the Persian 
ships, and sailed up the river Eurymedon with 
a favourable gale. The unsuspecting Barba- 
rians received them with open arms into their 
camp, as their lJong-expected companions. But 
the Greeks had no sooner been admitted within 
the gates, than on a given signal, at once draw- 
ing their swords, they attacked, with the con~ 
cert of disciplined valour, the defenceless 
security of their now astonished and trembling 
adversaries. Before the Persians recovered 
from their surprise, Cimon had advanced to the 
tent of their general. Consternation and despair 
seized this numerous but unwarlike host. The 
few who were least overcome by the impressions 
of fear and amazement, betook themselves to 
flight ; a panic terror suspended the powers of 
the rest ; they remained, and fell, unarmed and 
unresisting, by the hands of an unknown enemy. 

The rich spoil of the Barbarian camp reward- 
ed the enterprise and celerity of the Greeks, 
who, loaded with wealth and glory, returned 
home during winter, and piously dedicated to 
Apollo a tenth of the plunder acquired by these 
ever memorable achievements. A considera- 
ble portion of the remainder was employed (as 
mentioned above) in strengthening the fortifi- 
cations of Athens. Agreeably to the Grecian 
custom, the general was entitled to a valuable 
share. Cimon received it as a testimony of 
the public esteem, and expended it for the pub- 
lic use; embellishing his beloved native city 
with shady walks, gardens, porticoes, schools 
of exercise, and other works of general plea- 
sure and utility.4 

After these decisive victories, the Greeks 
headed by the Athenians, carried on the war 
during twenty-one years, rather for plunder 
than glory. The manifest supe- 


pymP-  riority which they enjoyed on all 
we D 469, the eastern shores of the Mediterra- 


nean, might have rendered their 
maritime allies sufficiently secure. But the 
people of Athens, whose councils began about 
this time to be governed by the magnanimous 
ambition and profound policy of Pericles, had 
the address to persuade their confederates that 
naval preparations and enterprises were still as 
necessary as ever. At length, however, most 
of those scattered islands and sea-ports, which 
followed the colours of Athens, grew weary of 
perpetual hostilities, of which they shared the 
toil and danger, while their ambitious leaders 
alone reaped the advantage and the glory, and 
became continually more anxious to enjoy the 
benefits of public peace, and the undisturbed 
comforts of domestic tranquillity. The Athe- 
nians availed themselves of this disposition, 
to engage such states as appeared most back- 
ward in raising their contingents for the com- 
mon armament, to compound for personal ser- 
vice on shipboard, by an annual supply of 
money, which might enable Athens continually 
to keep in readiness a fleet of observation, to 


4 Idem. ibid. et Nepos in Cimon. et Thucydid. 1. i. 


XIL] 


watch and check the motions of the common 
enemy. This, at first voluntary, contribution 
soon amounted to about a hundred thousand 
pounds. It was gradually augmented ; and, 
at length, raised by Pericles to three times the 
orginal sum ;5 an immense income, considering 
that the proportional value of money to labour 
was then ten times higher than at present; and 
considering also the very limited revenues of 
the greatest monarchs of antiquity; since, from 
all the various provinces of the Persian empire, 
scarcely four millions sterling entered the royal 
treasury.® 

In their easier expeditions, the Greeks had an 
opportunity of visitmg the large and beautiful 
island of Cyprus, which, though delivered by 
their valour from some Persian garrisons, either 
still continued, or again became, 


s si me subject to that empire. The strik- 
en 466 ing advantages’ of a delightful ter- 


ritory, four hundred miles in cir- 
cumference, producing in great abundance 
wine, oil, with the most delicious fruits, and 
deemed invaluable in ancient times on account 
of its rich mines of brass, naturally tempted the 
ambition of an enterprizing nation. The con- 
quest of Cyprus was still farther recommended 
to the Athenians, as the sea-coast had been 
peopled by a Grecian colony under the heroic 
Teucer, who built there a city called Salamis 
from the name of his native country,’ which, 
from the earliest antiquity, had been regarded 
as a dependence of Attica. The Grecian in- 
habitants of Cyprus had hitherto attained 
neither power nor splendour ; their settlements 
had been successively reduced by the Pheni- 
cians and the great king; and they actually 
languished in a condition of the greatest de- 
bility. Honour prompted the Athenians to 
relieve their distressed brethren; interest inci- 
ted them to acquire possession of a valuable 
island. With two hundred ships of war they 
prepared to undertake this important enterprise, 
when an object still more dazzling gave a new 
direction to their arms. 

Amidst the troubles which at- 


piymP- _ tended the establishment of Arta- 
fades xerxes on the Persian throne, the 


Egyptians sought an opportunity 
to withdraw themselves from the yoke of a na- 
tion whose tyranny they had long felt and la- 
mented. A leader only was wanting to head 
the rebellion. This also was at length disco- 
vered in Inarus, a bold Libyan chief, to whose 
standard the malcontents assembling from all 
quarters, gradually grew into an army, which 
attacked and defeated the Persian mercenaries, 
expelled the garrisons, banished or put to death 
the governors and officers of the revenue, and 
traversing the kingdom without control or re- 
sistance, every where proclaimed the Egyptians 
a free and independent nation. Nor was this 
the capricious revolt of short-sighted Barba- 


5 Thucydid. ibid. et Plut. iu Pericl. 

6 Herodot. iii. 95. In modern times the precions metals 
have so much increased in quantity and diminished in value, 
that in 1660 the revenue of Hindoostan amounted to thirty 
two millions sterling. 

7 Strabo, p. 648. 

9 Tsocrat. ibid. 


8 Tsocrat. in Evagor. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


155 


rians. Inarus maintained his conquest with 
valour and policy; and in order to strengthen 
his interest by foreign alliance, despatched an 
embassy to Athens, craving the assistance of 
that victorious republic against its most odious 
and inveterate enemy.?0 

The negociation was successful ; 


K ven the Athenians burned with desire 
XXe <en to share the spoils of Persia, and 
A. C. 463. 


commanded the ships, destined for 
Cyprus, to sail to Egypt. They had scarcely 
arrived in that kingdom, when a Persian army 
of three hundred thousand men, commanded 
by Achemenes, encamped on the banks of the 
Nile. A battle speedily ensued, in which the 
insurgents obtained a complete victory, chiefly 
through the valour and discipline of their Gre- 
clan auxiliaries. The vanquished sought re- 
fuge within the walls of Memphis; that capital 
was invested ; and after becoming master of 
two divisions of the city, the Athenians pushed 
with vigour the siege of the third, called, from 
the colour of its fortifications, the White Wall. 
Artaxerxes, mean while, neglected no possible 
effort, for breaking, or eluding, a tempest, that 
threatened to dismember his dominions. While 
Persian nobles of distinction conveyed immense 
sums of gold and silver into Greece, to rouse, 
by seasonable bribes, the hostility of rival states 
against the audacity of Athens, a new army 
was collected, still more numerous than the for- 
mer, and entrusted to Megabazus, the bravest 
general in the East. Such, at least, he was 
deemed by his countrymen; yet we cannot per- 
ceive any very illustrious merit in forcing the 
Greeks to raise the siege of Memphis, the sol- 
diers being already worn out with the fatigues 
of hard service, and probably enfeebled by 
diseases in a far distant climate, extremely dif 
ferent from their own. 
Ol Megabazus, however, had the 
a lory of first turning against the 
Ixxx. 4. rat y 8 ag 
A. C. 457. reeks that current of success 
which had run for many years so 
strongly in their favour. They and the revolted 
Egyptians were now besieged, in their turn, in 
a small island of the Nile called Prosopis, along 
the coast of which the Athenians had anchored 
their ships. By diverting the course of the 
river, Megabazus left them on dry land. This 
operation so much confounded the Egyptians, 
that they immediately laid down their arms: 
but their wonted magnanimity did not forsake 
the Greeks: with their own hands they set fire 
to their fleet, and exhorting each other to suffer 
nothing unworthy of their former fame, deter- 
mined, with one accord, to resist the assailants, 
and although they could not expect victory, to 
purchase an honourable tomb. Megabazus, in- 
timidated by their countenance and resolution, 
and unwilling to expose his men to the efforts 
of a dangerous despair, granted them a capitu- 
lation, and, what seems more extraordinary in 
a Persian. commander, allowed them to retire 
in safety. They endeavoured to penetrate 
through Libya to the Grecian colonies in Cy- 
renaica, from which they hoped to be trans- 
ported by sea to their native country. But the 


10 Thucydid. I. i. et Diodor. 1. xi. p. 279. 


156 


greater part perished through fatigue or disease 
in the inhospitable deserts of Africa, and only a 
miserable remnant of men, whose bravery de- 
served a better fate, revisited the shores of 
Greece. To complete the disaster, a reinforce- 
ment of sixty ships, which the Athenians had 
sent to Egypt, was attacked, surrounded, and 
totally destroyed by the Pheenicians, near the 
same scene which had already proved so fatal, 
but so honourable, to their countrymen. 


These repeated misfortunes, to- 
ae gether with the growing troubles in 
Baxu. a mE : 
A.C. 450. Greece, which we shall speedily 


have occasion to describe, prevent- 
ed the Athenians, during seven years, from re- 
viving their design against Cyprus. A fleet of 
two hundred sail was at length entrusted to 
Cimon, who enjoyed a prosperous voyage to 
the Cyprian coast. The towns of Malos and 
Citium opposed a feeble resistance, and the 
singular humanity with which Cimon treated 
his prisoners, would have facilitated more im- 
portant conquests: but the Phenician and 
Cilician fleets had again put to sea, and Cimon 
wisely determined to attack them as they 
approached the island, rather than wait their 
arrival, his countrymen being superior to their 
enemies, still more in naval than in military 
prowess. In the battle wlfich soon followed, 
he took above a hundred galleys; the number 
of those sunk or destroyed is unknown; the 
remainder fled to the coast of Cilicia, in hopes 
of protection from the army of Megabazus, 
encamped in that province; but that slow un- 
wieldy body was unable to afford them any 
seasonable or effectual relief. The Greeks, 
having pursued them on shore, totally destroyed 
them, as well as the Persian detachments who 
came to their succour, and returned loaded 
With spoil to Cyprus. The Athenian general 
then prepared to form the siege of Salamis, 
which, though defended by a numerous Persian 
garrison, and well provided with all the neces- 
saries of defence, must have soon yielded to 
his skill and valour, had not sickness, in con- 
sequence of a wound received before the walls 
of Citium, prevented him from exerting his 
usual activity. 

' Mean while Artaxerxes, who per- 


ee ceived that the acquisition of Sala- 
rer "449 mis would naturally draw after it 


the conquest of the whole island, 
and who had been continually disappointed in 
expecting to prepare fleets and armies capable 
to contend with the Athenians, eagerly solicited 
peace from that people, almost on their own 
terms. His ambassadors were favourably heard 
in the Athenian assembly by those who were 
‘more solicitous about confirming their usurpa- 
tions over their allies and colonies, than am- 
bitious of extending their Asiatic conquests. 
Cimon, who invariably maintained the contrary 
system, was now no more. A peace, therefore, 
was concluded on the following conditions :? 
That all the Greek colonies in Lower Asia 
should be declared independent of the Persian 
empire; that the armies of the great king should 
not approach within three days’ journey of the 


1 Isocrat.de Pace et Panegvr. et Thucyd. et Diodor. ibid. 
2 Thucydid. Plutarch. Diodor. Isocrat. &c. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


western coast; and that no Persian vessel 
should appear between the Cyanean rocks and 
the Chelidonian isles, that is, in the wide ex- 
tent of the Ægean and Mediterranean seas, be- 
tween the northern extremity of the Thracian 
Bosphorus and the southern promontory of 
Lycia. On such terms the Athenians and their 
allies stipulated to withdraw their armament 
from Cyprus, and to abstain thenceforward 
from molesting the territories of the king of 
Persia. Such was the conclusion of this me- 
morable war, which, since the burning of Sar- 
dis, the first decisive act of hostility, had beeg 
carried on, with little intermission, during fifty 
one years. The same magnanimous republic. 
which first ventured to oppose the pretensions 
of Persia, dictated to that haughty empire the 
most humiliating conditions of peace; an im- 
portant and illustrious era in Grecian history, 
which was often celebrated with pompous 
panegyric during the declining ages of Athe- 
nian glory. 

Although, for reasons which will be explained 
hereafter, peace was alike necessary to both 
parties, yet the rcader, who feels a warm inter- 
est in the cause of civilization and humanity, 
cannot but regret that, after disgracing the arms 
of Persia, and breaking the power of Carthage, 
the Greeks had not combined in one powerful 
exertion, and extended their victories and their 
improvements over the ancient world. But the 
internal defects in her political constitution, 
which stunted the growth of Greece, and pre- 
vented her manhood and maturity from corres- 
pouding to the blooming vigour of her youth, 
rendered impossible this most desirable union, 
which, could it have taken place, would proba- 
bly have left little room for the transient con- 
quests of Alexander, or the more permanent 
glory of the Roman arms. Instead of these 
imagined trophies, the subsequent history of 
Greece presents us with the melancholy pic- 
ture of intestine discord. 

During a hundred and eleven years, which 
elapsed between the glorious peace with Persia, 
in which the Athenians, at the head of their 
allies, seemed for ever to have repressed the 
ambition of that aspiring power, and the fatal 
defeat at Cheronza, in which the same people, 
with their unfortunate auxiliaries, submitted to 
the valour and activity of Philip, Greece, with 
short variations of domestic quiet and foreign 
hostility, carried on bloody wars, and obtained 
destructive victories, in which her own citizens, 
not the enemies of the confederacy, were the 
unhappy objects of her inglorious triumph. Yet 
the transactions of this distracted and misera- 
ble period, however immaterial in the history 
of empire, are peculiarly interesting in the still 
more instructive history of human nature. A 
confederacy of soldiers and freemen, extending 
their dominion over ignorant savages, or ef- 
feminate slaves, must continually exhibit the 
unequal combat of power, courage, and con- 
duct on the one side, against weakness, igno- 
rance, and timidity on the other. But amidst 
the domestic dissensions of Greece, the ad- 
vantages of the contending parties were nicely 


3 Isocrat. Panegyr 


XIL] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


157 


balanced and accurately adjusted. Force was| The Spartans in vain exerted their utmost en- 


resisted by force, valour opposed by valour, and 
art encountered or eluded by similar address. 
The active powers of man, excited by emula- 
tion, inflamed by opposition, nourished by in- 
terest, and at once strengthened and elevated 
by a sense of personal honour and the hope of 
immortal fame, operated in every direction with 
awakened energy, and were displayed in the 
boldest exertions of the voice and arm. In 
every field where glory might be won, men 
recognised the proper objects of their ambition, 
and aspired to the highest honours of their 
kind; and although the prizes were often 
small, and the victory always indecisive, yet 
the pertinacious efforts of the combatants 
(great beyond example, and almost beyond 
belief) furnish the most interesting spectacle 
that history can present to the rational wonder 
of posterity. 

The powerful cities of Sparta, Thebes, and 
Argos, which had long rivalled Athens and 
each other, could not behold, without much 
dissatisfaction and anxiety, the rapid growth 
of a republic which already eclipsed their 
splendour, and might some time endanger their 
safety. The Spartans had particular causes of 
disgust. The immortal victories of Cimon 
made them deeply regret that they, who had 
shared the first and severest toils of the war, 
had too hastily withdrawn from a field of ac- 
tion that afforded so many laurels. They were 
provoked at being denied the command of the 
maritime allies, and not less offended at being 
overreached by Themistocles. All these rea- 
sons had determined them, above twenty years 
before the peace with Persia, to make war on 
the Athenians, expecting to be seconded in this 
design by the fears of the weak, and the jea- 
lousy of the more powerful, states, on both 
sides the Corinthian isthmus. But their ani- 
mosity, before it broke out into action, was 
diverted by a calamity equally sudden and 
unforeseen. In the year four hun- 


z ly ee dred and sixty-nine before Christ, 
Rowe Sparta was overwhelmed by an 


earthquake.4 Taygetus and the 
neighbouring mountains were shaken to the 
foundation, and twenty thousand Lacedemo- 
nian citizens or subjects perished in this dread- 
ful disaster. But, amidst the ruins of Sparta, 
one description of men beheld the public mis- 
fortunes not only without horror, but with a 
secret satisfaction. 

The oppressed Spartan slaves, known by the 
appellation of Helots and Messenians, assem- 
bled in crowds from the villages in which they 
were cantoned, and took measures for deliver- 
ing themselves during the cruelty of the ele- 
ments, from the not less inexorable cruelty of 
their unfeeling tyrants. The prudent disposi- 
tions of king Archidamus, who, foreseeing the 
revolt, had summoned the citizens to arms, pre- 
vented them from getting immediate possession 
of the capital; but they rendered themselves 
masters of the ancient and strong fortress 
Ithomé, from which they continued many 
vears to infest the Lacedemonian territories. 


4 Thucydid. lib. i. cap.c. et seq. Diodor. lib. xi. cap. Ixiii. 


deavours to expel this dangerous intestine ene- 
my; and in the third year of the war (for this 
revolt is dignified in history by the name of the 
Third Messenian War,) they had recourse to 
the Athenians, who, of all the Greeks, were 
deemed the most skilful in sieges. The Athe- 
nians, either not sufficiently acquainted with 
the secret hostility of Sparta, or willing to dis- 
semble their knowledge of it, as they were 
then totally bent on other projects and enter- 
prises, sent them the required assistance. The 
besiegers, however, met with so little success, 
that the Spartans dismissed their Athenian 
auxiliaries, on prétence indeed that their help 
was no longer necessary; but, in reality, from a 
suspicion that they favoured the interest of the 
rebels; and, as they retained the troops of all 
the other allies, the Athenians were justly pro- 
voked by this instance of distrust. Mean 
while the inhabitants of Pisa, who, for a reason 
that will be immediately explained, were highly 
incensed against Sparta, gave vigorous assist- 
ance to the besieged. 

The place thus held out ten 


Olymp. i iF i 
Ixxx.Q, years: many sallies were made, 
A. C. 459 several battles were fought with 


the fury that might be expected 
from the cruelty of tyrants chastising the inso- 
lence of slaves. Both parties must have been 
reduced to extremity, since the Helots and 
Messenians, though obliged to surrender the 
place, obtained from the weakness, a condition 
which they would have vainly solicited from 
the mercy of Sparta, “that they should be 
allowed, with their wives, children, and effects, 
to depart, unmolested, from the Peloponnesus.” 
The Athenians, deeply resenting the affront of 
suspected fidelity, determined to mortify the 
Spartans by kindly receiving those needy fugi- 
tives, whom they finally established in Nau- 
pactus, a sea-port on the Crissean gulf, which 
their arms had justly wrested from the Locri 
Ozole; a cruel and barbarous people, whose 
savage manners and rapacity disgraced their 
Grecian extraction. The Helots and Messe- 
nians repaid, by signal gratitude, the humane 
protection of Athens. During the long course 
of the Peloponnesian war, while their neigh- 
bours on every side espoused the opposite 
interest, the inhabitants of Naupactus alone 
invariably exerted themselves, with zeal and 
vigour, in defence of the declining power of 
their magnanimous confederate and ancient 
benefactor. 

The cause above alluded to, which had in- 
censed the Pisans against Sparta, dated beyond 
a century. That people had long contended 
with Elis, the capital of their province, for the 
right of superintending the Olympic games, 
The Spartans enabled the Elians to prevail in 
the contest, who continued, without opposi- 
tion, to direct that august solemnity, until the 
earthquake and subsequent calamities of Sparta 
emboldened the insolent and wealthy Pisans 
to renew their pretensions.” Their attempts, 
however, to maintain this bold claim, especially 


5 Thucydid. l. i. cap. ci. 
6 Pausanias, l. vi. c. xxii. 


7 Strabo, l. viii. p. 545. 


` 158 


-` 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[| Cuar. 


after the removal of the Helots and Messe-|a wreath, resembled young Pantarces, the fa- 


nians, appear to have been alike feeble and 
unfortunate. Pisa was taken, plundered, and 
so thoroughly demolished, that not a vestige, 
and scarce the name, remained. 

With the valuable booty acquired 


ae a j in this warfare, the Elians exe- 
a 456 cuted a memorable undertaking; 


having, in the course of ten years,! 
enlarged and adorned the temple of Olympian 
Jupiter, and erected the celebrated statue of 
that divinity; a work which no subsequent age 
could ever rival, and whose sublimity is said to 
have increased and fortified the popular super- 
stition.2 This famous templeswas of the Doric 
order, encircled with a colonnade, and built of 
the stone of the country resembling Parian 
marble. From the area, or ground, to the de- 
coration over the gate, it reached sixty-eight 
feet it height; it was ninety-five feet broad, 
and two hundred and thirty long: thus failing 
short of the greatest modern temples in magni- 
tude, as much as it excelled them in beauty 
and the richness of material. It was covered 
with Pentelican marble, cut in the form of 
brick tiles. At each extremity of the roof stood 
a gilded vase; in the middle a golden victory; 
below which was a shield embossed with 
Medusa’s head, likewise of gold. Pelops and 
(Enomaus were represented, on the pediment, 
ready to begin the chariot-race before very 
illustrious spectators, since Jupiter himself was 
of the number. The vault was adorned with 
the battle of the Centaurs and Lapithe. The 
labours of Hercules distinguished the principal 
entrance. 

After passing the brass gates, you discovered 
Tphitus crowned by his spouse Echecheiria ; 
from thence you proceeded, through a noble 
portico, to the majestic creation of Phidias the 
Athenian, which formed the principal ornament 
of the temple, and of Greece. The god was 
sitting on a throne, and being sixty feet high, 
touched the roof with his head ; and threatened, 
if he moved himself, to shake in pieces that 
noble edifice, which, lofty and spacious as it 
was, still appeared unworthy to contain him. 
This vast colossus was composed of gold, taken 
in the sack of Pisa, and of ivory, then almost 
as precious as gold, which was brought from 
the East by Athenian merchantmen. The god 
had an enamelled crown of olive on his head, 
an image of victory in his right hand, a bur- 
nished sceptre in his left. His robes and san- 
dals were variegated with golden flowers and 
animals. The throne was made of ivory and 
ebony, inlaid with precious stones. The feet 
which supported it, as well as the fillets which 
joined them, were adorned with innumerable 
figures; among which you perceived the The- 
ban children torn by sphynxes, together with 
Apollo and Diana shooting the beautiful and 
once flourishing family of Niobé. Upon the 
most conspicuous part of the throne which met 
the eye in entering, you beheld eight statues, 
representing the gymnastic exercises ; and the 


beautiful figure, whose head was encircled with 


1 Between the years 456 and 446, A. C. 
2 Aliquid receptæ religioni adjecisse fertur.—PLIn. 
3 Pausan. in Eliac. p. 303, et seq. 


vourite scholar of Phidias, who, in the contest 
of the boys, had recently gained the Olympic 
prize. Besides the four feet, mentioned above, 
the throne was supported by four pillars, placed 
between them, and painted by Panenus, the 
brother of Phidias. There that admirable art- 
ist had delineated the Hesperides guarding the 
golden apples; Atlas painfully sustaining the 
heavens, with Hercules ready to assist him; 
Salaminé with naval ornaments in her hand; 
and Achilles supporting the beautiful expiring 
Penthesilea. 

It would be tedious to describe the remaining 
ornaments of this celebrated statue, and still 
more of the sacred edifice itself : yet the temple 
of Olympia was much inferior in size to that 
of Ceres and Proserpine, at Eleusis, in Attica. 
The latter was built by Ictinus, the contempo- 
rary and rival of Phidias; and sufficiently ca- 
pacious (could we believe the exaggerations of 
travellers) to contain thirty thousand persons.? 
This edifice was also of the Doric order; that 
of Diana at Ephesus, and of Apollo at Miletus, 
were both of the Ionic ; and the celebrated tem- 
ple of Jupiter at Athens, begun by Pisistratus, 
and enlarged by Pericles, was finished in the 
Corinthian style, by Antiochus Epiphanes, king 
of Syria. These four temples were tke richest 
and most beautiful in the world, and long re- 
garded as models of the three Grecian orders 
of architecture.® 
While the earthquake and the 


ana servile war confined within a do- 
A.C 468 mestic sphere the activity of Sparta, 


Argos, the second republic of the 
Peloponnesus, and long the most considerable 
principality in that peninsula, underwent such 
revolutions and misfortunes, as left her neither 
inclination nor power to oppose the Athenian 
greatness. Ever rivals and enemies of Sparta, 
the Argives had jealously declined the danger 
and glory of the Persian war, to the success of 
which their adversaries had so eminently con- 
tributed. This ungenerous dereliction passed 
not unpunished. As deserters of the common 
cause, the Argives incurred the hatred and con- 
tempt of their public-spirited neighbours. My- 
cenæ, once the proud residence of royal Aga- 
memnon, Epidaurus, and Trezené, which 
formed respectively the greatest strength and 
ornament of the Argive territory, threw off 
the yoke of a capital, whose folly or baseness 
rendered her unworthy to govern them. Si- 
cyon, Nauplia, Heliza, and other towns of less 
note, which were scattered at small distances 
over the face of that delightful province, obey- 
ed the summons to liberty, and assumed inde- 
pendence. The rebels (for as such they were 
treated by the indignant magistrates of Argos) 
strengthened themselves by foreign alliance, 
and continued thenceforth to disdain the au- 
thority of their ancient metropolis and sove- 
reign. At the commencement of the Pelopon- 
nesian war, they formed a respectable portion 
of the Lacedemonian confederacy; while Ar- 
gos alone, of all the cities in the Peloponne- 
sus, openly espoused the cause of the Athenians. 


4 Strabo. 1. ix. p. 395. 5 Vitruvius, I. vii. 


XIL] 


The ancient city of Mycenæ, which had first 
sounded the trumpet of sedition, was the only 
victim of Argive resentment. The Argives 
seized a favourable opportunity, while the allies 
and adherents of Mycen were occupied with 
their domestic concerns, to lead their whole 
forces against the place ; and having taken it 
by storm, they decimated the inhabitants, and 
demolished not only the walls, but the town® 
itself, which was never afterwards rebuilt. 

The desultory transactions of so many states 
and cities as composed the name and nation of 
Greece, must appear a continual maze of per- 
plexity and confusion, unless we carefully fol- 
low the threads which should direct us in this 
intricate, yet not inextricable, labyrinth. But 
if we seriously apply ourselves to investigate 
the hidden cause of events, and to trace revolu- 
tions to their source, we shall be surprised by 
the agreeable discovery, that the history of this 
celebrated people is not entirely that mass of 
disorder which it appears on a superficial sur- 
vey. The same causes which repressed the ac- 
tivity, and humbled the pride of Argos, operat- 
ed alike fatally on Thebes, the second republic 
beyond the isthmus, and the only one that ever 
aspired to rival the power of Athens. The 
Thebans, for similar, or more odious reasons, 
than those which had restrained the Argives, 
had also withheld their assistance in the Per- 
sian war; and by this mean selfishness or 
treachery had justly provoked the indignation 
of the subordinate cities of Beotia. Not only 
Thespiæ and Platæa, which had ever borne 
with impatience the Theban yoke, but the sea- 
ports of Aulis, Anthemon, and Larymna; As- 
chra, the beloved habitation of old Hesiod ; 
Coronea, overshadowed by mount Helicon, a 
favourite seat of the Muses; Labadea, famous 
for its oracle of Trophonius; Delium and Alal- 
komené, respectively sacred to Apollo and Mi- 
nerva, together with Leuctra and Cheronea, 
the destined scenes of immortal'‘victories; all 
these cities successively rejected the jurisdic- 
tion and sovereignty of Thebes, which, during 
the invasion of Xerxes, had so shamefully be- 
trayed the common interest and glory of the 
nation.” 

During several years, the Thebans patiently 
yielded to a storm, which they found it impos- 
sible to resist. But when the Spartans began 
to breathe after the recovery of Ithomé, and 
Ol had made a successful expedition 

ymp. 5 
Ea against the Phocians, in defence of 
A.C. 459 their kinsmen in Doris, the The- 

eee * bans warmly solicited them to take 
part in their domestic quarrels, and to enable 
them to regain their ascendant in Beotia; 
with assurance that they would employ the 
first moments of returning vigour to oppose the 
growing pretensions of the Athenians. This 
proposal was accepted, not only by the resent- 
ment, but by the policy, of the Spartan senate, 
who perceived, that it equally concerned their 
interest, that the neighbouring city of Argos 
should lose her jurisdiction over Argolis; and 
that Thebes, the neighbour and rival of Athens, 
should recover her authority in Beotia. 


6 Diodor. |. xi. p. 276. 
7 Diodor. l. xi. p. 283. et seq. et Thucydid. I. i. p. 273. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 159 


They were applying themselves with vigour 
and success to effect this salutary purpose, 
when the active vigilance of Athens despatched 
an army, fifteen thousand strong, to maintain 
the independence of Beotia. The valour and 
conduct of Myronides, the Athenian general, 
Kegel obtained a decisive victory near the 
453—456 walls of Tanagra, one of the few 

* places in the province which had 
preserved its fidelity to the capital. This me- 
morable battle, which no ancient writer has 
thought proper to describe, although it is com- 
pared to the glorious trophies of Marathon and 
Platæa, confirmed the liberty of Beotia; nor 
could the Thebans, notwithstanding their par- 
tial success against several of the revolted cities, 
reeover their authority in that province, until, 
about fourscore years afterwards, they emerg- 
ed into sudden splendour under the conduct 
of their heroic Epaminondas. 

The ambitious policy of Pericles, which will 
be fully explained in the sequel, was eager to 
profit by every favourable turn of fortune. He 
took care to place Athenian garrisons in several 
Beotian fortresses; he made the neighbouring 
A. C. 455. republics of Corinth and Megara 

." feel and acknowledge the supe- 
riority of Athens; and after sending Tolmi- 
das, a commander endued rather with an impe- 
tuous than well regulated courage, to ravage 

the coast of the Peloponnesus, he 
el sailed thither next vo in person, 
and made the Lacedemonians and their allies 
deeply regret, that they had too soon discover- 
ed their animosity against a republic, alike ca- 
pable to protect its friends and take vengeance 
on itsenemies. The measures of this daring 
leader were actually uncontrolled by any op- 
position, since his eloquence had prevailed 
over tlie innocence and merit of Cimon, and 
procured the banishment of that illustrious 
commander. But Cimon was recalled in two 
years; and his return was signalized by a sus- 
pension of arms in Greece, which that real pa- 
triot had been as zealous to promote, as he was 

ambitious to pursue his Asiatic tri- 
A. C. 447. umphs. This treaty, however, was 
soon broke; but an ill-concerted and unfortu- 
nate enterprise against Thebes (disapproved by 
Pericles himself,) in which the rash Tolmidas 
lost his army and his life, made the Athenians. 
again listen to terms of accommodation. They 
A. C. 445. agreed to withdraw their garri- 

sons from Bæotia; to disavow all 
pretensions against Corinth and Megara, pre- 
tensions which had no other effect than to ex- 
asperate those little republics against their 
usurping neighbour; and, on complying with 
these conditions, the Athenians recovered their 
citizens made captive in Bæotia, through the 
misconduct of Tolmidas.? 

This was the famous truce of thirty years, 
concluded in the fourteenth year 


“A aan a preceding the Peloponnesian war. 
ae 45 The former treaty had been limited 


to a much shorter period; for it is 
worthy of observation, that even in their agree- 


8 Diodor. l. xi. p. 284. l s 
9 Diodor. |. xii. p. 293. Thucydid. l. i. p. 71, et seq. 


160 


ments of peace, the Greeks discovered that per- 
petual propensity to war, which was the un- 
happy effect of their political institutions.} 
The terms of this accommodation, seemingly 
little favourable to the interest of Athens, were 
dictated, however, rather by the ambition than 
the equity of that republic; a conclusion that 
evidently results from examining the third se- 
ries of events, which (as observed 


Between above) completes the history of 
the years . i i 

z this memorable period. Amidst the 
410 and foreign expeditions of Cimon, and 
440, A. C. E 


the domestic dissensions of Greece, 
the Athenian arms and policy had been gra- 
dually, during thirty years, establishing the 
sovereignty of the republic over her distant co- 
lonies and confederates. This bold undertaking 
was finally. accomplished by Pericles, whose 
character contributed more than that of any 
one man, to the glory and greatness, as well as 
to the calamities and ruin of his country. 

His father Xanthippus, who gained the illus- 
trious victory at Mycalé, rejoiced in a son en- 
dued with the happiest natural talents, and an 
innate love of glory. His youth was entrusted 
to the learned and virtuous Damon, who con- 
cealed, under the uninvidious title of master of 
rhetoric, the art of animating his pupil with an 
ambition to deserve the first rank in the repub- 
lic,as well as of adorning him with the accom- 
plishments most necessary to attain it. From 
Aristagoras of Clazomené, denominated the 
philosopher of mind, on account of his con- 
tinual solicitude to confirm the most important 
and most pleasing of all doctrines, that a be- 
nevolent intelligence presides over the opera- 
tions of nature, and the events of human life, 
Pericles early learned to control the tempest of 
youthful passions, which so often blast the pro- 
mising hopes of manhood; to preserve an un- 
shaken constancy in all the vicissitudes of for- 
tune, since all are the varied dispensations of 
the same wise providence; and to trample, 
with generous contempt, on the groveling su- 
perstition of the vulgar. Thus qualified by 
nature and education, he soon displayed, in the 
Athenian assembly, an eloquence, nourished 
by the copious spring of philosophy, and enno- 
bled by the manly elevation of his character. 
His speeches consisted not in the unpremedi- 
tated effusions of a temporary enthusiasm ; he 
was the first of his countrymen who, before 
pronouncing his discourses, committed them 
to writing :? they were studied and composed 
with the most laborious and patient care; and 
being polished by repeated touches of correct- 
ing art, they rose in admiration, in proportion 
as they were more closely examined by the 
piercing eye of criticism; and acquired the 
epithet of Olympian, to express that permanent 
and steady lustre which they reflected. 

But the superior talents of Pericles, which in 
a well regulated government, would have in- 
creased his influence, had well nigh occasioned 
his ruin in a turbulent and suspicious demo- 
cracy. The memory of the oldest citizens 
faithfully recollected, and the envy or fears of 


? 1 Thucyd. L i. p. 74. 


2 Suidas. 3 Plut. in Pericl. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


the younger readily believed, that the figure, 


the countenance, and the voice, of the young 
orator, strongly resembled those of the anıbi- 
tious and artful Pisistratus, whose specious vir- 
tues had subverted the liberty of his country. 
The alarmed jealousy of freedom, which often 
destroyed, in an hour, the authority established 
slowly, and with much labour, during many 
meritorious years, might be tempted to punish 
the imagined tyranny of Pericles; who, to es- 
cape the disgrace of the ostracism, shunned the 
dangerous admiration of the assembly. 

The active vigour of his mind, thus with- 
drawn from polities, was totally directed to 
war; and his abilities, alike fitted to excel in 
every honourable pursuit, and gradually open- 
ing with every occasion to display them, carried 
off the palm of military renown from the most 
illustrious captains ofthe age. Cimon alone 
surpassed him in the object of lus victories 
gained over Barbarians; but Pericles equalled 
Cimon in valour and conduct. A rivality in 
warlike fame was followed by a competition 
for civil honours. Cimon, who had been in- 
troduced on the theatre of public life by the 
virtuous Aristides, regarded, like that great 
man, a moderate aristocracy, as the govern- 
ment most conducive to public happiness. The 
contrary opinion was warmly maintained by 
Pericles, who found an ostentatious admiration 
of democracy the best expedient for removing 
the prejudice excited against him, by his resem- 
blance to Pisistratus, of aspiring, or at least of 
being capable to aspire, at royal power. On 
every occasion he defended the privileges of 
the people against the pretensions of the rich 
and noble ; he embraced not only the interests, 
but adopted the capricious passions, of the 
multitude ; cherishing their presumption, flat- 
tering their vanity, indulging their rapacity, 
gratifying their taste for pleasure without ex- 
pense, and fomenting their natural antipathy to 
the Spartans, who, as the patrons of rigid aris- 
tocracy, were peculiarly obnoxious to their re- 
sentment. 

The condition of the times powerfully con- 
spired with the views and measures of Pericles, 
since the glory and wealth acquired in the Per- 
sian war, procured not only allies and power 
to the state, but industry and independence to 
the populace. The son of Xanthippus impel- 
led this natùral current, which ran so strongly 
in favour of both, when he maintained, that 
the citizens of Athens were entitled to enjoy 
equal advantages at home, to challenge a just 
pre-eminence in Greece, and to assume a legal 
dominion over their distant colonies and con- 
federates. 

These unfortunate communities had un- 
warily forged their own chains, when they 
consented to raise an annual subsidy to main- 
tain the guardian navy of Athens. They per- 
A. C. 470 ceived not, that this temporary 

0 benevolence would be soon con- 
=i verted into a perpetual tribute, 
since, in proportion as they became unaccus- 
tomed to war, they laid themselves at the mercy 
of that republic, to which they had tamely en- 
trusted the care of their defence. When the 
rigorous exactions of Athens speedily warned 


XIIL] 


them of their error, the wide intervals at which 
they were separated from each other, rendered 
it impossible for them to afford mutual assist- 
ance, and to act with united vigour. Naxos, 
Thasos, Ægina, Eubæa, Samos, and other 
islands or cities of less importance, boldly strug- 
gled to repel usurpation ; but fighting singly, 
were successively subdued; while new, and 
more grievous, burdens were cruelly imposed 
on them. The least patient again murmured, 
petitioned, rebelled, and taking arms to resist 
oppression, were treated with the severity due 
to unprovoked sedition. The punishment in- 
flicted on them was uniformly rigorous. They 
were compelled to deliver up the authors of the 
revolt, to surrender their shipping ; to demolish 
their walls, or receive an Athenian garrison, to 
pay the expenses of the war, and give hostages 
for their future obedience.* It is not the busi- 
ness of general history to describe more mi- 
nutely the events of this social war, which was 
carried on chiefly by Pericles, and finished in 
the course of thirty years, with every success 
the most presumptuous ambition of Athens 
could either expect or desire. Samos, the capi- 
tal of the island of that name, made the most 
vigorous resistance; but at length surrendered 
to Pericles, after a siege of nine months, in 
the ninth year before the war of the Pelopon- 
nesus.§ l 

Historians, partial or credulous, have handed 
down some atrocious cruelties committed after 
the taking of Samos, which may be confidently 
rejected as fictions, injurious to the fame of 
Pericles, who, though he approved and ani- 
mated the aspiring genius of his country, and 
vainly flattered himself that he could justify, by 
reasons of state, its most ambitious usurpations, | 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


161 


uniformly showed himself incapable of any de- 
liberate wickedness. It may be observed, how- 
ever, that as the moderate peace with Sparta 
had been concluded chiefly with a view to allow 
the Athenians to apply their undivided atten- 
tion to the affairs of their tributaries, the seve- 
rities exercised over these unfortunate states 
were, in consequence of that event, rather in- 
creased than mitigated. Athenian magistrates 
and garrisons were sent to govern and com- 
mand them. They were burthened with new 
impositions, and dishonoured by new badges 
of servitude. The lands, which the labour of 
their ancestors had cultivated, were seized and 
appropriated by strangers, who claimed the 
distinction of Athenian colonies; and all these 
once independent and flourishing republics 
were thenceforth compelled to submit their 
mutual contests, their domestic differences, and 
even thcir private litigations to the cognizance 
and decision of Athenian asscmblies and tri- 
bunals.6 By drawing thus closely the reins 
of government, Pericles, in the course of ten 
years, brought into the treasury of Athens the 
sum of near two millions sterling.” His vigi- 
lance seasonably displayed the terrors of the 
Athenian navy before the most distant enemies 
or allies of the republic; by alternate pliancy 
and firmness, by successive promises, bribes, 
and threats, he repressed the jealous hostility 
of neighbouring powers; and while his ambi- 
tion and magnificence fortified and adorned the 
capital with external strength and splendour, 
they also laid the foundations of those internal 
disorders, which rendered his long administra- 
tion glorious for his contemporaries, fatal to 
the succeeding generation, and ever memo- 
rable with posterity. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Transition to the Internal State of Athens—Laws of Draco—Solon—Pisistratus—Clisthenes— 


Aristides—Pericles—Final Settlement of the 


Athenian Government—View of the Athenian 


Empire—The combined Effect of External Prosperity and Democratic Government on Man- 
ners— Arts—Luxury—History of Grecian Literature and Philosophy—Singular Contrast 
and Balance of Virtues and Vices—The sublime Philosophy of Anaxagoras and Socrates— 
The unprincipled Captiousness of the Sophists—The Moral Tragedies of Sophocles and Euri- 
pides—The licentious Buffoonery of Aristophanes—The imitative Arts employed to the noblest 
Purposes—And abused to the most Infamous—Magnificence of public Festivals—Simplicity in 
private Life—Modest Reserve of Athenian Women—Voluptuousness, Impudence, and Artifices 


of the School of Aspasia. 


ITHE taking of Samos closed the long scries 

of Athenian conquests. During the nine 
subsequent years, that once fortunate people 
enjoyed and abused the blessings of peace and 
prosperity. Their ostentatious display of power 
increased the envy and terror of Greeks and 
Barbarians, and excited the obstinate and 
bloody war of twenty-seven ycars, during 


4 Thucydid. et Diodor. loc. citat. 

5 Thucydid. |. i. p. 75. 

6 Isocrat. de Pace; et Xenoph. de Repub. Athen. 
7 Thucyd. di Isocrat. Plut. &c. 


` 


which the force of the whole Grecian nation 
was exerted to demolislı or uphold the stately 
edifice of empire that had becn reared by the 
ambitious patriotism of Pericles. Assisted by 
feeble or reluctant allies, Athens long struggled 
against the combined strength of Peloponnesus, 
Beotia, Macedon, Sicily, and Persia; and our 
curiosity must deservedly be attracted towards 
the intcrnal resources and moral condition ofa 
people, who, with few natural advantages, 
could make such memorable and pertinacious 
cfforts, and who, amidst the din of arms, still 


b 


162 


cultivating and improving their favourite arts, 
produced those immortal monuments of taste 
and genius, which, surviving the destruction 
of their walls, navy, and harbours, have ever 

_ attested the glory of Athens, and thé impotent 
vengeance of her enemies. In an inquiry of 
this kind, the science of government and laws, 
which gives security to all other sciences, 
merits the first place in our attention; nor, at 
this distance of time, will the enlightened reader 
contemplate with indifference the laws of 
Athens, which having been incorporated! into 
the Roman jurisprudence about the middle of 
the fifth century before Christ, served, after an 
interval of above sixteen hundred years, to 
abolish the barbarous practices of the Gothic 
nations, and to introduce justice, security, and 
refinement, among the modern inhabitants of 
Europe.? 

The admirable institutions of the heroic 
ages were built on religion; which, as we have 
fully explained above, ascertained and enforced 
the rights and obligations of public and private 
life. But the abused authority of priests and 
oracles, and the natural depravity of man, ever 
solicitous to obtain the partial favour of his 
heavenly protectors on easier terms than the 
faithful discharge of his duty, gradually se- 
vered, by fraud or violence, the natural and 
most salutary union between religion and mo- 
rality ; in consequence of which separation, the 


1 The Romans sent deputies to Athens, to obtain a copy 
of Solon’s laws, four hundred and fifty-four years before 
Christ. The benefits derived from these salutary institu- 
tions were gratefully acknowledged by the liberal candour 
of a people, who Knew how to appreciate the merit of ene- 
mies and subjects. Hear the language of Pliny (l. viii. ep. 
24.) to Maximus, who in the reign of Trajan was appointed 
governor of the province of Achaia, or Greece: ‘‘ Remem- 
ber that you go to a country, where letters, politeness, and 
agriculture itself (if we believe common report,) were in- 
vented . Revere the gods and heroes, the ancient 
virtue and glory of.the nation. Respect even its fables and 
its vanity; remembering that from Greece we derived our 
Jaws. The right of conquest, indeed, hath enabled us to 
impose our laws on the Greeks; but that people had first 
given us their laws, at our solicitation, and when they had 
nothing to fear from the power of our arms. It would be 
inhuman and barbarous to deprive them of the small rem- 
nant of liberty which they still possess.” 

2 Justinian’s Pandects, it is well known, were discovered 
at Amalfi, in Italy, A. D. 1130. Tn less than half a century 
afterwards, the civil law was studied and understood in all 
the great provinces of Europe; and this study (as Mr. Hume 
observes, Reign of Richard the Third) tended to sharpen the 
wits of men, to give solidity to their judgment, to improve 
their taste, and to abolish the barbarous jurisprudence 
which universally prevailed among the Gothic nations. To 
this law we owe the abolition of the mode of proof by the 
ordeal, the corsnet, the duel, and other methods equally 
ridiculous and absurd. Pecuniary commutations ceased to 
be admitted for crimes; private revenge was no longer au- 
thorised by the magistrate; and the community was made 
to feel its interest in maintaining the rights, and avenging 
the wrongs, of all its members. See more in the admirable 
discourse annexed to the Reign of Richard the Third. I 
shall add but one observation, in Mr. Hume’s own words: 
“The sensible utility of the Roman law, both to public and 
private iuterest, recommended the study of it, at a time 
when the more exalted and speculative sciences carried no 
charms with them; and thus the last branch of ancient lite- 
rature which remained uncorrupted, was happily the first 
transmitted to the modern world: for it is remarkable, that 
in the decline of Roman learning, when the philosophers 
were universally infected with superstition and sophistry, 
and the poets and historians with barbarism, the lawyers, 
who, in other countries, are seldom models of science or 
politeness, were yet ahle, by the constant study and close 
imitation of their predecessors, to maintain the same good 
sense in their decisions and reasonings, and the same purity 
in their language and expression.” Hume’s Hist. 3d vol. 
8vo. p. 300. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


former degenerated into an illiberal supersti- 
tion, and the latter relaxed into licentiousness, 
or stiffened into pedantry. The striking com- 
parison, or rather contrast, between the genius 
and character, the virtues and vices, of the 
Greeks, as variously described by Homer and 
by Solon, and which is so much to the advan- 
tage of the earlier period, must, in the progress 
of this discourse, naturally present itself to the 
reflection of the attentive reader, and will set 
in the clearest point of view the unhappy re- 
volution of manners, which time and accident 
had produced in the wide interval between the 
poet and the legislator. 

The very imperfect legislation of Draco,’ 
who flourished thirty years before Solon,* 
proved that the Athenians felt the 


ka wt want of a science, which they knew 
A.C ; 62 4, not how to acquire or cultivate. 


The austere gravity of that magis- 
trate seems to have imposed on the easy cre- 
dulity of the multitude; for his ignorance or 
severity were alike unworthy of the important 
office with which he was entrusted. He gave 
laws, which, according to the lively expression 
of an orator, seemed to be written,5 not with 
ink, but with blood; since death or banishment 
were his ordinary penalties for the most trivial 
offences, as well as for the most dangerous 
crimes: and he justified this rigour, by ab- 
surdly observing, that the smallest disorders 
deserved death, and no severer punishment 
could be inflicted on the greatest. The laws 
of Draco, therefore, tended only to increase the 
evils which they were designed to remedy ;6 
and no people ever presented a scene of greater 
confusion and misery, than did the unhappy 
Athenians, when the abilities and virtues of 
Solon were seasonably called to their relief. 

In relating the general revolutions of Greece, 
we had occasion. to describe the im- 


eh ‘ portant services, and illustrious 
A C. 594 merit, of this extraordinary man, 


whose disinterestedness, patriotism, 
and humanity, equalled his military conduct 
and success. His royal extraction (for he 
sprang from the race of the Codridz,) his ex- 
perienced abilities, above all, his approved wis- 
dom and equity, pointed him out for the no- 
blest and most sublime employment of huma- 
nity, that of regulating the laws and govern- 
ment of a free people. Such, at least, the 
Athenians may be considered, when their una- 
nimous suffrage rendered Solon the absolute 
umpire of their whole constitution and policy ; 
although, prior to this period, they suffered the 
combined evils of anarcliy and oppression.’ 
The magistrates plundered the treasury and 
the temples; and often betrayed, for bribes, the 
interests of their country. The rich tyrannised 
over the poor, the poor continually alarmed 
the safety of the rich. The rapacity of credi- 


3 Suidas in voce Draco. Pollux, l. viii. c. vi. 

4 Meursius, Solon. 

5 The orator Demades, of whom more hereafter. The 
observation has been always repeated in speaking of Draco, 
though his laws were certainly written neither with blood 
nor ink. Even those of Solon were only engraved on tables 
kept in the citadel. 

6 Aristot. de Civ]. ii. et Plut. in Solon. 

7 Fragm. Solonis apud Demosth. p. 234. edit. Wol. 


XUL] 


tors knew no bounds. 


foreign countries. Solon, with a laudable 
vanity, boasts of having recovered and restored 
to their native rights many of those unhappy 
men, whose sentiments had been debased, and 
language corrupted, by the infamy of Barba- 
rian servitude. The wretched populace, de- 
riving courage from despair, had determined 
no longer to submit to such multiplied rigours; 
and before the wisdom of the lawgiver inter- 
posed, they had taken the resolution to elect 
and follow some warlike leader, to attack and 
butcher their oppressors, to establish an equal 
partition of lands, and to institute a new form 
of government. But the numerous clients 
and retainers, who, in a country little ac- 
quainted with arts and manufactures, depend- 
ed on the wealthy proprietors of lands and 
mines of Attica, must have rendered this un- 
dertaking alike dangerous to both parties; so 
that both became willing rather to submit their 
differences to law, than to decide them by the 
sword. 

The impartiality of Solon merited the un- 
limited confidence of his country. He main- 
tained the ancient division of property, but 
abolished debts. He established the rate of 
interest at 12 pcr cent., at which it afterwards 
remained; but forbade, that the insolvent 
debtor should become the slave of his creditor, 
or be conipelled to sell his children into servi- 
ude. After these preliminary regulations, 
which seemed immediately necessary to the 
public peace, Solon proceeded, with an impar- 
tial and steady hand, to new-inodel the govern- 
meut ;!0 on this generous, but equitable princi- 
ple, that the few ought not, as hitherto, to 
eommand, and the many to obey ; but that the 
zollective body of the people, legally convened 
in a national assembly, were entitled to decide, 
by a plurality of voices, the alternatives of 
peace and war; to contract or dissolve alliances 
with foreign states; to enjoy all the branches 
of legislative or sovereign power ;'! and to elect, 


8 Idem, ibid. 9 Plut. in Solon. 

10 The most correct information concerning the ancient 
republic of Athens, and the laws of Solon, is contained in 
Aristot. Fragm. de Civit. Athen. and in various parts of his 
second, fourth, and sixth books of Politics. 2. In Isocrat. 
Areopagit. Panathen. and Panegyr. And 3. In Plat. in 
Vit.Solon. Xenophon’s Treatise concerning the Athenian 
republic relates to later times, when many corruptions had 
crept in, as will be afterwards explained. It is reinarkable, 
that Polybius, l. vi. has confounded the moderate institu- 
tions of Solon with the democratical licentiousness aud ty- 
ranny introdueed by Pericles and his snecessors in the ad- 
ministration. The palpable errors of so judicious an author 
prove how little accurate knowledge the Greeks possessed 
on the subjeet of their own history ; aud bow impossible it 
is for a modern writer, who blindly follows such euides, not 
to fall into innumerable errors and eontradictions. The 
treatise of Aristotle (de Civitate) ahove mentioned, de- 
serves particular attention from those who write or study 
-he history of republies. In it we see the germ, and often 
more than the germ, of the political works of Machiavel, 
which Montesquieu has so often copicd, without once ac- 
knowledging lis obligation. 

11 The eleetion contained a mixture of chance, since 
those who were named by the people cast lots to decide on 
whom the office should be conferred. The same practice 

revaila in choosing the senatora of the reprhlic of Berne. 
But Solon enacted, that the fortunate candidate should un- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


They compelled the in- 
solvent debtors to cultivate their lands, like 
cattle; to perform the service of beasts of bur- 
den; and to transfer to them their sons and 
daughters, whom they exported as slaves to 


163 


approve, and judge the magistrates or minis- 
ters entrusted, for a limited time, with the ex- 
ecutive authority. 

In the actual state of most countries of Eu- 
rope, such a form of government, as only takes 
place in some small cantons of Switzerland, 
would be attended with the inconvenience of 
withdrawing the citizens too much from their 
private affairs. But in ancient Greece, and 
particularly in Attica, the slaves were four 
times more numerous than the freemen ;!2 and 
of the latter we may compute that little more 
than one-half were entitled to any share in the 
sovereignty. Strangers, and all those who 
could not ascertain their Athenian descent, 
both in the male and female line, were totally 
excluded from the assembly and courts of jus- 
tice. The regulations of Solon marked the 
utmost attention to preserve the pure blood of 
Athens unmixed and uncorrupted; nor could 
any foreigner, whatever merit he might claim 
with the public, be admitted to the rank of 
citizen, unless he abandoned for ever his native 
country, professed the knowledge of some 
highly useful or ingenious art, and, in both 
cases, had been chosen by ballot,in a full assem- 
bly of six thousand Athenians. These circum- 
stances (especially as the Athenian people were 
usually convened only four times in thirty-five 
days) prevented their assemblies from being 
either so inconvenient and burdensome, or so 
numerous and tumultuary, as might at first 
sight be supposed. Yet their numbers, and 
still more their impetuosity and ignorance, 
must have proved inconsistent with good 
government, if Solon had not secured the ves- 
sel of the republic from the waves of popular 
frenzy, by the two firm anchors of the senate 
and the Areopagus; tribunals originally of 
great dignity and of very extensive power, 
into which men of a certain description only 
could be reccived as members. 

Solon divided the Athenians into four classes, 
according to the produce of their estates. 
The first class consisted of those whose lands 
annually yielded five hundred measures of 
liquid, as well as dry commodities; and the 
minimum of whose yearly income may be cal- 
culated at sixty pounds sterling; which is 
equivalent, if we estimate the relative value 
of money by the price of labour, and of the 
things most necessary to life, to about six hun- 
dred pounds sterling in the present age.!3 The 
second class consisted of those whose estates 
produced three hundred measures; the third, 
of those whose estates produced two hundred ; 
the fourth, and by far the most numerous class 
of Athenians, either possessed no landed pro- 
perty, or at least enjoyed not a revenue in land 
equal to twenty-four pounds sterling, or, agree- 
ably to the above proportion, two hundred and 
forty pounds of our present currency. 

All ranks of citizens were alike admitted to 


derzo what is ealled a probation; his charaeter and merits 
were thus exposed to a second examination; and it seemed 
scarcely possible, after this severe serutiny, that any man 
shonld attain power, who was altogether unworthy of 
puhlie eonfidence. 

12 See my Introductory Discourse to the Orations of Ly 
sias and Isocrates, p. 5, et seq. 

13 See Introduction to Lysias, &c. p. 14. 


164 


vote in the public assembly, and to judge in the 
courts of justice, whether civil or criminal, 
which were properly so many committees of 
the assembly.! But the three first classes were 
exclusively entitled to sit in the senate, to de- 
cide in the Areopagus, or to hold any other 
office of magistracy. To these dignities they 
were elected by the free suffrages of the peo- 
ple, to whom they were accountable for their 
administration, and by whom they might be 
punished for malversation or negligence, al- 
though they derived no emolument from the 
diligent discharge of their duty. 

The senate of four hundred, which, eighty- 
six years after its institution, was augmented to 
five hundred by Clisthenes, enjoyed the im- 
portant prerogatives of convoking the popular 
assembly; of previously examining all matters 
before they came to be decided by the people, 
which gave them a negative before debate in all 
public resolutions; and of making laws which 
had force during a year, without requiring the 
consent of the populace. Besides this general 
superintendence and authority, the senate was 
exclusively invested with many particular 
branches of the executive power. The presi- 
dent of that council had the custody of the 
public archives and treasury. The senate 
alone built ships; equipped fleets and armies ; 
seized and confined state-criminals ; examined 
and punished several offences, which were not 
expressly forbidden by any positive law. The 
weight of such a council, which assembled 
every day, except festivals, infused a large mix- 
ture of aristocracy into the Athenian constitu- 
tion. This, as we shall immediately explain, 
was still farther increased by the authority of 
the Areopagus, a court so named from the 
place where it was held ; a hill sacred to Mars, 
adjoining to the citadel. 

The principal magistrates in Athens were the 
nine archons, the first of whom gave his name 
to the year, and presided in the civil courts of 
justice, where a committee of the people, cho- 
sen promiscuously from all classes by lot,? sat 
as judges and jury; but where it belonged to 
the archon and his assessors, men appointed by 
suffrage, and acquainted with forms, to take 
what in Scotiand is called precognition, to pre- 
scribe the form of action, to give the ballot,3 
and to receive and declare the verdict and sen- 
tence of the court. The archon next in dig- 
nity, who had the appellation of king, presided 


1In my Introductory Discourses to the Orations of Ly- 
sias, &c. I had occasion to explain the nature of the 
Athenian tribunals. Since the publication of that work, 
the same subject, and particularly the form of civil process, 
has been accurately explained by Sir William Jones, in his 
Dissertations annexed to the translation of Isæus. Mr. Pet- 
tingal’s learned work upon the use and practice of juries 
among the ancients, lately fell into my hands. Wherein 
my ideas and his differ, will easily appear from the text, 
and needs not be pointed out. 

2 The essential difference between the Roman and Athe- 
nian government, consisted in the different placing of the 
judicial power; which at Rome remained 300 years in the 
pants of the senate. The seditions of the Gracchi, and 
most of the civil dissensions which happened before the 
time of Augustus, had for their object or pretence, the al- 
tering of this order of things, and bringing the Roman con- 
stitution nearer the Athenian. 

3 O: riGevreg Tov aywve xzi Tyv YPypov didourss, are the 
words of Lysias. ‘The same writer mentions the mzesseos, 
wuvdsexet, assessors syndics. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


in causes respecting religion and things sacred, 
which formed the object of an important and . 
dangerous branch of Athenian jurisprudence. 
The Archon third in dignity, with his assessors 
the generals,‘ presided in military matters; and 
the six remaining, who were known by the 
general appellation of thesmothete, heard cri- 
minal pleas of various kinds, or rather direct- 
ed the proceedings of the six courts where cri- 
minal causes were examined and determined. 
These nine archons, or presidents of the several 
courts of justice, like all other Athenian magis- 
trates, were, at the expiration of their annual 
office, accountable to the people; and when 
their conduct, after a severe scrutiny, appeared 
to merit public approbation and gratitude, they 
were received, and remained for life, members 
of the Areopagus, a senate invested with a 
general inspection over the laws and religion, 
as well as over the lives and manners of the 
citizens; and which, in dangerous emergencies, 
was even entitled to assume a sort of dictato- 
rial power.§ 

Such is the great outline of the constitution 
established by Solon, according to which every 
Athenian citizen enjoyed the inestimable privi- 
lege of being judged by his peers, and tried 
by laws to which he himself had consented. 
Although the legislative and judicial powers 
were thus lodged with the people, men of pro- 
perty and ability were alone entrusted with the 
administration of government; and as power 
in some measure followed property, the same 
expedient which served to maintain a due dis- 
tinction of ranks in society, tended also to pro- 
mote the industry and frugality of the multitude, 
that they might thereby become entitled to 
share those honours and offices, to which per- 
sons of a certain estate only could aspire. 

The laws of Solon were of the most exten- 
sive nature, comprehending not only rules of 
right, but maxims of morality, regulations of 
commerce, and precepts of agriculture. To 
describe his institutions respecting such matters 
as are properly the objects of law, would be ex- 
plaining those great but familiar principles, 
concerning marriage, succession, testaments, 
the rights of persons and of things, which, 
through the medium of the civil law, have been 
conveyed into the jurisprudence of all the civi- 
lized nations of Europe. His laws concern- 
ing education and manners prove that drunk- 
enness and unnatural love were the pre- 
dominant vices of that early age. It was a 
particular duty of the archons, to prevent or 
punish offences committed in consequence of 
intoxication ; and the regulations concerning 
schools, which were not to be opened till sun- 
rise, which were ordered to be shut before night, 
and into which none but such relations of the 
master, as were particularly specified by law, 
could on any pretence be admitted, marked the 
utmost solicitude to root out an evil which al- 
ready infected and disgraced the manners of 
Greece. 


4 Lysias, in the second oration against Alcibiades (a mi- 
litary cause,) not only mentions the eteartyyo:, or generals, 
but addresses them separately from the avdeges dixacra: 
or judges. 

5 Isocrat. Oratio Areopagit. 

6 Æschin. in Timarchum. 


XIIL) 


The education recommended by Solon nearly 
resembled that above described, which gene- 
rally prevailed ‘in Greece.” The children of 
Athenian citizens, when taken from the hands 
of the women, were delivered to two masters, 
of whom the one formed the body, and the 
other the mind. Swimming, and the easier 
exercises, prepared them for the harder toils of 
the gymnastic. Reading, and learning by heart 
the lessons and examples of the poets, made 
way for the severer studies of eloquence and 
philosophy. In process of time, music, geome- 
try, and drawing, seem to have entered into 
the plan of a liberal education. At the age 
of twenty, the youth of all ranks took an oath 
in the temple of Agraulos (an appellation of 
Minerva,) to obey and to maintain the laws of 
their country ; to use their best endeavours to 
promote its prosperity ; to follow the standard 
of whatever commanders might be appointed to 
conduct them; to sail to every part of the 
world, when summoned by the public service ; 
to fight to death for their native land; and to 
regard ‘wheat, barley, vines, and olives, as the 
only boundaries of Attica; a preposterous 
arrogance in that little republic, which already 
betrayed an ambition to conquer and appro- 
priate all the cultivated parts of the world. 
When the Athenian youth were not, in conse- 
quence of this oath, engaged in military service, 
they were obliged by law to follow such em- 
ployments as suited their respective fortunes. 
Agriculture, commerce, and the mechanic arts, 
fell to the share of the poor; the rich still con- 
tinued their application to gymnastic and phi- 
losophy, carefully studied the laws of the 
republic, examined the ancient and actual con- 
dition of their own and neighbouring states; 
and, at the age of thirty, appeared as candidates 
in the assembly for such offices of trust and 
honour as their regular manners, inoffensive 
and dutiful behaviour in all the relations of 
private life, temperance, economy, public spirit, 
and abilities, might obtain from the voluntary 
suffrage of the people. 

A. C.578 The usurpation of Pisistratus, 

‘=~ though it destroyed for a time the 
political liberty of Athens, gave stability to most 
of the laws and forms introduced by Solon. 
That extraordinary tyrant, for so the Greeks 
styled him, was not more distinguished by the 
loftiness of his genius than the humanity of his 
disposition ; and had not the violence of con- 
tending factions, and the fury of his enemies, 
inflamed his natural love of power, the name 
of Pisistratus would stand the foremost in the 
list of Grecian patriots and heroes, His valour 
and conduct were signalized in the conquest of 
Nisa, Salamis, Naxos, Delos, and Sigwum ; 
and if he displayed boldness and address in ac- 
quiring sovereignty, he displayed still more 
moderation and vi¥tue in administering it. He 
assumed, indeed, the royal dignities of priest 
and general, and took care that the chief 
offices of magistracy should be filled by his par- 


7 See Chapters V. and VI. 

8 Arist. Polit. l. vii. c. iii. 

9 See introduction to Lysias, &c. p. 4. 
10 Lysias, passim. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


165 


tisans, But he maintained the regular course 
of law and justice, not only by his authority, 
but by his example; having appeared in person 
to answer an accusation in the Areopagus. He 
not only enforced the laws of Solon against 
idleness, but endeavoured to give them more 
efficacy by introducing new arts and manufac- 
tories into Attica. He was the first who brought 
into that country the complete collection of Ho- 
mer’s poems, which he commanded to be sung 
at the Panathenezan festival; nor can we sup- 
pose that he should have been zealous to diffuse 
the liberal and manly sentiments of that divine 
poet, if his government had not resembled the 
moderation and equity of the heroic ages, ra- 
ther than the despotism of tyrants. 

His son Hipparchus imitated and surpassed 
the mild virtues of his father; and amidst the 
turbulence of the late democracy, it was ac- 
knowledged with a sigh by the Athenians, that 
their ancestors were indeed happy under Solon 
and Pisistratus, but that the reign of the tyrant 
Hipparchus brought back on earth the golden 
days of Saturn. The father had required a 
tenth part of the produce of Attica, to support 
his guards,and the other appendages of royalty : 
his more generous son remitted one half of this 
imposition. While he alleviated the burdens, 
yet encouraged the industry of his subjects, by 
building the temple of Olympian Jupiter, he 
was solicitous to dispel their ignerance and bar- 
barity by erecting pillars in every part of the 
city, engraved with elegiac verses, containing 
lessons of wisdom and precepts of morality. 
He collected the first library in Athens; and 
his liberal rewards, and still more his agreeable 
manners and winning affability, attracted to 
that city the most distinguished poets of the 
age. 

The murder of Hipparchus exasperated the 
temper of his brother and successor Hippias; 
but notwithstanding the calamities which the 
latter inflicted and suffered, it must be allowed 
that the government of Pisistratus and his fa- 
mily, which, with various interruptions, lasted 
sixty-eight years,!! increased the strength, and 
promoted the refinement of Athens,!2 
Yet in nothing was that usurpa- 


> eee tion more advantageous than in the 
AG 509 animating sense of liberty which 


* the memory of past servitude, un- 
der Hippias, excited and kept alive in Athens, 
after the popular government had been restored 
by Clisthenes and Alcibiades. We have al- 
ready had occasion to relate the foreign victo- 
ries of the republic, which immediately followed 
that event; but at the same time the constitu- 
tion of government underwent a considerable 
change. By admitting to the rank of citizens 
a promiscuous crowd of strangers, fugitives, 
Athenians of half blood, and perhaps slaves, 
the tribes were augmented from four to ten; 
and the senators from four to five thousand. 


‘The ostracism was likewise established ; a law 


by which any citizen whose influence or abili- 


11 Between 578 and 510, P. C. 

12 Sce the treatise of Meursius, entitled Pisistratus, one 
of the few satisfactory performances in the immense collec- 
tion of Gronovius. 


166 


ties seemed dangerous to liberty, might be ban- 
ished ten years, without the proof or allegation 
of any positive crime. 

In this condition the republic 


opp, continued thirty years until the glo- 
ae Seng rious victories of Salamis, Platæa, 


and Mycalé, encouraged the lowest 
but most numerous class of citizens, by whose 
valour those memorable exploits had been 
achieved, to make further invasions on the pre- 
rogatives of their superiors. The sudden wealth, 
which the rich spoils of the Barbarians had dif- 
fused among all ranks of men, increased the 
census of individuals, and destroyed the balance 
of the constitution. Aristides, who perceived 
it to be impossible to resist the natural progress 
of democracy, seasonably yielded to men who 
had arms in their hands, and firmness in their 
hearts; and proposed, with apparent satisfac- 
tion, but much secret reluctance,! a law by 
which the Athenian magistrates should be 
thenceforth promiscuously elected from the 
four classes of citizens. This innovation paved 
the way for the still greater changes begun 
twenty years afterwards, and gradually com- 
pleted by Pericles ; a revolution of which the 
consequences were not immediately felt, but 
which continually became more sensible, and 
finally terminated in the ruin of Athens and 
of Greece. 

The general reasons which prevailed on the 
equity and discernment of Pericles to espouse, 
with undue warmth, the cause of the populace, 
have in the preceding chapter been sufficiently 
explained. Yet whatever partial motives of 
interest and ambition? might warp 


be +e A the views of this illustrious states- 
AC "449 man, it must be acknowledged, 


that the foreign transactions and 
success of the republic, and particularly the 
new situation in which the Athenians found 
themselves placed with regard to their distant 
allies and colonies, might naturally suggest and 
occasion very important alterations in thie 
Athenian constitution. The ancient and sacred 
law, which obliged every citizen, without fee 
or reward, to take arms in defence of his coun- 
try, could not easily be extended to the obliga- 
tion of protecting, without a proper recompense, 
the interest of foreign communities. The scanty 
population of Attica sufficed not to answer the 
demands of so many distant expeditions. It 
became necessary to hire troops wherever they 
might be found; and,asthis necessity introduced 
pay into the Athenian armies, a similar, though 
not equally cogent, reason established fees and 
salaries for all the different orders of judges and 
magistrates. 
public spirit, which obliged every freeman to 


l Exwy aexovre Se uxw, cited on this occasion by Plu- 
tarch, well expresses the forced generosity of Aristides to 
the populace. 

2 Plutarch (in Pericle) mentionsa particular reason which 
engaged Pericles to counteract the aristocracy, and to 
abridge the power of the Areopagus. Although he had 
been often named for the office of archon, the lot had never 
fallen on him; so that he could not be received as a mem- 
ber of that respected court. If this observation be well 
founded, it shows how little real weight the annual magis- 
tracies had at Athens; since Pericles, though he never at- 
tained the dignity of archon, governed the republic many 
years with unrivalled authority. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


The same principle of duty and | 


[Cuar. 


fight without pay, likewise obliged him gra- 
tuitously to judge, consult, and deliberate, for 
the benefit of his country. But when the con- 
tested interests of foreign, though dependent 
communities, were agitated and adjusted in the 
tribunals of Athens, it seemed reasonable for 
those wlio spent their time in an employment, 
to which no natural obligation called them, to 
demand a proper reward for their useful ser- 
vices. At first, therefore, a small sum, but 
which gradually increased with the-power of 
the people, was regularly «distributed among 
the citizens, for every deliberation which they 
held, and for every cause which they deter- 
mined. 

The desire of reaping this profit made the 
populace anxious to draw all causes and deli- 
berations before their own tribunals and assem- 
blies. This design was successfully accomplish- 
ed by Ephialtes,? an artful and daring dema- 
gogue, whom Pericles employed as a proper 
instrument to effect such invidious measures as 
were most obnoxious to the rich and noble. 
While his patron extended the renown of 
Athens by his foreign victories, and gradually 
reduced into subjection the colonies and allies 
of the republic, the obsequious Ephialtes zeal- 
ously promoted his domestic measures; and by 
undermining the authority of the senate and of 
the Areopagus,! the firmest bulwarks of the aris- 
tocracy, obtained a signal victory over the laws 
of Solon. The assassination of Ephialtes prov- 
ed only the weakness of his enemies; and we 
shall find, in the subsequent lustory of Athens, 
that most matters of deliberation came, thence- 
forth, in the first instance, before the popular as- 
sembly; that the wise institutions of Solon 
were reduced to an empty form; and that the 
magnanimity of Pericles, the extravagance of 
his immediate successors, the patriotism of 
Thrasybulus and Conon, the integrity of Pho. 
cion, the artifices of Æschines, and the elo- 
quence of Demosthenes, successively swayed, 
at will, a wild and capricious democracy. 

The revolution which immediately 


ONG followed, in the manners, character, 
A.C. 449, 22d conduct of the Athenians, 


was the natural consequence of the 
change of government, combined with other 
circumstances inseparably connected with their 
domestic and external prosperity. In the course 
of a few years, the success of Aristides, Cimon, 
and Pericles. had tripled the revenues, and in- 
creased, in a far greater proportion, the domi- 


3 Plut. in Pericle. 6 

4 Authors have not described in what particular respects, 
or by what particular means, Ephialtes effected his pur- 
pose: yet we may collect, from obscure hints on this sub- 
ject, that he not only brought before the inferior tribunals 
causes hitherto confined to the Areopagus, but took from 
that court its general inspection and superintendence over 
the religion and laws; which offices he bestowed on the 
popular court of the yAsasx and the vozoguraxecs, who were 
appointed, and dismissed, at the will of the people. He 
likewise rendered the probation for becoming an freopa- 
gite less severe than formerly. Persons crept into this or 
der, whose characters disgracedit. The Areopagites be- 
came equally accessible to presents and to beauty; and 
their decisions fell into contempt. See the discourse of Iso- 
crates upon reforming the government of Athens, and Athe- 
neus,l.ix. That Ephialtes, or Pericles himself, likewise 
weakened the authority of the senate (although itis not 
remarked by any ancient author,) appears from all the 
subsequent history of Athens 


l 
g 


XIL] 


nions of the republic. The Athenian galleys 
commanded the eastern coasts of the Mediter- 
ranean; their merchantmen had engrossed the 
traffic of the adjacent countries ; the magazines 
of Athens abounded with wood, metal, ebony, 
ivory, and all the materials, of the useful as 
well as of the agreeable arts; they imported 
the luxuries of Italy, Sicily, Cyprus, Lydia, 
Pontus, and Peioponnesus; experience had 
improved their skill in working the silver mines 
of mount Larium; they had lately opened the 
valuable marble veins in mount Pentelicus ; 
the honey of Hymettus was more esteemed, in 
proportion as it became better known to their 
neighbours ; the culture of their olives (oil be- 
ing long their staple commodity, and the only 
production of Attica, which Solon allowed them 
to export) must have improved with the gene- 
ral improvement of the country in arts and 
agriculture, especially under the active adminis- 
tration of Pericles, who liberally let loose the 
public treasure to encourage every species of 
industry.5 

But if that minister promoted the love of ac- 
tion, he found it necessary at least to comply 
with, if not to excite, the extreme passion for 
pleasure, which then began to distinguish lis 
countrymen. The people of Athens, successful 
n every enterprise against their foreign as well 
as domestic enemies, seemed entitled to reap 
the fruits of their dangers and victories. For the 
space of at least twelve years preceding the war 
of Peloponnesus, their city afforded a perpetual 
scene of triumph and festivity. Dramatic en- 
tertainments, to which they were passionately 
addicted, were no longer performed in slight 
unadorned edifices, but in stone or marble thea- 
tres, erected at great expense, and embellished 
with the most precious productions of nature 
and of art. The treasury was opened, not only 
to supply the decorations of this favourite 
amusement, but to enable the poorer citizens to 
enjoy it, without incurring any private expense ; 
and thus, at the cost of the state, or rather of its 
tributary allies and colonies, to feast and de- 
light their ears and fancy with the combined 
charms of music and poetry. -The pleasure of 
the eye was peculiarly consulted and gratified 
in the architecture of the theatres and other or- 
namental buildings; for as Themistocles had 
strengthened, Pericles adorned his native city ; 
and unless we had the concurring testimony of 
antiquity, as well as the immortal remains of 
the Parthenon, or temple of Minerva, which 
still excite the adnr‘ration of travellers, it would 
be difficult to believe that in the space of a few 
years, there could have becn created those in- 
estimable wonders of art, those innumerable 
temples, theatres, statues, altars, baths, gymna- 
sia, and porticoes, which, in the language of an- 
cient panegyric, rendered Athens the cye and 
light of Gresce.§ 

Pericles was blamed for thus decking one fa- 
vourite city, like a vain, voluptuous harlot, at 
the expense of plundered provinces;’ but it 
would have been fortunate for the Athenians if 


5 Isocrat. Areop. de Pace, et Panegyr. Xenoph. et Aris- 
tot. de Repub. Athen. 

6 Tsocrat. et Aristid. in Pangyr. 

7 Plutarch in Pericle. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


167 


their extorted wealth had not been employed 
in more perishing, as well as more criminal lua 
ury. The pomp of religious solemnities, which 
were twice as numerous and as costly in Athens 
asin any other city of Greece; the extrava- 
gance of entertainments and banquets which on 
such occasions always followed the sacrifices ; 
the increase of private luxury, which naturally 
accompanied this public profusion, exhausted 
the resources, without augmenting the glory, of 
the republic. Instead of the bread, herbs, and 
simple fare recommended by the laws of Solon, 
the Athenians, soon after the eightieth Olym- 
piad, availed themselves of their extensive com- 
merce to import the delicacies of distant coun- 
tries, which were prepared with all the refine- 
ments of cookery.8 The wines of Cyprus were 
cooled with snow in summier; in winter? the 
most delightful flowers adorned the tables and 
persons of the wealthy Athenians. Nor was it 
sufficient to be crowned with roses, unless they 
were likewise anointed with the most precious 
perfumes.!0 Parasites, dancers, and buffoons, 
were a usual appendage of every eutertain- 
ment.!! Among the weaker sex, the passion for 
delicate birds, distinguished by their voice or 
plumage, was carried to such excess as merited 
the name of madness.!2 The bodies of such 
youths as were peculiarly addicted to hunting 
and horses, which began to bea prevailing taste,!8 
were corrupted by the commerce of harlots, 
who had reduced their profession into sys- 
tem;'4 while their minds were still more pol- 
luted by the licentious philosophy of the so- 
phists. It is unnecessary to crowd the picture, 
since it may be observed, in one word, that the 
vices and extravagances, which are supposed to 
characterize the declining ages of Greece and 
Rome, took root in Athens during the adminis- 
tration of Pericles, the most splendid and most 
prosperous in the Grecian annals. 

This paradox, for such it must appear, may 
be explained by considering the singular com- 
bination of circumstances, which, in the time of 
that statesman gave every poison its antidote, 
and rendered the partial evils, already describ- 
ed, only the thorn that ever accompanies the 
rose. The Grecian history of those times affords 
a more striking contrast than ever appeared in 
any other age or country, of wisdom and folly, 
of magnanimity and mcanness, of liberty and 
tyranny, of simplicity and refinement, of aus- 
terity and voluptuousness. The sublime philo- 
sophy of Anaxogoras and Socrates was accom- 
panied, as with a shadow, by the dark, unprin- 
cipled captiousness’of the sophists ; the pathetic 
and moral strains of Sophocles and Euripides 
were parodied by the licentious buffoonery of 
Aristophanes; painting and sculpture, which, 
under geniuses of thc first order like Phidias, 
served as handmaids to religion and virtue, 
degenerated under inferior artists into mean 
hirelings of vice and disorder; the modesty of 
Athenian matrons was set off as hy a foil, 


8 Aristoph. Nubes, ver. 50. et Lysistrat. passim. 
9 Athen. L xi. 3. et Xenoph. Memorabilia, l. ii. 
10 Xenoph. ibid. 

11 Athenwenf, |. i. et Xenoph. Symp 

12 Ogvidouevex, Athen. L xi. 3. 

13 Aristoph. Nubes, passim, 

14 Alexis apud Atheneum, l. xiii. 


168 


when compared with the dissoluteness of the 
school of Aspasia; and the simple frugality of 
manners, which commonly prevailed in pri- 
vate families, even of the first distinction, was 
contrasted with the extravagant dissipation of 
public entertainments and festivals. To ex- 
amine the parallel links of this complicated 
chain will illustrate the character of a people 
whose subsequent transactions form one princi- 
pal object of Grecian history. ‘ 
Philosophy, which in Greece alone deserves 
the peculiar attention of the historian, arose 
about the beginning of the sixth century before 
Christ, and in a hundred and fifty years attain- 
ed the highest degree of perfection, and sunk 
into the lowest degeneracy and corruption, to 
which the use or abuse of the human intellect 
could raise or plunge it. Lesser Asia, to which 
Europe and America owe the inestimable bene- 
fits of their religion and letters, produced and 
nourished the tender plant of philosophy; and 
the flourishing Greek colonies on that delight- 
ful coast, communicated to their mother coun- 
try this precious offspring of their soil. Thales 
of Miletus, Pittacus of Mitylene, Bias of Priene, 
Cleobulus of Lindus in the isle of Rhodes, and 
the other wise men, as they were emphatically 
styled, who lived in that age, not only gave ad- 
vice and assistance to their countrymen in par- 
ticular emergencies, but restrained their vices 
by wholesome laws, improved their manners by 
useful lessons of morality, and extended their 
knowledge by important and difficult disco- 
veries.! But the first attempt towards moral’ 
philosophy, as independent on, and unconnect- 
ed with religion, seems to have been the fables 
of Æsop, which, to men in an early period of 
society, must have appeared a very serious and 
important species of composition. The sphere 
of history was narrow; the examples of the 
gods, amidst the continual corruptions of su- 
perstition, had become too flagitious for imita- 
tion; and men, whose rustic simplicity of life 
afforded them continual opportunities to ob- 
serve the instinctive sagacity of certain animals, 
might derive many useful lessons from those 
humble instructors. In the early ages of Greece 
and Rome, and of all other nations whose his- 
tory is recorded, fables were told, and in some 
degree believed, in the assembly and senate- 
house, on the most important occasions; for in 
the infancy of society men are children; and 
the delusion, which the belief of a fable sup- 
poses, is not more gross and improbable than 
many of those errors into which (as we have 
already proved?) their lively fancy had often 
hurried them. The same romantic cast of ima- 
gination which had animated woods and winds, 
mountains and rivers, which had changed he- 
roes into gods, and gods into frail men, might 
endow animals with reason, and even speech. 
The next step towards moral science was of 
a more refined and abstract kind, consisting of 
the sentences of the gnomonic poets,? and in 
those detached precepts or proverbs which, in 


g t 
1 Plutarch. Sympos. et de Placit. Philosoph. Plato in 
Protagor. Diogen. Laert. passim. 
2 Seeabbdve, Chapter H. 
3 See the sentences of Theognis, which are evidently a 
collection, not the work of one man. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


CHAP. 


all countries, have preceded any systematic ac- 
count of morality. Each of the seven sages, as 
they were called, had his favourite maxims,‘ 
which he engraved in temples and other places 
of public resort; but at this distance of time it 
is impossible, amidst the differences of authors, 
to discover what belongs to each; nor is the 
search important, since all their maxims or 
proverbs, whatever efforts of generalization 
they might cost their inventors, now appear 
extremely simple and familiar. 

These respectacle fathers of Grecian philoso- 
phy, who silently diffused light through the 
gloom of a barbarous age, are said to have 
maintained a correspondence® with each other, 
as well as with Solon of Athens, Chilon of 
Sparta, and Periander of Corinth; men who in 
imitation of their eastern brethren, chiefly cul- 
tivated such practical knowledge as qualified 
them to be the legislators, magistrates, and 
generals of their respective countries. 

Thales the Milesian, alone, quitted the ordi- 
nary pursuits of civil and military renown; 
and although he composed verses, promulgated 
moral sentences, and, on some particular emer- 
gencies, gave seasonable advice to his country- 
men, yet he established his fame on a basis 
more broad and permanent than the fluctuating 
interests of perishing communities. Many of 
the elementary propositions of geometry, after- 
wards collected by Euclid, were first discover- 
ed by Thales, who directed the acuteness of 
his mind with equal success to astronomy. He 
divided the heavens into five zones; discovered 
the equinoxes and solstices; remarked the Ursa 
Minor; observed, and nearly predicted, eclipses. 
The division of the year into three hundred 
and sixty-five days was already known to the 
Egyptians; but although Thales might borrow 
this, and perhaps other discoveries, from that 
ancient people, among whom he sometime re- 
sided, it appears, even from those authors who 
are ever prone to exaggerate the wisdom of 
Egypt, that he owed much less to that country, 
than to the native sagacity and penetration of 
his clear comprehensive mind.’ 

Thales founded the Ionic school, in which 
he was succeeded by Anixamander and Anaxi- 
menes, who were followed by Anaxagoras, the 
instructor of Pericles and Archelaus, who is 
called by ancient writers the master of Socra- 
tes. About fifty years after Thales, the same 
speculations which he had introduced were 
pursued by Xenophanes of Colophon, Leucip- 
pus and Parmenides of Elea, and Heraclitus 
of Ephesus. These ingenious men discovered 
many useful truths; yet all of them, not except- 
ing Thales himself, likewise busied themselves 
with subjects that will for ever excite and elude 
human curiosity. Their doctrines were equally 
liable to objection, whichever of the elements 
they assumed as the first principle of nature; 
they universally agreed in asserting the fallacy 
of the senses, and the unworthiness of the vul- 
gar superstition; but their various opinions 
concerning the origin and destruction of worlds, 


4 Aristot. Rhet. ii. 21. Stobæus, Serm. p. 44, &c. 

5 Plut. Symp. 6 Proclus in Euclid. 

7 Hieronym. apud Laert. |. i. c. xxvii. Plin. l. xxxviii. 
e. xvii. 


l 


XUL} 


the magnitudes and distances of heavenly 
bodies, the essence of matter and spirit,8 de- 
serve only to be considered as the dreams of 
inquisitive men, whose ambition of knowledge 
carried them beyond the sphcre of experience, 
and the clear deductions of reason. The sys- 
tem of Leucippus, the most famous of them all, 
was improved by Democritus of Abdera, and 
afterwards adopted by Epicurus, whose philo- 
sophy is sufficiently explained in the extraordi- 
nary work of Lucrctius, the boldest monument 
which the world is ever likely to behold, of 
learning, genius, and impiety. 

But it is particularly worthy of observation, 
that at the same time Democritus assailed the 
celestial mansions, and unveiled, with a daring 
hand, the feeble majesty of Grecian supersti- 
tion, Anaxagoras of Clazomené revealed a new 
and infinitely more august spectacle, by first 
announcing to the heathen world, a self-exist- 
ent, all-perfect mind, as the great cause and | 
author of the material world. Thales and | 
Pythagoras, with such of their disciples as 
faithfully adhered to their tenets, had indeed 
admitted spirit as a constituent principle of the | 
universe; but they had so intimately blended 
mind and matter, that these dissimilar substan- 
ces seemed to make an indissoluble compound, 
as the soul and body constitute but one man, 
According to Anaxagoras, on the other hand, 
the creating and sovereign intelligence was to 
be carefully distinguished from the soul of the 
world, which hc seems to have regarded merely 
as a poetical expression for the laws which the 
Deity lad impressed on his works. The great 
Ruler of the universe did not animate, but im- 
pel matter; he could not be included within its 
limited and pcrishing terms; hiš nature was 


pure and spiritual, and totally incapable of pol- 


lution by any corporeal admixture,!0 

The discovery and diffusion of this luminous 
and sublime principle, which was naturally 
followed by an investigation of the moral attri- 
butes of the Deity, and the deducing from 
thence the great duties of morality, might have 
produced a general and happy revolution in 
Greece, under the zealous and persevering la- 
bours of Socrates and his followers, if the ten- 
dency of this divine philosophy had not been 
counteracted, not only by the gross prejudices 
of the vulgar, but by the more dangerous re- 
finements of incredulous Sophists. 

The same spirit of inquiry, which leads to 
the discovery of truth, will ever promote the 
propagation of error; and unfortunately for 
Greece, in the middle of the fifth century be- 
fore Christ, errors were propagated, so conge- 
nial to-the condition of the times, that they 
could not fail to take deep root, and flourish 
in a soil which was peculiarly well prepared to 
receive them, The glorious victories over the 
Carthaginians and Persians had increased the 
wealth and seeurity, called forth the invention 
and industry, but, at the same timc, inultiplied 
the wants, and inflamed the passions, of the 


8 See Diogen. Laert. l.i. Aristot. Metaph. passim. ct 
Plut. de Placit. Philosoph. 

9 Laert. l. ix. Aristot. Physic. l. viii. 

10 Aristot. Metaphys. l. i. c. iii. Plato in Cratylo, ot 
Plut. in Pericle. 


Y . 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


169 


Greeks. The more powerful cities, and par- 
ticularly Athens and Syracuse, had attained a 
pitch of prosperity which exceeded their most 
sanguine hopcs; clated by the bloom of health 
and the pride of riches, they continually sighed 
for new and unknown enjoyments, while both 
individuals and communities were ever ready 
to listen to such instructors as justified their 
vices, and taught thein to abuse the gifts of 
fortune. 

In this situation of affairs appear- 


" oh ai ed the Sophists,'!! whose name, stil] 
hoe 440 familiar in the languages of Europe, 

b pretty faithfully expresses their 
character. Hippias of Elis, Protagoras of Ab- 


dera, Prodicus of Ceos, Gorgias of Leontium, 
with many inferior names, preserved in the 
writings of Xenophon, Plato, and lsocrates, 
started up about the same time, and exhibited 
a new phænomenon in Greece. The Olympic, 
and other public assemblies, furnished them 
with an opportunity to display their specious 
accomplishments to the admiring spectators. 
They frequented the great cities, particularly 
Athens, and acquired the friendship of the rich, 
and the applause of the multitude. They pro- 
fessed the knowledge of every science, and of 
every art, which they taught publicly, for a sti- 
pulated price; and, as they really possessed the 
art of persuasion, their disciples continually 
increased among the rich and the voluptuous, 
the idle and the vain. 

Their language was glowing and harmoni. 
ous, their manners elegant, their life splendid. 
When it served their interest, and pleased tha 
taste of their hearers, they could paint virtue 
in the warmest and most alluring colours; but 
the capricious will of their scholars, whose pas- 
sions they were evcr careful to gratify, served 
as the only standard of their principles; and 
engaged them, for the most part, to deck out 
the barren doctrines of Leucippus and Demo- 
critus with the meretricious arts of the rhetori- 
cian. Their morality supplied the springs with 
which Epicurus watered his gardens; and their 
captious logic furnished the arguments by 
which Pyrrho attempted to justify his scepti- 
cism.!2 Jt would be easy to trace up to the 
Sophists that quibbling metaphysic, which be- 
ing embodied in the Grcek language, thence- 
forth adhered too closely to the philosophical 
writings of that people, and whicli totally dis- 
figures many otherwise valuable compositions 
of antiquity. But our present business is only 
to remark the destructive effects immediatcly 
repulting from their tenets, which, while they 
undermined, without openly opposing, the an- 
cient and popular superstition, boldly set at 
defiance all those useful maxims of conduct, 
and all those salutary discoveries of reason, 
which, amidst the insolence of the Greek de- 
mocracies, fomented by prosperity, appeared 
essentially requisite to restrain the intemper- 
ance, injusticc, and violence, of individuals 


and communities. 


In several republics of Greece, the Sophists 
enjoyed a free career to display their talents, 


11 Vid. Philostrat. de Vit. Sophist. 
12 See the note onthe Sophists, in my Translation af 
Isocrates’s Panegyric of Athens, p. 1. et soq. 


A 


170 


practice their artifices, and to promote their 
fame and fortune. But in Athens their frauds 
were detected, and their characters unmasked 
by Socrates,! whose philosophy forms an im- 
portant era in the history of the human mind. 
The son of Sophroniscus was born at Athens, 
forty years before the commencement of the 
Peloponnesian war. The smallness of his 
patrimony, amounting only to three hundred 
pounds, and his original profession of a statu- 
ary,? have encouraged an opinion of the ob- 
security of his birth, among writers who did not 
reflect on the narrowness of Athenian fortunes, 
and who forgot to consider, that as hereditary 
distinctions were little known or regarded in 
the Grecian republics, a solid and permanent 
lustre was naturally derived from the practice 
of ingenious arts, which could not be cultivated, 
as in ancient Rome, and sometimes in modern 
Europe, by servile or mercenary hands, but 
only by the first class of freemen and citizens. 
Whatever reputation or advantage Socrates 
might have acquired by the exercise of a pro- 
fession, which was peculiarly encouraged by the 
taste of the times, and the magnificent spirit 
of Pericles, he readily sacrificed to the natural 
bent of his mind, which concealed, under an 
external form worthy to represent the voluptu- 
gus Silenus,? the fruitful seeds of every amiable 
and manly sentiment, and determined him, by 
an irresistible impulse, to the study of wisdom 
and virtue. 

In his early youth he heard the physics of 
Archelaus, and learned the geometry of Theo- 
dorus ;* and from these, and other teachers, ac- 
quired such an acquaintance with the fashion- 
able theories concerning the formation of the 
universe, the original principles of things, the 
hidden powers of matter, as enabled him to 
regard with just contempt, and occasionally to 
deride with inimitable humour, the vanity of 
those useless and shadowy speculations. He 
acknowledged with the pious Anaxagoras, the 
superintending mind, whose providence regu- 
lated the operations of nature, as well as the 
affairs of human life. He denied not the ex- 
istence of those inferior intelligences, which 
formed the only objects of popular adoration; 
he allowed the divine origin of dreams and 
omens; he was exemplary in all the religious 
duties of his country; and were we to judge 
the Athenian sage by the standard of ordinary 
men, we should be inclined to believe that he 
had not entirely escaped the contagion of 
superstition; since he professed to be accom- 
panied by a demon, or invisible conductor, who 
often restrained his passions, and influenced 
his behaviour.5 If this assertion was not an 
effect of that refined irony familiar to Socrates, 
we must allow his temper to have been tinged 
with credulity: yet, whoever seriously reflects 
on a life of seventy years, spent in the service 
of mankind, uniformly blameless, and termi- 
nated by a voluntary death, in obedience to the 


1 To avoid prolixity in the account of Socrates and his 
philosophy, I cite not particular passages, but give the 
general result of my reading in Plato and Xenophon. 

2 Laert. l. ii. art. Socrat. 

3 Plato et Xenoph. in Symp. 

4 Plato in Theetet. et in Menon. 

5 Plut de Genio Socratis A 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


unjust laws of his country; whoever considers 
attentively the habitual temperance, the un- 
shaken probity, the active usefulness, the diffu- 
sive benevolence, the constant equanimity and 
cheerfulness of this singular man, will admit a 
degree of enthusiasm, rather as the ornament, 
than defect, of such an extraordinary character. 
Men of learning and genius, who, examining 
the matter still more deeply, have observed the 
important revolution produced by the life and 
death of Socrates, on the principles and senti- 
ments of his contemporaries, and of posterity, 
are disposed to believe that such an extraordi- 
nary phænomenon could not have appeared in 
the moral world, without the particular inter- 
position of heaven. The cheerful serenity of 
his last moments,‘ and still more, the unde- 
viating tenor of his active virtue, justified the 
hardest maxims of Lycurgus and Pythagoras; 
while the main aim of his speculations was to 
establish the sublime morality of those sages, 
on the clearest deductions of reason and ex- 
perience. 

From the perfections of the supreme intelli- 
gence he deduced his just government of the 
universe, which implied the immortality of the 
human soul. But the great object of his re- 
search was to discover the general laws by 
which, even in this life, the superintending 
providence had variously dispensed to men 
good and evil, happiness and misery. These 
laws he regarded as the promulgated will of 
the God, with which, when clearly ascertained, 
it became our duty invariably to comply; since 
nothing but the most short-sighted folly could 
risk incurring the divine displeasure, in order to 
avoid pain or poverty, sickness or death; far 
less to acquire perishing gratifications, which 
leave a sting behind them. Reasoning on such 
principles, and taking experience only for his 
guide, he deduced, with admirable perspicuity, 
the interests and duties of nations and indivi- 
duals, in all the complicated relations of society. 
The actions of men furnished the’ materials, 
their instruction formed the object, their hap- 
piness was the end of his discourse. Wherever 
his lessons might be most generally useful, 
there he was always to be found; frequenting, 
at an early hour, the Academy, Lyceum, and 
other public Gymnasia; punctually attending 
the forum at mid-day, the hour of full assem- 
bly; and in the evening joining, without the 
affectation of austerity, in the convivial enter- 
tainments of his friends, or accompanying them 
in the delightful walks which adorned the 
banks of the Ilyssus. As a husband, a father, a 
citizen, and a soldier, the steady practice of his 
duty continually illustrated his doctrines. The 
conversation and example of this truly practical 
philosopher (and this is his highest panegyric) 
persuaded many of his fellow citizens sincerely 
to embrace a virtuous course of life; and even 
those who, like Critias and Alcibiades, allowed 
the current of their passions to prevail over 
the conviction of their sober hours, were still 
charmed with the wonderful extent, as well as 
the singular accuracy, of his various know- 
ledge; with the acuteness and penetration of 


G This subject will be treated hereafter 


ar 


XIIL] 


his arguments; the beauty, vivacity, and per- 
suasiveness of his style; which, whether he 
assumed the tone of reason or of ridicule, sur- 
passed whatever had been deemed most elo- 
quent.’ 

Yet, how great soever might be the personal 
influence of Socrates, the triumph of his philo- 
sophy became more illustrious and complete, 
after his principles were embraced by those who 
cultivated the imitative arts, and directed the 
public amusements, which in all countries, but 
particularly in Greece, have ever produced im- 
mediate and powerful effects on the national 
opinions and character. In Greece alone, the 
theatre was regarded as an object of the first 
importance and magnitude; it formed an es- 
sential, and by far the most splendid, part of 
religious worship ; the expense of supporting 
it exceeded that of the army and navy toge- 
ther ; and this celebrated entertainment, which 
united the tragedy and opera of the moderns, 
was carried to perfection by a favourite disci- 
ple of Socrates, whose works were so univer- 
sally admired in Greece, that (as we shall have 
occasion to relate in the Sicilian war) the Sy- 
racusans released from captivity those Athe- 
nians, and those only, who had learned to re- 
peat the verses of Euripides. This admired 
poet rendered the Grecian tragedy complete, 
by perfecting the chorus, the principle distinc- 
tion between the ancient and the modern 
drama, and wlich, when properly conducted, 
rendered the former more regulgr, yet more 
varied; more magnificent, and at the same 
time more affecting ; above all, more interest- 
ing and more instructive. 

From the prevailing manners of the times. 
when the principal citizens lived together in 
crowds, and daily frequented the public halls, 
the gymnasia, the forums, and temples, it was 
natural to expect that the action of a Grecian 
tragedy should consist in some great public 
event, which interested the whole body of the 
people. The scene was usually the portico of 
a temple, the gate of a palace, the wide ex- 
panse of a forum, or market-place. In such 
places many spectators must be supposed pre- 
sent, who would naturally take part in an ac- 
tion which concerned tle public interest and 
happiness.2 On this principle was introduced 


7 Xenoph. Memor. l. iv. c. xv. Laert. |. ii. c. xix. et seq. 
et Cicero de Orat. iii. 16. 

8 In this part of the drama, the Philosophy of Enripides 
excels the loftiness of Auschylus, and the richness of Sopho- 
cles. It is sufficient to compare the works of the three 
rivals, to perceive that the chorus in Euripides most faith- 
fully answers the description of Horace: 


Ille bonis faveatque, et consilietur amicis 
Et regat iratos, et amct peccare timentes. 
Ille dapes laudet mense brevis ; ille salubrem 
Justitiam, legesque, et apertis otia portis; 
Jlle tegat commissa; deosque precetur et oret, 
Ut redeat miseris, abeat fortuna superbis. 

9 In the Œdipus Tyrannus, the chorus is composed of 
priests, senators, Theban youths, &c. Creon says to Œdi- 
pus, 

Es rovds yeouless rAnrieCovrwv nause 

Erotpog esvsiv, EITE 42i oreiyerv sow. 
The answer ia 

Eg wruvras nude twd! yxp TALOV Geow 

Mev8og y xai tag emas Wuxyç megt 

CrRroN. Shall f speak in presence of this numerous as- 
sembly? or shall we retire ? 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


171 


the ancient chorus, consisting of such persons 
as most properly suited the occasion, and who, 
though not immediately or principally con- 
cerned in the catastrophe, had such general 
and indirect interest, as kept them continually 
on the scene, and made them approve or con- 
demn, promote or oppose, the sentiments and 
measures of the actors. The chorus, never 
quitting the stage, necessarily introduced the 
unity of place; and as their songs and dances 
between the acts expressed the feelings excited 
by the representation, they connected the pre- 
ceding act with that which immediately follow- 
ed it, and rendered the whole spectacle unin- 
terrupted and continuous. The music of the 
chorus was more rich and various, and the 
poetry more elevated and glowing, than what 
could be admitted into the acts, or ordinary 
dialogue, which was confined to the iambic 
measure ; circumstances which, together with 
the numbers, the dresses, the dances, and ges- 
tures, of these fancied spectators, equally 
increased the magnificence and variety of the 
entertainment. Thcy likewise rendered it more 
affecting ; since nothing is more proper to in- 
terest us in any scene, than the beholding a 
great number of persons deeply engaged by it, 
and expressing their feelings by natural tones 
and movements. But the principal advantage 
of the chorus was to furnish the poet with an 
opportunity (without loading the dialogue, and 
rendering it too sententious) of enforcing, by 
all the power of fancy and of numbers, that 
moral instruction, which was occasionally at- 
tempted by Aischylus and Sophocles, but which 
forms the continual end and aim of Euripides, 
who had a soul to feel, and a genius to express, 
whatever is most lovely and most excellent in 
sentiment and character. It is unnecessary to 
mention the affecting delicacy of Admetus and 
his attendants towards his guest Hercules; the 
lively emotions of gratitude in that hero; the 
friendship of Pylades and Orestes; the amiable 
picture of conjugal affection in the character of 
Alcestis; since the whole remains of that ines- 
timable writer prove his unceasing labours to 
warm his countrymen with all the virtues and 
charities that adorn private life, as well as to 
keep alive an ardent love of the republic, and 
a gencrous passion for its glory and liberty ; 
while, in several passages, he describes and re- 
futes the philosophy of Epicurus!0 (which, as we 
have already observed, was chiefly borrowed 
from the licentious maxims of the Sophists) 
with such fulness and accuracy as entitled him 
to tlie appellation of the Philosophic Tragedian. 


Cepirus. Speak before all present; for the public dis- 
tress afflicts me more than my own danger. 

10 Sce particularly Alcest. ver. 782, &c. and ver. 960, &c. 

Enripides flonrished near a hundred years before Fpicu- 
rus and Zeno, the respective founders of the Epicurean and 
Stoical philosophy. Yet we find the tenets of both sects in 
the tragedian; which may be easily explained, by consider- 
ing that those opposite kinds of philosophy arose fromm dif 
ferent aspects of nature, which must often present them- 
selves to an observing eye; and as the doctrines of the 
Sophists laid the foundation for the moral system of Epi- 
curus, #0 the moderate doubt of Socrates, and tho old 
academy, was corrupted into different degrees of scepti- 
cisin, according to the fancy of their successors; and his 
rational preference of virtue to all other objects, degene- 
rated into a pretended contempt for these objects, as things 
totally indifferent, the insensihility and pedantry of the Stoics, 


KE 


That Euripides, though ten years older than 
Socrates, owed the characteristic excellences 
of his works to the conversation and friendship 
of that unrivalled moralist, is universally ac- 
knowledged by antiquity ;! though the charac- 
ter and intentions both of the poet and the phi- 
losopher were grossly misrepresented by some 
of their contemporaries. Before the commence- 
ment, and during the continuance of the Pe- 
loponnesian war, there flourished at Athens a 
class of men who were the declared enemies, 
not only of Socrates and his disciples, but of all 
order and decency. The reader will easily per- 
ceive, that I allude to Aristophanes, and the 
other writers of the old licentious comedy ; an 
entertainment which was never carried to the 
same vicious excess in any other age or coun- 
try. Yet this hideous spectre was the sister of 
Tragedy, whose angelic sweetness and dignity 
were long accompanied by this odious and dis- 
gusting form; but to understand the natural 
connection between objects seemingly so differ- 
ent, it is necessary to remount to their source. 

Tragedy, the song of the goat,? and Comedy, 
the song of the village, sufficiently indicate, by 
the meanness of their ancient names, the humi- 
lity of their first original. They arose amidst 
the sacrifices and joyous festivity of the vin- 
tage, in a country which seldom adopted the 
amusements, any more than the arts and in- 
stitutions, of others, but which was destined to 
communicate her own to all the civilized por- 
tion of mankind. During the entertainments 
of a season peculiarly dedicated to recreation 
and pleasure, the susceptible minds of the 
Greeks naturally yielded to two propensities 
congenial to men in such circumstances, a dis- 
position to exercise their sensibility, and a de- 
sire to amuse their fancy. Availing himself of 
the former, the sublime genius of Auschylus? 
improved the song of the goat into a regular 
dramatic poem, agreeing with the Iliad and 
Odyssey in those unalterable rules of design 


1 Edoxse ouprosesy Evgiasdy. Diogen. Laert. in Vit. 
Socrat. The comic poets, who envied and hated Euripides, 
as the darling of the public, pretended that Socrates bad 
even composed all the finest passages in his tragedies. Soon 
after the representation of the the Troes, Mnesilochus paro- 
died it in a farce, which he called ®evy ss, Phrygians, proba- 
iy have an opportunity of playing onthe word ¢evy2voy, 

uel. 
Povyttc errs xaivov Sonus tour’ Evpsridou 
Q xxi Lwxexrys Tx Couyaye YTOTIJATI. 
The Phrygians is a new play of Euripides, te whom So- 
crates furnishes the fuel.” But the pun cannot be trans- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


and execution which are essential to the per- 
fection of every literary performance, yet dif- 
fering from those immortal archetypes of art, in 
a cirucmstance naturally suggested by the oc- 
casion for which tragedies were composed. It 
had been usual with the Athenians, when they 
celebrated in the spring and autumn the great 
festivals of Bacchus, to personate the exploits 
and fables handed down by immemorial tradi- 
tion concerning that bountiful divinity; this 
imitation was considered as a mark of gratitude 
due to the beneficence of the god, to whose 
honours they associated the kindred worship 
of Pan, Silenus, and their attendant fawns and 
satyrs. When A‘schylus represented, there- 
fore, instead of simply reciting, the real his- 
tory, or agreeable fictions, of antiquity, he only 
adopted a mode of imitation already practised 
in the religious ceremonies of his country; a 
mode of imitation more powerful than the epic, 
since, instead of barely describing the deeds of 
gods and heroes, it shows those distinguished 
personages on the scene, makes them speak 
and act for themselves, and thus approaching 
nearer to reality, is still more forcible and af- 
fecting. 

As tragedy was introduced in imitation of 
the more serious spectacles of the Dionysian 
festival, so comedy, which soon followed it, 
was owing to the more light and ludicrous 
parts of that solemnity. Tragedy is the imi- 
tation of an important and serious action, 
adapted to affect the sensibility of the specta~- 
tors, and to gratify their natural propensity to 
fear, to weep,and to wonder. Comedy is the 
imitation of a light and ludicrous action, adapted 
to amuse the fancy, and to gratify the natural 
disposition of men to laughter and merriment. 
Terror and pity have in all ages been regarded 
as the main springs of tragedy, because the 
laws of sensibility, founded solely in nature, are 
always the same. Comedy has been infinitely 
varied by the innumerable modes of wit, hu- 
mour, and ridicule, which prevail in different 
ages and countries, and which agree scarcely 
in any one particular, unless it may be reckoned 
an agreement, that men have seldom indulged 
them, except at the expense of their good-na- 
ture, and often of their virtue. The Grecian 
comedy was uncommonly licentious; the pro- 
fligate characters of Aristophanes and his con- 
temporaries, Mnesilochus, Callias, Eupolis, and 
Cratinus, contributed, doubtless, to this de- 


lated. The same Mnesilochus calls Euripides a sort of | formity ; yet these poets could not easily have 


hammerman to Socrates, 
Eveimcdus Dwxrexroprauteve, 

2 A goat, as the particular enemy of the vine, was very 
properly sacrificed to Bacchus, whose praises composed the 
song. In the Antigonė of Sophocles, v. 1127, 

TloAuwvuns Kadpesus 
Nupeas ayadun, xei Airos 
BueuSeszerx yevos, &c. 


we have a specimen of what formed the first business of 
tragedy. 

3 Æschylus is said by Aristotle (de Arte Poetica) to have 
introduced interlocutors, dialogue, &c. which is acknow- 
ledging him the father of tragedy. We know little of Thes- 
pis, but from Horacc: 


Tgnotum tragice genus invenisse cament 
Dicitur, et plaustris vexisse poémata Thespis. 

The plaustrum, however, has a more direct reference to 
comedy ; since AwAgty wo £Ẹ wyxFuc, to speak as froma 
cart, was a common Greek expression for reviling with 
gross indecent insolence. 


rendered their new entertainment agreeable to 
the taste’ and prejudices of the public, without 


4 Horace is authentic, and the most agreeable authority. 

Agricole pris«i, fortes, parveque beati 
Condita post frumenta, levantes tempore festo 
Corpus, et ipsum animum spe finis dura ferentem, 
Cum sociis operum, pueris, et conjuge fidà, 
Tellurem porco, Silvanum lacte piabant, 
Floribus et vino Genium, memorem brevis ævi. 
Fescennina per hunc invecta licentia morem 
Versibus alternis opprobria rustica fudit, &c. &c. 

and still more directly, Ars Poetic. v. 220, &c. 


5 Horace has expressed, with his usual felicity, the situa 
tion of the spectators, and the fatal necessity of humour 
ing it: 


Asper 
Incolumi gravitate jocum tentavit; eo quod 
Illecebris erat et grata novitate morandus 
Spectator, functusque sacris, et potus et exlex. 


XIIL] 


incorporating in them the substance of the 
phallic songs, which constituted an ancient and 
essential part of the amusements of the vintage, 
The fond admirers of antiquity have defended 
the abominable strains of these licentious poets, 
by pretending, that their intention was to re- 
form vice, not to recommend it; an apology 
which, if admitted, might tend to exculpate the 
writers, but could never justify their perform- 
ances, since it is known by experience, that 
lewd descriptions prove a poison rather than a 
remedy ; and instead of correcting manners, 
tend only to corrupt them. 

Besides the general licentiousness of the an- 
cient comedy, its more particular characteristics 
resulted from the peculiar circumstances of the 
Athenians, during the time of its introduction 
and continuance. The people of all rauks at 
Athens were then too deeply engaged in the 
military and political transactions of their coun- 
try, to enjoy any amusement which did not 
either directly flatter their passions, or bear an 
immediate relation to the great and important 
interests of the republic. It was during the 
confusion and calamities of the Peloponnesian 
war, that all the comic pieces which remain 
were originally represented ; a period too dis- 
orderly and tumultuous to relish comedies, 
such as are now written, or such as were com- 
posed in Greece by Menander, in an age of 
greater moderation and tranquillity. The ele- 
gant and ingenious, the moral and instructive 
strains of Moliere or Menander, may amuse 
the idleness of wealth, and the security of 
peace. But amjdst the fermentation of war and 
danger, amidst civil dissensions and foreign in- 
vasions, the minds of men are too little at ease 
to enjoy such refined and delicate beauties, 
which then appear lifeless and insipid. In such 
turbulent circumstances, the reluctant attention 
must be excited by real, instead of imaginary 
characters ; by a truc, instead of a fictitious 
event; by direct and particular advice concern- 
ing the actual state of their affairs, instead of 
vague or abstract lessons of wisdom and virtue. 
Coarse buffoonery may often force them to 
laugh; delicate ridicule will seldom engage 
them to smile; they may be affected by the 
sharpness of personal invective, but will re- 
main impenetrable to the shafts of general 
satire. 

` By combining the different parts of this de- 
scription, we may form a tolerably exact notion 
of the writings of Aristophanes, which com- 
monly conceal, under a thin allegorical veil, the 
recent history of some public transaction, or 
the principal features of some distinguished 
character, represcnted in such a ludicrous light, 
as reflects on those concerned, unexpected, and 
often unmerited, but not therefore the less 
striking, flashes of insolent ridicule. Such was 
the nature, and such the materials of the an- 
cicnt comedy, which, in its form, agrced entirely 
with tragedy, having borrowed from this enter- 
tainment (which was already in possession of 
the theatre) the distribution of the whole, as 
well as the arrangement of the sevcral parts; 


6 «aros. Priapus ZvaAcv exsuynes Yov ev Tw wxew rru- 
€ivov wsdcsov, Suidas. This was carried in procession, ac- 
companied with the ÇzAħixz «Tusta. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


173 


the music, the chorus, the dresses, decorations, 
and machinery ; all of which were so modified 
and burlesqued as suited the purposes of the 
comic writer, and often rendered his pieces 
little else than parodies of the more fashionable 
tragedies of the times. 

This singular species of drama, which, in its 
less perfect state, had long strolled the villages 
of Attica, was simply tolerated at Athens, until 
the profusion of Pericles, and his complai- 
sance for the populace, first supplied from the 
exchequer the necessary expenses for the repre- 
sentation of comedies, and proposed prizes for 
the comic, as well as for the tragic, poets and 
actors. But, by this injudicious encourage- 
ment, he unwarily cherished a serpent in his 
bosom. ‘Aristophanes and his licentious con- 
temporaries having previously ridiculed virtue 
and genius, in the persons of Socrates and Eu- 
ripides, boldly proceeded to avail themselves of 
the natural malignity of the vulgar, and their 
envy against whatever is elevated and illus- 
trious, to traduce and calumniate Pericles him- 
self; and though his successors in the adminis- 
tration justly merited (as we shall have occasion 
to relate) the severest lashes of their invective, 
yet, had their characters been more pure, they 
would have been equally exposed to the un- 
provoked satire of those insolent buffoons, who 
gratified the gross appetites of the vulgar, by 
an undistinguished mass of ridicule, involving 
vice and virtue, things profane and sacred, 
men and gods, 

Dramatic entertainments formed an essential 
part of the festivals consecrated to the bounti- 
ful author of the vine. Minerva, who had given 
not only the olive, but what was deemed far 
more valuable, her peculiar protection to the 
city of Athens, was rewarded with innumerable 
solemnities. Jupiter enjoyed his appropriated 
honours; but more commonly, as is attested by 
Athenian medals, the worship of the father of the 
gods was associated with that of his wife and 
warlike daughter. We shall have occasion to 
speak more particularly of the festival and mys- 
teries of Ceres, who taught the Athenians the 
important knowledge of agriculture, which they 
were supposed to have diffused over the ancient 
world. It would be cndless to mention the in- 
stitutions in honour of the crowd of inferior or 
less propitious divinities, which rendered the 
festivals at Athens twice more numerous than 
in any other Grecian city. Nor did their fre- 
quency abate any thing of the expensive 
splendour which accompanied them. The shops 
and courts of justice wcre shut; the mechanic 
quitted his tools, the husbandman ceased froin 
his labours, the mourner intermitted his sorrow. 
The whole city was dissolved in feasting and 
jollity ; the intervals of which werc filled up 
by pompous shows and processions, by con- 
certs of music, by exhibitions of painting ; and 
at several festivals, particularly the Panathe- 
nwan, by hearing and judging the noblest pro- 
ductions of eloquence and poetry.? We shall 
have occasion to mention some particular cerc- 
monies of-a more melancholy cast; but the 
general character of the Grecian religion was 


7 Ysocrat. Panegyr. et Panathen. 


174 


as cheerful and attractive, as the supersti- 
tion of the Egyptians, from whom they are 
ignorantly supposed to have borrowed it, was 
gloomy and forbidding. Even the Egyptian 
hymns consisted in dismal complaints and la- 
mentations;! the Grecian solemnities con- 
cluded with songs of joy and exultation. The 
feasts which followed the sacrifices were enriched 
by all the delicacies and luxuries of the ancient 
world; and, to use the words of Aristotle, 
many persons thought it their duty, at those 
religious entertainments, to get drunk in honour 
of the gods.? 

It seems extraordinary, that the revenues of 
Athens, notwithstanding their improvement by 
Pericles, should have sufficed for this multitude 
of expenses. But we must consider, that the 
general simplicity of manners in private life, 
formed a striking contrast with the extrava- 
gance of public festivals and amusements. The 
houses and tables of the most wealthy Athe- 
nians were little distinguished above those of 
their poorest neighbours. Pericles himself, 
though never suspected of avarice, lived with 
the exactest economy; and the superabundance 
of private wealth, which would have created 
envy and danger to the owner, if he had em- 
ployed it for his particular convenience and 
pleasure, procured him public gratitude and 
esteem, when expended for the satisfaction of 
the multitude. 

For reasons which will immediately appear, 
we have not hitherto found it necessary to de- 
scribe the manners and influence of the Grecian 
women; but the character and condition of 
the fair sex will throw light on the preceding 
observations in this chapter, and present the 
most striking contrast of any to be met with in 
history. If we knew not the consideration in 
which women were anciently held in Greece, 
and the advantages which they enjoyed at 
Sparta, after the laws of Lycurgus had revived 
the institutions of the heroic ages,? we should 
be apt to suspect that the ungenerous treat- 
ment of the feebier sex, which afterwards so 
universally prevailed, had been derived from 
the Egyptian and Asiatic colonies, which carly 
settled in that part of Europe. Excluded from 
social intercourse, which nature had fitted them 
to adorn, the Grecian women were rigorously 
confined to the most retired apartments of the 
family, and employed in the meanest offices of 
domestic economy. It was thought indecent 
for them to venture abroad, unless to attend a 
procession, to accompany a funeral,’ or to as- 
sist at certain other religious solemnities. Even 
on these occasions, their behaviour was atten- 
tively watched, and often malignantly inter- 
preted. The most innocent freedom was 
construed into a breach of decorum ; and their 
reputation, once sullied by the slightest impru- 
dence, could never afterwards be retrieved. If 
such unreasonable severities had proceeded from 
that absurd jealousy which sometimes accom- 
panies a violent love, and of which a certain 
degree is nearly connected with the delicacy of 


1 Apuleius de Genio Socratis. 

2 Arist. Ethic. ad Nichom. ]. viii. c. iil. 
3 Aristot. Politic. l. ii. p. 105. 

4 Lysias, p. 420. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


passion between the sexes, the condition of the 
Grecian women, though little less miserable, 
would have been far less cuntemptible. But 
the Greeks were utter strangers to that refine- 
ment of sentiment, which, in the ages of chi- 
valry, and which still, in some southern coun- 
tries of Europe, renders women the objects of a 
suspicious but respectful passion, and leads 
men to gratify their vanity at the expense of 
their freedom. Married or unmarried, the Gre- 
cian females were kept in equal restraint ; no 
pains were taken to render them, at any one 
period of their lives, agreeable rnembers of so- 
ciety; and their education was either entircly 
neglected, or confined at least to such humble 
objects, as, instead of elevating and enlarging 
the mind,tended only to narrow and to debase it 
Though neither qualified for holding an ho- 
nourable rank in society, nor permitted to 
enjoy the company of their nearest friends and 
relations, they were thought capable of super- 
intending or performing the drudgery of do- 
mestic labour, of acting as stewards for their 
husbands, and thus relieving them from a 
multiplicity of little cares, which seemed un- 
worthy of their attention, and unsuitable to 
their dignity. The whole burden of such mer- 
cenary cares being imposed on the women, 
their first instructions and treatment were 
adapted to that lowly rank, beyond which they 
could never afterwards aspire. Nothing was 
allowed to divert their minds from those ser- 
vile occupations in which it was intended that 
their whole lives should be spent; no liberal 
idea was presented to their imagination, that 
might raise them above the ‘ignoble arts in 
which they were ever destined to labour; the 
smallest familiarity with strangers was deemed 
a dangerous offence ; and any intimacy or con- 
nection beyond the walls of their own family, 
a heinous crime; since it might engage them 
to embezzle the household furniture and effects 
committed to tlieir care and custody. Even 
the laws of Athens confirmed this miserable 
degradation of women, holding the security of 
the husband’s property a matter of greater im- 
portance than defending the wife’s person from 
outrage, and protecting her character from in- 
famy.’? By such illiberal institutions were the 
most amiable part of the human species in- 
sulted, among a people in other respects the 
most improved of all antiquity. They were 
totally debarred from those refined arts and en- 
tertainments, to which their agreeable qualities 
might have added a new charm. Instead of 
directing the taste, and enlivening the pleasures 
of socicty, their value was estimated, like that 
of the ignoblest objects, merely by profit or 
utility. Their chief virtue was rescrve, and 
their point of honour, economy. 

The extreme depression of women levelled 
the natural inequalities of their temper and 
disposition ; the prude, the coquette, with the 
various intermediate shades of female charac- 
ter, disappeared ; and all the modest and vir- 


5 Idem, p. 435. 

6 Xenoph. Memorab. l. v. passim, particularly Socrates’s 
Discourse with Ischomachus. 

7 See the laws quoted by Lysias, explained in my Intro 
ductory Discourse to that orator, p. 100. 


XII.] 


tuous part of the sex (if virtué and modesty 
can ever be the effects of restraint) were re- 
duced to humble imitation and insipid unifor- 
mity. But,in the time of Pericles, there ap- 
peared and flourished at Athens a bolder class 
of females, who divested themselves of the 
natural modesty, disdained the artificial vir- 
tues, and avenged the violated privileges of 
their sex. Asia, the mother of voluptuousness, 
produced this dangerous brood, whose mere- 
tricious arts and occupations met with no check 
or restraint from the laxity of Ionian morals, 
and were even promoted and encouraged by 
the corruptions of Pagan superstition. In most 
of the Greek colonies of Asia, temples were 
erected to the earthly Venus; where courte- 
zans were not merely tolerated, but honoured, 
as priestesses of that condescending divinity.® 
The wealthy and commercial city of Corinth 
first imported this innovation from the East; 
and such is the entravagance of the human 
mind, that after the repulse of Xerxes, the ma- 
gistrates of that republic ascribed the safety of 
their country to the powerful intercession of 
the votaries of Venus, whose portraits they 
caused to be painted at the public expense, as 
the Athenians had done those of the warriors 
who gained the battle of Marathon.!0 The 
fame of all those accomplished, but mercenary 
beauties, though highly celebrated by the poets 
and historians of the times, was eclipsed by 
the splendour of Aspasia of Miletus, whio set- 
tled at Athens under the administration of Pe- 
ricles, and is said to have embarked in the fleet 
with which that fortunate commander subdued 
the powerful and wealthy island of Samos. 
The personal character of Aspasia gave tem- 
porary lustre to a profession, which, though 
exalted by the casual caprices of superstition, 
must naturally have fallen into contempt; 
since later writers among the Greeks!! acknow- 
ledge, that though she carried on a very dis- 
honourable commerce in female virtue, yet her 
wit and eloquence, still more than her beauty, 
gained her extraordinary consideration among 
all ranks in the republic. The susceptible 
minds of the Athenians were delighted with 
what their absurd institutions rendered a no- 
telty, the bekolding the native graces of the 
anx, embellished by education. Aspasia is said 


$ Athenrus,) xiii. et Plutarch, p. 637. 
Siren’ ier oud Athen. l xiii. 
1P'at -o Pericle. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


175 


to have acquired a powerful ascendant over 
Pericles himself; she certainly acquired his 
protection and friendship ; which is less extra- 
ordinary than that her conversation and com 

pany should have pleased the discernment of 
the sage Socrates. She is accused (as we shall 
afterwards have an opportunity to mention) of 
having excited, from motives of personal re- 
sentment, the war of Pcloponnesus; yet, 
calamitous as that long and obstinate conflict 
proved to Greece, and particularly to Athens, 
it may be suspected that Aspasia occasioned 
still more incurable evils to both. Her exam- 
ple, and still more her instructions, formed a 
school at Athens, by which her dangerous pro- 
fession was reduced into system. The compa- 
nions of Aspasia served as models for painting 
and statuary, and themes for poetry and pane- 
gyric. Nor were they mere objects, but the 
authors of many literary works, in which they 
established rules for the behaviour of their 
lovers, particularly at table; and explained the 
art of gaining the heart, and captivating the 
affections ;!2 which would have been an impru- 
dence, had they not considered, that the mys- 
teries of their calling alone lose little by be- 
ing disclosed, since men may often perceive 
the snare, without having courage to avoid it. 
The dress, behaviour, and artifices of this class 
of women, became continually more seductive 
and dangerous; and Athens thenceforth re- 
mained the chief school of vice and pleasure, 
as well as of literature and philosophy. 

It has been already hinted, that the tine arts, 
and particularly painting, were prostituted to 
the honour of harlots, and the purposes of 
voluptuousness, Licentious pictures are men- 
tioned by ancient writers as a gencral source 
ef corruption, and considered as the first am- 
bush that beset the safety of youth and inno- 
cence.!3 Yet this unhappy effect of the arts 
was only the vapour that accompanies the sun; 
since painting, architecture, and above all, sta- 
tuary, attained their meridian splendour in the 
age of Pericles; and shed peculiar glory on 
this period of Athenian history. not only by the 
powers of genius which they displayed, but by 
the noble purposes to which they were directed. 
But the arts of design form so important a 
subject, that they merit to be examined apart, 
in the following chapter. 


12 Athenwus, ibid. 
13 Euripid. in Hippolyt. 


176 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


History of the Aris of Design—Superiority of the Greeks in those Aris—Causes ef that Supe 
riorttly—A mong the Asiatic Greeks—Who communicated their Inventions to Europe—Bathy- 


cles the Magnesian—Dipenus and Seillis—Imitated in Greece, Italy, and Sicily—The Athe- 


nians surpass their Masters—Sublime Style of Ari—Works of Phidias, Polygnotus, &c.— 
Characteristic Excellence of Grecian Art— Different Impressions made by Painters and Poets— 
Depended on the Nature of their respective Arts. 


THAT the history of arts has been less cul- 

tivated than that of arms and politics, is a 
general and just complaint, to which writers 
will seldom be inclined to pay regard, because 
they will always find it an easier task to relate 
wars and negotiations, debates and battles, 
than to describe the gradual and almost imper- 
ceptible progress of genius and taste, in works 
of elegance and beauty. 

The origin of the imitative! arts (so conge- 
nial is imitation to man) reaches beyond tlhe 
limits of profane history ; and to dispute who 
were their inventors, is only to examine what 
nation is the most ancient. In this respect, the 
Egyptians and Phenicians merit, doubtless, the 
pre-eminence. From the earliest ages of Hea- 
then antiquity, both these nations seem to have 
cultivated the arts of design. In the remotest 
periods of their history, the Egyptians engraved 
on precious stones, and strove to render their 
public transactions immortal, by recording them 
in hieroglyphics, on the hardest bazaltes ; nor 
can we sufficiently admire the perfection to 
which the patience of that laborious people had 
carried the mechanical part of sculpture, before 
the Persian conquest, and the reign of Cam- 
byses. But beauty, the essence and the end of 
art, was never studied by the natives of either 
Phenicia or Egypt, who faithfully copied their 
national features, without attempting to im- 
prove them; until the traces of Grecian con- 
quest and colonization appeared in the medals 
of the Ptolemies, particularly those with the 
head of Jupiter Ammon. 

Allowance, doubtless, must be made for the 
prejudices of national vanity, when Euripides, 
Aristotle, and Epicurus, endeavour to persuade 
us, that the clear skies and happy temperature 
of Greece engendered a peculiar aptitude for 
arts, letters, and philosophy. The testimony, 
however, of modern travellers confirms the 
evidence of antiquity, that the shores and 
islands of the Archipelago produce more ele- 
gant and liberal forms, and features more ani- 
mated and expressive, with fewer individual 
imperfections, and more of general nature, 
than can be found in any other divisions of the 
world.2 Yet whatever the Greeks owed to 
their skies and climate, they were probably not 
less indebted to their active laborious education 
and way of life, and to the manly spirit of 
their religious, civil, and inilitary institutions. 


1 Concerning the arts of the Greeks, the most copious 
materials are furnished by Pausanias throughout; and by 
the 34th and 35th books of Pliny. The best modern guides 
are Winckelman and Lessing in German, and Caylus in 
French Many important errors of Winckelman, are de- 
tected by the learned professor Heine, in his Autiquarishe 
Abhandlungen. 

2 Belon. Observat. I. ii. 34. 


+ 


Long before the invasion of Xerxes, the Gre- 
cian sculpture was distinguished by an air of 
majesty peculiar to itself; and the awful 
images of the gods, as yet rudely finished, dis- 
played a grandeur and sublimity of expression, 
that delighted and astonished the best judges, 
in the most refined ages of art.4 

This singularity might be expected from the 
description already given of the religion and 
manners of Greece, and from the inimitable 
excellence of its poets. The divinities of 
Greece being imagined of the human form, 
though incomparably more noble and perfect, 
artists would naturally begin, at a very early 
period,’ to exalt and generalize their concep- 
tions. The bold enthusiasm of poetry served 
to elevate and support their flight, and the na- 
tive country of Homer was the first scene of 
their success, the happy climate of Ionia ren- 
dering frequent and natural, in that delightful 
region, those beautiful and lovely forms which 
are elsewhere merely ideal, while other cir- 
cumstances concurred to accelerate the pro- 
gress of invention and genius in that highly- 
favoured country. 

In the eighth century before the Christian 
era, the Asiatic colonies, as we already had oc- 
casion to explain, far surpassed their mother 
country in splendour and prosperity. For this 
pre-eminence, they were indebted to the supe- 
rior fertility of their soil, the number and con- 
venience of their harbours, the advantages of 
their situation and climate, the vicinity of the 
most wealthy and refined nations in Asia; 
above all, to their persevering diligence and 
ingenuity, by which they not only improved 
and ennobled the arts derived from the Lydians 
and Phrygians, but invented others long pecu- 
liar to themselves, particularly painting, sculp- 
ture in marble, together with the Doric and 
Ionic orders of architecture. ‘ 

In the seventh century before Christ, the 
magnificent presents which the far-famed oracle 
of Apollo received from the superstition or 
vanity of the Lydian kings, were the produc- 
tions, not of Egyptian or Phenician, but of 
Ionian artists; and, during both that and the 
following century, the Ionians diffused the ele- 
gant inventions of their country through the do- 
minions of their ancestors in Europe. Alarmed 


3 Pausan. Corinth. |. ii. 34. 

4 Plato et Aristot. passim. 

5 We omit the fabulous accounts of Dedalus the Athe- 
nian, who is said to have flourished in the time of Hercules 
and Theseus, and forty years before the Trojan war. It 
has been already proved that, during the heroic ages, the 
Greeks paid no adoration to statues. Athenian wri- 
ters, who lived a thousand years after that period, might 
easily confound the supposed works of the ancient Dedalus 
with those of Dedalus of Sicyon, especially since the error 
was extremely flattering to their national vanity. 


XIV.] 


by the inroads of the Cimmerians, and dıs- 
turbed by the continual hostility of Lydia, 
many Eastern artists sought refuge in the com- 
mercial cities of Ægina, Sicyon, and Corinth, 
where the peaceful spirit of the inhabitants, 
comparatively wealthy and luxurious, afforded 
the Ionian artists both encouragement and se- 
curity. 

The Asiatic fugitives, however, did not con- 
fine themselves to these secondary republics. 
Bathycles, a native of [onian Magnesia, a place 
early celebrated for painting, fixed his abode 
in Sparta, the most considerable community in 
Greece. By order of the magistrates of that 
illustrious republic, he made the throne of 
Amyclean Apollo, the statue of Diana Leu- 
cophryné, the figures of the Graces and Hore, 
and all the other gifts and ornaments inclosed 
within the consecrated ground surrounding the 
temple of Amycle. The statue of Apollo, 
thirty cubits high, seemed to be the work of an 
ignorant sculptor, and probably was the pro- 
duction of a far earlier age than that of Bathy- 
cles. But whoever considers the colossean bulk 
of the principal figure, the base of which was 
formed into an altar, containing the tomb of 
Hyacinth, must admire the proportional mag- 
nitude of his throne, both sides of which were 
adorned with sculpture.’ Among these orna- 
ments, many subjects of history or fable are 
mentioned by Pausanias, which bear no known 
relation to Apollo or Hyacinth, to Bathycles or 
the Spartans; but the top of the throne con- 
tained a cliorus of Magnesians, supposed to 
represent the artists who assisted in the execu- 
tion of this stupendous -vork. The altar re- 
presented a celestial group, Minerva, Venus, 
Diana, and several other divinities, conveying 
Hyacinth to the skies. Its sides were adorned 
with the combat of Tyndareus and Eurytus; 
the exploits of Castor and Pollux; and the ex- 
traordinary scene between Menelaus and the 
Egyptian Proteus, as described in the Odyssey.8 
Nor was this the only subject copied from the 
divine bard. It was easy to distinguish his 
favourite Demodocus singing among a chorus 
of Pheatians ; a circumstance confirming our 
observations in a former part of this work, that 
the poems of Homer were generally known in 
Sparta long before they had been collected by 
the Athenian tyrant Pisistratus. 

Almost six centuries before the Christian era, 
the Cretans, Dipenus and Scillis, adorned many 
Grecian cities in Europe as well as in Asia; 
and about fifty years afterward, the Chians, 
Bupalus and Anthermus, diffused over Greece 
those precious works in Parian marble, which 
were highly admired in the age of Augustus.9 


6 Plin. l. xxxv. I call it Jonian Magnesia, to distinguish 
it from other places of the same name. Vid. Plin. edit. 
Berolin. tom. i. p. 167. et tom. iii. p. 136. 139. et 255. 

7 Winkelman, who scarcely mentions the throne of 
Amyclean Apollo, though undoubtedly the greatest ancient 
monument in Greece, confounds Bathycles the Magnesian, 
with a later artist of the same name, who made the cele- 
brated cup which the seven sages modestly sent one to the 
other, as most worthy of such a present, and which was 
finally consecrated to Delphian Apollo. Diogenes Laer- 
tins, speaking on this subject, says, BeSuxrim tive Aouadas 
and that he was an Arcadian appears also from Plut. in 
Solon. et Causabon, ad Athenxunn, l. xi. 4. 

8 Pausan. Lacon. p. 196, et seq. 

9 Vid. Plin. l. xxxvi. § 4. 

Z 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


177 


About the same time, Polydorus of Samos, who 
seems to have been much employed by Cræsus, 
the last king of Lydia, made the famous ring 
for the Samian tyrant Polycrates, which is ex- 
tolled by Pliny! as a master-piece of art. 

The productions of those Eastern artists 
were imitated with successful emulation by 
their disciples in ancient Greece, and likewise 
by the Grecian colonies in Italy and Sicily ; as 
sufficiently appears from theymedals of those 
last-mentioned countries. These more durable 
monuments, however, can afford but an imper- 
fect idea of the innumerable statues which were 
formed of turf or gravel stone,!! and of various 
kinds of wood. The most estecmed were made 
of ivory, which, like the teeth of other animals, 
calcines under ground ; an unfortunate circum- 
stance for the arts, since, before the invasion 
of Xerxes, Greece could boast a hundred ivory 
statues of the gods, all of a colossean magni- 
tude, and many of them covered with gold.!? 
The white marbles of Paros, together with 
those of Cyprus and Atgina, furnished the chief 
materials for sculpture, before the Athenians 
opened the hard sparkling veins of mount Pon- 
telicus. Ebony, cypress, and other materials, 
were gradually brought into use, in conse- 
quence of the more general diffusion of the art, 
which was destined not only to represent gods 
and heroes, but to commemorate the useful 
merit of illustrious citizens.!3 At the four sacred 
festivals common to the Grecian name, the 
victors in the gymnastic exercises, as well as 
in the musical and poetical entertainments, were 
frequently distinguished by the honour of a 
statue. The scencs of those admired solemni- 
ties thus became the principal repositories of 
sculpture: and thecitiesof Delphi and Olympia, 
in particular, long surpassed the rest of Greece 
in the number and value of their statues, as 
well as in the splendour and magnificence of 
all their other ornaments.!4 

But the time approached when those cities 
themselves were to be eclipsed by the lustre of 
Athens, which, in the course of forty years, 
became the seat not only of opulence, power, 
and politics, but of literature, philosophy, and 
the fine arts, and thenceforth continued to be 
regarded asthe sovcreign of Greccc, rather 
than as tlie capital of the narrow and unfruitful 
territory of Attica. During that memorable 
period, the Athenians, whose circumstances 
had hitherto proved little favourable to the 
progress of taste and elegance, acquired unri- 
valled power and renown. Having disgraced 
the arms, they plundered the wealth of Persia. 
Their valour gave tlem possession of tliose 
maritime provinces of Lower Asia, which were 
justly regarded as the cradle of the arts. Their 
maguanimity and firmness commanded respect 
abroad, and ensured pre-cminence in Greece; 
while, by a rare felicity, their republic, amidst 
this uninterrupted flow of external prospcrity, 
produced men capable to improve the gifts of 
valour or fortune to the solid and permanent 
glory of their country. 

It is difficult to determine whether the dis- 


10 L. xxxvii. § 4. 1l Plut. in Vit. Andoc. 
12 Pausanias. 13 Lucian. Imagin. 
14 Pausanias Phócic. and Eliac. 


178 


cerning encouragement of Pericles was more 
useful in animating the industry of Phidias, or 
the genius of Phidias in seconding the views 
of his illustrious protector. Their congenial 
minds seemed as happily formed for each other, 
as both were admirably adapted to the flour- 
ishing circumstances of their country. In the 
language of Plutarch,} this great minister, whose 
virtues gradually rendered him the master 
of the republic, found Athens well furnished 
with marble, brass, ivory, gold, ebony, and 
cypress, together with all the other materials 
fitted to adorn a city, which, having raised to 
the glory of empire, he wished likewise to ren- 
der the model of elegance. According to the 
popular principles which he professed, he 
deemed it the duty of a statesman to provide 
not merely for the army, the navy, the judges, 
and others immediately employed in the public 
service ; the great body of the people he re- 
garded as the constant and most important 
object of his ministerial care. The immense 
revenues of the state, which had hitherto been 
chiefly squandered in shows and festivals, in 
gaudy ostentation and perishing luxury, he 
directed to objects more solid and durable, 
which, while they embellished the city, might 
exercise the industry and display the talents of 
the citizens. Guided by such motives, he boldly 
opened the treasury, and expended about four 
thousand talents; a sum which then might 
command as much labour as six or seven mil- 
lions sterling in the present age. By this liberal 
encouragement, he animated every art, excited 
every hand,enlivened every exertion,and called 
forth into the public service the whole dexterity, 
skill, and genius of his countrymen ; while the 
motives of gain or glory which he proposed, 
allured from all quarters the most ingenious 
strangers, who readily transported their talents 
to Athens, as to the best market, and most con- 
spicuous theatre. 

But it was the peculiar felicity of Pericles, to 
find Athens provided not only in al! the mate- 
rials of art, but in artists capable of employing 
them to the best advantage. In the inaccurate, 
but often expressive, language of Pliny, sculp- 
ture and painting then first arose, under the 
plastic hands of Phidias and his brother Pane- 
nus. Both arts, however, are known to have 
flourished at an earlier period; but in the age 
of Pericles, they assumed more elevation and 
majesty. The inventive genius of man tried a 
new and nobler flight. The superiority of Phi- 
dias and his contemporaries obscured, and 
almost obliterated, the memory of their pre- 
decessors, and produced that sublime style of 
art, which, having flourished about a hundred 
and fifty years, decayed with the glory of 
Greece, and disappeared soon after the reign 
of Alexander. 

It appears from the gems and medals, and 
the few remains in marble, preceding the age 
of Pericles, that the mechanical part of engrav- 
ing and sculpture had already attained a high 
degree of perfection. In many of those works, 
the minutest ornaments are finished with care, 
the muscles are boldly pronounced, the outline 


1 Plut. in Pericle. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


is faithful; but the design has more hardness 
than energy, the attitudes are too constrained 
to be graceful, and the strength of the expres- 
sion distorts, and for the most part destroys, 
beauty. The sculptors Phidias, Polycletus, 
Scopas, Alcamenes, and Myron, together with 
the contemporary painters, Panænus, Zeuxis, 
and Parrhasius, softened the asperities of their 
predecessors,’ rendered their contours more 
natural and flowing, and by employing greater 
address to conceal the mechanism of their art, 
displayed superior skill to the judgment, and 
afforded higher delight to the fancy, in propor- 
tion as less care and labour appeared visible to 
the eye. In the works of those admired artists, 
the expression was skilfully diffused through 
every part, without disturbing the harmony of 
the whole. Pain and sorrow were rather con- 
centrated in the soul than displayed on the 
countenance; and even the more turbulent 
passions of indignation, anger, and resentment, 
were so tempered and ennobled, that the indi- 
cations of them became consistent with the 
sublimest grace and beauty. But the triumph 
of art consisted in representing and recom- 
mending the social affections; for, setting aside 
the unwarranted assertions of Pliny, in his pre- 
tended epochs of painting, it appears from much 
higher authority, that as early as the age of 
Socrates, painters had discerned and attained 
that admired excellence of style, which has 
been called in modern times the manner of Ra- 
phael; and had learned to express, by the out- 
ward air, attitude, and features, whatever (in 
the words of Xenophon?) is most engaging, 
affectionate, sweet, attractive, and amiable, in 
the inward sentiments and character. Of these 
Grecian paintings, indeed, which were chiefiy 
on wood, and other perishing materials, no ves- 
tige remains; but the statuary of that cele- 
brated age, while it displays its own excellence, 
is sufficient to redeem from oblivion (as far at 
least as invention, expression, and ideal beauty, 
are concerned) the obliterated charms of the 
sister art. 

In statuary, the superior merit 


Olymp. of Phidias was acknowledged by 
lxxxiil. 4. h : ie sae pe 
A. C. 445. the unanimous admiration of inde- 


pendent and rival communities. 
Intrusted by Pericles with the superintendence 
of the public works, his own hands added to 
them their last and most valuable ornaménts. 
Before he was called to this honourable em- 
ployment, his statues had adorned the most 
celebrated temples of Greece. His Olympian 
Jupiter we had already occasion to describe. In 
the awful temple of Delphi, strangers admired 
his bronze statues of Apollo and Diana. He 
likewise made for the Delphians a group of 
twelve Grecian heroes, surrounding a figure of 
brass, that represented the Trojan horse. His 
admired statue of the goddess Nemesis, or Ven- 
geance, was formed from a block of marble, 
which the vain confidence of the Persians 
transported to Marathon for a trophy of victory, 
but which their disgraceful and precipitate 


2 Plut. in Pericle et Quintilian, l. xii. c. x. p. 578. ‘ 
3 See the conversation of Socrates with the painter 
Parrhasius, in Memorab. l. iii. 


XIV.] 


flight left for a monument of their cowardice 
on the Marathonian shore. The grateful piety 
of Greece adored his Venus Urania, and Par- 
thenopean Apollo. His three Mincrvas were 
respectively made for the Pallenians, Plateans, 
and Lemnians, and all three presented by those 
tributary states to their Athenian protectors 
and sovereigns. These inimitable works silenced 
the voice of envy. The most distinguished artists 
of Greece, sculptors, painters, and architects, 
hae were ambitious to receive the direc- 
45 5—430 tions, and to second the labours, of 
* Phidias, which were uninterrupt- 
edly employed, during fifteen years, in the em- 
bellishment of his native city. 

During that short period he completed the 
Odeum, or theatre of music; the Parthenon, or 
temple of Minerva; the Propylæa or vestibule, 
and porticoes belonging to the citadel, together 
with the sculptured and picturesque ornaments 
of these and other immortal works; which, when 
new (as Plutarch finely observes,) expressed 
the mellowed beauties of time and maturity, 
and when old, still preserved the fresh charms 
and alluring graces of novelty. The Parthenon, 
which still remains, attests the justice of this 
panegyric. It is two hundred and seventeen 
feet nine inches long, composed of beautiful 
white marble, and acknowledged by modern 
travellers’ to be the noblest picce of antiquity 
existing in the world. It appears at first sight 
extraordinary, that the expense of two thou- 
sand talents should have been bestowed on the 
Propylea.5 But we must consider, that this 
extensive name comprehended the temple of 
Minerva, the treasury, and other public edi- 
fices. 

The Pæcile, or diversified portico, which was 
painted by Panænus, the brother of Phidias, 
assisted by Polygnotus and Micon, must have 
been a work of great time and expense. Its 
front and ceilings were of marble, like those 
of all the other porticoes leading to the citadel, 
which still remained in the time of Pausanias, 
and were regarded, both on account of the 
workmanship and materials, as superior to any 
thing extant. In the Pæcile, those great paint- 
ers, whose merit Pliny§ forgets in his inaccu- 
rate epochs of art, had represented the most 
illustrious events of Grecian history; the vic- 
tory of Theseus over the Amazons, the sacking 
of Troy, and particularly the recent exploits 
against the Persians. In the battle of Mara- 
thon, the Athenian and Platæan heroes were 
drawn from the life, or more probably from the 
innumerable statues which preserved the faith- 
ful lineaments of those illustrious patriots. The 
whole extent of the Acropolis, above six miles 
in circumference, was so diversified by works 
of painting and statuary, that it became one 
continued scene of elegance and beauty. 

But all these ornaments were surpassed by 
one production of Phidias, which probably was 
the last of that great master: his admired statue 
of Minerva, the erccting of which served to 
consecrate the Parthenon, was composed of 


4 Sir George Wheeler’s Travels, &c. 

5 Plutarch. in Pericle, et Demosth. p. 71. 

6 He places the first epoch of great painters in the 20th 
Olymp. A. C. 420. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


179 


gold and ivory, twenty-six cubits high, being 
of inferior dimensions to his Minerva Poliades 
of bronze, the spear and crest of which was 
seen from the promontory of Sunium,’ at 
twenty-five miles distance. Parrhasius had 
painted the ornaments of the latter,’ Phidias 
himself adorned every part of the former; and, 
the compliment which, in this favourite work, 
he took an opportunity of paying to the merit 
of Pericles, occasioned (as we shall have occa- 
sion to explain?) his own banishment, a dis- 
grace which he seems not to have long sur- 
vived. Cicero, Plutarch, Pliny, and Pausanias, 
had seen and admired this invaluable monu- 
ment of piety, as well as genius, since the 
Minerva of Phidias increased the devotion of 
Athens towards her protecting divinity. It be- 
longs only to those who have seen and studied, 
to describe such master-pieces of art; and as 
they exist no more, it will better suit the design 
of this history, to confine ourselves to such 
works as we ourselves have seen, and which 
are generally acknowledged to bear the impres- 
sion of the Socratic age, when philosophy gave 
law to painting and sculpture, as well as to 
poetry and eloquence. 

Were it allowed to make the melancholy 
supposition, that all the monuments of Grecian 
literature had perished in the general wreck 
of their nation and liberty, and that posterity 
could collect nothing farther concerning that 
celebrated people, but what appeared from the 
Apollo Belvidere, the groupes of the Laocoon 
and Niobé, and other statues, gems, or medals, 
now scattered over Italy and Europe, what 
opinion would mankind form of the genius and 
character of the Greeks? would it correspond 
with the impressions made by their poets, ora- 
tors, and historians? which impression would 
be most favourable? and what would be the 
precise difference between them? The solution 
of these questions will throw much light on the 
present subject. 

The first observation that occurs on the most 
superficial, and that is strongly confirmed by a 
more attentive, survey of tlie ancient marbles, 
is, that their authors perfectly understood pro- 
portion, anatomy, the art of clothing, without 
concealing the naked figure, and whatever con- 
tributes to the justness and truth of design. 
The exact knowledge of form is as necessary 
to the painter or statuary, whose business it is 
to represent bodies, as that of language to the 
poet or historian, who undertakes to describe 
actions. In this particular, it would be unneces- 
sary to institute a comparison between Grecian 
writers and artists, since they are both allowed 
as perfect in their respective kinds as the con- 
dition of humanity renders possible. 

But when we advance a step farther, and 
consider the expression of passions, sentiments, 
and character, we find an extraordinary differ- 
ence, or rather contrariety. Homer, Sophocles, 
and Demosthencs, are not only the most origi- 
nal, but the most animated and glowing, of all 
writers. Every sentence is energetic; all the 
parts are in motion; the passions are described 


7 Pausanias Attic. 


8 Idem, ibid, 
9 Plutarch. in Pericl. et Thucydid. 1. ii. r 


180 


in their utmost fury, and expressed by the 
boldest words and gestures. To keep to the 
tragic poet, whose art approaches the nearest 
to painting and sculpture, the heroes, and even 
the gods of Sophocles, frequently display the 
impetuosity of the most ungoverned natures ; 
an, what is still more extraordinary, sometimes 
betray a momentary weakness, extremely in- 
consistent with their general character. The 
rocks of Lemnos resound with the cries of Phi- 
loctetes ; Gidipus, yielding to despair, plucks out 
his eyes ; even Hercules, the model of fortitude, 
sinks under the impressions of pain or sorrow. 

Nothing can be more opposite to the conduct 
of Grecian artists. They likewise have repre- 
sented Philoctetes; but, instead of effeminate 
tears and lamentations, have given him the pa- 
tient concentrated wo of a suffering hero. The 
furious Ajax of Timomaclius was painted, not 
in the moment when he destroyed the harmless 
sheep instead of the hostile Greeks, but after 
he had committed this mad deed, and when his 
rage having subsided, he remained, likc the sea 
after a storm, surrounded with the scattered 
fragments of mangled carcases, and reflecting 
with the silent anguish of despair on his useless 
and frantic brutality. The revenge of Medea 
against her husband was not represented, as in 
Euripides, butchering her innocent children, 
but while she was still wavering and irreso- 
lute, agitated between resentment and pity. 
Even Clytemnestra, whose unnatural, intrepid 
cruelty, poets and historians had so indignantly 
described and arraigned, was not deemed a 
proper subject for the pencil, when imbruing 
her hands in the blood of Agamemnon. And 
although this may be referred to a rule of Aris- 
totle, “that the characters of women should not 
be represented as too daring or decisive;” yet 
we shall find on examination that it results 
from principles of nature, whose authority is 
still more universal and indispensable. The 
consideration of the Apollo, Niobé, and Lao- 
coon, whose copies have been infinitely multi- 
plied, and are familiarly known, will set this 
matter in the clearest point of view. 

The Apollo Belvidere is universally felt and 
acknowledged to be the sublimest figure that 
either skill can execute, or imagination con- 
ceive. That favourite divinity, whom ancient 
poets seem peculiarly fond of describing in the 
warmest colours,! is represented in the attitude 
of darting the fatal arrow against the serpent 
Pytho, or the giant Tityus. Animated by the 
noblest conception of heavenly powers, the 
artist has far outstepped the perfections of hu- 
manity, and (if we may speak without irre- 
verence) made the corrupt put on incorrup- 
tion, and the mortal immortality. His stature 
is above the human, his attitude majestic; the 
Elysian spring of youth softens the manly 
graces of his person, and the bold structure of 
his limbs. Disdain sits on his lips, and indig- 
nation swells his nostrils; but an unalterable 
serenity invests his front, and the sublime elc- 
vation of his aspect aspires at deeds of renown 
still surpassing the present object of his victory. 

The irascible passions are not represented 


1 Horace, b. iii. ode 4. ver. 60, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


with more dignity in the Apollo, than are 
those of fear, terror, and consternation, in the 
Niobé. This group contained Niobé and her 
husband Amphion, with seven sons, and as 
many daughters. Their melancholy story, 
which is too well known? to be related here, 
required the deepest expression ; and the genius 
of the artist has chosen the only moment when 
this expression could be rendered consistent 
with the highest beauty; a beauty not flatter- 
ing the senses by images of pleasure, but trans- 
porting the fancy into regions of purity and 
virtue. The excess and suddenness of their 
disaster, occasioned a degree of amazement and 
horror, which, suspending the faculties, involv- 
ed them in that silence and insensibility, which 
neither breaks out in lamentable shrieks, nor 
distorts the countenance, but which leaves full 
play to the artists skill to represent motion 
without disorder, or, in other words, to render 
expression graceful. 

The Laocoon may be regarded as the tri- 
umph of Grecian sculpture; since bodily pain, 
the grossest and most ungovernable of all our 
passions, and that pain urited with anguish 
and torture of mind, are yet expressed with 
such propriety and dignity, as afford lessons 
of fortitude superior to any taught in schools 
of philosophy. The horrible shriek which Vir- 
gil’s Laocoon? emits, is a proper circumstance 
for poetry, which speaks to the fancy by images 
and ideas borrowed from all the senses, and 
has a thousand ways of ennobling its object; 
but the expression of this shriek would have 
totally degraded the statue. It is softened, 
therefore, into a patient sigh, with eyes turned 
to heaven in search of relief. The intolerable 
agony of suffering nature is represented in the 
lower part, and particularly in the extremities, 
of the body; but the manly breast struggles 
against calamity. The contention is still more 
plainly perceived in his furrowed forehead; and 
his languishing paternal eye demands assist- 
ance, less for himself, than for his miserable 
children, who look up to him for help. 

If subects of this nature are expressed with- 
out appearing hideous, shocking, or disgust- 
ful, we may well suppose that niore temperate 
passions are represented with the greatest mo- 
deration and dignity. The remark is justified 
by examining the remains or imitations of 
Grecian art; and were we to deduce from 
these alone the character of the nation, it 
would seem at first sight, that the contempo- 
raries of Pericles must have been a very supe 
rior people in point of fortitude, self-command, 
and every branch of practical philosophy, to 
the Athenians who are described by poets and 
historians. 

But when we consider the matter more 
decply, we shall find that it is the business of 
history to describe men as they are; of poetry 
and painting, to represent them as may afford 
most pleasure and instruction to the reader or 
spectator. The aim of these imitative arts is 
the same, but they differ widely in the mode, 
the object, and extent of their imitation. The 


2 Ovid Metamorph. l. vi. ver. 146, et seq. 
C) 


XV] 


poet who describes actions in time, may carry 
the reader through all the gradations of pas- 
sion, and display his genius most powerfully 
in its most furious excess. But the painter or 
statuary, who represents bodies in space, is 
confined to one moment, and must choose that 
which leaves the freest play to the imagination. 
This can seldom be the highest pitch of pas- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 181 


sion, which leaves nothing beyond it; and in 
contemplating which, the sympathy of the 
spectator, after his first surprise subsides, can 
only descend into indifference. Every violent 
situation, moreover, is felt not to be lasting; 
and all extreme perturbation is inconsistent 
with beauty, without which no visible object 
can long attract or please.’ 


CHAPTER XV. 


Causes of the Peloponnesian War—Rupture between Corinth and its Colony Corcyra—Sea 
Fights—Insolence and Cruelty of the Corcyreans—They provoke the Resentment of the Pelo- 
ponnesians—Obtain the protection of Athens—Are defeated by the Corinthians—Who dread 
the Resentment of Athens—Their Scheme for rendering it impotent—Description of the Ma- 
cedonian Coast—It revolts from Athens—Siege of Potidwa-—General Confederacy against 
Athens—Peloponnesian Embassy—lIts demands firmly answered by Pericles—His speech to 
the Athenians--The Thebans surprise Platea—Preparations for War on both Sides—Invasion 
of Attica-—Operations of the Athenian Fleet—Plague in Athens—Calamitous Situation of 
that Republic—Magnanimity of Pericles—Firmness of his last advice—His Death and 


Character. 


BY the lustre of the elegant arts, the mag- 

nificence of Pericles had displayed and 
ennobled the military glory of his country ; 
and the pre-eminence of Athens seemed im- 
moveably established on the solid foundation 
of internal strength, adorned by external splen- 
dour. But this abundant measure of prospe- 
rity satisfied neither the active ambition of the 
republic, nor the enterprising genius of its 
minister. The Greeks beheld and admired, 
but had not yet formally acknowledged, the 
full extent of Athenian greatness. In order 
to extort this reluctant confession, than which 
nothing could more firmly secure to him the 
affectionate gratitude of his fellow-citizens, 
Pericles despatched ambassadors to the repub- 
lics and colonies in Europe and in Asia, re- 
quiring the presence of their deputies in Athens, 
to concert measures for rebuilding their ruined 
temples, and for performing the solemn vows 
and sacrifices promised, with devout thankful- 
ness, to the immortal gods, who had wonder- 
fully protected the Grecian arms, during their 
long and dangerous conflict with the Persian 
empire. This proposal, which tended to ren- 
der Athens the common centre of deliberation 
and of union, was readily accepted in such 
foreign parts as had already submitted to the 
authority of that republic. Butin neighbour- 
ing states, the ambassadors of Pericles were 
received coldly, and treated disrespectfully ; in 
most assemblies of the Peloponnesus they were 
neard with secret disgust, and the pride of the 
Spartan senate openly derided the insolence of 
their demands. When at their return home, 
they explained the behaviour of the Spartans, 
Pericles exclaimed, in his bold style of elo- 


4 This subject is admirably treated in Lessing’s Laocoon, 
in which he traces the bounds of painting and poetry: a 
work which, :t is much to be regretted, that great genius 
did not finigh. 


quence, that he “beheld war advancing with 
wide and rapid steps from the Peloponnesus.”5 
Such was the preparation of materials which 
the smallest spark might throw into combus- 
tion. But before we relate the events which 
immediately occasioned the memorable war of 
twenty-seven years, it is impossible (it the 
calamities of our own times have taught us to 
compassionate the miserable) not to drop a tear 
over the continual disasters which so long and 
so cruelly afflicted the most valuable and en- 
lightened portion of mankind, and whose im- 
mortal genius was destined to enlighten the 
remotest ages of the world. When rude, illi- 
terate peasants are summoned to mutual hos- 
tility, and, unaffected by personal motives of 
interest or honour, expend their strength and 
blood to gratify the sordid ambition of their 
respective tyrants, we may lament the general 
stupidity and wretchedness of human nature; 
but we cannot heartily sympathize with men 
who have so little sensibility, nor very deeply 
and feelingly regret, that those should suffer 
pain, who seem both unwilling and incapable 
to relish pleasure. Their heavy unmeaning 
aspect, their barbarous language, and more 
barbarous manners, together with their total 
indifference to the objects and pursuits. which 
form the dignity and glory of man; these cir- 
cumstances, interrupting the ordinary course 
of our sentiments, divert or repel the natural 
current of sympathy. Their victories or de- 
feats are contemplated without emotion, coldly 
related, and read without interest or concern, 
But the war of Peloponnesus presents a differ- 
ent spectacle. The adverse parties took arms, 
not to support the unjust pretensions of a ty 
rant, whom they had reason to hate or to de 
spise, but to vindicate their civil rights, and to 
inaintain their political independence. The 


ð Plut. in Pericle. 


182 


meanest Grecian soldier knew the duties of the 
citizen, the magistrate, and the general.! His 
life had been equally divided between the most 
agreeable amusements of leisure, and the most 
‘honourable employments of activity. ‘Trained 
to those exercises and accomplishments which 
give strength and agility to the limbs, beauty to 
the shape, and grace to the motions, the dignity 
of his external appearance announced the libe- 
ral greatness of his mind: and his language, 
the most harmonious and expressive ever 
spoken by man, comprehended all that variety 
of conception, and all those shades of senti- 
ment, that characterize the most exalted per- 
fection of human manners. 

Ennobled by such actors, the scene itself was 
highly important, involving not only the states 
of Greece, but the greatest of the neighbouring 
kingdoms; and, together with the extent of a 
foreign war, exhibiting the intenseness of do- 
mestic sedition. As it exceeded the ordinary 
duration of human power or resentment, it 
was accompanied with unusual circumstances 
of terror, which, to the pious credulity of an 
unfortunate age, naturally announced the 
wrath of heaven, justly provoked by human 
cruelty. Whilst pestilence and famine multi- 
plied the actual sufferings, eclipses and earth- 
quakes increased the consternation and horror 
of that lamentable period.2 Several warlike 
communities were expelled from their here- 
ditary possessions ; others were not only driven 
from Greece, but utterly extirpated from the 
earth; some fell a prey to party-rage, others to 
the vengeance of foreign enemies; some were 
slowly exhausted by the contagion of a malig- 
nant atmosphere, others overwhelmed at once 
by sudden violence; while the combined 
weight of calamity assailed the power of 
Athens, and precipitated the downfal of that 
republic from the pride of prosperous dominion 
to the dejection of dependence and misery.? 
The general, but latent hostility 


a of the Greeks, of which we have 
AC. 439 already explained the cause, was 


first called into action by a rup- 
ture between the ancient republic of Co- 
rinth, and its flourishing colony Corcyra. 
The haughty disdain of Corcyra, elated with 
the pride of wealth and naval greatness, had 
long denied and scorned those marks of de- 


1 Such is the testimony uniformly given of them in the 
panegyric of Athens by Isocrates, and confirmed by the 
more impartial authority of Xenophon, in the expedition 
of Cyrus. Their exploits in that wonderful enterprise 
justify the highest praise; and yet the national character 
had rather degenerated than improved, in the long interval 
between the periods alluded to. 

2 Thucydid. l. i. p. 16. et seq. 

3 For the Peloponnesian war we have not, indeed, a full 
stream of history, but a regular series of annals in Thucy- 
dides and Xenophon; authors of whom each might say, 

Quaæque inse miserrima vidi, 

Et quorum pars magna fui: 
Many material circumstances may likewise be learned from 
the Greek orators; the writings of Plato and Aristotle, the 
comedies of Aristophanes, the twelfth and two following 
books of Diodorus Siculus, and Plutarch’s Lives of Peri- 
cles, Nicias, Alcibiades, Lysander, and Agesilaus. It is 
remarkable, that the heavy compiler, as well as the lively 
hiographer, have both followed the long lost works of 
Ephorus and Theopompus, in preference to those of Thu- 
cydides and Xenophon; a circumstance which strongly 
marks their want of judgment, but which renders their in- 
formation more interesting to posterity. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


ference and respect which the uniform practice 

of Greece exacted from colonies towards their 

mother country. At the Olympic and other 

solemn festivals, they yielded not the place of 

honour to the’Corinthians; they appointed not 

a Corinthian high-priest to preside over their 

religion; and when they established new set- 

tlements on distant coasts, they requested not," 
as usual with the Greeks, the auspicious guid- 

ance of a Corinthian conductor. 

While the ancient metropolis, incensed by 
those instances of contempt, longed for an op- 
portunity to punish them, the citizens of Epi- 
damnus, the most considerable sea-port on the 
coast of the Hadriatic, craved assistance at 
Corinth against the barbarous incursions of the 
Taulantii, an Illyrian tribe, who, having united 
with a powerful band of Epidamnian exiles, 
greatly infested that territory, and threatened 
to storm the city. As Epidamnus was a colony 
of Corcyra, its distressed inhabitants had first 
sought protection there; but although their 
petition was preferred with respectful deference, 
and urged with the most affecting demonstra- 
tion of abasement and calamity, by ambassa- 
dors who long remained under the melan- 
choly garb of supplicants in the temple of 
Corcyrean Juno, the proud insensibility of 
these intractable islanders showed not the 
smallest inclination to relieve them; partly 
restrained, it is probable, by the secret prac- 
tices of the Epidamnian exiles, consisting of 
some of the principal and richest families of 
that maritime republic. The Corinthians 
readily embraced the cause of a people aban- 
doned by their natural protectors, and their 
own inveterate enemies; and immediately sup- 
plied Epidamnus with a considerable body of 
troops, less with a view to defend its walls 
against the assaults of the Taulantii, than in 
order irrecoverably to detach and alienate its 
inhabitants from the interest of Corcyra. 
Olymp. The indignation of the Corcy- 
Ixxxvi, 2, Teans was inflamed into fury, when 
A. C. 435 they understood that those whom 

coe" they had long affected to consider 
as aliens and as rivals, had interfered in the 
affairs of their colony. They instantly launch- 
ed a fleet of forty sail, proceeded in hostile array 
to the harbour of Epidamnus, summoned the 
inhabitants to re-admit their exiles,and to expel 
the foreign troops. With such unconditional 
and arbitrary demands, the weakest and most 
pusillanimous garrison could scarcely be sup- 
posed to comply. The Epidamnians rejected 
them with scorn; in consequence of which their 
city was invested and attacked with vigour, 
by land and sea. The Corinthians were now 
doubly solicitous, both to defend the place, and 
to protect the troops already thrown into it, 
consisting partly of their Leucadian and Am- 
bracian allies, but chiefly of Corinthian citi- 
zens. <A proclamation, first published at Co- 
rinth, was industriously disseminated through 
Greece, inviting all who were unhappy at 
home, or who courted glory abroad, to under- 
take an expedition to Epidamnus, with assu- 


4 Schol. in Thucydid. ad locum. He mentions the other cir- 
cumstances which I have introduced into the text, and which 
will afterwards be confirmed by more classic authority. 


XV.] 


-ance of enjoying the immunities"and honours 
of a republic whose safety they had ventured 
to defend. Many exiles and military adven- 
turers, at all times profusely scattered over 
Greece, obeyed the welcome summons. Pub- 
lic assistance, likewise, was obtained, not only 
from Thebes and Megara, but from several 
states of the Peloponnesus. In this manner the 
Corinthians were speedily enabled to fit out an 
armament of seventy-five sail; which, directing 
its course toward Epidamnus, anchored in the 
Ambracian gulf, near the friendly harbour of 
Actium, where, in a future age, Augustus and 
Antony decided the empire of the Roman world. 
Near this celebrated scene of action, the im- 
petuous Corcyreans hastened to meet the enemy. 
Forty ships were employed in the siege of Epi- 
damnus. Twice that number sailed towards 
the Ambracian gulf. The hostile armaments 
fought with equal animosity; but the Corcy- 
reans far surpassed in bravery and skill. Fif- 
teen Corinthian vessels were destroyed; the rest 
escaped in disorder, and the decisive battle was 
soon followed by the surrender of Epidamnus. 
By aclemency little expected from the victors, 
the ancient inhabitants of the place were allow- 
ed their lives and liberties; but the Corinthians 
were made prisuners of war, and their allies 
condemned to death. 

The Corcyreans thanked their gods, and 
erected a conspicuous trophy of victory on the 
promontory of Leucimné, whose lofty ridges 
A.C overlooked the distant scene of the 
434—433. engagement. Daring the two fol- 

lowing years they reigned undis- 
turbed masters of the neighbouring seas; and 
though a principle of fear, or perhaps a faint 
remnant of respect towards their ancient metro- 
polis, prevented them from invading the terri- 
tory of Corinth, they determined to make the 
confederates of that republic feel the full weight 
of their vengeance. For this purpose they ra- 
vaged the coast of Appollonia; plundered the 
city Ambracia; almost desolated the peninsula, 
now the island of Leucas; and, emboldened by 
success, ventured to land in the Peloponnesus, 
and set fire to the harbour of Cyllene, because 
in the late sea-fight the Elians, to whom that 
place belonged, had supplied Corinth with a 
few galleys. 5 

The southern states of Greece, highly pro- 
voked by this outrage to the peaceable Elians, 
whose religious character had long commanded 
general respect, were still farther incensed by 
the active resentment of the Corinthians, who, 
exasperated at the disgrace of being vanquished 
by one of their own colonies, had, ever since 
their defeat, bent their whole attention, and 
employed the greatest part even of their pri- 
vate fortunes, to hire mercenaries, to gain al- 
lies, and espetially to equip a new fleet, that 
they might be enabled to chastise the impious 
audacity (as they called it) of their rebellious 
children.® 

The magistrates of Corcyra saw and dreaded 
the tempest that threatened to burst on them, 
and which the unassisted strength of their island 
was totally unable to resist. They had not 


5 Thucydid. |. i. p. 22. et seq. 
6 Idem, ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


183 


taken part in the late wars; they had not ac- 
ceded to the last treaty of peace; they could not 
summon the aid of a single confederate. In this 
difficulty they sent ambassadors to Athens, well 
knowing the secret animosity between that re- 
public and the enemies by whom their own 
safety was endangered. The Corinthians like- 
wise sent ambassadors to defeat their purpose. 
Both were allowed a hearing in the Athenian 
assembly ; but first the Corcyreans, who in a 
studied oration, acknowledged, “ that having 
no previous claim of merit to urge, they expect- 
ed not success in their negotiation, unless an al- 
liance between Athens and Corcyra should ap- 
pear alike advantageous to those who proposed, 
and to those who accepted it. Of this the Athe- 
nians would immediately become sensible, if 
they reflected that the people of Peloponnesus 
being equally hostile to both (the open enemies 
of Corcyra, the secret and more dangerous ene- 
mies of Athens,) their country must derive a 
vast accession of strength by receiving, without 
trouble or expense, a rich and warlike island, 
which, unassisted and alone, had defeated a nu- 
merous confederacy; and whose naval force, 
augmenting the fleet of Athens, would for ever 
render that republic sovereign of the seas. If the 
Corinthians complained of the injustice of re- 
ceiving their colony, let them remember, that 
colonies are preserved by moderation, and alien- 
ated by oppression; that men settle in foreign 
parts to better their situation, not to. submit 
their liberties; to continue the equals, not to 
become the slaves of their less adventurous fel- 
low-citizens. If they pretended, that the de- 
mand of Corcyra was inconsistent with the last 
general treaty of peace, let the words of that 
treaty confound them, which expressly declare 
every Grecian city, not previously bound to 
follow the standard of Athens or of Sparta, at 
full liberty to accede to the alliance of either 
of those powers.’ But it became the dignity of 
Athens to expect honour and safety, not from 
the punctilious observance of a slippery con- 
vention, but from the manly and prompt vi- 
gour of her councils. It suited the renowned 
wisdom of a republic, which had ever antici- 
pated her enemies, to prevent the fleet of Cor- 
cyra from falling a prey to that confederacy, 
with whose inveterate envy she herself must be 
soon called to contend; and to merit the use- 
ful gratitude of an island possessing other va- 
luable advantages, and most conveniently situ- 
ate for intercepting the Sicilian and Italian 
supplies, which, in the approaching and inevita- 
ble war, would otherwise so powerfully assist 
their Doric ancestors of Peloponnesus.”’ 

The Corinthians indirectly answered this dis- 
course by inveighing, with great bitterness, 
against the unexampled insolence and unnatur- 
al cruelty of Corcyra : “That infamous island 
had hitherto declined counection with every 
Grecian state, that she might carry on her pi- 
ratical depredations unobserved, and alone en- 
joy the spoil of the unwary mariners who ap- 
proached her inhospitable shores. Rendered at 
once wealthy and wicked by this inhuman 


T Eseyras yuo sv mutes, Twy EAAyvidwv woAtwy rie 
pyðxuou Fummeryer, sksives wee’ OTOTEpOIG av eperxyrece 
sAGesv. The oworegoss justifies the paraphraso in the text 


184 


practice, the Corcyreans had divested them- 
selves of all piety and gratitude towards their 
mother country, and imbrued their parricidal 
hands in their parent’s blood. Their auda- 
city having provoked a late vengeance, which 
they were unable to repel, they unseason- 
ably sought protection from Athens, desiring 
those who were not accomplices of their in- 
justice to participate their danger, and deluding 
them through the vain terror of contingent evil, 
into certain and immediate calamity ; for such 
must every war be regarded, its event being 
always destructive, often fatal. The Corcy- 
reans vainly chicaned as to words; Athens, it 
was clear, must violate the sense and spirit of 
the last treaty of peace, if she assisted the ene- 
mies of any contracting power. These fierce 
islanders acknowledged themselves a colony of 
Corinth, but pretended that settlements abroad 
owe nothing to those who established them, to 
those whose fostering care reared their infancy, 
from whose blood they sprung, by whose arms 
they have been defended. We affirm, on the 
contrary, (and appeal to you, Athenians! who 
have planted so many colonies,) that the mo- 
ther country is entitled to that authority which 
the Corcyreans have long spurned, to that re- 
spect which their insolence now refuses and 
disdains: that it belongs to us, their metropolis, 
to be their leaders in war, their magistrates in 
peace; nor can you, Athenians! oppose our 
just pretensions, and protect our rebellious co- 
lony, without setting an example most danger- 
ous to yourselves.” 

These sensible observations made a deep im- 
pression on the moderate portion of the assem- 
bly; but the speech of the Corcyreans was 
more congenial to the ambitious views of the 
republic, and the daring spirit of Pericles. He 
wished, however, to avoid the dishonour of 
manifestly violating the peace, and therefore 
advised his countrymen to conclude with Cor- 
cyra, not a general or complete alliance, but 
only a treaty of defence, which, in case of in- 
vasion, obliged the two states reciprocally to 
assist each other. 

This agreement was no sooner 


pa 1 ratified than ten Athenian ships re- 
A.C 439 inforced the fleets of Corcyra, sta- 


tioned on the eastern coast of the 
island; because the Corinthians, with their 
numerous allies, already rendezvoused on the 
opposite shore of Epirus. The hostile arma- 
ments met in line of battle, near the small isl- 
ands Sibota, which seem anciently to have been 
separated from the continent by the impetuosity 
of the deep and narrow sea between Epirus and 
Corcyra. The bold islanders, with a hundred 
and ten sail, furiously attacked the superior 
fleet of the Corinthians, which was divided 
into three squadrons; the Megareans and Am- 
bracians on the right, the Elians and other allies 
in the centre, their own ships on the left, which 
composed the principal strength of their line. 
The narrowness of the strait, and the immense 
number of ships (far greater than had ever as- 
sembled in former battles between the Greeks,) 
soon rendered it impossible, on either side, to 
display any superiority in sailing, or any ad- 
dress in maneuvre. The action was irregular 


. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


and tumultdous, and maintained with more 
firmness and vigour than naval skill. The nu- 
merous troops, both heavy and light-armed, who 
were placed on the decks, advanced, engaged, 
grappled, and fought with obstinate valour ; 
while the ships, continuing motionless and inac- 
tive, made a sea-fight resemble a pitched bat- 
tle. At length, twenty Corcyrean galleys, hav- 
ing broken the left wing of the enemy, and 
pursued them to the coast of Epirus, injudi- 
ciously landed there to burn or plunder the 
Corinthian camp. 

This inessential service too much weakened 
the smaller fleet, and rendered the inequality 
decisive. The Corcyreans were defeated with 
great slaughter, their incensed adversaries dis- 
regarding plunder and prisoners, and only 
thirsting for blood and revenge. In the blind- 
ness of their rage they destroyed many of their 
fellow citizens, who had been captured by the 
enemy in the beginning of the engagement. 
Nor was their loss of ships inconsiderable ; thir- 
ty were sunk, and the rest so much shattered. 
that when they endeavoured to pursue the fee- 
ble remains of the Corcyrean fleet, which hac 
lost seventy galleys, they were effectually pre- 
vented from executing this design by the smal! 
Athenian squadron, which, according tc its in- 
structions from the republic, had taken no 
share in the battle, but, agreeably to the re- 
cent treaty between Athens and Corcyra, hin- 
dered the total destruction of their allies, first 
by hostile threats, at length by actual resist- 
ance. 

The Corinthians having dragged up their 
wreck, and recovered the bodies of their slain, 
refitted on the coast of Epirus, and hastened to 
Corcyra; considerably off which they beheld 
the enemy reinforced, and drawn up in line of 
battle, in order to defend their coast. They ad- 
vanced, however, with intrepidity, till, to their 
surprise and terror, they perceived an unknown 
fleet pressing towards them. This new appear 
ance shook their resolution, and made them 
change their course. The Corcyreans, whose 
situation at first prevented them from seeing 
the advancing squadron, were astonished at the 
sudden retreat of the enemy; but when they 
discovered its cause, their uncertainty and 
fears, increased by their late afflicting calamity, 
made them prefer the safest measure. They 
also turned their prows; and, while the Corin- 
thians retired to Epirus, pressed in an opposite 
direction to Corcyra. There, to their inexpres- 
sible joy, not unmixed with shame, they were 
joined by the unknown fleet, consisting of 
twenty Athenian galleys; a reinforcement 
which enabled them, next morning, to brave 
the late victorious armament off the coast of 
Sibota, a deserted harbour of Epirus, opposite 
to the small islands of the same name. 

The Corinthians, unwilling to contend with 
the unbroken vigour of their new opponents, 
despatched a brigantine with the following re- 
monstrance: “ You act most unjustly, men of 
Athens! in breaking the peace, and commencing 
unprovoked hostilities. On what pretence do 
you hinder the Corinthians from taking ven- 
geance on an insolent foe? If you are deter- 
mined to persist in iniquity and cruelty, seize 


XV.] 


us who address you, and treat us as enemies.” 
The words were scarcely ended when the Cor- 
cyreans exclaimed, with a loud and unanimous 
voice, “* Seize, and kill them.” But the Athe- 
nians answered with moderation: “Men of 
Corinth, we neither break the peace, nor act 
unjustly. We come to defend our allies of 
Corcyra: sail unmolested by us to whatever 
friendly port you deem most convenient; but 
if you purpose making a descent on Corcyra, 
or ou any of the dependencies of that island, 
we will exert our utmost power to frustrate 
your attempt.”! 

This menace, which prevented immediate 
hostility, did not deter the Corinthians from 
surprising, as they sailed homeward, the town 
of Anactorium, on the Ambracian gulf, which, 
in the time of harmony between the colony and 
parent state, had been built at the joint ex- 
pense of Corinth and Corcyra. From this sea- 
port they carried off two hundred and fifty 
Corcyrean citizens, and eiglit hundred slaves. 
The former, added to the captives saved dur- 
ing the fury of the sea-fight, by the clemency 
or the avarice of a few Corinthian captains, 
made the whole prisoners of war amount to 
twelve hundred and fifty; a capture which, as 
we shall have occasion to relate, produced most 
important and lamentable consequences on the 
future fortune of Corcyra. 

The Corinthians, having chastised the inso- 
lence of their revolted colony, had reason to 
dréad the vengeance of its powerful ally. Im- 
pressed with this terror, they laboured with 
great activity and with unusual secrecy and 
address, to find for the Athenian 
ixxxvii, 1, 22ms an employment still more in- 
A. C. 432, teresting than the Corcyrean war. 

coe" The domestic strength of Athens 
defied assault; but a people who, on the basis 
of a diminutive territory and scanty population, 
had reared such an extensive fabric of empire, 
might easily be wounded in their foreign de- 
pendencies, which, for obvious causes, were 
ever prone to novelty and rebellion. The 
northern shores of the Augean sea, afterwards 
comprehended under the name of Macedon, 
and forming the most valuable portion of that 
kingdom, reluctantly acknowledged the stern 
authority of a sovereign whom they obeyed 
and detested. This extensive coast, of which 
the subsequent history will deserve our atten- 
tion, composed, next to the Ægean islands and 
colonies of Asia, the principal foreign domi- 
nions of the Athenian republic. The whole 
country (naturally divided by the Thermaic 
and Strymonic gulfs into the provinces of 
Pieria, Chalcis, and Pangzus) stretched in a 
direct line only a hundred and fifty miles; but 
the winding intricacies of the coast, indented 
by two great, and by two smaller bays, extend- 
ed tliree times that length; and almost every 
convenient situation was occupied by a Gre- 
cian sea-port. But neither the extent of above 
four hundred miles, nor the extreme populous- 
ness of the maritime parts, formed the chief 
importance of this valuable possession. The 


Olymp. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


185 


because originally peopled by a city of that 
name in Eubea, was equally fertile and de- 
lightful. The inland country, continually 
diversified by lakes, rivers, and arms of the sea, 
afforded an extreme facility of water carriage ; 
Amphipolis, Acanthus, Potidea, and many 
other towns, furnished considerable marts of 
commerce for the republics of Greece, as well 
as for the neighbouring kingdoms of Thrace 
and Macedon; and the constant demands of 
the merchant excited the patient industry of 
the husbandman. This beautiful district had, 
on one side, the black mountains of Pangeus, 
and on the other, the green vales of Pieria. 
The former, extending ninety miles towards 
the east and the river Nessus, abounded nei- 
ther in corn nor pasture, but produced variety 
of timber proper for building ships; and the 
southern branches of the mountain contained 
rich veins of gold and silver, which were suc- 
cessively wrought by the Thracians and the 
Athenians, but of which the full value was first 
discovered by Philip of Macedon, who annually 
extracted from them the value of two hundred 
thousand pounds sterling.2 The last and 
smallest division, Pieria, extended fifty miles 
along the Thermaic gulf to the confines of 
Thessaly and Mount Pindus. The towns of 
Pydna and Methoné enriched the shore with 
the benefits of arts and commerce. Nature had 
been peculiarly kind to the inland country, 
whose shady hills, sequestered walks and foun- 
tains, lovely verdure, and tranquil solitude, 
rendered it, in the fanciful belief of antiquity, 
the favourite haunt of the Muses; who borrow- 
ed from. this district their favourite appellation 
of Pierides. According to tlie same poetical 
creed, these goddesses might well envy the 
mortal inhabitants, who led a pastoral life, en- 
joyed happiness, and are scarcely mentioned in 
history. 

Sucli was the nature and such the divisions 
of a territory, which the policy and resentment 
of Corinth encouraged to successful rebellion 
against the sovereignty of Athens. Several 
maritime communities of the Chalcidicé3 took 
refuge within the walls of Olynthus, a town 
which they had built and fortified, at the dis- 
tance of five miles from the sea, in a fertile and 


| secure situation, between the rivers Olynthus 


and Amnius, which flow inte the lake Bolyce, 
the inmost recess of the Toronaic gulf. The 
neighhouring city of Potidæa, a colony of Co- 
rinth, and governed by annual magistrates sent 
from the mother country, yet like most esta- 
blishments in the Chalcidicé, a tributary con- 
federate? of Athens, likewise strengthened its 
walls, and prepared to revolt. But the Athe- 
nians anticipated this design, by sending a fleet 
of thirty sail, which having entered the har- 
bour of Potidea, commanded the citizens to 


2 Diodorus, l. xvi. p. 514. 

3 In using the name of Chalcidicé T have followed the 
analogy of the Greek language rather than complied with 
custom; yet that part of the Macedonian coast, usually 
called the region of Chalcis, gave name to the province of 
Chalcidicé in Syria, as Strabo mentions in his sixteenth 
bock ; wherein he explains how the principal divisions of 


middle division, called the region of Chalcis, | Syria, as well as Mesopotamia, came to be distinguished, 


1 Thucydid. p. 37. 
2A 


efter the contests of Alexander, by Grecian appellations, 
borrowed from the geography described in the text. 
Muppwyos uroreAgs. Thucydid. 


186 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


demolish their fortifications, to give hostages | liar grievances. 


[Cuar. 


The Megareans complained 


as security for their good behaviour, and to | that, by a recent decree of that stern unfeeling 


dismiss the Corinthian magistrates. The Poti- 
dæans artfully requested that the execution of 
these severe commands might be suspended 
until they had time to send ambassadors to 
Athens, and to remove the unjust suspicions 
of their fidelity. 

The weakness or avarice of Anchestratus, 
the Athenian admiral, listened to this deceitiui 
request, and, leaving the coast of 
a ae Potidiea, directed the operations of 

7 -5 his squadron against places of less 
C22. a ee 
importance, not sparing the depend- 
encies of Macedon. Meanwhile the Potideans 
sent a public but illusive embassy to Athens, 
while one more effectual was secretly despatch- 
ed to Corinth, and other cities of the Pelopon- 
nesus, from which they were supplied with two 
thousand men, commanded by the Corinthian 
Aristeus, a brave and enterprising general. 
These troops were thrown into the place dur- 
ing the absence of the Athenian fleet; and the 
Potidzans, thus reinforced, set their enemies at 
defiance. Alarmed by this intelligence, the 
Atherians fitted out a new fleet of forty sail, 
with a large body of troops, under the com- 
mand of Callias; who, arriving on the coast of 
Macedon, found the squadron of Anchestratus 
employed in the siege of Pydna. Callias judi- 
ciously exhorted him to desist from that enter- 
prise, comparatively of little importance, that 
the united squadrons might attack Potidea by 
.8ea, while an Athenian army of three thousand 
citizens, with a due proportion of allies, assault- 
ed it byland. This measure was adopted ; but 
the spirit of the garrison soon offered them bat- 
tle, almost on equal terms, though with un- 
equal success. Callias however was slain, and 
succeeded by Phormio ; who conducting a fresh 
supply of troops, desolated the hostile territory 
of Chalcis and Pieria; took several towns by 
storm; and, having ravaged the adjoining dis- 
trict, besieged the city of Potidza. 

While those transactions were carrying on in 
the north, the centre of Greece was shaken by 
the murmurs and complaints of the Corinthians 
and their Peloponnesian confederates, who lost 
all patience when their citizens were blocked 
up by an Athenian army. Accompanied by 
the deputies of several republics beyond the 
isthmus, who had recently experienced the ar- 
rogance of their imperious neighbour, they had 
recourse to Sparta, whose actual power and 
ancient renown justly merited the first rank in 
the confederacy, but whose measures! were 
rendered slow and cautious by the foresight 
and peaceful counsels of the prudent Archida- 
mus. When introduced into the Spartan as- 
sembly, the representatives of all the states 
inveighed, with equal bitterness, against the 
injustice and cruelty of Athens, while each de- 
sc..bed and exaggerated the weight of its pecu- 


Olymp. 


1 Plutarch (in Pericle) ascribes the backwardness of the 


| 


Spartans to engage in war to the advice of their principal | 


magistrates, bribed by Pericles, who wished to gain time | 


for his military preparations; a report as improbable as an- 
other calumny, that they were bribed by their allies to take 
arms against Atbens (Aristoph. in Pace.) The eause of 
their irresolution, assigned in the text, is confirmed by the 
subacquent behaviour of Archidamus. 


republic, they had been excluded from the ports 
and markets of Attica;? an exclusion which, 
considering the uarrowness and poverty of 
their own rocky district, was equivalent to de- 
priving them of the first necessaries of life. 
The inhabitants of Agina explained and la- 
inented that, in defiance of recent and solemn 
treaties, and disregarding the liberal spirit of 
Grecian policy, the Athenians had reduced 
their unfortunate island into the most deplora- 
ble condition of servitude. 

When other states had described their parti- 
cular sufferings, the Corinthians last arose, and 
their speaker thus addressed the Lacedemo- 
nian assembly: “ Had we come hither, men of 
Lacedemon! to urge our private wrongs, it 
might be sufficient barely to relate the transac- 
tions of the preceding and present years. The 
revolt of Corcyra, the siege of Potidea, are 
facts which speak for themselves; but the 
thoughts of this assembly should be directed to 
objects more important than particular injuries, 
however flagrant and enormous. The general 
oppressive system of Athenian policy,— it is 
this which demands your most serious concern; 
asystem aiming at nothing less than the de- 
struction of Grecian freedom, which is ready 
to perish through your supine neglect. That 
moderation and probity, men of Sparta! for 
which your domestic counsels are justly famous, 
render you the dupes of foreign artifice, and 
expose you to become the victims of foreign 
ambition; which, instead of opposing with 
prompt alacrity, you have nourished by unsea- 
sonable delay; and, in consequence of this fa- 
tal error, are now called to contend, not with 
the intant weakness, but with the matured vi- 
gour of your enemies, those enemies, who, ever 
unsatisfied with their present measure of pros- 
perity, are continually intent on some new 
project of aggrandizement. How different 
from your slow procrastination is the ardent 
character of the Athenians! Fond of novelty. 
and fertile in resources, alike active and vi- 
gilant, the accomplishment of one design leads 
them to another more daring. Desire, hope, 
enterprise, success, follow in rapid succession. 
Already have they subdued half of Greece; 
their ambition grasps the whole. Rouse, then, 
from your lethargy, defend your allies, mvade 
Attica, maintain the glory of Peloponnesus, 
that sacred deposit, with which being entrusted 
by your ancestors, you are bound to transmit 
unimpaired to posterity.” 


2 The Megareans were accused of ploughing some con- 
secrated lands: they were accused of harbouring tbe Athe- 
nian slaves, fugitives, and exiles; other causes of com- 
plaint might easily have been discovered or invented by . 
their powerful neighbours, who were provoked that such a 
small community on their frontier should uniformly spurn 
their autbority. But the malignity of the comic writers of 
the times ascribed the severe decree against Megara to an 
event equally disgraceful to the morals of their country, and 
injurious to the honour of Pericles. The following verses 
are translated from the Acbarnenses of Aristophanes: 


Juvenes profecti Megaram ebrii auferunt 
Simetham ex scortatione nobilem: 
Mezarensis hinc populus dolore perictus 
Furatur Aspasie duo seorta haud impiger: 
Hinc initium belli prorupit 

Universis Græcis ob tres meretriculas. 


XV] 


Several Athenians, then residing on other bu- 
siness at Sparta, desired to be heard in defence 
of their country. Equity could not deny the re- 
quest of these voluntary advocates, who spoke 
in a style well becoming the loftiness of their 
republic.3 With the pride of superiority, rather 
than the indignation of innocence, they affected 
to despise the false aspersions of their adversa- 
ries; and, instead of answering directly the nu- 


merous accusations against their presumptuous | 


abuse of power, described, with swelling enco- 
miums, “ the illustrious and memorable exploits 
of their countrymen; exploits which had justly 
raised them to a pre-eminence, acknowledged by 
their allies, uncontested by Sparta, and felt by 
Persia. When it became the dignity of Greece 
to chastise the repeated insults of that ambitious 
empire, the Spartans had declined the conduct 
of a distant war; Athens had assumed the aban- 
doned helm, and, after demolishing the cruel 
dominion of Barbarians, had acquired a just and 
lawful sway over the coasts of Europe and of 
Asia. The new subjects of the republic were 
long treated rather as fellow-citizens, than as 
tributaries and slaves. But it was the nature 
of man to revolt against the supposed injustice 
of his equals, rather than against the real ty- 
ranny of his masters. This circumstance, so 
honourable to Athenian lenity, had occasioned 
several unprovoked rebellions, which the re- 
public had been compelled to punish with an 
exemplary severity. The apprehension of fu- 
ture commotions had lately obliged her to hold, 


with a firmer hand, the reins of government, | 


and to maintain with armed power, an authority 
justly earned, and strictly founded in nature, of 
which it is an unalterable law, that the strong 
should govern the weak. If the Spartans, in 
violation of the right of treaties, thought proper 
to oppose this immovable purpose, Athens well 
knew how to redress her wrongs, and would, 
doubtless, uphold her empire with the same 
valour and activity by which it had been es- 
tablished.” 

Having heard both parties, the assembly ad- 
journed, without forming any resolution. But 
next day, it appeared to-be the prevailing opi- 
nion, that the arrogance and usurpation of 
Athens had already violated the peace, and that 
it became the prudence as well as the dignity 
of Sparta, no longer to defer hostilities. This 


popular current was vainly opposed by the ex- | 


perienced wisdom of king Archidamus, who 
still counselled peace and moderation, though 
his courage had been conspicuously distinguish- 
ed in every season of danger. He exhorted his 
countrymen “not to rush blindly on war, with- 
out examining the resources of the enemy and 
their own. The Athenians were powerful in 
ships, in money, in cavalry, and in arms; of all 
which the Lacedemonians were destitute, or at 
least, but feebly provided. Whiatever provoca- 
tion, therefore they had received, they ought in 
prudence to dissemble their resentment, until 
they could effectually exert their vengeance. 
The present crisis required negotiation ; if that 
failed, the silent preparation of a few years would 
enable them to take the field with well-founded 


3 Thucydid. l. xliii. et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


187 


hopes of redressing the grievances of their con- 
federates.” Had this moderate language made 
any impression on such an assembly, it would 
have been speedily obliterated by the blunt 
boldness of Sthenelaides, one of the Ephori, 
who closed the debate. “ Men of Sparta! Of 
the long speeches of the Athenians I under- 
stand not the drift. While they dwell with 
studied eloquence on their own praises, they 
deny not their having injured our allies. Ifthey 
behaved well in the Persian war, and now other- 
wise, their degeneracy is only the more apparent. 
But then, and now, we are still the saine; and 
if we would support our character, we must not 
overlook their injustice. They have ships, mo- 
ney, and horses; but we have good allies, whose 
interests we must not abandon. Why do we 
deliberate, while our eneinies are in arms? Let 
us take the field with speed, and fight with all 
our might.” The acclamations of the people 
followed, and war was resolved. 

This resolution was taken in the 


fale” 9 fourteenth year after the conclusion 
A C 431. of the general peace; but near a 


twelvemonth elapsed before the pro- 
perest measures for invading Attica could be 
finally adjusted among the discordant members 
of so numerous a confederacy. It consisted of 
all the seven republics of the Peloponnesus, ex- 
cept Argos and Achaia, the first of which from 
ambition, and the second perhaps from modera- 
tion, preserved, in the beginning of the war, a 
suspicious neutrality. Of the nine northern re- 
publics, Acarnania alone declined joining the 
allies, its coast being particularly exposed to the 
ravages of the Corcyrean fleets. The cities of 
Naupactus and Platæa, for reasons that will 
soon appear, were totally devoted to their Athe- 
nian protectors; whose cause was likewise em- 
braced by several petty princes of Thessaly. But 
all the other states beyond the isthmus longed 
to follow the standard of Sparta, and to humble 
the aspiring ambition of their too powerful 
neighbour. 

The representatives of these various commu- 
nities having, according to the received practice 
of Greece, assembled in the principal city of the 
confederacy, were strongly encouraged by the 
Corinthians, who, as their colony of Potidæa 
was still closely besieged, laboured to accelerate 
reprisals on Attica, by exhibiting the most ad- 
vantageous prospect of the approaching war. 
They observed, “ That the army of the confe- 
deracy, exceeding sixty thousand men, far out- 
numbered the enemy, whom they excelled still 
more in merit, than they surpassed in number. 
The one was composed of national troops, 
fighting for the independence of those countries 
in whose government they had a share; the 
other chiefly consisted in vile mercenarics, whose 
pay was their government and their country. 
If supplies of money were requisite, the allied 
states would doubtless be more liberal and for- 
ward to defend their interest and honour, than 
the reluctant tributaries of Athens to rivet 
their servitude and chains: and if still more 


4 The ambition of Argos is confirmed by the subsequent 
measures of that republic; the moderation of Achaia is 
suspected, from the nature of the Achæan laws which will 
! afterwards be described 


188 


money should be wanted, the Delphic - and 
Olympic treasures afforded an inexhaustible re- 
‘source, which could not be better expended than 
in defending the sacred cause of justice and of 
Grecian freedom.” In order to gain full time, 
however, for settling all matters among them- 
selves, the confederates despatched to Athens 
various overtures of accommodation, which they 
well knew would be indignantly rejected. In 
each embassy they rose in their demands, suc- 
cessively requiring the Athenians to raise the 
siege of Potidæa; to repeal their prohibitory de- 
cree against Megara; to withdraw their garrison 
from Ægina; in fine, to declare the indepen- 
dence of their colonies.! 

These last demands were heard at Athens with 
a mixture of rage and terror. The capricious 
multitude, who had hitherto approved and ad- 
mired the aspiring views of Pericles, now trem- 
bled on the brink of the precipice to which he 
had conducted them. They had hitherto pushed 
the siege of Potidea with great vigour, but 
without any near prospect of success. They 
must now contend with a numerous confede- 
racy, expose their boasted grandeur to the doubt- 
ful chance of war, and exchange the amuse- 
ments and pleasures of the city for the toils and 
hardships of a camp. Of these discontented 
murmurs the rivals and enemies of Pericles 
greedily availed themselves, to traduce the cha- 
racter and administration of that illustrious 
statesman. It was insinuated, that, sacrificing 
to private passion the interest of his country, 
he had enacted the imperious decree, of which 
the allies so justly complained, to resent the 
personal injury of his beloved Aspasia, whose 
family had been insulted by some licentious 
youths of Megara.? Diopeithes, Dracontides, 
and other demagogues, derided the folly of 
taking arms on such a frivolous pretence, and 
as preparatory to the impeachment of Pericles 
himself, the courts of justice were fatigued with 
prosecutions of his valuable friends. 

The philosopher Anaxagoras, and Phidias the 
statuary, reflected more lustre than they could 
derive from the protection of any patron. The 
mixed character of Aspasia was of a more 
doubtful kind. To the natural and sprightly 
graces of Ionia, her native country, she added 
extraordinary accomplishments of mind and 
body; and having acquired in high perfection 
the talents and excellences of the other sex, was 
accused of being too indifferent to the honour 
of her own. Scarcely superior in modesty to 
Phryné, Thais, or Erigoné,* her wit, her know- 
ledge, and her eloquence, excited universal ad- 
ee. ee 

1 Besides complying with the demands mentioned in the 
text, the Athenians were required “ to expel the descendants 
of those impious men who had profaned the temple of Mi- 
nerva.” This alluded to an event which happened the first 
year of the 45th Olympiad, or 598 years before Christ. 
Cylon, a powerful Athenian, having seized the citadel, and 
aspiring at royalty, was defeated in his purpose by Mega- 
cles, a maternal ancestor of Pericles, who having decoyed 
the associates of Cylon from the temple of Minerva, butch- 
ered them without mercy, and with too little respect for 
the privileges of that venerable sanctuary. The whole 
transaction is particularly related by Plutarch in his life of 
Solon. The renewal of such an antiquated complaint, at 
this juncture, pointed particularly at Pericles, and showed 
the opinion which the Spartans entertained of his unrivalled 


influence and authority. 


2 See above, p. 186 3 See above, p. 175. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


miration or envy,’ while the beauty of her 
fancy and of her person inspired more tender 
sentiments into the susceptible breast of Peri- 
cles. She was reproached, not with entertain- 
ing free votaries of pleasurein her family (which 
in that age was regarded as a very allowable 
commerce,) but of seducing the virtue of Athe- 
nian matrons; a crime severely punished by the 
laws of every Grecian republic. But we have 
reason to conclude her innocent, since the 
arguments and tears of her lover saved her 
from the: fury of an enraged populace, at a 
crisis when his most strenuous exertions could 
not prevent the banishment of Anaxagoras and 
Phidias. 

The former was accused of propagating doc- 
trines inconsistent with the established religion ; 
the latter of having indulged the very pardon- 
able vanity (as it should seem) of representing 
himself, and his patron, on the shield of his 
admired statue of Minerva. There, with inimi- 
table art, Phidias had engraved the renowned 
victory of the Athenians over the warlike 
daughters of the Thermodon;5 he had de- 
lineated himself in the figure of a bald old 
man raising a heavy stone (an allusion to his 
skill in architecture,) while the features of 
Pericles were distinguished in the countenance 
of an Athenian chief, bravely combating the 
queen of the Amazons, though his elevated 
arm hid part of the face, and in some measure 
concealed the resemblance.® For this fictitious 
crime, Phidias was driven from a city which 
had been adorned by the unwearied labours of 
his long life, and dcbarred beholding those 
wonders of art which his sublime genius had 
created. 

The accusation of the principal friends of 
Pericles paved the way for hisown. He was 
reproached with embezzling the public treasure ; 
but, on this occasion, plain facts confounded the 
artifices of his enemies. It was proved, that 
his private expenses were justly proportioned to 
the measure of his patrimony; many instances 
were brought of his generous contempt of 
wealth in the service of his country; and it ap- 
peared, after the strictest examination, that his 
fortunc had not increased since he was intrusted 
with the exchequer. This honourable display 
of unshaken probity, which had ever formed the 
basis of the authority’ of Pericles, again recon- 
ciled to him the unsteady affections of his coun- 
trymen,and gave irresistible force to that famous 
and fatal speech, which unalterably decided the 
war of Peloponnesus. 

« Often have I declared, Athenians! that we 


4 Plato in Menex. 5 Lysias Orat. Funeb. 

6 Plut. in Pericl. et Aristot. de Mund. 

7 This testimony, which is given by the impartiality of 
Thucydides, destroys at once the numerons aspersions of 
the comic poets of the times, which have been copied by 
Plutarch, and from him transerihed by modern compilers. 
Pericles, it is said, raised the war of Peloponnesus, 
merely for his own convenience and safety; and was en- 
couraged to this measure by the advice of his kinsman Al- 
cibiades, then a boy; who, calling one day at his house, 
was refused admittance, ““hecause Pericles was occupied 
in Considering how he might best state his accounts.” 
“& Let him rather consider,” said the sagacious stripling, 
t how to give no account at all.” Pericles took the hint, 
and involved his country in a war, which allowed no time 
for examining the public expenditure. Such anecdotes may 
amuse those who can believe them. 


XV. 


must not obey the unjust commands of our ene- 
mies. I am still firmly of that mind, convinced 
as Lam of the dangerous vicissitudes of war and 
fortune; and that human hopes, designs, and 
pursuits, are all fleeting and fallacious. Yet, in 
the present crisis, necessity and glory should 
alike fix us to this immovable resolution. The 
decree against Megara, which the first embassy 
required us to repeal, is not the cause of that 
hostile jealousy which has long secretly envied 
our greatness, and which has now more openly 
conspired our destruction. Yet that decree, of 
which some men have spoken so lightly, in- 
volved the honour of our councils and the sta- 
bility of our empire. By pusillanimously re- 
pealing it, we should have emboldened that ma- 
lignant enmity, which, notwithstanding our 
proper firmness in the first instance, has yet 
successively risen to higher and more arbitrary 
demands; demands which merit to be answered, 
not by embassies, but by arms. 

«The flourishing resources, and actual 
strength, of the republic, afford us the most flat- 
tering prospect of military success. Impregnably 
fortified by land, our shores are dcfended by 
three hundred gallies; besides a body of ca- 
valry, to the number of twelve hundred, together 
with two thousand archers, we can immediately 
take the field with thirteen thousand pikemen, 
without draining our foreign garrisons, or di- 
minishing the complete number of sixteen 
thousand men who defend the walls and for- 
tresses in Attica. The wealthy seaports of 
Thrace and Macedon; the flourishing colonies 
of Iona, Eolia, and Doria; in a word the whole 
extensive coast of the Asiatic peninsula, ac- 
knowledge by annua! contributions, the so- 
vereignty of our guardian navy, whose strength 
is increased by the ships of Chios, Lesbos, and 
Corcyra, while the smaller islands furnish us, 
according to their ability, with money and 
troops. Athens thus reigns queen of a thou- 
sand? tributary republics, and notwithstanding 
the expenses incurred by the siege of Potidea, 
and the architectural ornaments of the city, she 
possesses six thousand talents in her treasury. 

“ The situation of our enemies is totally the 
reverse. Animated by rage, and emboldened 
by numbers, they may be roused to a transient, 
desultory assault; but destitute of resources, 
and divided in interests, they are totally inca- 
pable of any steady, persevering exertion. With 
sixty thousand men they may enter Attica; 
and if our unseasonable courage gives them an 
opportunity, may win a battle; but unless our 
rash imprudence assists and enables them, they 
cannot possibly prosecute a successful war. In- 
deed, Athenians! I dread less the power of the 
enemy, than your own ungovernable spirit. In- 
stead of being seduced from your security, by 
a vain desire to defend, against superior num- 
bers, your plantations and villas in the open 
country, you ought to destroy these superfluous 
possessions with your own hands. To you who 
receive the conveniences of life from so many 
distant dependencies, the devastation of Attica 
is a matter of small moment; but how can 


8 Aristoph. Vesp. He says, that twenty thousand Athe- 
nians might live as in the Elysian fields, if each tributary 
city undertook to provide for twenty citizens. V. 705, &c. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


189 


your enemies repair, how can they survive, the 
devastation of the Peloponnesus? How can 
they prevent, or remedy, this fatal, this intoler- 
able calamity, while the squadrons of Athens 
command the surrounding seas? If these con- 
siderations be allowed their full weight; ifrea- 
son, not passion, conducts the war, it seems 
scarcely in the power of fortune to rob you of 
victory. Yet let us answer the Peloponnesians 
with moderation, “ that we will not forbid the 
Megareans our ports and markets, if the Spar- 
tans, and other states of Greece, abolish their 
exclusive and inhospitable laws: that we will 
restore independent governments to such cities 
as were free at the last treaty of peace, provided 
the Spartans engage to follow our example: 
that we are ready to submit all differences to 
the impartial decision of any equitable tribunal; 
and that, although these condescending over- 
tures be rejected, we will not commence hostili- 
ties, but are prepared to repel them with our 
usual vigour.”9 The assembly murmured ap- 
plause; a decree was proposed and ratified ; 
the ambassadors returned home with the re- 
ply dictated by Pericles; which, moderate as it 
seemed to the Athcnian statesman, sounded like 
an immediate declaration of war to the Spar- 
tans and their allies. 

Six months after the battle of 
Potidea, the Thebans, who were 
A.C. 431 the most powerful and the most 

a * daring of these allies, undertook a 
May 7th. -oe a 

y lit terprise against the small 

military enterp g 
but magnanimous republic of Platæa. Though 
situate in the heart of Boeotia, amidst nu- 
merous and warlike enemies, the Platæans still 
preserved an unshaken fidelity to Athens, 
wnose toils and triumphs they had shared in 
the Persian war. Yet even this feeble commu- 
nity, surrounded on every side by hostile Beo- 
tians, was not excmptcd from domestic discord. 
Nauclides, the perfidious and bloody leader of 
an aristocratical faction, engaged to betray the 
Platean gates to a body of foreign troops, pro- 
vided they enabled him to overturn the demo- 
cracy, and to take vengeance on his political 
adversaries, whom he regarded as his personal 
foes. Eurymachus, a noble and wealthy The- 
ban, with whom, in the name of lis associates, 
this sanguinary agreement liad been contracted, 
entered Platæa with three hundred of his coun- 
trymen, at the first watch of the night; but, 
regardless of their promise to Nauclides, who 
expected that they would break tumultuously 
into the houses, and butcher his enemies, the 
Thebans formed regularly in arms, and rc- 
mained quietly in the market-place, having is- 
sued a proclamation to invite all the citizens 
indiscriminately to become allies to Thebes. 
The Plateans readily accepted a proposal, 
which delivered them from the terror of imme- 
diate death. But while they successively rati- 
fied the agreement, they observed, with mixed 


Olymp. 


Ixxxvii. 2. 


9 In exnmining the speech ascribed to Pericles, on this 
occasion, by Thucydides, the attentive reader will per- 
ceive that it supposes the knowledge of several events 
oinitted in the preceding narrative of that historian, but 
which are carefully related in the text. The English 
Speech is shorter than the Greek, but contains more in 
formation, collected from Plutarch, Diodorus, Aristo 
phancs, and the 2nd book of Thucydides himself. 


190 


shame and joy, that darkness and surprise had 
greatly augmented the number of the con- 
spirators. Encouraged by this discovery, they 
secretly despatched a messenger to Athens; 
and, while they expected the assistance of their 
distant protector, determined to leave nothing 
untried for their own deliverance. 

The night was spent in an operation not less 
daring than extraordinary. As they could not 
assemble in the streets without alarming sus- 
picion, they dug through the interior walls of 
their houses, and fortified the outward in the 
best manner the time would allow, with their 
ploughs, carts, and other instruments of hus- 
bandry. Before day-break the work was com- 
plete; when, with one consent, they rushed 
furiously against the enemy, the women and 
children animating with horrid shrieks and 
gestures the efforts of their rage. It was night, | 
and a storm of rain and thunder augmented 
the gloomy terrors of the battle. The Thebans 
Were unacquainted‘with the ground ; above a 
hundred fell; near two hundred fied in trepi- | 
dation to a lofty and spacious tower adjoining 
the walls, which they mistook for one of the 
gates of the city. In the first movements of re- 
sentment, the Platæans prepared to burn them 
alive; but amoment’s reflection deterred them 
from this dangerous cruelty. Meanwhile a 
considerable body of Thebans advanced to- 
wards Platæa, to co-operate with their country- 
men. Their progress would have been hastened 
by a fugitive who met them, and related the 
miscarriage of the enterprise, had not the heavy 
rain so much swelled the Asopus, that an un- 
usual time was spent in crossing that river. 
They had scarcely entered the Platæan terri- 
tory, when a second messenger informed them, 
that their unfortunate companions were all 
killed or taken prisoners. Upon this intelli- 
gence they paused to consider, whcther, instead 
of proceeding to the Platean walls, where they 
could not perform any immediate service, they 
ought not, as an easier enterprise, to seize the 
citizens of that place, who were dispersed over 
their villages in the open country. 

But while they deliberated on this measure, a 
Platean herald arrived, complaining of the un- 
just and most unexpected infraction of the 
peace, by a daring and atrocious conspiracy ; 
commanding the Thebans immediately to leave 
the territory of Platæa, if they hoped to de- 
liver their fellow citizens from captivity ; and 
denouncing, if they refused compliance, that 
their countrymen would inevitably be punished 
with a cruel death. This stratagem, not less 
audacious than artful, prevailed on the enemy 
to repass the Asopus, while the Platæans lost 
not a moment to assemble within their walls the 
scattered inhabitants of their fields and villas; 
and braving the Theban resentment, the imme- 
diate effects of which thcy had rendered impo- 
tent, massacred the unhappy prisoners, to the 
number of a hundréd and eighty, among whom 
was Eurymachus, the chief promoter of the 
expedition. After this signal act of vengeance, 
they strengthened the works of the place; trans- 
ported their wives and children to the tributary 
islands of Athens; and that they might more 
securely sustain the expected siege, required 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


and received from that republic a plentiful sup- 
ply of provisions, and a considerable reinforce- 
ment of troops. 
A. C. 431. Tke sword was now drawn, and 
both parties seemed eager to exert 
their utmost strength. The Spartans summoned 
their confederates to the Isthmus; demanded 
money and ships from their Italian and Sicilian 
colonies; and solicited assistance from the Per- 
sian monarch Artaxerxes, and from Perdiccas 
king of Macedon ; both of whom naturally rc- 
garded the Athenians as dangerous neighbours, 
and ambitious invaders of their coasts. The 
people of Athens also condescended to crave 
the aid of Barbarians, and actually contracted 
an alliance with Sitalces, the warlike chief of 
the Odrysians, who formed the most powerful 
tribe in upper Thrace. They required at the 
same time an immediate supply of cavalry from 
their Thessalian allies, while their fleet already 
cruised along the coast of Peloponnesus, to 
confirm the fidelity of the surrounding islands ; 
an object deemed essential to the successful in- 
vasion of that territory. The unexperienced 
youth, extremely numerous in most republics 
of Greece, rejoiced at the prospect of war. 
The aged saw and dreaded the general commo- 
tion, darkly foretold, as they thought, by an- 
cient oracles and prophecies, but clearly and 
recently announced, by an earthquake in the 
sacred, and hitherto immovable island of De- 
los. Such was the ardour of preparation, that 
only a few weeks after the surprise of Platæa, 
tne Lacedemonian confederates to the number 
of sixty thousand, assembled from the north 
and south, at the Corinthian Isthmus. The 
several communities were respectively com- 
manded by leaders of their own appointment ; 
but the general conduct of the war was in- 
trusted to Archidamus, the Spartan king. 

In a council of the chiefs, that prince warmly 
approved their alacrity in taking the field, and 
extolled the greatness and bravery of an army, 
the most numerous and best provided that had 
ever followed the standard of any Grecian ge- 
neral. Yet their preparations, however extraor- 
dinary, were not greater than their enterprise 
required. They had waged war with a people 
not less powerful, than active and daring ; who 
had discernment to perceive, and ability to im- 
prove, every opportunity of advantage; aud 
whose resentincnt would be as much inflamed, 
as their pride would be wounded, by the ap- 
proach of invasion and hostility. It seemed 
probable, that the Athenians would not allow 
their lands to be wasted, without attempting to 
defend them. The confedcrates, thereforc, 
must be always on their guard; their disci- 
pline must be strict, regular, and uniform; to 
elude the skill, and to oppose the strength of 
Athens, demanded their utmost vigilance and 
activity. 

Archidanins, after leading his army into At- 
tica, seems blainable in allowing their martial 
ardour to evaporate in tlie fruitless siege of 
CEnoé, the strongest Athenian town towards 
the southern fronticr of Beotia. This tedious 
and unsuccessful opcration enitbled the Athe- 
nians to complete, without interruption, the 
singular plan of defence so ably traced by the 


XV.] 


bold genius of Pericles. Thcy hastened the 
desolation of their own fields; demolished their 
delightful gardens and villas, which it had been 
their pride to adorn; and transported, either to 
Athens or the isles, their valuable effects, their 
cattle, furniture, and even the frames of their 
houses. The numerous inhabitants of the 
country towns, and villages, where the more 
opulent Athenians commonly spent the greater 
part of their time, flocked to the capital, which 
was well furnished with the means of subsist- 
ence, though not of accommodation, for such a 
promiscuous crowd of strangers, with their 
families, slaves, or servants. Many people of 
lawer rank, destitute of private dwellings, were 
obliged to occupy the public halls, the groves 
and temples, the walls and battlements. Even 
persons of distinction were narrowly and 
meanly lodged ; an inconvenience severely felt 
by men accustomed to live at large in the 
country, in rural ease and elegance. But re- 
sentment against the public enemy blunted the 
sense of personal hardship, and silenced the 
voice of private complaint. 

Mean while, the confederate army, having 
raised the siege of Œnoé, advanced along the 
eastern frontier of Attica; and, within eighty 
days after the surprise of Platæa, invaded the 
Thriasian plain, the richest orna- 


Olymp. ment of the Athenian territory. 
lxxxvii. 2. ; 
A. Gx 434. Having wasted that valuable dis- 


trict with fire and sword, they pro- 
ceeded to Eleusis, and from thence to Achar- 
næ, the largest borough in the province, and 
only eight miles distant from the capital. 
Thcre they continued an unusual length of 
time, gradually demolishing the houses and 
plantations, and daily exercising every act of 
rapacious cruelty, with a view either to draw 
the enemy to a battle, or to discover whether 
they were unalterably determined to keep 
within their walls; a resolution, which, if 
clearly ascertained, would enable the invaders 
to proceed with more boldness and effect, and 
to carry on their ravages with security, even to 
the gates of Athens. 

The Athenians, hitherto intent on their na- 
val preparations, had exerted an uncommon 
degree of patience and self-command. But 
their unruly passions could no longer be re- 
straincd, when they learned the proceedings in 
Acharne. The proprietors of that rich and ex- 
tensive district boasted that thcy alone could 
send three thousand brave spearmen into the 
field, and lamented, that they should remain 
cooped up in dishonourable confinement, while 
their possessions fell a prey to a hostile in- 
vader. Their animatcd complaints inflamcd 
the kindred ardour of the Athenian youth. It 
appearcd unworthy of thosc, who had so often 
ravaged with impunity the territories of their 
neighbours, patiently to behold the desolation 
of theirown. Intercsted priests announced ap- 
proaching calamity ; seditious orators clamour- 
ed against the timid conncils of Pericles; the 
impetuous youth required thcir general to lead 
them to battle. Amidst this popular commo- 
tion, the accomplished general and statesman 
remained unmoved, bravcly resisting the storm, 
or dextcrously eluding its force. Though de- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| 


| 


191 


termined not to risk an engagement with the 
confederates, he seasonably employed the Athe- 
nian and Thessalian cavalry to beat up their 
quarters, to intercept their convoys, to harass, 
surprise, or cut off their advanced parties, 
While these enterprises tended to divert or ap- 


| pease the tumult, a fieet of a hundred and fifty 


sail ravaged the defenceless coast of Pelopon- 
nesus. A squadron, less numerous, made a de- 
scent on Locris. The rebellious inhabitants of 
Aigina were driven from their possessions, and 
an Athenian colony was settled in that island. 
The wretched fugitives, whose country had 
long rivalled Athens itself in wealth, commerce, 
and naval power, received the maritime dis- 
trict of Thyrea! from the bounty of their Spar- 
tan protectors. 

Intelligence of these proceedings, and still 
more the scarcity of provisions, engaged the 
confederates to return to their respective re- 
publics. Having advanced by the eastern, they 
retired along the western, frontier of Attica ; 
every place in their line of march experiencing 
the fatal effects of their resentment or rapacity. 
Soon after their retreat, Pericles, towards the 
beginning of autumn, led out the Athenians to 
ravage the neighbouring and hostile province 
of Megara. The invading army was accident- 
ally observed by the ficet, while it returned 
from the coast of Peloponnesus. The sailors 
hastened to share the danger and plunder. 
The whole Athenian force thus amounted to 
hear twenty thousand men; a number far more 
than sufficient to deprive the industrious Me- 
garians of the hope of a scanty harvest, earned 
with infinite toil and care, in their narrow un- 
fruitful territory. 

The winter was not distinguished by any 
important expedition on either side. The Co- 
rinthians, long inured to the sea in all seasons, 
carried on indecisive hostilities against the 
Athenian allies in Acarnania. During this in- 
active portion of the year, the Athenians, as 
well as their eneniies, were employed in cele- 
brating the memory qf the dead, with much 
funeral pomp, and high encomiums on their 
valour ;? in distributing the prizes of merit 


1 This district lay on the frontier of the Argive and La- 
eedemonian territory, and was long an object of eonten- 
tion between those republies. See p. 89. 

2 This mournful! solemnity, as practised by the Athenians, 
is described by Thucydides, 1. ii. p. 120, et seq. The bones 
of the deeeased were brought to a tabernaele previously 
ereeted for receiving them. On the day appointed for the 
funeral, they were conveyed from thence in cypress coftins, 
drawn on carriages, one for each tribe, to the public sepul- 
ehre in the Ceramicus, the most beautiful snburb of the 
city. The relations of the dead decked out the remains of 
their friends, as they judged most proper. (See Lysias 
against Agoratus.) One empty bier was drawn along in 
honour of those whose bodies had not been recovered. 
Persons of every age, and of cither sex, citizens and stran- 
gers, attended this solemnity. When the bones were de- 
posited in the earth, some citizen of dignity and merit, 
named by the state, mounted a lofty pulpit, and pronounced 
the panegyric of the deceased, of their ancestors, and the 
Athenian repnblic. On this oceasion, Pericles himself had 
been appointed to that solemn office. Je performed it with 
great dignity. His speech, containing almost as many 
ideas as words, is incapable of abridgment; nor does its 
nature admit the insertion of it entire in the present history, 
in which eloqnence is merely considered as an instrument 
of governinent, and such speeehes only introdueed as in 
fluenced publie resolutions and measures. It is, however, 
worthy of observation, that his maguificent display of the 


192 


among the surviving warriors; in confirming 
their respective alliances; and in fortifying 
such places on their frontier as seemed most 
exposed to military excursions, or naval de- 
scents, 

The return of summer brought-back into At- 
tica the Peloponnesian invaders; but it like- 
wise introduced a far more dreadful calamity. 
A. C. 430 A destructive pestilence, engendered 
sees” in Æthiopia, infected Egypt, and 
spread over great part of the dominions of the 
king of Persia. History does not explain by 
what means this fatal disorder was communi- 
cated to Greece. The year had been in other 
respects remarkably healthful. As the disease 
first appeared in the Pireus, the principal 
Athenian harbour, we may be allowed to con- 
jecture, that it was imported from the east, 
either by the Athenian merchantmen, or by 
the ships of war, which annually sailed to that 
quarter, in order to levy money on the tributary 
cities. When its miserable symptoms broke 
out in the Piræus, the inhabitants suspected 
that the enemy had poisoned their wells. But 
it soon extended over the adjoining districts, 
and raged with peculiar violence in the popu- 
lous streets which surrounded the citadel. 

The malady appeared under various forms, 
in different constitutions ; but its specific symp- 
toms were invariably thesame. It began with 
a burning heat in the head; the eyes were red 
and inflamed; the tongue and mouth had the 
colour of blood. The pain and inflammation 
descended to the breast with inexpressible an- 
guish; the skin was covered with ulcers; the 
body of a livid red; the external heat not sen- 
sible to the touch, but the internal so violent, 
that the slightest covering could not be endured. 
An insatiable thirst was a universal symptom ; 
and, when indulged, increased the disorder, 
When the bowels were attacked, the patient 
soon perished through debility. Some lived 
seven or nine days, and died of a fever, with 
apparent remains of strength. The life was 
saved, when the internal vigour diverted the 
course of the disease towards the extremities. 
Those who once recovered were never danger- 
ously attacked a second time, from which they 
conceived a vain hope of proving thenceforth 
superior to every bodily infirmity. The disorder, 
which was always accompanied with an ex- 
treme dejection of spirits, often impaired the 
judgment, as well as the memory. All reme- 
dies, human and divine, were employed in vain 
to stop the progress of this fatal contagion. 
The miserable crowds expired in the temples, 
preferring unavailing prayers to the gods. A 
shocking spectacle was seen round the sacred 
fountains, where multitudes lay dead, or perish- 
ing in agonizing torture. At length all medical 
assistance was despised,! and all religious cere- 


advantages, the security, and the glory of Athens, forms a 
striking contrast with the unexpected calamities which 
soon overwhelmed his unhappy country. 

1 The supposed decree of the Athenians in favour of 
Hippocrates, says, that his scholars showed the means both 
of preventing and curing the plague. Ts xen Geexmesnis 
ar parkws dixoevexoixs Tov Aosmov: and again, Owws te 
szroixy SoSsiox zooxrhws water rove xxmvovTxs. Hippo- 
crates, p. 1290. This decree therefore, as well as the letters 
of Hippocrates, mentioning the plague of Athens, are un- 
questionably spurious. The malady is minutely described 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


monies neglected. Continually suffering o 
apprehending the most dreadful calamities, th 
Athenians became equaliy regardless of laws 
human and divine. The fleeting moment only 
was theirs. About the future they felt no con- 
cern, nor did they believe it of concern to the 
gods, since all alike perished, guilty or inno 
cent. Decency no longer imposing respec‘ 
the only pursuit was that of present pleasure 
To beings of an hour, the dread of punishmen 
formed no restraint ; to victims of misery, con- 
science presented no terrors. Athens thus ex- 
hibited at once whatever is most afflicting in 
wretchedness, and most miserable in vice, 
uniting to the rage of disease the more destruc- 
tive fury of unbridled passions. 

While the city fella prey to these accumu- 
lated evils, the country was laid waste by an 
implacable enemy. On the present 


re 3 occasion, the confederates advanced 
A. C. 439, beyond Athens; they destroyed 


the works of the miners on Mount 
Laurium; and, having ravaged all that south- 
ern district, as well as the coast opposite to 
Eubæa and Naxos, they traced a line of devas- 
tation along the Marathonian skore, the glo- 
rious scene of an immortal victory, obtained by 
the valour of Athens, in defence of those very 
states by which her own territories were now 
so cruelly desolated. 

If conscious wisdom and rectitude were not 
superior to every assault of fortune, the manly 
soul of Pericles must have sunk under the 
weight of such multiplied calamities. But his 
fortitude still supported him amidst the flood of 
public and domestic wo. With decent and 
magnanimous composure, he beheld the un- 
happy fate of his numerous and flourishing 
family, successively snatched away by the ra- 
pacious pestilence. At the funeral of the last 
of his sons, he dropped, indeed, a few reluctant 
tears of paternal tenderness. But, ashamed of 
this momentary weakness, he bent his unde- 
jected mind to the defence of the republic. 
Having collected a hundred Athenian, together 
with fifty Chian or Lesbian vessels, he sailed 
through the Saronic gulf, and ravaged the un- 
protected coasts of Elis, Argos, and Laconia. 
While this armament weighed anchor in the 
Piræus, there happened an eclipse of the sun,? 
which terrified the superstitious mariners, whose 
mirds were already clouded by calamity. The 
pilot of the admiral’s galley betrayed the most 
unmanly cowardice, when Pericles, throwing a 
cloak before his eyes, asked, whether the ob- 
scurity surprised him. The pilot answering 
him in the negative, “ Neither,” rejoined Peri- 
cles, “© ought an eclipse of the sun, occasioned 
by the intervention of a revolving planet, which 
intercepts its light.” 

Having arrived on the Argolic coast, the 


by Thucydides, 1. ii. c. xlvii. by Lucretius, l. vi. ver. 1136, 
et seq. Diodorus, l. xii. differs widely from them both, 
probably having copied from Ephorus and Theopompus. 
Hippocrates has several cases of the plague from Thasos, 
Abdera, &c. but not one from Athens. See Hippocrat. de 
Morbis Epidem. à 

2 Plutarch. in Pericle. But as Thucydides mentions no 
such eclipse that summer, although extremely attentive in 
recording such phenomena, I would not warrant the chro- 
nology of Plutarch. 


XL] 


Athenians laid siege to the sacred city Epi- 
daurus, whose inhabitants gloried in the pecu- 
liar favour of Æsculapius. The plague again 
breaking out in the fleet, was na- 


sai turally ascribed to the vengeance 
A C 430 of that offended divinity. They 


raised the siege of Epidaurus ; nor 
were their operations more successful against 
Træzene, Hermioné, and other Peloponnesian 
cities. They took only the small fortress of 
Prasiæ, a sea-port of Laconia; after which they 
returned to the Piræus, afflicted with the pesti- 
lence, and without having performed any thing 
that corresponded to the greatness of the arma- 
ment, or the public expectation. 

The Athenian expedition into Thrace was 
still more unfortunate. Into that country 
Agnon conducted a body of four thousand men, 
to co-operate with Pliormio in the siege of Po- 
tidea. But in the space of forty days, he lost 
one thousand and fifty men in the plague; and 
the only consequence of his expedition was, to 
infect the northern army with that melancholy 
disorder. 

These multiplied disasters reduced the Athe- 
nians to despair. Their sufferings exceeded 
example and belief, while they were deprived 
of the only expected consolation, the pleasure 
of revenge. The bulk of the people desired 
peace on any terms. Ambassadors were sent to 
Sparta, but not admitted to an audience. The 
orators clamoured, and traduced Pcricles. The 
undiscerning populace ascribed their misfor- 
tunes to the unhappy effect of his councils ; but 
his magnanimity did not yet forsake him, and, 
for the last time, he addressed the assembly : 
*“ Your anger, Athenians! occasions no surprise, 
because it comes not unexpected. Your com- 
plaints excite no resentment, because to com- 
plain is the right of the miserable. Yet as you 
mistake both the cause and the measure of 
your present calamity, I will venture to expose 
such dangerous, and, if not speedily corrected, 
such fatal errors. The justice and necessity of 
the war I have often had occasion to explain : 
it is just that you, who have protected and 
saved, should govern Greece ; it is necessary, 
if you would assert your pre-eminence, that 
you should now resist the Peloponnesiaps. On 
maintaining this resolution, not your honour 
only, but your safety, depends. The sovereignty 
of Greece cannot, like an empty pageant of 
grandeur, be taken up with indiffcrence, or 
without danger laid down, That well-earned 
dominion, which you have sometimes exercised 
tyrannically, must be uphcld and defended, 
otherwise you must submit, without resource, 
to tle resentment of your injured allies, and 
tle animosity ef your inveterate enemics. The 
hardships, te which you were exposed from the 
latter, I foresaw and foretold; the pestilence, 
that sudden aud improbable disaster, it was 
impossible for human prudence to conjecture ; 
yet great and unexpected as our calamities 
have been, and continue, they are still acci- 
dental and transitory, while the advantages of 
this necessary war are permancnt, and its glory 
will be immortal. The greatness of that em- 
pire which we strive to uphold, extends beyond 
the territories of our most distant allies. Of 


2 B 


HISTORY-OF GREECE. 


193 


the two elements, destined for tle use of men, 
the sea and the land, we absolutely command 
the one, nor is there any kingdom, or republic, 
or confederacy, that pretends to dispute our do- 
minion. Let this consideration elevate our 
hopes; and personal afflictions will disappear 
at tlle view of public prosperity. Let us bear, 
with resignation, the strokes of providence ; 
and we shall repel, with vigour, the assaults of 
your enemies. It is the hereditary and glo- 
rious distinction of our republic, uever to yicld 
to adversity. We have defied danger, expended 
treasure and blood; and, amidst obstinate and 
formidable wars, auginented the power, and 
extended the fame, of a city unrivalled in wealth, 
populousness, and splendour, and governed by 
laws and institutions worthy its magnificence 
and renown. If Athens must perish, (as what 
human grandeur is not subject to decay?) let 
lier never fall, at least, through our pusil- 
lanimity ; a fall that would cancel the merit of 
our former virtue, and destroy at once that 
edifice of glory which it has been the work of 
ages to rear. When our walls and harbours 
are no more; when tlie terror of our navy shall 
lave ceased, and our external magnificence 
fallen to decay, the glory of Athens shall re- 
main. This is the prize which I have hitherto 
exhorted, and still exhort you to defend, re- 
gardless of the clamours of sloth, the suspicions 
of cowardice, or the persecution of envy.” 
Such were the sentiments of Pericles, who, 
on this occasion, declared to his assembled 
countrymen, with the freedom of conscious 
merit, that he felt himself inferior 
ee A. to none in wisdom to discover, and 
A.C 429 abilities to explain and promote, the 
wes" measures most honourable and use- 
ful; that he was a sincere and ardent lover of 
the republic, unbiased by the dictates of self- 
ishness, unseduced by the allurements of par- 
tiality, and superior to the temptations of ava- 
rice. The anger of the Athenians evaporated 
in imposing on him a small fine, and soon after 
they re-elected him gencral. The integrity 
and manly firmness of his mind restored the 
fainting courage of the republic. They rescued 
the dignity of Pericles from the rage of popular 
frenzy; but they could not defend his life 
against. the infectious malignity of the pesti- 
lence. He died two years and six months after 
the commencement of the war. The character 
which he draws of himself is confirmed by the 
impartial voice of history, which adds a few 
circuinstances fitted to confirm the texturc of 
a virtuous and lasting fame. During the first 
invasion of tle Peloponnesians, he declared 
that lic would convey his extensive and valua- 
ble estate to the public, if it should be excepted 
from the general devastation, by the policy or 
the gratitude of Archidamus, his hereditary 
gucst and friend.3 Yet this generous patriot 
lived with the most exemplary economy in his 
personal and domestic expense. His death-bed 
was surrounded by his numerous admirers, 
who dwelt with complacence on the illustrious 
exploits of his glorious life. While they re- 
counted the wisdom of his government, and 
SS ee O 


3 Thucydid. p. 108. 


Olymp. 


194 


enumerated the long series of his victories by 
sea and land, “You forget,” said the dying 
statesman and sage, “ you forget the only valu- 
able part of my character: none of my fellow 
citizens were ever compelled, through any ac- 
tion of mine to assume a mourning robe.”! 
He expired, teaching an invaluable lesson to 
human kind, that in the last important hour, 
when all other objects disappear, or lose their 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


value, the recollection of an innocent life is still 
present to the mind, and still affords consola- 
tion more valuable than Pericles could derive 
from his nine trophies erected over the enemies 
of his country, from his long and prosperous 
administration of forty years, the depth of his 
political wisdom, the perfection of his military 
and naval skill, and the immortal fame of his 
unrivalled eloquence. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Subsequent Events of the War—Platea taken—Revolt of Lesbos—Description and History of that 
Island—Nature of its political Connection with Athens—Address of Lesbos—Its Capital besieged 
by the Athenians—Measures of the Peloponnesians for relieving it—Mitylené surrenders—De- 
liberations in Athens concerning the Treatment of the Prisoners— Resettlement of the Affairs 
of Lesbos—The Corinthians foment Factions in Corcyra—Sedition in that Island—The con- 
tending Factions respectively supported by the Athenians and Peloponnesians—Progress, Ter- 


mination, and Consequences of the Sedition. 


MHE dignity and vigour of the republic 

seemed to perish with Pericles, and several 
years elapsed scarcely distinguished by any 
event that tended to vary the uniformity, much 
less to decide the fortune of the war. While 
the Peloponnesians invaded Attica, the Athe- 
nian fleet annually ravaged the coast of Pelo- 
ponnesus. In vain the inhabitants 
of that country, little accustomed 
C to the sea, collected ships, and used 
A. C. their utmost endeavours to contend 
429—425. with the experienced skill of the 
Athenian mariners. They were always de- 
feated, and often by an inferior force; one 
proof among many, that naval superiority is 
slowly acquired and slowly lost. Neither the 
Athenians nor the Peloponnesians derived any 
effectual assistance from their respective alli- 
ances with Sitalces and Perdiccas. The for- 
mer, reinforced by many independent tribes of 
Thrace, who were allured to his standard by 
the hopes of plunder, poured down a hundred 
and fifty thousand men on the Macedonian 
coast. But a hasty agreement between the 
two kings dissipated that numerous and desul- 
tory band with the same rapidity with which 
it had been collected.? 

One benefit, indeed, the Athenians received 
from Sitalces, if that can be reckoned a benefit, 
which enabled them to commit an action of 
atrocious cruelty: he put into their hands 
Aristæus, the Corinthian, a bold and deter- 
mined enemy of their republic; and actually 
travelling through Thrace into Persia, to solicit 
money from Artaxerxes to support the war 
against them. Both Aristæus and his col- 
aeagues in the embassy suffered a painful and 
ignominious death. 
The success of the adverse parties 


Olymp. 
Ixxxvii. 4. 


Olymp. 4, Was equally balanced in the sieges 
re of Potidea and Platea. The for- 


mer, having surrendered on capitu- 


1 Plut. in Pericl. 2 Thucydid. p. 167—170. 


lation, was occupied by new inhabitants. The 
expelled citizens retired to Olynthus and other 
places of the Chalcidicé, where they strength- 
ened and exasperated the foes of Athens, Pla- 
Olymp. A also R after a long 
lxxvii a ™ spirite resistance during five 
A.C. 497, Years. Notwithstanding the warm 

° and affecting remonstrances of the 
citizens who had acted such an illustrious part 
in the Persian war, when the Thebans behaved 
most disgracefully, the capitulation was shame- 
fully violated by the Spartans, who sacrificed 
to the resentment of Thebes, the eternal enemy 
of Platæa, two hundred brave men, whose 
courage and fidelity merited a better fate. But 
the youth of Platæa still flourished in the 
bosom of Athens, and were destined, in a future 
age, to reassume the dignity of independent 
government, which always formed the highest 
ambition of their small but magnanimous com- 
munity. 

Among the transactions of this otherwise un- 
important period, happened the revolt of Les- 
bos, and the sedition of Corcyra. Both events 
deeply affected the interest of Athens; and the 
former is distinguished by such circumstances 
as serve to explain the political condition of the 
times, while the latter exhibits a striking but 
gloomy picture of Grecian manners. 

The island of Lesbos, extending above a 
hundred and fifty miles in circumference, is 
the largest, except Eubma, in the Ægean sea. 
Originally planted by Eolians, Lesbos was the 
mother of many Eolie colonies. They were 
established on the opposite continent, and 
separated from their metropolis by a strait 
of seven miles, which expands itseif into the 
gulf of Thebe, and is beautifully diversified by 
the Hecatonnesian and Arginussian isles, of 
old sacred to Apollo. The happy temperature 
of the climate of Lesbos conspired with the rich 
fertility of the soil to produce those delicious 
fruits, and those exquisite wines, which are still 
acknowledged by modern travellers to deserve 


XVI.] 


the encomiums so liberally bestowed on them 
by ancient writers.3 The convenience of its 
harbours furnished another source of wealth 
and advantage to this delightfal island, which, 
as early as the age of Homer, was reckoned 
populous and powerful, and, like the rest of 
Greece at that time, governed by the modcrate 
jurisdiction of hereditary princes. The abuse 
of royal power occasioned the dissolution of 
monarchy in Lesbos, as well as in the neigh- 
bouring isles. The rival cities of Mitylené, 
and Methymna contended for republican pre- 
eminence. The former prevailed; and having 
reduced Methymna, as well as six cities of in- 
ferior note, began to extend its dominion be- 
yond the narrow bounds of the island, and con- 
quered a considerable part of Troas. Mean 
while the internal government of Mitylené was 
often disturbed by sedition, and sometimes 
usurped by tyrants. The wise Pittacus, con- 
temporary and rival of Solon, endeavoured to 
remedy these evils by giving his countrymen a 
body of laws, comprised in six hundred verses, 
which adjusted their political rights, and regu- 
lated their behaviour and manners. The Les- 
bians afterwards underwent those general re- 
volutions, to which both the islands and the 
continent of Asia Minor were exposed from the 
Lydian and Persian power. Delivered from 


the yoke of Persia by the successful valour of. 


Athens and Sparta, the Lesbians, as well as all 
the Greek settlements around them, spurned the 
tyrannical authority of Sparta and Pausanias, 
and ranged themselves under the honourable 
colours of Athens, which they thenceforth con- 
tinued to respect in peace, and to follow in war. 

In the exercise of power the Athenians dis- 
played principles totally different from those by 
which they had attained it. The confederacy 
between Atbens and Lesbos was still supported, 
however, by mutual fear rather than by reci- 
procal affection. During peace, the Lesbians 
dreaded tlle navy of Athens; the Athenians 
feared to lose the assistance of Lesbos in war. 
Besides this, the Athenians were of the Ionic, 
the Lesbians of the Eolic, race; and the latter 
justly regretted that the allies of Athens should 
be successively reduced to the condition of 
subjects. They perceived the artful policy of 
that republic in allowing the Chians and Les- 
bians alone to retain the semblance of liberty. 
While the Chians and Lesbians, still free in 
appearance, assisted in subduing the other con- 
federates of Athens, that ambitious republic 
was always furnished with a plausible justifi- 
cation of her general oppression and tyranny ; 
since it was natural to imagine that men, left 
to the unrestrained liberty of choice, should, 
in matters indifferent to themselves, prefer the 
cause of justice to that of usurpation. But 
even the apparent freedom which the Lesbians 
enjoyed had become extremcly precarious, 
They felt themselves under the disagreeable 
necessity to soothe, to bribe, and to flatter the 
Athenian demagogues, and in all their transac- 
tions with that imperious people, to testify the 


3 Mons. de Guys, Tournefort, &c. agree with Horace 
(passim) and Strabo, l. xiii. p. 584—657. from which the 
following particulars in the ‘text, concerning Lesbos, are 
extracted. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


195 


most mortifying deference and submission. 
Notwithstanding their watchful attention never 
designedly to offend, they were continually 
endangered by the quarrelsome humour of a 
capricious multitude, and had reason to dread, 
lest, in consequence of some unexpected gust 
of passion, they should be compelled to de- 
molish their walls, and to surrender their ship- 
ping, the punishment already inflicted on such 
of the neighbouring islands as had incurred the 
displeasure of Athens. 

This uneasy situation naturally disposed the 
Lesbians, amidst the calamities of the second 
Peloponnesian invasion, heightened by the 
plague at Athens, to watch an opportunity to 
revolt. The following year was employed in 
assembling the scattercd inhabitants of the 
island within the walls of Mitylené, in strength- 
ening these walls, in fortifying their harbours, 
in augmenting their fleet, and in collecting 
troops and provisions from the fertile shores 
of the Euxine sea. But in the 
i 4: . fourth year of the war, their de- 
XSXVilo 1. : 3 
A. C. 428, S82: yet unripe for execution, was 

made known to the Athenians by 
the inhabitants of Tenedos, the neighbours and 
enemies of Lesbos, as well as by the citizens 
of Methymna, the ancient rival of Mitylené, 
and by several malcontents in the Lesbian capi- 
tal. Notwithstanding the concurrence of such 
powerful testimonies, the Athenian magistrates 
affected to disbelieve intelligence which their 
distressed circumstances rendered peculiarly 
alarming. The Lesbians, it was said, could 
never think of forsaking the alliance of a 
country, which had always treated them with 
such distinguished favour, how powerfully so- 
ever they might be urged to that measure by 
the Thebans, their Eolian brethren, and the 
Spartans, their ancient confederates. Ambas- 
sadors, however, were sent to Lesbos, desiring 
an explanation of rumours so dishonourable to 
the fidelity and gratitude of the island. 

The ambassadors having confirmed the re- 
port, Athens equipped a fleet of forty sail, in- 
tending to attack the enemy by surprise, while 
they celebrated, with universal consent, the 
anniversary festival of Apollo, on the promon- 
tory of Malea. But this design was rendered 
abortive by the diligence of a Mitylenian tra- 
veller, who, passing from Athens to Eubea, 
procceded southward to Geraistos, and, em- 
barking in a merchant vessel, reached Lesbos 
in less than three days from the time that he 
undertook this important service. His seasona- 
ble advice not only prevented the Mitylenians 
from leaving their city, but prepared them to 
appear, at the arrival of the enemy in a tolera- 
ble posture of defence. This state of prepara- 
tion cnabled them to obtain from Cleippidas, 
the Athenian admiral, a suspension of hostili- 
ties, until they despatched an embassy to 
Athens, to remove, as they pretended, the 
groundless resentment of the people, and to 
give ample satisfaction to the magistrates. 

Ol On the part of the Lesbians, this 
yp: transaction was nothing more thi 
Ixxxvill. 1. . mao. 4 

on a contrivance to gain time. They 

A. C. 428 ; 
* expected no favour or forgiveness 
from the Athenian assembly; and while this 


Olymp. 


196 


illusive negotiation was carrying on at Athens, 
other ambassadors went secretly to Sparta, re- 
questing that the Lesbians might be admitted 
into the Peloponnesian confederacy, and thus 
entitled to the protection of that powerful 
league. The Spartans referred them to the 
general assembly, which was to be soon held at 
Olympia, to solemnize the most splendid of all 
the Grecian festivals. After the games were 
ended, and the Athenians, who little expected 
that such matters were in agitation, had re- 
turned home, the Lesbian ambassadors were 
favourably heard in a general convention of the 
Peloponnesian representatives or deputies, from 
whom they received assurance of immediate 
and effectual assistance. 

This promise, liowever, was not punctually 
performed. The eyes of the Athenians were at 
length opened; and while the Peloponnesians 
prepared or deliberated, thcir more active ene- 
mies had already taken the field. Various 
skirmishes, in which the islanders showed little 
vigour in their own defence, engaged the 
neighbouring states of Lemnos and Imbros to 
send, on the first summons, considerable sup- 
plies of troops to their Athenian confederates; 
but as the combined forces were still insufiicient 
completely to invest Mitylené, a powerful rein- 
forcement was sent from Athens; and before 
the beginning of winter, the place was blocked 
up by land, while an Athenian fleet occupied 
the harbour. i 

The unfavourable season, and still more, that 
dilatoriness which so often obstructed the mea- 
sures of the confederates, prevented timely aid 
from arriving at Mitylené. But in order to 
make a diversion in favour of their new allies, 
the Peloponnesians assembled a considerable 
armament at the isthmus, intending to convey 
their ships over land from Corinth to the sea 
of Athens, that they might thus infest the Athe- 
nian shores with their fleet, while the army 
carried on its usual ravages in the central parts 
of Attica. The activity of the Athenians de- 
feated this design. Notwithstanding their nu- 
merous squadrons on the coasts of Pelopon- 
nesus, Thrace, and Lesbos, they immediately 
fitted out a hundred sail to defend their own 
shores. The Peloponnesian sailors, who had 
been hastily collected from the maritime towns, 
soon became disgusted with an expedition, 
attended with unforeseen difficulties; and, as 
autumn advanced, the militia from the inland 
country grew impatient to return to their fields 
and vineyards. During winter, the Mitylenians 
were still disappointed in their hope of relief. 
They were cnoouraged, however, to persevere 
in resistance, by the arrival of Salethus, a 
Spartan general of considerable merit, who 
having landed in an obscure harbour of the 
island, travelled by land towards Mitylené ; 
and, during the obscurity of night, passed the 
Athenian wall of circumvallation, by favour 
of a breach made by a torrent. Salethus gave 
the besieged fresh assurances that a powerful 
fleet would be sent to their assistance early in 
the spring; and that, at the same time, the 
Athenians should be harassed by an invasion 
more terrible and destructive than any which 
they had yet experienced. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 
The latter part of the promise 


a a a o Was indeed performed. The Pelo- 
A C 427. ponnesians invaded Attica. What 


ever had been spared in former in- 
cursions, now fell a prey to their fury. But 
after the spring was considerably advanced, 
the long-expected fleet was looked for in vain. 
The same procrastination and difficulties still 
retarded the preparations of the confederates; 
and when at length forty sail were collected, 
the command was bestowed on the Spartan 
Alcidas, a man totally devoid of that spirit and 
judgment essential to the character of a naval 
commander. Instead of sailing directly to the 
relief of Mitylené, he wasted much precious 
time in pursuing the Athenian merchantmen, 
in harassing the unfortified islands, and in 
alarming the defenceless and unwarlike in- 
habitants of Ionia, who could scarcely recover 
from their astonishment, at seeing a Pclopon- 
nesian fleet in those seas. Many trading ves- 
sels, that sailed between the numerous islands 
and harbours on that extensive coast, fell into 
the hands of Alcidas; for when they descried 
his squadron, they attempted not to avoid it; 
many fearlessly approached it, as certainly 
Athenian, In consequence of this imprudence, 
Alcidas took a great number of prisoners, 
whom he butchered in cold blood at Myonesus. 
_This barbarity only disgraced 
ai a himself, and injured the Spartan 
A. C. 497, Cause in Asia, many cities of which 

~~ * were previously ripe for revolt. 
Before he attempted to accomplish the main 
object of his expedition, the opportunity was 
for ever lost by the surrender of Mitylené. 
Despair of assistance, and scarcity of provi- 
sions, had obliged Salæthus, who began him- 
self by this time to suspect that the Pelopon- 
nesians had laid aside all thoughts of succour- 
ing the place, to arm? the populace, in order to 
make a vigorous assault on the Athenian lines. 
But the lower ranks of men, who in Lesbos, 
as well as in all the Grecian isles, naturally fa- 
voured the cause of Athens, the avowed patron 
of democracy, no sooner received their armour, 
than they refused obeying their superiors, and 
threatened, that unless the corn were speedily 
brought to the market-place, and equally di- 
vided among all the citizens, they would in- 
stantly submit to the besiegers. The aristo- 
cratical party prudently yielded to the torrent 
of popular fury, which they had not strength 
to resist; and justly apprehensive, lest a more 
obstinate defence might totally exclude them 
from the benefit of canitulation, they surren- 
dered to Paches, the Athenian commander, on 
condition that none of the prisoners should be 
enslaved or put to death, until their agents, 
who were immediately sent to implore the 
clemency of Athens, sheuld return with the 
sentence of that republic. 

The terms were accepted and ratified; but 
such were the furious resentments which prce- 
vailed in that age, such the dark suspicions, 
and such the total disregard to all laws of jus- 
tice and humanity, that the Athenian army had 


Olymp. 


1 He gave the populace, who were before light armed, 
heavy armour. Thucydid. p. 188. English cannot imitato 
his expression: o+AsZes Tov nuov wgotseoy VINON OvTe. 


XVL] 


no sooner taken possession of the place, than 
the chief authors and abettors of the revolt, 
judging it imprudent to trust their safety to 
the faith of treaties, and the sanctity of oaths, 
flew for protection to their temples and altars. 
This unseasonable diffidence (for Paches ap- 
pears to have united uncommon humanity with 
a daring spirit, and great military abilities) dis- 


covered conscious guilt, and enabled the Athe- 


nians to distinguish between their friends and 
enemies. The latter were protected by Paches, 
and prevailed on to withdraw from their sanc- 
tuaries. He afterwards sent them to the isle 


of Tenedos, until their fate, as well as that of 


their fellow citizens, should be finally deter- 
mined by the Athenian republic. 

Immediately after the arrival of the Mityle- 
nian ambassadors, the people of Athens had 
assembled to deliberate on this important sub- 
ject. Agitated by the giddy transports of tri- 
umph over the rebellious ingratitude and per- 
fidy of a people, who, though distinguished by 
peculiar favours, had abandoned and betrayed 
their protectors in the season of danger, the 
Athenians doomed to death all the Mitylenian 
citizens, and condemned the women and chil- 
dren to perpetual servitude. In one day the 
bill was proposed, the decree passed, and the 
same evening a galley was despatched to 
Paches, conveying this cruel and bloody reso- 
lution. But the night left room for reflection; 
and the feelings of humanity were awakened 
by the stings of remorse. In the morning, 
having assembled, as usual, in the public square, 
men were surprised and pleased to find the 
sentiments of their ncighbours exactly corres- 
ponding with their own. Their dejected coun- 
tenances met each other; they lamented, with 
one accord, the rashness and ferocity of their 
passion, and bewailed the unhappy fate of Mi- 
tylené, the destined object of their misguided 
frenzy. The Mitylenian ambassadors availed 
themselves of this sudden change of sentiment; 
a new assembly was convened, and the ques- 
tion submitted to a second deliberation. 

A turbulent impetuous eloquence had raised 
the audacious profligacy of Cleon, from the 
lowest rank of life, to a high degree of au- 
thority in the Athenian assembly. The multi- 
tude were deceived by his artifices, and pleased 
with his frontless impudence, which they called 
boldness, and manly openness of character. 
His manners they approved in proportion as 
they resembled their own; and the worst of 
his vices found advocates among the dupes of 
his pretended patriotism. This violent dema- 
gogue, whose arrogant? presumption so unwor- 
thily succeeded the enlightened magnanimity 
of Pericles, had, in the former assembly, pro- 
posed and carried the sanguinary decree against 
Mitylené. He still persevered in supporting that 
atrocious measure, and upbraided the weak and 
wavering counsels of liis countrymen, liable to 
be shaken by every gust of passion, and totally 


2 The character of Cleon, sketched in miniature by Thu- 
cydides, pp. 193 and 266. is painted at full length by Aristo- 

hanes, in his comedy of the Ivzeis, “The Horseman.” 

et we could not safely trust the description of the angry 
satirist, who bore a personal grudge to Cleon, unless the 
principal strokes were justified by the impartial narrative 
of Thucydides. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


197 


incapable of that stability essential in the man- 
agement of great affairs, and particularly in- 
dispensable in the government of distant de- 
pendencies. p 

« Such a temper of mind (he had often ven- 
tured to declare, and would repeat the same 
disagreeable truth as often as their folly obliged 
him) was alike unworthy, and incapable, of 
command. That a democracy was unfit for 
sovereign rule, past experience convinced him, 
and the present instance now confirmed his 
opinion. The empire of Athens could not be 
maintained without an undivided attachment, 
an unalterable adherence, to the interest and 
honour of the republic. But the masters of 
Greece were the slaves of their own capricious 
passions; excited at will by the perfidious 
voice of venal speakers, bribed to betray them. 
Lulled to a fatal repose by the softness of me- 
lodious words, they forgot the dignity of the 
state, and restrained their personal resentment 
against multiplied and unprovoked injuries. 
What was still more dangerous, they invited, 
by an ill-judged lenity, the imitation and con- 
tinuance of such crimes as must terminate in 
public disgrace and inevitable ruin. What else 
can be expected from pardoning the aggravated 
guilt of Mitylené? Encouraged by this weak- 
ness, must not the neighbouring cities and 
islands, whose resources form the principal 
vigour of the republic, greedily seize the first 
opportunity of shaking off the yoke, which 
they have long reluctantly borne; and follow 
the example of a revolt, which, without pre- 
senting them with the fear of danger, promised 
them the hope of deliverance ?” 

This sanguinary speech was answered by 
Deodatus, a man endowed with an amiable 
moderation of character, joined to a profound 
knowledge of government, and a deep insight 
into human nature. In the former assembly, 
this respectable orator had ventured, almost 
single and alone, to plead the cause of the 
Mitylenians, and to assert the rights of lu- 
manity. He observed, “ that assemblies were 
liable to be misled by the fury of resentment, 
as well as by the weakness of compassion ; and 
that errors of the former kind were often at- 
tended by consequences not less destructive, 
and always followed by a far more bitter re- 
pentance. Against vague slanders and calumny 
no man is secure; but a true patriot must learn 
to despise such unmanly reproaches. Un- 
daunted by opposition, le will offer good coun- 
sel, to which there are no greater enemies than 
haste and anger. For my part, I stand up 
neither to defend the Mitylenians, nor to waste 
time in fruitless accusations. They lave in- 
jured us most outrageously, yet [ would not 
advise you to butclier them, unless thal can be 
proved expedient; neither, were they objects 
of forgiveness, would I advise you to pardon 
them, unless that were conducive to the pub- 
lic interest, the only point on which our pre- 
sent deliberation turns. Guided by vulgar 
prejudices, Cleon has loudly asserted, that the 
destruction of the Mitylenians is necessary to 


3 This is speaking like an orator. It will appear in the 
sequel, that Deodatus by no means considered the inno- 
cence or guilt of the Mitylenians as things indifferent. 


198 


deter neighbouring cities from rebellion. But 
distant subjects must be kept in obedience by 
the mildness of discretionary caution, not by 
the rigour ofsanguinary examples. What peo- 
ple were ever so mad as to revolt, without ex- 
pecting, either through their domestic strength, 
or the assistance of foreign powers, to make 
good their pretensions? Men who have known 
liberty, how sweet it is, ought not to be punished 
too severely for aspiring at that inestimable en- 
joyment. But their growing disaffection must 
be watched with care, and anticipated by dili- 
gence ; they must be prevented from taking 
the first steps towards emancipation; and 
taught, if possible, to regard it as a thing alto- 
gether unattainable. 

“ Yet such is the nature of man, considered 
either individually or collectively, that a law 
of infallible prevention will never be enacted. 
Of all crimes that any reasonable creature can 
commit, Desire is the forerunner, and Hope the 
attendant. These invisible principles within, 
are too powerful for all external terrors; nor 
has the increasing severity of laws rendered 
crimes less frequent in latter times, than during 
the mildness of the heroic ages, when few 
punishments were capital. While hunian na- 
ture remains the same, weakness will be dis- 
trustful, necessity will be daring, poverty will 
excite injustice, power will urge to rapacity, 
misery will sink into meanness, and prosperity 
swell into presumption. ‘There are other con- 
tingencies, which stir up the mutiny of pas- 
sions, too stubborn for control. The authority 
of government can neither change the combi- 
nation of events, nor interrupt the occasions of 
fortune. Impelled by such causes, the selfish 
desires of men will hurry them into wickedness 
and vice, whatever penalties await them. The 
imagination becomes familiar with one degree 
of punishment, as well as with another; and, 
in every degree, hope renders it alike ineffectual 
and impotent; since neither individuals nor 
communities would be guilty of injustice, if 
they believed that it must infallibly subject 
them to punishment, small or great. When 
individuals commit crimes, they always expect 
to elude the vengeance of law. When com- 
munities rebel, they expect to render their re- 
volt not the occasion of triumph to their ene- 
mies, but the means of their own deliverance 
and security. 

“ The severe punishment of Mitylené cannot, 
therefore, produce the good consequences with 
which Cleon has flattered you. But this cruel 
measure will be attended with irreparable pre- 
judice to your interest. It will estrange the 
affections of your allies; provoke the resent- 
ment of Greece; excite the indignation of man- 
kind; and, instead of preventing rebellion, 
render it more frequent and more dangerous. 
When all hopes of success have vanished, your 
rebellious subjects will never be persuaded to 
return to their duty. They will seek death in 
the field rather than await it from the hand of 
the executioner. Though reduced to the last 
extremity, they will spurn submission, and 
gathering courage from despair, either repel 
your assaults, or fall a useless prey, weak and 
exhausted, incapable of indemnifying you for 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


the expense of the war, or of raising those sub- 
sidies and contributions, which rendered their 
subjugation a reasonable object either of inte- 
rest or ambition. 

“ The revolt of Mitylené was the work of 
an aristocratical faction, fomented by the Lace- 
dæmonians and Thebans. The great body of 
the people were no sooner provided with arms, 
than they discovered their affection for Athens. 
It would be most cruel and most ungrateful, to 
confound the innocent with the guilty, to in- 
volve friends and foes in undistinguished ruin. 
Yet this odious measure would show more 
weakness than cruelty, more folly than injus 
tice. What advantage could the enemies of 
Athens more earnestly desire? What boon 
could the aristocratical factions, so profusely 
scattered over Greece, more anxiously request 
from Heaven? Furnished with your sangui 
nary decree against Mitylené, they might for 
ever alienate from the republic the affections 
of her subjects and confederates; for having 
once seduced them to revolt, they might unan- 
swerably convince them, that safety could only 
be purchased by persevering in rebellion, and 
that to return to duty was to submit to death.” 

The moderation and good sense of Deodatus 
(such was the influence of Cleon) were ap- 
proved only by a small majority of voices. Yet 
it remained uncertain, whether this late and re- 
luctant repentance would avail the Mitylenians, 
who, before any advice of it arrived, might be 
condemned and executed in consequence of the 
former decree. A galley was instantly fur- 
nished with every thing that might promote 
expedition. The Mitylenian deputies promised 
invaluable rewards to the rowers. But the 
fate of a numerous and lately flourishing com- 
munity, still depended on the uncertainty of 
winds and currents. The first advice-boat had 
sailed, as the messenger of bad news, with a 
slow and melancholy progress. The second 
advanced with the rapid movement of joy. Not 
an adverse blast opposed her course. The ne- 
cessity of food and sleep never restrained a mo- 
ment the labour of the oar; and her diligence 
was rewarded by reaching Lesbos in time to 
check the cruel hand of the executioner. 

The bloody sentence had been just read, even 
the orders had been issued for its execution, 
when the critical arrival of the Athenian galley 
converted the lamentable outcries, or gloomy 
despair of a whole republic, into expressions of 
admiration and gratitude. 

The punishment, however, of 


on 9 Mitylené was still sufficiently se- 
A. C. 427, Vere: even according to the rigor- 


ous maxims of Grecian policy. The 
prisoners, who had been sent to Tenedos, were 
transported to Athens. They exceeded a thou- 
sand in number, and were indiscriminately con- 
demned to death. Salethus, the Spartan gene- 
ral, shared the same fate, after descending to 
many mean contrivances to save his life. The 
walls of Mitylené were demolished, its shipping 
was sent to Athens, and its territory divided 
into three thousand portions, of which three 
hundred were consecrated to the gods, and the 
rest distributed by lot among the people of 
Athens. The Lesbians were still allowed to 


XVL] 


cultivate, as tenants, their own fields, paying 
for each share an annual rent of about siz 
pounds nine shillings sterling.! 

The activity and judgment of Paches thus 
effected an important conquest to his country. 
Though the affairs of Lesbos might have re- 
quired his undivided attention, he no sooner 
was apprised of the appearance of the Pelopon- 
nesian fleet, than he immediately put to sea, 
protected the allies of Athens, and chased the 
enemy from those shores. During the whole 
time of his command, he behaved with firmness 
tempered by humanity. But, at his return to 
Athens, he met with the usual reward of supe- 
rior merit. He was accused of misconduct; 
and finding sentence ready to be pronounced 
against him, his indignation rose so high, that 
he slew himself in court.? . 

The Spartan admiral, Alcidas, met, on the 
other hand, with a reception (such is the blind- 
ness of popular prejudice!) far better than his 
behaviour deserved. The Peloponnesian fleet 
of forty sail, imprudently intrusted to his com- 
mand, retired ingloriously, after a most expen- 
sive and fruitless expedition, to the protection 
of their friendly harbours. A northerly wind, 
however, drove them on the shores of Crete; 
from whence they dropped in successively to 
the port of Cyllené, which had recovered the 
disaster inflicted on it by the Corcyreans at 
the beginning of the war, and became the ordi- 
nary rendezvous of the Peloponnesian fleet. In 
this place, Alcidas found thirteen galleys, com- 
manded by Brasidas, a Spartan of distinguished 
valour and abilities, purposely chosen to assist 
the admiral with his counsels. This small 
squadron had orders to join the principal ar- 
mament; with which the confederates, as their 
design had miscarried at Lesbos, purposed to 
undertake an expedition to Corcyra, then agi- 
tated by the tumult of a most dangerous se- 
dition. 

Among the hostilities already related between 
the republics of Corinth and Corcyra, we de- 
scribed the enterprises by which the Corin- 
thians took above twelve hundred Corcyrean 
prisoners. Many of these persons were de- 
scended from the first families in the island ; 
a circumstance on which the policy of Corinth 
founded an extensive plan of artifice and ambi- 
tion. The Corcyreans, instead of feeling the 
rigours of captivity, or experiencing the stern 
severity of republican resentment, were treated 
with the liberal and endearing kindness of Gre- 
cian hospitality. Having acquired their confi- 
dence by good offices, the Corinthians insinuated 
to them, in the unguarded hours of convivial 
merriment, the danger as well as the disgrace 
of their connection with Athens, the universal 
tyrant of her allies; and represented their 
shameful ingratitude in deserting Corinth, to 
which the colony of Corcyra owed not only its 
early happiness and prosperity, but its original 
establishment and existence. These arguments, 
seasonably repeated, and urged with much ad- 
dress, at length proved effectual. The Corcy- 
reans recovered their freedom, and returned to 


1 Thucydid. p. 173—206. 
2 Plutarch. in Nicia, et in Aristid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


199 


their native country ; and while they pretended 
to be collecting the sum of eight hundred 
talents (ebout a hundred and fifty thousand 
pounds sterling) to pay their ransom, they left 
nothing untried to detach Corcyra from the 
Athenian interest. 

Their first expedient for accomplishing this 
purpose was, to traduce the popular leaders, 
who were the most steadfast partizans of that 
republic. Accusations, impeachments, all the 
artifices and chicane of legal persecution, were 
directed and played off against them. The 
demagogues, who were not of a temper to 
brook such injuries, retorted on their antago- 
nists with equal ingenuity, and far superior 
success. Peithias, the most distinguished advo- 
cate of the Athenian or democratica] party, 
accused five ringleaders of the opposite faction 
of having destroyed the fence which inclosed the 
grove of Jupiter; a trespass estimated by the 
Corcyrean law at a severe pecuniary punish- 
ment.? In vain the persons accused denied 
the charge ; in vain, after conviction before the 
senate, they fled as supplicants to the altars. 
They could obtain no mitigation of the amerce- 
ment. The demagogue was inflexible; and 
his influence with his colleagues in the senate, 
of which he happened that year to be a mem- 
ber, determined them to execute the law in its 
utmost rigour. 

Exasperated by this severity, and not doubt- 
ing that during the administration of the pre- 
sent senate, many similar prosecutions would 
be raised against them, the aristocratical party 
entered into a conspiracy for defending them- 
selves and their country against the oppressive 
injustice of Athens and Athenian partizans. 
On this emergency they acted like men who 
knew the danger of delay. Having fortified 
their cause with a sufficient number of adhe- 
rents, they armed themselves with concealed 
daggers, suddenly rushed into the senate-house, 
and assassinated Peithias, with sixty of his 
friends. This boldness struck their opponents 
with terror. Such persons as felt themselves 
most obnoxious to the conspirators, immediately 
fled to the harbour, embarked, and sailed to 
Athens. 

The people of Corcyra, thus deprived of their 
leaders by an event equally unex- 
Ixxxviil. 2. pected and atrocious, were seized 
A.C 427 with such astonishment as suspend- 

ae * ed their power of action. Before 
they had sufficiently recovered themselves to 
take the proper measures for revenge, or even 
for defence, the arrival of a Corinthian vessel, 
and a Lacedemonian embassy, encouraged 
their opponents to attempt their destruction. 
The attack was made at the hour of full as- 
sembly ; the forum, or public square, presented 
a scene of horror; the streets of Corcyra 
streamed with blood. The unguarded citizens 
were incapable of making resistance against 
such sudden and unforeseen fury. They fled in 
trepidation from the forum, and the more spa- 


Olymp. 


3 The fine was, for every pale a stater (one pound and 
nine pence sterling.) Such causes were frequent in other 
parts of Greece, as we learn from the oration of Lysias in 
defence of a citizen accused of cutting down a consecrated 
olive. See the translation of Lysias and Isocrates, p. 377 


200 


cious streets. Some took possession of the ci- 
tadel; others of the Hillæan harbour; and in 
general occupied, before evening, the higher and 
more remote parts of the town. Their adversa- 
ries kept possession of the market-place, around 
which most of their houses stood, or assembled 
in the principal harbour, that points towards 
Epirus, from which they expected succour. The 
day following was spent in doubtful skirmishes, 
and in summoning from the country the as- 


sistance of the peasants, or rather slaves, by | 
whom chiefly the lands of the island were cul- | 


tivated. These naturally ranged themselves on 
the side of the people: the Corcyrean women 
zealously embraced the same party, and sus- 
tained the tumult with more than female cou- 
rage. One inactive day intervened. ‘The. par- 
tizans of aristocracy were reinforced by eight 
hundred auxiliaries from the continent of Epi- 
rus. But in the succeeding engagement, the 
numbers and fury of the slaves, who seized the 
present opportunity to resent the barbarous cru- 
elty of their respective masters, and the gene- 
rous ardour of the women, rendered the friends 
of liberty completely victorious. The van- 
quished fled towards the forum and the greater 
harbour. Even these posts they soon despaired 


of being able to maintain; and, to escape im- i 


mediate death, set fire to the surrounding 
houses, which being soon thrown into a blaze, 
presented an impervious obstacle to the rage of 
the assailants. The most beautiful part of 
Corcyra was thus destroyed in one night; the 
houses, shops, magazines, and much valuable 
merchandize, were totally consumed; and had 
an easterly wind aided the conflagration, the 
whole city must in a short time have been re- 
duced to ashes. Amidst this scene of confu- 
sion and horror, the Corinthian galley, together 
with the auxiliaries from Epirus, retired in con- 
sternation from a place that seemed doomed to 
inevitable destruction. 

Next day twelve Athenian galleys arrived 
from Naupactus, containing, besides their ordi- 
nary complement of men, five hundred heavy- 
armed Messenians. Nicostratus, who com- 
manded this armament, had: upon the first in- 
telligence of the sedition, hastened with the 
utmost cclerity to support the cause of Athens 
and democracy. He had the good fortune not 
only to anticipate the Peloponnesian squadron, 
which was so anxiously expected by the enemy, 
but to find his friends triumphant. They had 
obtained, however, a melancholy triumph over 
the splendour of their country, which, if its fac- 
tions were not speedily reconciled, was threat- 
ened with total ruin. Nicostratus omitted 
nothing that seemed proper to heal the wounds 
of that afflicted commonwealth. By authority, 
entreaties, and commands, he persuaded the 
contending parties to accommodate matters be- 
tween themselves, and to renew their alliance 
with Athens. Having happily terminated this 
business, he was intent on immediate depar- 
ture ; but the managers for the people proposed, 
that he should leave five of his ships with them, 
to deter the enemy from any fresh commotion, 
and take in exchange five of theirs, which 
should be instantly manned to attend him on his 
station. With this proposal he complied; and 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


the Corcyreans selected the mariners destined to 
sail with Nicostratus. Those named for this 
service were, to a man, partisans of the oli- 
garchy and Lacedemon: a circumstance which 
created in them just alarm, lest they should be 
transported to Athens, and notwithstanding the 
faith of treaties, condemned to death. They 
took refuge in the temple of Castor and Pollux: 
the assurances of Nicostratus could scarcely re- 
move them from this sanctuary; and all his de- 
clarations and oaths were incapable to prevail on 
them to embark. The opposite party asserted, 
that this want of confidence betrayed not only 
the consciousness of past, but the fixed purpose 
of future, guilt; and would have immediately 
despatched them with their daggers, had not 
Nicostratus interposed. Terrified at these pro- 
ceedings, the unhappy victims of popular malice 
and suspicion assembled, to the number of four 
hundred, and retired with one accord, as suppli- 
cants, to the temple of Juno. From this sanctu- 
ary they were persuaded to arise, and were 
transported to a neighbouring island, or rather 
rock, small, barren, and uninhabited. There 
they remained four days, supplied barely with 
the means of subsistence, and impatiently wait- 
ing their fate. 

In this posture of affairs a numerous fleet was 
seen approaching from the south. This was the 
long-expected squadron of fifty-three ships com- 
manded by Alcidas and Brasidas. With the 
unfortunate slowness inhcrent in all the mea- 
sures of the confederacy, this armament arrived 
too late to support the ruined cause of their 
friends. The Peloponnesian commanders, how- 
ever, might still expect to take a useless but 
agreeable vengeance on their enemies. To ac- 
complish this design they prepared to attack the 
harbour of Corcyra, while all was hurry and 
confusion. The islanders had sixty vessels fit 
for sea, in which they embarked with the ut- 
most expedition, and successively sailed forth 
as each happened to be ready. Their ardour 
and impatience disdained the judicious advice 
of Nicostratus, who alone, calm and unmoved 
amidst a scene of unexpected danger, exhorted 
them to keep the harbour until they were all 
prepared to advance in line of battle, gene- 
rously offering, with his twelve Athenian gal 
leys, to sustain the first assaults of the enemy. 

The Peloponnesians, observing the hostile ar 
mament scattered and unsupported, divided 
their own fleet into two squadrons. The one, 
consisting of twenty galleys, attacked the Corcy- 
reans; the other, amounting to thirty-three, en- 
deavoured to surround the Athenians. But the 
address of the Athenian -mariners frustrated 
this attempt. Their front was extended with 
equal order and celerity. They assaulted, at 
once, the opposite wings of the Peloponnesian 
fleet, intercepted their motion, and skilfully en- 
circled them around, hoping to drive their ships 
against each other, and to throw them into uni- 
versal disorder. Perceiving these maneuvres, 
the ships which followed the Corcyreans left off 
the pursuit, and steered to support the main 
squadron: and now, with their whole embodied 
strength, they prepared to pour on the Athe- 
nians. These prudently declined the shock of su- 
perior force: but the glory of their retreat was 


XVI. 


equal to a victory. They seasonably shifted 
their helms, siowly and regularly gave way, and 
thus recovered the retreat of their Corcyrean 
allies, who, having already lost thirteen vessels, 
were totally unable to renew the engagement. 

Having reached the harbour, the Corcyreans 
still feared lest the enemy, in pursuance of their 
victory, should make a descent on the coast, and 
even assault the city. But the manly counsels 
of Brasidas, who strongly recommended the lat- 
ter measure, were defeated by the timidity and 
meapacity of Alcidas. The Corcyreans seized, 
therefore, the present opportunity to remove the 
supplicants from the uninhabited island to the 
temple of Juno, as less exposed there, to be dis- 
covered and taken up by the Peloponnesian 
fleet. Next day they entered into accommoda- 
tion with these unhappy men, and even ad- 
mitted several of them to embark in thirty ves- 
sels, which they hastily equipped, as the last 
defence of the island. The Peloponnesians, 
mean while, still prevented, by the dastardly 
counsels of Alcidas, from attacking the capital, 
wreaked their resentment on the adjacent ter- 
ritory. But before the dawn of the succeeding 
day, they were alarmed by lights on the north- 
ern shore of Leucadia, which, by their number 
and disposition, signified the approach of an 
Athenian fleet of sixty sail. 

The situation of the invaders was now ex- 
tremely dangerous. If they stretched out to sea, 
they might be obliged to encounter the unbroken 
vigour of the Athenians; if they cruised off the 
coast, they would be compelled to contend, not 
only with the power of Atnens, but with the 
resentment of Corcyra. One measure alone 
promised the hope of safety : it was immediately 
adopted. Having crept along the shore to Leu- 
eadia, they carried their vessels across the isth- 
mus,! afterwards buried in the sea, but which 
then joined the peninsula, now the island of 
Leucas, to the adjacent coast of Acarnania. 
From thence sailing through the narrow seas, 
which separate the neighbouring isles from the 
continent, they escaped without discovery, and 
safely arrived in the harbour of Cyllené. 

» The democratical party in Corcyra soon per- 
ceived the flight of the enemy, and descried the 
approach of the Athenian fleet, commanded by 
Eurymedon. These fortunate events, which 
vught in generous minds to have effaced the 
dark impressions of enmity and revenge, only 
enabled the Corcyreans to display the deep ina- 
lignity of their character. They commanded 
ne thirty galleys, recently manned, to pass in 
‘eview, and in proportion as they discovered 

leir enemies, punished them with immediate 
death. Fifty of the principal citizens, who still 
clung to the altars in the temple of Juno, they 
seduced from their asylum, and instantly butch- 
ered. 

Politics and party formed the pretence for 
violence, while individuals gratified their private 
passions, and wreaked vengeance on their per- 
sonal foes. The sedition became every hour 
more fierce: tlie confusion thickened; the whole 
city was filled with consternation and horror. 


1 D’Anville considers the ancient Leucadia as an island; 
Ptolemy speaks of it aa a peninsula. 


2C 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


201 


The altars and images of the gods were sur- 
rounded by votaries, whom even the terrors of 
a superstitious age could no longer protect. The 
miserable victims were dragged from the most 
revered temples, whose walls and pavement 
were now first stained with civil blood. Many 
withdrew themselves by a voluntary death from 
the fury of their enemies. In every house, and 
in every family, scenes were transacted too hor- 
rid for description. Parents, children, brothers, 
and pretended friends, seized the desired mo- 
ment for gratifying their latent malignity, and 
perpetrating crimes without a name. The un- 
feeling Eurymedon (whose character, as will 
shortly appear, was a disgrace to human nature) 
showed neither ability nor inclination to stop 
the carnage. During the space of six days that 
his fleet continued in the Corcyrean harbour, 
the actors in this lamentable tragedy continually 
aggravated the enormity of their guilt, and im- 
proved in the refinement of their cruelty. A 
dreadful calm succeeded this violent agitation. 
Five hundred partisans of aristocracy escaped 
to the coast of Epirus; and the Athenian fleet 
retired. 

The fugitives, instead of rejoicing in their 
safety, thought only of revenge. They sent 
agents to Lacedemon and Corinth. By describ- 
ing their sufferings to the astonished Epirots, 
they excited their compassion, and acquired their 
assistance. The severity of the prevailing party 
in Corcyra increased the number of outlaws; 
who, at length, finding themselves sufficiently 
powerful to attack and conquer the island, 
which, from the moment of their banishment, 
they had infested by naval descents, sailed with 
their whole strength for that purpose in boats 
provided by the Barbarians. In landing at 
Corcyra, the rowers drove with such violence 
against the shore, as broke many of their vessels 
in pieces; the rest they immediately burned, 
disdaining safety unless purchased by victory. 
This desperate measure deterred opposition; 
they advanced, seized, and fortified, mount 
Istoné; a strong post in the neighbourhood of 
the city, from which they ravaged the territory, 
and subjected their enemies to the multiplied 
evils of war and famine. 

An epidemical disorder increased 


Olymp. the measure of their calamities. 
Ixxxviii. 4. The Hames of civil discord, whicl 
A. C. 425. ma de 


had never been thoroughly extin- 
guished, again broke out within the walls. 
The misery of the Corcyreans was verging to 
despair, when an Athenian fleet of forty sail 
appeared off the coast. This armament was 
commanded by Eurymedon and Sophocles. It 
was principally destined against Sicily, as we 
shall have occasion to relate, but ordered in its 
voyage thitherto touch at Corcyra, and regulate 
the affairs of that island. This unexpected as- 
sistance enabled the besieged to become the be- 
siegers. The outworks and defences of Mount 
Istoné were successively taken, the parties who 
defended them gradually retiring to the more 
elevated branclies, and, at length, to the very 
summit, of the mountain. They were on the 
point of being driven from thence, and of falling 
into the hands of enemies exasperated by innu- 
nicrable injuries suffered and inflicted. Alarm- 


202 


ed by this reflection, they called out to the Athe- | 
nians for quarter, and surrendered to Euryme- 
don and Sophocles, on condition that their fate 
should be decided by the people of Athens. 
They were sent prisoners to the small island of 
Ptychia, till it should be found convenient to 
transport them te Athens, and commanded not 
to make any attempt to stir from thence under 
pain of annulling the capitulation which had 
been granted them.. 

Ifthe malignity of the Corcyrean populace 
had not exceeded the ordinary standard of hu- 
man pravity, their resentment must have been 
softened by the sudden transition wrought by 
accident in their favour. But their first concern 
was to intercept the precarious clemency of 
Athens, and to assure the destruction of their 
adversaries. This atrocious design was exe- 
cuted by a stratagem equally detestable, uniting, 
by a singular combination, whatever is savage 
in ferocity, and base in perfidy. By means of 
proper agents despatched secretly to Ptychia, 
the leaders of the popular faction acquainted 
those of the prisoners, with whom, in peaceable 
~ times, they had respectively lived in some ha- 
bits of intimacy, that the Athenians had dcter- 
mined to give them up indiscriminately to the 
fury of the populace. Pretending much regret 
that persons in whom they once had so tender 
a concern, should share the common calamity, 
they exhorted them, by all possible means, to 
contrive their escape, and offered to provide 
them with a bark for that purpose. The known 
cruelty of Eurymedon made the artifice suc- 
ceed. The bark was already launched from 
the island; the terms of the capitulation were 
thus infringed; the deluded victims were ap- 
prehended in the very act of departure, seized, 
bound, and delivered into the hands of their in- 
exorable enemies. 

The Athenian commanders, Eurymedon and 
Sophocles, favoured the deceit, because, as they 
were themselves obliged to proceed towards 
Sicily, they envied the honour that would ac- 
crue to their successors in conducting the cap- 
tives to Athens, To gratify this meanness of 
soul without example, they permitted barbarı- 
ties beyond belief. 

The unhappy prisoners were first confined in 
adungeon. Dragged successively from thence, 
in parties of twenty at a time, they were com- 
pelled to pass in pairs, their hands tied behind 
their backs, between two ranks of their ene- 
mies, armed with whips, prongs, and every in- 
strument of licentious and disgraceful torture. 
The wretches left in prison were long ignorant 
of the ignominious cruelty inflicted on their 
companions: but, as soon as they learned the 
abominable scenes transacted without, they re- 
fused to quit their confinement, guarded the en- 
trance, and invited, with one consent, the Athe- 
nians to murder them. But the Athenians want- 
ed either humanity or firmness to commit this 
kind cruelty. The Corcyrean populace ven- 
tured not to force a passage from despair. They 
mounted the prison walls, uncovered the roof, 
and overwhelmed those below with stones, 
darts, and arrows. These weapons were dc- 
structive to many, and furnished others with 
the means of destroying themselves, or cach | 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[ Cua. 


other. They laid down their heads, opened 
their breasts, exposed their necks, mutually so- 
liciting, in plaintive or frantic accents, the fatal 
siroke. The whole night (for the night inter- 
vened) was spent in this horrid scene; and the 
morning presented a spectacle too shocking for 
description. The obdurate hearts of the Cor- 


|cyreans were incapable of pity or remorse; 


but their relenting eyes could not bear the 
sight; and they commanded the bodies of their 
fellow citizens, now breathless or expiring, to 
be thrown on carts, and conveyed without the 
walls. 

Thus ended the sedition of Corcyra;! but its 
consequences were not soon to end. The conta- 
gion of that unhappy island engendered a po- 
litical malady, which spread its baneful in- 
fluence over Greece. The aristocratical, and 
still more, the popular governments of that 
country, had ever been liable to faction, which 
occasionally blazed into sedition. But this mor- 
bid tendency, congenial to the constitution of 
republics, thenceforth assumed a more danger- 
ous appearance, and betrayed more alarming 
symptoms. In every republic, and almost in 
every city, the intriguing and ambitious found 
the ready protection of Athens, or of Sparta, 
according as their selfish and guilty designs 
were screened under the pretence of maintain- 
ing the prerogatives of the nobles, or asserting 
the privileges of the people. A virtuous and mo- 
derate aristocracy, an equal, impartial freedom, 
these were the colourings which served to jus- 
tify violence and varnish guilt. Sheltered by 
the specious coverings of fair names, the prodi- 
gal assassin delivered himself from the impor- 
tunity of his creditor. The father, with unna- 
tural cruelty, punished the licentious extrava- 
gance of his son: the son avenged, by parricide, 
the stern severity of his father. The debates 
of the public assembly were decided by the 
sword. Not satisfied with victory, men thirsted 
for blood. This general disorder overwhelmed 
laws, human and divine. The ordinary course 
of events was reversed: sentiments lost their 
natural force, and words their usual mean- 
ing.? Dulness and stupidity triumphed over 
abilities and refinement; for while the crafty 
and ingenious were laying fine-spun snares for 
their enemies, men of blunter minds had im- 
mediate recourse to the sword and poniard. 
This successful audacity was termed manly 
enterprise ; ferocity assumed the name of cour- 
age; faction and ambition passed for patriotism 
and magnanimity; perfidy was called pru- 
dence; cunning, wisdom; every vice was 
clothed in the garb of every virtue; while jus- 
tice, moderation, and candour were branded as 
weakness, cowardice, meanness of soul, and in- 
difference to the public interest. Such was the 
perversion of sentiment, and such the corrup- 
tion of language, first engendered amidst the 
turbulence of Grecian factions, and too faith- 
fully imitated, as far as the soft effeminacy of 
modern manners will permit, by the discon- 
tented and seditious of later times—Wretched 
and detestable delusions, by which wicked men 
deceive and ruin the public and themselves, 


1 Thucydid p 220—285. 2 Ibid. p. 227, et seq. 


XVIL] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


203 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Physical Calamities conspire with the Evils of War—Atihenian Expedition into Alotia—Victories 
of Demosthenes—He fortifies Pybus—Blocks up the Spartans in Sphacteria—The Spartans 
solicit Peace—Artifices and Imprudence of Cleon-—His unmerited Success—Ridiculed by Aris- 
tophanes—Athenian Conquests—Baitle of Delium—Commotions in Thrace—Expedition of 
Brasidas--Truce fora Year—The War renewed—Batile of Amphipolis—Peace cf Nicias— 


Dissatisfaction of the Spartan Allies. 


JT would be agreeable to diversify the dark 
and melancholy scenes of the Peloponnesian 
war, by introducing occurrences 


oe mp: 9 and transactions of a different and 
a * more pleasing kind. But such, un- 


fortunately, is the settled gloom of 
our present subject, that the episodes com- 
monly reflect the same colour with the princi- 
pal action. The miserable period now under 
our revie-v, and already distinguished by re- 
volt and sedition, was still farther deformed by 
a return of the pestilence, and by innumerable 
earthquakes. The disease carried off five 
thousand Athenian troops, and a great but un- 
certain number of other citizens. It raged, 
during a tweivemonth, with unabating vio- 
lence ; many remedies were employed, but all 
equally ineffectual. The poison at length 
spent its force, and the malady disappeared by 
a slow and insensible progress, similar to that 
observed in the Levant, and other parts of the 
world, which are still liable to be visited by this 
dreadful calamity. The earthquakes alarmed 
Attica and Beotia, but proved most destructive 
in the neighbouring isles. The dreadful con- 
tussions of the land were accompanied, or per- 
haps produced, by a violent agitation of the 
sea. The reflux of the waves overwhelmed 
the flourishing city of Orobia, on the western 
toast of Eubea. Similar disasters happened 
in the small islands of Atalanta 


Oly mp. 3 and Perperathus. Nor did these 
ot. ae. alarming events terminate the af- 


flictions of the Greeks ; for Nature, 
as if she had delighted to produce at one period 
every thing most awful, poured forth a torrent 
of fire from Mount Etna, which demolished the 
industrious labours ofthe Cataneans. A dread- 
ful eruption had happened fifty years before 
this period; and the present was the third, and 
most memorable, by which Sicily had been 
agitated and inflamed, since the coasts of that 
island were adorned by Grecian colonies.‘ 

If the Peloponnesian war had not been car- 
ried on with an animosity unknown to the 
mildness of modern times, the long sufferings 
of the contending pariies would 


be he A have disposed them eagerly to de- 
A.C foe ‘sire the blessings of tranquillity. 


But such virulent passions rankled 
in Athens and Sparta, that while calamities 
were equally balanced, and the capitals of both 
republics were secure, no combination of ad- 
verse circumstances seemed sufficient to deter- 
mine either side to purchase peace by the 
smallest diminution of lonour. Yet to this 


3 Voyage de Tournefort, vol. ii. 
Plague, in the Phil. Trans. vol. lxiv. 
4 Thucydid. p. 250. 


Discourse on the 


necessity, Sparta in the following year was 
reduced by a train of events, equally sudden 
and singular. Demosthenes, a general of merit 
and enterprise, commanded the Athenian 
forces at Naupactus. This town, as related 
above, had been bestowed on the unfortunate 
Messenians; by whose assistance, together 
with that of the Athenian allies in Acarnania, 
Cephallenia, and Zacynthus, Demosthenes un- 
dertook to reduce the hostile provinces of Æto- 
lia, Ambracia, and Leucadia. But the opera- 
tions necessary for this purpose were obstructed 
by the jealousies and dissensions which pre- 
vailed among the confederates; each state in- 
sisting, that the whole force of the war should 
be immediately directed against its particular 
enemies. 

The allied army, thus distracted by contra- 
riety, and weakened by defection, performed 
nothing. decisive against Leucadia or Ambra- 
cia. In Atolia they were extremely unfortu- 
nate. The Messenians, who were continually 
harassed by the natives of that barbarous pro- 
vince, persuaded Demosthenes that it would 
be easy to overrun their country, before the 
inhabitants, who lived in scattered villages, 
widely separated from each other, could collect 
their force, or attempt resistance. In pursu- 
ance of this advice, Demosthenes entered Æto- 
lia took and plundered the towns, and drove the 
inhabitants before him. During several days 
he marched unresisted; but having proceeded 
to Aigitium, the principal, or rather only city 
in the province, he found that his design had 
by no means escaped the notice of the enemy. 
Aigitium is situate among lofty mountains, 
and about ten miles distant from the Corin- 
thian gulf. Among these intricate, and almost 
inaccessible heights the flower of the Atolian 
nation were posted. Even the most distant 
tribes had come up, before the confederate 
army entered their borders. 

fogitium was stormed; but the inhabitants 
escaped to their countrymen concealed among 
the mountains. While the Athenians and their 
allies pursued them, the Atolians rushed, in 
separate bodies, from different eminences, and 
checked the pursuers with their darts and jave- 
lins. Having discharged their missile weapons, 
they retired, being light-armed, and incapable 
to resist the impression of pikemen. New de- 
taclhments continually poured forth from the 
mountains, and in all directions annoyed the 
confederates. The latter lost no ground, as 
long as their archers had darts, and were ablo 
to use them. But when the greatest part of 
their light troops were wounded or slain, the 
heavy-armed men began to give way. They 
stil], however, maintained their order; and the 


204 


battle long continued, in alternate pursuits and 
retreats, the Ætolians always flying before the 
enemy as soon as they had discharged their 
javelins. But at length the confederates were 
exhausted by so many repeated charges, and 
totally defeated by opponents who durst not 
wait their approach. 

Their conductors through this intricate coun- 
try had all perished. They mistook their road 
to the sea. The enemy were light-arméd, and 
in their own territories. The pursuit, there- 
fore, was unusually destructive. Many fell into 
caverns, or tumbled headlong from precipices. 
A large party wandered into an impervious 
wood, which being set on fire by the enemy, 
consumed them in its flames. A miserable 
remnant returned to Naupactus, afflicted by the 
loss of their companions, and highly mortified 
at being defeated by Barbarians, alike ignorant 
of the rules of war, and of the laws of civil so- 
ciety, who spoke an unknown dialect, and fed 
on raw flesh.! 

This disaster deterred Demosthenes from re- 
turning to Athens, till fortune gave him an op- 
portunity to retrieve the honour of his arms. 
The Atolians and Ambraciots, the most formi- 
dable enemies of the republic on that western 
coast of Greece, solicited and obtained assist- 
ance from Lacedemon and Corinth, vigorously 
attacked the towns of Naupactus and Amphilo- 
chian Argos, and threatened to reduce the whole 
province of Acarnania, in which the latter was 
situated. The vigilance and activity of Demos- 
thenes not only saved these important cities, 
but obtained the most signal advantages over 
the assailants. With profound military skill he 
divided the strength of the enemy, and, by a 
well-conducted stratagem, totally defeated the 
Ambraciots among the heights of Idomené. A 
strong detachment of that brave nation had ad- 
vanced the preceding day to Olpæ, a place for- 
tified by the Acarnanians, and the seat of their 
courts of justice. Demosthenes obliged them to 
retreat with considerable loss, and intercepted 
their return homeward. Mean while the col- 
lected force of the Ambraciots marched to sup- 
port their detachment, with whose misfortunes 
they were totally unacquainted. Apprised of 
this design, Demosthenes beset the passes, 
and seized the most advantageous posts on their 
route. With the remainder of his force he ad- 
vanced to attack them in front. They had 
already proceeded to Idomené, and encamped 
on the lowest ridge of that mountain.? 

Demosthenes placed his Messenians in the 
van, and commanded them, as they marched 
along, to discourse in their Doric dialect. This 
circumstance, as the morning was yet in its 
dawn, effectually prevented the advanced guards 
from suspecting them to be enemies. Demos- 
thenes then rushed forward with the Messenians 
and Acarnanians. The Ambraciots were yet 
in their beds. The camp was no sooner as- 
saulted, than the rout began. Many were slain | 
on the spot; the rest fled amain; but the passes 
were beset, and the pursuers light-armed. Some 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


ror,in some Athenian ships then cruising on 
the coast. In this complication of calamities, 
they plunged into the water, and swam to the 
hostile squadron, choosing ratherto be destroyed 
by the Athenians, than by the enemies from 
whom they had escaped. ` 

On the following day, the victors, who re- 
mained at Idomené, stripping the dead, and 
erecting a trophy, were addressed by a herald 
sent on the part of the detachment who had so 
much suffered in its retreat from Olpe. This 
herald knew nothing of the fresh disaster that 
had befallen his countrymen. Observing the 
arms of the Ambraciots, he was astonished at 
their number. The victors perceiving his sur- 
prise, asked him, before he explained his com- 
mission, “ What he judged to be the amount of 
the slain?” ‘Not more than two hundred,” 
replied the herald. The demander then said, 
“It should seem otherwise, for there are the 
arms of more than a thousand men.” The he- 
rald rejoined, “ They cai. .ot then belong to our 
party.” The other replied, “ They must, if 
you fought yesterday at Idomend.” “ We 
fought no where yesterday; we suffered the 
day before, in our retreat from Olpe.” “ But 
we fought yesterday against these Ambraciots, 
who were marching to your relief.” When the 
herald heard this, he burst into a groan, and 
went abruptly off, without farther explaining 
his commission.3 
These important successes ena- 


oly mp; bled Demosthenes to return with 
lxxxviii. 4. Ke es de = A 
A. C, 495, oe Ao e term o 


* his military command had expired; 
but his mind could not brook inactivity. He 
therefore solicited permission to accompany, as 
a volunteer, the armament which sailed to 
Corcyra, the success of which has already been 
related, with leave to employ the Messenians, 
whom he carried along with him, on the coast . 
of Peloponnesus, should any opportunity occur 
there, for premoting the public service. While 
the fleet slowly coasted along the southern 
shores of that peninsula,the Messenians viewed, 
with mingled joy and sorrow, the long lost, but 
still beloved, seats of their ancestors. They 
regretted, in particular, the decay of ancient 
Pylus, the royal residence of their admired 
Nestor, whose youth had been adorned by va- 
lour, and his age renowned for wisdom. Their 
immortal resentment against Sparta was in- 
flamed by beholding the ruins of Messené. A 
thousand ideas and sentiments, which time had 
obliterated, revived at the sight of their native 
shores, 

When the tumult of their emotions subsided, 
they explained their feelings to Demosthenes, 
and to each other. He suggested, or at least 
warmly approved, the design of landing, and 
rebuilding Pylus, which had been abandoned 
by the Spartans, though it enjoyed a conve- 
nient harbour, and was strongly fortified by 
nature. Demosthenes proposed this measure 
to Eurymedon and Sophocles, who answered 
him with the insolence congenial to their cha- 


ran to the sea, and beheld a new object of ter- | racter, ©“ That there were many barren capes 


1 Thucydid. p. 237, et seq. 
2 Ibid. p. 244, et seq 


on the coast of Peloponnesus, which those might 


3 Thucydid. p. 244, et seq, 


XVIL] 


fortify who wished to entail a useless expense 
on their country.” He next applied to the 
several captains of the fleet, and even to the 
inferior officers, but without better success, 
although he assured them that the place 
abounded in wood and stone, with which a 
wall sufficient for defence, might speedily be 
completed. He had desisted from farther en- 
treaties, when a fortunate storm drove the 
whole fleet towards the Pylian harbour. This 
circumstance enabled him torenew his instances 
with greater force, alleging that the events of 
fortune confirmed the expediency of the under- 
taking. At length the sailors and soldiers, 
weary of idleness (for the weather prevented 
them from putting to sea,) began the work of 
their own accord, and carried it on with such 
vigour and activity, that in six days the place 
was strongly -fortified on every side.4 The 
Athenian fieet then proceeded to Corcyra, De- 
mosthenes retaining only five ships to guard 
this new acquisition. 

The Spartans were no sooner apprised of 
this daring measure, than they withdrew their 
army from its annual incursion into Attica, and 
recalled their fleet from Corcyra. The citizens, 
residing at home, immediately flew to arms, 
and marched towards Pylus, which was only 
fifty miles distant from their capital. They 
found the new fortress so well prepared for de- 
fence, that nothing could be undertaken against 
it with any prospect of success, until their 
whole forces had assembled. This occasioned 
a short delay; after which Pylus was vigor- 
ously assaulted by sea and land. The walls 
were weakest towards the harbour; the en- 
trance of which, however, was so narrow, that 
only two ships could sail into it abreast. Here 
the attack was most furious, and the resistance 
most obstinate. 

Demosthenes encouraged his troops by his 
voice and arm. The gallant Brasidas, a man 
destined to act such an illustrious part in the 
following scenes of the war, called out to the 
Lacedemonian pilots to drive against the 
beach ; and exhorted them, by the destruction 
of their ships, to save the honour of their coun- 
try. He farther recommended this boldness by 
his example, but, in performing it, received a 
wound which rendered him insensible. His 
body dropped into the sea, seemingly deprived 
of life, but was recovered by the affectionate 
zeal of his attendants. When his senses re- 
turned, he perceived the loss of his shield, a 
matter highly punishable by the Spartan laws, 
if the shield of Brasidas had not been lost with 
more glory than ever shield was defended.5 

During three days, Demosthenes, with very 
unequal strength, resisted the enemy; when 
the approach of the Athenian fleet from Cor- 
eyra, which he had apprised of his danger, 
termmated the incredible labours of his ex- 
hausted garrison. A naval engagement ensued, 
in which the Lacedemonians were defeated. 
But neither this defeat, nor the loss of five 
ships, nor the total dispersion of their fleet, nor 
the unexpected relief of Pylus, gave them so 


4 Thucydid. p. 256, et seq. 
5 Ibid. p. 758. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


ieee a a e e a a e e 


205 


much uneasiness, as an event principally occa- 
sioned by their own imprudence. The island 
of Sphacteria, scarce two miles in circum- 
ference, barren, woody, and uninhabited, lies 
before the harbour of Pylus. In this island the 
Spartans had posted four hundred and twenty 
heavy-armed men, with a much greater pro- 
portion of Helots, not reflecting that the Athe- 
nians, as soon as they had resumed the command 
of the neighbouring sea, must have these forces 
at their devotion. This circumstance occurred 
not to the Spartans till after their defeat; and 
then affected them the more deeply, because 
the troops blocked up in the island belonged to 
the first families of the republic. 

Advice of this misfortune was immediately 
sent to the capital. The annual magistrates, 
attended by a deputation of the senate, has- 
tened to examine matters on the spot. The 
evil appeared to be incapable of remedy; and 
of such importance was this body of Spartans 
to the community, that all present agreed in 
the necessity of soliciting a truce, until am- 
bassadors were sent to Athens to treat of a 
general peace. The Athenians granted a sus- 
pension of hostilities, on condition that the 
Spartans, as a pledge of their sincerity, surren- 
dered their whole flect (consisting of about 
sixty vessels) into the harbour of Pylus. Even 
this mortifying proposal was accepted. Twenty 
days were consumed in the embassy; during 
which time the troops intercepted in Sphacteria 
were supplied with a stated proportion of meal, 
meat, and wine, that of the freemen amount- 
ing to double the quantity allowed to the slaves. 

When the Spartan ambassadors were admit- 
ted to an audience at Athens, they artfully 
apologized for the intended length of their dis- 
courses. In all their transactions with the 
Greeks, they had hitherto affected the digni- 
fied brevity’ inspired by conscious pre-emi- 
nence: “Yet on the present occasion, they 
allowed that it was necessary to explain, at 
some length, the advantages which would result 
to all Greece, and particularly to Athens her- 
self, if the latter accepted the treaty and alli- 
ance, the free gifts of unfeigned friendship, 
spontaneously offered by Sparta. They pre- 
tended not to conceal or extenuate the great- 
ness of their misfortune; but the Athenians 
ought also to remember the vicissitudes of war. 
It was full time te embrace a hearty reconcile- 
ment, and to terminate the calamities of their 
common country. The war had as yet been 
carried on with more emulation than hatred ; 
neither party had been reduced to extremity, 
nor had any incurable evil been yet inflicted or 
suffered. Terms of agreement, if accepted in 
the moment of victory, would redound to the 
glory of Athens ; if rejected, would ascertain, 
who were the authors of the war, and to whom 
the public calamities ought thenceforth to he 


6 Thucydides does not uscertain the quantity of meat. 
He says, two chœnixes of meal, and two cotyls of wines 
that is, two pints of meal, and one pint of wine, English 
measure, à very small allowance; but tho Athenians were 
afraid lest the besieged might hoard their provisions, if 
allowed more for daily support; which, if the negotiation 
failed, would enablo them to hold out the place longer 
than they could otherwise have dono. 

7 Imperatoria brovitas. ‘Tacitus. 


206 


imputed; since it was well known, that if 
Athens and Sparta were unanimous, no power 
in Greece would venture to dispute their com- 
mands.” 

The meek spirit of this discourse only dis- 
covered to the Athenians the full extent of their 
good fortune, of which they determined com- 
pletely to avail themselves. Instigated by the 
violence of Cleon, they answered the ambassa- 
dors with great haughtiness; demanding, as 
preliminaries to the treaty, that the Spartans in 
Sphacteria should be sent to Athens, and that 
several places of great importance, belonging to 
the Spartans or their allies, should be delivered 
into their hands. These lofty pretensions, 
which were by no means justified by military 
success, appeared totally inadmissible to the 
ambassadors, who returned in disgust to the 
Spartan camp. 

Nothing, it was evident, could be expected 
from the moderation of Athens; but it was ex- 
pected from her justice, that she would restore 
the fleet, which had been surrendered as a 
pledge of the treaty. Even this was; on va- 
rious pretences, denied.? Both parties, there- 
fore, prepared for hostilities; the Athenians 
to maintain their arrogance, the Spartans to 
avenge it. 

The former employed the operation of fa- 
mine, as the readiest and least dangerous mode 
of reducing the soldiers in Sphacteria. The 
Athenian fleet now greatly augmented, carefully 
guarded the island night and day. But not- 
withstanding their utmost vigilance, small ves- 
sels availed themselves of storms and darkness 
to throw provisions into the place; a service un- 
dertaken by slaves from the promise of liberty ; 
and by freemen, from the prospect of great pe- 
cuniary rewards. The Athenians redoubled 
their diligence, and often intercepted these 
victuallers; but they found it more difficult to 
interrupt the expert divers, who, plunging deep 
under water, dragged after them bottles of 
leather, filled with honey and flour. The block- 
ade was thus fruitlessly protracted several 
weeks. Demosthenes was averse to attack an 
island difficult of access, covered with wood, 
destitute of roads, and defended on the side of 
Pylus by a natural fortitication, strengthened 
by art. Meanwhile the Athenians began to 
suffer inconveniences in their turn. Their gar- 
rison in Pylus was closely pressed by, the ene- 
my; there was but one source of fresh water, 
and that scanty, in the place; provisions grew 
scarce; the barrenness of the neighbouring 
coast afforded no supply; while they besieged 
the Spartans, they themselves experienced the 
hardships of a siege. 

When their situation was reported at Athens, 
the assembly fell into commotion: many cla- 
moured against Demosthenes; several accused 
Cleon. The artful demagogue, whose opposi- 
tion had chiefly prevented an advantageous 
peace with Sparta, affected to disbelieve the in- 
telligence, and advised sending men of approv- 


1 Thucydid. p. 262. et seq. 

2 The Athenians objected, “an incursion towards their 
fortress, during the suspension of hostilities, zæ: «AAw oux 
a&iorkoyx,”” and other matters of little moment, says Thu- 
cydides, with his usual impartiality, p. 266. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


ed confidence to Pylus, in order to detect the 
imposture. The populace called aloud, “ that 
Cleon himself should undertake that commis- 
sion. But the dissembler dreaded to become 
the dupe of his own artifice. He perceived, 
that if he went to Pylus, he must, at his return, 
either acknowledge the truth of the report, and 
thus be subjected to immediate shame, or fabri- 
cate false intelligence, and thus be exposed to 
future punishment. He therefore eluded his 
own proposal, by declaring, “ that it ill became 
the dignity of Athens to stoop to a formal and 
tedious examination; and that, whatever were 
the state of the armament, if the commanders 
acted like men, they might take Sphacteria in a 
few days: that if he had the honour to be 
general, he would sail to the island with a 
small body of light infantry, and take it at the 
first onset.” .- 

These sarcastic observations were chiefly di- 
rected against Nicias, one of the generals actually 
present in the assembly; a man of a virtuous, 
but timid disposition; endowed with much pru- 
dence, and little enterprise; possessed of mode- 
rate abilities, and immoderate riches; a zealous 
partizan of aristocracy, and an avowed enemy 
to Cleon, whom he regarded as the worst ene- 
my of his country. 

A person of this character could not be much 
inclined to engage in the hazardous expedition 
to Sphacteria. When the Athenians, with the 
usual licentiousness that prevailed in their as- 
semblies, called out to Cleon, “that if the en- 
terprise appeared so easy, it would better suit 
the extent of his abilities;”? Nicias rose up, and 
immediately offered to cede to him the com- 
mand. Cleon at first accepted it, thinking 
Nicias’s proposal merely a feint; but when the 
latter appeared in earnest, his adversary drew 
back, alleging, “that Nicias, not Cleon was 
general.” The Athenians, with the malicious 
pleasantry natural to the multitude, pressed 
Cleon the closer, the more eagerly he receded. 
He was at length overcome by their importu- 
nity, but not forsaken by his impudence.? Ad- 
vancing to the middle of the assembly, he de- 
clared, “ that he was not afraid of the Lacede- 
monians; and engaged in twenty days to bring 
the Spartans as prisoners to Athens, or to die 
in the attempt.”4 This heroical language ex- 
cited laughter among the multitude; the wise 
rejoiced in thinking, that they must obtain one 
of two advantages, either the destruction of a 
turbulent demagogue (which they rather hop- 
ed,) or the capture of the Spartans in Sphac- 
teria. 

The latter event was hastened by 


ee 4, an accident. While some soldiers 
A. C. 425, Were preparing their victuals, the 


wood was set on fire, and long 
burned unperceived, till a brisk gale arising, 
the conflagration raged with such violence, as 
threatened to consume the island. This unfore- 
seen disaster disclosed the strength and position 
of the Spartans ; and Demosthenes wasactually 


3 Thucydid. p. 271. 

4 H avrcu avoxrevesv, “or kill them on the spot.” A 
little alteration in the text will give the meaning which I 
preferred as most agreeable to what follows; but the other 
translation better suits the boastful character of Cleon. 


XVIL] 


preparing to attack them, when Cleon, with his 
light-armed troops, arrived in the camp. The 
island was invaded during night; the ad- 
vanced guards were taken or slain. At the 
dawn, tle Athenians made a descent from 
seventy ships. The main body of the enemy 
retired to the strong post opposite to Pylus, 
harassed in their march by showers of arrows, 
stones, and darts, involved in the ashes of the 
burnt wood, which mounting widely into the 
air, on all sides intercepted their sight, and in- 
creased the gloom of battle. The Spartans, 
closely embodied, and presenting a dreadful 
front to the assailants, made good their retreat. 
Having occupied the destined post, they boldly 
defended it wherever the enemy approached, 
for the nature of the ground hindered it froin 
being surrounded. The Athenians used their 
utmost efforts to repel and overcome them; 
and during the greatest part of the day, both 
parties obstinately persevered in their purpose, 
under the painful pressures of battle, thirst, 
and a burning sun. At length the Messenians, 
whose ardour had been signally distinguished 
in every part of this enterprise, discovered an 
unknown path leading to the eminence which 
defended the Lacedæmonian rear. The Spar- 
tans were thus encompassed on all sides, and 
reduced to a similar situation to that of their 
illustrious countrymen who fell at Thermopyle. 
Nor did their commanders disgrace the coun- 
try of Leonidas. Their general, Epitades, was 
slain. Hippagretes was dying of his wounds. 
Styphon, the third in command, still exhorted 
them to persevere. But Demosthenes and Cleon, 
desirous rather to carry them prisoners to Athens, 
than to put them to death, invited them, by the 
loud proclamation of a herald, to lay down their 
arms. The greater part dropped their shields, 
and waved their hands in token of compliance. 
A conference followed between Demosthenes 
and Cleon on one side, and Styphon on the 
other. Styphon desired leave to send over to 
the Lacedemonians on the continent for ad- 
vice. Several messages passed between them ; 
in the last of which it was said, “the Lacede- 
monians permit you to consult your own utility, 
provided you submit to nothing base:” in con- 
sequence of which determination, they surren- 
dered their arms and their persons. They were 
conducted to Athens, within the time assigned. 
by Cleon; having held out fifty-two days after 
the expiration of the truce, during which time 
they had been so sparing of the provisions con- 
veyed to them by the extraordinary means 
above mentioned, that, when the place was 
taken, they had still something in reserve.? 
The Athenians witlidrew their fleet, leaving a 
strong garrison in Pylus, which was soon rein- 
forced by an enterprising body of Messenians 
from Naupactus. The Messenians, though pos- 
sessed of no more than one barren cape on their 
native and once happy coast, resumed their in- 
veterate hatred against Sparta, whose territo- 
ries they continually infested by incursions, or 
harassed by alarms. This species of war, de- 
structive in itself, was rendered still more dan- 
gerous by the revolts of the Helots, attracted 


oe EEE EEE 
5 Thucydid. p. 271—279. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


207 


by every motive of affection towards their an- 
cient kinsmen, and animated by every principle 
of resentment against their tyrannical inasters. 
Mean while the Athenian fleet renewed and 
multiplied their ravages on the coast of Pelo- 
pounesus, Reduced to extremity by such pro- 
ceedings, the Spartans sent to Athens repeated 
overtures of accommodation. But the good 
fortune of the Athenians had only nourished 
their ambition. At the instigation of Cleon, 
they dismissed the Spartan ambassadors more 
iusolently than ever. Such was their deference 
to the opinion of this arrogant demagogue ; at 
the same time that, with the most inconsistent 
levity, they listened with pleasure to the plays 
of Aristophanes, which lashed the character 
&nd administration of Cleon with the boldest 
severity of satire, sharpened by the edge of the 


| most pceignant ridicule. 


The taking of Pylus, the triumphant return 
of Cleon, a notorious coward transformed by 
caprice and accident into a brave and successful 
commander, were topics well suiting the comic 
vein of Aristophanes. The imperious dema- 
gogue had deserved the personal resentment of 
the poet, by denying the legitimacy of his birth,” 
and thereby contesting his title to vote in the 
assembly. On former occasions, Aristophanes 
had stigmatised the incapacity and insolence 
of Cleon, together with his perfidious selfish- 
ness in embroiling the affairs of the republic. 
In the comedy® first represented in the seventh 
year of the war, he attacks him in the moment 
of victory, when fortune had rendered him the 
idol of a licentious multitude, when no come- 
dian was so daring as to play his character, 
and no painter so bold as to design his mask.9 

Aristophanes, therefore, appeared for the first 
time on the stage, only disguising his own face, 
the better to represent the part of Cleon. In 
this ludicrous piece, which seems to have been 
celebrated even beyond its merit, the people of 
Athens are described under the allegory of a 
capricious old dotard, whese credulity, abused 
by a malicious slave lately admitted into his 
house,!0 persecutes and torments his faithful 
old servants. Demosthenes bitterly complains, 
that, intending to gratify the palate of the old 
man, he had brouglit a delicate morsel from 
Pylus; but that it had been stolen by Cleon, 
and by him served up to their common master. 
After lamenting, with his companion Nicias, 
the hardships of thcir condition, they hold 
counsel together, and contrive various expe- 
dients for putting an end to their common ca- 
lamities. The desponding Nicias proposes 
drinking bull’s blood, after the example of 


‘Themistocles; Demosthenes, with more cou- 


rage, advises a hearty draught of wine. Find- 
ing Cleon asleep, they seize the opportunity 
not only to purloin this liquor, but to rifle his 
pockets, in which they discover some ancient 
oracles, typically representing the succession ot 
Athenian magistrates. Towards the end of the , 


6 Aristoph. Equit. 794. 
7 Vit. anonym. Aristoph. 
8 The irreg. 
9 Yro rou sous yeg avrov ovdess yISAs 
Lav cxevoroimy sixaces, Equites, v. 231. 
10 Neovytov xexov, * Tho new-bought mischief.” 


208 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[ Cuar. 


prophecy, it was said, that the dragon should |an Athenian garrison took possession of the 


overcome the devouring vulture. The rapacious 
avarice of Cleon corresponded to the type of the 
vulture; and the dragon darkly shadowed out 
Agoracritus, an eminent maker of puddings and 
sausages, the shape and contents of which allud- 


ed to the figure andfood of that terrible serpent. | 


Nicias and Demosthenes hail this favourite of 
fortune, as the destined master of the republic. 


Agoracritus alleges in vain, that lie is totally un- | 


acquainted with political affairs, ignorant of 
every liberal art, and has hardly learned to read. 
They reply, by announcing to him the oracle, 
and by proving that his pretended imperfections 
better qualified him to conduct the government 
of Athens. This office required none of the 
talents, the want of which he lamented. He 
matched Cleon in impudence,and surpassed him 
in strength of lungs. His profession had taught 
him to squeeze, to amass, to bruise, to embroil, 


and to confound; and long experience had ren- | 


dered him accomplished in all the frauds and 
chicane of the market.! He might therefore 
boldly enter the lists with Cleon, being assured 
of assistance from the whole body of Athenian 
knights.? Agoracritus, thus encouraged, pre- 
pares for encountering his adversary. The 
contest, long doubtful, is maintained in a style 
of the lowest buffoonery, always ludicrous, of- 
ten indecent. The old dotard, or rather the 
Athenians whom he represents, finally acknow- 
ledge their past errors ; and regret being so long 
deceived by an upstart slave, through whose 
obstinacy in continuing the war, they had been 
cooped up within the walls of an unwholesome 
city, and hindered from enjoying their beauti- 
ful fields and happy rural amusements. Ago- 
racritus seizes this favourable moment to pro- 
duce two ancient treaties with the Lacedemo- 
nians, personified by two beautiful women, 
whom he had found closely mewed up in the 
house of Cleon. Of these females the old Athe- 
nian becomes suddenly enamoured, and they 
retire together to the country. 

The people of Athens permitted, 


e a and even approved, the licentious 
A C 424 boldness of Aristophanes; but nei- 


ther the strength of reason, nor the 
sharpness of satire, could resist the impetuosity 
of their ambition, The war was rendered 
popular by success; they prepared for carrying 
it on with redoubled vigour. The first opera- 
tions of the ensuing summer gratified their ut- 
most hopes. The principal division of the fleet, 
conducted hy the prudence of Nicias, took the 
fertile and populous island of Cythera, stretch- 
ing from the southern promontory of Laconia 
towards the Cretan sea, and long enriched by 
the commerce of Egypt and Libya. The La- 
cedemonian garrison, as well as the Spartan 
magistrates in the island, surrendered prisoners 
of war. The more dangerous part of the 
inhabitants were removed to the Athenian 
isles; the remainder were subjected to an an- 
nual tribute of eight hundred pounds sterling; 


1 The same word in Greek denotes the market and the 
forum. Indeed the same place usually served for both. 

2 The :z7s6¢, or Equites, the second rank of citizens at 
Athens, who detested Cleon, and from whom the play 
takes its name. 


| condemned to a harder fate. 


fortress. 

Soon after this important conquest, the arms 
of Demosthenes and Hippocrates reduced the 
town of Nicwa, the principal sea-port of the 
Megareans; and thé Athenian fleet ravaged 
with impunity several maritime cities on the 
eastern coast of Peloponnesus. Thyrea was 
This city, toge- 
ther with the surrounding district, had been 
granted, by the compassion of Sparta, to the 
iniserable natives of Ægina, who (as above 
mentioned) had been driven from their once 


| powerful island by the cruelty of Athens. This 


cruelty still continued to pursue them. Their 
newly-raised walls were taken by assault; thetr 
houses burned; and the inhabitants, without 
distinction, put to the sword. 

Hitherto all the enterprises of the Athenians 
were crowned with success. Fortune first de-° 
serted them in Beotia. During several months 
their generals, Demosthenes and Hippocrates, 
availing themselves of the political factions of 
that country, had been carrying on secret in- 
trigues with Cheronea, Siphe, and Orchome- 
nus, places abounding in declared partizans of 
democracy, and eternally hostile to the ambi- 
tion of Thebes. The insurgents had agreed to 
take arms, in order to betray the western parts 
of Beeotia to Demosthenes, who sailed with 
forty galleys from Naupactus; while Hippocra- 
tes, at the head of seven thousand heavy-armed 
Athenians, and a much greater proportion of 
light-armed auxiliaries, invaded the eastern 
frontier of that province. It was expected, 
that, before the Thebans could bring a sufficient 
force into the field, the invaders and insurgents, 
advancing from opposite extremities of the 
country, might unite in the centre, and perhaps 
subdue Thebes itself, the most powerful, as 
well as most zealous, ally of Sparta. 

This plan, though concerted with much 
ability, was found too complicated for execu- 
tion. Demosthenes steered towards Siphe, 
before his coadjutor was ready to take the 
field; some mistake, it is said, having happened 
about the time appointed for action; and the 
whole contrivance was betrayed by Nichoma- 
chus, a Phocian, to the Spartans, and by them 
communicated to the Beotians. The cities 
which meditated revolt were thus secured, 
before Demosthenes appeared at Siphe, and 
before Hippocrates had even marched from 
Attica. 

The latter at length entered the 


agm- eastern frontier of Bæotia; and, as 
A.C. aga, the principal design had miscarried, 


contented himself with taking and 
fortifying Delium, a place sacred to Apollo. 
Having garrisoned this post, he prepared for 
returning home. But while his army still lay 
in the neighbourhood of Delium, the Thebans, 
encouraged by Pagondas, a brave and skilful 
leader, marched with great rapidity from Ta- 
nagra, in order to intercept his retreat. Their , 
forces amounted to eighteen thousand; the 
Athenians were little less numerous. An en- 
gagement ensued, which national emulation 
rendered bloody and obstinate. Before the 
battle, Pagondas had detached a small squadron 


XVII] 


of horse, with orders to ride up after the com- 
mencement of the action. This stratagem was 
decisive. The Athenians, terrified at the sight 
of a reinforcement, which their fears magnified 
into a new army, were thrown into disorder, 
and put to flight. Approaching darkness saved 
them from total destruction. They escaped 
disgracefully into Attica, after leaving in the 
field of battle a thousand pikemen, with their 
commander Hippocrates. 

The victorious army immediately formed the 
siege of Delium, which was taken by means 
of a machine first contrived for that purpose. 
Several parts of the fortification, which had 
been raised in great haste, consisted chiefly 
of wood. The besiegers therefore, joining to- 
gether a number of large beams, formed a huge 
mast, perforated in the middle; to one of its 
extremities they appended a prodigious mass 
of pitch and sulphur; and to the other a bel- 
lows, which, when this unusual instrument of 
destruction was raised above the wooden ram- 
part, immediately threw the whole into flames. 
The Athenian garrison, diminished by death or 
desertion to two hundred as surrendered 
prisoners of war.’ 

The Athenians had scarcely “ne to lament 
their losses in Beotia, when they received in- 
teligence of a calamity in another quarter, 
equally unexpected, and st#ll more alarming. 
This event is the more remarkable, becausc it 
naturally arose out of the preceding prosperity 
of Athens, and the past misfortunes of Sparta. 
The uninterrupted train of success which at- 
tended the arms of Nicias and Demosthenes in 
the eighth year of the war, alarmed the citi- 
zens of Olynthus and other places of the Chal- 
cidicé, which having embraced the earliest 
opportunity of revolting from the Athenians, 
justly dreaded the vengeance of an incensed 
and victorious people. Every southerly wind 
threatened them with the approach of an Athe- 
nian fleet. Their apprehensions were not less 
painful on the side of Thessaly. The slightest 
movement in that country terrified them with 
the apprehensions of an Athenian army, which, 
victorious in the south,should advance to punish 
its northern enemies. But as none of these 
dreaded dangers were realized, the inhabitants 
of the Chalcidicé gradually resumed courage, 
put their towns in a posture of defence, and 
craved assistance from their Peloponnesian 
allies. At the same time Perdiccas, king of 
Macedon, who regarded the Athenians as his 
ancient and natural enemies, and the rapacicus 
invaders of his coast, sent money into the south 
of Greece, for the purpose of hiring soldiers, 
whom he intended to employ in resisting the 
encroachments of that ambitious people, as 
well as in subduing the Elymeans, Lynceste, 
and other barbarous tribes, not yet incorporated 
in the Macedonian kingdom. 

Such were the enemics, whose activity the 
good fortune of Athens had roused; while the 
calamities of Sparta prompted her to supply the 
reinforcement of troops, which both Perdiccas 
and the Chalcidians demanded. During the 
seventh and eighth years of the war, that re- 


3 Thucydid. p. 304—320. 
2D 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


209 


public fatally experienced the truth of Pericles’s 
maxiin, “that those who command the sca, 
may also become masters at land.” The Athe- 
nian fleets domineered over the coast cf Pelo- 
ponnesus. It was impossible to foresee what 
places would be the next objects of their con- 
tinual descents. The maritime parts were suc- 
cessively laid waste, and finally abandoned by 
the inhabitants, wlio found resistance ineffec- 
tual aud uscless. These misfortunes were in- 
creased by the frequent desertion of the Helots 
to the neighbouring garrisons in Pylus and 
Cythera, and by the dread of a general insur- 
rection among those numerous and unhappy 
victims of Spartan tyranny. To prevent this 
evil, the Spartans had recourse to such expe- 
dients as excite astonishment and horror. They 
commanded the Helots to choose two thousand 
of their bravest and most meritorious youths, 
who, by the general consent of their com- 
panions, deserved the crown of liberty; and 
when invested with this perfidious ornament, 
the unsuspecting freemen had paraded the 
streets, and sacrificed in the temples, cxulting 
in their late emancipation, these new members 
of the community gradually disappeared from 
the sight of men, nor was it ever known by 
what means they had been destroyed. But the 
veil of mystery, which concealed that dark and 
bloody stratagem, prevented ncither the resent- 
ment of the slaves, nor the just suspicion of 
their masters. The latter were eager to em- 
brace any measure that might deliver their 
country from its dangerous domestic foes. 
With much satisfaction, therefore, they sent 
seven hundred Helots to the standard of Bra- 
sidas, whose merit had reconimended him to 
Perdiccas and the Chalcidians, as the general 
best qualified to manage the Macedonian war. 
About a thousand soldiers were levied in the 
neighbouring cities of Peloponnesus. Several 
Spartans cheerfully accompanied a leader 
whom they admired. With this inconsiderable 
force Brasidas, towards the beginning of au- 
tumn, undertook an expedition highly import- 
ant in its consequences, and conducted with 
consummate prudence and bravery.4 

Having traversed the friendly 


ae countries of Beotia and Phocis, he 
A C 424 arrived at the foot of Mount Oéta, 


* and penetrated through the narrow 
defiles confined between that steep and woody 
range of hills, and the boisterous waves of the 
Malian gulf. The sight of Thermopyle ani- 
mated the enthusiasm of the Spartans, and 
encouraged them to force their way through 
the hostile plains of Thessaly; a country ac- 
tually torn by domestic discord, but always 
friendly to the Athenians. The celerity of 
Brasidas anticipated the slow-opposition of a 
divided enemy. Having reached the Macedo- 
nian town of Dium, he joined forces with Per- 
diccas, who proposed directing the first opera- 
tions of the combined army against Arribeus, 
the king or leader of the barbarous Lynceste. 
But even this Barbarian knew the valour of 
the Spartans, and the equity of Brasidas. To 
the decision of the Grecian general he offered 


4 Thueydid. p. 304. 


210 


to submit the differences between Perdiccas 
and himself, and engaged to abide by the 
award, however unfavourable to his interest. 
The Spartan listened to a proposal extremely 
reasonable in itself, though altogether incon- 
sistent with the ambitious views of Perdiccas, 
who disdained to accept as a judge the man 
whom he paid as an auxiliary. Brasidas, on 
the other hand, declined in firm but decent 
terms, to employ his valour against those who 
implored his justice. The generals thus sepa- 
rated in mutual disgust; and Perdiccas thence- 
forth reduced his contribution of subsidy from 
a moiety to a third; but even that was ex- 
torted from his fears, not bestowed by his 
munificence. 

Brasidas hastened to join the Chalcidians, by 
whom he was received with a degree of joy 
suitable to the impatience with which he had 
been expected. Amidst the general defection 
of their neighbours, the towns of Acanthus and 
Stagirus still maintained their allegiance to 
Athens. Brasidas appeared before the gates 
of Acanthus, while the peaceful inhabitants 
were preparing for the labours of the vintage. 
He sent a messenger, craving leave to enter 
the place, and to address the assembly.. The 
Acanthians were divided in opinion; but the 
majority, fearing to expose their ripe fields and 
vineyards to the resentment of his army, agreed 
to admit the general alone and unattended, and 
impartially to weigh whatever he proposed for 
their deliberation. Brasidas, though a Spartan, 
was an able speaker. He observed to the 
Acanthians, convened in full assembly, “ That, 
in compliance with the generous resolution of 
Sparta, he had undertaken, and finally accom- 
plished, a long and dangerous journey, to de- 
liver them from the tyranny of Athenian ma- 
gistrates and garrisons, and to restore them, 
what the common oppressors of Greece had so 
long withheld, the independent government of 
their own equitable laws. This was the object, 
which, amidst all the calamities of war, the 
Spartans had ever kept in view; this was the 
purpose, which, before his departure from 
home, the principal magistrates had sworn 
unanimously to maintain. That freedom and 
independence, which formed the domestic hap- 
piness of Sparta, his countrymen were ambi- 
tious to communicate to all their allies. But 
if the Acanthians refused to share the general 
benefit, they must not complain of experiencing 
the unhappy effects of their obstinacy. The 
arms of Sparta would compel those whom her 
arguments had failed to persuade. Nor could 
this be blamed as injustice; first, because the 
resources with which the Acanthians furnished 
Athens, under the ignominious name of tribute, 
served to rivet the chains of Greece; and 
secondly, because the example of a people, so 
wealthy and flourishing, and long renowned 
for their penetration and sagacity, might influ- 
ence the resolutions of neighbouring states, and 
deter them from concurring with the measures 
necessary to promote the public welfare and 
security.” 

This judicious discourse, enforced by the ter- 
ror of the Spartan army, engaged the Acanthi- 


ans to accept the friendship of Brasidas. Stagi-| 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


{Cuar. 


rus, another city on the Strymonic gulf, 
readily followed the example, and opened its 
gates to the deliverer. During the ensuing 
winter, the measures of the Spartan general 
were conducted with equal ability and enter- 
prise. His successful operations against the in- 
land towns facilitated the surrender of such 
places, as, by their maritime or insular situa- 
tion, were most exposed to the vengeance of 
Athens, and therefore most averse to revolt. 
His moderate use of victory ensured the good- 
will of the vanquished. The various parts of a 
plan, thus artfully combined, mutually assisted 
each other; the success of one undertaking 
contributed to that of the next which followed 
it; and, at length, without any considerable 
miscarriage, he had rendered himself master of 
most places in the peninsulas of Acta, Sithonia, 
and Pallené. 

The loss of Amphipolis was that which most 
deeply afflicted the Athenians: a rich and popu- 
lous city, beautifully situate on a small but well 
cultivated island, surrounded by the river 
Strymon, the banks of which supplied excellent 
timber, and other materials of naval strength. 
By possessing this town, the Spartans now 
commanded both branches of the river, and 
might thus pass, without interruption, to the 
Athenian colonies, or subjects, on the coast of 
Thrace; seize, or plunder, the gold mines op- 
posite to the isle of Thasos; and ravage the 
fertile fields of the Thracian Chersonesus. The 
conquest of a place so essential to the enemy, 
had exercised the courage, the eloquence, and 
the dexterity of Brasidas. He formed a con- 
spiracy with the malecontents in the place, 
skilfully disposed his army before the walls, 
harangued the assembly ofthe people. A most 
seasonable promptitude distinguished all his 
measures; yet the Athenian Eucleus, who com- 
manded the garrison, found time to send a ves- 
sel to Thasos, requesting immediate and ef- 
fectual relief. 

The Athenians had committed the govern- 
ment of that island, as well as the direction of 
the mines on the opposite continent, to the 
celebrated historian of a war, in which he was 
a meritorious, though unfortunate, actor. With- 
out a moment’s delay, Thucydides put to sea 
with seven galleys, and arrived in the mouth 
of the Strymon the same day on which his as- 
sistance had been demanded. But it was 
already too late to save Amphipolis.! The 
Spartan general, who had exact information of 
all the measures of the besieged, well knew the 
importance of anticipating the arrival of Thu- 
cydides, whose name was highly respected by 
the Greek colonies in Thrace, and whose in- 
fluence was considerable among the native Bar- 
barians. Brasidas, therefore, proposed such a 
capitulation to the Amphipolitans as it seemed 
imprudent to refuse. They were to be released 
from the tribute which they had hitherto paid 
the Athenians ; to enjoy the utmost degree of 
political independence, not inconsistent with 
the alliance of Sparta; even the Athenian gar- 
rison, if they continued in the place, were to. 
be entitled to all the rights of citizens; and 


1 Thucydid. p. 322. 


XVIL] 


such persons as chose to leave it, were granted 


a reasonable time to remove their families and 
their property. The last condition was em- 
braced by the Athenians, and their more deter- 
They retired to the neigh- 
bouring town of Eion, situate near the sea, on 
the northern branch of the Strymon ; a place 
secured against every hostile assault by the 


mined partizans. 


skill and activity of Thucydides. 


Towards the end of winter, the full extent of 


Brasidas’s success was made known at Athens. 


The assembly was in commotion ; and the po- 


pulace were the more enraged at their losses, 
as it now appeared so easy to have prevented 
them, either by guarding the narrow defiles, 


which led to their Macedonian possessions, or 


by sending their fleet with a seasonable rein- 
forcement to their feeble garrisons in those 
parts. Their own neglect had occasioned the 
public disgrace; but with the usual injustice 
and absurdity accompanying popular discon- 
tents, they exculpated themselves, and banished 
their generals. Thucydides was involved in 
this cruel sentence. An armament was sent to 
Macedon; and new commanders were named 
to oppose Brasidas. 

But the designs of that commander, who had 
begun to build vessels on the Strymon, and as- 
pired at nothing less than succeeding to the 
authority, without exercising the oppression, of 
Athens, over those extensive shores, were more 
successfully opposed by the envy of the Spar- 
tan magistrates. The pride of the nobility was 
wounded by the glory of an expedition, in 
which they had no share; and their selfishness, 
while it obstinately prevented the supplies ne- 
cessary to complete the plan of Brasidas, was 
eager to reap the profit of his past succcss. The 
restoration of their kinsmen taken at Sphacte- 
ria formed the object of their fondest wish ; and 
they expected that the Athcnians might listen 
to a proposal for that purpose, in order to reco- 
ver the places which they had lost, and to 
check the fortunate career of a prudent and 
enterprising general. The Athenians rea- 
dily entered into these vicws; it was deter- 
mined that matters of such importance should 
be discussed with lcisure and impartiality ; a 
truce was therefore agreed on for a year be- 
tween the contending republics. 

Ol This transaction was concluded 
ee inat inth summer of the war 
ixxxix. 2. it nn ; 
A. C. 493, It was totally unexpected by Bra- 
sidas, who received the voluntary 
submission of Scioné and Menda, two places 
of considerable importance in the peninsula of 
Pallené ; of the former, indeed, before he was 
acquainted with the suspension of hostilities ; 
but of the latter, even after he was apprised of 
that treaty. 
Ol While the active valour of Bra- 

AP id vented the confirmati f 
Ixxxix, 3, Silas prevented t ation o 
A. C. 422, Peace, the couscious worthlessness 

ai * of Cleon promoted the renewal, or 
rather the continuance, of war. The glory of 
Athens was the perpetual theme of his discourse. 
He exhorted his countrymen to punish the per- 
fidy of Sparta, in abetting the insolent revolt 
of Menda and Scioné; and to employ his own 
akill and bravery, which had been so success- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


211 


fully exerted on the coast of Peloponnesus, to 
repair their declining fortune in Macedonia. 
The Athenians listened to the specious advice 
of this turbulent declaimer, who, in the ensuing 
spring, sailed to the Macedonian coast with a 
fleet of thirty galleys, twelve hundred citizens, 
heavy-armed, a squadron of three hundred 
horse, and a powerful body of light-armed 
auxiliaries, The surrender of Menda and To- 
rona, whose inhabitants were treated with every 
excess of cruelty, encouraged him to attack 
Amphipolis. With this design, having col- 
lected his forces at Eion, he waited the arrival 
of some Macedonian troops, promised by Per- 
diccas, who having quarrelled with the Spar- 
tan general, deccitfully flattered the hopes of 
his antagonist. 

The army of Cleon contained the flower of 


the Athenian youth, whose ardent valour dis- ` 


dained a precarious dependence on barbarian 
aid. They accused the cowardice of their 
leader, whicli was only equalled by his inca- 
pacity, and lamented their own hard fate in 
being subjected to the authority of a man so 
unworthy to command them. The impatient 
temper of an arrogant demagogue was ill fitted 
to-endure these seditious complaints. He hastily 


led his troops before the place, without pre- 


viously examining the strength of the walls, 
the situation of the ground, the number or 
disposition of the enemy. Brasidas, mean 
while, lad taken proper measures to avail him- 
self of the known imprudence of his adversary. 
A considerable body of men had been con- 
cealed in the woody mountain Cerdylium, 
which overhangs Amphipolis. The greater 
part of the army werc drawn up, ready for ac- 
tion, at the several gates of the city. Cleari- 
das, who commanded there, had orders to rush 
forth at a given signal, while Brasidas in per- 
son, conducting a select band of intrepid fol- 
lowers, watched the first opportunity for attack. 
The plan, contrived with so much skill, was 
executed with equal dexterity and precision. 
Confounded with the rapidity of such an un- 
expected and complicated charge, the cnemy 
fled amain, abandoning their shields, and ex- 
posing their naked backs to the swords and 
spears of the pursuers. The forces on cither 
side amountcd to about three thousand ; six 
hundred Athenians fell victims to the folly of 
Cleon, who, though foremost in the flight, was 
arrested by the hand of a Myrcinian targetcer. 

His death might appease the mancs of his 
unfortunate countrymen; but nothing could 
alleviate the sorrow of the victors for the loss 
of their admired Brasidas, wlio received a mor- 
tal wound while he advanced to the attack. 
He was conveyed alive to Amphipolis, and 
enjoyed the consolation of his last victory, in 
which only seven men had perished on the 
Spartan side. The sad magnificence of his 
funeral was adorned by the splendour of mili- 
tary honours; but what was still more honour- 
able to Brasidas, he was sincerely lamented by 
the grateful tears of numerous communities, 
who regarded his virtues and abilities as the 
surest pledges of their own happiness and se- 
curity. The citizens of Amphipolis paid an 
extraordinary tribute to his memory. Having 


212 


demolished every monument of their ancient 
leaders and patriots, they erected the statue of 
Brasidas in the most conspicuous square of the 
city, appointed annual games to be celebrated 
at his tomb, and sacrificed to his revered shade, 
as to the great hero and original founder of 


their community.! 
The battle of Amphipolis re- 


a lymp. A moved the principal obstacles to 
en peace. There was not any Spar- 


tan general qualified to accomplish 
the designs of Brasidas. e The Athenians, de- 
jected by defeat, and humbled by disgrace, 
wanted the bold imposing eloquence of Cleon, 
to disguise their weakness, and varnish their 
misfortunes. With the disheartened remains 
of an enfeebled armament, they despaired of 
recovering their Macedonian possessions; and 
the greater part returned home, well disposed 
for an accommodation withthe enemy. These 
dispositions were confirmed by the pacific tem- 
per of Nicias, who had succeeded to the 
influence of Cleon, and who fortunately dis- 
covered in the moderation of Pleistoanax, king 
of Sparta, a coadjutor extremely solicitous to 
promote his views. During winter, several 
friendly conferences were held between the 
commissioners of the two republics; and to- 
wards the commencement of the ensuing spring, 
a treaty of peace, and soon afterwards a defen- 
sive alliance, for fifty years, was ratified by the 
kings and ephori of Sparta on the one side, and 
by the archons and generals of Athens on the 
other. In consequence of this negociation, 
which was intended to comprehend the respec- 
tive allies of the contracting powers, all places 
and prisoners, taken in the course of the war, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| Cuar. 


| were to be mutually restored; the revolted ci- 
ties in Macedon were specified by name; but 
it was regulated that the Athenians should not 
require from them any higher revenue than 
that apportioned by the justice of Aristides.? 
In all their transactions, the Greeks were 
ever prodigal of promises, but backward in per- 
formance; and, amidst the continual rotation of 
authority, magistrates easily found excuses for 
violating the conditions granted by their pre- 
decessors. The known principles of republican 
inconstancy, ever ready to vibrate between ex- 
cessive animosity and immoderate friendship, 
might likewise suggest a reason for converting 
the treaty of peace into a contract of alliance. 
But this measure, in the present case, was the 
effect of necessity. Athens and Sparta might 
make mutual restitution, because their respec- 
tive interests required it. But no motive of 
interest engaged the former power to restore 
Nicæa to the Megarians, or the towns of Solium 
and Anactorium to Corinth. The Thebans, 
shortly before the peace, had seized the Athe- 
nian fortress of Panactum, situate on the fron- 
tier of Beotia. They were still masters of 
Platæa. Elated by their signal victory at De- 
lium, they could not be supposed willing to 
abandon their conquests, or even much inclined 
to peace. It was still less to be expected that 
the Macedonian cities should, for the conve- 
niency of Sparta, submit to the severe yoke 
of Athens, from which they had recently been 
delivered ; nor could it be hoped that even the 
inferior states of Peloponnesus should tamely 
lay down their arms, without obtaining any of 
those advantages with which they had been 
long flattered by their Spartan allies, 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


. 


Discontents fomented by the Corinthians—The Argive Alliance—To which Athens accedes— 
Birth and Education of Alcibiades—His Friendship with Socrates—His Character—And 
Views—Which are favoured by the State of Greece—He deceives the Spartan Ambassadors— 
Renewal of the Peloponnesian War—Battle of Mantinea—Tumults in Argos—Massacre of the 


Scioneans—Cruel Conquest of Melos. 

THE voluptuous, yet turbulent citizens of 
Corinth, enjoyed the odious distinction of 
renewing a war which their intrigues and ani- 
mosities had first kindled. Under pretence of 
having taker an oath never to abandon the 
Macedonian cities, they declined being parties 
in the general treaty of peace. The alliance be- 
tween Athens and Sparta, in which it was sti- 
pulated, that these contracting powers should be 
entitled to make such alterations in the treaty 
as circumstances might require, the Corinthians 
affected, with some reason, to consider as a 
conspiracy against the common liberties of 
Greece.3 Fired with this idea, they hastened 
> NON o 


1 Thucydid. p. 307. 2 Thucydid. p. 354, et seq. 

3 The clause was worded in such a manner as might na- 
turally excite alarm: Meorôsivgi xas apedcsy ori gv AM- 
DOIN Toiv rorsosv oxn. Thucydid. l. v. p. 284. 


to Argos, in order to animate that republic with 
the same passions which rankled in their own 
breasts. Having roused the ambition of the 
magistrates, they artfully reminded the people 
of the glory of Agamemnon, recalled to the 
Argives their ancient and just pre-eminence in 
the Peloponnesus, and conjured them to main- 
tain the honour of that illustrious peninsula, 
which had been so shamefully abandoned by 
the pusillanimity, or betrayed by the selfish- 
ness, of Sparta. 
The Argives wanted neither 
Ixexix, 4, Power nor inclination to assume 
A.C. 421 that important office. During the 
se "<" Peloponnesian war, they had ob- 
served the principles of a prudent neutrality, 
equally favourable to their populousness and 
their wealth. Their protection was courted by 


Olymp. 


XVIIL] 


Mantinæa, the most powerful city in Arcadia, 
which had recently conquered some villages in 
its neighbourhood, to which Sparta laid claim. 
The Elians, long hostile to Sparta, eagerly pro- 
moted the Argive alliance, which was farther 
strengthened by the speedy accession of the 
Macedonian allies, whose inhabitants were not 
more flattered by the kind zeal of Corinth, than 
provoked by the cruel indifference of Sparta. 
Thebes and Megara were equally offended with 
their Lacedæmonian allies, and equally inclined 
to war. But a rigid aristocracy prevailed in 
those states, whose ambitious magistrates, trem- 
bling for their personal authority, and that of 
their families, declined entering into confederacy 
with free democratical republics.4 
omen But this democratical association 
= 1 P+ goon acquired an accession still more 
A. C 420, important, and received into its 
co" bosom the fountain of liberty itself; 
even the republic of Athens, This extraordi- 
nary event happened in the year following the 
negociation between Athens and Sparta. It 
was effected by means extremely remote from 
the experience of modern times; means which 
it is incumbent on us to explain, lest the politi- 
cal transactions of Greece should appear too 
fluctuating and capricious to afford a proper 
subject for history. 

Amidst the factious turbulence of senates and 
assemblies, no measure could be adopted by one 
party, without being condemned by another. 
Many Athenians disapproved of the peace of 
Nicias ;5 but the general blaze of opposition 
was eclipsed by the splendour of one man, who, 
on this occasion, first displayed those singular 
but unhappy talents, which proved fatal to 
himself and to his country. Alcibiades had not 
yet reached his thirtieth year, the age required 
by the wisdom of Solon for being entitled to 
speak in the assembly. But every advantageous 
circumstance of birth and fortune, talents na- 
tural and acquired, accomplishments of mind 
and body, pleaded an exception in favour of 
this extraordinary character, which, producing 
at once flowers and fruit, united with the 
blooming vivacity of youth, the ripened wisdom 
of experience.6 His father, the rich and gene- 
rous Clinias, derived his extraction froin the 
heroic Ajax, and had distinguished his own va- 
lour and patriotism in the glorious scenes of 
the Persian war. Iu the female line, the son 
of Clinias was allied to the eloquence and mag- 
nanimity of Pericles, who, as his nearest sur- 
viving kinsman, was entrusted with the care of 
his minority. But the statesman, who govern- 
ed with undivided sway the affairs of Athens 
and of Greece, could not bestow much atten- 
tion on this important domestic task. The 
tender years of Alcibiades were committed to 
the illiberal discipline of mercenary preceptors; 
his youth and inexperience were beset by the 
destructive adulation of servile flatterers,—until 
the young Athenian, having began to relish the 
poems of Homer, the admiration of which is 


4 Thucydid. l. v. p. 371. 

5 The Greeks sometimes distinguished treaties by the 
names of those who made them: the peace of Cimon; the 
peace of Nicias; and, as we shall sec hereefter, the peace 
of Antalcidas. 

6 Plut. et Nepos in Alcibiad. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


213 


congenial to every great mind, learned from 
thence to despise the pedantry of the one, and 
to detest the meanness of the other.’ 

From Homer Alcibiades early imbibed that 
ambition for excellence which is the great lesson 
of the immortal bard. Having attained the 
verge of manhood, he readily distinguished, 
among the crowd of rhetoricians and sophists, 
the superior merit ef Socrates, who, rejecting 
all factitious and abstruse studies, confined his 
speculations to matters of real importance and 
utility; who, having never travelled to Egypt 
and the East in search of mysterious know- 
ledge, reasoned with an Attic perspicuity and 
freedom; and who, being unbiassed by the sys- 
tem of any master, and always master of him- 
self, thought, spoke, and acted with equal in- 
dependence and dignity. An amiable and most 
instructive writer, the disciple and friend of So- 
crates, has left an admirable panegyric of the 
uniform temperance, the unshaken probity, the 
diffusive benevolence invariably displayed in 
his virtuous life of seventy years.8 His distin- 
guishing excellences are justly appreciated by 
Xenophon, a scholar worthy of his master; but 
the youthful levity of Alcibiades (for youth is 
seldom capable of estimating the highest of all 
merits, the undeviating tenor of an innocent 
and useful life) was chiefly delighted with the 
splendour of particular actions. The eloquence, 
rather than the innocence of Socrates, excited 
his admiration. He was charmed with that in- 
imitable raillery, that clear comprehensive logic, 
which baffled the most acute disputants of the 
Athenian schools;!9 that erect independence 
of mind, which disdained the insolence of 
power, the pride of wealth, and the vanity of 
popular fame, was well fitted to attract the con- 
genial esteem of Alcibiades, who aspired beyond 
the beaten paths of vulgar greatness ; nor could 
the gallant youth be less affected by the invin- 
cible intrepidity of Socrates, when, quitting the 
shade of speculation, and covered with the 
helm and cuirass, he grasped the massy spear, 
and justified by his strenuous exertion in the 
field of battle, the useful lessons of his philo- 
sophy,!! 

Socrates in his turn (since it is easier for a 
wise man to correct the errors of reason than to 
conquer the delusions of sentiment) was deeply 
affected with tle beauty of Alcibiades ;!2 a 
beauty depending, not on the transient flower 
of youth, and the seductive delicacy of effemi- 
nate graces, but on the ineffable harmony of a 
form which realized the sublime conceptions of 
Homer and Phidias concerning their fabulous 
divinities, and which shone in the autumn of 
life with undiminished effulgence.!3 The affec- 
tion of Socrates, though infinitely removed from 
impurity, resembled rather the ardour of love 


7 Plut. in Alcibiad. 

8 Xenoph. Memorahil. Socrat. 

9 See particularly Xenoph. Apolog. Socrat. 

10 Plato, passim. 

11 Xenoph. Meimorah. Socrat. pp. 449. 804. 818. 

12 Vid. Xenoph. and Plato, passim. Socrates often ac- 
knowledges the danger of beauty, and its power over him- 
self; but loses no opportunity to caution his disciples against 
the shameful passions, and abominable vices, which flow 
from this fair source. Vid. Memorab. Socrat. |. ii. passim 
etl. v. c. iii. Sympos. c. iv. p. 246. 

13 Plut. in Alcibiad. 


214 


than the calm moderation of friendship. The 
sage, whose company was courted by his other 
disciples, himself courted the company of Al- 
cibiades; and when the ungrateful youth 
sometimes escaped to his licentious companions, 
the philosopher pursued him with the eagerness 
of a father or master, anxious to recovera 
fugitive son or slave.! At the battle of Potidea 
he saved the life of his pupil, and in order to 
gratify the love of military glory, which already 
, animated his youthful bosom, the sage obtained 
for Alcibiades the prize of valour, which the 
universal consent of the Athenians thought due 
to himself. At the fatal engagement of Delium, 
Alcibiades, it is said, had an opportunity of re- 
turning the more substantial favour, by saving 
the precious life of Socrates ;2 and it may well 
be supposed that an interchange of such im- 
portant favours would straiten the bands of 
their mutual friendship, during which the 
powers of reason and fancy were directed, with 
unabating diligence, to improve the understand- 
ing, and excite the virtue of Alcibiades. 

But this favourite youth laboured under a 
defect, which could not be compensated by the 
highest birth, the most splendid fortune, the 
noblest endowments of mind and body, and 
even the inestimable friendship of Socrates. 
He wanted an honest? heart. This we are 
warranted to affirm on the authority of con- 
temporary writers, who acknowledge, that first 
admiration, and then interest, was the founda- 
tion of his attachment to the illustrious sage, 
by whose instruction he expected to become, 
not a good, but an able, man. Some inclination 
to virtue he might, in such company, perhaps 
feel, but more probably feign; and the nicest 
discernment might mistake the real character 
of a man, who could adopt, at pleasure, the 
most opposite manners; and who, as will ap- 
pear from the subsequent events of his various 
life, could surpass the splendid magnificence of 
Athens, or the rigid frugality of Sparta; could 
conform, as interest required, to the laborious 
exercises of the Thebans, or to the voluptuous 
indolence of Ionia; assume the soft effeminacy 
of an Eastern prince, or rival the sturdy vices 
of the drunken Thracians.* 

The first specimen of his political conduct 
discovered the extraordinary resources of his 
versatile mind. He opposed the peace of Ni- 
cias, as the work of a rival, whom he wished 
to disgrace. His ambition longed for war, and 
the Spartans deserved his resentment, having, 
in all their transactions with Athens, testified 
the utmost respect for Nicias, while they were 
at no pains to conceal their want of regard for 
himself, though his family had been long con- 
nected with their republic by an intercourse of 
hospitality, and he had endeavoured to strength- 
en that connection by his personal good offices 
to the Lacedemonians taken in Sphacteria. 
To gratify at once his resentment, his ambition, 
and his jealousy, he determined to renew the 
war with Sparta; a design by no means diffi- 
cult at the present juncture. 


1 Plut. in Alcibiad. 

2 Strabo, p. 330. et Plut. in Alcibiad. 

3 Lysias cont. Alcibiad. et Xenoph. Memorab. Socrat. 
l.i. p. 715. 

4 Nepos in Alcibiad. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


{Cuar. 


In compliance with the peace of 
A Nicias, the Spartans withdrew their 
‘A.C. 499, tops from Amphipolis; but they 

could restore neither that city, nor 
the neighbouring places in Macedon, to the do- 
minion of Athens. The Athenians, agreeably 
to the treaty, allowed the captives taken in 
Sphacteria to meet the longing embraces of 
their kinsmen and friends; but good policy 
forbade their surrendering Pylus, until the 
enemy had performed some of the conditions 
stipulated in return. Mutual unwillingness, or 
inability, to comply with the articles of peace, 
sowed the seeds of animosity, which found a 
favourable soil in both republics, The au- 
thority of those magistrates, who supported the 
pacific measures of Nicias and Pleistoanax, had 
expired. The Spartan youth wished, by new 
hostilities, to cancel the memory of a war, which 
had been carried on without profit, and ter- 
minated with dishonour. But the wiser part 
perceived that better success could not be ex- 
pected while the Athenians possessed Pylus. 
In their eagerness to recover that fortress, they 
renewed their alliance with the Thebans, from 
whom they received Panactum, which they 
hoped to exchange for Pylus; forgetting, in 
this transaction, an important clause in their 
treaty with Athens, “that neither of the con- 
tracting powers should, without mutual com- 
munication and consent, conclude any new 
alliance.” The Thebans rejoiced in the pros- 
pect of embroiling the affairs of Athens and 
Sparta; and the Corinthians, guided by the 
same hostile views, readily concurred with the 
Thebans, and openly re-entered into the Lace- 
demonian confederacy.’ 
Ol Having concluded this negotia- 
ymP- tion, the Spartans who yielded to 
none in the art of dissembling 


Olymp. 


zeni 
59? 


A. C. 420. despatched ambassadors to Athens, 
excusing what they termed an apparent in- 
fringement of the treaty, and requesting that 
state to accept Panactum (whicl had been 
carefully dismantled) in exchange for Pylus. 
The senate of Athens heard their proposal 
without suspicion, especially as they declared 
themselves invested with full powers to em- 
brace every reasonablė plan of present accom- 
modation and permanent friendship. It now 
remained for the ambassadors to propose their 
demand in the popular assembly, which, they 
had reason to hope, might be deceived still 
more easily than the senate. But in this ex- 
pectation they were disappointed by a con- 
trivance of Alcibiades, no less singular than 
audacious. Having invited the ambassadors 
to an entertainment, during which he talked 
of their republic with more than his wonted 
respect, and testified the utmost solicitude for 
the success of their negotiation, he observed to 
them, that one circumstance gave him much 
concern, their having mentioned full powers. 
They must beware of repeating that error in 
the assembly, because the natural rapacity of 
the populace, apprized of that circumstance, 
would not fail to insist on such conditions as 
the honour of Sparta could not possibly comply 


— 


5 Thucydid. l. v. passim. 


XVIIL] 


with. If they concealed the extent of their 
commission, the deciaring of which could only 
serve to indicate timidity on the one side, and 
to provoke insolence on the other, he pledged 
himself to obtain the recovery of Pylus, and 
the gratification of their utmost hopes. On this 
occasion the Spartans injudiciously confided in 
a man, who had been irritated by the former 
neglect and ingratitude of their country. When 
they appeared next day in the assembly, Alci- 
biades demanded, with a loud voice, the object 
and extent of their commission. According to 
the concerted plan, they denied their having 
full powers. The artful Athenian, affecting a 
transport of indignation, arraigned the audacity 
and baseness of a people by whom his own un- 
suspecting temper had been egregiously abused. 
“But yesterday they declared their full powers 
in the senate; they denied to-day what yester- 
day they displayed with ostentation. Such (I 
now perceive it) is the usual duplicity of their 
republic. It is thus they have restored Am- 
phipolis. It is thus, Athenians! they have re- 
stored the neighbouring towns in Macedon: it 
is thus they have, indeed, put you in possession 
of Panactum, but with demolished walls; and 
after conciuding an alliance with Athens, rati- 
fied by solemn oath, most treacherously and 
daringly infringed it, by entering into a league 
with Thebes, your determined and inveterate 
enemy. Can you still, men of Athens! tamely 
submit to such indignities? Do you not expel 
such traitors (pointing to the ambassadors) from 
your presence, and from your city?” This ex- 
traordinary harangue totally disconcerted the 
Spartans. Had their confusion allowed them 
to extenuate their fault by declaring the truth, 
the least reflection must have suggested, that 
Alcibiades would represent their simple story 
as a new turn of ingenious artifice. They re- 
tired abruptly from the assembly ;§ Nicias, and 
the other partizans of Sparta, shared their dis- 
grace; and the Athenians were soon afterwards 
persuaded by Alcibiades to embrace the Argive 
alliance.” 

lt might be expected that the weight of such 
a powerful confederacy should have speedily 
crushed the debility of Sparta, already ex- 
hausted by the former war. But the military 
operations of Greece depended less 
Olymp. : 
Eoo on the relative strength of contend- 
A.C. 419, 128 powers, than on the alternate 

=“ preponderance of domestic factions. 
In the year following the treaty, the Athenians 
sent a small body of troops to assist their Pelo- 
ponnesian allies in the reduction of Epidaurus, 
Tegea, and other hostile cities in Argolis and 
Arcadia. Yet in the ensuing year when the 
Spartans, dreading the loss of some cities, and 
the defection of others, made a vigorous effort 
to retrieve their authority in Peloponnesus, the 
Athenians alone discovered little inclination, 
and exerted no activity, to obstruct their mea- 
‘sures for that purpose. Pleistoanax being a 
partizan of the peace of Nicias, the Spartans 
entrusted the command to Agis, his more war- 


6 Thueyd. mentions the shock of an earthquake which 
occasioned the dissolution of that assembly, before coming 
to any conclusion. 

7 Thucydid. l. v. p. 374, et seq. Plut. in Aleibiad. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


215 


like colleague. Ali Lacedemonians of the 
military age were summoned to the field. The. 
dangerous expedient of arming the Helots was 
adopted on this important emergence. The 
Spartan allies showed unusual ardour in their 
cause. The Thebans sent ten thousand foot, 
and one thousand horsemen;8 the Corinthians 
two thousand heavy-armed men; the Megarians 
almost an equal number; the ancient cities of 
Pallené and Sicyon in Achaia gave a powerful 
and ready assistance; while the small, but 
generous republic of Phlius, whose territory, 
bordering on Argolis, was appointed for the 
rendezvous of the confederates, took the field 
with the whole body of citizens and slaves 
capable of bearing arms.9 
Olymp. The Argives observed the ap- 
Taa proaching storm, and prepared to 
A.C. 419, Tesist it. The Eleans and Man- 
co" tineans joined tlem; and although 
the Athenians were long expected in vain, the 
Argives did not lose courage, but boldly took 
the field to oppose the invaders. The skilful 
movements of king Agis intercepted their return 
to Argos; the high grounds above them were 
occupied by the Corinthians and Phliasians; 
their retreat towards Nemea was cut off by the 
Beotians and Megarians. A battle seemed in- 
evitable in the winding vale of Argos; but it is 
easier to admire, than explain, the subsequent 
conduct of either army. Whether the Argive 
commanders!0 were disconcerted by the judi- 
cious position of the enemy, or that compassion 
touched their minds on perceiving such nu- 
merous bodies of men, chiefly natives of the 
same peninsula, sprung from the same blood, 
and speaking the same Doric tongue, prepared 
to imbrue their parricidal hands in kindred 
blood; or that, being secretly partizans of aris- 
tocracy,!! they were unwilling to come to ex- 
tremities with Sparta; it is certain, that instead 
of joining battle, they entered into conference, 
with the Lacedemonian king. In consequence 
of this unexpected measure, a truce was con- 
cluded between the chiefs, without the concur- 
rence or knowledge of the officers or troops in 
either army. The Argives, Thrasyllus and 
Alciphron, engaged that their countrymen 
should give complete satisfaction for the inju- 
ries of which they were accused; and king 
Agis, whose authority, by the Spartan laws, 
was absolute in the field, led off his obsequious 
army. 

Whatever might be the cause of this mea- 
sure, it occasioned (after the first pause of silent 
astonisliment) universal discontent, followed by 
loud and licentious clamours. The Spartans 
complained, “ That, after assembling such a 
body of men as had scarcely ever been collected 
in Peloponnesus, whose attachment to their 


8 They had, however, but five hundred horses; sss 
mevrensrsos wes yvir TOs soos. Perhaps the eviazos, those 
not provided with horses, served as attendants on the horse- 
men. The mixing of light infantry with the cavalry was 
frequent in later times; but of this hereafter. 

9 Thueydid. |. v. p. 384, et seq. 

10 Orrather Thrasyllus, who was one of five generals, but 
who seems to have enjoyed some pre-eminence over his 
colleagues. Perhaps it was his turn to command. 

11 Alciphron, who, with Thrasyllus, was the principal ` 
agent in this affair, was the “weoksvos Auxedatpoviwy,” 
the public host of the Lacedemonians. Thucydid. p. 386. 


216 


cause was ardent, whose numbers and courage 
were invincible, and after surrounding «their 
enemies on every side, and depriving them of 
every resource, the glorious hope, or rather 
certainty, of the most complete and important 
victory, should have been sacrificed, in one 
moment, by the caprice, the cowardicc, or the 
corruption of their general.” The Argives 
lamented, “That their numerous enemies, 
whom they had a fair opportunity of engaging 
in their own country, should have becn allowed 
to escape from their hands by a hasty and ill- 
judged composition.” Nor did they confine 
their resentment to vain complaints. The most 
daring or most seditious attacked the houses 
of Thrasyllus and Alciphron. The rest soon 
joined in the tumult. The effects of the gene- 
ys were plundcred or confiscated; and their 
ives were saved, with difficulty, by the re- 
spected sanctuary of Argive Juno. 

Though the Greeks, and indeed 


Oly ae the ancients in general, seldom 
e è 418 employed resident ambassadors in 


foreign states, Alcibiades was then 
invested with that character at Argos. His 
activity would not fail to promote the popular 
tumult, in which his own and the Athenian 
interest was concerned. On a future occasion 
he boasted, that, chiefly at his instigation, the 
Argives and their allies were persuaded to 
break the truce; a measure greatly facilitated 
by the long-expected arrival of the Athenian 
transports, conveying a reinforcement of twelve 
hundred soldiers, and a body of three hundred 
cavalry. Encouraged by this event, the Argives, 
regardless of the truce, attacked the ancient 
and wealthy city of Orchomenus in Arcadia, 
which, after a feeble resistance, submitted to 
their arms. They next proceeded to lay siege 
to the neighbouring town of Tegea, a design 
extremely contrary to the inclination of the 
Eleans, who were eager to chastise the in- 
habitants of Lepreum, a district on their own 
frontier. The Argives, however, paid no re- 
gard to their demands; and the Eleans, offended 
by this instance of contempt, returned home in 
disgust. 

The Lacedemonians learned with indigna- 
tion the submission of Orchomenus, the siege 
of Tegea, and the open infraction of the treaty. 
They had formerly murmured against the im- 
prudent or perfidious measures of king Agis; 
but when they felt the effects of his miscon- 
duct, their resentment became outrageous. In 
the first emotions of their animosity, they deter- 
mined to destroy his house, and to subject him 
to a fine of several thousand pounds sterling, 
which, in all probability, he would have been 
unable to pay. But his eloquence and address 
appeased the general clamour; and, as the anger 
of popular assemblies is easily converted into 
pity, he was again taken into favour. His 
known talents for war recommended him to 
the command of the army; and he assured his 
countrymen, that his future services should 
speedily wipe off the stain from his character. 
The Spartans, however, first elected on this 
occasion ten counsellors to attend their kings 
in the field, to restrain their too precipitate re- 
solves, and control their too absolute authority. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| CHAP 


Having taken this precaution, the necessity 


| of which seemed justified by recent experience, 


they summoned the assistance of their allies, 
whose ardour to renew hostilities was equal to 
their own. They proceeded with a numerous 
army (though inferior to that formerly col- 
lected, as their confederates beyond the Isthmus 
had not yet time to join them,) and marched 
directly to the town of Mantinewa, expecting 
either to take that place, or to oblige the enemy 
to defend it, by withdrawing their troops from 
the siege of Tegea. The approach of the Ar- 
gives prevented the surprise of Mantinea; and 
both armies, whose ambition or resentment had 
been so lately. disappointed of an opportunity 
to display their valour or their fury, eagerly 
prepared for an engagement. 

According to ancient custom, the leaders of 
the several nations addressed their respective 
troops. The Mantineans.were animated “ by 
the sight of their city, for the defence of which, 
as well as for the safety of their wives and chil- 
dren, they were exhorted valiantly to contend. 
The event of the battle must determine the im- 
portant alternative of dominion and servitude ; 
dominion which they had lately assumed over 
various cities in Arcadia, and servitude, which 
they had already sufiered under the cruel ty- 
ranny of Sparta.” The Argives were reminded 
“ of their ancient pre-eminence in Peloponnesus, 
which they had recently recovered, and whick 
their honour was now called to maintain. They 
were reminded of the long and bloody wars 
which they had formerly carried on, in order to 
repel the usurpation of a powerful and ambi- 
tious neighbour. This was the same enemy 
who actually provoked their arms, and gave 
them an opportunity of revenging, in one day 
the accumulated injustice of many centuries.” 
The Athenians heard, and repeated, * That it 
was glorious to march at the head of gallant 
and faithful allies, and to show: themselves de- 
serving of their hereditary renown. They 
yielded to none in bravery; their power was un- 
rivalled; and when they had overcome the La- 
cedemonians, even in the Peloponnesus, their 
dominion would be more extensive and secure.” 

_ The Spartans briefly exhorted their followers, 
and each other, “to exert that innate valour 
which had ever animated their breasts, and 
which could receive no additional force from a 
tedious display of useless words.” Thus say- 
ing, they marched with a slow and firm step, 
regulated by the sound of the flute, to meet the 
impetuous onset! of the Argives and Athenians. 
Above a thousand of the former, chosen from 
the flower of the noblest youth of Argos, had 
been employed, since the first dissensions occa- 
sioned by the peace of Nicias, in the constant 
exercise of arms, in order to maintain the ho- 
nourable pretensions of their country. They 
behaved with signal bravery. The Athenians 


1 The admirable verses of Milton, who was a diligent 

reader of Thucydides, are the best commentary on this battle.. 
Anon they move 

In perfect phalanx to the Dorian mood 

Of flutes and soft recorders, such as raised 

To height of noblest temper heroes old, 

Arming to battle; and instead of rage, ~ 

Deliberate valour breathed firm and unmoved, &c. 

Par. Lost, b. i. 


XVIIL] 


were not wanting to their ancient fame. The 
Mantinæans strenuously defended every thing 
most dear to them. But the allied army had 
been considerably weakened by the desertion of 
the Eleans; and the martial enthusiasm of king 
Agis, seconded by the persevering valour of the 
Spartans,? decided the fortune of the battle. 
The allies were repulsed, broken, thrown into 
disorder, and put to flight. The Spartans, un- 
willing to irritate their despair, or supersti- 
tiously observing an ancient maxim, which 
enjoined them “ to make a bridge for a flying 
enemy,” did not continue the pursuit, but 
speedily returned home to celebrate the Car- 
nean festival, rejoicing in having restored the 
lustre of their arms, and recovered their autho- 
rity in the Peloponnesus. 

This, in fact, proved the immediate conse- 


quence of a battle, which was not so bloody as | 
might have been expected, the vanquished lav- | 


ing lost eleven, and the victors only three, hun- 
dred. But the revolutions of Greece chicfly 
depended on the fluctuating politics of domestic 
factions. The Spartans had a numerous party 


in Argos itself, who, emboldened by the recent | 


victory of their friends, immediately took arms, 
abolished the popular government, destroyed 
the partisans of Athens, abjured the league 
with that state, and entered into a new con- 
federacy with Sparta. This event happened a 
few weeks after the engagement, and towards 
the close of the fourteenth winter of the Pelo- 
ponnesian war. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


During the two following | 


21i 


the name and honours of the city extinguished 
for ever; and the territory planted with a new 
colony, consisting chiefly of Platæan exiles. 
These atrocious cruelties alarmed the terror, 
exasperated the resentment, and invigorated the 
resistance, of the neighbouring republics Their 
defence was undertaken by Perdiccas, king of 
Macedon, whom the Athenians therefore inter- 
dicted the use of the Grecian seas. But that 
ambitious people made so little progress in re- 
ducing the Macedonian coast, that they finally 
desisted from this design, contenting themselves 
with guarding those places which still preserv- 
ed their allegiance, with re-establishing do- 
mestic order, and with collecting tlhe customary 
tribute from their numerous colonies and de- 
pendencies. 

The productive industry diffused through all 
branches of the community, the equality of 
private fortune, the absence of ha- 


O ap. bitual luxury, together with the 
AC 416 natural advantages of their soil and 


* climate, enabled the Greeks to flou- 
rish amidst furious and bloody wars. After a 
short period of tranquillity, their exuberant 
population overflowed, and was obliged to dis- 
charge itself in foreign colonies or conquests. 
Such a period Athens enjoyed for five years 
after the peace of Nicias, as the Macedonian 
and Argive wars only employed her activity, 
without exhausting her strength. The necessity 
of exerting her superfluous vigour in some 
useful and honourable design, was fatally ex- 


years, Argos paid dearly for a moment of tran- | perienced, in the year following, by the unfor- 
sient splendour, having undergone three bloody | tunate island of Melos, one ofthe largest of the 
revolutions, which renewed the atrocities of | Cyclades, lying directly opposite to the Cape 


Corcyrean sedition. The contest ended, as in 
Corcyra, in favour of the Athenians and de- 
mocracy. 

The affairs of the Peloponnesus had long 
occupied, without engrossing, the attention of 
Athens. The year preceding her alliance with 
Argos, the Athenians redueed the rebellious 
city of Scioné, in the peninsula of Pallené, 
against which their resentment had been pro- 
voked to the utmost fury, because the Scioneans, 
though inhabiting a country almost surrounded 
by the sea, had defied the naval power of 
Athens, and, amidst the misfortunes of that 
state, revolted to her encmies. The citizens of 
Scioné became the victims of a revenge equally 
crvel and imprudent. The males, above the 
age of puberty, were put to the sword; the 
women and children dragged into servitude ; 


a 


2 If the text is not corrupt, the words of Thneydides are 
very remarkable: AAaxz psrsors dy cate wuvtTs Ty ETE- 
toin Nuxedxiuovios eRaromievrec, TH evdgetx sdei uv ovy 
vorov seesyevousves. p. 394. “That the Lacedæmonians, 
exceedingly inferior as they appeared on this occasion to 
the enemy in military skill, showed themselves as much su- 
perior to them in true manly conrage.”’ It appears from the 
description of the battle, that the Lacedeemanians were de- 
fective, not jn skill, but in discipline. In approaching the 
enemy, their right wing extended too far, which frequently 
happened from the desire of every soldier to cover his nn- 
armed side by the shicld of the next person on his right. 
Jn consequence of this tendency, the Lacedrmonian left 
wing was over-reached by the enemy's right. Agis ordered 


the Skirite and Brasidians to whecl from their places on the | 
right, and lengthen the front of the left wing: commanding | iron, bitumen, sulphnr, and other minerals. 


the battalions of Hipponoidas and Aristocles to fll up the 
vacuity occasioned by this movement. But these generals 
absolutely refused to obey orders, and were allerwarda ba 
nished Sparta on that account. Thucydid. p. 393, et seq. 


oe é 


of Malea, the southern promontory ef Laconia. 

This beautiful island, sixty miles in circum- 
ference, of a circular form, of an agreeable tem- 
perature, and affording, in peculiar perfection,3 
the usual productions of a fine climate, had 
early invited the colonization of the Spartans; 
and the happy settlement had enjoyed political 
independence for seven hundred years. The 
strength and importance of the capital, which 
had the same name with the island, may be un- 
derstood by the armament, of thirty ships, and 
near three thousand soldiers, which the Athe- 
nians brought against it. Before they com- 
menced hostilities, either by attacking the city, 


-or by ravaging the country, they sent ambas- 


sadors to the Melians, in order to persuade them 
to surrender, without incurring the danger or 
the punishment of an unequal, and probably a 
fruitless, resistance. The cautious islanders, 
well acquainted with the eloquence and address 
of the encmy with whom they had to contend, 
denied them the permission to speak before the 
public assembly, but appointed a deputation of 
the magistrates, to hear and examine their de- 
mands. The Athenian ambassadors were re- 
ceived in the senate-house, where a most im- 
portant and interesting conference was held,‘ 
which, while it engages our compassion for the 


3 The island of Melos is every where impregnated with 
It is described 
by Tournefort as a great laboratory. Its suhterranean fires 
are supposed to give peculiar force and flavour to its wines 
and fruits. 

4 Thucydid. |. v. p. 400, et seq. 


218 


unhappy victims of ambition, explains the pre- 
vailing sentiments and opinions of the Greeks 
in matters of war and government, and illus- 
trates the daring injustice of the Athenian re- 
public. The ambassadors began the dialogue, 
by observing, “ That since the distrust of the 
Melians, probably arising from the conscious 
weakness of their cause, had refused them the 
liberty of speaking, in a continued oration, to 
the assembly of the people, they should use that 
mode of conference which seemed most agree- 
able to the inclinations of their adversaries, 
and patiently listen to the objections which 
might occur to any part of their discourse.” 
Melians. “* The proposal is just and reasonable; 
but you have come hither with an armed force, 
which renders you judges in your own cause. 
Though vanquished in debate, you may still 
conquer by arms; but if we yield in argument, 
we must submit to slavery.” Athenians. “If 
you intend to talk of matters foreign to the sub- 
ject, we have done.” M. «It is surely excusable 
for those, whose all is at stake, to turn them- 
selves on every side, and to suggest their sus- 
picions and their doubts. But let the conference 
be carried on in the manner which you have 
proposed.” 4. “ And, on both sides, let all 
superfluous arguments be omitted; eithcr that 
we, having repelled and conquered the Persians, 
are entitled to govern the Greeks; or that you, 
being a colony of Lacedemon, are entitled to 
independence. Let us speak like men of sense 
and experience, who know that the equal rules 
of justice are observed only by men of an equal 
condition ; but that it belongs to the strong to 
command, and to the weak to obey; because 
such is the interest of both.” M. “ How can 
our interest and yours coincide?” 4. “ By sub- 
mission, you will save your lives; and by pre- 
serving you, we will increase our own power.” 
M. « Consider (for this also must be mentioned, 
since disregarding justice, you are governed 
only by utility) that your unprovoked invasion 
of the Melians will rouse the resentment of 
all Greece; will render all neutral states your 
enemies; and, if ever your empire should de- 
cline, (as what human grandeur is not subject 
to decay?) will expose you to a dreadful and 
just punishment.” 4. “ The continuance of our 
empire is the care of fortune and the gods; the 
little that man can do to preserve it, we will 
not neglect. The liberty of Melos offends the 
pride of the neighbouring isles, and stirs them 
to rebellion. The interest of our present power 
must prevail over the apprehension of future 
danger.” JW. “ While the Athenians are thus 
prepared to incur danger for the preservation 
of empire, and their subject islands to defy death 
for the hopes of freedom, would it not be the 
‘basest and most infamous cowardice in us, who 
have long enjoyed liberty, to decline any toil or 
danger for maintaining the most valuable and the 
most glorious of all human possessions?” A. 
« We are not come hither to dispute the prize 
of valour, but to offer terms of safety.” M. 
« The event of war is uncertain; there is some 
hope in resistance, none in submission.” 4. 
“ Flattering hope often deceives the prosperous 
and the powerful, but always destroys the weak 
and unfortunate, who, disregarding natural 


a 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar, 


means of preservation, have recourse to idle 
dreams of the fancy, to omens, oracles, divina- 
tion, and all the fallacious illusions of a vain 
superstition.” M. “ We know that it will be 
dithcult for the Melians to ‘contend with the 
strength and fortune of Athens: yet we trust 
that the gods will support the justice of our 
cause; and that the I.acedemonians, from 
whom we are descended, moved by a sense of 
honour, will defend their own blood.” 4. “ Be- 
lieve not that Athens will be forsaken by the 
gods. Ambition is implanted in man. The 
wisdom of providence, not an Athenian decree, 
has established the inevitable law, that the 
strong should govern the weak. As to the as- 
sistance of the Lacedemonians, we sincerely 
congratulate your happy ignorance of their 
principles. Whatever equity prevails in their 
domestic institutions, they have but one rule 
respecting their neighbours, which is, to regu- 
late all their transactions with them by their 
own conveniency.” M. “ It is chiefly that con- 
sideration which affords us hope, that they will 
not forsake an island which they have planted, 
lest they should be regarded as traitors, than 
which nothing could be more unfavourable to 
their interest, especially since Melos, lying in 
the neighbourhood of their own territories, 
would be a dangerous possession in the hands 
of an enemy.” 4. “ The timid caution of the 
Lacedemonians seldom takes the field, even 
against their inveterate enemies in the Pelopon- 
nesus, unless when their standard is attended 
by numerous allies. It is not to be imagined 
that, for the safety of a colony, they will alone 
cross the Cretan sea, to contend with the supe- 
rior navy of Athens.” M. “Should the Lace- 
dzmonians be averse to sail, they can transport 
others in their stead; and the extent of the 
Cretan sea may elude the vigilance of your 
ships; or should that probability fail, the Lace- 
demonians may attack your subjects on the 
continent, and accomplish the designs of the 
warlike Brasidas.” 4. ©“ You are determined, | 
it seems, to learn, by fatal experience, that fear 
never compelled the Athenians to desist from 
their designs; especially never to raise the siege 
of any place which they had once invested. 
For during the whole of this long conference, 
you have not mentioned a single particular ca- 
pable of affording any just ground of confi- 
dence. Deceived by the splendour of words, 
you talk of honour and independence, rejecting 
the offers of a powerful state, whose arms you 
are unable to resist, and whose protection you 
might obtain at the expense of a moderate 
tribute. Lest shame should, have any share in 
this dangerous behaviour, we shall leave you 
to consult privately, only reminding you once 
more, that your present deliberations involve 
the fate of your country.” 

The Athenian ambassadors retired; and 
shortly afterwards, the Melians recalled them, 
and “declared their unanimous resolution not 
to betray, in one unlucky hour, the liberty 
which they had maintained for seven hundred 
years; depending on the vigorous assistance of 
their Lacedemonian kinsmen, and trusting 
especially in that divine providence which had 
hitherto most wonderfully preserved them 


XIX.] : 


amidst the general convulsions of Greece. But 
they entreated the Athenians to accept their 
offers of neutrality, and to abstain from unpro- 
voked violence.” The ambassadors prepared 
for returning to the camp, leaving the commis- 
sioners with a sarcastic threat, “ That of all 
men, in such a delicate situation, the Melians 
alone thought the future more certain than the 
past, and would grievously suffer for their folly, 
in preferring to the proposals of certain and 
ımmediate safety, the deceitfulness of hope, the 
mstability of fortune, and the vain prospect of 
uacedemonian aid.” The Athenians, irritated 
xy opposition, invested, without delay, the capi- 
al of Melos, which was blocked up for several 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


219 


months by sea and land. The besieged, after 
suffering cruelly by famine, made several des- 
perate sallies, seized the Athenian magazines, 
and destroyed part of their works. But to- 
wards the end of winter, their resistance was 
defeated by the vigorous efforts of the enemy, 
combined with domestic treason. The males 
above the age of fourteen shared the unhappy 
fate of the Scioneans. The women and chil- 
dren were subjected to perpetual servitude, and 
five hundred new inhabitants, drawn from the 
neighbouring colonies of Athens, were sent to 
occupy the vacant lands, which had been culti- 
vated and adorned for seven centuries by the 
labour of the exterminated Melians.! 


CHAPTER XIX. 


Alcibiades promotes the Sicilian Expedition—Revolutions in that Island—Embassy to Athens— ` 
Extravagant Views of Alcibiades—Ovposed by Nicias—The Athenians prepare to invade 
Sicily—Their Armament beheld with Suspicion by the Italian States—Deliberations concerning 
the Mode of carrying on the War—Aleibiades takes Catana by Stratagem—His Intrigues in 
Messené—He is unseasonably recalled to Athens—Charged with Treason and Impiety— Escapes 
to Sparta—Nicias determines to attack Syracuse—Description of that City—The Athenians 
prevail in a Battle—Return to Catana and Naxos. 


HE inhuman massacre of the Melians has 

been ascribed by an instructive, though 
often inaccurate biographer,? to the unfeeling 
pride of Alcibiades. But more ancient and au- 
thentic writers,’ whose silence seems to excul- 
pate the son of Clinias from this atrocious 
accusation, represent him as the principal 
author of the expedition against Sicily ; an cx- 
pedition not more unjust in its principle than 
fatal in its consequences. 
A.C The salutary union between the 
479—468 the princes of Syracuse and Agri- 
- gentum triumphed, as we had occa- 
sion to relate, over the ambition and resources 
of Carthage. Sicily flourished under the vir- 
tuous administration of Gelon’ and Theron; 
but its tranquillity was disturbed by the dissen- 
sions of their immediate successors. Hieron 
king of Syracuse proved victorious in a long 
and bloody war, during which the incapacity 
and misfortunes of his rival Thrasideus em- 
boldened the resentment of his subjects, already 
provoked by his injustice and cruelty. He 
escaped the popular fury, but fell a victim to 
his own despair; and the Agrigentines having 
expelled the family of an odious tyrant, insti- 
tuted a republican form of policy. 

The false, crucl, and avaricious Hieron (for 
such at least he is described‘ in the first years 
of his reign) probably received little benefit 
from the dangerous influence of prosperity. 
But his mind was not incapable of reflection ; 
and, in the course of a long sickness and con- 


1 Thucydid. |. v. p. 410. ad fin. 

2 Plut. in Alcib. 

3 Thucydid. l. v. Lysias Orat. cont. Alcib. 
4 See above, p. 145. 

5 Diodor. l. xi. c. Ixl. et seq. 

6 Diodor. Sic. l. xi. c. Ixvi. 


finement, he discovered the emptiness of such 
objects as kings are taught to admire, and had 
reçourse to the solid pleasures of the mind. 
By conversing with Grecian philosophers, he 
learned the most important of all lessons, that 
of conversing with himself; a conversation 
which none but the most virtuous or the most 
vicious of men can long and frequently main- 
tain, without deriving from it essential profit. 
With the improvement of his understanding, 
the sentiments of Hieron improved; his charac- 
ter and manners underwent a total change ; and 
the latter years of his reign adorn the history 
of Sicily, and the age in which he lived.? The 
poets Simonides, Æschylus, and Bacchilides, 
frequented his court, and admired the greatness 
of his mind, rather than of his fortune. The 
sublime genius of Pindar has celebrated the 
magnificent generosity of his illustrious patron. 
And in an age when writing was the picture 
of conversation, because men talked as they 
ueeded not have been ashamed to write, the 
impartial disciple of Socrates, who had nothing 
to hope or to fear from the ashes of a king 
of Sicily, has represented Hieron, in the dia- 
logue entitled from his name,’ as a model of 
wisdom and virtue. 

It is a mortifying reflection that 


Sele ge the inimitable qualities of a virtu- 
AC 466 ous prince should naturally en- 


courage the sloth, or irritate the 
vices of a degenerate successor. The glorious 
reign of Hieron was followed by the bloody 
tyranny of Thrasybulus; a wretch who, dis- 
gracing the throne and luman nature, was ex- 
pelled from Sicily by the just indignation of 


7 Elian. l. ix. c. vii. 2 Xenophont. Hieron. 


220 


his subjects. Resentment is more permanent 
than gratitude. The Syracusans forgot the 
fame of Gelon; they forgot the recent merit of 
Hieron; and, that they might never be again 
subjected to a tyrant like Thrasybulus, ex- 
changed the odious power of kings for the dan- 
gerous fury of democracy.! 

The inferior cities having successively imi- 
tated the example of Agrigentum and Syracuse, 
the Grecian colonies in Sicily experienced the 
disorders of that tumultuous liberty which had 
so long prevailed in the mother country. Dis- 
tracted by internal discord, and harassed by 
external hostility, they had neither leisure nor 
inclination to attend to the politics of Greece. 
The republic of Syracuse, which was alone 
capable of interposing, with effect, in the quar- 
rels of that country, imitated, instead of op- 
posing, the ambition of Athens. Most of the 
Dorian settlemerits had become confederates, 
or rather tributaries, to the Syracusans; and 
towards the commencement of the Peloponne- 
sian war, that aspiring people, though torn by 
domestic factions, strenuously exerted their 
valour against the Ionic settlements of Leon- 
tium, Catana, and Naxos. 

While these unhappy islanders struggled 
with the turbulence of a government more 
stormy than the whirlpools of 
1 a Scylla and Charybdis, they like- 
xxxvi. 3. `. . E h li 
A. C. 426, WISE enjoyed, however, t e peculiar 

advantages of democracy; which, 
of all political constitutions, presents the widest 
scope to the exercise of superior talents, and 
has always been the most productive in great 
men. The active fermentation of popular 
assemblies had given the eloquence of a Gor- 
gias to Leontium, and the abilities of a Her- 
mocrates to Syracuse. In the sixth year of the 
Peloponnesian war, the former came to Athens 
to solicit the protection of that republic against 
the unjust usurpation of the Sicilian capital. 
His arguments convinced the judgment, and 
the brilliant harmony of his style transported 
the sensibility, of the Athenians. They im- 
mediately despatched twenty ships of war to 
the assistance of their Ionic brethren. Two 
years afterwards a similar request was made, 
and as readily complied with ; and the Athe- 
nians seemed disposed to engage with vigour 
in the war, when the foresight of Hermocrates, 
alarmed’ by the intrusion of these ambitious 
strangers, promoted a general congress of the 
states of Sicily. 
This convention was held at the 


Olymp. 


ee a central town of Gela; it was at- 
A.C 424 tended by the plenipotentiaries of 


all the Doric and Ionic cities. Her- 
mocrates represented Syracuse ; and illustrious 
as that republic was, his conduct proved him 
worthy its highest honours. While the repre- 
sentatives of other states dwelt on their par- 
ticular grievauces, and urged their separate 
interests, Hermocrates regarded and enforced 
only the general interest of Sicily. His argu- 
ments finally prevailed, and all parties were 
engaged to terminate their domestic contests, 


1 Aristot. de Repub. J. v. © xii, 
2 Thucydid. p. 290. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


lest the whole island should fall a prey to a 
foreign power.’ 
But a plan of union, so season- 


eS B able and salutary, depended on the 
A. C. 416, ‘ansient influence of a single man, 


while the principles of discord were 
innumerable and permanent. Within a few 
years after this event, Leontium was taken 
and destroyed, its inhabitants reduced to the 
wretched condition of exiles, and its confede- 
rates, the Egestwans, closely besieged by the 
conjunct arms of Selinus and Syracuse. The 
unfortunate communities again sentan embassy 
to Athens, pleading the rights of consanguinity 
and addressing not only the passions but the 
interest of their powerful allies. “ The Athe 
nians,” they insisted, “ were bound by every 
principle of sound policy to repress the growing 
greatness of Syracuse, which must otherwise 
become a formidable accession to the Pelopon- 
nesian league; and now was the time for un- 
dertaking that enterprise, while their Jonian 
kinsmen in Sicily were still capable of exerting 
some vigour in their own defence.” In order 
to enforce these arguments, the ambassadors of 
Egesta or Segesta gave an ostentatious, and 
even a very false, description of the wealth of 
their republic; which, according to their ac- 
count, was capable of furnishing the whole ex- 
pense of the war. Their fellow citizens at 
home carried on the deception by a most un- 
justifiable artifice, displaying to the Athenian 
commissioners sent to confer with them, the 
borrowed riches of their neighbours, and raising, 
by extraordinary expedients, the sum of sixty 
talents of silver, to maintain, for a month, an 
Athenian fleet of sixty sail, as if they had pur- 
posed monthly to repeat this large subsidy, 
which at once exhausted their faculties,4 

The arguments of their Sicilian allies were 
doubtless entitled to considerable weight with 
the Athenians; yet various reasons might have 
dissuaded that ambitious people from under- 
taking, at the present juncture, an expedition 
against the powerful republic of Syracuse. The 
cloud of war, which Pericles saw advancing 
with rapid motion from the Peloponnesus, had 
been at length dispelled by the valour and for- 
tune of the Athenians; not, however, before 
the arms of Brasidas had shaken their empire 
to the foundation. The same storm might be 
again collected, if the Athenians removed their 
armies from home, especially if they were un- 
fortunate abroad, since the wounded pride of 
Sparta would eagerly seize the first opportunity 
of revenge. The rebellion of the Macedonian 
cities was still unsubdued, and it would be 
highly imprudent and dangerous, before re- 
covering the allegiance of these ancient posses- 
sions, to attempt the acquisition of new terri- 
tories. Should the Athenian expedition against 
Sicily be crowned with the most flattering suc- 
cess, it would still be difficult, nay, impossible, 
to preserve such a distant and extensive con- 
quest; but should this ambitious design fail in 
the execution, as there was too good reason to 
apprehend, the misfortunes of the Athenians, 
whose greatness was the object both of terror 


3 Thucydid. p. 290. 4 Thucydid. p. 444. 


XIX.] 


and of envy, would encourage the rebellious 
spirit of their subjects and allies, excite the 
latent animosity of the Peloponnesians, and 
reinforce their ancient enemies by the resent- 
ment and hostility of Syracuse and her con- 
federates, justly provoked by the daring inva- 
sion of their island. » 

These prudential considerations were unable 
to cool the ardour of the Athenian assembly, 
inflamed by the breath of their favourite Alci- 
biades. It is a just and profound observation 
of Machiavel, that the real powers of govern- 
ment are often contracted to a narrower point 
in republics than in monarchies; an observa- 
tion which that sagacious statesman had learn- 
ed from the experience of his native city, and 
which he might have confirmed by the history 
of the Greeks, whose political measures, and 
even whose national character, depended on 
the transient influence of a few individuals. 
Under the direction of Aristides and Themisto- 
cles, the Athenians displayed the soundest 
policy, adorned by unshaken probity, and by 
heroic valour. Cimon inspired the generous 
ambition which animated his own breast: a 
a dignified grandeur and magnanimous firm- 
ness distinguished the long administration, I 
had almost said reign, of Pericles. The son of 
Clinias succeeded to the power and authority, 
without succeeding to the virtues of those 
great men, whom his pride disdained to imitate. 
Regardless of order and decency, with a licen- 
tious magnificence most offensive to the spirit 
of republican equality, he blended a certain 
elegance of manners which not only repelled 
censure, but attracted applause. Thus dis- 
pensed from observing the established formali- 
ties of private life, he expected that the glory 
of his administration might soar above the ordi- 
nary dictates of political prudence.6 Though 
he preferred what was useful to what was vir- 
tuous, he preferred what was brilliant to what 
was useful, and, disdaining the common gifts 
of valour and fortune, aspired at objects extra- 
ordinary and unattainable. The recovery of 
the Athenian possessions, and the re-establish- 
ment of an empire, already too extensive, might 
have satisfied the ambition of a bold and active 
statesman. But the extravagant hopes of Alci- 
biades expatiated in a wider field. The ac- 
quisition of Sicily itself he regarded only as a 
necessary introduction to farther and more im- 
portant conquests. The intermediate situation 
of that beautiful and fertile island opened, on 
the one hand, an easy communication with the 
eastern front of Italy, which, from Brundusium 
to the Sicilian frith, was adorned by populous 
and flourishing cities; and on the other, afford- 
ed a short and safe passage to the northern 
shores of Africa, which, for many ages, had 
been cultivated and enriched by the united la- 
bours of the Greeks and Carthaginians. In his 
waking or sleeping dreams, Alcibiades grasped 
the wide extent of those distant possessions, by 
the resources of which he expected finally to 
subdue the pertinacious spirit, and obstinate 


5 See Plut. in Alcibiad. Isocrat. de Pace; above all, the 
animated pare in Plato’s Republic, (l. viii. cap. cc. et 
#0q.,) of which Alcibiades, doubtless, was the original. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


22 


resistance, of the Peloponnesians. Thus secure 
at home, and sovereign of the sea, Athens might 
incorporate with her own the troops of the 
conquered provinces, and maintain an unshaken 
dominion over the most delightful portion of 
the earth, while her fortunate citizen's, delivered 
from all laborious and mercenary cares, would 
be supported by the contributions of subject 
nations, and enabled to display, in their full 
extent, that taste for splendour and magnifi- 
cence, that greatness of soul and superiority of 
genius, which justly entitled them to the empire 
of the world.§ 

Allured by these extravagant, but 


oly pe flattering prospects of grandeur, the 
AC 415 Athenians, in two successive assem- 


blies, held at the short interval of 
five days, agreed to the resolution of making 
war against Sicily, and of raising such naval 
and military force as seemed necessary for car- 
tying it on with vigour and success. While 
they still deliberated on the latter object, the 
virtuous Nicias, who had been named with 
Alcibiades and Lamachus to the command of 
the projected armament, omitted nothing that 
prudence could suggest, and patriotism enforce, 
to deter his countrymen from such a dangerous 
and fatal design. On this memorable occasion, 
he threw aside his usual timidity, and divested 
himself of thatrigid regard for established forms, 
which was natural to his age and character. 
Though the assembly was convened to deter- 
mine the proportion of supplies and troops, and 
the means of collecting them with the greatest 
expedition and facility, he ventured, contrary 
to ancient custom, to propose a different sub- 
ject of debate; affirming, “That the interest 
of Athens was concerned, not in providing the 
preparations for the Sicilian invasion, but in 
re-examining the expediency ofthe war. The 
assembly ought not to be moved by the argu- 
ments and intreaties of the persecuted Egiste- 
ans, and fugitive Leontines, whom resentment 
had taught to exaggerate, and misery to de- 
ceive. Nor ought the vain phantom of glory 
and ambition to engage Athens in a design 
perhaps altogether impracticable, and, in the 
present juncture, peculiarly unseasonable; since 
it would be madness to excite the flames of a 
new war, before the ashes of the old were ex- 
tinguished. The pleas of danger and self-de- 
fence were in the highest degree frivolous; for, 
should the dreaded power of Syracuse be ex- 
tended over the whole of Sicily, the Athenians 
would have nothing to apprehend: this event 
would rather increase their security. In the 
actual state of the island, particular cities might 
be persuaded by fear, or interest, to court the 
protection of the Peloponnesian confederacy ; 
but the victorious Syracuse would disdain to 
follow the standard of Sparta. Should the 
former republic, by an effort of uncommon 
generosity, subject the partial dictates of her 
pride to the general safety and honour of the 
Dorian name, sound policy, however, would 
still prevent her from endangering the precari- 
ous empire which she had obtained over her 


6 Isocrat. de Pace. Andocid. Orat. iii. p. 269, et Aris- 
toph. Vesp. ver. 656. 


4 


Zae 


neighbours, by strengthening the confederacy 


of Peloponnesus, of which the avowed design 
was to give liberty and independence to the 
Grecian cities. Should all remote views of 
policy be disregarded, yet immediate fear 
would deter the Syracusans from provoking 
the resentment of Athens, the effects of which 
they had not as yet experienced, but which, 
being unknown, must appear the more formida- 
ble. It was evident, therefore, that the Sicilian 
expedition might be omitted without danger; 
but if this enterprise, which had been hastily 
resolved on, were injudiciously executed, or if 
any of those misfortunes should happen, which 
are but too frequent in war, the Athenians 
would be exposed not only to danger, but to 
disgrace and ruin. The result of such an im- 
portant deliberation ought not to be committed 
to the rash decision of youthful levity; which 
viewed the Sicilian war, as it did every other 
object, through the delusive medium of hope, 
vanity, and ambition; and, totally disregarding 
the expense and danger to be incurred by the 
republic, considered only the profits of military 
command, which might repair the wreck of 
exhausted fortunes, and supply a new fund for 
the indulgence of extravagant and licentious 
pleasures. He had in his eye a youth of that 
description, the principal author of the expedi- 
tion, who was surrounded by a numerous band 
of adherents, determined to applaud his dis- 
course and to promote his measures. It be- 
came the wisdom and dignity of the assembly 
to resist with firmness that juvenile conspiracy. 
In such a dangerous crisis, it was the duty of 
the president to dispense with ordinary forms, 
and to act, not merely as the instrument, but 
as the physician, of a diseased republic. The 
question ought to be debated a second time; 
and the Athenians ought to rescind the decree 
against Sicily, which had passed without suffi- 
cient examination, in the absence of several 
aged and respectable counsellors.””! 

This discourse immediately called up Alci- 
biades, who, presuming on his credit with the 
assembly, acknowledged, “ That he had aspired 
to the command in Sicily, and that he thought 
himself justly entitled to that honour. The 
extravagance of which he was accused, had re- 
dounded to the profit of his country; since his 
magnificence at the Olympic games, however 
it might be traduced by an abusive epithet, had 
extended the glory of Athens, and deserved the 
admiration of Greece. His youth and inex- 
perience had effected what the policy of the 
wisest statesmen had often attempted in vain. 
A powerful confederacy had been formed 
against Sparta, even in the bosom of the Pelo- 
ponnesus; and the terror of a domestic foe 
would long prevent the enmity of that rival 
state from interrupting the progress of Athe- 
nian grandeur. In an expedition, evidently 
directed to this glorious end, expense and 
danger ought not to be regarded, since wealth 


was usefully sacrificed to purchase victory and | 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


by seizing every favourable opportunity to in- 
crease it. To the undertaking which he ad- 
vised, no reasonable objection could be made; 
its expense would be furnished by the Egistæ- 
ans, and other confederates; and the danger 
could not be great, as Sicily, however exten- 
sive and populous, was inhabited by a promis- 
cuous crowd of various nations, without arms 
or discipline, devoid of patriotism, and incapa- 
ble of union.”2 

The assembly murmured applause, confirmed 
their former decree, and testified for the war 
greater alacrity than before. Nicias perceived 
the violence of the popular current; still, how- 
ever, he made one ineffectual effort to resist its 
force. * The success of an invader,” he ob- 
served, “commonly depended on the weight 
and rapidity of his first unexpected impression, 
which confirmed the confidence of his friends, 
and excited dismay and terror in his enemies. 
If the expedition into Sicily must be under- 
taken in defiance of every difficulty and dan- 
ger, it ought therefore to be carricd into execu- 
tion with the utmost vigour. The Athenians 
might thus secure the assistance of Naxos and 
Catana, which were connected by affinity with 
the Egisteans and Leontines. But there re- 
mained seven cities, and those far more power- 
ful, with which they must prepare to contepd; 
particularly Selinus and Syracuse, places well 
provided with ships, magazines, cavalry, arch- 
ers, heavy-armed troops, and every object and 
resource most useful in defensive war. An 
armament simply naval would not be sufficient 
to cope with such a strength. Five thousand 
pikemen, with a proportional number of arch- 
ers and cavalry, could not render the invasion 
successful. After arriving in Sicily, the towns 
must be besieged or stormed; workmen, with 
all sorts of machines and implements, must be 
collected for those purposes, and transported 
to an island from which, in the four winter 
months, a messenger could scarcely return to 
Athens. This necessary train, which would 
greatly encumber the fleet and army, must be 
subsisted in a hostile country. Besides a hun- 
dred galleys, a great number of tenders and 
victuallers would be required for the expedi- 
tion. To collect such an immense mass of war, 
demanded, doubtless, astonishing ardour and 
perseverance; but if the Athenians intended to 
employ a smaller force, he must, in justice to 
his country and himself, decline accepting the 
command, since nothing less than what he had 
described could promise a hope of victory, or 
prevent the certainty of defeat.’’3 

The last attempt of Nicias to dis- 
: suade his countrymen from this 
xe ee tal enterprise, by magnifying the 
A.C. 415. amea or cer 

ifhculty of its execution, produced 

an opposite effect. The obstacles, which were 
unable to conquer, only animated the courage 
of the assembly; and it was determined. that 
the generals should be invested with full au- 
thority to raise such sums of money, and to 


Olymp. 


renown; and power was only to be preserved | levy such a body of troops, as might ensure 


1 Thucydid. I. vi. p. 417, et seq. The Sicilian expedition 
is uninterruptedly related through the remainder of the sixth 
and seventh hooks of Thucydides. The collateral authority 
of Diodorus, Plutarch and the orators is of little importance. 


> 


success to their arms. The domestic strength 


2 Thueydid, p. 422—426. 
3 Thucydid. p. 427—429. 


XIX.] 


of the Athenians was unequal to the greatness 
of the undertaking: proper agents were de- 
spatched to demand an extraordinary contribu- 
tion from their dependent states, as well as to 
suimmon the reluctant assistance of their more 
warlike allies. These auxiliary squadrons were 
ordered to sail to Corcyra, in which rendezvous 
the Athenians, towards the middle of summer, 
were ready to join their confederates. 

The magnitude of the preparations increased 
the hopes and the ardour of all ranks of men 
in the republic. The old expected that nothing 
could resist such a numerous and well-equip- 
ped armament. The young eagerly seized an 
occasion to gratify their curiosity and love of 
knowledge in a distant navigation, and to share 
the honours of such a glorious enterprise. The 
rich exulted in displaying their magnificence; 
the poor rejoiced in the immediate assurance 
of pay sufficient to relieve their present wants,‘ 
and in the prospect of obtaining by their arms 
the materials of future ease and happiness. In- 
stead of finding any difficulty to complete the 
levies, the great difficulty consisted in deciding 
the preference of valour and merit among those 
who solicited to serve; and the whole comple- 
ment of forces, to be employed by sea and 
land, consisted of chosen men.é 

Amidst the general alacrity felt, or at least 
expressed, by people of all descriptions (for the 
dread of incurring public censure made several 
express what they did not fecl,) Socrates® alone 
ventured openly and boldly to condemn the 
expedition, and to predict the future calamities 
of his country. But the authority of a sage 
was incapable to check the course of that en- 
thusiasm, which had not been interrupted by 
the anniversary festival of Adonis, an ancient 
and melancholy rite, which inauspiciously re- 
turned a few days preceding the embarkation. 
During this dreary ceremony, the streets of 
Athens were crowded with spectres clothed in 
funeral robes, the spacious domes and temples 
resounded with lugubrious cries; while the 
Grecian matrons, marching in slow procession, 
tore their dishevelled hair, beat their naked 
bosoms, and lamented in mournful strains the 
untimely death of the lover, and beloved fa- 
vourite, of Venus.’ 

When the appointed day arrived, the whole 
inhabitants of Athens, whether citizens or 
strangers, assembled early in the Piræus, to 
admire the greatest spectacle ever beheld in a 
Grecian harbour. A hundred galleys were 
adorned with all the splendour of naval pomp: 
the troops destined to embark, vied with each 
other in the elegance of their dress and the 
brightness of their arms: the alacrity painted 
‘in every face, and the magnificence displayed 


4 The most expert and able seamen received a drachma 
(seven pence three farthings) as daily pay, besides dona- 
tives from their respective captains. Thueydid. et Plut. 

5 Thueydid. p. 430—433. 

6 Plutarch joins Meton the astrologer with Socrates. But 
the story of Meton, who pretended madness, burned his 
house, and entreated the Athenians, that, amidst his do- 
mestic misfortunes, he might not be deprived of the com- 
fort of his only son, is inconsistent with the narrative of 
Thueydides, which proves, that instead of compelling re- 
luctance, there was occasion to repress forwardness, to 
embark. 

7 Plut. in Nic. et Alcibiad. : 


‘HISTORY OF GREECE. 


223 


with profusion in every part of the equipage, 
represented a triumphal show, rather than the 
stern image of war. But the solidity and 
greatness of the armament proved that it was 
iitended for use, not for ostentation. Amidst 
this glare of external pageantry which accom- 
panied the adventurous youth, their friends 
and kinsmen could not suppress a few parting 
tears, wlien they considered the length of the 
voyage, the dangers of the sea, and tne uncer- 
tainty of beholding again the dearest pledges 
of their affections. But these partial expres- 
sions of grief were speedily interrupted by the 
animating sounds of the trumpet, which issued 
at once from a hundred ships, and provoked 
sympathetic acclamations from the shore. The 
captains then offered solemn prayers to the 
gods, which were answered by corresponding 
vows from the spectators: the customary liba- 
tions were poured out in goblets of gold and 
silver; and, after the triumphant Pæan had 
heen sung in full chorus, the whole fleet at 
once set sail, and contended for the prize of 
naval skill and celerity, until they reached the 
lofty shores of Ægina, from whence they en- 
joyed a prosperous navigation to the rendez- 
vous of their confederates at Corcyra.8 

At Corcyra the commanders reviewed the 
strength of the armament, which consisted of a 
hundred and thirty-four ships of war, with a 
proportional number of transports and tenders. 
The heavy-armed troops, exceeding five thou- 
sand, were attended with a sufficient body of 
slingers and archers. The army, abundantly 
provided in every other article, was extremely 
deficient in horses, which amounted to no more 
than thirty. But, at a moderate computation, 
we may estimate the whole military and naval 
strength, including slaves and servants, at 
twenty thousand men. 

With this powerful host, had the Athenians 
at once surprised and assailed the unprepared 
security of Syracuse, the expedition, however 
adventurous and imprudent, might, perhaps, 
have been crowned with success. But the 
timid mariners of Greece would have trembled 
at the proposal of trusting such a numerous 
fleet on the broad expanse of the Ionian sea. 
They determined to cross the narrowest pas- 
sage between Italy and Sicily, after coasting 
along the eastern shores of the former, until 
they reached the Strait of Messina. That this 
design might be executed with the greater 
safety, they despatched three light vessels to 
examine the disposition of the Italian cities, 
and to solicit admission into their harbours. 
The greatest part of Magna Grecia had, indeed, 
been peopled by Dorians, naturally hostile to 
Athens. But from one Italian city the Athe- 
nians had reason to expect a very favourable 
reception. The effeminate Sybaris had been 
demolished, as related above, by the warlike 
inhabitants of Crotona, about the time that the 
Athenians, growing more powerful than their 
neighbours, began to seize every opportunity 
to extend their colonies and their dominion. 
Governed by such principles, they could not 


——— a- 


8 Thuevdid. l vi. p. 432. et seq. Plut. in Nicia. Didor 
l Aili pe 332: 9 P. 145. 


224 


long overlook the happy situation of Sybaris, 
near to which they early formed an establish- 
ment that assumed the name of Thurium, from 
a salubrious fountain of fresh water;! and the 
colony was increased by a numerous supply 
of emigrants, who, under Athenian leaders, 
sailed from Greece thirteen years before the 
Peloponnesian war.? 

The armament at Corcyra, whatever jea- 
tousy its power might create in other cities, 
was entitled to the gratitude of Thurium; pre- 
suming on which, the commanders, without 
waiting the return of the advice-boats, ordered 
the fleet to proceed, in tliree divisions, to the 
Italian coast. But neither the ties of consan- 
guinity, nor the duties acknowledged by colo- 
nies towards their parent state, could prevail 
on the suspicious Thurians to open their gates, 
or even to furnish a market, to their Athenian 
ancestors. The towns of Tarentum and Locris 
prohibited them the use of their harbours, and 
refused to supply them with water; and they 
coasted the whole extent of the shore, from the 
promontory of [apygium to that of Rhegium, 
before any one city would allow them to pur- 
chase the commodities for which they had im- 
mediate use. The magistrates of Rhegium 
granted this favour, but they granted nothing 
more; notwithstanding the earnest solicitations 
of Alcibiades and his colleagues, who exhorted 
them, as a colony of Eubea, to assist their 
brethren of Leontium, whose republic the 
Athenians had determined to re-establish and 
to defend.3 

While the armament continucd at Rhegium, 
they were informed by vessels which had been 
purposely despatched from Corcyra, that the 
Egisteans, notwithstanding the boasted ac- 
counts lately given of their riches, possessed 
only thirty talents in their treasury. This dis- 
agrecable intelligence, together with the disap- 
pointment of assistance from any Italian city, 
occasioned a council of war, to consider what 
measures ought to be pursued in the Sicilian 
expedition. It was the opinion of Nicias, “that 
the Egistwans ought to be furnished with that 
proportion of ships only, the charges of which 
they were able to defray; and that the Athe- 
nian fleet, having settled, either by arms or by 
persuasion, the quarrels between them and their 
neighbours, should return to their own har- 
bours, after sailing along the coast of Sicily, 
and displaying to the inhabitants of that island 
both their inclination and their power to pro- 
tect the weakness of their allies.” 

Alcibiades declared, “That it would be 
shameful and ignominious to dissolve such a 
powerful armament, without performing some 
exploit worthy the renown of the republic; that, 
by the prospect of immediate and effectual 
support, the inferior cities might easily be 
alienated from the reluctant confederacy with 
Selinus and Syracuse; after which, the war 
ought to be carried on with the utmost vigour 
against those republics, unless they re-esta- 
blished the Leontines in their territory, and 


1 Qvouerzv aro tus xenvys ©ogiov, Diodor. l. xii. p. 295. 
2 Suid. ad voc. Lysias. 
3 Thucydid. p. 443. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


gave complete satisfaction to the injured Egis- 
tæans. 

Lamachus not only approved the active 
counsels of Alcibiades, but proposed a measure 
still more enterprising. “ The Athenians ought 
not to waste time in unimportant objects, Ín- 
stead of striking at the extremities, they ought 
to assault at once the heart and strength of the 
enemy. If they immediately attacked Syra- 
cuse, it would not only be the first, but the last 
city, which they would have occasion to be- 
siege. Nor could the attempt fail, if undertaken 
without delay, before the Syracusans had time 
to recollect themselves, and to provide for their 
own defence; and while the Athenian troops, 
as yet undaunted by any check, enjoyed un- 
broken courage and blooming hopes.” 

This advice, which does equal honour to the 
spirit and good sense of Lamachus, was reject- 
ed by the timidity of Nicias, and probably by 
the vanity of Alcibiades. The latter perceived 
a flattering opportunity of exhausting all the 
resources of lis eloquence and intrigue to get 
possession of the dependent cities, before he 
illustrated the glory of his arms in the siege 
of Syracuse. The fleet sailed from Rhegium 
to exccute his plan, which was adopted by his 
colleagues, as forming the middle between the 
extremes of the respective opinions. A con- 
siderable detachment was sent to examine the 
preparations and the strength of Syracuse, and 
to proclaim liberty, and offer protection, to all 
the captives and strangers confined within its 
walls, 

With another detachment Alcibiades sailed to 
Naxos, and persuaded the inhabitants to accept 
the alliance of Athens. The remainder of the 
armament proceeded to Catana, which refused 
to admit the ships into the harbour, or the 
troops into the city. But on the arrival of 
Alcibiades, the Cataneans allowed him to ad- 
dress the assembly, and propose his demands. 
The artful Athenian transported the populace, 
and even the magistrates themselves, by the 
charms of his eloquence; the citizens flocked 
from every quarter, to hear a discourse which 
was purposely protracted for several hours; the 
soldiers forsook their posts; and the enemy, 
who had prepared to avail themselves of this 
negligence, burst through the unguarded gates, 
and became masters of the city. Those of the 
Cataneans who were most attached to the in- 
terests of Syracuse, fortunately escaped death 
by the celerity of their flight. The rest accept- 
ed the proffered friendship of the Athenians. 
This success would probably have been fol- 
lowed by the surrender of Messené, which 
Alcibiades had filled with distrust and sedition. 
But when the plot was ripe for execution,‘ the 
man who had contrived, and who alone could 
conduct it, was disqualified from serving his 
country. The arrival of the Salaminian galley 
recalled Alcibiades to Athens, that he might 
stand trial for his life. 


4 Thucydides says, t When Alcibiades knew he should 
be banished, he betrayed his accomplices to the party 
favourable to Syracuse, who immediately put their adver- 
saries to death.” Thucydid. p. 462. We shall see hereafter 
still more fatal consequences of his resentment against his 
country. But nothing can more strongly attest the turpi- 
tude of his character. 


XIX. 


It would be improper to suspend the course 
of an interesting narrative, by describing the 
causes and circumstances of this unexpected 
event, if they were not immediately connected 
with the subsequent history of the Sicilian 
expedition, and with the future fortune of the 
Athenians, who, after engaging, by the advice 
of one man, in the most romantic schemes of 
conquest which the madness of ambition had 
ever dared to entertain, injudiciously arrested 
the activity of that man in the execution of 
such extraordinary designs, as could only be 
accomplished by the wonderful resources of his 
singular and eccentric genius. It happened, 
that on the night preceding the intended navi- 
gation to Sicily, all the statues of Mercury, 
which had been erected in the Athenian streets 
as the boundaries of different edifices and tenc- 
ments, were thrown down, broken, and defaced. 


One only image of the god, of uncommon size. 


and beauty, was saved from the general wreck; 
it was afterwards called the statue of Ando- 
cides, as it stood before the house of the Athe- 
nian orator of that name. This daring insult 
was first ascribed to the wicked artifices of the 
Corinthians, who, it was supposed, might em- 
ploy such an abominable and sacrilegious con- 
trivance to deter the Athenian armament from 
sailing against their colony and kinsmen of 
Syracuse. But the enemies of Alcibiades 
availed themselves of the impious levity of his 
character, to direct the popular storm against 
the head of their detested foe. On the evi- 
dence of slaves, he was accused of having 
treated, with rude familiarity, other adored 
images of the gods; and Thessalus, the degene- 
rate son of the magnanimous Cimon, impeached 
him of impiety towards the goddesses Ceres 
and Proserpine, whose awful ceremonies he 
had polluted and profaned; assuming, though 
uninitiated, the name and robes of the high 
priest, calling Polytion (in whose house this 
dreadful scene had been represented.) tlie torch- 
bearer, Theodorus the herald, and his other 
licentious companions the sacred brethren and 
holy ministers of those mysterious rites.® 

Such an atrocious accusation 


= a alarmed the terrors of the Athe- 
A Cc “415 nians; one assembly was summoned 


after another; and the panic became 
the more general, when it was understood that, 
during the same night in which the statues had 
been mutilated, a body of Peloponnesian troops 
had marched towards the Isthmus of Corinth. 
In the confused imagination of the vulgar, it 
was possible to unite the incompatible inter- 
ests of superstition and of freedom; and they 
were persuaded by Androcles, and other artful 
demagogues, tliat the profanation of the mys- 
teries, thie defacing of the statues of Mercury, 


5 Democritus, the chief promoter of the Atomic philoso- 
phy, was younger than Anaxagoras, and cider than Socrates. 
His scholars, Diagoras and Protagdras, propagated his wild 
system at Athens towards the commencement of the Pelo- 
ponnesian war. Whether Alcibiades embraced the barren 
doctrines of that miserable sect, or adhered to the divine 


philosophy of his master Socrates, or, more probably, flus- 
tuated between them, he must, in all cases alike, have been 
obnoxious to the suspicion of impiety. Cotnp. Strabo. L 
lxv. p. 703. Sext. Empiric. l. lix. 11. Laert. l ii. ia De- 
mocrit. Socrat. et Protag. 

6 Plutarch. in Alcibiad. 


2 F 


HISTORY OF GREECE. d 


225 


the movement of the Peloponnesian troops, all 
announced a conspiracy to demolish the esta- 
blished forin of popular government, the safety 
of which had, ever since the expulsion of the 
Pisistratide, formed an object of universal and 
most anxious solicitude. 

Alcibiades defended himself, with his usual 
eloquence and address, against the malignity 
of a charge, unsupported by any adequate evi- 
dence. The soldiers and sailors, whose eager- 
ness already grasped the conquest of Sicily, 
interceded for the deliverance of their com- 
mander, whom they regarded as the soul of 
that glorious enterprize. A thousand Argives 
and Mantinwans, who had enlisted, on this 
occasion, under the Athenian banners, declared 
their unwillingness to sail, unless they were 
accompanied by Alcibiades, whose valour and 
abilities alone had determined them to engage 
in such an important, but dangerous service. 
This powerful combination in his favour disap- 
pointed the present hopes, without disconcert- 
ing the future measures, of his enemies. They 
perceived that, were he brought to an imme- 
diate trial, it would be impossible to obtain 
sentence against him; but that were his person 
and influence removed to a distance from 
Athens, every thing might be hoped from the 
weakness, inconstancy, and credulity of the 
populace. It was therefore determined by this 
perfidious cabal, that such orators as had hither- 
to disguised, under the mask of friendship or 
admiration, their envy and hatred of Alcibiades, 
should declare in full assembly, “that it would 
be inconsistent with the clearest dictates of 
prudence and propriety, to involve in the tedi- 
ous formalities of a judicial procedure, a citizen 
who had been elected general by the unanimous 
suffrage of his country, and whose presence was 
eagerly demanded by the affectionate ardour 
of his troops. The charges against him de- 
served, doubtless, to be seriously examined; 
but the present was not a proper time for such 
an investigation, which must blunt the courage 
of his followers, and interrupt the service of the 
republic. Let him sail, therefore, for Sicily, 
and at his return home he will either vindicate 
his innocence, or suffer the punishment of his 
guilt.” Alcibiades perceived the poison con- 
cealed under this affected lenity, and testified 
his reluctance to leave behind him such abun- 
dant materials for the malice of informers. But 
his petition for an immediate trial was rejected 
by the assembly. He therefore set sail, proba- 
bly flattering himself, that by the glory and 
success of his arms, he would silence the 
clamours, and defeat the machinations, of his 
accusers. 

But this expectation was unfortunately dis- 
appointed. In a republican government, it is 
not more easy to excite, than it is difficult to 
appease, the fermentation of public discontents, 
especially if occasioned by any real or pre- 
tended diminution of freedom. The removal 
of Alcibiades gave full scope to the ebullitions 
of popular freuzy. The Athenians were con- 
tinually assembled to inquire into the violation 
of the statues. Many respectable citizens were 
seized on suspicion, because they had, on for- 
mer occasions, discovered principles hostile to 


226 


the wild extravagance of democracy. Others 


were imprisoned on the evidence of Teucer, an 


obscure stranger, and Diopeithes, a calumnious 
demagugue. The violence of the public disor- 
der opened a door to private vengeance. Every 
individual was desirous to see his personal 
enemies among the number of state criminals; 
and his resentment was invited falsely to accuse 
them, by au injudicious decree of the assembly, 
offering high rewards to those who should de- 
nounce the guilty, and even to the guilty them- 
selves, who should denounce their associates. 

Among the persons who had been 


a z * seized on suspicion, was the crafty 
AC. 415, 2nd intriguing Timeus, and the 


profligate and impious Andocides, 
the same whose statue of Mercury had escaped 
the general mutilation. The known character 
of these men naturally marked them out as 
peculiar victims of popular fury. As they were 
confined in the same prison, they had an op- 
portunity of communicating their apprehen- 
sions, and of contriving means of safety. Ti- 
meus persuaded his friend (for the ties of 
common danger create between knaves a tem- 
porary friendship,) that it would be weakness 
to die by a false accusation, when he might 
save himself bya lie. Andocides turned in- 
former. The prisoners whom he named were 
banished or put to death; the rest were set at 
liberty. The absent, among whom was Alci- 
biades, were recalled to stand trial. But they 
did not obey the summons sent them by the 
Salaminian galley. The wanderings and mis- 
fortunes of more obscure names are unknown. 
Alcibiades escaped to Thurium, and afterwards 
to Argos; and when he understood that the 
Athenians had set a price on his head, he 
finally took refuge in Sparta; where his active 
genius seized the first opportunity to advise 
and promote those fatal measures, which, while 
they gratified his private resentment, occasion- 
ed the ruin of his country.! 

The removal of Alcibiades soon appeared in 
the languid operations of the Athenian arma- 
ment. The cautious timidity of Nicias, sup- 
ported by wealth, eloquence, and authority, 
gained an absolute ascendant over the more 
warlike and enterprising character of Lama- 
chus, whose poverty exposed him to contempt. 
Instead of making a bold impression on Selinus 
or Syracuse, Nicias contented himself with 
taking possession of the inconsiderable colony 
of Hyccara. He ravaged, or laid under con- 
tribution, some'places of smaller note, and ob- 
tained thirty talents from the Egisteans, which, 
added to the sale of the booty, furnished about 
thirty thousand pounds sterling,? a sum that 
might be usefully employed in the prosecution 
_ of an expensive war. But this advantage did 
not compensate for the courage inspired into 
the Syracusans by delay, and for the dishonour 


1 Plut. in Alcibiad. et Isocrates, and Lysias, in the Ora- 
tions for and against the son of Alcibiades. Several facts 
and circumstances are differently represented in the orations 
of Andocides; but that orator was a party concérned. 

2 Thirty talents from the ee 

amount to . . : . eels 
The salo of slaves, ke |. Go © 93,250 
Sum L. 29,062 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Cuar. 


sustained by the Athenian troops, in their un 
successful attempts against Hybla and Himera 
as well as for their dejection at being confined 
during the greatest part of the summer, in the 
inactive quarters of Naxos and Catana. 

The impatience of the Athenians murmured 
against these dilatory and ignoble proceedings. 
which appeared altogether unworthy the great- 
ness of their armament, the generous spirit 
with which they felt themselves animated, and 
the ancient glory of the republic. Nicias, re- 
sisting the wary dictates of hiz own fear or 
foresight, determiged to gratify the inclination 
of his troops by t T vigour of his winter cam- 
paign. The conquest of Syracuse, against 
which he intended to lead them, might well 
excite the emulation of the combatants, since 
that powerful city formed the main obstacle to 
their ambition, and the principal bulwark not 
only of Sicily, but of the Italian and African 
shores. 

Ancient Syracuse, of which the ruined gran- 
deur still forms an object of admiration, was 
situate on a spacious promontory, washed on 
three sides by the sea, and defended on the 
west by abrupt and almost inaccessible moun- 
tains. The town was built in a triangular 
form, whose summit may be conceived at the 
lofty mountains Epipolé. Adjacent to these 
natural fortifications, the western or inland divi- 
sion of the city was distinguished by the name 
of Tycha, or Fortune being adorned by a mag- 
nificent temple of that flattering divinity. The 
triangle gradually widening towards the base, 
comprehendeq the vast extent of Achradina, 
reaching from the northern shore of the pro- 
montory to the southern island Ortygia. This 
small island, composing the whole of modern 
Syracuse, formed but the third and least ex- 
tensive division of the ancient; which was 
fortified by walls eighteen miles in circuit, en- 
riched by a triple harbour, and peopled by 
above two hundred thousand warlike citizens 
or industrious slaves.? 

When the Syracusans heard the first ru- 
mours of the Athenian invasion, they despised, 
or affected to despise them, as idle lies invented 
to amuse the ignorance of the populace. The 
hostile armament had arrived at Rhegium be- 
fore they could be persuaded, by the wisdom 
of Hermocrates, to provide against a danger 
which their presumption painted as imaginary. 
But when they received undoubted intelligence 
that the enemy had reached the Italian coast; 
when they beheld their numerous fleet com- 
manding the sea of Sicily, and ready to make 
a descent on their defenceless island, they were 
seized with a degree of just terror and alarm 
proportional to their false security. They con- 
demned their former incredulity and indiffer- 
ence, which had been nourished by the inter- 
ested adulation of the demagogue Athenagoras, 
who vainly assured them that the strength of 
Syracuse was sufficient not only to defy the 
assaults, but to deter the attempts of any Gre- 
cian foe. From the heights of presumption 
they plunged into the depths of despair, and 
their spirits were, with difficulty, restored by 


3 Strabo. p. 266, et seq. et Thucydid. passim. 1. vi. 


KIX.] 


the animating voice of Hermocrates, who was 
not more prudent in prosperity than intrepid 
in danger. 

By his exhortations they were encouraged to 
make ready their arms, to equip their fleet, to 
strengthen their garrisons, and to summon the 
assistance of their allies. These measures were 
undertaken with ardour, and carried on with 
unremitting activity; and the dilatory opera- 
tions of the enemy not only removed the recent 
terror and trepidation of the Syracusans, but 
inspired them with unusual firmness. They 
requested the generals, whom they had ap- 
pointed to the number of fifteen, to lead them 
to Catana, that they might attack the hostile 
camp. Their cavalry harassed the Athenians 
by frequent incursions, beat up their quarters, 
intercepted their convoys, destroyed their ad- 
vanced posts, and even procceded so near to 
the main body, that they were distinctly heard 
demanding, with loud insults, whether those 
boasted lords of Greece had left their native 
country, that they might form a precarious set- 
tiement at the foot of Mount Ætna.5 

Provoked by these indignities, and excited 
by the impatient resentment of his own troops, 
Nicias was still restrained from an open attempt 
against Syracuse by the difficulties attending 
that enterprise. The distance between Catana 
and the Sicilian capital was more than thirty 
miles; but, after the most prosperous voyage,the 
Athenians could not expect, without extreme 
danger, to make a descent on the fortified coast 
of a powerful and vigilant enemy. If they de- 
termined to mareh by land,they must be harass- 
ed by the numerous cavalry of Syracuse, which 
actually watched their motions, and with whose 
activity, in a broken and intricate country, the 
strength of heavy-armed troops was exceedingly 
ill qualified to contend. To avoid both inconve- 
niences, Nicias employed a stratagem. A citi- 
zen of Catana, whose subtile and daring genius, 
prepared alike to die or to deceive, ought to 
have preserved his name from oblivion, appear- 
ed in Syracuse as a deserter from his native 
city; the unhappy fate of which, in being sub- 
jected to the imperious commands, or licentious 
disorder of the Athenians, he lamented with 
perfidious tears, and with the plaintive accents 
of well-dissembled sorrow. “ He was not the 
only man who bewailed, with filial compassion, 
the misfortunes and ignominy of his country. 
A numerous band of Cataneans, whose resent- 
ment was repressed by fear, longed to take up 
arms, that they might deliver themselves from 
a disgraceful yoke, and repel the tyranny of the 
invaders. Nor could the design fail of success, 
if Syracuse should sccond their generous ardour. 
The Athenians, so liberally endowed with cou- 
rage and ambition, were destitute of wisdom 
and of discipline. They spurned the confine- 
ment of the military life; their posts were for- 
saken, their ships unguarded; they disdained 
the duties of the camp, and indulged in the 
pleasures of the city. On an appointed day it 


4 Thucydid. p. 436, et seq. 

Ə Plutarch. The sneer is differently expressed in Thu- 
cydides; ‘‘ Whether they had not come to gain a settlement 
for themselves in a foreign country, rather than to replace 
the Leontines in their own.” Thucydid. p. 455. 


HISTORY OF GREECE 


I 


would be easy for the Syracusans, assisted by 
the conspirators of Catana, to attack them un- 
prepared, to mount their undefended ramparts, 
to demolish their encampment, and to burn their 
fleet.” This daring proposal well corresponded 
with the keen sentiments of revenge which ani- 
mated the inhabitants of Syracuse. The day 
was named; the plan of the enterprise was 
concerted, and the treacherous Catanean re- 
turned home to revive the hopes, and to con- 
firm the resolution, of his pretended associates. 

The success of this intrigue gave the utmost 
satisfaction to Nicias, whose armament prepar- 
ed to sail for Syracuse on the day appointed by 
the inhabitants of that city for assaulting, with 
their whole force, the Athenian camp. Already 
had they marched, with this view, to the fertile 
plain of Leontium, when, after twelve hours’ 
sail, the Athenian fleet arrived in the great 
harbour, disembarked their troops, and fortified 
a camp without the western wall, near to a ce- 
lebrated temple of Olympian Jupiter, a situation 
which had been pointed out by some Syracusan 
exiles, and which was well adapted to every 
purposc of accommodation and defence. Mean 
while the cavalry of Syracuse, having proceeded 
to the walls of Catana, had discovered, to their 
infinite regret, the departure of the Athenians, 
The unwelcome intelligence was conveyed, with 
the utmost expedition, to the infantry, who im- 
mediately marched back to protect Syracuse. 
The rapid return of the warlike youth restored 
the courage of the aged Syracusans. They 


‘were joined by the forces of Gela Selinus, and 


Camarina ; and it was determined, without loss 
of time, to attack the hostile encampment.é 
Only a few days elapsed before the Athenians 
gave them a fairer opportunity ofrevenge. The 
2 two armies prepared to engage, re- 


oer spectively inflamed by resentment 
AC. ition ; forinidabl 
A E Als. and ambition; the one formidable 


in courage and numbers, the other 
elated by superior discipline and habitual vic- 
tory. The Syracusan gencrals drew up their 
troops, sixteen, and the Athenians only eight, 
deep : but the latter had, in their camp, a body 
of reserve, which was kept ready for action on 
the first signal. Nicias went round the ranks, 
exhorting his soldiers by a short discourse, in 
which he observed, “ that the strength of their 
present preparations was better fitted to inspire 
confidence, than the most cloquent speech with 
a weak army, especially as they contended 
against the Syracusans, a promiscuous crowd, 
whose presumption was founded on inexpe- 
rience, and whose desultorious ardour, however 
successful in predatory incursions, would yield 
to the first shock of regular war. They fought, 
indeed, in defence of their city; so did the Athe- 
nians and their allies, whom nothing but mili- 
tary valour and success would restore in safety 
to their respective countries.””? Having thus 
spoken, he led his troops to the enemy, who 
did not decline the engagement. The light- 
armed archers’ skirmished in the van: the 


6 Thuceydid. p. 445—457. 7 Ibid. p. 458 et 459. 

8 Thucydides mentions, besides the archers (roforee), 
the At5ofor0¢ and coevJovytas, “the throwers of stones 
and slingers.” P.419. They wero all Yeror, as he says 


immediately below. 


228 


priests brought forth the accustomed sacri- 
fices: the trumpets summoned for a general 
charge. 

The attack was begun with fury, and con- 
tinued with perseverance for several hours. 
Both sides were animated by every principle 
that can inspire and urge the utmost vigour of 
exertion, and victory was still doubtful, when a 
tempest suddenly arose, accompanied with un- 
usual peals of thunder. This event, which little 
affected the Athenians, confounded the unexpe- 
rienced credulity of the enemy, who were broken 
and put to flight. Nicias restrained the eager- 
ness of his men in the pursuit, lest they should 
be exposed to danger from a body of twelve 
hundred Syracusan cavalry, who had not en- 
gaged in the battle, but who impatiently watch- 
ed an opportunity to assault the disordered 
phalanx. The Syracusans escaped to their city, 
and the Athenians returned to their camp. In 
such an obstinate conflict the vanquished lost 
two hundred and sixty, the victors only fifty 
men; numbers that might occasion much sur- 
prise, if we reflected not that, to oppose the of- 
fensive weapons used by antiquity, the warriors 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[ Cuar. 


of Greece (in every circumstance so unlike the 
miserable and naked peasants of modern Eu- 
rope, whose lives are sacrificed without defence, 
as without remorse, to the ambition of men 
whom the Greeks would have styled tyrants) 
being armed with the helmet and cuirass, the 
ample buckler, the firm corselct, and the manly 
greaves, they often displayed their skill, their 
courage, and their love of liberty, at a very 
small expense of human blood. ` 

The voyage, the encampment, and the battle, 
employed the dangerous activity, and gratified 
the impetuous ardour of the Athenians, but did 
not facilitate the conquest of Syracuse. With- 
out more powerful preparations, Nicias despair- 
ed of taking the place, either by assault, or by 
aregular siege. Soon after his victory he re- 
turned with the whole armament to Naxos and 
Catana; a measure which sufficiently proves 
that the late enterprise had been undertaken, 
not in consequence of any permanent system 
of operations formed by the general, but in 
compliance with the ungovernable! temper of 
his troops, whose ideas of military subordina- 
tion were confined to the field of battle. 


° 


CHAPTER XX. 


Preparations for the ensuing Campaign—The Athenians begin the Siege with Vigour—Distress 
and Sedition in Syracuse—Arrival of Gylippus—Who defeats the Athenians—Transactions in 
Greece—A second Armament arrives at Syracuse—Its first Operations successful—The Athe- 
nians defeated—Prepare to raise the Siege—Naval Engagement in the Great Harbour— 
Despondency of the Athenians—Stratagem of Hermocrates—The Athenians raise their camp 
—Melancholy Firmness of Nicias—Demosthenes capitulates—Nicias surrenders—Cruel Treat- 
ment of the Athenian Captives—Singular Exception. 


NICIAS had reason to expect that his victory 
over the Syracusans would procure him 
respect and assistance from the inferior states 


ol of Sicily. His emissaries were dif- 
wa fused over that island and the 
A.C. Alb. neighbouring coast of Italy. Mes- 


sengers were sent to Tuscany, where 
Pisa and other cities had been founded by 
Greek colonies.2, An embassy was despatched 
to Carthage, the rival and enemy of Syracuse. 
Nicias gave orders to collect materials for cir- 
cumvallation, iron, bricks, and all necessary 
stores. He demanded horses from the Eges- 
teans; and required from Athens reinforce- 
ments and a large pecuniary supply ; and ne- 
glected nothing that might enable him to open 
the ensuing campaign with vigour and effect.’ 


1 Without attending to this circumstance, the conduct 
of Grecian generals must, on many occasions, appear alto- 
gether unaccountable. The same observation applies to 
modern history preceding the peace of Munster. The fa- 
mous war of thirty years, which ended in that peace, laid 
the foundation of the exact military subordination which 
distinguishes the present century. See Pere Bougeant, 
Histoire. de la Guerre de 30 Ans. 

2 Strabo, p. 243, et p. 283, et seq. 

3 It is remarkable that though Nicias, after the removal 
of Alcibiades, enjoyed the principal, or rather sole, command 
of the army, he acted quite contrary to the opinion which 


While the Athenians thus prepared for the 
attack of Syracuse, the citizens of that capital 
displayed cqual activity in providing for their 
own defence. By the advice of Hermocrates, 
they appointed himself, Heraclides, and Sica- 
nus; three, instead of fifteen generals. The 
commanders newly elected, both in civil and 
military affairs, were invested with unlimited 
power, which was usefully employed to pur- 
chase or prepare arms, daily to exercise the 
troops, and to strengthen and extend the fortifi- 
cations of Syracuse. They likewise despatched 
ambassadors to the numerous cities and re- 
publics with which they had been connected in 
peace, or allied in war, to solicit the continuance 
of their friendship, and to counteract the dan- 
gerous designs of the Athenians. 

The importance of the city Camerina, situate 
on the southern coast of Sicily, demanded the 
presence of Herm-crates himself. The Cameri- 
neans had given a very feeble and reluctant 
assistance to their allies of Syracuse; 


T oe i and tha orator Euphemus employed 
A.C. 415 all the resources of his genius to 


unite them to the Athenian con- 


own: the views of the }»nished general still actuated the 


he had declared at the commencement of the expedition.! army; but the ardent spit was withdrawn, that could 


The plan which he pursued was that of Alcibiades, not his 


alone ensure their success 


= 


Xx.] 


federacy. An assembly being summoned, Her- 
mocrates informed them “ That a desire to 
prevent the deception of the Camerineans, 
not the dread of the Athenian power, had oc- 
casioned his present journey. That restless 
and ambitious nation, which had so often kin- 
dled the flames of war on the continent of 
Greece, had lately sailed to Sicily, under pre- 
tence of re-establishing the affairs of the Leon- 
tines and Egesteans, but from a motive more 
selfish, which it was easy to conjecture, and 
impossible to mistake. Their real and only de- 
sign was to sow dissension and disagreement 
among the Sicilian states, which, fighting singly, 
might be successively subdued. How could 
effrontery affirm, or simplicity believe, that the 
Athenians should undertake a voyage to vin- 
dicate the freedom of Egesta; they who op- 
pressed, with all the rigours of slavery, the un- 
happy islanders of Eubea, by whom Egesta 
had been built, and from whom its inhabitants 
were descended! Under pretence of delivering 
from the tyranny of the great king, the Greeks 
of Asia, of the Hellespont, of Thrace, and of: 
the Aegean, they had conquered and enslaved 
those various countries. They actually em- 
ployed the seme perfidious contrivance against 
the safety of the Sicilians; but he trusted that 
their present undertaking, though carried on 
with equal artifice, would be attended with very 
different success; and that they would learn, by 
expericnce, to distinguish between the effemi- 
nate Ionians and Hellespontines, whose minds 
had been enfeebled and debased by the Persian 
yoke, and the magnanimous Dorians of Sicily, 
the genuine offspring of Peloponncsus, the 
source of valour and of liberty.’’4 

Euphemus, the Athenian, repelled with force 
and spirit, these reproachful accusations. “ The 
colonies of Athens were kept in a dependence, 
not less advantageous to themselves than hon- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


229 


Athens, but dreaded still more the neighbour- 
ing hostility of Syracuse. Their fears dictated 
a reply in friendly and respectful terms; but 
they craved leave to preserve a neutrality be- 
tween the contending powers, hoping, by this 
expedient, to irritate the resentment of neither, 
yet to defeat the designs of both. 

Mean while the expected rein- 


a aa forcements arrived from Athens, 
A.C. 414, 1 addition to his original force, 


Nicias had likewise collected a body 
of six hundred cavalry, and the sum of four 
hundred talents ; and, in the eighteenth sum- 
mer of the war, the activity of the troops and 
workmen had completed all necessary prepara- 
tions for undertaking the siege of Syracuse. 
The Athenian armament enjoyed a prosperous 
voyage to the northern harbour of Trogilé, and 
the troops were no sooner disembarked than they 
seized an opportunity of signalizing their valour 
against a body of seven hundred men, who 
marched to reinforce the garrison of Labdalus; 
an important fortress situate on the highest of 
the mountains which overlook and command 
the city. Three hundred Syracusans were kill- 
ed in the pursuit; the rest took refuge behind 
their walls; and the castle of Labdalus was 
taken, and strongly guarded by the victors. 
The plan which Nicias adopted for conquering 
the city, was to draw a wall on either side froin 
the neighbourhood of Labdalus, towards the 
port of Trogilé on the north, and towards the 
gulf, extending two leagues in circumference, 
and justly called the Great Harbour, on the 
south. When these circumvallations had sur- 
rounded the place by land, he expected, by his 
numerous fleet, to block up the wide extent of 
the Syracusan harbours. The whole strength 
of the Athenian armament was employed in 
the former operations ; and as all necessary ma- 
terials had been provided with due attention, 


ourable to the parent state. The general inter- | the works rose with a rapidity which surprised 


est of Greece required that the same republic | 


which at first had so bravely established, should 
still continue to maintain, the national indc- 
pendence. They who yield protection, must 
assume authority; but this authority the Athe- 
nians had exerted in a manner essential to their 
own and to the public safety. If they had 
subjected the neighbouring coasts and islands, 
their interest might justify that odious but 
necessary measure; and the same dictates of 
sound policy which induced them to conquer 
and to enslave the Hellespontine and Asiatic 


Greeks, would engage them to emancipate and | 


to deliver the oppressed Sicilians. To this 
office they were invited by the Leontines and 
Egesteans; to this duty they were prompted 
hy the ties of friendship and consanguinity ; to 
this enterprise they were determined by the 
strongest of all motives, a well-grounded fcar 
lest the inhabitants of Sicily (whose numbers 
and distance rendercd it impossible for Athens 
to subdue, far less to retain them in subjection) 
should fall a prey to the watchful encroach- 
ments of Syracuse, and thus become an acces- 
sion to the Peloponnesian confederacy.” The 
Gamerineans dreaded the distant ambition of 


4 Thueydid. l. vi. p. 463, et seq. 


and terrificd the besieged. Their former as 
well as their recent defeat, deterred them from 
opposing the enemy in a general engagement ; 
but the advice of Hermocratcs persuaded them 
to raise walls, which might traverse and inter- 
rupt those of the Athenians.5 The imminent 
danger urged the activity of the workmen; the 
hostile bulwarks approached each other; fre- 
quent skirmishes took place, in one of which 
the brave Lamachus unfortunately fell a vic- 
tim to his rash valour;6 but the Athenian 
troops maintained their usual superiority. 
Encouraged by success, Nicias pushed the 
encmy with vigour. The Syracusans lost 
hopcs of defending their new works, or of pre- 
venting the complete circumvallation of their 
city; and this despair was increased by the 
abundant supplies which arrived from all quar- 
ters to the besiegers, while the interest of Sy- 
racusc scemed tu be universally abandoned by 
the indifference or cowardice of her allies. In 
the turbulent democracies of Greece, the mo- 
ment of public danger commonly gave the signal 
for domestic sedition. The populace clamoured, 
with their usual licentiousness, against the inca- 
pacity or perfidy of their leaders, to whom alone 


5 Thucydid. 1. vi. p. 482, et seq. 6 Plutarch in Nicia. 


230 


they ascribed their misfortunes. New generals 
were named in the room of Hermocrates and 


his colleagues; and this injudicious alteration 


increased the calamities of Syracuse, which at 


length prepared to capitulate.! 


Oly A concerning the eaecution of a mea- 
A C Í 414, SYTS which, however disgraceful, 


‘ * was declared to be necessary, a Cc- 
rinthian galley, commanded by Gongylus, en- 
tered the central harbour of Ortygia, which 
being strongly fortified, and penetrating into 
the heart of the city, served as the principal 
and most secure station for the Syracusan fleet. 
The news immediately reached the assembly, 
and all ranks of men eagerly crowded around 
Gongylus the Corinthian, that they might learn 
the design of his voyage, and the intentions of 
their Poloponnesian allies. Gongylus announ- 
ced a speedy and effectual relief to the besieged 
city.2 He acquainted the Syracusans, that the 
embassy, sent the preceding year to crave the 
assistance of Peloponnesus, had been crowned 
with success. His own countrymen had warmly 
embraced the cause of their kinsmen, and most 
respectable colony. They had fitted out a con- 
siderable fleet, the arrival of which might be 
expected every hour. The Lacedemonians 
also had sent a small squadron, and the whole 
armament was condtcted by the Spartan Gy- 
lippus, an officer of tried valour and ability. 
While the desponding citizens of Syracuse 
listened to this intelligence with pleasing asto- 
nishment,a messenger arrived by land from Gy- 
lippus himself. That experienced commander, 
instead of pursuing a direct course to Sicily, 
which might have been intercepted by the 
Athenian fleet, had landed with four galleys on 


the western coast of the island. The name of 


a Spartan general determined the wavering ir- 
resolution of the Sicilians. The troops of Hi- 
mera, Selinus, and Gela, flocked to his stan- 
dard ; and he approached Syracuse on the side 
of Epipolé, where the line of contravallation 
was still unfinished, with a body of several 
thousand men. 

The most courageous of the citizens sallied 
forth to meet this generous and powerful pro- 
tector. The junction was happily effected ; the 
ardour of the troops kindled into enthusiasm ; 
and they distinguished that memorable day by 
surprising several important Athenian posts. 
This first success re-animated the activity of 
the soldiers and workmen. The traverse wall 
was extended with the utmost diligence, and a 
vigorous sally deprived the enemy of the strong 
castle of Labdalus. Nicias perceiving that the 
interest of the Athenians in Sicily would be 
continually weakened by delay, wished to bring 
the fortune of war to the decision of a battle. 
Nor did Gylippus decline the engagement. The 
first action was unfavourable to the Syracusans, 
who had been imprudently posted in the defiles 
between their own and the enemy’s walls, 
which rendered of no avail their superiority in 
cavalry and archers. The magnanimity of 


Gylippus acknowledged this error, for which he 
completely atoned by his judicious conduct in 


1 Thucydid. p. 487. 2 Thucydid. p. 490. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


While the assembly deliberated 


r 


[Cuar. 


the succeeding engagements. His forces were 
drawn up in a more spacious ground. The 
pikemen received the shock of the enemy’s 
front. The horses and light-armed troops as- 
sailed and harassed their undefended flanks. 
The Athenians were thrown into disorder, re- 
pulsed, and pursued to their camp with con- 
siderable loss, and with irreparable disgrace. 
The important consequences of this victory 
appeared in the subsequent events of the siege 
The Syracusans soon extended their works be- 
yond the line of circumvallation, so that it was 
impossible to block up their city, without forcing 
their ramparts. The besiegers, while they main- 
tained the superiority of their arms, had been 
abundantly supplied with necessaries from the 
neighbouring territory; but every place was 
alike hostile to them after their defeat. The 
soldiers whọ went out in quest of wood and 
water, were unexpectedly attacked and cut off 
by the enemy’s cavalry, or by the reinforce- 
ments which arrived from every quarter to the 
assistance of Syracuse; and they were at length 
reduced to depend, for every necessary supply, 
on the precarious bounty of the Italian shore. 
Nicias, whose sensibility deeply felt the pub- 
lic distress, wrote a most desponding letter to 
the Athenians. He honestly described, and 
lamented, the misfortunes and disorders of his 
army. The slaves deserted in great numbers; 
the mercenary troops, who fought only for pay 
and subsistence, preferred the more secure and 
lucrative service of Syracuse; even the Athe- 
nian citizens, disgusted with the unexpected 
length and intolerable hardships of the war, 
abandoned the care of the galleys to inexpe- 
rienced hands; an abuse too easily permitted 
by the captains, whose weakness and partiality 
had corrupted the discipline, and ruined th 
strength, of the fleet. Nicias frankly acknow- 
ledged his inability to check the disorder; ob- 
serving, that he wrote to those who knew the 
difficulty of governing the licentious spirit of 
their domestic troops. He therefore exhorted 
the assembly, either to call them home without 
delay, or to send immediately a second arma- 
ment, not less powerful than the first. 
Olymp Gylippus and Hermocrates (for 
Boe abe the latter had again assumed the 
XCI. 4, ; a 
A.C. 413. authority due to his abilities) were 
acquainted with the actual distress, 
as well as the future hopes of the besiegers, 
who might derive, in consequence of Nicias’s 
letter, more effectual succours from Attica than 
the besieged city could expect from Pelopon- 
nesus. They were prompted by interest there- 
fore, as well as by inclination, to press the ene- 
my on every side, and at once to assail them by 
sea and land. Besides the bad condition of 
the Athenian fleet, the absence of a considerable 
number of galleys employed in conducting the 
convoys of provisions, encouraged tlis. resolu- 
tion. The Corinthian squadron of twelve sail, 
long expected with anxiety, had escaped the 
dangers of a winter’s voyage; and at the com- 
mencement of the ensuing spring, the harbours 
of Syracuse were crowded with the whole naval 
strength of Sicily. Hermocrates persuaded his 
countrymen, “ That the advantages of skill and 
experience, which he honestly ascribed to the 


XX.] 


Athenians, could not compensate their terror 
und confusion at being suddenly attacked by a 
superior force, on an element which they af- 
fected to command. Athens had assumed this 
boasted empire of the sea in repelling the in- 
vasion of Persia. Syracuse had a similar, yet 
stronger motive ; and as she possessed greater 
power, was entitled to expect more distinguish- 
ed success.” 

The principal squadrons of Syracuse lay in 
the harbour of Ortygia, separated, by an island 
of the same name, from the station of the Athe- 
nian fleet. While Hermocrates sailed forth 
with eighty galleys, to venture a naval engage- 
ment, Gylippus attacked the hostile fortifica- 
tions at Plemmyrium, a promontory opposite 
to Ortygia, which confined the entrance of the 
Great Harbour. The defeat of the Syracusans 
at sea, whereby they lost fourteen vessels, was 
balanced by their victory at land, in which they 
took three fortresses, containing a large quan- 
tity of military and naval stores, and a con- 
siderable sum of money. In some subsequent 
actions, which scarcely deserve the name of 
battles, their fleet was still unsuccessful ; but as 
they engaged with great caution, and found 
every where a secure retreat on a friendly 
shore, their loss was extremely inconsiderable. 


The want of success, in their first attempt, did 


not abate their resolution to gain the command 
at sea. The hopes of defending their country 


sharpened their invention, and animated their 
activity. They could not, indeed, contend with 
the Athenians in the rapidity of naval evolution, 
or in the skill of seamanship; but in the des- 


tined scene of action, there was little opportu- 


nity for displaying those advantages; and by 


strengthening, with unremitting labour, the 
prows of their ships, they compensated, by su- 
perior weight, the defect of velocity. They 
provided also a great number of small vessels, 
which might approach so near the hostile fleet, 
that the light-armed troops with which they 
were filled could aim their darts against the 
Athenian mariners. 

By unexampled assiduity in completing these 
preparations, the Syracusans at length pre- 
vailed in a general engagement, which was 
fought in the Great Harbour. Seven Athenian 
ships were sunk, many more were disabled, 
and Nicias saved the remains of his shattered 
and dishonoured armament, by retiring behind 
a line of merchantmen and transports, from 
the masts of which had been suspended huge 
masses of lead, named dolphins, from their 
form, sufficient to crush, by their falling weight, 
the stoutest galleys of antiquity. This uncx- 
pected obstacle arrested the progress of the 
victors; but the advantages already obtained 
elevated them with the highest hopes, and 
reduced the enemy to despair. 

Thé Athenian misfortunes in 


ae Sicily weré attended by misfor- 
A © 412 tunes at home, still more dreadful. 


In the eighteenth year of the war, 
Alcibiades accompanied to Sparta the ambassa- 
dors of Corinth and Syracuse, who had solicited 
and obtained assistance to the besieged city. 
On that occasion the Athenian exile first ac- 
quired the confidence of the Spartans, by con- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


231 


demning, in the strongest terms, the injustice 
and ambition of his ungrateful countrymen, 
“whose cruelty towards himself equalled their 
inveterate hostility to the Lacedemonian re- 
public; but that republic might, by following 
his advice, disarm their resentment. The town 
of Decelia was situated on the Attic frontier, at 
an equal distance of fifteen miles from Thebes 
and Athens. This place, which commanded an 
extensive and fertile plain, might be surprised’ 
and fortified by the Spartans,3 who, instead 
of harassing their foes by annual incursions, 
might thus infest them by a continual war. 
The wisdom of Sparta had too long neglected 
such a salutary and decisive measure, especially 
as the existence of a similar design had often 
been suggested by the fears of the enemy, who 
trembled even at the apprehension of sceing a 
foreign garrison in their territory.” 

This advice first proposed, and 
often urged, by Alcibiades, was 
adopted in the commencement of 
the ensuing spring, when the war- 
like Agis led a powerful army into Attica. 
The defenceless inhabitants of the frontier fled 
before. his irresistible arms; but instead of pur- 
suing them, as usual, into the heart of the 
country, he stopped short at Decelia. As all 
necessary materials had been provided iy great 
abundance, the place was speedily fortified on 
every side, and the walls of Decelia, which 
might be distinctly seen across the intermediate 
plain, bid defiance to those of Athens.4 

The latter city was kept in continual alarm 
by the watchful hostility of a neighbouring 
garrison. The open country was entirely laid 
waste, and the usual communication was in- 
terrupted with the valuable island of Eubea, 
from which, in seasons of scarcity, or during 
the ravages of war, the Athenians commonly 
derived their supplies of corn, wine, and oil, and 
whatever is most necessary to life. Harassed 
by the fatigues of unremitting service, and 
deprived of daily bread, the slaves murmured 
complained, and revolted to the enemy; ané 
their defection robbed the state of twenty 
thousand useful artisans. Since the latter 
years of Pericles, the Athenians had not been 
involved in such distress. But their present 
were far more grievous than their past suffer 
ings. These had been chiefly occasioned by 
the temporary rage of the pestilence, the abate- 
ment of which there was always reason to ex- 
pect; but those were inflicted by the unex- 
tinguishable hatred of a cruel and unrelenting 
foe.® 

The domestic calamities of the republic did 
not, however, prevent the most vigorous exer- 
tions abroad. Twenty galleys, stationed at 
Naupactus, watched the motions of the Pelo- 
ponnesian fleet destined to the assistance of 
Syracuse; thirty carried on the war in Mace- 
donia, to reduce the rebellion of Amphipolis; 
a considerable squadron collected tribute, and 


3 The Athenians, with their usual imprudence, faeilitated 
the success of Alcibiades’s intrigues. At the time they 
ought, if possible, to have soothed, they exasperated the 
Spartans to the utmost, by frequent ineursions from Pylus, 
and hy openly assisting the Argives. Thucyd. l. vi. sub fine. 

4 Thucydid. p. 500, ct seq. 5 Id. ibid. 


232 


levied soldiers, in the colonies of Asia; another, 
still more powerful, ravaged the coast of Pelo- 
ponnesus. Never did any kingdom or republic 
equal the magnanimity of Athens; never in 
ancient or modern times, did the courage of 
any state entertain an ambition so far supe- 
rior to its power, or exert efforts so dispropor- 
tionate to its strength. Amidst the difficulties 
and dangers which encompassed them on every 
side, the Athenians persisted in the siege of 
Syracuse, a city little inferior to their own; 
and, undaunted by the actual devastation of 
their country, unterrified by the menaced as- 
sault of their walls, they sent, without delay, 
such a reinforcement into Sicily, as afforded 
the most promising hopes of success in their 
expedition against that island.! 

The Syracusans had scarcely time 


oy a to rejoice at their victory, or Nicias 
A. C. 413 to bewail his defeat, when a nu- 


' merous and formidable armament 
appeared on the Sicilian coast. The foremost 
galleys, their prows adorned with gaudy 
streamers, pursued a secure course towards the 
harbours of Syracuse. The emulation of the 
rowers was animated by the mingled sounds of 
the trumpet and clarion; and the regular decora- 
tion, the elegant splendour, which distinguished 
every part of the equipment, exhibited a pomp- 
ous spectacle of naval triumph.” Their appear- 
ance, even at a distance, announced the country 
to which they belonged; and both the joy of 
the besiegers, and the terror of the besieged, 
acknowledged that Athens was the only city in 
the world capable of sending to the sea such a 
beautiful and magnificent contribution. The 
Syracusans employed not unavailing efforts to 


check the progress, or to hinder the approach, 


of the hostile armament; which, besides innu- 
merable foreign vessels and transports, consisted 
of seventy-three Athenian galleys, commanded 
by the experienced valour of Demosthenes and 
Eurymedon. The pikemen on board exceeded 
five thousand; the light-armed troops were 
nearly as ntimerous; and, including the rowers, 
workmen, and attendants, the whole strength 
may be reckoned equal to that originally sent 
with Nicias,? which amouuted to above twenty 
thousand men. 

The misfortunes hitherto attending the ope- 
rations in Sicily had lowered the character of 
the general; and this circumstance, as well as 
the superior abilities of Demosthenes, entitled 
him to assume the tone of authority in their 
conjunct deliberations. His advice, which 
Eurymedon highly approved, and in which the 
dilatory caution of Nicias finally acquiesced, 
was clear and simple. ‘ They ought to avail 
themselves of the alarm which the unexpected 
arrival of such a powerful reinforcement had 
spread among the enemy; and instead of sub- 
mitting to the tedious formalities of a siege, at 
once assault the walls of Syracuse. He trusted, 
by the valour of his troops, to obtain, in one 
day, the valuable reward of long and severe 
labours. But if the gods had otherwise deter- 
mined, it would be time to desist from an enter- 


1 Thucydid. p. 501, et seq. 
2 Comp. Thucydid. supra citat. Diodor. l. xiii. p. 336. 
Plut. in Nicia. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


(Caar. 


prise, in which delay was equal to defeat, and 
to employ the bravery of the Athenian youth 
in repelling the invaders of their country.” 

After ravaging the banks of the Anapus, and 
making some ineffectual attempts against the 
fortifications on that side, probably with a view 
to divert the attention of the enemy, Demos- 
thenes chose the first hour of a moonshine 
night, to proceed with the flower of the army 
to seize the fortresses in Epipolé. The march 
was performed with successful celerity; the 
out-posts were surprised ; the guards put to the 
sword; and three separate encampments, of the 
Syracusans, the Sicilians, and allies, formed a 
feeble opposition to the Athenian ardour. As 
if their victory had already been complete, the 
assailants began to pull down the wooden bat- 
tlements, or to urge the pursuit with a rapidity 
which disordered their ranks. 

Mean while, the vigilant activity of Gylip- 
pus had assembled the whole force of Syracuse. 
At the approach of the enemy his vanguard 
retired. The Athenians were decoyed within 
the intricate windings of the walls, and their 
irregular fury was first checked by the firmness 
of a Theban phalanx. A resistance so sudden 
and unexpected might alone have been deci- 
sive; but other circumstances were adverse to 
the Athenians: their ignorance of the ground, 
the alternate obscurity of night, and the deceit- 
ful glare of the moon, which, shining in the 
front of the Thebans, illumined the splendour 
of their arms, and multiplied the terror of their 
numbers. The foremost ranks of the pursuers 
were repelled; and, as they retreated to the 
main body, encountered the advancing Argives 
and Corcyreans, who, singing the Pean in their 
Doric dialect and accent, were unfortunately 
taken for enemies. Fear, and then rage, seized 
the Athenians, who thinking themselves en- 
compassed on all sides, determined to force 
their way,,and committed much bloodshed 
among their allies, before the mistake could be 
discovered. To prevent the repetition of this 
dreadful error, their scattered bands were 
obliged at every moment to demand the watch- 
word, which was at length betrayed to their 
adversaries. The consequence of this was 
doubly fatal. At every rencounter the silent # 
Athenians were slaughtered without mercy, 
while the enemy, who knew their watch-word, 
might at pleasure join, or decline, the battle, 
and easily oppress their weakness, or elude 
their strength. The terror and confusion in- 
creased; the rout became general; Gylippus 
pursued in good order with his victorious 
troops. The vanquished could not descend in 
a body with the celerity of fear, by the narrow 
passages through which they had mounted. 
Many abandoned their arms, and explored the 
unknown paths of the rocky Epipolé. Others 
threw themselves from precipices, rather than 
await the pursuers. Several thousands were 
left dead or wounded on the scene of action; 
and in the morning the greater part of the 
stragglers were intercepted and cut off by the 
Syracusan cavalry.4 


a. 


3 Thucydid. l. vii. p. 519. 
4 Thucydid. p. 520, et seq. 


EK] 


This dreadful and unexpected disaster sus- 
pended the operations of the siege. The Athe- 
nian generals spent the time in fruitless de- 
liberations concerning their future measures, 
while the army lay encamped on the marshy 
and unhealthy banks of the Anapus. The 
vicissitudes of an autumnal atmosphere, cor- 
rupted by the foul vapours of an unwholesome 
soil, made a severe impression on the irritable 
‘fibres of men,-exhausted by fatigue, dejected 
by disgrace, and deprived of hope. A general 
sickness broke out in the camp. Demosthenes 
urged this calamity as a new reason for hasten- 
ing their departure, while it was yet possible 
to eross the Ionian sea, without risking the 
danger of a winter’s tempest. But Nicias dis- 
suaded the design of leaving Sicily until they 
should be warranted to take this important 
step by the positive authority of the republic. 
«Those who were actually the most bent on 
ignominious flight, would, after their return, 
be the foremost to accuse the weakness or the 
treachery of their commanders; and for his 
own part, he would rather die honourably in 
the field of battle, than perish by the unjust 
sentence of his country.” Demosthenes and 
Eurymedon knew, by fatal experience, the 
irascible temper of an Athenian assembly; they 
only insisted, that the armament should at 
least remove to a more convenient station, 
from whence, after the troops had recovered 
their usual health and spirits, they might harass 
the enemy by continual desccnts, until they 
obtained an opportunity of fighting the Syra- 
cusan fleet on the open sea. 

But even this resolution was strenuously op- 
posed by Nicias, who knew by the secret cor- 
respondence which he maintained with certain 
traitors in Syracuse, that the treasury of that 
city had been exhausted by the enormous ex- 
pense of two thousand talents already incurred 
in the war, and that the magistrates had 
stretched their credit to its utmost limits, in 
borrowing from their allies; and who thercfore 
naturally flattered himself, that the vigour of 
their assistance would abate with the decay of 
théir faculties. The colleagues of Nicias were 
confounded with the firmness of an opposition 
so unlike the flexible timidity of his ordinary 
character, and so inconsistent with the senti- 
ments which he had often expressed concern- 
ing the Sicilian expedition. They imagined 
that he might rely on some more important 
ground of confidence, which his caution was 
unwilling to explain; they submitted thercfore 
to his opinion, an opinion equally fatal to him- 
self and to them, and to the armament which 
they commanded. 

Mean while the prudence of Gylippus profited 
of the fame of his victory, to draw a powerful 
reinforcement from the Sicilian cities; and the 
transports, so long expected from Peloponnesus, 
finally arrived in the harbour of Ortygia. The 
Peloponnesian forces had sailed froin Greece 
early in the spring; and it is not explained for 
what reason they touched on the coast of Cyre- 
naica. There they continued for some mouths, 
that they might defend their Grecian bretliren, 


ö Comp. Thucydid. p. 521. et Plut. in Nicia. 
O ~ 


~ 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 233 


actually threatened by the barbarous assaults of 
the Lybians; and having conquered that dan- 
gerous enemy, they augmented their fleet with 
a few Cyrenian galleys, and safely reached 
Syracuse, the place of their first destination. 
This squadron formed the last assistance sent 
to either of the contending parties, and nothing 
farther was required to complete the actors in 
the following dreadful scene; for by the acces- 
sion of the Cyrenians, Syracuse was either at- 
tacked or defended by all the various divisions 
of the Grecian name, which formed, in that 
age, the most civilized portion of the inhabitants 
of Asia, Africa, and Europe. 

The arrival of such powerful auxiliaries to 
the besieged, and the increasing force of the 
malady, totally disconcerted the Athenians. 
Even Nicias agreed to set sail. Every necessary 
preparation was made for this purpose, and the 
cover of night was chosen, as most proper for 
concealing their own disgrace, and for eluding 
the vengeance of the enemy. But the night 
appointed for their departure was distinguished 
by an inauspicious eclipse of the moon, for so 
at least it was judged by the superstitious fears 
of Nicias, and by the ignorance of his diviners,? 
even in the vain art which they professed. 
The voyage was deferred till the mystical num- 
ber of thrice nine days. But before the expi- 
ration of that time it was no longer practicable; 
for the design was soon discovered to the Sy- 
racusans, and this discovery, added to the en- 
couragement derived from the circumstances 
of which we have already taken notice, increas- 
ed their eagerness to attack the enemy by sea 
and land. Their attempts failed to destroy, by 
fire-ships, the Athenian fleet. They were more 
successful in employing supcrior numbers to 
divide the strength, and to weaken the resist- 
ance, of an enfeebled and dejected foe. During 
three days there was a perpetual succession of 
military and naval exploits. On the first day 
fortune hung in suspense ; the second deprived 
the Athenians of a considcrable squadron com- 
manded by Euryinedon; and this misfortune 
was embittered, on the third day, by the loss 
of eighteen galleys, with their crews.8 

The Syracusans celebrated their victory with 
triumphant enthusiasm; while their orators 
“extolled and magnificd the glory of a city, 
which, by its native prowess and single danger, 
had not only maintained the independence of 
Sicily, but avenged the injuries of the whole 
Grecian name, too long dishonoured and af- 
flicted by the oppressive tyranny of Athens. 
That tyranny had been acquired and confirmed 
by the usurped sovereignty of the sea; but 
even on that element, the courage of Syracuse 
had defeated the experience of the enemy. 
Their renown would be immortal, if they ac- 
complished the useful and meritorious work ; 
and if, by intercepting the retreat, and destroy- 
ing the armament of the Athenians, they crushed 
at once the power, and for ever humbled the 
pride, of that aspiring people.” 


ar 


6 Thucydid. p 527. 

7 The rules of divination, we are told, should have taught 
them, that the obscurity ofan eclipse betokeneda successful 
retreat. Plutarch. in Nicia. 

8 Thucydid. p. 528, et seq 


234 


This design, suggested by the wisdom of 
Hermocrates, was eagerly adopted by the active 
zeal of his fellow citizens, who strove, with un- 
remitting ardour, to throw a chain of vessels 
across the mouth of the Great Harbour, about 
a mile in breadth. The labour was completc 
before Nicias, totally occupied by other objects, 
attempted to interrupt it. After repeated de- 
feats, and although he was so miserably tor- 
mented by the stone, that he had frequently 
solicited his recal, that virtuous commander, 
whose courage rose in adversity, used the ut- 
most diligence to retrieve the affairs of his 
country. The shattered galleys were speedily 
refitted, and again prepared, to the number of 
a hundred and ten, to risk the event of a battle. 
As they had suffered greatly, on former occa- 
sions, by the hardness and massive solidity of 
the Syracusan prows, Nicias provided them 
with grappling-irons, fitted to prevent the re- 
coil of their opponents, and the repetition of the 
hostile stroke. ‘The decks were crowded with 
armed men, and the contrivance to which the 
enemy had hitherto chiefly owed their success, 
of introducing the firmness and stability of a 
military, into a naval engagement, was adopted 
in its full extent by the Athenians. When the 
fleet was ready for sea, Nicias recalled the 
troops from the various posts and fortresses still 
occupied by their arms, and formed them into 
one camp on the shore, where, on the day of 
battle, their ranks might be extended as widely 
as the vicinity of the Syracusan ramparts could 
safely permit; that a spacious retreat might be 
secured to the Athenian ships, if persecuted by 
their usual bad fortune ; in which fata! alterna- 
tive nothing remained, but to retire by land with 
the miserable remnant of the army. But Nicias 
did not yet despair, that the last efforts of his 
countrymen would break the enemy’s chain at 
the mouth of the Great Harbour; and that 
they would return victorious, to transport their 
encamped companions to the friendly ports of 
Naxos and Catana. 

Elevated by this hope, he forgot his bodily 
infirmities, and suppressed the anguish of his 
soul. With a cheerful and magnanimous firm- 
ness, he removed the dejection of the Athenians, 
exhorting them, before they embarked, by an 
affecting and manly speech, “ to remember the 
vicissitudes of war, and the instability of for- 
tune.! Though hitherto unsuccessful, they had 
every thing to expect from the strength of their 
actual preparations; nor ought men, who had 
tried and surmounted so many dangers, to yield 
to the weak prejudices of unexperienced folly, 
and cloud the prospect of future victory, by the 
gloomy remembrance of past defeat. They yet 
enjoyed an opportunity to defend their lives, 
their liberty, their friends, their country, and 
the mighty name of Athens; an opportunity 
which never couid return, since the whole for- 
tune of the republic was embarked in the present 
fleet.” When Gylippus and the Syracusan com- 
manders were apprised of the designs of the 
enemy, they hastened to the defence of the bar 
which had been thrown across the entrance of 
the harbour. It is uncertain for what reason 


1 Thucydid. p. 535, et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuapr. 


they had left open one narrow passage,? on 
either side of which they stationed a powerful 
squadron. Gylippus animated the sailors with 
such topics as the occasion naturally furnished, 
and returned to take the conduct of the land 
forces, leaving Sicanus, Agatharchus, and Py 

then, the two first to command the wings, and 
the last, a citizen of Corinth, to command the 
centre, of the Syracusan fleet, which fell short 
of the Athenian by the number of twenty gallies, 
But the former was admirably provided with 
whatever scemed most necessary for attack or 
defence; even the Athenian grappling-irons 
had not been overlooked; to elude the danger- 
ous grasp of these instruments, the prows of the 
Syracusan vessels were covered with wet and 
slippery hides. 

Before the Athenians set sail, Nicias, that. 
nothing might be neglected to obtain success, 
went round the whole armament, addressing, in 
the most pathetic terms, the several command- 
ers by name, recalling to them the objects most 
dear and most respectable, which they were en- 
gaged by every tie of honour and affection to de- 
fend, and conjuring them by their families, their 
friends, and their paternal gods, to exert what- 
ever skill or courage they collectively, or as in- 
dividuals, possessed, on this ever memorable 
and most important occasion. He then returned 
to the camp with an enfeebled body and an anx- 
ious mind, committing the last hope of the re 
public to the active valour of Demosthenes, 
Eudemus, and Menander. The first impres- 
tion of the Athenians was irresistible; they 
burst through the passage of the bar, and repel- 
led the squadrons on either side. As the en- 
trance widened, the Syracusans, in their turn, 
rushed into the harbour, which was more fa- 
vourable than the open sea to their mode of fight- 
ing. Thither the foremost of the Athenians re- 
turned, either compelled by superior force, or 
that they might assist their companions. The 
engagement became general in the mouth of the 
harbour ; and in this narrow space two hundred 
gallies fought, during the greatest part of the 
day, with an obstinate and persevering valour. 
lt would require the expressive energy of Thu- 
cydides, and the imitative, though inimitable, 
sounds and expressions of the Grecian tongue, 
to describe the noise, the tumult, and the ar- 
dour of the contending squadrons. The battle 
was not long confined to the shock of adverse 
prows, and to the distant hostility of darts and 
arrows. The nearest vessels grappled, and 
closed with each other, and their decks were 
soon converted into a field of blood. While 
the heavy-armed troops boarded the enemy’s 
ships, they left their own exposed to a similar 
misfortune ; the fleets were divided into mas- 
sive clusters of adhering gallies; and the con- 
fusion of their mingled shouts overpowered the 
voice of authority ; the Athenians exhorting, 
not to abandon an element on which their re- 
public had ever acquired victory and glory, for 
the dangerous protection of a hostile shore; 
and the Syracusans encouraging each other not 
to fly from an enemy, whose weakness or cow- 
ardice had long meditated flight. 


2 Kxs tov xarwrciedsvra dsexmaouv. Thucydid. p. 451. 
3 Thucydid. p. 543, ct seq. 


XX] 


_ The singular and tremendous speetaele of an 
engagement more fierce and obstinate thąn any 
that had ever been beheld in the Grecian seas, 
restrained the activity,and totally suspended the 
powers, of the numerous and adverse battalions 
which eneircled the coast. The spectators and 
the actors were equally interested in the import- 
ant scene; but the former, the current of whose 
sensibility was undiverted by any exertion of 
mind or body, felt more deeply, and expressed 
more forcibly, the various emotions by which 
they were agitated.4 Hope, fear, the shouts of 
victory, the shrieks of despair, the anxious so- 
licitude of doubtful success, animated the coun- 
tenances, the voice, and the gesture of the 
Athenians, whose whole reliance centered in 
their fleet. When at length their gallies evi- 
dently gave way on every side, the contrast of 
alternate, and the rapid tumult of successive 
passions, subsided in a melancholy calm. This 
dreadful pause of astonishment and terror 
was followed by the disordered trepidation of 
flight and fear: many escaped to the camp: 
others ran, uncertain whither to direct their 
steps; while Nicias, with a small, but undis- 
mayed band, remained on the shore to protect 
the landing of their unfortunate gallies. But 
the retreat of the Athenians could not probably 
have been effected, had it not been favoured by 
the actual circumstances of the enemy, as well 
as by the peculiar prejudices of ancient super- 
stition. In this well-fought battle, the van- 
quished had lost fifty, and the victors forty ves- 
sels. It was ineumbent on the latter to employ 
their immediate and moststrenuous efforts to re- 
cover the dead bodies of their friends, that they 
might be honoured with the sacred and indis- 
pensable rites of funeral. The day was far 
spent; the strength of the sailors had been 
exhausted by a long continuanee of unremitting 
labour ; and both they and their companions 
on shore were more desirous to return to Syra- 
cuse to enjoy the fruits of victory, than to ir- 
ritate the dangerous despair of the vanquished 
Athenians.§ 

It is observed by the Roman orator, with no 
less truth than eleganee, that not only the navy 
of Athens, but the glory and the empire of that 
republic,suffered shipwreck in the fatal harbour 
of Syracuse. The despondent degeneracy which 
immediately followed this ever memorable en- 
gagement was testified in the negleet of a duty 
which the Athenians had never negleeted be- 
fore, and in denying a part of their national 
character, which it had hitherto been their 
greatest glory to maintain. They abandoned 
to insult and indignity the bodies of the slain ; 
and when it was proposed to them by their 
commanders to prepare next day for a second 
engagement, since their vessels were still more 
numerous than those of the cnemy, they, who 
had seldom avoided a superior, and who had 
never declined the encounter of an equal force, 
declared, that no motive could induce them to | 
withstand the weaker armament of Syracuse. 
Their only desire was to escape by land, under 
cover of the night, from a foe whom they had 


4 Thucydid. p. 544. 
6 Cic. in Ver. v 37 


5 Id. p. 545. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


235 


not eourage to oppose, and from a place where 
every objeet was offensive to their sight, and 
most painful to their reflection.’ 

The behaviour of the Syracusans might have 
proved extremely favourable to this design. 
The evening after the battle was the vigil of 
the feast of Hercules; and the still agitated 
combatants awakened, after a short and fever- 
ish repose, to eelebrate the memory of their 
favourite hero, to whose propitious influence 
they probably ascribed the merit of the most 
splendid trophy that ever adorned the fame of 
Syracuse. From the triumph of victory, and 
grateful emotions of religious enthusiasm, there 
Was an easy transition, in the ereed and in the 
practice of the Greeks, to the extravagance of 
licentious joy, and the excesses of sensual in- 
dulgence. Sports, processions, music, dancing, 
the pleasures of the table, of the elegant arts, 
and of unguarded conversation, were ineorpo- 
rated in the texture of their religious worship. 
But the coincidence of a festival and a victory 
demanded an accumulated profusion of sueh 
objects as sooth the senses and please the fancy. 
Amidst these giddy transports, the Syracusans 
lost all remembrance of an enemy whom they 
despised; even the soldiers on guard joined the 
dissolute or frivolous amusements of their com- 
panions; and, during the greatest part of the 
night, Syracuse presented a mixed scene of 
secure gayety, of thoughtless jollity, and of mad 
and dangerous disorder.8 

The firm and vigilant mind of Hermocrates 
alone withstood, but was unable to divert, the 
general current. It was impossible to rouse to 
the fatigues of war men buried in wine and 
pleasure, and intoxicated with victory; and, as 
he eould not intercept by foree, he determined 
to retard by stratagem, the intended retreat of 
the Athenians, whose numbers and resentment 
would still render them formidable to whatever 
part of Sicily they might remove their camp. 
A seleet band of horsemen, assuming the cha- 
racter of traitors, fearlessly approached the 
hostile ramparts, and warned the Athenians of 
the danger of departing that night, as many 
ambuscades lurked in the way, and all the 
most important passes were oceupied by the 
enemy. The frequency of treason gained credit 
to the perfidious advice; and the Athenians, 
having changed their first resolution, were per- 
suaded by Nicias to wait two days longer, that 
sueh measures might be taken as seemed best 
adapted to promote the safety and eelerity of 
their march.9 

The camp was raised on the third morning 
after the battle. Forty thousand men, of whom 
many were afllicted with wounds and disease, 
and all exhausted by fatigue, and dejeeted by 
ealamity, exhibited the appearance, not. of a 
flying army, but of a great and populous com- 
inunity, driven from their ancient habitations 
by the cruel vengeance of a conqueror. They 
lad miserably fallen from the lofty expecta- 
tions with which they sailed in triuinph to the 
harbour of Syracuse. They had abandoned 
their fleet, their transports, the hopes of vietory, 


7 Thucydid. p. 545. 8 Id. p. 546. 


9 Id. p. 547 


236 


and the glory of the Athenian name; and thesc 
collective sufferings were enhanced and exas- 
perated by the painful images which struck the 
eyes and the fancy of each unfortunate indi- 
vidual. The mangled bodies of their com- 
panions and friends, deprived of the sacred 
rites of funeral, affected them with a sentiment 
of religious horror, on which the weakness of 
luman nature is happily unable to dwell. 
They removed their attention from this dread- 
ful sight; but they could not divert their com- 
passion from a spectacle still more melancholy, 
the numerous crowds of sick and wounded, 
who followed them with enfeebled and unequal 
steps, entreating, in the accent and attitude of 
unutterable anguish, to be delivered from the 
horrors of fainine, or the rage of an exasperated 
foe. Amidst such affecting scenes, the heart 
of a stranger would have melted with tender 
sympathy; but how much more must it have 
afflicted the Athenians, to see their parents, 
brothers, children, and friends, involved in un- 
exampled misery! to hear, without the possi- 
bility of relieving, their lamentable complaints! 
and reluctantly to throw the clinging victims 
from their wearied necks and arms! Yet the 
care of personal safety prevailed over every 
other care; for the soldiers, either destitute of 
slaves, or distrusting their fidelity, were not 
only encumbered by their armour, but oppress- 
ed by the weight of their provisions.! 

The superior rank of Nicias entitled him to 
a pre-eminence of toil and of wo; and he de- 
serves the regard of posterity by his character 
and sufferings, and still more by the melancholy 
firmness of his conduct. The load of accumu- 
lated disasters did not sink him into inactive 
despondency. He moved with a rapid pace 
around every part of the army, and the ardour 
of his mind re-animating the langour of his de- 
bilitated frame, he exclaimed, with a loud and 
distinct voice, “ Athenians and allies! there is 
yet room for hope. Many have escaped from 
still greater evils; nor ought you rashly to ac- 
cuse either fortune or yourselves. As to me, 
who, in bodily strength, excel not the weakest 
among you (for you see to what a miserable con- 
dition my disease has reduced me,) and who, in 
the happiness of private life, and the deceitful 
gifts of prosperity, had long been distinguished 
above the most illustrious of my contempora- 
ries, I am now confounded with affliction with 
the meanest and most worthless. Yet am I 
unconscious of deserving such a fatal reverse 
of fortune. My conduct towards men has been 
irreproachable; my piety towards the gods 
conspicuous and sincere. For this reason | 
am still animated with confidence; calamities, 
unmerited by guilt, are disarmed of their ter- 
rors, If we have incurred the indignation of 
the gods by our ambitious designs against 
Sicily, our offence, surely, is sufficiently expi- 
ated by past sufferings, which now render us 
the objects of compassion. Other nations have 
attacked their neighbours with less provoca- 
tion, and have yet escaped with a gentler 
punishment; nor will experience warrant the 
belief, that for the frailties and errors of passion, 


1 Thucydid. p. H8. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


{ Cuar. 


providence should impose patios too heavy to 
be borne. We have the less reason to adopt an 
ae a so dishonourable to the gods, 
when we consider the means which their good- 
ness has still left us to provide for our defence 

Our numbers, our reselution, and even our 
misfortunes, still render us formidable. There 
is not an army in Sicily capable to intercept 
our course; much les expel us from the first 
friendly territory in which we may fix our 
camp. If we can sccure, therefore, our present 
safety, by a prudent, speedy, and courageous 
retreat, we may afterwards retrieve our lost- 
honour, and restore the fallen glory of Athens; 
since the chief ornament of a state consists in 
brave and virtuous men, not in empty e 


and undefended walls.”? 

The actions of Nicias fully corresponded wit 
his words. He ncglected none of the duties of 
a great general. Instead of leading the army 
towards Naxos and Catana, in which direction 
there was reason to apprehend many secret 
ambushes of the enemy, he conducted them by 
the western route towards Gela and Camerina; 
expecting, by this measure, to find provisions 
in greater plenty, as well as to elude the latent 
snares of the Syracusans. That nothing might 
be omitted which promised the hope of relief, 
messengers were immediately despatched to 
the neighhouring cities, which might possibly 
be tempted by their natural jealousy of the 
growing prosperity of Syracuse, to favour the 
retreat of the vanquished. The troops were 
then divided into two squares, as the most se 
cure and capacious arrangement. Nicias led 
the van; Demosthenes conducted the rear; the 
baggage, and unarmed multitude, occupied the 
centre. In this order of march they passed the 
river Anapus, the ford of which was feebly dis- 
puted by an inconsiderable guard; and having 
proceeded the first day only five miles, they 
encamped in the evening on a rising ground, 
after being much harassed during the latter 
part of their journey by the Syracusan cavalry 
and archers, who galled them at a distance, 
intercepted the stragglers, and avoided, by a 
seasonable retreat, to commit the security of 
their own fortune with the dangerous despair 
of the Athenians. Next day, having marched 
only twenty furlongs, they reached a spacious 
plain, the convenience of which invited them 
to repose; especially as they needed a supply 
of water and provisions, which might be easily 
obtained from the surrounding country.? 

Before this time, the enemy were apprized 
of their line of march; and, in order to inter- 
rupt it, they sent a numerous detachnient to 
fortify the mountain of Acreum. This moun- 
tain, which probably gave name to the small 
town situate in its neighbourhood, intcrsected 
the direct road to Gela and Camerina. It was 
distant a few milcs from the Athenian encamp- 
ment, and a small degree of art miglit render it 
impregnable, since it was of a steep and rapid 
ascent, and encompassed on every side by the 
rocky channel of a loud aud foaming torrent. 
In vain the Athenians attempted, on thrce 
successive days, to force the passage. They 


. 
2 Thueydid. p. 550. 3 Id. p. 552, et seq. 


_ 


XX.] i 


; > 

were repelled with loss in every new attack, 
which became more feeble than the preceding. 
In the first and most desperate, an cr the 
storm of thunder increased the cou of the 

he terror of the Athenians. 
had, in the first engagement 
after the invasior of Sicily, produced an oppo- 
site effect on the contending nations. But the 
hopes and the fears of ange with their 
fortune. 

In the evening after the last unsuccessful con- 
test, the condition of the Mocnian: was pecu- 
liarly deplorable. The numbers of the wounded 
had been increased by the fruitless attempts to 
pass the mountain; the enemy had continually 
galled and insulted them as they retreated to 
their camp; the adjacent territory could no 
longer supply them with the necessaries of life; 
and they must be compelled, after all their 
hardships and fatigues, to make a long circuit 
by the sea-shore, if they expected to reach, in 
safety, the places of their respective destination. 
Even this resolution (for there was no alterna- 
tive,) however dreadful to men in their com- 
fortless and exhausted state, was recommended 
by Nicias, who, to conceal his design from the 
enemy, caused innumerable fires to be lighted 
in every part of the camp.4 The troops then 
marched out under cover of the night, and in 
the same order which they had hitherto ob- 
served. But they had not proceeded far in 
this nocturnal expedition, when the obscurity 
of the skies, the deceitful tracks of an unknown 
and hostile country, filled the most timid or 
unfortunate with imaginary terrors. Their 
panic, as is usual in great bodies of men, was 
speedily communicated to those around them; 
and Demosthenes, with above one half of his 
division, fatally mistook the road, and quitted, 
never more to rejoin, the rest of the army. 

The scouts of Gylippus and the Syracusans 
immediately brought intelligence of this import- 
ant event, which furnished an opportunity to 
attack the divided strength of the Athenians. 
His superior knowledge of the country enabled 
Gylippus, by the celerity of his march, to in- 
tercept the smaller division, and to surround 
them on every side, in the difficult and intri- 
sate defiles which led to the ford of the river 
Erinios. There he assaulted them with impu- 
nity, during a whole day, with darts, arrows, 
and javelins. When the mcasure of their suf- 
ferings was complete, he proclaimed towards 
the evening, by the sound of the trumpet, and 
with the loud voice of the herald, freedom, 
forgiveness, and protection to all who should 
desert, and abandon the bad fortune of their 
leaders; an offer which was aceepted by the 
troops of scveral Asiatic islands, and other de- 
pendent and tributary countries. At length he 
entered into treaty with Demosthenes himself, 
whose soldiers laid down thcir arms, and dë 
livered their money (which filled the capacious 
hollow of four broad bucklers,) on condition 
that they slould not suffer death, imprison- 
ment, or famine.> Notwithstanding the num- 
ber of the deserters and of the slain, the re- 
mainder still amounted to six thousand, who 


Syracusans and 
A similar event 


4 Thucydid. p. 552, et seq. 5 Td. p. 553. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


237 


were sent to Syracuse with their captive gene- 
ral, under a powerful and vigilant escort, while 
the activity of Gylippus followed the flying 
battalions of the enemy, which had been con- 
ducted by Nicias to the distance of twenty 
miles, towards the fatal banks of the river 
Assinaros. 

The Syracusans overtook the rear before the 
van could arrive at the lofty and abrupt margin 
of this rapid stream; and a herald was sent to 
Nicias, exhorting him to imitate the example 
of his colleague, and to surrender, without fur- 
ther bloodshed, to the irresistible valour of his 
victorious pursuers. Nicias disbelieved, or af- , 
fected to disbelieve, the report; but when a 
confidential messenger, whom he was allowed 
to despatch for information, brought certain in- 
telligence of the surrender and disgrace of De- 
mosthenes, he also condescended to propose 
terms, in the name of the Athenians, engaging, 
on the immediate cessation of hostilities, to re- 
imburse the magistrates of Syracuse for the 
expense of the war, and to deliver Athenian 
hostages (a citizen for a talent) until the debt 
should be liquidated.6 

These terms were rejected by the Syracusans 
with disdain ; and Gylippus having occupied the 
most advantageous posts on every side, attacked 
the army of Nicias with the same mode of war- 
fare which had, two days before, proved sa, 
destructive to their unfortunate companions. 
During the whole day they bore, with extraor- 
dinary patience, the hostile assault, still expect- 
ing, under cover of the night, to escape the cruel 
vigilance of the enemy. But that hope was 
vain: Gylippus perceived their departure ; and 
although three hundred men of determined 
courage gallantly broke through the guards, and 
effected their escape, the rest were no sooner 
discovcred than they returned to their former 
station, and laid down their arms in silent 
despair. Yet the return of the morning brought 
back their cburage. They again took up their 
arms, and marched towards the river, miserably 
galled and afflicted by the hostile archers and 
cavalry. Their distress was most lamentable 
and incurable: yet hope did not totally forsake 
them ; for, like men in the oppression and lan- 
guor of a consuming disease, they still enter- 
tained a confused idea, that their sufferings 
would end, could they but reach the opposite 
banks of the neighbouring river.’ 

The desire of assuaging their thirst encour- 
aged this daring design. They rushed with 
frantic disorder into the rapidity of the stream; 
the pursuing Syracusans, who had occupied the 
rocky banks, destroying them with innumerable 
volleys of missile weapons. In the Assinaros 
they had a new enemy to contend with. The 
depth and force of the waters triumphed over 
their single,and shook their implicated strength. 
Many werc borne down the stream. At length 


the weight of their numbers resisted the violence 


of the torrent; but a new form of danger and 
of horror presented itself to the eyes of Nicias. 
His soldiers turned their fury against each 
other, disputing, with the point of the sword, 
the unwholesome draughts of the agitated and 


6 Thucydid. p. 554. 7 Id. 


238 


turbid current. This spectacle melted the firm- 
ness of his manly soul. He surrendered to 
Gylippus, and asked quarter for the miserable 
remnant of his troops, who had not perished in 
the Assinaros, or been destroyed by the Syra- 
cusan archers and cavalry.! Before the com- 
mands of the Lacedemonian general could per- 
vade the army, many of the soldiers had, ac- 
cording to the barbarous practice of the age, 
seized their prisoners and slaves; so that the 
Athenian captives were afterwards distributed 
among several communities of Sicily, which 
had sent assistance to Syracuse. The rest, 
upon laying down their arms, were entitled to 
the pity and protection of Gylippus; who, 
after sending proper detachments to intercept 
and collect the stragglers, returned in triumph 
to the city with the inestimable trophies of his 
valour and conduct. 

Nicias had little to expect from the humanity 
of a proud aud victorious Spartan ; but Demos- 
thenes might naturally flatter himself with the 
hope of justice. He urged with energy, but 
urged in vain, the observance of the capitulation 
which had been ratificd with due forms, on the 
faith of which he had surrendered himself and 
the troops entrusted to his command. The 
public prisoners, conducted successively to Syra- 
cuse, and exceeding together the number of 
seven thousand, were treated with the same in- 
human cruelty. They were univcrsally con- 
demned to labour in the mines and quarries of 
Sicily :2 their whole sustenance was bread 
and water: they suffered alternately the ardours 
of a scorching sun, and the chilling damps of 
autumn. For seventy days and nights they 
languished in this dreadful captivity, during 
which, the diseases incident to their manner of 
life were rendered infectious by the stench of the 
dead bodies, which corrupted the purity of the 
surrounding air. At length an eternal separa- 
tion was made betwecn those who should enjoy 
the happier lot of being sold as slaves into distant 
lands, and those who should for ever be confined 
to their terrible dungeons. The Athenians, 
with such Italians and Sicilians as had unnatu- 
rally embraced their cause, were reserved for 
the latter doom. Their generals, Nicias and De- 
mosthenes, had not lived to behold this melan- 
choly hour. Gylippug would have spared their 
lives, not from any motives of humanity and 
esteem, but that his joyous return to Sparta 
might have been graced by their presence. But 
the resentment of the Syracusans, the fears of 
the Corinthians; above all, the suspicious jea- 
lousy of those perfidious traitors who had main- 
tained a secret correspondence with Nicias, 
which they dreaded lest the accidents of his 
future life might discover, loudly demanded the 
immediate execution of the captive generals.3 
The Athenians of those times justly regretted 


1 Thucydid. p. 555. 


2 Id. p. 556. 
3 Id. l. vii. ad fin. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


the loss of Demosthenes, a gallant and enter- 
prising commander ; but posterity will for ever 

the E of Nicias, the most pious, the 
infortunate man 


of fe. age in which he lived 

Amidst this dark and dreadful scene of 
cruelty and revenge, we must not omitto men- 
tion one singular example of humanity, which 
broke fants like a meteor in the gloom of a 
nocturnal tempest. The Syracusans, who could 
punish their helpless captives with such unre- 
lenting severity, had often melted into tears at 
the affecting strains of Euripides,4 an Athenian 
poet, who had learned in the Socratic school to 
adorn the lessons of philosophy with the charms 
of fancy, and who was regarded by the taste of 
his contemporaries, as he still is by mauy en- 
lightened judges, as the most tender and pa- 
thetic, the most philosophical and instructive, 
of all tragic writers. The pleasure which the 
Syracusans had derived from his inimitable 
poetry, made them long to hear it rehearsed by 
the flexible voices and harmonious pronunciation 
of the Athenians, so unlike, and so superior, to 
the rudeness and asperity of their own Doric 
dialect. They desired their captives to repeat 
the plaintive scenes of their favourite bard. The 
captives obeyed; and affecting to represent the 
woes of ancient kings and heroes, they too 
faithfully expressed their own. Their taste and 
sensibility endeared them to the Syracusans, 
who released their bonds, received them with 
kindness into their families,> and, after treating 
them with all the honourable istinctionbof an- 
cient hospitality, restored them to their longing 
and afflicted country, as a small but precious 
wreck of the most formidable armament that 
had ever sailed from a Grecian harbour. At 
their return to Athens, the grateful captives 
walked in solemn procession to the house of 
Euripides, whom they hailed as their deliverer 
from slavery and death.6 This acknowledg- 
ment, infinitely more honourable than all the 
crowns and splendour that ever surrounded the 
person, and even than all the altars and temples 
that ever adorned the memory of a poet,’ must 
have transported Euripides with the second 
triumph which the heart of man can feel. He 
would have enjoyed the first, if his countrymen 
had owed to his virtues the tribute which they 
paid to his talents; and if, instead-of the beauty 
and elegancc of his verses, they had been saved 
by his probity, his courage, or hi i 
qualities which, still more than 
fancy, constitute the real excellence and dignity 
of human nature. 


4 See above, p. 171. 

5 Hros resvyxey ¥ Sidaames veznin “Te is either 
dead or teaching verses; an expression first introduced at 
this time, was afterw ards applied proverbially, in speaking 
of travellers in foreign countries, whose fate was uncertain 

6 Plutarch. in Nicia. - 

7 See above, Chapter VI. 


ae i 


Sade] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


239 


CHARTER XXI. 


Consequences of t 
Peculiar reso 


e Athenian Misfortunes in Sicily—Formidable confederacy against Athens— 
ces of free Governments—Naval Operations—Battle of Miletus—Intrigues of 


Alcibiades—The Athenian Democracy subverted—Tyrannical government of the Four Hundred 
— Battle of Eretria—Democracy re-established in Athens—Nuaval success of the Athenians— 
Triumphant return of Alcibiades—The Eleusinian Mystertes—and Plynteria. 


D the populous and extensive kingdoms of 
modern Europe, the revolutions of public 
affairs seldom disturb the humble obscurity of 
private life; but the national transactions of 
Greece involved the interest of every family, 
and deeply affected the fortune and happiness 
of every individual. Had the arms of the 
Athenians proved successful in Sicily, each 
citizen would have derived from that event an 
immediate accession of wealth, as well as of 
power, and have felt a proportional increase of 
honour and security. But their proud hopes 
perished for ever in the harbour of Syracuse. 
The succeeding disasters shook to the foundation 
the fabric of their empire. In one rash enter- 
prise they lost their army, their fleet, the pru- 
dence of their experienced gencrals, and the 
flourishing vigour of their manly youth8’—Ir- 
reparable disasters! which totally disabled them 
to resist the confederacy of Peloponnesus, rein- 
forced by the resentment of a new and power- 
fulenemy. While a Lacedemonian army in- 
vested their city, they had reason to dread that 
a Syracusan fleet should assault the Piræus; 
that Athens must finally yield to these com- 
bined attacks, and her once prosperous citizens 
destroyed by the sword, or dragged into cap- 
tivity, atone by their death or disgrace for the 
eruelties which they had recently inflicted on 
the wretched republics of Melos and Scioné. 
The dreadful alternative of vic- 


Ow = tory and defeat, renders it little sur- 
AC 413 prising that the Athenians should 


have rejected intelligence, which 
they must have received with horror. The 
first messengers of such sad news were treated 
with contempt: but it was impossible long? to 
withhold belief from the miserable fugitives, 
whose squalid and dejected countenances too 
faithfully attested the public calamity. Such 
evidence could not be refused; the arrogance 


of incredulity was abashed, and the whole re- 
public thrown into consternation, or seized with 
despair. e venerable members of the Areo- | 


pagus expressed the majesty of silent sorrow; 
but the piercing cries of wo extended many a 
mile along the lofty walls which joined the 
Piræus to the city ; and the licentious populace 
raged with unbridled fury against the diviners 


- - 

8 Thucydid. 1. vii. p. 557. Cicero goes further. Hic 
primam opes illius civitatis victm, comminute, depressmque 
sunt: in hoc portu Atheniensium nobilitatis, imperii, gloria 
naufragium factum existimatnr. Cicer. in Verrem, v. 37. 

9 The calamity was so great that the boldest imngina- 
tion had never dared to conceive its existence. Their 
minds being thus unprepared, the Athenians, says Thucy- 
dides, dishelieved xæ: roig wuvu Twv oTeeztiwrwy 9% xzuTou 
Tou epyou dtumrsOsuyors: even those soldiers who escaped 
from this melancholy business. The stories of Plutarch in 
Nicia, of Atheneus, &c. may be safely condemned as fic- 
tions, since they are inconsistent with Thucydides’s narra- 
tive. 


and orators, whose blind predictions, and am- 
bitious harangues, had promoted an expedition 
eternally fatal to their country.10 

The distress of the Athenians was too great 
to admit the comfort of sympathy; but had 
they been capable of receiving, they had little 
reason to expect, that melancholy consolation. 
The tidings so afflicting to them gave unspeak- 
able joy to their neighbours; many feared, most 
hated, and all envied, a people who had long 
usurped the dominion of Greece. The Athe- 
nian allies, or rather subjects, scattered over so 
many coasts and islands, prepared to assert 
their independence ; the confederates of Sparta, 
among whom the Syracusans justly assumed 
the first rank, were unsatisfied with victory, 
and longed for revenge: even those communi- 
ties, which had hitherto declined the danger 
of a doubtful contest, meanly solicited to be- 
come parties in a war, which they expected 
must finally terminate in the destruction of 
Athens.i! 

Should all the efforts of such a powerful 
confederacy still prove insufficient to accom- 
plish the ruin of the devoted city, there was yet 
another enemy behind, from whose strength 
and animosity the Athenians had every thing 
to fear. The long and peaceful reign of Ar- 
taxerxes king of Persia, expired four hundred 
and twenty-five years before the Christian era. 
The two following years were remarkable for a 
rapid succession of kings, Xerxes, Sogdianus, 
Ochus; the last of whom assumed the name of 
Darius, to which historians lave added the 
epithet of Nothus, the bastard, to distinguish 
this effeminate prince from his illustrious pre- 
decessor.!2 The first years of Darius Nothus 
were employed in confirming his disputed au- 
thority, and in watching the dangerous in- 
trigues of his numerous kinsmen who aspired 
to the throne. When every rival was removed 
that could either disturb his quict or offend his 
suspicion, the monarch sunk into an indolent 
security, and his voluptuous court was governed 
by the feeble administration of women and 
eunuchs.!3 But in the ninth year of his reign 
Darius was roused from his lethargy by the 
revolt of Egypt and Lydia. The defection of 
the latter threatened to tear from his dominion 
the valuable provinces of Asia Minor; a conse- 
quence which he determined to prevent by em- 
ploying the bravery of Pharnabazus, and the 
policy of the crafty Tissaphernes, to govern 
respectively the northern and southern districts 
of that rich and fertile peninsula. The abilities 
of these generals not only quelled the rebellion 


10 Thueydid. l. viii. p. 558, et seq. 

11 Thueydid. |. viii. p. 558, et seq. Diodor. l. xiii. p. 348, 
12 Diodor. 1. xii. p. 322. Ctesias, Persic. c. xiv. et seq. 
13 Ctesias, c. xlvii. 


one. 


y 


240 


in Lydia, but extended the arms of their master 
towards the shores of the Ægean, as well as of 
the Hellespont and Propontis; in direct opposi- 
tion to the treaty which forty years before had 
been ratified between the Athenians, then in 
the height of their prosperity, and tle unwar- 
like Artaxerxes. But the recent misfortunes 
of that ambitious people flattered the Persian 
commanders with the hope of restoring the 
whole Asiatic coast to the great king,! as well 
as of inflicting exemplary punishment on the 
proud city, which had resisted the power, dis- 
membered the empire, and tarnished the glory 
of Persia. 

The terror of such a formidable combination 
might have reduced the Athenians to despair; 
and our surprise that tlis consequence should 
not iinmediately follow, will be increased by 
the following reflection. Not to mention the 
immortal trophies of Alexander, or the exten- 
sive ravages of Zingis Khan, Tamerlane, and 
the Tartar princes of their race; the Spaniards, 
the Portuguese, and other nations of modern 
Europe, have, with a handful of men, marched 
victorious over the effeminate or barbarous 
coasts of the eastern and western world. The 
hardy discipline of Europe easily prevailed over 
the unwarlike softness of India and the savage 
ignorance of America. But the rapid success 
of all these conquerors was owing to their mili- 
tary knowledge? and experience. By the su- 
periority of their arms and of. their discipline, 
the Romans subdued the nations of the earth. 
But the Athenians afford the only example of a 
people, who, by the virtues of the mind alone, 
acquired an extensive dominion over men 
equally improved with themselves in the arts 
of war and government. They possessed, or 
were believed to possess, superior courage and 
capacity to the nations around them; and this 
opinion, which should seem not entirely desti- 
tute of foundation, enabled them to maintain, 
by very feeble garrisons, an absolute authority 
in the islands of the Ægean, as well as in the 
cities of the Asiatic coast. Their disasters and 
disgrace in Sicily destroyed at once the real 
and the ideal supports of their power; the loss 
of one third of their citizens made it impossible 
to supply, with fresh recruits, the exhausted 
strength of their garrisons in foreign parts; the 
terror of their fleet was no more; and their 
multiplied defeats, before the walls of Syra- 
cuse, had converted into contempt that admira- 
tion in which Athens had been long held by 
Greeks and Barbarians. 

But in free governments there are many 
latent resources which public calamities alone 
can bring to light; and adversity, which, to 
individuals endowed with inborn vigour of 
mind, is the great school of virtue and of hero- 
ism, furnishes also to the enthusiasm of popular 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


[Cuap, 


selfish timidity of a prince, and the cautious 
prudence of a council, would have sunk under 
| the weight of misfortunes, too heavy for the 
unsupported strength of ordinary minds. But 
the first spark of generous ardour, which the 
love of virtue, of glory, and the republic, or 
even the meaner motives of ambition and 
vanity, excited in the assembled multitude, was 
| diffused and increased by the natural contagion 
| of sympathy; the patriotic flame was commu- 
| nicated to every breast; and the social warmth, 
reflected from such a variety of objects, became 
too intense to be resisted by the coldness of 
caution and the damps of despair. 

With one mind and resolution the Athenians 
determined to brave the severity of fortune, 
aud to withstand the assaults of the enemy. 
Nor did this noble design evaporate in useless 
speculation; the wisest measures were adopted 
for reducing it to practice. The great work 
began, as national reformation ought always to 
begin, by regulating the finances, and lopping 
off every branch of superfluous expense. The 
clamour of turbulent demagogues was silenced; 
aged wisdom and experience were allowed 
calmly to direct the public councils; new levies 
were raised;‘the remainder of their fleet was 
equipped for sea; the motions of the colonies 
and tributary states were watched with an 
anxious solicitude, and every proper expedient 
was employed that might appease their ani- 
mosity, or render it impotent.3 Yet these 
“measures, prudent and vigorous as they were, 
could not, probably, have suspended the fall of 
Athens, had not several concurring causes fa- 
cilitated their operation. The weak, dilatory, 
and ineffectual proceedings of the Spartan con- 
federacy ; the temporising, equivocal, and capri- 
cious conduct of the Persian governors; above 
all, the intrigues and enterprising genius of 
Alcibiades, who, after involving his country in 
inextricable calamities, finally undertook its 
defence, and retarded, though he could not 
prevent, its destiny. 

In the year following the unfortunate ex- 
pedition into Sicily, the Spartans prepared a 
fleet cf a hundred sail, of which twenty-five 
galleys were furnished by their own sea-ports; 
twenty-five by the Thebans; fifteen by the 
Corinthians; and the remainder by Locris, 
Phocis, Megara, and the maritime cities on the 
coast of Peloponnesus. This armament was 
destined to encourage and support 


si : the revolt of the Asiatic subjects 
AC 412 of the Athenians. The islands of 


Chios and Lesbos, as well as the 
city Erythræ on the continent, solicited the 
Spartans to join them with their naval force. 
Their request was enforced by Tissaphernes, 
who promised to pay the sailors, and to victual 
the ships. At the same time, an ambassador 


assemblies the noblest field for the display of | from Cyzicus, a populous town situate on an 


national honour and magnanimity. Had the 
measures of the Athenians depended on one 
man, or even on a few, it is probable that the 


1 Thueydid. |. viii. p. 560. et Ctesias, Persic. c. li. 

2 If that of the Tartars should be doubted, the reader 
may consult Mons. de Guignes’s Hist. des Huns, and Mr. 
Gibbon’s admirable description of the manners of the pas- 
toral nations, v. ii 


island of the Propontis, entreated the Lacede- 
monian armament to sail to the safe and capa- 
cious harbours which had long formed the 
wealth and the ornament of that city, and to ex- 
pel the Athenian garrisons, to which the Cyzice- 
nes and their neighbours reluctantly submitted. 


3 Thucydid. |. viii. p. 559. Diodor. l xiii. p. 349. 


e 


XXL] 


The Persian Pharnabazus seconded their pro- 
posal; offered the same conditions with Tissa- 
phernes; and so little harmony subsisted be- 
tween the lieutenants of the great king, that 
each urged his particular demand with a total 
unconcern about the important interests of 
their common master.? The Lacedæmonians 
held many consultations among themselves, 
and with their allies; hesitated, deliberated, 
resolved, and changed their resołution; and at 
length were persuaded by Alcibiades to prefer 
the overture of Tissaphernes and the Ionians 
to that of the Hellespontines and Pharnabazus. 

The delay occasioned by this deliberation 
was the principal, but not the only cause which 
hindered the allies from acting expeditiously, 
at a time when expedition was of the utmost 
importance. A variety of private views di- 
verted them from the general aim of the con- 
federacy; and the season was far 


a a advanced before the Corinthians, 
AC "412, Whe had been distinguished by ex- 


cess of antipathy to Athens, were 
prepared to sail, They determined, from pride 
perhaps, as well as superstition, to celebrate, 
before leaving their harbours, the Isthmian 
games, consecrated to Neptune, the third of the 
Grecian festivals in point of dignity and splen- 
dour. From this ceremony the Athenians, 
though enemies, were not excluded by the 
Corinthian magistrates; nor did they exclude 
themselves, though oppressed by the weight of 
past misfortunes, and totally occupied by the 
thoughts of providing against future evils. 
While their representatives shared the amuse- 
ments of this sacred spectacle, they neglected 
not the commission recommended by their 
country. They secretly informed themselves 
of the plan and particular circumstances of the 
intended revolt, and learned the precise time 
fixed for the departure of the Corinthian fleet. 
In consequence of this important intelligence 
the Athenians anticipated the designs of the 
rebels of Chios, and carried off seven ships as 
pledges of their fidelity. The squadron which 
returned from this useful enterprize, intercepted 
the Corinthians as they sailed through the 
Saronic gulf; and having attacked and con- 
quered them, pursued and blocked them up in 
their harbours.§ 

Mean while the Spartans and their allies 
sent to the Ionian coast such squadrons as 
were successively ready for sea, under the con- 
duct of Alcibiades, Chalcydeus, and Astyochus. 
The first of these commanders sailed to the isle 
of Chios, which was distracted by contending 
factions. The Athenian partisans were sur- 
prised and compelled to submit; and the city, 
which possessed forty galleys, and yielded in 
wealth and populousness to none of the neigh- 
bouring colonies, became an accession to ihe 
Peloponnesian confederacy. The strong and 
rich town of Miletus followed the example: 


4 Id. p. 561, et 562 

5 “Tow rz Ilotpsx Sisoetacecs.”” The scholiast justly 
observes, the force of the “812,” “thoroughly, completely,” 
i. e. until they had celebrated the games, the complete num- 
=f days, appointed by antiquity. Vid. 4. Port ad loc. 


Pe A3). 
6 Thucydid. p. 564 


od 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


241 


Eurythre and Clazomené surrendered to Chal- 
cideus; several places of less note were con 
quered by Astyochus. 

When the Athenians received 


oe oe ; the unwelcome intelligence of these 
A.C 412 events, they voted the expenditure 


of a thousand talents, which in 
more prosperous times, they lad deposited in 
the citadel, under the sanction of a decree of 
the senate and people, to reserve it for an occa- 
sion of the utmost danger. This seasonable 
supply enabled them to increase the fleet, which 
sailed under Phrynichus and other leedere. to 
the isle of Lesbos. Having secured the fidelity 
of the Lesbians, who were ripe for rebellion, 
they endeavoured to recover their authority in 
Miletus, anciently regarded as the capital of the 
Tonic coast. A bloody battle was fought before 
the walls of that place, between the Athenians 
and Argives on one side, and the Peloponne- 
sians, assisted by the troops of Tissaphernes 
and the revolted Milesians, on the other. The 
Athenian bravery defeated on this occasion, the 
superior numbers of Greeks and Barbarians 
to whom they were opposed; but their Argive 
auxiliaries were repulsed by the gallant citizens 
of Miletus: so that in both parts of the en- 
gagement, the Ionic race, commonly reckoned 
the less warlike, prevailed over their Dorian 
rivals and enemies. Elevated with the joy of 
victory, the Athenians prepared to assault the 
town, when they were alarmed by the approach 
of a fleet of fifty-five sail which advanced in 
two divisions, the one commanded by the cele- 
brated Hermocrates, the other by Theramenes 
the Spartan. Phrynichus prudently considered, 
that his own strength only amounted to forty- 
eight galleys, and refused to commit the last 
hope of the republic to the danger of an unequal 
combat. His firmness despised the clamours 
of the Athenian sailors, who insulted, under 
the name of cowardice, the caution of their ad- 
miral; and he calmly retired with his whole 
force to the isle of Samos, where the popular 
faction having lately treated tle nobles with 
shocking injustice and cruelty, too frequent in 
Grecian democracies, were ready to receive 
with open arms the patrons of that fierce and 
licentious form of government. 

The retreat of the Athenian fleet acknow- 
ledged the naval superiority of the enemy; a su- 
periority which was alone sufficient either to 
acquire or to maintain the submission of the 
neighbouring coasts and islands. Jn other re- 
spects too, the Peloponnesians enjoyed the most 
decisive advantages. Their galleys were vic- , 
tualled, theirsoldiers were paid by Tissaphernes, 
and they daily expected a reinforcement of a 
hundred and fifty Phoenician ships, which, it 
was said, had already reached Aspendus, a sea- 
port of Pampliylia. But, in this dangerous 
crisis, fortune seemed to respect the declining 
age of Athens, and, by a train of accidents, 
singular and almost incredible, enabled Alci- 


7 Like Fabius, 
“Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem.” 
Ennius apud Cic. 
which Thucydides expresses with more vigour, “ouse rota 


TO LIKEN OVELJEL LIZZ KADY WS SsnxivSuvevoesy,” p. 574. 


242 


biades, so long the misfortune and the scourge, 
to become the defence and the saviour of his 
country. 

During his long residence in Sparta, Alci- 
biades assumed the outward gravity of deport- 
ment, and conformed himself to the spare diet, 
and laborious exercises, which prevailed in that 
austere republic; but his character and his 
principles remained as licentious as ever. His 
intrigue with Timea, the spouse of king Agis, 
was discovered by an excess of female levity. 
The queen, vain of the attachment of so cele- 
brated a character, familiarly gave the name of 
Alcibiades to her son Leotychides; a name 
which, first confined to the privacy of her female 
companions, was soon spread abroad in the 
world. Alcibiades punished her folly by a most 
mortifying but well-merited declaration, boast- 
ing that he had solicited her favours from no 
other motive but that he might indulge the am- 
bitious desire of giving a king to Sparta. The 
offence itself, and the shameless avowal, still 
more provoking than the offence, excited the 
keenest resentment in .the breast of the in- 
jured husband.! The magistrates and generals 
of Sparta, jealous of the fame, and envious of 
the merit of a stranger, readily sympathized 
with the misfortune, and encouraged the re- 
venge of Agis; and, as the horrid practice of 
assassination still disgraced the manners of 
Greece, orders were sent to Astyochus, who 
commanded in chief the Peloponnesian forces 
in Asia, secretly to destroy Alcibiades, whose 
power defied those laws which in every Gre- 
cian republic condemned adulterers to death.? 
But the active and subtile Athenian had secured 
too faithful domestic intelligence in the principal 
families of Sparta to become the victim of this 
execrable design. With his usual address he 
eluded all the snares of Astyochus: his safety, 
however, required perpetual vigilance and cau- 
tion, and he determined to escape from a situa- 
tion, which subjected him to such irksome con- 
straint. 

Publicly banished from Athens, secretly per- 
secuted by Sparta,he had recourse to the friend- 
ship of Tissaphernes, who admired his accom- 
plishments, and respected his abilities, which, 
though far superior in degree, were similar in 
kind to his own. Tissaphernes was of a temper 
the more readily to serve a friend, in proportion 
as he less needed his services. Alcibiades, there- 
fore, carefully concealed from him the dangerous 
resentment of the Spartans. In the selfish 
breast of the Persian no attachment could be 
durable unless founded on interest; and Alci- 
biades, who had deeply studied his character, 
began to flatter his avarice, that he might ensure 
his protection. He informed him, that by al- 
lowing the Peloponnesian sailors a drachma, 
or sevenpence sterling, of daily pay, he treated 
them with a useless and even dangerous libe- 
rality: that the pay given by the Athenians, 
even in the most flourishing times, amounted 
only to three oboli; which proceeded, not from 
a disinclination to reward the skill and valour 
of their seamen, but from an experience, that if 


1 Plutarch. ii. 49. in Alcibiad. 
2 Lysias in defence of Euphiletuy &c. p. 419. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


they received more than half a drachma each 
day, the superfluity would be squandered in 
such profligate pleasures as enfeebled and cor- 
rupted their minds and bodies, and rendered 
them equally incapable of activity and of disci- 
pline. Should the sailors prove dissatisfied with 
this equitable reduction, the Grecian character 
afforded an easy expedient for silencing their li- 
centious clamours. It would be sufficient to 
bribe the naval commanders and a few merce- 
nary orators, and the careless and improvident 
seamen would submit, without suspicion, the 
rate of their pay, as well as every other concern, 
to the influence and authority of those who 
were accustomed to govern them. 

Tissaphernes heard this advice with the at- 
tention of an avaricious man to every proposal 
for saving his money; and so true a judgment 
had Alcibiades formed of the Greeks, that Her- 
mocrates the Syracusan was the only officer 
who disdained, meanly and perfidiously, to be- 
tray the interest of the men under his com- 
mand: yet through the influence of his col- 
leagues, the plan of economy was universally 
adopted, and on a future occasion, Tissapher- 
nes boasted that Hermocrates, though more 
coy, was not less corruptible than others, and 
that the only reason for which he undertook 
the patronage of the sailors, was to compel his 
own reluctance to comply with the exorbitance 
of his demands. This reproach illustrates the 
opinion entertained by foreign nations of Gre- 
cian virtue; but it is probably an aspersion on 
the fame of the illustrious Syracusan. 

The intrigues of Alcibiades had sown jea- 
lousy and distrust in the Peloponnesian fleet: 
they had alienated the minds of the troops both 
from Tissaphernes and their commanders: the 
Persian was ready to forsake those whom he 
had learned to despise ; and Alcibiades profited 
of this disposition to insinuate that the alliance 
of the Lacedemonians was equally expensive 
and inconvenient for the great king and his 
lieutenants. “ That these haughty republicans 
were accustomed to take arms to defend the 
liberties of Greece, a design totally inconsistent 
with the views of the Persiancourt. If the Asiatic 
Greeks and islanders aspired at independence, 
and hoped to deliver themselves from Athenian 
governors and garrisons, without submitting to 
pay tribute to Persia, they ought to carry on 
the war at their own expense, since they would 
alone reap the benefit of its success. But if 
Tissaphernes purposed to recover the ancient 
possessions of his master, he must beware of 
giving a decided superiority to either party, es- 
pecially to the warlike Spartans. By an atten- 
tion to preserve the balance even, between the 
hostile republics, he would force them to ex- 
haust each other. Amidst their domestic con- 
tests an opportunity would soon arrive, when 
Darius, without danger or expense, might crush 
both, and vindicate his just hereditary claim to 
the dominion of all Asia.” 

These artful representations produced almost 
an open breach between Tissaphernes and his 
confederates. The advantage which Athens 
would derive from this rupture might have 


3 Thucydid. p. 584, et. seq. 


XXL] 


paved the way for Alcibiades to return to his 
country: but he dreaded to encounter that 
popular fury, whose effects he had fatally ex- 
perienced, and whose mad resentinent no de- 
gree of merit could appease; he therefore ap- 
plied secretly to Pisandcr, Theramenes, and 
other persons of distinction in the Athenian 
camp. To them he deplored the desperate state 
of public affairs, expatiated on his own credit 
with Tissaphernes, and insinuated that it might 
be yet possible to prevent the Pheenician fleet 
at Aspendus from sailing to assist the enemy. 
Assuming gradually more boldness, as he per- 
ceived the success of his intrigues, he finally 
declared that the Athenians might obtain not 
merely the neutrality, but perhaps the assistance 
of Artaxerxes, should they consent to abolish 
their turbulent democracy, so odious to the Per- 
sians, and entrust the administration of govern- 
ment to men worthy to negotiate with so mighty 
a monarch. 

When the illustrious exile proposed this mea- 
surc, it is uncertain whether he was acquainted 
with the secret cabals which had been already 
formed, both in the city and in the camp, for 
executing the design which he suggested. The 
misfortunes, occasioned by the giddy insolence 
of the multitude, had thrown the principal au- 
thority into the hands of the noble and wealthy, 
who, corrupted by the sweets of temporary 
power, were desirous of rendering it perpetual. 
Many prompted by ambition, several moved by 
inconstancy, a few directed by a just sense of 
the incurable defects of democracy, were pre- 
pared to encounter every danger, that they 
might overturn the established constitution. In 
the third and most honourable class was An- 
tiphon, a man of an exalted character, and en- 
dowed with extraordinary talents. The irre- 
sistible energy of his eloquence was suspected 
by the people. He appeared not in the courts 
of justice, nor in the assembly; but his artful 
and elaborate compositions often saved the lives 
of his friends. He was the invisible agent who 
governed all the motions of the conspiracy; and 
when compelled, after the ruin of his party, to 
stand trial for his life, he discovered an activity 
and force of mind that astonished the most 
discerning of his contemporaries.‘ Pisander, 
Theramenes, and the other leaders of the 
aristocratical party, warmly approved the views 
of Alcibiades. The Athenian soldiers likewise, 
though they detested the impiety, admired the 
valour, of the illustrious exile, and longed to see 
him restored to the service of his country. 
All ranks lamented the dangerous situation of 
Athens; many thought that their affairs must 
become desperate, should Tissaphernes com- 
mand the Phenician fleet to co-operate with 


4 Thucydid. l. viii. p. 600. A few lines above, Thucy- 
dides describea the character of Antiphon with expressive 
energy: 2vye Adyvxtwv Twv x29? sxutov wosty Te oudsvos 
VOTEROS, 42i KOLTITTOS evJuuyIyval PEVOMEVOS xt æ ZOEY, 
sizecv. “ An Athenian, in virtue second to no man then 
living, endowed with the greatest vigour of thought, and 
the greatest power of expression.” Plutarch in the very in- 
accurate and imperfect work, entitled, The Lives of the 
Ten Orators, tells us, that Antiphon was the first who wrote 
institutions of oratory; and that his pleadings were the 
most ancient that had come down to posterity. The cha- 
racter given by Plutarch of the writings of Antiphon 
agrees with the high commendation of Thucydides. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


243 


that of Peloponnesus; and many rejoiced in the 
prospect of a Persian alliance, in consequence 
of which they would entcr at once into the pay 
of that wealthy satrap.§ 

Onc man, the personal enemy of Alcibiades 
alone opposed the general current. But this 
man was Phrynichus, whose prudent firmness 
as a commander we have already had occasion 
to remark. The courage with which he invited 
dangers many have equalled, but none ever 
surpassed the boldness with which he extricated 
himself from difficulties. When he perceived 
that his colleagues were deaf to every objection 
against recalling the friend of Tissaphernes, he 
secretly informed the Spartan admiral Asty- 
ochus, of the intrigues which were carrying on 
to the disadvantage of his country. Daring as 
this treachery was, Phrynichus addressed a 
traitor not less perfidious than himself. Asty- 
ochus was become the pensioner and creature 
of Tissaphernes, to whom he communicated the 
intelligence. The Persian again communicated 
it to his favourite Alcibiades, who complained 
in strong terms to the Athenians of the bascness 
and villany of Phrynichus. The latter excul- 
pated himself with consummate address; but as 
the return of Alcibiades might prove fatal to his 
safety, he ventured, a second time, to write to 
Astyochus, gently reproaching him with his 
breach of confidence, and explaining by what 
means he might surprise the whole Athenian 
fleet at Samos; an exploit that must for ever 
establish his fame and fortune. Astyochus 
again betrayed the secret to Tissapliernes and 
Alcibiades; but before their letters could be 
conveyed to the Athenian camp, Phrynichus, 
who, by some unknown channel, was informed 
of this second treachery, anticipated the dan- 
gerous discovery, by apprising the Athenians 
of the enemy’s design to surprise their fleet. 
They had scarcely employed the proper means 
to counteract that purpose when messengers 
came from Alcibiades to announce the horrid 
perfidy of a wretch who had bascly sacrificed 
to private resentment the last hope of his coun- 
try. But the messengers arrived too late; the 
prior information of Phrynichus, as well as the 
bold and singular wickedness of his design, 
which no common degree of evidence was 
thought sufficient to prove, were sustained as 
arguments for his exculpation; and it was be- 
lieved that Alcibiades had made use of a stra- 
tagem most infamous in itself, but not unexam- 
pled among the Greeks, for destroying a man 
whom he detested.6 

The opposition of Phrynichus, though it re- 
tarded the designs of Alcibiades, prevented not 
the measures of Pisander and his associates for 
abolishing the democracy. The soldiers at 
Samos were induced, by the reasons above 
mentioned, to acquiesce in the resolution of 
their generals. But a more difficult task re- 
mained; to deprive the people of Athens of 
their liberty, which, since the expulsion of the 


5 What influence this consideration must have had, may 
be conjectured from the information of Andocides, Orat. iii. 
who says, that in the course of this war the Spartans re- 
ccived, from their Persian allics, subsidies to the amount 
of five thousand talents, about a million sterling. The sum 
is prodigious, considerii g the value of money in that age. 

6 Thucydid. p. 58: + 590. 


244 


family of Pisistratus, they had enjoyed a hun- 
dred years. Pisander headed the deputation 
which was sent from the camp to the city to 
effect this important revolution. He acquainted 
the extraordinary assembly, summoned on that 
occasion in the theatre of Bacchus, of the mea- 
sures which had been adopted by their soldiers 
and fellow citizens at Samos. The compact 
band! of conspirators warmly approved the 
example; but loud murmurs of discontent re- 
sounded in different quarters of that spacious 
theatre. Pisander asked the reason of this dis- 
approbation. ‘ Had his opponents any thing 
better to propose? If they had, let them come 
forward and explain the grounds of their dis- 
sent: but, above all, let them explain how they 
could save themselves, their families, and their 
country, unless they complied with the demand 
of Tissaphernes. The imperious voice of ne- 
cessity was superior to law; and when the ac- 
tual danger had ceased, they might re-establish 
their ancient constitution.” The opponents of 
Pisander were unable or afraid to reply: and 
the assembly passed a decree, investing ten 
ambassadors with full powers to treat with the 
Persian satrap. 

Soon after the arrival of the Pe- 


Cee loponnesian fleet on the coast of 
AC 412 Asia, the Spartan commanders had 


concluded, in the name of their re- 
public, a treaty with Tissaphernes; in which it 
was stipulated, that the subsidies should be 
regularly paid by the king of Persia, and that 
the Peloponnesian forces should employ their 
utmost endeavours to recover, for that nzonarch, 
the dominions of his ancestors, which had been 
long unjustly usurped, and cruelly insulted, by 
the Athenians. This treaty seemed so honour- 
able to the great king, that his lieutenant could 
not venture openly to infringe it. It is possible, 
that in the interval between his intrigues with 
Alcibiades, and the arrival of the Athenian am- 
bassadors at Magnesia, the place of his usual 
residence, Tissaphernes might receive fresh 
instructions from his court to make good his 
agreement with the Spartans. Perhaps the 
crafty satrap never entertained: any serious 
thoughts of an alliance with the Athenians, 
although he sufficiently relished the advice 
given him by Alcibiades to weaken both parties. 
But whatever motive determined hin, it is cer- 
tain that he showed a disinclination to enter 
into any negotiation with the Athenian ambas- 
sadors. Alarmed at the decay of his influence 
with the Persians, on which he had built the 
flattering hopes of returning to his country, 
Alcibiades employed all the resources of his 
genius to conceal his disgrace. By solicita- 
tions, entreaties, and the meanest compliances, 
he obtained an audience for his fellow citizens. 
As the agent of Tissapkernes, he then proposed 
the conditions on which they might obtain the 
friendship of the great king. Several demands 
were made, demands most disgraceful to the 


1 Or rather bands, according to Thucydides. Pisander 
was at pains to gain over to his views tzs Zuywuorens, 
CITES ETUPReVOY WEOTEOOY EY Ty TMOAEL OUTE Ems oinxse 
wos aexesse The factions or juntos already formed in 
Athens, with a view to thrust themselves into the seats of 
judicature and the great offices of state.” Thucydid. p. 592. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cunas 


.name of Athens: to all of which the ambassx - . 


dors submitted. They even agreed to surrender 
the whole coast of ouia to its ancient sovereign. 
But when the artful Athenian (fearful lest 
they should, on any terms, admit the treaty 
which Tissaphernes was resolved on no terms 
to grant) demanded that the Persian fleets 
should be allowed to sail, undisturbed, in the 
Grecian seas, the ambassadors, well knowing 
that should this condition be complied with, no 
treaty could hinder Greece from becoming a 
province of Persia, expressed their indignation 
in very unguarded language, and left the assem- 
bly in disgust. This imprudence enabled Alci- 
biades to affirm, with some appearance of truth, 
that their own anger and obstinacy, not the 
reluctance of Tissaphernes, had obstructed the 
negotiation, which was precisely the issue of 
the affair most favourable to his views.? 

His artifices succeeded, but were 


Olymp. not attended with the consequences 
XCI. 2. f ] The A 
A.C. All. expected from them. e Athe- 


nians, both in the camp and city, 
perceived, by this transaction, that his credit 
with the Persians was less than he repgesented 
it; and the aristocratical faction were glad to 
get rid of a man, whose restless ambition ren- 
dered him a dangerous associate. They per- 
sisted, however, with great activity, in executing 
their purpose; of which Phrynichus, who had 
opposed them only from hatred of Alcibiades, 
became an active abettor. When persuasion 
was ineffectual, they had recourse to violence. 
Androcles, Hyperbolus,? and other licentious 
demagogues, were assassinated. The people 
of Athens, ignorant of the strength of the con- 
spirators, and surprised to find in the number 
many whom they least suspected, were re- 
strained by inactive timidity, or fluctuated in 
doubtful suspense. The cabal alone acted with 
union and with vigour; and difficult as it seemed 
to subvert the Athenian democracy, which had 
subsisted a hundred years with unexampled 
glory, yet this design was undertaken and 
accomplished by the enterprising activity of 
Pisander, the artful eloquence of Theramenes, 
the firm intrepidity of Phrynichus, and the 
snuperintending wisdom of Antiphon.4 

He it was who formed the plan, and regu- 
lated the mode of attack, which was carried on 
by his associates. In a deliberation concerning 
the means of retrieving the affairs of the public, 
Pisander proposed the electing of ten men, 
who should be charged with the important 
trust of preparing and digesting resolutions, to 
be on an appointed day laid before the assembly 
of the people. When the day arrived, the com- 
missioners had but one resolution to propose: 
“That every citizen should be free to offer his 
opinion, however contrary to law, without fear 


2 Thucydid. l. viii. p. 593. 

3 Thucydides paints his character in few words: ‘Yzee- 
Gorov Te Tive Adyveswy, pog Sneoy avipwaay wrTpaxsomevoy 
ov Dice Suvamens kEi oFimpentos coboy, wAAw Die movneizy 
xas wsomuvnv THe TOAEwWS. ‘One Hyperbolus, a worthless 
fellow, and hanished by the Ostracism, not from fear of his 
power and dignity, but on account of his extreme profligacy, 
and his being a disgrace to the city.” The Ostracism was 
thought to be for ever disgraced by being applied to sucn 
an unworthy object, and thenceforth laid aside. See Plut, 
in Nicia, and Aristoph. in Pac. ver. 680. 

4 Thucydid. ibid. et Lysias advers. Agorat. 


XXL] 


of impeachment or trial;” a matter essential to 
the interests of the cabal, since by a strange 
contradiction in government, the Athenian ora- 
tors and statesmen were liable to prosecution 
before the ordinary courts of justice, for such 
speeches and decrees as had been approved and 
confirmed by the assembly. In consequence of 
this act of indemnity, Pisander and his party 
boldly declared, that neither the spirit nor the 
forms of the established constitution (which 
had recently subjected them to such a weight 
of misfortunes) suited the present dangerous 
and alarming crisis. ‘That it was necessary to 
new-model the whole fabric of government; 
for which purpose five persons (whose names 
he read) ought to be appointed by the people, 
to choose a hundred others; each of whom 
should select three associates; and the four 
hundred thus chosen, men of dignity and opu- 
lence, who would serve their country without 
fee or reward, ought immediately to be invested 
with the majesty of the republic. They alone 
should conduct the administration uncontrolled, 
and assemble, as often as seemed proper, five 
thousand citizens, whom they judged most 
worthy of being consulted in the management 
of public affairs. This extraordinary proposal 
was accepted without opposition: the partisans 
of democracy dreaded the strength of the cabal; 
and the undiscerning multitude, dazzled by the 
imposing name of five thousand, a number far 
exceeding the ordinary assemblies of Athens, 
perceived not that they surrendered their liber- 
ties to the artifice of an ambitious faction.§ 
But the conduct of the four hundred tyrants 
(for historians have justly adopted the language 
of Athenian resentment) soon opened the eyes 
and understanding of the most thoughtless. 
They abolished every vestige of ancient free- 
dom; employed mercenary troops levied from 
the small islands of the Ægean, to overawe the 
multitude, and to intimidate, in some instances 
to destroy, their real or suspected enemies. 
Instead of seizing the opportunity of annoying 
the Peloponnesians, enraged at the treachery 
of Tissaphernes, and mutinous for want of pay 
and subsistence, they sent ambassadors to soli- 
cit peace from the Spartans on the most dis- 
honourable terms. Their tyranny rendered 
them odious in the city, and their cowardice 
made them contemptible in the camp at Samos. 
Their cruelty and injustice were described, and 
exaggerated, by the fugitives who continually 
arrived in that island. The generous youth, 
employed in the sea and land service, were im- 
patient of the indignities offered to their fellow 
citizens. The same indignities might be in- 
flicted on themselves, if they did not vindicate 
their freedom. These secret murmurs broke 
out into loud and licentious clamours, which 
were encouraged by the approbation of the 
Samians. Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus, two 
officers of high merit and distinction, though 
not actually entrusted with a share in the prin- 
. cipal command,’ gave activity and boldness to 


5 By the ypzoy mapzvopwv. See Chap. xiii. 

6 Thucydid. et Lysias, ubi supra. 

7 Neither generals nor admirals; for Thrasybulus only 
commanded a galley; and Thrasyllus served in the heavy- 
armed infantry, whether as an officer, or in the ranks, the 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


245 


the insurgents. The abettors of the new go- 
vernment were attacked by surprise: thirty of 
the most criminal were put to death, several 
others were banished, democracy was re-esta- 
blished in the camp, and the soldiers were 
bound by oath to maintain their hereditary 
government against the conspiracy of domestic 
foes, and to act with vigour and unanimity 
against the public enemy. 

Thrasybulus, who headed this successful and 
meritorious sedition, had a mind to conceive, a 
tongue to persuade, and a hand to execute, the 
most daring designs. He exhorted the soldiers 
not to despair of effecting in the capital the 
same revolution which they had produced in 
the camp. But should they fail in that design 
they ought no longer to obey a city which had 
neither wealth nor wisdom, neither supplies nor 
good counsel to send them. They were them- 
selves more numerous than the subjects of the 
four hundred, and better provided in all things 
necessary for war. They possessed an island 
which had formerly contended with Athens for 
the command of the sea, and which, it was 
hoped, they might defend against every foe, 
foreign and domestic. But were they compel- 
led to forsake it, they had still reason to expect 
that, with a hundred ships of war, and with so 
many brave men, they might acquire an esta- 
blishment not less valuable elsewhere, in which 
they would enjoy, undisturbed, the invaluable 
possession of liberty. Their most immediate 
concern was to recall Alcibiades, who had been 
deceived and disgraced by the tyrants, and 
who not only felt with peculiar sensibility, but 
could resent with becoming dignity, the wrongs 
of his country and his own. The advice of 
Thrasybulus was approved; soon after he sailed 
to Magnesia, and returned in company with 
Alcibiades. 

Near four years had elapsed since the elo- 
quent son of Clinias had spoken in an Athenian 
assembly. Being presented by Thrasybulus to 
his fellow citizens, he began by accusing his 
fortune, and lamenting his calamities. * Yet 
his banishment ought not to affect him with 
permanent sorrow, since it had furnished him 
with an opportunity to serve the cause of his 
country. This event, otherwise unfortunate, 
had procured him the acquaintance and friend- 
ship of Tissaphernes; who, moved by his en- 
treaties, had withheld the stipulated pay from 
the Peloponnesian forces, and who, he doubted 
not, would continue his good offices to the 
Athenians, supply them with every thing re- 
quisite for maintaining the war, and even sum- 
mon the Pheenician fleet to their assistance.” 
These were magnificent but flattering promises. 
In making them, Alcibiades however did not 
consult merely the dictates of vanity. They 
raised his credit with the army, who immedi- 
ately saluted him general;® they widened the 
breach between Tissaphernes and the Spartans; 
and they struck terror (when his speech got 


expression leaves uncertain. The Scholiast, however, con- 
siders owAstrevovrs as synonimous with tov oArrexov 
aexovrs, Thucydid. p. 604. 

8 Msta Twv weotsewv—T hoy associated him with the 
former commanders. But Toei immediately adds, 
xat Tæ WenymaTe wuvTe ævsTisrev, pnd referred every 
thing to his management, p. 609. 


248 


abroad) into the tyrants of Athens, who had 
provoked the resentment of a man capable to 
subvert their usurpation. 

Alcibiades left the care of the troops to his 
colleagues ‘Lhrasybulus and Thrasyllus, and 
withdrew himself from the applauses of his ad- 
miring countrymen, on pretence of concerting 
with Tissaphernes the system of their future 
operations. But his principal motive was to 
show himself to the Persian, in the new and 
illustrious character with which he was invest- 
ed; for having raised his authority among the 
Athenians by his influence with the satrap, he 
expected to strengthen this influence by the sup- 
port of that authority. Before he returned to 
the camp, ambassadors had been sent by the 
tyrants, to attempt a negotiation with the parti- 
sans of democracy, who, inflamed by continual 
reports of the indignities and cruelties committed 
in Athens, prepared to sail thither to protect 
their friends and take vengeance on their ene- 
mies. Alcibiades judiciously opposed this rash 
resolution, which must have left the Hellespont, 
lonia, and the islands, at the mercy of the hos- 
tile fleet. But he commanded the ambassadors 
to deliver to their masters a short but pithy 
message: “ That they must divest themselves 
of their illegal power, and restore the ancient 
constitution. If they delayed obedience, he 
would sail to the Pireus, and deprive them of 
their authority and their lives.” 

When this message was reported at Athens, 
it added to the disorder and confusion in which 
that unhappy city was involved. The four hun- 
dred who had acted with unanimity in usurp- 
ing the government, soon disagreed about the 
administration, and split into factions, which 
persecuted each other as furiously as both had 
persecuted the people.? Theramenes and Aris- 
tocrates condemned and opposed the tyrannical 
measures of their colleagues. The perfidious 
Phrynichus was slain: both parties prepared 
for taking arms; and the horrors of a Corcyrean 
sedition were ready to be renewed in Athens, 
when the old men, the children, the women, 
and strangers, interposed for the safety of a city 
which had long been the ornament of Greece, 
the terror of Persia, and the admiration of the 
world.3 

Had the public enemy availed themselves of 
this opportunity to assault the Piræus, Athens 
could not have been saved from immediate de- 
struction. But the Peloponnesian forces at 
Miletus, long clamorous and discontented, had 
broken out into open mutiny, when they heard 
of the recall of Alcibiades, and the hostile in- 
tentions of Tissaphernes. To the duplicity of 
the satrap, and the treachery of their own cap- 
tains, they justly ascribed the want of pay and 
subsistence, and all the misfortunes which they 
felt or dreaded. Their resentment was violent 
and implacable. They destroyed the Persian 
fortifications in the neighbourhood of Miletus; 
they put the garrisons to the sword; their 
treacherous commander, Astyochus, saved his 
life by flying to an altar; nor was the tumult 


1 Thucydid. ibid. et Plut. ii. 54. in Vit. Alcibiad. 
2 Lysias adv. Agorat. 
3 Thucydid. p. 610. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


appeased until the guilty were removed from 
their sight, and Myndarus, an officer of approv- 
ed valour and fidelity, arrived from Sparta to 
assume the principal command.4 

The dreadful consequences which must have 
resulted to the Athenians, if, during the fury of 
their sedition, the enemy had attacked them 
with a fleet of a hundred and fifty sail, may be 
conceived by the terror inspired by a much 
smaller Peloponnesian squadron of only forty- 
two vessels; commanded by the Spartan He-, 
gesandridas. The friends of the constitution 
had assembled in the spacious theatre of Bac- 
chus. Messengers passed between them and 
the partisans of Antiphon and Pisander, whe 
had convened in a distant quarter of the city 
The most important matters were in agitation, 
when the alarm was given that some Pelopon- 
nesian ships had been seen on the coast. Both 
assemblies were immediately dissolved. All 
ranks of men hastened to the Piræus; manned 
the vessels in the harbour; launched others; 
and prepared thirty-six for taking the sea. 
When Hegesandridas perceived the ardent op- 
position which he must encounter in attempting 
to land, he doubled the promontory of Sunium, 
and sailed towards the fertile island of Eubea, 
from which, since the fortification of Decelia, 
the Athenians had derived far more plentiful 
supplies than from the desolated territory of 
Attica. To defend a country which formed 
their principal resource, they sailed in pursuit 
of the enemy, and observed them next day near 
the shore of Eretria, the most considerable town 
in the island. 

The Eubceans, who had long watched an op- 
portunity to revolt, supplied the Peloponnesian 
squadron with all necessaries in abundance ; but 
instead of furnishing a market to the Athenians, 
they retired from the coast on their approach. 
The commanders were obliged to weaken their 
strength, by detaching several parties into the 
country to procure provisions ; Hegesandridas 
seized this opportunity to attack them : most of 
the ships were taken; the crews swam to land; 
many were cruelly murdered by the Fretrians, 
from whom they expected protection ; and such 
only survived as took refuge in the Athenian 
garrisons scattered over the island.® 
The news of this misfortune was 


Oly T most alarming to the Athenians. 
AC 411 Neither the invasion of Xerxes, nor 


even the defeat in Sicily, occasioned 
such terrible consternation. They dreaded the 
immediate defection of Eubea; they had no 
more ships to launch; no means of resisting 
their multiplied enemies: the city was divided 
against the camp, and divided against itself. 
Yet the magnanimous firmness of Theramenes 
did not allow the friends of liberty to despair. 
He encouraged them to disburden the republic 
of its domestic foes, who had summoned, or 
who were at least believed to have summoned, 
the assistance of the Lacedemonian fleet, that 
they miglt be enabled to enslave their fellow 
citizens. Antiplion, Pisander, and others most 
obnoxious, scasonably escaped; the rest sub- 
mitted. A decree was passed, recalling Alci- 


4 Thucydid. p. 611. 5 Id. p. 622. 


4 


XXL] 


biades, and approving the conduct of the troops 
The sedition ceased. The demo- 
cracy, which had been interrupted four months, 
was restored; and such are the resources of a 
free government, that even this violent fermen- 
tation was not unproductive of benefit to the 


at Samos. 


‘state. The Athenians completed whatever had 


been left imperfect in former reformations ;6 


and determined to defend, to the last extremity, 
the ancient glory of the republic. 
By the imprudent or perfidious 


Oly TE ; conduct of their commanders, and 
Ae 411 the seditious spirit of their troops, 


the Peloponnesians losta seasonable 
opportunity to terminate the war with equal 
advantage and honour; and having neglected 
the prosperous current of their fortune, they 
were compelled long and laboriously to strive 
against an unfavourable stream. The doubtful 
Tissaphernes hesitated between the part of an 


open enemy,or a treacherousally ; the Spartans, 


who had formerly rejected the friendship, now 
courted the protection, of his rival Pharnabazus; 
to whose northern province they sailed with 
the principal strength of their armament, leav- 
ing only a small squadron at Miletus, to defend 
their southern acquisitions. The Athenians, 
animated by the manly counsels of Thrasybulus 
and Thrasyllus, the generous defenders of their 
freedom, proceeded northwards in pursuit of 
the enemy ; and the important straits, which 
join the Euxine and Ægean seas, became, 
and long continued, the scene of conflict. In 
the twenty-first winter of the war, a year al- 
ready distinguished by the dissolution and re- 
vival of their democracy, the Athenians pre- 
vailed in three successive engagements, the 
event of which became continually more de- 
cisive. In the first, which was fought in the 
narrow channel between Sestos and Abydus, 
the advantages were in some measure balanced, 
since Thrasybulus took twenty Peloponnesian 
ships, with the loss of fifteen of his own. But 
the glory remained entire to the Athenians, 
who repelled the enemy, and offered to renew 
the battle? Not long afterwards, they inter- 
cepted a squadron of fourteen Rhodian vessels, 
near Cape Rhegium. The islanders defended 
themselves with their usual bravery. Myndarus 
beheld the engagement from the distance of 
eight miles, while he performed his morning 
devotions to Minerva in the lofty temple of 
Ilium. Alarmed for the safety of his friends, 
he rushed from that sacred edifice, and hastened 
with great diligence to the shore, that he might 
launch his ships, and prevent, by speedy as- 
sistance, the capture or destruction of the Rho- 
dians.8 The principal Athenian squadron at- 
tacked him near the shore of Abydus. The 


6 The government was brought back to its original prin- 
ciples, as established by Solon. Among other salutary 
regulations, it was enacted, that no one should receive a 
salary for any public magistracy. ‘ And now,” says Thu- 
cydides, ‘‘ for the first time, in the present age at least, the 
Athenians modeled their government aright; and this en- 
abled Athens again to raise her head.” Thucydid. p. 623. 
It is remarkable, that neither Diodorus, Plutarch, nor any 
of the orators, make the least mention of those salutary 
regulations, which, however, lasted not long after the return 
of Alcibiades. 

7 Thucydid. l. viii. p. 626 

8 Xenoph. Hellen. J. i. c i. Diodor. xiii. p. 354. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


247 


engagement was foughtfrom morning till night, 
and still continued doubtful, when the arrival 
of eighteen galleys, commanded by Alcibiadeg. 
turned the seale of victory. The eseape of thy 
Peloponnesians was favoured by the braver, 
of Pharnabazus, who, at the kead of his Bar 
barian troops, lad been an impatient spectato 
of the combat. He gallantly rode into the sea 
encouraging his men with his voice, his arm 
and his example. The Spartan admiral drew 
up the greatest part of his fleet along the shore 
and prepared to resist the assailants; but the 
Athenians, satisfied with the advantages already 
obtained, sailed to Sestos, earrying with them 
a valuable prize, thirty Peloponnesian galleys, 
as well as fifteen of their own, which they had 
lost in the former engagement. Thracyllus was 
sent to Athens, that he might communicate the 
good news, and raise such supplies of men and 
money as could be expected from that exhausted 
city.9 

The Spartans yielded possession of the sea, 
which they hoped soon to recover, and retired 
to the friendly harbours of Cyzicus, to repair 
their shattered fleet ; while the Athenians pro- 
fited of the fame of their victory, and the terror 
of their arms, to demand contributions from 
the numerous and wealthy towns in that neigh- 
bourhood. The several divisions returned to 
Sestos, having met with very indiiferent success 
in their design ; nor, without obtaining more 
decisive and important advantages, could they 
expect to intimidate such strongly fortified 
places as Byzantium, Selembria, Perinthus, on 
the European, or Lampsacus, Parium, Chalce- 
don, on the Asiatic, coast. It was determined 
therefore, chiefly by the advice of Alcibiades, to 
attack the enemy at Cyzicus; for which pur 
pose they sailed, with cighty galleys, to the 
small island of Proconnesus, near the western 
extremity of the Propontis, and ten miles distant 
from the station of the Peloponnesian fleet. 
Alcibiades surprised sixty vessels in a dark and 
rainy morning, as they were mancuvring at a 
distance from the harbour, and skilfully inter- 
cepted their retreat. As the day cleared up, the 
rest sailed forth to their assistance; the action 
became general; the Athenians obtained a 
complete victory, and their valour was rewarded 
by the capture of the whole Peloponnesian fleet, 
except the Syracusan ships, which were burned, 
in the face of a victorious enemy, by the en- 
terprising Hermocrates. The cireumstances 
and consequences of this important action were 
related in few, but expressive words, to the 
Spartan senate, in a letter written by Hippo- 
crates, the second in command, and intereepted 
by the Athenians: * All is lost; our ships are 
taken; Myndarus is slain; the men want 
bread; we know not what to do.”!0 

The fatal disaster at Cyzicus prevented the 
Peloponnesians from obstructing, during the 
following year, the designs of the enemy, who 
took possession of that wealthy sea-port, as well 
as of the strong city Perinthus; 
raised a large contribution on Se- 
lembria; and fortified Chrysopolis, 
a small town of Chalcedonia, only 


Olymp. 
xcii. 3. 
As Co 410, 


9 Id. ibid. 
10 Xenoph, Hellen. l. i. c.i. et Plut. p. 60. in Alcibiad. 


248 


three miles distant from Byzantium. In this 
new fortress they placed a considerable body 
of troops; and guarded the neighbouring strait 
with a squadron of thirty sail, commanded by 
Theramenes and Eubuius, and destined to ex- 
act, as tribute. a tenth from all ships which 
sailed through the Bosphorus into the Euxine 
sea.! The Peloponnesians were assisted by 
Pharnabazus in equipping a new fleet; but 
were deprived of the wise counsels of Her- 
mocrates, whose abilities were well fitted both 
to prepare and to employ the resources of war. 
The success of the Asiatic expedition had not 
corresponded to the sanguine hopes of his coun- 
trymen ; the insolent populace accused the inca- 
pacity of their commanders; and a mandate was 
sent from Syracuse. depriving them of their 
office, and punishing them with banishment. 
The conduct of Hermocrates is worthy of ad- 
miration. Having called an assembly, he de- 
plored his hard fortune, but recommended the 
most submissive obedience to the authority of 
the republic. He then exhorted the sailors to 


name temporary commanders, till the arrival of 


those who had been appointed by their country. 
But the assembly. especially the captains and 
pilots, tumultuously called out, * That he and 
his colleagues ought to continue in the com- 
mand.” Hermocrates then conjured them “ not 
to rebel against the government. When they 
should return home. they would then enjoy a 
fair opportunity to do justice to their admirals, 
by recounting the battles which they had won, 
by enumerating the ships which they had taken, 
and by relating how their own courage, and the 
conduct of their commanders, had entitled them 
to the most honourable place in every engage- 
ment by sea and land.” At the earnest and 
unanimous entreaty of the assembly, he con- 
sented, however. to retain his authority, till the 
arrival of his suecessors. His colleagues imi- 
tated the example; and soon after this memo- 
rable scene, Demarchus, Myseo, and Potamis, 
the admirals named by the state. took the 
command of the Syracusan forces. Yet the 
soldiers and sailors would not allow their be- 
oved leaders to depart. before taking in their 
presence a solemn oath to revoke their unjust 
banishment, whenever they themselves return- 
ed to Syracuse. On Hermocrates in particular. 
the captains and pilots bestowed many distin- 
guished tokens of their affection and respect. 
which his behaviour had justly merited; for 
every morning and evening he had called them 
together, communicated his designs, asked their 
opinion and advice, reviewed the past, and 
concerted the future, operations of the war; 
while his popular manners and condescending 
affability secured the love of thote who re- 
spected his skill. his vigilance, and his courage.? 

Meanwhile Thrasyllus obtained at Athens 
the supplies which he had gone to solicit; sup- 


1 It is well known, that Mahomet the Second obtained 
the same end, by fortifving two castles. one on the Asiatic, 
and another on the European side. That near to Chryso- 
polis is called by the modern Greeks Neocastron; but the 
name of the town itself is now changed to Scutari, a place 
deemed by the Turks one of the suburbs of Constantinople. 

TOCRNEFORTE, Lettre 15. 

2 Xenoph. p. 431 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 
plies far more powerful than he had 


ee "reason to expect. They consisted 
4.C. 499, 12 a thousand heavy-armed men, a 


hundred horse, and fifty galleys, 
manned by five thousand experienced seamen. 
That the sailors might be usefully employed on 
every emergence at sea or land, they were pro- 
vided with “the small and light bucklers, and 
darts. swords, and javelins, appropriated to the 
Grecian targeteers, who, uniting strength and 
velocity, formed an intermediate and useful 
order between the archers and pikemen. With 
these forces, Thrasyllus sailed to Samos, hoping 
to render the twenty-third campaign not less 
glorious than the preceding; and ambitious to 
rival, by his victories in the central and south- 
ern parts of the Asiatic coast, the fame acquired 
by Alcibiades and Thrasybulus in the north. 
His first operations were successful. He took 
Colophon, with several places of less note, in 
Ionia ; penetrated into the heart of Lydia, burn- 
ing the corn and villages ; and returned to the 
shore, driving before him a numerous body of 
slaves, and other valuable booty. His courage 
was increased by the want of resistance on the 
part of Tissaphernes, whose province he had 
invaded; of the Peloponnesian forces at Miletus; 
and of the revolted colonies of Athens. He 
resolved, therefore. to attack the beautiful and 
flourishing city of Ephesus, which was then the 
principal ornament and defence of the Ionic 
coast. While his soldiers, in separate divisions, 
were making their approaches to the walls of 
that place, ‘the enemy assembled from every 
quarter to defend the majesty of Ephesian 
Diana. A vigorous sally of the townsmen in- 
creased the strength of Tissaphernes and the 
Peloponnesians. the latter of whom had been 
seasonably reinforced by a considerable squad- 
ron from Sicily. The Athenians were defeated, 
with the loss of three hundred men; and re- 
tiring from the field of battle, they sought 
refuge in their ships, and prepared to sail to- 
ward the Hellespont.? 

During the voyage thither. they fell in with 
twenty Sicilian galleys, of which they took four, 
and pursued the rest to Ephesus. Having soon 
afterwards reached the Hellespont, they found 
the Athenian armament at Lampsacus, where 
Alcibiades thought proper to muster the whole 
military and naval forces: but, on this occasion, 
the northern army gave a remarkable proof of 
pride or spirit. They, who had ever been victo- 
rious, refused to rank with the soldiers of Thra- 
syllus, who had been so shamefully foiled before 
the walls of Ephesus. They submitted, how- 
ever, though not without reluctance, to live in 
the same winter-quarters; from which they 
made a conjunct expedition against Abydus. 
Pharnabazus defended the place with a nume- 
rous body of Persian cavalry. The disgraced 
troops of Thrasyllus rejoiced in an opportunity 
to retrieve their honour. They attacked, repel- 
led. and routed the enemy. Their victory de- 
cided the fate of Abydus, and their courage was 
approved by the army of Alcibiades, who em- 
braced them as fellow-soldiers and friends. 


3 Xenoph. Hellen. L i p. 434. 


XXL] 

Ol For several years the measures 
oat of the Athenians had been almost 

AC 408 uniformly successful ; but the twen- 


ty-fourth campaign was distinguish- 
ed by peculiar favours of fortune. The invasion 
of Sicily by the Carthagenians prevented that 
island from sending any effectual assistance to 
their Peloponnesian allies. ‘The dangerous re- 
volt of the Medes withheld the Persian rein- 
forcements, which were necessary to support 
the arms of Pharnabazus.4 Both nations were 
repeatedly defeated by the Athenians, driven 
from their encampments and fortresses near the 
shore, and pursued into the inland country, 
which was plundered and desolated by the vic- 
tors. The Athenians returned in triumph to 
attack the fortified cities, which still declined 
submission; an undertaking in which Alcibiades 
displayed the wonderful resources of his extra- 
ordinary genius. By gradual approaches, by 
sudden assaults, by surprise, by treason, or by 
stratagem, he in a few months became master 
of Chalcedon, Selembria, and at last of Byzan- 
tium itself. His naval success was equally con- 
spicuous. The Athenians again commanded 
the sea. The small squadrons fitted out by 
the enemy successively fell into their power; 
and these multiplied captures, which were made 
with little difficulty, accumulated the trophies 
of the well-fought battles which we have al- 
ready described. It was computed by the par- 
tisans of Alcibiades, that, since assuming the 
command, he had taken or destroyed two hun- 
dred Syracusan and Peloponnesian galleys ; 
and his superiority of naval strength enabled 
him to raise such contributions, both in the 
Euxine and Mediterrenean, as abundantly sup- 
plied his fleet and army with every necessary 
article of subsistence and accommodation.® 

While the Athenian arms were 


or p crowned with such glory abroad, 
A. C. 407. the Attic territory was continually 


harassed by king Agis, and the La- 
cedæmonian troops posted at Decelia. Their bold 
and sudden incursions frequently threatened the 
safety of the city itself; the desolated lands af- 
forded no advantage to the ruined proprietors ; 
nor could the Athenians venture without their 
walls, to celebrate thcir accustomed festivals. 
Alcibiades, animated by his foreign victories, 
hoped to relieve the domestic sufferings of his 
country; and after an absence of many years, 
distinguished by such a variety of fortune, 
eagerly longed to revisit his native city, and to 
enjoy the rewards and honours usually bestow- 
ed by the Greeks on successful valour. This 
celebrated voyage, which several ancient histo- 
rians studiously decorated with every circum- 
stance of naval triumph,® was performed in the 
twenty-fifth summer of the war. Notwith- 
standing all his services, the cautious son of 
Clinias, instructed by adversity, declined to land 
in the Pirseus, until he was informed that the 
assembly had repealed the decrccs against 
him, formally revoked his banishment, and pro- 
longed the term of his command. Even after 
this agreeable intelligence he was still unable 


4 Diodorus. l. xiii. 
5 Xenoph. Hellen. Diodor. l. xiii. Plut in Alcibiad. 
6 Duris apud Plut. in a 

2 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


249 


to conquer his well-founded distrust of the va. 
riable and capricious humours of the people; 
nor would he approach the crowded shore, till 
he observed, in the midst of the multitude, his 
principal friends and relations inviting him by 
their voice and action. He then landed amidst 
the universal acclamations of the spectators, 
who, unattentive to the naval pomp, and re- 
gardless of the other commanders, fixed their 
eyes only on Alcibiades. Next day an extraor- 
dinary assembly was summoned, by order of 
the magistrates, that he might explain and justify 
his apparent misconduct, and receive the re- 
wards due to his acknowledged merit. The 
public anticipated his: apology, by contrasting 
the melancholy situation of affairs when Alcibi- 
ades assumcd the command with the actual 
condition of the republic. * At the former pe- 
riod Athens yiclded the command of the sea: 
the enemy were every where victorious; the 
state was oppressed by foreign war, torn by se- 
dition, without resources, and without hope. The 
address and dextcrity of Alcibiades were alone 
capable to have disunited the councils, to have 
weakened and afterwards repelled the efforts, 
of a powerful confederacy ; his activity and 
courage could alone have animated the dejec- 
tion of the citizens to pursue the measures of 
offensive war: his abilities, his virtue, and his 
fortune, could alone have rendered those mea- 
sures successful.” 

Before judges so favourably disposed to hear 
him, Alcioiades found no difficulty to make his 
defence ; but it was difficult both for him and 
his friends to modcrate the excessive transports 
of the people, who would have loaded their 
favourite with honours incompatible with the 
genius of a free republic, and which might, 
therefore, have proved dangerous to his future 
safety. He received with pleasure, the crowns 
and garlands, with other accustomed pledges 
of public gratitude and admiration; but he re- 
spectfully declined the royal sceptre, expressing 
a firm resolution to maintain the hereditary 
freedom of his country.” Athens required not 
a king, but a general with undivided power, 
capable of restoring the ancient splendour of 
the commonwealth. ‘To this illustrious rank, 
which had been filled by Themistocles and Ci- 
mon, the son of Clinias might justly aspire. He 
was appointed commander in chief by sea and 
land. A hundred galleys were equipped, and 
transports wcre prepared for fifteen hundred 
heavy-armed men, with a proportional body of 
cavalry. 

Several months? had passed in these prepara- 
tions, when the Eleusinian festival approached; 
a time destined to commemorate and to diffuse 
the temporal and spiritual gifts of the goddess 
Ceres, originally bestowed on the Athenians, 
and by them communicated to the rest of 
Greece.'0 Corn, wine, and oil, were the prin- 


7 Com. Isocrat. Orat. pro Aleibiad. et Plut. in Alcibiad. 


8 Avgienisis wmavtTwy yyeuwv euToxeztwe. “He wag 
chosen absolute commander of all.” Xenoph. p. 440. 

9 From the festivals Plynteria and Eleusinia, mentioned 
inthe text, it appeurs that he arrived in July, and sailed in 
November. 

10 Meursius, apud Gronov. Thesaur. has collected al} 
the passages in ancicnt writers respecting this festival. It 
a; aid to have been celebrated in the month Boedromion, 
which, according to Father Pelaut, answers to our Novem- 


250 


cipal production of Attica; each of which had 
been introduced into that country by the pro- 
pitious intervention of a divinity, whose festival 
was distinguished by appropriated honours. 
Minerva, who had given not only the olive, but 
what was regarded as far more valuable, her 
peculiar protection to the city of Athens, was 
rewarded with innumerable solemnities. Va- 
rious also were the professions of gratitude 
expressed, in stated days of the spring and 
autumn, to the generous author of the vine. 
The worship of Ceres returned, indeed, less fre- 
quently ; but was partly, on that account, the 
more solemn and awful; and partly, because 
distinguished by the Eleusinian mysteries, those 
hidden treasures of wisdom and happiness, 
which were poured out on the initiated in the 
temple of Eleusis. Fourteen! centuries before 
the Christian era, the goddess, it is said, com- 
municated these invaluable rights to Eumolpus 
and Keryx, two virtuous men, who had re- 
ceived her in the form of an unknown traveller 
with pious hospitality.2, Their descendants, the 
Eumolpide and Kerykes, continued the minis- 
ters and guardians of this memorable institu- 
tion, which was finally abolished by the great 
Theodosius, after it had lasted eighteen hundred 
years.3 The candidates for initiation were 
prepared by watching, abstinence, sacrifice, and 
prayer; and before revealing to them the divine 
secrets, the most awful silence was enjoined 
them. Yet enough transpired among the pro- 
fane vulgar to enable us still to collect, from 
impartial and authentic testimony, that the 
mysteries of Ceres expressed by external signs 
the immortality of the human soul, and the 
rewards prepared in a future life for the virtu- 
ous servants of heaven. The secrecy enjoined 
by her ministers, so unworthy the truths which 
hey taught, might justify the indifference of 
Socrates, whose doctrines, not less divine, were 
mculcated with unreserved freedom. But the 
fate of Socrates may justify in its turn, the 
circumspection of the hierophants of Ceres. 
Besides the mysterious ceremonies of the 
temple, the worship of that bountiful goddess 
was celebrated by vocal and instrumental music, 
by public shows, and exhibitions, which con- 
tinued during several days, and above all, by the 
ee ee u 


ber. But as the Attic year was lunar, the months of that 
year could not exactly correspond to thése of ours. In the 
computation of their months, the Greeks agreed not with 
other nations, nor even among themselves. Vid. Plut. in 
Vit. Romul. et Aristid. 

1 Marb. Arund. Epoch. 14. 

2 Diodor. l. v. Isocrat. Panegyr. Pollux, l. viii. c. ix. 

3 Zozim. Hist. l. iv. 

4 I say impartial, because Isocrates, the scholar of So- 
crates, cannot be supposed to exaggerate the merit of cere- 
monies, which his master is said to have despised. The 
passage is remarkable: “ Though what I am going to relate 
may be disfigured by tradition and fable, the substance of 
it is not the less deserving of your regard. When Ceres 
travelled to Attica in quest of her daughter, she received 
the most hospitable treatment, and those particular good 
offices which are known to the initiated. ‘The goddess was 
not ungrateful for such favours, but in return conferred on 
our ancestors the two most valuable presents which either 
heaven can bestow, or mankind can receive ; the practice 
of agriculture, which delivered us from the fierce and pre- 
“carious manner of life, common to us with wild animals ; 
and the knowledge of those sacred mysteries which fortify 
the initiated against the terrors of death, and inspire them 
with the pleasing hopes of a happy immortality.” See 
Panegyr. p. 24. et Euseb. Præpar. Evang. 1. iii. 

5 Laert. in Diogene. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| Cuar. 


pompous procession, which marched for ten 
miles along the sacred road leading from Athens 
to Eleusis.6 This important part of the so- 
lemnity had formerly been intermitted, because 
the Athenians, after the loss of Decelia, were 
no longer masters of the road, and were com- 
pelled, contrary to established custom, to pro- 
ceed by sea to the temple of Ceres. Alcibiades 
determined to wipe off the stain of impiety 
which had long adhered to his character, by ` 
renewing, in all its lustre, this venerable pro- 
cession. He prepared to defend, by an armed 
force, the peaceful ministers and votaries of the 
gods, persuaded that the Spartans would either 
allow them to pass undisturbed, which must 
lessen the military fame of that people, or, if 
they attempted to interrupt the ceremony, must 
be exposed not only to the dangerous resistance 
of men animated by enthusiasm, but to the dis- 
graceful charge of irreligion, and the genera} 
detestation of Greece. The priests, the heralds, 
and the whole body of the initiated, were ap- 
prized of his intention, and requested to hold 
themselves in readiness by the appointed day 

Early in the morning the cavalry explored the 
adjoining country ; the eminences were occu- 
pied by the light infantry and targeteers; and, 
after sufficient garrisons had been left to de- 
fend the Athenian walls and fortresses, the 
whole body of heavy-armed troops were drawn 
out to protect the Eleusinian procession, which 
marched along the usual road to the temple, 
and afterwards returned to Athens, without suf- 
fering any molestation from the Lacedemo- 
nians; having united, on this occasion alone, 
all the slendour of war with the pomp of super- 
stition.’ 

Soon after this meritorious enterprise, Alci- 
biades prepared to sail for Lesser Asia, accom- 
panied by the affectionate admiration of his 
fellow citizens, who flattered themselves that 
the abilities aud fortune of their commander 
would speedily reduce Chios, Ephesus, Miletus, 
and the other revolted cities and islands. The 
general alacrity, however, was somewhat abated 
by the reflection, that the arrival of Alcibiades 
in Athens coincided with the anniversary of 
the Plynteria,? a day condemned to melancholy 
idleness, from a superstitious belief that nothing 
undertaken on that day could be brought to a 
prosperous conclusion. The celebrated Parthe- 
non, whose remains still attest the magnificence 
of Pericles, was consecrated by the presence of 
a goddess, who realized the inspirations of Ho- 
mer, as far as they were capable of being ex- 
pressed by the genius of Phidias. Minerva, 
composed of gold and ivory, and twenty-six 
cubits high, was represented with the casque, 
the buckler, the lance, and all her usual em- 
blems; and the warm fancy of the Athenians, 
enlivened and transported by the graceful ma- 
jesty of her air and aspect, confounded the 
painful production of the statuary with the 
instantaneous creation of Jupiter. To confirm 
this useful allusion the crafty: priests of the 
temple carefully washed and brightened the 


6 Herodot. l. viii. c. lxv. et Flut. in Alcibiad. 

7 Plut. in Alcibiad. 

8 Tlauvesv, to wash; mAuvTue, mAUvTHEIOS | and in the 
plural neuter, “ the ceremony of ablution.” 


XXI.] 


image, whose extraordinary lustre increased the 
veneration of the multitude. The Plynteria, 
during which the ceremony was performed, 
required uncommon secrecy and circumspec- 
tion. The eyes and imagination of the vulgar 
might have become too familiar with their re- 
vered goddess, had they beheld her stripped of 
her accustomed ornaments, and observed every 
part of her form brightening into new beauty 
under the plastic hands of the priests. To pre- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


251 


vent this dangerous consequence, the Plynteria 
was veiled in mystic obscurity; the doors of 
the temple were shut; the sacred edifice was 
surrounded on all sidesto intercept the approach 
of indiscretion or profanity ; and the return of 
Alcibiades, the favourite hope of his country, 
happening on the inauspicious day when Mi- 
nerva hid her countenance, was believed by 
many to announce thedreadful calamities which 
soon afterwards befell the republic.9 


CHAPTER XXII. 


Character of Lysander—His conference with Cyrus—He defeats the Athenian Fleet—Disgrace 
of Alcibiades—Lysander succeeded by Callicratidas—His Transactions with the Persians— 
with the Spartan-Allies—Battle of Arginusse—Trial of the Athenian Admirals—Eteonicus 
checks a Mutiny of the Peloponnesian Troops—Lysander resumes the Command—Battle of 
/Egos Potamos—Spartan Empire in Asia—Siege and Surrender of Athens—Humiliation of 


the Athenians. 


yy HILE the superstitious multitude trem- 

bled at the imaginary anger of Minerva, 
men of reflection and experience dreaded the 
activity and valour of Lysander, who, during 
the residence of Alcibiades at Athens, had taken 
the command of the Peloponnesian forces in 


the East. The forms of the Spartan constitu- 
Olymp tion required a rapid succession of 
an 2. generals; a circumstance, which, 
A C 407 amidst the numerousinconveniences 


with which it was attended, enlarg- 
ed the sphere of military compctition, and multi- 
plying the number of actors on the theatre of 
war, afforded an opportunity for the display of 
many illustrious characters, which must other- 
wise have remained in obscurity. In the rota- 
tion of annual elections, offices of importance 
and dignity will often be entrusted to men un- 
worthy to fill them ; but in the vast variety of 
experiments, abilities of the most distinguished 
order (if any such exist in the community) must 
some timc bc called into exertion, honoured 
with confidence, and armed with authority. 
Such abilities the Spartans finally discovered 
in Lysander ; a shoot of the Herculean stock, 
but not descended from either of the royal 
branches. He had been educated with all the 
severity of Spartan discipline; and having 
spent his youth and his manhood in those ho- 
nourable employments! which became the dig- 
nity of his birth, he approached the decline of 
life, when his superior merit recommended him 
to the chief command in a season of public 
danger. Ycars had added expcrience to his 
valour, and enlarged the resources, without 
abating the ardour of his ambitious mind. In 
his transactions with the world, he had learned 
to soften the harsh asperity of his national 
manners; to gain by frand what could not be 
effected by force; and, in his own figurative 


9 Xenoph. p. 438. et Plut. in Alcibiad. 

10 He had served in the army and navy; had been em- 
ployed aa ambassador in foreign states, &c. Plut. in 
Lysand. 


language, to “ eke out the lion’s with the fox’s 
skin”) This mixed character admirably suited 
the part which he was called to act. His en- 
terprising courage was successfully exerted in 
the hostile operations against the Greeks; his 
subtle and insinuating address gave him an as- 
cendant in every negotiation with the Persians; 
and the re-union of those various qualities en- 
abled him, in a few years, finally to terminate 
the war, and to produce an important and per- 
manent revolution in the affairs of Athens, of 
Sparta, and of Greece. 
Olymp. _ Since the decisive action at Cy- 
xcii, 2,  Zicus, the Peloponnesians, unable to 
A. C. 407, Tesist the enemy; had been employ- 
“° edin preparing ships on the coast 
of their own peninsula, as well as in the har- 
bours of their Persian and Grecian allies. The 
most considerable squadrons had been equipped 
in Cos, Rhodes, Miletus, and Ephesus; in the 
last of which the whole armament, amounting 
to nincty sail, was collected by Lysander. But 
the assembling of such a force was a matter of 
little consequence, unless propermeasures should 
be taken for holding it together, and for enabling 
it to act with vigour. It was necessary, above 
all, to secure pay for the seamen; for this pur- 
pose, Lysander, accompanied by several Lace- 
dxmofhian ambassadors, repaired to Sardis, to 
congratulate the happy arrival of Cyrus, a ge- 
ncrous and valiant youth of seventeen, who 
had been entrusted by his father Darius with 
the government of the inland parts of Lesser 
Asia; or, in the language of the Persian court, 
with the command of the numerous troops, 
who rendezvoused in the plains of Kastolus.!2 


11 This was said in allusion to tho lion's skin of Hercules, 
to one who nsked Lysander, “How he, who sprang from 
that hero, could condescend to conquer bis enemies by 
fraud?” Tis character is diffusely described by Plutarch, 
tiii. p. 4—15. 

12 This was the style of the letter, confirmed by the 
royal seal. Kxzrexeurw Kueov xagxvov Taw sç Karrwrov 


ehertCousvwv, Xenoph. p. 438. 


252 


Lysander complained to the young and mag- 
nanimous prince, “of the perfidious duplicity 
of Tissaphernes, by which the Athenians had 
been enabled to re-assume that ascendant in the 
East, which had formerly proved so dangerous 
and disgraceful to the Persian name. That 
satrap seemed on one occasion indeed, to have 
discovered tht fatal tendency of his measures ; 
and had attempted to check the victorious ca- 
reer of those ambitious republicans, by seizing 
the person of Alcibiades.! Pharnabazus had 
more effectually served the cause of his master, 
by his active valour in the field; by detaining 
the Athenian ambassadors, who had been sent 
to surprise the unsuspecting generosity of Da- 
rius;2 and by supplying the Peloponnesians, 
after the unfortunate engagement at Cyzicus, 
with the means of preparing a new fleet, and 
with the necessaries and conveniences of life, 
while they were employed in this useful under- 
taking. But Tissaphernes was unwilling, and 
Pharnabazus was perhaps unable, to discharge 
the stipulated pay, without which the Grecian 
seamen and soldiers could not be kept together, 
or engaged to act with vigour against the com- 
mon enemy.” Cyrus replied, “ That he had 
been commanded by his father to assist the 
Lacedemonians, and to pay their troops with 
the most exact punctuality. That, for this pur- 
pose, he had carried with him five hundred 
talents (near a hundred thousand pounds ster- 
ling ;) and if such a sum should be found in- 
sufficient, he would willingly expend his private 
fortune, and even melt down and coin into 
money the golden throne on which he sat.” 
This discourse gave extraordinary satisfaction 
to his Grecian auditors ; and Lysander endea- 
voured to avail himself of what, judging by his 
own character, he imagined might be nothing 
more than a sudden transport of generosity, by 
requesting that the seamen’s pay might be raised 
from three oboli to an Attic drachma a day. 
Cyrus answered, * That, on this subject too, he 
had received express orders from his father.4 
That the pay should continue on the ancient 
footing, and the Peloponnesians regularly re- 
ceive thirty mine (above ninety pounds ster- 
ling) a month, for every ship which they fitted 
out.” Lysander acquiesced with some reluc- 
tance, determining to seize the first favourable 


1 This event, which happened in the twenty-first year of 
the war, is related hy Xenophon, p. 429. It was omitted in 
the text, because Alcibiades soon effected his escape; and 
the treachery of Tissaphernes only displayed his own worth- 
lessness, without hurting his enemies. 

2 This dishonourable transaction was approved even by 
Cyrus, which shows the disregard of the Persians to the laws 
of nations. He begged Pharnabazus to put the Athenians 
in hia hands; at least, not to set them at liberty, that their 
countrymen might be ignorant of the measures in agitation 
against them. But a remorse of conscience seized Pharna- 
bazus, who had sworn, either to conduct the ambassadors 
to the great king, or to send them to the Ionian coast; in 
consequence of which, the Athenians were released. Xenoph. 

38 


3 Kxsrov Geovov xataxowesy, ev w exaiyTo, ovTa zeyugoUY 
xæ: Xevrovy. Literally, “that he would cut in pieces the 
throne on which he sat,” which was composed of silver and 

old. 

i 4 Xenophon makes Cyrus answer with more art than 
truth, S40 ds xadrws ev epy æuTouçs AsyEtvy ou duveTov oe 
gives mag’ æ GursAcug ETETTEIAEV QUTOV AANA TOLEIV.”? 
Cyrus answered, “that they (Lysander and the Lacedæmo- 
nian ambassadors) spoke very reasonably, but that że could 
not act otherwise than he was commanded by his father. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


opportunity to renew his petition. But this 
instructive conversation may enable us to dis- 
cover an important matter of fact omitted by 
historians. As the military and naval officers 
of the Greeks were not distinguished above the 
common men by the excessive inequality of their 
appointments, we may compute, from the 
monthly sum of thirty mine, distributed at the 
rate of three oboli of daily pay, that the com- 
plement of each ship amounted to about two 
hundred and forty sailors; so that a fleet of 
ninety sail employed twenty-one thousand and 
six hundred men. 

Before Lysander returned to Ephesus, he was 
invited by the Persian prince to a magnificent 
entertainment, at which, according to the cus- 
tom of the age, the most serious matters were 
discussed amidst the freedom and intemperance 
of the table. This was a seasonable occasion for 
displaying the arts of insinuation and flattery, 
in which the Spartan was a complete master. 
He represented, without moderation, and with- 
out decency, the injustice and incapacity of 
Tissaphernes, who, as he was naturally the 
rival, might be suspected soon to become the 
personal enemy of Cyrus. He magnified the 
beauty, the strength, and the courage, of the 
young prince. His addressin military exercises, 
and the extraordinary endowments of his mind 
(the fame of which had reached the most dis- 
tant countries,) were extolled with the most 
elaborate praise. It is not improbable that he 
might find a topic of panegyric in a quality of 
which Cyrus was not a little vain ; the capacity 
of bearing, without intoxication, a greater quan- 
tity of liquor than any of his equals;5 and he 
might possibly suggest, that of all the sons of 
Darius, Cyrus was the best qualified to succeed 
his father, to fill with dignity the Persian throne, 
and to emulate the glory of that illustrious 
hero whose name he bore, the immortal founder 
of the monarchy. But whatever were the 
topics of which he made use, it is certain that 
he excited the warmest emotions of friendship 
in the youthful breast of Cyrus, who drinking 
his health after the Persian fashion, desired him 
to ask a boon, with full assurance that nothing 
should be denied him. Lysander replied, with 
his usual address, © That he should ask what 
it would be no less useful for the prince to give, 
than for him to receive: the addition of an 
obolus a day to the pay of the mariners; an 
augmentation which, by inducing the Athenian 
crews to desert, would not only increase their 
own strength, but enfeeble the common enemy.” 
Struck with the apparent disinterestedness of 
this specious proposal, Cyrus ordered him im- 
mediately ten thousand daricks (above five 
thousand pounds sterling ;) with which he re- 
turned to Epliesus, discharged the arrears due 
to his troops, gave them a month’s pay in 
advance, raised their daily allowance, and se- 
ef innumerable deserters from the Athenian 

eet.6 

While Lysander was usefully employed in 
manning his ships, and preparing them for 
action, Alcibiades attacked the small island of 


5 Plut. in Sympos. 
6 Plut. tom. iii. p. 7. Xenoph. Hellen. l.i. p. 441. Diodor 
l. xiii. 360. 


XXII] 
ol Andros. The resistance was more 
eet vigorous than he had reason to ex- 
we 407 pect; and the immediate necessity 


of procuring pay and subsistence 
for the fleet, obliged him to leave his work im- 
perfect. With a small squadron he sailed to 
raise contributions on the Ionian or Carian 
coast? committing the principal armament to 
Antiochus, a man totally unworthy of such an 
important trust. Even the affectionate par- 
tiality of Alcibiades seems to have discerned 
the unworthiness of his favourite, since he gave 
him strict orders to continue, during his own 
absence, in the harbour of Samos, and by no 
means to risk anengagement. This injunction, 
as it could not prevent the rashness, might per- 
haps provoke the vain levity of the vice-admiral, 
who, after the departure of his friend, sailed to- 
wards Ephesus, approached the sterns of Ly- 
sander’s ships, and with the most licentious 
insults challenged him to battle. The prudent 
Spartan delayed the moment of attack, until 
the presumption of his enemies had thrown 
them into scattered disorder.2 He then com- 
manded the Peloponnesian squadrons to ad- 
vance. His mancuvres were judicious, and 
executed with a prompt obedience. The battle 
was notobstinate, asthe Athenians, who scarcely 
expected any resistance, much less assault, sunk 
at once from the insolence of temerity into the 
despondency of fear. They lost fifteen vesscls, 
with a considerable part of their crews. The 
remainder retired disgracefully to Samos; 
while the Lacedemonians protited of their vic- 
tory by the taking of Eion and Delphinium. 
Though fortune thus favoured the prudence 
of Lysander, he declined to venture a second 
engagement with the superior strength of Alci- 
biades, who, having resumed the command, 
employed every artifice and insult that might 
procure him an opportunity to restore the tar- 
nished lustre of the Athenian fleet. 

But such an opportunity he could never again 
find. The people of Athens, who expected to 
hear of nothing but victories and triumphs, 
were mortified to the last degree, when they 
received intelligence of such a shamcful defeat. 
As they could not suspect the abilities, they 
distrusted the fidelity of their commander. 
Their suspicions were increased and confirmed 
by the arrival of Thrasybulus,!0 who, whether 
actuated by a laudable zeal for thc interest of 
the public service, or animated by a selfish 
jealousy of the fame and honours that had been 


* 7 Xenophon says, “ Alcibiades sailed to Phocra,” which 
is in Tonia; Plutarch says, “ to the coast of Caria.” 

8 Diodorus gives his character in few words: “O $e 
AvTioyog wy TH ures WOOKESCOS, X46 o7evowy dbx ExuToU 
Ti mexeat Aareov, Antiochus, naturally precipitate, and 
desirous, by himself, to perform some splendid exploit.” 

9 “Asverrueuevats Tiç vevos.”? Xenoph. p. 441. 

10 Thrasybulus, we have scen, had a principal share in 
bringing about the recall of Alcibiades. Nor was the latter 
ungrateful to his benefactor. When the Athenians com- 
mitted to him their whole military and naval force, exces 
Taç ĝuvausts,” and allowed him to name his own colleagues, 
or rather substitutes, he named T'hrasybulus and Adiman- 
tus. Diod. l. xiii. p. 368. Considering this interchange of 
good offices between Alcibiades and Thrasybulus, it is re- 
markuble that no Greek writer assigns any reason for the 
animosity that soon afterwards broke out between them. 
Plutarch says, that Thrasybulus was the bitterest of Alcibi- 
ades’s enemies, and imputes his accusation of him to enmity, 
not to patriotism. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


253 


so liberally heaped on a rival, formally im- 
peached Alcibiades in the Athenian assembly. 
* His misconduct had totally ruined the affairs 
of his country. A talent for low buffoonery 
was a sure recommendation to his favour. 
His friends were, partially, selected from the 
meanest and most abandoned of men, who pos- 
sessed no other merit than that of being sub- 
servient to his passions. To such unworthy in- 
struments the fleet of Athens was entrusted ; 
while the commander in chief revelled in de- 
bauchery with the harlots of Abydus and 
Jonia, ar raised exorbitant contributions on the 
dependent cities, that he might defray the ex- 
pense of a fortress on the coast of Thrace, in 
the neighbourhood of Byzantium, which he had 
erected to shelter himself against the just ven- 
geance of the republic.” 

Were it necessary to prove by examples the 
deceitful emptiness of popular favour, this sub- 
ject might be copiously illustrated from the 
history of the Athenians. The same man, 
whom a few months bcfore they found it 
impossible sufficiently to reward, was actually 
exposed to the rage of disappointment and the 
fury of revenge. They regretted the loss of 
every moment which intervened between the 
ra vid progress of their resentment, and the exe- 
cution of their vengeance. In the same assen- 
bly, and on the same day, Alcibiades was ac- 
cused, and almost unanimously condemned; 
and that the affairs of the republic might not 
again suffer by the abuse of undivided power, 
ten commanders were substituted in his room; 
among whom were Thrasyllus, Leon, Diomedon, 
whose approved valour, and love of liberty, 
justly recommended them to public honours ; 
Conon, a character as yet but little known, but 
destined, in a future period, to eclipse the fame 
of his contemporaries; and Pericles, who in- 
herited the namc, the merit, and the bad for- 
tune, of his illustrious father. The new gene- 
rals immediately sailed to Samos; and Alci- 
biades sought refuge in his Thracian fortress.!! 

They had scarcely assumed the command, 
when an important alteration took place in the 
Peloponnesian fleet. Lysander’s year had ex- 
pired, and Callicratidas, a Spartan of a very op- 
posite character, wassontto succeed 


ee him. The active, ambitious, and 
A c 406 intriguing temper of the former had 


employed as much assiduous and 
systematic policy during the short term of his 
precarious power, as if his authority had never 
been to end. Though endowed with uncommon 
vigour of mind, and with consummate pru- 
dencc (if prudence can belong to a character 
deficient in justice and humanity,) he possessed 
not those amiable and useful qualities which 
alone deserve, and can alone obtain, public con- 
fidence and respect. Lysander, sensible of this 
imperfection, had recourse to the ordinary ex- 
pedient by which crafty ambition supplies the 
want of virtue. He determined to govern by 
parties.'2 The boldest of the sailors were at- 


11 Xenoph. Hellen. 1. iv. sub. fin. Diodor. xiii. 67—74 

12 His maxims breathed the odious party spirit, ‘That 
it is impossible to do too much good to friends, or too much 
evil to enemies. Thatchildren are to be deceived by trin- 
kets, men by oaths; and others equally flagitious.” Plut. 
in Lysand. 


254 
vached to his person by liberal rewards and 
more liberal promises. The soldiers were in- 
dulged in the most licentious disorders. In 
every city and in every island, Lysander had his 
partizans, whom he flattered with the hopes of 
obtaining the same authority over their fellow 
citizens, which the Spartans enjoyed over the 
inferior ranks of men in Laconia.! 

It was the general expectation at Ephesus, 
that the Spartans would, for once, depart from 
established practice, in order to prolong the 
command of such an able and successful officer. 
A universal clamour arose, when Callicratidas 
displayed his commission in the council of the 
confederates. The friends of Lysander affirm- 
ed, “ That it was equally imprudent and un- 
generous to check the victorious career of a 
deserving and fortunate commander; that the 
important charge of the fleet ought not to be 
entrusted to men who were destitute of expe- 
rience, and perhaps of abilities ; nor would it be 
just to sacrifice the interest of such a numerous 
and powerful confederacy to a punctilious ob- 
servance of the Lacedemonian laws.” Lysan- 
der maintained a decent silence concerning the 
character of his successor, only observing that 
he resigned to him a fleet which commanded 
the sea. The noisy acclamations of the assembly 
confirmed his assertion. 

But Callicratidas had 1 heart untainted with 
reproach, and incapable of fear. Unabashed by 
the seditious turbulence of his opponents, he 
replied, That he must withhold his assent to 
the magnified superiority of the Peloponnesian 
fleet, unless Lysander should set sail from 
Ephesus, coast along the isle of Samos (where 
the Athenians then lay,) and surrender his vic- 
torious squadrons in the harbour of Miletus. 
The pride of Lysander might have been con- 
founded by this judicious and solid observation; 
but his ingenuity suggested a plausible or rather 
an elusive reply, “ That he was no longer ad- 
miral.” 

Callicratidas then addressed the assembly, 
with the manly simplicity of an honest heart, 
which disdains the artifice of words, defies the 
insolence of power, and defeats the intrigues of 
policy. “ Lacedemonians and allies, I should 
have been contented to stay at home; nor does 
it greatly affect me that Lysander, or any other, 
should be held a better seaman than myself, 
Hither I have been sent by my countrymen to 
command the fleet, and my chief concern is to 
execute their orders, and to perform my duty. 
It is my earnest desire to promote the public 
interest ; but you can best inform me whether 
I ought to continue here, or to return to Spar- 
ta.” Wonderful is the power of honest inten- 
tions and unaffected firmness. The assembly 
listened with admiration ; the partisans of Ly- 
sander were abashed ; none ventuted to object; 
and, after a considerable pause, all unanimously 
acknowledged that it became both Callicratidas 
and themselvesto obey the ordersof the Spartan 
government.2 

Lysander, not a little mortified by the lan- 
guage of the assembly, reluctantly resigned his 


1 Idem, ibid. et Xenoph. Hellen. 
2 Xenoph. Hellen. l. i. c. v. et seq. et Plut. in Lysand. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[| Cuap. 


employment ; but determined to render it pain- 
ful, and if possible, too weighty for the abilities 
of his successor. For this purpose he returned 
to the court of Cyrus, to whom he restored a 
considerable sum of money still unexpended in 
the service of the Grecian fleet, and to whom 
he misrepresented, under the names of obsti 

nacy, ignorance, and rusticity, the unaffected 
plainness, the downright sincerity, and the 
other manly, but uncomplying, virtues of the 
generous Callicratidas. When that commander 
repaired to Sardis to demand the stipulated pay, 
he could not obtain admission to the royal pre- 
sence. The first time that he visited the palace 
he was told that Cyrus was at table. It is well, 
said the unceremonious Spartan, I will wait 
till he has dined. The simplicity of this pro- 
ceeding, confirmed the opinion which Lysander 
had given the Persians of his character; and his 
honest frankness, which was construed into 
low breeding, seemed a proper object of ridicule 
to the proud retainers of the court. He return- 
ed on another occasion, but without being ad. 
mitted to see the young prince. The injustice 
of this treatment might have deserved his re- 
sentment, but it chiefly excited his contempt. 
He left the royal city, despising the pride and 
perfidy of his Persian allies, whose accidental 
importance depended on the precarious advan- 
tage of riches, and lamenting the domestic dis- 
sensions of the Greeks, which obliged them to 
court the favour of insolent Barbarians. 

But Callicratidas could not, with honour or 
safety, return to the fleet at Ephesus, without 
having collected money to supply the immediate 
wants of the sailors. He proceeded, therefore, 
to Miletus and other friendly towns of Ionia; 
and having met the principal citizens, in their 
respective assemblies, he explained openly and 
fully the mean jealousy of Lysander, and the 
disdainful arrogance of Cyrus.2 “The un- 


just behaviour of both compelled him, much 


against his inclination, to have recourse to 
the confederate cities (already too much bur- 
dened) for the money requisite to support the 
war. But he assured them, that, should his 
arms prove successful, he would repay their 
favours with gratitude. Their own interest 
required a cheerful compliance with his de- 
mands, since the expedition had been principally 
undertaken to vindicate their freedom. He had, 
however, sent messengers to require effectual 
supplies from Sparta; but until these should 
arrive, it became the Greeks in general, but 
especially the Jonians, who had suffered pe- 
culiar injuries from the usurping tyranny of 
the great king, to prove to the world that, 
without the sordid assistance of his boasted 
treasures, they could prosecute their just designs, 
and take vengeance on their enemies.” By 
those judicious and honourable expedients, 
Callicratidas, without fraud or violence, ob- 
tained such considerable, yet voluntary contri- 
butions, as enabled him to gratify the importu- 
nate demands of the sailors, and to return 


3 It will appear in the sequel, that Callicratidas had 
formed a very false opinion of the Persian prince, whose 
neglect of a worthy man was occasioned by the perfidious 
snggestions of his retainers, the friends or creatures of 
Lysander. 


XXII] k 


with honour to Ephesus, in order to prepare 
for action.4 

His first operations were directed against 
the isle of Lesbos, or rather against the strong 
and populous towns of Methymna and Mity- 
lené, which respectively commanded the north- 
ern and southern divisions of that island. 
Besides the numerous citizens of an age to 
bear arms, Methymna was defended by an 
Athenian garrison. The place made a brave 
resistance ; but the persevering efforts of Calli- 
cratidas exhausted its strength: Methymna was 
taken by storm, and subjected to the depreda- 
tions of the Peloponnesian troops. The garrison 
and the slaves were freated as part of the booty. 
The confederates advised, that the Methym- 
neang also should be sold into servitude; but 
Callicratidas assured them, that, while he en- 
joyed the command, there should not any Gre- 
cian citizen be reduced to the condition of a 
slave, unless he had taken arms to subvert the 
public freedom.® 

Mean while Conon, the most active and en- 
terprising of the Athenian commanders, had put 
to sea with a squadron of seventy sail, in order 
to protect the coast of Lesbos. But this design 
was attempted too late; nor, had it been more 
early undertaken, was the force of Conon suf- 
ficient to accomplish it. Callicratidas observed 
his motions, discovered his strength, and, with 
a far superior fleet, intercepted his retreat to 
the armament of Samos. The Athenians fled 
towards the coast of Mitylené, but were pre- 
vented from entering the harbour of that place 
by the resentment of the inhabitants, who 
rejoiced in an opportunity to punish those who 
had so often conquered, and so long oppressed, 
their city. In consequence of this unexpected 
opposition, the Athenian squadron was over- 
taken by the enemy. The engagement was 
more sharp and obstinate than might have been 
expected in such an inequality of strength. 
Thirty empty ships (for the most of the men 
swam to land) were taken by the Peloponne- 
sians. The remaining forty were hauled up 
under the walls of Mitylené: Callicratidas re- 
called his troops from Methymna, received a 
reinforcement from Chios, and blocked up the 
Athenians by sea and land.6 

‘The condition of Conon was most distressful. 
He was surrounded on all sides by a superior 
force; the town of Mitylené was hostile; his 
men were destitute of provisions, incapable of 
resistance, yet unwilling to surrender. Jn this 
melancholy situation, he attempted the only 
enterprise which could promise a hope of relief. 
The bravest and most experienced seamen were 
embarked in two swift-sailing vessels, one of 
which eluding the vigilance of the enemy, es- 
caped in safety to the Hellespont, and informed 
the Athenians of the misfortunes and blockade 
at Lesbos. The intelligence was immediately 
communicated to Samos and to Athens; and 
the importance of the object, which was no less 
than the safety of forty ships, and above eight 
thousand brave men, excited uncommon exer- 
tions of activity. The Athenians reinforced 


4 Xcnoph. Hellen. p. 444. 
i pae ubi supra. Diodor. l. xiii. p. 373. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


255 


their domestic strength with the assistance of 
their allies ; all able-bodied men were pressed 
into tle service ; and in a few weeks, they had 
assembled at Samos a hundred and fifty sail, 
which immediately took the sea, with a resolu- 
tion to encounter the enemy. 

Callicratidas did not decline the engagement. 
Having left fifty ships to guard the 


pee: harbour of Mitylené, he proceeded 
A. C. 406, With a hundred and twenty to Cape 


Malea, the most southern point of 
Lesbos. The Athenians hadadvanced, the same 
evening, to the islands, or rather rocks of 
Arginusse, four miles distant from that pro- 
montory. The night passed in bold stratagems 
for mutual surprise, which were rendered inef- 
fectual by a violent tempest of rain and thun- 
der. At the dawn both armaments were eager 
to engage; but Hermon and Megareus, two ex- 
perienced seamen, and the chief counsellors of 
Callicratidas, exhorted him not to commit the 
weakness of the Peloponnesians with the supe- 
rior strength and numbers of the enemy. The 
generous and intrepid Spartan despised danger 
and death in comparison of glory; but either 
his magnanimity had not overcome the last.im- 
perfection of virtuous minds, and was averse to 
sacrifice personal glory to public utility, or he 
imagined that this utility could not beseparated 
from an inflexible adherence to the martial laws 
of Lycurgus: He answered the prudent ad- 
monitions of his friends in these memorable 
words, which, according to the construction 
that is put on them,’ deserve our admiration or 
our pity. “ My death cannot be destructive to 
Sparta, but my flight would be dishonourable 
both to Sparta and myself.” So saying, he gave 
the signal for his ships to advance. The fight 
was long and bloody; passing, successively, 
through all the different gradations, from dis- 
ciplined order and regularity to the most tu- 
multuous confusion. The Spartan commander 
was slain charging in the centre of the bravest 
enemies. The hostile squadrons fought with 
various fortune in different parts of the battle, 
and promiscuously conquered, pursued, surren- 
dered, or fled. Thirteen Athenian vessels were 
taken by the Peloponnesians; but, at length, 
the latter gave way on all sides: seventy of 
their ships were captured, the rest escaped to 
Chios and Phocea.8 

The Athenian admirals, though justly elated 
with their good fortune, cautiously deliberated 
concerning the best means of improving their 
victory. Several advised that the fleet should 
steer its course to Mitylené, to surprise the Pe- 


7 Ciccro de Offic. l.i. c. xxiv. takes the unfavourable side. 
“Inventi autem multi sunt, qni uon modo pecuniam, sed vi- 
tam etiam profundere pro patria parati essent: idem gloriæ 
jacturam ne minimam qnidem facere vellent, ne republica 
quidem postulante ; ut Calficratidas, qui cum Lacedirmo- 
niorum dux fuisset Peloponnesiaco bello, multaque fecisset 
egregie; vertit ad extremum omnia, cum conšilio non paruit 
eorum, qui classem ab Arginussis removendain, nee cum 
Atheniensibus dimicandum putabant. Quibus ille respon- 
dit, Laccdemonios, classe illa amissa aliam parare posse ; 
se fugere sine suo dedecore non posse.”? Notwithstanding 
the respectable authority of Ciccro, whoever attentively 
considers the laws of Lycurgus and the character of Cal- 
licratidas, will be disposed to believe, that an undeviating 
principle of duty, not the fear of losing his glory, formed 
the sublime inotive of that accomplished Spartan. 

8 Xenoph. p. 446. et Diodor. p. 384. 


256 


loponnesian squadron which blocked up the har- 
bour of that city. Diomedon recommended it 
asa moreimmediate and essential object of their 
care to recover the bodies of the slain, and to 
save the wreck of twelve vessels which had been 
disabled in the engagement. ‘Thrasybulus ob- 
served, that by dividing their strength, both 
purposes might be effected. His opinion was 
approved. The charge of preserving the dying, 
and collecting the bodies of the dead, was com- 
mitted to Theramenes and Thrasybulus. Fifty 
vessels were destined to that important service, 
doubly recommended by humanity and supersti- 
tion. The remainder sailed to the isle of Lesbos, 
in quest of the Peloponnesians on that coast, 
who narrowly escaped destruction through the 
well-conducted stratagem of Eteonicus, the 
Spartan vice-admiral. Soon after the engage- 
ment a brigantine arrived at Mitylené, acquaint- 
ing him with the death of Callicratidas, as well 
as with the defeat and flight of the Peloponne- 
sian fleet. The sagacity of Eteonicus imme- 
diately foresaw the probable consequences of 
those events. The Athenians would naturally 
sail from Arginussæ`to pursue their good for- 
tune, and Conon, who was shut up at Mitylené, 
would be encouraged to break through the har- 
bour, that he might join his victorious country- 
men. 

In order to anticipate those measures, and to 
facilitate his own retreat, the Spartan com- 
mander ordered the brigantine privately to 
leave the harbour, and to return, at the distance 
of a short time, with joyous acclamations and 
music, the rowers crowned with garlands, and 
calling out that Callicratidas had destroyed the 
last hope of Athens, and obtained a glorious 
and decisive victory. The contrivance suc- 
ceeded; the Spartans thanked heaven for the 
good news by hymns and sacrifices; the sailors 
were enjoined to refresh themselves by a copi- 
ous repast, and to profit of a favourable gale to 
sail to the isle of Chios; while the soldiers 
burned their camp, and marched northward to 
Methymna,to reinforce the garrison there, which 
was threatened by a speedy visit of the enemy.! 

While the prudent foresight of Eteonicus 
saved the Peloponnesian squadron at Mytilené, 
the violence of a storm prevented Theramenes 
and Thrasybulus from saving their unfortunate 
companions, all of whom, excepting one of the 
admirals and a few others who escaped by their 
extraordinary dexterity in swimming, were 
overwhelmed by the waves of a tempestuous 
sea; nor could their dead bodies ever be re- 
covered. The Athenians were likewise disap- 
pointed of the immediate advantages which 
ought to have resulted from the engagement. 
Methymna was too strongly fortified to be 
taken by a sudden assault; they could not 
spare time for a regular siege; and when they 
proceeded to Chios in quest of the Peloponne- 
sian fleet, they found it carefully secured in the 
principal harbour of that island, which had been 
put in a vigorous posture of defence. These 
unforeseen circumstances were the more disa- 
greeable and mortifying to the commanders, 
because, immediately after the battle, they had 


1 Xenoph Hellen. et Diodor. p. 384. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


sent an advice-boat to Athens, acquainting the 


‘Magistrates with the capture of seventy ves- 


sels ;? mentioning their intended expeditions to 
Mitylené, Methymna, and Chios, from which 
they had reason to hope the most distinguished 
success; and particularly taking notice that the 
important charge of recovering the bodies of 
the drowned or slain had been committed to 
Theramenes and Thrasybulus, two captains of 
approved conduct and fidelity. 

The joy which the Athenians received from 
this flattering intelligence was converted into 
disappointment and sorrow, when they under- 
stood that their fleet had returned to Samos, 
without reaping the expected fruits of victory. 
They were afflicted beyond measure with the 
total loss of the wreck, by which their brave 
and victorious countrymen had been deprived 
of the sacred rites of funeral; a circumstance 
viewed with peculiar horror, because it was sup- 
posed, according to a superstition consecrated 
by the belief of ages, to subject their melan- 
choly shades to wander a hundred years on the 
gloomy banks of the Styx, before they could be 
transported to the regions of light and felicity. 
The relations of the dead lamented their private 
misfortunes; the enemies of the admirals exag- 
gerated the public calamity; both demanded 
an immediate and serious examination into the 
cause of this distressful event, that the guilty 
might be discovered and punished. 

Amidst the ferment of popular discontents, 
Theramenes sailed to Athens, with a view to 
exculpate himself and his colleague Thrasybu- 
lus. The lIctter sent thither before them had 
excited their fear and their resentment; since 
it rendered them responsible for a duty which 
they found it impossible to perform, Thera- 
menes accused the admirals of having neglected 
the favourable moment to save the perishing, 
and to recover the bodies of the dead; and, 
after the opportunity of this important service 
was lrrecoverably lost, of having devolved the 
charge on others, in order to screen their own 
misconduct. The Athenians greedily listened 
to the accusation, and cashiered the absent 
commanders. Conon, who during the action 
remained blocked up at Mitylené, was entrusted 
with the fleet. Protomachus and Aristogenes 
chose a voluntary banishment. The rest re- 
turned home to justify measures which ap- 
peared so criminal.? 

Among the inestimable rules of jurispru- 
dence, invented by the wisdom of Athens, we 
may remark that beneficial institution which 
subjects the life, the character, and the fortune 
of individuals, not to the capricious will of an 
arbitrary judge, but to the equitable decision of 
the public. In every case, civil and criminal, 
the rights of an Athenian citizen were entrusted 
to the judgment of his peers; who, according 
as the qucstion was more or less important, 
consisted of a committee, more or less numer- 
ous, of the popular assembly. But, in order to 
unite the double advantages of law and liberty, 
the nine archons, or chief magistrates, men of 
approved wisdom and fidelity, respectively pre- 


2 Xenoph. says sixty-nine; Diodorus, seventy-seven. 
3 Xenoph. Hellen. }. i. c. vii. et seq. Diodor. xiii. 
76—97. 


XXIL] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


257 


sided in the several courts of justicc, received | cedure. But the rabble made a violent uproar, 


complaints, examined the parties, directed pro- 
cess, and regularly conducted the suit through 
its various steps and stages. In matters of 
general concernment, sucli as treason, perfidy, 
or malversation of men in power, the senate of 
the five hundred, or rather the Prytanes, who 
presided in the senate, performed the functions 
of the magistrate, and the whole body of the 
people, convened in full assembly, executed the 
office_of judge and jury. It belonged to the 
Prytanes to prescribe the form of action or trial, 
and to adinit the accuser to implead or impeach 
his antagonist. The cause was then referred | 
to the people, who as judges of the fact, gave 
their verdict, and, as judges of the law, passed 
their sentence or decree. Such were the regu- 
lations which reason had established, but which 
passion and intcrest commonly rendered inef- 
fectual. 

Archedemus, an opulent and powerful citi- 
zen, and Callixenus, a seditious demagogue, 
partly moved by the intreaties of Theramenes, 
and partly excited by personal envy‘and resent- 
ment, denounced the admirals to the senate. 
The accusation was supported by the relations 
of the deceased, who appeared in mourning 
robes, their heads shaved, their arms folded, 
their eyes bathed’ in tears, piteously lamenting 
the loss and disgrace of their families, deprived 
of their protectors, who had becn themselves 
deprived of those last and solemn duties to 
which all mankind are entitled. A false witness 
swore in court, that he had been saved, almost 
by miracle, from the wreck, and that his com- 
panions, as they were ready to be drowned, 
charged him to acquaint his country how they 
nad fallen victims to the cruel neglect of their 
commanders. During these proceedings it hap- 
pened that the people had met to celebrate tlie 
Apatouria, or festival in January, so named 
because the Athenians then presented their 
sons, who had reached their seventh year, 
to be inscribed in the register of their respec- 
tive tribes. Callixenus, presuming on the evi- 
dence given in the senate, and on the actual 
disposition of the assembly, proposed the fol- 
lowing resolution: “ That the cause of the ad- 
mirals should be immediately referred to the 
people; that the suffrages should be given by 
tribes, in each of which the criers should make 
proclamation, having prepared two urns to re- 
ceive the white and black beans; if the latter 
were more numerous, the admirals should be 
delivered to the eleven men, the executioners 
of public justice, their estates confiscated, and 
the tenth part consecrated to Minerva.” 

This unjust decree, which deprived the com- 
manders of the benefits of a separate trial, of 
an impartial hearing, and of the time as well as 
the means necessary to prepare a legal defence, 
was approved by a majority of the senate, and 
reccived with loud acclamations by the pcople, 
whose levity, insolence, pride, and cruelty, all 
eagerly demanded the destruction of the ad- 
mirals. In such a numcrous assembly, two men 
alone, Euryptolemus and Axiochus, defended 
the cause of law and justice. The former im- 
peached Callixenus for proposing a resolution 


inconsistent with all the forms of legal pro- | 


9K 


calling out that none should attempt, with im- 
punity, to abridge their sovereign power. The 
Prytanes, who attended, as usual, to direct and 
control the proceedings of the multitude, en- 
deavoured to moderate the ferment: but they 
were licentiously told, that if they did not con- 
cur with the opinion of the majority, they 
should be involved in the same accusation with 
the admirals. This absurd menace, (such was 
the popular frenzy) might be carried into imme- 
diate cxecution. The senators were intimidated 
into a reluctant compliance with measures 
which they disapproved,and by which they 
were for ever to be disgraced. Yet the philo- 
sophic firmness of Socrates disdained to sub- 
mit. He protested against the tameness of his 
colleagues, and declared that neither threats, 
nor danger, nor violence, could compel him to 
conspire with injustice for the destruction of 
the innocent. 

But what could avail the voice of one virtu- 
ous man amidst the licentious madness of thou- 
sands? The commanders were accused, tried, 
condemned; and, with the most irregular pre- 
cipitancy, delivered to the executioner. Before 
they were léd to death, Diomedan addressed 
the assembly in a short but ever-memorable 
speech. “J am afraid, Athenians! lest the sen- 
tence which you have passed on us, prove hurt- 
ful to the republic. Yct I would exhort you to 
employ the most proper means to avert the 
vengeance of heaven. You must carefully per- 
form the sacrifices which, before giving battle 
at Arginusse, we promised to the gods in be- 
half of oursclves and of you. Our misfortunes 
deprive us of an opportunity to acquit this just 
debt, and to pay the sincere tribute of our grati- 
tude. But we are deeply sensible that the 
assistance of the gods enabled us to obtain that 
glorious and signal victory.” The disinterested- 
ness, the patriotism, and the magnanimity of 
this discourse, must have appeased (if any thing 
had been able to appease) the tumultuous pas- 
sions of the vulgar. But their headstrong fury 
defied every restraint of reason or of sentiment. 
They persisted in their bloody purpose, which 
was cxecuted without pity: yet their cruelty 
was followed by a speedy repentance, and pun- 
ished by the sharp pangs of remorse, the in- 
tolerable pain of which thcy vainly attempted 
to mitigate by inflicting a well-merited ven- 
geance on the worthless and detestable Cal- 
lixenus.4 

The removal of the Athenian admirals, and 
the defeat and death of the Spartan Callicrati- 
das, suspended for several months the military 
and naval operations on both sides. The bcha- 
viour of Philocles and Adimanthus, who had 
been joincd in authority with Conon, were bet- 
ter fitted to obstruct than promote the measures 
of that brave and prudent commander. The 
former was a man of a violent and impetuous 
temper, unaccustomed to reficction, destitute of 
experience, and incapable of governing others, 
or himself. The latter possessed perhaps the 
virtue of humanity, but was destitute of spirit 
and activity, qualities so usual in his age and 


4 Xenoph. et Diodor. ibid. 


258 


country. Though ready with his tongue, he 
was slow with his hand, careless of discipline, 
negligent of duty, and suspected of a treasona- 
ble correspondence with the public enemy. 
Eteonicus, who commanded the Spartans and 
their confederates, was a man of a very diffe- 
rent character. But the distressful situation of 
affairs prevented him from displaying his abili- 
ties in any important enterprise. His arma- 
ment was inferior in strength; his sailors were 
disheartened by defeat; he had not money to pay 
them; even theirsubsistence at Chios was very 
sparing and precarious. These vexatious circum- 
stances increased the mutinous spirit by which 
the confederates were too naturally animated. 
They reproached the ungenerous parsimony of 
the Chians, whom they had taken arms to defend; 
they spurned the authority of their commander; 


and in order, to obtain those advantages which | 


their services deserved, and which had been un- 
justly denied them, they determined to become 
rich at once by seizing and plundering the large 
and wealthy capital of that flourishing island. 
The design, though secretly formed, was avowed 
with open boldness. The conspirators, whose 
numbers seemed to promise success, or at least 
to secure impunity, assumed a badge of distinc- 
tion, that they might encourage each other, and 
intimidate their opponents. Eteonicus was 
justly alarmed with the progress of sedition. 
It was dangerous to attack the insurgents by 
force: if he destroyed them by fraud, he might 
be exposed to the reproach and obliquy of 
Greece. The conduct which he pursued was 
conceived with an enterprising courage, and ex- 
ecuted with a resolute firmness. With only 
fifteen faithful and intrepid followers, armed 
with concealed daggers, he patrolled the streets 
of Chios. The first man whom they met dis- 
tinguished by a reed (for that was the badge 
of conspiracy) was put to death, and a crowd 
collecting to know why the man had been slain, 
they were told it was for wearing a reed on his 
casque. The report was immediately spread 
through every quarter of the city. The reedmen 
(as they were called) were confounded at dis- 
covering a conspiracy more secret and more 
formidable than theirown. They dreaded that 
every man whom they met might know and 
kill them; and, as they had not time to as- 
semble for their mutual defence, they hastily 
threw away the reeds, which exposed them to 
the dangerous assault of their unknown ene- 
mies. 

The character of Eteonicus, as 


ae far as we can judge from his ac- 
A. C. 406. tions, justly entitled him to the 


command; but the partiality both 
of Cyrus and of the confederates eagerly soli- 
cited the return of Lysander. The Spartans, 
though inclined to gratify them, were perplexed 
by an ancient law enacted in the jealousy of 
freedom to prohibit the same person from be- 
ing twice entrusted with the fleet. That they 
might not violate the respect due to the laws, 
while at the same time they complied with the 
request of their powerful allies, they invested 
Aracus, a weak and obscure man, with the 
name of admiral, and sent out Lysander as 
second in command. The latter was received 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


at Sardis, by the Persian prince, with the warm- 
est demonstrations of joy. He was supplied 
with money to satisfy the immediate wants of 
the troops; and, as Cyrus at that time hap- 
pened to make a journey into Upper Asia, the 
revenues of his wealthy province were con- 
signed, in his absence, to the management of 
his Spartan friend. Such powerful resources 
could not long remain uncmployed in the ac- 
tive hands of Lysander. His emissaries assi 
duously engaged or pressed the Iénian and 
Carion seamen. The harbours of Asia Minor, 
particularly the port of Ephesus, glowed with 
the ardour of naval preparation, and in a few 
months Lysander sailed to the Hellespont with 
a hundred and fifty galleys, and attacked the 
important town of Lampsacus. The place, 
though vigorously defended by the natives as 
well as by the Athenian garrison, was at length 
taken by storm; and according to the barbar- 
ous practice of the age, abandoned to the li- 
centious rapacity, the avarice, the lust, and the 
fury, of the conquerors.! 

The languid and imprudent measures of the 
Athenians at Samos accuse the abilities of Ty- 
deus, Menander, and Cephisodotus, who had 
been lately joined in command with Conon and 
his unworthy colleagues. They sailed too late 
to save Lampsacus, but as they possessed a 
hundred and eighty galleys, a force superior to 
Lysander’s, they anchored on the opposite, or 
European side of the Hellespont, at the dis- 
tance cf fifteen furlongs, in order to provoke 
the enemy to an engagement. Their unfortu 
nate station was the mouth of the Ægos Pota- 
mos, or river of the goat, distinguished by that 
name on account òf some small islands, which 
rising high above the surface of the waters, ex- 
hibit to a lively imagination the appearance of 
that animal. This place was injudiciously cho- 
sen, Since it afforded very insecure riding; and 
was distant two miles from Sestos, the nearest 
town from which the fleet could be supplied 
with necessaries, Alcibiades, who in his Thra- 
clan retirement was unable to withdraw his 
attention from the war in which he had long 
acted such a distinguished part, modestly ad- 
monished his countrymen of their imprudence; 
but he was arrogantly reproached for presum- 
ing, while an exile and an outlaw, to give ad- 
vice to the admirals of Athens. Their subse- 
quent conduct too faithfully corresponded with 
this insolence and folly. Despising the inferi- 
ority of the Peloponnesian fleet, they advanced 
in order of battle to the harbour of Lampsa- 
cus; and when the enemy moved not from their 
station, they returned in triumph as acknow- 
ledged masters of the sea. The prudence of 
Lysander perceived and indulged their pre- 
sumption. During four days he bore, with ex- 
traordinary patience, their repeated insults, af- 
fecting tlic utmost disinclination to an engage- 
ment, carefully retaining his fleet in a place of 
security, and regularly despatching a few swift- 
sailing vessels to observe the motions and be- 
haviour of the Athenians when they returned 
from their daily cruise to the road of Ægos 
Potamos. 


i Phut in Iysand 


XXIL] 


The fifth day they again bore up 
with the Peloponnesians, and pro- 
voked them to battle with more dar- 
ing menaces than on any former 
occasion. As they flattered them- 
selves with an undoubted prospect of success, 
they yielded without reserve to all the petulance 
of prosperity, and debated in what manner they 
should treat the Lacedemonian prisoners who 
had the misfortune to fall into their power. 
The cruel Philocles proposed to cut off their 
right hands, that those enemies of Athens 
might be equally incapable to manage the oar 
and to brandish the spear; and this bloody re- 
solution, though opposed by Adimantus, was 
approved by the majority of his colleagues. 
After insulting the enemy in a manner the most 
mortifying and disgraceful, they retired with 
an air of exultation mingled with contempt. 
The Peloponnesian spy-boats followed them as 
usual’ at a convenient distance, and observed 
that they had no sooner reached their stations 
than the seamen landed, straggled about the 
shore, advanced into the inland country in quest 
of provisions or amusement, indulged in indo- 
lence, or revelled in disorder. The advice- 
boats returned with uncommon celerity to con- 
vey the welcome intelligence to Lysander, wł o 
had embarked the troops, cleared his ships, and 
made every necessary preparation to avail him- 
self of the favourable opportunity to effect by 
stratagem what it might have been dangerous 
to attempt by force. When his scouts ap- 
proached the middle of the channel, they hoist- 
ed their shields (for that was the appointed 
signal,) and at the same moment the Pelopon- 
nesian squadrons were commandcd to set sail, 
that they might surprise the hostile fleet, and 
indulge that resentment and animosity which 
had been rendered more violent and furious by 
the long and prudent restraint of their com- 
mander. The victory was complete, if that 
can be called a victory where there was scarcely 
any resistance. The vigilant activity of Conon 
endeavoured seasonably to assemble the strength 
of the Athenians; but his advice was dis- 
dained by officers incapable and unworthy of 
command, and his orders were despised by 
seamen unaccustomed and unwilling to obey. 
At length they became sensible of the danger 
when it was too late to avoid it. Their ships 
were taken, either altogether « mpty, or man- 
ned with such feeble crews as were unable to 
work, much less to defend them. The troops 
and sailors who flocked to the shore from dif- 
ferent quarters, and with disordered precipita- 
tion, were attacked by the regular onset and 
disciplined valour of the Peloponnesians. Those 
who fought were slain; the remainder fled into 
the inmost recesses of the Chersonesus, or took 
refuge in the Athenian fortresses which were 
scattered over that peninsula. When Lysan- 
der reviewed the extent of his well-merited 
success, he found that of a fleet of a hundred 
and eighty sail, only nine vessels had escaped, 
eight of which were conducted by Conon to 
the friendly island of Cyprus, while the ninth 
earried to Athens the melancholy news of a 
disaster equally unexpected and fatal. A hun- 
dred and seventy-one galleys, and three thou- 


Olymp. 
xciii. 4. 
A. C. 405. 


December. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


259 


sand prisoners (among whom were Philocles 
and Adimantus,) rewarded the patience and 
fortitude of Lysander, who returned with his 
invaluable spoil to Lampsacus, amidst the joy- 
ous acclamations of naval triumph.? 

Before pursuing the natural consequences of 
an event the most important that had hitherto 
happened in all the Grecian wars, it was ne- 
cessary for Lysander to decide the fate of the 
Athenian prisoners, against whom the confe- 
derates were animated by all that unrelenting 
hatred which is congenial to the stern charac- 
ter of republicans exasperated by continual 
provocation and recent insult. The injustice 
and cruelty of that ambitious people were 
carefully described and maliciously exaggerated 
in the dreadful tribunal of their enemies. “It 
would be tediqus to enumerate, though it was 
impossible ever to forget, their multiplied and 
abominable crimes, of which so many indivi- 
duals, and so many communities, had been the 
innocent and unhappy victims. Even of late 
they had destroyed without remorse, and with- 
out the shadow of necessity, the helpless crews 
of a Corinthian and an Andrian vessel. The 
gods had averted the atrocious resolution pro- 
posed by the bloody Philocles, of which the 
author and the approvers were equally crimi- 
nal; nor could those deserve pardon who were 
incapable of pity.” Such discourse, which re- 
sounded from every quarter of the assembly, 
declared, without the necessity of a formal 
vote, the unanimous decree of the confederates. 
As the prisoners had been stripped of their 
arms, there was nothing to be feared from their 
numbers and despair. They were conducted 
into the presence of their armed judges; and, 
as a prelude to the inhuman massacre, Lysan- 
der sternly demanded of Philocles what he de- 
served to suffer for his intended cruelty. The 
Athenian replied with firmness, “ Accuse not 
those whom you are entitled to judge, but in- 
flict on us the same punishment which we, in a 
different fortune, would have inflicted on our 
enemies.” The words were scarcely ended 
when Lysander hacked him in pieces. The 
Peloponnesian soldiers followed the bloody ex- 
ample of their commander. Of three thousand 
Athenians, Adimantus alone was spared, either 
because he had opposed the detestable resolu- 
tion of Philocles, or because he had engaged 
ina treacherous correspondence with the Spar- 
tans.3 


2 Xenoph. p. 456, et seq. et Plut. in Lysand. By the 
battle of Ægos Potainos the Athenians lost the empire of 
the sea, which they had acquired by the consent of their 
maritime allies in the fourth year of the seventy-fifth Olym- 
piad. They enjoyed, therefore, that sovereignty, or em- 
pire as they styled it, from the year 477 till the year 405 be- 
fore Christ; that is, a period of seventy-two years. This 
important computation is not to be found in any ancient 
writer; and no two authors agree in calculating the dura- 
tion of the Athenian empire. J.ysias in his Funeral Ora- 
tion, p- 93, says, “ Dnring seventy years in which the Athe- 
nians commanded the sea.” Diodorus Siculus (ad Olymp. 
95. 1.) says, the Athenians commanded the sea sixty-five 
years. Isocrates in ove place (i. p. 174.) agrees with Ly- 
sias; in another (ii. p. 209.) with Diodorus. Andocides 
(Orat. iii. p. 286.) states it at eightv-five years. Lycurens 
(adv. Leoc. p. 145.) at ninety. Dionysius Halicarnassus 
(Ant. Rom. snb. init.) at sixty-eight. Demosthenes, as we 
shall see below, states it variously at forty-five, sixty-five, 
and seventy-three years. 

3 Xenoph. Hellen. Plutarch. in Lyeand. 


> 


hJ 


260 


It might be expected, that immediately after 
an event which gave him the command of the 
sea, Lysander should sail to the Piræus, and 
assault the unfortunate city, which was already 
grievously oppressed by the Lacedemonian 
army at Decelia. But the sagacious Spartan 
foresaw the numerous obstacles that opposed 
his conquest of Athens, and prudently restrain- 
ed the eagerness of the troops and his own, 
The strongly fortified harbours of that capital, 
the long and lofty walls which surrounded the 
city on every side, the ancient renown and ac- 
tual despair of the Athenians, must render the 
siege, if not altogether fruitless, at least diffi- 
cult and tedious; and the precious moments 
wasted in this doubtful enterprise might be 
employed in attaining certain, immediate and 
most important advantages. 

On the coast neither of Greece nor of Asia, 
nor of any of the intermediate islands, was 
there a naval force capable of contending with 
the fleet of Lysander, nor any fortified place in 
all those countries (except the city 


Olymp of Athens alone) sufficient to re- 
ree 405 sist the impression of his army. It 


was a design, therefore, which might 
well deserve his ambition, and which was not 
condemned by his prudence, to establish or 
confirm the Lacedæmonian empire over those 
valuable and extensive coasts. The populous 
cities of Byzantium and Chalcedon were at- 
tacked and taken during the astonishment and 
terror occasioned by the dreadful and irrepara- 
ble misfortune-of their Athenian allies. 
these important acquisitions, Lysander sailed 
to the island of Lesbos, reduced Mitylené, and 
confirmed the allegiance of Methymna. While 
he extended his arms over the neighbouring 
islands, as well as the maritime towns of Lydia 
and Caria, a powerful squadron, commanded 
by the enterprising valour of Eteonicus. ra- 
vaged the shores of Macedon, subdued the sea- 
ports of Thrace, and rode victorious in the 
Hellespont and Propontis, the Ægean and Eux- 
ine seas. In six or eight months after the Athe- 
nian disaster at Ægos Potamos, the fairest por- 
tion of the ancient world, the most favoured by 
nature, and the most adorned by art, reluc- 
tantly submitted to the power, or voluntarily 
accepted the alliance of Sparta. 

During this long series of triumphs, Lysander 
never lost sight of the reduction of Athens; an 
object important in itself, and necessary to the 
completion of hisextensive plan. The vigilance 
of the Peloponnesian squadrons prevented the 
usual supplies of foreign grain from reaching the 
distressed city. In all the towns which surren- 
dered, or which were taken by storm, the Athe- 
nian garrisons were saved from immediate 
death, only on condition that they returned to 
their native country. By such contrivances the 
crafty Spartan expected that the scarcity of pro- 
visions would soon compel the growing multi- 
tude of inhabitants to submit to the Lacede- 
monian army at Decelia. But the Athenians, 
who despised the assaults of the enemy, braved 
the hardships of famine. Even after Lysander 
had blocked up their harbours with a hundred 
and fifty sail, they still defended, with vigour, 
their walls and ramparts; patiently endured 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


After, 


- 


[Cuar. 


* 

fatigue and hunger; and beheld with obstinate 
uncéncern, the affliction of their wives and 
children. Amidst the ravages of death and 
disease, which advanced with increasing horror, 
they punished, with the utmost severity, the ig- 
noble cowardice of Archestratus, who first men- 
tioned capitulation, and declared that the same 
moment should put anend to their independence 
and their lives. 

But notwithstanding the melancholy firmness 
of the popular assembly, a numer- 


~ ous and powerful party in the state 
A. d 40 4, Was governed rather by mterest 


than by honour; and the greatest 
enemies of Athenian liberty flourished in the 
bosom of the republic. The aristocratical leaven 
of the four hundred had infected the whole 
body of the senate ; and not only the inconstant 
Theramenes, but several other men of abilities 
and influence, who had been most active in 
subverting that cruel tyranny, regretted the 
restoration of democracy to a people, who (as 
they had recently proved in many parts of their 
conduct) were unable to enjoy, without abusing, 
the invaluable gift of freedom. In republican 
governments, the misfortunes which ought to 
bind all ranks of men in the firmest and most 
ir dissoluble union, have often little other ten- 
dency than to exasperate the political factions 
which tear and distract the community. Amidst 
every form of public distress, the Athenians 
caballed, clamoured, accused and persectted 
each other; and the faction of the nobles, who 
acted with superior concert, vigour, and address, 
destroyed, by dark insinuations, false witnesses, 
perjury, and every other species of legal fraud 
and cruelty, the seditious Cleophon, and other 
turbulent demagogues, who might most effectu- 
ally have opposed their measures.! 

When these obstacles were removed, Thera- 
menes (whose recent merit prevented the suspi- 
cion of the assembly) proposed an embassy to 
Lacedxmon, which should request a suspension 
of hostilities, and obtain, if possible, some mo- 
derate terms of accommodation. He named 
himself, with nine colleagues, as the persons 
best qualified to undertake this important com- 
mission ; flattering the people in the clearest and 
least ambiguous terms, with an undoubted pros- 
pect of success. A decree was immediately 
passed, investing the ambassadors with full 
powers. They a«sumed the sacred badge of their 
inviolable character, reached in safety the Spar- 
tan camp, held a conference with king Agis, 
and afterwards repaired to the Lacedemonian 
capital. During four months they carried on 
their pretended negotiation with the senate, the 
kings, the ephori, and especially with Lysander, 
whose authoritv, being unknown to the ancient 
constitution of Sparta, was far more extensive 
than that of all the other magistrates together. 
With him, principally, the plan was concerted 
for compelling the Athenians to submit to terms 
of peace, which they must have regarded as 
worse, not only than war, but death.2 The 
fortifications of their harbours were to be demo- 


‘lished, as well as the long walls which joined 


1 Lysias, p. 272. 
2 Lysias against Eratosthenes, p. 273 


XXIL] 


them with the city: they were to surrender all 
their ships, but twelve; to resign every preten- 
sion to their ancient possessious in foreign 
parts; to recall from banishment the surviving 
members of the late tyrannical aristocracy ; to 
follow the standard of Sparta in war; and, in 
peace, to mould their political constitution after 
the model which that victorious republic might 
think fit to prescribe. 

When Theramenes produced these unexpect- 
ed fruits of his boasted negotiation, the Athe- 
nians had no longer either strength or spirit to 
resist, or even courage to die. During the long 
absence of their ambassadors, the siege had been 
carried on with redoubled vigour. The Lace- 
dzmonians, reinforced by the Thebans as well 
as by their numerous allies of Peloponnesus, 
had invested the city on every side, the harbours 
were closely blocked up by Lysander, who had 
become master of Melos, Ceos, Æpgina, and Sa- 
lamis; islands so near to Athens that they were 
almost regarded as a part of the Attic territory. 

he greatest misery prevailed within the walls; 
the famine was intolerable, and the diseases 
more intolerable than the famine. The full 
period of thrice nine years had elapsed, which, 
if we may credit a most accurate and faithful 
historian,’ had been assigned by repeated oracles 
and predictions, as the destined term of the 
Peloponnesian war and of the Athenian great- 
ness. The principal leaders of the democracy 
had been cut off by the perfidious snares of their 
opponents, who were prepared to bear a foreign 
yoke, provided they might usurp domestic ty- 
ranny. That odious faction was ready to 
approve the measures of Theramenes, who 
might intimidate the dejected assembly by de- 
claring (a most melancholy truth) that the se- 
verity of the Lacedemonians, excessive as it 
seemed, was yet moderation and lenity when 
compared with the furious and unextinguishable 
rage of the Thebans and Corinthians, who 
maintained that the Athenians deserved not any 
terms of accommodation; that their crimes 
ought to be persecuted with unrelenting ven- 
geance ; their proud city demolished with such 
perfect destruction, that not even its vestige 
should remain; and the insolent inhabitants 


3 The words of Thucydides, l. v. p. 362. are very re- 
markable. ‘ He remembers, that from the first commence- 
ment of hostilities, it had been constantly prophesied that 
the war would last thrice nine years; which, of all predic- 
tions, was alone firm and stable;’’ or as the idiom of the 
Greek language will bear “ the most firm and stable.” 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


261 


utterly extirpated from Greece, which they had 
so long disturbed by their ambition, and pro- 
voked by their tyranny and cruelty. Such an 
argument Theramenes might have employed, if 
it had been necessary to employ any argument, 
to justify his negotiation with the Spartans, 
which was confirmed and ratified by the voice 
of the aristocratical cabal, and submitted to, 
rather than accepted, by the majority of the 
assembly, with the gloomy silence of despair. 

On the sixteenth of May, the 


Olymp. day on which the Athenians had 
xciv: 1. heen accustomed to celebrate the 
A. C. 404. 


anniversary of the immortal victory 
of Salamis, the hostile armament took possession 
of their harbours; the combined army entered 
their gates. The walls and fortresses of the 
city of Minerva, which the generous magnani- 
mity of its inhabitants, preferring the public 
safety to their own, had abandoned in defence 
of Greece to the fury of a barbarian invader, 
were ungratefully levelled to the ground by the 
implacable resentment of the Greeks; who exe- 
cuted their destructive purpose with all the 
eagerness of emulation, boasting, amidst the 
triumphs of martial music, that the demolition 
of Athens would be regarded, in succeeding 
ages, as the true era of Grecian freedom. Yet 
after they had satisfied their vengeance, they 
seemed to regret its effects. The day was con- 
eluded with a magnificent festival, in which the 
recitation of the poets formed as usual, the prin- 
cipal ornament of the entertainment. Among 
other pieces was rehearsed the Electra of Euri- 


pides, and particularly that affecting chorus, 


** We come, O daughter of Agamemnon! to 
thy rustic and humble roof.” The words were 
scarcely uttered, when the whole assembly melt- 
ed into tears, the forlorn condition of that young 
and virtuous princess, expelled the royal palace 
of her father, and inhabiting a miserable cot- 
tage, in want and wretchedness, recalling the 
dreadful vicissitudes of fortune which had be- 
fallen Athens, once mistress of the sea, and so- 
vereign of Greece, but deprived, in one fatal 
hour, of her ships, her walls, and her strength, 
and reduced from the pride of power and pros- 
perity, to misery, dependence, and servitude, 
without exerting one memorable effort to 
brighten the last moment of her destiny, and to 
render her fall illustrious.4 


4 Xenoph. Hellen. l. ii. c. i. et seq. Diodor. l. xiii. 104— 
107. Plut.in Lysand. p. 438. Lysias in Eratosth. et Agorat. 


262 


CHAPTER XX] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


Rapacity and Cruelty of the Spartan Governmeni—The Thirty Tyrants in Athens—Persecution 
of Lysias and his Family—Theramenes opposes the Tyrants—Sanguinary Speech of Critias— 
Death of Theramenes—Persecution and death of Alcibiades—Thrasybulus seizes Phylé—De- 
feats the Tyrants—Memorable Speech of Thrasybulus—Oath of Amnesty—Not faithfully ob- 


served. 


THE conquest of Athens, and the acknow- 
ledged dominion of Sparta, terminated the 
memorable war of twenty-seven years. It still 
remained for Lysander to reduce the island of 
Samos,! which enjoys:the honourable distinc- 
tion of being the last settlement in the East that 
defied the ambition of Pericles, and the last 
which submitted to the arms of Lysander. The 
conquered islands and cities suffered still greater 
vexations under the Spartan, than they had 
done under the Athenian empire. Among the 
hostile factions? which ambition or danger had 
formed in those turbulent republics, Lysander 
always preferred that party which possessed | 
most craft and least patriotism. At the head 
of this cabal he placed a Spartan Harmostes, 
or governor, on whose obsequious cruelty he 
could depend. The citidels were garrisoned by 
mercenaries; a tyrannical faction insulted as 
subjects, those whom they had envied as rivals, 
or dreaded as enemies; and every species of 
license and disorder was exercised, with a pre- 
sumption that could be equalled only by the 
tameness with which it was endured.? The 
Asiatic Greeks regretted the dishonourable yoke 
of Persia; they regretted the stern dominion of 
Athens; both of which seemed tolerable evils, 
compared to the oppressive cruelty of Sparta 
and Lysander. The contributions of which 
they had formerly so much complained, no 
longer appeared exorbitant. Lysander was the 
first and the last conqueror who imposed on 
those feeble communities the enormous tribute 
of a thousand talents.4 
The unrelenting severity of Sparta has usu- 
ally 1 zen ascribed to the personal character of 
her general, whose natural arrogance and cru- 
elty were heightened and confirmed by the sud- 


1 Comp. Xenoph. Hellen. l. ii. p. 461. et Plut. iii. p. 31. 
in Lysand. Lysjas adv. Eratosth. p. 274. et Diodor. p. 396. 
It is remarkable that Xenophon and Lysias, both contem- 
poraries, should differ in a matter of chronology; the one 
placing the conquest of Samos before, and the other after, 
Lysander’s voyage to Athens. 

2 These were the cuvwpworizs smi Sinaig xx LOK UEC, 
mentioned by Thucydides and Xenophon: ‘associations, or 
rather conspiracies, for mutual defence in courts of justice, 
and for mutual assistance in obtaining offices of power.” 

3 Instead of the sweet draught of Liberty, Sparta, ac- 
cording to Theopompus, gave Greece the bitter cup of 
Slavery. In the city of Miletus, he sacrificed at once eight 
hundred men, of the democratical factiou, to the implacable 
rage of their adversaries. Plut. in Lysand. 

4 Diodorus, p. 400. says, 7Aciw Twy YtAtwv TerAavTwy 
x23’ evsouruy, “ more than a thousand talents yearly ;” that 
is, above two hundred thousand pounds. It may be com- 
puted from Plut. in Lysand. et Xenoph. p. 462. that Ly- 
sander sent home a still larger sum after the surrender of 
Samos. The law of Lycurgus respecting gold and silver, 
which had been long virtually, was now formally, abolished. 
The use of the precious metals was allowed to the state, 
but forbidden to individuals, under pain of death. The pro- 
hibition, however, was universally disregarded ; many Spar- 
tans possessed abundance of gold and silver; none incurred 
the penalty of the law. Compar. Plat. et Xenoph. loc. 
citet. et Isocrat. in Archidam. 


den exaltation of his fortune. From the simple 
citizen of a small, and then unfortunate repub- 
lic, he became, in a few years, the arbiter of 
Greece. Athens acknowledged his authority ; 
the smaller cities courted his protection ; venal 
poets and orators extolled him with odes and 
panegyrics; he was honoured with crowns and 
statues, and worshipped by hymns and sacri- 
fices.5 Yet it is obvious to remark, that what 

ever might be the temper and manners of Ly- 
sander, his country is justly accountable for the 
wrongs which he was allowed to commit with 
impunity ; and it is uncertain whether another 
general, placed in the same situation, would 
have acted on different principles; since the 
nature of the Spartan institutions, and the am- 
bitious views of the republic, seemed to demand 
and justify uncommon exertions of severity. 
In the administration of their domestic govern- 
ment, five or six thousand Spartans tyrannised 
over thirty thousand Lacedemonians; these 
tyrannised, with still greater rigour, over thrice 
that number of slaves; and it was natural to 
expect, that when the slaves were associated 
with the troops,‘ all these descriptions of men, 
Spartans, Lacedemonians and Helots, would 
tyrannise, with the emulation of cruelty, over 
their conquered subjects. 

The scanty materials of ancient history can- 
not enable us minutely to explain the humilia- 
tion and distress of the Asiatic Greeks, op- 
pressed by the double tyranny of the Spartans, 
and of their fellow citizens. Contemporary 
writers, who beheld this scene of misery and 
desolation, seem at a loss for words to impress 
its horror. [Isocrates endeavours to grasp the 
amplitude of the subject in the vague language 
of general description; by strokes of exagye- 
ration and hyperbole, he supplies the place of 
clear and positive information ; but all the co- 
piousness and energy of the Greek tongue sink 
beneath the heavy afflictions of that unfortu- 
nate people; and the mind of the orator seems 
to labour with a thought which he is unable to 
express,’ It.is not, however, from such rheto- 


5 Plut. in Lysand. 

6 The Helots then took the title of veodxuwdess, Liber- 
tini, Suvaras de ro veodzpwdes exeudepov andy esves. Thu- 
cydid. |. v. p. 533. From some passages in Isocrates 
(Panegyr. et de Pace.,) it should seem that Lysander oflen 
appointed these freed men to offices of great trust and au 
thority. 

7 Se the oration of Isocrates on the peace, p. 171, &e 
In the panegyric of Athens, speaking of the aristocratical 
factions supported by Lysander and the Lacedæmonians, 
Isocrates says, they consisted of wretches, “ whose cruelty 
and injustice are unexampled in the history of mankind. 
From what indignity did they abstain ? Into what excesses 
were they not transported? They, who regarded the most 
factious as the most faithful; the most treacherous as the 
most deserving. Their crimes proved infectious, and 
changed the mildness of human nature into savage ferocity,” 
&c. See p. 52, &c. 


XXIL] 


rical descriptions that we can attain an adequate 
and satisfactory knowledge of the Spartan ad- 
ministration: history delights in plain and au- 
thentic facts; and the rigorous treatment of 
the Athenians themselves, will best represent 
the hardships inflicted on their Asiatic colonies 
and dependencies. 

The Athenians had surrendered their fleet ; 
their walls and harbours were de- 


Oly a molished ; their citadel was occu- 
ai 404 pied by a Lacedæmonian garrison, 


commanded by Callibius, tlie friend 
of Lysander; and their government was usurp- 
ed by thirty men, the dependents and creatures 
of Sparta. The furious and profligate Critias 
formed a proper head for this aristocratical 
council, whose members have been justly brand- 
ed in history under the name of the Thirty 
Tyrants. On pretence of delivering the state 
from the malice of informers, and the turbu- 
lence of seditious demagogues, they destroyed 
the most valuable portion of the community.® 
Niceratus, the son of Nicias, and a son who 
inherited not only the opulence, but the virtues 
of his illustrious father, was condemned to 
death ; Leon, the most public-spirited, and An- 
tiphon, the most eloquent of his contempora- 
ries, shared the same fate; Thrasybulus and 
Anytus were banished. Whoever was known 
to be powerful, was regarded as dangerous; 
whoever was supposed to be-rich, was accused 
as criminal. Strangers and citizens were in- 
volved in one promiscuous ruin.!0 

Amidst this general wreck of whatever was 
most worthy and respectable, I shall select the 
persecution of Lysias and his family, the only 
transaction of that kind, recorded with such 
circumstances as answer the ends of history. 
Cephalus, the father of that ingenious orator, 
was by birth a Syracusan. The friendship of 
Pericles persuaded him to settle in Athens, 
where, under the protection of that powerful 
statesman, he obtained wealth and honours. 
His inoffensive and generous character escaped 
the enmity and persecution to which the opu- 
lent Athenians were commonly exposed; and 
he enjoyed the rare felicity of living thirty 
years in the midst of continual trials and im- 
peachments, without being obliged to appear as 
plaintiff or defendant in any litigation. His 
sons, Lysias and Polemarchus, inherited his in- 
nocence, his generosity, and his good fortune. 
Though possessed of the most valuable accom- 
plishments, natural and acquired, the brothers 
prudently kept aloof from the dangcrous paths 
of public life; contented with their domestic 
felicity, they aspired not to the rank of Athe- 
nian citizens; but liberally contributed to sup- 
ply the exigencies of the state, from the profits 
of a flourishing manufacture of shields, which 


__& Their names are preserved in Xenophon, Hellen. 
ii. 3. 

9 Xenoph. p. 462. which Cesar, ap. Sallust. de Bello 
Catil. c. 5t. evidently had in view, ‘* Lacedwmohii devictis 
Atheniensibus, triginta viros imposuere.... Hi primo cæ- 
pere pessimum quemque, et omnibus invisum, indemnatum 
necare. Eo populus lætari, et merito dicere fieri. Post 
ubi paullatim licentia crevit juxta bonos et malos libidinose 
interficere. ... Eta civitas, servitute oppressa stultæ lætitiæ 
graves pænas dedit.” 

10 Xenoph. 1. ii. p. 463, et sey. * 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


263 


they carried on by the labour of a hundred and 
twenty slaves. The cruelty of the thirty ty- 
rants, from whose rapacious eye neither obscu- 
rity could conceal, nor merit defend, occasioned 
the death of Polemarchus, and the immediate 
misfortunes, as well as the future glory of Ly- 
sias, who acted a distinguished part in over- 
turning that detestable tyrauny, and in bring- 
ing its authors and abettors to condign punish- 
ment.!! 

The history is related by himself with: per- 


|spicuous precision and graceful simplicity : 


“The tyrants Theognis and Piso acquainted 
their associates, that many strangers established 
at Athens were disaffected to the government. 
This was a plausible pretence for rifling the 
effects of these unhappy men; a measure to 
which the thirty were not only excited by ava- 
rice, but prompted by fear. Money was be- 
come necessary for the preservation of their 
power, which, being founded on usurpation, 
and tyrannically administered, could only be 
maintained by the influence of corruption, and 
the mercenary aid of foreign troops. The life 
of man, therefore, they regarded as a matter 
of little moment; the amassing of wealth was 
the principal object of their desire; to gratify 
which, ten strangers were at once devoted to 
destruction. In this number, indeed, were two 
poor men; a base and cruel artifice to persuade 
you, Athenians, that the remaining eight had 
been condemned, not for the sake of their riches, 
but in order to preserve the public tranquillity ; 
as if the interest of the public had ever been 
the concern of that tyrannical cabal! Their in- 
famous design was executed with inhuman 
cruelty. Thcir victims were taken in their 
beds, at supper, in the privacy of domestic re- 
tiremeut. Me they seized exercising the rites 
of hospitality; my guests were rudely dis- 
missed ; I was delivered into the custody of the 
worthless Piso. While his accomplices con- 
tinued in the workshop, taking a list of our 
slaves and effects, I asked him, ‘ Whether mo- 
ney could save my life?’ ‘ Yes, a considerable 
sum,’ ‘I will give you a talent of silver.’ This 
he consented to accept, as the price of my safe- 
ty; and to such a melancholy situation was I 
reduced, that it afforded me a momentary con- 
solation to depend on the precarious faith of a 
man, who (as I well knew) despised every law, 
human and divine. But my comfort was of 
short duration; for I had no sooner opened my 
coffer to pay him the talent, than he ordered 
luis attendant to seize the contents, consisting 
of three talents of silver, a hundred Daricks, 
three hundred Cyzicenes, and three silver cups. 
I entreated Piso to allow mea small sum to de- 
fray the expense of my journey. But he de- 
sired me to be thankful to escape with my life. 
Going out together, we met the tyrants Melo- 
bius and Mnesitheides, returning from the 
workshop. They inquired, where we were 
going? Piso answered, to examine the house 
of my brother Polemarchus. They desired him 
to proceed ; but commanded me to follow them 
to the house of Damasippus. Piso whispered 


11 Sce the Life of Lysias, and the Orations there refor 
red to, p. 110, et seq. 


264 


me to be silent, and to fear nothing, because he 
would immediately come there. Upon our ar- 
rival, we found Theognis guarding several of 
my companions in calamity. I increased the 
number of his prisoners; but obtained an op- 
portunity to represent my innocence and mis- 
fortunes to Damasippus, entreating lim, by our 
past friendship, to employ his influence in my 
behalf. He assured me of his intention to in- 
tercede with Theognis, whose avarice would 
easily persuade him to betray his trust. While 
they conversed on this subject, I took advan- 
tage of my knowledge of the house to escape 
through three secret passages, which all hap- 
pened to be open and unguarded; and fortu- 
nately reaching the country-house of my friend 
Archimaus, a ship-master, sent him to the city, 
that he might bring me intelligence of my bro- 
ther. He discovered, that the tyrant Eratos- 
thenes had dragged him from the road, and 
conducted him to prison, where he was ordered 
to drink hemlock. At this melancholy news, I 
sailed to Megara, under cover of the night. Our 
effects became the property of the tyrants, whese 
mean avarice spared not the smallest trifle be- 
longing to us. Even the gold ear-rings of Po- 
lemarchus’s wife were forcibly torn away by 
the brutal Melobius.””? 

The Thirty justified these abominable acts 
of cruelty by the authority of a servile senate, 
which they still allowed to subsist as the instru- 
ment and accomplice of their tyranny. It could 
not be expected, however, that in a city accus- 
tomed to the utmost liberty of opinion and free- 
dom of debate, a body of five hundred, or even 
of thirty men, should continue to agree in the 
same odious and oppressive measures. The 
first seeds of discord, or rather the first symp- 
toms of repentance, appeared in the speeches 
and behaviour of the bold and active Thera- 
menes; who, though the principal author of 
the usurpation, was already disposed by the 
humanity of his nature, or by the singular in- 
constancy of his temper,? to destroy the work 
of his own hands. His strenuous endeavours 
were used to save the innocent and unhappy 
victims whom his furious colleagues daily de- 
voted to destruction; under his protection the 
citizens assembled, and expressed their resent- 
ment or despair; and it was justly apprehended 
that the government of the Thirty might be 
dissolved by the same means, and by the same 
man, who had set on foot and subverted the 
short-lived tyranny of the four hundred. The 
present usurpation, indeed, was defended by a 
Lacedemonian garrison; but the Thirty dread- 
ed the influence of Theramenes over the fo- 
reign troops; they dreaded still more his influ- 
ence over the Athenian citizens. When they 
considered the precarious tenure of their au- 
thority, and the unjust violence of their admi- 
nistration, they reflected on the past with pain, 
and viewed the future with terror. But they 
had gone too far to retreat, and nothing re- 


1 See the discourses of Lysias against Agoratus and 
Eratosthenes, p. 258, et seq. 

2 Thucydid. viii. 68, et seq. Lysias advers. Eratosth. 
Xenophon paints him more favourably; and Aristot. apud 
Plut. iii. 337. et Diodor. p. 350, et seq. still more favoura- 
bly than Xenophon. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


mained but to prop the tottering fabric of their 
power by enlarging its base. ‘Three thousand 
citizens were invited to participate in the ad- 
vantages and dangers of their government. 
The rest were disarmed and treated with an ın- 
crease of severity. 

Theramenes vainly opposed the criminal de- 
signs of his colleagues, who implicitly submitted 
their opinions to the imy-lacable fury of Critias, 
He it was who chiefly encouraged them boldly. 
to persevere, and to remove every obstacle to 
the unlimited gratification of their passions. 
The safety of Theramenes, he assured them, 
was no longer compatible with their own. His 
delicacy, real or affected, was totally inconsis- 
tent with the spirit of the present administra- 
tion; nor could the government of Thirty, any 
more than that of one tyrant, admit of being 
curiously canvassed, or fastidiously opposed. 
These sentiments being received with approba- 
tion, we might expect that Theramenes should 
have been destroyed by that sudden and open 
violence which’ had proved fatal to so many 
others. But as the most daring violators of the 
laws of society are obliged to establish and ob- 
serve some rules of justice, in their conduct to- 
wards each other, it had been resolved by the 
Thirty, that, amidst the violent and capricious 
outrages which they committed against their 
subjects, none of their own number should be 
put to death without the benefit of a trial before 
the senate; a privilege extending to the three 
thousand entrusted with the use of arms, and 
sufficiently denoting the miserable condition of 
the other citizens. The senate was assembled 
to try Theramenes; but this tribunal was sur- 
rounded by armed men. When the pretended 
criminal appeared, Critias addressed the court _ 
in a speech too remarkable ever to be forgot- 
ten. 

« Should you imagine, O senators! consider- 
ing the great numbers who have suffered death, 
that we have been guilty of unnecessary cruelty, 
you will alter that opinion on reflecting that 
revolutions of government must always be at- 
tended with bloodshed; but particularly when 
a populous city like Athens, which has been 
long pampered with liberty, is reduced under 
the dominion of a few. The actual form of ad- 
ministration was imposed by the Lacedemo- 
nians as the condition of the public safety. In 
order to maintain its authority we have remov- 
ed those seditious demagogues, whose demo- 
cratical madness hath occasioned all our past 
calamities. It is our duty to proceed in this 
useful work, and to destroy, without fear or 
compassion, all who would disturb the public 
tranquillity. Should a man of this dangerous 
disposition be found in our own order, he 
ought to be punished with double rigour, and 
treated not only as an enemy, but as a traitor. 
That Theramenes is liable to this accusation ap- 
pears from the whole tenor of his conduct. 
He concluded the treaty with the Lacedemo- 
nians; he dissolved the popular government; 
he directed and approved the first and boldest 
measures of our administration: but no sooner 
did difficulties arise than he deserted his asso- 
ciates, declared his opposition to their designs, 
and undertook the protection of the populace, 


XXIILJ 


When the weather was fair and favourable, he 
pursued the same course with his companions, 
but on the first change of wind, he thought 
proper to alter his navigation. With such an 
irresolute steersman it is impossible to govern 
the helm of the republic, and to guide the ves- 
sel to her destined harbour. This dangerous 
inconsistency ought, indeed, to have been ex- 
pected from a man to whose character perfidy 
is congenial. He began his political career un- 
der the direction of his father Hagnon, a vio- 
lent partisan of democracy. He afterwards 
changed his system, in order to obtain the fa- 
vour of the nobles. He both established and 
dissolved the government of the four hundred; 
and the whole strain of his behaviour proves 
him unfit to govern, and unworthy to live.” 

Theramenes made a copious and persuasive 
defence, acknowledging, “ That he had often 
changed his conduct, but denying that he had 
ever varied his principles. When the demo- 
cracy flourished, he had maintained the just 
rights, but repressed the insolence, of the peo- 
ple. When it became necessary to alter the 
form of the republic, in compliance with the 
command of the Spartans, he had supported 
the legal power, but opposed the tyranny, of 
the magistrates. Under every administration of 
government he had approved himself the friend 
of moderation and justice, which he still con- 
tinued, and ever would continue, to recommend 
and enforce, convinced that those virtues alone 
could give stability and permanence to any sys- 
tem of government, whether aristocratical or 
popular.” 

The senators murmured applause, unawed 
by the presence of Critias and his associates. 
But this furious tyrant made a signal to the 
armed men, who surrounded the senate-house, 
to show the points of their daggers; and then 
stepping forward, said, “It is the duty, O sena- 
tors! of a prudent magistrate, to prevent the 
deception and danger of his friends. The coun- 
tenance of those brave youths (pointing to his 
armed partisans) sufficiently discovers that they 
will not permit you to save a man who is mani- 
festly subverting the government: I, therefore, 
with the general consent, strike the name of 
Theramenes from the list of those who have a 
right to be tried before the senate; and, with 
the approbation of my colleagues, I condemn 
him to immediate death.” Roused by this un- 
expected and bloody sentence, Theramenes 
started from his seat, and sprang to the altar 
of the senate-house, at once imploring the com- 
passion, and urging the intcrest of the specta- 
tors, whose names, he observed, might be struck 
out, and whose lives might be sacrificed, as un- 
justly and cruelly as his own. But the terror 
of armed violence prevented any assistance or 
intercession; and the eleven men (for thus the 
Athenian delicacy styled the exccutioncrs of 
public justice) dragged him from the altar, and 
hurried him to execution. i 

In proceeding through the market-place the 
unhappy victim of tyranny invoked the favour 
and gratitude of his fellow citizens, who had 
often been protectcd by his eloquence, and dc- 


3 Xenoph. p. 464—4566. 
2L 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Ed 
265 


fended by his valour. But the impudent Saty 
rus, the chief minister of vengeance both in 
authority and cruelty, sternly told him, that if 
he continued his lamentations and uproar he 
should soon cry in good earnest: “ And shall 
I not,” said Theramenes, “though I remain 
silent ?” When he drank the fatal hemlock, he 
poured a libation on the ground with a health 
to the honest Critias; circumstances unworthy 
to relate, if they proved not, that even in his 
last moments, he was forsaken neither by his 
facetiousness nor by his fortitude.’ 

The death of Theramenes delivered the ty- 
rants from the only restraint which tended to 
control their insolence, and to moderate their 
cruelty. They might now indulge in all the 
licentiousness of outrage, without the fear of 
reproach or the danger of resistance. Their 
miserable subjects were driven from the city, 
from the Piræus, from their houses, their farms, 
and their villages, which were divided among 
the detestable instruments of an odious usurpa- 
tion. Nor did the tyrants stop here. A man- 
date was published, enforced by the authority 
of the Spartan senate, prohibiting any Grecian 
city to receive the unfortunate fugitives. But 
this inhuman order was almost universally dis- 
obeyed; the sacred laws of hospitality prevailed 
over the terror of an unjust decree; Thebes, 
Argos, and Megara, were crowded with Athe- 
nian exiles.6 

In exercising those abominable acts of cruelty, 
the Thirty probably consulted the immediate 
safety of their persons, but they precipitated the 
downfall of their power. The oppressed Athe- 
nians, whose sufferings seemed no longer tole- 
rable, requircd only a leader to rouse them to 
arms, and to conduct them to victory and to ven- 
geance. This danger the tyrants had greater 
reason to apprehend, since they could not ex- 
pect a reinforcement to the garrison, while the 
efforts of Lysander and the Spartans were prin- 
cipally directed towards the extension of their 
Asiatic conquests. The abilities and resent- 
ment of Alcibiades pointed him out as the per- 
son best qualified to undertake the arduous and 
honourable design of reassembling the fugitives, 
and of animating them with courage to recover 
their lost. country. That illustrious exile had 
been driven from his Thracian fortress by the 
terror of the Lacedwemonians, then masters of 
the Hellespont, and had acquircd a settlement 
under the protection of Pharnabazus, in the 
little village of Grynium in Phrygia, where, 
undisturbed by the dangcrous contentions of 
war and politics, he enjoyed an obscure happi- 
ness in the bosom of love and friendship. But 
the cruel fears of the tyrants pursued him to 
this last retrcat. 


4 Or: osuwEosr0, es py cawtycesev. Literally, that he 
would cry out unless he were silent. The inaccurate lan- 
guage of the executioner furnished occasion to the smart 
reply of Theramenes. 

5 Xenoph. p. 470. The glorious death of Theramenes 
cancelled the imperfections of his life. That his character 
was inconstant, most writers allow. Lysias adversus Era- 
tosthen. accuses him of many deliberate crimes; but he 
died in a virtuous cause, and, however he acted, left the 
scene gracefully. ‘Quam me delectat Theramenes! quam 
elato animo est! Etsi enim flemus, cum legimus, tamen 
non miserabiliter vir clarus moritur.” Cic. Tusc. Quest. 

6 Diodor. |. xiv. p. 236. 


266 


Lysander told Pharnabazus that the sacrifice 
of Alcibiades was necessary for the safety of 
that form of government which had been re- 
cently established in Athens, and which it was 
the interest both of Sparta and of Persia to 
maintain. A private reason (which will after- 
wards appear) prevailed with the satrap to pay 
immediate attention to this bloody advice. A 
band of armed Phrygians was sent to surprise 
and destroy Alcibiades. Such was the fame 
of his prowess, that these timid assassins durst 
not attack him in broad day, or by open force. 
They chose the obscurity of night to surround 
and set fire to his house, which, according to 
the fashion of the country, was chiefly com- 
posed of light and combustible materials. The 
crackling noise of the flames alarmed Alcibia- 
des, whose own treacherous character render- 
ed him always suspicious of treachery. He 
snatched his sword, and, twisting his mantle 
round his left arm, rushed through the flaming 
edifice, followed by his faithful Arcadian friend, 
and by his affectionate mistress Timandra.! 
The cowardice of the Phrygians, declining to 
meet the fury of his assault, covered him with 
a shower of javelins. But even these Barba- 
rians spared the weakness and the sex of Ti- 
-mandra, whose tears and entreaties obtained 
the melancholy consolation of burying her un- 
fortunate lover; a man whose various charac- 
ter can only be represented in the wonderful 
vicissitudes of his life and fortune; and who, 
though eminently adorned with the advantages 
of birth, wealth, valour, and eloquence, and 
endowed with uncommon gifts of nature and 
acquirements of art, yet deficient in discretion 
and probity, involved his country and himself 
in inextricable calamities. 

Although the life of Alcibiades had been 
highly pernicious to his country, his death, at 
this particular juncture, might be regarded as a 
misfortune, if the Athenian exiles at Thebes 
had not been headed by a man who possessed 
his excellences, unmingled with his defects and 
vices. The enterprising courage of Thrasybu- 
lus was animated by the love of liberty; and 
while he generally followed? the rules of justice 
and humanity, he had magnanimity to con- 
ceive, abilities to conduct, and perseverance to 
accomplish, the boldest and most arduous de- 
signs. Having communicated his intentions 
to the unhappy fugitives in Thebes and Mega- 
ra, he encouraged a body of seventy intrepid 
followers to seize the important fortress of 
Phyla, situate on the Beotian and Athenian 
frontier. This daring enterprize alarmed the 
tyrants, who marched forth with the flower of 
their troops to dislodge the new garrison. But 
the natural strength of the place baffled their 
assault; and, when they determined to invest 
it, the unexpected violence of a tempest, accom- 
panied with an extraordinary fall of snow,? 
obliged them to desist from their undertaking. 
They returned with precipitation to Athens, 
leaving behind part of their attendants and 


1 Corn. Nepos, et Plut. in Alcibiad. 

2 His conduct, as will appear hereafter, was not uni- 
form. . 

3 Emsytyvitas THs vuxTus Xiwy waumhydus. 


p. 471. 


Zenoph. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


baggage, which fell a prey to the garrison of 
Phyla; the strength of which continually aug 
mented by the confluence of Athenian exiles, 
and soon increased from seventy, to seven hun- 
dred, men. 

The tyrants had just reason to apprehend 
that these daring invaders might ravage the 
surrounding country, and even attack the capi- 
tal. Alarmed by this danger, they despatched 
several troops of horse, with the greater part 
of their Lacedemonian mercenaries, who en- 
camped in a woody country, at the distance of 
fifteen furlongs from Phyla, in order to watch 
the niotions and repress the incursions of the 
enemy. But these forces, which had been sent 
to guard the territory and city frem surprise, 
were themselves surprised by Thrasybulus, 
who silently marched forth in the night, posted 
his men amidst the concealed intricacies of the 
forest, and suddeuly attacked the Lacedemo- 
nians before they had time to recollect them- 
selves, or even to stand to their arms. The 
dread of an ambush probably prevented the 
wary general from following them to any great 
distance from the garrison. A hundred and 
twenty men were slain in the pursuit; a trophy 
was erected; the baggage and arms were con- 
veyed in triumph to Phyla.4 

The news of this disaster inspired the Thirty 
with such terror that they no longer regarded a 
demolished city like Athens as proper for their 
residence. They determined to remove to the 
neighbouring town of Eleusis, which, in case of 
extremity, seemed more capable of defence. 
The three thousand, who were entrusted with . 
the use of arms, accompanied them thither, and 
assisted them in treacherously putting to death 
all such of the Eleusinians as were thought dis- 
affected to the usurpation. Under pretence of 
mustering the inhabitants, those unhappy men 
were singly conducted through a narrow gate 
leading to the shore, where they were succes- 
sively disarmed, bound, and executed, by the 
cruel instruments of tyranny. 

Mean while the garrison of Phyla continually 
receivednew reinforcements. The orator Lysias, 
whose domestic sufferings have been recently 
described, collected three hundred men to take 
vengeance on the murderers of his brother, and 
the authors of his own banishment. These use- 
ful supplies encouraged Thrasybulus to attempt 
surprising the Pireus, the inhabitants of which, 
consisting chiefly of tradesmen, merchants, and 
mariners, bore with great impatience and indig- 
nation the injuries of a subordinate council of 
Ten, the obsequious imitators of the Thirty. 
This enterprise was crowned with success, al- 
though the tyrants brought forth their whole 
force to oppose it. Having intercepted their 
march to the place, Thrasybulus occupied a ris- 
ing ground, which gave him a decisive advan- 
tage 1 in the engagement. 

‘Before leading his men to action, he animated 
their valour and resentment, by reminding 
them, that the enemy on the right consisted of 
those Lacedeemonians whom only five days be- 


4 Xenoph. p. 471 __ 5 Id. ibid. 
6 Justin. l. v. c.1x. The compiler, with his usual inac- 
curacy, says Lysias Syracusanus orator. 


XXHL] 


fore they had shamefully routed and put to 
flight; that the troops on the left were com- 
manded by the Thirty tyrants, who had unjustly 
driven them into banishment, confiscated their 
property, and murdered their dearest friends. 
“« But the gods have finally given us the oppor- 
tunity (long ardently desired) toface our oppres- 
sors with arms in our hands, and to take ven- 
geance on their multiplied wickedness and cru- 
elty. When they invested us at Phyla, the gods, 
consulting our safety, ruffled the serenity of the 
sky with an unexpected tempest. The assist- 
ance of Heaven enabled us, with a handful of 
men, to raise a trophy over our numerous foes ; 
and the same divine Providence siill favours us 
with the most manifest marks of partiality. 
The enemy are drawn up in a deep and close 
array; they must be obliged to ascend the emi- 
nence; the javelins of their rear cannot reach 
beyond their van; while, from the reverse of 
these circumstances, no weapon of ours needs 
be discharged in vain. Let us avail ourselves, 
therefore, of an arrangement evidently produc- 
ed by the favour of Heaven; each soldier re- 
membering, that he never can achieve a more 
honourable victory, or obtain a more glorious 
tomb.’ 

The revered authority of the priest enforced 
the exhortation of the general. He promised 
them complete success, provided they forbore to 
charge till one of their men were killed or wound- 
ed: “ Then,” added he,“ I will conduct you on 
to victory, though I myself shall fall.” He had 
scarcely ended, when the enemy threw their 
javelins; upon which, as if guided by a divine 
impulse, he rushed forward to the attack. Both 
parts of his prediction were accomplished. The 
battle was neither long nor bloody; but Critias 
and Hippomachus, the two most violent of the 
tyrants, were left among the slain. Thrasybu- 


lus judiciously avoided to pursue the scattered | 


fugitives, who being superior in number, might 
still rally and renew the battle, if he quitted the 


advantage of the ground. But having proceed- | 


ed to the foot of the hill, he stopped the ardour 
of his troops, and commanded the herald Cleo- 
critus to proclaim with a loud voice, “ Where- 
fore, Athenians! would you fly from your coun- 
trymen? Wherefore have you driven them from 
the city? Why do you thirst for their blood ? 
We are all united by religious, civil, and do- 
mestic ties. Often, with combined arms, have 
we fought by sea and land, to defend our com- 
mon country and common freedom. Even in 
this unnatural civil war, excited and fomented 
by the ambition of impious and abominable ty- 
rants, who have shed more blood in eight 
months, than tlie Peloponnesians, our public 
enemies, in ten years, we have lamented your 
misfortunes as mucli as our own; nor is there a 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


man whom you have left on the field of battle, | 


whose death does not excite our sympathy, and 
increase our affliction.” The tyrants, dreading 
the effect of a proclamation well calculated to 
sow the seeds of disaffection, led off their 
troops with great precipitation ; and Thrasybu- 
lus, without stripping the dead, marched to the 
Piræus.8 


7 Xenoph. p. 473. et Diodor. l. xiv. p. 414. 
8 Xenoph. p. 474. 


267 


Next day the Thirty, shamefully discomfited 
in the engagement, and deprived of Critias, their 
furious but intrepid leader, took their inelan- 
choly seats in council with strong indications of 
expected ruin. Their unfortunate subjects ac- 
cused their commanders, and each other; a new 
sedition arose ; nor was the ferment allayed, 
until the tyrants had been deprived oftheir dig- 
nity, and ten magistrates (one elected from each 
tribe) appointed in their room.9 The surviving 
tyrants, with those who were too closely united 
with them in guilt, not to be united in interest, 
fled to Eleusis. 

It might be expected that the decemvirs, 
who now assumed the government, should have 
been deterred from injustice by the fatal example 
of their predecessors. But in the turbulent re- 
publics of Greece, however free in theory, men 
were little acquainted with the benefits of prac- 
tical liberty. Whether the nobles, or people, or 
a prevailing faction of either; whether party in 
the state obtained the chief'administration, their 
authority was almost alike oppressive and tyran- 
nical. Alternately masters and slaves, those 
fierce republicans were either unable or unwil- 
ling to draw that decisive and impervious line 
between the power of government, and the 
liberty of the subject; a line which forms the 
only solid barrier of a uniform, consistent, and 
rational freedom. 

The Ten had no sooner been invested withthe 
ensigns of command, than they showed an equal 
inclination with the Thirty to obey the Lacede- 
monians, and to tyrannise over their fellow- 
citizens.!0 After various skirmishes, which hap- 
pened in the course of two weeks, and generally 
proved honourable to the bravery and conduct 
of Thrasybulus, the tyrants both in Eleusis and 
in Athens despatched messengers to solicit far- 
ther assistance from Sparta and Lysander. That 
active and enterprising leader employed his 
usual diligence to protect the government which 
he had established. At the head of a powerful 
body of mercenaries, he marched to the Piræus, 
which he invested by land; while his brother 
Libys, who commanded a considerable squa- 
dron, blocked up the harbour.!! 

These vigorous exertions restored the hopes 
and courage of the tyrants; nor can it be doubt- 
ed that Thrasybulus and his followers must 
have speedily been compelled to surrender, had 
the Spartan commanders been allowed to act 
without control. But the proud arrogance of 
Lysander, and the rapacious avarice of his de- 
pendents, provoked the indignation and resent- 
inent of whatever was most respectable in his 
country. The kings, magistrates, and senate, 
conspired to humble his ambition ; and, lest he 
should enjoy the glory of conquering Athens a 
second time, Pausanias, the most popular and 
beloved of the Spartan princes, hastily levied 
the domestic troops, and a considerable body of 
Peloponnesian allies, and marching through the 
Isthmus of Corinth encamped in the neighbour- 
hood of Athens; little solicitous to increase the 
dissensions in that city, provided he could anti- 
cipate and thwart the measures of Lysander. 


9 Ibid. et Isocrat. ii. p. 426. 
10 T.vsins advers. Fratosth. p. 212, et seq. 
J1 Xenoph. p. 476. et Diodor. ubi. supra, 


= 


263 
oba While the two Lacedæmonian ar- 
a re mies discovered, in the distance of 
A C. 403. their encampments, a disunion of 


their views and interests, an inci- 
dent happened which determined Pausanias to 
undertake the protection of Thracybulus and 
his adherents ; a resolution to which he was 
naturally inclined from opposition to an envied 
and odious rival. Diognotus, an Athenian of 
an amiable and respectable character, brought 
him the children of Niceratus and Eucrates; 
the former the son, the latter the brother, of the 
great Nicias, with whom the Spartan king was 
connected by the hereditary ties of hospitality 
and friendship. Having placed the helpless 
infants on his knees, he conjured him, by his 
religious regard for the memory of their much- 
respected ancestor, to pity their innocence and 
weakness, and to defend them against the cruel 
tyranny of a worthless faction, ambitious to cut 
off and destroy whatever was distinguished by 
birth, wealth, or virtue.! This affecting scene, 
had it failed to touch the heart of Pausanias, 
must at least have afforded him a plausible pre- 
tence for embracing the party of Thrasybulus, 
which numbered among its adherents the friends 
and family of Nicias, who had long been sus- 
pected of an undue attachment to the Spartan 
interest. 

Before he could fully persuade the enemy of 
his favourable intentions, several bloody skir- 
mishes were fought, in which the partisans of 
democracy defended the Pireus with unequal 
force, but with uncommon resolution.2 At 
length Pausanias made them understand, that, 
instead of destroying their persons, he wished to 
protect their liberties. In Athens his emissa- 
ries made known this unexpected revolution, 
which excited a numerous party to throw off 
the yoke of the tyrants, and to desire a recon- 
ciliation with their fellow citizens in the Piræus. 
The deputies were favourably received by the 
Spartan king, and sent, under his protection, to 
propose overtures of accommodation to the 
ephori and senate. The messengers of Lysan- 
der and the tyrants endeavoured to traverse this 
negutiation ; but notwithstanding their opposi- 
tion, the Spartans appointed fifteen commis- 
sioners, who, in conjunction with Pausanias, 
were empowered to settle the affairs of Athens.? 

With the approbation, or rather by the com- 
mand, of those ministers, the Athenian factions 
ceasec from hostility ; the tyrants were divested 
of their power ; the foreign garrison was with- 
drawn; and the popular government re-esta- 
blished. This important revolution was re- 
markable for its singular mildness. The authors 
and instruments of the most oppressive usurpa- 
tion recorded in the annals of any people, were 
allowed to retire in safety to Eleusis. Thra- 
sybulus conducted a military procession to the 
temple of Minerva in the citadel, where the ac- 
knowledgments of thanks and sacrifice were of- 
fered to that protecting divinity, who had re- 
stored the virtuous exiles to their country, and 
healed the divisions of the state. The citizens 


1 Lysias adv. Poliuchun, p. 323. and the translation of 
Lysias, p. 231. 

2 Xenoph. Diodor. Lysias, ubi supra. 

3 Xenoph. p. 478. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


who had been banished, and those who hag 
driven them into banishment, joined in this 
solenm exercise of religious duty ; after which, 
convening in full assembly, they were address- 
ed by Thrasybulus in these memorable words : 

« The experience of your past transactions 
may enable you, men of Athens! to know each 
other, and to know yourselves. On what pre- 
tence could you, who drove us from the city, 
abet a tyrannical faction? Why would you 
have enslaved your fellow citizens? On what 
superiority of merit could you found your claim 
of dominion? Is it that you are more honest 
and virtuous? Yet the people whom you in- 
sulted never relieved their poverty by unjust 
gain; whereas the tyrants whom you served, 
increased their wealth by the most oppressive 
rapacity. Is it that you are more brave and 
warlike? Yet this injured people, alone and 
unassisted, and almost unarmed, have ovcr- 
come your superior numbers, reinforced by the 
Lacedemonian garrison, the powerful succours 
of Pausanias, and the experienced mercenaries 
of Lysander. As you must yield the prize both 
of probity and of prowess, so neither can you 
claim the honour of superior prudence and sa- 
gacity. You have been not only conquered in 
war, but overcome in negotiation, by the peo- 
ple whom you despised ; to whom your Lace- 
demonian masters have delivered you, like 
biting curs,4 bound and muzzled, to be justly 
punished for your unprovoked insolence and 
audacity. But as to you, my fellow sufferers 
and fellow exiles! you, who shared the hard- 


ships of my banishment, and who now share the 


ee ee 


triumph of my victorious return, I exhort you 
to forgive and forget our common injuries. Let 
the dignity of your sentiments adorn the splen- 
dour of your actions. Prove yourselves superior 
to your enemies, not only in valour but in cle- 
mency, that moderation may produce concord, 
and concord strength.” 

The effect of this generous enthusiasm, ex- 
cited and diffused by Thrasybulus, appeared in 
a very extraordinary resolution of the assem- 
bly. During the usurpation of the Thirty, a 
hundred talents had been borrowed from the 
Lacedemonians, to support the rigorous cru- 
elty of a government which had banished five 
thousand, and put to death, untried, fifteen 
hundred citizens. The repayment of this sum 
was not to be expected from the people at large, 
against whose interest and safety it had been so 
notoriously employed. Yet the Athenians una- 
nimously resolved, on this occasion, that the 
money should be charged indiscriminately on 
them all.6 This unexampled generosity might 
have encouraged even the enfeebled party of 
the tyrants to return from Eleusis. But they 
were too sensible of their guilt to expect for- 
giveness or impunity. Having fortified their 
insecure residence, in the best manner that their 
circumstances could permit, they began to pre- 
pare arms; to collect mercenaries; and to try, 
anew, the fortune of war. But their unequal 


4 'OQrrso tous Suxvovras xuv SuoavTes mE% Ssdoursy, 
Xenoph. Hellen. ii. sub fin. In their comparisons the an- 
cients, it is well known, regarded justness more than dignity 

5 Isocrat. in Areopag. p. 345. says upwards of five hun- 
dred. Diodorus says the one-half of the citizens. 

6 Isocrates, ibid. et p. 495. of the translation. 


XXIV.] 


hostility, the effect of rage and despair, was 
easily defeated by the vigour of the new re- 
public. The most obnoxious leaders sealed, 
‘with their blood, the safety of their adherents, 
who submitted to the clemency of Thrasybulus. 
That fortunate and magnanimous commander 
generously undertook their cause, and obtained 
a decrce of the people for restoring them to the 
city, for reinstating them in their fortunes and 
privileges, and for burying in oblivion the me- 
mory of their past offences.” The assembly 
even ratified, by oath, this act of amnesty, of 
which both the idea and the name have been 
adopted by most civilized nations, and extolled 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


269 


by all historians, ancient and modern; who, 
dazzled by the splendour of a transaction so 
honourable to Thrasybulus and to Athens, have 
universally forgot to mention, that the condi- 
tions of the amnesty were not faithfully ob- 
served. Yet there is the fullest evidence to 
prove,’ that, when the tyrants were no more, 
the abeitors of their usurpation were accused, 
convicted, and punished, for crimes of which 
they had been promised indemnity by a solemn 
oath. So true it is, that the Athenians had 
wisdom to discern, but wanted constancy to 
practise, the lessons of sound policy, or even 
the rules of justice. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


Accusation of Socrates—Ariifices of his Accusers—His Defence—Condemnation—Address to the 
Judges—His Conversation in Prison—and Death—Transient Persecution of his Disciples— 
Writings of Cebes—/ischines—State of Philosophy—Of the Fine Arts—Of Literature—He- 
rodotus—Thucydides—Xenophon—Transition to the public Transactions of Greece—The Spar- 
tans invade Elis—The Messenians driven from Greece—History of Cyrene—Of Sicily—War 
with Carthage—Siege of Agrigentum—Reign of Dionysius—Sicily the first Province of 


Rome. 


JT were well for the honour of Athens, if none 
but the cruel abettors of an aristocratical fac- 
tion had experienced the unjust rigour of its 


tribunals. But among the first me- 
oly A : morable transactions, after the re- 
A c 400 establishment of democracy, hap- 


pened the trial and condemnation 
of Socrates; a man guiltless of every offence 
but that of disgracing, by his illustrious merit, 
the vices and follies of his contemporaries. His 
death sealed the inimitable virtues of his useful 
and honourable life; it seemed to be bestowed 
as a favour, not inflicted as a punishment; since, 
had Socrates, who had already passed his se- 
ventieth year, yielded to the decays of nature, 
his fame would have descended less splendid, 
certainly more doubtful, to posterity. 

The remote cause of his prosecution was the 
ludicrous farce of Aristophanes, entitled the 
Clouds; to which we had occasion formerly to 
allude. In this infamous performance, Socrates 
is introduced denying the religion of his coun- 


7 Among these offences were reckoned the arbitrary laws 
enacted during their usurpation. All these laws were an- 
nulled, and those of Solon, Clisthenes, Pericles, &c. re-es- 
tablished. It appears that the Athenians embraced the 
same opportunity of examining their ancient laws, abolish- 
ing such as no longer suited the condition of the times, and 
enacting some new ones. Andocid. Orat. i. de Myster. p. 
212. et Demost. adv. Timocrat. p. 469. The year in which 
the democracy was restored, or, in other words, the archon- 
ship of Euclides, was regarded, therefore, as an important 
era in Atheniap jurisprudence. The only material altera- 
tions on record consist, 1. In the law confining the right of 
voting in the assembly to those born of Athenian mothers. 
Formerly it sufficed that the father was a citizen, the con- 
dition of the mother not being regarded. Athenxus, xiii. 
Fae et Mark. in Vit. Lysiæ, p. 55. 2. In the law of 

emophantus, requiring the gitizens to take an oath that no 
personal danger should prevent them from doing their ut- 
most to deliver their country from tyrants. Vid. Lycurg. 
adv. Leocr. p. 180. et Andoc. de Myst. p. 220. 

8 See Lysias’s Orations against Agoratus and Eratos- 
thenes, from p. 233. to p. 280. 


try, corrupting the morals of his disciples, and 
professing the odious arts of sophistry and 
chicane. The envy of a licentious populace, 
which ever attends virtue too independent to 
court, and too sincere to flatter them, gradually 
envenomed the shafts of the poet, and malig- 
nantly insinuated that the pretended sage was 
really such a person as the petulance of Aris- 
tophanes had described him. The calumny 
was greedily received, and its virulence imbit- 
tercd by the craft of designing priests and am- 
biguous demagogues, as well as by the resent- 
ment of bad poets and vain sophists, whose 
pretended exccellences the discernment of So- 
crates had unmasked, and whose irritable tem- 
per his sincerity had grievously offended. From 
such a powcrful combination it seems cxtraor- 
dinary that Socrates should have lived so long, 
especially since, during the democracy, he ne- 
ver disguised his contempt for the capricious 
levity, injustice, and cruelty of the multitude, 
and during the usurpation of the Thirty openly 
arraigned the vices, and defied the authority of 
those odious tyrants. His long escape he hiin- 
self ascribed to his total want of ambition. 
Had he intermeddled in public affairs, and en- 
deavoured, by arming himself with authority, 
to withstand the corruptions of the times, his 
more formidable opposition would have exposed 
him to an earlier fatc.!0 Notwithstanding his 


9 The causes of his persecution, which are hinted at in 
Xenophon’s Apology for Socrates, are more fully explained 
in that written by Plato. Vid. Plat. Apolog. Socrat. sect. 
vi. From these two admirable treatises of practical mo- 
rality, together with the first chapter of Xcnophon’s Me- 
morabilia, and Plato's Phado, the narrative in the text is 
principally extracted. 

10 The memorable words of Socrates will for ever brand 
the stern unfeeling spirit of democracy. Ev yee tots w 
avdees Alnvasor, 6t syw MAAHI MEXLEIPUTE TH TOASTING 
MOLY LET, TIAL AVY HTOAWAELV, KGL OUTE GY UMAG WHE 


270 


private station, it seems still to have appeared 
remarkable to his disciples, that amidst the liti- 
gious turbulence of democracy, his invidious 
rame and merit should have escaped persecu- 
tion during a long life of seventy years. 

When his enemies finally determined to raise 
an accusation against him, it required uncom- 
mon address to give their malignant calumnies 
the appearance of probability. Socrates con- 
versed in public with every description of men, 
in all places, and on all occasions. His opinions 
were as well known as his person, and ever uni- 
form and consistent; he taught no secret doc- 
trines; admitted no private auditors; his les- 
sons were open to all; and that they were gra- 
tuitous, his poverty, compared with the exorbi- 
tant wealth of the sophists who accused him, 
furnished abundant proof. To balance these 
stubborn circumstances, his enemies confided 
in the hatred of the jury and judges, composed 
of the meanest populace, and the perjury of 
false witnesses, which might be purchased at 
Athens for the small sum of a few drachmas. 
They trusted, however, not less in the artifices 
and eloquence of Miletus, Anytus,! and Ly- 
con; the first of whom appeared on the part of 
the priests and poets; the second, on that of 
the politicians and artists; the third, on that of 
the rhetoricians and sophists.? 

From the nature of an accusation, which 
principally respected religion, the cause ought 
to have been regularly tried in the less numer- 
ous but more enlightened tribunal of the Areo- 
pagus; yet it was immediately carried before 
the tumultuary assembly, or rather mob of the 
Heliva,? a court, for so it was called, consist- 
ing of five hundred persons, most of whom 
were liable, by their education and way of life, 
to be seduced by eloquence, intimidated by au- 
thority, and corrupted by every species of un- 
due influence. 

In a degenerate age and nation, few virtuous 
or able men ever acquired popularity merely 
by their virtues or abilities. In such a nation, 
should a person, otherwise estimable, be unfor- 


Anmesy ouSev OUTE av EMLUTOV® KZE TOL UY XLÍETÍE AEYOVTE 
T’ Anina ou YUP ETTIV OOTES TWIVTET eb, OUTE Usely OUTE 
AAW OVOEVE MANIEE YVNTIWG EVEVTSOUMEVES, KZI Jsaxwmduwy 
OAS wdina Xab WHOMVOKMR EV TH TOAES yyverins xaz 
xvay KOEGV ETTS TwovTi payovevov VTE TOU Sixazsov, xxi 
£6 REAAEL ONIY OV Hpovoy CwIACETIEt, IÕtwTEYSIV, ZAAR My- 
Snuorieveiv, Plut. Apolog. Socrat. c. xiii. * You well know, 
Athenians! that had I formerly intermeddled in public af- 
fairs I should formerly have perished, without benefiting 
either you or myself. Be not offended ; but it is impossible 
that he should live long who arraigns and manfully oppo- 
ses the injustice and licentiousness of you, Athenians! or 
of any other multitude. A champion for virtue, if he 
would survive but a few years, must lead a private life, and 
not interfere in politics.” 

1 Some persona! reasons are glanced at why Miletus and 
Anytus stepped forth as accusers. Vid. Andocid. Orat. i. 
et Xenoph. Apol. Socrat. Libanius has swelled to a long 
story, and strangely disfigured the hint of Xenophon. Apol. 
Soc. p. 642, et seq. 

2 Plato Apol. Soc. c. x. 

3 This appears from innumerable circumstances, some 
of which are mentioned below, though Meursius, in his 
Treatise on the Areopagus (vid. Gronov. Thesaur. vol. 5.,) 
maintains that Socrates was tried in that court; an opinion 
which has been generally followed, but which the slightest 
attention to the works of the Athenian orators is sufficient 
to disprove. Vid. Isoc. Orat. Areopag. Lysias adv. An- 
docid. p. 108. et Andocid. Orat. i. p.215. The oath to 
which Socrates alludes in Xenophon’s Apology, ¢ iv. can 
only apply to the Heliæa. It is recited at length by De- 
mosthenes, Orat. cont. Timocrat. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


tunately cursed with ambition, he must endea- 
vour to gratify it at the expense of his feelings 
and his principles, and can attain general favour 
only in proportion as he ceases to deserve it. 
Uncomplying integrity will meet with derision; 
and wisdom, disdaining artifice, will grovel in 
obscurity, while those alone will reach fame, or 
fortune, or honour, who, though endowed with 
talents just beyond mediocrity, condescend to 
flatter the prejudices, imitate the manners, gra- 
tify the pride, or adopt the resentments, of an 
insolent populace. 

The superior mind of Socrates was incapa- 
ble of such mean compliances. When called 
to make his defence, he honestly acknowledged 
that he himself was much affected by the per- 
suasive eloquence of his adversaries; though, 
in truth, if he might use the expression, they 
had said nothing to the purpose.4 He then ob- 
served, that the fond partiality of his friend 
Cherephon, having asked the Delphic oracle, 
whether any man was wiser than Socrates ?— 
the oracle replied, that Socrates was the wisest 
of men. In order to justify the answer of that 
god, whose veracity they all acknowledged, he 
had conversed with every distinction of per- 
sons, most eminent in the republic; and finding 
that they universally pretended to know many 
things of which they were ignorant, he began 
to suspcct, that in this circumstance he excelled 
them, since he pretended to no sort of know- 
ledge of which he was not really aster. 
What he did know, he freely communicated, 
striving, to the utmost, to render his fellow ci- 
tizens more virtuous and more happy; an em- 
ployment to which he believed himself called 
by the god, “ whose authority I respect, Athe- 
nians! still more than yours.” 

The judges were seized with indignation at 
this firm language from a man capitally accused, 
from whom they expected, that according to 
the usual practice, he would have brought his 
wife and children to intercede for him by their 
tears, or even have employed the elaborate 
discourse which his friend Lysias, the orator, 
had composed for his defence; a discourse alike 
fitted to detect calumny, and to excite compas- 
sion, But Socrates, who considered it as a far 
greater misfortune to commit, than to suffer an 
injustice, declared, that he thought it unbecom- 
ing his fame, and unworthy his character, to 
employ any other defence than that of an inno- 
cent and useful life. Whether to incur the 
penalties of the delinquency with which he was 
falsely charged ought to be regarded as an evil, 
the gods alone knew. For his part he imagined 
that he should have no reason for sorrow at 
being delivered from the inconveniences of old 
age, which were ready to overtake him, and at 
being commanded to quit life’ while his mind, 


4 The simplicity of the original is inimitnble—Kzs ros 
wrnSec ye, we ETOS escresy, ovscv espyxzos, Plut. Apal. 

5 These circumstances, which are mentioned both by 
Xenophon and Plato, prove that Socrates was tried before 
a popular tribunal. Itis wel! known that the Areopagus 
rigorously proscribed all such undue methods of biassing the 
judgment and seducing the p&ssions. Vid. Demosth. in 
Neer. et Aristocrat. Æschin. in Timarch. Lucian. Hermo- 
tim. et Isocrat. Areopag. 

6 Xenophon says, that he writes Socrates’ Defence, after 
so many others, who had already executed that task with 


XXI1V.] HISTORY 


still active and vigorous, was likely to leave be- 
hind him the most agreeable impression in the 
remembrance of his friends. 

The firm magnanimity of Socrates could not 
alter the resolution of his judges; yet such is 
the ascendancy of virtue over the worst of 
minds, that he was found guilty by a majority 
of only three voices.” The court then com- 
manded him, agreeably to a principle which 
betrays the true spirit of democratical tyranny, 
to pass sentence of condeinnation on himself, 
and to name the punishment which ought to be 
inflicted on him. The punishment, said Socra- 
tes, which I deserve for having spent my whole 
life in endeavouring to render my fellow citizens 
wiser and better, and particularly in striving to 
inspire the Athenian youth with the love of 
justice and temperance, is “ To be maintained, 
during the remainder of my life, in the Pryta- 
nzeum; an honour due to me, rather than to 
the victors in the Olympic games, since as far as 
depended on me, I have made my countrymen 
more happy in reality; they only in appearance.” 
Provoked by this observation, by which they 
ought to have been confounded, the judges pro- 
ceeded to pass sentence, and condemned Socra- 
tes to drink hemlock.’ 

This atrocious injustice excited the indigna- 
tion of his numerous friends and disciples, most 
of whom had accompanied him to the court; 
but it awakened no other passion in the illus- 
trious sage than that of pity for the blind pre- 
judices of the Athenians. He then addressed 
that part of the court who had been favourable 
to him, or rather to themselves, since they had 
avoided the misfortune of passing an unjust sen- 
tence, which would have disgraced and imbit- 
tered the latest moment of their lives. “ He 
considered them as friends with whom he would 
willingly converse for a moment, upon the event 
which had happened to him, before he was sum- 
moned to death. From the commencement of 
the prosecution, an unusual circumstance, he 
observed, had attended all his words and ac- 
tions, and every step which he had taken in the 
whole course of his trial. The demon, who on 
ordinary occasions had ever been so watchful 
to restrain him, when he prepared to say or do 
any thing improper or hurtful, had never once 
withheld him, during the whole progress of 
this affair, from following the bent of his own 
inclination. For this reason he was apt to 
suspect that the fate which the court had 
decreed him, although they meant it for an evil, 
was to him a real good. If to die was only to 
change the scene, must it not be an advantage to 
remove from these pretended judges to Minos, 
Rhadamanthus, and other real judges, whio, 
through their love of justice, had been exalted 
by the divinity to this important function of 
government? What delight to live and converse 
with the immortal heroes and poets of antiquity! 
It becomes you also, my friends! to be of good 
confort with regard to death, since no evil, in 
life or death, can befall virtuous men, whose 
true interest is ever the concern of heaven. For 


sufficient skill and fidelity, in order to illustrate one point 
much insisted on by Socrates, ‘ That it was better for him 
to die than to live.” Xenoph. Apol. sub init. 

7 Plato Apol. 8 Ibid. 


OF GREECE. 


my part I am persuaded that it is better for me 
to die than to live, and therefore am not offended 
witi my judges. I entreat you all to behave 
towards my sons, when they-attain the years of 
reason, as I have done to you, not ceasing to 
blame and accuse them, when they prefer wealth 
or pleasure, or any other frivolous object, to the 
inestimable worth of ‘virtue. If they think 
highly of their own merit, while in fact it is of 
little value, reproach them severely, Athenians! 
as l have done you. By so doing you will 
behave justly to me and to my sons. It is 
now time for us to part. I go to die, you to 
live; but which is best, none but the divinity 
knows.”9 

It is not wonderful that the disciples of So- 
crates should have believed the events of his 
extraordinary life, and especially its concluding 
scene, to be regulated by the interposition of a 
particular providence.'0 Every circumstance 
conspired to evince his unalterable firmness, 
and display his inimitable virtue. It happened, 
before the day of his trial, that the high-priest 
had crowned the stern of the vessel, which was 
annually sent to Delos, to commemorate by 
grateful acknowledgments to Apoilo, the tri- 
umphant return of Theseus from Crete, and 
the happy deliverance of Athens from a dis- 
graceful tribute.'! This ceremony announced 
the commencement of the festival, which ended 
with the return of the vessel; and, during the 
intervening time, which was consecrated to the 
honour of Apollo, it was not lawful to inflict 
any capital punishment. Contrary winds pro- 
tracted the ceremony thirty days, during which 
Socrates lay in prison, and in fetters. His 
friends daily visited him, repairing, at the dawn, 
to the prison gate, and impatiently waiting till 
it opened. Their conversation turned on the 
same subjects which had formerly occupied 
them; but afforded not that pure unmixed 
pleasure which they usually derived from the 
company of Socrates. It occasioned, however, 
nothing of that gloom which is naturally ex- 
cited by the presence of a friend under sentence 
of death. They felt a certain pleasing melan- 
choly, a mixed sensation of sorrow and delight, 
for which no language has assigned a name.!2 

When the fatal vessel arrived in the harbour 
of Sunium, and was hourly expected in the 
Piræus, Crito, the most confidential of the 


271 


9 Plato Apol. sub fin. 

10 According to Plato nothing happened in this transac- 
tion zveu Gesxg poses, Plat. Apol. Yet in the Phædo. 
sub. init. he says, Tuy4 Tiç eutw,w Exexexric! ruven, But 
tun here refers not ta the cause, but to the effect; not to 
blind chance, but to an unaccountable disposition of events 
produeed by a particular interposition of the divinity. In 
this sense the word is used not only by philcsophers but 
orators, particularly Demosthenes, as we shall see below. 

11 See p. 18. 

12 This is admirably described by Plato: AXkAw erexvws 
ZTOTOV TI KOL we5oc WRONV, XLI TIG aning xexTıç—aro Ts 
THE HOOVHS ruyxexexuevy oou xzi THS AUays- The follow- 
ing circumstanees are inimitable: Kx: ravreg os wxeovrss 
Tysdov Ts OuTw Dsexesuesdx, MOTE EV YbAwTes, eviots Os 
Fuxeupvorect eig Senpewy Sixgegovtws AmrodArAwdogoc? Osroes 
yue trav “vdex xxi Tov Teomov autov. Phardo. viii. c. il. 
Socrates alone felt none of these sensations; but as Mon- 
taigne, who had seized his true eharaeter, says, Et qui ne 
reconnoisse en luy, non sulement de la fermeté et de la con- 
stanee (c’¢toit son assiette ordinaire que eelle la) mais je ne 
scay qnel contentement nouveau et une allegresse enjouée 
en sos propos et facons dernieres. 


var < 


212 cy 
disciples of Socrates;! first brought the melan- 
cholly intelligence; and, moved byeéhe*near 
danger of his admired friend, venturedsto pro- 
pose a clandestine escape, showitigehim at the 
same time that he had collected a sufficient sum 
of money to corrupt the fidelity of his keefiers. 
This unmanly proposal, which nothing butte 
andistinguishing ardour of friendship co 
excuse, Socrates answered in a vein of plea- 
santry, which showed the perfect freedom of 
his mind, “In what country, O Grito! can 1 
escape death? where shall I fly to elude this 
irrevocable doom, passed on all human kind ?” 
To Apollodorus, a man of no great depth of un- 
derstanding, but his affectionate and zealous 
admirer, who said, “ That what grieved him 
beyond measure was, that such a man should 
perish unjustly,” he replied, stroking the head 
of his friend, “ And would you be less grieved, 
O Apolloderus! were I deserving of death?”? 
When his friends, and Crito especially, insisted, 
“That it would be no less ungenerous than im- 
prudent, in compliance with the hasty resolu- 
tion of a malignant or misguided multitude, to 
render his wife a widow, his children orphans, 
his disciples for ever miserable and forlorn, and 
conjured him, by every thing sacred, to save a 
life so inestimably precious;” Socrates assumed 
a tone more serious, recalled the maxims which 
he professed, and the doctrines which he had 
ever incuicated, “ That how unjustly soever we 
were treated, it could never be our interest to 
practice injustice, much less to retort the in- 
juries of our parents or our country; and to 
teach, by our example, disobedience to the 
laws.” The strength of his arguments, and 
still more, the unalterable firmness and cheerful 
serenity that appeared in his looks, words, and 
actions,? silenced the struggling emotions of his 
disciples. The dignity of virtue elevated their 
souls; they parted with tears of inexpressible 
admiration, and with a firm purpose to see 
their master earlier than usual on the fatal 
morning. 

Having arrived at the prison-gate, they were 
desired to wait without, because the Eleven (so 
the delicacy of Athens styled the executioners of 
public justice) unloosed the fetters of Socrates, 
and announced to him his death before the 
setting of the sun. They had not waited long, 
when they were desired toenter. They found 
Socrates just relieved from the weight of his 
bonds, attended by his wife Xantippé, who 
bore in her arms his infant son. At their ap- 
pearance, she exclaimed, “ Alas! Socrates, here 
come your friends, whom you for the last time 
behold, and who for the last time behold you!” 
Socrates, looking at Crito, desired some one to 
conduct her home. She departed, beating her 
breast, and lamenting with that clamorous sor- 
row natural to her sex‘ and her character. 

Socrates, mean while, reclining on the couch 
with his usual composure, drew his leg towards 
him, and gently rubbing the part which had 
ee eee 


1 Finding Socrates in a profound sleep, he reposed him- 
self by his side till he awoke. Plat. ibid. 
2 Xenoph. et Plat. ibid. 
Kzi ouuZTIi xxi oxnmars xx 
Xenoph. Apol. 
4 Bowruy t: uxt komrtousvyra ; and a little above, “osx 
S4 swba: os yuvasxes.”” Phardo, sect. iii. 


Eadirpxrs oxsders. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


- [Cuar. ? 


een galled by the fetters, remarked the won- 
derful connection between what men call plea- 
sure, and its opposite, pain. The one sensa- 
tion, he observed (as just happened to his leg 
after being delivered from the smart of the 
irons,) was generally followed by the other. 


Neither of them could long exist apart; they 


are seldom pure and unmixed; and whoever 
feels the one, may be sure that he will soon feel 
the other. “I think, that had sop the fabulist 
made this reflection, he would have said, that 
the divinity, desirous to reconcile these opposite 
natures, but finding the design impracticable, 
had at least joined their summits; for which 
reason pleasure has ever since dragged pain 
after it, and pain pleasure.” 

The mention of Æsop recalled to Cebes, the 
Theban, a conversation which he had recently 
had with Euenus of Paros, a celebrated elegiac 
poet, then resident in Athens.5 The poet asked 
Cebes, ** Why his master, who had never before 
addicted himself to poetry, should since his con- 
finement have written a hymn to Apollo, and 
turned into verse several of Æsop’s fables ?” 
The Theban seized the present opportunity to 
satisfy himself in this particular, and to acquire 
such information as might satisfy Euenus, who, 
he assured Socrates, would certainly repeat his 
question. The illustrious sage, whose inimita- 
ble virtues were all tinged, or rather brightened, 
by enthusiasm, desired Cebes to tell Euenus, 
“That it was not with a view to rival him, or 
with a hope to excel his poetry (for that, he 
knew, would not be easy,) that he had begun 
late in life this new pursuit. He had attempted 
it in compliance with a divine mandate, which 
frequently commanded him in dreams to culti- 
vate music, He had, therefore, first applied to 
philosophy, thinking that the greatest music; 
but since he was under sentence of death, he 
judged it safest to try likewise the popular mu- 
sic, lest any thing should on his part be omitted, 
which the gods had enjoined him. For this 
reason, he had composed a hymn to Apollo, 
whose festival was now celebrating ; and not 
being himself a mythologist, had versified such 
fablesof Æsop as happened most readily to occur 
to his memory. Tell this to Euenus—bid him 
farewell; and farther, that if he is wise, he will 
follow me; for I depart, as it is likely, to-day ; 
so the Athenians have ordered it.” 

The last words introduced an important con- 
versation concerning suicide, and the immor- 
tality of the soul. Socrates maintained, that 
though it was better for a wise man to die 
than to live, because there was reason to be- 
lieve that he would be happier in a future than 
in the present state of existence, yet it could 
never be allowable for him to perish by his own 
hand, or even to lay down life without a suffi- 
cient motive, such as that which influenced 
himself, a respectful submission to the laws of 
his country. This interesting discussion con- 
sumed the greatest part of the day. Socrates 
encouraged his disciples not to spare his opi- 
nions from delicacy to his present situation. 
Those who were of his mind he exhorted to 


5 The following narrative, to the death of Socrates, is 
entirely borrowed from the Phado, to which it is therefore 
unnecessary at every moment to refer. 


a 


E a 


v 
XXIV] 


persevere. Entwining his hand in the long 
hair of Pheedo, “These beautiful locks, my dear 
Phedo, you will this day cut off;5 but were I 
in your place, I would not again allow them to 
grow, but make a vow (as the Argives did in 
a matter of infinitely less moment) never to re- 
sume the wonted ornament of my beauty, un- 
til I had confirmed the doctrine of tle soul’s 
immortality.” 

The argument of Socrates convinced and 
consoled his disciples, as they have often done 
the learned and virtuous in succeeding times. 
“ Those who had adorned their minds with tem- 
perance, justice, and fortitude, and had despised 
the vain ornaments and vain pleasures of the 
body, could never regret their separation from 
this terrestrial companion. And now,” con- 
tinued he, in the language of tragedy, * the 
destined hour summons me to death; it is al- 
most time to bathe, and surely it will be better 
that I myself, before I drink the poison, should 
perform this ceremony, than occasion unneces- 
sary trouble to the women after [am dead.” 
“So let it be,” said Crito; “but first inform us, 
Socrates, in what we can do you pleasure, re- 
specting your children, or any other concern.” 
“ Nothing new, O Crito! but what I have al- 
ways told you. By consulting your own hap- 
piness, you will act the best part with regard to 
my children, to me, and to all mankind; al- 
though you bind not yourselves by any new 
promise. But if you forsake the rules of vir- 
tue, which we have just endeavoured to explain, 
you will benefit neither my children, nor any 
with whom you live, although you should now 
swear to the contrary.” Crito then asked him, 
« How he chose to be buried?” “As you please, 
provided [ dont escape you.” Saying this, he 
smiled, adding, that as to his body, they might 
bury it as seemed most decent, and most suita- 
ble to the laws of his country. 

He then retired into the adjoining chamber, 
accompanied only by Crito; the rest remained 
behind, like children mourning a father. When 
he had bathed and dressed, his sons (one grown 
up, and two children,) together with his female 
relations, were admitted to him. He conversed 
with them in the presence of Crito, and then 
returned to his disciples near sun-set, for he 
tarried long within. Before he had time to be- 
gin any new subject, the keeper of the prison 
entered, and standing near Socrates, “I can- 
not,” said he, “accuse you, O Socrates! of the 
rage and execrations teo often vented against 
me by those here confined, to whom, by com- 
mand of the magistrates, I announce that it is 
time to drink the poison. Your fortitude, mild- 
ness, and generosity, exceed all that I have 
ever witnessed; even now I know you pardon 
me, since I act by compulsion; and as you are 
acquainted with the purport of my message, 


5 The ceremony of cutting off the hair at funerals was 
mentioned above, p. 217, where the transaction of the Ar- 
gives, alluded to in the text, is related. 

6 ‘The otxcszs yuvesxss of Plato. This expression seems 
to have given rise to the absnrd fable, that Soerates had 
two wives, mentioned bv Diogenes Laertius, and others; 
and the absurd explication of that irregularity, “that the 
Athenians, after the pestilence, had allowed polygamy, 
at least bigamy, to repair the ravages of that dreadful 


malady.” 
2M 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


273 


farewell, and bear your fate with as much pa- 
tience as possible.” At these words the execu- 
tioner, hardened as he was in scenes of death, 
dissolved in tears, and turning from Socrates, 
went out. The latter following him with his 
eye, replied, “And youalso, farewell; as to me, 
I shall obey your instructions.” Then looking 
at his disciples, “How truly polite,” said he, 
“is the man/7 During my confinement, he of- 
ten visited and conversed with me; and now, 
how generously does he lament my death! But 
let the poison be brought, that we may obey 
his orders.” 

Crito then said, “Still, O Socrates! there is 
time; the sun still brightens the tops of the 
mountains, Many have I known, who have 
drank the poison late in the night, after a luxu- 
rious supper and generous wines, and lastly, 
after enjoying the embraces of those with whom 
they were enamoured.2 But hasten not; it is 
yet time.” *“ With good reason,” said Socrates, 
these persons did what you say, because they 
believed thereby to be gainers; and with good 
reason I shall act otherwise, because I am con- 
vinced that I should gain nothing but ridicule 
by an over-anxious solicitude for life, when it is 
just ready to leave me.” Crito then made a 
sign to the boy who waited; he went, ground 
the hemlock, and returned with him who was 
to administer it. Socrates perceiving his arri- 
val, “Tell me,” said he, “for you are experi- 
enced in such matters, what have I to do?”, 
Nothing further than to walk in the apartment 
till your limbs feel heavy; then repose your- 
self on the couch.” Socrates then taking the 
cup in his hand, and looking at him with inef- 
fable serenity, * Say, as to this beverage, is it 
lawful to employ any part of it in libation?” The 
other replied, * There is no more than what is 
proper to drink.” * But it is proper,” re- 
joined Socrates, “and necessary, if we would 
perform our duty, to pray the gods that our 
passage hence may be fortunate.” So saying, 
he was silent for a moment, and then drank the 
poison with an unaltered countenance. Min- 
gling gentleness with authority, he stilled the 
noisy lamentations of his friends, saying, that 
in order to avoid such unmanly complaints, he 
had before dismissed the women. As the poi- 
son began to gain his vitals, he uncovered his 
face, and said to Crito, “We owe a cock to 
Æsculapius ; sacrifice it, and neglect it not.” 
Crito asked, if he had any thing further to 
command? But he made no reply. A little 
after, he was in agony—Crito shut his eyes. 
Thus died Socrates; whom, his disciples de- 
clared, they could never cease to remember, 
nor remembering, cease to admire. “If any 
man,” says Xenophon inimitably, “if any man, 
a lover of virtue, ever found a more profitable 
companion than Socrates, I deem that man the 
happiest of human kind.”9 

The current of popular passions appears no- 


7 O aviewmrss, the term for the executioner. 

8 Luyyevouevous y’ evious wy av tuxwors sxrsSupouvres, 
Phæd. e. xlviii. What an extraordinary picture of Athe- 
nian manners! 

9 Plato speaks with equal feoling, of rather enthusiasm. 
Kzı yx TO pspvyTrizi, xzi auroy ASyYOVTÆg XXi AOU 
ALOUVOVTÆ, oiy t xisi mavTwv ysiotoy. Phæd. c. iiL 


274 


where more uniform than in the history of 
Athens. The factitious resentment excited 
against Socrates by such improbable calumnies, 
as even those who were the readiest to receive 
and to disseminate, could never seriously belicva, 
extended itself with rapidity to his numerous 
friends and adherents. But fortunately for the 
interest of letters and humanity, the endemic 
contagion was confined within the Athenian 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


The remains of Cebes and Asschines, and fas 
more, as will appear in the sequel, the copious 
writings of Plato and Zenonhon, may enable 
us to discriminate the philosophy of Socrates, 
from that of the various sects who misrepre- 
sented or adulterated his opinions. The estab- 
lishment of these sects belongs not to the period 
of history now under our review. But the 
foundation of their respective tenets, which had 


frontiers. Plato, Antisthenes, A:schines, Crito- | been laid in a former age, was confirmed by 
bulus, end other Athenians, wisely eluded aj| the philosophers who flourished in the time of 


storm which they had not strength to resist.| Socrates. 


Of these, the most distinguished 


Some took refuge in Thebes with their fellow- | were Euclid of Megara, Phedo of Elis, Aris- 


disciples, Simmias, Cebes, and Phedondas; 
others found protection in Megara from Euclid 


| 


tippus of Cyrené, Antisthenes of Athens. The 
two first restored the captious logic of the 


and Terpsion. This persecution of philosophy, | sophists; Aristippus embraced their licentious 


however, was accidental and transient. Min- 
gled sentiments of pity, shame, and resentment, 
soon gave a new direction to the popular fury, 
which raged with more destructive, yet far 
juster cruelty, against the accusers and judges 
of Socrates.) Many were driven into exile; 
many were put to death; several perished in 
despair, by their own hands. The illustrious 
sage was honoured by signal monuments of 
public admiration;? his fame, like the hardy 
oak, derived vigour from years ;3 and increased 
from age to age, till the superstition of the 
Athenians at length worshipped, as a god,4 him 
whoni their injustice condemned as a criminal. 

The persecution, the death, and the honours 
of Socrates, all conspired to animate the afiec- 
tion, and to increase the zeal, of his disciples. 
Their number had been great in his lifetime: 
it became greater after his death; since those 
who followed, and those who rejected his doc- 
trines, alike styled themselves Socratic philoso- 
phers. His name was thus adopted and pro- 
faned by many sects, who, while they differed 
widely from each other, universally changed, 
exaggerated, or perverted the tenets of their 
common master. Among the genuine followers 
of Socrates, Xenophon, as will appear hereaf- 
ter, unquestionably merits the first place. Plato 
comes next, yet separated by a long interval. 
In the same class may be ranked Cebes the 
Theban, Æschines, Crito, and Simon, Athe- 
nians. The table of Cebes, which has been 
transmitted to modern times, contains a beau- 
tiful and affecting picture of human life, de- 
lineated with accuracy of judgment, and illu- 
minated by the splendour of sentiment. Three 
remaining dialogues of Æschines breathe the 
same sublime spirit, and abound in irresistible 
persuasions to virtue: “ That happiness is at- 
tained, not by gratifying, but by moderating 
the passions; that he alone is rich and power- 
ful, whose faculties exceed his desires; that 
virtue is true wisdom, and being attended with 
the only secure happiness which can be enjoyed 
in the present life, must, according to the unal- 
terable laws of Providence, be crowned with 
immortal felicity hereafter.” 


1 Plutarch. de Invid. p. 538. 

2 Statues, altars, even a chapel called Socrateion. Vide 
Diogen. in Socrat. 

3 Crescit occulto, velut arbor, evo 

Fama Marcelli-—— HORACE. 

4 Or rather as a demi-god; but the boundaries were not 
very aceurately ascertained, though that is attempted by 
Arrian, in Expedit. Alexand. l. iv. p. 86 


morality. While the schools of Elis and Me- 
gara studied to confound the understanding, 
that of Cyrené laboured to corrupt the heart. 
Antisthenes set himself to oppose these perni- 
cious sects, deriding the refined subtleties of the 
sceptics, and disdaining the mean pleasures of 
the Epicureans.5 To prefer the mind to the 
body, duty to interest, and virtue to pleasure, 
were the great lessons of Antisthenes. Yet 
this sublime philosophy he carried to extrava- 
gance,® affecting not only to moderate and go- 
vern, but to silence and extirpate the passions, 
and declaring bodily pleasure not only un- 
worthy of pursuit, but a thing carefully to be 
avoided as the greatest and most dangerous of 
evils. His rigid severity of life deceived not 
the penetration of Socrates. The sage could 
discern, that no small share of spiritual pride 
lurked under the tattered cloak of Antisthenes. 
While philosophy, true or false, thus flourish- 
ed in Greece, a propitious destiny watched over 
the imitative arts, which continued, during half 
A.C a century of perpetual wars and 
43140 4 revolutions, to be cultivated with 
* equal assiduity and success. The 

most distinguished scholars of Phidias were 
Alcamenes of Athens, and Agoracritus of the 
isle of Paros. They contended for the prize 
of sculpture in their respective statues of Ve- 
nus; and the Athenians, it is said, too partially 
decided in favour of their countryman. Ago- 
racritus, unwilling that his work should remain 
in a city where it had met with so little justice, 
sold it to the borough of Rhamnus. There it 
was beheld with admiration, and soon passed 
for a production of Phidias? himself. The 
sculptor Cteselaus excelled in heroes. He chose 
noble subjects, and still farther ennobled them 
by his art. His contemporary Patrocles dis- 
tinguished himself by his statues of Olympic 
victors, and particularly of celebrated wrestlers. 


5 I anticipate these names. The scepticism of Pyrrho, 
as will be explained hereafter, arose from the quibbling 
sophisms of the schools of Elis and Megara. Epicurus, 
having adapted and refined the selfish philosophy of Aris- 
tippus, had the honour of distinguishing by his name, the 
Epicurean sect. 

6 His follower, Diogenes, as will appenr in the sequel, 
pushed this extravagance still further. They both taught 
in the suburb of Athens called the Cynosarges, from which 
they and their disciples were called Cynics. In a subse- 
quent part of this work, it will be explained, how the 
Cynical philosophy gave rise to Stoicism, so salled, because 
Zeno and his followers taught at Athens in the “Stoa 
pecile,”’ the painted portico. 

7 Vid. Suid. et Hesych. voc. Papveug. 

8 Plin. l. xxxv. 


a 


XXIV.| 


Assisted by Canachus, he made the greatest 
work mentioned during the period now under 
our review, thirty-one figures of bronze, repre- 
senting the respective commanders of the se- 
veral cities or republics, who, under the con- 
duct of Lysander, obtained the memorable 
victory of Ægos Potamos. They were erected 
in the temple of Delphian Apollo, together with 
the statue of Lysander himself, crowned by 
Neptune. Inferior artists? were employed to 
copy the statues of various divinities, dedicated 
at the same time, and in the same place, by the 
Lacedemonian conqueror. 

It appears not, however, that, during the 
Peloponnesian war, any new style was attempt- 
ed either in sculpture or painting. The artists 
of that period contented themselves with walk- 
ing in the footsteps of their great predecessors. 
The same observation applies to music and 
poetry; but eloquence, on the contrary, receiv- 
ed a new form, and flourishing amidst the tu- 
mults of war and the contentions of active life, 
produced that concise, rapid, and manly cha- 
racter of composition which thenceforth distin- 
guished the Attic writers. The works of Ho- 
mer, Sophocles, and Pindar, left few laurels to 
be gained by their successors. It was impossi- 
ble to excel, it was dangerous to rival them. 
Great genius was required to start, without dis- 
grace, in a career where such candidates had 
run. But great genius is rare, and commonly 
disdains imitation ; and the first poetical prizes 
being already carried off, men who felt the ani- 
mation and vigour of their own powers, natu- 
rally directed them to objects which possessed 
the charms of novelty, and promised the hope 
of excellence. 

Even in prosaic composition the merit and 
fame of Herodotus and Democritus!? (not to 
mention authors more ancient) opposed very 
formidable obstacles to the ambition of their 
successors. In a work no less splendid than 
important, the father of profane history had 
deduced the transactions between the Greeks 
and Barbarians, from the earliest accounts till 
the conclusion of the Persian war; a work in- 
cluding the history of many centurics, and 
comprehending the greatest kingdoms and em- 
pires of the ancient world. This extensive 
subject was handled with order and dignity. 
The episodes were ingeniously interwoven with 
the principal action. The various parts of the 
narrative were so skilfully combined, that they 
mutually reflected light on each other. Geo- 
graphy, manners, religion, laws, and arts, en- 
tered into the plan of his work; and it is re- 
markable that the earliest of historians agrees 
more nearly, as to the design and form of his 
undertaking, with the enlightened writers of 
the present century, than any historical author 
in the long series of intervening ages. 

His language was the picture of his mind; 


9 See their names in Pausan. l. x. p. 625, et seq. 

10 Itaque video visum esse nonnullis Platonis et Demo- 
criti locutionem, etsi absit a versu, tamen quod incitatius 
feratur, et clarissimis verhorum luminibus utatur, potius 
poéma putandum, quam comicorum poetarum. Cicero ad 
M. Brutum Orator, c. xx. See also de Orator. l. i. c. xl. It 
is impossible to read Lucretius, without fancying, if we re- 
collect Cicero's criticisms on Democritus, that we are pe- 
rusing the long lost works of that great philosopher. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


275 


natural, flowing, persuasive ; lofty on great oc- 
sions,! affecting in scenes of distress,!2 perspi- 
cuous in narration, animated in description. 
Yet this admired writer has sometimes inserted 
reports romantic and incredible. Of many, in- 
deed, of the fables of Herodotus, as ignorance 
conceited of its knowledge long affected to call 
them, subsequent experience has proved the 
reality ; modern discoveries and voyages seem 
purposely directed to vindicate the fame of a 
writer, whom Cicero!? dignifies with the appel- 
lation of Prince of Historians. Of other won- 
drous tales which he relates, his own discern- 
ment showed him the futility. Whatever is 
contrary to the analogy of nature he rejects 
with scorn. He speaks with contempt of the 
/Egepodes, and of the one-eyed Arimaspi, and 
of other ridiculous and absurd fictions which 
have been adopted, however, by some credulous 
writers even in the eighteenth century. But 
Herodotus thought himself bound in duty to 
relate what he had heard, not always to be- 
lieve what he related.!4_ Having travelled into 
Egypt and the east, he recounts, with fidelity, 
the reports current in those remote countries. 
And his mind being opened and enlarged by an 
extensive view of men and manners, he had 
learned to set bounds to his disbelief, as well 
as to his credulity. Yetit must not be dissem- 
bled that the fabulous traditions, in which he 
too much abounds, give the air of romance to 
his history. Though forming, comparatively, 
but a small part of the work, they assume mag- 
nitude and importance, when invidiously de- 
tached from it.'5 It thus seems as if this most 
instructive author had written with a view ra- 
ther to amuse the fancy than to inform the un- 
derstanding. The lively graces of his diction 
tend to confirm this supposition. His mode of 
composition may be regarded as the interme- 
diate shade between epic poetry and history. 
Neither concise nor vehement, the general cha- 
racter of his style is natural, copious, and flow- 
ing ;'6 and his manner throughout breathes 
the softness of Jonia, rather than the active 
contention of Athens. 


11 Longinus cites as an example of the sublime, Hero- 
dot. l. vii. c. Ix. The whole expedition of Xerxes is writ: 
ten with an elevation becoming the subject. 

12 See the affecting story of Adrastus, l. i. €. xxxv. 

13 L. ii. de Orator. ` 

14 Eyw Se ogeiaw Acyeiv re Asyouevæ, wesherdas ye uye 
ov wavTamars oOsikw. Herodot. l. vii. c. clii. p. 433. 

15 The reproaches which Juvenal (Satyr. 10.) and Plu- 
tarch (in his treatise entitled the Malignity of Herodotus) 
make to this great historian, are fully answered by Aldus 
Manutius, Camerarius, and Stephanus. Plutarch, forsooth, 
was offended that his countrymen made so bad a figure in 
the history of Herodotus. The criticism of Dionysius of 
Halicarnassus, a writer of more taste and discernment than 
Plutarch, does ample justice to the father of history. 

16 Aristotle, in his Rhetoric, L iii. c. ix. distinguishes two 
kinds of style; the continuous and the periodic. The for- 
mer flows on without interruption, until the sense is com- 
plete. The latter is divided by stops, into due proportions 
of duration, which are easily felt by the ear, and measured 
by the mind. The former style is tiresome, because in every 
thing men delight to see the end; even racers, when they 
pass the goal, are quickly out of breath. Herodotus is the 
most remarkable instance of the continuous style. In his 
lime scarcely any other was in use; but it is now entirely 
laid aside. So fur Aristotle, who seems rather unjnst to 
Herodotus, since many parts of his work are sufficiently 
adorned by periods, although the loose style in general pre- 
vails. But the partiality of his countryman Dionysius com- 
pletely avenges the wrongs of Herodotus. 


276 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


(Cap. 


In this light Herodotus appeared to the Athe- | in this particular he must be acknowledged far 


nians in the age immediately succeeding his 
own. At the Olympic games he had read his 
work with universal applause. Thucydides, 
then a youth, wept mixed tears of wonder 
and emulation.! His father was complimented 
on the generous ardour of a son, whose early 
inquietude at another’s fame announced a cha- 
racter formed for great designs and illustrions 
exertions. But Herodotus had pre-occupied the 
subjects best adapted to historical composition; 
and it was not till the commencement of the 
memorable war of twenty-seven years, that 
Thucydides, amidst the dangers which threat- 
ened his country, rejoiced in a theme worthy to 
exercise the genius, and call forth the whole 
vigour of an historian. From the breaking out 
of this war, in which he proved an unfortunate 
actor, he judged that it would be the greatest, 
the most obstinate, and important that had ever 
been carried on. He began therefore to collect, 
and treasure up, such materials as were neces- 
sary for describing it; in the selection, as well 
as in the distribution of which, he afterwards 
discovered an evident purpose to rival and sur- 
pass Herodotus. Too much indulgence for fic- 
tion had disgraced the narrative of the latter: 
Thucydides professed to be animated purely by 
the love of truth. “His relation was not in- 
tended to delight the ears of an Olympic audi- 
ence. By a faithful account of the past, he 
hoped to assist his readers in conjecturing the 
future. While human nature remained the 
same, his work would have its use, being built 
on such principles as rendered it an everlasting 
possession, not a contentious instrument of tem- 
porary applause.”? The execution correspond- 
ed with this nobie design. In his introductory 
discourse he runs over the fabulous ages of 
Greece, carefully separating the ore from the 
dross. In speaking of Thrace, he touches, with 
proper brevity, on the fable of Tereus and 
Progne ;3 and in describing Sicily, glances at 
the Cyclops and Lestrigons. But he recedes, 
as it were, with disgust, from such monstrous 
phantoms, and immediately returns to the main 
purpose of his history. “In order to render it a 
faithful picture of the times, he professes to re- 
late not only what was done, but what was 
said, by inserting such speeches of statesmen 
and generals as he had himself heard, or as 
had been reported to him by others. This va- 
luable part of his work was imitated by all fu- 
ture historians, till the improvement of military 
discipline on the one hand, and the corruption 
of manners on the other, rendered such speeches 
superfluous. Eloquence once served as an in- 
centive to courage, and an instrument of govern- 
ment. But the time was to arrive, when the 
dead principles of fear and interest should alone 
predominate. In most countries of Europe, 
despotism has rendered public assemblies a 
dramatic representation; and in the few, where 
men are not enslaved by a master, they are the 
slaves of pride, of avarice, and of faction. 
Thucydides, doubtless, had his model in the 
short and oblique speeches of Herodotus; but 


1 Suidas, Photius, Marcellinus. 
2 Thucydid. in Proem. 
3 Ovid. Metam. l. vi. 


to surpass his patron. In the distribution of 
his subject, however, he fell short of that wri- 
ter. Thucydides, aspiring at extraordinary ac- 
curacy, divides his work by summers and win- 
ters, relating apart the events comprehended in 
each period of six months. But this space of 
time is commonly too short for events deserv- 
ing the notice of history, to be begun, carried 
on, and completed. His narrative, therefore, is 
continually broken and interrupted: curiosity 
is raised without being satisfied, and the reader 
is transported, as by magic, from Athens to 
Corcyra, from Lesbos to Peloponnesus, from 
the coast of Asia to Sicily. Thucydides follows 
the order of time; Herodotus the connection 
of events: in the language of a great critic, 
the skill and taste of Herodotus have reduced 
a very complicated argument into one harmo- 
nious whole; the preposterous industry of Thu- 
cydides has divided a very simple subject into 
many detached parts and scattered limbs of 
history, which it is difficult again to reduce into 
one regular body. The same critic observes, 
that Herodotus’s history not only possesses 
more art and variety, but displays more gayety 
and splendour. A settled gloom, doubtless, 
hangs over the events of the Peloponnesian 
war: but what is the history of all wars, but a 
description of crimes and calamities? The aus- 
tere gravity of Thucydides admirably corres- 
ponds with his subject. His majesty is worthy 
of Athens, when she commanded a thousand 
tributary republics. His concise, nervous, and 
energetic style, his abrupt brevity, and elabo- 
rate plainness, admirably represent the con- 
tentions of active life, and the tumult of de- 
mocratical assemblies. Demosthenes, whom 
Dionysius himself extols above all orators, 
transcribed eight times, not the elegant flowing 
smoothness of Herodotus, but the sententious, 
harsh, and often obscure annals of Thucydides.5 

Thucydides left his work unfinished in the 
twenty-first year of the Peloponnesian war. It 
was continued by Xenophon, who deduced the 
revolutions of Greece through a series of forty- 
eight years to the battle of Mantinea; a work 
which enables us to pursue the important se- 
ries of Grecian history. 

To a reader accustomed to contemplate the 
uniform and consistent operations of modern 
policy, it must appear extraordinary that, at the 
distance of less than two years from the sub- 
version of the Athenian democracy by a Spar- 
tan general, the same turbulent form of go- 
vernment should have been re-established with 
new splendour, by the approbation, and even 
the assistance, of a Spartan king. The reasons 
explained in the preceding chapter may lessen, 
but cannot altogether remove. his surprise ; and, 
in order fully to comprehend the causes of this 
event, it is necessary to consider not only the 
internal factions which distracted the councils 
of Sparta, but the external objects of ambition 
or revenge which solicited and employed her 
arms. 

While the fortune of the Peloponnesian war 
still hung in doubtful suspense, the peaceful in- 


4 Dionys. Halicarn. de Herodot. et Thucydid. 
5 Ibid. 


XXIV.} 


habitants of Elis often testified an inclination to 
preserve an inoffensive neutrality, that they 
might apply, with undivided attention, to their 
happy rural Jabours, to the administration of 
the Olympian festival, and to the indispensable 
worship of those gods and heroes to whom their 
territory was peculiarly consecrated. The con- 
tinual solicitation of Sparta, and the unprovoked 
violence of Athens, determined the Elians to 
declare for the former republic; but of all the 
Spartan allies they were the most lukewarm and 
indifferent. In time of action their assistance 
was languid and ineffectual, and when the regu- 
Jar return of the Olympic solemnity suspended 
the course of hostilities, they showed little par- 
tiality or respect for their powerful confederates, 
whose warlike and ambitious spirit seemed in- 
compatible with the enjoyment of their own 
contemplative tranquillity. This omission of 
duty was followed by the actual trangression 
of the Elians. In conjunction with the Man- 
tinæans and Argives they deserted the alliance 
of Sparta; defended themselves by arms against 
the usurpations of that republic; and excluded 
its members from consulting the oracle, and 
from partaking of the games and sacrifices ce- 
lebrated at Olympia. These injuries passed 
with impunity until the successful issue of the 
war of Peloponnesus disposed the Spartans to 
feel with sensibility, and enabled them severely 
to chastise every insult that had been offered 
them during the less prosperous current of their 
fortune. 

While Pausanias and Lysander settled the 
affairs of Athens and of Asia, Agis, the most 
warlike of their princes, levied a 


Olyan. powerful army, to inflict a late, but 
XCIV. 2. k 
A. C. 403. terrible vengeance on the Elians. 


That he might attack the enemy 
unprepared, he led his forces through the coun- 
tries of Argolis and Achaia, entering the Elian 
territory by the way of Larissa, and intending 
to march by the shortest road to the devoted 
capital. But he had scarcely passed the river 
Larissus, which gives name to the town, and 
separates the adjoining provinces of Elis and 
Achaia, when the invaders were admonished, 
by repeated shocks of an earthquake, to abstain 
from ravaging a country which enjoyed the im- 
mediate protection of Heaven. Into such a 
menace, at least, this terrible phenomenon was 
interpreted by the superstition of the Spartan 
king, who immediately repassed the river, and, 
returning home, disbanded his army. But the 
hostility of the Spartans was restrained, not 
extinguished. Having offered due supplications 
and sacrifices to sanctify the impious invasion, 
the ephori, next year, commanded Agis again 
to levy troops, and to enter the Elian territory. 
No unfavourable sign checked the progress of 
his arms. During two summers and autumns, 
the country was desolated; the villages burned 
or demolished ; their inhabitants dragged into 
captivity; the sacred edifices were despoiled of 
their most valued ornaments; the porticos, 
gymnasia, and temples, which adorned the city 
of Jupiter, were many of them reduced to ruins. 
The Spartans neither alone incurred the guilt, 


6 Thucydid. l. v. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


277 


nor exclusively enjoyed the profits of this cruel 
devastation. The Elian invasion furnished a 
rich harvest of plunder to the Arcadians and 
other communities of Peloponnesus, whose ra- 
pacious lust was enflamed by the virgin bloom 
of a country which had long been protected by 
religion against the ravages of war. When the 
principal property of the Elians was destroyed 
or plundered, the Spartans at length granted 
them a peace, on condition that they surrender- 
ed their fleet, acknowledged the independence 
of the inferior towns and villages, which were 
scattered along the delightful banks of the 
Peneus and the Alpheus, and modelled their in- 
ternal government according to the plan pre- 
scribed by their conquerors.’ 

The war of Elis occupied, but did not engross, 
the attention of the Spartans; nor did the pu- 
nishment of that unfortunate re- 


hag public divert them from other pro- 
A C 401 jects of revenge. The Messenians 


were not their accidental and tem- 
porary, but their natural and inveterate, foes ; 
and might justly expect to fecl the unhappy 
consequences of their triumph. After the de- 
struction of Messené, and the long wanderings 
and misery of its persecuted citizens, the town 
of Naupactus, situate on the northern shore of 
the Corinthian gulf, furnished a safe retreat to 
a feeble remnant of that ancient community ; 
which, flourishing under the protection of 
Athens, spread along the western coast, and 
planted a considerable colony in the neighbour- 
ing island of Cephalenia. We have already 
described the memorable gratitude of the Mes- 
senians, who were the most active, zealous, 
and, according to their ability, the most useful 
allies of Athens in the Peloponnesian war. But 
their assistance (and assistance far more power- 
ful than theirs) proved ineffectual; and the 
time was now arrived when they were to suffer 
a severe punishment for their recent as well as 
ancient injuries. The resentment of Sparta 
drove them from Naupactus and Cephalenia. 
The greater part escaped to Sicily; above three 
thousand sailed to Cyrenaica, the only countries 
inhabited by the Hellenic race, which lay be- 
yond the reach of the Lacedemonian power.8 

From the era of this important migration, the 
names of Sicily and Cyrenaica will seldom oc- 
cur in the present history ; on which account 
it may not be improper briefly to explain the 
causes which withdrew from the general sphere 
of Grecian politics a fruitful and extensive 
coast, and an island not less fruitful and exten- 
sive, and far more populous and powerful. The 
insulated situation of these remote provinces, 
while it rendered it extremely inconvenient for 
Greece to interfere in their affairs, peculiarly 
exposed them to two evils, which rendered it 
still more inconvenient for them to interfere in 
the affairs of Greece. Removed from the pro- 
tection of their Peloponnesian ancestors, both 
the Cyreneans and Sicilians often endured the 
oppression of domestic tyrants, and often suf- 
fered the ravages of foreign barbarians. 

The inhabitants of Cyrenaica alternately car- 
ried on the war against the Libians and Car- 


7 Xenophon Hellen. l. iii. c. 2. Diodor, l. xiv. p. 404. 
8 Diodor. l. xiv. p. 415. 


278 


thaginians.! They were actually oppressed by 
the tyrant Ariston. Soon afterwards they re- 
covered their civil liberty ;2 but were com- 
pelled frequently to struggle for their national 
independence. Though often invaded, their 
country was never subdued by any barbarian 
enemy ; and their liberties survived the repub- 
lics of their European brethren, since they re- 
luctantly submitted for the first time to the 
fortunate general of Alexander, who, in the 
division of his master’s conquests, obtained the 
fertile and wealthy kingdom of Egypt.? 

The revolutions of Sicily are far better known 
than those of Cyrené, and still more worthy to 
be remembered. During the latter years of the 
Peloponnesian war, the assistance given by Sy- 
racuse to the Lacedemonians became gradually 
more faint and imperceptible, and at length it 
was totally withdrawn. This was occasioned 
by the necessity of defending the safety of the 
whole island, in which that of the capital was 
involved, against the formidable descents of the 
Carthaginians, whom the invitation of Segesta 
and several inferior cities at variance with their 
powerful neighbours, the hopes of acquiring at 
once those valuable commodities, the annual 
purchase of which drained Africa of such im- 
mense treasures, and, above all, the desire of 
revenging the death of Hamilcar, and the dis- 
honour of the Carthaginian name in the unfor- 
tunate siege of Himera, encouraged to under- 
take and carry on various expeditions for the 
entire subjugation of Sicily. 

Hannibal, the grandson of Ha- 


aap milcar, was entrusted with the con- 
Ol, duct of the war, which commenced 

wee the four hundred and tenth, and 
af X continued, with little intermission, 
410—404 till the four hundred and fourth 


* year before the Christian era. The 
domestic troops of Carthage were reinforced by 
their African allies. Considerable levies were 
made among the native Spaniards and Italians, 
who had long envied the splendour, and dread- 
ed the power of the Greeks, to whose conquest 
and colonies they saw no bounds. The united 
army exceeded a hundred thousand men, and 
was conveyed to the southern shore of Sicily 
in a proportionable number of transports and 
galleys.4 
The design of Hannibal, as far as it appears 
from his measures, was to conquer successively 
the smaller and more defenceless towns, before 
he laid siege to Syracuse, whose natural strength, 
recently improved by art, bidding defiance to 
assault, could only be taken by blockade. The 
first campaign was rendered memo- 
BEST rable by the conquest of Selinus 
and Himera; the second by the demolition of 
Agrigentum ; the third by the taking of Gela. 
The inferior cities of Solas, Egesta, Motya, 
A.C.40g, Ancyra, Entelta, and Panormus, 
A.C. 405. either invited the Carthaginian 
~ * arms, or surrendered without re- 
sistance. The invaders might have proceeded 
to the siege of Syracuse, the main object of 


1 Aristot. Polit. Sallust. de Bell. Jugurth. 

2 Diodor. l. xiv. p. 415. 

3 Diodor. l. xix. p. 715. et Strabo. 1. xvii. p. 836. 
4 Diodor. Sicul. l. xiii. c. 43. et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


their expedition; but pestilence followed the 
bloody havoe of war, and swept off, in undis- 
tinguished ruin, the victors and the vanquished. 
Not only the general, but the most numerous 
portion of his troops, had fallen a prey to this 
calamity ; and Hamilcar, who succeeded to the 
command, contented himself with leaving gar- 
risons in the towns which had been conquered, 
and returned to Africa with the enfeebled re- 
mains of his armament, which communicated 
the pestilential infection to Carthage, where it 
long raged with destructive fury.’ 

According to the genius of Grecian supersti- 
tion, it was natural to ascribe the sufferings of 
the Carthaginians to the unexampled cruelty 
and impiety with which, in their successive ra- 
vages, they had deformed the fair face of Sicily. 
It would be useless and disgustful to describe the 
horrid scenes of bloodshed and slaughter trans- 
acted’in the several places which presumed to 
resist their power. Whatever atrocities could 
be invented by the unprincipled license of the 
Italians, approved by the stern insensibility of 
the Spaniards, and inflicted by the implacable 
revenge of the Africans, were committed in the 
miserable cities of Selinus, Himera, Gela, and 
Agrigentum. After the taking of Himera, 
Hannibal sacrificed in one day three thousand 
of its inhabitants to the manes of his grand- 
father, who in the first Carthaginian invasion, 
had perished before its walls; and the lot of 
these unhappy victims, dreadful as it was, 
might justly be an object of envy to the long 
tormented natives of Gela and Selinus. 

Yet of all Sicilian cities, the fate of Agri- 
gentum seemed the most worthy to be deplored, 
from the striking contrast of its fallen state 
with its recent splendour and prosperity. The 
natural beauties of Agrigentum were secured 
by strength, and adorned with elegance; and 
whoever considered either the innumerable ad- 
vantages of the city itself, or the gay cultiva- 
tion of the surrounding territory, which abound- 
ed in every luxury of the sea and land, was 
ready to pronounce the Agrigentines the most 
favoured inhabitants of the earth. The exu- 
berant fertility of the soil, particularly the rich 
luxuriance of the vines and olives,’ exceeded 
every thing that is related of the happiest cli- 
mates, and furnished the materials of a lucra- 
tive commerce with the populous coast of Af- 
rica, which was very sparingly provided in those 
valuable plants. The extraordinary wealth of 
the Agrigentines was displayed in the magnifi- 
cence of public edifices, and in the splendid en- 
joyment of private fortunes. They had begun, 
and almost completed, the celebrated temple ot 
Jupiter, built in the grandest style of architec- 
ture employed by the Greeks on the greatest 
and most solemn occasions. Its walls were en- 
compassed by pillars without, and adorned by 
pilasters within ; and its magnitude far exceed- 


am 


ed the ordinary dimensions of ancient temples, ° 


as it extended three hundred a forty feet in 
length, sixty in breadth, and a hundred and 


ð Diodor. l. xiii. c. 70. et seq. 

6 The following particulars in the text, concerning Agri- 
gentum, we learn from Diodorus Siculus, p. 374—379. Va 
ler. Maxim. l. iv. 8. Athenæus, l. i. c€. 3. 

7 Diodorus celebrates the height of the vines, which we 
are not used to consider as a proper subject of panegyric. 


XXIV.] 


twenty in height, without including the lofty 
and spacious dome. The grandeur of the doors 
and vestibule corresponded with the simple 
majesty of the whole edifice, whose sculptured 
ornaments represented, with finished elegance, 
and with a laborious accuracy that distinguish- 
ed each particular figure, the defeat of the 
Giants, and the taking of Troy; respectively, 
the most illustrious exploits of Grecian gods, 
and Grecian heroes. 

This noble monument, consecrated to piety 
and patriotism, might be contrasted, by a philo- 
sophic mind, with others destined to a very dif- 
ferent purpose. Without the walls of Agrigen- 
tum, an artificial pond, or rather lake, thirty feet 
deep and near a mile in circumference, was 
continually replenished with a rare variety of 
the most delicate fishes, to furnish a sure sup- 
ply to the sumptuous extravagance of public 
entertainments. But nothing could rival the 
elegance and beauty of the tombs and sepul- 
chres erected by the Agrigentines, to perpetuate 
the fame of their coursers which had obtained 
the Olympic prize ; and, if we believe the tes- 
timony of an eye-witness,’ to commemorate the 
quails and other delicate birds, which were 
cherished with an affectionate and partial fond- 
ness by the effeminate youth of both sexes. 
Such capricious and absurd abuses of opulence 
and the arts might be expected amidst the mor- 
tifying discrimination of ranks, and the enor- 
mous superabundance of private riches, which 
distinguished the Agrigentines. The labour of 
numerous and active slaves cultivated agricul- 
ture and manufactures with extraordinary suc- 
cess. From the profit of these servile hands 
many citizens attained, and exceeded, the mea- 
sure not only of Grecian, but of modern wealth. 
A short time before the siege of the town, 
Hexenitus returned in triumph from Olympia, 
with three hundred chariots, each drawn by 
two milk-white horses of Sicilian blood. Antis- 
thenes had eclipsed this magnificence in cele- 
brating the marriage of his daughter. But 
every native of Agrigentum yielded the fame 
of splendour to the hospitable Gellias, whose 
palace could entertain and lodge five hundred 
guests, who had been clothed from his ward- 
robe, and whose cellars, consisting of three 
hundred spacious reservoirs, cut in the solid 
rock, daily invited the joyous festivity of stran- 
gers and citizens, 

Before the second Carthaginian invasion, the 
Agrigentines, warned by the fate of Selinus and 
Himera, had prepared whatever seemed most 
necessary for their own defence. Their maga- 
zines were stored with provisions, their arsenals 
with arms. Elevated by the confidence of pros- 
perity, they had courage to resist the first im- 
pressions of their enemies; but, corrupted by 
the vices of wealth and luxury, they wanted 
fortitude to persevere. Their allies in Sicily 
and Italy showed not that degree of ardour 
which might have been expected in a war which 
so deeply concerned them all: yet, by the par- 
tial assistance of Syracuse, Gela, and Camerina, 
as well as several Grecian allies in Italy, the 
Agrigentines stood the siege eight months, dur- 


8 Timaus apud Diodor. l. xiii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


279 


ing which, the Carthaginians employed every 
resource of strength and ingenuity. At length 
the place was reduced to great difficulties by 
means of immense wooden machines, drawn on 
wheels, which enabled the besiegers to fight on 
equal ground with those who defended the 
walls. But before any breach was effected, tlhe 
greater part of the inliabitants determined to 
abandon the city. 

In the obscurity of night, they departed with 
their wives and families, and many of them for- 
tunately escaped to Gela, Syracuse, and Leon- 
tium. Others, wanting courage for this danger- 
ous resolution, or unwilling to survive the fate 
of their country, perished by their own hands. 
A third class, more timid, or more superstitious, 
shut themselves up in the temples, expecting 
| to be saved by the protection of the gods, or by 
the religious awe of the enemy. But the Bar- 
barians no more respected what was sacred, 
than what was'profane. The consecrated sta- 
tues, and altars, and offerings, were confounded 
with things the most vile, and plundered or de- 
stroyed in the promiscuous ruin. One memora- 
ble act of despair may represent the general 
horror of this dreadful scene. With his numer- 
ous friends, and most valued treasure, the hu- 
mane and hospitable Gellias had taken refuge 
in the temple of Minerva; but when he under- 
stood the universal desolation of his country, 
he set fire to that sacred edifice, choosing to 
perish by the flames rather than by the rage of 
the Carthaginians.9 

Near fourscore years before the 
oe demolition of Agrigentum, Sicily 

xeni, l. va had acquired immortal glory, by de- 
A. C. 408. acquired immortal glory, by de 

feating more numerous invaders; 
but, at that time, the efforts of the whole island 
were united'and animated by the virtues and 
abilities of Gelon; whereas, amidst the actual 
dangers and trepidation of the Carthaginian 
war, the Sicilians were distracted by domestic 
factions. Syracuse had banished the only man 
whose consummate wisdom, and approved va- 
lour and fidelity, seemed worthy to direct the 
helm in the present tempestuous juncture. In 
the interval between the siege of Himera and 
that of Agrigentum, the patriotic Hermocratus 
had returned to Sicily ; and, at the head of his 
numerous adherents, had attempted to gain ad- 
mission into the capital. But the attempt was 
immediately fatal to himself; and, in its conse- 
quences, destructive of the public freedom. 
His partisans, though discomfited and banished, 
soon found a leader qualified to avenge their 
cause, and to punish the ingratitude of Syra- 
cuse. 

This was the celebrated Dionysius, a youth 
of twenty-two years; of mean parentage, but 
unbounded ambition; destitute (if we believe 
historians) of almost every virtue, and possess- 
ed of every talent; and whose fortune it was, to 
live and flourish amidst those perturbed cir- 
cumstances of foreign war and civil dissension, 
which are favourable to the elevation of supe- 
rior minds. Though esteemed and entrusted 

| by Hermocrates, who could more easily discern 
| the merit of his abilities, than discover the dan- 
| 


| 9 Diodorus, p. 379 


Olymp. 


280 


ger of his ambition, Dionysius had gained 
friends in the opposite faction, by whose in- 
terest he was recalled from exile. His services 
in the Carthaginian war raised him to eminence. 
He excelled in valour; he was unrivalled in 
eloquence; his ends were pursued with steady 
perseverance; his mcans were varied with con- 
venient flexibility ; the appearance of patriotism 
rendered him popular, and he employed his 
popularity to restore his banished fricnds. 

The gratitude of one party, and the admira- 
tion of both, enabled him to attain the command 
of the mercenaries, and the conduct of the war. 
But he was less solicitous to con- 


oP quer the Carthaginians than to en- 
A C 405 slave his fellow-citizens, whose fac- 


* tious turbulence rendered them un- 
worthy of liberty. By the affccted dread of 
violence from his enemics, he obtained a guard 
for his person, which his artful generosity easily 
attached to his interest; and the arms of his 
troops, the influence and wealth of Philistus, 
the historian of Sicily, who was honoured with 
the appeliation of the second Thucydides,! 
above all his own crafty and daring ambition, 
enabled him, at the age of twenty-five, to usurp 
the government of Syracuse, which he held for 
thirty-eight years. 

During his long and active reign he was gene- 
rally engaged in war; sometimes 


PE, with the Carthaginians, sometimes 
A C 403 with his revolted subjects. Yet in 

‘ie * both contests he finally prevailed, 
an having reduced the Carthaginian 
oan o" powerin Sicily, and appeased, or in- 
A. C. 367. timidated domestic rebellion. His 


actual condition, however splendid, 
he regarded only as a preparation for higher 
grandeur. He besieged and took Rhegium, 
the key of Italy: nor could the feeble confede- 
racy of the Italian Greeks have prevented the 
conquest of that country, had not the renewed 
hostilities of the Carthaginians, and fresh dis- 
contents at home, interrupted the progress of 
his arms. This growing storm he resisted as 
successfully as before, and transmitted, to a de- 
generate son, the peaceful inheritance of the 
greatest part of Sicily; after having strength- 
ened, with wonderful art, the fortifications of 
the capital; enlarged the size, and improved 
the form of the Syracusan galleys; invented 
the military catapults, an engine of war which 
he employed, with great advantage, in the siege 
of Motya and Rhegium; and not only defended 
his native island against foreign invasion, but 
rendered its power formidable to the neigh- 
bouring countries. 

His poetical labours were the least uniformly 
successful of all his undertakings. His verses, 
though rehearsed by the most skilful rhapso- 
dists of the age, were treated with signal con- 
tempt at the Olympic games. A second time 
he renewed his pretension to literary fame in 
that illustrious assembly; but his ambassador 
was insulted by the most humiliating indigni- 
ties; and the orator Lysias pronounced a dis- 
course, in which he maintained the impropriety 
of admitting the representative of an impious 


1 Cicero de Orator. l. xi. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


tyrant to assist at a solemnity consecrated to 
A. C. 387. religion, virtue, and liberty.? The 

oration of Lysias leaves room to 
suspect that the plenitude of Dionysius’s power, 
rather than the defect of his poetry; exposed 
him to the censure and derision of the Olympic 
spectators; and this suspicion receives strong 
confirmation by considering, that, in the last 
year of his reign, lie deserved and obtained the 
poetic crown at Athens; a city renowned for 
the impartiality of its literary decision.? 

It is remarkable, that, with such an active, 
vigorous, and comprehensive mind; with such 
a variety of talents, and such an accumulation 
of glory, Dionysius should be universally held 
out and branded, as the most conspicuous ex- 
ample of an odious and miserable tyrant, the 
object of terror in his own, and of detestation in 
succeeding ages. Yet the uncorrupted evi- 
dence of history will prove, that the character 
of Dionysius was not decisively flagitious. His 
situation rendered it artificial; and he is ac- 
knowledged often to have assumed the sem- 
blance of virtue. Always crafty and cautious; 
but by turns, as it suited his interest, mild, affa- 
ble, and condescending; or cruel, arrogant, and 
imperious: nor did the Syracusans feel the 
rigour of his tyranny, until they had justly pro- 
voked it by an insurrection, during which they 
treated his wife and children with the most bar- 
barous and brutal fury. But there are two 
circumstances in the character of Dionysius 
which peculiarly excited the indignation of the 
moralists of Greece and Rome, and which the 
moderation or the softness of modern times will 
be disposed to consider with less severity. He 
had usurped the government of a free republic; 
a crime necessarily heinous in the sight of those 
who held the assassination of a tyrant to be the 
most ineritorious exertion of human virtue; and 
he professed an open contempt for the religion 
of his country; a crime of which the bare sus- 
picion:had brought to death the most amiable 
and respected of men. Yet the impiety of Dio- 
nysius was only the child of his interest, and 
sometimes the parent of his wit. He strip- 
ped acelebrated statue of Jupiter of a golden 
robe, observing, that it was too heavy in sum- 
mer, and too cold in winter. For a reason 
equally ingenious he deprived A’sculapius of 
his golden beard; asserting, that such a venera- 
ble ornament ill became the son of the beardless 
Apollo. But if he despoiled the altars and 
statues, he increased and improved the fleets 
and armies, of Syracuse, which were success- 
fully employed against the public enemy. And 
to the general current of satire and declamation 
against this extraordinary man,’ may be op- 
posed the opinion of Polybius and Scipio 
Africanus, the most illustrious characters of the 
most illustrious age of Rome: “That none 


2 Life of Lysias, p. 117. Dionys. Halicar. de Demosth. 

3 Isocrat Panegyr. , 

4 The authentic history of the reign of Dionysius is 
copiously recorded by Diodorus Siculus, l. xiv. et xv. To 
relate the numerous and improbabk stories told of him by 
Cicero, Plutarch, Seneca, and other moralists, would be to 
transcribe what it is not easy to believe. The reader may 
consult, particularly, Plut. ex. edit. Paris, in Moral. pp. 78 
et 83. De Garrul. p. 508. In Dion. p. 961; and various 
passages of Cicero de Officiis, and Tusculan. Quest. 


XXV.] 


ever concerted his schemes with more pru- 
dence, or executed them with more boldness, 
than Dionysius the Elder.” 

His son, Dionysius the Younger, exceeded 
his vices without possessing his abilities. The 
reign of this second tyrant was distracted and 


Ol inglorious. His kinsman Dion, the 
fg oi 2 amiable disciple of Plato, endea- 
a $ 362 voured to correct the disorders of 
a * his ungoverned mind. But the task 
owm was too heavy for Dion, and even 
y 1 pe for Plato himself. The former, un- 
a C. 340 able to restrain the excesses of the 
cos" prince, undertook the defence of the 
people. His patriotism interrupted, but did not 


destroy, the tyranny of Dionysius, which was 
finally abolished, twenty-two years after he first 
mounted the throne, by the magnanimity of 
Timoleon. This revolution happened only 
two years before Corinth, the country of Tinio- 
leon, as well as the other republics of Greece, 
submitted to the arms of Philip of Macedon; 
and, having lost their own independence, be- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


281 


came ineapable of asserting the freedom of their 
colonies. 

New tyrants started up in Syracuse, and al- 
most in every city of Sicily, and held a preca- 
rious sway under the alternate pro- 


ae P- tection of the Carthaginians and 
a = ae. Romans. The citizens of Syracuse, 


mindful of their ancient fame, de- 
throned their usurpers, and enjoyed consider- 
able intervals of liberty. But at length the 
Romans gained possession of the place; the 
persevering valour of Marcellus, assisted by the 
treachery of the garrison, prevailing, after a 
siege of three years, over the bold efforts of 
mechanical power, directed by the inventive 
genius of Archimedes. The reduction of the 
capital was immediately followed by the con- 
quest of the adjoining territory; and Sicily 
came thus to be regarded as the eldest province 
of Rome, and the first country, without the 
limits of Italy, whic™ had taught that victorious 
republic to taste and enjoy the sweets of foreign 
dominion.’ 


CHAPTER XXV. 


Death of Darius Nothus—Cyrus disputes the Succession with his elder Brother Artaxerxes— 
Character of Cyrus—State of Lower Asia under his administration—His Strength and Re- 
sources—His Expedition into Upper Asia—Descries the vast Army of his Brother—Battle of 
Canaxa—Death of Cyrus—His Grecian Auxiliaries victorious—Their Treaty with Tissa- 
phernes—Perfidious Assassination of the Grecian Generals—Artaxerxes sends to the Greeks to 
demand their Arms—Conference on that Subject. 


WHILE the operations of war conspired 

with the revolutions of government, to 
detach the Grecian colonies in Italy, Sicily, and 
Cyrené, from the general interests 


~ 15 me and politics of the mother country, 
a 404 a series of events, not less curious 


than important, connected, in the 
closest intimacy, the history of Greece with the 
annals of the Persian empire. The same me- 
morable year which terminated the destructive 
war of Peloponnesus brought to a conclusion 
the active and prosperous reign of Darius No- 
thus. He named as his successor Artaxerxes, 
styled Mnemon, from the strength of his memory; 
and persisted in this choice, notwithstanding 
the opposition of the artful and ambitious Pa- 
rysatis, who employed her extensive influence 
over the mind of an old and uxorious husband, 
to obtain the kingdom for Cyrus, the younger 
brother of Artaxerxes, and the peculiar favour- 
ite of his mother. The rivalship of the young 
princes, both of whom were at court during the 
last illness of Darius, unhappily degenerated 
into enmity ; and a circumstance, which would 


5 Corn. Nepos. Diodorus Sicul. Plut. Dion. 

6 Polyb. Excerpt. |. viii. Plut. in Marcell. 

7 Livy, l. xxiv. et Cicero in Verrem in few words—Om- 
nium exterarum gentium princeps Sicilia ad amicitiam 
fidemque, P. R. applicuit; primaque omnium, id quod or- 
namentum imperii est, provincia est appellata: prima do- 
cuit majores nostros, quàm præclarum coset exteris gentibus 
imperitare. 

2N 


be thought immaterial in the present age, in- 
creased the indignation of Cyrus. The birth 
of Artaxerxes had happened before the acces- 
sion of his father to the throne, but Cyrus was 
born the son of a king; a distinction which, 
however frivolous it may appear in modern 
times, had engaged Darius Hystaspes to prefer 
Xerxes, the younger of his sons, to his elder 
brother Artabazanes.8 

The precedent established by such an illus- 
trious monarch might have enforced the partial 
arguments of Parysatis, and both might have 
been confirmed by the strong claim of merit, 
since Cyrus early discovered such talents and 
virtues, as fitted him to fill the most difficult, 
and to adorn the most exalted, station. At the 
age of seventeen, he had obtained the govern- 
ment of Lydia, Phrygia, and Cappadocia; and 
the same mandate of Darius, which destroyed 
his hopes of succession to the Persian throne, 
rendered him hereditary satrap of those valua- 
ble provinces. On the demise of that monarch, 
Cyrus prepared to return to Asia Minor, at- 
tended by the same escort with which he had 
come to Susa; a faithful body of three hundred 
heavy-armed Greeks, commanded by Xenias, 
an Arcadian. But when he prepared to leave 
court, a very criminal and unfortunate incident 


retarded his departure. The selfish and perfi- 


8 Herodot. |. vii. c. H. 


282 


dious Tissaphernes, who expected to divide the 
spoils of the young prince, accused him of trea- 
son. He was apprehended by order of Arta- 
xerxes; but the powerful protection of Parysatis, 
who, though she loved only one, was beloved, 
or at least feared, by both of her sons, defended 
his life, vindicated his honour, and restored him 
in safety to his government. 

The danger that had threatened his person 
could not much affect the heroic fortitude of 
Cyrus; but the affront offered to his dignity 
sunk deep into his heart; and from the moment 
that he recovered his freedom, he determined to 
revenge his injuries,! or to perish in the attempt. 
In the despotic countries of the East, as there 
is scarcely any intermediate gradation between 
the prince and people, and scarcely any alterna- 
tive but that of dominion or servitude, a dis- 


contented or rebellious subject must either stifle | 


his animosity, submit to die, or aspire to reign.? 
The magnanimity of Cyrus naturally preferred 
the road of danger and glory ; he prepared not 
only to punish the injustice, but to usurp the 
throne of Artaxerxes, defended as it was by a 
million of armed men, and protected both by 
the power of superstition, and by the splendour 
of hereditary renown. The design would have 
been great, but romantic, if the young prince 
had not enjoyed very extraordinary resources in 
the powers of his own mind, in the affectionate 
attachinent of his Barbarian subjects, and, 
above all, in the fidelity and valour of his La- 
eedemonian allies, 

Whether we consider what he said, or what 
he did, the testimony of his contemporaries, or 
the more unerring testithony of his life and 
actions, Cyrus appears to have been born for the 
honour of human nature, and particularly forthe 
honour of Asia, which, though the richest and 
most populous quarter of the globe, has never, 
in any age, abounded in great characters. From 
the age of seven years, he had been trained, at 
the gate of the palace, to shoot with the bow, to 
manage the horse, and to speak truth; according 
to the discipline instituted by the great founder 
of the monarchy, and well adapted, in an age of 
simplicity, to form the princes and nobles of 
Persia. But in the course of two centuries, 
the progress of refinement and luxury, the in- 
fectious example of a corrupt court, and the per- 
fidious lessons of the world, had perverted, or 
rendered ineffectual, a very salutary system of 
education; and the grandees of Persia, what- 
ever proficiency they made in their exercises, felt 
so little regard for veracity, that (as will abun- 
dantly appear in the sequel) they seldom spoke 
but with a view to deceive, and rarely made a 
promise which they did not break, or took an 
oath which they did not violate. The behaviour 
of Cyrus was totally the reverse. He equalled, 
and surpassed his companions in all exterior 
accomplishments. But while his manly beauty, 
his bodily activity and address, and the superior 


1 Xenoph. Anabas. I. i. c.i. This was the origin of his 
resentment, which Xenophon expresses with great delicacy; 
o de xtvduveurns xzi aTipaxrdssc, GourAsveTaxs Orme fenTOTE 
stisorasemts Tw adevow, &c. He asserted independence, 
the first wish of every great mind. 

2 “Cyrus determined no longer,” says Xenophon, ‘to 
depend on his brother; 2Aax xv duvyrxs Cerirxeuresy vyt’ 
sxatyou, but, if possible, to reign in his stead.” 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Cuar. 


courage, as well as skill, which he displayed in 
hunting, horsemanship, and every military ex- 
ercise, commanded the admiration of the multi- 
tude; he himself seems not to have estimated 
such superficial advantages beyond their real 
worth. He regarded integrity of heart as the 
only solid basis of a great character. His probi- 
ty was uniform, his word sacred, his friendship 
inviolable. In the giddy season of youth, he 
yielded, with uncommon docility, to the admo- 
nitions of experience. Neither wealth, nor 
birth, nor rank, but age and virtue, were the 
objects of his respect: and his behaviour, equally 
meritorious and singular, was justly and uni- 
versally admired. 

His subjects in Lesser Asia, in particular, 
wereseized with the most pleasing astonishment, 
when, instead of a greedy and voluptuous satrap, 
eager only to squeeze, to amass, and to enjoy, 
they beheld a prince who preferred the public 
interest to his own; who alleviated the weight 
of taxes, that he might encourage the operations 
of industry ; whose own hands gave the usefal 
example of rural labour;? whose decisions 
united justice and mercy; and whose active 
vigilance introduced (what neither before nor 
since the government of Cyrus has been known 
in the Asiatic peninsula) such a regularity of 
police, as rendered intercourse safe, and pro- 
perty secure. 

The virtues of justice and integrity, when ac- 
companied with diligence and abilities, must 
procure such a degree of respect for the admin- 
istration, as will naturally be extended to the 
person, of a prince. But something farther is 
required, not to obtain the public gratitude and 
esteem, but to excite the affectionate ardour of 
select and devoted friends; without the assist- 
ance of whom, it is seldom possible to accomplish 
any great and memorable design. Cyrus excel- 
led all his contemporaries in the art both of ac- 
quiring and of preserving the most valuable 
friendships. His gratitude overpaid every fa- 
vour; his liberality was large, yet discerning ; 
and his donatives were always enhanced by the 
handsome and affectionate manner in which 
they were bestowed. When he discovered a 
man really worthy of his confidence and esteem, 
he was not satisfied with giving him a partial 
share of his affections; he gave his heart entire: 
and it was his constant prayer to the gods, that 
he might live to requite and surpass the good 
offices of his friends, and the injuries of his 
enenlies.4 

With such sentiments and character, Cyrus 
acquired the firm attachment of a few, and the 
willing obedience of all his Barbarian subjects, 
in the populous provinces which he commanded, 
whose united strength exceeded a hundred 
thousand fighting men; who, unwarlike as they 
were, yet excelled, both in bravery and in skill, 
the effeminate troops of Upper Asia. 

They were probably indebted for this advan- 
tage to their intercourse with the Greeks, whose 
disciplined valour, far more than the numbers of 
his Barbarians, encouraged Cyrus to undertake 
an expedition for acquiring the empire of the 


3 Xenoph. ibid. Cic. in Senect. Plut. in Lysand. have 
all celebrated this part of his character. 
4 Xenoph. Hellen. 1. iii. 


XXV.] 


East. By the most important services he had 
deserved the gratitude of the Lacedemonian re- 
public; which had been raised, chiefly by his 
assistance, to the head of Greece, and to the 
command of the sea. In return for that favour, 
so inestimable in the sight of an ambitious peo- 
ple, the Spartans readily complied with his re- 
quest, by sending into Asia eight hundred 
heavy-armed men, under the command of the 
intrepid Cheirisophus; and they charged their 
admiral, Samius, who had succeeded Lysander 
in the government of the Jonian coast, faith- 
fully to co-operate with Cyrus, by employing 
his powerful fleet in whatever service the Per- 
sian prince might think proper to recommend.§ 
Had they done nothing more than this, Cyrus 
might well have approved their useful gratitude; 
especially as their alliance, securing him on 
the side of Europe, enabled him, without dan- 
ger, to drain his western garrisons, and to aug- 
ment the strength of his army. But the friend- 
ship of the Spartans carried them still farther. 
They allowed him to recruit his forces in every 
part of their dominions; and the generous mu- 
nificence of Cyrus had acquired numerous par- 
tisans well qualified to raise and to command 
those valuable levies. Clearchus the Spartan, 
Menon the Thessalian, Proxenus the Beotian, 
Agias the Arcadian, and Socrates the Achzan, 
all alike devoted to the interest and glory of the 
Persian prince, collected, chiefly from their re- 
spective republics, above ten thousand heavy- 
armed men, and near three thousand archers 
and targeteers. 

These preparations, which were carried on 
with silence and celerity, deceived the haughty 
indolence of the Persians; but they could not 
escape the vigilance of Alcibiades, who then 
resided at Grynium, a town of Phrygia, under 
the protection of Pharnabazus. Moved by re- 
sentment against the Lacedemonians, or am- 
bitious of gaining merit with the great king, 
he desired an escort from the satrap, that he 
might undertake with safety a journey to Susa, 
in order to acquaint Artaxerxes with the hostile 
designs of his brother. Pharnabazus, who pos- 
sessed not the merit, desired the reward of the 
discovery ; and therefore (as we formerly had 
occasion to relate)§ readily gratified the request 
of Lysander, by the destruction of Alcibiades. 
But neither the intelligence con- 


Olymp. Seyed by the Persian governor, nor 
= the repeated solicitations of Tissa- 
A. C. 400. A 


phernes, nor the consciousness of 
his own injustice and cruelty, could rouse Arta- 
xerxes from the profound security of lis re- 
pose. Cyrus completed his levies without mo- 
lestation, and almost without suspicion; and 
prepared, in the beginning of the year four 
hundred before Christ, to march from the Io- 
uian coast into Upper Asia, at the head of a 
hundred thousand Barbarians, and above thir- 
teen thousand Greeks. His journey towards 
Babylon, his defeat and death ın the plain of 
Cynaxa, the retreat and dispersion of his fol- 
lowers, and the memorable return of the Greeks 
to their native country, have been related by 
the admired disciple of Socrates (whom the 


5 Xenoph. Hellen. l. iii. 6 See above, p. 266. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


283 


friendship of Proxenus, the Bæotian, recom- 
mended to the service and esteem of Cyrus,) 
with such descriptive beauty, with such pro- 
found knowledge of war and of human nature, 
and with such inimitable eloquence, as never 
were re-united in the work of any one man but 
that of Xenophon the Athenian. The retreat 
was principally conducted by Xenophon him- 
self; which has enabled him to adorn his nar- 
rative with such an affecting variety of inci- 
dents and characters as will always serve to 
prove that the force of truth and nature is far 
superior to the powers of the most fertile fancy. 
It would be an undertaking not only hardy, but 
presumptuous, to invade the province of such 
an accomplished writer, if the design of the 
present work did not oblige us to select the 
principal circumstances which illustrate the 
condition of the times, and connect the expe- 
dition of Cyrus with the subsequent history of 
Greece. 

Having assembled his forces at Sardis, the 
Persian prince was carried, by the activity of 
his resentment or ambition, with the utmost 
celerity, towards Upper Asia. In ninety-three 
marches he travelled through the central pro- 
vinces of Lydia, Phrygia, Cappadocia; tra- 
versed the mountains of Cilicia; passed unre- 
sisted through Syria; crossed the Euphrates at 
Thapsacus ; and after penetrating the desert, 
entered the confines of Babylonia. Ina jour- 
ney of above twelve hundred miles, his numer- 
ous army experienced fewer difficulties than 
might naturally be expected. The fertile 
territory of Asia Minor supplying them abun- 
dantly with provisions, enabled them to pro- 
ceed commonly at the rate of fifteen or sixteen 
miles a-day; and almost every second day 
brought them to a large and populous city. 
The dependent satraps or viceroys of Lycaonia 
and Cilicia were less solicitous to defend the 
throne of Artaxerxes, than anxious to protect 
their respective provinces from plunder and de- 
vastation. But the former experienced the se- 
verity of an invader whom he had the weak- 
ness to oppose, without the strength or courage 
to resist.” 

Syennesis, governor of Cilicia, had reason to 
fear that his country might be plundered with 
equal rapacity. He endeavoured, therefore, to 
avail himself of the natural strength of a pro- 
vince whose southern boundaries are washed 
by the sea, and which is defended on other sides 
by the winding branches of Mount Taurus.’ 
Towards the west is but one pass, called by 
Arrian the Gates of Cilicia ;9 sufficient to ad= 
mit only one chariot at a time, and rendered 
dark and difficult by steep and almost inacces- 
sible mountains. These were occupied by the 
troops of Syennesis, who, had he maintained 
his post, might have easily prevented the pas- 
sage of an army. But the timid Cilician had 
not trusted in arms alone for the defence of his 
country. By the order, or at least with the 
permission of her husband, his queen, the beau- 
tiful Epyaxa, had met Cyrus at Cylenæ, on the 
frontiers of Phrygia; and, according to the 


7 Xenoph. Anabas. J. i. p. 248. & Ibid. 
9 Arrian. Exped. Alexand. |. ii. p. 31._ 


284 


custom of the East, presented her acknowledged 
liege-lord and superior with gold, silver, and 
other costly gifts. But the greatest gift was her 
youth and beauty, which she submitted, it is 
said, to the enamoured prince, who after enter- 
taining her with the utmost magnificence and 
distinction,' restored her to Cilicia by a near, 
but difficult road, which led across the moun- 
tains. 

To the escort which accompanied her, Cyrus 
added a considerable body of Greeks com- 
manded by Menon the Thessalian. The greater 
part arrived at Tarsus, the capital, before the 
army of Cyrus reached the gates of Cilicia ; 
but two companies, amounting together to a 
hundred men, were missing, and supposed to 
have been destroyed by the mountaineers, while 
they wandered in quest of booty. Syennesis 
was mortified at hearing that the enemy had 
already entered his province. But when he 
likewise received intelligence that the Pelopon- 
nesian fleet had sailed round from Jonia, in or- 
der to co-operate with the army, the disagree- 
able news totally disconcerted the measures of 
his defence. He fled in precipitation, abandon- 
ing his tents and baggage to the invaders. Cy- 
rus crossed the mountains without opposition, 
and traversed the beautiful irriguous plains of 
Cilicia, which were adorned with trees and 
vines, and abounded in sesame, panic, millet, 
wheat, and barley. In four days he arrived at 
the large and rich city of Tarsus, which was 
plundered by the resentment of the Greeks, 
for the loss of their companions. 

Cyrus immediately sent for the governor, 
who had removed from his palace, and, attend- 
ed by the greater part of the inhabitants, had 
taken refuge among the fastnesses in the neigh- 
bouring mountains. By the assurances of 
Epyaxa, her timorous? husband was with much 
difficulty persuaded to put himself in the power 
of a superior, to whom, as the price of his 
safety, he carried large sums of money. Cyrus 
courteously accepted the welcome supply, 
which the demands of his troops rendered pe- 
culiarly seasonable; and, in return, honoured 
Syennesis with snch presents as were deemed 
of great value by the king?’ of the east. They 
consisted in a Persian robe, a horse with a gol- 
den bit, a chain, bracelets, and scimitar of gold, 
the restoration of prisoners, and the exemption 
of Cilicia from farther plunder.’ 

During their luxurious residence at Tarsus, 
the Greeks were corrupted by prosperity. They 


1 She requested Cyrus to show her his troops. He com- 
plied; and attended her coach in an open car. But the 
curiosity of Epyaxa had almost cost her dear. ‘t When the 
Barbarians were reviewed, the Greeks were ordered to their 
arms, and commanded to advance, as to a charge; after 
which, the soldiers of their own accord, ran with shouts to 
their tents. The Barbarians were thrown into consterna- 
tion; Epyaxa quitted her coach; the Greeks returned 
laughing to their tents; and Cyrus rejoiced at seeing the 
terror with which the Greeks had inspired the Barbarians.” 
Xenoph. Anabas. l. i. p. 247. 

2 Pride, as well as fear, secms to have actuated Syennc- 
Bis; o de ovde meotegov oudevi ww xesiTTOVE ExUTOU EtG 
Mesos EAĴssy £04, oude rore Kupw sesva y5ere, wesv y yuvy 
eutov semsiye 5 “ Svennesis declared, that he had never for- 
merly put himself in the powcr of a man in any respect su- 
perior to himself; nor would he then go to Cyrus, till his 
wife persuaded him,” &c. A true picture of oriental man- 
ners, meanness varnished with pride?! 

3 Xenophon. Anabas. p. 249. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


disdained to obey their commanders, and re- 
fused to continue their journey. The design 
of marching to Babylon, though it was not un- 
known to Clearchus, or to the Spartan senate, 
had been concealed from the soldiers, lest their 
impatience or their fears might be alarmed by 
the prospect of such a long and dangerous un- 
dertaking. At Tarsus they first discovered 
their suspicions of deceit, which immediately 
broke out into licentious clamours. They in- 
sulted the majesty of Cyrus; they reproached 
the perfidy of their generals; and their anger 
was ready to vent itself in open sedition, when 
the ferment was appeased by the address and 
prudence of Clearchus. While he privately 
assured Cyrus of his best endeavours to make 
the affair take a favourable turn, he openly em- 
braced the cause of the soldiers, affected deeply 
to feel their grievances, and eagerly concurred 
with every measure that seemed proper to re- 
move them. His eloquence and his tears di- 
verted the design of immediate hostility. An 
assembly was summoned to deliberate on the 
actual posture of affairs, Several, of their own 
accord, offered their opinion; others spoke as 
they had been directed by Clearchus. One 
counsellor, who was heard with applause, ad- 
vised them to pack up their baggage, and to de- 
mand guides or ships from Cyrus, to facilitate 
their return. Another showed the folly of this 
request from a man whose measures they had 
traversed, and whose purpose they had endea- 
voured to defeat.4 They surely could not trust 
in guides given them by an enemy; nor could 
it be expected that Cyrus should part with his 
ships, which were evidently so necessary to the 
success of his expedition. At length it was 
determined to send commissioners to treat with 
Cyrus, that he might either, by granting the 
demands of the Greeks, prevail on them to fol- 
low him, or be himself prevailed on to allow 
them to return home; and the difference was 
thus finally adjusted, by promising each soldier 
a darick and a half, instead of a darick, of 
monthly pay. 

When this storm was happily appeased, the 
enemy left Tarsus, and marched five days 
through the fertile plains of Cilicia, till they 
arrived at Issus, the last town of the province; 
large, rich, and populous; and only fifteen 
miles distant from the frontier of Syria. This 
wealthy province was defended by twv for- 
tresses, calied the Gates of Syria and Cilicia. 
They extended from the mountains to the sea. 
The interval of three furlongs between them 


eee 

4 This passage is translated as follows by Mr. Spelman : 
“ After him another got up, showing the folly of the man 
who advised to demand the ships, as if Cyrus would not 
resume his expedition. He showed also how weak a thing 
it was to apply for a guide to that person whose undertaking 
we had defeated.” If Cyrus resumed his expedition, it 
could not be said that his undertaking was deteated ; nor 
is this the proper meaning of the word Av“esvozsd2, which 
significs to hurt or weaken. I am sensible that by an easy 
transition, it sometimes signifies to corrupt, to destroy, to 
defeat; but in the passage before us, if a translater should 
choose to explain it by any of those words, he must say, 
“whose undertaking we had begun, endeavoured, or pur- 
posed to defeat ;’? an explanation of AuzzsvoweSx, which is 
justified by the analogy of the Greck language, and which 
the sense absolutely requires. This is one of the few mi- 
nute mistakes which I have discovered in Mr. Spehaan’s 
most accurate translation. 

5 Xenoph. Arabas. p. 250. et seq. 


XXV.] 


contained several passes, narrow and intricate, 
besides the rapid Kersas, which flowed in the 
middle, one hundred feet in breadth. It was 
on this occasion that Cyrus experienced the full 
advantage of the Lacedemonian assistance. 
A fleet of sixty sail, conducted by Pythagoras 
the Spartan, who had succeeded Samius in the 
naval command, prepared to land the Greeks 
on the eastern side of the gates, which must 
have exposed the Syrian works to a double as- 
sault; but the cowardice of Abracomas, who 
commanded the numerous forces of Syria and 
Pheenicia, rendered the execution of this mea- 
sure unnecessary. The design, alone, was suf- 
ficient to terrify him. He abandoned his forts, 
and fled with precipitation before the approach 
of an enemy. 

Cyrus thenceforth proceeded without meet- 
ing with any appearance of opposition, and in 
fifteen days’ march, reached the banks of the 
Euphrates. At Thapsacus, which in some 
eastern languages signifies the ford,’ this noble 
river is above half a mile in breadth, but so 
shoaly that the navigation is reckoned danger- 
ous even for boats which draw very little water. 
The shallowness increases in the autumnal sea- 
son, which happened to be the time that the 
army passed the Euphrates, which no where 
reached above the breast. This favourable 
circumstance furnished an opportunity to the 
inhabitants of Thapsacus to flatter Cyrus, that 
the great river had visibly submitted to him as 
its future king.8 Elevated by this auspicious 
prediction, he pursued his journey through Me- 
sopotamia, part of which was anciently com- 
prehended under the name of Syria.? While he 
proceeded through this fertile country he did 
not forget that a laborious march of seventeen 
days, through a barren desert, must conduct him 
to the cultivated plains of Babylon. 

Having amply provided for this dangerous 
undertaking, he performed it with uncommon 
celerity, both in order to avoid risking the want 
of provisions, and, if possible, to take his eneiny 
unprepared. For several days the army march- 
ed, without interruption, through the province 
of Babylonia; and, on the fifth, came to a deep 
and broad ditch, which had been recently dug 
to intercept, or retard, their passage. But as 
this defence was left altogether unguarded, and 
the great king had taken no measures to pro- 
tect the most valuable portion of his domi- 
nions, it was generally believed that he had laid 
aside the design of venturing an engagement. 
The troops of Cyrus therefore, who had, hitherto 
maintained their ranks with circumspection, 
no longer observed any order of march; their 
arms were carried in wagons, or on sumpter 
horses; and their, general, in his car, rode in 
the van with few armed attendants. While 
they proceeded in this fearless contempt of the 
enemy, and approached the plain of Cynaxa, 
which is within a day’s journey of Babylon,!0 


6 Xenoph. Anabas. p. 253. et seq. 

7 Foster’s Geographical! Dissertation on Xenophon’s Re- 
treat. 

8 Zenoph. p. 255. 

9 So it is called by Xenoph. ibid. 

10 I have used an indeterminate expression to denote 
the uncertain situation of those places as described by 
Strabo, l. ii. et Plut in Artaxerxes. Mr. Spelman justly 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


285 


Patagyas, a Persian, and confidential friend of 
Cyrus, came riding towards them in full speed, 
his horse all in a foam, calling aloud succes- 
sively in his own language, and in Greek, that 
the king was at hand with a vast army.!! 

The experienced Greeks, who best knew the 
danger of being attacked in disorder, were most 
sensibly alarmed by this sudden surprise. Cy- 
rus, leaping from his car, put on his corslet, 
mounted his horse, seized his javelin, command- 
ed his troops to arm, and ordered every man to 
his post. His orders were readily obeyed; and 
the army advanced, several hours, in order of 
battle. It was now mid-day; yet no enemy 
appeared: but in the afternoon they perceived 
a dust like a white cloud, which gradually 
thickened into darkness, and overspread the 
plain. At length the brazen armour flashed; 
the motion, the ranks, and spears, were dis- 
tinctly seen. In the front were innumerable 
chariots, armed with scythes in a downward, 
and, in an oblique direction. The cavalry, 
commanded by Tissaphernes, were distinguish- 
ed by white corslets; the Persians by wicker 
bucklers; the Egyptians by wooden shields 
reaching down to their feet. These formed the 
chief strength of Artaxerxes; but the various 
multitude of nations, marching in separate co- 
Jumns according to their respective countries, 
had scarcely any armour of defence, and could 
annoy the enemy only at a distance, with their 
slings, darts, and arrows,!2 

While the hostile battalions approached, Cy- 
rus, accompanied by Pigres the interpreter, and 
a few chosen attendants, all mounted on horses 
of extraordinary swiftness, rode through the 
intermediate space, observing the numbers and 
disposition of the enemy. He had learned from 
deserters, that the troops of the great king 
amounted to twelve hundred thousand, divided 
into four equal bodies of men, respectively com- 
manded by the four generals, Tissaphernes, Go- 
brias, Arbaces, and Abracomas. The last, how- 
ever, had not yet joined; nor did he reach Ba- 
bylonia until five days after the battle. But, 
notwithstanding this defect, the numbers of 
Artaxerxes were still sufficient to perform what- 
ever numbers can accomplish. According to 
the custom of the East, the king, surrounded 
by a chosen body of cavalry, occupied the cen- 
tre of the army, as the place of greatest secu- 
rity, and most convenient for issuing his orders 
with promptitude and effect. But such was 
the extent of ground covered by the various 
nations whom he commanded, that even his 
centre reached beyond the left wing of the army 
of Cyrus; who, therefore, called aloud to Clear- 
chus to advance opposite to the kings guard, 
because, if that should be broken, the work 
would be done. But Clearchus was unwilling 
to withdraw the Greeks from the Euphrates, 
lest they should be surrounded by the enemy; 
he therefore kept his post, assuring Cyrus of 
his utmost care to make all go well. 


observes, that the error of Xenophon (unnoticed by any 
former translator,) who makes the distance between Pahv. 
lon three thousand and sixty stadia, is so enormous, t Š 
can only be owing to a mistake of the transcriber i 
11 Xenoph. p. 263. 
12 Xenoph. p. 263, et seq. 


286 


The disobedience of Clearchus, and the dis- 
trust of Cyras, threw away the fortune of the 
day, which involved the fate of Persia, and the 
renown of Greece. For although, by skilful 
evolutions, Clearchus eluded the 


Oly Si armed chariots and cavalry of the 
Ao Foo enemy ; though the Greeks, by their 


countenance and shouts alone, put 
to flight the opposing crowd, who could not en- 
dure the sight of their regular array, their bur- 
nished arms, or hear without terror the martial 
sounds of their harmonious Peeans, intermixed 
with the clanging of their spears against their 
_ brazen bucklers; yet the great king, perceiving 
the rapid pursuit of the Greeks, and that no- 
thing opposed him in front, commanded his 
men to wheel to the left, and advanced with 
celerity in order to attack the rear of the enemy. 
If this design had been carried into execution, 
it is probable that the Greeks, having prevailed 
on the first onset, would immediately have 
faced about, and, animated by the joy of vic- 
tory, and their native ardour, have repelled and 
routed the troops of Artaxerxes. 

But the impatience of Cyrus defeated this 
favourable prospect. He observed the move- 
ment of his brother, and eagerly rode to meet 
him, at the head of only six hundred horse. 


Such was the rapid violence of his assault, that. 


the advanced guards of the king were thrown 
into disorder, and their leader, Artagerses fell 
by the hand of Cyrus, who, with all his great 
qualities, had not learned to distinguish be- 
tween the duties of a soldier anda general. By 
a seasonable retreat he might still, perhaps, 
have saved his life, and gained a crown. But 
his eye darting along the ranks, met that of his 
brother. He rushed forward, with a blind in- 
stinctive fury, crying out, “I see the man!” 
and, penetrating the thick globe of attendants, 
aimed his javelin at the king, pierced his cors- 
let, and wounded his breast. His eagerness to 
destroy the enemy prevented proper attention 
to save himself. From an uncertain hand he 
received a severe wound in the face, which, 
however, only increased the fury with which he 
assaulted his brother. Various and inconsis- 
tent accounts were given of the death of Cyrus, 
even by those who assisted in this memorable 
engagement. The crowd of historians thought 
it incumbent on them to make him die like the 
hero of a tragedy, after many vicissitudes of 
fortune, and many variations of misery. Dinon 
and Ctesias,! the longer to suspend the curiosity 
of their readers, kill him as with a blunted wea- 
pon; but Xenophon is contented with saying, 
that he fell in the tumultuary conflict of his at- 
tendants with the guards of Artaxerxes, who 
zealously defended their respective masters ; 
and that eight of his most confidential friends 
lay dead upon him, thus sealing with their 
blood their inviolable affection and fidelity.? 
Such was the catastrophe of this audacious 
and fatal enterprise; after which the troops of 
Artaxerxes advanced, in the ardour of success, 
and proceeded without encountering any re- 
sistance to the hostile camp; Arius leading 
off the forces of Lesser Asia, dejected and dis- 


1 Apud Plutarch. in Artaxerx. 2 Xenoph. p. 266. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| CHar. 


mayed by the loss of their prince and general. 
Among the valuable plunder in the tents of Cy- 
rus, the Barbarians found two Grecian women, 
his favourite mistresses, the elder of Phocea, 
the younger of Miletus. The former, whose 
wit and accomplishments heightened the charms 
of her beauty, received and deserved the name 
of Aspasia, from the celebrated mistress of 
Pericles, whose talents she rivalled, and whose 
character she too faithfully resembled. The 
young Milesian likewise fell into the hands of 
the enemy; but while carelessly guarded by the 
Barbarians, intent on more useful plunder, es- 
caped unobserved, and arrived naked in the 
quarter of the Greeks, where a small guard 
had been left to defend the baggage. 

Mean while Clearchus, at the head of the 
Grecian phalanx, pursuing the fugitives, had 
been carried above the distance of three miles 
from Artaxerxes. But when he heard that the 
Barbarians were in his tent; and perceived, 
that, tired with plunder, they advanced to at- 
tack his rear, he faced about in order to receive 
them. The time was spent till sun-set, in va- 
rious dispositions made by the cavalry of Ar- 
taxerxes; but neither the soldiers, nor their 
commanders, had courage to come within the 
reach of the Grecian spear. They fled in scat- 
tered disorder, wherever the Grecians advanc- 
ed; who, wearied with marching against an 
enemy that seemed incapable to fight, at length 
determined to return to their camp; wondering 
that neither Cyrus himself appeared, nor any 
of his messengers.3 They arrived in the begin- 
ning of the night; but found their tents in dis- 
order, their baggage plundered, their provisions 
destroyed or spent. They chiefly regretted the 
loss of four hundred carriages filled with wine 
and flour, which had been provided by thë fore- 
sight of Cyrus, as a resource in time of want. 
Even these were rifled by the king’s troops; 
and the Greeks, whom the sudden appearance 
of the enemy had not allowed to dine, were 
obliged to pass the night without supper; their 
bodies exhausted by the fatigue of a laborious 
day, and their minds perplexed by the uncertain 
fate of their allies.4 

At the approach of light, they prepared to 
move their camp, when the messengers of 
Arizus arrived, acquainting them with the death 
of Cyrus. The new commander, they said, had 
assembled the troops of Lesser Asia in their 
former encampment, about twelve miles from 
the field of battle; where he intended to con- 
tinue that day, that the Greeks might have 
time to join him; butif they delayed, he would 
next day proceed, without them, towards Ionia, 
with the utmost expedition. When the Greeks 
recovered from the consternation into which 
they were thrown by these unexpected and 
melancholy tidings, Clearchus replied, “Would 


3 In relating this battle, I have followed the advice of 
Plutarch in Artaxerxes, who says, “that Xenophon has 
described it with such perspicuity, elegance, and force, a8 
sets the action before the eyes of his reader, and makes 
him assist with emotion at every incident, not as past, but 
as present. A man of sense, therefore, will despair to rival 
Xenophon; and, instead of relating the action in detail, 
will select such circumstances only as are most worthy of 
notice.” ` 

4 Xenoph. p. 270 et sec. 


XXV.] 


to God Cyrus were alive! but since he is dead, 
let Ariæus know, that we have conquered the 
king; that his troops have every where fled 
before us; and that now no enemy appears to 
resist our arms. You may, therefore, assure 
Arizus, that if he will come hither, we will 
place him on the Persian throne, which is the 
just reward of our victory.” With this propo- 
sal the messengers departed, and Clearchus led 
his troops to the field of battle, to collect pro- 
visions, which were prepared by using for fuel 
the wooden bucklers, shields, and arrows, of 
the Barbarians. 

Next morning heralds arrived from Artaxer- 
xes, who entertained a very different opinion 
from that expressed by Clearchus, concerning 
the issue of the battle. Among these respected 
ministers was Philinus, a fugitive Greek, a man 
esteemed by Tissaphernes, both as a skilful cap- 
tain and as an able negociator. When the 
chiefs were assembled, Philinus, speaking for 
his colleagues, declared it to be the will of the 
great king, who had defeated and killed Cyrus, 
“That the Greeks, who had now become the 
slaves of tle conqueror, should surrender their 
arms.” The demand was heard with universal 
indignation. One desired him to tell the king, 
“to come and take them;” another, “that it 
was better to die, than to deliver up their arms.” 
Xenophon spoke to the following purpose: “ We 
have nothing, as you see, O Philinus! but our 
arms, and our valour. While we keep posses- 
sion of the one, we can avail ourselves of the 
other: but if we deliver up our arms, we also 
surrender our persons. Do not therefore ex- 
pect that we shall throw away the only advan- 
tages which we stiil enjoy; on the contrary, be 
assured, that, relying on our arms and our va- 
lour, wefwill dispute with you those advantages 
which you possess.” Clearchus enforced the 
sentiments of Xenophon, which were confirmed 
by the army; and Philinus, after a fruitless at- 
tempt to discover the immediate designs of the 
Greeks, returned with his colleagues to the 
Persian camp.§ 

Mean while, Arius replied to the honourable 
embassy which had been sent him, “ That there 
were many Persians of greater consideration 
than himself, who would never permit him to 
be their king; he repeated his desire that the 
Greeks should join him; but, if they declined to 
come, persisted in his resolution of returning 
with all haste to Ionia.” This proposal was 
approved by the propitious indications of the 
victims: the army marched in order of battle to 
the encampment of Ariæus; who, with the 
most distinguished of his captains, entered into 
treaty with the Grecian commanders, binding 
themselves by mutual oaths to perform to each 
other the duties of faithful and affectionate 
allies. Having ratified this engagement by a 
solemn sacrifice, they proceeded to deliberate 
concerning tlicir intended journey. It was 
determined, that instead of traversing the deso- 
lated country by which they had arrived at the 
field of battle, they should direct their course 
towards the north, by which means they would 
avoid the desert, acquire provisions in greater 


5 Xenoph. p. 272. 6 Id p.273. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


287 


plenty, and cross the great rivers, which com- 
monly diminish near their source, with less 
difficulty and danger. They resolved also to 
perform their first marches with all possible 
expedition, in order to anticipate the king’s ap- 
proach ; since with a small force he would not 
dare to follow, and with a great army he would 
not be able to overtake them.’ 

This plan of retreat proposed by Ariæus, had 
the dishonourable appearance of flight; but for- 
tune proved a more glorious conductor. Such 
was the effect of the Grecian courage and firm- 
ness on the counsels of Artaxerxes, that he, who 
had so lately commanded the soldiers to surren- 
der their arms, scnt heralds to them the day 
following to treat of a truce. This memorable 
agreement, the consequences of which were so 
calamitous, yet so honourable to the Greeks, 
was concluded by the intervention of Tissa- 
phernes; who engaged, on the part of his 
master, to furnish them with a market, to 
cause them to be treated as friends in the coun- 
tries through which they marched, and to con- 
duct them without guile into Greece. For the 
Greeks, on the other hand, Clearchus and the 
generals swore, that they should abstain from 
ravaging the king’s territories; that they should 
supply themselves with meat and drink only, 
when, by any accident, the market was not 
provided; but when it was, that they should 
purchase whatever they wanted for a reasonable 
price.® 

When this business was transacted, Tissa- 
phernes returned to the king, promising to come 
back as soon as possible. But on various pre- 
tences, he delayed twenty days; during which 
the Persians had an opportunity to practise 
with Arizus. By the dread of punishment, if 
he persisted in rebellion; by the promise of par- 
don, if he returned to his allegiance; and, above 
all, by the warm solicitation of his kinsmen and 
friends, that unsteady Barbarian was totally 
detached from the interest of his Grecian allies. 
His conduct gave just ground to suspect this 
disposition, which became fully evident after 
the return of Tissaphernes. From that moment 
Arigus no longer encamped with the Greeks, 
but preferred the neighbourhood of that per- 
fidious satrap. Yet, for three weeks, no open 
hostility was committed; the armies, fearing, 
and feared by each other, pursued the same line 
of march; Tissaphernes led the way ; and, ac- 
cording to agreement, furnished the Grecks 
with a market ; but treacherously increased the 
difficulty of their journey, by conducting them 
by many windings through the canals and 
marches between the Tigris and Euphrates. 
When they had crossed the former river, they 
continucd to march northward along its eastern 
banks, always encamping at the distance of two 
or three miles from the Barbarians. Yet this 
precaution was unable to prevent the parties 
sent out to provide wood or forage from quar- 
relling with each other. From reproachful 
words, they soon proceeded to hostile actions; 
and these partial encounters were likely to pro- 
duce the worst consequences, by inflaming the 


7 Xenoph. p. 276. 
8 Ibid. p. 281, et seq. 


288 


latent, but general animosity, which it had been 
so difficult to stifle or conceal.! 

At length they arrived at the fatal scene, 
where the river Zabatus, flowing westward 
from the mountains of Media, pours its tributary 
waters into the broad stream of the Tigris. 
The Grecian generals, and particularly Clear- 
chus, who had long seen and lamented the 
unfortunate jealousies prevailing among those 
who had sworn mutual fidelity, proposed a 
conference between the commanders, in order 
amicably to explain and remove every ground 
of hatred and complaint. Tissaphernes and 
Arizus, as well as their colleague Orontes, 
eagerly desired the conference, though their 
motives were very different from those which 
actuated Clearchus. A measure so agreeable to 
both parties was, without difficulty, carried 
intoexecution; and the Greeks, on this occasion 
alone, forsook that prudence and caution, which, 
both before and after, uniformly governed their 
conduct. Five generals, and twenty captains, 
repaired to the tent of Tissaphernes ; only two 
hundred soldiers followed them, under pretence 
of going to market. Clearchus with his col- 
leagues, Menon, Proxenus, Agias, and So- 
crates, were conducted into the satrap’s apart- 
ment; the rest, whether captains or soldiers, 
were not allowed to enter. The separation 
occasioned fear and distrust. The appearance 
of armed Barbarians increased the terror. A 
gloomy silence prevailed; when, on a given 
signal, those within the tent were apprehended, 
and those without cut to pieces. At the same 
time the Persian cavalry scoured the plain, 
destroying whomsoever they encountered. The 
Greeks were astonished at this mad excursion, 
which they beheld from their camp; until 
Nicarchus, an Arcadian, came, miserably man- 
gled, and informed them of the dreadful tragedy 
that had been acted.? 

Upon this intelligence they ran to their arms, 
expecting an immediate assault. But the cow- 
ardly Barbarians, not daring to engage in open 
and honourable war, endeavoured to accomplish 
their designs by the same impious treachery 
with which they had begun them. Instead of 
advancing in a body to attack the Grecian 
camp, they sent Arizus, Arteazus, and Mithri- 
dates, persons whose great credit with Cyrus 


1 Xenoph. p, 282. 2 Xenoph. p. 286, et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuapr. 


might prevent their intentions from being sus- 
pected by the enemy. ‘They were attended by 
three hundred Persians, cladincomplete armour. 
When they drew near to the Greeks, a herald 
called out, “That, if any of the generals or 
captains were present, they should advance, in 
order to be made acquainted with the king’s 
pleasure.” Cheirisophus the Lacedemonian, 
who, next to Clearchus, had hitherto maintained 
the greatest influence over the army, happened 
to be absent with a party of foragers. But the 
remaining generals, Cleanor the Orchomenian, 
and Sophonetus the Stymphalian, proceeded 
with caution from the camp, accompanied by 
Xenophon the Athenian, who (though only a 
volunteer) followed the commanders, that he 
might learn what was become of his friend 
Proxenus.3 When they came within hearing 
of the Barbarians, Ariæus said, “ Clearchus, O 
Greeks! having violated his oath, and the arti- 
cles of peace, is punished with just death; but 
Proxenus and Menon, who gave information of 
his crimes, are rewarded with the king’s favour. 
Of you the king demands your arms, which, he 
says, are now his property, because they be- 
longed to Cyrus, who was his slave.” Cleanor 
the Orchomenian, speaking in the name of the 
rest, replied to this demand with the utmost in- 
dignation, reproaching the perfidy of Arieus, 
who had betrayed the friends and benefactors 
of his master Cyrus; and who co-operated with 
the enemy of that master, the deceitful and im- 
pious Tissaphernes. The Persian endeavoured 
to justify himself, by repeating his accusation of 
Clearchus. Upon which Xenophon observed, 
* That Clearchus, if guilty of perjury, had been 
justly punished ; but where are Proxenus and 
Menon, who are your benefactors, and our com- 
manders? Let them, at least, be semt to us, 
since it is evident that their friendship for both 
parties will make them advise what is best for 
both.” This reasonable request it was impos- 
sible to elude; and the Barbarians, after long 
conferring together, departed without attempt- 
ing an answer.4- Their mean duplicity in this 
interview sufficiently indicated the unhappy 
treatment of the Grecian commanders, who 
were kept in close captivity, and afterwards 
sent to Artaxerxes, by whose order they were 
put to death. 


3 Xenoph. p. 288, et seq. 4 Ibid. p. 289. 


XXVI] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


289 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


Consternation of the Greeks—Manly Advice of Xenophon—Their Retreat—Dificulties attend- 
ing it—Surmounted by their Skill and Perseverance—Their Sufferings among the Carduchian 
Mountains—They traverse Armenia—First behold the Sea from Mount Theches—Defeat the 
Colchians—Description of the southern Shore of the Euxine—Transactions with the Greek 
Colonies there—The Greeks arrive at Bysantium—Enter into the Service of Seuthes—His 
History—Conjunct Expeditions of the Greeks and Thracians—The Greeks return to the Ser- 


vice of their Country. 


HE perfidious assassination of their com- 

manders converted the alarm and terror, 
that had hitherto reigned in the Grecian camp, 
into consternation and despair. This dreadful 
catastrophe completed the afflictions of men dis- 
tant above twelve hundred miles from their na- 
tive land; surrounded by craggy mountains, 
deep and rapid rivers; by famine, war, and the 
treachery of their allies, still more formidable 
than the resentment of their enemies. The 
soldiers reflected, that it was dangerous to de- 
part, yet more dangerous to remain ; provisions 
could ve acquired only by the point of thesword; 
every country was hostile; although they con- 
quered one enemy, another would be still ready 
to receive them’;:they wanted cavalry to pursue 
the Barbarians, or to elude their pursuit; vic- 
tory itself would be fruitless; defeat, certain 
ruin. 

Amidst these melancholy reflections they had 
spent the greater part of the night; when Xeno- 
phon the Athenian, inspired, as he acknow- 
ledges, by a favourable dream, and animated, as 
his conduct proves, by the native vigour of a 
virtuous mind, roused and imboldened by ad- 
versity, undertook, amidst the general dejection 
and dismay, the care of his own and of the pub- 
lic safety. Having assembled the captains be- 
longing to the division of his beloved Proxenus, 
he faithfully represented to them their situation, 
which, dangerous as it was, ought not to sink 
brave men to despair. Even in the worst cir- 
cumstances, fortitude, and fortitude alone, could 
afford relief. They had been deccived, but not 
conquered, by the Barbarians; whose perfidious 
violation of faith, friendship, and hospitality, 
rendered them odious and contemptible to men 
and gods; the gods, who were the umpires of 
the contest, and whose assistance could make 
the cause of justice and valour prevail over 
every superiority of strength and numbers.5 

The manly piety of Xenophon was com- 
municated, by a generous sympathy, to the 
breasts of his hearers; who, dispersing through 
the various quarters of the camp, summoned 
together the principal officers in the army. 
To them Xenophon addressed a similar dis- 
course, encouraging them by every argument 
that religion, philosophy, expcrience, and par- 
ticularly their own expcrience, and that of the 
Grecian history, could afford, to expect success 
from their own bravery, and the favour of hea- 
ven, and to disdain thc offers of accommodation 
(if such should be made) from their impious 


The hearty approbation of the Spartan Cheiri- 
sophus added weight and authority to the per- 
suasive eloquence of the Athenian; who farther 
exhorted them to substitute commanders in the 
room of those whom they had lost; to disentan- 
gle themselves from every superfluous incum- 
brance that might obstruct the progress of their 
march, and to advance with all expedition to- 
wards the sources of the Tigris and Euphrates, 
in the form of a hollow square, having the bag- 
gage and those who attended it in the middle, 
and presenting the valour of their battalions on 
every side to the enemy. These resolutions 
were unanimously approved by the council, after 
which they were referred to the assembled 
troops, by whom they were readily confirmed, 
and carried into immediate execution.6 Tima- 
sion, Xanthicles, Cleanor, Philysias, succeeded 
to the late commanders; Xenophon supplied 
the place of Proxenus; and so ably was the 
ascendant of Spartan and ‘Athenian virtue 
maintained by him and Cheirisophus, that the 
names of their uncqual colleagues will seldom 
occur in the following narrative of their retreat. 

The greater part of the day had been em- 
ployed in these neccssary measures; and in the 
afternoon, the troops having passed the Zaba- 
tus, pursued their march in the disposition re- 
comniended by Xenophon. But they had not 
proceeded far, before their rear was harassed 
by the Persian archers and cavalry, which af- 
forded them a very inauspicious presage of the 
hardships to which they must be continually 
exposed in eighteen days’ journey along the 
level frontiers of Media. It was difficult to re- 
pel these light skirmishers, and impossible to 
attack them without being exposed to consi- 
derable loss ; because a detachment of heavy- 
armed men, or even of targeteers, could not 
overtake them in a short space, nor could they 
continue the pursuit without being cut off from 
the rest of the army. Xenophon, with more 
valour than prudence, tried the unfortunate ex- 
periment; but was obliged to retreat fighting, 
and brought back his men wounded, disheart- 
ened, and disgraced.’ 

But this‘unfortunate event neither disheart- 
ened nor disgraced the commander. He inge- 
nuously acknowledged his error, which, perni- 
cious as it was, had taught the Greeks their 
wants. They wanted cavalry and light-armed 
troops; the former of which might be obtained 
by equipping for war the baggage-horses which 
had been taken from the enciny ; and the latter 


foes, whose insidious friendship had always| might be supplied by the Rhodians (well skilled 


proved more hurtful than thcir open enmity. 


9 Xenoph. p. 209. 


20 


in the sling,) of whom there were great num- 


— — 


6 Xenoph. p. 299. 


7 Ibid. p. 305, et seq. 


290 


bers in the army. This advice was approved; 
2 company of fifty horsemen was soon raised, 
the men vying with each other to obtain the 
honour of this distinguished service; and two 
hundred Rhodians were drawn from the ranks, 
who furnished themselves with slings and leaden 
balls, which they threw twice as far as the 
stones employed by the Barbarians. The horse- 
men wore buff ĉoats and corslets; they were 
commanded by Lycius the Athenian.! 

The utility of these preparations was disco- 
vered as soon as the enemy renewed their as- 
saults, with a thousand horse, and four thou- 
sand slingers and archers. The newly-raised 
troops advanced with boldness and celerity, 
being assured that their unequal attack would 
be sustained by the targeteers and heavy-armed 
men. But the Persians, not waiting to receive 
them, fled in scattered disorder; the Greeks 
pursued, took many prisoners, made great 
slaughter, and mangled the bodies of the slain, 
in order to terrify, by such a dreadful spectacle 
of revenge, their cowardly and perfidious ene- 
mies.? 

After this advantage, the army continued to 
march along the banks of the Tigris, and the 
western boundaries of Media, meeting with 
many rich and populous villages, from which 
they were supplied with provisions; and ad- 
miring, as they passed along, the immense 
walls, the lofty and durable pyramids, the spa- 
cious but deserted cities, which testified the 
ancient greatness of that flourishing kingdom, 
pefore the Medes reluctantly submitted to the 
oppressive government of Persia. The Bar- 
barians still endeavoured to annoy them, but 
with very little success, unless when they pass- 
ed a bridge, or any narrow defile. On such 
occasions, the square form, in which they had 
hitherto marched, was found doubly inconve- 
nient.? In order to traverse such a passage, the 
soldiers were obliged to close the wings, and to 
crowd into a narrow space, which disordered 
tiie ranks, and made them obstruct each other. 
When they had crossed the bridge or defile, 
they were again obliged to run with all haste, 
in order to extend the wings, and resume their 
ranks, which occasioned a void in the centre, 
and much disheartened the men, thus exposed 
to the sudden attack of the pursuers. 

To obviate both inconveniences, the Greeks 
separated from the army six companies, each 
consisting of a hundred men. These were 
subdivided into smaller bodies, of fifty and 
twenty-five, each division of the company, as 
well as the whole, commanded by proper offi- 
cers. When it became necessary to close the 
wings, in order to pass a defile, these trooops 
staid behind, thus disburdening the army of a 
superfluous mass, and thereby enabling them 
to proceed without confusion in their ranks. 
After the passage was effected, the army might 
again extend the wings, and assume the same 
loose arrangement as before, without exposing 
the centre to danger; because the vacuity left 
there was immediately supplied by the detach- 
ed companies; the opening, if small, being fill- 
ed up by the six divisions of a hundred men 


1 Xenoph. p. 307. 
3 Ibid. p. 310. 


2 Ibid. 308. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


each; if larger, by the twelve divisions of fifty ; 
and if very large, by the twenty-four divisions 
of twenty-five ;4 as the same number of men, 
in proportion to the number of columns into 
which they were divided, would occupy a 
wider extent of ground.’ 

With this useful precaution the Greeks per- 
formed a successful march to the mountains of 
the Carduchians, where the enemy’s cavalry 
could no longer annoy them. But here they 
found new difficulties, far more formidable than 
those with which they had hitherto been obliged 
to contend. The Tigris, on their left, was so 
deep and rapid, that the passage appeared abso- 
lutely impracticable. Before them rose the 
high and craggy mountains, which oversha- 
dowed the river, inhabited by a warlike race of 
men, whose barbarous independence had al- 
ways defied the hostilities® of Persia, as that 
of their successors, the modern Curdes, does the 
arms of the Turk, to whom they are but nomi- 
nally subject.? While the Greeks doubted what 
course to pursue, a certain Rhodian undertook 
to deliver them from their perplexity, provided 
they gave him a talent, to reward his labour. 
«I shall want, besides,” continued he, “two 
thousand leather bags, which may be obtained 
by flaying the sheep, goats, oxen, and asses, 
which the country affords in such numbers as 
we see around us. The skins may be blown, 
tied at the ends, and fastened together by the 
girths belonging to the sumpter horses, then 
covered with fascines, and lastly with earth. I 
shall use large stones instead of anchors; every 
bag will bear two men, whom the fascines and 
earth will prevent from slipping, and whom, 
with very little labour on their part, the rapidity 
of the current will waft across the river.”8 

This ingenious contrivance was commended, 
but not carried into execution; the Grecians 
having learned from some prisoners recently 
taken, that the road through the country of the 
Carduchians would soon conduct them to the 
spacious and plentiful province of Armenia. 
Thither they fearlessly penetrated, regardless 
of the report, that under a former reign, a Per- 
sian army of a hundred and twenty thousand 
men had been cut off by those fierce barbari- 
ans, whose manners were more rude and in- 
hospitable than the mountains which they in- 
habited. At the approach of the Greeks, the 
Carduchians retired to their fastnesses, leaving 
the villages in the plain at the mercy of the in- 
vaders. The troops were restrained from in- 
jury ; but their inoffensive behaviour, and kind 
invitations to peace, were regarded with con- 
tempt by the common enemies of the Greeks, 


of the Persians, and of human kind. They 


4 Xenoph. 310. 

5 I have explained this matter minutely, because the 
words of Xenophon are mistaken by great military writers. 
Major Mauvillon, a skilful engineer and excellent scholar, 
proposes a transposition of the words of Xenophon, that 
the greater gaps may be filled up by the greater divisions. 
He justly observes, that no translator or commentator has 
taken notice of the difficulty that naturally presents itself 
on reading the passage, which, however, I hope is suffi- 
ciently perspicuous in the text. See )’Essai sur l’Influence 
de la Poudre à Canon, &c. a work which, I believe, no 
military man can read without receiving from it instruction 
and entertainment. 

6 Xenoph. p. 315. 7 Rauwolfs Travels. 

8 Xenoph. p. 314. 


XXVL] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


291 


seized every opportunity to obstruct the march ; down the precipices. But this artillery was at 


of the army; and though unprepared for a 
close engagement, used with extraordinary ef- 
fect their bows, three cubits long, which they 
bent by pressing the lower part with their lett 
foot. The arrows were near as long as the 
bows; and their irresistible points pierced: the 
firmest shields and corslets. The Greeks em- 
ployed their skill in tactics, and their valour, to 
elude, or to repel, the assault of these danger- 
ous foes, from whom they suffered more in se- 
ven days than they had done in as many weeke 
from the bravest troops of Artaxerxes.2 At 
length they arrived at the river Centrites, two 
hundred feet broad, which forms the southern 
boundary of Armenia, having just reason to 
rejoice that they had escaped the weapons of 
the Carduchians, whose posterity, the Parthi- 
ans,!0 with the same arms and address, became 
formidable to Rome, when Rome was formida- 
ble to the world.!! 

The month of January was employed in tra- 
versing tle fruitful plans of Armenia,!? which 
are beautifully diversified by hills of easy as- 
cent. Teribazus, the Persian governor of the 
province, entered into an agreement with the 
generals, that if they abstained from hostilities, 
he would not obstruct their march, but furnish 
them plentifully with provisions. But this 
league was perfidiously violated. The Greeks 
had recourse to arms; pursued Teribazus; as- 
saulted and plundered his camp.}3 
they were exposed to a more dangerous con- 


length exhausted; the Greeks became masters 
of the heights; and a dreadful scene followed. 
The women first threw their children down the 
rocks, and then themselves. The men imitat- 
ed this frantic example of despair; so that 
the assailants made few prisoners, but took 
a considerable quantity of sheep, oxen, and 
asses,!5 
From thence the army proceeded with un- 
common celerity through the bleak and rocky 
country of the Chalybeans; marching, in seven 
days about a hundred and fifty miles. The 
Chalybeans were the fiercest nation in all those 
parts. They wore, for their defence, linen 
corslets, greaves, and helmets; they carried a 
short falchion at their girdles; and attacked 
with pikes fifteen cubits long. Instead of dis- 
covering any symptoms of flight or fear, they 
sang, danced, and rejoiced, at the approach of 
an enemy. They boldly defended their villa- 
ges, not declining even a close engagemeut with 
the Greeks; who could supply themselves with 
nothing from this inhospitable and warlike 
country, but, in their dangerous march through 
| it, subsisted entirely on the cattle lately taken 
from the Taochians.!6 
The river Harpasus, four hundred feet broad, 
separated the territories of the Chalybeans and 
Scythians. From the latter the Greeks met 
with little resistance, in a march of thirteen 


Next day | days, which brought them to the lofty mount 


| Theches, a place held in particular devotion by 


test, in which neither skill nor valour could | the inhabitants of the neighbouring territory. 


avail. The snow fell in such quantities during 
the night, as completely covered the men with 
their arms. Their bodies were benumbed and 
parched with the piercing coldness of the north 
wind. Many slaves and sumpter horses pe- 
rished, with about thirty soldiers. The rest 
could scarcely be persuaded by Xenophon to 
put themselves in motion, which was known to 
be the only remedy for their distress; and as 
the severity of the weather still continued dur- 
ing the remainder of their march through Ar- 
menia, several soldiers lost their sight by the 
glare of the snow, and their toes and fingers 
by the intenseness of the cold.'4 The eyes 


were best defended by wearing something black | 


before them ; the feet were preserved by con- 
stant motion in the day, and by stripping bare 
in the night. 

From Armenia they proceeded to the coun- 
try of the Taochians, who, alarmed by the ap- 
proach of an unknown enemy, had abandoned 
the valleys, and taken refuge on the mountains, 
with their wives, children, and cattle. Hither 
also they had conveyed all their provisions; so 
that the Greeks were obliged to attack these 
fastnesses, otherwise the army must have been 
starved. The Barbarians boldly defended them, 
by letting fly innumerable vollies of stones 


Y Xenoph. p. 213—228. 

10 Strabo, l. xvi. p. 515. 

-11 Plut. in Crasso et Marc. Anton. 

12 There the Greeks found wavtz rx exirydese, ow 
oriv ayala, LEQELX, TITOV} OLVOUŞ MWxAMLOUS suudess, OTT be 
Oide¢, orrçix mavrofærz; ‘all kinds of necessaries, and 
even luxuries, victims, corn, old fragrant wines, dried 
grapes, and all sorts of pulso.” 

13 Xenoph. p. 328. 14 Xenoph. p 329. et seq. 


The vanguard had no sooner ascended this 
sacred mountain, than the army were alarmed 
by loud shouts, which continued to redouble 
with increasing violence. Jt was imagined that 
some new form of danger had appeared, or that 
some new enemy was ready to assail them. 
The rear advanced with all possible expedition 
to the assistance of their companions; but hav- 
ing arrived within hearing, were seized with 
the most pleasing astonishment, whien their ears 
were saluted from every quarter with the repe- 
tition, “ The sea! the sea !” the sight of which, 
a sight so long wished in vain, at first filled 
them with transports of tumultuous joy, and 
afterwards recalled more distinctly the remem- 
brance of their parents, their friends, their 
country, and every object of their most tender 
concern.!?7 The soldiers, with tears in their 
eyes, embraced each other, and embraced their 
commanders; and then, as by a sudden consent 
of sympathy (for it was never known by whose 
orders,) heaped up a mount of stones, which 
they covered with barbaric arms, as a trophy of 
their memorablejourney through so many fierce 
and hostile nations. 

The distant prospect of the Euxine made them 
forget that they had not yet attained the end of 
their labours. A space, indeed, of less than 
sixty miles intervened; but it was covered by 
the trackless forests of the Macronians, and by 
the abrupt and intricate windings of the Col- 
chian mountains. A fortunate circumstance 
enabled them without difficulty to surmount tha 


15 Xenophon, p. 338. 
17 [bid. p. 379. 


16 Thid. 338, 


292 
first of those obstacles. Among the Grecian 
targeteers was a man who understood the lan- 
guage of the Barbarians. He had been carried 
to Athens in his youth, where he had served as 
aslave. At the sight of the Macronians, he 
recognized his long-forgotten countrymen; and 
having addressed them in terms of friendship 
and respect, engaged them to exchange presents, 
and to enter into alliance with the Greeks,! 
whom they plentifully supplied with provisions, 
and having cut down the trees that interrupted 
their passage, conducted them in three days to 
ne western frontier of Colchos. 

This country, so famous in the fables of anti- 
quity,? was inhabited by an ancient colony of 
Egyptians, who long preserved pure from any 
foreign admixture, not only their original lan- 
guage, but the singular manners, and the more 
singular rites and ceremonies, of their mother 
country.2 Though distinguished in other re- 
spects from the neighbouring nations, whom 
they detested, and to whom they seemed detes- 
table, they agreed with them in their jealousy 
of the Greeks, whose flourishing colonies along 
the southern shores of the Euxine threatened 
the safety of their dominions. They assembled 
therefore from all quarters, occupied the heights, 
and prepared to dispute the passage with obsti- 
nacy. Their numbers, their discipline, their 
arms, but, still more, their situation, rendered 
them formidable. If the Greeks advanced in 
a phalanx, or full line, their ranks would be 
broken by the inequalities of the ground, the 
centre would be disordered, and the superior 
numbers of the enemy would outreach either 
wing.! These inconveniences might partly be 
remedied by making such parts of the line, as 
had an easy ascent, wait for the slow and diffi- 
cult progress of their companions through more 
abrupt and inaccessible mountains; and, by ex- 
tending the phalanx in length, and leaving very 
few men in file, their front might be ren- 
dered equal to that of the Colchians. But the 
first of these operations would have too long ex- 
posed the army to the darts and arrows of the 
Barbarians, and the second would have so much 
enfeebled the line, as must have rendered it 
liable to be penetrated. Amidst this choice of 
difficulties, Xenophon proposed, and the pro- 
posal was readily approved by his colleagues, 
that the heavy-armed men should be divided 
into companies of a hundred each, and that 
each division should be thrown into a separate 
column. The wide intervals between the co- 
lumns might thus enable the smaller army to 
extend on the right and left beyond the ene- 
my’s line; each company or division might as- 
cend the mountain wherever they found it most 
convenient; the bravest men might be led first 
to the charge; the depth of the columns could 
not possibly be penetrated ; nor could the ene- 
my fall into the intervals between them, with- 


1 Xenoph. p. 340. 2 See p. 14, et seq. 

3 Herodot. l. xi. c. eiv. 4 Idem, p. 341. 

5 The A0x5 cesses is defined by Arian to be a body of 
men, with the files longer than the ranks; that is. with more 
men in depth than in front. The ¢xa272, without any 
epithet, means the contrary But the ¢xAz7% coSixeis 
an army, as the same author tells us, otzy sm: xtews 
woptunt=s, that is, having more men in depth than in front, 
and employing, for some extraordinary reason, what is 
naturally the line of march as an order of batue 


HISTORY OF GREECE 


(Cuar. 


out being cut off by the divisions on either 
side, which might be arranged in such a manner 
as to relieve, encourage, and support each other 

This judicious disposition was attended with 
the expected success. The heavy-armed men 
formed eighty companies; the targeteers and 
archers, divided into three bodies, each of about 
six hundred men, flanked the army on the right 
and left. Their third division, consisting chiefly 
of Arcadians, occupied a distinguished place in 
the centre. Thus disposed for battle, the wings 
of the Grecian army, and particularly the tar- 
geteers and archers, who were most capable of 
expedition, advanced with celerity to the attack. 
The enemy, who saw them approach, and who 
perceived that on either hand they outreached 
their line, filed to the right and left in order to 
receive them. By this movement they left a 
void in their centre, towards which the Arca- 
dian targeteers, supported by the nearest co- 
lumns, advanced with rapidity, and soon gained 
the summit. They could thus fight on equal 
terms with the Barbarians, who, thinking they 
had lost all when they lost the advantage of the 
ground, no longer offered resistance, but fled on 
every side with disordered trepidation, leaving 
the Greeks masters of the field of battle, as well 
as of the numerous villages in that neighbour- 
hood, and within two days’ march of the 
Euxine sea, without any other enemy to oppose 
their long-disputed passage thither. 

The southern shore of the Euxine, which 
actually presents one uniform scene of effemi- 
nate indolence and sullen tyranny, anciently 
contained many barbarous but warlike tribes, 
totally independent on each other, and scarcely 
acknowledging any dependence on the king of 
Persia. That part which extends towards the 
east and the borders of Mount Caucasus, and 
which afterwards formed the kingdom of the 
great Mithridates, was inhabited by the Col- 
chians, Drillians, Mysonecians, and Tybare- 
nians; the middle division was possessed by the 
Paphlagonians, who gloried in the irresistible 
prowess of their numerous cavalry; and the 
western parts, extending two hundred miles 
from Heraclea to the Thracian Bosphorus, were 
occupied by the inhospitable Bithynians; a 
colony of Thrace, who excelled and delighted 
in war, which, like their ancestors in Europe, 
they carried on with a savage fury.’ 

Amidst the formidable hostility of those nu- 
merous nations, arose, at wide intervals, several 
Grecian cities, which enlivened the barbaric 
gloom, and displayed the peculiar glory of their 
arts and arms. Sinopé, the mother and the 
queen of those cities, was advantageously situ- 
ated on a narrow istlimus which joined its ter- 
ritory, Consisting in a small but fertile penin- 
sula,$ to the province of Paphlagonia. The foun- 
dation of Sinopé remounted to the highest an- 
tiquity, and was ascribed to Antolycus, one of 
the Argonauts.9 The city was afterwards in- 


6 Xenoph. p. 342. 

7 See Dionvsius Periegetes, and Arrian’s Periplus. 

& Tournefort, v. iii. p. 46. says it is about six miles in cir- 
cumference. 

9 See the account of the Argonautie expedition, p. 15, et 
seq. Straho, l. xii. p. 546. who gives us this information, 
says further, that Lucullus, when he took the town. carried 
away the statue of Antolycus. 


. 


XXVI] 


creased by a powerful accession of Milesians. 
It possessed convenient harbours on either side 
of the isthmus. The peninsula was surrounded 
by sharp rocks, which rendered it inaccessible 
to an enemy ; and the sea abounded with the 
tunny fish, which flow in shoals from the Palus 
Meotis, where they are supposed to be bred,!0 
to the Euxine and Propontis. 

Such multiplied advantages rendered the Si- 
nopians populous and powerful. They diffused 
their colonies to the east and west. It is not 
improbable that they founded Heraclea,!! on the 
frontier of Bithynia; and it is certain that they 
built Cotyora in the territory of the Tybare- 
nians, Cerasus in that of the Mysonecians, and 
Trapezus in that of the Drillians. 

Trapezus, or Trebizond, was the first friendly 
city at which the Grecians arrived, after spend- 
ing more than atwelvemonth in almost con- 
tinual travelling and war. The numerous in- 
habitants of this flourishing sea-port, which has 
now decayed into the much-neglected harbour 
of Platana,'? received them with open arms, 
generously supplied their wants, and treated 
them with all that endearing yet respectful hos- 
pitality of kinsmen, who commiserated their 
sufferings and admired their virtue. The Gre- 
cians, on their part, displayed a very just and 
becoming sense of the evils which they had 
escaped, and of their actual security. In the 
fervour of religious gratitude they paid the so- 
lemn vows and sacrifices which they had pro- 
mised to Jupiter the preserver, and the other 
gods and heroes, whose bountiful protection 
had hitherto conducted them through so many 
known, and so many concealed dangers. They 
afterwards celebrated, with much pomp and 
festivity, the gymnastic gamesand exercises; an 
entertainment-equally agreeable to themselves, 
to the citizens of Trebizond, and to the divini- 
ties whom they both adored. When these essen- 
tial duties, for such the Greeks deemed them, 
had been performed with universal satisfaction, 
the soldiers, who were unwilling to be burden- 
some to their Trebizontian friends, found suffi- 
cient employment in providing for their own 
‘subsistence, and that of their numerous attend- 
ants. For several days they ravaged the neigh- 
bouring villages of the Colchians and Driliians; 
and while they cruelly harassed the enemies, 
they carefully respected the allies,of Trebizond. 
Their repeated devastations at length desolated 
the country immediately around them, so that 
the foraging parties could no longer set out 
and return on the same day; nor could they 
penetrate deep into the territory, without being 
endangered by the nocturnal assaults of the 
Barbarians. These circumstances rendered it 
necessary for them to think of leaving Trebi- 


10 Lournefort, Voyage au Levant. 

11 Strabo, |. xii. p. 542. calls Heraclea a colony of the 
Milesians, by whom we may understand the Sinopians, who 
were themselves 1 colony of that people. Xenophon, how- 
ever, called Heraclea a colony of Megareans. Xenoph. 
Anabas. p. 358. 

12 Tournefort, l. xvii. This place, however, is still large 
but depopulated ; coutaining more woods and gardens than 
houses, and those only of one story; yet the town retains 
the form of an oblong square, the modern walls being built 
on the ruins of the ancient, the shape of which occasioned 
the name of Trapezus, from the Greck word signifying a 
table. Tournefort, ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


ec a, 


Spartan fleet in that sea. 


293 


zond; on which account an assembly was 
convened to fix the day of their departure, and - 
to regulate the mode and plan of their future 
journey.!3, 

In this important deliberation the soldiers 
very generally embraced the opinion of Antileon 
of Thuria, who told them that, for his part, he 
was already tired with packing up his baggage, 
marching, running, mounting guard, and fight- 
ing, and now wished, after all his labours, to 
perform the remainder of the journey like 
Ulysses, and, stretched out at his ease, to be 
carried asleep!‘ into Greece. That this pleasing 
proposal might he put in execution, Cheiriso- 
phus sailed to the Hellespont, hoping to obtain 
ships from Anaxibius, who commanded the 
But in case such a 
request could not be conveniently granted, the 
soldiers determined to demand a few ships of 
war from the inhabitants of Trebizond, with 
which they intended to put to sea, and capture 
whatever merchantmen they could meet with 
in the Euxine, in order to employ them as 
transports.!5 

Several weeks elapsed without bringing any 
news of Cheirisophus, or promising any hope of 
assistance from the Spartan admiral. Mean 
while the Grecian pirates, for they deserve no 
better name, infested the Euxine sea. Dexip- 
pus, the Lacedemonian, with a degree of per- 
fidy worthy of his commission, betrayed his 
companions, and sailed off with the galley which 
he commanded.'§ But Polycrates, the Athe- 
nian, behaved with an ardour and fidelity which 
even robbers sometimes display in their trans- 
actions with each other; and his successful dili- 
gence soon collected such a number of vessels 
as served to transport to Cerasus the aged, the 
infirm, the women and baggage; while the 
strength of the army, consisting of men below 
forty years of age, reached the same place in 
three days’ march.!7 

The colony of Cerasus, or Cerazunt, was de- 
lightfully situated near the sea, among hills of 
easy ascent, covered in every age!’ with whole 
woods of cherry-trees, from which, in all proba- 
bility, the place derived its name.'9 From 
thence the voluptuous Lucullus, in the six hun 
dred and eightieth year of Rome, first brought 
into Italy this delicious fruit, which ancient na- 
turalists scarcely believed capable of thriving in 


13 Xenoph. 343. et seq. 

14 Thus was Ulysses transported by the Phaatians, who 
placed lim sleeping on the shore of Ithaca: 

Os Se evdovr’ ev vys Goy ers movrov wyovres 

Kaærĝĵsrxv civ Izza, Odyss. xiii. 134. 

The beautiful images which the poet, in the samo hook, 
gives of the pleasures of rest, after immoderate Inbour, 
played about the fancy of Antileon: 

Kas tw vydueog umves emi CAEQLEOLTI ETITTS 

Nuyerros, YOITTOS, verw ay LITTE £OIMWS, V, 80. 

And again, “The ship cnt the waves with a rapidity, 
which the flight of the swiftest hawk could not accompany, 
carrying a man. 

Oç mgiv pev perg TOAN Z mab’ “Kye OV KATZ buxov, 

Avdpwv TE TTOAEUOUS, MALY sive TE AUNTS TELEWV” 

An rors y’ aTeeuns tude, AsAATuEvoç OTe” ererrovags,’” 

15 Xenoph. p. 345. 16 Ihid. 

17 Ibid. p. 349. 18 Tournefort. 

19 Ksgxoos, cerasus, cerise, cherry. For a similar rea- 
son Tadmor in the desart was called Palmyra, a palmis, 
the palm tree. Tournefort mentions it as the opinion of St. 
Jerom, that the place gave name to the fruit. The diffe- 
rence is not material. 


294 


an Italian sky; but which actually adorns the 
bleakest and most northern regions of our own 
island. At Cerasus the Greeks remained ten 
days, disposing of their booty, supplying their 
wants, and reviewing the army, which still 
amounted to eight thousand six hundred men, 
the rest having perished by fatigue, war, cold, 
and sickness.! 

After this necessary delay, the less active por- 
tion again embarked, while the vigorous youth 
pursued their journey through the romantic 
country of the Mosynecians; a barbarous, yet 
powerful tribe, who received their singular de- 
nomination from the wooden houses, or rather 
towers, which they inhabited;2 and which, 
either by chance or design, were scattered in 
such a manner among the hills and valleys, that 
at the distance of eight miles, the villages could 
hear and alarm each other.2 The army next 
proceeded through the dark and narrow district 
of the Chalybeans, who subsisted by the work- 
ing of iron; and whose toilsome labours, rugged 
mountains, and more rugged manners,4 must 
have formed a striking contrast with the smiling 
plains, the pastoral life, the innocent and hos- 
pitable character of their Tyberenian neigh- 
bours; who treated the Greeks with every 
mark of friendship and respect, and conducted 
them, with attentive civility, to the city of Co- 
tyora, 

It might be expected, that the army, having 
reached the country of their friends and kins- 
men, should have been disposed peaceably to 
enjoy the fruits of their past labours and dan- 
gers. If they were unwilling to expose them- 
selves to fresh hostilities from the warlike inha- 
bitants of Paphlagonia and Bithynia, they might 
have waited the arrival of ships from Sinopé 
and Heraclea, or from the Spartan admiral in 
the Hellespont, who would either retain them 
m his own service, or transport them to the 
Chersonesus, to Byzantium, and to other cities 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


a a ae 


[ Cuap. 


the wrong; and both suspected and accused 
each other of imaginary crimes, of which none 
were guilty. 

Xenophon, who, with wonderful address, has 
justified himself from every reproach® that can 
reflect either on his understanding or his heart, 
does not deny an imputation to which he was 
exposed by discovering (somewhat, perhaps, 
unseasonably) the just and extensive views of 
a philosopher. When he surveyed the southern 
shores of the Euxine, cc vered in ancient ‘imes, 
as well as they are at present, with tall and 
majestic forest trees, admirably adapted to 
ship-building; when he considered the conve- 
nience of the harbours, and the productions of 
the neighbouring territory, consisting in flax, 
iron, and every commodity most necessary in 
raising a naval power, he was ambitious of es- 
tablishing a new settlement, which the numbers, 
the valour, and the activity of his followers, 
must soon render superior to the other Grecian 
colonies on the Euxine, or perhaps in any part 
of Asia. But this noble design, which might 
have proved so useful and honourable to the 
army, was blasted by the mean jealousy of his 
enemies. Xenophon was reproached with form- 
ing projects equally romantic and dangerous; 
and accused of an intention to keep the soldiers 
from home, that they might continue dependent 
on himself, and that he might increase his 
own fame and fortune at the risk of the public 
safety.” 

The mutinous and distracted spirit of the 
troops rendered all their future measures weak 
and wavering. The terror which they inspired, 
and their wants, which it was necessary to sup- 
ply, made them very unwelcome guests at Co- 
tyora, Sinopé, and Heraclea, at which places 
they continued several months, under pretence 
of waiting for transports, but mean while plun- 
dering the neighbouring country, laying the 
cities under contribution, and threatening them 


and territories, which, being lately conquered | with burdens that exceeded their faculties. 
by Sparta, required the vigilant protection of | The inhabitants of Heraclea, while they affected 


brave and numerous garrisons. 


But it is more | to consider those unreasonable demands, remov- 


easy for men to repel the assaults of external | ed their effects from the villages, shut the gates 


violence, than to elude the effects of their own 
ungovernable passions. The Greeks were in- 
volved in real danger, in proportion as they at- 
tained apparent security. During the long 
course of their laborious journey, the terror of 
unknown Barbarians hanging over them, pre- 
served their discipline and their union. But 
the air of a Grecian colony at once dissolved 
both. They, who in the remote regions of the 
East had acted with one soul, and regarded 
each other as brethren, again felt the unhappy 
influence of their provincial distinctions. The 
army was divided by separate interests, as well 
as by partial attachments. Those who had ac- 
quired wealth, desired to return home to enjoy 
it. Those who were destitute of fortune, longed 
to plunder friends and foes, Greeks and Barba- 
rians. The commanders despised and deceived 
the troops; the troops clamoured against, and 
insulted the commanders. Both were really in 


1 Xenoph. p. 349. 2 Mocuy and otxew. 

3 Xenoph. p. 351. 4 Ibid, p. 354. 

5 Dionysius Periegetes qualifies them by the epithet 
ws oAveenves, abounding in sheep. 


of their city, and placed armed men on the 
walls. Cheirisophus had by this time returned 
with vessels from Anaxibius, the Spartan admi- 
ral, but not sufficiently numerous to transport 


Iso great an army. The soldiers thus disap- 


pointed of their hopes, and discontented with 
their commanders, and with each other, rashly 
undertook, in separate bodies, the dangerous 
journey through Bithynia, a country extending 
two hundred miles from Heraclea to Byzan- 
tium, and totally inhabited, or rather wasted, by 
the Thynians, a Thracian tribe, the most cruel 
and inhospitable of the human race. In this 
expedition they lost above a thousand men; 
and the destruction must have been much 
greater, had not the generous activity of Xeno- 
phon seasonably led his own division to the as- 
sistance of those who had deserted his standard. 
Cheirisophus was soon afterwards killed by a 
medicine which he had taken ina fever. The sole 


}command devolved on Xenophon; not by ap- 


pointment, but by the voluntary submission of 


6 Xenoph.p. 367 7 Xenoph. p. 259, et seq. 


XXVL] 


the troops to his superior mind. Heat length 
taught them to defeat the irregular fury of the 
Thynians; and after taking many slaves and 
much useful booty, conducted them in safety to 
Chrysopolis,§ which is now known by the name 
of Scutari, and considered as the Asiatic suburb 
of Constantinople. 

The neighbourhood of a Grecian colony 
seemed infectious to the temper of the troops. 
At Byzantium their mutinous spirits were again 
thrown into fermentation. Cleander, the go- 
vernor of that city, who had come to meet them, 
narrowly escaped death during the fury of a 
military sedition. Their behaviour rendered 
them the objects of terror to all the inhabitants 
of those parts. The Lacedemonians dreaded 
the assistance of such dangerousallies; and the 
satrap Pharnabazus, alarmed for the safety of 
his province, practised with Anaxibius, who 
commanded in the Hellespont, to allure them, 
by fair promises, into Europe. Gained by the 
bribes of the Persian, not only Anaxibius, but 
his successor Aristarchus, made proposals of 
advantage to the army, which he had not any 
intention to fulfil. The troops, enraged at this 
disappointment, and still more at the treachery 
of the Spartan commanders, would have at- 
tacked and plundered Byzantium, had they not 
been restrained by the wisdom and authority 
of Xenophon, who, struggling like a skilful 
pilot against the violence of a tempest, prevent- 
ed the execution of ameasure which must have 
exposed them to immediate danger, and covered 
them with eternal infamy.° 

With tears and prayers, he conjured them 
“not to tarnish, by the destruction of a Grecian 
city, the glory of a campaign signalized by so 
many illustrious victories over the Barbarians. 
What hopes of safety could they entertain, if, 
after unsuccessfully attempting to dethrone the 
king of Persia, they should provoke the resent- 
ment of Sparta? Destitute as they were of 
friends, of money, of subsistence; and reduced 
by their inisconduct to a handful of men, could 
they expect to insult with impunity the two 
greatest powers in the world? The experience 
of late years ought to correct their folly. They 
had seen that even Athens, in the zenith of her 
greatness, possessed of four hundred galleys, an 
annual revenue of a thousand talents, and ten 
times that sum in her treasury; Athens, who 
commanded all the islands, and occupied many 
cities both in Asia and Europe, among which 
was Byzantium itself, the present object of their 
frantic ambition, had yielded to the arms of 
Sparta, whose authority was actually acknow- 
ledged in every part of Greece. What mad- 
ness, then, for men in their friendless condition, 
a mixed assemblage of different nations, to at- 
tack the dominions of a people whose valour 
was irresistible, and from whose vengeance it 
was impossible for them to fly, without flying 
from their country, and taking refuge among 
those hostile Barbarians, from whom, for near 
two years past, they had met with nothing but 
cruelty, injustice, persecution, and treachery ?” 

The judicious representations of Xenophon 
saved Byzantium; but it is probable that nei- 


8 Xenoph. p. 277, et seq. 9 Xenoph. p. 399, et seq. | 10 Xenoph. p. 393, et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


295 


ther the weight of argument, nor the powes 
of eloquence, would have long restrained the 
discontented and needy troops from attempting 
other enterprises of a similar nature, if an op 
portunity had not fortunately presented itself 
of employing their dangerous activity in the 
service of Seuthes, a bold and successful ad 
venturer of Lower Thrace. Mesades, the fa 
ther of Seuthes, reigned over the Melandep- 
tans, the Thynians, and the Thranipsans, whc 
inhabited the European shores of the Propontis 
and Euxine sea. The licentious turbulence ot 
his subjects, compelled hiin to fly from his do 
minions. He took refuge with Medocus, king 
of the Odrysians, the most powerful tribe in 
Upper Thrace, with whose family his own had 
long been connected by the sacred ties of hos- 
pitality. Medocus kindly received, and gene- 
rously entertained, the father; and, after his 
decease, continued the same protection and 
bounty to his son, Seuthes. But the indepen- 
dent spint of the young prince disdained, as he 
expresses it, to live like a dog at another man’s 
table. He desired horses and soldiers from Me- 
docus, that he might acquire subsistence for 
himself. His request was granted; his incur 
sions were successful; the terror of his name 
filled all the maritime parts of Thrace; and 
there was reason to believe that if he could join 
the Grecian forces to his own, he might easily 
regain possession of his hereditary dominions.!¢ 

For this purpose he sent to Xenophon Medo- 
sades, a Thracian, who, understanding the 
Greek language, usually served him as ambas- 
sador. The terms of the treaty were soon 
agreed on. Seuthes promised each soldier a 
cyzicene (about eighteen shillings sterling,) the 
captains two cyzicenes, and the generals four, 
of monthly pay. The money, it was observed, 
would be clear gain, as they might subsist by 
plundering the country; yet such of the booty 
as was not of a perishable nature, Seuthes re- 
served for himself, that by selling it in the mari- 
time towns, he might provide for the pay of 
his new auxiliaries,!! 

Having communicated their designs to the 
army, the Grecian commanders followed Me- 
dosades to the camp of Seuthes, which was dis- 
tant about six miles from the coast of Perin- 
thus, a city of considerable note in the neigh- 
bourhood of Byzantium. They arrived after 
sun-set, but found the Barbarians awake and 
watchful. Seuthes himself was posted in a 
strong tower; horses ready bridled stood at the 
gate ; large fires blazed at a distance, while the 
camp itself was concealed in darkness; precau- 
tions, however singular, yet necessary against 
the Thynians, who were deemed, of all men, 
the most dangerous enemies in the night. The 
Greeks were permitted to enter. Seuthes re- 
ceived them with rustic hospitality ; before en- 
tering on business, challenged them to drink in 
large horns full of wine; then confirmed the 
promises of his ambassador; and still farther 
allured Xenophon by the hopes of receiving, 
besides the stipulated pay, lands and cattle, and 
an advantageous establishment on the sea- 
shore. 


11 Idem, ibid 


296 


Next day the Grecian army joined the camp 
of their new master. The commanders were 
again entertaii.ed with a copious feast, in which 
Seuthes displayed all his magnificence. After 
supper, the buffoons and dancers were intro- 
duced, the cup went briskly round, and the 
whole assembly were dissolved in merriment. 
But Seuthes knew how far to indulge, and 
when to restrain, the joys of festivity. With- 
out allowing his revels to disturb the stillness 
of the night, he rose with a martial shout, imi- 
tating a man who avoided a javelin; and then 
addressing the Grecian captains without any 
sign of intoxication, desired them to have their 
men ready to march in a few hours, that the 
enemy, who were as yet unacquainted with the 
powerful reinforcement which he had received, 
might be taken unprepared, and conquered by 
surprise.! 

The camp was in motion at midnight; it was 
the middle of winter, and the ground was in 
many parts covered with a deep snow. But 
the Thracians, clothed in skins of foxes, were 
well prepared for such nocturnal expeditions. 
The Greeks suffered much? by the cold; but 
the rapidity of their march, animated by the 
certain prospect of success, made them forget 
their sufferings. Wherever they arrived, the 
villages were attacked and plundered, the houses 
were burned, many captives and cattle were 
taken, and the ravages of that bloody night 
sufficiently represent the uniform scene of cru- 
elty, by which, in the course of a few weeks, 
Seuthes compelled into submission the inha- 
bitants of that fertile and populous slip of land 
that lies between the Euxine and Propontis. 
But the possession of this territory, which 
formed the inost valuable portion of his here- 
ditary dominions, could not satisfy his ambi- 
tion. He turned his arms northwards, and 
overran the country about Salmydessus, a mari- 
time city situate at the mouth of a river of the 
same name, which flows from the southern 
branch of mount Hemus into a spacious bay 


1 Xenoph. p. 406. et seq. 

2 Hv de iwy TONAN, x8 Vuyes ourws wore TO vdwe 0 
EÇQECOVTO ETI OES VOV, ETRY VUTO, xxi O O8VOS EV TOES xy- 
yesoige XXi TWV E^ Anvwv TOAAWV XXI CLVES LTMEXLIOVTO XLI 
wrx. There was much snow, and the cold so intense, that 
the water froze as they were carrying it to supper, and the 
wine in the vessels. Many of the Greeks also lost their 
ears and noses. Xenoph. p. 408. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


of the Euxine. There the allied army repeated 
the same destructive havoc which they had al- 
ready made in the south; and avenged, by their 
cruel incursions, tle cause of violated hospi- 
tality ; for the Barbarians of those parts were 
so much accustomed to plunder the vessels 
which were often ship-wrecked on their shoaly 
coast, that they had distinguished it by pillars, 
in the nature of land-marks, to prevent intestine 
quarrels, by ascertaining the property of the 
spoil.3 
In the space of two months after his junction 
with the Greeks, Seuthes extended his posses 
sions several days’ march from the sea; his nu 
merous, but unskilful enemies, fighting singly 
were successively subdued; each vanquished 
tribe increased the strength of his army; the 
Odrysians, allured by the hopes of plunder, 
flocked to his standard, and the growing pros- 
perity of his fortune, no longer requiring the 
support, disposed him to neglect the services, 
of his Grecian auxiliaries.1 The ungrateful 
levity of the Barbarian was encouraged by the 
perfidious counsels of his favourite Heraclides 
of Maronea, one of those fugitive Greeks, who 
having merited punishment at home for their 
wickedness, obtained distinction abroad by their 
talents; men sullied with every vice, prepared 
alike to die or to deceive, and who having pro- 
voked the resentment of their own country- 
men by their intrigues and their audacity, often 
acquired the esteem of foreigners by their va- 
lour and eloquence, their skill in war, and dex- 
terity in negotiation. Heraclides strongly ex- 
horted his master to defraud the Greeks of 
their pay, and to deliver himself from their 
troublesome importunities, by dismissing them 
from his service. But the fears, rather than 
the delicacy of Seuthes, prevented him from 
complying with this advice; he lost his honour 
without saving his money; and the Grecian 
generals had an early opportunity to reproach 
his perfidy and ingratitude, being soon called 
to engage in a more honourable war, kindled 
by the resentment of Artaxerxes against the 
presumption of the Spartans, who had so stre- 
nuously supported the unfortunate rebellion of 
| Cyrus. 


3 Xenoph. p. 408. 4 Idem. p. 414, et seq. 


5 Idem. p. 427 


XXVIL.] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 297 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


Tissaphernes makes War on the Greeks, by order of Artaxerzes—Atlacks the Æolian Citres— 
Expedition of Thimbron—He is succeeded by Dercyllidas—His treaty with Tissaphernes— 
Agesilaus King of Sparta—Cinadon’s Conspiracy—Agesilaus Commander of the Grecian 
Forces in Asia—His Success—Tissaphernes succeeded by Tithraustes—Great Views of Age- 
silaus—War kindled in Greece—League against Sparta—Campaign of Lysander in Beotia— 


His Death. 


ig does honour rather to the modesty than to 
the judgment of Xenophon, that he has ex- 
cluded, from his general history of Greeian af- 
fairs, the account of an expedition, in which he 
himself acted so distinguished a part, and 
which immediately oceasioned very important 
transactions both in Asia and in Europe. After 
- the downfall of Athenian greatness, the Spar- 
tans were naturally exposed to the jealousy and 
Olymp. resentment of Persia, by their do- 
xe". minion in Greece, by their con- 
A. C. 399, quests on the coast of Asia, by the 
nl * pre-eminence of their naval power, 
and especially by their open participation in 
the rebellious designs of Cyrus. The former 
circumstances rendered their republic the rival 
of the king of Persia; but their co-operation 
with an ambitious rebel rendered them the per- 
sonal enemies of Artaxerxes. His resolution 
to chastise their audacity was communicated 
to Tissaphernes. who, after harassing the re- 
treat of the Greeks to the foot of the Cardu- 
chian mountains, beyond whieh he had not 
courage to follow them, returned with a pow- 
erful army towards Lower Asia, to resume the 
government of Caria, his hereditary province, 
as well as to take possession of the rich spoils 
of Cyrus, bestowed on him by the gratitude of 
his master, in return for his recent and signal 
services against that dangerous pretender to 
the throne. 
Honoured with this magnificent present, Tis- 


saphernes was farther entrusted with executing- 


the vengeance of the great king against the 
Spartans. Without any formal declaration of 
war, which the late hostilities in the East seem- 
ed to render unneeessary, he attacked the Æo- 
lian cities; the satrap Pharnabazus readily en- 
tered into his views, and concurred with all his 
measures, ‘The Lacedemonian garrison, sup- 
ported by the townsmen, defended themselves 
with their usual courage, earnestly soliciting, 
however, a reinforcement from home, which 
- might enable them to resist and to surmount 
such an unexpected danger.6 

On this important occasion, the Spartan se- 
nate and assembly were not wanting to the as- 
sistance of their garrisons, or to the hopes of 
their Æolian allies, They immediately levied 
a body of five thousand Peloponnesian troops, 
and demanded a eonsiderable supply from the 
Athenians. The latter sent them three hun- 
dred horsemen, who having served under the 
thirty tyrants, were cheerfully saerifieed to this 
dangerous duty by the partisans of the new 
democracy. The command of the joint forces 
was entrusted to the Spartan Thimbron, who 


+ 


6 Xenoph. Hellen ? iii. p. 460. Diodor. Sicul. l. xiv. p. 
416. 


Ay 


had orders,’ as soon as he arrived in Æolis, to 
take into pay the Greeks who had engaged in 
the expedition of Cyrus, and who were actually 
employed in the dishonourable serviee of an 
ungrateful Barbarian. The mean and perfidi- 
ous behaviour of Seuthes, who, in his new eha- 
raeter of prinee, still retained his original man- 
ners of a Thracian robber, rendered the proposal 
of joining Thimbron extremely agreeable to 
Xenophon, who eondueted to the Lacedwemo- 
nian standard six thousand men, the venerable 
remains of an army exhausted and ennobled 
by unexampled toils and dangets.® 

Having reeeived this powerful reinforcement, 
Thimbron opened the campaign against the 
lieutenant of Artaxerxes, at the distance of two 
years after Cyrus had marched 


vy Ti from Ephesus to dispute the crown 
hae 398 of Persia. The first impressions of 


the Grecian arms were attended 
with considerable suceess. Thimbron took, or 
regained, the towns of Pergamus, Teuthrania, 
Halisarnia, Myrina, Cymé, and Grynium. But 
the walls of Larissa, a strong city in the Troade, 
defied his assault; the vigilant garrison baffled 
all his contrivanees for depriving them of fresh 
water; and, assisted by the inhabitants of the 
place, made a vigorous sally, repelled the be- 
siegers, and burned or demolished their works, 
Nothing but continual aetion, and an unin- 
terrupted career of vietory, eould restrain the 
licentious passions of the troops, composed of 
a motley assemblage from so many different, 
and often hostile communities. Their seditious 
spirit rendered them formidable to each other, 
and to the Greeks of Asia. Their rapacity 
spared not the territories of the Laeedemonian 
allies, who loudly complained to the senate, as- 
eribing the violence of the troops to the weak 
ness of the general. In consequence of this 
representation, Thimbron was recalled and dis- 
graced,? and the command, for which he seemed 
so ill qualified, was bestowed on Dereyllidas, a 
man fertile in resources, who could often vary 
his conduct, without changing his principles; 
who knew when to relax, and when to enforce 
the discipline of the camp; and who, to the 
talents of an able general, added the reputation 
of being the best engineer of his times. By a 
judicious direetion of the maehines of war 
whieh he invented, or improved, Dercyllidas 
overeame the obstinacy of Larissa; and in the 
space of eight days, redueed eight other cities 
in the province of Pharnabazus. The rapidity 
of his conquests reeommended him to the Spar- 
tan senate, and his moderate use of victory en- 


7 Xenoph. Hellen. p. 550. Diodor. p. 416. 
8 Xenoph. Anabas. |. vii. p. 427 
9 Xenoph. p. 431. 


298 


deared him to the Asiatic colonies. He lessened 
their taxes, encouraged their industry, heard 
their complaints with candour, and decided 
their differences with the most impartial jus- 
tice. Disdaining the cruel example of his pre- 
decessors, he imposed not any arbitrary exac- 
tions on the peaceful citizens and husbandmen; 
and lest the maintenance of his troops should 
prove burdensome to the allies and subjects of 
Sparta, he fixed his winter quarters in Bithynia, 
where the valour of Xenophon and his follow- 
ers had lately spread the terror of the Grecian 
name. : 

arly in the spring, commis- 
ae ne ithe wall sent from Sparta to 

coe" inspect the affairs of Asia, and to 
prorogue, for another year, the authority of 
Dercyllidas, provided their observations and in- 
quiries confirmed the very favourable accounts 
that had been given of his administration. On 
their arrival at Lampsacus, where the army 
was then assembled, they visited the camp, and 
assured the soldiers, that the magistrates of the 
republic as mucli approved their conduct in the 
last, as they had condemned it in the preceding, 
year. A captain, expressing the sense of the 
multitude, replied, that the different behaviour 
of the troops, now and formerly, was yet less 
different than the characters of Thimbron and 
Dercyllidas. This testimony of military appro- 
bation was not more flattering to the general, 
than satisfactory to the commissioners; who 
afterwards, at his request, visited the neigh- 
bouring towns of Molis and Ionia, and found 
them in a condition extremely happy and 
flourishing.! 

Before taking leave of Dercyllidas, they ac- 
quainted him, that the inhabitants of the Thra- 
cian Chersonesus had lately sent to Sparta an 
embassy, requesting assistance against the fierce 
Barbarians who inhabited the adjoining terri- 
tory; and that, should circumstances permit 
him to afford protection to those industrious and 
distressed Greeks, he would perform a signal 
service to the state. The inactivity of Tissa- 
phernes, who, notwithstanding the powerful 
army which he had conducted from Upper Asia, 
still expected further reinforcements from the 
East, encouraged the Grecian general to under- 
take this useful and meritoriousenterprise. The 
Chersonesus was one of the most fertile? and 
best cultivated spots in the ancient world. In 
an extent of fifty miles in length, and fifteen in 
breadth, it contained eleven rich and flourishing 
cities, dita several commodious harbours. The 
fields, producing the most valuable grains, were 
interspersed and adorned with delightful planta- 
tions and orchards, as well as with lawns and 
meadows, stored with all sorts of useful cattle. 
Had this beautiful country enjoyed an insular 
form, its happiness would have been complete; 
but a neck of land, thirty-seven furlongs in 
breadth, joined it to the territories of the fiercest 
tribes in Thrace. The troops of Dercyllidas | 
could easily have repelled their inroads. They | 


might have punished their cruelty by destroying 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


{Cuap. 


refuge in their woods and mountains, and 
whenever the army was withdrawn, would have 
again poured down on the helpless Chersonesus 
with their native fury, heightened by revenge. 
Dercyllidas afforded a more useful assistance to 
those unhappy Greeks; and employed in their 
defence, not the courage, but the labour, of his 
soldiers. With incessant toil, begun in the 
spring, and continued almost to the autumn, 
they formed a strong wall across the isthmus; 
the space was marked out, and the labour dis- 
tinctly apportioned to the separate communities 
from which the army had been levied; and the 
spur of emulation was sharpened by the incite- 
ment of gain, the general in person superintend- 
ing the work, and bestowing rewards (lavishly 
furnished by the wealthy Chersonites) on the 
most diligent and deserving.? 

Dercyllidas had scarcely returned from this 
employment, justly ennobled by itsutility, when 
the combined forces of Pharnabazus and Tissa- 
phernes appeared in the neighbourhood of Ephe- 
sus. This general ‘collected his whole strength 
in order to give them battle; the European sol- 
diers displayed a noble ardour for action; but 
the inhabitants of the Asiatic coast, who had 
flocked to his standard, were intimidated by the 
sight of an enemy whose numbers far exceeded 
their own. This panic might have proved fatal, 
had not the troops of Tissaphernes felt the hor- 
ror which they inspired. They recollected the 
bravery of the ten thousand who had accom- 
panied Cyrus; they perceived that the forces 
with whom they now had to contend exceeded 
that number; but they did not reflect that the 
army of Dercyllidas was swelled by the degen- 
erate Greeks of Æolis and Ionia, whose minds 
had been enfeebled and degraded bya long series 
of oppression. The cowardice of the Persians 
engaged Tissaphernes, much against the incli 
nation of Pharnabazus, to propose a conference; 
the cowardice of the Ionians engaged Dercylli- 
das to accept the proposal. Hostilities were 
thus suspended; mutual hostages were given ; 
overtures of peace were made; and messengers 
were despatched for instructions to the Spartan 
council, and to the court of Persia. 

The design of Tissaphernes, however, was 
only to gain time by amusing the enemy. The 
most solemn oaths and engagements had long 
lost their power over his perfidious mind. He 
treacherously watched an opportunity to renew 
the war, waiting with impatience for the pro- 
mised reinforcements from the East, and espe- 
cially for the equipment of a fleet , which Arta- 
xerxes Was preparing with silence and celerity, 
in the ports of Phenicia. The secret prepara- 
tions were communicated to the Spartan magis- 
trates by the patriotism of Herodas, a Syracusan, 
who, animated by the love of Greece, betrayed 
his Phenician master. The Spartans were 
alarmed with the danger, indignant at the 
treachery of Tissaphernes, and perhaps dis- 
pleased with the too easy credulity of their ge- 
neral. But the death of king Agis had given 
them, in the person of their first magistrate, a 


their miserable villages in the open country; | commander who equalled Dercyllidas in merit, 
but the Barbarians would have found a secure | and who has far surpassed him in renown. 


1 Xenoph. Hellen. 1. iii. p. 487. 


2 Wapeweoraryy xxi wpiorryy, 


Xenoph. p. 488. 


3 Xenoph. p. 488. E 


XXVIL] 


The destructive expedition against the Eleans 
was the last exploit of the long and warlike reign 
of Agis. On his death-bed he acknowledged for 
his son Leotychides, whose legitimacy, the levity 
or the guilt of his mother Timea had exposed 
to just suspicion. But this late avowal of a 
successor, whom he had so long disowned, did 
not satisfy the partisans of Agesilaus, who was 
the brother of Agis on the side of his father 
Archidamus, but younger by many years, being 
born of a different mother, and failing Leoty- 
chide, the nearest heir to the throne. Under a 
a diminutive and ignoble form, Agesilaus eon- 
cealed a vigorous and fervid mind, a manly ele- 
vation of eharacter,a generous ambition of soul. 
These respectable qualities, adorned by the 
milder virtues of modesty, candour, condescen- 
sion, and unlimited eomplaisance for his friends, 
early attracted the notice, and merited the esteem 
of the first names of Sparta; and of none more 
than Lysander, who, as his personal hopes of 
grandeur were blasted by the universal jealousy 
and resentment that had been justly excited in 
Sparta against his ostentatious abuse of power, 
confined all his projects of ambition to the ag- 
grandisement of his favourite. That eloquence 
and address,4 which would have been ineffectual 
if employed for himself, succeeded in behalf of 
another; and by the influence and intrigues of 
Lysander, still more than by the strong claims 
of justice and of merit, Agesilaus was declared 
successor to the vacant throne; and, at the dis- 
tance of about two years, commander in chief 
of the Greek forces in Asia; an office less splen- 
did in name than that of king of Sparta, but 
carrying with it more solid weight and au- 
thority. 

In the interval of these successive honours, he 
approved his attentive vigilance in the service of 
the republic, of which the safety, and even the 
existence, was endangered by a daring and 
bloody conspiracy. A youth named Cinadon, 
distinguished above lis companions by extraor- 
dinary strength and agility, was not less conspi- 
cuous for undaunted courage and ambition. 
Descended of an obscure family, Cinadon felt 
and regretted the mortifying partiality of the 
government under whieh he lived. His pride 
was deeply wounded with the reflection, that 
whatever abilities his youth might promise, and 
his manhood mature, the unfortunate circum- 
stances of his birth must for ever exclude him 
from the principal dignities of the siate, which 
circulated among a few Spartan families, with- 
out the possibility of extending beyond that very 
limited sphere. The warmth of his character, 
and the impetuosity of his passions, prompted 
him to seek justice and revenge; nor was his 


4 The partisans of Leotychides, in pleading his cause be- 
fore the assembly, alleged an oracle that exhorted the 
Spartans to beware of a lame reign. This pointed at Age- 
silaus, who limped in walking. But Lysander, by one of 
those ready and unexpected tarns, which often decide the 
resolutions of numerous assemblies, directed the battery of 
the oracle against Leotychides, asserting, that it was the 
Jameness of the title only which Apollo must have had in 
view, since it was a matter indifferent to the gods whether 
the Spartan kings walked gracefully; but a matter of high 
importance whether they descended from Hercules, the son 
of Jupiter, or Alcibiades, an Athenian profligate and exile. 
Com. Plut. in Agesil.et Lysand.et Xenoph. Agesil. Panegyr. 
et Hollen. l. iii. p. 493. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


299 


blind and headlong ferocity alarmed by the 
means, however atrocious, tliat must lead to this 
favourite end. He communicated the horrid de- 
sign to men of his own, and of an inferior con- 
dition, exaggerating their cruel treatment by a 
stern aristocracy, which he contrasted with the 
mild equality of the neighbouring communities; 
and perhaps asserting, that if they must submit 
to a master, it would be better to have one than 
many ; that even the subjects of a monarchy en- 
joyed greater equality and liberty than the mem- 
bers of the Spartan republic,’ since the former 
all equally participated in those preferments 
and honours, to which not only the slaves, the 
Helots, and freedmen, but the whole body of 
the Lacedemonian people, were forbidden to 
aspire. After this general representation, he 
neglected not, what was more effectual and im- 
portant, to arraign the arrogance and cruelty of 
particular senators, and to inflame the resent- 
ment of individuals against their private and 
domestic foes; nor did he forget to encourage 
them all with the certain prospect of success, 
by eontrasting their own strength and numbers 
with the weakness of an enemy, who might be 
taken unarmed, and cut off by suprise.® 

The time for action approached, and the 
author of the conspiracy commanded his asso- 
ciates to stay at home, that they might be ready 
ata call. Agesilaus, mean while, performed 
the accustomed vows and sacrifices for the safety 
of the republie ; the appearance of the entrails 
aunounced some dreadful and concealed dan- 
ger; a second victim was slain, and the signs 
were still more unfavourable ; but after exam- 
ining the third sacrifice, the priest exclaimed, 
*“ We seem, O Agesilaus! to be in the midst of 
our enemies.” Soon afterwards, a person, 
whose name has not been thought worthy of 
record, denounced Cinadon to the magistrates, 
as guilty of a treasonable design, of which he 
had endeavoured to render himself an accom- 
plice. When the informer was desired to ex- 
plain his declaration more fully, he told them, 


| that Cinadon having conducted him to the great 


square of the eity, which, being destined for thie 
public assembly and the market, was the usual 
place of rendezvous, desired him to count the 
number of Spartans whom lhe saw in that spa- 
cious resort. That he counted the king, the 
ephori, the senators, and about forty others, 
and then asked Cinadon, for what purpose he 
haa required him to take that seemingly useless 
trouble? Because, replied the eonspirator, I 
reckon the Spartans to be encmies, and all the 
rest, whose great numbers you behold in the 
market-place, to be friends. Nor does this pro- 
portion apply to Sparta only ; in the farms and 
villages adjacent to the city, we shall in each 
house and family have one enemy, the master, 
but all the servants will be our friends. Cina- 
don then acquainted him with the object and 
cause of the conspiracy, which had been formed 
by men of probity and fortitude, and which was 
soon to be communicated to the slaves, pea- 


5 This language [ have often heard from the subjects of 
a modern republic, whose citizens are not more remarkable 
for thcir firmness in maintaining power, than for their ma- 
deration in exercising it. 

6 Xenoph Hellen. |. iii. p. 493 et seq. 


300 


sants, and the whole body of Lacedemoman 
people, whose animosity against the Spartans 
was too violent to be concealed. That the 
greatest part of the conspirators, being trained 
for war, had arms in their hands; that the 
shops of the armourers, the tools of those arti- 
ficers who wrought in metal, wood, and stone, 
and even the instruments of agriculture, might 
furnish such weapons to the rest, as would fully 
answer the purpose against unarmed men. 
This alarming intelligence roused the activi- 
ty, without shaking the firmness, of the Spartan 
magistrates. It would have been imprudent to 
seize Cinadon in the capital, as they were unac- 
quainted with the extent of his resources, and 
the number of his associates. On pretence of 
the public service, they contrived to send him 
to Aulon (for in similar expeditions they had 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


often employed his ready arm and enterprising | 
| alone, whose name in Asia was illustrious or 


valour,) that he might seize, in that licentious 
city, ana bring within the reach of justice, seve- 


ral daring violators of the Spartan laws, among | 
whom was a very beautiful woman, who cor- | first to dispute his pretensions, and to control 


rupted the manners of young and old.! 
senate prepared wagons for conveying the pri- 
soners, and furnished every thing necessary for 
the journey. A body of chosen horsemen was 
appointed to accompany Cinadon, who set out 
without suspecting that this long train of pre- 
paration was destined against himself alone. 
But no sooner had he reached a proper distance 
from the city, than he was seized as a traitor, 
and compelled, by the terror of immediate death, 
to denounce his accomplices. Their names 
were sent to the senate, who instantly secured 
their persons. Cinadon, Tisamenes, a priest, 
and the other leaders of the conspiracy, were 
scourged through the city, gored with instru- 
ements of torture, and finally relieved by death. 
The rash enterprise of Cinadon 


wym E still filled the Spartans with alarm, 
xcvi. 1l. E intelli pe 
A. C. 396. when intelligence was conveyed o 


the formidable preparations of Ar- 
taxerxes, against whom the persuasive influence 
of Lysander encouraged them to employ ihe 
great and solid, but as yet unknown abilities, 
of their young and warlike prince. 
reign of Agamemnon, Agesilaus was the first 
Grecian king who led the united forces of his 
country to make war in Asia; and his expedi- 
tion, though not less important than the ex- 
ploits of the sons of Atreus and Achilles, is 
much inferior in renown; because the panegy- 


Since the | 


tic of Xenophon, warm and splendid as it is, | 
| part of the coast; at the same time that such a 


even beyond the usual colour of his composi- 
tions, must yet, like all the works of man, be 
for ever eclipsed by the lustre of the Iliad. But 
the conquests of Agesilaus, however different 
in fame, yet surpassed in misfortune, the war 


[Cuar. 


body of foreign, troops amounting to six thou- 
sand, chiefly collected from the confederate 
cities of Peloponnesus. Since the irregular and 
unjustifiable conduct of Agis,in his unfortu- 
nate expedition against Argos, the Spartan 
kings were usually attended in the field by a 
council of ten senators, whose concurrence was 
held necessary in all public measures. Agesi- 
laus demanded a council, not of ten, but of 
thirty Spartans: a refined stroke of policy, which 
strongly indicates that artful dexterity with 
which, during a long adminis.ration, he uni- 
formly promoted the views of his interest and 
ambition. By augmenting the number of the 
council, he diminished its importance. Each 
member, as he possessed less weight and influ- 
ence, felt himself less concerned in the honour 
of the body; and the whole were more easily 
swayed and governed by the king. Lysander 


terrible, rivalled for awhile the power of Agesi- 
laus. But the colleagues of Lysander were the 


The | his authority. Agesilaus availed himself of 


their envy, and listened too easily to the dictates 
of selfishness, in humbling the arrogance of a 
rival who had been the chief author of his own 
greatness. By thwarting the measures of Ly- 
sander, by denying his requests, by employing 
him in offices unbecoming his dignity,? he ren- 
dered him contemptible in the eyes of those by 
whom he had been so long feared. This unge- 
nerous treatment of a benefactor, as well as the 
aspiring pride of the benefactor himself, which 
could excite such black ingratitude in an other- 
wise virtuous breast, doubly prove the insta- 
bility of friendship between ambitious minds. 
After a disgraceful rupture, which ended in an 
affected reconciliation, Lysander was sent by 
Agesilaus and his council to command the La- 
cedemonian squadron in the Hellespont, an 
inactive and subordinate service, in which he 
could not expect an opportunity to perform any 
thing worthy of his ancient fame. He return- 
ed, therefore, in a few months to Sparta, co- 
vered with disgrace, enraged by disappoint- 
ment, and vowing implacable revenge against 
the cruel ingratitude of his friend, which he felt 
more deeply than the injustice of all his ene- 


‘mies together. 


Agesilaus fixed his head-quarters at Ephesus, 
a place recommended by its centrical situation, 
as the most convenient rendezvous for the re- 
cruits which flocked to his standard from every 


station enabled him to conceal from the enemy 
which of their provinces was the intended ob- 
ject of his invasion. Thither Tissaphernes sent 
an embassy, demanding the reason of such 


of Troy. Both were pernicious to the interests | mighty preparations. Agesilaus replied, “ That 
of Greece; but of the two, the victories of Age- | the Greeks in Asia might enjoy the same liberty 


silaus proved the most fatal, not indeed in their | with their brethren in Europe.” 


The messen- 


immediate, but in their remote consequences. | gers of Tissaphernes had orders to declare, 

In the spring of the year three hundred and | that the king was inclined to acknowledge the 
ninety-six before Christ, he left Sparta, with | ancient freedom and independence of the Gre- 
three thousand Lacedemonian freedmen, and a cian colonies; that the report of his hostile 


1 Ayzytty 8’ exsacuov THY PUVAINnG MXSZAALT TM HEV EAS- 
ysTO wuTods gives, AvuexiverSzs ð’ ewnts Tous zosevouLs- 
vous Azxeduspoviwy xxs TeseSuTséesus zzi VEWTERIUS. Xe- 


aoph. p 494. 


| 


intentions against either of them or the mother 


2 Lysander was known in the East as a conqueror: 
Agesilaus made him a commissary. Vid. Plut. in Agesil. 
et Lysand et Xencph. Heten. ) 3. v, 497. 


XXVIL| 


country was totally void of foundation; and 
that, in consequence of the recent transactions 
between Tissaphernes and Dercyllidas, ambas- 
sadors might shortly be expected from Susa, 
empowered to ratify a firm and lasting peace 
between Artaxerxes and the Greeks. Until 
this desirable work should be completed, Tissa- 
phernes earnestly desired a continuation of the 
truce, which, on his side, he was ready to seal 
by whatever formalities Agesilaus thought 
proper to require. The Spartan king frankly 
avowed his suspicions of treachery; yet being 
unwilling to embroil his country in an unne- 
cessary war, he despatched Dercyllidas, with 
two members of the Spartan council, to renew 
his late engagements with Tissaphernes. The 
perfidious satrap swore and deceived for the 
last time. No sooner had he received the long 
expected auxiliaries from the east, than ‘he 
commanded Agesilaus to leave Ephesus, and to 
evacuate the coast of Asia; if he delayed to 
comply, the weight of the Persian arms would 
enforce obedience. The prudent, or pious Spar- 
tan, while his friends were alarmed with this 
unexpected declaration, assumed an unusual 
gaiety of countenance, observing, that he re- 
joiced to commence the war under such fa- 
vourable auspices, since the treachery of Tis- 
saphernes must render the gods his enemies. 
Mean while he prepared to encounter the in- 
siduous arts of the satrap, with equal, but more 
innocent address. It was iudustriously given 
out, that he intended to march into the province 
of Caria, the favourite residence of Tissapher- 
nes, which was adorned by his voluptuous 
parks and palaces, and strengthened by a for- 
tress, the repository of his treasures. The in- 
ning cities were ordered to mend the roads, 
mish a market, and to prepare every thing 
necessary to facilitate the march of the 
army. Tissaphernes, not doubting 
Caria was the intended scene of war, espe- 
cially as the mountainous nature of that pro- 
vince rendered it improper for horse, in which 
the Greeks were very poorly provided, en- 
camped wi is own numerous cavalry in the 
plains of theé™feandcr, in order to intercept the 
passage of tÆ enemy. But Agesilaus having 
posted a suthcient garrison in Ephesus, left that 
city, and turning to the north, advanced by ra- 
pid marches into Phrygia, the rich plunder of 
which rewarded the active diligence of his sol- 
diers. The selfish satrap was “unwilling to re- 
lieve the province of Pharnabazus, by weaken- 
ing the defence of his own; and accordingly 
remained inactive on the fruitful banks of the 
Meander, whose winding stream skirts the nor- 
thern frontier of Caria, still suspecting an inva- 
sion of the Grecks from Ephesus and the neigh- 
bouring sea-ports. During the greatest part 
of the summer Agesilaus ravaged Phrygia; the 
Barbarians were shamefully defeated in several 
rencounters; at length they ceased to resist his 
arms; nor attempted even to harass his retreat, 
when, having gratified the just resentment of 
his country, he returned, loaded with spoil, to 
winter in Ephesus. 
In the Phrygian expedition, Agesilaus shared, 


3 Xenoph. Hellen. 1. iii. p. 498, et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


301 


and surpassed, the toils of the meanest soldier, 
from whom he refused to be distinguished by 
his dress, his food, or his accommodations, by 
day or night. The inactive season of the year 
was most diligently and usefully employed. 
Ephesus and the neighbouring towns glowed 
with the ardour of military preparation. The 
Phrygian wealth .was employed to urge the 
hand of industry. Shields, spears, swords, and 
helmets, filled every shop, and crowded every 
magazine. The inhabitants of the country 
were allured by great rewards to form their best 
horses to the discipline of the field; and the 
wealthy citizens were exempted from the ser- 
vice of the ensuing campaign, upon condition 
only-that they furnished a horseman, properly 
equipped, to perform their vicarious duty. The 
veteran soldiers, as well as the new levies, were 
daily exercised within the walls of Ephesus, in 
those martial amusements which represented a 
faithful image, and which formed the best 
school, of war. Agesilaus often condescended 
to dispute the prize of valour or dexterity; his 
popular manners endeared him to the troops; 
the superiority of his talents commanded their 
willing obedience; they vied with each other 
in loyalty to their prince ; they vied in gratitude 
to the gods with their prince himself, who, as 
often as he obtained the crown of victory, dedi- 
cated the honourable reward in the admired 
temple of Ephesian Diana. “ What then (adds 
a soldier, a philosopher, and a man of piety) 
might not be expected from troops, who de- 
lighted in the exercise of war, respected their 
general, and revered their gods?”4 

The expectation of Xenophon, 


poe. who beheld the interesting scenes at 
xcvi. 2. : 7 BCer 
A. C. 395 Ephesus, which he has inimitably 


described, was fully gratified by the 
success of the ensuing campaign. Agreeably to 
the annual revolution of offices in the Lacede- 
monian republic, a commission of thirty Spar- 
tans were sent early in the spring to supply the 
place of Lysander and his colleagues. Among 
the members of this new council Agesilaus dis- 
tributed the various departments of military 
command. The superior abilities of Herripi- 
das were entrusted with the veteran army who 
had served under Cyrus. Xenocles was ap- 
pointed to conduct the cavalry. Mygdo com- 
manded the Asiatic levies; Scythes, the Lace- 
demonian freedmen; for himself, as his pecu- 
liar care, the general reserved the faithful and 
warlike body of Peloponnesian allies, chosen 
from the flower and vigour of many flourishing 
republics. With a view to encourage his sol- 
diers before taking the field, he ordered the 
Phrygian prisoners to be brought forth, strip- 
ped, and exposed to sale. The Greeks viewed 
with contempt the delicate whiteness of their 
skins, their flaccid muscles, their awkward mo- 
tions, their shapeless forms, their unwieldy cor- 
pulence, and the effeminate softness of their 
whole persons. Such an enemy they consi- 
dered as nothing superior to an army of wo- 
men.5 

Agesilaus had declared that he would be no 
longer satisfied with ravaging the extremities, 


4 Xenoph. Panegyr. Agesil. 5 Xenoph. p. 500. 


302 


but was determined to attack the centre of the 
Persian power. Tissaphernes, fearful of being 
deceived by a second feint, again conducted his 
squadrons to the banks of the Meander, and re- 
inforced with the flower of his infantry the gar- 
risons of Caria, which (as the contrary had 
been industriously reported) he concluded to be 
the main object of approaching hostilities. But 
the Spartan was too able a general to repeat the 
same game. On this occasion therefore he 
carried into execution the design which had 
been made public, marched toward the royal 
city of Sardis, and ravaged the adjoining ter- 
ritory without opposition. He had acquired 
much valuable booty, and shaken the fidelity 
of the Lydians, before any enemy appeared to 
resist his progress. That resistance, which was 
made too late, proved ineffectual. After several 
successful skirmishes, he defeated the Persians 
in a general engagement on the banks of the 
Pactolus, surrounded and took their camp, in 
which, beside other riches, he found seventy 
talents of silver. He likewise expected to have 
taken the unrelenting enemy of the Greeks, 
the perfidious Tissaphernes; but that crafty 
traitor, suspecting the event of the battle, had 
thrown himself, with a considerable body of 
troops, within the strong walls of Sardis, where 
his cowardice continued to reside, displaying 
the inglorious pride of pomp and luxury, while 
the provinces of Artaxerxes fell a prey to the 
hostile invader. The time of his punishment, 
however, was now arrived. His whole life had 
been disgraceful to himself; but its last scene 
had disgraced the arms of his master, who can- 
celled, by one stroke of royal ingratitude, the 
merit of innumerable perfidies and cruelties 
committed for his service. Tithraustes was 
sent from court to take off the head of the ob- 
noxious satrap; who, being allured to a confer- 
ence, was caught by his own arts,! and met with 
a just fate; although the author of his death 
was, perhaps, the only man in Persia or in 
Greece with whom Tissaphernes had any claim 
of merit. 

Tithraustes, who had come from Babylon 
escorted by a powerful body of cavalry, pos- 
sessed the mandate of the great king for assum- 
ing the government of Lower Asia, and the 
conduct of the war. Having removed the 
only rival who had interest or ability to dis- 
pute this extensive and honourable commis- 
sion, his next care was to send an embassy 
to Agesilaus, which, instead of indicating the 
character of a great general (for such Tith- 
raustes was esteemed in the East,) betray- 
ed the mean and temporising genius of 
his worthless predecessor. The ambassadors 
were instructed to declare, “ That Tissapher- 
nes, the author of those troubles which em- 
broiled Greece and Persia, had suffered a just 
death; and that the king, who had been too 
long deceived by his artifices, was now ready 
to acknowledge the mdependence of the Gre- 
cian colonies, on condition that Agesilaus with- 
drew his troops from Asia.” The Spartan ho- 
nestly replied, “That the alternative of war 


1 Polyznus, }. vii. This fact is mentioned with few cir- 
cumstances in Diodorus, and with none in Xenophon, p. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


or peace depended, not on himself, but on the 
resolution of the assembly and senate; nor 
could he remove his forces from the East with- 
out the express command of his republic.” The 
artful satrap perceiving that it was impossible 
for him to interrupt, determined at least to di- 
vert, the course of hostilities. None knew 
better than Tithraustes the use of money as an 
instrument of negotiation. He condescended 
to purchase from Agvcsilaus, by a very large 
sum, the tranquillity of Lydia; and as it 
seemed a matter of indifference to the Spartan 
king whichever part of the Persian domi- 
nions felt the weight of his invasion, he evacu- 
ated that province, and again entered Phrygia. 
While he pursued his march 


a northwards, he was overtaken in 
A č 394 Ionio by a welcome messenger from 


home, who delivered him a letter, 
testifying the grateful admiration of his coun- 
trymen, prolonging the term of his military 
command, and entrusting him witk the numer- 
ous fleet, which had sailed two years before, to 
counteract the designs of the enemy.? This 
fleet, consisting of ninety galleys, was actually 
commanded by Pharax, who, during the glori- 
rious career of Agesilaus’s victories, had si- 
lently performed very useful and meritorious 
seryice, The naval preparations of Artaxerxes, 
which, as above mentioned, first excited the 
alarm in Greece, were still carried on with ac- 
tivity. Various squadrons were equipped in 
the harbours of Pheenicia, Cilicia, and other 
maritime provinces, of which the combined 
strength far exceeded the fleet of Greece. But 
the vigilant diligence of Pharax prevented their 
union. His ships were victualled by Nepbzge, 
the rebellious viceroy of Egypt; with when 

in the name of Sparta, he had contraege 
alliance. The ports of Cyprus, Rhode 
the Greek eities in the Carian Che 
were open to his cruisers. Availing himse 
those important advantages, he steered~witk 
rapidity along the hostile shores; and seasona- 
bly dividing or combining his fleet, effectually 
restrained the enemy from. m - their pro- 
jected descents on Peloponnes nd even de- 
terred them from sailing th siatie seas.3 
Agesilaus, unmindful of this essential service, 
which had prevented any diversion of the 
Greek forces in the East, deprived Pharax of 
the command, and substituted in his stead Pi- 
sander, a near relation of his own, who pos- 
sessed indeed the ambitious valour and manly 
firmness of the Spartan character, but neither 
the experience nor the abilities, sufficient to 
qualify him for this weighty trust. 

The first effects of this fatal error were eclips 
ed by a momentary blaze of glory. Agesilaus 
entered Phrygia; attacked, conquered, and pur- 
sued Pharnabazus; who, flying from post to 
post, was successively driven from every part 
of his valuable province.4 The fame of the 
Grecian victories struck terror into the neigh- 
bouring countries. Cotys,5 or Corylas, the 


2 Xenoph. Hellen. }. iii. p. 501. 

3 Isocrat. Panegyr. He does not give the name of the 
admiral, which we find in Xenophon's Gr. Hist. 

4 Xenophon compares him to the Scythian Nomades. 

5 He is called Cotys in Xenoph. Gr. Bist. Plutarch, and 
Diodorus; and Corylas in Xenoph. Anabas. I. v. p. 370. 


7 


XXVIL] 


proud tyrant of Paphlagonia, who disdained the 
friendship of the great king,® sent humbly to 
request that the native valour of his numerous 
and invincible cavalry might be associated with 
the Spartan arms.” The inferior satraps, and 
especially their oppressed subjects, courted the 
protection of Agesilaus, expecting that the un- 
known dominion of Greece would be lighter 
than the yoke of Persia, of which they had 
long felt and regretted the severity. The de- 
ceitful Arius, who had shared the guilt, with- 
out sharing the punishment of Cyrus, could 
never be heartily reconciled to a master against 
whom he had once rebelled. His actual wealth, 
and ancient honours, gave him a powerful in- 
fluence over the numerous Barbarians, wlio had 
followed the standard of Cyrus and his own ; 
and whose discontented spirits might easily be 
inflamed into a second revolt. The commo- 
tion was general in Lesser Asia; and, as Egypt 


had already rebelled, Agesilaus, at the head of | 


about twenty thousand Greeks, and innumera- 
ble Barbarian allies, might entertain a very ra- 
tional expectation to shake the throne of Arta- 
xerxes; especially as the experience of his 
friend and admirer, Xenophon, who was still 
the companion of his arms, must have power- 
fully encouraged him to that glorious enter- 
prise.’ . 

But an undertaking of which the success, 
however splendid, could not probably have 
been followed by any solid advantages, be- 
cause the diminutive territory and population 
of Sparta formed a basis far too feeble to sup- 
port such a weight of conquest, was blasted in 
the bloom of hope, by intelligence equally un- 
expected and distressful. Tithraustes, who 
knew the power of gold over the Grecian coun- 
cils, determined, with the approbation of the 
king his master, to give full play to this main- 
spring of politics. The Cretan and Augean seas 
were carelessly guarded by the unsuspecting 
confidence of the new admiral. Tithraustes 
perceived the neglect; and despatched, without 
any fear of capture, various emissaries into 
Greece, well qualified, by bribes and address, to 
practise with the discontented and factious de- 
magogues, the natural enemies of Sparta, of 
aristocratic government, and of the public 
tranquillity.!0 

The principal instrument of thesc sccret ne- 
gotiations was Timocrates of Rhodes, a man 
of an intriguing and audacious spirit, who car- 
ried with him no less a sum than fifty talents 
{above nine thousand pounds sterling,) which 
he distributed, with lavish promises of future 
bounty, to Cyclon of Argos, to Timolaus and 
Polyanthes of Corinth, to Androclides Ismenias 
and Galaxadorus of Thebes; names for the 
most part obscure in the annals of war, but im- 
portant in the history of domestic faction. The 
tyranny of Sparta was the perpetual theme of 
these venal hirelings, not only in their respective 
communities, but in every quarter of Greece, 
to which they were successively carried with a 


6 Xenoph. ibid. 

8 Ibid. Diodor. l. xiv. p. 439. 

9 Diodor. ibid. et Xenoph. Agesil. Panegyr. ct Plut. in 
Agesil. 

10 Xenoph. p. 513. et seq. 


7 Plut. in Agesil. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


303 


mercenary diligence. They painted in the 
strongest colours the injustice, the cruelty, and 
the immeasurable ambition of that haughty re- 
public, who had made soldiers of her slaves, 
that she might make slaves of her allies. The 
destructive and iinpious devastation of the sa- 
cred territory of Ellis was arraigned with every 
term of reproach. The same calamities, it was 
prophesied, must soon overwhelm the neigh- 
bouring countries, unless they prepared (while 
it was yet time to prepare) for a vigorous de- 
fence ; since Sparta pursued her conquests in 
Asia with no other view but to lull the security, 
and rivet the chains, of Greece.!! 

Strong as these invectives may appear, and 
interested as they certainly were, they did not 
exceed the truth; and, what is of more im- 
portance, they were addressed to men well dis- 
posed to believe them. Since the subversion 
of the Athenian power, the imperious govern- 
ment of Sparta had rendered her almost alike 
odious to her old, and to her new, confederates. 
The former, and particularly the Corinthians, 
Arcadians, and Acæans, complained with the 
warmth which justice gives, that, after sharing 
the toils and dangers of the Pelopounesian war, 
they had been cruelly deprived of the fruits of 
victory. The latter, and especially such com- 
munities as had revolted from Athens, lament- 
ed that their blood and treasure had been spent 
in vain. They had fought for freedom and in- 
dependence; but their valour had been re- 
warded by a more intolerable servitude. Argos 
had long been the enemy, and Thebes aspired 
to become the rival, of Sparta. Above all, the 
Athenians, animated by the patriotism of Thra- 
sybulus, their deliverer from the Spartan yokc, 
longed to employ the first moments of return- 
ing vigour in the pursuit of glory and revenge. 

The corruption of those morbid humours, 
which must have soon fermented of them- 
selves, was accelerated by the mercenary emis- 
saries of Tithraustes. The occasion, too, seemed 
favourable for assaulting the domestic strength 
of a republic, whose arms were ambitiously 
employed in extending her distant conquests. 
The conduct of the Thebans had already an- 
nounced this design. They not only refused 
assistance to Agesilaus towards carrying on his 
castern campaign, but treated him without re- 
spect or decency, while he crossed their domi- 
nions; and, were not ambition blind, he must 
have perceived and resented their hostility, and 
have delayed to undertake his expedition against 
Asia, till he had extinguished the seeds of war 
in Greece, 

But, notwithstanding the concurring causes 
which hastened a rupture, such was the terror 
of the Spartan name, increased by the recent 
glory of Agesilaus, that none of her numerous 
encmies had courage openly to take arms, and 
to avow their just animosity. After various, 
but secret conferences, held in the principal 
cities, it was determined to wound that repub- 
lic through her allies, the Phocians, who were 
distinguished, amidst the very general discon- 
tent, by their unshaken attachment and fidelity. 
The Locri Ozole, a fierce and insolent people, ? 


11 Xenoph. p. 514 
12 Thucydid. l. i. p. 4. et p. 47. 


304 


who lived in the neighbourhood of Phocis, were 
easily persuaded to levy contributions from a 
district on their eastern frontier, to which they 
had not the smallest claim, and of which the 
dominion had been long a matter of dispute 
between the Phocians and Thebans. Both these 
states seem to have been injured, and exactly 
in the same degree, by this aggression; but the 
Phocians, who were the enemies of the Locri, 
took arms to revenge, while the Thebans, who 
were their friends, prepared to abet, their in- 
justice. They expected, and their expectation 
was gratified, that the Spartans would quickly 
interfere in a quarrel that affected the most im- 
portant interests of their Phocian allies; a mea- 
sure which tended precisely to that issue which 
prudence and policy required, since the The- 
bans would be compelled to arm in their own 
defence, and must appear to all the neutral 
states of Greece, and even to their Lacedemo- 
nian enemies, to be undesignedly dragged into 
a war, not from an inclination to commit, but 
from tle necessity to repel, injuries.! 

The irascible pride of Sparta, ever prone to 
chastise the smallest offences with unbounded 
severity, conspired with the most sanguine 
hopes of Thebes and her allies. Instead of 
condescending to remonstrate, instead of de- 
manding satisfaction, instead of ordering the 
Thebans to evacuate the territory of Phocis, 
and to abstain from future injury, the Spartans 
flew to arms, and marched to invade Beotia. 
On the first rumour of hostilities, the activity 
of Lysander had been employed to assemble 
their northern confederates, the Maleans, He- 
racleans, with those who inhabited the villages 
of Doris and Mount Œ@ta. He penetrated into 
the Theban territory, gained Lebadea by force, 
Orchomenus by address, and prepared to as- 
sault the walls of Haliartus, which, next to 
Thebes, was the strongest of the Beotian cities. 
The difficulty of this enterprise made him de- 
spatch a messenger to hasten the arrival of 
Pausanias, the Spartan king, who had led forth 
six thousand Peloponnesians, to co-operate 
with this experienced commander. The un- 
fortunate messenger was taken by the scouts 
of the Thebans, and with him a letter, in which 
Lysander had signified his purpose, and ap- 
pointed the time of rendezvous with Pausanias, 
that they might surprise Haliartus with their 
combined forces.? 

At the same time that this useful intelligence 
was brought to Thebes, there arrived in that 
city a powerful reinforcement of Athenian 
troops, who, though their own capital was un- 
walled and defenceless, had been persuaded by 
Thrasybulus to brave the resentment of Sparta. 
To these generous auxiliaries the Thebans com- 
mitted their city, their wives, their children, 
and every object of their most tender concern ; 
while the warlike youth, and almost all those of 
a military age, assembled in complete armour, 
set out in the dead of night, and performing a 
journey of fifteen miles with silence and celerity, 


1 Xenoph. Hellen. l. iii. ad fin. Diodor. xiv. 82. Plu- 
farch. in Lysand. p. 448, et seq. 


2 Xenoph. Hellen. p. 503, et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| Cuap. 


reached, while it was yet dark, the gates of 
Haliartus. Their unexpected arrival struck a 
pleasing terror into their friends, who were af- 
fected still more deeply, when they understood 
the cause of this nocturnal expedition. The 
Thebans dispelled their fear,and animated their 
hope, expecting not only to save Haliartus, but 
to obtain a signal advantage over the unsus- 
pecting confidence of the assailants. 

For this purpose, they sent a strong detach- 
ment to lie in ambush without the walls. The 
rest, reinforced by the townsmen, formed them- 
selves in battle array, and stood to their arms, 
behind the gates. Lysander arrived in the 
morning; but Pausanias, who had not received 
his message, still continued in the neighbour- 
hood of Platæa. The soldiers, flushed by re- 
cent victory, disdained to depend on the tardy 
motions of their auxiliaries. They requested 
Lysander to lead them against the place; a 
measure to which he was otherwise much in- 
clined, being eager to snatch the glory to him- 
self, without dividing it with Pausanias, his 
rival and enemy. 

He approached the town, and boldly Began 
the attack, perceiving the walls and battlements 
to be unguarded. But before any breach was 
made, the different gates at once flew open, 
while the Thebans and Haliartians rushed forth 
with one consent, and with irresistible fury. 
Lysander, with a priest who attended him, was 
slain on the first onset. His men began to rally, 
but the Thebans, posted in ambush without 
the city, occasioned a new terror. The enemy 
every where gave way; above a thousand fell in 
the field of battle, the rest were routed, put to 
flight, and pursued with great slaughter.? 

The first intelligence of this fatal disaster 
brought Pausanias to the scene of action, that 
he might examine the full extent of the calami- 
ty. It would have been fruitless to attempt the 
siege of Haliartus; but it was necessary to carry 
off the bodies of the slain. Pausanias held a 
council of war, to determine whether this pious 
duty should be effected by force, or whether he 
might condescend to solicit the humanity of the 
victors. Force seemed dangerous, as the princi- 
pal destruction had happened immediately un- 
der the walls of the place, which it would be 
impossible to approach without suffering ex- 
tremely from the missile weapons of the enemy, 
and without being exposed to a second attack, 
perhaps more bloody than the first. It was 
therefore unanimously resolved to send a Spar- 
tan herald to Haliartus, requesting leave to bury 
the dead. The demand was granted, on con- 
dition that the Peloponnesian army should im- 
mediately evacuate Beotia. Pausanias com- 
plied, and returned to Sparta. His want of 
success, rather than his demerit, subjected him 
to trial and condemnation. He escaped capital 
punishment by flying to Tegea, where he soon 
afterwards sickened and died. His son Agesi- 
polis assumed the Spartan sceptre, which, at 
that juncture, required the direction of more 
experienced hands. 


3 Xe eph l iii. p. 505, et seq. Plutarch. in Lysand 
4 Ibi 


XXVIIL} 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


CHAPTER XXVIII.’ 


Recall of Agesilaus from the East—He invades Beotia—Views of Evagoras King of Cyprus— 
His Friendship with Conon—The latter entrusted with the Persian Fleet—He defeats the La- 
cedemonians—Battle of Coronea—The Corinthian War—Conon rebuilds the Walls and 
Harbours of Athens—Conquests of Conon and Thrasybvlus— Peace of Antalcidas. 


i HE defeat at Haliartus, 
yes ae = T which exasperated, with- 
<a í out humbling, the Spartans, 
confirmed the courage of their enemies, and 
hastened the defection of their allies. The 
league was openly ratified and avowed by the 
republics of Thebes, Argos, Athens, and Co- 
rinth. The spirit of revolt seized Eubæa, per- 
vaded the provinces of Acarnania, Leucas, Am- 
bracia, the rich cities of Chalcis, and the war- 
like principalities of Thessaly.6 The whole 
fabric of the Spartan power, raised and cement- 
ed by a war of twenty-seven years, was shaken 
to the foundation; their victorious leaders were 
no more; nor did any resource remain, but 
that of recalling Agesilaus from his Asiatic vic- 
tories, that the fortune and valour of this ac- 
complished general might sustain the falling 
ruins of his country. He received the fatal 
scytale,® intimating his recall, at the important 
crisis of his fortune. He had completed his 
preparations for marching into Upper Asia, and 
his heart already beat with the ardour of pro- 
mised conquest and glory.’ 

Having assembled the confederates, he com- 
municated the revered order of the republic, with 
which he expressed his resolution immediately 
tocomply. The generous troops, having asso- 
ciated their own honour with the renown of the 
general, testified their grief and their reluctance 
by tears and entreaties. But Agesilaus remain- 
ed firm in his purpose, to obcy the command of 
Sparta, to set bounds to his triumphs in the 
East, and to turn the direction of his arms to- 
wards a less promising field, to which he was 
summoned by the danger of his country.8 Be- 
fore crossing the Hellespont, he detached four 
thousand veteran soldiers, to strengthen the 
Asiatic garrisons; several of which he visited 
in person, every where assuring his fricnds, 
that it was his most earnest wish to rejoin them 
in Asia, whenever the troubles of Greece should 
permit his absence. 

The greater part of the army, and particularly 
the new levies of Ionians and Æolians, who had 
passed their apprenticeship in arms under his 
fortunate standard, declared, with tears of affec- 
tion, that they never would abandon their be- 
loved general. Agesilaus encouraged this dis- 
position, which was extremely favourable to his 
views; and lest it might be nothing but a sally 
of temporary enthusiasm, artfully secured its 
permanence, by proposing the distribution of 


5 Diodor. l. xiv. p. 443. Xenoph. Hellen. 1. iii. p. 507. 

6 See c. xii. DiS}. 

7 Plutarch. in m Aigi. et Xenoph. Hellen. I. iv, p. 513. 

8 Xenoph. Hellen. et Panegyr. Agesil. et Plutarch. in 
Agesil. bestow seemingly immoderate praises on this resolu- 
tion; but itis to be considered, that in the tumultuary govern- 
ments of Greece, it was not uncommon to behold a success- 
ful general, proud of the zeal and strength of his followers, 
set at defiance the ae authority of his republic. 


2 


valuable rewards, in the Thracian Chersonesus, 
to such officers as brought the best companies of 
foot or cavalry for the service of his intended 
expedition. He was able to perform his pro- 
mises with a generous magnificence ; since, af- 
ter defraying the necessary expenses of the war, 
he carried from Asia above a thousand talents, 
or a hundred and ninety-three thousand pounds 
sterling.9 

When the whole forces were assembled in the 
Chersonesus, they probably amounted to about 
ten thousand men. ‘Their nearest route into 
Greece lay through the same countrics that had 
been traversed near a century before by Xerxes; 
but the activity of Agesilaus accomplished in a 
month what, to eastern effeminacy, had been 
the journey of a laborious year. In the long 
interval of time between these celebrated expe- 
ditions, the Barbarians of Thrace and Macedon, 
through whose countries it was necessary to 
march, seem not to have made much improve- 
ment in the arts of war or peace. They were 
still undisciplined and disunited ; and their de- 
sultory arms were alike incapable of opposing 
the Spartan and the Persian. Agesilaus de- 
scended without resistance into the plains of 
Thessaly, where his progress was stopped for a 
moment by the numerous cavalry of that coun- 
try, whose petty princes had acceded to the al- 
liance formed against the ambition of Sparta. 
By a judicious disposition of his forces, and by 
evolutions equally skilful and rapid, he speedily 
surmounted this obstacle. To the charge of the 
Thessalian cavalry, he opposed the weight of his 
heavy-armed men, by whom the enemy were 
routed and put to flight. Then with his own 
horsemen, who would have proved an unequal 
match for the unbroken vigour of the Thessa- 
lians, he pursued them with great slaughter, 
took many prisoners, and erected a trophy of 
his victory, between the mountains Prantes and 
Narthacium,!? which form the western boundary 
of the extensive plain of Coronza. 

Instead of continuing his journey through the 
hostile country of Locris, whose weakness he 
disdained to chastise, he marched through the 
friendly territories of Doris and Phocis, that he 
might turn the shock of the war against the 
daring and rebellious Thebans. He found them 
in arms with their powerful allies, rather pro- 
voked, than discouraged, by a bloody but unde- 
cisive battle, which, soon aftcr the disaster at 
Haliartus, had been fought against the Lacedwx- 
monians at Epiccia, a small town on the com- 
mon frontier of Corinth and Sicyon. The con- 
federate army was still about twenty thousand 
strong; the forces of Agesilaus fully equalled 
that number, as he had received considerable 


9 Xenoph. Hellen. et Panegyr. Agesi]. et Plutarch. in 
Agesil. et Diodor. p. 441. 
10 Xenoph. Hellen. l. iv. p. 517. 


306 


supplies from Sparta and Phocis; and as the 
secondary cities, particularly Orchomenus of 
Beotia, and Epidaurus of Argolis, had joined 
his arms, prompted by their usual envy and 
resentment against their respective capitals. 
The hostile battalions approached; those of 
Agesilaus marching, in good order, from the 
banks of the Cephissus, while the Thebans 
impetuously descended from the mountains of 
Helicon. Before they arrived at the scene of 
action, in the Beotian plain of Coronza,! a 
city thirty miles distant from Thebes, the su- 
perstition of both'armies was alarmed by an 
eclipse of the sun; and the wisdom of Agesi- 
laus was alarmed, far more justly, by most un- 
expected intelligence from the East.? 

Since his unfortunate partiality had entrusted 
the Lacedemonian fleet to the obstinacy and in- 
experience of his kinsman Pisander, the Per- 
sian, or rather Phoenician, squadrons had been 
committed to the direction of a far more able 
commander. After the decisive engagement at 
f£gos-Potamos, which was followed by the 
taking of Athens, and the conclusion of the Pe- 
loponnesian war, Conon, the Athenian admiral, 
escaped with a few galleys into the harbour of 
Salamis, the capital of the isle of Cyprus. 
That city, and a considerable part of the island, 
was then subject to Evagoras, a man whom 
the voice of panegyric represents as governing 
with consummate wisdom,’ a kingdom, which 
he had acquired by heroic valour. This admired 
prince boasted a descent from Teucer, who, re- 
turning from the siege of Troy eight hundred 
years before the reign of Evagoras, had founded 
the first Grecian colony on the Cyprian shore. 
During that long space of time, Salamis had 
undergone various revolutions. Evagoras was 
born and educated, under the reign of an 
usurper, who fell by the dagger of an assassin, 
who in his turn assumed the crown. Evagoras 
fled to Cilicia, obtained the protection of the 
satrap of that province,returned to Salamis with 
a handful of men, surprised and dethroned the 
new tyrant, to whom he was not bound by any 
tie of allegiance. 

From the moment that he began to reign, he 
discovered the most partial fondness for Athens, 
in whose language, arts, and institutions, his 
youth had been liberally instructed; and which 
afterwards formed the study and delight of his 
manhood, the amusement and consolation of 
his declining age. But unfortunately for the 
sensibility and affectionate gratitude of Eva- 
goras towards a country to which he owed his 
education and his happiness, he lived at a pe- 
riod when, before the situation of his princi- 
pality enabled him to afford any effectual as- 
sistance to Athens, he beheld that proud republic 
deprived of the splendour and dominion which 
she had enjoyed above seventy years. He la- 
mented her misfortunes with a filial tenderness, 
and received with the kindest hospitality her 
oppressed and afflicted citizens. The virtuous 
and enterprising Conon deserved his affection 


1 The places distinguished by that name are described 
by Strabo, p. 407, 410, 411, and 434. 

2 Xenoph. Hellen. l. iv. p. 518. Plut. in Agesil. 

3 Isocrates’s panegyric of Evagoras may he entitled the 
victure of a great king: the character is only too perfect. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| Cuar, 


and esteem, and soon acquired the unlimited 
confidence of a mind congenial to his own 

They acted with the happiest concert for the 
security and aggrandisement of the little king 

dom, alluring new inhabitants from Greece, in 

creasing their arts and industry, extending na 

vigation and commerce ; and, in a short time 

Salamis was able to fit out a considerable nava 
power, and to subdue and incorporate with her 
own subjects several of the neighbouring com 

munities. The great king, who had long been 
considered as lord paramount of Cyprus, in 

terfered not in the domestic concerns of the 
island, provided he received from thence his 
small customary tribute. The flourishing state 
of Evagoras’s affairs might enable him to pay, 
and to exceed, the stipulated sum; though it is 
probable that he early meditated, what he af- 
terwards attempted to accomplish, the deliver- 
ance of his country from this mark of bond- 
age. 

But a design which actually engaged him 
more deeply, and to which he was strongly in- 
cited by the ardent solicitations of Conon, was 
the restoration of Athens (which he considered 
as his adoptive country and parent) to that 
state of glory and pre-eminence from which 
she had miserably fallen. The virtuous and 
patriotic friends (for as such contemporaries 
described them) are represented as pilots and 
mariners watching the tides and currents, and 
catching every propitious gale that might fa- 
cilitate the execution of this hazardous enter- 
prise. The victories of Agesilaus in the East, 
which threatened to shake the throne of Arta- 
xerxes, furnished an opportunity too favourable 
to escape their vigilance. Conon had been al- 
ready recommended to the great king by Eva- 
goras; and the recommendation had been en- 
forced by Pharnabazus, who knew and admired 
his merit. The experienced skill of the illus- 
trious Athenian, and of his countrymen Hiero- 
nymus and Nicodemus, had assisted in equip- 
ping the Barbarian squadrons in the Cilician and 
Phenician harbours. But the abilities of Pha- 
rax, the Spartan admiral, and the cowardice 
or negligence of the Persian commanders, hith- 
erto rendered useless a fleet of near three hun- 
dred sail, which was ill manned, and which 
often wanted money. 

The activity of Conon undertook to remedy 
these evils. He left Cilicia, travelled to Thap- 
sacus, embarked in the Euphrates; and, as his 
vessel was moved by the combined impulse of 
winds, oars, and stream, he descended with ra- 
pidity along the winding channel to Babylon.‘ 
The only obstacle to his intended conference 
with Artaxerxes was, his unwillingness to de- 
grade the Athenian character by depressing the 
body, bending the knee, and paying the usual 
marks of respectful submission, which were 
readily granted by Barbarians to the monarch 
of the East; but which the Greeks refused to 
man, and reserved for the majesty of the gods. 
This difficulty, however, was at length obviated 
by those whose mutual interest strongly soli- 
cited an interview. Conon represented to the 
trembling monarch, who was still agitated by 


4 Diodorus, |. xiv. p. 442 


XXVIIL] 


the terror of Agesilaus’s victories, the necessity 
of opposing the Spartans vigorously by sea. 
Their fleet alone had acquired, and maintained, 
the command of the Asiatic coast. A single 
defeat at sea would excite their allies to revolt, 
and drive their armies from Asia. But to ob- 
tain this advantage, the great king must employ 
an admiral worthy to command, and men wil- 
ling to obey. In looking for the first, the valour 
of Pharnabazus could not escape lis notice. 
The second might be purchased by money. 
And should Artaxerxes entrust him with the 
requisite sum, he pledged his life that he would 
soon collect such a number of sailors (chiefly 
from the Grecian coasts and islands) as would 
enable him to defeat the fleet of Sparta, and to 
compel that republic to abandon her eastern 
conquests. The proposal pleased Artaxerxes, 
the money was raised, and Conon returned to 
Cilicia to accomplish his undertaking. 

From various sea-poris of Asia, from the 
smaller Greek cities, the reluctant subjects of 
Sparta, from several maritime towns whose in- 
habitants were ready to serve any master for 
pay, but chiefly from the powerful islands of 
Rhodes and Cyprus, he soon collected a naval 
force exceeding his most sanguine hopes; and 
which might have enabled him (in- 


Came dependent of the Barbarian squa- 
AC 394 drons commanded by Pharnabazus) 


to contend on nearly equal terms 
with Pisander! With their combined strength, 
Conon and Pharnabazus sailed westward in 
quest of the hostile fleet, persuaded that the 
rash confidence of the Spartan admiral would 
not decline battle with a superior enemy. As 
the united armament doubled the northern 
point of Rhodes, they perceived the Lacede- 
monian squadron, amounting to near a hun- 
dred galleys, in the capacious bay which is 
formed between the projections of the Dorian 
shore, and the small islands called Sporades, 
from the careless irregularity with which they 
seem to have been scattered by the hand of 
nature. The unexpected approach of such a 
formidable fleet did not shake the sullen obsti- 
nacy of Pisander. He commanded (as it had 
been foreseen) his men to prepare for battle. 
They bore up against the enemy, but on a 
nearer survey were alarmed and terrified with 
the excessive disproportion of numbers. The 
greater part turned their prows, and retired 
towards the friendly shore of Cnidus. Pisan- 
der advanced in the admiral galley, and died 
fighting bravely in defence of the Spartan ho- 
nour, vainly endeavouring to maintain, by the 
vigour of his arm, what had been betrayed by 
the weakness of his counsels. The victors 
pursued ; and after destroying great numbers 
of the enemy, took and carried off fifty gal- 
leys; a capture sufficient to decide the fate of 
any Grecian republic.® 


5 Virgil expresses, in few words, tlie geography described 

in the text: : 
— Et crebris legimus freta consita terris. 
Virg. Aucid. iii. v. 129, 

6 Polybius seems to consider the battle of Cnidus ns the 
era at which the Spartans lost the command of the sea, 
which they had acquired by their victory at A2gos-Pota- 
mos. He says, their dominion lasted twelve years. This 
number, however, is too large for the interval between those 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


307 


It was the intelligence of this 


Fh r þattle, of which he anticipated the 
A. C. 394. consequences, in the loss of the 


Spartan dominions from Cnidus to 
Byzantium, that justly alarmed and afflicted 
tle patriotic breast of Agesilaus. He assem- 
bled the troops, honestly confessed the death of 
Pisander, but artfully declared, that, though the 


‘admiral was slain, his fect had obtained a com- 


plete victory, for which it became himself and 
them to pay the usual tribute of thanks and 
sacrifices to the protecting gods. He then 
crowned himself with a chaplet of flowers, and 
set the example of performing this pious duty. 
The devout stratagem was attended with a very 
salutary effect; for in a skirmish between the 
advanced guards, immediately preceding the 
battle, the Lacedemonian troops, animated by 
their imagined victory in the East, defeated 
and repelled the enemy. Mean while the main 
bodies of either army advanced into the plain 
of Coronea, at first in awful silence ; but hav- 
ing approached within a furlong of each other, 
the Thebans raised a universal shout, and ran 
furiously to the charge. Their impetuosity 
bore down every thing before them; but the 
troops immediately commanded by Agesilaus, 
repelled the left wing of the enemy, chiefly 
consisting of Argives and Athenians. Already 
those who surrounded his person, saluted him 
as conqueror, and adorned him with the crown 
of victory; when it was told, that the The- 
bans had broke and totally routed the Orcho- 
menians, and were advancing to seize the bag- 
gage. Agesilaus, by a rapid evolution, prepared 
to intercept them, in order to frustrate this de- 
sign. The Thebans perceived this movement, 
wheeled about, and marched in an opposite di- 
rection, that they might join, and rally their 
allies, who fled towards the mountains of He- 
licon. In the rencounter which followed Xeno- 
phon is disposed to admire rather the valour, 
than the prudence, of the Spartan king. In- 
stead of allowing the Thebans to pass, that he 
might attack their rear and flanks, he boldly 
opposed their progress, and assailed their front. 
The shock was terrible; their shields meeting, 
clashed; they fought, slew, and were slain. 
No voice was heard, yet none was silent; the 
field resounded with the noise of rage and bat- 
tle:7 and this was the most desperate and 
bloody scene of an action, itself the most des- 
perate and bloody of any in that age. At 
length, the firmness of the Thebans effected 
their long-attempted passage to Helicon; but 
could not encourage their allies to renew the 
engagement. The Spartans thus remained 
masters of the field, the sight of which seems 
to have deeply affected a spectator whose mind 


battles, as appears from the text. Other writers say, that 
the Lacediemonian empire, which the Greeks speak of as sy- 
honymous with the command of the sea, lasted thirty years, 
reckoning from the battle of Ægos-Potamos to the defeat 
at Leuctra. But this vumber again is too small for the in- 
terval between those events; a remarkable proof of the 
carelessness of Greek writers in matters of chronology. 
See Isocrat. de Pace, et Casaub. ad Polyb. vol. iii. p. 97— 
99. cdit. Gronov. 

7 Kus xozuyy pev ovĵspis megyr, ou pry ouds riyy’ Ouvy 
Ba Tiç yV TOLÆYTY, Chev OYN TE XLi LLN MAUPLTYOIT? ov. 
Xenoph. Agesilaus, c. xii. Such passages, inimitable in 
any other language, show the superioritv of the Greek. 


308 


was habituated to such objects of horror. It 
was covered with steel and blood, with the 
bodies of friends and foes heaped proiniscu- 
ously together, with transfixed bucklers and 
broken lances, some strewed on the ground, 
others deeply adhering in the mortal wounds 
which they had inflicted, and others still grasp- 
ed by the cold and insensible hands of the com- 
batants who had lately fought with such im- 
petuous ardour.! 

Agesilaus himself had received several 
wounds from various kinds of weapons; yet 
did he restrain his resentment in the moment 
of victory. When informed that about four- 
score of the enemy had taken refuge in a neigh- 
bouring temple of Minerva, he religiously re- 
spected the right of sanctuary, ordered his 
soldiers to abstain from hurting them, and even 
appointed a body of horse to conduct them to 
a place of security. The next day was em- 
ployed by the victors in erecting a trophy on 
the scene of this important action; while the 
enemy acknowledged their defeat, by request- 
ing the bodies of the slain. Notwithstanding 
his fatigue and wounds, Agesilaus then travel- 
led to Phocis, that he might dedicate the tenth 
of his Asiatic spoil (amounting to above a hun- 
dred talents) in the temple of Delphian Apollo. 
Having returned towards the Peloponnesus, he 
disbanded his eastern troops, most of whom 
were desirous to revisit their respective cities ; 
his Peloponnesian, and even Lacedemonian 
forces inclined also to return home, that they 
might reap the fruits of harvest ;? and the ge- 
neral, probably to avoid a journey painful to 
his wounds, sailed to Sparta, aud joined in the 
celebration of the Hyacinthian festival. 

The sea-fight of Cnidus, and the 


cme: battle of Coronæa, were the most 
A.C 394, important and decisive actions in 
Ol a * the Beotian or Corinthian war, 
ste which lasted eight years. The con- 
A. C. 387. tending republics seem at once to 


have put forth their strength; and af- 
terwards to have retained their resentment when 
they had lost the power of gratifying it. Petty 
hostilities indeed were carried on by mutual 
inroads, and ravages in the spring and autumn; 
the Lacedemonians issuing from Sicyon, and 
the'Thebans from Corinth. The inhabitants 
of the latter city had eagerly promoted the al- 
liance against Sparta; but when their country 
was made the seat of war, they began to repent 
of this rash measure. The noble and wealthy 
part of the community, who had most to fear, 
as they had most to lose, talked of a separate 
peace ; and as they were abetted by a majority 
of the people, their dependents or clients, they 
intended to summon an assembly which might 
confirm this laudable resolution. But the par- 
tisans of Timolaus and Polyanthes, who, though 
the mercenaries of a Barbarian slave, were the 
patrons of Corinthian liberty, anticipated a de- 
sign so unfavourable to their interests, by com- 
mitting one of the most horrid massacres re- 
corded in history. They chose the Eucleian 


1 Xenoph. Agesil. c. xii. 
2 The solar eclipse, mentioned above in the text, fixes 
he battle of Corona to the fourteenth of August. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


festival,? a circumstance which seemed to black 

en the atrocity of a crime which nothing could 
aggravate. Many of the citizens were then en- 
joying themselves in the market-place, or as- 
sembled at the dramatic entertainments. The 
assault was rapid and general. The Corinthians 
were assassinated in the circles of conversation, 
some in the public walks, most in the theatre; 
the judges on the bench, the priests at the altar: 
nor did those monsters cease from destroying, 
till they had cut off whoever they deemed most 
willing, or most able to oppose their measures. 
The great body of the people, who perceived 
that even the temples, and adored images of 
the gods (whose knees they grasped.) afforded 
not any protection to the victims of this impious 
fury, prepared to fly from their country; when 
they were restrained, first, by the lamentable 
cries of their wives and children, and then by 
the declaration of the assassins, that they in- 
tended nothing farther than to deliver the city 
from traitors,the partisansof Sparta and slavery. 
This abominable massacre infected Corinth with 
the plague of sedition, which silently lurked, 
or openly raged, in that unfortunate republic, 
during the six following years. The Spartans 
and Argives assisted their respective factions; 
Corinth was alternately subject to the one and 
the other, but always to a foreign power; and 
of the two Corinthian harbours, which were 
considered as an important part of the capital, 
the Lecheum was long garrisoned by the Spar- 
tans, while the Cenchree remained in posses 
sion of the Argives. 

After the battles of Cnidus and Coroneza, 
there was not any general engagement by land 
or sea; and it is worthy of observation, that the 
partial actions, which happened on either ele- 
ment, generally followed the bias of those im- 
portant victories. Success for the most part 
attended the sailors of Athens, and the soldiers 
of Sparta; though the naval exploits of Teleutias, 
the kinsman of Agesilaus, who surprised the 
Piræus with twelve galleys, took many mer- 
chantmen, destroyed several ships of war, and 
scoured the coast of Attica, formed an exception 
extremely honourable to that commander ; and 
the military advantages of Iphicrates the Athe- 
nian, though unimportant in theirconsequences, 
announced those great talents for war, which 
afterwards rendered him so illustrious. But, in 
general, Agesilaus and the Spartans maintained 
their superiority in the field; while Conon, 
Thrasybulus, and Chabrias, proved successful 
against Thimbron, Anaxibius, and the other 
naval commanders of the enemy. 

In the actual state of Greece, the respective 
successes of the contending powers were not ac- 
companied by proportional advantages. The 
Lacedemonians derived not any solid or perma- 
nent benefit from their victory at Coronea, 
unless we account as such the gratification of 
their revenge, in ravaging without resistance 
the Argive and Beotian territory; but their 
defeat at Cnidus deprived them in one day of 
the fruit of many laborious campaigns, since, 


3 Xenophon, with the superstitious insensibility of his 
age, dwells on the enormous impiety of this choice. 
} 4 Diodor. 1. xiv. ad Olym. xcvi. 4. and Xenoph. Hellen. 
iv. p. 5. 


[Cuap. 


XXVIIL] 


with the assistance of a superior naval force, 
and with the command of the Persian treasury, 
Conon found little difficulty in detaching for 
ever from their dominion the whole western 
coast of Lesser Asia. This enterprise must 
have been effected with uncommon rapidity, 
and, unless the Persian fleet kept the sea in the 
middle of winter (which is not at all probable,) 
could only employ about three months. The 
measures taken by the Spartans, either to pre- 
serve or to recover their important possessions 
in the East, have scarcely deserved the notice of 
history, if we except their resistance at Abydus, 
a place less famous for this memorable defence, 
(such is the love of fiction, and the contempt of 
truth!) than for the fabulous amours of Hero 
and Leander. Dercyllidas had obtained the 
government of this strong and populous town, 
as the reward of his military services. Instead 
of imitating the pusillanimity of the neighbour- 
ing governors, many of whom, alarmed by the 
disaster at Cnidus, fled in precipitation from the 
places entrusted to their command, Dercyllidas 
assembled the Abydenians; assured them that 
one naval defeat had not ruined the power of 
Sparta, who even before she had attained the 
sovereignty of the sea, now unfortunately lost, 
was able to reward her benefactors, and to 
punish her enemies. “* The moment of adversity 
furnished an occasion to display their inviolable 
attachment to the republic; and it would be 
glorious for them alone, of all the inhabitants 
of the Asiatic coast, to brave the power of 
Persia.” Having confirmed the courage of the 
Abydenians, he sailed to the town of Sestos, 
across the most frequented and narrowest pas- 
sage of the Hellespont. Sestos was the prin- 
cipal place of the Thracian Chersonesus, the 
inhabitants of which owed their protection and 
safety to the useful labours of Dercyllidas ;6 and 
this claim of merit enabled him to secure their 
allegiance. The fidelity of these towns, amidst 
the general defection of the coast of Europe 
and of Asia, prevented the inconveniences and 
hardships to which the expelled Spartans, who 
had been employed in the ggrrisons of those 
parts, must have been otherwise exposed ; and 
delivered them from the necessity of under- 
taking a winter’s journey to the Peloponnesus, 
through the territories of many hostile repub- 
lics. The unfortunate governors and garrisons, 
who had fled, or who had been driven from 
the places of their respective command, took 
refuge within the friendly walls of Sestos and 
Abydus. Their numbers increased the security 
of those cities, and enabled Dercyllidas, who 
excelled in the art of fortification, to put them 
in such a posture of defence as baffled the at- 
tempts of Conon and Pharnabazus. 

But the success of these commanders was still 
sufficiently complete; and the importance of 
their services excited the warmest gratitude in 
the breast of Artaxerxes. The merit of the 


5 The remarkable expression of Xenophon shows the im- 
portance of this defeat in the general estimation of the 
Abydenians, and of Dercyllidas himself, though he would 
fain dissemble it. Err: 5: ou% ovrws exov, as TH veupenyin 
sxeatnongev, ovdsy wen evs exxsv, “The matter stands 
not thus, that because we have been worsted in the sea fight, 
we are therefore nothing.” 

6 See above, p. 298. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


SUI 


satrap was acknowledged soon afterwards, by 
his obtaining in marriage the daughter of the 
great king. 

The patriotic Conon neither de- 


Oly ae sired nor received any personal re- 
AG 393 ward; but employed his favour with 


Artaxerxes to retrieve the affairs 
of Athens, the interest of which formed the 
honourable motive that had alone engaged, 
and that still retained him, in the Persian ser- 
vice. He inflamed the resentment which both 
Pharnabazus and his master had justly conceiv- 
ed against Sparta, and encouraged them, early 
in the spring, to send their victorious arma- 
ment towards Greece, to retaliate the ravages 
committed in the East by the arms of Agesilaus. 
But he instructed them, that if they would 
render their vengeance complete, and humble 
for ever the Spartan pride, they must raise the 
fallen rival of that imperious republic. The dis- 
bursement of a sum of money, which would be 
scarcely felt by the treasury of Persia, might 
suffice to rebuild the walls and harbours of 
Athens; a measure by which they would inflict 
the deepest wound on the power, as well as on 
the pride, of their ambitious enemy. The pro- 
posal was heard with approbation; the expense 
was liberally supplied; the Persian fleet set sail, 
reduced the Cyclades and Cythera, ravaged the 
coast of Laconia, and, after performing in de- 
tached squadrons whatever seemed most useful 
for the Persian service, assembled in the long- 
deserted harbours of the Phalerus, Munichia, 
and Piræus. There, the important task of re- 
storing the ancient ornaments and defence of 
the city of Minerva, was begun, carried on, and 
accomplished, with extraordinary diligence. 
The ready service of the crews belonging to the 
numerous fleet, assisted the industry of merce- 
nary workmen, whom the allurement of gain 
had brought from every quarter of Greece; and 
the labour of both was seconded and encour- 
aged by the voluntary and eager exertions of 
the Beotians and Argives; but, above all, by 
the zeal of the Athenians themselves, who 
justly regarded their actual employment as 
the second foundation of their once glorious 
capital. 

The work was completed before 


emp. the return of spring; and the morti- 
xevil. l. +s : 
A. C. 392 fying intelligence, when brought to 


Sparta, affected the magistrates of 
that republic with the cruclest anxiety. They 
were ready to abandon for ever the prospect 
of recovering their lost dominion in the East; 
they were desirous to obtain an accommodation 
with Artaxerxes on the most humiliating terms; 
they were willing to deprive themselves of 
the only advantage yet in their power, to fore- 
go even the pleasure of revenge, and to abstain 
from ravaging the territories of their neighbours 
and enemies, provided only the great king and 
his satraps would grant them a condition, with 
which it was easy to comply, since it required 
nothing but that they should cease to lavish 
their own money in raising the dangerous 
power of the Athenians. For effecting this 
purpose, they sent successive embassies to the 
court of Persia, as well as to Teribazus, who 
had lately succeeded Tithraustes in the govern- 


310 


ment of the southern provinces. They indus- 
triously neglected Pharnabazus, from whom 
they could not reasonably expect any favour, as 
the hostilities of Agesilaus had peculiarly ex- 
cited the resentment of that warlike satrap. 

Among the ministers employed by Sparta, in 
this negotiation, was Antalcidas, a man whose 
prior history is little known. He appears to 
have had an intercourse of hospitality with 
several noble Persians;! it is not improbable 
that he had served under the standard of Cyrus, 
and perhaps continued in the East during the 
successive expeditions of Thimbron, Dercylli- 
das, and Agesilaus. If we except the artful and 
daring Lysander, Sparta never employed a 
more proper agent to treat with the Barbarians. 
Antalcidas was bold, eloquent, subtle, comply- 
ing, a master in all the arts of insinuation and 
address, and equally well qualified, by his abili- 
ties and vices, to execute an insidious commis- 
sion at a corrupt court. The revered institu- 
tions of his country were the objects of real or 
well-feigned contempt; he derided the frugal 
self-denying maxims of the divine Lycurgus ; 
but peculiarly delighted the voluptuous, cow- 
ardly, and treacherous satraps and courtiers, 
when he directed the poisoned shafts of his 
ridicule against the manly firmness, the probity, 
and the patriotism of Leonidas and Callicra- 
tidas, names equally glorious to Sparta and 
dishonourable to Persia. 

The success of such a minister, almost ensur- 
ed by his own character and talents, was has- 
tened by the imprudent ambition of Conon and 
the Athenians, too soon and too fatally intoxi- 
cated by the deccitful gifts of prosperity. When 
this illustrious commander co-operated with 
Pharnabazus in expelling the Lacedemonians 
from the East, he earnestly exhorted the satrap 
to confirm the Asiatic Greeks in the enjoyment 
of their ancient liberties, lest the fear of op- 
pression might suggest the means of resistance, 
and oblige them to form a general alliance for 
their own defence, which might prove favoura- 
ble to Artaxerxes. In this plausible advice the 
patriotic Athenian had a farther view than it 
was possible for the Persian at that time to dis- 
cover. After rebuilding the walls and harbours 
of Athens, he requested Pharnabazus, who pre- 
pared to return to his province, that he might be 
allowed, for a few months longer, to employ a 
squadron of Persian ships, in conjunction with 
his uwn, to infest the territories of Sparta and 
her allies. The satrap, naturally unsuspicious, 
and perhaps betrayed by his resentment, readily 
granted this demand. But Conon, unmindful 
of itis promised operations against the common 
enemy, thought only of promoting the interest 
of his republic. He sailed to the Cyclades, to 
Chios, to Lesbos, and even to the coast of Eolis 
and Ionia, displayed the strength of his arma- 
ment, described the flourishing fortune of 
Athens, and endeavoured to persuade or to 
compel the astonished Asiatics and islanders to 
acknowledge the just authority of their ancient 
metropolis or sovercign, who having risen more 
splendid from her ruins, required only the at- 
tachment of her former allies and subjects, to 


1 Xenoph Hellen. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


resume her wonted power, and recover her 
hereditary renown. 

The success of this extraordinary enterprise 
is not particularly described, nor is the omission 
material, since this last expedition of Conon had 
not any other permanent effect but that of ruin- 
ing himself. His unjustifiable ambition fur- 
nished powerful weapons to the dexterity of 
Antalcidas, who represented him as guilty of 
the most unexampled audacity, aggravated by 
the most perfidious ingratitude, in attempting 
to alienate and ta conquer the king’s dominions, 
even by the assistance of the king’s forces, to 
which both his country and himself owed so 
many recent and signal benefits. The accusa- 
tion was probably rendered more welcome to 
Teribazus, by the jealousy which he naturally 
entertained of the neighbouring satrap, the 
friend of Conon, and his own rival. But after 
the last unwarrantable transaction of the Athe- 
nian, which he could defend only by the obso- 
lete Greek maxim, that every thing is lawful 
to a man in the service of his country, even his 
late colleague Pharnabazus seems to have with- - 
drawn from him the protection and friendship 
by which he had been so long distinguished, so 
that the influence of that powerful satrap form- 
ed not any opposition to the negotiations and 
intrigues of Antalcidas. The Athenians, how- 
ever, sent Dion, Hermogenes, with other emis- 
saries, to watch and counteract his measures. 
Conon was named at the head of this deputa- 
tion; and as he knew not the full extent of 
Teribazus’s animosity, inflamed and exaspe- 
rated by the address of Antalcidas, he expected 
that the personal presence of a man, who had 
formerly served the Persians with fidelity and 
success, might obtain an easy pardon from the 
satrap, and perhaps prove useful to the affairs 
of Athens. The Beotians and Argives like- 
wise sent their ambassadors, who had instruc- 
tions to act in concert with Conon and his col- 
leagues. But their overtures were little regard- 
ed, while those of Antalcidas met with warm 
approbation from Teribazus. 

The Jacedemonian ambassador declared 
that he had been commanded to offer such 
terms of peace as suited equally the dignity and 
the interest of the great king. “The Spartans 
resigned all pretensions to the Greek cities in 
Asia, which they acknowledged to be depen- 
dencies of the Persian empire. Whyshould Ar- 
taxerxes then continue to lavish his treasures 
in vain? since the Spartans not only ceded to 
him the immediate object of dispute, but ear- 
nestly desired to promote the future prosperity 
of his dominions, by settling the affairs of 
Greece, as best answered his convenience. For 
this purpose they were ready to declare all the 
cities and islands, small and great, totally inde- 
pendent of each other; in consequence of which 
there would not be any republic sufficiently 
powerful thenceforth to disturb the tranquillity 
of Persia.” These conditions, which the most 
insolent minister of the great king might him- 
self have dictated, were too advantageous not 
to be liable to suspicion. But Teribazus was 
so blinded by partiality for the Spartan minis- 
ter, that he seems not to have entertained tho 
smallest doubt of his sincerity. The terms of 


XXVIIL] 


peace were transmitted to the court of Susa, 
that they might be approved and ratified by 
Artaxerxes. The subtlety of Antalcidas was 
rewarded by a considerable sum of money; 
and the patriotism of Conon (a patriotism 
which had carried him beyond the bounds of 
justice and propriety) was punished by imme- 
diate death,? or by an ignominous confinement.’ 
His fate is variously related; but his actions 
justly rank him with the first of Grecian names; 
and the fame of an illustrious father was support- 
ed and rivalled by that of his son Timotheus.4 

It might have been expected that a plan of 


accommodation, so advantageous and honoura-. 


ble for Persia, should have been readily accept- 
ed by Artaxerxes. But the rego- 


vas os tiation languished for several years, 
f» C 390 partly on account of the temporary 


disgrace of Teribazus, who was suc- 
ceeded by Struthas; a man who,moved by some 
unknown motive, warmly espoused the interest 
of the Athenians; and partly by the powerful 
solicitations and remonstrances of the Bæotian 
and Argive ambassadors, who accused the since- 
rity, and unveiled the latent ambition of Sparta. 

Mean while the war was carried on with un- 
remitting activity. The Lacedemonians and 
their allies sallied from their strong garrisons in 
Sicyon and the Lecheum, to destroy the har- 
vests and the villages of their Peloponnesian 
enemies. The Beotians and Argives retaliated 
these injuries by several hostile incursions into 
the territories of Sparta; while’the Athenians, 
as if they had again attained the command of 
the sea, bent the whole vigour of their repub- 
lic towards an element long propitious to their 
ancestors. 

The recent splendour of Conon had eclipsed 
the ancient and well-merited renown of Thra- 
sybulus, whose extraordinary abilities, and more 
extraordinary good fortune, had twice rescued 
his country from the yoke of tyrants. But after 
the lamented death or captivity of the former, 
the Athenian fleet, amounting to forty sail, was 
entrusted to Thrasybulus; who, having scoured 
the Ægcan sea, sailed to the Hellespont, and 
persuaded or compelled the inhabitants of By- 
zantium, and several other Thracian cities, to 
abolish their aristocratic government, and to 
accept the alliance of Athens. His activity was 
next directed against the isle of Lesbos, in 
which the Lacedemonian interest was still sup- 
ported by a considerable body of troops. Hav- 
ing landed his men, he joined battle with the 
enemy in the neighbourhood, of Mcthymna, 
and obtained a complete victory, after killing 
with his own hand Therimachus, the Spartan 
governor and general. The principal cities of 
the island acknowledged the Athenian power, 
and seasonably reinforced the fleet, by the ter- 
ror of which they had been subdued. Encou- 
raged by this success, Thrasybulus sailed to- 
ward Rhodes, in order to assist the democratic 
faction, who equally contended for the interest 
of Athens and their own. 

Before proceeding, however, to that impor- 
tant island, he determined to multiply the re- 


2 Isoc. Panegyr. 3 Xenoph. Gr. Hist. l. iv. 
4 Dinarch. adv. Demosth. p. 94. et Corn. Nepos, in Vit. 
Conon, et Timoth. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


3l 


sources, and to confirm the affections, of the 
fleet. For this purpose he raised considerable 
supplies of whatever seemed most necessary 
for his expedition from the maritime towns of 
Asia, and at length entered the mouth of the 
Eurymedon (the glorious scene of Cymon’s 
victories) and levied a heavy contribution on 
Aspendus, tle principal sea-port and capital of 
Pamphylia. But here his good fortune ended.5 
The patient timidity of the Barbarians had en- 
dured the public depredation, to which they 
were long accustomed; but even their servility 
could not brook the private rapacity and in- 
tolerable exactions of the sailors and troops, 
which were imputed (not perhaps without rea- 
son) to the unrelenting avarice of the comman- 
der. The resentment of the Pamphylians over- 
came their cowardice. They attacked the Gre- 
cian tents in the night, and surprised the secu- 
rity of Thrasybulus, who thus fell a sacrifice 
to a very unjustifiable defect, which, if we may 
believe a contemporary writer, greatly debased 
the dignity of his otherwise illustrious character.6 
The unjust treatment of Aspen- 


oya 7 dus, which had been retorted by 
A C. 389 such signal revenge, would never 


perhaps have reached the ears of 
Artaxerxes, had not his voluptuous indolence 
been beset by the active importunity of Antal- 
cidas. This vigilant and artful minister let 
slip no opportunity to rouse the jealousy of the 
great king against the Athenians, his hereditary 
foes, and to obliterate his resentment against 
the Spartans, his recent but less natural ene- 
mies. The severe exactions from Pamphylia, 
a province acknowledging his authority, afford- 
ded a powerful topie of persuasion, which the 
Spartan ambassador could not fail to employ; 
but it is uncertain. whether even this important 
argument would have conquered the reluctance 
of the Persian monarch to concur with the mea- 
sures of a people, who lad enabled the rebel- 
lious Cyrus to dispute his throne, and who had 
recently invaded and plundered, not a maritime 
city, but the interior provinces of the empire. 
His interest and }»clination were combated by 
his resentment and his pride; when his fluctuat- 
ing irresolution was at length decided by the 
Athenians, whose mad imprudence crowned 
the triumph of Antalcidas. 

The signal victories of Conon and Thrasybu- 
lus, and thes rising fortune of Athens, encour- 
aged Evagoras king of Salamis, who had re- 
ceived some late cause of disgust, to execute 
his long-meditated design of revolting from 
Persia. Egypt was actually in rebellion; Arta- 
xerxes had undertaken a war against the bar- 
barous Carduchians,’ who were by no means a 


ae 


5 Corn. Nep. in Vit. Thrasybul. 

6 Lysias against Ergocles. This Ergocles was the friend 
and confidant of Thrasybulus. He had assisted him in 
expelling the thirty tyrants, and had recently accompanied 
him in his expedition to the coast of Thrace, mentioned in 
the text. The military exploits of Thrasybulus in Thrace 
were highly honourable and meritorious; but his private 
behaviour was the reverse. Ho stuck at nothing by which 
he could enrich himself or his dependants. Ergocles was 
condemned to death for the share which he had taken in 
this unjustifiable peculation and rapacity. Lysias’s Ora- 
tions against Ergocles and Philocrates. Sce likewise Aris- 
tophancs Ecclesiaz. v. 356. and Schol. ad locum. 

7 These and the following circumstances concerning the 


312 


contemptible enemy. These were very favoura- 
ble circumstances; but tlie Persian fleet, which, 
after performing the service for which it had 
been equipped, had continued to lie inactive in 
the Phenician and Cilician harbours, was ready 
to be employed in any new enterprise. The 
skilful and experienced bravery of the king of 
Salamis, seconded by the youthful ardour of 
his son Protagoras, obtained an easy victory 
over the first squadrons that were sent to in- 
vade his island. But there was reason to dread 
the arrival cf a far superior force. In this dan- 
ger Evagoras requested, and obtained, the as- 
sistance of the Athenians; who not only en- 
joyed peace with Persia, but whose ambassa- 
dors were endeavouring to prevent that court 
from making peace with their enemies. 

This extraordinary measure of a 


ee people, in preferring their gratitude 
A.C "998 to their interest; a gratitude which 


they might have foreseen to be use- 
less to him whom they meant to oblige, and per- 
nicious to the most important interests of their 
republic, finally determined Artaxerxes to es- 
pouse the cause of the Spartans; and to dictate 
the terms of a general peace, almost in the 
same words which had been proposed by An- 
talcides: That the Greek cities in Asia, with 
the island of Cyprus and the Peninsula of Cla- 
zomené, should be subject to Persia; Athens 
should be allowed to retain her immemorial 
jurisdiction in the isles of Lemnos, Imbros, and 
Scyros; but all the other republics, small and 
great, should enjoy the independent govern- 
ment of their own hereditary Jaws. Whatever 
people rejected these conditions, so evidently 
calculated for preserving the public tranquillity, 
must expect the utmost indignation of the great 
king, who, in conjunction with the republic of 
Sparta, would make war, on their perverse and 
dangerous obstinacy, by sea and land, with 
ships and money.”! 

Teribazus and Antalcidas return- 


Olymp. ed from the East, charged with the 
xcevill. 2. definiti ub ve 
A. C. 397, definitive resolutions, or rather the 


haughty mandate of Artaxerxes, 
which had been confirmed by the unalterable 
sanction of the royalsignet. There was reason, 
however, to apprehend that Thebes, Athens, 
and Argos, might still reject the terms of a 
peace proposed by their avowed enemies, per- 
nicious to their particular and immediate in- 
terests, and equally disadvantageous and disho- 
nourable to the whole Grecian name. The re- 
membrance of the glorious confederacy, for de- 
fending the Asiatic colonies against the oppres- 
sion of Barbarians, could not indeed much 
influence the degenerate councils of those re- 
publics; but the Thebans must resign, with 
reluctance, their real or pretended authority 
over the inferior cities of Beotia; the Argives 
must unwillingly withdraw their garrison from 
Corinth, and leave that important capital in the 
power of the aristocratic or Lacedemonian fac- 
tion; and the Athenians must abandon, with 


war of Cyprus are scattered through Diodorus, Isocrates’s 
Panegyric of Athens, and the Panegyric of Evagoras. 

1 ‘Phe last words are literally translated from Xenoph. 
p. 550. See likewise Diodor. l. xiv. c. cx. Plut. Agesyl. p. 
608: and Artaxerx. p. 1022. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


regret, the fruits of their recent victories, and 
the hopes of recovering their ancient grandeur. 
The opposition of these states had been fore- 
seen hy Antalcidas, who took the most effectual 
measures to render it impotent. By the assis- 
tance of Persian nioney he equipped a fleet of 
eighty sail, from the mercenary sea-ports of 
Greece and Asia, from the intermediate isles, 
and even from the coasts of Italy and Sicily. 
This armament was independent of the squa- 
drons with which Teribazus prepared to attack 
the isles of Cyprus, if the presumption of Eva- 
goras, unassisted and alone, should dare to 
provoke his hostility. The satrap also had col- 
lected a very considerable army, which was 
ready to embark for Greece, and to co-operate 
with Agesilaus, who had assembled the domestic 
troops and allies of Sparta to march, at the 
first summons, against any city or republic that 
might reject the peace of Antalcidas.2 These 
vigorous preparations, intimidating the weak- 
ness of the confederates, compelled them into 
a reluctant compliance with the terms of the 
treaty. The Thebans made the strongest and 
most obstinate resistance; but their pretensions 
were finally silenced by the threats of the Spar- 
tan king, the inveterate enemy of their republic. 
The Beotian cities were acknowledged to be 
independent, and admitted as parties in the 
peace. The Argives retired from Corinth, which, 
being deserted by the leaders of the democratical] 
faction, became a faithful ally to Sparta. The 
military and naval operations ceased, tranquillity 
was restored, and the armies and fleets were, 
on both sides, disbanded and dissolved.? 

But amidst this universal and most obsequi- 
ous submission to the court of Persia, one man 
avowed his discontent and prepared to main- 
tain his opposition. The article respecting Cy- 
prus was loudly rejected by Evagoras, who 
asserted the independence of his native island; 
and, with a magnanimity that formed a striking 
contrast with the degenerate and disgraceful 
softness of his Grecian allies, set the power of 
Artaxerxes at defiance. Evagoras trusted to 
the resources of his own vigorous mind, to the 
superior skill of his seamen, and to the assist- 
ance of Acoris king of Egypt. But the nu- 
merous squadrons of Teribazus prevailed over 
all his hopes. He was discomfited in a naval 
engagement; his territories were invaded and 
ravaged; he was reduced to his capital Sala- 
mis; and even Salamis was threatened with a 
siege. His resistance had already exceeded 
what his strength warranted, or what his dig- 
nity required. His enemies were incapable of 
perseverance, or unwilling to drive him to de- 
spair. He resigned his numerous and recent 
conquests in Cyprus, but retained 
xeviii. 4, Possession of the ancient princi- 
A. C. 395, P2lity of Teucer, which his fortu- 

coe" nate arms had recovered from an 
usurper; and submitted, without dishonour, to 
imitate the example of many preceding princes 
of Salamis, and to acknowledge himself the 
tributary of the king of Persia.‘ 


Olymp. 


2 Tus sv Avrarxsdov esenvns xadcunsyys, Xenoph. p.277 
3 Aiarvsy usv ræ wiĝixz, &c. Xenoph. p. 551. 
4 Diodor. l. xv. p. 462. 


XXIX.] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


313 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


Reflections upon the Peace of Antaleidas—Ambitious views of Sparta—Siate of Arcadia—Siege 
of Mantinea—Olynihian Confederacy—The Spartans make War on Olynthus—Submission of 
that Republic—Pella becomes the Capital of Macedon—Phebidas seizes the Theban Citadel— 
The Measure approved by Agesilaus—Conspiracy of the Thebun Exiles—The Theban Demo- 


cracy restored. 


THE peace of Antalcidas forms an important 

and disgraceful era in the Grecian history. 
The valuable colonies in Asia, the cause, the 
object, and the scene, of so many memorable 
wars, were resigned and abandoned for ever to 
the power of a Barbarian master. The king 
of Persia dismembered the distant dependen- 
cies, and controlled the domestic arrangements 
of a people who had given law to his ances- 
tors.6 Their ancient confederacies were dis- 
solved; the smaller cities were loosened from 
dependence on their powerful neighbours ; all 
were disunited and weakened; and Greece felt 
the languor of peace without enjoying the bene- 
fits of security. 

But if the whole Grecian name was disho- 
noured by aceepting this ignominious treaty, 
what peculiar infamy must belong to the ma- 
gistrates of Sparta, by whom it was proposed 
and promoted? What motives of advantage 
could balance this weight of disgrace? Or, ra- 
ther, what advantage could the Spartans derive 
from such ignoble condescension as seemed to- 
tally unworthy of their ancient power, but far 
more unworthy of their actual renown? This 
question, like most political questions, may be 
best answered by facts; and the transactions 
which both preeeded and followed the peace 
of Antalcidas elearly discover and ascertain the 
secret, but powerful, causes of that dishonoura- 
ble, and seemingly disadvantageous, measure. 

The ambition of making conquests in the 
East, which it now appeared impossible to re- 
tain, had deprived the Lacedemonians of an 
authority, or rather dominion in Greece, ac- 
quired by the success of the Peloponnesian war, 
and which they might have reasonably ex- 
pected to preserve and to confirm. 
their power, but their safety, was threatened 
by the arms of a hostile confederacy, which had 
been formed and fomented by the wealth of 
Persia. Athens, their rival, their superior, their 
subject, but always their unrelenting enemy, 
had recovered her walls and fleet, and aspired 
to command the sea. Thebes and Argos had 
become sensible of their natural strength, and 
disdained to acknowledge the pre-eminence, or 
to follow the standard, of any foreign republic. 
The inferior states of Peloponnesus were weary 
of obeying every idle summons to war, from 
which they derived not any advantage but that 
of gratifying the ambition of their Spartan 
masters. The valuable colonies in Macedon 
and Thrace, and particularly the rich and po- 
pulous cities of the Chalcidic region, the blood- 
less conquests of the virtuous Brasidas, had 
forsaken the interest of Sparta, when Sparta 
forsook the interest of justice. Searcely any 


i imma lI dd 
“a the Articles of the Treaty concluded in 449 A. C. 
p. 156. 
2R 


Not only. 


vestige appeared of the memorable trophies 
erected in a war of twenty-seven years. The 
eastern provinces (incomparably tle most im- 
portant of all) were irrecoverable lost; and 
this rapid decline of power had happened in 
the course of ten years, and had been chiefiy 
occasioned by the fatal splendour of Agesilaus’s 
victories in Asia. 

About a century before, and almost on the 
same scene, the Spartans had been first deprived 
of their hereditary fame, and prescriptive ho- 
nours.’? Almost every interference, in peace or 
war, with the Ionian colonies, had hurt the in- 
terests of their republic. They naturally began 
to suspect, therefore, that such distant expedi- 
tions suited not the circumstances of Sparta, 
an inland city, with a fertile territory, but 
destitute of arts, industry, and commerce ; and 
whose inhabitants, having little genius for the 
sea, were naturally unable to equip, or to main- 
tain, such a naval force as might command the 
obedience of an extensive coast, attached by 
powerful ties to their Athenian rivals. The 
abandoning, therefore, of what they could not 
hope to regain, or, if regained, to preserve, 
seemed a very prudent and salutary measure ; 
since, in return for this imaginary concession, 
they received many real and important advan- 
tages. They were appointed to superintend 
and to direct the execution of the treaty; and 
in order to make their authority effectual, en- 
titled to demand the assistance of Persian mo- 
ney, with which they might easily purchase 
Grecian soldiers. The condition requiring the 
smaller cities to be declared free and indepen- 
dent (although the dexterity of Antalcidas had 
proposed it as the best means of preventing the 
future invasion of Asia,) was peculiarly bene- 
ficial to the Spartans. It represented them as 
the patrons of universal liberty, and restored 
them that honourable reputation which they 
had long lost. From the nature of the condi- 
tion itself, it could only apply to such places as 
being kept in a reluctant subjection, still pos- 
sessed courage to vindieate their freedom. In 
the secondary towns of Messenia and Laconia, 
the stern policy of Sparta had crushed the 
hope, and almost the desire, of obtaining this 
inestimable benefit. The authority of other 
capitals was less imperious and imposing; the 
sovereign and subject were more on a footing 
of equality; and it was a maxim in Greece, 
“ That men are disposed to reject the just rights 
of their equals, rather than to revolt against the 
unlawful tyranny of their masters.8 But Sparta 
expected not only to detach the inferior com- 


7 See above, p. 151. 

8 Thucydid. passim. See particularly the speech of the 
Athenians at the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, ¢. xv., 
p. 187. 


334 


munities from their more powerful neighbours, 
but to add them to the confederacy of which 
she formed the head; and by such multiplied 
accessions of power, of wealth, and of fame, 
to re-establish that solid power in Greece, 
whicli had been imprudently abandoned for the 
hope of Asiatic triumphs.! 

That such considerations of interest and am- 
bition, not a sincere desire to promote the pub- 
lic tranquillity, had produced this perfidious 
treaty, could not long be kept secret; notwith- 
standing the various artifices employed to con- 
ceal it. Thebes and Argos were required to 
comply with the terms of the peace; but no 
mention was made of withdrawing the Lace- 
demonian garrisons from the places which they 
occupied. Lest this injustice might occasion 
general discontent, the Athenians were allowed 
the same privilege. The possession of the un- 
important isles of Lemnos, Scyros, and Imbros, 
flattered their vain hopes, and lulled them into 
false security ; and, as they expected to reap 
the fruits of the victories of Conon and Thra- 
sybulus, they were averse to renew the war for 
the sake of their allies, whose interests were 
now separated from their own. Meanwhile 
the Spartan emissaries negotiated and intrigued 
in all the subordinate cities, encouraging the 
aristocratical factions, and fomenting the ani- 
mosities of the citizens against each other, and 
against their respective capitals. The jealousies 
and complaints, which had been principally oc- 
casioned by these secret cabals, were usually 
referred to the Spartan senate; whose affected 
moderation, under pretence of defending the 
cause of the weak and the injured, always‘de- 
cided the contest in the way most favourable 
for themselves. But the warlike disciples of 
Lycurgus could not long remain satisfied with 
these juridical usurpations. They determined 
to take arms, which they probably hoped to 
employ with such artful dexterity as might pre- 
vent any general, or very dangerous, alarm; 
beginning with such cities as had not entered 
into the late confederacy against them, gradu- 
ally extending their hostilities tothe more pow- 
erful members of that confederacy ; and thus 
conquering successively those whose entire and 
collective strength it would have been vain to 
assail,? 

The first victim of this ambitious 


Bene. policy was the flourishing republic 
A. C. 336 of Mantinæa, whose territory was 


* situate almost in the centre of Ar- 
cadia,,,itself the centre of the Peloponnesus. 
The origin of Mantinza was the same with 
that of Tegea, Stymphalis, Herwa, Orcho- 
menas, and other neighbouring cities, which 
had grown into populousness and power 
from the scattered villages of shepherds inha- 
biting the valleys and mountains of Arcadia. 
The exuberant fertility, the inland situation, 
the generous warmth, yet lively verdure,? to- 
gether with the picturesque and animating 
scenery of this delightful region, seemed pecu- 


1 Vid. Isocrat. de Pace, passim. 

2 Xenoph. Hellen. l. v. p. 551. and Diodor. |. xv. p. 448. 

3 These circumstances are common to Arcadia with the 
other mountainous districts of Greece, as wel] as with the 
islands of the Archipelago. TourNEFORT. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


liarly adapted to inspire, and to gratify, the 
love of rural happiness; and to afford, in all 
their elegance and dignity, those sublime and 
sacred joys of the country, which the genius of 
ancient poets hath felt, and described with such 
affecting sensibility. Every district of Arca- 
dia was marked and diversified by hills, some 
of which, could we credit the inaccuracy of 
geographical description, ascend two miles in 
perpendicular height,* and which supply innu- 
merable streams, that water and fertilize the rich 
valleys which they enclose and defend. This 
secure and insulated position of their territory 
long preserved the Arcadians ignorant and un- 
corrupted; and a little before the period of his- 
tory now under review, they were distinguished 
by the innocent simplicity of their manners, 
and by their fond attachment to a pastoral life. 
But the turbulent ambition of their neighbours 
had often obliged them to employ the sword in- 
stead of the sheep-hook. They had reluctantly 
taken arms; yet, when compelled by necessity, 
or excited by honour, the mountaineers of Ar- 
cadia had displayed such stubborn valour, and 
exerted such efforts of vigour and activity, as 
made their services eagerly desired, and pur- 
chased with emulation, by the surrounding 
states. Nor had they trusted to their personal 
strength and bravery alone for the defence of 
their beloved possession. Having quitted their 
farms and villages, they had assembled into 
walled towns, from which their numerous gar- 
risons were ready to sally forth against a hos- 
tile invader. The dangerous vicinity of Sparta 
had early driven the companions of Pan and 
the Nymphs from the vocal woods of mount 
Menalus,* into the fortifications of Tegea, for- 
merly the principal city of the province,’ but 
afterwards rivalled and surpassed by Mantinea. 
which was become an object of jealousy and 
envy, not only to the neighbouring cities of 
Arcadia, but even to Sparta herself. 

In the year immediately follow- 


E ToB ing the treaty of Antalcidas, Lace- 
AC 976 dzemonian ambassadors were sent 


to Mantinza, to discharge a very ex- 
traordinary commission. Having demanded an 
audience of the assembly, they expressed the 
resentment of their republic against a people, 
who, pretending to live in friendship with them, 
had in the late war repeatedly furnished with 
corn their avowed enemies the Argives. That, 
on other occasions, the Mantineans had un- 
guardedly discovered their secret hatred to 
Sparta, rejoicing in her misfortunes, and envy- 
ing her prosperity. That it was time to antici- 
pate this dangerous and unjust animosity; for 
which purpose the Spartans commanded them 
to demolish their walls, to abandon their proud 
city, and to return to those peaceful villages in 
which their ancestors had lived and flourished.” 
The Mantineans received this proposal with the 
indignation which it merited; the ambassadors 


4 Descript. Grec. apud Gronov. vol. i. 

5 Menalus argutumque nemus pinosque loquentes 
Semper habet ; semper pastorum ille audit amores 
Panaaue, &c. Vira. Ecl. viii. v. 22. 

6 Herodot. I. vi. c. 105. 

7 Xenoph. Hellen. 1. v. c. 2, et seq. Diodor. l. xv. c. 7 

et seq. 


XXIX.] 


retired in disgust; the Spartans declared war; 
summoned the assistance of their confederates ; 
and a powerful army, commanded by king Age- 
sipolis, invaded the hostile territory. 

But the most destructive ravages could not 
bend the resolution of the Mantinwzans. The 
Strength and loftiness of their walls bade defi- 
ance to assault; nor could a regular siege be 
undertaken with certain success, as the maga- 
zines of Mantinwa were abundantly stored 
with various kinds of grain, the crops of the 
former year having been uncommonly plentiful. 
Agesipolis, however, embraced this doubtful 
mode of attack, and drew first a ditch, and then 
a wall, entirely round the place, employing one 
part of his troops in the work, and another in 
guarding the workmen. This tedious service 
exhausted the patience of the besiegers, with- 
out shaking the firmness of the Mantinewans. 
The Spartans were afraid to detain longer in 
the field their reluctant confederates; but Age- 
sip6lis proposed a new measure, which was at- 
tended with complete and immediate success. 
The river Ophis, formed by the collected tor- 
rents from mount Anchisius, a river broad! 
deep, and rapid, flowed through the plain, and 
the city of Mantinea. It was a laborious un- 
dertaking to stop the course of this copious 
stream; which was no sooner effected, than 
the lower parts of the walls of Mantinæa were 
laid under water. According to the usual praz- 
tice of the Greeks, the fortifications of this 
place were built of raw bricks, which being less 
liable to break into chinks, and to fly out of 
their courses, were preferred as the best defence 
against the battering-engines then in use. But 
it is the inconvenience of raw bricks, to be as 
easily dissolved by water, as wax is melted by 
the sun. The walls of Mantinea began to 
yield, to shake, to fall in pieces. The activity 
of the inhabitants propped them with wood, 
but without any permanent advantage; so that, 
despairing of being able to exclude the enemy, 
they sent to capitulate, requesting that they 
might be permitted to keep possession of their 
eity, on condition that they demolished their 
fortifications, and followed, in peace and war, 
the fortune of Sparta. l 
Agesipolis and his counsellors re- 


iba fused to grant them any other terms 
A. C. 385. of peace than those which had been 


originally proposed by the republic. 
He observed, that while they lived together in 
one populous city, their numbers exposed them 
to the delusions of seditious demagogues, whose 
address and eloquence easily seduced the mul- 
titude from their real interest, and destroycd 
the influence of their superiors in rank, in 
wealth, and in wisdom, ou whose attachment 
alone the Lecedemonians could safely depend. 
They insisted, therefore, that the Mantinmwans 
should destroy their houses in the city; sepa- 
rate into four distinct communities;9 and return 
to those villages which their ancestors had in- 
habited. The terror of an immediate assault 
made it necessary to comply with this humiliat- 


8 This is the expression of Pausanias, in Arcad. who 
mentions the name of the river Ophis, omitted by Xeno- 
phon and Diodorus. 

9 Xenophon says four. Diodorus five. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


315 


ing demand; but the most zealous partisans of 
democracy, to the number of sixty, afraid of 
trusting to the capitulation, were allowed to fiy 
from their country; which is mentioned as an 
instance of moderation in the Lacedemonian 
soldiers, who might have put them to death as 
they passed through the gates. 

This transaction was scarcely 


Oi ra finished, when the Spartan magis- 
Za l.: trates seized an opportunity of the 
A. C. 384. ee 


domestic discontents among the 
Phliasians, to display the same tyrannical spi- 
rit, but with still greater exertions of severity. 
The little republic of Phiius, like every state of 
Greece in those unfortunate, at least turbulent 
times, was distracted by factions. The prevail- 
ing party banished their opponents, the friends 
of Sparta and aristocracy. They were allowed 
to return from exile, in consequence of the com- 
mands and threats of Agesilaus;!! but met not 
with that respectful treatment which seemed 
due to persons who enjoyed such powerful pro- 
tection. They complained, and Agesilaus again 
interfered, by appointing commissioners to try 
and condemn to death the obnoxious Phliasians; 
an odious office, which must have been exe- 
cuted with unexampled rigour, since the city 
of Phlius, which had hitherto been divided by a, 
variety of interests, thenceforward continued 
invariably the steadfast ally of Sparta.12 

Mean while ambassadors arrived from Acan- 
thus and Apollonia,two cities of the Chalcidicé, 
requesting the Lacedemonian assistance against 
the dangerous ambition of Olynthus. This 
city, of which we had occasion to mention the 
foundation towards the beginning of the Pelo- 
ponnesian war, was situate nine miles from the 
sea, in a fertile and secure district, between the 
rivers Olynthus and Amnias, which flow into 
the lake Bolyca, a name improperly bestowed 
on the inmost recess of the Toronaic gulf. 
The vexatious government of Athens first 
drove the maritime communities of the Chal- 
cidic region within the walls of Olynthus; the 
oppressive tyranny of Sparta obliged them to 
strengthen those walls, as well as to provide 
sufficient garrisons to defend them; and the 
subsequent misfortunes of these domineering 
republics, together with the weakness of Mace- 
don, encouraged and enabled the inhabitants of 
Olynthus thus successfully to employ, in offen- 
sive war, the forces which had been raised with 
no other view tlan to maintain their own inde- 
pendence. The towns which they subdued were 
either incorporated or associated with their 
own; and Olynthus became the head ofa con- 
federacy, whose extent, power, resources, and 
hopes, occasioned just alarm among the neigh- 
bouring communities of Greeks and Barbarians. 
They had already conquered the southern 
shores of Macedon, which comprehended the 
delightful regions of Chalcis and Pierea, in- 
dented by two great and two smaller bays, and 
affording, in the highest perfection, the united 
benefits of agriculture, pasturage, and com- 


10 Or rather of good discipline; we1§xex%s0. The nobles 
of the Mantinwans, os G:Atioros rwv Mzvtivesv, were not 
so temperate ; vide Xenoph. p. 552. 

Ji Xenoph. in Agesyl. et Hellen. 1. v. p. 553. 

12 Id. l. vii. ». 625. 


316 


merce. They aspired at acquiring the valuable 
district of mount Pangeus, whose timber and 
mines alike tempted their ambition and avarice; 
and Olynthus being favourably situate in the 
centre of the Chalcidicé, itself the centre of the 
Macedonian and Thracian coasts, might have 
preserved and extended her dominion, if the 
ambassadors of Acanthus and Apollonia had 
not completely effected the object of their com- 
mission at Sparta. They applied to the ephori, 
who introduced them to the greater assembly, 
consisting not only of the Spartans and Lace- 
dæmonians, but of the deputies sent by their 
confederates. Cleigenes, the Acanthian, spoke 
in the name of his colleagues: “ We apprehend, 
O Lacedemonians, and allies! that amidst the 
multiplied objects of your care and correction, 
you have overlooked a great and growing dis- 
order which threatens, like a pestilence, to in- 
fect and pervade Greece. The ambition of the 
Olynthians has increased with their power. 
By the voluntary submission of the smaller 
cities in their neighbourhood, they have been 
enabled to subdue the more powerful. Embol- 
dened by this accession of strength, they have 
wrested from the king of Macedon his most 
valuable provinces. They actually possess 
Fella, the greatest city in that kingdom; and 
the unfortunate Amyntas ison the point of aban- 
doning the remainder of his dominions, which 
he is unable to defend. There is not any com- 
munity in Thrace capable to stop their pro- 
gress. The independent tribes of that warlike 
but divided country, respect the authority, and 
court the friendship of the Olynthians, who will 
doubtless be tempted to extend their dominion 
on that side, in order to augment the great 
revenues which they derive from their commer- 
cial cities and harbours, by the inexhaustible 
mines in mount Pangeus. If this extensive 
plan should be effected, what can prevent them 
from acquiring a decisive superiority by sea and 
land? and should they enter into an alliance 
with Athens and Thebes (a measure actually 
in contemplation,) what will become, we say 
not, of the hereditary pre-eminence of. Sparta, 
but of its independence and safety? The pre- 
sent emergency, therefore, solicits, by every 
motive of interest and of honour, the activity 
and valour of your republic. By yielding a 
seasonable assistance to Acanthus and Apollo- 
nia, wliich, unmoved by the pusillanimous ex- 
ample of their neighbours, have hitherto spurn- 
ed the yoke, and defied the threats of Olynthus, 
you will save from oppression two peaceful 
communities, and check the ambition of an 
usurping tyrant. The reluctant subjects of the 
Olynthians will court your protection; and the 
Chaleidian cities will be encouraged to revolt, 
especially as they are not yet inseparably linked 
with the capital by the ties of intermarriage and 
consanguinity, and by the interchange of rights 
and possessions.) When such a connection 
shall take place, (for the Olynthians have made 
a law to encourage it,) you will be unable to 
break the force of this powerful and dangerous 
confederacy.” 

The spcech of Cleigenes, and the ambitious 


1 Eriyapiaig xei syATATETI waeahanrns, 
p. 555. 


Xenoph. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


views of the republic to which it was addressed, 
afford reason to conjecture that the ambassa- 
dors neither asked any thing in favour of their 
own communities, nor urged any accusation 
Olymp. against Olynthus, which had not 
ol been previously suggested by the 
A. C. 383 Spartan emissaries in Macedon. 

coe" The reception given to the proposal 
of Cleigenes tends to confirm this conclusion. 
The Lacedæmonians, with affected impartiality 
and indifference, desired the opinion of their 
allies, before declaring their own. But there 
was not any occasion to declare what none 
could be so blind as to mistake. The confede- 
rates with one consent, but especially those 
who wished to ingratiate themselves with 
Sparta,? determined to undertake the expedi- 
tion against Olynthus. The Spartans com- 
mended their resolution, and proceeded to de- 
liberate concerning the strength of the army to 
be raised, the mode of levying it, and the time 
for taking the field. It was resolved, that the 
whole forces should amount to ten thousand 
effective men; and a list was prepared, con- 
taining the respective contingents to be fur- 
nished by the several cities. If any state should 
be unable to supply the full complement of 
soldiers, money would be taken in their stead, 
at the rate of half a drachm a day (or three- 
pence halfpenny) for each man; but if neither 
the troops nor the money were sent in due time, 
the Lacedemonians would punish the disobe- 
dience of the obstinate or neglectful, by fining 
them eight times the sum which they had been 
originally required to contribute. 

The ambassadors then rose up, and Clei- 
genes, again speaking for the rest, declared that 
these were indeed noble and generous resolu- 
tions; but, unfortunately, could not be exe- 
cuted with such promptitude as suited the 
urgency of the present crisis. The dangerous 
situation of Acanthus and Apollonia demanded 
immediate assistance. He proposed, therefore, 
that those troops which were ready, should in- 
stantly take the field; and insisted on this 
measure as a matter of the utmost importance 
to the future success of the war. 

The Lacedemonians acknowledged the ex- 
pediency of the advice; and commanded Eu- 
damidas, with two thousand men, to proceed 
without delay to Macedon, while 


ne lis brother Pheebidas collected a 
A c 393 powerful reinforcement, in order to 


follow him, A very extraordinary 
event, which we shall have occasion fully to 
explain, retarded the arrival of those auxilia- 
ries, until the season for action had been nearly 
spent. But Eudamidas, with his little band, 
performed very essential service. He strengthi- 
ened the garrisons of such places as were most 
exposed to assaults from the enemy; the ap- 
pearance of a Spartan army encouraged the 
spirit of revolt among the allies and subjects 
of Olynthus; and soon after his march into 
the Chalcidicé, Eudamidas received the volun- 
tary surrender of Potidwa, a city of great im- 
portance in the isthmus of Pallené. 

Such was the first campaign of a war which 


2 Kx parsora cs Sovrcuevos AapsCerdae Tor Naxedas 
eoveoss, Xenoph. p. 555. 


XXIX.] 


lasted four years, and was Carried on under 
four successive generals, Eudamidas, too much 
elated by his first success, ravaged the Olyn- 
thian territory, and unguardedly approached 
the city. He was intercepted, conquered, and 
slain, and his army dispersed or lost.3 
Teleutias, the brother of Agesilaus, whose 
naval exploits have been atready mentioned 
with applause, assumed the conduct of this 
distant expedition, with a body of ten thou- 
sand men. He was assisted by Amyntas, king 
of Macedon, and still more effectu- 


gly ika ally by Derdas, the brother of that 
raw 382 prince, and the governor, or rather 


sovereign, of Elymea, the most 
western province of Macedon, which abounded 
in cavalry. By the united efforts of these for- 
midable enemies, the Olynthians, who had been 
defeated in various rencounters, were shut up 
within their walls, and prevented from culti- 
vating their territory. Teleutias at length 
marched with his whole forces, in order to in- 
vest, or if he found an opportunity, to assault 
the place. His surprise and indignation were 
excited by the boldness of the Olynthian horse, 
who ventured to pass the Amnias in sight of 
such a superior army; and he ordered the tar- 
geteers, who were commanded by Tlemonidas, 
to repel their insolence. The cavalry made an 
artful retreat across the Amnias, and were 
fiercely pursued by the Lacedemonians. When 
a considerable part of the latter had likewise 
passed the river, the Olynthians suddenly faced 
about, and charged them. Tlemonidas, with 
above a hundred of his companions, fell in the 
action. The Spartan general beheld with grief 
and rage the successful bravery of the enemy. 
Grasping his shield and lance, he commanded 
the cavalry, and the remainder of the target- 
eers, to pursue without intermission; and, at 
the head of his heavy-armed men, advanced 
with less order than celerity. The Olynthians 
attempted not to stop their progress, till they 
arrived under the walls and battlements. At 
that moment the townsmen mounted their ram- 
parts, and assailed the enemy with a shower of 
darts and arrows, and every kind of missile 
weapon, which greatly added to the confusion 
occasioned by the rapidity of their march. 
Mean while the flower of the Olynthian troops, 
who had been purposely drawn up behind the 
gates, sallied forth with irresistible violence ; 
Teleutias, attempting to rally his men, was 
slain in the first onset; the Spartans who at- 
tended him gave ground; the whole army was 
repelled, and pursued with great slaughter, 
while they fled in scattered disorder towards 
the friendly towns of Acanthus, Apollonia, 
Spartolus, and Potidæa.4 

This mortifying disaster did not cool the ur- 
dour of the Spartans for gaining possession of 
Olynthus. In the year three hundred and 
Olymp. eighty-one before Christ, which was 
xcix, 4, _ the third of the war, they sent Age- 
A. C. 381 sipolis, with a powerful reinforce- 

“st ` ment, into Macedon. The arrival 
of this prince early in the spring, revived the 
hopes of the vanquished, and confirmed the 


3 Xenoph. p. 556. 


4 Idem. p. 561, et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


317 


attachment of the Lacedemonian allies. He 
invaded and ravaged such parts of the Olyn- 
thian territory as had been spared in former in- 
cursions, and took by storm the strong city of 
Torona. But while he prepared to avail him- 
self of these advantages for rendering his suc- 
cess complete, he was seized by a calenture, a 
disease incident to warm climates, and, as the 
name expresses, affecting the patient with a 
painful sensation of burning heat, which he is 
eager to extinguish by the most violent and 
dangerous remedies. Agesipolis had lately 
visited the temple of Apollo at Aphytis, a 
maritime town on the Toranaic gulf. In the 
paroxysm of this disorder, he longed for the 
fanning breezes, the shady walks and groves, 
and the cool crystalline streams, of that de- 
lightful retreat. His attendants indulged his 
inclination, but could not save his life. He 
died on the seventh day ofthe disease, within 
the precincts of the consecrated ground. His 
remains, embalmed in honey, were conveyed to 
Sparta. - His brother Cleombrotus succeeded 
to the throne; and Polybiades, a general of ex- 
perience and capacity, was invested with the 
command in Macedon. 

Polybiades, imitating the exam- 


3 p= ple of his predecessors, conducted 
A. C. 380. 2 powerful reinforcement against 


Olynthus, which was completely 
surrounded by land, while a squadron of La- 
cedæmonian galleys blocked up the neighbour- 
ing harbour of Mecyberna. The events of the 
siege, which lasted eight or ten months, have 
not been thought worthy of record. It is pro- 
bable that the Olynthians no longer ventured 
to sally forth against such a superior force: 
yet they must have been exceedingly distressed 
by famine before their obstinacy could be de- 
termined to capitulate. They formally relin- 
quished all claim to the dominion of the Chal- 
cidicé: they ceded the Macedonian cities to 
their ancient sovereign; and engaged, by so- 
lemn oaths, to obey, in peace and war, the 
commands of their Spartan confederates and 
masters.” Jn consequence of this humiliating 
treaty, or rather of this absolute submission of 
the Clynthians, Polybiades led off his victori- 
ous army, and Amyntas forsook the royal resi- 
dence of Ægæ or Edessa, and re-established 
his court at Pella, a place of great strength and 
beauty, situate on an eminence, which, with an 
adjoining plain of considerable extent, was de- 
fended by the rivers Axius and Lydias, and by 
impervious lakes.and morasses. The city was 
distant only fifteen miles from the /Ægean sea, 
with which it communicated by means of the 
above mentioned rivers. It had been of old 
founded by Greeks, by whom it was recently 
conquered and peopled; but in consequence of 
the misfortunes and surrender of Olynthus, 
Pella became, and thenceforth continued, the 
capital of Macedon. 


5 It is supposed, with great probability, that the sailors 
who suddenly disappear in the Mediterranean, during the 
heat of summer, have been attacked in the night by the 
calenture, and have thrown themselves into the sea. Cy- 
cloped. Par. ad voc. The disorder is examined by Dr 
Shaw, Phil. Trans. Abridg. vol. iv. 

6 Xenoph. p. 564. 7 Ibid. p. 565. 


318 
The commencement, and especially the con- 
clusion of the Olynthian war, breathed the 


same spirit with the peace of Antalcidas, and 
proved the degenerate ambition of the Spar- 


tans, who were prepared to aggrandise the Bar-. 


barians on every side, in order to obtain their 
assistance towards extending their own domi- 
nion in Greece. This selfish and cruel system 
of policy deserved the indignation and resent- 
ment of the whole Grecian name, who were at 
length excited against Sparta by a very extra- 
ordinary transaction, to which we already had 
occasion to allude. When Eudamidas under- 
took the expedition against Olynthus, it was 
intended that his brother Phebidas should fol- 
low him at the head of eight thousand men. 
This powerful reinforcement marched from 
Peloponnesus, and, in their journey north- 
wards, encamped in the neighbourhood of 
Thebes, which was then torn by the inveterate 
hostility of contending factions. Ismenias, 
whose name has already occurred on a very 
dishonourable occasion, headed the democra- 
tical party; Leontiades supported the interest 
of Sparta and aristocracy ; and both were in- 
vested with the archonship, the chief magis- 
tracy in the commonwealth, It is not abso- 
lutely certain that Pheebidas had previous or- 
ders to interfere in this dissension,! when he 
was accosted by Leontiades, “ who exhorted 
him to seize the opportunity which fortune had 
thrown in his way, of performing a signal ser- 
vice to his country. He then explained to the 
Lacedemonian the distracted state of Thebes, 
and the facility with which he might become 
master of the citadel; so that while his brother 
Eudamidas was carrying on the war against 
Olynthus, he himself would acquire possession 
of a much greater city.”? 

A contemporary historian, whose known 
partiality for the Lacedemonians disposed him 
to regard this singular enterprise as 


ee anact of private audacity, repre- 
Waar sents Phebidas as a man of a light 
A. C. 383. 


and vain mind, who loved the fame 
of a splendid action more than life itself, and 
who embraced, with childish transports of joy,? 
the proposal of Leontiades. The mode of ex- 
ecuting their plan was soon settled between 
them. To elude suspicion, Pheebidas made the 
usual preparations for continuing his journey, 
when he was suddenly recalled by his associate. 
It was the month of July; the heat was in- 
tense, and, at mid-day, few or no passengers 
were to be seen in the roads or streets. The 
Theban matrons celebrated the festival of 
Ceres, and prayed that bountiful divinity to 
preserve the hope of a favourable harvest. 
The appropriated scene of their female worship 
was the Cadmæa, or citadel, of which the gates 
had been purposely thrown open, and which 
was totally defenceless, as the males were uni- 
versally excluded from this venerable ceremony. 


1 Diodorus boldly asserts, that Phebidas acted by orders 
of his republic, and that the feigned complaints against him 
were nothing but a mask to disguise or to conceal the in- 
justice of the community. 

eh. p. 297, et seq. Plutarch. in Pelopid. Diodor. 
p. 457. 


3 Avixeugiosy is the expression used by Xenophon. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


Every circumstance conspired to facilitate the 
design of Leontiades, who conducted the La- 
cedemonians to the fortress, without finding 
the smallest opposition. He immediately de- 
scended to the senate, which, though it usually 
assembled in the Cadmea, was then sitting in 
the market-place; declared that the Lacede- 
monians liad acted by his advice, and without 
any purpose of hostility ; seized Ismenias with 
his own hand as a disturber of the public peace, 
and ordered the other leaders of the republican 
faction to be taken into safe custody. Many 
were caught and imprisoned, and about four 
hundred escaped to Athens.4 

When the news of this event reached Sparta, 
the senate and assembly resounded with real or 
well-feigned complaints against the madness of 
Phebidas, who, unprovoked by any injury, had 
violently seized a place in alliance and amity 
with the republic. Agesilaus, however, under- 
took his defence; his ambitious mind had long 
fomented tlre domineering arrogance of his 
country ; possibly he had prompted the enter- 
prise of Phebidas, which he warmly approved; 
and his influence being as extensive as his abili- 
ties, he easily persuaded his countrymen to jus- 
tify the fortunate rashness® of that commander, 
by keeping possession of the Theban citadel. 

During five years the Spartans maintained, 
in the Cadmea, a garrison of fifteen hundred 
men. Protected by such a body of foreign 
troops, which might be reinforced on the short- 
est warning, the partisans of aristocracy acquir- 
ed an absolute ascendant in the affairs of the 
republic, which they conducted in such a man- 
ner as best suited their own interest, and the 
convenience of Sparta. Without pretending to 
describe the banishments, confiscations, and 
murders, of which they were guilty, it is suffi- 
cient for the purpose of general history to ob- 
serve, that the miserable victims of their ven- 
geance suffered similar calamities to those which 
afllicted Athens under the thirty tyrants. The 
severity of the government at length drove the 
Thebans to despair; and both the persecuted 
exiles abroad, and the oppressed subjects at 
home, prepared to embrace any measures, how- 
ever daring and hazardous, which promised 
them a faint hope of relief.6 
Among the Theban fugitives who 


OEP * had taken refuge in Athens, and 
AC, 378. whose persons were now loudly de- 


manded by Sparta, was Pelopidas, 
the son of Hippocles, a youth, whose distin- 
guished advantages might have justly rendered 
him an object of envy, before he was involved 
in the misfortunes of his country. He yielded 
to none in birth; he surpassed all in fortune ; 
he excelled in the manly exercises so much 
esteemed by the Greeks, and was unrivalled in 
qualities still more estimable, generosity and 
courage. He had an hereditary attachment to 
the democratic form of policy ; and, previous 


4 Xenoph. p. 557. 

5 To save appearances, however, Phæbidas was fined. 
Even his accusers were offended, not at his injustice, but 
at his acting without orders. Xenoph. ibid. et Plutarch, 
vil. ii. p. 336. 

6 Xenoph. Hellen. l. v. e. iv. 

$ Genio Socratis, p. 322, et seq. 


Plut. in Pelopid. dem de 


XXVI] 


to tLe late melancholy revolution, was marked 
out by his numerous friends and adherents as 
the person most worthy of adininistering the 
government, Pelopidas had often conferred 
with his fellow sufferers at Athens about the 
means of returning to their country, and re- 
storing the democracy ; encouraging them by 
, the example of the patriotic Thrasybulus, who, 
with a handful of men, had issued from Thebes, 
and effected a similar, but still more diffeult, 
enterprise. 
this important object, Mello, one of the exiles, 
introduced to their nocturnal assembly his friend 
Phyllidas, who had lately arrived from Thebes; 
a man whose enterprising activity, singular ad- 
dress, and crafty boldness, justly entitle him to 
the regard of history. 

Phyllidas was strongly attached to the cause 
of the exiles; yet, by his insinuating complai- 
sance, and officious servility, he had acquired 
the entire confidence of Leontiades, Archias, 
and the other magistrates, or rather tyrants,’ 
of the republic. In business and in pleasure, 
he rendered himself alike necessary to his mas- 
ters; his diligence and abilities had procured 
him the important office of secretary to the 
council; and he had lately promised to Archias 
and Philip, the two most licentious of the ty- 
rants, that he would give them an entertain- 
ment, during which they might enjoy the con- 
versation and the persons of the finest women 
in Thebes. The day was appointed for this 
infamous rendezvous, which these magisterial 
debauchees expected with the greatest impa- 
tience; and, in the interval, Phyllidas set out 
for Athens, on pretence of private business.8 

‘Jn Athens, the time and the means were ad- 
justed for executing the conspiracy. A body 
of Theban exiles assembled in the Thriasian 
plain, on the frontier of Attica, where seven,9 
or twelve,!0 of the youngest and most enter- 
prising, voluntarily offered themselves to enter 
the capital, and to co-operate with Phyllidas in 
the destruction of the magistrates. The distance 
between Thebes and Athens was about thirty- 
five miles, The conspirators had thirteen miles 
to march through a hostile territory. They 
disguised themselves in the garb of peasants, 
arrived at the city towards evening with nets 
and hunting poles, and passed the gates with- 
out suspicion. During that night, and the suc- 
ceeding day, the house of Charon, a wealthy 
and respectable citizen, the friend of Phyllidas 
and a determined enemy of the aristocracy, 
afforded them a secure refuge, till the favoura- 
ble moment summoned thei to action. 

The important evening approached, when the 
artful secretary had prepared his long-expected 
entertainment in the treasury. Nothing had 
been omitted that could flatter the senses, and 
lull the activity of the mind in a dream of plea- 
sure. But a secret and obscure rumour, which 
had spread in the city, hung, like a drawn dag- 
ger, over the voluptuous joys of the festivity. 
It had been darkly reported, that some unknown 
strangers, supposed to be a party of the exiles, 
had been received into the house of Charon. All 


Xenopb. 


10 Ibid. 


7 Tyv rsg: Agyiay tTugavvidx, 
8 Xenoph. p. 566. 
9 Plutarch in Pelopid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


While they secretly deliberated on. 


319 


the address of Phyllidas could not divert the 
terror of his guests. They despatched one of 
their lictors or attendants to demand the imme- 
diate presence of Charon. The conspirators 
were already buckling on their armour, in 
hopes of being immediately summoned to exe- 
cute their purpose. But what was their asto- 
nishment and terror, when their host and pro- 
tector was sternly ordered to appear before the 
magistrates! The most sanguine were per- 
suaded that their design had become public, 
and that they must all miserably perish, without 
effecting any thing worthy of their courage. 
After a moment of dreadful reflection, they ex- 
horted Charon to obey the mandate without 
delay. But that firm and patriotic Theban first 
went to the apartment of his wife, took his in- 
fant son, an only child, and presented him to 
Pelopidas and Mello, requesting them to retain 
in their hands this dearest pledge of his fidelity. 
They unanimously declared their entire confi- 
denee in his honour, and entreated him to re- 
move from danger a helpless infant, who might 
become, in some future time, the avenger of his 
country’s wrongs. But Charon was inflexible, 
declaring, “* That his son could never aspire at 
a happier fortune, than that of dying honourably 
with his father and friends.” 

So saying, he addressed a short prayer to the 
gods, embraced his associates, and departed. 
Before he arrived at the treasury, he was met 
by Archias and Phyllidas. The former asked 
him, in the presence of the other magistrates, 
whose anxiety had brouglit them from table, 
« Who are those strangers said to have arrived 
the other day, and to be now entertained in 
your family?” Charon had composed hiscounte- 
nance so artfully, and retorted the question with 
such well-dissembled surprise, as considerably 
quieted the solicitude of the tyrants, which was 
totally removed by a whisper of Phyllidas, 
“ That the absurd rumour had doubtless been 
spread for no other purpose but that of disturb- 
ing their pleasures.” 

They had seareely returned to the banquet, 
when Fortune, as if she had taken pleasure to 
confound the dexterity of Phyllidas, raised up a 
new and most alarming danger. A courier ar- 
rived from Athens with every mark of haste 
and trepidation, desiring to see Archigs, to 
whom he delivered a letter from an Athenian 
magistrate of the same name, his ancient friend 
and guest. This letter revealed the conspiracy; 
a secret not entrusted to the messenger, who 
had orders, however, to request Archias to read 
the despatch immediately, as containing matters 
of the utmost importance. But that careless 
voluptuary, whose thoughts were totally absorb- 
ed in the expeeted scene of pleasure, replied with 
a smile, * Business to-morrow;” deposited the 
letter under the pillow of the couch, on which, 
according to ancient custom, he lay at the enter- 
tainment ; and resumed liis conversation with 
Phyllidas concerning the ladies, whom he had 
promised to introduee. Matters were now 
eome toa crisis; Phyllidas retired for a mo- 
ment; the conspirators were put in motion; 
their weapons concealed under the flowing swell 
of female attire, and their countenances over- 
shadowed and hid by a load of crowns and gar- 


320 


lands. In this disguise they were presented to 
the magistrates intoxicated with wine and folly. 
At a given signal they drew their daggers, and 
effected their purpose.'! Charon and Mello were 
the principal actors in this bloody scene, which 
was entirely directed by Phyllidas. But a more 
difficult task remained. Leontiades, with other 
abettors of the tyranny, still lived, to avenge the 
murder of their associates. The conspirators, 
encouraged by their first success, and conducted 
by Phyllidas, gained admission into their houses 
successively, by means of the unsuspected secre- 
tary. On the appearance of disorder and tu- 
mult, Leontiades seized his sword, and boldly 
prepared for his defence. Pelopidas had the 
merit of destroying the principal author of the 
Theban servitude and disgrace. His associates 
perished without resistance ; men whose names 
may be consigned to just oblivion, since they 
were distinguished by nothing memorable but 
their cruel and oppressive tyranny. 

T he measures of the conspirators were equally 
vigorous and prudent. Before alarming the 
city, they proceeded to the different prisons, 
which were crowded with the unfortunate vic- 
tims of arbitrary power. Every door was open 
to Phyllidas. The captives, transported with 
joy and gratitude, increased the strength of their 
deliverers. They broke open the arsenals, and 
provided themselves with arms. The streets of 
Thebes now resounded with alarm and terror; 
every house and family were filled with confu- 
sion and uproar; the inhabitants were univer- 
sally in motion; some providing lights, others 
running in wild disorder to the public places, 
and all anxiously wishing the return of day, that 
they might discover the unknown cause of this 
nocturnal tumult. 

During a moment of dreadful silence, which 
interrupted the noise of sedition, a herald pro- 
claimed, with a clear and loud voice, the death 
of the tyrasts, and summoned to arms the 
friends of liberty and the republic. Among 
others who obeyed the welcome invitation was 
Epaminondas, the son of Polyimnis, a youth of 
the most illustrious merit; who united the 
wisdom of the sage, and the magnanimity of 
the hero, with the practice of every mild and 
gentle virtue ; unrivalled in knowledge and in 
eloquence; in birth, valour, and patriotism, not 
interior to Pelopidas, with whom he had.con- 
tracted an early friendship. The principles of 
the Pythagorean philosophy,? which he had 
diligently studied under Lysis of Tarentum, 
rendered Epaminondas averse to engage in the 
corspiracy, lest he might imbue his hands in 
civil blood. But when the sword was once 
drawn, he appeared with ardour in defence of 
his friends and country; and his example was 
followed by many brave and generous youths 
who had reluctantly endured the double yoke of 
domestic and foreign tyranny. l 
The approach of morning had 


Ki brought the Theban exiles, in arms, 
A.C. 278 from the Thriasian plain. The par- 


* tisans of the conspirators were con- 


og p. 567. Plutarch. in Pelopid. Diodor, l. xv. 
e 21U. 


2 See p. 141—146. 
3 Plutarch. de Genio Socratis, p. 279, ct passim. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| 
| 


[Cuar. 


tinually increased by a confiuence of new aux- 
iliaries from every quarter of the city. En- 
compassed by such an invincible band of ad- 
herents, Pelopidas and his associates proceeded 
to the market-place; summoned a general as- 
sembly of the people; explained the necessity, 
the object, and the extent of the conspiracy; 
and, with the universal approbation of their 
fellow citizens, restored the democratic form 
of government. 

Exploits of valour and intrepidity may be dis- 
covered in the history of every nation. But the 
revolution of Thebes displayed not less wisdom 
of design, than enterprising gallantry in execu- 
tion. Amidst the tumult of action, and ardour 
of victory, the conspirators possessed sufficient 
coolness and foresight to reflect that the Cad- 
mea, or citadel, which was held by a Lacede- 
monian garrison of fifteen hundred men, would 
be reinforced, on the first intelligence of dan- 
ger, by the resentful activity of Sparta. To 
anticipate this alarming event, which must 
have rendered the consequences of the conspi- 
racy incomplete and precarious, they command- 
ed the messenger, whom, immediately after the 
destruction of the tyrants, they had despatched 
to their friends in the Thriasian plain, to pro- 
ceed to Athens, in order to communicate the 
news of a revolution which could not fail to 
be highly agreeable to that state, and to solicit 
the immediate assistance of the Athenians, 
whose superior skill in attacking fortified 
places was acknowledged by Greeks and Bar- 
barians. This message was attended with the 
most salutary effects. The acute discernment 
of the Athenians eagerly seized the precious 
opportunity of weakening Sparta,> which, if 
once neglected, might never return. Several 
thousand men were ordered to march; and no 
time was lost, either in the preparation, or in 
the journey, since they reached Thebes the 
day after Pelopidas had re-established the de- 
mocracy. 

The seasonable arrival of those 
auxiliaries, whose celerity exceed- 
ed the most sanguine hopes of the 

* Thebans, increased the ardour of 
the latter to attack the citadel. The events of 
the siege are variously related.6 According to 
the most probable account, the garrison made 
a very feeble resistance, being intimidated by 
the impetuous alacrity and enthusiasm, as well 
as the increasing numbers of the assailants, who 
already amounted to fourteen thousand men, 
and received continual accessions of strength 
from the neighbouring cities of Beotia. Only 
a few days had elapsed, when the Lacedemo- 
nians desired to capitulate, on condition of be- 
ing allowed to depart in safety with their arms. 
Their proposal was readily accepted; but they 
seem not to have demanded, or at least not to 
have obtained, any terms of advantage or secu- 
rity for those unfortunate Thebans, whose at- 
tachment to the Spartan interest strongly soli- 
cited their protection. At the first alarm of 
sedition, these unhappy men, with their wives 


4 Xenoph. Diodor. et Plutarch. ibid. 

5 Dinarch. Orat. contra Desmosth. p. 100. 

6 Diodorus differs entirely from Xenophon and Plutarch, 
whom I have chiofly followed. 


E 


and families, had taken refuge in the citadel. 
The greater part of them eruelly perished by 
the resentment of their countrymen; a remnant 
only was saved by the humane interposition 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


: 321 


of the Athenians.’ So justly had Epaminon- 
das suspeeted, that the revolution could not 
be accomplished without the effusion of civil 
blood. 


CHAPTER XXX. 


The Beoltian war—Unsuccessful attempt of Sphrodias against the Pireus—Doubts concerning 
Xenophon’s Account of that transaction—Agesilaus invades Beotia—Military Success of the 
Thebans—Naval Success of the Athenians—Congress for Peace under the Mediation of Arta- 
xerxes—Epaminondas, Deputy from Thebes—Cleombrotus invades Beotia—Battle of Leuctra— 
State of Greece—Jason of Thessaly—His Character and Views— Assassinated in the midst of 


his Projects. 


rue emancipation of Thebes gave a deep 
wound to the pride and tyranny of Sparta; 
Olen and the magistrates of the latter re- 
é a P. public prepared to punish, with due 
A. C. 37g, Severity, what they affeeted to term 
° the unprovoked rebellion of their 
subjeets. The Thebans firmly resolved to main- 
tain the freedom which they had assumed; and 
these dispositions on both sides occasioned a 
memorable war, whieh, having lasted with little 
interruption during seven years, ended with the 
battle of Leuetra, which produced a total revo- 
lution in the affairs of Greece. 

The ardent mind of Agesilaus had long in- 
spired, or directed, the ambitious views of his 
country. He enjoyed the glory, but could not 
avoid the odium, attached to his exalted situa- 
tion; and fearing to increase the latter, he al- 
lowed the conduct of the Theban war to be 
committed to the inexperience of his unequal 
colleague. In the heart of a severe winter, 
Cleombrotus, with a well-appointed army, en- 
tered Beotia. His presence confirmed the obe- 
dience of Thespiw, Płatæa, and other inferior 
communities. He defeated some straggling par- 
ties of the Thebans, repelled their incursions, 
ravaged their territory, burned their villages, 
but attempted not to make any impression on 
the well-defended strength of their city. After 
a campaign of two months, he returned home, 
leaving a numerous garrison in Thespiæ, com- 
manded by Sphodrias, a general of great enter- 
prise, but little prudence. 

Mean while the Athenians, alarmed by the 
nearer view of danger, publicly disavowed the 
assistance which they had given to Thebes; 
and having disgraced, banished, or put to 
death, the advisers of that daring measure, re- 
newed their alliance with Sparta. The Thebans 
felt the full importance of this defection, and 
left nothing untried to prevent its fatal ten- 
deney, a design (could we believe tradition) in 
whieh they succeeded by a very singular strata- 
gem. The light and rash charaeter of Spho- 
drias was well known, we are told, to the The- 
ban chiefs, who employed seeret emissaries to 
persuade him, by arguments most flattering to 


oo m 


7 Xenoph. et Plutarch. ibid. 
8 Xenoph. p. 334. I have endeavoured to reconcile 
Xenophon and Dinarchua, cited above. 


his passions, to attack by surprise the imper- 
feetly repaired harbour of Athens. These art- 
ful ministers of deceit represented to Sphodrias, 
that it was unworthy of his dignity, and of his 
valour, to employ the arms of Sparta in a pre- 
datory war, while an object of far more impor- 
tance and glory naturally solicited the aetivity 
of his enterprising mind. “The Thebans, in- 
deed, were vigilant in guard; and, being ani- 
mated by the enthusiasm of newly-reeovered 
freedom, were determined, rather than surren- 
der, to bury themselves under the ruins of their 
country. But their seeret and perfidious ally, 
whose assistance had recently enabled them to 
throw off the Spartan yoke, was lulled in seeu- 
rity. The moment had arrived for erushing 
the implaeable hatred of the Athenians, by sur- 
prising the Piræus, their principal ornament 
and defenee; an action which would be cele- 
brated by posterity above the kindred glory of 
Phebidas, who, during the time also of an 
insidious peace, had seized the Theban eitadel.”’9 

The distance between Thebes and Thespia, 
which was not more than twenty miles, fur- 
nished an easy opportunity for earrying on 
these seeret practices; but the distanee, which 
exceeded forty miles, between Thebes and 
Athens, rendered the enterprise of Sphodrias 
abortive. He marehed from Thespiæ with the 
flower of his garrison, early in the morning, ex 
peeting to reach the Piræus before the dawn of 
the sueceeding day. But he was surprised by 
the return of light in the Thriasian plain. The 
borough of Eleusis was alarmed; the report flew 
to Athens, and the citizens, with their usual alae- 
rity, seized their arms, and prepared for a vigor 
ous defence. The mad design, and the still 
greater madness of Sphodrias, in ravaging the 
eountry during his retreat, provoked the fury of 
the Athenians. They immediately seized the per- 
sons of such Lacedamonians as happened to re- 
side in their city. They sent an embassy to Spar- 
ta, complaining, in the most indignant terms, of 
the insult of Sphodrias. The Spartans disavow- 
ed his conduct. He was recalled and tried, but 
saved from death by the authority of Agesilaus. 
This powerful protection was obtained by the 
intercession of his son Cleonymus, the beloved 
companion of Archidamus, the son and succes- 


ee 


9 Xencph. p. 340. Diodorus, p. 472. 


322 


sor of the Spartan king. Archidamus pieaded, 
with the modest eloquence of tears, for the 
father of a friend, his equal in years and valour, 
with whom he had been long united in the 
most tender affection. Cleonymus declared on 
this ocĉêasion, that he should never disgrace the 
ardent attachment of the royal youth: and 
illustrious as Archidamus afterwards became, 
Xenophon affirms, that his early and unaltera- 
ble love of Cleonymus forms not the shade, but 
rather the fairest light, of his amiable and ex- 
alted character.! 

Such is the account of this transaction, 
given originally by Xenophon, and faithfully 
copied by other writers, ancient and modern. 
But there is some reason to suspect that Age- 
silaus was not totally unacquainted with the 
ambitious and unwarrantable design of Spho- 
drias; that the Spartans would have approved 
the measure, had it been crowned with success; 
and that even the philosophic Xenophon, a par- 
tial admirer of Agesilaus and the Lacedemo- 
nians, has employed the persuasive simplicity 
of his inimitable style, to varnish a very unjus- 
tifiable transaction. Such, at least, it appeared 
to the Athenian assembly, who, offended by the 
crime, were still more indignant at the acquit- 
tal, of Sphodrias. From that time they began 
to prepare their fleet, to enlist sailors, to collect 
and to employ all the materials of war, with a 
resolution firmly to maintain the cause of 
Thebes and their own. 

While they were busied in such 
preparations, Agesilaus repeatedly 
invaded Beotia, without perform- 

* ing any thing worthy of his former 
renown. His army amounted to 
eighteen thousand foot, and fifteen 
hundred horse. The enemy were 
assisted by a considerable body of mercenaries, 
commanded by Chabrias the Athenian, who 
finally repelled the Spartan king from Thebes, 
by a stratagem not less simple than uncommon. 
The Theban army prepared to act on the de- 
fensive against a superior force, and occupied a 
rising ground in the neighbourhood of their 
city. Agesilaus detached a body of light-armed 
troops, to provoke them to quit this advanta- 
geous post; but the Thebans cautiously main- 
tained their ground, and obliged the enemy to 
draw out their whole forces, in order to dis- 
lodge them. Chabrias, waiting their approach, 
commanded his troops to execute a new move- 
‘ment, which he had recently taught them for 
such anemergency. They supported their ad- 
vanced bodies on their left knee, extended their 
shields and spears, and thus firmly maintained 
their ranks.2 Alarmed at the determined bold- 


1 Xenoph. p. 570. 

2 The words of Nepos, in Chabria, are better explained 
by reading, * Qui obnixo genu scuto, pro jactaque hasta, 
impetum excipere hostium docuit.” This agrees with the 
statue of Chabrias in the Villa Borghese, whose singular 
attitude has given so much trouble to antiquaries. Winkel- 
man conjectures this master-piece of art to be the most an- 
cient statue in Rome, from the form of the letters in the 
name Agasias with which it is inscribed. He observes, 
that it is erroneously supposed to be a gladiator, since the 
Greeks never honoured gladiators with such monuments; 
and the style of the workmanship proves it more ancient 
than the introduction of that inhuman spectacle into Greece. 
The body of the statue is advanced and rests on the left 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap, 


ness of an unusual array, which seemed to bid 
him defiance, Agesilaus withdrew his army 
from the capital, and contented himself with 
committing further ravages on the country. 

In the skirmishes which hap- 
A. C. 315 pened after his retreat, the The- 

>"> > bans proved repeatedly victori- 
ous. He returned home, and continued, at 
Sparta during the following year, to be cured 
of his wounds; where he suffered the mortify- 
ing reproaches of his adversary Antalcidas, “for 
teaching the Thebans to conquer.” The gene- 
rals who succeeded him had not better success. 
Phebidas, the original author of the war, who 
had been appointed governor of Thespie, was 
defeated and slain, with the greatest part of the 
garrison of that place. Pelopidas, with his 
own hand, killed the Spartan commander in 
the action at Tanagra; and in the pitched bat- 
tle of Tegyra, the Lacedemonians, though 
superior in number, were broken and put to 
flight; a disgrace which, they reflected with 
sorrow, had never befallen them in any former 
engagement. 


Olymp. ci. 2. 


While the war was thus carried 


“ER on by land, the Athenians put to 
A. C.376. S€% and gained the most distin- 


uished advantages on their favour- 
ite element. The Lacedxmonian fleet, of sixty 
sail, commanded by Pollis, was shamefully de- 
feated near the isle of Naxos, by the skilful 
bravery of Chabrias, who performed alternately, 
and with equal abilities, the duties of admiral 
and general. But the principal scene of ac- 
tion was the Ionian sea, where Timotheus‘ and 
Tphicrates every where prevailed over the com- 
manders who opposed them. The fleet of 
Sparta was totally ruined by the victors, who 
repeatedly ravaged the coasts of Laconia,5 and 
laid under heavy contributions the islands of 
Corcyra, Zacinthus, Leucadia, and Cephalenia. 
Even the isles and cities more remote from the 
scene of this naval war, particularly the valua- 
ble island of Chios, and the important city of 
Byzantium, deserted their involuntary connec- 
tion with the declining fortune of Sparta, and 
once more accepted the dangerous alliance of 
the Athenians.§ 

These hostile operations, which weakened, 
without subduing, the spirit of the vanquished, 
were interrupted by the solicitations and bribes 
of the king of Persia, who earnestly promoted 
the domestic tranquillity of Greece, that he 
might enjoy the assistance of its arms in crush- 
ing a new rebellion in Egypt. His emissaries 
met with equal success in Athens and Sparta, 
which were alike weary of the war, the former 


thigh; the right arm grasps a javelin, or spear; around the 
left is seen a leather thong, or handle of a shield. It seems, 
says Winkelman, the particular attitude of a warrior on 
some dangerous emergency. What this emergency was, 
the learned and ingenious Lessing fortunately discovered, 
by the words of Cornelius Nepos. ‘Hoc (the stratagem of 
Chabrias) usque ed tota Grecia fama celebratum est, ut 
illo statu Chabrias sibi statuam fieri voluerit, qua pub- 
licè ei ab Atheniensibus in foro constitutaest.” 

3 Xenoph. p. 577. Diodor. 1. xv. ad Olymp. ci. 1. 

4 Corn. Nep. in Vit. Timoth. et Dinarch. adv. Demosth., 
Such was the good fortune of Timotheus, that the satirical 
artists of the times painted him asleep, covered with a net, 
in which the cities and islands entangled and-caught them- 
selves. Plntarch. de invid. et odio. 

5 Xenoph. p. 578. 6 Id. ibid. 


XXX.] 


having little more to hope, and the latter hav- 
ing every thing to fear, from its continuance. 
Many of the inferior states, being implicitly 
governed by the resolves of these powerful re- 
publics, readily imitated their example. And 
so precarious and miserable was the ccndition 
of them all, in that disorderly period, that about 
twenty thousand men abandoned their homes 
and families, and followed the standard of the 
Persians. The merit of Iphicrates justly enti- 
tled him to the command of his countrymen, 
which was unanimously conferred on him. But 
the expedition produced nothing worthy of 
such a general, who in a few months returned 
to Athens, disgusted with the ignorant pride, 
and slothful timidity, of the Persian command- 
ers, who \durst not undertake any important 
enterprise, without receiving the slow instruc- 
tions of a distant court.’ 

Mean while the Thebans, who, 


Ee elated by a flow of unwonted pros- 
ity C 374 perity, had proudly disregarded the 


representations of Artaxerxes, pro- 
fited of the temporary diversion made by the 
Egyptian war, to reduce several inferior cities 
of Beotia. The walls of Thespiæ were rased 
to the ground; Platæa met with the same fate ; 
and its inhabitants, after suffering the cruellest 
indignities, were driven into banishment. It 
might be expected that the unfortunate exiles 
should have sought refuge in Sparta, whose 
authority they had uniformly acknowledged, 
since the dishonourable peace of Antalcidas. 
But so dissimilar were the fluctuating politics 
of Greece to the regular transactions of mo- 
dern times (governed by the lifeless but steady 
principle of interest,) that the Platæans had re- 
course to Athens, a city actually in alliance 
with the people by whom they had been so un- 
justly persecuted. Their eloquence, their tears, 
the memory of past services, and the promise 
of future gratitude, prevailed on the Athenian 
assembly, who kindly received them into the 
bosom of their republic, and expressed the 
warmest indignation against their insolent op- 
pressors.8 
Olymp. This affecting transaction threat- 
E ened to'deprive the Thebans of an 
A.C 372 ally, to whom they were in a grcat 
“=>> 7 measure indebted for their prospe- 
rity. Their subsequent conduct tended still 
farther to widen the breach. They marched 
troops into Phocis, with an intention to reduce 
that country. They heard with equal disdain, 
the remonstrances of their friends, and the 
threats of their enemies. Their unusual arro- 
gance totally alienated the Athenians, who 
seemed finally disposed to conclude a lasting 
peace with Sparta, on the principles of the 
treaty of Antalcidas, that their respective gar- 
risons should be withdrawn from foreign parts, 
and the communities, small as well as great, 
be permitted to enjoy the independent govern- 
ment of their own equitable laws. The inte- 
rest of the king of Persia, who still needed 
fresh supplies to carry on the Egyptian war, 


7 Corn. Nepos. in Iphicrat. Diodorus, l. xv. ad Olymp. 
Cc. IV. 
8 Diodor. l. xv. ad Olymp. ct Isocrat. Orat. pro Plat. 


i 
HISTORY OF GREECE. 


323 


induced him to employ his good offices for pro- 
moting this specious purpose; and a conyen- 
tion of all the states was summoned to Sparta, 
whither the Thebans deigned indeed to send a 
representative; but a representative, whose 
firmness and magnaniinity were well fitted to 
sustain and elevate the aspiring pretensions of 
his republic. 

In effecting this glorious revolution, which 
gave frecdom to Thebes, as well as in the mili- 
tary operations, which immediately followed 
that important event, the youthful merit of Pe- 
lopidas had acquired the fame of patriotism, 
valour, and conduct. The nobility of his birth, 
and the generous use of his riches, increased 
the ascendant due to his illustrious services. 
Every external advantage, the manly grace of 
his person, the winning affability of his de- 
portment, his superior excellence in the martial 
exercises so highly prized by the Greeks, and 
especially by the Thebans, gained him the ad- 
miration of the multitude; or, in other words, 
of the legislative assembly of his country. He 
had been successively elected, during six years, 
to the first dignity of the republic; nor had 
the Thebans ever found reason to repent their 
choice.2 Yet in the present-emergency, when 
they were required to appoint a deputy for the 
convention at Sparta (the most important 
charge with which any citizen could be en- 
trusted,) Pelopidas, with all his merit, was not 
the minister whom they thought proper to em- 
ploy. 

Epaminondas, naturally his rival, but always 
his friend, had hitherto been contented with a 
subordinate station: yet every office which he 
exercised, whether in the civil or military de- 
partment, derived new lustre from his personal 
dignity. His exterior accomplishments were 
not inferior to those of Pelopidas; but he had 
learned from the philosophy of Lysis the Py- 
thagorean, to prefer the mind to the body, me- 
rit to fame, and the rewards of virtue to the 
gifts of fortune. He resisted the generous so- 
licitations of his friends to deliver him from the 
honourable poverty in which he was born; 
continuing poor from taste and choice, and 
justly delighting in a situation, which is more 
favourable, especially in a democratical repub- 
lic, tothat freedom and independence of mind 
which wisdom recommends as the greatest 
good. Nor was he more careless of money 
than avaricious of time, which he continually 
dedicated to the study of learning and philo- 
sophy, or employed in the exercise of public 
and private virtue. Yet to become useful he 
was not desirous to be great. The same soli- 
citude which others felt to obtain, Epaminon- 
das showed to avoid, the dangerous honours of 
his country. His ambitious temper would have 
been better satisfied to direct, by a personal in- 
fluence with the magistrates, the administra- 
tion of government from the bosom of his be- 
loved retirement, when the unanimous voice 
of the citizens, and still more the urgency of 
the times, called him to public life; and such 


9 Pint. in Pelopid. 

10 The conduct of Epaminondas coincides with, and 
Seed the account above given of the Pythagorean phi 
osophy 


324 


was his contempt for the glory of a name, that 
had he lived in a less turbulent period, his ex- 
alted qualities, however admired by select 
friends, would have probably remained un- 
known to his contemporaries and posterity. 

Such was the man to whose 


be a abilities and eloquence the The- 
A. C. 372. bans committed the defence of their 


most important interests in the ge- 
neral congress of the Grecian states. The 
Athenians sent Antocles and Callistratus; the 
first a subtile,! the second an affecting orator.? 
Agesilaus himself appeared on the part of. 
Sparta. Matters were easily adjusted between 
those leading republics, who felt equal resent- 
ment at the unhappy fate of Thespie and Pla- 
tea. They lamented their mutual jealousy, 
and unfortunate ambition, which had occa- 
sioned so many bloody and destructive wars ; 
and commemorated the short but glorious in- 
tervals of moderation and concord, which had 
tended so evidently to their own and the pub- 
lic felicity. Instructed by fatal experience, it 
was time for them to lay down their arms, and 
to allow that tranquillity to themselves and to 
their neighbours, which was necessary to heal 
the wounds of their common country. The 
peace could not be useful or permanent, unless 
it were established on the liberal principles of 
equality and freedom, to which all the Grecian 
communities were alike entitled by the treaty 
of Antalcidas. It was proposed, therefore, to 
renew that salutary contract, which was ac- 
cepted by the unanimous consent of Athens, 
of Sparta, and of their respective confederates. 

Epaminondas? then stood up, offering to sign 
the treaty in the name of the Beotians. “ The 
Athenians,” he took notice, “had signed for 
all the inhabitants of Attica; the Spartans had 
signed not only for the cities of Laconia, but 
for their numerous allies in all the provinces 
of the Peloponnesus. Thebes was entitled to 
the same prerogatives over her dependent cities, 
which had anciently acknowledged the power 
of her kings, and had recently submitted to the 
arms of her citizens.” Agesilaus, instead of 
answering directly a demand which could nei- 
ther be granted with honour, nor denied with 
justice, asked, in his turn, Whether it was the 
intention of the Thebans to admit, in terms of 
the treaty, the independence of Beotia? Epa- 
minondas demanded, Whether it was the in- 
tention of Sparta to admit the independence 
of Laconia? “Shall the Beotians,” said the 
king, with emotion, “ be free ?” “ Whenever,” 
replied Epaminondas with firmness, “ you re- 
store freedom to the Lacedemonians, the Mes- 
senians, and the oppressed communities of Pe- 
loponnesus, whom, under the name of allies, 
you retain in an involuntary and rigorous ser- 
vitude.” 


1 Exioreseus eytwe. Xenoph. |. vi. 

2 The pathetic pleading of Callistratus, for the citizens 
of Oropus, first inspired Demosthenes with the ambition of 
eloquence. Plut. in Demosth. 

3 The convention of Sparta is noticed by Xenophon, 
Diodorus, Plutarch, and Cornelius Nepos. The first writer 
is silent with regard to Epaminondas. Plutarch and Cor- 
nelius Nepos furnish the hints which I have made use of in 
the text. It is not impossible that there were two conven- 
tions, at different times, respecting the same object. In that 
«ase, Xenophon must have totally omitted one of them. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


Then turning to the deputies of the allies, he 
represented to them the cruel mockery by which 
they were insulted. “ Summoned to deliberate 
concerning the general freedom and indepen- 
dence, they were called to ratify a peace, 
which, instead of establishing these invaluable 
and sacred rights, confirmed the stern tyranny 
of an imperious master.” That “the cities, 
small and great, should be free,” was the ver- 
bal condition of the treaty; but its real drift 
and import was, that Thebes should give free- 
dom to Beotia, and thereby weaken her own 
strength, while Sparta kept in subjection the 
extensive territories of her confederates, in 
whose name she had signed that perfidious 
contract, and whose assistance she expected, 
and could demand, towards giving it iminediate 
effect. If the allies persisted in their actual 
resolution, they consented to destroy the power 
of Thebes, which was the only bulwark to de- 
fend them against Spartan usurpation: they 
consented to continue the payment of those in- 
tolerable contributions with which they had 
long been oppressed; and to obey every idle 
summons to war, of which they chiefly suffered 
the fatigues and dangers, while the advantage 
and glory redounded to the Spartans alone. If 
they felt any respect for the glorious name of 
their ancestors; if they entertained any sense 
of their own most precious interests, they 
would be so little disposed to promote the re- 
duction of Thebes, that they would imitate 
the auspicious example of that ancient and no- 
ble city, which had acquired the dignity of in- 
dependent government, not by inscriptions‘ and 
treaties, but by arms and valour. 

The just remonstrances of Epaminondas 
made a deep impression on the deputies, Agesi- 
laus, alarmed at its effect, answered him in a 
strain very different from that despotic brevity 
which the Spartans usually affected. His 
speech was long and eloquent. He reasoned, 
prayed, threatened. The deputies were awed 
into submission, less perhaps by the force of his 
eloquence, than by the terror of the Spartan 
armies ready to take the field. But the words 
of Epaminondas sunk deep into their hearts. 
They communicated, at their return, the pow- 
erful impression to their constituents; and its 
influence was visible in the field of Leuctra, 
and in the events which followed that memora- 
ble engagement. 

As the Grecian states were accustomed to 
grant more unreserved powers to their generals 
and ministers, than are allowed by the practice 
of modern times, we must be contented to 
doubt, whether, in this important negotiation, 
Epaminondas acted merely by the extemporary 
impulse of his own mind, or only executed, 
with boldness and dignity, the previous instruc- 
tions of his republic. It is certain, that his re- 
fusal to acknowledge the freedom of Beotia, 
not only excluded Thebes from the treaty, but 
exposed her to the immediate vengeance of the 
confederates; and according to the received 
principles of modern policy, there is reason to 


4 The public deeds and transactions of the Greeks were 
inscribed on pillars of marble. Thucyd. et Xenoph. passim 

5 Epaminondas said, or more probably it was said for 
him, that he had compelled the Spartans to lengthen their 
monosyllables. Plut. in Agesil. 


XXX] 


accuse both the prudence and the justice of the 
admired Theban; his prudence, in provoking 
the strength of a confederacy, with which the 
weakness of any single republic seemed totally 
unable to contend; and his justice, in denying 
to several communities of Beotia their heredi- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


325 


cestors, the warlike inhabitants of Peloponnesus 
were not unworthy to be ranked with her citi- 
zens; and by admitting them to this honour, 
she would have given them an interest in her 
victories, and rendered them willing partners 
of her danger. But, instead of adopting this 


tary laws and government. Yet the conduct of | generous policy, which possibly might have ren- 


Epaminondas has never been exposed to such 
odious reproaches. Success justified his auda- 
city; and the Greeks, animated by an ambi- 
tious enthusiasm to aggrandise their respectiv 
cities, were taught to dignify by the names of 
patriotism and magnanimity, qualities which, 
in the sober judgment of posterity, would be 
degraded by very different appellations. There 
are reasons, however, not merely specious, by 
which Epaminondas might justify his conduct 
at an impartial bar. He could not be ignorant 
that Thebes, unassisted and alone, was unable 
to cope with the general confederacy of Greece: 
but he knew that this confederacy would never 
exist but in words, since the jealousy of several 
states, and particularly of Athens, would be dis- 
posed rather to commiserate, than to increase, 
the calamities of a people at variance with 
Sparta.6 He perceived the effect of his spirited 
remonstrances on the most steadfast adherents 
of that republic; and contemplating the circum- 
stances of his country, and of the enemy, he 
found several motives of encouragement to the 
seeming unequal contest. 

The Spartans had been weakened by the de- 
fection and loss of their dominions, and dejected 
by their unfortunate attempts to recover them. 
They had been deprived of their prescriptive 
honours, and had forsaken their hereditary 
maxims, Their ancient and venerable laws 
had in a great measure ceased to govern them; 
and the seeds of those corruptions were already 
sown, which have been censured by philoso- 
phers and statesmen with equal justice and se- 
verity.? Nor were they exposed to the usual 
misfortunes, only, of a degenerate people; the 


institutions of Lycurgus formed one consistent | 
plan of legislation, which could not be par- 


tially observed and partially neglected. While 
the submissive disciples of that extraordi- 
nary lawgiver remained satisfied with their 
simplicity of manners, their poverty, and their 
virtue, and had scarcely any other object in 
view, but to resist the solicitations of pleasure, 
and to repel the encroachments of enemies, 
the law, which discouraged a commercial in- 
tercourse with foreign nations, and which ex- 
cluded strangers, whatever merit they might 
possess, from aspiring to the rank of citizens, 
wasan establishment strictly comformable to the 
peculiar spirit ofthe Lacedwemonian constitution. 
But when Sparta abandoned the simplicity of 
her primitive maxims, became ambitious, 
wealthy, triumphant, and almost continually 
engaged in war, not as the means of defence, 
but as the instrument of power and conquest, 
consistency required that she should have laid 
aside her pretensions to those exclusive honours 
which she no longer deserved. When she re- 
linquished the virtuous pre-eminence of her an- 


6 Xenophon hints at this disposition, }. vi. p. 618. 
7 Aristot. Politic. 1. ii. c. 9. 


dered her what Rome, with more wisdom in- 
deed, but not with more virtue or more valour, 
afterwards became, the mistress of the world, 
sle increased he pretensions in proportion to 
the decline of her merit; spurned the inequality 
of a fæderal union, to which the Peloponnesians 
were entitled; deprived even the Lacedæmoni- 
ans of their just share in the government, and 
concentrated all power and authority within the 
senate and assembly of Sparta. A long course 
ofalmost uninterrupted hostilities had deprived 
her of the best half of her citizens, whose num- 
bers were continually diminishing, without the 
possibility of ever being repaired ; nor could it 
be difficult to overthrow an empire which de- 
pended on the address and bravery of about four 
thousand warriors, the splendour of a great 
name, and the reluctant assistance of insulted 
allies and oppressed subjects.8 
The consideration of these circumstances, 
which could not fail to present themselves to the 
sagacity of Epaminondas, might have encour- 
aged him to set the threats of his adversaries at 
defiance, especially when he reflected on the 
actual condition of Thebes, whose civil and 
military institutions had recently acquired new 
spirit and fresh vigour. 
The Thebans, with their subjects or neigh- 
bours in Beotia, had been long regarded as an 
| unworthy and faithless race, with strong bodies 
but ignoble souls, and infamous among the 
Greeks, on account of their ancientalliance with 
Xerxes and the Barbarians. The divine genius 
of Pindar had not redeemed them from the cha- 
racter of a sluggish and heavy people, noted 
even to a proverb for stupidity.2 From the age 
of that inimitable writer, they appear, indeed, 
to have been little addicted to the pursuit of 
mentalexcellence; but they uniformly continued 
to cultivate, with peculiar care, the gymnastic 
exercises, which gave the address and dexterity 
of art to the ponderous strength of their gigan- 
tic members. To acquire renown in war, such 
people only wanted that spark of etherial fire 
which is kindled by a generous emulation. The 
tyranny of Sparta first animated their inactive 
languor. Having spurned an oppressive yoke, 
they boldly maintained their freedom ; and, in 
the exercise of defensive war, gained many ho- 
nourable trophies over enemies who had long 
despised them. Success enlivened their hopes, 
inflamed their ambition, and gave a certain 
elevation to their national character, which 
rendered them as ambitious of war and victory, 


te 


8 The condition of Sparta, represented in the text, is 
taken from the history of the times in Xenophon and Dio- 
dorus, from Aristotle’s Politics, |. ii. c. 9. the Oration of 
Archidamus, and the Panathanxan Oration of Isocrates. 
The last writer reduces the number of Spartan citizens to 
two thousand; a diminution principally occasioned by the 
battles of Leuctra and Mantinæa which happened a con- 
siderable time before the composition of that discourse. 

i Baotum in crasso jurares aëro natum. Hor. Epist. i. 


326 


as they had formerly been anxious for peace 
and preservation. They had introduced a severe 
system of military discipline; they had con- 
siderably improved the arms and exercise of 
cavalry; they had adopted various modes of 
arranging their forces in order of battle, superior 
to those practised by their neighbours. Emula- 
tion, ardour, mutual esteem, and that spirit of 
combination, which often prevails in turbulent 
and distracted times, had united a considerable 
number of their citizens in the closest engage- 
ments, and inspired them with the generous 
resolution of braving every danger in defence of 
each other. This association originally consist- 
ed of about three hundred men, in the prime of 
life, and of tried fidelity, and commanded by 
Pelopidas, the glorious restorer of his country’s 
freedom. From the inviolable sanctity of their 
friendship, they were called the Sacred Band, 
and their valour was as permanent as their 
friendship. During a long succession of years, 
they proved victorious wherever they fought ; 
and at length fell together, with immortal glory, 
in the field of Cheronea, with the fall of Thebes, 
of Athens, and of Greece. Such, in general, 
were the circumstances and condition of those 
rival republics,! when they were encouraged by 
their respective chiefs to decide their preten- 
sions by the event of a battle. 

In the interval of several months, between the 
congress at Sparta and the invasion 


ae of Beotia, Agesilaus and his son 
E C. 371 Archidamus collected the domestic 


strength of their republic, and sum- 
moned the tardy aid of their confederates. Sick- 
ness prevented the Spartan king from taking 
the field in person; but his advice prevailed 
with the ephori and senate, to command his 
colleague Cleombrotus (who, in the former 
year, had conducted a considerable body of 
troops into Phocis, in order to repel the The- 
bans from that countrv,) to march without delay 
into the hostile territory, with assurance of 
being speedily joined by a powerful reinforce- 
ment. The rendezvous was appointed in the 
plain of Leuctra, which surrounded an obscure 
village of the same name, situate on the Bæo- 
tian frohtier, almost at the equal distance of ten 
miles from the sea and from Platæa. The plain 
was encompassed on all sides by the lofty 
ridges of Helicon, Citheron, and Cynocephale; 
and the village was hitherto remarkable only 
for the tomb of two Theban damsels, the 
daughters of Scedasus, who had been violated 
by the brutality of three Spartan youths. The 
dishonoured females had ended their disgrace 
by d voluntary death; and the afflicted father 
had imitated the example of their despair, after 
imploring vengeance in vain from gods and 
men. 

The Spartans and their confederates joined 
forces in this neighbourhood, after repelling a 
few Theban detachments Which guarded the 
defiles of Mount Helicon. Their army amount- 
ed to twenty-four thousand foot, and sixteen 
hundred horse. The Thebans could not muster 
half that strength, after assembling all their 


1 Plut. in Pelopid. v. 11. p. 355—366. 
2 Xenoph. p. 595. 


HISTORY OF GREECE 


[Cuar 


troops, which had been scattered over the fron- 
tier, in order to oppose the desultory irruptions 
of the enemy. Their cavalry, however, nearly 
equalled those of the Spartans in number, and 
far excelled them in discipline and in valour. 
Epaminondas exhorted them to march, and 
repel the invaders, if they would prevent the 
defection of Beotia, and avoid the dangers and 
disgrace of a siege. They readily obeyed, and 
proceeded to the neighbouring mountains, on 
which having encamped, they obtained a com- 
manding view of the forces in the plain. 

Having heard an account of the superior 
numbers of the enemy, the Thebans still deter- 
mined to give them battle. But as the eyes are 
the most timorous of the senses, they were 
seized with terror and consternation at behold- 
ing the massy extent of the Spartan camp. 
Several of the colleagues of Epaminondas (for 
he had no fewer than six) were averse to an 
engagement, strongly dissuading the general 
from this dangerous measure, and artfully in- 
creasing the panic of the troops, by recounting 
many sinister omens and prodigies. The mag- 
nanimous chief opposed the dangerous torrent 
of superstitious terror, by a verse of Homer,? 
importing, that to men engaged in the pious 
duty of defending their country, no particular 
indication was necessary of the favourable will 
of heaven, since they were immediately em- 
ployed in a service peculiarly agreeable to the 
gods. Atthe same time, he counteracted the 
dejection of their imaginary fears, by encourage- 
ments equally chimerical. It was circulated, 
by his contrivance, that the Theban temples had 
opened of their own accord, in consequence of 
which the priestesses had announced a victory; 
that the armour of Hercules, reposited in the 
Cadmea, had suddenly disappeared, as if that 
invincible hero in person had gone to battle in 
defence of his Theban countrymen; above all, 
an ancient oracle was carefully handed about, 
denouncing defeat and ruin to the Spartans 
near the indignant tomb of the daughters of 
Scedasus. These artifices gained the multi- 
tude, while arguments more rational prevailed 
with their leaders, of whom the majority at 
length ranged themselves on the side of the 
general. 

Before conducting them to battle, Epaminon- 
das displayed his confidence of victory, by per- 
mitting all those to retire, who either disap- 
proved his cause, or were averse to share his 
danger ; a permission which the Thespians first 
thought proper to embrace. The unwarlike 
crowd of attendants, whose services were use- 
less in time of action, gradually seized the same 
opportunity toleave the camp. The swelling 
multitude appeared as a second army to the 
Spartans, who sent a powerful detachment to 
oppose them. The fear of being cut off by the 
enemy threw them back on the Thebans, whose 
hopes were enlivened by the unexpected return 
of such a considerable reinforcement. Thus 
encouraged, they determined unanimously to 
stand by their admired chief, and either to de- 
fend their country, or to perish in the attempt; 


3 Esl owwvos agertos amoverSas meçi matere. Il. xii. 
v. 243. 


XXX] 


and the ardour of the troops equalling the skill 
of the general, the union of such advantages 
rendered them invincible. 

Cleombrotus had disposed lus forces in the 
form of a crescent, according to an ancient and 
favourite practice of the Spartans. His cavalry 
were posted in squadrons along the front of the 
right wing, where he commanded in person. 
The allies composed the left wing, conducted by 
Archidamus. The Theban general, perceiving 
this dispositition, and sensible that the issue of 
the battle would chiefly depend on the domes- 
tic troops of Sparta, determined to charge vi- 
gorously with his left, in order to seize or de- 
stroy the person of Cleombrotus; thinking that 
should this design succeed, the Spartans must 
be discouraged and repelled; and that even the 
attempt must occasion great disorder in their 
ranks, as the bravest would hasten, from every 
quarter, to defend the sacred person of their 
king. Having resolved, therefore, to commit 
the fortune of the day to the bravery of the left 
division of his forces, he strengthened it with 
the choice of his hecavy-armed men, whom he 
drew up fifty deep. The cavalry were placed 
in the van, to oppose the Spartan horse, whom 
they excelled in experience and valour. Pelo- 
pidas, with the Sacred Band, flanked the whole 
on the left; and deeming no particular station 
worthy of their prowess, they were prepared to 
appear in every tumult of the field, whither 
they might be called, either by an opportunity 
of success, or by the prospect of distinguished 
danger. The principal inconvenience to which 
the Thebans were exposed, in advancing to the 
charge, was that of being surrounded by the 
wide-extended arms of the Spartan crescent. 
This danger the general foresaw; and in order 
to prevent it, he spread out his right wing, of 
which the files had only six men in depth, and 
the ranks proceeding in an oblique line, diverged 
the farther from the enemy, in proportion as 
they extended in length. 

The action began with the caval- 


or Sa * ry, which, on the Spartan side, con- 
AC. 371 sisted chiefly of such horses as were 


kept for pleasure by the richer citi- 
zens in timeš of peace; and which, proving an 
unequal match for the disciplined valour of the 
Thebans, were speedily broken, and thrown 
back on the infantry. Their repulse and rout 
occasioned considerable disorder in the Lacedæ- 
monian ranks, which was greatly heightened 
by the impetuous onset of the Sacred Band. 
Epaminondas availed himself of this momen- 
tary confusion to perform one of tlose rapid 
evolutions which commonly decide the fortune 
of battles. He formed his strongest, but least 
numerous division, into a compact wedge, with 
a sharp point and with spreading flanks; ex- 
pecting that the Lacedæmonians, as soon as 
they had recovered their ranks, would attack 
the weaker and more extended part of his army, 
which, froin the oblique arrangement in which 
it had been originally drawn up, seemed pre- 
pared for a retreat. The event answered his 
expectation. While the Lacedæmonians ad- 
vanced against his right wing, where they found 
little or no resistance, he rushed forward with 
his left; and darting like the beak of a gal- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


327 


ley‘ on the flank of the enemy, bore down every 
thing before him, until he arrived near the post 
occupied by Cleombrotus. The urgency of the 
danger recalled to their ancient principles the 
degenerate disciples of Lycurgus. The bravest 
warriors flew from every quarter to the assist- 
ance of their prince, covered him with their 
shields, and defended him with their swords 
and lances. Their impetuous valour resisted 
the intrepid progress of the Thebans, till the 
Spartan horemen, who attended the person of 
Cleombrotus, were totally cut off, and the king 
himself, pierced with many wounds, fell on 
the breathless or expiring bodies of his gener- 
ous defenders. The fall of the chief gave 
new rage to the battle. Anger, resentment, 
and despair, by turns agitated the Spartans. 
According to the superstitious ideas of pagan- 
ism, the death of their king appeared to them a 
slight misfortune, compared with the disgrace- 
ful impiety of committing his mangled remains 
to the insults of an enemy. To prevent this 
abomination, they exerted their utmost valour, 
and their strenuous efforts were successful. 
But they could not obtain any further advan- 
tage. Epaminondas was careful to fortify his 
ranks, and to maintain his order of battle; and 
the firmness and rapidity of his regular assault 
gained a complete and decisive victory over the 
desperate resistance of broken troops. The 
principal strength of the allies had hitherto 
remained inactive, unwilling rashly to engage 
in a battle, the motives of which they had 
never heartily approved. The defeat of the 
Lacedemonians, and the death of Cleombrotus, 
decided their wavering irresolution. They de- 
termined, almost with one accord, to decline 
the engagement; their retreat was effected 
with the loss of about two thousand men; and 
the Thebans remained sole masters of the field.é 

The care of burying the dead, and the fear 
of reducing the enemy to despair, seemed to 
have prevented Epaminondas from pursuing 
the vanquished to their camp; which, as it was 
strongly fortified, could not be taken without 
great slaughter of the assailants. When the 
Lacedemonians had assembled within the de- 
fence of their ditch and rampart, their security 
from imniediate danger allowed them time to 
reflect with astonishment and sorrow on the 
humiliating consequences of their recent dis- 
aster. Whether they considered the number 
of the slain, or reflected on the mortifying loss 
of national honour, it was easy for them to per- 
ceive, that, on no former occasign, the glory of 
their country had ever received such a fatal 
wound. Many Spartans declared their disgrace 
too heavy to be borne; that they never would 
permit their ancient laurels to be buried under 
a Theban trophy ; and that, instead of craving 
their dead under the protection of a treaty, 
(which would be acknowledging their defeat,) 
they were determined to return into the field, 
and to recover them by force of arms. This 
manly, but dangerous resolution, was con- 
demned in the council of war, by the officers 


4 Xenophon employs this expression on a similar occa- 
sion, in relating the battle of Mantinwa. 
5 Xenoph. p. 596. et seq. ad Plut. vol. ii. 366. et seq. 


328 


of most experience and authority. They ob- 
served, that of seven hundred Spartans who 
fought in the engagement, four hundred had 
fallen; that the Lacedsemonians had lost one 
thousand, and the allies two thousand six hun- 
dred. Their army indeed still outnumbered 
that of the enemy; but their domestic forces 
formed scarcely the tenth part of their strength, 
nor could they repose any cunfidence in the 
forced assistance of their reluctant confederates, 
who, emboldened by the misfortunes of Sparta, 
declared their unwillingness to renew the bat- 
tle, and scarcely concealed their satisfaction at 
the humiliation and disgrace of that haughty 
and tyrannical republic. Yielding, therefore, 
to the necessity of this miserable juncture, the 
Spartans sent a herald to crave their dead, and 
to acknowledge the victory of the Thebans.! 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| while it spared the lives of the citizens. 


Before they found it convenient to return) 
home, the fatal tidings had reached their capi- | 


tal; and on this memorable occasion, the Spar- 
tans exhibited that striking peculiarity of beha- 
viour, which naturally resulted from the insti- 
tutions of Lycurgus. Availing himself of the 
extraordinary respect which uncultivated na- 
tions bestow on military courage, in preference 
to all other virtues and accomplishments, that 
legislator allowed to the man who had lost his 
defensive armour, or who had fled in the day 
of battle, but one melancholy alternative, more 
dreadful than death to a generous mind. The 
unfortunate soldier was either driven into per- 
petual banishment, and subjected to every in- 
dignity which, in a rude age, would naturally 
be inflicted by the resentment of neighbouring 
and hostile tribes; or, if he submitted to remain 
at home, he was excluded from the public as- 
semblies, from every office of power or honour, 
from the protection of the laws, and almost 
from the society of men, without the shadow of 
a hope ever to amend his condition. The in- 
fluence of this stern law, which seems to have 
been forgotten in the field of Leuctra, was illus- 
trated in a very striking manner, after that un- 
fortunate battle. 

The messenger of bad news arrived, while 
the Spartans, according to annual custom, were 
celebrating, in the month of July, gymnastic 
and musical entertainments, and invoking hea- 
ven to preserve the fruits of the approaching 
autumn. Being introduced to the Ephori, he 
informed them of the publicdisaster. These ma- 
gistrates commanded the festival to proceed; 
sending, however, to each family a list of the 
warriors whom it had lost, and enjoining the 
women to abstain from unavailing lamentations. 
Next day, the fathers and other relations of 
such as had perished in the field of battle, ap- 
peared in the public places, dressed in their 
gayest attire, saluting and congratulating each 
other on the bravery of their brethren or chil- 
dren, But the kinsmen of those who had saved 
themselves by a shameful flight, either remain- 
ed at home, brooding in silence over their do- 
mestic affliction, or, if they ventured abroad, 
discovered every symptom of unutterable an- 
guish and despair. Their persons were shame- 
fully neglected, their garments rent, their arms 

eee 


1 Xenoph. p 596, et seq. et Plut. vol. ii. p- 366, et seq. 


-every where conspicuous. 


[Cuar. 


folded, their eyes fixed immoveably on the 
ground; expecting, in humble resignation, the 
sentence of eternal ignominy ready to be de- 
nounced by the magistrate against the unworthy 
causes of their sorrow.? But, on this critical 
emergency, the rigour of the Spartan discipline 
was mitigated by Agesilaus, whom the number 
and rank of the criminals deterred from inflict- 
ing on them the merited punishment. He en- 
deavoured to atone for abandoning the spirit of 
the laws, by what may appear a very puerile 
expedient; “Let us suppose,” said he, * the 
sacred institutions of Lycurgus to have slept 
during one unfortunate day, but henceforth let 
them rcsume their wonted vigour and activity :” 
a sentence extravagantly praised by many wri- 
ters, as preserving the authority of the laws, 
But 
as,on the one hand, we cannot discover the 
admired sagacity of Agesilaus in dispensing 
this act of lenity; so, on the other, we cannot 
condemn as imprudent the act itself, which the 
present circumstances of his country rendered 
not only expedient, but necessary. If Sparta 
had been the populous capital of an extensive 
territory, the lives of three hundred citizens 
miglit, perhaps, have been usefully sacrificed to 
the honour of military discipline. But a com- 
munity exceedingly small, and actually weaken- 
ed by the loss of four hundred members, could 
scarcely lave survived another blow equally 
destructive. No distant prospect of advantage, 
therefore, could have justified such an unsea- 
sonable severity. 
When the intelligence was dif- 

Oly a Pe fused over Greta the The- 
W zith the loss of only th 
A. C. 371, bans: Wi „of only three 

hundred men, had raised an immor- 
tal trophy over the strength and renown of 
Sparta, the importance of this event became 
The desire, and 
hope, of a revolution in public affairs, filled 
the Peloponnesus with agitation and tumult. 
Eleans, Arcadians, and Argives, every people 
who had been influenced by Spartan councils, 
or intimidated by Spartan power, openly as- 
pired at independence. The less considerable 
states expected to remain thenceforth unmo- 
lested, no longer paying contributions, nor obey- 
ing every idle summons to war. The more 
powerful republics breathed hatred and re- 
venge, and gloried in an opportunity of taking 
vengeance on the proud senators of Sparta, for 
the calamities which they had so often inflicted 
on their neighbours. 

But amidst this general ferment, and while 
every other people were guided rather by their 
passions and animosities, than by the principles 
of justice or sound policy, the Athenians ex- 
hibited an illustrious example of pohtical mode- 
ration.2 Immediately after the battle of Leuc- 
tra, a Theban herald, adorned with the em- 
blems of peace and victory, had been despatched 
to Athens, in order to relate the- particulars of 
the engagement, and to invite the Athenians 
to an offensive alliance against a republic, 
which had ever proved the most dangerous, as 
well as the most inveterate enemy of their 


2 Xenoph. p. 596. 3 Ibid. p. 598 


XXX.] 


country. But the assembly of Athens, governed 
by the magnanimity, or rather by the prudence, 
of Timotheus and Iphicrates, determined to 
humble their rivals, not to destroy them. 

The ancient and illustrious merit of the Spar- 
tans, their important services during the Per- 
sian war, and the fame of their laws and dis- 
Cipline, which still rendered them a respectable 
branch of the Grecian confederacy, might have 
a considerable influence in producing this reso- 
lution. But it chiefly proceeded from a jealousy 
of the growing power of Thebes, the situation 
of whose territories might soon render her a 
more formidable opponent to Athens, than even 
Sparta herself. This political consideration for 
once prevailed over a deep-rooted national an- 
tipathy. The Theban herald was not received 
with respect, nor even with decency. He was 
not entertained in public, according to the es- 
tablished hospitality of the Greeks; and al- 
though the senate of the Five Hundred (who 
usually answered foreign ambassadors) was 
then assembled in the citadel, he was allowed 
to return home without receiving the smallest 
satisfaction on the subject of his demand. But 
the Athenians, though unwilling to second the 
resentment, and promote the prosperity of 
Thebes, prepared to derive every possible ad- 
vantage from the misfortunes and distress of 
Sparta. Convinced that the inhabitants of Pe- 
loponnesus would no longer be inclined to fol- 
low her standard, and share her danger and ad- 
versity, they eagerly seized the opportunity of 
delivering them for ever from her yoke; and, 
lest any other people might attain the rank 
which the Spartans once held, and raise their 
own importance on the ruins of public free- 
dom, ambassadors were sent successively to the 
several cities, requiring their respective com- 
pliance with the treaty of Antalcidas. Against 
such as rejected this overture, war was de- 
nounced in the name of Athens and her allies; 
which was declaring to all Greece, that the 
battle of Leuctra had put the balance of power 
in her hands, and that she had determined to 
check the ambition of every republic whose 
views were too aspiring.? 

Disappointed of the assistance of Athens, 
the Thebans had recourse to an ally not less 
powerful. The extensive and fertile territory 
of Thessaly, which had been so long weaken- 
ed by division, was fortunately united under 
the government of Jason of Phere, a man 
whose abilities and enterprising ambition seem- 
ed destined to change the face of the ancient 
world.6 To the native virtues of hospitality 
and magnificence, which peculiarly distinguish- 
ed his country, Jason added indefatigable la- 
bour and invincible courage, with a mind ca- 
pable to conceive the loftiest designs, and a 
character ready to promote them by tle mean- 
est artifices.6 His family descended from the 
ancient kings of the heroic ages, and formed 
the wealthiest louse in Pherw, wlich had al- 
ready attained considerable pre-eminence over 
the neighbouring cities of Thessaly. By con- 
trivances extremely unworthy of that greatness 


4 Xenoph. p. 602. 
5 Xenoph. Hellen. I. vi. c. i. et sea 
6 Polyen. Stratagem. 

2 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


329 


to which they frequently conduct, Jason de- 
ceived his brothers and kinsmen, and appropri- 
ated almost the sole use of his domestic opu- 
lence. With this he hired a well-appointed 
body of mercenaries, by whose assistance he 
acquired greater authority in Pheræ, than any 
former general or king had ever enjoyed.? But 
the government of a single city could not sa- 
tisfy bis aspiring mind. By stratagem, by sur- 
prise, or by force, he extended his Cominion 
over the richest parts of Thessaly; and was 
ready to grasp the whole, when his designs 
were obstructed by the powerful opposition of 
Polydamas the Pharsalian.§ 

Next to Phere and Larissa, Pharsalus was the 
largest and most flourishing city in that north- 
ern division of Greece. But the inhabitants, 
distracted by factions, exhausted their strength 
in civil discord and sedition, until a ray of wis- 
dom illuminating both parties, they committed 
their differences, and themselves, to the probity 
and patriotism of Polydamas, which were equally 
respected at home and abroad. For several 
years Polydamas commanded the citadel, and 
administered justice and the finances with such 
diligence and fidelity, as might reasonably have 
entitled him to the glorious appellation of Fa- 
ther of his country. He firmly opposed and 
counteracted the secret practices, as well as the 
open designs, of Jason, who eagerly solicited 
his friendship by every motive. that could actu- 
ate a mind of less determined integrity. 

At a conference which was held between 
them at Pharsalus, where Jason had come alone 
and unattended, the better to gain the confi- 
dence of a generous adversary, the Pherean 
displayed the magnitude of his power and re- 
sources, which it seemed impossible for the 
weakness of Pharsalus to resist; and promised, 
that, on surrendering the citadel of that place, 
which must otherwise soon yield to force, Po- 
lydamas should enjoy in Thessaly the second 
rank after himself; that he would regard him 
as his friend and colleague ; nor could there re- 
main a doubt that their united labours might 
raise their common country to that station in 
Greece which it had been long entitled to hold. 
That the subjugation of the neighbouring states 
opened vaster prospects, which forced them- 
selves irresistibly on his mind, when he consi- 
dered the natural advantages of Thessaly, the 
fertility of the soil, the swiftness of the horses, 
the disciplined bravery and martial ardour of 
the inhabitants, with whom no nation in Eu- 
rope, or in Asia, was able to contend. 

Polydamas heard with pleasure the praises 
of his native land, and admired the magna- 
nimity of Jason. But he observed, that his 
fellow citizens had honoured him with a trust 
which it was impossible for him ever to betray; 
aud that their community still enjoyed the al- 
liance of Sparta, from which the neighbouring 
cities had revolted. That he was determined 
to demand the protection of that republic; and 
if the Lacedæmonians were willing and able to 
afford him any effectual assistance, he would 
defend to the last extremity the walls of Phar- 
salus. Jason commended his integrity and pa- 


7 Plut. Polit. et san. tuend. 
8 Xenoph. Hellen. |. vi. c. i. et seq. 


330 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


triotism, which, he declared, inspired him with] cestor of the renowned Pyrrhus, he extended 
the warmer desire to obtain the friendship of | the dominion of Thessaly from the Ægean to 


such an illustrious character. 


Oly oe to Sparta, and proposed his demand 
oo C. 370 in the council; exhorting the ma- 


gistrates not only to undertake the 
expedition, but to undertake it with vigour; 
for if they expected to oppose the forces of Ja- 
son by their undisciplined peasants, or half- 
armed slaves, they would infallibly bring dis- 
grace on themselves, and ruin on their confede- 
rates. The Lacedemonians were deeply engaged 
in the Theban war, which had been hitherto 
carried on unsuccessfully. They prudently de- 
clined, therefore, the invitation of Polydamas ; 
who, returning to Thessaly, held a second con- 
ference with Jason. He still refused to sur- 
render the citadel, but promised to use his best 
endeavours for making the Pharsalians submit 
of their own accord; and offered his only son 
as a pledge of his fidelity. Jason accepted the 
offer, and, by the influence of Polydamas, was 
soon afterwards declared captain-general of 
Pharsalus and all Thessaly ; a modest appella- 
tion, under which he enjoyed the full extent of 
royal power.! 

He began his reign by adjusting, with equity 
and precision, the proportion of taxes, and the 
contingent of troops, to be raised by the several 
cities in his dominions. The new levies, added 
to his standing army of mercenaries, amounted 
to eight thousand horse, twenty thousand heavy- 
armed foot, and such a body of targeteers, as 
no nation of antiquity could match.? But 
numbers formed the least advantageous dis- 
tinction of the army of Jason. Every day he 
exercised his troops in person; dispensed re- 
wards and punishments; cashiered the slothful 
and effeminate; honoured the brave and dili- 
gent with double, and sometimes treble pay, 

-with large donatives in money, and with such 
other presents as peculiarly suited their re- 
spective tastes. By this judicious plan of mili- 
tary administration, the soldiers of Jason be- 
came alike attached to their duty, and to the 
person of their general, whose standard they 
were ready to follow into any part of the 
world.3 

He began his military operations by subduing 
the Dryopes,4 the Dolopians, and the other 
small but warlike tribes, inhabiting the long 
and intricate chain of mounts (ta and Pindus, 
which form the southern frontier of Thessaly. 
Then turning northwards, he struck terror into 
Macedon, and compelled Amyntas to become 
his ally, and most probably his tributary. Thus 
fortified on both sides, he retaliated the inroads 
of the Phocians, who had long profited of the 
divisions, and insulted the weakness, of his 
country; and by conquering the small and un- 
cultivated district of Epirus, which then formed 
a barbarous principality under Alcetas,5 an an- 


1 Xenoph. Hellen. l. vi. c. 1, et seq. et Diodor. Sicul. 1. 
Xv. p. 488. 

2 Xenophon expresses it more strongly; zeArarrixoy 
ene?” ixzvoy mecs mavTas aevIoewsroug ovTiTAKInVas, p. 


3 Xenoph. p. 600. 4 Strabo. l. viii. p. 299. 
5 In speaking of Arrybas (the son of Alcetas, and the 
grandfather of Pyrrhus,) who received his education at 


s 


the Ionian sea, and encompassed, as with a belt, 


Soon afterwards Polydamas went | the utmost breadth of the Grecian republics. 


It cannot be doubted, that the subjugation, or 
at least the command, of those immortal com- 
monwealths, was the aim of the Thessalian 
prince, who declared to his friends, that he ex- 
pected, by the assistance of Greece, to imitate 
the glorious example of Cyrus and Agesilaus, 
and to effect, by the united strength of the con- 
federacy, what these generals had nearly ac- 
complished by a body of ten or twelve thousand 
soldiers.6 While the Spartans, however, pre- 
served their long-boasted pre-eminence, and 
regarded it as their hereditary and unalienable 
right to conduct their confederates to war, Ja- 
son could not hope to attain the priucipal com- 
mand in an Asiatic expedition. As the natural 
enemy of that haughty people, he rejoiced in 
their unprosperous war against the Thebans; 
nor could he receive small satisfaction from be- 
holding the southern states of Greece engaged 
in perpetual warfare, while he himself main- 
tained a respected neutrality, and watched the 
first favourable occasion of interfering, with de- 
cisive effect, in the final settlement of that 
country. 5 

He seldom ventured indeed into the Pelopon- 
nesus; but, in order to examine matters more 
nearly, he undertook, upon very extraordinary 
pretences, several journeys to Athens and 
Thebes. From policy, and perhaps from ine 
clination, he had formed an intimate connec- 
tion with the most distinguished characters of 
those republics, and particularly with Pelopi- 
das and Timotheus. The latter, after serving 
his country with equal glory and success, was, 
according to the usual fortune of Athenian 
commanders, exposed to a cruel persecution of 
his rivals and enemies, which endangered his 
honour and his life. On the day of trial the 
admirers and friends of that great man appear- 
ed in the Athenian assembly, in order to inter- 
cede with his judges; and among the rest, Jason, 
habited in the robe of a suppliant, humbly so- 
liciting the release of Timotheus, from a peo- 
ple who would not probably have denied a 
much greater favour to the simple recommen- 
dation of so powerful a prince.” In a visit to 
Thebes, he endeavoured to gain or secure the 
attachment of Epaminondas, by large presents 
and promises; but the illustrious Theban, 
whose independent and honourable poverty had 
rejected the assistance of his friends and fellow 
citizens, spurned with disdain the insolent ge- 
nerosity of a stranger.8 Yet, by the interven- 
tion of Pelopidas, Jason contracted an engage- 
ment of hospitality with the Thebans, in con- 
sequence of which he was invited to join their 
arms, after thcir memorable victory at Leuctra. 

The Thessalian prince accepted the invita- 
tion, though his designs respecting Greece were 
not yet ripe for execution. He was actually 


Athens, Justin says, “ Quanto doctior majoribus suis, tanto 
et gratior populo fuit. Primus itaque leges et senatum an- 
nuosque magistratus et reipublice formam composuit. Et 
uta Pyrrho sedes, sic vita cultior populo ab Arryba statuta.” 

6 Xenoph. p. 600. 

7 Demosthenes et Cornel. Nepos in Timoth. 

8 Plut. Apophtheg. 


y 


XXX.] 


engaged in war with the Phocians, of which, 
whatever might be the pretence, the real ob- 
ject was to obtain the superintendence of the 
Delphic oracle, and the administration of the 
sacred treasure. To avoid marching through 
a hostile territory, he ordered his galleys to be 
equipped, as if he had intended to proceed by 
sea to the coast of Beotia. His naval prepa- 
rations amused the attention of the Phocians, 
while Jason entered their country with a body 
of two thousand light horse, and advanced 
with such rapidity that he was every where the 
first messenger of his own arrival. | 

By this unusual celerity, he joined, without 
encountering any obstacle, the army of the The- 
bans, who were encamped in the neighbourhood 
of Leuctra,at no great distance from the enemy. 
Instead of an auxiliary, Jason thought it more 
suitable to his interest to act the part of a medi- 
ator. He exhorted the Thebans to rest satisfied 
with the advantages which they had already ob- 
tained, without driving their adversaries to des- 
pair; that the recent history of their own re- 
public, and of Sparta, should teach them to 
remember the vicissitudes of fortune. The La- 
cedemonians, on the other hand, he reminded 
of the difference between a victorious and van- 
quished army. That the present crisis seemed 
totally adverse to the re-establishment of their 
greatness ; that they should yield to the fatality 
of circumstances, and watch a more favourable 
opportunity to restore the tarnished lustre of 
their arms. His arguments prevailed; hostili- 
ties were suspended ; the terms of a peace were 
‘proposed and accepted: but it is remarkable, 
that the Spartans and their allies had so little 
confidence in this sudden negotiation, that they 
decamped the night following, and continued to 
march homeward, with the diligence of distrust 
and fear, until they got entirely beyond reach 
of the Thebans.9 

Jason had not, probably, more confidence in 
a treaty hastily concluded betwecn enemies, 
whose resentments were irritated and inflamed 
by so many mutualinjuries offered and retorted. 
Nothing could have been more contrary to his 
views than a sincere and lasting peace between 
these powerful republics ; but as this was not to 
be apprehended, he wished to obtain the reputa- 
tion of appeasing the dissensions of Greece ; a 


9 Xenoph. p. 600. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


331 


circumstance of great importance to the accom- 
plisiiment of his ambitious designs. 

In his return home, he demolished the walls 
of Heraclea, a town situate near the straits of 
Thermopylæ ; not fearing, says his historian,!9 
that any of the Greek states should 


n a invade hisdominions from that side, 
A.C.370, but unwilling to leave a place of 


such strength on his frontier, which, 
if scized by a powerful neighbour, might ob- 
struct his passage into Greece. Thither he 
determined to return at the celebration of the 
Pythian games, at which he meant to claim 
the right of presiding, as an honour due both 
to his piety and to his power. He commanded, 
therefore, the cities and villages of Thessaly to 
fatten sheep, goats, swine, and oxen, and pro- 
posed honourable rewards to such districts as 
furnished the best victims for the altars of 
Apollo. Without any burdensome imposition 
on his subjects, he collected a thousand oxen, 
and, of smaller cattle, to the number of ten 
thousand. At the same time, he prepared the 
whole military strength of his kingdom, by 
whose assistance, still more effectually than by 
the merit of his sacrifices, he might maintain 
his pretensions to the superintendence of the 
games, the direction of the oracle, and the ad- 
ministration of the sacred treasure, which he re- 
garded as so many previous steps to the con- 
quest of Greece and Asia. But, amidst these 
lofty projects, Jason, while reviewing the Phe- 
rean cavalry, was stabbed by seven youths, 
who approached him, on pretence of demand- 
ing justice against each other. Two of the as- 
sassins were despatched by his guards. Five 
mounted flcet horses, which had been prepared 
for their use, and escaped to the Grecian re- 
publics, in which they were received with uni- 
versal acclamations of joy, and honoured as the 
saviours of their country from the formidable 
power of a brave but ambitious tyrant.!! The 
projects and the empire of Jason perished with 
himself; Thessaly, as we shall have occasion 
to explain, relapsed into its former state of di- 
vision and weakness: but it is the business of 
history to relate not only great actions, but 
great designs; and cven the designs of Jason 
announce the approaching downfall of Grecian 
freedom. 


10 Xenoph.p. 599. 
11 Xenoph. et Diodor. ibid. et Valerius Maximus, 1. ix. 


332 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


Tumults in the Peloponnesus—Invasion of Laconia—Epaminondas rebuilds Messene—Founda- 
tion of Megalopolis—Archidamus restores the Fortune of Sparta—Affairs of Thessaly and Ma- 
cedon—Negotiations for Peace—The Pretensions of Thebes rejected—Epaminondas invades the 
Peloponnesus—Revolutions in Achaia—Speech of Archidamus in the Spartan Council—De- 
signs of Thebes—Disconcerted by Athens—Pelopidas’s Expedition in Thessaly—The Arcadians 
seize the Olympic Treasure—Batile of Mantinea—Agesilaus’s Expedition into Egypt. 


"THE death of Jason removed the terror of 
Greece; but of a country which owed its 
safety to the arm of an assassin, the condition 
may justly be regarded as extremely unstable 
and precarious. There elapsed, however, thirty- 
three years of discord and calamity, before the 
Greeks finally experienced, in Philip of Mace- 
don, such ambition and abilities as enabled him 
fully to accomplish the lofty designs of the Thes- 
salian. The history of this last stage of tumul- 
tuous liberty comprehends the bloody, but inde- 
cisive wars, which exhausted Greece during 
eleven years that intervened between the battle 
of Leuctra, and the accession of Philip to the 
Macedonian throne, together with the active 
reign of that prince; a memorable period of 
twenty-two years, illuminated by the success 
and glory of Macedon, and clouded by the dis- 
grace and ruin of the Grecian republics. 
The unexpected issue of the bat- 


T a P tle of Leuctra was doubly prejudi- 
a O cial to the Spartans, by weakening 


their own confederacy, and strength- 
ening that of their enemies. In less than two 
years after that important event, the alliance in 
Peloponnesus, over which Sparta had so long 
maintained an ascendant, was totally dissolved, 
and most cities had changed not only their 
foreign connections, but their domestic laws 
and government. During the same period, the 
confederacy, of which Thebes was the head, 
had, on the contrary, been very widely ex- 
tended. Many communities of the Pelopon- 
nesus courted her protection; and, in the north 
of Greece, the Acarnanians, Locrians, Pho- 
cians, the whole breadth of the continent, from 
the Ionian to the Ægean sea, and even the isle 
of Eubæa, increased the power, and in some 
measure acknowledged the dominion of Thebes. 
The history of these revolutions is very imper- 
fectly related by ancient writers; but their con- 
sequences were too remarkable not to be attend- 
ed to and explained. The Peloponnesians, after 
being delivered from the oppression of the Spar- 
tan yoke, were subjected to the more destructive 
tyranny of their own ungovernable passions.! 
` Every state and every city was torn by factions 
which frequently blazed forth into the most 
violent seditions. The exiles from several re- 
publics were nearly as numerous as those who 
had expelled them. Fourteen hundred were 
banished from Tegea; two thousand? were slain 


1 Diedorus, L xv. p. 371, et seq. Ysocrat. in Archidam. 
et de Pace. 

2 This number is made out by comparing different 
authors, and uniting tn one view the different scenes of the 
sedition, which is called the Scytalism by Diodorus (ubi 
supra,) and Pausanias (Corinth,) from the Greek word 
exuta), signifying a club, which, it seems, was the princi- 
pal instrument of slaughter. 


in Argos; in many places the contending fac- 
tions alternately prevailed; and those who, in 
the first encounter, had got possession of the 
government and the capital, were sometimes at- 
tacked? and conquered by the numerous fugi- 
tives, who formed a camp in the adjoining ter- 
ritory. The Mantinzans alone seem to have 
acted wisely. With one accord, and with equal 
diligence, they laboured to rebuild their walls, 
which the insolence of Sparta had demolished. 
The work was soon brought to a conclusion ; 
and the Mantinzans, united in one democracy, 
fully determined thenceforth to preserve the 
strength of their city, which appeared necessary 
to maintain their political independence. 
Neither the Thebans nor the Spartans imme- 
diately interfered in this scene of disorder. The 
former found sufficient employment for their 
arms and negotiations in the northern parts of 
Greece; and the latter were so much humbled 
by their defeat at Leuctra, that they contented 
themselves with preparing to defend the banks 
of the Eurotas, and to repel the expected assault 
of their capital. For this purpose they had armed 
the aged and infirm, who were legally exempt- 
ed from military service.4 They had command- 
ed into the field even those citizens who were 
employed in such sacred and civil offices as are 
deemed most useful in society; and, as their 
last resource, they talked of giving arms to the 
Helots. But the convulsions of Peloponnesus 
soon supplied them with less dangerous auxilia- 
ries. The incensed partisans of aristocracy, 
who had been expelled from Argolis, Achaia, 
and Arcadia, had recourse to the most ancient 
and distinguished patrons of their political prin- 
ciples. Encouraged by this seasonable reinforce- 
ment, the Spartans set at defiance the Theban 
invasion, by which they had been so long 
threatened, and sent a considerable detachment 
to recover their lost authority in Arcadia. But 
it was the fate of Sparta, to regain neither in 
that, nor in any other state of the Peloponnesus, 
the influence which she had lost in the field of 
Leuctra. Polytropos, who commanded her 
allies in this expedition, was defeated and slain 
in the first rencounter with the Arcadians and 
Lycomedes, their intrepid and magnanimous 
leader. Nor did Agesilaus perform any thing 
decisive against the enemy. He was contented 
with ravaging the villages and delightful fields 
of Arcadia, in which he met with little resist- 
ance from the inhabitants, who declined an en- 
gagement, until they should be joined by the 
Theban confederacy, whose assistance they had 
sent to solicit, and had just reason to expect.® 


3 Diodorus, l. xv. p. 371, et seq, 
4 Xenoph. l. vi. p. 597. 
6 Xenophon. 1. vi. p. 605. 


5 Id. p. 603, 


XXXI.] 
ol At length the far-renowned The- 
oie e“ bans took the field, having carefully 
s C. 369 pondered their own strength, and 


collected into one body the flower 
and vigour of their numerous allies. They 
were accompanied by the warlike youth of the 
towns and villages of Bæotia, by the Acarna- 
nians, Phocians, Locrians, and Eubæans, and 
by a promiscuous crowd of needy fugitives, who 
were attracted to their camp by the allurement 
of plunder. They had no sooner arrived on 
the frontier of Arcadia, than they were joined 
by the inhabitants of that country, as well as 
by the Elians and Argives. This united mass 
of war exceeded any numbers, that either be- 
fore or afterwards, ever assembled in Greece 
under onc standard, amounting to fifty, some 
say to seventy thousand men.’ The Thebans, 
and the rest of the Beotians, were command- 
ed by Epaminondas and Pelopidas, to whom 
the generous admiration of their colleagues had 
voluntarily resigned their authority. Apprised 
of the march of such a formidable army, con- 
ducted by generals of such unquestionable 
merit, Agesilaus prepared to evacuate Arcadia, 
a measure which he fortunately effected, before 
his soldiers beheld the fires kindled in the 
hostile camp, and thus avoided the disgrace 
of retiring before the enemy.® His unresisted 
devastation of the territory which he had in- 
vaded, as well as his successful retreat, gave 
fresh spirits to his followers, and made them 
return with better hopes to defend their own 
country, which was now threatened with in- 
vasion. 

The Thebans, though they had no longer any 
occasion to protect the Arcadians from insult, 
were determined,’ by many powcrful motives, 
to employ the vast preparations which they had 
collected. Their particular resentment against 
Sparta was heightened by the general voice of 
their allies, who exhorted them to embrace an 
opportunity which, perhaps, might never return, 
utterly to destroy a people who neither could 
enjoy tranquillity, nor allow their neighbours to 
enjoy it. The inhabitants of Carya, and of 
several other towns in Laconia, declared their 
resolution to revolt from Sparta, as soon as the 
enemy should enter their boundaries. In a 
council of war summoned by the Theban gene- 
rals, it was therefore detcrmined to march 
without farther delay into the Lacedemonian 
territories, to lay waste the country, and if pos- 
sible, to take possession of the capital. 

That this resolution might be executed with 
the greater celerity and effect, the army was 


thrown into four divisions, destined, by separate 


roads, to break into the devoted province, to join 
forces at Sellasia, and thence to march in one 
body to Sparta. The Beotians, Elians, and 
Argives penetrated, without opposition, by the 


7 The numbers differ in Xenoph. Hellen. 1. vi. Pausan. 
Beotic. Diodorus, l. xv. and Plut. in Pelopid. 

8 Xenoph. p. 606. 

9 They at first opposed the eagerness of the Arcadians, 
Flians, and Argives, for invading Laconia, considering ors 
Sureuarwrary yev y Acxwvixy syEAETO tivæi, Dpovens os 
xabsoravns avopsCov ext rois surporodwrorusc, That 
it would be difficult to penetrate into a country defended 
hy the natural strength of its frontier, or by vigilant gar- 
isons.” Xenoph. p. 607. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


333 


particular routes which had been assigned them. 
But when the Arcadians, who formed the 
fourth division of the army, attempted to tra- 
verse the district Sciritis, the brave Ischilas, 
who guarded that important pass, determined 
to repel them, or to perish. The example of 
Leonidas at Thermopyle kindled a generous 
enthusiasm in the breast of this gallant Spartan. 
The number of the Arcadian levies so far ex- 
ceeded his own, that death seemed the sure 
reward of his courage. Yet he exhorted all 
those to decline danger who were not ambitious 
to share it. He even commanded the youth to 
leave his camp before fhe engagement, deeming 
their lives too precious to be risked in so des- 
perate an enterprise. He, with the old soldiers 
who followed him, chose the present opportu- 
nity to meet a glorious death in defence of their 
country. But thcir lives were sold dearly. 
The action was long doubtful: the loss of the 
Arcadians great; nor did the battle cease till 
the last of the Spartans had perished.!0 

The confederates having soon after assembled 
at Sellasia, the place of rendezvous, marched 
forward to Sparta, burning and destroying all 
before them. During five hundred years La- 
conia had. not experienced a similar calamity. 
The guards who defended the city were. thrown 
into consternation. The women were terrified 
by the smoke and tumult raised by the invaders; 
a spectacle, concerning which it had been their 
usual boast, that they alone of all the Grecian 
females, had never beheld it in their native land. 
Alarmed by the danger which threatened them, 
and which they were sensible of their own 
inability to repel, the Spartans embraced the 
doubtful expedient of giving arms to their pea- 
sants and slaves, whom they commonly treated 
which such an excess of cruelty. Not less than 
six thousand of these unhappy men were en- 
gaged, by threats or promises, to undertake the 
reluctant defence of the proud tyrants, whom 
they detested. Their formidable numbers in- 
creased the general panic, which had seized the 
magistrates and citizens, and which did not 
finally cease until the arrival of a powerful body 
of men from Corinth, Phlius, Epidaurus, and 
Pallené; cities which, though tney had ever 
opposed the despotism, were unwilling to permit 
the destruction of Sparta. 

This seasonable reinforcement not only re- 
moved the consternation of the Spartans, but 
made them pass with rapidity from the depths 
of despondency to the joys of success. The 
kings and magistrates could scarcely restrain 
their impetuosity from rushing into the field : 
and this martial enthusiasm, guided by the con- 
summate prudence of Agesilaus, enabled them 
to repel the first assaults of the enemy, and to 
convince them that every succeeding attempt to 
get possession of the city, must be attended 
with such fatigue, and danger, and loss of men, 
as could not be compensated by the success of 
that enterprise. The conduct of Agesilaus, 
during this critical emergency, has been highly 


10 Xenoph. }. vi. p. 607, et Diodor. 1. xv. p. 376. The 
former indeed adds si py vic gupiyvonbsiç Siscuye, “Un. 
less, perhaps, somo one escaped unknown through the 
enemy.” 


334 z 


extolled by all writers, and never beyond its 
merit. By a well-contrived ambusli in the 
temple of the Tyndaridw,? he defeated the 
designs of the assailants: by very uncommon 
presence of mind,’ he quelled a dangerous in- 
surrection; and, while, by force or stratagem, 
he overcame the united efforts of domestic and 
foreign enemies, he negotiated the most power- 
ful assistance for the relief of his country. 

Immediately after the battle of Leuctra the 
Athenians had declared their resolution to re- 
new and confirm the treaty of Antalcidas, 
which, though it diminished the grandeur, yet 
secured the tranquillity of Greece, and prevent- 
ed the weakness of any one republic from fall- 
ing a prey to the ambition of another. But 
notwithstanding this declaration, which was 
universally approved by their neighbours, they 
had, either from resentment or from policy, 
remained above two years spectators of the de- 
cline of the Lacedemonian, and the growth of 
the Theban league. Whateveruneasiness might 
be occasioned by the increasing strength of their 
newrival, was sufficiently balanced by the decay 
and downfall of their ancient and inveterate 
enemy. But though, doubtless, they ardently 
desired the ruin of the Spartan power, they 
could not sincerely approve the cruel destruction 
of their persons, and of their city. When in- 
formed of the terrible devastation of Laconia, 
they naturally felt a return of compassion for 
a people whose exploits, on many memorable 
occasions, had done such signal honour to the 
Grecian name. 

The emissaries of Agesilaus, whose superior 
mind had assumed dictatorial power amidst the 
distress of his Gountry, seized the favourable 
opportunity to urge, with the Athenians, many 
motives of action, which seldom operate amidst 
the cold lifeless politics of modern times. 
They took notice that the Athenians and La- 
cedwmonians had often mutually assisted each 
other in seasons of distress, and that the most 
glorious era of their story was that in which 
the two republics had united their councils and 
measures against a common enemy. That 
when the spirit of rivality and ambition had 
unhappily divided Greece, and the Athenians 
were exposed to the calamities of a long and 
unfortunate war, they had been protected by 
the humauity of Sparta against the implacable 
rage of the Thebans, who wished to demolish 
the city of Athens, and to reduce its territory 


to the barren solitude of the Crissean plain.. 


That by the moderation of Sparta, the Athe- 
nians had not only been saved from the ven- 
geance of foreign enemies, but delivered from 
the yoke of domestic tyrants, and the cruel ty- 


1 Xenoph. et Plut. in Agesilao. 
Pausanias Lacon. 

2 Castor and Pollux, so called from their mother Tyn- 
daris, or Leda. 

3 The mutineers had entered into a conspiracy to seize 
an important post in the city. Agesilaus observed them as 
they marched thither, and immediately suspecting their de- 
sign, called out, that they had mistaken his orders; adding 
his meaning to be, that they should separate into different 
divisions, and repair to the several posts which he named. 
The conspirators naturally concluded that he knew nothing 
of their purpose, and separating, as he commanded, could 
never afterwards find an opportunity to unite in such num- 
bers as rendcred them dangerous. 


Diodorus, l. xv. et 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


ranny of the Pisistratide. The merit of these 
services deserved the reward of gratitude; the 
hereditary renown of Athens urged her to pro- 
tect the miserable ; and justice demanded that 
she should assert, and maintain, the conditions 
of a recent treaty, which she herself had pro- 
posed, and which the Thebans, after accepting, 
had so manifestly violated. 

A loud and discordant murmur ran through 
the assembly. Some approved the demand, 
others observed that the Spartans changed their 
language with their fortune; that they had for-. 
merly, and probably would again, whenever 
they became powerful, assume a very different 
tone, and, instead of colouring by false disguises, 
display in its native force, their inveterate en- 
mity to Athens. That the late treaty of peace 
could not entitle them to any assistance, since 
they themselves had begun the war by the in- 
vasion of Arcadia; a war undertaken from the 
unjust motive of supporting the tyrannical 
usurpation of the nobles of Tegea over the 
rights of their fellow citizens. 

Together with the Lacedemonian ambassa- 
dors, had come those of Corinth and Phlius, 
cities eminently distinguished by an unshaken 
fidelity to their ancient confederate and protec- 
tor. Cleiteles the Corinthian, observing what 
turn the debate was likely to take, stood up and 
said, “ Were it a matter of doubt, Athenians! 
who are the aggressors, the melancholy expe- 
rience of our state would remove the difficulty. 
Since the renovation of the peace of Antalcidas, 
the Corinthians, surely, have not committed 
hostilities against any power in Greece. Yet 
the Thebans have entered our territory, cut 
down our trées, burned our houses, plundered 
our cattle and effects. How, then, can you re- 
fuse your assistance to those who have been so 
manifestly injured, in direct violation of the 
treaty, to which, at your express desire, they 
acceded and swore?” The assembly loudly 
approved the discourse of Cleiteles, which was 
supported and confirmed by the arguments and 
eloquence of Patrocles the Phliasian. 

“It is manifest, I think, to all of you, 
Athenians! that should Sparta be destroyed, 
Athens must be the next object of the hostility 
of Thebes, since that city alone would then 
stand in the way of her ambition. The cause 
of the Lacedemonians therefore is, in fact, 
yourown. You must embrace it with ardour, 
as the last opportunity which the gods perhaps 
will afford you, of defending the general free- 
dom at the head of your allies, and of preventing 
the dangerous domination of the Thebans; the 
effects of which, you, who are their neighbours, 
would feel with peculiar severity. By taking 
this resolution, which is equally generous and 
salutary, you will acquire a fund of merit, not 
only with the Spartans, than whom none were 
ever more mindful of favours, or more ambi- 
tious of honest fame, but also with us their allies, 
who, since we have continued faithful to our 
friends in their adversity, cannot be suspected 
of ingratitude to our prosperous benefactors. I 
have heard with admiration how, in ancient 
times, the injured and afflicted always had 
recourse to Athens, and were never disappointed 
of relief. I now no langer hear, but see, the 


XXXL] 


Lacedemonians, with their faithful allies, soli- 
citing your protection against the Thebans, 
whose unrelenting cruelty could not persuade 
Sparta, in the height of her resentment and of 
her power, to desolate your country, and to re- 
duce you into servitude. Your aneestors ae- 
quired just renown by saving the dead bodies of 
the Argives, to whom the impiety of Thebes 
denied the sacred rights of burial.4 How much 
greater renown will redound to you, when the 
Lacedemonians, by your generous assistance, 
snall be saved from death. It was deemed me- 
ritorious in them to have defended the children 
of Hercules against the unnatural persecution 
of Eurystheus; but it will be far more glorious 
for you to have defended not only the descend- 
ants of that hero, the hereditary kings of Lace- 
dæmon, but, along with them, the senate, the 
magistrates, the people; in one word, to have 
delivered the whole nation from a danger dread- 
ful in itself, and otherwise inevitable. During 
the prosperity of their empire, the Lacedemo- 
nians prevented your destruction by a deeree, 
which displayed their humanity, without expos- 
ing their safety. You are called to defend the 
Lacedemonians, not by inactive decrees, but by 
arms and courage. Arm, then, in their behalf; 
and, forgetful of recent animosities, repay the 
important services which, in the Barbarian war, 
the valour of Sparta rendered to Athens and to 
all Greece.” 

The assembly was so deeply affected by the 
persuasive discourse of the Phliasian, that they 
refused to hear any thing in oppositon to it, 
and determined, almost unanimously, to take 
the field. Iphicrates was named general; twelve 
thousand men were ordered to repair to his 
standard; the sacrifices were propitious; the 
troops took a short repast; and such was their 
ardour to meet the enemy, that many of them 
marched forth without waiting the orders of 
their commander. 

Epaminondas, mean while, had committed 
dreadful devastation in Laconia. His repulse 
from the capital had exasperated his hostilities 
against the country. He had desolated the fer- 
tile banks of the Eurotas, which were thick 
planted with houses, and abounding in all the 
conveniences of life known to the austere sim- 
plicity of Sparta. He had assaulted Helos and 
Gythium; and, traversing the whole provinee, 
had destroyed the villages by fire, and the in- 
habitants by the sword. Even these terrible 
ravages did not satisfy his resentment; he de- 
termined, that the invasion of Laconia should 
not be a temporary evil, which the labour of 
years might repair; and for this purpose em- 
ployed an expedient, which, even after he 
might evacuate their country, must leave the 
Lacedemonians exposed to the rage of an im- 
placable enemy. 

We have had occasion to relate 


2, P+ the various fortunes of the Messe- 
A. C. 369. 2ians. About three centuries be- 


fore the period now under review, 


4 Seep. 17. The facts alluded to in the text are related 
in all the panegyrics of Athens, by Plato, Lysias, Isocrates, 
and Thucydides. 

5 This whole transaction is explained in Xenoph. p. 609 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


335 


their city had been demolished by the Spartans; 
their territory had been seized, and divided 
among that people; the ancient inhabitants 
had been reduced into servitude, and compelled 
to cultivate their paternal fields for the benefit 
of eruel masters; or dispersed in miserable 
banishment, over Greece, Italy, and Sicily. 
After two centuries of humiliation and cala- 
mity, the humanity, or perhaps the policy of 
Athens, took compassion on this unfortunate 
race, and settled them in the territory of Nau- 
pactus, and the neighbouring island of Cepha- 
lenia. The Messenians displayed their grati- 
tude by important services during the Pelopon- 
nesian war; but their most vigorous exertions 
could not long retard the deelining fortune of 
Athens. The event of that war rendered Sparta 
the arbiter of Greece; and the Messenians 
were the first objects of her memorable tyranny, 
being universally enslaved, banished, or put to 
death. It is probable that the seattered re- 
mains of this miserable community would flock 
from every quarter to the standard of Epami- 
nondas, rejoicing in an opportunity to retaliate 
the unrelenting perseeution of a people, who 
now suffered the calamities which they had so 
often inflicted. But the general voice of his- 
tory aseribes to Epaminondas the merit of 
assembling the Messenians. It is certain, that 
he rebuilt their city, and put them in possession 
of their territory; an act of generous compas- 
sion which inflicted a most unexpeeted and 
eruel punishment on the Spartans, who beheld 
the ashes of a nation, whieh they had twice 
endeavoured to extinguish, revive and flourish 
in their neighbourhood; continually inerease 
by the accession of Spartan subjects and slaves; 
and, encouraged by a Theban garrison, and 
their own inveterate hostility, watch every 
favourable oceasion to exert the full power of 
their vengeance.’ 

Epaminondas had accomplished this extraor- 
dinary enterprise, when he received intelligence 
of the motions of the Athenian army com- 
manded by Iphierates. That illustrious gene- 
ral had allowed the ardour of his troops to 
evaporate, by pursuing a conduet whieh it is 
impossible, at this distance of time, to explain, 
but which the military historian’ condemns, as 
highly unworthy of his former renown. When 
celerity was of the utmost importance, he 
wasted several precious days at Corinth, with- 
out any necessity, or even pretence, for this 
unseasonable delay. His soldiers loudly de- 
manded to meet the enemy, or even to assault 
the walls of Argos, the strongest and most 
populous city in Peloponnesus, and not inferior 
to Thebes itself in active animosity against their 
common foe. Iphicrates, liowever, embraced 
none of those measures, but led his army to- 
wards Arcadia; expecting, perhaps, what aetu- 
ally happened, that the news of his arrival 
there would deliver Laconia from the hostile 
invader. 

It cannot be imagined, indeed, that Epami- 
nondas feared the issue of an engagement with 


6 Plutarch. in Pelopid. Diodor. l. xv. p. 491. Pausan 
Messen. p. 265. 

7 Diodor. |. xv. c. 16. 

8 Xenoph. l. vi. versus finem 


336 


the Athenians. But he was justly alarmed 
with the interest which even that people had 
taken in the danger of Sparta. The indigna- 
tion and resentment which they, the rivals and 
enemies of the injured, discovered on this occa- 
sion, taught him what sentiments his conduct 
must excite in more impartial states, should he 
persist in his original plan, destroy the Lacede- 
monian capital, and, as tle orator Leptines ex- 
pressed it, “pluck out an eye of Greece.”! 
Many concurring causes tended also to accele- 
rate his departure. The Arcadians were called | 
home to defend their houses and families. The 
Elians and Argives were anxious to secure 
tneir booty by an expeditious retreat. Even 
the Thebans were weary of an expedition 
which had consumed several winter months, a 
season in which they were not accustomed to 
keep the field. Provisions likewise grew scarce; 
and Epaminondas, pressed by difficulties on 
every side, prepared to evacuate the Lacede- 
monian territories; but not (in the words of 
Xenophon) until “every thing of value had 
been consumed or plundergd, poured out, or 
burned down.”? 

At the same time that the Thebans left La- 
conia, Iphicrates withdrew the Athenians from 
the country which they had invaded. The two 
armies filed off, as by mutual consent, and re- 
turned to their respective cities by separate 
roads, without any attempt to interrupt the 
progress of each other. Iphicrates was blamed 
for allowing an enemy, heavy with plunder, 
and exhausted by the fatigue of a winter’s 
campaign, to pass unmolested through the isth- 
mus of Corinth. Pelopidas and Epaminondas 
were accused and tried before the Theban as- 
sembly, for protracting the term of their com- 
mand beyond the time limited by law. The 
former discovered less courage than might have 
been expected from his impetuous and daring 
character. He, who had never feared the 
sword of an enemy, trembled at the angry voice 
of his insolent accusers. But Epaminondas 
displayed, on this occasion, the superiority of 
philosophical firmness, seated in the mind, to 
that constitutional courage which is the result 
of blood and spirits. The latter is sufficient for 
a day of battle; but the former alone can yield 
support in every vicissitude of fortune. 

Instead of observing the formality of a regu- 
lar defence, the illustrious Theban undertook 
the invidious task of pronouncing his own pane- 
gyric.? After relating his exploits, without 
amplification, and without diminution, he con- 
cluded by observing, “that he could submit to 
death without reluctance, secure of immortal 
fame, earned in the service of his country.” 
The seditious demagogues were awed by his 
magnanimity; the anger of the assembly against 
himself and his colleague dissolved in admira- 
tion; and Epaminondas was conducted from 
the tribunal with as much glory as from the 
field of Leuctra. 

From the invasion of Laconia to the general 
engagement at Mantinea, there elapsed six 


EE eee 
1 Aristot. Rhetor. 1. iii. c. 10. 
2 Xenoph. p. 612. 
3 Plut. de a: Laude, p. 540, 


a 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


years of indecisive war and tumultuous activity; 
battles lost and gained, conquests made and 
abandoned, alliances concluded and broken; 
treaties of peace proposed, accepted, and vio- 
lated, by those who felt the unhappy effects of 
dissensions which their rancorous animosity 
was unwilling to terminate. In examining the 
history of this period, we may perceive the same 
confusion in the relation, which appears at first 
sight to have been in the events themselves. It 
is necessary, however, to reduce them into the 
form of a regular narrative. In important con 

cerns, numerous bodies of men, however they 
may act without efiect, cannot be supposed to 
act entirely without design: their motives, un- 
steady and capricious as they often are, form 
the invisible chain which it is the business of 
the historian to investigate and to follow; since 
it is otherwise impossible that the transactions 
which he describes, should afford either real in- 
struction, or any rational entertainment. 

Early in the ensuing spring, the Lacedemo. 
nians, with the few allies who still adhered to 
their cause, despatched an embassy to Athens, 
in order to strengthen the bands of 


eo p : amity and union with that republic. 
A. C. "369. In the conference held for that pur- 


pose, it appeared that the Spartans 
were either very deeply affected by the recent 
obligations conferred on them, or that they very 
earnestly desired the continuance of similar 
favours. They acknowledged that the expe- 
rience, the bravery, the naval victories and for- 
tune of Athens, justly entitled her to the sove- 
reignty of the Grecian seas; and when this 
concession, which had hitherto been withheld 
with such disdain, could not satisfy the more 
patriotic, or rather the less generous, members 
of the assembly, they condescended to grant 
another acknowledgment still more inconsis- 
tent with the pride of their hereditary preten- 
sions; that in such military expeditions as were 
undertaken by the joint forces of both republics, 
the command should be equal and alternate ; 
so that an army of Lacedemonians (a thing 
hitherto unexampled) would be commanded 
during lialf the campaign by Athenian generals. 
Patrocles the Phliasian, whose eloquence and 
address had been distinguished in the former 
negotiation, was not less active in the preseut; 

chiefly by his intervention, matters were finally 
adjusted; an alliance of the most intimate kind 
was concluded between the two republics; and, 

by the assistance of the generous Phliasian, the 
Spartans obtained this important advantage, 
without the disgrace of many ineffectual over- 
tures, or the mortification of long supplicatory 
speeches, which they deemed of all things the 
most grievous. 

The Spartan negotiations, so fortunate in 
Athens, were equally successful with Dionysius 
tyrant of Sicily, and Artaxerxes king of Persia. 
The former, himself a Dorian, naturally la- 
mented the humiliation and distress of a people, 
who, during seven hundred years, had formed 
the principal ornament and defence of the Do- 
rian race; and the latter pursued his ordinary 
system of politics, of assisting the weaker party, 


4 Xenoph. p. 613—616. 


XXXI.| 


in order to balance the contending powers, and 
to perpetuate the hostilities of Greece. 

While the Lacedemonians’ gained strength 
by these important alhances, their enemies took 
the field. The Arcadians began the cainpaign 
by entering the territory of Pallené, an Achzan 
republic, which still remained faithful to Sparta. 
The country was laid waste, the villages burn- 
ed, the city taken by storm, and the garrison, 
consisting of three hundred men, partly Lace- 
demonians, put to the sword. Soon after this 
success, the Arcadians were joined by the 
Elians and Argives. Epaminondas likewise 
marched southward at the head of the Thebans, 
their foot amounting to seven thousand, and 
their cavalry to five hundred. Before he reach- 
ed the Isthmus, the Lacedemonians had been 
reinforced by a body of two thousand Sicilian 
troops, agreeably to their treaty with Diony- 
sius; and the Athenians had taken the field, 
under the command of Chabrias, actually the 
most respected, or at least the most popular, of 
their generals. It was naturally the object of 
the Spartan and Athenian commanders, to pre- 
vent the junction of Epaminondas with his 
southern allies. For this purpose they strongly 
guarded, and even fortified’/the Isthmus; an 
expedient which had not been put in practice 
since the expedition of Xerxes. The Thebans, 
however, broke through, took Sicyon, and as- 
saulted Corinth. But Chabrias, who lappen- 
ed at this time to enjoy tlie alternate command, 
repulsed them with such loss, that Epaminon- 
das judged proper to retire homeward; on 
which account he was blamed and disgraccd 
by his countrymen, who, insolent with pros- 
perity, thought themselves cntitled always to 
conquer. 

The unexpected retreat of the Thebans, of 
which it is not easy to conjecture the real 
cause, occasioned much dissatisfaction among 
‘their confederates, particularly the Arcadians. 
This simple, but warlike people, had obtained 
distinguished honour in several recent expedi- 
tions. They were usually conducted by the 
Mantinzan Lycomedes, a man gallant in enter- 
prise and persevering in execution; rich, noble, 
eloquent, generous, and affable. Under a com- 
mander equally respected and beloved, the Ar- 
cadians found nothing too arduous for their 
courage. In regular engagements, they com- 
monly proved victorious wherever they fought. 
But their principal merit was displayed in am- 
bushes and surprise, and all the dangerous stra- 
tagems of desultory war. When a favourable 
occasion summoned their activity, neither length 
of way, nor difficult mountains, nor storms, 
nor darkness, could interrupt their course, or 
prevent their unexpected assault. Unassisted 
and alone, they had often defeated superior 
strength and numbers; and when, together with 
their Peloponnesian allies, they served under 
the Theban standard, their prowess had bcen 
acknowledged and admired by the united army. 
* The repulse and retreat of Epaininondas gave 


5 The Theban demagogues, as we learn from Diodorus 
and Plutarch, accused Epaminondas of treacherous cor- 
respondence with the enemy, or at east of secretly favour- 
ding their cause; but this is altogether improbable. 

6 Vid. Xenoph. 618, et seq. 


2U 


HISTORY OF GREECE. ' 


337 


relief and splendour to the recent glory of Ar 

cadia, and inspired Lycoinedes with an ambi- 
tion which he easily communicated to his coun- 
trymèn. He told them, * That they were the 
most ancient, the most populous, and surely 
not the least warlike community in Pelopon- 
nesus ; but that they had hitherto neglected to 
profit of the advantages which they possessed. 
In the memorable war of twenty-seven years, 
they had joined with the Lacedamonians, 
whom they had raised to an authority, of 
which the Arcadians, as well as the rest of 
Greece, felt the intolerable oppression. That 
of late years they had acted with the Thebans, 
who, by their assistance chiefly, had attained a 
very alarming degree of power, which they 
occasionally exerted or remitted, as suited their 
own convenience, without the smallest regard 
to the interest of their confederates. If this 
power should be increased, inight not the yoke 
of Thebes become as grievous as that of Sparta? 
It was time for the Arcadians to know their 
own worth; to disdain following the standard 
of any foreign state ; and not only to vindicate 
their freedoin, hut to claim their just pre-emi- 
nence.” The assembly applauded the manly? 
resolution of Lycomedes; and, in order to ren- 
der it effectual, determined to keep possession 
of such places as they had taken from the La- 
cedemonians or their allies in Elis and Achaia, 
and to complete their conquests in these and 
the neighbouring provinces of Pcloponnesus, 

For several months they met with 


ee little interruption in this design, 
rere "367 the Spartans, after the departure 


of their auxiliaries, not venturing 
to take the field until the beginning of the en- 
suing year, when they received a new supply 
of troops from Dionysius, and both troops’ and 
money from Artaxerxes. The Theban arms 
were actually employed in Thessaly and Ma- 
cedon, as we shall have occasion hereafter to 
relate; so that every circumstance conspired to 
hasten the march of Agesilaus and the Lace- 
demonians. But the infirmities incident to old 
age made him decline the command, which was 
entrusted to his son Archidamus; his colleague 
Agesipolis not possessing great abilities either 
for war or government. : 

The rapid success of Archidamus, who scem- 
ed destined to restore the declining fortune of 
Sparta, justified the prudent choice of the ma- 
gistrates and pcople. He expelled the hostile 
garrisons from the inferior cities of Laconia, 
stormed Carye, and put the rebellious inhabit- 
ants to the sword. From thence he hastened 
to Aacadia, laid waste tle southern frontier of 
that province, and prepared to attack the po- 
pulous city of Parrhasia, when the united 
strength of the Arcadians, commanded by Ly- 
comedes, and reinforced by the Argives, ap- 
proached to its relief. Their arrival made Ar- 
chidamus withdraw to the hills that overhang the 
obscure village of Midea. While he encamped 
there, Cissidas, who commandcd the Sicilians, 
declared that the time limited for his absence 


7 Xenophon’s expression is lively; xæs povov avdges 
nyouvres, thinking him the on/y man.” L. vii. p. 618. 

8 These were not Persians, but ¢evixos, “ Greek merce- 
narices.” Xenoph. l. vii. p. 619 


338 


was expired, and, without waiting an answer, 
ordered his forces to prepare their baggage, and 
to march towards Laconia. But the nearest 
passage into that country had been seized by 
the Messenians. In this difficulty Cissidas ap- 
plied to Archidamus, who hastened to his de- 
fence. The Arcadians and Argives at the same 
time decamped. The hostile armies encounter- 
ed near the joining of tle two roads which led 
towards Sparta from Midea and Eutresios. As 
soon as Archidamus beheld the enemy prepared 
for an engagement, he commanded the Spar- 
tans to form, and when they were ready to ad- 
vance, addressed them as follows: “ Fellow 
citizens and friends! if we are still brave, we 
may look forward with confidence; we may 
yet retrieve our affairs, and deliver down the 
republic to posterity as we received it from our 
ancestors. Let us strive, then, by one glorious 
effort, to recover our hereditary renown; and 
let us cease being the reproach (instead of what 
the Spartans once were, the ornament and de- 
fence) of our friends, our parents, our families, 
and our country.” 

While he yet spoke, it thundered on the right, 
though the day was clear and serene. The sol- 
diers, roused by the noise, looked towards the 
direction from which it came, and beheld, in a 
consecrated grove at no great distance, an altar 
and statue of Hercules, the great progenitor of 
Archidamus and the Spartan kings. Animated 
by the wonderful concurrence of such auspicious 
circumstances, they were transported with an 
enthusiasm of valour, and impetuously rushed 
against their opponents, in full confidence of 
victory. The enemy, who thought they had 
to do with a vanquished and spiritless people, 
were astonished at their mien and aspect as 
they advanced to the attack. The few who 
waited their approach, were totally destroyed ; 
many thousands perished in the pursuit; it is 
said by ancient historians,' that the Spartans 
lost not aman. Archidamus erected a trophy, 
and despatched a messenger to Sparta. The 
people were assembled, when he communicated 
his extraordinary intelligence. The aged Age- 
silaus shed tears of joy. The ephori and sena- 
tors sympathised with the emotions of their 
king. The patriotic weakness was communi- 
cated from breast to breast; the amiable con- 
tagion spread; the sternest members of this 
numerous assembly dissolved in softness, and 
melted in sensibility.? 

The Spartans were prevented from reaping 
the full fruits of this victory, by a considerable 
reinforcement which the Arcadians soon after- 
wards received from Thebes. By the assistance 
of these troops, the Menalians and Parrhasians, 
who, from their situation on the southern fron- 
tier of Arcadia, were most exposed to the in- 
cursions of the enemy, found means to exe- 
cute a design said to have been formerly sug- 
gested by Epaminondas. They abandoned 
twenty straggling and defenceless villages; and 
choosing an advantageous situation in the 
centre of their territory, erected a fortress there, 


1 Xenoph. 1. vii. p. 620. Diodor. et Plut. ubi supra. 

2 Xenoph. ibid. He observes, cvrw xosvov ri wow yaga 
zas Avry, Saxeua ertev, “So common are tears to joy 
and sorrow.” 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| Ciap. 


which they surrounded with a strong wall. 
The benefit of security attracted new inhabit- 
ants; the walls were extended; the place ac- 
quired the magnificent name of Megalopolis,? 
the last city built by the Greeks, while they 


-preserved the dignity of independent govern- 


ment.4 

The temporary success of the Spartans un- 
der Archidamus, which is generally ascribed to 
the valour of that commander, was principally 
occasioned by the withdrawing from Pelopon- 
nesus, at a very critical juncture, the numerous 
army of Thebes, which was at that time called 
northward, in order to take an important and 
honourable part in the affairs of Macedon and 
Thessaly. Since the atrocious murder of the 
heroic Jason, the latter kingdom had been af- 
flicted by a continued train of crimes and dis- 
orders. Just gratitude and respect towards the 
memory of their generous and warlike chief, 
engaged the Thessalians to perpetuate the ho- 
nours of his family. He was succeeded by his 
brothers Polydore and Polyphron; of whom 
the latter, not being able to endure the restraint 
of a limited, much less of a divided rule, at- 
tained, by the assassination of his colleague, 
the sole dominion of Thessaly. His stern 
despotism was abolished by the hand of Alex- 
ander, who avenged the blood of his kinsman$ 
Polydore, the only meritorious action of his 
life. For Alexander (as his character is re- 
presented to us) exceeded the cruelties of Po- 
lyphron, and of all the detested tyrants that 
have ever been condemned to the infamy of 
history. The Thessalians were delivered from 
such a monster by the domestic conspiracy of 
his wife Thebé, the daughter of Jason, and her 
brothers Tisiphonus, Pitholaus, and Lycophron; 
who governed with precarious sway, till the 
power and address of Philip destroyed their 
usurpation, and rendered their distracted coun- 
try, which seemed incapable of freedom, 2 
province of Macedonia. Such, in few words, 
were the revolutions of Thessaly; but the 
bloody reign of Alexander demands more par- 
ticular attention, being connected with the ge- 
neral revolutions of Greece. 

A cautious’ reader will always receive, with 
some distrust, the accounts transmitted by an- 
cient republicans of the lives and actions of 
tyrants. The popular histories of Alexander 
remind us of the fanciful descriptions of Busi- 
ris or Pygmalion. Yet it cannot be doubted 
that the tyrant of Thessaly was cruel to his 
subjects, perfidious to his allies, implacable to 
his enemies, a robber by land, and a pirate at 
sea:’ but that it was his usual diversion to 
bury men alive, to enclose them in the skins of 


3 “The great city.” 

4 I have melted together Pausanias in Beotic. and Dio 
dorus, l. xv. p. 384. but followed the chronology of the latter 

5 His brother, uncle, or father, according to different au 
thors. 

6 The acceptation of the word tyrant in Greek history’ 
is well known. The Greeks called tugevvo:, “tyrants,” 
those who had acquired sovereignty in states formerly re- 
publican. Thessaly, Sicily, Corinth, &c. were governed, 
not by Bzercdess, but ruezvvos, “ not by kings, but tyrants ; 
whereas Macedonia, which had never been subject to any 
species of popular government, was ruled, not by tugavvos, 
but SzcsAess “ not by tyrants, but kings.” 

7 These are the works of Xenophon, p. 601. 


XXXL] 


wild beasts, as a prey to ravenous dogs, to mu- 
tilate and torture children in the presence of 
their parents, can scarcely be reconciled with 
his shedding tears for the imaginary sufferings 
of Hecuba and Andromaché, during the repre- 
sentation of the Troades.2 It is true, that he 
is said to have been ashamed of this weakness, 
and to have left the theatre with confusion ; 
but what could have engaged a monster, such 
as Alexander is described, to listen to the pa- 
thetic strains of the tender Euripides? What 
pleasure, or what pain, could a tyger, thirsting 
for human blood, receive from such an enter- 
tainment? Although we abstract from his story 
many incredible fictions, Alexander miglit well 
deserve the resentment of the Thessalians. His 


‘injured subjects took arms, and solicited thie 


protection of Thebes, whose justice or ambi- 
tion readily embraced their cause. As Epami- 
nondas still continued under the displeasure of 
his country, the Theban army was conducted 
by Pelopidas and Ismenias. Their arrival 
struck terror into the conscious breast of the 
tyrant, who, without daring to trust his defence 
to the numerous guards and mercenaries by 
whom his usurpation was supported, implored 
the elemency of the Theban generals, submit- 
ting to the most humiliating conditions which 
their wisdom might judge proper to exact for 
the future security of his subjects.!0 

This transaction was searcely 


en ended, when the Thebans, whose 
e reputation and success rendered 


them the most proper mediators in 
the affairs of their neighbours, were invited 
into Macedon, which, since the death of Amyn- 
tas II. had been a prey, during six years, to all 
the ealamities of a disputed succession. Amyn- 
tas left three legitimate sons, Alexander, Per- 
diccas, and Philip, and a natural son, Ptolemy, 
whose intrigues chiefly oceasioned the disorders 
of the kingdom. He eould not prevent the 
accession of Alexander to the throne, as that 
prince had attained the age of manhood at the 
time of his father’s death. But he imbittered 
and shortened his reign, which lasted only one 
year; after whieh Ptolemy assumed the reins 
of government, as guardian of the minority of 
Perdiccas, and protector of Macedon. It soon 
appeared, however, that his ambition would not 
rest satisfied with the borrowed power of a re- 
gent. He gained a eonsiderable party to his 
interest, baffled the opposition of Perdiccas’s 
partisans, and boldly usurped the sovereignty. 
The friends of that unfortunate prince had rc- 
eourse to the justice and power of Thebes. Pe- 
lopidas entered Macedon at the hcad of his 
army; restored the numcrous exiles whom 
Ptolemy had banished ; asserted tlic just rights 
of Perdiceas to the throne; and, after rccciv- 
ing hostages from the contending factions, 
among whom was Philip, the younger brother 
of Perdiecas, afterwards king of Macedon, and 
conqueror of Grcece, returned towards Thes- 
saly, having finally re-established the tranquil- 
lity of the neighbouring kingdom.!! 


8 Plut. in Pelopid. 

9 Plut. de Fort. Alexand. 

1M Diodor. l. xv. c. xvir. and Plut. in Pelopid. 
11 Ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


339 


on In his journey through a country 
ae 4 ‘where he had so lately acted the 
A © 364 part of a judge and master, it seem- 
pe * ed as if little danger could reason- 
ably be apprehended. Pelopidas had sent before 
him a considerable detachment of his army, to 
conduct the Macedonian hostages towards 
Thebes. With the remainder he marched se- 
curely through the territory of his Thessalian 
confedcrates, when he was informed that Alex- 
ander had come to meet him at the head of his 
mercenaries. Even this suspicious circumstance 
could not undeceive the sanguine credulity of 
the Theban chief. He imagined that the ty- 
raht had taken this measure in order to show 
him respect, and to justify himself against some 
recent eomplaints of his injured subjects. With 
an imprudence which all historians agree to 
condemn,!2 both Pelopidas and Ismenias threw 
themselves into the hands of a traitor, who 
gloried in despising laws human and divine. 
They were instantly seized by his order, carried 
to Phere, bound, imprisoned, and exposed to 
the insulting eyes of an invidious multitude. 

It might be expected that the Theban soldiers 
should have been animated with indignation and 
rage at the unexampled treatment of their be- 
loved chiefs. But their numbers were too small 
to contend with the Thessalian merccnaries; 
and when a powerful reinforcement arrived 
from Beotia, they fatally experienced, in the 
first encounters with the enemy, the absence of 
Pelopidas, and the degradation of his magnani- 
mous friend. The army was reduced to the 
utmost difficulties, encompassed on every side, 
unwilling to fight, and unable to fly. The 
troops justly accused the inexperience of their 
commanders, remembering their glorious cam- 
paigns’in the Peloponnesus, where they con- 
tended with far more formidable enemies, 
Epaminondas, who had commanded tlem on 
those memorable occasions, actually served in 
the ranks. The soldiers with one accord 
saluted him general. The singular abilities of 
thiscxtraordinary man soon changed the posture 
of affairs; the tyrant was defeated in his turn, 
and compelled to retire. Epaminondas, instead 
of pushing him to extremity, which might have 
turned his desperate fury against the valuable 
lives of the Theban prisoners, hovered round 
with a victorious army, ostentatiously displayed 
the advantages of military skill and conduet; 
and whilc he kept Alexander in continual re- 
spect and fcar, yet left him sufficient time 
for repentance and submission. This judieious 
plan of operations was attended with success. 
The tyrant implored peace; but he only rc- 
ceived a truee of thirty days, on condition of 
restoring the persons of Pciopidas and Isme- 
nias.!3 

Those who love to find in history events ex- 
traordinary and romantic, would not easily ex- 
eusc my omitting to mention the interview of 
Pclopidas, during his imprisonment, with the 


12 Besides Diodorus and Plutarch, the sage Polybius se- 
verely arraigns the imprudent confidence of Pelopidas. 
Polyb. Casaub. t. ii. p. 98. Polybius in that passage speaks 
of the expedition as an embassy. I have carefully com- 
pared the different writers, and adopted tbe account that 
seemed most probable and consistent. 

13 Plut. in Pelopid. et Diodorus, ibid. 


340 


Thessalian queen. The daughter of the heroic 
Jason united the beauty of the one sex with the 
courage of the other, and was beloved by ‘her 
husband with such love as a tyrant can feel, 
which is always corrupted by suspicion. At 
her earnest and repeated entreaties, Thebé was 
dermitted to see, and converse with, the Theban 
~aneral, whose merit and fame she had long 
admired. But his appearance did not answer 
her expectation. At beholding his neglected 
and squalid figure, she was seized with an emo- 
tion of pity, and exclaimed, “How much, 
Pelopidas, do I lament your wife and family.” 
“You, Thebé! are more to be lamented,” 
replied the Theban hero, “ who, without being 
a prisoner, continue the voluntary slave of a 
perfidious and cruel tyrant.” The expression 
is said to have sunk deep into the heart of the 
queen, who remembered the reproach of Pelo- 
pidas, when ten years afterwards, she support- 
ed the courage, and urged the hand, of the as- 
sassins of Alexander.! But this moral narra- 
tive, however strongly authenticated, cannot be 
attentively read without occasioning some de- 
gree of scepticism concerning the history of Al- 
exander. Had he been the monster which re- 
sentment or credulity has taken pleasure to de- 
lineate, who never entered the apartment of 
his wife without an armed attendant, who slept 
in a lofty inaccessible tower, to which he 
mounted by a ladder, and which was guarded 
by a fierce dog,? it is incredible that he should 
have permitted an interview between a secret 
and open enemy. 

Nor will it be easy to reconcile with the 
fierceness of the Thessalian, another anecdote, 
which has probably been invented to display the 
magnanimity of Pelopidas, but which displays 
still more strongly the patience of Alexander. 
During the confinement of the former at Phere, 
the latter is said to have exceeded his usual 
cruelties towards the inhabitants of that city. 
Pelopidas consoled their affliction, and encou- 
raged them to hope for vengeance. He even 
sent to reproach the absurdity of the tyrant, in 
destroying daily so many innocent men, from 
whom he had nothing to fear, while he allowed 
an enemy to live, who would employ the first 
moment of freedom to punish his manifold 
enormities. “ And is Pelopidas so desirous to 
die?” was the answer of the Thessalian. 
“Yes,” replied the prisoner, “that you may 
the sooner perish, having rendered yourself 
still more obnoxious to gods and men.” The 
resentment of Pelopidas, if ever it was ex- 
pressed, proved an empty boast; for imme- 
diately after his deliverance, the Theban army 
was, for very urgent reasons, withdrawn from 
Thessaly. 

The Theban expedition in the 
north had allowed the Spartans, in 
some degree, to recover their in- 
fluence in the south of Greece. 


Olymp. 
ciii, 2. 
A. C. 367. 


1 Xenoph. p. 601. 

2 Cicero de Offic. 1.2. Plut. in Pelopid. But the story, 
as related by Xenophon, is divested of such impropable 
fictions; and Xenophon seems hardly to believe all he re- 
lates. He says, Acyetss umo Tivev,—and repeats that it 
was a hear say, a few sentences below. 

3 Plutarch. in Pelopid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap, 


Archidamus had obtained a complete victory 
over the Arcadians, the bravest and most pow 
erful of the confederates. The crafty: Antal- 
cidas, with Euthycles,5 a Spartan of abilities 
and intrigue, had been sent as ambassadors to 
Persia, in order to hasten the supplies of troops, 
or money, expected from that country. It was 
time for Thebes to assert her interest in the 
Peloponnesus, and to counteract the dangerous 
negotiations of her enemies with Artaxerxes. 
Epaminondas, whose recent and illustrious 
merit had silenced the unjust clamours of fac- 
tion, was confirmed in his military command ; 
and Pelopidas, whose unfortunate adventure in 
Thessaly was ascribed less to his own impru- 
dence than to the treachery of Alexander, was 
despatched to the East, as the person best quali- 
fied to conduct a negotiation with the ministers 
of the great king. He was accompanied by the 
ambassadors of Elis, Argos,and Arcadia; those 
of Athens followed soon afterwards; so that 
there appeared, for the first time, a general 
congress of the Grecian states, to settle and ad- 
just their interests at the court of a foreign 
prince. It might be expected, that a scene so 
new and interesting should have excited the 
attention of historians; yet they have left us 
ignorant in what city of his dominions Ar- 
taxerxes received the Greeks. At their arrival, 
the king treated Antalcidas with that partial 
kindness due to an ancient guest and favourite; 
but at their public audience, the appearance, the 
fame, and the eloquence of Pelopidas, more 
majestic than that of Athens, more nervous 
than that of Sparta,® entitled him to a just 
preference, which the king, whose rank and 
temper alike disdained restraint, was at no pains 
to conceal. 

The Theban represented, that in the battle 
of Platæa, fought above a century ago, and ever 
since that memorable engagement, his country 
men had uniformly adhered to the interest of 
Persia, at the risk of losing whatever men hold 
most precious. Thatthe dangerous war in which 
they were actually engaged. had been occasioned 
by their open and steady opposition to the mea- 
sures of the Spartans, previous to their destruc- 
tive invasions of Asia. The imperious pride of 
Agesilaus could never forget the affront offered 
him at Aulis, when, in imitation of Agamem- 
non, he intended to offer sacrifice before his 
embarkation. He had begun hostilities without 
justice, and carried them on without success. 
The field of Leuctra had been alike fatal to the 
strength and glory of Sparta; nor would that 
ambitious republic have reason to boast of its 
recent success in Arcadia, if, at that unfortu- 
nate juncture, the Thebans had not been pre- 
vented, by reasons equally important and ho- 
nourable, from assisting their Peloponnesian 
confederates. Timagoras the Athenian, guided 
by motives which ancient’ history has not con- 


4 Plut. in Artaxerx. 5 Xenoph. Hellen. 

6 Plut. in Pelopid. 

7 The extraordinary behaviour of Timagoras deserves 
attention. He co-operated with the enemy of his coun- 
try, and the ambassador of a state actually at war with 
it. We may guess his motives by his rewards. He re- 
ceived from the king of Persia, at his departure, gold and 
silver, and other valuable presents, particulary a bed of cn- 


Í rious covstruction, with Persian slaves to make it, the 


XXXL] 


descended to explain, seconded, with vigour 
and address, the arguments of the illustrious 
Theban. In vain did Leon, the colleague of 
Timagoras, remonstrate against his perfidy. 
The other deputies were confounded by his im- 
pudence; and before they had time to express 
their astonishment and indignation, the king 
desired Pelopidas to explain the object of his 
commission, and the demand of his countrymen. 
The Theban replied, that he had been sent to 
propose and ratify a treaty between his republic 
and Persia, on conditions equally advantageous 
to both, since the carrying of them into execu- 
tion would destroy the power of those states 
which had hitherto occasioned so much dis- 
turbance and danger to all their neighbours. 
His proposals were, that the Athenians should 
be commanded to lay up their fleet, and that 
the fertile country of Messenia should be de- 
clared totally independent of Sparta. If any 
opposition to the treaty were made by these 
powers, that war should be levied against them 
by Persia, Thebes, and their allies; and if the 
inferior cities of Greece declined to engage in 
so just a cause, that their obstinacy should be 
punished with an exemplary severity. The 
king approved these articles, which were imme- 
diately consigned to writing, confirmed by the 
royal seal, and read aloud to the ambassadors. 
On hearing the clause which related to Athens, 
Leon exclaimed, with the freedom peculiar to 
his country, “ The Athenians, it seems, must 
look out for some other ally, instead of the king 
of Persia.” After this daring threat, the am- 
bassadors took leave, and returned to Greece 
with all -possible expedition.’ 

Pelopidas was accompanied by a Persian of 
distinction, entrusted with the instrument, con- 
taining the treaty. On his arrival in Thebes, 
the people were immediately assembled, and be- 
ing acquainted with the happy fruits of his em- 
bassy, they commended his diligence and dex- 
terity. Without losing a day, messengers were 
despatched to demand the attendance of repre- 
sentatives from the Grecian states, whose inter- 
ests were allalike concerned in the late important 
negotiation. It does not appear that either 
Athens or Sparta condescended to obey the sum- 
mons. The convention, however, was very 
numerous. The Persian read the treaty, showed 
the king’s scal, and, in the name of his master, 
required the agreement to be ratificd with the 
formality of oaths usually employed on such oc- 


Greeks being little acquainted with that operation, and he 
was carried ina sedan to the sea shore at the King’s ex- 
pense. Yet this man had the effrontery to return to Athens, 
and to appear in the public assembly. He knew the force 
of eloquence and intrigue cver the capricious minds of his 
countrymen; he knew that the practice of receiving bribes 
was so usual, that the Athenians had lost the proper sense 
of its baseness. Ile perhaps remembered the pleasant pro- 
posal of Epicrates, that instead of nine Archons, the Athe- 
nians should annually elect nine ambassadors, chosen from 
the poorest citizens, who might return rich from Persia. 
Epierates had acquired a very undue proportion of wealth 
‘oy this infamous means, as we learn from an oration of 
Lysias. Yet the Athenians were less indignant at his guilt, 
than delighted with his humour. Timagoras, however, was 
snot so fortunate; he was accused by his colleague Leon, 
and condemned to death, not, if we m y credit Plutareh, 
because lie had betrayed his trust, and accepted bribes, but 
because the Athenians were extremely displeased that Pe- 
lopidas had effected the object of his commission at the 
Persian court. Plut. in Pelopid. 
8 Xenoph. p 621, et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


341 


casions. The representatives almost unani- 
mously declared that they had bcen sent to hear, 
not to swear; and that before the treaty could 
be ratified by general consent, its conditions 
must be previously discussed in the particular 
assembly of each independent republic. Such 
was the firm, but moderate answer of the other 
deputies; but the high-spirited Lycomedes went 
farther than his colleagues. His friend and 
countryman, Antiochus, who had lately acted 
as the ambassador of Arcadia at the Persian 
court, returned disgusted by the contempt shown 
towards his country by the great king, who 
hesitated not to prefer Elis to Arcadia. In 
giving an account of lis embassy to the Ten 
Thousand (the name usually bestowed on the 
Arcadians since the re-union of their tribes in 
Mantinea and Megalopolis,) he indulged him- 
self in many contumelious expressions against 
Artaxerxes and his subjects, which were 
greedily listened to by the resentment and envy 
of his hearers. ‘ Neither the wealth nor the 
power of the great king were so great in reality 
as flattery and falsehood represented them. 
The golden plane-tree, which had often been so 
ostentatiously described, could scarce afford 
shade to a grasshopper. He himself had been 
an attentive observer; yet all he could find in 
Persia was the idle retinue of vice and luxury, 
bakers, butlers, and cooks, a useless and servile 
train; but men fit to contend with the Greeks, 
he neither himself saw, nor thought it possible 
for others to discover.” The proud disdain of 
Antiochus had been communicated entire to the 
breast of Lycomedes. He declared, that Ar- 
cadia needed not any alliance with the great 
king ; and that were such a matter in agitation, 
Thebes would not be the proper place to de- 
termine it, since every convention tending to a 
general peace ought to be held in that country 
which had been the principal scene of war. 
The Theban magistrates discovered the min- 
gled symptoms of disappointment, indignation, 
grief, and rage. They accused Lycomedes as 
a traitor to Thebes, and an enemy to his coun- 
try ; but he despised their empty clamours, and, 
without deigning an answer, walked from the 
assembly, and was followed by all the deputics 
of Arcadia. Notwithstanding this severe mor- 
tification, the Thebans did not abandon the am- 
bitious project at which they had long aimed. 
Nothing’ favourable, they perccived, could be 
expected in the general congress of the states, 
so that they allowed the assembly to break up. 
without insisting farther on their demands. 
But at the distance of a short time, they rc- 
newed the same proposal to the several repub- 
lics, beginning with Corinth, one of the weakest, 
yet most wealthy, in hopes that whatever op- 
position the overtures of the king of Persia, 
and their own, had found in the united strength 
and confidence of the assembled confederacy, 
few single states at least would venture to pro- 
voke the indignation of such powerful adver- 
sarics. But in this, too, they were disappointed. 
The Corinthians declined entering into any 
alliance with the king of Persia, and sct his 
power at defiance. The magnanimous cxam- 
ple was imitated by their neighbours; the 
secret practices of the Thebans were equally 


342 


fruitless with their open declarations and de- 
mands. : 
Epaminondas encouraged his coun- 


Olymp. trymen to acquire, by arms, that 
pile pre-eminence which they had vainly 
AnmGaS6s. 


expected to obtain by negotiation. 
His renown, justly increased by the recent 
transactions in Thessaly, rendered his influence 
irresistible. He was again entrusted with the 
command of a powerful army, with which, for 
the third time, he invaded the Peioponnesus. 
The Elians and Arcadians, though hostile to 
each other, were alike disposed for rebellion 
„against Thebes; but instead of marching into 
their territories, a measure which might have 
engaged them to settle their private differences, 
and to unite against the common enemy, Epa- 
minondas endeavoured to quash their disaffec- 
tion by the rapid conquest of Achaia, which, 
stretching along the Corinthian gulf, skirted the 
northern frontiers of Elis and Arcadia. From 
the nature of their government the Achzans 
usually enjoyed more tranquillity than their 
neighbours. They possessed not any great 
town, whose needy and turbulent inhabitants, 
seduced by popular demagogues, could rouse 
the whole province to arms and ambition. To- 
wards the east and the isthmus of Corinth, the 
cities of Sicyon and Phlius had long been re- 
garded as separate republics, unconnected with 
the general body of the Achzan nation. Ægium 
enjoyed the prerogative of constituting the 
usual place of convention for the states of 
Achaia; but Dymé, Tirtea, and Pellené, 
scarcely yielded to Ægium in populousness and 
power, and seem, with several places of infe- 
rior note, to have formed so many separate and 
independent communities, all alike subject to 
the same equitable system of Achæan laws. 
Immediately before the Theban invasion the 
aristocracy had acquired an undue weight in 
the constitution of Achaia, so that the princi- 
pal nobles and magistrates were no sooner in- 
formed of the approach of an enemy, than they 
flocked from all quarters of the province to 
meet Epaminondas, soliciting lis favour and 
friendship, and little anxious about the inde- 
pendence of their country, provided they might 
preserve their personal privileges and private 
fortunes. The people perceiving themselves 
betrayed by those who ought to have been 
their protectors, abandoned all thoughts of re- 
sistance. Epaminondas accepted the submis- 
sion of the magistrates, and received pledges 
of their engagement, that Achaia should thence- 
forth adhere to the interest of Thebes, and fol- 
low the standard of that republic.) 

This conquest, which was effected without 
striking a blow, and without producing any in- 
ternal revolution of government, was destruc- 
tive and bloody in its consequences. Epami- 
nondas, for reasons not sufficiently explained, 
returned with his army to Thebes; but before 
he arrived there, various complaints against his 
conduct had been made in the Theban assem- 
bly. The Arcadians and Argives complained, 
that a people, who knew by their own recent 
experience the inconveniences of aristocracy, 


rr a eee 


Xenoph. p. 622. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap, 


should have confirmed that severe form of go- 
vernment in a dependent province. The de- 
mocratic faction in Achaia secretly sent emis- 
saries to second the complaint. The enemies 
of Epaminondas seized the favourable oppor- 
tunity of accusing and calumniating that illus- 
trious commander, and the capricious multitude 
were persuaded to condemn his proceedings, 
and to send commissioners into Achaia, who, 
with the assistance of the populace, as well as 
of a considerable body of mercenaries, dissolved 
the aristocracy, banished or put to death the 
nobles, and instituted a democratic form of 
policy. The foreign troops had scarcely left 
that country, when the exiles, who were ex- 
tremely numerous and powerful, returned with 
common consent, and, after a bloody and des- 
perate struggle, recovered their ancient influ- 
ence in their respective cities. The leaders of 
the populace were now, in their turn, put to 
death or expelled; the aristocracy was re-es- 
tablished; and the magistrates, knowing that 
it was dangerous to depend on the unsteady 
politics of Thebes, craved the protection of 
Sparta, which was readily granted them. The 
Achæans approved their gratitude by ravaging 
the northern, while the Lacedemonians infest- 
ed the southern frontier of Arcadia; and that 
unhappy province felt and regretted the incon- 
venience of its situation between two impla- 
cable enemies. 


Sicyon, though governed by the 


pe Pi Achæan laws, did not follow, on 
ae "366 this occasion, the example of its 


neighbours, That unfortunate city, 
which had long been the seat of luxury and 
the arts, was reserved for peculiar calamities. 
Euphron, a bold, crafty, and ambitious dema- 
gogue, having already acquired great credit 
with the Lacedemonians, was desirous of ob- 
taining equal consideration among the enemies 
of that people, hoping, by so many foreign con- 
nections, to render himself absolute master of 
his little republic. For this purpose he secretly 
reminded the Arcadians and Argives, that 
“ Sicyon, having the same laws and govern- 
ment, would naturally embrace the same alli- 
ance with the neighbouring cities; but the dan- 
ger of this event he would undertake to re- 
move, with very slender assistance from Argos 
and Arcadia.” The admonition was not lost; 
a body of armed men arrived at Sicyon; Eu- 
phron assembled the people; the government 


° . 4 
was changed; new magistrates were appointed, 


and Euphron was entrusted with the command 
of the national force, consisting chiefly of mer- 
cenaries. Having obtained this, he obtained 
all. By caresses, bribes, and flattery, the troops 
were gained over to his party, and became at- 
tached to his person. His colleagues in the 
government were removed by secret treachery 
or open violence. His private enemies were 
held the enemies of the state, accused, con- 
demned, and banished; and their confiscated 
estates augmented the wealth of Euphron, 
whose rapacity knew no bounds, sparing nei- 
ther the property of individuals nor the public 
treasury, nor the consecrated gold and silver 


2 Xenoph. p. 623. 


~ 


XXXI.] 


which adorned the temples of Sicyon. 
sums amassed by such impious means enabled 
lim to confirm his usurpation. He augmented 
' the number of his mercenary guards, whi, 
while they oppressed the republic, were useful 
auxiliaries to the Argives and Arcadiaus. What- 
ever these nations thought proper to command, 
the soldiers of Euphron were ready to obey; 
and partly by this alacrity in their service, 
partly by bribing? the principal men in Argos 
and Arcadia, the crafty tyrant expected to pre- 
vent those neighbouring communities from in- 
terfering in the domestic affairs of Sicyon. 
Such was the venality and corruption of the 
Greeks, that this detestable policy was attended 
with success, until Æneas, the Stymphialian, 
obtained the command of the Areadians, This 
man, availing himself of the vicinity of Sicyon 
to Stymphalus, the place of his birth and resi- 
dence, had formed a connection with the op- 
pressed citizens of the former. Æneas, per- 
laps, had not sufficiently shared the largesses 


of Euphron; perhaps the humanity of his na- | 


turet lamented the sufferings of the Sicyonians. 
Whatever was his motive, it is certain that he 
endeavoured to expel their tyrant, and to re- 
store their liberty. oO 

Euphron, however, had the dexterity to en- 
gage successively in his favour the Lacede- 
monians, Athenians, and Thebans. He spared 
neither pains, nor promises, nor bribes. He 
was conimonly his own ambassador; and his 
activity and abilities must have risen far above 
the ordinary pitch, to engage the principal 
states of Greece, one after another, to support, 
in direct opposition to their principles, the ty- 
ranny of a single man. Insurrections at home, 
and hostilities from abroad, at length occasion- 
ed his downfall. He escaped to Thebes with 
the greatest part of his treasure. His enemies 
sent proper persons to counteract his intrigues 
there. The money, however, and the address 
of Euphron, prevailed with the Theban ma- 
gistrates, and he expected to be restored in tri- 
umph by the Thebans, as he had already been 
by the Athenians. 
followed him to Thebes, perceiving his famili- 
arity® with the principal inen of that city, had 
recourse to the only expedient that seemed ca- 
pable of frustrating his designs, and assassinat- 
ed Euphron in the Cadmza, while the The- 
ban archons and senators were assembled within 
the walls of that edifice.é 

Tlie murderers were seized, and the atrocity, 
as well as the indignity of their crime, was 
strongly represented to the senate by one of 
the archons, who probably regretted the death 
of Euphron, as the loss of a wealthy client. 
The criminals denied the fact, till one, bolder 
than the rest, not only avowed but justified the 
assassination as equally lawful, advantageous, 
and honourable. And so little horror do men 
feel at crimes which prevail in their own age, 


3 Tx pev roi xxi xenmars Sisreurrero. Xenoph. p. 624. 

4 Xenophon seems to approve this reason. He says 
Æneas, the Stymphalian, voxiræç oux avexrwo exerv Tx ev 
Zıxvwvi. “ Thinking the grievauces of the Sicyonians in- 
lerable.”” 

5 Qo St ewewv aurov OIXESwG ToWg aexyours TuvovTe. 
Xenoph. p. 630. 

6 Xenoph. l. vii p. 630. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


But the Sicyonians, who | 


t 
343 


The jand with which thcir fancies are familiar, that 


the assassins were pnanimously acquitted by 
the Theban senate, whose award was approved 
by the assembly.? 

Mean while the war languished 


Olymp. on both sides, and the hostile con- 
ell. 3. federacies were on the point of be- 
A. C. 366. P 


ing dissolved. The Athenians and 
Areadians, equally disgusted with their respec- 
tive allies, concluded a treaty of peace and mu- 
tual defence, by the intervention of Lycomedes 
the Mantinæan, who was slain in his return 
from Athens by a party of Arcadian exiles. 
This negotiation gave general alarm; the Ar- 
cadians, who had entered into treaty with 
Athens, were the allies of Thebes; and the 
united strength of these three republics was at 
that time sufficient to subdue and enslave the 
rest of Greece. The terror was increased 
when it appeared that the Athenians had little 
inclination to evacuate several places in the 
Corinthian territory which they had under- 
taken to defend against the Arcadanians and 
Thebans. By seasonable vigilance the Corin- 
thians anticipated a design, too unjust to be 
publicly avowed; they cautiously dissembled 
their fears; graciously thanked Chares, who 
had arrived with an Athenian fleet on pretence 
of offering them his service, but took care not 
to admit him within their harbours; and by 
extreme kindness and condescension, accom- 
panied with warm professions of gratitude for 
the protection hitherto afforded them, they got 
rid of the foreign garrisons, without coming to 
an open rupture with the Athenians. But the 
narrow escape which they had made, and the 
dread of being exposed in future to any similar 


danger, made them extremely solicitous to pro- 


mote a gencral peace on the terms proposed by 
Artaxerxes and the Thebans. Motives of the 
same kind influenced the cities of Achaia, and 
the little republic of Phlius, which, together 
with Corinth, were the only allies that remain- 
ed faithful to Sparta. A similarity of interests 
occasioned & close communication of views and 
measures among all those communities; who 
agreed, by comimon consent, to despatch an 
embassy to Sparta, requesting that she would 
accept the conditions of peace lately offered by 
Thebes, or if she thought it inconsistent ` 
with honour to cede her just pretensions to 
Messené, that she would allow her faithful but 
helpless allies to enter into a separate negotia- 
tion with the Theban republic. 

The reasonableness, and even modesty, of 
this request must have been apparent to the 
Spartans, when they reflected on the useful 
services of the allies, and considered how much 
they had already suffered in their cause. The 
Phliasians, in particular, had, during five years, 
given such illustrious proofs of their unshaken 
adherence to Sparta, as stand unrivalled in the 
history of national honour and fidelity. Situ- 
ated in the midst of enemies, they had continu- 
ally, since the battle of Leuctra, suffered the 
invasions and assaults of the Thebans, Arca. 
dians, and Argives. Their territory was totally 
wasted; their city closely besieged ; their cita 


7 Xenoph. ibid. p. 631, et seq. 


344 


del, more than once, surprised and taken ; their 
wealth, public and private, was exhausted, and 
they subsisted precariously on provisions 
brought from Corinth, for the payment of 
which they pledged their beasts of burden and 
instruments of agriculture. Yet under the 
pressure of these multiplied calamities, they 
had preserved their fidelity inviolate; they had 
disdained to accept the peace which the The- 
bans offered them on condition of their forsak- 
ing Sparta; even,at last, they were determin- 
ed to negotiate with Thebes for neutrality 
alone; nor had they humbly solicited permis- 
sion to embrace this measure, until Corinth, 
the only source of their subsistence, seemed 
ready to forsake them.! 

The strength of such arguments urged by the 
eloquence of Patrocles the Phliasian, might 
have softened, if any thing could have softened, 
the inflexible temper of the Spartan senate, 
and disposed that assembly to prefer the interest 
of their allies, and their own immediate safety, 
to the insisting on a fruitless claiın to Messené, 
which, unaided and alone, they could never 
expect to maintain. But the pretensions of this 
extraordinary people seem to have become more 
lofty, in proportion to their inability to support 
them; and, on that particular occasion, the 
proud obstinacy, natural to the Spartans, was 
increased by an animated speech of Archida- 
mus, full of the most confident hopes, and 
glowing with all the warmth of his age and 
character. 

He spoke with contempt concerning the de- 
fection of the confederates. ‘*The Phliasians, 
the inhabitants of Corinth and Achaia, may, 
without exciting surprise, express an anxiety 
for peace; safety, not glory, is their aim. But 
the Spartans have a character to sustain, which. 
it would be infamous to relinquish. They 
expect not barely to exist, but to enjoy fame 
and honour, the true sweeteners of existence; 
and, if that be impossible, they must perish! 
Yet is not their situation desperate: a nation 
cannot be reduced to any condition of distress, 
in which a warlike genius, and a well-regulated 
government, may not afford relief. But in 
military experience and abilities, we are still 
unrivalled; and such a system of policy as we 
enjoy, no other people can boast. We enjoy, 
besides, temperate and laborious habits, the 
contempt of pleasure and wealth, an ardour for 
martial glory, and an ambition of honest fame. 
These are powerful auxiliaries, when protected 
by the immortal gods, whose oracles anciently 
approved our just conquest of Messené. Nor, 
though the Corinthians and Acheans forsake 
us, shall we be destitute of whrlike allies. The 
Athenians ever jealous of Thebes, their most 
formidable neighbour, will again take arms in 
our cause. Dionysius, the tyrant of Sicily, 
gives us hope of farther assistance; the king of 
Egypt, and many princes of Asia, declared 
enemies of Artaxerxes, are all naturally our 
friends. We possess, besides, though not the | 
persons and actual service, the hearts and affec- | 
tions at least, of whatever is most eminent in 
Greece, In all the republics, whoever is dis- 


1 Xenoph. 624. et 634. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


tinguished by his fame, his wealth, or his 
virtues, though he may not accompany our 
standard, secretly wishes success to our arms. 
Iam of opinion, too, that the crowd? of Pelo- 
ponnesus, that mob on which we at first too 
vainly relied, will at length return to their 
duty. They have obtained none of these ad 
vantages, the vain prospect of which urged 
them to revolt. Instead of acquiring the inde- 
pendent government of their own laws, they 
have fallen a prey to lawless anarchy, or been 
subjected to the inhuman cruelty of tyrants. 
The bloody seditions, of which they once knew 
the nature by report only, they have long ex- 
perienced; and there are actually more exiles 
from particular cities, than were formerly from 
all Peloponnesus. But even banishment is hap- 
piness to those who, while they remained at 
home, butchered each other at the altars; and 
who, instead of that peaceful abundance which 
they enjoyed under the Spartan government, 
perished for want of bread. Such is the con- 
dition of the Peloponnesians, whose lands have 
been laid waste, tlieir cities desolated, and that 
constitution and those laws, under which they 
once lived the happiest of men, overturned from 
the foundation. We might subdue them by 
force; but that isnot necessary; they will vo- 
luntarily return to their allegiance, and solicit 
our protection, as alone capable to alleviate their 
misery, and prevent their total ruin. 

“ But had we nothing of this kind to expect, 
and were the one half of Greece not more dis- 
posed to injure us, than the other to abet their 
injustice, I have still one resolution to propose, 
harsh indeed and severe, but becoming those 
sentiments, which have ever animated the Spar- 
tans.. Prosperity, that conceals the infamy of 


cowardice, robs fortitude of half its glory. It is 


adversity alone that can display the full lustre 
of a firm and manly character. I propose, 
therefore, that rather than cede a territory, 
which your ancestors acquired by the blood 
and labour of twenty victorious campaigns, you 
should remove from Sparta your wives, chil- 
dren, and parents, who will be received with 
kindness in Italy, Sicily, Cyrené, and many 
parts of Asia. Those who are fit to bear arms 
must also leave the city, and carry nothing from 
thence that may not easily be transported. 
They must, then, fix on some post well fortified 
by nature, and which art may render secure 
against every hostile assault. This, thenceforth, 
must be their city and country; and from this, 
as a centre, they must on all sides infest the 
enemy, until either the Thebans remit their 
arrogance, or the last of the Spartans perish.” 

The speech of Archidamus expressed the 
general sense of his country. The allies were 
dismissed with permission to act as best suited 
their convenience, but with assurance that 
Sparta would never listen to any terms of ac- 
commodation while deprived of Messené. With 
this answer the ambassadors returned to their 
respective cities. Soon afterwards they were 
despatched to Thebes, where, having proposed 
their demands, they were offered admission into 


2 OxAcs. Tsocrat.in Arcid. He means the Arcadians, 
Elians, &c. formerly allies of Sparta. 
3 Isocrat. in Archidam. 


XXXL] 


«he Theban confederacy. They answered, that 
this was uot peace, but only a change of the 
war; and at length, after various propositions 
and reasonings, they obtained the much-desired 
neutrality.4 

The Spartans, thus deserted on 


T Ea every side, would probably have 
A. C. 364. been the victims of thcir pride and 


obstinacy, if circumstances, unfore- 
seen by Archidamus, had not prevented the 
Thebans and Arcadians from carrying on the 
war with their usual animosity. Projects of 
glory and ambition had disarmed the resent- 
ment of Epaminondas. That active and en- 
terprising leader, who thouglit that nothing was 
done, while any thing was neglected, had set 
himself to render Thebes mistress of the sea. 
The attention and labour of the republic was 
directed to this important object; preparations 
were made at Aulis with silence and cclerity; 
and when the design seemed ripe for execution, 
Epaminondas sailed to Rhodes, Chios, and 
Byzantium, to. concert measures with those 
maritime states, which had already begun to 
feel the severe yoke of the Athenians, and be- 
come eager to shake it off. But the vigilance 
of the latter, who had sent out a strong fleet 
under Laches, a commander of reputation and 
ability, prevented the dangerous consequences 
of this defection; and the Theban arms were, 
at the same time, summoned toa service which 
more immediately concerned their interest and 
honour. 
Alexander, the tyrant of Phere, 
dari began once more to display the re- 
A.C. 364, Sources of his fertile genius, and the 
inhuman cruelty of his temper. His 
numerous mercenaries, whom he collected and 
kept together with singular address, and the 
secret assistance of Athens, enabled him to 
overrun the whole territory, and to gain posses- 
sion of all the principal cities, of Thessaly. 
The oppressed Thessalians had recourse to 
‘Thebes, whose powerful protection they had so 
happily experienced on former occasions, and 
whose standard they had uniformly followed, 
with an alacrity which afforded a sufficient 
pledge of their gratitude. The Thebans de- 
crced to assist them with ten thousand men, 
and the command was entrusted to Pelopidas, 
the personal enemy of Alexander. But the day 
appointed for the march was darkened by an 
eclipse of the sun, which greatly diminished the 
army, as Pelopidas was unwilling to exact the 
reluctant services of men dispirited by the ima- 
ginary terrors of superstition. Such only as, 
despising vain omens, desired to follow their 
beloved general, were conducted into Thessaly; 
and being joined by their allies in that country 
near the town of Pharsalus, they encamped at 
the foot of the mountains of Cynoscephale. 
The tyrant approached with an army twenty 
thousand strong, boldly offering tliem battle. 
Nor did Pelopidas decline the engagement, 
though his foot were, in number, infcrior to the 
encmy. The action began with the cavalry, 
and was favourable tothe Thebans; but the 
mercenaries of Alexander having gained tlic 


Olymp. 


4 Xenoph. ubi supra. 5 Plutarch. in Pelopid. 


2x 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


345 


advantage of the ground, pressed with vigour 
the Theban and Thessalian infantry. In this 
emergency, Pelopidas rode up, and encouraging 
the retirmg troops with his voice and action. 
gave them such fresh spirits, that Alexander did 
not doubt their having received a considerable 
reinforcement. The mercenaries were pressed 
in their turn, and thrown into disorder. Pelo- 
pidas darting hiseye through their broken ranks, 
espied Alexander in the right wing rallying his 
men, and preparing to advance with his usual 
intrepidity. At this sight the Theban was no 
longer master of his passion. Naturally a foe 
to tyrants, he beheld a personal foe in the tyrant 
Alexander. Accompanied by a few horsemen, 
he impetuously rushed forward, calling aloud 
to his adversary, and challenging him to single 
combat. Alexander, fearing to meet the man 
whom he had injured, retired behind his guards, 
who received, first with a shower of javelins, 
and then with their spears, the little band of 
Pelopidas; who, after producing such carnage® 
as Homer ascribes to the rage of Diomed or 
Achilles, fell a victim to the blindness of his 
own ungovernable fury. Mean while, his troops 
advancing to the relief of their general, the 
guards of the tyrant were repelled; the The- 
bans, with their allies, proved victorious in 
every part of the battle; the enemy were dis- 
persed in flight, and pursued with the loss of 
three thousand men. 

But the death of Pelopidas threw a gloom 
over the victory. He was lamented by the 
Thebans and Thessalians with immoderate de- 
monstrations of sorrow. Accompanied by an 
innumerable crowd of real mourners, his body 
was carried in procession to Thebes. The 
Thessalians, in whose service he had fallen, re- 
quested the honour of supplying the expenses 
of his funeral, which was celebrated with every 
circumstance of sad magnificence. The multi- 
tude recollected the eclipse which preceded his 
departure, and which, as they believed, an- 
nounced his misfortune; and, in alhision to that 
fatal omen, exclaimed, * that the sun of Thebes 
was set, and her glory departed for ever.” The 
Thebans appointed Malcitas and Diogeiton to 
the command in Thessaly. The tyrant was 
again defeated, and stripped of all his conquests. 
But what appears extraordinary, he was allow- 
ed to live and reign in Phere,’ while the neigh- 
bouring cities entered into a close alliance with 
Thebes. 

The foreign expeditions which have been de- 
scribed, were not the only causes that diverted 
the attention of the Thebans from the affairs of 
Pcloponnesus. While Epaminondas was em- 
ployed abroad in the fleet, and Pelopidas in 
Thessaly, the government of Thebes was on the 
point of being overturned by an aristocratical 
faction. The inhabitants of Orchomenus, the 
second city in Beotia, and anciently the rival 
of Thebes, entered into this conspiracy, which 
was to be executed at the annual review of the 


6 Diodorus says, that the bodies of these whom he slew 
covered a long tract of ground. Plutarch is equally hyper- 
bolical. The battles of Homer rendered the marvellous in 
military description too familiar to the Greek historians, I 
mean Diodorus, Plutarch, Pausanias; Thucydides and 
Xenophon knew their duty better. 


7 Diodorus, l. xv. c. 20. 8 Pausanias Beatic. 


UJ 


346 


Orchomenian troops. But the plot was dis- 
covered by the fears or the repentance of some 
accomplices, who became informers. The ca- 
valry of Orchomenus, to the number of three 
hundred, were surrounded and cut to pieces in 
the Theban market-place. Nor did this ven- 
geance satisfy the enraged multitude, who 
marched in a body to Orchomenus, besieged 
and took the city, razed it to the ground, put 
the men of full age to the sword, and dragged 
their wives and children into captivity.! 

While operations, destructive or 
fruitless, employed the activity of 
A c 36 4 Thebes, her allies in Arcadia were 

-M.e 22# occupied with designs still more 
blameable. Their own strength and numbers, 
together with a confidence in Athens, their new 
confederate, encouraged the Arcadians to give 
full scope to their ambition, by which they had 
been long animated. To pave the way for the 
total conquest of the Peloponnesus, in which 
they had already obtained a dangerous ascend- 
ant, they began by wresting several places from 
the Elians, the least warlike, and most wealthy, 
of their neighbours. The Elians, worsted in 
every encounter with the enemy, craved the 
assistance of Sparta, which being reinforced by 
the Acheans (notwithstanding the neutrality 
so recently stipulated,) nade several vigorous, 
but unsuccessful efforts, for the defence of the 
Elian territory. The Arcadians still pushed 
their conquests in that country, gaining one 
town after another, and at length Olympia it- 
self, the most precious jewel of the Elians, and 
the greatest ornament of the Peloponnesus. 
As possessors of the sacred city, and by virtue 
of a pretended right derived from the inha- 
bitants of Pisa, an ancient but decayed place in 
the neighbourhood of Olympia, the Arcadians 
prepared to celebrate the hundred and fourth 
Olympiad, the time of which was at hand. At 


civ. 1 


the approach of this august solemnity, the con- |. 


course, as usual, was great from every part of 
Greece ; hostilities were suspended; and all 
parties united in common amusements, and 
common ceremonies of religion. 

The prayers and sacrifices were performed, 
and the military games had begun, when the 
performers and spectators were alarmed by the 
sudden clashing of armour, and the sight of a 
real battle. The Elians had marched forth with 
their whole forces, and surprised the Arcadians, 
who, with two thousand Argives, and a body of 
Athenian cavalry amounting to four hundred, 
guarded the sacred groves and temples of Olym- 
pia. The vigour of their unexpected assault 
successfully repelled these intruders, who fled in 
disorder through the streets, and were pursued 
by the Elians with an inspired valour, * since,” 
says Xenophon, “ Heaven alone can do, in one 
day, what no other power can accomplish but in 
great length of time; make cowards courage- 
ous.”? The Arcadians, however, recovering 
from their consternation, began to rally. The 
assailants were resisted with obstinacy; but did 
not retire, till having lost Stratolas their com- 


1 Diodor. l. xv. c. 20. 

2 Tosouros YEVOMEVOL OLOUÇ THY HoETHY CEOS MEY XY EUTVEV- 
Tas duvasto ræs ev nuegz amodeikair avioewwos Oude xy ey 
WOANw Xeovw Toup py OVTaS sAxiuoug TOLKTEVAY. p. 639. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


[Cuar. 


mander, with other brave men, they retreated in 
good order, after giving a conspicuous proof of 
their courage and intrepidity to those who had 
long despised the softness of their unwarlike 
character. The Arcadians renewed the guard 
with double vigilance; fortified the avenues 
that led to the Stadium and Hippodrome; and 
having taken these necessary precautions against 
a second surprise, proceeded with the remain- 
ing ceremonies of the festival, which, though 
brought to an undisturbed conclusion, was 
neyer acknowledged in the records of the 
Elians. 

After celebrating the Olympic games, the 
mixed concourse of people returned to their re- 
spective homes, and the Arcadians found them- 
selves sole masters of the city and temple of Ju- 
piter, containing the collected treasures ofmany 
centuries, the rich gifts of vanity and supersti- 
tion. Opportunity, joined to want, is naturally 
the mother of injustice. The Arcadians, who, 
to promote their ambitious designs, had raised a- 
body of standing troops called Eparitoi, laid hold 
of the sacred treasure, in order to pay those mer- 
cenaries, whose demands they were otherwise 
incapable of satisfying, without great incon- 
venience. The Mantinzans first protested 
against this unwarrantable rapacity. Instead ot 
accepting their proportion of the plunder, they 
imposed, for the payment of the mercenaries, a 
tax on themselves, of which they transmitted the 
produce to the archons, or magistrates, appointed 
by the Ten Tousand to administer the general 
concerns of the Arcadian nation. The archons, 
who had themselves freely handled the sacred 
mouey, represented to their constituents the af- 
fected delicacy of the Mantinæans as an obsti- 
nacy extremely dangerous to the states of Ar- 
cadia, and insinuated that this unseasonable re- 
gard for justice and piety most probably con- 
cealed some very criminal design.? 

The Ten Thousand, or, as we should say, the 
States- General, listened to this insidious accusa- 
tion; and summoned the municipal magistrates 
of Mantinea to appear and answer for their con- 
duct. They refused to obey; a detachment of 
the Eparitoi was sent to bring them by force; 
the Mantinzans shut their gates. This firmness 
roused the attention of the States; and many 
members of weight in that assembly began to 
suspect that the Mantinzans must posses some 
secret ground of confidence, that encouraged 
them to set at defiance an authority which they 
were bound to revere. They reflected first on 
the alarming consequences to which Arcadia 
might be exposed by plundering the shrines of 
Jupiter; and then on the injustice and impiety 
of the deed itself. These sentiments, enforced 
by the superstition of the age, spread with ra- 
pidity in the assembly; it was determined 
thenceforth to abstain from a consecrated fund, 
the violation of which might prove dangerous 
to themselves, and entail a curse on their pos- 
terity ; and, to prevent the bad consequences 
of the desertion of the Eparitoi, whose pay must 
thereby be diminished, many wealthy Arca- 
dians, who could subsist on their private in 
comes, enrolled themselves in their stead. 


3 Xenoph. |. vii. p. 638, et seq. et Diodor. l. xv. c. 22. 


, 


N 
XXXL] 


These measures, though approved by the 
States, gave great uneasiness to the archons, to 
the mereenaries, and to all who had shared the 
Olympie spoil, lest they might be ealled to ae- 
count for their rapaeity, and compelled to re- 
fund the sums whieh they had embezzled. To 
prevent this danger, they had recourse to the 
Thebans, from whom they requested immediate 
assistanee, on pretence that the States of Area- 
dia were ready to revolt to Sparta. The States, 
on the other hand, sent an embassy requesting 
the Thebans not to pass the Isthmus, until they 
should reeeive further invitation. Nor were 
they satisfied with barely counteracting the ne- 
gotiations of their enemies. Having determined 
not to derive any benefit from the wealth of 
Olympia, they thought proper to restore that 
city, as well as the direetion of the games, to 
those who had, from tine immemorial, enjoyed 
both, and to eonelude a peace with the Elians, 
who solieited it with much earnestness, as a 
measure highly eondueive to the general in- 
terest of the Peloponnesus. 

The congress, assembled for this beneficial 
purpose, was held at Tegea, and consisted of 
deputies from Elis, and from many cities of 
Areadia. When matters were seemingly ad- 
justed to the satisfaction of all parties, enter- 
tainments, as usual, were prepared; and the 
deputies, exeept those of Mantinæa, most of 
whom were invited home by the vieinity of 
their city, remained at Tegea to celebrate the 
feast of peace. While they were employed in 
drinking and merriment, the arehonsj and sueh 
others as dreaded the eonsequenees of this hasty 
aeeommodation, addressed themselves to a'The- 
ban general, who commanded a considerable 
body of Beotian troops that had long garrison- 
ed Tegea, in order to secure the fidelity of that 
place and the adjacent territory. The Theban 
had himself made free with the saered treasure, 
and was therefore easily prevailed on to embrace 
any measure that might prevent an inquiry into 
that enormous crime. Nothing appeared so 
proper for this purpose as to seize and detain 
the unsuspeeting deputies, who consisted of the 
leading men from most eities of Arcadia. This 
seheme was no sooner proposed, than earried 
into exeeution. The gates of Tegea were se- 
cured; a body of armed men surrounded the 
plaee of entertainment; the deputies, who had 
prolonged to a late hour the joys of festivity, 
were taken unprepared, and condueted to va- 
rious places of confinement, their number be- 
ing too great for one prison to contain.‘ 

Next day, the Mantinewans, being apprised of 
this unexpeeted event, despatched messengers, 
demanding some few of their citizens who hap- 
pened to remain at Tegea, after the departure 
of their companions; and at the same time ac- 
quainting the magistrates of that plaee. the 
archons, and the Theban general, that no Arca- 
dian could be put to death without a fair and 
open trial. They likewise, without loss of time, 
despatelicd an embassy to the several cities of 
Arcadia, rousing them to arms in their own 
defence, and exhorting them to rescue their im- 
prisoned citizens, and to avenge the insult of- 


4 Xenoph. p. 640. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


347 


fered to the general body of their nation. When 
those who had eommitted the outrage, and es- 
pecially the Theban general, were aequainted 
with the vigour of these proceedings, they began 
to be more alarmed than before. As they had 
seized but few Mantinzans, they eould derive 
little advantage from the hostages of that city, 
whose resentment they had most reason to fear. 
They were sensible of deserving the indignation 
of Areadia; and that the general voiee of 
Greeee must condemn the irregularity and vio- 
lence of their measures. Intimidated by sueh 
reflections, the Theban eommander at onee set 
the prisoners at liberty; and, appearing next 
day before an assembly as numerous as eould 
be eolleeted in such troublesome times, endea- 
voured to exeuse his conduet, by saying, that 
he had heard of the march of the Lacedemo- 
nian army towards the frontier, and that seve- 
ral of the deputies, whom he had seized, were 
prepared to betray Tegea to the publie enemy. 
The Areadians were not the dupes of this shal- 
low artifiee ; yet they abstained from punishing 
their own wrongs, and sent ambassadors to 
Thebes, who might deseribe the injury that had 
been committed, and impeach the criminals.5 

Upon hearing the aeeusation, 


oy a Epaminondas, who was then gene- 
a c 363 ral of the Beeotians, deelared, that 


his countrymen had done better in 
seizing, than in diseharging the Areadians, whose 
conduet was highly blameable in making peace 
without the adviee of their confederates. “ Be 
assured,” eontinued he to the ambassadors, 
“that the Thebans will march into Arcadia, 
and support their friends in that provinee.” 
This resolution, which expressed the general 
sense of the republie, was heard with great in- 
dignation by the Arcadian states, and their 
allies of Elis and Aehaia. They observed, that 
the Thebans eould not have felt. mueh less 
have expressed, any displeasure at the peaee 
of Peloponnesus, if they had not deemed it their 
interest to perpetuate the divisions and hostili- 
ties of a eountry which they wished to weaken 
and to subdue. They entered into a strieter 
alliance with each other, and prepared for a 
vigorous defenee; sending ambassadors to 
Athens and Sparta, that the former might be 
ready to thwart the measures of a neighbouring 
and rival state, and that the latter might take 
arms to maintain the independence of that por- 
tion of Greeee, of whieh the valour of Sparta 
had long formed the strength and bulwark. 
During these hostile preparations, 
Epaminondas took the field with 
all the Beotians, with the Eubeans, 
and with a strong body of Thessa- 
lians, partly supplied by Alexander, and partly 
raised by the eities whieh Pelopidas had re- 
cently delivered from the yoke of that eruel 
tyrant. Upon his arrival in the Peloponnesus, 
he expected to be joined by the Argives, the 
Messenians, and several communities of Arca- 
dia, partieularly the inhabitants of Tegea and 
Megalopolis. With these hopes, he proceeded 
southward to Nemea, an aneient city in the 
Argive territory, distinguished by the games 


5 Xenoph. p. 641. 


348 


celebrated in honour of Hercules. There he 
encamped for several days, with an intention to 
intercept the Athenians, whose nearest route 
into Peloponnesus lay through the district of 
Nemea; convinced that nothing could more 
contribute, than an advantage over that people 
in the beginning of the campaign, to animate 
the courage, as well as to increase the number 
of the Theban partisans in every part of Greece. 
But this scheme was defeated by the prudence 
of the Athenians, who, instead of marching 
through the Isthmus, sailed to the coast of La- 
conia, and proceeded from thence to join their 
confederates at Mantinewa. Apprised of this 
design, Epaminondas moved his camp, and 
marched forward to Tegea, which being strong- 
ly fortified, and enjoying a lofty and central 
situation, was judiciously chosen as the place 
of rendezvous for his Peloponnesian confede- 
rates. Having continued several weeks at Te- 
gea, he was much disappointed that none of 
the neighbouring towns sent to offer their sub- 
mission, and to solicit the protection of the The- 
ban arms. This waste of time gave him the 
more uneasiness, as his command was limited 
to a short term. The strength of the enemy 
at Mantinea was continually increasing. Age- 
silaus had already conducted the Lacedemo- 
nians to the frontier of Arcadia. If they like- 
wise should join, the combined forces would 
prove superior to the army of Epaminondas, 
which amounted to thirty thousand in number, 
and of which the cavalry alone exceeded three 
thousand. Considering these circumstances, he 
suddenly determined on an enterprise, which, 
if crowned with success, would render the pre- 
sent hitherto fruitless expedition not unworthy 
of his former fame. 

Having decamped with his whole army in 
the night, he performed a hasty march of thirty 
miles, in order to surprize Sparta; and had not 
the extraordinary swiftness of a Cretan deserter 
apprised Agesilaus of the danger, that city 
would have been taken unprepared, and totally 
incapable of defence.! The bulk of the Lace- 
demonian army had proceeded too far on the 
road to Mantinza, to anticipate the design of 
the enemy; but the aged king, with his son 
Archidamus, returned, with a small but valiant 
band, to the defence of Sparta. The engage- 
ment which followed, as related by Xenophon, 
appears one of the most extraordinary that his- 
tory records. Epaminondas had employed 
every precaution which his peculiar sagacity 
could suggest; he did not approach Sparta by 
those narrow roads, where a superiority of num- 
bers would afford him small advantage; he did 
not draw up his forces in the plain, in which, 
while entering the town, they might have been 
annoyed with missile weapons; nor did he 
allow an opportunity of surprising him by strata- 
gem or ambuscade, in the management of which 
the Spartans were at all times so dexterous. 
Seizing an eminence which commanded the 
tewn, he determined to descend into it with 
every-advantage on his side, and without the 
seeming possibility of being exposed to any in- 


1 Xenophon says, werte veotriay wavreracsy Epy soy. 


Tay womuvougsvev, Xenophon p. 644. 


j “As a nest quite 
destitute of its defenders.” 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


convenience. But the issue of so well-con- 
certed an enterprise, the historian hesitates 
whether to refer to a particular providence of 
the gods, or to ascribe to the invincible courage 
of men actuated by despair. Archidamus, 
with scarcely a hundred men, opposed the pro- 
gress of the enemy, cut down the first ranks, 
and advanced to assault the remainder. Then, 
strange to relate! those Thebans, says Xeno- 
phon, who breathed fire, who had so often con- 
quered, who were far superior in number, and 
who possessed the advantage of the ground, 
shamefully gave way. The Spartans pursued 
them with impetuosity, but were soon repelled 
with loss; for the divinity, whose assistance 
had produced this extraordinary victory, seems 
also to*have prescribed the limits beyond which 
it was not to extend.2 i 
Epaminondas, foiled in an attempt which 
promised such a fair prospect of success, did not 
sink under his disappointment. As he had 
reason to believe that the whole forces at Man- 
tinæa would be withdrawn from that place to 
the defence of Sparta, he immediately sounded 
a retreat, returned to Tegea with the utmost 
expedition, and allowing his infantry to take 
time for rest and refreshment, he, with admira- 
ble presence of mind, ordered the horse to ad- 
vance forward to Mantinæa, (which was dis- 
tant only twelve miles,) and to maintain their 
ground until his arrival with the rest of the 
army. He expected to find the Mantinwans 
totally unprepared for such a visit; and asit was 
then autumn, he doubted not that most of the 
townsmen would be employed in the country, 
in reaping and bringing in the corn. His plan 
was wise, and well executed. The situation of 
the Mantinæans corresponded to his hopes. 
But it seemed as if fortune had delighted to 
baffe his sagacity. Before the Theban forces 
arrived at Mantinæa, a numerous and powerful 
squadron of Athenian cavalry entered that 
place, commanded by Hegelochus, who then 
first learned the departure of the allies to pro- 
tect the Lacedæmonian capital. He had scarcely 
received this intelligence, when the Thebans 
appeared, and, advancing with great rapidity, 
prepared to effect the purpose of their expedi- 
tion. The Athenians had not time to refresh 
themselves; they had eat nothing that day; 
they were inferior in number; they knew the 
bravery of the Theban and Thessalian cavalry, 
with whom they must contend; yet, regardless 
of every consideration but the safety of their 
allies, they rushed into the field, stopped the 
progress of the assailants, and, after a fierce 
and bloody engagement, which displayed great 
courage on both sides, obtained an acknow- 
ledged victory. The enemy craved the bodies 
of their dead; the victors erected a trophy of 
their useful valour, which had saved the corn, 


2 Plutarch tells a story on this occasion, of a young Spar- 
tan named Isadas, who stripped naked, anointed himself 
with oil, sallied forth with a spear in one hand, and a 
sword in the other, and traced his path in blood through 
the thickest of the enemy. He returned unhurt, was 
crowned for his valour, but fined for fighting without his 
shield. Plut. in Agesil. To a modern reader, Xenophon’s 
account of the battle will appear a pompous description of 
the effect of panic terror with which the Thebans were in- 
spired, by finding, instead of veortexy eenmov, “a defence- 
less nest.” the vigorous opposition of men in arms. 


XXXI] 


cattle, slaves, women, and children? of Manti- 
næa from falling a prey to the invaders. 

The repeated misfortunes, which would have 
broken the spirit of an ordinary commander, 
only determined Epaminondas to a general en- 
gagement, in which he might either wipe off 
the memory of his late disgrace, or obtain an 
honourable death, fighting to render his country 
the sovereign of Greece. The confederates 
had re-assembled at Mantinea, strengthened by 
considerable reinforcements. Fresh succours 
had likewise arrived to the Thebans. Never 
had such numerous armies‘ taken the field 
during the perpetual war in which those un- 
happy republics were engaged. But battles 
become really interesting, not so much by the 
number of the troops, as by the conduct of the 
generals. It is worth while, says the military 
historian,® to observe the operations of Epami- 
nondas on this memorable occasion. Having 
ranged his men in battalions, he led them, not 
along the plain, which was the nearest road to 
Mantinea, but turning to the left, conducted 
them by a chain of hills which joined that city 
and Tegea, and skirted the eastern extremity 
of both. The enemy, apprised of his march, 
drew up their forces before the walls of Man- 
tinea; the Lacedemonians, and such Arca- 
dians as had embraced’the more honourable 
cause, in the right wing, the Athenians in the 
left, the Achzans and Elians forming the main 
body. Mean while Epaminondas marched 
slowly along, extending his circuit, as if he 
wished to decline the engagement. Having 
approached that part of the mountain which 
faced the hostile army, he ordered his men to 
halt, and to lay down their arms. His former 
movements had occasioned great doubt and 
perplexity; but now it scemed evident that he 
had laid aside all thoughts of fighting that day, 
and was preparing to encamp. This opinion, 
too lightly conceived, proved fatal to the enemy. 
They abandoned their arms and their ranks, 
dispersed in their tents, and lost not only that 
external arrangement, but that inward prepara- 
tion, that martial ardour of mind, which ought 
to aninate soldiers at the near prospect of an 
engagement. Epaminondas seized the decisive 
moment of attack. Facing to the right, he con- 
verted the column of march into an order of 
battle. His troops were thus disposed instan- 
taneously in the same order in which he meant 
to fight. At the head of his left wing, which 
consisted of the flower of the Beeotians, and 
which, as at the battle of Leuctra, he formed 
into a firm wedge, with a sharp point, and with 
spreading flanks, he advanced against the Spar- 
tans and Mantineans; and trusting the event 
of the battle to the rapid impulse of this unex- 
pected onset, he commanded the centre and 
right wing, in which he placed less confidence, 
to proceed with a slow pace, that they might 
not come up and grapple with the opposing 
divisions of the enemy, until the victory of his 
left wing had taught them to conquer. 


3 Xenophon, l. vii. p. 644. 

4 Diodorus, I. xv. c. 21. 5 Xenoph. p. 645. 

6 Eavce uev Twy woreuiwy Tyv ev tag Wuxynis meag 
THY MEKNY TeperKsuyV' LAUTE ÔE TWV GY TÆIÇ TUVTÆZETIV., 


Xenoph. p. 645. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


349 


This judicious design was crown- 


Oly ee ed with merited success. The ene- 
we "9¢3. MY» perceiving the dreadful shock 


to which they were exposed, flew 
to their arms, put on their bucklers and helmets, 
bridled their horses, and suddenly resumed their 
ranks; but these different operations were per- 
formed with the trepidation of surprise and 
haste, rather than with the ardour of hope and 
courage; and the whole army had the appear- 
ance of men prepared rather to suffer, than to 
inflict, any thing cruel or terrible.” The Spar- 
tans and Mantineans, drawn up in firm order, 
sternly waited the first brunt of the assailants. 
The battle was fierce and bloody, and after 
their spears were broken, both parties had re- 
coure to their swords. The wedge of Epami- 
nondas at length penetrated the Spartan line, 
and this advantage encouraged his centre and 
right wing to attack and repel the correspond- 
ing divisions of the encmy. The Theban and 
Thessalian cavalry were equally successful. 
In the intervals of their ranks Epaminondas had 
placed a body of light infantry, whose missile 
weapons greatly annoyed the enemy’s horse, 
who were drawn up two deep. He had likewise 
taken the precaution to occupy a rising ground 
on his right with a considerable detachment, 
which might takethe Atheniansin flank and rear, 
should they advance from their post. These 
prudent dispositions produced a victory, which 
Epaminondas did not live to complete or im- 
prove. In the heat of the battle he received a 
mortal wound, and was carried to an eminence, 
which was afterwards calledsthe Watch-tower,? 
probably that he might the better observe the 
subsequent operations of the field. But with 
the departure of their leader was withdrawn 
the spirit which animated the Theban army. 
Having impetuously broken through the hostile 
ranks, they knew not how to profit of this ad- 
vantage. The enemy rallied in different parts 
of the fields and prevailed in several partial 
encounters. All was confusion and terror. The 
light infantry, which had been posted amidst 
the Theban and Thessalian horse, being left 
behind in the pursuit, were reccived and cut to 
pieces by the Athenian cavalry, commanded 
by Hegelochus. Elated with this success, the 
Athenians turned their arms against the de- 
tachments placed on the heights, consisting 
chiefly of Eubæans, whom they routed and put 


7 Wievres Se resromevoig TE MAAAOV N TOLYTOUTIV EWKET XY, 
Xenoph. p. 646. 

8 Pausanias, in Arcad. says, that Epaminondas was 
killed by Gryllus, the son of Xenophon the Athenian; and, 
as a proof of this assertion, mentions a beautiful picture of 
the battle of Mantinwa, in the Ceramicus of Athens, as 
well as the monument of Gryllus, ereeted by the Manti 
næans on the field of battle; both subsisting in the time of 
Pausanias, and both aseribing to this Athenian the honour 
of killing Epaminondas. Plutareh, in Agesilao, says, that 
Anticrates, a Spartan, killed Epaminondas with a sword ; 
that his posterity were thence ealled Machairionidas; and 
that, as late as the days of Plutarch, they enjoyed eertain 
immunities and honours as a reeompense for the merit of 
their ancestor Antierates in destroying the worst enemy of 
Sparta. Gryllns the son of Xenophon fell in the battle of 
Mantinea; and the words, or rather the silence of his 
father, is very remarkable coneerning the death of Epami- 
nondas: “'The Theban eolumn broke the Spartans, but 
when Epaminondas fell, the rest knew not how to use the 
victory.” What sublimity in this passage, if Gryllus really 
slew Epaminondas? 

9 Pausan. ubi supra. 


350 


to flight, after a terrible slaughter. With such 
alternations of victory and defeat ended this 
memorable engagement, Both armies, as con- 
querors, erected a trophy; both craved their 
dead, as conquered;! and this battle, which be- 
ing certainly the greatest, was expected to have 
proved the most decisive ever fought among 
the Greeks, produced no other consequence 
but that general languor and debility long re- 
markable in the subsequent operations of those 
hostile republics. œ 

When the tumult of the action ceased, the 
most distinguished Thebans assembled around 
their dying general. His body had been pierced 
with a javelin; and the surgeons declared, that 
it was impossible for him to survive the extrac- 
tion of the weapon. He asked whether his 
shicld was safe ? which being presented to him, 
he viewed it with a languid smile of melan- 
choly joy. He then demanded, whether the 
[hebans had obtained the victory? Being an- 
swered in the affirmative (for the Lacedemo- 

iaus indeed had first sent to demand the bodies 
of their slain,) he declared himself ready to 
quit life without regret, since he left his country 
triumphant. The spectators lamented, among 
other objects of sorrow, that he should die 
without children, who might inherit the glory 
of his name, and the fame of his virtucs. “ You 
mistake,” said he with a cheerful prescnce of 
mind, “I leave two fair daughters, the battles 
of Leuctra and Mantinæa, who will transmit 
my renown to the latest ages.” So saying, he 
ordered the weapon to be extracted, and imme- 
diately expired. The awful solemnity of his 
death corresponded with the dignified splen- 
dour of an active and useful life. He is usually 
described as a perfect character ;2 nor does the 
truth of history oblige us to detract any thing 
from this description, except that in some in- 
stances, and particularly in his last fatal inva- 
sion of the Peloponnesus, he allowed the blaze 
of patriotism to eclipse the mild light of jus- 
tice and benevolence. He was buricd in the 
field of battle, where his monument still ex- 
isted, after four centuries, in the time of Pau- 
sanias, with an inscription in elegiac verse, 
enumerating his exploits. Hadrian, then mas- 
ter of the Roman world, added a second co- 
lumn, with a new inscription,’ in honour of a 
character, whom that unsteady emperor had 
genius to admire, but wanted firmness to imi- 
tate. 

An elegant Roman writer gives a brief but 
comprehensive panegyric of Epaminondas, that 
during his lifetime Thebes was the arbiter of 
Greece; whereas both before and afterwards, 
that republic continually languished in servi- 
tude or dependence.4 But this observation 


1 Xenoph. |. vii. ad fin. 

2 Cicero Acad. Quest. J. i. ct Passim. Plutarch. Corn. 
Nepos. Pausan. 

3 Vid. Pausan. in Arcad. et Beotic. 

4 Hujus de virtutibus vitaque satis erit dictum, si hoc 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


betrays the inaccurate partiality of a biogra- 
pher, who often exalts the glory of a favourite 
hero, at the expense of historic truth. By the 
death of Epaminondas, Thebes was deprived 
of her principal ornament and defence, the 
source of her confidence, and the spring of her 
activity; and her councils were thenceforth 
less ambitious, and her arms less enterprising.’ 
But six years after that event, she controlled 
the decisions of the Amphictyonic council, and, 
instead of being reduced to a condition of de- 
pendence, her power was still formidable to the 
most warlike of her neighbours. 
Ol Soon after the battle of Manti- 
ah hoe l] peace was proposed 
av". nea, a general pe prop 
A. C. 362. under the mediation of Artaxerxes, 
i who wanted Grecian auxiliaries to 
check the insurrections in Egypt and Lesser 
Asia, which disturbed the two last years of his 
reign. The only condition annexed to this 
treaty was, that each republic should retain its 
respective possessions. The Spartans deter- 
mined to reject every accommodation until they 
had recovered Messenia; and as Artaxerxes 
had uniformly opposed this demand, they trans- 
ported forces into Egypt, to foment the defec- 
tion of that province. At the head of a thou- 
sand heavy-armed Lacedemonians, and ten 
thousand mercenaries, Agesilaus supported one 
rebel after another, having successively set 
on the throne Taches and Nectanebas.6 In 
this dishonourable war he amassed considerable 
wealth, by means of which he probably ex- 
pected to retrieve the affairs of his country. 
Olymp But returning home by Cyrenaica, 
; * he died on that coast, in the eighty- 
civ. 4. f h f hi d E 
A. C. 361. ourth year oi his age, and forty- 
first of his reign.? His character 
has been sufficiently illustrated in the course ot 
this work. Hc was the greatest, and the most 
unfortunate of the Spartan kings. He had 
seen the highest grandeur of Sparta, and he 
beheld her fall. During the time that he go- 
verned the republic, his country suffered more 
calamities and disgrace than in seven centuries 
preceding his reign. His ambition and his ob- 
stinacy, doubtless, contributed to her disasters ; 
yet so natural were the principles from which 
he acted, so probable his hopes of success, and 
so firm and manly his struggles for victory, that 
a contemporary writer, who could see through 
the cloud of fortune, ventured to bestow on 
Agesilaus a panegyric,8 which exalts him be- 
yond the renown of his most illustrious prede- 
cessors. 


unum adjunxero, guod nemo est inficias ; Thebas et ante 
Epaminondam natum, et post ejus interitum, perpetuo 
alieno paruisse imperio; contra ea, quamdiu ille prefuerit 
reipublice, caput fuisse totius Gracie. Corn. Nepos, in 


pam. 

5 Vid. Polyb. Hist. l. vi. e. xli. 3 
6 Plut. in Agesilao. Diodorus, l. xv. c. xxii. 
7 Diodor. ibid. 

8 O Aoyos ess Ayeriagov, by Xenophon. 


XXXIIL] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 351 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


State of Greece after the Battle of Mantinea—The Amphictyonic Council—Returning prospe- 
rity of Athens—Vices resulting from its Government—Abuses of the judiciary power—Of the 
Theatre—Degeneracy of Grecian Music—Extreme Profligacy of the Athenitans—The Vices of 
Chares render him the Idol of the Multitude—The Social War—Banishment of Timotheus and 

_ Iphicrates—Disgraceful Issue of the War—Philosophy—sStatuary—Praxiteles—The Cnidian 
Venus—Painting—Pamphilus, Nicias, Zeuxis—Literature—Xenophon—His Military Expe- 
ditions—Religious and Literary Retreat—Lysias—Isocrates—Plato—His Travels—He settles 
in the Academy—His great Views—Thcology—Cosmogony—Doetrine of Ideas—Of the Hu- 
man Understanding—The Passions—Virtues—State of Retribution—Genius, and Character. 


With the battle of Mantinæa euded® the 
bloody struggle for dominion, which had 
long exhausted Thebes and Sparta. In that, 
or in the preceding engagements, they had lost 
their ablest generals, and the flower of their 
troops. No Theban arose to emulate the mag- 
nanimity of Epaminondas, and to complete the 
designs of that illustrious patriot. Archidamus, 
who succeeded to the Spartan throne, imper- 
fectly justified the high opinion conceived of 
his early wisdom and valour. Weakened by 
their wounds, and fatigued by exertions long 
and fruitless, those republics sunk into such 
weakness, as encouraged pretensions of their 
neighbours that had long lain dormant. 
During the superiority, or, in the 


Oly ort * language of ancient writers, during 
=. A the empire of Athens, Sparta, and 


Thebes, the majesty of the Am- 
phictyonic council had degenerated into an 
empty pageant. Its deliberations were confined 
to matters of mere form; it regulated some 
ceremonies of superstition; it superintended 
games and spectacles; it preserved peace and 
good order among the crowd of strangers who 
assembled, at stated times, to consult the oracle 
of Apollo. But for more than a century past, 
the public measures of the Greeks had been 
directed by councils held, not at Delphi, the 
residence of the Amphictyons, but in Athens, 
Sparta, or Thebes, in one or other of which 
the allies convened on every important emer- 
gency, acknowledging, by their presence there, 
the respective authority of those capitals which 
were regarded as the heads of their sevcradl 
confederacies. But when first the Peloponne- 
sian, then the Beotian war, and last of all the 
battle of Mantinza, had levelled the greatness, 
and overthrown the proud tyranny of those 
domineering republics, the Amphictyonic coun- 
cil once more emerged from obscurity ; and the 
general states of Greece having asscmbled ac- 
cording to their national and hereditary forms, 
spurned the imperious dictates of any single 
community. 


9 Xenophon’s Greek history likewise ends with that 
battle. Henceforth we follow Plutarch and Diodorus, from 
whom we learn the principal circumstances of great events, 
which the orators Isocrates and Demosthenes, Aristotle’s 
Treatise of Politics, and Xenophon’s Discourses on the 
Revenues and Government of Athens, will enable us more 
fully to explain. 


While this event strengthened 


Olymp the federal union, and tended to 
cy. 1.— ‘ia ji 

T restore the primitive equa ity of 
A " C the Grecian states, various circum- 
360—358. stances concurred to revive the as- 


piring ambition of Athens. Dur- 
ing the Bæotian war, the Athenians had acted 
as auxiliaries only; without making such ef- 
forts as enfeebled their strength, their arms had 
acquired great lustre. Their powerful rivals 
were humbled and exhausted: expericnce had 
taughtthem the danger of attempting tosubdue, 
and the impossibility of keeping in subjection, 
the territories of their werlike neighbours: but 
the numerous islands of the Ægean and Ionian 
seas, the remote coasts of Thrace and Asia, in- 
vited the activity of their fleet, which they 
might now employ in foreign conquests, fear- 
less of domestic envy. It appears, that soon 
after the death of Epaminondas, Eubea again 
acknowledged the authority! of Athens; an 
event facilitated by the destruction of the The- 
ban partisans, belonging to that place, in the 
battle of Mantinwa. From the Thracian Bos- 
phorus to Rhodes, several places along both 
shores submitted to the arms of Timotheus, 
Chabrias, and Iphicrates; men, who having 
survived Agesilaus and Epaminondas, were 
far superior, in abilities and in virtue, to the 
contempc rary generals of other republics. The 
Cyclades and Corcyra courted the friendship. 
of a people capable to interrupt thcir naviga- 
tion and to destroy their commerce. Byzan- 
tium had become their ally, and there was rea- 
son to hope that Amphipolis would soon be 
rendered their subject. Such multiplied ad- 
vantages revived the ancient grandeur of 
Athens, which once more commanded tlic sea, 
with a fleet of near three hundred sail, and 
employed the best half of her citizens and sub- 
jects in ships of war or commerce.!! 

This tide of prosperity, which flowed with 


10 Comp. Diodor. |. xvi. p. 513. and Demosthenes de Cher- 
soneso, sub fine, and Auschines in Ctesiphont. It appears, 
however, from these authors, that the Thebans soon after- 
wards endeavoured to recover Eubwa. The Athenians 
again rescued it from their power, at the exhortation of 
Timotheus, whose pithy speech is commonded by Demos- 
thenes: “ What, my countrymen, the Thebans in the island, 
and you still deliberating! Why not already in the har- 
bour? why not embarked? why is not the sea covered 
with your navy?’ Demosthen. ubi supra. 

11 Xenoph. Hellen. l. vii. p. 615. Diodorus l. xv. ¢. xi. 
Isocrat. Panegyr. and de Pace. 


352 


most apparent force immediately after the battle 
of Mantinæa,! has been supposed productive of 
very important consequences. While Epami- 
nondas lived, the Athenians, it is said, were 
kept vigilant in duty through jealousy and fear; 
but after the death of this formidable enemy, 
they sunk into those vices which occasioned 
their ruin. This specious remark is not found- 
ed in truth. Two centuries before the birth of 
Epaminondas, the injustice, the avarice, the 
total corruption of the Athenians, is forcibly 
described by one of the most respectable of their 
countrymen,? who composed a system of wise 
laws in order to ascertain their rights, and to 
reform their manners. But it was difficult to 
correct abuses that seem inherent in the nature 
of democracy, which, even as regulated by Solon, 
but still more as ngw-modeled by Pericles, left 
the citizens tyrants in one capacity, and slaves 
in another. The division of the executive power 
of government among the archons, the senate, 
assembly, and even various committees of the 
assembly, rendered it impossible to perceive, or 
prevent, the hand of oppression. Men knew 
not from what quarter their safety might be 
assailed; and being called to authority in their 
turn, they, instead of making united opposition 
to the injustice of their magistrates, contented 
themselves with inflicting the same injuries 
which they had either previously suffered, or 
still apprehended, from the malice of their ene- 
mies. Nor is this inconvenience peculiar to the 
Greek republics. While human nature remains 
unchanged, and the passions of men run in their 
ordinary channel, the right to exercise power 
will commonly be attended with a strong in- 
clination to abuse it. Unless power, therefore, 
be counteracted by liberty; unless an imper- 
vious line of separation be drawn between pre- 
rogative and privilege, and that part of the 
constitution which sustains its political life, be 
kept separate and distinct from that which 
tends to corruption, it is of little consequence 
whether a country be governed by one tyrant 
or a thousand; in both cases alike the condi- 
tion of man is precarious, and force prevails 
over law. 

This radical defect in the Grecian policies 
produced many ruinous consequences in affairs 
foreign and domestic, which were commonly 
directed by the selfish passions.of a few, or the 
fluctuating caprices of the multitude, rather than 
by the rational and permanent interest of the 
community. But as diseases and other accidents 
often bring to light the latent weakness and 
imperfections of the body, so the vices of the 
Athenian government first appeared in their 
full magnitude after the unfortunate war of 
Peloponnesus; and, although the excess of the 
malady sometimes checked itself, and returns 
of ease and prosperity sometimes concealed its 
virulence, yet the deep-rooted evil still main- 
tained its destructive progress, till it wrought 
the ruin of the constitution. 


$I 


1 Justin. l. vi. c. ix. first made this observation, which 
has been so frequently repeated. 

2 See above, p. 162. and the elegiac verses of Solon pre- 
served in Demosthenes Orat. mses axeuwesobeses; a title 
that can only be translated by a paraphrase “ the miscon- 
duct of Æschines in his embassy.’ 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


In the tumultuary governments of Greece, 
where the judiciary power frequently prevailed 
over the legislative, the sources of dissension 
were innumerable ; while the feeble restraint of 
laws, ill administered, was unable to counteract 
their force. Although hereditary distinctions 
were little known or regarded, the poor and 
rich formed two distinct parties, which had 
their particular views and separate interests. In 
some republics the higher ranks bound them 
selves, by oath, to neglect no opportunity of 
hurting theirinferiors.? The populace of Athens 
commonly treated the rich as if they had enter 
ed into an engagement not less atrocious.‘ 
During the intervals of party rage, private 
quarrels kept the state in perpetual fermenta 
tion. Beside the ordinary disputes concerning 
property, the competitions for civil offices, for 
military conimand, for obtaining public ho- 
nours, or eluding punishments or burdens, open- 
ed an ever-flowing source of bitter animosity. 
Among this litigious people, neighbours were 
continually at variance. Every man was re- 
garded as a rival and enemy, who had not 
proved himself a friend.5 Hereditary resent- 
ments were perpetuated from one generation 
to another; and the seeds of discord being 
sown in such abundance, yielded a never-failing 
crop of libels, invectives, and legal prosecutions. 
The usual employment of six thousand Athe- 
nians consisted in deciding law-suits, the profits 
of which afforded the principal resource of the 
poorer citizens. Their legal fees amounted an- 
nually to a hundred and fifty talents; the bribes 
which they received, sometimes exceeded that 
sum; and, both united, formed a sixth part of 
the Athenian revenues,§ even in the most flou- 
rishing times. As the most numerous but most 
worthless class of the people commonly prevail- 
ed in the assembly,so they had totally engrossed 
the tribunals; and it was to be expected that 
such judges would always be more swayed by 
favour and prejudice than by law and reason. 
The law punished with death the man guilty of 
giving bribes; but “we,” say the Athenian 
writers,’ “advance him to the command of 
our armies; and the more criminal he becomes 
in this respect, with the higher and more lucra- 
tive honours is he invested.” Those who 
courted popular favour, lavished not only their 
own, but the public wealth, to flatter the pas- 
sions of their adherents; an abuse which began 
during the splendid administration of Pericles,8 
extended more widely under his unworthy 
successors ; and, though interrupted during the 
calamities of the republic, revived with new 
force on the first dawn of returning prosperity.9 

In the license of democratic freedom, the 
citizens, poor and rich, thought themselves 
alike entitled to enjoy every species of festivity. 
Pericles introduced the practice of exhibiting 
not only tragedies, but comedies, at the public 
expense, and of paying for the admission of the 


3 Aristot. Polit. Isocrat. et Lysias, passim. 

4 Xenoph. de Rep. Athen. 

5 See Lysias passim. et Xenoph. Memorab. |. ii. p. 748, 
et seq. 

6 Risto! Vesp. 

7 Isocrat. de Pace, et Demosthenes, passim, 

8 Thucydides, p. 108, et seq. 

9 Plut. in Pericle. 


XXXII] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


353 


populace. At the period of which we write, a clamation was effeminate and vicious; above 
considerable portion of the revenue was appro- | all, the music became glaring, tawdy, volup- 


priated to the theatre; and some years after- 
wards,'0 a law was proposed by the demagogue 
Eubulus, and enacted by the senate and people, 
rendering it capital to divert, or even to propose 
diverting, the theatrical money to any other end 
or object.!! ' 

Of all amusements known in polished society, 
the Grecian theatre was, doubtless, the most 
elegant and ingenious; yetseveral circumstances 
rendered it peculiarly liable to abuse. The 
great extent of the edifices in which plays were 
represented, naturally introduced masques, the 
better to distinguish the different persons,!? or 
characters, of the drama; since the variations 
of passion, with the correspondent changes of 


tuous, and dissolute in the highest degree, and 
suited only that perverse debauchery of soul 
from which it originally sprung, and which it 
served afterward to inflame and nourish.!5 

A mysterious cloud hangs over the Grecian 
music, to which effects are ascribed far tran- 
scending the actual power of that art. Yet we 
cannot refuse our assent to the concurring tes- 
timony of ancient writers, who refer to this 
principle the extreme dcgencracy and corruption 
which almost universally infected the Athenians 
at the period now under review. Causes which 
operate on the many, are not easily mistaken ; 
but should we still doubt the cause, the cffect at 
least cannot be denied. The Athenian youth 


countenance, which form the capital mcrit of| are said to have dissipated their fortunes, and 


modern performers, could scarcely have been 
observed by an immense crowd of people, many 
of whom must have been placed at a grcat dis- 
tance from the scene. The same causes, to- 
gether with the inimitable harmony of the 
Greek language, gave rise to musical declama- 
tion,'3 which might sometimes fortify passion, 
but always rendcred speech more slow and ar- 
ticulate, and thercfore more easily heard by the 
remote part of the audience. In combining the 
different parts of a tragic fable, the poet na- 
turally rejects such incidents as are improper 
for representation. These, if necessary for car- 
rying on the action of the piece, are supposed 
to be transacted elsewhere, and barely related 
on the theatre. The time required for such 
events, when they are not simultaneous with 
those cxhibited on the stage, necessarily inter- 
rupts the representation, and leaves room for 
the choral songs, which being incorporated with 
the tragedy, heightens its effect, and increascs 
the spectator’s delight ; consequences extremely 
different from those attending the act-tunes and 
detached airs of modern plays and operas, uni- 
versally condemned by good judges, as sus- 
pending the action, and destroying the interest 
of the drama, and only affording opportunitics 
to effeminate throats to shine in trills and di- 
visions, at the expense of poetry and good sense. 
But in ancient, as well as modern times, the 
corrupt taste of the licentious vulgar was ever 
at variance with the discerning judgment of the 
wise and virtuous. The form and arrangement 
of the Grecian tragedy was exactly imitated in 
the extravagant pieces of Aristophanes, and 
his profligate contemporaries and succcssors,!4 
These pernicious productions formed the fa- 
vourite entertainment of the populace. The 
masque, disguising the countenance of the per- 
former, allowed him to indulge in the most un- 
blushing license of voice and gesture ; the de- 


10 Before Christ 349, according to S. Petitus, de Leg. 
Attic. p. 38. ‘ 

11 Plutarch. in Pericle, et Demosthen. Oration. passim. 

12 It is well know that the word persona originally sig- 
nified a masque, from personare, because the ancient masks, 
both Greek and Roman, were so made as to increase and 
invigorate sound. 

13 Notwithstanding the assertions of Casaubon, Gravina, 
&c. the Greeks in ancient times seem not to have been ac- 
quainted with the abaurd practice of dividing the acting and 
speaking between two persons. This is mentioned by Livy, 
as the invention of ‘Titus Andronicus, who flourished 240 
years before Christ. 

14 See p. 172. 


2 


melted the vigour of mind and body, in wanton 
and expensive dalliance with the female per- 
formers on the theatre.16 Weary and fastidious 
with excess of criminal indulgence, they lost all 
capacity or relish for solid and manly occupa- 
tions; and at once deserted the exercises of 
war, and the schools of philosophers. To fill 
up the vacuities of their listless lives, they, as 
well as persons more advanced in years, loi- 
tered in the shops of musicians, and other art- 
ists ;!7 and sauntered in the forum and public 
places, idly inquiring after news, in which they 
took little interest, unless some danger alarmed 
‘the insipid uniformity of their pleasures.'8 Dice, 
and other games of chance, were carried toa 
ruinous excess; and are so keenly stigmatized 
by the moral writers of the age, that it should 
seem they had begun but recently to prevail, 
ane prove fatal.!9 The people at large were 
peculiarly addicted to the sensual gratifications 
of the table; and, might we believe a poet 
quoted by Atheneus, had lately bestowed the 
freedom of their city (once deemed an honour 
by princes and kings)20 on the sons of Chere- 
philus, on account of the uncommon merit of 
their father in the art of cookery.?! 

Idleness, indulgence, and dissipation, had re- 
duced the greater part of the Athenian citizens 
to extreme indigence. Although landed pro- 
perty was more equally divided in Greece than 
in any modern country, we are told that about 
one fourth of the Athenians were totally desti- 


15 Aristotle, 1. viii. de Republ. says ironically, ‘‘ Every 
‘kind of music is good for something; that of the thcatres 
is necessary for the amusement of the mob; being well 
suited to the perversion of their minds and manners, and let 
them enjoy it” Plato, Aristoxenus, and Ptutarch, bitterly 
complain ofthe corruption of music, as the main source of vice 
and immorality. That art, which had anciently been used as 
the vehicle of religious and moral instruction, was employed 
in the theatres to excite every voluptuous and dissolute pas- 
sion. Plato de Legibus,]. iii. Aristoxenus, quoted by Athe- 
neus,]. xiv. et Plutarch. de Musica. Inspeaking of the vices of 
London, a writer, who had the spirit of an ancient legislator, 
says, “That were a man permitted to make all the ballads 
of a nation, he needed not care who should make its laws.” 
Fletcher of Saltoun’s Works, p. 266. 

16 Athenus, l. xii. p. 534. who gives a general descrip- 
tion of Athenian profligacy. 

17 Tsocrat. in Areopag. and Lysias’s defence of a poor 
man accused before the senate, translated in the Life of 
Lysias, p. 114. 

18 Demosthen. Philipp. passim. 

19 Athcnæuns, |. xii. Lysias in Alcibiad. 

20 Demosthen. de Republic. ordinand. 

21 Athcneug, l. iii. p. 119 


354 


tute of immoveable possessions.! Their dress 
was frequently so mean and dirty, that it was 
difficult, by their external appearance, to dis- 
{inguish them from slaves; a circumstance 
which arose not from slovenliness, but from 
poverty, since we are assured that such as could 
afford the expense spared no pains to adorn 
their persons ; and that many who danced dur- 
ing summer in embroidered robes, spent the 
winter in places too shameful to be named.? 
And how is it possible (to use the words of their 
own authors)? that wretches destitute of the 
first necessaries of life should administer public 
affairs with wisdom? We find accordingly, 
that they were extremely ill qualified for execu- 
ting those offices with which they were entrust- 
ed. As the lower ranks had ina great measure 
engrossed the administration of justice, it was 
not uncommon to bribe the clerks employed in 
transcribing the laws of Solon, to abridge, in- 
terpolate, and corrupt them. What is still 
more extraordinary, such a gross artifice fre- 
quently succeeded; nor was the deceit discover- 
ed until litigant parties produced in court con- 
tradictory laws.4 When their negligence could 
not be surprised, their avarice might be bribed; 
justice was sold; riches, virtue, eminence of 
rank or abilities, always exposed to danger, and 
often ended in disgrace. For those needy 
Athenians, who formed the most numerous class 
in the republic, endeavoured to alleviate their 
misery by a very criminal consolation; persecut- 
ing their superiors, banishing them their coun- 
try, confiscating their estates, and treating them 
on the slightest provocation, and often without 
any provocation at all, with the utmost injus- 
tice and cruelty.6 Though occasionaliy direct- 
ed by the equity of an Aristides, or the mag- 
nanimity of a Cimon, they, for the most part, 
listened to men of an opposite character. He 
who could best flatter and deceive them obtain- 
ed most of their confidence. With such quali- 
fications, the turbulent, licentious, and disso- 
lute, in a word, the orator who most resembled 
his audience, commonly prevailed in the as- 
sembly ; and specious or hurtful talents carried 
off the rewards due to real merit. Isocrate? 
assures us of the fact; and Xenophon’ affirms, 
that it is perfectly conformable to the nature 
and principles of the Athenian form of govern- 
ment. 

With such principles and manners, the Athe- 
nians required only a daring and profligate 


1 See the Discourse of Lysias upon a proposal for dis- 
solving the ancient government of Athens. Lysias’s ora- 
tions were chiefly written in the space of twenty years, be- 
tween 404 and 384 before Christ. They afford a uniform 
picture of the poverty, misery, and vices of his contempora- 
ries; which the reader will find abridged in the introduction 
to my translation of that writer. The Athenian affairs be- 
came more flourishing after the fall of Thebes and Sparta. 
Their resources were again exhausted by the war with their 
allies. ‘The revenues were greatly raised by the conquests 
of Timotheus, Phocion, &c. and the good management of 
Lycurgus and Demosthenes. Plut. in Lycurg. in lib. de 
Dec. Orator. 

2 Isocrates on reforming the government of Athens. 

3 Isocrat. et Xenoph. de Repub. Athen. 

4 Life of Lysias, prefixed to his Orations, p. 116. 

5S See Lysias’s pleadings throughout. 

6 Isocrates de Pace; and the numerous examples of that 
kind, which have already occurred in this history. 

7 In his oration on reforming the government of Athens. 

8 In his treatiso de Republic. Athen. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Ly 


[Cuar. 


leader, to involve them in designs the most ex- 
travagant and pernicious. Such a personage 
presented himself in Chares, whose soldier-like 
appearance, blunt address, and bold impetuous 
valour, masked his selfish ambition, and render- 
ed him the idol of the populace. His person 
was gigantic and robust, his voice commanding, 
his manners haughty; he asserted positively, 
and promised boldly; and his presumption was 
so excessive, that it concealed his incapacity not 
only from others, but from himself. Though 
an enterprising and successful partisan, he was 
unacquainted with the great duties of a general ; 
and his defects appear the more striking and 
palpable, when compared with the abilities of 
Iphicrates and Timotheus, his contemporaries, 
who prevailed as often by address as by force, 
and whose conquests were secured to the re- 
public by the moderation, justice,and humanity, 
with which they had been obtained, and with 
which they continued to be governed. Chares 
proposed a very different mode of administra- 
tion; he exhorted his countrymen to supply the 
defects of their treasury, and to acquire the 
materials of those pleasures which they regard- 
ed as essential to their happiness, by plundering 
the wealth of their allies and colonies. This 
counsel was too faithfully obeyed; the vexations, 
anciently exercised against the tributary and 
dependent states, were renewed and exceeded.9 
The weaker communities complained, and re- 
monstrated, against this intolerable rapacity and 
oppression; while the islands of Chios, Coos, 
Rhodes, as well as the city of Byzantium, pre- 
pared openly to revolt, and engaged with each 
other to repel force by force, until they should 
obtain peace and independence. 

Chares, probably the chief in- 


C TR : strpment, as well as the adviser, of 
y C. 358 the arbitrary measures which had 


occasioned the revolt, was sent out 
with a powerful fleet and army, to quash at 
once the hopes of the insurgents. He sailed 
towards Chios, with an intention to seize the 
capital of that island, which was supposed to 
be the centre and prime mover of rebellion. 
The confederates, informed of his motions, had 
already drawn thither the greatest part of their 
force. The city of Chios was besieged by sea 
and land. The islanders defended themselves 
with vigour. Chares found it difficult to re- 
pulse their sallies. His fleet attempted to enter 
their harbour without success; the ship of 
Chabrias alone penetrated thus far; and that 
able commander, whose valour and integrity 
merited a better fortune, though deserted by the 
flcet, yet forsook not the ship entrusted to him 
by the republic. His companions threw away 
their shields, and saved themselves by swim- 
ming to the Athenian squadron, which was still 
within their reach. But Chabrias, fighting 
bravely, fell by the darts of the Chians, prefer- 
ring an honourable death to a disgraceful life." 

Encouraged by advantages over an enemy 
who had at first affected to despise them, the 
insurgents augmented their fleet, and ravaged 
the isles of Lemnos and Samos. The Atheni- 


9 Diodor. } xvi. et Isocrat. de Pace. y 
10 Diodor. l. xvi. pp. 413. 423. 
11 Nepos. in Chabr. et Diodor. l. xvi. p. 423. et seq. 


XXXII] 


ans, indignant that the territories of their faith- 
ful allies should fall a prey to the depredations | 
of rebels, fitted out, early in the next year, a 
new armament under the command of Mnes- 
theus, the son of Iphicrates, and son-in-law of 
Timotheus, expecting that the new commander 
would respectfully listen to the advice of those 
great men, who perhaps declined acting as 
principals in an expedition where Chares pos- 
sessed any share of authority. That general 
had raised the siege of Chios, and now cruised 
in the Hellespont; where, being joined by 
Mnestheus, the united squadrons amounted to a 
hundred and twenty sail. It was immediately 
determined to cause a diversion of the enemy’s 
forces from Samos and Lemnos, by laying siege 
to Byzantium. The design succeeded; the al- 
lies withdrew from these islands, collected their 
whole naval strength, and prepared vigorously 
for defending the principal city in their confed- 
eracy. 

The hostile armaments approach each other, 
with a resolution to join battle, when a sudden 
and violent storm arose, which rendered it im- 
possible for the Athenians to bear up to the 
enemy, or even to keep the sea, without being 
exposed to shipwreck. Chare& alone confident- 
ly insisted on commencing the attack, while the | 
other commanders, more cautious and experi- 
enced, perceived the disadvantage, and declined 
the unequal danger.!2 His impetuosity, thus 
overruled by the prudence of his colleagues, 
was converted into resentment and fury; he 
called the soldiers and sailors to witness their 
opposition, which he branded with every odious 
epithet of reproach ; and, with the first oppor- 
tunity, despatched proper messengers to Athens, 
to accuse them of incapacity, cowardice, and 
total neglect of duty. The accusation was sup- 
ported by venal orators in the pay of Chares. 

Timotheus and Iphicrates were tried capitally. 
The former trusted to his innocence and elo- 
quence; the latter used a very extraordinary 
expedient to sway the judges, conformable, 
however, to the spirit of that age, when courts 
of justice were frequently instruments of op- 
pression, governed by every species of undue 
influence, easily corrupted and easily intimida- 
ted. The targeteers, or light infantry, who had 
been armed, disciplined, and long commanded, 
oy Iphicrates, enjoyed the same reputation in 
Grecec, which the Fabian soldiers afterwards 
did in Italy. They were called the Iphicraten- 
sian troops, from the name of their commander, 
to whom they owed their merit and their fame, 
and to whose person (notwithstanding the strict- 
ness of his discipline) they were strongly at- 
tached by the ties of gratitude and esteem. The 
youngest and bravest of this celebrated band 
readily obeyed the injunctions of their admired 
general; surrounded, on the day of trial, the 
benches of the magistrates ; and took care sea- 
sonably to display the points of their daggers.!3 


12 Weare not informed by Diodorua or Nepos, why the 
disadvantage and danger were on the side of the Athenians; 
probably, being better sailors, they expected to profit of 
their skill in maneuvre, which the storm rendered useless 
and unavailing. 

13 It was probably during this trial, that Tphicrates being 
reproached with betraying the interests of his country, asked 
his accuser, “ Would you, on a like occasion, have been 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


355 


It wasthe law of Athens, that, after prelimi- 
naries had been adjusted, and the judges assem- 
bled, the parties should be heard, and the trial 
begun and ended on the same day; nor could 
any person be twice tried for the same offence. 
The rapidity of this mode of procedure favour- 
ed the views of Iphicrates. The magistrates 
were overawed by the imminence of a danger, 
which they had neither strength to resist nor 
time to elade. They were compelled to an im- 
mediate decision; but, instead of the sentence 
of death, which was expected, they imposed a 
fine!4 on the delinquents, which no Athenian 
citizen in that age was in a condition to pay. 
This severity drove into banishment those able 
and illustrious commanders. Timotheus sailed 
to Chalcis in Eubea, and afterwards to the isle 


‘of Lesbos, both which places his valour and 


abilities had recovered for the republic, and 
which, being chosen as his residence in disgrace, 
sufficiently evince the mildness of his govern- 
ment, and his moderation in prosperity. Iphi- 
crates travelled into Thrace, where he had long 
resided. He had formerly married the daugh- 
ter of Cotys, the most considerable of the 
Thracian princes; yet hedived and died in ob- 
scurity;!5 nor did either he or Timotheus thence- 
forth take any share in the affairs of their un- 
grateful country.!6 Thus did the social war de- 
stroy or remove Iphicrates, Chabrias, and Timo- 
theus, the best generals whom Greece could 
boast; and, the brave and honest Phocion ex- 
cepted, the last venerable remains of Athenian 
virtue.!7 
Olymp By the removal of those great 
i men, Chares was left to conduct,’ 
cv. 4. : 
A.C. 357. uncontrolled, the war against the 
allies; and to display the full ex- 
tent of his worthlessness and incapacity. His 
insatiable avarice rendered him intolerable to 
the friends of Athens; his weakness and negli- 
gence exposed him to the contempt of the insur- 
gents. He indulged his officers and himself in 
a total neglect of discipline; the reduction of 
the rebels was the least matter of his concern; 
he was attended by an effeminate crowd of 
singers, dancers, and harlots,!8 whose luxury 
exhausted the scanty supplics raised by the 
Athenians for the service of the war.!9 In or- 
der to satisfy the clamorous demands of the 
soldiers, Chares, regardless of the treaties sub- 
sisting between Athens and Persia, hired him- 
self and his forces to Artabazus, the wealthy 
satrap of Ionia, who had revolted from his mas- 
ter Artaxerxes Ochus, the most cruel and de- 


guilty of that crime?’ “By no means,” replied the other. 
tt And can you then imagine,” replied the hero, “ that Iphi- 
crates should be guilty ?” Quintilian L v. c. xii. 

14 Once hundred talents, about twenty thousand pounds. 

15 Diodorus only says, that he was dead before the battle 
of Cheronwa, which happened twenty years after his ba- 
nishment. 

16 Nepos says, that after the death of Timotheus, the 
Athenians remitted nine parts of his fine; but obliged his 
son Conon to pay the remaining tenth, for repairing the 
walls of the Piræus, which his grandfather had rebuilt from 
the spoils of the enemy. 

17 Military virtue. Wee extrema fuit wtas imperatornm 
Atheniensium, [phicrates, Chabrias, Timotheus; neque 
post illoruin obitnin quisquam dux in illa nrbe fuit dignus 
memoria. Nepos in Timoth. The biographer forgets Pho- 
cion. ° 

18 Athenmus, l. xii. p. 534. 

19 Demosthen. Philipp. 1. 


356 


testable tyrant that ever disgraced the throne 
of Cyrus. The arms of the Greeks saved Ar- 
tabazus from the implacable resentment of a 
monster incapable to pity or forgive; and their 
meritorious services were amply rewarded by 
the lavish gratitude of the satrap. 

This transaction, how extraordi- 


oa ae nary soever it may appear to the 
we 3 56 modern reader, neither surprised nor 


displeased the Athenians. They 
were accustomed to allow their commanders in 
foreign parts to act without instructions or con- 
trol; and the creatures of Chares loudly extol- 
led his good management in paying the Grecian 
troops with Persian money. But the triumph 
of false joy was of short duration. Ochus sent 
an embassy to remonstrate with the Athenians 
on their unprovoked infraction of the peace; 
and threatened, that unless they immediately 
withdrew their forces from Asia, he would as- 
sist the rebels with a fleet of three hundred sail. 
This just menace, want of success against the 
confederates, together with areason still more 
important, which will soon come to be fully ex- 
plained, obliged the Athenians to recall their 
armament from the east, and to terminate the 
social war, without obtaining any of the pur- 
poses for which it had been undertaken. The 
confederates made good the claims which their 
boldness had urged; regained complete freedom 
and independence ;! and lived twenty years ex- 
empt from the legal oppression of subsidies and 
contingents, till they submitted, with the rest 
of Greece, to the arms and intrigues of Philip, 
and the irresistible fortune of the Macedonians, 

Notwithstanding the decay of martial spirit, 
the extravagance of public councils, and the 
general corruption of manners, which prevailed 
in Athens, and in other cities of Greece, the 
arts and sciences were still cultivated with ar- 
dour and success. During the period now un- 
der review, the scholars of Hippocrates and 
Democritus enriched natural philosophy with 
many important discoveries.2 The different 
branches of mathematics, mechanics, and as- 
tronomy, received great improvements from 
Eudoxus? of Cnidus, Timeus‘ of Loceri, Ar- 
chytas of Tarentum, and Meton of Athens. 
The Megaric school flourished under Stilpo, 
the most learned and acute of that dispufatious 
sect, which, from its continual wranglings, 
merited the epithet of contentious.6 The doc- 
trines of Aristippus were maintained by his 
daughter Areté, and improved by Hegesias and 
Anneceris, who paved the way for Epicurus,’ 
The severe philosophy of Antisthenes had 
fewer followers. But Diogenes alone was equal 
to a sect.9 

Statuary was cultivated by Polycletus and 
Canachus of Sicyon, by Naucydes of Argos, 
and by innumerable artists in other cities of 
Greece, Italy, and Tonia. The works of Po- 


7 


1 Diodor. p. 424. 
2 Galenus de Natur. Facultat. et Hippocrat. Mes aexwv, 


c. 

3 Laert l. viii. sect. 86. et Suid. in Eudox. 

4 Jambl. de Pythagor. 5 Censorin. de Die natal. 

6 Egirraxy, Laert. l. vi. sect. 107. 

7 Laertius et Suidas. 

8 Ælian. Var. Histor. l. x. ¢. xvi. 

9 We shall have occasion to speak more fully of Dio- 
gencs hereafter. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


(Cmar. 


lycletus were the most admired. His greates* 
work was the colossal statue of Argive Juno, 
composed of gold and ivory. Bronze and mar- 
ble, however, still furnished the usual mate- 
rials for sculpture. The Grecian temples, par- 
ticularly those of Delphi and Olympia, were 
enriched with innumerable productions of this 
kind, during the period to which our present 
observations relate. One figure of Polycletus 
acquired peculiar fame. From the exactness 
of the proportions,” it was called the rule, or 
standard. Even Lysippus, the contemporary 
and favourite of Alexander, regarded it as a 
model of excellence, from which it was impru- 
dent to depart. 

Between Polycletus and Lysip- 


Cos pus flourished Praxiteles, whose 
A. C. 460 works. formed the intermediate 


shade between the sublime style, 
which prevailed in the age of Pericles, and the 
beautiful, which attained perfection under Ly- 
sippus and Apelles, in the age of Alexander. 
The statues of Praxiteles bore a similar rela- 
tion to those of Phidias, which the paintings 
of Guido and Correggio bear to those of Julic 
Romano and Raphael. The works of the 
earlier artists are more grand and more sub- 
lime, those of the later more graceful and more 
alluring; the first class being addressed to the 
imagination, the second to the senses. The 
works of Praxiteles were in the Ceramicus of 
Athens; but neither in the Ceramicus, nor 
in any part of the world, was a statue to be 
seen equal to his celebrated Venus, which long 
attracted spectators from all parts to Cnidus. 
Praxiteles made two statues of the goddess at 
the same time, the one clothed, the other naked. 
The decent modesty of the Coans preferred the 
former; the latter was purchased by the Cni- 
dians, and long regarded as the most valuable 
possession of their community. The voluptu- 
ous Nicomedes, king of Bithynia, languished 
after this statue; to purchase such unrivalled 
charms, he offered to pay the debts of Cnidus. 
which were immense; but the Cnidians deter- 
mined not to part with an ornament from which 
their republic derived so much celebrity. “ Hav- 
ing considered,” says an ancient author,!! * the 
beautiful avenues leading to the temple, we at 
length entered the sacred dome. In the middle 
stands the statue of the goddess, in marble of 
Paros. A sweet smile sits on her lips; no gar- 
ment hides her charms; the hand only, as by 
an instinctive impulse, conceals those parts 
which modesty permits not to name. The art 
of Praxiteles has given to the stone the soft- 
ness and sensibility of flesh. O Mars, the most 
fortunate of the gods!” But it is impossible to 
translate his too faithful description into the 


10 Winckelmann, p. 653. and his translator Mr. Huber, 
vol. iii. p. 34. differ from Pliny, I. 35. c. 19. They confound 
the statue, called the Rule, or Canon, with another called 
the Doryphorus, because grasping a spear. Pliny’s words 
are, “ Polycletus Sicyonius Diadumenum fecit molliter ju- 
venem, centum talentis nobilitatum; idem et Doryphorum 
viriliter puerum. Fecit et quem canona artifices vocant, 
lineamenta artis ex eo petentes, velut a lege quadam ; s80- 
lusque hominum artem ipse (forte ipsam) fecisse, artis opere 
judicatur.” They have followed Cicero de Clar. Orator. 
c. 86.—yet Cicero, speaking incidentally on the subject, 
might more naturally mistake than Pliny, writing expressly 
on sculpture. 

11 Lucian. Amor. 


XXXII] 


decency of modern language; a description 
more animated and voluptuous than even the 
chisel of Praxiteles. 

The honour which Polycletus and Praxiteles 
aequired in sculpture, was, during the same age, 
attained in painting by Eupompus and Pam- 
philus of Sicyon, by Euphranor of Corinth, 
by Apollodorus and Nicias of Athens; above 
all by Xeuxis and Timanthes.'? The works of 
Eupompus are now unknown, but in his own 
times his merit and celebrity occasioned a new 
division of the schools, which were formerly 
the Grecian and the Asiatic; but after Eupom- 
pus, the Grecian school was subdivided into the 
Athenian and Sicyonian. Pamphilus, and his 
scholar Apelles, gave fresh lustre to the latter 
school, which seems to have flourished longer 
than any other in Greece, since the paintings 
exhibited at the celebrated procession of Pto- 
lemy Philadelphus were all the productions of 
Sicyonian masters.}3 

Few works of Pamphilus are described by 
ancient authors. His picture of the Heraclide, 
carrying branches of olive, and imploring the 
assistance of the Athenians, has not, however, 
escaped the vigilant eye of national vanity.!4 
He was by birth a Macedonian, but well versed 
in literature and science, which he thought in- 
dispensably necessary to a painter. He re- 
ceived about two hundred pounds from each 
of his scholars, and seems to have been the first 
who put a high price on his works. He lived 
to enjoy his fame, and rendered his profession 
so fashionable, that it became customary in 
Sicyon, and afterwards in other parts of Greece, 
to instruct the sons of wealthy families in the 
arts of design. This liberal profession was 
forbidden to slaves; nor, during the existence 
of Grecian freedom, did any celebrated pro- 
duction in sculpture or painting come from ser- 
vile hands.!5 

Euphranor, the Corinthian, excelled both in 
painting and statuary. The dignity of his he- 
roes was admired. He painted the twelve 
gods. He said that his Theseus had fed on 
flesh, that of Parrhasius on roses. He wrote 
on colours and symmetry. Apollodorus the 
Athenian was deemed the first who knew the 
force of light and shade.'§ His priest in prayer, 


12 Pliny, in his 35th book. I have paid little attention 
to his pretended Epochs of Art, when inconsistent with the 
information of more ancient authors. The Greek histo- 
rians, from whom he copied this part of his work, found it 
convenient, at every pause in their narrative, to give some 
account of men who had distinguished themselves in the 
arta and sciences, of whom they had no opportunity to 
make mention in rclating public transactions, and describ- 
ing wars and negotiations. The era of every peace fur- 
nished a proper resting place to the historian; from which 
he looked back, and collected the names worthy to be 
hended down to posterity. Every such era, therefore, 
Pliny, and after him Winckelmann, have considered as an 
epoch of art; not reflecting, that arts do not suddenly arise 
and flourish, and when once they flourish, do not sudden! 
decay; since the mind long retains the impulse which it 
has received; and the active powers of man, when once 
directed to their proper objects, are not easily lulled to re- 

ose. 

13 Athen. Deipn. l. v. p. 196. 

14 Aristoph. Plut. v. 385. 

15 Plin. l. xxxv. c. xxxvi. sect. 8. 

16 This is the commendation of Plutarch. Pliny speaks 
more highly of Apollodorus. “ Festinas ad lumina artig, 
in quibus primus refulsit Apollodorus Atheniensis ... 
neque ante eum tabula ullius ostenditur, quæ teneat oculos.” 
Pliny’s praises often clash with each other. He frequently 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


357 


and his Ajax struck with lightning, were held 
in high estimation. Nicias, his fellow-citizen, 
excelled in female figures, and in all the magic 
of colouring. His Calypso, Ið, and Andro- 
meda, claimed just fame; but his greatest com- 
position was the Necromanteia of Homer.!7, 
Attalus king of Pergamus (for Nicias lived to 
a great age) offered twelve thousand pounds 
for this picture; but the artist, who was ex- 
tremely wealthy, gave it in a present to his na- 
tive country. Praxiteles, when asked which 
of his statues he most valued, answered, 
“ Those of which the models were retouched 
by Nicias.” 

Zeuxis is said to have been born at Heraclea, 
but it is uncertain in which of the cities known 
by that name. He acquired great wealth by 
his works; at length he refused money, boast- 
ing that no price could pay them. The mo- 
desty of his Penelopé was equal to a lesson of 
morality. He painted Hercules strangling the 
serpents in the presence of the astonished Am- 
phitryon and Alcmena. His picture dedicated 
in the temple of Juno Lucina, at Agrigentem, 
has been often mentioned. Being allowed to 
view the naked beauty of that populous city, 
it is known that he chose as models five vir- 
gins, whose united charms were expressed in 
this celebrated piece. His gteatest work was 
Jupiter sitting on his throne, and surrounded 
by the gods.!8 


calls different persons the first in the art, and even in the 
same branch of it. The warmth of his fancy leaves him 
no time for calculating the weight of his expressions. His 
credulity, love of wonder, and inaccuracy, cannot be de- 
fended. Yet his judgments on pictures and statues are not 
without their merit; since the perfection of those works of 
art consists in making a deep impression, in transporting 
and elévating the affections, and in raising that glow of 
sentiment, which Pliny is so happy in communicating to 
his readers, 

17 Long before all the celebrated works of art, Homer 
had viewed nature with a: picturesque eye. For the innu- 
merable pictures copied from him, see Fabricii Biblioth. 
Gree. l. ii. c. vi. p. 345. Homer gave the idea of what is 
grand and pathetic in intellect, which painters aud statua- 
ries transtated into what is touching and awful to the eye. 

18 Valerius Maximus, l. iii. e. vii. speaks of his Helena 
painted for the city of Crotona. On his naked Helen Zeuxis 
inscribed the following lines of Homer: 


Ou veusris, Towas xe euxvyussxg Axxsous 
Tosyd zui yuvasns roduy Yeovoy QAYER TAaTKesve 
Atvws ehavatyrs Seng ets wwe EOLKEV, Tl. iii. v. 156 


“They cried, No wonder such celestial charms 

For nine long years have set the world in arms: 

What winning graces! what majestic mien! 

She moves a goddess, and she looks a queen.” Pope. 


Pope has paraphrased the last line, ‘For she is wonder- 
fully like to the immortal gods.” This must have sounded 
nobly to the Greeks, who would doubtless have considered 
“looking a queen,” as a sinking in poetry. But I have 
cited the lines, to show by what different means poetry and 
painting attain the same end. Both Homer and Zcuxis 
convey an high idea of Helen’s beauty; but Homer does 
it by the cffects of this beauty, which could animate the 
cold age of Priam, Panthoos, &c. whom he has just inimi- 
tably described: 

Tegi Sn roAsmoso TETAUMEVOI, OAA?’ ey opytat 

ErAOty TETTIYICTIV sosnorss OLTE XAI’ VANY 

Asviesw sGsCopsvos ore AEIRLOETTZV LEITH, 


When the Greek monk, Constantinus Manassea (Chron. 
p. 20.) describes the beauty of Helen, 
Hy y yuvy wee txxrAAns, 6U0P EUS, EUXEOUTTATY, 
Evmaeetog, sumporwr0s, Bowmis, Mrovexeous® 
and so on, through a dozen of lines, the imagination of the 
reader cannot follow him; each epithet of beauty drives 
the preceding from the memory ; and we fancy that we see 
a man laberiously rolling stones up one side of a hill, which 


358 


Timanthes reached the highest perfection of 
his art; but his genius surpassed the art itself. 
In his sacrifice of Iphigenia, a gradation of sor- 
row was seen in the faces of the spectators. It 
was carried to the utmost height, consistent with 
beauty, in the countenance of her uncle Mene- 
laus, But Agamemnon, who was still more 
deeply afflicted with the unhappy fate of his 
daughter, veiled his face with his robe. In 
several others of his pieces, Timanthes disco- 
vered the power of transporting the mind be- 
yond the picture. He painted to the fancy 
rather than to the eye. In his works, as in the 
description of Homer and Milton, more was 
understood than expressed. 

The power of expression was carried to a 
degree of perfection which it is not easy to be- 
lieve, and scarcely possible to comprehend. 
The civil and military arrangements of the 
Greeks gave, doubtless, great advantages to 
their artists in this respect. Aristides, a The- 
ban painter, represented the sacking of a town; 
among other scenes of horror, a child was paint- 
ed clinging to the breast of its wounded mother, 
who “felt and feared,! that after she was dead, 
the child should suck blood instead of milk.” 
Parrhasius of Ephesus, in an earlier age, per- 
sonified the people of Athens, in a figure that 
characterised them as at once cruel and com- 
passionate, proud and humble, brave and cow- 
ardly, elevated and mean. Such discrimina- 
tions, as well as such complications of passion, 
are unquestionably beyond the reach of modern 
art, and will therefore, by many, be pronounced 
impossible. It is worthy of remark, that the 
same Parrhasius, who seems to have united the 
excellences of Dominichino, Raphael, aird Cor- 
reggio, was distinguished by the gliding motion 
of his outline, and the sweetness with which it 
melted into the ground.? 

Ideal beauty, just proportion, natural and 
noble attitudes, a uniform greatness of style, 
are acknowledged to have equally belonged to 
the ancient painters and statuaries. But the 
vanity or envy of modern times is unwilling to 
allow any merit to the former, which the re- 
mains of the latter do not justify and confirm. 
The Greek painters, therefore, have been sup- 
posed deficient in colouring; and this supposi- 
tion has been supported by the words of Pliny: 


immediately roll down the other. Ariosto’s description of 
the beauty of Alcina (cant. viii.) is in the same bad taste. 
How different is Virgil’s “ Pulcherrima Dido.” Virgil 
knew the difference between poetical and picturcsque im- 
ages. Our English romances abound with examples of this 
species of bad taste, arising from mistaking the boundaries 
of distinct, though kindred arts. See above, p. 180. 

1 These are the words of Pliny. 

2 Phny considers this as the perfection of art. ‘t Hac est 
in pictura summa sublimitas. Corpora enim pingere et 
media rerum, est quidem magni operis; sed in quo multi 
gloriam tulerint. Extrema corporum facere, et dcsinentis 
picture modum includcre, rarum iu successu artis invenitur. 
Ambire enim debet se extremitas ipsa, et sic desinere, ut 
promittat alia post se; ostentatquc etiam que occultat.” 
Ibid. c. xxxvi. sect. 5. Mr. Falconer, in his observations 
on this passage, is of a different opinion. He thinks it 
tnore difficult to paint the middle parts, than the shades and 
tones which round the extremitics of objects; because the 
former, though exposed to the light, must have their form, 
relief, depth, and all the tints of nature. He instances the 
heads painted by Rubens and Vandyck scen in front. 
Pliny, had he lived in latter times, might have instanced, 
in his turn, the swect outlines and inimitable softness of 
Correggio. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


« With four colours only, Apelles, Echion, Me- 
lanthius, and Nicomachus produced those im- 
mortal works which were singly purchased by 
the common wealth of cities and republics.” 
The colours were white, red, yellow, and black. 
It has been often said that with these only on 
his palette, a painter cannot colour like nature, 
far less attain the magic of the clair obscure. 
Yet a great artist of our own country thinks 
that four colours are sufficient for every combi- 
nation required. * The fewer the colours, the 
cleaner, he observes, will be their effect. Two 
colours mixed togcther will not preserve the 
brightness of eithcr of them single, nor will 
three be as bright as two.”3 Pliny says, that 
Apelles spread over his pictures, when finished, 
a transparent liquid like ink, which increased 
the clearness and brilliancy of the whole, while 
it softened the glare of too florid colours, This, 
according to the same excellent painter, is a 
true and artist-like description of scambling or 
glazing, as practised by the Venetian school, 
and by Correggio, in whose works, as well as 
those mentioned by Pliny, it was perceptible 
only to such as closely examined the picture. 
He very reasonably concludes, therefore, that 
if the master-picces of ancient painting re- 
mained, we should probably find them as cor- 
rectly drawn as the Laocoon, and as admirably 
coloured as the glowing productions of Titian. 

That the Grecks were acquainted with the 
effect of the clair obscure, or the distribution of 
all the tones of light and shade relatively to 
the different plans of the picture, has been de- 
nied by those who allow them the highest ex- 
cellence in colouring single figures. They might 
excel, it has been said, in a solo, but were inca- 
pable of producing a full piece for a concert of 
different instruments. Whether this observa- 
tion be well founded can only be discovered by 
carefully examining ancient authors, from whom 


‘it would appcar that even in this branch the 


Greek painters were not deficient.4 

Of all the arts cultivated during the period 
now under review, none attained higher pro- 
ficiency than composition in prose. The his- 
tory of Thucydides was continued by Xeno- 
phon; but we should form a very imperfect 
notion of this amiable writer were we to judge 
him by his Grecian history, to which he seems 
not to have put the last hand. Yet in this, as 
well as in his more finished works, we see the 
scholar of Socrates; and, of all others, the 
scholar who most resembled his master in his 
sentiment and expression,’ in the excellences 


3 See Sir Joshua Reynolds’ notes on Mr. Mason’s trans- 
lation of Fresnoy’s Art of Painting. 

4 In speaking of Nicias, Pliny says, ‘ Lumen et umbras 
custodivit, atque ut emineret è tabulis picture maxime 
custodivit.” Unless the clair obscure be meant, the second 
member of this sentence is a pleonasm. Another passage is 
highly to the purpose, I. xxxv. c. xi. “Tandem se ars ipsa 
distinxit, et invenit lumen atque umbras, differentia colo- 
rum alterna via sese excitante. Deinde adjectus est splen- 
dor, alius hic quam lumen: quem, quia inter hoc et um- 
hrum esset, appellaverunt tonon; commissuras verð colo- 
rum et transitus, harmogen.” Clair obscure in painting is 
something like counterpoint in musie; and if the ancients 
cultivated ncither of them, perhaps the more substantia] 
parts of the arts lost nothing by the neglect. In melody 
and design, effect and expression, they probably excelled 
the most hoasted productions of later ages. 

5 See the description which Alcibiades gives of Socrates’s 
eloquence, in Plato’s Symposium 


` 


XXXIL] 


as well as in the respectable weaknesses‘ of his 
eharacter. The same undeviating virtue, the 
same indefatigable spirit, the same erect probity, 
the same diffusive benevolenec, the same cre- 
dulity, the same enthusiasm, together with that 
unaffeeted propriety of thought and diction, 
whose native graces outshine all ornaments of 
art. 

‘This admirable personage, who, had he lived 
before the Athenians were grown too conceited 
to learn, and too corrupt to mend, might have 
proved the saviour of his eountry, reached his 
fiftieth year in a happy obscurity, enjoying the 
confidential society of Socrates and a few seleet 
friends. Of these Proxenus, an illustrious The- 
ban exile, who well knew the worth of Xeno- 
phon, invited him to Sardis, from a desire to 
introduce him to Cyrus, the brother of Arta- 
xerxes, and governor of Lower Asia, whose 
friendship he himself had found more valuable 
than the precarious honours of his capricious 
and ungrateful republic. Xenophon communi- 
cated the proposal to Socrates, who, suspeeting 
that the Athenians might not relish his friend’s 
design, beeause the Persians were then allied 
with Sparta, desired him to consult the oracle 
of Delphi.” This counsel was but partially fol- 
lowed; for Xenophon, who seems to have been 
fond of the journey, asked not the oraele whe- 
ther it ought to be undertaken, but only by vir- 
tue of what prayers and saerifiees it might be 
rendered successful. Soerates approved not this 
precipitation; yet as the god had answered, he 
thought it neeessary for Xenophon to obey. 
The important consequences of this resolution 
to the Ten Thousand Greeks who followed the 
standard of Cyrus, have been related in a for- 
mer part of this work. After his glorious retreat 
from Upper Asia, Xenophon remained several 
years on the western coast, and shared the vie- 
tories of his admired Agesilaus, with whom he 
returned to Greece, and conquered in the bat- 
tle of Coronea. 

Mean while a decree of banishment passed 
against him in Athens. But having acquired 
considerable riehes in his Asiatie expedition, he 
had deposited them at Ephesus with the Sa- 
eristan of Diana’s temple, with this injunction, 
that if he perished in battle, his wealth should 
be employed in honour of the goddess. Having 
survived the bloody engagement of Coronza, 
which he afterwards so affeetingly deseribed in 
his Helleniea, he settled in the town of Seil- 
luns, a new establishment formed by the Lace- 
dæmonians, scaree three miles distant from 
Olympia. Megabyzus, the Sacrist of Diana, 
came to behold the games, and faithfully re- 
stored his deposit, with whieh Xenophon, as 
enjoined by an oracle, purchased in that neigh- 
bourhood a beautiful spot of ground, watered 
by the Sellenus, a name which coincided with 
that of the river near Ephesus. On the banks 
of Elian Sellenus, Xenophon erected a temple, 


6 It is remarkable that the superstitious belief of Xeno- 
phon in celestial warnings, of which see innumerable exam- 
ples, particularly Anabas. I. iii. c. v. l. v. c. viii. and l. vi. 
c. 1. never encouraged him to any thing imprudent or hurt- 
ful, and never restrained him from any thing useful or vir- 
tuous. The admonitions likewise of Socrates’s dæmon 
were always the same with the dictates of right reason. 

7 Anabas l. v. p. 356, et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


statue of gold. 


359 


ineomparably smaller indeed, yet similar in 
form to the great temple of Diana. His image 
of the goddess resembled that at Ephesus, as 
much asa figure in cyprus could resemble a 
The banks of the river were 
planted with fruit-trees. The surrounding 
plains and meadows afforded excellent pasture. 
The adjoining forests and mountains abounded 
in wild boar, red deer, and other species of 
game. There Xenophon’s sons often hunted 
with the youth of the neighbouring towns and 
villages; and the whole inhabitants of the eoun- 
try round were invited and entertained by him 
at an annual festival saered to Diana. A mo- 
dest inseription on a marble column, erected 
near the temple, testified the holiness of the 
place. “ This spot is dedicated to Diana. Let 
him, whoever shall possess it, employ the tenth 
of its annual produce in sacrifice, and the re- 
mainder in keeping in repair, and in adorning 
the temple. His neglect will not be overlooked 
by the goddess.”8 By this inseription, wherein 
Xenophon ventures not to mention the name 
of the founder, his mind seems to forebode the 
calamities which at last befel him. In the war 
between the Lacedemonians and Elians, the 
town of Scilluns, together with the cireumja- 
cent territory, was seized by Elian troops; and 
the amiable philosopher and historian, who had, 
in this delightful retreat, composed those in- 
valuable works, which will inspire the last ages 
of the world with the love of virtue, was com- 
pelled, in the decline of life, to seek refuge in 
the eorrupt and licentious city of Corinth. 

His Expedition, his Greeian History, his de- 
scription of the Athenian and Lacedemonian 
governments, have been noticed in their proper 
place. The Cyropedeia, or institutions of the 
elder Cyrus, is a philosophieal romance, intend- 
ed to exemplify the doctrines taught by Soera- 
tes in the Memorabilia, and to prove the success 
whieh naturally attends the practice of wisdom 
and virtue in the great affairs of war and go- 
vernment. The highest panegyrie of this work 
is, that many learned men have mistaken it for 
a true history, and, deceived by the inimitable 
naiveté and persuasiveness of tlie narrative, 
have believed it possible that, during the various 
stages of a long life, Cyrus should have invaria- 
bly followed the dictates of the sublimest philo- 
sophy. In his Giconomies, Xenophon under- 
takes the humbler but not less useful task, of 
regulating the duties of domestie life. The 
dialogue, entitled Hiero, paints the misery of 
tyrants contrasted with the happiness of virtu- 
ous princes, in colours so lively, and in line¥ so 
expressive, that an admirer of the aneients 
might ehallenge the ingenuity of modern ages 
to add a single stroke to the picture. In speak- 
ing of the works of Xenophon, we must not 
forget his treatise on the Revenues of Athens, 
It was written long after his banishment. In- 
stead of resenting the obdurate eruelty of his 
eountrymen, he gave them most judicious and 
seasonable advice coneerning the improvement 
of the public revenues, whieh, there is reason 
to believe, was in part adopted. 

The orators Lysias and Isoerates flourished 
in the period now under review. The former 


8 Xenoph. Anabas. |. v. p. 356, ct seq. 


360 


was distinguished by the refined subtilty of his 
pleadings; the latter by the polished elegance 
of his moral and political orations.! Isocrates 
ventured not to speak in public, neither his con- 
stitution nor his voice admitting the great exer- 
tions necessary for that purpose. His school of 
oratory and composition was frequented by the 
noblest youths of Athens, of the neighbouring 
republics, and even by foreign princes ; and as 
his maxims were borrowed from the Socratic 
school, his long and honourable labours tended 
to keep alive some sparks of virtue among his 
degenerate countrymen, ? 

But the man of learning in that age, whose 
abilities, if properly directed, might have most 
benefited his contemporaries, was the celebrated 
Plato, a man justly admired, yet more extra- 
ordinary than admirable. The same memorable 
year which produced the Peloponnesian war 
gave birth to Plato. He was descended from 
the Codridæ, the most illustrious as well as the 
most opulent family in Athens. His education 
was worthy of his birth. The gymnastic form- 
ed and invigorated his body; his mind was 
enlarged and enlightened by the studies of poe- 
try? and geometry, from which he derived that 
acuteness of judgment, and that warmth of 
fancy, which, being both carried to excess, 
render him at once the most subtile and the 
most flowery writer of antiquity.4 In his twen- 
tieth year he became acquainted with Socrates; 
and having compared his own poetical produc- 
tions with those of his immortal predecessors 
in this walk of literature, he committed the 
former to the flames, and totally addicted him- 
self to philosophy. During eight years he con- 
tinued an assiduous hearer of Socrates; an oc- 
casional5 indisposition prevented him from as- 
sisting at the last conversations of the sage, 
before he drank the fatal hemlock. Yet these 
conversations, as related to him by persons who 
were present, Plato has delivered down to the 
admiration of posterity ; and the affecting sen- 
sibility with which he minutely describes the 
inimitable behaviour of Socrates, on this trying 
occasion, proves how deeply the author was in- 
terested in his subject. 

Fear or disgust removed the scholar of Socra- 
tes from the murderers of his master. Having 
spent some time in Thebes, Elis, and Megara, 
where he enjoyed the conversation of several of 
his fellow-disciples, the love of knowledge car- 
ried him to Magna Grecia; from thence he 


1 See the Lives of Lysias and Isocrates, prefixed to my 
translation of their works. 

2 Ibid. 

3 Diogen. Laert. l. ii. 

4 Plato’s dialogues are so different from each other, in 
point of thought and expression, that, if we knew not the 
versatility of his genius, it would be difficult to believe them 
the works of one man. He is over-refined, wire-drawn, and 
triffling, in the Cratylus, Parmendies, Meno, Thezetetus, and 
Sophistes. He is flowery, pompous, and tumid, in his Ti- 
macus, Panegyric, Symposium, and Phidrus. But in those 
invaluable writings, the Apology, Crito, Alcibiades, Gor- 
gias, Phedo, and the greater part of his books of laws, in 
which he adheres to the doctrines of Socrates, and indulges, 
without art or affectation, the natural bent of his own ge- 
nius, his style is inimitably sweet and attractive, always 
elegant, and often sublime. His Republic, which is gene- 
rally considered as his greatest work, abounds in all the 
beauties, and in all the deformities, for which he is remark- 
able. See Dionys. Halicarn. de Platon. 

Š Martwy 3s (oiua) yorbsves, Phaedo, 2, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


sailed to Cyrené, attracted by the fame of the 
mathematician Theodorus; Egypt next de- 
served his curiosity, as the country to which 
the science of Theodorus owed its birth, and 
from which the Pythagoreans in Magna Grecia 
derived several tenets of their philosophy. 

At lus return to Athens, Plato could have 
little inclination to engage in public life. The 
days were past when the virtues of a Solon, or 
of a Lycurgus, could reform fhe manners of 
their countrymen. In early periods of society, 
the example and influence of one able and dis- 
interested man may produce a happy revolution 
in the community of which he is a member. 
But in the age of Plato, the Athenians had 
fallen into dotage and imbecility. His luxu- 
riant fancy compares them sometimes to old 
men, who have outlived their senses, and with 
whom it is vain to reason; sometimes to wild 
beasts, whom it is dangerous to approach; 
sometimes to an unfruitful soil, that chokes 
every useful plant, and produces weeds only.® 
He prudently withdrew himself from the scene, 
which presented nothing but danger or disgust, 
and purchased a small villa in the suburbs near 
the academy, or gymnasium, that had been so 
elegantly adorned by Cimon.’ To this retire- 
ment, his fame attracted the most illustrious 
characters in his age: the noblest youths of 
Athens daily frequented the school of Plato; 
and here he continued above forty years, with 
little interruption except from his voyages into 
Sicily, instructing his disciples, and composing 
his Dialogues, to which the most distinguished 
philosophers in ancient and modern times are 
greatly indebted, without excepting those who 
reject his doctrines, and affect to treat them as 
visionary. 

The capacious mind of Plato embraced the 
whole circle of science. The objects of human 
thought had, previously to his age, been reduced, 
by the Pythagoreans, to certain classes or ge-° 
nera ;8 the nature of truth had been investi- 
gated; and men had distinguished the relations,’ 
which the predicate of any proposition can bear 
to its subject. The sciences had already been 
divided into the natural and moral; or, in the 
language of Plato, into the knowledge of divine 
and human things. The frivolous art of syllo- 
gism was not as yet invented; and the logic of 
Plato! was confined to the more useful subjects 
of definition and division, by means of which he 


6 Republic. |. vi. p. 38. 7 See above, p. 138. 

8 Many less perfect divisions had probably been made 
before Archytas of Tarentum distinguished the ten Catego- 
ties. Simplicius et Jamblichus apud Fr. Patricium, Dis- 
cuss. Peripatet. t. ii. p. 182. This division, the most perfect 
of any that philosophers have yet been able to discover, 
Plato learned from Archytas. It consisted in substances 
and modes. The former are either primary, asall individual 
substances, which neither are in any other subject, nor can 
be predicated of it; or secondary, which subsist in the first, 
and can be predicated of them, to wit, the genera and spe- 
cies of substances. Of modes there are nine kinds, quantity, 
quality, relation, habit, time, place, having, doing, and suf- 
fering. Aristot. de Categor. 

9 These are called by logicians the five Predicables, o 
more properly, the five classes of Predicates. They are the 
genus, species, specific difference, property, and accident. 
The use of these distinctions is universal in every subject re~ 
quiring definition and division; yet if meant to comprehend 
whatever may be affirmed of any subject, the enumeration 
is doubtless incomplete. 

10 The science properly called Logic was invented by 
Aristotle; the division of the sciences into Logic, Physica, 


XXXIL] 


attempted to fix and ascertain not only the prac- 
tical doctrines of morals and politics, but the 
abstruse and shadowy speculations of mystical 
theology. It is much to be regretted that this 


great and original genius should have mistaken | 


the proper objects as well as the natural limits 
of the human understanding, and that most of 
the inquiries of Plato and his successors should 
appear extremely remote from the public trans- 
actions of the times in which they lived. Yet 
the speculations in which they were engaged, 
how little socver they may be connected with 
the political revolutions of Greece, seem too in- 
teresting in themselves to be entirely omitted in 
this historical work, especially when it is con- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


361 


regular motions of the heavenly bodies,!? the 
beautiful order of the seasons, the admirable 
structure of plants and animals, announce an 
intelligent Author." It is difficult by scarching 
to find out the nature of the Divinity, and im- 
possible by words to describe it; yet the works 
which he has done, attest his power, his wis- 
dom, and his goodness, tobe greater than human 
imagination can couceive.'5 In the self-existent 
cause, these attributes must unite. He is there- 
fore unchangeable!® since no alteration can in- 
crease his perfections, and it would be absurd to 
suppose him ever inclined to diminish them.17 
Impelled by his goodness, the Deity, viewing 
in his own intellect the ideas or archetypes of all 


sidered that the philosophy of Plato and his | possible existence, formed the beautiful arrange- 
disciples has been very widely diffused among | ment of the universe from that rude indigested 
all the civilized nations of the world ; that dur- | matter, which, existing from all eternity, had 
ing many centuries, it governed with uncon- | been for ever animated by an irregular principle 


trolled sway the opinions of the speculative | of motion.!8 


This principle, which Plato calls 


part of mankind; and that the same philosophy | the irrational soul of the world, he thought suf- 


still influences the reasonings, and divides the 
sentiments, of the learned in modern Europe. 

The lively, but immethodical, manner in 

which the opinions of Plato are explained by 
himself, renders it difficult to collect and abridge 
them. The great number of interlocutors in 
his dialogues, the irony of Socrates, and the 
continual intermixture of Plato’s own senti- 
ments with those of his master, heighten the 
difficulty, and make it impossible, from particu- 
lar passages, to judge of the scope and tendency 
of the whole. The works of Xenophon, how- 
ever, may enable a diligent student to separate 
the pure ore of Socrates from the adventitious 
matter with which it is combined in the rich 
vein of Platonism; and by carefully comparing 
the different parts of the latter, he may with 
certainty determine the principal designs of its 
author. 
. From this view of the subject, it would ap- 
pear that Plato aimed at nothing less, than to 
reconcile the appearances of the natural and 
moral world with the wise government of a 
self-existent unchangeable cause; to explain the 
nature and origin of the human mind, as well 
as of its various powers of perception, volition, 
and intellect; and, on principles resulting from 
these discoveries, to build a system of ethics, 
which, in proportion as it were followed by 
mankind, would promote not only their inde- 
pendence and sccurity in the present world, but 
chcir happiness and perfection in a future state 
of existence. 

Let us look where we will around us, we 
shall every where, said Plato, perccive a passing 
procession ;!! the objects which compose the ma- 
terial world, arise, change, perish, and arc suc- 
ceeded by others, which undergo thc same re- 
volutions.'2 One body moves another, which 
impels a third, and so forwards in succession ; 
but the first cause of motion resides not in any 
ofthem. This causc acts not fortuitously ; the 


and Ethics, was first given hy his contemporary Xenocrates, 
Vid. Brncker. de Aristot. et Xenocrat. Of Aristotle more 
hereafter. 

11 This was borrowed from Heraclitus, who expressed 
the same idea, by saying, that all corporeal things were in a 
perpetual flux. Vid. Platon. in Thewtet. p. 83. et in So- 
phist. p. 108. 

12 Timeous, sub initio. 


ee ——— ee 


ficiently attested, in the innumerable deviations 
from the established laws of nature, in the ex- 
travagant passions of men, and in the physical 
and moral evil, which, in consequence of these 
deviations and passions, so visibly prevail in the 
world. Without admitting a certain stubborn 
intractability, and disorderly wildness, essential 
to matter, and therefore incapable of being en- 
tirely eradicated or subdued, it seemed impossi- 
ble to explain the origin of evil under the go- 
vernment of Deity.!9 

From these rude materials, God, according to 
the fanciful doctrine of Plato, formed the four 
elements, and built the beautiful structure of the 
heavens and the earth, after the model of those 
eternal exemplars,29 or patterns, which subsist 


13 By these he meant the fixed stars; the motions of the 
planets he ascribed to another cause, as will appear below. 

14 Plato de Legihus, l. x. p. 609. 

15 Timeus. p. 477. et de Repub. 1. ii. p. 144. 

16 For the immutability of the Deity, Plato, contrary to 
his general custom, condescends to use an argument from 
induction: “ Even of material things, the most perfect least 
feel the effects of time, and remain longest unaltered.” De - 
Repuh. p. 150. 

17 Ibid. p. 150. 

18 Politic. p. 120, et seq. et Timzus, passim. 

19 De Legibus, l. x. p. 608. Philem, p. 160. 

20 These exemplars, or mzezsesy uzre, are the ideas of 
Plato, which are so much misrepresented by many of the 
later Platonists, or Eclectics. He names them, indifferently, 
teL, Ebon, EbKOVAS, TX HATE THUTS, et OTAUTWE EXovTa, 
The two last expressions are used to distinguish them from 
the fleeting and perishable forms of matter. Plato repre- 
sents these ideas as existing in the divine intellect, as beings 
entirely mental, not objects of any of the senses, and not 
circumscribed by place or time. By the first universal cause, 
these ideas were infused into the various species of created 
beings, in whom (according to Ammonins, in Porphyr. In- 
troduct. p. 29.) they existed, as the impression of a seal ex- 
ists in the wax to which it has been applied. In its pre- 
existent state, the human mind viewed these intelligible 
forms in their original seat, the field of truth. But since men 
were imprisoned in the body, they receive their ideas from 
external objects, as explained in the text. Such is the doc 
trine of Plato. But many of the later Platonists, and even 
several writers of the present age, have imagined that he 
nscribed to ideas a separate and independent existence. 
Vid. Brucker. Histor. Philosoph. p. 695, et seq. Gedike. 
Tlistor. Philosoph, ex Ciceron. Collect. p. 183, et seq. Mon- 
hoddo, Origin of Language, vol. i. c. ix. Of allthe absurdi- 
ties embraced by philosophers, this doubtless would be tho 
greatest, fo believe eternal unchangeable patterns of the va- 
rious genera and species of things existing apart, and inde- 
pendent of the mind by which these abstract notions are 
conceived. Tt is not extraordinary therefore, that many 
writers of the Alexandrian school, whose extravagant fan 
cies could fix and emhady metaphysical abstractions, and 
realize intellectual ideas, should animate and personify the 


362 


in the divine intelligence.! Considering that 
beings possessed of mental powers were far 
preferable to those destitute of such faculties, 
God infused into the corporeal world a rational 
soul, which, as it could not be immediately 
combined with body, he united to the active, 
but irrational principle, essentially inherent in 
matter.2 Having thus formed and animated 
the earth, the sun, the moon, and the other 
visible divinities, the great father of spirits 
proceeded to create the invisible gods and dæ- 
mons,? whose nature and history Plato de- 
scribes with a respectful reverence for the 
religion of his country.4 After finishing this 
great work, the God of gods, again contemplat- 
ing the ideal forms in his own mind, perceived 
there the exemplars of three species of beings, 
which he realized in the mortal inhabitants of 
the earth, air, and water. The task of forming 
these sensible, but irrational beings, he com- 
mitted to the inferior divinities; because, had 
this last work likewise proceeded from his own 
hands, it must have been immortal like the 
gods.5 The souls of men, on the other hand, 
he himself formed from the remainder of the 
rational soul of the world. They first existed 
in the state of demons, only invested with a 
thin ethereal body. Having offended God by 
neglecting their duty, they were condemned to 
unite with the gross corporeal mass, by which 
their divine faculties are so much clogged and 
encumbered.® 

It was necessary briefly to explain the meta- 
physical theology of Plato, how visionary soever 
it may appear, because the doctrine of ideal 


forms, together with that of the pre-existent |. 
state of the human mind, are the main pillars! 


of his philosophy. Before their incarceration 
in the body, the souls of men enjoyed the pre- 
sence of their Maker, and contemplated the 
unchangeable ideas and essences of things in 
the field of truth. In viewing and examining 
these eternal archetypes of order, beauty, and 
virtue, consisted the noblest energy, and highest 
perfection of celestial spirits,’ which, being 
emanations of the deity, can never rest satisfied 
with objects and occupations unworthy their 
divine original. But in their actual state, men 
can perceive with their corporeal senses, only 
the fleeting images and imperfect representa- 
tions of these immutable essences of things, in 
the fluctuating objects of the material world, 
which are so little steady and perinament, that 
they often change their nature and properties, 
even while we view and examine them.’ Be- 


Aoyov rou Gov, the divine intellect, in which, according to 
Plato, these ideas resided, and from which they were com- 
municated to other intelligences. The same visionary fa- 
natics who discovered, in the Acyes of Plato, the second 
person of the Trinity, recognised the Holy Spirit in his Soul 
ofthe World; but as this irrational principle of motion ill 
corresponded to the third person of the Godhead, they in- 
vented an hvper-cosmian soul, concerning which Plato is 
altogether silent. See the Encyclopedie, article Eclectique. 
Brucker. Hist. Philosoph. vol. i. p. 712, et seq. and Meiner’s 
Beytrag zur geschichte der denkart der ersten Jahrhunderte 
nach Christi geburt in einigen betrachtungen über die neu 
Platonische Philosophie. 

1 Timeus, Polit. l. vi. 2 Thid. p. 477, et seq. 

3 Ibid. p. 480. 4 Apolog. Socratis 

5 Timeus, p. 480, et 481. 6 Ibid. 

7 Repub. l. vi. Phedrus, Philebus, &c 

8 Phado, Timeus, &c. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


side this, our senses themselves are liable to in- 
numerable disorders; and unless we are con- 
stantly on the watch, never fail to deceive us.9 
Hence the continual errors in our judgments of 
men and things; hence the improper ends we 
pursue; hence the very inadequate means by 
which we seek to attain them; hence, in one 
word, all the errors and misery of life. Yet 
even in this degraded state, to which men were 
condemned for past offences, their happiness 
ceases not to be an object of care to the Deity. 
As none can rise so high, none can sink so low, 
as to escape the eye and arm of the Almighty.0 
Tire divine Providence observes and regulates 
the meanest, as well as the greatest, of its pro- 
ductions. But the good of the part being sub- 
ordinate to that of the whole, it is necessary 
that each individual should be rewarded or pu- 
nished, in proportion as he fulfils the task as- 
signed him. It is by the performance of his 
duty alone, that man can regain the favour of 
his Maker ;!! for it is ridiculous to think that this 
inestimable benefit can be purchased by rich 
presents and expensive sacrifices. Religion 
cannot be a traffic of interest.!2 Whatcan we 
offer to the gods, which they have not first be- 
stowed on us? Will they thank us for restor- 
ing their own gifts? It is absurd to think it. 
To please the Divinity, we must obey his will 
concerning us; nor can we comply with the 
purpose of our creation, and fulfil our destiny, 
without aspiring at those noble powers with 
which we were originally endowed ;!3 and which, 
even in our present degenerate state, it is still 
possible, by proper diligence, to recover.'4 

Our senses give us information of external 
objects, which are stored up in the memory, 
and variously combined by the imagination.!5 
But it is remarkable that those ideas, thus ac- 
quired and retained, have the power of suggest- 
ing others far more accurate and perfect than 
themselves, and which, though excited by ma- 
terial objects, cannot be derived from them, un- 
less (which is impossible) the effect were more 
beautiful and perfect than the cause. That we 
possessed, in a pre-existent state, those ideas 
which modern philosophers refer by an easy 
solution to the powers of generalization and ab- 
straction,!6 Plato thought evident from the fa- 
cility with which we recalled them.'? Of this 
he gave an example in Meno’s slave, who, 
when properly questioned by Socrates, easily 
recollected and explained many properties of 
numbers and figures, although he had never 
learned the sciences of arithmetic and geome- 
try.!8 According to Plato, therefore, all science 
consisted in reminiscence, in recalling the na- 
ture, proportions, and relations of those uni- 
form and unchangeable essences, about which 


9 Phædo. p. 31. et Repub. I. v. 10 De Legibus. 
11 Eutyphon. 12 Repuh. I. ii. p. 100. et seq. 
13 Minos, p. 510. Timeus, p. 500. 

14 Repub. l. v. 

15 Theetet. p. 85. et seq. and Philem. 184, et seq. 

16 The ancients were not ignorant of this philosophy. 
Simplicius, speaking of the origin of intelligible forms, or 
ideas, in the human mind, says, nueis wperocvTss SUTA sv 
TAIG NMETEQLIC EVVOIKIC RATS ELVT VTETTHT MEY | = We 
ourselves, abstracting them in our thoughts, have, by this 
abstraction, given them an existence in themselves.” Simp. 
in Pred. p. 17. i 

17 Menon. p. 344. 18 Ibid. 


XXXII] 


the human mind had originally been conver- 
sant, and after the model of which all created 
things were made.!9 These intellectual forms, 
comprehending the true essences of things, 
were the only proper objects of solid and per- 
niament science ;70 their fluctuating’ represen- 
tatives in the material world, the actions and 
virtues of men, the order and beauty visible in 
the universe, were only so far real and substan- 
tial as they corresponded to their divine arche- 
types;2! but as this correspondence never be- 
came complete, the examination of the perish- 
ing objects of sense could only afford us un- 
steady and uncertain notions, fleeting and fugi- 
tive like themselves.22 From these observations, 
Plato thought it evident, that the duty and hap- 
piness of men consisted in withdrawing them- 
selves from the material, and approaching the 
intellectual world,23 to which their own natures 
were more congenial. To promote this purpose 
was the great aim of his philosophy. If we 
were deceived by the senses, hg observed, that 
we were still more fatally endangered by the 
passions, those flimsy sails of the mind, which 
were expanded and agitated by every varying 
gust of imagined good or evil.24 The pains 
and pleasures of the body were all of a mixed 
kind, and nearly allied to each other. The God 
who arranged the world, desirous to unite 
and incorporate these seemingly opposite na- 
tures, had at least joined their summits; for 
pleasure was nothing else but a rapid cessation 
of pain; and the liveliest of our bodily enjoy- 
ments were preceded by uneasiness, and follow- 


19 Repub. 1. vi. 

20 Exsrryuy, science, in opposition to do%«, opinion. 
The material world he called ro So%acrov, that of which 
the knowledge admitted of probability only. Repub. 1. v. 
The zdeas of Plato, which, according to that philosopher, 
formed the sole objects of real and certain knowledge, were 

owerfully combated by his scholar and rival Aristotle. 
Vet the latter, who was so sharp-sighted to the faults of 
Plato, never accuses him of maintaining the separate and 
independent existence of intellectual forms. The obscure 
passage in Aristotle’s Metaphysics, p. 201, which has been 
Construed into such an accusation, means nothing more, 
than that Socrates regarded the Te ««§’ odov, general ideas, 
as differing in no respect from our notions of the genera 
and species of things; whereas Plato made a distinction 
between them, asserting these ideas to have existed in the 
divine intellect before the creation, &c. as explained in the 
text. Aristotle discusses the doctrine of ideas more per- 
spicuously in his Ethics to Nicomachus, l. i. c. vi. He re- 
gards them as mere fictions of the fancy, and the know- 
ledge founded on them as altogether visionary. ‘The idea 
of good,” he observed, tt might be applied to substances, as 
the Deity, the mind of man; to qualities, as the virtues; to 
quantity, as mediocrity ; to time, as the juncture or nick of 
time; in short, through all the categories. There is not, 
therefore, any one general idea of good common to all 
these. Were there one idea, the same in all, there could 
be but one science respecting it. But there are many, 
physic, gymnastic, the military art, &c. which all have some 
good in view. Things are good in themselves, or good as 
means to an end. But even those things which are ulti- 
mately good, as wisdom, honour, pleasure, are not compre- 
hended under any one definition of good, though distin- 
guished by the same epithet from some analogy or resem- 
blance, as the understanding is called the eye of the mind. 
Jf there is any such general idea, it is surely iucapable of 
being applied to any practical use; not as a model, other- 
wise the arts and sciences, all of which have some good in 
view, would continually have this model before them. Yet 
they all neglect it, and justly; for what benefit could they 
derive from this abstract idea? A physician, for instance, 
contemplates not health in that general manner, but the 
health of man, or rather of a particular man, who happens 
to be his patient; for with individuals only his art is con- 
ceraed.”’ 

21 Parmen. p. 140. 22 Repub. l. vii. 

23 Repub. p. 134. et Phad. p. 26. 24 Phædrus. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


363 


ed by langour.?5 To illustrate the necessity o. 
governing with a strong hand the appetites and 
passions, Plato compared the soul to a little re- 
public, composed of different faculties or or- 
ders.2° The judging or reasoning faculty, justly 
entitled to the supremacy, was seated, as in a 
firm citadel, in the head; the senses were its 
guards and servants; the various desires and 
affections were bound to pay it obedience. 

Of these desires, whicli were all of them the 
natural subjects of the ruling faculty, Plato 
distinguished two orders, ever ready to rebel 
against their master. The first consisted of 
those passions which are founded in pride and 
resentment, or in what tlie schoolmen called 
the irascible part of the soul ;2? and were seated 
in the breast. The second consisted of those 
passions which are founded in the love of plea- 
sure, or in what the schoolmen called the con- 
cupiscible?8 part of the soul, and were seated 
in the belly, and inferior parts of the body. 
These different orders, though commonly at 
variance with each other, were alike dangerous 
to the public interest, and unless restrained by 
the wisdom and authority of their sovereign, 
must inevitably plunge the little republic of 
man into the utmost disorder and misery.?9 

Yet, according to Plato, both these sets of 
passions were, in the present state of things, 
necessary parts of our constitution; and, when 
properly regulated, became very useful subjects. 
The irascible asserted our rank and dignity, de- 
fended us against injuries, and when duly in- 
formed and tempered by reason, taught us with 
becoming fortitude to despise dangers and death, 
in pursuit of what is honourable and virtuous. 
The concupiscible provided for the support and 
necessities of the body; and, when reduced to 
such submission as to reject every gratification 
not approved by reason, gave rise to the virtue 
of temperance. Justice took place, according to 
Plato, when reason directed and passion obeyed, 
and when each passion performed its proper of- 
fice, and acknowledged due respect towards its 
superior. In the strength, acuteness, and pér- 
fection of the ruling faculty, consisted the vir- 
tue of prudence, the great source and principle 
of all other virtues, without which temperance, 
fortitude, and even justice itself, were nothing 
but empty shadows, that deluded the ignorant 
vulgar. In the exercise of prudence or wisdom, 
man resembled his Maker, and contemplated 
those intellecual forms, which taught him to 
discern with certainty the ends proper to be 
pursued, and the means necessary to attain 
them. The wise man compares the mind with 
the body, eternity with time, virtue with plea- 
sure. He thus learns to despise the inferior 
parts of his nature, to defy its pains, to disdain 
its pleasures. Without attaining this true ele- 
vation of mind, he never can be virtuous or 
happy, since whoever depends on the body, 
must consider death as an evil, the fear of which 
can only be overcome by some greater terror; 
so that in him who is not truly wise, forti- 


25 Phed. Philem. et Repub. l. ii. p. 262. et seq. 

26 Repub. I. iv. 27 The To Guuosidss of Plato. 

28 The To smiGuuyrixoy of Plato. Both are included 
under what Plato and Aristotle call the ogextsxov tha seat 
of the desires and passions. 

29 Ibid. p. 254. 


364 
tude itself must be the effect of timidity.! 
the same manner, his pretended moderation 
and temperance will spring from the impure 
source of the opposite vices. He will deny 
himself some pleasures, to attain others which 
he regards as more valuable, and will submit to 
small pains to avoid the greater.? He thus 
continues through life, exchanging one trifle 
for another; a traffic which never can enrich 
him, while he rejects wisdom, the only precious 
merchandise. 

But the temple of wisdom is, according to 
Plato, situate on a rock, which few men have 
the strength to ascend.2 This difference of 
ability proceeds from various causes: 1. At 
their creation, all minds were not alike excellent 
and perfect.4 2. They were not alike crimi- 
nal during their pre-existent state. 3. The 
gross bodies which they now inhabit are vari- 
ously moulded, some being too strong, others 
too weak, and very few in just harmony with 
the divine principle by which they are animat- 
ed.6 4, Early institution and example occa- 
sion great differences among them. Such, in- 
deed, is the power of education and habit, that 
the errors and crimes of men are less chargea- 
ble on those who commit them, than on their 
parents, guardians, and instructors ;7 and it 
seems hardly possible for those who have the 
misfortune to be born ina licentious age and 
country, to attain wisdom and virtue. Even 
when the most favourite circumstances unite, 
the mind must still, however, have a tendency 
to degenerate, while united with matter.8 The 
body, therefore, must be continually exercised 
and subdued by the gymnastic, the soul must 
be purified and ennobled by philosophy. With- 
out such attention, men can neither reach the 
perfection of their nature, or, when they have 
reached it, maintain that elevated post, from 
which they look down with compassion on the 
errors and misery of their fellow creatures.9 

In the description of his imaginary sage, 
Plato empleys the colours which were after- 
wards borrowed by the Stoics and Epicureans. 
But neither of these sects, as will appear here- 
after, were so well entitled as the Platonists, to 
boast their philosophical happiness, and to as- 
sert their superiority to the vicissitudes of time 
and fortune. Plato was the first philosopher 
who supported the doctrine of a future state, 
by arguments that seemed capable to convince 
intelligent and thinking men. From the pro- 
perties of mind, he inferred the simplicity and 
indestructibility of the substance in which they 
reside.!0 He described the mental powers with 
an eloquence that Cicero!! and Buffon!? have 
not been able to surpass. And since he re- 


1 Repub. l. vi. 2 Phedo, p. 26, et seq. 
3 Repub. l. vi. p. 74. 4 Phedrus. , 
5 Thid 6 Timeus. 7 Ibid. 


8 Ibid. p. 484. et Repub. passim. 

9 Timeus, p. 484. et Repub. passim. 
10 Phiedo, p. 25, et seq. 

11 See Cicer. de Offic. l. i. et passim. 
12 Buffon sur Homme. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


In | garded the soul as the principle of life and mo- 


[Cuar. 


tion, he thought it absurd to suppose that the 
diseases and death of the body should take 
from this principle such qualities as it essen- 
tially possessed in itself, and accidentally com- 
municated to matter.!3 It was his firm per 
suasion, that, according to the employment of 
its rational and moral powers, the soul, after its 
separation from the body, would be raised to a 
higher, or depressed to a lower state of exist- 
ence. 

This belief, which raised his hopes to a higher 
scene, gave him not, however, that contempt, 
affected by a very different class of philoso- 
phers, for the perishing affairs! of the present 
world. Like some others of the scholars of 
Socrates, he traced the plan of a perfect com- 
monwealth; though his work, known by that 
title, as has heen justly observed by a great 
genius,!6 is rather a treatise of education than 
a system of policy. The real republic’ of Plato 
is contained in his books of laws, in which he 
explains, with ño less acuteness than elegance, 
the origin and revolutions of civil society, and 
traces the plan of a republic nearly resembling 
the Spartan model. 

His practical morality, which he borrowed 
from Socrates, is profusely scattered through 
his dialogues; and in his own times, Plato was 
not considered as that visionary speculatist 
which he has appeared to later ages. His scho- 
lars, Aristonymus, Phormio, and Eudoxus, were 
successively sent by him to regulate the repub- 
lies of the Arcadians, Elians, and Cnidians,!7 
at the earnest request of those communities 
From Xenocrates, another of his disciples, Al- 
exander desired rules for good government.!8 
The fame of Aristotle is well known; and it 
will afterwards appear how much he was in 
debted to a master, whose opinions he often 
combated with seeming reluctance, and real 
satisfaction. Plato was no less capable to dis- 
tinguish ideas than to combine images. He 
united warmth of fancy and acuteness of un- 
derstanding, in a greater degree than perhaps 
has fallen to the share of any other man. Yet 
when compared with his master Socrates, his 
genius will appear more subtile than sagacious 
He wanted that patient spirit of observation 
which distinguished the illustrious sage, who 
in all his reasonings kept facts ever in his view. 
and at every step he made, looked back with 
wary circumspection on experience. Accom- 
panied by this faithful guide, Socrates trod se- 
curely the paths of truth and nature; but his 
adventurous disciple, trusting to the wings of 
fancy, often expatiates in imaginary worlds of 
his own creation. 


13 Phedo. 


14 Phedrus, et Pheedo, pass, 
15 The Epicureans. 


“ Non res humana, perituraque regna.” GEORG. 
Of this more below. ‘ 

16 Rousseau in his Emile. 

17 Plutarch. advers. Colot. Epicur. 

18 Idem, ibid. k 


XXXIIL] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


History of Macedon—Reign of Archelaus—Series of Usurpations and Revolutions—Perdiccas 
defeated by the Illyrians—Distracted State of Macedon—First Transactions of Philip—State 
of Thrace and Peonia—Philip defeats Argeus and the Athenians—His Treatment of the Pri- 
soners—His military Arrangements—He defeats the Illyrians—His designs against Amphipolis 
——He prevents an Alliance between Athens and Olynthus—Amuses the Athenians—Takes Am- 
phipolis—His Conquests in Thrace—The Mines of Crenide—Philip marries Olympias—His 


Letter to Aristotle. 


OUR hundred and sixteen years before the 
- Christian era, and little more than half a 
century before Philip assumed the government 
of Macedon, that country, to a superficial ob- 
server, might have appeared scarcely distin- 
A.C. 814. guishable from the barbarous king- 
P doms of Thrace, Pæonia, and Illy- 
ricum, which surrounded it on the north, east, 
and west. Towards the south, it was excluded 
from the sea by a chain of Grecian republics, 
of which Olynthus and Amphipolis were the 
most flourishing and powerful, To this inland 
district, originally confined to the circumference 
of about three hundred miles, Caranus, an Ar- 
give prince of the numerous race of Hercules, 
eluding the dangers which provcd fatal to roy- 
alty!’ in most communities of Greece,?? con- 
ducted g small colony of his adventurous and 
warlike countrymen, and, having conquered the 
barbarous natives, settled in Edessa, the capital 
of the province then named Emathia, and af- 
terwards Macedonia, for reasons equally un- 
known.?! The establishment of this little prin- 
cipality, which, under Philip, grew into a pow- 
erful kingdom, and, under Alexander, swelled 
into the most extensive empire known in the 
ancient world, was adorned (could we believe 
historic flattery) by many extraordinary cir- 
cumstances, presaging its future greatness. The 
gods took care of the infancy of Macedon, and 
sent, as oracles had announced, a herd of goats 
to conduct Caranus to his new capital of Edessa, 
which thence changed its name to Ægæ, the 
city of goats; a fiction unworthy of record, 
did it not explain the reason why goats wcre 
adopted as the ensigns of Macedon, and why 
the figures of those animals are still to be seen 
on the coins of Philip, and those of his suc- 
cessors. 

Caranus, as well as the princes Cænus?? and 
Thyrimas, who immediately followed him, had 
occasion to exercise their prudence still more 
than their valour. Their feeble colony of 
Greeks might have fallen an casy prey to the 
unhospitable ferocity of the barbarous tribes, 
by whom it was on all sides surrounded. But 
the policy of the first kings of Macedon, in- 
stead of vainly attempting to repel or to sub- 
due, endeavoured, with more success, to gain, 
by good offices, the ancicnt inhabitants of Ema- 
thia and the neighbouring districts. They 
communicated to them the knowledge of many 
useful?’ arts; they gave them the Grecian reli- 


19 Justin. l. vii. c. i. 
20 See p. 36. 

21 Crophius Antiquit. Macedon. 

22 Justin. ubi supra. Syncell. Chronic. 
23 Pausanias Achaic. et Thucydid. 1. ii. 


Velleius Paterculus, 1. i. c. vi. 


gion?4 and government?5 in that state of happy 
simplicity which prevailed during the heroic 
ages; and while, to render intercourse more 
easy and familiar, they adopted, in some de- 
gree, the language and manners of the barbar- 
ous natives, they, in their turn, imparted to the 
latter a tincture of the Grecian language and 
civility.?6 By this judicious and liberal system, 
so unlike to that pursued by their countrymen 
in other parts of the world, the followers of 
Caranus gradually associated with the warlike 
tribes in their neighbourhood, whom it would 
have been alike impossible for them to extirpate 
or to enslave; and the same generous policy, 
being embraced by their descendants, deserves 
to be regarded as the primary cause of Mace- 
donian greatness. 

Perdiccas, the first of that name, so far 
eclipsed the fame of his three predecessors, that 
he is accounted the founder of the monarchy 
by Herodotus?” and Thucydides.?8 His history 
A.C has been magnified by fable, which 
713—416 has also obscured or distorted the 
= actions of the five princes?9 that in- 
tervened between him and Alexander I. who 
filled the Macedonian throne when Xerxes in- 
vaded Greece.?0 Here we attain historic 
ground. Alexander, as related above,?! took 
an important and honourable part in the affairs 
of Greece and Persia, without neglecting the 
interest of his own kingdom, which he extend- 
ed to the river Nessus on the east, and to the 
Axius on the west. His son, Perdiccas II. in- 
herited the abilities of his father, without in- 
heriting his integrity. During the Pcloponne- 
sian war, the alliance of this prince formed an 
object of important concern to the Athenians 
and Lacedamonians. He espoused the cause 
of the latter, which he regarded as his own, be- 
cause the Athenians, who had occasionally le- 
vied tribute on his ancestors,?2 were then mas- 
ters of the Greek settlements along the Mace- 
donian coast, the vicinity of which naturally 
tempted the ambition of Perdiccas. Under the 
specious pretence of enabling Olynthus and the 
other cities of Chalcidicé to recover their inde- 
pendence, he lent his aid to destroy the Athe- 


24 Arria Exped. Alexand. |. iv. p. 83. 

25 biasrrov uey mæði, Hexxdresdy ðs wero yevous, orou 
ot meoyovos && Apyeos sis Mzxedoviay yalov, ov 3s Gia 
HAAS volw, Mexsdovuv aeyovres Susrereoay, Arrian, I. iv 
p. 86. In another passage of the same book he says, the 
subjects of Macedon had more liberty than the citizens of 
Greece. 

26 Demosthenes, Arrian, and Curtius. 

27 Herodot. l. viii. c. cxxxvii. 

28 Thucydid. ). ii. p. 168. 

29 Argacus I. Philip. I. Æropus I. Alcetas, Amyntas I. 
Justin. l. vii. c. ii. 

30 Herodot. |. v. ¢. xix. 31 Page 129. 

32 Thucydid. ubi supra. et Demosthenes, passim, 


366 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


nian influence there, expecting to establish the | ed the assistance of the Thracians, of the Illy- 


Macedonian in its stead. But this design failed 
of success. The Olynthian confederacy was 
broken, its members became subject to Sparta, 
and after the misfortunes of that republic had 
encouraged the Olynthians to resume their 
freedom, they felt themselves sufficiently pow- 
erful not only to resist the encroachments of 
Macedon, but to make considerabie conquests 
in that country.! 

Archelaus I. who succeeded to the throne, 
displayed an enlightened policy, far more bene- 
cial to his kingdom than the courage of Alex- 
ander, or the craft of Perdiccas. Like those 

c princes, Archelaus was ambitious to 
os 410 enlarge his dominions (having con- 
ee ae quered Pydna and other towns in 
the delightful region of Pieria;)? but his main 
care was to cultivate and improve them. He 
facilitated communication between the princi- 
pal towns of Macedon, by cutting straight roads 
through most parts of the country; he built 
walls and places of strength in the situations 
most favourable for that purpose; encouraged 
agriculture and the arts, particularly those sub- 
servient to war; formed magazines of arms; 
raised and disciplined a corsiderable body of 
cavalry; and, in a word, added more to the 
solid grandeur of Macedon than had been done 
by all his predecessors together.2 Nor was he 
regardless of the arts of peace. His palace was 
adorned by the works of Grecian painters. 
Euripides was long entertained at his court; 
Socrates was earnestly solicited to live there after 
the example of this philosophic poet, formed by 
his precepts, and cherished by his friendship: 
men of merit and genius, in all the various walks 
of literature and science, were invited to reside 
in Macedon, and treated with distinguished re- 
gard by a monarch duly attentive to promote his 
own glory and the happiness of his subjects.4 

A.C A reign of six years was too short 
405—360. 2 period for accomplishing the im- 

portant ends which Archelaus had 
in view. By his death the prosperity of Mace- 
don was interrupted for almost half a century, 
crowded by a succession of ten> princes or 
usurpers, whose history forms a perpetual series 
of crimes and calamities. Amidst these disor- 
ders, the sceptre still remained in the family 
of Hercules; but almost every prince of the 
blood had an ambition to reign. In order to at- 
tain their purpose, the different competitors court- 


1 See above, c. xxix. p. 315, et seq. 

2 Diodor. Sicul. 1. xiii. c. xvi. 

3 Thucydides says, “than the eight kings who preceded 
him,” counting Perdiccas for the first. Aex:àgiç os 
Tisgðixxou viog, Buotrsug yevomeveg Ta TELXA VUV OVTZ 
tv TH HwEx wKodopeyoe, Kas OdOUC suÎetAg ETEME, KALE TZAAZ 
Sesxormycoe TATE XZT TOV WOASMOV ITNOIG, XAL OTAOIG 
xati my LAAY MLELTLEUY KEEITOOVE H Fupaavres Ob ZAADS 
alla OxTw os reo wuTOU yeEvoxusvos. Thucydides, p. 

4 Aristot. Rhetor. l. ii. c. xxix. Stohæus Sermon. 237. 

5 Their names, with the dates of their accession or 
usurpation, are as follows: 


1 Orestes, A.C. 405 6 Argeus II. A. C. 385 

2 Æropus IT. 402 Amyntas again re- 

3 Archelaus If. 394 established, 383 

4 Amyntas II 392 7 Alexander II. one 

3 Pausianas, 391 8 Perdiccas III. 71 
Amyntas IE 390 9 Ptolemy, 370 
Perdiccas, 368 10 Amyntas, 360 
Ptolemy, 367 To him Philip succeeded 
Perdiccas, 365 in the same year. 


è 


rians, of the Thessalians, of the Olynthian con- 
federacy, of Athens, of Sparta, and of Thebes; 
and each of those powers endeaveured to turn 
to their own immediate profit the dissensions 
in Macedon. Bardyllis, an active and daring 
chief, who by his abilities in acquiring, and his 
equity® in dividing the spoil, hud risen from the 
condition of a private robber to the command 
of the Illyrian tribes, entered Macedon at the 
head of a numerous army, dispossessed Amyn- 
A. C. 385 tas II. the father of Philip, and 
ces" placed Argeus on the throne, who 
cousented to become the tributary of his bene- 
factor.? The Thracians supported the title of 
another prince named Pausanias: but the as- 
sistance of Thessaly and Olynthus enabled 
Amyntas to resume the govern- 
fo Beja ment; the Olynthians E siaeyhow- 
ever, to surrender several places of importance 
which Amyntas had entrusted to their protec- 
tion, or which they had conquered from his 
competitor, Amyntas complained to Sparta, and 
that republic, for reasons above’ related, de- 
clared war against Olynthus, and reinstated the 
Macedonian king in full possession of his do- 
minions. In consequence of that 
a event, Amyntas established, and 
thenceforth held, his court at Pella, where he 
enjoyed several years of tranquillity, cultivating 
the friendship of the Lacedemonians and Athe- 
nians. 

The short reign of his son Alexander was 
disturbed by a fresh invasion of the Illyrians, 
from whom he purchased a precarious peace.9 
He left two brothers, Perdiccas and Philip, of 
whom the eldest was still a minor. Availing 
himself of their youth and weakness, Pausanias 
found means to usurp the throne, being sup- 
ported not only by the Thracians, but by a con- 
siderable body of Greek mercenaries, as well aa 
by a powerful party in Macedon. 

A. C. 370, Iphicrates, the Athenian, hap- 
pened at this critical juncture to re- 
turn from Amphipolis, the recovery of which- 
formed the main object of his expedition. In 
former journies to the coast of Thrace, he had 
been treated with distinguished regard by 
Amyntas, whose widow Eurydicé now craved 
the protection of Iphicrates for the sons of his 
friend. This princess was descended from the 
Bacchiadw, the noblest family of Corinth, who, 
rather than. live on an equality with their fel- 
low citizens in that republic, had become the 
leaders of the Lynceste, a barbarous tribe in 
habiting the most western district of Macedon. 
Eurydicé inherited all the ambition of her race, 
and was dintinguished by a bold intriguing spi- 
rit" still more than by her beauty and accom- 
plishments. With her young sons she suddenly 
appeared before Iphicrates, in the supplicating 
form of calamity and woe; presented the eldest 
to his hand, placed Philip, the younger, on his 
knee, and conjured him, by “the sincere friend- 
ship which Amyntas had ever entertained for 
Ashens and for himself, to pity their tender 


6 Cicero de Offic. I. ii. 

8 See c. xxix. p. 318. 

9 Diodorus et Justin. ubi supra. 
10 Justin. l. vii. c. iv 


7 Diodor. l. xiv. c. xcii. 


XXXIIL] ; 


years, oppressed by cruel usurpation.” The 
dignity of her sorrow prevailed with Iphicrates, 
who respected the sacred ties of hospitality, 
and who saw the advantage that might accrue 
to Athens by gaining an interest in Macedon. 
We are not informed by what means he esta- 
blished Perdiccas on the throne. The revolu- 
tion was effected with such rapidity,!! that we 
may suppose a sudden insurrection of the peo- 
ple, who, on important emergencies, were ac- 
customed, as in the heroic ages, to assemble in 


arms. 

During the minority of the young 
A. C. 367. prince, the kingdom was governed 
by his natural brother Ptolemy, whose ambi- 
tion, unsatisfied with a delegated power, openly 
aspired to reign. This usurper (as we have re- 
lated above) was dethroned hy Pelopidas and 
the Thebans, who reinstated Perdiccas in his 
dominions; and in order to secure the depend- 
ence of Macedon on Thebes, carried into that 
city as hostages thirty Macedonian youths, and 
with them Philip, the younger brother of the 
king. 

enas seemed proud of his chain. Elated 
with the protection of the Thebans, then in the 
height of their prosperity, he forgot the grati- 
tude due to Iphicrates and the Athenians; dis- 
puted the right of that people to Amphipolis, 
which had been acknowledged by the general 
council of Greece;!? and his opposition ren- 
dered fruitless their well-directed endeavours 
to recover that important establishment. The 
Athenians found an avenger in Bardyllis the 
Illyrian, to whom Perdiccas had denied the tri- 
bute that had been paid by his predecessors 
Argeus and Alexander. Bardyllus maintained 
his claim by force of arms. The Macedonians 
met him in the field, but were totally defeated 
with the loss of four thousand men.!3 Perdic- 
cas was taken prisoner, and soon after died of 
his wounds. His son Amyntas was an infant. 
Thebes having lost her pre-eminence in Greece, 
was unable to protect her distant allies. Athens 
was hostile, and Macedon, surrounded by ene- 
mies on every side, already experienced the fury 
of Barbarian invaders. 

Not only the Illyrians and Bardyllis, who 
ravaged the west, but the Peonians, a power- 
ful and warlike tribe, having received some 
cause of offence from Perdiccas, now indulged 
their revenge, and insulted the northern frontier 
without interruption or control. The Thra- 
cians still supported the cause of Pausanias, 
whom they prepared to send back into Mace- 
don at the head of a numerous army. Ptolemy 
was dead; but Argæus, the ancient competitor 
of king Amyntas, imboldened by the victory 
of the Illyrians, who had formerly placed him 
on the throne, renewed his pretensions to that 
dignity; and, grown old in intrigue, easily per- 
suaded the Athenians, by the hopes of recover- 
ing Amphipolis, to exert themselves in his fa- 
vour, especially against the son and brother of 
Perdiccas, by whose insolence and ingratitude 
they were justly provoked and disgusted. Im- 


11 Cornel. Nepos, in Iphicrat. Æschin. de falsa Lega- 
tione. 

12 Demosth. de falsa Legat. 

13 Diodor. |. xvi. sect 2. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 367 


pelled by such motives, the Athenians Jaunched 


their fleet, and sailed towards the coast of Ma- 


cedon, with three thousand heavy-armed men, 
commanded by Mantias.'4 

Such were the evils which threat- 
ened, and the calamities which op- 
pressed, that unfortunate and dis- 
tracted kingdom, when Philip ap- 
peared, asserting, unterrified, the rights of his 
infant nephew, against two candidates for the 
throne, and four formidable armies. A prince 
of less courage than Philip would have shrunk 
from a design seemingly desperate and imprac- 


‘ticable; and had courage been his principal 


virtue, he would have only heightened the gis- 
orders which he hoped to remedy.!®, But on 
this emergency, the young Macedonian (for he 
was only in his twenty-third year!®) displayed 
those extraordinary abilities which distinguis.. 
his reign, and render it the most interesting spec- 
tacle that history can present to those who are 
delighted with surveying, not the vulgar revo- 
lutions of force and fortune, but the active ener- 
gies and resources of a vigorous and compre- 
hensive mind. Such was the obscurity in 
which his merit had hitherto lain concealed 
froin the public, that historians!’ disagree as to 
the place of his residence, when he was inform- 
ed of the defeat and death of his brother Per- 
diccas. From the age of fifteen he had lived 
chiefly in Thebes, in the family, and under the 
direction of Epaminondas,!8 whose lessons and 
example could not fail to excite, in a kindred 
mind, the emulation of excellence, and the 
ardour of patriotism.'? It is probable that, 
agreeably to the custom of Greece and Rome, 
where the youth alternately frequented the 
school and the camp, and might somctimes find 
a school of philosophy in the tent of a general, 
that Philip accompanied the Thcban hero in 
many of his military expeditions. It is certain 
that, attended suitably to his rank, he visited 
the principal republics of Greece, whose insti- 
tutions in peace and war he examined with a 
sagacity far superior to his years.22 The tac- 
tics of the Lacedemonians were the first new 
establishment which he introduced into Mace- 
don. Nor was the improvement of his know- 
ledge the only fruit of his travels. The brother 
ofa king found an easy access to whosoever he 
had an interest to know and cultivate. Even 
in Athens, then hostile to Thebes, and naturally 
unfavourable to a pupil of Epaminondas, Philip 
acquired the friendship and esteem of Plato,?! 
Isocrates,22 and Aristotle ;23 and the early con- 


14 Diodorus, ubi supra. 

15 Olivier Vie de Philippe, p. 47. 

16 Comp. Diodor. p. 510. et Justin. l. ix. e. viii. 

17 Diodorus places him in Thebes; Athenwus, l. ii. p. 
506, in Macedon; and adds, Atarespwv ds evtavia uvas 
ftv, ws relave Wepdsxxac, s erosmov, Suvemews vusrap- 
“ovens, emerso Tois MeævuaTi, Words which admira- 
bly correspond to ihe rapid motions of Philip after the 
death of Perdiccas. 

18 Plutarch. in Pelopida. 

19 Plutarch speaks with the partiality of a Beotian for 
Epaminondas, and the resentment of a native of Cheronea 
against Philip. See Plutarch. in Pelopid. 

20 Plutarch. in Alexand. Athenwus, |. xi. p. 506. 

21 Athenæuvs, l. xi. lian, l. iv. c. xix. 

22 Isocratis Epistole, et Oratio ad Philipp. 

23 Aristotle at this time lived in the Academy with Plato, 
where, most probably, Philip first saw him. Dionys. Hali- 
carnas. Epist. ad. Ammxum. 


568 


nection which he formed with the principal 
leaders of Athens, and the neighbouring repub- 
lics, contributed, perhaps, in no small degree, 
to the success of his future designs.! 

His seasonable appearance in Macedon, after 
the defeat and death of Perdiccas, suddenly 
changed the fortune of that seemingly devoted 
kingdom. Yet our admiration of Philip ought 
not to make us overlook the favourable circum- 
stances which seconded his abilities, and con- 
spired to promote his success. The places of 
strength built by Archelaus furnished a secure 
retreat to the remains of Perdiccas’s army ; the 
Macedonians, though conquered, were not sub- 
dued; they had considerable garrisons in the 
fortresses and walled towns scattered over the 
kingdom ;? their whole forces had not been 
engaged in the unfortunate battle with the Illy- 
rians ;3 and those fierce invaders, impatient of 
delay, and only solicitous for plunder, having 
ravaged the open country, returned home to 
enjoy the fruits of their violence and rapine. 
They probably intended soon to assault Macedon 
with increased numbers, and to complete their 
devastations ; tut they seem to have been alike 
incapable to concert or to pursue any permanent 
plan of conquest; and being distinguished, as 
historians relate, by their blooming complexions, 
active vigour, and longevity,’ they were not 
less distinguished by that irregular and capri- 
cious mode of acting, and that inattention to 
remote consquences, which characterise the 
manners of Barbarians. 

The warriors of Peonia and Thrace® were 
less formidable by their numbers, and equally 
contemptible for their ignorance and indocility. 
In early times, the Peonians indeed had been 
regarded as a tribe less savaze, and more con- 
siderable’ than their Macedonian neighbours; 
but the former had remained stationary, in the 
rudeness of their primitive state, while the 
latter had been improved by a Grecian colony, 
and by frequent communication and intercourse 
with the Grecian republics. Of the Thracians 
we have had occasion to speak in the preceding 
parts of this work. The destructive ravages of 


Seuthes’? represent the ordinary condition of | 


that unsettled and inhospitable country, some- 
times united under one chief, more frequently 


divided among many, whose mutual hostilities | 


- banished agriculture, industry, and every useful 
art. Exclusive of the Grecian settlements on 
the coast, Thrace contained not any city, nor 
even any considerable town. The Barbarian 
Cotys, who was dignified with the title of king, 
led a wandering life, encamping on the banks of 
rivers with his flocks and followers. War 
and pasturage formed the only sources of his 
grandeur, and even the only means of his sub- 
sistence. 

Such were the first enemies with whom 
Philip had to contend. Their own capricious 
unsteadiness delivered him from the Illyrians. 


1 Dcmosthen. passim. 

3 Atheneus, l. xi. p. 506. 

4 Lucian. in Macrobiis, et Cornel. Alexand. apud Plinium, 
lib. vii. cap. clvii. 

5 Cornel. Nepos in Iphicrat. Xenoph. Anab.]. vii. p. 393. 

6 Hippocrat. de Epidem. 

7 See p. 296, et seq. 

8 Atheneus, |. xii. p. 33]. 


2 Thucyd. l. xi. p. 168. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


To the Peonians, who ravaged the north, he 
either sent a deputation, or applied in person; 
and partly by bribes, partly by artful promises 
and flattery, persuaded the invaders to retire. 
The same arts prevailed with the selfish king of 
Thrace,? whose avarice readily sacrificed the 
cause of Pausanias, while Philip thought the 
remaining wealth of Macedon usefully consuin- 
ed in removing those barbarous foes, that he 
might resist, with undivided strength, the more 
formidable invasion of Argeus and the Athe- 
nians. 

The Athenian fleet already an- 


eee chored before the harbour of Me- 
A.C. 360 thoné; Argeus, with his numerous 


* followers, had encamped in the 
province of Pieria ; and their united forces pre- 
pared to march northward to Edessa, or Age, 
the ancient capital of Macedon, where they ex- 
pected to be joined by a powerful party, whom 


| fear or inclination would bring to the standard 


of the banished king. The Macedonians who 
adhered to the interest of Perdiccas, or rather 
of lis infant son, had been dispirited by the re- 
cent victory ofthe Illyrians, and the misfortunes 
consequent on that event. But the manly ex- 
hortations, and undaunted deportment of Philip, 
roused them from their despair. They admired 
the dexterity with which he had disarmed the 
resentment of the Thracians and Peonians. 
His graceful person, insinuating address, and 
winning atfability, qualities which he possessed 
in a very uncommon degree,” gained the affec- 
tions of the Macedonians, who either recollected, 
or were studiously reminded of, a prophecy,!! 
that announced great glory to their nation under 
the reign of the son of Amyntas. In an as- 
sembly held at Ægæ, they exclaimed, with one 
consent, “ This is the man whom the gods point 
out as the founder of the Macedonian greatness. 
The dangerous condition of the times admits not 
of an infant reign. Let us obey the celestial 
voice, and cntrust the sceptre to hands alike 
worthy to hold, and able to defend it.”!2 This 
proposal seemed not extraordinary in a country 
which had been long accustomed to interrup- 
tions in the lineal order of succession. Amyn- 
tas was set aside, and Philip, who had hitherto 
possessed only the delegated power of regent, 
was invested with the royal title and authority.!3 

While all ranks of men were thus animated 
with affectionate admiration of their young 
king, the obsolete claims of Argeus could only 


be maintained by arms. Attended by his Athe- 


nian allies, he marched towards Edessa; but 
that city shut its gates against him. Dispirited 
by this repulse, he made no farther attempts to 
gain admission into any of the Macedonian 


9 Diodor. Sicul. l. xvi. sect. 3. Horace alludes to these 
events: 
diffidit urbium 
Portas vir Macedo, et subruit emulos 
Reges muneribus. Lib. iii. Ode 16. 
10 Æschin. de falsa Legatione. ` 
11 In the Sibylline verses preserved in Pausanias (in 
Achaic.) Philip is named as the author of the Macedonian 
greatness, and the destruction of the kingdom is foretold 
under another Philip. These verses, though evidently com- 
posed after the event, serve to confirm the fact, that the su- 
perstition of the multitude was wrought upon for the pur- 
poses of Philip. Justin. l. vii. c. vi. 
12 Ibib. idem. 
13 Diodorus, l. xvi. sect. 3- 


XXXIIL] 


cities, but directed his course backward to Me- 
thoné. Philip, who had now collected sufficient 
strength to take the field, harassed his retreat, 
cut his rear to pieces, and defeated him in a 
general engagement, in which Argeus himself 
fell, with the flower of his army. The rest, 
whether Greeks or Barbarians, were made 
prisoners of war.!4 

It was on this occasion that Philip first dis- 
played that deep and artful policy, which, in the 
course of a long reign, gained him such a power- 
ful ascendant over the passions of other men, 
and enabled him uniformly to govern his own 
by the interest of his ambition. In the midst 
of prosperity, his proud and lofty spirit must 
have been highly provoked by the Athenians, as 
well as by the followers of Argeus; and the 
barbarous maxims and practices which prevailed 
in that age, left him at full liberty to wreak 
his vengeance on the unhappy prisoners of both, 
who had fallen into his hands. But the interest 
of Philip required him rather to soothe than to 
irritate the people of Athens, and to obtain by 
good offices (what he could not command by 
force) the confidence of his Macedonian sub- 
jects. The captives of the latter nation were 
called into his presence, rebuked with gentleness 
and humanity, admitted to swear allegiance to 
their new master, and promiscuously distribut- 
ed in the body of his army. The Athenian 
prisoners were treated in a manner still more 
extraordinary.!® Instead of demanding any ran- 
som for their persons, he restored their baggage 
unexamined, and entertained them at his table 
with such condescending hospitality, that they 
returned home, full of admiration for the young 
king, and deeply persuaded of his attachment 
and respect for their republic.!6 
They had only time to blaze forth 


Oly i the praises of Philip, when his am- 
‘asa, bassadors arrived at Athens.!” He 


knew that the loss of Amphipolis 
principally excited the resentment of the Athe- 
nians; he knew that the interest of Macedon 
required that resentment to be appeased. Im- 
pressed with these ideas, he renounced all ju- 
risdiction over Amphipolis, which was formerly 
declared a free and independent city, subject 
only to the government of its own equitable 
laws.'8. This measure, together with the dis- 
tinguished treatment of the Athenian prisoners, 
insured the success of his embassy. An ancient 
treaty was renewed, that had long subsisted be- 
tween his father Amyntas and the Athenians. 
That capricious and unsteady people, not less 
susceptible of gratitude, than prone to anger, 
were thus lulled into repose, at a time when 
Fortune having placed them at the head of 
Greece, both their present power and ancient 


14 Diodorus, l. xvi. s. 3. et Demosth. in Aristocrat. 

15 The fair side of Philip’s character is described by 
Diodor. |. xvi. p. 510, et seq. and 539. By Just. l. ix. c. viii. 
The most disadvantageous description of him is given by 
Demosthenes, passim, and by Athenteus, |. iv. c. xix. J. vi. 
e. xvii. etl. x. c. x. Cicero seems not to have regarded the 
assertions of Demosthenes, when, in speaking of Philip and 
Alexander, he says, * Alter semper magnus, alter stepe tur- 
pissimus.” But the artificial character of Philip, which 
varied with his interest, merits neither the panegyrics nor 
invectives too liberally bestowed on it. 

16 Demosthenes in Aristocrat. 17 Ibid. 

18 Polyen. Stratag. |. iv. c. 17. 

4 3 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


—— Ő eee a ea a ee e e aa 


369 


glory urged them to take the front of the battle 
against Philip. Confiding in the insidious 
treaty with that prince, they engaged in a ruin- 
ous war with their allies;!? and ceased, during 
several years, to make any opposition to the 
ambitious designs of the Macedonian. 


The young king having given 


ae P- such illustrious proofs of his abili- 
A.C. 359. ties in negotiation and war, availed 


himself of the affectionate admira- 
tion of his subjects to establish, during a season 
of tranquillity, such institutions as might main- 
tain and extend his own power, and confirm the 
solid grandeur of Macedon. The laws and 
maxims which prevailed in the heroic ages, 
and which, as we have already observed, had 
been early introduced into that kingdom, cir- 
cumscribed the royal authority within very nar- 
row bounds. The chiefs and nobles, especially 
in the more remote provinces, regarded them- 
selves as therivals and equals of their sovereign. 
In foreign war they followed his standard, but 
they often shook his throne by domestic sedi- 
tion; and, amidst the scanty materials for ex- 
plaining the internal state of Macedon in an- 
cient times, we may discover several instances in 
which they disavowed their allegiance, and as- 
sumed independent government over consider- 
able districts of the country.20 The moment 
of glory and success seemed the most favourable 
for extinguishing this dangerous spirit, and 
quashing the proud hopes of the nobles. In 
this design Philip proceeded with that artful 
policy which characterizes his reign. From the 
bravest of the Macedonian youth, he chose a 
select body of companions,?! who, being distin- 
guished by honourable appellations, and enter- 
tained at the royal table, attended the king’s 
person in war and in hunting. Their intimacy 
with the sovereign, which was regarded as a 
proof of their merit, obliged them to superior 
diligence in all the severe duties of a military 
life.22 The noble youth, animated with the 
hope of glory, vied with each other to gain ad- 
mission into this distinguished order; and while, 
on one hand, they served as hostages? for the 
allegiance of their families, they formed, on the 
other, a useful seminary of future generals,24 
who, after conquering for Philipand Alexander, 
at length conquered for themselves, and divided 
the spoils of the ancient world. 

It is ignorantly said by some writers,?5 that 
Philip, in the first year of his reign, invented 
the phalanx,a body of six thousand men, armed 
with short swords, fit either for cutting or 
thrusting; strong bucklers, four feet in length 
and two and a half in breadth; and pikes four- 
teen cubits long, which usually arranged sixteen 
deep, formed the main battle of the Macedo- 


19 See c. xxxii. p. 351, et seq. ; 

20 Strabo, |. vii. p. 326. Xenoph. Hist. Greve. l. v. 

21 Arrian, et Ablian. 22 ASlian, 1. xiv. c. 49. 

23 Arian says, © Twv ev TENSI Mzxeðovwv rous masdas,”” 
“tho sons of men in office;’? which well agrees with the 
idea of their being hostages for the fidelity of their parents. 
He also ascribes the institution to Philip. Ex dsAsraov 
yon xeSeornxocs. Arrian. l iv. p. 89. 

24 Curtius, l. viii. c. 6. 

25 Diodorus Siculus, l. xvi. s. 3, and all the Roman 
writers of Greek history.. It was natural for the Romans, 
who began to know Greece and Macedon almost at the 
same time, and who found the phalanx most complete in 
the latter, to suppose it invented in that country. 


370 


nians, But this is nothing different from the 
armour and arrangement which had always 
prevailed among the Greeks, and which Philip 
adopted in their most perfect form ; nor is there 
reason to think that a prince, who knew the 
danger of changing what the experience of ages 
had approved, made any alteration in the wea- 
pons or tactics of that people.! His attention 
was more judiciously directed to procure, in 
sufficient abundance, arms, horses, and other 
necessary instruments of war; in reviewing and 
exercising his troops; and in accustoming them 
to that austere and laborious life,2 which is the 
best preparation for the field. 

The military resources which his 


mp. activity had provided, his ambition 
w ©. 35g, didnot allow to remain long unem- 


ployed. The death of Agis, the 
most warlike chieftain, or, as he is called by a 
historian,? king of the Pæonians, drew Philip 
into the field, to revenge recent injuries which 
those Barbarians had inflicted on Macedon. 
Among a people where the laws of peace or war 
are neglected or unknown, almost every thing 
depends on the precarious character of their 
leaders. Deprived of the valour of Agis, the 
Peonians lost all hopes of defence. Philip 
overran their country without resistance; car- 
ried off slaves and plunder; imposed a tribute 
on their chiefs; took hostages; and reduced 
Peonia to an absolute dependence on Macedon. 

It is probable that, according to the practice 
of the age, he permitted or required a certain 
number of the vanquished to follow hisstandard ; 
but the Peonians were no sooner reduced, than 
Philip, to whom all seasons seemed alike pro- 
per for war, undertook a winter’s campaign 
against Bardyllis and the Illyrians, the heredi- 
tary enemies of his family and kingdom. He 
marched towards the frontier of [llyria* at the 
head of ten thousand foot and six hundred 
horse, and, before entering the country, animat- 
ed the resentment and valour of his troops by 
a.military oration, after the custom of the Geeks, 
whose manners he seemed, on every occasion, 
ambitious to imitate. Indignation of past in- 
juries, the honour of his subjects, and the glory 
of his crown might be topics proper to influ- 
ence the Macedonian soldiers, who could not 
fully enter into the more refined motives of their 
sovereign. Illyria had been extended on the 


1 The improvement in the countermarch, to which Philip 
gave the appearance of advancing, instead of retreating, 
mentioned by Ælian in his tactics, c. xxviii. was borrowed, 
as this author tells us, from the Lacedemonians. If Philip 
increased this phalanx, usually less numerous, to six thou- 
sand men, this was far from*an improvement; and the latter 
kings of Macedon, who swelled it to sixteen thousand, only 
rendered that order of battle more unwieldy and inconve- 
nient. ‘The highest perfection of Grecian tactics is to be 
found in Xenophon’s expedition. See c. xxvi. p. 259, et 
seq. See also Polyb. ]. xvii. p. 764. et Liv. l. xliv. c. 40. 

2 Polyænus, l. iv. c. 3. Frontin. Strat. l. iv. c.1. 

3 Diodorus, |. xvi. sect. 4. 

4 The Greek name of this country is IAAvess, but more 
commonly 0: IAAveto:, from its inhabitants. Vid. Arrian, 
l. i. passim. The Latin name is Illyricum; most English 
writers of ancient history use Illyria, probably from the 
French Illyrie. The Greek IAaAveis is described by Strabo, 
1. vii. p. 317. It comprehended the eastern shore of the 
Hadriatic, between Epirus and Istria. T'he Latin [lyri- 
cum had a signification far more extensive. See Gibbon’s 
History, vol. i. p. 27. 

5 The heads of the speech are given, indirectly, in the 
fragments of Theopompus. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cus . 


east, to the prejudice of Macedon, which it to- 
tally excluded from the excellent harbours on 
the Hadriatic.6 This was an important con- 
sideration to a prince, who seems to have early 
meditated the raising of a naval power. Be- 
sides this, it was impossible for Philip to under- 
take with safety the other measures which he 
had in view, should he leave his kingdom ex- 
posed to the predatory incursions of a neigh- 
bouring enemy, who, unless they feared Mace- 
don, must always be formidable to that coun- 
try. Directed by such solid principles of policy, 
rather than governed by resentment, or allured 
by the splendour of victory, Philip proceeded 
forward, with the caution necessary to be ob- 
served ina hostile territory. After a fruitless 
negotiation, Bardyllis met him in the field with 
an adequate body of infantry, but with only 
four hundred horse. The precise scene of the 
engagement is unknown. The Macedonian 
phalanx attaked the Illyrian column’ in front, 
while the targeteers and light-armed troops 
galled its fanks, and the cavalry harassed its 
rear. The Illyrians, thus surrounded on every 
side, were crushed between two opposite as- 
saults, without having an opportunity to exert 
their full strength.8 Their resistance, however, 
must have been vigorous, since seven thousand 
were left on the field of battle, and with them 
their gallant leader Bardyllis, who fell, at the 
age of ninety, fighting bravely on horseback. 
The loss of their experienced chief, and of 
the flower of their youthful warriors, broke the 
strength and courage of the Illyrian tribes, who 
sent a deputation to Philip, humbly craving 
peace, and submitting their fortune to the will 
of the conqueror. Philip granted them the 
same terms? which he had lately imposed on 
the Peonians. That part of their country 
which lies east of the lake Lychnidus he joined 
to Macedon; and probably built a town and 
settled a colony on the side of the lake, which 
watered a fertile country, and abounded in 
different kinds of fish, highly esteemed by the 
ancients. The town and lake of Lychnidus 
were fifty miles distant from the Ionian sea; 
but such was the ascendant that the arms and 
policy of Philip acquired over his neighbours, 
that the inhabitants of the intermediate district 
soon adopted the language and manners of 


6 Strabo says, æmævra tov IAAvesxow (soilicet xweov} 
ogodex evAsmwevov eivzt; and adds, that the shore of Illyria 
is as abundant, as the opposite coast of Italy ia defective, 
in good harbours. Strabo, l. viii. 

7 The Illyrians were drawn up in the order of battle 
called zAsv3sav, from 2Asvdos, a brick ; which clearly points 
out its form. 

8 Frontinus Stratag. I. ii. c. 3. 

9 It should seem from Diodorus, that the Ilyrians had 
entertained the same superstitious terror of neglecting the 
interment of the dead, which prevailed among the Greeks. 
Yet Diodorus, perhaps, only used a privilege too common 
among historians, of transferring their own feelings to those 
concerning whom they write. He says, that Philip “ restored 
their dead, and erected a trophy.” Pausanias (in Beotic.) 
denies that either Philip or his son Alexander ever erected 
any of those monuments of victory; which practice, he 
says, was Contrary to a Macedonian maxim, established as 
early as the time of Caranus, when a lion having over- 
turned onc of his trophics, the wise foundcr of the monar- 
chy regarded this event as a warning to forbear raising 
them in future. But the medals of Philip and Alexander, 
of which the reverse is sometimes charged with trophies, 
refute the assertion of Pansanias; which is likewise con- 
tradicted by Arrian, Curtius, and all the writers of the life, 
or expedition, of Alexander. 


XXXIIL] 


their conquerors; and their territory, hitherto 
unconnected with any foreign power, sunk into 
such an absolute dependence on Macedon, that 
many ancient geographers considered it as a 
province of that country.!0 

Having settled the affairs of Illy- 
ria, Philip returned home, not to 
ev. 4. $ : 

A.C. 357, €Y the sweets of victory and re- 
pose, but to pursue more important 
and more arduous desigus than those which he 
had hitherto carried on with such signal suc- 
cess. He had secured and extended the north- 
ern and western frontier of Macedon; but the 
rich southern shores, chiefly inhabited by 
Greeks, presented at once a more tempting 
prize, and a more formidable enemy. The con- 
federacy of Olynthus, having thrown off the 
yoke of Sparta, had become more powerful 
than ever. It could send into the field ten thou- 
sand heavy-armed men, and a large body of 
well-disciplined cavalry. Most towns of the 
Chalcidicé had become its allies or subjects; 
and this populous and wealthy province, toge- 
ther with Pangeus on the right, and Pieria on 
. the left, the cities of both which were either 
independent, or subject to the Athenians, form- 
ed a barrier sufficient not only to guard the 
Grecian states against Macedon, but even to 
threaten the safety of that kingdom. Every 
motive concurred to direct the active policy of 
Philip towards acquisitions immediately neces- 
sary in themselves, and essential to the comple- 
tion of his remote purposes. In the course of 
twenty years he accomplished his designs, and 
conquered Greece; often varying his means, 
never changing his end; and notwithstanding 
the circumstances and events that continually 
thwarted his ambition, we behold the opening 
and gradual progress of a vast plan, every step 
in which paved the way for that which followed, 
till the whole ended in the most signal triumph, 
perhaps, ever attained by human prudence, 
over courage and fortune. 

The importance of Olynthus and Chalcidicé 
could not divert the sagacity of Philip from 
Amphipolis, which he regarded as a more neces- 
sary, though less splendid, conquest. The pos- 
session of Amphipolis, which would connect 
Macedon with the sea, and secure to that king- 
dom many commercial advantages, opened a 
road to the woods and mines of mount Pangeus, 
the former of which was so essential to the 
raising of a naval power, and the latter to the 
forming and keeping on foot a sufficient military 
force. The place itself Philip in the beginning 
of his reign had declared independent, to avoid 
a rupture with the Athenians, who still asserted 
their pretensions to their ancient colony. But 
„their measures to regain Amphipolis had hither- 
to been rendered ineffectual by the caprice or 
perfidy of Charidemus, a native of Eubcea, who, 
from the common level of a soldier of fortune, 
had risen to the command of a considerable body 
of mercenaries, frequently employed by the in- 
dolence and licentiousness of the Athenians, a 
people extremely averse both to the fatigue and 
restraint of personal service. They determined, 


10 Strabo, 1. vii. p. 327. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


371 


however, to renew their attempts for recovering 
their dominion, while the A mphipolitans, having 
tasted the sweets of liberty, prepared to main- 
tain their independence. 

In this posture of affairs, the hostile designs 
of Philip, which all bis artifice had not been able 
to conceal from the suspicious jealousy of the 
new republic, alarmed the magistrates of Anı- 
phipolis, and obliged them to seek protection 
from tle Olynthians, who readily admitted them 
into their confederacy. Imboldened by this 
alliance, they set at defiance the menaces of 
their neighbouring, as well as of their more dis- 
tant, enemy; and their imprudent insolence 
readily furnished Philip with specious grounds 
of hostility. The Olynthians perceived that 
the indignation of this prince must soon break 
forth into action, and overwhelm the Amphi- 
politans; while they themselves might be in- 
volved in the ruin of their new confederate. 
To anticipate this danger, they sent ambassa- 
dors to Athens, requesting an alliance with that 
republic against the natural enemy of both 
states, and an enemy whose successful activity 
rendered him a just object of terror. 

This alliance, had it taken place, must have 
given a fatal blow to the rising greatness of 
Macedon, which as yet was incapable to con- 
tend with the united strength of Olynthus and 
Athens. The spies and emissaries of Philip 
(for he had already begun to employ those 
odious, but necessary instruments of policy) 
immediately gave the alarm. The prince him- 
self was deeply sensible of the danger, and de- 
termined to repel it with equal vigour and 
celerity. His agents reached Athens before any 
thing was concluded with the Olynthian depu- 
ties. The popular leaders and orators were 
bribed and gained; the magistrates and senate 
were flattered and deceived by the most plausi- 
ble declarations and promises. A negotiation 
was immediately set on foot, by which Philip 
stipulated to conquer Amphipolis for the Athe- 
nians, on condition that they surrendered to 
him Pydna, a place of far lessimportance. He 
promised, besides, to confer many other advan- 
tages on the republic, which it was not proper 
at present to mention, but which time would 
reveal,!!_ Amused by the artifices of the Mace- 
donian, deceived by the perfidy of their own 
magistrates, and elated with the hopes of re- 
covering Amphipolis, the great object of their 
ambition, the senate of the Five Hundred (for 
the transaction was carried on with such haste 
as allowed not time for assembling the people) 
rejected with disdain the overtures of the Olyn- 
thians,'? who returned home disgusted and in- 
dignant. 

They had scarcely time to communicate to 
their countrymen the angry passions which 
agitated their own breasts, when the ambassa- 
dors of Philip craved audience in the assembly 
of Olynthus. That artful prince affected to 


V1 Kzı ro Sevadroupesvoy rors azrogeyrov sxetvo, Domos- 
then. Olynth. i. p. 6. edit. Wolfii. It is strange that Wolfius 
has changed the order of the Olynthian orations, so distinct- 
ly marked by Dion. Halicarn. in his letter to Ammous. 

12 Demosthenes expressos it in the strongest terms, as if 
they had driven the Olynthians from Athens: “ore Oruvdroug 
amydauvov tives svdevde.”” Demosthen. Olynth. i. p. 6. 


372 


condole with the Olynthians on the affront 
which they had received from the insolence of 
Athens; but at the same time testified his sur- 
prise, that they should condescend to court the 
distant protection of that proud republic, when 
they might find in Macedon an ally near at 
hand, who wished for nothing more earnestly 
than to enter into equal and lasting engage- 
ments with their confederacy. Asa proof of 
his moderation and sincerity, he offered imme- 
diately to put them in possession of Anthemus, 
a town of some importance in their neighbour- 
hood, the jurisdiction of which had long been 
claimed by the kings of Macedon;! at the 
same time assuring them of his intentions to 
deserve their gratitude by still more important 
services, and particularly by employing his 
arms to reduce the cities of Pydna and Potidea, 
commanding the opposite sides of the Thermaic 
gulf; places, therefore, of considerable value, 
which he wished to see dependent on Olynthus, 
rather than, as at present, subject to Athens. 

The immediate offers of Philip, his 


wn professions and promises, in which, 
A i C. 357, as they suited his interest, he doubt- 


less was sincere, and still more, his 
secret practices with some powerful men of 
Olynthus, effectually prevailed with that re- 
public to abandon the cause of Amphipolis, 
whose imprudent inhabitants had been at little 
pains to prevent those offences and complaints 
which naturally arise between the jealous mem- 
bers of an unequal confederacy. By these in- 
trigues, the Macedonian not only removed all 
opposition to his views on the part of the Olyn- 
thians, but acquired the sincere friendship of 
that people, who were ready to assist his arms, 
and to second his most ambitious designs. He 
therefore prepared for action, because he might 
now act with safety; marched rapidly towards 
Amphipolis, and pressed that city with a vigor- 
ous siege. The inhabitants, deeply affected by 
the near prospect of a calamity which they had 
taken little care to prevent, had recourse, in 
their distress, to Athens. Thither they des- 
patched Hierax and Stratocles, two of their 
most distinguished citizens, to represent the 
danger of an alliance between Philip and Olyn- 
thus; to entreat the Athenians to accept the 
sincere repentance of their unfortunate colony, 
and once more to take Amphipolis under the 
protection of their fleet. 

At that time the Athenians were deeply en- 
gaged in the social war; yet the hopes of re- 
covering so important a settlement might have 
directed their attention to Macedon, had not 
the vigilant policy of Philip sent them a letter, 
renewing the assurances of his friendship, ac- 
knowledging their pretensions to the city, 
which he actually besieged, and of which he 
artfully said, that, in terms of his recent en- 
gagement, he hoped shortly to put them in 
possession. Amused by these insinuating re- 
presentations, the Athenians treated the depu- 
ties of Amphipolis with as little respect as they 
had lately done those of Olynthus. The be- 
sieged city was thus deprived of all hopes of 
relief; Philip pressed the attack with new vi- 


pee ENR? 
1 Demosthen. Philip. ii. 4. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuapr, 


gour; 2 breach was made in the 
walls; and the Amphipolitans, after 
A. C. 357, 20 obstinacy of defence which could 
it ther effect than to pro- 
ave no other an to pr 
voke the resentment of the conqueror, at 
length surrendered at discretion.? 

The prudent Macedonian always preferred 
his own profit to the punishment of his ene- 
mies. It was his interest to preserve and to 
aggrandize, not to depopulate, Amphipolis. He 
banished a few daring leaders, whose seditious 
or patriotic spirit might disturb the measures 
of his government. The bulk of the citizens 
were treated with sufficient mildness. Their 
territory was reunited to Macedon, from which 
Philip resolved that it should never be dismem- 
bered, notwithstanding his promises to the 
Athenians. 

That he might arm himself against the re- 
sentment of a people, whom, if he could not 
deceive, he was determined to defy, he cultivat- 
ed, with great earnestness, the Olynthian con- 
federacy ; and having besieged and taken the 
towns of Pydna and Potide, he readily ceded 
them to the Olynthians, who had but feebly 
assisted him in making these conquests. In the 
whole transaction Philip affected to act merely 
as an auxiliary. The Athenian garrison in Po- 
tide, who had surrendered themselves prison- 
ers of war, he took under his immediate pro- 
tection, and dismissed them without ransom, 
artfully lamenting that the necessity of his 
affairs, and his alliance with Olynthus, obliged 
him to oppose the interests of their republic, 
for which he entertained the most sincere re- 
spect.? 

It is impossible that the Athenians, weak and 
credulous as they were, should have been the 
dupes of this gross artifice. But they could 
not immediately withdraw their exertions from 
the social war, the events of which grew con- 
tinually more unprosperous. Philip, ever vigi- 
lant and active, profited ef this favonrable di- 
version, to pursue his conquests in Thrace, to 
which the possession of Amphipolis afforded 
him an opening. In the beginning of his reign, 
he had found it necessary to purchase a peace 
from Cotys, who still governed that country, 
but from whom Philip could not actually ap- 
prehend any formidable opposition. The late 
acquaintance of that Barbarian with the Gre- 
cian religion and manners, which he had adopt- 
ed in consequence of his connection with Iphi- 
crates and the Athenians, served only to deprave 
his faculties and to cloud his reason. We 
should pronounce absolutely mad, the man who 
fancied himself enamoured sof Minerva; but 
the ancients, who believed that the gods often 
appeared in a human form, regarded with more 
tenderness this frantic enthusiasm. Cotys was 
allowed to possess his freedom and his crown, 
whether, with his ambulatory court, he travers- 
ed the inhospitable mountains of Thrace, or 
pitched his tents on the fragrant banks of the 
Strymon or the Nessus; or, to enjoy with more 
privacy the favours of his celestial mistress, 


Olymp. 
CVA. 


2 Diodor. }. xvi. c. viii. Demosthen. Olynth. iii. sect. 
4—7. 

3 Diodor. 1}. xvi. c. viii. et Demosth. Philipp. ii. et 
Olynth. i. 


XXXIIL] 


penetrated into the deep recesses of the beau- 
tiful forests which adorned his kingdom. 
At the approach of the Macedo- 


Oly Fia nians, having abandoned the grove 
a c. 357 of Onocarsis, the favourite scene of 


his wild and romantic enjoyments,4 
he endeavoured to stop the progress of the 
enemy by a letter; but a letter from such a 
man could excite nothing but ridicule or pity. 
Philip penetrated eastward thirty miles beyond 
Amphipolis, to the town of Crenide, situated 
at the foot of Mount Pangeus, and distant 
ten miles from the sea. He admired the soli- 
tary beauty of the place, which being bounded 
on one side by the sea, and on the other by 
lofty mountains, was watered by many streams 
and rivulets, which, tempering the dryness of 
the soil, produced the finest and most delicious 
fruit and flowers, especially roses, of a pecu- 
liar hue and fragrancy. But the attention of 
Philip was attracted by objects more important, 
by the gold mines in that neighbourhood, for- 
merly wrought by colonies from Thasos and 
from Athens, but totally neglected since the 
ignorant Thracians had become masters of Cre- 
nide. Philip expelled those Barbarians from 
a possession which they seemed unworthy to 
hold. Having descended into the gold mines, 
he traced, by the help of torches, the decayed 
labours of the ancient proprietors. By his care 
the water was drained off; the canals, broken 
or choaked up, were repaired; and the bosom 
of the earth was again opened and ransacked 
with eager avidity by a prince who well knew 
the value of the precious metals. A Macedo- 
nian colony was planted at Crenidæ, which 
thenceforth assumed the name of Philippi, a 
name bestowed also on the golden coins struck 
by order of Philip,’ to the annual amount of 
nearly a thousand talents, or two hundred 
thousand pounds sterling.’ 

Having effected the main purpose of his 
Thracian expedition, the prudence of Philip 
set bounds to his conquests in that country, and 
carried his arms into Thessaly, which, by the 
murder of Alexander of Phere, had got three 
tyrants instead of one. These were, Tissipho- 
nus, Pitholaus, and Lycophron, the brothers- 
in-law, the assassins, and the successors of Al- 
exander. The resentment of the Thessalians, 
and the valour of the Macedonian troops, to- 
tally defeated those oppressors of their country, 
who were reduced to such humiliating terms as 
seemed sufficient to prevent them from being 
thenceforth formidable either to their own sub- 
jects or to their neighbours.? The Thessalians, 
who were susceptible of all impressions, but 
incapable of preserving any, concluded, in the 


4 Theopomp. apud Atheneum, l. xii. p. 531. 
5 Senec. Natur. Quest. |. v. p. 760. et Demosth. in Lep- 


tin. 

6 The fatal defeat and death of Brutus and Cassius have 
eclipsed, in their melancholy splendour, all the preceding 
events which distinguish Philippi. There liberty expired, 
and virtue yielded to force. 

Cum fracta virtus, et minaces 
Turpe solum tetigere mento. 

7 Regale numisma Philippos. 

8 Diodor. l. xvi. c. ix. Justin. l. viii. c. iii. speaks differ- 
ently; but the whole of that chapter bears evident marks 
of ignorance and error. 

9 Diodor. l. xvi. c. xiv. et Plut. in Pelopid. 


HORACE. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


373 


first emotions of their gratitude, an agreement 
with their deliverer, by which they surrendered 
to him the revenues arising from their fairs and 
towns of commerce, as well as all the con- 
veniences of their harbours and shipping ; and 
extraordinary as this cession was, Philip found 
means to render it effectual and permanent,!0 

He immediately contracted an 


am alliance with Arybbas, king of Epi- 

A rus, a small principality which 
SRO LE skirted the western frontier of 
Thessaly. In his excursions from Thebes, 


Philip had early seen Olympias, the sister of 
that prince, whose wit and spirit, joined to the 
lively graces of her youth and beauty, had 
made a deep impression on his heart. They 
were initiated, at the same time, in the myste- 
ries of Ceres, daring the triennial festival in 
the isle of Samothrace, which had been long as 
much distinguished as Eleusis!! itself, by the 
peculiar worship and protection of this bounti- 
ful goddess. But the ag¢tive ambition which 
employed and engrossed the first years of 
Philip’s reign had probably banished the me- 
mory of his love, when his expedition into 
Thessaly recalled the image of Olympias. 
Their first interview naturally revived his ten- 
der passions ; and, as the kings of Epirus were 
lineally descended from Achilles, the match 
appeared every way suitable; Arybbas readily 
yielded his consent, and the beautiful princess 
was conducted into Macedon.!? 

The nuptials of Philip were solemnized at 
Pella with unusual pomp and splendour. Seve- 
ral months were destincd to religious shows and 
processions, to gymnastic games and exercises, 
to musical and dramatic entertainments. The 
young and fortunate prince naturally took a 
principal share in all these scenes of festivity ; 
and it is probable that, amidst the more elegant 
amusements of his court, Philip might disco- 
ver that strong propensity to vicious indul- 
gence, that delight in buffoons and flatterers, 
and other disgraccful ministers of his more 
criminal pleasures, which, however counter- 
acted and balanced by his ambition and mag- 
nanimity, disgraced and tarnished the succeed- 
ing glories of his reign. It is certain that the 
voluptuous inactivity in which he seemed sunk, 
encouraged the hopes of his enemies.!3 The 
tributary princes of Paonia and Illyria pre- 
pared to rebel; the king of Thrace engaged in 
their designs, which were concerted with more 
caution than is usual with Barbarians; and this 
ee conspiracy of neighbouring states might 

ave repressed for awhile the fortune of Ma- 
cedon, if Philip had not been scasonably in- 
formed of the danger by his faithful partisans 
and emissaries in those countries. 
Early in the ensuing spring he 


eee took the field with the flower of 
i C. 356. the Maccdonian troops. Parmenio, 


the general in whom he had most 
confidence, crushed the rebellion in Jllyria. 
Philip was equally successful in Pmronia and 
Thrace. While he returned from the latter, he 


10 Demosth. Philip. 1. 10. Polysen. Stratag. K iv. c. xix. 
11 See c. xxi. p. 249 et seq. 

12 Diodor. |. xvi. c. xxii. 

13 Justin. l. vii. c. vi. 


374 


was informed of the victory of Parmenio. A 
second messenger acquainted him that his 
horses had gained the prize in the chariot-races 
at the Olympic games; a victory which he re- 
garded as far more honourable, and which, as 
it proved him a legitimate son of Greece, he 
carefully commemorated, by impressing a cha- 
riot on his coins. Almost at the same time a 
third messenger arrived to tell him that Olym- 
pias had brought forth a prince at Pella; to 
whom, as born amidst such auspicious circum- 
stances, the diviners announced the greatest 
prosperity! and glory. 

Such a rapid tide of good fortune did not 
overset the wisdom of Philip, if we may judge 
by the first authentic transaction which imme- 
diately followed those events. This was the 
correspondence with Aristotle. the philosopher, 
whose merit Philip had early discerned at 
Athens, when he still resided with his master 
Plato. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


is written with a brevity which marks the king 
and the man of genius. * Know that a son is 
born tous. We thank the gods, not so much 
for the gift, as for bestowing it at a time when 
Aristotle lives. We assure ourselves that you 
will form him a prince worthy of his father, and 
worthy of Macedon.” Aristotle commenced 
this illustrious employment about thirteen years 
afterwards,? when the opening mind of Alex- 
ander might be supposed capable of receiving 
the benefit of his instructions. The success of: 
his labours will be explained in the sequel. 
The fortune of Alexander surpassed that of all 
other conquerors as much as his virtues sur- 
passed his fortune. Yet the fame of the philo- 
sopher abundantly repays the honour reflected 
on him by his royal pupil, since sixteen centu- 
ries after the subversion of Alexander’s empire, 
the writings of Aristotle still maintained an un 

exampled ascendant over the opinions, and 


The first letter (fortunately preserved) | even over the actions of men. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


Philip’s Prosperity—Imprudent Measures of the Amphictyonic Council—The Phocian, or Sacred 
War—Philomelus seizes the Temple of Delphi—Takes the Field against the Thebans and their 
Allies—Defeat and Death of Philomelus—A ffairs of Thrace, Macedon, and Attica—Onemar- 
chus takes the Command of the Phocians—Encounters Philip in Thessaly—He is defeated and 
slain— Philips Designs against Olynthus and Byzantium—Traversed by the Athenians— 
Phayllus takes the Command of the Phocians—Philip marches towards Thermopyle—Antici- 
pated by the Athenians—Demosthenes’ first Philippic—Philip’s Occupations at Pella—His 


Vices—and Policy. 


HILIP had now reigned almost 
aap. P five years. He had greatly en- 
om. larged the boundaries, he had still 
ARC. 266. aa. i 


more augmented the revenues, of 
his kingdom. Pæonia, no longer the rival, was 
become an obsequious province of Macedon. 
At the expense of Thrace and Illyria, he had 
extended his frontier on the east to the sea of 
Thasos; on the west to the lake Lychnidus. 
He was master of Thessaly without having the 
trouble to govern it. He secured many com- 
mercial advantages by the possession of Am- 
phipolis. His troops were numerous and well 
disciplined; his large finances were regulated 
with economy ; and the mines of Philippi fur- 


1 Plut. in Alexand. 

2 The chronology appears from Dionysius of Halicar- 
nassus’s letter to Ammæus, who, in order to prove that 
Demosthenes had attained the highest perfection in the 
practice, before Aristotle had delivered the theory, of elo- 
quence, marks, with great exactness, the principal events in 
the lives of the philosopher and orator. Aristotle, a native 
of Stagira, came to Athens in his eighteenth year, 367, A. 
C. There he continued twenty years, as the scholar or as- 
sistant of Plato, who died 348 A. C. Aristotle left Athens 
on the death of his master, and spent three years at Atar- 
næus, and two at Mytelené. From thence he went to Ma- 
cedon, in the forty-third year of his age, and 343 A. C. He 
was employed eight years in the education of Alexander. 
He returned to Athens 335 A. C.: taught twelve years in 
the Lyceum, and died the year following at Chalcis, ætat. 
sixty-three, A. C. 323, and a year after the death of Alex- 


ander. Dionysius ad Ammeum. He reckons by the Ar- 
am of Athens; I have substituted the years before 
rist. 


nished him with an annual resource alike use- 
ful to his designs, whether he pursued the am- 
bitious career of foreign conquest, or set himselt 
to build up and consolidate the internal gran- 
deur of his dominions. 

The power of Philip was admired, and feared, 
by those who were unable to penetrate the deep 
principles of his policy, which ałone rendered 
kim really formidable. The first and most na- 
tural object of his desire was the territory of 
Olynthus, the most populous and fertile portion 
of the Macedonian coast. His second and far 
more arduous purpose was to obtain the sove- 
reignty of Greece. But instead of discovering 
these designs, he had hitherto cultivated the 
Olynthians with a careful assiduity, and had 
deserved their gratitude by many solid and im- 
portant services. His success had been com- 


i plete, and if, elated by the many advantages 


which we have enumerated, he had already pre- 
pared to invade Greece, it is more than probable 
that the Olynthians would have consented to 
follow his standard. But Philip was sensible, 
that by snatching too eagerly at this glorious 
prize, he might destroy for ever his prospect of 
obtaining it. While the Athenians were occu- 
pied and harassed by the destructive war with 
their confederates, he had, indeed, embraced the 
opportunity to gain possession of several of their 
dependent settlements in Thrace and Macedon; 
colouring, however, these proceedings by the 


XXXIV. ] 


pretence of justice or necessity, and tenipering'| 
even his hostilities by many partial acts of kind- 
ness and respect. Before the social war was 
ended, the seeds of dissension, so profusely scat- | 
tered in Greece, were likely to ripen into a new 
quarrel far more general and important. Philip 
patiently waited their maturity. His hopes 
were founded on the domestic animosities of 
Greece; but the too early discovery of his sys- 
tem might have united a hundred thousand? 
warriors against their common enemy; where- 
as, by the secret refinements of a slow and stea- 
dy policy, he effected his vast purposes without 
being obliged, on any one occasion, to fight 
against thirty thousand men. 

The Amphictyons having recovered their au- 
thority in consequence of the events which have 
formerly been described, began early to display 
those dangerous passions with which the exer- 
cise of uncontrolled power too naturally corrupts 
the heart. They pretended, that during the 
decline of their jurisdiction, many unwarrant- | 
able abuses had been introduced, which it be- 
came them to remedy. The rights of religion 
(they said,) which it was their first duty to 
maintain, had been materially violated by the 
Phocians, who, alike regardless of the decision 
of the oracle, and of an Amphictyonic decree, 
had ploughed lands consecrated to Apollo, and 
therefore withdrawn from agriculture.4 These 
lands, however, were confined to the narrow 
district between the river Cephissus and Mount 
Thurium, on the western frontier of Beotia. 
The crime of the Phocians (if their useful la- 
bours deserve the name of crime) was neither 
great nor unprecedented, since the Locrians of 
Amphissa had long cultivated the Crissæan 
plain; a more extensive territory, and conse- 
crated to the god by far more awful ceremo- 
nies.5 But the proud tyranny of the Amphic- 
tyons, careless of such distinctions, fulminated 
an angry decree against Phocis,commanding the 
sacred lands to be laid waste, and imposing a 
heavy fine on that community. 

It is believed that the Thebans, the enemies 
and neighbonrs of Phocis, and whose influence 
at that time predominated in the council, were 
the principal abettors of this arbitrary measure;® 
a supposition rendered probable by the ensuing 
deliberations of the Amphictyons. Their next 
sentence was directed against Sparta, to punish 
the injury of Pheebidas, who, in time of peace, 
had surprised and seized the Theban citadel. 
This breach of public faith, however criminal 
and flagrant, had been committed so many years 
before, that prudence required it to be for ever 
buried in obscurity. But, at the instigation of 
the Thebans, the Amphictyons brought it once 
more to light; commanded the Lacedemonians 
to pay a fine of five hundred talents; decreed 
that the fine should be doubled, unless paid 


3 The number is chosen as a very moderate medium he- 
tween the two hundred and twenty thousand men, after- 
wards promised to Philip in the general convention of the 
States at Corinth for the service of the Persian expedition 
and the eighty thonsand which the Greeks actually raised 
against Xerxes, and which Thucydides savs, that the Pelo- 
ponnesian confederacy alone could send into Attica, 

4 See c. v. p. 65. 

5 See c. v. p. 64, et seq. 

6 Justin. |. viii. c. i. et seq. 


= 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


375 


within an appointed time; and if the decree 
were finally disregarded, that the Lacedemo- 


nians should be treated as public enemies to 


Greece.” 

Ol The Phocians, singled out as the 
ie first victims of oppression, were 

ie c. 357. deeply affected by their danger. To 


pay the money demanded of them 
exceeded their faculties. It would be grievous 
to desolate the fields which their own hands 
had cultivated with so much toil. The com- 
mands of the Amphictyons were indeed pe- 
remptory; but that council had not on foot any 
sufficient force to render them effectual, should 
the devoted objects of their vengeance venture 
to dispute their authority. This measure, dar- 
ing as it seemed, was strongly recommended 
by Philomelus, whose popular eloquence and 
valour gave him a powerful ascendant in 
Phocis. He possessed great hereditary wealth ; 
contemned the national superstition ; and being 
endowed with a bold ambitious spirit, he expect- 
ed to rise, amidst the tumult of action and dan- 
ger, to unrivalled pre-eminence in his republic. 
After repeated deliberations, in which he flat- 
tered the vanity, and tempted the avarice of his 
countrymen, by proving, that to them of right 
belonged the guardianship of the Delphian tem- 
ple, and the immense treasures contained within 
its sacred walls, he brought the majority of the 
senate and assembly into his opinion. As the 
properest instrument to execute his own mea- 
sures, Philomelus was named general : the Pho- 
cian youth flocked to his standard; and his 
private fortune, as well as the public revenues, 
were consumed in purchasing the mercenary 
aid of those needy adventurers, who abounded 
in every province of Greece. 

The following year wasemployed 


ee by Philomelus in providing arms, 
A c 956 in exercising his troops, and in an 


embassy which he undertook in 
person to Sparta. As that community had not 
discharged the fine imposed by the Amphic- 
tyons, the penalty was doubled, and the de- 
linquents were condemned to pay a thousand 
talents. The exorbitance of this imposition 
might have justified the Spartans in following 
the example of Phocis, and setting the Amphic- 
tyons at defiance. But Archidamus, who pos- 
sessed all the caution and address of his father 
Agesilaus, was unwilling to take a principal 
part in the first dangerous experiment, and to 
post himself in the front of battle, against the 
revered decrees of an assembly, considered as 
the legal guardian of national religion and 
liberty. He assured Philomelus that both him- 
self and the Spartans fully approved his cause ; 
that reasons of a temporary nature hindered 
their declaring themselves openly, but that he 
might depend on secret supplies of men and 
money.? 


7 Diodor. |. xvi. c. xxiii. et seq. : 
8 Philomelus cited the respectable authority of Homer : 


Avrze Daxcwy Exediog xxi Errsrreooas yeyov, 
Oi Kurzesoroy esyov, Muiwun re wetensroray. 
But Schedius and Epistrophus led the Phocians, who in- 
habited Cyparissus, and the rocky Python,” the ancient 
name of Delphi. 
9 OSs Agysdupos arodezupmevos Tov Aoyov, Puvegmg Kav, 
Kore TO waeov, Ove sours Condursivy Awiem E wavTE cupe 


376 
š Encouraged by this assurance, 
oT and by a considerable sum! imme- 
A. C. 355. diately put into his hands, Philo- 


melus, at his return, ventured on a 
measure not less audacious than unexpected. 
The temple of Delphi, so awfully guarded by 
superstition, was scarcely defended by any mi- 
litary force. Philomelus, having prepared the 
imagination of his followers for this bold enter- 
prise, immediately conducted them towards 
Delphi, defeated the feeble resistance of the 
Thracide, who inhabited the neighbouring dis- 
trict, and entered the sacred city with the calm 
intrepidity of a conqueror. The Delphians, who 
expected no mercy from a man devoid of res- 
pect for religion, prepared themselves in silent 
horror, for beholding the complicated guilt of 
sacrilege and murder. But the countenance of 
Philomelus re-assured them, and his discourse 
totally dispelled their ill-grounded fears. He 
declared that he had come to Delphi with no 
hostile disposition against the inhabitants, with 
no sacrilegious designs against the temple. His 
principal motive was to emancipate the one and 
the other from the arbitrary proceedings of the 
Amphictyons, and to assert the ancient and un- 
alienable prerogative of Phocis to be the patron 
and protector of the Delphian shrine. To the 
same purpose he scattered declarations through 
the different republics of Greece ; his emissaries 
acquainted the Spartans that he had destroyed 
the brazen tablets containing the unjust decrees 
against Sparta and Phocis; they inflamed the 
resentment of the Athenians, naturally hostile 
to Thebes; and both these republics came to 
the resolution of supporting the measures of 
Philomelus. 

The Thebans, on the other hand, who direct- 
ed, and the Locrians, Thessalians, with other 
states of less consideration, who tamely obeyed 
the decrees of the Amphictyons, determined to 
take the field in defence of their insulted reli- 
gion and violated laws. Their operations were 
conducted with that extreme slowness natural 
to confederacies. Philomelus acted with more 
vigour. He received little assistance from his 
distant allies. But, first, by imposing a heavy tax 
on the Delphians, who had been enriched by 
the devotion of Greece, and then, notwithstand- 
ing his declaration, by taking very undue liber- 
ties with the treasure of Apollo,? he collected 
above ten thousand mercenaries, men daring 
and profligate as himself, who sacrificed all 
scruples of religion to the hopes of dividing a 
rich spoil. Such at least was the general cha- 
racter.of his followers. To the few who had 
more piety, or less avarice, he endeavoured to 
justify his measures by the authority of an 
oracle. The Pythia at first refused to mount 
the sacred tripod. Philomelus sternly com- 
manded her. She obeyed with reluctance, ob- 
serving, that being already master of Delphi, 
he might act without sanction or control.3 Phi- 


mea siv, XOenyav xxi Xoumera XAI zirbo@egous. Diodor. 
1. xvi. p. 426. 
1 Diodorus (l. xvi. p. 426.) says, fifteen talents. 
_2 Diodorus sometimes acknowledges, and sometimes de- 
nies, that Philomelus meddled with the sacred treasure. 
3 Amochsyzamevns ð’ utus meos Tuy umepoxay TOU 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


lomelus waited for no other answer, but gladly 
interpreted the words as an acknowledgment 
of his absolute authority ; and, with the address 
suitable to his situation and character, con- 
firmed the auspicious declaration of the priestess 
by the report of many favourable omens. 

Having obtained the supposed 


ai ie * sanction of religion, Philomelus pro- 
w ‘ggg, ceeded to fortify the temple and city 


of Delphi, in which he placed a 
strong garrison; and, with the remainder of 
his forces, boldly marched forth to repel the in- 
cursions of the enemy. During two years, hos- 
tilities were carried on with various fortune 
against the Locrians and Thebans. Victory 
for the most part inclined to the Phocians; but 
there happened not any decisive action, nor 
was the war memorable on any other account 
but that of the excessive cruelty mutually in- 
flicted andsuffered. The Phocian prisoners were 
uniformly condemned to death, as wretches 
convicted of the most abominable sacrilege and 
impiety; and the resentment of their country- 
men retaliated with equal severity on the un- 
happy captives whom the chance of war fre- 
quently put into their hands. 
Olymp. As both armies anxiously expect- 
AOR ed reinforcements, they were unwill- 
A. C. 353, 8 to risk a general engagement, 
till chance rendered that measure 
unavoidable. Entangled among the woods and 
mountains of Phocis, the inconvenience of for- 
age attracted them to the same point. The van- 
guards met unexpectedly near the town of 
Neone, and began to skirmish. A general and 
fierce action followed, in which the Phocians 
were repelled by superior numbers. Pathless 
woods, abrupt rocks and precipices, obstructed 
their retreat. Jn vain Philomelus strove with 
his voice and arm to rally the fugitives. He 
himself was carried along by the torrent to the 
brow of a precipice, afflicted with wounds, and 
still more with anguish and despair. The ene- 
my advanced; it seemed impossible to escape 
their vengeance; the resolution of Philomelus 
was prompt and terrible; with a vigorous 
bound he sprang from the rock, thus eluding 
the torment of his own guilty conscience, and 
the resentment of his pursuers.6 While the 
Thebans and their allies admired this spectacle 
as a manifest indication of divine vengeance,’ 
Onomarchus, the lieutenant and brother of the 
Phocian general, collected and drew off the 
scattered remains of the vanquished army to- 
wards Delphi. The confederates determined 
to expel them from that holy place, and to in- 
flict on the enemies of Greece and heaven, a 
punishment similar to that to which the wrath 
of Apollo had driven the impious Philomelus.8 
Different causes concurred to prevent Philip 
on the one hand, and Athens and Sparta on the 
other, from taking a principal or early part in 
the Phocian war. The interested policy of 


% 


4 Diodor. p. 429. 5 Diodor. p. 530. et seq. 

6 Diodorus hints, that had Philomelus been taken captive, 
his body would have been shockingly mangled: @oGougsvos 
THY EX THS wIXMAAWOIAS aixsev. p. 432. 

7 Such it appeared to future historians: xa: Tourov Toy 
Teomov, doug Tw Sasmoviw Dinas xaracresys Tov Poy 


Biaousvoy “ors eSsrre autw mexrtesy o Govacras.” Dio-| Diodor. ibid. 


dor. p. 428. 


8 Diodor. l. xvi. p. 432. 


XXXIV.] 


Archidamus, who directed with absolute au- 
thority the councils of Sparta, was less anxious 
to support the arms of his distant confederates, 
than solicitous to recover the Lace- 


ae demonian dominion in Peloponne- 
A7 333 sus. The opportunity seemed fa- 


* vourable for this purpose, the The- 
bans being deeply engaged in another contest, 
and the Athenians in strict alliance with Sparta. 
For several years, the arms and intrigues of 
Archidamus were employed against tlie Messe- 
nians, Arcadians, and Argives. But his ambi- 
tious design failed of success; the inferior cities 
of Peloponnesus, roused by a common danger, 
confederated for their mutual defence; and 
Athens, though actually the ally of Sparta, was 
unwilling to abandon to the tyranny of that re- 
public her more ancient and faithful allies, the 
Arcadians and Messenians.9 

While the politics of the Peloponnesus formed 
a system apart, the sacred war shook the centre 
of Greece, and the affairs of Tlirace occupied 
Philip and the Athenians. Cotys was dead; 
his sons, Kersobleptes, Berisades, and Amado- 
cus, were all dissatisfied with the partition of 
his dominions. While their hostilities against 
each other exhibited the odious picture of fra- 
ternal discord, the prizes for which they con- 
tended were successively carried off by Philip. 
The encroacaments of that prince at length en- 
gaged Kersobleptes, the most powerful of the 
co-heirs, to cede the Thracian Chersonesus to 
the Athenians, who sent Chares with a numer- 
ous fleet to take possession of that peninsula. 
The town of Sestos alone made resistance. It 
was taken by storm, and treated with great 
severity by Chares; while Philip besieged and 
took the far more important city of Methoné in 
Pieria. In this siege he lost an eye, a loss 
which he is said to have borne with impa- 
tience,!0 as the circumstances attending it were 
alike dishonourable to his judgment and hu- 
manity.!! 
Gin It appears extraordinary that the 
on a i Thebans, after the defcat and death 
A Cc "353 of Philomelus, should not have pur- 

A * sued their good fortune, without al- 
lowing the enemy time to breathe and recover 
strength. They probably imagined that the 


9 The question appears to have occasioned warm debates 
in the Athenian assembly: the Spartan and Arcadian 
parties were animated with the utmost zeal; and, according 
to the lively observation of Demosthenes, the Athenian 
orators, had they not spoke the Attic dialect, would have 
appeared, the one half Spartans, the other Arcadians. De- 
mosthen. pro Megalop. p. 83. 

10 Lucian de Scribend. Hist. p. 365. 

11 These circumstances, however, rest on the authority 
of Suidas and Ulpian. It is said, that when the arrow was 
extracted, the following inscription appeared on it: “Aster 
to Philip’s right eye.” Aster, it seems, had offered his 
services to Philip, as an excellent marksman; to which 
Philip replied, that he would employ him when he waged 
war with starlings. Philip caused the arrow to he shot 
back into the place, with a new inscription, “That he 
would hang up Aster;” a threat which was executed as 
soon as he was master of Methoné. Fictions still more in- 
credible were retated on this subject by the fabulons writers 
of the age of Alexander. Philip, it was said, lost his right 
eye by his unseasonable curiosity in prying into the amours 
of Olympias and Jupiter Ammon. This ridiculons flattery 
to Alexander has been so widely diffused, that it was anp- 
posed to be the subject represented on the celebrated vase, 
which is so much better explained by Mr. D’Hancarville. 
See Recherches sur les Arts de la Gréce, vol. ii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


377 


fatal exit of that daring chief would deter a 
successor; and that the Phocians would crave 
peace, if not driven to despair. Such indeed 
was the resolution of the more respectable part 
of the Phocians. But the bold, impious, and 
needy, who composed the most numerous de- 
scription of that people, were bent on continu- 
ing the war. An assembly was convened, ` 
when Onomarchus, in a set speech,!? flattered 
their hopes, and encouraged them to persevere. 
His opinion prevailed; he was uamed general; 
and his conduct soon proved, that he equalled his 
brother in boldness and ambition, and surpassed 
him in activity and enterprise. None better knew 
the power of gold, or had more address in em- 
ploying it. With the Delphic treasure he coin- 
ed such a quantity of money as perhaps had 
never before circulated in Greece. The Pho- 
clan army was restored and augmented; their 
allies were rendered more hearty in their cause; 
even their enemies were not proof against the 
temptations which continually assailed their 
fidelity. By seasonable bribes, Onomarchus 
distracted the councils of Thebes, and kept 
their arms inactive. The neighbouring states 
were persuaded to observe a neutrality; while 
the Thessalians, a people at all times noted for 
avarice and fraud,!3 and of whose country the 
proverb said, that it had never produced a bad 
horse or an honest man, openly embraced the 
cause of Phocis. 

These multiplied advantages were not allow- 
ed to languish in the hands of Onomarchus, 
who hoped to eclipse the unjust motives of his 
enterprise by the sudden splendour of victory. 
At the head of a numerous and well-appointed 
army, he poured down on Locris and Doris, 
ravaged the country, took Thronium by storm, 
laid several cities under contribution, pierced 
into Beeotia, and made himself master of Or- 
chomenus. The Thebans assembled their forces 
to stem the torrent. Onomarchus first met 
with a repulse before the walls of Cheronza, 
and ventured not to rencw the engagement, 
having weakened his forces by placing garri- 
sons in the important places which he had taken, 
as well as by sending a detachment of seven 
thousand men under his brother Phayllus, into 
Thessaly. 

In that country, the intrigues of Philip had 
counteracted the gold of Onomarchus. But 
Lycophron, who was the chief partisan of the 
latter, and whom Philip had formerly divested 
of his authority, had again established himself in 
Phere, Pegase, Magnesia, and several places 
of less note, declared for the tyrant, and for 
Phocis. The Macedonian interest prevailed 
elsewhere; and tlie factions were equally ba- 
lanced, when Philip, with his usual diligence, 
entered Thessaly, defeated Phayllus, besieged 


12 Weogrvrigpevov Aoyov Sisaswv. Diodor. p- 432. 

13 The Thessalians had the same character in Greece, 
as the Lygurians in Italy: 

Vane Ligus 
Nequicquam patrias tentdsti luhricns artes. Virg. . 

Euripides speaks of the slippery deceits of the Thessalians. 
Demosthenes (Olynth.i. p. 4. ex edit. Wolf.) says, tre Tæ 
Twy Oertedrwy TUUT ye amigtTs usv yv dy TOU ures, 
xsi gisi xari avdewzorc. Philip was farther distressed by 
the insurrectiuns of the Thessalians, a people faithless by 
nature, at all times, to all men.” è 

14 Diodor. p. 434. 


378 


and took Pegasæ, and drove the enemy with 
disgrace towards the frontier of Phocis. The 
fear of losing his newly-acquired interest among 
the Thessalians, made Onomarchus evacuate 
Beotia, and advance against Philip with his 
whole army. The Macedonians, though less 
numerous, did not decline the engagement. At 
the first charge the Phocians gave way, and re- 
treated towards the neighbouring mountains. 
Philip ordered his men to pursue in their ranks. 
It was then that the Phocians really began the 
battle. Onomarchus, foreseeing that the Mace- 
donians would follow in close order, had posted 
a detachment on the summit of the precipice, 
wlio were ready, on a given signal, to roll down 
fragments of rock, and stones of an enormous 
size, on the embattled phalanx. This was the 
only mode of attack, for which the Macedonians 
were not prepared. The line of march, in 
which the moment before they proceeded with 
such firmness and confidence, was converted 
into a dreadful scene of carnage andruin. Be- 
fore they recovered from their consternation, 
the flying Phocians, who had decoyed them 
into this ambush, returned to the charge. Phi- 
lip, however, rallied his men; and while Ono- 
marchus hesitated to advance, drew them off 
in good order, saying, that they did not retreat 
through fear, but retired like rams, in order to 
strike with the more impetuous vigour.! 

This saying was finally justified, although 
the Phocians and Lycophron first enjoyed a 
short triumph. The tyrant established himself, 
as he thought, securely, in his native city ; the 
Phocians, reinforced by their Thessalian allies, 
again invaded Beotia, assaulted and took Co- 
ronea, and dreadfully alarmed the Thebans, by 
the devastations committed in the very centre 
of their territory. But the time of vengeance 
arrived. Philip having recruited his army, re- 
turned into Thessaly. The unsteady partisans 
of Lycophron, had they determined to share his 
danger, would have proved unable to support 
his cause. A considerable portion of the Thes- 
Salians received the king of Macedon as their 
deliverer. Onomarchus was thus obliged to 
withdraw his forces from Beotia. At the head 
of twenty thousand foot and five hundred horse, 
he marched to the defence of Lycophron, and 
was niet by the enemy, still more numerous, on 
the level coast of Magnesia. To remind his 
soldiers that they fought in the cause of Delphi 
and of heaven, Philip crowned their heads with 
the laurel consecrated to Apollo, and adorned 
his ensigns and standards with the emblems 
and attributes of that divinity.2 Their onset 
was impetuous and fierce, and their valour, ani- 
mated by enthusiasm, rendered them irresisti- 
ble, though the enemy, conscious of guilt, fought 
with the fury of despair. Three thousand 
Thessalian cavalry, who had signally contri- 
buted to the victory of Philip, rendered the 
pursuit bloody and destructive; while the Pho- 
cians, having thrown away their armour, fled 
towards the sea, allured by the sight of the 
Athenian fleet under Chares, which was -re- 


1 Polyxen. Stratag. l. ii. c. xxviii. 
et seq. 
2 Justin. l. viii. Q. 


Diodor. |. xvi. 44, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


had 


[Cuar. 


turning from the Chersonesus. That com- 
mander seems not to have made any attempt 
to protect them. Above six thousand perished 
in the battle, or in the pursuit. The body of 
Onomarchus was found among the slain; 
Philip ordered it to be hung on a gibbet, as a 
mark of peculiar infamy; the rest were thrown 
into the sea, as unworthy, by their impious 
sacrilege, of the rites of funeral. Three thou- 
sand were taken alive; but it is not absolutely 
certain whether they were drowned, or reduced 
into captivity ; though the latter opinion is the 
more probable.? 

It might be expected that such a decisive 
blow should have proved fatal to the Phocians. 
But Philip, who had conquered them in Thes- 
saly, durst not pursue his advantages by invad 
ing Phocis; well knowing, that an attempt to 
pass the straits of Thermopyle would alarm 
not only his enemies but his allies. It was his 
interest to perpetuate dissensions in Greece. 
For that reason he fomented the discord that 
reigned among the states of Peloponnesus; and 
though he had punished the obnoxious Pho- 
cians, he was unwilling to terminate a war 
which diverted the public attention from watch- 
ing too studiously his own ambitious designs. 
His victory over an odious enemy extended his 
just renown. He secured the dominion of 
Thessaly, by planting garrisons in Phere, Pe- 
gas, and Magnesia. His army was ready to 
march towards Greece on the first favourable 
opportunity; but till that should arrive, he re- 
joiced to see both divisions of that country in- 
volved in war, which allowed him to accom- 
plish, unmolested, the subordinate purposes of 
his reign. He had long deceived the Olynthi- 
ans by good offices and promises, but now be- 
gan to throw off the mask, and to show that 
he meant to be their master. He actually ap- 
plied to Kersobleptes, whom he detached from 
the interest of Athens; and having raised him 
on the ruins of the neighbouring chieftains of 
Thrace, thereby obtained his confidence, and 
waited an occasion to destroy him with secu- 
rity.4 The dominions of that prince opened 
the way to Byzantium, the possession of which 
must have early tempted the ambition of Philip, 
who knew so well to estimate the importance 
of its situation both in commerce and in war. 
He began to discover his designs against Byzan- 
tium by attacking the fortress of Hereum, a 
place so called from the neighbouring temple 


3 The leaving such a circumstance at all doubtful, is 
very dishonourable to the accuracy of the compiler Diodo- 
rus. His words are, TeAd05 de, Twy Pwxewy xas pirhopopwv 
wvyosinoay KEV UTEE TOUS EFAKETRsASOUS, EV OG HY X28 
euros O TTELTAYJOG. HAWORY Ss oux EARTTOVS TWV Teller tAEwy, 
o de Diasmmos Tov pev Ovopwexov Exeeuorey, TOUS Dé wAAOUS 
ws segorudoug xaterovtics, Literally, “At length above 
six thousand of the Phocians and mercenaries were, on the 
one hand, taken up dead, among whom was the general. 
Not less thau three thousand were, on the other hand, ta- 
ken prisoners. Philip hung up Onomarchus, and threw the 
rest into the seayas guilty of sacrilege.” The learned 
reader will perceive, that I have given the full force of the 
word evyesdyrav; and from the precise and distinctive 
force of the particles «ev and ôs, which separate the two 
first clauses of the text, I am of opinion that the Toug wAdAous 
can apply only to the rest of those who were taken up 
dead. There is nothing determinate to be learned from the 
word xetezoytsers, which signifies barely to plunge into 
the sea. 

4 Justin. I. viii. 3. Demost. Olynth. 2 et 3. 


XXXIV.] 


of Juno, which formed its principal ornament. 
The town of Hereum was small, and in itself 
unimportant; its harbour was dangerous and 
deceitful; but being situate contiguous to By- 
zantium, it served as an outwork and defence 
to that rich and populous city.§ 

The Athenians had sufficient penetration to 
discern the drift of those enterprises. They 
formed an alliance with the republic of Olyn- 
thus; they warned Kersobleptes of his danger; 
they voted a numerous fleet to sail to the de- 
fence of Heræum, or rather of Byzantium, with 
which, though rendered independent of Athens 
by the social war, they still carried on a lucra- 
tive commerce. But these spirited exertions 
were not of long continuance. Philip’s wound 
at Methoné, together with the continual labour 
and fatigue to which he had afterwards sub- 
-mitted, threw him into a dangerous malady. 
The report of his sickness was, before it reach- 
ed Athens, magnified into his death. The 
Athenians rejoiced in so seasonable a deliver- 
ance, and laying aside their naval preparations, 
bent their principal attention to the sacred 
war. 

That unhappy contest was re- 


ee newed by Phayllus, the last surviv- 
ANG. $59, ing brother of Philomelus and Ono- 


marchus. As his cause became 
more desperate, Phayllus availed himself to 
the utmost of the only resource which was left 
him. Having converted into ready money the 
most precious dedications of Delphi, he doubled 
the pay of his mercenaries. This extraordinary 
encouragement brought new adventurcrs to his 
standard, and soon rendered his army equal to 
that of either of his predecessors. The fugi- 
tive Thessalians, assembled in a body by Ly- 
cophron, entered into his pay. By means of 
the Delphic treasure, he acquired, likewise, the 
public assistance of a thousand Lacedemoni- 
ans, two thousand Acheans, five thousand 
Athenian foot, with four hundred cavalry. 


These powerful reinforcements enabled the, 


Phocians to take the field with a good prospect 
of success, and rendered those who had so 
lately been the objects of pity, again formida- 
ble to their enemies.’ 

Philip, mean while, had recovered from his 
indisposition. The votes and preparations of 
the Athenians had taught him that his designs 
could no longer be concealed. He was ac- 
quainted with the alliance formed between that 
republic and Olynthus. His emissaries gave 
him intelligence of the actual commotions in 
Greece, where the countenance and assistance 
of so many powerful states abetted the sacri- 
lege of the Phocians. The occasion required 
that he should appear in favour of his allics, 
and in defence of the pious cause which he had 
formerly maintained with so much glory. His 
trophies gained over Onomarchus were still 
fresh and blooming; and not only the The- 
bans, Dorians, and Locrians, who were princi- 
pals in the war, but the sincerc votaries of 
Apollo in every quarter of Greece, secretly ex- 
pected him as their deliverer: while his cne- 


5 Justin. |. viii. 3. Demost. Olynth. 2 et 3. 
6 Id. ubi supra. 7 Diodor. p. 436, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


79 


mies admired his piety and trembled at his va- 
lour; and as they had been lately amused with 
the news of his sickness and death, they would 
now view with religious terror his unexpected 
appearance at Thermopyle, to assert the vio- 
lated rights of the Delphian temple. Such 
were the hopes and motives on which Philip, 
at the head of a. numerous army, directed his 
march’ towards those celebrated straits, which 
we have formerly described, and so often men- 
tioned. 

But the event showed, that on this occasion 
he had made a false estimate of the superstition 
or timidity of the Greeks, and particularly had 
built too much on the paticnce and indolence 
of the Athenians. That people penetrated his 
designs, and determined to oppose them. Un- 
der the veil of religious zeal, they doubted not 
that he concealed the desire to invade and con- 
quer their country; and, on the first intelli- 
gence of his expedition, their foresight and 
patriotism represented the Macedonians, Thes- 
salians, and Thebans, pouring down like a de- 
structive inundation, on Attica and Pclopon- 
nesus. With an alacrity and ardour, of which 
there was no recent example in their councils, 
they flew to arms, launched their flect, sailed 
to Thermopyle, and took possession of the 
straits.9 

Never did Philip meet with a more cruel dis- 
appointment, than in being thus anticipated by 
a people whom he had so often deceived. He 
retired with deep regret, leaving the Phocian 
war to be carried on by the Thebans and their 
allies. Mean while, the Athenians placed a 
guard at Thermopyle ; and, elated by the first 
instance of their success against the Macedo- 
nian, called an assembly to deliberate on mea- 
surcs proper to restrain his ambition. 

This assembly is rendered memorable by the 
first appearance of Demosthenes against Philip, 
whose measures from this moment he ceased 
not to watch, and to counteract. Two years 
before, this illustrious orator, whose works have 
been more praised than read, and more read 
than understood, began, in the twenty-eighth 
year of his age, to appear on the theatre of 
public life. The Athenians were then involved 
in the sacred war; their northern possessions 
were continually insulted, plundered, or con- 
qucred by Philip; yet in this situation of af- 
fairs, the mercenary partisans of that prince, in 
order to divert the public attention from his too 
aspiring designs, affected to extend their views 
to Asia, and to be alarmed by the motions of 
Artaxerxes Ochus, who was preparing to re- 
duce the rebels of Cyprus, Egypt, and Pheni- 
cia. In cvery assembly of the people, the crea- 
tures of Philip dwelt, with exaggerated terror, 
on the naval and military preparations of the 
great king, which they represented as certainly 
destined to revenge the recent injuries commit- 
ted by the Athenian troops, under Chares, on 
the coast of Asia. The trophies of Miltiades, 
Themistocles, and Cimon, were adorned with 
all the pomp of eloquence; and the Athenians 
were exhorted to imitate those memorable ex- 
ploits of their ancestors in the Persian war 


8 Id. l. xvi. p. 436. 
9 Demosthen. de Fulsa Legat. sect. 29. 


380 


which shed a lustre on all the succeeding pe- 
riods of their history. i 

In this popular enthusiasm joined Isocrates 
the orator, together with the statesman and 
general Phocion, two men whose talents and 
virtues would have done honour to the most 
illustrious age of the republic. The unblem- 
ished integrity of Isocrates, the disinterested 
poverty of Phocion, afford sufficient proof that 
neither of these great men were corrupted by 
Macedonian gold. But they both perceived 
the indolence and unsteadiness of Athens were 
incapable to contend with the unceasing acti- 
vity of Philip, and both exhorted their coun- 
trymen to gain and cultivate the friendship of 
a prince, against whom they could not make 
war with any reasonable prospect of success. 

Isocrates, from the most accurate and exten- 
sive survey of the political history of Greece, 
discovered that a foreign war alone could heal 
the domestic dissensions which reigned in every 
quarter of that divided country; and from a 
thorough knowledge of the inherent defects in 
the government of Thebes, Athens, and Sparta, 
he regarded Macedon as the state, and Philip 
as the general, best entitled, and best qualified, 
to assume the command of a military expedi- 
tion into Asia, to revenge ancient wrongs, and 
to deliver the Grecian colonies from the actual 
oppression of Barbarians. On this important 
subject he addressed a discourse to Philip; he 
repeatedly insisted on the same topic with the 
Athenians; and it is obscurely related, that on 
one occasion he reconciled those hostile pow- 
ers,! and engaged them to concur in this ex- 
tensive yet rational scheme of conquest. 

The sentiments and views of Demosthenes 
were equally different from those of Isocrates 
and Phocion on the one hand, and from those 
of the infamous hirelings of Philip on the other. 
None knew better than he did the corruption 
and degeneracy of his countrymen; but he 
hoped to rouse them from their lethargy ; a de- 
sign, arduous as it may seem, sometimes effect- 
ed by his eloquence, the most powerful, glow- 
ing, and sublime, ever employed by man; and 
‘which, of all men, he had been at most pains 
to acquire and cultivate.2 His imagination 
was filled with the ancient glory of the repub- 
lic; in the ardour of patriotism he forgot the 
moderation of philosophy ; and while he sternly 
maintained the prerogatives and pretensions of 
his country, he would rather have seen Athens 
defeated at the head of her allies, than victori- 
ous under the standard of the Macedonians, or 
any standard but her own. With such senti- 
ments and character, he was naturally a favour- 
ite of the people, and a warm partisan of po- 
pular government; while Phocion, like most 
men of sense and worth in that age, preferred 
a moderate aristocracy ; and Isocrates was in- 
clined to regard a well-regulated monarchy as 
the best of all governments.? 

In his first speeches before the assembly, De- 
mosthenes announced -himself as the minister 
of the people at large, whom he exhorted to 


_1 See the life of Isocrates, prefixed to my translation of 
his works. 

2 Dionys. Halicarn. et Plut. de Demost. 

3 See his Nicocles, Evagoras, &c. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


awaken from their indolence, and at length to 
assume the direction of their own affairs. They 
had been too long governed by the incapacity 
of a few ambitious men, to the great detriment 
and disgrace of the community. First an ora- 
tor at the head of all, under him a general 
abetted by a faction of three or four hundred, 
availed themselves of the sloth and negligence 
of a people careless of every thing but pleasure, 
to domineer in the public councils, and to be- 
come masters of the state. From considerations 
of their present corruption and weakness, as 
well as of the designs and commotions of neigh- 
bouring powers, he advised them to forsake all 
distant and romantic schemes of ambition; and, 
instead of carrying their arms into remote coun- 
tries, to prepare for repelling the attacks that 
might be made against their own dominions. 
He insisted earnestly on a better regulation of 
their finances, on the retrenching of many su- 
perfluous branches of expense, and especially on 
a more equitable repartition of public burdens, 
in proportion to the fortunes of individuals; 
which, though the income of the state had 
dwindled to four hundred talents, were actually 
more considerable than at any former period. 
While the rich cheerfully paid their contribu- 
tions, the poor must be willing to forego the 
burdensome gratuities which they derived from 
the treasury ; and all must be ready to take the 
field in person, that the public service might be 
no longer betrayed, or disgraced, by strangers 
and mercenaries.4 

Subsequent events justified the opinions, and 
enforced the counsels of Demosthenes. The 
Athenians were delivered from their ill-ground- 
ed fears of Artaxerxes Ochus, when they beheld 
the preparations of that monarch directed 
against his rebellious subjects. The encroach- 
ments of Philip became continually more dar- 
ing and more formidable; and his recent at- 
tempts to seize the straits of Thermopyle 
showed the necessity of opposing him with 
re-united vigilance and vigour. 

In this juncture, so favourable to awakening 
the activity of Athens, Demosthenes mounted 
the rostrum* before any other orator, apologiz- 
ing for this forwardness in a man not yet thirty 
years of age, by observing, “ That already the 
usual speakers had given their opinions on the 
subject of Philip; and that, had their advices 
been useful and practicable, they must have 
precluded the necessity of any further deliber- 
ation. First of all, Athenians! you ought not 
to despair; no! not although your affairs seem 
indeed involved in equal confusion and danger. 
For the same circumstance which is the cause 
of your past misfortunes, ought to furnish the 
source of your present hope. What is that? 
Your own negligence and sloth, not the power 
of your enemies, have disordered the state. 
Had your distress arisen, notwithstanding your 
utmost care to prevent it, there would then be 
little hope of relief. But since it is occasioned 
by your own misconduct, you need only repair 
your errors, in order to retrieve your affairs. 


4 Vid. Oration. de Classibus, et de Ordinand. Republic. 

5 I have used that word, because adopted in our 
to express the Enga, pulpit or gallery appropriated to the 
speakers ia the Athenian assembly. 


XXXIV.] 


Considering the weakness of Athens, thus de- 
-spoiled of her dominions, and the strength of 
Philip, which has increased immoderately at 
our expense, should you think him a formidable 
enemy, you doubtless think aright. Yet reflcct, 
Athenians! that there was a time when we pos- 
sessed Pydna, Potidea, Methoné, and all the 
surrounding territory; that the nations in that 
neighbourhood, now subject to Philip, were then 
independent, and preferred the alliance of 
Athens to that of Macedon. In the infancy 
of his fortune, had Philip reasoned timidly, as 
we do now, ‘ How shall I, destitute of allies, 
attack the Athenians, whose garrisons com- 
mand my frontier?’ he would not have engag- 
ed in those enterprises which have been crown- 
ed with such signal success, nor raised his king- 
dom to such an unexampled pitch of grandeur. 
No, Athenians! he knew well, that towns and 
fortresses are but prizes of skill and valour® 
proposed to the combatants, and belong of right 
to the conqueror; that the dominions of the 
absent are seized by those who take the field, 
and the possessions of the negligent and sloth- 
ful by the vigilant and intrepid. Guided by 
these principles, he has subdued, and governs 
all; holding some communities by right of con- 
quest, and others under the title of allies; for 
allies no prince nor state can want, who are not 
wanting to themselves. But should you, Athe- 
nians! imitate the example of Philip, and at 
length, rousing from your lethargy, apply se- 
riously to your interest, you would speedily re- 
cover those advantages which your negligence 
only has lost. Favourable occasions will yet 
occur; for you must not imagine that Philip, 
like a god, enjoys his prosperity for ever fixed 
and immutable.? No, Athenians! there are 
who hate him, who fear him, who envy him, 
even among those seemingly the most devoted 
to his cause. These are universal passions, 
from which the allies of Macedon are not, sure- 
ly, exempted. They have hitherto concealed 
them, finding no resource in you; but it depends 
on your councils to call them into action. 
When, therefore,O my countrymen! when will 
you exert your vigour? when rouscd by some 
event—when urged by some necessity —What 
can be more urgent than the present juncture? 
To freemen, the most necessary of all motives 
is the shame of misconduct. Or say, will it 
still be your sole business to saunter in the pub- 
lic place, inquiring after news? What can be 
more new, than that a Macedonian should con- 
quer Athens, and enslave Greece? Is Philip 
dead? No,butin great danger. How are you 
concerned in these rumours? What matters it 
to you whether he is sick or dead, since, if you 
thus manage your affairs, your folly will soon 
raise up another Philip 78 


6 Ara?’ o1dev, w avbecs Adyvatot, TouTO xarws EXEIVOG, 
OTE TRUTH MEY ETTI QTZVTÆ TA Kogi aIAm TOU TOAEMWY 
xsiusvz ev weow, In ancient times the figure had more 
force, as well as dignity; because at the Olympic, and 
other sacred games, the spectators were nsed to behold the 
prizes proposed to the victors, xetmeve sy srw, exposed in 
the middle of the field, to excite their emulation and ardour. 
Sce page 66. 

7 The original is inimitable: uy yag ws Îsw voiler’ 
txeivw Te magovra memyyivzi mexyuuta alavare., Join 
the ræ and the rezygaærtz, the article and the substantive, 
and the charm will be dissolved. 

8 The sense indeed of that period, but neither its force 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


381 


After this animated remonstrance, Demos- 
thenes proposes a plan of operations calculated 
chiefly for defence. The Athenians, he observes, 
were not yet prepared to meet Philip in the 
field. They must begin by protecting Olyn- 
thus, and the Chersonesus, from his incursions. 
For this purpose, it was necessary to raise a 
body of two thousand men light-armed, and an 
adequate proportion of cavalry, which were to 
be transported under a proper convoy (as Philip 
had his fleet) with all expedition to the isles of 
Lemnos, Thasos, and Sciathos, contiguous to 
the coast of Macedon. Conveniently posted in 
those islands, where they would enjoy necessa- 
ries in abundance, the Athenian troops might 
avail themselves of every favourable incident, 
to appear at the first summons of their allies, 
and either to repel the inroads of the Macedo- 
nians, or to harass the extended, and, in many 
parts, defenceless territory of that people. 
Mean while, preparations would be made at 
home for carrying on the war in due time, with 
more numerous forces, and with greater vigour. 
Such moderate proposals prove that Demos- 
thenes well understood the genius of his coun- 
trymen. He required that only the fourth part 
of the troops should consist of Athenian citi- 
zens, and the immediate supplies were only to 
amount to ninety talents. He knew that hither 
demands would alarm their indolence and love 
of pleasure; and so fatally were thcy sunk in 
the dissipated amusements of the city, that it is 
probable the small armament proposed did not 
actually set sail; it is certain that no future 
preparations were made adequate to the public 
service. 

The profound policy of Philip fostered the 
supine negligence of his enemies. For more 
than two years after his retreat from Thermo- 
pyle, that crafty prince much confined himself 
to his dominions, and chiefly to his capital, anx- 
ious to dissipate the clamour occasioned by his 
too great precipitation to seize the gates of 
Greece. In that interval he indeed made an 
expedition to chastise the rebellious spirit of the 
A.C.35 Thessalians. But the greatest part 

. C. 350. ee 7 
Hid 349 of his time was spent at Pella, and 
` addicted to the arts of peace, which 
he judged with skill, and encouraged with 
munificence. ‘That favourite city was adorned 
with temples, theatres, and porticoes. The most 
ingenious artists of Greece were summoncd, by 
liberal rewards, to the court of Macedon ;9 
and men of talents and genius,!0 who were 
too often exposed to envy and persecution in 
the former country, were received with open 
arms by a prince, who, amidst the tumult of 
war, assiduously cultivated the studies of litera- 
ture and eloquence. In his domestic govern- 
ment, Philip administered justice with impar- 
tiality, listened with condescension to the com- 


nor its harmony, can be translated. Tedvyxe Dirsamos; ov 
uz Aia! arr’ wodeverc rs de vmsy Sinoeeer; nue pre av 
ouTos TE mala, TAXEWÇ UHEL ETEQOV PINIM TAOV TOLYTETE, AV 
WEE OUTW TEOTERNTE TOlG mMEæypaTıi TOV vovv” oude yae 
OUTOŞ MAPL THV ExUTOU eweYY TorOUTOY EmyUČYTÆI, OOD 
MAPL THY UMETEPAV AMENEIXV, 

9 Justin. L viii. c. 3. 

10 Among other Greeks who lived at Philip’s court were 
Leosthenes the orator, Ncoptolemus the poet, Aristodemus 
and Satyrus, celebrated players. /Eschin. et Demosthen. 
passim. 


382 


plaints of his meanest subjects, and disdaining 
the ceremonious and forbidding pomp of tyran- 
ny, Maintained an intercourse of visits and en- 
tertainments with his courtiers and generals.! 
In a prince so respectably employed, it is dif- 
ficult to conceive the odious and detestable vices 
with which Philip is upbraided by Demos- 
thenes ;? yet the brief descriptions occasionally 
sketched by the orator are filled up by an an- 
cient historian, who represents the infamies of 
the life of Philip in language well fitted to ar- 
raign the horrors of Nero or Heliogabalus, 
Could we believe the acrimony of Theopom- 
pus, a writer who flourished in the age of Alex- 
ander, by whom he was rewarded and honour- 
ed, not perhaps the less willingly because he 
had exposed or exaggerated the vices of his fa- 
ther, Philip sullied his great actions by the most 
enormous and detestable crimes. Alike avari- 
cious and prodigal, the wealth which he had 
amassed by injustice and rapacity, he dissipated 
in the most flagitious gratifications, and in com- 
pany with the meanest and most worthless of 
mankind. His companions were chosen pro- 
miscuously from Macedonians and Greeks, and 
especially from Thessalians, the most profligate 
of the Greeks, and were admitted to his fami- 
liarity and friendship, in proportion to their 
proficiency in the most odious and unnatural 
abominations? that ever polluted the worst men 


1 Plut. in Apophth. et in Demosthen. et Alexand. 

2 Vid. Demosthen. ex. edit. Wolf. pp. 5, 8, 48, 66, &c. 

3 The epithets given them by Theopompus are BosAveos, 
abominabiles ; and Azcrevees3 the last word is compound- 
ed of Ax, valde, and r2ve0ec, taurus ; and translated inseg- 
nitur mentulatus, which corresponds to the enormitas 
membrorum of the Augustan historians. The following 
description of the friends of Philip is too indecent for mo- 
dern language: “ Horum enim quidam jam viri barbam 
identidem radebant et vellebantur : alii vero barbati citra 
pudorem vicissim se impudicabant, stupris intercutibus se 
fagitantes ; regi vero duo vel tres circumducebantur qui 
paterentur muliebria, et eandem operam navarent alios 
subagitantes. Quamobrem illos jure aliquis non amicos 
regis, sed amicas esse credidisset, nec milites sed pros- 
tibula noncupasset, ingenio quidem et natura sanguina- 
rios, moribus autem virilia scorta, &c.” This passage 
is quoted from the forty-ninth book of Theopompus. fn 
his twenty-sixth book he speaks to the same purpose: 
“Philippum cum Thessalos intemperantes esse, ac lascivæ 
petulantisque vitæ prospiceret, eorum conventus ac Con- 
tubernia instituisse; iisque uti placeret modis omnibus 
fuisse conatum, cum illis saltåsse, commissatum fuisse, 
cuivis libidini se ac nequitiæ tradidisse.” A mistaken pas- 
sage of Diodorus has made some learned men doubt the 
authenticity of these descriptions. Diodorus (l. xvi. sect. 3.) 
says, that Theopompus yiyezçsvzi oxtw Sirous, wees 
Tots mevryxovTx eZ wy msvrts iægwvovris “had written 


the history of Philip in fifty-eight books, five of which differ 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


in the most corrupt ages of the world. We 
must, doubtless, make allowances for the gall of 
a writer, noted to a proverb for severity. Yet 
there is sufficient collateral evidence, that Phi- 
lip’s strong propensity to low wit, obscenity, 
and drunkenness, rendered him a prey to buf- 
foons, parasites, and flatterers, and all the 
worthless retinue of intemperance and folly 
These disgraceful associates of the prince, form- 
ed, in time of war, a regiment apart, of about 
eight hundred men, whose gradual waste was 
continually recruited by new members, who 
either were, or soon became, worthy of the old; 
for, as we shall soon have occasion to relate, the 
whole band were alike cowardly and profligate. 

But in whatever manner Philip employed his 
private hours, he at no time lost sight of those 
great principles of policy which regulated his 
public administration. Under pretence of want- 
ing money to supply the expense of his build- 
ings, and other public works, he employed an 
expedient which is well known in latter times, 
and which has been carried to such excess as 
threatens the safety of those governments which 
it was intended to uphold. The letting loose of 
the Delphic treasures had diffused near a mil- 
lion sterling over Greece.4 The unsettled state 
of that country rendered those who had ac- 
quired wealth very uncertain of enjoying it. 
With the rich and avaricious, Philip employed 
proper agents to take up> nioney at high in- 
terest, which procured him two advantages of 
a very important kind, the attaching to his go- 
vernment and person a numerous and power- 
ful band of creditors; and the enabling him to 
pay, under the title of debts, and therefore with- 
out suspicion, the various pensions and gra- 
tuities by which he maintained his influence 
among the orators and leading men in the 
several republics. 


in style from the rest.” Were we therefore to suppose the 
five last books spurious (for that is the inference which has 
been drawn,) the observation of Diodorus would not at all 
affect the passages above cited. 

4 The sacred war lasted ten years, and cost the Phocians 
ten thousand talents, near two millions; it had etready 
lasted five years, and may be supposed to have cost near 
the half of that sum. Diodor. l. xvi. p. 453. He says, that 
the gold and silver dedications (which were coined into 
money) vseszAAsiv T% pugix TæAxzvrz, “exceeded ten 
thousand talents; a prodigious sum (considering the rela- 
tive value of money in those days,) of which the sudden 
diffusion could not fail to produce most important conse- 
quences. 

5 Justin. viii. 3. 


% 


XXXV.] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


383 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


Negligence and Licentiousness of the Athenians—Philip’s Intrigues in Eubea—Phocion defeats 
the Macedonians and Eubeans—Philip invades the Olynthian Territory—Demosthenes’s Ora- 
tions in favour of the Olynthians—Expedition of Chares—Philip takes Olynthus—Celebrates 
the Festival of the Muses at Dium—Commits naval Depredations on Attica—His Embassy to 
Athens—The Athenian Embassy to Philip—Character of the Ambassadors—Their Conference 
with the King—Differently reported to the Senate and Assembly—Philip’s Conquests in Thrace 
—The Phocian War—Negotiations—Philip’s Intrigues—Decree of the Amphictyons against 
Phocis—Executed by Philip—Macedon acknowledged the principal Member of the Amphic- 


tyonic Council. 


ae inactivity of the king of Mace- 
A. C. 349 don, indulged themselves without 


reserye, in their favourite amuse- 
ments. Their confederates, the Phocians, were 
abandoned ; the war with Philip, in which they 
might well have considered themselves as prin- 
cipals, was neglected. Magistrates and people 
seemed solely attentive to regulate public fes- 
tivals and processions, and to ascertain the re- 
spective merit of dramatic poetsand performers. 
The fund originally intended for the exigences 
of war, had already been appropriated to the 
theatre; and a law was now enacted, on the 
motion of Eubulus, an artful flatterer of the 
multitude, rendering it a capital crime to pro- 
pose altering this unexampled and most whim- 
sical destination. It was in vain for Demos- 
thenes to resist the popular torrent. He was 
opposed and overcome by Eubulus and De- 
mades, the latter of whom, with talents that 
might have adorned his country, condescended 
to sell its interests to the public enemy. 

Born in the lowest condition of life, Demades 
retained the vices of his birth; and always dis- 
covered that sordid spirit, and weltered in those 
brutal excesses, which betray the want of early 
culture. Yet the acuteness of his apprehension, 
the strength of his reason and memory, and, 
above all, the bold and copious flow of his un- 
premeditated eloquence, in which he was allow- 
ed to excel even Demosthenes‘ himself, raised 
him to a contfiituous rank in the assembly ; 
and it being his business, as the hireling of 
Philip, to sail along with the stream of popular 
frenzy, which the patriotism of his rival en- 
deavoured to struggle with, and to stem, he 
possessed a free and ample scope for exercising 
his abilities, 
Olymp: . The people of Athens triumphed 
caine. in the victory of perfidious dema- 
A. C. 349, Sogues over the wisest and best of 

ine ` their fellow citizens, or rather over 
the laws and constitution of their country, 
when Philip began to play those batteries which 
he had patiently raised with such skill and se- 
crecy. The island of Eubæa, which he called 
the fetters of Greece, was the first object of his 
attack. Since the expulsion of the Thebans, 
of which we have formerly taken notice, the 
Athenians had preserved their interest in the 
island, where they maintained a small body of 
troops. The different cities, however, enjoyed 


6 Plutarch. in Demosthen. 


HE Athenians, deceived by the | the independent government of their own laws; 


they appointed their own magistrates; they 
sometimes made war against each other; and 
separately assumed the prerogatives of free and 
sovereign states, while they all collectively ac- 
knowledged their dependence on Athens. Such 
political arrangements made room for the in- 
trigues of Philip. He fomented their civil dis- 
cord; gained partisans in each city; and, at 
length, under colour of protecting his allies, 
landed several Macedonian battalions in tne 
island.” 

Matters were soon disposed to his wish. The 
Macedonians were allowed to occupy the most 
advantageous posts. The Athenian party ex- 
claimed and threatened; but Plutarch, the 
leader of that party, was gained to the interests 
of Philip,and demanded auxiliaries from Athens 
only to betray them into the hands of their 
enemies. Demosthenes, who alone penetrated 
this dark scheme of villany, entreated and con- 
jured his countrymen to put no confidence in 
Plutarch. But he was single in his opinion. 
The confidants of Philip were true to their 
master, and therefore urged the expedition. 
The friends of their country were eager to save 
the isle of Eubcea, and the capricious multi- 
tude, ever in extremes, rushed with as much 
impetuosity to an enterprise intended for their 
ruin, as they had long shown backwardness to 
engage in every other. The promptitude and 
vigour of their preparations much exceeded the 
expectation, and even alarmed the fears, of the 
Macedonian faction. But the latter had gone 
too far to retreat; nor could they foresee the 
consequences that happened, so contrary to 
their hopes. The Athenians, in fact, obtained 
a decisive victory, not by the strength of their 
arms, which was inferior to the enemy’s, but 
by the wise choice of a general. 

The consummate prudence of Phocion, who, 
on his arrival in Eubea, found things in a 
worse state than had been represented, risked 
no chance of defeat, and lost no opportunity of 
advantage.? Having chosen a favourable post, 
which was on all sides surrounded by broken 
and uneven ground, he despised the clamours 
of his men and the insults of the enemy. The 
treacherous Plutarch was quickly defeated in 
a mock battle, in which he fell back on the 
Athenian cavalry, who fled in disorder to the 


7 /Eschin. in Ctesiphont. et Demosth. de Falsa Legatione 
et de Pace. 

8 Demosth. de Pace. 

9 Plutarch. in Phocion. 


384 


camp of Phocion. The Eubæans and Mace- 
donians pursued with a rash and intemperate 
ardour; and elated with victory, and confident 
in their superior numbers, prepared to assail the 
camp. The general, mean while, performed a 
sacrifice, which he studiously prolonged, either 
from religion or policy, until he beheld the dis- 
order of the assailants, embarrassed by the un- 
equal ground, and by their own rashness. He 
then commanded his men to stand to their 
arms, and sallying from his intrenchments with 
intrepid valour, increased the confusion of the 
enemy, who were repelled with great slaughter 
towards the plain which they had at first occu- 
pied. The activity of Cleophanes, who had 
rallied and formed the Athenian cavalry, ren- 
dered the victory complete. The remaius of 
the vanquished took refuge in the fortress of 
Zeratra, in the northern corner of the island, 
which, being attacked, made a feeble resistance.! 
The garrison surrendered; but Phocion restor- 
ed all the Eubceans to liberty, lest the people 
of Athens, inflamed by their popular leadcrs, 
might treat them with that cruelty, which, on 
a similar occasion, they had inflicted on the re- 
bellious citizens of Mitylené.? Having spent a 
few weeks in settling the affairs of the island, 
he returned in triumph to Athens, his ships 
drawn up in line of battle, their stems crowned 
with garlands, and the rowers keeping time to 
the sound of martial music. His fellow citizens 
received him with acclamations of joy; but 
their imprudence did not allow them to reap 
the fruits of his success. Molossus, an obscure 
stranger, was appointed, by cabal, to command 
the troops left in the island; and Philip, having 
renewed his intrigues, carried them on with the 
same dexterity, and met with better success.? 
It is worthy of attention, that Demosthenes 
followed the standard of Phocion to Eubma, 
though he had strongly disapproved the expe- 
dition. Both he and his rival Æschines, of whom 
we shall soon have occasion to speak more fully, 
served in the cavalry. Demosthenes was re- 
proached with being the first who deserted his 
rank, and among the last who returned to the 
charge. Atschines behaved with distinguished 
gallantry, and had the honour of being appoint- 
ed by Phocion to carry home the first intelli- 
gence of the victory.4 
Ol Philip’s disappointment in Eu- 
JOP- bea only stimulated his activity. 
evii. 4. so A S - y 
A. C. 349 His toils were spread so widely all 
2 * around him, that when one part 
failed he could catch his prey in another. 
The Olynthians, against whom he seemed to 
have long forgotten his resentment, were asto- 
nished to observe that several of their citizens 
grew rich and great in a manner equally sudden 
and unaccountable; and that they enlarged 
their possessions, built stately palaces, and dis- 
played a degree of magnificence and grandeur 
hitherto unknown in their frugal republic. The 
unexpected invasion of Philip revealed the mys- 
tery. A considerable party had grown wealthy | 
by betraying the secrcts, exposing the weakness, | 


1 Plut. in Phocion. 

2 See above, c. xvi. p. 197. 

3 Plut. in Phocion. 

4 Æschin. de Falsa Legatione, et Demost. in Midiam. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


and fostering the ill-timed security of their 
country. Their influence at home had recom- 
mended them to Philip, and the wages of their 
iniquity had increased that influence. It would 
not.probably have been difficult to prove their 
treason, but it seemed dangerous to punish it ; 
and the Olynthians were more immediately 
concerned to repel the open ravages of their 
territory. In this emergency they trusted not 
to their domestic forces of ten thousand foot 
and one thousand horse,® but sent an embassy 
to Athens, inveighing in the strongest terms 
against Philip, who had first courted, then de- 
ceived, and at last invaded and attacked them ; 
and craving assistance from the Athenians, in 
consequence of the alliance formerly concluded 
between the two republics, to defeat the de- 
signs of a tyrant equally daring and perfidious. 

Had the people of Athens heartily undertaken 
the cause of Olynthus, Philip would have been 
exposed a second time to the danger which he 
had eluded with so much address in the begin- 
ning of his reign. Thebes was employed and 
exhausted in the Phocian war; the grandeur of 
Sparta had decayed as much as her principles 
had degenerated; the inferior states extended 
not their views of policy beyond their respective 
districts. But the Athenians, recently success- 
ful in Eubeea, and reinforced by the strength 
and resentment of such a republic as Olynthus, 
might have still rendered themselves formida- 
ble to the public enemy, especially as at this 
juncture the rebellious humours of the Thessa- 
lians broke out afresh, and led them capriciously 
to oppose, with as much eagerness as they had 
often helped to promote, the interest of Mace- 
don. But to compensate these unpromising 
circumstances, Philip possessed strenuous abet- 
tors of his power within the walls of Athens 
and Olynthus; and his garrisons actually com- 
manded the principal posts in Thessaly. Above 
all, the indolence and vices of his enemies were 
most favourable to his cause. The late success 
in Eubea, which should have animated a brave 
and generous people to new exertions and dan- 
gers, only replunged the Athenians into a sloth- 
ful security. While they enjoyed their thea- 
trical entertainments, their shows and festivals, 
and all the ease and luxury of a city life, they 
were little inclined to engage in any enterprise 
that might disturb the tranquil course of their 
pleasures. In this disposition they were en- 
couraged by their perfidious orators, who 
strongly exhorted them to beware of involving 
themselves in the danger of Olynthus, or of 
provoking the resentment of a prince whose 
power they were unable to resist. The orator 
Demades particularly distinguished his zeal in 
the Macedonian interest; advising an absolute 
and total rejection of the demands of the Olyn- 
thian ambassadors. 

Demosthenes at length arose, and as the de- 
sign of calling the assembly had been already 
explained, entered immediately on the question 
under deliberation. “On? many occasions, 


5 Demosthen. Olynth. passim. 

6 Demosthen. de Falsa Legatione. 

7 I mean not a translation of Demosthenes. The insert- 
ing his speeches entire would destroy the humble uniformity 


of this historical work, with the design of which it would 


XXXV.] 


Athenians! have the gods declared their favour 
to this state, but never more manifestly than in 
the present juncture. That enemies should be 
raised to Philip, on the confines of his territory, 
enemies not contemptible in power, and, which 
is more important, so determined on the war, 
that they regard every accommodation with 
Macedon, first as insidious, next as the destruc- 
tion of their country, can be ascribed to nothing 
less than the bountiful interposition of Heaven. 
With every thing else on our side, let us not be 
wanting to ourselves; let us not be reproached 
with the unspeakable infamy of throwing away, 
not only those cities and territories which we 
inherited from our ancestors, but those occa- 
sions and alliances offered us by fortune and 
the gods. To insist on the power and great- 
ness of Philip belongs not to the present sub- 
ject. He has become great through yoursupine 
neglect, and the perfidy of traitors, whom it 
becomes you to punish. Such topics are not 
honourable for you: I wave ther as superfluous, 
having matter more material to urge. To cali 
the king of Macedon perjured and perfidious, 
without proving my assertions, would be the 
language of insult and reproach. But his own 
actions, and not my resentment, shall nanie 
him; and of these I think it necessary to speak, 
for two reasons; first, that he may appear, 
what he really is, a wicked man; and, secondly, 
that the weak minds who are intimidated by 
his power and resources, may perceive that the 
artifices to which he owes them are now all 
exhausted, and that his ruin is at hand. As to 
myself, Athenians! I should not only fear but 
adinire Philip, had he attained his present 
height of grandeur by honourable and equitable 
means. But after the most serious examina- 
tion I find, that at first he seduced our simpli- 
city by the flattering promise of Amphipolis; 
that he next surprised the friendship of Olyn- 
thus by the deceitful gift of Potidea; that, 
lastly, he enslaved the Thessalians, under the 
specious pretence of delivering them from ty- 
rants. In one word, with what community 
hath he treated which hath not experienced his 
fraud? Which of his confederates hath he not 
shamelessly betrayed? Can it be expected, 
then, that those who promoted his elevation, 
because they thought him ¢heir friend, will con- 
tinue to support it, when they find him a friend 
to his own interests alone? Impossible! When 
confederacies are formed on the principles of 
common advantage and affection, each member 
shares the toils with alacrity; all persevere ; 
such confederacies endure. But when worth- 
lessness and lawless ambition have raised a sin- 
gle man, the slightest accident overthrows the 
unstable edifice of his grandeur. It is not, no! 
Athenians! it is not possible to found a lasting 
power on treachery, fraud, and perjury. These 
may succeed for awhile: but time reveals their 
weakness. For, as in a house, a ship, and in 
structures of every kind, the foundation and 


he inconsislent to transcribe what the orator found it neces 
sary to say, repent, and enforce so often. Besides, Demos- 
thenes is one of the few Greek writers that has been trans- 
lated, as the late Mr. Ifarris savs in his Philological 
Enquiries, by competent persons: Dra. Leland nnd Francis, 
in English; Mr. Tourreil and the Abbé Auger, in French: 
and the Abbé Cesarotti, in Italian. 


3C 


6 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


a aaia aaa aaaeeeaa caires 


385 


lower parts should be firm and solid, so the 
grounds and principles of action should be just 
and true. But such qualities belong not to the 
actions of Philip:8 

«I am of opinion, then, that fearless of con- 
sequences, you ought to assist Olynthus with 
the utmost celerity and vigour, and to despatch 
an embassy to the Thessalians, to inflame their 
hostility. But take care, Athenians! that your 
ardour evaporate not in resolutions and decrees. 
Be rcady to pay your contributions; prepare to 
take the field; show yourselves in earnest, and 
you will soon discover not only the hollow 
faith of the allies of Philip, but the internal and 
concealed infirmity of Macedon itsel. ‘That 
kingdom has emerged from obscurity amidst 
the contests of neighbouring states, during 
which, the smallest weiglit, put into either scale, 
is sufficient to incline the balance. But, in itself, 
Macedon is inconsiderable and weak, and its 
real weakness is increased by the splendid but 
ruinous expeditions of Philip. For the king 
and his subjects are actuated by very different 
sentiments. Domineered by ambition, he dis- 
regards ease aud safety; but his subjects, who 
individually have little share in the glory of his 
conquests, are indignant, that, for the sake of 
one man, they should be harassed by continua! 
warfare, and withdrawn from those occupations 
and pursuits, which afford the comforts and 
happiness of private life. On the great body of 
his people, Philip, therefore, can have no reli- 
ance; nor, whatever may be said of their va- 
lour and discipline, can he depend more on his 
mercenaries. For I am informed, by a man of 
undoubted veracity, who has just arrived trom 
Macedon, that none of Philip’s guards, even 
those whom he treats with the affectionate, but 
deceitful names of companions, and fellow 
soldiers, can merit his esteein, without incurring 
his hatred and persecution. Such is the intoler- 
able jealousy, such the malignant envy, which 
crowns the other odious vices of this monster, 
who, defying every sentiment of virtue and de- 
cency, drives from his presence all who shud- 
der, all who are disgusted, at the most unna- 
tural enormities; and whose court is continually 
crowded by buffoons, parasites, obscene poets 
and drunkards; wretches who, when drunk, 
will dance, but such dances? as modesty dare 
not name. Slight and trivial as these matters 
may to some appear, they exhibit the worthless- 


8 The important, though Irite proverb, that in public, as 


| well as in private transactions, ‘honesty is the best policy,” 


was never expressed, perhaps with such dignity, as in the 
following words of Demosthenes: otrzy pev ye um’ suvoizg 
TH TOLP MATA TUTTY XXI WUT’ TZUT TUMTEPN TOI fesTE- 
LOUTI TOV MOAEMOV” KLE TUMTOVELY, XLE CEGEIY TAG TUMSORW 
Oty XXE EVERY EDEADUTEY OF VEWTO OTV ÔE Ex TAEO- 
vsi TIG, WwTTEE OUTOS, IT HVTN, N TEwTH MEOÇATIÇ nus 
KREV WAIT Ly AT AVL LVE LITITE XZE dexdurenv, ov y ze 
sors, w ævõeeç Adyvnsos, adsxouvTe ZŁE ETIOEXOUYTE “xb 
Usvdousvov, Ouvegervy Csbgixy ATATATIXI WAAL TE TOLMUTE 
EIG MEV AMAZ, AAI SEALY Heovor, AVTEV EL Kt THODOR yE 
nv usy ETI THES SAmioiv, xv TUN Tw Heoven Se CHEAT Hb, 
KHL TEEI AUTH KLTAE CEL, WITTER YLE O1MENG, Olki KE 
WHOL, KE TWV KAAwWY TWV TOLOUT WY, TH KBTWIEV ET YUM 
eoTaTs eivae dss, OUT XXi THY TORE wv TAÇ LONG xx 
Taç uTojsrsig xandeic uxt oxmsxs sivi weoryner® TOUTO 
Se oux eve vuv ev Toss wemrexymevots Dirsrawe Demos- 
then. Olynth. i. or Olyn'h. ti. p. 7th, in the common but 
incorrect edition of Wolfius. 

G The xoeñzairgose Demosth. p. R. Vid. Schol. ad 
Aristoph. in Nubib. From the description above given of 
Athenian manners, it appears that Demosthenes’s delicacy 
was merely complimenital. 


386 


ness of Philip, and announce the infelicity 


which awaits him. The dangerous defects of | 
his character are hid in the blaze of prosperity ;! | 


but when misfortune happens, his native de- 
formity will appear. For it is easy to prove 
that, as in the bodily frame, men, during the 
season of health, are insensible of what is weak 
and disordered in their constitutions, which im- 
perfections are immediately felt on the first 
approach of sickness; so the glory of foreign 
conquest conceals the vices and defects of re- 
publics and monarchies; but let calamity hap- 
pen, let the war be carried to their frontiers, 
and those hitherto latent evils immediately be- 
conme manifest. 

“If there is aman among you, Athenians! 
who thinks that Philip is a formidable enemy, 
because he is fortunate, I agree with that man. 
Fortune? has a mighty influence, or rather 
Fortune alone domineers in human affairs. Yet 
could you be persuaded to do but the smallest 
part of your duty, I would greatly prefer your 


fortune to Philip’s; for you, surely, have better | 


reason to trust in the assistance of Heaven. 


But we remain, I think, inactive, hesitating, | 


delaying, and deliberating, while our enemy 
takes the field, braving seasons and dangers, 
and neglecting no opportunity of advantage. 
And if the indolent and careless are abandoned 
by their best friends, can we expect that the 
gods, however favourable, should assist us, if 
we will not help ourselves?” 

The people of Athens, animated to their duty, 
on the one hand, by Demosthenes, and seduced, 
on the other, by the hirelings of Philip,? and 
their own deceitful passions,imprudently steered 
a middle course, which, in public affairs, is 
often the most dangerous. Convinced that the 
preservation of Olynthus was the best safeguard 
of Attica, yet unwilling to tear themselves from 
their beloved pleasures, they determined to send 
Chares, with a fleet and two thousand merce- 
naries, to the assistance of their allies. This 
commander, who was the idol of the multitude, 
but the disgrace of his country and of his pro- 
fession,’ showed no solicitude to protect the de- 
pendencies of Olynthus, which successively sub- 
mitted to the Macedonian arms. To gratify 
the rapacity of his troops, he made a descent on 
the fertile coast of Pallené, where, falling in 
with eight hundred men commanded by Au- 
deus, called the friends of Philip, he obtained 
over those contemptible cowards an easy and 
ludicrous victory, which served only to amuse 
the comic poets of the times. Having gained 
this advantage, Chares became unwilling to 
try his fortune in any severer conflict; and dis- 
daining, as he affected, to follow the motions 
of Philip, returned home, and celebrated his 
triumph over the vain, boastful, and voluptuous 
Audeus;> not, however, with the spoils of the 
vanquished, but with the sum of sixty talents, 


1 Secund@ res mirè sunt vitiis ohtentui. Sallust. 

2 From what is said below, it appears that, by Fortune, 
Demosthenes here means the dispensations of Providence; 
and by good fortune, the Favour of Heaven. 

3 Philochorus in Dionys. Epist. ad Ammonium. 

4 Timotheus said of him, ‘that he was fitter to carry the 
baggage, than to command an army.” Plut. in Apophth. 

Among his contemporaries, he was nicknamed xAsx- 
sevay, the cock. Athenmus l. xii. p. 534. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


which he had extorted from the Phocians, who 
were actually in alliance with Athens.6 

The thoughtless multitude, who judged of 
the expedition of Chares by the expensive pomp 
with which he entertained them at his return, 
talked extravagantly of invading Macedon, and 
chastising the insolence of Philip, when a se- 
cond embassy arrived from Olynthus. The in- 
habitants of this place had been shut up within 
their walls; they had lost Stagyra, Miciberna, 
Toroné, cities of considerable strength, besides 
many inferior towns, which, on the first appear- 
ance of Philip, were forward to receive his 
bribes, and to open their gates ;8 and this shame- 
ful venality, in places well provided for defence. 
made the king of Macedon observe to his gene- 
rals, that he would thenceforth consider no for- 
tress as impregnable, which could admit a mule 
laden with money.9 Dejected by continual 
losses, the Olynthians turned their thoughts to 
negotiation, that they might at least amuse the 
invader till the arrival of the Athenian succours. 
Philip penetrated their design, and dexterously 
turned their arts against them; affecting to lend 
an ear to their proposals, but mean while con- 
tinuing his approaches, till, having got within 
forty stadia of their walls, he declared that of 
two things one was necessary, either they must 
leave Olynthus, or he Macedon.'!0 This expli- 
cit declaration from an enemy, who often flat- 
tered to destroy, but who might always be be- 
lieved when he threatened, convinced the Olyn- 
thians of what they had long suspected, that 
their utter ruin was at hand. They endea- 
voured to retard the fatal moment by a vigour- 
ous sally, in which their cavalry, commanded 
by Apollonides, particularly signalised their va- 
lour.!! But they were repulsed by superior 
numbers, and obliged to take refuge in the city. 

In this posture of affairs, the ambassadors 
sailed for Athens; and having arrived there, 
found, to their utter astonishment, the multi- 
tude still enjoying the imaginary triumph of 
Chares. This commander, who chiefly owed 
his credit to the ascendant of superficial qualities 
over the undiscerning folly of the people, was a 
warm and active partisan of democracy. and 
as such viewed, even by Demosthenes, with too 
partial eyes. The orator, besides, well knew 
that the irregular, useless, or destructive opera- 
tions of the Athenian arms, ought not always 
to be charged on the misconduct of the general. 
The troops were always ill paid; sometimes 
not paid at all; and therefore disobedient and 
mutinous. Instead of submitting to control, 
they often controlled their leaders; their reso- 
lutions were prompt and ungovernable; when 
they could not persuade, they threatened; and 
compelled even prudent commanders to mea- 
sures wild, ruinous, and dishonourable. 

Demosthenes, therefore, who again undertook 
to second the demands of Olynthus, waved all 


§ Atheneus l. xii. p. 534. 

7 Demosthen. Olynth. ii. 

8 Diodorns, l. xvi. p. 450. 

9 Plutarch. ubi supra. Diodorus, p. 451, retates the mat- 
ter somewhat differently. But he acknowledges that the 
king of Macedon boasted that he had augmented his domi 
nions more by gold than by arms. Diodorus, p. 450. 

10 Demosthen. Philipp. 

11 Id. Ibid. 


` 


XXXV.] 


accusation against particular persons. After 
endeavouring to repress the vain confidence of 
his countrymen, which had been excited by the 
supposed advantages of Chares, and the venal 
breath of corrupt orators, he describes the real 
danger of their allies, which he persuades them 
to regard as their own. The crisis was now 
arrived; and if they neglected the present op- 
portunity of fulfilling their engagements to 
Olynthus, they must soon be obliged to mect 
Philip in Attica. He reminds them of the 
various ovcasions, which they had already lost, 
of repelling this rapacious tyrant, this hostile 
Barbarian, this mixture of perfidy and violence, 
for whom he cannot find any name sufħciently 
reproachful. “ But some perhaps will say, it is 
the business of a public speaker to advise, not to 
\upbraid. We wish to assist the Olynthians, 
and we will assist them; but inform us how 
our aid may be rendered most effectual. Ap- 
point magistrates, Athenians? for the inspection 
of your laws; not to enact new laws; they are 
already too nunterous; but to repeal those whose 
ill effects you daily experience; | mean the laws 
respecting the theatrical funds (thus openly I 
declare it.) and some about the soldiery. By 
the first, the soldier’s pay is consumed, as thea- 
trical expenses, by the useless and inactive ; the 
second screen from justice the coward who de- 
clines the service, and damp the ardour of the 
brave who would be ready to take the field. 
Till these laws be repealed, expect not that any 
man will urge your true interest, since his 
honest zeal must be repaid with destruction.” 
After insisting still farther on this delicate and 
dangerous subject, Demosthenes probably ob- 
served displeasure and resentment in the coun- 
tenances of his hearers, and then (as his custom 
was) artfully turning the discourse: “ I speak 
thus, not with a view to give offence, for I am 
not so mad as wantonly to offend; but because 
I think it the duty of a public speaker to prefer 
your interest to your pleasure. Such were the 
maxims and conduct (you yourselves know it) 
of those ancient and illustrious orators whom 
all unite to praise, but none venture to imitate; 
of the virtuous Aristides, of Nicias, of Pericles, 
and of him whose name!! [ bear. But since 
ministers have appeared who dare not address 
the assembly, till they have first consul/ed you 
about the counsels which they ought to give, 
who ask, as it were, What shall l propose ? 
What shall I advise? In what, Athenians! can 
I do you pleasure? the sweet draught of flattery 
has concealed a deadly poison; our strength is 
enervated, our glory tarnished, the public beg- 
gared and disgraced, while those smooth- 
tongned declaimers have acquired opulence and 
splendour.!2 Consider, Athenians! how briefly 


11 Demosthenes, who aeted snch a distinguished part in 
the Peloponnesian war. See above, c. xvii. p. 203, et seq. 

12 It is warthy of observation thut, in this diseourse 
throughom, Demosthenes insists that the people at large en- 
joyed much less authority in his time than in the days of 
Aristides, &c. All depends, he asserts, on the popular orn- 
tors and magistrates, ‘f or7oAsrevouevos.” Yet it is well 
known that, sinee the age of Aristides, the government had 
berome more democratical. Demosthenes himself ollows 
this: the orators, he says, dare nat address the people now 
with that freedom which they used formerly.—This appn- 
rent contradiction shows the nature and tendency of that 
species of popular government which the Greeks call ochla- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 387 


the conduct of your ancestors may be contrasted 
with your own; for if you would pursue the 
road to glory and happiness, you need not foreign 
instructors: it will be suflicient to follow the 
exainple of those from whom you are descend- 
ed. The Athenians of former times, whom the 
orators never courted, never treated with that 
indulgence to which you are accustomed, held, 
with general consent, the sovereignty of Greece 
for sixty-five years ;!3 deposited above ten thou- 
sand talents in the citadel; kept the king of 
Macedon in that subjection which a Barbarian 
owes to Greece; erected many and illustrious 
trophies of the exploits which their own valour 
had achieved by lanċ and sea; in a word, are 
the only people on record whose glorious actions 
transcend the power of envy. Thus great in 
war, their civil administration was not less ad- 
inirable. The stately edifices which they raised, 
the temples which they adorned, the dedications 
which they offered to the gods, will never be 
excelled in magnificence ; but, in private life, so 
exemplary was their moderation, and so scru- 
pulous their adherence to the frugal maxims of 
antiquity, that if any of you has examined the 
houses of Aristides ‘or Miltiades, he will find 
them undistinguished above the contiguous 
buildings by superior elegance or grandeur. 
The ambition of those illustrious statesmen was 
to exalt the republic, not to enrich themselves ;!4 
and this just moderation, accompanied by piety 
and patriotism, raised their country (and no 
wonder !) to the height of prosperity. Such was 
the condition of Athens under those sincere and 
honest men. Is it the same, or nearly the same, 
under tle indulgence of our present ministers? 
I wave other topics on which I might enlarge. 
But you behold in what solitude we are left. 
The Lacedemonians lost ; the Thebans harassed 
by war; no other republic worthy of aspiring 
to the sovereignty. Yet, at this period, when 
we might not only have defended our own pos- 
sessions, but lave become the arbiters and um- 
pires of all around us, we have been stripped of 
whole provinces; we have expended fifteen 
hundred talents fruitlessly; we have lost, in 
time of peace, the alliancesandadvantages which 
the arms of our ancestors had acquired ; and we 
have raised up and armed a most formidable 
enemy against ourselves. If not, let the man 
stand forth who can show from what other cause 
Philip has derived his greatness. But the miser- 
able condition of our foreign affairs, is perhaps 
compensated by the happiness of our domestic 
state, and the splendid improvements of our 
capital. Roads repaired, walls whitened, foun- 
tains, and follies !!5 And the ministers who have 
procured us those magnificent advantages, pass 
from poverty and meanness to opnlence and 
dignity; build private palaces which insult the 


garchy.—The popnlace are the slaves of their demnagogues, 
and the demagognes of the populaee. Instead of liberty, 
there is an interchnnge of servitude. 

13 Demosthencs’s chronology here is not accurate. Sce 
above, p. 209. in the note. 


14 Privatus illis consug erat brevis 
Cominune magnom. Hor. ode xv. l ii. 


15 Isyasi xi Avext. Demosthenes disdained not sneh a 
gingle of words when it presented itself naturally ; but as it 
rarely occurs in his warks, it is plain that he never sought 
for it. 


388 


edifices of the public; grow greater as their 
country becomes less, and gradually rise on its 
ruins. What is the source of this disorder? It 
is, Athenians! that formerly the people did 
their duty, took the field in person, and thus 
kept the magistrates in awe.” 

The assembly remained insensible to the mo- 
tives of interest and honour. Instead of taking 
the field in person, they sent to Olynthus a 
body of foreign infantry, amounting to four 
thousand, with a hundred and fifty horse, un- 
der the command of Charidemus. This un- 
worthy general, who was the slave of his mer- 
cenaries, and of his own detestable passions, 
gratified the rapacity of .*.s troops by ravaging 
the Macedonian province of Bottiæa, on the 
confines of Chalcis. At length, however, he 
threw his forces into Olynthus; and the be- 
sieged, encouraged by this reinforcement, ha- 
zarded another sally, in which they were de- 
feated and repelled with considerable loss. The 
Athenian mercenaries were rendered every day 
more contemptible by their cowardice, and more 
dangerous by their licentiousness. The beastiy 
Charidemus had neither inclination nor ability 
to restrain their irregularities. According to 
his custom, he drank, at every meal, to a scan- 
dalous excess: his brutality insulted the women 
of Olynthus; and such was his impudent and 
abandoned profligacy. that he demanded of the 
senate, as a reward for his pretended services, 
a beautiful Macedonian youth, then captive in 
the city.! 

In this state of affairs, the Olynthians a 
third time applied to Athens. On the present 
occasion, A schines, who afterwards became 
such an active partisan of the Macedonian in- 
terest, particularly distinguished his zeal and 
his patriotism. The speech of Demosthenes, 
to the same purpose, is still on recora. He ex- 
lorts and conjures his countrymen to send to 
Olynthus an army of citizens, and at the same 
time to make a diversion, by invading the Ma- 
cedonian coast. Unless both be done, the in- 
defatigable industry of Philip would render 
either ineffectual. “ Have you ever considered 
the rapid progress of this prince? He began by 
taking Amphipolis, then Pydna, Potidea, and 
Methoné; from thence he poured his troops 
into Thessaly, and became master of Phere, 
Pegasæ, and Magnesia. Then, turning towards 
Thrace, he overran provinces, conquered and 
divided kingdoms, and seated himself on the 
trophies of fallen crowns and broken sceptres. 
I speak not of his expedition against the Pæo- 
nians and Illyrians, into Epirus.—and where 
has not ambition conducted his arms? But 
why this long enumeration?—To prove the 
important opportunities which vour negligence 
has lost, and the unextinguishable ardour of an 
adversary, whose successive conquests contin- 
ually bring him nearer to your walls. For is 
there a man in this assembly, whose blindness 
perceives not that the sufferings of the Olyn- 
thians are the forerunners of ourown? The 
present conjuncture calls you, as with a loud 
voice, at length to rouse from your lethargy, 
and to profit by this last testimony of the boun- 


1 Theopomp. apud Athen. 1. x. p. 436. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


tiful protection of the gods. Another is not to 
be expected, after the many which you have 
despised and forgotten: I say forgotten ; for fa- 
vourable conjunctures, like riches, and other 
gifts of heaven, are remembered with gratitude, 
only by those who have understanding to pre- 
serve and to enjoy them. The spendthrift dis- 
sipates his thankfulness with his wealth ;2 and 
the same imprudent folly renders him both 
miserable and ungrateful.’ After these bold 
expostulations, or rather reproaches, he encou- 
rages them to relieve Olynthus, by observing, 
that Philip would never have undertaken the 
siege of that place, if he had expected such a 
vigorous resistance ; especially at a time when 
his allies were ready to revolt; when the Thes- 
salians wished to throw off the yoke ; when the 
Thracians and Illyrians longed to recover thei 

freedom. Thus the power of Philip, lately re- 
presented as so formidable, is by no means real 
and solid; one vigorous effort might yet over- 
whelin him; and the passion of hope, as well 
as that of fear, is rendered subs to the 
purpose of the orator. He again t es on the 
article of supplies; but with such caution as 
shows that his former more explicit observations 
had been heard impatiently. “ As to money 
for the expenses of the war (for without money 
nothing can be done.) you possess, Athenians ! 
a military fund exceeding that of any other 
people. But you have unfortunately with- 
drawn it from its original destination, to which 
were it restored. there could not be any neces- 
sity for extraordinary contributions. What! 
do you purpose in form,? that the theatrical 
money should be applied to the use of the sol- 
diery? No, surely. But I affirm, that soldiers 
must be raised; that a fund has been allotted 
for their subsistence ; and that in every well- 
regulated community, those who are paid by the 
public, ought to serve the public. To profit of 
the present conjuncture, we must act with 
vigour and celerity, we must despatch ambassa- 
dors, to animate the neighbouring states against 
Philip; we must take the field in person. If 
war raged on the frontiers of this country, with 
what rapidity would the Macedonians march 
hither? Why will you throw away a similar 
opportunity ? Know, that but one alternative 
remains, to carry the war into Macedon, or to 
receive it in Attica. If Olynthus resists, we 
may ravage the territories of Philip; should 
that republic be destroyed, who will hinder him 
from coming hither? The Thebans! to say 
nothing too severe, they would rather reinforce 
his arms. The Phocians! they who, without 
our assistance, cannot defend themselves. O! 
but he dares not come! It is madness to think 
that the designs of which he already boasts with 
such bold imprudence, he will not venture to 
execute, when nothing opposes his success.4 I 


2 The observation is uncommon, but just; zAA# cin, 
TROOMGIOV ET TI, OTEP RAE TE’ TRG THY EPULT KTHTEWS? 
ay EV xe CCTM tv Ths AxzSsm tazi ToT», MEyxAnv EYES TH 
TUZ THY Hxrekv, zy Se xmvxrAQworns LETI TuVevAAWOE Heb TO 
usuvsrizi TH tuy» Tey x%2zesv, Demosth. Olynth. iii. 
Olvnth. i.-p. 2. ex edil. Wolf. 

3 Such a proposal, the Alhenians had absurdly declared 
punishable bv death. 

4 With all his policy, Philip seems to have had the va- 
nitv of a Greek. The vigour of the original is not to be 
translated: “Av Se sxesva @sAcrsros Amer, TIS auTov ers 


XXXV.] . 


think it unnecessary to describe the difference 
between attacking Philip at home, and waiting 
for him here. Were you obliged, only for one 
month, to encamp without the walls, and to 
subsist an army in the country, your husband- 
men would sustain more loss than has been in- 
curred by all the former exigences of the war. 
This would happen, although the enemy kept 
at a distance; but at the approach and entrance 
of an invader, what devastation must be pro- 
duced! Add to this, the insult and disgrace, 
the most ruinous of all losses, to men capable 
of reflection.” 

The arguments of Demosthenes 


peu prevailed; an embassy was sent 
| Peloponnesus, to inflame tle 
A. C. 343. W 


hostility of that country against 
Philip; and it was determined to assist the 
Olynthians with an army of Athenian citizens. 
But before this resolution could be carried into 
effect, Olynthus was no more. The cavalry 
belonging to that place had acted with great 
i he besiegers. As the works were 

n to be completely invested, the 
Olynthian horsemen made frequent incursions$ 
into the surrounding territory, where they not 
only supplied themselves with provisions and 
forage, but beat up the quarters, attacked 
the advanced posts, and intercepted the con- 
voys of the enemy. These advantages were 
chiefly owing to the merit of one man. In the 
various skirmishes, as well as in the two gene- 
ral engagements which had liappened since the 
commencement of the siege, Philip perceived 
that Apollonides, who commanded the enemy’s 
horse, displayed such valour and abilities as 
might long retard, perhaps altogether defeat, 
the success of his undertaking. His secret 
emissaries were therefore set to work; perfi- 
dious clamours were sown among the populace 
of Olynthus; Apollonides was publicly accus- 
ed; and, by the malignant practices of traitors, 
condemned to banishment on a suspicion of 
treason.6 The command of the cavalry was 
bestowed on Lasthenes and Euthycrates, two 
wretches who had sold their country to Philip. 
Having obtained some previous successes, which 
had been concerted the better to mask their de- 
signs, they advanced against a Macedonian 
post; carried it at the first onset; pursued the 
flying garrison; and betrayed their own troops 
into an ambush prepared by the enemy. Sur- 
rounded on all sides, the Olynthians surren- 
dered their arms; and this fatal disaster en- 
couraging the Macedonian partisans within the 
walls, soon opened the gates of Olynthus.’ 
The conqneror entered in triumph, plundered 
and demolished the city, and dragged the inha- 
bitants into servitude. Lasthcnes, Euthy- 
crates, and their associates, shared the same, 


xwrurts dsves BxdeCesv: OySasors uy hixv wexgov groresy 
n, 4x8 TAVESToxAOvuTs ETOtewS, MAAS Pwxess 3 Ob THY Oizsizvy 
GUM 0108 TE OVTES CUARTTEEY, EAV Key ONTHTHTEUMESC’ y LAAC 
Tis 3 ZAA’ wTav out COVANTET LI —TwY LTO DTATWV EVTOI 
Av éin E8 Z vuv žvOixv OÇAITAZVwV} OMS EAAZASIg TAUTE 
axheret, T2uTx urnjsis py mex3is. I have useda little 
freedom with the ¢ ovy: BovAycet xs.” 

5 Diodorns, t. xvi. 53. 

6 Demosth. de Falsa Legatione. 

7 Ibd. 

8 Four reasons conspired to produce the severe trent- 
ment of the Olynthians: 1. Philip had lost a great many 
men in the siege ; gwokAoug Twy TT eATiwTwy tv Taig TXI- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


389 


or even a worse fate. Philip is said to have 
abandoned them to the indignant rage of the 
Macedonian soldiers, who butehered them al- 
most betore his eyes. It is certain, that though 
his mean and bhnd ambition often é¢mployed 
treachery, his justice or his pride always de- 
tested the traitor.9 
The conquest of Olynthus put Philip in pos- 
session of the region of Chalcis,and the north- 
ern coast of Ægean sea; an acquisition of ter- 
ritory, which rendered his dominions on that 
side round and complete. His kingdom was 
now bounded, on the north by the Thracian 
possessions of Kersobleptes, and on the south 
by the territory of Phocis, a province actually 
comprehending the straits of Thermopyle, 
which had formerly belonged to a different di- 
vision of Greece. Besides the general motives 
of interest, which promptcd him to extend his 
dominions, he discerned the peculiar importance 
of acquiring the Thermopylæ and the Helles- 
pont, since the former was emphatically styled 
the Gates of Grecce, and the latter formed the 
only communication betwcen that country and 
the fertile shores of the Euxine. Greece, cx- 
ceeding’in population the proportion of its ex- 
tent and fertility, annually drew supplies of 
corn from those northern regions. The Athe- 
nians, in particular, had settlements even in 
the remote peninsuia of Crim Tartary, an- 
ciently called the Taurica Chersonesus, by 
means of which they purchased and imported 
the superfluous productions of that remote 
climate.'0 Their ships could only sail thither 
by the Hellespont; and should that important 
strait be reduced under the power of an 
enemy, they must be totally excluded from 
a useful, and even necessary, branch of com- 
merce. 
yep. or ee these conse- 
L quences. lt was the general in- 
A. C. 343. terest of all the Grecian republics 
to assist Kersobleptes and the Pho- 
cians, which was, in other words, to defend 
the Hellespont and Thermopylæ. The in- 
terest of the Macedonian was diametrically 
opposite; nor could he expect to accomplish 
the great objects ,of his reign, unless he 
first rendered himself inaster of those impor- 
tant posts. This delicate situation furnished 
a proper exercise for the dexterity of Philip. 
After the destruction of Olynthus, he celebrat- 
ed a public festival of gratitude and joy, at the 
neighbouring town of Dium; to which, as at 
the Olympian aud other Grecian games, all the 
republics were promiscuously invited, whether 
friends or eneiics.!! Jt appears that several 
Athcnians assisted at these magnificent enter- 
tainments, which lasted nine days, in honour 
of tlie Muses, and which wanted no object of 


payizig zventrhev, Dolor. p. 450. 2. The Olvuthians 
had received his natural brathers, Aridwus and Menelaus, 
accused of treason. Justin. |. viii. c. ii 3. Philip wanted 
money to carry on his intrignes in other cities; rizereraeç 
me xuTyv (scil. Oauv5ov) xz: Touç svoixouvreç 12 2vdp270~ 
Airapsvoc, EALQVUEATmAATE TOUTO ôi mELSwS, LOumxtwv TE 
mOARKwY Gig TOV WOAEMOV EUroeros. 4. Dindorus immedi- 
utely after ndds the fourth reason, “That he might deter 
the neighbouring cities froin opposing his measures.’ Dio- 
dor. p. 450. : 

9 Demosth. Olynth. ii. sect. 3. 

10 Demosthen. in Leptin. 


11 Demosth. de Falsa Legatione, and iodor. p. 451. 


390 


elegance or splendour, that either art could 
produce or wealth could purchase. The po- 
liteness and condescending affability of Philip 
obliterated the remembrance of his recent se- 
verity to Olynthus; and his liberal distribution 
of the spoils of that unfortunate city! gained 
him new friends, and confirmed the attachment 
of his old partisans. 

Amidst these scenes of rejoiting and festi- 
vity, Philip seems not to have forgotten, one 
moment, that the most immediate object of his 
policy was to detach the Athenians from the 
cause of Phocis and Kersobleptes, who were 
both their allies. For this purpose, while he 
courted individuals with peculiar address, he 
determined to make the public feel the incon- 
venience of the war, the better to prepare them 
for the insidious proposal of a separate peace. 
The bad conduct of Chares left the sea open 
to the Macedonians, who had silently acquired 
a considerable naval force. Philip began to 
attack the Athenians on their favourite eleinent. 
His fleet ravaged their tributary islands of Lem- 
nos and Im»ros; surprised and took a squa- 
dron of Athenian vessels, stationed on the 
southern coast of Eubcea; and, encouraged by 
these advantages, boldly sailed to Attica, made 
a descent on the shore of Marathon, repelled 
the Athenian cavalry, headed by Deotimus, ra- 
vaged the territory, and carried off the Sala- 
manian galley. From thence they proceeded 
to the isle of Salamis, and defeated a consider- 
able detachment commanded by Charidemus. 
The illustrious trophies of Marathon and Sa- 
lamis were effaced by the insults of the Mace- 
donians, whose fleet returned home in triumph, 
adorned with hostile spoils, and with military 
and naval glory.? 

The activity of Philip seconded his good for- 
tune. His intrigues were renewed in Eubea. 
Under pretence of delivering the island from 
the tyranny and extortions of Molossus, the 
Athenian commander, he landed such a body 
of troops there, as proved suflicient, with the 
assistance of his adherents, to expel the Athe- 
nians. Such a multiplication of calamities 
might have disgusted that people with the war 
against Philip, whose hostility, directed against 
them alone, seemed to have forgotten the Pho- 
cians and Kersobleptes; when secret but zeal- 


1 Both Demosthenes and Diodorus mention an anecdote 
which does honour to Philip, and still more to Satyrus the 
player. After dinner, the king, according to his custom, 
was distributing his presents; amidst the general festivity, 
Satyrus alone wore a sad countenance. The king address- 
ed him kindly, and inthe language of the times, desired 
him to ask a boon. Satyrus said, that such presents as 
others received (cups of gold, &c.) seemed to him of little 
value; that he had indeed something to ask, but feared a 
denial. Philip having eucouraged him, he proceeded: 
« Apollophanes of Pydna was my friend: at his death, his 
two daughters, both arrived at a marriageable age, were 
sent to Olynthus, taken ciptive, and subjected to all the 
calamities of servitude. These are the presents I request, 
not with any design unworthy of their father or myself, but 
that I may give them such portions as shall enable them to 
marry happily.” Apollophanes had been an active oppo- 
nent, and even the personal enemy, of Philip; vet this 
prince granted the request of Satyrus, and enabled him 
liberally to provide for the daugh ers of his friend. 

2 In the chronology of these events, I have followed Dr. 
Leland. See his life of Philip, vol. ii. p. 43. The events 
themselves are rela'ed in the oration of Demosthenes com- 
monly entitled the First Philippic, but which the Doctor, 
with great probability, considers as two distinct orations 
epoken at different times. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


CHAP, 


ous partisans of Macedon arrived at Athens, 
as ambassadors from Eubæa, commissioned to 
settle amicably all differences between the two 
countries. They observed, that Philip had lett 
the islund absolutely free and independent ; and 
that, though constrained to take arms in de- 
fence of his allies, he was sincerely desirous of 
making peace with the Athenians. The repre- 
sentations of the Eubcan ambassadois were 
enforced by the influence of two Athenians, 
Aristodemus and Neoptolemus, the first dis- 
tinguished as a player, the second as a player 
and poet, who having acquired fortunes in Ma- 
cedon, returned to their own country, to for- 
ward the measures of their liberal protector. 
They afiirmed that the king of Macedon ear- 
nestly wished to live on guod terms with the 
republic; and the Athenians paid much regard 
to men, whose talents were then highly esteein- 
ed, and who had remitted the riches amassed 
in a foreign country, to purchase lands in At- 
tica, and to supply with alacrity the exigences 
| of the public service. 
| Demosthenes saw through these dark and 
| deep artifices;3 but in vain endeavoured to 
| alarm the unsuspecting credulity of his coun- 
trymen. Ona future occasion, after the plot 
had become manifest, he upbraids their careless 
indifference and delusion at this important cri- 
sis. ‘ Had you been spectators in the theatre, 
and not deliberating on matters of the highest 
moment, you could not have heard Neoptole- 
mus with more indulgence, nor me with more 
resentment,” 

Such was the disposition of the assembly, 
when Æschines returned from his Peloponne- 
sian embassy. He had assembled the great 
council of the Arcadians ; revealed to them the 
dangerous views of Philip, which threatened 
the liberty of Greece; and, notwithstanding the 
powerful opposition of Hieronymus, and other 
Macedonian partisans, had engaged that people 
to approve the patriot zeal of Athens, and to 
deliberate on taking arms in the common cause. 
In relating the success of his embassy, he in- 
veighed with great severity against those ner- 
cenary traitors, who had sold the interests of 
their country to a cruel tyrant. The Greeks 
had full warning of their danger. The miser- 
able fate of Olynthus ought ever to be before 
their eyes. At his return through Peloponnesus, 
he had beheld a sight sufficient to melt the most 
obdurate heart; thirty young Olynthians, of 
both sexes, driven like a herd of cattle, as a pre- 
sent from Philip to some of the unworthy in- 
struments of his ambition.é 

The susceptible and ever-varying temper of 
the multitude was deeply affected by the repre- 
sentations of Æchines; the pacific advices of 
Neoptolemus and his associates were forgotten ; 
war and revenge again echoed through the as- 
sembly. At the requisition of Æschines, am- 
bassadors were despatched to confirm the hostile 
resolutions of the Arcadians, and to awaken the 
terror of the neighbouring republics. The Athe- 
nian youth were assembled in the temple of 
Agraulos to swear irreconcilable hatred against 


3 Demosthen. de Chersoneso, et de Pace. 
4 Demosthen. de Chersoneso. 
5 Demosthen. de Falsa Legatione, sect. 5. 


XXXV.] 


Philip and the Macedonians; and the most aw- 
ful imprecations were denounced against the 
mercenary traitors who co-operated with the 
public enemy. This fermentation might at 
length have purified into strong and decisive 
measures; and had Philip possessed only an 
ordinary degree of vigilance, a confederacy 
might have been yet formed in Greece suilicient 
to repel the Macedonian arms. But that con- 
suminate politician thought nothing done while 
any thing was neglected; and, as he allowed 
not the slightest opportunity to pass uniinprov- 
ed, he often derived very important benefits 
from seemingly inconsiderable causes. 

An Athenian of the name of Phrynon, a man 
wealthy and powerful, had been attacked, rob- 
bed, and confined by some Macedonian soldiers, 
who obliged him to purchase his liberty by a 
very considerable ransom.® As this violence 
had been committed during the fifteen days of 
truce that followed the celebration of the Olym- 
pic games, Phrynon very judiciously supposed 
that the king of Macedon, who had long been 
ambitious of obtaining a place in the Grecian 
confederacy, would not abet this act of injustice 
and impiety. He had therefore requested his 
countrymen, who at that time prepared to ne- 
gotiate with Philip an exchange of prisoners, to 
join him in commission with Ctesiphon, a man 
of experience and capacity, who had been al- 
ready named to that einbassy; imagining that by 
appearing in a public character, he might the 
more easily recover the ransom and other mo- 
nies that had been unjustly extorted from him. 
Having arrived in Macedon, the ambassadors 
were received and treated by Philip with un- 
common politeness and respect; their demands 
were most obligingly granted, or rather pre- 
vented; the king apologised to Phrynon for the 
ignorant rusticity of his soldiers, which had led 
tlem to act so unwarrantably ; and he lament- 
ed both to Phrynon and Ctesiphon, the neces- 
sity of their present mission, since he had no- 
thing more sincerely at heart than to live on 
good terms with their republic.’ At their re- 
turn to Athens, the representations of such men 
could not be without weight; nor could they 
fail being extremely favourable to the king of 
Macedon. 

Another incident followed, which was iin- 
proved with no less dexterity.8 At the taking 
and sack of Olynthus, Stratocles and Eucrates, 
two Athenians of distinction, had been seized 
and carried into Macedon. By some accident 
these men had not been released with the other 
prisoners. Their relations were anxious for 
their safety, and therefore applied to the Athe- 
nians, that a proper person might be sent to 
treat of their ransom. Aristodemus was em- 
ployed in this commission, but was more atten- 
tive to paying his court than performing his 
duty; and, at his return home neglected to give 
an account of his negotiation. Philip, mean 
while, whose vigilance never slept, and who 
well knew the hostile resolutions in agitation 
against lim at Athens, released the prisoners 
without ransom, and dismissed tlem with the 


6 Æschines de Falsa Legatione. 


7 Id. ibid. 8 Id. ibid. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


391 


highest expressions of regard. Moved by grati- 
tude, Stratocles appeared in the asseinbly, bla- 
zoned forth the praises of the king of Macedon, 
and loudly complained against the careless in- 
difference of Aristodenius, who had neglected 
to report his embassy.9 

The artful player, thus called upon to act his 
part, excused his omitting to relate one example 
of kindness, in a man who had recently given 
so many proofs of the most unbounded genero- 
sity. He expatiated on the candour and bene- 


‘volence of Philip, and especially on his pro- 


found respect for the republic, with which, he 
assured them, tle king of Macedon was earnest 
to conclude a peace, and even to enter into an 
alliance, on tle most honourable and advan- 
tageous terms. He probably reminded them 
of the misfortunes which had attended their 
arms since they commenced war against this 
prince. Fifteen hundred talents expended with 
disgrace; seventy-five dependent cities, includ- 
ing those of the Chalcidic region, lost irrecover- 
ably; Olynthus destroyed; Eubæa revolted; 
Athens dishonoured and exhausted; and Moce- 
don more powerful and more respected than at 
any former period. This representation did not 
exceed the truth; and the calamities of the wai 
had long inclined to peace the more moderate 
and judicious portion of the assembly. The 
artificial generosity of Philip, in his treatment 
of Phrynon and Stratocłeš, blazoned by the 
eloquence of Aristodemus, fixed the wavering 
irresolution of the multitude. The military 
preparations were suspended. Even Demos 
thenes and schines yielded to the torrent; and 
imagining that a bad peace was better than a 
bad war (since it was impossible to expect suc- 
cess from the fluctuating councils of their coun- 
try,) supported a decree!® of Philocrates for 
sending a herald and ambassadors to discover 
the real intentions of Philip, and to hearken to 
the terms of accommodation with which he had 
so long amused them. 

The ministers appointed to this commission 
seem to have been purposely chosen among men 
of opposite principles, who might mutually be 
checks on each other. Phrynon, Ctesiphon, 
Aristodemus, and Philocrates, who had uni- 
forinly testified their confidence in the king of 
Macedon, were opposed by Aschines and De- 
mosthenes, who had long discovered their sus- 
picions of that prince. To the embassy were 
added Nausiclesand Dercyllus,men distingnish- 
ed by the public offices which they had discharg- 
ed with equal patriotism and fidelity; Jatrocles, 
the chosen friend of A‘schines; and Cimon, 
illustrious for the name he bore, which descend- 
ed to him from the greatest and most fortunate 
of the Athenian commanders. The whole num- 
ber amounted to ten, besides Agalocreon of 
Tenedos, who was sent on the part of the Greek 
islands in alliance with Athens"! 

Thus far conteinporary authors agree; but in 
describing the cvents which followed the de- 
parture of the ambassadors, all is inconsistency 


9 AXschines de Fulsa Legatione. 

10 The decree was attacked by one Licinus. Demos- 
thenes defended il; and beth Demosthenes und ASschines, 
as appears from the text, were on the embassy. 

11 Deinosthen. and Æschin. de Falsa Legatione. 


392 


and contradiction. The misunderstanding that 
arose between Æschines and Demosthenes, the 
former of whom was impeached by the latter, 
furnish us, in the accusation and defence, with 
the fullest and most diffuse, but at the same 
time the least authentic, materials, that present 
themselves in any passage of Grecian history. 
The whole train of the negotiation, as well as 
the events connected with it, are represented in 
colours the most discordant; facts are asserted 
and denied; while both parties appeal to the 
memory of the assembly before which they 
spoke, to the testimony of witnesses, and even 
to the evidence of public decrees and records; 
circumstances that must appear very extraordi- 
nary, unless we consider that suborning of wit- 
nesses, perjury, and even the falsifying of laws 
and records, were crimes not unusual at Athens.! 
Amidst this confusion, the discerning eye of 
criticism would vainly endeavour to penetrate 
the truth. /£schines was indeed acquitted by 
his countrymen. But nothing positive can be 
learned from a partial sentence, pronounced 
three years after the alleged crimes had been 
committed, when the power of Philip had in- 
creased to such an alarming degree, as gave his 
faction a decided ascendant even in the Athe- 
nian assembly. 

To disentangle such perplexity, 


pa we shall keep chiefly to those facts 
te 2. which are allowed on both sides, 
nm C 348 deducing from. them such conse- 
an 347. * quences as seem most natural and 


probable. In the course of one year, 
three embassies were sent to Philip; the first 
to propose a peace, the second to ratify it, the 
third to see the conditions of it observed; and 
in that space of time Kersobleptes, being strip- 
ped of his dominions, was reduced into captivi- 
ty, and Philip having seized Thermopylæ, in- 
vaded Phocis, and destroyed the twenty-two 
cities of that province in less than twenty-two 
days. Nor was this all: a foreign prince having 
made himself master of Thermopyle and the 
Hellespont, the most valuable safeguards of 
Greece—having invaded and desolated the ter- 
ritory of a Grecian republic, the most respecta- 
ble for its antiquity, power, and wealth, the seat 
of the Amphicty onic council, and of the revered 
oracle of Delphi—T hese daring measures tended 
so little to excite the displeasure of Greece, that 
the king of Macedon had no sooner accomplish- 
ed them, than he threatened to attack Athens 
(who weakly lamented calamities which she 
had neither prudence nor courage to prevent) at 
the head of a general confederacy of the Am- 
phictyonic states. 

Such extraordinary transactions, of which 
history scarcely offers another example for the 
instruction of posterity, Demosthenes ascribes 
entirely to the corruption and perfidy of the 
Athenian ambassadors. *“ The felicity of Phi- 
lip,” he says, “consists chiefly in this; that 
having occasion for traitors, fortune has given 
him men treacherous and corrupt beyond his 
most sanguine hopes and prayers.”? This, 


12 See my Discourse on the Character and Manners of 
the Athenians, prefixed to Lysias and Isocrates. 

2 Subsequent writers have copied the language of De- 
mosthenes, xx: xenpztTæv wAnics Sindous rows ev ras 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


[Cuar. 


doubtless, is the exaggeration of an orator, de- 
sirous by every means to blacken the character 
of his colleagues in the embassy, and particu- 
larly that of his adversary Æschines. Yet it 
will appear, from the most careful survey of the 
events of those times, that the incapacity and 
neglect, if not the treason, of the Athenian mi- 
nisters, greatly contributed to the success of the 
Macedonian arms. p 

From the first moment of their departure 
from Athens, the ambassadors began to betray 
their mutual jealousies and suspicions of each 
other’s fidelity. The dangerous character of 
Philocrates was equally dreaded by Æschines 
and Demosthenes; and the latter, if we may 
believe his rival, so much disgusted the other 
ambassadors, by the morose severity of his tem- 
per, that they had almost excluded him their 
society; a circumstance rendered credible, not 
merely by the partial evidence of an adversary, 
but by the resentment and indignation dlways 
expressed by Demosthenes against the beha- 
viour of his colleagues. Having arrived at Pella, 
they were introduced to an audience; and spoke, 
as had been agreed on, in the order of their 
seniority. The discourse of schines was the 
most copious and elaborate, but seemed rather 
calculated for gaining merit with the Athenian 
assembly, than for influencing the conduct of 
Philip. “He recalled to the memory of the 
king, the favours of the Athenians towards his 
ancestors; the distressed condition of the chil- 
dren of Amyntas; the solicitations of Euridicé; 
and the generous interpositions of Iphicrates, to 
whom the family of Philip owed the crown of 
Macedon. Having touched slightly on the un 
grateful returns made by Ptolemy and Perdic 
cas, he dwelt on the injustice of those hostilities 
which Philip had committed against the re- 
public, especially in taking Amphipolis, which 
his father Amyntas had acknowledged to be a 
dependent colony of Athens. He insisted on 
the impropriety of retaining this possession, 
which as it could not be claimed by any ancient 
title, neither could it be held by the right of 
conquest, not being gained in any war between 
the two states. In the time of profound peace 
between Athens and Macedon, Philiphad taken 
from the Amphipolitans an Athenian city, 
which it concerned his justice and his honour 
to restore, without delay, to its lawful and ac- 
knowledged owners.” 

Had Zschines wished to furnish Philip with 
a pretence for protracting the negotiation, he 
could not have done it more effectually than by 
such a demand. It could not possibly be ex- 
pected, that a victorious monarch should set 
bounds to his own triumphs, in order to pur- 
clase peace by tamely surrendering one of the 
most important of his acquisitions. In this light 
the proposal appeared to Demosthenes, who 
thought that his colleague had totally forgotten 
the object of the embassy, the distressed state of 
Athens, how greatly the people had been ha- 
rassed by the war, and how eagerly they wished 
for peace. It was now his own turn to speak 
before a prince whom he had often and highly 


WOAETS soyucurTs, wOAAOUS ETE mw eossT as Tay waretdwy 
Diodorus, ubi supra. À 
3 Demosthen. and Æschin. de Falsa Legatione 


© 


XXXV.] 


offended, whose character and actions he had 
ever viewed and represented with the utmost 
severity; but whom, on the present occasion, it 
was his business to soothe rather than to irri- 
tate. The novelty of the situation might have 
disconeerted a man of less sensibility than De- 
mosthenes. The envious jealousy of his col- 
leagues was prepared to listen, with a malicious 


ear, to those irresisuble arguments which tue | 


orator is said to have promised, with a very un- 
becoming confidence; the Macedonian eourtiers 
expected some prodigy of eloquence from the 
perpetual opponent of their admired master. 
Amidst the sileut suspense of an unfavourable 
audience, Demosthenes began to speak with 
ungrateful hesitation, and after uttering a few 
obscure and interrupted sentences, his niemory 
totally forsook him. Philip endeavoured to re- 


move his embarrassment with a mortifying po- | 


liteness, telling him that he was not now ina 
theatre, where sueh an aceident might be at- 
tended with disagreeable consequences; and, 
exhorting hini to take time for recollection, and 
to pursue his intended discourse. Demosthenes 
again began, but without better success. The 
assembly beheld his confusion with a malignant 
pleasure; and the ambassadors were ordered to 
withdraw. l 

After a proper interval, they were summoned 
to the royal presence. Philip received them 
with great dignity, and answered with precision 
and eleganee the arguments respectively used by 
the several speakers, particularly those of Æs- 
ehines. The confused hints of Demosthenes he 


passed over with merited neglect; thus proving | 


to the world, that the man who kad ever ar- 
raigned him with most severity in the tumultu- 
ous assemblies of Greeee, had not dared to say 
any thing in his presence which deserved the 
smallest notice or reply. The ambassadors were 
then invited to an entertainment, when Demos- 
thenes is said to have behaved with great weak- 
ness, and where Philip displayed sueh powers 
of merriment and festivity, as eclipsed his talents 
for negotiation and war. The ambassadors were 


persuaded of his candour and sineerity, and | 


dismissed with a letter to the people of 
Athens, assuring them that his intentions were 
truly paeific, and that as soon as they eonsented 
to an alliance with him, he would freely indulge 
those sentiments of affection and respect which 
he had ever entertained for their republie. 

The mortification whieh Demosthenes had 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


reeeived, made him at first vent his chagrin by | 
eondemning the conduet of his eolleagues; but | 


when he reflected, that a fair representation of 
faets would greatly depreciate his character at 
Athens, policy prevailed over resentment. He 
began privately to tamper with his eompanions 
on the road, freely rallied the eonfusion into 
which he’ had been betrayed, extolled the ready 
genius and memory of Auschines; and endea- 
voured, by promises and flattery, to ingratiate 


himself with those whom his reecnt beliaviour | 


4 Notwithstanding the passion of the Athenians for dra- 
matic entertainments, and their consideration for the cha- 
racter of players beyond that of any other nation, they were 
indecently severe against their negligences and faults on the 
theatre; as appears from various passages of the judicial 
orationa of Demosthenes and Æschines. 


3D 


393 


had justly provoked and disgusted. In a eon- 
versation at Larissa in Thessaly, he acknow- 
ledged the masterly reasoning of the king of 
Macedon. The ambassadors all joined in the 
praises of this extraordinary man. Æschines 
admired the strength and perspicuity with which 


| he had answered their respective discourses; and 


Ctesiphon cried out in transport, that, in the 
course of a long life, he had never beheld a man 
of such a polite and engaging deportment. De- 
niosthenes then artfully said, * he apprelended 
they would not venture to make such represen- 
tations to the Athenian assembly; that their 
honour and safety required them to be consistent 
in their reports ;” to which they all assented ; 
and /Eschines acknowledges, that he was pre- 
valed on by the entreaties of his rival to pro- 
mise, that he would give a favourable and false 
account of the behaviour of Demosthenes, and 
assure the people of Athens, that he had spoken 
with dignity and firmness on the affair of Am- 
phipolis. 

According to the forms of the republie, the 
ambassadors first reported the success of their 
negotiation, and delivered the letter of Philip, 
to the senate of the Five Hundred. They ex- 
plained, in order, what each had said in presence 
of the king; when Demosthenes, rising up the 
last, affirmed with his usual oath of assevera- 
tion,> “ that the ambassadors had not spoken in 
the senate as they did before Philip; that they 
had spoken much better in Macedon :” he then 
moved, that they should be honoured with a 
crown of sacred olive, and invited next day to 
an entertainment in the Prytaneum.,’ 

The day following, they made their report to 
the asseinbly of the people; when the ambassa- 
dors, finding the subject not disagreeable to their 
hearers, expatiated on the politeness, condeseen- 
sion, eloquenee, and abilities of the prince, with 
whoin their republic was ready not only to ne- 
gotiate a peace, but to eontraet an alhanee. 
Having allowed them to exhaust this fertile 
subjeet, Demosthenes at length arose, and, after 
those eontortions of body, which, if we believe 
his adversary, wcre familiar to him, declared, 
that he was equally surprised at those who, ina 
deliberation of such importanee, eould talk of 
such trifles, and at those who eould endure to 
hear them. “ The negotiation may be briefly 
reported. Here is the decree by which we aro 
commissioned. We have executed this commis- 
sion. Here is Philip’s answer (pointing to the 
letter.) You have only to examine its eontents.” 
A confused murmur arose in the assembly,some 
applauding the strength and preeision of the 
specch, others eondemning the asperity of the 
speaker. As soon as he could be heard, De- 
mosthenes thus proceeded : “ You shall see how 
I will lop off those superfluous matters. Æs- 
chines praises the memory and eloquence of 
Philip, in which, however, I find nothing ex- 
traordinary, since any other man, placed in the 
same advantageous circumstances of rank and 


5 Mz Aiz, indecently explained “ hy Jove,” since the ex- 
pression is elliptical, and incIndes a short prayer, cuzouw 
Tov Ais owCesy re sæ s ‘My assertion is truc, may Jove 
thus protect me.” 

6 Sce the Discourse of Lysias on an accusation for cutting 
down a consecrated olive. 

7 Æschin. de Falsa Legatione. 


394 


fortune, would be equally attended to and ad- 
mired. Ctesiphon praises the gracefulness and 
dignity of his person ; my colleague Aristode- 
mus does not yield to him in these particulars. 
Others admire his mirth and gayety at table; 
yet in such qualities Philocrates excels him.? 
But this is unseasonable. Ishall therefore draw 
up a decree for convening an extraordinary as- 
sembly, to deliberate on the peace and the alli- 
ance. ’? 

The decree was propcsed on the eighth of 
March, and the assembly was fixed for the se- 
venteenth of the same month. In the interval, 
arrived, as ambassadors from Philip, Antipater, 
the most respected of his ministers; Parmenio, 
the bravest of his generals; and Eurylochus, who 
united, almost in an equal degree, the praise of 
eloquence aud valour. Parmenio had been 
employed in the siege of Halus, a place filled 
with inaleontents from Thessaly, who still re- 
sisted the Macedonian power in that country. 
That he might have leisure to join his colleagues, 
Parmenio ordered the siege to be converted into 
a blockade; and the merit of thrce such ambas- 
sadors sufficiently announced the important pur- 
poses which Philip wished to effect by the pre- 
sentnegotiation. They were received with great 
distinction by the senate, and (what seems ex- 
traordinary) lodged in the house of Demosthe- 
nes, who was careful to adorn their seats in the 
theatre, and to distinguish them by every other 
mark of honour.? Having been introduced, on 
the appointed day, into the assembly, they de- 
clared the object of their commission, to con- 
clude in the name of their master a peace and 
alliance with the people of Athens. Demosthe- 
nes, in an elaborate speech, urged the expediency 
of listening to their demands; but without neg- 
lecting the interest of the Athenian allies. Æs- 
chines delivered the same opinion, and severely 
reproached Philocrates, who urged the necessity 
of precipitating the treaty. The two first days 
were spent in debate; but on the third, the in- 
fluence of Philocrates prevailed, chiefly, if we 
believe Demosthenes, by the unexpected acces- 
sion of A‘schines to that party. He, who had 
hitherto been a strenuous defender of the inter- 
est of Kersobleptes, declared that he had now 
altered his opinion. That peace was necessary 
for Athens, and ought not to be retarded by the 
slow deliberations of other powers, That the 


circumstances of the republic were changed ;' 


and that, in their actual situation, it was an idle 
vanity to attend to those who flattered them 
with pompous panegyrics of the magnanimity 
of their ancestors; since the weakness of Athens 
was no longer called on to undertake the pro- 
tection of every state that could not defend its 
own cause.””4 

Demosthenes had formerly suspected the trea- 
chery of Æschines; but this speech fully con- 
vinced him, that if his adversary had not before 
sold himself to Philip, he had then been tam- 
pered with, and gained by the Macedonian am- 


1 Even by Demosthenes’s testimony, it required the 
combination of several Athenian characters to match the 
various excellences of Philip. 

2 Æschin. de Falsa Legatione. 

3 ZEschin. in Ctesiphont. 

4 Demosthen. de Falsa Legatione. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


te 


[Cuap. 


bassadors. But Demosthenes, and the assembly 
in general, saw the necessity of immediately 
ratifying the peace with that prince, who had 
actually taken the field in Thrace, along the 
coast of which the Athenians still possessed Ser- 
rium, Doriscus, and several other tributary 
cities. A decree was proposed for this purpose, 
and ambassadors were named, who might, with 
all convenient speed, repair to Philip, in order 
mutually to give and receive the oaths and rati- 
fications of the treaty just concluded at Athens. 
The ambassadors were Eubulus, 4schines, 
Ctesiphon, Democrates, and Cleon ; the princi- 
pal of whom, being entirely devoted to the Ma- 
cedonian interest,contrived various pretences to 
delay their departure. In this interval, Kerso- 
bleptes met with the unhappy fate of which we 
have already taken notice; and Philip, en- 
couraged by the success of his intrigues, ven- 
tured to attack the cities of Serrium and Doris- 
cus, which readily submitted to his arms.5 
Upon intelligence of the latter event, the Athe- 
nians despatched Euclides to inform the king of 
Macedon, that the places which he had taken 
helonged to Athens ; to which he coldly replied, 
that he had not been so instructed by his am- 
bassadors, nor was there any mention of those 
cities in the treaty recently signed, but not yet 
ratified, between the two powers. 

féschines and his colleagues still delayed to 
set out, although the conduct of Philip con- 
tinually urged the necessity of hastening their 
departure. They were finally ordered to be 
gone, in consequence of a decree proposed by 
Demosthenes, who was unable to prevail on the 
Athenians, till it was too late, to pay due regard 
to the interest of Kersobleptes. In twenty-five 
days the Athenian ministers arrived at Pella, a 
journey which they might have performed in 
six: and instead of directly proceeding to Phi- 
lip, who was employed in reducing the cities on 
the Prepontis, they patiently waited, above 
three weeks, the return of that monarch to his 
capital. During their residence in Pella, they 
were joined by Demosthenes, who, at his own 
request, had been added to this commission, 
under pretence of ransoming some Athenian 
captives, but in reality with a view to watch 
the conduct of his colleagues. Philip at length 
arrived: the ambassadors were called to an 
audience. On this occasion they spoke, not as 
formerly, according to their respective ages, but 
in an order, if we believe #schines, first esta- 
blished by the impudence of Demosthenes ; 
whose discourse, as represented by his adver 
sary, must have appeared highly ridiculous, 
even in an age when the decent formality of 
public transactions was little known or re- 
garded. 

Anticipating his more experienced colleagues, 
he observed, “ That they were unfortunately 
divided in their views and sentiments. That 
his own were strictly conformable to those of 
Philip. From the beginning he had advised a 
peace and alliance with Macedon. That he 
had procured all possible honours for the arn- 
bassadors of that country during their resi- 
dence in Athens, and had afterwards escorted 


5 Demosthen. Orat. v. in Philipp. 
6 Demosthen. de Falsa Legatione. 


XXXV.] 


their journey as far as Thebes. He knew that 
his good intentions had been misrepresented to 
Philip, on account of some expressions that 
had dropped from him in the Athenian assem- 
bly.. But if he had denied the superior excel- 
lence of that prince in beauty, in drinking, and 
in debate,’ it was, because he believed such 
qualities to belong to a woman, a spunge, and 
a hireling rhetorician and sophist, rather than 
to a warlike monarch, and mighty conqueror.” 
This extraordinary apology excited the derision 
of the Macedonian courtiers, and made the 
Athenian ainbassadors hold down their heads 
in confusion.8 

Æschines first recovered his composure; and 
modestly addressing Philip, observed, “ That 
the present was not a proper occasion for the 
Athenian ministers to praise or to defend their 
ownconduct. They had been deemed worthy 
of their commission by the republic which em- 
ployed them, and to which alone they were 
accountable.2 Their actual business was to 
receive Philip’s oath in ratification of the treaty 
already concluded on the part of Athens. The 
military preparations carrying on in every part 
of Macedon could not but excite their fears for 
the unhappy Phocians. But he entreated Philip, 
that, if he was determined to gratify the The- 
bans by making war on that unfortunate peo- 
ple, he would make at least a proper distinc- 
tion between the innocent and the guilty. The 
sacriligeous violators of the temple ought to 


be punished with due severity; the state itself | 
must be spared; since the laws and institutions | 


of Greece guard the safety of every Amphic- 
tyonic city. Æschines then spoke, in the se- 
verest terms, against the injustice and cruelty 
of the Thebans, who, he ventured to prophesy, 
would repay the partiality of Philip with the 
same falsehood and ingratitude with which 
they had been accustomed to requite their for- 
mer allies and benefactors.” 

The discourse of Atschines, though it could 
not be expected to move the resolutions of the 
king, was well calculated to raise the credit of 
the speaker, when it should be reported in his 
own country. Philip confined himself to vague 
expressions of friendship and respect. The 
ambassadors of Thebes were already at Pella, 
a circumstance which furnished him with a 
pretence for declining to make an explicit de- 
claration in favour of Phocis. But he hinted 
his compassionate concern for that republic; 
and requested tle Athenians to accompany him 
to Thessaly, that he might avail himself of 
their abilities and experience to settle the af- 
fairs of that country, which required his im- 
mediate presence. Extraordinary as this de- 
mand was, the Athenians readily complied with 
it, notwithstanding the king, who had ordered 
his army to march, was attended in this expe- 
dition by the ambassadors of Thebes, who, as 
well as the Athenians, were daily entertained 
at his table, and whose views were diametri- 


7 See above, p. 394. 

8 Æschin. de Falsa Legatione. 

9 The speech of A&achines. as reported by himself, is 
inimitably graceful and dignified. Acyove ove weuberay 
an Adyvasos mesrGess, &e. Vid. p. 26], et seq. edit. 
Wolf, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


395 


cally opposite to the interests both of Phocis and 
of Athens,!0 
The unhappy and distracted situ- 


Kas ation of the former republic pro- 
ie ised a speedy issue to the Sacred 
AC. 340. 


War, which, for more than two 
years, had been feebly carried on between the 
Phocians on one side, and the Thebans and 
Locrians on the other, by such petty incursions 
and ravages as indicated the inveterate rancour 
of combatants, who still retained the desire of 
hurting, after they had lost the power.!! Dur- 
ing the greater part of that time, the Athbeni- 
ans, amused by their negotiation with Philip, 
afforded no assistance to their unfortunate al- 
hes. The treasures of Delphi, immense as they 
were, at length began to fail. The Phocians, 
thus abandoned and exhausted, reflected with 
terror and remorse on their past conduct; and, 
in order to nake atonement for their sacrile- 
gious violations of the temple, instituted a ju- 
dicial inquiry against Phaleucus, their general, 
and his aceomplices, in plundering the dedica- 
tions to Apollo.!2 Several were condemned to 
death; Phaleucus was deposed; and the Pho- 
cians, having performed these substantial acts 
of justice, which tended to remove the odium 
that had long adhered to their cause, solicited 
with better hopes of success the assistance of 
Sparta and Athens. 

But the crafty Archidamus, who had long di- 


| rected the Spartan councils, considered the dis- 


tress of the Phocians as a favourable opportunity 
to urge the claim of his own republic to the su- 
perintendence of the Delphic temple; and ac- 
tually sent ambassadors into Thessaly, to con- 
fer with the king of Macedon on that subject.!3 
The Athenians paid more attention to the re- 
quest of their allies, who, as an inducement to 
excite their activity, offered to put them in pos- 
session of the towns of Nicæa, Alpenus, and 
Thronium, which commanded the straits of 
Thermopyle. But this salutary plan, which 
might have retarded the fate of Greece, was 
defeated by Phaleucus, who commanding eight 
thousand mercenaries, that acknowledged no 
authority but that of their general, established 
his head-quarters at Nicwa, and despised the 
menaces both of Phocis and of Athens. 
Mortifying as this disappointment must have 
been, it was followed by a disaster in another 
quarter still more terrible. The Phocians had 
fortified the city of Abæ, to defend their north- 
ern frontier against the depredations of the 
Locrians. The Thebans, reinforced by some 
auxiliaries of Macedon, marched against that 
place. The Phocians, with more courage than 
prudence, met them in the field; but were dce- 
feated with great slaugliter, and pursued, in 
their disordered flight, through the surrounding 
territory. A party of above five hundred took 
refuge in the temple of Abran Apollo, where 
they remained for several days, slecping under 
the porticoes, on beds of dried herbs, straw, and 
other combustible materials. An accidental 


19 Demosthen. de Fulsa Legatione. 

1? Diodor. }. xvi. p. 454. 

12 Idem. p. 453. 

13 Demosthen. and Æschin. ubi supra. 


396 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


fire, that began in the night, was communicated | he detested the insolence of Thebes; and that, 
to the whole edifice, part of which was con- | should he ever proceed to the straits of Ther- 


sumed, while the unhappy Phocians were sti- 
fled, or burnt to ashes.! 

The Thebans failed not to represent this ca- 
lamity as a judgment of heaven, against the 
daring impiety of wretches, who had ventured 
to take refuge in the temple of a god whom 
their sacrilege had long offended. They en- 
treated Philip to assist them in destroying the 
remnant of the guilty race. This was the chief 
purpose of their embassy to that prince, whom 
the Athenians, as related above, entreated to 
spare the nation, while he punished the crimi- 
nals; and the Lacedemonians, regardless of 
the fate of Phocis, thought only of making 
good their ancient claim to the guardianship of 
the Delphic temple. 

Philip treated the deputies of the three re- 
publics with apparent frankness and cordiality, 
under the veil of which he knew so well to dis- 
guise the interests of his policy and ambition. 
He assured the Thebans that his arms should 
be employed to recover for them the towns 
of Orchomenus, Corona, and Tilphosseum, 
which, ever ready to rebel against a tyrannical 
capital, had readily submitted to the Phocians, 
during their invasion of Beotia. The Phocians, 
he said, had rendered themselves the objects of 
divine displeasure ; it would be as meritorious 
to punish, as it was impious to protect them. 
He was determined that both they and their 
allies should suffer those calamities which their 
crimes so justly deserved. Thus far Philip was 
sincere; for, in these particulars, the views of 
Thebes were exactly conformable to his own. 
But in his mind he agitated other matters, in 
which the interest of Thebes interfered with 
that of Macedon. To accomplish those pur- 
poses, without offending his allies, it was ne- 
cessary to gain the ambassadors. Caresses, 
flattery, and promises,.were lavished in vain. 
Money was at length tendered with a profuse 
liberality ; but, though no man ever possessed 
more address than Philip in rendering his bribes 
acceptable, the Theban deputies remained ho- 
nest and uncorrupted, firmly maintaining to 
the end their patriotism and their honour. Phi- 
lon, the chief of the embassy, answered for his 
colleagues: ‘“ We are already persuaded of 
your friendship for us, independent of your 
presents. Reserve your generosity for our coun- 
try, on which it will be more profitably bestow- 
ed, since your favours, conferred on Thebes, 
will ever excite the gratitude both of that re- 
public and its ministers.’’? 

Demosthenes extols the dignity of this re- 
ply, as becoming rather the ambassadors of 
Athens. But these ministers, though one ob- 
ject of their commission was to save the Gre- 
cian state which the Thebans wished to de- 
stroy, discovered neither integrity nor spirit. 
All of them, but Demosthenes himself, ac- 
cepted the presents of the king of Macedon, 
who found little difficulty in persuading men, 
thus prepossessed in his favour, that he pitied 
the Phocians; that he respected Athens; that 


1 Diodorus, p. 454. 
2 Demosthen. de Falsa Legatione. 


p aaa a a a e e e a a a a a aa 


mopylæ, his expedition would be more danger- 
ous to that state than to its enemies. At pre- 
sent, however, he observed, that he had private 
reasons for managing the friendship of a people 
who set no bounds to their resentment. From 
such motives, he had hitherto declined ratifying 
the peace with Athens; but this measure he 
would no longer defer. He only entreated, 
that to save appearances with the Thebans, the 
name of the Phocians might be omitted in the 
treaty. This arduous work was at length 
brought to a conclusion; and, for the more 
secrecy, transacted in a place which Demos- 
thenes calls a tavern, adjoining to the temple 
of Pollux, in the neighbourhood of Phere. 
The Athenian ambassadors took leave, affect- 
ing to be persuaded (perhaps persuaded in re- 
ality) of the good intentions of the king of 
Macedon. About the same time, the ambas- 
sadors of Sparta departed, but with far less 
satisfaction. They either perceived, from the 
beginning, the artifices of the prince with whom 
they came to treat, or at least made such a re- 
port to Archidamus, as convinced him that his 
republic had not any advantage to expect from 
the preponderance of the Macedonian inte- 
rest, and the destruction of the Phocians; 
and that, should the Spartans persist in their 
claim to the superintendence of the Delphic 
temple, they must prepare to assert it by force 
of arms. 

Archidamus raised an army for this purpose, 
and marched towards the straits. But the in- 
trigues of Philip, as we shall have occasion to 
relate, rendered his hostility as impotent as his 
negotiations had been fruitless. From Thes- 
saly that prince had already sent a letter to the 
Athenians, couched in the most artful terms. 
He expressed his profound respect for the state, 
and his high esteem for its ambassadors; de- 
claring that he should omit no opportunity of 
proving how earnestly he desired to promote 
the prosperity aud glory of Athens. He re- 
quested that the means might be pointed out 
to Lim, by which he could most effectually gra- 
tify the people. Of the conditions of the peace 
and alliance, he was careful to make no men- 
tion; but after many other general declarations 
of his good-will, he entrusted them “not to be 
offended at his detaining their ambassadors, of 
whose eloquence and abilities he wished to 
avail himself in settling the affairs of Thes- 
saly.”9 

Soon afterwards these ambassadors returned 
home; and having given an account of their 
negotiation to the senate of the Five Hundred, 
with very little satisfaction to that select hody, 
they next appeared before the popular assem- 
bly. Æschines first mounted the rostrum, and 
in an elaborate and artful discourse, set forth 
the advantages resulting from his successful 
embassy, in which he had persuaded Philip to 
embrace precisely those measures which the 
interest of Athens required. That now, the 
people had peace instead of war, and that, 
without harassing themselves by military expe 


3 Demosthen. et /Eschin. ubi supra 


XXXV.] 


ditions, they had only to remain quietly at 
1ome, enjoying the amusements of the city, 
and in a few days they would learn that Philip 
had passed Thermopyle, to take vengeance, 
not on the Phocians, out on the Thebans, who 
had been the real authors of the war, and who, 
having entertained a design of seizing the tem- 
ple, were not the less culpable (as had been 
proved to Philip) because they had failed in 
this impious purpose. That the Beotian allies 
of Thespiz and Plate, whose hatred to Thebes 
was as inveterate as their attachment to Athens 
was sincere, would be restored to their pristine 
strength and splendour. That the Thebans, 
not the Phocians, would be compelled to pay 
the fine imposed by the Amphictyonic council, 
and to repair the fatal effects of sacrilege and 
profanation. That the magistrates of Thebes 
foresaw the hostility of Philip, and well knew 
by whom it had been excited. “ They have, 
therefore,” said Æschines, * devoted me to de- 
struction, and actually set a price upon my 
head. The people of Eubea are equally alarn- 
ed by our accommodation with Philip, not 
doubting that their island will be restored to 
us, as an equivalent for Amphipolis. Nor are 
these the only advantages of the treaty: ano- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


ther point of still higher importance, a point of | 
the most intimate concern to the public, has | 


been secured. But of this I shall speak at an- 
other time, since at present I perceive the envy 


and malignity of certain persons ready to break | 


forth.” The advantage hinted at, with such 
significant obscurity, was the recovery of Oro- 
pus, a considerable city on the Athenian fron- 
tier, which had long been subject to Thebes. 
This specious haiangue, so flattering to the in- 
dolence and vain hopes of the multitude, was 
received with general approbation, notwith- 
standing the opposition of Demosthenes, who 


declared that he knew nothing of all those great | 


advantages promised by his colleague; and that | 


he did not expect them. Atschines and Philo- 
crates heard him with the supercilious contempt 


of men who possessed a secret with which he | 


was unacquainted. But when he endeavoured 
to continue his discourse, and to expose their 
artifice and insincerity, all was clamour, indig- 
nation, and insult. Æschines bade him remem- 
ber, not to claim any share of the rewards duc 
to the important services of his colleagues. 
Philocrates, with an air of pleasantry, said, it 
was no wonder that the hopes of Demosthenes 
were less sanguine than his own, “since he 
drinks water; I wine.” This insipid jest was 
received with loud bursts of laughter and ap- 
plause, which prevented the assembly from at- 
tending to the spirited remonstrances of Demos- 
thenes. 
for thanking Philip for his equitable and friendly 
intentions, as well as for ratifying a perpetual 
peace and alliance between Athens and Mace- 
don.4 In the same decree, it was determined 
that the Phocians should submit to the Amphic- 
tyonic council, under pain of incurring the dis- 
pleasure of the republic. 

These articles, together with the secret mo- 
tives which produced them, were, by the emis- 


Demosthen. de Falsa Legatione. 


A motion was made, and agreed to, | 


3Y / 


saries of Philip, immediatly communicated to 
the Phocian ambassadors then residing at 
Athens; who, transported with joy at the pros- 
pect of averting the calamities which long 
threatened their country, lost no time in trans- 
mitting tle agreeable intelligence to their fel- 
low citizens. They concluded, with a high 
degree of probability, that, however Philip 
might deceive the Pliocians, the ministers of 
Athens could never be so bold as publicly to 
deceive the Athenians; and that, therefore, 
they could no longer entertain any reasonable 
doubt of the favourable disposition of the king 
of Maccdon. This belief was so firmly estab- 
lished, that when Archidamus marched into 
Phocis at the headsof an army in order to defend 
the temple against Philip, the Phocifins rejected 
his assistance, observing, that they feared for 
Sparta much more than for themselves; upon 
which the Lacedemonians returned into Pelo- 
ponnesus. 

Philip was now prepared for executing his 
grand enterprise. Halus, long besicged, had 
submitted to the united arms of Parmenio and 
his own. Fresh troops had arrived from Ma- 
cedon. The Athenians were appeased; the La- 
cedemonians had retired; the Phocians were 
imposed on; the Thessalians, Thebans, and 
Locrians, were ready to follow his standard. 
One obstacle only remained, and that easy to 
be surmounted. Phaleucus, who commanded 
eiglit thousand mercenaries, still kept posses- 
sion of Nicæa. But aman who had betrayed 
the interest of his own republic, could not be 
very obstinate in defending the cause of Greece. 
Philip entered into a negotiation with him, in 
order to get possession of Nicea,® without which 
it would have becn impossible to pass the Ther- 
mopyle ; and while this transaction was going 
forward, wrote repeated letters to the Atheni- 
ans, full of cordiality and affection. 

He suspected the dangerous capriciousness of 
a people, whose security might yet be alarmed; 
and whose opposition might still prove fatal to 
his designs, should they either march forth to 
the straits, or command their admiral Proxenus, 
who was stationed in the Opuntian gulf, be- 
tween Locris and Eubea, to intercept the Ma- 
cedonian convoys; for the frontiers both of 
Phocis and Thessaly having long lain waste in 
consequence of the sacred war, Philip received 
his provisions chiefly by sea. The seasonable 
professions of friendship, contained in the let- 
ters, not only kept the Athenians from listening 
to the remonstrances of Demosthenes, but pre- 
vailed on them to depute that orator, together 
with Æschines, and several others, whose ad- 
vice and assistance Philip affected to desire in 
settling the arduous business in which he was 
engaged. Demosthenes saw through the arti- 
fice of his enemies, for withdrawing him, at 
this important crisis, from his duty in the as- 
sembly: he therefore absolutely refused the 
commission, /®scliincs,on pretence of sickness, 
staid at home to watch and counteract the mea- 
sures of his rival. The other ambassadors 
departed, in compliance with the request of 


5 Demosthen. de Falsa Legatione. 
6 Diodor. l. xvi. p. 455. 


398 


Philip, and the orders of their republic, and in 
hopes of seeing a treaty fulfilled, which they 
had been taught to believe, would be attended 
with consequences equally advantageous and 
honourable.! 

While the ambassadors travelled through Eu- 
beea, in their way to join the king of Macedon, 
they learned, to their utter astonishment, the 
wonderful events that had been transacted. 
Phaleucus had been persuaded to evacuate Ni- 
cea. He retired towards the Peloponnesus, and 
embarked at Corinth, with a view to sail to 
Italy, where he expected to form an establish- 
ment. But the capricious and ungovernable 
temper of his followers compelled him to make 
a descent on the coast of Elis. After this they 
re-embarked, and sailed to Crete, where tlieir 
invasion proved fatal to their general. Having 
returned to the Peloponnesus, they were defeat- 
ed by the Elians and Arcadians. The greater 
part of those who survived the battle, fell into 
the hands of the enemy, by whom they were 
shot with arrows or precipitated from rocks. 
A feeble remnant escaped to their ships, but 
perished soon afterwards in an insurrection 
which they had excited or fomented, in the isle 
of Sicily. The destruction of this numerous 
body of men is ascribed by ancient historians? 
to the divine vengeance which pursued their 
sacrilege and impiety. It is astonishing that 
those superstitious writers did not reflect on the 
swifter and more terrible destruction that over- 
took the whole Phocian nation, by whom the 
wickedness of Phaleucus and his followers had 
been so recently condemned; and by whom, had 
not power been wanting, it would have been 
punished with an exemplary rigour. 

Philip having passed the straits of Thermo- 
pyle, was received by the Phocians as their de- 
liverer. He had promised to plead their cause 
before the Amphictyonie council, to the deci- 
sions of which that credulous people consented 
to submit, well knowing that a prince who en- 
tered Greece at the head of a numerous army 
might easily control the resolutions of the Am- 
phictyons, aud fondly believing that prince to 
be their friend. The deputies of Athens had 
not yet arrived; those of the southern republics 
had not even been summoned. The Locrians, 
Thebans, and Thessalians, alone composed the 
assembly that was to decide the fate of Phocis; 
a country which they had persecuted with un- 
relenting hostility in a war of ten years. The 
sentence was sucli as might be expected from 
the cruel resentment of the judges. It was de- 
creed that the Phocians should be excluded 
from the general confederacy of Greece, and for 
ever deprived of the right to send representa- 
tives to the council of Amphictyons: that their 
arms and horses should be sold for the benefit 
of Apollo; that they should be allowed to keep 
possession of their lands, but compelled to pay 
annually from their produce the value of sixty 
thousand talents, till they had completely in- 
demnified the temple; that their cities should be 
dismantled, and reduced to distinct villages, 
containing no more than sixty houses each, at 
the distance of a furlong from each other; and 


1 Demosthen. de Falsa Legatione. 
2 Diodorus, l. xvi. c. xx. gives this as a general opinion. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


that the Corinthians, who had recently given 
them some assistance, should therefore be de- 
prived of the presidency at the Pythian games; 
which important prerogative, together with the 
superintendence of the temple of Delphi, as well 
as the right of suffrage in the Amphictyonic 
council, lost by the Phocians, should thence- 
forth be transferred to the king of Macedon. 
It was decreed that the Amphictyons, having 
executed these regulations, should next proceed 
to procure all due repairs, and expiations to 
the temple, and should exert their wisdom and 
their power to establish, on a solid foundation, 
the tranquillity and happiness of Greece.? 

This extraordinary decree, when 


Olymp. communicated to the Phocians, filled 
cviil. 2. 1 ; bl leth ier 
A. C. 347. that miserable people with such ter- 


ror and dismay, as rendered them 
totally incapable of acting with vigour or with 
union. They took not any common measures 
for repelling the invader; a few cities only, 
more daring than the rest, endeavoured, with 
unequal strength, to defend their walls, their 
temples, and the revered tombs of their anccs- 
tors. Their feeble resistance was soon over- 
come; all opposition ceased; and the Macedo- 
nians proceeded to execute the will of the Am- 
phictyonic council with inflexible cruelty, and 
with such undisturbed order and silence as 
seemed more dreadful than the tumultuary ra- 
vages of the fiercest war. Without dropping a 
tear, or heaving a sigh, since the smallest mark 
of regret was construed into an obstinacy of 
guilt, the wretched Phocians belield the destruc- 
tion of their ancient monuments and trophies, 
their proud walls levelled with the ground, the 
fertile banks of the divine Cephissus covered 
with ruin and desolation, and the venerable 
cities of Daulis, Penopeus, Lilea, and Hyam- 
polis, which had flourished above nine centuries 
in splendour and prosperity, and which will for 
ever flourish in the song of Homer, so totally 
burned or demolished as scarcely to leave a 
vestige of their existence.4 After this terrible 
havoc of whatever they possessed most valuable 
and respected, the inhabitants were driven like 
herds of cattle to the settlements allotted for 
them, and compelled to cultivate their paternal 
fields for the benefit of stern and unrelenting 
masters. At the distance of three years, travel- 
lers, who passed through Phocis to visit the 
temple of Delphi, melted with compassion, or 
shuddered with horror, at the sight of such 
piteous and unexampled devastation. They 
turned their reluctant eyes from the shattered 
ruins of a country, and a people, once so illus- 
trious; the youth, and men of full age, had 
either perished in the war, or been dragged into 
captivity ; the populous cities were no more; 
and the villages were thinly inhabited by wo- 
inen, children, and wretched old men, whose 
silent but emphatic expressions of deep-rooted 
misery exceeded all power of words to describe.§ 

The unexpected news of these melancholy 
events reached Athens in five days. The peéo- 
ple were then assembled in the Piræus to ex- 
amine the state of their harbours and shipping. 


3 Diodor. l. xvi. c. lix. et seq. ' ; 
4 Pausanias in Phocic. et Diodor. l. xvi. c. lix. et_seq. 
5 Demosthen. et Æschin. de Falsa Legat. et de Coron. 


XXXV.] 


The dreadful intelligence filled them with con- 
sternation. They imagined that they already 
beheld the destructive armies of Macedon and 
Thessaly, excited by the inveterate hostility of 
Thebes, pouring in upon their northern troutier, 
and overwhelining the whole country with 
havoc and desolation. A decree immediately 
passed, at the motion of Callisthenes, which 
marked the utmost danger and dismay. It 
was resolved, “ that the Athenians, who usually 
resided in the country, should be summoned to 
the deience of the city; that those, within the 
distance of twelve miles round, should, along 
with their persons, transport their most valua- 
le effects into the city or the Piræus; that 
those at a greater distance should respectively 
convey themselves and their property to the 
nearest fortresses, particularly Eleusis, Phylé, 
Aphidna, and Sunium, the principal places of 
strength in the Attic territory.’ 

Tis decree shows, that terror was the first 
moveinent of the Athenians; but vengeance 
wasthe second. Reluctantly cooped up within 
their walls, they called aloud for arms: levies 
were prepared for the relief of Phocis; and their 
adiniral Proxenus, who had lately returned 
from the neighbouring coast, was ordered again 
to direct his course towards that country. The 
king of Macedun was duly attentive to those 
transactions, of which he had been regularly 
informed by his emissaries. He therefore wrote 
a letter to the Athenians, in that style of supe- 
riority which the success of his policy and of 
his arms, justly entitled him to assume. After 
acquainting them with his treatment of the 
Phocians, he mentions his being informed of 
their preparations for supporting that impious 
people, who were not included in the treaty of 
peace recently signed and ratified between 
Athens and Macedon. He exhorts them to lay 
aside this unwarrantable design, which could 
have no other effect than to show the inqiuity 
and extravagance of their conduct, in arming 
against a prince, with whom they had so lately 
concluded an alliance. “But if you persist, 
know that we are prepared for repelling your 
hostilities with equal firmness and vigour.” 

This mortifying letter was received at the 
same time that the Athenian ambassadors re- 
turned from Eubæa, and brought such accounts 
of the destruction of the Phocians, that it ap- 
peared scarcely possible to afford them any re- 
lief. All that remained was to save, from the 
unrelenting vengeance of their enemies, the 
miserable wreck of that unfortunate communi- 
ty. The Athenians passed a decree for receiv- 
ing the fugitives with kindness, and for provid- 
ing them with settlements in Attica, or in the 
foreign dependencies of the republic; a resolu- 
tion which, though it was founded on the most 
evident duties of gratitude and humanity to- 
wards ancient and faithful allies, cave great of- 
fence to the inexorable cruelty of the Thessali- 
ans and Thebans,’ 

Amidst these transactions the Macedonian 
partisans, and especially Æschines and Philo- 
crates, whose vain assurances had been attended 


6 Demosthen. de Falsa Legat. sect. 20. 
7 Demosthen. et Æschin. de Falsa Legat. sect. 20. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


399 


with such fatal effects, had just zause to dread 
the resentinent of their country. The former, 
who had been the principal agent in this dis- 
graceful.scene of intrigue and delusion, no long- 
er affected sickness; he forgot the threatenings 
denounced against him by Thebes; he disre- 
garded the Athenian decree, prohibiting any 
citizen to stir from the walls; and having wait- 
ed for, and beheld, the destruction of the Pho- 
cians with as much indifference, if we may be 

lieve his adversary, as he would have seen the 
conclusion of any ordinary affair, which con- 
cerned merely lus pecuniary interest, he repair 

ed to Philip to receive the wages of his iniquity. 
Æschines accounts for his journey at this time 
by a inore honourable, but less probable cause, 
the desire of saving the feeble and unhappy 
remnant of the Phocian nation, wlio were per- 
secuted to extremity by the barbarous ven- 
geance of their Grecian foes, and protected at 
the intercession of the Athenian orator, by the 
clemency or compassion of tle Macedonians. 
There is reason to believe that Æschines, in or- 
der to gain merit with his countrymen, whose 
resentinent he had so highly provoked, opposed 
an inhuman resolution of precipitating from 
rocks all those of the Phocians who had attain- 
ed the age of puberty. But the king of Mace- 
don, whose character was not naturally flagi- 
tious, or cruel without necessity, must, of his 
own accord, have been inclined to avert such 
an atrocious and bloody sentence, which, with- 
out promoting his interest, would haye for ever 
ruined his fame. 

This conclusion appears the more probable, 
since, we are assured, that, upon the same prin- 
ciple, but with far less success, he assumed the 
protection of the oppressed Beotians. Orcho- 
nienus, Coronea, Hyampolis, with other cities 
of less note in Beotia, were, in consequence of 
the ruin of their Phocian allies, again subjected 
to the dominion of Thebes; a republic, always 
haughty and unrelenting, who, on this occasion, 
prepared to treat the rebels with more than her 
usual insolence and cruelty. Philip espoused 
the cause of the injured with a generous ardour, 
extremely disagreeable to the Thebans. His 
humanity, whether real or affected, was loudly 
extolled by his partisans in most republics of 
Greece. It redounded, however, more to his 
own glory, than to the benefit of the afflicted 
Bæotians; who, being expelled from their own 
country by the intolerable oppression of Theban 
tyranny, sought refuge in the compassionate 
bosoin of Athens.’ 

Having finished the sacred war 


o in a manner so favourable to his own 
A C 346. interest and ambition, Philip con- 


vened the members of the Amphic- 
tyonic council, to the number of two hundred, 
and assisted in the hymns, prayers, and sacrifices 
offered to Apollo, in acknowledgment of his 
divine protection of their councils and arms. 
The name of the pious king of Macedon, who 
had been the principal instrument of their suc- 
cess, resounded in the sacred Pwans sung in ho- 
nour of the god. The Amphictyons ratified all 
the transactions of that prince, erected his sta- 
tue in the temple of Delphi, and acknowledged, 


8 Demosthen. et Auschin. de Falsa Legat. sect. 20. 


400 


by a solemn decree, the kingdom of Macedon 
as the principal member of the Hellenic body.! 
Philip at the same time appointed deputies to 
preside at the Pythian games, the celebration 
of which was nearly approaching, and to which 
most of the Grecian states had already sent 
their representatives. The Athenians, stung 
with indignation and regret, abstained from this 
festival, An embassy was therefore despatched 
to them in the name of the Ampliictyons, re- 
quiring their concurrence with measures recent- 
ly embraced by the general council of Greece; 
and remonstrating against their displeasure at 
the aggrandisement of a prince with whom 
they had so lately contracted an alliance. 

The deliberations of the Athenian assembly, 
on this occasion, showed the full extent of their 
own folly, and evinced the consummate policy 
of Philip. They acknowledged, with dejection 
and anguish, that they had neglected the many 
opportunities presented them by the favour of 
heaven, for repressing the ambition of their 
rival; that the time of acting, with vigour and 
boldness, was now no more; that the cause of 
Greece was an enipty name, since the Greeks 
surrendered their dignity to the king of Mace- 
don; and that it became their own republic to 
consult rather its safety than its honour, and to 
Maintain peace with a monarch against whom 
they were by no means prepared to wage war. 
Even Demosthenes? recommended this resolu- 
tion; lest, says he, we should offend those now 
assembled, who call themselves the Amphicty- 
ons, and thus excite a general war against our- 
selves. The Thebans, besides ancient causes of 
quarrel with us, are incensed at our harbouring 
their exiles; the Locrians and Thessalians re- 
sent our protecting the Phocians; the Argives, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


PEE 
ee 


[Cuar. 


pleased at our concurring with the views of: 
Lacedemon. If we refuse the demands of Phi- 
lip and the Amphictyons, they may assault us 
with the combined arms of all those states, 
which we are totally unable to resist. One 
point, therefore, is necessary, the continuance or 
the present peace; not that it is so very excel- 
lent, or so worthy of you; but, of what kind 
soever it may be, it were more for the interest 
of your affairs, that it never had been conclud- 
ed, than that now, when it is concluded, you 
should infringe it. This opinion was universally 
approved: Macedon was acknowledged a mem- 
ber of the Grecian confederacy ; and Isocrates, 
an Athenian of the highest merit and reputa- 
tion, addressed a discourse to Philip, in which 
he exhorted him to disdain inglorious victories 
over his countrymen and friends, to employ his 
authority to extinguish, for ever, the animosi- 
ties of Greece, and to direct the united efforts 
of that country, of which Macedon now formed 
a part, against the wealth and effeminacy of 
Persia, its ancient and natural enemy.? 
Whether these exhortations proceeded from 
the virtuous simplicity which did not suspect, 
or from the insinuating and artful policy which, 
though it suspected, hoped to prevent, the hos- 
tile projects’ of Macedon, the measures of Phi- 
lip were, doubtless, taken with too much care, 
and his plans founded too deep and firm, to be 
shaken by the specious eloquence of a rhetori- 
cian. He had long meditated the invasion of 
Asia; the conquest of the Persian empire was 
an object that might well tempt his ambition; 
but neither his own passions, nor the arguments 
of other men, could hasten, retard, or vary his 
undeviating progress in a system which could 
only be completed by consolidating his ancient, 


the Messenians, and Megalopolitans, are dis- | before he attempted new conquests, 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Foundation of Philippopolis and Cabyla—Philip’s Expedition to INyria—Alexander receives the 
Persian Ambassadors—Affairs of Greece—Demosthenes unmasks the Designs of Philip’s 
Expedition to the Peloponnesus—to Epirus—to Thrace—Diopeithes opposes him with Vigour 
—The Athenians recover Euhea—Siege of Perinthus—Philip’s Letter to the Ithenians— 
Expedition of Chares—of Phocion—uwho retrieves the Athenian Affairs in Thrace—Philip’s 
Scythian Expedition—The Incendiary Antiphon—Philip’s Intrigues embroil the Affairs of 
Greece—The third Sacred War—Philip General of the Amphictyons—Confederacy against 
that Prince—He seizes Elatea—Battle of Charonea—His Moderation in Victory—Demos- 


thenes’s Oration in Honour of the Slain. 


Y his intrigues Philip had ob- 
oa B tained more important advan- 
A. C. 345. tages, than he could have gained by 


a long series of victories. The con- 
quest of Greece was his object; he had taken 
many preliminary measures towards effecting 
this purpose; while his conduct, so far from ex- 
citing the jealousy of those fierce republics, ac- 
quired their admiration and gratitude. Instead 
of rousing the dangerous resentment of a na- 


1 Diodor. |. xvi. p. 60. 2 Demosthen. de Pace. 


tion whom he was ambitious to subdue, Philip 
disarmed the hostility of Athens, and threatened 
with the vengeance of combined Greece, the 
only republic that appeared forward to obstruct 
his designs. It seemed high time, therefore, to 
withdraw his army ; to set bounds, for the pre- 
sent, to his own triumphs; nor to attempt, with 
danger, effecting by premature force, what 


3 Isocrat. Orat. Philipp. } 
4 See the Life of Isocrates, prefixed to my translation of 
his works. 


XXXVI] 


might be safely accomplished by seasonable 
policy. Before evacuating Greece, he took care 
to place a strong garrison in Nicwa, which 
might thenceforth secure his free passage 
through the straits of Thermopyle. Mace- 
donian troops occupied the principal cities of 
Thessaly, and the strongest posts of Phocis. 
He conducted with him into Macedon eleven 
thousand Phocian captives; an acquisition 
which he regarded as not the least valuable 
fruits of his success; and of which, on his re- 
turn home, he determined immediately to avail 
himself. 

The warlike tribes of Thrace, though often 
vanquished had never been thoroughly subdued. 
In order to bridle the dangerous fury of those | 
northern barbarians, Philip built two cities, Phi- | 
lippopolis and Cabyla,® the first at the west- 
ern extremity of the country, on the contines of 
mount Rhodopé, the second towards the east, at 
the foot of mount Hemus, above a hundred and 
fifty miles distant from each other, and almost 
equally remote from the Macedonian capital. 
The Phocian captives, blended with a due pro- 
portion of Macedonian subjects, well provided | 
with arms for their defence, were sent to people 
and cultivate those new settlements, whose 
flourishing condition soon exceeded the expecta- | 
tion of their founder. At the same time, Philip | 
pale a colony in the isle of Thasos, which | 

ad formerly belonged to the Athenians; but 

that people having already lost possession of the 
gold mines at Philippi, on the neighbouring | 
coast of Thrace, seemed now so indifferent 
about the possession of Thasos, that their trans- 
ports were employed in conveying the Mace- 
donians thither.® 

In such occupations,,chiefly, Phi- 
lip employed the first year of the 

am peace, not neglecting to complete 
A. C. 344. the Mates of his capital; for 
which purpose he borrowed, as formerly, large 
sums of money from the richest citizens of 
Greece. The year following, he made an ex- 
pedition into Illyria, and, at the expense of that 
country, extended his dominions from the lake 
Lychnidus to the Ionian sea. This district, 
about sixty miles in breadth, was barbarous 
and uncultivated, but contained valuable salt- 
mines, which had occasioned a bloody war be- 
tween two neighbouring tribes. While Philip 
was absent in Illyria, an embassy arrived from 
Ochus king of Persia, who, alarmed by the 
magnificent reports of the growing greatness 
of Macedon, sent the most trusty of his minis- 
ters, who, under pretence of offering to Philip 
the friendship and alliance of the great king, 
might examine with their own eyes the strength 
and resources of a monarch, which were repre- 
sented as so formidable. 

In the absence of his father, the young Alex- 
ander did the honours of the court; and it is 
said, that during an entertainment given to 
the Persian ambassadors, the prince, who had 
not yet reached his twelfth year, discovered 
such manly and prematnre wisdom, as already 
announced the dawn of a very extraordinary 


5 Strabo, I. vii. p. 118. 
6 Demosthen. de Haloneso. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


401 


character.” Among other questions, that could 
not have been expected from his age, he inquired 
into the nature of the Persian government and 
art of war; the genius and disposition of the 
reigning sovereign ; the distance of his capital 
from the coast, and the difficulty of the inter- 
vening roads.8 Such inquiries, whatever talents 
they announced in the young prince, seem to 
prove that the conquest of Persia had been a 
frequent subject of conversation between Alex- 
ander and his instructors; and that an un- 
bounded ambition had already taken possession 
of his youthful mind. The ambassadors heard 
him with astonishment, and exclaimed with 
that freedom which so wonderfully distin- 
guishes the public transactions of ancient, from 
those of modern times, “Ours is a rich and 
powerful, but this will be truly a wise and 
great king.9 
Olymp. F Philip had no sooner returned 
wa rom lllyria, than he made an ex- 
A. C. 344, Cursion to Thessaly, and finally set- 
tled the affairs of that distracted 
country ; having taken on himself the whole 
management of the revenue, and having di- 
vided the territory into four separate govern- 
ments, in order to weaken the force of oppo- 
sition, and to render the whole province more 
patient and submissive under the dominion of 
Mecedon,'0 While Philip was thus employed 
in Thessaly, his agents were not less active in 
confirming the Macedonian authority in the isle 
of Eubæa. Nor was he satisfied with securing 
his former acquisitions; he aspired at new con- 
quests. The barren and rocky territory of 
Megara, divided by an extent of only ten miles, 
the frontier of Bæotia from the isthmus of Co- 
rinth. The industrious and frugal simplicity 
of this little republic could not defend its virtue 
against the corrupt influence of the Macedo- 
nian.!! Philip gained a party in Megara, which 
he cultivated with peculiar care; because, be- 
ing already master of Beotia, Phocis, and 
Thessaly, the narrow territory of the Megarians 
formed the chief obstacle to his free passage 
into the Peloponnesus, the affairs of which, at 
this juncture, particularly deserved his atten- 
tion. 

The Lacedemonians, repulsed by Philip, 
whom they had condescended to solicit, rejected 
by the Phocians, whom they offered to assist, 
and having lost all hopes of obtaining the guar- 
dianship of the Delphic temple, totally deserted 


7 Plutarch (in Alexandro.) expresses himself strongly on 
this subject: ‘wore exesvoug (ihe ambassadors) Guupnlery, 
xxs THY AEYOMEVTY Dirswzovu desvornta puey nyerodxs 
TES Tyv TOU watdog Oppenv Kat MEP RAOTEXY MOTUVHY, — 
Read vey 2xroduxsxv, and then the sentence may he literally 
explained ; “ So that the ambassadors wondered, and thought 
nothing of the famed abilities of Philip, compared with the 
spirit and magnanimity of his son.” I recollect not having 
met with “ey “Aowexyporuxy in the writers of the Socratie¢ 
ave; but it is a good word to mark the churacter of a per- 
son “ who busies himself about great objects.” 

8 Plutarch. in Alexand. 

9 I have used a litle freedom with the words of Plu- 
tarch, ws o 728s ovTog Cxrsrcus ey 2ç* o St ymsregos TOV- 
cioc, Plut. Orat. ii. de Fortun. Alexand. 

10 Demosth. Philipp. iii. 

11 Demosth. de Falsa Legatione, et Philipp. iii. In 
Philipp. iv. he speaks as if Philip had made some apen at- 
tempt against Megara, in which he had failed: taurye 
cs Ev6os%5) OAbyueouuEunc, Mey aoa sxrw FALAUIKGOVY 
p. 54. 


402 5 


a scene of action, in which they could expect 
neither profit nor honour, and confined their 
politics and their arms within the narrow circle 
of their own peninsula. For almost two years, 
Archidamus had laboured with undivided atten- 
tion, and with his usual address and activity, 
to extend the pretensions and the power of 
Sparta over the territories of Messené, Argos, 
and Arcadia. His measures, planned with 
prudence, and conducted with vigour, were at- 
tended with success, though the inhabitants of 
the dependent provinces bore with much regret 
and indignation the yoke of a republic, which 
they had formerly spurned as oppressive and in- 
tolerable. Their murmurs and discontents were 
inflamed into hostility by the Thebans, the 
eternal enemies of Sparta, and, at that time, 
closely allied with the king of Macedon. To 
this monarch the Thebans applied, requesting 
him not to permit the destruction of their con- 
federates in the Peloponnesus. The intrigues 
and money of Philip had already gained him a 
considerable influence in that country, which 
he was glad of an opportunity to increase. To 
justify his proceedings for this purpose, he pro- 
cured a decree gf the Amphictyonic council, 
requiring him to check the insolence of Sparta, 
and to protect the defenceless communities 
which had so often been the victims of her ty- 
ranny and cruelty. Encouraged by this reso- 
lution of the Amphictyons, and impelled by his 
own ambition, Philip sent troops and money 
into the Peloponnesus, and prepared to march 
thither in person, at the head of a powerful 
army.! 

These transactions excited new commotions 
and alarms throughout most countries of 
Greece. The Corinthians,? jealous of the 
power of a prince, who, at the close of the Pho- 
cian war, deprived them of their ancient pre- 
rogatives and honours, and who, still more re- 
cently, had taken possession of Leucas, a city 
in Acarnania, and of Ambracia in Epirus, both 
colonies of Corinth, determined to oppose his 
passage into the Peloponnesus. Weapons and 
defensive armour were provided, the walls and 
fortifications were repaired, mercenary troops 
were levied, the citizens exercised in arms, tlie 
whole republic glowed with the ardour of mili- 
tary preparation ; insomuch that Diogenes the 
Cynic, who lost no opportunity to deride the 
follies of his contemporaries, beholding with 
just contempt the hurry and vain bustle of the 
effeminate Corinthians, that seemed so ill cal- 
culated to contend with the active vigour of 
Philip, began to roll about his tub,? lest he 
should be the only person unemployed in so 
busy a city. 

The Laced#monians, mean while, not less 
alarmed, but always better prepared for war, 
solicited the assistance of Athens. The latter 
state had received a considerable accession of 
strength, as well as of just honour and respect, 


1 Demosth. de Pace. | 

2 Lucian de Conscribend. Histor. 

3 Auct. apud Brucker. in Vit. Diogen. That learned | 
writer has collected all that is written for and against | 
the tuh of Diogenes. Were authors less explicit, the movea- 
ble habitation of this philosopher would be sufficiently at- 
tested by ancient monuments. See Winckelmann, d’Han- 
earville &c. | 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


from its hospitable reception of the distressed 
exiles from Phocis and Beotia. It derived new 
consideration and lustre from the general con- 
gress of ambassadors from Sparta, Thebes, Ma- 
cedon, Argos, Messené, and Arcadia, who, after 
a long interval of time, again condescended to 
assert their respective claims before the Athe- 
nian assembly. The Lacedemonians represent- 
ed the league, formed against theniselves, as 
alike dangerous to Athens and to Sparta; that 
the ambition of Philip would not rest satisfied 
with a partial conquest; his imagination already 
grasped the dominion of Greece ; and now was 
the only time for the two leading republics, who 
had ever mutually assisted each other in seasons 
of calamity, to make a firm stand, and to exert 
their utmost vigour in defence of their own and 
the public safety, so shamefully abandoned by 
the Thebans, and by the mob of Peloponne- 
sus.4 The Thebans joined with the minister? 
of Phiiip in calling on the Athenians to adhere 
strictly to their treaty of peace recently con- 
cluded with that prince ; they endeavoured, by 
art and sophistry, to varnish or to palliate such 
deeds of fraud or violence as could not be alto- 
gether denied; and laboured with the utmost 
assiduity to separate the views and interests of 
Athens and Lacedemon on this important 
emergency. The ambassadors of the inferior 
states of Peloponnesus loudly complained, that 
the Athenians, who affected to be the patrons 
of liberty, should favour the views of Sparta. 
which had so long been the scourge of Greece 
They represented this conduct as not only un- 
just and cruel, but contradictory and absurd ; 
and used many plausible arguments to deter the 
people of Athens, who still strenuously asserted 
the freedom of Beotia, from taking such a part 
in the present quarrel as might tend to rivet 
the chains of Peloponnesus. 

The Athenian orators, many of them crea- 
tures of Philip, exhorted their countrymen not 
to break too hastily with a prince with whom 
they had so recently concluded an alliance, nor 
imprudently renew a bloody and destructive 
war, out of which they had been lately extri- 
cated ‘with so much difficulty. They observed, 
that although the measures of Philip, since the 
conclusion of the peace, had indeed been more 
agreeable to the Thebans than to the Athenians, 
he had considered himself as bound in justice to 
chastise the sacrilege of the Phocians. Nor was 
he altogether at liberty to follow his own incli- 
nations ; surrounded by the Thessalian cavalry 
and the Theban infantry, he was compelled to 
treat the enemies of those states with a severity 
which his own feelings disapproved. But the 
time was arrived when he might act with more 
independence and dignity ; and that, could any 
credit be given to report, he was already prepar- 
ing to rebuild the ruined cities of Phocis and 
to fortify Elate, on the frontier of that terri- 
tory, by which means he might thenceforth re- 
strain and bridle the insolent cruelty of Thebes. 
These observatious, however improbable, re- 
ceived great force from the peaceful, or rather 
indolent disposition of the people, who, though 
they heard with pleasure those who magnified 


4 Ox 2.05 Hsaorovygrou, Teocrat. in Archidam. 


XXXVI] 


their ancient grandeur, and inveighed against 
the injustice and ambition of Philip, were 
averse to employ either their money or their 
personal service, in such active measures, as 
could alone set bounds to the Macedonian en- 
croachments. ; i 
Demosthenes, last, arose, and pronounced a 
discourse, whìch the king of Macedon is said to 
have read with a mixture of terror and admira- 
tion.5 ‘When you hear described, men of 
Athens! the continual hostilities by which Phi- 
hp violates the peace, I observe that you approve 
the equity and patriotism of those who support 
the rights of the republic: but while nothing is 
done, on account of which it is worth while to 
listen to such speeches, our affairs are brought 
to such a pass, that the more clearly we convict 
Philip of perfidy towards you, and of hostile 
designs against Greece, the more difficult it is to 
propose any seasonable advice. The cause of 
this difficulty is, that the encroachments of am- 
bition must be repelled, not by words, but by 
deeds. If speeches and reasonings sufficed, we 
should long ere now have prevailed over our ad- 
versary. But Philip excels in actions as much 
as we do in arguments; and both of us obtain 
the superiority in what forms respectively the 
chief object of our study and concern; we in 
our assemblies, Philip in the field. 
“Immediately after the peace, the king of 
Macedon became master of Phocis and Ther- 
mopyle, and made such a use of these acquisi- 
tions as suited the interest of Thebes, not of 
Athens. Upon what principle did he act thus? 
Because, governed in all his proceedings, not 
by the love of peace and justice, but by an in- 
satiable lust of power, he saw the impossibility 
of bending the Athenians to his selfish and ty- 
rannical purposes. He knew that the loftiness 
of their character would never stoop to private 
considerations, but prefer to any advantage that 
he might offer them, the dictates of justice and 
of honour; and that neither their penetration, 
nor their dignity, could ever be prevailed on to 
sacrifice to a partial and temporary interest, 
the general safety of Greece; but that they 
would fight for each member of the confederacy 
with the same ardour as for their own walls. 
The Thebans he judged (and he judged aright) 
to be more assailable; he knew their folly and 
their meanness to be such, that provided he 
heaped benefits on themselves, they would as- 
sist him to enslave their neighbours. Upon the 
same principle he now cultivates, in preference 
to yours, the friendship of the Messenians and 
Argives; a circumstance, Athenians! which 
highly redounds to your honour, since Philip 
thus declares his persuasion, that you alone have 
wisdom to understand, and virtue to oppose, his 
designs; that you foresee the drift of al] his nego- 
tiations and wars, and are determined to be the 
incorruptible defenders of the common cause. 
Nor is it without good grounds that he enter- 
tains such an honourable opinion of you, and 
the coutrary of the Thebans and Argives. When 
the liberties of Greece were threatened by Per- 
sia, as they now are by Macedon, the Thebans 
basely followed the standard of the invaders ; 


5 Plut.in Vit Demosth. in lib. de dec, Orator. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


403 


the Argives did not oppose their arms; while 
the magnanimous patriots, from whom you are 
descended, spurned offers, highly advantageous, 
made them by Alexander of Macedon, the an- 
cestor of Philip, who acted as the ambassador 
of Persia; and, preferring the public interest to 
their own, provoked the devastation of their 
territory, and the destruction of their capital, 
and performed, in defence of Greece, those un- 
rivalled exploits of heroism which can never be 
celebrated with due praise. For such reasons, 
Philip chooses for his allies, Thebes, Argos, and 
Messené, rather than Athens and Sparta. The 
former states possess not greater strength, 
wealth, fleets, harbours, and armies; they have 
not more power, but less virtue. Norcan Philip 
plead the merits of their cause; since, if Che- 
ronga and Orchomenus are justly subject to 
Thebes, Argos and Messené are justly subject 
to Lacedgwinon; nor could it be equitable to 
enslave the inferior cities of Beotia, and at the 
same time to teach those of Peloponnesus to 
rebel. 

“ But Philip was compelled to this conduct 
(for this is the only remaining argument that 
can be alleged in his defence.) ‘Surrounded 
by the Thessalian cavalry and Theban infantry, 
he was obliged to assist allies whom he dis- 
trusted, and to concur with measures which he 
disapproved. Hence the severe treatment of 
Phocis, hence the cruel servitude of Orchomenus 
and Cheronwa. The king of Macedon, being 
now at liberty to consult the dictates vf his own 
humanity and justice, is desirous to re-establish 
the republic of Phocis; and, in order to bridle 
the insolence of Thebes, actually meditates the 
fortifying of Elatewa.’ This, indeed, he medi- 
tates, and will meditate long. But he does not 
meditate the destruction of Lacedemon. For 
this purpose he has remitted nioney, he has 
sent his mercenaries, he is prepared, himself, to 
march at the lead of a powerful army. His 
present transactions sufficiently explain the mo- 
tives of his past conduct. It is evident that he 
acts from system, and that his principal batteries 
are erected against Athens itself. How can it 
be otherwise? He is ambitious to rule Greece ; 
you alone are capable to thwart his measures. 
He has long treated you unworthily; and he is 
conscious of his injustice. He is actually con- 
triving your destruction, and he ìs sensible that 
you see through his designs. For all these rea- 
sons he knows that you detest him, and that 
should he not anticipate your hostility, he must 
fall a victim to your just vengeance. Hence he 
is ever active and alert, watching a favourable 
moment of assault, and practising on the stupi- 
dity and selfishness of the Thebans and Pelo- 
ponnesians; for if they were not stupid and 
blind, they might perceive the fatal aim of the 
Macedonian policy. I once spoke$ on this sub- 
ject before the Messenians and Argives; my 
discourse, which was useless to them, may, 
perhaps, not unseasonably be repeated to you. 
“Men of Argos and Messené! you remember 
the time when Philip caressed the Olynthians, 
as he now does you: how highly, do you think, 
that infatuated people would have been offend- 


6 During his embassy to Peloponnesus, mentioned above 


404 


ed, had any man talked against the benefactor, 
who had generously bestowed on them Anthe- 
mus and Potidea? Had any man warned them 
against the dangerous artifices of Philip, would 
they have listened to his advice? Yet, after en- 
joying for a moment the territories of their 
neighbours, they were for ever despoiled of their 
own. Inglorious was their fall; not conquered 
only, but betrayed and sold by one another. 
Turn your eyes to the Thessalians. When Phi- 
lip expelled their tyrants, could the Thessalians 
ever conjecture that the same prince would sub- 
ject them to the creatures of Macedon, still more 
tyrannical and oppressive? When he restored 
them to their seat and suffrage in the Amphic- 
tyonic council, could they have been persuaded 
that he would one day deprive them of the 
management of their own revenues? As to you, 
Messenians and Argives! you have beheld Phi- 
lip smiling and deceiving; but beware! pray to 
heaven, that you may never behold him insult- 
ing, threatening, and destroying. Various are 
the contrivances which communities have dis- 
covered for their defence; walls, ramparts, bat- 
tlements, all of which are raised by the labour 
of man, and supported by continual expense 
and toil. But there is one common bulwark, 
which only the prudent employ, though alike 
useful to all, especially to free cities against 
tyrants. What is that? Distrust. Of this be 
mindful; to this adhere; preserve this carefully, 
and no calamity can befall you.” 

Demosthenes then read to the assembly the 
schedule of an answer, which he advised to be 
given to the ambassadors, and which was en- 
tirely favourable to the Lacedemonians. At 
the same time he exhorted his countrymen to 
deliberate with firmness, yet with temper, on 
the means by which they might resist the com- 
mon enemy; “an enemy with whom he had 
exhorted them to maintain peace, as long as that 
seemed possible; but peace was no longer in 
their power; Philip gradually carried on a vast 
system of hostile ambition, dismembering their 
possessions, debauching their allies, paring their 
dominions all around, that he might at length 
attack the centre, unguarded and defenceless.” 
Had the orator stopped here, his advice might 
have been followed with some useful conse- 
quences. But in declaiming against the en- 
croachments of Macedon, his resentment was 
naturally inflamed against Philocrates, Æschi- 
nes, and their associates, whose perfidious in- 
trigues and machinations had produced the 
public danger and disgrace. He strongly re- 
commended to the injured people to impeach, 
condemn, and consign to due punishment those 
detestable traitors. This counsel was not given 
in vain to the litigious Athenians, who were 
better pleased to attend the courts of justice at 
home, than to march into the Peloponnesus. 
The city resounded with the noise of trials and 
accusations. Philocrates was banished,? aud 
Æschines nearly escaped the same fate, by ex- 
posing the profligate life of his accuser Timar- 
chus.3 

Philip, mean while, unopposed and unob- 


1 Demosthen. Orat. ii. in Philipp. 
2 #schin. in Ctesiphon. 
3 Argum in Eschin. Orat. in Timarch. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


{[Cuap. 


served by his enemies, was sailing with a power- 
ful armament towards Cape Tenarus, the most 
southern promontory of Laconia. Having land- 
ed there without opposition, he was joined by 
the Messenians, Arcadians, and Argives. The 
united army, after ravaging the most valuable 
part of the Lacedemonian territories, besieged 
and took Trinasus, a maritime city of consi- 
derable strength and importance. The terror 
occasioned among the Spartans by these misfor- 
tunes, was heightened by extraordinary meteors 
in the air, whose unusual redness seemed to 
presage some dreadful calamity.4 The alarm 
was so general, that it has been thought worth 
while to record the saying of a Spartan youth, 
who remained unmoved amidst the public con- 
sternation. Being asked, * Whether he was 
not afraid of Philip?” “ Why,” replied the 
generous youth, “should I fear him? he cannot 
hinder ine from dying for my country.”> But 
this manly resolution no longer animated the 
great body of the Spartan nation. Unable to 
meet the invader in the field, they sent Agis, 
the son of king Archidamus, to propose terms 
of accommodation, or rather to submit their 
whole fortune to the disposal of the Macedo- 
nians. The young prince coming alone and un- 
attended, Philipexpressed his surprise. What, 
have the Spartans sent but one!” “An I not 
sent to one?” was the manly reply of Agis.§ 
This was the expiring voice of Spartan pride; 
for the king of Macedon, though unwilling to 
provoke the despair of a people, whose degene- 
rate virtue might yet be animated by the insti- 
tutions of Lycurgus and the example of Leoni- 
das, compelled them to resign their pretended 
authority over Argos, Messené, and Arcadia; 
and settled the boundaries of those republics in 
a manner highly agreeable to the wishes of his 
confederates. Before leaving the Peloponne- 
sus, he solemnly renewed his engagements to 
protect them ; and, in return, only required, on 
their part, that the magistracy in Argos should 
be entrusted to Myrtis, Teledamus, and Mna- 
sias; in Arcadia, to Cercidas, Hieronymus, and 
Eucampidas; in Messené, to Neon and Thra- 
sylochus, the sons of Iphiades; men whose 
names would merit eternal! oblivion, if Demos- 
thenes had not justly branded them as traitors ;7 
but a more impartial, and not less judicious 
writer,* that by early espousing the interest of 
Philip, they acquired many important advan- 
tages for their respective communities; that 
their sagacity having foreseen the final preva- 
lence of the Macedonian power and policy over 
the weakness and folly of Greece, they acted 
wisely in courting the rising fortune of a prince, 
who was, at length, enabled to take complete 
vengeance on his enemies; a vengeance, which 
the Peloponnesians escaped by their own pru- 
dence and foresight, and from which the Athe- 
nians, after long provoking it, were finally de- 


4 Plin. Hist. Nat. l. ti. c. xxxvi. 

5 Frontin. l. iv. c. v. 

6 Plut. Apophth. 

7 Ilxex yxe Tois EAAncsy, OU Tis, AAAA MATIV OMOIOS y 
Cogxv meooTwv xati Swecdoxwy xai sois EXIpwY avoewmaY, 
ouvs ôy yevsrixiy ornv ovdess ww mMEOTEEOV psuyyTZi yi- 
yovviæzv. These traitors are named in Philipp. iii. et in 
Orat. de Corona. 

8 Pol b. iii. 72. 


XXXVL] 


livered by the love of glory and magnanimity, 
which regulated the conduct, and adorned the 
victory, of Philip. 

_ Having settled the affairs of Peloponnesus, 
the king of Macedon marched through that 
country amidst the acclamations of the people, 
who vid with each other in bestowing crowns 
and statues, the usual marks of public grati- 
tude and admiration, on a prince who had 
generously rescued them from the cruel yoke of 
Sparta. At Corinth he passed some days in 
the house of Demaratus, a man totally devoted 
to his service; and assisted aft the games and 
spectacles, which were celebrated in that city, 
by an immense concourse of people from the 
neighbouring republics. The turbulent Co- 
rinthians, who, besides their innate hatred of 
kings, had particular causes of animosity against 
Philip, did not conceal their sentiments; and 
their inhospitable insolence was abetted by 
many Peloponnesians, who profited of the 
liberty of the place, and of the occasion, to tes- 
tify their rooted aversion to the king of Mace- 
don, and their unwillingness to owe their free- 
dom and their safety to the interposition of a 
foreign tyrant. Philip was strongly urged by 
his courtiers to punish their ingratitude; but he 
knew how to digest an affront,? when forgive- 
ness was more useful than vengeance ; and re- 
pressed the unseasonable indignation of his 
attendants, by observing, with admirable pa- 
tience, “ Were I to act with severity, what must 
I expect from men, who repay even kindness 
with insult.”!6 l 

Philip proceeded from Corinth 


Olymp. by the nearest route into Macedon, 
Gix. 1, where h tinued the remainder 
A.C. 344 r e continue e 


of that year, directing the improve- 
ments that were carrying on in his kingdom, 
and inspecting with particular care the educa- 
tion of his son Alexander, whose capacious and 
fervid mind, like a rich and luxuriant soil, 
producing promiscuously flowers and weeds, 
strongly required the hands of early culture." 
But these useful occupations did not divert his 
attention from the politics of neighbouring 
states. He extended the boundaries of Epirus, 
then governed by his brother-in-law Alexander, 
the most faithful and devoted of his vassals, by 
adding to that little principality the province 
of Cassiopea, which was chiefly inhabited by 
Elian colonies. At the same time he exercised 
his fleet by wresting Halonnesus, an island 
near the coast of Thessaly, from the hands of 
corsairs, and kept possession of his conquest, 
without paying any regard to the claim of the 
Athenians, the ancient and lawful proprietors 
of the island.!2 
Next year Philip was summoned 
cio into Upper Thrace, by a rebellion 
A. C. 343. of the petty princes in that conn- 
try, fomented by Amadocus king 
of the Odrysians. The warlike tribes of that 
great nation, acting with little concert or union, 
were successively subdued; and the dexterity 


9 Longinus has preserved the expression of Theopompus, 
t that Philip could easily swallow affronts ” 

10 Pint. in Alexand. 

11 Ibid. 

12 Demosthen. Orat. de Halon. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


405 


of the king of Macedon seconding his usual 
good fortune, he soon ranked the most obstinate 
of his enemies in the number of his vassals or 
courtiers.!3 At his return from the inhospitable 
wilds of Thrace, he received into his protec- 
tion the city and republic of Cardia, occupying 
the neck of land which joins the Thracian 
Chersonesus to the continent. The rest of the 
peninsula had long been subject to the Athe- 
nians, whose authority the citizens of Cardia 
always set at defiance. The Athenians had 
lately strengthened the Chersonesites by a new 
colony, which had continual disputes with the 
Cardians about the extent of their boundaries. 
Matters had actually come to a crisis, and the 
Cardians were ready to be overwhelmed by 
the strength and numbers of the enemy, when 
they were seasonably defended by the Mace- 
donian arms.!4 

The seizing of Halonnesus, the conquering 
of Grecian colonies for the tyrant of Epirus, 
above all, the open assistance given to their in- 
veterate enemies, the Cardians, once more 
roused the Athenians from their lethargy. 
These fresh insults brought back to their re- 
collection the ancient grounds of animosity, 
and the manifold injuries which they had suf- 
fered since the conclusion of the peace with 
Macedon. But instead of opposing Philip with 
arms, the only means by which he might yet 
be resisted with any hope of success, they em- 
ployed the impotent defence of speeches, reso- 
lutions, and embassies. Their complaints were 
loud and violent in every country of Greece., 
They called the attention of the whole confe- 
deracy to the formidable encroachments of a 
Barbarian, to which there seemed no end ; and 
exhorted the Greeks to unite in repressing his 
insolent usnrpation.!5 

Philip, who then agitated schemes from which 
he wished not to be diverted by a war with the 
Athenians, sent proper agents throughout 
Greece, to counteract the inflammatory re- 
monstrances of that people; and despatched 
to Athens itself, Python of Byzantium, a man 
of a daring and vigorous mind; but who con- 
cealed, under that passionate vehemence of 
language which seems to arise from conviction 
and sincerity, a mercenary spirit, and a perfi- 
dious heart. Python had long ago sold him- 
self, and, as far as depended on himself, the in- 
terest of his country, to the king of Macedon, 
from whom he now conveyed a letter to the 
senate and people of Athens, written with that 
specious moderation and artful plausibility, 
which Philip knew so well to assume in all his 
transactions. “ He offered to make a present 
to the Athenians of the island of Halonnesus, 
and invited them to join with him in purging 
the sea of pirates: he entreated them to refer 
to impartial arbitrators all the differences that 
had long subsisted between the two nations, 
and to concert amicably together such commer- 
cial regulations as would tend greatly to the 
advantage of both. He denied that they could 
produce any proof of that duplicity on his part, 


13 Diodor. |. xvi. p. 464. 

14 Demosth. Orat. de Halon. p. 34. et Plut. in Vit. Eu 
men. 

15 Demosthen. de Cheroneso, p. 35, et seq. 


406 


of which they so loudly complained. That for 
himse.!, he. was ready not only to terminate all 
disputes with them by a fair arbitration, but to 
compel the Cardians to abide by the award ; 
and he concluded, by exhorting them to distrust 
those designing and turbulent demagogues, 
whose selfish ambition longed to embroil the 
two countries, and involve them in the horrors 
of war.! 

The subtle artifices of Philip, though sup- 
ported on this occasion by the impetuous elo- 
quence of Python, were overcome by Hegesip- 
pus and Demosthenes, who refuted the various 
articles of the letter with great strength and 
perspicuity, and unveiled the injustice of Philip 
with such force of evidence, that the Athenians 
resolved upon sending a considerable arinament 
to the Chersonesus, to protect their subjects in 
that peninsula.? Diopeithes, who commanded 
the expedition, was a determined enemy to the 
Macedonians, and a man of courage and en- 
terprise. Before he arrived in the Chersonesus, 
Philip, trusting to the effect of his letter and 
intrigues, had returned into Upper Thrace. Dio- 
peithes availed himself of this opportunity to 
act with vigour. Having provided for the de- 
fence of the Athenian settlements in Thrace, 
he made an incursion into the neighbouring 
country ; stormed the Macedonian settlements 
at Crobylé and Tiristasis; and having carried 
off many prisoners, and a considerable booty, 
lodged them in the safe retreat of the Cherso- 
nesus. On this emergency, Amphilochus, a 
Macedonian of rank, was sent as ambassador, 
to treat of the ransom of prisoners; but Dio- 
peithes, regardless of this character, ever held 
sacred in Greece, cast him in prison, the more 
surely to widen the breach between Athens and 
Macedon; and, if possible, to render it irrepa- 
rable. With equal severity he treated a herald, 
whom he had taken in his late excursion, charg- 
ed with letters from Philip; which were sent 
to Athens, and read in full assembly. 

The king of Macedon, when informed of 
these hostilities and insults, gave free scope to 
his complaints and threats; and his emissaries 
had an easier game at Athens, as Diopeithes 
had not only violated the peace with Macedon, 
but, in order to maintain his troops, which 
were very sparingly supplied by the republic, 
levied considerable contributions from the 
Greek settlements in Asia. The partisans of 
Macedon inveighed against this commander as 
a robber and pirate, the common enemy of 
Greeks and Barbarians; Philip’s letters de- 
manded vengeance from the justice of Athens ; 
if not, he would be his own avenger; the per- 
sonal enemies of Diopeithes joined in the out- 
cry, and insisted, that such a daring offender 
ought immediately to be recalled, and punished 
for his misconduct. 

On this occasion Demosthenes undertook to 
defend the accused general, whose measures he 
warmly approved; and metives of private 
friendship heightening the ardour of patriot- 
ism, render his discourse on the affairs of the 


l Demosthen. seu Hegesipp. de Halon. p. 33, et seq. 
2 Ibid. 


3 Epistol. Philipp. et Liban. Argum. in Demosth. Orat. 
de Chersoneso. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


Chersonesus one of the most animated and in- 
teresting of his productions. The impeach- 
ment of Diopeithes he ascribes entirely to ma- 
lice or perfidy, which had been too successfully 
employed to withdraw the attention of the 
Athenians from the main object of their con- 
cern, the continual encroachments of Philip, to 
unjust complaints and calumnies against their 
fellow citizens. Diopeithes, if really criminal, 
might be recalled, and punished whenever they 
thought proper. A simple mandate from the 
republic could, at any time, reduce him to his 
duty. But Philip, the public enemy, who was 
continually infringing the peace, who, before 
the expedition of Diopeithes, had oppressed the 
Chersonesites, had stormed Serrium and Do- 
riscus, how was Philip to be restrained, unless 
they repelled force by force? Instead of recall- 
ing their troops from the Chersonesus on the re- 
monstrance of a crafty tyrant, who would not 
acknowledge himself at war with them, till he 
assaulted the walls of Athens, they ought to 
exert their utmost ability in augmenting the 
army in that quarter. Should their forces be 
withdrawn, Philip would wait the approach of 
winter, or the setting in of the Etesian winds, 
to fall on the Chersonesus. Will it then be 
sufficient to accuse Diopeithes? Or will this 
save our allies? * O, but we will sail to their 
relief.” But if the winds will not permit you? 
Even should our enemy attack, not the Cher- 
sonesus, but Megara or Chalcis, as he lately 
did Oreum, would it not be better to oppose 
him in Thrace, than to carry the war to the 
frontiers of Attica? The exactions demanded 
by Diopeithes from the Asiatic Greeks are jus- 
tified by the example of all his predecessors, 
who, according to the strength oftheir respect- 
ive armaments, have always levied proportional 
contributions from the colonies; and the peo- 
ple who grant this money, whether more or 
less, do not give it for nothing. Itis the price 
for which they are furnished with convoys to 
protect their trading vessels from rapine and 
piracy. If Diopeithes had not that resource, 
how could he subsist his troops, he who receives 
nothing from you, and who has nothing of his 
own? From the skies? No; but from what he 
can collect, and beg, and borrow. Who does 
not perceive that this pretended concern for the 
colonies, in men who have no concern for their 
country, is one of the many artifices employed 
to confine and fix you to the city, while the 
enemy keeps the field, and manages the war 
at pleasure? That such traitors should exist, is 
less surprising than that you should patiently 
receive from them such counsels, as Philip him- 
self would dictate. For what else could the 
king of Macedon, who understands his own 
interest so well, advise, but that you should re- 
main quietly at home, decline personal service 
in the war, deny pay to your soldiers, revile 
and insult your general? When a man, hired 
to betray you, rises up in the assembly, and de- 
clares Chares or Diopeithes to be the cause of 
your calamities, such a hypocrite is heard with 
satisfaction. You despise the voice of him, 
who, animated by a sincere love for his coun- 


4 Demosthen. Orat. de Chersoneso. 


XXXVI] 


try, calls out, “Be not deceived, Athenians! 
Philip is the real cause of all your misfortunes 
and disgrace.” The disagreeable truth renders 
the man who declares it odious; for the insi- 
dious discipline of certain ministers has so 
changed your principles and characters, that 
you are become fierce and formidable in your 
courts of justice, but tame and contemptible in 
the field. You rejoice, therefore, to hear your 
distress charged on those whom you can punish 
at home; but are unwilling to believe that it 
proceeds from a public enemy, whom you must 
oppose with arms in your hands. Yet, Athe- 
nians, if the states of Greece should thus call 
you to account for your conduct: ‘Men of 
Athens, you are continually sending embassies 
to assure us, that Philip is projecting owr ruin, 
and that of all the Greeks. But O, most 
wretched of mankind! when this common foe 
was detained six months abroad by sickness, 
the severity of winter, and the armies of his 
enemies, did you profit by that opportunity to 
recover your lost possessions? Did you restore 
even Eubeea to liberty, and expel those troops 
and tyrants who had been placed there in am- 
bush, and directly opposite to Attica? No. You 
have remained insensible to your wrongs, and 
fully convinced us, that were Philip ten times 
to die, it would not inspire you with the least 
degree of vigour. Why then these embassies, 
these accusations, all this unnecessary ferment!’ 
If the Greeks should ask this, what could we 
answer? I know not. 

“ There are men who think to perplex a well- 
intentioned speaker by asking, What ought we 
to do? My answer is sincere, None of those 
things which you do at present. I explain my 
opinion at greater length, and may you be as 
ready to receive, as to ask, advice! First of all, 
you must hold it as a matter of firm belief, that 
Philip has broken the peace, and is at war with 
your republic: that he is an enemy to your 
vity, to the ground on which it stands, to all 
those who inhabit it, and not least to such as 
are most distinguished by his favours. The 
fate of Euthycrates and [asthenes,5 citizens of 
Olynthus, may teach our traitors the destruc- 
tion that awaits them, after they have surren- 
dered their country. But, though an enemy to 
your city, your soil, and your people, Philip is 
chiefly hostile to your government, which, 
though ill fitted to acquire, or to maintain, do- 
minion over others, is admirably adapted to de- 
fend both yourselves and them, to repel usur- 
pation, and to humble tyrants. To your de- 
mocracy, therefore, Philip is an unrelenting 
foe, a truth, of which you ought to be deeply 
persuaded; and next, that wherever you repress 
his encroachments, you act for the safety of 
Athens, against which, chiefly, all his batteries 
are erected. For who can be so foolish as to 
believe, that the cottages of Thrace (Drongila, 
Cabyla, and Mastira,) should form an object 
worthy of his ambition; that, in order to ac- 
quire them, he should submit to toils and dan- 
gers; that, for the sake of the rye and millet 
of Thrace, he should consent to spend so many 
months amidst winter snows and tempests; 


5 See above, ©. XXXV. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


407 


while, at the same time, he disregarded the 
riches and splendour of Athens, your harbours, 
arsenals, galleys, mines, and revenues? No, 
Athenians. Itis to get possession of Athens, 
that he makes war in Thrace and elsewhere. 
What then ought we to do? Tear ourselves 
from our indolence; not only support, but aug- 
ment, the troops which are on foot; that, as 
Philip has an army ever ready to attack and 
conquer the Greeks, you also may be ready to 
succour and to save them,’ 

It is worthy of observation (because nothing 
betrays more evidently the tyrannical spirit of 
democracy ,) that Demosthenes does not propose 
the war in form, by bringing in a written bill 
or decree, to be approved or rejected by the 
votes of his countrymen. This decree must have 
been recorded among the Athenian archives; 
and, if the war should prove unfortunate, might 
be produced at some future time for the destruc- 
tion of its author, whose enemies would not 
fail to allege this instrument as a proof that 
he had occaioned the rupture with Philip, and 
all the calamities consequent on that measure. 
The party accused would, in that case, vainly 
endeavour to shelter himself under the votes of 
the assembly, since an ordinary court of justice 
could call him to account for misleading the 
people,’ and punish him with banishment or 
death. Demosthenes artfully glances at this 
disagreeable subject: “ Rash, impudent, and 
audacious, I neither am, Athenians, nor wish 
ever to become; yet possess more true fortitude 
than the boldest of your demagogues, who, ca- 
priciously distributing honours and largesses on 
the one hand, and as capriciously impeaching, 
condemning, and confiscating on the other, 
have, in either case, a sure pledge of impunity 
in the flattery and artifices by which they have 
long seduced the public. The courage of that 
minister is put to an easy trial, who is ever rea- 
dy to sacrifice your permanent interest to your 
present pleasure. But he is truly courageous, 
who, for the sake of your safety and glory, op- 
poses your most favourite inclinations, rouses 
you from your dream of pleasure, disdains to 
flatter you, and having the good of his country 
ever in view, assumes that post in the adminis- 
tration in which fortune often prevails over 
policy, knowing himself responsible for the is- 
sue. Such a minister am I, whose unpopular 
counsels tend to render, not myself, but my 
country great.” 

The arguments and remonstrances of Demos- 
thenes not only saved Diopcithes, but animated 
the Athenians with a degree of vigour’ which 
they had been long unaccustomed to exert. A 
fleet was fitted out under the command of Cal- 
lias, who seized all Macedonian ships as lawful 
prize, and made a descent on the coast of Thes- 
saly, after plundering the harbours in the Pelas- 
gic gulf. A considerable body of forces was 
sent into Acarnania to repel the incursions of 
Philip, assisted by his kinsman and ally, Alex- 
ander of Epirus. The inhabitants of the island 
of Peperathus, trusting to the protection of 


6 Demosthen. Orat. de Chersones. p. 35, et seq. 
7 By the yex@y wagovoxwv. Vide Demosthen. de Coron. 
passim. 


8 Vid. Epist. Philip. 


408 


Athens, expelled the Macedonian garrison from 
Halonnesus. Repeated embassies were des- 
patched to the Peloponnesians and Eubeans, 
exhorting them to throw off the ignominious 
yoke of Macedon, and to unite with their Gre- 
cian brethren against the public enemy. Philip 
was not unattentive to these commotions, but 
his designs against the valuable cities on the 
Propontis and Thracian Bosphorus! being ripe 
for execution, he was unwilling to allow any 
secondary consideration to divert him from that 
important enterprise. 


His intrigues and bribery had 


Oly i gained a considerable party in By- 
fc 349 zantium, at the head of which was 


the perfidious Python, whose vehe- 
ment eloquence gave him great influence with 
the multitude. A conspiracy was formed to 
surrender one of the gates of the city; the Ma- 
cedonian army of thirty thousand men hovered 
round; but the design was suspected or dis- 
covered, and Philip, to screen his partizans 
from public vengeance, seasonably withdrew his 
army, and invested the neighbouring city of 
Perinthus. The news of these transactions not 
only increased the activity of Athens, but 
alarmed Ochus king of Persia, who being no 
stranger to Philip’s design of invading his do- 
minions, trembled at beholding that ambitious 
prince gradually approach his frontier. To 
prevent this danger, Ochus adopted the same 
policy, which, in similar circumstances, had 
been successfully employed by his predeces- 
sors.? The Persian gold was profusely scatter- 
ed among the most eminent of the Grecian de- 
magogues. Demosthenes, whose patriotism 
was not always proof against an unworthy al- 
liance? with interest, rejoiced at being paid for 


doing what he considered as his duty. At} 
Athens his invectives were louder than ever | 
against the king of Macedon; and the affairs of | 


Eubea gave him an opportunity of exerting 
himself with equal zeal in that island. 

The fictious spirit of the Eubeans rendered 
them alike incapable of independence, and of 
remaining quietly under the government either 
of Athens or Macedon, to which they were al- 
ternately subject. The recent prevalence of the 
Macedonian party had been marked by many 
acts of violence and oppression. The cities of 
Chalcis, Oreuin, and Eretria, prepared to rebel, 
having previously solicited assistance from Pe- 
loponnesus, Acarnania, Attica, and every pro- 
vince of Greece, which they had any reason to 
deem favourable to their views. From other 
states they brought back promises and hopes; 
from Athens they obtained, chiefly by the in- 


fluence of Demosthenes, a considerable body of 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


sons were expelled from the principal cities, and 
driven from one post to another, till they were 
compelled entirely to evacuate the island. This 
event occasioned great joy at Athens; and the 
principal merit was ascribed to Demosthenes, 
who, at the motion of Aristonicus, a man of 
merit and eminence, was crowned by the senate 
and people with a golden crown; which ho- 
nour was publicly proclaimed in the theatre of 
Bacchus, during the representations of the new 
tragedies, amidst an immense concourse of peo- 
ple, citizens and strangers.4 

arar The loss of Eubea was ill com- 
a a pensated to Philip by the military 
i c "341 operations against Perinthus, in 
“a s"" which he found an enemy worthy 
of his courage and perseverance. The town 
was situated on the sloping ridge of an isthmus, 
and strongly fortified both by art and nature, 
the houses and streets rising one above another 
like the seats of an amphitheatre, so that the 
higher edifices overlooked and defended the 
lower. Having scoured the neighbouring coun- 
try with his cavalry, Philip exhausted, in the 
siege of Perinthus, all the military skill known 
| to the ancients. He raised towers forty cubits 
high, which enabled his men to fight on equal 
ground with the besieged; his miners were 
| busy at the foundation; at length the battering- 
rams advanced to the wall, in which a consi- 
derable breach was made. During this time, 
however, the townsmen had not been idle. The 
superior discharge of darts, arrows, and every 
kind of missile weapon from the Macedonian 
towers, had indeed dislodged the Perinthians 
from those parts of the wall and battlements, 
| against which the principal attack had been di- 
‘rected. But with incessant toil, the besieged 
built a new wall within the former, on which 
they appeared in battle array, prepared to repel 
the enemy who entered the breaches.5 The 
Macedonians, who advanced with impetuous 
Joy to reap the fruits of their labour, were infi- 
-nitely mortified to find that their work must be 
begun anew. Philip employed rewards and 
| punishments, and all the resources of his mind 
fertile in expedients, to restore their hopes, and 
| to reanimate their activity. The siege recom- 
| menced with fresh ardour, and the PerintHians 
were twice reduced to extremity, when they 
were unexpectedly saved, first by a large supply 
'of arms and provisions from Byzantium, next 
by a strong reinforcement of men in Persian 
pay, commanded by Apollodorus, a citizen of 
Athens; and lastly by the advantageous situa- 
tion of the town, which, being built in a conical 
| form, presenting its apex or narrow point to the 


| besiegers, gradually rose and widened towards 


troops commanded by the brave and virtuous | the remoter parts, from which it was easy to 


Phocion. The orator accompanied the expedi- 
tion; and being allowed to address the popular 
assemblies in most of the cities of Eubæa, he 


| observe all the motions of the enemy, and to 
| overwhelm them with missile weapons as they 


advanced to the charge. Philip, ever sparing 


inflamed them with such animosity against of the lives of his men, was deterred by this 
Philip and his partisans, that little remained to | circumstance from venturing an assault, though 
be done by the valour of the Athenian general. | his machines had effected a breach in the new 
The Eubeans every where took arms in de- | wall: he therefore determined to change the 
fence of their freedom, the Macedonian garri- | siege into a blockade. Perinthus was shut up 


4 Demosthen. de Coron. et Plut. in Demosth. 
5 Diodor. p. 466, et seq. 


1 Demosthen. de Coron. et Diodor. l. xvi. c. xxii. 
2 Plut. in Alex. 3 Plut. in Demosth. 


XXXVL.J 


as closely as possible by sea and land: part of 
the Macedonian troops who had become muti- 
nous for want of pay (for Philip at this time 
owed above two hundred talents, or forty thou- 
sand pounds sterling,) were indulged in plun- 
dering the rich territory of Byzantium, while 
the remainder were conducted to the siege of 
Selymbria, and soon after of Byzantium itself, 
the taking of which places, it was hoped, might 
compensate their lost labour at Perinthus.® 
During the military operations against the 
cities of the Propontis, Demosthenes did not 
cease exhorting his countrymen to undertake 
their defence, as essential to their own safety. 
The hostilities and devastations of Philip, he 
represented as the periodical returns of the pes- 
tilence and other contagious disorders, in which 
all men were alike threatened with their respec- 
tive shares of calamity. He, who was actually 
sound and untainted, had an equal interest with 
the diseased and infirm,to root out the common 
evil, which, if allowed to lurk in any part, 
would speedily pervade and afflict the whole. 
The Macedonians now besieged Selymbria and 
Byzantium; if successful in these enterprises, 
they would soon appear before Sparta, Thebes, 
and Athens. Yet he knew not by what fatality 
the Greeks looked on the successive encroach- 
ments of Philip, not as events which their vi- 
gorous and united opposition might ward off 
and repel, but as disasters inflicted by the hand 
of Providence; as a tempestuous cloud of hail, 
so destructive to the vines in autumn, which all 
beheld, with horror, hovering over them, but 
none took any other means to prevent, than by 
deprecating the gods that it might not fall on 
his own fields? These animated and just re- 
presentations of the common distress or danger, 
engaged the Athenians to enter into a close cor- 
respondence with the besieged cities.8 Demos- 
thenes undertook a journey to Byzantium; and 
Leon, a Byzantine orator and patriot, the friend 
and fellow student of the virtuous Phocion, re- 
sided as ambassador in Athens. At the saine 
time the principal cities of the Propontis, main- 
tained an uninterrupted intercourse of good of- 
fices with each other, as well as with their allies 
of Rhodes and Chios, from whom they received 
repeated supplies of arms and provisions. 
Philip, mean while, ceased not to assure the 
Athenians, by his letters and emissaries, that he 
was extremely desirous of maintaining peace 
with the republic, and gently chid them for 
their evident marks of partiality towards his 
enemies, which, however, he took care to as- 
cribe, not to the general teinper and disposition 
of the people, but to the prevalence of a dan- 
gerous faction, inflamed by seditious and selfish 
demagogues. By a rapid march he had recent- 
ly surprised an Athenian detachment ravaging 
the territory of Cardia. Diopeithes, the Athenian 


6 Diodor. l. xvi. c. xxii. 

7 AAAs Omws TeuT’ OCpwvres os SEAAnusS wveyouT xi xx 
TOV XUTOV TEITOV, OVTEE OL THY yehucur, EMoLYe DoxoUTs 
Geweervs cuyomevos AXLI ExUTOUS EXATTOL PEVETI“I,MHAUESY 
Se ovdess exsxseenv. Demosthen. in Philip. iii. p. 48. In 
the country where I now write (the Pais de Vaud) the 
beanty and force of this comparison is 100 well understood. 
Lofty mountains covered with snow, sunny hills, and fertile 
valleys—Such too is the geography of Greece, which ren- 
dered the hail-storme so alarming and so destructive. 

8 Demosthen. de Corona. 


3 F 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


409 


general in the Chersonesus, commanded this 
predatory band, who, after a slight skirmish, 
were repelled with the loss of their leader, slain 
by a dart, while he rallied his men with his 
voice and arm. Philip failed not, by letter, to 
excuse this act of hostility, to which, he assur- 
ed the Athenians, that he had been compelled, 
much against his inclination: he affected to 
consider Diopeithes as the instrument of a ma- 
hgnant faction, headed by Demosthenes, rather 
than as the general of the republic; and as that 
commander had acted unwarrantably in plun- 
dering the Cardians, a people strictly allied 
with Macedon, Philip assured himself that the 
senate and people would not take it amiss that, 
provoked by repeated injuries, he had at length 
repelled violence, and defended the lives and 
fortunes of his long-injured confederates. 
While the Athenians and Philip were on this 
footing of correspondence, the former sent 
twenty vessels laden with corn to the relief of 
the Selymbrians. Leodamas, who commanded 
this convoy, seems to have imagined that the 
treaty formerly subsisting between the two 
powers, would protect him from injury. But 
in this he was disappointed. His fleet was sur- 
rounded and taken by Amyntas, who command- 
ed the naval force of Macedon, and who deter- 
mined to retain his prize, without paying any 
regard to the complaints and remonstrances of 
Leodamas, who pretended that the convoy was 
not destined for Selymbria, but employed in 
conveying the superabundance of the fertile 
Chersonesus to the rocky and barren island of 
Lemnos. 
The news of the capture of their 


ee ships occasioned much tumult and 
in C€ 341 uneasiness among the Athenians. 


After frequent deliberations on this 
subject, a decree was framed for sending am- 
bassadors to Philip, in order to re-demand their 
property, and to require that Amyntas, if he 
had exceeded his instructions, should be pu- 
nished with due severity. Cephisophon, De- 
mocritus, and Polycrates, who were named for 
this commission, repaired without delay to Phi- 
lip in the Hellespont, who, at their request, im- 
mediately released the captured vessels, and 
dismissed the Athenians with the following 
letter; “ Philip king of Macedon, to the senate 
and people of Athens, Health. I have received 
three of your citizens in quality of ambassadors, 
who have conferred with me about the release 
of certain ships, commanded by Leodamas. IĮ 
cannot but admire their simplicity in thinking 
to persuade me that these ships were intended 
to convey corn from the Chersonesus to the isle 
of Lemnos, and not destined for the relief of 
the Selymbrians, actually besieged by me, and 
nowise included in the treaty of pacification 
between Athens and Macedon. This unjust 
coiminission Leodamas received, not from the 
people of Athens, but from certain magistrates, 
and others now in private stations, who are too 
busy in urging you to violate your engage- 
ments, and to commence hostilities against me; 
a matter which they have more at heart than 
the relief of Selyinbria, fondly imagining that 
they may derive advantage from such a rup- 
ture. Deeply persuaded that our mutual in- 


410 


terest requires us to frustrate their wicked 
schemes, I have given orders to release the cap- 
tured vessels; and do you, in return, remove 
such pernicious counsellors from the adminis- 
tration of your affairs; and let them feel the se- 
verity of your justice. On my part, I shall en- 
deavour to preserve inviolate the treaty, by 
which we stand mutually engaged.””! 

The moderate and friendly sentiments ex- 
pressed in this letter afforded great advantage to 
the Macedonian partisans at Athens. But 
Demosthenes, and Leon of Byzantium, spared 
no pains to detect and expose the artifices and 
duplicity of Philip, who employed this humble 
and peaceful tone, during his operations against 
the cities of the Propontis, in order to stifle the 
resentment of the Athenians, at a crisis when 
they might act against him with peculiar advan- 
tage. In elaborate and powerful orations,? in 
which, without urging any new matter, De- 
mosthenes condensed, invigorated, and enliv- 
ened his former observations and reasonings, 
he convinced his countrymen of the expe- 
diency of being for once before-hand_ with 
their enemy, and of anticipating his designs 
against themselves by a speedy and effectual as- 
sistance to their distressed brethren of Perin- 
thus, Selymbria, and Byzantium. By his con- 
vincing eloquence the public councils were ani- 
mated with a degree of energy and enthusiasm 
which had not appeared in thein during many 
years, and which produced the last transitory 
glimpse of success and splendour, before the 
glory of Athens was extinguished for ever. 

It was decreed by the senate and 


oe people, to tit out a fleet of a hun- 
Qs C. 340. dred and twenty galleys; but un- 


fortunately the command was given 
to Chares, whose character rendered him as 
contemptible to the enemies, as he was formi- 
dable to the allies, of the republic. The By- 
zantines excluded him from their harbour, and 
he was defeated by Amyntus, the Macedonian 
admiral, off the opposite shore of Cha!cedon. 
This disaster, which was chiefly occasioned by 
the incapacity of their commander, made the 
Athenians cast their eyes on Phocion,’ who, 
though ever ready to serve his country, was 
most frequently called for in times of danger 
and calamity. 

Before Phocion reached the Propontis, Philip, 
flushed with his naval success, made an attempt 
to storm Byzantium. The city was environed 
on three sides by the sea, and defended on the 
fourth by a strong wall, and a large and deep 
trench, covered by lofty towers, separated at 
small intervals from each other. Confident in 
the strength of the place and the abundance of 
their magazines, the inhabitants of Byzantium, 
without risking a sally, allowed Philip to carry 
on his works, and gradually to make his ap- 
proaches to their walls. During this inaction 
of the townsmen, Philip carefully advanced his 
battering engines, and seemed determined to 
assault the walls; but, mean while, embraced 
proper measures for gaining the place by sur- 
prise. For executing this design, he chose the 


1 Epist. Philip. in Demosth. 
2 Orat. iv. in Philip. et Orat. de Epist. Philip. 
3 Plutarch in Phocion. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


r 


[Cuar 


gloom of a tempestuous night; a determined 
band of Macedonians passed the ditch; the scal- 
ing-ladders were already fixed ; when the senti- 
nels of Byzantium were alarmed by the barking 
of mastiffs, kept in the towers even in time 
of peace, to secure them in the night. The 
alarm spread with rapidity among the several 
guards, who rushing tumultuously from their 
respective stations, as if the enemy had been 
already masters of the town, were on the point 
of blindly assaulting each other, when a bright 
meteor, or repeated flashes of lightning, enabled 
them to distinguish their friends, and to discern 
the danger. Having formed in some degree of 
order, they advanced against the Macedonians, 
who had already gained the rampart, from 
which they were with difficulty repulsed by su- 
perior numbers.4 


The defeat of this bold and dan- 


Sl ‘hin gerous enterprise did not discourage 
A- C 340 Philip from carrying on his opera- 


tions with indefatigable diligence 
and vigour. His perseverance must finally 
have prevailed over the obstinacy of the be- 
sieged, had not the Athenian fleet, under Pho- 
cion, arrived in the Thracian Bosphorus. The 
Byzantines received him with open arms, ex- 
pecting that under such a commander, their 
auxiliaries would prove not less modest and in- 
offensive in their quarters, than active and in- 
trepid in the field. Nor were their hopes dis- 
appointed; the arms of Philip were foiled in 
every rencounter ; his artifices were met and 
eluded by similar address; nor could he expect 
by force or fraud to gain any advantages over an 
opponent alike brave and vigilant.6 The king 
of Macedon, who had as much flexibility in 
varying his measures, as firmness in adhering to 
his purposes, was unwilling any farther to press 
his bad fortune. In the actual state of his 
affairs, he judged it necessary to raise the siege 
of Byzantium, to withdraw his forces from Se- 
lymbria and Perinthus, and to leave the Athe- 
nians in possession of the northern shore of the 
Propontis. These were humiliating resolutions; 
but fortunately for Philip, an event fell out, 
which prevented the execution of them from 
reflecting much discredit on his arms or policy. 

Phocion, to whose conduct the safety of so 
many important cities was principally owing, 
sailed from Byzantium amidst the grateful vows 
and acclamations of innumerable spectators. In 
his voyage to the Chersonesus, he captured a 
fleet of victuallers and transports, carrying arms 
and provisions for the enemy. When he ar- 
rived in that peninsula, he repressed the inso- 
lence of the Cardians, who, reinforced by a Ma- 
cedonian garrison, had recently undertaken an 
expedition against the city of Sestos. He re- 
covered several places on the coast of Thrace, 
which had reluctantly submitted to the domi- 
nion of the Macedonians; and, in concert with 
the inhabitants, took such measures as seemed 
most proper to protect the Athenian allies in 
those parts, from future danger. Instead of 
burdening the confederates with the mainte- 
nance of his army. he plentifully supplied all 
the wants of his soldiers from the enemy’s coun- 


4 Diodor. |. xvi. p. 468. 
5 Plut. in Phocion. 


XXXVI] 


try. He commanded in person the parties that 
went out to forage and to plunder ; and in one 
of thəse expeditions, received a dangerous 
wound, yet did not embark for his return, until 
he had spread the terror of the Athenian name, 
by ravaging with fire and sword the hereditary 
dominions of Philip.® 

The meritorious services of Phocion were 
deeply felt and acknowledged by the communi- 
ties whom he had protected and relieved.’ The 
deliverance and gratitude of the Chersonesus, of 
Perinthus, and of Byzantium, were testified by 
crowns, statues, inscriptions, and altars; and 
are still recorded in an oration of Demosthenes, 
which has deservedly survived those perishing 
monuments of gold and marble. The decree of 
the Byzantines and Perinthians, after describ- 
ing the ancient and recent benefits of Athens 


towards them, enacted, “that, in return for those | 


favours, the Athenians should be entitled to the 
right of intermarriage, the privilege of purchas- 
ing lands in their territories, the freedom of 
their respective cities, and the first and most 
honourable place in all their entertainments and 
assemblies: that whatever Athenians chose to 
reside with them should be exempted from all 
taxes: And that, further, three statues, each 
sixteen cubits high,should be erected in the port 
of Byzantium, representing the republic of 
Athens, crowned by the Byzantines and Perin- 
thians: That this crown should be proclaimed 
at the four principal festivals of Greece, in order 
to commemorate the magnanimity of Athens, 
and the gratitude of the Byzantines and Perin- 
thians.” The inhabitants of the Chersonesus 


were not less forward in their acknowledgments | 


and rewards. After a similar preamble, setting 
forth the manifold favours of their great and 
generous allies, they resolved to crown the se- 
nate and people of Athens with a golden crown 
worth sixty talents; and to consecrate an altar 
to Gratitude and the Athenians. These public 
and solemn honours afforded matter of equal 
triumph to Phocion, who had executed, and to 
Demosthenes, who had advised the measures, 
in consequence of which such just glory had 
been acquired. At the distance of several years, 
the orator still boasted of this important service. 
“You have frequently, Athenians! rewarded 
with crowns the statesmen most successful in 
conducting your affairs. But name, if you 
can, any other counsellor, any other statesman, 
by whose means the state itself hath been thus 
honoured.’ 

The circumstance which enabled Philip to 
elude the violence of the storm with which the 
hostility of Athens, Persia, and so many other 
powers, had been long preparing to overwhelm 
him, took its rise from an error of judgment, 
occasioned by that boundless ambition which 
formed the ruling passion of the Macedonian 
prince. Beyond the confines of Thrace, and 
beyond the northern frontier of the Lower 
Mesia, dwelt a powerful Scythian tribe, in the 
valuable peninsula contained between the west- 
ern waves of the Euxine and the majestic stream 
of the Danube. The roving and unsettled life 


7 Ibid. 


6 Plut. in Phocion. and Diodor. ubi supra. 
9 Ibid. 


8 Demosthen. de Corona. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


411 


of the Scythians, like that of their descendants 
the Tartars, had led them into this country, 
from their native and proper territories, einbrac- 
ing the six mouths of the Danube or Ister, the 
banks of the Boristhenes, and the shores of the 
Palus Meotis, which districts in ancient times 
had the name of Little Scythia,!° and are still 
called Little Tartary.!! A monarch less warlike 
and less ambitious than Philip, might have ob- 
served, with indignation and regret, those fierce 
and rapacious Barbarians, extending themselves 
beyond their natural limits, and enjoying an es- 
tablishment on the south of the Danube; which 
great river, as he was already master of Thrace, 
and counted the Triballi of Masia among the 
number of his tributaries, Philip’s proud an 
usurping fancy had already grasped as the fron- 
tier of his empire, and the proper line of sepa- 
ration between barbarous and civilized nations, 
It was not, therefore, without such excess of 
joy as transported him beyond the bounds of 
sound policy, that, amidst his preparations 
against the cities on the Propontis, he received 
an invitation from Atheas,'2 who styled himself 
king of the Scythians, to march to his assist- 
ance, and to defend his dominions, consisting 
in the peninsula above mentioned, against an 
invasion of the Istrians, which the domestic 
forces of Atheas were totally unable to resist, 
To this proposal was added a condition ex- 
tremely alluring to the king of Macedon, that 
if his auxiliary arms enabled Atheas to van- 
quish and expel the invaders, Philip should be 
named heir to the kingdom of Scythia; for, ac- 
cording to the fashion of ancient tines, Atheas 
dignified with the name of kingdom, a territory 
little larger than the principality of Wales. 

In greedily snatching this bait laid for his am- 
bition, Philip was not enough on his guard 
against the usual perfidy and levity of Barba- 
rians; nor did he sufficiently consider, that by 
sending a powerful detachment into Scythia, 
he must greatly weaken his exertions against 
the cities of the Propontis. With an ardour 
and alacrity too rapid for reflection, he eagerly 
closed with the proposition of Atheas, sent a 
great body of forces to the north, and promised 
to assist them in person at the head of his whole 
army, should they encounter any difficulty in 
the execution of their purpose. Mean while 
the warlike chief of the Istrians, whose courage 
alone animated, and whose conduct rendered 
successful, the arms of his followers, was cut 
off by sudden death: tle dispirited Istrians 
were attacked, defeated, and repelled; and, 
without the-assistanee of Macedon, Atleas 
once more regained possession of his king- 
dom. This unexpected revolution served to 
display the crafty and faithless Barbarian in his 
genuine deformity. The Macedonian troops 
were received coldly, treated with contempt, 
and absolutely denied their stipulated pay and 
subsistence. Their just remonstrances and com- 
plaints Atheas heard with scorn, and totally dis- 
avowed the propositions and promises of those 
who styled themselves his ambassadors; ob- 
serving “how unlikely it was, that le should 


10 Herodotus and Strabo, passim. 
J1 Geograph. D’Anville. 
12 Justin. I. ix. c. 2. 


412 


have solicited the assistance of the Macedo- 
nians, who, brave as they were, could fight only 
with men, while the Scythians could combat 
cold and famine; and that it would have been 
still more unnatural to appoint Philip his suc- 
cessor, since he had a son of his own, worthy 
to inherit his crown and dignity.”! 

Upon receiving an account of the insolent 
behaviour of a prince, who had so recently soli- 
cited his alliance, Philip, while still busily, but 
unsuccessfully, employed against the cities of 
the Propontis, sent an embassy to Scythia, re- 
quiring Atheas to satisfy the just demands of 
the Macedonian troops, and to indemnify him- 
self for the expense incurred in his defence. 
The ambassadors found the king of Scythia in 
his stable, currying his horse. When they tes- 
tified surprise at seeing him engaged in such 
an occupation, he asked them, Whether their 
master did not often employ himself in the same 
manner? adding, that for his own part, in time 
of peace, he made not any distinction between 
himself and his groom. When they opened 
their commission, and explained the demands 
of Philip, the subtle Barbarian told them, that 
the poverty of Scythia could not furnish a pre- 
sent becoming the greatness of their master; 
and that, therefore, it seemed more eligible to 
offer nothing at all, than a present totally un- 
worthy of his acceptance.? 

This evasive and mortifying answer being 
brought to the king of Macedon when foiled 
and harassed, yet not disheartened, by his un- 
prosperous expedition against Byzantium, fur- 
nished him with a very honourable pretence for 
raising the siege of that place, and conducting 
a powerful army into Scythia, that he might 
chastise the treacherous ingratitude of a prince, 
who, after having overreached him by policy, 
now mocked him with insolence. Having ad- 
vanced to the frontier of Atheas’s dominions, 
Philip had recourse to his usual arts, and sent 
a herald with the ensigns of peace and friend- 
ship, to announce his arrival in Scythia, in or- 
der to perform a solemn vow which he had 
made during the siege of Byzantium, to erect a 
brazen statue to Hercules on the banks of the 
Danube. The cunning Atheas was not the 
dupe of this artifice, which he knew how to en- 
counter and elude with similar address. With- 
out praising or blaming the pious intention of 
the king, he coolly desired him to forward the 
statue, which he himself would take care to 
erect in the appointed place; that should it be 
set up with his concurrence and direction, it 
would probably be allowed to stand; otherwise 
he could give no assurance that the Scythians 
would not pull it down, and melt it, to make 
points for their weapons.? 

The return of the Macedonian herald gave 
the signal for hostility. Philip entered the 
country with fire and sword, destroying the fo- 
rests and pasturage, and seizing the slaves and 
cattle, which formed the principal wealth of the 
Scythians. He seems to have employed several 
weeks in an expedition, the circumstances of 
which, were they essential to the designs of this 
work, could not be related with any fulness or 


1 Justin. | ix. c. 2. 2 Ibid. 3 Ibid, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


tS 
pS 


[Cuar. 


accuracy. Countries in a pastoral state are but 
thinly peopled; and Philip was obliged to divide 
his forces, in order to vanquish with greater 
rapidity the wandering hordes, separated from 
each other by wide intervals, according as a 
forest, a meadow, or a streain of fresh water, 
obtained their preference, and fixed their tem- 
porary abode. A party of Macedonian soldiers 
beat up the quarters of a numerous and warlike 
clan, by which they were repelled, with the loss 
of several slain or taken. Among the latter 
was Ismenias, an eminent musician, who had 
been invited by liberal rewards to reside at the 
court of Philip, after being long admired in 
Greece for his performance on the flute. This 
distinguished captive was sent as a present to 
Atheas, who was so little delighted with his ac- 
complishment, that having heard him perform, 
he acknowledged the neighing of his horse to 
be to his ear far more agreeable music. The 
skirmish in which Ismenias was taken, seems to 
have been the principal advantage obtained by 
the Barbarians, whose constitutional courage, 
and impetuous ill-directed fury, was every- 
where overcome by the disciplined valour of 
the Macedonian phalanx.‘ 

Philip reaped such fruits from his expedi- 
tion as might be expected by a victory over a 
people who had no king but their general, no 
god but their sword, and no cities but the ground 
on which they occasionally encamped with their 
herds and families. The spoil consisted in 
arms, chariots, twenty thousand robust captives, 
a greater number of inares, destined to replen- 
ish the studs of Pella.s We are not informed 
whether Philip erected the promised statue to 
the great founder and protector of his family 
and kingdom. It is probable that he imposed 
a tribute on the Scythians, as a mark of their 
submission and dependence, purposing to reduce 
them more thoroughly, when he had effected 
his great designs in Greece, to which country 
the silent operation of his intrigues now sum- 
moned his return. 

But while he marched southward at the head 
of an army encumbered with baggage and spoil, 
a very unexpected event threatened to blast his 
laurels, and to terminate at once his glory and 
his life. Allured by the hopes of sharing the 
warlike plunder of the Scythians, the barbarous 
Triballi, who had been often conquered, but 
never thoroughly subdued, beset by ambush, 
and vigorously assaulted, the Macedonians, 
entangled amidst the intricate windings of the 
mountains of Mesia; hoping to cut off, by one 
stroke, the flower of a nation whose authority 
their own fierce spirit of independence had very 
reluctantly condescended to obey. The confu- 
sion and the danger was increased by a merce- 
nary band of Greeks, who, harassed by the 
fatigues of war and travelling, always clamor- 
ous for pay, which was very irregularly paid 
them, and perhaps jealous of the Macedonians, 
seized the present opportunity to desert the 
standard of Philip, and to reinforce the arms of 
the Triballi.6 

The king of Macedon, too prudent to under- 


4 Justin. l. ii. ce. 5. 
5 Compar. Justin. l. ix. c. 2. et Strabo, p. 752. 
6 Justin. l. ix. c. 3. Plut. in Alexand. 


XXXVL] 


take superfluous danger, never acquired by 
valour what might be obtained by stratagem; 
but when a necessary occasion solicited his 
courage and his prowess, lie knew how to as- 
sume the hero, and (if we may transpose an 
ancient proverb) * to eke out the fox’s with the 
lion’s skin.”? The urgency of the present emer- 
gence summoned all the firmness of his mind. 
With his voice and example he encouraged the 
astonished and disheartened Macedonians; con- 
ducted his faithful guards to the heat of the 
battle, and fought with unexampled bravery, 
till the same weapon which pierced his horse, 
laid the rider senseless on the ground. The 
young Alexander, who fought near him, de- 
rived peculiar glory from saving the life of his 
father, whom he covered with his shield, and 
defended by his sword, until his attendants con- 
veyed him to a place of safety;8 the son so 
worthily succeeding to the command, that the 
tumult was fortunately appeased, and the Bar- 
barians routed and put to flight. Philip’s wound 
was attended with an incurable lameness, 
which he bore with much impatience. His 
magnanimous son endeavoured to remove his 
anxiety by asking, how he could be chagrined 
at an accident, which continually reminded him 
of his valour?9 

To repair the effects of this un- 


Ee foreseen delay, the Macedonians 
A. C. 339. hastened through Thrace, where 


Philip, as he had reason to expect, 
was met by deputies from the Amphictyonic 
council, appointing him general of their forces, 
ar J requesting him to march into Greece with 
all convenient speed. The secret practices and 
intrigues, which had been ripening during the 
Scythian expedition, produced this cxtraordi- 
nary message, the remote as well as immediate 
causes of which deserve to be distinctly unra- 
velled, being the last knot of a tragedy which 
involves the fate of Grecce. 

The spirited resistance of Selym- 


oe bria and Byzantium, the successful 
A.C. 339 expeditions of Phocion in the Hel- 


lespont and Propontis, the prodigal 
terrors of Ochus king of Persia, who thought it 
impossible to employ his wealth more usefully 
than in bridling the ambition of Philip; above 
all, the continual expostulations and remon- 
strances of Demosthenes, conspired to rouse 
the Athenians froin the lethargy in which they 
had been long sunk, and animated them with a 
desire to carry on the war with activity and effect 
against the common encmy of Greece. In or- 
der to save the state, they consented (though 
probably not without a violent struggle) to 
abolish the very popular law, or rather abuse, 
introduced by Eubulus. The theatrical amuse- 
ments, so passionately idolized by the multi- 
tude, were celebrated with less pomp and splen- 
dour; and the military fund was thenceforth 
applied to its original and proper destination. 
A fleet was equipped far superior to the naval 
strength of Macedon.'0 The troops and parti- 
sans of that kingdom were driven from their 


ambushes in Megara, and in the neighbouring | 


7 Vid. Plut. in Lysand. 
8 Plut. de Fortun. Alexand. et Justin. l. ix. ¢. 3. 
9 Plut. in Alexand. 10 Demosthen. de Corona. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


413 


territories, where they had long watched an op- 
portunity of destroying the liberty of Athens. 
Demosthenes, and Hyperides, an orator second 
only to Demosthenes, were despatched into the 
Peloponnesus and other parts of Greece, to 
persuade the several republics to second the 
generous ardour of the Athenians, whose recent 
success under Phocion added great weight to 
the arguments and eloquence of those illustri- 
ous statesmen,!! 

Philip was accurately informed of all tliose 
transactions ; and the alarm universally spread 
among his faithful emissaries, inclined them ra- 
ther to exaggerate, than to conceal, the danger. 
Highly provoked against the Athenians, the 
continual opposers of his greatness, he was un- 
able to retaliate their injuries. If he attacked 
them by land, he must march through the ter- 
ritories of the Thebans and Thessalians, who, 
ever selfish and capricious, would be ready to 
forsake him with his good fortune. His dis- 
graceful expedition against the cities of the Pro- 
pontis, rendered the present juncture extremcly 
unfavourable to such a hazardous design. Nor 
could he attempt, with any prospect of success, 
to attack the enemy by sea, since the Athenian 
fleet so far exceeded his own, that it had inter- 
rupted, and almost totally destroyed, the com- 
merce of Macedon. 

Amidst this complication of difficulties, Phi- 
lip showed how well he understood the unsteady 
temper of the Greeks, by raising the siege of 
Byzantium, and burying himself in the wilds 
of Scythia, till the fuming animosity of his ad- 
versaries had time to evaporate. Not ventur- 
ing on open hostility, he, mean while, employed 
two secret engines, which continued to work 
during his absence, and from which he had 
reason to expect very signal advantages before 
his return. There lived at Athens a man of 
the name of Antiphon, bold, loud, and loqua- 
cious in the popular assembly, in which, how- 
ever, he had not a title to vote, much less to 
speak, his name not being recorded in the pub- 
lic register of the city. This defect passed long 
unobserved, through that supine negligence 
with which Demosthenes so frequently up- 
braids his countrymen. At length the treason 
of Antiphon (for the Athenians regarded an 
unqualified voter in the assembly as an usurper 
of sovereign power) was discovered, and ar- 
raigned by one of the many citizens to whom 
his insolence and calumny had justly rendered 
lim obnoxious ; in consequence of which im- 
peachment, the supposititious Athenian was 
divested of his borrowed character, and driven 
with ignominy from a country, whose most au- 
gust rights and honours he had usurped and 
disgraced. Stung with disappointment and 
ragc, Antiphon had recourse to the king of 
Macedon, and offered himself for any enter- 
prise, however bloody or desperate, by which, 
in serving the interest of Philip, he might gra- 
tify his own thirst for vengeance. The ambi- 
tious Macedonian kept his ends too steadily in 
view, and pursued them with too much ardour 
and perseverance, to be very delicate in choosing 
the means by which he might distress his ad- 
versaries. He greedily closed, therefore, with 


11 Demosthen. de Corona. 


414 


the proposal of Antiphon, in whom he rejoiced 
to find an instrument so fit for his service. 
The superiority of the Athenians by sea, 
which their actual diligence in their docks and 
arsenals showed them determined to maintain 
and increase, formed the chief obstacle to the 
grandeur of Macedon. By whom the design 
was suggested, is unknown; but it was agreed 
between Philip and Antiphon, that the latter 
should return to Athens in disguise, insinuate 
himself into the Piræus, and lie there in con- 
cealment, until he found an opportunity to set 
fire to the Athenian docks, and thus destroy at 
once the main hope of the republic. While 
the artful king of Macedon eluded the storm 
of his enemies by wandering in the woods of 
Scythia, his perfidious accomplice lurked, like 
a serpent, in the bosom of Athens, being lodged 
without suspicion in the harbour which glowed 
with the ardour of naval preparation, and mto 
which were daily accumulated new masses of 
tar, timber, and other materials, alike proper 
for a fleet, and for the purpose of Antiphon. 
But the vigilance of Demosthenes discover- 
ed this desperate design, when on the point of 
execution. He immediately flew to the Pireus, 
dragged Antiphon from his concealment, divest- 
ed him of his disguise, and produced him at 
the bar of the assembly. The capricious and 
deluded multitude, alike prone to anger and to 
compassion, were on.this occasion very differ- 
ently affected from what might be conjectured. 
Instead of execrating a wretch capable of such 
black deeds, they beheld, with pity,a man once 
regarded as their fellow citizen, brought before 
them after a long absence, and accused, per- 
haps on vain presumptions, of such a horrid 
crime. They knew besides the wicked artifices 
of their orators, who, to increase their own im- 
portance, often terrified the public with false 
alarms and imaginary dangers. Æschines, and 
other partisans of Philip, were at hand to 
strengthen these impressions. They represent- 
ed the whole transaction of Demosthenes as a 
complication of fraud and cruelty ; loudly in- 
veighed against his insolent triumph over the 
calamities of the unfortunate; and reproached 
his entering by force into the house where An- 
tiphon was concealed, as a violation of free- 
dom pregnant with the most dangerous conse- 
quences, and as trampling on the respected 
maxim of Athenian law and religion, that every 
man’s house was his sanctuary.! Such was 
the effect of these clamours, that Antiphon was 
dismissed without the formality of a trial, and 
might, perhaps, have resumed his purpose with 
more security than before, had not the senate 
of the Areopagus more carefully examined the 
information of Demosthenes. By the antho- 
rity of that court, the traitor was again seized, 
and tried. Torture, which the institution of 
domestic slavery introduced and rendered fa- 
miliar in Greece, extorted from him a late and 
reluctant confession; and his enormous guilt 
was punished with an enormous severity.? 
Had the detestable enterprise of Antiphon 
been crowned with unmerited success, Philip 


1 Lysias passim in Agorat. et Eratosth. 
2 Demosthenes de Coron. who gives the honourable ac- 
sount of hia own conduct described in the text. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


would have attained his purpose of ruining 
Athens, by a rude stroke of vulgar perfidy. 
But the engines which he set in motion for 
gaining the same end, at a time when he was 
obliged to fly the awakened resentment of 
Greece, and to bury in the wilds of Scythia the 
disgrace sustained before the walls of Byzan- 
tium, will not be easily matched by any paral- 
lel transactions in history, whether we consider 
the profound artifice with which the plan was 
contrived and combined, the nice adaptation of 
the several parts, or the unwearied dexterity 
with which the whole was carried into execu- 
tion. It is on this occasion that Demosthenes 
might justly exclaim, “In one circumstance, 
chiefly, is Philip distinguished above all his 
ambitious predecessors, the enemies of Gre- 
cian freedom. His measures required the co- 
operation of traitors, and traiters he has found 
more corrupt and more dexterous than ever 


| appeared in any former age; and, what is most 


worthy of remark, the principal instruments ot 
his ambition flourished in the bosom of that 
state, whose public councils most openly op- 
posed his greatness.3 

The time approached for convening at Del- 
phi the vernal assembly of the Amphictyons. 
It was evidently the interest of the Athenians, 
and might have been expected from their just 
resentment against Philip, that they should 
send such deputies to the city of Apollo, as 
were most hostile to the Macedonian, and most 
zealous in the cause of liberty and their coun- 
try. But intrigue and cabal prevailed over 
every motive of public utility ; and the negli- 
gent or factious multitude were persuaded, at 
a crisis which demanded the most faithful and 
incorrupt ministers, to employ, as their repre- 
sentatives in the Amphictyonic council, Æs- 
chines and Midias; the former of whom had 
so often reproached, and the latter had, on one 
occasion, struck Demosthenes in the public 
theatre ;1 and who were both not only the de- 
clared enemies of this illustrious patriot, but, 
as well as their colleagues Diognetus and Thra- 
sicles, the warm and active partisans of the 
king of Macedon. Soon after their arrival at 
Delphi, Midias and Diognetus® pretended sick- 
ness, that they might allow A‘schines to dis- 
play, uncontrolled, his superior dexterity ; and 


to act a part, which, requiring the deepest dis- 


simulation, might be performed most success- 
fully by a single traitor, The Amphictyons 
were employed in repairing the temple; the 
sacred offerings, which had been removed and 
sold by the impiety of the Phocians, were col- 
lected from every quarter of Greece; and new 
presents were made by several states, to supply 
the place of the old, which could not be reco- 
vered. 

The Athenians particularly signalized their 
pious munificence, and sent, among other dedi- 
cations, several golden shields, with the follow- 
ing inscription: “ Taken from the Medes and 
Thebans, when they fought against Greece.” 


3 Demosth. de Coron. 

4 Demosth. in Mid. and Æsrhin. in Ctesiphont. 

5 Æschines savs, Qicyvnrov wuestresv: “That Diogne- 
tus was seized with a fever, and that the same mis/ortune 
happened to Midias.” p. 290 


XXXVL] 


This offering, highly offensive to the Theban 
deputies, was prematurely suspended in the 
temple; the Thebans murmured, the Amphic- 
tyons listened to their complaints, and it was 
whispered in the council, that the Athenians 
deserved punishment for presenting their gift 
to the god, before it had been regularly conse- 
crated, together with the other offerings. Pre- 
tending high indignation at these murmurs, 
/Eschines® rushed into the assembly, and began 
a formal, yet spirited defence of his country- 
men; when he was rudely interrupted by a 
Locrian, of Amphissa,’ a city eight miles dis- 
tant from Delphi, which growing populous and 
powerful on the ruins of Crissa and Cirrha, 
had ventured to cultivate the Cirrhean plain, 
which, near three centuries before, had been 
desolated by the Amphictyons, solemnly conse- 
crated to Apollo, and devoted to perpetual 
sterility.8 

The artful Locrian, affecting a religious zeal 
not less ardent than the patriotism of Æschines, 
clamorously interrupted that orator, calling 
aloud in the assembly, that it ill became the 
dignity of the Amphictyons to hear with pa- 
tience the justification, much less the praises of 
Athens, a city impious and profane, which, in 
defiance of human and divine laws, had so re- 
cently abetted the execrable sacrilege of the 
Phocians; that if the Amphictyons followed 
his advice, or consulted the dictates of duty 
and honour, they would not allow the detested 
name of the Athenians to be mentioned in that 
august council.? 

Æschines thus obtained an opportunity of 
exciting such tumults in the assembly as suited 
the views of Philip.'!0 In the ardour of patri- 
otic indignation, which he knew so well to as- 
sume, he poured forth a torrent of impetuous 
invective against the insolent Locrian, and his 
city Amphissa; not only justified the inno- 
cence, but displayed with ostentation, the illus- 
trious merit of the Athenians; and then ad- 
dressing the Amphictyons with a look pecu- 
liarly earnest and expressive, “Say, ye Gre- 
cians! shall men who never knew the exalted 
pleasures of virtue and renown, be suffered to 
tear from us the inestimable rewards of glory 
so justly earned ?!! Shall men, themselves pol- 
luted by sacrilege, and already devoted to de- 
struction by the most awful imprecations, pre- 


6 Aexomevou St pov Acysiv, xxi reojumorepoy mws EITEAN- 
AvSoro¢ sis TO cuvedeiov, /Eschin. p. 290. 

7 Æschines varnishes the story with inimitable address : 
avezGonres Tis Twv Apoircewy, avoewTos ZGTEAVETTATOS, 
KOE WS SUOI EDAOVETO OUIEMIAS MAIDELAS METETHYK WS, bows 
Se xzi Sxsmovirivos EE mere TAVELY ZUTOV TEOLYOMEVOV, 
“ He was interrupted by the vociferation of a certain Am- 
phissean, a man the most impndent, totally illiterate, and 
perhaps impelled to folly by some offended divinity.” 

8 See these events particularly related, c. v. p. 5L 

9 A‘schin. in Ctesiphon. 

10 Demosthen. de Corona. 

11 The persuasive energy with which Æschines defends 
his treachery, or rather displays his patriotism, on this oc- 
cas on, is not excelled by any thing in Demosthenes him- 
self. Had the works of the latter perished, the two ora- 
tions of Aschines (de Falsa Legatione, and in Ctesiphont.) 
would have justly been regarded as the most perfect mo- 
dels of eloquence produced bv hnman genius. But the 
works, and even the name of A®achines, are eclipsed in the 
fame of his rival. So disproportionate are the rewards of 
acting a first and a second part, and so just the poet's ad- 
vice to all candidates for fame : 

Atty mgiorcvesy XAI UME gowOV EKMEVaes WARY, 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


415 


sume to call the Athenians profane and impious? 
Look down, ye reverend guardians of religion! 
look down on that plain (pointing to the Cirr- 
hean plain, which might be seen from the tem- 
ple,) behold these lands anciently devoted to 
the god, but now appropriated and cultivated 
by the Amphisseans; behold the numerous 
buildings which they have erected there, and 
that accursed port of Cirrha, justly demolished 
by our ancestors, now rebuilt and fortified.” 
Æschines here read the oracle of Apollo, which 
condemned that harbour and those lands to 
perpetual desolation. Then proceeding with 
increased vehemence : “ For myself, ye Gre- 
cians! I swear, that I myself, my children, my 
country, will discharge our duty to heaven ; 
and, with all the powers and faculties of mind 
and body, avenge the abominable violation of 
the consecrated territory. Do you, Amphicty- 
ons! determine as wisdom shall direct. Your 
offerings are prepared, your victims are brought 
to the altar; you are ready to offer solemn 
prayers for blessings on yourselves, and on the 
republics which you represent. But consider 
with what voice, with what heart, with what 
confidence, you can breathe out your petitions, 
while you suffer the profanation of the Am- 
phisseans to pass unrevenged. Hear the words 
of the imprecation, not only against those who 
cultivate the consecrated ground, but against 
those who neglect to punish them: “ May they 
never present an acceptable offering to Apollo, 
Diana, Latona, or Minerva the provident; but 
may all their sacrifices and religious rites be for 
ever rejected and abhorred !””!2 

The warmth of /Eschines occasioned the ut- 
most confusion in the assembly. The golden 
shields, irregularly dedicated by the Athenians, 
were no longer the subject of discourse. This 
slight impropriety disappeared amidst the enor- 
mous impieties of the Amphisseans, which had 
been so forcibly painted to the superstitious 
fancies of the terrified multitude. It was de- 
termined, after violent contentions between 
those who accused, and those who defended, 
this unhappy people, that the Amphictyons, 
having summoned the assistance of the citizens 
of Delphi, should next day repair to the Cirr- 
hean plain, in order to burn, cut down, and de- 
stroy the houses and plantations, which had so 
long adorned and defiled that devoted territory. 
The ravagers met with little opposition in per- 
forming this pious devastation; but as they re- 
turned towards the temple, they were overtaken 
and assaulted by a numerous party of Amphis- 
seans, who threw them into disorder, took se- 
veral prisoners, and pursued the rest to Delphi. 
The signal of war was now raised ; the insult- 
ed Amphictyons, in whose persons the sanctity 
of religion had been violated, complained to 
their respect ve republics, while the recent au- 
dacity of the Amphisseans aggravated their 
ancient crimes and enormities. But agreeably 
to the languor inherent in councils which pos- 
sess only a delegated authority, the measures 
of the Amphictyons were extremely slow and 
irresolute; and when they at length raised an 
army under the command of Cottyphus, a 


12 Pausanias Phocic. and Æschin. in Ctesiphont. 


416 


Thessalian, and a creature of Philip’s, their 
operations were ill conducted and unsuccess- 
ful.} 

Affairs were thus brought to the issue which 
had been expected by A‘schines, and the accom- 
plices who assisted him in promoting the interest 
ofthe king of Macedon. They loudly declaimed 
in the council against the lukewarm indifference 
of the Grecian states in a war which so deeply 
concerned the national religion. * It became 
the Amphictyons, therefore, as the ministers of 
Apollo, and the guardians of his temple, to seek 
out and employ some more powerful instrument 
of the divine vengeance. Philip of Macedon 
had formerly given proof of his pious zeal in 
the Phocian war. That prince was now re- 
turning in triumph from his Scythian expedi- 
tion. His assistance must again be demanded 
(nor would it be demanded in vain) to defend 
the cause of Apollo and the sacred shrine.” 
This proposal being approved, a deputation of 
the Amphictyons met Philip in Thrace. He 
received their welcome message with well- 
affected surprise, but declared his veneration 
for the commands of the council, which he 
should be ever ready to obey.? 

The vigilant prince had already taken proper 
measures for acting as general of the Am- 
phictyons, and provided a sufficient number of 
transports to convey his army into Greece. He 
understood that notwithstanding the intrigues 
of Æschines and his associates, the Athenians 
had been persuaded by Demosthenes to oppose 
his design, and that their admirals Chares and 
Proxenus prepared to intercept his passage with 
a superior naval force. To baffle this opposition, 
Philip employed a stratagem. A light brigan- 
tine was despatched to Macedon with letters of 
such import as gave reason to believe that he 
purposed immediately returning into Thrace.’ 
Besides writing to Antipater, his principal con- 
fidant and minister, he took care to mask his 
artifice, by sending letters to his queen Olympias. 
The brigantine designedly fell into the hands of 
the Athenians. The despatches were seized and 
read; but the letter of the queen was politely 
forwarded to its destination.4 The Athenian 
admirals quitted their station, and Philip ar- 
rived, without opposition, on the coast of Locris, 
from whence he proceeded to Delphi. 

Though the Macedonians alone were far more 
numerous than seemed necessary for the reduc- 
tion of Amphissa, the king, in the month of 
November, despatched circular letters through 
most parts of Greece, requiring from the The- 
bans, Peloponnesians, and other states, the as- 
sistance of their combined arms to maintain the 
cause of the Amphictyons and Apollo. The 
Thebans, rather intimidated by a powerful army 
in their neighbourhood, than inclined to the 
Macedonians, of whose designs they had lately 
become extremely jealous, sent a small body of 
infantry to join the standard of Philip. The 
Lacedemonians, long disgusted with the mea- 
sures of Greece, and envying the power of 
Macedon, which they had not public spirit to 
oppose, beheld all recent transactions with a 


1 A schin. in Ctesiphont. 


3 Polyen. |. iv. c. ii. 
2 Ibid. 


4 Plut. in Demetr. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


contemptuous disregard, and seemed firm in 
their purpose of preserving a sullen neutrality. 
The Athenians, awakened by the activity of 
Demosthenes to a sense of their danger, opposed 
Philip with ten thousand mercenaries, despising 
the threats of the oracle, against those who took 
part with the impious Amphisseans. The ora- 
tor boldly accused the Pythian priestess and her 
ministers of being bribed to Philippise, or to 
prophesy as might best suit the interest of 
Philip; while Aschines, on the other hand, 
accused his adversary of having received a thou- 
sand drachmas, and an annual pension of twenty 
mine, to abet the impiety of Amphissa.5 The 
king of Macedon, without waiting for any far- 
ther reinforcement than that which he had re- 
ceived from the Thebans, besieged, took, and 
garrisoned that unfortunate city; and having 
routed and put to flight the Athenian mercena- 
ries, spread the terror of his arms round all the 
neighbouring territory.6 

The news of these events occasioned dreadful 
consternation in Athens. The terrified citizens, 
who could not be persuaded to tear themselves 
from their beloved pleasures in order to defend 
Amphissa, believed the moment approaching 
when they must defend their own walls against 
the victorious invader. After less altercation 
and delay than usually prevailed in their coun- 
cils, they sent an embassy to Philip, craving a 
suspension of hostilities, and, at the same time, 
despatched their ablest orators to rouse the 
Greeks from their supine negligence, and to 
animate and unite them against a Barbarian, 
who, under pretence of avenging the offended 
divinity of Apollo, meditated the subjugation of 
their common country. Megara, Eubea, Leu- 
cas, Corinth, Corcyra, and Achaia, favourably 
received the ambassadors, and readily entered 
into a league against Macedon. Thebes fluctu- 
ated in uncertainty, hating the Athenians as 
rivals, and dreading Philip as a tyrant. The 
situation of the Theban territory, through 
which Philip must march before he could in- 
vade Attica, rendered the decision of that people 
peculiarly important? To gain or to retain 
their friendship, the intrigues of Philip, the 
eloquence of Athens, had been employed with 
unwearied assiduity. The Thebans temporised, 
deliberated, resolved, and changed their resolu- 
tions. The partisans of Athens were most nu- 
merous, those of Macedon most active, while the 
great body of the Theban people heard the cla- 
mours and arguments of both parties with that 
stupid indifference, and took their measures 
with that lethargic slowness, which disgraced 
even the heavy character of Beotians.® 
To fix their wavering irresolu- 


S tion, and to awaken their sensibility, 
i c 338 Philip at length had recourse to the 


strong impression of terror. From 
the general wreck of Phocis, his foresight and 
policy had spared the walls of Elatæa, a city 
important by its situation between two ranges 
of mountains, which opened into Phocis and 
Bæotia. The citadel was built on an eminence, 
washed by the river Cephissus, which flowed 


5 Æschin. in Ctesiphont. 
6 Demosthen. de Corona. 


7 Diodor. }. xvi. p. 475. 
8 Demosthen. de Coron. 


XXXVI] 


in a winding course through Beotia into the 
lake Copais; a broad expanse of water, which, 
by certain navigable streams, communicated 
with Attica. This valuable post, conveniently 
situate for receiving reinforcements from Thes- 
saly and Macedon, commanding the passage 
into Bæotia, distant only two days march from 
Attica, and which, being garrisoned by a pow- 
ful army, might continually alarm the safety of 
Thebes and Athens, Philip seized with equal 
boldness and celerity,9 drew the greater part 
of his troops thither, repaired and strengthened 
the walls of the place, and having thus secured 
himself from surprise, watched a favourable 
opportunity of inflicting punishment on the 
Athenians, who had given him sufficient ground 
to represent them as the enemies of the Am- 
phictyonic council,!0 by whose authority the 
king of Macedon affected to be guided in all 
his operations. 

We are not acquainted with the immediate 
effect of this vigorous measure onthe resolutions 
of the Thebans; but the terror and consterna- 
tion of the uncorrupt part of the citizens, may 
be conjectured by what happened on the same 
occasion at Athens. It was late in the evening 
when a courier arrived with the melancholy 
tidings that Philip had taken possession of 
Elatea. The people had retired to their houses; 
the magistrates supped in the Prytaneum; but 
in a moment all were abroad. Some hastened 
to the generals; others went in quest of the 
officer'! whose business it was to summon the 
citizens to council; most flocked to the market- 
place; and, in order to make room for the as- 
sembly, pulled down or burned the temporary 
wooden edifices erected by the tradesmen or ar- 
tificers who exposed their wares to sale in that 
spacious square. Before dawn the confusion 
ceased; the citizens were all assembled; the 
senators took their places; the president report- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


ed to them the alarming intelligence that had | 


been received. The herald then proclaimed 
with a loud voice, “ That he who had any thing 
to offer on the present emergence, should mount 
the rostrum, and propose his advice.” The 
invitation, though frequently repeated, was re- 
ceived with silence and dismay. The magis- 
trates, the generals, the demagogues, were all 
present; but none obeyed the summons of the 
herald, which Demosthenes calls the voice of 
their country imploring the assistance of her 
children,!2 

At length that accomplished orator arose, and 
obtained the noblest triumph of patriotism; hav- 
ing proposed, amidst universal consternation, 
an advice equally prudent, generous, and suc- 
cessful. He began by darting a ray of hope into 
the desponding citizens, and assuring them that, 
were not the Thebans, the greater part at least 
of the Thebans, hostile to Philip, that prince 
would not be actually posted at Elatæa, but on 


— 


9 Diodor. et Demosthen. ubi supra. 

10 Æschin. in Ctesiphont. 

1l Tov cxamreyutny exxrovr, p. 329. 

12 Kzaovons Se ryc nosvng Tus mareig Owvne TOV SEIVYTÆ 
urie THTHEINS HY yte O XNEUE NATL TOUS VOMIUS CwryY 
Qinti, THUTHY KObvHY THE wet esSoG SsAxsov ETTI ny itr 
bzi, p. 317. The passage that follows has been often cited, 
and can never be too much studied, as ono of the finest ex- 
amples of oratorical narration. 


3G 


417 


the Athenian frontier. He exhorted his coun- 
trymen to shake off the unmanly terror which 
had surprised them; and, instead of fearing 
for theinselves, to fear only for their neighbours, 
whose territories were more immediately threat- 
ened, and who must sustain the first shock of 
the invasion. ‘Let your forces,” continued 
he, “immediately march to Eleusis, in order 
to show the Thebans, and all Greece, that as 
those who have sold their country, are support- 
ed by the Macedonian forces at Elatea, so you 
are ready to defend with your hereditary cou- 
rage and fortune those who fight for liberty. 
Let ambassadors at the same time be sent to 
Thebes, to remind that republic of the good 
offices conferred by your ancestors; to assure 
the Thebans, that you do not consider them as 
aliens; that the people of Athens have forgot 
all recent hostilities with the citizens of Greece, 
and will never forsake the cause of their common 
country, which is actually, in a peculiar man- 
ner, the cause of Thebes. To this community, 
therefore, offer your most disinterested servi- 
ces. To make any demand for yourselves, 
would be highly improper in the present junc- 
ture. Assure them that you are deeply affected 
by their danger, and prepared generously to de- 
fend them to the utmost of your power.” 
These proposals being received with general 
approbation, Demostlienes drew up a formal 
decree for carrying them into execution; a 
decree which may be considered as the expiring 
voice of a people, who, agreeably to the mag- 
nanimous counsel of Pericles, had determined, 
that when every thing mortal perished, the 
fame of Athens should remain.!3 Having 
painted in the most odious colours, the perfidy 
and violence of Philip; and having stigmatized 
with due severity, the recent instances of his 
injustice and lust of power, the orator concludes, 
“ For such reasons, the senate and people of 


13 See c. xv. p. 194. In defending his own conduct, not- 
withstanding the unfortunate consequences with which it 
was attended, Demosthenes seems animated by the true 
spirit of Pericles. BovAowess rs xi weendozov esmesv 3 xat 
pov mgoç Diag xt Jewv! peyderg Tyv umeeSragv Sxupeon, 
LAAL MET’ EvvoIeg O ALY w GewonTXTu’ EE YLP ATLTI FEO- 
SnAw Te MEANOVTEÆ YEVYTET IL, nab Weonrderay T AVTEG} KU 
ov mpovdAeye Asoyivy, x26 Oisueueregou, Gowy xai XEREZ YJ WG, 
0g Oude soey Ewe OVIE OUT UG ATOTTATEOV TH wOAES TOUTwY 
yve eire n O0ENS y TEOyIvwV y TOU MEAAOVTOG weEewvos EIXE 
Aoyov. The beanties of such passages, depending chiefly 
on collocation of words and sentiments, of which Demos- 
thenes, of all writers, was the greatest master, cannot be 
translited. The meaning is, “YT will ventnre to say what 
is contrary 10 contmon opinion, and, inthe name of the 
Gods! regard not its extravagance, but examine if with in- 
dnigenee. Had all of yon foreseen what was going ta hap- 
pen, had the consequences af our condnet been manifest, 
and had yon, Auschines, repeatedly proclaimed them with 
a lond voice, yon, who then opened not your month, yet 
the Athenians onght not to have forsaken the cause of Gre- 
cian freedom, unless they forsook their glory, their ances- 
tors, and their renown with succeeding ages.” The same 
thonght is expressed in language still bolder, after the hear- 
ers are preonred far it, by a page af the mast animated elo- 
quence: AAAs nux errs, Omme HMXETETE, wvtoes Aiyvxios, 
Tov VTE TYG 27 4vTwyv EXSUTEpI LS Kes TwTHELeS xivðuvop 
wpzusvai” OU wee TOUS EY Maexdevi meoxivdunevezyTes TWV 
meryovwv, &e, See the passage, p. 343. He swenra by 
those who fell at Marathon, Platea, Salamis, and Artemi- 
sium, thant the Athenians did not err in defending, with un- 
equal ‘ortune, and against superior force, the public snfety 
and liherty. Such passage when detached, may appear 
extravagant and gigantice; but, as in the ehnech of St. 
Peter's, where all is arranged with such admirable sym- 
inetry, that no figure appears bevond the natural size, so in 
the works of Demosthenes, nothing appears monstrous be- 
cause all is great. 


418 


Athens, emulating the glory of their ancestors, 
to whom the liberty of Greece was ever dearer 
than the interest of their particular republic, 
and humbly revering the gods and heroes, 
guardians of the Athenian city and territory, 
whose aid they now implore, have resolved to 
send to the coast of Beotia a fleet of two hun- 
dred sail, to march to Eleusis with their whole 
military strength, to despatch ambassadors to 
the several states of Greece, and particularly to 
the Thebans, encouraging them to remain un- 
terrified amidst the dangers which threaten 
them, and to exert themselves manfully in de- 
fence of the common cause, with assurance 
that the people of Athens, unmindful of old or 
later differences which have prevailed between 
the two republics, are determined and ready to 
support them with all their faculties, their trea- 
sures, their navies, and their arms; well know- 
ing that to contend for pre-eminence with the 
Greeks is an honourable contest; but to be 
commanded by a foreigner, and to suffer a Bar- 
barian to wrest the sovereignty from their 
hands, would tarnish their heréditary glory, 
and disgrace their country for ever.” 

The same undaunted spirit which dictated 
this decree, attended the exertions of Demos- 
thenes in his embassy to Thebes, in which he 
triumphed over the intrigues of Amyntas and 
Clearchus, and over the eloquence of Philon of 
Byzantium, the emissaries employed by Philip 
on this important occasion. The Thebans 
passed a decrce for receiving with gratitude the 
proffered assistance of Athens; and the Athe- 
nian army having soon after taken the field, 
were admitted within the Theban walls, and 
treated with all the flattering distinctions of 
ancient hospitality.! 

Mean while Philip having advanced towards 
the Beotian frontier, his detached parties were 
foiled in two rencounters with the confederates. 
Regardless of these losses, to which, perhaps, he 
purposely submitted, as necessary stratagems to 
draw the enemy from their walls, he proceeded 
with his main body, thirty-two thousand strong, 
to the plain of Cheronea. This place was 
considered by Philip as well adapted to the 
operations of the Macedonian phalanx; and the 
ground for his encampment, and afterwards the 
field of battle, were chosen with equal sagacity; 
having in view, on one side, a temple of Her- 
cules, whom the Macedonians regarded as the 
author of their royal house, and the high pro- 
tector of their fortune; and, on the other, the 
banks of the Thermodon, a small river flowing 
into the Cephissus, announced by the oracles of 
Greece as the destined scene of desolation and 
wo to their unhappy country.? The generals 
of the confederate Greeks had been much less 
careful to avail themselves of the powerful 
sanctions of superstition. Unrestrained by in- 
auspicious sacrifices, the Athenians had left 
their city at th: exhortation of Demosthenes, to 
wait no other omen but the cause of their coun- 
try. Regardless of oracles, they afterwards ad- 
vanced to the ill-fated Thermodon, accom- 


1 Demosthenes, who furnishes the above narrative, avoids 
dwelling on the following melancholy events, which are re- 
lated by Diodorus, l. xvi. p. 475. et seq. Plut. in Alexand. 
Strabo, l. ix. p. 414. Justin. |. ix.c. iii. et Pausanias Bæotic. 

2 Plut. in Vit. Demosth. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Canar 


panied by the Thebans, and the scanty rein- 
forcements raised by the islands, the states of 
Peloponnesus, which had joined their alliance. 
Their army amounted to thirty thousand men, 
animated by the noblest cause for which men 
can fight, but commanded by the Athenians 
Lysicles and Chares, the first but liftle, and 
the second unfavourably, known; and by The- 
agenes the Theban, a person strongly suspected 
of treachery ; all three creatures of cabal, and 
tools of faction, slaves of interest or voluptu- 
ousness, whose characters (especially as they 
had been appointed to command the only states 
whose shame, rather tlan virtue, yet opposed 
the public enemy) are alone sufficient to prove 
that Greece was ripe for ruin. 

When the day approached for abolishing the 
tottering independence of those turbulent re- 
publics, which their own internal vices, and the 
arms and intrigues of Philip, had been gradually 
undermining for twenty-two years, both armies 
formed in battle array before the rising of the 
sun. The right wing of the Macedonians was 
headed by Philip, who judged proper to oppose 
in person the dangerous fury of the Athenians. 
His son Alexander, only nineteen years of age, 
but surrounded by experienced officers, com- 

| manded the left wing, which faced tne Sacred 
| Band of the Thebans. The auxiliaries of either 


were posted in the centre. In the begin- 
| 


impetuousity, and repelled the opposing divi- 
sions of the enemy; but the youthful ardour 
of Alexander obliged the Thebans? to retire, the 
Sacred Band being cut down to a man. The 
activity of the young prince completed their dis- 
order, and pursued the scattered multitude with 
his Thessalian cavalry. 

Mean time the Athenian generals, too much 
elated by their first advantage, lost the opportu- 
nity to improve it; for, having repelled the cen- 
tre and right wing of the Macedonians, except 
the phalanx, which was composed of chosen 
men, and immediately commanded by the king, 
they, instead of attempting to break this formi- 
dable body, by attacking it in flank, pressed 
forward against the fugitives, the insolent Lysi- 
cles exclaiming in vain triumph, “ Pursue, my 
brave countrymen! let us drive the cowards to 
Macedon.” Philip observed this rash folly 
with contempt, and saying to those around him, 
“our enemies know not how to conquer,” 
commanded his phalanx, by a rapid evolution, 
to gain an adjacent eminence, from which they 
poured down, firm and -collected, on the ad- 
vancing Athenians, whose confidence of success 
had rendered them totally insensible to danger. 
But the irresistible shock of the Macedonian 
spear converted their fury into despair. Above 
a thousand fell, two thousand were taken pri- , 
soners; the rest escaped by a precipitate and 
shameful flight. Of the Thebans more were 
killed than taken. Few of the confederates 
perished, as they had little share in the action, 
and as Philip, perceiving his victory to be com- 
plete. gave orders to spare the vanquished, with 
a clemency unusual in that age, and not less 
honourable to his understanding than his heart; 


ning of the action, the Athenians charged with 
| 


3 Plutarch. in Alexand. 
4 Polyen. Stratagem. l. iv. c. ìi. 


XXXVI] 


since his humanity thus subdued the minds, 
and gained the affections, of his conquered 
enemies. 

According to the Grecian custom, the battle 
was followed by an entertainment, at which the 
king, presiding in person, received the congratu- 
lations of his friends, and the humble supplica- 
tions of the Athenian deputies, who craved the 
bodies of their slain. Their request, which 
served as an acknowledgment of their defeat, 
was readily granted; but before they availed 
themselves of the permission to carry off their 
dead, Philip, who with his natural intemperance, 
had protracted the entertainment till morning, 
issued forth with his licentious companions to 
visit the field of battle; their heads crowned 
with festive garlands, their minds intoxicated 
with the insolence of wine and victory ; yet the 
sight of the slaughtered Thebans, which first 
presented itself to their eyes, and particularly 
the sacred band of friends and lovers, who lay 
covered with honourable wounds, on the spot 
where they had been drawn up to fight, brought 
back these insolent spectators to the sentiments 
of reason and humanity. Philip belield the 
awful scene with a mixture of admiration and 
pity; and, after an affecting silence, denounc- 
ed a solemn curse against those who basely 
suspected the friendship of such brave men 
to be tainted with criminal and infamous pas- 
sions.§ 

But this serious temper of mind did not last 
long; for having proceeded to that quarter of 
the field where the Athenians had fought and 
fallen, the king abandoned himself to all the 
levity and littleness of the most petulant joy. 
Instead of being impressed with a deep sense of 
his recent danger, and with dutiful gratitude to 
Heaven for the happiness of his escape, and the 
importance of his victory, Philip only compared 
the boastful pretensions, witli the mean per- 
formances of his Athenian enemies; and, struck 
by this contrast, rehearsed, with the insolent 
mockery of a buffoon, the pompous declaration 
of war lately drawn up by the ardent patriotism 
and too sanguine hopes of Demosthenes. It 
was on this occasion that the orator Demades 
at once rcbuked the folly, and flattered the am- 
bition of Philip, by asking him, Why he assumed 
the character of Thersites, when fortune assign- 
ed him the part of Agamemnon ?7 

Whatever might be the effect of this sharp re- 
primand, it is certain that the king of Macedon 
indulged not, on any future occasion, a vain 
triumph over the vanquished. When advised 
by his generals to advance into Attica, and to 
render himself master of Athens, he only re- 
plied, “Have I done so much for glory, and 
shall I destroy the theatre of that glory?”9 His 
subsequent conduct corresponded with the mo- 
deration of this sentiment. He restored, with- 
out ransom, the Athenian prisoners; who, at 
departing, having demanded their baggage, were 
also gratified in this particular; the king plea- 
santly obscrving, that the Athenians seemcd to 


5 Pausan. Achaic. Diodor. et Justin, nbi supra. 

6 Plutarch in Pelopid. 7 Plutarch in Demosthen. 

8 Plutarch ascribes to this smart observation the modera- 
tion of Philip’s subsequent conduct. 

9 Plutarch in Apophth. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


sssaaa eaaa et 


419 


think he had not conquered tlem in earnest.!0 
Soon afterwards he despatched his son Alexan- 
der, and Antipater, the most trusted of his mi- 
nisters, to offer them peace on such favourable 
terms as they had little reason to expect. They 
were required to send deputies to the Isthmus 
of Corinth, where, to adjust their respective 
contingents of troops for the Persian expedition, 
Philip purposed assembling, early in the spring, 
a general convention of all the Grecian states; 
they were ordered to surrender the isle of Sa- 
mos, which actually formed the principal station 
of their fleet, and the main bulwark and de- 
fence of all their maritime or insular posses- 
sions; but they were allowed to enjoy, unmo- 
lested, the Attic territory, with their hereditary 
form of government, and flattered by the ac- 
quisition of Oropus, for which they had so long 
contended with the unhappy Thebans."! It was 
not merely in being deprived of this city, that 
the Thebans experienced the indignation of the 
conqueror. From the transactions between Ma- 
cedon and Thebes, in the early part of his 
reign, Philip thought himself entitled to treat 
that people, not as open and generous enemies, 
whose struggle for freedom deserved his cle- 
mency, but as faithless and insidious rebels, 
who merited all the severity of his justice. He 
punished the republican party with unrelenting 
rigour; restored the traitors, whom they had 
banished, to tlie first honours of the republic; 
and, in order to support their government, 
placed a Macedonian garrison in the Theban 
citadel. !2 

In his opposite treatment of the two repub- 
lics, Philip, it is probable, was swayed neither 
by affection nor hatred; his generosity and his 
rigour were alike artificial, and both directed by 
his interest. Besides the different characters of 
the Thebans and Athenians, which rendered the 
former as sensible to the impression of fear, as 
the latter were susceptible of gratitude and es- 
teem, the Thebans had too long, and too early, 
abandoned the cause of Greecc, and too strenu- 
ously exerted themselves in establishing the 
power of Macedon, to acquire much reputation 
by one unsuccessful attempt to resist Philip, to 
which they had been at length roused less by 
their own public spirit or courage, than by the 
zeal and eloquence of Demosthenes. The Athe- 
nians, on the contrary, who from the beginning 
had opposed the views of this prince, though 
with far less prudence and activity than their 
situation required; who, through the whole 
course of his reign, had continued to traverse 
his measures, and to spurn his authority ; and 
who, previously to the last fatal encounter at 
Cheronea, had endeavoured to form a gencral 
confederacy, and when that proved impossible, 
had determined, alniost unassisted and alone, to 
resist the common foe, seemed entitled to such 
gratitude and applause, as compassion bestows 
on ill-directed valour and unfortunate patriot- 
ism; and the rigorous treatment of such a peo- 
ple must have shocked the sentiments, and ex- 
asperated the hatred, of every citizen of Greece, 
who yet retained the faintest tincture of ancient 


JO Plutarch in Apophth. 
1] Pausanias Beotic. Diodorus. ubi supra. 
12 Justin. l. ix. c. iv. 


420 


principles, or who was still animated by the 
smallest spark of public spirit. 

Philip too well understood his interest, thus 
to tarnish the glory, and risk the fruits of vic- 
tory, although the daring and imprudent beha- 
viour of the Athenians, after the battle, might 
have served to justify the harshest measures. 
The first news of their defeat filled the city with 
tumult or consternation. But when the disor- 
der ceased, the people showed themselves dispos- 
edto place their whole confidence in arms, none 
in the mercy of Philip. Upon the motion of 
Hyperides,' a decree passed for sending to the 
Pireus their wives, children, and most valuable 
effects, together with the sacred images and or- 
namnents of their gods. By the same decree, the 
rights and freedom of the city were bestowed on 
strangers and slaves, and restored to persons de- 
clared infamous, on this one condition, that they 
exerted themselves in the public defence. De- 
mosthenes, with equal success, proposed a decree 
for repairing the walls and fortifications, a work 
which, being himself appointed to superintend, 
he generously accomplished at the expense of his 
private fortune.? The orator Lycurgus under- 
took the more easy task of impeaching the 
worthless Lysicles, whose misconduct in the 
day of battle had been the immediate cause of 
the late fatal disaster. In a discourse calculated 
to revive the spirit of military enthusiasm, which 
had anciently animated the Athenians, the 
speaker thus warmly apostrophised the con- 
scious guilt of the mute and trembling general: 
“ The Athenians have been totally defeated in 
an engagement; the enemy have erected a 
trophy to the eternal dishonour of Athens; and 
Greece is now prepared to receive the detested 
yoke of servitude. You were our commander 
on that inglorious day; and still you breathe 
the vital air, enjoy the light of the sun, and ap- 
pear in our public places, a living monument 
of the disgrace and ruin of yourcountry.” The 
quick resentment of the hearers supplied the 
consequence, and the criminal was dragged to 
execution.3 

Neither the inflammatory decrees, nor the 
hostile preparations of Athens, could shake the 
moderation of Philip, or determine him to alter 
the favourable terms of accommodation, which 
he had already proposed by his ambassadors. 
The patriotic or republican party, headed by the 
orators just mentioned, breathed hatred and re- 
venge; but, at the intercession of the Areopagus, 
which on this occasion acted suitably to the 
fame of its ancient wisdom, the prudent and 
virtuous Phocion‘ was appointed to the chief 
command. The discernment of this statesman 
and general, whose merit had been neglected 
while it was yet time to perform any essential 
service, might easily perceive the vanity of at- 
tempting to recover the honour of a people, 
who, antecedently to their defeat by Philip, had 
been still more fatally subdued by their own 
pernicious vices. Amidst the important events 
of the Macedonian war, and amidst the dread- 
ful misfortunes which, in consequence of its 


a 


2 Demosth. de Corona. 


1 Plot. in Vita Hyperid. 
4 Plutarch in Phocion. 


3 Diodor. l. xvi. p. 477. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuapr. 


melancholy issue, hung over their country, a 
set of Athenian citizens, distinguished by their 
rank and fortune, and known by the appellation 
of the Sixty, from the accidental number of 
their original institution, daily assembled into 
a club, where all serious transactions were 
treated with levity and ridicule, and the time 
totally dedicated to feasting, gaming, and the 
sprightly exercises of wit and pleasantry. This 
detestable society saw,> without emotion, their 
countrymen arming for battle; with the most 
carelgss indifference they received accounts of 
their captivity or death; nor did the public ca- 
lamities in any degree disturb their festivity, or 
interrupt, for a moment, the tranquil course of 
their pleasures. Their fame having reached 
Macedon, Philip sent them a sum of money, to 
support the expense of an institution so favour- 
able to his views. But what opinion must 
Phocion have formed of such an establishment; 
or how was it possible for any dispassionate 
man of ordinary prudence to expect, that a re- 
public so totally degenerate, as to foster such 
wretches within its bosom, could successfully 
wage War against a vigilant and enterprising 
enemy ? 

The arguments of the wisest portion of the 
community for accepting the peace proffered by 
Philip, were strengthened and confirmed by the 
return of Demades with the Athenian prisoners 
taken at Chæronæa, who unanimously blazed 
forth the praises of their generous conqueror. 
Ambassadors were accordingly despatched to 
the king of Macedon, to accept and ratify the 
treaty of peace, upon the terms which he had 
condescended to offer; and the only marks of 
deference shown to the violent party, who still 
clamoured for war, were, that Demochares, 
who ostentatiously affected a rude boldness of 
speech against Philip, was named among the 
ambassadors; and that Demosthenes, the irre- 
concilable enemy of that prince, was appointed 
to pronounce the funeral oration in honour of 
those slain at Cheronea. 

Demochares acquitted himself of his commis- 
sion with that extravagant petulance which 
naturally flowed from his character; and which, 
in the Grecian commonwealths, too frequently 
disgraced the decency of public transactions. 
At their audience of leave, Philip, with less 
sincerity than politeness, lavished on the am- 
bassadors his usual professions of friendship, 
and obligingly asked them, if there was any 
thing farther in whieh he could gratify the 
Athenians? ‘ Yes,” said Demochares, “ hang 
thyself.” The just indignation of all present 
broke forth against this unprovoked insolence, 
when Philip, with admirable coolness, silenced 
the clamour, by saying, “Let this ridiculous 
brawler depart unmolested ;” and then turning 
to the other ambassadors, * Go, tell your coun- 
trymen, that those who can utter such out- 
rages are less just and moderate, than he who 
can pardon them.’ 

The honourable employment conferred on 
Demosthenes, which showed that, notwith- 
standing the unfortunate issue of his councils, 
the Athenians still approved his principles and 


5 Athenzus, l. xiv. p. 614. 6 Seneca de Ira. 


XXXVIL] 


his patriotism, might have been expected to 
elevate his sentiments and his language to the 
highest strain of eloquence. But the complec- 
tion of the times no longer adinitted those daring 
flights to which he had been accustomed to 
soar; and the powers of the orator seem to 
have declined with the fortunes of his country. 
With too apparent caution he avoids the men- 
tion of all recent transactions, and dwells with 
tiresome minuteness on the ancient, and even 
fabulous parts, of the Athenian story. One 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


421 


transient flash of light breaks forth towards the 
end of his discourse, when commemorating the 
glory of the slain, he says, that the removal of 
those zealous republicans from their country 
was like taking the sun from the world; a 
figure bold, yet just; since, after the battle of 
Cheronea, there remained no further hopes of 
resisting the conqueror—the dignity of freedom 
was for ever lost, and the gloom of night 
and tyranny descended and thickened over 
Greece.8 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


Liberal Spirit of the Macedonian Government—Philip appointed General of the Greeks—Re- 
bellion of Illyria—Assassination of Philip—His Character—Accession of Alexander—His Ex- 
pedition against the Illyrians and Triballi—He passes the Danube—Rebellion in Greece—De- 
struction of Thebes—Heroism of Timoclea—Alexander crosses the Hellespont—Stale of the Per- 
sian Empire—Balile of the Granicus—Siege of Miletus and Halicarnassus—Bold Adventure of 
two Macedonian Soldiers—Alexander’s judicious Plan of War—Arts by which he secured his 
Conquests—The Battle of Issus—The Virtues of Alexander expand with his prosperity. 


(THE Greeks acknowledged, with reluctance 

and sorrow, that by the decisive victory of 
Cheeronea, Philip became master of their coun- 
try.2 But we should form a very erroneous 
notion of the Macedonian government, if we 
compared it with the.despotism of the East, or 
the absolute dominion of many European mo- 
narchs. The authority of Philip, even in his 
hereditary realm, was modeled on that admira- 
ble system of power and liberty, which distin- 
guished and ennobled the policies of the heroic 
ages.'0 He administered thé religion, decided 
the differences, and commanded the valour, of 
soldiers and freemen.!! Personal merit entitled 


7 Qaoreg yup Et Tig Ex TOU xaFerTYyXOTOS KOTMOU TO OWE 
§ZEAOSTO, durx~eens xxt XLAEMOS ATAÇ O AEbTTOMEVOS yiv 
bsogs ourw Twvde gvôpwyv avxtgeevTwv, EV TXOTEL Kab TOAAN 
Surxrern was o mewtoç yros Twv EAAnvwv yevove. p. 155. 
“ For, as if light were taken froin the world, the remaining 
life of inortals would be involved in difficulty and misery ; 
so by the death of those warriors, the original glory of 
Greece was buried in darkness and ignominy.” Of his dis- 
course, which Libanius denis to be genuine, many passages 
are corrupt, and many interpolated. The general debility 
of the whole may be explained by the observation in the 
text, without having recourse to the defence of Wolfius: 
“ Orationem Libanius Demosthenis esse negat ut vilem et 
imbecillem omnino Quod quis miretur, cnm et argumentum 
sit imbecille?" Demosthen. edit. Wolf. p. 152. 

8 Hic dies universe Grecia, et gloriain dominationis, et 
yetustissimam libertatem finivit. Justin. |. ix. e. iii. De- 
mosthenes, Diodorus, Strabo, and Pausanias, all express 
the same sentiments, and nearly in the same words. 

9 Demosth. Æschin. Diodor. Plutarch. Arrian, passim. 
I shal! cite only the words of Strabo: “ Xzigwveiz Se orou 
Dirimmos o Auvvrou psyxziwç vixnons ASyvauious TE x% 
Boswrous xz: Kopivicous, xuterty Tyg EAAxdo¢ xuproçg,” 
“ And Cheronæn, where Philip, the son of Amyntns, hav- 
ing conquered the Athenians, Bæotians, and Corinthians, 
in a great battle, rendered himself master of Greece.” 
Sirab. Geograph. l. ix. p. 414. 

10 When Alexander, intoxicated with progperity, claim- 
ed too exalted honours, he was told by Callisthenes the 
philosopher, “Os mesyovot e% Aeyous sis Muxedovexyv 
mAGov, oude Ciz xax vouw Maxedovewv aomouvTss Tietsre- 
cozy.” “Your ancestors came from Argos to Macedon, and 
continued there, governing the Macedonians, not by force, 
but by law.” Arrian. Exped. Alexand. p. 87. 

11 Iu capital cases, says Curtius, the soldiers judged in 
time of war the citizens in time of peace. He then adds, 


him to hold the sceptre, which, being derived 
from Jove, could not long be swayed by un- 
worthy hands. The superiority of his abilities, 
the vigilant and impartial justice of his adminis- 
tration, formed the main pillars of his preroga- 
tive; since, according to the principles and feel- 
ings of the Macedonians, he who infringed the 
rights of his subjects,!2 ceased from that mo- 
ment to be a king. 

Having effected the conquest of Greece, the 
prudence of Philip could not be supposed am- 
bitious of introducing into that country more 
severe maxims of government than those which 
prevailed in Macedon. He affected, on the 
contrary, to preserve inviolate the ancient forms 
of the republican constitution, and determined 
to govern the Greeks by the same policy with 
which he had subdued them. While Macedo- 
nian garrisons kept possession of Thermopyle 
and the other strong holds of Greece, the faith- 
ful and active partisans of Philip controlled the 
resolutions, and directed the measures, of each 
particular republic. The superintendence of the 
sacred games, as well as of the Delphic temple, 
rendered him the only visible head of the na- 
tional religion: in consequence of the double 
right of presiding and voting in the Amphictyo- 
nic council, he appeared in the character of su- 
preme civil magistrate of Greece; and his illus- 
trious victory at Chæronæa over the only com- 
munities that opposed his greatness, pointed 
him out as the general best entitled to conduct 
the military force of Greece and Macedon in 
the long-projected invasion of Persia; an office 
which, as he might have assumed it without 
blame, he therefore solicited with applause 
from the impartial suffrages of the people.'3 


“ Nihil potestas regum valebat nisi prius valuisset auctori- 
tas;” seilicet popnli. Curtius, l. vi. €. ix. p. 44l. 
12 A very mean subject literally told Philip, “Ifyou re. 
fuse todo me justice, cense to he a king.” Pint. Apophth 
13 Diodor. l. xvi. p. 556. Twy EAAgvwy sdouevay auroy 
rrextnyov, &C. 


422 

one That this condescension must 
an p have been highly flattering to the 
A i C. 337 vanity of the Greeks, appears from 


the transactions at Corinth, where 
Philip, the year following the battle of Chæro- 
nea, had assembled a general convention of the 
Amphictyonic states.! In this assembly, Dias 
of Ephesus represented, with affecting energy, 
the vexations and oppression which the feeble 
colonies of Asia daily experienced from the ra- 
pacious cruelty of the Persian satraps. The 
general voice of the assembly approved his 
complaint, while they recollected, with indig- 
nation, the continual outrages of a people who 
had anciently invaded their country, insulted 
their religion, burned their temples, and, not 
satisfied with these acts of vengeance, had re- 
duced and oppressed their colonies, and uninter- 
raptedly excited and nourished those cruel ani- 
mosities which had long filled every part of 
Greece with sedition and blood.2 Philip had 
private wrongs to urge against the Persians, 
whose hatred and jealousy had, on several oc- 
casions, thwarted his measures and disturbed 
his government. Yet he insisted chiefly on 
their public injuries, and notorious enmity to 
the whole Grecian name, the honour of which 
could only be redeemed by a successful expedi- 
tion into Asia. 

This expedition was determined with uni- 
versal consent. Philip was appointed general 
of the confederacy; and (although the Lacede- 
monians sullenly absented themselves from the 
convention) when the several states came to 
ascertain the contingent of troops which they 
could respectively raise, the whole, exclusive 
of the Macedonians, amounted to two hundred 
and twenty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand 
horse ;3 a prodigious force, of which the do- 
mestic dissensions of the Greeks had hitherto, 
perhaps, prevented them from forming an ade- 
quate notion. On no former occasion had the 
several republics appeared so thoroughly united 
in one common cause; never had they shown 
themselves so sensible of their combined strength; 
never had they testified such general alacrity 
to take the field, or such unlimited confidence 
in the abilities of their commander. 

It belongs to the biographers of 


ee the king of Macedon, to examine 
A. C. 336 the circumstances of the bloody 


transaction which clouded this glo- 
rious prospect. In the general history of Greece, 
it is sufficient to mention, that Philip, having 
despatched Parmenio with a body of troops to 
protect the Asiatic colonies, was prevented 
from immediately following that commander 
by an insurrection of the Illyrian tribes.¢ This 
unseasonable diversion from the greatest enter- 
prise of his reign, was rendered more formida- 
ble by the domestic discord which shook the 
palace of Philip. A spirit less proud and jea- 
lous than that of Olympias, mother of Alexan- 
der, might have been justly provoked by the 
continual infidelities of her husband, who, 
whether at home or abroad, in peace or in war, 
never ceased to augment the number of his 


3 Justin. l. ix. c. v. 


1 Diodor. l. xvi. p. 556. 
4 Diodor. ad Olymp. 


2 Isocrat. Orat. ad. Philip. 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


[Cuar. 


wives or concubines.5 The generous mind of 
Alexander must naturally have espoused the 
cause of his mother, although his own interest 
had not been deeply concerned in preventing 
Philip from continually giving him so many 
new rivals to the throne. The young prince 
defended the rights of Olympias and his own, 


‘with the inipetuosity natural to his character; 


at the nuptials of Philip with Cassandra, the 
niece of Attalus, one of his generals and favour- 
ites, an open rupture broke out between the im- 
perious father and his more haughty son; and 
the latter, concluding all those to be his own 
friends who were enemies to the former, sought 
refuge among the rebellious Illyrians, who were 
already in arms against their sovereign. 

The dexterity of Philip extricated 


Soe. him from these difficulties. Having 
AC 996 conquered the Illyrians, he softened 


Alexander by assuring him that his 
illustrious merit, which was alike admired in 
Greece and Macedon, had not escaped the 
anxious vigilance of a parent, who, by giving 
him many rivals to the throne, had only given 
him an opportunity of surpassing them all in 
glory, and in the merited affection of the Ma- 
cedonians.? Soothed by this condescension, 
Olympias and her son again appeared at the 
court with the distinction due to their rank; 
and to announce and confirm this happy recon- 
cilement with his family, Philip married his 
beloved daughter Cleopatra to the king of Epi- 
rus, maternal uncle of Alexander; and celebrat- 
ed the nuptials by a magnificent festival which 
lasted several days, during which the Greeks 
and Macedonians vied with each other in show- 
ing their obsequious respect towards their com- 
mon general and master. 

Amidst the tumultaous amusements of the 
festivity, Philip often appeared in public with 
unguarded confidence in the fidelity and attach- 
ment of all his subjects: but proceeding one 
day from the palace to the theatre, he was 
stabbed to the heart by Pausanias, -a Mace- 
donian; whether the assassin was stimulated 
merely by private resentment, or prompted by 
the ill-appeased rage of Olympias, or instigated 
to commit this atrocity by the Persian satraps; 
which last is asserted by Alexander,’ who al- 
leged the assassination of his father among his 
reasons for invading the Persian empire. 

Thus fell Philip of Macedon, in the forty- 
seventh year of his age and twenty-fourth of 
his reign; the first prince whose life and actions 
history hath described with such regalar accu- 
racy, and circumstantial fulness, as render his 
administration a matter of instraction to suc- 
ceeding ages. With a reach of foresight and 
sagacity peculiar to himself, he united all the 
prominent features of the Grecian character, 
valour, eloguence, address, flexibility to vary 
his conduct without changing his purpose, the 
most extraordinary powers of application and 
perseverance, of cool combination and ardent 
execution. Intercepted in the middle of his 
career by the hand of an assassin, he was pre- 
vented from undertaking the justest and noblest 


5 Atheneus, l. xiii. 7 Plut. Apophth. 
6 Plutarch. in Alexand. 8 Diodor. et Justin. ubi supra. 
9 Arrian. |. ii. c. iii. et Curtius, |. iv- €. i. 


XXXVIL.] 


design of his reign; a design which he had long 
meditated, and in which his near prospect of 
success promised to reward the labours and 
dangers of his toilsome life. Had not his days 
been shortened by a premature death, there a 
good reason to believe that he might have sub- | 
dued the Persian empire; an enterprise more | 
dazzling, but less difficult, than the exploits | 
which he had already achieved. Had that 
event taken place, the arduous undertakings of 
his long and successful reign would have been | 
ennobled and illuminated by the splendour 
of extensive foreign conquest; Philip would 
have reached the height of such renown as is 
obtained by the habits of activity, vigilance, 
and fortitude in the pursuit of unbounded great- 
ness; and, in the opinion of posterity, would 
perhaps have surpassed the glory of all kings 
and conquerors, who either preceded or fol- 
lowed him. Yet, even on this supposition, 
there is not any man of sense and probity, who, 
if he allows himself time for serious reflection, 
would purchase the imagined grandeur and 
prosperity of the king of Macedon, at the price 
of his artifices and crimes; and to a philoso- 
pher, who considered either the means by 
which he had obtained his triumphs, or the pro- 
bable consequences of his dominion over Greece 
and Asia, the busy ambition of this mighty con- 
queror would appear but a deceitful scene of 
splendid misery. 

A prince who is his own minister, 


prr: and almost the sole depository of 
A. C. 336. his own secrets, commonly leaves 


an arduous task for the labours of 
his successor. This difficulty presented itself 
to Alexander; but it was not the only circum- 
stance that rendered his situation difficult. The 
regular order of succession had never been 
clearly established in Macedon, and was, in 
some measure, incompatible with the spirit of 
royal government, which, as then generally 
understood, required such qualities and accom- 
plishments in the first magistrate, as could not 
be expected from a promiscuous line of here- 
ditary princes. The numerous wives of Philip 
had, however, been most fruitful in female off- 
spring. Nor had Alexander much to appre- 
hend from the rivalship of his brothers, since 
Ptolemy, born of Arsinoë, and afterwards king 
of Egypt, was reputed to be the son of Lagus, 
to whom Philip had married Arsinoé, while she 
was with child by himself; and Arideeus, the 
son of Philina, who, for six years after the death 
of Alexander, held a pageant royalty in the 
East, by the terror of his brother’s name, and 
through the discordant ambition of his lieu- 
tenants, possessed not vigour of mind eagerly 
to dispute the succession. But Alexander’s title 
was contested by Amyntas, son of Perdiccas, 
the elder brother of Philip, in whose name the 
last mentioned prince originally administered 
the government, till the tender age of Amyntas 
being rejected by the Macedonians, Philip so 
little feared the revival of his pretensions to the 
throne, that he had given him his daughter Cyna 
in marriage. This new advantage strengthen- 
ed the claim of Amyntas, which, it was proba- 
ble, would be warmly supported by Attalus, a 
bold and enterprising commander, the personal 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


423 


enemy of Olympias and her son, of whom the 
former had recently put to death his kinswo- 
man Cleopatra, with shocking circumstances of 
cruelty. Alexander privately took measures 
with his friends for crushing those dangerous 
|enemies;!0 and, being acknowledged king of 
| Macedon, hastened into Greece to reap the 
fruits of his father’s labours, which might be 
lost by delay. 

In his journey thither, he experienced the per- 
fidious inconstancy of the Thessalians, whom 
he chastised with proper severity; and having 
assembled the deputies of the states at Corinth, 
he was invested with the same honours!! which 
had been conferred on his predecessor. During 
his residence in that city there happened an in- 
cident which more clearly displays the charac- 
ter of Alexander, than can be done by the most 
elaborate description. Curiosity led him to 
visit Diogenes the cynic, whose singular man- 
ners and mode of life have been mentioned on 
a former occasion. He found him basking in 
the sun,!? and, having made himself known as 
the master of Macedon and Greece, asked the 
philosopher, what he could do to oblige him? 
“ Stand from between me and the sun,” was 
the answer of the cynic: upon which the king 
observed to his attendants, “that he would 
choose to be Diogenes,'3 if he were not Alex- 
ander.” The observation was natural and 
sublime; since, under the most dissimilar veils 
of external circumstances and pursuits, their 
characters concealed a real resemblance. Both 
possessed that proud erect spirit which disdains 
authority, spurns control, and aspires to domi- 
neer over fortune. But by diminishing the 
number of his wants, Diogenes found, in his 
tub, that independence of mind, which Alex- 
ander, by the unbounded gratification of his de- 
sires, could not attain on the imperial throne of 
Persia. 

Alexander having returned to 


es Macedon, prepared for his eastern 
AC 335 expedition by diffusing the terror of 

ta * his name among the northern Bar- 
harians. The Illyrians and Triballi, mindful 


of the injuries of Philip, had hastily taken arms 
to oppose, ere it became too late, the youth 
and inexperience of his son. But the discern- 
ment of the young prince readily perceived the 
danger of leaving such formidable enemies on 
his frontier. With a well-appointed army, he 
marched from Amphipolis, and, leaving the city ` 
Phihppi and Mount Orbelus on the left, arrived 
in ten days at the principal pass of Mount Hæ- 
mus, which led into the territory of the Triballi. 
There he found a new, and not less formidable 
enemy. The independent tribes of Thrace, 
having embraced the cause of the Triballi, had 
seized an eminence commanding the pass; and, 
instead of a breastwork, had fortified them- 
seives with their carriages or wagons, which 
they purposed to roll down on the Macedo- 
nians. To elude this unusual attack, Alexan- 
der commanded such of his troops as could not 
conveniently open their ranks, and allow free 


10 Diodorus, l. xvii. 2, et seq. et Justin. xi. i, et seq. 
11 Idem, ibid. 

12 Pausan. |. ii. p. 88. 

13 Laertius in Vit. Diogen. 


424 


issue to the intended violence, to fall flat on the 
ground, and carefully close their shields, that 
the descending wagons might harmlessly bound 
over them. In consequence of this contrivance, 
the hostile artillery was exhausted in vain. 
Alexander then attacked the Thracians with 
admirable order and celerity. Fifteen hundred 
fell; their swiftness and knowledge of the 
country saved the greater number. The pri- 
soners, women, and booty, were sent for sale 
to the maritime cities on the Euxine.! 
Alexander having entrusted this business to 
Lysanias and Philotas, passed the mountains, 
and pursued the Triballi. By galling them 
with his bowmen and slingers, he gradually 
forced them from their fastnesses, and defeated 
a powerful body of their warriors encamped 
on the woody banks of the Lyginus, distant 
three days’ march from the Danube. The re- 
mainder of the nation, conducted by the valour 
of their chieftain Syrmus, and reinforced by a 
numerous band of Thracians, took refuge in 
Peucé, an island in the Danube, defended by 
abrupt and rugged banks, surrounded by deep 
and foaming streams. Alexander, though he 
had just received some ships of war from By- 
zantium, judged it too hazardous to assault the 
island; and the hostile appearance of the Gete 
on the northern bank, furnished him with an 
honourable pretence for declining the siege of 
Peucé. On the margin of the Danube, that 
audacious people had drawn up four thousand 
horse, and above ten thousand foot, showing, 
by their countenance and demeanour, a deter- 
mined resolution to oppose the landing of an 
enemy. Provoked by those signs of defiance, 
and animated by the glory of passing the great- 
est of all European rivers, and that which was 
surrounded with the greatest and most warlike 
nations, Alexander filled the hides used in en- 
campment with straw and other buoyant ma- 
terials, and collected all the boats employed by 
the natives of those parts in fishing, commerce, 
or piracy. Amidst the darkness of the ensu- 
ing night, he thus transported fifteen hundred 
cavalry, and four thousand infantry, to that part 
of the opposite bank, which was covered with 
high and thick corn. At the dawn of day, he 
commanded his foot to march through those 
rich fields? with transversed spears; while they 
remained concealed in the corn, the cavalry 
followed them; but as soon as they emerged 
into the naked plain, the horse advanced to the 
front, and both suddenly presenting an irresisti- 
ble object of terror, the Gete abandoned their 
post, and fled to their city, which was four 
miles distant. There, they at first purposed to 
make a vigorous defence; but perceiving that 
Alexander cautiously skirted the river, to avoid 
the danger of an ambush, reflecting on his as- 
tonishing boldness in passing, without a bridge, 
the Danube in one night, and beholding the 
impenetrable firmness of his phalanx, and the 
irresistible impetuosity of his cavalry,’ they 


1 Arrian. Alexand. Expedit. l. i. p. 2, et seq. 

TlAxysxig Taig Txerroxzis eEmrsxrAsvavTes TOV TITOV, 
The spears were transversed, not only for the purpose of 
concealment, “ but to make a road through the corn.” 

3 @obeen Se tus pzazyyos n Suvedzess, Giziz Je y Tw 
swmewv exsorn, Arrian, p.4. Alexander knew the proper 
use of cavalry, which was so little understood in the last 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


regarded farther opposition as vain, forsook 
their habitations, and retired precipitately, with 
their wives and children, into the northern de- 
sert.4 

The Macedonians entered, and sacked the 
town. The spoil was entrusted to Philip and 
Meleager; Alexander, mindful of so many fa- 
vours, returned sacrifices of thanks to Jupiter, 
Hercules, and the god of the Danube; and, 
encamping on the northern bank of the river, 
received very submissive embassies from the 
surrounding nations. Even Syrmus, the intre- 
pid leader of the Triballi, sent propitiatory 
presents, and readily obtained pardon from a 
prince, who could admire virtue in a Barbarian, 
and an enemy. 5 

Necessity alone compelled Alexander to carry 
his arms into those inhospitable regions. Ani- 
mated by an ambition to subdue the Asiatic 
plains, he turned with contempt from bleak 
heaths and barren mountains, not deigning to 
chastise the boastful arrogance of the Celte. 
The Boii and Senones, Celtic or German tribes 
(for those nations were often confounded by 
the Greeks,) sent ambassadors to Alexander, 
who, observing their lofly stature and haughty 
spirit, endeavoured to humble them by asking, 
“ what, of all things, they most feared?” not 
doubting they would answer, “ yourself ;” but 
they replied, * the fall of heaven.” The king 
declared them his friends and allies, but whis- 
pered to those around him, “the Celt are an 
arrogant people.6 Could we admit the truth 
of this narrative, and believe that ambassadors 
were really sent to Alexander by the nations 
inhabiting the northern recesses of the Ionian 
gulf, it would be interesting to observe the early 
character and first proceedings of a people who 
were destined to subdue the conquerors of the 
Macedonian empire. 

In his return towards Pella, Alexander 
marched through the friendly country of the 
Peonians, where he received the unpleasant in- 
telligence that the Illyrian tribes were in arms, 
headed by Clitus, son of Bardyllis, the heredi- 
tary foe of Macedon. Glaucias, king of the 
Taulantii, prepared to join the arms of Clitus; 
the Autariade, likewise an Illyrian nation, had 
determined to obstruct the march of Alexander. 
Amidst these difficulties, he was encouraged by 
Langarus, chief of the Agrians, a warlike tribe 
inhabiting the ridges of Mount Hemus. Even 
in the life-time of Philip, Langarus’? had dis- 
cerned the superior merit of his son, with 
whom he had early entered into a confidential 
correspondence. Conducted by the activity of 
Langarus, the Agrian targeteers, who thence- 
forth had an important share in all the Mace- 
donian victories, invaded the country of the 
Autariade. Their ravages were equally rapid 
and destructive; the Autariade, broken by do- 


century, that the three ranks fired successively before the 
charge; each, after firing, passing, by a carocol, behind the 
rest. Gustavus Adolphus allowed only his first rank to 
fire; which was doubtless a great improvement, and paved 
the wav for reducing the service of cavalry to its true 
principle, what Arran calls “y Gsasx euSorn.” Å 

4 Arrian, l. i. p. 3 et seq. 5 Idem. ibid. 

6 Idem. p. 5. et Strabo, l. vii. p. 208 et 209. 

7 Aazyyzeog .. . xai ®ihirmou Cortos acral opivor 
Arskzvdgov zaas nyy xas sdem smpercsvers wag? auTov, 


Arrian, p. 5. 


XXXVIL] 


mestic calamity, or alarmed by private danger, 
abandoned the design of co-operating with the 
enemies of Alexander. That prince thus ad- 
vanced without opposition to Pellion, the prin- 
cipal strong-hold of the Illyrians. His army 
encamped on the banks of the Eordaicus. The 
enemy were posted on tlie adjacent mountains, 
and concealed among thick woods, purposing 
to attack the Macedonians by a sudden and 
united assault. But their courage failed them 
in the moment of execution. Not daring to 
wait the appreach of the phalanx, they preci- 
pitately retreated to their city, leaving behind 
them the horrid vestiges of their bloody super- 
stition, three boys, three maids, and as many 
black rams, which, having just sacrificed, they 
wanted time to remove.’ 

Mean while Glaucias, king of the Taulantii, 
approached with a great force? to relieve Pel- 
lion, and assist his ally. Alexander had des- 
patched Philotas to forage at the head of a 
strong body of cavalry. Glaucias attempted 
to intercept and cut off this detachment. Al- 
exander, leaving part of his army to awe Pel- 
lion, marched to the assistance of Philotas; 
Clitus reinforced Glaucias; a decisive action 
thus seemed inevitable, if the thickness of lofty 
forests, and the intricacies of winding moun- 
tains, had afforded a proper scene for a general 
engagement. The Barbarians excelled in know- 
ledge of the country ; the Macedonians in skill 
and courage. The war was widely diffused, 
and ably supported. But the discipline of Al- 
exander finally prevailed. By surprise, by 
stratagem, by the terror of his military en- 
gines, which destroyed at a distance, and by 
such prompt and skilful manœuvres!’ as had 
never been before seen, on the banks of the 
Apsus!! and Erigoné, he totally dispersed this 
immense cloud of Barbarians. Many were 
slain, and many made captive; a remnant hav- 
ing burnt their city, which they despaired be- 
ing able to defend, sought refuge among the 
Taulantian mountains.!? 

Mean while a report circulated in 


at Greece, that Alexander had perish- 
er 935 ed in Illyria; and as men readily 


believe that which their interests 
make them wish,!3 this vague rumour was gree- 
dily embraced by the part'sans of Grecian in- 
dependence. The Athenian demagogues re- 
sumed their usual boldness; the Lacedemonians 
already fancied themselves heading the revolt ;'! 
but the first acts of rebellion were committed 
by the Thebans, who, having secretly recalled 
their exiles, treacherously! murdered Amyntas 
and Timolaus, commanders of the Cadmaa, 


8 Arrian, p. 5. 

9 Mera monang Suvxpens. Idem. p.6. Neither Thrace 
nor Illyria were populous in those days; but as every man 
was a soldier, the princes of those countries often brought 
ninnerous armies into the field. 

10 These are laboriously described by Arrian, p. 6. who, 
it must be acknowledged, appears sometimes too fond of 
displaving his skill in tacties. 

l1 Otherwise called the Eordaicus. 

12 Arrian, p. 7. 

13 Ov yivwoxovtes Te ovra, Te uzrirTa xal’ yĝovyy 
ogiosy sixæfove ‘t Not knowing the truth, hope regulated 
their conjectures.” Idem. p. 8. 

14 The Lucedemonians, says Arrian, were yvwuziç 
egsotnxores, ‘revolted in their minds.” 

15 They scized them withont the garrison, ovdev 
UTOTOTYTLVTAG TOALMIOV, ane no hostility.” 

af 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


425 


and prepared to expel the Macedonian garrison 
from that fortress. 
Alexander, when apprised of 


Oly a ; these proceedings, relinquished the 
AC "995 pursuit of the Barbarians, descend- 


` ed by rapid marches along the west- 
ern frontier of Macedon, traversed Thessaly, 
entered Bæ ttia, and in the space of fourteen 
days after his receiving the first news of the 
rebellion, besieged and demolished Thebes. 
The decisive boldness of this measure has been 
highly extolled by historians, because nothing 
could have a more direct tendency to quash the 
seditious spirit of the Greeks, than the rapid 
punishment of T’hebes, which at once filled the 
neighbouring cities with pity and terror. A 
spectacle of that dreadful kind was necessary, 
it has been said, to secure the future tranquil- 
lity of Greece and Macedon, and to enable Al- 
exander to undertake his Persian expedition, 
without the danger of being interrupted by re- 
bellions in Europe.'® But, notwithstanding this 
sagacious reflection, it appears that the destruc- 
tion of Thebes was the effect, not of policy, 
but of obstinacy and accident. In approaching 
that unfortunate city, Alexander repeatedly 
halted, to allow the insurgents time to repent 
of their rashness. The wiser part of the The- 
bans proposed to embrace the opportunity of 
sending ambassadors to crave his pardon. But 
the exiles and authors of the sedition encou- 
raged the multitude to persevere; and instead 
of showing remorse for their past crimes, sent 
forth their cavalry and light infantry, who as- 
saulted and slew several of the Macedonian 
outguards,!7 

Exasperated by these irsults, Perdiccas, com- 
mander of an advanced party, attacked the 
Theban wall, without waiting the orders of 
Alexander. A breach was speedily effected ; 
the brigade of Perdiccas was followed by that 
of Amyntas, son of Andromenes; but both 
were so warnily received by the enemy, that 
Alexander saw the necessity of reinforcing 
them, lest they should be surrounded and cut 
off. The Thebaus were then repelled in their 
turn; but soon rallying, beat baek the assail- 
ants, and pursued them with disordered ranks. 
Alexander then seized the decisive moment of 
advancing with a close phalanx. His assault 
was irresistible. The Thebans fled amain; 
and such was their trepidation, that having en- 
tered their gates, they neglected to shut them 
against the pursuers. The Macedonians, and 
their Greek auxiliaries, thus rushed tumultu- 
ously into the place. A dreadful slaughter en- 
sued. The Phocians. Orchomenians, and Pla- 
teans, rejoiced at gaining an opportunity to 
gratify their implacable resentment against 


14 Plut. Diodor. Justin, Among the moderns, Mably snr 
les Grées, and the Jenrned author of the Examen des His- 
toriens d'Alexandre, who saya, p. 46. “ Alexandre devoit 
assurer sa domination dansla Gréce par qnelaneconp d’eciat, 
avant que de passer en Asie; la revolte de Thebes lui pre- 
senta une occasion favourable a ses vues.” Yet Arrian, 
whose narrative was copied from the relation of eye-wit- 
nesses, expresses, thrice inthe same page, tho reluctance 
of Alexander to attack the Thebans. Exdidoug ers toss 
OnExsots reslyv, ss msTeyVvOVTES EMI TOIÇ KaxwE tYVWT EES 
vors meeTCsuraivto mze’ svtov, And amin, Eni ye toig 
©ybxinig Six Corsuc EAGEIv MeAAOv Ti y Six KEVoUNOU JEA. 
And still to the same purpose, Aàsžævðęoç Js oude we TĄ 
morss wmeoreGaarev. Arrian, p. 8 

17 Arrian, p. 8, et seq 


426 


Thebes. The greater part of the citizens, ex- 
ceeding thirty thousand in’ number,! were 
either put to the sword or dragged intocaptivity. 
A feeble remnant escaped to Athens. The an- 
cient city of Cadmus was razed to the ground; 
but the citadel was still garrisoned by Macedo- 
nian troops, and long maintained as a conve- 
nient post for overawing the adjacent territory. 

The severities exercised against Thebes were 
reluctantly permitted by Alexander, at the in- 
stigation of the Grecian auxiliaries.2 The few 
acts of forbearance or mercy, which appeared in 
this lamentable transaction, flowed from the 
humanity of his own nature. By his particular 
orders, the house and family of Pindar were 
saved from the general desolation. He com- 
manded likewise, that the sacred families should 
be spared, as well as those connected with Ma- 
cedon by the ties of hospitality; and as he is 
the only great conqueror who built many more 
towns than he destroyed, he took care that the 
demolition of Thebes should be immediately 
followed by the restoration of Orchomenus and 
Platæa. Even the gloomiest events of his reign 
were distinguished by some flashes of light, that 
displayed his magnanimity. It happened in the 
sack of Thebes, that a band of fierce Thracians 
broke into the house of Timoclea, an illustrious 
Theban matron, the ornament of her sex. The 
soldiers plundered her house; their brutal com- 
mander violated her person. Having gratified 
his lust, he was next stimulated by avarice, and 
demanded her gold and silver. She conducted 
him to a garden, and showed him a well, into 
which she pretended to have thrown her most 
valuable treasure. With blind avidity, he stoop- 
ed to grasp it, while the woman, being behind, 
pushed him headlong into the cistern, and cov- 
ered him with stones. Timoclea was seized by 
the soldiers, and carried in chains to Alexander. 
Her firm gait, and intrepid aspect, commanded 
the attention of the conqueror. Having learned 
her crime, Alexander asked her, “© Who she 
was, that could venture to commit so bold a 
deed?” “I am,” replied she, “the sister of 
Theagenes, who fell at Cheronea, fighting 
against Philip in defence of Grecian freedom.” 
Alexander admired both her action and her an- 
. swer, and desired her to depart free with her 
children.3 While Alexander returned towards 
Macedon, he received many congratulatory em- 
bassies from the Greeks. Those affected most 
friendship in their speeches, who had most en- 
mity in their hearts. The Athenians sent to 
deprecate his wrath against themselves, and to 
excuse their compassionate treatment of the 
Theban fugitives. Alexander demanded the 
persons of Demosthenes, Lycurgus, Hyperides, 
and five other orators, to whose inflammatory 
speeches he ascribed the seditious spirit that had 
recently prevailed in Athens, An assembly was 
immediately summoned to deliberate on this 
demand; and a decree unanimously passed for 
trying the orators accused by Alexander, and for 
inflicting on them such punishinent as their of- 


1 According to the lowest computation, Thebes at that 
time contained above thirty thousand citizens. Comp. Dio- 
dor. Plut. ibid. Ælian. Var. Hist. l. xiii. e. vii. Agathar- 
chid. apud Phot. Bibl. 1337. 

2 Diodor. l. xvii. p. 560. 

3 Plut. de Vit. Alexand. p. 7. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


fences should appear to merit. This pretended 
forwardness in the Athenians to avenge his 
quarrel, was highly agreeable to Alexander. 
The artful decree, which was immediately 
transmitted to him, was rendered still more ac- 
ceptable, by being delivered by Demades, an 
avowed friend to Macedon, whom the party of 
Demosthenes bribed with five talents to under- 
take this useful service.1 Amidst the various 
embassies to the king, the Spartans alone pre- 
served a sullen, or magnanimous silence. Alex- 
ander treated them with real, or well-affected 
contempt; and, without deigning to require 
their assistance, prepared for the greatest en- 
terprise that ever was undertaken by the Gre- 
cian confederacy. 
arm The arrival of the army in Ma- 
Y™P- cedon was celebrated with all the 
exi. i. 
A. C. 334, POMP of an elegant superstition. A 
faithful image of the Olympic so- 
lemnity was exhibited in the ancient city of 
Ægæ. Continual games and sacritices were 
performed in Dium, during the space of nine 
days, in honour of the Muses. Alexander en- 
tertained at his table the ambassadors of the 
Grecian states, together with the principal offi- 
cers of his army, whether Greeks or Macedoni- 
ans. In the interval of public representations, 
he discoursed with his confidential friends con- 
cerning the important expedition which chiefly 
occupied his thoughts. Parmenio and Antipa- 
ter, the most respected of his father’s counsel- 
lors, exhorted him not to march into the East, 
until by marriage, and the birth of a son, he 
had provided a successor to the monarchy. But 
the ardent patriotism of Alexander disdained 
every personal consideration. He remembered 
that he was elected general of the Greeks, and 
that he commanded the invincible troops of his 
father.§ 
Having entrusted to Antipater 


pa- the affairs of Greece and Macedon, 
D C. 334. and committed to that general an 


army of above twenty thousand 
men,ê to maintain domestic tranquillity in those 
countries, he departed early in the spring, at 
the head of above five thousand horse, and 
somewhat more than thirty thousand infantry.” 
In twenty days march, he arrived at Sestos, on 
the Hellespont. From thence the army was 
conveyed to Asia, in a hundred and sixty gal- 
leys, and probably a still greater number of 
transports. The armament landed without 
opposition on the Asiatic coast; the Persians, 
though long ago apprised of the intended inva- 
sion, having totally neglected the defence of 
their western frontier. 

The cause of this negligence resulted, in 
some degree perhaps, from the character of the 
prince, but still more from that of the nation. 


— 


4 The cirenmstances of this transaction are differently 
related hy all the authors who ment‘on it. Compare Dio- 
dorus, l. xvii. p. 493. ZEschin. in Ctes'phont. Plut. in Vit. 
Alexand. et Arrian, l.i. p. 11. In military affairs Arrian’s 
authority stands unrivalled; but Æschines, a contemporary 
orator, must have been better informed concerning the civil 
transactions of the Athenians. 

5 Diodor. l. xvii. p. 499. 

6 Diodorus, who enters into some detail on this subject, 
says, twelve thousand infantry, and eleven thousand five 
hundred cavalry. o 

7 Arrian, p. 12 


XXXVIL] 


Codomannus had been raised by assassinations 
and intrigues to the throne of Persia, about the 
same time that Alexander succeeded his father 
Philip. The first year of his reign had been 
employed in stifling domestic rebellion, in secur- 
ing, and afterwards in displaying, the fruits of 
victory. This prince assumed the appellation 
of Darius, but could not recall the principles or 
manners which distinguished his countrymen, 
during the reign of the first monarch of that 
name. In the space of about two hundred and 
thirty years, the Persians had been continually 
degenerating from the virtues which character- 
ize a poor and warlike nation, without acquir- 
ing any of those arts and improvements which 
usually attend peace and opulence. Their em- 
pire, as extended by Darius Hystaspes, still 
embraced the most valuable portion of Asia and 
Africa. The revenue paid in money was still 
estimated, as during the reign of that monarch, 
at fourteen thousand five hundred and sixty 
Eubeic talents. Immensé treasures had been 
accumulated in Damascus, Arbela, Susa, Per- 
sepolis, Ecbatan, and other great cities of the 
empire. The revenue paid in kind cannot be 
appreciated; but such was the extraordinary 
opulence of this great monarchy, that the con- 
quests of Alexander are supposed to have given 
him an income of sixty millions sterling ;3 a 
sum which will admit allowance for exaggera- 
tion, and still appear sufficiently great. 

Although the extravagance and vices of Susa, 
Babylon, and other imperial cities, correspond- 
ed to the extent and wealth of the monarchy, 
yet the Persians were prepared for destruction 
rather by their ignorance of the arts of peace 
and war, than by their effeminacy and luxury. 
The provinces, moreover, had ceased to main- 
tain any regular communication with the capi- 
tal, or with each other. The standing military 
force proved insufficient to keep in awe the dis- 
tant satraps, or viceroys. The ties of acommon 
religion and language, or the sense of a public 
interest, had never united into one system this 
discordant mass of nations, which was ready 
to crumble into pieces at the touch of an inva- 
der. When to these unfavourable circumstances 
we join the reflection, that under the younger 
Cyrus, twelve thousand Greeks baffled the 
arms, and almost divided the empire of Persia, 
we shall not find much reason to admirc the 
magnanimity of Alexander in undertaking his 
eastern expedition; unless we arc at the same 
time apprised, that Darius was deemed a brave 
and generous prince, beloved by his Persian 
subjects, and assisted by the valour of fifty 
thousand Greek mercenaries.? 

Having arrived in Asia, Alexander, than 
whom none ever employed more successfully 
the power of superstition,' confirmcd tle confi- 
dence of his followers by many auspicious prc- 
dictions and prodigies. Whilc, with every mi- 
litary precaution, lie pursued his march along 
the coast, Arsites, Spithridates, Memnon, and 
other governors of the maritime provinces, as- 
sembled in the town of Zelcia, distant sixty 
miles from the Hellespont. They had neglected 


8 Justin, xiii. 1. 
9 Arrian, Diodorus, and Curtius. 
10 Plut. Curtius, and Arrian, passim. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


427 


to oppose the invasion by their superior fleet ; 
they had allowed the enemy to encamp, unmo- 
lested, on their coasts; fear now compelled 
them to reluctant union; but jealousy made 
them reject the most reasonable plan of defence. 
This was proposed by Memnon the Rhodian, 
the ablest general in the service of Darius. He 
observed the danger of resisting the Macedonian 
infantry, who were superior in number, and 
encouraged by the presence of their king. That 
the invaders, fiery and impetuous, were now 
animated by hope, but would lose courage on 
the first disappointment. Destitute of maga- 
zines and resources, their safety depended on 
sudden victory. It was the interest of the Per- 
sians, on the other hand, to protract the war, 
above all to avoid a general engagement. 
Without risking the event of a battle, they had 
other means to check the progress of the inva- 
ders. For this purpose, they ought to trample 
down, the corn with their numerous cavalry, 
destroy all other fruits of the ground, and deso- 
late the whole country, without sparing tlie 
towns and villages. Some rejected this advice, 
as unbecoming the dignity of Persia;!! Arsites, 
governor of Lesser Phrygia, declared with in- 
dignation, that he would never permit the pro- 
perty of Ais subjects to be ravaged with impu- 
nity. These sentiments the more easily pre- 
vailed, because many suspected the motives of 
Memnon. It was determined, therefore, by this 
council of princes, to assemble their respective 
forces with all possible cxpedition, and to en- 
camp on the eastern bank of the Granicus, a 
river (midway between Zeleia and the Helles- 
pont) which, issuing from Mount Ida, falls into 
the Propontis. 
The scouts of Alexander having 


e i brought him intelligence of the ene- 
A c "934 my’s design, he immediately ad- 


vanced to give them battle. The 
phalanx marched by its flank in a double line,'? 
the cavalry on the wings, the wagons and 
baggage in the rear. The advanced guard, 
consisting of horsemen armed with pikes, and 
five hundred light infantry, the whole com- 
manded by Hegelochus, were detached to ex- 
amine the fords of the Granicus, and to observe 
the disposition of the enemy. They returned 
with great celerity, to acquaint Alexander, that 
the Persians were advantageously posted on the 
opposite bank, their horse amounting to twenty 
thousand, and their forcign mercenaries, drawn 
up on the slope of a rising ground, behind the 
cavalry, scarcely less numcrous. Notwithstand- 
ing this alarming intelligence, the young prince 
determined to pass the river. Having advanced 
within sight of the hostile ranks, lis horse 
spread to the right and left, the massy column 
of infantry opened, and the whole formed along 
the bank in ordcr of battle. The phalanx, 
divided into cight sections, composed the main 
body, which occupied the centre ; the Mace- 
donian cavalry formed the right wing; the 
Grecian, the lcft. 


lls Avxtiov rue Megroy peyxrovuxizs, "t Unworthy the 
magnanimity of Persia.” Diodor. p. 501. 

12 The iray ọxàxyë is explained in this sense by 
Alisan and Arrian. In ordinary cases the phalanx marched 
by its flunk, that is, with a front of swen men. The Siray 
gxduy’, therefore, contained a frors e tgirty-two men. 


428 


While Alexander made these dispositions, the 
cautious Parmenio approached, ard remon- 
strated against passing the Granicus in the face 
ofanenemy. The river, he observed, was deep 
and full of eddies ; its banks abrupt and craggy; 
“it would be impossible, therefore, to march 
the Macedonians in front, and if they advanced 
in columns, their flanks must be exposed naked 
and defenceless. Totry such dangerous maneu- 
vres seemed unnecessary in the present junc- 
ture, because the Barbarians would certainly 
quit their station in the night, rather than re- 
main encamped in the neighbourhood of so for- 
midable an army.” These prudential consider- 
ations prevailed not with Alexander, who de- 
clared that, in the first conflict, the Macedo- 
nians must act with equal promptitude and 
vigour, and perform something worthy of the 
terror which they bore. Saying this, he sprung 
on his horse, assumed the command of the right 
Wing, and committed the left to Parmenio. 
Animated by the hope of soon 


i ui: closing with the enemy, he dis- 
‘x 99, dained to employ his military en- 
A. C. 334. 


gines. The balistas and catapults, 
by which, in a similar situation, he had repelled 
the Taulantii, were rejected as tedious or in- 
effectual. Alexander distributed his orders; a 
dreadful silence ensued; the hostile armies be- 
held each other with resentment or terror. 
This solemn pause was interrupted by the Ma- 
cedonian trumpet, which, on a signal given by 
Alexander, resounded from every part of the 
line. His brother Ptolemy, as had been pre- 
viously regulated, then rode forth at the head 
of a squadron of cuirassiers,' followed by two 
bodies of light dragoons, and a battalion of in- 
fantry commanded by Amyntas. While these 
troops boldly entered the Granicus, Alexander 
likewise advanced with the chosen cavalry on 
the right wing, followed by the archers and 
Agrians. In passing the river, both Alexander 
and Ptolemy led their troops obliquely down 
the current, to prevent, as much as possible, the 
Persians from attacking them in flank, as they 
successively reached the shore. The Persian 
cavalry behaved with courage ; the first squad- 
rons of the Macedonians were driven back into 
the stream. But Alexander, who animated the 
Companions? with his voice and arm, main- 
tained his ground on the bank, and thought he 
had gained the battle, when he obtained an op- 
portunity of fighting. In the equestrian en- 
gagement which followed, the Macedonians 
owed much to their skilful evolutions and dis- 
cipline ;? still more to their strength and cou- 
rage; and not a little to the excellence of their 
weapons, which being made of the cornel- 


1 Thave used this word to express those troops which 
the Greeks called Cataphracts, from the completeness of 
their defensive armour. Milton mentions them in Samson 
Agonistes, 

« Archers and s!ingers, Cataphracts and spears.” 


2 The eight squadrons of chosen cavalry, which were ef | 
that kind called Catanhracts, were honoured with the name | 
of Companions and friends of the king. Arrian and Diodor. 
passim. 

3 They derived great advantages, particularly from the 
light infantry intermixed with their squadrens. The target- 
eers and Agrians proved extremely useful in helping the 
Macedonians to keep off the Persian cavalry, which, when 
too near, hindered them from the proper use of their lances. 


HISTORY OF GREECE 


[Cuap. 


tree,4 far surpassed the brittle javelins of the . 


enemy. 

Mean while Parmenio crossed the Granicus. 
at the head of the left wing, with equal success, 
but unequal glory, because Alexander had al- 
ready proved, by his example, that the difficulty 
might be overcome, which would have other- 
wise appeared unsurmountable. The attention 
of the enemy was so deeply engaged by the 
successive attacks of the cavalry, that they 
seem not to have made much opposition to the 
passage of the phalanx. But before this pow- 
erful body of infantry had crossed the river, the 
Macedonian horse had already reaped the fair- 
est honours of the field. Alexander animated 
them by his presence, and, after performing all 
the duties of a great general, displayed such 
personal acts of prowess as will be more readily 
admired than believed by the modern reader. 
But in the close combats of antiquity, the forces, 
when once thoroughly engaged, might be safely 
abandoned to the direction of their own re- 
sentment and -courage, while the commanders 
displayed the peculiar accomplishments to which 
they had been trained from their youth, in the 
more conspicuous parts of the field. Alexander 
was easily distinguished by the brightness of his 
armour, and the admirable alacrity of his at- 
tendants. The bravest of the Persian nobles 
impatiently waited his approach. He darted 
into the midst of them, and fought till he broke 
his spear. Having demanded a new weapon 
from Aretes, his master of horse, Aretes showed 
him his own spear, which likewise was broken. 
Demaratus the Corinthian supplied the king 
with a weapon. Thus armed, he rode up, and 
assaulted Mithridates, son-in-law of Darius, 
who exulted before the hostile ranks. While 
Alexander beat him to the ground, he was him- 
self struck by Resaces with a hatchet. His 
helmet saved his life. He pierced the breast of 
Resaces; but a new danger threatened him 
from the scimitar of Spithridates. The instrn- 
ment of death already descended on his head, 
when Clitus cut off the arm of Spithridates, 
which fell with the grasped weapon. 

The heroism of Alexander animated the 
valour of the Companions, and the enemy first 
fled where the king commanded in person. In 
the left wing, the Grecian cavalry must have 
behaved with distinguished merit. since the 
Persians had begun on every side to give way 
before the Macedonian infantry had completely 
passed the river. The stern aspect of the 
phalanx, shining in steel and bristling with 
spears, confirmed the victory. Above a thou- 
sand Persian horse were slain in the pursuit. 
The foot, consisting chiefly in Greek mercena- 
ries, still continued in their first position, not 
firm, but inactive, petrified by astonishinent, 
not steady through resolution.6 While the 


4 At myrtus validis hastilibus et bona bello 
Cornus. Vire. Geore. ii. v. 447. 

5 Guischardt, p. 208. savs, “ Aussitôt que la phalange 
fnt en état d'agir contre l'ennemie, avec tout son front 
herissé de piques, la victoire cessa d'être doutense.” It ap- 
nears not, however, that the phalanx at allacted against the 
Persian cavalry. The battle of Granicus was entirely an 
equestrian engagement, as had been prophesied to Alex- 
ander by his namesake, a priest of Minerva in the Troade. 
See Diodor. l. xvii. p. 571. 

6 ExaAnfes maddow Ts TOV saemdoyou, y AoyiTuw 


XXXVIL] 


phalanx attacked them in front, the victorious 
cavalry assailed their flanks. Surrounded on 
all sides, they fell an easy prey ; two thousand 
surrendered prisoners; the rest all perished, 
unless a few stragglers perchance lurked among 
the slain. 

The battle of the Granicus proved fatal to 
most of the Persian commanders. Arsites, the 
chief adviser of the engagement, died in de- 
spair by his own hand. The generals Niphates 
and Petenes, Omares leader of the mercenaries, 
Spithridates satrap of Lydia, Mithrobuzanes 
governor of Cappadocia, Mithridatcs, son-in- 
law of Darius, and Arbupales son of Artaxerxes, 
were numbered among the slain. Such illus- 
trious names might lead us to suspect, that the 
Persians were still more numerous than Arrian? 
represents them ; and, notwithstanding the na- 
ture of ancient weapons and ‘actics, which 
rendered every hattle a route, and commonly 
prevented the retreat of the vanquished, it is 
scarcely to be believed, that in such an impor- 
tant engagement, Alexander should have lost 
only eighty-five horsemen, and thirty light in- 
infantry.8. Of the former, twenty-five belong- 
ed to the royal band of Companions. By com- 
mand of Alexander, their statues were formed 
by the art ef his admired Lysippus,? and erected 
in the Macedonian city of Dium. 

This important victory enabled Alexander to 
display both his humanity and his prudence. 
He declared the parents and children of the 
deceased thenceforth exempted from every spe- 
cies of tribute.'0 He carefully visited the 
wounded, attentively asked how each of them 
had received harm, and heard with patience and 
commendation their much boasted exploits. 
The Persian commanders were interred; and 
the Greeks, both officers and soldiers. The 
Grecian captives were condemned to work in 
the Thracian mines, as a punishment for bear- 
ing arms against the cause of their country. 
But even this severity Alexander softened by 
a very seasonable compliment to the-Athenians, 
whose city he preferred to be the repository of 
his trophies and renown. Immcdiately after 
the battle, he sent three hundred suits of Per- 
sian armour, as dedications to Minerva in the 


ReGxsvw, Arrian. It might be suspected that the Greek 
mercenaries were not very hearty in the Persian cause, and 
had delayed declaring themselves till they heheld the issue 
of the eqnestrian engagement. This is conjeclured by 
Guischardt in his admirable Memoires Militaires, p. 208. 
But the fidelity of their countrymen to Darius on all subse- 
quent occasions, as well as the severe treatment they met 
within the present battle, seem sufficient to remove that 
dishonourable suspicion. 
countable, is ascribed, by Arrian, to their astonishment, that 
Alexander’s cavalry should have passed the Granicns, and 
repelled the Persian horse, which was fonr times more nu- 
merous. 

7 Diodorus. |. xvii. p. 572, makes them amonnt to one 
hundred and ten thousand. Justin is quite extravagant. 
The Persians, he says, were six hnndred thonsand. 

8 Others diminished the loss to thirty-five horsemen and 
nine foot soldiers. Aristobul. apud Plut. in Vit. Alexand. 

9 Arrian says, orree xi Arse zvdeov ovog weoxessess 
smo, “* Who was alone preferred to make the image of 
Alexander.” This, donhtless, incrensed the hononr con- 
ferred on the Companions. Arrian would have spoken more 
accurately, had he said, “to cast the figure of Alexander 
in bronze.” Other artists represented him in marble, in 
gems, medala, &c. of which hereafter. 

10 Arrian distinguishes rw cwexts AgitOUpy IES $s xet 
RnTH THG XTYTEIS BIT POeses, personal services; and con- 
tributions, in proportion to their property. 


HISTORY OF GREECE 


Their conduct, seemingly unac-. 


429 


citadel. This magnificent present was inscribed 
with the following words: “ Gained by Alex- 
ander, son of Philip, and the Greeks (except 
the Lacedemonians,) from the Barbarians of 
Asia.” It is remarkable, that on this occasion 
he omits mention of the Macedonians, whether 
because he wished them to be comprchended 
under the name of Greeks; or because, in the 
Persian war, he alwaysaftectcd rather to avenge 
the cause of Greece, than to gratify his own 
ambition; or, finally, that the Greeks being 
thus exclusively associated to his honours, might 
thenceforth continue zealous in making new 
levies for his service. 

The battle of the Granicus opened to Alex- 
ander the conquest of Iona, Caria, Phrygia; in 
a word, all the Asiatic provinces west of the 
river Halys, which had anciently formed the 
powerful nionarchy of the Lydians. Many of 
the walled towns surrendered at his approach. 
Sardis, the splendid capital of Craesus, opened 
its gates toa deliverer, and once more obtained 
the privilege of being governed by its ancient 
laws, after reluctantly enduring, above two 
centuries, the cruel yoke of Persia. The Gre- 
cian cities on the coast were delivered from the 
burden of tribute and the oppression of garri- 
sons; and, under the auspices of a prince, who 
admired their ancient glory in arts and arms, 
resumed the enjoyment of their hereditary free- 
dom. During the Persian expedition of Alex- 
ander, the Ephesians were still employed in 
rebuilding their temple, which had been set on 
fire by Herostratus, twenty years before that 
period, and on the same night, it is said, which 
gave birth to the destined conqueror of the 
East. Alexander encouraged their pious and 
honourable undertaking ; and, in order to ac- 
celerate its progress, commanded the tribute 
which had been paid to the Persians, to be ap- 
propriated to the temple of Diana.!! 

Miletus and Halicarnassus alone retarded the 
progress of the conqucror. The latter place, 
commanded by Memnon the Rhodian, made a 
memorable defence. Alexander had scarcely 
set down before it, when the garrison, consist- 
ing of Greeks and Persians, sallied forth, and 
maintained a desperate conflict. Having re- 
pelled them with much difficulty, he undertook 
the laborious work of filling up a ditch thirty 
cubits broad, and fifteen deep, which the be- 
sieged, with incredible diligence, had drawn 
round their wall. This being effected, he ad- 
vanced wooden towers, on which the Macedo- 
nians erected their battering cngines, and pre- 
pared to assault the enemy on equal ground. 
But a nocturnal sally attacked these prepara- 
tions; a sccond engagement was fought with 
still greater fury than the first; three hundred 
Macedonians were wounded, darkness prevent- 
ing their usual precaution in guarding their 
bodies,!2 

A few days afterwards, Halicarnassus, which 
had so obstinately resisted skill and courage, 
was on the point of yielding to rashness and 
accident. The battalion of Perdiccas happened 
to be posted on that side of the wall, which 
looked towards Miletus. Two soldiers, belong- 


11 Comp. Arrian. p. 18. et Strab. p. 049 
12 Arrian, p. 20. 


430 


‘ng to this corps, while they supped together in 
their tent, boasted their military exploits ; each, 
as usual, preferring his own. Wine heated 
their emulation. They rushed forth to assault 
the wall of Halicarnassus, animated less with 
the mad hope of victory, than with an ambition 
to display their respective prowess. ‘The sen- 
tinels perceived their audacity, and prepared to 
repel them, but they killed the first men who 
approached, and threw javelins at others who 
followed them. Before their boldness was 
overwhelmed by numbers, many soldiers be- 
longing to the same battalion advanced to their 
relief. The Halicarnassians, also, hastened to 
the defence of their friends; a sharp conflict 
ensued ; the garrison was repelled ; the wall at- 
tacked ; two towers and the intervening curtain 
thrown down; and had greater numbers joined 
in the assault, the town must have been taken 
by storm.! 

` The humanity of Alexander ren- 


a ae dered him unwilling to come to 
A G 334. that extremity. But the extraordi- 


nary success of such an unpreme- 
ditated enterprise, engaged him to ply the walls 
with new vigour. The defence was as obsti- 
nate as before ; two desperate sallies were made, 


and repelled with consummate bravery. Alex- 


ander’s tenderness for the Halicarnassians pre- 
vented him from entering the place with an en- 
raged and licentious soldiery. He therefore 
recalled his troops in the moment of victory, 
hoping that the besieged would finally surren- 
der, and thus save their lives and properties. 
From the various breaches in the walls, and the 
numbers who had perished, or been wounded, in 
repeated conflicts, Memnon and his colleagues 
perceived, that much longer resistance was im- 
possible. In this emergency they displayed the 
same decisive boldness which had appeared in 
everv part of their defence. Having summoned 
the bravest of their adherents, they, in the 
night-time, set fire to a wooden tower, which 
they had erected for defence against the shocks 
of the enemy’s engines, and for protection to 
their arsenal and magazines, and escaped to two 
neighbouring castles of great strength. About 
midnight, Alexander perceived theraging flames, 
and immediately sent a detachment to punish 
those who had excited, or who fomented, the 
conflagration; but with strict orders to spare 
such of the townsmen as were found in their 
houses. Next day, he examined the castles, 
and perceived that they could not be taken 
without much loss of time; but that indepen- 
dent of the town, they were of themselves of 
little value; a circumstance which obliged him, 
reluctantly, to demolish Halicarnassus, that it 
might never thenceforth serve a$ a retreat to 
his enemies.? 

The inactive season of the year was employed 
by Alexander in securing and improving his 
advantages. The inferior cities were commit- 
ted to the discretion of his lieutenants; the 
king in person visited his more important con- 
quests; and few places were honoured with his 
presence without experiencing his bounty. Be- 
fore leaving Caria, where the siege of Halicar- 


t Arrian, p. 22. 2 Ibid. p. 23. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


nassus long detained his ‘impatient activity, he 
committed the administration to Ada, the he- 
reditary governess of that province. Ada was 
the sister, and the wife of Hidrieus, on whose 
decease she was entitled to reign, both by the 
Carian laws and those of Upper Asia, where 
female succession had been established ever 
since the age of Semiramis. But the great 
king, with the usual caprice of a despot, had 
rejected the just claim of Ada, and seated a 
pretender on her tributary throne. The in- 
jured princess, however, still maintained pos- 
session of the strongly fortified city Alinda. 
When Alexander appeared in Caria, Ada has- 
tened to meet him, addressed him by the name 
of son, and voluntarily surrendered to him 
Alinda. The king neither rejected her present, 
nor declined her friendship ; and, as he always 
repaid favours with interest, he committed to 
her, at his departure, the government of the 
whole province, and left a body of three thou- 
sand foot and two hundred horse, to support 
her authority. 

The measures of Alexander were equally 
decisive and prudent. The Persian fleet, sup- 
plied by Egypt, Pheenicia, and the maritime 
provinces of Lower Asia, four times outnum- 
bered his awn, which, small as it was, still ap- 
peared too expensive for his treasury. Alex- 
ander determined to discharge it, declaring to 
his heutenants, that by conquering the land, he 
would render himself master of the sea, since 
every harbour that surrendered to him must 
diminish the naval resources of the eneiny.? 
Agreeably to this judicious plan of conquest, 
he pursued his journey through the southern 
provinces of the Asiatic peninsula, while Par- 
menio traversed the central countries of Lydia 
and Phrygia. At the same time Cleander was 
despatched into Greece to raise new levies; 
and such soldiers as had married shortly before 
the expedition, were sent home to winter with 
their wives; a measure which extremely en- 
deared Alexander to the army, and ensured the 
utmost alacrity of his European subjects, in 
furnishing supplies towards the ensuing cam- 
paign. 

Accompanied by such winning arts, the va- 
lour and prudence of Alexander seemed worthy 
to govern the world. His conduct, perhaps, 
often proceeded from the immediate impulse of 
sentiment; but it could not have been more 
subservient to his ambition, had it been invari- 
ably directed by the deepest policy. After the 
decisive battle of the Granicus, he experienced 
little obstinacy of resistance from the numer- 
ous forts and garrisons in Lower Asia. The 
tributary princes and satraps readily submitted 
to a milder and more magnanimous master ; 
and the Grecian colonies on the coast eagerly 
espoused the interest of a prince who, on all 
occasions, avowed his partiality for their fa- 
vourite institutions. In every province or city 
which he conquered, he restored to the Asiatics 
their hereditary laws; to the Greeks, their be- 
loved democracy. While he allowed them to 


3 It will anpear in the sequel how faithfully Alexander 
adhered to this plan of war, which kept open his commu- 
nication with Greece and Macedon, and enabled him to 
pursue, with security his conquests in the East. 


XXXVIL] 


assume the forms of independent government, 
he was careful to bridle the animosity of do- 
mestic faction. Into whatever country he 
marched, he encouraged useful industry, and 
alleviated public burdens. His taste and his 
piety alike prompted him to repair the sacred 
and venerable remains of antiquity. He con- 
sidered the Barbarians, not as slaves, but as 
subjects; the Greeks, not as subjects, but al- 
lies; and both perceived in his government such 
moderation and equity as they had never expe- 
rienced either from the despotism of Persia, or 
from the domineering ambition of Athens and 
Sparta.4 

Having received the submission of Xanthus, 
Patara, Phaselis, and above thirty other towns 
or sea-ports in Lycia, Alexander, probably for 
the sake of greater expedition, divided the 
corps under his immediate command. A con- 
siderable detachment traversed the Lycian and 
Pamphylian mountains, while the king in per- 
son pursued the still more dangerous track, 
leading along the sea-coast from Phaselis to 
Perga. On this foaming shore, the sea com- 
monly beats against the rocks, and renders the 
passage impracticable, unless when the waves 
are repelled by a strong north wind. When 
Alexander began his march, the wind blew 
from the south. Yet he advanced without fear, 
confiding in his fortune. His troops cheerfully 
followed him, encouraged by many artful pro- 
digies5 which announced success to his under- 
taking. The event which next happened, was 
well fitted to strengthen their credulity, and 
confirm their implicit obedience. Before they 
had reached the main difficulties of the pass, 
the south wind gradually ceased; a brisk gale 
sprang up from the north; the sea retired; and 
their march thus became alike easy and expe- 
ditious. The authentic evidence of Arrian ex- 
plains the marvellous in this occurrence, which 
Josephus, with no less indecency than folly, 
compares with the passage of the Israelites 
over the Red Sea. Yet even the philosophical 
Arian acknowledges, that the many concur- 
ring instances of good fortune in the life of 
Alexander, seemed to be produced by the im- 
mediate interposition of divine power, which, 
in effecting an important revolution in the 
Eastern world, rendered the operations of na- 
ture, and the volitions of men, subservient to 
the secret purposes of its providence. 

In proceeding eastward from Perga, Alexan- 
der was met by ambassadors from Aspendus, 
the principal city and sea-port of Pamphylia. 
The Aspendians offered to surrender their city, 


4 Compare Plut. in Alexand. Curtius et Arrian, passim ; 
et Thucvdid. Xenoph. Isoecrat. et Diodor. 

5 While Alexander deliberated whether he should march 
forwards to attack Darius, a measure which promised glory 
and plunder to his troops, or proceed along the sea-coast, 
and reduce the maritime cities, which would prevent the 
enemv from profiting of his absence in Upper Asia, to con- 
quer Greece or Macedon with their fleet, a fountain near 
the citv Xanthus in Lvcia, boiled up, and threw ont a cop- 
per-plate, engraved with ancient characters, siguifving that 
the time was come when the Persian empire should he 
overthrown by the Greeks. Plutarch adds, rouross srxofeis, 
NOEIVETO THY weoedrixny avexxdnoxedxi. * Encouraged bv 
this prodigy, he hastened to subdue the coast.” It would 
perhaps have been more worthy of an historian to say, 
t Encouraged by this prodigy, the Greeks and Macedonians 
readily obeyed the commands of their prudent not less 
than valiant general.” 


5 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


431 


but entreated, that they might not be burdened 
with a garrison. Alexander granted their re- 
quest, on condition of their raising fifty talents 
to pay his soldiers, and delivering to him the 
horses which they reared as a tribute for Da- 
rius. The ambassadors accepted these terms; 
but their countrymen, who were distinguished 
by their ambition and rapacity, still more than 
by their commerce and their wealth, discovered 
no inclination to fulfil them. Alexander was 
informed of their treachery while he examined 
the walls of Syllius, another strong hold of 
Pamphylia. He immediately marched towards 
Aspendus, the greater part of which was situ- 
ate ona high and steep rock, washed by the 
river Eurymedon. Several streets, however, 
were likewise built on the plain, surrounded 
only by a slight wall. At the approach of Al- 
exander, the inhabitants of the lower part of 
the town ascended the mountain. Alexander 
entered the place, and encamped within the 
walls. The Aspendians, alarmed by the ap- 
prehension of a siege, D him to accept 
the former conditions. He commanded them 
to deliver the horses, as agreed on ; to pay, in- 
stead of fifty, a hundred talents; and to sur- 
render their principal citizens as securities, that 
they would thenceforth obey the governor set 
over them; pay an annual tribute to Macedon ; 
and submit to arbitration a dispute concerning 
some lands, which they were accused of hav- 
ing unjustly wrested from their neighbours.6 

Having chastised the insolence 


ee and treachery of Aspendus, Alex- 
igs >> ander determined to march into 
IN, (Oo oone 


Phrygia, that he might join forces 
with Parmenio, whom he had commanded to 
meet him in that country. The new levies from 
Greece and Macedon were likewise ordered to 
assemble in the same province; from which it 
was intended, early in the spring, to proceed 
eastward, and achieve still more important con- 
quests. To reach the southern frontier of 
Phrygia, Alexander was under a necessity of 
traversing the inhospitable mountains of the 
warlike Pisidians. Amidst those rocks and 
fastnesses, the Macedonians lost several brave 
men; but the undisciplined fury, and unarmed 
courage, of the Pisidians were unable to check 
the progress of Alexander. The city of Gor- 
dium in Phrygia, was appointed for the general 
rendezvous. This place is distant about se- 
venty-five miles from the Euxine, and two hun- 
dred and forty from the Cilician sea; and was 
famous, in remote ‘antiquity, as the principal 
residence of the Phrygian kings, and the chief 
seat of their opulence and grandeur.’ Alexan- 
der had not long arrived in that place, when a 
desire seized him of ascending to the ancient 
castle or palace of Gordius, and of beholding 
the famous knot on his chariot, which was be- 
lieved to involve the fate of Asia. Gordius, 
as the story went, was a man of slender for- 
tune among the ancient Phrygians, who had 
but a small piece of land, and two yokes of 
oxen, one of which he employed in the plough, 
and the other in the wagon. It happened to 
Gordius, while he was one day ploughing, that 


6 Arrian, p. 26. 7 See c. vii. p. 81. 


432 


an eagle alighted on his yoke, and sat on it till 
evening. Alarmed by the prodigy, Gordius 
had recourse to the Telmessians, a people in- 
habiting the loftiest mountains! in Pisidia, and 
celebrated over all the neighbouring countries 
for their skill in augury. At the first village 
of the Telmessians, he met a virgin drawing 
water at a fountain, to whom having commu- 
nicated his errand, she ordered him to ascend 
the hill, and there sacrifice to Jupiter. Gor- 
dius entreated her to accompany him, that the 
sacrifice might be perforined in due form. She 
obeyed. Gordius took her to wife. She bore 
him a son, Midas, who, when he arrived at 
manhood, was distinguished by his beauty and 
valour. It should seem that the father of Mi- 
das had, in consequence of his marriage, set- 
tled among the Telimessians, with whose arts 
his son would naturally become acquainted. 
The Phrygians, at that time, were harassed by 
cruel seditions; they consulted an oracle, who 
told them, that a chariot should soon bring them 
a king, who would appease their tumults. 
While the assembly still deliberated on the an- 
swer given them by the oracle, Midas arrived 
in his chariot? accompanied by his parents. 
The appearance of Midas justified the predic- 
tion, and announced him worthy of royalty. 
The Phrygians elected him king; their sedi- 
tions ceased; and Midas, in gratitude to Jupi- 
ter, consecrated his father’s chariot, and sus- 
pended it by a cord made of the inner rind of 
the cornel-tree, the knot of which was so nicely 
tied, that no eye could perceive where it began 
or ended. Whether Alexander untied, or cut 
the knot, is left uncertain by historians;? but 
all agree that his followers retired with com- 
plete conviction that he had fulfilled the oracle. 
A seasonable storm of thunder confirmed their 
credulity ;4 and the belief, that their master was 
destined to be lord of Asia, could not fail to 
facilitate that event. | 

The rapid progress of Alexander, and his 
continual exertions during that season of the 
year when armies are little accustomed to keep 
the field, tends to heighten our surprise at the 
inactivity of Darius, an ambitious prince, who 
had signalized his valour against the fiercest 
nations of Asia. But Darius, corrupted by the 
honours of royalty, employed very different 
weapons against Alexander, from those by 
which the champion of Ochus had defeated the 
warlike chief of the Cardusians.5 Instead of 
opposing the invader in the field, he hoped to 
destroy him by the arm of an assassin. Many 


1 Arrian. p. 27, calls it ureeulyrov, xa: wavry amoTtomov, 
S Exceedingly high and every where abrupt.” But in Gor- 
dius’s time at least, the Telmessians must have possessed 
some villages on the plain. See Arrian, p. 30. 

2 The Greek word 2422 expresses either a chariot or 
a wagon. Perhaps neither the name, nor the thing, were 
then distinguished in Phrygia. Curtius tells us, this zuz¢ z 
was “cultu haud sane a vilioribus vulgatisque usu abhor- 
rens,” l. iii. c. i. p. 10. 

3 Curtius l. iii. c. i. says, he cut ìt with his sword. Plu- 
tarch says he untied it. Vit. Alexand. p. 1236. Arrian 
gives both accounts; and the latter on the authority of 
Aristobulus, which is therefore the more probable. 

4 Arrian. p. 31. 

5 Darius killed a warrior of that nation who challenged 
the bravest of the Persians to single combat. This exploit 
gained him the government of Armenia, and made him be 
afterwards deemed worthy of the Persian throne. Diodor. 
L xvii. p. 565. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


traitors were suborned for this infamous pur- 

| pose, but none with greater prospect of success 
‘than Alexander, the son of £ropus. This man 
owed his life to the clemency of the son of Phi- 
lip, when his brothers Heromenes and Arrabæus 
were condemned as accessory to the murder of 
that prince. He was numbered among the 
companions of Alexander, and had recently 
been entrusted with the command of the Thes- 
salian cavalry, after the nomination of Calas, 
who held that high office, to the government of 
Phrygia. The promise of ten thousand talents, 
and of the kingdom of Macedon, obliterated his 
gratitude and seduced his allegiance. But his 
treason escaped not the vigilance of Parmenio,® 
who communicated the intelligence to his mas- 
ter, while encamped in the neighbourhood of 
Phaselis. By the same faithful minister, the 
unworthy son of Æropus was seized and com- 
mitted to safe custody. 

Darius, without desisting from his intrigues, 
finally had recourse to arms. His troops were 
assembled in the plains of Babylon. They con- 
sisted of a hundred thousand Persians, of whom 
thirty thousand were cavalry. The Medes sup- 
plied almost half that number, and the Arme- 
nians almost as many as the Medes. The Bar- 
cani, the Hyrcanians, the inhabitants of the 
Caspian shores, and nations more obscure or 
more remote, sent their due proportion of ca- 
valry and infantry for this immense army, 
which, including thirty thousand Greek mer- 
cenaries in the Persian service, is said to have 
amounted to six hundred thousand men. The 
magnificence of the Persians had not diminish- 
ed since the days of Xerxes; neither had their 
military knowledge increased. Their muster 
was taken by the same contrivance employed by 
that monarch.’ Ten thousand men were se- 
parated from the rest, formed into a compact 
body, and surrounded bya palisade. The whole 
army passing suecessively into this inclosure, 
were rather measured than numbered by their 
generals, Nothing could exceed the splendour 
that surrounded Darius; the trappings of tis 
horses, the rich materials and nice adjustment 
of his chariot, the profusion of jewels which 
covered his royal mantle, vest, and tiara. The 
dress, and even the armour of his guards, were 
adorned with gold, silver and precious stones. 
He was attended by his family, his treasures, 
and his concubines, all escorted by numerous 
bands of horse and foot. His courtiers and 
generals copied, as usual, too faithfully, the 
effeminate manners of their master.® 


6 According to Arrian, p. 25, a swallow shared the ho- 
nour with Parmenio. While Alexander was asleep at mid- 
day, the swallow hovered around his head, perching some- 
times on one side of his couch, and sometimes on another. 
Its incessant chattering roused the king from sleep: ‘but be- 
ing exceedingly fatigued, he gently removed the bird with 
his hand. Instead of endeavouring to escape, the swallow 
perched on his head, and ceased not being extremely noisy 
and troublesume, till he thoroughly awoke. The prodigy 
was immediately communicated to Aristander the Telmes- 
sian soothsayer, who declared that aconspiracy was formed 
against the king by one of his domestics and friends; but 
that it would certainly be discovered, because the swallow 
is a domestic bird, a friend to man, and exceedingly loqua- 
cious. 

7 Seec. ix. p. 113, et seq. . 4 

8 Propinquorum, amicorumque, conjuges huic agmini 
proxime. Q. Curtius, l. iii. c. iii. et Diodor. l. xvii. p. 580. 


XXXVIL.J 


While this pageant, for it deserves not the 
name of army, slowly advanced towards Lower 
Asia, Alexander left Gordium, and marched to 
Ancyra, a city of Galatia. In that place, he 
received an embassy from the Paphlagonians, 
who surrendered to him the sovereignty of their 
province, but entreated that his army might not 
enter their borders. He granted their request, 
and commanded them to obey Calas, satrap of 
Phrygia. Alexander then marched victorious 
through Cappadocia; and Sabictas being ap- 
pointed to the administration of that extensive 
province, the army encainped at the distance of 
six miles from the Cilician frontier, at a piace 
which, since the memorable expedition perform- 
ed and described by Zenophon, retained the 
name of Cyrus’s Camp. ‘Towards the south, 
the rich plain of Cilicia is washed by the sea, 
and surrounded on three sides by lofty and al- 
most impervious mountains. Arsames, gover- 
nor of that country, had sent a body of troops 
to guard a post called the Gates, and the only 
pass which leads from Cappadocia into Cilicia. 
Apprised of this measure, Alexander left Par- 
menio and the heavy-armed troops in the Camp 
of Cyrus. At the first watch of the night, he 
led the targeteers, archers, and Agrians, to sur- 
prise the Persian forces stationed at the north- 
ern Gate of Cilicia. The Barbarians fled on 
his approach; and the pusillanimous Arsames, 
to whom the whole province was entrusted by 
Darius, prepared to plunder, and then abandon, 
his own capital of Tarsus. But he had only 
time to save his person. The rapidity of Alex- 
ander prevented the destruction of that city, 
where the inhabitants received him as their de- 

*liverer. 

At Tarsus, Alexander was detained by a ma- 

lady, occasioned by excessive fatigue; or, as 


others say, by imprudently bathing, when heat-. 


ed, in the cold waters of the Cydnus, which 
flows through that city, ina clear and rocky 
channel.9 Philip the Acarnanian was the only 
person who despaired not of his life. While 
this skilful physician administered a draught to 
his royal patieut, a letter came from Parmenio, 
warning Alexander to beware of Philip, who 
had been bribed by Darius to poison him. 
Alexander took the potion, and gave Philip the 
letter; so that the physician read, while the 
king drank; a transaction which proved either 
his contempt of death, or his unshaken confi- 
dence in his friends; but which, by the admira- 
tion of his contemporaries and posterity,!0 has 
been construed into a proof of beth. 

The sickness of Alexander interrupted not 
the operations of the army. Parmenio was des- 
patched to seize the only pass on Mount Ama- 
nus, which divides Cilicia from Assyria. The 
king soon followed, having in one day’s march 
reached Anchialos, an ancient city of vast ex- 
tent, and surrounded with walls of prodigious 
thickness. The greatest curiosity of Anchialos 
was the tomb of Sardanapalus, distinguished 


9 Curtius gives another reason for its excessive coldness: 
t Frigidissimus quippe multa riparum amenitate inumbra- 
tus,” |. iii. c. iv. From his laboured description of this 
river, it seems as if he imagined that water must have pos- 
sessed very extraordinary qualities, which proved hurtful to 
Alexander. 

10 See Arrian, p. 32. ae 1. iii. c€. v. 

3 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


433 


by the statue of that effeminate tyrant, in the 
attitude of clapping his hands; and by an As- 
syrian inscription, breathing the true spirit of 
modern Epicurism. The original ran in verse 
to the following purpose: “ Sardanapalus, son 
of Anacyndaraxas, built Anchialos and Tarsus 
in one day. As to you, stranger! eat, drink, 
and sport,!! for other human things are not 
worth ¢his,” alluding to the clap of his hands,!2 

Having arrived at Mallos, an Argive colony 
at the eastern extremity of Cilicia, Alexander 
learned that Darius lay with his army in the 
extensive plain of Sochos, in the province of 
Comagene, distant only two days’ march from 
the Cilician frontier. The hostile armies were 
separated by the mountains which divide Cili- 
cia and Syria. Alexander hastened to pass the 
straits called the Syrian Gates, proceeded south- 
wards along the bay of Issus, and encamped 
before the city Mariandrus. At this place he 
received a very extraordinary piece of intelli- 
gence. His delay in Cilicia, which had been 
occasioned by sickness, and by the many pious 
ceremonies'? with which he gratefully thanked 
Heaven for his recovery, was ascribed to very 
different motives by Darius and his flatterers. 
That perfidious race, the eternal bane of kings,!4 
easily persuaded the vain credulity of their 
master, that Alexander shunned his approach. 
The proud resentment of Darius was exaspe- 
rated by the imagined fears of his adversary ; 
with the impatience of a despot he longed to 
come to action; and not suspecting that Alex- 
ander would traverse the Syrian Gates in search 
of the enemy, he hastily determined to pass, 
in an opposite direction,'> the straits of Ama- 
nus, in quest of Alexander. This fatal mea- 
sure was carried into immediate execution, 
notwithstanding the strong representations of 
Amyntas! the Macedonian, and of all Darius’s 
Grecian counsellors,” who unanimously ex- 
horted him to wait the enemy in his present 
advantageous position. In the language of an- 
tiquity,'8 an irresistible fate, which had deter- 
mined that thé Greeks shonld conquer the Per- 
sians, as the Persians had the Medes, and the 
Medes the Assyrians, impelled Darius to his 
ruin. Having passed the defiles of Amanus, 
he directed his march southward to the bay of 
Issus, and took the city of that name, which 
contained, under a feeble guard, the sick and 
wounded Macedonians, who had not been able 


11 The word translated “sport,” is z%sCe in Arrian, p. 
32. But that author savs, the Assyrian origina] had a more 
lascivious meaning. Plnt. Orat. ii. de Fortun. Alexand. 
translates it, eceodsosxCe, “veneri indulge.” 

12 Mr. de Guignes, so descrvedly celebrated for his Ori- 
ental learning, proves this inscription to be entirely con- 
formable to the style and manners of the East. See Mem. 
de Il’ Acad. des Inscrip. tom. xxxiv. p. 416, et seq. 

13 Processions with lighted torches, sacrifices to Æscu- 
lapins, gymnastic and musica! contests. Arrian, l ii. p. 33. 

14 Arrian cxpresses this sentiment with more than his 
usual eaergy: Twv care ydovny Fuvovrwy Te nas Zuverope 
Evwv ETI KXKwW TOMS KIEL PLTIAEVCUTS, 

15 These movements are explained only by Arrian. Dio- 
dorus, Plutarch, and Curtius, not attending to the geogra- 
phy of the country, are inconsisteut and unintelligible. 

16 Amyntas, thongh an exile, was not a flatterer. He 
aseured Darius, that Alexander would certainly come to 
anv place where the Persians eacamped. Arrian, p. 34. 

17 Aristomenes the Pherman, Bianor the Arcananian, Thy- 
mondas the son of Mentor, the Rhodian, and others men- 
tioned by Arrian, passim. 

18 Arrian, Plut. Diodor. Curt. 


434 


to follow the army in its expeditious march 
across the mountains. The Persians put these 
unhappy men to death with shocking circum- 
stances of cruelty,! little thinking that Alex- 
ander was now behind, prepared to avenge 
their fate. 

That enlightened prince, who could scarcely 
believe the folly of Darius, sent a small flat- 
bottomed vessel to reconnoitre his motions. 
This vessel speedily returned to Alexander, and 
saluted him with the agreeable news that his 
enemies were now in hishands. Having sum- 
moned an assembly, the king forgot none of 
those topics of encouragement which the occa- 
sion so naturally suggested, since the meanest 
Macedonian soldier could discern the injudi- 
cious movements of the Persians, who had quit- 
ted a spacious plain, to entangle themselves 
among intricate mountains, where their numer- 
ous cavalry, in which they chiefly excelled, 
could perform no essential service. In prepar- 
ing for this important contest, the spirits of the 
Macedonians were elevated by a recollection 
of many fortunate occurrences. Ptolemy, as 
they had recently learned, had made himself 
master of the strong fortresses in Caria. The 
brave Memnon indeed had escaped; but that 
able commander, who, to pave the way for in- 
vading Macedon, had attacked the Grecian isles 
with his fleet, was since dead; and his succes- 
sors in command, after irritating the islanders 
by their insolence and oppression, were defeated 
in all their designs by the vigilance of Antipa- 
ter. The army of Alexander had lately in- 
creased by many voluntary accessions of the 
Asiatics, who admired his courage, mildness, 
and uninterrupted good fortune; and the sol- 
diers, who the preceding year had been sent to 
winter in Europe, had not only rejoined the 
camp, but brought with them numerous levies 
from Greece, Macedon, and all the adjoining 
countries. By men thus disposed to indulge 
the most sanguine hopes, the military harangue 
of their prince was received with a joyous ar- 
dour. They embraced each other; they em- 
braced’ their admired commander; and his 
countenance confirming their alacrity, they en- 
treated to be led to battle.2 l 

Alexander commanded them first to refresh 
their bodies: but immediately despatched some 
horse and archers to clear the road to Issus. 
In the evening he followed with his whole 
army, and about midnight took possession of 
the Syrian straits. The soldiers were then 
allowed a short repose, sufficient guards being 
posted on the surrounding eminences. At 
dawn, the army was in motion, marching by its 
flank while the passage continued narrow; and 
new columns being successively brought up, as 
the mountains gradually opened. Before reach- 
ing the river Pinarus, on the opposite bank of 
which the enemy were encamped, the Mace- 
donians had formed in order of battle; Alex- 
ander leading the right wing, and the left being 
commanded by Parmenio. They continued to 
advance, till their right was flanked by a moun- 
tain, and their left by the sea, from which Par- 


19 Xxarsrws wixsoxpevug xroxtesve, Arrian, p. 34. It is 
remarkable, that he ascribes this ferocity to Darius himself. 
2 Arrian, p. 33—36. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


menio was ordered not to recede. Darius 
being apprised of the enemy’s approach, de- 
tached a body of fifty thousand cavalry and 
light infantry across the Pinarus, that the re- 
mainder might have room to form without con- 
fusion. His Greek mercenaries, amounting to 
thirty thousand, he posted directly opposite to 
the Macedonian phalanx. The Greeks were 
flanked on both sides by double that number of 
Barbarians, also heavy armed. The nature of 
the ground admitted not more troops to be 
ranged in front; but as the mountain on Alex- 
ander’s left, sloped inwards, Darius placed on 
that sinuosity twenty thousand men, who could 
see the enemy’s rear, though it appears not 
that they could advance against them. Behind 
the first line the rest of the Barbarians were 
ranged, according to their various nations, in 
close and unserviceable ranks: Darius being 
every where encumbered by the vastness of a 
machine, which he had not skill to wield. 

His pusillanimity was more fatal 


seven: than his ignorance. When he per- 
Mor ceived the Macedonians advancing, 


he commanded his men to maintain 
their post on the Pinarus, the bank of which 
was in some places high and steep; where the 
access seemed easier, he gave orders to raise a 
rampart; precautions which showed the enemy, 
thai even before the battle began, the mind of 
Darius was already conquered.4 Alexander, 
mean while, rode along the ranks, exhorting, 
by name, not only.the commanders of the several 
brigades, but the tribunes and inferior officers, 
and even such captains of the auxiliaries as 
were distinguished by rank, or ennobled by 
merit. Perceiving it necessary to moderate 
the martial ardour that prevailed, he command- 
ed his forces to advance with a regular and 
slow step, lest the phalanx should fluctuate 
through too eager a contention. Their motion 
quickened as they proceeded within reach of the 
enemy’s darts. Alexander, with those around 
him, then sprung into the river. Their impe- 
tuosity frightened the Barbarians, who scarcely 
waited the first shock. But the Greek merce- 
naries, perceiving that by the rapidity and suc- 
cess of Alexander’s assault, the Macedonians 
were bent towards the right wing, which was 
separated from the centre, seized the decisive 
moment of rushing into the interval, where the 
phalanx was disjointed. A fierce engagement 
ensued, the Greeks eager to regain the honour 
of their name, the Macedonians ambitious to 
maintain the unsullied glory of the phalanx. 
This desperate action proved fatal to Ptolemy 
the son of Seleucus, and other officers of dis- 
tinction, to the number of a hundred and 
twenty. Mean while, the Macedonian right 
wing having repelled the enemy with great 


3 Arrian, p. 36. 

4 Kus raury eugug Syaug eyevero Tois audi Adsoavdpov 
rH yvwun Sedovawsevos. “And thence he immediately ap- 
peared to those about Alexander to be already enslaved 
in his mind.” Iv those times, slavery was the natural con- 
sequence of being conquered in battle. 

5 They did, however, wait it; for Arrian says, suive ze 
mg ev eeri waxy eyeveto. The “peux sv wseoe eyevero 5” 
when the darts and javelins ceased, and the. contending 
parties came to the use of manual; “instead of missile, 
weapons. ES 


XXXVII] 


slaughter, wheeled to the left, and, animated by 
recent victory, finally prevailed against the 
obstinacy of the Greeks. A body of Persian 
horse still maintained the battle against the 
Thessalian cavalry; nor did they quit the field, 
till informed that Darius had betaken himself 
to flight.6 

. The overthrow of the Persians was now 
manifest on all sides. Their cavalry and in- 
fantry suffered equally in the rout; for their 
horsemen were heavy-armed, and encumbered 
sby the narrowness of the roads, and their own 
terror. Ptolemy, the son of Lagus,” says, that 
the pursuers filled up the ditches with dead 
bodies. The number of the slain was com- 
puted at a hundred and ten thousand, among 
whom were many satraps and nobles. 

The great king had discovered little obstinacy 
in defending the important objects at stake. 
His left wing was no sooner repelled by Alex- 
ander, than he drove away in his chariot, ac- 
companied by his courtiers. When the road 
grew rough and mountainous, he continued his 
flight on horseback, leaving his shield, his man- 
tle, and his bow, which were found by the Ma- 
cedonians. Alexander, who had received a 
troublesome wound on the thigh, judged it 
improper to pursue him, till the Greek merce- 
naries were dispersed; and the approach of 
night facilitated his escape. 
` The Persian camp afforded abundant proof 
of Asiatic luxury and opulence.? It contained 
however in money but three thousand talents ; 
the magnificent treasures, which accompanied 
the great king, being deposited, previous to the 
battle, in the neighbouring city of Damascus. 
This inestimable booty was afterwards seized 
by order of Alexander, who found in the camp 


a booty more precious, the wife and daughters 


of Darius, his mother Sysigambis, and his in- 
fant son. In an age when prisoners of war 
were synonymous with slaves, Alexander be- 
haved to his royal captives with the tenderness 
of a parent, blended with the respect of a son. 


6 Arrian. l. ii. p. 36, et seq. 7. Idem, ibid. 

8 Chares, cited by Plutarch, says, that Alexander re- 
ceived this wound from the hand of Darius; but the silence 
of Alexander's letter to Antipater, in which he gave an ac- 
count of the battle, and of his wound on the thigh, refutes 
that improbable assertion. 

9 Among other things of value in the tent of Darius, 
was found a casket of exquisite workmanship, adorned 
with jewels. It was employed to hold Darius’s perfumes.— 
Alexander said, “I use no perfumes, but shall put into it 
something more precious.” This was the Iliad of Homer, 
corrected by Aristotle, and often mentioned by ancient 
writers; 4 ex tov vaeGyxes, “the Hiad of the casket.” 
Strabo, |. xiii. p. 888. Plut. in Alexand. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


435 


In his chaste attention to Statira, the fairest 
beauty of the East, his conduct forms a re- 
markable contrast with that of his admired 
Achilles, whom he equalled in valour, but far 
surpassed in humanity. These illustrious prin- 
cesses bore their own misfortunes with patience, 
but burst into dreadful lamentations, when in- 
formed by a eunuch that he had seen the mantle 
of Darius in the hands of a Macedonian soldier. 
Alexander sent to assure them that Darius yet 
lived; and next day visited them in person, ac- 
companied by Hephestion, the most affectionate 
of his friends.!0 Sysigambis approached to pros- 
trate!! herself before the conqueror, according 
to the custom of the East; but not knowing the 
king, as their dress was alike, she turned to 
Hephcstion. Hephestion suddenly stepping 
back, Sysigambis saw her mistake, and was 
covered with confusion. ‘* You mistook not, 
madam !” said the king, “ Hephestion is like- 
wise Alexander.””!2 

The virtues of Alexander long continued to 
expand with his prosperity; but he was never 
more inimitably great, than after the battle of 
Issus. The city of Soli, in Cilicia, though in- 
habited by a Grecian colony, had discovered 
uncommon zeal in the cause of Darius. To 
punish this unnatural apostacy from Greece, 
Alexander demanded a heavy contribution from 
Soli; but, after the victory, he remitted this 
fine. Impelled by the same generous magna- 
nimity, he released the Athenian captives taken 
at the battle of the Granicus; a favour which 
he had sternly refused, in the dawn of his for- 
tune. In Damascus, several Grecian ambassa- 
dors were found among the captives. Alex- 
ander ordered them to be brought into his 
presence. Thessaliscus and Dionysodorus, the 
Thebans, he instantly declared free, observing, 
that the misfortunes of their country justly en- 
titled the Thebans to apply to Darius, and to 
every prince from whom they might derive 
relief. Iphicrates, the Athenian, he treated 
with the respect which appeared due both to 
his country and to his father. Euthycles the 
Spartan, alone, he detained in safe custody, 
because Sparta sullenly rejected the friendship 
of Macedon. But as his forgiveness still in- 
creased with his power,!8 he afterwards released 
Euthycles. 


9 Alexander, with his usual discernment, charaetcriseé 
the affection of Hephestion: “ Craterus loves the prince 
Hephestion loves Alexander.” Plut. in Alexand. 

11 Ieoreydesv xxi meorxuyyrat, Arrian, ii. p. 39. 

12 Curtius, l iii. c. xii. Arrian, p. 39. 

13 Arrian, p. 42. 


436 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[CuaP. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


Siege of Tyre—Desperate Resistance of Gaza—Easy Conquest of Egypt—Foundation of Alex- 
andria—Alexander visits the temple of Jupiter Ammon—Marches into Assyria—Batile of 
Gaugamela—Darius betrayed and slain—Alexander pursues the Murderers of Darius— 
Bactrian and Scythian War—Siege of the Sogdian Fortress—Surrender of Chorienes— 
Commotions in Greece—Checked by Antipater—The Cause of Ctesiphon and Demosthenes— 
/Eschines banished—State of Greece during Alexander’s Reign. 


| his precipitate flight across the ridges of 

Amanas, Darius was gradually joined by 
about four thousand men, chiefly Greeks, Un- 
der this feeble escort, he departed 


bate hastily from Sochos, pursued his 
A. C. 333. march eastward, and crossed the 


Euphrates at Thapsacus, eager to 
interpose that deep and rapid stream between 
himself and the conqueror.! Alexander’s in- 
clination to seize the person of his adversary 
could not divert him from the judicious plan of 
war, to which he immoveably adhered. In a 
council of his friends, he declared his opinion, 
that it would be highly imprudent to attempt 
the conquest of Babylon, until he had tho- 
roughly subdued the maritime provinces; be- 
cause, should he be carried by an unseasonable 


celerity into Upper Asia, while the enemy com- 


manded the sea, the war might be removed to 
Europe, where the Lacedemonians were open 
enemies, and the Athenians doubtful friends. 
Having appointed governors of Cilicia and 
Celo-Syria, he therefore directed his march 
southward along the Phenician coast. Aradus, 
Marathus, and Sidon,? readily opened their 
gates. The Tyrians sent a submissive embassy 
of their most illustrious citizens, among whom 
was the son of Azelmicus, their king, who had 
himself embarked with Autophradates in the 
Persian fleet. They humbly informed Alexan- 
der, that the community? from which they 
came was prepared to obey his commands, 
Having complimented the city and the am- 
bassadors, he desired them to acquaint their 
countrymen, that he intended shortly to enter 
Tyre, and to perform sacrifice there to Her- 
cules.4 

Upon this alarming intelligence, the Tyrians 
discovered equal firmness and prudence. A se- 
cond embassy assured Alexander of their unal- 
terable respect, but at the same time communi- 
cated to him their determined resolution, that 
neither the Persians northe Macedonians should 
ever enter their walls. This boldness appears 
remarkable in a nation of merchants, long un- 


1 Qs TxXirT% KETOV auTou TE Kas TOU AdreZxvdgov Tov 
Eveeatyy wotnoes, Arrian, p. 40. 

2 I omit the story of Abdelerminus, whom Alexander 
raised from the humble condition of a gardener to the 
throne of Sidon. Vid. Curt. l. iv. e.i. Diodor. l. xvii. re- 
lates the same story as happening in Tyre. Plutarch, de 
Fortun. Alexand. translates the scene to Paphos. Amidst 
such inconsistencies, the silence of Arrian seemed worthy 
of imitation. 

3 Arrian says, that these ambassadors were ro Tov 
xotvo exrarpevot. It should seem that the king of Tyre 
was a very limited prince, and the government rather 
republican than monarchical. 

4 The reader may recollect, that Philip sent a similar 
message to Atheas, king of the Scythians. Such pious 
pretences were often employed by antiquity to justify very 
unwarrantable transactions. 


accustomed to war.5 But the resources of their 
wealth and commerce seem to have elevated 
the courage, instead of softening the character, 
of the Tyreans. Their city, which, in the lan- 
guage of the East, wasstyled the eldest daughter 
of Sidon,® had long reigned queen of the sea. 
The purple shell-fish, which is found in great 
abundance on their coast,’ early gave them pos- 
session of that lucrative trade, and confined 
chiefly to the Tyrians the advantage of clothing 
the princes and nobles in most civilized coun- 
tries of antiquity. Tyre was separated from 
the continent by a frith half a mile broad ; its 
walls exceeded a hundred feet? in height, and 
extended eighteen miles in circumference. The 
convenience of its situation, the capaciousness 
of its harbours, and the industrious ingenuity 
of its inhabitants, rendered it the commercial 
capital of the world. Its magazines were plen- 
tifully provided with military and naval stores, 
and :t was peopled by numerous and skilful 
artificers in stone, wood, and iron.!0 

Notwithstanding the strength of 


moe the city, Alexander determined to 
XIL hag form the siege of Tyres and the 
A. C. 332. 


difficulty of an undertaking which 
seemed necessary in itself, and essential to the 
success of still more important enterprises, only 
stimulated the activity of a prince, who knew 
that, on many emergencies, boldness is the 
greatest prudence. The first operation which 
he directed, was to run a mole from the conti- 
nent to the walls of Tyre, where the sea was 
about three fathom deep. The necessity of this 
measure arose from the imperfection of the 
battering engines of antiquity, which had little 
power, except at small distances. On the side 
of the continent, the work was carried on with 
great alacrity ; but when the Macedonians ap- 
proached the city, they were much incommoded 
by the depth of water, and exceedingly galled 
by darts and missile weapons from the battle- 
ments. The Tyrians, likewise, having the com- 
mand of the sea, annoyed the workmen from 
their galleys, and retarded the completion of 
their labours. To resist these assaults, Alex- 
ander erected, on the furthest projecture of the 
mole, two wooden towers, on which he placed 
his engines, and which he covered with leather 


5 Old Tyre was built on the continent, by the Sidonians 
1252 B. C. It was besieged hy Salmanesar, 719 B.C.; and by 
Nebuchadnezzar, 572 B.C. The latter took the place after > 
a siege of thirteen years; ‘but the greater part of the inha- 
bitanta had previously fled with their effects to a neighbour- 
ing island, and founded the city described in the text. Vid. 
Joseph. l. viii. cap. ii. l. ix. cap. xiv. et l. x. cap. xi. 

6 Isaiah, xxiii. 12. 7 Strabo, l. vi. p. 521. 

8 Homer, Herodot. &c. passim. See likewise p. 80. _ 

9 Arrian says one hundred and fifty feet. The copies 
probably are erroneous. 

10 Plutarch, Curtius, Arrian. 


XXXVII] 


and raw hides to resist the ignited darts and 
fire-ships of the enemy. This contrivance, 
howėver, the ingenuity of his adversaries soon 
rendered ineffectual: Having procured a huge 
hulk, they filled it with dry twigs, pitch, sul- 
phuf, and other combustibles. Toward the 
prow, they raised two masts, each of which was 
armed with a double yard, from whose extremi- 
ties were suspended vast chaldrons, filled with 
whatever might add to the violence of the con- 
flagration. Having prepared this uncummon 
instrument of destruction, they patiently waited 
a favourable wind. The hulk was then towed 
into the sea by two galleys. As she approached 
the mole, the rowers set her on fire, and es- 
caped by swimming. The works of the Mace- 
donians were soon thrown into a blaze. The 
enemy, Sailing forth in boats, prevented them 
from extinguishing the flames; and the labour 
of many weeks was thus in one day reduced to 
tuins.!! 

The perseverance of Alexander was proof 
against such accidents. He immediately com- 
manded new engines to be made, and a new 
mole to be raised, stronger and broader than 
the preceding. The orders of a prince, who 
directed every operation in person, and whose 
bodily toils exceeded those of the meanest sol- 
dier, were always obeyed with alacrity. The 
ruins of old Tyre afforded abundance of stone; 
wood was brought from Anti-Libanus;'2 and 
it should seem that the Arabians, having dis- 
turbed the Macedonian workmen, were repelled 
by Alexander, which gave rise to the improbable 
fiction of his having conquered Arabia. By 
incredible exertions, the mole was at length 
built, and the battering engines were erected. 
The arrival of four thousand Peloponnesian 
forces seasonably reinforced Alexander, and re- 
vived the courage of his troops, exhausted by 
fatigue and dejected by defeat. At the same 
time the fleets of the maritime provinces which 
he had subdued, came to offer their assistance 
in an undertaking, which could scarcely have 
proved successful, while the Tyrians command- 
ed the sea. The squadrons of Lower Asia 
were joined by the naval force of Rhodes and 
Cyprus. The whole armament of Alexander 
amounted to two hundred and twenty-four 
vessels,!3 so that tlle T'yrians, who hitherto con- 


11 Arrain, p. 44. et seq. 

12 Curtius confounds Anti-Libanus with Mount Libanus. 
Tt would be endless to notice his errors, exaggerations, and 
fictions in the account of this siege, which is oneof the most 
romantic passages in his history. Curtius writes to the 

ancy, not to the judgment; and to readers of a certain 
taste, the picturesque beanties of bis style will atone for 
errors in matter of fact. He may he allowed to raise an 
imaginary storm, who can describe it like Curtius. “Tum 
inhorrescens mare paullatim levari, deinde acriori vento 
concitatum, fluctus ciere, et inter se navigia callidere. 
Jamque scindi cæperant vinenla, qnibus connexæ quad- 
riremes erant, ruere tabulata, et eum ingenti fragore in pro- 
fandum secum milites trahere.” It is Alexander, whose 
actions he disfigures and venders incredible, not the reader, 
whose fancy he amuses, that is entitled to condemn Curtius. 

13 Curtius. |. iv. c. ili. says, that it consisted of one hun- 
dred and eighty sail. Plutarch. in Alexand. says, that the 
haven of Tyre was blocked up with two hundred triremes. 
Arrian distinctly mentions the number and species of ships 
sent by each city or province. From Macedon there came, 
he says, a vessel of fifty oars, zevryxovroeos;: n circum- 
stance which proves that, on this emergency, Alexander 
had taken pains to collect ships from all qaarters. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


437 


fided in their fleet, now retired behind the de- 
fences of their ports for safety. 

But these persevering islanders, though they 
prudently declined an unequal combat, were 
forsaken neither by their activity nor their cou- 
rage. The hulks and galleys,!4 destined to ad- 
vance the battering engines against their walls, 
were assailed with continual showers of ignited 
arrows,!5 and other missile weapons, which 
came with peculiar effect from wooden towers 
newly raised on their lofty battlements. This 
distant hostility retarded, but could not pre- 
vent, the approaches of the enemy. The pur- 
pose of the Tyrians was better effected by cast- 
ing down huge stones into the sea, which 
hindered access to the walls. To clear these 
incumbrances required the perseverance of the 
Macedonians, and the animating presence of 
Alexander. Before the work could be accom- 
plished, the enemy advanced in covered vessels, 
and cut the cables of the hulks employed in 
that laborious service. Alexander commanded 
a squadron to advance and repel the Tyrians. 
Yet even this did not facilitate the removal of 
the bar; for the islanders, being expert divers, 
plunged under water, and again cutting the 
cables, set the Macedonian vessels adrift. It 
thus became necessary to prepare chains, which 
were used instead of ropes; by which con- 
trivance the hulks were secured in firm an- 
chorage, the bank of stones was removed, and 
the battering engines advanced to the walls. 

In this extremity, the Tyrians, still trusting 
to their courage, determined to attack the Cy- 
prian squadron, stationed at the mouth of the 
habour which looked towards Sidon. The 
boldness of this design could only be surpassed 
by the deliberate valour with which it was car- 
ried into execution. The mouth of the haven 
they had previously covered with spread sails, 
to conceal their operations from the enemy. 
The hour of attack was fixed at mid-day, at 
which time the Greeks and Mecedonians were 
usually employed in private affairs, or the care 
of their bodies, and Alexander commonly re- 
tired to his pavilion, erected near the harbour 
which looked towards Egypt. The best sailing 
vessels were carefully selected from the whole 
fleet,!6 and manned with the most expert 
rowers, and the most resolute soldiers, all inured 
to the sea, and well armed for fight. At first 
they came forth in a line, slowly and silently ; 
but having proceeded within sight of the Cy- 
prians, they at once clashed their oars, raised a 
shout, and avanced abreast of each other to the 
attack. Several of the enemy’s ships were sunk 
at the first shock ; others were dashed in pieces 
agaist the shore. Alexander, who had fortu- 
nately that day tarried but a short time in his 
pavilion, was no sooncr informed of this despe- 
rate sally, than, with admirable presence of 
mind, he immediately ordered such vessels as 
were ready, to block up the mouth of the haven, 
and thereby prevent the remainder of the Ty- 


14 Such vessels were used for this purpose, as were the 
stontest sailors. Arrian, p. 46. 

15 Mugoogoss osrross. 

16 They consisted, says Arrian, in five choice quin- 
queremes, as many quadriremes, and seven triremes. Sce 
note, p. 61. 


438 


rian fleet from joining their victorious com- 
panions. Mean while, with several quinque- 
reme, and five trireme, galleys, hastily prepar- 
ed, he sailed round to attack the Tyrians. The 
besieged observing from their walls the approach 
of Alexander, endeavoured, by shouts and sig- 
nals, to recall their ships. ‘They had scarcely 
changed their course, when the enemy assailed, 
and soon rendered them unserviceable. The 
men saved themselves by swimming; few ves- 
sels escaped; two were taken at the very en- 
trance of the harbour. 

The issue of these naval opera- 


ne tions decided the fate of Tyre. Un- 
A.C 339 awed by the hostile fleet, the Mace- 
‘ July * donians now fearlessly advanced 


their engines on all sides. Amidst 
repeated assaults during two days, the besiegers 
displayed the ardour of enthusiasm,! the be- 
sieged the fury of despair. From towers equal 
in height to the walls, the Greeks and Mace- 
donians fought hand to hand with the enemy. 
By throwing spontoons across, the bravest some- 
times passed over, even to the battlements. In 
other parts, the Tyrians successfully employed 
hooks and grappling-irons to remove the assail- 
ants. On those who attempted scaling-ladders, 
they poured vessels of burning sand, which pe- 
netrated to the bone. The vigour of the at- 
tack was opposed by as vigorous a resistance, 
The shock of the battering engines was dead- 
ened by green hides and coverlets of wool, and 
whenever an opening was effected, the bravest 
combatants advanced to defend the breach. 
But time and fatigue, which exhausted the vi- 
gour of the enemy, only confirmed the perse- 
verance of Alexander. On the third day, the 
engines assailed the walls; and the fleet, di- 
vided into two squadrons, attacked the opposite 
harbours. A wide breach being effected, Al- 
exander commanded the hulks, which carried: 
the engines, to retire, and others, bearing the 
scaling-ladders, to advance, that his soldiers 
might enter the town over the ruins. The tar- 
geteers, headed by Admetus, first mounted the 
breach. This gallant commander was slain by 
a spear; but Alexander, who was present wher- 
ever danger called, immediately followed with 
the royal band of Companions. At the same 
time the Phenician fleet broke into the harbour 
of Egypt, and the Cyprians into that of Sidon. 
After their walls were taken, the townsmen 
still rallied, and prepared for defence. The 
length of the siege, and still more the cruelty of 
the Tyrians, who having taken some Grecian 
vessels from Sidon, butchered their crews on 
the top of their wall, and threw their bodies into 


1 From the beginning, the difficulties of the siege had 
appeared almost insurmountable to the soldiers. “ But Al- 
exander,”’ says Curtius, “ haudquaquam rudis tractandi mili- 
tares animos, speciem sibi Herculis in somno oblatam esse 
pronunciat, dextram porrigentis.”” The diviners thence con- 
cluded, as Arrian tells us, that Tyre would be taken, but 
that it would be a Herculean labour. Alexander continued 
throughout the siege to employ the aids of superstition. At 
one time it was said, that Apollo was about to leave Tyre, 
and that the Tyrians had fastened him with golden chains 
to prevent his clopement. At another, Alexander dreamed 
that a satyr playing before him, long eluded his grasp, but 
finally allowed himself to be caught. The augurs divided 
the word Zarueos, a Satyr, into two syllables, Ez rveos, 
Tyre is thine. By such coarse artifices did Alexander con- 
quer the world 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


(Cuar. 


the sea, in sight of the whole Macedonian army, 
provoked the indignation of Alexander, and ex- 
asperated the fury of the victors. Eight thou- 
sand Tyrians were slain ; thirty thousand were 
reduced to servitude.? The principal ma- 
gistrates, together with some Carthaginians 
who had come to worship the gods of their 
mother country, took refuge in the temple of 
Tyrian Hercules. They were saved by the 
clemency or piety of Alexander, who had lost 
four hundred men in this obstinate siege of 
seven months.3 

The conquest of Phenicia was followed by 
the submission of the neighbouring province of 
Judza.4 But in the road leading to Egypt, the 
progress of the conqueror was interrupted by 
the strong city of Gaza, situate on a high hill, 
near the confines of the Arabian desert.5 This 
place, distant about two miles from the sea, and 
surrounded by marshes or a deep sand, which 
rendered it extremely difficult of access, was 
held for Darius by the loyalty of Batis,‘ a 
eunuch, who had prepared to resist Alexander 
by hiring Arabian troops, and by providing co- 
pious magazines. The Macedonian engineers? 
declared their opinion that Gaza was impreg- 
nable. But Alexander, unwilling to incur the 
disgrace and danger of leaving a strong fortress 
behind him, commanded a rampart to be raised 
on the south side of the wall, which seemed 
least secure against an attack. His engines 
were scarcely erected, when the garrison made 
a furious sally, and threw them into flames. 
It required the presence of the king to save the 
rampart, and to prevent the total defeat of the 
Macedonians. Warned by a heavenly admoni- 


2 Curtius, l. iv. c. iv. says, that fifteen thousand Tyrians 
were saved by their Sidonian brethren, who clandestinely 
embarked them in their ships, and transported them to Si- 
don. This circumstance, omitted by Arrian, derives some 
probability from the vigorous resistance which, nineteen 
years afterwards, Tyre again made to the arms of Antigo- 
nus. Vid. Diodor. Sicul. p. 702—704. 

3 Arrian, I. ii. p. 44—50. 

4 All the historians of Alexander are silent concerning 
his journey to Jerusalem, and his extraordinary transactions 
there, deseribed by Josephus, |. xi. c. viii. This story, in- 
vented by the patriotic vanity of the Jews, is totally incon- 
sistent with the narrative of Arrian, copied in the text. As 
all Palestine,except Gaza, had submitted to his arms, ‘ Tæ 
psu xax Tyc Iigixirtivzs meorxsgwenxotTra yoy.” Alex- 
ander had no occasion to march against Jerusalem. The 
conversation between Alexander, Parmenio, and the high- 
priest Jadduah, as related by Josephus, is likewise contradic- 
tory to the hest authenticated events in the reign of Alex- 
ander. When the high-priest approached to implore the 
clemency of the conqueror, Alexander, says the Jewish his- 
torian, prostrated himself before that venerable old man; an 
action which so much surprised Parmeuio, that he imme- 
diately asked his master, “ Why he, whom all the world 
adored, should himself adore the bigh-priest of the Jews?” 
Tt will appear in the sequel, that Alexander did not require 
this mark of respect (the zeorxuvaesc,) till long after the 
period alluded to by Josephus; neither contd he be accom- 
panied by the Chaldeans, as that writer alleges; much less 
could the high-priest with propriety, have requested Alex- 
ander to permit the Jews, settled in Babylon and Medea, 
the free exercise of their religion, before that prince had 
conquered those countries, or even passed the Euphrates. 
See this subject further exammed in Moyle’s Letters, vol. ii. 
p. 415. and in Examen. Critique des Historiens d’Alex 
andre, p. 65—69. 

5 Eryæry Se wxesto wo em’ Atrurrov ex Doivixnc sovTs, 
emi TH woy tus conuov. *Ttis the last inhabited place on 
the road from Phenicia to Egypt, on the skirts of the de- 
sert.”’ 

6 Curtius, l. iv. c. vi. calls him Belis; Josephus, l. xi. c. 
vii. Bahameses. 

7 O: wnxxvomosos, the engine-makers; it should seem 
that the same persons who made the engines, directed the 
application of them. 


XXXVI] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


439 


tion, he had hitherto kept beyond the reach of | perceived what the boasted wisdom of Egypt 
the enemy’s darts; and when the danger of his; had never been able to discover. The inspection 


troops made him forget the divinc omen, a 
weapon, thrown from a catapult, pierced his 
shield and breat-plate,and wounded him in the 
shoulder. Soon afterwards the engines, which 
had been used in the siege of Tyre, arrived by 
sea. A wall of incredible height and breadth? 
was run entirely round the city; the Macedo- 
nians raised their batteries ; the miners!’ were 
busy at the foundation; breaches were effected; 
and, after repeated assaults, the city was taken 
by storm. When their wall was underinined, 
and their gates in possession of the enemy, the 
inhabitants still fought desperately, and without 
losing ground,"! perished toa man. Their wives 
and children were enslaved; and Gaza, being 
repeopled from the neighbouring territory, serv- 
ed as a place of arms to restrain the incursions 
of the Arabs. 

The obstinate resistance of the 


i obscure fortress of Gaza, was con- 
A. C..332: trasted by the ready submission of 


the celebrated kingdom of Egypt. 
In seven days’ march, Alexander reached the 
maritime city of Pelusium, to which he had 
previously sent the fleet, with an injunction 
carefully to examine the neighbouring coasts, 
lakes, and rivers. His decisive victory at Issus, 
the shameful flight of Darius, the recent sub- 
jugation of Syria and Pheenicia, together with 
the actually defenceless state of Egypt (Ma- 
zaces, the satrap of that large province, having 
no Persian, and scarcely any regular troops,) 
opened a ready passage to the wealthy capital 
of Memphis. There, Alexander was received 
as sovereign, and immediately afterwards ac- 
knowledged by the whole nation; a nation 
long accustomed to fluctuate between one ser- 
vitude and another, always ready to obey the 
first summons of an invader, and ever willing 
to betray him for a new master. Grateful for 
his unexampled success, Alexander sacrificed at 
Memphis to the Egyptian gods, and celebrated 
in that city gymnastic and musical games, 
which were adorned by Grecian artists, ac- 
companying him for that purpose. Having 
placed sufficient garrisons both in Mempis and 
Pelusium, he embarked with the remainder of 
his forces, and sailed down the Nile to Ca- 
nopus.!2 

At this place Alexander found abundant oc- 
cupation for his policy, in a country where there 
was no opportunity for exercising his valour. 
Continually occupied with the thoughts, not 
only of extending, but of improving, his con- 
quests, the first glance of his discerning eye 


— 


8 While Alexander was sacrificing, a bird of prey let fall 
astone on his head. According to Aristander, the sooth- 
sayer, this prodigy portended that the city should be taken, 
but that Alexander would be exposed to danger in the siege, 

9 Evgos mev sç duo orudsous, vlog Sees modas mevty- 
movTe xut gixxorssucs “Two furlongs in breadth, two 
hundred and fifty feet in height;” but the text is absurdly 
erroneous. 

10 Yrovopewy re wAAy xzi wAAY opumrousvwv., Arrian, pe 
51. This was an uncommon expedient, and used only on 
great emergencics. 

J] Kz: amebxvov TAVTEÇ aurou peuyomevos wo exurros 
staxsycxv. The highest panegyric, being the very words 
applied by Lysias, Herodotus, &c. to those who fell at 
Thermopylæ. 

12 Arrian, p. 51, et seq. 


of the Mediterranean coast, of the Red Sea, 
of the lake Maræotis, and of the various 
branches of the Nile, suggested the design of 
founding a city, which should derive, from 
nature, only, more permanent advantages than 
the favour of the greatest princes can bestow. 
Fired with this idea, he not only fixed the 
situation,!? but traced the plan of his intended 
capital, desctibed the circuit of its walls, and 
assigned the ground for its squares, market- 
places, and temples.!4 Such was the sagacity 
of his choice, that within the space of twenty 
years, Alexandria rose to distinguished emi- 
nence among the cities of Egypt and the East, 
and continued, through all subsequent ages of 
antiquity, the principal bond of union, the seat 
of correspondence and commerce, among the 
civilized nations of the earth. 

In Egypt, an inclination seized 


i se Alexander to traverse the southern 
A. ©. 332, ©o2st of the Mediterranean, that he 


might visit the revered temple and 
oracle of Jupiter Ammon. This venerable 
shrine was situate in a cultivated spot of five 
miles in diameter, distant about fifty leagues 
from the sea, and rising with the most attrac- 
tive beauty amidst the sandy deserts of Lybia. 
Among the African and Asiatic nations, the 
oracle of Ammon enjoyed a similar authority 
to that which Delphi had long held in Greece; 
and, perhaps, the conquest of the East could not 
have been so easily accomplished by Alexander, 
had he not previously obtained the sanction of 
this vencrated shrine. Guided by prudence, or 
impelled by curiosity, he first proceeded two 
hundred miles westward, along the coast to 
Paretonius, through a desolate country, but 
not destitute of water. He then boldly pene- 
trated towards the south, into the midland ter- 
ritory, despising the danger of traversing an 
ocean of sand, unmarked by trees, mountains, 
or any other object that might direct his course, 
or vary this gloomy scenc of uniform sterility.!5 
The superstition of the ancients believed him 
to have been conducted by ravens, or serpents; 
which, without supposing a miracle, may, 
agreeably to the natural instinct of animals, 
have somctimes bent thcir course, through the 
desert, towards a well-watered and fertile spot, 
covered with palms and olives. The fountain, 
which was the source of this fertility, formed 
not the least curiosity of the place. It was ex- 
ceedingly cool at mid-day, and warm at mid- 
niglit; and in the intervening time, regularly, 
every day, underwent all the intermediate de- 


13 Egypt, says Baron Tott, who lately snrveyed that 
eountry with the eye of an engineer ond a statesman, was 
formed to unite the commerce of Enrope, Africa, and the 
Indies. Tt stood in need of a harbour, vast, and of casy ac- 
cess. The months of the Nile afford neither of these ad- 
vantages; the only proper situation was distant twelve 
lenenes from the river, and in the heart of a desert. On 
this spot, which none but a great genius could have disco- 
vered, Alexander built a city, which, being joined to the 
Nile by a navigable canal, became the capital of nations, 
the metropolis of commerce. The trading nations of the 
earth still respect its ruins, heaped up bv barbarism, and 
which require but the operation of a beneficent hand, to re- 
store the boldest edifice which the human mind ever dared 
to conceive. Mem. dn Baron de Tott. t. ii. p. 179, 

14 Arrian, l. iii. sub. init. 

15 Arrain, p. 53 et Curtius, l. iv. c. vii. 


440 


grees of temperature. The adjacent territory 
produced a fossile salt, which was often dug 
out in large oblong pieces, clear as crystal. 
The priests of Ammon inclosed it in boxes of 
palm-trees, and bestowed it, in presents, on 
kings and other illustrious personages; such 
salt being regarded as purer than that procured 
from sea water, and therefore preferred for the 
purpose of sacrifice, by persons curious in their 
worship.! 

Alexander admired the nature ‘of the place, 
consulted the oracle concerning the success of 
his expedition, and received, as was universally 
reported, a very favourable answer.2 Having 
thus effected his purpose at the temple of Am- 
mon, he returned to Memphis, in order finally 
to settle the affairs of Egypt. The inhabitants 
of that country were reinstated in the enjoy- 
ment of their ancient religion and laws. Two 
Egyptians were appointed to administer the 
civi; gcvernment; but the principal garrisons, 
Alexander prudently entrusted to the command 
of his most confidential friends;3 a policy alike 
recommended by the strength and importance 
of the country, and by the restless temper of its 
inhabitants. 

The Macedonians had now extended their 
arms over Anatolia, Carmania, Syria, and 
Egypt; countries which anciently formed the 
seat of arts and empire, and which actually 
compose the strength and centre of the Turk- 
ish power. But Darius (after all hopes of ac- 
commodation had vanished with a conqueror 
who demanded unconditional submission to his 
clemency)‘ still found resources in his eastern 
provinces, Schirvan, Gilan, Corosan, and the 
wide extent of territory between the Caspian 
and the Jaxartes. Not only the subjects of the 
empire, but the independent tribes in those remote 
regions, which in ancient and modern times have 
ever been the abode of courage and barbarity, 
rejoiced in an opportunity to signalize their 
restless valour. At the first summons, they 
poured down into the fertile plains of Assyria, 
and increased the army of Darius far beyond 
any proportion of force which he had hitherto 
collected. 

Mean while, Alexander having 
aie received considerable reinforce- 
A C 331 ments from Greece, Macedon, and 

coe" Thrace, pursued his journey east- 
ward from Pheenicia, passed the Euphrates at 
Thapsacus,® boldly stemmed the rapid stream 


Olymp. 


1 Arrian, p. 53, et seq. et Curtius, l. iv. c. vii. 

2 Vid. Plut. Alexand. p. 680. The priest, or prophet, 
meant to address Alexander hy the affectionate title of 
a2i5sov, child, son; but not being sufficiently acquainted 
with the Greek tongue, he said, zæ: dsoc, son of Jupiter. 
On this wretched blunder were founded Alexander's pre- 
tensions to divinity. Plut. ibid. et Zonar. Annal. i. p. 134. 
The fictions of Curtius are inconsistent with Arrian, and 
with Strabo, l. xvii. p. 1168. 

3 Arrian observes, that the Romans seem to have imi- 
t®ted the jealousy of Alexander respecting Egypt. Sensible 
of the temptations of the governors of that province to revolt, 
they appointed, not senators, but men of the equestrian 
order, to be proconsuls of Egypt. Arrian, p. 55. 

4 In this, Arrian and Curtius agree. The letters between 
Alexander and Darius are differently expressed hy these 
writers. In both their accounts, which are totally inconsis- 
tent with each other, there are internal marks of falsehood. 

5 Darius had entrusted the defence of the pass to Maza- 
cus, with a body of cavalry, of which two thousand were 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


of the Tigris, and hastened to meet the enemy 
in Assyria. Darius had pitched his tents on 
the level banks of the Bumadus, near the ob- 
scure village of Gaugamela; but the famous 
battle, which finally decided the empire of the 
East, derived its name from Arbela, a town in 
the same province, sixty miles distant from the 
former, better known, and of easier pronuncia- 
tion.6 

The fourth day after passing the Tigris, Al- 
exander was informed by his scouts, that they 
had seen some bodies of the enemy’s horse, but 
could not discover their numbers. Upon this 
intelligence he marched forward in order of 
battle; bat had not proceeded far, when he 
was met by other scouts, who having pene- 
trated deeper into the country, or examined 
with greater accuracy, acquainted him that the 
hostile cavalry scarcely exceeded a thousand. 
This news made him alter his measures. The 
heavy-armied troops were commanded to slacken 
their pace. At the head of the royal cohort, 
the Psonians, and auxiliaries, Alexander ad- 
vanced with such celerity, that several of 
the Barbarians fell into his hands. These pri- 
soners gave him very alarming accounts of 
the strength of Darius, who was encamped 
within a few hours’ march. Some made it 
amount to a million of foot, forty thousand 
horse, two hundred armed chariots, and fifteen 
elephants from the eastern banks of the Indus.7 
Others exaggerated (if indeed it was an exag- 
geration) with more method and probability, 
reducing the infantry to six hundred thousand, 
and raising the cavalry to a hundred and forty- 
five thousand.’ But all agreed, that the pre- 
sent army was greatly more numerous, and 
composed of more warlike nations, than that 
which had fought at Issus.9 

Alexander received this information without, 
testifying the smallest surprise. Having com- 
manded a halt, he encamped four days to give 
his men rest and refreshment. His camp being 
fortified by a good intrenchment, he left in it 
the sick and infirm, together with all the bag- 
gage; and on the evening of the fourth day, 
prepared to march against the enemy, with the 
effective part of his army, which was said to 
consist of forty thousand infantry, and seven 
thousand horse, unincumbered with any thing 
but their provisions and armour. The march 
was undertaken at the second watch of the 
night, that the Macedonians, by joining battle 
in the morning, might enjoy the important ad- 
vantage of having an entire day before them, 
to reap the full fruits of their expected victory. 
About half way between the hostile camps, 
some eminences intercepted the view of either 
army. Having ascended the rising ground, 
Alexander first beheld the Barbarians, drawn 
up in battle array, and perhaps more skilfully 


proach, Mazacus abandoned his post, and drew off his 
forces. Arrian, p. 56. 

6 This reason, which is given by Arrian, could scarcely 
have appeared valid to any but a Greek. Vid. Arrian. p. 
131. 
7 Arrian, p. 57. 

8 Cortius, l. iv. c. xii. xiii. edit. Genev. 
are different in the other editions. 

9 Arrian et Curtius, loc. citat. Justin. 1. xi. c. xii. Dio- 
dorus, I. xvii. c. xxxix. et liii. Orasius, J. iii. c. xvii. Plut. 


The numbers 


Greeks. But on the first intelligence of Alexander's ap-' in Alexand. 


XXXVIII] j 


marshalled than he had reason to apprehend. 
Their appearance, at least, immediately deter- 
mined him to change his first resolution. He 
again commanded a halt, summoned a council 
of war; and different measures being proposed, 
acceded to the single opinion of Parmenio, who 
advised that the foot should remain stationary, 
until a detachment of horse had explored the 
field of battle,’ and carefully examined the 
disposition of the enemy. Alexander, whose 
conduct was equalled by his courage, and both 
surpassed by his activity, performed those im- 
portant duties in person, at the head of his 
light horse, and royal cohort. Having returned 
with unexampled celerity, he again assembled 
his captains and encouraged them by a short 
speech. Their ardour corresponded with his 
own; and the soldiers, confident of victory, 
were commanded to take rest and refresh- 
ment,!! 

Mean while, Darius perceiving the enemy’s 
approach, kept his men prepared for action. 
Notwithstanding the great length of the plain, 
he was obliged to contract his front, and form 
in two lines, each of which was extremely 
deep. According to the Persian custom, the 
king occupied the centre of the first line, sur- 
rounded by the princes of the blood, and the 
great officers of his court, and defended by his 
horse and foot guards, amounting to fifteen 
thousand chosen men. These splendid troops, 
who seemed fitter for parade than battle, were 
flanked, on either side, by the Greek mercena- 
ries, and other warlike battalions, carefully se- 
lected from the whole army. The right wing 
consisted of the Medes, Parthians, Hyrcanians, 
and Sace; the left was chiefly occupied by the 
Bactrians, Persians, and Cardusians. The va- 
rious nations composing this immense host, 
were differently armed, with swords, spears, 
clubs, and hatchets; while the horse and foot 
of each division were promiscuously blended, 
rather from the result of accident, than by the 
direction of design. The armed chariots fronted 
the first line, whose centre was farther defend- 
ed by the elephants. Chosen squadrons of 
Scythian, Bactrian, and Cappadocian cavalry 
advanced before either wing, prepared to bring 
on the action, or after it began, to attack the 
enemy in flank and rear. : 

The unexpected approach of Alexander with- 
in sight of his tents, prevented Darius from 
fortifying the wide extent of his camp; and, as 
he dreaded a nocturnal assault, from enemies 
who often veiled their designs in darkness, he 
commanded his men to remain all night under 
arms. This unusual measure, the gloomy si- 
lence, the long and anxious expectation, toge- 


10 Try xwexv mzrzv ave to Eeyov ETETILI EUSAAEV, 
“The whole scene of the future action.” Arrian, p. 8. 

ll Asirvorossir$xs xxi evxrsuici xs EXEABUTE TOV TTZ- 
tov, ‘He commanded his army to sup and rest.” Arrian, 
p. 598. This does not well agree with what is said, p. 57. 
oudav ZAAO OT! uy orma Gsooues, “That the soldiers car- 
ried nothing but their armour.” [have therefore supplied 
the word “provisions.” Both Arrian (loc. citat.) and Cur- 
tius, l. iv. c. xiii. say, that Parmenio exhorted Alexander to 
attack the enemy in the night; to which the king answered, 
that he disdained xr¢yxe Tyv vexyv,-" to steal the victory :” 
an answer worthy of his magnanimity and his prudence; 
since the day and the light were more favourable to the full 
exertion and display of his superior skill and courage. 


3K 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


441 


ther with the fatigue of a restless night, discou 
raged the whole army, but inspired double ter- 
ror into those who had witnessed the miserable 
disasters on the banks of the Granicus and the 
Issus. 

At day-break, Alexander disposed his troops 
in a manner suggested by the superior numbers 
and deep order of the enemy. His main body 
consisted in two heavy-armed phalanxes, each 
amounting to above sixteen thousand men. Of 
these, the greater part formed into one line; 
behind which, he placed the heavy-armed men, 
reinforced by his targeteers, with orders, that 
when the out-spreading wings of the enemy 
prepared to attack the tlanks and rear of his 
first line, the second should immediately wheel 
to receive them.'2 The cavalry and light in- 
fantry were so disposed on the wings, that 
while one part resisted the shock of the Per- 
sians in front, another, by only facing to the 
right or left, might take them in flank. Skil- 
ful archers and darters were posted at pro- 
per intervals, as affording the best defence 
against the armed chariots, which (as Alexan- 
der well knew) must immediately become use- 
less, whenever their conductors or horses were 
wounded. 

Having thus arranged the several parts, Al- 
exander with equal judgment led the whole ih 
an oblique direction towards the enemy’s left; 
a manceuvre which enabled the Macedonians to 
avoid contending at once with superior num- 
vers. When his advanced battalions, notwith 
standing their nearness to the enemy, still 
stretched towards the right, Darius also extend- 
ed his left, till fearing that by continuing this 
movement his men should be drawn gradually 
on the plain, he commanded the Scythian 
squadrons to advance, and prevent the further 
extension of the hostile line. Alexander im- 
mediately detached a body of horse to oppose 
them. An equestrian combat ensued, in which 
both parties were reinforced, and the Barbari- 
ans finally repelled. The armed chariots then 
issued forth with impetuous violence; but their 
appearance only was formidable; for the pre- 
cautions taken by Alexander, ren- 


ee dered their assault harmless. Da- 
ae 33] rius next moved his main body, 
Since * but with so little order, that the 


horse, mixed with the infantry, ad- 
vanced, and left a vacuity in the line, which his 
generals wanted time or vigilance to supply. 
Alexander seized the decisive mioment, and 
penetrated into the void with a wedge of squa- 
drons. He was followed by the nearest sec- 
tions of the phalanx, who rushed forward with 
loud shouts, as if they had already pursued the 
enemy. [In this part of the field, the victory 
was not long doubtful ; after a feeble resistance, 
the Barbarians gave way; and the pusillani- 
mous Darius was foremost in the flight.!3 

The battle, however, was not yet decided. 
The more remote divisions of the phalanx, 
upon receiving intelligence that the left wing, 


12 Evera$s de xas devrepxv traci we sivi Tyv paray yo 
apecsoromov. Arrian, p. 60. The ¢xrxy& aporrropos ig 
explained by Astian, as describe in the text. 

13 Eguys ev ross wewross xsrxyews. “Ile fled shame- 
fully among the foremost.” Arrian, p. 69. 


442 


commanded by Parmenio, was in danger, had 
not immediately followed Alexander. A va- 
cant space was thus left in the Macedonian 
line, through which some squadrons of Persian 
and Indian horse penetrated with celerity, and 
advanced to the hostile camp.! It was then 
that Alexander derived signal and well-earned 
advantages from his judicious order of battle. 
The heavy-armed troops and targeteers, which 
he had skilfully posted behind the phalanx, 
speedily faced about, advanced with a rapid 
step, and attacked the Barbarian cavalry, al- 
ready entangled among the baggage. The 
enemy thus surprised, were destroyed, or put 
to flight. Mean while, the danger of his left 
wing recalled Alexander from the pursuit of 
Darius. In advancing against the enemy’s 
right, he was met by the Parthian, Indian, and 
Persian horse, who maintained a sharp conflict. 
Sixty of the Companions fell; Hephestion, 
Ceenus, and Menidas, were wounded. Having 
at length dissipated this cloud of cavalry, Al- 
exander prepared to attack the foot in that 
wing. But the business was already effected, 
chiefly by the Thessalian horse; and nothing 
remained to be done, but to pursue the fugi- 
tives, and to render the victory as decisive as 
possible.? 


1 The words of Arrian are, AAA? extoryrzvres try 
Gxzazyye (viz. the sections on the left,) xy 2viCovro, ore 
TO SUWVUMOV TOVEITIZI AY yEAASTO, Kui TuT Wueueenyen 
toys xuros THS TAPEWS, KTR TO OLE, ObsxwZsougs TWV 
TE Ivdwvyrsves xazi Tug Ilegorsuyg barzrou, wp ETE TR THEVOS OES 
Twv Mzxedovwv, &c. The learned Guischardt’s commen- 
tary is ingenious, but scarcely warranted by the text. ‘ Les 
sections de la droite de la phalange ayant donnée en même 
temps que les Peltastes, les autres sections, qui €toient par 
l'oblique plus ou moins en arrière, tacherent aussi de 
marcher ens avant, et decharger lennemi. Mais les troupes 
de la droite des Perses, voyant le fort de combat au centre, 
se presserent toutes vers cet endroit de la ligne, en se pous- 
sant mutuellement, et la foule embarassa tellement les sal- 
dats de la phalange, qu'il leur fut alors impossible de s’avan- 
cer. Sur ces en'refaites, Alexandre, pour se faire jour, se 
jetta sur les derriéres de ces ennemis. En méme temps la 
nouvelle de la fuite de Darius, et de la deroute de toute sa 
gauche s’étant repandue, la consternation devint générale. 
L’effet en fut singulier; les Perses se voyant coupés, dans 
Jeur retraite, par les escadrons d’ Alexandre, qu'ils avoient 
a dos, chercherent ase sauver, méme a travers la phalange. 
Ils se jetterent å corps perdu sur elle. Quoique de vingt 
quatre de hauteur, elle ne put resister au poids de cette 
masse. Sa gauche étant alors plus chargée que sa droite, 
les sections, de celle-ci poussérent en avant, et u’observe- 
rent pas que, depuis la troisiéme section, la gauche restoit 
en arriére. Ilen resulta que Ja phalange se separa, que sa 
droite s'avança 4 la poursuite de l'ennemi, et que des corps 
nombreux de cavalerie et d’infanterie, qui avoient éte au 
centre Persan, entrerent tout a-coup par la crevasse, et pous- 
sérent jusques derrière la ligne des Macédoniens.” See 
Mémoires Militaires, c. xv. p. 221. 

2 Soldiers, better acquainted with the practice than 
with the theory of their art, have often testified a just sur- 
prise, thatthe battles of the ancients should be described 
with an order, perspicuity, and circumstantial minuteness, 
which are not to be found in the military writers of modern 
times. Scholars have endeavoured to explain this differ- 
ence, by observing the immense disproportion, in point of 
dignity and abilities, between the military historians of mo- 
dern Europe, and those of Greece and Rome. But the 
difficully will be better solved, by reflecting on the changes 
introduced into the art of war by the change of arms; 
which, in military operations, form the pivat on which the 
whole turns. 1. From the nature of fire-arms, modern 
battles are involved in smoke and confusion. 2. Froin the 
same cause, modern armies occupy a much greater extent 
of ground, and begin to act at much greater distances; 
which renders it more difficult to ohserve and ascertain their 
maneuvres. 3. The immense train of artillery, ammuni- 
tion, &c. required in the practice of modern war, gives a 
certain immobility to our armies, which renders it impos- 
cible to perform, without great danger, those rapid evolu- 
tions in sight of an enemy, which so often decided the bat- 


HISTORY OF GRUNCE., 


[Cuar, 


According ‘9 the least extravagant account. 
with the loss ot Gve hundred men, he destroye.’ 
forty thousand of the Rarbacians,? who neve. 
thenceforth assemblea in cufici2nt numbers t 
dispute his dominion in the Kast. The invalua 
ble provinces of Babylonia, Sus:ana, and Persis 
with their respective capitals of Babylon, Susa 
and Persepolis,! formed the prize of his skil 
and valour. Alexander had not yet attainec 
the summit of his fortune, but he had already 
reached the height of his renown.5 The burn- 
ing of the royal palace of Persepolis, to reta- 
liate the ravages of Xerxes in Greece, afforded 
the first indication of his being overcome by too 
much prosperity. To speak the most favoura- 
bly of this transaction, an undistinguishing re- 
sentment made him forget that he destroyed 
his own palace, not that of his adversary. 

The settlement of his important and exten- 
sive conquests, and the reduction of the warlike 


‘Uxii, those independent mountaineers, who, 


inhabiting the western frontier of Persia, had 
ever defied the Persian power, restrained Alex- 
ander from urging the pursuit of Darius. After 
his defeat, that unfortunate prince escaped by 
a precipitate and obscure? flight across the Ar- 


tles of the ancients. With us, almost every thing depends 
on the judicious choice of ground, a matter requiring great 
military genius, but not admitting the embellishments of 
historical description. p 

3 In the battles of the Greeks and Romans, the extraor- 
dinary disproportion between the numbers slain on the side 
of the victors and of the vanquished, necessarily resulted 
from the natnre of their arms. Their principal weapons 
being not missile, but manual, armies could not begin to 
act till they had approached so nearly to each other, that 
the conquered found themselves cut off from all possibility 
of retreat. In modern times, the use of fire-arms (which 
often renders the action itself more bloody) furnishes the 
defeated party with various means of retreating with con- 
siderable safety. The sphere of military action is so widely 
extended in modern times, that before the victors can run 
over the space which separates them from the vanquished, 
the latter may fall back, and proceed with little loss beyond 
their reach; and should any village, hedge, ravine, &c. 
be found in their way, may often check the ardour of the 
pursuers. ¢Upon these considerations, the invention of 
gunpowder may be said to have saved the effusion of hu- 
man blood. Equestrian engagements (s*nce the principles 
on which cavalry act remain nearly the same in every age) 
are still distinguished by similar circumstances to those 
which appear so extraordinary in the battles of antiquity. 

4 The gold and silver found in those cities, amounted to 
thirty milions sterling; the jewels and other precious spoil, 
helonging to Darius, sufficed, according to Plutarch, to load 
twenty thousand mules, and five thousand camels. Plut. 
in Alexand. 

5 After the battle of Arbela, many of Alexander’s ac- 
tions, as will appear in the text, deserve the highest praise; 
but, before that period, few of them can be justly blamed. 

6 Arrian, l. iii. p. 66. Plut. in Alexand. and Strabo, l. xv. 
p. 502. agree with Arrian in confining the conflagration to 
the palace. Plutarch tells us, that only a part of that edi- 
fice was consumed. D‘odorus says inaccurately, o mees 
tyv Gzotrkerav to7os, “the place around the pa'ace ;° and 
Curtius, l. v. c. vii. with his usual extravagance, burns the 
whole city of Persepolis so completely, that not a vestige of 
it remained. The learned author of the Examen Critique 
des Historiens a’ Alexandre, is at pains to prove that Perse- 
polis existed under the successors of Alexander, and con- 
tinned to exist till the first ages of Mahometanism, when the 
inhabitants of Persepolis, having violated their treaty with 
the Musselmen, were hutchered without mercy, and their 
city totally demolished. See Examen Critique, p. 125, et 
seq. Mr. D’Hankerville, however, alleges reasons for be- 
lieving that there were two cities called Persepolis by the 
Greeks, sitnate at a considerable distance from each other, 
one of which was burnt by Alexander, and the other de- 
stroved by the Musselmen. See his Supplement to his 
Recherches sur les Artz, &c. de la Gréce. 

7 Arrian ohserves, that Darius showed great judgment in 
his flight, having left the popnlous and well-freqnented 
roads leading to Susa and Babylon, towards which he 


XXXVII] 


menian mountains into Media. 
ally joincd by the scattered remnant of his 
army, amouuitiuzg to several thousand Barba- 
rians, and fifteen hundred Greek mercenaries, 
he purposed to establish his court in Media, 
should Alexander remain at Susa or Babylon ;8 
but in case he were still pursued by the con- 
queror, his resolution was to proceed eastward, 
through Parthia and Hyrcania, into the valua- 
ble province of Bactria, laying waste the inter- 
mediate country, that he might thus interpose 
a desert between himself and the Macedonians. 
In this design, he despatched to the Caspian 
Gates the wagons conveying his women, and 
such instruments of convenicnce or luxury as 
still softened his misfortunes; and remained in 
person at Ecbatana, with his army. Alexan- 
der, when apprised of these measures, hastened 
into Media. In his way he subdued the Pari- 
tace; and having reached within three days’ 
march of the Median capital, was met by Bis- 
thanes, the son of Ochus, Darius’s predeces- 
sor.2 This prince informed him, that Darius 
had fled from thence five days before, attended 
by three thousand horsemen, and six thousand 
foot. 

Animated by this intelligence, Alexander 
proceeded to Ecbatana, in which place he left 
his treasures, and posted a strong garrison. In 
this city he likewise dismissed the Thessalian 
cavalry, and several auxiliary squadrons; pay- 
ing them, besides their arrears, a gratuity of two 
thousand talents. Such as preferred the glory 
of accompanying his standard to the joy of re- 
visiting their respective countries, were allowed 
again to enlist; a permission which many em- 
braced. A strong detachment under Parmenio 
was sent into Hyrcania; Cenas, who had been 
left sick at Susa, was commanded to march 
with all convenient speed into Parthia; while 
the king, with a well-appointed army, advanced 
with incredible expedition’? in pursuit of Da- 
rius. Having passed the Caspian Straits, he 
was met by Bagistanes, a Babylonian of distinc- 
tion, who acquainted him that Bessus, gover- 
nor of Bactria, in conjunction with Nabarzanes, 
an officer in Darius’s cavalry, and Barzaentes, 
satrap of the barbarous Drange and Arachoti, 
had thrown aside all respect for a prince, who 
was no longer an object of fear. Upon this in- 
telligence, Alexander declared expedition to be 
more necessary than cver. Having, therefore, 
left the heavy-armed troops and baggage under 
the command of Craterus, he hastened forward 


justly suspected that Alexander would march his army, 
and directing his course over the Armenian mountains into 
Media. Arrian, p. 63. Diodorus, l. xvii. p. 538. agrees 
with Arrian. The errors of Curtius, l. v. c. i. are too ab- 
surd to merit refutation. 

8 The fonndation of this hope was, that a revolt might 
break ont in the Macedonian army; since the more and the 
richer provinces Atexander acquired, his lientenants would 
have the greater temptation to aspire at independence. 
Snhseqnent events will justify the reasonable expectation 
of Darius, which was on this occasion disappointed. 

9 Arrian, p. 66. epeaks as if Ochns had been Darins’s im- 
mediate predecessor, neglecting the short reign of Arces, 
the san of Ochns, who was poisoned soon after his father 
by the eunuch Bagoas. Diodor. xvii. 5. Ælian. Var. Hist. 
vi. 8. 

10 His marches were thirty-eight and forty miles a day: 
sometimes more. Xenophon's expedition of Cyrns, and 
Arrian’s expedition of Alexander, mutually illustrate and 
confirm each othor. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


Being gradu-| with 3 few select bands, encumbered only with 


443 


their arms and two days’ provisions. In that 
space of time, he reached the camp from which 
Bagistanes had deserted; and finding some 
parties of the enemy there, learned that Darius, 
being seized ana bound, was actually carried 
prisoner in his chariot; that Bessus, in whose 
province this treason kad been committed, liad 
assumed the imperial honours; that all the 
Barbarians (Artabazus only and his sons ex- 
cepted) already acknowledged the usurper; 
that the Greek mercenaries preserved their 
fidelity inviolate; but finding themselves unable 
to prevent the flagitious scenes that were trans- 
acting, had quitted the public road, and retired 
to the mountains, disdaining not only to parti- 
cipate in the designs, but even to share the 
same camp with the traitors. Alexander far- 
ther learned, that should he pursue Bessus and 
his associates, it was their intention to make 
peace with him by delivering up Darius; but 
should he cease from the pursuit, that they had 
determined to collect forces, and to divide tie 
eastern provinces of the empire. 

Having received this information, 


eee Alexander marched all night, and 
A C 330 next day till noon, with the utmost 


speed, but without overtaking the 
enemy. He therefore dismounted five hundred 
of his cavalry, placed the bravest of his foot, 
completely armed, on horseback; and com- 
manded Attalus and Nicanor to pursue the 
great road which Bessus had followed, ad- 
vance in person with his chosen band by a 
nearer way, which was almost desert, and en- 
tirely destitute of water. The natives of the 
country were his guides. From the close of 
the evening till day-break he had rode near 
fifty miles, when he first discovered the enemy 
flying in disorder, and unarmed. Probably to 
facilitate their own escape, Satibarzanes and 
Barzaentes stabbed Darius, and then rode away 
with Bessus, accompanied by six hundred 
horse. Notwithstanding the celerity of Alex- 
ander, the unhappy Darius expired before the 
conqueror beheld him.!! Darius was the last 
king of the house of Hystaspes, and the tenth 
in succession to the monarchy of Cyrus. That 
he was neither brave nor prudent, his conduct 
sufficiently evinces; but the uninterrupted chain 
of his calamities would have prevented him 
(had he been otherwise inclined) from imitat- 
ing the injustice and cruelty of too many of 
his predecessors. !2 

In this important stage of his fortune, Alex- 
ander displayed tender sympathy with afflic- 


11 Snch is the simple narration of Arrian. The fictions 
related by Plutarch in Atexand. et Curtius, |. v. c. xii. et 
Justin, l. xi. c. xv. are inconsistent with each other, and all 
of them betray the «tesire to contrast the exultation and de- 
pression of the fartune of Darius. “ He was chained,” says 
Curtius, “with golden fetters; but taid in a dirty cart, 
covered with raw hides.” This harangue in praise of Alex- 
ander would be ine ral an:t affecting, were it not totally im- 
probable. 

12 Arrian makes this judicious observation, which proves 
the futility of the Oriental traditions representing Darius as 
a monster of tvranny and crucity. See D'ferhetot. Bibl. 
Orientale, art Darnb. p. 285. Should the fushionahle seep- 
ticism of the times hesitate hetween these anthorities, the 
reader has only to ask, what Ocental historian has related 
the transactions of Darius with the fulness and accuracy so 
conspicuous in Arrian? 


444 


tion, warm esteem of fidelity, and just hatred 
of treason. He gave orders, that the body of 
Darius should be transported to Persia, and in- 
terred in the royal mausoleum. The children 
of the deceased prince were uniformly treated 
with those distinctions which belonged to their 
birth ; and Barciné,' his eldest daughter, was 
finally espoused by Alexander. The pardon of 
the Greek mercenaries, who were admitted into 
the Macedonian service, and the honourable re- 
ception of Artabazus and his sons, well became 
the character of a prince, who could discern 
and reward the merit of his enemies. Alexan- 
der then pursued the murderers of Darius 


through the inhospitable territories of the Arii | 


and Zarangei,and in two days accomplished a 
journey of six hundred furlongs. Having re- 
ceived the submission of Aornos? and Bactra, 
he passed the deep and rapid Oxus, and learn- 
ed, on the eastern banks of this river, that Bes- 
sus, who had betrayed his master, had been 
betrayed in his turn by Spitamenes. The for- 
Mer was surprised by the Macedonians, and 
treated with a barbarity? better merited by his 
own crimes, than becoming the character of 
Alexander. 

Spitamenes succeeded to his ambition and 
danger. In pursuit of this daring rebel, the 
resentment of Alexander hurried him through 
the vast but undescribed! provinces of Aria, 
Bactria, Sogdiana, and other less considerable 
divisions of the southern region of Tartary. 
The more northern and indepen- 


ae dent tribes of that immense coun- 
Me i try, whose pastoral life formed an 
E : admirable preparation for war, ven- 


398, 329. tured to take arms against a con- 

queror who hovered on the frontier 
of their plains, and whose camp tempted them 
with the prospect of arich plunder. The policy 
of Spitamenes inflamed their courage, and ani- 
mated their hopes. These rude nations, and 
this obscure leader, proved the most dangerous 
enemies with whom Alexander ever had to 
contend. Sometimes they faced him in the 
field, and after obstinately resisting, retreated 
skilfully. Though never vanquished, Alexan- 
der obtained many dear-boughit victories. The 
Scythians, on several occasions, surprised his 
advanced parties, and interrupted his convoys. 
The abruptness of their attack was only equal- 
led by the celerity of their retreat; their num- 
bers, their courage, and their stratagems, all 
rendered them formidable. But the enlighten- 


1 Called by some writers Statira. 

2 We shall meet with another place of this name, be- 
tween the Suastus and the Indus. 

3 He was stripped naked, whipped, shamefully mutilat- 
ed, &c. Arrian arraigns those cruelties as unworthy of the 
Grecian character: hut he warmly approves the punish- 
ing of Bessus, and the other murderers of Darius. 

4 The erroneous geography of the ancients is laboriously 
compared with subsequent discoveries, in the learned work 
entitled Examen des Anciens Historiens d’Alexandre; and 
mav be seen at one glance, by comparing tho maps, usually 
prefixed to Quintus Curtius, with the admirable maps of 
D’ Anville. 

5 In one action, Arrian tells us, that only forty Macedo- 
nian horsemen, and three hundred foot, escaped. Arrian, 
l. iv. Curtius mentions another, afier which it was made 
death to divulge the number of the slain. Curtius, l. vii.c. 
vii. Alexander was not present in either of these engage- 
ments; but in a third battle, related hy Arrian, the Macedo- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


ed intrepidity, and inimitable discipline of the 
Greeks and Macedonians, finally prevailed over 
Barbarian craft, and desultory fury. Not con- 
tented with repelling his enemies, Alexander 
crossed the laxurtes,and defeated the Scythians® 
on the northern bank of that river. This vic- 
tory was sufhcient for his renown; and the ur- 
gency of his affairs soon recalled him from an 
inhospitable desert. 

The provinces between the Cas- 
pian and the Jaxartes twice rebelled, 
and twice were reduced to submis- 
sion. The Barbarians fighting sing- 


Olymp. 
exili. 2. 


A. C, 327. 


ly were successively subdued; their bravest 


troops were gradually intermixed in the Mace- 
donian ranks; and Alexander, thus continually 
reinforced by new numbers, was enabled tu 
overawe those extensive countries, by dividing 
his army into five formidable brigades, com- 
manded by Hephestion, Ptolemy, Perdiccas, 
Cenus,’ and himself. Near Gabe, a fortress 
of Sogdiana, Cenus attacked and defeated Spi- 
tamenes. The Sogdians and Bactrians deserted 
their unfortunate general, and surrendered their 
arms to the conqueror. The Massayete and 
other Scythians, having plundered the camp of 
their allies, fled with Spitamenes to the desert; 
but being apprised, that the Macedonians pre- 
pared to pursue them, they slew this active and 
daring chief, whose courage deserved a better 
fate; and in hopes of making their own peace, 
sent his head to the conqueror. 

After the death of Spitamenes, 


AT the enemy feebly resisted Alexan- 
A. C. 397. der in the open country; but in 


the provinces of Sogdiana and Pa- 
rætacene, two important fortresses, long deem- 
ed impregnable, still bade defiance to the inva- 
der. Into the former, Oxyartes the Bactrian, 
who headed the rebellion (for so the Macedoni- 
ans termed the brave defence of the Bactrians,) 
had placed his wife and children. The rock 


lesser bone of his leg. The Macedonians, however, rallied, 
and totally defeated the enemy. Arrian, l. iri. sub fin. 

6 Before Alexander passed the Jaxartes, he received an 
embassy probably from the Abian Scythians. Their ora- 
tion, omitted by all the Greck writers, is preserved in Cur- 
tius, |. vii. c. viii. Tt is remarkable for the bold elevated 
style, in which these Barbarians display their own advane 
tages, and describe the destructive ambition of the invader. 
In both respecte, it agrees with the admirable harangue of 
the Caledonian chieftain Galgacus, in Tacitus’s Life of 
Agricola. But the glowing sentiments of those independent 
and high-minded nations are invigorated by the brevity of 
Tacitus, and weakened by the diffusiveness of Curtius. 
Both orations abound in metaphors. ‘' Great trees,” say the 
Scythians to Alexander, “ require long time to grow: the 
labour of a few hours levels them with the ground. Take 
care, lest, in climbing to the top, you should fall with the 
branches which you have seized. Grasp Fortune with both 
your hands; she is slippery, and cannot be confined. Our 
countrymen describe her without feet, with hands only, and 
wings. Those to whom she stretches out her hand, she al- 
lows not to touch her wings. Rein your prosperity, that you 
may more easily manage it. Our poverty will be ewifter 
than your army loaded with spoil. We range the plain and 
the forest; we disdain to serve, and desire not to command.” 
The figurative sty'e of the Scythians is sufficiently consonant 
to the manners of barbarous nations. See Principii di Sci- 
enza nuova, vol. i. p. 156, et seq. See likewise chapters 
fifth and sixth of the present History. Le Clerc, therefore, 
speaks with equal ignorance and severity, when, in arraign- 
ing the fidelity of Curtius, he says, “Scythe ipsi, omnium 
literarum rudes, rhetorico calamistro inusti, in medium pro- 
dennt.” Judic. Curt. p. 326. 

7 Artabazus, the faithful attendant of Darius, and after- 


nians were at first repelled, many of them wounded, and | wards the friend of Alexander, was joined in the command 
the king struck with an arrow, which broke the fibula, or! with Cænus. Arrian. 


XXXVIIL] 


was steep, rugged, almost inaccessible, and pro- 
vided with corn for a long siege. The deep 


snow, by which it was surrounded, increased | 


the difficulty of assaulting it, and supplied the 
garrison with water. Alexander, having sum- 
moned the Bactrians to surrender, was asked 
in derision, Whether he had furnished himself 
with winged soldiers? This insolence picqued 
his pride; and he determined to make himself 
master of the place, with whatever difficulties 
and dangers his undertaking might be attended. 
This resolution was consonant to his charac- 
ter. His success in arms, owing to the re- 
sources of his active and comprehensive mind, 
sometimes encouraged him toenterprises, neither 
justified by necessity, nor warranted by pru- 
dence. Fond of war, not only as an instrument 
of ambition, but as an art in which he gloried 
to excel, he began to regard the means as more 
valuable than the end, and sacrificed the lives 
of his men to military experiments, alike ha- 
zardous and useless: yet, on the present occasion, 
sound policy seems to have directed his mea- 
sures. Having determined soon to depart from 
those provinces, he might judge it imprudent to 
leave an enemy behind: it might seem neces- 
sary to destroy the seeds of future rebellion; 
and, by exploits unexainpled and almost incre- 
dible, to impress such terror of his name, as 
would astonish and overawe his more distant 
and warlike dependencies. 

Alexander carefully examined the Sogdian 
fortress, and proposed a reward of twelve ta- 
lents8 to the man who should tirst mount the 
top of the rock on which it was situated. The 
second and third were to be proportionably re- 
warded, and even the last of ten was to be gra- 
tified with the sum of three hundred darics. 
The hopes of this recompence, which, in the 
conception of the Greeks and Macedonians, 
was equally honourable and lucrative, stimulat- 
ed the love of adventure, so conspicuous in both 
nations. Three hundred men, carefully selected 
from the whole army, were furnished with 
ropes made of the strongest flax, and with iron 
pins used in pitching tents. They were like- 
wise provided with small pieces of linen, which, 
being joined together, might serve as a signal, 
Thus e ,uipped, they proceeded at the close of 
evening towards the most abrupt side of the 
rock, and therefore the most likely to be un- 
guarded. By driving the iron pins into con- 
gealed snow, and then fastening to them the 
ropes, they gradually hoisted themselves up the 
mountain. In this extraordinary enterprise, 
thirty men perished, whose bodies were so 
profoundly buried in the snow, that, notwith- 
standing the most diligent search, they could 
never afterwards be recovered. By this simple 
contrivance, those daring adventurers gained 
the summit of the rocks, which overlooked the 
fortress; and waving their signal in the morn- 
ing, were discovered by Alexander. At this 
joyous sight, he summoned the besieged to sur- 
render to his winged soldiers. The Barbarians 
beheld and trembled; terror multiplied the 
number of their enemies, and represented them 


8 Above 200U/. equal in value to near 20,000/. in the pre- 
sent age. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


445 
¢ 


as completely armed ; Alexander was invited to 
take possession of the fortress.9 

This obscure and even nameless castle con- 
tained Roxana, daughter of Oxyartes, and 
deemed, next to the spouse of Darius, the great- 
est beauty in the East. Alexander admired 
her form and her accomplishments; but even 
in the fervour of youth, and the intoxication of 
prosperity, his generous mind disdained the cruel 
rights of a conqueror, as justified by the max- 
ims and example of his age and country. With 
a moderation and self-command, worthy the 
scholar of Aristotle, he declined the embraces 
of his captive, till his condescending affection 
raised her to the throne, choosing rather to of- 
fend the prejudices of the Macedonians, than to 
transgress the laws of humanity.}!0 

In Bactria, Alexander learned 
that the Paretace were in arms, 
A. C. 327 and that many of his most danger- 

cos" ous enemies had shut themselves 
up in the fortress or rock of Chorienes. Upon 
this intelligence, he hastened to the Paretacene. 
The height of the rock, which was every where 
steep and craggy, he found to be near three 
miles, and its circumference above seven. It 
was surrounded by a broad and deep ditch, at 
such distance from the base as placed the gar- 
rison beyond the reach of missile weapons. Al- 
exander gave orders that the fir trees, of extra- 
ordinary height, which surrounded the moun- 
tain, should be cut down, and formed into lad- 
ders, by means of which, his men descending 
the ditch, drove huge piles into the bottom. 
These, being placed at proper distances, were 
covered with hurdles of ozier consolidated with 
earth. In this occupation his whole army were 
employed by turns, night and day. The Bar- 
barians at first derided this seemingly useless 
labour. But their insults were soon answered 
by Macedonian arrows. By these, and other 
missile weapons, the Macedonians, who were 
carefully protected by their coverings, so much 
annoyed the besieged, that the latter became 
desirous to capitulate. For this purpose, Cho- 
rienes, from whom the place derived its name, 
desired to converse with Oxyartes the Bactrian, 
who, since the taking of his wife and children, 
had submitted to Alexander. His request be- 
ing granted, Oxyartes strongly exhorted him to 
surrender his fortress and himself, assuring him 
of Alexander’s goodness, of which his own 
treatment furnished an eminent example, and 
declaring that no place was impregnable to 
such troops and such a general. Chorienes pru- 
dently followed this advice; and, by his speedy 
submission, not only obtained pardon, but gain- 
ed the friendship of Alexander, who again en- 
trusted him with the command of his fortress, 
and the government of his province, The vast 
magazines of corn, meat, and wine, collected by 
the Parwtace for along siege, afforded a sea- 
sonable supply to the Macedonian army, espe- 
cially during the severity of winter, in a country 
covered with snow many feet deep.!! 

By such memorable achievements, Alexander 
subdued the nations between the Caspian sea, 
the river Jaxartes, and the lofty chain of moun- 


Olymp. 


exiil. 2. 


9 Arrian, p. 91, et seq. 10 Ibid. 11 Tbid. p. 92. 


446 


tains, which supply the sources of the Indus 
and the Ganges. In the conduct of this remote 
and dangerous war, the great abilities of the 
general were conspicuously distinguished. His 
example taught the troops to despise hunger, 
fatigue, cold, and danger; neither ragged moun- 
tains, nor deep and rapid rivers, nor wounds, 
nor sickness, could interrupt his progress, or 
abate his activity: his courage exposed him to 
difficulties, from which he was extricated by 
new efforts of courage, which, in any other 
commander would have passed for temerity. 
Amidst the hardships of a military life, obstinate 
sieges, bloody battles, and dear-bought victo- 
ries, he still respected the rights of mankind, 
and practised the inild virtues of humanity. 
The conquered nations enjoyed their ancient 
laws and privileges; the rigours of despotism 
were softened; arts and industry encouraged; 
and the proudest Macedonian governors com- 
pelled, by the authority and example of Alex- 
ander, to observe the rules of justice towards 
their meanest subjects.! To bridle the fierce 
inhabitants of the Scythian plains, he founded 
cities, and established colonies on the banks of 
the Iaxartes and the Oxus; and those destruc- 
tive campaigns, usually ascribed to his restless 
activity and blind ambition, appeared to the 
discernment of this extraordinary man, not only 
essential to the security of the conquests which 
he had already made, but necessary prepara- 
tions for more remote and splendid expeditions 
which he still purposed to undertake; and 
which, as will appear in the succeeding chapter, 
he performed with singular boldness and unex- 
ampled success. 

During the three first years that 


a the invincible heroism of Alexander 
A. C. 330. triumphed in the East, the firm vi- 


gilance of Antipater repressed re- 
bellion in Greece. But the attention of that 
general being diverted, by a revolt in Thrace, 
from the affairs of the southern provinces, the 
Lacedæmonians, instigated by the warlike am- 
bition of their king Agis, ventured to exert that 
hostility against Macedon which they had long 
felt and expressed. Reinforced by some com- 
munities of the Peloponnesus, which impru- 
dently listened to their counsels, the allied army 
amounted to twenty-two thousand men. An- 
tipater, having checked the insurrection in 
Thrace, hastened into the Grecian peninsula 
with a superior force, and defeated the con- 
federates in a battle, which proved fatal to king 
Agis, and three thousand Peloponnesian troops. 
The vanquished were allowed to send ambas- 
sadors to implore the clemency of Alexander. 
From that generous prince, the rebellious re- 
publics received promise of pardon, on con- 
dition that they punished with due severity 
the authors of an unprovoked and ill-judged re- 
volt.2 

From this period, till the death of Alexander, 
Greece enjoyed, above eight years, an unusual 
degree of tranquillity and happiness. The sus- 
picious and severe temper of Antipater was re- 
strained by the commands of his master, who, 


1 Plutarch, Arrian, et Curtius, passim. 
2 Diodorus, l. xvii. p. 537. Cus*as, l. vi. c. 1. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


provided the several republics sent him their 
appointed contingents of men to reinforce his 
armies, was unwilling to exact from them anv 
further mark of submission. Under the pro- 
tection of this indulgent sovereign, to the glory 
of whose conquests they were associated, the 
Greeks still preserved the forms, and displayed 
the image, of that free constitution of govern- 
ment, whose spirit had animated their ancestors. 
While Alexander pursued the 


ce murderers of Darius, Athens was 
A. C. 330. crowded with spectators from the 


neighbouring republics, to behold 
that intellectual conflict between Æschines and 
Demosthenes, whose rivalship in power and 
fame had long divided the affections of their 
countrymen. In consequence of a decree pro- 
posed by Ctesiphon, Demosthenes, as above 
mentioned, had been honoured with a golden 
crown, as the reward of his political merit. 
His adversary had, even before the death of 
Philip, denounced the author’of this decree as 
a violator of the laws of his country. 1. Be- 
cause he had decreed public honours to a man 
actually entrusted with the public money, and 
who had not yet passed hisaccounts. 2. Because, 
contrary to law, he had advised that the crown 
conferred on Demosthenes, should be proclaim- 
ed in the theatre. 3. Because the boasted ser- 
vices of Demosthenes had ended in public dis- 
grace and ruin; and that, instead of being 
rewarded with a crown, he ought to be pun- 
ished as a traitor. Various circumstances, 
which it is now impossible to explain, prevented 
this important cause from being heard by the 
Athenians, till the sixth year of the reign of 
Alexander. The triumph of the Macedonians 
seemed to promise every advantage to Æschi- 
nes, who had long been the partisan of Philip, 
and of his magnanimous son; and who, by a 
stroke aimed at Ctesiphon, meant chiefly to 
wound Demosthenes, the avowed enemy of 
both. 

In the oration of #schines, we find the united 
powers of reason and argument, combined with 
the most splendid eloquence. Yet the persua- 
sive vehemence of Demosthenes prevailed in 
the contest. The unexampled exertions,’ by 
which he obtained this victory, will be admired 
to the latest ages of the world. To what an 
exalted pitch of enthusiasm must the orator 
have raised himself and his audience, when, to 
justify his advising the fatal battle of Chero- 
nea, he exclaimed, “No, my fellow citizens, 
you have not erred; No! I swear it by the 
manes of those heroes, who fought in the same 
cause at Marathon and Platæa.” What sub- 
lime art was required to arrive, by just degrers, 
at this extraordinary sentiment, which, in any 
other light than the inimitable blaze of elo- 
quence with which it was surrounded, would 
appear altogether excessive and gigantic ! 

The orator not only justified Ctesiphon and 
himself, but procured the banishment of his ad- 
versary, as the author of a malignant and ca- 
lumnious accusation. Honourable as this tri- 
umph was, Deinosthenes derived more solid 
glory from the generous treatment of his van- 


3 See the Orat. de Coron. throughout. 


XXXVIIL.] 


quished rival. Before Aschines set sail, he 
carried to him a purse of money, which he 
kindly compelled him to accept; a generosity 
which made the banished man feel severely the 
weight of his punishment, and affectingly ob- 
serve, “ How deeply must I regret the loss of a 
country, in which enemies are more generous 
than friends elsewhere!” Æschines retired to 
the isle of Rhodes,’and instituted a school of 
eloquence, which flourished several centuries. 
It is recorded, that having read to his scholars 
the oration which occasioned his banishment, 
it was received with extraordinary applause. 
But when this applause was redoubled on his 
reading the answer of Demosthenes, he was so 
far from testifying envy, that he exclaimed to 
his audience, ‘* What would have been your 
admiration, had you heard the orator himself!” 

Demosthenes survived Alexan- 


Gee der, whose magnanimity disdained 
A.C. 322, t° punish an enemy whom he scarce- 


ly regarded as dangerous. But this 
illustrious Athenian patriot fell a prey to the 
more suspicious policy of Antipater. At the 
desire of that prince he was banished Athens, 
and being pursued by Macedonian assassins to 
the little island of Calauria, he ended his life 
by poison.‘ 

It may be thought, that the conqueror of the 
Persian empire would have little leisure, or 
inclination, to attend to a personal dispute be- 
tween two Athenian orators: and that neither 
the impeachment nor the defence of Demos- 
thenes could affect his pride or his interest. It 
deserves to be considered, however, that this 
orator was the inveterate, and long the success- 
ful, opponent of the greatness of his family ; 
and in the beginning of his own reign, had at- 
tempted, with more courage, indeed, than pru- 
dence, to overturn the yet unconsolidated pillar 
of his fortune. But whatever indifference 
Alexander, who was carefully informed of the 
transactions of Greece, might testify amidst 
the honours of Demosthenes, it cannot be be- 
lieved that he heard with total unconcern the 


4 Plut in Demosth. et Lucian. Demosth. Encom. 


` 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


447 


sentence of the Athenian people; a sentence 
which reversed the decision of fortune, and ar- 
raigned the cruel and melancholy triumph of 
Philip over the liberties of Greece. That he 
never resented the indignity, is a proof of his 
moderation; and that the Athenians could ven- 
ture on a measure so offensive, is a proof of the 
freedom and security which they enjoyed under 
the Macedonian government. 

Deprived indeed of the honour, but also de- 
livered from the cares, of independent sove- 
reignty, and undisturbed by those continual 
and often bloody dissensions, which deform the 
annals of their tumultuous liberty, the Greeks 
indulged their natural propensity to the social 
embellishments of life; a propensity by which 
they were honourably distinguished above all 
other nations of antiquity. Their innumerable 
shows, festivals, and dramatic entertainments, 
were exhibited with more pomp than at any 
former period. The schools of philosophers 
and rhetoricians were frequented by all de- 
scriptions of men. Painting and statuary 
were cultivated with equal ardour and success. 
Many improvements were made in the sciences; 
and, as will appear more fully hereafter, the 
Greeks, and the Athenians in particular, still 
rivalled the taste and genius, though not the 
spirit and virtue, of their ancestors. Yet even 
in this degenerate state, when patriotism and 
true valour were extinct, and those vanquished 
republicans had neither liberties to love, nor 
country to defend, their martial honours were 
revived and brightened by an association with 
the renown of their conqueror. Under Alex- 
ander, their exploits, though directed to very 
different purposes, equalled, perhaps excelled, 
the boasted trophies of Marathon and Platæa. 
By a singularity peculiar to their fortune, the 
era of their political disgrace coincides with 
the most splendid period of their military glory. 
Alexander was himself a Greek; his king- 
dom had been founded by a Grecian colony; 
and to revenge the wrongs of his nation, he 
undertook and accomplished the most extra- 
ordinary enterprises recorded in the history of 
the world. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


Alexander's Indian Expedition—Route pursued by the Army—Aornos taken—Nysa and Mount 
Meros—Alexander passes the Indus and Hydaspes—Defeats Porus—Founds Nicea and 
Bucephalia—Pusses the Acesines and Hydraoles—Sangala taken—Eastern boundary of Alex- 
ander’s Conquests—He sails down the Hydaspes—Takes the Mallian Fortress—His March 
through the Gedrosian Desert—Voyage of Nearchus—Alexander improves the internal State 
of his Conquests—Incorporates the Barbarian Levies with the Greeks and Macedonians— 
Intermarriages of the Europeans and Asiatics—Arlifices to prevent Alexander's Return to 
Babylon—His Death, and Character—Division of his Conquests—Subsequent History of 
Egypt and Syria—The Western Division of Alexander’s Empire conquered by the Romans— 


State of Greece after the Age of Alexander. 


BY just views of policy, rather than the mad- 

ness of ambition, Alexander was carried to 
the rugged banks of the Oxus and the Iaxartes. 
The fierce nations of those inhospitable regions 
had, in ancient times, repeatedly 


Olymp. overrun the more wealthy and 
cxin, 2- more civilized provinces of Asia 
AwC. 327. Le i 


Without diffusing through the Scy- 
thian plains the terror of his name, the con- 
queror would not have securely enjoyed the 
splendour of Susa and Babylon; nor without 
the assistance of numerous and warlike levies, 
taised in those barbarous countries, could he 
have prudently undertaken his Indian expedi- 
tion. For this remote and dangerous enter- 
prise, he prepared early in the spring; Amyn- 
tas being appointed governor of Bactria, and 
entrusted with a sufficient strength to over- 
awe the surrounding provinces, 

With all the remainder of his forces, Alex- 
ander hastened southwards, and in ten days’ 
march traversed the Paropamisus, a link of 
that immense chain of mountains, reaching 
from the coast of Cilicia to the sea of China. 
This southern belt, distinguished in different 
portions of its length by the various names of 
Taurus, Paropamisus, Imaus, and Edinodus, 
the Greeks confounded! with the northern 
chain, of which Scythian Caucasus is a part,and 
whose remote branches extend from the shores 
of the Euxine to the eastern extremity of Tar- 
tary. Such is the strong frame which supports 
the ponderous mass of Asia. The intermediate 
space, especially towards the central country 
of Bukaria, is far more elevated than any other 
portion of the Eastern continent; and the tower- 
ing heights of Paropamisus had hitherto de- 
fended (if we except the obscure expedition of 
Darius) the feeble majesty of India against the 
ravagers of the earth. The difficulties of this 
celebrated journey have, perhaps, been rather 
exaggerated than described, by the historians 
of Alexander. Yet our indulgence may par- 
don the fanciful 2 expressions of antiquity, when 
we read in the work of a modern writer of 
acknowledged veracity, ‘Those mountains are 
covered with ice; the cold which I suffered was 
extreme, the country presents a melancholy 
image of death and horror.” 


1 The errors of Diodorus, l. xvi. p. 553. and of Curtius, 

vii œe. iii. are avoided by Arrian, l. v. p. 103. and by 
Strabo, l. xv. p. 724. 

2 Curtius, l. vii. c. iii. 

3 See “le Voyage du Pere Desideri.” It was performed 
in the year 1715. Lettres Edifiantes, xv. 185. 


But the rugged nature of the country was 
not the only difficulty with which the Macedo- 
nians had to struggle. The northern regions 
of India were inhabited in ancient, as they are 
still in modern times, by men of superior 
strength and courage ;‘ and the vigorous resist- 
ance made by the natives of those parts, ren- 
dered it as difficult for Alexander to penetrate 
into the Indian peninsula by land, as it has al- 
ways been found easy by the maritime powers 
of Europe, to invade and subdue the unwar- 
like inhabitants of its coasts. 

The experienced leader seems to have con- 
ducted his army by the route of Candahar, well 
known to the caravans of Agra and Ispahan. 
Having reached the banks of the Cophenes, he 
divided his forces; the greater part he retained 
under his immediate command; the remainder 
were detached, under Hephestion and Perdic- 
cas, to clear the road to the Indus, and to make 
all necessary preparations for crossing that ri» 
ver. After many severe conflicts, he subdued 
the Aspii, Thyrei, Arasaci, and Assacenis 
scoured the banks of the Choas and Cophenes; 
expelled the Barbarians from their fastnesses ; 
and drove them towards the northern moun- 
tains, which supply the sources of the Oxus 
and the Indus. 

Near the western margin of the latter, one 
place, defended by the Buziri, still defied his 
assaults. This place, called by the Greeks 
Aornos, afforded refuge not only to the Baziri, 
but to the most warlike of their neighbours, 
after their other strong holds had surrendered. 
From its description, it appears to have been 
admirably adapted to the purpose of a long 
and vigorous defence. Mount Aornos was two 
hundred furlongs in circuit; eleven in height, 
where lowest; accessible by only one danger- 
ous path cut in the rock by art; containing, 
near the top, a plentiful spring of water, a 
thick and lofty wood, together with a sufficient 
quantity of arable land to employ the labour 
of a thousand men. An emulation of glory 
prompted Alexander to make himself master 
of a place, which fable described as impregna- 
ble to the greatest heroes of antiquity.6 By 


4 Arrian, p. 97. et seq. 

5 Arrian, p. 98. who supplies the particulars in the text, 
says, that he knows not whether it was the Grecian, Ty- 
rian, or Egyptian Hercules, who laid siege unsuccessfully 
to Aornos. He doubts whether any of them ever pene- 
trated to Indias adding, that the name of Hercules appears 
to him to have been employed, on this occasion, as on many 
others, “ess xoumyy Tov Aoyou,” “as an ostentatious fic- 
tion.” 


MaeIX. 


the voluntary assistance and direction of some 
neighbouring tribes, hostile to the Baziri, Ptole- 
my ascended part of the rock unperceived ; 
Alexander, with his usual diligence, raised a 
mount, erected his engines, and prepared to an- 
noy the enemy. But, before he had an oppor- 
tunity to employ the resources of his genius, 
by which he had taken places still stronger than 
Aornos, the garrison sent a herald, under pre- 
tence of surrendcring on terms, but in reality 
with a view to spin out the negotiation during 
the whole day, and in the night to effect their 
escape. Alexander, who suspected this inten- 
tion, met their art with similar address. Pa- 
tiently waiting till the Indians descended the 
mountain, he took possession of the strong 
hold which they had abandoned, having pre- 
viously posted a proper detachment to inter- 
cept the fugitives, and punish their perfidy. 
The Macedonians proceeded southward from 
Aornos, into the country between the Cophenes 
and the Indus. In this fertile district, the army 
as it advanced towards Mount Meros and the 
celebrated Nysa, was met by a deputation from 
‘the citizens of that place, which (could we be- 
lieve historic flattery) had been founded in the 
heroic, or rather in the fabulous ages, by a 
Grecian colony established by Bacchus at the 
eastern extremity of his conquests. These 
wandering Greeks, might we indulge for a mo- 
ment the supposition that the inhabitants of 
Nysa were really entitled to that name, appear 
in this Indian soil to have degenerated from the 
courage, while they preserved the policy, the 
eloquence, and the artifices, of their European 
brethren. Being immediately conducted to 
Alexander, who had just sat down in his tent, 
covered with sweat and dust, and still armed 
with his casque and lance, they testified great 
horror at his aspect, and threw themsclves pros- 
trate on the ground. The king having raised 
them from this humiliating posture, and ad- 
dressed them with his usual condescension, 
they recovered sufticient boldness to entrcat 
him to spare their country and their liberties 
for the sake of Bacchus their founder. In proof 
of this allegation, they insisted on the name 
Nysa, derived from the nurse® of Bacchus, and 
on the abundance, not only of vines and laurel, 
but of ivy which grew in their territory, and in 
no other part of India. Alexander, willing to 
admit a pretension, which might attest to suc- 
ceeding ages that he had carried his conquests 
still farther than Bacchus,’ readily granted their 


6 The respect shown bv the Grecks to their nurses is 
well known, and is attested hv the tragedians. In this re- 
spect, the madern Greeks still imitate their ancestors. The 
word employed to sign fy a nurse, pronerlv denotes “a s0- 
cond mother.” See Mr. Guy’s Voyage Litteraire de la 
Gréce. 

7 Eratosthenes the Cyrenean, and many other ancient 
writers, asserted, that the fictions concerning Bacchns’s ex- 
pedition to the East, were invented by the flatterers of AH- 
exander. But Strubo justly observes that the belief of that 
expedition long preceded the age af the son of Philip. To 
justify this observation, he cites the verses of Sophocles 
and Euripides. The latter of these poets, in the prologue 
to his Bacche, introduces Bacchus, saving, that he had 
come to Thebes, and adorned with vines the temple of 
Semele. 

Atmov Se AuSwv TZE wokuyevrous yuxs, 
Dovywv rs, legrwy $° yasobanrousg wrrxnns, 
Baxrgin ts TEiLN, TYV va SuTyesuov Xoovx 


3L 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


449 


request. Having understood that Nysa was 
governed by an aristocracy, he demanded, as 
hostages, a hundred of their principal citizens, 
and three hundred of their cavalry. This de- 
mand excited the smile of Acuphis, who headed 
the embassy. Alexander asked him, “ At what 
he smiled?” He replied, “O king! you are 
welcome to three hundred of our horsemen, 
and more, should you think proper. But can 
you believe it possible that any city should long 
continue safe, after losing a hundred of its most 
virtuous citizens? Instead of one hundred of 
the best, should you be ‘contented with two 
hundred of the worst men in Nysa, be assured 
that, at your return, you will find this country 
in as flourishing a condition as when you left 
it.” Pleased with his address, Alexander re- 
mitted his demand of the magistratcs ; he was 
accompanied by the cavalry, and by the son 
and nephew of Acuphis, who were ambitious 
to learn the art of war under such an accom- 
plished general. 

The transactions which we have described, 
and a march of sixteen days from the Oxus to 
the Indus, allowed time for Hephestion and 
Perdiccas to make the preparations necessary 
for passing the latter river, most probably by a 
bridge of boats. On the eastern bank, Alex- 
ander received the subinission of the neigh- 
bouring princes. Of these, Taxiles, who was 
the most considerable, brought, besides other 
valuable presents, the assistance of seven thou- 
sand Indian horse, and surrendered his capital, 


Mudwv, exeriwy Agubsny T’ sudasmovn, 
Aciuy TE TATV, Y ThE’ AAUVEXRV LAX 
Kiti, wip uoiv Exayos Bzebxgois 6’ ouou 
IIA neits EXOVTZ xnAaswueywtoug TOASIS. 


“ Leaving the golden ficlds of the Lydians, the sun-beat 
plains of Phrygia and Persia, the Bactrian fortresses, and 
the wintry storms of the Medes—havieg overrun Happy 
Arabia, and the maritime provinces of Asia, crowned with 
fair turreted cities, inhabited by mingled Greeks and Bar- 
barians.” Sophocles mentions Nysa in particular. Beotoss 
xagivyy Nuoocxv. Vide Strabo, |. xv. p. 687. Notwith- 
standing such respectable authorities for the vulgar tradi- 
tion, both Strabo and Arrian treat the expedition of Bac- 
ebus to India as a fable; the geographer on the following 
grounds: J. Because the rela‘ions of authors on this sub- 
ject are totally inconsistent. 2. Because many of the wri- 
ters who accompanied Alexander are altogether silent con- 
cerning this matter. 3. Because the intermediate countries 
between Greece and India, possess no m+ numents of this 
pretended expedition. Strabo, p. 6*8. The philosopher 
and historian discovers his sentiments to be the same witk 
Straho’s, bat expresses himself with more tenderness for 
the popolar superstition, concluding, toux 2xes6y eFerarryy 
LEN EIVI TWV UTEP TIV ELOV, EX TLALIOU, MEmMUESUMEVWY 3°? 
“that tbe trnditions of the ancients concerning the gods 
ought not ta be too carefully sifted.” Arrian, p. 101. An 
observation which might have meted the attention of 
thase who, in Ja‘er times, have ventured to explain histo- 
rically, or to analyze, the Greciay mythol: gy. 

6 Arrian, p. 100 and 10%, leaves it uncertoin in what 
manner the bridge was constructed. Neither that accurate 
writer, nor the other careless describers of the exploits of 
Alexander, ascestain the pass of the Indus, at which the 
Macedonians crossed that river. Major Rennel, late snr- 
vevor-general af Bengal, has the follawing observations in 
his excellent Memoir on the Map of Indostan: “I take it 
for granted, that Alexander crossed the Indns at the place 
where the city of Attock now stands: as it appears to have 
heen in all ages, the pass on Ibe Indus leading from the 
countries of Cabul and Candabar into India .. . Attock 
must then stand on the site of the ‘lVaxila of Alexander. 
From thence, as his intention seems to have been to pene- 
trate hy the shortest way to the Ganges, he would proceed 
hy the ordinary road to that part of the bunk ofthe Hedaspes 
for Behat) where the fortress of Ratas now stands; and 
here be put in execution his stratagem for crossing the ri- 
ver, whilst the opposite shore was possessed by Porus.” Of 
which more in the text. 


450 


Taxila, the most wealthy and populous city be- 
tween the Indus and Hydaspes. But the king, 
who never allowed himself to be outdone in 
generosity, restored and augmented tlie domi- 
nions of Taxiles. 

The army crossed the Indus about the time 
of the summer solstice, at which season the In- 
dian rivers are swelled by heavy rains, as well 
as by the melted snow, which descends in tor- 
rents from Paropamisus. ‘Trusting to this cir- 
cumstance, Porus, a powerful and warlike 
prince, had encamped on the Shantrou, or Hy- 
daspes, with thirty thousand foot, four thousand 
horse, three hundred armed chariots, and two 
hundred elephants. At an inconsiderable dis- 
tance from the main body, his son commanded 
a detachment, consisting of the same kind of 
forces, which were all well accoutred, and ex- 
cellently disciplined. Alexander perceived the 
difficulty of passing the Hydaspes in the face 
of this formidable host ; a difficulty which must 
be greatly increased by the elephants, whose 
noise, and smell, and aspect, were alike terri- 
ble to cavalry. He therefore collected provi- 
sions on the opposite hank, and industriously 
gave out that he purposed to delay passing the 
river till a more favourable season. This arti- 
fice deluded not the Indians; and Porus kept 
his post. The king next had recourse to a dif- 
ferent stratagem. Having posted his cavalry 
in separate detachments along the river, he 
commanded them to raise in the night loud 
shouts of war, and to fill the bank with agita- 
tion and tumult, as if they had determined at 
all hazards to effect their passage. The noise 
roused the enemy, and Porus conducted his 
elephants wherever the danger threatened. 
This scene was repeated several successive 
nights; during which the Barbarians were fa- 
tigued and harassed by perpetual alarms. Po- 
rus discovering, as he fondly believed, that no- 
thing was intended by this vain noise, but 
merely to disturb his repose, at length desisted 
from following the motions of the Macedonian 
cavalry, and remained quiet in his encamp- 
ment, having stationed proper guards on the 
bank. ! 

The false security of Porus enabled Alexan- 
der to effect his long meditated purpose. At the 
distance of about eighteen miles from his camp, 
and at the principal winding of the Hydaspes, 
there stood a lofty rock, thickly covered with 
trees; and near to this rock, an island, likewise 
overrun with wood, and uninhabited. Such 
objects were favourable for concealment: they 
immediately suggested to Alexander the design 
of passing the river with a strong detachment, 
which he resolved to<ommand in person, as he 
seldom did by others what he could himself 
perform ; and, amidst the variety of operations, 
always claimed for his own the task of impor- 
tance or danger. The Macedonian phalanx, 
the new levies from Paropamisus, together with 
the Indian auxiliaries, and one division of the 
cavalry, remained under the command of Cra- 
terus. They had orders to amuse the enemy 
by making fires in the night, and by preparing 
openly during day-time to cross the Hydaspes. 


1 Arrian, l. v. p. }0? et seq. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


While these operations were carrying on by 
Craterus, Alexander, having collected hides 
and boats, marched up the country with a 
choice body of light infantry, the archers and 
Agrians, the Bactrian, Scythian, and Parthian? 
cavalry, together with a due proportion of 
heavy-armed troops; the whole a well-assorted 
brigade, adapted to every mode of war re- 
quired by the nature of the ground, the arms 
or disposition of the enemy. Having receded 
from the bank to a distance sufficiently remote 
for eluding the observation of Porus, he ad- 
vanced towards the rock and island; and in 
this secure post prepared to embark, after tak- 
ing such precautions against the vicissitudes of 
war and fortune, as could be suggested only by 
the most profound military genius. The or- 
ders given to Craterus were precise: should 
the Indians perceive, and endeavour to inter- 
rupt the passage to the rock and island, he was 
in that case to hasten over with his cavalry 
otherwise not to stir from his post, until he ob- 
served Porus advancing against Alexander, or 
flying from the field. At an equal distance be- 
tween the bank, where Alexander meant to 
pass, and the camp where Craterus lay, Atta- 
lus and Meleager were posted with a powerful 
body of mercenaries, chiefly consisting of In- 
dian mountaineers, who had been defeated by 
the Macedonians, and taken into the pay of the 
conqueror. To provide for any unforeseen ac- 
cident, sentinels were placed along the bank, 
at convenient distances, to observe and repeat 
signals, 

Fortune favoured these judicious dispositions. 
A violent tempest concealed from the enemy’s 
out-guards the tumult of preparation ; the clash 
of armour and the voice of command being 
overpowered by the complicated crash of rain 
and thunder. When the storm somewhat abat- 
ed, the horse and infantry, in such proportions 
as both the boats and hides could convey, passed 
over, unperceived, into the island. Alexander 
led the line, accompanied in his vessel of thirty 
oars by Seleucus, Ptolemy, Perdiccas, and Ly 
simachus; names destined to fill the ancient 
world, when their renown was no longer re- 
pressed by the irresistibie diffusion of their 
master’s glory. 

The king first reached the opposite bank, in 
sight of the enemy’s out-guards, who hastened, 
in trepidation, to convey the unwelcome intelli- 
gence to Porus. The Macedonians mean while 
formed in order of battle; but before meeting 
their enemies, they had to struggle with an 
unforeseen difficulty. The coast on which they 
landed was the shore of another island, disjoin- 
ed from the continent by a river commonly 
fordable, but actually so much swelled by the 
rains of the preceding night, that the water 
reached the breasts of the men, and the necks 
of the horses. Having passed this dangerous 
stream with his cavalry and targeteers, Alex- 
ander advanced with all possible expedition, 
considering, that should Porus offer battle, these 
forces would resist till joined by the heavy in- 
fantry; but should the Indians be struck with 


2 Arrian callsthem the Dahe; they were szzorezorxs 
“archers on horseback.” Arrian, l. v. p 109. 


\ 


XXXIX.] 


panic at his unexpected passage of the Hydas- 
pes, the light-armed troops would thus arrive 
in time to attack and pursue them with ad- 
vantage. 

Upon the first alarm given by his out-guards, 
Porus detached his son to oppose the landing 
of the enemy with two thousand horse, and 
one hundred and twenty armed chariots. These 
forces, arriving too late to` defend the bank, 
were speedily broken and put to flight by 
the equestrian archers; their leader and four 
hundred horsemen were slain; most of the 
chariots were taken; the slime of the river, 
which rendered them unserviceable in the ac- 
tion, likewise interrupting their flight. 

The sad news of this discomfiture deeply 
afflicted Porus; but his immediate danger al- 
lowed not time for reflection. Craterus visibly 
prepared to pass the river, and to attack him in 
front; his flanks were threatened with the 
shock of the Macedonian horse, elated by recent 
victory. In this emergency the Indian appears 
to have acted with equal prudence and firmness. 
Unable to oppose this complicated assault, he 
left part of the elephants under a small guard, 
to frighten, rather than resist, Craterus’s cavalry; 
while, at the head of his whole army, he 
marclied in person to meet the more formidable 
division of the enemy, commanded by their 
king. His horse amounted to four, and his 
foot to thirty, thousand; but the part of his 
strength in which he seemed most to confide, 
consisted of three hundred armed chariots, and 
two hundred elephants. With these forces, 
Porus advanced, until he found a plain suffi- 
ciently dry and firm for his chariots to wheel. 
He then arranged his elephants at intervals of 
a hundred feet; in these intervals he placed his 
infantry, a little behind the line. By this order 
of battle, he expected to intimidate the enemy, 
since their horse, he thought, would be deterred 
from advancing at sight of the elephants; and 
their infantry, he imagined, would not venture 
to attack the Indians in front, while they must 
be themselves exposed to be attacked in flank, 
and trampled under foot by those terrible ani- 
mals. At either extremity of the line, the ele- 
phants bore huge wooden towers, filled with 
armed men. The cavalry formed the wings, 
covered in front with the armed chariots. 

Alexander by this time appeared at the head 
of the royal cohort and equestrian archers. 
Perceiving that the enemy had already prepar- 
ed for battle, he commanded a halt, until the 
heavy-armed troops should join. This being 
effected, he allowed them time to rest and re- 
cover strength, carefully encircling them with 
the cavalry; and mean while examined, with 
his usual diligence, the disposition of the In- 
dians. Upon observing their order of battle, he 
immediately determined, not to attack them in 
front, in order to avoid encountering the diffi- 
culties which Porus had artfully thrown in 
his way; and at once resolved on an operation, 
which, with such troops as those whom he 
commanded, could scarcely fail to prove deci- 
sive. By intricate and skilful mancuvres, al- 
together unintelligible to the Indians, he moved 
imperceptibly towards their left wing with the 
flower of his cavalry. The remainder, con- 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


451 


ducted by Cenus, stretched towards the right, 
having orders to wheel at a given distance, that 
they might attack the Indians in rear, should 
they wait to receive the shock of Alexander’s 
squadrons. A thousand equestrian archers di- 
rected their rapid course towards the same 
wing; while the Macedonian foot remained 
firm in their posts, waiting the event of this 
complicated assault, which appears to have 
been conducted with the most precise observ- 
ance of time and distance. 

The Indian horse, harassed by the equestrian 
archers, and exposed to the danger of being 
surrounded, were obliged to form into two di- 
visions, of which one prepared to resist Alex- 
ander, and the other faced about to meet 
Cenus. But this evolution so much disordered 
their ranks and dejected their courage, that they 
were totally unable to stand the shock of the 
Macedonian cavalry, which surpassed them as 
much in strength, as it excelled them in disci- 
pline. The fugitives took refuge, as behind a 
line of friendly towers, in the intervals that had 
been left between the elephants. These fierce 
animals were then conducted against the ene- 
my’s horse; which movement was no sooner 
observed by the infantry, than they seasonably 
advanced, and galled the assailants with darts 
and arrows. Wherever the elephants turned 
the Macedonians opened their ranks, finding it 
dangerous to resist them with a close and deep 
phalanx. Mean while, the Indian cavalry ral- 
lied, and were repelled with greater loss than 
before. They again sought the same friendly 
retreat; but their flight was now intercepted, 
and themselves almost entirely surrounded, by 
the Macedonian horse; at the same time that 
the elephants, having lost their riders, enraged at 
being pent up within a narrow space, and fu- 
rious, through their wounds, proved more for- 
midable to friends than foes, because the Ma- 
cedonians, having the advantage of an open 
ground, could every where give vent to their 
fury.? 

The battle was decided before the division, 
under Craterus, passed the river. But the 
arrival of these fresh troops rendered the pur- 
suit peculiarly destructive. The unfortunate 
Porus lost both his sons, ail his captains, 
twenty thousand foot, and three thousand horse. 
The elephants, spent with fatigue, were slain 
or taken ; even the armed chariots were hacked 
in pieces, having proved less formidable in 
reality than appearance, could we believe that 
little more than three hundred men perished 
on the side of Alexander. An obvious incon- 
sistency too often appears in the historians of 
that conqueror. With a view to enhance his 
merit, they describe and exaggerate the valour 
and resistance of his enemies; but, in comput- 
ing the numbers of the slain, they become 
averse to allow this valour and resistance to 
have produced any adequate effects. 

The Indian king having behaved with great 


3 Arrian, p. 112. 
4 See Arrian, p. 113. The observation applies not, how- 


ever, to that historian, but rather to Ptolemy and Aristobu- 
lus, from whom he derived his materials; nor could it be 
expected that those generals should preserve perfect im- 


p rtiality in relating the exploits.of a master whom they 
admired. 


452 


gallantry in the engagement, was the last to 
leave the field. His flight being retarded by his 
wounds, he was overtaken by Taxiles, whom 
Alexander entrusted with the care of seizing 
him alive. But Porus, percciving the approach 
of a man, who was his ancient and inveterate 
enemy, turned his elephant, and prepared to 
renew the combat. Alexander then despatched 
to him Meroe, an Indian of distinction, who, he 
understood, had formerly lived with Porus in 
habits of friendship. By the entreaties of 
Meroe, the high-minded prince, spent with 
thirst and fatigue, was finally persuaded to sur- 
render; and being refreshed with drink and 
repose was conducted to the presence of the 
conqueror. Alexander admired his stature (for 
he was above seven feet high) and the majesty 
of his person; but he admired still morc his 
courage and magnanimity. Having asked in 
what he could oblige him? Porus answered, 
& By acting like a king.” ‘ That,” said Alex- 
ander with a smile, “I should do for my own 
sake, but what can I do for yours?” Porus 
replied, “© All my wishes are contained in that 
one request.”! None ever adinired virtue more 
than Alexander. Struck with the firmness of 
Porus, he declared him reinstated on his throne; 
acknowledged him for his ally and his friend; 


and having soon afterwards received the sub- | 


mission of the Glause, who possessed thirty- 


seven cities on his eastern frontier, the least of | 


which contained five thousand, and many of 
the greatest above ten thousand inhabitants, he 
added this populous province to the dominions 
of his new confederate. Immediately after the 
battle, he interred the slain, performed the ac- 
customed sacrifices, and exhibited gymnastic 


and equestrian games on the banks of the Hy- | 
Before leaving that river, he founded | 
two cities, Nicea and Bucephalia; the former | 


daspes. 


was so called, to commemorate the victory 
gained near the place where it stood; the latter, 
situate on the opposite bank, was named in 


honour of his horse Bucephalus,2 who died | 


there, worn out by age and fatigue. A large 
division of the army remained under the com- 
mand of Craterus, to build and fortify these 
new cities. 

In promoting the success of Alexander, the 
fame of his generosity conspired with the power 
of his arms. Without encountering any memo- 
rable resistance, he reduced the dominions of 
another prince named Porus, and the valuable 
country between the Acesines and the Hydra- 
otes. In effecting this conquest, the obstacles 
of nature were the principal, or rather the only, 


1 The modern histories of Alexander universally mis- 
represent this conference. All of them, as far as I know, 
make Porus say, “ that he desires to be treated like a king:” 
anexplanation which cannot be reconciled with Alexander’s 
reply, Touro uev sera, cos IIwet suoy svexx* cv Ss cxurou 
evexz 0, TE qos OtAov xZcou? F will act towards you, O 
Porus! as becomes a king, on my own account; but what 
do vou desire that I should do on yours ?” 

2 This generous anima!, who had so long shared the 
toils and dangers of his master, had formerly received aignai 
marks of royal regard. Having disappeared in the country 
of the Uxii, Alexander issued a proclamation, commanding 
his horse to be restored, otherwise he wou'd ravage the 
whole country with fire and sword. This command was 
immediately oheyed. ‘So dear,” save Arrian, t was Bu- 


cephalus to Alexander, and so terrible was Alexander to | 


the Barbarians.” Arrian, p. 114. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


enemies, with whom he had to contend. The 
river Acesines, fifteen furlongs broad, is deep 
and rapid; many parts of its channel are filled 
with large and sharp rocks, which, opposing the 
rapidity of the stream, occasion loud and foam- 
ing billows, mixed with boiling eddies and 
whirlpools, equally formidable, and still more 
dangerous. Of the Macedonians, who attempt- 
ed to pass in boats, many drove against the 
rocks, and perished; but such as employed 
hides, reached the opposite shore in safety. 
The Hydravotes is of the same breadth with the 
Acesines, but flows with a gentle current. ‘On 
its eastern bank, Alexander learned that the 
Cathei, Malli, and other independent Indian 
tribes, prepared to resist his progress. They had 
encamped on the side of the hill, near the city 
Sangala, two days march from the Hydraotes; 
and, instead of a breast-work, had fortified 
themselves with a triple row of carriages. 
Alexander advanced with his cavalry; the In- 
dians stirred not from their post, but, mounting 
their carriages, poured forth a shower of missile 
weapons. Alexander perceiving the cavalry 
unfit for such an attack, immediately dismount- 
ed, and conducted a battalion of foot against 
the enemy. The lines were attacked, where 
weakest; some passages were opened; the 
Macedonians rushed in; and the Indians, being 
successively driven from theirtriple barrier, fled 
in precipitation to Sangala. 

The walls of that place were too extensive to 
be completely invested. On one side, the town 
was skirted by a lake, long and broad, but not 
deep. Alexander suspecting that the Indians, 
intimidated by their former defeat, would at- 
temp? to escape in the night, caused the lake to 
be surrounded with his cavalry. This precau- 
tion was attended with success. The foremost 
of the Indians were cut to pieces by the ad- 
vanced guards of the Macedonian horse; the 
| rest escaped with difficulty to Sangala. Alex- 
ander then invested the greatest part of the 
town with a rampart and a ditch, and prepared 
to advance his engines to batter the walls, when 
he was informed by some deserters, that the 
enemy still resolved, that very night, to steal, if 
possible, through the lake; if not, to force their 
way with their whole strength. Upon this in- 
telligence Alexander posted Ptolemy, the son of 
Lagus, with threc thousand targeteers, one troop 
of archers, and all the Agrians, upon the spot 
where he sagaciously conjectured that the be- 
sieged would attempt to force their passage. At 
the first sound of the trumpet, the other com- 
manders were to advance to the assistance of 
Ptolemy. Alexander declared his intention to 
| share the common danger. By this judicious 

disposition, the enemy were successfully repel- 
led, after leaving five hundred men on the place. 
| Mean while Porus, Alexander's principal ally in 
| those parts, arrived in the camp with five thou- 
i sand Indians, and a considerable number of ele- 
phants. Encouraged by this reinforcement, the 
| Macedonians prepared to terminate the siege. 
The engines were got ready; the wall, built of 
brick, was undermined; the scaling-ladders 
were fixed; several breaches were made; and 
ithe town was taken by assault. Seventeen 
thousand Indians are said to have perished in 


XXXIX.] 


the sack of Sangala; above seventy thousand 
were taken prisoners; Sangala was razed; its 
confederates submitted or fled. Above a hun- 
dred Macedonians fell in the siege or assault; 
twelve hundred were wounded. 

The persevering intrepidity of Alexander thus 
rendered him master of the valuable country, 
now called the Punjab, watered by the five great 
streams whose confluence forms the Indus.3 
The banks of the Hyphasis, the most eastern of 
these rivers, which he actually intended to cross, 
allured by the flattering description of the ad- 
joining territory, were adorned by twelve Mace- 
donian altars, equal in height, and exceeding in 
bulk,the greatest towers in that country. These 
monuments, erected midway between Delhi and 
Lahor,’ marked the extremity of Alexander’s 
empire; an empire thus limited, not by the dif- 
ficulties ef the country, or the opposition of 
enemies, but by the iminoveable and unanimous 
resolution of his European troops. 


3 The annals of the Gentoos distinguish Alexander by 
the epithets of Mhaahah, Dukkoyt, and Kooneah, “the 
great robber and assassin ;’’ but most of the Oriental tradi- 
tions are highly honourable to that prince, and extol his 
humanity not less than his prowess. The high idea enter- 
tained of him by the Indians, appears from their ascribing 
to his taste and magnificence, the most remarkable monu- 
ments scattered over their immense country. See l’Examen 
Critique, p. 143, et seq. M. Anquetil’s Zend-A vesta, t. i p. 
392. and Mr. Howell’s Religion of the Gentoos, P. ii. p. 5. 

4 Probably near the place where the great western road 
passes between these cities. See D’Anville Geogr. Anci- 
enne, and Gibbon’s Hist. vol. i. c. ii. Major Rennel, how- 
ever, in his excellent Memoir on the new Map of Indostan, 
assigns reasons for believing that Alexander was not so high 
up the river. ‘ After crossing,’ says he, “the Acesines, or 
Jenaub, and the Hydraotes or Ravee, which latter he may 
be supposed to cross at the place where Lahor now 
stands, he appears to have been drawn out of the direct 
route towards the Ganges, to attack the city of Sangala, 
most probably lying between Lahor and Moultan. From 
Sangala he proceeded to the Hyphasis, or Setlege, most 
probably hetween Abjodin and Dehalpour, hy the circum- 
stance of the deserts lying between him and the Ganges; for 
the country between the Beath and the Ganges is fertile and 
well inhabited, but that between the lower parts of the Set- 
lege and the Ganges, has really a desert in it, as Timur ex- 
perienced in his march from Adjodin to Balnir. The dis- 
tance Between Alexander’s position on the Hyphasis and 
the Jumma, as given by Pliny, accords with this opinion. 
He gives it as three hundred and thirty six Roman miles, 
which, by a proper proportional scale, formed from his dis- 
tances in known places, reaches from the banksof the Jum- 
ma to a point a little below the confiux of the Beath and Set- 
lege. But had Alexander been as high up the river as the 
place where the great western road crosses from Lahor to 
Delhi, he would have been only two hundred and fifty such 
miles from the Jumma. This opinion is strengthened by the 
account. of what happened immediately after; T mean his 
recrossing the Flydraotes, and then encamping on the bank 
of the Acesines, in a low situation, and where the whole 
country was flooded on the coming on of the periodical 
rains; which circumstances obliged him to move his camp 
higher up the river, in‘o a more elevated country. This 
agrees perfectly with the description of the country. The 
lower parts of the courses of the Jenaub and Ravee are 
really through a low country; and these are also the paits 
nearest to Adjodin and Dehalpour, hstween which places, I 
suppose, Alexander’s altars were erected.” It is rather un- 
fortunate for this ingenious conjecture, that the desert on 
the eastern bank of the JIyphasis, hetween Alexander and 
the Ganges, is to be found only in the inaccurate compila- 
tion of Diodorus, l. xvii. p. 612. (whose narrative of Alex- 
ander’s expedition is as much inferior to Arrian’s, as his 
imperfect and inconsistent account of the expedition of the 
younger Cyrus, and the retreat of the ten thousand, is in- 
ferior to the admired Anabasis of Xenophon,) and tn the 
romantic descr ption of Curtius, |. ix. c. ii. The existenve 
of such a desert, at the ex'remity of Alexander’s conquests, 
is contradicted by the circumstantial and satisfactory narra 
tive of Arrian, l. v. p. 119. wha says, “ that the country he- 
yand the Hyphasis was rich and ‘eriile, the inhahitants in- 
dustrious and hrave; governed by a modern aristocracy; 
flourishing in peace and plenty; possessing a great numher 
of elephants, and those of superior strength and stature.” 


HISTORY OF GREECE, 


453 


Invincible by his enemies, Alex- 


Olymp. ander submitted to his friends, at 
ie G 396 whose desire he set bounds to his 


trophies in the East. But his rest- 
less curiosity prepared new toils and dangers for 
the army and himself. Having returned to the 
cities Nicea and Bucephalia, he divided his 
forces, for the sake of exploring more carefully 
the unknown regions of India. Two divisions, 
respectively commanded by Craterus and He- 
phestion (for Cenus was now dead,) had orders 
to marcli southward along the opposite banks 
of the Hydaspes. Philip, to whom lie had com- 
mitted the government of the provinces adja- 
cent to Bactria, was reca:led with the troops 
under his command; and the whole Macedonian 
conquests in India, including seven nations and 
above two thousand cities, were subjected to 
the dominion of Porus. Mean while the [oni- 
ans, Cyprians, Pheenicians, and other maritime 
nations, who followed the standard of Alexan- 
der, industriously built, or collected, above two 
thousand vessels,’ for sailing down the Hydas- 
pes till its junction with the Indus, and thence 
along that majestic stream to the Indian ocean. 
On board this fleet the king embarked in person 
with the third division of his forces. His na- 
vigation employed several months, being fre- 
quently retarded by hostilities with the natives, 
particularly the warlike tribe of the Malli. 
These Barbarians were driven from the open 
country; their cities were successively besieged 
and taken; but, at the storm of their capital, a 
scene was transacted, which would have indica- 
ted madness in any other general, and which 
betrayed temerity even in Alexander. 

When their streets were filled with the ene- 
my, the Malli took refuge in their citadel. 
This fortress was defended by a thick wall, 
which being thrown around the declivity of a 
mountain, was extremely lofty without, but 
towards the inner circumference of an incon- 
siderable height. Alexander, provoked by the 
o SY 


5 “It may appear extraordinary,” says Mr. Rennel, “that 
Alexander should, in the course of a few inonths, prepare 
so vast a fleet for his voyage down the Indus; especially as 
it is said to be the work of his army. But the Punjab coun- 
try, like that of Bengal, is full of navigahle rivers, which 
communicating with the Indus, form an uninterrupted navi- 
gation froin Cashmere to Tatta, and no daubt abounded 
with boats and vessels ready constructed to the conqueror’s 
hands. Ithink it probable too, that the vessels in which 
Nearchus performed his coasting voyage to the Gulf of Per- 
sia, were found in the Indus. Vessels of one hundred and 
eighty tons burden are sometimes used in the Ganges; and 
those of one hundred not unfrequently.” Tt is worthy of 
observation, that this judicions conjecture of Mr. Rennel is 
justified by the words of Arrian. In speaking of the num- 
ber of vessels, he SAYS, XXI OTK LAAL WOTH MEL HY Twy THAME 
WAEOVTWY KXTH TOUS WOTRMOUS, H EV TW TOTE mwosGevrwy, pe 
124. The veasels employed hy Alexander appear, therefore, 
to have heen partly collected on the Indian rivers, and part- 
ly constructed for the occasion. They were, I. Long ships, 
for the purpose of war; 2. Round ships, for carrying provi- 
sions, baggage, &e.; and 3. trrxywye mAoiz, vessels for 
transporting horses Mr. Rennel’s conjecture can only re- 
late to the ships of hurden. That the two other kinds were 
built by the fonians and islanders, appears from Arrian, p. 
124, and 181. The account of Alexander’s embarkation, 
given in Arrian’s expedition of Alexander, as well ns in his 
Tndian history, iz inconsistent with the relation of Curtius, 
l. ix. c. iii. with that of Diodorus, l. xvii. p. 363. and that of 
Justin, l. xii. e. ix. The narrative of Arrian is, however, 
confirmed hy Straho, |. xv. p. 1023. That accurate geogra- 
nher informs us, that the fleet was constructed near the 
cities whieh Alexander had built on each side the Hydas- 
pes; and that the timher, chiefly pine, fir, and cedar, was 
brought from a wood near to Mount Emodus, 


454 


obstinacy of the Indians, commanded the scal- 
ing-ladders to be applied with all possible expe- 
dition. But this service being performed more 
tardily than usual, the king, in his anger, 
snatched a ladder from one who carried it, and 
having fastened it to the wall, mounted with 
rapidity in defiance of the enemy’s weapons. 
The Macedonians, alarmed by the danger of 
their general, followed in such numbers, that 
the ladder broke as Alexander reached the sum- 
mit; the same accident happened to other lad- 
ders which were hastily applied, and injudici- 
ously crowded. For sotne moments, the king 
thus remained alone on the wall, conspicuous 
by the brightness of his arms, and the extrava- 
gance! of his valour, exposed to thick vollies of 
hostile darts from the adjacent towers. His 
resolution was more than daring. At one bound 
he sprang into the place, and posting himself 
at the wall, slew the chief of the Malli, and 
three others, who ventured to assault him 
Mean while Abreas, Leonnatus, and Peucestas, 
the only Macedonians who had got safe to the 
top of the wall, imitated the example of Alex- 
ander. Abreas was wounded and fell; his com- 
panions, regardless of their own safety, defend- 
ed the king, whose breast had been pierced 
with an arrow. They were soon covered with 
wounds, and Alexander seemed ready to expire. 
By this time, the Macedonians had burst through 
the gates of the place. Their first concern was 
to carry off the king; the second to revenge his 
death, for they believed the wound to be mortal, 
as breath issued forth with his blood. Soine 
report, that the weapon was extracted by Crito- 
demus of Cos; others, that no surgeon being 
near, Perdiccas, of the life-guards, opened the 
wound with his sword, by his master’s com- 
mand, The great effusion of blood threatened 
his immediate dissolution; but a seasonable 
swooning retarded the circulation of the fluids, 
stopped the discharge of blood, and saved the 
life of Alexander. The affectionate admiration 
in which he was held by his troops, appeared 
in their gloomy sadness during his danger, and 
their immoderate joy at his recovery.? 

Having performed his intended voyage to the 
ocean, and provided necessaries for a long 
march, Alexander determined to 


Olymp. proceed towards Persepolis, through 
a the barren solitudes of Gedrosia 
A. C, 342. ; 


This arduous design was not in- 
spired by an idle ambition to surpass the ex- 
ploits of Cyrus and Semiramis, whose armies 
were said to have perished in those deserts, but 
prompted by the necessity of supplying with 
water, the first European fleet which navigated 
the Indian sea, explored the Persian gulf, and 
examined the mouths of the Euphrates and the 
Tigris. This important voyage was performed, 
and afterwards related, by Nearchus,? whose 


1] Tw zrorw Tys toAes; literally, ‘the absurdity of his 
valour,” could our idom admit such an expression; æroroç 
properly singnifies ‘what has no place in nature.” It is 
commonly translated absurd, but may here mean super- 
natural. 

2 The extraordinary adventure related in the text, is said 
by Curtuis, l. ix. c. iv. to have happened in storming a city 
of the Oxydrace. Lucian (Dial. mort.) et Pausan. (Atiic.) 
agree with Curtius. But these are feeble anthorities, com- 
pared with Arrian, l. vi. p. 127, et seq. et Straho, l. xvii. p. 

3 Nearchus was a native of Crete, but had long resided 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


enterprising genius was worthy of the master 
whom he served. In discovering the sea and 
the land, the fleet and army of Alexander mu- 
tually assisted each other. By the exainple of 
the king, both were taught to depise toil and 
danger. On foot, and encumbered with his 
armour, he traversed the tempestuous sands of 
the Persian coast, sharing the hunger, thirst, 
and fatigue of the meanest soldier ;4 nor was 
it till after a march of two months, distinguish- 
ed by unexampled hardships, that the army 
emerged into the cultivated province of Car- 
mania. 

In this country Alexander was met by a di- 
vision of his forces, which he had sent under the 
command of Craterus through the territories ot 
the Arii and Derangew. Stasanor and Phrata- 
phernes, governors of those warlike nations, and 
of the more northern provinces of Parthia and 
Hyrcania, brought a seasonable supply of camels 
and other beasts of burden, to relieve the exi- 
gencies of an army enfeebled by disease and ex-’ 
hausted by fatigue. The waste of men, occa- 
sioned by this destructive expedition, was 
repaired by the arrival of numerous battalions 
from Media, which rendered the standard of 
Alexander sufficiently respectable. Cleander 
and Sitalus, the commanders of those forces, 
were accused by the Medes of despoiling their 
temples, ransacking their tombs, and commit- 
ting other detestable deeds of avarice and cruel- 
ty. Their own soldiers confirmed the accusa- 
tion; and their crimes were punished with 
death. This prompt justice gave immediate 
satisfaction, and served as a salutary example in 
future; for, of all the rules of government, 
practised by this illustrious conqueror, none 
had a stronger tendency to confirm his autlio- 
rity, and consolidate his empire than his vigi- 
lance to restrain the rapacity of his lieutenants, 
and to defend his subjects from oppression.§ 


in Amphipolis. The journal of his celebrated voyage from 
the mouth of the Indus to that of the Euphrates, is preserved 
in Arrian's Indian History, from c. xx. to c. xli. inclusively. 
Seven months were employed in this voyage, during three 
of which the fleet kept the sea. Nearchus sailed in the 
month of September, and arrived in April in the Euphrates, 
Plin. Nat. Hist. l. vi. c. xxiii. The relation of this iliustri- 
ous admiral has been called in question by Dodwell, Har- 
douin, and others: but its authenticity is confirmed by the 
incomparable d’Anville. See Recherch. Georg. sur le Golfe 
Persique, Acad. des Inserip. t. xxx. p. 133. 

4 Parties were continually employed on all sides, in 
searching for water. On one occasion, they were more un- 
fortunate than usual; the heat of the sun was excessive, 
and reflected by the scorching sand; Alexander marched 
on foot, parched with thirst, exhausted bv fatigue, and op- 
pressed by care. Amidst these distressful circums'ances, 
some soldiers discovering a small quantity of turbid water, 
hrought it in great haste to the king. He received the pre- 
sent with thanks, then poured it on the ground; and the 
water, thus spilt, refreshed not only Alexander, but the 
whole army. Arrian, p. 141. 

5 Plutarch says, that the march through Gedrosia cost 
Alexan‘er near one hundred thousand men; a palpable ex- 
aggeration, since he supposes the whole army, at the'r de- 
partnre from India, to have amounted to one hundred and 
twenty thonsand foot, and fifteen thousand horse ; of which 
one division embarked with Nearchus, and another march- 
ed, under the command of Craterus, through the territories 
of the Arii and Drang»; little more than a third part of the 
whole number entered the Gedrosian deserts. 

G Kus routo, SITE Th AAO, XETETXEV EV XCTHW Te eGvy 
Tæ e% AnreSxzvd pou, Sopuarwra, H EXOVTÆ TEOTK WONT AVT XL, 
Topzura usv wAn5eEs ovræ, Torov SE xAAnhov BoETTHXOTS® 
ors oux s¥yv umro ry ArsẸavõgou Rarirsix æðixesrjæs Toug 
zeyouevsuç ure Twv aeyovrwy, Arrian, l. vi. p. 143. “ This, 
especiallv, kept in awe the nations that were either subdued 
by Alexander, or that voluntarily submiited to him (numer 


XXXIX.] 


Among the fables, which gave the air of ro- 
mance to the memorable exploits of Alexander, 
we may reckon the triumphant procession 
through Carmania. In imitation of Bacchus, 
Alexander is said to have traversed this pro- 
vince, amidst dancing and music, crowned with 
flowers, intoxicated with wine, and allowing 
the utmost extravagance of disorder and folly to 
himself and his followers.’ The revel con- 
tinued seven days, during which a small body 
of sober men might have overwhelmed this 
army of bacchanals, and avenged the cause of 
Darius and of Asia.2 Were not this improbable 
fiction discountenanced by the silence of con- 
temporary writers,? it would be refuted by its 
own absurdity. Instead of yielding to the 
transports of mad joy, Alexander, whose heart 
was extremely susceptible of compassion, inust 
have been deeply afflicted by the recent loss of 
so many brave men; nor did the necessity of 
his affairs, to which he was ever duly attentive, 
admit of unseasonable delay. 

Encouraged by the long absence of their 
master, and the perils to which his too adven- 
turous character continually exposed his life, 
Harpalus, Orsines, and Abulites, who were re- 
spectively governors of Babylon, Persepolis, 
and Susa, began to despise his orders, and to 
act as independent princes, rather than ac- 
countable ministers. In such emergencies, Al- 
exander knew by experience the advantage of 
celerity. He therefore divided his army. The 
greater part of the heavy-armed troops were 
entrusted to Hephestion, with orders to pro- 
ceed along the sea-coast, and to attend the mo- 
tions of the fleet commanded by Nearchus. 
With the remainder the king hastened to Pa- 
sargade. Orsines was convicted of many enor- 
mous crimes, which were punished with as 
enormous severity.!0 Baryaxes, a Mede, who 
had assumed the royal tiara, suffered death ; 
his numerous adherents shared the same fate. 
The return of Alexander from the East proved 
fatal to Abulites, and his son Oxathres, who, 
during the absence of thcir master, had cruelly 
oppressed the wealthy province of Susiana, 
and particularly the inhabitants of the capital. 
Harpalus, whose conduct at Babylon had been 
no less flagitious, escaped with his treasures to 
Athens: the avarice of the Athenians engaged 
them to receive this wealthy fugitive; but their 
fears forbade them to harbour the enemy of 
Alexander. By a decrec of the people, he was 
expelled from Attica, and this traitor to the 
most gencrous of princes seems himself to have 
been soon afterwards treacherously slain.!1 


ous and remote as they were;) that, under the reign of this 
, prince, the governors durst not injure the governed.” 

7 Plut. in Alexand. Diodor. p. 573. 

8 Curtins, l. ix. c. x. 

9 Arrian informs us, that neither Ptolemy nor Aristobulus 
make the least mention of this extraordinary transaction, 
which he treats with praper conteinpt. Vid. Arrian, p. 143. 

10 Arrian, who exenses Alexander's adopting the Persian 
manners, repeatedly blames him for imitating the Barbarian 
punishments. 

11 Comp. Curtins, l. x. c. ii. Plut. in Demosthen. Diodor. 
l. xviii. p. 19. Strabo, l. xvii. p. 576. Burt all these writers 
omit the first crime of Harpalus mentioned by Arrian, the 
pardon of which does great honour to the clemeney of Al 
exander. Tarpalus, even in the life-time of Philip, had 
gained the friendship of his illustrions son, who, soon after 
monnting the throne, employed him as his treasurer. But, 
before the battle of Issus, this unworthy minister betrayed 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


455 


The brave Peucestos, who had saved Alexan 

der’s life at the assault of the Mallian fortress, 
was promoted to the government of Persia. In 
this important command, he proved his wisdom 
to be equal to his valour. By conforming to 
the customs, adopting the manners, and using 
the language of the vanquished, he acquired 
the affectionate respect of the people committed 
to his care. His pliant condescension, directed 
by sound policy, was highly approved by the 
discernment of Alexander; but his affectation 
of foreign manners greatly offended the pride 
of his Macedonian countrymen. 

In the central provinces of his 


ne empire, which from time immemo- 
A c 325 rial had been the seat of Asiatic 


pomp and luxury, Alexander spent 
the last, and not the least glorious, year of his. 
reign. In the nervous language of antiquity, 
the world was silent in his presence; and his 
only remaining care was to improve and con- 
solidate his conquests. For these important 
purposes, he carefully examined the course of 
the Euleus, the Tigris, and the Euphrates; 
and the indefatigable industry of his troops was 
judiciously employed in removing the weirs or 
dams, by which the timid ignorance of the As- 
syrian and Persian kings had obstructed the 
navigation of those great rivers. But Alexan- 
der, having no reason to dread fleets of war, 
wished to invite those of commerce. The har- 
bours were repaired; arsenals were constructed; 
a bason was formed at Babylon sufficient to 
contain a thousand galleys. By these and simi- 
lar improvements, he expected to facilitate in- 
ternal intercourse among his central provinces, 
while, by opening new channels of communi- 
cation he hoped to unite the wealthy countries 
of Egypt and the East, with the most remote 
regions of the earth. His ships were sent to 
explore the Persian and Arabian gulfs. Ar- 
chias brought him such accounts of the former, 
'that he determined to plant its shores with 
| Grecian colonies. Hieron of Soli proceeded 
‘farthest in examining the Arabian coast; but 
he found it impossible to double the southern 
) extremity of that immense peninsula, and still 
more to remount (as he had been command- 
ed by Alexander) to the city Hieropolis in 
Egypt. This daring enterprise seemed to be 
reserved for the king in person. It is certain, 
that, shortly before his death, he took measures 
for examining this great southern gulf, as well 
as for discovering the shores of the Caspian 
Sea, which was then believed to communicate 
with the Northern Ocean.!2 
But objects, less remote, demanded his more 
immediate attention. In the winter season, the 
waters of the Euphrates, which produce the 
extraordinary fertility of Assyria,'3 are confined 


his trust, and fled to Megara. Alexander, unwilling hastily 
to condemn an old friend, who had for his sake inenrred 
the resentment of Philip, ascribed the misconduct of Har- 
palns to the bad counsels of Tauriscns, a daring villain, 
who had accomplished his flight. After the death of Tau- 
riseus, he prevailed on Harpnlus again to return to his sere 
vice, and again entrusted him with the custody of his trea- 
sures. Arrian, l. iii. c. vi. 

12 Arrian, l. vii. p. 158. 

13 “ This country,” according to Strabo, ‘is more fertile 
than any other; producing, it is said, three hundred fold.” 
Strabo, p. 1077 


456 


within their lofty channel. But in spring and 
sumnier, and especially towards the summer 
solstice they overflow their banks, and, instead 
of watering, would totally deluge the adjacent 
territory, unless the superfluous fluid were dis- 
charged into the great canal of Pallacopas. This 
artificial river, formed, it is said, by Nebuchad- 
nezzar, commences a hundred miles below Ba- 
bylon. It is not fed by springs, nor replenished 
from mountain snows, but branching from the 
great trunk of the Euphrates, moderates its 
too impetuous stream, by diverting it into the 
sea, through lakes and marshes, by various, and 
for the most part, invisible outlets. But this 
useful contrivance finally defeated its own pur- 
pose. The Pallacopas gradually sunk into its 
soft and oozy bed, and the Euphrates, which 
even originally was much higher than this 
canal, contirued to flow into the new channel, 
even after the season when its waters cease 
to rise by the melting of the Armenian'snows. 
This diminution of the river rendered it insuf- 
ficient to water the fields of Assyria; an incon- 
venience severely felt in a country almost unac- 
quainted with rain. The governors of Babylon 
attempted unsuccessfully to remedy the evil, 
whose magnitude justly excited the attention 
of Alexander. From war, the mother of arts, 
he had learned to improve the benefits of peace. 
While preparations were making for more dis- 
tant expeditions, he sailed down the Euphrates ; 
carefully examined the nature of the soil; and 
having discovered, at the distance of about four 
miles from the inosculation of the Euphrates 
and Pallacopas, a hard and rocky bottom, he 
commanded a canal to be cut there, which serv- 
ed to moderate the inundations at one season, 
without too much draining the waters at an- 
other. Having performed this essential service 
to Assyria, he followed the course of the Palla- 
copas, and surveyed the lakes and marshes, 
which guard the Arabian frontiers. In the 
neighbourhood of this new canal, he observed 
a convenient situation for a city, which being 
built and fortified, was peopled with those su- 
perannuated Greeks, who seemed no longer ca- 
pable of military service, and with such others 
of their countrymen as thought proper to settle 
in this fertile, though remote country.! 
Animated by a zeal for public happiness, 
Alexander thus traversed the populous provinces 
of the East, and successively visited the imperial 
cities of Persepolis, Susa, Ecbatana, and Baby- 
lon. These places, and others of inferior note, 
were adorned with signal marks of his taste, 
and respectively distinguished by transactions 
which discover the boldest, yet most enlighten- 
ed views of policy. The important design of 
uniting, by laws and manners, the subjects of 
his extensive monarchy, was ever present to his 
mind. For this purpose, he took care to incor- 
porate in his Barbarian armies the Greeks and 
Macedonians. In each company, or rather in 
each division of sixteen, he joined four Euro- 
peans to twelve Asiatics. In the Macedonian 
squadrons and battalions, he intermixed, on the 
other hand, such of the Barbarians as were 
most distinguished by their strength, their acti- 


1 Arrian, ubi supra. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuap. 


vity, and their merit. Soon after the battle of 
Arbela, he had given orders to raise new levies 
in the conquered provinces. The Barbarian 
youth delighted in the Grecian exercise and dis- 
cipline, and rejoiced at being associated to the 
glory of their victors. On the banks of the 
Tigris, Alexander was joined by a powerful 
body of those recruits, whose improvements in 
arts and arms fully answered his expectations, 
and justly rewarded his foresight. The arrival 
of such numerous auxiliaries enabled him to 
discharge at Opis, a city on the Tigris, such 
Greeks and Macedonians as were tired of the 
service, worn out with age, or enfeebled by 
sickness. After an interesting scene, which we 
shall have occasion to describe, he dismissed 
those respectable veterans, loaded with wealth 
and honours. They were conducted by Cra- 
terus, whom he appointed to succeed Antipater 
in the administration of his European domi- 
nions ; and Antipater, who had long executed 
that important trust with equal prudence and 
fidelity, was commanded to join his master 
with new levies from Greece, Thrace, and 
Macedon.? l 

At Susa, Alexander learned that his soldiers, 
indulging the extravagance too natural to their 
profession, had contracted immense debts, which 
they had neither ability nor inclination to pay. 
Upon this intelligence, he issued orders that 
each man should give an exact account of what 
he owed, with the names of his creditors, de- 
claring, that he was determined to satisfy them 
at his own expense. The troops suspected an 
intention, merely to discover their characters, 
and to learn their economy or profusion. At 
first, therefore, many denied, and all diminish- 
ed, their debts. But Alexander issued a se- 
cond declaration, “ That it became not a prince 
to deceive his people, nor a people to suppose 
their prince capable of deceit.” Faithful lists 
were immediately presented, and the whole 
debts discharged, to the amount, it is said, of 
four millions sterling. 

This event was accompanied by a transac- 
tion of a different kind, which discovers, how- 
ever, the same spirit, and which equally en- 
deared Alexander to his Asiatic subjects. In 
the royal palace of Susa, he publicly espoused 
Barciné,’ the daughter of Darius; and bestowed 
her sister Drypetis on his friend Hephastion, 
saying, that he wished their children to be kins- 
men. By the advice of their master, Perdic- 
cas, Seleucus, Ptolemy, and other generals, in- 
termarried with the most illustrious of the van- 
quished Barbarians. The soldiers were encou- 
raged by presents, and by the hope of royal 
favour, to follow the example of their leaders; 
and it appeared from the catalogue of their 
names, presented to the king, that above ten 
thousand Greeks and Macedonians married 
Asiatic women.‘ 


2 Arrian, ubi supra. 

3 Called Statira by Curtius, Justin, and Plutarch. 

4 Plutarch, seizing the true spirit of these regulations, 
exclaims, 2 GxeSzee Zee kn, xæi avonTe, xxs pxTyy TONAS 
weet Tyv *EAAnomrovriay mwovnbess yiGuexrv, ovuTws sue- 
veig Geosrsig Aosav Evpwæry cuverroues, oy Eurois, ovds 
ox!Siziç, Oude euyoss xei xovurnbsos Seopmotc, ard’ 
EOwWTS VOfeisew KLE YAOS TWH LOTl, XAL LOsVwYS MIC maido 
+e yevy cuvarrovres, “O! barbarous and foolish Xerxes. 


XXXIX.] 


In all the cities which he visited, 
he was careful to celebrate the mu- 
sical and gymnastic games; those 
distinguishing fruits of Grecian culture, which 
being adapted to gratify the senses, as well as 
to please the fancy, were beheld with delight 
even by the most ignorant Barbarians. Con- 
vinced that nothing has a more direct tendency 
to unite and harmonize the minds and manners 
of men, than public entertainments and com- 
mon pleasures, Alexander determined to intro- 
duce and diffuse the amusements of the thea- 
tre. For this purpose above three thousand 
players and musicians, collected from all parts 
of Greece, assembled in Ecbatana, the capital 
of Media, which was chosen for the scene of 
those theatrical exhibitions.5 But the sickness 
and death of Hephestion changed this magni- 
ficent spectacle into melancholy obsequies. In 
the moment of his triumph, the king was de- 
prived of his dearest friend.6 This irreparable 
loss, he felt and expressed with an affectionate 
ardour congenial to his character, and justified 
his immoderate sorrow by the inconsolable? 
grief of Achilles for the fate of his beloved 
Patrocles. During three days and nights after 
the death of Hephestion, Alexander neither 
changed his apparel nor tasted food. A public 
mourning was observed throughout the empire. 
Funeral games were cclebrated in the great 
cities; the royal cohort was commanded thence- 
forward to retain the name and banner of He- 
phestion ;8 and the lofty genius of Stasicrates 
erected at Ecbatana a monument worthy of 
him, whom the obsequious oracle of Ammon 
declared deserving of herove worship. To ap- 
pease the grief of Alexander, his lieutenants 
dedicated their armour at the tomb of his friend. 
The example was given by Eumenes, the king’s 
secretary, who shortly before Hephestion’s 
death, had offended this illustrious favourite ; 
aman whe long and uninterruptedly enjoyed, 


Olymp. 
cxiv. 1. 


thou who labouredst in vain to throw a bridge over the 
Hellespont, it is thus that wise kings join Asia to Europe, 
not by hoards, ships, lifeless and insensible bonds, but by 
lawful love, chaste nuptials, and the indissoluble tie of 
common progeny.” Plut. Orat. i. de Fortun. Alexand. 
See likewise above, c. ix. p. 113. 

5 It should seem from Plutarch, that the entertainments 
of the theatre were soon diffused through other parts of 
Asia. Aarczzvdeou Tyv Aginv eFuusoouvTss, Onyeos yy 
ayznyvwT er, xi Viserwy “xt Yovoinvwy zzi Tedeworiwy 
muideg Taç Evgimidou xai Momoxrssus tTexpwdius ydov. 
* Alexander, having tamed Asia, Homer was read in the 
East; the children of the Persians, Susians, and Gedrosia, 
recited the tragedies of Sophocles and Euripides.” Plut. 
ibid. 

6 Next to Hephestion, Craterus seems to have enjoyed 
the greatest share of Alexander's confidence; yet he ofien 
Baid, “ Craterus loves the king, Hephiwstion loves Alexan- 
der.” Plutarch in Alexand. In passing throngh the Tro- 
ede, Alexander crowned the tomb of Achilles, and He- 
phwstion that of Patrocles. Elian, Var. Hist. xii. 7. 

7 If, inthe melancholy shades below, 

The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow, 

Yet mine shall sacred tast; and, undecay’d, 

Burn on through death, and animate my shade. 
Pope’s Iliad. 

8 According to Plutarch, Stasicrates proposed to form 
Mount Athos into a statue of Alexander, grasping a city 
with one hand, and with the other discharging a river into 
the sea. Plut. in Alexand. Vitruvius, 1. ii. in Proem. et Lu- 
cian, t. ii. p. 489. ascribe this design to Dinocrates. Alex- 
ander extolled the boldness of the artist, but added, Ex Se 
Meverv tov Ajw zara yworv? agxis yxp evog Burirews evu- 
Coirzvrtoçs sivxi pevywesov. “Let alone Mount Athos; it 
is enough that it is the monument of one king’s folly alrea- 
dy ;”’ alluding to the event related above, c. ix. p. 113. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


457 


without abusing in any one instance, the confi- 
dence of his master; who exercised power 
without pride, and enforced discipline without 
severity ; whose conduct merited at once pub- 
lic respect and royal favour, and whose virtues 
disarmed envy.’ 

To moderate and divert his sorrow, Alexan- 
der, who in the practice of war found at once 
business and amusement, undertook an expedi- 
tion in person, which perhaps would otherwise 
have been committed to the valour of his lieu- 
tenants. The Cossæans, a fierce and untracta- 
ble nation, inhabited the southern frontier of 
Media. Secure amidst their rocks and fast- 
nesses, they had ever defied the arms of the 
Persians; and the degenerate successors of 


‘Cyrus had judged it more prudent to purchase 


their friendship than to repel their hostility. In 
their annual journey from Babylon to Ecbatana, 
the pride of these magnificent but pusillani- 
mous princes condescended to bestow presents 
on the Cosswans, that they might procure an 
undisturbed passage for themselves and their 
train; and this impolitic meanness only in- 
creased the audacity of the mountaineers, who 
often ravaged the Susian plains, and often re- 
tired to their fastnesses, loaded with the richest 
spoils of Media. Alexander was not of a tem- 
per patiently to endure the repetition of such 
indignities. In forty days, he attacked, de- 
feated, and totally subdued this rapacious and 
warlike tribe. The Cosseans were driven from 
their last retreats, and compelled to surrender 
their territory. After obtaining sufficient pledges 
of their fidelity, the conqueror allowed them to 
ransom their prisoners, and at his departure 
from their country, took care to erect such for- 
tresses as seemed necessary for bridling, in fu- 
ture, the dangerous fury of this headstrong 
people.!0 

In returning from this successful expedition 
towards the banks of the Euphrates, Alexander 
was met by ambassadors from Carthage, Spain, 
and Italy, as well as from many inland coun- 
tries of Asia and Africa, extending from Mount 
Imaus to the southern extremity of Æthiopia. 
It was then, says his historian, that he appear- 
ed master of the world, both to his followers 
and to himself; and, as if the known parts of 
it had been insufficient to satisfy his ambition, 
he gave orders to cut timber in the Hyrcanian 
forest, with a design to build ships, and explore 
the undiscovered shores of the Caspian and 
Arabian seas. But neither these lofty designs, 
nor the glory of war, nor the pomp of royalty, 
which, of all princes, Alexander enjoyed in the 
greatest spicndour,!! could appease his gricf for 


9 Arrian, p. 156. tells us, that concerning the funeral ho- 
nonrs of Hephwestion, innumerable and absurd fictions were 
invented hy the friends and by the enemies of Alexander ; 
nay, what is extraordinary, the same falsehoods were some- 
times authorised by both; the former intending thereby to 
extol the warmth of his friendship, the latter to expose his 
extravagance and folly. 

10 Such is the account of this expedition given by Ar- 
rian, l. vii. p. 157. and confirmed bv Strabo, 1. xi. p. 795. 
and by Diodorus, |. xvii. p. 577. Plutarch, on the other 
hand, most unwarrantably and absurdly tells us, thnt Alex 
ander, to divert his grief, took the amusement of man-hunt- 
ing, and massacred the whole Cossæan natiou, without dis- 
tinction of age or sex. Plut. p. 94. 

11 Vid. Athen. |. x. p. 436. et |. xit. p. 537—541. Wo 
may believe that Alexander’s tent contained a hundred 


458 


the loss of Hephestion. The death of his be- 
loved friend is said, by Arrian, to have hasten- 
ed his own. It certainly tinged his character 
with a deep melancholy, which rendered him 
susceptible of such impressions as the firmness 
of his manly soul would otherwise have re- 
sisted and repelled. 

He, who had so often employed superstition 
as an instrument of policy, began himself to 
falla prey to that miserable passion. The ser- 
vants of princes, ever quick in discerning, and 
dexterous in turning to their own profit, the 
foibles of their masters, soon discovered and 
abused the weakness of Alexander. Alarmed 
at the severe treatment of several of his col- 
leagues, Apollodorus, a citizen of Amphipolis, 
who had been entrusted with the government 
of Babylon, practised with his brother Pytha- 
goras, a diviner; and the latter, ambitious to 
promote the greatness of his family, pretended 
to perceive in the victims evident marks of di- 
vine displeasure against the king, should he 
enter the gates of Babylon. Notwithstanding 
this menace, Alexander, after reducing the Cos- 
sans, approached towards that city with his 
army. He was met by a long train of Chal- 
dzan priests, who conjured him to change his 
resolution, because they had received an oracle 
from Belus, declaring that his journey thither 
would prove fatal. The interest of the Chal- 
dans conspired with the views of Apollodo- 
rus. 
fice, situate in the heart of Babylon, had been 
very richly endowed by the Assyrian kings. 
But the produce of the consecrated ground, 
instead of being applied to its original destina- 
tion of repairing the temple, and offering sacri- 
fices to the gods, had, ever since the impious 
reign of Xerxes, been appropriated by the Chal- 
dean priests, Alexander, it is well known, in- 
tended to reforin this abuse; and, although his 
mind was not altogether unmoved by the ad- 
monition of the priests, he discerned their in- 
terested motives, and answered them by a 
verse of Euripides, “ He’s the best prophet that 
conjectures best.” Foiled in their first attempt, 
the Chaldeans had recourse to another artifice. 
Since the king had determined at every hazard 
to visit Babylon, they entreated him at least 
not to enter it on the eastern side, but to fetch 
a compass round, and to march with his face 
towards the rising sun. He prepared to com- 
ply with this advice; but the marshiness of the 
soil rendered his design impracticable ; and he 


couches; that the pillars which supported it were encrusted 
with gold; that he gave audience, surrounded with guards, 
and seated on a golden throne. In the language of anti- 
qnity, “the master of both continents” found it necessary 
to unite the pomp of the East with the arts of Greece. But 
when Atheneus tells us of the precious essences, the frag- 
rant wines, the effeminacy, and vices, of Alexander, we 
discover the credulous, or rather criminal sophist, who has 
collected into one work all the vices and impurities which 
disgraced his country and human nature. To the unwar- 
ranted assertions of the obscure writers cited by an Elian 
(l. ix. c. iii.) and an Atheneus, we can oppose the authority 
of an Arrian and a Plutarch.—Could he who so severely 
censured the effeminate and luxurious life of Agnon and 
Philotas, be himself effeminate and luxurious. ‘Of all 
men,” says Arrian, ‘ Alexander was the most economical 
a what regarded his private pleasures.” Arrian, l vii. p. 
fle 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


| 


[Cuar 


was thus reluctantly compelled to enter the city 
by the forbidden road. 

During his short stay at Babylon, his mind 
was disturbed by superstitious fears,! awakened 
by the intrigues of Apollodorus, or the artifices 
of the Chaldeans, and confirmed by a circum- 
stance well fitted to operate on a disordered 
fancy. In his Indian expedition, he had con- 
versed with the Gymnosophists, or Braclimans, 
men wlio practised the philosophy which Plato 
taught, and whose contempt for the pomp and 
pleasures of the present life, was founded on 
the firm belief of a better and more permanent 
state of existence. To those sages, the fortu- 
nate ambition of Alexander appeared an object 
of derision or pity. At sight of the conqueror, 
they stamped their feet with vehemence on the 
ground; indicating, by an expressive action, 
more eloquent than words, that he, whose name 
now filled the world, must soon be confined 
within the narrow grave. The flatterers of the 
king rebuked them for insulting the sun of Ju- 
piter, who had the power to reward or punish 
them. They replied, by saying, “That all 
were the sons of Jupiter; that the rewards of 
Alexander they disdained, and set at defiance 
his punishments, which at last could only re- 
lieve them from the load of frail mortality.” 
Yet Calanus, one of their number, allured by 
curiosity, or irresistibly captivated by the sooth- 
ing condescension of the king, agreed to accoin- 


The temple of Belus, a stupendous edi-| pany him; for which inconsistency he was 


much blamed by his companions. Alexander 
treated this eastern sage with’ great respect, 
and when Calanus, who had passed his seventy- 
second year without experiencing any bodily 
infirmity, fell sick in Persia, the affectionate 
prince earnestly entreated him not to anticipate 
fate by a voluntary death. But finding him 
inflexibly bent on this purpose, he allowed a 
pyre to be constructed, to which the Indian 
(being too feeble to walk or ride on horse-back) 
was conveyed in a litter. In sight of the Ma- 
cedonian army, who had heen ordered to assist 
ai this uncommon solemnity, Calanus composed 
himself decently on the pyre; the music struck 
up; the soldiers raised a shout of war; and the 
Indian, with a serene countenance, expired 
amidst the flames, singing a hymn to the gods 
of his country. 

The curiosity of Alexander was unbounded; 
but his humanity likewise was great. This 
principle, which is too often a stranger to the 
breast of conquerors, made him decline witness- 
ing the extraordinary death of a friend, who, 
for his sake, had abandoned his native land. 
But before Calanus was carried to the funeral 
pile, the king affectionately paid him the last 
visit. Calanus having embraced all present, 
refused to take leave of Alexander, saying, that 
“he should again see him in Babylon.” The 
words of a dying man were considered by the 
Greeks as prophetical. Those of Calanus sunk 
deep into tle mind of Alexander; and the pain- 
ful impression which they made, hastened his 
departure from a city, in which so many con- 
curring circumstances forbade him to reside. 


1 He became, says Plutarch, SureAwig meos ro Gesov. 


XXXIX.] 


His superstitious terrors, how- 
ever, seem to have been diverted 
A. C. 324. by the voyage oe the Euphrates, 
May 28th. and by directing the improvements 

in the canal of Pallacopas. Having 
resumed his courage, he ventured to return to 
Babylon, gave audience to some Grecian am- 
bassadors, who presented him with golden 
crowns from the submissive flattery of their 
several republics; and having reviewed his 
troops and galleys, prepared to execute the en- 
terprises which he had so long meditated. But 
his designs and his life were now drawing to a 
close. Whether to conquer his melancholy, or 
to triumph in the victory which he had already 
gained over it, he indulged, without modera- 
tion, in that banqueting and festivity to which, 
after the fatigues of war, he had often shown 
himself too much addicted; and a fever, occa- 
sioned, or at least increased, by an excessive 
abuse of wine, the vice of his nation and of his 
family, put a period to his life in the thirty- 
third year of his age, and in the thirteenth of 
his reign. After the first days of the disorder, 
he had been conveyed to the ccol verdure of a 
beautiful garden; but the malady increasing, he 
was soon brought back to the palace. The last 
remains of strength, he spent in assisting at 
daily sacrifices to the gods. During his illness 
he spoke but little, and that only concerning 
his intended expeditions. The temples were 
crowded by his friends; the generals waited in 
the hall; the soldiers surrounded the gates. 
Such was the grief of many, and the respectful 
admiration of all, that none ventured to an- 
nounce to him his approaching dissolution, 
none ventured to demand his last orders. 
When all hopes of recovery had vanished, his 
favourite troops were admitted to behold him. 
He was speechless, but had still strength to 
stretch forth his hand.? 

Such was the reign of Alexander, whose cha- 
racter, being unexampled and inimitable, can 
only be explained by relating his actions. He 
was of a low stature, and somewhat deformed; 
but the activity and elevation of his mind ani- 
mated and ennobled his frame: By a life of 
continual labour, and by an early and habitual 
practice of the gymnastic exercises, he had har- 
dened his body against the impressions of cold 
and heat, hunger and thirst, and prepared his 
robust constitution for bearing such exertions 
of strength and activity, as have appeared in- 
credible to the undisciplined softness of modern 
times. In generosity and in prowess, he rival- 
led the greatest heroes of antiquity; and in the 
race of glory, having finally outstripped all 
competitors, became ambitious to surpass him- 
self. His superior skill in war gave uninter- 
rupted success to his arms; and his natural 


Olymp. 


cxiv. 1. 


2 Arrian says, that many reports were spread concerning 
the death of Alexander, snch as, that he had been poisoned 
by the emissaries of Antipater, whom, as mentioned above 
in the text, he had recently deprived of the government of 
Greece und Macedon; that when asked to whom he be 
queathed the empire, he had answered, to the “stiongest;” 
and that he had foretold his ohsequies would be celebrated 
by bloody wnrs among his lieutenants. But these rnmours 
received not the least countenance from the royal diary, 
which seems to have heen carefully copied hy Arrian, nor 
from the histories of Ptolemy and Aristobnlus. 

3 Plut. Orat. i. ct ii. de Fortun. Alexand. 


HISTORY OF GREECE 


459 


humanity, enlightened by the philosophy of 
Greece, taught him to improve his conquests 
to the best interests of mankind.’ In his ex- 
tensive dominions, he built, or founded, not less 
than seventy cities,> the situation of which be- 
ing chosen with consummate wisdom, tended 
to facilitate communication, to promote com- 
merce, and to diffuse civility through the great- 
est nations of the earth.6 It may be suspected, 
indeed, that he mistook the extent of human 
power, when, in the course of one reign, he un- 
dertook to change the face of the world; and 
that he miscalculated the stubbornness of igno- 
rance, and the force of habit, when he attempt- 
ed to enlighten barbarism, to soften servitude 
and to transplant the improvements of Greece 
into an African and Asiatic soil, where they 
have never been known to flourish. Yet let 
not the designs of Alexander be too hastily ac- 
cused of extravagance. Whoever seriously 
considers what he actually performed before 
his thirty-third year, will be cautious of deter- 
mining what he might have accomplished, had 
he reached the ordinary term of human life. 
His resources were peculiar to himself; and 
such views, as well as actions, became him, as 
would have become none besides. In the lan- 
guage of a pliilosophical historian, “ he seems 
to have been given to the world by a peculiar 
dispensation of Providence, being a man like 
to none other of the human kind.’ 

From the part which his father Philip and 
himself acted in the affairs of Greece, his history 
has been transmitted through the impure chan- 
nels of exaggerated flattery, or malignant envy. 
The innumerable fictions, which disgrace the 
works of his biographers, are contradicted by 
the most authentic accounts of his reign, and 
inconsistent with those public transactions, 
which concurring authorities confirm. In the 
present work, it seemed unnecessary to expa- 
tiate on such topics, since it is less the business 
of history to repeat, or even to expose errors, 
than to select and impress useful truths. An au- 
thor, ambitious of attaining that purpose, can 
seldom indulge the language of general pane- 
gyric. He willacknowledge, that Alexander’sac- 
tions were not always blameless; but, after the 
most careful examination, he will affirm, that 
his faults were few in number, and resulted from 
his situation rather than from his character. 


4 Plutarch says, the nations conquered by Alexander 
might adopt the language of Themistoles, when, in conse- 
quence of bis banishment from Greece, he was raised to 
great wealth and honour in Asia. “O maidse worwrometce, 
es py ceorwromede.”? “O my children! we shonld have 
been undone, bad we not been undone.” In the same 
manner, those nations, had they not been vanquished by 
Alexander, had pot been civilized, Egypt would not beast 
ber Alexandria, Mesopotamia her Selencia, &c. And 
again, “Alexander tought marriage to the Hyrcanians, nud 
agricultnre to the Arachosii. He tanght the Sogidians to 
maintain, and not te kill, their parents; the Persians to re- 
spect, and not to marry, their mothers; the Scythians to 
bury, and not to eat, their dead.” Pint. ibid. 

5 Vid. Plot. de Fortun. Alexand. tit. ii. p. 327. In tbe 
language of Plutarch, he sowed Asia with Greek cities. 

6 Plut. ibid. Diodor. Sicul. xvii. 83. Stephan. Byzant. 
in voc. As ævðesix. 

7 Oude suoi sË rou Ossou Quvæs av Soxsi vye oudevs 
Aaw vjowmwvy corxwg. Arrian, p. 168. How for he was 
an instromept in the hands of Divine Providence, belongs 
not to the subjeet of profane history to inquire. On this 

i subject, the reader may sce Bishop Lowth on Isaiah, xix. 
18. and xxiv. H. 


460 ” 

From the first years of his reign, he experi- 
enced the crimes of disaffection and treachery, 
which multiplied, and became more dangerous, 
with the extent of his dominions, and the diffi- 
culty to govern them. Several of his lieute- 
nants early aspired at independence; others 
formed conspiracies against the life of their 
inaster. The first criminals were treated, as 
we have already seen, with a lenity becoming 
the generous spirit of Alexander. But when 
Philotas, the son of Parmenio, and 


Ter even Parmenio! himself, afforded 
S reason to suspect their fidelity ; 
A. C. 329. 


when the Macedonian youths, who, 
according to the institution of Philip, guarded 
the royal Pavilion, prepared to murder their 
sovereign,? he found it necessary to depart 
from his lenient system, and to hold with a 
firmer hand the reins of government. Elated 
by unexampled prosperity, and tle submissive 
reverence of vanquished nations, his loftiness 
disgusted the pride of his European troops, par- 
ticularly the Macedonian nobles, who had been 
accustomed to regard themselves rather as his 


1 Philotas was punished in the country of the Arii; Par- 
menio was put to death in Media. Curtius (l. vi. c. vii. et 
seq.) who has given the fullest account of these executions, 
says, that Philutas deserved not the compassion of his 
friends, “ Amicorum misericordiai non meruit.” He leaves 
it uncertain whether Parmenio fell a sacrifice to his own 
treason, or to the policy of Alexander. Arrian thinks, that 
the death of Parmenio was necessary to his master’s 
safety.—Although the evidence of this general's guilt has 
not been handed down to posterity, Alexander, it is certain, 
believed him guilty. He who disdained to conquer his 
enemies by deceit, cannot, without proof, be supposed capa- 
ble of treacherously assassinating his friends. 


2 This conspiracy is related by Arrian, l. iv. c. xiii. and 
xiv. The scene was Bactra, or Zariaspa, the captital of 
Bactria. Ata hunting-match, the king, being ready to kill 
a boar, was anticipated by Hermolaus. To punish the in- 
solence of the youth, Alexander ordered him to be whipped. 
The disgrace seemed intolerable to Hermolaus and his 
companions; a conspiracy was formed to destroy Alexan- 
der in his sleep. It was discovered by Ptolemy, the son of 
Lagus. The youths confessed their guilt, and declared 
that they had been confirmed in their purpose by Callis- 
thenes, the scholar of Aristotle, an arrogant and morose 
man, who, sheltered by the cloak of philosophy, insolently 
brow-beat the prince, whom he was bound to respect 
(Arrian, p. 871.) The conspirators were stoned to death; 
a punishment common in that age, when persons accused 
werc tried before numerous assemblies, whosc indignation 
frequently burst forth and destroyed atrocious offenders on 
the spot, with the first instruments of death that chance 
offered to their hands. Callisthenes was dragged round the 
army in chains. Such is the best authenticated account of 
this affair, concerning which the variations of ancicnt 
writers are innumerable. Vid. Arrian,]. iv. c. xiv. Curtius, 
l. viii. c. viii. Seneca Suasor, i. Justin, l. xv. c. iti, Phi- 
lostratus, l. viii. e.i. Diodor. Sicul. pp. 356 et 358. Dio- 
gen. Laert. in Aristot. Suidos, ad voc. As an cxample of 
the injustice done the character of Alexander, I shall insert 
the passage of Seneca: “Hoc est Alexandri, crimen æter- 
num, quod nulla virtus, nulla bellorum felicitas redimet. 
Nam quoties qnis dixerit, Occidit Persarum multa millia; 
opponitur, et Callisthenem. Quoties dictum erit, omnia 
oceano tenus vicit, ipsam quoquc tentavit novis classibus, 
et imperium ex angulo Thraciæ usque ad orientis terminos 
protulit; dicetur, sed Callisthenem occidit?’ Yet this Cal- 
ïsthenes was a traitor, whosc writings are mentioned with 
zontempt by Arrian. loc. citat. Polybius, t. ii. pp. 64. 335. 
ett. ui. p. 45. Cicero ad Quint. Frat. l. ii. epist. xiii. et 
Longinus, c. iii. p. 14. The patriotism of the Greeks, and 
the envy of the Romans, could never forgive the transcen- 
dent glory of Alexander, which eclipse their own. In 
speaking of Philip and his son, even Cicero, (de Offic.) says, 
“ Alter semper magnus, alter sepe turpissimus.”’ See like- 
wise Livy, |. ix. c. xviii.) The last mentioned writer (I. ix. 
c. xvii.) goes out of his way to allege very inconclusive ar- 
guments for believing, that had Alexander turned his arms 
against Italy, he would have certainly becn conquered by 
the Romans. i 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


E 


[Cuar. 


companions than subjects. The pretensions 
which sound policy taught him to form and to 
maintain, of being treated with those external 
honours ever claimed by the monarchs of the 
East, highly offended the religious prejudices 
of the Greeks, who deemed it impious to pros- 
trate the body, or bend the knee, to any mor- 
tal sovereign. Yet had he remitted formalities 
consecrated by the practice of ages, he must 
insensibly have lost the respect of his Asiatic 
subjects. With a view to reconcile the dis- 
cordant principles of the victors and vanquish- 
ed, he affected an immediate descent from Ju- 
piter Ammon, a claim liberally admitted by the 
avarice or fears of the Libyan priests, and 
which, he had reason to expect, could not be 
very obstinately denied by the credulity of the 
Greeks and Macedonians, who universally ac- 
knowledged that Philip, his reputed father, was 
remotely descended from the Grecian Jupiter. 
But the success of this design, which might 
have entitled him, as son of Jupiter, to the same 
obeisance from the Greeks, which the Barba- 
rians readily paid him as monarch of the East, 
was counteracted, at first by the secret displea- 
sure, and afterwards by the open indignation, 
of several of his generals and courtiers. Nor did 
the conduct of Alexander tend to extricate him 
from this difficulty. With his friends, he 
maintained that equal intercourse of visits and 
entertainments, which characterised the Mace- 
donian manners; indulged the liberal flow of 
unguarded conversation; and often exceeded 
that intemperance in wine, which disgraced his 
age and country. 

On such occasions his guests, or 


oap., entertainers, enjoyed and abused 
A. C. 328. the indecent familiarity to which 


they had been accustomed with 
their kings; but which the temper of Alexan- 
der, corrupted by prosperity and flattery, was 
no longer able to endure. A scene of drunken 
debauchery, which must appear highly disgust- 
ing to the propriety of modern manners, proved 
fatal to Clitus, who, emboldened by wine, dar- 
ingly insulted his prince, vilified his noblest 
actions, and derided his pretensions to divinity. 
The king, being likewise intoxicated, was no 
longer master of himself, when Clitus, who 
had been once carried from his presence, re- 
turned a second time to the charge, and be- 
haved more insolently than before. In an un- 
happy moment, Alexander thrust a spear into 
the breast of his friend ;3 but instantly repent- 
ing his fury, would have destroyed himself 
by the same weapon, had he not been prevent- 
ed by his attendants. The bitterness of his re- 
pentance, and the pungency of his remorse, 
which neither flattery could soften, nor so- 
phistry appease,* rendered his life burdensome, 


3 Montesquieu, who (Veltaire only excepted) is the most 
distinguished modern apologist of Alexander, says, “II fit 
deux mauvaises actions; il brula Persepolis et tua Clitus.” 
(Esprit des Loix, |. x. c. xiv.) The story of the burning of 
Persepolis we have already refuted. The dcath of Clitus, 
Aristobulus, cited by Arrian, ascribes entirely to the inso- 
lence and folly of Clitus himself, and totally exculpates Al- 
exander. But Arrian observes, like a philosopher, that Al- 
exander was justly blameable in allowing himself to be 
overcome by drunkenness and anger, p. 84. À 

4 Agis, an Argive poet, and Anaxarchus the Sophist, 
endeavoured to cure his melancholy. The latter told him, 


XXXIX.] 


and his actions inconsistent. At times, he as- 
sumed the Persian dress and ornaments; dis- 
played the pomp of Oriental: despotism ; em- 
ployed, and often preferred, the Barbarians; 
and, in several passages of his reign, this suc- 
cessful, but unhappy, conqueror appears to 
have been beset with flatterers, surrounded by 
conspirators, adored by the passive submission 
of his eastern subjects,and insulted by the li- 
centious petulance of the Greeks and Macedo- 
nians. 

The indignation or jealousy of the latter 
tinged the fairest of his actions with dark and 
odious colours. About a year before his death, 
a scene was transacted at Opis on the Tigris, 
which shows the difficulties of his situation, 
and the magnanimity by which he overcame 
them. Having assembled the Macedonian 
troops, he declared to them his pleasure, that 
such as felt themselves unable, through age or 
infirmities, to undergo the fatigues of war, 
should be honourably discharged from the ser- 
vice, and safely conducted to their respective 
provinces. This proposal, which ought to have 
been accepted with gratitude, was heard with 
disgust. The soldiers reflected, that the army 
had recently increased by an accession of thirty 
thousand Barbarians, armed and accoutred 
after the European fashion, trained to the Gre- 
cian discipline and exercises, and instructed in 
the arts and language of the victors. The king, 
they thought, no longer cared for the service of 
his veterans, and therefore dismissed them with 
contempt. The spirit of sedition seized the 
camp; the Macedoniansunanimously demanded 
their discharge; some adding with scoffs, “ That 
he had no further use for them; his father Am- 
mon could fight his battles.” At these words, 
the king sprung from the rostrum on which he 
stood, and commanded the most audacious to 
be seized by his targeteers, and conducted to 
immediate execution. This prompt severity 
appeased the rising tumult. The soldiers re- 
mained motionless and silent, doubtful or terri- 
fied. Alexander again mounted the rostrum, 
and spoke as follows: “It is not my design, 
Macedonians, to change your resolution. Re- 
turn home, without hinderance from me. But, 
before leaving the camp, first learn to know 
your king and yourselves. My father Philip 
(for with him it is ever fit to begin) found you, 
at his arrival in Macedon, miserable and hope- 
less fugitives; covered with skins of sheep; 
feeding among the mountains some wretched 
herds, which you had neither strength nor 
courage to defend against the "Thracians, Illy- 
rians, and Treballi. Having repelled the rava- 
gers of your country, he brought you from the 
mountains to the plain, and taught you to con- 
fide, not in your fastnesses, but in your valour. 
By his wisdom and discipline he trained you 
to arts and civility, enriched you with mines of 
gold, instructed you in navigation and com- 
merce, and rendered you a terror to those na- 


that Justice was described by the ancients as sealed near 
the throne of Jupiter, to indicate that right and wrong de- 
ended on the will of kings, all whose actions ought to be 
eld just by themselves and others. This flagitious servility 
Arrian spurns with indignation, and brands with infamy. 
Arrian, p. 84. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


461 


tions, at whose names you used to tremble. 
Need I mention his conquests in Upper Thrace, 
or those still more valuable in the maritime pro- 
vinces of that country? Having opened the 
gates of Greece, he chastised the Phocians, re- 
duced the Thessalians, and, while 1 shared the 
cominand, defeated and humbled the Athenians 
and Thebans, eternal foes to Macedon, to whom 
you had been successively tributaries, subjects, 
and slaves. But my father rendered you their 
masters ; and having entered the Peloponnesus, 
and regulated at discretion the affairs of that 
peninsula, he was appointed, by universal con- 
sent, general of combined Greece ; an appoint- 
ment not more honourable to himself, than glo- 
rious for his country. At my accession to the 
throne, I found a debt of five hundred talents, 
and scarce sixty in the treasury. I contracted a 
fresh debt of eight hundred; and conducting 
you from Macedon, whose boundaries seemed 
unworthy to confine you, safely crossed the 
Heilespont, though the Persians still command- 
ed the sea. By one victory we gained Ionia, 
Æolia, both Phrygias, and Lydia. By our 
courage and activity, the provinces of Cilicia 
and Syria, the strength of Palestine, the anti- 
quity of Egypt, and the renown of Persia, were 
added to your empire. Yours now are Bactria 
and Aria, the productions of India, the fertility 
of Assyria, the wealth of Susa, and the won- 
ders of Babylon. You are generals, princes, 
satraps. What have I reserved for myself, but 
this purple and diadem, which mark my pre- 
eminence in toil and danger! Where are my 
private treasures?5 Or why should I collect 
them? Are my pleasures expensive? You 
know that I fare worse than many of yourselves; 


and have in nothing spared my person. Let 
him, who dares, compare with me. Let him 
bare his breast, and I will bare mine. My 


body, the fore part of my body, is covered with 
honourable wounds from every sort of weapon. 
I often watch, that you may enjoy repose ; and, 
to testify my unremitting attention to your 
happiness, had deterinined to send home the 
aged and infirm among you, loaded with wealth 
and honour. „But since you are all desirous to 
leave me, Go! Report to your countrymen, 
that, unmindful of the signal bounty of your 
king, yon entrusted him to the vanquished Bar- 
barians. The report, doubtless, will bespeak 
your gratitude and piety.”6 
Olen Having thus spoken, he sprung 
YR. from the rostrum, and hastened to 
cxill. 4. : 
A. C. 325. the palace, accompanied only by 
his guards. During two days, none 
g . g ya 
were admitted to his presence. On the third, 
he called the Persian nobles of distinction, and 
distributed among them the principal depart- 
ments of military cominand. He then issued 
orders, that certain bodies of the Barbarian in- 
fantry and cavalry should be called the royal 
battalion, and royal cohort, and by such other 
names as commanded greatest respect. Ap- 


5 It appears from Arrian, Ihat Alexander speaks of these, 
as distinct from the military fund, and olher revenues, em 
ployed in pnying and rewarding his lroops, and in executing 
such public designs as seemed conducive to the prosperity 
of the empire. 

6 Arrian, p. 152 et seq. 


462 


prised of these innovations, the Macedonians, 
who had long remained in confusion before the 
tribunal, afraid to follow Alexander, and afraid 
to allow his retiring unattended, flocked around 
the palace, and deposited their arms at the gate, 
humbly requesting to see their king, and de- 
claring that they would never stir from the 
place, till their tears had moved his compassion. 
Alexander came forth, beheld their abasement, 
and wept. The affecting silence, marked by 
alternate emotions of repentance and reconci- 
liation, was at length broke by Callines, a man 
highly esteemed in the cavalry: * Thy Mace- 
donians, O king! are grieved that the Persians 
alone should be called thy kindred, and entitled 
as such to embrace thee, while none of them- 
selves are allowed to taste that honour.”! Al- 
exander replied, t From this moment you are 
all my kindred.” Callines then stepped for- 
ward and embraced hln; and severa? others 
having followed the example, they all took up 
their arms, and returned to the camp with 
shouts of joy, and songs. 

Of all men (if we believe the concurring tes- 
timony of his historians) Alexander was the 
most mindful of his duty to the gods. To thank 
heaven for the happy issue of this transaction, 
he celebrated a solemn sacrifice, and after the 
sacrifice, an entertainment for the principal of 
his European and Asiatic subjects. The Mace- 
donians were next to his person; the Persians 
next the Macedonians; the Grecian priests and 
Persian magi joined in common libations, in- 
voking perpetual concord, and eternal union of 
empire, to the Macedonians and Persians. Soon 
afterwards, the invalids, whose dismission had 
produced the mutiny, gladly returned home. 
Alexander discharged their arrears, allowed 
them full pay until their arrival in Macedon, 
and granted each soldier a gratuity of two hun- 
dred pounds sterling. He again shed tears at 
parting with upwards of ten thousand men, 
who had served him in so many glorious cam- 
paigns; and, as a testimony of his affectionate 
concern for their safety, appointed Craterus, 
whom he loved as his own life,? to be their con- 
ductor. 

Such was the life of this extraordinary man, 
whose genius might have changed and improved 
the state of the ancient world. But the spirit 
of improvement is transient, and demands per- 
petual efforts; the sources of degeneracy are 
permanent and innumerable. It seems at first 
sight to be regretted, that by neglecting to pro- 
vide for the succession to his throne, he left the 
field open for those bloody wars among his cap- 
tains, which long desolated the earth. Yet the 
difficulties, with which he was himself obliged 
to struggle, might teach him the impossibility 
of securing the empire for the infancy of his 
son Hercules, or the weakness of his brother 
Arideus, The principles of royal succession 
were never accurately ascertained in Macedon; 
and the camp of a conqueror could not be ex- 
pected to prove a good school of moderation or 
justice. The first measure adopted by his 


1 Arrian says, “ While none of themselves ever tasted 
that honour.” MxxeSovev oumw Tis yeypeutas TRUTHS TNS 
tiers. Arrian, p. 154. 

2 Arrian, p. 135. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


{Cuap. 


generals was, to set aside the natural claim of 
Hercules, born of the daughter of Darius, and 
to appoint Aridæus, together with the fruit of 
Roxana’s pregnancy, if she brought forth a son, 
to be joint heirs of the monarchy. This whim- 
sical destination announced little union or sta- 
bility. Perdiceas, in virtue of possessing the 
ring or seal of his deceased master, assumed the 
regency: the troops and provinces were divided 
among Antigonus, Ptolemy, Craterus, and 
other chiefs, who, having been formerly the 
equals, disdained to remain the inferiors, of 
Perdiccas. Each general trusted in his sword 
for an independent establishment; new troops 
Were raised and disciplined; leagues formed 
and broken; the children and relations of 
Alexander, who became successively prisoners 
in different hands, all perished miserably; nor 
was there any cessation of crimes and calami- 
ties,? or any permanent settlement of the pro- 
A.C. 301, Yince® until the battle of Issus in 

co <""" Phrygia confirmed Ptolemy in the 
possession of Egypt, and'Seleucus in that of 
Upper Asia.4 -The issue of the same battle 
gave Macedon and Greece to Cassander, and 
Thrace, with several provinces of Lower Asia, 
to Lysimachus. 

The great kingdoms of Syria and Egypt, 
which continued thenceforward, till subdued 
by the Romans, to be governed by the respec- 
tive families of Seleucus and Ptolemy, never 
generally® adopted the language or manners of 
their Grecian sovereigns. In Egypt, the first 
successors of Alexander accomplished the com- 
mercial improvements planned by that prince ; 
and the kings both of Egypt and of Syria af- 
fected, in their magnificent courts, to join the 
arts and elegance of Greece to the pomp and 
luxury of the East. But their ostentation was 
more remarkable than their taste; their liberal 
characters were effaced by the continual con- 
tact of servitude; they sunk into the softness 
and insignificance of hereditary despots, whose 
reigns are neither busy nor instructive; nor 
could the intrigues of women and eunuchs, or 
ministers equally effeminate, form a subject 
sufficiently interesting to succeed the memora- 
ble transactions of the Grecian republics. 

In the history of those kingdoms, the most 
important event is their conquest by the Ro- 
mans, who gradually seized all the western 
spoils of the empire of Alexander, compre- 
hended between the Euphrates and the Hadri- 


3 Diodor. Sicul. |. xix. et xx. passim. 

4 Arrian, pp. 160. et 164. 

5 Yet among the higher ranks of men, the Greek lan- 
guage continually gained ground. Before the Christian ers, 
it was spoken by Jews, Romans, and Africans. It was the 
language of the learned and polite in Egypt and Syria, as 
well as in [talv and Carthage. It mnst have been under- 
stood by all ranks of men in Judea, since the inspired wri- 
ters employed it in propagating the gospel, which was to be 
first preached 10 the Jews. For this univetsality, the Greek 
seems to have been indebted, 1. To the innumerable Greek 
colonies in Europe, Asia, and Africa. 2. Tothe conquests 
of Alexander, whose armies and garrisons were continua'ly 
reinforced from Greece. 3. To the social and agreeable 
character of the Greeks. 4. To the excellence of the lan- 
guage itself (see above, chapters v. and 6.) whose dnration 
is as wonderful as its extent. The Greek was spoken in 
the middle of the fifteenth century, when Constantinople 
was taken by the Turks; so that, from the time of Homer, 
it subsisted with little variation, as a living tongue for two 
thousand and four hundred years. 


XL.] 


~ atic sea, and successively reduced them into 
the forin of provinces, Greece, which came 
to be distinguished by the name of Achaia, im- 
parted its literature, its arts, and its vices, to 
Italy. The conquest of Macedon freed Rome 
from the weight of taxes. The acquisition of 
Syria doubled the revenues of that republic. 
The subjugation of Egypt doubled the price of 
commodities in Italy. Yet whatever might be 
the wealth’ of those nations, they are entitled 
to littie regard from posterity, since, from the 
death of Alexander, they were not distinguished 
by any invention that either improved the prac- 
tice of war, orincreased the enjoy ments of peace. 

The feeble mixture of Grecian colonization 
diffused through the East, was sufficient, in- 
deed, to tinge, but too inconsiderable to alter 
and assimilate, the vast mass of barbarism. 
But as the principle of degeneracy is often 
stronger than that of improvement, the sloth 
and servility of Asia graduaily crept into 
Greece. That unfortunate country, drained 
of its most enterprising inhabitants, who either 
followed the standard, or opposed the arms, of 
Alexander, was equally insulted by the severity 
and the indulgence of his successors, since, in 
either case, the Greeks felt and acknowledged 
their dependence. Reluctantly compelled to 
submit to a master, they lost that elevation of 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


463 


character, and that enthusiasm of valour, which 
had been produced by freedom, nourished by 
victory, and confirmed by the just sense of na- 
tional pre-eminence. Their domestic dissen- 
sions, by carrying them in great numbers into 
the service of foreign princes, thereby diffused 
the knowledge of their tactics and discipline 
through countries far more extensive and po- 
pulous than their own; and amidst all their 
personal animositics, the captains of Alexan- 
der, uniformly embracing the maxims of des- 
potism which their master magnanimously dis- 
dained, firmly and unitedly resisted aud crushed 
the rising rebellions of the Greeks, whose feeble 
and ill-conducted efforts for regaining their 
liberty, only plunged them deeper into servi- 
tude. Destitute of immediate and important 
objects to rouse their activity, the example of 
their ancestors at length ceased to animate and 
inspire them. The rewards of merit being 
withdrawn, men no longer aspired at excel- 
lence. The spirit of patriotism evaporated ; the 
fire of genius was extinguished; exertion pe- 
rished with hope; and, exclusively of the 
Achean League,? the unfortunate issue of 
which has been already explained in this work,!0 
Greece, from the age of Alexander, offers not 
any series of transactions highly memorable in 
the history of arts or arms. 


CHAPTER XL. 


State of Literature in the Age of Alexander—Poetry—Music—Arts of Design—Geography— 
Astronomy—Natural History—Works of Aristotle—Philosophical Sects established at Athens 
— Decline of Genius—Tenets of the different Sects—Peripatetic Philosophy—Estimate of that 
Philosophy—tIts Fate in the World—Coincidence in the Opinions of Zeno and Epicurus— 
The Stoic Philosophy—Estimate of that Philosophy—The Epicurean Philosophy—Character 
of Epicurus—Philosophy of Pyrrho—Conclusion. 


N the latter years of Alexander, literature, 

philosophy, and the fine arts, displayed their 
brightest charms; yet the source of that health 
and vigour, from which their beauty flowed, 
had already begun to fail. The military expe- 
ditions of that illustrious conqueror were de- 
scribed, and published after his death, in the 
authentic and intcresting narratives of Ptolemy 
and Aristobulus,'0 who had been the witnesses 


6 Notwithstanding the degencracy of the Greeks under 
the Macedonian and Roman governments, their country, 
and particularly Athens, was long regarded as the principal 
seat of aris and philosophy. But the Greck artists, as well 


as poets, orators, historians, and philosophers, of later | 


times, Were mee imitators, who fell infinitely short of the 
merit and fame of the great originals. The works of Phi- 
dias and Apelles, of Sophocles, Demosthenes, Plato, &c. 
not those of the Greeks their own contemporaries, were the 
objects of admiration to Cicero and Seneca, to the writers 
of the Augustan age, to Pliny, Tacitus, &c. But of this 
more in the next chapter. 

7 Of which see an account extracted from the public re- 
giaters, in Appian. Alexand. in Proem. 

8 The judicious Polybing treats the Achwan league, and 
other collateral transactions of the Greeks and Macedo- 
nians, as episodes in his invaluable history of the progress 
and aggrandisement of the Roman republic. 

9 See p. 137. 

10 Artian in Proem. 

r 


and companions of his victories. But his ex- 
traordinary exploits, and unexampled success, 
which far eclipsed the imaginary renown of the 
fabled heroes of antiquity, produzed, even in 
his life-time, a crowd of writers, whose credu- 
lity, and love of the marvellous, could only be 
exceeded by their mean adulation, and servile 
superstition.!! Exaggeration in matters of fact 
produced that swelling amplification of style, 
those merctricious ornaments, and affected 
graces, which characterized the puerile and 
frigid compositions of Callisthenes, Onesicritus, 
and Hegesias.'2 The false taste of these pre- 
tended historians, to whose perverse industry 
must be ascribed the ridiculous trappings which 
have too long disfigured the august form of Al- 
exander, was admired and imitated by many 
of their contemporarics. The contagion in- 
fected even the orators; and it is worthy of 
observation, that the verbose emptiness and 
bombast of the Asiatic eloquence, was first in- 
troduced into Greccc, in the age which had 
applauded the chaste and nervous compositions 


11 Lucian de Scribend. Histor. 
12 Strabo, l. xix. p. 446. 


464 
of Lycurgus, Hyperides, A’schines, and De- 


mosthenes.! So true it is, that in every coun- 
try where the human genius has attained its 
highest point of perfection, a principle of de- 
generacy naturally carries things in a contrary 
direction; because those who are incapable of 
excellence, still covet distinction, and despair- 
ing to equal their predecessors in the beauties 
of truth and nature, have recourse to false con- 
ceits and artificial refinements. 

Under the Macedonian government, Greece 
produced not any original genius in the serious 
kinds of poetry. The tragedies of Sophocles 
and Euripides still kept possession of the thea- 
tre. But no lyric, no epic poet appeared, capa- 
ble to adorn the exploits of Alexander, though 
that prince, intoxicated with the love of fame, 
munificently rewarded the ignoble flattery of 
Agis, Cleon, Cherilus, and other contemptible 
encomiasts; who corrupted his heart, without 
vitiating his judgment, since he declared, that 
he would rather be the Thersites of Homer, 
than the Achilles of Cherilus.2 Yet in the 


same age Philemon, Antiphanes,? Lycon,*. 


above all, the Athenian Menander, carried co- 
medy to the highest perfection which it ever 
attained in any nation of antiquity. During 
the republican form of government, the insti- 
tutions and character of the Greeks were ex- 
tremely unfavourable to this species of writing. 
The licentious turbulence of democracy gene- 
rally converted their attempts at wit and hu- 
mour into petulance and buffoonery. The 
change of government and manners, requiring 
due respect to the rules of propriety and the 
dictates of caution, improved their discern- 
ment, and gradually made them sensible to that 
refined ridicule, where more is meant than said, 
and to those more interesting, because juster, 
delineations of character, which distinguished 
the comic strains of Philemon and Menander.$ 

Alexander, during his early youth, took de- 
light in dramatic entertainments. Thessalus 
was his favourite actor, but Athenadorus was 
more approved by the public. To Athenadorus, 
the magistrates, who, according to the Grecian 
custom, were appointed to decide the preten- 
` sions of rival candidates for theatrical fame, 
adjudged the prize of merit. The young hero 
declared, that this decision gave him more pain 
than he would have felt at the loss of his in- 
heritance.6 The musicians Timotheus’ and 
Antigenides® still displayed the wonderful ef- 
fects of their art; but as the severity of edu- 
cation and manners continually relaxed in all 
parts of Greece, we find that music, originally 
destined to purify and exalt the mind, was in 
latter times universally employed to seduce 
and inflame the passions.? 

The arts of design, painting, sculpture, and 
architecture, appeared in their highest lustre in 


1 Dionys. Halicarn. de Structura Oration. Longinus 
de Sublim. Cicero de Orator. et de Clar. Orator. passim. 

2 Acro. ad Horat. Art. Poet. v. 357. Curtius, l. viii. c. v. 

3 Athenzus, l. xiii. p. 555. 

4 Plut. Orat. ii. de Fortun. Alexand. 

5 Vid. Plut. Comp. Aristoph. et Menand. 

6 Plut. Orat. ii. de Fortun. Alexand. 

7 Hephæst. de Metr. 

8 Plut. Orat. de Fortun. Alexand. 

9 Aristot. Politic. l. viii. c. vi. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 
the age of Philip and Alexander, both which 


princes had no less taste to judge,!0 than muni- 
ficence to reward them. The eastern expedi- 
tion of the latter introduced, or at least greatly 
multiplied, in Greece, those precious and dura- 
ble gems, which thenceforth exhibited some of 
the finest specimens of Grecian ingenuity. 
The skill and taste of Pyrgoteles were distin- 
guished in this valuable, though minute art.!! 
He enjoyed the exclusive honour of represent- 
ing the figure of Alexander on gems, as did 
Lysippus of casting it in bronze, and Apelles 
of painting it in colours.!? Lysippus was justly 
admired for bringing back the art to a closer 
study, and nearer imitation, of nature, without 
yielding to his predecessors in ideal beauty.!3 
We have already mentioned his twenty-one 
equestrian statues of the Macedonian guards, 
slain in the battle of the Granicus. He is said 
to have made six hundred and ten figures in 
bronze ;!4 a number which, if not greatly ex- 
aggerated, would prove his facility of working 
to have far surpassed that of all statuaries, an- 
cient or modern. The numerous list of paint- 
ers, contemporary with Apelles, indicates an 
extraordinary demand for their art; since no 
profession, that is not gainful, will ever be very 
generally followed.'5 The most celebrated of 
these artists were Amphion and Asclepiodorus,!6 
whom Apelles acknowledged as his superiors 
in some parts of composition; Aristides the 
Theban, who was inimitable in expression ;!7 
and Protogenes of Rhodes, whom Aristotle ex- 
horted to paint the immortal exploits of Alex- 
ander.'8 The inferior branches of the art, if 
not first cultivated in that age, were then car- 
ried to perfection. Pyreicus!9 confined him- 
self to subjects of low life, and Antiphilus?0 to 
caricatures, which the Greeks called Grylli. 
The theory and practice of painting was ex- 
plained in many works, the loss of which is 
much to be regretted:?! 

Amidst the great multitude of artists, and 
writers on art, all acknowledged the pre-emi- 
nence of Apelles, whose works were innumera- 
ble, and each sufficient to establish his fame. 22 
His picture of Alexander, grasping a thunder- 
bolt, was sold to the temple of Ephesian Diana 
for four thousand pounds. His Venus Ana- 
dyomené was damaged by accident; none would 
venture to restore the parts that had been effac- 
ed: so that the injury of the picture contributed 
to the glory of the artist. The model of this 
Venus was the beautiful Campaspé, the favour- 
ite mistress of Alexander. The sensibility of - 
Apelles was too deeply penetrated with the 


‘charms which he so successfully expressed. 


i subtile videndis, artibus. Her. Ep. 1l. ii. Ep. 
i. v. 242. 

11 Plin. l. vii. e. xxxvii. et Plutarch. in Alexand. 

12 Vid. Plin. edit. Berolin. i. 221. iii. 217—228. 

13 Plin. iii. 194, et seq. 

14 The Sieur Falconet, who made the famous statue of 
Peter the Great, thinks the thing impossible, and gives a 
different meaning to the words of Pliny. See his observa- 
tions on the passage, in his translation of the books of 
Pliny relative tothe arts. Vol. ii. Lausanne. 

15 Plin. iji. 222. 16 Idem, iii. 226. 

17 ldem, iii. 215—225. 

18 He exhorted him to paint them “ propter eternitatem 


rerum.” Plin. ibid. 
20 Idem, iii. 229. 


19 Plin. iii. 236. 
21 Idem, ibid. 22 Plin. iii. 222, et seq. 


.] 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


465 


Alexander was no sooner acquainted with his | thirty-four years beyond the Christian æra. By 
passion, than, in the language of Pliny, he| order of Alexander, they were faithfully tran- 
made him a present, not only of Campaspé, but | scribed, and transmitted to Aristotle,29 who 
of his own affection, too little respecting the | was probably prevented by his infirm state of 


feelings of the beloved object, at her degradation 
from being the mistress of a king, to become the 
possession of a painter. Yet this celebrated 
artist, who enjoyed other striking proofs of his 
master’s partiality and friendship, lived on good 
terms with his brethren. With the frankness 
of his age and nation, he assumed the merit 
which belonged to him, and freely asserted, that 
none of his competitors could imitate the grace- 
fulness?3 of his attitudes and figures. But in 
some other branches of the art, he acknowledg- 
ed himself inferior to several of his contempo- 
raries. The desire of seeing the works of Pro- 
togenes carried him to Rhodes. He there found 
a rival not altogether unworthy to alarm his 
jealousy. But instead of yielding to the dic- 
tates of this unworthy passion, he drew Proto- 
genes from obscurity ; raised the price of his 
pictures; and taught the Rhodians, who under- 
_valued the same talents in their fellow citizen, 
which they admired in a stranger, to acknow- 
ledge and respect his merit.?4 
Soon after the death of Alexander, painting 
and the kindred arts ceased.25 By this expres- 
sion, Pliny nieans not, that they ceased to be 
cultivated, but to make farther progress ; since 
neither the scholars of Apelles and Lysippus, 
nor those who came after them, were capable to 
reach the glory of their predecessors. The 
Greek kings of Egypt and Syria seem to have 
bent their attention rather to literature, than to 
the arts. But, in both, the schools of Alexandria 
and Seleucia never aspired beyond the humble 
merit of imperfectly imitating those of Greece. 
In proportion to its neighbourhood to that coun- 
try, the arts took firmer root in Alexandria 
than in Seleucia; and, from the same circum- 
stance, they seem to have flourished longer and 
more abundantly in the little principalities of 
Pergamus and Bithynia, than in the wealthy 
kingdoms of Syria and Egypt.?6 
The expedition of Alexander contributed to 
the improvement of the sciences, both natural 
and moral. His marches were carefully mea- 
sured by Diognetes and Beton. Other geome- 
ters’? were employed to survey the more re- 
mote parts of the countries which he traversed; 
and the exact description of his conquests, 
which, from these and other materials, he took 
care to have compiled by men of approved in- 
tegrity and abilities, gave a new form to the 
science of geography.8 
After the conquest of Babylon, Alexander 
eagerly demanded the astronomical observa- 
tions, which had been carefully preserved in 
that ancient capital above nineteen centuries. 
They remounted twenty-two hundred and 


23 * De esse iis "nam Venerem dicebat quam Greci charita 
vocant; cetera omnia contigisse ; sed hac sola sibi neminem 

rem.” Plin. iii. 222, et seq. 

24 Plin. ibid. 

25 '* Ceseavit deinde ars.” Plin. ibid. 

26 Winkelmann, Geschichte der Kunat des Alterthums, 

-TIF et seq. 

27 Strabo, |. ii p. 47. 

28 Cassini sur l’Origine de l’Astronomie, &c. Academ. 
des Sciences, t. viii. p. 13. 


3N 


| health from accompanying his pupil to the 

| East; or who, perhaps, voluntarily preferred a 
philosophical retirement in Athens, to the glory 
of attending the conqueror of the world. 

Nor was this the only present to his preceptor, 
by which Alexander displayed at once his grati- 
tude and love of science. Natural history was 
peculiarly indebted to his curiosity and munifi- 
cence. At the expense of near two hundred 
thousand pounds, an expense equivalent to å far 
larger sum in the present age, he collected many 
rare productions of nature in different countries 
of Asia, and particularly that amazing variety 
of animals,30 which Aristotle has described 
with such inimitable precision?! in his work on 
that subject. 

But whatever obligations natural knowledge 
owed to Alexander, it would seem that the mo- 


ral sciences were not less benefited by his dis- 
coveries and conquests,?2 The study of human 
nature must have been greatly enlarged by such 
a wide survey of manners, institutions, and 
usages; nor was this advantage, perhaps, con- 
fined to those who performed the expedition, 
whose works have unfortunately perished ; since 
the moral and political treatises of Aristotle 
discover not only more method in his reason- 
ings, but a more copious fund of facts on which 
to reason, than the writings of all his predeces- 
sors together, not excepting those of the tra- 
vellers, Xenophon and Plato. 

The greatest part of the works of Aristotle 
were doubtless composed before the Macedonian 
conquest ; yet it is not improbable that this ex- 
traordinary man, whose industry was equal to 
his genius, continually retouched and improved 
them; and it cannot be imagined that the rich 
harvest of facts and observations collected by his 
learned friends who accompanied Alexander, 
would be overlooked by a philosopher, who 
seems not only ainbitious to eclipse his predeces- 
sors and contemporaries, but solicitous to leave 
no gleanings of fame to be acquired by his 
scholars and successors. 

« Aristotle,” says Lord Bacon,?3 “thought, 
like the Ottoman princes, that he could not 
reign secure, unless he destroyed al] his bre- 
thren ;” nor was his literary ambition more ex- 
clusive than exorbitant. He aspired to embrace 
the whole circle of the arts and sciences, and 
professed to explain whatever can be known 
concerning the moral, as well as the material, 
world. Not satisfied with extending his em- 
pire to the utmost verge of intellect, he boldly 
attempts questions beyond all human know- 
ledge, with the same confidence that his pupil 


29 Porphyr. apud Simplicium, in Aristot de Calo, 1. ii. 

30 Plin. l. viii. c. xvi. 

31 See the admirable criticism on Aristotle's History of 
Animals, by Buffon, vol. i. 

32 The arts and sciences not only flourished in Alexan- 
der’s time; they flanrished, soys Plutarch, dix ArsZxvdeov. 
“ He was the efficient cause of this effect.” The passage 
which follows, Kzevwyv mev ye eveogsxn, &e. should he 
studied by all princes who aspire to glory; a glory greater 
than power can give; more extensive and more permanent 
than conquest can confer. 

33 De Augm. Scientiarum, I. iii. €. iv. 


466 


entered on a battle. But having to contend 
with enemies more stubborn than the Persians, 
his rashness was less successful than that of 
Alexander. 

He divided philosophy into contemplative 
and practical. The contemplative or abstract 
philosophy, to which he first gave the name of 
metaphysics,! is obscure throughout, often un- 
intelligible, still more chimerical, but far less 
agreeable, than that of his master Plato. It 
comprehended not only the examination of those 
abstract ideas, existence, substance, quality, ge- 
nus, species, &c. which were so long and so 
uselessly tortured by the perverse industry of 
the schoolmen, but the general doctrines con- 
cerning mind or spirit, particularly the mind of 
the Deity. The human soul is treated in a 
separate work; in which it must be acknow- 
ledged, that Aristotle has made new names, 


rather than new discoveries ; and the doctrine | 


of the immortality is no where so fully eluci- 
dated by this philosopher, as it had been by 
Plato. 

The natural philosophy of Aristotle deserves 
the name of metaphysic, in the modern sense 
of that word, since he explained the laws of the 
universe, by comparing abstract ideas, not by 
observation and experience. When he descends 
to particulars, he betrays more ignorance con- 
cerning the motions and magnitudes of the 
heavenly bodies, than many of his predecessors. 
With the anatomy of man and other animals, 
he was well acquainted, considering the gross 
errors which generally prevailed in the age in 
which he lived. Chemistry was not yet invent- 
ed. Since the introduction of the ideal philo- 
sophy, men had ceased to observe nature; it 
could not therefore be expected that they should 
imitate her operations, and examine her by the 
test of experiment. In mathematics, Aristotle 
appears to have been less versed than his pre- 
decessors, Pythagoras and Plato; although, in 
the invention of the art of syllogism, he dis- 
plays a perseverance of mental energy, which, 
had it been directed to the mathematical 
sciences, might have produced the greatest 
discoveries, 

The scepticism of his contemporary Pyrrho, 
and still more the captious sophistry of the 
Eristics, might naturally engage Aristotle to 
examine with more attention than his prede- 
cessors, the nature of truth, and the means of 
defending it against the attacks of declamation 
and the snares of subtlety. He undertook, 
therefore, the arduous task, of resolving all rea- 


1 By some writers it is supposed, that this title was be- 
stowed on the fourteen hooks of Aristotle, immediately fol- 
lowing his Physics, by Andronicus of Rhodes, a Peripatetic 
philosopher in the age of Augustus, who published the first 
complete edition of Aristotle's works. From that time, the 
various subjects treated in these fourteen books were con- 
ceived as constituting one branch of science. Aristotle had 
divided philosophy into speculative and practical. The first 
comprehended metaphysics, which examined the general 
properties of being, and the essence of things separate from 
matter; physics, which examined the nature of material 
substances, and the human soul; and mathematics, which 
examined certain properties of body, abstracted from body. 
The practical philosophy of Aristotle, which was intended 
to regulate the intellectual and moral operations of men, 
comprehended logic, under which he seems to have included 
rhetoric and criticism; aud morals, including economies 
and politics. See Strabo, p. 609; and Bayle’s Dictionary, 
article Tyrannion. i 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


soning into its primary elements, and of de- 
ducing from thence the rules by which every 
conclusion must be connected with his pre- 
mises, in order to render it legitimate. his 
bold design he accomplished ; having erected, 
on a single axiom, a larger system of abstract 
truths, all fortified by demonstration, than were 
ever invented and perfected by any other man. 
The axiom from which he sets out, and in 
which the whole terminates, is, that whatever 
is predicated of a genus, may be predicated of 
every species and individual contained under 
it. But the application of this axiom is for 
the most part sufficiently obvious, without the 
rules of Aristotle ; whose logic, how successful 
soever it might prove against the subtleties of 
the Sophists and Eristics, contibutes little to 
the formation of the understanding, and no- 
thing to the judicious observation of man or 
nature, on which all useful discoveries must be 
founded. 

From the general wreck of literature, in 
which many of Aristotle’s writings perished,? 
had nothing been saved but the works above 
mentioned, it must be confessed that the pre- 
ceptor of Alexander would not greatly merit 
the attention of posterity. In his abstract or 
metaphysical philosophy, we can only lament 
vast efforts mispent, and great genius misap- 
plied. But, in his critical and moral, and above 
all, in his political works, we find the same 
penetrating and comprchensive mind, the same 
subtlety of reasoning, and vigour of intellect, 
directed to objects of great importance and ex- 
tensive utility. The condition of the times in 
which he lived, and the opportunities peculiar 
to himself, conspired with the gifts of nature, 
and the habits of industry, to raise him to that 
eminence, which was acknowledged by his con- 
temporaries, and admired by posterity. 

He was born in the first year of 
a the ninety-ninth Olympiad, at Sta- 
gira, a provincial city of Macedon, and educat- 
ed at the court of Pella, where his father was 
king’s physician. In his early youth, he was 
sent to Athens, and remained there twenty 
years an assiduous scholar of Plato, in a city. 
where literature and the fine arts were culti- 
vated with unexampled success, and where the 
philosophic spirit, though often improperly di- 
rected, flourished in the utmost vigour. Se- 
lected by the discernment of Philip, to guide 
and confirm the promising dispositions of his 
admired son, he returned to his native country, 
and continued eight years at the Macedonian 
court. Whatever benefit accrued to Alexander 
from the instructions of Aristotle, it is certain 
that the latter derived great advantages from 
the gratitude of his royal pupil. Of this, seve- 
ral proofs have already occurred ; and perhaps 
it may be ascribed to the munificence of Alex- 
ander, that his preceptor was enabled to form a 
library, a work of prodigious expense in that 
age, and in which he could only be rivalled by 
the Egyptian and Pergamenian kings. But the 


| library of Aristotle was collected for use, not 


merely for ostentation.4 


a eee 
2 See the fate of his works carefully related in Bayle’s 
Dictionary, article Tyrannion. 
3 Strabo. 
4 The Egyptian and Pergamenian kings were lovers 


XL.] 


The last fourteen years of his life he spent 
mostly at Athens, surrounded with every as- 
sistance which men® and books could afford 
him, for prosecuting his philosophical inquiries. 
The glory of Alexander’s name, which then 
filled the world, ensured tranquillity and respect 
‘to the man whom he distinguished as his friend; 
but after the premature death of that illustrious 
protector, the invidious jealousy of priests and 
sophists inflamed the malignant and supersti- 
tious fury of the Athenian populace; and the 
same odious passions which proved fatal to the 
offensive® virtue of Socrates, fiercely assailed 
the fame and merit of Aristotle. To avoid the 
cruelty of persecution, he secretly withdrew 
himself to Chalcis, in Eubea. This measure 
was sufficiently justified by a pru- 


Mee dent regard to his personal safety ; 
A. C. 322, butlest his conduct should appear 
Ætat. 63 * unmanly, when contrasted with the 


firmness of Socrates in a similar 
situation, he condescended to apologise for his 
flight, by saying, that he was unwilling to af- 
ford the Athenians a second opportunity “ to 
sin against philosophy.”” He seems to have 
survived his retreat from Athens only a few 
months; vexation and regret probably shorten- 
ed his days.8 

Notwithstanding the occasional persecutions 
of speculative men, philosophy had fixed its 
roots too deeply in Athens, to be extirpated by 
the temporary frenzy of a capricious populace. 
Theophrastus calmly succeeded Aristotle in 
the Peripaton, or walk of the Lyceum, from 
which place their followers retained the name 
of Peripatetics.29 At the same time, 
Zeno taught virtue in the Stota, or 
Portico, from which his disciples 
derived the appellation of Stoics.!0 Epicurus 
explained pleasure in those well-known gar- 
dens, which were distinguished by his name.!! 
The followers of Diogenes, the Cynic, still as- 
sembled in the Cynosarges;!2 Speusippus and 
Xenocrates succeeded Plato in the Academy ;!3 
and even Pyrrlio, the Elian, the founder of the 
sceptical sect, who had accompanied Alexan- 
der in his eastern expedition, and shared the 
munificence of that prince,!4 became, after the 
death of his benefactor, a citizen of Athens.!5 
Thus did that illustrious city, after the extinc- 
tion of its freedom, and of its military glory, 
still maintain it pre-eminence in literature, phi- 
losophy, and the fine arts. In the age of Alex- 


Olymp. 


CXX. 


rather of books tban of learning. They considered a great 

library as contributing to the superfluous magnificence of 

ee Vid. Galen. Comment. 2. in Hippocrat. de Natur. 
om. 

5 Aristotle probably had many assistants in his philoso- 
phical inquiries and compositions. O Ss comes, nas xx 
weUTOV wv, duvatxt Jswesiv' Berriov 5’ sows Suvegyous exwv. 
Ethic. Nicom. l. x. c. vii. 

6 Virtutem incolumen odimus 

Sublatam ex oculis querimus invidi. Horace. 

7 Auxeraverv meet Tyv Qiaoropizv, ADlian, |. iii. c. vi. 

8 Laert. l. v. in Aristot. et Auctor. citat. apud Brucker. 
Histor. Philosoph. vol. i. p. 787, ct seq. 

§ The common opinion, that the followers of Aristotle 
were called peripatetics, ex rou msoiraærsiv, ‘tex deambnia- 
tione,” adopted by Cicero and others, is refuted by the au- 
thors cited by Brucker, v. i. p. 787. 

10 Laert. vii. 5. U 

11 Cicero ad Attic, l. ii. epist. 24. 12 Idem, ibid. 

13 Suidas in Speusipp. Laert. |. iv. c. 1, et seq. 

14 Sextus Empiric. Pyrrhon. Hypotyp. I. i. ¢. iii. 

15 Leart. in Pyrrhon. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


464 


ander, Athens, as the seat of learning, assumed 
that precise form, which it exactly preserved 
seven centuries, till the destructive invasion of 
Greece by Alaric, and the Goths.'6 For it is 
A. D. 396. pace of observation, that the phi- 

osophers, who, during this long in- 
terval, perpetuated the several sects, submis- 
sively followed the opinions of their respective 
masters. Soon after the age of Alexander, 
genius disappeared; literature and the arts alike 
degenerated ; no new sect arose; few innova- 
tions, and those unsuccessful, were attempted ; 
and thus the period, which has been assigned 
for the termination of the present work, seems 
to have bounded the progress of the human 
mind; whether, according to the observation 
of Longinus, bevause liberty is the best nurse 
of genius, and singularly adapted, by cherish- 
ing the emulation and the hopes, to excite the 
energies, of those born to true excellence ;!7 or 
because, in the words of a great philosopher, 
“there is a pitch of exaltation, as well as of 
depression, to which when any nation has at- 
tained, its affairs necessarily return in an oppo- 
site direction.” 

Instead of examining this speculative ques- 
tion, which the world is perhaps still too young 
to enable us with accuracy to determine, it will 
better suit the design of an historical work, to 
explain the tenets of the different schools of 
philosophy, then first established~in Athens ; 

Tiefly to relate their various success in the 
world; and to inquire, with becoming modesty, 
how far those artificial systems of happiness 
correspond with the natural dictates of unper- 
verted sentiment, and impartial reason. 

Aristotle, the founder of the Peripatetic 
school, recognised, like Socrates and Plato, the 
dignity of human nature, and placed the chief 
happiness of man, not in the agreeableness of 
his passive sensations, but in the proper exer- 
cise'8 of his intellectual and moral powers. 
According to Aristotle, the habit of this exer- 
cise, directed by right reason, constituted the 
highest excellence of man, in the same manner 
as the excellence of other animals, and even of 
tle vegetable and mineral kingdoms, resulted 
from the perfection of those qualities, by which 
they -are respectively distinguished. Yet, as 
man is a compound being, consisting of mind 
and matter, it seemed evident that his well-be- 
ing must in some measure depend on the con- 
dition of his body, and on the means necessary 
to maintain this inferior part of his nature in 
its most perfect state. The absence of disease 
and infirmity, and the proper constitution of all 
our bodily organs, are things desirable not only 
on their own account, but as furnishing us with 
the opportunity and the means to exert those 
mental energies, from which our principal feli- 
city results. In the same manner, the goods 
of fortune, wealth, friends, and other external 


16 Sce Gibbon’s History of the Roman Empire, v. iii. c. 
XXX, 

17 Long. de Sublim. sect. 44. 

18 The Stoics adopted, on this occasion, both the senti- 
ments and the langnage of Aristotle. ʻO wsv @trodofog are 
Aoreizv svegyeiæv sdtov æy xov UrOAmeSxVEL® ODE GIAHOO~ 
vog ræv reiriv* ode vouv exw, edexv mexziv, M. Anton, 
vi. 5l. ‘The vain-glorions man places his own happinoss 
in the action of others: the voluptnous man, in his passive 
sensations; the wise man, in his own active exertions.” 


468 


advantages, are desirable not only as contri- 
buting to the supply of our bodily wants, but 
as the instruments through which a wise man 
is enabled to exercise his virtues, and accom- 
plish his purposes. Amidst great calamities,! 
Aristotle required not that perfect self-com- 
mand to which some philosophers pretended. 
He allowed a moderate degree of perturbation, 
as suitable to the weakness of human nature. 
In the present constitution of things, he thought 
a certain sensibility of passion not only excusa- 
ble, but necessary; since resentment enabled us 
to repel injuries,? and grief for past misfortunes 
made us vigilant to prevent the evils that might 
otherwise overtake us. But although this great 
philosopher acknowledged the influence of for- 
tune in human affairs, and thought it impossible 
for the firmest of men to remain unmoved 
amidst the miseries of Priam;? he maintained, 
however, that we ourselves were the principal 
architects of our own happiness. The attain- 
ment of this great object depended far more on 
our own thoughts and reflections, which were 
ever and intimately present with us, and on the 
constitution of our own minds, which were in 
some measure subject to our own direction and 
control, than on our external situation and 
circumstances, which only affected us by acci- 
dent, and over which we commonly enjoyed 
but little power, and sometimes none. The per- 
fection of our virtue, which was entirely our 
own work, shone forth with peculiar lustre 
amidst the gloom of unmerited calamity. When 
we bore it with becoming patience, we rejoiced 
in our own fortitude; and this inward pleasure 
always alleviated the smart of external wounds. 
Assaulted by the most terrible afflictions, a wise 
man would not deserve indeed the epithet of 
happy ; yet neither could he be called miserable, 
since he would still disdain to commit any thing 
odious or base. Philosophy, which professes to 
teach us the art of enjoying life, must therefore 
disregard such circumstances as we can neither 
govern nor change, and confine itself to that 
part which we can regulate and control. It 
must withdraw our attention from external 
objects, and fix it on ourselves.‘ 

To know himself, man must know the pow- 
ers with which he is endowed. Of those, we 
possess some in common with other animals, 
and others in common even with the inanimate 
parts of nature. In none of these, it is evident, 
can the proper employment of man consist, but 
rather in such faculties, as, being peculiar to 
himself, distinguish and ennoble humanity. 


1 Oure yxe ex tas Evdxspovins xivninoerat pxdias, OUTE 
UTO Tov TUYOVTwWY ATUAHUST wy, “LA? vro MEY tAwY Kx 
ToAAwy. Ethic. Nicom. l. i. c. x. 

2 To bear insults tamely, was regarded as highly un- 
graceful, and becoming only the character of a slave. T2d¢ 
WOITHARKILOMEVOY aVEXETIAA zvdoxmedwdes, Ethic. Nicom. 
iv. 2. 

3 Ev ruzzic¢ Weszusxxis, Aristot. Ethic. Nicom. p. 40. 

4 In explaining the Aristotelian philosophy, the learned 
reader will perceive that I have endeavoured to translate, 
as literally as possible, the energetic expressions of its au- 
thor. The outline has been traced with equal perspicuity 
and elegance by Dr. Adam Smith, in his Account of the 
Svstems of Ancient Philusophy, annexed to his admired 
Theory of Moral Sentiments. The design of my work 
obliges me to treat the subject more particularly. 

5 The ro ascdnrsxoy, the powers of sensation, &c. 

6 The ro Sgsrrixov, &e. the powers of nutrition, &c. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


These characteristic excellencies of our species 
all refer, either to the understanding, or to the 
will;7 the first possesses reason essentially in 
itself, the second is capable of being combined 
and assimilated with this divine principle. 
From the two powers of the understanding and 
the will are respectively derived two classes of 
virtues, the intellectual and the moral. Saga- 
city, penetration, intelligence, wisdom, are vir- 
tues of the understanding; gentleness, temper- 
ance, fortitude, justice, are virtues of the heart. 
The former class consists in the proper disposi- 
tion and habits of the intellectual part of the 
soul; the latter, in the proper disposition and 
habit of the desires and affections, which being 
formed subordinate to reason, and capable of 
listening to its dictates, then only perform their 
duty, when, like, obedient subjects, they cheer- 
fully observe the commands of their sovereign. 
The intellectual virtues depend chiefly on edu- 
cation and exercise; the moral proceed entirely 
from habit, from which they derive their 
name? It is by practising justice, that we 
become just; by practising temperance, that 
we become temperate; by practising courage, 
that we become courageous. Hence the won- 
derful power of legislation, and early institu- 


7 I have ventured to use this word to express the ro 
cesxtsxov of Aristotle, the seat of appetites, affections, and 
passions. ` 

8 Erzivovusy de xxi Tov rogov xaTa tTHy EFive Twy Ebewy 
Ôe r2g semziveraç, zgstzę Atyouev. Ethic. Nicom. l. i. 
c. ult. 

9 Hisxos, £5063 moralis, mos. The same holds not in 
English. The words zee7 in Greek, and virtus in Latin, 
are of very general import, denoting any praiseworthy dis- 
position, habit, or quality, of body or mind, intellectual or 
moral. The indeterminate use of these words has occa- 
sioned a strange confusion. The late ingenious Mr. Hume, 
in bis Inquiry into the Principles of Morals, which in other 
respects, he justly considers as the most valuable of his 
writings, enters into a large deduction, to prove that all vir- 
tues are praised and recommended as useful or agreeahle. 
These qualities constitute, according to him, the proper de- 
finition, the very essence of virtue ; and all other distinctions 
are frivolous. To justify this paradox, he alleges the au- 
thority of Greek poets and philosophers, who apply the 
term virtue to bodily strength or address, to memory, judg- 
ment, sagacity, &c. as well as to justice, humanity, charity. 
This indeed is true; but the Greeks distinguished between 
the virtues of the body, and those of the mind; and the 
mental virtues they divided into the intellectual and moral. 
Aristotle characterises moral virtue as a voluntary habit, 
and says, that moral approbation is excited only by the 
praiseworthy habit of such affections and actions as origi- 
nate in ourselves, and depend on no extrinsic cause. See 
Aristot. Magn. Moral. l. i. c. xv. and his commentator An- 
dronicus Rhodius, p. 89. and the Ethics to Nicomachus, 
throughout. Mr. Hume, therefore, is justly reproved by 
Dr. Beattie, for saying, “that the ancient moralists made 
no material distinction among the different species of mental 
endowments and defects.” See Hume's Inquiry, vol. ii. p. 
387. But although the ancients, and Aristotle in particular, 
make very materia] distinctions between moral and intel- 
lectual virtues, yet, in his zeal for the good cause, Dr. 
Beattie appears to me to go too far in asserting, ‘that 
though they considered both the moral and intellectual vir- 
tues as necessary to the formation of a perfect character, 
and sometimes discoursed of both in the same treatise or 
svstem, vet thev deemed the latter naluahble only as means 
to qualify us for the former, and insignificant, or even 
odious, when thy failed to answer this end.’ See Essay 
on Truth, p. 425. First of all, according to the Greek 
moralists, it is impossible ever to treat of the moral virtues 
as distinct from the intellectual, since the former could not 
exist without a mixture of reason or intellect. Ethic. Ni- 
com. passim; and particularly, l. iii. c. ii. Secondly, The 
intellectnal virtues were so far from being esteemed only as 
means to qualify us for the moral, that Arsitotle considers 
the exercise of the former totally independent of the latter, 
as constituting our highest perfection and happiness. Ethic. 
Nicom. I. x. c. vii. 


XL] 


tion, by which the Cretans, the Spartans, and 
some other nations, were honourably distin- 
guished among the rest of mankind; and by 
which such states as shall wisely imitate their 
example, may still reach the same elevation of 
character, and still acquire the same renown: 
“For it is not a matter of little moment, how 
we are accustomed in youtli ; much depends on 
that, or rather all.” 

The moral virtues, it is evident, are not im- 
planted by nature; for that which is established 
by nature, cannot be essentially changed by 
custom. Heavy bodies, which, by the law of 
nature, descend, cannot be habituated to mount 
upwards; nor can fire, which naturally ascends, 
be taught by habit to move in a contrary direc- 
tion. The same holds concerning all the other 
laws by which nature governs her works. Our 
senses, and other natural gifts, have the power 
of performing their several functions, before 
they exert it; and they retain this power, al- 
though we should allow them to remain inac- 
tive. But virtue, like all practical arts, can be 
acquired and preserved by practice only. It is 
neither natural, nor contrary to nature. We 
are born capable to attain it, but the invaluable 
attainment must be made and perfected by ha- 
bit. Yet the greater part of those who aspire 
to this inestimable prize, have recourse to vain 
speculations, flattering themselves that this is 
philosophy. Their conduct resembles that of 
a patient, who should carefully listen to his 
physician, but do nothing which he prescribed. 
By such medicine it is not possible to cure the 
disorders of the body, nor by such philosophy, 
those of the mind. 

Virtue, as a matter of practice, cannot be re- 
duced to metaphysical precision. It is to be 
observed, however, that all the virtues depend 
on the propriety of the affections from which 
they arise; and that this propriety consists in 
a certain point or centre, from which the devia- 
tions may be innumerable. The vices, there- 
fore, many of which are without names, are far 
more numerous than the virtues. In general, 
virtue may be conceived to lie in a mean be- 
twixt the extremes of too much and too little ; 
and this health of the mind resembles bodily 
health and strength, which are destroyed by ex- 
cess or defect of nourishment and exercise. 
Thus, to fear every thing is cowardly; to fear 
nothing is audacious; courage requires that we 
should fear only such objects as are truly for- 
midable, and only in that degree in which they 
ought to be feared. In the same manner, he 
who is too much affected by objects of pleasure, 
and seizes every opportunity to enjoy them, is 
called intemperate ; he who is too little affected 
by such objects, and refuses every opportunity 
to enjoy them, may be called insensible. Tem- 
perance teaches us to pursue only such plea- 
sures as we ought, at proper times, in proper 
places, and on proper occasions. According to 
the same view of things, generosity lies in the 
middle between avarice and profusion; mo- 
desty, between pride and diffidence; mildness, 
between irascibility and softness; magnificence, 
between ostentation and parsimony; popularity, 
between forbidding disdain and officious adula- 
tion; in a word, every virtue consists in a 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


469 


mean, equally remote from two vicious ex- 
tremes.1!¢ 

Considered as the quality of an action, virtue 
consists in the propriety of that affection from 
which the action proceeds; when the affection 
is neither too strong nor too weak, but has pre- 
cisely that degree of strength, which right rea- 
son teaches us to approve. As the quality of 
an action, virtue consists, therefore, in medio- 
crity ; but as the quality of 4 person, it consists 
in the habit of this mediocrity, since, in Judging 
persons and characters, we regard not particular 
acts and feelings, but such actsand feelingsas are 
frequent and habitual. We may perform many 
virtuous actions, without being virtuous men. 
The most worthless of human kind sometimes 
indulge the propensity to pity and humanity. But 
whoever acts right, merely from feeling, will 
also, from feeling, more frequently act wrong. 
The sentiments of nature, which prompt us to 
take care of our children, to relieve objects in 
distress, and to perform many important duties 
of morality, likewise prompt us to gratify the 
vilest and most brutal of our passions. Besides 
this, there are many, and those the most impor- 
tant virtues, the exercise of which is not at first 
attended with pleasure. To support labour, to 
endure pain, to encounter difficulties and dan- 
gers, which wisdom and fortitude, on many 
occasions, require, are not obviously recom- 
mended by any natural desire ; nor is the prac- 
tice of such duties immediately agreeable. It 
is still less agreeable, in the first instance, to 
curb and restrain our natural appetites for plea- 
sure, which is the proper office of temperance ; 
nor can that vigilant circumspection, and ever 
watchful attention to the most remote conse- 
quences of our actions, which is essential to the 
virtue of prudence, be acquired without trouble 
and care, without many painful efforts and 
many difficult struggles. Yet it is the nature 
of all those virtues, as well as of the hardest 
lessons of justice, patriotism, and friendship, to 
become, through habit, agreeable; and the only 
sure test that we have acquired them, is, that 
they are practised with pleasure. With good 
reason, therefore, Plato defines education to be 
the art of teaching men to rejoice and grieve as 
they ought; for though there be three ends ul- 
timately agreeable, the pleasant, the honoura- 
ble, and useful; yet honour and utility are like- 
wise pursued as pleasures. !! 

The most extensive part of virtue is employed, 
therefore, in regulating our desire of pleasure, 
and aversion to pain. It is also the most diffi- 
cult; for, as Heraclitus observes, it is harder. to 
combat pleasure than anger. The irascible 
passions are always moved by some appearance 
of reason; and, in their most furious excesses, 
still affect some deference for their sovereign. 
They often, indeed, mistake his intentions; 
and, like hasty servants, fly into action, without 
waiting his last orders. But pleasure passively 
obeys sensation, without regarding reason at 
all. The mishief is the more dangerous, being 
produced by the first object of natural desire; 
for the love of pleasure is implanted in our 


10 Ethic. Nicom. l. ii. c.i. et seq. 
11 Ibid. |. vii. c. xi. et seq. 


470 


frame; the germ expands with our nature; and 
unless counteracted in due time, becomes in- 
grained in our constitution, every part of which 
it impregnates and stains. Habit alone can 
counteract those dangerous propensities of na- 
ture. Habit can enable us to reject dishonoura- 
ble or hurtful pleasures, to prefer honourable, 
or useful pains; for, as the poet Euenus says, 
“ there is a long continued exercise of attention, 
which finally becomes nature.”! 

The moral virtues cannot, according to Aris- 
totle, subsist without some mixture of the intel- 
lectual; but the latter may subsist alone and 
independent; and according to both Aristotle 
and Plato, the purest and most permanent feli- 
city of which man is susceptible, results from 
the exercise of his rational powers upon sub- 
jects of abstract speculation. The labours of 
the statesman or general, the exertions of the 
legislator or patriot, all refer to some end or 
purpose, the attainment of which may be pre- 
vented by fortune, or frustrated by the weak- 
ness or wickedness of man. The practice of 
justice, generosity, temperance, and fortitude, 
requires many conditions, and supposes a va- 
riety of situations, which it is not always in 
our power tocommand. The just or generous 
man must have objects to whom he may distri- 
bute his justice or generosity; he must possess 
the means by which to exercise those virtues, 
which all participate of frail mortality; since, 
though directed by prudence, they are impelled 
by passion, and result from the exigencies of 
our present corporeal state. But the energies 
of contemplative wisdom are pure and simple, 
like the intellectual source from which they 
spring. Not subservient to remote purposes, 
or contingent ends, they are immediately agree- 
able on their own account; and, on every side, 
round and complete in themselves. If the pro- 
per exercise of every member or faculty en- 
livens the sense of our existence, and thereby 
yields us a perception of pleasure, how wonder- 
fully delightful must be the exercise of the in- 
tellect, which renders us sensible of the divine 
principle within us! To live according to na- 
ture, is to live according to the noblest part of 
our nature, which, doubtless, is the mind. To 
live thus, is the life ofa god; for, human as we 
are, we ought not, according to the vulgar ex- 
hortation, to regard only human things; but, 
though mortal, strive to put on immortality ;? 
assured, that as the mind chiefly forms the man, 
he who most cultivates his mind, is the best 
disposed in himself, and the most agreeable to 
the gods.3 

Such is the philosophy of Aristotle, lofty 
sometimes, and imposing, but in general, less 


1 Euenus was an elegiac poet of Paros, of whom few 

fragments remain. The verses translated in the text are, 
Dyfes TWOAVMEOvsLOv MEAETHY EMEVAS OLAE KE ox 
Tauryy avoewrosrs TEAUTWTZV ÇUTIV esyas. 

This is better expressed by another Greek proverb: Eou 
Biov aesrrov, youv de avrov 4 cuvybesx orosyoes. Plut. 
Moral. p. 602. “Choose the best life, and custom will ren- 
der it agreeable.” 

2 Xoy Se ov xara Tous wageuivouvTas, avĝewmivz Çeo- 
veiv, aviewmov ovTæ, oude vyra Tov GvyTOv aAA? EF’ 
OTov evdeyerus amraduvaricetv, XLI ÆTRVTÆ TOIEOV XATA 
TO xezviorws rwv ev xuTw, Ethic. Nicom. l. x. c. vii. 

3 O s xere vouv EvEgy wV, xxs TOUTOV ÇEELTEVWV} Kas 
Tranesmevos aerrra, xe Seodtdertaros soixev sivas, Id. 
C. X. C. Vill. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


erect and independent than that of Socrates and 
Plato, who preceded him; less proud and boast- 
ful than that of the Stoics, or even the Epicu- 
reans, by whom he was followed; and on the 
whole, perhaps as unexceptionable as that of 
any moralist ancient or modern. 

It is commonly observed, that Aristotle at- 
tained the same authority over the opinions of 
men, which his pupil Alexander acquired over 
their persons. But the empire of Alexander 
was established in his own lifetime, and perished 
with himself. That of Aristotle did not com- 
mence till more than a thousand years after his 
decease, and continued several centuries. The 
Peripatetic school subsisted, indeed, without 
interruption, at Athens; but the Lyceum never 
attained there any pre-eminence above the Por- 
tico and Academy. When philosophy was 
transplanted to a more splendid theatre in 
Rome, men of speculation and science generally 
preferred Plato to Aristotle;+ while many of 
the most celebrated characters of the republic 
enlisted themselves under the banners of Zeno 
or Epicurus. With the fall of Roman liberty, 
philosophy, as well as literature and the fine 
arts, slowly declined; and under the emperors, 
particularly in the second and third centuries of 
the Christian era, the most extravagant of Pla- 
to’s speculations were the doctrines best adapted 
to the condition of the times, and to the dark 
and shadowy minds of Plotinus, Porphyry, Jam- 
blichus, and other contemplative visionaries, 
distinguished by the appellation of Eclectics, or 
later Platonists, who possessed the wildness 
without the fancy, and the subtilty without the 
genius, of Plato.6 During the succeeding cen- 
turies, the doctrines of Aristotle slowly gained 
the ascendant; but, as had happened to Plato 
in an earlier period, the most frivolous part of 
Aristotle’s philosophy was the highest in esteem 
during the darkness of the middle ages. The 
decisive boldness of his logic, physic, and meta- 
physic, suited the genius of a church which 
affected to be universal, and the insolence of a 
man who pretended to be infallible; and, while 
the useful and practical works of Aristote were 
neglected, his speculative philosophy being thus 
incorporated with the Romish superstition, they 
long conspired, with astonishing success, to en- 
thral the human mind. 

Zeno and Epicurus pretended, as well as 
Plato and Aristotle, to deduce their philosophy 
from experience ; but their views of nature are 
less perspicuous, and less extensive ; and their 
conclusions less convincing, and less reasonable. 
For the infinite variety of nature, they substi- 
tuted the narrowness of their own artificial sys- 
tems; and it will ever be the scandal of this 
abstract philosophy, that men who boasted fol- 
lowing the same path, should have reached such 
opposite goals; the sect of Zeno having discov- 
ered, by all its researches, that pain was not an 
evil; and the sect of Epicurus, that pleasure 
was the only good: the Stoics, that virtue alone 
was truly valuable in itself, and desirable on its 
own account; the Epicureans, that virtue in 


4 Cicero, passim. 

5 Besides the works of Brucker and Stanley, the learned 
reader may consult, on this subject, professor Meiners Bey- 
trag über die Neu-Platonische Philosophie. Leipzig, 1762. 


XL.] 


itself was really of no value, and merely desira- 
ble for the sake of pleasure. Yet, amidst the 
striking contradictions of these sects, they agreed 
in speculative pride, loudly asserting, that the 
philosophy which they respectively taught, was 
the exclusive road to happiness. Both required 
from their imaginary sage an absolute command 
over his passions ; and botli supposed, that in 
his present state of existence, he could attain this 
perfection. Zeno and Epicurus alike rejected 
the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, 
as unnecessary to their system; both justified 
suicide; both boasted of enjoying a felicity 
equal to that of the gods; and, in proportion 
as their principles receded from truth and na- 
ture, and flattered that factitious vanity inci- 
dent to the human heart, they were diffused 
with greater rapidity, more zealously embraced, 
and more obstinately defended.® 

In examining by what show of reason, men 
whose wisdom was revered by their contempo- 
raries, could arrive at such extraordinary con- 
clusions, the dignity of virtue demands the pre- 
cedence for Zeno. That philosopher affected, 
with great accuracy, to examine the natural 
propensities of the human race; to observe the 
various changes which they underwent in their 
progress from infancy to manhood ; to contem- 
plate the effects produced by external causes on 
our internal frame; and, by comparing man 
with inferior animals, to display the illustrious 
prerogatives which he enjoyed, and the high 
destination which nature had assigned him. 
Self-preservation, he observed, was the univer- 
sal and primary desire of all animals. In man, 
this desire respected his body, and all its differ- 
ent members, his mind, and all its different 
faculties; and prompted him to maintain the 
whole fabric of his complex existence in the 
most perfect condition of which if is capable. 
Nature had generally attached a pleasure to the 
means necessary for this purpose; but that we 
desired pleasure for the sake of preservation, 
not preservation for the sake of pleasure, he 
thought evident from the first motions and ef- 
forts of all animals, tending to prevent dissolu- 
tion, and preceding any distinct notions of pain 
or pleasure.? 

Although, in the order of time, man per- 
haps first felt the propensities requisite to the 
safety of his bodily frame, yet, at a very early 
period, he showed himself endowed with desires 
of a different, and more exalted kind. Not to 
mention the obscure intimations of his love of 
truth and knowledge during his infant state, in 
which he applied his senses with great activity 
to the examination of the objects presented to 
him, he naturally learned the use of words to 
express these objects, as well as the notions of 
his own mind concerning them; and had no 
sooner made this important acquisition, than he 
testified an ardent curiosity to extend his 
knowledge, and to enlarge his acquaintance 


6 Laert. in Zenon. et Epicur. Cicero de Finibus, l. i. ii, 
iii, Plutarch. de Commun. Concept. contra Stuicos. 

7 The principles of the Stoical philosophy are explained 
in Cicero de Finibus, the works of Epictetus, Arrian, Sim- 
plicius, aud Seneca. In treating of the practical duties of 
morality. Cicero, in his Offices chiefly follows the princi- 
ples of the Stoics. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


4i 


with the nature, the causes, and dependencies 
of the various classes of beings which he be- 
held around him. From this love and appro- 
bation of what is true and sincere, rather than 
of the contrary, which he felt to be congenial 
to his own nature, he readily believed what- 
ever those persons, with whom he conversed, 
thought proper to communicate to him; a prin- 
ciple which, though the source of innumerable 
errors and prejudices, served, however, as the 
only foundation ‘on which his future improve- 
ments could be built. j 

In examining the nature and relations of 
other things, he gradually became sensible of his 
own. His affections, he felt, carried him be- 
yond his own person, and he derived happiness 
from the happiness of others, although he re- 
ceived from it no advantage but the pleasure 
of beholding it. The sentiments of justice, gra- 
titude, and benevolence, he felt to be agreeable 
to his nature, to be proper and laudable; the 
contrary sentiments, to be disagreeable to his 
nature, to be improper and odious. His own 
good, therefore, was thus pointed out to him, 
by the original frame of his sentiments, to be 
intimately connected with the good of his fa- 
mily, his friends, his country, and the great so- 
ciety of mankind, of which he made part. En- 
larging his views still farther, he perceived, that 
every species is relative to the element in which 
it lives; thus fishes have fins for the water, birds 
have wings for the air; and that many of these 
species are mutually connected with, and reci- 
procally subservient to, each other, while all of 
them essentially enter into the great plan-of na- 
ture, and complete the harmony and perfection 
of that universal system, to the stability of 
which the order of particular parts, or what, 
in each species, and in each individual, is called 
private good, must necessarily be subordinate. 
Considering the narrowness of human capacity 
it is not wonderful that many of the connections 
and dependencies of this universal system should 
escape our observation. But if we confine our 
view to those objects of which we have the 
clearest apprehension, we shall find that they 
all depend on each other, and are united in one 
scheme or constitution of things. The indi- 
viduals of the human race were doubtless form- 
ed, not for themselves alone. In the different 
sexes, the external organization, and still more 
the inward frame, the correspondence of parts, 
and still more the sympathy of sentiments, in- 
dicate the male and female mutually destined 
for each other. The naked helplessness of in- 
fancy requires the tender cares of a parent. 
The decrepitude of age loudly demands the 
kind returns of filial gratitude. In early ages 
of the world, men, without uniting in small 
communities, must have fallen a prey to the 
savages of the desert; and, with the growth of 
these communities, social affection naturally 
makes progress; since, with the advancement 
of arts and civility, the bands which unite us 
to our country are continually multiplied and 
strengthened. 

In thus contemplating the relations in which 
he stands, man becomes sensible of the duties 
required of him. The voice of nature teaches 
him (for this is her universal law) that the 


472 


& 
greater good is to be preferred to the lesser, and 
the good of the many to that ofthe few. In 
applying this rule to all the classes of objects 
submitted to our choice, we live consistently 
with nature. The goods of the mind, there- 
foie, must be preferred to those of the body; 
and what is called private interest must yield to 
that of the public. Even in objects of the same 
class, the general law must be observed. We 
must prefer and reject, according to the rules of 
tight reason, not according to caprice and fancy. 
In the primary objects of desire respecting the 
dody, health is to be preferred to strength, and 
strength to agility ; and in the secondary objects 
‘especting this part of our natures, or those 
which may be employed as instruments to pro- 
*ure bodily pleasures, and ward off bodily pains, 
ach as wealth, power, the good opinion of those 
with whom we iive, and innumerable other cir- 
\wmstances of a similar kind, we must uni- 
wermly regulate our conduct by the same great 
xginciples of preference and rejection.! In thus 
a ppreciating the objects of desire, and when all 
cannot be obtained, in preferring the most va- 
tuable and honourable; in thus appreciating 
the cbjects of aversion, and when all cannot be 
avoided, in rejecting the most hurtful and odious, 
consist that erder and harmony, that just ba- 
lance of affection, and perfect propriety of con- 
duct which essentially contains in it whatever 
is meritorious, laudable, and happy. It is con- 
cerning the primary objects of desire, indeed, 
and the means necessary to attain them, that 
this propriety of sentiment and action is exer- 
cised; but as those to whom we are recom- 
mended are often mae valued by us, than those 
by whom we are made known to them, so the 
duties of wisdom and virtue, to which we have 
been, as it were, recomunended by the original 
propensities of our nature, are far more esti- 
mable in themselves, than oll the external ad- 
vantages which they aro fitted to procure. 
When our lives are harmonised to virtue, when 
we perceive the agreement of cur thoughts and 
actions to propriety and decorum, the beauty 
of this concord strikes us as infinitely more de- 
sirable than all the ends which it has a tendency 
to promote; this concord itself becomes the 
great, or rather the sole, end of all our pur- 
suits; compared with which, health and sick- 
ness, riches and poverty, pain and pleasure, are 
finally considered as objects of little moment, 
and altogether incapable of shaking the stability 
of our happiness. 

It is in vain that men seek felicity in those 
objects which depend not on themselves; which, 
even while they possess, they fear to lose; and 
which fortune can neither give nor take away.” 
The feelings of our own minds, which are ever 
and intimately present to us, must always afford 
the princpal source of our happiness or misery. 
To a wise man, therefore, every condition of 
external circumstances, and every situation in 
life, must be alike indifferent, since there is 


1 The technical terms of the Stoical philosophy, like all 
terms of art, sound awkward in languages in which they 
were not originally invented ; nothing can be more natural 
than the Greek expressions, oesyer$xs and exxAsvesy, 

2 Kxs rx uev £O niv ETTE ÇUTEL edsvSeen, axaduTa, 
axageumoderra, te ds OVX% £9 nuiv, ardevny Sovran, 
xoAuTz, eAAoreie. Epictet. Enchir. c. ii. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar 


none wherein he can be placed, in which he 
may not perform his duty, and render himself 
an object of approbation and applause to all 
rational nature. To feelin our own minds the 
testimony of the whole universe in our favour, 
and to be sensible, that whatever may be the 
consequences of our conduct, it has been go- 
verned by the great rules which the Divinity 
prescribes, affords a degree of inward satisfac- 
tion, to which the greatest outward prosperity 
can add nothing worthy of calculation ; for as 
a single drop of water is lost in the broad ex- 
panse of the Ægean, as a single step is disre- 
garded in the immense distance to India, as 
the light of a taper is eclipsed by the meridian 
sun,? so the external conveniencies of life, and 
the advantages pertaining to the body, are 
overwhelmed, obscured and lost, in the tran- 
scendent excellence and incomparable splen- 
dour of virtue. 

Those dangers which appear most formidable, 
and those calamities which appear most dread- 
ful to the vulgar, cannot intimidate or deject 
the man, who has fortitude to despise the one, 
and constancy to bear the other. The sage de- 
lights in those clouds of adversity, through 
which his virtue beams forth with peculiar 
lustre; and rejoices in the kind cruelties of 
fortune, which subject him to difficult and glo- 
rious combats. Sensible of his own powers, he 
is happy to measure them against a vigorous 
antagonist. The victory is not liable to con- 
tingencies, but depends on himself alone: a 
consideration sufficient to support him against 
the number and strength of his enemies.4 When 
the firm probity of Regulus submitted his pe- 
rishable body to be burned and lacerated by the 
Carthaginians, he well knew that those re- 
vengeful Barbarians could not torture his for- 
titude, his patriotism, his magnanimity. His 
mind, guarded by such an assemblage and at- 
tendance of virtues, bade defiance to every as- 
sault. The mind of Regulus still triumphed ; 
and amidst the painful discerption of his frail 
members, he maintained and fortified the in- 
tegrity of that part of his nature which properly 
constitutes the man, and in which alone any 
permanent happiness or misery can reside. 

From the enthusiasm naturally inspired by 
the beautiful and august forms of benevolence 
and magnanimity, the Stoics again returned to 
the speculations of abstract philosophy, In 
every arrangement or combination of objects, 
which can be called a constitution or system, 
the good of each part, they observed, must be 
relative and subordinate to that of the whole. 
To illustrate in the constitution most familiar 
to us, the body of man, the good of each limb 
and member, considered as something separate 
and independent, consisted in preserving its 
natural state, and in never being subjected to 
any fatigue or hardship, to any pain or uneasi- 
ness. But considered as the part of a system, 
in the good of which its own is necessarily in- 
cluded, this limb or member must often submit 
to great inconveniencies. For the sake of the 
whole body, the foot must often trample in the 


3 The illustrations given by Cic. de Fin. 
4 Avixyros eivai Suvaras, sv siç Mydsvw æy mvs xT 
Cusvnss ov oux sors es cos vixnoas, Enchir. C. xxv. 


XL] 


dirt, must often tread upon thorns, and some- 
times be burned, or lacerated, or even cut off, 
when such operations are requisite for the 
safety of the whole system. In refusing te 
comply, the foot ceases to be a foot; in the 
same manner do you cease to be a man, in 
shrinking from the hardest dutiey,required by 
the interest of society. But that society itself, 
as well as every member which it contains, are 
parts of a larger system, that harmonious 
whole, whose admirable order and beauty 
evince the superintendence of infinite wisdom 
and goodness. Under such government, no 
absolute evil can exist; and what appears 
wrong respecting particular parts, must neces- 
sarily be right respecting the whole. A wise 
man will therefore be alike satisfied with every 
situation in which he may be placed; deeply 
convinced, that were he acquainted with the 
whole connections and dependencies of events, 
that situation would, even to himself, appear 
the most proper, that could possibly be assign- 
ed him. He uses, indeed, such means as pru- 
dence directs, to avert calamity ; but when that 
is his lot, he cheerfully submits to the wise dis- 
pensation of Providence. The established or- 
der of the universe, he knows, is not to be 
changed by the prayers of men. When he 
prays to the gods, it is not with a view to alter 
their wise intentions concerning him: he prays 
that they would show him the hardest trials 
with which he must contend, and the severest 
circumstances in which he must be placed: 
that by voluntarily accepting those trials, and 
voluntarily embracing those circumstances, he 
may prove his confidence in their goodness, and 
his perfect resignation to their sovereign will.é 
If our own unmerited misfortunes ought 
never to occasion us any uneasiness, so neither 
ought we to be affected by those of our rela- 
tions, our friends, or our country. When ca- 
lamity threatens connections so dear to us, we 
must exert ourselves strenuously in their be- 
half; but should our welkmeant endeavours 
be frustrated by circumstances not liable to our 
control, it would be highly ungraceful and im- 
proper to have recourse to unmanly lamenta- 
tions. The same law of propriety which 
prompts our active exertions to the good of 
others, restrains our passive feelings at sight of 
their distress; the former alone can be useful 
to them, the latter would be both hurtful and 
dishonourable to ourselves. 


The Stoical philosophy imposed therefore an 


/ absolute silence on the soft voice of pity, as 
- well as on the boisterous dissonance of anger, 
and on all passions in general which were re- 
garded as perturbations and diseases of the 


5 Ays Sy we, w Zev xzi ov y rerenmevy, 
Oroi 206? upsv sims Sixtsraymtvos, 
Qs eons rrovizsog nde woxves. 
The reason is subjoined. 
Exv Se py sharw, ovy yrrov spozi, 

* We ought to be willing to obey the gods, since we must 
obey them whether we are willing or not.” 

6 Epictetns, bowever, allows the appearance of sympa- 
thv with objects in distress, but sternly forbids the reaiity. 
Mıxei wiv Toi ACyOU MH Oxvii TUMTIeIZICET Sus UTW 
(viz. the person afflicted) x2v ruyy cuveriorevatxs mporexe 
MEV Tol, Ky xxi ETwSEY TUVEMIaTEVernC. Enictet. Ficia 


c. xxii. 
3.0 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


473 


mind, that a wise man ought not merely to ap- 
pease, but utterly to eradicate. As they sup- 
posed their imaginary sage capable of attaining 
this perfection, they interred that all duties 
were alike easy to him. His actions were con- 
tinually regulated by propriety, and all of them 
therefore equally laudable; whereas those of a 
fool, or one who substituted passion and caprice 
in the stead of reason and principle, were all 
equally blameable. This doctrine, which so 
nearly resembles that of many Christian di- 
vines, “that the greatest virtues of the hea- 
thens were but splendid vices,” is the source to 
which all the other paradoxes of the Stoics 
may be traced. Both these Christians and the 
Stoics considered good or bad actions as rela- 
tive only to the cause which produces them, 
the affection or character from which they pro- 
ceed, not to the consequences which flow from 
them, the good or bad effects which they tend 
to promote. These consequences and effects, 
it was observed by the Stoics, depended not on 
ourselves. With regard to us, therefore, they 
were altogether indifferent; and as such, could 
not possibly constitute any part of merit or 
demerit, or become the proper objects of praise 
or censure. 

The ignorant vulgar indeed, and as such the 
Stoics considered all those who were unac- 
quainted with their philosophy, allowed such 
contingent circumstances to influence their ap- 
preciation of actions and characters; and thence 
the extraordinary confusion introduced into re- 
ligion and morality. Of two men, equally vi- 
cious, the one may be condemned to obscurity, 
and bereft of opportunity to exert his wicked- 
ness; the other may be raised to power, which 
he abuses, or entrusted with a sceptre, which 
becomes an iron rod in his hands. To the bulk 
of mankind, the second appears a greater mon- 
ster than the first. To the philosopher, they 
appear equally criminal; but the first is a storm 
which spends its rage in vacuity; the second 
a cloud, not more tempestuous, that destroys 
the fair objects accidentally exposed to its vio- 
lence. In the same manner two men’ may be 
equally meritorious, although the one, from the 
unfavourable circumstances in which he is 
placed, may resemble a clear stream rolling 
through a lonesome solitude, while the other, 
more advantageously situated with respect to 
external objects, may resemble a beautiful river 
flowing through a populous valley, supplying 
the wants of man and other animals, and dif- 
fusing abundance and pleasure through the ad- 
joining country, which it fertilizes and adorns. 

The injudicious estimation of virtues and 
vices, by the effects which they tend to pro- 
duce, is the source of that extravagant admira- 
tion on the one hand, and that excessive seve- 
rity on the other, which universally character- 
ize the judgments of the vulgar. But a wise 
man, who examines the first principles of ac- 
tion in the human heart, will neither be dazzled 
by the splendour of heroes and patriots, nor 
provoked to undue revenge against illustrious 
criminals.’ The civil magistrate, who is en- 


7 Enusiz weoxomtovTdg? oudsva yey, oudeve imavvest, 
&e. Enchir. c. lxxii. 


e 


474 


trusted with the interest of society, and who 
has that interest always in view, must chiefly 
regard external actions, and consider them as 
sufficient indications of the inward affections 
and character. It is his business to regulate 
the lives, not to purify the hearts, of men. But 
we may be assured that He, who can penetrate 
deeper than an earthly judge, governs the mo- 
ral world by more refined principles, and dis- 
penses rewards and punishments according to 
amore accurate standard.! To avert his an- 
ger, superstition tells us to repair the bad con- 
sequences of our misconduct; and, as this is 
often impracticable, therefore commands an 
impossibility : to regain his approbation, and 
that of our own breasts, philosophy exhorts us 
to fix our chief attention, not on effects, which 
are transitory, but on the cause, which is per- 
manent; to be less anxious about wiping off 
the stain of particular sins, than solicitous to 
stop the source from which they all flow. 
When we have accomplished this great pur- 
pose, we have reached the pertection of our 
nature. For the Deity, who has enjoined vir- 
tue as our duty, has placed our happiness in 
virtue. In performing the task assigned us, 
we necessarily attain our reward.? 

~~Such is the philosophy of the Stoics, which, 
beside containing several contradictions which 
all the subtlety of the sect was unable to re- 
concile, evidently supposes a degree of perfec- 
tion far beyond the weakness of humanity. 
The system of Epicurus is not less artificial in 
its texture, and, though humbler in its origin, 
is equally magnificent in its conclusions.? Like 
the lowly plant, which, at first feebly emerging 
from the ground, gradually rises to a stately 
tree towering to the sky, the philosophy of 
Epicurus, at first restricting the primary ob- 
jects of natural desire and aversion to bodily 
pleasure and pain, by degrees expands itself 
into the fairest forms of virtue, and enforces 
the severest lessons of duty. That pleasure 
and pain are the universal objects of desire and 
aversion is a truth, he observed, powerfully at- 
tested by the consenting voice of all animated 
nature. Not only men, but children, and even 
brute animals,could they emit articulate sounds, 
would declare and cry out, that pleasure is the 
sovereign good, and pain the greatest evil.4 
That they are, not only the greatest and most 
universal, but the sole ultimate objects of de- 
sire and aversion, Epicurus endeavoured to 
prove by analyzing our passions, and actions, 
and virtues, all of which, he pretended, had, in 
the last instance, nothing farther in view than 
to procure bodily pleasure, and avoid bodily 
pain. If we desire power and wealth, it is be- 
cause power and wealth furnish us with innu- 
merable means of enjoyment. Sensible that 
the good-will of the society in which we live, 
is necessary to our security, we strive assidu- 
ously to acquire it, cultivate friendship, exer- 


1 Epictet. Enchir. c. xxxviii. 

Quod si ita est, ut neque quisquam, nisi bonus vir, et 
omnes boni beati sin!; quid philosophia magis colendum, 
aut quid est virtute divinius. Cicero de Fin. 1. iii. ad fin. 

3 Diogen. Laert. in Aristip. et Fpicur. 
4 Cicero de Finibus, l. i. ¢. ix. et passim. 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


[Cuar. 


cise benevolence, and practise with diligence 
and alacrity all those social virtues essential to 
the public safety, in which our own is included. 
When it is necessary to reject a present plea- 
sure, in order to attain a greater in future, tem- 
perance must moderate the eagerness of de- 
sire; and when it is necessary to encounter a 
present pain, in order to avoid a greater in fu 
ture, fortitude must control tne dictates of pu 
sillanimity. Justice teaches us to abstain from 
injuring others, as the only condition on which 
we can escape being injured by them. And 
prudence, which, according to Epicurus, is the 
queen of all the virtues, and to which justice, 
temperance, and fortitude are barely handmaids 
and attendants, invariably points out to us, and 
enforces, that course of action which is most 
conducive to our private comfort and happi- 
ness. This course of action is acknowledged 
by all moralists to consist in the practice of vir- 
tue; so that virtue, according to Epicurus, is 
the only true wisdom, and vice the most short- 
sighted levity and folly. 

To illustrate this doctrine, he,observed, that 
though all the modifications of hope and fear 
ultimately refer to the sensations of bodily 
pleasure or pain, yet the pleasures and pains of 
the mind are infinitely more important than 
their originals. The body can only feel the 
sensation of the present moment, which can 
never be of great importance; whereas the 
mind recollects the past, and anticipates the fu- 
ture. If our mental frame, therefore, be pro- 
perly adjusted, if our sentiments and judgments 
be duly regulated, it is a matter of little mo- 
ment how our bodies be disposed; we may 
despise its pleasures, and even set its pains at 
defiance. If pain be violent, experience teaches 
us that it must be short; it cannot be con- 
tinued long without becoming moderate, and 
admitting many intervals of ease; besides, 
death is always within our reach, and ready 
at a call to deliver us, whenever life becomes a 
burden. 

By this kind of philosophical chemistry, Epi- 
curus extracted from the grossest materials, the 
most sublime principles of wisdom and virtue. 
His philosophy imposed absolute silence on the 
passions; since no state, and therefore not the 
little republic of man, can be happy in sedition. 
In this tranquillity of mind, he boasted a felicity 
which external pleasures might vary, but could 
ne‘ increase; and his security of enjoyment he 
asserted to be equally firm and unalterable with 
that of the gods, since the most unbounded 
duration could not afford greater happiness than 
arose from reflecting, that all our pleasures and 
pains are confined within a narrow span. Hav- 
ing adopted the atomic philosophy of Democri- 
tus, he rendered it subservient to his morality. 
The phenomena of nature, he fancied might be 
explained by the figures and motions of the 
small particles of matter; and as the universe 
arose, so did it continue, without the inter- 
ference of the gods, those celestial beings, who, 
enjoying complete happiness in themselves, and 
totally independent on the actions of men, are 
neither pleased with our virtues, nor offended 
by our crimes. Confiding in the certainty of 


~~ 


XL. 


these speculations, he trampled under foot the 
superstitious terrors of the vulgar, and fortified 
his mind against the fear of death.é 

Such were the tencts of Ep:curus,than whom 
no philosopher was ever more admired and 
beloved by his disciples, or more cordially at- 
tached to them in affectionate esteem. He is 
described as a man of the most amiable dispo- 
sition, of great gentleness and humanity ; and, 
like Eudoxus, who preceded him, and who in- 
culeated the same loose doctrines of religion 
and morality, extremely temperate with regard 
to pleasure; a circumstance which failed not to 
add much reputation to his philosophy. In his 
character, the firm and manly, were united with 
the gentler, virtues. When grievously afflicted 
with the stone, he bore the agony incident to 
that disease with the greatest constancy ; and in 
the last day of his life, when his pain had reach- 
ed a degree beyond which he could conceive 
none greater, wrote to his friend Hermachus,é 
and recommended to him the children of his 
favourite disciple Metrodorus, assuring him at 
the same time, that as to himself, he still was 
happy, since the smart of his bodily sufferings 
was more than compensated by the pleasures 
of his mind, and particularly by the agreeable 
remembrance of his discoveries; a declaration, 
however inconsistent it may be deemed with 
his opinions, highly honourable to the man. 

Such were the philosophical systems respect- 
ing life and happiness, by which the more libe- 
ral part of mankind long affected to regulate 
their sentiments and conduct. The excessive 
scepticism of Pyrrho, which none could reduce 
to practice without meriting the charge of in- 
sanity, seems never, even in theory, to have 
had much vogue among the speculatists of an- 
tiquity. In matters of doubtful evidence, in- 
deed, a prudent suspension of judgment had 
been recommended by Socrates, enforced by 
Plato, and extended to subjects of every kind 
by his followers Arcesilas and Carneades.’ 
These philosophers, however, in denying cer- 
tainty, still admitted probability, which they 
thought sufficient for regulating our judgments 
and actions. But the extravagant Pyrrho was 
dogmatical only in maintaining, that no one opi- 
nion was more probablethan another. Thenon- 
existence of sensible qualities, which had been 
proved by Democritus,’ Protagoras? and Aris- 
tippus,!9 and which is commonly supposed a 


5 Lucretius, passim. 

6 Vil. Diogen. Laert. l. x. sect. ix. et Cic. de Finibus, I. 
ii. C. XXX. et 32q. 

7 Becnuse Socrates and Plato doubted some things, these 
philosophers doubted all. Vid. Cicer. Acad. l i. Thev 
formed, what was called, the New Academy, which held 
the same tenets with the ancient, only asserting them still 
less pos tively. 

8 See Sextus Empiricus, p. 399. 

9 Pyrrhon. Hypot. l. i. sect. 216. 

10 Preterea quoniam nequeant sine Juce colores 

Fs-e, neque in luce existant primordia rerum 
Scire licet, quam sint nullo velata colore. 


* * kal % * 


HISTORY OF GREECE. 


475 


modern discovery, because the contrary opinion 
obtained among the schoolmen, probably led 
Pyrrho to deny the reality likewise of moral 
qualities and distinctions. As heat and cold, 
tastes and colours, had no external existence in 
bodies, and were mere ideas of the mind; in 
the same manner, beauty and deformity, virtue 
and vice, happiness and misery, had no real or 
permament cause, but depended, like every 
thing else, on relation or comparison. Upon 
this principle, “ that all was relative,”!! Pyrrho 
established topics for enabling his sect readily 
to dispute the truth of all positions whatever, 
and which were reduced to ten,!? probably in 
opposition to the ten categories of the dogmat- 
ists. The great patron of Pyrrhonism boasts, 
that while other philosophers wandered in pur- 
suit of a false and artificial happiness, Pyrrho 
alone had discovered the true and natural one, 
and that, by an accident similar to the pain- 
ter’s,'3 who, having finished the picture of a dog 
all to the foam of his mouth, could not, after re- 
peated trials, satisfy himself in painting this last 
circumstance. Enraged by disappointment, he 
at length dashed against the canvas the spunge 
with which he wiped his pencils. Accident 
produced the effect which he had vainly sought 
from art; and the foam was represented so 
naturally, that the picture, though admirable 
in other respects, was chiefly admired on this 
account. Fatigued by many painful researches 
into the nature of truth and virtue, Pyrrho, in 
the same manner, had discovered that truth and 
virtue were nowhere to be found; a discovery 
which produced that moderation and indisturb- 
ance, that happy indifference, or rather perfect 
insensibility, which is as naturally attended by 
happiness, as a body is followed by its shadow.'5 

In concluding this work with the scepticism 
of Pyrrho, it is proper to observe, for the honour 
of Greece, that though the doctrines which 
that philosopher inculcated can have no other 
tendency than to unhinge the moral principles, 
to darken and perplex the mind; yet those sys- 
tems of his contemporaries, or predecessors, 
which have been more particularly explained 
in the present history, amidst all their appa- 
rent contradictions, uniformly afford such views 
of nature and of man, as awaken and cherish 
our love for both. Established on firm grounds 
of reason, they evince the indissoluble union of 


‘interest with duty, display the beauty of virtue 


in its brightest charms, and unmask the hideous 
spectres of fancy and superstition. 


Sed ne forte putes solo spoliata co'ore 
Corpora prima manere; etiam secreta teporis 
Sunt, ac frigoris omnino, &c. LUCRETIUS, l. ii. 


11 MWexvre weog rs. Sextus Empiric. 

12 Sextus Empiric. Hypothet. Pyrrhon. 1. i. c. xiv. et 
Diogen. Laert. in Pyrrhon. 

13 Sextus Empiric. |. i. c. xii. Sextus catls the painter 
Apelles. Pliny, |. xxxv. c. xx. ascribes this accident to 
Protogenes, nnd a similar one to Nealcesin painting a horse 

14 Araex¥ix, Sextus Empiric. 

15 Sextus Empiric. ubi supra, et passim. 


A 


ABDELERMINUS, story of, rejected, 436. (Note.) 

Abe, city of, destroyed by the Persians, 123. 

i lac faculty of, not unknown to the ancients, 

2, 

Accent, in language, its use and varieties, 70. 

Achaia conquered, 34. Brief political history of, 62. 
Wisdom of its laws, 140. Revolutions, 342. 

Achilles, opinions concerning his shield, 31. (Note.) 

Ages his successful negotiation with Alexander, 
449. 

Ada, the government of Caria committed to her by 
Alexander, 430. 

Adimanthus, his character, 257. Is taken prisoner 
by Lysander, 259. 

Adimantus,his violent opposition to Themistocles,125. 

Adonis, festival of, at Athens, described, 223. 

Adrastus, a fugitive Phrygian prince, his history, 85. 

Adultery, how punished during the heroic ages of 
Greece, 28. 

fEgina, island of, described, 111. Fleet of, destroy- 
ed by Themistocles, ib. 

4Æ£gos Potamos, naval engagement there, 259. 

Æneas, probably contemporary with Dido, 136. 
(Note.) ` 

Eschines, the -philosopher, his dialogues, 274. 

—_———— the orator, his embassy to Peloponnesus, 
388, 390. Quarrel between him and Demosthenes, 
392. His speech to Philip of Macedon, ib. Is 
corrupted by Philip’s ambassadors, 394. Hisspeech 
to Philip on another embassy, 395. Gives an ac- 
count of his embassy to the Athenians, 396. As- 
sumes the merit of softening Philip toward the 
Phocians, 399. 
Demosthenes, 404. Is sent as deputy to the Am- 
phictyonic council, 414. Inveighs against the 
Locrians, 415. Accuses Ctesiphon for his decreein 
honour of Demosthenes, 446. His banishment, ib. 

Æschylus, the tragedian, distinguishes himself at the 
battle of Marathon, 108. Was the father of Greek 
tragedy, 172. 

Æsop, his fables, 163. 

4Stolians, engage as auxiliaries to the Heraclida, 34. 
Establish themselves in Peloponnesus, ib. Are 
ravaged by the Athenians, 203. Singular mode of 
fighting the invaders, 204. 

Agamemnon commands the Grecian armament col- 
lected against Troy, 21. Takes and destroys that 
city, 22. How he obtained the pre-eminence over 
the other Grecian princes, 27. His death, 32. 

Agesilaus, his character, and pretensions to the 
crown of Sparta, 299. Is declared king, ib. Takes 
the command of the Grecian forces in Asia, 300. 
His ill treatment of Lysander, ib. His address in 
counteracting the treachery of Tissaphernes, ib. 
His expedition to Phrygia, 301. His military pre- 

arations, and martial exercises, ib. Defeats the 
Persians 302. Negotiation between him and Tith- 
raustes for the indemnity of Lydia, ib. Is entrusted 
with the command of the Grecian fleet, ib. Is re- 
called, 305. He defeats the Thessalians on his 
return, ib. Defeats the confederate army at Co- 
ronea, 307. His Asiatic victories prejudicial to 
Sparta, 313. Allows his colleague Cleombrotus to 
conduct the war in Beotia, 321. Is supposed to 


Is prosecuted at the persuasion of |. 


have been privy to the attempt of Sphodrias on the 
Pireus of Athens, 321. His invasions of Beotia, 
322. Acts as the Spartan deputy in the Grecian 
congress, 324, Debates between him and Epami- 
nondas, ib. Evades the law of Lycurgus with re- 
spect to the troops vanquished at Leuctra, 128. 
His ineffectual attempts to restore the Spartan 
authority in Arcadia, 332. His vigilant exertions 
on the invasion of Laconia by the Thebans, 333. 
Negotiates a defensive treaty with Athens, 334. 
His death and character, 350. 

Agesipolis, king of Sparta, besieges and takes the city 
of Mantinza, 315. Takes Torona, 317. Dies, ib. 

Agis, king of Sparta, commands the Spartan forces 
at the renewal of the Peloponnesian war, 215. Con- 
cludes a truce with the Argives, ib. Battle of 
Mantinea, 217. His expedition into Attica, 231. 
His wife Timea seduced by Alcibiades, 242. In- 
vades the Elians, 277. His death, 299. 

Agoracritus, his celebrated statue of Venus, 274. 

Agriculture taught in Attica by Cecrops, 13. How 
practised in Greece during the heroic ages, 27, 30. 

Agrigentum, by whom founded, 139. Its magnifi- 
cence and prosperity, 278. Siege of, by the Car- 
thaginians, 279. Miserable fate of the Agrigen- 
tines, ib. 

Ajax, the son of Telamon, his presumption, and how 

unished, 24. (Note.) 

Alcæus, the ancient Greek poet, his character, 76. 

Alcander, becomes a supporter of the institutions of 
Lycurgus, 42. ( Note.) 

Alcibiades, his birth and education, 213. Attachment 
between him and Socrates, 214. His character, ib. 
His deceitful conduct toward the Spartan ambas- 
sadors, 214. Persuades the Athenians to enter 
into the Argive alliance, 215. Persuades the Ar- 
gives to break their truce, 216. His ambitious views, 
221. His debate with Nicias, respecting the expe- 
dition to Sicily, ib. His armament sails, 223. He 
takes Catana, 224. Recalled to Athens, ib. Is 
accused of impiety by Thessalus, 225. Flies to 
Sparta, 226, 231. Surprises the Athenian partisans 
in Chios, 241. Seduces the wife of king Agis, 242. 
Takes refuge with Tissaphernes, ib. Alienates 
that general from the Spartan interests, ib, Con- 
spires against the democracy in Athens, 243. Frus- 
trates the negotiation between the Athenian am- 
bassadors and Tissaphernes, 244. Is invited by 
Thrasybulus to the camp at Samos, 245. His ad- 
dress to his countrymen, ib. His message to the 
tyrants, 246. Is recalled to Athens, ib. Captures 
the whole Peloponnesian fleet, 247. Takes Byzan- 
tium, 249. His triumphant return to Athens, ib. 
Conducts the Eleusinian festival, 250. His fleet 
defeated during his absence, by Lysander, 253. He 
is impeached by Thrasybulus, and disgraced, ib. 
His advice for the security of the Athenian fleet 
rejected, 258. Retires to Phrygia, 265. Manner 
of his death, 266. 

Alcidas, the Spartan naval commander, sent to the 
relief of Mitylene, his imprudent conduct, 196, 199, 
His engagement with Nicostratus at Corcyra, 201. 

Alexander, king of Macedon, his character, 129. Is 

employed by Mardonius to treat with the Atheni- 

ans, ib. 


INDEX. 


Alexander the Great, his birth, 374. His behaviour 
to the Persian ambassadors at his father’s court, 
__ 401. Saves the life of his father Philip, 413. Routs 
the Thebans, 418. Quarrels with his father, and 
takes refuge among the Illyrians, 422. Is recon- 
ciled, ib. Difficulties attending his accession, 423. 
Is acknowledged general of the Greeks, ib. His 
interview with Diogenes, ib. Defeats the Thra- 
cians, 424. Passes the Danube, ib. Is assisted by 
Langarus the Agrian, ib. Defeats Glaucias, king 
of the Taulantii, 425. Revolt and destruction of 
Thebes, ib. His acts of forbearance there, 426. 
Receives congratulatory embassies from the Gre- 
cian states, ib. Prepares for his eastern expedi- 
tion, ib. Prepares to pass the Granicus, 427. Bat- 
tle there, 428. His personal gallantry, ib. His 
prudent humanity after the engagement, 429. Be- 
sieges Halicarnassus, ib. The town taken and de- 
molished, 430. His judicious plan of warfare, ib. 
The arts by which he secured his conquests, ib. 
His march from Phaselis to Perga, 431. He chas- 
tises the duplicity of the citizens of Aspendus, ib. 
Enters Phrygia, ib. Fulfils the oracle relating to 
the Gordian knot, 432. Passes the northern gate 
of Cilicia, 433. His sickness at Tarsus, ib. Dis- 
position of his army previous to the battle of Issus, 
434. Defeats Darius, ib. His generous treatment 
of Darius’s captive family, 435. His moderation 
increases with his good fortane, ib. Receives an 
amicable embassy from Tyre, 436. Besieges Tyre, 
tb. Takes the c.ty, 433. Is wounded at the siege 
of Gaza, 439. His easy conquest of Egypt, 1b. 
Founds the city of Alexandria, ib. Visits the ora- 
cle of Jupiter Ammon, ib. Foundation of his claim 
to being the son of Jupiter, 440. (Note.) He march- 
es into Assyria, ib. Battle of Arbela, ib. His 
acquisitions by the defeat of Darius, 442. Pursues 
Darius, 443. Pursues the murderers of Darius, 444. 
Besieges the Sogdian fortress, ib. Reduces it, 
and marries Roxana, the daughter of Oxyartes, 
445. Surrender of the fortress of Chorienes, ib. 
His prudent regulation of his conquests, 446. Un- 
dertakes his Indian expedition, 448. His difficult 
passage over the Paropamisus, ib. Reduces mount 
Aornos, 449. Receives the submission of Nysa, ib. 
Passes the Indus, 450. His passage over the Hy- 
daspes disputed by Porus, ib. The passage effect- 
ed, 451. Defeats Porus, and treats him generous- 
ly, 452. Founds Nicea and Bucephalia, ib. Passes 
the Acesines and Hydraotes, ib. Besieges and 
takes Sangala, ib. ‘The eastern bounds of his 
conquests, 453. His life endangered at the siege of 
the Malhan fortress, 454. Marches through the 
Gedrosian desert, ib. Punishes the lcentious 
cruelty of Cleander and Sitalus, ib. Romantic 
account of his march through Carmania, 455. Pun- 
ishes the revolt of his governors of Babylon, Per- 
ashy and Susa,ib Improves the internal state 
of his conquests, ib. Sends vessels to explore 
the Persian and Arabian gulfs, 456. Founds a 
city of retreat for his superannuated soldiers, ib. 
Discharges the debts of his army, ib. Promotes 
intermarriages with the Asiatics, ib. His immo- 
derate grief for the death of Hephestion, 457. Re- 
duces the Cosszans, ib. Arts practised to pre- 
vent his return to Babylon, ib. His death, 459. His 
character, ib. [lis account of his father and him- 
self,461. The division of his conquests, 462. 
Alexander, king of Thessaly, his character, 333. His 
treacherous seizure of Pelopidas, ib. Anecdotes 
of Pelopidas during his confinement with him, 340 
Battle of Cynoscephale, 345. Is defeated by the 
Thebans, 346. 
, the son of ropus, his treachery detect- 
ed, 432. 
w a city of, founded by Alexander the Great, 
Alphabet, Phenician, introduced into Greece, 13. 
Alyattes, king of Lydia, his depredations on the Mi- 
esians, 83. Concludes a peace with them, ib. His 
reign, ib. 


477 


Amasis, king of Egypt, his character, 94. 

Amazons 15. (Note.) 

Ampheia, a Messenian city, seized by the Spartans, 
50 


Amphictyonic council, origin of the, 15. Its authority 
‘extended, 36. Conduct of, on the temple of Del- 
phi being plundered by the Crisseans, 63. Sum- 
mary history of, %1. Decree of, issued against the 
Phocians, 375 and 399. And against Sparta, 375. 
Philip declared general of the Amphictyons, 413. 
They destroy the Amphissean plantations on the 
Cirrhean plain, 416. 

Amphion, the Grecian bard, who, 72. 

Amphipolis, city of, its revolt from the Athenians, 
210. Battle of,211. The city joins the Olynthian 
confederacy, 371. Is besieged by Philip of Mace- 
don, 372. Is taken and annexed to Macedon, ib. 

Amphisseans accused, for cultivating the Cirrhean 
plain, 415. They attack the Amphictyons, ib. 
Amphissa taken by Philip of Macedon, 416. 

Amusements of the Greeks during the heroic ages, 31. 

Amyntas 1l. king of Macedonia, dethroned by Bar- 
dyllis, and restored by the Spartans, 366. 

Amyntas, son of Philip, his pretensions to the throne 
‘of Macedonia, 423. 

Anacreon, the poet, his character, 76. 

Anaxagoras, the first Grecian philosopher who en- 
tertained rational ideas of the Deity, 141, (Note.) 
169. His doctrines counteracted by the refine 
ments of the Sophists, ib. His accusation and 
banishment, 188. 

Anaxander, the Spartan general, defeated by Aris- 
tomeues, 55. : 

Anderica settled by the Eretrian prisoners, 108. 

Androcles, joint king of Messenia, his contest with 
his associate Antiochus, 50. Obtains the province 
of Hyamia from the Spartan conquerors, 53. 

Anompharetus, the Spartan commander under Pau- 
sanias, his refractory conduct, 133. 

Antalcidas, his character, 310. His successful nego- 
tiations, ib. Rouses the jealousy of Artaxerxes 
against the Athenians, 312. Reduces the Grecian 
states to the terms dictated by Artaxerxes, ib. 
Assists at a congress of the Grecian states, 340. 

F a exposes himself to a defeat by Lysander, 

53. ` 

Antipater, is entrusted by Alexander with the care 
of Macedon and Greece, during his Eastern expe- 
dition, 426. Checks the commotions in Greece, 
i Is ordered to join his master with new levies, 

56. 

Antiphon, the orator, his character, 243. 

Antiphon, an Athenian incendiary, is employed by 
Philip of Macedon to burn the Athenian docks, 
413. Is detected by Demosthenes, and punished, 
414. 

Antisthenes, of Athens, the great lessons of his phi- 
losophy, 274. 

Aornos, mount, reduced by Alexander, 449. 

Apelles, his eminence as a painter, his works, 464. 

Apollo, his oracle at Delphi, 33. Statue of Apollo 
Belvidere described, 180. Abæau temple of, burn- 
ed, 395. 

Apollo, the Amyclean, account of the throne of, 177. 

Apollodorus, the Athenian painter, the first who 
knew the force of light and shade, 357. 

Apoilodorus, governor of Babylon, his arts to prevent 
Alexander from returning to that city, 457. 

Apollouides, the Olynthian, banished by the intrigues 
of Philip, 339. 

Aracus, appointed to command the Spartan flcet, 253. 

Arbela, battle of, 410. 

Arcadia, situation of that country, and character of 
its inhabitants, 61. State of, at the era of the 
peace of Antalcidas, 314. National character of 
the Arcadians, 337. Are defeated by Archidamus, 
333. Arcadia ravaged by the Spartans, and the 
Achewans, 342. A peace concluded with Athens, 
343. The Arcadians seize Olympia, and celebrate 
the games, 346. They plunder the Olympic trea- 
sure, ib. 


478 


Archelaus J. kiag of Macedon, his history and cha- 
racter, 366. 

Archidamus, king of Sparta, his pacific advice, 187. 
Is appointed to conduct the war, 190. Leads his 
army into Attica, ib. 

Archidamus, son of Agesilaus, commands the Spar- 
tan forces sent against the Arcadians, 337. Defeats 
them at Midea, 338. His speech, on the peace with 
Thebes; 344. Defeats the attempt of Epaminondas 
to surprise the city of Sparta, 343. Endeavours to 
revive the Spartan power in the Peloponnesus, 
377. Aims at the temple at Delphi, 395. Raises 
an army for that purpose, 396. - 

Archilochus, the poet, memoirs of, 74. His bitter 
revenge against Neobulé and her father, ib. Cha- 
racter of his poetry, 75. Is banished Paros, ib. 
Recovers credit at the Olympic games, ib. Ho- 
nours paid him on his return to Paros, 76. 

Architecture, rnde state of, in the heroic ages of 
Greece, 31. The Doric and Ionic orders of, where 
invented, 176. 

Archons, commencement of the magistracy of, at 
Athens, in the stead of kings, 35. ‘Their number, 
office, and rank, 164. 

Areopagus, court of, at Athens, described, 98, 164. 

Arginussa, battle of, 255. 

Argonautic expedition undertaken, 15. The object 
of this adyenture, 16. 

Argos, first settled by Danaus, 13. Contests between 
the citizens, and those of the dependent towns, 62. 
War with Sparta, 89. Intestine commotions in the 
republic of, 158. Thetown of Mycene destroyed, 
159. Conduct of the Argives during the Pelopon- 
nesian war, 212. The Argive alliance, 213. ‘Lhe 
Argives take arms on the renewal of the Pelopon- 
nesian war, 215. Conclude a truce, ib. The truce 
broken, 216. ‘Tumult at Argos, 217. 

Arteus, succeeds to the command of Cyrus’s army, 
237. Concludes a truce with Artaxerxes, ib. Is 
detached from the Grecian allies, ib. 

Aristeus, commands the Corinthian auxiliaries, 186. 
Istaken by the Athenians and put to death, 194. 
Aristagoras, of Melitus, instigates the lIonians to 
revolt against the Persian government, 97. His 
negotiations at Sparta, ib. Applies to the Athe- 
nians for assistance, 98, 100. The remainder of his 

history, and death, 101. 

Aristides, his generous deference to Miltiades, 107. 
Comparison between him and Themistocles, 110. 
Their rivalship, ib. He is banished, ib. Returns to 
the Grecian fleet before the battle off Salamis, 126. 
His speech to Mardonius, 130. Is entrusted with 
the finances of the confederated Greek forces, 152. 
His death and character, 153. 

, a Theban painter, his great power of 
expression, 358. 

Aristocrates, king of Arcadia, professes to assist the 
Messenians against the Spartans, 57. Deserts 
them, 1b. His second treachery, and punishment, 


Aristodemus, the Messenian, devotes his daughter to 
death, in obedience to oracular demand, 52. Kills 
her himself, 53. Becomes king, and wages suc- 
cessful war against the Spartans, ib. Kills him- 
self, ib. 

Aristodemus, an Athenian player, employed by Philip 
of Macedon to cultivate his interest at Athens, 390. 
His embassy to Philip, ib. Is sent again, 391. 

Aristomenex, is saluted king of Messenia by the army, 
55. His expedition to the city of Sparta, ib. His 
repeated successes against the Spartans, ib. Is 
defeated at the Trenches, 57. Defends the fortress 
of Eira,ib. Is taken prisoner, ib. His escape, 58. 
Is surprised by the Spartans, ib. Abandons Eira, 
59. Is kindly received by the Arcadians, ib. His 
travels, death, and character, 60. 

Aristophanes, a declared enemy to Socrates, 172. 
Nature of his comedies described, 172. Ridicules 
Cleon, 207. His comedy of the Clouds, the remote 
cause of the prosecution of Socrates, 269. 

Aristotle, his deito of style in writing, 275. 


INDEX. 


(Note.) Inquiry into Plato’s doctrine of ideas, 363. 
ei e p =- by Alexander, 465. His 
moral and political works, ib. His philosophy, 466. 
His logic, ib. His great PPOs tes of moa 
ment, ib. His death, 467. Tenets ofthe Peripa- 
tetic school, ib. Estimate and fate of his phi- 
losophy, 470. 

Armenia, passage of the Greeks through that coun- 
try, 291. 

Arrian, remarks on his account of Alexander’s pas- 
sage from Phaselis'to Perga, 431. 

Artabanus, his moral reflections to Xerxes, on the 
review of his immense army, 114. His cautions 
for the safety of the Persian fleet, 115. 

Artabazus, satrap of Ionia, revolts from the king of 
Persia, 355. 

Artaphernes, the Persian governor of Sardis, com- 
mands the Athenians to reinstate Hippias, 100. 

Artaxerxes Longimanus, king of Persia, affords pro- 
tection to Themistocles on his banishment, 152, 
153. His measures of defence against the Grecian 
invasion, 154. Cimon’s victories over his fleet and 
army, ib. Revolt of Egypt, 155. Solicits a peace 
with the Athenians, 156. 

Artaxerxes (Mnemon,) is appointed successor to the 

throne of Persia, 231. His brother Cyrus disputes 

the crown with him, 232. Leads his army against 

him, 285. Battle of Cynaxa, ib. Concludes a 

truce with the Grecian army, 287. Makes war 

against the Spartans, 297. Orders the death of 

Tissaphernes, 302. His interview with Conon, 

306. Is persuaded by Conon to rebuild the walls 

of Athens, 309. He dictates the terms of a general 

peace, 312. His motive for promoting the tran- 
quillity of Greece, 322. Procures a congress to be 
held at Sparta, 323. Concludes a treaty with the 

Spartans, 336. A congress of the Grecian states 

at his court, 340. 

Artemisia, of Halicarnasus, her advice to Xerxes, 
124. Her artifice to save herself at the battle of 
Salamis, 127. 

Artemisium, the first sea engagement there between 
the Grecian and Persian fleets, 121. The second, 
122. 

Aspasia, the Athenian courtesan, her character, 175, 
188. 

ae inhabitants of, chastised by Alexander, 
431 


a 


Asia Minor, is colonized by Greeks, 35. Distinction 
of dialects in the new settlements, ib. Peculiar 
advantages of the Ionian colonies, ib. 

Assyria, downfall ofthe monarchy of, 86. 

Astronomy favoured by Alexander’s conquest of Ba- 
bylon, 465. 

Atheas, king of Scythia, invites Philip of Macedon to 
assist him against the Istrians, 411. His perfidy, 
ib. Is chastised by Philip, 412. 

Athenagoras, of Syracuse, inspires his countrymen 
against the Athenian armament, 226. 

Athens, first settled by Cecrops, 13. Agriculture 
taught there by Cecrops, ib. The Cretan insti- 
tutions introduced by Theseus, 18. The exiled 
descendants of Hercules received into Attica, 33. 
Royalty abolished, and the magistracy of Archons 
substituted in its room, 35. The Dorians expelled 
by the Athenians, ib. Political revolutions at 
Athens, 62. Constitution of the republic, as regu- 
lated by Solon, 938. Rapid successes of the Athe- 
nians after establishing a democracy, 99. They 
assist the Ionian revolters against the Persians, 100. 
But afterward leave them, 101. Attica invaded by 
the Persians, 105. Conduct of the Athenians after 
the battle of Marathon, 1038, 109. Naval successes, 
111. Strength and spirit of the republic, ib. Bat- 
tle of Thermopylæ, 119. Xerxes enters Attica, and 
the Athenians abandon their country, 124. The 
Spartans desert the Athenian cause, 130. Contest 
between the Athenians and Tegeans, 132. They 
distinguish themselves at the battle of Platea, 134. 
And at that of Mycalé, 136. Their prosperity after 
these victories, 147. Their attainments in the arts 


INDEX. 


of peace, ib. Celebrate their victory over the Per- 
sians at Salamis, 148. The city of Athens rebuilt 
and fortified, ib. The Athenians assist the revolt 
of Egypt from Artaxerzes, 155. Peace concluded 
with Artaxerxes, 156. The power of Athens 
viewed with discontent by the other Grecian 
states, 157. The famous truce of thirty years, 159. 
How they subdued their neighbouring states, 160. 
Spiritof the Athenian government, ib. Panegyric 
on the Athenian laws, 162. State of Athens at the 
time of Solon, ib. Alterations in government 
introduced by Clisthenes, 165. The democratic 
form of government completed by Pericles, 166. 
Progress of luxury in the republic, 167. The vir- 
tues and vices of this period compared, 167. His- 
tory of philosophy, 168. Tragedy, 171. Comedy, 
172. Minerva honoured as the tutelary deity of 
Athens, 173. Mode of celebrating the festivals, ib. 
Domestic manuers of the Athenians, 174. The 
fine arts, 178. Great improvements made by 
Athenian sculptors and painters, ib. Origin of the 
Peloponnesian war, 181. The Corinthians and 
Corcyreans appeal to Athens, 183. A treaty of 
mutual defence concluded with Corcyra, 184. A 
reinforcement sent to the Corcyrean fleet, ib. 
Reply to the remonstrance of the Corinthians, 185. 
Account of the states confederated against Athens, 
187. A menacing embassy received from the con- 
federate&, ib. Preparations for war, 190. Inva- 
sion of Attica by Archidamus, ib. The invasion 
retaliated on the confederates by sea, 191. Attica 
evacuated, ib. Athens visited by the plague, 192 
Devastation of Attica by the enemy, ib 
cess of the war, 193. The Athenian troops weak- 
ened by the plague, 203. Expedition to Ætolia, ib. 
Peace made with Sparta, 212. Accession of 
Athens to the Argive alliance, 213. Mutual dis- 
contents between Athens and Sparta, 214. Re- 
newal of the war, 215—219. Send a fleet to Sicily, 
°Q21. Attica invaded by Agis, 231. Vigorous exer- 
tions of the Athenians, ib. Are finally defeated at 
sea before Syracuse, 235. Their disastrous retreat 
from that city, ib. General consternation, 239. 
Combination of the Grecian states against Athens, 
ib. The Athenians defeat the measures of the 
Corinthians and Chians, 241. The democracy over- 
turned, 243. The government of the Four Hun- 
dred formed, 245. Their tyranny, ib. Tumults at 
Athens, 246. The democracy restored, 247. The 
Athenians become again victorious at sea, ib. Ce- 
lebration of the Eleusinian rites, 249. Celebration 
of the Plynteria, 250. Athens besieged by Lysan- 
der, 260. Athens surrenders to Lysander, and is 
dismantled, 261. Cruel treatment of the Athenians 
by the thirty tyrants, 263. The tyrants deposed, 
and decemvirs elected, 267. The internal peace of 
Athens effected, 268. A general amnesty, 269. 
State of the fine arts at this time, 274. The Athe- 
nians assist the Thebans against the Spartans, 304. 
The walls of Athens rebuilt, 309. The Athenians 
contribute to the revolt of Cyprus, 312. Accept 
terms of peace from Artaxerxes, ib. The alliance 
with Sparta renewed, 321. The Athenians irrita- 
ted at the attempt of Sphodrias on the Piræus, ib. 
Naval successes against the Spartans, 322. The 
exiled inhabitants of Platæa received into the re- 
public, 323. Deputies sent to the Grecian congress 
at Sparta, 324. Conduct of the Athenians after the 
battle of Leuctra, 328. They resolve to hold the 
balance of power, 329. A defensive alliance with 
Sparta debated; 334. Assistance sent to the Spar- 
tans against the Theban invasion, 335. The alliance 
with Sparta extended and confirmed, 336. Peace 
concluded with the Arcadians, 313. The Atheni- 
ans recover many of their maritime possessions, 
351. The degeneracy of the Athenians, 352. Their 
extreme profligacy, 353. The social war, 354. 
State of philosophy at this time, 356. Statuary, 
ib. Painting, ib. Literature, 353. The Athenians 
deluded by a trea wi Philip of Macedon, 369. 
They counteract his views upon Olynthus, 379. 


Til suc-. 


79 


They defend the straits of Thermopyle against 
Philip, ib. Are deluded into negligence, 383. 
State of parties in Athens, 384. Attica insulted by 
Macedonian fleets, 390. Ambassadors sent to ne- 
gotiate with Philip, 391. A third embassy to Phi- 
lip, 394. A treaty concluded with Philip, 396. 
General consternation at the fate of the Phocians, 
398. Pass a decree for receiving the Phocian fugi- 
tives, 399. Resolve to preserve their engagements 
with Philip, 400. The Athenians courted by the 
Spartans and Peloponnesians, 402. They endea- 
vour to rouse the Grecian states against Philip, 405. 
Spirited exertions against Philip, by sea and land, 
413. The Athenians raise a confederacy against 
Philip, 416. General consternation on Philip seiz- 
ing Elatea, 417. Moderation of Philip toward 
Athens, 419. The peace with Philip ratified, 420. 
State of, during the latter years of N 447. 
Philosophical sects established there, 467. 

Atys, son of Creesus king of Lydia, his death, and the 
consequences of it, 85. 


B 


Babylon, the capital of Assyria, besieged by Cyrus, 
94, The city, and its resources, described, ib. Is 
taken by stratagem, ib. Improvements made there 
by Alexander, 455. Scheme of Apollodorus to pre- 
vent Alexander’s return thither, 458. 

Bacchus, his expedition to India inquired into, 449.. 
(Note.) 

Bacon, lord, his character of Aristotle, 465. 

Bards, Grecian, their character during the heroic 
ages, 7]. Their high authority and influence on 
Society, 72. The respect attached to their cha- 
racter, ib. Peculiar advantages of the ages in which 
they lived, 73. The perfection and authority of 
their compositions, ib. 

Bardyllis, an Illyrian chief, effects a revolution in 
Macedonia, 367. Defeats Perdiccas, ib. Is de- 
feated and killed by Philip of Macedon, 370. 

Batchycles, the Magnesian, makes the throne of Amy- 
clean Apollo, 177. 

Beattie, Dr. remarks on his Essay on Truth, 468. 
(Note.) 

Belus, temple of, at Babylon, account of, 458. 

Bias, of Priené, dissuades Croesus king of Lydia 
from attempting naval exploits, 84. 

Beotia, revolt of the inferior cities of, from the autho- 
rity of Thebes, 159. The revolters assisted by the 
Athenians, 159. Battle of Delium, 203. 

Boges, the Persian governor of Eion, his desperate 
conduct and death, 153. 

Boxing, how practised in the ancient gymnastic ex- 
ercises, 67. 

Brachmans, ancient, account of their tenets, 458. 

Brasidas, a Spartan naval commander, joins the fleet 
of Alcidas, 199. His prudent counsel overruled, 
201. His expedition to Thrace, 209. His address 
to the Acanthians, ib. Procures the revolt of Am- 
phipolis, 210. His death, aud honours paid to his 
memory, 211. 

Bucephalus, Alexander the Great’s horse, a city found- 
ed to his memory, 426. 

Bythima, sufferings of the Greeks under Xeno- 
phon, in their passage through that country, 294. 
Byzantium, its foundation, and peculiar situation, de- 
scribed, 150 Is taken from the Persians, by thie 
Greeks, ib. Is taken by Alcibiades, 249. Is taken 
from the Athenians by Lysander, 260. Attempt of 

Philip of Macedon to surprise it, 410. 


C 


Cabyla, founded by Philip of Macedon, 401. 

Cadmus, a Pheuician, the founder of Thebes, 13. 

Calanus, the Brachman, his death and prophecy, 
458. 

Calenture, general idea of this disorder, 317. 

Callas, the Athenian admiral, his exertions against 
Philip of Macedon, 407. 


480 


Callicratidas, his reception in the command of the 
Peloponnesian fleet, 254. His manly behaviour, 
ib. Obtains voluntary contributions from the Io- 
nians, ib. Takes Methymna, 255. Defeats the 
Athenian fleet under Conon, ib. Is defeated and 
killed at Arginusse, ib. 

Callicratides, the Spartan, manner of his death at the 
battle of Platæa, 135. 

Callisthenes, put to death for a conspiracy against 
Alexander the Great, 460. (Note.) 

Callizenus, procures a decree against the Athenian 

_ admirals, 257. 

Cambyses, king of Persia, pursues the conquests of 
his father Cyrus, 94. Reduces Egypt, 95. His 
death, ib. 

Camerina, city of, holds a neutrality between Syra- 
cuse and Athens, 229. 

Candaules, king of Lydia, the consequences of his 
imprudence, 82. 

Cappadocia, invaded and ravaged by Cresus king of 
Lydia, 88. 

Caranus, an Argive prince, establishes a principality | 
in Macedonia, 365. 

Carthage, the foundation and growth of, 136. Pre- 
vents the Phoczans from settling in Corsica, 137. 
Commercial prosperity and power of the Cartha- 
ginians, ib. Civil government of the republic, ib. 
(Note.) Ambitious and jealous spirit of the repub- 
lic, 138. Learning of, ib. (Note.) Views of the Car- 
thaginians in entering into alliance with Xerxes, 
ib. They invade Sicily, 145. Conclude a trea- 
ty of peace with Syracuse, 146. Undertake the 
eapenest of Sicily, 278. ‘Treat the natives cruel- 

, ib. 

One of Rhodes, his character as a chronologist 
and historian, 81. (Note.) | 

Cataphracts, in the Grecian military, what, 428. 
(Note.) 

Categories, the ten, in the ancient logic explained, 
360. (Note.) 

Cebes the Theban, his final conversation with Socra- 
tes, 272. Account of his celebrated Table, 274. 

Cecrops his settlement in Attica, 13. 

Cephalus, his character and good fortune at Athens, 
263. 

Ceres, honoured by the Athenians in the Eleusinian 
festival, 249. 

Chabrias, the Athenian general of the Theban army, 
his address in opposing the operations of Agesilaus, 
in Beotia, 322. The unusual attitude of his statue 
at Rome explained, ib. (Note.) Acts in the capaci- 
ties of general and admiral, ib. Repulses Epami- 
nondas from before Corinth, 337. Is killed in the 
Social war, 354. ° 

Chalcis, region of, in Macedonia, described, 185. 

Chalyheans, their opposition to the Greeks under 
Xenophon and Cheirisophus, 291. 

Chares of Athens, his character, 354. Is sent out to 
conduct the Social war, ib. Abandons the siege 
of Chios, ib. Accuses his associates, 355. Enga- 
ges in the service of Artabazus, ib. Occasion of 
his recall, 356. His expedition to Olynthus, 386. 
Is sent to Thrace, where he is defeated by Amyn- 
tas, 410., Is one of the generals at the battle of 
Cheronea, 418. 

Charidemus, his character, and expedition to Olyn- 
thus, 388. 

Chariot-races, in the ancient Grecian public games, 
when instituted, 67. 

Charon, his address and fortitude during the execu- 
tiod of Pelopidas’s conspiracy at Thebes, 319. 

Cherisophus commands the Spartan troops sent to 
assist Cyrus in his Asiatic expedition, 283. His 
advice to the Greeks, 289. Is elected one of their 
generals, ib. Memorable retreat of the Greeks 
from Asia, ib. Leaves Trebizond, 293. His return, 
294. His death, ib. 

i Aaa battle of, between Philip and the Greeks, 

Cherries, first brought from Cerasus to Italy by Lu- 
cullus, 293. 


| 


INDEX. 


Chersonesus, Thracian, description of the country, 
298. Is fortified by Dereyllidas, ib. 

Chieftains, Grecian, during the heroic ages, their rank 
and authority, 27. 

Chios, besieged by Chares, 354. 

Chiron, the Grecian bard, brief account of, 72. 

Chorienes, his submission to Alexander the Great, 
445. 

Chorus in the Grecian theatre, its origin, and advan- 
tages, 171. 

Chronology very loosely regarded by the ancient 
Greek historians, 12. ( Note.) 

Cicero, remarks on his account of the conduct of 
Callicratidas,.255. (Note.) 

Cimmerians, their invasion of Asia Minor, 82. 

Cimon, his character, 153. Succeeds to the com- 
mand of the Grecian army, on the death of Aris- 
tides, ib. His rapid successes in Caria and Lycia, 
ib. Reduces Phaselis, ib. Defeats the Persian 
fleet, 154. Surprises the Persian camp at Euryme- 
don,ib. His successful expedition to Cyprus, 156. 
Is banished by the influence of Pericles, 159. 
Parallel between him and Pericles, 160. 

Cinadon, his character, and conspiracy against the 
Spartan government, 299. His plot discovered, ib. 
He is put to death, 300. 

Cirrha, a city of the Crisseans, described, 63. Is 
taken and destroyed by the Amphictyonic army, 65. 

Clearchus, his address in appeasing the mutiny of 
Cyrus’s Grecian troops, 284. His misccnduct at 
the battle of Cynaxa, 286. Concludes a truce 
with Tissaphernes, 287. Is perfidiously seized by 
Tissaphernes, ib. 

Cleigenes, the Acanthian, his speech in the Spartan 
assembly against the Olynthian confederacy, 316. 

Cleiteles, the Corinthian, his speech at Athens in 
favour of a defensive alliance with Sparta, 334. 

Cleombrotus, his accession to the throne of Sparta, 

-317. Is sent to conduct the war in Beeotia, 321. 
Ts sent a second time with that trust, 326. Is de- 
feated and killed on the plain of Leuctra, 327. 

Cleomenes, king of Sparta, rejects the overtures of 
Aristagoras, 98. His resentment against Clisthe- 
nes, 99. (Note.) His death, 112. 

Cleon of Athens, his character, 197. Urges the doom 
of death against the captive citizens of Mitylené, 
ib. Prevails on the Athenians to reject the Spar- 
tan overtures for peace, 206. His seditious artifi- 
ces, ib. Gains the eredit of reducing Sphacteria, 
ib. Is ridiculed by Aristophanes, 207. Is killed 
before Amphipolis, 211. 

Clisthenes, alterations made by him in the govern- 
ment of Athens, 165. 

Clitus, account of the manner of his death, 460. 

Cnidus, naval engagement there, between Conon 
and Pisander, 307. 

Codrus, king of Attica, devotes himself to death for 
the cause of his country, 35. 

Colchos, inhabitants of, oppose the passage of the 
Greeks under Xenophon and Cheirisophus, but 
are defeated, 292. 

Colonization, how practised by the early Greeks, 13. 

Colours, in painting, remarks on, 35 

Comedy, Greek, origin of the, 172. Its characteristic 
distinctions from tragedy, ib. And from modern 
comedy, 173. State of, in the age of Alexander the 
Great, 463. 

Companions, a body of Macedonian youth, instituted 
by king Philip, 369. 

Conon, is appointed one of the ten commanders to 
supersede Alcibiades, 253. Is defeated by Calli- 
cratidas, 255. His advice rejected, and the Athe- 
nian fleet captured by Lysander, 259. Entertains 
the hope of retrieving the fortune of Athens, 3J6. 
His interview with Artaxerxes, ib. Defeats Pisan- 
der by sea at Cnidus, 307. Prevails on Artaxerxes 
to rebuild the walls of Athens, 309. His endea- 
vours to restore the power of Athens, 310. Is put 
to death by the Persians, 311. 

Corcyra, fleet of, destroyed by Themistocles, 111. 
Rupture between this colony and Corinth, 182 


INDEX. 


The fleet of, defeats that of the Corinthians, 183. 
The Corcyreans ravage the states allied with Co- 
rinth, ib. Apply to Athens, ib. Representations 
of the Corcyrean deputies, ib. A treaty of mutual 
defence concluded with Athens, 184. Are defeated 
by the Corinthians in an obstinate sea-fight, ib. 
Factions generated in Corcyra by Corinthian in- 
trigues, 199. The demagogues assassinated, ib. 
Tumult between the Athenian and the Corinthian 
factions, 200. Arrival of Nicostratus with a squad- 
ron from Athens, ib. Massacre of the Lacedemo- 
nian partizans, 201. Perfidious cruelty of the 
Corcyreans, 202. 

Corinthians, their situation and character,61. Their 
political revolutions, ib. Rupture between them 
and the Corcyreans, 182. The Corinthians under- 
take the cause of Epidamnus, ib. Their fleet 
defeated by the Corcyreans, 183. Appeal to 
Athens, ib. Speech of the Corinthian deputies, ib. 
Defeat the Corcyreans in an obstinate sea-engage- 
ment, 184. Remonstrance with the Athenians, ib. 
Encourage a revolt of Macedonia from the Athe- 
nians, 185. Apply to Sparta for assistance, 186. 
Corrupt their Corcyrean prisoners, 199. Commu- 
nicate their discontents to the Argives, 212. Their 
designs against Athens discovered, 241. Mas- 
sacre of the principal citizens, 308. The Corinth- 
ians prepare to oppose the passage of Philip of 
Macedon into Peloponnesus, 402. Philip insulted 
at Corinth, 405. 

Coronea, battle of, 307. 

Cosse@ans reduced by Alexander the Great, 457. 

Cotys, king of Thrace, his rude way of life, 368. His 
frantic delusion, 372. 

Courtezans, Grecian, an account of, 175. 

Craterus succeeds Antipater as governor of Mace- 
donia and Greece, 431. 

Crenide, taken by Philip of Macedon, and called 
from him Philippi, 373. 

Crete, island of, how settled, 17. Institutions and 
manners of the natives, 18. 

Criminal jurisdiction, how exercised during the 
heroic ages of Greece, 27. 

Crissa, the republic of, described, 63. Impositions 
exacted from the pilgrims to Delphi by the 
Crisseans, ib. They plunder the shrine of Del- 
phi, ib. Siege of Crissa, 64. The city taken and 


demolished, ib. The Crissean community extir- 


pated, 65. 

Critias, chief of the thirty tyrants of Athens, his 
character, 263. His accusation of Theramenes, 
264. Orders him to be put to death, 265. Is killed 
in battle with Thrasybulus, 267. 

Crito, his last conversation with Socrates, 272. 

Cresus, the last king of Lydia, subdues the Asiatic 
Greeks, 84. Dissuaded from attempting naval 
exploits, ib. His character and splendour, ib. 
His conversation with Solon, 85. His extreme 
solicitude for the safety of his son Atys, and grief 
for his death, ib. Determines to check the pro- 
gress of Cyrus, 87. Invades Persia, 88. Is defeat- 
ed by Cyrus, ib. Is routed by him at Sardis, ib. 
Ts taken at Sardis, 90. Ilow treated by Cyrus, 90. 
Reproaches the oracle of Delphi, ib. 

Crotona, when, and by whom built, 139. The citi- 
zens reformed by Pythagoras, 143. War between 
Crotona and Sybaris, 145. Sedition there, ib. 
The citizeus defeated by the Locrians and Rhe- 
gians, 146. 

Cteselaus, his principal excellence as a sculptor, 274. 

Ctesiphon, is prosecuted by A%schines for his decree 
in honour of Demosthenes, 446. 

Curtius, Quintus, character of his histcry of Alexan- 
der the Great, 437. (Note.) 

Cyclades, reduced by the Persian generals, 105. 
Their present deplorable state, ib. (Note.) 

Cymaza, battle of, 285. 

Cynoseeplte, battle of, 345. 
yprus, description of that island, 155. 
expedition of Cimon to, 156. 

Cyrenaica, history of the ai inhabitants of, 95. 
P 3 


Successful 


401 


How withdrawn from the sphere of Grecian poli- 
tics, 277. 

Cyrus, king of Persia, his extraction, 86. His first 
exploits, 87. Defeats Croesus king of Lydia, 88. 
Routs him again at Sardis, ib. Takes the city of 


Sardis, 90. His treatment of Crasus, ib. His 
reply to the solicitations of the Ionians, 91. His 
reply to the Spartan deputies, 92. Besieges 


Babylon, 94. Reduces it by stratagem, ib. His 
character, 96. 

Cyrus, son of Darius Nothus, his interview with Ly- 
sander in Asia Minor, 251. Solicits the re-ap- 
pointment of Lysander to the command of the 
Spartan fleet, 258. Disputes the succession of his 
brother Artaxerxes, 281. His character, 282. State 
of Lower Asia under his administration, ib. His 
popular conduct, ib. Procures the assistance of 

_ the Greeks, 283. His expedition into Upper Asia, 
ib. His interview with Epyaxa wife of Syennesis, 
ib. He passes the Euphrates, 285. Battle of Cy- 
naxa, ib, «His death, 286. 

Cythera, island of, subdued by the Athenians under 
Nicias, 208. 

Cyzicus, the whole Peloponnesian fleet captured 
there by Alcibiades, 247. 


D 


Danaus, his settlement at Argos, 13. 

Darius Codomanus, his accession to the throne of 
Persia, 427. His inactivity during the progress of 
Alexander accounted for, 432. Collects an im- 
mense army to oppose Alexander, ib. His indis- 
creet march to Issus, 433. Disposition of his army 
at the battle of Issus, 434. Is routed, ib. His es- 
cape, 435. Battle of Arbela, 441. His flight, ib. 
His assassination, 443. 

Hystaspes, king of Persia, his character, 95. 

His revenue and resources, 96. His expedition 

into Scythia, 97. His exertions to reduce the revolt 

of Ionia, 102. Takes Miletus, 103. His attention 
to the prosperity of Ionia after its reduction, ib. 

His resentment against the Athenians, 104. His 

instructions to Datis and Artaphernes, 105. His 

generosity to his Eretrian prisoners after the battle 
of Marathon, 108. His last years employed in ` 

preparations for another Grecian expedition, 112, 

See Xerzes. 

Nothus, king of Persia, his character, 239. 
His generals violate the Persian treaty with Athens, 
240. He sends his son Cyrus into Asia Minor, 
251. His death, 281. 

Datis, and Artaphernes, Persian generals, their inva- 
sion of Greece, 104. They reduce the Cyclades, 
105. Land in Attica, ib. Battle of Marathon, 107 

Dead, the memory of those slain in war, how cele- 
brated by the Athenians, 190. (Note.) 

Decelia, in Attica, fortified by Agis king of Sparta, 231, 

Decemvirs chosen by the Athenians on the deposition 
of the thirty tyrants, 267. 

Dedalus the Athenian, and Dedalus of Sicyon, pro- 
bably confounded by the Athenian writers, 176. 
(Note.) 

Deliun, battle of, between the Thebans and Atheni- 
ans, 208. 

Delphi, oracle of, 37. Description of Delphi, 38. 
Mode of delivering oracles there, ib. Its influence 
in establishing the Olympic games, and the laws of 
Sparta, ib. The temple plundered by the Crisse- 
ans, 63. Command of the oracle on this occasion, 
64. How rescucd from the attempt of Xerxes, 123. 
The temple seized by the Phocians, 375. 

Demades, his character and opposition to Demosthe- 
nes, 383. Reprimands the levity of Philip of Ma- 
cedon after the battle of Cheronæa, 419. 

Demaratus, joint king of Sparta, is reduced by Cleo- 
meues, his associate, to take refuge at the court of 
Persia, 112. His character of the Greeks, 114, 
Aud of the Spartans, 117. 

Demetrius, (Phalerius,) the first writer who cultivated 
chronology as a science, 11. (Note.) 


482 


Demochares, his insolence to Philip of Macedon, 420. 

Demosthenes, the Athenian general, his expedition 
to Ætolia, 203. Storms Ægitium, ib. Defends 
Naupactus, 204. Surprises the camp of the Am- 
brasians, ib. Fortifies Pylus, ib. H:s defence of 
this port against the Spartans, 205. Reduces 
Sphacteria, 206. His operations in Beotia discon- 
certed, 208. He and his troops captivated by Gy- 
lippus, 238. Is put to death, ib. 

————,, the orator, his first appearance against 
Philip of Macedon, 379. The motives by which he 

was actuated, 380. His first Philippic, ib. Mea- 

sures proposed by him for resisting Philip, 381. His 
military behaviour in Eubeea, 384. His first oration 
in favour of the Olynthians, ib. Cause of his par- 
tiality to Chares, 386. His second oration in behalf 
of the Olynthians, ib. His third oration, 388. His 
quarrel with Æschines, 392. Dissensions between 
him and his colleagues, ambassadors to Philip, ib. 

Is disabled by embarrassment from addressing 

Philip, 393. His artful behaviour to his associates 

on their return,ib. His speech at the report of the 

embassy, ib. Procures himself to be joined an ano- 
ther embassy to Philip, 394. His speech to Philip, 
ib. Is prevented trom declaring his sentiments to 
the Athenians, 397. Advises the Athenians not to 
break their treaty with Philip, 400. His celebrated 
reply to the partizans of Macedon, 403. Defends 
the conduct of Diopeithes, 406. Receives Persian 

ay to encourage his opposition to Philip, 408. 

Ero wens conferred on him for his services in Eu- 

bea, ib. Exhorts the Athenians to assist the 

cities of Propontis, 409. Renews his exhortations, 

410. Detects the plot of Antiphon, 414. His ora- 

tion on the seizing of Elatea by Philip, 417. Per- 

suades the Thebans to oppose Philip, 418. Repairs 
the walls and fortifications of Athens at his own 
charges, 420. His oration in honour of the slain at 

Cheronea, 421. His masterly defence against 

Æschines, 446. His generosity to him, 447. His 

banishment and death, ib. 

Deodatus, of Athens, opposes the cruel resolution of 
Cleon against the captive citizens of Mytilené, 197. 

Dere, battle of, between the Spartans and Messe- 
nians, 55. 

Dercyllidas, the Spartan general, his character, 297. 
Fortifies Chersonesus against the Thracians, 298. 
m treaty with Tissaphernes, ib. Defends Abydus, 
3 F 


' 


Design, history of the arts of, 176. State of, in the 
age of Alexander the Great, 464. 

Dido, probably contemporary with Æneas, 136. 
(Note.) 

Diogenes, the cynic, ridicules the efforts of the Co- 
rinthians to oppose Philip of Macedon, 402. Is 
visited by Alexander king of Macedon, 423. 

Diognotus disposes Pausanias to protect Thrasy- 
bulus, 268. 

Diomedon, the Athenian admiral, his speech before 
his execution, 257. 

Dioneces, the Spartan, his memorable observation at 
the battle of Thermopyle, 120. 

Dionysius of Syracuse, his first rise and character, 
279. His artful usurpation of the government, 280. 
His unsuccessful attempts for literary fame, ib. 
Reasons why his character has been held in so odi- 
ous a light, ib. 

Dionysius the younger, his character, 281. His 
tyranny abolished by Timoleon, ib. 

, a Phocean, his advice at a council of war, 
102. His ineffectual efforts to introduce active dis- 
cipline in the fleet, 103. Betakes himself to pira- 
cy, ib. 


of Halicarnassus, his distinctions in the | 


qualities of style, 69. (Note.) 

Diopeithes, an Athenian general, his vigorous exer- 
tions against Philip of Macedon, 406. His conduct 
defended by Demosthenes, ib. Is defeated and 
killed by Philip, 409. 

Dodona, origin of the oracle there, 37. 

Dorians, their o1iz*n, 12. Engage as auxiliaries to 


INDEX. i 


the Heracleidæ, 34. Establish themselves in Pelo- 
ponnesus, ib. Migration of, 35. Why not alarm- 
ed at the progress of Cyrus, 92. Review of their 
circumstances at the time of their emigration to 
Magna Græcia, 140. 

Draco, the lawgiver of Athens, character of him and 
his institutions, 162. 


E. 


Education, the main objects of, during the heroic 
ages of Greece, 31. How regulated by Lycurgus 
at Sparta, 45. By Solon at Athens, 165. The plan 
of, according to the Pythagorean school, 143. 

Egypt, the Egyptians, why unqualified for relishing 
or improving music, 68. A settlement of Grecian 
pirates established in Egypt, 94. Is reduced by 
Cambyses, 95. Revolt of, under Inarus, 155. The 
arts of design early cultivated there, 176. Ready 
submission of that country to Alexander the Great, 
439. History of, subsequent to Alexander, 463. 

Eira, fortress of, gallantly defended by Aristomenes, 
57. Is surprised by the Spartans, 58. 

Elatea seized by Philip of Macedon, 417. 

Elegy, in poetry, to what purposes principally ap- 
plied by the Greeks, 73. 

Eleusinian mysteries, celebration of the, at Athens 
described, 249. Requisites for initiation into them, 
me The procession of, conducted by Alcibia- 

es, ib. 

Elis, republic of, contrasted with that of Sparta, 62. 
The Elians destroy Pisa, and adorn the temple of 
the Olympian Jupiter, 158. They feebly assist the 
Spartans against the Athenians, 277. Elis invaded 
by the Spartans, and snbjugated, ib. The Elian 
territory invaded by the Arcadians, who seize 
Olympia, 346. The city restored, 347. 

Enharmonic genus of Grecian music, by whom in- 
vented, 69. 

Ennius, his concise enumeration of the principal 
Greek and Roman divinities, 26. (Note.) 

Eolians, their origin, 12. Eolia settled by Pelopon- 
nesian fugitives, 34. Confederacy of the Eolians 
against Cyrus, 91. 

Epaminondas, his character, 320. Appears at Sparta 
as the Theban deputy, 323. His demands, 324. 
Reflections on his conduct, ib. Assembles the 
Theban forces before the plain of Leuctra, 326. 
Disposition of his troops opposed to Cleombrotus, 
327. Battle of Leuctra, ib. Ravages Laconia, and 
rebuilds Messene, 335. His motives for evacuating 
Laconia, 336. Is tried for his conduct, ib. Marches 
against Corinth, 337. Is again disgraced, ib. De- 
livers Pelopidas from the king of Thessaly, 340. 
Compels the Achzans to accept the Theban alli- 
ance, 342. Aims to render Thebes mistress of the 
sea, 345. His attempt to surprise Sparta, 348. 
Attempts Mantinæa, ib. His victory before that 
city, 349. His death, 350. His character, ib. 

Ephualtes, employed by Pericles at Athens, 166 

Ephori, instituted by Lycurgus at Sparta, the nature 
of their office, 42. 

Epialtes, his treachery to the Greek defenders of the 
straits of Thermopylæ, 118. 

Epicides, his opposition to Themistocles silenced by 
a bribe, 115. 

Epicurus, account of his philosophy, 474. His cha- 
racter, 475. 

Epidamnus, citizens of, apply to Corinth for protec- 
tion against the Taulantii, 182. Submits to the 
Corcyreans, 183. 

Epode and Iambic, the distinction between, 74. 

Epyaza, wife of Syennesis, governor of Cilicia, medi- 

| __ ates between Cyrus and her husband, 283. 
| Equestrian exercises at the ancient public games, 
described, 67. 
Eretria, naval engagement there, 246. 
| Escuoius engages in the Argonautic expedition, 16. 
| Eteocles and Polynices, the sons of Œdipus, history 


| of, 17 


Eteonicus, his stratagem to preserve the Peloponne- 


INDEX, 


_ sian fleet after the defeat of Callieratidas, 256. 
His address in quelling a mutiny among his sea- 
men, 258. 

Eubæa, island of, reduced by the Persians, 105. State 
of, after the expulsion of the Thebans, 383. The 
intrigues of Philip of Macedon there, 384. Philip 
expels the Athenians, 390. The Macedonians ex- 
pelled by Phocion and Demosthenes, 408. 

Eudamidas, his expedition to Macedon, 316. 

Euephnus the Lacedemonian, his perfidy, 49. 

Eumenes, secretary to Alexander the Great, his cha- 
raeter, 457. 

Euphaes, king of Messené, his advice on the treach- 
erous hostilities of the Spartans, 50. His exhorta- 
tion to his forces, 51. His battle with the Spar- 
tans, ib. His exposition of the oraeular demand of 
a virgin sacrifice, 53. His death, ib. 

Euphemus, the orator, his reply to Hermocrates at 
Camerina, 229. 

Euphranor, the Corinthian painter, his great cha- 
racter, and principal works, 357. 

Euphrates, the inundations of, restrained by Alex- 
ander the Great, 456. 

Euphron, usurps the government of Sieyon, 342. Is 
assassinated, 343. 

Eupompus, the Grecian painter, forms a new school 
at Sieyon, 357. 

Euripides eomplctes the Grecian tragedy, by perfect- 
ing the chorus, 171. His character, 172. 

Eurydice, queen of Macedonia, solicits the assistance 
oft Iphicrates in behalf of her sons, 366. 

Eurylochus, a Thessalian prince, commands the Am- 
phictyonic army sent against Crissa, 64. His army 
distressed by pestilence, ib. Takes and destroys 
the eity, 65. 

Eurymedon conducts an Athenian fleet to the assist- 
ance of Corcyra, 201. Concurs in the eruelty of 
the Coreyrean parties, 202. 

, the Persian eamp there surprised and 
taken by Cimon, 154. 

Euzine Sea, the southern coast of, 292. Xenophon 
proposes to settle his Grecian troops there, 294. 
Evagoras, king of Cyprus, his history and character, 
306. His attachment to Athens and friendship for 
Conon, ib. Revolts against the Persians, 311. Is 

reduced to become tributary to Persia, 312. 


F 
Fables, current lessons of morality in the early ages 
of Greeee and Rome, 168. 


G 


Galleys of the ancients, the true disposition of the 
rowers deseribed, 62. (Note.) Skilful management 
of them in battle, 103. 

Comes, public, why instituted by the ancient Greeks, 
6 


Gaza, taken by Alexander the Great, after a despe- 
rate dcfence, 439. 

Gellias of Agrigentum, his riches and splendid mode 
of life, 279. His miserable death, ib. 

Gelon, kiug of Syracuse, his eharacter, 145. His 
stratagem to destroy Hamilcar, and the Carthagi- 
nian fleet, ib. Dictates the terms of peace to Car- 
thage, 146. 

Geography, improved by the expedition of Alexander 
the Great to the East, 465. 

Germans, as deseribed by Tacitus, eompared with 
the Greeks as deseribed by Homer, 23. Their su- 

erstition dark and gloomy, ib. 

Glaucias, king of the Taulantii, takes arms against 
Alexander king of Macedon, 424. Is defcated by 
him, 425. 

Gods of the aneient Greeks, origin and number of 
the, aecounted for, 26. 

Gongylus, the Corinthian, brings news of relief to 
the besieged Syraeusans, 230. 

Gordius, his history, 431. His famous knot untied or 
cut by Alexander the Great, 432. 


423 


Gorgias of Leontium applies to Athens for protection 
against the usurpations of Syracuse, 220. 

Granicus, battle of, between Alexander the Great 
and the Persians, 428 

Gryllus, the son of Xenqphon, supposed to have 
killed Epaminondas, 349 (Note.) 

Guischard, his remarks on warfare, 442. (Note.) 

Gyges, how he obtained the crown of Lydia, 82. 

Gylippus, the Spartan commander, relieves the be- 
sieged Syracusans, 231. And defeats the Atheni- 
ans, 232. Captures Demosthenes and his troops, 
237. And Nicias, 238. 

Gymnastic exercises in the Grecian games described, 


H 


Haliartus, besieged by Lysander, but relieved by the 
Thebans, 304. 

Halicarnassus, besieged by Alexander the Great, 429. 
The town taken and demolished, 430. 

Hamilcar, his invasion of Sicily, and death, 145. 

Hannibal, undertakes the eonquest of Sicily, 278. 
Is, with the greatest portion of his troops, destroy- 
ed by the pestilence, ib. 

Harmocydes, commander of the Phoeian detachment 
sent to the army of Mardonius, his ill reeeption by 
that general, 131. 

Harpagus, a Mede, his stratagem in battle, 88. Re- 
duces the countries of Lower Asia, 92. Takes 
Phocza, 93. 

Harpalus, governor of Babylon, his unsuccessful 
treachery, 455. R 

Hecatonpolis, the ancient name of Laconia, 48. 

Hecatus, the diviner, his politic adviee to the Spar- 
tans.at the surprise of Eira, 59. 

Hegasandridas eommands a Peloponnesian fleet sent 
to the Athenian coast, 246. Defcats the Athenians 
at Eretria, ib. 

Hegelochus, the Athenian general, proteets Manti- 
nea, 348 

Helen, the motive that suggested the rape of, 20. 
History of; ib. Is married to Menelaus, 21. Elopes 
‘with Paris, ib. Is recovered on the destruction 
of Troy, 22. Instance of her persona] attentions, 
89. (Note.) 

Hellebore, a medicinal plant cultivated at Crissa, 63. 

Hellenes, their origin, 12. Diffuse their colonies and 
language over Greece, 14. Causes of the migra- 
tions of the Hellenic tribes, 33. 

Helots, in Sparta, aceount of, 12. How reduced toa 
state of slavery, 49. Conspire with the Parthenie, 
54. Revolt of them and the Messenians, 157. 
They are received by the Athenians on the reduc- 
tion of Ithome, ib. Cruel treatment of, by the 
Spartans, 209. Are armed by the Spartans at the 
renewal of the Peloponnesian war, ib. 

Hephestion, the favourite of Alexander the Great, 
is mistaken for him by Darius’s mother, Sisygam- 
bis, 435. Marries Darius’s daughter, Drypetis, 456. 
His death, 457. 

Heracleide expelled by the Pelopide, and received 
into Attiea, 33. Their establishment in Pcloponne- 
sus, 34. Their division of their conquests, ib. 

Hermocrates, procures a general congress of the Si- 
eilian states, 220. Animates his countrymen to de- 
fend Syraeuse against the Athenians, 227. Solicits 
aid from Camerina, 229. His works of defenee 
against the approaches of the besicgers, ib. De- 
feats the Athenian fleet, 231. His scheme to pre- 
vent the retreat of the Athenian gallcys, 233. 
Another seheme to retard their final retreat, 235. 
Burns his ships, 247. Is banished by the Syracu- 
sans, 248. His death, 279. 

Hermolaus, aecount of his eonspiracy against Alex- 

‘ ander the Great, 460. (Note.) 

Herodotus, his charaetcr and rank as a writer, 11. 
(Note.) Iis work the intermcdiatc shade between 
poetry and history, 36. (Note.) His account of the 
times of Homer and Hesiod, 71. (Note.) His his- 
tory of Cyrus preferabie to that of Xenophon, 86 


484 


INDEX. 


(Note.) His encomium on the climate of Ionia, 91. | Iphicrates commands the Grecian auxiliaries sent to 


(Note.) His account of the doctrines of Zoroaster, 
95. His character as an historian, 275. Compared 
with Thucydides, 276. 

Heroic ages of Greece, review of the, 15. In reli- 
gion, 23. In policy, 27. In natural affections, 28. 
In war, 30. In arts,31. Sciences, ib. Education, 
ib. Amusements, ib. General estimate of man- 
ners and institutions, 32. 

Hesiod, his account of the number of the heathen 
divinities, 26. 

Hexameter thought to be the only kind of verse 
known in the time of Homer, 71. (Note.) 

Hieron, king of Syracuse, his reign, 219. 

Hipparchus, tyrant of Athens, his character, 165. 

Hippias, king of Athens, expelled for his oppressive 
government, 99. (Note.) Attempt of the Spartans 
to restore him, ib. He applies to the Persians, 100. 
Is killed at the battle of Marathon, 107. 

Hippocrates, the physician, letters under his name 
shown to be spurious, 192. (Note.) 

, the Athenian general, defeated at Delium 
by the Thebans, 209. 

Hippodrome, for equestrian exercises, its size, 67. 

Histieus, tyrant of Miletus, opposes the scheme of 
cutting off the retreat of Darius Hystaspes from 
Scythia, 97. Attaches himself to Darius, ib. His 
scheme to withdraw himself, ib. Assists in crush- 
ing the revolt in Ionia, 102. His intrigues and 
death, ib. 

Homer, his poems illustrate the obscure antiquities 
of his country, 12. His account of the ancient 
Greek method of barter, 13. (Note.) His poems 
long an authority to settle disputed boundaries, 19. 
Inquiry into his authority as an historian, 22. His 
mythology conformable to popular belief, 23. Re- 
mark on his description of the shield of Achilles, 
27. (Note.) Exhibits moving scenes of conjugal 
affection, 29. His account of the state of arts, 30. 
His poems collected by Lycurgus, and brought to 
Sparta, 41. The time when he lived ascertained, 
ib. (Note.) 71. (Note.) 

Honour, the modern point of, unknown to the 
Greeks, and of Scythian origin, 79. 

Horse-races, why not so early practised as chariot- 
races at the Grecian public games, 67. 

Hume, Mr. his encomium on the Roman laws, 162. 
(Note.) 

Hydaspes, passage of Alexander the Great over that 
river, 450. Porus defeated by Alexander, 452. 
Alexander’s passage down that river, 453. 

Hyperides, decree passed at Athens on his motion, 
420. 


I 


Iambic, and epode, distinction between, 74. 

Ideas, Plato’s doctrine of, 361. 

Inarus, a Lybian chief, heads a revolt of the Egyp- 
tians against Artaxerxes, 155. 

India, an expedition to, undertaken by Alexander 
the Great, 448. The expedition of Bacchus to, 449. 
(Note.) 

Infantry more useful in war than cavalry, 86. 

Inheritance, the law of, during the heroic ages of 
Greece, 27. 

Ionia, the original inhabitants of, 12. Is settled by 
Grecian fugitives, 35. Their prosperity there, ib., 

1. Successful cultivation of arts, 82. The Ionians 
solicit the friendship of Cyrus, 91. The Ionian 
confederacy, ib. Application to the mother-coun- 
try for assistance, 92. Is over-run by the Persians, 
ib. Revolt of, against the Persians, 97. Are as- 
sisted by the Athenians, 100. But at length desert- 
ed by them, 101. Exertions of the Persians to sup- 
press them, 102. Siege of Miletus, ib. Defeat the 
Grecian fleet, but lose that city, 103. The country 
recovers its prosperity under the Persian govern- 
ment, ib. Their ships desert from the Persians at 
the battle of Salamis, 126. Battle of Mycalé, 135. 
Great progress of the fine arts there, 177. 


Persia, but returns disgusted at the service, 323. 
Is sent with an army to assist the Spartans against 
the Theban invasion, 335. His conduct censured, 
wa Is tried for failure of duty, 355. Dies in ex- 
ile, ib. 

Iphitus, institutes the regular celebration of the 
Olympic games, 39. 

Iron, its scarcity in early times, 43. The coinage of 
it into money at Sparta, ib. 

Isadus, a Spartan, romantic story of, 348. (Note.) 

Ischylus, his desperate defence of Sciritis against 
the Arcadians, 333. 

Isocrates, his encomium on Pythagoras, 141. (Note.) 
His character of the Eleusinian mysteries, 250. 
{Note.) His character of the aristocratica} factions 
supported by Lysander, 262. (Note.) His charac- 
ter as an orator, 360. Motives of his conduct in 
reference to Philip of Macedon, 361. 

Issus, battle of, 434. 

Ithome maintained by the Messenians against the 
Spartans, 52. Is reduced by the Spartans, 53. The 
fortress of, seized by the Helots, 157. Long siege 
and reduction of, ib. 


J l 

Jason undertakes the Argonautic expedition, 15. 

of Pheræ, his character and fortunes, 329. 
Conference between him and Polydamas, ib. Is 
declared captain-general of the Thessalians, 330. 
His conquests, ib. Courts an alliance with Thebes 
ib. His views in mediating a truce between The- 
bes and Sparta, 331. His assassination, ib. 

Josephus, the authenticity of his history of the Jews 
defended, 141. (Note.) Reasons for discrediting 
his account of the journey of Alexander the Great 
to Jerusalem, 438. (Note.) 

Jupiter, temple of, at Olympia, described, 158. Com: 
parison of, with other Grecian temples, ib. Tem. 
ple of, in Agrigentum described, 279. 

(Ammon,) the situation of the oracle of, de 
<a 439. Is visited by Alexander the Great. 
ib. 

Justin, his character of Arrybus, 330. (Note.) 

Juvenal, his satires criticised, 113. (Note.) 


K 


ka human, Plato’s account of the origin of, 
3 s 


L 


Laconia described, 48. See Sparta. 
Lacrines, a Spartan deputy, his declaration to Cyrus, 
92 ‘ 


Lamachus, his advice to the Athenian commanders 
of the armament sent to Sicily, 224. Is killed be- 
fore Syracuse, 229. 

Lampsacus is taken by Lysander, 258. 

Land, an idea of property in, one of the most im- 
portant steps in the progress of society, 13. Dis- 
puted boundaries of, in Greece, long settled by the 
authority of Homer’s poems, 19. How cultivated 
in Greece, during the heroic ages, 27. How divi- 
ded in Sparta, by the laws of Lycurgus, 42. 

Langarus, chief of the Agrians, assists Alexander in 
his return to Pella, 424. 

Language, general comparison between that of 
Greece and that of the Orientals, 14. (Note.) Causes 
of the perfection of the Greek language, 68. Con- 
nection between the melody of language and that 
of music, 69. 

Laocoon, the fine expression in this piece of sculp- 
ture, 180. 

Larissa, vigorous defence of, against Thimbron, 297. 
Is reduced by Dercyllidas, ib. 

Leodamas, commander of an Athenian convoy of 
provisions to Selymbria, seized by the Macedoni- 
ans, 409. The ships restored by Philip, ib. 


INDEX. 


485 


Leonidas, succeeds to the throne of Sparta, 112. ] Zyciscus preserves his daughter from being sacrificed 


Commands the Peloponnesians in the straits of 
Thermopylæ, 116. Repels the attacks of the Per- 
sians, 117. His magnanimity on discovering the 
treachery of Epialtes, 119. Surprises the Persian 
camp in the night, ib. Is killed in the battle of 
Thermopylæ, 120. 

Leontiades, betrays the citadel of Thebes to Phebi- 
das the Spartan general, 318. Is killed by Pelo- 
pidas, 320. 4 

Leotychides, the reputed son of Agis king of Sparta, 
his doubtful legitimacy, 242. His pretensions 
to the crown of Sparta disputed by Agesilaus, 
299: 

Lesbos, description and history of that island, 194. 
Its political connection with Athens, 195. Mea- 
sures taken by the Lesbians preparatory to a revolt, 
ib. They join the confederacy against Athens, ib. 
Siege of Mytilené, 196. The city surrenders, ib. 
Treatment of the inhabitants, 198. 

Leuctra, battle of, 327. 

Literature, state of, in Greece, at the close of the 
social war of Athens, 358. State of, in the age of 
Alexander the Great, 463. 

Lucian, his encomium on the Cnidian Venus, 356. 

Lycomedes, the leader of the Arcadians, defeats the 
Spartans, 332. His character, 337. His spirited 
address to his countrymen, ib. Is defeated by 
-Archidamus, 338. His firm opposition to Pelopi- 
das’s treaty, 341. Effects a peace between the 
Arcadians and the Athenians, 343. 

Lycurgus, the Spartan legislator, regulates the athletic 
exercises in the Olympic games, 39. State of 
Greece in his age, 40. Occasion ofhis travelling, 
ib. Collects the poems of Homer, and brings 
them to Sparta, 41. The main objects of his legis- 
lation, ib. His favourable reception at Delphi, ib. 
His regulations for the distribution of political 
power, 42. Institutes the Ephori, ib. His laws 
concerning property, ib. Introduces iron money, 
43. Effects of his institutions, ib. His laws com- 
prised in memorial verses, ib. His expedients to 
encourage population, 44. His care of the wo- 
men, 45. Of education, ib. Coincidence,of his 
institutions with those of the heroic ages, 46. 
Causes which undermined his institutions, 47. His 
expedient to bind the Spartans to preserve his 
laws, ib. Conformity between his institutions and 
those of Pythagoras, 144. 

Boris, the orator, stimulates the Athenians to 
put Lysicles to death, 420. 

Lydia, its ancient limits, 81. Brief history of, 82. 
Sardis taken by Cyrus, 90. 

Lysander, commander of the Peloponnesian forces; 
his character, 251. His conference with Cyrus, 
son of Darius, ib. Procures an augmentation of 
pay for the Grecian seamen, 252. Defeats the 
Athenian fleet, 253. His capacity for party in- 
trigues, ib. Is succeeded by Callicratidas, 254. 
Resumés the command of the fleet, and takes 
Lampsacus, 258. Defeats and captures the Athe- 
nian fleet, 259. Puts his prisoners to death, ib. 
Reduces the coasts and islands of Asia and Eu- 
rope, 260. Besicges and takes Athens, 261, 262. 
His cruel treatment of the conquered provinces, 
262. Procures the death of Alcibiades, 266. Ile 
invests Thrasybulus in the Piræus, 267. His ope- 
rations opposed by Pausanias, ib. Espouses the 
pretensions of Agesilaus to the Spartan crown, 
299. Is disgusted at the trcatment he receives 
from him, 300. His invasion of the Theban terri- 
tory, 304. Is killed before Ifaliartus, ib. 

Lysias, the orator, his account of the persecution of 
himself and family by the thirty tyrants of Athens, 
263. Collects a body, and joins Thrasybulus to 
oppose them, 266. Charactcr of his orations, 354. 
(Note.) His character as an orator, 359. 

Lysicles, onc of the Athenian generals at the battle 
of Cheronea, his indiscreet conduct, 418. Is put 
to death, 420. 

Lysippus, his eminence as a caster in bronze, 464. 


E a a E O N e a L L e a a a 


by the Messenians, 52. 
M 


Macedonia, the coast of, described, 185. Revolts 
from the Athenian government, instigated by the 
Corinthians, ib. And the Spartans, 209. Perdiccas 
established on the throne of Macedon by Pelopi- 
das, 339. The first principality founded there by 
Caranus, 365. Primary cause of the greatness of 
Macedon, ib. Brief history of, preceding the reign 
of Archelaus I. ib. Revolutions in, to the restora- 
tion of Amyntas IJ. 366. Distracted state of the 
country on the death of Perdiccas, 367. Philip 
declared king, 368. The Olynthian territory 
added to Macedon, 389. Macedon declared a 
member of the Hellenic body, 400. Liberal spirit 
of the Macedonian government, 421.—See Alex- 
ander. 

Magna Grecia, occasion of giving this name to the 
southern division of Italy, 54. History of the colo- 
nization of, 138. General causes of the prosperity 
of these colonies, 139. Their manners and policy 
improved by Pythagoras, 141. Decline of, and 
destruction of the Pythagoreans, 146. 

Malli, fortress of the, besieged by Alexander, 454. 

Mantinea, battle of, 216. Its situation described, 
314. Haughty message received there, from the 
Spartan government, ib. The town besieged and 
taken by Agesipolis, 315. The inhabitants refuse 
their share of the Olympic treasure, 346. Attempt 
of Epaminondas to surprise this city, 348. Victory 
gained by Epaminondas before that city, ib. 

Marathon, battle of, 107. 

Mardonius, his character, and expedition to Greece, 
104. His fleet destroyed by a storm, ib. Left in 
charge of Greece on the retreat of Xerxes, 127. 
Enters into a negotiation with the Athenians, 129. 
His address to the Athenians, ib. The ill success 
of his solicitations, 129. Ravages Attica, 130. His 
death, 134. 

Marriage, the obligations and ceremonies of, during 
the heroic ages of Greece, 28. Conjugal affection, 


Masistius, a Persian general, killed in a skirmish 
with the Athenians, 132. 

Masques, why worn by performers on the Grecian 
theatre, 353. 

Mauvillon, Major, his proposed correction of Xeno- 
phon examined, 290. (Note.) 

Measure, its use in regulating the rhythm of ancient 
music, 70. The great varieties of, ib. 

Mechanical arts, state of, in the heroic ages of 
Greece, 31. 

Medea carried into Greece by the Argonauts, 16. 

Megabazus, the Persian general, raiscs the siege of 
Memphis, 155. Reduces the Grecian army in Pro- 
sopis to capitulation, ib. 

Megacreon, of Abdera, his remark on the rapacity of 
Xerxes’s Persian army, 116. (Note.) 

Megalopolis, the city of, founded, 338. 

Megara, quarrel between that state and Athens, 186. 
(Note.) Invaded by Pericles, 191. 

Melampus, the Grecian bard, who, 72. 

Melanthus, king of Messenia, dispossessed by the 
Iferaclide, 34. Becomes king of Attica, ib. 

Melody of the Grecian music, 70. Distinctions under 
this head, ib. Connection between that of lan- 
guage and that of music, ib. 

Melos, island of, described, 217. Conference be- 
tween Athens and Melos, ib. Reduction of Melos, 
219. 

Melville, General, account of his model of the seats 
of the rowers in the ancient gallcys, 62. (Note.) 
Memphis, besieged by the Athenians, and relieved 

by Megabazus, 155. 

Menelaus, his marriage with Helen of Sparta, 21. 
Who is seduced from him by Paris, ib. Animates 
the Grecian states to revenge his cause, ib. 

Messenia, described, 48. The people, ib. Causes of 


486 j 


the war with Sparta, 49. Ampheia seized by the 
Spartans, 50. And the country plundered, ib. An 
indecisive battle with the Spartans, 52. The 
Messenians retire to Ithome, ib. Ithome reduced, 
53. Severe terms imposed by the Spartans, ib. Re- 
volt against the Spartans, ib. Battle of Deræ, 55. 
Suocessful exploits against the Spartans, ib. Ar- 
istomenes defeated, 57. Disastrous end of the 
second Messenian war, 60. The third Messenian 
war, 157. The Messenians driven from Greece by 
the Spartans, 277. Messené rebuilt by Epaminon- 
das, 335. 

Messina, city of, founded, 60. 

Metaphysics of Aristotle, account of, 466. 

Methymna taken by Callicratidas, 255. 

Midea, battle of, 338. 

Miletus, a city of Ionia, besieged by the Persians, 101. 
Is taken, 103. Battle of, 241. 

Multary discipline of the Grecians, 106. Of the Per- 
sians, 107. 

Miltiades, king of Cardia, recommends cutting off 
the retreat of Darius Hystaspes from Scythia, 97. 
Retires to Athens, ib. Advises the Athenians to 
risk a battle with the Persian invaders, 106. Obtains 
the sole command of the Athenian forces, 107. Dis- 
position of his army at the battle of Marathon, ib. 
Honours bestowed on him after this victory, 109. 
Is vested with the command of the fleet, ib. His 
motive for besieging Paros, ib. Cause of his failure, 
ib. His death, ib. ` 

Milton, his description of the Grecian mode of march- 
ing to battle, 216. (Note.) 

Minerva, the statue of, formed by Phidias, 179, 250. 
Anniversary of the Plynteria, how observed, ib. 

Minos, the elder, his history and character, 18. 

, the second, his ¢haracter, 18. His generosity 
to Theseus, ib. 

Minotaur, the fabulous accounts of, exploded, 18. 

Money, iron, the use of, introduced in Sparta by Ly- 
curgus, 43. 

Morals, Plato’s doctrine concerning, 362. Causes of 
the diversity of moral character, 364. 

Mosynecians, the singular structure of their habita- 
tions, 294. 

Music, that of Greece described, 68. Why intro- 
duced at the public games, ib. Its extent, and the 
purposes to which it was applied, ib. Causes of 
its perfection, ib. Melody of, 69. Connection 
between the melody of language and of music, 70. 
Counterpoint not understood by the Greeks, 71. 
(Note.) Influence of the musical contests at the 
public games, 80. Its extensive influence over 
mankind, 353. State of, in the age of Alexander 
the Great, 464. 

Mycale, battle of, 135. 

Mycene, town of, destroyed by the Argives, 159. 

Myronides, the Athenian general, defeats the The- 
bans near Tanagra, 159. 

Mythology of the Greeks justified by popular belief, 
23. Compared with that of the ancient Germans, 
ib. The powerful effects of, asserted, in opposi- 
tion to late inquiries, 24. Attempts to derive the 
Grecian mythology from more remote sources, 
hitherto unsuccessful, ib. Philosophical deduction 
of, 25. Moral tendency of, 26. The abuses of, un- 
known during the heroic ages, ib. Its influence 
on the political state of Greece, 27. 

Mytilene, capital of Lesbos, besieged by the Atheni- 
ans, 195. Surrenders, 196. Narrow escape of 
the inhabitants, 198. ‘The city demolished, ib. 


N 


Nature, one universal system of, 470. 

Naupactus, a settlement granted there by the Athe- 
nians to the Spartan Helots and Messenians, 157. 
Assists the Athenians in the Peloponnesian war, 
203, 207. The Messenians of Naupactus driven 
out of Greece by the Spartans, 277. 

Navigation generally applied by the early Greeks to 
piratical purposes, 15. 


INDEX. 


Nearchus, his famous voyage from the mouth of the 
Indus to that of the Euphrates, 453. 

Nebros of Cos, undertakes the cure of the pestilence 
in the Amphictyonic army before Crissa, 64. 
Poisons the water that supplied the city, 65. 

Neobule, a Parian damsel beloved by Archilochus, 
her unhappy fate, 74. 

Niceratus and his son put to death by the thirty ty- 
rants of Athens, 263. 

Nichomachus betrays the operations of the Atheni- 
ans in Beotia to the Spartans, 208. 

Nicias of Athens, his character, 206. Reduces. the 
island Cythera, 208. Accomplishes a peace with 
Sparta, 212. Opposes the Sicilian expedition, 221. 
His stratagem to deceive the Syracusans, 227. 
Defeats them in battle, 228. He prepares for ano- 
ther campaign, ib. His armament reinforced, 229. 
Applies to Athens for farther assistance,230. Ar- 
rival of Demosthenes with a fleet, 232. Is defeat- 
ed in a general engagement, ib. Prepares for 
another sea fight, 234. His address to his de- 
sponding troops, 236. His prudent order of re~ 
treat, ib. Is harassed by the enemy, ib. Surren- 
ders himself and his men to Gylippus, 238. Is put 
to death, ib. 

Nicias, the Athenian painter, his chief excellence, 
and principal works, 357. 

Nicostratus commands the Athenian squadron sent 
to the relief of Corcyra, 200. His judicious con- 
duct in an engagement with the Peloponnesian 
fleet at Corcyra, ib. 

Niobe, the sculptured group of, described, 180. 


O 


Ode, in Grecian poetry, the characteristics of, 78. 
Their want of the accompaniments of music and 
dancing, ib. ‘ 

Olympia, description of the temple of Jupiter there, 
158. The city of, seized by the Arcadians, who 
celebrate the games, 346. ‘The Olympic treasure 
plundira ib. The temple restored to the Elians, 

Olympias, sister of Aribbas king of Epirus, her ‘first 
introduction to Philip of Macedon, 373. Is marri- 
ed to him, ib. Her resentment at Philip’s infidelity, 
422. Is reconciled to him, ib 

Olympic games, the origin of, traced, 38. The imme- 
diate causes of their establishment, 39. Nature of 
this institution, and its important consequences, 40. 
Inquiry into the physical effects of the games, 78. 

Olynthus, strength and power attained by that city, 
315. Brave resistance made by, against the Spar- 
tans, 317. Is reduced by Polybiades, 318. Revival 
of the Olynthian confederacy, 371. Philip invades 
Olynthus, 384. He besieges and takes the city, 
386, 389. 

Onomarchus conducts the retreat of the Phocian 
army, after the death of Philomelus, 376. Is cho- 
sen general, and renews the war, 377. Is defeated 
and killed by Philip, 378. 

Oracles, Grecian, origin of the, traced, 37. Causes 
which gave celebrity to that at Delphi, 38. Doubt- 
ful responses of, 115. 

Oratory, how corrupted in the age of Alexander the 
Great, 463. 

Orchomenus, city of, destroyed by the Thebans, 346, 

Orpheus engages in the Argonautic expedition, 16. 

Ostracism, in the Athenian law, explained, 110, 165. 
On what occasion laid aside, 244. ( Note.) 

Othryades, the Spartan, story of, 89. 

Oxyartes defends the Sogdian fortress against Alex- 
ander, 444. Is reduced, 445. 


P 


Paches reduces Mytilené, 197. His character, and 
unfortunate end, 199. 

Peonia, is overrun by Philip of Macedon, 370. 

Pagondas, a Theban general, defeats the Athenians 
at Delium, 208. 


INDEX. 


Painting, state of, in Greece, at the close of the so- 
cial war of Athens, 356. Great expression in the 
Grecian ‘performances, 358. Colouring, ib. Clair 
obscure, ib. State of, in the age of Alexander the 
Great, 464. Declines soon after his death, 465. 

Pamphylus, the painter of Sicyon, some account of, 
357 


Pancratium, in the ancient gymnastic exercises, ex- 
plained, 67. 

Parental affection, very ardent during the heroic ages 
of Greece, 29. 

Paris, son of Priam king of Troy, his character, 21. 
Seduces and carries oif Helen, the wite of Mene- 
laus, ib. 

Parmenio, and his son Philotas, remarks on their 
deaths, 460. (Note.) 

Puropamisus, this chain of mountains passed by 
Alexander the Great, 448. 

Paros, island of, excellences of the marble there, 105. 
(Note.) The island relieved from the arms of Mil- 

` tiades, 109. 

Parrhasius, the Ephesian painter, his great power of 
expression, 353. 

Purthenia, a class of inhabitants in Sparta, 54. Con- 
spire with the Helots, ib. Form a settlement at 
Tarentum, ib 

Passions, huinan, Plato’s doctrine of, 363. Are dis- 
eases of the mind, according to the Stoics, 473. 
How analyzed by Epicurus, 474. 

Patrocles, his principal excellence as a sculptor, 274. 

, the Phliasian, his speech at Athens in 
favour of a defensive alliance with Sparta, 334. 
Assists at a renewal of it, 336. 

Pausanias commands the Greeks sent against Mar- 
donius, 131. Dissensions in his army, 132. Battle 
of Platæa, 133. Takes Byzantium, 150. His treach- 
erous application to Xerxes, ib. Is recalled, 151. 
His death, ib. , 

, opposes the operations of Lysander 

against Thrasybulus, in the Piræus, 267. Peace of 

Athens effected by his negotiations, ib. His death, 

304. 


usurps the crown of Macedon, 366. Is dis- 

` placed by Iphicrates, 367. 

Peithias, of Corcyra, assassinated in the senate- 
house, 199. 

Pelasgi and Hellenes distinguished, 12. 

Pella, the capital of Macedon, its situation described, 
3M. 

Pelopidas, his birth and character, 318. Restores 
the democratical government of Thebes, 320. 
Honours conferred on him by the Thebans, 323. 
Commands the Theban Band at the battle of Leuc- 
tra, 327. Is joined with Epaminondas in the com- 
mand of the Theban army sent against the Spar- 
tans, 333. Is intimidated at the censure of his 
conduct, 336. Is sent with an army to settle the 
affairs of Thessaly, 339. Establishes Perdiccas on 
the throne of Macedon, ib. Is treacherously seiz- 
ed by Alexander king of Thessaly, ib. His inter- 
view with queen Thebé, 340. Conversation be- 
tween him and Alexander, ib. Is sent to negotiate 
at the court of Persia, ib. His proposals accepted, 
341. The ratification of his treaty refused by the 
Grecian states, ib. His expedition to Thessaly, 
345. Is killed at the battle of Cynoscephalw, ib. 
Honours paid to his memory, ib. 

r onnesian war, origin and history of the, 181— 
261. 

Peloponnesus, first scttled by Pelops, 13. How peo- 
pled by Grecian colonies, 14. The country de- 
scribed, 19. Is scized by the Ieraclidx, 34. State 
of, after the conquest of Mcssenia, 61. 

Pelops, his settlement in Grecce, 13. 

Pentathlon, in the ancient gymnastic exercises ex- 
plained, 67. 

Perdiccas, king of Macedon, prepares to repel the 
attacks of the Athenians, 209. Refuscs the propo- 
sal of Arribæus, 210. 

Pericles, flourishing state of the polite arts in Athens 
during his time, 147. Influence of his ambition and 


487 


policy over the Athenian state, 154. Extends the 
power of Athens, 159. His character, 160. His 
popularity, ib. Parallel between him and Cimon, 
ib. Completes the democratic government of 
Athens, 166. Encourages Aristophanes, and other 
writers of the ancient comedy, 173. His attach- 
ment to Aspasia, 175. Becomes a liberal patron 
of the fine arts, 178. Summons deputies from all 
the Grecian republics to Athens, 181. Clamours 
excited against him, 188. His accusation and de- 
fence, ib. Advises the Peloponnesian war, 189. 
He invades Megara, 191. His magnanimity on oc- 
casion of the plague at Athens, 192. His unsuc- 
cessful naval expedition to the Peloponnesus, ib. 
His reply to the clamours raised against him, and 
last advice, 193. His death and character, ib. 

Persia, rise of the power of that kingdom, 86. De- 
scription of the country, and its inhabitants, ib. 
The causes of the Persian grandeur, ib. Reduces 
the states of Lower Asia, 92. Assyria conquered, 
94. Egypt conquered, 95. Religion of the Per- 
sians, 1b. Their manners, 96. Vigorous measures 
to reduce the Ionians, 102. Three distinct periods 
into which the invasion of Greece may be divided, 
104. The unfortunate expedition of Mardonius, ib. 
Invasion of Attica by Datis and Artaphernes, ib. 
Battle of Marathon, 107. Preparations of Xerxes 
for another invasion of Greece, 112. Number of his 
forces, ib. Battle of Thermopyle, 119. Disasters 
attending the Persian fleet, 120. First sea-fight at 
Artemisium, 121. The second, 122. Battle of 
Salamis, 126. Battle of Mycalé, 135. See Mar- 
donius. Character of Darius Nothus and the first 
acts of his reign, 239. Artaxerxes and Cyrus dis- 
pute the succession, 281. Expedition of Cyrus 
into Upper Asia, 283. Battle of Cynaxa, 285. 
State of the Persian empire, at the era of Alexan- 
der’s eastern expedition, 427. Deliberations of 
the Persian satraps, ib. Battles of the Granicus, 
of Issus, and of Arbela, 428, 434,440. Death of 
Darius, 443. The government of Persia intrusted 
to Peucestas, 455. 

Perinthus, obstinate defence of that city against 
Philip of Macedon, 408. 

Peripatetics, appellation of, whence derived, 467. 
Their tenets, ib. 

Persepolis, the royal palace of, burnt by Alexander 
the great, 442. 

Peucestas made governor of Persia, 455. 

Phalanz, Grecian, described, 106. Not instituted by 
Philip king of Macedon, 369. 

Phalaris, tyrant of Agrigentum, his history, 143. 
(Note.) : 

Phaleucus, commander of the Athenian mercenaries, 
disobeys orders, and seizes Nicwa, 395. The dis- 
asters of him and his followers, 397. 

Pharax, commander of the Grecian flect, removed 
by Agesilaus in favour of Pisander, 302. 

Pharnabazus, commands the Persian fleet, 307. Ob- 
tains the daughter of Artaxerxes‘in marriage, 309. 

Pharsalus, wise administration of Polydamus there, 
al Jason declared captain general of the city, 

0. 

Phaselis, city of, reduced by Cimon the Grecian 
commander, 153. 

Phayllus renews the sacred war, 379. 

Phere, great authority of Jason there, 329. See 
Jason, and Alexander. 

Phidias, description of his statue of Jupiter at 
Olympia, 158. Is patronised by Pericles, 178. His 
most enngathed. performances, ib. His statue 
of Minerva, 179. His accusation and banishment, 
188. His principal scholars, 274. 

Philip, afterward king of Macedon, is carried as a 
hostage to Thebes by Pelopidas, 367. His educa- 
tion, and early transactions, ib His return to 
Macedon, ib., 368. Is declarcd king of Macedon, 
368. His kind treatment of his prisoners, 369. His 
treaty with the Athenians, ib. His military insti- 
tutions, ib. He conquers Pæonia, 370. His mo- 
tives for attacking the Illyrians, ib. Defeats and 


488 


kills Bardyllis, ib. His motives for attacking Am- 
phipolis, 371. His intrigues at Athens and Olyn- 
thus, ib. Besieges Amphipolis, 372. Takes, and 
annexes this city to Macedon, ib. Pursues his 
concuests in Thrace, ib. Takes possession of the 
gold mines at Crenidz, 373. His advantageous set- 
tlement of the affairs of Thessaly, ib. His mar- 
riage with Olympias, ib. Birth of his son Alexan- 
der, 374. His prosperity, ib. His impenetrable 
policy, ib. His military operations in Thrace, 377. 
Defeats Lycophron and Onomarchus, 378. He is 
opposed at the straits of Thermopylæ by the Athe- 
nians, 379. Dissembles his ambition, 38]. His 
vices, 382. His intrigues at Eubcea, 384. Invades 
the Olynthian territory, ib. Besieges Olynthus, 386. 
Takes that city, 389. Celebrates the festival of the 
Muses at Dium, ib. His naval depredations on 
Attica, 390. He seizes Eubcea, ib. His address in 
gaining partisans among the Athenians, ib. His 
rapid successes in Greece, 392. His reception and 
treatment of the Athenian ambassadors, ib. His 
embassy to Athens, 394. Receives a third embassy 
from Athens, ib. His reply ta the Theban ambas- 
sadors, 396. Corrupts and deludes the Athenian 
ambassadors, ib. His flattering letter to the Athe- 
nians, ib. Is vested with the custody of the tem- 
ple of Delphi by the Amphictyonic council, 398. 
His stern letter to the Athenians, 399. Honours 
decreed to him by the Amphictyonic council, ib. 
Evacuates Greece, 400. His expedition to Illyria, 
401. And to Thessaly,ib. Undertakes to protect 
the Peloponnesians against the oppressions of 
Sparta, 402. Attacks the Spartan territories, 404. 
Settles the affairs of Peloponnesus,ib. His mode- 
ration on receiving insults at Corinth, 405. Extends 
the bounds of Epirus, and seizes the Hallonesus, 
ib. His letter to the Athenians, ib. Siege of 
Perinthus, 408. Defeats and kills Diopeithes, 409. 
Restores the convoy of provisions seized by Amyn- 
tas, ib. Attempts to surprise Byzantium, 410. Is 
invited to the assistance of Atheas, king of Scythia, 
411. His expedition to chastise the perfidy of 
Atheas, 412. His life saved by his son Alexander, 
413. He is appointed general of the Amphicty- 
ons, ib. A review of his difficulties at this time, 
ib. Employs Antiphon to burn the Athenian 
docks, 414. Is applied to by the Amphictyons to 
punish the Amphisseans, 416. ‘Takes the city of 
Amphissa, ib. Seizes Elatea, 417. Encamps his 
army on the plain of Cheronza, 418. Defeats the 
confederated Greeks, ib. His levity on viewing 
the field of battle, 419. His moderate use of vic- 
tory, ib. Causes of his different treatment of 
Athens and Thebes, ib. Nature and extent of his 
authority in Greece, 421. Is appointed general of 
the Grecian confederacy against Persia, 422. Quar- 
rels with his queen and his son Alexander, ib. Is 
assassinated, ib. His character, ib. 

Philip the Arcarnanian, physician to Alexander the 
Great, Alexander’s confidence in him, 433. 

Philippopolis, founded by Philip of Macedon, 401. 

Philocles, associate of Conon in the command of the 
Athenian fleet, his character, 257. Instance of 
his presumption and cruelty, 259. Is taken prison- 
er by Lysander, ib. And putto death, ib. 

Philomelus, the Phocian, instigates his countrymen 
to withstand the decree of the Amphictyonic coun- 
cil, 375. Seizes the temple of Delphi, 376. Em- 
ploys the sacred treasure in raising mercenaries, 
ib. His defeat and desperate end, ib. 

Philosophy, rise and decline of, at Athens, 168. State 
of, at the close of the social war of Athens, 356. 
State of, inthe age of Alexander the Great, 466. 
Tenets of the Peripatetics, 467. Estimate of 
Aristotle’s philesophy, 470. ‘Tenets of the Stoics, 
ib. Philosophy of Epicurus, 474. That of Pyrrho, 
475. 

Phlius, republic of, takes arms at the renewal of the 
Peloponnesian war, 215. Is subjected by the Spar- 
tans, 315. Fidelity ofthat republic to Sparta, 344. 

Phocea, a city of Ionia, besieged by Harpagus the 


Phrygia, invasion of, by Agesilaus, 301. 


INDEX. 


Persian general, 93. Is deserted by the inhabi- 
tants, ib. Who remove to Corsica, ib. 

Phocians incur the censure of the Amphictyonic 
council, 375. They resolve to withstand the de- 
cree, ib. They seize the temple of Delphi, ib 
Are defeated by the Thebans and their allies, 376. 
The war renewed by Onomarchus, 377. The Pho- 
cians intimidated, condemn the plunderers of the 
treasure of Delphi, 395. Are again defeated by 
the Thebans, ib. Are deluded into security by 
Philip, 397. Cruel decree of the Amphictyonic 
council against them, 398. Which is executed by 
Philip, ib. The fugitives received by the Atheni- 
ans, 399. Philippopolis and Cabyla settled with 
Phocian captives by Philip, 401. 

Phocion, the motives of his conduct in reference to 

fhilip of Macedon, 380. Defeats the Macedonians 

and Eubæans, 384. Expels the Macedonians from 
Eubæa, 408. Arrives at Byzantium with a fleet,. 
and saves the Thracian cities, 410. Is vested with 
the supreme command, after the defeat at Chero- 
næa, 420. 

Phebidas, the Spartan general, seizes the citadel of 
Thebes, 318. Is protected by Agesilaus, ib. His 
death, 322. 

Phenicians, a colony of, under Cadmus, settled at 
Thebes, 13. Instructed the Greeks in navigation 
and commerce, 14. 

Character 
ofthe Phrygians, ib. 

Phrynichus preserves the Athenian fleet from the 
superior fleet of the Peloponnesians, 241. Coun 
teracts the intrigues of Alcibiades, 243. Assists 
an k ig the democracy, 244. His death, 

wt 

Phrynon, the Athenian, his embassy to Philip of 
Macedon, 391. Is sent again, 391. 

Phyllidas, the Theban, his character, 319. Engages 
in the conspiracy of Pelopidas, ib. 

Pindar, the ancient Greek poet, memoirs of, 76. 
His works, 77. His characteristic excellence, 78. 
His house and family spared by Alexander at the 
demolition of Thebes, 426. 

Pireus, the harbour of Athens, built and fortified by 
Themistocles, 149. 

Pisa, cause of the war between that city and Elis, 
and the destruction of the former, 157. 

Pisander, his conspiracy against the democratical 
government of Athens, 243. Proposes the govern- 
ment of the four hundred, 245. Is defeated at sea, 
and killed by Conon, 307. 

Pisistratus, how he acquired the supreme authority 
at Athens, and his character, 99, 165. 

Piso, one of the thirty tyrants of Athens, his rapa- 
cious treatment of Lysias, 263. 

Pittacus, the lawgiver of Mitylené, 195. 

Plague at Athens, account of the, 192. 

Platea, battle of, 133. The city of, surprised by the 
Thebans, 189. Recovered by a ready expedient of 
the inhabitants, 190. Is reduced by the Spartans, 
194. And finally destroyed, and the inhabitants 
driven into exile, 323. 

Plato, his birth and education, 360. Character of 
his works, ib. (Note.) His travels, and settlement 
in the Academy, ib. General character of his phi- 
losophy, ib. Difficulty of explaining and abridging 
his doctrines, 361. His great views, ib. His theo- 
logy, ib. His doctrine of ideas, ib. His morals, 
362. His account of the origin of human know- 
ledge, ib. Of the powers of perception and intel- 
lect, 363. Of the passions, ib. Of virtue, ib. His 
doctrine of a future state, 364. His republic, ib. 
His genius and character, ib. Compared with 
Socrates, ib. 

Pleasure and pain, how analyzed by Epicurus, 474. 

Pliny, his advice to Maximus, 162. (Note.) Remarks 
on his accounts of the Grecian artists, 356. (Note.) 
357. (Note.) 358. (Note.) ib. (Note.) 

Plutarch, his account of the operations of the laws 
of Lycurgus at Sparta, 43. His character of Anti- 
phon, 243. (Note.) 


INDEX. 


Plynteria, the anniversary of, how observed at 
Athens, 250. 

Poetry, and music, early connected, 68. Ascribes 
wonderful power to the Grecian music, 71. Cir- 
cumstances that improved the Grecian poetry, 72. 
Satire, how introduced, 73. Elegy, ib. ‘The ode, 
77. Influence of the poetical contests at the public 
games, 79. State of,in the age of Alexander the 
Great, 464. 

Polemarchus, the brother of Lysias, poisoned by the 
thirty tyrants of Athens, 263. 

Pollis, the Spartan admiral, defeated by the Atheni- 
ans near Naxos, 322. 

Polybiades, the Spartan general, reduces the city of 
Olynthus, 317. 

Polybius, his crroneous representations of the Athe- 
nian history, 163. (Note. ; 

Polychares, the Messenian, how defrauded by Eu- 
ephnus the Lacedzmonian, 49. Fatal consequences 
of this transaction, 50. 

Polyclitas, his great skill in statuary, 356. 

Polydamus, his wise administration in Pharsalus, 
329. Conference between him and Jason of Phe- 
re, ib. Procures for Jason the supreme command 
of Thessaly, 330. z 

Porus, king, disputes the passage of Alexander the 
Great over the Hydaspes, 450. He is defeated, 
451. Isreinstated by Alexander, 452. Obtains all 
Alexander's Indian acquisitions, ib. 

Potidea, besieged by the Athenians, and assisted by 
the Corinthians, 136. Is reduced, 194. 

Praziteles, his great skill in statuary, 356. His two 
statues of Venus, ib. 

Priam, king of Troy, his history, 20. 

Property, judicial decisions of, during the heroic ages 
of Greece, 27. , 

Prosopis, the Grecian army besieged there by Me- 
gabazus, thc Persian general, 155. The Grecians 
capitulate, ib. 

Protogenes, the painter, patronised by Apelles, 464. 

Psammenitus, king of Egypt, reduced by Cambyses 
king of Persia, 95. 

Psyttalea, island of, occupied by the flower of the 
Persian infantry previous to the battle of Salamis, 
126. Where they are cut to pieces by tlic Greeks, 
127. 

Pylus, fortified by Demosthenes, 204. 
the Spartans, 205. 

Pyrgoteles, his eminence as an engraver on gems, 464. 

Pyrrho, account of his philosophy, 475. 

Pythagoras, his history, 141. Cause of the fabulous 
relations of his travels, ib. His acquisitions in 
Egypt, ib. His definition of a philosopher, 142. 
Is highly honoured in Italy, ib. llis manner of 
life, ib. Effects a reformation in the manners of 
the citizens of Crotona, 143. Forms his disciples 
into an exclusive society, ib. His politics, ib. 
His morality, ib. His system of education, 144. 
His rules for the conduct of his disciples, ib. 
Conformity of these with the institutions of Lycur- 

us, ib. Origin of the fictions concerning him, ib. 
tis death, 145. His disciples in Magna Grecia 
destroyed, 146. 

Pythia, the priestess of Apollo at Delphi, her mode 
of delivering the oracles there, 38. 

Pythian gamcs, description of the, 66. 

Python of Byzantium, his character and embassy 
from Philip of Maccdon to Athens, 405. 


R 


Attack of, by 


Rennel, major, ascertains the place where Alexander 
the Great crossed the Indus, 449. (Note.) His ac- 
count of the eastern boundary of Alcxander’s con- 
quests, 453. (iVote.) 

Resignation, the Stoical doctrine of, 473. 

Rhapsodists of the Greeks, thcir high authority and 
influence on socicty, 72. 

Rhegium settled by Grecks, 54, 60. 

Rhythm of ancient music, how regulated, 70. 


Romans, their religion merce plagiarism froni that of | 
3.Q 


489 


the Greeks, 26. (Nete.) Send deputies to Athens, 
to obtain a copy of Solon’s laws, 162. ( Note.) Dit- 
ference between the Roman and Athenian govern- 
ments, 164. (Note.) Conquer the western division 
of Alexander’s empire, 462. 

Rousseau, Jean Jaques, his system of cducation, 144. 
( Note.) 

Roxana, the daughter of Oxyartes, taken prisoner by 
Alexander the Great, and married by him, 445. 


— 5 

Sacred band of Thebans, account of, 326. 

Sacred war, origin and principal events of the, 63 
Sacred war against the Phocians, history of, 375. 
Sages, the seven, peculiarly distinguished among thie 

Greek philosophers, 163. 

Salethus, a Spartan general, goes to the relief of 
Mytilené, besieged by the Athenians, 196. Is put 
to death by the Athenians, 198. 

Salamis, sea engagement off that island, 126. 

Samos, favoured by the Persians, 103. Revolt of the 
Athenian troops there, 245. Is reduced by Lysan- 
der, 262. 

i a canal cut through the isthmus of, by Xerxes, 
113. 

eae his prudent advice to Cresus king of Ly- 
dia, 88. 

Sangala besieged and taken by Alexandcr the Great, 
452. 

Sardanapalus, king of Assyria, his tomb described, 
433. 

Sardis, battle of, between Cyrus and Cresus, 88. 
The city taken by Cyrus, 90. Is retaken and de- 
stroyed by the Athenians, 101. But instantly re- 
covered, 1b. 

Satire, in poetry, origin of, accounted for, 73. 

Satyrus, the player, signal instance of his friendship 
for Apollophanes, 390. (Note.) 

Sciences, state of, during the heroic ages of Greece, 


Scione, city of, reduccd by the Athenians, and the 
inhabitants massacred, 217. 

Sculpture, Greek, the most cclebrated monuments 
of, pointed out, 178. Characteristic excellence of, 
179. 

Scyllias of Scioné, discovers the Persian stratagems 
to the commander of the Grecian fleet at Artemi- 
sium, 121. 

Scytale, in the Spartan laws, explained, 151. 

Seuthes, a Thracian adventurer, takes the troops 
under Xenophon into his service, 295. Conducts 
them after a fcast to instant action, 296. Recovers 
his hereditary dominions by their assistance, ib. 
His ingratitude, ib. 

Sicily, colonization of, by Grecians, 133. Revolutions 
in that island, 219. A general congress of the 
states of, 220. Destruction of Leontium, ib. Siege 
of Syracuse, 226. Miserable retreat of the Atlhc- 
nians, 235. How withdrawn from the sphere of 
Grecian politics, 277. ls invaded by the Carthagi- 
nians, 278. ‘Their excessive crueltics towards the 
inhabitants, ib. ‘The island reduced to tle condi- 
tion of a Roman province, 281. 

Sicinus, his character, and the important enterprise 
lie was entrusted with by Themistocles, 126. His 
second commission to Xerxes, 128. 

Sicyon, the goverument of, usurped by Enphron, 342. 
A schoq) of painting formed there, 357. 

Sinope, its situation, and by whom built, 292. 

Sixty, account of the profligate club of, at Athens, 420 

Social war of Atheus, history of the, 35-4. 

Society, the narrow sphere of human faculties and 
pursuits, in the infancy of, 11. An idea of property 
in land, one of the miost important steps in the 
progress of, 13. Political, during the heroic ages 
of Greece, a review of, 27. The reciprocal obli- 
gations of, unfolded by utility, 28. 

Socrates detects the arts of the Sophists, 170. His 
education and character, ib. Flis philosophy, 171. 
Is assisted by the tragic pocts, ib. Ilis views 


490 


counteracted by the writers of the old comedy, 172. 
Is seduced by the arts of Aspasia. 175. Attach- 
ment between him and Alcibiades, 213. Condemns 
the expedition to Sicily, 223. Opposes the irregu- 
Jar condemnation of the admirals accused for mis- 
conduct at Arginusse, 257. ‘The principal causes 
of his prosecution, 269. His defence, 270. Is con- 
‘aemned, 271. He refuses to escape from prison, 
272. His conversation with his friends on the last 
day of his life, ib. His declared motive for writing 
a hymn to Apollo, 272. His opinion of suicide, 
and of the immortality of the soul, ib. Is warned 
to die, 273. ifis death, ib. The Athenians honour 
his memory, 274. His principal disciples and fol- 


lowers, ib. Philosophers who misrepresented his 


tenets, ib. 

Solon of Athens restores and improves the institu- 
tions of Theseus, 62. Animates the Amphictyonic 
council to revenge the violation of the temple at 
Delphi, 64. Advises the consecration of the Cirr- 
hean plain to fulfil the oracle, 65. His conversa- 
tion with Creesus king of Lydia, 85. His summary 
of human life, ib. Relieves the Athenians from 
the laws of Draco, 162. His exalted character, ib. 
His regulations concerning property, 163. New 
models the government, ib. His institutions suited 
to the times, ib. His division of the citizens, ib. 
His system of education, 165. 

Sophists of Greece, history of the, 169. 

Sosicles, the Corinthian deputy at Sparta, his speech, 
100. 

Sparta, Lycurgus driven from thence,40. The prin- 
cipal objects of his legislation, 41. Institution of 
the ephori, and nature of their office, 42. Laws 
concerning property, ib. The use of iron money 
introduced, 43. Review of Spartan manners, 44— 
47. Causes which undermined the felicity of 
Sparta, 47. Description of Laconia, 48. The 
people, ib. How Sparta gained the ascendancy 
over the other cities in Laconia, 49. Causes of the 
war with Messenia, ib. The Spartans seize Am- 
pheia, 50. And ravage the country, ib. Indeci- 
sive battle with the Messenians, 51. End of the 
first Messenian war, 53. Origin of the Partheniz, 
54. Conspiracy with the Helots, ib. Revolt of the 
Messenians, ib. Battle of Dere, 55. The Spartans 
commanded by the oracle to ask a general from 
Athens, and receive the poet Tyrteus, ib. Tyr- 
tæus animates them to pursue the war, 56. End 
of the second Messenian war, 60. Insolent op- 
pression of the Messenians, 62. Alliance with 
Creesus king of Lydia, 87. State of, at the time of 
the battle of Sardis, 89. Defeat of the Argives, 
ib. Deputies sent to observe the motions of Cyrus, 
92. The Spartans endeavour to form a confederacy 
to check the power of the Athenians, 99. Domestic 
dissensions between Cleomenes and Demaratus, 
112. The straits of Thermopylæ defended by king 
Leonidas, 116. Sperthies and Bulis devote them- 
selves for their country, ib. The atonement re- 
fused by Xerxes, 117. Battle of Thermopylae, 119. 
Address of the Spartan ambassadors to the Athe- 
nians, 129. They desert the Athenians, 130. Re- 
monstrate with the Athenians on the fortifying of 
their city, 148. Artful embassy of Themistocles to 
Sparta, ib. Treachery of Pausanias, 150. The 
city of Sparta destroyed by an earthquake, 157. 
Revolt of the Helots and Messenians, ib. The 
Peloponnesians endeavour to engage the Spartans 
to assist them against the Athenians, 186. Pacific 
council of king Archidamus, 187. The Spartans 
engage in the Peloponnesian war, ib. Operations 
of the Spartan fleet, 199. The Spartans solicit 
peace at Athens, 205. Their overtures rejected, 
206. They apply again, 207. ‘They assist the re- 
volt of Macedonia, 209. Base treatment of the 
Helots, ib. Peace concluded with Athens, 212. 
Mutual discontents between Sparta and Athens, 
214. Renewal of the war, 215. Battle of Man- 
tinea, 216. Battle of Ægos Potamos, 259. The 
city of Athens taken by Lysander, 261, Rapacity 


INDEX. 


and cruelty of the Spartan government, 262. The 
Spartans invade Elis, 277. Subdue the Eleans, ib. 
Assist Cyrus, 283. Incur the resentment of Ar- 
taxerxes by this measure, 297. Thimbron sent to 
defend the olian cities, ib. Dercyllidas sent to 
supersede him, ib. Death of Agis, and aie 
succession to the crown, 299. Agesilaus declare 
successor, ib. Cinadon’s conspiracy, ib. A jea- 
lousy of the Spartan power excited, 303. The 
Spartans take arms against the Thébans, 304. A 
league formed against Sparta, 305. Pisander de- 
feated at sea at Cnidus, 307. The Spartans solicit 
peace with Persia, 309. Accept the terms dictated 
by Artaxerxes, 312. Benefits derived from this® 
peace, 313. Their ambitious views, 314. Their 
haughty message to the Mantinæans, ib. They 
assume a regulating power over Phlius, 315. War 
commenced in Macedon, 316. Warin Beotia, 321. 
Losses by sea, 322. A congress of the Grecian 
states held at Sparta, 323. The Spartans defeated 
on the plain of Leuctra, 327. Their singular be- 
haviour on this event, 328. They in vain attempt 
to recover their authority in Arcadia, 332. Laconia 
invaded by the Thebans, 333. General consterna- 
tion, ib. A defensive alliance negotiated at Athens, 
334. This alliance extended and confirmed, 336. 
Treaties concluded with Sicily, and Persia, ib. 
They take the field against the Arcadians, 337. 
Battle of Midea, 338. The Spartan allies solicit 
permission to negotiate peace with Thebes for 
themselves, 343. Attempt of Epaminondas to sur- 
prise the city of Sparta, 348. The Spartans incur 
the resentment of the Amphictyonie council, 375. 
They claim the superintendance of the temple at 
Delphi, 395. Philip of Macedon required to check 
their insolence by the Amphictyonic council, 402. 
They solicit the assistance of the Athenians, ib 
The Spartan territories ravaged by Philip, 404. The 
Spartans take arms against Macedon during the ab- 
sence of Alexander, but are reduced by Antipater, 
446. K 

Spelman, Mr. a mistake of, corrected, 284. (Note.) 

Sphacteria, a body of Spartan forces blocked up 
there by the Athenians, 205. Is obstinately de- 
fended, 206. How reduced, ib. 

Sphodrias, the Spartan general, attempts the Piræus 
of Athens, 321. Fails, and is disgraced, ib. 

Spitamenes betrays Bessus the murderer of Darius, 
444. Opposes Alexander, ib. His death, ib. 

Sporades, derivation of the names of those islands, 307. 

Stadium in the Grecian public games, explained, 66. 

Statuary, state of, at the close of the social war of 
Athens, 356. 

Sthenelaides, one of the Spartan ephori, stirs up the 
Spartans to join in the Peloponnesian war against 
Athens, 187. 

Stoicism, the name of, whence derived, 274. (Note.) 
467. Tenets of, 470. 

Strabo, his observation on the first historians of 
Attica, 11. (Note.) 

, justifies the report of Bacchus’s expedition 
to India, 449. (Note.) 

Superstition, its causes and operation in Greece, 25. 

Sybaris, city of, by whom founded, and its situation 
139. Conquered by Milo of Crotona, 145. 

Syennesis, governor of Cilicia, secures himself from the 
arms of Cyrus by the means of his wife Epyaxa, 283. 

Syracuse founded by the Corinthians, 133. Reign of 
Gelon, 145. Reign of Hieron, 219. Expulsion of 
Thrasybulus, and establishment of a democracy, ib. 
The tyranny of this city distracts the whole island, 
220. The city described, 226. Apprehensions of 
the citizens on the approach of the Athenian fleet, 
ib. The stratagem of Nicias to seize the city, 227. 
The scheme defeated, ib. Nicias gains a victory 
over them, 228. Distress and relief of the city, 229, 
The besiegers defeated in a general engagement, 
232. Again defeated, 234. Miserable retreat of 
the Athenians, 236. Banishment of Hermocrates, 
248. Revolutions of the city, 279. Is taken by 
Marcellus the Roman general, 281. 


INDEX. 


, T 


Taochians, their desperate opposition to the Greeks 
under Xenophon and Cheinsophus, 291. 

Tarentum settled by Greeks, 54. 

Tarsus, on what occasion plundered by the Grecian 
troops of Cyrus, 284. 

Taurus, mount, description of, 448. 

Taziles, an Indian prince, mutual generosity between 
him and Alexander the Great, 449. 

Tegea, seizure of the Elean deputies there by the 
Arcadians, 347. Is chosen by Epaminondas as a 
place of rendezvous for his troops, 348. 

Tegeans, their contest with the Athenians in the con- 
federate army, 132. 

Teians, desert their country, when attacked by the 
Persians, 193. 

Teleutias, brother of Agesilaus, invests the city of 
Olynthus, 317 Is killed, ib. 

Tellus, the Athenian, pronounced a happy man by 
Solon, 85. 

Tempe, valley of, described, 114. Is occupied by 
Themistocles, 115. Abandoned, ib. 

Teribazus, his treacherous behaviour to the Greeks, 
291. His negotiations with Antalcidas, 310. 

Terpander of Lesbos, his history, 76. 

Thales, the poet, disposes the Spartans to receive 
the laws of Lycurgus, 41. 

, the Milesian, his scientifical discoveries, 168. 
His school and successors, ib. 

Thasos, some account of the colony settled there, 74. 

Theatre, Grecian, circumstances which rendered it 
extremely liable to abuse, 353. 

Thebe, queen of Thessaly, her interview with Pelopi- 
das during his confinement, 340. 

Thebes, founded by Cadmus, 13. Origin of the war 
of, 17. Revolt of the inferior cities of Beeotia from, 
159. Surprise the city of Platæa, 190. The inva- 
ders destroyed, ib. How engaged in a war with 
Sparta, 304. Battle of Corona, 307. The The- 
bans agree to the terms of Artaxerxes, 312. The 
citadel of, betrayed to Phebidas the Spartan, 318. 
Conspiracy of the Theban exiles, 319. Circum- 
stances attending its execution, ib. The heads of 
the aristocratic party killed, 320. The democratic 
government -restored, ib. The citadel recovered 
from the Spartans, ib. Scheme of the Thebans 
to produce a rupture between Athens and Sparta, 
321. Their cruel treatment of the Beotian cities, 


323. Epaminondas sent as deputy to Sparta, ib. | 


Account of the sacred band, 326. Battle of Leuc- 
tra, 327. Invasion of Laconia, 333. A neutrality 
granted to the Spartan allies, 344. Battle of Cy- 
noscephale, ib. The Thebans destroy the city 
Orchomenus, 346. Battle of Mantinæa, 349. En- 
gage in the sacred war against Phocis, 376. Their 
embassy to Philip of Macedon, 396. Their tyranny 
over the Bæotians, 399. The Thebans persuaded 
to unite against Philip, 418. Battle of Cheronæa, 
ib. Harshly treated by Philip, 419. Demolition 
of Thebes by Alexander the Great, 425. 

Themistocles, his character and pretensions to the 
command of the Athenian forces, compared with 
those of Aristides, 110. Their rıvalship, ib. De- 
stroys the fleets of Ægina and Corcyra, 111. Ex- 
horts his countrymen to keep up their military 
strength by land and sea, ib. Opposes Xerxes at 
the vale of Tempé, 115. Advises the Athenians to 
trust to their fleet, in obedience to the oracle, ib. 
His expedient to detach the lonians from the Per- 
sians, 122. His prudent advice to the Grecian 
fleet, 125. Jiis stratagem to draw Xerxes to a 
naval engagement, 126. Is joined by Aristides, ib. 
Battle of Salamis, ib. His scheme to accelerate 
the flight of Xerxes, 128. Honours conferred on 
him, and his conduct after his victory, 129. Per- 
suades the Athenians to fortify their city, 148. 
His embassy to Sparta, ib. Builds the Pireus, 
149. Is aecused by the Spartans as an accom- 
plice with Pausanias, 152. His banishment and 
death, ib. 


491 


Theocles, the Messenian diviner, devotes himself to 
death at Eira, to intimidate the besiegers, 59. 

Theogony, in poetry, explained, 72. ( Note.) 

Theopompus, his character of the associates of Phi- 
lip of Macedon, 382. (Note.) 

Theramenes restores the democracy at Athens, 246. 
His embassy to Sparta, 260. As one of the thirty 
tyrants of Athens cndeavours to mitigate the odious 
oppressions of his colleagues, 265. Is accused by 
Critias, ib. His defence, 265. Is violently dragged 
to death, ib. 

Thermopylæ, straits of, described, 116. Are guarded 
by the Grecks to stem the progress of Xerxes, ib 
An attack of the Persians repulsed, 117. Memo- 
rable battle of, 119. The Thebans desert to the 
Persians, 120. Monuments erected in memory of 
this battle, ib. Philip of Macedon stopped there 
by the Athenians, 379. Seized by Philip, 392. 

Theseus, his voyage to Crete, and treatment by Minos, 
18. Introduces the Cretan institutions into At- 
tica, ib. 

Thessalus impeaches Alcibiades of impiety, 225. 

Thessaly, great part of, reduced under the dominion 
of Jason of Phere, 329. Revolutions of this eoun- 
try after the death of Jason, 333. The Thessalians 
apply to Thebes for protection against their king 
Alexander, 345. Battle of Cynoscephale, ib. The 
affairs of that country settled by Philip king of 
Macedon, 373. Why Philip selected his friends 
from among the Thessalians, 382. Is reduced by 
Philip to a Macedonian province, 401. 

Thimbron is sent from Sparta to assist the Æolian 
cities against Tissaphernes, 297. Is reinforced by- 
the Greek troops under Xenophon, ib. His re- 
pulse at Larissa occasions his recall, ib. 

Thrace, the coast of, reduced by Cimon the Grecian 
commander, 153. Expedition of Brasidas the | 
Spartan general to, 210. The commotions there 
settled, and the country reduced to a Macedonian 
province, by Philip, 406. 

Thrasybulus, king of Syracuse, his character, and 
expulsion from Sicily, 220. 

—_——__—_——_, tyrant of Miletus, his expedient to dis- 
pose Alyattes king of Lydia to peace, 83. 

of Athens, heads an insurrection in the 
camp at Samos, 245. Conducts Alcibiades to the 
camp,ib. Gains a naval victory over the Pelopon- 
nesians, 247. He impeaches Alcibiades in the Atlie- 
nian assembly, 253. His character, 266. Seizes 
Phrygia, and defeats the thirty tyrants, ib. Sur- 
prises the Piræus, 267. Gives the tyrants another 
defeat, ib. His proclamation to the vanquished 
fugitives, ib. Is invested in the Piræus by Lysan- 
der, ib. Returns to the city through the media- 
tion of Pausanias, 268. Procures a general amnes- 
ty, 269. Ilis naval enterprises and death, 311. 

Thrasyllus encourages the revolt in the Athenian 
camp at Samos, 245. Suffers a defeat at Ephesus, 
248. oe his honour before the walls of Aby- 
dus, ib. 

Thucydides, general remarks on his history of the 
Peloponnesian war, 11. (Note.) His activity as 
Athenian commander of 'Thasos, 210. Is banished 
by the Athcnians, 21]. His character of Hyperbo- 
lus, 244. (Note.) His youthful admiration of He- 
rodotus, and his own character as an historian, 
276. Comparison between him and IHerodotus, ib. 
Ilis work continued by Xenophon, ib. 

Thyrea, the possession of, contested by the Spartans 
and the Argives, 89. 

Tigris, contrivance for the passage of the Grecks 
under Xenophon over that river, 290. 

Timagoras, the Athenian deputy at the court of Ar- 
taxerxes, 341. Is condemned to death, ib. (Note.) 

Timandra, the mistress of Alcibiades, is spared by 
those who put him to death, 266. 

Timanthes, the Grecian painter, his great power of 
expression, 358. 

Timoclea, a Theban matron, her heroism, 426. 

Timoleon puts an end to the tyranny of Dionysius 
the younger, in Syracuse, 281. 


` 


492 x 


Tisamenes, king of Lacedæmon, dispossessed of his 
dominions by the Heraclidæ, 34. His death, ib. 
Tissaphernes, the Persian general, is sent by Darius 
Nothus to quell the revolt in Asia Minor, 239. 
Protects Alcibiades from the resentment of Agis 
king of Sparta, 242. Accuses Cyrus of treason, 
282. Concludes a truce with the Grecian army, 
287. His treachery, 28S. Seizes the Grecian gene- 
ralsyib. Is rewarded by Artaxerxes with the spoils 
of Cyrus, 297. Attacks the Æolian cities under 
the Spartan government, ib. His treaty with Der- 
cyllidas, 298. His treacherous negotiations with 

» Agesilaus, 390. Is deceived by the military policy of 
Agesilaus, 201. Is put to death by Artaxerxes, 302. 

Tithraustes, is employed by Artaxerxes to put Tissa- 
pherres te death, and to succeed to his command 
in Lower Asia, 302. Sends an embassy to Agesi- 
laus, ib. Ccrrupts leading men in the several 
Grecian states, 303. 

Tragedy, Greek, origin of the, 172. How distinguish- 
ed from comedy, 1b. 

TYebisond, city of, hospitable reception of the Greeks 
there, under Xenophon and Cheirisophus, 293. Its 
present state described, ib. (Note.) 

Trenches, battle of, between the Spartans and Mes- 
senians, 56. 

Troy, review of the Grecian armament sent against 
that city, 19. The kingdom of, described, 20. De- 
rivation of the names Troas and Ilion, ib. Causes 
of the Trojan war, ib. Is besieged by the Greeks, 
21. Is taken and destroyed, ib. Its subsequent 
history, 22. 

Tymeus, the first historian who arranged his narra- 
tive according to the Olympiads, 11. (Note.) 

Tyrant, in Grecian history, the true import of the 
term explained, 83. (Nofe.) 

Tyrarts, thirty, established over the city of Athens, 

» alter its reduction by Lysander, 263. ‘Their rapa- 
cious and cruel conduct, ib. Are opposed by Thra- 
sybulus, 266. They retire to Eleusis, 267. Are 
defeated by Thrasybulus, ib. Are deposed, 268. 

Tyre, embassies from that city to Alexander the 
Great, 436. Description of the city, ib. The city 
besieged by Alexander, ib. The inhabitants re- 
duced, 433. 

Tyrteus, the Athenian poet, sent to command the 
Spartans against the Messenians, 55. Animates 
the Spartans to persevere in the war, 56. 


U 


Ulysses, king of Ithaca, his embassy to Troy on be- 
half of Menelaus, 21. 


Yy 


Venus, encomium on the Cnidian statue of, 356. 

Victors, at the Olympic games, their emulation and 
rewards, 80. 

Virtue, the origin and nature of, according to Plato, 
361. Moral inquiry into, on the principles of the 
Peripatetics, 469. How to be attained, ib. The 
ae task of, ib. How estimated by the Stoics, 
473. 


W 


War, how carried on, during the heroic ages of 
Greece, 30. Its laws, ib. 

Warburton, Bishop, his opinion of the necessity of 
the doctrine of a future state to the support of the 
Grecian Governments, not justified by the Grecian 
writers, 24. 


m 


Weapons of war, those generally used 
heroic ages of Greece, 30. 


Women, their condition and ceaupations th 


INDEX. 


ages of Greece, 23. Their oc 4 
ments, 29. How treated by the laws of Lycurgus 
at Sparta, 45. A general review of the rank they 
held, and their treatment, 174. 

Wrestling, how practised in the ancient gymnastic 
exercises, 66. 

Writers, the most ancient pointed out, 11. (Note.) 


X 


Xantippe, the wife of Sccrates, her final parting with 
him, 272. 

Xantippus, his persecution, the cause of the death ot 
Miltiades, 109. Is not deemed worthy to succeed 
him, ib. Defeats the Persians at Mycalé, 136. 

Xenophon, his account of the operation of the laws 
of Lycurgus at Sparta, 43. Of the Spartan art of 
war, 44. Of the Persian institutions, 86. Of the 
expedition of Cyrus into Upper Asia, 233. Of the 
death of Cyrus, 286. His reply to the imperious 
demands of Artaxerxes, 287. His address to the 
Greeks after the seizure of their generals by Tissa- 

hernes, 233. Is elected one of their generals, 289. 
i nctbic retreat of the Greeks from Asia under 
his conduct, ib. Proposes to settle on the coast 
of the Euxine sea, 294. Is vested with the sole 
command of the troops on the death of Cheiriso- 
phus, ib. Prevails on them not to plunder Byzan- 
tium, 295. His troops hired by Seuthes, a Thracian 
adventurer, ib. Conducts them afterward into the 
service of Sparta, 297. Attends Agesilaus in his 
war with Persia, 303. His history ends with the 
battle of Mantinza, 351. (Note.) His character as 
a writer, 358. How he was engaged in the expe- 
dition of Cyrus, 359. His subsequent military em- 
ployments and retreats, ib. Is driven to Corinth, 
ib. His literary performances, ib. 

Xerzes, king of Persia, his preparations for an inva- 
vasion of Greece, 112. Amount of his forces, ib. 
His passage over the Hellespont, 113. Cuts a 
canal through the isthmus of Sana, ib. His re- 
flection on the review of his immense army, 114. 
Receives the submission of the Grecian communi- 
ties, ib. His march to the plains of Trachis, 116. 
His negotiation with the Spartans, 117. His in- 
quiry into their character, ib. His astonishment at 
the repulse of his troops at Thermopylæ, 118. The 
Greeks betrayed to him by Epialtes, ib. His nar- 
row escape when Leonidas surprised his camp, 
119. Battle of Thermopyle, ib. He advances 
toward Attica, 123. Ravages the territory of 
Phocis, ib. His attempt on Delphi, how frustrated, 
ib. Enters Attica, 124. Prevailed on to risk the 
battle of Salamis, 126. Views the engagement 
from Mount Ægialos, ib. His fleet defeated, 127. 
His disgraceful retreat from Greece, ib. His flight 
accelerated by the artifice of Themistocles, 128 


Y 


Youth, duties and employments of, at Athens, ac- 
cording to the institutions of Solon, 165. 


Z = 
Zeno, account of his philosophy, 470. 
Zeuxis, the Grecian painter, account of his principal 
works, 357. 


Zoroaster, the founder of the Persian religion, bis 
peculiar doctrines, 95. 


THE END 


iw 


Mn 


112 07292 


Ni 


| 


E 
E 
-l 
a= 
£ u. 
fe) 
i 
> 
z 
= 


—— 
SE 
a. 
z 
e 
a 
z 
—— 
ER ss 
ee 
——___ 
EE, 
—_ 
R Tf 


2 


