125  370 


IJ\ 

'*    I 


CONTENTS. 


INTEODUCTION. 


PJMSE 


§  1.    Name  and  Conception  of  Philosophy 1 

§  2.    The  History  of  Philosophy 8 

§  3.    Division  of  Philosophy  and  of  its  History        18 

PART  I. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  GREEKS. 

INTRODUCTION 23 

CHAPTER  L    THE  COSMOLOGICAL  PERIOD        27 

§  4.    Conceptions  of  Being  .         .         .    .  31 

§  5.    Conceptions  of  the  Cosmic  Processes  or  Becoming        .    .  47 

§  0     Conceptions  of  Cognition 57 

CHAPTER  II,    THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PERIOD 66 

§  7.    The  Problem  of  Morality 72 

§  8     The  Problem  of  Science       87 

CHAPTER  III.    THE  SYSTEMATIC  PERIOD 99 

§    9.    Metaphysics  grounded  anew  by  Epibteiuology  and  Ethics  .  104 

\§  10.    The  System  of  Materialism 109 

^§  11.    The  System  of  Idealism 116 

§  12.    The  Aristotelian  Logic 132 

§  18.    The  System  of  Development 139 

PART  II. 

THE  HELLENISTIC-ROMAN  PHILOSOPHY. 

INTRODUCTION I55 

CHAPTER  I.    Tirra  ETHICAL  PERIOD 159 

§  14,    The  Ideal  of  the  Wise  Man .        .163 

\  §  1'5,    Mechanism  and  Teleology 178 

§  10*    The  Freedom  of  the  Will  and  the  -  Perfection  of  the  Uni- 
verse   1-90 

§17.    Tfce  Criteria''  of  'Itoth  .    ,    ,,    ...,....:.  197 


xiv  Contents, 

CHAPTER  II.    THE  RELIGIOUS  PERIOD i>10 

§  18,     Authority  and  Revelation 2U) 

§  19.    Spirit  and  Matter ^oj) 

§20.     God  ami  the  World                UUD 

.     §  21.    The  Problem  of  the  Woild'a  History 255 

PART  UI. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES, 

INTRODUCTION   .                  203 

CHAPTER  I.    FIRST  PERIOD 1»70 

§  22.    The  Metaphysics  ol  Inner  Experience U7(> 

§  23.    The  Controversy  over  [Juiversals 1>H7 

§  24.    The  Dualism  oC  Body  and  Soul Ml 

CHAPTER  II.    SECOND  PEIIIOD IJIO 

§  25.    The  Realm  of  Nature  and  the  llealm  of  Grace      .     .     .     ,  ,'JIH 

§  2G.    The  Primacy  of  the  Will  or  of  the  Intellect \m 

§  27.    The  Problem  of  Individuality        3;J7 

PART  IV. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  TIIK  HKNATfiSANCK. 

INTRODUCTION jjj^ 

CHAPTEH  I.    THE  HUMANISTIC  PKIUOU ;iny 


§  28.    The  Struggle  between  the  Tratlitioiw IJ57 

§  2(J.    Macrocosm  and  Microcosm ;i(j(j 

CHAPTER  II.    THE  NATURAL  SOIKNOM  PERIOD ;t78 

§  30.    The  Problem  of  Method       m 

§  31.    Substance  anrt  Causality jjjjj) 

§  32.    Natural  Right     ..." [ 

PART  V. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  ENLIGHTENMENT. 
INTKODUCTION 

CHAPTER  T.    THEORETICAL  QUESTIONS 447 

i 

§  33.    Innate  Ideas  .    .         4/jj) 

§  34.    Knowledge  of  the  External  World 400 

§  35.    Natural  Religion 


Contents 


xv 


PUrE 

CHAPTER  II.    PRACTICAL  QUESTIONS 500 

§  ;>G.     The  Principles  of  Morals      .  502 

§  J»7.    The  Problem  of  Civilisation  518 


PART  VI. 
THE  GERMAN  PHILOSOPHY. 

INTRODUCTION    ...                          .                  529 

CHAPTER  I.    KANT'S  CRITIQUE  OF  THE  REA&ON                     .    .    .  532 

§;JS     The  Object  of  Knowledge          .                       ...  537 

§  Ijfl.    The  Categorical  Impel  ative  .    ,         .         .    .         .    .  551 

§  40.    Natural  Purposiveness      ....                                .  559 

CHAPTER  II.    THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  IDEALISM 568 

§  41.    The  Thing-m-itself  ...             573 

§  42.    The  System  of  Reason     .         .             590 

§  43.     The  Metaphysics  of  the  Irrational 015 

PART  VII. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY, 
INTRODUCTION   ...  .  .    .  ,623 

§  44.    The  Controversy  over  the  Soul  .  ...  .634 

§  45.     Nature  and  History 648 

§40.    The  Problem  o£  Values 660 


APPENDIX 68 

INDEX 


HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY. 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  1.  The  Name  and  Conception  of  Philosophy. 

K.  Haym,  Art.  Philosophie  in  Ersch  und  Gruber's  EnGyclopddie,  III.  Abth., 

Bd  24 

W.  Wmdelband,  Praeludien  (Freibuig  i.  B.,  1884),  1  fL 
[A  Seth,  Art.  Philosophy  in  Enc.  Bnt.~\ 
[G.  T.  Ladd,  Introduction  to  Philosophy.    N.  Y.  1891  ] 

BY  philosophy  present  usage  understands  the  scientific  treatment 
of  the  general  questions  relating  to  the  universe  and  human  life. 
Individual  philosophers,  according  to  the  presuppositions  with 
which  they  have  entered  upon  their  work,  and  the  results  which 
they  have  reached  in  it,  have  sought  to  change  this  indefinite  idea 
common  to  all,  into  more  precise  definitions,1  which  in  part  diverge 
so  widely  that  the  common  element  in  the  conception  of  the  science 
may  seem  lost.  But  even  the  more  general  meaning  given  above  is 
itself  a  limitation  and  transformation  of  the  original  significance 
which  the  Greeks  connected  with  the  name  philosophy,  —  a  limita- 
tion and  transformation  brought  about  by  the  whole  course  of  the  in- 
tellectual and  spiritual  life  of  the  West,  and  following  along  with 

the  same. 

1.  While  in  the  first  appearance  in  literature2  of  the  words 
<t>i\o<ro<t>£v  and  ^Xoo-o^'a  the  simple  and  at  the  same  time  indefinite 
meaning,  "  striving  after  wisdom,"  may  still  be  recognised,  the  word 
"philosophy"  in  the  literature  after  Socrates,  particularly  in  the 
school  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  acquired  the  fixed  significance  accord- 


i  Cited  in  detail  in  UeTberweg-Heinze,  Grundriss  der  Geschichte  der 
phie,  I.  §  1.     [Eng  trans.  Ueberweg's  History  of  Philosophy,  trans,  toy  tr.  b. 

^Srodo'to,1!!  a(J  and  50  j  Thucydides,  II.  40  ;  and  frequently  also  even  in 
Plato,  e.g.  Apol  29  j  Lysis,  218  A  ;  Symp  202  E  ff. 


2  Introduction, 

ing  to  winch  it  denotes  exactly  the  samo  as  tho  Gorman,  word 
"  Wissenschaft  " 1  According  to  this  meaning  philosophy  in  general 2 
is  the  methodical  work  of  thought,  through  which  wo  arc  to  know 
that  which  "is";  individual  "philosophies"  arc  tho  partituilar  sci- 
ences in  which  individual  realms  of  the  existent  are  to  be  investi- 
gated and  known.3 

With  this  first  theoretical  meaning  oi!  tho  word  "philosophy"  a 
second  was  very  early  associated.  The  development  of  Greek 
philosophy  came  at  the  time  when  tho  naive  religious  and  ethical 
consciousness  was  in  process  of  disintegration.  This  not  only 
made  the  questions  as  to  man's  vocation  and  tasks  more  and  more 
important  for  scientific  investigation  (of.  below,  Part  1.  oh.  14),  but 
also  made  instruction  in  the  right  conduct  of  life  appear  as  an 
essential  aim,  and  finally  as  the  main  content  of  philosophy  or 
science.  Thus  philosophy  in  the  Hellenistic  period  received  tho 
practical  meaning  of  an  art  of  Ufa  based  -upon  mwtfflc  princ-tyles,* -- 
a  meaning  for  which  the  way  had  already  been  prepared  by  the 
Sophists  and  Socrates. 

In  consequence  of  this  change,  purely  theoretical  interest  passed 
over  to  the  particular  "philosophies,"  which  now  in  part  aHsumed 
the  names  of  their  special  subjects  oJt1  research,  historical  or  belong- 
ing to  natural  science,  while  mathematics  and  medicine  lu»pl  all  the 
more  rigorously  that  independence  which  they  had  possessed  from 
the  beginning  with  relation  to  science  in  general/'  Tho  name  of 
philosophy,  however,  remained  attached  to  those  scientific!  efforts 
which  hoped  to  win  from  the  most  general  results  of  human  knowl- 
edge a  conviction  for  the  direction  of  life,  and  which  finally  culmi- 
nated in  the  attempt  (made  by  Nee-Plutonium)  to  create  from  such 
a  philosophy  a  new  religion  to  replace  the  old  that  had  been  lout,*1 


1  A  conception  which  it  is  well  known  IB  of  inuclx  greater  compans  than  tho 
English  and  French  "  science  "    [Jn  this  translation  tho  wordu  **  Hoienco  "  and 
"  scientific  "  are  used  in  this  larger  sense.    Tho  term  u  natural  Hoii'iuw  "  will  Im 
used  for  the  narrower  meaning  which  "science  "  alono  often  haw.    II  ifc  Hlmuiil 
serve  to  remind  the  beginner  that  philosophy  and  scientific  thought  whould  bo 
one,  and  that  natural  science  is  not  all  of  science,  it  may  bo  of  value,] 

2  Plato,  Rep  480  B  ;  Aristotle,  Met.  VI.  1,  1020  a  18, 

3  Plato,  Thewt.  USD.    Aristotle  sets  tho  doctrinu  "ul  Ruing  an  finch"  (the 
later  so-called  Metaphysics)  as  "  First  Philosophy  "  over  agaiiwt  tho  other 
"philosophies,"  and  distinguishes  further  theoretical  and  practical  "philoHo- 
phy."    In  one  passage  (Met.  I.  0,  987  a  20)  ho  applies  Lhe  plural  </»tX0cro0£ai  also 
to  the  different  systems  of  science  which  have  followed  in  historical  HWiooBslon, 


as  we  should  speak  of  the  philosophies  of  Kant,  Fiohto,  Ho^nl,  ota 

*  Of.  the  definition  of  Epicurus  in  Soxt,  Krnp,  Adv.  Math.  XL  100,  and  on 
the  other  hand  that  of  Seneca,  Ernst.  8lf, 

5  Cf.  below,  Part  I. 

6  Hence  Proclus,  for  example,  would  prefer  to  have  philosophy  called 
theology. 


§  1.]  Name  and  Conception  of  Philosophy.  3 

There  was  at  first  little  change  in  these  relations,  when  the  remains 
of  ancient  science  passed  over  into  the  culture  of  the  present  peoples 
of  Europe  as  the  determining  forces  of  their  intellectual  life.  Con- 
tent and  task  of  that  which  the  Middle  Ages  called  philosophy  coin- 
cided with  the  conception  held  by  later  antiquity.1  And  yet  the 
meaning  of  philosophy  underwent  an  essential  change  by  finding 
philosophy's  task  already  performed,  in  a  certain  sense,  by  religion. 
For  religion,  too,  afforded  not  only  a  sure  conviction  as  a  rule  for 
the  guidance  of  personal  life,  but  also  in  connection  with  this,  a  gen- 
eral theoretical  view  of  all  reality,  which  was  the  more  philosophical 
in  its  character,  as  the  dogmas  of  Christianity  had  been  formulated 
entirely  under  the  influence  of  ancient  philosophy.  Under  these 
circumstances,  during  the  unbroken  dominance  of  Church  doctrine, 
there  remained  for  philosophy,  for  the  most  part,  only  the  position 
of  a  handmaid  to  ground,  develop,  and  defend  dogma  scientifically. 
But  just  by  this  means  philosophy  came  into  a  certain  opposition  to 
theology  as  regards  method;  for  what  the  latter  taught  on  the 
ground  of  divine  revelation,  the  former  was  to  win  and  set  forth  by 
means  of  human  knowledge.2 

But  the  infallible  consequence  of  this  relation  was,  that  the  freer 
individual  thinking  became  in  its  relation  to  the  Church,  the  more 
independently  philosophy  began  the  solution  of  the  problem  which 
she  had  in  common  with  religion ;  from  presentation  and  defence  of 
doctrine  she  passed  to  its  criticism,  and  finally,  in  complete  inde- 
pendence of  religious  interests,  sought  to  derive  her  teaching  from 
the  sources  which  she  thought  she  possessed  in  the  "natural  light" 
of  human  reason  and  experience.3  The  opposition  to  theology,  as 
regards  methods,  grew  in  this  way  to  an  opposition  in  the  subject 
matter,  and  modern  philosophy  as  "world-wisdom"  set  itself  over 
against  Church  dogma.1*  However  manifold  the  aspects  which  this 
relation  took  on,  shading  from  a  clinging  attachment  to  a  passionate 
conflict,  the  office  of  "philosophy"  remained  always  that  which 


1Cf,1  for  example,  Augustine,  Solil  I  7  ;  Oonf.  V.  7;  Scotus  Engena,  De 
Div  Prwlest.  I.  1  (Migne,  358)  ,  Anselm  Proslog.,  ch  1.  (Migne,  I.  227)  ; 
Abelard,  Introd.  in  Theol  II.  8  ;  Kayinundus  Lullus,  De  Qutnque  Sap.  8. 

a  Thomas  Aquinas,  Summa  Theol  I.  32,  1;  G'ojitr  Gent  I.  8  f,  II.  Iff. , 
Dims  Scotus,  Op,  0$.  I.  H,  qu.  4  ;  Durand  de  Pour^ain,  In  Sent  Prol,  qu.  8  , 
Raymuiidus  oi  Halmmle,  Theol.  Natur.  Prooem. 

8  Laur.  Valla,  Dialect.  Disp.  III.  9  ;  B.  Telesio,  De  Nat  JRer,  Prooem  ;  FT. 
Bacon,  De  Augm,  III.  1  (Works,  Speddmg,  I.  539  =  111.  336),  Taurellus, 
Philos.  Tnumph.  I.  1 ;  Paracelsus,  Paragr  (ed  Huser)  II  23  f  ;  G  Bruno, 
Delia  00118(1,  etc.,  IV.  107  (Lagarde,  L  272) ;  Hobbes,  De  Corpor.  I.  (Worlcs, 
Molesworth,  I.  2  and  6  f.). 

4  Characteristic  definitions,  on  the  one  hand,  in  Gottsched,  Erste  Gfrilnde  der 
gesammten  Weltweisheit  (Leips.  1756),  pp  07  ff. ,  on.  the  other  hand,  in  the 
article  Philosophic,  in  the  Encyclopedic  (Vol  XXV.  pp.  632  ff). 


4  Introduction. 

antiquity  had  assigned  to  it,  to  supply  from  scientific  insight  a 
foundation  for  a  theory  of  the  world  and  of  human  life,,  where  rolig- 
1011  was  no  longer  able  to  meet  this  neod,  or  at  leant  to  meet  it,  alone, 
In  the  conviction  that  it  was  equal  to  this  task,  tho  philosophy  of 
the  eighteenth  century,  like  that  of  tho  Greeks,  considorod  at,  its 
right  and  duty  to  enlighten  men  with  regard  to  tho  nature,  of  things, 
and  from  this  position  of  insight  to  rule  tho  HCo  of  tho  individual 
and  of  society. 

In  this  position  of  self-security  philosophy  was  shaken  by  Kan,tt 
who  demonstrated  the  impossibility  oC  a  philosophical  (/.P.  meta- 
physical) knowledge  of  the  world  beside  of  or  above  the  individual 
sciences,  and  thereby  restricted  once  more  the  coiuwpluon  and  tho 
task  of  philosophy;  for  after  this  quitclaim  tho  realm  of 
as  a  particular  science,  was  narrowed  to  just  that  critiml 
by  Reason  of  itself,  from  which  Kant  had  won  his  dotumvu  insight,  and 
which  needed  only  to  be  extended  systematically  to  acUvitias  other 
than  that  of  knowing.  With  this  function,  could  bo  united  what 
Kant1  called  the  universal  or  oosmioal  conception  of  philosophy, — 
its  vocation  m  the  practical  direction  of  life. 

It  is,  to  be  sure,  far  from  true  that  this  new  and  apparently  linal 
conception  of  philosophy  gained  universal  acceptance  al.  once.  U  is 
rather  the  case  that  the  great  variety  of  philosophical  movements  of 
the  nineteenth  century  has  left  no  earlier  form  of  philosophy  uure- 
peated,  and  that  a  luxuriant  development  oC  tho  "metaphysical 
need"3  even  brought  back,  for  a  time,  the  inclination  to  swallow  up 
all  human  knowledge  in  philosophy,  and  complete  this  again  us  an 
all-enibracing  science. 

2.  In  view  of  these  mutations  through  which  the  meaning  of  tho 
word  "philosophy"  has  passed  in  the  course  oC  Lime,  it  seems  im- 
practicable to  pretend  to  g<(>in  a  general  conception  of  jihiltMopJiy  from 
Jiistorical  comparison.  None  of  those  brought  forward  for  this 
purpose3  apply  to  all  those  structures  of  mental  activity  which 
lay  claim  to  the  name.  Even  the  subordination  of  philosophy  under 
the  more  general  conception  "science"  is  questionable  in  the  case 
of  those  types  of  teaching  which  place  a  one-sided  emphasis  on  the 


1  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  A.  830;  B  8(50, 

3  Scliopeuliauer,  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  Vol.  II,  oh,  17. 

*  Instead  of  criticising  particular  conceptions  id  is  Hullloiiiut  hora  to  point  to 
the  widely  diverging  formulas  in  which  tho  attempt  has  boon  in  ado  to  porform 
this  impossible  task  •  cf  ,  for  example1,  only  tho  introduction  to  worko  mioh  an 
those  of  Erdmann,  TJeberweg,  Kuno  Fischer,  Zoller,  etc.  All  tlxwo  conceptions 
thus  determined  apply  only  in  so  fat  as  tho  history  of  philosophy  has  yielded 
the  result  which  they  express,  but  they  do  not  apply  with  reference  Lo  the  inten- 
tions expressed  by  the  philosophers  themselves. 


§  1-]  Name  and  Conception  of  Philosophy. 


practical  significance  of  their  doctrine  • l  still  less  can  we  define 
the  subject-matter  and  form  of  philosophy  considered  as  a  special 
science,  in  a  way  that  shall  hold  good  for  all  cases.  For  even  aside 
from  the  primitive  or  the  revived  standpoint  for  which  philosophy 
is  a  universal  science,2  the  attempts  to  limit  it  are  extremely  vari- 
ous. The  problems  of  natural  science  form  at  first  almost  the  sole 
objects  of  interest  for  philosophy,  then  for  a  long  period  are  in- 
cluded in  its  scope,  and  do  not  separate  from  it  until  modern  times. 
History,  on  the  other  hand,  has  remained  an  object  of  indifference  to 
most  philosophical  systems,  and  has  emerged  as  an  object  of  philo- 
sophical investigation  relatively  late  and  in  isolated  cases.  Meta- 
physical doctrines,  again,  in  which  the  centre  of  philosophy  is 
usually  sought,  we  see  either  pushed  one  side  at  important  turning- 
points  in  history  or  declared  to  be  entirely  impossible3;  and  if  at 
times  the  ability  of  philosophy  to  determine  the  life  of  the  indi- 
vidual or  of  society  is  emphasised,  a  proud  standpoint  of  pure  theory 
has  renounced  such  a  menial  occupation  * 

From  still  another  side  it  has  been  claimed  that  philosophy  treats 
the  same  subjects  as  the  other  sciences,  but  m  another  sense  and  by 
another  method ;  but  neither  has  this  specific  characteristic  of  form 
historical  universality.  That  there  is  no  such  acknowledged  his- 
torical method  would  of  course  be  no  objection  if  only  the  endeavour 
after  such  a  method  were  a  constant  characteristic  of  all  philoso- 
phies. This  is,  however,  so  far  from  being  the  case  that  in  fact 
many  philosophers  imprint  on  their  science  the  method  of  other 
disciplines,  e.g.  of  mathematics  or  of  investigation  of  nature,5  while 
others  will  have  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  a  methodical  treatment  of 
their  problems,  and  regard  the  philosophic  activity  as  analogous  to 
the  creations  of  genius  in  art. 

3.  From  these  circumstances  is  explained  also  the  fact  that  there 
is  no  fixed  relation  of  philosophy  to  the  other  sciences,  which  is  capa- 
ble of  a  definition  valid  for  all  history.  Where  philosophy  presents 
itself  as  the  universal  science,  the  other  sciences  appear  only  as  its 
more  or  less  distinctly  separated  parts.0  Where,  on  the  contrary, 
philosophy  is  assigned  the  task  of  grasping  the  results  of  the  par- 


1  So  in  the  case  of  the  majority  of  the  philosophers  of  later  antiquity 

2  As  for  Chr.  Wolf ;  cf  his  Logica,  §§  29  fl. 

8  This  is  especially  the  case  where  philosophy  is  regarded  solely  as  "  science 
of  cognition  "  Cf ,  e  g  ,  W.  Hamilton  in  his  notes  to  Reid's  works,  II  808. 
Among  the  French  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  and  the  beginning  of  this  cen- 
tury, philosophy  =  analyse  tie  Ventcndement  humain. 

*  E.g  with  Plotmus. 

6  So 'Descartes  and  Bacon. 

0  So,  for  example,  in  the  Hegelian  system. 


6  Introduction. 

ticular  sciences  in  their  general  significance,  and  harmonising  thorn 
into  a  comprehensive  knowledge  of  the  world,  wo  have  us  the  renult 
peculiarly  complex  relations-  in  the  lirst  plae.e,  a  dependence  of 
philosophy  upon  the  existing  condition  ol!  insight  reached  in  the  par- 
ticular disciplines  —  a  dependence  which  expresses  itself  principally 
in  the  furtherance  of  philosophy  by  the  prominent  advances  inado 
by  individual  sciences;1  in  the  next  place,  an  influence  in  the 
opposite  direction,  when  philosophy  takes  part  in  the  work  of  the 
particular  sciences.  This  action  is  felt  as  help  or  as  hindrance, 
according  as  the  philosophical  treatment  of  the  (pujstions  embraced 
under  the  particular  disciplines  sometimes  contributes  valuable 
factors  for  their  solution,  by  means  of  its  wider  range  of  vision  and 
its  tendency  toward  unity,2  but  at  other  timea  presents  itself  only 
as  a  duplication  which,  if  it  leads  to  like  n  walls,  appears  useless,  or 
if  it  wishes  to  furnish  other  results,  dangerous,1*1 

Prom  what  has  been  said  it  is  evident  farther,  that  this  relations 
of  philosophy  to  the  other  activities  of  civilisation  are  no  less  eloso  than 
its  relation  to  the  individual  sciences.  For  tho  conceptions  arising 
from  the  religious  and  ethical  and  artistic  life,  from  tho  lifo  of  the 
state  and  of  society,  force  their  way  everywhere,  side  by  side  wifch 
the  results  won  from  scientific  investigation,  into  the  idea  of  tho 
universe  which  the  philosophy  of  metaphysical  tendencies  aims  to 
frame;  and  the  reason's  valuations  (WerlhbtiittinimuwjMi)  and  stand- 
ards of  judgment  demand  their  place  in  that  idea  the  more  vigor- 
ously, just  in  proportion  as  it  is  to  become  tho  basis  for  tho  praelical 
significance  of  philosophy.  In  this  way  humanity's  eonvielionH  and 
ideals  fiud  their  expression  in  philosophy  side  by  .side  with  its 
intellectual  insights;  and  if  these  convictions  and  ideals  art*  regarded, 
erroneously  often,  as  gaining  thereby  the  form  of  seiouliiio  intelli- 
gence, they  may  receive  under  certain  cireuiUHbanees  valuable  elari- 
fication  and  modification  by  this  means.  Thus  this  relation  nlso  of 
philosophy  to  general  culture  is  not  only  that  of  receiving,  but  al  HO 
that  of  giving. 


It  is  not  without  interest  to  consider  also  tho  mutations  in  external 
and  social  relations  which  philosophy  has  experienced.    It  may  be  HHHiuwil 
science  was  from  the  first,  with  perhaps  a  few  oxoepl-ioiiH  (SorraU'K),  pnrsui'd  in 
Greece  in  closed  schools.*  The  fact  that  those,  oven  at  a  later  time,  had  the  form 


1  As  the  influence  of  astronomy  upon  tho  beginnings  of  Greek,  or  that  of! 
mechanics  upon  those  of  modern,  philosophy. 

2  The  Protestant  theology  of  tho  nineteenth  century  stands  in  thin  rdutiou 
to  German  philosophy. 

8  Cf.  the  opposition  of  natural  science  to  SchnlHng's  philosophy  of  naluro, 
4  H.  Diels,   Ueber  difi  altesten  PhilosophensrJiulfin  to  (IriwJwn  in  Phllos, 
AuMtze  zum  Juhilftum  E.  teller's,  Leips.  1887,  pp.  241  IT. 


§  1  ]  Name  and  Conception  of  Philosophy.  7 

of  societies  with  religious  laws  1  would  not  in  itself  alone,  in  view  of  the  religious 
character  of  all  Greek  ]udicial  institutions,  prove  a  religious  origin  of  these 
schools,  but  the  cncumstaiice  that  Greek  science  worked  out  its  contents  directly 
from  religious  ideas,  and  that  certain  connections  with  religious  cults  present 
themselves  unmistakably  in  a  number  of  directions,2  makes  it  not  improbable 
that  the  scientific  societies  sprang  originally  from  religious  unions  (the  Mys- 
tenes)  and  continued  in  a  ceitam  connection  with  them.  But  when  the  scien- 
tific life  had  developed  to  complete  independence,  these  connections  fell  away 
and  purely  scientific  schools  were  founded  as  free  unions  of  men  who,  under  the 
guidance  of  persons  of  importance,  shared  with  each  other  the  work  of  research, 
exposition,  defence,  and  polemic,3  and  at  the  same  time  had  an  ethical  bond  in 
a  common  ideal  ot  the  conduct  of  life. 

With  the  advent  of  the  larger  relations  of  life  in  the  Hellenistic  and  Roman 
period,  theae  unions  naturally  became  loosened,  and  we  frequently  meet  writers, 
especially  among  the  Romans,  who  are  active  in  the  field  of  philosophy  in  a 
purely  individual  way,  neither  members  of  a  school  nor  professional  teachers. 
Such  were  Ciceio,  Seneca,  and  Marcus  Aurelius.  Not  until  the  latest  period  of 
antiquity  were  the  ties  of  the  schools  drawn  moie  closely  again,  as  in  Neo- 
Pythagoreamsm  and  Neo-Platom&m 

Among  the  Romanic  and  Germanic  peoples  the  course  of  events  has  been  not 
unlike  that  in  the  ancient  world  The  science  of  the  Middle  Ages  also  appears 
in  the  tram  of  the  Church  civilisation ,  it  has  its  seats  in  the  cloister-schools,  and 
is  stimulated  toward  independent  development  primarily  by  questions  of  religious 
interest.  In  it,  too,  the  oppositions  of  various  leligious  orders,  such  as  the  Do- 
minicans and  Franciscans,  assert  themselves  for  a  time,  and  even  the  freer 
scientific  associations  out  of  which  the  universities  giadually  developed,  had 
originally  a  religious  background  and  an  ecclesiastical  stamp  *  Hence  there 
was  always  but  a  slight  degree  of  independence  with  refeience  to  Ghuich  doc- 
trine in  this  corporate  philosophy  of  the  univeisities,  and  this  held  true  on  into 
the  eighteenth  century  for  the  Protestant  universities  also,  in  the  foundation 
and  development  of  which  ecclesiastical  and  religious  interests  had  a  foremost 
place. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  characteristic  of  the  "world-wisdom"  or  secular 
philosophy  which  was  gaming  its  independence  at  the  beginning  of  the  modern 
period,  that  those  who  bring  and  support  it  are  not  at  all  men  of  the  schools, 
but  men  of  the  world  and  of  life  An  escaped  monk,  a  state-chancellor,  a 
cobbler,  a  nobleman,  a  pioscribed  Jew,  a  learned  diplomat,  independent  men  of 
letters  ami  journalists, — these  are  the  founders  of  modern  philosophy,  and  in 
accord  with  this,  their  work  takes  for  its  outer  fonn  not  the  test-book  or  the 
deposit  of  academical  disputations,  but  the  free  literary  production,  the  essay 

Not  until  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  did  philosophy  again 
become  corporate,  and  domesticated  in  the  universities.  This  took  place  first 
in  Germany,  where  the  moat  favourable  conditions  were  afforded  by  the  rising 
independence  of  tho  universities,  and  where  a  fruitful  interchange  between 
teachers  and  students  of  the  university  was  beneficial  to  philosophy  also.6 

1  v.  Wilamowitz-Mollendorf,  Antigonos  von  Karystos  (Philol.  Stud.    IT. 
Berlin,  1881,  pp.  20.3  ff.) 

2  Tho  Pythagoreans,  as  is  well  known,  offer  a  pre-eminent  example  of  this , 
but  sympathies  with  the  Apollo  cultus  are  plain  enough  in  the  Platonic  Academy 
also.    Ptieiderer  has  lately  sought  to  bring  the  apparently  isolated  Herachtus 
into  connection  with  the  Mysteries    (E.   Pfleiderer,   Heraklit  von  Ephesus 
Berlin,  1880) 

8  Of.  II.  Usener,  tyber  die  Orr/amsation  tier  wissenscliaffticlien  Arbeit  zm 
AUerthum  (PreuHH.  Jahrb  ,  Jahrg.  LIII  ,  1884,  pp  1  ff ),  and  E.  Heitz,  Die  Philo- 
sophenschulen  Athens  (Deutsche  Revue,  1884,  pp.  326  tf ). 

*  Cf .  G.  Kauf inann,  Geschichte  tier  dtutschen  Universttaten  I.  pp.  98  ff,  (Stuttg. 
1888). 

6  SchelUng  has  erected  the  finest  monument  to  the  ideal  conception  of  science 
in  the  activity  of  German  universities,  in  his  Vorlesunr/en  liber  die  Methode  de$ 
akademischen  Studiums  (2.  and  3,  Vorlesung.  Ges.  Werke,  I.  Abth,,  Vol.  5, 
pp.  223  ££.). 


g  Introduction. 

From  Germany  this  spread  to  Scotland,  England,  Franco,  and  Italy,  and  in  gen- 
eral it  may  oe  said  that  in  the  nineteenth  century  the  seatol  philosophy  is  casen. 
tially  to  be  sought  in  the  universities  * 

In  couclusion,  the  share,  of  the  various  pities  In  the  development  of  philoso- 
phy deserves  a  brief  mention.  As  with  all  developments  of  European  cultuie, 
so  with  philosophy,  —  the  Greeks  created  it,  and  the  primitive  structuiti  of 
philosophy  due  to  their  creative  activity  is  still  to-day  an  essential  basis  of  the 
bcience  What  was  added  m  antiquity  by  the  mixed  peoples  ol  Hellenism  and 
by  the  Romans  does  not,  in  general,  amount  to  more  than  a  special  form  and 
practical  adaptation  of  the  Gieek  philosophy.  Only  m  tho  religious  turn  which 
this  last  movement  took  (cf  below,  Part  II.  eh  2)  do  wo  iiud  something  ehsen- 
tially  new  which  sprang  troin  the  harmonising  of  national  diilerenees  in  tho 
Roman  Empire  The  scientific  culture  of  the  Middle  Ages  was  also  international, 
as  is  implied  in  the  universal  employment  of  tho  Latin  liwignatfo.  It  is  with 
modern  philosophy  that  the  special  characters  ol  particular  nations  first  present 
themselves  as  of  decisive  influence  While  the  traditions  of  medieval  scholas- 
ticism maintain  themselves  most  vigorously  and  independently  in  Spain  and 
Portugal,  the  Italians,  Germans,  English,  and  French  supply  the  llrst  movement** 
of  the  new  science  which  reached  its  highest  point  in  tho  oliutHiofU  period  of 
German  philosophy  Compaied  with  these  four  nations,  tho  lest  stand  ;tl most 
entirely  m  a  leceptive  attitude ,  a  certain  uuLenoiultmuu  to  noticeable,  if  any- 
where, in  more  recent  tune  among  the  Swedes. 

§  3.   The  History  of  Philosophy. 

The  more  varied  the  character  assumed  by  the  probloniH  and  con- 
tent of  philosophy  in  the  course  of  time,  the  more  tho  question 
rises,  what  meaning  there  can  be  in  uniting  in  historical  invewLiga- 
tion  and  exposition  products  of  thought  which  are  not  only  MO 
manifold,  but  also  so  different  in  kind,  and  between  which  there 
seems  to  be  ultimately  nothing  in  common  but  lhe  name, 

For  the  anecdotal  interest  in  this  chcc.kered  diversity  of  vari- 
ous opinions  on  various  things,  which  was  perhaps  formerly  tho 
chief  motive  of  a  "History  of  Philosophy,"  Hlimulated  too  by  tho 
remarkable  and  strange  nature  of  many  of  tbeno  vioww,  cannot 
possibly  serve  as  the  permanent  contro  of  a  genuine  Hcu*ntiti(%  iliwui- 
pline. 

1.  At  all  events,  however,  it  is  clear  that  tho  OOHO  HtatwlH  other- 
wise with  the  history  of  philosophy  than  wiLh  that  of  any  other 
science.  For  with  all  these  tho  fiehl  of  research  remains  lixcil,  on 
the  whole  at  least,  however  many  the  variations  to  \vhwh  ifcs  extend, 
its  separation  from  a  still  more  general  iieltl,  and  HH  liiniUi.tion  with 
reference  to  neighbouring  fields,  may  be  subjeel  in  tho  eourno  of  his- 
tory. In  such  a  case  there  i»  no  difficulty  in  tracing  the  develop- 
ment of  knowledge  over  a  field  which  can  be  determined  in  this 
way,  and  in  eventually  making  just  those  variations  intelligible  as 
the  natural  consequences  of  this  development  of  inflight, 

1  The  foest  evidence  for  this  statement  is  afforded  by  just  tho  passionate 
attacks  which  Schopenhauer  directed  against  tho  relation  bulwotm  philosophy 
and  the  universiLies. 


§  2.]  The  History  of  Philosophy.  9 

Quite  otherwise,  however,  in  the  case  of  philosophy,  which  has 
no  such  subject-matter  common  to  all  its  periods,  and  whose  « his- 
tory," therefore,  sets  forth  no  constant  advance  or  gradual  approxi- 
mation to  a  knowledge  of  the  subject  in  question  Bather,  it  has 
always  been  emphasised  that  while  m  other  sciences,  a  quiet  build- 
ing up  of  knowledge  is  the  rule,  as  soon  as  they  have  once  gained 
a  sure  methodical  footing  after  their  rhapsodical  beginnings,  —  a 
rule  which  is  interrupted  only  from  time  to  time  by  a  sudden  new 
beginning,  —  in  philosophy  the  reverse  is  true  There  it  is  the 
exception  that  successors  gratefully  develop  what  has  been  already 
achieved,  and  each  of  the  great  systems  of  philosophy  begins  to 
solve  its  newly  formulated  problem  ab  ovo,  as  if  the  other  systems 
had  scarcely  existed. 

2.  If  in  spite  of  all  of  this  we  are  still  to  be  able  to  speak  of  a  "his- 
tory of  philosophy,"  the  unity  of  connection,  which  we  find  neither 
in  the  objects  with  which  philosophers  busy  themselves,  nor  in  the 
problems  they  have  sot  themselves,  can  be  found  only  in  the  common 
work  which  they  have  accomplished  in  spite  of  all  the  variety  in  their 
subject-matter  and  in  the  purposes  with  which  they  have  worked. 

But  tins  common  product,  which  constitutes  the  meaning  of  the 
history  of  philosophy,  resbs  on  just  the  changing  relations  which 
the  work  of  philosophers  has  sustained  in  the  course  of  history,  not 
only  to  the  maturest  results  of  science  in  general  and  of  the  special 
sciences  in  particular,  but  also  to  the  other  activities  of  European 
civilisation.  For  was  it  that  philosophy  had  in  view  the  project  of 
a  general  scientific  knowledge  of  the  universe,  which  she  would  win 
either  in  tho  role  of  universal  science,  or  as  a  generalising  compre- 
hension of  the  results  of  the  special  sciences,  or  was  it  that  she 
sought  a  view  of  life  which  should  give  a  complete  expression  to 
tho  highest  values  of  will  and  feeling,  or  was  it  finally  that  with  a 
clearly  defined  limitation  of  her  field  she  made  reason's  self-knowl- 
edge her  goal,  —  tho  result  always  was  that  she  was  labouring  to 
bring  to  conscious  expression  the  necessary  forms  and  principles  in 
whic,h  the  human  reason  manifests  its  activity,  and  to  transfer  these 
from  their  original  form  of  perceptions,  feelings,  and  impulses,  into 
that  of  conceptions.  In  some  direction  and  in  some  fashion  every 
philosophy  has  striven  to  reach,  over  a  more  or  less  extensive  field, 
a  formulation  in  conception  of  the  material  immediately  given  m 
the  world  and  in  life;  and  so,  as  these  efforts  have  passed  into  his- 
tory, the  constitution  of  the  mental  and  spiritual  life  has  been 
step  by  step  disclosed,  TJie  History  of  Philosophy  is  the  process  in 
which  European  humanity  has  embodied  in  scientific  conceptions  its 
views  of  the  world  and  its  judgments  of  life. 


10  Introduction. 

It  is  this  common  fruit  of  all  the  intellectual  creations  which 
present  themselves  as  ft  philosophies,"  which  alone  gives  to  the 
history  of  philosophy  as  a  genuine  science  its  content,  its  problem, 
and  its  justification.  This,  too,  is  the  reason  why  a  knowledge  of 
the  history  of  philosophy  is  a  necessary  requirement,  not  only  for 
all  scholarly  education,  but  for  all  culture  whatever ;  for  it  lusichos 
how  the  conceptions  and  forms  have  been  coined,  in  which  wo  all, 
in  every-day  life  as  well  as  in  the  particular  sciences,  think  and 
judge  the  world  of  our  experience. 

The  beginnings  of  the  history  of  philosophy  are  to  bo  sought  in  tho  historical 
compositions  (ior  the  most  part  lost)  of  the  great  schools  of  mitHimty,  especially 
the  Peripatetic  School.  As  we  may  see  in  the  examples  given  by  Aristotle,1 
these  works  had  the  critical  purpose  of  preparing  ior  tho  development  of  tlicur 
own  views  by  a  dialectical  examination  oE  views  previously  brought  lorwaid. 
Such,  collections  of  historical  material  were  planned  for  tho  various  fields  of 
science,  and  demographies a  in  philosophy  arose  in  this  way  sulu  by  side  with 
his  tones  o£  particular  disciplines,  such  as  mathematics,  astronomy,  physics,  ei,«. 
As  inclination  and  power  for  independent  philosophic  thought  lati>r  di-olmcd, 
this  literature  degenerated  into  a  learned  scrap-book  work,  in  which  wcro  mingled 
anecdotes  from  the  lives  of  the  philosophers,  individual  epigrammatic  saying, 
and  sketches  ol  their  doctrines. 

Those  expositions  belonging  to  the  modem  period  which  woro  based  upon 
the  remains  of  ancient  tradition  had  this  same  character  of  oolloolmiiH  of  <mhoHi- 
ties.  Such  were  Stanleys*  leproduction  of  Diogenes  Lacrthw,  and  lim?k?r*$ 
works  *  Only  with  time  do  we  find  critical  ilinneniinwiL  in  UHH  of  tho  HOUWJOH 
(BuhU*  JPullebom*),  a  more  unprejudiced  apprehension  of  the  historical 
significance  of  individual  doctrines  ( Tifidemann,"1  Dptjerandt) "),  and  flyHtmfttto 
criticism  of  these  upon  the  basis  ol  the  now  standpoint  (Tanneinann^  /W'«,ll) 
and  Schleiermacher  n) . 

It  was,  however,  through  Hegel 12  that  tho  history  of  philosophy  wan  first 
made  an  independent  science,  tor  he  discovered  tho  essential  point  that  the 

1  Eg.  in  the  beginning  of  the  Mctaphyms, 

2  More  in  detail  on  these  below. 

8  Th.  Stanley,  Thfi  History  of  Philosophy.    Loud.  1H85- 

4  J.  tl  Brackor,  inntoria  Gritmi  PhiloMphiw.   5  vols,  Utipfl,    1742ff, 
tutiones  Histonai  Philosophic     Letps.  1747. 

5  jr.  G.  Buhle,  Lehrbuch  der  Qettchtehte  der  Philosophic    8  voln, 
1706  fl 

b  G,  G.  Fiilleborn,  Beitrftae  sur  Qeschichte  dcr  Philosophic,  la  Studion. 
Ziillichau,  1791  fl. 

*  D    Tiedemann,   Geist  d&r  Speculative  Philosophic    1  volfl,     Marburg, 

8  De  Gerando,  Histoire  Gomparee  des  flys&mes  dc,  Philosophic,,  iid  (ul.  in 
4  vols.  Park,  1822  f. 

9W.  Gr.  Tennemann,  Qetchichte  far  Philosophic    11  volH.    Lcips,  170HIC. 
GFrundms  der  QeschicMe  der  Philosophic  fnr  d<>n  ahailmiwlwi   "  ' 
Leips.  1812.    [Eng.  trans.  1833  and  1852.] 

10  J.  Fr.  Fries,  Geschichte  der  Philosophic,.    2  vote,    Hallo,  1M7  ff, 

11  ]Fr  Schleiermacher,  Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  from  his  literary 
in  the  Coll.  Works.    Ill,  Abth,,  4  Bd.,  1  Th.    Berlin,  18W, 

12  Cf.  the  introductions  of  the  fhftnometMlof/fa  tics  M»/Mw,  of  tho  locturea  ou 
the  Philosophy  of  History,  and  those  on  tho  History  of  Philosophy,    GOH,  Werki?, 
Bd.  II  pp.  62  ft.;  IX.  pp.  11  ff.  j  XIII  pp.  11-134,    In  lletft'l'H  works  tho  (jwhirhte 
der  Philosophy  edited  from  his  lectures  byMichdot,  oomipirH  VolH,  XI1I.-XV. 
Berlin,  1888-30      [Lectures  <m  the  History  of  Philosophy,  by  (^,  W,  ilo«el, 
Trans,  by  E.  S.  Haldane  ui  3  vols.    Vol.  I.    Loud.  180S8.]    Ou  hifl  standpoint 


5  2.]  The  History  of  Philosophy.  11 

history  of  philosophy  can  set  forth  neither  a  motley  collection  of  opinions  of 
various  learned  gentleman  "  de  omnibus  rebus  et  de  qmbusdam  aliis,"  nor  a 
constantly  widening  and  perfecting  elaboration  of  the  same  subject-matter,  but 
rather  only  the  limited  process  m  which  the  "  categories"  of  reason  have  suc- 
cessively attained  distinct  consciousness  and  reached  the  form  of  conceptions 

This  valuable  insight  was,  however,  obscured  and  injured  in  the  case  of  Hegel 
by  an  additional  asumption,  since  he  was  convinced  that  the  chronological  order 
in  which  the  above  "categories"  have  presented  themselves  in  the  historical 
systems  of  philosophy  must  necessarily  correspond  with  the  logical  and  syste- 
matic order  in  which  these  same  categories  should  appear  as  "  elements  of 
truth"  m  the  logical  construction  of  the  final  system  oi  philosophy  (z  e.  m 
Hegel's  view,  his  own).  The  fundamental  thought,  right  in  itself,  thus  led  to 
the  mistake  of  a  construction  of  the  history  of  philosophy  under  the  control  of  a 
philosophical  system,  and  so  to  a  frequent  violation  of  historical  fact.  This 
error,  which  the  development  of  a  scientific  history  of  philosophy  in  the  nine- 
teenth century  has  set  aside  m  favour  of  historical  accuracy  and  exactness,  arose 
from  the  wrong  idea  (though  an  idea  in  logical  consistence  with  the  principles  of 
Hegel's  philosophy)  that  the  historical  progress  of  philosophical  thought  is  due 
solely,  or  at  least  essentially,  to  an  ideal  necessity  with  which  one  "category  " 
pushes  forward  another  m  the  dialectical  movement.  In  truth,  the  pictuie  of 
the  historical  movement  of  philosophy  is  quite  a  different  one  It  depends  not 
solely  upon  the  thinking  of  "humanity  "  or  even  of  the  "  Wettgeist,"  "but  just 
as  truly  upon  the  reflections,  the  needs  of  mind  and  heart,  the  presaging  thought 
and  sudden  flashes  of  insight,  of  philosophising  individuals. 

3.  The  history  of  philosophy,  considered  as  such  a  sum-total,  in 
which  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  man's  views  of  the  world  and 
judgments  of  life  have  been  embodied,  is  the  product  of  a  great 
variety  of  single  movements  of  thought.  And  as  the  actual  motives 
of  these  movements,  various  factors  are  to  be  distinguished,  both  in 
the  setting  of  the  problems  and  in  the  attempts  at  their  logical 
solution. 

The  logical,  2)mgmatic  factor  is  no  doubt  sufficiently  important. 
For  the  problems  of  philosophy  are  in  the  mam  given,  and  this  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  they  are  constantly  recurring  in  the  histor- 
ical movement  of  thought  as  the  "  primeval  enigma  of  existence," 
and  are  ever  anew  demanding  imperiously  the  solution  which  has 
never  completely  succeeded.  They  are  given,  however,  by  the 
inadequacy  and  internal  contradictions  of  the  material  which  con- 
sciousness presents  for  philosophical  consideration.1  But  just  for 

stand  Gk  0.  Marbach,  Lehrbuch  der  G-escliichte  Philosophic  (2.  Abth,  Leips. 
183H  ff.),  C.  Hermann,  Geschichte  der  Philosophic  in  praytnatischer  Behandlung 
(Loipa.  1807),  and  in  part  also  the  survey  of  the  entire  history  of  philosophy 
which  rT  Braiiiss  has  published  as  the  first  (only)  volume  of  a  Geschichte  der 
Philosophic  sGit  Kant  (Bruslau,  1842).  In  France  this  line  is  represented  by  V. 
Cousin,  Introduction  &  VUistoire  de  la  Philosophie  (Paris,  1828 ;  7th  ed.  1872) ; 
Hintoire  CfMrale  de  la  Philosophie  (12th  ed.,  Paris,  1884) 

1  More  precisely,  this  inadequacy,  which  cannot  here  be  more  exactly  devel- 
oped, and  which  can  be  fully  brought  out  only  in  a  system  of  epistemology, 
consists  in  the  circumstance  that  that  which  is  given  hi  experience  never  meets 
completely  the  oonooptional  demands  which,  in  elaborating  the  same  according 
to  tho  inner  nature  of  the  reason,  we  set  up,  at  first  naively  and  immediately, 
and  later  with  reflective  consciousness  Tins  antinomism  (or  failure  to  meet 
tho  laws  of  thought)  can  be  escaped  by  ordinary  lite,  or  even  by  experiential 


12  Introduction* 

this  reason  this  material  contains  the  real  presuppositions  and  the 
logical  constraining  forces  for  all  rational  reflection  upon  it,  and 
because  from  the  nature  of  the  case  these  are  always  asserting 
themselves  anew  in  the  same  way,  it  follows  that  not  only  the  chief 
problems  in  the  history  of  philosophy,  but  also  the  chief  lines  along 
which  a  solution  is  attempted,  are  repeated.  Just  this  constancy 
in  all  change,  which,  regarded  from  without,  makes  the  impression 
that  philosophy  is  striving  fruitlessly  in  ever-repeated  circles  for 
a  goal  that  is  never  attained,  proves  only  this,  —  that  the  problems 
of  philosophy  are  tasks  which  the  human  mind  cannot  escape.1 
And  so  we  understand  how  the  same  logical  necessity  in  repeated 
instances  causes  one  doctrine  to  give  birth  to  another.  Uenco  prog- 
ress in  the  history  of  philosophy  is,  during  certain  periods,  to  bo 
understood  entirely  pragmatically,  i.e.  through  the  internal  necessity 
of  the  thoughts  and  through  the  "  logic  of  things." 

The  mistake  of  Hegel's  mentioned  above,  consists,  then,  only  in  his  wishing  to 
make  of  a  factor  which  is  effective  within  certain  limits,  the  only,  or  at  least 
the  principal,  factor.  It  would  be  the  opposite  error  to  deny  absolutely  the 
"reason  in  history,"  and  to  see  in  the  successive  doctrines  of  philosophy  only 
confused  chance-thoughts  of  individuals.  It  is  rather  true  that  the  total  content 
of  the  history  of  philosophy  can  be  explained  only  through  the  fact  that  the 
necessities  existing  in  the  nature  of  things  assert  themselves  over  and  over  in 
the  thinking  of  individuals,  however  accidental  the  special  conditions  of  this 
latter  may  be.  On  these  relations  rest  the  attempts  made  to  classify  all  philo- 
sophical doctrines  under  certain  types,  and  to  establish  a  sort,  of  rhythmical 
repetition  in  their  historical  development.  On  this  basis  V.  Cousin51*  1m  night 
forward  his  theory  of  the  four  systems,  Idealism,  Sensualism,  Scepticism,  Mys- 
ticism ;  so  too  August  Comte3  his  of  the  three  stages,  the  theological,  the  meta- 
physical, and  the  positive.  An  interesting  and  in  many  ways  instructive 
grouping  of  philosophical  doctrines  about  the  particular  main  problems  is 
afforded  by  A.  Kenouvier  in  his  Enquteufi  tfunfi  ClasnijlctttwH  NyNt-fiMaffqw 
des  Doctrines  PhilosopUiques  ("2  vote.,  Paris,  18H5  F.),  *A  school-book  which 
arranges  the  philosophical  doctrines  according  to  problems  and  schools  luis  been 
Issued  by  Paul  Janet  and  Seailles  ;  Hitttotre  dc,  Id  Philottophic.  ;  Im  problems  cb 
les  &coles  (Paris,  1887). 

4  But  the  pragmatic  thread  very  often  breaks  off  in  the,  history 
of  philosophy.  The  historical  order  in  particular,  in  which  prob- 
lems have  presented  themselves,  shows  almowt  a  completo 


science,  "by  working  with  auxiliary  conceptions,  which  indeed  remain  problem- 
atical in  themselves,  but  which,  within  certain  bounds,  Huflloo  for  an  elaboration 
of  the  material  of  experience  that  meets  our  practical  needs.  But  it  is  just  in 
these  auxiliary  conceptions  that  the  problems  of  philosophy  inhere. 

1  In  this  way  the  results  of  Kant's  investigations  on  "The  Antinomy  oC  Puro 
Reason"  (Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  Transcendental  Dialectic,  second  sec.)  might 
be  historically  and  systematically  extended ;  of.  W.  Windelbaiul,  (kwhicJUti  dcr 
neueren  Philosophic,  II.  95  f. 

2  Cf.  Note  12,  p.  10. 

* A.  Comte,  Oours  de  Philosophic  Positive  I.  0,  with  which  Vote.  V,  and  VT. 
are  to  be  compared  as  the  carrying  out  of  the  scheme.  Similar  thoughts  are 
also  found  in  D'Alembert's  Discours  Prtliminaire  in  the  Encyvlopfalie. 


§  2-]  2^0  History  of  Philosophy.  13 

of  such  an  immanent  logical  necessity.  Here,  on  the  contrary, 
another  factor  asserts  itself  which  may  best  be  designated  as  the 
factor  contributed  by  the  history  of  civilisation.  For  philosophy 
receives  both  its  problems  and  the  materials  for  their  solution  from 
the  ideas  of  the  general  consciousness  of  the  time,  and  from  the 
needs  of  society.  The  great  conquests  and  the  newly  emerging 
questions  of  the  special  sciences,  the  movements  of  the  religious 
consciousness,  the  intuitions  of  art,  the  revolutions  in  social  and 
political  life,  —  all  these  give  philosophy  new  impulses  at  irregular 
intervals,  and  condition  the  directions  of  the  interest  which  forces, 
now  these,  now  those,  problems  into  the  foreground,  and  crowds 
others  for  the  time  being  aside ;  and  no  less  do  they  condition  also 
the  changes  which  questions  and  answers  experience  in  course  of 
time.  Where  this  dependence  shows  itself  with  especial  clearness, 
we  have  under  certain  circumstances  a  philosophical  system  appear- 
ing, that  represents  exactly  the  knowledge  which  a  definite  age  has 
of  itself;  or  we  may  have  the  oppositions  in  the  general  culture  of 
the  age  finding  their  expression  in  the  strife  of  philosophical  sys- 
tems. And  so  besides  the  constant  dependence  upon  the  essential 
character  of  the  subject-matter  —  the  pragmatic  factor — there  pre- 
vails also  a  necessity  growing  out  of  the  history  of  civilisation,  or 
current  state  of  culture,  which  warrants  a  historical  right  of  exist- 
ence to  structures  of  thought  in  themselves  untenable. 

This  relation  also  was  first  brought  to  notice  in  a  greater  degree  than  before 
by  Ifrflcl,  although  the  "relative  truth"  which  he  ascribes  to  the  particular 
system's  has  with  him  at  the  same  time  a  systematic  meaning,  owing  to  his 
dialectical  fundamental  thought.  On  the  other  hand,  the  element  due  to  the 
history  of  civilisation  has  been  best  formulated  among  his  successors  by  Kuno 
JFtotchar,1  who  has  also  availed  himself  of  it  in  most  hrilliant  manner  in  his  expo- 
sition of  the  subject.  He  regards  philosophy  in  its  historical  unfolding  as  the 
progressive  self-knowledge  of  the  human  mind,  and  makes  its  development 
appear  as  constantly  conditioned  by  the  development  of  the  object  which  in  it 
is  attaining  self-knowledge.  Although  this  applies  to  a  number  of  the  most 
important  systems,  it  is  yet  but  one  of  the  factors  involved. 

The  influences  from  the  history  of  civilisation  which  condition  the  statement 
and  solution  of  philosophic  problems,  afford  an  explanation  in  most  cases  of  an 
extremely  interesting  phenomenon  which  is  of  great  importance  for  understand- 
ing the  historical  development ;  viz.  the  complication  or  interweaving  of  prob- 
lem*. For  when  interest  is  directed  chiefly  on  certain  lines  of  thought,  it  is 
inevitable,  according  to  psychological  laws,  that  associations  will  be  formed 
between  different  bodies  of  thought,  —  associations  which  are  not  based  on  the 
subject-matter,  —  and  so,  that  questions  which  in  themselves  have  nothing  to  do 
with  each  other  become  blended  and  made  to  depend  upon  each  other  in  their 
solution.  An  extremely  important  and  very  often  recurring  example  of  this  is 
the  intermingling  of  ethical  and  aesthetic  interests  in  the  treatment  of  theoretical 
problems.  The  well-known  fact  of  daily  life  that  men's  views  are  determined 
by  their  wishes,  hopes,  fears,  and  inclinations,  that  their  theoretical  are  condi- 

1  Kuno  Fischer,  Geschichte  der  neueren  Philosophy  I.  1,  Einleitung  I.-V. 
[trans,  by  J.  P.  Gordy,  Descartes  and  his  School,  N.Y.  1887]. 


14:  Introduction. 

tioned  by  their  ethical  and  sesthetic  judgments  (  Urtheile  durch  ihre  BeurtUei- 
lungen^  —  ihis  fact  is  repeated  on  a  larger  scale  in  their  views  of  the  universe, 
and  has  even  been  able  to  rise  so  high  in  philosophy  that  what  had  been  pre- 
viously involuntarily  practised,  was  proclaimed  (by  Kant)  an  epistemological 
postulate. 

5.  Meanwhile  the  historical  process  we  are  tracing  owes  all  its 
variety  and  multiplicity  of  forms  to  the  circumstance  that  the  de- 
velopment of  ideas  and  the  formulation  of  general  beliefs  into 
abstract  conceptions  are  accomplished  only  through  the  thinking 
of  individual  personalities,  who,  though  rooted  ever  so  deeply  with 
their  thought  in  the  logical  connection  and  prevalent  ideas  of  a 
historical  period,  always  add  a  particular  element  by  their  own 
individuality  and  conduct  of  life.  This  individual  factor  in  the 
development  of  the  history  of  philosophy  deserves  so  great  atten- 
tion for  the  reason  that  those  who  have  borne  the  loading  part  in 
the  movement  have  shown  themselves  to  be  marked,  independent 
personalities,  whose  peculiar  nature  has  been  a  determining  in- 
fluence, not  merely  for  the  selection  and  combination  of  problems, 
but  also  for  working  out  the  conceptions  to  furnish  solutions,  both 
in  their  own  doctrines  and  in  those  of  their  successors.  That  history 
is  the  kingdom  of  individualities,  of  details  which  are  not  to  be 
repeated  and  which  have  value  in  themselves,  is  shown  also  in  the 
history  of  philosophy :  here,  too,  great  personalities  have  exercised 
far-reaching  and  not  exclusively  beneficial  influences. 

It  is  clear  that  the  above-mentioned  complication  of  problems  is  brought 
about  by  the  subjective  relations  in  which  individual  philosopher**  stand,  in  a 
much  greater  degree  than  by  the  occasions  presented  iu  the*  general  conseious- 
ness  of  a  time,  of  a  people,  etc.  There  is  no  philosophical  system  that  is  free 
from  this  influence  of  the  personality  of  its  founder.  Hence  all  philosophical 
systems  are  creations  of  individuality,  presenting  in  this  respect  a  certain  re- 
semblance with  works  of  art,  and  as  such  art*  to  bu  understood  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  personality  of  their  founder.  The  elements  of  every  philosopher's 
Weltanschauung  grow  out  of  the  problems  of  reality  which  arc,  over  tho  name, 
and  out  of  the  reason  as  it  is  directed  to  their  solution,  but  besides  this  out  of 
the  views  and  ideals  of  his  people  and  his  time ;  the  form  and  arrangement, 
however,  the  connection  and  valuation  which  thoy  find  in  tho  system,  are  condi- 
tioned by  his  birth  and  education,  his  activity  and  lot  in  life,,  his  character  and 
his  experience.  Here,  accordingly,  the  universality  which  belongs  to  tho  other 
two  factors  is  often  wanting.  In  the  case  of  thesis  purely  individual  creations, 
sesthetic  charm  must  take  the  place  of  the  worth  of  abiding  knowledge,  and  tho 
impressiveness  of  many  phenomena  of  the  history  of  philosophy  rests,  in  fact, 
only  upon  the  magic  of  their  "poetry  of  ideas"  (Retfrf/Mlifihtunf/), 

In  addition,  then,  to  the  complication  of  problems  and  to  the  ideas  determined 
by  fancy  and  feeling,  which  are  already  enough  to  lead  the  general  conHcioviK- 
ness  astray,  there  are  in  the  case  of  individuals  similar,  but  purely  personal, 
processes  to  lend  to  the  formation  and  solution  of  problems  still  more  tho  char- 
acter of  artificiality.  We  cannot  fail  to  recognise  that  philosophers  have  often 
gone  about  struggling  with  questions  which  have  no  basis  in  reality,  so  that  all 
thought  expended  upon  them  was  in  vain,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  even  in 
connection  with  the  solution  of  real  problems,  unfortunate  attempts  in  the  a 
priori  construction  of  conceptions  have  slipped  in,  which  have  boon  hindrances 
rather  than  helps  toward  the  issue  of  the  matter. 


§  2.]  The  History  of  Philosophy.  15 

The  wonderful  feature  in  the  history  of  philosophy  remains  just  this,  that 
out  of  such  a  multitude  of  individual  and  general  complications  there  has  yet 
been  on  the  whole  laid  down  that  outline  of  universally  valid  conceptions  for 
viewing  the  world  and  judging  life,  which  presents  the  scientific  significance  of 
this  development. 

6,  Investigation  in  the  history  of  philosophy  has  accordingly  the 
following  tasks  to  accomplish :  (1)  To  establish  with  precision  what 
may  be  derived  from  the  available  sources  as  to  the  circumstances 
in  life,  the  mental  development,  and  the  doctrines  of  individual 
philosophers ;  (2)  from  these  facts  to  reconstruct  the  genetic  pro- 
cess in  such  a  way  that  in  the  case  of  every  philosopher  we  may 
understand  how  his  doctrines  depend  in  part  upon  those  of  his 
predecessors,  in  part  upon  the  general  ideas  of  his  time,  and  in  part 
upon  his  own  nature  and  the  course  of  his  education ;  (3)  from 
the  consideration  of  the  whole  to  estimate  what  value  for  the  total 
result  of  the  history  of  philosophy  belongs  to  the  theories  thus 
established  and  explained  as  regards  their  origin. 

With  reference  to  the  first  two  points,  the  history  of  philosophy 
is  a  jihilologico-lristoricalj  with  reference  to  the  third  element  it  is  a 
critico-philosophical  science. 

(a)  To  establish  its  facts  the  history  of  philosophy  must  proceed  to  a  careful 
and  comprehensive  examination  of  the  sources.  These  sources,  however,  vary 
greatly  at  different  times  in  their  transparency  and  fulness. 

The  main  sources  for  investigation  in  the  history  of  philosophy  are  of  course 
the  works  of  the  philosophers  themselves.  For  the  modern  period  we  stand 
here  upon  a  relatively  safe  footing.  Since  the  discovery  of  the  art  of  printing, 
literary  tradition  has  become  so  well  established  and  clear  that  it  offers  in  gen- 
eral no  difficulties  of  any  kind.  The  writings  which  philosophers  have  pub- 
lished since  the  Renaissance  are  throughout  accessible  for  the  research  of 
to-day.  The  cases  in  which  questions  of  genuineness,  of  the  time  of  origina- 
tion, etc.,  give  rise  to  controversies  are  extremely  seldom ;  a  philological  criti- 
cism has  here  but  a  narrow  field  for  activity,  and  where  it  can  enter  (as  is  the 
case  in  part  in  reference  to  the  different  editions  of  Kant's  works),  it  concerns 
solely  subordinate,  and  in  the  last  instance  indifferent,  points.  Here,  too,  we  are 
tolerably  sure  of  the  completeness  of  the  material ;  that  anything  of  weight  is 
lost,  or  still  to  be  expected  from  later  publication,  is  scarcely  to  be  assumed ;  if 
the  sharpened  philological  attentiveness  of  the  last  decades  has  brought  us  new 
material  for  Spinoza,  Leibniz,  Kant,  Maine  de  Biran,  the  philosophical  outcome 
has-been  only  vanishing  in  comparison  with  the  value  of  what  was  already 
known.  At  most  it  has  concerned  the  question  of  supplementing  our  knowl- 
edge, and  this  must  continue  to  be  its  province.  The  importance  of  occasional 
expressions  in  letters  has  been  specially  felt  here,  for  these  are  adapted  to  shed 
more  light  on  the  individual  factor  in  the  historical  development  of  philosophy. 

With  the  sources  of  the  Mediaeval  Philosophy  the  case  stands  less  favourably. 
These  have  in  part  (a  small  part,  to  be  sure)  still  only  a  manuscript  existence. 
V.  Cousin  and  his  school  have  rendered  valuable  service  in  publishing  the 
texts,  and  in  general  we  may  be  convinced  that  for  this  period  also  we  possess 
material,  which  has  indeed  gaps,  but  is  on  the  whole  adequate  for  our  purpose. 
On  the  other  hand,  our  knowledge  of  the  Arabian  and  Jewish  philosophy  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  and  so  of  the  influence  of  those  systems  on  the  course  of  Western 
Thought,  is  still  very  problematical  in  details ;  and  this  is  perhaps  the  gap  most 
sorely  felt  in  our  investigation  of  the  sources  for  the  history  of  philosophy. 

Much  worse  still  is  the  situation  as  regards  the  direct  sources  for  Ancient 
Philosophy.  Of  the  original  works,  we  have  preserved,  to  be  sure,  the  most 


^g  Introduction. 

important :  the  fundamental  portion  of  the  works  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  though 
even  these  are  often  doubtful  in  form.  Besides  these  we  have  only  the  writings 
of  later  time,  such  as  those  of  Cicero,  Seneca,  Plutarch,  the  Church  Fathers, 
and  the  Neo-Platonists.  By  far  the  greater  part  of  the  philosophical  writings 
of  antiquity  is  lost.  In  their  stead  \ve  must  content  ourselves  with  the  frag- 
ments which  the  accident  of  an  incidental  mention  in  the  writings  of  extant 
authors  has  kept  for  us,  here  too  often  in  a  questionable  form.1 

If,  nevertheless,  success  has  been  attained  in  gaming  a  view  of  the  rlewlop- 
ment  of  the  ancient  philosophy,  clearer  than  that  of  the  medieval,  presenting  a 
picture  whose  accuracy  extends  even  to  details  and  is  scientifically  assured,  this 
is  due  not  only  to  the  unremitting  pains  of  philologists  and  philosophers  in 
working  through  their  material,  but  also  to  the  circumstance  that  beside  the 
remains  of  the  original  works  of  the  philosophers  there  arc  preserved  also,  as 
secondary  sourws,  remains  of  historical  records  made  in  antiquity.  The  best, 
indeed,  of  these  also  is  lost :  namely,  the  historical  works  which  arose  from  the 
learned  collection  made  by  the  Peripatetic  and  Stoic  schools  at  the  end  of  the 
fourth  and  in  the  third  century  B.C.  These  works  passed  later  through  many 
hands  before  they  were  preserved  for  us  in  thu  extant  compilations  prepared  in 
the  Roman  period,  as  in  the  Flacita  Philosophorum,*  going  by  the  name  of 
Plutarch,  in  the  writings  of  Sextus  Empiricus,8  in  the  JMpnosopMHtm  of  Athe- 
naeum,4 in  the  treatise  of  Diogenes  Laertius,  irepl  jttuv  Soy^druv  ica.1  d-rrode'yij.dTdjv 
rQv  tv  <f>L\offO(f>Lg.  tidoKLMtrdvTuv?  in  the  collections  of  the  Church  Fathers,  and 
in  the  notes  of  the  Commentators  of  the  latest  period,  such  as  Alexander  Aphro- 
disias,  Themistius,  and  Simplicms.  H.  Diels  has  given  an  excellent  and  thor- 
ough treatment  of  these  secondary  sources  of  ancient  philosophy,  DnxotjrupUt 
Qraci  (Berlin,  1879). 

Where  the  condition  of  the  sources  is  so  doubtful  as  is  tho  case  ovor  the 
entire  field  of  ancient  philosophy,  critical  ascertainment  of  the  facia  must  go 
hand  in  hand  with  examination  of  the  pragmatic  and  genetic  connection.  Jte 
where  the  transmission  of  the  material  is  itself  doubtful  wo  can  roach  a  decision, 
only  by  taking  a  view  of  the  connection  that  shall  accord  with  reason  and 
psychological  experience.  In  these  cases  it  becomes  the  task  of  the  history  of 
philosophy  as  of  all  history,  after  establishing  a  base  of  operations  in  that  which 
is  assured  by  the  sources,  to  proceed  to  ascertain  its  position  in  tho««  regions 
with  which  tradition  finds  itself  no  longer  directly  and  surely  in  touch.  The 
historical  study  of  philosophy  in  the  nineteenth  century  may  boast  that  it  has 
fulfilled  this  task,  to  which  it  was  stimulated  by  Schleiormaeher,  by  tho  labours 
of  H.  Bitter,— whose  Qtschichte  for  Philosophic  (12  vois.,  Hamburg,  iH80~5:j)  us 
now,  to  be  sure,  antiquated, — Brandis  and  teller  for  the  ancient  philosophy  ; 
and  of  jr.  E.  Erdmann  and  Kuno  Fischer  for  the  modern.  Among  the  many 
complete  expositions  of  the  history  of  philosophy  by  far  tho  niont  trustworthy 
in  these  respects  is  J.  S.  Erdmann's  Gfrundrm  tier  Ue$cM("M<>,  dcr  rhilMtophiP, 
2  vols.  (3d  ed.),  Berlin,  1878  ;  [Brdmann's  History  of  Ph&osrmhy,  trans,  ed.  by 
W.  S.  Plough,  Lond.  and  N.Y.,  1800]. 

An  excellent  bibliography  of  the  entire  history  of  philosophy,  assembling  tho 
literature  in  exhaustive  completeness  and  good  arrangement,  IH  to  be  found  in 
Ueberweg's  Cfrundriss  tier  Qeschichte  der  Philosophic,  4  vols.,  8th  ed.,  e<l.  by 
M.  Heinze  (Berlin,  1804-98).  [Ueberweg's  JTMwy  of  PhiloMphy,  trans,  from 
the  4th  ed.  by  G.  S.  Morris  (N.Y.  1871),  contains  additions,  but  of  courses  does  not 


1  The  collections  of  fragments  of  particular  authors  are  mentioned  under  tho 
notices  of  the  individual  philosophers.    It  would  bo  desirable  if  they  were  all  HH 
excellent  as  Usener's  JBpicurea.    Of  the  fragments  of  the  Pre-Socnition  W.  F. 
A.  Mullach  has  published  a  careful  collection,  which,  however,  w  no  longer 
adequate  in  the  present  condition  of  research  (Fragments  Ji*hil<Mwh<mm 
Q-rwcorum}. 

2  Plut.  Moralia,  ed.  Dtibner,  Paris,  1841 ;  Piels,  &ox.,  pp,  272  ff. ;  [Plutarch'n 
Morals,  Miscellanies,  and  Essays,  ed.  by  Goodwill,  Boston,  1870  :  trans,  al«o  in 
the  Bohn  Lib.]. 

8  Ed.  Bekker,  Berlin,  1847. 
*  G.  Kaibel,  Leips.  1888-00. 
«  Ed.  Cobet,  Paris,  1850. 


§  2.]  The  History  of  Philosophy.  IT 

give  the  bibliography  of  recent  works.]    Under  the  general  literature  may  also 
be  mentioned,  R.  Eucken,  Die  Leoensanschauungen  der  grossen  Denker  (Leips. 

(&)  Explanation  of  facts  in  the  history  of  philosophy  is  either  pragmatic  (logi- 
cal), or  based  on  the  history  of  civilisation,  or  psychological,  corresponding  to  the 
three  factors  which  we  have  set  forth  above  as  determining  the  movement  of 
thought.  Which  of  these  three  modes  of  explanation  is  to  be  applied  in  individ- 
ual cases  depends  solely  upon  the  state  of  the  facts  with  regard  to  the  trans- 
mission of  material.  It  is  then  incorrect  to  make  either  one  the  sole  principle 
of  treatment.  The  pragmatic  method  of  explanation  is  dominant  with  those 
who  see  in  the  entire  history  of  philosophy  the  preparation  for  a  definite  system 
of  philosophy  ;  so  with  Hegel  and  his  disciples  (see  above,  p.  101);  so  from  a 
Herbartian  standpoint  with  Clir.  A.  Thilo,  Kurze  pragmatische  Geschichte  der 
Philosophie  (2  pts. ;  Coethen,  1876-80).  Kuno  Fischer  and  W.  Windelband 
have  emphasised  in  their  interpretation  of  modern  philosophy,  the  importance 
of  considering  the  history  of  civilisation  and  the  problems  of  the  individual 
sciences. 

The  purely  biographical  treatment  which  deals  only  with  successive  person- 
alities is  quite  inadequate  as  a  scientific  exposition  of  the  history  of  philosophy. 
This  mode  of  treatment  is  represented  in  recent  time  by  the  treatise  of  G.  H. 
Lewes,  The  History  of  Philosophy  from  Tholes  to  the  Present  Day  (2  vols., 
Lond.  1871),  a  book  destitute  of  all  historical  apprehension,  and  at  the  same 
time  a  party  composition  in  the  spirit  of  the  Positivism  of  Comte.  The  works 
of  the  French  historians  (Danriron,  Ferraz)  are  inclined  to  take  this  form  of 
a  separate  essay-like  treatment  of  individual  philosophers,  not  losing  from  sight, 
however,  the  course  of  development  of  the  whole.1 

(c)  The  most  difficult  task  is  to  establish  the  principles  according  to  which  the 
critical  philosophical  estimate  of  the  individual  doctrines  must  be  made  up. 
The  history  of  philosophy,  like  all  history,  is  a  critical  science  ;  its  duty  is  not 
only  to  record  and  explain,  but  also  to  estimate  what  is  to  count  as  progress 
and  fruit  in  the  historical  movement,  when  we  have  succeeded  in  knowing  and 
understanding  this.  There  is  no  history  without  this  critical  point  of  view,  and 
the  evidence  of  a  historian's  maturity  is  that  he  is  clearly  conscious  of  this  point 
of  view  of  criticism  ;  for  where  this  is  not  the  case  he  proceeds  in  the  selection 
of  his  material  and  in  his  characterisation  of  details  only  instinctively  and 
without  a  clear  standard.2 

It  is  understood,  of  course,  that  the  standard  of  critical  judgment  must  not  be 
a  private  theory  of  the  historian,  nor  even  his  philosophic  conviction  ;  at  least 
the  employment  of  such  a  standard  deprives  the  criticism  exercised  in  accord- 
ance with  it  of  the  value  of  scientific  universality.  -He  who  is  given  to  the 
belief  that  he  possesses  the  sole  philosophical  truth,  or  who  comes  to  this  field 
imbued  with  the  customs  of  the  special  sciences  in  which,  no  doubt,  a  sure  result 
makes  it  a  very  simple  &  matter  to  estimate  the  attempts  which  have  led  to  it,  — 
such  a  one  may  well  be  tempted  to  stretch  all  forms  that  pass  before  him  upon 
the  Procrustea-bed  of  his  system  ;  but  he  who  contemplates  the  work  of  thought 
in  history,  witli  an  open  historical  vision,  will  be  restrained  by  a  respectful 
reverence  from  reprimanding  the  heroes  of  philosophy  for  their  ignorance  of  the 
wisdom  of  an  epigone.4 

1  A.  Weber,  History  of  Philosophy,  is  to  be  recommended  as  a  good  text-book 
(5th  French  ed.,  Paris,  1891).    [Eng.  tr.  by  Thilly,  N.Y.  1896.] 

2  This  applies  in  every  domain  of  history,  in  the  history  of  politics  and  of 
literature,  as  well  as  in  that  of  philosophy. 

8  As  an  example  of  this  it  may  be  noticed  that  the  deserving  author  of  an 
excellent  History  of  the  Principles  of  Mechanics,  Ed.  pahring,  has  developed 
in  his  Kritische  Geschichte  der  Philosophie  (3d  ed.,  Berlin,  1878)  all  the  caprice 
of  a  one-sided  judgment.  The  like  is  true  of  the  confessional  criticism  passed 
by  A.  Stockl,  Lehrbuch  der  Geschichte  der  Philosophie  (2  vols.,  3d  ed.,  Mainz, 
1889). 

*  It  is  impossible  to  protest  enough  against  the  youthful  conceit  with  which 
It  was  for  a  time  the  fashion  in  Germany  to  look  down  with  ridicule  or  insult 
from  the  u  achievements  of  the  present "  upon  the  great  men  of  Greek  and  Ger- 


18  Introduction. 

In  contrast  with  this  external  method  of  pronouncing  sentence,  the  scientific 
history  of  philosophy  must  place  itself  upon  the  standpoint  of  immanent  criti- 
cism, the  principles  of  which  are  two :  formal  logical  cttnsiatenc.y  and  intellectual 
fruitfulness. 

Every  philosopher  grows  into  a  certain  set  of  ideas,  and  to  those  his  thinking 
remains  bound,  and  is  subjected  in  its  development  to  psychological  necessity. 
Critical  investigation  has  to  settle  how  tar  it  has  been  possible  for  him  to  bring 
the  different  elements  of  his  thinking  into  agreement  with  each  other.  The 
contradiction  is  almost  never  actually  present  in  so  direct  a  form  that  the  same 
thing  is  expressly  maintained  and  also  denied,  but  always  in  such  a  way  that 
various  positions  are  put  forward  which,  only  by  virtue  of  their  logical  conse- 
quences, lead  to  direct  contradiction  and  really  irreconcilable  results.  The  dis- 
covery o£  these  discrepancies  is  formal  criticism ;  it  fret iuon tly  coincides  with 
pragmatic  explanation,  for  this  formal  criticism  1m  been  performed  in  history 
itself  by  the  successors  of  the  philosopher  iu  question,  and  has  thus  doUjnuined 
for  them  their  problems. 

Yet  this  point  of  view  alone  is  not  sufficient.  As  purely  formal  it  applies 
without  exception  to  all  attested  views  of  a  philosopher,  but  Hi  givus  no  criterion 
for  decision  on  the  question,  in  what  the  philosophical  Higuiltoamw  of  a  doctrine 
really  consists.  For  it  is  often  the  case  that  philosophy  has  done  its  work  just 
in  conceptions  which  must  by  no  means  be  regarded  as  in  themselves  peri'ect 
or  free  from  contradiction ;  while  a  multitude  of  individual  convictions,  which 
there  is  no  occasion  to  oppose,  must  remain  mmotieed  in  a  corner,  so  far  an  our 
historical  survey  is  concerned.  Jn  the  history  of  philosophy  grout  errors  arc 
weightier  than  small  truths. 

For  before  all  else  the  decisive  question  is  :  what  has  yielded  a  contribution  to 
the  development  of  man's  conception  of  tho  universe,  and  estimate  of  life!'  In 
the  history  of  philosophy  those  structures  of  thought  aw  tho  objects  of  study 
which  have  maintained  themselves  permanent  and  Hying  as  forms  of  apprehen- 
sion and  norms  of  judgment,  and  in  which  tho  abiding  inner  structure  of  the 
human  mind  has  thus  come  to  clear  recognition. 

This  is  then  the  standard,  according  to  which  alone  we  e,an  decide  also  which 
among  the  doctrines  of  the  philosophers  —  concerning,  as  they  often  do,  so 
many  various  things  —  are  to  be  regarded  as  properly  philosophies!,  and  which, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  to  be  excluded  from  tho  history  of  philosophy.  Investi- 
gation of  the  sources  has  of  course  tho  duty  of  gnlhering  carefully  and  com- 
pletely all  the  doctrines  of  philosophers,  and  so  of  affording  all  the  material  for 
explaining  then:  genesis,  whether  from  their  logical  contend,  or  from  the  history 
of  civilisation,  or  from  psychological  grounds  ;  but  the  purpose  of  l.his  laborioiw 
work  is  yet  only  this,  that  the  philosophically  indifferent  winy  bo  ultimately 
recognised  as  such,  and  tho  ballast  then  thrown  overboard. 

It  is  especially  true  that  this  point  of  view  must  cHHunlially  determine  selec- 
tion, and  presentation  of  material  in  a  text-look,  which  in  not  to  give  tho  iuvotiU- 
gation  itself,  but  to  gather  up  its  results. 

§  3.  Division  of  Philosophy  and  of  its  History. 

It  cannot  be  our  purpose  here  to  proposo  a  systematic!  division  of 
philosophy,  for  this  could  in  no  case  possess  universal  validity  his- 
torically. The  differences  which  prevail  in  tho  courso  o£  tho  histori- 
cal development,  in  determining  the  conception,  tlio  ttwk,  and  tho 
subject-matter  of  philosophy,  involve  so  necessarily  and  obviously  a 
change  also  in  the  divisions,  that  this  needs  no  ospowal  illustration. 
The  oldest  philosophy  knew  no  division  at  all.  In  later  antiquity 


man  philosophy ;  this  was  mainly  the  haughtiness  of  an  ignorance  which  had 
no  suspicion  that  it  was  ultimately  living  only  by  tho  thought**  of  those  whom  it 
was  abusing  and  despising. 


§  3.]  Division  of  Philosophy  and  of  its  History.  19 

a  division  of  philosophy  into  logic,  physics,  and  ethics  was  cur- 
rent. In  the  Middle  Ages,  and  still  more  in  modern  times,  the 
first  two  of  these  subjects  were  often  comprised  under  the  title, 
theoretical  philosophy,  and  set  over  against  practical  philosophy. 
Since  Kant  a  new  threefold  division  into  logical,  ethical,  and 
sesthetical  philosophy  is  beginning  to  make  its  way,  yet  these 
various  divisions  are  too  much  dependent  upon  the  actual  course 
of  philosophy  itself  to  make  it  worth  our  while  to  recount  them 
here  in  detail. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  does  commend  itself  to  preface  the  historical 
exposition  with  at  least  a  brief  survey  of  the  entire  circuit  of  those 
problems  which  have  always  formed  the  subject  of  philosophy,  how- 
ever varied  the  extent  to  which  they  have  been  studied  or  the  value 
that  has  been  attached  to  them,  —  a  survey,  therefore,  for  which  no 
claim  is  made  to  validity  from  a  systematic  point  of  view,  but  which 
is  determined  only  by  the  purpose  of  preliminary  orientation. 

1.  Theoretical  problems.  Such  we  call  those  which  refer,  in  part  to 
our  knowledge  of  the  actual  world,  in  part  to  an  investigation  of  the 
knowing  process  itself.  In  dealing  with  the  former  class,  however, 
the  general  questions  which  concern  the  actual  taken  as  a  whole  are 
distinguished  from  those  which  deal  with  single  provinces  of  the 
actual.  The  former,  viz.  the  highest  principles  for  explaining  the 
universe,  and  the  general  view  of  the  universe  based  on  these  prin- 
ciples, form  the  problem  of  metaphysics,  called  by  Aristotle  first,  i.e. 
fundamental,  science,  and  designated  by  the  name  now  usual,  only  on 
account  of  the  position  which  it  had  in  the  ancient  collection  of  the 
Aristotelian  works  —  "  after  physics."  On  account  of  his.  monothe- 
istic view  of  the  world,  Aristotle  also  called  this  branch  of  knowl- 
edge theology.  Later  writers  have  also  treated  rational  or  natural 
theology  as  a  branch  of  metaphysics. 

The  special  provinces  of  the  actual  are  Mature  and  History.  In 
the  former,  external  and  internal  nature  are  to  be  distinguished. 
The  problems  presented  to  knowledge  by  external  nature  are  called 
cosmological,  or,  specially,  problems  of  natural  philosophy,  or  perhaps 
physical.  The  investigation  of  internal  nature,  i.e.  of  consciousness 
and  its  states  and  activities,  is  the  business  of  psychology.  The  phil- 
osophical consideration  of  history  remains  within  the  borders  of 
theoretical  philosophy  only  if  it  be  limited  to  the  investigation  of 
the  laws  that  prevail  in  the  historical  life  of  peoples ;  since,  how- 
ever, history  is  the  realm  of  man's  purposeful  actions,  the  questions 
of  the  philosophy  of  history,  so  far  as  this  deals  with  the  end  of  the 
movement  of  history  viewed  as  a  whole,  and  with  the  fulfilment  of 
this  end,  fall  under  the  head  of  practical  problems. 


20  Introduction. 

Investigation  directed  upon  knowledge  itself  is  called  logic  (in 
the  general  sense  of  the  word),  and  also  sometimes  noetic.  If  we 
are  occupied  with  the  question  how  knowledge  actually  arises,  this 
psycho-genetic  consideration  falls  in  the  province  of  psychology.  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  set  up  norms  or  standards  according  to  which 
our  ideas  are  estimated  as  regards  their  worth  for  truth,  we  call 
these  logical  laws,  and  designate  investigation  directed  upon  them 
as  logic  in  the  narrower  sense.  The  application  of  those,  laws  gives 
rise  to  methodology,  which  develops  the  prescriptions  for  a  systematic 
ordering  of  scientific  activity  with  reference  to  the  various  ends  of 
knowledge.  The  problems,  finally,  which  arise  from  the  questions 
concerning  the  range  and  limit  of  man's  knowing  faculty  and  its 
relation  to  the  reality  to  be  known,  form  the  subject-matter  of 
epistemology  or  theory  of 'knowledge. 

H.  Siebeck,  Geschichte,  far  Psychology  Vol.  L,  in  two  parte  (Gotha,  1880-84), 
incomplete,  extending  into  the  scholastic  period. 

K.  Prantl,  G-eschicltie  tier  Logik  im  Abmdlttntle,  4  vote.  (Lcips.  1855-70), 
brought  down  only  to  the  Renaissance. 

Pr.  Harms,  Die  Philosophie  in  Hirer  G-escfiiclifa.  I.  "  Psychologic";  n. 
"Logik"  (Berlin,  1877  and  1881). 

[R.  Adamson,  Tfie  History  of  Psychology  (in  prep.).] 

2.  Practical  problems  are,  in  general,  those  which  grow  out  of  tho 
investigation  of  man's  activity,  so  far  as  it  is  determined  by  ends. 
Here,  too,  a  psycho-genetic  treatment  is  possible,  which  falls  under 
psychology.  That  discipline,  on  the  other  hand,  whieli  considers 
man's  action  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  othioal  norm  or  stand* 
ardj  is  ethics  or  moral  philosophy.  By  morals  (Moml)  in  tho  narrower 
sense  is  usually  understood  the  proposal  and  grounding  of  ethical 
precepts.  Since,  however,  all  ethieal  action  has  reference  to  tho 
community,  there  are  attached  to  morals  or  ethics,  in  the  narrower 
sense,  the  philosophy  of  society  (for  which  the  unfortunate  inimo 
sociology  seems  likely  to  become  permanent),  and  tho  yhilottoplM/  of 
laic  or  right.  Further,  in  so  far  as  the  ideal  ol!  human  sooioty  con- 
stitutes the  ultimate  meaning  of  history,  the  yh'doMphy  of  history 
appears  also  in  this  connection,  as  already  mentioned. 

To  practical  problems,  in  the  broadest  sense  of!  the  word,  belong 
also  those  which  relate  to  art  and  religion.  To  designate  philosoph- 
ical investigation  of  the  nature  of  the  beautiful  and  of  art,  the  name 
(Esthetics  has  been  introduced  since  the  end  of  last  century,  If  phi- 
losophy takes  the  religious  life  for  its  object,  not  in  tho  goutm  of 
itself  intending  to  give  a  science  of  the  nature  of  the  deity,  but  in 
the  sense  of  an  investigation  with  regard  to  man's  religious  behaviour, 
we  call  this  discipline  philosophy  of  religion. 


§  a.]  Division  of  Philosophy  and  of  its  History.  21 

Fr.  Schleiennacher,  arundlinien  einer  Ertttk  der  lisherigen  Sittenlehre  (col- 
lected works,  III.,  Vol.  I.,  Berlin,  1881).  L.  v.  Henniug,  Die  Principien  der 
Ethik  in  historischer  Entwicldung  (Berlin,  1825).  FT.  v.  Raunier,  Die  ge- 
schichtliche  JEntwicklung  der  Begriffe  von  Staat,  Recht,  und  Politik  (Leips.,  3d 
ed.,  1861).  E.  Eeuerlein,  Die  philos.  Sittenlehre  in  ihren  (jeschichtlichen  jffaupt- 
formen  (2  vols.,  Tubingen,  1857-59).  P.  Janet,  Histoire  de  la  philosophic 
morale  et  politiyue  (Paris,  1858).  W.  Whewell,  History  of  Moral  Science 
(Ediuburg,  180J5).  H.  Sidgwick,  The  Methods  of  Ethics,  4th  ed.  (Loud,  and 
N.Y.  1800).  [Outlines  of  the  History  of  Ethics]  by  same  author  (Lond.  and 
N.Y.,  3d  ed.,  1892).  J.  Martineau,  Types  of  Ethical  Theory  (2d  ed.,  Oxford 
and  N.Y.  1880).]  Th.  Ziegler,  Qeschichte  der  Etitik,  2  yola.  (the  third  not  yet 
appeared;  Strassburg,  1881-80).  K.  Kostlin,  GescMclite  der  Ethik  (only  the 
beginning,  1  vol.,  Tubingen,  1887).  [J.  Bonar,  Philosophy  and  Economics  in 
their  Historical  Relations  (Lond.  and  N.Y.  181)3).  D.  G-.  Ritchie,  The  History 
of  Political  Philosophy  (in  prep.).] 

ft.  Zimmennann,  Geschichte  der  Aesthetik  (Vienna,  1858) .  M.  Schasler, 
Eritische  Geschichte  der  Aeathetik  (Berlin,  1871).  [B.  Bosanquet,  The  History 
of  ^Esthetics  (Lond.  and  N.Y.  18»2).  W.  Knight,  The  Philosophy  of  the  Beau- 
tiful (an  outline  of  the  history,  Edin.  and  N.Y,  1891).  Gayley  and  Scott,  ^i 
(ruide  t<>  the  Literature  of  ^Esthetics,  Univ.  of  California,  and  Introd.  to  the 
Methods  and  Materials  of  Literary  Criticism  (Bost.  1899)  have  bibliographies.] 

J.  Berger,  Geschichte  der  Rdiyionsphilosophie  (Berlin,  1800).  [Piinjer, 
History  of  the  Christian  Philosophy  of  Religion  (Vol.  L,  Edin.  and  N.Y.  1887). 
0.  Pikdderer,  The  Philosophy  of  Religion,  trans,  by  Menzies  (Lond.  1887).  Mar- 
tineau,  A  Study  of  lieliyion  ("2  vols.,  1888),  and  Seat  of  Authority  in  Religion 
'1800).  J.  Caird,  Introd.  to  the  Philos.  of  Religion  (1880).  E.  Caird,  Ewlit- 
iion  of  Religion  (2  vols.,  Lond.  and  N.Y.  1893).] 

The  division  of  the  history  of  philosophy  is  usually  connected  with 
that  current  for  political  history,  so  as  to  distinguish  three  great 
periods,  —  Ancient,  Mediaeval,  and  Modern  Philosophy.  Yet  the 
sections  made  in  this  way  are  not  so  favourable  for  the  history  of 
philosophy  as  they  perhaps  are  for  political  history.  Other  points 
of  division  must  be  made,  equally  important  as  regards  the  nature 
of  the  development ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  transition  between 
the  Middle  Ages  and  mdd'ern  times  demands  a  shifting  of  the  point 
of  division  on  either  side. 

In  consequence  of  this,  the  entire  history  of  philosophy  will  here 
be  treated  according  to  the  following  plau  of  division,  in  a  manner 
to  be  more  exactly  illustrated  and  justified  in  detail  by  the  exposi- 
tion itself : — 

(1)  TJie   Philosophy   of  the  Greeks:    from   the   beginnings    of 
scientific  thought  to  the  death  of  Aristotle,  —  from  about  600  to 
322  u.c. 

(2)  Hellenistic-Roman  Philosophy:  from  the  death  of  Aristotle 
to  the  passing  away  of  Neo-Platonisin, — from  322  B.C.  to  about 
500  A.D. 

(3)  Mediceval  Philosophy :  from  Augustine  to  Nicolaus  Cusanus, 
—  from  the  fifth  to  the  fifteenth  century. 

(4)  The  Philosophy  of  the  Renaissance :  from  the  fifteenth  to  the 
seventeenth  century. 


22  Introduction. 

(5)  The  Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment:  from  Locke  to  the 
death  of  Leasing, —1689-1781. 

(6)  The  German  Philosophy :  from  Kant  to  Hegel  and  Herbart,  — 
1781-1820. 

(7)  Tlie  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century. 


PART  I. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  GREEKS. 

Chr.  A.  Brandis,  Handbuch  der  Geschichte  der  griechisch-romischen  Philosophie. 
3  pts.  in  6  vols.  Berlin,  1835-66. 

Same  author,  Geschichte  der  Entwickelungen  der  griechischen  Philosophie  und 
Hirer  Nachwirkungen  im  romischen  Reiche.  2  pts.  Berlin,  1862-66. 

Ed.  Zeller,  Die  Philosophie  der  Griechen.  3  pts.  in  5  vols.  1st  vol.  in  5th, 
2  vol.  in  4th,  3-5  vols.  in  3d  ed.  Leips.  1879-93.  [Trans.,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  portion  on  the  concluding  religious  period,  as  six  works:  Pre- 
Socratic  Philosophy  (2  vols.),  Socrates  and  the  Socratic  Schools,  Plato  and 
the  Older  Academy,  Aristotle  and  the  Earlier  Peripatetics  (2  vols.),  Stoics, 
Epicureans,  and  Sceptics,  History  of  Eclecticism,  chiefly  by  S.  P.  Alleyne  and 
0.  J.  Reichel.  Lond.  and  N.Y.,  Longmans.] 

A.  Schwegler,  Geschichte  der  griechischen  Philosophie.  Ed.  by  K.  Kostlin.  3d 
ed.  Freiburg,  1882. 

L.  Striinipell,  Die  Geschichte  der  griechischen  Philosophie.  2  pts.  Leips. 
1854-61. 

W.  Windelband,  Geschichte  der  alten  Philosophie.  2d  ed.  Munich,  1894. 
[History  of  Ancient  Philosophy,  trans,  by  H.  E.  Cushman,  N.Y.,  1899.] 

Ritter  et  Preller,  Historia  philosophic  gr&co-romance  (Grcecce).  In  8th  ed. 
Edited  by  Wellman.  Gotha,  1898.  An  excellent  collection  of  the  most 
important  sources. 

[A.  W.  Benn,  TJie  Greek  Philosophers.    2  vols.    Lond.,  1883.    The  Philoso- 
phy of  Greece.    Lond.  1898.] 

Th.  Gomperz,  Griechische  Denker,  Vienna,  1897.  [Trans,  by  L.  Magnus. 
Greek  Thinkers.  Lond.  and  N.Y.,  1900.] 

IP  by  science  we  understand  that  independent  and  self-conscious 
work  of  intelligence  which  seeks  knowledge  methodically  for  its 
own  sake,  then,  it  is  among  the  Greeks,  and  the  Greeks  of  the  sixth 
century  B.C.,  that  we  first  find  such  a  science,  —  aside  from  some 
tendencies  among  the  peoples  of  the  Orient,  those  of  China  and 
India1  particularly,  only  recently  disclosed.  The  great  civilised 

1  Even  if  it  be  conceded  that  the  beginnings  of  moral  philosophy  among  the 
Chinese  rise  above  moralising,  and  especially  those  of  logic  in  India  above  inci- 
dental reflections  on  the  scientific  formation  of  conceptions,  —  on  which  we  shall 
not  here  pronounce,  —  these  remain  so  remote  from  the  course  of  European 
philosophy,  which  forms  a  complete  unity  in  itself,  that  a  text-book  has  no 
occasion  to  enter  upon  them.  The  literature  is  brought  together  in  Ueber- 
weg,  I.  §  6. 

23 


24  The  Philosophy  of  the  Greeks. 

peoples  of  earlier  antiquity  were  not,  indeed,  wanting  either  in  an 
abundance  of  information  on  single  subjects,  or  in  general  views  of 
the  universe;  but  as  the  former  was  gained  in  connection  with  prac- 
tical needs,  and  the  latter  grew  out  of  mythical  fancy,  so  they 
remained  under  the  control,  partly  of  daily  need,  partly  of  religious 
poetry ;  and,  as  was  natural  in  consequence  of  tho  peculiar  restraint 
of  the  Oriental  mind,  they  lacked,  for  their  fruitful  and  independent 
development,  the  initiative  activity  of  individuals. 

Among  the  Greeks,  also,  similar  relations  existed  until,  at  the  time 
mentioned,  the  mighty  upward  movement  of  the  national  life  unfet- 
tered the  mental  powers  of  this  most  gifted  of  all  peoples.  For  this 
result  the  democratic  development  of  constitutions  which  in  passion- 
ate party  struggle  tended  to  bring  out  independence  of  individual 
opinions  and  judgments,  and  to  develop  the  significance  of  person- 
ality, proved  even  more  favourable  than  the  refinement  and  spiritual- 
isation  of  life  which  increasing  wealth  of  trade  brought  with  it. 
The  more  the  luxuriant  development  of  individualism  loosened  tho 
old  bonds  of  the  common  consciousness,  of  faith,  and  of  morals,  and 
threatened  the  youthful  civilisation  of  Greece  with  the  danger  of 
anarchy,  the  more  pressing  did  individual  men,  prominent  by  their 
position  in  life,  their  insight,  and  their  character,  lind  the  duty 
of  recovering  in  their  own  reflection  the  measure  that  was  becoming 
lost.  This  ethical  reflection  found  its  rep reseu tatives  in  the  lyric 
and  gnomic  poets,  especially,  however,  in  the  so-called  ,wwi  /WM  w«M.1 
It  could  not  fail  to  occur,  also,  that  a  similar  movement,  in  which 
individual  opinions  asserted  their  independence,  should  treneh  upon 
the  religious  life  already  so  varied,  in  which  the  opposition  between 
the  old  mystery-cults  and  the  aesthetic  national  mythology  stimu- 
lated the  formation  of  so  many  special  typos.2  Already  in  tho  <tos- 
niogonic  poetry  the  poet  had  dared  to  portray  tho  heaven  of  tho 
myths  according  to  his  own  individual  fancy ;  the  ago  of  the  seven 
sages  began  to  read  its  ethical  ideals  into  the  gods  olj  the  Homeric 
poetry,  and  in  the  ethico-religious  reformation  attempted  by  Pythag- 
oras,8 coming  as  it  did  in  the  outer  form  of  a  return  to  the  old  strict- 
ness of  life,  the  new  content  which  life  had  gained  came  all  the  more 
clearly  to  view. 

1The  "seven  sages,"  among  whom  Tbalen,  Bias,  PittatuiH,  and  Solon  arc 
usually  named,  while  with  regard  to  the  rest,  tradition  is  not,  n^rml,  muhl  not, 
with  the  exception  of  Thales,  be  regarded  as  rcpresontativow  of  Hdunca  I  Hog. 
Laert.  I.  40 ;  Plato,  Protay.  34.3, 

2  Cf.  E.  Rohde  (Psyche,  2d  ed.,  1807)  for  tho  influence  of  religious  Moan. 

8  Pherecydes  of  Syms  is  to  be  regarded  as  tho  most  important  of  Uutte  COK- 
mogonic  poets ;  he  wrote  in  prose  at  the  time  of  the  first  philosophic,  but  his 
mode  of  thought  is  still  mythical  throughout,  not  scientific.  FragmontH  ol  his 
mitings  collected  by  Sturz  (Leips.  1834). 


The  Philosophy  of  the  Greeks,  25 

From  such,  conditions  of  fermentation  the  science  of  the  Greeks 
to  which  they  gave  the  name  philosophy  was  born.  The  independ- 
ent reflection  of  individuals,  aided  by  the  fluctuations  of  religious 
fancy,  extended  itself  from  the  questions  of  practical  life  to  the 
knowledge  of  Nature,  and  there  first  won  that  freedom  from  exter- 
nal ends,  that  limitation  of  knowledge  to  itself,  which  constitutes 
the  essence  of  science. 

All  these  processes,  however,  took  place  principally  in  the  outly- 
ing parts  of  Greek  civilisation,  in  the  colonies,  which  were  in  advance 
of  the  so-called  Mother-country  in  mental  as  in  material  develop- 
ment. In  Ionia,  in  Magna  Greecia,  in  Thrace,  stood  the  cradles  of 
science.  It  was  only  after  Athens  in  the  Persian  wars  had  assumed 
together  with  the  political  hegemony  the  mental  as  well,  which  she 
was  to  keep  so  much  longer  than  the  former,  that  Attic  soil,  conse- 
crated to  all  the  muses,  attracted  science  also.  Its  advent  was  at 
the  time  of  the  Sophists;  it  found  its  completion  in  the  doctrine 
and  school  of  Aristotle. 

It  was  in  connection  with  the  disinterested  consideration  of 
Nature  that  reflection  first  rose  to  the  scientific  construction  of 
conceptions.  The  result  of  this  was  that  Greek  science  devoted  all 
the  freshness  of  youthful  joy  and  knowledge  primarily  to  the  prob- 
lems of  Nature,  and  in  this  work  stamped  out  fundamental  concep- 
tions, or  Forms  of  thought,  for  apprehending  the  external  world.  In 
order  to  turn  the  look  of  philosophy  inward  and  make  human  action 
the  object  of  its  study,  there  was  first  need,  for  one  thing,  of  subse- 
quent reflection  upon  what  had,  and  what  had  not,  been  accomplished 
by  this  study  of  Nature,  and,  for  another  thing,  of  the  imperious 
demands  made  by  public  life  on  science  now  so  far  matured  as  to  be 
a  social  factor.  The  effect  of  this  change  might  for  a  time  seem  to 
be  to  check  the  pure  zeal  for  research  which  had  marked  the  begin- 
nings, but  after  positive  results  had  been  reached  in  the  field  of  the 
knowledge  of  man's  inner  nature  this  same  zeal  developed  all  the 
more  vigorously,  and  led  to  the  construction  of  those  great  systems 
with  which  purely  Greek  philosophy  reached  its  consummation. 

The  philosophy  of  the  Greeks  divides,  therefore,  into  three  periods : 
a  cosmologicdlj  which  extends  from  about  600  to  about  450  B.C.  ;  an 
anthropological,  which  fills  out  about  the  second  half  of  the  fifth 
century  B.C.  (450-400) ;  and  a  systematic,  which  contains  the 
development  of  the  three  great  systems  of  Greek  science,  those  of 
Democritus,  Plato,  and  Aristotle  (400-322). 

The  philosophy  of  the  Greeks  forms  the  most  instructive  part  of  the  whole 
history  of  philosophy  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  not  only  because  the 
fundamental  conceptions  created  in  it  have  hecome  the  permanent  foundations 


26  The  Philosophy  of  the  Greeks. 

for  all  further  development  of  thought,  and  promise  to  remain  such,  but  also 
because  in  it  the  formal  presuppositions  contained  in  the  postulates  of  the 
thinkin^  Reason  itself,  attained  sharp  formulation  as  set  over  against  the  mate- 
rial of  knowledge,  which,  especially  at  the  beginning,  was  still  relatively  small 
in  amount.  In  this  the  Greek  philosophy  has  its  typical  value  and  its  didactic 

importance. 

These  advantages  appear  already  in  the  transparency  and  simplicity  of  the 
entire  development,  which  enable  us  to  see  the  inquiring  mind  at  first  turned 
outward,  then  thrown  back  upon  itself,  and  from  this  point  of  view  returning 
to  a  deeper  apprehension  of  reality  as  a  whole. 

•  There  is,  therefore,  scarcely  any  controversy  with  regard  to  this  course  of 
the  general  development  of  Greek  philosophy,  though  different  expositions  have 
located  the  divisions  between  the  periods  at  different  points.  Whether  Socrates 
is  made  to  begin  a  new  period,  or  is  placed  together  with  the  Sophists  in  the 
period  of  Greek  Enlightenment,  depends  ultimately  only  on  whether  the  result 
(negative  or  positive),  or  the  object-matter  of  the  philosophising,  is  regarded  as 
of  decisive  importance.  That,  however,  Democritus  must  hi  any  case  be  sepa- 
rated from  the  "  Pre-Socratics "  and  assigned  to  the  great  systematic  period 
of  Greek  Philosophy,  has  been  proved  by  the  Author  iu  Ul»  survey  of  the 
History  of  Ancient  Philosophy,  eh.  V.,  and  the  objections  which  the  innovation 
has  encountered  have  not  sufficed  to  convince  him  of  any  mistake. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  COSMOLOGICAL  PERIOD. 

S.  A.  Byk,  Die  vorsokratische  Philosophie  der  Griechen  in  ihrer  organischen 

Gliederung.    2  Parts.    Leips.  1875-77. 
[J.  Burnet,  Early  Greek  Philosophy.    Lond.  1892.] 

THE  immediate  background  for  the  beginnings  of  Greek  philoso- 
phy was  formed  by  the  cosmogonic  poetry,  which  aimed  to  present 
in  mythical  garb  the  story  of  the  prehistoric  ages  of  the  given 
world,  and  so,  in  the  form  of  narratives  of  the  origination  of  the 
universe,  made  use  of  prevailing  ideas  as  to  the  constant  mutations 
of  things.  The  more  freely  individual  views  developed  in  this  pro- 
cess, the  more  the  time  factor  in  the  myth  retreated  in  favour  of  the 
emphasising  of  these  abiding  relations;  and  the  question  finally 
emerged;  "What  is  then  the  original  ground 'of  things,  which  out- 
lasts all  temporal  change,  and  how  does  it  change  itself  into  these 
particular  things,  or  change  these  things  back  into  itself  ?  " 

The  solution  of  this  question  was  first  attempted  in  the  sixth 
century  by  the  Milesian  School  of  natural  philosophy }  of  which 
Thales,  Anaximander,  and  Anaximenes  are  known  to  us  as  the 
three  chief  representatives.  Information  of  many  kinds,  which  had 
long  been  publicly  accumulating  in  the  practical  experience  of  the 
sea-faring  lonians,  stood  at  their  disposal,  as  well  as  many  true 
observations,  often  of  an  acute  sort.  They  kept  in  touch,  also,  no 
doubt,  with  the  experience  of  the  Oriental  peoples,  especially  the 
Egyptians,  with  whom  they  stood  in  so  close  relation.1  Knowledge 
from  these  various  sources  was  brought  together  with  youthful  zeal. 
The  chief  interest  fell  upon  physical  questions,  particularly  upon 


1  The  influence  of  the  Orient  upon  the  beginnings  of  Greek  philosophy  has 
been  overestimated  by  Glabisch  (Die  Religion  und  die  Philosophie  in  ihrrr 
weltgeschichtlichen  Entwicklung,  Breslau,  1852)  and  Roth  (Geschichte  unserer 
abendlandischen  Philosophie,  2  Vols.,  Mannheim,  1858  ff.).  In  the  case  of 
information  upon  particular  fields  such  influence  is  certainly  to  be  recognised  ; 
on  the  other  hand,  the  scientific  conceptions  are  throughout  independent  work6; 
of  Greek  thought. 

27 


28  The  Philosophy  of  the  Greeks.  [TAUT  I. 

fche  great  elementary  plienomena,  to  explain  wliicli  many  hypotheses 
were  thought  out.  Besides  this,  interest  turned  chiefly  to  geo- 
graphical and  astronomical  problems,  such  as  the  form  of  the  earth, 
its  relation  to  the  sidereal  heavens,  the  nature  of  the  sun,  moon, 
and  planets,  and  the  manner  and  cause  of  their  motion.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  but  feeble  indications  of  a  zeal  Lor  knowledge 
applied  to  the  organic  world  and  man. 

Such  were  the  objects  of  experience  studied  by  the  first  "philosophy."  It 
stood  quite  far  removed  from  medical  science,  which,  to  be  sure,  was  limited  to 
technical  information  and  proficiency  in  the  art,  and  was  handed  down  as  a 
secret  doctrine,  guarded  in  priest-like  fashion  in  orders  and  schools,  such  as 
those  of  Khodes,  Gyrene,  Crotona,  Cos,  and  Cnidus.  Ando.nl  mcdlcln^  which 
aimed  expressly  to  be  an  art  and  not  a  science  (so  Hippocrates),  eamo  into 
contact  with  philosophy  when  this  was  an  all -embracing  science,  only  at  a  lato 
period  and  quite  transiently.  Cf.  lliiser,  Lehrlntdi  <lnr  (hw.hichte,  (tor  MwIMn, 
I.  (2d  ed.,  Jena,  1875). 

So  also  the  beginnings  of  matheniatfn^  go  along  independently  beside,  those  of 
ancient  philosophy.  The  propositions  ascribed  to  tho  Miluaiuns  make  the  im- 
pression of  individual  pieces  of  information  picked  up  and  put  together,  rather 
than  of  results  of  genuine  research,  and  are  quite  out  of  relation  with  their 
doctrines  in  natural  science  and  philosophy.  In  the  dir.los  of  the  Pythagoreans, 
also,  mathematical  studies  were  at  first  evidently  pursued  for  their  own  sake,  to 
be  drawn  all  the  more  vigorously  into  the  treatment  of  general  problems.  (If. 
G.  Cantor,  tteschichte  tier  MatMmatik,  1.  (Lcips.  IH80). 

The  efforts  of  the  Milesians  to  determine  the  nature  of  tho  one 
world-ground  had  already  in  the  case  of  An<wi.mtu>.d<>.r  led  beyond 
experience  to  the  construction  of  a  metaphysical  conception  to  be 
used  for  explanation,  viz.  the  farapov,  and  thereby  drew  Hcioneo  away 
from  the  investigation  of  facts  to  the  consideration  of  conceptions. 
While  Xenophanes,  the  founder  of  the  Ekatic  tfnhool,  drew  the  con- 
sequences which  result  for  the  religious  ccmsciouHUc.SH  from  tho 
philosophical  conception  of  the  unity  of  the  world,  IfanwMkm,  in 
hard  struggle  with  ideas  that  were  obscure  and  religiounly  coloured, 
analysed  destructively  the  presupposition  of  an  abiding  wibHtaucc, 
and  allowed  only  a  law  of  change  to  stand  as  ultimate  content  of 
knowledge.  All  the  more  sharply,  on  the  other  hand,  did  fcho  Eleatic 
School,  in  its  great  representative,  Pitrmmiidw,  shape  out  tho  con- 
ception of  Being  until  it  reached  that  regardless  bolduoHH  of  formu- 
lation which,  in  the  following  generation  of  the  School,  was  defended 
by  Zeno,  and  softened  down  in  some  measure  ouly  by  MclisBus. 

Very  soon,  however,  a  series  of  efforts  appeared,  which  brought 
anew  into  the  foreground  the  interest  in  explanatory  natural  science 
that  had  been  thrust  aside  by  this  development  of  the  first  meta- 
physical antitheses.  In  behalf  of  this  interest  more  comprehensive 
efforts  were  made  toward  an  enrichment  of  knowledge ;  this  time, 
more  than  in  the  case  of  previous  observations,  questions  and 
hypotheses  from  the  organic  and  physiological  realms  wore  kept  in 


CHAP.  1.]  The  Oosmological  Period.  29 

mind;  and  the  attempt  was  made  to  mediate  with  explanatory 
theories  between  the  opposing  conceptions  of  Heraclitus  and  Par- 
menides. 

Out  of  these  needs  arose,  about  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century, 
side  by  side,  and  with  many  reciprocal  relations,  positive  and  polem- 
ical, the  theories  of  Empedodes,  Anaxagoras,  and  Leucippus,  founder 
of  the  Atomistic  School  of  Abdera.  The  number  of  these  theories 
and  their  well-known  dependence  upon  one  another  prove  that  in 
spite  of  the  distance  by  which  individual  men  and  schools  found 
themselves  separated,  there  was  already  a  great  vigour  in  exchange 
of  thought  and  in  literary  activity.  The  picture  of  this  life  takes 
on  a  much  fuller  form  as  we  reflect  that  tradition,  in  sifting  its 
material,  has  obviously  preserved  only  the  memory  of  what  was 
most  important,  and  that  each  of  the  names  remaining  known  to 
us  indicates,  in  truth,  an  entire  circle  of  scientific  activity. 

The  Pythagoreans,  during  this  same  period,  occupied  a  peculiar 
position  at  one  side.  They  also  took  up  the  metaphysical  problem 
given  by  the  opposition  between  Heraclitus  and  the  Eleatics,  but 
hoped  to  find  its  solution  by  the  aid  of  mathematics,  and,  by  their 
theory  of  numbers,  as  whose  first  literary  representative  Philolaus  is 
known,  added  a  number  of  most  important  factors  to  the  further 
movement  of  thought.  The  original  purpose  or  tendency  of  their 
league  made  itself  felt  in  their  doctrines,  in  that,  in  fixing  these, 
they  conceded  a  considerable  influence  to  considerations  of  (ethical 
or  aesthetic)  worth.  They  indeed  attempted  a  scientific  treatment 
of  ethical  questions  as  little  as  did  the  entire  philosophy  of  this 
period,  but  the  cosmology  which  they  based  upon  their  astronomical 
ideas,  already  widely  developed  with  the  help  of  mathematics,  is 
yet  at  the  same  time  permeated  by  aesthetic  and  ethical  motives. 

Of  the  Milesian  School  only  three  names— Thales,  Anaximander,  and  An- 
aximenes — have  "been  handed  down  to  us.  From  this  it  appears  that  the  school 
flourished  in  what  was  then  the  Ionic  capital  during  the  entire  sixth  century, 
and  perished  with  the  city  itself,  which  was  laid  waste  by  the  Persians  in  494, 
after  tho  battle  of  Lade. 

Thales,  sprung  from  an  old  merchant  family,  is  said  to  have  predicted  the 
solar  eclipse  in  585,  and  survived  the  invasion  of  the  Persians  in  the  middle  of 
the  sixth  century.  He  had  perhaps  seen  Egypt,  and  was  not  deficient  in  mathe- 
matical and  physical  knowledge.  So  early  an  author  as  Aristotle  did  not  know 
writings  from  him. 

Anaximander  seems  to  have  been  little  younger.  Of  his  treatise  irepl  0i5<rews 
a  curious  fragment  only  is  preserved.  Cf.  Neuhauser  (Bonn,  1883) .  —  Busgen, 
Ueber  das  fatipov  des  A.  (Wiesbaden,  1867). 

It  is  difficult  to  determine  the  period  of  Anaximenes.  It  falls  probably  about 
560-500.  Almost  nothing  of  his  work  irepl  0i5<rewy  remains. 

Aside  from  that  given  by  Aristotle  (in  the  beginning  of  the  Metaphysics}  we 
owe  our  meagre  information  concerning  the  theories  of  the  Milesians  chiefly  to 
the  Commentary  of  Simplicius.  Cf.  H.  Ritter,  Geschichte  der  jonischen  Philos- 
ophie  (Berlin,  1821)  ;  R.  Seydel,  Der  Fortschritt  der  Metaphysik  unter  den  altes- 
ten  jonischen  Philosophen  (Leips.  1801). 


30  .  The  Crreeks:   Oosmological  Period.  [PART  I. 

At  the  head  of  the  Bleatic  School,  Xenophanes,  who  at  all  events  was 
concerned  in  its  establishment,  is  generally  placed.  Born  about  r>70  in  Colophon, 
he  fled  in  540,  in  consequence  of  the  Persian  conquest  of  Ionia,  and  gained  a 
living  as  wandering  poet.  At  last,  in  Elea,  founded  by  the  lonians  who  tied  into 
Magna  Gnecia,  he  found  a  permanent  dwelling.  He  died  after  480.  The  frag- 
ments of  his  partly  gnomic,  partly  philosophical,  sayings  have  been  collected  by 
Karsten  (Amsterdam,  1835).  Concerning  him  see  Fr.  Kern  (Naumburg,  18(J4, 
Oldenburg,  1807,  Danzig,  1871,  Stettin,  1874  and  1877)  and  J,  Ereudonthal  (Bres- 
lau,  188C). 

Parmenides,  an  Eleatic  of  renowned  family,  who  was  not  a  stranger  to  the 
Pythagorean  society,  wrote  about  470.  The  fragments  of  his  didactic  poem 
have  been  collected  by  Peyron  (Leips.  1810)  and  II.  Stein  (Loipn.  1804).  [Met. 
tr.  in  Juur.  Spec.  Phil,  IV.]  The  lost  treatise  of  Zeno  (about  40()-4oO)  was 
probably  the  first  which  was  separated  into  chapters  and  arranged  dialoctically. 
He,  too,  came  from  Elea. 

Melissos,  on  the  contrary,  was  the  Samian  general  who  conquered  the  Athe- 
nians in  442.  Concerning  his  personal  connection  with  the  Eleatic  school  nothing 
id  Known.  A.  Pabst,  JJe  M.  ^rat/mentis  (.boun,  ih&i);. 

The  unimportant  fragments  of  the  Eleatics  arc  in  a  measure  supplemented  by 
the  accounts  of  Aristotle,  Simplicius,  and  others.  The  pseudo-Aristotelian  work, 
De  Xenephom,  Zenone,  Gorr/ia  (Arist.,  Berl.  ed.,  974  t'f.),  which  nuwt  be  used 
with  great  discretion,  gives  an  account  in  the  iirst  chapter  probably  ot'  Melissos  ; 
in  the  second,  from  confusedly  intermingling  sources,  of  Xoiio  ;  in  the  third,  of 
Gorgias. 

Heraclitus  of  Ephesus  ("the  Obscuro"),  about  530-170,  disgusted  with  the 
ever-growing  power  of  the  democracy,  gave  up  the  high  position  which  was  hi« 
by  birth,  and  in  the  moody  leisure  of  the  last  docado  of  his  life,  wrote  a  treatise 
which  was  pronounced  difficult  of  comprehension  even  by  tho  anc-ii'iids,  while 
the  fragments  of  it  which  we  possess  arc  often  very  ambiguous.  Collected  and 
edited  by  P.  Schuster  (Leips.  1873)  and  J.  Bywater  (Oxford,  1877).  Cf.  Fr. 
Schleiermacher  (Ges.  W-,  III.  Abth.,  Bd.  2,  pp.  1-140);  J.  Boniays  (  (1«*.AhlMMlr 
lungen,  Bd.  I.,  1885);  F.  Lasalle  (2  Bde.,  Berlin,  1858);  K.  IMleiderer  (Berlin, 
1880).  [G.  T.  W.  Patrick,  JScraditus  in  Am.  Jour.  Psy.,  f.,  1888,  contains  trails. 
of  the  Fr.] 

The  first  Dorian  in  the  history  of  philosophy  is  Empedocles  of  Agrigentum, 
about  490-430,  a  priestly  and  prophetic  personality,  much  regarded  in  his  (Char- 
acter as  statesman,  physician,  and  worker  of  miracles,  lie  had,  too,  relations 
with  the  Sicilian  school  of  orators,  of  which  tho  names  of  Korax  and  Tisiiw  are 


familiar  ;  and  besides  his  mQappol  (Songs  of  Puriiioalion)  haw  left,  a  didactic 
poem,  the  fragments  of  which  have  been  published  by  Sturis  (LoipH.  1805), 
Jvarsten  (Amsterdam,  1838),  and  Htein  (Bonn,  1852). 

Anaxagoras  of  Klazomene  (500  till  after  4JJO)  settled,  toward  tho  middle 
of  the  fifth  century,  in  Athens,  where  ho  made  friends  with  I'erieleH.  In  4^4 
he  was  accused  o  if  impiety  and  obliged  Lo  leave  tho  city,  and  founded  a  school 
in  Lampsacus.  Schaubach  (Leips.  1827)  and  Schorn  (Bonn,  182S))  liave,  (Col- 
lected the  fragments  of  his  treatise,  irepi  cfoJo-eo)?.  (!f.  Breicr  (Berlin,  1840), 
Zevort  (Paris,  1843). 

So  little  is  known  of  the  personality  of  Leucippus,  that  oven  in  ancient 
times  his  very  existence  was  doubted.  Tho  great  development,  of  the  atomistic 
theory  by  Democritus  (seo  ch.  3)  had  completely  overshadowed  its  founder. 
But  traces  of  A  tomtom  are  to  be  recognised  with  certainly  in  the  outiro  Htruoturo 
of  thought  after  Parmenides.  Leucippua,  if  not  born  in^Abde.ra,  ye,t  active 
there  as  head  of  the  school  out  of  which  Protagoras  and  DwnooriUw  went  later, 
must  have  been  contemporary  with  Empodocles  and  AnaxagoniH,  «von  though 
somewhat  older.  Whether  he  wrote  anything  is  uncertain,  (If.  Dieln,  Verh. 
far  Stttt.  Phttol  Vm.  (188U).—  A  Brioger,  I)  fa  Urtwmyung  tl<r  Attww  (Halle, 
1884);  H.  Liepmann,  Die  MecJiaHik  der  Uuc.ipp-d(Mtofortttor.fwn  Atwtw  (I'xiipH. 
1885). 

The  Pythagorean  Society  first  appeared  in  tho  cities  of  Magna  Griwcia  as 
a  religious-political  association  toward  tho  end  of  tho  Kixth  century.  HH  founder 
was  Pythagoras,  of  Samos,  who,  born  about  580,  after  long  journeys,  which 
probably  led  him  toward  Egypt  also,  made  tho  aristocratic  city  of  Orotona  the 
starting-point  of  a  reform  movement  which  had  for  iLH  aim  a  moral  and  religious 


CHAP.  1,  §  4.]  Conceptions  of  Being.  31 

purification.  We  are  first  apprised  of  the  internal  relations  of  the  society 
through  subsequent  narratives  (  Jamblichus,  De  Vita  Pythagorica,  and  Porphyrius, 
De  Vita  Pythagoras,  published  by  Kiesling  (Leips.  1815-16),  whose  trustworthiness 
is  doubtful.  It  seems,  however,  to  be  certain  that  already  the  old  society  imposed 
definite  duties  upon  its  members,  even  for  private  life,  and  introduced  the  prac- 
tice of  working  in  common  at  intellectual  pursuits,  especially  at  music  and 
mathematics.  In  consequence  of  its  political  position  (in  regard  to  which 
B.  Krische,  Gottingen,  1830)  the  external  conditions  of  the  society  assumed  at 
first  a  very  favourable  form,  inasmuch  as,  after  the  plunder  of  the  democratic 
Sybaris,  500,  Crotona  won  a  kind  of  hegemonic  influence  in  Magna  Grsecia. 
In  time,  however,  the  Pythagoreans  became  the  losers  in  the  bitter  party 
struggles  of  the  cities,  and  often  suffered  bitter  persecution,  by  which  the 
society  was  finally  destroyed  in  the  fourth  century. 

To  Pythagoras  himself,  who  died  about  500,  we  can  trace  back  no  philosoph- 
ical writings,  although  the  subsequent  myth-making  process  sought  so  strenu- 
ously to  make  him  the  idol  of  all  Hellenic  wisdom.  (E.  Zeller  in  Vortr.  u. 
AbhandL,  I.,  Leips.  1865.)  Plato  and  Aristotle  knew  only  of  a  philosophy  of 
the  Pythagoreans.  Philolaus,  who  seems  to  have  been  somewhat  younger  than 
Empedocles  and  Anaxagoras,  appears  as  the  most  prominent  representative  of 
this  philosophy.  Almost  nothing  is  known  of  the  circumstances  of  his  life,  and 
the  fragments  of  his  treatise  (ed.  by  Boeckh,  Berlin,  1819;  cf.  C.  Schaar- 
schmidt,  Bonn,  1804)  lie  under  considerable  suspicion. 

Of  the  remaining  adherents  of  the  society,  only  the  names  are  known.  The 
latest  representatives  came  into  so  close  relations  with  the  Platonic  Academy 
that,  as  regards  their  philosophy,  they  may  almost  be  said  to  have  belonged  to 
it.  Among  them  Archytas  of  Tarentum,  the  well-known  savant  and  statesman, 
should  be  mentioned.  Concerning  the  very  doubtful  fragments  attributed  to 
him,  cf.  G-.  liartenstein  (Leips.  1833),  Fr.  Petersen  (Zeitschr.  f.  Alterthumsk; 
1830),  0.  Gruppe  (Berlin,  1840),  Fr.  Beckman  (Berlin,  1844). 

The  reports  concerning  the  teaching  of  the  Pythagoreans,  especially  in  the  later 
accounts,  are  clouded  by  so  many  additions  from  foreign  sources,  that  perhaps 
at  no  point  in  ancient  philosophy  is  it  so  difficult  to  determine  the  actual  facts 
in  the  case  as  here,  even  if  we  sift  out  the  most  trustworthy,  namely  Aristotle 
and  his  best  taught  commentators,  notably  Simplicius,  many  dark  points  and 
contradictory  statements  remain,  particularly  in  details.  The  reason  for  this 
lies  probably  in  the  fact  that  in  the  school,  which  for  a  time  was  widely  extended, 
various  trends  of  thought  ran  side  by  side,  and  that  among  these  the  general  fun- 
damental thought  first  brought  forward  perhaps  by  Philolaus,  was  worked  out 
in  different  ways.  It  would  be  of  great  service  to  attempt  such  a  separation. 

H.  Hitter,  (jeschichte  der  pythagoreischen  Philosophic  (Hamburg,  1826)  ; 
Rothcnbucher,  Das  System  der  Pyihayoreer  nacli  Aristoteles  (Berlin,  1867)  ; 
E.  Chaignet,  Pythagore  et  la  philosophie  pythagoricienne  (2  vols.,  Paris, 
1873). 

§  4.  The  Conceptions  of  Being. 

The  fact  that  things  of  experience  change  into  one  another  was 
the  stimulus  to  the  first  philosophical  reflections,  and  wonder  x  at 
this  must  indeed  have  arisen  early  among  a  people  so  mobile  and 
with  so  varied  an  experience  of  Nature  as  the  lonians.  To  this 
fact,  which  furnished  the  fundamental  motive  of  its  reflection,  the 
Ionic  philosophy  gave  liveliest  expression  in  Heraclitus,  who  seems 
to  have  been  unwearied  2  in  seeking  the  most  pointed  formulations 
for  this  universal  mutability  of  all  things,  and  especially  for  the 
sudden  changes  of  opposites  into  each  other.  But  while  myth  gave 


1  Cf.  upon  the  philosophical  value  of  the  Oavidfav,  Arist  Met.  I.  2,  982  b  12. 

2  Fragm.  (Schust.)  41-44,  60,  03,  67. 


32  The  Greeks :   Comoloyical  Period.  [TAUT  I. 

to  this  view  the  garb  of  a  fabled  account  of  the  formation  of  the 
world,  science  asked  for  the  abiding  ground  of  all  these  changes, 
and  fixed  this  question  in  the  conception  of  the  cosmic  matter,  or 
"world-stuff"  (Weltsto/),  which  experiences  all  these  transforma- 
tions, from  which  all  individual  things  arise,  and  into  which  they 
become  again  transformed  (dpx7?)-  *n  tnis  conception1  was  tacitly 
contained  the  presupposition  of  the  unity  of  the  world;  whether  the 
Milesians 2  already  sought  to  justify  this  we  do  not  know.  It  was  a 
later  eclectic  straggler3  who  first  attempted  to  justify  this  Monism 
by  the  transformation  of  all  things  into  one  another,  and  by  the 
inter-connection  of  all  things  without  exception. 

1.  That,  however,  a  single  cosmic  matter,  or  world-stuff,  lies  at 
the  basis  of  the  entire  process  of  nature,  appears  in  ancient  tradi- 
tion as  a  self-evident  presupposition  of  the  Ionic  School.  Tho  only 
question  was  to  determine  what  this  elementary  matter  was.  The 
nearest  course  was  then  to  seek  for  it  in  what  was  given  in  experi- 
ence, and  so  Tholes  declared  it  to  be  water;  Anaxi'menes,  air.  To 
this  choice  they  were  probably  determined  only  by  the  mobility, 
changeability,  and  apparent  inner  vitality4  of 'water  and  air.  It  is 
evident,  too,  that  the  Milesians  thought  little  in  this  connection  of 
the  chemical  peculiarities  of  water  and  air,  but  only  of  the  status 
of  aggregation5  concerned.  While  the  solid  appears  in  itself  dead, 
moved  only  from  without,  the  liquid  and  volatile  make  tho  impres- 
sion of  independent  mobility  and  vitality ;  and  the  monistic  prepos- 
session of  this  first  philosophising  was  so  groat  that  the  Milesians 
never  once  thought  of  asking  for  a  reason  or  ground  of  this  cease- 
less change  of  the  cosmic  matter,  but  instead  assumed  this  as  a  solf- 
intelligible  fact  —  a  matter  of  course  —  as  they  did  all  change  or 
occurrence;  at  most  they  described  its  individual  forms.  Tho  cos- 
mic matter  passed  with  them  for  something  in  itsolf  living:  thoy 
thought  of  it  as  animated,  just  as  are  particular  organisms,6  and  for 
this  reason  their  doctrine  is  usually  characterised  from  tho  stand- 
point of  the  later  separation  in  conceptions  as  Hylozomn. 

1  Which  Aristotle  in  the  Met.  I.  3,  983  b  8,  has  dunned,  not  without  tho 
admixture  of  his  own  categories, 

2  The  expression  d-px^,  which,  moreover,  bears  in  itsdf  tho  memory  of  tho 
chronological  fancies  of  the  Cosmologlsts,  is  said  by  Slmplioius  to  have  boon 
used  first  by  Anaximander. 

3  Diogenes  of  Apollonia.   Cf.  Simpl.  Phys.  (IX)  fl£r  151,  ,30,  and  Arist.  6Vw,  M 
Oorr.  1.6,  322  b  13. 

4  iScJiol  in  Arist.  514  a  33. 

6  For  v5w/>,  vyp6v  is  frequently  substituted.  With  regard  to  tho  typ  of  Anaxi- 
menes  the  accounts  are  such  that  the  attempt  has  boon  mado  to  distinguish  his 
metaphysical  uair"  from  the  empirical:  Ritter,  I.  217  ;  Brandts,  I,  144, 

6  Plut.  Plac.  1.3  (Doxogr.  D.  278).  Perhaps  this  is  intended  in  tho  conjec- 
ture of  Aristotle,  Met.  I.  3,  983  b  22. 


CHAP.  1,  §  4.]     Conceptions  of  Being :  The  Milesians.  33 

2.  If  we  ask,  however,  why  Anaximenes,  whose  doctrine,  like 
that  of  Thales,  seems  to  have  kept  within  the  bounds  of  experience, 
substituted  air  for  water,  we  learn *  that  he  believed  air  to  have  a 
characteristic  which  water  lacked,  —  a  characteristic,  too,  which  his 
predecessor  Anaximander  had  postulated  as  indispensable  for  the 
conception  of  primitive  matter,  viz.  that  of  infinity.  As  motive  for 
this  postulate  of  Anaximander  there  is  related  the  argument  that  a 
finite  cosmic  matter  would  exhaust  itself  in  the  ceaseless  succession 
of  productions.2  But  Anaximander  had  also  seen  that  this  demand 
made  by  the  conception  of  the  aptf  could  not  be  satisfied  by  any 
matter  or  substance  which  we  can  perceive,  and  had  on  this  account 
transferred  the  cosmic  matter  beyond  experience.  He  maintained 
boldly  the  reality  of  an  original  ground  of  things,  possessing  all  the 
properties  that  are  necessary,  if  we  are  to  derive  the  changes  in  the 
world  of  experience  from  something  itself  abiding  and  raised  above 
change,  —  even  though  such  a  ground  might  not  be  found  in  experi- 
ence. He  drew  from  the  conception  of  the  dp^  the  consequence, 
that  though  no  object  of  experience  corresponds  to  this  conception, 
we  must  yet,  to  explain  experience,  assume  such  a  conception  behind 
it  as  real  and  conditioning  it.  He  therefore  called  the  cosmic  mat- 
ter "the  Infinite"  (TO  airapov),  and  ascribed  to  it  all  the  qualities 
postulated  in  the  conception  of  the  dpxv :  that  is,  that  it  had  never 
begun  to  be,  and  was  imperishable,  inexhaustible^  and  indestructible. 

The  conception  of  matter,  thus  constructed  by  Anaximander  is, 
nevertheless,  clear  only  in  the  respect  that  it  is  to  unite  within  it 
spatial  infinity  and  the  quality  of  being  without  beginning  or  end 
in  time,  and  thus  the  mark  of  the  all-embracing  and  all-determin- 
ing;3 on  the  other  hand,  with  reference  to  its  qualitative  deter- 
mination, it  cannot  be  made  clear  what  the  philosopher  intended. 
Later  accounts  give  us  to  understand  that  he  expressly  maintained 
that  the  original  matter  was  qualitatively  undetermined  or  indefinite 
(do/Horos),4  while  the  statements  of  Aristotle 6  speak  more  for  the 
assumption  of  a  mixture  of  all  kinds  of  matter  known  in  experience, 
—  a  mixture  completely  adjusted  or  equalised,  and  therefore  as  a 
whole  indifferent  or  neutral.  The  most  probable  view  here  is,  that 
Anaximander  reproduced  in  the  form  of  an  abstract  conception  the 


.  Phys.  (D.)  6*24,26. 

2  Plut,  PZac.  I.  3  (Doxngr.  D.  277) ;  Arist.  Phys.  III.  8,  208  a  8. 

a  Arist.  Pty«.IIL4,203b7. 

*  Schol.  in  Arist.  514  a  33 ;  Herbart,  Einleitung  in  die  Philosophic  (Ges. 
W.,  I.  196). 

6  Met.  XII.  2, 1069  b  18,  and  especially  Phys.  1. 4,  187  a  20.  Of.  also  Simpl, 
Phys.  (D.)  33r  164, 14  (according  to  Theophrastus) .  This  much-treated  contro- 
versy will  be  spoken  of  more  in  detail  below  (§  6) . 


34  The  GrreeJcs :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART.  I. 

unclear  idea  of  the  mythical  chaos  which  was  "one"  and  yet  also 
"  all."  This  he  did  by  assuming  as  the  cosmic  matter  an  infinite, 
corporeal  mass,  in  which  the  various  empirical  substances  were  so 
mixed  that  no  definite  quality  could  be  ascribed  to  it  as  a  whole. 
For  this  reason,  however,  the  separation  of  the  individual  qualities 
out  of  this  self-moved  matter  could  no  longer  be  regarded  as  properly 
a  qualitative  change  in  it.  With  this  view  the  conception  of  the 
unity  of  the  world  as  regards  quality  would  be  given  up,  to  be  sure, 
and  an  essential  preparation  made  for  the  later  development. 

3.  Still  another  predicate  was  given  by  Anaximander  to  the  In- 
finite, —  TO  Odovj  the  divine.  As  a  last  remembrance  of  the  religious 
home  in  which  scientific  reflection  arose,  it  shows  for  the  first  time 
the  inclination  of  philosophers,  constantly  recurring  in  history,  to 
view  as  "  Deity  "  the  highest  conception  which  theory  has  led  them 
to  use  for  explaining  the  world,  and  so  to  give  it  at  the  same  time 
a  sanction  for  the  religious  consciousness.  Ana^ina/odor's  matter  is 
the  first  philosophic  conception  of  God,  the  first  attempt,  and  one 
which  remains  still  entirely  within  the  physical,  to  strip  the  idea 
of  Gocl  of  all  mythical  form. 

But  while  the  religious  need  thus  maintained  itself  in  the  deter- 
mination of  metaphysical  conception,  the  possibility  of  an  influence 
of  the  results  of  science  upon  the  religious  life  was  brought  nearer,  the 
more  these  results  met  and  responded  to  an  impulse  which  hitherto 
had  been  dominant  only  in  an  obscure  and  uncertain  manner  within 
that  life.  The  transformation  which  the  Greek  myths  had  undergone, 
as  well  in  the  import  given  them  in  cosmogonic  fancy  as  in  that  given 
to  their  ethical  interpretation,  tended  everywhere  toward  a  mono- 
theistic culmination  (Pherecydes,  Solon);  and  to  this  movement 
its  final  result,  a  clearly  outspoken  monism,  was  now  proffered  by 
science. 

This  relation  was  brought  to  expression  by  Xwiophanas,  not  a 
thinker  and  investigator,  but  an  imaginative  disci  pie  o£  science, 
strong  in  his  convictions,  who  brought  the  new  teaching  from  East 
to  West  and  gave  it  a  thoroughly  religious  colouring.  His  mainte- 
nance of  monotheism,  which  he  expressed  as  enthusiastic  intuition  in 
the  saying,1  that  whithersoever  he  looked  all  was  constantly  flowing 
together  for  him  into  one  Nature  (/u'av  cts  <£vW),  took  on  at  once, 
however,  that  sharp  polemic  turn  against  the  popular  faith,  by  which 
he  is  principally  characterised  in  literature.  The  scorn,  which  he 
poured  out  with  abundant  wit  over  the  anthropomorphism  of  myth- 
ology,2 the  anger  with  which  he  pursued  the  poets  as  the  portrayers 

i  Timon  in  Sext.  Emp.  Pyrrh.  Hyp.  I.  224.     2  Clem.  Alex,  Strom.  V.  001. 


CHAP.  1.  §  4.]      Conceptions  of  Being :  Xenophanes.  35 

of  these  divine  figures  provided  with  all  the  weaknesses  arid  vices  of 
human  nature,1  —  these  rest  upon  an  ideal  of  God  which  will  have 
the  Supreme  Being  regarded  as  incomparable  with  man  in  both 
bodily  and  mental  characteristics.  When  he  passes  to  positive  at- 
tributes, Xenophanes  becomes  more  obscure.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
deity  as  Iv  /cat  nav  is  identified  with  the  universe,  and  to  this  "  World- 
God39  are  then  ascribed  all  the  predicates  of  the  Milesian  apxy 
(eternity,  existence  that  has  not  become  what  it  is,  imperishability)  ; 
on  the  other  hand,  qualities  are  ascribed  to  the  deity,  some  of  which 
are  spatial,  as  the  spherical  form,  while  others  are  psychical  func- 
tions. Among  these  latter  the  omnipresence  of  the  knowing  activity 
and  of  the  rational  guidance  of  things  is  expressly  mentioned.  In 
this  respect  the  World-God  of  Xenophanes  appears  only  as  the 
highest  among  the  rest  of  "  gods  and  men." 

While  here  a  predominantly  theological  turn  of  philosophy  is 
already  manifested,  the  exchange  of  the  point  of  view  of  metaphysics 
and  natural  science  taken  by  Anaximander,  for  the  religious  point 
of  view  of  Xenophanes  shows  itself  in  two  essential  deviations. 
The  conception  of  the  World-God  is  for  the  latter  an  object  of 
religious  reverence,  and  scarcely  a  means  for  understanding  Nature. 
The  Colophonian's  sense  for  knowledge  of  Nature  is  slight,  his  ideas 
are  in  part  very  childlike,  and,  as  compared  with  those  of  the  Mile- 
sians, undeveloped.  And  so  for  his  views,  the  characteristic  of 
infinity,  which  Milesian  science  regarded  as  necessary  in  the  cosmic 
matter,  could  be  dispensed  with ;  on  the  contrary,  it  seemed  to  him 
more  in  accordance  with  the  dignity  of  the  divine  Nature,2  to  think 
of  this  as  limited  within  itself,  as  entirely  shut  up  or  complete,  con- 
sequently as  regards  its  spatial  aspect,  spherical.  And  while  the 
Milesians  thought  of  the  original  ground  of  things  as  ever  in  motion 
spontaneously,  and  as  characterised  by  living  variety  in  its  inter- 
nal structure,  Xenophanes  struck  out  this  postulate  hitherto  in  use 
for  the  explanation  of  Nature,  and  declared  the  World-God  to  be 
immovable  and  perfectly  homogeneous  in  all  its  parts.  How,  indeed, 
he  thought  that  the  variety  of  individual  things  whose  reality  he 
did  not  doubt,  could  be  reconciled  with  this  view,  must  remain 
uncertain. 

4.  As  was  required  by  the  conception  of  change,  the  Milesian 
conception  of  the  World-substance  had  united  without  clear  discrim- 
ination two  essential  elements:  the  one  that  of  a  substance  re- 
maining like  itself,  the  other  that  of  independent  or  self-subs istent 

1  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  IX.  193. 

2Hippol.  Ref.  I  14  (Doxogr.  D.  565).  In  other  passages,  again,  it*is  said 
that  he  would  have  the  deity  thought  neither  limited  nor  unlimited  (?). 


36  The  Greeks :  Oosmological  Period.  [PART  L 

changeability.  In  the  thought  of  Xenophanes  the  first  element  was 
isolated ;  the  same  process  took  place  for  the  second  through  Hera- 
ditus.  His  doctrine  presupposes  the  work  of  the  Milesians,  from 
the  conclusion  of  which  it  is  separated  by  a  generation,  in  this  way  : 
their  effort  to  determine  or  define  in  conceptions  an  abiding  world- 
ground  has  been  recognised  as  hopeless.  There  is  nothing  abiding, 
either  in  the  world  or  in  its  constitution  taken  as  a  whole.  Not 
only  individual  things,  but  also  the  universe  as  a  whole,  are  involved 
in  perpetual,  ceaseless  revolution:  all  flows,  and  nothing  abides.  We 
cannot  say  of  things  that  they  are ;  they  become  only,  and  pass  away 
in  the  ever-changing  play  of  the  movement  of  the  universe.  That, 
then,  which  abides  and  deserves  the  name  of  deity,  is  not  a  thing, 
and  not  substance  or  matter,  but  motion,  the  cosmic  process,  Becom- 
ing itself. 

To  meet  a  strong  demand  that  seems  made  by  this  turn  to  abstrac- 
tion, Heraclitus  found  help  in  the  sensuous  perception  in  which  this 
motion  presented  itself  to  him :  that  of  fire.  The  co-operation  of 
this  in  the  conversion  of  things  of  Nature  into  each  other  had  been 
already  noticed  by  the  Milesians;  to  this  may  have  been  added 
ancient  Oriental  mystical  ideas,  which  contact  with  the  Persians 
made  especially  accessible  to  the  lonians  of  that  day.  But  when 
Heraclitus  declared  the  world  to  be  an  evor-living  tiro,  and  Fire, 
therefore,  to  be  the  essence  of  all  things,  he  understood  by  this  apxy 
not  a  material  or  substance  which  survived  all  its  transformations, 
but  just  the  transforming  process  itself  in  its  evo.r-darting,  vibrating 
activity  (tiingelnde),  the  soaring  up  and  vanishing  which  corre- 
spond to  the  Becoming  and  passing  away.1 

At  the  same  time,  however,  this  idea  takes  OH  a  still  firmer  form, 
in  that  Heraclitus  emphasised  much  more  strongly  than  the  Miltv- 
sians  the  fact  that  this  change  is  accomplished  in  accordance  with 
definite  relations,  and  in  a  succession  that  remains  always  the  sarno.* 
This  rhythm  of  events  (which  later  times  have  called  tho  uniformity 
of  Nature  under  law)  is  therefore  the  only  permanent ;  it  is  termed 
by  Heraclitus  the  destiny  (eijuap/xeV^),  tho  ardor  ($6*17),  tho  reason 
(Aoyo?)  of  the  world.  These  predicates,  in  which  plrymcal,  othical, 

1  The  difficulty  of  ascribing  to  such  a  motion  without  any  milwtrrtto,  to  a  more 
Becoming,  the  highest  reality  and  the  capacity  to  produce  th'mgn,  was  evidently 
very  much  less  for  undeveloped  thought  not  yet  coiwciouH  of  it«  categories  than 
for  later  apprehension.    The  conception  of  Becoming  as  ilro,  hovering  between 
the  symbolic  and  the  real  meaning  of  the  term,  was  supported  by  tho  use  of 
language  which  treats  of  functions  and  relations  as  also  substantives.     But 
Heraclitus  does  not  disdain  to  let  the  dim  idea  of  a  World-substance  stand  in  the 
background  in  his  metaphors  (of  the  clay  kneaded  over  anew,  of  tho  drink 
continually  stirred) . 

2  Further  in  detail  on  this  point  in  the  following  section. 


CHAP.  1,  §  4.]   Conceptions  of  Being :  fferaclitus,  Parmenides.     37 

and  logical  order  in  the  world  appear  as  still  identified,  prove  only 
the  undeveloped  state  of  thought  which  does  not  yet  know  how  to 
separate  the  different  motives.  The  conception,  however,  which 
Heraclitus  has  grasped  with  complete  clearness,  and  carried  though 
with  all  the  strength  of  his  austere  personality,  is  that  of  order,  a 
conception,  nevertheless,  whose  validity  was  for  him  as  much  a 
matter  of  conviction  as  of  knowledge. 

5.  In  evident  opposition  to  this  theory  of  the  Ephesian,  the  con- 
ception of  Being  was  worked  oat  by  Parmenides,  the  head  of  the 
Eleatic  School,  and  the  most  important  thinker  of  this  period.  Yet 
it  is  not  easy  to  reconstruct  his  formulation  of  this  conception  from 
the  few  fragments  of  his  didactic  poem,  the  quite  unique  character 
of  which  consists  in  the  union  of  dryest  abstraction  with  grand  and 
rich  imagery.  That  there  is  a  Being  (lo-rt  yap  cW),  is  for  the  Ele- 
atic a  postulate  of  such  cogent  evidence  that  he  only  states  this 
position  without  proving  it,  and  that  he  explains  it  only  by  a  nega- 
tive turn  of  thought  which  first  discloses  to  us  completely  the  sense 
in  which  we  are  to  understand  his  main  thought.  "Non-being" 
(w  emu),  he  adds,  or  that  which  "is"  not  (TO  ^  edV),  cannot  be 
and  cannot  be  thought.  For  all  thought  is  in  relation  to  a  some- 
thing that  is,  which  forms  its  content.1  This  view  of  the  correla- 
tive nature  of  Being  and  consciousness  leads  so  far  with  Parmenides 
that  the  two,  thought  and  Being,  are  declared  to  be  fully  identical. 
No  thought  to  whose  content  Being  does  not  belong, — no  Being 
that  is  not  thought :  thought  and  Being  are  the  same. 

These  propositions,  which  look  so  abstractly  ontological  if  we  con- 
sider only  the  words,  take  on  quite  another  meaning  when  we  con- 
sider that  the  fragments  of  the  great  Elean  leave  no  doubt  as  to 
what  he  desired  to  have  regarded  as  "Being"  or  that  which  "is." 
This  was  corporeality ,  materiality  (TO  TT^COV).  For  him,  "'being"  and 
"filling  space  "  are  the  same.  This  "Being/5  this  function  of  filling 
space,  is  precisely  the  same  in  the  case  of  all  that  "  is " ;  there  is, 
therefore,  only  the  one,  single  Being  which  has  no  internal  distinc- 
tions. "  Non-being,"  or  what  is  not  [has  not  the  attribute  of  Being], 
means,  accordingly,  incorporeality,  empty  space  (TO  KO/OV).  This 
double  meaning  of  the  cW  (Being)  employed  by  Parmenides,  ac- 
cording to  which  the  word  means  at  one  time  "  the  full "  and  at  an- 
other time  "  Beality,"  leads  then  to  the  proposition  that  empty  space 
cannot  be. 

Now  for  the  naive,  sensuous  way  of  looking  at  things  which 
lurks  even  in  these  principles  of  Parmenides,  the  separateness  of 

i  JV.,  ed.  Karsten,  w.  94  ft 


38  The  Gf-reeJcs :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART  I. 

things,  by  virtue  of  which  they  present  themselves  in  their  plurality 
and  multiplicity,  consists  in  their  separation  by  empty  space ;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  all  that  takes  place  in  the  corporeal  world,  i.e. 
all  motion,  consists  in  the  change  of  place  which  the  "  full "  experi- 
ences in  the  "empty"  (or  the  "  Void").  If,  therefore,  the  Void  is 
not  real  or  actual,  then  the  plurality  and  motion  of  individual  things 
cannot  be  real. 

The  number  and  variety  of  things  presented  in  co-existence  and 
succession  by  experience  had  given  the  Milesians  occasion  to  ask 
for  the  common  abiding  ground  of  which  all  these  things  were 
metamorphoses.  When,  however,  the  conception  of  cosmic  sub- 
stance or  world-stuff  has  culminated  with  Parmenides  in  the  con- 
ception of  Being,  there  seems  so  little  possibility  of  uniting  these 
individual  things  with  it,  that  reality  is  denied  them,  and  the  one 
unitary  Being  remains  also  the  only  being.1  The  conception  formed 
for  the  purpose  of  explanation  has  so  developed  internally  that  to 
maintain  it  involves  the  denial  of  that  which  was  to  be  explained 
by  it.  In  this  sense  the  Eleatic  doctrine  is  acosmism :  the  mani- 
f oldness  of  things  has  sunk  in  the  All-one :  the  latter  alone  "  is/' 
the  former  are  deception  and  seeming. 

According  to  Parmenides,  however,  we  are  to  predicate  of  the 
One  that  it  is  eternal/  has  never  come  into  being,  is  imperishable, 
and  especially  (as  Xenophanes  had  maintained)  that  it  is  through 
and  through  one  in  kind,  one  with  itself,  without  any  distinctions 
or  differences,  i.e.  completely  homogeneous  and  absolutely  unchange- 
able. He  follows  Xenophanes  also  in  regarding  the  One  as  limited, 
complete,  and  definitive.  Being  is  then  a  well-rounded  sphere,  per- 
fectly homogeneous  within  itself,  and  this  only  and  unitary  world- 
body  is  at  the  same  time  the  world-thought*  simple,  excluding  all 
particulars  from  itself :  TO  yap  irXtov  ecru  VO^/AO. 

6.  All  these  attempts,  in  part  fantastic,  in  part  regardlessly 
abstract,  were  needed  in  order  to  gain  the  presuppositions  for  the 
development  of  the  first  usable  conceptions  for  apprehending  Nature. 
For  important  as  were  the  motives  of  thought  that  had  come  to 
recognition  therein,  neither  the  world-stuff  or  cosmic  matter  of  the 
Milesians,  nor  the  "Fire-Becomiug"  of  Heraclitus,  nor  the  Being  of 
Parmenides  were  available  for  explaining  Nature.  Now  the  imper- 
fection of  the  first  had  become  clear  through  the  contrast  which 

1  A  great  r61e  in  these  considerations  of  the  Eleatics  is  obviously  played  by 
the  ambiguities  in  language,  by  which,  on  the  one  hand,  the  fr  means  both 
numerical  unity  and  also  qualitative  unity  or  simplicity,  while  the  verb  eT«u  has 
not  only  the  function  of  the  copula,  but  also  the  meaning  of  "  Reality." 

2  Hence,  terms  like  "materialism"  and  "idealism"  do  not  apply  to  thisnalVe 
identification  of  consciousness  aud  its  object,  the  corporeal  world. 


CHAP.  1,  §  4.]       Conceptions  of  Being :.  Empedooles.  39 

separated  the  two  latter  as  by  a  gulf,  and  with  the  recognition  of 
ihis,  occasion  was  given  for  the  more  independent  investigators  of 
the  next  period  to  separate  in  their  conceptions  the  two  motifs 
(being  and  becoming),  and  by  setting  them  over  against  one  another 
to  think  out  new  forms  of  relation,  out  of  which  permanently  valua- 
ble categories  for  the  knowledge  of  Nature  resulted. 

These  mediating  attempts  have  in  common,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
recognition  of  the  Eleatic  postulate  that  that  which  "  is  "  must  be 
thought  throughout  not  only  as  eternal,  without  a  beginning  and 
imperishable,  but  also  as  homogeneous,  and  as  regards  its  qualities 
unchangeable ;  on  the  other  hand,  however,  they  assent  also  to  the 
thought  of  Heraclitus  that  an  undeniable  reality  belongs  to  Becom- 
ing and  change  (Geschehen),  and  so  to  the  manifoldness  of  things. 
Common  to  them,  also,  in  their  adjustment  of  these  two  needs  of 
thought  is  the  attempt  to  assume  a  plurality  of  beings,  each  of  which 
should  satisfy  for  itself  the  postulate  of  Parmenides;  while,  on 
the  other  hand,  by  changing  their  spatial  relations,  they  were  to 
bring  about  the  changeful  variety  of  individual  things  which  expe- 
rience shows.  If  the  Milesians  had  spoken  of  qualitative  changes 
of  the  cosmic  substance  or  matter,  the  Eleatic  principle  had  ex- 
cluded the  possibility  of  it ;  if,  nevertheless,  change  ought  to  receive 
recognition,  as  with  Heraclitus,  and  be  attributed  to  Being  itself, 
it  must  be  reduced  to  a  kind  of  change  which  leaves  untouched 
the  qualities  of  the  existent.  Such  a  change,  however,  was  think- 
able only  as  a  change  of  place,  i.e.  as  motion.  The  investigators  of 
Nature  in  the  fifth  century  maintained,  therefore,  with  the  Eleatics, 
the  (qualitative)  iinchangeableness  of  the  existent,  but  against  the 
Eleatics,  its  plurality  and  motion ; x  with  Heraclitus,  they  insisted 
upon  the  reality  of  occurrence  and  change,  and  against  Heraclitus, 
upon  the  Being  of  permanent  and  unchangeable  substances  as  under- 
lying and  producing  the  same.  Their  common  view  is  this :  there 
is  a  plurality  of  existing  beings  which,  unchangeable  in  them- 
selves, make  the  change  and  variety  of  individual  things  compre- 
hensible. 

7.  This  principle  seems  to  have  been  asserted  first  and  in  its 
most  imperfect  form  "bj^mpedodesj  —  in  a  form,  however,  that  was 
widely  influential  historically.  He  put  forward  as  "  elements" 2  the 
four  which  are  still  current  in  the  popular  modes  of  thought,  —  earth, 


1  Later  (Plato,  Theaet.  181  D ;  Arist.  var.  Zoc.),  d\Xo£w<r«  (qualitative  change) 
and  TrepL(f>op&  (change  of  place)  are  contrasted  as  species  of  Klrqffu  or  /wra/SoX^. 
In  reality  this  is  done  here,  though  the  terms  are  as  yet  lacking. 

2  Instead  of  the  later  expression  o-rotx«a,  we  find  in  Empedocles  the  more 
poetic  term  "  roots  of  all  things," 


40  The  Greeks :  Co&mological  Period.  [PART  L 

water,  air,  and  fire.1  Each,  of  these  is  according  to  this  system, 
without  beginning  and  imperishable,  homogeneous  and  unchange- 
able, but  at  the  same  time  divisible  into  parts,  and  in  these  parts 
capable  of  change  of  place.  Out  of  the  mixture  of  the  elements 
arise  individual  things,  which  in  turn  cease  to  exist  when  the  mix- 
ture is  separated  into  the  elements ;  to  the  kind  of  mixture  made 
are  due  the  various  qualities  of  individual  things,  which  are  often 
different  from  the  properties  of  the  elements  themselves. 

At  the  same  time  the  note  of  unchangeableness  and  a  deviation 
from  the  Milesian  Hylozoism  assert  themselves  in  the  system  of 
Empedocles  to  the  extent  that  he  could  not  assign  independent  ca- 
pacity of  motion  to  these  material  elements  which  experience  only 
changing  states  of  motion  and  mechanical  mixings.  On  this  account 
he  was  obliged  to  seek  a  cause  of  motion  independent  of  the  four 
elements.  As  such  a  cause  he  designated  love  and  hate.  The  out- 
come, however,  of  this  first  attempt  to  set  over  against  a  dead  matter, 
deprived  by  abstraction  of  all  motion  of  its  own,  the  force  which 
moves  it,  as  a  metaphysically  independent  something,  was  very 
obscure.  Love  and  hate  are,  with  Empedocles,  not  mere  properties, 
functions,  or  relations  of  the  elements,  but  rather  independent 
powers  set  over  against  them ;  but  how  we  are  to  think  the  reality 
of  these  moving  forces  is  not  disclosed  in  any  satisfactory  way  in  the 
fragments.2  Only  this  seems  certain,  that  in  fixing  the  dual  nature 
of  the  principle  of  motion  the  thought  was  also  operative  that  two 
distinct  causes,  love  and  hate,  were  requisite  to  account  for  the 
good  and  the  evil  in  the  change  of  things  of  our  experience,3  —  a  first 
indication  that  determinations  of  "  worth "  or  value  are  beginning 
to  be  introduced  into  the  theory  of  Nature. 

8.  Empedocles  thought  it  possible  to  derive  the  special  qualities 
of  individual  things  from  the  proper  mixture  of  the  four  elements  : 
whether  he  attempted  so  to  derive  them,  and  if  so,  how,  we  do  not 
indeed  know.  This  difficulty  was  avoided  by  Anaxagoras,  who, 
from  the  Eleatic  principle  that  nothing  that  is  can  arise  or  pass 
away,  drew  the  conclusion  that  as  many  elements  must  be  assumed  * 

1  Aside  from  dependence  upon  his  predecessors,  his  selection  was  evidently 
due  to  the  inclination  to  regard  the  different  states  of  aggregation  as  the  original 
essence  of  things.    No  importance  seems  to  have  attached  to  the  number  four, 
in  this.    The  dialectical  construction  which  Plato  and  Aristotle  gave  for  this  is 
quite  remote  from  the  thought  of  the  Agrigentine, 

2  If  <j>i\ia  and  wt/cos  are  occasionally  counted  by  the  later  recorders  as  fifth 
and  sixth  aprf  of  Empedocles,  we  must  not  infer  from  this  that  he  regarded 
them  as  substances.    His  obscure  and  almost  mythical  terminology  rests,  for 
the  most  part,  upon  the  fact  that  conceptions  standing  for  functions  are  substan- 
tives in  language.  a  Arist.  Met.  I.  4,  984  b  :J2. 

4  He  called  them  (Tirana.™  (seeds  of  things),  or  also  simply 
stances). 


CHAP.  1,  §  4.]      Conceptions  of  Being :  Anaxagoras.  41 

as  there  are  simple  substances  in  the  things  of  experience,  meaning 
by  simple  substances  those  which  on  repeated  division  always  sep- 
arate into  parts  qualitatively  the  same  with  their  wholes.  Such 
elementary  substances  were  later,  in  accordance  with  his  definition, 
called  homoiomeriai.  At  that  time,  however,  when  only  mechanical 
division  or  change  of  temperature  were  known  as  means  of  investi- 
gation, this  conception  of  element  (in  principle  entirely  correspond- 
ing to  the  conceptions  of  the  chemistry  of  to-day)  applied  to  the 
greater  part  of  the  substances  given  in  experience,1  and  on  that  ac- 
count Anaxagoras  maintained  that  there  were  countless  elements  dif- 
fering in  form,  colour,  and  taste.  He  held  that  they  were  present 
throughout  the  entire  universe  in  a  very  finely  divided  state.  Their 
coming  together  or  compounding  (aruyKpicns)  constitutes  the  arising, 
their  separation  (Sta/cpto-ts)  the  passing  away,  of  individual  things. 
There  is,  accordingly,  something  of  every  substance  present  in  every- 
thing :  it  is  only  for  our  sensuous  apprehension  that  the  individual 
thing  takes  on  the  properties  of  that  substance  or  of  those  sub- 
stances which  may  be  present  in  a  preponderating  degree. 

The  elements,  as  the  true  being,  are  regarded  now  by  Anaxagoras 
also  as  eternal,  without  beginning  or  end,  unchangeable,  and  though 
movable  in  space,  yet  not  in  motion  of  themselves.  Here,  too,  then, 
we  must  ask  for  a  force  which  is  the  cause  of  motion.  Since,  how- 
ever, this  force  must  be  regarded  as  existent,  a  something  that  is, 
Anaxagoras  hit  upon  the  expedient  of  assigning  it  to  a  special, 
single  sort  of  matter  or  elementary  substance.  This  force-element 
or  motive-matter  (Beiuegungsstoff)  is  conceived  to  be  the  lightest  and 
most  mobile  of  all  elements.  In  distinction  from  all  the  others  it  is 
that  one  of  the  homoiomeriai  which  alone  is  in  motion  of  itself,  and 
communicates  this  its  own  motion  to  the  rest ;  it  moves  itself  and 
the  rest.  To  determine  the  inner  nature  of  this  "  force-subs tance," 
however,  two  lines  of  thought  unite :  the  property  of  originating  mo- 
tion is,  for  the  naive  mode  of  looking  at  things,  the  surest  sign  of  the 
animate;  this  exceptional  kind  of  matter,  then,  which  is  self-moved? 
must  be  animate  matter  or  "soul-stuff"  (Seelenstqff),  its  quality 
must  be  animate  or  psychical.2  And,  secondly,  a  power  is  known 
through  its  effect :  if,  now,  this  motive-matter  is  the  cause  of  the 
formation  of  the  world,  to  bring  about  which  it  has  separated  out 
the  remaining  idle  elements,  then  we  must  be  able  to  know  its 
nature  from  this  which  it  has  accomplished.  But  the  universe,  in 
particular  the  regular  revolution  of  the  stars,  makes  the  impression 

1  According  to  the  fragments  of  Anaxagoras,  bones,  flesh,  and  marrow  also  j 
on  the  other  hand,  the  metals. 

2  [The  Greek  ^w^  and  German  Seele  include  both  these  meanings.] 


42  The  GrreeJcs :  Cosmological  Period.  [?ART  I. 

of  beautiful  and  purposive  order  (/COO-/AO?)  .  Such,  a  mastering  of 
gigantic  masses  in  a  harmonious  system,  —  this  undisturbed  circling 
of  countless  worlds,  on  which  Anaxagoras  turned  his  wondering 
contemplation,  it  seemed  to  him  could  be  the  result  only  of  a  mind 
arranging  the  movements  according  to  ends,  and  ruling  them.  For 
this  reason  he  characterised  the  force-substance  as  Reason  (voOs)  or 
as  "  Thought-stuff." 

The  voOs  of  Anaxagoras  is  then  a  stuff  or  substance,  a  corporeal 
element,  homogeneous,  unproduced,  and  imperishable,  diffused  in  a 
finely  divided  state  throughout  the  universe;  different  from  the 
other  substances,  however,  not  only  in  degree,  as  being  the  finest, 
lightest,  and  most  mobile,  but  also  in  essence,  since  it  alone  is  self- 
moved,  and  by  virtue  of  its  own  motion  moves  the  other  elements  in 
the  purposive  way  which  we  recognise  in  the  order  of  the  world. 
This  emphasising  of  the  order  in  the  universe  is  a  Heraclitic  element 
in  the  teaching  of  Anaxagoras,  and  the  conclusion  drawn  from  the 
ordered  movements  to  a  rational  cause  of  them,  acting  according  to 
ends,  is  the  first  instance  of  the  teleological  explanation  of  nature.1 
With  this  procedure  a  conception  of  worth  (Wertlibegriff) — namely, 
beauty  and  perfection  —  is  made  a  principle  of  explanation  in  the 
theoretical  field  also. 

9.  The  Atomism  of  Leucippus  developed  from  the  Eleatic  concep- 
tion of  Being  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that  just  traced.  While 
Empedocles  maintained  that  some,  and  Anaxagoras  that  all,  qualities 
were  metaphysically  primitive,  the  founder  of  the  school  of  Abdera 
remained  in  accord  with  the  position  of  Parmenides,  that  no  "Being" 
belongs  to  any  of  all  the  various  qualitative  determinations  exhibited 
by  experience,  and  that  the  sole  property  of  Being  is  the  property  of 
filling  space,  corporeality,  TO  ir\4ov.  If  now,  however,  the  plurality  of 
things,  and  the  mutations  taking  place  among  them  as  they  come 
and  go,  were  to  be  made  intelligible,  then  instead  of  the  single  world- 
body,  with  no  internal  distinctions  which  Parmenicles  had  taught,  a 
plurality  of  such  must  be  assumed,  separated  from  one  another,  not 
by  other  Being,  but  by  that  which  is  not  Being,  Non-being:  i.e.  by  the 
incorporeal,  by  empty  space.  This  entity,  then,  which  is  Non-being  [i.e. 
not  Being  in  the  true  sense],  must  have  in  its  turn  a  kind  of  Being, 
or  of  metaphysical  reality  ascribed  to  it,2  and  Leucippus  regarded  it 

1  As  such  he  was  praised  by  Plato  (Plmcl.  97  B),  and  overestimated  by 
Aristotle  (Met.  I.  3,  984  b).  Of.,  however,  §  5.  The  moderns  (Hegel)  have 
added  the  further  over-estimate  of  seeking  to  interpret  the  vws  as  an  immate- 
rial principle.  But  the  fragments  (Simpl.  Phys.  (D.)  33V  15C,  IS)  leave  no 
doubt  that  this  lightest,  purest  element,  which  does  not  mingle  with  the  rest, 
but  only  plays  about  them  and  moves  them  as  living  force,  was  also  a  space- 
filling matter  or  stuff.  2  piut.  j^p  #0Z.  4,  2,  1109. 


CHAP.  1,  §  4.]  Conceptions  of  Being :  Leucippus,  Zeno.  43 

as  the  unlimited,  the  owreipov,  in  contrast  -with  the  limitation  which 
Being  proper  possesses,  according  to  Parinenides.  Leucippus,  there- 
fore, shatters  in  pieces  the  world-body  of  Parmenides,  and  scatters 
its  parts  through  infinite  space.  Each  of  these  parts,  however,  is, 
like  the  absolute  Being  of  Parmenides,  eternal  and  unchangeable, 
without  beginning,  indestructible,  homogeneous,  limited,  and  indi- 
visible. Hence  these  portions  of  Being  are  called  atoms,  aro^oi; 
and  for  the  reasons  which  had  led  Anaximander  to  his  concept 
of  the  aTrupov  Leucippus  maintained  that  there  were  countless 
numbers  of  such  atoms,  infinitely  varied  in  form.  Their  size  must 
be  taken  as  imperceptibly  small,  since  all  things  in  our  experience 
are  divisible.  Since,  however,  they  all  possess  only  the  one  like 
quality  of  filling  space,  differences  between  them  can  be  only  quan- 
titative ;  differences  in  size,  form,  and  situation. 

Out  of  such  metaphysical  considerations  grew  the  concept  of  the 
atom,  which  has  proved  so  fruitful  for  the  theoretical  science  of 
Nature  just  because,  as  was  evident  already  in  the  system  of  Leu- 
cippus, it  contains  the  postulate  that  all  qualitative  differences 
exhibited  by  Nature  are  to  be  reduced  to  quantitative.  The  things 
which  we  perceive,  Leucippus  taught,  are  combinations  of  atoms ; 
they  arise  when  atoms  unite,  and  pass  away  when  they  part.  The 
properties  which  we  perceive  in  these  complexes  are  only  seeming 
or  appearance ;  there  exist  in  truth  only  the  determinations  of  size, 
form,  arrangement,  and  situation  of  the  individual  atoms  which 
constitute  Being. 

Empty  space  is,  accordingly,  the  presupposition  as  well  for  the 
uniting  and  separating  of  atoms  as  for  their  separateness  and  shape. 
All  "  becoming,"  or  change,  is  in  its  essence  motion  of  atoms  in  space. 
If  we  ask  for  the  ground  of  this  motion  of  the  atoms,1  since  space 
as  properly  not  a  true  Being  cannot  be  allowed  as  cause,  and 
Atomism  recognises  nothing  as  actual  except  space  and  the  atoms, 
this  ground  can  be  sought  only  in  the  atoms  themselves;  i.e.  the 
atoms  are  of  themselves  in  motion,  and  this,  their  independent  mo- 
tion, is  as  truly  without  beginning  and  end  as  is  their  being.  And  as 
the  atoms  are  indefinitely  varied  in  size  and  form,  and  completely 
independent  of  one  another,  so  their  original  motions  are  infinite  in 
variety.  They  fly  confusedly  about  in  infinite  space,  which  knows 
no  above  and  below,  no  within  and  without,  each  for  itself,  until 
their  accidental  meeting  leads  to  the  formation  of  things  and  worlds. 
The  separation  between  the  conceptions  of  matter  and  moving  force 

1  Arist.  Phys.  VIII.  1,  252  a  32,  says  of  the  Atomists  that  they  did  not  ask  as 
to  the  origin  of  motion — as  a  matter  of  course,  for  they  declared  motion  itself 
to  be  causeless  (cf.  Met  I.  4). 


44  The  Greeks  :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART  I. 

which  Empedocles  and  Anaxagoras,  each  in  his  way,  had  attempted, 
was  thus  in  turn  abolished  by  the  Atomists.  They  ascribed  to  the 
particles  of  matter  the  capacity,  not  indeed  of  qualitative  change 
(dAAotWt?),  but  of  independent  motion  (/uV^cris  in  the  narrower  sense, 
equivalent  to  7repi<j!>opa),  and  took  up  again  in  this  sense  the  principle 
of  Milesian  hylozoism. 

10.  In  opposition  to  these  pluralistic  systems,  Zeno,  the  friend 
and  disciple  of  Parmenides,  sought  to  defend  the  Eleatic  doctrine  by 
setting  forth  the  contradictions  in  which  the  assumption  of  a  plural- 
ity of  Beings  is  involved.  As  regards  size,  he  pointed  out,  it  fol- 
lows that  the  totality  of  Being  must  be  on  the  one  hand  infinitely 
small,  on  the  other  hand  infinitely  great  :  infinitely  small,  because 
the  combination  of  any  number  whatever  of  parts,  each  of  which  is 
to  be  infinitely  small,  never  yields  anything  more  than  an  infinitely 
small  sum;1  infinitely  great,  on  the  contrary,  because  the  bound- 
ary which  is  to  separate  two  parts  must  itself  be  an  existent  some- 
thing, i.e.  spatial  magnitude,  which  again  is  itself  separated  from 
the  two  parts  by  a  boundary  of  which  the  same  holds  true,  and  so 
on  in  infinitwn.  From  the  latter  argument,  which  was  called  that 
from  dichotomy  (the  e/c  Sixoro/u'as),  Zeno  reasoned  also  that  as 
regards  number,  what  is  must  be  unlimited,  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
this  complete  Being,  not  in  process  of  becoming,  is  to  be  regarded 
also  as  numerically  limited  [i.e.  as  complete].  And  just  as  with  the 
assumption  of  the  "  many,"  so  the  position  that  empty  space  is  real 
is  held  to  refute  itself  by  a  regress  ad  infinitum  :  if  all  that  is  is  in 
space,  and  thus  space  is  itself  an  existing  entity,  then  it  must  itself 
be  in  a  space,  and  this  last  likewise,  etc.  When  the  concept  of  the 
infinite,  to  which  the  Atomists  had  given  a  new  turn,  became  thus 
prominent,  all  the  enigmas  involved  in  it  for  the  contrasting  points 
of  view  of  intellect  and  sense-perception  became  prominent  also,  and 
Zeno  used  them  to  involve  in  a  rediictio  ad  absurdum  the  opponents 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  one,  self-limited  Being. 

This  dialectic,  however,  cut  both  ways,  as  was  shown  in  the  Ele- 
atic School  itself,  by  the  fact  that  a  cotemporary  of  Zeno,  Melissus, 
who  shared  his  opinions,  saw  himself  forced  to  declare  that  the 
Being  of  Parmenides  was  as  unlimited  in  space  as  in  time.  For  as 
Being  can  arise  neither  from  other  Being  nor  from  Non-being,  so 
it  can  be  limited  neither  by  existing  Being  (for  then  there  must  be 
a  second  Being),  nor  by  a  non-existent  (for  then  this  non-existent 
must  be)  :  a  line  of  argument  more  consistent  from  a  purely  theo- 


1  The  argument  can  be  directed  only  against  Atomism,  and  applies  to  this 
weakly. 


CHAP.  1,  §  4.]    Conceptions  of  Being :  Pythagoreans.  45 

retical  point  of  view  than  the  position  of  the  master,  which  had 
been  influenced  by  determinations  of  worth. 

11.  The  Pythagoreans  took  a  mediating  position  in  these  ques- 
tions :  for  this,  as  for  their  other  doctrines,  they  were  happily  fitted 
by  their  employment  with  mathematics,  and  by  the  manner  in  which 
they  prosecuted  this  study.  Its  chief  direction  seems  to  have  been 
arithmetical ;  even  the  geometrical  knowledge  ascribed  to  them  (as 
the  well-known  proposition  named  after  Pythagoras)  amounts  to  a 
linear  representation  of  simple  relations  between  numbers  (32  +  42 
=  52,  etc.).  It  was  not,  however,  in  the  general  relations  of  construc- 
tions in  space  only  that  the  Pythagoreans  found  numbers,  to  be  the 
determining  principles ;  the  same  was  found  to  be  true  also  in  such 
phenomena  of  the  corporeal  world  as  they  were  chiefly  engaged 
with.  Their  theoretical  investigations  concerning  music  taught  them 
that  harmony  was  based  upon  simple  numerical  relations  of  the 
length  of  the  strings  (octave,  third,  fourth),  and  their  knowledge 
of  astronomy,  which  was  far  advanced,  led  them  to  the  view  that 
the  harmony  prevailing  in  the  motions  in  the  heavenly  bodies  had, 
like  the  harmony  in  music,1  its  ground  in  an  order,  in  accordance 
with  which  the  various  spheres  of  the  universe  moved  about  a  com- 
mon centre  at  intervals  fixed  by  numbers.  Suggestions  so  various 
as  these  mentioned  seem  to  have  united  to  evoke  in  a  man  like 
Philolaus  the  thought,  that  the  permanent  Being  which  philosophy 
was  seeking  was  to  be  found  in  numbers.  In  contrast  with  the 
changing  things  of  experience  mathematical  conceptions  possess  as 
regards  their  content  the  marks  of  a  validity  not  subject  to  time 
—  they  are  eternal,  without  beginning,  imperishable,  unchangeable, 
and  even  immovable ;  and  while  they  thus  satisfy  the  Eleatic  postu- 
late for  Being,  they  present,  on  the  other  hand,  fixed  relations,  — 
that  rhythmical  order  which  Heraclitus  had  demanded.  Thus,  then, 
the  Pythagoreans  found  the  abiding  essense  of  the  world  in  the 
mathematical  relations,  and  in  particular  in  numbers,  —  a  solution 
of  the  problem  more  abstract  than  the  Milesian,  more  capable  of 
being  represented  to  perception  or  imagination  than  the  Eleatic, 
clearer  than  the  Heraclitic,  more  difficult  than  those  offered  by 
cotemporary  mediating  attempts. 

The  Pythagorean  doctrine  of  numbers,  as  carried  out  by  them,  was 
attached  partly  to  the  numerous  observations  they  had  made  on  the 
arithmetical  relations,  partly  to  analogies  which  they  discovered  or 
sometimes  artificially  introduced,  between  numerical  and  philosophi- 
cal problems.  The  definite  nature  of  each  individual  number  and 

1  Out  of  .this  analogy  arose  the  fantastic  idea  of  the  harmony  of  the  spheres. 


46  The  Greeks :   CoBmological  Period.  [PART  L 

tlie  endlessness  of  the  number  series  must  indeed  have  at  first  sug- 
gested that  reality  belongs  as  well  to  the  limited  as  to  the  unlimited, 
and  by  transferring  this  thought  into  the  geometrical  sphere  the 
Pythagoreans  came  to  recognise,  in  addition  to  the  elements  as  the 
limited,  a  Reality  as  belonging  also  to  space  as  the  unlimited  void. 
They  thought  of  the  elements,  however,  as  determined  by  the  forms 
of  the  simple  solids :  fire  by  the  tetrahedron,  earth  by  the  cube, 
air  by  the  octahedron,  water  by  the  icosahedron,  and  a  fifth  material, 
gether,  which  they  added  as  the  celestial  element  to  the  four  terres- 
trial elements  assumed  by  Ernpedocles,  by  the  dodecahedron.1  In 
these  conceptions  the  prevailing  idea  was  this :  corporeality,  or  the 
essential  quality  of  bodies,  consists  in  the  mathematical  limitation 
of  the  unlimited,  in  the  shaping  out  of  space  into  forms.  Mathemati- 
cal forms  are  made  the  essence  of  physical  reality. 

The  Pythagoreans  further  believed  that  in  the  antithesis  between 
the  limited  and  the  unlimited  they  recognised  the  antithesis  found 
in  numbers  between  the  odd  and  the  even ; 2  and  this  antithesis  was 
again  identified  with  that  between  the  perfect  and  the  imperfect, 
the  good  and  the  bad,3  in  this  last  case  not  without  the  influence  of 
old  ideas  connected  with  the  religious  faith  of  the  oracles.  Their 
Weltanschauung  becomes  thus  dualistic:  over  against  the  limited, 
odd,  perfect,  and  good  stands  the  limitless,  even,  imperfect,  and  bad. 
As,  however,  both  principles  are  united  in  the  number  one,4  which 
has  the  value  of  an  even  as  well  as  of  an  odd  number,  so  in  the 
world  as  a  whole  these  antitheses  are  adjusted  to  form  a  harmony. 
The  world  is  harmony  of  numbers. 

Some  of  the  Pythagoreans,5  moreover,  sought  to  trace  out  through 
the  various  realms  of  experience  that  fundamental  antithesis,  in  the 
assumption  of  which  all  the  school  were  agreed,  and  so  a  table  of  ten 
pairs  of  opposites  came  into  existence:  viz.  limited  and  unlimited — 
odd  and  even  —  one  and  many  —  right  and  left  —  male  and  female 
—  at  rest  and  in  motion  —  straight  and  curved  —  light  and  dark  — 


1  While  the  main  line  of  the  Pythagoreans  thus  followed  Empedocles,  a  later, 
Ecphantus,  conceived  of  this  limitation  of  space  in  the  sense  of  Atomism. 

2  The  reason  presented  for  this,  viz.  that  even  numbers  permit  of  bisection 
to  infinity  (?),  is  indeed  very  questionable  and  artificial  (Simpl.  Phys.  D.  105r 
455,20), 

3  Nor  must  we  here  overlook  the  factor  which  had  already  asserted  itself  with 
Xenophanes  and  Parmenides,  viz.  that  to  the  Greek  the  conception  of  measure 
was  one  that  had  a  high  ethical  worth ;  so  that  the  infinite,  which  derides  all 
measure,  must  to  him  appear  imperfect,  while  the  definite  or  limited  (wc-jrepaff- 
fdvov)  was  necessarily  regarded  as  more  valuable. 

*  Arist.  Met.  I.  5,  986  a  19. 

6  Or  men  standing  in  close  relations  with  Pythagoreanism,  such  as  the  physi- 
cian Alcmaeon,  a  perhaps  somewhat  older  contemporary  of  Philolaus.  Ci 
Arist.  Met.  I.  5,  986  a  22. 


CHAP.  1,  §  5.]       Conceptions  of  Cosmic  Processes.  47 

good  and  bad  —  square  and  oblong  or  with  unequal  sides.  This  is 
evidently  a  collection  put  together  without  system,  to  fill  out  the 
sacred  number  ten,  but  an  attempt  at  an  articulation  may  at  least  be 
recognised. 

In  accordance,  then,  with  this  or  a  similar  scheme  the  Pythagoreans 
exerted  themselves  to  make  an  order  of  things  corresponding  to  the 
system  of  numbers,  by  assigning  the  fundamental  conceptions  in 
every  department  of  knowledge  to  various  numbers,  and  on  the  other  ' 
hand  by  adjudging  to  every  individual  number,  but  especially  to  those 
from  one  to  ten,  determining  significance  in  the  various  spheres  of 
reality.  The  fantastic  nature  of  the  symbolic  interpretation  into 
which  they  fell  in  doing  this  must  yet  not  cause  us  to  overlook  the 
fact  that  the  attempt  was  therewith  made  to  recognise  an  abiding  order 
of  things  which  could  be  grasped  and  expressed  in  conceptions,  and  to 
find  the  ultimate  ground  of  this  order  in  mathematical  relations. 

Nor  did  it  escape  the  notice  of  the  Pythagoreans  themselves, 
notably  of  the  later  members  of  the  school,  that  numbers  could  not 
be  called  the  principles  (d/>xaO  of  things  in  the  same  way  in  which 
the  term  is  applied  to  the  various  "stuffs,"  or  kinds  of  matter,  to  the 
elements,  etc.,  that  things  have  not  arisen  out  of  them,  but  are 
formed  according  to  them;  and  perhaps  they  best  and  most  effec- 
tively express  their  thoughts  when  they  say  that  all  things  are 
copies  or  imitations  of  numbers.  With  this  conception  the  world  of 
mathematical  forms  was  thought  as  a  higher,  more  original  reality, 
of  which  the  empirical  reality  was  held  to  be  only  a  copy :  to  the 
former  belonged  abiding  Being ;  the  latter  was  the  contrasted  world 
of  Becoming  and  change.  ' 

§  5.  Conceptions  of  Cosmic  Processes.1 

E.  Hardy,  Der  Begriff  far  Physis  in  griechischen  Philosophie,  I.  Berlin,  1884. 

As  the  fact  of  change — that  is,  the  cosmic  processes — furnished 
the  most  immediate  occasion  for  reflection  upon  the  abiding  Being, 
so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  various  conceptions  of  Being  had 
as  their  ultimate  aim  only  to  make  the  processes  of  Nature  intel- 
ligible. This  task  was  indeed  occasionally  forgotten,  or  set  aside, 
in  the  development  of  the  conceptions  of  Being,  as  by  the  Eleatics ; 
but  immediately  afterward  the  further  progress  of  thought  proved 
to  be  determined  all  the  more  by  the  renewed  attention  given  to 

1  [Geschehen.  I  have  translated  this  word  variously  by  "  change,11  "  occur- 
rence," "event,"  "taking  place,"  " coming  to  pass,"  " becoming,"  etc.  The 
last,  which  is  ordinarily  used  for  the  Greek  ylyvofMi  seems  hardly  broad  enough. 
The  German  means  any  natural  process  or  event.] 


48  The  Greeks :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART  I. 

Becoming  and  change,  and  by  the  need  of  so  thinking  Being  that 
Becoming  and  change  could  not  only  be  reconciled  with  it,  but  also 
be  made  intelligible  by  it.  Hand  in  hand,  then,  with  ideas  of  Being, 
go  those  of  Becoming,  the  two  in  constant  relation  to  one  another. 

1.  To  the  lonians  the  living  activity  of  the  world  was  something 
so  much  a  matter  of  course  that  they  never  thought  of  asking  for 
a  cause  of  it.  Naive  Hylozoism  could  have  in  view  only  the  explana- 
tion of  a  particular  occurrence  or  cosmic  process.  Explanation, 
however,  consists  in  reducing  what  is  striking  —  not  a  matter  of 
course  or  intelligible  in  itself  —  to  such  simpler  forms  of  occur- 
rence as  seem  to  need  no  explanation,  inasmuch  as  they  are  most 
familiar  to  our  perception.  That  things  change  their  form,  their 
qualities,  their  working  upon  one  another,  seemed  to  the  Mile- 
sians to  require  explanation.  They  contented  themselves  in  this 
with  conceiving  these  changes  as  condensation  or  rarefaction  of  the 
cosmic  matter.  This  latter  process  did  not  seem  to  them  to  need  a 
farther  explanation,  though  Anaximenes  at  least  did  add,  that  these 
changes  in  the  state  of  aggregation  were  connected  with  changes  in 
temperature  —  condensation  with  cooling,  rarefaction  with  growing 
warm.  This  contrast  gave  rise  to  the  arrangement  of  the  states  of 
aggregation  in  a  series  corresponding  to  the  degree  of  rarefaction 
or  condensation  of  the  primitive  matter : l  viz.  fire,  air,  water,  earth 
(or  stone). 

The  Milesians  used  these  ideas  not  only  to  explain  individual 
phenomena  of  Nature,  particularly  the  meteorological  processes  so 
important  for  a  sea-faring  people,  but  also  to  explain  the  develop- 
ment of  the  present  state  of  the  world  out  of  the  prime  matter. 
Thus  Thales  conceived  water  as  in  part  rarefying  to  form  air  and 
fire,  and  in  part  condensing  to  form  earth  and  stone ;  Anaximenes, 
starting  from  air,  taught  an  analogous  process  of  world-formation. 
As  a  result  of  these  views  it  was  assumed  that  the  earth.  —  resting 
on  water,  according  to  the  first,  on  air,  according  to  the  second  — 
occupied  the  centre  of  the  sphere  of  air  revolving  about  it,  and  this 
sphere  of  air  was  yet  again  surrounded  by  a  sphere  of  fire,  which 
either  broke  through  or  shone  through  in  the  stars. 

In  setting  forth  this  process  of  world-origination,  which  was  per- 
haps still  regarded  by  Thales  and  Anaximander  as  a  process  occur- 
ring once  for  all,  the  Milesians  attached  themselves  closely  to  the 
cosmogonic  poetry.2  Not  until  later  does  the  consideration  seem  to 

1  Hence  it  is  intelligible  that  there  were  also  physicists  (not  known  to  us  by 
name)  who  would  regard  the  world-stuff  as  an  intermediate  stage  between  air 
and  water,  or  between  air  and  fire. 

2  Hence,  also,  the  designation  of  the  world-stuff  as  &PXJ  (beginning). 


CHAP.  1,  §  5.]   Cosmic  Processes :  Anaximander,  Beraclitus.       49 

have  gained  prevalence,  that  if  to  change  of  form  a  change  back  to 
the  original  form  corresponds,  and  if,  at  the  same  time,  matter  is 
to  be  regarded  as  not  only  eternal  but  eternally  living,  it  is  necessary 
to  assume  a  ceaseless  process  of  world-formation  and  world-destruc- 
tion, a  countless  number  of  successive  tuorlds.1 

2.  Although  these  essential  constituents  characterise  also  the 
physical  theories  o.f  Anaximander,  he  was  led  beyond  them  by  his 
metaphysical  conception  of  the  aTrapov.    The  infinite,   self-moved 
matter  which  was  intended  by  this  obscure  conception  was  indeed, 
as  a  whole,  to  have  no  definite  properties.    It  was  held,  however,  to 
contain  qualitative  opposites  within  itself,  and  in  its  process  of  evolu- 
tion to  exclude  them  from  itself,  so  that  they  became  separate.2 
Anaximander  remained  then  a  Hylozoist  in  so  far  as  he  regarded 
matter  as  self -moved;  he  had  seen,  however,  that  the  differences 
must  be  put  into  it  if  they  were  to  come  forth  out  of  it  on  occasion 
of  its  self-motion.    If,  then,  as  regards  his  doctrine  of  Being,  he  ap- 
proached the  later  theory  of  a  plurality  of  primitive  substances,  and 
abandoned  the  doctrine  that  the  primitive  matter  was  changeable  in 
quality,  he  was  yet  entirely  at  one  with  the  other  Milesians  as 
regards  his  conception  of  the  causelessness  of  the  cosmic  process,  and 
thought  that  by  the  union  of  the  two  opposites,  the  warm  and  the 
cold,  which  he  conceived  as  the  first  to  come  out  from  the  aircipov,  he 
could  explain  water.    This  done,  he  could  proceed  with  his  cosmog- 
ony along  the  oceanic  path  taken  by  Thales. 

But  besides  these  physical  and  metaphysical  determinations,  the 
only  fragment 3  preserved  from  him,  giving  his  own  words,  repre- 
sents the  perishing  of  things  as  an  expiation  for  injustice,  and  so 
presents  the  first  dim  attempt  to  present  the  world-process  as 
ethical  necessity,  and  to  conceive  of  the  shadows  of  transitoriness, 
which  rest  even  on  the  bright  picture  of  Hellenic  life,  as  retribution 
for  sin.  However  doubtful  the  particular  interpretation  of  this 
utterance,  there  is  yet  without  doubt  voiced  in  it  the  need  of  giving 
to  physical  necessity  the  worth  of  an  ethical  order.  Here  Anaxi- 
mander appears  as  a  predecessor  of  Heraclitus. 

3.  The  order  of  events  which  Heraclitus  thought  he  could  estab- 
lish as  the  only  constant  amid  the  mutation  of  things,  had  two 
essential  marks,  the  harmony  of  opposites  and  the  circuit  completed  by 

1  This  doctrine  -was  supported,  probably  by  Anaximander,   certainly  by 
Anaximenes.    It  is  repeated  in  Heraclitus  and  Empedocles.^ 

2  The  decisive  passages  for  this  very  controverted  question  (Bitter,  Seydel, 
Zeller)  are  Arist.  Phys.  1. 4,  187  a  20,  and  Simpl.  Phys.  (P.)  33'  154,  14  (after 
Theophrastus) :  also  the  continuation  of  the  passage  in  the  following  note. 

*  Simpl.  Phys.  (D.)  6*  24,  18.  Ct  Th.  Ziegler,  Arch.  f.  Gesch.  d.  Philos., 
1. 16  ff. 


50  The  Grreeks :   Cosmological  Period.  [PART  I. 

matter  in  its  successive  changes  in  the  universe.  The  observation  that 
everything  in  the  world  is  in  process  of  constant  change  was 
exaggerated  by  Heraclitus  to  the  claim  that  everything  is  con- 
tinually changing  into  its  opposite.  The  "  other "  was  for  him  eo 
ipso  the  opposed.  The  "flux  of  things  "  became  transformed  in  his 
poetic  rhetoric  into  a  ceaseless  strife  of  opposites,  and  this  strife 
(•n-oAejitos)  he  declared  to  be  the  father  of  things.  All  that  seems  to 
be  for  a  shorter  or  longer  time  is  the  product  of  opposed  motions 
and  forces  which  in  their  operation  maintain  themselves  in  equilib- 
rium. The  universe  is  thus  at  every  moment  a  unity  divided  in 
itself  and  again  re-united,  a  strife  which  finds  its  reconciliation,  a 
want  that  finds  its  satisfaction.  The  essence  of  the  world  is  the 
invisible  harmony  in  which  all  differences  and  oppositions  are 
solved.  The  world  is  Becoming,  and  Becoming  is  unity  of  oppo- 
sites. 

These  antitheses,  according  to  the  view  of  Heraclitus,  present 
themselves  particularly  in  the  two  processes  taking  place  in  con- 
trary directions,  through  which,  on  the  one  hand,  fire  becomes 
changed  into  all  things,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  all  things  change 
back  into  fire.  The  same  stages  are  passed  through  in  both 
processes:  on  the  "way  downward"  fire  passes  over,  by  condensation, 
into  water  and  earth,  on  the  "way  upward"  earth  and  water,  by  rare- 
faction, pass  over  into  fire ;  and  these  two  ways  are  alike.  Change 
and  counter-change  run  on  side  by  side,  and  the  semblance  of  a  per- 
manent thing  makes  its  appearance  where  for  a  time  there  is  as 
much  counter-change  upon  the  one  way  as  there  is  change  upon  the 
other.  The  fantastic  forms  in  which  Heraclitus  put  these  views 
envelop  the  essential  thought  of  a  sequence  of  changes  taking  place 
in  conformity  to  law,  and  of  a  continual  compensation  of  these 
changes.  The  world  is  produced  from,  the  fire  in  ever-repeated 
rhythm  and  at  fixed  intervals  of  time,  and  then  again  flashes  up  in 
fire,  to  arise  from  it  anew,  a  Phcenix.1 

In  this  ceaseless  transformation  of  all  things  nothing  individual 
persists,  but  only  the  order,  in  which  the  exchange  between  the 
contrary  movements  is  effected,  —  the  law  of  change,  which  consti- 
tutes the  meaning  and  worth  of  the  whole.  If  in  the  struggle  be- 
tween opposites  it  seems  as  though  something  new  were  constantly 
arising,  this  new  is  at  the  same  time  always  a  perishing  product. 
The  Becoming  of  Heraclitus  produces  no  Being,  as  the  Being  of 
Parinenides  produces  no  Becoming. 

1  In  details  his  physical,  and  especially  his  astronomical,  ideas  are  weak. 
Metaphysical  inquiry  is  more  important  with  him  than  explanatory  investiga- 
tion. He  shares  this  with  his  opponent,  Parmenides. 


CHAP.  1,  §  5.]    Cosmic  Processes  :  Parmenides^  Umpedocles.         51 

4.  In  fact,  the  doctrine  of  Being  held  by  the  Eleatics  excluded 
with  plurality  and  change,  events  or  cosmic  processes,  also.    Ac- 
cording to  their  metaphysics  an  event  or  occurrence  is  incomprehen- 
sible, it  is   impossible.     This  metaphysics   tolerates   no    physics. 
Parmenides  denies  to  time,  as  to  space,  independent  reality  (<&Ao 
irape/c  TOU  edvros) :  for  him  there  is  only  timeless  Being  with  no  dis- 
tinctions.  Although  Parmenides  added  to  the  first  part  of  his  didac- 
tic poem,  which  presents  the  doctrine  of  Being,  a  second  part  which 
treats  physical  problems,  this  is  yet  done  with  the  protest  in  advance 
that  he  is  here  presenting  not  truth,  but  the  "  opinions  of  mortals." l 
At  the  basis  of  all  these  ordinary  opinions  lies  the  false  presupposi- 
tion, previously  rejected,  that  in  addition  to  Being  there  is  still 
another,  Non-being.    All  becoming,  all  plurality  and  motion,  rest  on 
the  interaction  of  these  opposites,  which  are  then  further  designated 
as  light  and  darkness,  warmth  and  cold.    A  WeltanscJiauung  is  then 
portrayed  in  poetic  imagery,  in  which  fire  shapes  the  dark  empty 
space  into  corporeal  structures,  a  mode  of  representation  which  in 
part  reminds  us  of  Heraclitus,  and  in  part  accords  with  the  astro- 
nomical teaching  of  the  Pythagoreans.    The  all-ruling  Fire-power 
(Sat/Awv),  as  inexorable  necessity  (81)07),  with  the  help  of  love  (lpo>s) 
forces  together  what  is  akin,  working  from  the  centre  of  the  world 
outward.      Appropriation  of  the  doctrines   of  others  and  polemic 
against  them  appear  in  motley  mixture,  agreeably  to  the  purpose  of 
the  whole.     Over  this  tissue  thus  interwoven  hovers  a  poetic  breath 
of  plastic  formative  power,  but  original  research  and  clear  concep- 
tions are  lacking. 

5.  Ideas  more  definite,  and  more  usable  for  explaining  the  par- 
ticular, are  found  among  the  successors,  who  transformed  the  Eleatic 
conception  of  Being  into  the  conceptions  of  element,  homoiomerise, 
and  atom,  expressly  for  this  purpose.    They  all  declare  that  by 
occurrence  or  coming  to  be  nothing  else  is  to  be  understood  than  the 
motion  of  unchangeable  corporeal  particles.    Empedocles  and  Anax- 
agoras  seem  still  to  have  sought  to  connect  with  this  the  denial  of 
empty  space,  —  a  principle  which  they  received  from  Parmenides. 
They  ascribed  to  their  substances  universal  divisibility,  and  re- 
garded parts  as  capable  of  displacement  in  such  a  way  that  as  these 
parts  mixed  and  reciprocally  interpenetrated,  all  space  should  be 
always  filled  out.     The  motion  in  the  world  consists,  then,  in  this 


1  The  hypothetical  exposition  of  how  the  world  would  have  to  be  thought  if, 
in  addition  to  Being,  Non-being,  plurality,  and  becoming  were  also  regarded  as 
real,  had,  on  the  one  hand,  a  polemic  purpose;  and  on  the  other,  it  met  the 
want  of  his  disciples,  who  probably  demanded  of  the  master  an  explanation  of 
his  own  of  the  empirical  world. 


52  "         The  Greeks :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART  L 

displacement  of  the  parts  of  matter,  each,  of  which  is  always  crowd- 
ing and  displacing  the  other.  Things  at  a  distance  from  one  anothei 
cannot  act  upon  one  another,  except  as  parts  of  the  one  flow  out  and 
penetrate  into  the  other.  This  action  is  the  more  possible  in  pro- 
portion as  the  effluxes  of  the  one  body  resemble  in  their  spatial 
form  the  pores  of  the  other.  So  at  least  Empedocles  taught,  and 
the  assumption  of  an  infinite^divisibility  of  substances  is  attested  in 
the  case  of  Anaxagoras  also.  Another  picture  of  occurrence  more 
akin  to  the  present  way  of  thinking  is  that  presented  by  Leucippus. 
The  atoms  which  impinge  upon  each  other  in  empty  space  act  upon 
each  other  by  pressure  and  impact,  group  themselves  together,  and 
so  form  greater  or  smaller  things  or  masses  which  are  not  separated 
and  destroyed  until  some  impact  or  pressure  of  other  masses  comes 
from  without.  All  occurrence  and  coming  to  be  consists  in  this 
process  in  which  atom-complexes  are  successively  formed  and 
shattered. 

The  fundamental  form  of  world-motion  in  all  three  systems,  how- 
ever, is  that  of  the  vortex,  of  circular  rotation  (80/97),  According  to 
Empedocles  it  is  brought  about  by  the  forces  of  love  and  hate  acting 
among  the  elements ;  according  to  Anaxagoras  it  is  begun  by  the 
Reason-stuff  acting  according  to  ends,  and  then  continues  with 
mechanical  consistency ;  according  to  Leucippus  it  is  the  result 
always  occurring  from  the  collision  of  several  atoms.  The  principle 
of  mechanism  was  with  Empedocles  still  enveloped  in  myth,  with 
Anaxagoras  it  first  made  a  half-successful  attempt  to  break  through 
the  covering,  and  was  completely  carried  through  only  by  Leucippus. 
What  hindered  the  first  two  from  reaching  this  position  was  the 
introduction  of  considerations  of  worth  into  their  explanatory 
theory.  The  one  was  for  tracing  the  good  and  the  evil  back  to  cor- 
responding powers  of  mind,  which  were,  to  be  sure,  not  ascribed  to 
any  being,  but  mythically  hypostatised ;  the  other  believed  that  he 
could  explain  the  order  of  the  whole  only  from  the  assumption  that 
purposive,  rationally  considered  impulse  had  originated  the  motions. 
Yet  both  came  so  near  the  position  of  Leucippus  as  to  demand  a 
teleological  explanation  for  the  beginning  only  of  the  vortex-motion; 
the  farther  course  of  the  motions,  and  thus  every  individual  occur- 
rence, they  explained,  as  did  Leucippus,  purely  mechanically,  by  the 
pushing  and  crowding  of  the  particles  of  matter  after  these  are  once 
in  motion  in  the  manner  determined.  They  proceeded  so  con- 
sistently in  this  that  they  did  not  exclude  from  this  mechanical 
explanation  even  the  origination  and  functions  of  organisms,  among 
which,  moreover,  plants  are  regarded  as  being  as  truly  animate  as  are 
animals.  Anaxagoras  is  reproached  for  this  by  Plato  and  Aristotle, 


CHAP.  1,  §  5.]   Cosmic  Processes :  Anaxagoras,  Leucippus.          53 

and  an  expression  of  Enipedocles  has  been  handed  down,1  according 
to  which  he  taught  that  the  animals  had  arisen  here  and  there,  with- 
out any  rule,  in  odd  and  grotesque  forms,  and  that  in  the  course  of 
time  only  those  fitted  for  life  maintained  themselves.  The  principle 
of  the  survival  of  the  fittest,  which  plays  so  great  a  part  in  the 
biology  of  to-day,  i.e.  in  Darwinism,  is  here  already  clearly  formu- 
lated. 

On  the  ground  of  these  ideas,  an  interesting  contrast  discloses 
itself  in  the  case  of  the  three  investigators,  as  regards  their  atti- 
tude toward  cosmogonic  theories.  Por  Empedocles  and  for  Leu- 
cippus, namely,  the  process  of  world-formation  and  world-dissolu- 
tion is  a  perpetual  one ;  for  Anaxagoras,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  one 
that  takes  place  once  for  all.  Between  the  first  two  there  is  again 
the  difference  that  Empedocles,  like  Heraclitus,  teaches  that  the 
world  arises  and  perishes  in  periodic  alternation ;  while  Atomism, 
on  the  contrary,  holds.that  a  countless  number  of  worlds  come  into 
being  and  pass  away.  According  to  the  principles  of  Empedocles, 
to  be  more  explicit,  there  are  four  different  states  of  the  elements ; 
their  complete  intermixture,  in  which  love  alone  rules,  and  hate  is 
excluded,  he  calls  <r<£ai/>os 2  (sphere) ;  when  hate  penetrates,  this 
homogeneous  world-sphere  becomes  separated  into  the  individual 
things,  until  the  elements  are  completely  parted  from  one  another ; 
and  out  of  this  separate  condition  love  brings  them  again  together, 
until  full  union  is  again  attained.  Neither  in  the  case  of  complete 
mixture,  nor  in  that  of  complete  separation,  are  there  individual 
things ;  in  both  cases  the  Eleatic  acosmism  makes  its  appearance. 
A  world  of  individual  things  in  motion  exists  only  where  love  and 
hate  struggle  with  one  another  in  mingling  and  separating  the 
elements. 

It  is  otherwise  with  Leucippus.  Some  of  the  atoms  that  dart 
about  irregularly  in  the  universe  strike  together  here  and  there. 
Prom  the  various  impulses  to  motion  which  the  individual  particles 
bring  with  them,  where  such  aggregations  occur,  there  results, 
according  to  mathematical  necessity  (dwxyKi/),  a  whirling  movement 
of  the  whole,  which  draws  into  itself  neighbouring  atoms  and  atom- 
complexes,  and  sometimes  even  whole  "  worlds,"  and  so  gradually 


1  Arist.  Phys.  II.  8,  198  b  29.    Moreover,  we  find  an  expression  already 
attributed  to  Anaximander,  which  teaches  a  transformation  of  organisms  by 
adaptation  to  changed  conditions  of  life :  Plut.  Plac.  V.  19, 1  (Dox.  D.  430, 15). 
For  man,  also,  the  oldest  thinkers  claimed  no  other  origin  than  that  of  growth 
out  of  the  animal  world:  so  Empedocles  in  Plut.  Strom,  fr.  2.  (Dox.  D.  579, 17). 

2  Evidently  not  without  suggestion  from  the  Eleatic  world-sphere,  which  this 
absolute,  fully  adjusted  mingling  of  all  elements,  taught  by  Empedocles,  much 
resembles. 


54  The  Greeks:  Cosmological  Period.  [PAET! 

extends.  Meanwhile  such  a  system  in  process  of  revolution  is 
differentiating  itself,  since,  by  the  rotation,  the  finer,  more  movable 
atoms  are  driven  to  the,  periphery,  the  more  inert  and  massy  are 
gathered  in  the  centre ;  and  so  like  finds  its  way  to  like,  not  by 
inclination  or  love,  but  through  their  like  conformity  to  the  law  of 
pressure  and  impact.  So  there  arise  at  various  times  and  in  differ- 
ent places  in  the  boundless  universe,  various  worlds,  each  of  which 
continues  in  motion  within  itself,  according  to  mechanical  law,  until 
it  perhaps  is  shattered  in  pieces  by  collision  with  another  world,  or 
is  drawn  into  the  revolution  of  a  greater.  So,  the  Atomists  main- 
tained, the  sun  and  moon  were  at  one  time  worlds  by  themselves, 
which  subsequently  fell  into  the  greater  vortex  of  which  our  earth 
is  the  centre.  How  near  in  principle  this  whole  conception  is  to 
the  natural  science  of  to-day  is  obvious. 

The  tekological  point  of  mew  taken  by  Anaxagoras  excludes,  on 
the  contrary,  a  plurality  of  worlds  in  time  as  well  as  a  plurality  of 
worlds  in  space.  The  ordering  mind,  which  introduces  the  pur- 
posive motion  of  the  elements,  forms  just  this  one  world  only,  which 
is  the  most  perfect.1  Anaxagoras,  therefore,  quite  in  the  manner  of 
the  cosmogonic  poetry,  describes  how  the  beginning  of  the  world 
was  preceded  by  a  chaotic  primitive  condition,  in  which  the  ele- 
ments were  intermingled  without  order  and  without  motion.  Then 
came  the  VOTJS,  the  " Beason-stuff "  (Vernunftstoff),  and  set  it  into 
ordered  motion.  This  vortex-motion  began  at  one  point,  the  pole  of 
the  celestial  vault,  and  extended  gradually  throughout  the  entire 
mass  of  matter,  separating  and  dividing  the  elements,  so  that  they 
now  perform  their  mighty  revolution  in  a  uniformly  harmonious 
manner.  The  teleological  motive  of  the  doctrine  of  Anaxagoras 
is  due  essentially  to  his  admiration  of  the  order  in  the  stellar 
world,  which,  after  it  has  performed  the  rotations  started  by  the 
vow,  moves  on  without  disturbance  always  in  the  same  track.  There 
is  no  ground  for  assuming  that  this  teleological  cosmology  directed 
attention  to  the  adaptation  to  ends  in  living  beings,  or  even  to  the 
connected  system  of  Nature  as  beneficent  to  man ;  its  gaze  was  fixed 
on  the  beauty  of  the  starry  heavens ;  and  what  is  related  of  the 
views  of  Anaxagoras  on  terrestrial  things,  on  organisms,  and  on 
man,  keeps  quite  within  the  setting  of  the  mechanical  mode  of 
explanation  in  vogue  among  his  contemporaries.  What  he  said,  too, 
with  regard  to  the  presence  of  life  on  other  heavenly  bodies,  might 
just  as  well  have  come  from  the  Atomists. 


1  This  motive,  fully  carried  out,  is  found  in  Plato,  Tim.  31,  with  unmistak- 
able reference  to  the  opposition  between  Anaxagoras  and  the  Atomists. 


CHAP.  1,  §  5.]   Cosmic  Processes :  Zeno,  the  Pythagoreans.  55 

v 

Accordingly,  although  Anaxagoras  conceived  of  the  voOs  as  also  the  principle 
of  animation,  and  thought  of  the  particles  of  this  substance  as  mingled  in 
greater  or  lesser  number  with  organic  bodies,  yet  the  central  point  in  this  con- 
ception  is  that  of  the  authorship  of  the  astronomical  world-order.  The  other 
side,  the  moment  or  factor  of  the  cause  of  animate  life,  is  much  more  energeti- 
cally emphasised  in  the  transformation  which  a  younger  eclectic  natural 
philosopher,  Diogenes  of  Applloma,  undertook  to  effect  in  the  conception  of 
Anaxagoras  "by  connecting  it  with  the  hylozoistic  principle  of  Anaximenes. 
He  designated  air  as  a.px'h  [first  principle,  primitive  element],  fitted  it  out, 
however,  with  the  characteristics  of  the  voO?,  —  omniscience  and  force  acting 
according  to  ends,— named  this  "rational  air"  also  irvevfjut  [spirit],  and  found 
this  formative  principle  in  man  and  other  organisms  as  well  as  in  the  universe. 
A  rich  physiological  knowledge  enabled  him  to  carry  through  in  detail  this 
thought  as  applied  to  the  structure  and  functions  of  the  human  body.  With 
him  teleology  became  the  dominant  mode  of  apprehending  also  the  organic 
world. 

His  fragments  have  been  collected  by  Schorn  (Bonn,  1829)  and  Panzerbieter 
(Leips.  1830).  Of.  K.  Steinhart  in  Ersch  und  Grtiber's  Encydopadie. 

6.  All  these  doctrines,  however,  presuppose  the  conception  of 
motion  as  one  that  is  intelligible  of  itself  and  in  need  of  no  further 
explanation.  They  thought  they  had  explained  qualitative  change 
when  they  had  pointed  out  as  its  true  essence  motion,  whether 
between  the  parts  of  a  continuously  connected  matter,  or  in  empty 
space.  The  opposition,  therefore,  which"  the  Eleatic  School  brought 
to  bear  upon  all  these  doctrines  was  directed  first  of  all  against  this 
conception  of  motion,  and  Zeno  showed  that  this  could  by  no  means 
be  taken  so  simply,  but  was  rather  full  of  contradictions  which  inca- 
pacitated it  for  serving  as  principle  of  explanation. 

Among  Zeno's  famous  proofs  of  the  impossibility  of  motion,1  the 
weakest  is  that  which  proceeds  from  the  relativity  of  tlie  amount  of 
motion,  by  showing  that  the  movement  of  a  wagon  is  variously  esti- 
mated if  it  is  observed  either  from  wagons  also  in  motion  but  in 
different  directions  and  at  varying  rates  of  speed,  or  again  from  two 
wagons  one  of  which  is  moving  and  one  standing  still.  The  three 
other  proofs,  on  the  contrary,  which  made  use  of  the  analysis  into 
discrete  parts,  infinitely  many  and  infinitely  small,  of  the  space- 
passed  through  by  motion,  and  the  time  occupied  by  it,  were 
stronger,  and  for  a  long  time  were  not  overcome.  The  first  proof 
was  with  reference  to  the  impossibility  of  passing  through  a  Jixed 
space.  This  was  regarded  as  proved  by  the  infinite  divisibility  of 
the  line,  since  the  infinite  number  of  points  which  must  be  attained 
before  reaching  the  goal  permitted  no  beginning  of  motion.  The 
same  thought  appears,  somewhat  varied,  in  the  second  argument, 
which  seeks  to  prove  the  impossibility  of  passing  through  a  space 
whicli  has  movable  boundaries.  The  argument  (known  as  that  of 

1  Arist.  Phys.  VL  9,  239  b.  9.  Cf .  Ed.  Wellmann,  Zenon's  Seweise  gegen  die 
Bewegung  und  ihre  Widerlegungen  (Frankfurt  a.  0. 1870). 


56  The  Greeks :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART  I. 

•* 

Achilles  and  the  tortoise)  is,  that  since  the  pursuer  in  every  inter- 
val or  subdivision  of  time  must  first  reach  the  point  from  which  the 
pursued  simultaneously  starts,  it  follows  that  the  latter  will  always 
be  in  advance,  though  by  an  interval  which  becomes  constantly 
smaller  and  approaches  a  minimum.  The  third  argument  has  refer- 
ence to  the  infinitely  small  extent  of  the  motion  performed  in  any 
instant  According  to  this  argument,  called  " the  resting  arrow"  the 
moved  body  is  in  every  instant  in  some  one  point  of  its  track ;  its 
movement  in  this  instant  is  then  equal  to  zero  j  but  from  ever  so 
many  zeros  no  real  magnitude  arises. 

Together  with  the  above-mentioned  difficulties  (diro/Duu)  with 
regard  to  space  and  plurality,  these,  argumentations  of  Zeno  set 
forth  an  extremely  skilfully  projected  system  of  refuting  the 
mechanical  theories,  especially  Atomism,  —  a  refutation  which  was 
intended  to  serve  at  the  same  time  as  indirect  proof  of  the  correct- 
ness of  the  Eleatic  conception  of  Being. 

7.  The  number-theory  of  the  Pythagoreans,  too,  was  determined  by 
Eleatic  conceptions  in  so  far  as  its  procedure  was,  in  the  main,  to 
demonstrate  mathematical*  forms  to  be  the  fundamental  relations 
of  reality.  When,  however,  they  termed  the  actual  world  of  reality 
an  imitation  of  the  mathematical  forms,  they  thereby  ascribed  a  sort 
of  reality,  even  though  of  a  derivative  and  secondary  character,  to 
individual  things,  and  to  what  takes  place  among  them.  They  were 
also  the  less  inclined  to  withdraw  from  answering  cosmological  and 
physical  questions  as  they  were  able  to  bring  to  philosophy  the 
brilliant  results  of  their  astronomical  investigation.  They  had  come 
to  a  knowledge  of  the  spherical  form  of  the  earth  and  of  the  heav- 
enly bodies  j  they  were  aware  also  that  the  change  of  day  and  night 
depends  upon  a  movement  of  the  earth  itself.  At  first,  indeed,  they 
thought  of  this  movement  as  a  circuit  performed  about  a  central  fire 
to  which  the  earth  presented  always  the  same  side,  a  side  unknown 
to  us.1  On  the  other  hand,  they  assumed  that  about  this  same  cen- 
tral fire  there  moved  in  concentric  circles,  outside  the  earth's  track, 
successively  the  moon,  the  sun,  the  planets,  and  finally  the  heaven 
containing  the  fixed  stars.  They  brought  into  this  system,  however, 
in  a  way,  the  metaphysical  dualism  which  they  had  maintained  be- 
tween the  perfect  and  the  imperfect,  inasmuch  as  they  regarded  the 

1  Already  in  Plato's  time  the  hypothesis  of  the  central  fire  was  given  up  by 
the  younger  Pythagoreans,  Ecphantus,  Hicetus  of  Syracuse  (and  with  it  that 
of  the  "  counter-earth,"  which  had  hitherto  been  assumed  as  placed  between  the 
central  fire  and  the  earth,  invented  merely  to  fill  out  the  number  ten),  and 
instead  the  earth  was  located  in  the  centre  of  the  universe  and  provided  with  a 
rotation  on  its  axis.  With  this  latter  assumption  that  of  a  resting  position  of 
the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars  was  connected. 


CHAP.  1,  §  6.]  Conceptions  of  Cognition.  57 

heaven  of  the  stars,  on  account  of  the  sublime  uniformity  of  its 
motions,  as  the  realm  of  perfection;  the  world  "beneath  the  moon," 
on  the  contrary,  on  account  of  the  unrest  of  its  changing  formations 
and  motions,  they  regarded  as  that  of  imperfection. 

This  way  of  looking  at  things  runs  parallel  to  that  of  Anaxagoras, 
and  leads,  though  in  another  way,  to  the  interweaving  and  complica- 
tion of  theory  with  considerations  of  worth  [ethical  or  aesthetic 
values].  It  was  in  connection  with  astronomical  insight  that  the 
thought  of  an  order  of  Nature  in  conformity  to  law  dawned  as  clear 
knowledge  upon  the  Grecian  mind.  Anaxagoras  reasons  from  this 
to  an  ordering  principle.  Pythagoreanism  finds  in  the  heavens  the 
divine  rest  of  unchangeableness  (Sichgleichbkibens)  which  it  misses 
upon  the  earth.  Here  we  have  a  meeting  of  the  ancient  religious 
ideas  and  the  very  different  result  yielded  thus  far  by  the  scientific 
work  of  the  Greeks.  This  latter,  seeking  a  Permanent  in  the  muta- 
tion of  occurrence,  found  such  a  permanence  only  in  the  great,  simple 
relations,  in  the  revolution  of  the  stars,  which  abides  ever  the  same. 
In  the  terrestrial  world,  with  its  whole  change  of  manifold,  con- 
stantly intersecting  motions,  this  uniformity  remained  still  hidden 
from  Greek  science :  she  regarded  this  terrestrial  world  rather  as  a 
domain  of  the  imperfect,  the  lower,  which  wants  the  sure  order  of 
that  other  world.  In  a  certain  sense  this  may  be  looked  upon  as 
the  ultimate  result  of  the  first  period,  a  result  which  had  a  determin- 
ing influence  for  after  time. 

What  the  attitude  of  the  Pythagoreans  was  to  the  question  concerning  a  peri- 
odic change  of  origination  and  annihilation  of  the  world  is  uncertain.  A  plurality 
of  co-existing  worlds  is  excluded  in  their  system.  In  their  theory  of  world-for- 
mation and  in  their  particular  physical  doctrines  they  concede  so  prominent  a 
place  to  fire  that  they  come  very  near  to  Heraclitus.  Aristotle  even  places  one 
of  the  contemporaries  of  Philolaus,  Hippasus  of  Metapontum,  in  immediate  con- 
nection with  Heraclitus  (Met.  I.  3). 

Their  assumption  of  sether  as  a  fifth  element  out  of  which  the  spherical  shells 
of  the  heavens  were  formed,  in  addition  to  the  four  elements  of  Empedocles,  is 
doubtless  connected  with  the  separation  which  they  made  between  heaven  and 
earth.  It  is  not  less  difficult  to  decide  whether  they  derived  the  elements  from 
a  common  ground,  and  if  so,  how:  according  to  many  passages  it  would  seem  as 
if  they  had  spoken  of  a  progressive  "attraction,1*  i.e.  in  this  case  (cf.  above,  p. 
46),  mathematical  shaping  out  or  forming  of  empty  space  by  the  to  (one),  the 
original  number,  which  is  exalted  above  limitation  and  the  unlimited.  Yet  it 
seems,  too,  that  in  regard  to  these  questions  various  views  were  held  within  the 
school  side  by  side. 

§  6.  The  Conceptions  of  Cognition. 

M.  Schneidewin,  Ueber  dieKeime  erkenntnisstheoretischer  und  ethischer  Phi- 
losopheme  bei  den  vorsokratischen  Derikern,  Philos.  Monatshefte,  II.  (1869),  pp. 
257,  345,  429. 

B.  Mtinz,  Die  Keime  der  Erkenntnisstheorie  in  der  vorsophistischen  Period* 
der  griechischen  Philosophic.  Vienna,  1880. 


58  The  Greeks :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART  I. 

The  question,  what  things  really  are,  or  what  is  the  intrinsic 
nature  of  things,  which  is  already  contained  in  the  Milesian  con- 
ception of  the  apxn,  presupposes  that  the  current,  original  and  naive 
mode  of  thinking  of  the  world  has  been  shaken,  although  this  pre- 
supposition has  not  come  to  clear  recognition  in  consciousness.  The 
question  proves  that  reflective  thought  is  no  longer  satisfied  with 
the  ideas  which  it  finds  current,  and  that  it  seeks  truth  behind  or 
above  them.  Those  ideas  are  given,  however,  through  sense-per- 
ception and  through  the  involuntary  elaboration  of  this  in  thought, 
—  an  elaboration  that  has  been  transmitted  from  generation  to 
generation,  until  it  has  became  consolidated  and  fixed  and  embodied 
in  language,  and  so  forms  a  part  of  the  thinker's  data.  When  the 
individual  with  his  reflection  transcends  these  ideas  so  given  —  and 
it  is  in  this  that  philosophical  activity  ultimately  consists  —  he  does 
it  on  the  ground  of  logical  needs  which  assert  themselves  as  he  re- 
flects on  the  given.  His  philosophising,  then,  even  though  he  takes 
no  account  of  this  fact,  grows  out  of  discrepancies  between  his  expe- 
rience and  his  thought  —  out  of  the  inadequacy  exhibited  by  what 
is  presented  to  his  perception  or  imagination,  when  set  over  against 
the  demands  and  presuppositions  of  his  understanding.  However 
unconscious  of  this  its  inner  ground  naive  philosophising  may  be 
at  the  outset,  attention  cannot  fail  to  be  turned  in  time  to  the  diver- 
sity in  the  sources  of  the  conflicting  ideas  within. 

1.  The  first  observations,  therefore,  which  the  Grecian  philosophers 
made  on  human  knowledge  concern  this  contrast  between  experience 
and  reflection.  The  farther  the  explanatory  theories  of  science 
became  separated  from  the  way  of  looking  at  things  which  belongs 
to  daily  life,  the  clearer  it  became  to  their  authors  that  those 
theories  sprang  from  another  source  than  that  of  the  customary 
opinions.  To  be  sure  they  have  not  as  yet  much  to  say  on  this 
point.  They  set  opinion  (So£a)  over  against  truth,  and  this  often 
means  only  that  their  own  doctrines  are  true  and  the  opinions  of 
others  false.  So  much  only  is  certain  to  them,  that  they  owe  their 
own  views  to  reflection,  while  the  mass  of  mankind  —  concerning 
whose  intellectual  activity  it  is  just  the  older  philosophers, 
Heraclitus,  Parmenides,  Empedocles,  who  express  themselves  in 
an  extremely  depreciatory  manner  —  persist  in  the  illusion  of  the 
senses.  Only  through  thinking  (<fy>ov€iv,  voeiv,  Xoyos),  then,  is  the 
truth  found  j  the  senses,  if  alone,  give  fraud  and  a  lie.  *  So  strong 
has  reflection  become  in  itself  that  it  not  only  proceeds  to  con- 
sequences which  to  the  common  thinking  have  become  absolutely 

i  Heracl.  Frag,  (Schust.)  11,  123 ;  Parmen.  Frag,  (Karsten)  54  ff. 


CHAP.  1,  §  6.]  Conceptions  of  Cognition:  Heraelitus,  Parmenides.  59 

paradoxical,  but  also  maintains  expressly  that  it  is  itself  the  sole 
source  of  truth  as  opposed  to  opinions. 

This,  to  be  sure,  works  oddly  when  we  notice  that  completely 
opposite  illustrations  of  this  same  assertion  are  given  by  Heracli- 
tus  and  Parmenides  in  close  succession.  The  former  finds  the 
deceit  caused  by  the  senses,  and  the  error  of  the  multitude,  to  consist 
in  the  illusory  appearance  of  the  Being  of  permanent  things,  which 
is  presented  to  men  by  sense-perception ;  the  Eleatic,  on  the  contrary, 
is  zealous  against  the  senses,  because  they  would  fain  persuade  us 
that  there  are  in  truth  motion  and  change,  becoming  and  arising, 
plurality  and  variety.  Precisely  this  double  form  in  which  this 
same  claim  is  put  forward  shows  that  it  is  not  the  result  of  an 
investigation,  but  the  expression  of  a  demand  made  on  other 
grounds. 

Moreover,  this  proposition  fits  very  differently  into  the  general 
theories  of  the  two  great  metaphysicians.  The  flux  of  all  things, 
with  its  restless  change  of  individual  phenomena,  as  taught  by 
Heraclitus,  makes  it  easy  to  comprehend  also  the  possibility  of  the 
emergence  of  false  ideas,  and  the  seeming  of  permanence  and  Being 
had  besides  a  special  explanation  in  the  counter-course  or  opposi- 
tion (evavrioTpoTim)  of  the  two  "  ways,"  for  this  causes  the  illusion  of 
permanence  or  Being  to  arise  where  there  is  just  as  much  change  in 
one  direction  as  in  the  other  [i.e.  from  primitive  fire  into  things  and 
vice  versa] .  On  the  contrary,  it  is  quite  impossible  to  see  where  the 
seat  of  illusion  and  error  was  to  be  sought  in  the  one  world-sphere 
of  Parmenides,  everywhere  the  same,  which  was  held  to  be  at  the 
same  time  the  one,  true  world-thought.  The  search  could  be  only 
among  individual  things  and  their  changing  activities,  which  were 
themselves  declared  to  be  illusion,  non-existent.  Nevertheless 
there  is  no  support  to  be  found  in  the  literature  preserved,  for 
supposing  that  this  so  simple  a  thought l  which  would  have  over- 
thrown the  entire  Eleatic  system,  ever  occurred  to  the  investigators 
of  that  time.  In  any  case,  the  Eleatics  contented  themselves  with 
the  assertion  that  all  particular  existence  and  all  change  were  decep- 
tion and  illusion  of  the  senses. 

The  same  naive  denial  of  that  which  they  could  not  explain  seems  to 
have  been  employed  also  by  the  successors  of  the  Eleatics  in  the 
matter  of  the  qualitative  attributes  of  individual  things.  Emped- 
ocles  at  least  maintained  that  all  things  .were  mixtures  of  the  ele- 
ments. The  task  that  logically  grew  out  of  this  was  to  show  how 
the  other  qualities  arise  from  the  mixture  of  the  properties  of  the 

1  First  carried  out  in  Plato,  Sophist,  237  A. 


60  The  Greeks :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART  I. 

elements.  But  this  lie  did  not  perform  5  so  far  as  our  knowledge 
extends,  he  did  not  at  all  set  himself  this  task;  he  probably  re- 
garded these  particular  qualities  as  not  being  (objectively ),  and  as 
a  deception  of  the  senses,  just  as  all  qualities  whatever  were  such 
in  the  view  of  Parmenides.  And  so  the  oldest  view  of  the  Ato- 
mists,  as  supported  by  Leuoippus,  may  well  have  gone  just  to  this 
point,  maintaining  that  in  individual  things  only  the  form,  arrange- 
ment, situation,  and  motion  of  the  constituent  atoms  were  real,  and 
that  the  other  properties  were  a  deceitful  product  of  the  senses, 
which  here,  too,  found  no  further  explanation.1 

These  difficulties  were  perhaps  jointly  influential  in  the  mind  of 
Anaxagoras  when  he  regarded  all  qualities  as  original,  and  not  as 
having  become  what  they  are,  and  accordingly  postulated  countless 
elements.  But  for  him  arose  the  opposite  difficulty  of  showing  how 
it  could  come  about,  if  all  was  regarded  as  contained  in  all,  every 
quality  in  every  thing,  that  only  some  of  these  qualities  seemed  to 
be  present  in  individual  things.  He  explained  this  in  part  from  the 
consideration  that  many  of  the  constituent  parts  are  imperceptible 
because  of  their  minuteness ;  hence  it  is  only  by  thought  that  we 
can  learn  the  true  qualities  of  things.2  Besides  this,  however,  he 
seems  to  have  followed  up  the  thought,  found  already  in  Anaximan- 
der's  idea  of  the  &rrctpov9  that  a  complete  mingling  of  definite  quali- 
ties yields  something  indefinite.  So,  at  least,  he  described  the 
primitive  mixture  of  all  substances  which  preceded  the  formation 
of  the  world  as  completely  devoid  of  quality,3  and  a  similar  thought 
seems  to  have  permitted  him  to  regard  the  four  elements  of  Emped- 
ocles  not  as  primitive  substances,  but  rather  as  already  mixtures.4 

The  rationalism  common  to  the  pre-Sophistic  thinkers  assumes, 
among  the  Pythagoreans,  the  particular  form  of  affirming  that 
knowledge  consists  in  mathematical  thought.  This,  though  in  itself 
a  narrowing,  is  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  a  great  step  in  advance,  in- 
asmuch, as  there  is  here  given  for  the  first  time  a  positive  definition 
of  "thought"  as  contrasted  with  "perception."  Only  through 
number,  taught  Pliilolausf  is  the  essential  nature  of  things  to  be 
known  3-  that  is,  it  is  when  the  definite  mathematical  relations  lying 
at  their  basis  are  recognised  that  things  are  properly  conceived  or 

1  It  is  extremely  improbable  that  the  solution  of  the  problem  through  the 
subjectivity  of  the  sense-qualities,  which  is  found  in  Democritus,  was  presented 
already  by  Leucippus,  and  therefore  before  Protagoras,  who  is  universally 
regarded  as  the  founder  of  this  theory. 

2  Sext.  Emp.  A&o.  Math.  VII.  90  f . 

8  Frag.  (Schorn)  4.  From  this  passage  the  true  light  may,  perhaps,  be  thrown 
upon  the  sense  in  which  Anaximander  designates  the  faetpov  as  d6purrov. 

4  Arist.  De  Gen.  et  Oorr.  1 1,  314  a  24. 

5  Frag.  (Mull.)  13. 


CHAP.  1,  §  6.]    Conceptions  of  Cognition  :  PTiilolaus^  Zeno.  61 

understood.  This  had  been  the  experience  of  the  Pythagoreans  in 
music  and  in  astronomy,  and  this  was  the  object  of  their  desire  and 
effort  in  all  other  fields.  When,  however,  they  ultimately  came  to 
the  result  that  this  requirement  could  be  completely  met  only  in 
the  knowledge  of  the  perfect  world  of  the  stars,  they  concluded 
from  this  that  science  (cro^w.)  relates  only  to  the  realm  of  order  and 
perfection,  that  is,  to  heaven,  and  that  in  the  realm  of  the  imper- 
fect, of  change  not  subject  to  order,  i.e.  on  earth,  only  practical 
ability  (dp^)  is  of  avail.1 

Another  positive  characteristic  of  the  "thinking"  which  the 
earlier  investigators  had  set  over  against  "perceiving,"  without 
closer  specification,  appears  obscurely  in  the  reasonings  of  Zeno, 
viz.  conformity  to  logical  laws.  At  the  basis  of  all  his  attacks 
against  plurality  and  motion  lie  the  principle  of  contradiction  and 
the  presupposition  that  that  can  not  be  actual  of  which  the  same 
thing  must  be  affirmed  and  also  denied.  This  principle  and  presup- 
position were  applied  with  clearness  and  certainty,  though  not  ab- 
stractly expressed.  The  Eleatic  theory  of  the  world,  so  highly 
paradoxical,  forced  its  supporters  to  enter  into  polemic  more  than 
did  others,  and  the  accounts  as  to  Zeno's  treatise,  which,  as  it  seems, 
was  also  logically  well  arranged  and  divided,  offer  a  notable  evi- 
dence of  the  developed  technique  of  refutation  to  which  the  school 
attained  in  consequence.  To  be  sure,  this  formal  training  which 
prevailed  in  Eleatic  circles  does  not  seem  to  have  led  as  yet  to  the 
abstract  statement  of  logical  laws. 

2.  The  setting  over  against  each  other  of  "  thinking  "  and  "  per- 
ceiving "  arose,  then,  from  an  estimation  of  their  relative  epistemo- 
logical  value  (erkenntnisstheoretischen  Werthbestimmung)  [i.e.  from 
the  postulate  that  one  of  these  two  forms  of  mental  activity  is 
worth  more  epistemologically  for  attaining  truth].  In  decided 
contradiction  with  this,  however,  stand  the  psychological  principles 
with  which  these  same  investigators  sought  to  apprehend  the  origin 
and  process  of  knowing.  For  although  their  thinking  was  directed 
first  and  chiefly  toward  the  outer  world,  man's  mental  activity  came 
under  their  attention  in  so  far  as  they  were  obliged  to  see  in  this 
activity  one  of  the  formations,  or  transformations,  or  products  of 
motion,  of  the  universe.  The  mind  or  soul  and  its  action  are  then 
at  this  time  considered  scientifically  only  in  connection  with  the  entire 
course  of  the  universe,  whose  product  they  are  as  truly  as  are  all 
other  things ;  and  since  among  the  men  of  this  period  the  general 
principles  of  explanation  are  everywhere  as  yet  conceived  corpore- 

L488. 


62  The  Grreeks :  Cosmological  Period.  [PART  L 

ally  it  follows  that  we  meet  also  a  thorough-going  materialistic 
psychology.1 

Now  mind  or  soul  is  in  the  first  place  moving  force.  Thales 
ascribed  such  a  soul  to  magnets,  and  declared  that  the  whole  world 
was  full  of  souls.  The  essential  nature  of  individual  souls  was 
therefore  sought  at  first  in  that  which  had  been  recognised  as  the 
moving  principle  in  the  whole.  Anaxinienes  found  it  in  air, 
Heraclitus  and  likewise  Parmenides  (in  his  hypothetical  physics) 
in  fire,  Leucippus  in  the  fiery  atoms,2  and  Anaxagoras  in  the  world- 
moving,  rational  substance,  the  vov$.  Where,  as  in  the  system  of 
Empedocles,  a  corporeal  moving  principle  was  lacking,  the  mixed 
substance  which  streams  through  the  living  body,  the  blood,  was 
regarded  as  soul.  Diogenes  of  Apollonia  found  the  essence  of  the 
soul  in  the  air  mixed  with  the  blood.3  With  the  Pythagoreans,  too, 
the  individual  soul  could  not  be  considered  as  the  same  with  the  a/ 
(One)  which  they  conceived  as  moving  principle  of  the  world,  nor 
regarded  as  a  part  of  it ;  instead,  they  taught  that  the  soul  was  a 
number,  and  made  this  very  vague  statement  more  definite  by  say- 
ing that  it  was  a  harmony,  —  an  expression  which  we  can  only 
interpret4  as  meaning  a  harmony  of  the  body;  that  is,  the  living, 
harmonious  activity  of  its  parts. 

If  now  to  this  moving  force,  which  leaves  the  body  in  death,  were 
ascribed  at  the  same  time  those  properties  which  we  to-day  designate 
as  "  psychical,"  we  find  a  clear  characterisation  of  the  specifically 
theoretical  interest  by  which  this  oldest  science  was  filled,  in  the 
fact  that  among  these  attributes  it  is  that  of  ideation,  of  "  knowing," 
which  is  almost  exclusively  the  object  of  attention.5  Of  feelings 
and  volitions  there  is  scarcely  incidental  mention.6  But  as  the 


1  Besides  those  characterisations  of  the  soul,  which  resulted  from  their  gen- 
eral scientific  theory,  we  find  in  the  tradition  in  case  of  several  of  these  men 
(Heraclitus,  Parmenides,  Empedocles,  and  the  Pythagoreans)  still  other  doc- 
trines which  are  not  only  not  connected  with  the  former,  but  are  even  in  con- 
tradiction to  them.    A  conception  of  the  body  as  prison  of  the  soul  (<ru>A«x  = 
o-^^a),  personal  immortality,  recompense  after  death,  transmigration  of  souls, 
—  all  these  are  ideas  which  the  philosophers  took  from  their  relations  to  the 
mysteries  and  retained  in  their  priestly  teaching,  however  little  they  accorded 
with  their  scientific  teachings.    Such  expressions  are  not  treated  above. 

2  In  like  manner,  some  of  the  Pythagoreans  declared  the  motes  which  the 
sunlight  discloses  in  the  air  to  be  souls. 

8  Since,  with  reference  to  this,  he  recognised  the  distinction  between  venous  and 
arterial  blood,  he  meant  by  his  irvevna.  what  the  chemistry  of  to-day  calls  oxygen. 

4  Ace.  to  Plato,  Phado,  85  ff.,  where  the  view  is  rejected  as  materialistic. 

6  The  vous  of  Anaxagoras  is  only  knowing  j  air  with  Diogenes  of  Apollonia  is 
a  great,  powerful,  eternal,  intelligent  body.  Being  with  Parmenides  is  at  the 
same  time  poeiv,  etc.  Only  ^tXir^s  and  velms  with  Empedocles  are  mythically 
hypostasised  impulses,  and  these,  too,  have  nothing  to  do  with  his  psychological 
views. 

6  With  this  is  connected  the  fact  that  in  general  we  cannot  once  speak  of 


CHAP.  1,  §  6.]  Conceptions  of  Cognition:  Seraclitus,  Anaxagoras.  63 

individual  soul  in  so  far  as  it  is  moving  force  was  held  to  be  a  part 
of  the  force  which  moves  the  entire  universe,  so  also  the  "  T&wwing  " 
of  the  individual  could  be  conceived  only  as  a  part  of  the  knowing 
activity  of  the  world.1  This  is  clearest  in  the  systems  of  Heraclitus 
and  Anaxagoras ;  each  individual  has  so  much  knowledge  as  there 
is  contained  in  him  of  the  general  World-reason,  —  fire  with 
Heraclitus,2  the  voCs  with  Anaxagoras.  In  the  case  of  Leucippus 
and  of  Diogenes  of  Apollonia  the  ideas  are  similar. 

This  physical  conception,  which  with  Anaxagoras  especially  is 
purely  quantitative,  was  given  a  turn  by  Heraclitus,  in  which  the 
epistemological  postulate  again  forces  its  way  to  the  front,  and 
asserts  itself  in  the  interest  of  a  deeper  insight  and  a  profouncler 
view.  The  World-reason  in  which  the  individual  participates  in  his 
knowledge  is  everywhere  the  same;  the  Ao'yos  of  Heraclitus3  and 
the  voSs  of  Anaxagoras,  as  homogenous  Eeason,  are  distributed 
through  the  whole  universe  as  moving  force.  Knowing,  then,  is 
that  which  is  common  to  all.  It  is  therefore  the  law  and  order  to 
which  every  one  has  to  unite  himself.  In  dreams,  in  personal  opin- 
ion, each  one  has  his  own  world;  knowing  is  common  (fwoi/)  to 
all.  By  means  of  this  characteristic,  viz.  that  of  universally  valid 
law,  the  conception  of  knowing  acquires  a  normative  significance* 
and  subjection  to  the  common,  to  the  law,  appears  as  a  duty 
in  the  intellectual  realm  as  well  as  in  the  political,  ethical,  and 
religious.5 


attempts  at  ethical  investigation  in  this  period.  For  single  moralising  reflections 
or  admonitions  cannot  be  regarded  as  beginnings  of  ethics.  On  the  only  excep- 
tion cf.  below,  note  5. 

1  The  expression  "  World-soul "  was  first  used  by  Plato,  or  at  the  earliest  by 
Philolaus  (in  the  fragment  which  has  certainly  been  much  questioned  just  for 
this  reason,  Mull.  21).    The  idea  is  certainly  present  in  Anaximenes,  Heraclitus, 
Anaxagoras,  aud  perhaps  also  among  the  Pythagoreans. 

2  Hence  the  paradoxical  expression,  the  dryest  soul  is  the  wisest,  and  the 
warning  to  guard  the  soul  from  the  wet  (intoxication). 

3  Cf.,  for  this  and  the  following,  M.  Heinze,  Die  Lehre  wm  Logos  in  der 
griechischen  Philosophic  (Oldenburg,  1872). 

4  Frag.  (Schust.)  123. 

6  This  is  the  only  conception  in  the  development  of  pre-Sophistic  thought,  in 
the  case  of  which  we  can  speak  of  an  attempt  to  propound  a  scientific  principle 
of  ethics.  If  Heraclitus  had  in  mind  a  universal  expression  for  all  moral  duties 
in  speaking  of  this  subordination  to  law,  or  at  least  hit  upon  such,  he  attached 
it  at  once  to  the  fundamental  thoughts  of  his  metaphysics,  which  declared  this 
law  to  be  the  abiding  essence  of  the  world.  Yet  attention  has  above  (§  4)  been 
called  to  the  fact  that  in  the  conception  of  the  world-order  which  hovered  before 
him,  he  did  not  as  yet  separate  consciously  the  different  motives  (especially  the 
physical  from  the  ethical),  and  so  ethical  investigation  does  not  as  yet  work 
itself  clear  from  the  physical  to  an  independent  position.  The  same  is  true  of 
the  Pythagoreans,  who  expressed  the  conception  of  order  by  the  term  "  harmony  " 
(which  also  might  be  adopted  from  Heraclitus),  and  therefore  designated  virtue 
as  "  harmony."  To  be  sure,  they  used  the  term  "harmony"  for  the  soul,  for 
health,  and  for  many  other  things. 


64  The  Greeks :  Gosmological  Period*  [PAET  I. 

3.  If  now  we  ask  how  under  these  assumptions  the  fact  was 
explained  that  "knowledge"  comes  into  the  individual  man,  i.e.  into 
his  body,  we  find  that  the  only  answer  offered  by  Heraclitus  and 
the  whole  company  of  his  successors  is,  "through  the  door  of  the 
senses."  When  a  man  is  awake,  the  World-reason  streams  into  his 
body  through  the  opened  senses  (sight  and  hearing  are  of  course 
chiefly  noticed1),  and,  therefore,  he  knows.  This  comes  about,  to 
be  sure,  only  if  there  is  besides,  in  the  man  himself,  so  much  reason 
or  soul  that  the  motion  coming  from  without  is  met  by  an  inner 
motion;2  but  upon  this  interaction,  effected  through  the  senses? 
between  the  outer  and  the  inner  reason  knowledge  rests. 

A  psychological  distinction,  then,  between  perceiving  and  think- 
ing, which,  as  regards  their  respective  epistemological  values,  are  so 
abruptly  opposed,  Heraclitus  does  not  know  how  to  state.  Par- 
menides,3  however,  was  just  as  little  in  a  position  to  make  such  a 
distinction.14  Rather,  he  expressed  more  sharply  still  the  dependence 
upon  bodily  relations  in  which  the  thinking  of  the  individual  man  is 
involved,  when  he  said  that  every  one  so  thought  as  the  conditions 
constituted  by  the  mixture  of  substances  in  the  members  of  the  body 
permitted,  and  when  he  found  in  this  a  confirmation  of  his  general 
thought  of  the  identity  of  corporeality  and  thinking  in  general.5 
Still  more  express  is  the  testimony6  that  Empedocles  declared 
thinking  and  perceiving  to  be  the  same,  that  he  thought  change  in 
thinking  as  dependent  upon  change  of  the  body,  and  that  he 
regarded  the  constitution  of  the  blood  as  of  decisive  importance 
for  the  intellectual  capacity  of  the  man. 

These  two  last-named  thinkers  did  not  hesitate,  moreover,  to  make 
their  conception  more  plain  to  the  imagination  by  means  of  physio- 
logical hypotheses.  Parmenides  taught  in  his  hypothetical  physics 

1  Also  smell  (Empedocles)  and  taste  (Anaxagoras).    Only  the  Atomists,  and 
in  particular  Democritus,  seem  to  have  given  value  to  the  sense  of  touch. 

2  Arist.  De  An.  I.  2,  405  a  27. 
5  Theophr.  De  Sens.  3  f. 

*  So,  too,  it  is  reported  (Theophr.  De  Sens.  25)  of  Alcm&on,  the  Pythago- 
reanising  physician,  that  he  declared  thought  or  consciousness  (8n  /*<W  £v virjo-i') 
to  be  the  characteristic  which  distinguishes  man  from  the  other  animals.  But 
a  more  precise  determination  is  lacking  here  also  unless,  in  accordance  with  the 
expression,  we  think  of  something  similar  to  the  Aristotelian  icoivbv  a&r^rij/nov. 
With  this  would  agree  the  circumstance  that  the  first  attempts  to  localise  the 
particular  psychical  activities  in  particular  parts  of  the  body  seem  to  have  been 
made  in  the  circles  of  the  Pythagoreans  and  of  the  physicians  who  stood  in  near 
relations  to  them ;  localising,  e.g ,  thought  in  the  brain,  perception  in  the  indi- 
vidual organs  and  in  the  heart,  and  the  emotions  also  in  the  latter  organ.  From 
them  Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  and  after  him  Democritus,  seem  to  have  taken 
these  beginnings  of  a  physiological  psychology. 

5  Frag.  (Karst.)  w.  146-149. 

6  Arist.  De  An.  I.  2,  404=  b  7 ;  HI.  3,  427  a  21  j  Met.  III.  5,  1009  b  17 ; 
Theophr.  De  Sens.  10  f. 


CHAP.  1,  §  6 .]  Conceptions  of  Cognition :  Parmenides,  JZmpedocles.  65 

that  like  is  always  perceived  by  like,  warmth  without  by  the  warmth 
in  man,  the  cold  without  by  the  cold  even  in  the  dead  body.  Emped- 
ocles,  with  the  aid  of  his  theory  of  effluxes  and  pores,  carried  out 
the  thought  that  every  element  in  our  body  perceives  the  same  ele- 
ment in  the  outer  world,  so  as  to  teach  that  each  organ  is  accessible 
to  the  impress  of  those  substances  only  whose  effluxes  fit  into  its 
pores ;  i.e.  he  derived  the  specific  energy  of  the  sense  organs  from 
relations  of  similarity  between  their  outer  form  and  their  objects, 
and  carried  this  out  for  sight,  hearing,  and  smell,  with  observations 
which  in  part  are  very  acute.1 

This  view,  that  like  is  apprehended  by  like,  was  opposed  by 
Anaxagoras, — on  what  ground  it  is  not  certain.2  He  taught  that 
perception  is  only  of  opposite  by  opposite,  warmth  without  by  the 
cold  in  man,  etc.3  At  all  events,  his  doctrine  also  is  a  proof  that 
these  metaphysical  rationalists  maintained  all  of  them  in  their 
psychology  a  crass  semationalism. 

1  Theophr.  De  Sens.  7. 

2  Perhaps  we  have  here  a  remembrance  of  Heraclitus,  who  also  explained 
perception  from  the  fravriorpoiria, — motion  against  motion,  —  and  with  whom 
opposition  was  the  principle  of  all  motion. 

3  Theophr.  De  Sens.  27  fi\    It  is  interesting  that  Anaxagoras  inferred  from 
this  that  every  perception  is  joined  with  pain  (XJ/TTTJ), 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PERIOD. 

G.  Grote,  History  of  Greece,  VIII.  (London,  1850),  pp.  474-544. 

C.  F.  Hermann,  Geschichte  und  System  der  platonischen  Philosophic,  I.  (Heidel- 
berg, 1839),  pp.  179-231. 

Blass,  Die  attische  Beredsamkeit  von  Gorgias  bis  zu  Lysias.    Leips.  1868. 

H.  Kochly,  Sofcrates  und  sein  Volk,  1855,  in  "  Akad.  Vortragen  und  Reden, "  L 
(Zurich,  1859),  pp.  219  ff. 

H.  Siebeck,  Ueber  Sokrates^  Verhdltniss  zur  Sophistik,  in  "  Untersuchungen 
zur  Philosophic  der  Griechen,"  1873,  2  Aufl.  (Freiburg  i.  B.  1888). 

W.  Windelband,  Sokmtes  in  "Prseludien"  (Freiburg  L  B.  1884),  pp.  54  fl. 

[H.  Jackson,  Art.  Sophists,  in  J3nc.  Brit.] 

THE  farther  development  of  Greek  science  was  determined  by  the 
circumstance  that  in  the  powerful,  universal  upward  movement  of 
the  mental  and  spiritual  life  which  the  nation  achieved  after  the 
victorious  result  of  the  Persian  wars,  science  was  torn  away  from 
the  restraints  of  close  schools  in  which  it  had  been  quietly  pursued, 
and  brought  out  upon  the  stage  of  publicity,  where  all  was  in  vehe- 
ment agitation. 

The  circles  in  which  scientific  research  was  fostered  had  widened 
from  generation  to  generation,  and  the  doctrines  which  at  first  had 
been  presented  in  smaller  societies  and  spread  abroad  in  writings 
that  were  hard  to  understand,  had  begun  to  filter  through  into  the 
general  consciousness.  The  poets,  -as  Euripides  and  Epicharmus, 
began  already  to  translate  into  their  language  scientific  conceptions 
and  views ;  the  knowledge  gained  by  investigation  of  Nature  had 
already  been  made  practically  effective,  as  by  Hippodamus  in  his 
architecture.  Even  medicine,  which  had  formerly  been  only  ati  art 
practised  according  to  traditions,  became  so  permeated  with  the 
general  conceptions  of  natural  philosophy,  and  with  the  special  doc- 
trines, information,  and  hypotheses  of  physiological  research  which 
in  the  course  of  time  had  occupied  an  ever-broader  space  in  the 
systems  of  science,  that  it  became  encumbered  with  an  excessive 

66 


CHAP.  2.]  The  Anthropological  Period.  67 

growth  of  etiological  theories,1  and  first  found  in  Hippocrates  the 
reformer  who  reduced  this  tendency  to  its  proper  measure  and  gave 
back  to  the  physician's  art  its  old  character  in  contrast  to  scientific 
doctrine.2 

Moreover,  the  Greek  nation,  matured  by  the  stern  experience 
which  had  been  its  lot  within  and  without,  had  entered  upon  the 
age  of  manhood.  It  had  lost  its  naive  faith  in  old  tradition,  and 
had  learned  the  value  of  knowledge  and  ability  for  practical  life. 
Of  science,  which  up  to  this  time  had  followed  in  quiet  the  pure 
impulse  of  investigation  —  the  noble  curiosity  which  seeks  knowledge 
for  its  own  sake  —  the  state  now  demanded  light  on  the  questions 
which  disturbed  it,  counsel  and  help  in  the  doubt  into  which  the 
luxuriance  of  its  own  development  in  culture  had  plunged  it.  In 
the  feverish  emulation  of  intellectual  forces  which  this  greatest 
period  in  the  world's  history  brought  with  it,  the  thought  everywhere 
gained  recognition  that  in  every  walk  in  life  the  man  of  knowledge 
is  the  most  capable,  the  most  useful,  and  the  most  successful.  In 
every  department  of  practical  activity,  the  fruitful  innovation  of 
independent  reflection,  of  individual  judgment,  took  the  place  of  the 
old  life  controlled  by  custom.  The  mass  of  the  people  was  seized  ivith 
the  burning  desire  to  make  the  results  of  science  its  own.  It  was  espe- 
cially true,  however,  that  at  this  time  family  tradition,  habituation, 
personal  excellence  of  character  and  address  were  no  longer  suffi- 
cient, as  formerly,  for  the  man  who  wished  to  play  a  political  part. 
The  variety  of  transactions  and  the  attendant  difficulties,  as  well  as 
the  intellectual  status  of  .those  with  whom  and  upon  whom  he  would 
work,  made  a  theoretical  schooling  for  the  political  career  indispen- 
sable. Nowhere  was  this  movement  so  powerful  as  in  Athens,  then 
the  capital  of  Greece,  and  here  also  these  desires  found  their  fullest 
satisfaction. 

For  the  supply  followed  the  demand.  The  men  of  science,  the 
Sophists  (<ro<£iorat),  stepped  forth  out  of  the  schools  into  public  life, 
and  taught  the  people  what  they  themselves  had  learned  or  discov- 
ered. They  did  this,  indeed,  partly  out  of  the  noble  impulse  to 
teach  their  fellow-citizens,3  but  it  was  none  the  less  true  that  this 
teaching  became  their  business.  From  all  parts  of  Greece  men  of 
the  different  schools  flocked  toward  Athens  to  expound,  their  doc- 


1  This  innovation  in  medicine  began  among  the  physicians  who  stood  in  near 
relation  to  Pythagoreanism,  especially  with  Alcmseon.    As  a  literary  instance 
of  it,  the  writing  which  goes  falsely  under  the  name  of  Hippocrates,  -rrepl 
serves.    Cf.  H.  Siebeck,  Qesrh,  d.  Psyrh.  1. 1,  94  ff. 

2  Cf.  principally  his  writings  irepi  Apxa-lv  fyrpt«?s  and  «pl  Statrijs  d&uv. 
8  Cf.  Protagoras  in  Plato,  Prot.  316  d. 


68  The  Philosophy  of  the   Greeks.  [PART  I, 

trines,  and  from  so  expounding  them  in  the  capital  as  well  as  in 
the  smaller  cities,  to  gain  honour  and  wealth. 

In  this  way  it  happened  that  in  a  short  time  not  only  the  social 
position  of  science,  but  its  own  inner  nature,  its  tendency  and  the 
questions  for  its  solution,  were  fundamentally  changed.  It  became 
a  social  power,  a  determining  factor  in  political  life,  as  in  the  case 
of  Pericles ;  but  just  by  this  means  it  came  into  a  state  of  dependence 
upon  the  demands  of 'practical,  and  in  particular,  of  political  life. 

These  demands  showed  themselves  principally  in  the  facts  that 
the  democratic  polity  demanded  of  politicians  tirst  of  all  the  capac- 
ity for  public  speaking,  and  that  in  consequence  the  instruction 
of  the  Sophists  was  especially  sought  as  a  preparation  for  public 
life,  and  converged  more  and  more  upon  this  object.  Men  of  science 
became  teachers  of  eloquence. 

As  such,  however,  they  lost  sight  of  the  goal  of  nature-knowledge, 
the  vision  of  which  had  formerly  hovered  before  the  eyes  of  science. 
At  the  most  they  presented  transmitted  doctrines  in  the  most  grace- 
ful and  pleasing  form  possible.  But  their  own  investigations,  if 
they  were  not  confined  to  a  formal  routine,  were  necessarily  directed 
toward  man's  thinking  and  willing,  —  the  activities  which  public 
speaking  was  designed  to  determine  and  control, — toward  the 
manner  in  which  ideas  and  volitions  arise,  and  the  way  in  which 
they  contend  with  one  another  and  maintain  their  mutual  rights. 
In  this  way  Greek  science  took  an  essentially  anthropological  or 
subjective  direction,  studying  the  inner  activities  of  man,  his 
ideation  and  volition,  and  at  the  same  time  lost  its  purely  theoretical 
character  and  acquired  a  preponderantly  practical  significance.1 

But  while  the  activity  of  the  Sophists  found  itself  brought  face 
to  face  with  the  manifold  character  of  human  thought  and  will, 
while  the  teachers  of  eloquence  were  presenting  the  art  of  persua- 
sion and  pursuing  the  path  upon  which  every  opinion  could  be 
helped  to  victory,  every  purpose  to  its  achievement,  the  question 
rose  before  them  whether  above  and  beyond  these  individual  opin- 
ions and  purposes  which  each  one  feels  within  himself  as  a  necessity 
and  can.  defend  against  others,  there  is  anything  whatever  that 
is  right  and  true  in  itself.  The  question  whether  there  is  anything 
universally  valid,  is  the  problem  of  the  anthropological  period  of 
Greek  philosophy,  or  of  the  Greek  Enlightenment. 

For  it  is  likewise  the  problem  of  the  time,  —  of  a  time  in  which 
religious  faith  and  the  old  morality  were  wavering,  a  time  when  the 

1  Cicero's  well-known  expression  (Tusc.  V.  4,  10)  with  regard  to  Socrates 
holds  good  for  the  entire  philosophy  of  this  period. 


CHAP.  2.]  The  Anthropological  Period.  69 

respect  which  authority  had  commanded  sank  more  and  more,  and 
all  tended  towards  an  anarchy  of  individuals  who  had  become  self- 
governing.  Very  soon  this  internal  disintegration  of  the  Greek 
spirit  became  clearly  evident  in  the  disorders  of  the  Peloponnesian 
war,  and  with  the  fall  of  Athenian  supremacy  the  flower  of  Grecian 
culture  withered. 

The  dangers  of  this  condition  were  at  first  decidedly  increased  by 
philosophy.  For  while  the  Sophists  were  perfecting  the  scientific 
development  of  the  formal  art  of  presentation,  verification,  and  refu- 
tation which  they  had  to  teach,  they  indeed  created  with  this  rheto- 
ric, on  the  one  hand,  the  beginnings  of  an  independent  psychology, 
and  raised  this  branch  of  investigation  from  the  inferior  position 
which  it  had  taken  in  the  cosmological  systems  to  the  importance  of 
a  fundamental  science,  and  developed,  on  the  other  hand,  the  prelim- 
inaries for  a  systematic  consideration  of  the  logical  and  ethical  norms. 
But  as  they  considered  what  they  practised  and  taught,  —  viz.  the 
skill  to  carry  through  any  proposition  whatever,1 — the  relativity  of 
human  ideas  and  purposes  presented  itself  to  their  consciousness  so 
clearly  and  with  such  overwhelming  force  that  they  disowned  in- 
quiry as  to  the  existence  of  a  universally  valid  truth  in  the  theoreti- 
cal, as  well  as  in  the  practical  sphere,  and  so  fell  into  a  scepticism 
which  at  first  was  a  genuine  scientific  theory,  but  soon  became  a 
frivolous  play.  With  their  self-complacent,  pettifogging  advocacy, 
the  Sophists  made  themselves  the  mouth-piece  of  all  the  unbridled 
tendencies  which  were  undermining  the  order  of  public  life. 

The  intellectual  head  of  the  Sophists  was  Protagoras;  at  least,  he 
was  the  only  one  who  was  the  author  of  any  conceptions  philosophi- 
cally fruitful  and  significant.  Contrasted  with  him,  Gorgias,  who  is 
usually  placed  at  his  side,  appears  only  as  a  rhetorician  who  occa- 
sionally attempted  the  domain  of  philosophy  and  surpassed  the 
artifices  of  the  Eleatic  dialectic.  Hippias  and  Prodicus  are  only  to 
be  mentioned,  the  one  as  the  type  of  a  popularising  polyhistor,  and 
the  other  as  an  example  of  superficial  moralising. 

To  the  disordered  activity  and  lack  of  conviction  of  the  younger 
Sophists,  Socrates  opposed  faith  in  reason  and  a  conviction  of  the 
existence  of  a  universally  valid  truth.  This  conviction  was  with 
him  of  an  essentially  practical  sort;  it  was  his  moral  disposition,  but 
it  led  him  to  an  investigation  of  "knowledge,  which  he  anew  set  over 
against  opinions,  and  whose  essence  he  found  in  conceptional  thought 

Socrates  and  the  Sophists  stand,  accordingly,  on  the  ground  of 


1  Cf.  the  well-known  rbv  ^ma  \&yov  Kpdrro  Totetv,  Aristoph.  Nub.  112  ff., 
893  fL;  Arist.  Rhet.  II.  24,  1402  a  23. 


70  The  Philosophy  of  the  Greek*.  [PART  I. 

the  same  common  consciousness  of  the  time,  and  discuss  the  same 
problems ;  but  where  the  Sophists  with  their  skill  and  learning  re- 
main caught  in  the  confusion  of  the  opinions  of  the  day  and  end 
with  a  negative  result,  there  the  plain,  sound  sense,  and  the  pure 
and  noble  personality  of  Socrates  find  again  the  ideals  of  morality 
and  science. 

The  strong  impression  which  the  teaching  of  Socrates  made  forced 
the  Sophistic  activity  into  new  lines.  It  followed  him  in  the  at- 
tempt to  gain,  through  scientific  insight,  sure  principles  for  the 
ethical  conduct  of  life.  While  the  old  schools  had  for  the  most  part 
become  disintegrated,  aud  had  diverted  their  activity  to  the  teaching 
of  rhetoric,  men  who  had  enjoyed  intercourse  with  the  Athenian 
sage  now  founded  new  schools,  in  whose  scientific  work  Socratio 
and  Sophistic  principles  were  often  strangely  intermingled,  while 
the  exclusively  anthropological  direction  of  their  investigation 
remained  the  same. 

Among  these  schools,  called  for  the  most  part  "  Socratic,"  though 
not  quite  accurately,  the  MegariaUj  founded  by  Eudid,  fell  most 
deeply  into  the  unfruitful  subtleties  of  the  later  Sophists.  Con- 
nected with  this  is  the  Elean-Eretrian  School,  the  most  unimportant. 
The  fundamental  contrast,  however,  in  the  conception  of  life  which 
prevailed  in  the  Greek  life  of  that  day,  found  its  scientific  expression 
in  the  teachings  of  those  two  schools  whose  opposition  permeates  all 
ancient  literature  from  that  time  on:  namely,  the  Cynic  and  the 
Cyrenaic,  the  precursors  of  the  Stoic  and  Epicurean.  The  first  of 
these  schools  numbers  among  its  adherents,  besides  its  founder 
Antisthenes,  the  popular  figure  of  Diogenes.  In  the  latter,  which  is 
also  called  the  Hedonistic  School,  the  founder,  Aristypyus,  was  suc- 
ceeded by  a  grandson  of  the  same  name,  and  later  by  TJieodorus, 
Anniceris,  HegesiaSj  and  Euemerus. 

The  wandering  teachers  known  as  the  Sophists  came  in  part  from  the  earlier 
scholastic  societies.  In  the  second  half  of  the  fifth  century  these  had  for  tho 
most  part  disappeared,  and  had  given  place  to  a  freer  announcement  of  opinions 
attained,  which  was  not  unfavourable  to  special  research,  particularly  physiologi- 
cal research,  as  in  the  case  of  Hippo,  Cteidemus,  and  Diogenes  of  Apollonia, 
but  which  was  attended  by  a  crippling  of  general  speculation.  Only  the  school 
of  Abdera  and  the  Pythagorean  School  survived  this  time  of  dissolution.  A 
society  of  Heracliteans  which  maintained  itself  in  Ephesus  appears  soon  to  have 
fallen  away  into  the  pursuits  of  the  Sophists,  as  in  the  case  of  Cratylus.1 

From  the  Atomistic  School  came  Protagoras  of  Abdera  (about  480-410).  He 
was  one  of  the  first,  and  rightly  the  most  renowned,  of  these  wandering  teachers. 
Active  at  various  times  in  Athens,  he  is  said  to  have  been  convicted  of  impiety 
in  that  city,  to  have  fled  because  of  this,  and  to  have  met  his  death  in  flight.  Of 
his  mimerous  treatises,  grammatical,  logical,  ethical,  political,  and  religious  in 
their  character,  very  little  lias  been  preserved. 

1  In  Plato  (Thevt.  181  A)  they  are  called  ol  Moves:  ci  Arist.  Met.  IV.  6, 
1010  a  13. 


CHAP.  2.]  The  Anthropological  Period.  71 

Gorgias  of  Leoutini  (483-375)  was  in  Athens  in  427  as  an  envoy  from  his 
native  city,  and  there  gained  great  literary  influence.  In  old  age  he  lived  in 
Larissa  in  Thessaly.  He  came  from  the  Sicilian  school  of  orators,  with  which 
Empedocles  also  had  heen  connected.1 

Concerning  Hippias  of  Elis,  with  the  exception  of  some  opinions  (among 
which  are  those  criticised  in  the  Platonic  dialogue  Hippias  Major} ,  it  is  known 
only  that  he  made  great  parade  of  his  "much  knowledge."  Of  Frodicus  of 
lulis,  a  town  on  the  island  of  Ceos,  the  familiar  allegory  "Hercules  at  the  Cross- 
roads" is  preserved  by  Xenophon,  Memor.  II.  1,21.  The  remaining  Sophists, 
known  for  the  most  part  through  Plato,  are  without  intrinsic  importance.  We 
know  only  that  this  or  that  characteristic  affirmation  is  put  in  the  mouth  of  one 
or  another. 

In  forming  a  conception  of  the  Sophistic  doctrine  we  have  to  contend  with  the 
difficulty  that  we  are  made  acquainted  with  them  almost  exclusively  through 
their  victorious  opponents,  Plato  and  Aristotle.  The  first  has  given  in  the  Pro- 
tagoras^  a  graceful,  lively  delineation  of  a  Sophist  congress,  redolent  with  fine 
irony,  in  the  Gorgias  a  more  earnest,  in  the  Theatetus  a  sharper  criticism,  and 
in  the  Gratylus  and  fiuihydemus  supercilious  satire  of  the  Sophists'  methods  of 
teaching.  In  the  dialogue  the  Sophist,  to  which  Plato's  name  is  attached,  an 
extremely  malicious  definition  of  the  theories  of  the  Sophists  is  attempted,  and 
Aristotle  reaches  the  same  result  in  the  book  on  the  fallacies  of  the  Sophists 
(Ch.  I.  165  a  21). 

The  history  of  philosophy  for  a  long  time  repeated  the  depreciatory  judg- 
ment of  opponents  of  the  Sophists,  and  allowed  the  word  <ro0i<rri}s  (which 
meant  only  a  "learned  man,"  or,  if  you  will,  a  "professor")  to  hear  the  dis- 
paraging meaning  which  they  had  given  it.  Hegel  rehabilitated  the  Sophists, 
and  thereupon  it  followed,  as  often  happens,  that  they  were  for  a  time  over- 
estimated, as  by  Grote. 

M.  Schanz,  Die  Sophisten  (Gottingen,  1867). 

Socrates  of  Athens  (469-399)  makes  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  philosophy, 
even  by  his  external  characteristics,  by  his  original  personality,  and  his  new 
style  of  philosophising.  He  was  neither  savant  nor  wandering  teacher,  be- 
longed to  no  school  and  adhered  to  none.  He  was  a  simple  man  of  the.  people, 
the  son  of  a  sculptor,  and  at  first  busied  himself  with  the  chisel.  In  his  ardent 
desire  for  knowledge  he  absorbed  the  new  doctrines  with  which  the  streets  of 
his  native  city  re-echoed,  but  did  not  allow  himself  to  be  dazzled  by  these  brill- 
iant rhetorical  efforts,  nor  did  he  find  himself  much  advanced  "by  them.  His 
keen  thought  took  note  of  their  contradictions,  and  his  moral  earnestness  was 
offended  by  the  superficiality  and  frivolity  of  this  constant  effort  after  culture. 
He  held  it  to  be  his  duty  to  enlighten  himself  and  his  fellow-citizens  concerning 
the  emptiness  of  this  pretended  knowledge,  and,  through  earnest  investigation, 
to  follow  after  truth.  So,  a  philosopher  of  this  opportunity  and  of  daily  Hfe,  he 
worked  unremittingly  among  his  fellow-citizens,  until  misunderstanding  and  per- 
sonal intrigue  brought  him  before  the  court  which  condemned  him  to  the  death 
that  was  to  become  his  greatest  glory. 

The  accounts  concerning  him  give  a  clear  and  trustworthy  picture  of  his  per- 
sonality. In  these  accounts  Plato's  finer  and  Xenophon' s  coarser  portrayal 
supplement  each  other  most  happily.  The  first  in  almost  all  his  writings  I  rings 
out  the  honoured  teacher  with  dramatic  vividness.  Of  the  second  we  have  to 
consider  the  Memorabilia  ('ATroju^/iopeifytaTa  S«KP<£T<U>S)  and  the  Symposium. 
As  regards  his  teaching,  the  case  is  more  difficult,  for  here  the  presentations  of 
both  Xenophon  and  Plato  are  partisan  writings,  each  laying  claim  to  the  famous 
name  for  his  own  doctrine  (in  the  case  of  Xenophon  a  mild  Cynicism).  The 
statements  of  Aristotle  are  authoritative  on  all  essential  points,  because  of  the 
greater  historical  separation  and  the  freer  point  of  view. 

E.  Alberti,  JSokrates  (Gottingen,  1869)  ;  A.  Labriola,  La  Dottrina  di  Socrate 
(Naples,  1871) ;  A.  FouillSe,  La  Philosophie  de  Socrate  (Paris,  1873). 

Euclid  of  Megara  founded  his  school  soon  after  the  death  of  Socrates.  The 
two  Eristics  (see  below),  Bubulidea  of  Miletus,  Alexinus  of  Elis,  Diodorus 
Cronus  of  Caria  (died  307),  and  Stilpo  (380-300),  are  to  be  mentioned  as 

1  In  regard  to  these  relationships  cf.  H.  Diels,  Serichte  der  Berl.  Akademie, 
1884,  pp.  343  ff. 


72  The  Greeks  :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  L 

belonging  to  this  school,  which  had  only  a  brief  existence,  and  later  became 
incorporated  with  the  Cynics  and  Stoics.  The  same  is  true  of  the  society  which 
Phsedo,  the  favourite  pupil  of  Socrates,  founded  in  his  home  at  Elis,  and  which 
Menedenms  soon  after  transplanted  to  Eretria.  Cf.  E.  Mallet,  Histoire  de 
Vecole  de  Megare  et  des  ecoles  ft  Mis  et  d'Eretrie  (Paris,  1845). 

The  founder  of  the  Cynic  School  (named  after  the  gymnasium  Cynosar- 
ges)  was  Antisthenes  of  Athens,  who,  like  Euclid,  was  an  older  friend  of 
Socrates.  The  singular  Diogenes  of  Sinope  is  rather  a  characteristic  by-figure 
in  the  history  of  civilisation  than  a  man  of  science.  In  this  connection  Crates 
of  Thebes  may  also  be  mentioned.  Later  this  school  was  blended  with  that  of 
the  Stoics. 

F.  Dummler,  Antisfhenica  (Halle,  1882)  ;  K.  W.  Gottling,  Diogenes  der 
Kyniker,  oder  die  Philosophie  des  griechischen  Proletariats  (Ges.  Abhandl. 


Aristippus  of  Cyrene,  a  Sophist  and  wandering  teacher,  somewhat  younger 
than  Euclid  and  Antisthenes,  and  united  only  for  a  little  time  with  the  Socratic 
circle,  founded  his  school  in  old  age,  and  seems  to  have  left  to  his  grandson  the 
systematic  development  of  thoughts,  which,  for  himself,  were  rather  a  practical 
principle  of  life.  The  above-named  successors  (Theodoras,  etc.)  extend  into 
the  third  century,  and  form  the  transition  to  the  Epicurean  School,  which  took 
up  the  remnants  of  the  Hedonistic  into  itself. 

A.  Wendt,  De  Philosophia  Cyrenaica  (Gottingen,  1841). 

§  7.  The  Problem  of  Morality. 

The  reflections  of  the  Gnomic  poets  and  the  sentences  of  the 
so-called  seven  wise  men  had  already,  as  their  central  point,  the 
admonition  to  observe  moderation.  In  like  manner  the  pessimistic 
complaints  which  we  meet  among  poets,  philosophers,  and  moralists 
of  the  fifth  century  are  directed  for  the  most  part  against  the 
unbridled  license  of  men,  their  lack  of  discipline  and  of  obedience 
to  law.  The  more  serious  niinds  discerned  the  danger  which  the 
passionate  seething  and  foaming  of  public  life  brought  with  it,  and 
the  political  experience  that  party  strife  was  ethically  endurable 
only  where  it  left  the  order  of  the  laws  untouched,  made  subjection 
to  law  appear  as  the  supreme  duty.  Heraclitus  and  the  Pythagoreans 
expressed  this  with  complete  clearness,  and  knew  how  to  attach  it 
to  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  their  metaphysical  theories.1 

We  meet  here  with  two  assumptions  which  even  among  these 
thinkers  appear  as  self-evident  presuppositions.  The  first  is  the 
validity  of  laws.  The  naive  consciousness  obeys  the  command 
without  asking  whence  it  comes  or  by  what  it  is  justified.  Laws 
have  actual  existence,  those  of  morals  as  well  as  those  of  the  courts  j 
they  are  here  once  for  all,  and  the  individual  has  to  follow  them. 
No  one  in  the  pre-Sophistic  period  thought  of  examining  the  law 
and  asking  in  what  its  claim  to  valid  authority  consists.  The  sec- 
ond assumption  is  a  conviction  which  is  fundamental  in  the  moralis- 
ing of  all  peoples  and  all  times:  viz.  that  obedience  to  the  law 
brings  advantage,  disregard  of  it,  disadvantage.  As  the  result  of 

1  Cf.  above,  p.  63,  note  5. 


CHAP.  2,  §  7.]      Problem  of  Morality :  the  Sophists.  73 

this  thought  admonition  takes  on  the  character  of  persuasive  coun- 
sel,1 which  is  directed  to  the  shrewdness  of  the  one  admonished  as 
well  as  to  the  desires  slumbering  within  him. 

With  the  Greek  Enlightenment  confidence  in  both  of  these  pre- 
suppositions began  to  waver,  and  accordingly  morality  became  for 
it  a  problem. 

1.  The  impulse  to  this  came  from  the  experiences  of  public  life. 
The  frequent  and  sudden  change  of  constitutions  was  indeed  adapted 
to  undermine  the  authority  of  law.  It  not  only  took  away  the  halo 
of  unconditional,  unquestioned  validity  from  the  individual  law, 
but  it  accustomed  the  citizen  of  the  democratic  republic  especially 
to  reflect  and  decide  upon  the  ground  and  validity  of  laws  as  he 
consulted  and  voted.  Political  law  became  a  subject  for  discussion, 
and  the  individual  set  himself  with  his  judgment  above  it.  If,  now, 
besides  noting  this  mutation  in  time,  attention  is  also  given 
to  the  variety  exhibited  not  only  in  the  political  laws,  but  also  in 
the  usages  prescribed  by  customary  morality  in  the  different  states 
and  among  different  peoples,  the  consequence  is  that  the  worth  of 
universal  validity  for  all  men  can  no  longer  be  attributed  to  laws. 
At  least  this  holds  good  in  the  first  place  for  all  laws  made  by  man; 
in  any  case,  therefore,  for  political  laws. 

In  the  face  of  these  experiences  the  question  arose  whether  there 
is  anything  whatever  that  is  valid  everywhere  and  always,  any  law 
that  is  independent  of  the  difference  between  peoples,  states,  and 
times,  and  therefore  authoritative  for  all.  Greek  ethics  began  thus 
with  a  problem  ivhicJi  was  completely  parallel  to  the  initial  problem  of 
physics.  The  essence  of  things  which  remains  ever  the  same  and 
survives  all  changes  the  philosophers  of  the  first  period  had  called 
Nature  (<£u'<n?) : 3  it  is  now  asked  whether  there  is  also  determined 
by  this  unchanging  Nature  (<£u'<ret)  a  law  that  is  exalted  above 
all  change  and  all  differences,  and  in  contrast  with  this  it  is  pointed 
out  that  all  existing  prescriptions  valid  only  for  a  time,  and  within 
a  limited  territory,  are  given  and  established  by  human  institution  or 
Statute  (Secret  or  VO/AO))  . 

This  contrast  between  Nature  and  institution  or  statute  is  the 
most  characteristic  work  of  the  Greek  Enlightenment  in  the  forma- 


1  A  typical  example  of  this  is  the  allegory  of  Prodicus,  in  which  the  choosing 
Hercules  is  promised  golden  mountains  by  Virtue  as  well  as  by  Vice,  in  case  he 
will  intrust  himself  to  her  guidance. 

2  Hippias  in  Xen.  Mem.  IV.  4,  14  ff. 

s  ttepl  0i!<reojs  is  the  title  borne  by  the  writings  of  all  the  older  philosophers. 
It  is  to  be  emphasised  that  the  constitutive  mark  of  the  concept  ^tfo-is  was 
originally  that  of  remaining  ever  like  itself.  The  contrary  of  this  is  then  the 
transient,  that  which  occurs  a  single  tune. 


74  The  Grreeks :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 

tion  of  conceptions.  It  dominates  the  entire  philosophy  of  the 
period,  and  has  from  the  beginning  not  only  the  meaning  of  a  prin- 
ciple of  genetic  explanation,  but  the  significance  of  a  norm  or  stan- 
dard for  the  estimation  of  worth.  If  there  is  anything  universally 
valid,  it  is  that  which  is  valid  "  by  Nature "  for  all  men  without 
distinction  of  people  and  time ;  what  has  been  established  by  man 
in  the  course  of  history  has  only  historical  worth,  worth  for  a  single 
occasion.  That  only  is  justly  authorised  which  Nature  determines, 
but  human  institution  goes  beyond  this.  The  "  law  "  (VO/AOS)  tyr- 
annises over  man  and  forces  him  to  much  that  is  contrary  to  Nature.1 
Philosophy  formulated  in  its  conceptions  that  opposition  between  a 
natural,  "  divine  "  law  and  the  written  law,  which  formed  the  theme 
of  the  Antigone  of  Sophocles. 

Out  of  this  antithesis  came  the  problems,  on  the  one  hand,  to 
establish  in  what  this  law  of  Nature,  everywhere  the  same,  consists ; 
on  the  other,  to  understand  how,  in  addition  to  this,  the  institutions 
of  historical  law  arise. 

The  first  problem  Protagoras  did  not  avoid.  In  the  mythical 
presentation  of  his  thought  which  Plato  has  preserved,2  he  taught 
that  the  gods  gave  to  all  men  in  equal  measure  a  sense  of  justice,  and 
of  ethical  respect  or  reverence  (81*07  and  atSois),  in  order  that  in  the 
struggle  of  life  they  might  be  able  to  form  permanent  unions  for 
mutual  preservation.  He  found,  therefore,  the  <£v<ns  of  practical 
.  life  in  primary  ethical  feelings  which  impel  man  to  union  in  society 
and  in  the  state.  The  carrying  out  of  this  thought  in  its  details  and 
the  definition  of  the  boundary  between  this  which  is  valid  by  Nature 
(<£ixret)  and  the  positive  determinations  of  historical  institution  are 
unfortunately  not  preserved  to  us. 

There  are,  however,  many  indications  that  the  theory  of  the 
Sophists  proceeded  from  such  fundamental  conceptions  to  a  wide- 
reaching  criticism  of  existing  conditions,  and  to  the  demand  for  pro- 
found revolutions  in  social  and  political  life.  The 'thought  was 
already  at  that  time  forcing  its  way  forward,  that  all  distinctions 
between  men  before  the  law  rest  only  upon  institution,  and  that 
Nature  demands  equal  right  for  all  Lycophron  desired  to  do  away 
with  the  nobility.  Alcidamas 8  and  others 4  combated  slavery  from 
this  point  of  view.  Phaleas  demanded  equality  of  property  as  well 
as  of  education  for  all  citizens,  and  Hippodamus  was  the  first  to 


1  Hippias  in  Plat.  Prot.  337  C. 

2  Plat.  Prot.  320  ft '   Cf.  A.  HarpE,  Die  Ethik  des  Protagoras  (Heidelberg, 

«  Arist.  m&t.  I.  13, 1373  b  18.    Cf.  also  Orat.  Attic,  (ed.  Bekker)  II.  154. 
*  Arist.  Pol.  I.  3, 1253  b  20. 


CHAP.  2,  §  7.]      Problem  of  Morality :  the  Sophists.  75 

project  the  outlines  of  an  ideal  state,  constituted  according  to 
reason.  Even  the  thought  of  a  political  equality  of  women  with 
men  caine  to  the  surface  in  this  connection.1 

If  now  positive  legislation  deviates  from  these  demands  of  ^Nature, 
its  rationale  is  to  be  sought  only  in  the  interests  of  those  who  make 
the  laws.  Whether  this  takes  the  form  assumed  in  the  opinion  of 
Thrasyrnachus2  of  Chalcedon,  who  held  that  it  is  those  in  power 
who  by  means  of  the  law  force  the  subjects  to  do  what  is  for  their 
(the  masters')  advantage,  or  whether  it  wears  the  contrary  form  as 
developed  by  Callicles,3  that  laws  have  been  erected  by  the  great 
mass  of  the  weak  as  a  bulwark  against  the  power  of  strong  person- 
alities which  would  be  superior  to  the  individual,  and  that  according 
to  the  view  of  Lycophron4  all  those  who  do  no  harm  to  others  thus 
mutually  assure  for  themselves  life  and  property, — in  all  these 
cases  the  ground  of  the  laws  lies  in  the  interests  of  those  who  make 
them. 

2.  If  personal  interest  is  therefore  the  ground  for  setting  up  laws, 
it  is  also  the  sole  motive  for  obeying  them.  Even  the  moralist  wishes 
to  convince  man  that  it  is  for  his  interest  to  accommodate  himself 
to  the  law.  Prom  this  it  follows,  however,  that  obedience  to  the 
law  is  under  obligation  to  extend  only  so  far  as  it  is  the  indi- 
vidual's Merest.  And  there  are  cases  where  the  two  do  not  coincide. 
It  is  not  true  that  only  subordination  to  law  makes  a  man  happy ; 
there  are  great  criminals,  so  Polus  works  out  the  thought,5  who 
have  attained  the  happiest  results  by  the  most  frightful  misdeeds. 
Experience  contradicts  the  claim  that  only  right  doing  leads  to 
happiness ;  it  shows  rather  that  a  shrewd  conduct  of  life,  restrained 
by  no  regard  for  right  and  law,  is  the  best  guaranty  of  good  for- 
tune.6 

Through  such  considerations  the  scepticism  which  had  originally, 
as  it  seems,7  been  directed  only  toward  the  validity  of  political 
law,  gradually  attacked  that  of  the  moral  laws  as  well.  What 
Polus,  Callicles,  and  Thrasymachus  propound  in  the  Platonic  dia- 
logues, the  Gorgias  and  the  Bepublic,  with  regard  to  the  concep- 
tions of  the  just  and  unjust  (StWov  and  <$>IKOV)  has  reference  in 
equal  measure  to  the  moral  and  to  the  political  law.  This  double 
reference  is  effected  through  the  middle  ground  of  the  characteristics 

1  The  persiflage  in  the  Ecdesiazusce  of  Aristophanes  can  refer  only  to  this. 

2  Plat.  Xtp.  338  C. 

*  Plat.  &org.  483  B. 

*  Arist  Pol  III.  9,  1280  b  11. 

5  In  Plat.  Gorff.tfl. 

6  Of.  the  praise  of  tdiicta  by  Thrasymachus  in  Plat.  Rep.  344  A. 

7  This  is  especially  true  of  Protagoras,  perhaps  also  of  Hippias. 


76  The  G-reeks :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I 

of  penal  justice,  and  proves  that  the  law  of  Nature  is  set  over 
against,  not  only  the  civil  law,  but  also  the  requirements  of  morals. 

In  both  respects  the  naturalism  and  radicalism  of  the  younger 
Sophists  pushed  on  to  the  extreme  consequences.  The  weak  may 
subject  himself  to  the  law  j  he  is,  though,  but  the  stupid  man,  serv- 
ing the  uses  of  others  by  so  doing ; !  the  strong,  however,  who  is  at 
the  same  time  the  wise,  does  not  allow  himself  to  be  led  astray  by 
the  law;  he  follows  solely  the  impulse  of  his  own  nature.  And  this 
is  the  right,  if  not  according  to  human  law,  yet  according  to  the 
higher  law  of  Nature.  She  shows  in  all  living  beings  that  the 
stronger  should  rule  the  weaker ;  only  for  the  slave  is  it  becoming 
to  recognise  a  command  above  himself.  The  free  man  should  not 
bridle  his  desires,  but  let  them  have  full  development;  according  to 
human  law  it  may  be  a  disgrace  to  do  injustice,  according  to  the 
dictates  of  Nature  it  is  a  disgrace  to  suffer  injustice.2 

In  such  forms  the  individual's  natural  disposition,  the  constitution 
of  his  impulses,  was  proclaimed  as  law  of  Nature,  and  exalted  to  be 
the  supreme  law  of  action  ;  and  Archelaus,  a  disciple  of  Anaxagoras, 
belonging  to  the  Sophistic  period,  proclaimed  that  the  predicates 
good  and  bad,  "just"  and  "shameful"  (&'<«uov — atxrxpov),  spring 
not  from  Nature,  but  from  Institution.  All  ethical  judging  is  con- 
ventional.3 

3.  Religious  ideas  were  also  involved  in  this  overthrow  as  a  mat- 
ter of  course,  and  all  the  more  since  after  their  theoretical  value 
had  been  taken  away,  at  least  in  educated  circles,  by  the  cosmologi- 
cal  philosophy  typified  by  Xenophanes,  they  had  retained  recogni- 
tion only  as  allegorical  methods  of  presenting  ethical  conceptions. 
In  this  latter  line  of  thought  the  school  of  Anaxagoras  had  been 
active  for  a  time,  especially  a  certain  Metrodorus  of  Lampsacus.    It 
was  only  a  consequence  of  the  ethical  relativism  of  the  Sophists 
when  Prodicus  taught  that  men  had  made  to  themselves  gods  out  of 
all  that  brought  them  blessing,  and  when  Critias  declared  belief  in 
the  gods  to  be  an  invention  of  shrewd  statecraft.4    If  such  claims 
still  excited  indignation  among  the  masses  and  the  powers  of  the 
official  priesthood,5  it  was  easy  for  Protagoras  in  the  presence  of 
these  questions  to  wrap  himself  in  the  mantle  of  his  scepticism.6 

4.  The  position  of  Socrates  with  reference  to  this  whole  move- 
ment presents  two  sides :  on  the  one  hand,  he  brought  the  principle 

1  Thrasymachus  in  Plat.  Rep.  343  C. 

2  Callicles  in  Plat.  Qwg.  483  A  and  491  E. 
s  Diog.  Laert.  II.  16. 

*  Sext.  Ernp.  Adv.  Math.  IX.  51-54. 

6  As  is  shown  by  the  condemnation  of  Diagoras  of  Melos  (Aristoph.  Av.  1073). 

•  Diog.  Laert.  IX.  51. 


CHAP.  2,  §  7,]        Problem  of  Morality :  Socrates.  77 

underlying  the  movement  to  its  clearest  and  most  comprehensive 
expression  ;  on  the  other  hand,  he  set  himself  in  the  most  vigorous 
manner  against  its  outcome,  and  both  these  sides  of  his  activity, 
contrary  as  they  seem  to  be  and  much  as  this  external  opposition 
had  to  do  with  the  tragic  fate  of  the  man,  stand,  nevertheless,  in  the 
most  exact  and  rigidly  consistent  connection ;  for  just  by  grasping 
the  principle  of  the  Enlightenment  in  all  its  depth,  and  formulating 
it  in  its  full  force,  did  Socrates  succeed  in  developing  from  it  a 
positive  result  of  wide-reaching  power. 

For  him,  also,  the  time  for  following  traditional  customs  without 
question  is  past.  Independent  judgment  of  individuals  has  taken 
the  place  of  authority.  But  while  the  Sophists  gave  their  attention 
to  the  analysis  of  the  feelings  and  impulses  which  lie  at  the  basis  of 
the  actual  decisions  of  individuals,  and  ultimately  saw  themselves 
forced  to  adjudge  to  all  these  motives  the  equal  right  of  an  unfold- 
ing in  accordance  with  the  necessity  of  Nature,  Socrates,  on  the 
contrary,  reflected  upon  precisely  that  element  which  was  the  deci- 
sive factor  in  the  culture  of  his  time :  namely,  the  practical,  polit- 
ical, and  social  significance  which  knowledge  and  science  had 
achieved.  Just  through  the  process  in  which  individuals  had 
achieved  independence,  through  the  unfettering  of  personal  passions, 
it  had  become  evident  that  in  all  fields  mam's  ability  rests  upon  his 
insight.  In  this  Socrates  found  that  objective  standard  for  the  esti- 
mation of  men  and  their  actions  which  the  Sophists  had  sought  in 
vain  in  the  machinery  of  feelings  and  desires. 

Ability,  then,  or  excellence  (Tuchtigkeit,  apery)  is  insight.  He 
who  acts  according  to  feelings,  according  to  presuppositions  that 
are  not  clear,  according  to  customs  that  have  been  handed  down, 
may  indeed  occasionally  hit  the  right  thing,  but  he  does  not  know 
it,  he  is  not  sure  of  the  issue ;  he  who  is  entirely  involved  in  delusion 
and  error  as  to  the  matter  in  hand  is  certain  to  make  mistakes ;  he 
only  will  be  able  to  act  right  who  has  the  right  knowledge  of  things 
and  of  himself.1  Scientific  knowledge  (e^rn?/^)  is  therefore  the 
basis  of  all  qualities  which  make  man  able  and  useful,  of  all  single 

aperat. 

This  insight  consists,  on  the  one  hand,  in  an  exact  knowledge  of  the 
things  to  which  the  action  is  to  relate.  Man  should  understand  his 
business ;  as  we  find  the  able  man  in  every  business  to  be  the  one 
who  has  learned  it  thoroughly  and  knows  the  objects  with  which  he 
has  to  work,  so  sliould  it  be  also  in  civil  and  political  life ;  here,  too, 

1  These  fundamental  thoughts  of  Socrates  are  reproduced  by  Xenophon  and 
Plato  in  countless  turns  and  variations.  In  Xenophon  the  passage,  Mem.  III. 
ch.  9,  is  most  important  for  comparison;  in  Plato,  the  dialogue  Protagoras. 


78  The  Greeks :  Anthropological  Period.          [PART  I. 

only  insight  should  be  trusted.1  The  individual  excellences  differ- 
entiate themselves  accordingly  with  reference  to  the  objects  which 
the  knowledge  concerns  in  the  individual  case;2  common,  to  all, 
however,  is  not  only  knowledge  in  general,  but  also  self-knowledge. 
Hence  Socrates  declared  it  to  be  his  principal  vocation  to  educate 
himself  and  his  fellow-citizens  to  earnest  self -examination ;  the 
yv^Oi  o-eavTov  was  the  watch-word  of  his  teaching.3 

5.  These  considerations,  which  Socrates  developed  out  of  the 
principles  by  which  practical  ability  or  excellence  is  determined, 
became  transferred  by  the  aid  of  the  ambiguity  in  the  word  d/oer^4 
to  ethical  excellence  also,  or  virtue,  and  so  led  to  the  fundamental 
doctrine  that  virtue  consists  in  knowledge  of  the  good.4  So  far  the 
course  of  thought  followed  by  Socrates  is  clear  and  free  from  doubt. 
The  sources  become  less  clear  when  we  ask  what  the  man  who  was 
so  strenuous  to  reach  clearly  defined  conceptions  intended  by  the 
good.  According  to  Xenophon's  exposition,  the  good  (dyafloV)  must 
have  coincided  everywhere,  for  his  master,  with  the  profitable  or 
useful  (w<£e\ijuov).  Virtue  would  then  be  the  knowledge  of  what 
was  suited  to  the  end  in  view,  or  useful,  in  each  particular  instance. 
This  interpretation  is  the  easiest  to  attach  to  that  analogy  between 
moral  virtue  and  the  various  kinds  of  excellence  shown  in  daily 
life,  which  Socrates  really  taught,  and  the  presentation  given  in  the 
earliest  Platonic  dialogues,  in  particular  the  Protagoras  attributes 
to  Socrates  this  standpoint  of  individual  advantage.  Insight  or  dis- 
cernment (here  called  prudence,  <£/>ov7?cris)  is  a  measuring  art,  which 
weighs  exactly  the  benefit  and  the  harm  that  will  result  from  the 
action,  and  so  chooses  what  is  most  to  the  purpose.  In  further  agree- 
ment with  this  view  is  the  fact  that  in  exact  contrast  with  the 
Sophists,  who  demanded  a  free  and  uncramped  development  of  the 
passions,  Socrates  emphasised  no  virtue  so  much,  and  exhibited  none 
so  fully  in  his  own  life,  as  that  of  self-control  (o-oxjboowiy). 

But  according  to  this  interpretation  the  Socratic  conception  of 
the  good  would  be  indefinite  in  its  content ;  decision  must  be  made 
from  case  to  case  as  to  what  suits  the  end  in  view,  or  is  useful,  and 

1  Hence,  too,  the  anti-democratic  position,  so  fatal  for  his  personal  destiny, 
taken  by  Socrates,  who  demanded  expressly  that  the  most  difficult  and  most 
responsible  art,  that  of  governing,  should  be  practised  only  by  those  of  the  most 
complete  discernment,  and  who  on  this  account  absolutely  rejected  the  appoint- 
ment of  state  officials  by  lot  or  popular  choice. 

2  Socrates  did  not  attempt  a  system  of  the  individual  excellences ;   on  the 
other  hand,  he  did  give  by  way  of  example  definitions  of  courage  (of.  the  Platonic 
Laches),  piety  (Plat.  Euthyphro,  Xen.  Mem.  IV.  6,  3),  justice  (Mem.  IV.  6,  6), 
etc. 

8  As  defined  by  his  theoretical  philosophy;  see  §  8. 

*  The  same  ambiguity  which  has  given  occasion  to  countless  difficulties  lies 
in  the  Latin  virtus  ;  so,  too,  in  dyadbv,  bonum,  good. 


CHAP.  2,  §  7.]         Problem  of  Morality :  Socrates.  79 

instead  of  the  good  we  should  again  always  have  what  is  good  for 
something.1  It  may  be  regarded  as  certain  that  Socrates  strove  to 
transcend  this  relativism,  and  also  that  by  reason  of  the  anthropo- 
logical basis  of  his  thinking  he  did  not  get  beyond  this  position  in 
the  formulation  of  his  conceptions.  His  doctrine  that  it  is  better  to 
suffer  wrong  than  to  do  wrong,  his  strict  conformity  to  law,  in 
accordance  with  which  he  scorned  to  avoid  the  execution  of  an 
unjust  sentence  and  preserve  himself  by  flight  for  further  life  and 
activity,  his  admonition  that  the  true  meaning  of  life  consists  in 
evTrpa&a,  in  continual  right-doing,  in  man's  ceaseless  labour  for  ethical 
improvement,  in  the  participation  in  all  that  is  good  and  beautiful 
(*aAo/caya0«x),  especially,  however,  his  erotic,  i.e.  his  doctrine  that 
friendship  and  the  relation  of  attachment  between  teacher  and 
taught  should  consist  only  in  a  mutual  striving  to  become  good  or 
constantly  better  through  their  life  in  common  and  their  mutual 
furtherance  of  each  other's  aims, — all  this  goes  far  beyond  the  con- 
ception presented  by  Xenophon.  It  can  be  united  with  the  stand- 
point of  utility  only  if  we  attribute  to  Socrates  the  distinction 
between  the  true  welfare  of  the  soul,  on  the  one  hand,  and  earthly 
gain,  on  the  other,  which  Plato  makes  him  set  forth  in  the  Phcedo, 
but  of  which  we  elsewhere  find  but  slight  traces,  since  the  historic 
Socrates,  even  according  to  Plato's  Apology,  maintained  a  completely 
sceptical  position  with  regard  to  personal  immortality,  and  did  not 
know  the  sharp  Platonic  separation  between  immateriality  and  cor- 
poreality. Socrates  teaches,  indeed,  even  according  to  Xenophon, 
that  man's  true  fortune  is  to  be  sought,  not  in  outward  goods  nor  in 
luxurious  life,  but  in  virtue  alone :  if,  however,  this  virtue  is  to 
consist  only  in  the  capacity  to  recognise  the  truly  useful  and  act 
accordingly,  the  doctrine  moves  in  a  circle  as  soon  as  it  maintains 
that  this  truly  useful  is  just  virtue  itself.  In  this  circle  Socrates 
remained  fast ;  the  objective  determination  of  the  conception  of  the 
good  which  he  sought  he  did  not  find. 

6.  However  indefinite  the  answer  to  the  question  as  to  what 
should  properly  form  the  content  of  that  knowledge  of  the  good 
which  constitutes  virtue,  Socrates  was  at  all  events  convinced  — 
and  this  proved  much  more  important  —  that  this  knowledge  is 
in  itself  sufficient  to  cause  one  to  do  the  good,  and  so  bring  happi- 
ness. This  proposition,  which  may  serve  as  a  type  of  a  rationalis- 
tic conception  of  life,  contains  two  pregnant  presuppositions,  one 
psychological,  viz.  pronounced  intellectualism,  the  other  ethical,  viz. 
pronounced  eudc&monism. 

i  Xen.  Mem.  III.  8,  5. 


80  The  Greeks :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 

The  fundamental  assumption  which.  Socrates  thus  makes  is 
indeed  the  expression  of  his  own  reflective,  judicious  nature.  Every 
man,  he  says,  acts  in  the  manner  that  he  considers  best  suited  for 
his  end,  most  beneficial  and  most  useful ;  no  one  does  that  which 
he  knows  to  be  unfit  for  the  end  in  view,  or  even  fit  in  a  lesser 
degree.  If,  then,  virtue  is  knowledge  of  what  is  to  the  purpose,  it 
follows  immediately  that  the  virtuous  man  acts  in  accordance  with 
his  knowledge,  therefore  to  the  purpose,  rightly,  in  the  way  that  is 
beneficial  to  him.  No  one  does  wrong  knowingly  and  purposely  :  he 
only  does  not  act  rightly  who  has  not  right  insight.  If  it  sometimes 
seems  as  if  some  one  acted  wrongly  in  the  face  of  better  insight  — 
"against  his  better  judgment "  —  it  must  be  that  he  was  not  clearly 
and  surely  in  possession  of  this  better  knowledge,  for  otherwise  he 
would  have  purposely  injured  himself,  which  is  absurd. 

In  this  a  fundamental  difference  between  Socrates  and  the 
Sophists  becomes  evident:  the  latter  maintained  the  originality  of 
the  will,  and  on  that  account  its  warrant  from  Nature  ;  for  Socrates, 
to  will  a  thing  and  to  regard  a  thing  as  good,  profitable,  and  useful 
are  the  same  thing.  Knowledge  determines  the  will  without 
opposition ;  man  does  what  he  holds  to  be  best.  True  as  it  may  be 
that  Socrates  was  in  error  in  this  opinion,  and  that  the  truth  lies  in 
the  mean  between  him  and  the  Sophists,  this  his  intellectualistic 
conception  of  the  will  came  to  exercise  a  decisive  influence  over  all 
ancient  ethics. 

Sin  is,  then,  error.  He  who  does  a  bad  act  does  it  from  a  mistaken 
judgment,  regarding  the  bad,  i.e.  the  injurious,  as  the  good ;  for  every 
one  believes  that  he  is  doing  the  good,  i.e.  the  advantageous.  Only 
because  the  case  stands  thus  is  there  any  meaning  in  instructing 
men  ethically ;  only  for  this  reason  is  virtue  capable  of  being  taught. 
For  all  teaching  addresses  itself  to  man's  knowledge.  Because  man 
can  be  taught  what  the  good  is,  therefore  —  and  by  this  means  alone 
—  he  can  be  brought  to  the  stage  of  right  action.  Were  virtue  not 
knowledge,  it  would  not  be  capable  of  being  taught. 

From  this  standpoint  Socrates  raised  the  customary  morality 
taught  by  the  popular  moralising  to  a  scientific  plane.  All  his 
keenness,  his  subtlety,  and  dialectical  dexterity  were  employed *  to 
prove  against  the  Sophists  that  not  only  the  surest,  but  even  the 
only  sure  way  of  attaining  to  permanent  happiness,  lies'  in  obeying 
ethical  prescriptions  under  all  circumstances,  in  subordination  to  law 
and  morals.  So  he  gives  back  to  Authority  her  right.  The  prin- 

1  Compare  in  Plato  the  refutation  of  Thrasymachus  in  the  first  book  of  the 
Republic,  which  may  be  regarded  as  Socratic  in  its  principles,  but  which  in  part 
id  very  weakly  supported,  both  in  form  and  in  matter. 


CHAP.  2,  §  7.]         Problem  of  Morality ;  Socrates.  81 

ciple  of  the  Enlightenment  tolerates  no  unquestioning  subjection  to 
the  existing  state  of  things  and  requires  examination  of  the  laws  ; 
but  these  laws  sustain  the  examination,  they  evince  themselves  to  be 
requirements  made  by  insight  into  what  is  for  the  best;  and  because 
it  has  now  been  recognised  that  it  is  the  right  course  to  obey  them, 
unconditional  obedience  must  be  rendered.1  Far  from  being  in  con- 
flict with  the  institutions  of  law  and  morals,  Socrates  is  rather  the 
one  who  undertook  to  prove  their  reasonableness  and  thereby  their 
claim  to  universal  validity? 

F.  Wildauer,  Socrates'  Lehre  vom  Willen.    Innsbruck,  1877. 
M.  Heinze,  Der  Euddmonistnus   in  der   griechischen  Philosophie.    Leips. 
1883. 

7.  In  addition  to  the  psychologico-ethical  presuppositions  that 
the  will  is  always  directed  toward  what  is  recognised  as  good, 
and  that  therefore  virtue,  as  knowledge  of  the  good,  draws  after  it 
of  itself  the  appropriate  action,  we  find  in  the  argumentations  of 
Socrates  the  further  opinion  that  this  appropriate  action  of  the 
virtuous  man  actually  attains  its  end  and  makes  him  happy.  Happi- 
ness or  well-being  (eu&u/jiovta)  is  the  necessary  result  of  virtue.  The 
intelligent  man  knows,  and  hence  does,  what  is  good  for  him ;  he 
must  then,  through  his  doing,  become  happy  also.  This  assump- 
tion applies,  however,  only  to  a  perfect  intelligence  which  would 
be  absolutely  certain  of  the  effects  that  an  intended  action  would 
have  in  the  connected  series  of  the  world's  events. 


1  In  details,  as  might  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  this  rehabilita- 
tion of  the  popular  morals  falls  into  trivial  moralising,  especially  as  Xenophon 
portrays  it.    But  while  Socrates  hoped  precisely  by  this  means  to  render  the 
right  service  to  his  people,  it  proved  to  be  just  the  point  where  he  came  to  the 
ground  between  two  stools :  with  the  Sophists  and  their  adherents,  he  passed  for 
a  reactionary ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  men  who,  like  Aristophanes,  saw  pre- 
cisely in  the  questioning  of  the  authority  of  law  and  morals  in  general,  the  dan- 
gerous cancer  of  the  liine,  without  investigation  classed  him  who  wished  to 
place  this  authority  on  a  basis  of  reason,  among  those  who  were  undermining 
it.     So  it  was  that  it  could  come  about  that  Socrates  appeared  in  the  Clouds  of 
Aristophanes  as  the  type  of  Sophistic  teaching  which  he  combated. 

2  It  is  hence  quite  alien  to  the  principles  of  Socrates  to  demand  or  even  to 
allow  for  every  individual  act  a  special  examination  of  the  grounds  of  the  polit- 
ical or  ethical  command.    If,  for  example,  it  has  once  been  recognised  as  right 
to  obey  the  ordinances  of  the  government  under  all  circumstances,  this  obedience 
must  then  be  rendered,  even  if  the  ordinance  evidently  commands  the  unreason- 
able and  the  unjust ;  cf .  Plato's  Crito.    If,  as  was  true  of  Socrates  himself,  a  man 
is  convinced  that  his  life  is  under  divine  guidance,  and  that  where  his  insight 
does  not  suffice,  a  higher  voice  warns  him  through  his  feeling,  —at  least,  warns 
him  away  from  what  is  wrong, —then  he  must  obey  this  voice.    Cf.  on  the 
falfMviov,  §  8.    The  essential  thing  always  is  that  a  man  give  an  account  to  him- 
self of  his  doing,  but  the  grounds  on  which  he  acts  in  so  doing  may  even  consist 
in  such  maxims  as  exclude  an  examination  in  individual  cases. 


82  The  Greeks :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 

The  transmitted  expressions  of  Socrates,  in  fact,  make  the  impres- 
sion that  he  was  convinced  that  man  could  possess  that  insight 
which  by  its  operation  upon  his  action  and  its  consequences  is 
adapted  to  bring  about  happiness,  and  that  he  might  gain  this 
insight  through  philosophy :  that  is,  through  unremitting  earnest 
examination  of  himself,  of  others,  and  of  the  relations  of  human 
life.  Investigations  as  to  how  far  the  world's  course,  which  man 
cannot  foresee,  may  cross  and  destroy  the  operation  even  of  the  best 
planned  and  most  intelligent  conduct  of  life,  are  not  to  be  pointed 
out  in  the  teaching  of  Socrates.  When  we  consider  the  slight 
degree  of  confidence  which  he  otherwise  had  in  human  knowledge, 
as  soon  as  this  attempted  to  venture  beyond  establishing  ethical 
conceptions  and  practical  requirements,  we  can  explain  the  above . 
conviction  only  on  the  following  basis  —  he  did  not  fear  that  the 
providential  guidance,  which  was  for  him  indeed  an  object  not  of 
knowledge,  but  of  faith,  would  frustrate  the  beneficial  consequences 
of  right  action. 

8.  Socrates  had  defined  virtue,  the  fundamental  ethical  concep- 
tion, as  insight,  and  this  in  turn  as  knowledge  of  the  good,  but  had 
given  to  the  concept  of  the  good  no  universal  content,  and  in  a  cer- 
tain respect  had  left  it  open.  This  made  it  possible  for  the  most 
diverse  conceptions  of  life  to  introduce  their  views  of  the  ultimate 
end  (T&OS)  of  human  existence  into  this  open  place  in  the  Socratic 
concept ;  and  so  this  first  incomplete  work  in  the  formation  of  ethi- 
cal conceptions  at  once  afforded  the  material  for  a  number  of  partic- 
ular structures.1  The  most  important  of  these  are  the  Cynic  and 
the  Cyrenaic.  Both  -present  the  attempt  to  define  the  true  intrinsic 
worth  of  the  life  of  the  individual  in  a  universal  manner.  Both 
wish  to  show  in  what  man's  true  happiness  consists,  how  man  must 
be  constituted  and  how  he  must  act  in  order  to  attain  this  with  cer- 
tainty; both  call  this  constitution  or  disposition  through  which 
participation  in  happiness  is  gained,  virtue.  The  eudsemonistic  side 
of  the  Socratic  ethics  is  here  developed  in  an  entirely  one-sided 
manner,  and  though  universal  validity  is  vindicated  for  the  concep 
tion  proposed,  the  point  of  view  of  the  individual's  happiness  forms  s< 
exclusively  the  standard  that  the  worth  of  all  relations  of  publi< 
life  even  is  estimated  by  it.  In  Cynicism,  as  in  Hedonism,  the  G-reel 
spirit  is  proceeding  to  appropriate  the  fruit  which  the  condition 


1  So  indeed  in  the  case  of  Xenophon  and  JEschines ;  the  philosophising  col 
bier  Simon,  too,  seems  to  have  have  been  thus  dependent  on  Socrates.    Whs 
the  Megarian  and  the  Elean-Eretrian  schools  accomplished  in  this  respect 
too  indefinitely  transmitted  to  us,  and  is  too  closely  in  contact  with  Cynicisn 
to  deserve  separate  mention. 


CHAP.  2,  §  7.]       Problem  of  Morality  :  Antisthenes.  83 

of  life  brought  about  by  civilisation  yield  for  the  fortune  of  the 
individual.  The  criticism  of  the  social  conditions  and  authorities, 
begun  by  the  Sophists,  has  won  a  fixed  standard  through  the  medi- 
ating aid  of  the  Socratic  conception  of  virtue. 

The  doctrine  of  virtue  taught  by  Antisthenes1  takes  at  the  begin- 
ning a  high  and  specie  as  turn  at  the  point  where  the  doctrine  finds 
itself  hopelessly  entangled  in  the  Socratic  circle.  He  declines  to 
define  more  closely  the  contents  of  the  concept  of  the  good,  and 
declares  virtue  itself  to  be  not  only  the  highest,  but  the  only  good, 
understanding,  however,  by  virtue  essentially  only  the  intelligent  con- 
duct of  life.  This  alone  makes  happy,  not  indeed  through  the  conse- 
quences which  it  brings  about,  but  through  itself.  The  contentment 
that  dwells  within  the  right  life  itself  is  accordingly  completely 
independent  of  the  world's  course :  virtue  is  itself  sufficient  for 
happiness ;  the  wise  man  stands  free  in  the  presence  of  fate  and 
fortune. 

But  this  Cynic  conception  of  virtue  as  sufficient  in  itself  is,  as  is 
shown  by  its  further  development,  in  nowise  to  be  interpreted  as 
meaning  that  the  virtuous  man  should  find  his  fortune  in  doing 
good  for  its  own  sake  amid  all  the  whims  of  fate.  Cynicism  did 
not  rise  to  this  height,  however  much  it  may  sound  like  it  when 
virtue  is  celebrated  as  the  only  sure  possession  in  the  vicissitudes 
of  life,  when  it  is  designated  as  the  only  thing  to  be  striven  for, 
and  baseness,  on  the  contrary,  as  the  only  thing  to  be  avoided.  This 
doctrine  is  a  postulate  derived  with  great  logical  consistency  from 
the  Socratic  principle  that  virtue  necessarily  makes  happy  (cf. 
above,  7),  and  from  this  postulate  Antisthenes  sought  in  turn  to 
define  the  real  contents  of  the  concept  of  virtue. 

If,  namely,  virtue  is  to  make  happy  with  certainty  and  under  all 
circumstances,  it  must  be  that  conduct  of  life  which  makes  man  as 
independent  as  possible  of  the  course  of  events.  Now  every  want  and 
every  desire  is  a  bond  which  makes  man  dependent  upon  fortune, 
in  so  far  as  his  happiness  or  unhappiness  is  made  to  consist  in 
whether  a  given  wish  is  fulfilled  or  not  by  the  course  of  life.  We 
have  no  power  over  the  outer  world,  but  we  have  power  over  our 
desires.  We  expose  ourselves  the  more  to  alien  powers,  the  more 
we  desire,  hope,  or  fear  from  them  ;  every  desire  makes  us  slaves  of 
the  outer  world.  Virtue,  then,- which  makes  man  independent,  can 
consist  only  in  suppression  of  desires,  and  restriction  of  wants 
to  the  smallest  conceivable  measure.  Virtue  is  freedom  from 
wants?  —  from  the  standpoint  of  eudsemonism  certainly  the  most 

1  Principally  preserved  in  Diog.  Laert.  VI.  2  Xen.  Symp.  4»  34  ff. 


84  The  Greeks :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 

consistent  conclusion,  and  one  that  must  Lave  appealed  especially  to 
men  of  a  humble  position  in  life  such  as  we  find  the  Cynics  to  be  in 
part. 

By  carrying  out  this  thought  in  a  radical  manner  the  Cynics  came 
to  occupy  a  purely  negative  attitude  toward  civilisation.  By  aiming 
to  reduce  the  measure  of  the  virtuous  wise  man's  wants  to  what  was 
absolutely  inevitable,  and  to  regard  all  other  strivings  as  pernicious 
or  indifferent,  they  rejected  all  the  goods  of  civilisation  and  attained 
the  ideal  of  astute  of  Nature,  — an  ideal  stripped  of  all  higher  worth. 
Taking  up  earlier  Sophistic  theories  and  developing  them  farther, 
they  taught  that  the  wise  man  accommodates  himself  only  to  what 
Nature  peremptorily  demands,  but  despises  all  that  appears  desir- 
able or  worthy  of  obedience  merely  as  the  result  of  human  opinion 
or  institution.  Wealth  and  refinement,  fame  and  honour,  seemed  to 
them  just  as  superfluous  as  those  enjoyments  of  the  senses  which 
went  beyond  the  satisfaction  of  the  most  elementary  wants  of  hunger 
and  love.  Art  and  science,  family  and  native  land,  were  to  them 
indifferent,  and  Diogenes  owed  his  paradoxical  popularity  to  the 
ostentatious  jest  of  attempting  to  live  in  civilised  Greece  as  if  in  a 
state  of  Nature,  solely  <£wr«. 

In  this  way  the  philosophising  proletarian  forced  himself  to  despise 
ail  the  good  things  of  civilisation,  from  the  enjoyment  of  which  he 
found  himself  more  or  less  excluded.  On  the  other  hand,  he  recog- 
nised none  of  the  laws  to  which  civilised  society  subjected  itself,  as 
binding  in  themselves,  and  if  there  is  any  truth  at  all  in  the  coarse 
anecdotes  which  antiquity  relates  on  the  subject,  this  class  took 
pleasure  in  scoffing  openly  at  the  most  elementary  demands  of 
morals  and  decency.  This  forced  and,  in  part,  openly  affected  nat- 
uralism knows  nothing  any  longer  of  UK.TJ  and  cuSw?  (justice  and  rev- 
erence), which  the  older  Sophistic  teaching  had  allowed  to  remain 
as  natural  impulses,  and  elicits  a  conception  of  virtue  which  sup- 
poses that  greed  and  lust  complete  the  essential  qualities  of  the 
natural  man. 

Yet  the  Cynics  were  not  'so  bad  as  they  made  themselves. 
Diogenes  even  preserved  a  remnant  of  respect  for  mental  training, 
as  the  only  thing  which  could  free  man  from  the  prejudices  of  con- 
ventional institutions  and  lead  to  freedom  from  wants  by  insight 
into  the  nothingness  of  the  pretended  goods  of  civilisation.  He 
also  conducted  the  education  of  the  sons  of  Xeniades,  a  Corinthian 
Sophist,  according  to  the  principles  of  the  Cynic  naturalism,  and 
not  without  success. 

On  the  whole,  this  philosophy  is  a  characteristic  sign  of  the  time, 
the  mark  of  a  disposition  which,  if  not  hostile,  was  yet  indifferent 


CHAP.  2,  §  7.]       Problem  of  Morality :  Aristippus,  85 

to  society  and  had  lost  all  comprehension  of  its  ideal  goods  ;  it  ena- 
bles us  to  see  from  within  how  at  that  time  Greek  society  was  dis- 
integrating into  individuals.  When  Diogenes  called  himself  a 
cosmopolitan,  there  was  in  this  no  trace  of  the  ideal  thought  of  a 
community  of  all  men,  but  only  the  denial  of  his  adherence  to  any 
civilised  community ;  and  if  Crates  taught  that  the  plurality  of  gods 
exists  only  in  the  opinion  of  men,  and  that,  "  according  to  Nature," 
there  is  but  one  God,  there  is  in  the  Cynic  doctrine  no  trace  to  war- 
rant the  conclusion  that  this  monotheism  was  for  them  an  especially 
clear  idea  or  even  an  especially  deep  feeling. 

9.  In  complete  contrast  with  this  system  stands  Hedonism,  the 
philosophy  of  regardless  enjoyment.  Starting  as  did  the  Cynics 
from  the  incompleteness  of  the  Socratic  doctrine,  Aristippus  struck 
out  in  the  opposite  direction.  He  was  quick  to  give  to  the  concept 
of  the  good,  a  clear  and  simple  content,  —  that  of  pleasure  (iJSonJ). 
This  latter  conception  at  first  does  duty  under  the  general  psycholo- 
gical meaning  of  the.  feeling  of  contentment  which  grows  out  of 
the  fulfilment  of  every  striving  and  wish.1  Happiness  is  then  the 
state  of  pleasure  which  springs  from  the  satisfied  will.  If  this  is 
the  only  thing  to  be  considered,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  what 
the  object  of  will  and  of  gratification  is;  all  depends  on  the 
degree  of  pleasure,  on  the  strength  of  the  feeling  of  satisfaction.2 
This,  however,  in  the  opinion  of  Aristippus,  is  present  in  the  highest 
degree  in  the  case  of  sensuous,  bodily  enjoyment  which  relates  to 
the  immediate  present,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  moment.  If,  then, 
virtue  is  knowledge  directed  toward  happiness,  it  must  enable  man 
to  enjoy  as  much  and  as  vigorously  as  possible.  Virtue  is  ability 
for  enjoyment. 

Every  one,  to  be  sure,  may  and  can  enjoy ;  but  only  the  man  of 
education,  of  intelligence,  of  insight  —  the  wise  man  —  understands 
how  to  enjoy  rightly.  In  this  we  must  consider  not  only  the 
intelligent  appraisal  (<#)/ooi^o-ts),  which  knows  how  to  select,  among 
the  various  enjoyments  that  present  themselves  in  the  course  of 
life,  those  which  will  afford  the  pleasure  that  is  highest,  purest, 
least  mixed  with  pain ;  we  must  consider  also  the  inner  self-posses- 
sion of  the  man  who  is  not  blindly  to  follow  every  rising  appetite, 
and  who,  when  he  enjoys,  is  never  to  give  himself  entirely  up  to 
the  enjoyment,  but  is  to  stand  above  it  and  control  it.  The  enjoy- 
ment which  makes  man  the  slave  of  things  is,  indeed,  as  the  Cynics 

1  Besides  this,  also,  Xenophon  not  infrequently  puts  the  i?5iJ  into  the  mouth 
of  Socrates.  ... 

2  This,  too,  is  a  completely  correct  consequence  from  the  eudsemomstic  prin- 
ciple. 


86  The  Greeks :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. ' 

say,  to  be  rejected;  but  to  delight  in  pleasure  and  yet  not  give  one's 
self  up  to  it  is  harder  than  to  renounce  it,  as  they  do.  Of  this, 
however,  man  becomes  capable  through  right  insight  only.1 

On  this  ground  the  Cyrenaics,  in  particular  the  younger  Aristippus 
(called  ^rpoStSaKTo?,  "mother-taught,"  because  his  grandfather's 
wisdom  was  transmitted  to  him  through  his  mother  Arete),  set  on 
foot  systematic  investigations  as  to  the  origin  of  the  irdO^j  the 
feelings  and  impulses.  In  a  physiological  psychology  which  was 
connected  with  that  of  Protagoras  (cf.  below,  §  8),  they  traced  the 
varieties  in  feeling  back  to  states  of  motion  in  the  body :  to  rest 
corresponded  indifference,  to  violent  motion  pain,  to  gentle  motion 
pleasure.  Besides  such  explanatory  theories,  however,  this  philos- 
ophy of  bonvivants  extended  to  an  unprejudiced  general  theory 
of  things.  "For  them,  too,  as  Theodoi-us  taught,  all  ethical  and  legal 
prescriptions  were  ultimately  merely  institutions  that  were  valid  for 
the  mass  of  men;  the  educated  man  of  enjoyment  gives  himself 
no  trouble  about  them,  and  enjoys  things  when  they  come  into  his 
possession.  Theodorus,  who  bears  the  surname  "  the  Atheist,"  put 
aside  also  all  religious  scruples  which  are  opposed  to  devotion  to 
sensuous  enjoyment,  and  the  school  also  exerted  itself  in  this 
interest  to  strip  the  halo  from  religious  faith,  so  far  as  possible,  as 
is  proved  by  the  well-known  theory  of  Euemerus,  who  in  his  lepa. 
cH>aypa<£?7  undertook  to  trace  belief  in  the  gods  back  to  the  worship 
of  ancestors  and  veneration  of  heroes. 

Thus  the  Cyrenaics  ultimately  agreed  with  the  Cynics  in  this, 
that  they,  too,  regarded  all  that  is  fixed  vojuw,  i.e.  by  the  social 
convention  of  morals  and  law,  as  a  limitation  of  that  right  to  enjoy- 
ment which  man  has  by  nature  (<£vo-ei),  and  which  the  wise  man 
exercises  without  troubling  himself  about  historical  institutions. 
The  Hedonists  gladly  shared  the  refinement  of  enjoyment  which 
civilisation  brought  with  it;  they  found  it  convenient  and  per- 
missible that  the  intelligent  man  should  enjoy  the  honey  which 
others  prepared ;  but  no  feeling  of  duty  or  thankfulness  bound 
them  to  the  civilisation  whose  fruits  they  enjoyed.  This  same  con- 
dition of  recognising  no  native  land,  this  same  turning  aside  from 
the  feeling  'of  political  responsibility,  which  among  the  Cynics  grow 
out  of  'despising  the  enjoyments  of  civilisation,  resulted  for  the 
Oyrenaics  from  the  egoism  of  their  enjoyment.  Sacrifice  for 
others,  patriotism,  and  devotion  to  a  general  object,  Theodorus 
declared  to  be  a  form  of  foolishness  which  it  did  not  become  the 
wise  man  to  share,  and  even  Aristippus  rejoiced  in  the  freedom  from 

i  Cf.  Diog.  Laert.  II.  65  ft 


CHAP.  2,  §  S.]       Problem  of  Science :  the  Sophists.  87 

connection  with  any  state,  which  his  wandering  life  afforded  him.1 
The  philosophy  of  the  parasites,  who  feasted  at  the  full  table  of 
Grecian  beauty,  was  as  far  removed  from  the  ideal  meaning  of  that 
beauty  as  was  the  philosophy  of  the  beggars  who  lay  at  the  threshold. 
In  the  meantime,  the  principle  of  the  expert  weighing  of  enjoy- 
ments contains  an  element  which  necessarily  leads  beyond  that 
doctrine  of  enjoyment  for  the  moment  which  Aristippus  preached, 
and  this  advance  was  made  in  two  directions,  Aristippus  himself 
had  already  admitted  that  in  the  act  of  weighing,  the  pleasure 
and  pain  which  would  in  future  result  from  the  enjoyment 
must  be  taken  into  account,-  Tlieodorus  found  that  the  highest  good 
was  to  be  sought  rather  in  the  cheerful  frame  of  mind  (x^/oa)  than 
in  the  enjoyment  of  the  moment,  and  Anniceris  came  to  see  that  this 
could  be  attained  in  a  higher  degree  through  the  spiritual  joys  of 
human  intercourse,  of  friendship,  of  the  family,  and  of  civil  society 
than  through  bodily  enjoyments.  This  knowledge  that  the  enjoy- 
ments afforded  by  the  intellectual  and  spiritual  aspects  of  .civilisa- 
tion are  ultimately  finer,  richer,  and  more  gratifying  than  those 
of  bodily  existence,  leads  directly  over  into  the  doctrine  of  the 
Epicureans.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Hedonistic  school  could 
not  fail  ultimately  to  see  that  the  painless  enjoyment  to  which  it 
aimed  to  educate  the  man  of  culture  is  but  a  rare  lot.  In  general, 
found  Hegesias,  he  is  to  be  accounted -as  already  happy  who  attains 
the  painless  state,  is  free  from  actual  discomfort.  With  the  great 
mass  of  men  discomfort,  the  pain  of  unsatisfied  desires,  pre- 
ponderates :  for  them  it  would  be  better,  therefore,  not  to  live. 
The  impressiveness  with  which  he  presented  this  brought  him  the 
surname  7rao-i0avaro?, — he  persuaded  to  death.  He  is  the  first 
representative  of  eudcemonistic  pessimism;  with  this  doctrine,  how- 
ever, eudsemonisHi  refutes  itself.  He  shows  that  if  happiness, 
satisfaction  of  wishes,  and  enjoyment  are  to  be  the  meaning  and 
end  of  human  life,  it  misses  this  end,  and  is  to  be  rejected  as 
worthless.  Pessimism  is  the  last  but  also  the  annihilating  con- 
sequence of  eudaemonisin, — its  immanent  criticism. 

§  8.  The  Problem  of  Science,2 

P.  Natorp,  Forschungen  zur  GescJiiclite  des  Erkenntnissproblems  bei  den 
AUen.    Berlin,  1884. 

The  Sophists  were  teachers  of  political  eloquence.    They  were 
obliged  in  the  first  instance  to  give  instruction  on  the  nature  and 

1  Xen.  Mem.  II.  1,  8  ff.  .    , 

2  [Wissenschaft.    Science,  as  used  in  this  section,  is  nearly  equivalent  to 
"  scientific  knowledge."    Sometimes  the  subjective  aspect  of  the  term  is  promi- 
nent, and  sometimes  the  objective.] 


88  The  G-reeJcs :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 

right  use  of  language.  And  while  they  were  transforming  rhetoric 
from  a  traditional  art  to  a  science,  they  applied  themselves  in  the 
first  place  to  linguistic  researches,  and  became  creators  of  grammar 
and  syntax.  They  instituted  investigations  as  to  the  parts  of  the 
sentence,  the  use  of  words,  synonyms,  and  etymology.  Prodicus, 
Hippias,  and  Protagoras  distinguished  themselves  in  this  respect; 
as  to  the  fruit  of  their  investigations,  we  are  only  imperfectly 
informed. 

1.  Our  knowledge  of  their  logical  acquisitions,  which  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  allusions  are  lost,  is  in  a  still  more  unfortunate 
condition.  For,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  teachers  of  rhetoric 
treated  also  the  train  of  thought  in  discourse.  This  train  of  thought, 
however,  consists  in  proof  and  refutation.  It  was  then  inevitable 
that  the  Sophists  should  project  a  theory  of  proof  and  refutation, 
and  there  is  explicit  testimony  to  this  in  the  case  of  Protagoras.1 
Unfortunately,  there  is  no  more  precise  information  as  to  how 
far  the  Sophists  proceeded  with  this,  and  as  to  whether  they 
attempted  to  separate  out  the  logical  Forms  from  those  elements 
which  belong  to  the  content  of  thought.  It  is  characteristic  that 
the  little  information  which  we  have  concerning  the  logic  of  the 
Sophists  relates  almost  without  exception  to  their  emphasising  of 
the  principle  of  contradiction.  To  the  essential  nature  of  the  advo- 
cate's task,  refutation  was  more  closely  related  than  proof.  Protag- 
oras left  a  special  treatise  2  concerning  Grounds  of  Refutation, 
perhaps  his  most  important  writing,  and  formulated  the  law  of  the 
contradictory  opposite,  so  far,  at  least,  as  to  say  that  there  are  with 
reference  to  every  object  two  mutually  opposing  propositions,  and 
to  draw  consequences  from  this.  He  thus  formulated,  in  fact,  the 
procedure  which  Zeno  had  practically  employed,  and  which  also 
played  a  great  part  in  the  disciplinary  exercises  of  the  Sophists, 
indeed  the  greatest  part. 

For  it  was  one  of  the  main  arts  of  these  "  Enlighteners  "  to  per- 
plex men  as  to  the  ideas  previously  regarded  as  valid,  to  involve 
them  in  contradictions,  and  when  the  victims  were  thus  confused, 
to  force  them  if  possible,  by  logical  consequences,  real  or  manufac- 
tured, to  such  absurd  answers  as  to  make  them  become  ridiculous 
to  themselves  and  others.  From  the  examples  which  Plato s  and 
Aristotle  3  have  preserved,  it  is  evident  that  this  procedure  was  not 


1  Diog.  Laert.  IX.  51  fl. 

2  It  is  probable  that  Kara/3«£XXo*™  (sc.  Xfyoi)  and  'Avrfroytai  are  only  two 
different  titles  of  this  work,  the  first  chapter  of  which  treated  truth. 

8  Plato  in  the  JSuthydemus  and  in  the  Cratylus,  Aristotle  in  the  book  "On  the 
Sophistic  Fallacies." 


CHAP.  2,  §  8.]     Problem  of  Science :  the  Megarians.  89 

always  any  too  purely  logical,  but  was  thoroughly  sophistical  in  the 
present  sense  of  the  word.  The  examples  show  that  these  people 
let  slip  no  ambiguity  in  speech,  no  awkwardness  in  popular  expres- 
sion, if  out  of  it  they  might  weave  a  snare  of  absurdity.  The 
witticisms  which  result  are  often  based  merely  upon  language, 
grammar,  and  etymology;  more  rarely  they  are  properly  logical; 
quite  often,  however,  coarse  and  dull.  Characteristic  here,  too,  are 
the  catch-questions,  where  either  an  affirmative  or  negative  answer, 
according  to  the  customs  and  presuppositions  of  the  ordinary  mean- 
ings of  the  words,  gives  rise  to  nonsensical  consequences,  unforeseen 
by  the  one  answering.1 

Plato  has  portrayed  two  brothers,  Eutliydemus  and  DionysidoruSj 
who  practised  this  art  of  logomachy  or  eristic,  which  had  great 
success  among  the  Athenians  who  were  great  talkers  and  accus- 
tomed to  word-quibbling.  Aside  from  them,  it  was  prosecuted 
principally  by  the  Megarians,  among  whom  the  head  of  the  school, 
Euclid,  busied  himself  with  the  theory  of  refutation.2  His  adhe- 
rents, Eubulides  and  Alexinus,  were  famous  for  a  series  of  such 
catches,  which  made  a  great  sensation  and  called  forth  a  whole  lit- 
erature.3  Among  these  there  are  two,  the  "  Heap  "  and  the  "  Bald- 
head,"4  the  fundamental  thought  in  which  is  to  be  traced  back  to 
Zeno,  and  was  introduced  by  him  into  the  arguments  by  which  he 
wished  to  show  that  the  composition  of  magnitudes  out  of  small 
parts  is  impossible.  In  like  manner,  Zeno's  arguments  against 
motion  were  amplified,  even  if  not  deepened  or  strengthened,6  by 
another  Megarian,  Diodorus  Cronos.  Unwearied  in  finding  out  such 
aporicB,  difficulties,  and  contradictions,  this  same  Diodorus  invented 
also  the  famous  argument  (Kvpiewv)  which  was  designed  to  destroy 
the  conception  of  possibility:  only  the  actual  is  possible;  for  a 
possible  which  does  not  become  actual  evinces  itself  thereby  to  be 
impossible.6 

In  another  manner,  also,  the  Sophists  who  were  affiliated  with  the 
JEleatics,  show  an  extreme  application  of  the  principle  of  contradic- 
tion, and  a  corresponding  exaggeration  of  the  principle  of  identity. 
Even  Gorgias  seems  to  have  supported  his  opinion  that  all  state- 
ments are  false,  upon  the  assumption  that  it  is  incorrect  to  predicate 


1  As  a  typical  example,  "  Have  you  left  off  beating  your  father  ?  "  or  "  Have 
you  shed  your  horns  ?  " 

2  Diog.  Laert.  II.  107. 

»  Cf.  Prantl,  Gesch.  der  Log,  I.  33  ff. 

*  Which  kernel  of  grain  by  being  added  makes  the  heap  ?    Which  hair  falling 
out  makes  the  bald  head  ? 

5  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  X.  85  ff. 

*  Cic.  De  Fato,  7,  13. 


90  The  Greeks :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 

of  any  subject  anything  else  than  just  this  subject  itself;  and  the 
Cynics,  as  well  as  Stilpo  the  Megarian,  made  this  thought  their  own 
There  remain,  accordingly,  only  such  purely  identical  judgments  as, 
good  is  good,  man  is  man,  etc.1  As  a  logical  consequence  of  this, 
judging  and  talking  are  made  as  impossible  as  were  plurality  and 
motion  according  to  the  Eleatic  principle.  As  in  the  metaphysics 
of  Parrnenides,  the  ghost  of  which  appears  occasionally  both  among 
the  Megarians  and  the  Cynics  (cf.  below,  No,  5),  the  lack  of  concep- 
tions of  relation  permitted  no  combination  of  unity  with  plurality 
and  led  to  a  denial  of  plurality,  so  here  the  lack  of  conceptions  of 
logical  relation  made  it  appear  impossible  to  assert  of  the  subject  a 
variety  of  predicates. 

2.  In  all  these  devious  windings  taken  by  the  researches  of  the 
Sophists  concerning  the  knowing  activity,  the  sceptical  direction  is 
manifesting  itself.  If  on  such  grounds  the  logical  impossibility  of 
all  formation  of  synthetic  propositions  was  maintained,  this  showed 
that  knowledge  itself  was  irreconcilable  with  the  abstract '  principle 
of  identity,  as  it  had  been  formulated  in  the  Eleatics'  doctrine  of 
Being,  The  doctrine  of  Parmenides  had  itself  become  ensnared 
past  help  in  the  dichotomies  of  Zeno.  This  came  to  most  open 
expression  in  the  treatise  of  Gorgias,2  which  declared  Being,  Knowl- 
edge, and  Communication  of  Knowledge  to  be  impossible.  There  is 
nothing;  for  both  Being,  which  can  be  thought  neither  as  eternal 
nor  as  transitory,  neither  as  one  nor  as  manifold,  and  Non-being  are 
conceptions  that  are  in  themselves  contradictory.  If,  however, 
there  were  anything,  it  would  not  be  knowable ;  for  that  which  is 
thought  is  always  something  else  than  that  which  actually  is,  other- 
wise they  could  not  be  distinguished.  Finally,  if  there  were  knowl- 
edge, it  could  not  be  taught ;  for  every  one  has  only  his  own  ideas, 
and  in  view  of  the  difference  between  the  thoughts  and  the  signs 
which  must  be  employed  in  their  communication,  there  is  no  guar- 
anty of  mutual  understanding. 

This  nihilism,  to  be  sure,  scarcely  claimed  to  be  taken  in  earnest ; 
even  the  title  of  the  book,  Trept  <£ixrec«>s  $  TTC/H  TOT)  $  OVTOS  (Concern- 
ing Nature,  or  concerning  that  which  is  not),  appears  like  a 
grotesque  farce.  The  Rhetorician,  trained  to  formal  dexterity,  who 
despised  all  earnest  science  and  pursued  only  his  art  of  speaking,3 
indulged  in  the  jest  of  satirising  as  empty  the  entire  labour  of  philos- 


1  Plat.  The&t,  201  E.  Cf.  Soph.  251  B. 

2  Extracts  are  found  partly  in  the  third  chapter  of  the  pseudo-Aristotelian 
treatise  De  Xenophane,  Zenone,  G-orgia  (cf.  p.  30),  in  part  in  Sext.  Emp.  VIL 
65-86. 

8  Plat.  3/eno.  95  C. 


CHAP.  2,  §  8.]       Prollem  of  Science :  Protagoras.  91 

ophy,  and  doing  this  ironically  in  the  style  of  Zeno's  pinching-mill 
of  contradictions.  But  just  the  facts  that  he  did  this,  and  that  his 
work  found  applause,  show  how  among  the  men  who  occupied  them- 
selves in  instructing  the  people,  and  in  the  circles  of  scientific 
culture  itself,  faith  in  science  was  becoming  lost  at  just  the  time 
when  the  mass  of  the  people  was  seeking  its  welfare  in  it.  This 
despair  of  truth  is  the  more  comprehensible,  as  we  see  how  the 
serious  scientific  investigation  of  Protagoras  attained  the  same 
result. 

E.  Laas,  Idealismus  und  Positivismus.    I.  Berlin,  1880. 

W.  Halbfass.  Die  Berichte  des  Platon  und  Aristoteles  uber  Protagoras. 
Strassb.  1882. 

Sattig,  Der  Protagoreiscke  Sensualisms  (Zeitschrift  fur  Philosophic,  vols. 
86-89). 

3.  The  germ  of  the  doctrine  of  Protagoras  is  found  in  his  effort 
to  explain  the  ideas  of  the  human  mind  psycho-geneticalty.  Insight 
into  the  origin  and  development  of  ideas  was  absolutely  necessary 
for  the  practical  aspect  of  a  system  of  ethics,  and  particularly  for 
the  cultivation  of  rhetoric.  The  statements,  however,  which  the 
metaphysicians  had  occasionally  uttered,  were  in  nowise  sufficient 
for  the  purpose,  constructed  as  they  were  from  general  presupposi- 
tions and  permeated  by  them  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  observations  in 
physiological  psychology  which  had  been  made  in  the  more  recent 
circles  of  investigators  who  were  more  given  to  natural  science, 
offered  themselves  as  fit  for  the  purpose.  Thinking  and  perceiving 
had  been  set  over  against  each  other  from  the  point  of  view  of 
their  relative  worth ;  this  determining  element  now  disappeared  for 
Protagoras,  and  so  there  remained  for  him  only  the  view  of  the 
psychological  identity  of  thinking  and  perceiving,  —  a  view  to  which 
even  those  metaphysicians  had  committed  themselves  as  soon  as 
they  attempted  to  explain  ideation  from  the  world-process  (cf.  §  8). 
In  consequence  of  this  he  declared  that  the  entire  psychical  life  con- 
sists only  in  perceptions.1  This  sensualism  was  then  illustrated  by 
the  great  mass  of  facts  which  physiological  psychology  had  assembled 
in  connection  with  the  teaching  of  the  physicians  that  were  scien- 
tific investigators,  and  by  the  numerous  theories  which  had  been 
brought  forward  with  special  reference  to  the  process  of  the  action 
of  the  senses. 

All  these,  however,  had  in  common  the  idea  that  perception  rests 
in  the  last  instance  upon  motion,  as  does  every  process  by  which 
things  come  to  be  or  occur  in  the  world.  In  this  even  Anaxagoras 

i  Diog.  Laert.  IX.  51. 


92  The  G-reeJcs:  Anthropological  Period.  [PART!. 

and  Empedocles  were  at  one  with  the  Atomists,  from  whose  school 
Protagoras,  as  a  native  of  Abdera,  had  probably  gone  out.  This 
agreement  extended  still  farther  to  the  assumption,  made  on  all 
sides,  that  in  perception  there  was  not  only  a  condition  of  motion 
in  the  thing  to  be  perceived,  but  also  a  like  condition  in  the  percip- 
ient organ.  Whatever  view  might  be  taken  as  to  the  metaphysical 
essence  of  that  which  was  there  in  motion,  it  seemed  to  be  acknowl- 
edged as  undoubted  that  every  perception  presupposed  this  double 
motion.  Empedocles  had  already  anticipated  the  doctrine  that  the 
inner  organic  motion  advances  to  meet  the  outer.1 

On  this  foundation 2  the  Protagorean  theory  of  knowledge  is  built 
up.  If,  that  is  to  say,  perception  is  the  product  of  these  two  motions 
directed  toward  one  another,  it  is  obviously  something  else  than  the 
perceiving  subject)  but  just  as  obviously  it  is  something  else  than  the 
object  ivhich  calls  forth  the  perception.  Conditioned  by  both,  it  is  yet 
different  from  both.  This  pregnant  discovery  is  designated  as  the 
doctrine  of  the  subjectivity  of  sense-perception. 

Nevertheless,  in  the  case  of  Protagoras  this  appears  with  a  peculiar 
restriction.  Since,  like  all  earlier  thinkers,  he  evidently  could  not 
assume  a  consciousness  without  a  corresponding  existent  content  of 
consciousness,  he  taught  that  from  this  double  motion  there  was  a  two- 
fold result :  viz.  perception  (aurftytw)  in  the  man,  and  content  of  per- 
ception (TO  alcrQyTov)  in  the  thing.  Perception  is  therefore  indeed 
the  completely  adequate  knowledge  of  what  is  perceived,  but  no  knowl- 
edge of  the  thing.  Every  perception  is  then  in  so  far  true  as,  at 
the  instant  when  it  arises,  there  arises  also  in  connection  with  the 
thing  the  represented  content,  as  alffOvyrw,  but  no  perception  knows 
the  thing  itself.  Consequently  every  one  knows  things  not  as 
they  are,  but  as  they  are  in  the  moment  of  perception  for  him,  and 
for  him  only ;  and  they  are  in  this  moment  with  reference  to  him 
such  as  he  represents  them  to  himself.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the 
Protagorean  relativism,  according  to  which  things  are  for  every 
individual  such  as  they  appear  to  him  j  and  this  he  expressed  in  the 
famous  proposition  that  man  is  the  measure  of  all  things. 

According  to  this,  therefore,  every  opinion  which  grows  out  of  per- 
ception is  true,  and  yet  in  a  certain  sense,  just  for  this  reason,  it  is 

1  Whether  these  two  motions  were  already  designated  by  Protagoras  as  active 
and  passive  (vowvv  and  ird<rxoy^  as  is  the  case  in  Plato's  presentation  (The&t. 
156  A) ,  may  remain  undecided.   At  all  events,  such  anthropological  categories  in 
the  mouth  of  the  Sophist  are  not  surprising. 

2  With  regard  to  such  preparatory  ideas,  there  is  no  ground  to  trace  this 
theory  of  the  motions  which  advance  to  meet  one  another,  to  direct  connection 
with  fferaclitus.    Its  Heraclitean  element,  which  Plato  very  correctly  saw,  was 
sufficiently  maintained  by  those  direct  predecessors  who  reduced  all  Becoming 
and  change  to  relations  of  motion. 


CHAP.  2,  §  8.]       Problem  of  Science  :  Protagoras.  93 

also  false.  It  is  valid  only  for  the  one  perceiving,  and  for  him  even 
only  at  the  moment  when  it  arises.  All  universal  validity  forsakes 
it.  And  since,  according  to  the  view  of  Protagoras,  there  is  no 
other  kind  of  ideas,  and  therefore  no  other  knowledge  than  percep- 
tion, there  is  for  human  knowledge  nothing  whatever  that  is  univer- 
sally valid.  This  view  is  phenomenalism  in  so  far  as  it  teaches  in 
this  entirely  definite  sense  a  knowledge  of  the  phenomenon,  limited 
to  the  individual  and  to  the  moinent  j  it  is,  however,  scepticism  in  so 
far  as  it  rejects  all  knowledge  which  transcends  that. 

How  far  Protagoras  himself  drew  practical  consequences  from  this 
principle  that  every  one's  opinion  is  true  for  himself,  we  do  not 
know.  Later  Sophists  concluded  that,  according  to  this,  error  would 
not  be  possible ;  everything,  and  again  nothing,  belongs  to  everything 
as  attribute.  In  particular  they  concluded  that  no  actual  contradic- 
tion is  possible ;  for  since  every  one  talks  about  the  content  of  his 
perception,  different  assertions  can  never  have  the  same  object.  At 
all  events,  Protagoras  refused  to  make  any  positive  statement  con- 
cerning what  is;  he  spoke  not  of  the  actual  reality  that  moves, 
but  only  of  motion,  and  of  the  phenomena  which  it  produces  for 
perception. 

Moreover,  the  attempt  was  now  made,  whether  by  Protagoras  him- 
self, or  by  the  Sophistic  activity  dependent  upon  him,  to  trace  dif- 
ferences in  perception,  and  so  also  in  the  phenomenon,  back  to 
differences  in  this  motion.  It  was  principally  the  velocity  of  the 
motion  which  was  considered  in  this  connection,  though  the  form  also 
was  probably  regarded.1  It  is  interesting  to  note  further  that  under 
the  concept  of  perception  not  only  sensations  and  perceptions,  but 
also  the  sensuous  feelings  and  desires,  were  subsumed ;  it  is  note- 
worthy especially  because  to  these  states  also  an  aicrOijrw,  a  momen- 
tary qualification  of  the  thing  which  produced  the  perception,  was 
held  to  correspond.  The  predicates  of  agreeableness  and  desir- 
ability receive  in  this  way  the  same  valuation  epistemologically 
as  do  the  predicates  of  sensuous  qualification.  "What  appears 
agreeable,  useful,  and  desirable  to  any  one  is  agreeable,  useful, 
and  desirable  for  him.  The  individual  state  of  consciousness  is 
here,  too,  the  measure  of  things,  and  no  other  universally  valid 
determination  of  the  worth  of  things  exists.  In  this  direction 
the  Hedonism  of  Aristippus  was  developed  out  of  the  Protagorean 
doctrine ;  we  know,  teaches  Aristippus,  not  things,  but  only  their 

1  Doubtless  we  have  here  asserting  itself  the  development  of  the  Pythagorean 
theory  of  knowledge  out  of  the  Atomistic  school,  to  which  this  reduction  of  the 
qualitative  to  the  quantitative  was  essential  (of.  above,  §  5),  even  though  the  So- 
phist declined  from  principle  to  enter  into  such  metaphysical  theories  as  Atomism, 


94  The  Greeks  :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 


•worth  for  us,  and  the  states  (ira^)  into  which  they  pnt  us.  These, 
however,  are  rest  and  indifference,  violent  motion  and  pain,  or  gentle 
motion  and  pleasure.  Of  these  only  the  last  is  worth  striving  for 
(of.  above,  §7,9). 

4.  Thus  all  courses  of  Sophistic  thought  issued  in  giving  up  truth 
as  unattainable.  Socrates,  however,  needed  truth,  and  on  this  account 
he  believed  that  it  was  to  be  attained  if  it  were  honestly  sought  for. 
Virtue  is  knowledge  ;  and  since  there  must  be  virtue,  there  must  be 
knowledge  also.  Here  for  the  first  time  in  history  the  moral  con- 
sciousness  appears  with  complete  clearness  as  an  epistemological 
postulate.  Because  morality  is  not  possible  without  knowledge, 
there  must  be  knowledge  ;  and  if  knowledge  is  not  here  and  now 
existent,  it  must  be  striven  for  as  the  lover  seeks  for  the  possession 
of  the  loved  object.  Science  is  the  yearning,  struggling  love  for 
knowledge,  —  <£docro<]E>ia,  philosophy  (cf.  Plat.  Symp.  203  E). 

Out  of  this  conviction  grow  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  Socratic  * 
doctrine  of  science,2  and  in  the  first  place  the  bounds  within  which 
he  held  knowledge  to  be  necessary  and  therefore  possible.  It  is 
only  a  knowledge  of  the  relations  of  human  life  that  is  necessary 
for  the  ethical  life;  only  for  these  is  a  knowing  necessary,  and 
only  for  these  is  man's  knowing  faculty  adequate.  Hypotheses  as 
to  metaphysics  and  the  philosophy  of  Nature  have  nothing  to  do 
with  man's  ethical  task,  and  they  are  left  unconsidered  by  Socrates, 
so  much  the  rather  as  he  shared  the  view  of  the  Sophists  that  it 
was  impossible  to  gain  a  sure  knowledge  concerning  them.  Science 
is  possible  only  as  practical  insight,  as  knowledge  of  the  ethical 
life. 

This  view  was  formulated  still  more  sharply  by  the  Sophistic 
successors  of  Socrates  under  the  influence  of  his  eudaemonistic 
principle.  For  both  Cynics  and  Cyrenaics  science  had  worth  only 
so  far  as  it  affords  to  man  the  right  insight  which  serves  to  make 
him  happy.  With  Antisthenes  and  Diogenes  science  was  prized 
not  in  itself,  but  as  a  means  for  controlling  the  desires  and  for 
knowing  man's  natural  needs;  the  Cyrenaics  said  the  causes  of 
perception  (ra  TreTrot^/coVa  ra  irdBrj)  are  for  us  as  much  matters  of 
indifference  as  they  are  unknowable;  knowledge  which  leads  to 
happiness  :has  to  do  only  with  our  states,  which  we  know  with 
certainty.  Indifference  toward  metaphysics  and  natural  science 

1  Cf.  Fr.  Schleiermacher,  Ueber  den  Werth  des  Sokrates  als  Philosopher*,  (Gesi 
W.  III.,  Bd.2,pp.  287  ff.). 

2  [  Wissenschaftslehre.     Wissenschaft,  "scientia,"  "science,"  has  here  both 
its  subjective  and  objective  sense  ;  knowledge  as  mental  act,  and  knowledge  as 
a  body  of  truth.    Hence  Wissenschaftslehre  means  both  "doctrine  of  science," 
i.e.  science  of  knowledge,  and  "  scientific  doctrine"  i.e.  philosophy,—  Tr.] 


CHAP.  2,  §  8.]          Problem  of  Science :  Socrates.  95 

is  with  Socrates,  as  with  the  Sophists,  the  result  of  employment 
with  the  inner  nature  of  man. 

5.  It  will  remain  a  noteworthy  fact  for  all  time  that  a  man  who 
so  narrowed  for  himself  the  intellectual  horizon  of  scientific  research 
as  did  Socrates,  should  yet  determine  within  this  the  essential 
nature  of  science  itself,  in  a  manner  so  clear  and  so  authoritative 
for  all  the  future.  This  achievement  was  due  essentially  to  his 
opposition  to  the  relativism  of  the  Sophists,  —  an  opposition  that  was 
a  matter  both  of  instinct  and  of  positive  conviction.  They  taught 
that  there  are  only  opinions  (So'£ai)  which  hold  good  for  individuals 
with  psycho-genetic  necessity ;  he,  however,  sought  a  knowledge  that 
should  be  authoritative  for  all  in  like  manner.  In  contrast  with 
the  change  and  multiplicity  of  individual  ideas  he  demanded  the 
one  and  abiding  which  all  should  acknowledge.  He  sought  the 
logical  "Nature"  (<£™ns)  as  others  had  sought  the  cosmological 
or  ethical  "Nature"  (cf.  §  7,  1),  and  found  it  in  the  concept  or 
general  notion.  Here,  too,  the  view  propounded  was  rooted  in  the 
demand,  the  theory  in  the  postulate. 

The  ancient  thinkers,  also,  had  had  a  feeling  that  the  rational 
thinking  to  which  they  owed  their  knowledge  was  something  essen- 
tially other  than  the  sensuous  mode  of  apprehending  the  world  in 
vogue  in  everyday  life,  or  than  traditional  opinion ;  but  they  had 
not  been  able  to  carry  out  this  distinction  in  relative  worth  either 
psychologically  or  logically.  Socrates  succeeded  in  this  because 
here,  too,  he  defined  the  thing  in  question  by  the  work  which  he 
expected  it  to  perform.  The  idea  that  is  to  be  more  than  opinion, 
that  is  to  serve  as  knowledge  for  all,  must  be  what  is  common 
in  all  the  particular  ideas  which  have  forced  themselves  upon 
individuals  in  individual  relations  :  subjective  universal  validity  is 
to  be  expected  only  for  the  objectively  universal.  Hence,  if  there  is 
to  be  knowledge,  it  is  to  be  found  only  in  that  in  which  all  par- 
ticular ideas  agree.  This  universal  in  the  object-matter  which 
makes  possible  the  subjective  community  of  ideas  is  the  concept 
(Xoyos),andscie7ice  [scientific  knowledge]  is  accordingly  conceptional 
thinking, — abstract  thought.  The  universal  validity  which  is 
claimed  for  knowledge  is  only  possible  on  condition  that  the 
scientific  concept  brings  out  into  relief  the  common  element  which 
is  contained  in  all  individual  perceptions  and  opinions. 

Hence  the  goal  of  all  scientific  work  is  the  determination  of  the 
essential  nature  of  conceptions,  —  definition.  The  aim  of  investiga- 
tion is  to  establish  ri  Ifcaorov  cfy,  what  each  thing  is,  and  to  come  to 
ideas  of  an  abiding  nature  as  over  against  changing  opinions. 


96  The  Greeks  :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 

This  doctrine  was  in  some  measure  prepared  for  by  the  investigations  of  the 
Sophists  concerning  the  meaning  of  words,  synonyms,  and  etymological  rela- 
tions. In  the  latter  respect,  the  hypotheses  of  the  Sophists  in  the  beginnings  of 
the  philosophy  of  language  (cf.  Plato's  Cmtyliis)  extended  to  the  question 
whether  a  natural  or  only  a  conventional  relation  obtains  between  words  and 
their  meanings  (0i}<ret  y  0<ro-ei).  Prodicus,  whom  Socrates  mentions  with  com- 
mendation, seems  to  have  been  specially  successful  in  fixing  the  meanings  of  words, 

Among  the  later  Sophists  the  Socratic  demand  for  fixed  conceptions  became 
forthwith  fused  with  the  Eleatic  metaphysics,  and  with  its  postulate  of  the  iden- 
tity of  Being  with  itself.  Euclid  called  virtue,  or  the  good,  the  only  Being  :  it 
remains  the  same,  changeless  in  itself,  and  only  the  names  by  which  men  call 
it  differ.  Antisthenes,  indeed,  explained  the  concept  by  the  definition  that  it 
is  this  which  determines  the  timeless  Being  of  the  thing;1  but  he  conceived 
this  identity  of  the  existent  with  itself,  raised  above  all  relations,  in  so  bold  a 
manner  that  he  thought  of  every  truly  existing  entity  as  capable  of  being  defined 
only  through  itself.  Predication  is  impossible.  There  are  none  but  analytic 
judgments  (cf.  above,  No.  1).  Accordingly  only  the  composite  can  have  its 
essential  elements  determined  in  conceptions  ;  the  simple  is  not  to  be  defined.2 
There  is,  then,  no  possibility  of  understanding  the  simple  by  conceptions  ;  it  can 
only  be  exhibited  in  a  sensuous  presentation.  The  Cynics  came  thus  from  the 
Socratic  doctrine  of  the  conception  to  a  sensualism  which  recognised  as  simple 
and  original  only  that  which  can  be  grasped  with  the  hands  and  seen  with  the 
eyes,  and  this  is  the  ground  of  their  opposition  to  Plato. 

6.  The  searching  out  of  conceptions  (for  his  purpose,  indeed,  only 
ethical  conceptions)  was  accordingly  for  Socrates  the  essence  of 
science,  and  this  determined  in  the  first  place  the  outer  form  of  his 
philosophising.  The  conception  was  to  be  that  which  is  valid  for 
all  :  it  must  then  be  found  in  common  thinking.  Socrates  is  neither 
a  solitary  hypercritic  nor  an  instructor  who  teaches  ex  cathedra,  but 
a  man  thirsting  for  the  truth,  as  anxious  to  instruct  himself  as  to 
teach  others.  His  philosophy  is  a  philosophy  of  the  dialogue;  it 
develops  itself  in  conversation  which  he  was  ready  to  begin  with 
every  one  who  would  talk  with  him.3  To  the  ethical  conceptions 
which  he  alone  was  seeking  for,  it  was  indeed  easy  to  find  access 
from  any  object  whatever  of  everyday  business.  The  common 
element  must  be  found  in  the  mutual  exchange  of  thoughts  ;  the 
SioAo-yto-juos  was  the  way  to  the  Xoyos.  But  this  "conversation" 
encountered  many  difficulties  :  the  inertia  of  the  customary  mode 
of  thinkingj  the  idle  desire  for  innovation,  and  the  paradoxical  state- 
ments which  were  characteristic  of  the  Sophists,  the  pride  belong- 
ing to  seeming  knowledge  and  thoughtless  imitation.  Into  such  a 
condition  of  things  Socrates  made  his  entrance  by  introducing  him- 
self as  one  eager  to  learn.  By  skilful  questions  he  drew  out  the 
views  of  others,  disclosed  the  defects  in  these  views  with  remorse- 
less consistency,  -and  finally  led  the  Athenian,  proud  of  his  culture, 
into  the  state  of  mind  where  he  recognised  that  insight  into  one's 


1  \6yos  tffTiv  6  rt>  ri  ?jv  TJ  &m  5vj\uv  :  Diog.  Laert.  VI.  3. 

2  Plat.  Thecct.  202  B. 

8  This  factor  united  with  the  influence  of  Zeno's  dialectic  to  stamp  upon  the 
succeeding  philosophical  literature  the  form  of  the  dialogue. 


CHAP.  2,  §  8.]          Problem  of  Science :  Socrates.  97 

own  ignorance,  is  the  beginning  of  all  knowledge.  Whoever  stood 
this  test  and  still  remained  with  him  was  taken  into  partnership 
in  a  serious  effort  to  determine,  in  common  thinking,  the  essential 
meaning  of  conceptions.  Undertaking  the  direction  of  the  conver- 
sation, Socrates  brought  his  companion  step  by  step  to  unfold  his 
own  thoughts  in  clearer,  less  contradictory  statements,  and  so  caused 
him  to  bring  to  definite  expression  what  was  slumbering  in  him  as 
an  imperfect  presentiment.  He  called  this  his  art  of  mental  mid- 
wifery, and  that  preparation  for  it  his  irony. 

7.  The  maieutic  method    has,   however,  still    another  essential 
meaning.    In  the  process   of  conversation  the   common  rational 
quality  comes  to  light,  to  which  all  parts  are  subject  in  spite  of 
their  diverging  opinions.     The  conception  is  not  to  be  made,  it  is 
to  be  found ;  it  is  already  there,  it  requires  only  to  be  delivered  from 
the  envelopes  of  individual  experiences  and  opinions  in  which  it 
lies  hidden.    The  procedure  of  the  Socratic  formation  of  conceptions 
is,  therefore,  epagogic  or  inductive :  it  leads  to  the  generic  concep- 
tion by  the  comparison  of  particular  views  and  individual  sensuous 
presentations;  it  decides  every  individual  question  by  seeking  to 
press  forward  to  determine  a  general  conception.    This  is  accom- 
plished by  bringing  together  analogous  cases,  and  by  searching 
out  allied  relations.    The  general  conception  thus  gained  is  then 
employed  to  decide  the  special  problem  proposed,  and  this  subordi- 
nation of  the  particular  under  the  general  is  thus  worked  out  as  the 
fundamental  relation  of  scientific  knowledge. 

The  inductive  method  of  procedure  as  employed  by  Socrates, 
according  to  Xenophon  and  Plato,  is,  to  be  sure,  still  marked  by  a 
childlike  simplicity  and  imperfection.  It  lacks  as  yet  caution  in. 
generalisation  and  methodical  circumspection  in  the  formation  of 
conceptions.  The  need  for  the  general  is  so  lively  that  it  satisfies 
itself  at  once  with  hastily  gathered  material,  and  the  conviction  of 
the  determining  validity  of  the  conception  is  so  strong  that  the 
individual  questions  proposed  are  decided  forthwith  in  accordance 
with  it.  But  however  great  the  gaps  may  be  in  the  arguments  of 
Socrates,  the  significance  of  these  arguments  is  by  no  means  lessened. 
His  doctrine  of  induction  has  its  value  not  for  methodology,  but  for 
logic,  and  for  the  theory  of  knowledge.  It  fixes  in  a  way  that  is 
decisive  for  all  the  future  that  it  is  the  task  of  science  to  strive  to 
establish  general  conceptions  from  comparison  of  facts. 

8.  While  Socrates  thus  defined  the  essential  nature  of  science  as 
conceptional  thought,  —thinking  in  conceptions,  — he  also  fixed  the 
bounds  within  which  science  can  be  employed:  this  task  is,  in  his 
opinion,  to  be  fulfilled  only  within  the  domain  of  practical  life. 


98  The  Ghreeks :  Anthropological  Period.  [PART  I. 

Science  is,  as  regards  its  form,  the  formation  of  conceptions,  and  as 
regards  its  content  ethics. 

Meanwhile  the  whole  mass  of  ideas  concerning  Nature  and  all  the 
connected  questions  and  problems  still  persist,  and  though  for  the  most 
part  they  are  a  matter  of  indifference  for  the  moral  life,  neverthe- 
less they  cannot  be  entirely  put  aside.  But  after  Socrates  renounced 
the  task  of  attaining  insight  into  such  questions  through  conceptions, 
it  was  all  the  more  possible  for  him  to  form  an  idea  of  the  universe 
that  should  satisfy  his  scientifically  grounded  ethical  needs. 

So  it  comes  that  Socrates  puts  aside,  indeed,  all  natural  science, 
but  at  the  same  time  professes  a  teleological  view  of  Nature,  which 
admires  the  wisdom  in  the  arrangement  of  the  world,  the  adaptation 
in  things,1  and  which,  where  understanding  ceases,  trusts  Providence 
in  faith.  With  this  faith  Socrates  kept  himself  as  near  as  possible 
to  the  religious  ideas  of  his  people,  and  even  spoke  of  a  plurality  of 
gods,  although  he  indeed  inclined  to  the  ethical  monotheism  which 
was  preparing  in  his  time.  But  he  did  not  come  forward  in  such 
matters  as  a  reformer :  he  taught  morality,  and  if  he  expounded  his 
own  faith,  he  left  that  of  others  untouched. 

Out  of  this  faith,  however,  grew  the  conviction  with  which  he 
limited  the  rationalism  of  his  ethics,  —  his  confidence  in  the  Scuju.dviov. 
The  more  he  pressed  toward  clearness  of  conceptions  and  complete 
knowledge  of  ethical  relations,  and  the  more  true  to  himself  he  was 
in  this,  the  less  could  he  hide  from  himself  that  man  in  his  limita- 
tion does  not  completely  succeed  in  this  task,  that  there  are  condi- 
tions in  which  knowledge  is  not  sufficient  for  certain  decision,"  and 
where  feeling  enters  upon  its  rights.  Under  such  conditions  Soc- 
rates believed  that  he  heard  within  himself  the  daimonionj  a  coun- 
selling and  for  the  most  part  warning  voice.  He  thought  that  in 
this  way  the  gods  warned  from  evil  in  difficult  cases,  where  his 
knowledge  ceased,  the  man  who  otherwise  served  them. 

So  the  wise  man  of  Athens  set  faith  and  feeling  beside  ethical 
science. 

1  It  is  not  probable  that  Socrates  experienced  any  strong  influence  from 
Anaxagoras  in  this  respect,  for  the  latter's  teleology  relates  to  the  harmony  of 
the  stellar  universe,  not  to  human  life,  while  the  considerations  which  are 
ascribed  to  Socrates,  especially  by  Xenophon,  make  utility  for  man  the  standard 
for  admiration  of  the  world.  Much  more  closely  related  to  Socra-tic  faith  are 
the  religious  views  of  the  great  poets  of  Athens,  especially  the  tragedians. 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE  SYSTEMATIC  PERIOD. 

THE  third,  completing  period  of  Greek  science  harvested  the  fruit 
of  the  two  preceding  developments.  It  appears  essentially  as  a 
reciprocal  inter -penetration  ofcosmological  and  anthropological  bodies  of 
thought  This  union  appears  in  but  a  very  slight  degree  as  a  neces- 
sity found  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  still  less  as  a  demand  of  the 
time ;  rather,  it  is  in  its  essentials  the  work  of  great  personalities 
and  of  the  peculiar  direction  taken  by  their  knowledge. 

The  tendency  of  the  time  was  rather  toward  a  practical  utilisa- 
tion of  science :  it  was  in  accord  with  this  tendency  when  research 
separated  into  special  investigations  on  mechanical,  physiological, 
rhetorical,  and  political  problems,  and  when  scientific  instruction 
accommodated  itself  to  the  ideas  of  the  ordinary  man.  Not  only  for 
the  mass  of  the  people,  but  for  scholars  as  well,  general  questions  of 
cosmology  had  lost  the  interest  which  in  the  beginning  was  directed 
toward  them,  and  the  fact  that  they  were  sceptically  abandoned 
because  of  the  Sophistic  theory  of  knowledge  is  nowhere  presented 
in  the  form  of  renunciation  or  lamentation. 

If,  therefore,  Greek  philosophy  turned  with  renewed  force  from 
the  investigation  of  human  thinking  and  willing — researches  with 
which  it  had  busied  itself  during  the  time  of  the  Enlightenment  — 
back  to  the  great  problems  of  metaphysics,  and  reached  its  greatest 
height  along  this  path,  it  owes  this  achievement  to  the  personal 
thirst  for  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  three  great  men  who 
brought  in  this  most  valuable  development  of  ancient  thought,  and 
stand  as  its  representatives, — Democritiis,  Plato,  and  Aristotle. 

The  creations  of  these  three  heroes  of  Greek  thought  differ  from  the 
doctrines  of  all  their  predecessors  by  reason  of  their  systematic  char- 
acter. Each  of  the  three  gave  to  the  world  an  all-embracing  system 
of  science  complete  in  itself.  Their  teachings  gained  this  character, 
on  the  one  hand,  through  the  all-sidedness  of  their  problems,  and  on 
the  other,  through  the  conscious  unity  in  their  treatment  of  them. 

While  each  of  the  earlier  thinkers  had  seized  upon  but  a  limited 

99 


100  The  Philosophy  of  the  Greeks.  [PART  I. 

circle  of  questions,  and  in  like  manner  had  shown  himself  informed 
only  in  certain  departments  of  actual  reality,  while  especially  no 
one  had  as  yet  shown  interest  in  both  physical  and  psychological 
investigation,  these  three  men  directed  their  work  in  like  measure 
to  the  entire  compass  of  scientific  problems.  They  brought  together 
what  experience  and  observation  had  won ;  they  examined  and  com- 
pared the  conceptions  which  had  been  formed  from  these,  and  they 
brought  that  which  up  to  this  time  had  been  isolated,  into  fruitful 
union  and  relation.  This  all-sidedness  of  their  scientific  interest 
appears  in  the  compass  and  varied  character  of  their  literary  activ- 
ity, and  the  great  amount  of  material  elaborated  is  in  part  explained 
only  through  the  vigorous  co-operation  of  their  extended  schools,  in 
which  a  division  of  labour  in  accordance  with  inclination  and  endow- 
ment was  allowed. 

But  this  work  thus  shared  in  common  did  not  result  in  a  mass  of 
unrelated  material.  This  was  guarded  against  by  the  fact  that  each 
of  these  three  men  undertook  and  conducted  the  'working  over  of  the 
entire  material  of  knowledge  with  a  unity  of  purpose  and  method 
derived  from  the  principle  which  formed  his  fundamental  thought. 
This,  indeed,  led  at  more  than  one  point  to  a  one-sided  conception, 
and  to  a  kind  of  violation  of  individual  domains,  and  thereby  to 
the  inter-weaving  of  problems  in  ways  which  do  not  stand  criticism. 
But  on  the  other  hand,  just  by  means  of  the  adjustment  which  must 
take  place  in  this  process  between  the  forms  of  cognition  in  differ- 
ent departments  of  knowledge,  the  formation  of  metaphysical  concep- 
tions was  so  furthered,  abstract  thought  was  so  refined  and  deepened, 
that  in  the  short  time  of  scarcely  two  generations  the  typical  out- 
lines of  three  different  conceptions  of  the  world  were  worked  out. 
Thus  the  advantages  and  the  disadvantages  of  philosophical  system- 
building  appear  in  like  measure  in  the  case  of  these  men  of  genius 
who  were  the  first  founders  of  systems. 

The  systematising  of  knowledge  so  that  it  should  become  an  all-in- 
clusive philosophical  doctrine  was  achieved  with  increasing  success 
by  Democritus,  Plato,  and  Aristotle,  and  with  the  last  first  found 
the  form  of  an  organic  articulation  of  science  into  the  individual 
disciplines.  With  this  Aristotle  concluded  the  development  of  Greek 
philosophy  and  inaugurated  the  age  of  the  special  sciences. 

The  course  of  this  development  was  more  particularly  this  :  the 
two  opposing  systems  of  Democritus  and  Plato  arose  from  the 
application  to  cosmological  and  metaphysical  problems,  of  the  prin- 
ciples gained  through  the  doctrines  of  the  Sophists  and  of  Socrates ; 
from  the  attempt  to  reconcile  these  opposites  proceeded  the  conclud- 
ing doctrine  of  Aristotle. 


CHAP.  3.]  The  Systematic  Period.  101 

The  essential  feature  in  the  work  of  Democritus  and  Plato  was 
that  they  used  the  insight  into  the  theory  of  knowledge,  gained  by 
the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment,  to  ground  metaphysics  anew. 
Their  common  dependence  upon  the  doctrines  of  the  cosmological 
period  and  upon  the  Sophistic  teaching,  in  particular  upon  the  the- 
ory of  Protagoras,  stamps  upon  the  two  doctrines  a  certain  parallel- 
ism and  a  partial  relationship,  — a  relationship  the  more  interesting, 
the  deeper  the  contrast  between  the  two  in  other  respects.  This 
contrast,  however,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Socratic  teaching  had 
no  effect  upon  Democritus,  while  its  influence  on  Plato  was  decisive ; 
hence  the  ethical  factor  is  as  preponderant  in  the  system  of  the  latter 
as  it  is  unimportant  in  that  of  the  former.  Thus  in  parallel  lines  from 
the  same  source  developed  the  materialism  of  Democritus  and  the 
idealism  of  Plato. 

From  this  contrast  is  explained,  too,  the  difference  in  their  work- 
ing. The  purely  theoretical  conception  of  science  which  prevails 
with  Democritus  did  not  suit  the  age  ;  his  school  soon  disappeared. 
Plato,  on  the  contrary,  whose  scientific  teaching  furnished  at  the 
same  time  the  basis  for  a  principle  of  life,  had  the  pleasure  of  form- 
ing in  the  Academy  an  extensive  and  lasting  school.  But  this  school, 
the  so-called  Older  Academy,  following  the  general  tendency  of  the 
time,  soon  ran  out  partly  into  special  investigation,  partly  into  pop- 
ular moralising. 

Out  of  it  rose  then  the  great  form  of  Aristotle,  the  most  influential 
thinker  that  history  has  seen.  The  powerful  concentration  with 
which  he  caused  the  entire  content  of  thought  in  Greek  science  to 
crystallise  about  the  conception  of  development  (cvreXe^eta)  in  order 
to  adjust  the  opposition  discovered  between  his  two  great  predeces- 
sors, made  him  the  philosophical  teacher  of  the  future,  and  his  system 
the  most  perfect  expression  of  Greek  thought. 

Democritus  of  Abelera  (about  460-360)  was  educated  in  the  scientific  asso- 
ciation of  his  home  and  by  journeys  lasting  many  years,  led  the  life  of  a  quiet, 
unassuming  investigator  in  his  native  city  during  the  turmoil  of  the  Sophistic 
period,  and  remained  far  from  the  noisy  activity  of  Athens.  He  did  not  impart 
any  special  ability,  political  or  otherwise,  by  his  teaching,  but  was  essentially 
disposed  to  theoretical  thought,  and  particularly  inclined  to  the  investigation  of 
Nature.  With  gigantic  learning  and  comprehensive  information  he  united  great 
clearness  of  abstract  thought  and  apparently  a  strong  inclination  to  simplify  prob- 
lems schematically.  The  number  of  his  works  proves  that  he  stood  at  the  head 
of  an  extended  school,  of  which  some  unimportant  names  are  preserved,  yet 
nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  the  way  in  which  his  age  turned  aside  from 
research  that  was  not  interesting  to  it  than  the  indifference  with  which  his  sys- 
tem of  the  mechanical  explanation  of  Nature  was  met.  His  doctrine  was  forced 
into  the  background  for  two  thousand  years  by  the  teleological  systems,  and 
prolonged  its  existence  only  in  the  Epicurean  school,  while  even  there  it  was  not 
understood. 

Antiquity  honoured  Democritus  as  a  great  writer  also,  and  for  this  reason  the 
almost  complete  loss  of  his  works  is  all  the  more  to  be  lamented,  as  aside  from 


102  The  Philosophy  of  the  Greeks.  [PART  L 

the  numerous  titles  only  very  unimportant  and  in  part  doubtful  fragments  are 
extant.  The  most  important  writings  seem  to  have  been,  theoretically,  the  M£yas 
and  MiKpbs  StdKoovios,  irspl  vov  and  irepl  ISeGv ;  practically,  -n-epl  eMu/xfys  and  {nrodi)- 
KO.I.  W.  Kahl  (Diedenhofen,  1880)  has  begun  to  work  through  the  sources 
which  had  been  collected  by  W.  Burchard  (Minden,  1830  and  1834)  and  Lort- 
zing  (Berlin,  1873).  P.  Natorp  has  edited  the  Ethics  (Leips.  181)3). 

Cf.  P.  Natorp,  Forschungen  zur  Geschichtt  ties  Erkenntnissproblems  im  Alter- 
thum  (Berlin,  1884);  G.  Hart,  Zur  Seelen-  und  JSrkenntnisslehre  des  Demokrit 
(Leips.  1886). 

Plato  of  Athens  (427-347),  of  distinguished  family,  had  most  successfully 
assimilated  the  artistic  and  scientific  culture  of  his  time  when  the  personality  of 
Socrates  made  so  decisive  an  impression  upon  him  that  he  abandoned  his  at- 
tempts at  poetry  and  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  society  of  the  master.  He 
was  his  truest  and  most  intelligent,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  his  most  indepen- 
dent disciple.  The  execution  of  Socrates  occasioned  his  acceptance  of  Euclid's 
invitation  to  Megara ;  then  he  journeyed  to  Gyrene  and  Egypt,  returned  for  a 
time  to  Athens,  and  here  began  to  teach  through  his  writings,  and  perhaps  also 
orally.  About  390  we  find  him  in  Magna  Gr&cia  and  Sicily,  where  he  became 
connected  with  the  Pythagoreans  and  took  part  also  in  political  action.  This 
brought  him  into  serious  danger  at  the  court  of  the  ruler  of  Syracuse,  the  elder 
Dionysius,  whom  he  sought  to  influence  with  the  help  of  his  friend  Dion ;  he 
was  delivered  as  prisoner  of  war  to  the  Spartans  and  ransomed  only  by  the  help 
of  a  friend.  This  attempt  at  practical  politics  in  Sicily  was  twice  repeated  later 
(367  and  361),  but  always  with  unfortunate  results. 

After  the  first  Sicilian  journey,  he  founded  his  school  in  the  grove  Akademos, 
and  soon  united  about  him  a  great  number  of  prominent  men  for  the  purpose 
of  common  scientific  work.  Yet  the  bond  of  this  society  was  to  be  sought  still 
more  in  a  friendship  based  upon  community  of  ethical  ideals.  His  teaching 
activity  at  the  beginning  had,  like  that  of  Socrates,  that  character  of  a  common 
search  for  truth  which  finds  expression  in  the  dialogue.  It  was  not  until  his 
old  age  that  it  took  on  more  the  form  of  the  didactic  lecture. 

This  life  finds  its  aesthetic  and  literary  embodiment  in  Plato's  ivories,*  in  which 
the  process  itself  of  philosophising  is  set  forth  with  dramatic  vividness  and 
plastic  portraiture  of  personalities  and  their  views  of  life.  As  works  of  art,  the 
Symposium  and  the  Phado  are  most  successful;  the  grandest  impression  of 
the  system,  as  a  whole,  is  afforded  by  the  Rp.pnblic.  With  the  exception  of  the 
Apology  of  Socrates,  the  form  is  everywhere  that  of  the  dialogue.  Yet  the 
artistic  treatment  suffers  in  Plato's  old  age,  and  the  dialogue  remains  only  as 
the  schematic  setting  of  a  lecture,  as  in  the  Timceus  and  the  Laws.  For  the 
most  part,  Socrates  leads  the  conversation,  and  it  is  into  his  mouth  that  Plato 
puts  his  own  decision  when  he  comes  to  one.  Exceptions  to  this  are  not  found 
until  in  the  latest  writings. 

The  mode  of  presentation  is  also  on  the  whole  more  artistic  than  scientific.  It 
exhibits  extreme  vividness  and  plasticity  of  imagination  in  perfect  language,  but 
no  strictness  in  separating  problems  or  in  methodical  investigation.  The  con- 
tents of  any  individual  dialogue  is  to  be  designated  only  by  the  prominent  sub- 
ject of  inquiry.  Where  abstract  presentation  is  not  possible  or  not  in  place 
Plato  takes  to  his  aid  the  so-called  myths,  allegorical  presentations  which  utilise 
motives  from  fables  and  tales  of  the  gods  in  free,  poetic  form. 

The  transmission  of  his  works  is  only  in  part  certain,  and  it  is  just  as  doubtful 
in  what  order  they  originated  and  what  relation  they  bear  to  one  another. 

The  following  are  among  the  most  important  names  of  those  who  have  worked 
over  these  questions  since  Schleierinacher  in  his  translation  (Berlin,  1804  if.) 
gave  an  impulse  in  that  direction:  J.  Socher  (Munich,  1820),  C.  Fr.  Hermann 

1  Translated  into  German  by  Hier.  Miiller,  with  introductions  by  K.  Steinhart. 
8  vols.  Leips.  1850-1866.  As  ninth  volume  of  the  series  Platorfs  Leben,  by 
K.  Steinhart.  Leips.  1873.  [English  by  Jowett,  third  ed.  6  vols.  Oxford, 
1893.]  Among  more  recent  editions,  in  which  the  paging  of  that  of  Stephanus 
(Paris,  1578),  employed  in  citations,  is  always  repeated,  are  to  be  noted  those 
of  J.  Bekker  (Berlin,  1816  f.),  Stallbaum  (Leips.  1850),  Schneider  and 
Hirschig  (Paris:  Didot,  1846  fl.),  M.  Schanz  (Leips.  1875  ff.). 


CHAP.  3.]  The  Systematic  Period.  103 

(Heidelberg,  1839),  E.  Zeller  (Ttibingen,  1839),  Er.  Suckow  (Berlin,  1855), 
Pr.  Susemihl  (Berlin,  1855-56),  E.  Munk  (Berlin,  1886),  Jr.  Ueberweg  (Vienna, 
1861),  K.  Schaarschmidt  (Bonn,  1866),  H.  Bonitz  (Berlin,  1875),  G.  Teich- 
muller  (Gotha,  1876;  Leipsic,  1879;  Breslau,  1881),  A.  Krohn  (Halle,  1878),  W. 
Dittenberger  (in  Hermes,  1881),  H.  Siebeck  (Freiburg  i.  B.  1889).  [H.  Jack- 
son in  Jour.  Phil.,  X.,  XI.,  and  XIIL;  Archer-Hind's  editions  of  Phcedo  and 
Tim&us;  reviewed  critically  by  P.  Shorey  in  Am.  Jour.  PhiloL,  IX.  and  X.] 

[On  Plato's  philosophy,  in  addition  to  the  above,  W.  Pater,  Plato  and  Platon- 
ism  (Lond.  and  N.Y.  1893)  ;  J.  Martineau,  in  Types  of  Ethical  Theory  (Lond. 
and  N.Y.  1886),  also  in  Essays;  Art.  Plato  in  Enc.  Brit.,  by  L.  Campbell  ;  R.  L. 
Nettleship,  The  Theory  of  Education  in  P.'s  Hep.,  in  Hellenica;  J.  S.  Mill  in 
Essays  and  Discussions.} 

The  writings  which  are  considered  genuinely  Platonic  are  (a)  youthful  works, 
which  scarcely  go  beyond  the  Socratic  standpoint  :  Apology,  Crito,  Euthyphro, 
Lysis,  Laches  (perhaps  also  Charmides,  Hippias  Minor,  and  Alcibiades,  I.)  ; 
(&)  writings  to  establish  his  position  with  regard  to  the  Sophistic  doctrines: 
Protagoras,  Q-orgias,  Euthydemus,  Cratylus,  Jtfeno,  Theatetus  ;  (c)  main  works 
intended  to  present  his  own  doctrine  :  Phcedrus,  Symposium,  Phcedo,  Philebus, 
and  the  Republic,  whose  working  out,  begun  early  and  completed  in  successive 
strata,  as  it  were,  extended  into  the  last  years  of  the  Philosopher's  life  ;  (rf)  the 
writings  of  his  old  age  :  Timceus,  the  Laws,  and  the  fragment  of  Critias.  Among 
the  doubtful  writings  the  most  important  are  the  Sophist,  Politicks,  and  Par- 
menides.  These  probably  did  not  originate  with  Plato,  but  with  men  of  his 
school  who  were  closely  related  with  the  Eleatic  dialectic  and  eristic.  The  first 
two  are  by  the  same  author. 

Cf.  H.  v.  Stein,  Sieben  Bllcher  zi\r  Geschichte  des  Platonismus  (Gottingen, 
1861  ff.);  G.  Grote,  Plato  and  the  Other  Companions  of  Socrates  (Lond.  1865); 
A.  E.  Chaignet,  La  vie  et  les  ecrits  de  Platon  (Paris,  1873);  E.  Heitz,  (0.  Miller's 
O-esch.  der  griech.  Lit.,  2.  Aufl.,  II.  2,  148-235). 

Plato's  school  is  called  the  Academy,  and  the  time  of  its  development,  which 
reaches  to  the  end  of  ancient  thought,  and  which  was  aided  by  the  continued 
possession  of  the  academic  grove  and  the  gymnasium  existing  there,  is  usually 
divided  into  three  or  five  periods  :  (1)  the  Older  Academy,  Plato's  most  imme- 
diate circle  of  scholars  and  the  succeeding  generations,  extending  to  about  200 
B.C.  ;  (2)  the  Middle  Academy,  which  took  a  sceptical  direction,  and  in  which 
an  older  school  of  Arcesilaus  and  a  younger  school  of  Carneades  (about  160)  are 
distinguished  ;  (3)  the  New  Academy,  which  with  Philo  of  Larissa  (about  100) 
turned  back  to  the  old  dogmatism,  and  with  Antiochus  of  Ascalon'(about  twenty- 
five  years  later)  turned  into  the  paths  of  Eclecticism.  Concerning  the  two  (or 
four)  later  forms  cf.  Part  U.  ch.  1.  Later  the  Neo-Platonic  school  took  posses- 
sion of  the  Academy.  Cf.  Part  II.  ch.  .2. 

To  the  Older  Academy  belonged  men  of  great  erudition  and  honourable  per- 
sonality. The  heads  of  the  school  were  Speusippus,  the  nephew  ^  of  Plato, 
Xenocrates  of  Chalcedon,  Polemo  and  Crates  of  Athens;  beside  these, 
Philip  of  Opus  and  Heracleides  from  Pontic  Heraclea  are  to  be  mentioned 
among  the  older,  and  Grantor  among  the  younger  members.  Less  closely 
related  with  the  school  were  the  astronomers  Eudoams  of  Cnidos  and  the 
Pythagorean  Archytas  of  Tarentum.  R.  Heinze,  Xenocrates  (Leips.  1892). 

Aristotle  of  Stagira  towers  far  above  all  his  associates  m  the  Academy 
(384-3-22).  As  son  of  a  Macedonian  ^hysician,  he  brought  with  him  an  inclina- 
tion toward  medical  and  natural  science,  when,  at  eighteen  years  of  age,  he 
entered  the  Academy,  in  which  as  literary  supporter  and  also  as  teacher  at  first 
of  rhetoric,  he  early  played  a  comparatively  independent  part,  without  acting 
contrary  to  a  feeling  of  reverent  subordination  to  the  master,  by  so  doing. 
It  was  not  until  after  Plato's  death  that  he  separated  himself  externally  from  the 
Academy,  visiting,  with  Xenocrates,  his  friend  Hermias,  the  ruler  of  Atarneus  aM 
Assus  in  Mysia,  whose  relative  Pythias  he  afterwards  married.  After  an  appar- 
ently transient  stay  at  Athens  and  Mitylene,  he  undertook,  at  the  w^h  .of  Philip 
of  Macedon  the  education  of  the  latter's  son  Alexander,  and  conducted  it  for 


called  the  Peripatetic  School. 


104  The  Greeks :   Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

After  twelve  years  of  the  greatest  activity,  he  left  Athens  on  account  of 
political  disturbances  and  went  to  Chalcis,  where  he  died  in  the  following  year, 
of  a  disease  of  the  stomach.  Cf.  A.  Stahr,  Aristotelia,  I.  (Halle,  1830). 

Of  the  results  of  the  extraordinarily  comprehensive  literary  activity  of  Aris- 
totle only  the  smallest  part,  but  the  most  important  part  from  the  point  of  view 
of  science,  is  extant.  The  dialogues  published  by  himself,  which  in  the  eyes  of 
the  ancients  placed  him  on  a  level  with  Plato  as  an  author  also,  are  lost  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  fragments,  and  so  also  are  the  great  compilations  which  with 
the  aid  of  his  scholars  he  prepared  for  the  different  branches  of  scientific  knowl- 
edge. Only  his  scientific  didactic  writings,  which  were  designed  as  text-books 
to  be  made  the  foundation  of  lectures  in  the  Lyceum,  are  extant.  The  plan  of 
execution  in  his  works  varies  greatly ;  in  many  places  there  are  only  sketchy 
notes,  in  others  complete  elaborations ;  there  are  also  diff erent  revisions  of  the 
same  sketch,  and  it  is  probable  that  supplementary  matter  by  different  scholars 
has  been  inserted  in  the  gaps  of  the  manuscripts.  Since  the  first  complete  edi- 
tion prepared  in  ancient  times  (as  it  appears,  on  the  occasion  of  a  new  discovery 
of  original  manuscripts)  by  Andronicus  of  Rhodes  (60-50  B.C.)  did  not  separate 
these  parts,  many  critical  questions  are  still  afloat  concerning  it. 

Cf.  A.  Stahr,  Aristotelia,  II.  (Leips.  1832);  V.  Rose  (Berlin,  1854);  H.  Bonitz 
(Vienna,  1862  fiY);  J.  Bernays  (Berlin,  1863);  E.  Heitz  (Leips.  1865  and  in  the 
second  ed.  of  0.  Miiller's  Gesch.  cler  griech.  Lit.,  II.  2,  236-321);  E.  Vahlen 
(Vienna,  1870  ff.). 

This  text-book  collection,1  as  it  were,  is  arranged  in  the  following  manner : 
(a)  Logical  treatises:  the  Categories,  on  the  Proposition,  on  Interpretation, 
the  Analytics,  the  Topics  including  the  book  on  the  Fallacies  —  brought  together 
by  the  school  as  "Organon"  ;  (6)  Theoretical  Philosophy  :  Fundamental  Science 
(Metaphysics),  the  Physics,  the  History  of  Animals,  and  the  Psychology ;  to  the 
three  last  are  attached  a  number  of  separate  treatises  ;  (c)  Practical  Philosophy: 
the  Ethics  in  the  Nicomachean  and  Eudemian  editions  and  the  Politics  (which 
likewise  is  not  complete) ;  (d)  Poietical  or  Poetical  Philosophy  :  the  Rhetoric 
and  the  Poetic. 

JFr.  Biese,  Die  Philosophic  des  Aristoteles  (2  vols.,  Berlin,  1835-42);  A. 
Rosmini-Serbati,  Aristotele  Exposto  ed  Esaminato  (Torino,  1858);  G.  II.  Lewes, 
Aristotle,  a  Chapter  from  the  History  of  Science  (Lond.  1804)  ;  G.  Grote, 
Aristotle  (published  from  his  literary  remains,  Lond.  1872). 

[Trans,  of  the  Psychology  by  E.  Wallace  (Camb.  1882)  ;  of  the  Ethics,  by 
Peters  (Lond.  1881),  Welldon  (Lond.  and  N.Y.),  Williams  (Lond.  1870),  Chase 
(Lond.  1877),  Hatch  (Lond.  1879);  of  the  Poetics,  by  Wharton  (Camb.  1883) ;  of 
the  Politics,  by  Welldon  (Camb.  1888),  Jowett  (2  vols.,  Oxford,  1885-88)  ;  of 
the  Bhetoric,  by  Welldon  (Lond.  and  N.Y.  1886)  ;  also  tr.  of  all  of  the  above  and 
of  the  Metaphysics,  Organon,  and  History  of  Animals  in  the  Bohn  Library. 
Editions  of  the  Politics  with  valuable  introduction  by  Newman  (Oxford,  1887, 
2  vols.) ;  of  the  Ethics,  by  A.  Grant.  Cf.  also  Art.  in  Enc.  Brit.,  Aristotle  by 
A.  Giant ;  T.  H.  Green  in  Works;  A.  C.  Bradley,  ASs  Theory  of  the  State,  in 
Hellenica.  E.  Wallace,  Outlines  ofA.'s  Phil,  is  convenient  for  the  student.] 


§  9.  Metaphysics  grounded  anew  in  Epistemology  and  Ethics. 

The  great  systematisers  of  Greek  science  exercised  a  swift  but 
just  criticism  upon  the  Sophistic  doctrine.  They  saw  at  once  that 
among  the  doctrines  of  the  Sophists  but  a  single  one  possessed  the 
worth  of  lasting  validity  and  scientific  f ruitfulness  —  the  perception 
theory  of  Protagoras. 


1  Of  the  newer  editions,  that  of  the  Berlin  Academy  (J.  Bekker,  Brandis, 
Rose,  Usener,  Bonitz),  5  vols.,  Berlin,  1831-70,  is  made  the  basis  of  citations. 
The  Parisian  edition  (Didot)  is  also  to  be  noticed  (Dabner,  Bussemaker,  Heitz) 
5  vols.,  Paris,  1848-74. 


CHAP.  3,  §  9.]  The  New  Metaphysics.  105 

1.  This,  therefore,  became  the  starting-point  for  Democritus  and 
for  Plato ;  and  both  adopted  it  in  order  to  transcend  it  and  attack 
the  consequences  which  the  Sophist  had  drawn  from  it.    Both  admit 
that  perception,  as  being  itself  only  a  product  of  a  natural  process, 
can  be  the  knowledge  of  something  only  which  likewise  arises  and 
passes  aw&y  as  transitory  product  of  the  same  natural  process. 
Perception  then  gives  only  opinion  (So|a) ;  it  teaches  what  appears 
in  and  for  human  view  (called  VO'/AU>  in  Democritus  with  a  genuine 
Sophistic  mode  of  expression),  not  what  truly  or  really  (Ira?  with 
Democritus,  6W<os  with  Plato)  is. 

For  Protagoras,  who  regarded  perception  as  the  only  source  of 
knowledge,  there  was  consequently  no  knowledge  of  what  is.  That 
he  took  the  farther  step  of  denying  Being  altogether  and  declaring 
the  objects  of  perception  to  be  the  sole  reality,  behind  which  there 
is  no  Being  to  be  sought  for,  —  this  "positivist"  conclusion  is  not 
to  be  demonstrated  in  his  case  :  the  doctrine  of  "nihilism  "  ("there 
is  no  Being  ")  is  expressly  ascribed  by  tradition  only  to  Gorgias. 

If,  nevertheless,  from  any  grounds  whatever,  a  universally  valid 
knowledge  (yvrjo-fy  yvu/^  with  Democritus,  cirtonj^  with  Plato)  was 
to  be  again  set  over  a,gainst  opinions,  the  sensualism  of  Protagoras 
must  be  abandoned  and  the  position  of  the  old  metaphysicians,  who 
distinguished  thought  (Siavoia),  as  a  higher  and  better  knowledge, 
from  perception,  must  be  taken  again  (cf.  §  6).  Thus  Democritus 
and  Plato  both  in  like  manner  transcend  Protagoras  by  acknowledg- 
ing the  relativity  of  perception,  and  looking  to  "thought"  again  for 
knowledge  of  what  truly  is.  Both  are  outspoken  rationalists.1 

2.  This  new  metaphysical  rationalism  is  yet  distinguished  from 
the  older  rationalism  of  the  cosmological  period,  not  only  by  its 
broader  psychological  basis,  which  it  owed  to  the  Protagorean 
analysis  of  perception,  but  also  in  consequence  of  this,  by  another 
valuation  of  perception  itself  from  the  standpoint  of  the  theory  of 
"knowledge.    The  earlier  metaphysicians,  where  they  could  not  fit 
the  contents  of  perception  into  their  conceptional  idea  of  the  world, 
had  simply  rejected  them  as  deceit  and  illusion.    Now  this  illusion 
had  been  explained  (by  Protagoras),  but  in  such  a  way  that  while 
surrendering  its  universal  validity  the  content  of  perception  might 
yet  claim  at  least  the  value  of  a  transient  and  relative  reality. 

This,  in  connection  with  the  fact  that  scientific  knowledge  was 


i  Cf .  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VIII.  56.  The  doctrine  of  Democritus  with 
regard  to  "genuine  "  knowledge  is  most  shaiply  formulated  in  Sext.  Emp.  Adv. 
Math.  VII.  139.  Plato's  attack  upon  the  Protagorean  sensualism  is  found  prin- 
cipally in  the  Thecetetus,  his  positive  rationalistic  attitude  in  the  Ph&drus,  Sym- 
posium, Republic,  and  Phasdo. 


106  The  Greeks :   Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

directed  toward  the  abiding  "true  "  Being,  led  to  a  division  in  the 
conception  of  reality,  and  with  this  the  fundamental  need  of  explana- 
tory thought  came  to  clear,  explicit  consciousness,  —  a  need  which 
unconsciously  lay  at  the  basis  of  the  beginnings  of  science.  To  the 
two  kinds  of  knowledge  —  so  Democritus  and  Plato  taught  —  cor- 
respond two  different  kinds  of  reality:  to  perception  a  changing, 
relative,  transient  reality  or  actuality ;  to  thought  a  reality  homo- 
geneous, absolute  and  abiding.  For  the  former  Democritus  seems 
to  have  introduced  the  expression  phenomena ;  Plato  designates  it 
as  the  world  of  generation,  yo/eo-ts :  the  other  kind  of  reality  Democ- 
ritus calls  ra  erefj  ovra ;  Plato,  TO  ovro>s  ov  or  OVCTLO,  [that  which  really 
is,  or  essence]. 

In  this  way  perception  and  opinion  gain  a  correctness  which  is 
analogous  to  that  of  scientific  thought.  Perception  cognises  chang- 
ing reality  as  thought  cognises  abiding  reality.  To  the  two  modes 
of  cognition  correspond  two  domains  of  reality.1 

But  between  these  two  domains  there  exists  for  this  reason  the 
same  relation,  as  regards  their  respective  values,  as  obtains  between 
the  two  kinds  of  cognition.  By  as  much  as  thought,  the  universally 
valid  act  of  consciousness,  is  above  perception,  the  knowledge  valid 
only  for  individuals  and  for  the  particular,  by  so  much  is  the  true 
Being  higher,  purer,  more  primitive,  raised  above  the  lower  actuality 
of  phenomena  and  the  changing  processes  and  events  among  them. 
This  relation  was  especially  emphasised  and  carried  out  by  Plato 
for  reasons  hereafter  to  be  unfolded.  But  it  appears  also  with  Democ- 
ritus, not  only  in  his  theory  of  knowledge,  but  also  in  his  ethics. 

In  this  way  the  two  metaphysicians  agree  with  the  result  which 
the  Pythagoreans  (cf.  §  5,  7,  and  §  6,  1)  had  likewise  won  from 
their  premises,  viz.  the  distinction  of  a  higher  and  lower  kind  of 
reality.  Nevertheless,  in  the  presence  of  this  similarity  we  are  not 
to  think  of  a  dependence;  in  nowise  in  the  case  of  Democritus, 
who  was  a  complete  stranger  to  the  astronomical  view  of  the  Pythag- 
oreans, and  scarcely  in  the  case  of  Plato,  who  indeed  later  adopted 
the  astronomical  theory,  but  whose  idea  of  the  higher  reality  (the 
doctrine  of  Ideas)  has  an  entirely  different  content.  The  case 
rather  is  that  the  common,  fundamental  motive  which  came  from 
the  conception  of  Being  propounded  by  Parmenides,  led  in  these 
three  quite  different  forms  to  the  division  of  the  world  into  a 
sphere  of  higher  and  one  of  lower  reality. 

3.  The  pragmatic  parallelism  in  the  motives  of  the  two  opposed 
systems  of  Democritus  and  Plato  reaches  a  step  farther,  although 

1  Best  formulated  in  Plat.,  Tim.  27  D  ff.,  especially  29  C. 


CHAP.  3,  §9.]     The  New  Metaphysics:  Demoeritus,  Plato.      107 

but  a  short  step.  To  the  world  of  perception  belong,  without  doubt, 
the  specific  qualities  of  the  senses,  for  these  disclose  their  relativity 
in  the  fact  that  the  same  thing  appears  differently  to  different  senses. 
But  after  we  have  abstracted  these  qualities,  that  which  remains  as 
an  object  for  the  knowledge  of  the  truly  actual,  is  primarily  the 
form  which  things  have,  and  both  thinkers  designated  as  the  true 
essential  nature  of  things  the  pure/oms  (tBcai). 

But  it  almost  seems  as  though  here  they  had  nothing  in  common 
but  the  name,  striking  as  this  fact  is ;  for  if  Demoeritus  understood 
by  the  iSou,  which  he  also  called  cr^/wtra,  his  atom-forms,  while 
Plato  understood  by  his  i8«u  or  etS^  the  conceptions  corresponding 
to  logical  species  (Gattungsbegriffe) ,  then  the  apparently  like  state- 
ment that  the  truly  existent  consists  in  "  forms  "  has  a  completely 
different  meaning  in  the  two  authors.  For  this  reason  we  must 
here,  too,  remain  in  doubt  as  to  whether  we  should  see  a  parallel 
dependence  upon  Pythagoreanism,  which,  to  be  sure,  had  previously 
found  the  essence  of  things  in  mathematical  forms,  and  whose  influ- 
ence upon  the  two  thinkers  may  be  assumed  without  encountering 
any  difficulties  in  the  assumption  itself.  At  all  events,  however,  if 
a  common  suggestion  was  present,  it  led  to  quite  different  results  in 
the  two  systems  before  us,  and  though  in  both  of  them  knowledge 
of  mathematical  relations  stands  in  very  close  relation  to  knowledge 
of  true  reality,  these  relations  are  yet  completely  different  with  the 
respective  thinkers. 

4.  The  relationship  thus  far  unfolded  between  the  two  rational- 
istic systems  changes  now  suddenly  to  a  sharp  opposition  as  soon  as 
we  consider  the  motives  from  which  the  two  thinkers  transcended 
the  Protagorean  sensualism  and  relativism,  and  observe  also  the 
consequences  which  result  therefrom.  Here  the  circumstance  be- 
comes of  decisive  importance,  that  Plato  loas  the  disciple  of  Socrates, 
while  Demoeritus  experienced  not  even  the  slightest  influence  from 
the  great  Athenian  sage. 

With  Demoeritus  the  demand  which  drives  him  to  transcend  the 
position  of  Protagoras  grows  solely  out  of  his  theoretical  need  and 
develops  according  to  his  personal  nature,  —  the  demand,  namely, 
that  there  is  a  knowledge,  and  that  this,  if  it  is  not  to  be  found  in 
perception,  must  be  sought  for  in  thought ;  the  investigator  of  Nat- 
ure believes,  as  against  all  the  Sophistic  teaching,  in  the  possibility 
of  a  theory  that  shall  explain  phenomena.  Plato,  on  the  contrary, 
sets  out  with  his  postulate  of  the  Socratic  conception  of  virtue. 
Virtue  is  to  be  gained  only  through  right  knowledge ;  knowledge, 
however,  is  cognition  of  the  true  Being :  if,  then,  this  is  not  to  be 
found  in  perception,  it  must  be  sought  for  through  thought.  Tor 


108  The  Q-reeks:   Systematic  Period.  [PART!. 

Plato  philosophy  grows,  according  to  the  Socratic  principle,1  out  of 
the  ethical  need.  But  while  the  Sophistic  friends  of  Socrates  were 
endeavouring  to  give  to  the  knowledge  that  constituted  virtue  some 
object  in  the  form  of  a  general  life-purpose,  the  good,  pleasure,  etc., 
Plato  wins  his  metaphysical  position  with  one  stroke,  by  drawing 
the  inference  that  this  knowledge  in  which  virtue  is  to  consist  must 
be  the  cognition  of  what  is  truly  real,  the  ouo-ia, —  as  opposed  to 
opinions  which  relate  to  the  relative.  In  his  case  the  knowledge 
in  which  virtue  is  to  consist  demands  a  metaphysics. 

Here,  then,  the  ways  are  already  parting.  Knowledge  of  the 
truly  real  was  for  Democritus,  as  for  the  old  metaphysicians, 
essentially  an  idea  of  the  unchangeably  abiding  Being,  but  an  idea 
by  means  of  which  it  should  be  possible  to  understand  the 
derivative  form  of  reality  which  is  cognised  in  perception.  His 
rationalism  amounted  to  an  explanation  of  phenomena,  to  be  gained 
through  thought;  it  was  essentially  theoretical  rationalism.  Eor 
Plato,  on  the  contrary,  knowledge  of  the  truly  real  had  its  ethical 
purpose  within  itself;  this  knowledge  was  to  constitute  virtue,  and 
hence  it  had  no  other  relation  to  the  world  given  through  per- 
ception than  that  of  sharply  defining  its  limits.  True  Being  has 
for  Democritus  the  theoretical  value  of  explaining  phenomena ;  for 
Plato,  the  practical  value  of  being  the  object  of  that  knowledge 
which  constitutes  virtue.  His  doctrine  is,  as  regards  its  original 
principle,  essentially  ethical  rationalism. 

Democritus,  therefore,  persevered  in  the  work  undertaken  in  the 
school  of  Abdera,  —  the  construction  of  a  metaphysics  of  Nature. 
With  the  help  of  the  Sophistic  psychology  he  developed  Atomism 
to  a  comprehensive  system.  Like  Leucippus,  he  regarded  empty 
space  and  the  atoms  moving  in  it  as  the  true  reality.  He  then 
attempted  not  only  to  explain  from  the  motion  of  these  atoms 
all  qualitative  phenomena  of  the  corporeal  world  as  quantitative 
phenomena,  but  also  to  explain  from  these  motions  all  mental 
activities,  including  that  knowing  activity  which  is  directed 
toward  true  Being.  Thus  he  created  the  system  of  materialism. 

Plato,  however,  was  led  to  the  entirely  opposite  result  by  his 
attachment  to  the  Socratic  doctrine,  which  proved  to  be  of  decisive 
importance  for  his  conception  of  the  essential  nature  of  science. 

5.  Socrates  had  taught  that  knowledge  consists  in  general  concep- 
tions. If,  however,  this  knowledge,  in  contrast  with  opinions,  was 
to  be  knowledge  of  what  truly,  actually  is,  there  must  belong  to  the 
content  of  these  conceptions  that  higher  Being,  that  true  essential 

1  Set  forth  most  clearly  in  the  Meno,  96  ff. 


CHAP.  3,  §  10.]     System  of  Materialism :  Democritus.  109 

reality  which,  it  was  held,  could  be  grasped  only  by  thought,  in 
contrast  with  perception.  The  "forms"  of  true  reality,  knowledge 
of  which  constitutes  virtue,  are  the  species  or  class-concepts  (Gattungs- 
begriJTe),  €1807.  With  this  consideration,  the  Platonic  conception  of 
the  "Idea"  first  gains  its  complete  determination. 

So  understood,  Plato's  doctrine  of  Ideas  presents  itself  as  the 
summit  of  Greek  philosophy.  In  it  are  combined  all  the  different 
lines  of  thought  which  had  been  directed  toward  the  physical,  the 
ethical,  the  logical  first  principle  (apxn  °r  Averts).  The  Platonic 
Idea,  the  species  or  class-concept,  is  firstly  the  abiding  Being  in  the 
change  of  phenomena;  secondly,  the  object  of  knowledge  in  the 
change  of  opinions ;  thirdly,  the  true  end  in  the  change  of  desires. 

But  this  ovcrt'a,  from  the  nature  of  its  definition,  is  not  to  be  found 
within  the  sphere  of  what  may  be  perceived,  and  everything  cor- 
poreal is  capable  of  being  perceived.  The  Ideas  are  then  something 
essentially  different  from  the  corporeal  world.  True  reality  is 
incorporeal.  The  division  in  the  conception  of  reality  takes  on 
accordingly  a  fixed  form ;  the  lower  reality  of  natural  processes  or 
generation  (yo/ecrts),  which  forms  the  object  of  perception,  is  the 
corporeal  world ;  the  higher  reality  of  Being,  which  thought  knows, 
is  the  incorporeal,  the  immaterial  world,  TOTTOS  m/ros.  Thus  the 
Platonic  system  becomes  immaterialism,  or,  as  we  call  it  after  the 
meaning  given  by  him  to  the  word  "Idea,"  Idealism. 

6.  In  the  Platonic  system,  accordingly,  we  find  perhaps  the  most 
extensive  interweaving  and  complication  of  problems  which  history 
has  seen.  The  doctrine  of  Democritus,  on  the  contrary,  is  ruled 
throughout  by  the  one  interest  of  explaining  Nature.  However 
rich  the  results  which  this  latter  doctrine  might  achieve  for  this 
its  proper  end,  —  results  which  could  be  taken  up  again  in  a  later, 
similarly  disposed  condition  of  thought,  and  then  first  unfold  their 
whole  f ruitfulness,  —  at  first  the  other  doctrine  must  surpass  this, 
all  the  more  in  proportion  as  it  satisfied  all  needs  of  the  time  and 
united  within  itself  the  entire  product  of  earlier  4  thought.  More 
points  of  attack  for  immanent  criticism  are  perhaps  offered  by  the 
Platonic  system  than  by  that  of  Democritus ;  but  for  Greek  thought 
the  latter  was  a  relapse  into  the  cosmology  of  the  first  period,  and 
it  was  Plato's  doctrine  that  must  become  the  system  of  the  future. 

§  10.  The  System  of  Materialism. 

The  systematic  character  of  the  doctrine  of  Democritus  consists 
in  the  way  in  which  he  carried  through  in  all  departments  of  his 
work  the  fundamental  thought,  that  scientific  theory  must  so  far 


110  The  Grreeks  :   Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

gain  knowledge  of  the  true  reality,  i.e.  of  the  atoms  and  their 
motions  in  space,  as  to  be  able  to  explain  from  them  the  reality 
which  appears  in  phenomena,  as  this  presents  itself  in  perception. 
There  is  every  indication  (even  the  titles  of  his  books  would  show 
this)  that  Deniocritus  took  np  this  task  by  means  of  investigations 
covering  the  entire  compass  of  the  objects  of  experience,  and  in  this 
connection  devoted  himself  with  as  great  an  interest  to  the  psy- 
chological as  to  the  physical  problems.  So  much  the  more  must  we 
regret  that  the  greater  part  of  his  teachings  has  been  lost,  and 
that  what  is  preserved,  in  connection  with  accounts  of  others, 
permits  only  a  hypothetical  reconstruction  of  the  main  conceptions 
of  his  great  work,  a  reconstruction  which  must  always  remain 
defective  and  uncertain. 

1.  It  must  be  assumed  in  the  first  place  that  Democritus  was 
fully  conscious  of  this  task  of  science,  viz.  that  of  explaining  the 
world  of  experience  through  conceptions  of  the  true  reality.  That 
which  the  Atoinists  regard  as  the  Existent,  viz.  space  and  the  par- 
ticles whirring  in  it,  has  no  value  except  for  theoretical  purposes. 
It  is  only  thought  in  order  to  make  intelligible  what  is  perceived  ; 
but  for  this  reason  the  problem  is  so  to  think  the  truly  real  that 
it  may  explain  the  real  which  appears  in  phenomena,  that  at  the 
same  time  this  latter  reality  may  "remain  preserved"1  as  some- 
thing that  "  is  3)  in  a  derived  sense,  and  that  the  truth  which  inheres 
in  it  may  remain  recognised.  Hence  Democritus  knew  very  well 
that  thought  also  must  seek  the  truth  in  perception,  and  win  it  out 
of  perception.2  His  rationalism  is  far  removed  from  being  in  con- 
tradiction with  experience,  or  even  from  being  strange  to  experience. 
Thought  has  to  infer  from  perception  that  by  means  of  which  the 
latter  is  explained.  The  motive  which  lay  at  the  foundation  of 
the  mediating  attempts  following  the  Eleatic  paradox  of  acosmism 
became  with  Democritus  the  clearly  recognised  principle  of  meta- 
physics and  natural  science.  Yet  unfortunately  nothing  is  now 
known  as  to  how  he  carried  out  in  detail  the  methodical  relation 
between  the  two  modes  of  cognition,  and  how  the  process  by  which 
knowledge  grows  out  of  perception  in  the  particular  instance  was 
thought  by  him. 

More  particularly,  the  theoretical  explanation  which  Democritus 


1  The  very  happy  expression  for  this  is  SLao-dfav  rb  ^cuwfyteva.    Cf  .  also  Arist. 
Gen.  et  Oorr.  I.  832,  5  a. 

2  Hence,  the  expressions  in  which  he  recognised  the  truth  in  the  phenome- 
non ;  e.g.  Arist.  De  An.  I.  2,  404  a  27,  and  the  like.    To  attempt,  however,  to 
construe  out  of  this  a  "sensualism"  of  Democritus,  as  has  "been  attempted  "by 
E.  Johnson  (Plauen,  1868),  contradicts  completely  the  accounts  with  regard  to 
his  attitude  toward  Protagoras. 


CHAP.  3,  §  10.]     System  of  Materialism :   Demoeritus.  Ill 

gave  for  the  contents  of  perception  consists,  as  with  Leucippus,  in 
the  reduction  of  all  phenomena  to  the  mechanics  of  atoms.  What 
appears  in  perception  as  qualitatively  determined,  and  also  as  in- 
volved in  qualitative  change  (dUoiov/^oi/),  exists  uin  truth"  only 
as  a  quantitative  relation  of  the  atoms,  of  their  order,  and  their 
motion.  The  task  of  science  is  then  to  reduce  all  qualitative  to 
quantitative  relations^  and  to  show  in  detail  what  quantitative  rela- 
tions of  the  absolute  reality  produce  the  qualitative  characteristics 
of  the  reality  which  appears  in  phenomena.  Thus,  the  prejudice  in 
favour  of  what  may  be  perceived  or  imaged  (anschaulicli),  as  if  spatial 
form  and  motion  were  something  simpler,  more  comprehensible  in 
themselves,  and  less  of  a  problem  than  qualitative  character  and 
alteration,  is  made  the  principle  for  the  theoretical  explanation  of 
the  world. 

Since  this  principle  is  applied  with  complete  systematic  rigour 
.  to  the  whole  of  experience,  Atomism  regards  the  psychical  life  with 
all  its  essential  elements  and  values  as  also  a  phenomenon,  and  the 
form  and  motion  of  the  atoms  which  constitute  the  true  Being  of 
this  phenomenon  must  be  stated  by  the  explanatory  theory.  Thus 
matter  in  its  form  and  motion  is  regarded  as  that  which  alone  is 
truly  real,  and  the  entire  mental  or  spiritual  life  as  the  derived, 
phenomenal  reality.  With  this  the  system  of  Dernocritus  first 
assumes  the  character  of  conscious,  outspoken  materialism. 

2.  In  the  properly  physical  doctrines,  the  teaching  of  Democritus 
presents,  therefore,  no  change  in  principle  as  compared  with  that  of 
Leucippus,  though  there  is  a  great  enrichment  by  careful  detailed 
investigation.  He  emphasised  still  more  sharply  than  his  predeces- 
sor, where  possible,  the  thought  of  the  mechanical  necessity  (dray*^ 
which  he  also  occasionally  called  Aoyos),  in  accordance  with  which 
all  occurrence  or  change  whatever  takes  place,  and  further  defined 
this  thought  as  involving  that  no  operation  of  atoms  upon  one 
another  is  possible  except  through  impact,  through  immediate  con- 
tact, and  further,  that  this  operation  consists  only  in  the  change  of 
the  state  of  motion  of  the  atoms  which  are  also  unchangeable  as 
regards  their  form. 

The  atom  itself  as  that  which  "is,"  in  the  proper  sense  of  the 
word,  has  accordingly  only  the  characteristics  of  abstract  corpore- 
ality, viz.  the  filling  of  a  limited  space,  and  the  quality  of  being 
in  motion  in  the  void,  Although  all  are  imperceptibly  small,  they 
yet  exhibit  an  endless  variety  of  forms  (i8«u  or  o^'/wra).  To  form, 
which  constitutes  the  proper  fundamental  difference  in  the  atoms, 
belongs  in  a  certain  sense  also  size ;  yet  it  is  to  be  observed  that 
the  same  stereometrical  form,  e.g.  the  sphere,  may  appear  in  different 


112  The  Greeks ;   Systematic  Period,  [PART!, 

sizes.  The  larger  the  atom,  the  greater  its  mass ;  for  the  essential 
quality  of  what  is,  is  indeed  materiality,  space-claiming.  For  this 
reason  Democritns  asserted  weight  or  lightness  to  be  a  function  of 
size,1  evidently  yielding  to  the  mechanical  analogies  of  daily  life. 
In  connection  with  these  terms  (fiapv  and  KOI)<£OV),  however,  we  are 
not  to  think  of  the  falling  motion,  but  solely  of  the  degree  of  mechani- 
cal movability  or  of  inertia?  Hence  it  was  also  his  opinion  that  as 
the  atom-complexes  whirled  about,  the  lighter  parts  were  forced  out- 
ward, while  the  more  inert  with  their  inferior  mobility  were  gath- 
ered in  the  middle. 

The  same  properties  communicate  themselves  as  metaphysical 
qualities  to  things  which  are  composed  of  atoms.  The  form  and 
size  of  things  is  produced  by  the  simple  summation  of  the  form  and 
size  of  the  component  atoms  ;  though  in  this  case,  the  inertia  is  not 
dependent  solely  upon  the  sum  total  of  the  magnitudes  of  the  atoms, 
but  upon  the  greater  or  less  amount  of  empty  space  that  remains • 
between  the  individual  particles  when  they  are  grouped  together. 
The  inertia  depends  therefore  upon  the  less  or  greater  degree  of 
density.  And  since  the  ease  with  which  particles  may  be  displaced 
with  reference  to  one  another  depends  upon  this  interruption  of  the 
mass  by  empty  space,  the  properties  of  hardness  and  softness  belong 
also  to  the  true  reality  that  is  known  by  thought. 

All  other  properties,  however,  belong  to  things  not  in  them- 
selves, but  only  in  so  far  as  motions  proceeding  from  things  act 
upon  the  organs  of  perception  j  they  are  "  states  of  perception  as  it 
is  in  process  of  qualitative  change."  But  these  states  are  also 
conditioned  throughout  by  the  things  in  which  the  perceived  prop- 
erties appear,  and  here  the  arrangement  and  the  situation  which  the 
atoms  have  taken  with  reference  to  each  other  in  the  process  of 
composition  are  of  principal  importance.3 

While,  then,  form,  size,  inertia,  density,  and  hardness  are  properties 
of  things  CTOJ,  i.e.  in  truth,  all  that  is  perceived  in  them  by  the  indi- 
vidual senses  as  colour,  sound,  smell,  taste,  exists  only  j/o/Aa>or  0«r«, 
i.e.  in  the  phenomenon.  This  doctrine,  when  taken  up  anew  in  the 
philosophy  of  the  Eenaissance  (cf.  Part  IV.  ch.  2)  and  later,  was 

1  As  the  most  extensive  exposition  for  this  and  for  the  following  topic  The- 
ophr.  De  Sens.  61  fi.  (Dox.  D.  516)  is  to  be  compared. 

2  It  is  scarcely  to  be  decided  now  whether  the  motion  of  their  own,  which 
Atomism  ascribed  to  all  the  atoms  as  primitive  and  causeless,  was  thought  of 
by  Democritus  as  conditioned  already  by  the  size  or  mass,  so  that  the  greater 
had,  even  from  the  beginning,  possessed  less  velocity.    At  all  events,  these 
determinations  held  good  for  him  within  the  sphere  of  the  mechanical  operation 
of  the  atoms  on  one  another.    "What  is  larger  can  be  pushed  with  greater  diffi- 
culty ;  what  is  smaller  can  be  pushed  more  easily. 

3  Cf.  Arist.  Gen.  et  Corr.  1. 2,  315  b  6. 


CHAP.  3,  §  10.]     System  of  Materialism:   Democritus.  113 

designated  as  distinguishing  between  the  primary  and  secondary 
qualities  of  things,  and  it  is  desirable  to  introduce  this  expression 
here,  since  it  corresponds  throughout  to  the  metaphysical  and  episte- 
mological  sense  in  which  Democritus  made  the  Protagorean  doctrine 
useful  for  his  own  purpose.  While  the  Sophist  -would  make  all 
properties  secondary  and  relative,  Democritus  admitted  this  only  for 
the  qualities  perceived  by  special  senses,  and  set  over  against  these 
the  quantitative  determinations  as  primary  and  absolute.  He  there- 
fore designated  also  as  "  genuine  knowledge  "  the  insight  into  the 
primary  qualities  to  be  won  through  thought,  while,  on  the  contrary, 
perception  which  is  directed  toward  the  secondary  qualities  he 
termed  "  obscure  knowledge  "  (yvyo-fy — ovcorfy  yi/oJ/^). 

3.  The  secondary  qualities  appear  accordingly  as  dependent 
upon  the  primary ;  they  are  not,  however,  dependent  upon  these 
alone3  but  rather  upon  the  action  of  these  upon  the  percipient 
agent.  But  in  the  atomistic  system  that  which  perceives,  the  mind 
or  soul,  can  consist  only  of  atoms.  To  be  more  explicit,  it  consists, 
according  to  Democritus,  of  the  same  atoms  which  constitute  also 
the  essence  of  fire :  namely,  the  finest,  smoothest,  and  most  mobile. 
These  are  indeed  scattered  also  through  the  whole  world,  and  in  so  ', 
far  animals,  plants,  and  other  things  may  be  regarded  as  animate,  as 
having  souls,  but  they  are  united  in  largest  numbers  in  the  human 
body,  where  in  life  a  fire-atom  is  placed  between  every  two  atoms  of 
other  sorts,  and  where  they  are  held  together  by  breathing. 

Upon  this  presupposition,  then,  analogous,  as  we  see,  to  the  older 
systems,  Democritus  built  up  his  explanation  of  phenomena  from 
the  true  essence  of  things.  That  is,  perception,  and  with  it  the 
secondary  qualities,  arises  from  the  action  of  things  upon  the  fire- 
atoms  of  the  soul.  The  reality  which  appears  is  a  necessary  result 
of  the  true  reality. 

In  carrying  out  this  doctrine  Democritus  took  up  and  refined  the 
theories  of  perception  advanced  by  his  predecessors.  The  effluxes 
(cf.  above,  §  6,  3)  which  proceed  from  things  to  set  in  motion  the 
organs  and  through  them  the  fire-atoms,  he  called  images  (ctSwXa), 
and  regarded  them  as  infinitely  small  copies  of  the  things.  Their 
impression  upon  the  fire-atoms  is  perception,  and  the  similarity 
between  the  content  of  this  perception  and  its  object  was  held  to  be 
secured  thereby.  Since  impact  and  pressure  are  the  essence  of  all 
the  mechanics  of  the  atoms,  touch  is  regarded  as  the  most  primitive 
sense.  The  special  organs,  on  the  contrary,  were  regarded  as  capable 
of  receiving  only  such  images  as  corresponded  to  their  own  forma- 
tion and  motion,  and  this  theory  of  the  specific  energy  of  the  sense 
organs  was  worked  out  very  acutely  by  Democritus.  From  this  it 


114  The  Greeks :   Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

followed  also  that  in  case  there  were  things  whose  effluxes  could 
not  act  upon  any  one  of  the  organs,  these  would  remain  imperceptible 
for  the  ordinary  man,  and  for  these  perhaps  "  other  senses  "  might 
be  accessible. 

This  theory  of  images  appeared  very  plausible  to  ancient  thought. 
It  brought  to  definite  expression,  and  indeed  to  a  certain,  extent 
explained,  the  mode  of  representing  things  which  is  still  common 
for  the  ordinary  consciousness,  as  if  our  perceptions  were  "  copies  " 
of  things  existing  outside  of  us.  If  one  did  not  ask  further  how 
things  should  come  to  send  out  such  miniature  likenesses  of  them- 
selves into  the  world,  he  might  think  that  he  understood,  by  means 
of  this  theory,  how  our  "  impressions  "  can  resemble  things  with- 
out. For  this  reason  this  theory  at  once  attained  the  predominance 
in  physiological  psychology,  and  retained  its  position  until  after  the 
beginnings  of  modern  philosophy,  where  it  was  defended  by  Locke. 

Its  significance,  however,  for  the  conceptions  in  the  system  of 
Democritus,  lies  in  this,  that  it  was  regarded  as  describing  that 
motion  of  the  atoms  in  which  perception  consists.  It  remained 
hidden  from  this  materialism,  which  was  such  from  principle,  as 
well  as  from  all  its  later  transformations,  that  perception  as  a 
psychical  activity  is  something  specifically  different  from  any  and 
every  motion  of  atoms,  however  determined.  But  in  seeking  out 
the  individual  forms  of  motion  from  which  the  individual  percep- 
tions of  the  special  senses  arise,  the  philosopher  of  Abdera  caused 
many  a  keen  observation,  many  a  fine  suggestion,  to  become  known. 

4.  It  is  interesting  now  that  the  same  fate  befell  the  materialistic 
psychology  of  Democritus  as  had  befallen  the  pre-Sophistic  meta- 
physicians (cf.  §  6) :  it,  too,  was  obliged  in  a  certain  respect  to  oblit- 
erate again  the  epistemological  contrast  between  perception  and 
thought.  Since,  that  is,  all  psychical  life  is  regarded  as  motion  of 
the  fire-atoms,1  and  since  the  motion  of  atoms  in  the  connected  sys- 
tem of  the  universe  is  conditioned  by  contact  and  impact,  it  follows 
that  thought,  which  knows  the  truly  real,  can  be  explained  only  from 
an  impression  which  this  truly  real  makes  upon  the  fiery  atoms,  — 
explained  therefore  itself  only  through  the  efflux  of  such  images. 
As  a  psychological  process,  therefore,  thought  is  the  same  as  percep- 
tion, viz.  impression  of  images  upon  fire-atoms ;  the  only  difference 
is  that  in  the  case  of  perception  the  relatively  coarse  images  of  the 
atom-complexes  are  active,  while  thought,  which  apprehends  true 
reality,  rests  upon  a  contact  of  the  fire-atoms  with  the  finest  images, 
with  those  which  represent  the  atomic  structure  of  things. 

i  Arist.  De  An.  I.  2,  405  a  8. 


CHAP.  3,  §  10.]     System  of  Materialism :   Democritus.  115 

Odd  and  fantastic  as  this  sounds,  the  indications  are  yet  all  in 
favour  of  the  supposition  that  Democritus  drew  this  conclusion  from 
the  presuppositions  of  his  m  iterialistic  psychology.  This  psychol- 
ogy knew  no  independent,  internal  mechanism  of  ideas  or  conscious 
states,  but  only  an  arising  of  ideas  through  the  motion  of  atoms. 
Hence  it  regarded  ideas  that  were  evidently  deceptive  as  also 
"  impressions,"  and  sought  for  these  the  exciting  images.  Dreams, 
e.g.  were  traced  back  to  etSwXa  which  had  either  penetrated  into  the 
body  in  the  waking  state  and  on  account  of  their  weak  motion  had 
previously  produced  no  impression,  or  had  first  reached  the  fiery 
atoms  in  sleep,  evading  the  senses.  A  mysterious  ("magnetic,"  or 
"psychic,"  we  should  say  to-day)  action  of  men  upon  one  another 
appeared  comprehensible  on  this  hypothesis,  and  an  objective  basis 
was  given  to  faith  in  gods  and  demons  by  assuming  giant  forms  in 
infinite  space  from  which  corresponding  images  proceeded. 

In  correspondence  with  this  Democritus  seems  to  have  thought  of 
"  genuine  knowledge  "  as  that  motion  of  the  fire-atoms  which  is  pro- 
duced by  the  impression  of  the  smallest  and  finest  images, — those 
which  represent  the  atomic  composition  of  things.  This  motion  is, 
however,  the  most  delicate,  the  finest,  the  gentlest  of  all — that  which 
comes  nearest  to  rest.  With  this  definition  the  contrast  "between  per- 
ception and  thought  was  expressed  in  quantitative  terms  —  quite  in  the 
spirit  of  the  system.  The  coarse  images  of  things  as  wholes  set  the 
fiery  atoms  into  relatively  violent  motion  and  produce  by  this  means 
the  "obscure  insight  "  which  presents  itself  as  perception ;  the  finest 
images,  on  the  contrary,  impress  upon  the  fiery  atoms  a  gentle,  fine" 
motion  which  evokes  the  "  genuine  insight "  into  the  atomic  structure 
of  things,  i.e.  thought.  In  consideration  of  this,  Democritus  com- 
mends the  thinker  to  turn  away  from  the  world  of  the  senses,  quite 
in  contrast  with  the  mode  of  thought  which  would  develop  truth  out 
of  perception.  Those  finest  motions  assert  their  influence  only  where 
the  coarser  are  kept  back;  and  where  too  violent  motions  of  the 
fiery  atoms  take  place,  the  result  is  false  ideation,  the  dAAo^povetv.1 

5.  This  same  quantitative  contrast  of  strong  and  soft,  violent 
and  gentle  motion,  was  laid  by  Democritus  at  the  basis  of  his  ethical 
theory  also.2  In  so  doing  he  stood  with  his  psychology  completely 
upon  the  wtellectuaUstic  standpoint  of  Socrates  in  so  far  as  he 
transposed  the  epistemological  values  of  ideas  immediately  into 
ethical  values  of  states  of  will.  As  from  perception  only  that 

1  Theophr.  De  Sens.  58  (Dox.  D.  516). 

2  The  resemblance  with  the  theory  of  Aristippus  (§  7,  9)  is  so  striking,  that 
the  assumption  of  a  causal  connection  is  scarcely  to  be  avoided.    Tet  it  may  be 
that  we  should  seek  for  this  rather  in  a  common  dependence  upon  Protagoras, 
than  in  the  interaction  of  Atomism  and  Hedonism  upon  each  other. 


116  TJie  Greeks:   Systematic  Period.  [PART! 

obscure  insight  follows  which  lias  for  its  object  the  phenomenon 
and  not  the  true  essence,  so  also  the  pleasure  which  arises  from  the 
excitation  of  the  senses  is  only  relative  (v6fju*>),  obscure,  uncertain 
of  itself,  and  deceitful.  The  true  happiness,  on  the  contrary,  for 
which  the  "wise  man  lives  "according  to  nature"  (<£iW),  the  CU&H/AO- 
vi'a,  which  is  the  end  (reXos)  and  measure  (ovpos)  of  human  life,  must 
not  be  sought  in  external  goods,  in  sensuous  satisfaction,  but  only 
in  that  gentle  motion,  that  tranquil  frame  (eveo-raJ),  which  attends 
upon  right  insight,  upon  the  gentle  movement  of  the  fiery  atoms. 
This  insight  "alone  gives  to  the  soul  measure  and  harmony  (£v/A/*e- 
Tpia),  guards  it  from  emotional  astonishment  (a^av/xao-ta),  lends  it 
security  and  imperturbability  (aroLpa^  d0a//,/3ia), —  the  ocean-calm 
(70X171/97)  of  the  soul  that  has  become  master  of  its  passions  through 
knowledge.  True  happiness  is  rest  (i/crvxta),  and  rest  is  secured  only 
by  knowledge.  Thus  Democritus  gains  as  the  cap-stone  of  his 
system  his  personal  ideal  of  life,  —  that  of  pure  knowledge,  free 
from  all  wishes ;  with  this  ideal,  this  systematic  materialism  cul- 
minates in  a  noble  and  lofty  theory  of  life.  And  yet  there  is  in  it 
also  a  tendency  which  characterises  the  morals  of  the  age  of  the 
Enlightenment :  this  peace  of  mind  resting  upon  knowledge  is  the 
happiness  of  an  individual  life,  and  where  the  ethical  teachings  of 
Democritus  extend  beyond  the  individual,  it  is  friendship,  the  rela- 
tion of  individual  personalities  to  one  another,  that  he  praises, 
while  he  remains  indifferent  as  regards  connection  with  the  state. 

§  11.  The  System  of  Idealism. 

The  origin  and  development  of  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  Ideas  is 
one  of  the  most  difficult  and  involved,  as  well  as  one  of  the  most 
effective  and  fruitful,  processes  in  the  entire  history  of  European 
thought,  and  the  task  of  apprehending  it  properly  is  made  still 
more  difficult  by  the  literary  form  in  which  it  has  been  transmitted. 
The  Platonic  dialogues  show  the  philosophy  of  their  author  in 
process  of  constant  re-shaping :  their  composition  extended  through 
half  a  century.  Since,  however,  the  order  in  which  the  individual 
dialogues  arose  has  not  been  transmitted  to  us  and  cannot  be  estab- 
lished absolutely  from  external  characteristics,  pragmatic  hypotheses 
based  on  the  logical  connections  of  thought  must  be  called  to  our  aid. 

1.  In  the  first  place  there  is  no  question  that  the  opposition 
between  Socrates  and  the  Sophists  formed  the  starting-point  for 
Platonic  thought.  Plato's  first  writings  were  dedicated  to  an 
affectionate  and  in  the  main,  certainly,  a  faithful  presentation  of 
the  Socratic  doctrine  of  virtue.  To  this  he  attached  a  polemic 


CHAP.  3,  §11.]         System  of  Idealism:   Plato.  117 

against  the  Sophistic  doctrines  of  society  and  knowledge  marked  by 
increasing  keenness,  but  also  by  an  increasing  tendency  toward 
establishing  his  own  view  upon  an  independent  basis.  The  Platonic 
criticism  of  the  Sophistic  theories,  however,  proceeded  essentially 
from  the  Socratic  postulate.  It  admitted  fully,  in  the  spirit  of 
Protagoras,  the  relativity  of  all  knowledge  gained  through  percep- 
tion, but  it  found  just  in  this  the  inadequacy  of  the  Sophistic  theory 
for  a  true  science  of  ethics.1  The  knowledge  which  is  necessary  for 
virtue  cannot  consist  in  opinions  as  they  arise  from  the  changing 
states  of  motion  in  subject  and  object,  nor  can  it  consist  of  a 
rational  consideration  and  legitimation  of  such  opinions  gained  by 
perception;2  it  must  have  a  wholly  different  source  and  wholly 
different  objects.  Of  the  corporeal  world  and  its  changing  states  — 
Plato  held  to  this  view  of  Protagoras  in  its  entirety  —  there  is  no 
science,  but  only  perceptions  and  opinions ;  it  is  accordingly  an 
incorporeal  ivorld  that  forms  the  object  of  science,  and  this  world 
must  exist  side  by  side  with  the  corporeal  world  as  independently 
as  does  knowledge  side  by  side  with  opinion.3 

Here  we  have  for  the  first  time  the  claim  of  an  immaterial  reality, 
brought  forward  expressly  and  with  full  consciousness,  and  it  is 
clear  that  this  springs  from  the  ethical  need  for  a  knowledge  that 
is  raised  above  all  ideas  gained  by  sense-perception.  The  assump- 
tion of  immateriality  did  not  at  first  have  as  its  aim,  for  Plato,  the 
explanation  of  phenomena :  its  end  was  rather  to  assure  an  object 
for  ethical  knowledge.  The  idealistic  metaphysics,  therefore,  in  its 
first  draft  *  builds  entirely  upon  a  new  foundation  of  its  own,  with- 
out any  reference  to  the  work  of  earlier  science  that  had  been 
directed  toward  investigating  and  understanding  phenomena ;  it  is 
an  immaterial  Eleatism,  which  seeks  true  Being  in  the  Ideas,  with- 
out troubling  itself  about  the  world  of  generation  and  occurrence, 
which  it  leaves  to  perception  and  opinion.6 

To  avoid  numerous  misunderstandings6  we  must,  nevertheless, 
expressly  point  out  that  the  Platonic  conception  of  immateriality 
(dcrdi/xarov)  is  in  nowise  coincident  with  that  of  the  spiritual  or 
psychical,  as  might  be  easily  assumed  from  the  modern  mode  of 
thinking.  For  the  Platonic  conception  the  particular  psychical 

1  On  this  point,  the  Thecetetus  brings  together  the  whole  criticism  of  the 
Sophistic  doctrine. 

2  5<{£a  dX^s  perk  \6yov,  Thecet.  201  E.     (Probably  a  theory  of  Antisthenes.) 
8  Arist.  Met.  I.  6,  987  a  32  ;  XIIL  4,  1078  b  12.    • 

*  As  set  forth  in  the  dialogues  Phcedrus  and  the  Symposium. 

5  Investigations  as  to  theoretical  and  natural  science  are  first  found  in  the 
latest  dialogues. 

6  To  which  the  Neo-Pythagorean  and  Neo-PIatouic  transformation  of  the 
doctrine  of  Ideas  gave  occasion.    Cf.  Pt.  II.  ch.  2,  §  18. 


118  The  Greeks :   Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

functions  belong  to  the  world  of  Becoming,  precisely  as  do  those  of 
the  body  and  of  other  corporeal  things ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  in 
the  true  reality  the  "  forms  "  or  "  shapes  "  of  corporeality,  the  Ideas 
of  sensuous  qualities  and  relations,  find  a  place  precisely  as  do  those 
of  the  spiritual  relations.  The  identification  of  spirit  or  mind  and 
incorporeality,  the  division  of  the  world  into  mind  and  matter,  is  un- 
Platonic.  The  incorporeal  world  which  Plato  teaches  is  not  yet  the 
spiritual. 

Bather,  the  Ideas  are,  for  Plato,  that  incoiyoreal  Being  which  is 
known  through  conceptions.  Since,  that  is,  the  conceptions  in  which 
Socrates  found  the  essence  of  science  are  not  given  as  such  in  the 
reality  that  can  be  perceived,  they  must  form  a  "  second,"  "  other  " 
reality,  different  from  the  former,  existing  by  itself,  and  this  imma- 
terial reality  is  related  to  the  material,  as  Being  to  Becoming,  as  the 
abiding  to  the  changing,  as  the  simple  to  the  manifold  —  in  short, 
as  the  world  of  Parrnenides  to  that  of  Heraclitus.  The  object  of 
ethical  knowledge,  cognised  through  general  conceptions,  is  that 
which  "  is  "  in  the  true  sense :  the  ethical,  the  logical,  and  the  phys- 
ical apxfi  (ground  or  first  principle)  are  the  same.  This  is  the  point 
in  which  all  lines  of  earlier  philosophy  converge. 

2.  If  the  Ideas  are  to.  be  "  something  other "  than  the  percep- 
tible world,  knowledge  of  them  through  conceptions  cannot  be  found 
in  the  content  of  perception,  for  they  cannot  be .  contained  in  it. 
With  this  turn  of  thought,  which  corresponds  to  the  sharper  separa- 
tion of  the  two  worlds,  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  knowledge  becomes 
much  more  rationalistic  than  that  of  Democritus,  and  goes  also 
decidedly  beyond  that  of  Socrates ;  for  while  the  latter  had  devel- 
oped the  universal  out  of  the  opinions  and  perceptions  of  individuals 
inductively,  and  had  found  it  as  the  common  content  in  these  opin- 
ions and  perceptions,  Plato  does  not  conceive  of  the  process  of 
induction  in  this  analytical  manner,  but  sees  in  perceptions  only  the 
suggestions  or  promptings  with  the  help  of  which  the  soul  bethinks 
itself  of.  the  conceptions,  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Ideas. 

Plato  expressed  this  rationalistic  principle  in  the  form  that  phil- 
osophical Jcnoioledge  is  recollection  (dva^tns).  He  showed  in  the 
example  of  the  Pythagorean  proposition l  that  mathematical  knowl- 
edge is  not  extracted  from  sense-perception,  but  that  sense-percep- 
tion offers  only  the  opportunity  on  occasion  of  which  the  soul 
recollects  the  knowledge  already  present  within  her,  that  is,  knowl- 
edge that  has  purely  rational  validity.  He  points  out  that  the  pure 
mathematical  relations  are  not  present  in  corporeal  reality ;  on  the 

i  Meno,  80  ff. 


CHAP.  3,  §11.]          System  of  Idealism:   Plato.  119 

contrary,  the  notion  of  these  relations  arises  in  us  when  similar 
figures  of  perception  offer  but  the  occasion  therefor,  and  he  extended 
this  observation;  which  is  completely  applicable  to  mathematical 
knowledge,  to  the  sum  total  of  scientific  knowledge. 

That  this  reflection  upon  what  is  rationally  necessary  should  be 
conceived  of  as  recollection  is  connected  with  the  fact  that  Plato, 
as  little  as  any  of  his  predecessors,  recognises  a  creative  activity  of 
the  consciousness,  which  produces  its  content.  This  is  a  general 
limit  for  all  G-reek  psychology ;  the  content  for  ideas  must  somehow 
be  given  to  the  "  soul " ;  hence,  if  the  Ideas  are  not  given  in  perception, 
and  the  soul  nevertheless  finds  them  in  herself  on  occasion  of  per- 
ception, she  must  have  already  received  these  Ideas  in  some  way  or 
other.  For  this  act  of  reception,  however,  Plato  finds  only  the 
mythical  representation,1  that  before  the  earthly  life  the  souls  have 
beheld  the  pure  forms  of  reality  in  the  incorporeal  world  itself,  that 
the  perception  of  similar  corporeal  things  calls  the  remembrance 
back  to  those  forms  forgotten  in  the  corporeal  earthly  life,  and  that 
from  this  awakes  the  philosophical  impulse,  the  love  of  the  Ideas 
(t/ows),  by  which  the  soul  becomes  raised  again  to  the  knowledge 
of  that  true  reality.  Here,  too,  as  in  the  case  of  Democritus,  it  is 
shown  that  the  entire  ancient  rationalism  could  form  no  idea  of 
the  process  of  thought  except  after  the  analogy  of  sensuous  percep- 
tion, particularly  that  of  the  sense  of  sight. 

What  Socrates  in  his  doctrine  of  the  formation  of  conceptions  had 
designated  as  induction,  became  transformed,  therefore,  for  Plato, 
into  an  intuition  that  proceeds  by  recollecting  (o-waywyif),  into  re- 
flection upon  a  higher  and  purer  perception  (Anschauung).  This 
pure  perception,  however,  yields  a  plurality  of  ideas  corresponding 
to  the  multiplicity  of  objects  which  occasion  such  perceptions,  and 
from  this  grows  the  further  task  for  science  to  know  also  the  rela- 
tions of  the  Ideas  to  each  other.  This  is  a  second  step  of  Plato's 
beyond  Socrates,  and  is  specially  important  for  the  reason  that  it  led 
shortly  to  the  apprehension  of  the  logical  relations  between  concep- 
tions. It  was  principally  the  relations  of  the  subordination  and  co- 
ordination of  concepts  to  which  Plato  became  attentive.  The 
division  of  the  class-concepts  or  logical  genera  into  their  species 
played  a  great  part  in  his  teaching.2  The  possibility  or  impossibility 
of  the  union  of  particular  conceptions  is  brought  more  exactly  into 

1  fhdBdr.  246  fl. 

2  Cf.  Phileb.  16  C.  Yet  this  dividing  process  is  not  anywhere  especially  promi- 
nent in  the  writings  that  are  certainly  Platonic.    It  is  handled  with  the  pedantry 
of  a  school  inrthe  Sophist  and  Politicus.    Antiquity  preserved  "definitions'1 
and  "divisions"  from  the  Platonic  school.    In  Athenceus,  II.  59  C,  is  an  instance 
of  mockery,  by  a  comic  poet,  at  this  academical  concept-splitting. 


120  The  Greeks:   Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

consideration/  and  as  a  methodical  aid  he  recommended  the  hypo- 
thetical method  of  discussion,  which  aims  to  examine  a  tentatively 
proposed  conception  by  developing  all  the  possible  consequences 
that  would  follow  from  the  possibility  of  its  union  with  conceptions 
already  known. 

These  logical  operations  taken  as  a  whole,  by  means  of  which  the 
Ideas  and  their  relations  to  one  another  (/coivowa)  were  to  be  found, 
Plato  denoted  by  the  name  dialectic.  What  is  found  in  his  writings 
concerning  it  has  throughout  a  methodological  character,  but  is  not 
properly  logical. 

3.  The  doctrine  of  knowledge  as  recollection  stood,  however,  in 
closest  connection  with  Plato's  conception  of  the  relation  of  Ideas  to 
the  world  of  phenomena.  Between  the  higher  world  of  ova-La  and  the 
lower  world  of  ye»/e<n?,  between  what  is  and  what  is  in  process  of 
Becoming,  he  found  that  relation  of  similarity  which  exists  between 
archetypes  (rapaSefyttara)  and  their  copies  or  images  (ctSoAa) .  In  this, 
too,  a  strong  influence  of  mathematics  upon  the  Platonic  philosophy 
is  disclosed:  as  the  Pythagoreans  had  already  designated  things  as 
imitations  of  numbers,  so  Plato  found  that  individual  things  always 
correspond  to  their  class-concepts  only  to  a  certain  degree,  and  that 
the  class-concept  is  a  logical  ideal  which  none  of  its  empirical 
examples  comes  up  to.  He  expressed  this  by  the  conception  of 
imitation  (/w/^o-is).  It  was  thus  at  the  same  time  established  that 
tjiat  second  world,  that  of  the  incorporeal  Ideas,  was  to  be  regarded 
as  the  higher,  the  more  valuable,  the  more  primitive  world. 

Yet  this  mode  of  representing  the  matter  gave  rather  a  deter- 
mination of  their  respective  values  than  a  view  that  was  usable  for 
metaphysical  consideration :  hence  Plato  sought  for  still  other  desig- 
nations of  the  relation.  The  logical  side  of  the  matter,  according  to 
which  the  Idea  as  class-concept  or  species  represents  the  total  uni- 
tary extent  or  compass,  of  which  the  individual  things  denote  but  a 
part,  appears  in  the  expression  participation  (/w&fis),  which  means 
that  the  individual  thing  but  partakes  in  the  universal  essence  of  the 
Idea ;  and  the  changing  process  of  this  partaking  is  emphasised  by 
the  conception  of  presence  (irapwcrfo).  The  class-concept  or  species 
is  present  in  the  thing  so  long  as  the  latter  possesses  the  qualities 
which  dwell  in  the  Idea.  The  Ideas  come  and  go,  and  as  these  now 
communicate  themselves  to  things  and  now  again  withdraw,  the 
qualities  in  these  things  which  are  like  the  Ideas  are  successively 
changed  to  the  eye  of  perception. 

The  precise  designation  of  this  relation  was,  for  Plato,  an  object 

1  Phcedo,  102  ff. 


CHAP.  3,  §  11.]          System  of  Idealism:  Plato.  121 

of  only  secondary  interest,  provided  only  the  difference  between 
the  world  of  Ideas  and  the  corporeal  world,  and  the  dependence  of 
the  latter  upon  the  former,  were  recognised.1  Most  important  and 
sufficient  for  him  was  the  conviction  that  by  means  of  conceptions 
that  knowledge  which  virtue  needs  of  what  truly  and  really  zs,  could 
be  won. 

A.  Peipers,  Ontologia  Platonica.    Leips.  1883. 

4.  But  the  logico-metaphysical  interest  which  Plato  grafted  upon 
the  Socratic  doctrine  of  knowledge  carried  him  far  beyond  the 
master  as  regards  the  contents  of  this  doctrine.  The  general 
characteristics  which  he  developed  for  the  essence  of  the  Ideas 
applied  to  all  class-concepts^  and  the  immaterial  world  was  therefore 
peopled  with  the  archetypes  of  the  entire  world  of  experience.  So 
many  class-concepts,  so  many  Ideas ;  for  Plato,  too,  there  are  count- 
less " forms."  In  so  far  criticism2  was  right  in  saying  that  Plato's 
world  of  Ideas  was  the  world  of  perception  thought  over  again  in 
conception. 

In  fact,  according  to  the  first  draft  of  the  Platonic  philosophy, 
there  are  Ideas  of  everything  possible,  of  things,  qualities,  and 
relations ;  of  the  good  and  the  beautiful  as  well  as  of  the  bad  and 
the  ugly.  Since  the  Idea  is  defined  methodologically,  in  a  purely 
formal  way,  as  class-concept,  every  class-concept  whatever  belongs 
to  the  higher  world  of  pure  forms ;  and  in  the  dialogue  Parmenides? 
not  only  was  Plato's  attention  called  by  a  man  schooled  in  the 
Eleatic  Sophistic  doctrine  to  all  kinds  of  dialectical  difficulties 
which  inhere  in  the  logical  relation  of  the  one  Idea  to  its  many 
copies,  but  he  was  also  rallied,  spitefully  enough,  with  the  thought 
of  all  the  foul  companions  that  would  be  met  in  his  world  of  pure 
conceptual  forms. 

Plato's  philosophy  had  no  principle  that  could  serve  as  a  weapon 
against  such  an  objection,  nor  is  there  in  the  dialogues  any  intima- 
tion that  he  had  attempted  to  announce  a  definite  criterion  for  the 
selection  of  those  class-concepts  that  were  to  be  regarded  as  Ideas, 
as  constituents  of  the  higher  incorporeal  world.  NOT  do  the  ex- 
amples which  he  adduces  permit  such  a  principle  to  be  recognised  j 
we  can  only  say  that  it  seems  as  if  in  course  of  time  he  continually 
emphasised  more  strongly  the  attributes  expressing  worth  (as  the 
good  and  the  beautiful),  the  mathematical  relations  (greatness  and 
smallness,  numerical  determinations,  etc.),  and  the  types  of  species 
in  the  organic  world,  while,  on  the  contrary,  he  no  longer  reckoned 

1  Phasdo,  100  D.  2  Arist.  Met.  I.  9,  990  b  1.  8  Farm.  130  0. 


122  The  Greeks :   Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

among  the  Ideas  mere  concepts  of  relation,  especially  negative 
notions  and  things  made  by  human  art.1 

5.  Our  knowledge  of  the  systematic  connection  and  order  which 
Plato  intended  to  affirm  in  the  realm  of  Ideas  remains  ultimately  as 
obscure  as  that  in  regard  to  the  preceding  point.  Urgent  as  he  was 
to  establish  co-ordination  and  subordination  among  the  conceptions, 
the  thought  of  a  logically  arranged  pyramid  of  conceptions  which 
must  culminate  in  the  conception  that  was  most  general  and  poorest 
in  content  seems  not  to  have  been  carried  out.  A  very  problematical 
attempt  to  set  up  a  limited  number  (five)  of  most  general  concep- 
tions2 is  presented  in  the  Sophist  (254  ff.).  But  these  attempts, 
which  tend  toward  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  the  categories,  are 
not  to  be  traced  back  with  certainty  to  Plato  himself. 

"With  him  we  find,  rather,  only  the  doctrine  presented  in  the 
Philebus,  as  well  as  in  the  Republic,  that  the  Idea  of  the  Good  is  the 
highest,  embracing,  ruling,  and  realising  all  others.  Plato  defines 
this  Idea  as  regards  its  content  as  little  as  did  Socrates;  he  de- 
termined it  only  by  means  of  the  relation,  that  it  should  represent 
in  its  content  the  highest  absolute  end  of  all  reality,  of  the  incor- 
poreal as  of  the  corporeal.  The  subordination  of  the  other  Ideas 
to  this  highest  Idea  is  accordingly  not  the  logical  subordination  of 
a  particular  under  the  general,  but  the  teleological  of  the  means  to 
the  end. 

In  the  latest  period  of  his  philosophising,  concerning  which  we 
have  only  intimations  in  the  Laws  and  in  critical  notices  of  Aris- 
totle/ and  in  the  teachings  of  his  nearest  successors,  the  imperfec- 
tion of  this  solution  of  the  logical  problem  seems  to  have  led  Plato 
to  the  unfortunate  thought  of  developing  the  system  of  Ideas  ac- 
cording to  the  method  of  the  Pythagorean  number-theory.  The 
Pythagoreans  also,  to  be  sure,  had  the  purpose  of  attaching  the 
abiding  arrangements  of  things  symbolically  to  the  development  of 
the  number  series.  But  that  was  only  a  makeshift,  because  they 
had  as  yet  no  idea  of  the  logical  arrangement  of  conceptions :  hence, 
when  Plato,  in  connection  with  his  other  thoughts,  fell  back  upon 
this  makeshift,  designated  the  Idea  of  the  Good  as  the  &,  the  One, 
and  attempted  to  derive  from  it  the  duality  (Svas)  of  the  Infinite  or 
Indefinite,  and  the  Measure  (arrupov  and  Wpas,  =  even  and  odd ;  cf . 
§  4,  11),  and  from  this,  further,  the  other  Ideas  in  such  a  way  as  to 
present  a  series  of  the  conditioning  and  the  conditioned,  neither 

1  Cf.  also  Arist.  Met.  XII.  3, 1070  c  18. 

2  Being-,  rest,  motion,  sameness  (ra^r6ri;s)  and  otherness  (^rep6r^s),  i.e.  the 
division  of  Being  into  the  resting  (otf<rfa),  ever  the  same  with  itself,  and  the 
moved  (7<?ve<ns),  in  process  of  constant  change. 

8  Cf.  A  Trendelenburg,  Platonis  de  Ideis  et  Nwneris  Doctrina  (Leips.  1826). 


CHAP.  3,  §  11.]         System  of  Idealism :  Plato.  123 

this  deplorable  construction  nor  the  fact  that  men  like  Speusippus, 
Xenocrates,  Philippus,  and  Archytas  undertook  to  carry  it  out  in 
detail,  would  be  worth  more  particular  mention,  were  not  this  just 
the  point  to  which  the  speculation  of  the  Neo-Pythagoreans  and  the 
Neo-Platonists  became  attached.  For  by  this  gradation  which  Plato 
thus  began  within  the  ava-ia  the  world  of  true  reality,  the  division 
in  the  conception  of  reality,  which  had  developed  out  of  the  opposi- 
tion between  perception  and  thought,  became  multiplied,  and  thus 
dualism  was  again  abolished.  For  when  to  the  One,  or  the  Idea  of 
the  Good,  was  ascribed  the  highest  absolute  reality,  and  to  the  vari- 
ous strata  of  the  world  of  Ideas,  a  reality  of  constantly  decreasing 
worth  in  proportion  as  they  were  removed  from  the  One  in  the 
system  in  numbers,  there  arose  from  this  a  scale  of  realities  which 
extended  from  the  One  down  to  the  lowest  reality,  —  that  of  the 
corporeal  world.  Fantastic  as  this  thought  may  be,  it  yet  evinced 
its  force  and  influence  in  the  development  of  thought,  even  to  the 
threshold  of  modern  philosophy.  Its  power,  however,  lies  doubtless 
in  all  cases  in  its  amalgamation  of  attributes  of  worth  with  these 
various  grades  of  reality. 

6.  While  as  metaphysics,  the  doctrine  of  Ideas  fell  into  such  seri- 
ous difficulties,  it  was  carried  out  in  an  extremely  happy,  simple,  and 
transparent  manner  in  that  domain  which  formed  its  proper  home, 
— that  of  ethics.  For  the  systematic  elaboration  of  this,  however, 
Plato  needed  a  psychology,  and  that,  too,  of  another  sort  than  the 
psychology  which  had  arisen  in  previous  science,  out  of  the  presup- 
positions of  natural  philosophy,  and  with  the  aid  of  individual  per- 
ceptions or  opinions.  When,  in  contrast  with  this,  he  developed 
his  psychology  from  the '  postulates  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  the 
result  was  of  course  a  purely  metaphysical  theory  which  stood  and 
fell  with  its  postulate,  yet  it  was  at  the  same  time,  by  reason  of  the 
import  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  a  first  attempt  to  understand  the 
psychical  life  from  within,  and  in  accordance  with  its  internal  char- 
acter and  articulation. 

The  conception  of  the  soul  or  mind  was  in  itself  a  difficulty1  in 
the  dualism  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas.  For  Plato,  also,  "soul"  was 
on  the  one  hand  the  living  element,  that  which  is  moved  of  itself 
and  moves  other  things,  and  on  the  other  hand,  that  which  perceives, 
knows,  and  wills.  As  principle  of  life  and  of  motion,  the  soul 
belongs,  therefore,  to  the  lower  world  of  Becoming,  and  in  this  it 
remains  when  it  perceives  and  directs  its  desires  toward  objects  of 
the  senses.  But  this  same  soul,  nevertheless,  by  its  true  knowledge 

I'Phcedo,  76  ft,  105,  Phadr.  245,  Laws,  X.  896. 


124  The  Greeks:   Systematic  Period.  [PART!. 

of  the  Ideas,  becomes  partaker  in  the  higher  reality  of  abiding  Being. 
Hence  it  must  be  assigned  a  position  between  the  two  worlds  —  not 
the  timeless,  unchanged  essence  of  the  Ideas,  but  a  vitality  which 
survives  change ;  i.e.  immortality.  Here,  for  the  first  time,  personal 
immortality  is  brought  forward  by  Plato  as  a  part  of  philosophic 
teaching.  Of  the  proofs  which  the  Phcedo  adduces  for  this,  those 
are  most  in  accord  with  the  spirit  of  the  system  which  reason  from 
the  soul's  knowledge  of  Ideas  to  its  relationship  with  eternity ;  in 
correspondence  with  the  form  of  the  system  is  the  dialectic  false 
conclusion  that  the  soul  cannot  be  or  become  dead,  because  its 
essential  characteristic  is  life ;  the  most  tenable  of  the  arguments  is 
the  reference  to  the  unity  and  substantiality  which  the  soul  evinces 
in  ruling  the  body. 

In  consequence  of  this  intermediate  position  the  soul  must  bear  in 
itself  the  traits  of  both  worlds ;  there  must  be  in  its  essence  some- 
thing which  corresponds  •  to  the  world  of  Ideas,  and  something 
which  corresponds  to  the  world  of  perception.  The  former  is  the 
rational  nature  (XoyicrriKov  or  vofc),  the  seat  of  knowledge  and  of  the 
virtue  which  corresponds"  to  it ;  in  the  latter,  the  irrational  nature, 
Plato  made  a  further  distinction  of  two  elements,  —  the  nobler,  which 
inclines  towards  the  Beason,  and  the  lower,  which  resists  it.  The 
nobler  he  found  in  the  ardent,  spirited  Will  (Spirit,  tfv/xos),  the 
lower  in  the  sensuous  desire  (Appetite,  cvriOvfLui).  Thus  Reason, 
Spirit,  and  Appetite  are  the  three  forms  of  activity  of  the  soul,  the 
classes  or  species  (£fy)  of  its  states. 

These  fundamental  psychological  conceptions  which  had  thus  grown 
out  of  considerations  of  ethical  worth  are  employed  by  Plato  to  set 
forth  the  moral  destiny  of  the  individual.  The  fettering  of  the 
soul  to  the  body  is  at  once  a  consequence  and  a  punishment  of 
the  sensuous  appetite.  Plato  extends  the  immortal  existence  of 
the  soul  equally  beyond  the  two  boundaries  of  the  earthly  life. 
The  sin  for  the  sake  of  which  the  soul  is  ensnared  in  the  world  of 
sense  is  to  be  sought  in  a  pre-existent  state ;  *  its  destiny  in  the 
hereafter l  will  depend  upon  how  far  it  has  freed  itself  in  the  earthly 
life  from  the  sensuous  appetite,  and  turned  to  its  higher  vocation  — 
knowledge  of  the  Ideas.  But  inasmuch  as  the  ultimate  goal  of  the 
soul  appears  to  be  to  strip  of  the  sensuous  nature,  the  three  forms 
of  activity  are  designated  also  as  parts  of  the  soul  In  the  Timceus 
Plato  even  portrays  the  process  of  the  formation  of  the  soul  out  of 
these  parts,  and  retains  immortality  for  the  rational  part  only. 

i  These  doctrines  are  depicted  in  the  form  of  mythical  allegories  which  make 
use  of  motives  from  the  popular  faith  and  from  the  Mystery-cults.  V.  Phcedr. 
246  ft;  Gorgias,  523  ff.;  Sep.  614  fl.;  Fbasfo,  107  ff. 


CHAP.  3,  §  11.]          System  of  Idealism:  Plato.  125 

It  is  already  clear  from  these  changing  determinations  that  the 
relation  of  these  three  fundamental  forms  of  the  psychical  life  to 
the  none  too  strongly  emphasised  unity  of  the  soul's  nature  was  not 
clearly  thought  out  ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  give  to  these  conceptions 
formed  from  the  ethical  need  the  significance  of  purely  psychologi- 
cal distinctions,  such  as  have  since  been  made.1 

7.  But  at  all  events  there  followed  in  this  way,  from  the  doctrine 
of  the  two  worlds,  a  negative  morals  that  would  fly  from  the  world, 
and  in  which  the  withdrawal  from  the  world  of  sense  and  the  spir- 
itualisation  of  life  were  praised  as  ideals  of  wisdom.  It  is  not  only 
the  Phcedo  that  breathes  this  earnest  disposition  in  its  portrayal  of 
the  death  of  Socrates  ;  the  same  ethical  theory  prevails  in  such  dia- 
logues as  the  Gorgias,  the  TJiecetetus,  and,  in  part,  the  Republic. 
But  in  Plato's  own  nature  the  heavy  blood  of  the  thinker  was 
associated  with  the  light  heart-beat  of  the  artist,  and  thus  while  his 
philosophy  lured  him  into  the  realm  of  bodiless  forms,  the  whole 
charm  of  Hellenic  beauty  was  living  and  active  within  him. 
Strongly  as  he  therefore  combated  root  and  branch  the  theory  of 
Aristippus,  which  would  fain  regard  man's  strivings  as  satisfied 
with  sensuous  pleasure,  it  was  nevertheless  his  opinion  that  the 
Idea  of  the  Good  becomes  realised  even  in  the  world  of  sense. 
Joy  in  the  beautiful,  pleasure  in  the  sensuous  imitation  of  the  Idea, 
painless  because  free  from  the  element  of  wishing,  the  development 
of  knowledge  and  practical  artistic  skill,  the  intelligent  understand- 
ing of  the  mathematical  relations  which  measure  empirical  reality, 
and  the  appropriate  ordering  of  the  individual  life,  —  all  these  were 
valued  by  him  as  at  least  preparatory  stages  and  participations  in 
that  highest  good  which  consists  in  knowledge  of  the  Ideas,  and  of 
the  highest  among  them,  the  Idea  of  the  G-ood.  In  the  Symposium 
and  in  the  Philebus  he  has  given  expression  to  this  his  estimate  of 
the  goods  of  life. 

This  same  thought,  that  ethical  values  and  standards  must  illu- 
mine the  whole  circuit  of  human  life,  was  used  in  another  -form  by 
Plato  in  that  presentation  of  the  system  of  the  virtues  which  he 
developed  in  the  Eepullic.  Here  he  showed  that  each  part  of  the 
soul  has  a  definite  task  to  fulfil,  and  so  a  perfection  of  its  own  to 
reach  :  the  rational  part,  in  wisdom  (o-o<£ta),  the  spirited  (fopoaSe?) 
in  energy  of  will  (courage,  dvSpia),  the  appetitive  (iTriflu/iTjnKov)  in 


1  That  the  question  here  for  Plato  was  essentially  that  of  the  gradation  of  the 
psychical  from  the  point  of  view  of  relative  worth,  is  shown  not  only  in  the 
employment  made  of  these  distinctions  in  ethics  and  politics,  but  also  in  such 
remarks  as  those  which  designated  this  triple  division  as  characteristic  for  the 
different  organic  beings  (plant,  animal,  man),  or  for  the  different  peoples, 
inhabitants  of  southern  countries,  of  northern  countries,  and  the  Greeks. 


126  The  Greeks  :   Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 


self-control  (moderation,  wfywrwij)  ;  that,  however,  in  addition  to 
all  these,  as  the  virtue  of  the  soul  as  a  whole,  there  must  be  the 
right  relation  of  these  parts,  complete  uprightness  (justice,  StKcuoowj). 

The  true  significance,  however,  of  these  four  cardinal  virtues,  is 
first  unfolded  upon  a  higher  domain,  that  of  politics. 

8.  The  tendency  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  directed  as  it  was 
toward  the  general  and  the  universal,  exhibited  its  most  perfect 
operation  in  the  aspect  now  to  be  noticed,  viz.  that  the  ethical 
ideal  of  the  Platonic  philosophy  lay  not  in  the  ability  and  happi- 
ness of  the  individual,  but  in  the  ethical  perfection  of  the  species. 
True  to  the  logical  principle  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  that  which 
truly  is  in  the  ethical  sense,  is  not  the  individual  man,  but  mankind, 
and  the  form  in  which  this  truly  existent  humanity  appears  is  the 
organic  union  of  individuals  in  the  state.  The  ethical  ideal  becomes 
for  Plato  the  political,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  time  which  saw  the 
dissolution  of  Greek  political  life,  and  in  opposition  to  those  doc- 
trines which  proclaimed  only  the  principle  of  individual  happiness, 
he  raised  the  conception  of  the  state  to  an  all-controlling  height. 

He  considered  the  state,  however,  not  from  the  side  of  its  empiri- 
cal origin,  but  in  reference  to  its  task,  viz.  that  of  presenting  in 
large  the  ideal  of  humanity,  and  of  educating  the  citizen  to  that 
particular  virtue  which  makes  him  truly  happy.  Convinced  that 
his  project  could  be  realised,  with  force  if  necessary,  he  wove  into 
its  fabric  not  only  features  which  he  approved  of  the  then-existing 
Greek  political  life,  in  particular  those  of  the  aristocratic  Doric 
constitutions,  but  also  all  the  ideals  for  whose  fulfilment  he  hoped 
from  the  right  formation  of  public  life. 

K.  F.  Hermann,  Ges.  Abhandlungen,  122  f.;  E.  Zeller,  Vortrtige  und  Al- 
handlungen,  I.  62  IE. 

If  the  ideal  state  is  to  present  man  in  large,  it  must  consist  of  the 
three  parts  which  correspond  to  the  three  parts  of  the  soul,  —  the 
teaching  class,  the  warrior  class,  and  the  working  class.  It  belongs 
to  the  first  class  alone,  that  of  the  cultured  (<£doo-o<£oi),  to  guide  the 
state  and  to  rule1  (a/oxwre?),  to  give  laws  and  to  watch  over  their 
observance.  The  virtue  proper  to  this  class  is  wisdom,  insight  into 
that  which  is  for  the  advantage  of  the  whole,  and  which  is  demanded 
by  the  ethical  aim  of  the  whole.  To  support  this  class  there  is  the 
second  class,  that  of  the  public  officials  (MKovpoi.;  guardians,  <£vAo/ces), 
which  has  to  evince  the  virtue  of  the  fearless  performance  of  duty 
as  it  maintains  the  order  of  the  state  within  and  without. 


1  Hence  the  \oyi(mK&v  is  called  also  ^ye^v^v. 


CHAP.  3,  §11.]         System  of  Idealism:  Plato.  127 

It  is,  however,  obedience  which  holds  the  desires  in  check,  self-control 
(o-ax^pocrw?;),  that  becomes  the  great  mass  of  the  people,  the  artisans 
and  farmers  (yeupyol  KCU  fy/uoupyoQ,  who  have  to  care  for  providing 
for  the  external  means  of  the  states  by  their  labour  and  industry.1 
Only  when  each  class  thus  does  its  duty  and  maintains  its  appro- 
priate virtue  does  the  nature  of  the  state  correspond  to  the  ideal  of 

justice  (StKcuocrw^). 

The  principle  of  aristocracy  in  education,  which  is  of  decisive  im- 
portance in  the  Platonic  ideal  of  the  state,  appears  most  clearly  in 
the  provision  that  for  the  great  mass  of  the  third  class  only  the 
ordinary  ability  of  practical  life  is  claimed,  and  in  that  this  is  re- 
garded as  sufficient  for  their  purpose,  while  the  education,  which  the 
state  has  the  right  and  duty  to  take  in  hand  itself  in  order  to  train 
its  citizens  for  its  own  ends,  is  given  only  to  the  two  other  classes. 
By  means  of  a  constantly  repeated  process  of  selection  continued 
from  birth,  to  the  late  years,  the  government  causes  the  two  upper 
classes  to  be  continually  renewed,  strata  by  strata;  and  in  order  that 
no  individual  interest  may  remain  to  hold  back  these  classes,  who  are 
properly  the  organs  of  the  whole  body,  in  the  fulfilment  of  their 
task,  they  are  to  renounce  family  life  and  private  property.  Their 
lot  is  that  of  education  by  the  state,  absence  of  family  relations, 
community  of  life  and  of  goods.  He  who  is  to  live  for  the  ends  of  the 
whole,  for  the  ethical  education  of  the  people,  must  not  be  bound  to 
the  individual  by  any  personal  interest.  To  this  thought,  which 
found  its  historic  realisation  in  the  sacerdotal  state  of  the  mediaeval 
hierarchy,  is  limited  whatever  of  communism,  community  of  wives, 
etc.,  men  have  professed  to  discover  in  the  Platonic  teaching.  The 
great  Idealist  carries  out  to  its  extreme  consequences  the  thought 
that  the  end  of  human  life  consists  in  moral  education,  and  that 
the  entire  organisation  of  a  community  must  be  arranged  for  this 
sole  end. 

9.  With  this  a  new  relation  between  the  world  of  ideas  and  the 
world  of  phenomena  was  discovered,  and  one  which  corresponded 
most  perfectly  to  the  spirit  of  the  Platonic  system :  the  Idea  of  the 
Good  disclosed  itself  as  the  task,  as  the  end  (re\os),  which  the 
phenomenon  of  human  life  in  society  has  to  fulfil.  This  discovery 
became  of  decisive  importance  for  the  final  form  taken  by  Plato's 
metaphysical  system. 

For,  as  first  projected,  the  doctrine  of  Ideas  had  been  precisely  as 
incompetent  as  the  Eleatie  doctrine  of  Being  to  explain  empirical 
reality.  The  class-concepts  were  held  to  give  knowledge  of  the 

1  Hence  the  third  part  of  the  soul  is  called  also  the  ^i\o%p^^a.rov. 


128  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

absolute  reality,1  which,  purely  for  itself,  simple  and  changeless, 
without  origin  and  imperishable,  forms  a  world  by  itself,  and,  as  in- 
corporeal, is  separated  from  the  world  where  things  arise.  Hence, 
as  was  demonstrated  in  the  dialogue  the  Sophist,2  in  a  keen  polemic 
against  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  this  doctrine  formed  no  principle  of 
motion,  and  therefore  no  explanation  of  facts,  because  it  excluded 
from  itself  all  motion  and  change. 

But  however  little  Plato's  interests  may  have  been  directed 
toward  this  end,  the  conception  of  the  Idea  as  true  Being  ultimately 
demanded,  nevertheless,  that  the  phenomenon  should  be  regarded, 
not  only  as  something  other,  something  imitative,  something  that 
participated,  but  also  as  something  dependent.  It  demanded  that 
the  Idea  be  regarded  as  cause  of  occurrence  and  change  (curia) .  But 
that  which  is  itself  absolutely  unchangeable  and  immovable,  and 
excludes  every  particular  function  from  itself,  cannot  be  a  cause  in 
the  mechanical  sense,  but  only  in  the  sense  that  it  presents  the  end 
for  the  sake  of  which  the  occurrence  takes  place.  Here  for  the  first 
time  the  relation  between  the  two  worlds  of  Being  and  Becoming 
(ovo-ia  and  yo'eons)  is  fully  defined;  all  change  and  occurrence  exists 
for  the  sake  of  the  Idea  j 3  the  Idea  is  the  final  cause  of  phenomena. 

This  foundation  of  teleological  metaphysics  Plato  gives  in  the 
Philebus  and  in  the  middle  books  of  the  Republic,  and  adds  at  once  a 
further  culminating  thought  by  introducing  as  the  final  cause  of  all 
occurrence,  the  world  of  Ideas  as  a  whole,  but  in  particular  the  high- 
est Idea,  to  which  all  the  rest  are  subordinate  in  the  sense  of  means 
to  end,  —  the  Idea  of  the  Good.  This,  referring  to  Anaxagoras,  he 
designates  as  the  World-reason  (voSs),  or  as  the  deity  t 

Side  by  side  with  this  motif  taken  from  Anaxagoras,  another  of 
a  Pythagorean  nature  appears  with  increasing  force  in  a  later  form 
of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  a  motif  in  accordance  with  which  the 
imperfection  of  the  phenomenon  is  pointed  out  as  in  contrast  with 
the  true  Being.  This  inadequacy,  however,  could  not  be  derived 
from  Being  itself,  and  just  as  Leucippus,  in  order  to  understand 
plurality  and  motion,  had  declared  that  in  addition  to  the  Being  of 


_  .  211  B,  aM  Ka0'  abrb  ped1  aurou  fwvoeitits  del  6v. 

2  Page  246  ff.  The  doctrine  there  criticised,  that  of  the  a<rcfy«xra  eftij,  can  in 
accordance  with  the  individual  verbal  coincidences  be  only  the  Platonic ;  just 
this  is  a  factor  in  the  decision  against  the  genuineness  of  the  dialogue.  Schleier- 
macher's  hypothesis  of  a  Megarian  doctrine  of  Ideas,  thought  out  to  rescue  the 
genuineness,  has  not  shown  itself  tenable. 

8  Phileb.  54  C. 

4  Yet  we  are  not  to  think  in  this  case  of  personality,  or  of  a  spiritual  being, 
but  of  the  absolute  ethical  end  or  purpose  of  the  world,  the  conception  of  the 
dya66v  finding  an  exact  definition  as  little  as  with  Socrates.  It  is  rather  presup- 
posed as  being  the  simplest,  the  most  comprehensible  in  itself. 


CHAP.  3,.§  11.]          System  of  Idealism:  Plato.  129 

"Parmenides  tlie  Not-being  was  also  "  real,"  or  "actual,"  and  existent, 
so  Plato  saw  himself  forced,  with  like  logical  consistency,  for  the 
purpose  of  explaining  phenomena  and  the  inadequacy  which  they 
show  with  reference  to  the  Ideas,  to  assume  beside  the  world  of 
Being  or  of  cause,  i.e.  the  world  of  Ideas  and  the  Idea  of  the  Good, 
a  secondary  or  accessory  cause  (£wat'nov)  in  that  which  has  not  the 
attribute  of  Being.  Indeed,  the  parallelism  in  the  two  thinkers 
goes  so  far  that  this  secondary  cause,  which  is  not  Being  (TO  w  oV), 
is  for  Plato  precisely  the  same  as  for  Leucippus  and  Philolaus,  viz. 
empty  space.1 

Space  was  then  for  Plato  the  "nothing"  out  of  which  the  world 
of  phenomena  is  formed  for  the  sake  of  the  Idea  of  the  Good,  or  of 
the  deity.  This  process  of  formation,  however,  consists  in  taking  on 
mathematical  form;  hence  Plato  taught  in  the  Philebus  that  the 
world  of  perception  was  a  "mixture"  of  the  "unlimited"  (aveipov), 
i.e.  space,  and  of  "  limitation  "  (Trcpas),  i.e.  the  mathematical  forms ; 2 
and  that  the  cause  of  this  mixture,  the  highest,  divine  world-prin- 
ciple, was  the  Idea  of  the  Good.  Space  assumes  mathematical  for- 
mation in  order  to  become  like  the  world  of  Ideas. 

The  importance  which  mathematics  had  possessed  from  the  outset 
in  the  development  of  Plato's  thought  finds  thus  at  last  its  metaphys- 
ical expression.  The  mathematical  structures  are  the  intermediate 
link,  by  means  of  which  empty  space,  which  is  not,  is  able  to  imitate 
in  phenomena  the  pure  "forms"  of  the  world  of  Ideas.  Hence 
mathematical  knowledge  (Stavota),  as  well  as  purely  philosophical 
knowledge  (eirwmf/M/),  has  to  do  with  an  abiding  essence  (owta), 
and  is  therefore  comprised  together  with  this,  as  rational  knowledge 
(1/0170-15),  and  set  over  against  knowledge  of  phenomena  (So'|a).  But 
occupying  thus  an  intermediate  place,  it  takes  only  the  position  of  a 
last  stage  in  the  preparation  for  the  wisdom  of  the  "rulers,"  as  set 
forth  in  the  system  of  education  in  the  Republic. 

10.  The  metaphysical  preliminaries  were  now  given  for  what 
Plato  ultimately  projected  in  the  Timceus;  viz.  a  sketch  or  rough 
draught  of  the  philosophy  of  Nature,  for  which,  of  course,  true  to  his 
epistemological  principle,  he  could  not  claim  the  worth  of  certainty, 
but  only  that  of  probability,3  Since,  that  is,  he  was  not  in  a  position 

1  Under  the  influence  of  the  Aristotelian  terminology,  this  secondary  cause 
has  teen  designated  as  "matter"  (vX^?),  and  it  is  only  recently  that  modern 
researches  have  made  it  clear  that  the  Platonic  "  matter"  is  simply  space.  Of. 
H,  Siebeck,  Untersuchungen  z.  Philos.  d.  Gr.  (2  Aufl.,  Preiburg  i.  B.  1889). 

?  It  is  probable  that  in  this  case  Plato  transposed  the  numbers  into  the  world 
of  Ideas  itself,  but  looked  upon  their  representation  in  geometrical  structures  as 
the  "limitation"  added  to  space, 

8  The  Platonic  Physics  is  then,  hypothetical  in  like  manner  with  that  of 
Parmenides.  Here,  too,  it  would  seem  that  regard  for  the  demands  of  his  dis- 


130  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  L 

to  carry  through  dialectically,  and  establish  in  conceptions  this 
project  of  explaining  occurrence  from  the  world's  end  or  purpose, 
Plato  gave  an  exposition  of  his  teleological  view  of  Nature  in  mythical 
form  only,  —  a  view  intended  only  as  an  opinion,  and  not  as  science. 

This  view,  nevertheless,  takes  a  position  sharply  opposed  to  the 
mechanical  explanation  of  Nature,  and,  as  this  latter  is  set  forth,  we 
can  scarcely  suppose  that  Plato  had  any  other  doctrine  in  mind  than 
that  of  Deinocritus.  In  opposition  to  the  theory  which  makes  all 
kinds  of  worlds  arise  here  and  there  from  the  "  accidental  "  (mean- 
ing "purposeless"  or  "undesigned")  meeting  of  "that  which  is  in 
unordered,  lawless  motion,"  and  perish  again,  he  sets  forth  his  own 
theory  that  there  is  only  this  one,  most  perfect  and  most  beauti- 
ful cosmos,  unitary  in  nature  and  unique  as  regards  its  kind,  and 
that  its  origin  can  be  traced  only  to  a  reason  acting  according  to 
ends. 

If,  then,  it  is  desired  to  form  a  theory  concerning  this  origin,  the 
ground  of  the  world  of  phenomena  must  be  sought  in  the  telic  rela- 
tion of  this  world  to  the  Ideas.  This  relation  Plato  expressed  by 
the  idea  of  a  "world-forming  God"  (fy/uoupyo?,  demiurge)  who 
formed  or  shaped  out  that  which  is  not  Being,  i.e.  space,  "  with 
regard  to  the  Ideas."  In  this  connection  the  Not-being  is  character- 
ised as  the  indefinite  plasticity  which  takes  up  all  corporeal  forms 
into  itself  (Se^o^),  and  yet  at  the  same  time  forms  the  ground 
for  the  fact  that  the  Ideas  find  no  pure  representation  in  it.  This 
counter-working  of  the  accessory  cause,  or  of  the  individual  acces- 
sory causes,  Plato  designates  as  mechanical  necessity  (dray/o?).  He 
takes  up  then  the  conception  of  Democritus  as  a  particular  moment 
into  his  physics,  in  order  to  explain  by  it  what  cannot  be  under- 
stood teleologically.  Divine  activity  according  to  ends  and  natural 
necessity  are  set  over  against  each  other  as  explaining  principles,  on 
the  one  hand  for  the  perfect,  and  on  the  other  hand  for  the  imper- 
fect in  the  world  of  phenomena.  Ethical  dualism  passes  over  from 
metaphysics  into  physical  theory. 

ciples  was  united  with  a  polemical  purpose.  Hence  there  is  found  mingled  in 
the  Tim&us,  a  dependence  upon  Democritus  and  a  combating  of  his  views,  an 
attitude  like  that  of  Pannenides  toward  Heraclitus.  Yet  the  distinction  is  not 
to  be  forgotten,  that  the  Eleatic  denied  the  reality  of  the  world  of  phenomena, 
while  Plato  denied  only  that  it  could  be  known  scientifically,  i.e.  through  con- 
ceptions. In  presenting  his  view,  however,  Plato  goes  into  questions  of  astron- 
omy, mechanics,  chemistry,  organic  life,  physiological  psychology,  finally  even 
into  those  of  medicine.  He  gives,  therefore,  a  kind  of  compendious  exposi- 
tion of  his  opinions  in  matters  of  natural  science,  opinions  which  in  detail  are 
extraordinarily  fantastic,  and  as  compared  with  the  exact  ideas  even  of  his 
time,  inadequate ;  and  yet  taken  in  their  whole  connection,  in  their  relation  to 
their  central  principle,  they  have  exercised  an  effect  extending  far  beyond  the 
design  of  their  author. 


CHAP.  3,  §  11.]          System  of  Idealism:  Plato.  131° 

The  characteristic  fundamental  thought  of  the  Platonic  as  con- 
trasted with  the  Atomistic  physics  is,  that  while  Democritus  con- 
ceived of  the  movements  of  the  whole  as  mechanical  resultants  of 
the  original  states  of  motion  of  the  individual  atoms,  Plato,  on  the 
contrary,  regarded  the  ordered  motion  of  the  universe  as  a  whole,  as 
the  primitive  unit,  and  derived  every  individual  change  or  occur- 
rence from  this  purposively  determined  whole.  From  this  thought 
sprang  the  strange  construction  of  the  conception  of  the  world-soul, 
which  Plato  characterised  as  the  single  principle  of  all  motions,  and 
thus  also  of  all  determinations  of  form,  and  likewise  of  all  activities 
of  perception  and  ideation  in  the  world.1  In  fantastic,  obscure  ex- 
position he  brought  forward  as  the  mathematical  "  division  "  of  this 
world-soul,  his  astronomical  theory,  which  was  'in  the  main  closely 
connected  with  that  of  the  younger  Pythagoreans,  but  which  was 
less  advanced  than  theirs  in  its  assumption  that  the  earth  stood 
still.  The  main  criterion  in  this  process  of  division  was  the  dis- 
tinction between  that  which  remains  like  itself  (ravroV)  and  that 
which  changes  (0arepoi/), — a  contrast  in  which  we  easily  recognise 
the  Pythagorean  contrast  between  the  perfect  stellar  world  and  the 
imperfect  terrestrial  world. 

A  similar  continuation  of  Pythagorean  doctrine  is  contained  in 
the  Platonic  Timaus,  with  reference  also  to  the  purely  mathematical 
construction  of  the  corporeal  world.  Here,  too,  the  four  elements 
are  characterised  according  to  the  simple,  regular,  geometrical  solids 
(cf.  p.  46).  But  it  is  expressly  taught  that  these  consist  of  triangu- 
lar surfaces,  and  those,  too,  of  a  right-angled  sort,  which  are  in  part 
equilateral,  in  part  so  formed  that  the  shorter  side  is  half  the  length 
of  the  hypothenuse.  The  limiting  surfaces  of  these  solids,  —  tetrahe- 
dron, cube,  etc., — maybe  thought  of  as  composed  of  such  right- 
angled  triangles,  and  Plato  would  have  the  essence  of  space-filling, 
i.e.  density  or  solidity  of  bodies,  regarded  as  consisting  in  this  com- 
position of  these  limiting  surfaces.  By  thus  conceiving  of  physical 
bodies  as  purely  mathematical  structures,  the  metaphysical  thought 
of  the  Philebus  found  expression  also  in  physics,  —  the  thought, 
namely,  that  the  phenomenal  world  is  a  limitation  of  space  formed 
in  imitation  of  the  Ideas.  These  triangular  surfaces,  which  were, 
moreover,  conceived  of  as  being  indivisible,  have  a  suspicious  simi- 
larity with  the  atomic  forms  (v^ fta.ro.)  of  Democritus. 

1  In  this  respect  the  Tim&us,  quite  as  does  Democritus,  characterises  psychical 
differences  by  differences  of  motion,  tracing,  for  example,  right  ideation  to  the 
Tafa-foj  merely  individual  perception  to  the  fldrepo?,  etc.  "Soul"  is  for  the 
Greeks  at  the  same  time  principle  of  motion  and  of  perception,  and  just  that 
(KirrjriKdv  and  *lff torrefy  Arist.  J)e  An.  1. 2,  403  b  25),  and  even  Plato  makes  the 
second  characteristic  dependent  upon  the  first. 


132  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

§  12.  The  Aristotelian  Logic. 

The  breadth,  of  plan  which  appeared  in  the  systems  of  the  two 
great  antipodal  thinkers,  Democritus  and  Plato,  and  in  accordance 
with  which  their  doctrines  were  methodically  developed,  made  it 
indispensable  that  there  should  be  not  only  a  division  of  labour,  but 
a  separation  of  problems.  The  titles  of  the  writings  of  Democrifcus 
make  it  probable  that  he  proceeded  clearly  and  definitely  in  this 
respect  also.  Plato,  to  be  sure,  conceived  his  literary  activity  essen- 
tially from  the  artist's  point  of  view,  but  it  is  evident  that  in  his 
activity  as  a  teacher  he  did  not  fail  to  make  that  arrangement  of 
problems  for  separate  treatment  which  we  miss  in  his  dialogues. 
In  his  school  the  division  of  philosophy  into  dialectic,  physics, 
and  ethics  became  dominant. 

If  by  dialectic  in  this  connection  we  are  to  understand  essentially 
the  doctrine  of  Ideas  in  its  metaphysical  development,  Aristotle 
made  the  great  step  in  advance  of  prefacing  the  investigation  of  the 
subject-matter  in  all  three  departments  with  a  preliminary  study  of 
the  essential  nature  of  science,  a  doctrine  of  the  forms  and  laws  of 
scientific  thought.  Even  with  the  Sophists  and  Socrates  reflection 
had  begun  upon  the  question,  in  what  scientific  activity  properly 
consists,  and  the  sharpened  attention  given  to  the  inner  processes 
had  made  it  possible  for  the  abstracting  thinker  to  separate  the 
general  forms  of  the  thought-process  itself  from  the  particular  con- 
tents to  which  this  process  relates  at  different  times.  All  these 
beginnings  and  attempts  — for  even  with  Plato  it  did  not  go  beyond 
this  —  were  comprehended  by  Aristotle  in  his  Logic,  and  developed 
into  a  complete  system  in  which  we  have  before  us  the  ripe  self- 
knowledge  of  Greek  science. 

1.  The  immediate  aim  of  the  Aristotelian  logic  is,  according  to 
the  express  declarations  of  the  philosopher,  entirely  methodological 
The  way  is  to  be  shown  by  which  the  goal  of  scientific  cognition  can 
be  reached  in  all  departments  of  knowledge.  As  in  rhetoric  the  art 
of  persuasion  is  taught,  so  in  logic  we  are  to  learn  the  art  of  scien- 
tific investigation,  cognition,  and  proof.  For  this  reason  Aristotle 
did  not  reckon  logic,  which  was  his  greatest  creation,  among  the 
philosophical  disciplines  themselves,  but  treated  it  in  his  lectures 
as  a  propaedeutic,  and  for  this  reason  his  school  regarded  this 
study  as  the  general  instrument  (opyavov)  for  all  scientific  work. 

But  this  preparatory  study  itself  was  made  a  science  by  Aristotle. 
Instead  of  bringing  forward  rules  of  practical  value  in  individual 
cases,  as  may  well  have  been  the  case  with  the  Sophists,  instead 
of  the  general  fixing  of  a  principle  which  had  been  the  service  of 


CHAP.  3,  §  12.]  The  Aristotelian  Logic.  133 

Socrates,  he  offers  an  examination  of  the  thinking  activity  on  all 
sides,  a  comprehensive  examination  of  its  regular  forms.  He  fulfils 
the  methodological  task  by  formal  logic. 

But  in  so  doing  it  becomes  evident  that  the  knowledge  of  the 
forms  of  right  thinking  can  be  gained  only  from  understanding  the 
task  of  thought,  and  that  in  turn  this  task  can  be  disclosed  only 
from  a  definite  idea  of  the  general  relation  of  knowledge  to  its 
object.  Thus  the  Aristotelian  logic  is  connected  in  the  most 
intimate  manner  with  the  metaphysical  presupposition  which  lie 
at  the  basis  of  his  treatment  of  the  other  disciplines  also.  In 
its  principle,  it  is  thoroughly  epistemological. 

2.  As  such,  however,  it  has  its  roots  in  the  Socratic-Platouic 
doctrine  of  Ideas.  That  which  truly  is,  is  the  general  or  universal, 
and  knowledge  of  this  is  the  conception.  In  this  respect  Aristotle 
always  remained  a  Platonist.  What  he  combated  in  the  system  of 
his  great  predecessor1  was  only  the  Eleatic  assumption  of  absence 
of  relation,  —  absence  of  relation  between  general  and  particular, 
between  Ideas  and  phenomena,  between  conceptions  and  percep- 
tions ;  an  absence  of  relation  which,  in  spite  of  all  his  efforts, 
Plato  had  not  overcome,  even  in  the  later  phase  of  his  teaching. 
Even  as  the  final  cause  of  occurrence  the  Ideas  remained  a  world 
by  themselves  beside  (?ra/)d)  the  phenomena.  This  tearing  apart 
(x^pt^etv)  of  essence  and  phenomenon,  of  Being  and  Becoming,  is? 
in  addition  to  special  dialectical  objections,2  the  object  of  the  chief 
reproach  which  Aristotle  brings  against  the  doctrine  of  ideas. 
While  Plato  had  made  two  different  worlds  out  of  the  general 
which  is  known  by  the  conception,  and  the  particular  which  is  per- 
ceived, the  entire  effort  of  Aristotle  is  directed  toward  removing 
again  this  division  in  the  conception  of  reality,  and  discovering  that 
relation  between  Idea  and  phenomenon  which  shall  make  concep- 
tional  knowledge  able  to  explain  what  is  perceived. 

Out  of  this  grows  as  the  primary  task  for  logic,  that  of  recognis- 
ing the  true  relation  between  the  general  and  the  particular,  and  hence 
this  fundamental  form  of  abstract  or  conceptional  thought,  which 
had  been  already  recognised  as  fundamental  by  Socrates,  stands  in 
the  centre  of  the  Aristotelian  logic. 


1  Principally  in  Met.  I.  9,  and  XIII.  4. 

2  Of  these,  two  are  principally  worthy  of  mention  in  passing.     The  one 
argues,  from  the  logical  subordination  which  obtains  among  the  Ideas,  that 
everything  that  we  perceive  must  be  s_ubsumed  under  a  number  of  Ideas ;  the 
other  calls  attention  to  the  difficulty  that  the  resemblance,  which,  according  to. 
this  system  exists  between  the  Idea  and  the  phenomenon,  makes  necessary  still 
a  higher  general  above  both,  etc.,  in  infinitum  (toBpuiros — aMvBpwTros — rptros 

&V0PWTTOS), 


134  The  Q-reeJcs :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

The  importance  of  this  same  relation  grows  out  of  still  another 
course  of  thought.  If  Aristotle  found  any  previous  works  that 
were  preparatory  for  his  theory  of  science,  they  consisted  in  the 
considerations  of  the  Sophists  with  regard  to  the  art  (principally 
rhetorical)  of  proof  and  refutation.  If  now  Aristotle  asked  how 
one  can  prove  anything  scientifically,  i.e.  in  a  manner  universally 
valid  and  relating  to  true  knowledge,  he  found  that  this  could  con- 
sist only  in  the  deduction  of  the  particular  from  the  general  To 
prove  scientifically  means  to  state  the  grounds  for  the  validity  of 
what  is  asserted,  and  these  are  to  be  found  only  in  the  more  general 
under  which  the  particular  is  subsumed. 

From  this  resulted  the  peculiar  complication  which  constitutes 
the  Aristotelian  conception  of  science.  The  general,  the  Idea,  is, 
as  the  true  Being,  the  cause  of  occurrence  and  change.  It  is  that, 
therefore,  out  of  which  and  through  which  the  perceived  particular 
is  to  be  comprehended,  conceived,  or  explained.  Science  has  to  set  forth 
how  the  perceived  particular  follows  from  the  general  which  is 
known  in  conceptions.  On  the  other  hand,  the  general  is  in  thought 
the  ground  by  means  of  which  and  from  which  the  particular  is 
proved.  Accordingly,  conceiving  or  comprehending  and  proving  are 
the  same  thing,  viz.  deduction  of  the  particular  from  the  general. 

The  scientific  theory  of  Aristotle  is  accordingly  concentrated  in 
the  conception  of  derivation  or  deduction  (owno'Softs).  Scientific 
explanation  of  phenomena  from  true  Being  is  the  same  logical 
process  as  scientific  proof :  namely,  the  deduction  or  derivation  of 
what  is  given  in  perception  from  its  general  ground.  Explaining 
and  proving  are  therefore  denoted  by  the  same  word,  "  deduction," 
and  the  right  proof  is  that  which  takes  as  its  ground  the  actual  or 
real  general  cause  of  that  which  is  to  be  proved.1  It  is,  therefore, 
the  task  of  science  to  exhibit  the  logical  necessity  with  which  the 
particular  insight  (of  perception)  follows  from  the  general  insight  (of 
conception),  and  the  particular  phenomenon  from  the  general  cause. 

This  characterisation  of  the  task  of  science,  thus  developed  from 
metaphysical  presuppositions,  experienced  an  essential  change  in 
the  progress  of  its  author's  investigations. 

3.  The  most  immediate  task  of  logic,  according  to  this,  is  to 
establish  more  exactly  what  deduction— i.e.  on  the  one  hand,  proof; 

1  This  definition  of  the  conception  of  scientific  proof  is  obviously  directed 
against  the  rhetorical  proof  of  the  Sophists.  In  the  art  of  persuasion,  all  proofs 
are  welcome,  however  external  they  may  .remain  to  the  true  nature  of  the  case, 
provided  only  they  are  formally  sufficient  to  bring  the  hearer  to  assent.  Scientific 
proof,  however,  should  proceed  from  the  inner,  logical  necessity  of  the  case,  and 
should  therefore  give  at  the  same  time  insight  into  the  true  cause  of  what  is  to 
be  proved. 


CHAP.  3,  §  12.]  The  Aristotelian  Logic.  135 

on  the  other  hand,  explanation  —  properly  is,  or  to  set  forth  those 
forms  in  which  thought  cognises  the  dependence  of  the  particular 
upon  the  general.  This  theory  was  given  by  Aristotle  in  the  Analyt- 
ics, the  logical  groundwork,  which  treats  synthetically,  in  the  first 
part,  of  the  syllogism,  in  the  second  of  deduction,  proof,  and  concep- 
tion. For  in  the  process  of  analysing  those  activities  of  thought  in 
which  all  deduction  consists,  there  results  as  simple  fundamental 
form  the  deduction  of  one  proposition,  one  statement  from  another  : 
i.e.  the  inference  or  syllogism  (cnAAoyioyios). 

The  doctrine  of  the  syllogism  became  thus  the  central  point  of  the 
Aristotelian  logic.  To  this  points  all  that  he  taught  (apparently 
only  in  the  most  general  outlines)  concerning  the  forms  of  thought 
which  lie  at  the  basis  of  the  syllogism :  out  of  it  come  all  the  points 
of  view  in  his  methodology. 

The  outlines  of  this  doctrine,  which  form  the  basis  of  traditional 
logic  even  to  this  day,  are  the  following.  The  syllogism  is  the 
deduction  of  a  judgment  from  two  other  judgments.  Since  in  a 
judgment  one  concept  (the  predicate)  is  affirmed  of  another  concept 
(the  subject),  this  affirmation  can  be  grounded  only  by  establishing 
the  desired  connection  between  the  two  by  means  of  a  third  concept, 
the  middle  term  (/teo-ov).  This  third  concept  must  then  stand  in. 
some  relations  with  the  other  two,  and  these  relations  must  be 
expressed  in  two  judgments,  which  are  called  the  premises  (Trpora- 
or«s)  of  the  syllogism.  Inference,  or  drawing  the  conclusion,  con- 
sists in  the  process  of  thought  which,  from  the  relations  that  one 
and  the  same  concept  (the  middle  term)  sustains  to  two  other 
concepts,  discovers  the  relation  of  these  two  concepts  to  each  other. 

Agreeably  to  its  general  presuppositions,  the  Aristotelian  doctrine 
of  the  syllogism  fixed  its  attention  upon  but  one  of  the  possible 
relations  existing  between  concepts,  —  the  relation  of  the  subordina- 
tion of  the  particular  under  the  general.  The  only  question  for  this 
theory  is  always  whether  the  one  concept  (the  subject)  should  be 
subordinated  to  the  other  (the  predicate)  or  not.  The  doctrine  of 
the  syllogism  has  to  'do  only  with  the  knowledge  of  those  forms 
of  thought  according  to  which  it  is  to  be  decided,  with  the  help  of 
an  intermediate  concept,  whether  a  subordination  of  one  concept  under 
another  occurs  or  not.  This  question  Aristotle  answered  in  an  abso- 
lutely exhaustive  manner ;  in  this  consists  both  the  abiding  worth 
of  his  doctrine  of  the  syllogism  and  also  the  limits  of  its  signifi- 
cance. 

In  correspondence  with  the  fact  just  noted,  Aristotle  treats  in  his 
theory  of  the  judgment  essentially  only  the  two  elements  which  come 
into  consideration  for  this  end :  first,  Quantity,  which  determines 


186  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

the  kind  of  subordination  of  the  subject  to  the  predicate  as  regards 
extent,  and  yields  the  distinctions  of  general,  particular,  and  singu- 
lar judgments;  and  second,  Quality,  according  to  which  this  sub- 
ordination is  either  affirmed  or  denied,  and,  therefore,  the  relation 
either  of  connection  or  of  separation  is  asserted  as  existing  between 
the  respective  extents  of  the  two  concepts. 

The  kinds  or  figures  ((r^^aro^  of  the  syllogism  are,  therefore, 
essentially  fixed  by  the  manner  in  which  the  relations  of  subordina- 
tion between  the  concepts,  which  are  given  in  the  premises,  deter- 
mine the  subordination  sought  in  the  conclusion,  —  a  relation  which 
finds  its  external  expression  in  the  position  of  the  middle  term  in 
the  two  premises,  since  this  is  either  the  subject  of  one  premise  and 
predicate  of  the  other,  or  predicate  of  both,  or  subject  of  both.  As 
the  most  valuable  and  primitive  of  these  three  figures,  however, 
Aristotle  consistently  designated  the  first,  because  in  it  the  principle 
of  subordination  is  purely  and  clearly  expressed,  since  the  subject 
of  the  conclusion  is  subordinated  to  the  middle  term,  and  together 
with  this,  as  falling  within  its  compass,  is  subordinated  to  the  predi- 
cate of  the  major.1 

4.  But  by  defining  inference,  and  so  deduction,  proof,  and  expla- 
nation in  this  way,  it  followed  that  only  propositions  of  a  lesser 
degree  of  generality  could  be  deduced  from  those  of  higher  generality 
by  means  of  this  activity  so  essential  to  science.  That  is,  by  means 
of  inference,  we  can  never  prove  anything  equally  general  with  the 
premises,  to  say  nothing  of  proving  anything  more  general.  The 
peculiar  restriction  of  the  ancient  idea  of  the  nature  of  thought, 
according  to  which  thought  can  only  apprehend  and  take  apart 
what  is  given  but  can  never  produce  anything  new,  makes  its 
appearance  in  this  feature  of  the  Aristotelian  logic.  From  this, 
however,  it  follows  immediately  that  the  deducing,  proving,  and  ex- 
plaining science  may,  indeed,  in  the  individual  case,  be  able  to  take 
that  which  has  served  as  premise  in  the  syllogism,  and  deduce  it 
again  as  the  conclusion  of  a  still  more  general  syllogism,  but  must, 
nevertheless,  ultimately  proceed  from  premises  which  are  themselves 
capable  of  no  further  deduction,  proof,  and  comprehension,  of  no 
reduction  to  middle  terms.  The  truth  of  these  ultimate  premises  is, 
therefore,  immediate  (a/wo-a),  not  to  be  deduced,  proved  or  compre- 
hended. All  deduction  needs  something  primitive ;  all  proof,  a 
ground  that  cannot  be  proved ;  all  explaining,  something  given  which 
cannot  be  explained. 

i  The  details  cannot  be  developed  here.  Cf.  in  general,  F.  Kampe,  Die 
Erkenntnisstheorie  des  Aristoteles  (Leips.  1870);  R.  Eucken,  Die  Methode  der 
aristotelischen  Forschung  (Berlin,  1872). 


CHAP.  3,  §  12.]  The  Aristotelian  Logic.  137 

The  apodictic,  proving,  and  explaining  activity  of  science  has, 
therefore,  a  limit ;  the  ultimate  grounds  of  proof  are  not  to  be  proved ; 
the  ultimate  causes  used  in  explaining  are  not  to  be  explained. 
Hence  if  science  is  to  fulfil  its  task,  which  consists  in  explaining  the 
particular  by  means  of  the  general,  it  must  first  press  forward  from 
the  particular  on  to  the  general,  in  the  case  of  which  proving  and 
explaining  are  forbidden  by  the  nature  of  the  case,  because  as  imme- 
diately certain  it  asserts  itself  as  not  to  be  deduced  and  not  to  be 
proved.  Hence  the  processes  of  deducing,  proving,  and  explaining, 
in  which  the  ultimate  task  of  science  consists,  must  be  preceded  by 
the  searching  out  of  the  starting-points  for  deduction,  of  the  ultimate 
grounds  of  proof,  and  of  the  highest  principles  of  explanation.  The 
activity  of  thought  involved  in  this  last  process  Aristotle  calls  dia- 
lectic, and  has  laid  down  its  principles  in  the  Topics. 

This  procedure  of  searching  out  the  grounds  is  not,  in  the  nature  of 
the  case,  attended  by  the  same  "  apodictic  certainty,"  as  is  that  of 
deducing  consequences  from  the  grounds,  when  the  latter  are  once 
established.  Investigation  proceeds  from  the  particular  given  in 
perception,  and  from  the  ideas  current  in  customary  opinion  («/8o£ov), 
to  find  the  general,  from  which  the  particular  can  then  be  proved 
and  explained.  Investigation,  therefore,  follows  a  direction  the 
reverse  of  that  taken  by  deduction ;  the  latter  is  deductive,  the 
former  inductive,  epagogic.  The  latter  proceeds,  proving  and 
explaining,  from  general  to  particular ;  the  former,  searching  and 
testing,  from  particular  to  general.1  Only  the  completed  science  is 
"  apodictic  "  j  science,  in  its  process  of  coming  into  being,  is  epa- 
gogic. 

In  all  these  investigations  and  the  contrasts  that  appear  in  them, 
the  chief  question  for  Aristotle  is  that  with  regard  to  judgments ; 
but  in  connection  with  this  he  treats  also  concepts.  As  a  judgment 
is  proved  or  deduced,  by  being  concluded  from  more  general  judg- 
ments, by  means  of  the  middle  term,  so  a  concept  is  deduced  or 
derived  by  being  formed  from  a  more  general  concept  (the  next 
higher  class  or  genus,  y<W)  by  adding  a  particular  characteristic 
mark  or  difference  (8ia<£o/>a).  This  deduction  of  the  concept  is  defini- 
tion (Spur/ids).  As,  however,  the  deduction  of  propositions  ulti- 
mately presupposes  most  general  premises,  which  cannot  be  further 

1  This  relation  of  contrariety  between  deduction  and  inquiry  Aristotle  ex- 
pressed in  the'statements  that  that  which,  as  regards  the  nature  of  the  thing,  is 
the  original  (irpdrepov  rjj  0tf<ret),  and  therefore  the  general,  is  for  human  knowl- 
edge the  later,  that  which  must  be  acquired  (vrrepov  irpbs  ^as)  ;  and  that,  on 
the  contrary,  that  which  is  for  us  the  most  immediate  (irpfoepov  irpfc  ^as),  the 
particular,  is,  according  to  the  true  essence,  the  derivative,  the  later  (va-repov  T-Q 


138  The  G-reeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

proved,  so,  too,  definition  of  lower  concepts  goes  back  ultimately  to 
most  general  concepts  which  withdraw  from  all  attempts  at  deduc- 
tion and  explanation.  These  concepts,  also,  as  well  as  the  highest 
premises  of  proof,  must  be  sought  inductively;1  and  it  seems  as 
though  Aristotle  looked  upon  the  propositions  of  highest  generality 
as  the  elucidations  of  these  most  general  concepts. 

5.  Among  the  text-books  which  -Aristotle  left,  the  two  main 
logical  treatises,  the  Analytics  and  the  Topics,  are  those  which  are 
most  nearly  complete  by  far.2  This  may  explain  the  fact  that  the 
logical  demands  which  the  Philosopher  makes  of  science  are  devel- 
oped so  clearly  and  surely,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  his  system  as 
carried  out  in  the  form  known  to  us,  fulfils  in  but  a  lesser  measure 
the  expectations  thus  raised. 

For  evidently  we  should  expect  that  a  sure  statement  could  be 
made  as  to  what  the  Philosopher  declared  to  be  those  immediately 
certain,  highest  propositions  or  concepts  which  were  to  be  the  result 
of  investigation,  and  the  starting-point  of  proof  and  explanation. 
If,  however,  we  ask  for  these,  we  find  ourselves  in  great  embarrass- 
ment as  regards  the  teaching  of  Aristotle.  Of  general  propositions 
there  is  but  a  single  principle,  the  principle  of  contradiction*  which 
he  set  forth  as  an  unprovable  major  premise,  or  highest  principle 
for  all  proofs,  partly  in  the  purely  logical  setting  that  affirmation 
and  denial  of  the  same  combination  of  concepts  reciprocally  exclude 
each  other,  partly  in  the  metaphysical  form  that  a  thing  cannot  be 
the  same  and  also  not  be  the  same.  But  aside  from  this  he  prefers  to 
call  attention  to  the  fact  that  every  department  of  knowledge  has  its 
own  ultimate  presuppositions,  and  does  not  state  these  more  exactly. 

If,  however,  we  seek  for  the  highest  concepts, — aside  from  the 
reference  made  here  also  to  the  particular  nature  of  individual  dis- 
ciplines,— we  have  the  choice  between  the  four  "principles"  (dpxai), 
or  "causes,"  of  the  Metaphysics,  and  the  "categories,"  which  are 
designated  as  the  fundamental  forms  of  predication  concerning  what 
is,  — a  choice  not  decided  by  Aristotle.  In  both  cases  we  find  our- 
selves already  in  the  midst  of  the  material  as  opposed  to  the  formal 
elements  of  his  teaching. 

1  Over  against  determination  (irp6a-6ea-^') ,  as  the  deduction  of  one  concept 
from  the  higher  by  adding  a  new  mark,  stands  therefore  abstraction  (a.<t>a.tpe<ri^ 
as  process  of  formation  of  class-concepts,  —  a  process  which,  by  continually 
taking  away  individual  characteristics,  gains  a  concept  poorer  in  contents,  but 
wider  in  its  extent.    Formation  of  concepts  is,  accordingly,  with  Aristotle,  again 
completely  analytic,  while  with  Plato  it  had  been  intuitive.    Aristotle  was  the 
ilrst  to  free  himself  from  the  optical  analogy,  in  accordance  with  which  the  know- 
ing process  of  thought  had  been  conceived  even  by  Democritus  and  Plato. 

2  In  the  case  of  the  Topics,  this  completeness  seems  even  to  have  been  at- 
tained, s  jffa  iv\  3  flf. 


CHAP.  3,  §  13.]     System  of  Development :  Aristotle.  139 

§  13.  The  System  of  Development 

The  impression  of  something  completely  new,  which  the  logic  of 
Aristotle  makes,  as  contrasted  with  all  that  had  previously  appeared 
in  Greek  science,  rests  principally  upon  the  capacity  for  abstract 
thought,  presupposed  in  so  high  a  degree  by  this  separation  of  the 
general  Forms  of  thought  from  every  possible  content  —  a  separa- 
tion that  evinced  his  genius.  This  genius  for  the  formation  of  con- 
ceptions by  abstraction  was  evinced  by  Aristotle  in  all  departments 
of  his  scientific  work,  and  if  the  "Father  of  logic"  became  the 
philosophic  teacher  for  two  thousand  years,  he  owes  this  success, 
first  of  all,  to  the  sureness,  clearness,  and  consistency  with  which 
he  formed  and  defined  his  conceptions.  He  fulfilled  the  task  set  by 
Socrates,  and  in  so  doing  created  the  language  of  science.  The  funda- 
mental part  of  the  scientific  conceptions  and  expressions  everywhere 
in  use,  even  to  the  present  time,  goes  back  to  his  formulations. 

With  this  inclination  to  abstraction  is  connected  the  further  fact 
that  Aristotle  solved  the  fundamental  problem  of  Greek  philosophy 
— viz.  how  behind  the  changing  multiplicity  of  phenomena  a  uni- 
tary and  abiding  Being  is  to  be  thought  —  by  means  of  a  concept  of 
relation,  that  of  development.  His  two  great  predecessors  had  still 
been  seeking  to  assign  a  particular  content  to  the  conception  of  true 
Being.  Democritus  had  regarded  the  atoms  and  their  motion,  Plato 
the  Ideas  and  their  final  causation,  as  the  causes  of  phenomena,  — 
causes  different  from  the  phenomena  themselves.  Aristotle,  how- 
ever, determined  the  true  reality — that  which  is — as  the  essence 
which  unfolds  in  the  phenomena  themselves.  He  renounced  the  at- 
tempt to  think  but  as  the  cause  of  phenomena  something  different 
from  them  (a  second  world),  and  taught  that  the  Being  of  things 
which  is  known  in  conception  possesses  no  other  reality  than  the 
sum  total  of  the  phenomena  in  which  it  realises  itself.  So  regarded, 
Being  (ovcna)  takes  on  the  character  of  the  essence  (TO  rl  fy  e«/<u), 
which  constitutes  the  one,  only  ground  of  its  individual  formations, 
but  is  real  or  actual  only  in  these  themselves,  and  all  phenomenal 
appearance  or  coming  into  being  becomes  the  realisation  of  the 
essence.  This  is  the  concept  of  relation  by  means  of  which  Aristotle 
overcame  the  opposition  of  the  Heraclitic  and  Eleatic  metaphysics, 

1.  In  particular,  the  process  of  development  presents  itself  to 
Aristotle  as  the  relation  of  Form  and  Matter  (ctSos,  pop^y  —  vAiy). 
Plato *  had  declared  the  world  of  phenomena  to  be  a  mixture  of  the 

1  The  main  outlines  of  the  Aristotelian  metaphysics  develop  in  the  simplest 
way  from  that  phase  of  the  Platonic  metaphysics  which  is  presented  in.  the 
Philebus  (cf.  above,  §  11,  9).  Cf.  J.  C.  Glaser,  Lie  MetaphysiJc  des  Aristoteles 
(Berlin,  1841). 


140  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  L 

"  unlimited "  and  of  "  limitation  "  ;  Aristotle  holds  to  the  observa- 
tion that,  in  everything  of  the  phenomenal  world,  formed  matter 
lies  before  us.  But  for  him  this  matter  is,  indeed,  in  itself  indefi- 
nite, and  yet  not  purely  indifferent,  empty  space,  but  a  corporeal 
substratum  (VITOK^VOV)  ;  for  him,  this  form  is  not  merely  the 
mathematical  limit,  but  the  form  determined  as  to  its  contents  by 
the  essence.  The  matter  or  material  substratum  is  the  possibility 
of  that  which,  in  the  complete  thing,  has  become  actual  or  real  by 
means  of  the  form.  In  matter,  therefore,  the  essential  nature 
(owta)  is  given  only  potentially  (SW^ei) .  First,  and  only  by  means, 
of  the  form,  does  it  exist  in  reality  or  actuality  (ei/e/oyetot,  actu). 
Occurrence,  however,  or  the  natural  process,  is  that  process  in  whicli 
the  essence  passes  over  from  mere  possibility,  through  form,  into- 
actualisation.  The  essence  has  not  any  second,  higher  reality  beside 
and  apart  from  the  phenomena ;  it  exists  only  in  the  succession  of 
its  phenomenal  manifestations,  by  means  of  which  it  realises  its- 
own  possibility.  The  universal  is  real  or  actual  only  in  the  partic- 
ular; the  particular  is  only  because  in  it  the  universal  realises 
itself. 

With  this  transformation  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  Aristotle  solves- 
the  fundamental  problem  of  the  theoretical  philosophy  of  the 
Greeks,  viz.  that  of  so  thinking  Being  or  what  "is"  that  Becoming, 
or  the  process  of  Nature  (das  Geschehen),  may  be  explained  from 
it.  From  the  Hylozoism  of  the  Milesians  on  to  the  opposing- 
theories  of  his  two  great  predecessors,  all  standpoints  of  Greek 
metaphysics  are  contained  as  elements  in  this  doctrine  of  Aristotle. 
The  Being  cognised  in  conception  is  the  general  essence,  which, 
realises  itself  in  its  particular  phenomenal  manifestations  from 
potentiality  on  through  form,  and  the  process  of  this  realisation  is- 
motion.  Being  is  that  which  comes  to  existence  in  the  processes- 
of  Nature.  This  self-realisation  of  the  essence  in  the  phenomena, 
Aristotle  calls  entelechy  (evTe\exet<*). 

2.  The  central  point  of  the  Aristotelian  philosophy  lies,  therefore, 
in  this  new  conception  of  the  cosmic  processes  as  the  realisation  of 
the  essence  in  the  phenomenon,  and  the  respect  in  which  it  is  op- 
posed to  the  earlier  explanation  of  Nature  consists  therefore  in 
carrying  through  in  conceptions  the  teleology  which  Plato  had  only 
set  up  as  postulate,  and  developed  in  mythical,  figurative  form. 
While  the  earlier  metaphysics  had  looked  upon  the  mechanical 
process  of  pressure  and  impact  as  the  typical  fundamental  relation 
of  the  cosmic  processes,  Aristotle  regarded  as  this  typical  rela- 
tion the  development  of  organisms  and  man's  building  or  forming 
activity.  From  these  two  departments  lie  took  his  examples  when. 


CHAP.  3,  §  13.]      System  of  Development:  Aristotle.  141 

he  wished  to  elucidate  the  metaphysical  character  of  the  cosmic 
processes.1 

Nevertheless,  the  relation  of  form  and  matter  is  not  completely 
the  same  in  these  two  kinds  of  purposive  processes,  and  the  differ- 
ence between  the  two  asserts  itself  everywhere  in  the  carrying  out 
of  the  Aristotelian  fundamental  thought.  In  the  case  of  organic 
processes,  matter  and  form  are  the  two  sides,  separable  only  through 
abstraction,  of  one  and  the  same  reality  identical  from  beginning 
to  end ;  even  in  the  germ  which  in  the  process  of  development 
brings  the  essence  to  its  unfolding,  the  matter  is  already  shaped 
internally  by  the  form.  In  the  case  of  artistic  construction,  on  the 
contrary,  the  material  which  contains  possibility  exists  at  first  by 
itself,  and  the  work  of  the  artist  with  its  end  in  view  is  added  later 
to  produce  the  shape  by  means  of  motion. 

In  the  latter  case,  therefore,  the  development  is  to  be  regarded 
under  four  principles.  These  are  the  Matter,  the  Form,  the  End,  and 
the  Cause  of  what  comes  to  pass  or  comes  to  be. 

In  the  former  case,  on  the  contrary,  the  three  other  principles,  as 
set  over  against  the  Matter,  are  but  different  expressions  for  the 
same  thing,  since  the  Form  constitutes  the  Cause  and  the  Eesult  of 
the  process. 

We  find,  accordingly,  that  when  applied  to  the  task  of  science, 
this  fundamental  relation  of  form  and  matter  is  carried  out  in  a 
twofold  way:  on  the  one  hand,  individual  tilings  are  regarded  as 
self-realising  forms;  on  the  other  hand,  things  in  relation  to  one 
another  are  regarded,  the  one  as  matter,  the  other  as  form.  These 
two  applications  of  the  fundamental  principle  go  through  the  entire 
Aristotelian  system  side  by  side,  and  in  the  general  principles  of 
the  system  they  sometimes  so  collide,  that  it  is  only  by  their  separa- 
tion that  apparent  contradiction  can  be  cleared  away. 

3.  The  former  point  of  view  yields  the  result,  that  for  the  Aristo- 
telian conception  of  the  world,  in  contrast  with  both  that  of  Democ- 
ritus  and  that  of  Plato,  the  truly  real  is  the  individual  thing, 
determined  in  itself  by  its  form.  To  it,  therefore,  belongs  primarily 
the  name  of  essence  or  substance  (ovo-«x).  But  the  essence  develops 
and  realises  itself  in  individual  determinations,  which  are  partly  its 
states  Orafy),  partly  its  relations  to  other  things2  (TO.  7iy>os  rt)- 
Hence  knowledge  has  these  which  belong  to  the  thing  (TO.  cru^e/?^ 
K<*ra)  to  predicate  of  it,  while  the  individual  thing  itself  cannot  be 
predicated  of  anything  else,  i.e.  in  the  proposition  it  can  be  only 

1  Aside  from  its  discussion  in  the  Metaphysics,  this  question  is  chiefly  treated 
in  the  Physics. 

IV.2,  1089  b  23. 


142  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

subject  and  never  predicate.1  Of  these  modes  in  which  substance 
manifests  itself,  or  of  the  predicates  that  are  possible  with  regard 
to  it,  Aristotle  enumerates  as  categories,  quantity  (irtxrov),  quality 
(TTOJOI/),  relation  (TT/OOS  ri),  determination  in  space  and  time  (TTOV,  TTOTC), 
action  (woieiv),  and  passion  or  passivity  (Trao-^tv) ;  and  in  addition, 
also,  position  (*etcr0cu)  and  condition  (lx«tv).  This  collection 
(making  ten  categories  inclusive  of  substance),  in  which,  perhaps, 
grammatical  observations  co-operated,  is  designed  to  present  the 
highest  classes  or  genera  under  which  the  contents  of  all  possible 
ideas  are  to  be  subsumed.  Yet  Aristotle  made  no  methodical  use 
of  this  collection,  and  his  doctrine  of  the  categories  acquired,  there- 
fore, no  importance  in  his  metaphysics,  aside  from  the  above-noted 
relation  of  substance  to  its  determinations. 

When  we  consider  how  sharply  Aristotle  shaped  out  the  scientific 
conception  of  substance  in  its  logical  and  metaphysical  character, 
it  may  appear  strange  at  the  first  glance  that  he  has  announced 
neither  a  methodical  principle  nor  a  real  principle  applying  to  the 
nature  of  the  thing,  according  to  which  it  would  be  possible  to  de- 
cide what  these  truly  existing  individual  things,  in  his  sense  of  the 
word,  are.  It  is  clear  only  that,  on  the  one  hand,  he  did  not  regard 
as  essence  everything  whatever  that  occasionally  appears  in  ex- 
perience as  a  thing  separate  from  others,  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  he  ascribed  this  character  to  organic  individuals,  to  individual 
men.  It  would  be  in  the  spirit  of  his  teaching  to  suppose  that  he 
could  have  spoken  of  an  "  essence  "  only  where  an  inner  determina- 
tion of  form  constitutes  the  ground  of  the  coherence  of  individual 
characteristics,  where,  therefore,  the  knowledge  of  this  essence 
solves  the  problem  of  science — viz.  to  determine  existent, reality 
by  the  general  conception  —  in  so  far  as  the  abiding  individual 
thing  forms  the  class-concept  for  all  its  particular  modes  of  appear- 
ing which  show  themselves  in  perception. 

But  the  Socratic-Platonic  view  of  'the  problem  of  science  brought 
with  it  the  consequence  that  Aristotle  defined  yet  again  the  essence 
of  the  individual  thing  as  that  through  which  the  individual  thing 
belongs  to  its  class  or  species.  If  substance,  as  contrasted  with  its 
perceptible  phenomena  and  attributes,  presents  the  universal,  on 
the  other  hand  the  species  (yeyos,  or  again  Platonically,  etSos)  is  the 
universal  that  realises  itself  in  the  individual  substances.  Here,  too, 
the  same  relation  is  repeated ;  the  species  exists  only  in  so  far  as  it 
realises  itself  in  individual  things  as  their  truly  existing  essence, 
and  the  individual  thing  exists  only  as  the  species  comes  to  its  phe- 

1  Analyt.  Post.  I.  22,  83  a  24. 


CHAP.  3,  §  13.]      System  of  Development :  Aristotle.  143 

nomenal  manifestation  in  it.  Just  for  this  reason  the  species  also 
have  the  claim  to  the  metaphysical  significance  of  being  essences 
(ova-tat) .  By  this  means  the  conception  of  substance  with  Aristotle 
contains  a  peculiarly  changeable  double  meaning.  The  substances 
proper  are  individual  things  as  determined  in  conception,  but  as  a 
second  kind  of  substances  (Sevrepcu  ow«u)  *  we  have  the  species 
which  constitute  the  essence  of  individual  things,  just  as  these  latter 
constitute  the  essence  of  perceptible  phenomena. 

Scientific  knowledge  is  directed  partly  toward  the  conception  of 
the  individual  thing,  partly  toward  the  conception  of  the  species. 
Each  of  these  realises  itself  in  phenomena,  and  here  there  is  found 
much  which,  as  belonging  directly  to  the  conception  (oT^/k/fy/cora  in 
the  narrower  sense),  can  be  deduced  from  it,  but  also  much  which, 
as  foreign  to  the  conception,  appears  in  the  particular  only  incident- 
ally, as  a  consequence  of  the  matter  in  which  the  conception  realises 
itself;  and  of  this  which  is  conceptionally  indifferent  or  "  accidental " 
(o-uppep-QKOTa  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  word)  there  is,  according 
to  the  presuppositions  of  the  Aristotelian  doctrine,  no  "theory,1' 
no  scientific  knowledge.  Hence  Aristotle  also — and  in  this  lies  a 
characteristic  limit  of  the  ancient  study  of  Nature — disclaimed  on 
principle  any  scientific  insight  into  the  necessity  of  law,  with  which 
even  the  most  individual  and  most  particular  follow  from  the  gen- 
eral. This  individual  instance  he  declared  rather  to  be  something 
really  accidental,  not  to  be  explained  by  conception,  and  limited 
scientific  consideration  to  that  which  is  valid  universally  (Kaff  oXou), 
or  at  least  for  the  most  part  (cm  TO  TroXv). 

4  In  this  we  see  decidedly  a  holding  fast  to  the  tradition  of  the 
doctrine  of  Ideas :  the  same  attitude  discloses  itself  also  in  another 
direction.  If,  that  is,  the  relation  of  matter  and  form  is  affirmed 
between  the  different  things  or  classes  of  things,  each  of  which  is 
in  itself  already  actual  as  formed  matter,  this  relation  becomes 
relative  in  so  far  as  the  same  thing  which  in  contrast  with  a  lower 
is  to  be  regarded  as  form,  appears  as  matter  when  contrasted  with 
the  higher.  In  this  aspect  the  conception  of  development  becomes 
the  principle  of  an  ordering  of  things  according  to  their  metaphysical 
values,  considering  these  things  as  rising  in  uninterrupted  succession 
from  the  lowest  formations  of  matter,  to  the  highest  forms.  In 
this  scale  every  class  of  things  is  assigned  its  metaphysical  dignity 
by  means  of  the  test  that  it  is  regarded  as  form  of  the  lower  and  as 
the  material  of  the  higher. 

1  So,  at  least,  they  are  called  in  the  treatise  on  categories,  the  genuineness  of 
which  is,  to  be  sure,  not  entirely  uncontested ;  yet  the  designation  is  quite  in 
the  line  of  Aristotle's  teaching  taken  as  a  whole. 


144  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

u 

This  system  of  individual  things,  and  of  their  classes,  has  both  a 
lower  and  an  upper  limit,  the  former  in  mere  matter,  the  latter  in- 
pure  form.  Wholly  unformed  matter  (irpunq  vXvj)  is,  of  course,  in 
itself,  as  mere  possibility,  not  actual ;  it  never  exists  without  being 
somehow  actualised  as  form.  Yet  it  is  not  merely  that  which  is  not 
Being  (the  Platonic  $  oV,  or  empty  space),  but  the  accessory  cause, 
which  evinces  itself  as  such  through  real  effects  (TO  <xu  OVK  ai/€u,  sine 
qua  non).  Its  reality  is  shown  in  the  fact  that  the  forms  do  not 
completely  realise  themselves  in  individual  things,  and  that  from  it 
side-workings  (irapafads)  proceed  which  are  without  connection 
with  the  purposefully  active  form,  or  even  in  contradiction  with  it. 
It  is,  therefore,  from  matter  that  the  fact  is  explained  that  the 
forms  realise  themselves  only  potentially  (/caret  TO  3waroi/) :  from 
matter  arises  that  which  is  conceptionally  indeterminate  (c™//,/3e- 
/fyfco's),  or  the  accidental  (avrofwTov),  — the  lawless  and  purposeless 
in  Nature.  Hence  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  distinguishes,  in  its 
explanation  of  Nature,  as  did  Plato  in  the  Philebus,  between  final 
causes  (TO  ov  we™)  and  mechanical  causes  (TO  e£  avay/oys) :  the  former 
are  the  forms  which  realise  themselves  in  matter ;  the  latter  reside 
in  matter,  out  of  which  proceed  side-workings  and  counter-workings. 
Thus  the  cosmic  processes  are  regarded  by  Aristotle  ultimately 
under  the  analogy  of  the  plastic  artist,  who  finds  in  the  hard  material 
a  limit  to  the  realisation  of  his  formative  thought.  This  material 
is,  indeed,  so  far  related  to  the  Idea,  that  the  Idea  can  present  itself 
in  it,  at  least  in  general,  and  yet  it  is  in  so  far  a  foreign,  and  thus 
an  independent,  element,  that  it  in  part  opposes  itself  as  a  retarding 
principle  to  the  realising  of  the  forms.  Ancient  philosophy  did  not 
overstep  this  dualism  between  the  purposive  activity  of  the  form 
and  the  resistance  of  matter ;  with  the  demand  of  the  teleological 
view  of  the  world  it  united  the  naive  honesty  of  experience,  recog- 
nising the  necessity,  purposeless  and  contrary  to  design,  which 
asserts  itself  in  the  phenomena  of  the  actual  world. 

5.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  self-evident  in  the  case  of  pure  form, 
since  its  conception  is  immediately  connected  with  that  of  true  act- 
uality, that  it  possesses  in  itself  the  highest  actuality  without  need- 
ing any  matter  whatever.  The  assumption  of  such  a  pure  Form  is 
necessary  according  to  the  system  of  Aristotle,  for  the  reason  that 
matter,  as  the  merely  possible  or  potential,  has  in  itself  alone  no 
principle  of  motion  or  of  generation.  We  cannot,  indeed,  speak  of 
a  beginning  of  motion  in  time  in  this  system  of  development,  which 
centres  about  the  conception  of  self-realising  essence,  since  motion 
must  be  as  eternal  as  Being  itself,  to  the  essential  characteristics  of 
which  it  belongs  5  but  yet  we  must  point  out  that  property  in  Being 


CHAP.  3,  §  13.]      System  of  Development  ;  Aristotle.  145 

which  is  the  cause  of  motion.  This  is,  however,  everywhere  the 
action  of  the  form  upon  the  matter,  in  which,  -with  reference  to  indi- 
vidual things,  Aristotle  distinguishes  two  elements,  viz.  an  impulse 
to  be  formed  inherent  in  matter,  and  the  purposive  motion  proceed- 
ing from  the  form  itself.  But  in  so  far  as  the  form  is  itself  moved, 
it  must  be  regarded  in  turn  as  matter  for  a  higher  form  ;  and,  since 
the  same  thing  is  true  of  the  latter,  and  so  on,  motion  would  not  be 
understood  if  the  chain  of  its  causes  did  not  have  a  first  link  in  the 
pure  Form  which  is  itself  not  moved.  The  first  mover  (irp&Tov  KLVOVV) 
is  itself  unmoved.  Hence,  in  the  case  of  its  action  upon  matter, 
only  the  first  of  the  two  elements  above  mentioned  comes  into  con- 
sideration. It  operates,  not  by  means  of  its  own  activity,  but  only 
by  means  of  the  fact  that  its  absolute  actuality  excites  in  matter 
the  impulse  to  form  itself  according  to  it  (the  prime  mover),  not  as 
a  mechanical,  but  as  a  pure,  final  cause  (/avet  us  cp&fjww,  ov 


The  prime  mover,  or  the  pure  Form,  means,  then,  in  the  Aristo- 
telian metaphysics,  quite  the  same  thing  as  the  Idea  of  the  Grood  in 
the  Platonic,  and  for  it  alone  Aristotle  employs  all  the  predicates 
of  the  Platonic  Idea.  It  is  eternal,  unchangeable,  immovable, 
wholly  independent,  separated  (x<»purrov)  from  all  else,  incorporeal, 
and  yet  at  the  same  time  the  cause  of  all  generation  and  change. 
It  is  the  perfect  Being  (evepyoa)  in  which  all  possibility  is  at  the 
same  time  actuality  ;  of  all  that  exists  it  is  the  highest  (TO  n  rp  elvat 
TO  ?rpam>j/)  and  best  —  the  deity.1 

The  highest  Being  or  Essence,  thus  determined  according  to  its 
relations,  is  also  characterised  by  Aristotle  as  regards  its  content. 
Such  an  activity,  related  to  no  possibility,  resting  purely  within 
itself  (actus  punts),  is  thought,  and  thought  alone  ;  not,  of  course, 
that  mental  process  which  applies  itself  to  individual  things  and 
their  changing  phenomena,  but  the  pure  thought,  which  is  employed 
with  itself  and  its  eternal  nature  ;  that  thought  which  presupposes 
nothing  else  as  an  object,  but  has  itself  for  its  constant,  unchang- 
ing content,  the  thought  of  thought  (vorjvts  vo^o-ews),  —  self-conscious- 
ness. 

In  these  conceptions,  so  determined,  dwells  a  significance  of 
mighty  import  for  the  world's  history.  On  the  one  hand,  mono- 

1  The  exposition  of  this  course  of  thought  from  which  the  later,  so-called  cos- 
mologicdl  proof  for  the  existence  of  God  essentially  arose,  is  found  principally 
in  the  twelfth  book  of  the  Metaphysics.  In  his  popular  dialogues  Aristotle 
amalgamated  it  with  determinations  of  worth,  by  giving  it  the  following  form  : 
the  distinction  between  the  imperfect  and  the  more  perfect  which  things^  of 
experience  show  presupposes  the  reality  of  a  most  perfect.  Cf  .  Schol.  In  Arist. 
487  a  6. 


146  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

theism  was  herewith,  conceptionally  formulated  and  scientifically 
grounded;  on  the  other  hand,  it  passed  over  from  the  pantheistic 
form,  which  it  had  with  Xenophanes,  and  even  still  with  Plato,  into 
the  theistic  form,  since  God  is  conceived  of  as  a  self-conscious  being 
different  from  the  world.  But  besides  this  transcendence,  the  doc- 
trine that  God  is  the  absolute  mind  or  spirit  ( Geist)  involves  at  the 
same  time  the  metaphysical  advance  that  the  immaterial,  the  incor- 
poreal pure  Being,  is  made  equivalent  to  the  spiritual.  Spiritual 
monotheism  is  the  ripe  fruit  of  Grecian  science. 

This  divine  spirituality  is  conceived  of  in  a  purely  intellectualistic 
manner ;  its  essential  nature  is  solely  thought  directed  upon  itself. 
All  doing,  all  willing,  is  directed  toward  an  object,  distinct  from  the 
doer  or  the  wilier.  The  divine  mind,  as  pure  form,  needs  no  object; 
he  is  sufficient  for  himself,  and  his  knowledge  of  himself  (flewpta), 
which  has  no  other  goal  than  itself,  is  his  eternal  blessedness. 
He  acts  upon  the  world,  not  through  his  motion  or  activity,  but 
through  the  longing  for  him  which  the  world  has.  The  world,  and 
what  takes  place  in  it,  arises  from  the  longing  of  matter  after  God. 

6.  Matter  (the  merely  potential)  is  that  which  is  moved  without 
itself  moving  anything;  God  (the  solely  actual)  is  that  which  moves 
without  itself  being  moved ;  between  the  two  is  the  entire  series  of 
things,  which  suffer  motion  as  well  as  call  it  forth ;  and  these,  taken 
as  a  whole,  are  designated  by  Aristotle  as  Nature  (<£v<ris;  equivalent 
to  "world"  according  to  present  usage).  Nature  is,  accordingly, 
the  connected  system  of  living  beings  viewed  as  a  unity,  in  which 
matter  developing  ever  higher,  from  form  to  form,  through  all  the 
multitude  of  its  particular  shapes,  approaches  the  resting  Being  of 
the  deity,  and  imitating  this,  potentially  takes  it  up  into  itself. 

But  in  this  connection,  the  graded  scale  of  things,  in  the  exposition 
of  which  the  Aristotelian  philosophy  of  Nature  consists,  shows  a  two- 
fold standard  for  estimating  relative  worth.  The  scale  is  therefore 
developed  in  two  different  series,  which  find  their  union  only  at  the 
end  in  a  manner  which  is,  indeed,  consistent  with  the  fundamental 
conceptions  of  the  system,  but  which  is,  nevertheless,  in  itself  sur- 
prising. 

In  the  conception  of  the  deity,  according  to  Aristotle,  there  meet, 
as  chief  characteristics,  that  of  Being,  resting  within  itself,  and 
remaining  like  itself  (&'Siov),  and  that  of  spirituality  or  rationality 
(vovs).  Hence  the  individual  "forms"  of  Nature  take  a  higher 
rank  in  proportion  as  they  contain  the  one  or  the  other  of  these 
elements  which  constitute  the  highest  worth.  In  the  one  line, 
the  series  of  phenomena  ascends  from  the  unordered  change  of  the 
terrestrial  world  to  the  ever-uniform  revolution  of  the  stars ;  in  the 


CHAP.  3,  §  13.]      System  of  Development :  Aristotle.  147 

other  line,  we  are  led  from  the  merely  mechanical  change  of 
place  to  the  activities  of  the  soul  and  its  most  valuable  develop- 
ment, rational  knowledge;  and  both  series  have  the  same  terminus, 
inasmuch  as  the  stars  that  are  in  most  uniform  motion  are  con- 
ceived of  as  the  highest  intelligences,  the  most  rational  spirits. 

7.  In  relation  to  the  first  of  these  two  aspects  Aristotle,  taking 
up  the  astronomical  views  of  Plato,  adopted  the  old  Pythagorean 
antithesis  between  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly  world,  and  it  is  to 
be  ascribed  to  the  victorious  influence  of  his  philosophy  that  the 
inaturer  ideas  of  the  later  Pythagoreans  did  not  prevail  in  antiquity, 
in  spite  of  their  recognition  by  those  learned  in  astronomy  in  the 
following  period.  As  the  whole  universe  has  the  most  perfect  form, 
everywhere  the  same,  —  that  of  the  sphere,  —  so  among  all  motions 
the  most  perfect  is  the  circular  motion,  which  returns  into  itself. 
This  belongs  to  the  asther,  the  celestial  element,  out  of  which  the 
stars  are  formed,  and  the  transparent  hollow  spheres,  in  which  the 
stars  move  with  ever-unchanged  uniformity.  Farthest  out,  and  in 
an  absolute  changelessness  that  conies  nearest  the  divine  Being,  is 
the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars,  beneath  that  the  planets,  the  sun,  and 
the  moon,  whose  apparent  deviation  from  the  circular  movement 
was  explained  by  a  complicated  theory  of  hollow  spheres  placed  one 
within  another,  the  theory  which  Eudoxus,  an  astronomer  sustaining 
a  close  relation  to  the  Academy,  and  his  disciple  Callippus  had 
propounded.1  The  stars  themselves  were,  however,  for  Aristotle 
beings  of  superhuman  intelligence,  incorporate  deities.  They  ap- 
peared to  him  as  the  purer  forms,  those  more  like  the  deity,  and 
from  them  a  purposive,  rational  influence  upon  the  lower  life  of 
earth  seemed  to  proceed,  —  a  thought  which  became  the  root  of 
mediaeval  astrology. 

The  lower  "  forms  "  of  terrestrial  life,  on  the  other  hand,  are  the 
four  elements  (of  Empedocles),  which  are  characterised  by  the  ten- 
dency to  rectilinear  motion.  But  rectilinear  motion  involves  at  once 
the  opposition  of  two  tendencies, — the  centrifugal,  which  belongs  to 
Fire;  and  the  centripetal,  which  belongs  to  Earth.  The  first  of  the 
two  tendencies  is  also  attributed  in  a  lesser  degree  to  Air,  and  the 
latter  in  a  lesser  degree  to  Water,  and  so  the  central  mass,  our  earth, 

1  Schiaparelli,  Le  Sfere  Omocentriche  di  Eudosso,  CalUppo,  ed  Aristotele  (Mi- 
lan, 1876).  Of.  also  0.  Gruppe,  Die  kosmischen  Systeme  der  (rriechen  (Berlin, 
1851).  As  a  principle  of  method,  the  following  prescription  for  the  proposal  of 
these  questions  has  been  preserved  from  the  Old  Academy,  typical  of  the  math- 
ematioo-metaphysical  presupposition  of  the  speculative  explanation  of  Nature : 
viz.  to  discover  the  uniformly  ordered  motions  of  the  stars  by  means  of  which 
their  apparent  motions  may  t>e  explained  (Staff &£etv).  Simpl.  in  Arist.  De  Ooslo 
(Karst.),  119. 


148  The  Greeks  :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

in  a  state  of  rest  as  a  whole,  is  composed  in  such  a  way  that  about 
the  earthy  material  is  disposed  at  first  Water  and  then  Air,  while 
Eire  strives  toward  the  celestial  outer  world.  The  changing  combi- 
nations, however,  into  which  the  four  elements  enter,  constitute  the 
imperfect,  that  which  cannot  be  conceived,  that  which  is  accidental 
in  the  terrestrial  world.  Here  the  side-working  and  counter-work- 
ing of  matter  are  stronger  than  in  the  celestial  region  where  the 
mathematical  determinateness  of  undisturbed  circular  motion  real- 
ises itself. 

8.  In  the  changes  of  the  terrestrial  world,  mechanical)  chemical, 
and  organic  processes  are  built  up  upon  each  other  in  such  a  way 
that  the  higher  always  presupposes  the  lower  as  its  condition. 
Without  change  of  place  (fopa.  or  KO^O-IS  in  the  narrowest  sense), 
change  of  qualities  (dAJVoiWis)  is  not  possible,  and  the  organic 
transformation  which  consists  in  growth  and  decay  (averts  —  <£0iW) 
is  not  possible  without  both  the  preceding.  The  higher  form  is, 
however,  never  merely  a  product  of  the  lower,  but  is  something  self- 
subsistent,  by  means  of  which  those  lower  forms  can  be  employed 
only  in  a  purposive  manner. 

From  this  develops  an  important  principle  in  which  Aristotle  is 
opposed  to  Democritus,  —  a  principle  which  the  former  esteemed 
very  highly  in  regard  to  detailed  research  in  natural  science,  and 
used  a  great  deal,  even  with  express  mention.  Aristotle 1  protests 
against  the  attempt  to  reduce  all  qualitative  to  quantitative  deter- 
minations,—  an  attempt  ultimately  accepted  even  by  Plato.  He 
combats  the  contrasting  from  an  epistemological  and  metaphysical 
point  of  view,  of  secondary  and  primary  qualities ;  to  the  former  he 
accords  not  a  less  but  rather  a  higher  reality  than  to  the  latter,  and 
in  the  succession  of  "forms"  the  inner  conceptional  character  or 
determination  is  evidently  of  more  worth  for  him  than  the  outer 
determination  which  is  capable  of  mathematical  expression.2  The 
attempt  of  Democritus  to  raise  to  the  rank  of  a  principle  for 
explaining  the  world  the  reduction  of  all  qualitative  to  quantitative 
differences,  found  its  victorious  opponent  in  Aristotle  and  his  doctrine 
of  the  "  entelechies,"  the  inner  Forms  of  things.  The  keen  logician 
saw  that  it  is  never  possible  to  develop  qualities  analytically  from 
quantitative  relations,  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  quality  (by  which- 
ever sense  it  may  be  perceived)  is  something  new,  which  presup- 
poses the  entire  body  of  quantitative  relations  as  its  occasion  only. 

1  Of.  especially  the  third  book  of  the  treatise  Ve  Ccelo. 

2  For  this  reason  Aristotle  also  characterises  the  elements  not  only  by  the 
different  tendencies  of  their  motions,  but  also  by  primitive  qualities ;  and  he 
develops  them  out  of  a  meeting  of  the  contrasted  pairs,  warm  and  cold,  dry  and 
moist.     Meteor.  IV.  1,  378  b  11. 


CHAP.  3,  §  13.]      System  of  Development  :  Aristotle.  149 

9.  With  logical  consistency  the  same  view  is  applied  by  Aristotle 
to  the  relation  of  the  psychical  and  bodily  activities  ;  the  latter  are 
but  the  matter  for  which  the  former  furnish  the  forms.  There  is, 
with  Aristotle,  no  such  dependence  of  psychical  upon  corporeal  func- 
tions as  Democritus,  in  accordance  with  the  procedure  of  the  older 
metaphysics,  and  even  Plato,  in  part  (in  the  Timteus),  had  taught. 
For  Aristotle  the  soul  is  rather  the  entelechy  of  the  body,  i.e.  the 
Form  which  realises  itself  in  the  motions  and  changes  of  the  organic 
body.  The  soul  is  the  cause  of  bodily  formation  and  motion,  a 
cause  acting  from  ends  ;  itself  incorporeal,  it  is  yet  actual  or  real 
only  as  the  power  moving  and  controlling  the  body. 

But  the  psychical  life  itself  is  also,  according  to  Aristotle,  built 
up  as  it  were  in  successive  grades  or  strata,  each  of  which,  in  turn, 
presents  matter  for  the  higher.  The  first  Form  of  organic  life  is 
the  vegetative  soul  (OpeTrrtKov),  which  "forms"  the  mechanical  and 
chemical  changes  to  the  purposive  functions  of  assimilation  and 
propagation.  The  soul  of  plants  is  restricted  to  this  purely  physio- 
logical significance  of  a  vital  force  ;  to  this  is  added  in  the  whole 
animal  kingdom,1  the  animal  soul,  whose  constitutive  characteristics 
are  spontaneous  motion  in  space  (KWIJTIKOV  /caret  TOTTOV)  and  sensation 


The  purposive,  spontaneous  motion  of  the  animal  body  proceeds 
from  desire  (opc&s),  which  arises  from  the  feelings  of^pleasure  and 
pain,  in  the  form  of  an  effort  to  procure  or  shun.  But  these  pre- 
suppose everywhere  the  idea  of  their  object,  and  are  at  the  same 
time  bound  together  with  the  thought  that  this  object  is  worthy  to 
be  striven  for  or  to  be  shunned.  The  view  of  the  dependence  of  all 
desire  upon  ideas,  peculiar  to  all  Greek  psychology,  is  so  strong  with 
Aristotle,  that  he  even  sets  forth  these  relations  expressly,  accord- 
ing to  the  logical  function  of  judgment  and  inference.  In  the 
practical  sphere,  also,  there  is  affirmation  and  denial,2  there  is  the 
process  of  drawing  a  conclusion  from  a  general  aim  to  a  particular 
mode  of  action. 

The  proper  seat,  or  home,  as  it  were,  of  the  entire  animal  life  of 
ideation  is  found  in  sensation.  In  the  physiological  psychology 
which  treats  this  subject8  Aristotle  has  used  in  comprehensive 

1  Aristotle's  History  of  Animals  (cf.  J.  B.  Meyer,  Berlin,  1855)  treats  in  ex- 
emplary manner,  and  with  admirable  care  of  detailed  investigation,  anatomical, 
physiological,  morphological,  and  biological  problems,  and  also  the  questions  of 
system.    The  parallel  work  on  plants  is  indeed  lost,  but  in  compensation  we 
have  the  work  of  his  friend  and  disciple  Theophrastus. 

2  Efh.  Nic.  VI.  2,  1139  a  21. 

8  Besides  the  sections  which  treat  this  subject,  in  the  treatise  on  the  Sonl,  the 
smaller  treatises  attached  to  this  are  also  to  be  compared,  viz  :  on  Perception, 
on  Memory  r,  on  Dreams,  etc. 


150  The' Greeks:  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

manner  all  the  particular  information  and  theories  which  his  prede- 
cessors, especially  Democritus,  possessed  on  this  point;  but  he 
overcame  the  common  inadequacy  of  all  earlier  doctrines  by  conced- 
ing a  much  greater  importance  to  the  self-activity  of  the  soul  in  the 
process  in  which  perception  arises.  Not  satisfied  to  adopt  the  old 
theory  that  perception  consists  in  a  co-operation  of  object  and  sub- 
ject, he  pointed  to  the  unity  of  consciousness  (Einlieitlklikeit,  ju,eo-oT7?s), 
with  which  the  animal  soul  unites  what  is  given  in  the  individual 
perceptions  of  the  individual  senses  to  form  collective  perceptions, 
or  perceptions  that  perceive  the  object  as  a  whole,  and  in  so  doing 
grasps  also  the  relations  of  number,  situation,  and  motion.  Thus 
above  the  individual  senses  we  must  assume  the  common  sense 
(KOLVQV  alofyrfpiw)  ,l  which  is  also  the  seat  of  recollection,  both  of 
the  involuntary  or  memory  (/xi/^r?)  and  the  voluntary  (dva/w^o-is), 
by  virtue  of  the  circumstance  that  in  it  the  perceptions  remain  as 
imaginative  representations  (<£avra<r«u) ;  at  the  same  time,  however, 
it  is  also  the  seat  of  our  knowledge  of  our  own  states.2 

10.  Vegetative  and  animal  souls,  however,  form  in  man  but  the 
matter  for  the  realisation  of  the  Form  peculiar  to  him,  — the  reason 
(vo£s  —  Stavo£to-0ai).  By  its  operation,  impulse  (ope£is)  becomes  will 
(/3ov\7}(n$) ;  imaginative  representation  becomes  knowledge  (!TTI- 
It  comes  as  a  something  new  and  higher  ("from  without," 
to  all  the  psychical  activities  which  develop  from  perception 
even  among  the  beasts.  Aristotle  expressed  this  relation  by  desig- 
nating the  pure  rational  activity  itself  as  the  active  reason  (vofc 
TTowfTtKos),  and,  on  the  contrary,  as  passive  reason  (vovs  ira&qriKas), 
the  material  of  perceptions,  which  arises  from  the  bodily  existence, 
furnishes  possibilities  and  occasions  for  reason,  and  is  subsequently 
worked  over  and  formed  by  it. 

Accordingly  the  "passive"  reason  signifies  the  individual  phase 
(Erscheinungsioeise)  given  in  the  natural  disposition  of  the  individ- 
ual man,  and  determined  by  the  occasions  of  his  personal  experience, 
—  the  "active"  reason,  on  the  contrary,  signifying  the  pure  reason 
considered  as  a  unity  in  its  nature  and  principles  (principielle  Ein- 
heitlichJceit),  common  to  all  individuals.  The  latter  is  imperishable, 
as  it  is  without  beginning,  while  the  former  passes  away  with  the 

1  With  regard  to  physiological  localisation  Aristotle  found  the  psychical 
activity  to  be  attached  to  the  vital  warmth  (fy^vrov  Bepnfo),  which  as  animating 
breath  (irvevft.a')  is  mingled  with  the  blood,  and  his  school  developed  this  doc- 
trine still  further.    Cf.  H.  Siebeck,  Zeitschrift,  fur  Volkerpsychologie,  1881,  pp. 
364  ff.    In  consequence  of  this  he  regarded  the  heart  as  the  seat  of  the  common 
sense  and  so  supplanted  the  better  insight  with  which  Alcmaeon,  Diogenes  of 
Apollonia,  Democritus,  and  Plato  had  recognised  the  importance  of  the  brain. 

2  This  beginning  for  a  doctrine  of  inner  perception  is  found  in  Arist.  De.  An. 
III.  2,  425  b  12. 


CHAP.  3,  §  13.]      System  of  Development :  Aristotle.  151 

individuals  in  whom  it  appears.  Personal  immortality  is  put  in 
question  by  this  conclusion  just  as  in  the  Platonic  Thnceus,  where 
it  was  claimed  only  for  the  "rational"  "part"  of  the  soul,  i.e.  that 
part  which  is  everywhere  alike  and  impersonal.  It  is  clear  that  we 
have  here  no  longer  to  do  with  empirical  psychology,  but  with  such 
doctrines  as  have  been  taken  from  the  systematic  connection  of 
the  whole  work,  and  grafted  upon  psychology  in  consequence  of 
ethical  and  epistemological  postulates. 

11.  In  the  conception  of  the  reason  as  the  Porm  peculiar  to  the 
human  soul,  Aristotle  found  the  key  to  the  solution  of  that  feature 
of  the  ethical  problem  which  even  Plato  had  sought  in  vain,  i.e. 
that  of  the  content  of  the   Good.    Man's  happiness  or  well-being 
(evSoi/jLovia) ,  which  in  Aristotle's  system  'also  is  regarded  as  the 
supreme  end  of  all  endeavour  (r&os),  is,  indeed,  dependent  in  part 
upon  external  fortune ;  it  is  not  complete  until  this  has  afforded 
its  good  things ;  but  ethics  has  to  do  only  with  that  which  stands  in 
our  power  (TO.  l<fi  %f£v)3  only  with  the  happiness  which  man  gains 
by  his  own  activity  (TTPO.KTOV  ayaOov).    Every  being,  however,  be- 
comes happy  by  the  unfolding  of  his  own  nature  and  of  his  own 
peculiar  activity  —  man,  therefore,  through  reason.    The  virtue  of 
man  is,  accordingly,  that  habitude  or  permanent  state  of  mind  (S&$) 
through  which  he  is  made  capable  of  the  practice  of  rational  activ- 
ity ;  it  develops  out  of  the  endowments  of  his  natural  disposition, 
and  has  for  its  fruit,  satisfaction,  pleasure. 

As  in  the  animal  soul  impulse  and  perception  were  to  be  dis- 
tinguished as  different  expressions,  so,  too,  the  reason  develops 
itself,  partly  as  rational  action,  partly  as  rational  thought ;  as  per- 
fection, on  the  one  hand,  of  the  character  or  disposition  (?&>$),  on 
the  other,  of  the  faculty  of  intelligence  (alvOdvevOaj.  in  the  broadest 
sense  of  the  word).  Thus  there  result,  as  the  excellence  or  ability 
of  the  rational  man,  the  ethical  and  the  intellectual  or  dianoetic  vir- 
tues. 

12.  The  ethical  virtues  grow  out  of  that  training  of  the  will  by 
which  it  becomes  accustomed  to   act  according  to  right  insight 
(<l>p6vT)<rL$  —  optfos  Aoyos).    It  enables  man,  in  his  decisions,  to  follow 
practical  reason,  i.e.  insight  into  what  is  correct  or  proper.    With 
this  doctrine   Aristotle  transcends  the  principles  of  Socrates,  — 
with  evident  regard  to  the  facts  of  the  ethical  life :  not  that  he 
assigned  to  the  will  a  psychological  independence  as  over  against 
knowledge ;  the  point,  rather,  is,  that  he  gave  up  the  opinion  that 
the  determination  of  the  will  arising  from  rational  insight  must  of 
itself  be  stronger  than  the  desire  arising  from  defective  knowledge. 
Since  experience  often  shows  the  reverse  of  this,  man  must  gain  by 


152  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

practice  that  self-control  (eyKpdraa.)  by  means  of  which  he  follows 
under  all  circumstances  that  which  is  rationally  known,  even  against 
the  strongest  desires.1 

While  to  ethical  virtue  in  general  belong  natural  disposition, 
insight,  and  habitude,  the  individual  virtues  are  distinguished  by 
the  different  relations  of  life  to  which  they  refer.  A  systematic 
development  of  these  is  not  given  by  Aristotle,  but  we  have,  rather, 
a  comprehensive  and  delicate  treatment  of  the  individual  virtues. 
The  general  principle  is  that  rational  insight  always  finds  the  right 
mean  between  the  unreasonable  extremes  to  which  the  natural 
impulsive  life  leads.  Thus  courage  is  the  right  mean  between 
cowardice  and  rashness.  A  particularly  detailed  exposition  is  given 
to  friendship 2  as  the  common  striving  for  all  that  is  good  and 
beautiful,  and  also  to  justice  as  the  basis  of  the  political  community. 

13,  For  Aristotle,  like  Plato,  was  convinced  that  the  moral  excel- 
lence of  man,  since  it  always  relates  to  activities  which  prosper  in 
the  life  of  a  community,  can  find  its  fulfilment  only  in  the  life  of  a 
community ;  for  him,  too,  there  is  ultimately  no  perfect  moral  life 
outside  the  state}  the  essential  end  of  which  was  considered  by 
Aristotle,  also,  to  be  the  ethical  training  of  its  citizens.  As,  never- 
theless, in  the  case  of  the  individual  man,  virtue  ought  to  develop 
out  of  the  natural  disposition,  so  the  political  relations  also  are 
treated  by  Aristotle  from  the  point  of  view,  that  the  historically 
given  relations  are  to  be  used  for  the  highest  possible  fulfilment  of 
that  highest  end. 

Every  constitution  is  right  if  the  government  has  the  ethical  weal 
of  the  community  as  its  highest  goal ;  every  constitution  has  failed 
if  this  is  not  the  case.  The  good  of  the  state,  therefore,  does  not 
depend  upon  the  external  form,  which  is  defined  by  the  number 
of  those  who  rule.3  The  rule  of  a  single  individual  may  be  right 
as  a  kingdom  (/focrcAaa),  bad  if  a  despotism  (rupam's) ;  the  rule 
of  few  may  be  good  if  an  aristocracy  of  culture  and  disposition, 
if  an  oligarchy  of  birth  or  property,  bad;  the  rule  of  all  as  a 
republic  of  law  and  order  (TroXtreta)  may  be  good,  as  mob-rule 
(fyfj.oKpa.TLa),  bad.  With  profound  political  intelligence,  Aristotle 
brings  together  in  these  expositions  the  experiences  of  Grecian 
history,  and  on  the  ground  of  these  enters  upon  the  philosophy  of 

1  In  the  polemic  against  the  Socratic  doctrine  which  Aristotle  brings  forward 
in  this  line,  Eth.  Nic.  III.  1-8,  are  developed  the  first  beginnings  of  the  problem 
of  freedom. 

2  In  the  eighth  book  of  the  Nicomachcean  Ethics. 

8  A  point  of  view  which  the  dialogue  the  Statesman,  passing  under  Plato's 
name,  had  already  emphasised,  while  Plato  himself  in  the  Republic  constructed 
the  u  bad  "  constitutions  from  psychological  analogies  of  a  predominance  of  the 
lower  parts  of  the  soul. 


CHAP.  3,  §  13.]      System  of  Development :  Aristotle.  153 


history  in  giving  intimations  as  to  the  necessity  with  which  individ- 
ual forms  of  constitutions  pass  over  into  one  another  and  develop 
out  of  one  another. 

After  these  presuppositions  we  can  understand  that  Aristotle 
could  not  think  of  projecting  in  detail  the  constitution  of  an  ideal 
state  in  Plato's  manner.  He  contented  himself  with  a  critical 
emphasising  of  those  elements  which  had  proved  requisite  in  indi- 
vidual constitutions  for  fulfilling  the  general  task  of  the  state.  In 
this  connection  he  agrees  with  the  Platonic  demand  for  a  public 
system  of  education ;  the  ethical  community  must  itself  take  the 
care  of  fitting  for  their  place  the  elements  of  which  it  will  in  future 
consist,  and  it  is  the  task  of  education  (in  the  treatment  of  which 
the  fragment  of  the  Politics  breaks  off)  to  lead  man  out  of  his  rude 
state  of  nature  with  the  help  of  the  noble  arts,  to  ethical  and  intel- 
lectual culture. 

14.  To  the  practical  activity  of  the  reason  (\oyia-r LKOV)  ,  in  the 
broader  sense  of  the  word,  Aristotle  reckoned  also  "making" 
(Trotetv)  in  addition  to  "acting"  (Trpa&s) ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  made  so  great  distinction  between  this  creative  activity,  which 
presents  itself  in  art,  and  the  action  directed  toward  the  ends  of 
daily  life,  that  he  occasionally  set  the  science  of  art,  poietic  phi- 
losophy, as  a  third  independent  science,  side  by  side  with  the  theo- 
retical and  practical.  Of  this  poietic  philosophy,  there  is  preserved 
besides  the  Rhetoric  only  the  fragment  of  his  theory  of  the  art  of 
poetry,  under  the  name  of  the  Poetic.  This  sets  out,  indeed,  from 
principles  relating  to  the  nature  of  art  in  general,  but  in  its  particu- 
lar subject  offers  only  the  outlines  of  a  theory  of  tragedy.  In 
this,  such  peculiar  relations  of  this  science  of  art  to  the  two  other 
principal  parts  of  philosophy  appear,  that  it  becomes  difficult  to  sub- 
ordinate this  branch  under  either  of  the  other  two. 

Art  is  imitative  production,  and  the  arts  are  distinguished  as  well 
by  the  objects  which  they  imitate  as  by  the  material  with  which 
they  imitate.  The  objects  of  poetic  art  are  men  and  their  actions ; 
its  means  are  language,  rhythm,  and  harmony.  Tragedy,  in  particu- 
lar, represents  an  important  action  as  performed  immediately  by 
speaking  and  acting  persons.1 

But  the  purpose  of  this  imitative  representation  is  an  ethical  one : 
the  passions  of  man,  in  particular  in  the  case  of  tragedy,  fear  and 
sympathy,  are  to  be  so  excited,  that  by  their  excitation  and  en- 
hancement purification  of  the  soul  (/ca&xpo-is)  from  these  passions 
is  brought  about 

i  Poet.  6,  1449 1)  24. 


154  The  Greeks :  Systematic  Period.  [PART  I. 

On  the  doctrine  of  the  Catharsis,  which  became  so  important  for  the  later 
theory  of  art,  and  on  the  literature  concerning  it,  cf.  A.  Doring,  Die  Kunstlehre 
des  Aristoteles  (Jena,  1876). 

The  attainment  of  this  end  is,  however,  accomplished  in  such 
a  way,  that  in  artistic  representation  the  particular  is  brought  to 
our  view,  not  as  a  particular,  but  in  its  universal  nature  or  essence. 
Art,  like  science,  has  for  its  object  the  universal  in  its  particular 
realisation ;  it  offers  a  kind  of  knowledge,  and  with  this  the  pleas- 
ure which  attends  upon  knowledge.1 

15.  The  highest  perfection  of  its  development  finally  is  achieved 
by  the  rational  nature  of  man  in  Jcnoivledge.  The  dianoetic  virtues 
are  the  highest,  and  those  which  bring  complete  happiness.  The 
activity  of  the  theoretical  reason  (eTrio-TT^uoviKov)  is  directed  to  the 
immediate  apprehension  of  the  highest  truths,  i.e.  of  the  concep- 
tions and  judgments  which  the  inductive  search  of  scientific  inves- 
tigation only  leads  up  to  without  being  able  to  prove,  and  from 
which  all  deduction  must  take  its  beginning  (cf.  §  12,  4). 

But  knowledge  of  these,  the  full  unfolding  of  the  "  active  reason  " 
in  man,  is  again  designated  by  Aristotle  as  a  "beholding"  (tfecopt'a) ; 
and  with  this  beholding  of  the  highest  truth  man  gains  a  participa- 
tion in  that  pure  thought,  in  which  the  essence  of  the  deity  consists, 
and  thus,  also,  in  the  eternal  blessedness  of  the  divine  self-conscious- 
ness. For  this  "  beholding "  which  exists  only  for  its  own  sake 
and  has  no  ends  of  will  or  deed,  this  wishless  absorption  in  the 
perception  of  the  highest  truth,  is  the  blessedest  and  best  of  all. 

1  Poet.  9,  1451 1>  5. 


PART  II. 

THE  HELLENISTIC-ROMA1T  PHILOSOPHY. 

As  regards  the  general  literature,  the  same  works  serve  for  this  part  that  were 
cited  at  the  beginning  of  Part  I. 

WITH  the  age  of  Aristotle,  Grecian  civilisation  stepped  out 
from  its  national  restrictions  and  into  the  great  general  movement 
in  which  the  peoples  of  antiquity  that  dwelt  about  the  Mediter- 
ranean, through  interchange  and  adjustment  of  their  ideas,  became 
fused  into  one  common  civilisation.  This  process  began  through 
the  union  of  Oriental  with  Greek  thought,  in  the  Hellenistic  states 
of  Alexander's  successors.  It  found  its  external  completion  in  the 
Roman  Empire,  its  internal  completion  in  Christianity.  Hellen- 
ism, Bomanism,  and  Christianity  were  the  three  stages  in  which  the 
world's  future  civilisation  developed  from  antiquity. 

The  intellectually  determining  element  in  this  union  was  Greek 
science,  and  herein  consists  its  significance  for  the  world's  history. 
It  became,  like  Greek  art,  the  common  possession  of  ancient  civili- 
sation. To  it  were  joined  step  by  step  the  highest  movements  in 
the  inner  life  of  the  peoples,  and  it  became  the  forming  power  for 
all  the  longings  and  impulses  that  lived  within  their  souls.  It 
was  with  the  fall  of  its  political  independence,  with  its  absorp- 
tion into  the  Empire,  that  the  Greek  nation  bought  the  accomplish- 
ment of  its  task  of  civilisation;  by  their  dispersal  over  the  world 
the  Greeks  became  the  teachers  of  the  world. 

But  in  connection  with  this  entrance  into  more  extended  relations, 
Greek  science  experienced  a  separation  of  the  different  elements 
which  were  united  in  it.  Together  with  the  purely  theoretical 
interest  in  which  it  had  originated,  and  which  had  found  so  clear 
an  expression  in  the  personality  and  teaching  of  Aristotle,  a  practi- 
cal interest  had  in  time  developed,  which  sought  in  science  the 
conviction  that  should  govern  life.  In  Plato's  philosophy  the  two 
were  inseparately  fused  together,  but  now  these  two  tendencies  of 
science  became  separated. 

Scientific  thought,  which  had  come  to  a  knowledge  of  its  own 
processes  in  the  Aristotelian  logic,  had  arrived  at  the  consciousness 

155 


156  Hellenistic-Roman  Philosophy.  [PART  II. 

of  fundamental  conceptions,  with  the  aid  of  which  it  could  use  the 
abundance  of  phenomena.  The  principal  opposing  theories  of  the 
interpretation  of  the  world  had  developed  in  the  great  systems,  and 
in  this  way  a  fixed  frame  or  setting  was  formed  for  the  scientific 
treatment  of  detail.  But  beginning,  as  it  did,  with  so  slightly  ex- 
tended a  knowledge  of  detail,  the  more  successful  Greek  science  was 
in  the  development  of  principles,  the  more  it  now  experienced  a 
crippling,  at  once  of  metaphysical  interest  and  metaphysical  force. 

In  consequence  of  this,  however,  the  theoretical  tendency  of  sci- 
ence was  toward  details,  and  the  fundamental  scientific  character  of 
the  Hellenistic- Roman  time  is  erudition  and  the  development  of  the 
special  sciences.  The  individual  man  of  science,  by  entrance  into 
one  of  the  great  schools,  gained  a  firm  support  of  collective  opinion, 
and  a  ruling  principle  for  the  treatment  of  separate  questions  and 
subjects  which  interested  him.  And  indifference  toward  general 
metaphysical  theories  was  the  greater,  the  more  it  appeared  that 
fruitful  investigation  in  special  provinces,  extension  of  knowledge 
of  facts,  and  comprehension  of  special  departments  of  science  were 
possible,  independently  of  the  strife  of  metaphysical  systems.  The 
separation  of  problems,  which  had  been  completed  typically  in  the 
Aristotelian  teaching  and  school,  led  necessarily  to  specialisation, 
and  the  purely  theoretical  interest  in  knowledge  for  its  own  sake 
developed,  during  the  Hellenistic-Eoman  period,  essentially  in  the 
individual  sciences.  The  great  savants  of  later  antiquity  stand,  it  is 
true,  in  loose  relations  with  one  school  or  another,  but  they  always 
show  themselves  indifferent  to  metaphysics.  So  it  happens  that 
during  this  time  production,  so  far  as  the  theoretical  principles  of 
philosophy  were  concerned,  was  extremely  small,  while  investiga- 
tion into  mathematics,  natural  science,  grammar,  philology,  literary 
and  general  history,  had  rich  and  comprehensive  results  to  record. 
With  the  great  mass  of  those  names  which  are  reckoned  as  "  philos- 
ophers,3' whether  heads  of  schools  or  associates  in  the  schools,  and 
which  are  continued  in  the  schematic  treatment  of  the  "  History  of 
Philosophy"  only  literary-historical  notices  are  connected,  as  that 
they  worked  specially  in  this  or  that  department ;  or  it  may  be  per- 
sonal information,  of  no  importance  to  philosophy,  as  that  they 
attached  themselves  to  this  or  that  one  among  the  earlier  teachers, 
—  almost  never  do  we  find  any  formation  of  new  and  original  con- 
ceptions. So  far  as  theoretical  knowledge  was  concerned,  this 
period  turned  the  old  problems  of  the  Greeks  hither  and  thither, 
and  moved  along  the  track  which  it  found  already  laid  down, 

So  much  the  more  powerfully,  during  these  centuries  of  appropri- 
ation and  elaboration,  did  the  practical  significance  of  philosophy 


Hellenistic-Roman  Philosophy.  157 

unfold  itself.  The  need  of  a  scientific  doctrine  of  the  ends  of 
human  life,  of  such  a  wisdom  as  should  guarantee  the  happiness  of 
the  individual,  could  but  become  more  urgent  as  the  ideal  structure 
of  Greek  life  fell  in  pieces,  as  the  religion  of  the  people  sank  ever 
more  and  more  to  an  external  traditions  as  the  crumbling  political 
life,  robbed  of  its  independence,  no  longer  awakened  devotion,  and 
the  individual  in  his  inner  life  felt  thrown  back  upon  himself. 
Thus  wisdom  for  the  conduct  of  life  became  the  fundamental  problem 
of  the  philosophy  which  followed  that  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  nar- 
rowing in  the  statement  of  the  philosophical  problem  which  Socrates, 
and  after  him  the  Cynic  and  Cyrenaic  schools  of  Sophistic  thought, 
had  begun,  is  the  general  character  of  the  succeeding  period. 

This  did  not  exclude  general  theoretical  doctrines  and  their 
sharply  championed  contests  from  assuming  airs  of  great  impor- 
tance during  this  period  j  but,  on  the  one  hand,  they  met  with  no 
original  interest  for  their  own  sake,  and  consequently  developed 
only  in  the  directions  which  were  determined  by  the  real  end  in 
view,  i.e.  that  of  wisdom  for  the  conduct  of  life;  on  the  other  hand, 
they  were  lacking  in  originality,  they  were  throughout  only  the  old 
traditions  shifted  about,  conditioned  by  the  fundamental  practical 
thoughts.  Even  such  comprehensive  systems  as  the  Stoic  and  the 
ISTeo-Platonic  work  only  with  the  conceptions  of  Greek  philosophy, 
in  order  to  gain  a  theoretical  basis  for  their  practical  ideal.  The 
key  to  their  theoretical  doctrines  lies  always  in  the  fundamental 
practical  conviction,  and  in  so  far  they  are  all  of  them  character- 
istic types  of  the  mingling  of  problems. 

With  this  predominance  of  practical  importance  is  connected  the 
fact  that  the  dependence  of  philosophy  upon  the  general  movement 
of  civilisation,  which  had  already  with  the  Sophists  made  its 
entrance  into  the  quiet  circle  of  disinterested  investigation,  became 
in  the  Hellenistic-Eoman  period  a  permanent  phenomenon,  and 
this  appears  most  decisively  in  the  changing  attitude  of  this  phi- 
losophy toward  religion. 

The  development  which  Greek  philosophy  had  taken,  and  the 
ever  more  sharply  pronounced  opposition  to  the  religion  of  the 
people  into  which  it  had  come,  brought  with  it  the  result  that 
the  special  task  of  that  wisdom  for  the  conduct  of  life  which  the 
post- Aristotelian  philosophy  sought,  was  to  find  a  compensation  for 
religious  faith.  The  cultured  world,  which  had  lost  the  support 
afforded  by  religion,  and  was  obliged  to  give  up  that  of  the  state 
also,  sought  it  in  philosophy.  As  a  result,  the  point  of  view  of  the 
Hellenistic-Eoman  wisdom  for  the  conduct  of  life  was  primarily 
that  of  individual  morality,  and  the  philosophy  which  busied  itself 


158  Hellenistic-Roman  Philosophy.  [PART  II. 

with  this  had,  consequently,  a  thoroughly  ethical  stamp.  The 
sharpness  of  the  opposition  of  this  individualistic  ethics  to  religion 
appears  most  clearly  among  the  Epicureans.  But  in  the  other 
schools,  also,  the  doctrines  of  the  deity  have  a  purely  ethical,  or 
perhaps  a  theoretical  interest,  but  none  that  is  specifically  religious. 

This  essentially  ethical  development  of  philosophy  reached  its 
completion  in  Greece,  especially,  indeed,  in  Athens,  which,  amid  all 
the  spread  of  Greek  culture  eastward  and  westward,  formed  for 
centuries  the  centre  of  scientific  life.  But  soon  new  centres  par- 
ticularly for  erudite  detailed  investigation,  arose  in  the  great  libra- 
ries and  museums,  in  Rhodes,  in  Pergamum,  in  Alexandria,  in 
Tarsus,  in  Rome,  and  later,  in  Antioch  and  Byzantium.  Of  these, 
Alexandria  became  especially  important,  where  not  only  did  elabora- 
tive  erudition  experience  so  typical  a  development,  that  the  entire 
direction  of  this  period  is  generally  called  "  literary-historical "  in 
accordance  with  it,  but  where,  also,  the  philosophical  direction  of 
the  time  experienced  its  decided  change. 

For  as  time  went  on  philosophy  could  not  remain  indifferent  to 
that  deep  feeling  of  dissatisfaction  which  had  seized  the  ancient 
world  in  the  midst  of  all  the  glory  of  the  Roman  Empire.  This 
huge  empire  offered  to  the  peoples  which  it  had  welded  together 
into  a  mighty  unit,  no  compensation  for  the  loss  of  their  national 
independence;  it  granted  them  neither  inner  worth  nor  outer  for- 
tune. The  draught  from  the  life  of  earth  had  become  insipid  to 
ancient  peoples,  and  they  thirsted  after  religion.  So  they  groped 
after  the  different  cults  and  religious  practices  which  individual 
peoples  had  brought  with  them,  and  the  religions  of  the  Orient 
became  mixed  with  those  of  the  Occident. 

Into  this  movement  philosophy  was  the  more  drawn,  the  more  it 
became  clear  that  it  could  not  satisfy  the  cultured  man  by  the 
presentation  of  its  ethical  ideal  of  life,  —  could  not  secure .  for  him 
the  promised  happiness.  It  followed  then  —  at  first,  in  Alexandria 
—  that  the  mingling,  surging  flood  of  religious  ideas  emptied  itself 
into  philosophy,  which  now  sought  to  build  up  upon  a  scientific 
basis,  not  only  an  ethical  conviction,  but  a  religion  as  well.  Philos- 
ophy employed  the  conceptions  of  Greek  science  to  clarify  and  put 
in  order  religious  ideas,  to  give  to  the  importunate  demand  of 
religious  feeling  an  idea  of  the  world  that  should  be  satisfactory 
to  it,  and  so  created  the  systems  of  religious  metaphysics,  in  more  or 
less  intimate  connection  with  the  contending  religions. 

Accordingly,  in  the  Hellenistic-Roman  philosophy  there  are  two 
distinct  periods  to  be  distinguished,  the  ethical  and  the  religious. 
The  last  century  B.C.  is  to  be  designated  as  the  time  in  which  the 
one  gradually  passed  over  into  the  other. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  ETHICAL  PEEIOD. 

THE  two  schools  of  the  great  masters  of  Attic  philosophy,  the 
Academic  and  the  Peripatetic,  followed  the  tendency  of  the  time 
which  separated  science  into  the  two  branches,  ethical  philosophy 
and  learned  investigation.  While  in  the  first  generation  of  the 
Academy  —  that  contemporary  with  Aristotle  —a  Pythagoreanising 
metaphysics  had  predominated,  this  made  room  in  the  next  period 
for  popular  moralising  (cf.  p.  101).  In  the  Lyceum,  indeed,  Theo- 
pkrastuSj  and  after  him,  Strata,  held  fast  to  the  development  and 
re-shaping  of  the  Aristotelian  metaphysics,  but  the  associates  of 
Theoprastus,  Diccearchus,  Aristoxenus,  and  others,  as  well  as  Theo- 
phrastus  himself,  turned  to  literary-historical  studies  and  to  natural 
science.  Later,  the  Peripatetics  had  a  great  share  in  the  Alexan- 
drian erudition,  and  the  history  of  philosophy  especially  found  in 
them  its  most  industrious  workers.  But  in  philosophy  itself  they 
played  only  the  conservative  role  of  defending  the  system  of  their 
school  against  the  attacks  of  the  others,  especially  upon  the  ethical 
domain,  and  the  new  edition  of  the  Aristotelian  works  by  Androni- 
cus  gave  new  stimulus  for  a  zealous  reproduction  of  his  teaching. 
Paraphrases,  commentaries,  excerpts,  and  interpretations  formed 
the  chief  occupation  of  the  later  Peripatetics. 

The  Academy  and  Lyceum  were,  however,  injured  in  their  work- 
ing by  the  two  schools  which  were  founded  toward  the  end  of  the 
fourth  century,  and  which  owed  their  great  success  to  the  fact  that 
they  formulated  the  tendency  of  the  time  toward  the  practical  wis- 
dom of  life  with  the  clearness  and  impressiveness  of  one-sidedness : 
namely,  the  Stoic  and  the  Epicurean. 

The  first  was  founded  in  the  3roa  Trot/a^  by  Zeno,  a  native  of 
Gitium  in  Cyprus,  and  had,  both  in  his  time  and  in  that  of  his  suc- 
cessor, Cleanthes,  more  likeness  to  Cynicism  than  in  the  time  of  its 
third  head,  Ohrysippus,  who  succeeded  in  turning  the  school  into  a 
more  scientific  course.  Epicurus}  on  the  contrary,  founded  a  society 
which  made  the  Hedonistic  principle,  in  a  refined  and  intellect- 

159 


160  Hellenistic-Roman  Philosophy.  [PART  II. 

ualised  form,  its  centre,  but  developed  only  a  slight  degree  of 
scientific  vitality.  While  numerous  adherents  were  won  to  its 
social-ethical  principle  then  established,  and  to  the  view  of  the 
world  connected  with  it,  as  these  were  continued  through  antiquity 
and  especially  in  the  Roman  world,  the  school  remained  decidedly 
more  unfruitful  scientifically  than  the  others,  as  well  in  the  special 
sciences  as  in  philosophy.  Its  doctrines  have  been  presented  in  an 
interesting  manner  by  the  Roman  poet,  Lucretius. 

These  four  schools  continued  side  by  side  in  Athens  for  centuries, 
and  in  the  time  of  the  Empire  they  were  still  maintained  in  various 
chairs  of  instruction,  and  formed  there  a  sort  of  university ;  but 
only  in  the  Academy,  and  here  only  with  great  gaps,  can  a  succes- 
sion of  heads  of  the  school  be  traced;  while  the  tradition  in  the 
case  of  the  Stoa  and  the  Epicureans  breaks  off  with  the  first  cen- 
tury B.C.,  and  for  the  Lyceum  soon  after  that  time. 

At  first,  however,  these  four  schools  contended  with  each  other  in 
the  liveliest  fashion  during  the  third  and  second  centuries  B.C.,  and 
it  was  especially  in  ethical  questions,  and  in  metaphysical,  physical, 
and  logical  questions  only  in  so  far  as  connected  with  the  ethical, 
that  they  sought  to  bear  away  the  palm  from  one  another.1 

But,  moving  along  side  by  side  with  the  dogmatic  doctrines  during 
the  whole  period  was  another  tendency,  which,  like  the  Stoic  and 
Epicurean  philosophy,  originated  in  the  teaching  of  the  Sophists : 
namely,  Scepticism.  It  did  not,  indeed,  take  on  the  form  of  an 
association  in  a  school,  but  it,  too,  was  brought  together  into  a  system- 
atic form,  and  found  an  ethical  culmination.  Such  a  concentration, 
in  accord  with  the  spirit  of  the  times,  of  the  negative  results  of  the 
teaching  of  the  Sophists,  was  achieved  by  Pyrrho,  whose  doctrines 
were  set  forth  by  Timon.  This  Sophistical  scepticism  had  the 
triumph  of  obtaining  possession  of  Plato's  grove  for  a  time ;  for,  if 
the  Middle  Academy  did  not  make  this  doctrine  fully  its  own,  it  made 
it  a  weapon  for  combating  Stoicism  and  grounding  its  own  ethics. 
In  this  phase  of  the  development  of  the  Academy  appear  the  two 
heads  of  the  school,  Arcesilaus  and  Carneades,  who  were  separated  by 
about  a  century.  In  after  time,  when  the  Academy  again  rejected 
Scepticism,  this  doctrine  met  with  sympathy  principally  among  the 
empirical  physicians,  among  whom,  even  at  the  end  of  this  period, 
dflnesidemus  and  Agrippa  are  to  be  mentioned.  A  complete  collec- 
tion of  the  doctrines  of  the  Sceptics,  made  at  a  much  later  time, 
is  preserved  in  the  works  of  Sextus  Empiricus. 


1  Cicero  in  his  philosophical  dialogues  gives  vivid  pictures  of  these  school  con- 
troversies, with  a  dextrous  use  of  the  original  sources. 


CHAP.  1.]  The  Ethical  Period.  161 

But  the  deeper  significance  of  this  Scepticism  was  that  it  brought 
to  expression  the  fundamental  frame  of  mind  which  had  seized  the 
entire  ancient  civilisation  as  it  had  once  seized  that  of  Greece,  —  a 
frame  of  mind  at  variance  with  the  true  ideal  import  and  content  of 
that  civilisation ;  and  the  same  lack  of  the  spirit  of  decided  convic- 
tion found  only  another  form  in  the  Eclecticism  which  began  to 
develop  in  the  second  half  of  the  second  century.  With  the  exten- 
sion of  the  schools  in  the  great  relations  of  the  life  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  the  school-spirit  disappeared,  polemic  was  crippled,  and  the 
need  of  adjustment  and  fusion  made  itself  felt  instead.  The  teleo- 
logical  view  of  the  world,  especially,  formed  the  basis  upon  which 
Platonism,  Aristotelianism,  and  Stoicism  could  agree  in  a  common 
opposition  against  Epicureanism. 

The  tendency  toward  such  a  fusion,  toward  syncretism,  first  awoke 
in  the  Stoic  school,  and  found  its  most  efficient  supporters  in  Pance- 
tius  and  Posidonius,  who  supplemented  the  doctrine  of  the  Stoa 
on  all  sides  by  borrowing  Platonic  and  Aristotelian  elements.  In 
opposition  to  them  stood  the  New  Academy,  which,  after  Philo  of 
Larissa  had  made  an  end  of  the  sceptical  episode  in  the  develop- 
ment of  the  school,  made  the  attempt,  through  Antioclms,  to  unite 
philosophy,  then  so  disunited,  upon  those  doctrines  in  which  Plato 
and  Aristotle  agree. 

Less  important,  because  'more  devoid  of  principles,  but  not,  there- 
fore, the  less  significant  historically,  was  that  sort  of  eclecticism 
which  the  Romans  employed  in  taking  up  Greek  philosophy.  This 
consisted  in  piecing  together,  from  an  essentially  practical  point  of 
view,  the  different  school  systems  which  met  their  approval.  This 
was  the  case  with  Cicero,  Varro,  and  in  part  with  the  school  of  the 
Sextians. 

Of  the  Peripatetic  School  (the  Lyceum),  the  co-founder  himself  is  primarily 
to  be  noticed,  Theophrastus  of  Erebus  in  Lesbos  (about  370-287),  a  somewhat 
younger  friend  of  Aristotle,  who  through  his  teachings  and  writings  won  great 
regard  for  the  school.  Of  his  works,  the  botanical,  also  a  fragment  of  the 
Metaphysics,  extracts  from  his  Characters,  from  the  treatise  concerning  percep- 
tion, from  his  history  of  physics,  and  some  isolated  fragments  are  preserved 
(edited  by  F.  Wimmer,  Breslau,  1842-62). 

With  him  appear  Eudemus  of  Rhodes,  Aristoxenus  of  Tarentum,  who 
studied  music  historically  and  theoretically  (Elements  der  Musik,  German  by 
R.  Westphal,  Leips.  1883),  Dicsearchus  of  Messina,  a  learned  polyhistor  who 
wrote  a  history  of  Grecian  civilisation  (jSfos  'EXXeSSos),  and  Strato  of  Lampsacus, 
who  was  head  of  the  school  (287-269)  and  had  as  surname  "  The  Physicist." 

Among  the  Peripatetic  doxographers,  Hermippus,  Sotion,  Satyrus,  Heracleides 
Lembus  (in  the  second  century  B.C.),  and  among  the  later  commentators, 
Alexander  of  Aphrodisias  (about  200  A.D.  in  Athens)  are  to  be  mentioned. 

The  Middle  Academy  begins  with  Arcesilaus  of  Pitane  in  ^Eolia  (about 
315-241),  whose  teachings  were  recorded  by  his  pupil  Lacydes,  and  ends  with 
Carneades  (in  Rome,  155)  and  his  successor  Clitomachus,  who  died  110.  Noth- 
ing remains  of  their  writings.  The  sources  are,  beside  Diogenes  Laertius,  prin- 
cipally Cicero  and  Sextus  Empiricus. 


160  Hellenistic-Roman  Philosophy.  [PART  II. 

ualised  form,  its  centre,  but  developed  only  a  slight  degree  of 
scientific  vitality.  While  numerous  adherents  were  won  to  its 
social-ethical  principle  then  established,  and  to  the  view  of  the 
world  connected  with  it,  as  these  were  continued  through  antiquity 
and  especially  in  the  Roman  world,  the  school  remained  decidedly 
more  unfruitful  scientifically  than  the  others,  as  well  in  the  special 
sciences  as  in  philosophy.  Its  doctrines  have  been  presented  in  an 
interesting  manner  by  the  Roman  poet,  Lucretius. 

These  four  schools  continued  side  by  side  in  Athens  for  centuries, 
and  in  the  time  of  the  Empire  they  were  still  maintained  in  various 
chairs  of  instruction,  and  formed  there  a  sort  of  university;  but 
only  in  the  Academy,  and  here  only  with  great  gaps,  can  a  succes- 
sion of  heads  of  the  school  be  traced;  while  the  tradition  in  the 
case  of  the  Stoa  and  the  Epicureans  breaks  off  with  the  first  cen- 
tury B.C.,  and  for  the  Lyceum  soon  after  that  time. 

At  first,  however,  these  four  schools  contended  with  each  other  in 
the  liveliest  fashion  during  the  third  and  second  centuries  B.C.,  and 
it  was  especially  in  ethical  questions,  and  in  metaphysical,  physical, 
and  logical  questions  only  in  so  far  as  connected  with  the  ethical, 
that  they  sought  to  bear  away  the  palm  from  one  another.1 

But,  moving  along  side  by  side  with  the  dogmatic  doctrines  during 
the  whole  period  was  another  tendency,  which,  like  the  Stoic  and 
Epicurean  philosophy,  originated  in  the  teaching  of  the  Sophists : 
namely,  Scepticism.    It  did  not,  indeed,  take  on  the  form  of  an 
association  in  a  school,  but  it,  too,  was  brought  together  into  a  system- 
atic form,  and  found  an  ethical  culmination.    Such  a  concentration, 
in  accord  with  the  spirit  of  the  times,  of  the  negative  results  of  the 
teaching  of  the  Sophists,  was  achieved  by  Pyrrho,  whose  doctrines 
were  set  forth  by  Timon.    This  Sophistical  scepticism   had  the 
triumph  of  obtaining  possession  of  Plato's  grove  for  a  time;  for,  if 
the  Middle  Academy  did  not  make  this  doctrine  fully- its  own,  it  made 
it  a  weapon  for  combating  Stoicism  and  grounding  its  own  ethics. 
In  this  phase  of  the  development  of  the  Academy  appear  the  two 
heads  of  the  school,  Arcesilaus  and  Carneades,  who  were  separated  by 
about  a  century.    In  after  time,  when  the  Academy  again  rejected 
Scepticism,  this  doctrine  met  with  sympathy  principally  among  the 
empirical  physicians,  among  whom,  even  at  the  end  of  this  period, 
jffinesidemus  and  Agrippa  are  to  be  mentioned.    A  complete  collec- 
tion of  the  doctrines  of  the  Sceptics,  made  at  a  much  later  time, 
is  preserved  in  the  works  of  Sextus  Empiricus. 


1  Cicero  in  his  philosophical  dialogues  gives  vivid  pictures  of  these  school  con- 
troversies, with  a  dextrous  use  of  the  original  sources. 


CHAP.  1.]  The  Ethical  Period.  161 

But  the  deeper  significance  of  this  Scepticism  was  that  it  brought 
to  expression  the  fundamental  frame  of  mind  which  had  seized  the 
entire  ancient  civilisation  as  it  had  once  seized  that  of  Greece,  —  a 
frame  of  mind  at  variance  with  the  true  ideal  import  and  content  of 
that  civilisation ;  and  the  same  lack  of  the  spirit  of  decided  convic- 
tion found  only  another  form  in  the  Eclecticism  which  began  to 
develop  in  the  second  half  of  the  second  century.  "With  the  exten- 
sion of  the  schools  in  the  great  relations  of  the  life  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  the  school-spirit  disappeared,  polemic  was  crippled,  and  the 
need  of  adjustment  and  fusion  made  itself  felt  instead.  The  teleo- 
logical  view  of  the  world,  especially,  formed  the  basis  upon  which 
Platonisrn,  Aristotelianisnij  and  Stoicism  could  agree  in  a  common 
opposition  against  Epicureanism. 

The  tendency  toward  such  a  fusion,  toward  syncretism,  first  awoke 
in  the  Stoic  school,  and  found  its  most  efficient  supporters  in  Pance- 
tius  and  Posidonius,  who  supplemented  the  doctrine  of  the  Stoa 
on  all  sides  by  borrowing  Platonic  and  Aristotelian  elements.  In 
opposition  to  them  stood  the  New  Academy,  which,  after  PMo  of 
Larissa  had  made  an  end  of  the  sceptical  episode  in  the  develop- 
ment of  the  school,  made  the  attempt,  through  Antiochus,  to  unite 
philosophy,  then  so  disunited,  upon  those  doctrines  in  which  Plato 
and  Aristotle  agree. 

Less  important,  because  'more  devoid  of  principles,  but  not,  there- 
fore, the  less  significant  historically,  was  that  sort  of  eclecticism 
which  the  Romans  employed  in  taking  up  Greek  philosophy.  This 
consisted  in  piecing  together,  from  an  essentially  practical  point  of 
view,  the  different  school  systems  which  met  their  approval.  This 
was  the  case  with  Cicero,  Varro,  and  in  part  with  the  school  of  the 
Sextians. 

Of  the  Peripatetic  School  (the  Lyceum),  the  co-founder  himself  is  primarily 
to  be  noticed,  Theophrastus  of  Erebus  in  Lesbos  (about  370-287),  a  somewhat 
younger  friend  of  Aristotle,  who  through  his  teachings  and  writings  won  great 
regard  for  the  school.  Of  his  works,  the  botanical,  also  a  fragment  of  the 
Metaphysics,  extracts  from  his  Characters,  from  the  treatise  concerning  percep- 
tion, from  his  history  of  physics,  and  some  isolated  fragments  are  preserved 
(edited  by  F.  Wimmer,  Breslau,  1842-62). 

With  him  appear  Eudemua  of  Rhodes,  Aristoxenus  of  Tarentum,  who 
studied  music  historically  and  theoretically  (Elements  tier  Musik^  German  by 
B.  Westphal,  Leips.  1883),  Dicaearchus  of  Messina,  a  learned  polyhistor  who 
wrote  a  history  of  Grecian  civilisation  (/3(o*  'EXXdSos),  and  Strato  of  Lampsacus, 
who  was  head  of  the  school  (287-269)  and  had  as  surname  »*  The  Physicist." 

Among  the  Peripatetic  doxographers,  Hermippus,  Sotion,  Satyrus,  Heracleides 
Lemhus  (in  the  second  century  B.C.),  and  among  the  later  commentators, 
Alexander  of  Aphrodisias  (about  200  A.D.  in  Athens)  are  to  be  mentioned. 

The  Middle  Academy  begins  with  Arcesilaus  of  Pitane  in  J&olia  (about 
315-241),  whose  teachings  were  recorded  by  his  pupil  Lacydes,  and  ends  with 
Carneades  (in  Rome,  155)  and  his  successor  Clitomachus,  who  died  110.  Noth- 
ing remains  of  their  writings.  The  sources  are,  beside  Diogenes  Laertius,  prin- 
cipally Cicero  and  Sextus  Empiricus. 


162         Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Ethical  Period.     [PART  IL 

Just  as  indirect  and  general  in  its  character  is  our  knowledge  of  the  Wew 
Academy.  Philo  of  Larissa  was  still  in  Rome  in  87.  His  successor,  Antio- 
chus  of  Ascalon,  was  heard  by  Cicero  in  Athens  in  78.  To  the  supporters  of 
eclectic  Platonism  in  this  first,  essentially  ethical  form  belong  among  others 
Arius  Didymus,  who  inclined  strongly  to  Stoicism  (in  the  time  of  Augustus), 
and  Thrasyllus  (under  Tiberius),  who  prepared  an  edition  of  the  works  of 
Democritus  and  Plato,  arranged  according  to  subjects.  An  extensive  literature 
of  paraphrase  and  commentary  connected  with  Plato's  works  also  developed  in 
the  Academy. 

When  we  consider  the  personality  of  the  Stoic  School,  we  are  struck  by  the 
frequency  of  the  descent  of  its  members  from  the  Hellenistic  mixed  races  of  the 
Orient.  Thus  the  founder,  Zeno  (about  340-265),  came  from  his  Cyprian  home 
as  a  merchant  to  Athens,  and  there,  taken  captive  by  philosophy,  is  said  to 
have  absorbed  the  doctrines  of  the  different  schools,  to  found  his  own  in  the 
year  SOS.  His  principal  pupil  was  Cleanthes  of  Assos  in  Troas,  from  whose 
writings  a  monotheistic  hymn  to  Zeus  is  preserved,  Stob.  Eel.  I.  30  (Wachs- 
muth,  p.  25).  The  scientific  head  of  the  school  was  Chrysippus  (280-209)  of 
Soli  or  Tarsus  in  Cilicia.  He  is  said  to  have  written  an  extraordinary  amount, 
but,  aside  from  the  titles,  only  very  unimportant  fragments  of  his*  works  are 
preserved.  Cf.  G.  Bagnet  (Loewen,  1822).  Among  the  literary-historical 
savants  of  the  Stoic  School,  Diogenes  of  Babylon  and  ApoUodonis  are  to  be 
mentioned  ;  Aristarchus  and  Eratosthenes  stood  in  close  relation  to  the  school. 

Pansetius  (180-110),  who  was  strongly  influenced  by  the  Academic  scepticism 
and  who  maintained  a  close  relation  with  the  Roman  statesmen,  began  the  syn- 
cretistic  development  of  the  Stoa,  which  was  completed  by  Posidonius  of  Syrian 
Apamea  (about  135-50).  The  latter  was  one  of  the  greatest  polyhistors  of 
antiquity,  especially  in  the  geographico-historical  domain.  He  taught  in  Rhodes, 
and  was  heard  by  many  young  Romans,  among  whom  was  Cicero. 

Concerning  the  Stoics  of  the  time  of  the  Empire,  cf.  the  following  chapter. 
Sources  for  the  Stoic  doctrines  are  Cicero  and  Diogenes  Laertius,  Book  VIL,  in 
part  also  the  exiant  writings  of  the  Stoics  of  the  time  of  the  Empire,  and  the 
discoveries  at  Herculaneum. 

IX  Tiedmann,  System  far  stoischen  Philosophie  (3  vote.,  Leips.  1776)  ;  P. 
Weygoldt,  Die  Philosophic  der  Stoa  (Leips.  1883) ;  P.  Ogereau,  Essai  sur  le 
Sy steme  PhilosopMque  des  Stoiciens  (Paris,  1885) ;  L.  Stein,  Die  Psychologie 
for  Stoa  (2  vote.,  Berlin,  1886-88)  ;  [Capes,  Stoicism,  Lond.  1880], 

Epicurus  (341-270),  born  in  Samos,  the  son  of  an  Athenian  schoolmaster, 
had  already  made  attempts  at  teaching  in  Mitylene  and  in  Lampsacus,  before 
founding  in  Athens,  in  306,  the  society  which  is  named  after  his  "gardens" 
(fcijiro:,  horti,  as  also  the  other  schools  were  named  after  the  places  where  they 
assembled).  He  was  much  loved  as  a  teacher,  on  account  of  his  companionable 
qualities.  Of  his  numerous  writings  lightly  thrown  off,  the  proverbs  (/ci/piew 
86&L),  three  didactic  letters,  parts  of  his  treatise  irepl  0v;rews  (in  the  discoveries 
at  Herculaneum),  and  besides  only  scattered  fragments  are  preserved ;  collected 
and  arranged  systematically  by  H.  Usener,  Epicure®  (Leips,  1887). 

Among  the  great  mass  of  his  followers,  antiquity  brings  into  prominence  his 
closest  friend  Metrodorus  of  Lampsacus  j  also  Zeno  of  Sidon  (about  150)  and 
Phsedrus  (about  100  B.  c. ) .  Fhilodemus  of  Gadara  in  Coele-Syria  has  become  a 
somewhat  more  distinct  figure  to  us  since  a  part  of  his  writings  has  been  found 
at  Herculaneum  (Herculanensium  voluminum  qua*  supersunt,  first  series,  Naples, 
179; »  ff. ;  second,  18131  ff.) ;  the  most  valuable,  rcpl  c^Aw  KO.I  o"nu£td><rcw  (cf. 
Fr  Bahusch,  Lyck,  1879 ;  H.  v.  Arnim,  Philodemea*  Halle,  1888). 

The  didactic  poem  of  Tit.  Lucretius  Cams  (98-54),  De  Natum  Serum,  in  six 
books,  has  been  edited  by  Lachmann  (Berlin,  1850)  and  Jac.  Bernays  (Leips. 
1852)  ;  [Eng.  ed.  with  tr.  of  the  poem  by  Munro,  Loud.  1886.  Cf.  Tlie  Atomic 
Theory  of  Lucretius,  by  J.  Masson,  Lond.  1884]. 

Further  sources  are  Cicero  and  Diogenes  Laertius,  in  the  tenth  book. 

Cf.  M.  Guyau,  La  Morale  $  Epicure  (Paris,  1878);  P.  v.  Gizycki,  Ueber  das 
Leben  und  die  Moralphilosophie  des  Epikur  (Berlin,  1879) :  W.  Wallace  Epi- 
cureanism (Lond.  1880);  [Wallace,  Art.  Ep.  in  Enc.  Brit.;  W.  L.  Courtney. 
Sp.  in  aellenicct]. 


CHAP.  1,  §  14.]  Ideal  of  the  Sage.  163 

Scepticism,  as  accords  with  the  nature  of  the  case,  makes  its  appearance, 
not  as  a  close  school,  but  in  looser  form.1  It  remains  doubtful  whether  the  sys- 
tematiser  of  Scepticism,  Pyrrho  of  Elis  (perhaps  365-275),  had  any  intimate 
relations  with  the  Socratic-Sophistic  school  of  his  native  city.  A  certain  Bryso, 
•who  passes  for  the  son  of  Stilpo,  is  looked  upon  as  an  intermediate  link.  He 
accompanied  Alexander  on  his  journey  to  Asia,  together  with  a  follower  of 
Democritus,  Anaxarchus  by  name.  The  Sillograph,  Tirnon  of  Phlius  (320-230, 
the  latter  part  of  the  time  at  Athens)  from  Pyrrho's  standpoint  derides  philoso- 
phers. Fragments  of  his  writings  in  C.  Wachsmuth,  De  Timone  Phliasio 
(Leips.  1859).  Cf.  Ch.  Waddington,  Pyrrhon  (Paris,  1877). 

The  external  relations  of  later  Scepticism  are  very  obscure  and  uncertain. 
JEnesidemus  from  Cnossus  taught  in  Alexandria,  and  composed  a  treatise, 
TLvpp&veLoi  Xo7oi,  of  which  nothing  remains.  His  life  falls  probably  in  the  first 
century  B.C.,  yet  it  has  also  been  set  almost  two  centuries  later.  Of  Agrippa, 
nothing  in  detail  can  be  established.  The  literary  representative  of  Scepticism 
is  the  physician  Seztus  Empiricus,  who  lived  about  200  A.D.,  and  of  his  writ- 
ings there  are  extant  his  Outline  Sketches  of  Pyrrhonism  (Uvpp^veioi  fnTorvircha-e^, 
and  the  investigations  comprehended  under  the  name  Adversus  Ifathematicos, 
of  which  Books  VII.-XI.  contain  the  exposition  of  the  sceptical  doctrine,  with 
many  valuable  historical  notices  (ed.  by  J.  Bekker,  Berlin,  1842). 

Cf.  K.  Staudlin,  Gesch.  und  Geist  des  Skepticismus  (Leips.  1794-95)  ;  N. 
Maccoll,  The  Greek  Sceptics  (London,  186D)  ;  L.  Haas,  De  Philosophorum 
Scepticorum  Successionibus  OVttrzburg,  1875) ;  [Owen,  Evenings  icith  the  Scep- 
tics (Lond.  1881)  ;  A.  Seth,  Art.  Scepticism,  in  Em.  Brit.]. 

Among  the  Romans,  the  admission  of  philosophy  at  first  encountered  violent 
resistance  j  but  by  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.C.  it  was  the  general 
custom  for  the  young  Romans  of  superior  rank  to  study  in  Athens  or  Rhodes, 
and  to  hear  the  lectures  of  the  heads  of  schools,  for  the  same  end  as  that  for  which 
the  Athenians  had  formerly  heard  the  Sophists.  The  literary  activity  of  ifareus 
Tullius  Cicero  (106-43)  must  be  judged  from  the  point  of  view  of  his  purpose, 
which  was  to  awaken  among  his  countrymen  an  inclination  for  general  scien- 
tific culture  and  a  comprehension  of  its  meaning,  and  from  this  standpoint  his 
work  is  to  be  highly  prized.  Skill  in  composition  and  grace  of  form  excuse  the 
lack  of  proper  philosophising  ability,  which  is  shown  in  a  selection  of  doctrines 
based  on  no  philosophical  principle.  The  main  treatises  are  De  Finibus,  De 
Officiis,  TusculancB  Disputationes,  Academic,  De  Xatura  Deorum,  De  Fato, 
De  Dimnatione.  Cf.  Herbart,  Ueber  die  Philosophie  des  Cicero;  in  Works, 
XII.  167  ff.  [Trans,  of  the  above  writings  of  Cicero  in  the  Bohn.  Lib.] 

His  friend,  M.  Terentius  Varro  (116-27),  the  well-known  polyhistor  and 
prolific  writer,  was  more  learned,  but  of  his  labours  toward  the  history  of  philos- 
ophy only  occasional  notes  are  extant. 

Quintus  Sextus  and  a  son  of  the  same  name  and  Sotion  of  Alexandria  are 
named  as  Sextians.  Sotion  seems  to  have  been  the  intermediate  link  in  which 
the  Stoic  morals  were  brought  into  union  with  the  Alexandrian  Py  thagoreanism, 
and  given  that  religious  turn  which  characterises  them  in  the  time  of  the  Empire. 
Some  of  their  Sentences,  discovered  in  a  Syrian  translation,  have  been  edited 
by  Gildemeister  (Bonn,  1873). 

On  the  literary  conditions  of  this  whole  period  cf .  R.  Hirzel,  Untersuchungen 
zu  Cicero's philosophischen  Schriften  (3  vols.,  Leips.  1877-83). 

§  14.  The  Ideal  of  the  Wise  Man. 

The  fundamental  ethical  tendency  of  the  philosophising  of  this 
entire  period  is  still  more  precisely  characterised  by  the  fact  that 
it  is  throughout  individual  ethics  that  forms  the  centre  of  investiga- 
tion in  this  time  of  epigones.  The  elevation  to  the  ideals  of  ethical 

1  Hence  all  reckonings  by  the  successions  of  heads  of  the  school,  attempted 
in  order  to  fix  the  chronology  of  the  later  Sceptics,  are  illusory. 


164         Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.      [PART  IT. 

community,  in  which  morals  culminated  with  both  Plato  and  Aris- 
totle, was  a  glorification  that  had  become  foreign  to  its  time,  of 
that  through  which  Greece  had  become  great,  viz.  the  thought 
of  an  active,  living  state.  This  had  lost  power  over  the  hearts  of 
men,  and  even  in  the  schools  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  it  found  so 
little  sympathy  that  the  Academicians,  as  well  as  the  Peripatetics, 
brought  into  the  foreground  the  question  of  individual  happiness 
and  virtue.  TYhat  is  preserved  from  the  treatise  of  the  Academi- 
cian Grantor,  On  Grief,1  or  from  the  works  of  Theophrastus  under 
the  title  of  Ethical  Characters,  stands  wholly  upon  the  footing  of  a 
philosophy  that  esteems  the  right  appreciation  of  the  good  things 
of  life  to  be  its  essential  object. 

In  the  endless  discussions  on  these  questions  in  which  the  schools 
engaged  in  the  following  centuries,  the  successors  of  the  two  great 
thinkers  of  Attic  philosophy  found  themselves  in  an  attitude  of 
common  opposition  to  the  new  schools.  Both  had  pursued  through 
the  entire  circuit  of  empirical  reality  the  realisation  of  the  Idea  of 
the  Good,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  idealism  with  which  Plato 
especially  strove  to  transcend  the  world  of  the  senses,  they  had 
not  failed  to  appreciate  the  relative  value  of  this  world's  goods. 
Highly  as  they  prized  virtue,  they  yet  did  not  exclude  the  view  that 
for  the  complete  happiness  of  man 2  the  favour  of  external  fortune, 
health,  prosperity,  etc.,  are  requisite  also,  and  they  denied  espe- 
cially the  doctrine  of  the  Cynics  and  Stoics  that  virtue  is  not 
only  the  highest  (as  they  admitted),  but  also  the  sole  good. 

At  all  events,  however,  they  too  laboured  to  determine  the  right 
conduct  of  life  which  promised  to  make  man  happy,  and  while 
individual  members  of  the  schools  pursued  their  special  researches, 
the  public  activity,  especially  that  of  the  heads  of  the  schools 
in  their  polemic  with  their  opponents,  was  directed  to  the  end  of 
drawing  the  picture  of  the  normal  man.  This  it  was  that  the  time 
desired  of  philosophy :  "  Show  us  how  the  man  must  be  constituted 
who  is  sure  of  his  happiness,  whatever  the  fortune  of  the  world 
may  bring  him ! "  That  this  normal  man  must  be  called  the  able, 
the  virtuous,  and  that  he  can  owe  his  virtue  only  to  insight,  to 
knowledge,  that  he  therefore  must  be  the  "wise"  man, — this  is 
the  presupposition  arising  from  the  Socratic  doctrine,  which  is 
recognised  as  self-evident  by  all  parties  during  this  entire  period ; 
and  therefore  all  strive  to  portray  the  ideal  of  the  wise  man,  i.e. 
of  the  man  whom  his  insight  makes  virtuous,  and  so,  happy. 

1  Cf.  F.  Kayser  (Heidelberg,  1841). 

2  This  Aristotelian  view  was  completely  assented  to  by  Speusippus  and  Xen- 
ocrates  of  the  Older  Academy. 


CHAP.  1,  §  14.]         Ideal  of  the  Sage  :  Epicurus.  165 

1.  The  most  prominent  characteristic  in  the  conception  of  the 
"wise  man,"  as  determined  in  this  period,  is,  therefore,  imperturbd- 
bility  (ataraxy,  arapa&a).  Stoics,  Epicureans,  and  Sceptics  are  un- 
wearied in  praising  this  independence  of  the  world  as  the  desirable 
quality  of  the  wise  man :  he  is  free,  a  king,  a  god ;  whatever  hap- 
pens to  him,  it  cannot  attack  his  knowledge,  his  virtue,  his  happi- 
ness ;  his  wisdom  rests  in  himself,  and  the  world  does  not  trouble 
him.  This  ideal,  as  thus  portrayed,  is  characteristic  of  its  time; 
the  normal  man,  for  this  period,  is  not  he  who  works  and  creates 
for  the  sake  of  great  purposes,  but  he  who  knows  how  to  free  him- 
self  from  the  external  world,  and  find  his  happiness  in  himself  alone. 
The  inner  isolation  of  individuals,  and  indifference  toward  general 
ends,  find  here  sharp  expression:  the  overcoming  of  the  outer  world 
conditions  the  happiness  of  the  wise  man. 

But  since  he  has  no  power  over  the  world  without  him,  he  must 
overcome  it  within  himself;  he  must  become  master  of  the  effects 
which  it  exercises  upon  him.  These  effects,  however,  consist  in 
the  feelings  and  desires  which  the  world  and  life  excite  in  man ; 
they  are  disturbances  of  his  own  nature — emotions,  or  passions 
(7ra&7,  affectus).  Wisdom  is  shown,  therefore,  in  the  relation 
which  man  maintains  to  his  passions.1  It  is  essentially  freedom 
from  passions  or  emotions,  emotionlessness  (apathy,  axrafeio,  is  the 
Stoic  expression).  To  rest  unmoved  within  one's  self,  this  is  the 
blessing  of  this  "  wisdom." 

The  terms  with  which  this  doctrine  is  introduced  in  the  case  of 
Epicurus  and  Pyrrho  point  immediately  to  a  dependence  upon 
Aristippus  and  Democritus.  It  corresponds  to  the  gradual  trans- 
formation which  took  place  in  the  Hedonistic  school  (cf .  §  7, 9)  that 
Epicurus,2  who  made  its  principle  his  own,  and  likewise  designated 
pleasure  as  the  highest  good,  nevertheless  preferred  the  permanent 
frame  of  satisfaction  and  rest  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  moment. 
The  Cyrenaics  also  had  found  the  essence  of  pleasure  in  gentle 
motion;  but — Epicurus  held — that  is  still  a  "pleasure  in  motion v ; 
and  the  state  of  painless  rest,  free  from  all  wishes  (^Sovi?  KOLTao-TTj- 
fjumKy),  is  of  higher  value.  Even  the  zest  and  spirit  of  enjoy- 
ment has  become  lost ;  the  Epicurean  would  indeed  gladly  enjoy 


1  The  ancient  conception  of  the  passions  (Affect),  extending  into  modern 
time  (Spinoza),  is  accordingly  wider  than  that  of  the  present  psychology.    It  is 
best  defined  by  the  Latin  translation  " perturbationes  animi^  "emotions,"  and 
includes  all  states  of  feeling  and  will  in  which  man  is  dependent  upon  the  outer 
world. 

2  As  intermediate  links,  the  younger  followers  of  Democritus,  strongly  tinc- 
tured with  Sophistic  doctrine,  are  named;  especially  a  certain  Naitsiphanes, 
whom  Epicurus  heard. 


166         Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.      [PART  n. 

all  pleasure,  but  it  must  not  excite  him  or  set  him  in  motion. 
Peace  of  soul  (yaXrjvurfios,  cf.  §  10,  o)  is  all  that  he  wishes,  and  he 
anxiously  avoids  the  storms  which  threaten  it,  Le.  the  passions. 

Epicurus  therefore  recognised  the  logical  consistency  with  which 
the  Cynics  had  characterised  absence  of  icants  as  virtue  and  happi- 
ness ;  but  he  was  far  from  seriously  renouncing  pleasure,  as  they 
did.  The  wise  man  must,  to  be  sure,  understand  this  also,  and  act 
accordingly,  as  soon  as  it  becomes  requisite  in  the  course  of  things, 
But  his  satisfaction  will  be  greater  in  proportion  as  the  compass  of 
the  wishes  which  he  finds  satisfied  is  fuller.  Just  for  this  reason, 
he  needs  the  insight  (<j>p6vrjo-i?)  which  not  only  makes  it  possible  to 
estimate  the  different  degrees  of  pleasure  and  pain  as  determined 
through  the  feelings,  which  are  to  be  expected  in  a  particular  case, 
but  also  decides  whether  and  hovr  far  one  should  give  place  to  indi- 
vidual wishes.  In  this  aspect  Epicureanism  distinguished  three 
kinds  of  wants :  some  are  natural  (<£wrei)  and  unavoidable,  so  that, 
since  it  is  not  possible  to  exist  at  all  without  their  satisfaction,  even 
the  wise  man  cannot  free  himself  from  them;  others,  again,  are  only 
conventional  (vopy),  artificial,  and  imaginary,  and  the  wise  man  has 
to  see  through  their  nothingness  and  put  them  from  him ;  between 
the  two,  however  (here  Epicurus  opposes  the  radically  one-sided 
nature  of  Cynicism),  lies  the  great  mass  of  those  wants  which  have 
their  natural  right,  but  are  not  indeed  indispensable  for  existence. 
Hence  the  wise  man  can  in  case  of  necessity  renounce  them ;  but 
since  the  satisfaction  of  these  gives  happiness,  he  will  seek  to  satisfy 
them  as  far  as  possible.  Complete  blessedness  falls  to  his  lot  who 
rejoices  in  all  these  good  things  in  quiet  enjoyment,  without  stormy 
striving. 

On  the  same  ground,  Epicurus  prized  mental  joys  higher  than 
physical  enjoyments  which  are  connected  with  passionate  agitation. 
But  he  seeks  the  joys  of  the  mind,  not  in  pure  knowledge,  but  in 
the  aesthetic  refinement  of  life,  in  that  intercourse  with  friends 
which  is  pervaded  by  wit  and  sentiment  and  touched  with  delicacy, 
in  the  comfortable  arrangement  of  daily  living.  Thus  the  wise 
man,  in  quiet,  creates  for  himself  the  blessedness  of  self -enjoyment, 
independence  of  the  moment,  of  its  demands  and  its  results.  He 
knows  what  he  can  secure  for  himself,  and  of  this  he  denies  himself 
nothing  j  but  he  is  not  so  foolish  as  to  be  angry  at  fate  or  to  lament 
that  he  cannot  possess  everything.  This  is  his  "  ataraxy,"  or  im- 
passiveness :  an  enjoyment  like  that  of  the  Hedonists,  but  more 
refined,  more  intellectual,  and  —  more  blast. 

2.   Pyrrho's  Hedonism  took  another  direction,  inasmuch  as  he 
sought  to  draw  the  practical  result  from  the  sceptical  teachings  of 


CHAP.  1,  §  14.]       Ideal  of  the  Sage :  Pyrrlo,  Stoics.  167 

the  Sophists.  According  to  the  exposition  of  his  disciple,  Timon,  he 
held  it  to  be  the  task  of  science  to  investigate  the  constitution 
of  things,  in  order  to  establish  man's  appropriate  relations  to  them, 
and  to  know  what  he  may  expect  to  gain  from  them.1  But  accord- 
ing to  Pyrrho's  theory  it  has  become  evident  that  we  can  never 
know  the  true  constitution  of  things  but  at  the  most  can  know 
only  states  of  feelings  (TTC^)  into  which  these  put  us  (Protagoras, 
Aristippus).  If,  however,  there  is  no  knowledge  of  things,  it 
cannot  be  determined  what  the  right  relation  to  them  is,  and 
what  the  success  that  will  result  from  our  action.  This  scepticism 
is  the  negative  reverse  side  to  the  Socratic-Platonic  inference.  As 
there,  from  the  premise  that  right  action  is  not  possible  without 
knowledge,  the  demand  had  been  made  that  knowledge  must  be 
possible,  so  here  the  argument  is,  that  because  there  is  no  knowl- 
edge, right  action  is  also  impossible. 

Under  these  circumstances  all  that  remains  for  the  wise  man  is 
to  resist  as  far  as  possible  the  seducements  to  opinion  and  to  action, 
to  which  the  mass  of  men  are  subject.  All  action  proceeds,  as 
Socrates  had  taught,  from  our  ideas  of  things  and  their  value ;  all 
foolish  and  injurious  actions  result  from  incorrect  opinions.  The 
wise  man,  however,  who  knows  that  nothing  can  be  affirmed  as  to 
things  themselves  (a<£ao-ta),  and  that  no  opinion  may  be  assented  to 
(aKCLTaXTjiffui)  ,2  restrains  himself,  as  far  as  possible,  from  judgment, 
and  thereby  also  from  action.  He  withdraws  into  himself,  and  in 
the  suspension  (ero^)  s  of  judgment,  which  preserves  him  from 
passion  and  from  false  action,  he  finds  imperturbability,  rest  within 
himself,  ataraxy. 

This  is  the  Sceptical  virtue,  which  also  aims  to  free  man  from  the 
world,  and  it  finds  its  limit  only  in  the  fact  that  there  are,  never- 
theless, relations  in  which  even  the  wise  man,  withdrawn  within 
himself,  must  act,  and  when  nothing  else  remains  for  him  than  to  act 
according  to  that  which  appears  to  him,  and  according  to  tradition. 

3.  A  deeper  conception  of  the  process  of  overcoming  the  world  in 
man.  was  formed  by  the  Stoics.  At  the  beginning,  to  be  sure,  they 
professed  quite  fully  the  Cynic  indifference  toward  all  goods  of  the 
outer  world,  and  the  self-control  of  the  virtuous  wise  man  remained 
stamped  upon  their  ethics  also  as  an  ineradicable  feature ;  but  they 

1  Euseb.  Praep.  Ev.  XIV.  18,  2.    The  doctrine  of  Pyrrlio  is  shown  by  this  to 
be  in  exact  coincidence  with  the  tendency  of  the  time  ;  It  asks,  "  What  are  we 
to  do,  then,  if  there  is  no  knowledge  ?  " 

2  An  expression  which  was  probably  formed  in  the  polemic  against  the  Stole 
conception  of  /carciX^T/as ;  cf.  §  17. 

*  The  Sceptics  were  called  also  the  tyeicriKoL  ["  Suspenders  "]  with  reference 
to  this  term,  characteristic  for  them. 


168         Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Ethical  Period.     [PART  II. 

soon  dulled  the  edge  of  the  radical  naturalism  of  the  Cynics  by  a 
penetrating  psychology  of  the  impulsive  life,  which  shows  a  strong 
dependence  upon  Aristotle.  They  emphasise,  still  more  than  the 
Stagirite,  the  unity  and  independence  of  the  individual  soul,  as  con- 
trasted-with  its  particular  states  and  activities,  and  so,  with  them, 
personality  first  becomes  a  determinative  principle.  The  leading, 
power,  or  governing  part  of  the  soul  (TO  ^-ye/iow/coV),  is,  for  them,  not 
only  that  which  makes  perceptions  out  of  the  excitations  of  the 
individual  organs  in  sensation,  but  also  that  which  by  its  assent  * 
{<nryKcrra0ecris)  transforms  excitations  of  the  feelings  into  activities 
of  the  will.  This  consciousness,  whose  vocation  is  to  apprehend 
and  form  its  contents  as  a  unity,  is,  according  to  its  proper  and 
true  nature,  reason  (vo£s)  ;  the  states,  therefore,  in  which  conscious- 
ness allows  itself  to  be  hurried  along  to  assent  by  the  violence  of 
excitement  contradict,  in  like  measure,  its  own  nature  and  reason. 
These  states  (affectus)  are,  then,  those  of  passion  (vaJ^rf)  and  dis- 
ease of  the  soul;  they  are  perturbations  of  the  soul,  contrary  to 
Isature  and  contrary  to  reason.2  Hence  the  wise  man,  if  he  cannot 
defend  himself  from  those  excitations  of  feeling  in  presence  of  the 
world,  will  deny  them  his  assent  with  the  power  of  reason ;  he  does 
not  allow  them  to  become  passions  or  emotions,  his  virtue  is  the 
absence  of  emotions  (dra^ta).  His  overcoming  of  the  world  is  his 
overcoming  of  his  own  impulses.  It  is  not  until  we  give  our  assent 
that  we  become  dependent  upon  the  course  of  things ;  if  we  with- 
hold it,  our  personality  remains  immovable,  resting  upon  itself.  If 
man  cannot  hinder  fate  from  preparing  for  him  pleasure  and  pain, 
he  may,  nevertheless,  by  esteeming  the  former  as  not  a  good,  and 
the  latter  as  not  an  evil,  keep  the  proud  consciousness  of  his  self- 
sufficiency. 

Hence,  in  itself,  virtue  is  for  the  Stoics  the  sole  good,  and  on  the 
other  hand,  vice,  which  consists  in  the  control  of  the  reason  by  the 
passions,  is  the  sole  evil,  and  all  other  things  and  relations  are 
regarded  as  in  themselves  indifferent  (d&a<£opa)  ,3  But  in  their 

1  This  assent,  to  be  sure,  even  according  to  the  Stoics,  rests  upon  the  judg- 
ment ;  in  the  case  of  passion,  therefore,  upon  a  false  judgment,  but  it  is  yet  at 
the  same  time  the  act  of  the  will  which  is  bound  up  with  the  judgment.  Of.  §  17. 

3Diog.  Laert.  VII.  110:  rb  irdeos  —  ij  &\oyos  Kal  Trapk  Qtoiv  ^MS  rivy™  y 
opri  vXeov&tovo-a.  The  psychological  theory  of  the  emotions  was  developed 
especially  by  Chrysippus.  Zeno  distinguished,  as  fundamental  forms,  pleasure 
and  pain,  desire  and  fear.  As  principles  of  division  ainbng  the  later  Stoics 
there  seem  to  have  been  used,  partly  characteristics  of  the  ideas  and  judgments 
which  call  out  the  emotion,  and  partly  the  characteristics  of  the  states  of  "feeling 
and  will  which  proceed  from  it.  Cf.  Diog.  Laert.  VII.  Ill  E. ;  Stob.  EcL  II.  174  f. 

8  By  reckoning  even  life  in  this  division,  they  came  to  their  well-known 
defence  or  commendation  of  suicide  (tfaytayfi}.  Cf.  Diog.  Laert.  VII.  130- 
Seneca,  Ep.  12, 10. 


CHAP.  1,  §  14.]  Ideal  of  the  Sage :  Stoics.  169 

doctrine  of  goods  they  moderate  the  rigour  of  this  principle  by  the 
distinction  of  the  desirable  and  that  which  is  to  be  rejected  (rpo^- 
jLiei/a  and  aTrorrpoi/yjaer/a) .  Strongly  as  they  emphasised  in  this  con- 
nection that  the  worth  (dfca)  which  belongs  to  the  desirable  is  to  be 
distinguished  strictly  from  the  Good  of  virtue,  which  is  a  good  in 
itself,  there  yet  resulted  from  this,  in  opposition  to  the  Cynic  one- 
sidedness,  an  at  least  secondary  appreciation  of  the  good  things  of 
life.  For  since  the  desirable  was  valued  for  the  reason  that  it 
seemed  adapted  to  further  the  Good,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
demerit  of  that  which  was  to  be  rejected  consisted  in  the  hindrances 
which  it  prepares  for  virtue,  the  threads  between  the  self-sufficient 
individual  and  the  course  of  the  world,  which  the  Cynic  paradoxical 
theory  had  cut,  were  thus  more  and  more  knit  together  again.  The 
mean  between  what  is  desirable  and  what  is  to  be  rejected,  the  abso- 
lutely indifferent,  survived  ultimately  only  in  that  which  could  be 
brought  in  no  relation  whatever  to  morality. 

As  these  distinctions,  by  repression  of  the  Cynic  element,  gradu- 
ally made  Stoicism  more  viable  and,  so  to  speak,  better  able  to  get 
on  in  the  world,  so  we  may  see  a  like  modification,  by  means  of 
which  it  became  more  usable  pedagogically,  in  the  later  removal  of 
the  abrupt  contrast  which  at  the  beginning  was  made  between  the 
virtuous  wise  and  the  vicious  fools  ($a£A.oi,  pupof)*  The  wise  man, 
so  it  was  said  at  the  beginning,  is  wise  and  virtuous  entirely,  and  in 
everything  the  fool  is  just  as  entirely  and  universally  foolish  and 
sinful ;  there  is  no  middle  ground.  If  man  possesses  the  force  and 
soundness  of  reason,  with  which  he  controls  his  passions,  then  he 
possesses  with  this  one  virtue  all  the  individual  particular  virtues  1 
at  the  same  time,  and  this  possession,  which  alone  makes  happy, 
cannot  be  lost ;  if  he  lacks  this,  he  is  a  plaything  of  circumstances 
and  of  his  own  passions,  and  this  radical  disease  of  his  soul  commu- 
nicates itself  to  his  entire  action  and  passion.  According  to  the 
view  of  the  Stoics,  therefore,  the  few  sages  stood  as  perfect  men 
over  against  the  great  mass  of  fools  and  sinners,  and  in  many  decla- 
mations they  lamented  the  baseness  of  men  with  the  Pharisaic 
pessimism  which  thus  gratifies  its  self-consciousness.  But  over 
against  this  first  opinion,  which  looked  upon  all  fools  as  to  be 
rejected  alike,  the  consideration  presented  itself  that  among  these 
fools  there  were  always  noticeable  differences  with  regard  to  their 
departure  from  the  ideal  virtue,  and  thus  between  wise  men  and 
fools  there  was  inserted  the  conception  of  the  man  who  is  progres- 
sive and  in  a  state  of  improvement  (TTPOKOTTTWV).  The  Stoics,  indeed, 

1  The  Stoics  also  made  the  Platonic  cardinal  virtues  the  basis  for  their  sys- 
tematic development  of  their  doctrine  of  the  virtues.  Stob.  Eel.  II.  102  ff. 


170         Hellenistic-Roman  Thought >:  Ethical  Period,      [PART  II. 

held  fast  to  the  view  that  no  gradual  transition  takes  place  from 
this  process  of  improvement  to  true  virtue,  and  that  the  entrance 
into  the  condition  of  perfection  results  rather  from  a  sudden  turn 
about.  But  when  the  different  stages  of  ethical  progress  (irpoKoinj) 
were  investigated  and  a  state  was  designated  as  the  highest  stage, 
in  which  apathy  is  indeed  attained,  but  not  yet  with  full  sureness 
and  certainty,1  —  when  this  was  done,  the  rigorous  boundary  lines 
were  in  some  measure  effaced. 

4.  Yet  in  spite  of  these  practical  concessions,  the  withdrawal 
of  the  individual  personality  within  itself  remained  ultimately  an 
essential  characteristic  in  the  Stoic  ideal  of  life ;  on  the  other  hand, 
this  which  these  Greek  epigones  in  common  regarded  as  the  mark 
of  wisdom,  was  nowhere  so  valuably  supplemented  as  among  the 
Stoics.  Scepticism,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  never  desired  such  a  pos- 
itive supplementation  —  consistently  enough  ;  and  Epicureanism 
sought  it  in  a  direction  which  expressed  in  the  sharpest  form  the 
restriction  of  ethical  interest  to  individual  happiness.  For  the 
positive  content  of  the  wise  man's  peace  of  soul,  hidden  from 
the  storms  of  the  world,  is,  for  Epicurus  and  his  followers,  at  last 
only  pleasure.  In  this  they  lacked,  indeed,  that  spirited  joy  of  the 
sensuous  nature  with  which  Aristippus  had  exalted  the  enjoyment 
of  the  moment  and  the  joys  of  the  body  to  be  the  supreme  end, 
and  we  find,  as  already  mentioned,  that  in  their  doctrine  of  the 
highest  good  the  blase,  critically  appreciative  epicurism  of  the  culti- 
vated man,  is  declared  to  be  the  content  of  the  ethical  life.  To  be 
sure,  in  his  psycho-genetic  explanation  Epicurus  reduced  all  pleasure 
without  exception  to  that  of  the  senses,  or,  as  they  said  later,  to 
that  of  the  flesh; 2  but,  combating  the  Cyrenaics,  he  declared8  that 
just  these  derivative  and  therefore  refined  joys  of  the  mind  were  far 
superior  to  those  of  the  senses.  He  recognised  very  properly  that 
the  individual,  upon  whose  independence  of  the  outer  world  all 
hinges,  is  much  surer  and  much  more  the  master  of  mental  than 
of  material  enjoyments.  The  joys  of  the  body  depend  on  health, 
riches,  and  other  gifts  of  fortune,  but  what  is  afforded  by  science 
and  art,  by  the  intimate  friendship  of  noble  men,  by  the  calm,  self- 
contented  and  free  from  wants,  of  the  mind  freed  from  passions,  — 
this  is  the  sure  possession  of  the  wise  man,  almost  or  wholly  un- 
touched by  the  change  of  fortune.  The  (esthetic  self-enjoyment  of 
the  cultured  man  is  hence  the  highest  good  for  the  Epicureans. 

1  Cf.  the  account  (probably  with  regard  to  Chrysippus)  in  Seneca,  Ep. 
75,  8  ff. 

2  Athen.  XII.  546  (Us.  Fr.  409)  ;  Pint.  Ad.  Col.  27,  1122  (Us.  JFV.  411)  :  id. 
Contr.  Epic.  Orat.  4,  1088  (Us.  Fr.  420).  s  Diog.  Laert.  X.  137. 


CHAP.  1,  §  H.]      Ideal  of  the  Sage  :  Epicureans,  Stoics.  171 

Thus,  to  be  sure,  the  coarse  and  sensuous  in  Hedonism  fell  away, 
and  the  Gardens  of  Epicurus  were  a  nursery  of  fair  conduct  of  life, 
finest  morals,  and  noble  employments;  but  the  principle  of  indi- 
vidual enjoyment  remained  the  same,  and  the  only  difference  was 
that  the  Greeks,  in  the  old  age  of  the  national  life,  together  with 
their  Eoman  disciples,  enjoyed  in  a  more  refined,  intellectual,  and 
delicate  manner  than  did  their  youthful  and  manly  ancestors.  Only 
the  content  had  become  more  valuable,  because  it  was  the  content 
presented  to  enjoyment  by  a  civilisation  more  richly  developed 
and  deeply  lived  out;  the  disposition  with  which  life's  cup  was 
smilingly  emptied,  no  longer  in  hasty  quaffing,  but  in  deliberate 
draughts,  was  the  same  egoism,  devoid  of  all  sense  of  duty.  Hence 
the  inner  indifference  of  the  wise  man  toward  ethical  tradition  and 
rules  of  the  land,  which  we  find  here  also,  though  with  greater  cau- 
tion; hence,  above  all,  the  putting  aside  of  all  metaphysical  or 
religious  ideas  that  might  disturb  the  wise  man  in  this  self-compla- 
cent satisfaction  of  enjoyment,  and  burden  him  with  the  feeling  of 
responsibility  and  duty. 

5.  To  this,  the  Stoic  ethics  forms  the  strongest  contrast.  Already, 
in  the  thought  reminding  us  of  Aristotle  (§  13,  11),  that  the  soul 
exercises  its  own  proper  nature  in  the  rational  power  with  which  it 
refuses  assent  to  impulses,  we  may  recognise  the  peculiar  antago- 
nism which  the  Stoics  assumed  in  the  human  psychical  life.  For 
just  what  we  now  are  likely  to  call  the  natural  impulses,  viz.  the 
excitations  of  feeling  and  will  called  forth  by  things  of  the  outer 
world  through  the  senses,  and  referring  to  these  things,  —  just  these 
seemed  to  them,  as  above  mentioned,  that  which  was  contrary  to 
nature  (7ra/oa  <£ucnv).  Reason,  on  the  other  hand,  was  for  them  the 
"  nature,"  not  only  of  man,  but  of  the  universe  in  general.  When, 
for  this  reason,  they  adopt  the  Cynic  principles  in  which  the  moral 
is  made  equivalent  to  the  natural,  the  same  expression  contains  in 
this  latter  case  a  completely  changed  thought.  As  a  part  of  the 
World-reason  the  soul  excludes  from  itself,  as  an  opposing  element, 
the  determination  by  sensuous  impulses  to  which  the  Cynics  had 
reduced  morality  :  the  demands  of  Nature,  identical  with  those  of 
reason,  are  in  contradiction  with  those  of  the  senses. 

Accordingly,  the  positive  content  of  morality  among  the  Stoics 
appears  as  harmony  with  Nature,  and  thus,  at  the  same  time,  as  a 
law  which  claims  normative  validity  as  it  confronts  the  sensuous 
man  (vofto?).1  In  this  formula,  however,  "Nature  "is  used  in  a 


1  With  this  is  completed  an  interesting  change  in  Sophistic  terminology  in 
which  (§  7,  1)  v6jMs  and  6&ts  had  been  made  equivalent  to  one  another,  and 
set  over  against  0u<ris  ;  with  the  Stoics  v<fyws  =  0tf<ri$. 


172         SelleniBtie-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.      [PART  II. 

double  sense.1  On  the  one  hand  is  meant  universal  Nature,  the 
creative,  cosmic  power,  the  world-thought  acting  according  to 
ends  (cf.  §  15),  the  Xdyosj  and  agreeably  to  this  meaning,  man's 
morality  is  his  subordination  to  the  law  of  Nature,  his  willing  obe- 
dience to  the  course  of  the  world,  to  the  eternal  necessity,  and  in  so 
far  as  this  World-reason  is  designated  in  the  Stoic  doctrine  as  deity, 
it  is  also  obedience  to  God  and  to  the  divine  law,  as  well  as  sub- 
ordination to  the  world-purpose  and  the  rule  of  Providence.  The 
virtue  of  the  perfect  individual,  who,  as  over  against  other  indi- 
vidual beings  and  their  action  upon  him  through  the  senses,  ought 
to  withdraw  within  himself,  his  own  master,  and  rest  within  him- 
self, appears  thus  under  obligation  to  something  universal  and 
all-ruling. 

Nevertheless,  since  according  to  the  Stoic  conception  the  ^-ye- 
iwirixw,  the  life-unity  of  the  human  soul,  is  a  consubstantial  part  of 
this  divine  World-reason,  the  life  in  conformity  with  Nature  must 
be  also  that  which  is  adapted  to  human  nature,  to  the  essential 
nature  of  man;  and  this,  too,  as  well  in  the  more  general  sense 
that  morality  coincides  with  genuine,  complete  humanity  and  with 
the  reasonableness  which  is  valid  in  like  measure  for  all,  as  also  in 
the  special  meaning,  that  by  fulfilling  the  command  of  Nature,  each 
person  brings  to  its  unfolding  the  inmost  germ  of  his  own  individual 
essence.  Uniting  these  two  points  of  view,  it  seemed  to  the  Stoics 
that  a  rationally  guided  consistency  in  the  conduct  of  life  was  the 
ideal  of  wisdom,  and  they  found  the  supreme  task  of  life  in  this, 
that  the  virtuous  man  has  to  preserve  this  complete  harmony  with 
himself 2  in  every  change  of  life,  as  his  true  strength  of  character. 
The  political  doctrinairism  of  the  Greeks  found  thus  its  philosophi- 
cal formulation  and  became  a  welcome  conviction  for  the  iron  states- 
men of  republican  Rome. 

But  whatever  the  particular  terms  in  which  the  Stoics  gave 
expression  to  their  fundamental  thought,  this  thought  itself  was 
everywhere  the  same,  — that  life  according  to  Nature  and  according 
to  reason  is  a  duty  (KaOrjKov)  which  the  wise  nian  has  to  fulfil,  a 
law  to  which  he  has  to  subject  himself  in  opposition  to  his  sensuous 
inclinations.  And  this  feeling  of  responsibility,  this  strict  conscious- 
ness of  the  "  ought,"  this  recognition  of  a  higher  order,  gives  to  their 
doctrine,  as  to  their  life,  backbone  and  marrow. 

This  demand  also,  for  a  life  according  to  duty,  we  occasionally 
meet  among  the  Stoics  in  the  one-sided  form,  that  the  ethical  con- 

1  Cf.  Diog.  Laert.  VII.  87. 

2  Thus  the  formulas  o^oyovfUvus  ry  <£i5tret  fiv  and  i>no\oyovidvus  ffiv  have 
ultimately  the  same  meaning.    Stob.  Eel.  II.  132. 


CHAP.  1,  §  14.]      Ideal  of  the  Sage :  Epicureans,  Stoics.  173 

sciousness  requires  some  things  on  rational  grounds,  forbids  the 
opposites,  and  declares  all  else  to  be  ethically  indifferent.  What 
is  not  commanded  and  not  forbidden,  remains  morally  indifferent 
(d8ta</K>pov) ,  and  from  this  the  Stoics  sometimes  drew  lax:  conse- 
quences, which  they  perhaps  defended  more  in  words  than  in  actual 
intention.  But  here,  too,  the  systematic  development  of  the  theory 
created  valuable  intermediate  links.  For  even  if  only  the  Good  is 
unconditionally  commanded,  yet,  in  a  secondary  degree,  the  desir- 
able must  be  regarded  as  ethically  advisable ;  and  though  baseness 
proper  consists  only  in  willing  that  which  is  unconditionally  for- 
bidden, the  moral  man  will  yet  seek  to  avoid  also  that  which  is  "  to 
be  rejected."  Thus,  corresponding  to  the  gradation  of  goods,  there 
was  introduced  a  like  gradation  of  duties,  which  were  distinguished 
as  absolute  and  "  intermediate."  So,  on  the  other  hand,  with  regard 
to  the  valuation  of  human  actions,  a  distinction  was  made  on  a  some- 
what different  basis  between  those  actions  which  fulfil  the  demand 
of  reason1  externally  —  these  are  called  "befitting,"  conformable  to 
duty  in  the  broader  sense  (KaOrJKovra)  —and  such  as  fulfil  the  de- 
mand of  reason  solely  from  the  intention  to  do  the  Good.  Only  in 
the  latter  case2  is  there  a  perfect  fulfilment  of  duty  (Kardp^cujota), 
the  opposite  of  which  is  the  intention  that  is  contrary  to  duty,  as 
evinced  in  an  action,  —  sin  (a/wi/or^/wi) .  Thus  the  Stoics,  proceed- 
ing from  the  consciousness  of  duty,  entered  upon  a  profound  and 
earnest  study,  extending  sometimes  to  considerations  of  casuistry, 
of  the  ethical  values  of  human  will  and  action,  and  we  may  regard 
as  their  most  valuable  contribution  the  universally  applied  thought, 
that  man  in  all  his  conduct,  outer  and  inner,  is  responsible  to  a 
higher  command. 

6.  The  great  difference  in  apprehension  of  the  ethical  life  which 
exists  between  the  Epicureans  and  the  Stoics,  in  spite  of  a  number 
of  deep  and  far-reaching  common  qualities,  becomes  most  clearly 
manifest  in  their  respective  theories  of  society  and  of  the  state.  In 
this,  to  be  sure,  they  are  both  at  one  almost  to  verbal  agreement  in 
the  doctrine  that  the  wise  man,  in  the  self-sufficiency  of  his  virtue, 
needs  the  state 3  as  little  as  he  needs  any  other  society ;  yes,  that  in 
certain  circumstances,  he  should  even  avoid  these  in  the  interest, 
either  of  his  own  enjoyment  or  of  the  fulfilment  of  duty.  In  this 
sense,  even  the  Stoics,  especially  the  later  Stoics,  dissuaded  from 


1  foa  6  \6yos  alpel  iroiw;  I>iog.  Laert.  VH.  108. 

2  For  the  contrast  here  alluded  to  by  the  Stoics  Kant  has  made  customary 
the  expressions  legality  and  morality ;  the  Latin  distinguishes  according  to 
Cicero's  precedent,  rectum  and  honestum. 

8  Epic,  in  Plut.  De  Aud.  Poet.  14,  37  (Us.  Fr.  548). 


174          EeUenistic-Roman  Thought :  Ethical  Period.     [PART  II. 

entrance  into  the  family  life  and  political  activity  \  and  for  the 
Epicureans,  the  responsibility  which  marriage  and  public  activity 
bring  "with  them  was  sufficient  to  justify  a  very  sceptical  attitude 
toward  both,  and  especially  to  make  the  latter  appear  advisable  for 
the  wise  man,  only  in  the  case  where  it  is  unavoidable,  or  of  quite 
certain  advantage.  In  general,  the  Epicureans  hold  to  the  maxim  of 
their  master,  to  live  in  quiet,1  Aa0e  /ftwcras,  in  which  the  inner  crum- 
bling of  ancient  society  found  its  typical  expression. 

But  a  greater  distinction  between  the  two  conceptions  of  life 
shows  itself  in  the  fact  that,  to  the  Stoics,  human  society  appeared 
as  a  command  of  reason,  which  must  give  way  only  occasionally  to 
the  wise  man's  task  of  personal  perfection,  while  Epicurus  expressly 
denied  all  natural  society  among  men,2  and  therefore  reduced 
every  form  of  social  conjunction  to  considerations  of  utility.  So 
the  theory  of  friendship,  which  in  his  school  was  so  zealously 
pledged,  even  to  the  point  of  sentimentality,  did  not  find  the  ideal 
support  which  it  had  received  in  Aristotle's  splendid  exposition ; 3 
it  finds  ultimately  only  the  motives  of  the  wise  man's  enjoyment  of 
culture  as  heightened  in  society.4 

In  particular,  however,  Epicureanism  carried  through  systemati- 
cally the  ideas  already  developed  in  Sophistic  teaching  concerning 
the  origin  of  the  political  community  from  the  well-weighed  interest 
of  the  individuals  who  formed  it.  The  state  is  not  a  natural  structure, 
but  has  been  brought  about  by  men  as  the  result  of  reflection,  and 
for  the  sake  of  the  advantages  which  are  expected  and  received  from 
it.  It  grows  out  of  a  compact  (crw&J/o/)  which  men  enter  into  with 
each  other  in  order  that  they  may  not  injure  one  another,5  and  the 
formation  of  the  state  is  hence  one  of  the  mighty  processes  through 
which  the  human  race  has  brought  itself  up  from  the  savage  state  to 
that  of  civilisation,  by  virtue  of  its  growing  intelligence.6  Laws, 
therefore,  have  arisen  in  every  particular  case  from  a  convention  as 
to  the  common  advantage  ((rvju,j&>Aov  TOV  crv^lpovro^) .  There  is 
nothing  in  itself  right  or  wrong ;  and  since  in  the  formation  of  a 
compact  the  greater  intelligence  asserts  itself  to  its  own  advantage 


1  Plutarch  wrote  against  this  the  extant  treatise  (1128  ff.), 

ri  Xe£0€  /Jititras. 

2  Arrian,  Epict.  Diss.  I.  23,  1  (Us.  Fr.  525);  ib.  II.  20,  6  (523). 

8  Cf.  §  13, 12.  The  extensive  literature  on  friendship  is  in  this  respect 
a  characteristic  sign  of  the  time  which  found  its  chief  interest  in  the  individual 
personality  and  its  relations.  Cicero's  dialogue  Lalius  (De  Amicitia)  repro- 
duces essentially  the  Peripatetic  conception. 

*  Diog.  Laert.  X.  120  (Us.  Fr.  540). 

5  Cf.  among  the  tcvpuu  56£eu  of  Epicurus  the  terse  sentences  in  Diog.  Laert.  X. 
160  f. 

«  Cf.  the  description  in  Lucretius,  De  Ser.  Nat.  Y.  922  ff.,  especially  1103  ff. 


CHAP.  1,  §  14.]  Ideal  of  the  Sage :  Stoics.  175 

as  a  matter  «of  course,  it  is  for  the  most  part  the  advantages  of  the 
wise  that  disclose  themselves  as  motives  in  the  enaction  of  laws.1 
And  as  is  the  case  for  their  origin  and  content,  so  also  for  their 
validity  and  acknowledgment,  the  amount  of  pain  which  they  are 
adapted  to  hinder  and  pleasure  which  they  are  adapted  to  produce, 
is  the  only  standard.  All  the  main  outlines  of  the  utilitarian  theory 
of  society  are  logically  developed  by  Epicurus  from  the  atomistic 
assumption  that  individuals  first  exist  by  and  for  themselves,  and 
enter  voluntarily  and  with  design  into  the  relations  of  society,  only 
for  the  sake  of  the  goods  which  as  individuals  they  could  not  obtain 
or  could  not  protect. 

7.  The  Stoics,  on  the  contrary,  regarded  man  as  already,  by  virtue 
of  the  consubstantiality  of  his  soul  with  the  World-reason,  a  being 
constituted  by  Nature  for  society,2  and  by  reason  of  this  very  fact 
as  under  obligation  by  the  command  of  reason  to  lead  a  social  life, 
—  an  obligation  which  admits  of  exception  only  in  special  cases. 
As  the  most  immediate  relation  we  have  here  also  friendship, 
the  ethical  connection  of  virtuous  individuals  who  are  united  in 
the  common  employment  of  proving  in  action  the  moral  law.3  But 
from  these  purely  personal  relations  the  Stoic  doctrine  at  once  passes 
over  to  the  most  general,  to  all  rational  beings  taken  as  an  entirety. 
As  parts  of  the  same  one  World-reason,  gods  and  men  together  form 
one  great  rational  living  structure,  a  TTO\LTLKOV  crwrr^/Aa,  in  which 
every  individual  is  a  necessary  member  (juAos),  and  from  this  re- 
sults for  the  human  race  the  ideal  task  of  forming  a  realm  of  reason 
that  shall  embrace  all  its  members. 

The  ideal  state  of  the  Stoics  as  it  had  been  already  delineated  by 
Zeno,  partly  in  a  polemic  parallel  to  that  of  Plato,  knows,  accord- 
ingly, no  bounds  of  nationality  or  of  the  historic  state;  it  is  a 
rational  society  of  all  men,  —  an  ideal  universal  empire.  Plutarch, 
indeed,  recognised 4  that  in  this  thought  philosophy  constructed  as 
rational  that  which  was  historically  prepared  by  Alexander  the 
Great,  and  completed,  as  we  know,  by  the  Eomans.  But  it  must 
not  remain  unnoticed  that  the  Stoics  thought  of  this  empire  only 
secondarily  as  a  political  power ;  primarily  it  was  a  spiritual  unity 
of  knowledge  and  will. 

It  is  comprehensible  that  with  such  a  high-flying  idealism  the 

1  Stob.  Flor.  43,  139  (Us.  Fr.  530). 

2  ruv  <f>ti<rei  iro\iTiKuv  few:  Stob.  Ed.  II.  226  ff. 

*  It  was,  to  be  sure,  extraordinarily  difficult  for  the  Stoics  to  bring  the  need, 
which  they  were  obliged  to  recognise  as  a  fact  lying  at  the  basis  of  the  social 
impulse,  into  accord  with  the  independence  of  the  wise  man,  so  baldly  empha- 
sised by  them. 

*  Plut.  De  Alex.  M.  Fort.  I.  6. 


176          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.     [FART  IL 

Stoics  retained  only  a  very  weak  interest  for  actual  political  life  in 
the  proper  sense.  Although  the  wise  man  was  permitted  and 
indeed  charged  to  take  part  in  the  life  of  some  particular  state,  in 
order  to  fulfil  his  duty  to  all  even  in  this  base  world,  yet  both  the 
particular  forms  of  the  state  and  the  individual  historical  states 
were  held  to  be  ultimately  indifferent  to  him.  As  to  the  former, 
the  Stoa  could  not  become  enthusiastic  for  any  of  the  characteristic 
kinds  of  government,  but,  following  the  Aristotelian  suggestion,  held 
rather  to  a  mixed  system,  something  such  as  Polybius I  presented 
as  desirable  on  the  ground  of  his  philosophico-historical  considera- 
tion of  the  necessary  transitions  of  one-sided  forms  into  each  other. 
To  the  splitting  up  of  mankind  in  different  states,  the  Stoics  op- 
posed the  idea  of  cosmopolitanism)  —  world-citizenship,  —  which  fol- 
lowed directly  from  their  idea  of  an  ethical  community  of  all  men. 
It  corresponded  to  the  great  historical  movements  of  the  age,  that 
the  difference  in  worth  between  Hellenes  and  Barbarians,  which  had 
been  still  maintained  even  by  Aristotle,2  was  set  aside  by  the  Stoics 
as  overcome,3  and  though,  in  accordance  with  their  ethical  principle, 
they  were  too  indifferent  to  the  outer  relations  of  position  to  enter 
upon  active  agitation  for  social  reforms,  they  demanded,  neverthe- 
less, that  justice  and  the  universal  love  of  ma?i}  which  resulted  as 
the  highest  duties  from  the  idea  of  the  realm  of  reason,  should  be 
applied  also  in  full  measure,  even  to  the  lowest  members  of  human 
society  —  the  slaves. 

In  spite  of  the  fact,  therefore,  that  it  turned  aside  from  the 
Greek  thought  of  the  national  state,  to  the  Stoic  ethics  belongs  the 
glory  that  in  it  the  ripest  and  highest  which  the  ethical  life  of 
antiquity  produced,  and  by  means  of  which  it  transcended  itself 
and  pointed  to  the  future,  attained  its  best  formulation.  The  intrin- 
sic worth  of  moral  personality,  the  overcoming  of  the  world  in  man's 
overcoming  of  himself,  the  subordination  of  the  individual  to  a 
divine  law  of  the  world,  his  disposition  in  an  ideal  union  of  spirits 
by  means  of  which  he  is  raised  far  above  the  bounds  of  his  earthly 
life,  and  yet,  in  connection  with  this,  the  energetic  feeling  of  duty 
that  teaches  him  to  fill  vigorously  his  place  in  the  actual  world,  — 
all  these  are  the  characteristics  of  a  view  of  life  which,  though 
from  a  scientific  point  of  view  it  may  appear  rather  as  put  together 
than  as  produced  from  one  principle,  presents,  nevertheless,  one  of 
the  most  powerful  and  pregnant  creations  in  the  history  of  the 
conceptions  of  human  life. 

1  la  the  extant  part  of  the  sixth,  book. 

2  Aiist.  Pol  I  2, 1252  b  5. 

a  Seneca,  £p.  95,  52  j  ct  Strabo,  I.  4,  9.   The  personal  composition  also  of  the 
Stoic  school  was  from  its  beginning  decidedly  international. 


CHAP.  1,  §  14.]      Ideal  of  the  Sage :  Stoics,  Qicero.  177 

8.  Iii  a  concentrated  form  all  these  doctrines  appear  in  tlie  con- 
ception of  the  law  of  life,  determined  by  Nature  and  reason  for 
all  men  equally,  TO  <t>va-€i  Skuay,  and  this  conception,  through  Cicero,1 
became  the  formative  principle  of  Roman  jurisprudence. 

For,  in  his  eclectic  attachment  to  all  the  great  men  of  Attic  phi- 
losophy,  Cicero  not  only  held  fast  objectively  with  all  his  energy 
to  the  thought  of  a  moral  world-order  which  determines  with  uni- 
versal validity  the  relation  of  rational  beings  to  each  other,  but 
he  thought  also  with  regard  to  the  subjective  aspect  of  the  question 
—  in  correspondence  with  his  epistemological  theory  (§  17,  4)  — 
that  this  command  of  reason  was  innate  in  all  men  equally,  and  that 
it  had  grown  into  inseparable  connection  with  their  instinct  of  self- 
preservation.  Out  of  this  lex  natures,  the  universally  valid  natural 
law  which  is  exalted  above  all  human  caprice,  and  above  all  change 
of  historical  life,  develop  both  the  commands  of  morality  in  general, 
and  in  particular  those  of  human  society,  —  the  jus  naturale.  But 
while  Cicero  proceeds  to  project  from  this  standpoint  the  ideal  form 
of  political  life,  the  Stoic  universal  state  takes  on  under  his  hands 2 
the  outlines  of  the  Bornan  Empire.  Cosmopolitanism,  which  had 
arisen  among  the  Greeks  as  a  distant  ideal,  in  the  downfall  of  their 
own  political  importance,  becomes  with  the  Eomans  the  proud 
self-consciousness  of  their  historical  mission. 

But  even  in  this  theoretical  development  of  what  the  state  should 
be,  Cicero  interweaves  the  investigation  of  what  it  is.  Not  sprung 
from  the  consideration  or  the  voluntary  choice  of  individuals,  it  is 
rather  a  product  of  history,  and  therefore  the  ever-valid  principles 
of  the  law  of  Nature  are  mingled  in  the  structures  of  its  life  with 
the  historical  institutions  of  positive  law.  These  latter  develop 
partly  as  the  domestic  law  of  individual  states,  jus  civile,  partly  as 
the  law  which  the  confederates  of  different  states  recognise  in  their 
relation  to  one  another,  jus  gentium.  Both  kinds  of  positive  law 
coincide  to  a  large  extent  in  their  ethical  content  with  the  law  of 
Nature,  but  they  supplement  this  by  the  multitude  of  historical  ele- 
ments which  in  them  come  into  force.  The  conceptions  thus  formed 
are  important  not  only  as  constructing  the  skeleton  for  a  new  special 
science  soon  to  branch  off  from  philosophy;  they  have  also  the 
significance  that  in  them,  the  worth  of  the  historical  for  the  first 
time  reaches  full  philosophical  appreciation :  and  at  this  point  Cicero 


1  Two  of  his  treatises,  only  partly  preserved,  come  into  consideration  here, 
De  Itepublica  and  De  Legibus.    Of.  M.  Voigt,  Die  Lehre  vom  jus  naturale^  etc. 
(Leips.  1856),  and  K.  Hildenhrand,  GesGhichte  und  System  far  Eechts-  und 
StaatsphilosopJiie,  I.  523  ff. 

2  Cic.  De  Rep.  II.  1  ff. 


ITS  Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Ethical  Period.     [PART  IL 

knew  how  to  transform  the  political  greatness  of  his  people  into  a 
scientific  creation. 

§  15.  Mechanism  and  Teleology. 

The  practice  of  the  schools  in  the  post- Aristotelian  period  sepa- 
rated philosophical  investigations  into  three  main  divisions,  — 
ethics,  physics,  and  logic  (the  latter  called  canonic  among  the 
Epicureans).  The  chief  interest  was  everywhere  given  to  ethics, 
and  theoretically  the  two  others  were  allowed  importance  only  so 
far  as  correct  action  presupposes  a  knowledge  of  things,  and  this  in 
turn  a  clearness  with  regard  to  the  right  methods  of  knowledge. 
Hence  the  main  tendencies  of  physical  and  logical  theories  are 
undoubtedly  determined  in  this  period  by  the  ethical  point  of  view, 
and  the  practical  need  is  easily  contented  by  taking  up  and  re-shap- 
ing the  older  teachings ;  but  yet  in  scientific  work  the  great  objects 
of  interest,  especially  metaphysical  and  physical  problems,  assert 
their  fascinating  power,  and  so  notwithstanding  we  see  these  other 
branches  of  philosophy  often  developing  in  a  way  that  is  not  in  full 
conformity  with  the  nature  of  the  ethical  trunk  from  which  they 
spring.  Particularly  in  the  case  of  physics,  the  rich  development  of 
the  special  sciences  must  ultimately  keep  general  principles  always 
alive  and  in  a  state  of  flux. 

In  this  respect  we  notice  first  that  the  Peripatetic  School,  during 
the  first  generations,  made  a  noteworthy  change  in  the  principles  for 
explaining  Kature  which  it  had  received  from  its  master. 

1.  The  beginning  of  this  is  found  already  with  TJieophrastus,  who 
doubtless  defended  all  the  main  doctrines  of  Aristotelianism,  espe- 
cially against  the  Stoics,  but  yet  in  part  went  his  own  ways.  The 
extant  fragment  of  his  metaphysics  discusses,  among  the  aporise, 
principally  such  difficulties  as  were  contained  in  the  Aristotelian 
conceptions  of  the  relation  of  the  world  to  the  deity.  The  Stagi- 
rite  had  conceived  of  Nature  (<jf>™ns)  as  a  being  in  itself  alive 
(£<?ov)?  an(i  ye"k  nad.  conceived  of  its  entire  motion  as  a  (teleological) 
effect  of  the  divine  Beason ;  God,  as  pure  Form,  was  separated  from 
the  world,  transcendent ;  and  yet,  as  animating,  first-moving  power, 
he  was  immanent  in  it.  This  chief  metaphysical  problem  of  the 
following  period  was  seen  by  Theophrastus,  though  his  own  attitude 
toward  it  remained  fixed  by  the  bounds  of  Aristotle's  doctrine.  On 
the  other  hand,  he  shows  a  more  definite  tendency  in  the  closely 
connected  question  regarding  the  relation  of  reason  to  the  lower 
psychical  activities.  The  vovs  was  regarded,  on  the  one  hand  (con- 
sidered as  Form  of  the  animal  soul),  as  immanent,  inborn;  on  the 
other  hand,  in  its  purity,  as  different  in  essence,  and  as  having  come 


CHAP.  1,  §  15,]    Mechanism  and  Teleology :  Peripatetics.          179 

into  the  individual  soul  from  without.  Here  now  Theophrastus 
decided  absolutely  against  transcendence;  he  subsumed  the  vou? 
also  as  a  self-developing  activity,  under  the  concept  of  a  cosmic 
process,1  of  motion  (/ciV^o-is),  and  set  it  beside  the  animal  soul  as 
something  different,  not  in  kind,  but  in  degree  only. 

Strata  proceeded  still  more  energetically  in  the  same  direction. 
He  removed  completely  the  limits  between  reason  and  the  lower 
activities  of  ideation.  Both,  he  taught,  form  an  inseparable  unity; 
there  is  no  thought  without  perceptions,  and  just  as  little  is  there 
sense-perception  without  the  co-operation  of  thought ;  both  together 
belong  to  the  unitary  consciousness,  which  he,  with  the  Stoics,  calls 
TO  fiyepovLKov  (cf.  §  14,  3).  But  Strato  applied  the  same  thought, 
which  he  carried  out  psychologically,  to  the  analogous  metaphysical 
relation  also.  The  ^ye/iow/cov  of  the  <£wns,  also,  the  Reason  of  Nature, 
cannot  be  regarded  as  something  separated  from  her.  Whether  now 
this  may  be  expressed  in  the  form  that  Strato  did  not  think  the 
hypothesis  of  the  deity  necessary  for  the  explanation  of  Nature  and 
its  phenomena,  or  in  the  form  that  he  postulated  Nature  itself  as 
God,  but  denied  it  not  only  external  resemblance  to  man,  but  even 
consciousness,2 — in  any  case,  Stratonism,  regarded  from  the  stand- 
point of  Aristotle's  teaching,  forms  a  one-sidedly  naturalistic  or 
pantheistic  modification.  He  denies  spiritual  monotheism,  the  con- 
ception of  the  transcendence  of  God,  and  by  teaching  that  a  pure 
"Form  is  as  unthinkable  as  mere  matter,  he  pushes  the  Platonic 
element  in  the  Aristotelian  metaphysics,  which  had  remained  just 
in  the  thought  of  the  separation  (xupicr/io's)  of  reason  from  matter, 
so  far  into  the  background  that  the  element  derived  from  Democ- 
ritus  becomes  again  entirely  free.  Strato  sees  in  what  takes  place 
in  the  world?  only  an  immanent  necessity  of  Nature,  and  no  longer 
the  working  of  a  spiritual,  extramundane  cause. 

Yet  this  naturalism  remains  still  in  dependence  upon  Aristotle,  in 
so  far  as  it  seeks  the  natural  causes  of  the  cosmic  processes,  not 
in  the  atoms  and  their  quantitative  determinations,  but  expressly 
in  the  original  qualities  (Troionyres)  and  powers  (Sweets)  of  things. 
If  among  these  it  emphasised  especially  warmth  and  cold,  this  was 
quite  in  the  spirit  of  the  dynamic  conceptions  held  by  the  older 
Hylozoism,  and  to  this,  also,  Strato  seems  most  nearly  related  in  his 
undecided,  intermediate  position  between  mechanical  and  teleologies! 
explanation  of  the  world.  Just  for  this  reason,  however,  this  side- 
development  ran  its  course  with  Strato  himself  without  further 
result,  for  it  was  already  outrun  at  the  beginning  by  the  Stoic  and 

1  Simpl.  Phys.  225  a.        2  Cic.  Acad.  U.  38,  121 ;  De  Nat.  Deor.  1. 13,  35. 


180          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.     [PART  U, 

the  Epicurean  physics.  These  both  defended  also  the  standpoint 
of  the  immanent  explanation  of  Nature,  but  the  former  was  as  out- 
spokenly teleological  as  the  latter  was  mechanical. 

2.  The  peculiarly  involved  position  of  the  Stoics,  in  the  de- 
partment of  metaphysical  and  physical  questions,  resulted  from 
the  union  of  different  elements.  In  the  foreground  stands  the 
ethical  need  of  deducing  from  a  most  general  metaphysical  prin- 
ciple the  content  of  individual  morality  which  could  no  longer  find 
its  roots  in  state  and  nationality  as  in  the  period  of  Grecian  great- 
ness, and  therefore  of  so  shaping  the  conception  of  this  principle  as 
to  make  this  deduction  possible.  But,  in  opposition  to  this,  stood, 
as  an  inheritance  from  Cynicism,  the  decided  disinclination  to  regard 
this  principle  as  a  transcendent,  supersensuous,  and -incorporeal  prin- 
ciple, out  of  the  world  of  experience.  All  the  more  decisive  was  the 
force  with  which  the  thoughts  suggested  in  the  Peripatetic  philos- 
ophy of  Mature  came  forward,  in  which  the  attempt  was  made  to 
understand  the  world  as  a  living  being,  in  purposive  motion  of  itself. 
For  all  these  motives,  the  logos  doctrine  of  Heraclitus  seemed  to 
present  itself  as  in  like  measure  a  solution  of  the  problem,  and  this 
became,  therefore,  the  central  point  of  the  Stoic  metaphysics.1 

The  fundamental  view  of  the  Stoics  is,  then,  that  the  entire  uni- 
verse forms  a  single,  unitary,  living,  connected  whole,  and  that  all 
particular  things  are  the  determinate  forms  assumed  by  a  divine 
primitive  power  which  is  in  a  state  of  eternal  activity.  Their  doc- 
trine is  in  its  fundamental  principles  pantheism,  and  (in  opposition 
to  Aristotle)  conscious  pantheism.  The  immediate  consequence  of 
it,  however,  is  the  energetic  effort  to  overcome  the  Platonic-Aris- 
totelian dualism,2  and  remove  the  opposition  between  sensuous  and 
supersensuous,  between  natural  necessity  and  reason  acting  accord- 
ing to  ends,  between  Matter  and  Form.  The  Stoa  attempts  this 
through  simple  identification  of  those  conceptions  whose  opposing 
characters,  to  be  sure,  cannot  by  this  means  be  put  out  of  the  world. 

Hence  it  declares  the  divine  World-being  to  be  the  primitive 
power  in  which  are  contained  in  like  measure  the  conditioning  laws 
and  the  purposeful  determination  of  all  things  and  of  all  cosmic 
processes,  —  the  World-ground  and  the  World-mind.  As  actively 
productive  and  formative  power,  the  deity  is  the  Xoyos  ( 


1  Cf.  H.  Siebeck,  Die  Umbildung  der  peripatetischen  Naturphilosophie  in  die 
der  Stoiker  (Unters.  z.  Philosophic  der  Griechen,  2  Aufl.,  pp.  181  fl.). 

2  If  we  were  obliged  to  conceive  of  the  relation  of  Aristotle  to  Plato  in  a 
similar  manner  (§  13,  1-4),  just  in  this  point  the  Stoic  philosophy  of  Nature 
shows  a  farther  development  in  the  same  direction  which  the  Peripatetic  takes 
in  Strato.  * 


CHAP.  1,  §  15.]     Mechanism  and  Teleology :  Stoics.  181 

the  vital  principle,  which  unfolds  itself  in  the  multitude  of  phenom- 
ena as  their  peculiar,  particular  \oyot  o-Trep/wmKot  or  formative  forces. 
In  this  organic  function,  God  is,  however,  also  the  purposefully 
creating  and  guiding  Keason,  and  thus  with  regard  to  all  particular 
processes  the  all-ruling  Providence*  (?rpovota).  The  determination  of 
the  particular  by  the  universe  (which  constitutes  the  dominant 
fundamental  conviction  of  the  Stoics)  is  a  completely  purposeful 
and  rational  order,1  and  forms  as  such  the  highest  norm  (vo'/ios), 
according  to  which  all  individual  beings  should  direct  themselves  in 
the  development  of  their  activity.2 

But  this  all-determining  "  law "  is  for  the  Stoics,  as  it  was  for 
Heraclitus,  likewise  the  all-compelling  power  which,  as  inviolable 
necessity  (dray/c^),  and  so,  as  inevitable  destiny  (etftap/zewy,  fatum), 
brings  forth  every  particular  phenomenon  in  the  unalterable  succes- 
sion of  causes  and  effects.  Nothing  takes  place  hi  the  world  with- 
out a  preceding  cause  (am'a  Trpo^yov/Aeio;),  and  just  by  virtue  of  this 
complete  causal  determination  of  every  particular  does  the  universe 
possess  its  character  of  a  purposeful,  connected  whole.3  Hence 
Chrysippus  combated  in  the  most  emphatic  manner  the  conception 
of  chance,  and  taught  that  apparent  causelessness  in  a  particular 
event  could  mean  only  a  kind  of  causation  hidden  from  human 
insight.4  In  this  assumption  of  a  natural  necessity,  admitting  of  no 
exceptions  even  for  the  most  particular  and  the  least  important 
occurrence,  —  a  conviction  which  naturally  found  expression  also  in 
the  form  that  the  divine  providence  extends  even  to  the  smallest 
events  of  life,5  —  the  Stoic  school  agrees  even  verbally  with  Demoe- 
ritus,  and  is  the  only  school  in  antiquity  which  carried  this  most 
valuable  thought  of  the  great  Abderite  through  all  branches  of 
theoretical  science. 

In  all  other  respects,  indeed,  the  Stoics  stand  in  opposition  to 
Democritus  and  in  closer  relation  to  Aristotle.  For  while  in  the 
Atomistic  system  the  natural  necessity  of  all  that  comes  to  pass 
results  from  the  motive  impulses  of  individual  things,  with  the 
Stoics  it  fjows  immediately  from  the  living  activity  of  the  ichole,  and 


1  As  the  Platonic  Timseus  had  already  taught,  §  11, 10. 

2  The  normative  character  in  the  conception  of  the  logos  appeared  clearly  even 
with  Heraclitus  (§  6,  2,  p.  63,  note  5). 

*  Plut.  De  Fato,  11,  574.  *  Ib.  7,  572. 

5  Plutarch  makes  Chrysippus  say  (Comm.  Not.  34,  5, 1076)  that  not  even  the 
meanest  thing  can  sustain  any  other  relation  than  that  which  accords  with  the 
decree  of  Zeus.  Cf.  Cic.  De  Nat.  Deor.  II.  65,  164.  Only  the  circumstance 
that  the  Stoa  limited  the  immediate  action  of  the  divine  providence  to  the  pur- 
poseful determination  of  the  whole,  and  derived  from  this  that  of  the  particular, 
explains  such  modes  of  expression  as  the  well-known  Magna  dii  curant,  parva 
negligunt.  Cf.  §  16,  3. 


182  Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Ethical  Period,    [PART  IL 

as  over  against  the  reduction  of  all  qualities  to  quantitative  differ- 
ences, they  held  fast  to  the  reality  of  properties  as  the  peculiar 
forces  of  individual  things,  and  to  qualitative  alteration  (dAAotWis, 
in  opposition  to  motion  in  space).  They  directed  their  polemic 
particularly  against  the  purely  mechanical  explanation  of  natural 
processes  by  pressure  and  impact ;  but  in  carrying  out  their  teleology, 
they  sank  from  the  great  conception  of  Aristotle,  who  had  every- 
where emphasised  the  immanent  purposiveness  of  the  formations  in 
which  the  Forms  were  realised,  to  the  consideration  of  the  benefits 
which  flow  from  the  phenomena  of  Mature  to  meet  the  needs  of 
beings  endowed  with  reason,  "of  gods  and  men."1  In  particular, 
they  exaggerated,  even  to  ridiculous  Philistinism,  the  demonstration 
of  the  manner  in  which  heaven  and  earth  and  all  that  in  them  is, 
are  arranged  with  such  magnificent  adaptation  for  man.2 

3.  In  all  these  theoretical  views,  and  just  in  these,  the  Epicureans 
are  diametrically  opposed  to  the  Stoics.  With  the  Epicureans,  em- 
ployment with  metaphysical  and  physical  problems  had  in  general 
only  the  negative  purpose3  of  setting  aside  the  religious  ideas 
through  which  the  quiet  self-enjoyment  of  the  wise  man  might  be 
disturbed.  Hence  it  was  the  chief  concern  of  Epicurus  to  exclude 
from  the  explanation  of  Nature  every  element  that  would  allow  a 
government  of  the  world,  guided  by  universal  ends,  to  appear  as 
even  possible ;  hence,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Epicurean  view  of  the 
world  was  absolutely  lacking  in  a  positive  principle.  This  explains 
the  fact  that  Epicurus,  at  least,  had  only  a  sceptical  shrug  of  the 
shoulders  for  all  questions  of  natural  science  from  which  no  practical 
advantage  was  'to  be  gained ;  and  though  many  of  his  later  disciples 
seem  to  have  been  less  limited,  and  to  have  thought  more  scien- 
tifically, the  ruts  of  the  school's  opinion  were  worn  too  deep  to 
allow  the  attainment  of  essentially  broader  aims.  The  more  the 
teleological  conception  of  Nature  formed,  in  the  course  of  time,  the 
common  ground  on  which  Academic,  Peripatetic,  and  Stoic  doctrines 
met  in  syncretistic  blending,  the  more  Epicureanism  insisted  upon 
its  isolated  standpoint  of  negation ;  theoretically,  it  was  essentially 
anti-teleological,  and  in  this  respect  brought  forth  nothing  positive. 

It  was  successful  only  in  combating  the  anthropological  excres- 
cences to  which  the  teleological  view  of  the  world  led,  especially 

1  Cic.  De  Fin.  III.  20,  67  ;  De  Fat.  Deor.  II.  53  ft 

2  If  one  might  trust  Xenophon's  Memorabilia,  the  Stoics  had  in  this  no  less 
a  man  than  Socrates  as  their  predecessor;  yet  it  seems  that  even  in  this  account,1 
•which  is  tinctured  with  Cynicism  if  not  worked  over  from  the  Stoic  point  of 
view  (Krohn),  the  general  faith  of  Socrates  in  a  purposeful  guiding  of  the  world 
by  divine  providence  has  descended  into  the  petty.     Cf.  §  8,  8. 

«  Diog.  Laert.  X,  143 ;  Us.  p.  74. 


CHAP.  1,  §  15.]     Mechanism  and  Teleology :  Epicureans.  183 

with  the  Stoics,1  —  a  task  which  was  undoubtedly  not  so  very  diffi- 
cult, —  but  to  create  from  principles  a  counter-theory  it  was  not  pre- 
pared. Epicurus,  indeed,  availed  himself  for  this  purpose  of  the 
external  data  of  the  materialistic  metaphysics,  as  he  was  able  to 
receive  them  from  Democritus  5  but  he  was  far  from  attaining  the 
latter's  scientific  height.  He  could  follow  the  great  Atomist  only 
so  far  as  to  believe  that  he  himself  also,  for  explaining  the  world, 
needed  nothing  more  than  empty  space  and  the  corporeal  particles 
moving  within  it,  countless  in  number,  infinitely  varied  in  form  and 
size,  and  indivisible ;  and  to  their  motion,  impact,  and  pressure  he 
traced  all  cosmic  processes,  and  all  things  and  systems  of  things 
(worlds)  which  arise  and  again  perish,  thereby  seeking  to  deduce 
all  qualitative  differences  from  these  purely  quantitative  relations.3 
He  accepted,  accordingly,  the  purely  mechanical  conception  of  nat- 
ural processes,  but  denied  expressly  their  unconditioned  and  excep- 
tionless necessity.  The  doctrine  of  Democritus,  therefore,  passed 
over  to  the  Epicureans  only  in  so  far  as  it  was  Atomism  and  mechan- 
ism ;  with  regard  to  the  much  deeper  and  more  valuable  principle 
of  the  universal  reign  of  law  in  Nature,  his  legacy,  as  we  have  seen 
above,  passed  to  the  Stoics. 

Meanwhile,  just  this  peculiar  relation  is  most  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  Epicurean  ethics  and  with  the  decisive  influence 
which  that  exercised  upon  their  physics  ;  indeed,  one  may  say  that 
the  individualising  tendency  taken  by  the  ethical  reflection  of  the 
post-Aristotelian  age  found  its  most  adequate  metaphysics  just  in 
the  doctrine  of  Epicurus.  To  a  morals,  which  had  for  its  essential 
content  the  independence  of  the  individual  and  his  withdrawal 
upon  himself,  a  view  of  the  world  must  have  been  welcome  which 
regarded  the  prime  constituents  of  reality  as  completely  independ- 
ent, both  of  each  other  and  of  a  single  force,  and  regarded  their 
activity  as  determined  solely  by  themselves.3  Now  the  doctrine  of 
Democritus  which  taught  the  inevitable,  natural  necessity  of  all 
that  comes  to  pass,  contains  unmistakably  a  (Heraclitic)  element 
which  removes  this  autonomy  of  individual  things,  and  just  to  their 
adoption  of  this  element  did  the  Stoics  owe  the  fact  (cf.  §  14,  5) 
that  their  ethics  outgrew  the  one-sided  Cynic  presuppositions  with 
which  they  started.  It  is  all  the  more  comprehensible  that  Epi- 
curus let  just  this  element  fall  away;  and  his  conception  of  the 


1  Cf.  especially  Lucret.  De  Jter.  Nat.  I.  1021 ;  Y.  156  ;  Diog.  Laert.  X.  97. 

2  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  X.  42. 

8  Thus  Epicurus  grounded  his  deviation  from  Democritus's  explanation  of  the 
•world  by  an  appeal  to  human  freedom  of  the  will.  Cf .  §  I6r  and  also  the  cita- 
tions in  Zeller  IV.8  408,  1  [Eng.  tr.  Stoics,  etc.,  p.  446]. 


184  Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.    [PART  H. 

world  as  contrasted  with  that  of  the  Stoa  is  characterised  precisely 
by  this,  that  while  the  latter  regarded  every  individual  as  deter- 
mined by  the  whole,  he  rather  regarded  the  whole  as  a  product  of 
originally  existing  and  likewise  originally  functioning  individual 
things.  His  doctrine  is  in  every  respect  consistent  Atomism. 

Thus  the  system  of  Democritus  had  the  misfortune  to  be  propa- 
gated for  traditions  of  antiquity,  and  so  also  for  those  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  in  a  system  which  indeed  retained  his  Atomistic  view,  looking 
in  the  direction  of  the  exclusive  reality  of  quantitative  relations 
and  of  the  mechanical  conception  of  the  cosmic  processes,  but 
set  aside  his  thought  of  Mature  as  a  connected  whole,  regulated  by 
law. 

4  Following  this  latter  direction,  Epicurus  gave  a  new  form  to 
the  doctrine  of  the  origin  of  the  world  maintained  by  Atomism.1 
In  contrast  with  what  had  been  already  seen,  perhaps  by  the 
Pythagoreans,  but,  at  all  events,  by  Democritus,  Plato,  and  Aristotle, 
that  in  space  in  itself  there  is  no  other  direction  than  that  from 
the  centre  toward  the  periphery,  and  the  reverse,  he  appeals  to  the 
declaration  of  the  senses,2  —  agreeably  to  his  doctrine  of  knowl- 
edge, —  according  to  which  there  is  an  absolute  up  and  down,  and 
maintains  that  the  atoms  were  all  originally  in  motion  from  above 
downward  by  virtue  of  their  weight.  But,  in  order  to  derive  the 
origination  of  atom  groups  from  this  universal  rain  of  atoms,  he 
assumed  that  some  of  them  had  voluntarily  deviated  from  the  direct 
line  of  fall.  From  this  deviation  were  explained  the  impacts,  the 
grouping  of  atoms,  and,  ultimately,  the  whirling  motions  which 
lead  to  the  formation  of  worlds,  and  which  the  old  Atomism  had 
derived  from  the  meeting  of  atoms  which  were  moving  about  in  an 
unordered  manner.8 

It  is  noteworthy,  however,  that  after  he  had  in  this  way  spoiled 
the  ifaner  coherence  of  the  doctrine  of  Democritus,  Epicurus  re- 
nounced the  voluntary  choice  of  the  atoms  as  a  means  for  the 
further  explanation  of  the  individual  processes  of  Nature,  and  from 
the  point  when  the  whirling  motion  of  the  atom-complexes  seemed 
to  him  to  be  explained,  allowed  only  the  principle  of  mechanical 


i  Ps.-Plut.  Flac.  I.  3 ;  Dox.  D.  285 ;  Cic.  De  Pin.  L  6,  17 ;  Guyau,  Morale 
(TJEpic.  74. 

a  Diog.  Laert.  X.  60. 

8  Cf .  §  4T  9.  It  seems  that  later  Epicureans  who  held  fast  to  the  sensuous 
basis  of  this  idea  and  yet  would  exclude  the  voluntary  action  of  the  atoms  and 
carry  out  more  thoroughly  the  Democritic  thought  of  Nature's  conformity  to 
law,  hit  upon  the  plan  of  explaining  the  grouping  (dfyottr^s)  of  the  atoms  on 
the  hypothesis  that  the  more  massive  fell  faster  in  empty  space  than  the  "  lighter" ; 
at  least,  Lucretius  combats  such  theories  (De  Her.  Nat.  II.  225  ff.). 


CHAP.  1,  §  15.]     Mechanism  and  Teleology  :  Epicureans.  185 

necessity  to  stand.1  He  used,  therefore,  the  voluntary  self-determi- 
nation of  the  atoms  only  as  a  principle  to  explain  the  beginning  of 
a  whirling  motion  which  afterwards  went  on  purely  mechanically. 
He  used  it,  therefore,  just  as  Anaxagoras  used  his  force-matter,  vovs 
(cf.  p.  52).  For  upon  this  metaphysical  substructure  Epicurus 
erected  a  physical  theory  which  acknowledged  only  the  mechanics 
of  atoms  as  explanation  for  all  phenomena  of  Xature  without  any 
exception,  and  carried  this  out,  for  organisms  especially,  by  employ- 
ing for  the  explanation  of  their  purposive  formation  the  Empedo- 
clean  thought  of  the  survival  of  the  fit. 

Lastly,  the  Democritic  principle  of  natural  necessity  asserts  itself 
in  the  system  of  Epicurus  in  his  assumption  that  in  the  continuous 
arising,  and  perishing  of  the  worlds  which  become  formed  by  the 
assemblages  of  atoms,  every  possible  combination,  and  thus  every 
form  of  world-construction,  must  ultimately  repeat  itself.  This 
was  proved  in  a  manner  which  would  now  be  put  upon  the  basis  of 
the  theory  of  probabilities,  and  the  result  of  this  repetition  was 
held  to  be,  that  considering  the  infinitude  of  time,  nothing  can 
happen  which  has  not  already  existed  in  the  same  way.  2  In  this 
doctrine,  again,  Epicurus  agrees  with  the  Stoics,  who  taught  a  plu- 
rality of  worlds,  not  co-existent,  but  following  one  another  in  time, 
and  yet  found  themselves  forced  to  maintain  that  these  must  be 
always  completely  alike,  even  to  the  last  detail  of  particular  forma- 
tion and  particular  events.  As  the  world  proceeds  forth  from  the 
divine  primitive  fire,  so  it  is  each  time  taken  back  again  into  the 
same  after  a  predetermined  period  :  and  then  when  after  the  world- 
conflagration  the  primitive  power  begins  the  construction  of  a  new 
world,  this  <£uW  (Nature),  which  remains  eternally  the  same,  unfolds 
itself  again  and  again  in  the  same  manner,  in  correspondence  with 
its  own  rationality  and  necessity.  This  return  of  all  things  (TroXty- 
yei/eo-ia  or  dTroKaracrrao-is)  appears,  accordingly,  as  a  necessary  con- 
sequence of  the  two  alternative  conceptions  of  the  Stoics,  Axfyos  and 


5.   The  theoretical  ideas  of  these  two  main  schools  of  later  an- 
tiquity are  accordingly  at  one  only  in  being  completely  material- 

1  Hence  in  a  certain  sense  it  might  be  said,  from  the  standpoint  of  present 
criticism,  that  the  difference  between  Democritus  and  Epicurus  was  only  a  rela- 
tive one.    The  former  regards  as  an  unexplained  primitive  fact  the  direction 
which  each  atom  has  from  the  beginning,  the  latter  regards  as  an  unexplained 
primitive  fact  a  voluntary  deviation,  taking  place  at  some  point  of  time,  from  a, 
direction  of  fall  which  is  uniform  for  all.    The  essential  difference,  however,  is. 
that  with  Democritus  this  primitive  fact  is  something  timeless,  while  with 
Epicurus  it  is  a  single  voluntary  act  occurring  in  time,  an  act  which  is  expressly 
compared  with  the  causeless  self-determination  of  the  human  will  (cf,  §  16). 

2  Hut.  in  Euseb.  Dox.  D.  581,  19  ;  Us.  Fr.  266. 


186          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.     [PART  II. 


and  it  was  just  in  opposition  to  Plato  and  Aristotle  that 
they  expressly  emphasised  this  position  of  theirs,  Both  maintain 
that  the  real  (TO.  ovra).  because  it  manifests  itself  in  action  and 
passion  (iroitLv  KOL  Tracrxeiv).  can  be  only  corporeal;  the  Epicureans 
declared  only  empty  space  to  be  incorporeal.  On  the  contrary, 
they  combated  the  (Platonic)  view  that  the  properties  of  bodies 
are  something  incorporeal  per  se  (/ca0'  Zavro),1  and  the  Stoics  even 
went  so  far  as  to  declare  that  even  the  qualities,  forces,  and  rela- 
tions of  things,  which  present  themselves  in  changing  modes  in 
connection  with  things  and  yet  as  actual  or  real,  are  "bodies,"2 
and  with  a  mode  of  thought  which  reminds  us  of  the  coming  and 
going  of  the  homoiomerise  with  Anaxagoras,3  they  regarded  the 
presence  and  change  of  properties  in  things  as  a  kind  of  inter- 
mixture of  these  bodies  with  others,  a  view  from  which  resulted 
the  theory  of  the  universal  mingling  and  reciprocal  interpenetration 
of  all  bodies  (/cpSo-is  oY  oA.o>i/). 

In  carrying  out  the  materialistic  theory  the  Epicureans  produced 
scarcely  anything  new  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  Stoic  doctrine  of  Nature 
shows  a  number  of  new  views,  which-  are  interesting  not  only  in 
themselves,  but  also  as  having  marked  out  the  essential  lines  for 
the  idea  of  the  world  held  during  the  following  centuries. 

First  of  all,  in  the  Stoic  system  the  two  antitheses,  which  were 
feo  be  removed  or  identified  in  the  conception  of  Nature  as  one,  again 
part  company.  The  divine  primitive  essence  divides  into  the  active 
and  the  passive,  into  force  and  matter.  As  force,  the  deity  is  fire 
or  warm,  vital  breath,  pneuma  ;  as  matter,  it  changes  itself  out  of 
moist  vapour  (air)  partly  into  water,  partly  into  earth.  Thus  fire  is 
the  -soul,  and  the  "moist  "is  the  body,  of  the  World-god;  and  yet 
the  two  form  a  single  being,  identical  within  itself.  While  the 
Stoics  thus  attach  themselves,  in  their  doctrine  of  the  transmuta- 
tion and  re-transmutation  of  substances,  to  Heraclitus,  and  in  their 
characterisation  of  the  four  elements  principally  to  Aristotle,  and 
follow  Aristotle  also  in  the  main  in  their  exposition  of  the  world- 
structure  and  of  the  purposive  system  of  its  movements,  the  most 
important  thing  in  their  physics  is  doubtless  the  doctrine  of  the 
pneuma. 

God  as  creative  reason  (Aoyos  o-wep/jumKos)  is  this  warm  vital 
breath,  the  formative  fire-mind  which  penetrates  all  things  and  is 

*  Diog.  Laert/X.  67. 

2  Plut.  C.  Not.  50,  1085. 

3  A  similar  materialising  of  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  Ideas  (Plat.  Phcedo^  102)  t 
which  reminds  us  of  Anaxagoras,  was  apparently  worked  out  by  Eudoxos,  who 
belonged  to  the  Academy  (p.  103).    Arist.  Met.  I.  9,  991  a  17,  and  also  Alex. 
Aphr.  JSchoL  in  Arist.  573  a  12. 


CHAP.  1,  §  15.]   Mechanism  and  Teleology:  Epicureans^  Stoics.   187 

dominant  in  them  as  their  active  principle;  he  is  the  universe 
regarded  as  an  animate  being,  spontaneously  in  motion  within 
itself,  and  purposefully  and  regularly  developed.  All  this  is 
comprehended  by  the  Stoics  in  the  conception  of  the  TrveS/wt,1  an 
extraordinarily  condensed  conception,  full  of  relations,  —  an  idea 
in  which  suggestions  from  Heraclitus  (Aoyo?),  Anaxagoras  (vo£s), 
Diogenes  of  Apollonia  (orfp),  Democritus  (fire-atoms),  and  not  least 
the  Peripatetic  natural  philosophy  and  physiology,  became  intri- 
cately combined.2 

6.  The  most  effective  element  in  this  combination  proved  to  be 
the  analogy  between  macrocosm  and  microcosm,  universe  and  man, 
which  the  Stoics  adopted  from  Aristotle.  The  individual  soul,  also, 
the  vital  force  of  the  body,  which  holds  together  and  rules  the  flesh, 
is  fiery  breath,  pneuma;  but  all  the  individual  forces  which  are 
active  in  the  members  and  control  their  purposive  functions,  are 
also  such  vital  minds  or  spirits  (spiritus  animales).  In  the  human 
and  the  animal  organism  the  activity  of  the  pneuma  appears  con- 
nected with  the  blood  and  its  circulation  ;  nevertheless,  the  pneuma 
itself  —  just  because  it  is  also  a  body,  said  Chrysippus3  —  is  sep- 
arable in  detail  from  the  lower  elements  which  it  animates,  and  this 
separation  takes  place  in  death. 

At  the  same  time,  however,  the  individual  soul,  as  it  is  only  a 
part  of  the  universal  World-soul,  is  completely  determined  in  its 
nature  and  its  activity  by  this  World-soul  ;  it  is  consubstantial  with 
the  divine  Pneuma  and  dependent  upon  it.  Just  for  this  reason  the 
World-reason,  the  Aoyos,  is  for  the  soul  the  highest  law  (cf.  above, 
§  14,  3).  The  soul's  independence  is  therefore  only  one  that  is 
limited  by  time,  and  in  any  case  it  is  its  ultimate  destiny  to  be 
taken  back  into  the  divine  All-mind  at  the  universal  conflagration 
of  the  world.  With  regard  to  the  continuance  of  this  independence, 
i.e.  as  to  the  extent  of  individual  immortality,  various  views  were 
current  in  the  school;  some  recognised  the  duration  of  all  souls 
until  the  time  of  the  universal  conflagration,  others  reserved  this 
for  the  wise  only. 

As  now  the  one  Pneuma  of  the  universe  (whose  seat  was  located 
by  the  Stoics  sometimes  in  heaven,  sometimes  in  the  sun,  sometimes 
in  the  midst  of  the  world)  pours  itself  forth  into  all  things  as 
animating  force,  so  the  ruling  part  of  the  individual  soul  (TO  •tf-yeju.o- 
vwcoVor  XoyioTios)  in  which  dwell  ideas,  judgments,  and  impulses,  and 


1  Stob.  Ed.  I.  374.     Dox.  D.  463,  16  :   elvai  rb  ov  irvevfM  KIVOVV  barr& 
rb  Kal  ^|  aflroi;,  1}  irveu/ta  tavrb  KIVOVV  irpfxTta  Kal  fattrw  KT\. 

2  Cf  .  H.  Siebeck  Zeitsch.  /.  Volkerpyychologie,  1881,  pp.  364  ff. 
8  Nemesius,  De  Nat,  Horn.  p.  34. 


188  Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.     [PART  11. 

as  whose  seat  the  heart  was  assumed,  was  regarded  as  extending  its 
particular  ramifications  throughout  the  whole  body,  like  the  "  arms 
of  a  polyp/3  Of  such  particular  "  pneumata "  the  Stoa  assumed 
seven, — the  fire  senses,  the  faculty  of  speech,  and  the  reproductive 
power.  As  the  unity  of  the  divine  Primitive  Being  dwells  in  the 
universe,  so  the  individual  personality  lives  in  the  body. 

It  is  characteristic  that  the  Epicureans  could  entirely  adopt 
this  external  apparatus  of  psychological  views.  For  them,  too,  the 
soul  —  which  according  to  Democritus  consists  of  the  finest  atoms  — 
is  a  fiery,  atmospheric  breath  (they  apply  likewise  the  term 
"pneunia");  but  they  see  in  this  breath  something  that  is  intro- 
duced into  the  body  from  without,  something  held  fast  by  the  body 
and  mechanically  connected  with  it,  which  in  death  is  forthwith 
scattered.  They  also  distinguish  between  the  rational  and  the 
irrational  part  of  the  soul,  without,  however,  being  able  to  attribute 
to  the  former  the  metaphysical  dignity  which  it  acquired  in  the  Stoic 
theory.  Here,  too,  their  doctrine  is,  on  the  whole,  insufficient  and 
dependent. 

7.  In  accordance  with  th'e  pantheistic  presupposition  of  the 
system,  the  metaphysics  and  physics  of  the  Stoics  form  also  a 
theology,  a  system  of  natural  religion  based  on  scientific  demonstra- 
tion, and  this  found  also  poetic  presentations  in  the  school,  such  as 
the  hyniu  of  Cleanthes.  Epicureanism,  on  the  contrary,  is  in  its 
whole  nature  anti-religious.  It  takes  throughout  the  standpoint  of 
"  Enlightenment/'"  that  religion  has  been  overcome  by  science,  and 
that  it  is  the  task  and  triumph  of  wisdom  to  put  aside  the  phantoms 
of  superstition  which  have  grown  out  of  fear  and  ignorance.  The 
poet  of  this  school  depicts  in  grotesque  outlines  the  evils  which 
religion  brought  on  man,  and  sings  the  glory  of  their  conquest  by 
scientific  knowledge.1  It  is  all  the  more  amusing  that  the  Epicurean 
theory  itself  fell  to  depicting  a-  mythology  of  its  own  which  it  re- 
garded as  harmless.  It  believed  that  a  certain  degree  of  truth  must 
attach  to  the  universal  faith  in  gods,2  but  it  found  that  this  correct 
idea  was  disfigured  by  false  assumptions.  These  it  sought  in  the 
myths  which  feigned  a  participation  of  the  gods  in  human  life,  and 
an  interference  on  their  part  in  the  course  of  things;  even  the 
Stoics'  belief  in  Providence  appeared  to  them  in  this  respect  as  but 
a  refined  illusion.  Epicurus,  therefore,  —  following  Democritus  in 
Ms  doctrine  of  the  eidola,  or  images  (§  10,  4),  —  saw  in  the  gods 
giant  forms  resembling  men,  who  lead  a  blessed  life  of  contemplation 
and  spiritual  intercourse  in  the  intermediate  spaces  between  the 

i  Lucret.  De  Her.  Nat.  I.  62  ft  *  Diog.  Laert.  X.  123  f . ;  Us.  p.  59  f. 


CHAP.  1,  §  15.]  Mechanism  and  Teleology :  Epicureans,  tftoics.   189 

worlds  (intermunclia),  undisturbed  by  the  change  of  events,  and 
unconcerned  as  to  the  destiny  of  lower  beings ;  and  thus  this  doc- 
trine, also,  is  fundamentally  only  the  attempt  of  Epicureanism  to 
put  in  mythological  form  its  ideal  of  aesthetic  self-enjoyment. 

8.  It  was  in  an  entirely  different  way  that  the  ideas  of  the 
popular  religion  were  fitted  into  the  Stoic  metaphysics.  Whereas, 
up  to  this  time  in  the  development  of  Greek  thought  philosoph- 
ical theology  had  separated  itself  farther  and  farther  from  the 
indigenous  mythology,  we  meet  here,  for  the  first  time,  the 
systematic  attempt  to  bring  natural  and  iiositive  religion  into 
harmony.  Accordingly,  when  the  Stoics,  also,  yielded  to  the  need  of 
recognising  the  warrant  of  ideas  universally  present  throughout  the 
human  race  (cf.  §  17,  4),  their  pneuma  doctrine  offered  them  not 
only  a  welcome  instrument,  but  suggestions  that  were  determinative. 
For  consideration  of  the  universe  must  teach  them  that  the  divine 
World-power  has  evidently  taken,  on  mightier  forms  -and  those  of 
more  vigorous  life  than  individual  human  souls ;  and  so,  beside  the 
one  deity  without  beginning  and  end,  which  for  the  most  part  they 
designated  as  Zeus,  a  great  number  of  "gods  that  had  come  into  exist- 
ence," made  their  appearance.  To  these  the  Stoics,  as  Plato  and 
Aristotle  had  already  done,  reckoned  first  of  all  the  stars,  which 
they  too  honoured  as  higher  intelligences  and  especially  pure  for- 
mations of  the  primitive  fire,  and  further,  the  personifications  of 
other  natural  forces  in  which  the  power  of  Providence,  benevolent 
to  man,  reveals  itself.  From  this  point  of  view  we  can  understand 
how  an  extensive  interpretation  of  myths  was  the  order  of  the  day 
in  the  Stoic  school,  seeking  to  incorporate  the  popular  figures  in  its 
metaphysical  system  by  all  kinds  of  allegories.  In  addition  to  this 
there  was  an  equally  welcome  use  of  the  Euemeristic  theory,  which 
not  only  explained  and  justified  the  deification  of  prominent  men, 
but  taught  also  to  consider  the  demons  sacred,  as  the  guardian 
spirits  of  individual  men. 

Thus  the  Stoic  world  became  peopled  with  a  whole  host  of  higher 
and  lower  gods,  but  they  all  appeared  as  ultimately  but  emanations  of 
the  one  highest  World-power,  —  as  the  subordinate  powers  or  forces 
which,  themselves  determined  by  the  universal  Pneuma,  were  con- 
ceived of  as  the  ruling  spirits  of  the  world's  life.  They  formed, 
therefore,  for  the  faith  of  the  Stoics,  the  mediating  organs,  which 
represent,  each  in  its  realm,  the  vital  force  and  Providence  of  the 
World-reason,  and  to  them  the  piety  of  the  Stoics  turned  in  the 
forms  of  worship  of  positive  religion.  The  polytheism  of  the  popular 
faith  was  thus  philosophically  re-established,  and  taken  up  as  an 
integrant  constituent  into  metaphysical  pantheism. 


190          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.     [PART II. 

In  connection  with  this  scientific  reconstruction  of  positive  re- 
ligion stands  the  theoretical  justification  of  divination  in  the  Stoic 
system  where  it  awakened  great  interest,  except  in  the  case  of  a  few 
men  like  Pansetius,  who  thought  more  coolly.  The  interconnection 
and  providentially  governed  unity  of  the  world's  processes  was  held  to 
show  itself — as  one  form  of  manifestation  —  in  the  possibility  that 
different  things  and  processes  which  stand  in  no  direct  causal  rela- 
tion to  one  another,  may  yet  point  to  one  another  by  delicate  rela- 
tions, and  therefore  be  able  to  serve  as  signs  for  one  another.  The 
human  soul  is  capable  of  understanding  these  by  virtue  of  its  rela- 
tionship with  the  all-ruling  Pneuma,  but  for  the  full  interpretation 
of  such  ecstatic  revelations  the  art  and  science  of  divination,  resting 
upon  experience,  must  be  added.  On  this  basis  Stoicism  regarded 
itself  as  strong  enough  to  elaborate  philosophically  all  the  divination 
of  the  ancient  world.  This  was  especially  true  of  its  younger  repre- 
sentatives, and  in  particular,  as  it  seems,  of  Posidonius. 


§  16.  The  Freedom  of  the  "Will  and  the  Perfection  of  the  World. 

The  sharp  definition  of  the  contrasted  mechanical  and  teleological 
views  of  the  world,  and  especially  the  difference  in  the  conceptional 
forms  in  which  the  thought,  common  to  a  certain  extent,  of  Nature's 
universal  conformity  to  law  had  been  developed,  led,  in  connection 
with  the  ethical  postulates  and  presuppositions  which  controlled 
the  thought  of  the  time,  to  two  new  problems,  which  from  the 
beginning  had  various  complications.  These  were  the  problems  of 
the  freedom  of  the  human  will  and  of  the  goodness  and  perfection 
of  the  world.  Both  problems  grew  out  of  contradictions  which 
made  their  appearance  between  moral  needs  and  just  those  meta- 
physical theories  which  had  been  formed  to  satisfy  those  needs. 

1.  The  proper  home  for  the  formation  of  these  new  problems 
was  the  Stoic  system,  and  they  may  be  understood  as  the  necessary 
consequence  of  a  deep  and  ultimately  irreconcilable  antagonism  be- 
tween the  fundamental  principles  of  the  system.  These  principles  are 
metaphysical  monism  and  ethical  dualism.  The  fundamental  moral 
doctrine  of  the  Stoics,  according  to  which  man  should  overcome  the 
world  in  Ms  own  impulses  by  virtue,  presupposes  an  anthropological 
duality,  an  opposition  in  human  nature  in  accordance  with  which 
reason  stands  over  against  a  sensuous  nature  contrary  to  reason. 
Without  this  antithesis  the  whole  Stoic  ethics  is  ready  to  fall.  The 
metaphysical  doctrine,  however,  by  which  the  command  of  reason 
in  man  is  to  be  explained,  postulates  such  an  unrestricted  and  all- 


CHAP.  1,  §  16.]     Freedom  of  the  Will :  Socrates,  Aristotle.         191 

controlling  reality  of  the  World-reason  that  the  reality  of  what  is 
contrary  to  reason,  either  in  man  or  in  the  course  of  the  world, 
cannot  be  united  therewith.  From  this  source  grew  the  two  ques- 
tions which  since  then  have  never  ceased  to  employ  man's  critical 
investigation,  although  all  essential  points  of  view  that  can  come 
into  consideration  in  the  case  were  more  or  less  clearly  illumined  at 
that  time. 

2.  The  conceptions  which  form  the  presuppositions  for  the  prob- 
lem of  freedom  lie  ready  at  hand  in  the  ethical  reflections  on  the 
voluntary  nature  of  wrongdoing,  which  were  begun  by  Socrates 
and  brought  to  a  preliminary  conclusion  by  Aristotle  in  a  brilliant 
investigation.1  The  motives  of  these  thoughts  are  ethical  through- 
out, and  the  domain  in  which  they  move  is  exclusively  psychologi- 
cal. The  question  at  issue  is  hence  essentially  that  of  freedom  of 
choice,  and  while  the  reality  of  this  is  doubtless  affirmed  upon  the 
basis  of  immediate  feeling,  and  with  reference  to  man's  conscious- 
ness of  his  responsibility,  difficulty  arises  only  in  consequence  of 
the  intellectualistic  conception  of  Socrates,  who  brought  the  will 
into  complete  dependence  upon  insight.  This  difficulty  develops 
primarily  in  the  double  meaning  of  "  freedom/'  or,  as  it  is  here  still 
called,  "  voluntariness  "  (cKownw),  an  ambiguity  which  has  since 
been  repeated  again  and  again  in  the  most  variously  shifted  forms. 
According  to  Socrates,  all  ethically  wrong  action  proceeds  from  a 
wrong  view  —  a  view  clouded  by  desires.  He  who  thus  acts  does 
not  "  know/'  therefore,  what  he  is  doing,  and  in  this  sense  he  acts 
involuntarily.2  That  is,  only  the  wise  man  is  free ;  the  wicked  is 
not  free.3  From  this  ethical  conception  of  freedom,  however,  the 
psychological  conception  of  freedom  —  i.e.  the  conception  of  freedom 
of  choice  as  the  ability  to  decide  between  different  motives  —  must 
be  carefully  separated.  Whether  Socrates  did  this  is  a  question ;  * 
at  all  events,  it  was  done  'by  Plato.  The  latter  expressly  affirmed 
man's  freedom  of  choice,5  appealing  to  his  responsibility,  —  a  psycho- 
logical decision  on  essentially  ethical  grounds,  —  and,  at  the  same 
time3  he  held  fast  to  the  Socratic  doctrine  that  the  wicked  man  acts 
involuntarily,  i.e.  is  ethically  not  free.  He  even  connects  the  two 
directly  when  he  develops  the  thought 6  that  man  may  sink  into  the 


*  JSth.  Nic.  III.  1-8. 

2  Xen.  Mem.  III.  9,  4 ;  Cyrop.  HI.  1,  38. 
s  Cf.  Arist  fflh.  NIC.  III.  7,  113  b  14. 

*  According  to  a  remark  in  the  Peripatetic  Magna  Moralia  (I.  9, 1187  a  7} 
Socrates,  indeed,  had  expressly  said,  "  it  is  not  in  our  power"  to  be  good  or  bad. 
According  to  this,  therefore,  he  had  denied  psychological  freedom.  . 

5  Plat.  Hep.  X.  617  ff. 
e  Plat.  Phced.  81  B, 


192          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought  :  Ethical  Period.     [PART  II. 

condition  of  ethical  non-freedom  by  Ms  own  fault,  and,  therefore, 
with  psychological  freedom. 

With  Aristotle,  who  separated  himself  farther  from  the  Socratic 
intellectualism,  the  psychological  conception  of  freedom  conies  out 
more  clearly  and  independently.  He  proceeds  from  the  position 
that  ethical  qualification  in  general  is  applicable  only  in  the  case  of 
'-  voluntary  "  actions,  and  discusses  in  the  first  place  the  prejudices 
which  this  voluntariness  sustains,  partly  from  external  force  (/fra) 
and  psychical  compulsion,  and  partly  from  ignorance  of  the  matter. 
That  action  only  is  completely  voluntary  which  has  its  origin  in  the 
personality  itself,  and  of  which  the  relations  are  fully  known.1  The 
whole  investigation  -  is  maintained  from  the  standpoint  of  responsi- 
bility, and  the  discovered  conception  of  voluntariness  is  designed  to 
lead  to  the  conception  of  accountability.  It  contains  within  itself 
the  characteristics  of  external  freedom  of  action,  and  of  a  conception 
of  the  situation  unclouded  by  any  deception.  But,  on  this  account, 
it  must  be  still  further  restricted,  for  among  his  voluntary  acts  a 
man  can  be  held  accountable  for  those  only  that  proceed  from  a 
choice  (7rpoatpe<rts).3  Freedom  of  choice,  therefore,  which  proceeds 
by  reflecting  upon  ends  as  well  as  upon  means,  is  the  condition  of 
ethical  accountability. 

Aristotle  avoided  a  farther  entrance  upon  the  psychology  of 
motivation  and  upon  the  determining  causes  of  this  choice  ;  he  con- 
tents himself  with  establishing  the  position  that  the  personality 
itself  is  the  sufficient  reason  for  the  actions  4  which  are  ascribed  to 
it;  and  to  this  maintenance  of  the  freedom  of  choice  his  school,  and 
especially  Theophrastus,  who  composed  a  treatise  of  his  own  on 
freedom,  held  fast. 

3.  On  this  same  basis  we  find  also  the  Stoics,  in  so  far  as  purely 
ethical  considerations  are  concerned.  Precisely  that  lively  feeling 
of  responsibility  which  characterises  their  morals  demanded  of  them 
the  recognition  of  this  free  choice  on  the  part  of  the  individual,  and 
they  sought  therefore  to  maintain  this  in  every  way. 

Their  position  became  critical,  however,  by  reason  of  the  fact 
that  their  metaphysics,  with  its  doctrine  of  fate  and  providence, 
drove  them  beyond  this  attitude.  For  since  this  theory  of  fate 
made  man,  like  all  other  creatures,  determined  in  all  his  external 
and  internal  formation  and  in  all  that  he  does  and  suffers,  by  the 


1  Eth.  ytC.  III.  3,  1111  a  73:  o£  $  dpxif  to  atfr$  eltidri  ra  xaff  hurra  to  oh  -f] 
*•/>££«.      • 

2  As  the  reference  at  the  beginning  to  the  right  of  punishment  clearlv  shows 
(EtJi.  NIC.  1109  b  34). 

s  Ib.  4,  1112  a  1. 

4  Ib.  5,  1112  b  31  :  *ocx*  dif  ...  Mpuiros  elvat  apx^l  ruv  irpd&uv. 


CHAP.  1,  §  16.]     Freedom  of  the  Will:  Stoics,  Epicurus.  193 

all-animating  World-power,  personality  ceased  to  be  the  true  ground 
(apxn)  of  his  actions,  and  these  appeared  to  be,  like  all  else  that 
occurs,  but  the  predetermined  and  unavoidably  necessary  operations 
of  the  God-Nature.  In  fact,  the  Stoa  did  not  shrink  from  this 
extreme  consequence  of  determinism;  on  the  contrary,  Chrysippus 
heaped  up  proof  on  proof  for  this  doctrine.  He  based  it  upon  the 
principle  of  sufficient  reason  (cf.  above,  §  -15,  2)  ;  he  showed  that 
only  by  presupposing  this  could  the  correctness  of  judgments  con- 
cerning the  future  be  maintained,  since  a  criterion  for  their  truth  or 
falsity  is  given  only  if  the  matter  is  already  determined ; I  he  also 
gave  to  this  argument  the  changed  form,  that  since  only  the 
necessary  can  be  known,  and  not  that  which  is  still  undecided,  the 
foreknowledge  of  the  gods  makes  necessary  the  assumption  of  deter- 
minism ;  he  even  did  not  scorn  to  adduce  the  fulfilment  of  predic- 
tions as  a  welcome  argument. 

In  this  doctrine,  which,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Stoic  doctrine 
of  the  logos,  was  completely  consistent,  the  opponents  of  the  system 
saw  of  course  a  decided  denial  of  freedom  of  the  will,  and  of  the 
criticisms  which  the  system  experienced  this  was  perhaps  the 
most  frequent  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  incisive.  Among 
the  numerous  attacks  the  best  known  is  the  so-called  ignava  ratio,  or 
"lazy  reason"  (d/>yos  Xoyo?),  which  from  the  claim  of  the  unavoid- 
able necessity  of  future  events  draws  the  fatalistic  conclusion  that 
one  should  await  them  inactively, — an  attack  which  Chrysippus 
did  not  know  how  to  avoid  except  by  the  aid  of  very  forced  distinc- 
tions.2 The  Stoics,  on  the  contrary,  concerned  themselves  to  show 
that  in  spite  of  this  determinism,  and  rather  exactly  by  virtue  of  it, 
man  remains  the  cause  of  his  actions  in  the  sense  that  he  is  to  be 
made  responsible  for  them.  On  the  basis  of  a  distinction 3  between 
main  and  accessory  causes  (which,  moreover,  reminds  us  throughout 
of  the  Platonic  omov  and  &VOLTLOV)  Chrysippus  showed  that  every 
decision  of  the  will  does  indeed  necessarily  follow  from  the  co-opera- 
tion of  man  with  his  environment,  but  that  just  here  the  outer 
circumstances  are  only  the  accessory  causes,  while  the  assent  pro- 
ceeding from  the  personality  is  the  main  cause,  and  to  this  account- 
ability applies.  While,  however,  this  voluntarily  acting  ijye/xovt/cov, 
or  ruling  faculty  of  man,  is  determined  from  the  universal  Pneuma, 
this  Pneuma  takes  on  in  every  separate  being  a  self-subsistent 


1  Cic.  De  Fato,  10,  20.    So  far  as  concerns  disjunctive  propositions  Epicurus 
also  for  this  reason  gave  up  the  truth  of  disjunction  j  Cic.  De  Nat.  Deor.  I. 
25,  70. 

2  Cic.  De  Fato,  12,  28  ff. 
*  Cic.  De  Fato,  16,  36  fi. 


194          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Ethical  Period.     [PART  II. 

nature,  different  from  that  of  others,  and  this  is  to  be  regarded  as  a 
proper  apx^1  In  particular,  the  Stoics  make  prominent  the  point 
that  responsibility,  as  a  judgment  pronounced  on  the  ethical  quality 
of  actions  and  characters,  is  quite  independent  of  the  question 
whether  the  persons  or  deeds  might,  in  the  course  of  events,  have 
been  other  than  they  were,  or  not.2 

4.  The  problem  of  the  freedom  of  the  will,  which  had  been 
already  complicated  ethically  and  psychologically,  experienced  in 
this  way  still  further  a  metaphysical  and  (in  the  Stoic  sense)  theo- 
logical complication,  and  the  consequence  was  that  the  indeterminists 
who  were  opponents  of  the  Stoa  gave  a  new  turn  to  the  conception 
of  freedom  which  they  regarded  as  threatened  by  the  Stoic  doctrine, 
and  brought  it  into  sharp  definition.  The  assumption  of  the  excep- 
tionless causal  nexus  to  which  even  the  functions  of  the  will  were 
to  be  subordinated,  seemed  to  exclude  the  capacity  of  free  decision ; 
but  this  freedom  of  choice  had,  since  Aristotle,  been  regarded  in  all 
schools  as  the  indispensable  presupposition  of  ethical  accountability. 
On  this  account  the  opponents  thought  —  and  this  gave  the  contro- 
versy its  especial  violence  —  that  they  were  defending  an  ethical 
good  when  they  combated  the  Stoic  doctrine  of  fate,  and  with  that 
the  Deiaocritic  principle  of  natural  necessity.  And  if  Chrysippus 
had  appealed  to  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason  to  establish  this, 
Carneades,  to  whom  the  freedom  of  the  will  was  an  incontestable 
fact,  did  not  fear  to  draw  in  question  the  universal  and  invariable 
validity  of  this  principle.3 

Epicurus  went  still  farther.  He  found  the  Stoic  determinism  so 
irreconcilable  with  the  wise  man's  self-determination  which  formed 
the  essential  feature  of  his  ethical  ideal,  that  he  would  rather  still 
assume  the  illusory  ideas  of  religion  than  believe  in  such  a  slavery 
of  the  soul4  Therefore  he,  too,  denied  the  universal  validity  of  the 
causal  law  and  subsumed  freedom  together  with  chance  under  the 
conception  of  uncaused  occurrence.  Thus  in  opposition  to  Stoic 
determinism,  the  metaphysical  conception  of  freedom  arose,  by  means 
of  which  Epicurus  put  the  uncaused  function  of  the  will  in  man 
upon  a  parallel  with  the  causeless  deviation  of  the  atoms  from  their 
line  of  fall  (cf.  §  15,  4).  The  freedom  of  mdeterminism  means, 
accordingly,  a  choice  between  different  possibilities  that  is  deter- 
mined by  no  causes,  and  Epicurus  thought  thereby  to  rescue  moral 
responsibility. 
This  metaphysical  conception  of  freedom  as  causelessness  is  not  at 

i  Alex.  Aphr.  De  Fato,  p.  112.  a  Cic.  De  Fato,  5,  9 ;  11,  23  ;  14,  31. 

*  Ib,  p.  106.  4  Diog.  Laert.  X.  133  f. ;  Us.  p.  65. 


CHAP.  1,  §  16.]     Physico-Theology  :  Epicurus,  Stoics.  195 

all  isolated  in  the  scientific  thought  of  antiquity.  Only  the  Stoa 
held  fast  inviolably  to  the  principle  of  causality.  Even  Aristotle 
had  not  followed  into  details  the  application  of  his  general  principles 
(cf.  p.  143);  he  had  contented  himself  with  the  cVt  TO  TTO\V,  "for  the 
most  part,"  and  had  based  his  renunciation  of  the  attempt  fully  to 
comprehend  the  particular  upon  the  assumption  of  the  contingent 
in  Nature,  i.e.  of  the  lawless  and  causeless.  In  this  respect  the 
Stoics  alone  are  to  be  regarded  as  forerunners  of  the  modern  study 
of  Nature. 

5.  Stoicism  encountered  difficulties  which  were  no  less  great,  in 
carrying  out  its  teleology.  The  pantheistic  system  which  regarded 
the  whole  world  as  the  living  product  of  a  divine  Reason  acting 
according  to  ends,  and  found  in  this  its  sole  ground  of  explanation, 
must  of  course  maintain  also  the  purposiveness,  goodness,  and  perfec- 
tion of  this  universe;  and  conversely  the  Stoics  were  accustomed  to 
prove  the  existence  of  the  gods  and  of  Providence  by  pointing  to 
the  purposiveness,  beauty,  and  perfection  of  the  world  ;  that  is,  by 
the  so-called  physico-theological  method.1 

The  attacks  which  this  line  of  thought  experienced  in  antiquity 
were  directed  not  so  much  against  the  correctness  of  the  reasoning 
(though  Carneades  applied  his  criticism  at  this  point  also)  as 
against  the  premises  ;  and  conversely,  the  easy  exhibition  of  the 
many  defects  and  maladaptations,  of  the  evils  and  the  ethical  harm 
in  the  world  was  employed  as  a  counter-reason  against  the  assump- 
tion of  a  rational,  purposeful  World-cause  and  of  a  Providence. 
This  was  done  first  and  with  full  energy,  naturally,  by  Epicurus, 
who  asked  whether  G-od  would  remove  the  evil  in  the  world  but 
could  not,  or  could  remove  it  but  would  not,  or  whether  perhaps 
neither  of  these  was  true,2  —  and  who  also  pointed  to  the  instances 
of  injustice  in  which  the  course  of  life  so  often  makes  the  good 
miserable  and  the  wicked  happy.3 

These  objections,  intensified  and  carried  out  with  especial  care, 
were  brought  into  the  field  by  Carneades*  But  to  the  reference  to 
the  evil  and  injustice  of  the  course  of  events  he  added  the  objec- 
tion to  which  the  Stoics  were  most  sensitive  :  5  "  Whence  then  in 
this  world  which  has  been  created  by  Reason  comes  that  which  is 
void  of  reason  and  contrary  to  reason,  whence  in  this  world  ani- 
mated by  the  divine  Spirit  come  sin  and  folly,  the  greatest  of  all 


1  Cic.  De  Nat.  Deor.  II  5,  13  ft 

2  Lactant.  De  Ira  Dei,  13,  19  ;  Us.  Fr.  374. 

*  Id.  Inst.  Div.  III.  17,  8  ;  Us.  Fr.  370. 

*  Cic.  Acad.  II.  38,  120  ;  De  Nat.  Deor.  HI.  32,  80  ft. 

*  Cic.  De  Nat.  Deor.  III.  25-31. 


196          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.     [PART II. 

evils?  '7  And  if  the  Stoics,  as  perhaps  occurred  in  spite  of  their 
determinism,1  wished  to  make  free  will  responsible  for  these  things, 
the  further  question  arose,  why  the  almighty  World-reason  should 
have  given  man  a  freedom  which  was  thus  to  be  abused,  and  why 
it  should  permit  this  abuse. 

6.  In  the  presence  of  such  questions  the  Stoics  with  their  monis- 
tic metaphvsics  were  in  a  much  worse  case  than  Plato  and  Aristotle, 
who  had  been  able  to  trace  the  maladaptations  and  evil  back  to 
the  resistance  of  the  "  ^Tot-being,"  or  of  matter  respectively.  In 
spite  of  this  the  Stoics  came  forward  boWy  to  master  these  diffi- 
culties., and  brought  to  light,  not  without  acute  thought,  most  of 
those  arguments  in  which  at  later  periods  theodicy  has  moved  again 
and  again. 

The  teleological  doctrine  of  the  perfection  of  the  universe  can  be 
protected  against  such  attacks  either  by  denying  the  dys-teleological 
facts,  or  by  justifying  them  as  the  indispensable  means  or  attend- 
ant result  in  the  purposefully  connected  whole.  Both  methods 
were  pursued  by  the  Stoa. 

Their  psychological  and  ethical  theories  permitted  the  claim  that 
what  is  called  a  physical  evil  is  not  such  in  itself,  but  becomes  such 
by  man's  assent,  that  hence,  if  diseases  and  the  like  are  brought 
about  by  the  necessity  of  the  natural  course  of  events,  it  is  only 
man's  fault  that  makes  an  evil  out  of  them ;  just  as  it  is  frequently 
only  the  wrong  use  which  the  foolish  man  makes  of  things  that 
makes  these  injurious,2  while  in  themselves  they  are  either  indif- 
ferent or  even  beneficial.  So  the  objection  based  on  the  injustice 
of  the  course  of  the  world  is  rebutted  by  the  claim  that  in  truth  for 
the  good  man  and  the  wise  man  physical  evils  are  no  evils  at  all, 
and  that  for  the  bad  man,  on  the  other  hand,  only  a  sensuous  illu- 
sory satisfaction  is  possible,  which  does  not  make  him  truly  happy, 
but  rather  only  aggravates  and  strengthens  the  moral  disease  which 
has  laid  hold  of  him.3 

On  the  other  hand,  physical  evils  may  also  be  defended  on  the 
ground  that  they  are  the  inevitable  consequences  of  arrangements 
of  Mature  which  are  in  themselves  adapted  to  their  ends  and  do 
not  fail  of  their  purpose,  —  as  Chrysippus,  for  example,  attempted  to 
show  in  the  case  of  diseases.4  In  particular,  however,  they  have 
the  moral  significance  of  serving  partly  as  reformatory  punishments 
of  Providence ; 5  partly,  also,  as  a  useful  stimulus  for  the  exercise 
of  our  moral  powers. 6 

1  Cleanth.  Hymn.  v.  17.  *  Q.eu.  jV/j_  yn  i    7  ff. 

2  Seneca,  Qu.  Nat.  V.  18,  4.      -  5  piut.  StoiCt  ^ep.  35,  1. 
8  Seneca,  Ep.  87,  11  ff.      -  e  Marc.  Aurel.  VIII.  35. 


CHAP.  1,  §  IT.]         Criteria  of  Truth:  Peripatetics.  197 

While  external  evils  were  thus  justified  principally  by  pointing 
out  their  ethical  purposiveness,  it  appeared  for  the  Stoics  an  all  the 
more  urgent  problem,  though  one  which  proved  also  the  more  diffi- 
cult, to  make  moral  evil  or  sin  comprehensible.  Here  the  negative 
way  of  escape  was  quite  impossible,  for  the  reality  of  baseness  in 
the  case  of  the  great  majority  of  men  was  the  favourite  subject  of 
declamation  in  the  Stoic  discourses  on  morals.  Here,  then,  was  the 
centre  of  the  whole  theodicy,  namely,  to  show  how  in  this  world 
which  is  the  product  of  divine  Keason,  that  which  is  contrary  to 
reason  in  the  impulses,  dispositions,  and  actions  of  rationally 
endowed  beings  is  possible.  Here,  therefore,  the  Stoics  resorted  to 
universal  considerations.  They  showed  how  the  perfection  of  the 
whole  not  only  does  not  include  that  of  all  the  individual  parts,  but 
even  excludes  it,1  and  in  this  way  substantiated  their  claim  that 
God  must  necessarily  allow  even  the  imperfection  and  baseness  of 
man.  In  particular,  they  emphasised  the  point  that  it  is  only 
through  opposition  to  evil  that  good  as  such  is  brought  about ;  for 
were  there  no  sin  and  folly,  there  would  be  no  virtue  and  wisdom.2 
And  while  vice  is  thus  deduced  as  the  necessary  foil  for  the  good, 
the  Stoics  give  as  a  final  consideration,3  that  the  eternal  Providence 
ultimately  turns  even  the  evil  to  good,  and  has  in  it  but  an  appar- 
ently refractory  means  for  the  fulfilment  of  its  own  highest  ends.* 

§  17.  The  Criteria  of  Truth. 

The  philosophical  achievements  of  the  post-Aristotelian  time 
were  least  important  in  the  department  of  logic.  Such  a  powerful 
creation  as  the  Analytics  of  the  Stagirite,  which  brought  the  prin- 
ciples of  Greek  science  in  so  masterly  a  fashion  to  the  consciousness 
of  all  in  a  conclusive  form,  must  naturally  rule  logical  thought  for 
a  long  time,  and,  in  fact,  did  this  until  the  close  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  and  even  beyond.  The  foundations  of  this  system  were  so 
firmly  laid  that  at  first  nothing  there  was  shaken,  and  there  re- 
mained for  the  activity  of  the  schools  but  to  build  up  individual 
parts,  —  an  activity  in  connection  with  which,  even  at  that  time, 
much  of  the  artificial  adornment  characteristic  of  a  degenerate  age 
displayed  itself. 

1.  The  Peripatetics  had  already  attempted  to  develop  the  Aristote- 
lian Analytics  systematically  in  this  direction  by  a  more  detailed  treat- 
ment, by  partially  new  proofs,  by  farther  subdivision,  and  by  more 


1  Pint.  Stoic.  Rep.  44,  6.  8  Ib.  35,  3. 

2  Ib.  36,  1.  *  Cleanth.  Hymn.  w.  18  f. 


198          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.     [PART  II. 

methodical  formulation.  In  particular,  Euclemus  and  Tlieophrastus 
undertook  investigations  concerning  the  hypothetical  and  disjunc- 
tive judgments,  and  the  extension  of  the  theory  of  the  syllogism 
occasioned  by  the  appearance  of  these  judgments  and  premises. 
The  Stoics  continued  these  efforts;  they  set  these  new  forms  of 
judgment  (d&'a>fui)  as  composite  over  against  the  simple l  categorical 
forms,  developed  into  all  their  details  the  resulting  forms  of  the 
syllogism,  emphasised  also  especially  the  quality3  of  judgments, 
and  deduced  the  laws  of  thought  in  altered  forms.  In  general, 
however,  they  spun  out  the3  logical  rules  into  a  dry  schematism  and 
genuine  scholastic  formalism  which  thereby  became  farther  and 
farther  removed  from  the  significant  fundamental  thoughts  of  the 
Aristotelian  Analytics,  and  became  a  dead  mass  of  formulse.  The 
unfruitful  subtlety  of  this  process  took  special  delight  in  the  solu- 
tion of  sophistical  catches,  in  which  the  real  meaning  was  inextri- 
cably involved  in  the  contradiction  of  forms. 

It  was  in  these  elaborations  by  the  schools  that  the  science  of 
logic  created  by  Aristotle  first  took  on  the  purely  formal  character 
that  it  retained  up  to  the  time  of  KA:N-T.  The  more  pedantic  the 
form  taken  in  the  development  of  the  particular  features,  the  more 
the  consciousness  of  the  living  thought,  to  which  Aristotle  had 
aspired,  was  replaced  by  a  schoolmaster-like  network  of  rules, — 
essentially  designed  to  catch  thoughts  and  examine  their  formal 
legitimacy,  but  incapable  of  doing  justice  to  the  creative  power  of 
scientific  activity.  While,  even  with  Aristotle,  regard  for  proof 
and  refutation  had  occupied  the  foreground,  here  it  occupies  the 
whole  field.  Antiquity  did  not  attain  a  theory  of  investigation  5 
for  the  weak  beginnings  which  we  find  toward  this  end  in  the  inves- 
tigations of  a  younger  Epicurean,3  Philodemus,4  concerning  conclu- 
sions from  induction  and  analogy,  are  relatively  isolated,  and  have 
no  result  worthy  of  mention, 

2.  In  the  doctrine  of  the  Categories,  of  the  elaboration  of  which  the 
Stoics  made  much  account,  more  that  was  real  was  to  be  expected. 
Here  it  was  indeed  quite  correct,  and  yet  not  very  fruitful,  to  call 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  supreme  category,  of  which  the  rest 


1  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VIII.  93. 

2  Diog.  Laert.  VII.  65. 

s  Epicurus  himself,  and  his  school  also,  as  a  whole,  did  not  trouble  themselves 
as  to  the  principles  of  formal  logic.  One  might  regard  this  as  an  evidence  of 
taste  and  intelligence,  hut  it  was  in  truth  only  indifference  toward  all  that  did 
not  promise  directly  practical  advantages. 

4  On  his  treatise  irepi  (njijxliav  K&1  ffyiLeuSxrewv,  discovered  in  Herculaneum,  cf. 
Th.  Gompertz,  Herculanensische  Studien,  Heft  1  (Leips.  1865) :  Fr.  Bahusch 
(Lyck,  1879)j  K.  Philippson  (Berlin,  1881). 


CHAP.  1,  §  17.]  Criteria  of  Truth;  Stoics.  199 

represent  only  special  determinations,  is  that  of  Being  (TO  ov)1  or 
Something  (rt);  and  the  co-ordination  of  the  categories  which,  at 
least  as  regards  the  method  of  their  enumeration,  was  Aristotle's 
plan,  was  replaced  by  an  expressly  systematic  succession,  according 
to  which  each  category  was  to  be  more  exactly  determined  by  the 
following  one.  "  What  is,"  or  Being,  as  abiding  substrate  of  all 
possible  relations,  is  substance  (vroKeijucvov)  ;  this  is  the  supporter 
(Trager)  of  fixed  qualities  (TTOIOV),  and  only  in  this  aspect  is  it 
involved  in  changing  states  (TO  TTUS  Ixov),  and,  in  consequence  of 
these  latter,  in  relations  to  other  substances  (TO  :rpos  TLTTWS  lxOI/)- 

Out  of  the  doctrine  of  the  categories  grows  thus  an  ontology,  that 
is,  a  metaphysical  theory  as  to  the  most  general  formal  relations  of 
reality,  and  this  theory  in  the  system  of  the  Stoics,  agreeably  to 
their  general  tendency  (cf.  §  15,  5),  takes  on  a  thoroughly  materi- 
alistic character.  As  substance,  the  existent  is  matter  which  is  in 
itself  destitute  of  properties  (vXi;),  and  the  qualities  and  forces 
which  are  inherent  in  matter  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  in  a  particular 
part  (?roioT?7T€s —  Suva/Acts),  are  likewise  kinds  of  matter  (atmospheric 
currents)  which  are  commingled  with  it  (K/>SO-IS  oY  oAan/).  In  this 
connection  both  substance  and  attributes  are  regarded,  as  well  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  general  conception  as  from  that  of  the  indi- 
vidual thing,  and  in  the  latter  aspect  it  is  emphasised  that  every 
individual  thing  is  essentially  and  definitely  distinguished  from  all 
others.2 

Besides  these  categories  of  Being,  we  find  making  their  appear- 
ance among  the  Stoics  those  conceptional  forms  by  which  the  rela- 
tion of  thought  to  Being  is  expressed,  and  in  these  the  separation  of 
the  subjective  from  the  objective,  for  which  a  preparation  had  been 
growing  more  and  more  complete  in  the  development  of  Greek 
thought,  now  attains  definite  expression.  For  while  the  Stoics 
regarded  all  objects  to  which  thought  relates  as  corporeal,  while 
they  regarded  the  activity  of  thought  itself,  and  no  less  its  expres- 
sion in  language 3  as  corporeal  functions,  they  were  still  obliged  to 
confess  that  the  content  of  consciousness  as  such  (TO  XZKTOV)  is  of  in- 


1  That  the  Peripatetics  also  busied  themselves  with  this  category  is  proved 
by  the  definition  preserved  by  Strato  :  rb  5?  fan  rb  TTJS  StafMvrjs  aXriov  (Proclus 
in  Tim.  242  E). 

2  In  contrasting  the  first  two  with  the  last  two  categories,  the  language  rela- 
tion of  noun  and  verb  appears  here  also  (in  Stoic  terminology  irrwcr«  and  K&TTJ- 


8  The  Stoics  laid  great  weight  upon  the  discriminative  comparison  of  thought 
and  of  speech,  of  the  inner  activity  of  reason  (\67os  4z>5«£0eros),  and  of  its  ex- 
pression through  the  voice  (\6yos  •jrpo<f>opiK6s').  Hence,  too,  the  assumption  (cf. 
§  15,  6)  of  the  faculty  of  speech  as  a  proper  part  of  the  soul  ;  hence  their  thor- 
ough treatment  of  rhetoric  and  grammar  side  by  side  with  logic. 


200  Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.    [PAKT  II 

corporeal  nature.  But  since  the  distinction  was  thus  sharply 
drawn  between  Being  and  content  of  consciousness,  the  fundamental 
epistemological  problem  came  forward,  how  the  relations  by  which  the 
ideational  content  refers  to  Being  and  agrees  with  it,  are  to  be  thought. 

3.  This  question  was,  moreover,  also  brought  home  by  the  vigor- 
ous development  which  Scepticism  had  meanwhile  undergone,  and 
by  the  relatively  strong  position  which  it  occupied  as  compared  with 
the  dogmatic  systems. 

TThether  by  Pyrrho  or  Timon  it  matters  not,  it  was  at  all  events 
at  about  the  same  time  at  which  the  great  school-systems  became 
dogmatically  developed  and  fortified,  that  all  those  arguments  were 
svstematised  into  a  complete  whole,  by  which  the  Sophistic  period 
had  shaken  the  naive  trust  in  man's  capacity  for  knowledge.  Al- 
though the  ethical  end  of  making  man  independent  of  fate  by  with- 
holding judgment  was  ultimately  decisive  (cf.  §  14,  2),  this 
Scepticism  still  forms  a  carefully  carried  out  theoretical  doctrine. 
It  doubts  the  possibility  of  knowledge  in  both  its  forms,  the  form 
of  perception  as  truly  as  that  of  judging  thought,  and  after  it  has 
destructively  analysed  each  of  these  two  factors  singly,  it  adds 
expressly  that  just  on  this  account  their  union  can  have  no  certain 
result.1 

As  regards  perception,  the  Sceptics  availed  themselves  of  the 
Protagorean  relativism,  and  in  the  so-called  ten  Tropes 2  in  which 
JSnesidemus3  sets  forth  the  sceptical  theory  with  very  defective 
arrangement,  this  tendency  still  occupies  the  broadest  space.  Per- 
ceptions change  not  only  with  the  different  species  of  animate 
beings  (1),  not  only  with  different  men  (2),  according  to  their  cus- 
toms (9)  and  their  whole  development  (10),  but  even  in  the  case 
of  the  same  individual  at  different  times  (3),  in  dependence  upon 
bodily  conditions  (4),  and  upon  the  different  relations  in  which  the 
individual  finds  himself  with  regard  to  his  object  spatially  (5). 
They  alter,  also,  because  of  the  difference  in  the  states  of  the  object 
(7),  and  have,  therefore,  no  claim  to  the  value  of  an  immediate 
report  of  things,  because  their  origination  is  conditioned  by  inter- 
mediate states  in  media  such  as  the  air,  the  co-operating  elements 
furnished  by  which  we  are  not  able  to  deduct  (6),  Man  is,  there- 

1  Prom  two  deceivers  combined  it  is  only  right  to  expect  no  truth.  Diog. 
Laert.  IX.  114. 

*  Sext.  Emp.  Pt/rrh.  Hyp.  I  38  ff. 

8  It  was  said  by  the  ancient  writers  that  JEnesidemus  was  attached,  not  only 
to  Scepticism,  but  also  to  the  metaphysics  of  Heraclitus.  The  question  whether 
this  was  actually  so,  or  whether  such  a  relation  was  only  ascribed  to  him  by  mis- 
take, has  solely  antiquarian  significance.  For  had  the  former  been  the  case,  it 
would  have  been  but  another  manifestation  of  a  real  relationship  in  thought,  to 
which  Plato  had  already  directed  attention,  Thecet.  152  E  ff. ;  cf.  p.  92,  note  2. 


CHAP.  1,  §  17.]  Criteria  of  Truth :  Sceptics.  .        201 

fore,  in  all  ways,  not  in  a  condition  to  know  things  purely  (8),  and 
in  the  face  of  the  multiplicity  of  impressions  so  full  of  contradic- 
tions he  has  no  means  of  distinguishing  a  true  from  a  false  impres- 
sion. One  is  no  more  (ov  juSAAov)  valid  than  another. 

Equally  relative  with  man's  perceptions  are  also  his  opinions 
(8o'£cu).  In  this  aspect  the  influences  of  the  Eleatic  dialectic 
assert  themselves  in  Pyrrhonism.  It  is  shown  that  to  everv  opinion 
the  opposite  can  be  opposed  with  equally  good  reasons,  and  this 
equilibrium  of  reasons  (lo-oo-Qeveia  T&V  Xoycov)  does  not  permit  us, 
therefore,  to  distinguish  true  and  false :  in  the  case  of  such  a  con- 
tradiction (dvrtXoyta)  the  one  holds  no  more  than  the  other.  All 
opinions  accordingly  stand  —  according  to  the  phrase  of  the 
Sophists,  adopted  by  the  Sceptics  —  only  by  convention  and  cus- 
tom (vo/io)  re  KO!  20et),  not  by  their  essential  right  and  title  (<£ixra). 

More  energetically  still  did  the  later  Scepticism  attack  the  possi- 
bility of  scientific  knowledge,  by  disclosing  the  difficulties  of  the 
syllogistic  procedure,  and  of  the  methods  which  Aristotle  had  built 
up  upon  this.1  In  this  Carneades  seems  to  have  led  the  way,  show- 
ing that  every  proof,  since  it  presupposes  other  proofs  for  the  valid- 
ity of  its  premises,  makes  necessary  a  regressus  in  injinitum  —  an 
argument  that  was  completely  in  place  for  the  Sceptic  who  did  not, 
as  did  Aristotle,  recognise  anything  as  immediately  certain  (apto-ov ; 
cf.  §  12,  4).  The  same  argument  was  carried  further  by  Agrippa, 
who  formulated  Scepticism  in  five  Tropes 2  much  more  clearly  and 
comprehensively  than  JEnesidemus.  He  called  attention  again  to  the 
relativity  of  perceptions  (3)  and  of  opinions  (1) ;  he  showed  how 
every  proof  pushes  on  into  infinity  (2 :  6  eh  okretpoi/  eK/3oAAo>v),  and  how 
unjustifiable  it  is  in  the  process  of  proof  to  proceed  from  premises 
that  are  only  hypothetically  to  be  assumed  (4)}  and  finally,  how 
often  it  occurs,  even  in  science,  that  that  must  be  postulated  as 
ground  of  the  premises  which  is  only  to  be  proved  by  means  of  the 
syllogism  in  question  (5 :  o  StoAA^Xos).  In  the  latter  aspect  atten- 
tion was  also  called  to  the  fact  that  in  the  syllogistic  deduction  of 
a  particular  proposition  from  a  general  one,  the  general  would  yet 
from  the  outset  be  justified  only  on  condition  that  the  particular 
were  valid.3 

Since  the  essential  nature  of  things  is  thus  inaccessible  to  human 


1  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VIIL  316  fi. 

2  Sext.  Emp.  Pyrrh.  Hyp.  I.  164  ft. :  (1)  The  conflict  of  opinions.    (2)  The 
endless  regress  in  proving.    (3)  The  relativity  of  all  perceptions.    (4)  The  im- 
possibility of  other  than  hypothetical  premises.     (5)  The  circle  in  the  syllogism. 

»  Sort.  Emp.  Pyrrh.  Hyp.  II.  194  ff.    Renewed  in  J.  S.  Mill,  Logic,  II.  3,  2; 
corrected  in  Chr.  Sigwart,  Logik^  I.  §  55,  3. 


202          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Ethical  Period.    [PART  II. 

knowledge,1  the  Sceptics  demanded  that  man  should  suspend  judg- 
ment so  far  as  possible  (cro^).  We  can  say  nothing  concerning 
things  (<i<£acrta)  ;  we  can  only  assert  that  this  and  that  appears  so 
or  so,  and  in  so  doing  we  report  only  our  own  momentary  states  (as 
the  Cyrenaics  had  already  taught,  §  8,  3).  Even  the  sceptical  main- 
tenance of  the  impossibility  of  knowledge  (in  order  to  avoid  the 
contradiction  that  here  something  of  a  negative  character,  at  least, 
seems  to  be  maintained  and  proved)2  should  be  conceived  of  rather 
as  a  profession  of  belief  than  as  knowledge, — more  as  a  withholding 
of  opinion  than  as  a  positive  assertion. 

Cf.  V.  Brochard,  Les  Sceptiques  Grecs  (Paris,  1877). 

4.  The  attack  of  Scepticism  was  most  sharply  concentrated  in 
the  principle8  that,  in  the  presence  of  the.  deceptions  to  which 
man  is  exposed  in  all  his  ideas  of  whatever  origin,  there  is  no  uni- 
vocal,  sure  sign  of  knowledge,  no  criterion  of  truth.  If;  therefore, 
the  dogmatic  schools  held  fast  to  the  reality  of  knowledge,  even 
from  the  Socratic  motive  that  virtue  is  impossible  without  knowl- 
edge,4 they  found  the  task  assigned  them  by  this  sceptical  position 
of  announcing  such  a  criterion  and  of  defending  it  against  the 
sceptical  objections.  This  was  done  also  by  the  Epicureans  and 
fitoics,  although  their  materialistic  metaphysics  and  the  sensualistic 
psychology  connected  with  it  prepared  for  them  serious,  and, 
•ultimately,  insurmountable  difficulties. 

In  fact,  it  was  the  psycho-genetic  doctrine  of  both  these  schools 
that  the  content  of  all  ideas  and  knowledge  arises  solely  from  sertr 
suous  perception.  The  origin  of  sense-perception  the  Epicureans 
explained  by  the  image  theory  of  Democritus  (§  10,  3).  This 
theory  gave  even  to  the  illusions  of  the  senses,  to  dreams,  etc.,  the 
character  of  perceptions  corresponding  to  reality ;  and  even  the  con- 
structions of  the  combining  fancy  or  imagination  could  be  explained 
on  this  theory  by  unions  which  had  already  taken  place  objectively 
between  the  images.  But  the  Stoics  also  regarded  perception  as  a 
bodily  process,  as  an  impression  of  outer  things  upon  the  soul 
(rvVaxns),  the  possibility  of  which  seemed  to  them  to  be  self- 
evident,  in  view  of  the  universal  commingling  of  all  bodies,  This 

1  The  simplest  formulation  of  Scepticism,  finally,  was  that  which  brought 
Agrippa's  five  Tropes  together  into  two ;  there  is  nothing  immediately  certain, 
]nst  on  this  account  nothing  mediately  certain;  accordingly  nothing  what- 
ever that  is  certain.  Sext.  Emp.  Pyrrh.  Hyp.  I.  178  f. 

-  Cic.  Acad.  II.  9,  28  and  34,  109  ;  Sext  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VIII  463  ff 

B  Sext.  Emp.  Afiv.  Math.  VII.  159. 


CHAP.  1,  §  17.]    Criteria  of  Truth  :  Epicureans,  Stoics.  203 

crassly  sensuous  conception  they  expressed  by  the  since  frequently 
repeated  comparison,  that  the  soul  is  originally  like  a  blank  tablet, 
on  which  the  outer  world  imprints  its  signs  in  the  course  of  time.1 
More  refined,  but  more  indefinite,  and  yet  absolutely  mechanical 
still  in  its  tone  is  the  designation  of  Chrysippus,  who  called  percep- 
tion an  alteration  of  qualities  (IrepotWis)  in  the  soul;  for,  at  all 
events,  the  idea  or  mental  presentation  (^avrao-La)  remains  for 
him,  too,  a  corporeal  effect  or  product  of  that  which  is  presented 


Both  schools  explained  the  presence  of  conceptions  and  of  general 
ideas  (^-poX-q^eis,  and  among  the  Stoics  also  KOLVU  Iwotat)  solely  by 
the  persistence  of  these  impressions,  or  of  parts  of  them,  and  by 
their  combination.  They  combated,  therefore,  as  the  Cynics  espe- 
cially had  already  done,  the  Platonic-Aristotelian  doctrine  of  Ideas 
and  Forms,2  especially  the  assumption  of  an  independent  activity 
or  power  of  forming  conceptions,  and  traced  even  the  -most  general 
and  abstract  conceptions  back  to  this  mechanism  of  elementary 
perceptions  (to  which  they  scarcely  gave  any  further  analysis). 
To  these  general  ideas  of  experience  (c/«retpia)}  which  arise  natu- 
rally and  involuntarily  (QVCTLKW)  ,  the  Stoics  indeed  opposed  the 
conceptions  of  science  produced  by  the  aid  of  a  methodical  con- 
sciousness ;  but  even  the  content  of  these  scientific  conceptions  was 
held  to  be  exclusively  derived  from  sensations.  In  this  connection, 
both  schools  laid  especial  weight  upon  the  co-operation  of  language 
in  the  origination  of  conceptions. 

But  now,  in  so  far  as  the  total  content  of  impressions,  and  like- 
wise also  the  nature  of  thought,  are  the  same  among  all  men,  it 
necessarily  follows  that  under  these  circumstances  the  same  general 
ideas  will  be  formed,  in  both  the  theoretical  and  the  practical  domain, 
by  means  of  the  psychological  mechanism.  This  consequence  was 
drawn  especially  by  the  Stoics,  whose  attention  was  by  their  whole 
metaphysics  directed  vigorously  to  the  common  nature  of  the  psy- 
chical functions,  which  were  all  held  to  arise  from  the  divine  Pneuma. 
They  taught,  therefore,  that  the  surest  truth  is  to  be  sought  in  those 
ideas  which  develop  uniformly  among  all  men  with  natural  neces- 
sity, and  they  liked  to  take  as  their  starting-point,  even  for  scientific 
reasonings,  these  Kowal  Ivi/oat,  or  communes  notiones.  They  have  a 


1  Pint.  Plac.  IV.  11 ;  Dox.  D.  400 ;  Pint.  Comm.  Not  47 ;  cf.  besides  Plat 
Thecet.  191  C. 

2  Hence  the  Stoics  regard  Platonic  *'  Ideas  "  (class-concepts)  as  merely  struc- 
tures of  the  human  mind  (hvoTinara  ifr/iA-epa ;  cf.  Hut.  Plac.  1. 10,  Dox.  D.  309), 
and  thus  gave  the  first  suggestion  for  the  later  subjective  meaning  of  the  term 
"idea,"     Cf .  §  19. 


204          Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Ethical  Period.     [?AJRT!L 

predilection  for  appealing  to  the  consensus  gentium  —  the  consent  of 
all  men,  —  an  argument  whose  validity  it  was  easy  for  the  Sceptics 
to  shake  by  pointing  to  the  negative  instances  of  experience.1 

It  was,  therefore,  not  in  the  spirit  of  the  Stoics  that  in  the  later 
Eclectic  literature  these  common  ideas  were  called  innate  (iVmafce), 
and  that  Cicero  especially  saw  in  them  not  only  that  which  Nature 
teaches  equally  to  all,  but  also  that  which  Nature  or  the  deity  has 
originally  implanted  in  every  one  at  the  same  time  with  his  reason. 
Cicero  maintains  this,  not  only  for  the  fundamental  conceptions  of 
morality  and  right,  but  also  for  the  belief  in  the  deity  and  in  the 
immortality  of  the  soul :  the  knowledge  of  God  especially  is  held 
to  be  only  man's  recollection  of  his  true  origin.2  This  doctrine 
formed  the  best  bridge  between  the  Platonic  and  the  Stoic  theories 
of  knowledge,  and  under  the  Stoic  name  of  KOWOI  IWQO.L  the  ration- 
alistic doctrine  of  knowledge  was  propagated  on  into  the  beginnings 
of  modern  philosophy.  Just  by  this  means  it  retained  the  accessory 
psychologists  meaning  that  rational  knowledge  consists  in  innate  ideas. 

o.  While  now  the  Stoics  as  well  as  the  Epicureans  originally 
traced  back  all  the  contents  of  ideas  to  sense-impressions  psycho- 
genetically,  it  was  only  the  Epicureans  who  drew  from  this  the 
consistent  inference  that  the  sign  for  the  recognition  of  tmth  is 
solely  the  feeling  of  the  necessity  with  which  a  perception  forces 
itself  upon  consciousness,  the  irresistible  clearness  or  vividness 
(ewzpyeia)  conjoined  with  the  taking  up  of  reality  in  the  function 
of  the  senses.  Every  perception  is  as  such  true  and  irrefutable ;  it 
exists,  so  to  speak,  as  a  self -certain  atom  of  the  world  of  conscious- 
ness, free  from  doubt,  independent,  and  uninovable  by  any  reasons 
whatever.3  And  if  different  and  mutually  contradictory  perceptions 
of  the  same  objects  seem  to  exist,  the  error  lies  only  in  the  opinion 
which  refers  them,  and  not  in  the  perceptions  which  by  the  very 
fact  of  their  difference  prove  that  different  outer  causes  correspond 
to  them ;  relativity  is  accordingly  nothing  in  point  against  the  cor- 
rectness of  all  perceptions.4 

Meanwhile,  opinions  (So'&u)  constantly  and  necessarily  go  beyond 
this  immediate  presence  of  sense-impressions :  for  the  knowledge 
requisite  for  acting  needs  also  knowledge  of  that  which  is  not 
immediately  perceptible:  it  needs  to  know,  on  the  one  hand,  grounds 


1  Cic.  De  Nat.  Deor.  1. 23,  62  f. 

2  Id.  De  Leg.  I.  8,  24 :  ...  ut  is  agnoscat  deum,  qui  unde  ortus  sit  quasi  re- 
cortetur  ac  noscat. 

8  The  parallelism  of  this  epistemological  Atomism  with,  the  physical  and 
ethical  Atomism  of  the  Epicureans  is  obvious. 
*  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VII.  203  fL 


CHAP.  1,  §  17.]        Criteria  of  Truth:  Epicureans.  205 

of  phenomena  (aS?jA.ov),  and  on  the  other  hand  the  expectation  as  to 
the  future  that  may  be  inferred  from  them  (Trpoa-^ov).  But  for  all 
these  farther  functions  of  the  psychical  mechanism  there  is,  accord- 
ing to  the  Epicureans,  no  other  guaranty  than  perception  again. 
Tor  if  conceptions  (irpaXi^reis)  are  only  sense-impressions  retained 
in  the  memory,  they  have  their  own  certainty  in  the  clearness  or 
vividness  of  these  impressions,  a  certainty  susceptible  neither  of 
proof  nor  of  attack;  *  and  hypotheses  (wroXi^eis),  both  with  regard 
to  the  imperceptible  grounds  of  things  and  also  with  regard  to  future 
events,  find  their  criterion  solely  in  perception,  in  so  far  as  they  are 
verified  by  it,  or  at  least  not  refuted ;  the  former  holds  for  the  pre- 
diction of  the  future,  the  latter  for  explanatory  theories.2  There 
is  therefore  among  the  Epicureans  nothing  said  of  an  independent 
faculty  of  conviction  or  belief ;  whether  our  expectation  of  any  event 
is  correct  we  can  know  only  when  the  event  occurs.  Thus  they  re- 
nounce on  principle  any  attempt  at  an  actual  theory  of  investigation. 

6.  It  is  evident  from  this  that  the  Epicureans  might  regard  their 
own  Atomistic  metaphysics  as  a  hypothesis  not  refuted  by  facts,  but 
that  they  were  not  permitted  to  regard  it  as  a  hypothesis  that  was 
proved.  It  was  a  hypothesis,  indeed,  of  which  the  essential  end,  as 
they  employed  it,  was  to  displace  other  hypotheses  which  seemed 
to  them  ethically  objectionable.  Their  dogmatism  is  accordingly 
only  problematical,  and  their  doctrine  of  knowledge,  in  so  far  as  it 
has  to  do  with  rational  knowledge,  is  very  strongly  permeated  with 
scepticism.  In  so  far  as  they  recognise  only  that  which  passes  with 
sense-perception  as  a  "  fact,"  but  regard  such  facts  as  completely  cer- 
tain, their  standpoint  is  to  be  designated  as  that  of  Positivism. 

This  positivism  was  developed  in  antiquity  still  more  consistently, 
and  in  a  form  freed  from  the  ethical  and  metaphysical  tendencies  of 
Epicurus,  by  the  theories  of  the  later  schools  of  empirical  physi- 
cians. These  schools  went  with  the  Sceptics  as  regards  knowledge 
of  all  that  is  imperceptible  by  the  senses  and  as  regards  all  rational 
theories ;  on  the  other  hand,  in  their  recognition  of  the  sensuous 
evidence  of  perceptions,  they  went  with  the  Epicureans.  Observation 
(<rqpji<ris)  is  here  portrayed  as  the  basis  of  the  physician's  art,  and  ob- 
servation retained  in  memory  is  regarded  as  the  sole  essence  of  his 
theory :  setiological  explanations  especially  are  rejected  on  principle. 

Connected  with  this  is  the  circumstance  that  the  later  Sceptics 
treated  the  conception  of  causality  in  searching  investigations  and 

1  As  the  final  criterion  even  for  the  intellectually  good  is,  with  Epicurus,  sen- 
suous pleasure,  so  the  criterion  of  the  truth  of  conceptions,  is  only  sensuous 
vividness  (Evidenz}. 

2  Seit.  Emp.  VII.  211, 


206       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Ethical  Period.        [PART  II. 

discovered  its  difficulties.  JEnesidemus  had  already  propounded  a 
series  of  such  aporise,1  and  in  Sextus  Empiricus  "we  find  them  devel- 
oped more  broadly  and  comprehensively.2  With  him.  not  only  such 
defects  of  setiological  theories  are  designated  as,  that  they  reduce 
the  known  to  the  unknown  which  is  just  as  inexplicable,  that  they 
maintain  one  possibility  among  many  without  a  sufficient  reason, 
that  they  do  not  examine  experience  carefully  enough  with  a  view- 
to  possible  negative  instances,  and  finally  that  they  after  all  explain 
that  which  is  inaccessible  to  perception  by  some  sort  of  a  scheme 
known  from  perception,  which  is  especially  simple  and  therefore 
apparently  intelligible  in  itself ;  besides  these,  he  searches  out,  also, 
all  the  general  difficulties  which  prevent  us  from  gaining  a  clear 
(picturate)  idea  of  the  causal  relation.  The  process  of  the  action 
of  one  thing  upon  another,  the  passing  over  of  motion  from  one 
thing  to  another,  can  be  made  intelligible  neither  on  the  assumption 
that  that  which  acts  (as  force)  is  immaterial,  nor  on  the  opposite 
assumption ;  nor  does  contact  (a^)  which  is  assumed  as  a  conditio 
sine  qua  non  of  the  causal  process  (as  had  been  already  done  by 
Aristotle)  make  it  any  more  explicable.  So,  too,  the  time  relation 
of  cause  and  effect  is  extremely  difficult  to  determine.  The  most 
important  thought  in  these  discussions,  however,  is  the  pointing  out 
of  the  relativity  of  the  causal  relation:  nothing  is  in  itself  a  cause  or 
effect ;  each  of  the  two  is  such  only  with  reference  to  the  other ; 
alnov  and  TTO.CTXOV  are  correlative  terms  which  must  not  be  absolutely 
postulated  or  asserted.  The  (Stoic)  conception  of  an  essentially 
efficient  cause,  the  conception  of  a  creative  deity,  is  then  thereby 
excluded. 

7.  The  Sceptics  of  the  Academy  sought  in.  another  direction  a 
substitute  for  the  certainty  of  rational  knowledge  which  they  also 
had  given  up.  Since  in  practical  life  suspense  cannot  be  carried 
out  as  a  principle  of  conduct  and  action  is  indispensable,  and  since 
for  action  determining  ideas  are  requisite,  Arcesilaus  brought  out 
the  view  that  ideas,  even  though  one  refuse  them  his  complete 
assent,  are  yet  able  to  move  the  will,3  and  that  in  practical  life  one 
must  content  himself  with  a  certain  kind  of  confidence  or  trust 
(  TROTIS),  according  to  which  some  ideas  may  in  a  greater  degree  than 
others  be  regarded  as  probable  (euAoyov),  adapted  to  the  purpose  of 
life,  and  reasonable.4 


1  Sext.  Emp.  Pyrrh.  Hyp.  1. 180  ff. 

a  Adv.  Math.  IX.  195  ft. ;  cf.  K.  Goring,  Der  Begri/  far  Ursaehe  in  der  gri&- 
chischen  Philosophie  (Leips.  1874). 
8  Plut.  Adv.  Col.  26,  3. 
*  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VII.  158. 


CHAP.  1,  §  17.]     Criteria  of  Truth :  Sceptics,  Stoics.  207 

The  theory  of  Probabilism,  was  carried  out  farther  by  Cameades1 
in  an  attempt  to  define  more  exactly,  according  to  logical  relations, 
the  particular  degrees  of  this  "  belief."  The  least  degree  of  proba- 
bility (iriQavoTirjs}  is  that  which  (as  an  indistinct  and  imperfect  form 
of  sensuous  clearness  or  vividness  —  empyoa)  belongs  to  the  single 
idea  that  stands  in  no  farther  connections.  A  higher  degree  of 
probability  belongs  to  that  idea  which  can  be  united  (dTrepiWaoros), 
without  any  contradictions,  with  other  ideas  in  connection  with 
which  it  belongs.  Lastly,  the  highest  stage  of  belief  is  reached 
where  a  whole  system  of  such  connected  ideas  is  examined  as  to  its 
complete  harmony  and  verification  in  experience  (TreptojSev^en;) . 
Empirical  confidence  rises,  therefore,  from  the  sensuously  isolated 
to  the  logical  systems  of  scientific  research.  But  though  in  the 
latter  form  it  may  be  completely  sufficient  for  practical  life  (as 
Cameades  assumed),  it  is  yet  not  able  to  lead  to  a  completely 
certain  conviction. 

8.  In  contrast  with  this,  the  Stoics  made  the  most  strenuous 
efforts  to  gain  an  epistemological  substructure  for  their  metaphysics, 
to  which  they  attributed  so  high  a  value  from  considerations  of  ethi- 
cal interest,  and  in  spite  of  psycho-genetic  sensualism,  to  rescue  the 
rational  character  of  science.2  On  the  principle  that  like  is  known 
by  like,  their  doctrine  of  the  World-reason  demanded  a  knowledge 
of  the  external  Logos  by  the  internal  logos  of  man,  —  by  his  rea- 
son ; 3  and  the  ethical  antagonism  or  dualism  between  virtue  and 
the  sensuous  impulses  required  a  parallel  distinction  between 
knowledge  and  sensuous  ideas.  Although,  therefore,  the  whole 
material  of  knowledge  was  held  to  grow  out  of  sensuous  presenta- 
tions, the  Stoics  pointed  out,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  perception 
as  such,  no  knowledge  whatever  is  contained;  that  it  is  not  to 
be  characterised  as  either  true  or  false.  Truth  and  falsity  can  be 
predicated  only  when  judgments  (o|t<6/jurra)  have  been  formed  in 
which  something  is  asserted  or  denied  as  to  the  relation  of  ideas.4 

Judgment,  nevertheless,  is  conceived  of  by  the  Stoics  —  and  in 
this  they  take  a  new  and  important  position,  which,  in  antiquity, 
only  the  Sceptics  approach  in  some  degree — by  no  means  merely  as 
the  theoretical  process  of  ideation  and  combination  of  ideas.  They 
recognised,  as  the  essential  characteristic  in  judgment,  the  peculiar 
act  of  assent  (<rvyKara0«ris),  of  approval,  and  of  being  convinced, 
with  which  the  mind  makes  the  content  of  the  idea  its  own,  grasps 

1  Ib.  166  ff. 

2  Cf.  M.  Heinze,  Zur  Erkenntnisslehre  der  Stoiker  (Leips.  1880). 
8  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VII.  93. 

*  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VIII.  10. 


208         Hellenistic-Roman  Thought  :  Jfithical  Period.      [PART  H. 


it,  and  in  a  certain  way  takes  possession  of  it  (KaroAa^avetv).  This 
act  of  apprehension  the  Stoics  regard  as  an  independent  function  of 
consciousness  (^yc/iow/coV).  in  the  same  way  as  they  regard  the 
assent  to  the  impulses,  which  makes  its  appearance  in  passion.  The 
arising  of  ideas,  like  that  of  the  excitations  of  feeling,  is  a  process 
which  is  of  natural  necessity  and  completely  independent  of  human 
will  (o/cownov)  ;  but  the  assent  by  which  we  make  the  one  class, 
judgments,  and  the  other,  passions,  is  a  decision  (/cpiW)  of  con- 
sciousness, free  (eKoiWv)  from  the  outer  world.1 

But  now  in  the  case  of  the  wise  man,  by  virtue  of  the  identity  of 
the  universal  with  the  individual  logos,  this  assent  appears  only  in 
the  case  of  those  ideas  which  are  true  :  the  soul,  therefore,  in  appre- 
hending the  content  of  these  ideas,  apprehends  reality.  Such  an 
idea  the  Stoics  called  ^>avracrta  KaTaXiyTrrtK-jJ,2  and  they  were  of  the 
conviction  that  such  an  idea  must  call  forth  the  reasonable  man's 
assent  with  immediate  evidence  or  clearness.  Hence  assent  itself 
(o-vyKara&tris)  is  conceived  of  as  an  activity  of  the  thinking  soul, 
but  individual  perceptions  appear  as  the  objects  of  assent  as  truly 
as  do  the  intellectual  activities  of  conception,  judgment,  and  reason- 
ing, based  upon  the  individual  perceptions. 

If  thus  the  Stoics  understood  by  the  ^avrao-ia  KaTaA^Trn*^  that 
idea  by  which  the  mind  lays  hold  of  reality,  and  which,  therefore, 
so  illumines  the  mind  that  this,  in  its  assent,  makes  reality  its  own, 
this  was  indeed  the  correct  expression  for  the  requirement  which 
they  set  up  for  the  true  idea,3  but  the  definition  was  not  at  all 
adapted  to  the  end  for  which  it  was  framed  :  that  is,  for  a  sign  by 
which  to  recognise  truth.  For  as  the  Sceptics4  very  justly  objected, 
the  subjective  mark,  assent,  might  be  shown  as  a  psychological  fact 
in  the  case  of  a  multitude  of  evidently  false  ideas. 

Thus  the  anthropological  discord  in  the  Stoic  doctrine  manifests 

1  Ib.  VIII.  39,  7. 

2  In  the  interpretation  of  this  term  there  is  a  wide  divergence.    According  to 
the  sources,  it  seems  now  as  if  the  idea  were  intended  which  the  mind  lays  hold 
of,  now  that  which  apprehends  the  real  fact,  now  that  hy  which  the  mind  appre- 
hends reality,  and  now  again  that  which  on  its  part  so  lays  hold  of  the  mind 
that  the  mind  must  assent  to  it.    It  has  hence  been  supposed  that  the  Stoics 
purposely  constructed  the  expression  in  this  ambiguous  form,  inasmuch  as  all 
these  relations  would  harmonise  in  it,  and  perhaps  E.  Zeller  (IV.8  83)  [Eng.  tr., 
Stoics,  etc.,  p.  89]  intended  to  repeat  this  ambiguity  by  his  translation,  "  concep- 
tional  idea  or  perception*'  (begriffliche  Vorstellung),  which,  however,  has  an 
accessory  logical  sense  that  the  Stoics  certainly  did  not  intend. 

3  It  is  worth  while  to  point  out  the  fact  that  in  their  designations  for  the 
relation  of  the  knowing  mind  to  the  external  reality,  the  Stoics  employ,  for  the 
most  part,  expressions  from  the  field  of  the  sense  of  touch  (impression,  appre- 
hending, or  grasping,  etc.),  while  formerly  optical  analogies  had  been  preferred. 
Cf.  §  11,  2. 

4  Sext.  Emp.  Adv.  Math.  VII.  402  ft 


CHAP.  1,  §  17.]  Criteria  of  Truth :  Stoics.  209 

itself  even  in  this  central  conception  of  their  theory  of  knowledge. 
As  it  could  not  be  explained  in  accordance  with  their  metaphysics 
how  the  individual  soul  arising  from  the  World-reason  should  fall 
under  the  mastery  of  sensuous  impulses,  so  it  is  equally  impossible 
to  understand  how  theoretical  assent  should,  under  certain  circum- 
stances, be  given  even  to  false  ideas.  Both  difficulties,  however, 
have  ultimately  a  common  ground.  The  Stoics  agreed  with  Hera- 
clitus  in  identifying  in  their  metaphysics  the  normative  and  the 
actual  ordering  of  things,  although  these  conceptions  had  meanwhile 
become  much  more  clearly  separated.  Eeason  was  for  them  that 
which  should  be,  as  well  as  that  which  is ;  it  was  at  the  same  time 
i/o/*os  and  <£iW.  And  this  antithesis,  the  two  sides  of  which  came 
into  strenuous  opposition  in  their  doctrine  of  freedom  and  their 
theodicy,  was  the  problem  of  the  future. 


CHAPTER  H. 

THE  RELIGIOUS   PERIOD. 

J.  Simon,  Histoire  de  VEcole  $  Alexandrie.    Paris,  1843  fit. 

E.  Matter,  Essai  sur  TEcole  &  Alexandrie.    Paris,  1840  ff. 

E.  Yacherot,  Histoire  Critique  de  VEcole  d' Alexandrie.    Paris,  1846  f£. 

[J.  Drummond,  Philo  Judceus,  or  the  Jewish  Alexandrian  Philosophy  in  its 

Development  and  Completion.    2  vols.,  Lond.  1888.] 
Barthelemy  St.  Hilaire,  Sur  le  Concours  ouvert  par  VAcademie,  etc.,  sur  VEcole 

& 'Alexandrie.    Paris,  1845. 

K.  Yogt,  Xeuplatonismus  und  Ghristenthwn,    Berlin,  1836. 
Greorgii,  Ueber  die  G-egensatze  in  der  Auffassung  der  alexandrinischen  Eeligions- 

philosophie  (Ztitschr.  f.  hist.  Theol  1839). 

E.  Deutinger,  G-eist  der  christlichen  Ueberlieferung.    Regensburg,  1850-51. 
A.  Ritschl,  Die  JSntstehung  der  altkatholischen  Kirche.    2d  ed.,  Bonn,  1857. 
Chr.  Baur,  Das  Ghristenthutn  der  drei  ersten  Jahrhunderte.    Tubingen,  1860. 
J.  Alzog,  G-rundriss  der  Patrologie.    3d  ed.,  Freiburg  i.  B.  1876. 
[A.  Y.  G.  Allen,  The  Continuity  of  Christian  Thought.    Boston,  1884.] 
Alb.  Stockl,  Geschichte  der  Philosophie  der  patristischen  Zeit.    Wiirzburg,  1859. 
J.  Huber,  Die  Philosophie  der  Kirchenvater.    Munich,  1859. 
Fr.  Overbeck,  Ueber  die  Anfange  der  patristischen  Litter atur  {Hist.  Zeitschr. 

1882). 

A.  Harnack,  Lehrbuch  der  Dogmengeschichte.     3  vols.    Freiburg  i.  B.  1886-90. 
[J.  Donaldson,  Critical  History  of  Christian  Literature  and  Doctrine.'] 

THE  gradual  transition  of  the  HellemstioBoman  philosophy  from 
the  ethical  to  the  religious  standpoint  had  its  inner  causes  in  this 
philosophy  itself,  and  its  external  occasion  in  the  imperious  de- 
mands made  by  the  felt  need  of  the  time.  For  the  farther  the 
contact  between  the  systems  extended,  the  more  it  became  evident 
how  little  able  philosophy  was  to  fulfil  the  task  whicn  it  had  set 
itself :  namely,  that  of  educating  man  by  a  sure  insight  to  a  state 
of  virtue  and  happiness,  to  inner  independence  of  the  world.  While 
the  sceptical  mode  of  thought,  which  was  extending  more  and  more, 
already  taught  that  virtue  consists  rather  in  the  renunciation  of  the 
attempt  to  know,  than  in  knowledge  itself,  the  view  forced  its  way 
more  and  more,  even  among  the  Stoics,  that  their  ideal  of  the  wise 
man,  so  sharply  and  rigidly  drawn,  was  not  entirely  realised  in  any 

210 


CHAP.  2.]  The  Religious  Period.  211 

human  being,  and  thus  it  was  felt  in  every  direction  that  man  in 
his  own  strength  can  become  neither  knowing,  nor  virtuous  and 
happy. 

If,  then,  a  disposition  to  welcome  a  higher  help  for  ethical  ends 
was  necessarily  evoked  in  philosophy  itself,  it  was  also  true  that 
the  theoretical  doctrines  of  the  time  contained  a  great  number  of 
religious  elements.  The  Epicureans,  to  be  sure,  purposely  excluded 
such,  but  the  Stoics,  on  the  contrary,  granted  them  an  entrance  that 
was  all  the  freer.  With  the  Stoics,  not  only  did  metaphysics  lead 
to  seeking  the  principle  of  morals  in  a  divine  command,  but  in  their 
pneuma  doctrine,  the  possibility  presented  itself  of  giving  to  the 
creations  of  myth  a  philosophical  meaning,  which  might  be  shared 
also  by  all  forms  of  worship.  Finally,  the  spiritual  monotheism  in 
Aristotle's  teaching,  and  that  ideal  tendency  with  which  Plato 
sought  the  abiding  essence  of  things  in  a  higher  world  of  the  super- 
sensuous,  were  not  forgotten. 

Just  this  dualism,  which  opposed  the  earthly  world  of  the  perish- 
able to  a  supersensuous  world  of  the  divine,  ultimately  proved  to  be 
the  right  expression  for  that  inner  discord  which  ran  through  the 
entire  life  of  the  aging  Greek  and  Roman  world.  The  old  craving 
for  sensuous  pleasure  might  still  celebrate  its  orgies  in  full  power 
and  to  the  intoxication  of  the  senses ;  but  in  the  midst  of  it  all,  out 
of  surfeit  and  loathing  grew  a  new  craving  for  a  purer,  higher  joy : 
and  in  the  presence  of  the  tremendous  contrasts  which  the  social 
condition  of  the  Roman  Empire  brought  with  it,  the  look  of  all  the 
millions  that  saw  themselves  excluded  from  the  good  things  of  this 
earth  turned  longingly  toward  a  better  world.  Thus  in  all  ways  a 
deep,  passionate  need  for  true  salvation  of  the  soul  (vuTTjpia)  came 
to  be  increasingly  felt,  a  hunger  for  something  beyond  the  earthly, 
a  religious  urgency  without  an  equal. 

This  religious  movement  proved  its  vigour  first  of  all  in  the  eager 
reception  which  foreign  forms  of  worship  found  in  the  G-rseco- 
Rornan  world,  in  the  mingling  and  fusing  of  Oriental  and  Occidental 
religions.  But  with  the  adjustment  which  their  oppositions  found 
here  and  there,  their  strife  for  the  mastery  over  men's  spirits  be- 
came still  more  energetic,  and  thus  the  soil  of  the  ancient  world  of 
civilisation,  after  bearing  the  fruits  of  art  and  science,  became  the 
battleground  of  religions.  Man's  essential  interest  became  thereby 
transferred  for  long  centuries  from  the  earthly  to  the  heavenly 
sphere  ;  he  began  to  seek  his  salvation  beyond  the  world  of  sense. 

But  the  forms  in  which  this  contest  of  the  religions  was  waged 
prove  in  spite  of  all  what  a  spiritual  and  intellectual  power  Greek 
science  had  grown  to  be.  For  so  strongly  was  the  ancient  world 


212  Hellenistic-Roman  Thought. 

<*  sicklied  o'er  with  the  pale  cast  of  thought,"  so  deeply  had  it  be- 
come permeated  by  the  feeling  of  a  need  for  knowledge,  that  each  of 
the  religions  desired  to  satisfy  not  only  the  feelings  but  also  the 
intellect,  and  was  therefore  anxious  to  transform  its  life  into  a  doc- 
trine. This  is  true  even  of  Christianity,  and  indeed  precisely  true  of 
it.  The  true,  victorious  power  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  lay,  to  be 
sure,  in  the  fact  that  it  entered  this  decrepit,  blas6  world  with  the 
youthful  force  of  a  pure,  high,  religious  feeling,  and  a  conviction 
that  was  courageous  to  the  death ;  but  it  was  able  to  conquer  the 
ancient  civilised  world  only  by  taking  it  up  into  itself  and  working 
it  over ;  and  as  in  its  external  conflict  with  the  old  world  it  shaped 
its  own  constitution *  and  thereby  ultimately  became  so  strong  as  to 
be  able  to  take  possession  of  the  Eoman  state,  so  also  in  its  defence 
against  the  ancient  philosophy  it  made  the  world  of  that  philoso- 
phy's ideas  its  own,  in  order  thereby  to  build  up  its  own  dogmatic 
system. 

Thus  the  needs  of  science  and  of  life  met.  The  former  sought  the 
solution  of  the  problems  at  which  it  had  been  labouring  in  vain,  in 
religion,  and  the  latter  desired  a  scientific  formulation  and  basis  for 
its  religious  longing  or  conviction.  Hence  from  this  time  on,  for 
many  centuries,  the  history  of  philosophy  is  grown  together  with 
that  of  dogmatic  theology,2  and  the  period  of  religious  metaphysics 
begins.  The  thought  of  antiquity  described  a  peculiar  curve,  sepa- 
rating itself  farther  and  farther  from  religion  from  which  it  pro- 
ceeded, reaching  its  extreme  separation  in  Epicureanism,  and  then 
again  steadily  drawing  near  to  religion,  to  return  at  last  entirely 
within  it. 

Under  these  conditions  it  is  possible  to  understand  how  that 
Weltanschauung  which  separated  the  supersensuous  and  the  sensu- 
ous, —  looking  upon  them,  from  the  point  of  view  of  value,  as  divine 
perfection  and  earthly  baseness,  respectively,  —  constituted  the 
common  ground  of  the  whole  religious-philosophical  movement. 
This  view  had  already,  indeed,  been  introduced  by  the  Pythagoreans 
(cf.  §  5,  7),  and  had  been  maintained  even  by  Aristotle,  but  it  had, 
without  doubt,  found  its  most  forcible  formulation  in  the  Platonic 
metaphysics.  It  was,  therefore,  this  latter  system  which  formed  the 
controlling  centre  for  the  religious  closing  development  of  ancient 
thought.  A  religious  development  of  Platonism  is  the  fundamental 
character  of  this  period. 

1  Cf.  K.  J.  Neumann,  Der  romische  Staat  und  die  allgemeine  Kirche  Us  auf 
Diocletian  (Vol. I.  Leips.  1890). 

2  It  will  be  understood  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  following  exposition 
has  left  at  one  side  all  specifically  dogmatic  elements,  except  where  they  are 
quite  inseparably  interwoven  with  pnilosophical  principles. 


CHAP.  2.]  The  Religious  Period.  21S 

The  geographical  centre  of  the  movement,  however,  is  found  in 
that  city  which,  by  its  history,  as  well  as  by  its  population,  repre- 
sented most  distinctly  the  mingling  of  peoples  and  of  religions,  — 
Alexandria.  Here,  where  in  the  active  work  of  the  museum  all 
treasures  of  Grecian  culture  were  garnered,  all  religions  and  forms 
of  worship  crowded  together  in  the  great  throngs  of  the  commercial 
metropolis  to  seek  a  scientific  clarification  of  the  feelings  that 
surged  and  stormed  within  them. 

The  first  line  of  the  Alexandrian  philosophy  is  the  so-called  Neo- 
Pythagoreanism,  a  mode  of  thought  which,  proceeding  from  the 
religious  practice  of  the  Pythagorean  mysteries,  makes  only  an 
external  use  of  the  number-mysticism  of  the  old  Pythagoreans  after 
whom  it  calls  itself  and  its  writings,  while  it  finds  the  theoretical 
setting  for  its  world-renouncing,  religious-ascetic  ethics  in  a  trans- 
formation of  the  Platonic  metaphysics,  which  became  of  the  pro- 
foundest  value  for  the  conception  of  the  spiritual  nature  in  the 
following  period.  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  the  founder  of  a  religion, 
is  to  be  regarded  as  typical  representative  of  this  school. 

Not  without  influence  from  this  school,  the  Stoa,  also,  in  the  time 
of  the  Empire,  brought  out  more  energetically  the  religious  elements 
in  its  theory  of  the  world,  so  that  not  only  did  the  anthropological 
dualism  of  the  system  become  sharpened,  but  a  more  theistic  mode 
of  thought  gradually  became  substituted  for  the  original  pantheism 
of  the  school.  In  men  like  Seneca,  Epictetus,  and  Marcus  Aurelius* 
the  Stoic  doctrine  became  completely  a  philosophy  of  deliverance  or 
redemption. 

Even  Cynicism  revived  again  about  this  time  in  a  religious  garb, 
as  a  rude,  popular  preaching  of  renunciation,  and  Demonax  passes 
for  its  best-known  representative. 

Scarcely  to  be  separated  from  the  Keo-Pythagoreans  are  the 
Eclectic  Platonists  of  the  first  centuries  of  our  era,  such  as  Plutarch  of 
Chgeronea  and  Apuleius  of  Madaura.  Later  appear  Xumemus  of 
Apainea  and  Nicomachus  of  G-erasa,  who,  besides,  already  stand 
under  Jewish  and  Christian  influences  as  witnesses  of  a  complete 
fusion  of  the  two  tendencies. 

But  while,  in  all  these  forms,  the  Hellenic  element  ever  maintains 
the  ascendency  over  the  Oriental,  the  latter  makes  its  appearance  in 
very  much  stronger  force  in  the  Jewish  philosophy  of  religion.  As 
the  sect  of  the  Essenes l  probably  proceeded  from  a  contact  of  Neo- 
Pythagoreanism  with  the  Hebrew  religious  life,  so  the  various 
attempts  of  learned  Jews  to  draw  nearer  to  Greek  science  in  the 

iCf.  E.ZellerV.8277ff. 


214  ffellenistic-JRoman  Thought.  [PARTH 

presentation  of  their  dogmas,  led  ultimately  to  the  doctrine  of  PJiilo 
of  Alexandria,  whose  original  elaboration  of  these  fermenting  bodies 
of  thought  influenced  their  further  formation  and  movement  in  the 
most  important  points. 

The  philosophy  of  Christianity,  which  for  these  first  centuries  is 
usually  designated  by  the  name  Patristics,  unfolded  in  an  analogous 
manner  upon  a  larger  scale.  This  philosophical  secularisation  of  the 
gospel  begins  with  the  ApologistSj  who  sought  to  present  its  re- 
ligious belief  as  the  only  true  philosophy,  with  the  purpose  of  pro- 
tecting Christianity  in  the  eyes  of  the  cultured  world  from  contempt 
and  persecution,  and  therefore  began  to  adapt  this  content  of  re- 
ligious faith  to  the  conceptional  forms  of  Greek  science :  the  most 
important  of  them  are  Justin  and  Mimtcius  Felix. 

But  the  need  of  changing  faith  (mcms)  into  knowledge  or  wisdom 
(yvoio-is)  asserted  itself  vigorously  in  the  Christian  communities, 
even  without  this  polemical  tendency.  The  first  attempts,  how- 
ever, which  the  Gnostics  made  to  create  an  adequate  view  of  the 
world  for  the  new  religion,  proceeded  from  the  excited  phantasies 
of  a  Syrian  mingling  of  religions,  and,  in  spite  of  the  employment  of 
Hellenistic  philosophemes,  led  to  such  grotesque  constructions,  that 
the  Church  as  it  grew  stronger  and  more  definitive  was  obliged  to 
reject  them.  Saturninus,  Basil&ides,  and  Valentinus  are  to  be  named 
as  the  best  known  of  this  class. 

In  reaction  against  such  over-hasty  attempts  of  religious  fantasti- 
calness,  a  violent  aversion  toward  all  philosophical  interpretation 
and  adjustment  of  Christian  faith  set  in,  for  a  time,  in  Christian 
literature  in  the  writings  of  men  like  Tatianf  Tertullian,  and  Amo- 
biiis.  An  express  anti-rationalism  thus  came  forward  which  never- 
theless found  it  necessary  on  its  part  also  to  return  to  the  related 
doctrines  of  Greek  philosophy.  Without  this  one-sidedness  and 
with  a  closer  approximation  to  the  older  Hellenising  Apologists, 
Gnosticism  was  combated  by  Irenceus  and  his  disciple  Hippolytus. 

It  was  not  until  the  beginning  of  the  third  century,  and  after  all 
these  preceding  attempts,  that  a  positive  Christian  theology,  a  sys- 
tem of  dogmatics  in  a  complete  conceptional  form,  was  established. 
This  came  about  in  the  School  for  Catechists  at  Alexandria,  through 
the  leaders  of  the  school,  Clement  and  Origen.  The  latter  especially 
is  to  be  regarded  as  philosophically  the  most  important  representa- 
tive of  Christianity  in  this  period. 

By  his  side,  however,  there  went  out  from  the  Alexandrian  phil- 
osophic school  the  man  who  undertook  to  bring  the  religion-forming 
tendency  of  philosophy  to  an  issue  solely  upon  the  Hellenistic  basis, 
—Plotinus,  the  greatest  thinker  of  this  period.  His  attempt  to 


CHAP.  2.]  The  Religious  Period.  215 

systematise  all  the  main  doctrines  of  Greek  and  Hellenistic  phil- 
osophy under  the  religious  principle  is  designated  as  Neo-Plntonism. 
His  doctrine  is  the  most  definitive  and  thoroughly  constructed  sys- 
tem of  science  that  antiquity  produced.  His  disciple  Porphyry, 
however,  showed  himself  already  inclined  to  make  a  religion  out  of 
this  religious  teaching,  and  Jcniiblichus,  who  is  termed  the  leader  of 
Syrian  Neo-Platonisrn,  transformed  it  into  a  dogmatic  theology  of  poly- 
theism, with  which  the  learned  and  political  opponents  of  Christianity, 
such  as  the  Emperor  Julian,  hoped  to  revive  the  forms  of  -worship 
of  the  heathen  religions,  then  in  a  state  of  dissolution.  After  this 
attempt  had  miscarried,  the  Athenian  school  of  Xeo-Platonism,  as 
the  heads  of  -which  Plutarch  of  Athens,  Produs,  and  Damascius 
appear,  returned  finally  to  a  methodical,  scholastic  development  of 
the  system  of  Plotinus. 

Thus  the  Hellenistic  efforts  to  attain  to  a  new  religion  by  means 
of  science  remained  without  result  in  this  form :  the  scholars  dis- 
covered no  church.  On  the  other  hand,  the  need  felt  by  positive 
religion  to  complete  and  strengthen  itself  in  a  scientific  doctrine  did 
attain  its  goal :  the  Church  created  its  dogma.  And  the  great  course 
of  history  in  this  movement  -was,  that  the  defeated  Hellenism  in  its 
powerful  death-struggle  still  created  the  conceptions  by  means  of 
-which  the  new  religion  shaped  itself  into  a  dogma. 

While  the  Pythagorean  mysteries  had  maintained  their  existence  through  all 
antiquity,  scientific  Fythagoreanism  vanished  as  a  proper  school  after  its 
incorporation  into  the  Academy  (cf.  p,  31).  It  is  not  until  during  the  first 
century  B.C.  that  specifically  Pythagorean  doctrines  become  noticeable  again : 
they  appear  in  the  Pythagorean  writings,  of  which  Diogenes  Laertius  ( VIIL 
24  ff.),  following  Alexander  Polyhistor,  gives  an  account  that  leads  us  to  infer 
an  essentially  Stoic  influence.  They  are  renewed  expressly  by  Cicero's  learned 
friend,  P.  Nigidius  Pigulus  (died  45  B.C.),  and  find  approval  also  with  other 
men  in  Rome.  Cf .  M.  Herz,  De  P.  Nig.  Fig.  Studiis  atque  Operilus  (Berlin,  1845). 

But  Neo-Fythagoreanism  proper  was  first  presented  in  literary  form  by 
the  great  number  of  writings  which  became  public  in  Alexandria  at  about  the 
beginning  of  our  era,  under  the  names  of  Pythagoras,  or  Philolaus,  or  Archytas, 
or  other  older  Pythagoreans,  the  fragments  of  which  give  rise  to  so  great  diffi- 
culties in  forming  a  conception  of  genuine  Pythagoreanism.  Cf .  the  lit.  p.  81. 

Of  the  personalities  of  the  new  school,  on  the  contrary,  very  little  is  known. 
The  only  distinct  figure  is  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  of  whose  life  and  nature  the 
rhetorician  Philostratus  (ed.  by  C.  L.  Kayser,  Leips.  1870)  gave  a  romantic 
representation  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  century,  in  order  to  portray  in  it 
the  ideal  of  the  Pythagorean  life.  Of  the  works  of  Apollonius  himself,  who 
lived  in  the  first  century  A.D.,  fragments  of  a  biography  of  Pythagoras  and  of 
a  treatise  on  Sacrifice  are  extant.  Cf.  Chr.  Baur,  Apollonius  und  Ckristus  in 
Drei  Abhandl.  zur  Gesch.  d.  alt.  Philos.  (Leips.  1876).  [Tredwell,  Life  of 
Apollonius  of  Tyana,  contains  a  good  bibliography,  N.Y.  1886.]  His  con- 
temporary, Moderatus  of  Gades,  might  perhaps  also  be  mentioned. 

Keo-Pythagoreau  and  Stoic  doctrines  appear  mingled  in  the  Eclectic  Sotion 
of  Alexandria,  who  was  affiliated  with  the  Sextians  (cf.  p.  163).  His  disciple, 
L.  Annseus  Seneca  of  Cordova  (4-65  A.B.),  was  the  leader  of  the  Stoics  in 
the  time  of  the  Empire.  He  was  instructor  of  Nero,  was  well  known  because  of 
his  tragic  fate,  and  also  as  tragic  poet  unfolded  the  rigid  conceptions  of  life  held 


216  Hellenistic-Roman  Thought.  [PART  II. 

by  his  school.  Of  his  writings  a  considerable  number  of  mainly  ethical  trea- 
tises are  preserved  besides  his  Epistolce  (ed.  by  Haase,  3  vols.,  Leips.  1852-3) 
[Eng.  tr.  (or  rather  paraphrase)  by  T.  Lodge,  Lond.  1614,  Selections  from  ttLS 
and  from  L'Estrange's  Seneca's  Morals  by  Way  of  Abstract,  Lond.  1888,  Game- 
lot  series].  Cf.  Chr.  Baur,  S.  und  Paulus  in  the  Drei  AbhandL;  see  above. 

Besides  him  we  mention  L.  Annseus  Cormitus  (Phurnutus),  a  chief  repre- 
sentative of  the  Stoic  interpretation  of  myths  (IIe/>2  rijr  T&V  6e(av  <pv<recas,  ed. 
by  Osann,  Gottingen,  1844),  the  satiric  poetPersius,  the  moralist  C.  Musonius 
Rufus,  and  especially  Epictetus,  who  lived  at  the  time  of  Domitian,  and  whose 
doctrines  were  published  by  Arrian  in  two  works,  Aiar/>t£<u  and  'EYxecjotfcop  (ed. 
together  with  the  commentary  of  Simplicius  by  J.  Schweighauser,  Leips.  1799  f.) 
[tr.  by  G.  Lons,  Bonn's  library ;  also  by  T.  W.  Higginson,  Boston,  1865].  Cf. 
A.  Bonhof  er  E.  und  die  Stua  (Stuttgart,  1890). 

With  the  noble  Marcus  Aurelius  Ajatoninus  the  Stoa  mounted  the  Roman 
imperial  throne  (161-180).  His  reflections  ra  eis  aMv  (ed.  by  J.  Stich,  Leips. 
lSb'2)  are  the  characteristic  monument  of  this  eclectic-religious  Stoicism. 
[Eng.  tr.  by  G.  Long.  The  Thoughts  of  the  Emperor,  31.  Aurelius  Antoninus, 
Lond.  Bonn's  lib. ;  W.  Pater,  Marius  thp,  Epicurean,  Lond.  and  X.Y.  1S88  ;  M. 
Arnold  in  Essays.] 

In  the  ancient  Grecian  period,  an  original  figure,  that  of  the  monkish  wan- 
dering preacher  Teles,  had  gone  out  from  the  Cynic  school  (cf.  v.  \Vilamovitz- 
Molleiidorf.  Philol.  Unters,  IV.  292  ff.).  In  the  time  of  the  Empire  this  quaint 
creature  was  frequently  copied  and  exaggerated  even  to  the  most  ridiculous 
extent.  Demetrius,  Oinomaos  of  Gadara,  Demonax  (cf.  Fritsche,  Leips.  1860), 
and  Peregrinus  Proteus,  known  through  Lucian,  belong  to  these  figures.  Cf. 
J.  Bernays,  Lukian  und  die  Eyniker  (Berlin,  1879). 

Of  the  representatives  of  religious  Platonism  who  kept  at  a  distance  from 
the  number  theory,  may  be  mentioned  the  eclectic  commentators  Eudorus  and 
Arius  Didymus,  Thrasyllus,  the  editor  of  the  works  of  Plato  and  Deiuocritus, 
and  especially  Plutarch  of  Chaeronea  (about  100  A.D.),  from  whom,  in  addition 
to  his  famous  biographies,  a  great  number  of  other  writings  are  preserved, 
especially  philosophical  treatises  of  dogmatic  and  polemical  content  (Moralia, 
ed.  Diihner ;  Paris,  Didot,  Vols.  III.  and  IV.  1855)  (cf.  R.  Volkmann,  Leben, 
Schriften  und  Philosophic  des  P.,  Berlin,  1872).  [Plutarch's  Morals,  trans,  ed. 
by  Goodwin,  5  vols.,  Boston,  1870 ;  also  tr.  by  Shilleto  and  by  C.  W.  King,  both 
in  Bonn's  lib.,  Lond.  1838  and  1882  resp.]  \Ve  mention  further  Maximus  of 
Tyre  of  the  time  of  the  Antonines ;  his  contemporary,  Apuleius  of  Madaura, 
who  belongs  in  this  series  not  only  on  account  of  his  philosophical  writings  (ed. 
by  A.  Goldbacher,  Vienna,  1876) ,  but  also  on  account  of  his  allegorico-satirical 
romance,  uTne  Golden  Ass"  (cf.  Hildebrand  in  the  introduction  to  his  col- 
lected works,  Leips.  1842)  [The  Works  of  Apuleius,  Bonn's  lib.];  the  oppo- 
nent of  Christianity,  Celsus,  whose  treatise  dKyefa  \6yo$  (about  180)  is  known 
only  from  the  counter- treatise  of  Origen,  /card  K<&<rou  (cf.  Th.  Keim,  C.  u  wahres 
TFbrf,"  Ziirich,  1873);  and  lastly  the  physician  Claudius  Galen,  who  died  about 
200,  and  might,  to  be  sure,  with  his  broad  eclecticism  be  likewise  classed  as  a  Peri- 
patetic and  also  as  a  Stoic  (cf.  K.  Sprengel,  Betirage  sur  Gesch.  d.  Medicin,  I. 
117  ff.).  From  the  same  circle  of  ideas  arose  also  the  writings  circulated  under 
the  name  of  Hermes  Trismegistus,  which  belong  to  the  third  century  (French 
tr.  by  L.  Me'nard,  Paris,  I860 ;  partially  published  by  G.  Parthey,  Berlin,  1854). 

Among  the  Platonists  of  the  second  century  Nicomachus  of  Gerasa  in  Ara- 
bia, of  whose  writings  arithmetical  text-books  and  (through  Photius)  an  extract 
from  a  work  'A/u0;«?TMc&  BeoXoyovfteva  are  extant,  and  Numenius  of  Apamea, 
concerning  whom  we  owe  oar  instruction  mainly  to  Eusebius,  are  strongly  Neo- 
Pythagorean.  Cf.  P.  Thedinga  (Bonn,  1875), 

The  entrance  of  Greek  philosophy  into  Jewish  theology  may  be  traced  back 
to  the  middle  of  the  second  century  B.C.,  where  it  can  be  recognised  in  the 
Biblical  explanation  of  Aristobulus ;  it  appears  then  in  a  particularly  marked 
manner,  and  in  a  form  that  is  already  much  nearer  the  Alexandrian  sphere  of 
thought,  in  the  pseudo-Solomonic  Book  of  Wisdom.  Yet  these  are  but  weak 
forerunners  of  the  important  creation  of  Philo  of  Alexandria,  of  whose  life 
little  more  is  known  than  that  in  the  year  39,  when  already  in  advanced  age,  he 
was  a  member  of  an  embassy  from  his  native  community  to  the  Emperor  Calig- 


CHAP.  2.]  The  Religious  Period.  217 

ula.  His  numerous  writings,  among  which  there  is  also  much  that  is  not 
genuine,  were  edited  by  Th.  Mangey  (Lond.  1742),  Leips.  stereotype  ed.,  8  vols., 
1851-53  ;  [Eng.  tr.  by  C.  D.  Yonge,  4  vols..  Lond.,  Bohn's  lib.]. 

F.  Dahne,  Die  fudiseh-alexcnulrinische  Relifjinnsphilosophie  (Halle,  1834). 

A.Gfrorer,  Philon  und  die  (dezandrinische'Theosophie  (Stuttgart,  1835);  M. 
"Wolff,  Die  philonische  Philosophic  ( Gothenburg,  1858):  Ewald,  Gesch.  des 
Voltes  Israel,  VI.  231  fl. 

Among  the  Christian  Apologists  whose  writings  are  collected  in  the  Corpus 
Apologetarum  Christ  ianonnn  secundi  swctili,  ed.  by  Otto  (Jena,  1842  ff.),  the 
most  prominent  is  Flavius  Justin  Martyr  of  Sichem,  who  lived  in  the  middle  of 
the  second  century.  Two  defensive  writings  and  a  dialogue  with  Trypho  the 
Jew  are  preserved  [Eng.  tr.  in  Ante-Nicene  Ch.  lib.,  ed.  by  Roberts  and  Donald- 
son, Edinburg,  T.  &  T.  Clark,  1807  — ].  K.  Semisch  (2  vbls.,  Breslau,  1S40-42  •, 
and  B.  Aub6  (Paris,  1801)  treat  of  him.  Further  Apologists  from  the  Hellenic 
circle  of  culture  are  Aristides  (whose  discourses,  discovered  in  the  Armenian 
language,  were  printed  with  a  Latin  translation.  Venice,  1878),  Athenagoras 
of  Athens  (Trpeo-pda  vepi  XpurrLavQv  addressed  to  Marcus  Aurelius  about  176\ 
Theophilus  of  Antioch  (a  treatise  addressed  to  Autolycus  about  IbOj,  Melito 
of  Sarclis,  Apollinaris  of  Hierapolis,  and  others.  —  Latin  literature  presents 
especially  Mimicius  Felix,  whose  dialogue  Octariits  was  written  about  200 
(ed.  in  the  Corpus  scriptorum  ecdesiasticornm  latinorum,  by  C.  Halm,  Vienna, 
1867).  The  rhetorician,  Firmianus  Lactantius  (about  SOU),  is  to  be  placed  in 
Hie  same  series.  His  main  treatise  is  the  Institiitiones  Dirince  [tr.  of  the  above 
authors  in  Ante-Nicene  lib.,  see  above]. 

Of  the  Gnostics  our  information  conies  essentially  through  their  opponents, 
Irenseus  (140-200  ;  his  treatise "E\ey%os  teal  avarpoirij  TTJS  ifevduvvftov  -/Strews,  ed. 
by  A.  Stieren,  Leips.  1853),  Hippolytus  (Kari  iraa-tiv  alpfoewv  e\eyxos*  ed.  by 
Duncker  and  Schneidewin,  Gottingen,  1859),  Tertullian  (Adcersus  Valenti- 
nianos),  etc.  [Eng.  tr.  of  the  above  writings  in  Ante-Nicene  lib.,  above].  Of 
Gnostic  treatises  only  one,  and  that  by  an'unknown  author,  is  extant,  'iLio-rts 
ffo$la  (ed.  by  Petermann,  Berlin,  1851).  Of  the  main  representatives  of  this 
doctrine  there  were  active  in  the  first  half  of  the  second  century  Saturninus  of 
Antioch,  Basilides,  a  Syrian,  and  Carpocrates  in  Alexandria ;  toward  the 
middle  of  the  century  Valentinus,  the  most  important  of  them  (died  about 
160);  and  toward  the  end  of  the  century  Bardesanes  of  Mesopotamia. — Expo- 
sitions of  the  Gnostic  Systems  by  A.  W.  Xeander  (Berlin,  1818)  [Eng.  tr.  by 
Torrey,  Boston,  1865],  E.  Matter  (Paris,  1843),  Chr.  Baur  (Tubingen,  1835), 
A.  Hilgenfeld  (Jena,  1884),  same  author,  Sardesanes,  der  letzte  Gnostiker 
(Leips.  1864).  — A.Harnack,  Zur  Queflenkritik  der  Geschichte  des  Gnosticismus 
(Leips.  1873);  [H.  L.  Mansel,  Gnostic  Heresies,  Lond.  1876]. 

The  most  radical  opponent  of  Greek  science  was  Tatian,  an  Assyrian, 
whose  treatise  Upbs  "EXX^wzs  arose  about  170,  but  who  later  became  himself  an 
adherent  of  the  Valentinian  Gnosticism.  The  passionate  Apologist  Qu.  Sep- 
timius  Florens  Tertullian  (165-220,  for  a  time  Presbyter  in  Carthage)  ended 
likewise  in  opposition  to  the  Catholic  Church,  in  the  sect  of  the  Montanists. 
His  works  have  been  edited  by  Fr.  Oehler  (3  vols..  Leips.  1853  f.)}  recently  by 
A.  Reifferscheid  and  Wissowa  (Vol.  I.  Vienna,  1890,  in  Corp.  script,  eccl  lat.) 
[Eng.  tr.  in  Ante-Mcene  lib.].  Cf.  A.  TV.  Neander,  Antignosticits,  Geist  des 
Tertutttan,  etc.  (2d  ed.  Berlin,  1849)  [Eng.  tr.  Boon's  lib.,  1861  J|;  A.  Hauck, 
T.'s  Lehen  und  Schriften,  Erlangen;  1877).— In  the  same  series,  but  from 
a  later  time,  is  the  African  rhetorician  Arnobius,  whose  seven  books,  Adi-ersus 
G-entes,  were  composed  about  300  (ed.  by  A.  Reifferscheid  hi  Corp.  script.  eccL 
lat.,  Vienna,  1875). 

Of  the  writings  of  Clement  of  Alexandria  (died  about  217)  three  treatises 
are  preserved,  A6yos  ir parpen-rucks  irp&s  "EXX^vas  —  Hai8ay(iry6^  —  Srpw/tarets  (ed. 
by  J.  Potter,  Oxford,  1715)  [tr.  in  Ante-Nicene  lib.].  From  his  school  (cf.  on 
the  Alex.  Catechetical  school,  Guericke,  Halle,  1824  f.,  and  Hasselbach,  Stettin, 
1826)  went  forth  the  founder  of  Christian  theology,  Origen,  surnamed  the  Ada- 
mantine. Born  185  A.D.  in  Alexandria,  equipped  with  the  full  education  of  the 
time,  he  came  forward  early  as  a  teacher,  fell  into  conflicts  on  account  of  his 
doctrines  with  the  Synod,  was  by  it  removed  from  his  office,  and  later  lived  in 
Csesarea  and  Tyre,  dying  in  the  latter  place  254.  Of  his  writings,  aside  from 
the  above-mentioned  treatise  against  Celsus,  his  work  Ifcpi  dpx&v  is  of  chief 
importance ;  it  is  extant  almost  only  in  the  Latin  version  of  Rnfimis  (ed.  by 


218       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Eeligious  Period.     [PART!! 

Redepenning,  Leips.  1836)  [tr.  in  Ante-Xicene  lib.].  Cf.  J.  Reinkens,  De 
Clemente  Preslytero  AL  (Breslau,  1851);  Redepenning,  0.,  Darstellung  selves 
Lebens  imd  seiner  Lehre  (Bonn,  1841-46)  [cf.  Bigg,  The  Christian  Platonists 
of  Alexandria,  Oxford,  1887  ;  A.  Harnack,  Art.  Origen  in  Enc.  JBrft.]. 

A  collection  of  the  sources  for  all  the  Church  writers  of  this  period  has  been 
issued  by  J.  P.  Migne,  Patrvlogice  Cursus  Completes  (Paris,  1840  JL). 

A  certain  Ammonius  Saccus  appears  in  old  traditions  as  the  founder  of 
Neo-Platonism,  but  nothing  is  known  to  justify  this  tradition.  To  his  pupils 
belonged  Plotinus,  Origen,  the  rhetorician  Longimis  (213-273),  to  whom  the 
book  Uepi  tyovs  was  ascribed,  and  another  Origen. 

The  true  founder  of  the  school  was  Plotinus  (204-269).  Born  in  Lycopolis 
in  Egypt,  and  educated  in  Alexandria,  he  became  a  member  of  an  expedition 
against  the  Persians  in  order  to  promote  his  religious  studies,  made  a  highly 
successful  appearance  as  teacher  in  Rome  about  244,  and  died  on  a  country 
•  estate  in  Campania.  His  works,  written  late  in  life,  were  published  by  his 
disciple  Porphyry,  arranged  in  six  enneads.  Ed.  by  H.  Miiller  (Leips.  1878-80), 
with  a  German  translation  [Eng.  tr.  in  part  by  Th.  Taylor,  Lond.  1787,  1794, 
1817,  French  tr.  by  Bouillet,  Paris,  1857-60].  Cf.  H.  Kirchner,  Die  Philos.  des 
PL  (Halle,  1854).— A.  Richter,  Xeuplatonische  Studien  (Halle,  1864  if.).— 
H.  v.  Kleist,  Xeuflat.  Studien  (Heidelberg,  1883).  — [A.  Harnack,  Art.  Xeo- 
Platonism  in  Ent.  Brit] 

To  the  Alexandrian  Neo-Platonism  are  reckoned  further  Gentilianus  Ame- 
lias of  Ameria,  and  the  Tyrian  Porphyry  (about  230-300).  Among  the  ex- 
tant writings,  aside  from  the  biographies  of  Plotinus  and  Pythagoras,  are  to  be 
mentioned  'A0op/*ai  irpds  ri  ro^ra,  an  aphoristic  abridgment  of  the  system  of 
Plotinus  (printed  in  Creuzer's  ed.  of  the  works  of  Plotinus,  Paris,  1855),  the 
treatise  On  Abstemiousness  (irepl  airoxys  ruv  eirflxuv,  important  on  account  of 
its  use  of  the  irepl  «i)<r€jSetas  of  Theophrastus  j  cf.  J.  Bernays,  Berlin,  1866),  and 
of  the  commentaries  the  Ela-ayuy^j  els  r&$  KarTjyoplas  (ed.  by  Busse,  Berlin,  1877 ; 
and  also  in  the  Berlin  ed.  of  Aristotle,  Vol.  IV.). 

Syrian  ^"eo-Platonism  was  founded  by  Jamblichns  of  Chalcis  in  Ccele- 
Syria  (died  about  330),  a  hearer  of  Porphyry.  His  writings  were  principally 
commentaries  upon  Hellenistic  and  Oriental  theology.  The  following  are  par- 
tially preserved :  Hepi  TOV  TLv6a.yopi.Kov  piov  (ed.  by  Westermann,  Paris,  1850), 
A67os  7r/>oTp«rritf&s  ei's  <pL\o<ro<pLav  (ed.  by  Kiessling,  Leips.  1813),  Hepl  -HJs  KOLVIJS 
iMQwaTiicys  <br«m}/i7;s  (ed.  by  Villoison,  Venice,  1781)  [Eng.  tr.  Life  of  Pyth. 
by  Taylor,  Lond.  1818,  Egyptian  Jlyst  ries,  by  same,  Chiswick,  1821]. 

Of  the  disciples  of  the  school,  Dezippus  commented  on  the  Aristotelian 
Categories  (ed.  by  L.  Spengel,  Munich,  1859),  Sallustius  wrote  a  compendium 
of  metaphysics  (ed.  by  Orelli,  Zurich,  1821),  and  Themistms  (about  317-387) 
made  himself  known  as  a  paraphrast  and  commentator  upon  Aristotelian  works. 
From  the  same  circle  comes  the  treatise  De  Jtfysteriis  JEgyptiQrum  (ed.  by  G. 
Parthey,  Berlin,  1857 ;  cf.  Harless,  Munich,  1858). 

This  movement  had  a  transient  political  success  by  the  accession  of  the 
Emperor  Julian,  who  hoped  by  its  help  to  renew  the  old  religion  and  displace 
Christianity.  His  writings  against  the  Christians  have  been  edited  with  a 
German  translation  byK.  J.  Neumann  (Leips.  1880).  Cf.  A.  W.  Neander, 
Ueber  den  Kaiser  J.  ttnd  sein  Zeitalter  (Berlin,  1812).  —  D.  Fr.  Strauss,  J.  der 
Abtritnnige,  der  Romantiker  aufdem  Throne  der  Casaren  (Mannheim.  1847).— 
A.  Mfioke,  /.  nach  den  Quellen  (Gotha,  1866-68). 

The  founder  of  Athenian  Neo-Platonism  was  Plutarch  of  Athens  (died 
after  430),  with  his  pupils  Syiianus  and  Hierocles.  All  these,  as  well  as  the 
following,  composed  commentaries  upon  Platonic  and  Aristotelian  or  Pythago- 
rean writings,  which  are  in  part  preserved.  More  important  was  Proclus 
(411-485),  among  whose  works  the  most  important  is  Tiepl  TIJS  /car*  ILUruva 
eeo\oylas  (ed.  of  his  works  by  V.  Cousin,  Paris,  1820-25)  [Eng.  tr.  by  Th. 
Taylor].  Ct  H.  Kirchner,  De  Prod.  Metaphytica  (Berlin,  1846).  K.  Stein- 
hart's  Art.  in  Ersch  und  Gruber's  Enc. 

The  last  head  of  the  Platonic  Academy  was  Damascius,  of  whose  writings 
the  beginning  of  a  treatise  irepl  r&v  irp&ruv  dp^w?,  and  the  conclusion  of  a  com- 
mentary upon  the  Parmenides  are  extant  (ed.  by  J.  Kopp,  Frankfort  a.  M. 
1826 ;  cf.  E.  Heitz  in  Strass.  Abfidl  fur  Philos.,  1884),  and  also  a  biography  of 


CHAP.  2,  §  18.]  Authority  and  Revelation.  21£ 

his  teacher  Isidoras.  Among  the  commentators  of  this  time  Simplicins  is 
prominent  (on  the  Physics,  ed.  pr.  Venice,  1526,  the  first  four  books,  Diels, 
Berlin,  1882 ;  on  the  De  Ccelo,  Karsten.  Utrecht.  1865 :  on  the  De  Anima* 
Hayduck,  Berlin,  1882). 

The  two  latter  wandered  with  their  immediate  associates  for  a  time  toward 
Persia,  when  in  the  year  529  the  Emperor  Justinian  closed  the  Academy,  con- 
fiscated its  property,  and  by  forbidding  lectures  on  heathen  philosophy  gave 
the  external  confirmation  to  its  close. 

§  18.    Authority  and  Eevelation. 

The  imperturbable  self-certainty  and  self-mastery  which  the  post- 
Aristotelian  philosophy  had  sought  and  in  part  claimed  for  the  wise 
man,  had  been  so  deeply  shaken  with  the  progress  of  time  that  it 
had  given  place  to  a  feeling  of  the  need  of  help,  both  in  the  ethical 
and  in  the  theoretical  spheres.  The  philosophising  individual  no 
longer  had  confidence  that  he  could  attain  to  right  insight  or  to  his 
soul's  salvation  by  his  own  strength,  and  sought  his  help  accord- 
ingly, partly  amid  the  great  monuments  of  the  past,  partly  in 
a  divine  revelation.  Both  tendencies,  however,  are  ultimately  upon 
the  same  basis,  for  the  confidence  which  was  placed  in  the  men  and 
writings  of  a  previous  time  rested  only  upon  the  fact  that  they 
were  regarded  as  especially  favoured  vessels  of  higher  revelation. 
Authority,  therefore,  acquired  its  value  as  the  mediate,  historically 
accredited  revelation,  while  the  divine  illumination  of  the  individ- 
ual as  immediate  revelation  came  to  its  assistance.  Differently  as 
the  relation  between  these  two  forms  was  conceived  of,  it  is  yet  the 
common  mark  of  all  Alexandrian  philosophy  that  it  regards  divine 
revelation  as  the  highest  source  of  'knowledge.  Already  in  this  inno- 
vation in  the  theory  of  knowledge,  we  find  expressed  the  heightened 
value  which  this  period  put  upon  personality,  and  on  personality  as 
evincing  itself  in  the  feelings.  The  longing  of  this  time  desired 
that  the  truth  might  be  found  by  experience,  as  an  inner  commun- 
ion of  man  with  the  Supreme  Being. 

1.  The  appeal  to  authority  often  makes  its  appearance  in  Greek 
and  Hellenistic  philosophy  in  the  sense  of  a  confirmation  and 
strengthening  of  an  author's  own  views,  but  not  as  a  decisive  and 
conclusive  argument.  The  jurare  in  verba  magistri  might  be  usual 
enough  among  the  subordinate  members  of  the  schools,1  but  the 
heads  of  schools,  and  in  general  the  men  who  engaged  in  indepen- 
dent research,  maintained  an  attitude  toward  the  teachings  of  the 
former  time  that  was  much  more  one  of  criticism  than  of  uncondi- 
tional subjection ; 2  and  though  in  the  schools,  chiefly  the  Academic 

1  Though  even  the  well-known  aflrta  fya  [ipse  dixif]  of  the  Pythagoreans  is 
attested  only  through  later  writers  (Cicero). 

2  Even  the  admiration  of  Socrates,  in  which  all  the  following  schools  were  at 
one,  did  not  in  itself  lead  to  his  being  regarded  as  the  valid  authority  for  defi- 
nite philosophical  doctrines. 


220       Hellenistic-Roman  Tliougkt :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

and  Peripatetic,  the  inclination  to  preserve  and  maintain  the 
teaching  of  the  founder  as  an  unassailable  treasure  was  fostered  by 
the  custom  of  commenting  upon  his  works,  yet  in  all  the  conflict 
as  to  the  criteria  of  truth  the  principle  had  never  been  brought 
forward  that  something  must  be  believed  because  this  or  that  great 
man  had  said  it. 

How  strongly  the  need  for  authority  had  come  to  be  felt  in  the 
later  time,  we  may  recognise  even  from  the  countless  interpolations 
which  were  the  order  of  the  day  in  the  whole  Alexandrian  litera- 
ture. Their  authors,  who,  perhaps,  for  the  most  part  acted  in  good 
faith,  since  they  themselves  regarded  their  thoughts  as  only  devel- 
opments and  cjntinuations  of  the  old  doctrines,  evidently  believed 
that  they  could  get  a  hearing  for  their  works  in  no  better  way  than 
by  assigning  to  them  the  name  of  one  of  the  heroes  of  wisdom,  of 
an  Aristotle,  a  Plato,  or  a  Pythagoras.  This  phenomenon  appeared 
most  extensively  among  the  ISTeo-Pythagoreans,  whose  chief  con- 
cern it  was  to  invest  their  new  doctrine  with  the  halo  of  ancient 
wisdom.  But  the  more  the  convictions  that  were  to  be  established 
in  this  manner  bore  a  religious  character,  the  more  lively  became 
the  need  to  conceive  of  these  authorities  themselves  as  the  bearers 
of  a  religious  revelation,  and  therefore  all  the  traits  that  might 
stamp  them  as  such  were  sought  for  within  them  or  even  read  into 
them.  Xot  contented,  however,  with  this,  the  later  Greeks  believed 
that  they  could  give  a  higher  sanction  to  their  philosophy,  as  well 
as  to  their  entire  civilisation,  by  deriving  it  from  the  Oriental 
religions:  thus  JSiumenius1  did  not  hesitate  to  maintain  that 
Pythagoras  and  Plato  had  presented  only  the  old  wisdom  of  the 
Brahmans,  Magi,  Egyptians,  and  Jews.  As  a  result  of  this,  the 
extent  of  literary  authorities  increased  extraordinarily;  the  later 
Xeo-Platonists,  a  Jambliehus  and  Proclus,  commented  not  only  on 
Greek  philosophers,  but  also  upon  the  entire  Hellenic  and  barbarian 
theology,2  and  credulously  adopted  myths  and  miraculous  tales 
from  these  sources. 

In  quite  a  similar  manner  Oriental  literature  testified  also  to  its 
esteem  for  Hellenism.  Among  the  predecessors  of  Philo,  Aristo- 
bulus  especially  appealed  to  verses  which  were  interpolated  in 
Orpheus  and  Linus,  in  Homer  and  Hesiod ;  and  with  Philo  himself, 
the  great  Jewish  theologian,  the  great  men  of  Greek  philosophy 
appear  side  by  side  with  the  Old  Testament,  as  bearers  of  wisdom. 

The  felt  need  of  authority  naturally  asserts  itself  most  strongly 
in  the  unconditional  faith  in  religious  records.  Here  the  Old  Testa- 

1  In  Ens.  Prcep.  Ev.  IX.  7.  2  Marinus,  Prod  Vit.  22. 


CHAP.  2,  §  18.]     Authority  and  Revelation  :  Philo.  221 

ment  was  from  the  beginning  the  firm  foundation  for  the  science 
and  philosophy  of  Judaism  and  also  for  that  of  (orthodox)  Christian- 
ity. But  in  the  Christian  Church  the  need  of  establishing  a  collec- 
tion of  writings  in  which  the  system  of  faith  should  be  denned  with 
certainty,  first  developed  with  Marcion,  and  then  was  gradually 
satisfied  in  the  completion  and  conclusion  of  the  Xew  Testament : 
with  Irenseus  and  Tertullian  both  Testaments  already  appear  with 
the  full  value  and  validity  of  churchly  authority. 

2.  If  now  in  this  way  even  scientific  thought,  which  in  conse- 
quence of  sceptical  disintegration  no  longer  gave  itself  credit  for 
the  power  of  truth,  subjected  itself  voluntarily  to  the  authorities  of 
antiquity  and  to  religious  institution,  it  was  yet  in  nowise  bound 
thereby  to  the  extent  that  we  might  suppose.  This  relation  rather 
took  the  form,  along  all  lines,  of  extracting  from  the  authoritative 
sources,  and  also  of  reading  into  them,  the  scientific  doctrines  which 
arose  from  the  new.  religious  movements.1 

Where  in  so  doing  they  did  not  resort  expressly  to  those  inter- 
polations which  are  found  more  or  less  in  the  entire  literature  of 
the  period  as  well  as  in  Neo-Pythagoreanism,  they  employed  as 
their  instrument  the  method  of  allegorical  interpretation. 

This  meets  us  first  in  Jewish  theology.  It  had  its  prototype 
indeed  in  the  allegorical  interpretation  of  myths,  which  made  its 
appearance  early  in  Grecian  literature,  was  employed  by  the  Sophists, 
and  extensively  prosecuted  by  the  Stoics.  It  was  applied  to  relig- 
ious documents  by  Aristobulus,  but  it  was  Philo*  who  carried  it 
through  methodically,  proceeding  from  the  conviction  that  a  dis- 
tinction must  be  made  in  Scripture  between  the  literal  and  the 
spiritual  meaning,  between  its  body  and  its  soul.  In  order  to  teach 
his  commands  to  the  great  mass  of  men,  who  in  their  sensuous 
nature  are  unable  to  apprehend  the  divine  purely,  God  gave  to 
revelation  the  anthropomorphic  form,  behind  which  only  the  spirit- 
ually mature  man  penetrates  to  the  true  sense.  This  sense  is  to  be 
sought  in  the  philosophical  conceptions  which  lie  hidden  in  the 
historical  husks.  Accordingly,  since  Philo  the  task  of  theology 
has  been  directed  toward  interpreting  religious  documents  into  a  sys- 
tem of  scientific  doctrines;  and  if  he  uses  Greek  philosophy  for  this 
purpose,  and  finds  in  it  the  higher  meaning  of  the  Scripture,  he 


1  Even  a  man  like  Plutarch  of  Chseronea,  who  follows  the  writings  of  Plato 
as  he  would  the  revelations  of  a  religious  document,  does  not  scruple  to  intro- 
duce into  the  teaching  of  his  master  Aristotelian  and  Stoic  doctrines  jas  well  as 
his  own  religious  view. 

2  Cf.   Siegfried,  Philon  v.  Alexandria  als  Ausleger  des  alien  Testaments 
(Jena,  1875). 


222      Sellenistic-Eoman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

explains  this  relation  on  the  ground  that  the  thinkers  of  Greece 
have  drawn  from  Mosaic  documents.1 

Following  his  example,  the  Gnostics  then  attempted  to  transform 
Oriental  myths  into  Greek  conceptions  bj  allegorical  interpretation, 
and  thought  thus  to  develop  a  secret  doctrine  of  the  Apostolic 
tradition,  —  the  Apologists  maintained  the  harmony  of  Christian 
doctrine  with  the  dogmas  of  Greek  philosophy,  —  even  men  like 
Iren'seus  and  Tertullian  worked  upon  the  New  Testament,  —  and 
finally  Ortgen  knew  how  to  bring  the  philosophy  of  Christianity 
into  accord  with  its  documents.  The  great  Alexandrian  theologian, 
like  the  Gnostics  who  first  attempted  to  create  a  Christian  theology, 
distinguished  between  the  carnal  (somatic),  psychical,  and  spiritual 
(pneumatic)  conceptions  of  the  religious  records,  —  corresponding 
to  the  metaphysico-anthropological  ideas  of  the  time  (cf.  §  19  f.). 
For  him  the  literal  historical  tradition  yields  only  a  "  Christianity 
according  to  the  flesh  "  (^/oto-navto-^cos  crwjotaTtKos),  and  it  is  the  task  of 
theology  to  lead  out  of  this,  through  the  moral  significance  at  which 
the  "  psychical "  readers  stop,  to  the  ideal  content  of  the  Scripture, 
which  must  then  illumine  the  reader  as  self-evident  truth.  Only  he 
who  grasps  this  last  belongs  to  the  pneumatic  or  spiritual  readers, 
to  whom  the  eternal  gospel  thus  disclosed  reveals  itself. 

This  extraction  of  philosophical  meaning  from  religious  tradition 
is  found  in  fullest  extent  among  the  Neo-Platonists.  Jamblichus 
practises  it,  in  accordance  with  the  Stoic  model,  on  all  forms  of 
Oriental  and  Occidental  mythology,  and  Proclus,  too,  declares  ex- 
pressly that  myths  veil  the  truth  from  sensuous  -men  who  are  not 
worthy  of  it2 

3.  But  in  all  such  doctrines,  the  interest  of  science  (in  the  Chris- 
tian teachings,  yvScrts)  ultimately  predominates  over  that  of  faith ; 
they  are  accommodations  of  philosophy  to  the  need  of  religious 
authority,  felt  at  this  time.  The  essential  identity  of  authority  and 
of  rational  knowledge  obtains,  therefore,  as  the  fundamental  presuppo- 
sition ;  it  obtains  in  such  a  degree,  that  just  where  it  seems  threat- 
ened, all  artifices  of  allegorical  interpretation  are  attempted  in  order 
to  rescue  it.  This  confidence,  nevertheless,  with  which  science  pro- 
ceeded to  develop  its  own  content  as  that  of  the  religious  documents, 
rested  ultimately  upon  the  conviction  that  both  historical  authority 
and  scientific  doctrine  are  but  different  revelations  of  the  same  divine 
Power. 

We  have  seen  that  the  belief  in  authority  in  this  period  grew  out 
of  the  fe.lt  need  of  salvation  and  help.  Another  psychological  root  of 

i  Phil.  Vit.  Mos.  657  a.  (137  m.).  2  ProcL  In  Eemp.  369. 


CHAP.  2,  §  IS.]     Authority  and  Revelation  :  Origen,  Justin.      223 

this  belief  was  the  enhanced  importance  of  personality.  This  shows 
itself  in  the  lively  expression  of  admiration  for  the  great  men  of  the 
past,  as  we  find  it  in  Philo  and  in  all  lines  of  Platonism,  and  not 
less  in  the  unconditional  trust  of  the  disciples  in  their  masters, 
which,  especially  in  later  itfeo-Platonism,  degenerated  to  exaggerated 
veneration  of  "the  heads  of  schools.1  This  same  motive  appears  in 
grandest  form  as  a  power  in  the  world's  history,  in  the  stupendous, 
overpowering  impression  of  the  personality  of  Jesus.  Faith  in  him 
was  the  uniting  bond  which  held  together  victoriously  the  various  and 
manifold  tendencies  of  early  Christianity. 

But  this  psychological  motive  justified  itself  to  theory  by  the 
consideration  that  the  admired  personality  was  regarded,  in  teach- 
ing and  life,  as  a  revelation  of  the  divine  World-reason.  The  meta- 
physical and  epistemological  bases  for  this  were  given  in  Platonism 
and  especially  in  Stoicism,  Attachment  to  the  Platonic  doctrine 
that  knowledge  is  recollection,  with  the  turn  already  expressed  in 
Cicero  that  right  knowledge  is  implanted  by  God  in  the  soul,  is  innate 
within  it,  the  carrying  out  of  the  Stoic  logos  doctrine,  and  of  the 
idea  contained  in  it  that  the  rational  part  of  the  soul  is  a  consub- 
stantial  emanation  from  the  divine  World-reason,  —  all  this  led  to 
regarding  every  form  of  right  knowledge  as  a  kind  of  divine  revela- 
tion in  man.2  All  knowledge  is,  as  Xumenius  said,3  the  kindling  of 
the  small  light  from  the  great  light  which  illumines  the  world. 

It  was  from  this  point  of  view  that  Justin,  especially,  conceived 
of  the  relationship  maintained  by  him  between  the  old  philosophy 
and  Christianity,  and  at  the  same  time  conceived  the  superiority  of 
the  latter.  God  has  indeed  revealed  himself  internally  through  the 
rational  nature  *  (cnrep/ia  Xoyov  t^mov)  of  man  who  is  created  in 
his  image,  as  he  has  revealed  himself  externally  through  the  perfec- 
tion of  his  creation;  but  the  development  of  this  universal,  more 
potential  than  actual  revelation,  is  retarded  by  evil  demons  and 
man's  sensuous  impulses.  God  has,  therefore,  for  man's  help,  em- 
ployed the  special  revelation,  which  has  appeared  not  only  in  Moses 
and  the  prophets,  but  also  in  the  men  of  Greek  science.5  Justin 
calls  the  revelation  which  is  extended  to  the  entire  human  race,  the 

1  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  history  of  civilisation  we  may  notice  the 
parallel  in  the  boundless  deification  of  the  Roman  Emperors. 

2  so  also  by  the  Stoics  of  the  time  of  the  Empire,  phUosophy,  which  among 
them  likewise  aimed  to  be  a  cure  for  sick  souls  (Epictetus,  Dissert.  HI ,23, 30), . 
is  set  forth  as  a  sermon  of  the  deity  himself,  through  the  mouth  of  the  wise 
man  (ib.  I.  36). 

s  In  Euseb.  Prap.  Ev.  XL  18,  8. 
4  Apol.  II.  8 ;  cf.  Min.  Fel.  Oct.  16,  5. 

6  On  the  other  hand,  to  be  sure,  Justin  as  well  as  Phuo  derives  tne 
philosophy  from  the  Jewish  religion,  as  a  borrowing. 


22-i       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought  :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

Xoyos  orre/^umKo's.  But  that  which  has  appeared  in  former  time,  so 
dispersed  and  often  obscured,  is  not  the  full  truth  :  the  entire,  pure 
logos  has  been  revealed  in  Christ,  Son  of  God,  and  second  God. 

In  this  teaching  there  prevails,  on  the  one  hand,  with  the  Apolo- 
gists, the  effort  to  set  forth  Christianity  as  the  true  and  highest  phil- 
osophy, and  to  show  that  it  unites  in  itself  all  teachings  a  of  abiding 
worth  that  can  be  discovered  in  the  earlier  philosophy.  Christ  is 
called  the  teacher  (SiSaovcoAos),  and  this  teacher  is  Eeason  itself. 
While  Christianity  was  by  this  means  brought  as  near  as  possible  to 
rational  philosophy,  and  philosophy's  principle  of  knowledge  made 
essentially  equivalent  to  that  of  religion,  this  had  yet  at  the  same 
time  the  consequence,  that  the  conception  of  the  religious  content 
itself  became  strongly  rationalistic  with  Justin  and  similar  Apolo- 
gists, such  as  Minucius  Felix:  the  specifically  religious  elements 
appear  more  repressed,  and  Christianity  takes  on  the  character  of  a 
moralising  deism,  in  which  it  acquires  the  greatest  similarity  to 
religious  Stoicism.2 

On  the  other  hand,  in  this  relation  the  self-consciousness  of 
Christianity  speaks  out,  for  with  its  perfect  revelation  it  regarded 
all  other  kinds  of  revelation,  universal  as  well  as  particular,  as  super- 
fluous j  and  at  this  point  the  Apologetic  doctrine  became  of  itself 
polemic,  as  is  shown  especially  in  Athenagoras.  Eevelation  here, 
too,  is  still  regarded  as  the  truly  reasonable,  but  just  on  this  account 
the  reasonable  is  not  to  be  demonstrated,  but  only  believed.  Phil- 
osophers have  not  found  the  full  truth,  because  they  have  not  been 
willing  or  able  to  learn  God  from  God  himself. 

4.  Thus,  although  in  the  Apologetic  doctrine  the  rational  is  re- 
garded as  supernaturally  revealed,  there  is  gradually  preparing  an 
opposition  between  revelation  and  'knowledge  by  the  reason.  The  more 
the  Gnostics,  in  developing  their  theological  metaphysics,  separated 
themselves  from  the  simple  content  of  Christian  faith,  the  more 
Irenceus  3  warned  against  the  speculations  of  worldly  wisdom,  and 
the  more  violently  Tatian,  with  Oriental  contempt  of  the  Greeks, 
"rejected  erery  delusion  of  the  Hellenic  philosophy  which  was 
always  at  variance  with  itself,  and  of  whose  teachers  each  would 
exalt  only  his  own  opinions  to  the  rank  of  law,  while  the  Christians. 
uniformly  subjected  themselves  to  the  divine  revelation. 

This  opposition  becomes  still  sharper  with  Tertullian  and  Arno- 
bius.  The  former,  as  Tatian  had  already  done  in  part,  adopted  the 


1  ApoL  II.  13T  Sera  irapd  iraffi  /caXus  etpyrat  yjiwv  J.piffriavQv          . 

2  Cf.  Min.  Fel.  Oct.  31  fi.,  where  the  Christian  fellowship  of  love  appears  pre- 
cisely as  the  Stoic  world-state  of  philosophers. 

s  Kef.  II.  25  ft. 


CHAP.  2,  §  18.]  Authority  and  Revelation :  Tertullian,  Plutarch,  225 

Stoic  materialism  in.  its  metaphysical  aspect,  but  drew  from  it  only 
the  logical  consequence  of  a  purely  sensualistic  theory  of  knowledge. 
This  was  carried  out  in  an  interesting  wav  by  Arnobius,  when,  to 
combat  the  Platonic  and  Platonising  theory  of  knowledge,  he  showed 
that  a  man  left  in  complete  isolation  from  his  birth  on,  would  re- 
main  mentally  empty,  and  not  gain  higher  knowledge.1  Since  the 
human  soul  is  by  nature  limited  solely  to  the  impressions  of  the 
senses,  it  is  therefore  of  its  own  power  absolutely  incapable  of 
acquiring  knowledge  of  the  deity,  or  of  any  yocation  or  destiny  of 
its  own  that  transcends  this  life.  Just  for  this  reason  it  needs  rev- 
elation, and  finds  its  salvation  only  in  faith  in  this.  So  sensualism 
here  shows  itself  for  the  first  time  as  basis  for  orthodoxy.  The  lower 
the  natural  knowing  faculty  of  man,  and  the  more  it  is  limited  to 
the  senses,  the  more  necessary  does  revelation  appear. 

Accordingly,  with  Tertuttian,  the  content  of  revelation  is  not  only 
above  reason,  but  also  in  a  certain  sense  contrary  to  reason,  in  so 
far  as  by  reason  man's  natural  knowing  activity  is  to  be  understood. 
The  gospel  is  not  only  incomprehensible,  but  is  also  in  necessary 
contradiction  with  worldly  discernment:  credibile  est  quia  inep- 
turn  est;  cerium  est,  quia  impossible  est — credo  quia  absurdum.  Hence 
Christianity,  according  to  his  view,  has  nothing  to  do  with  philoso- 
phy, Jerusalem  nothing  to  do  with  Athens.2  Philosophy  as  natural 
knowledge  is  unbelief ;  there  is  therefore  no  Christian  philosophy. 

5.  But  rationalistic  theory  also  found  occasions  enough  for  such 
a  defining  of  boundaries  between  revelation  and  natural  Tcnoidedge. 
3?or  by  their  identification  the  criterion  of  truth  threatened  to 
become  lost.  The  quantity  of  that  which  presented  itself  as  reve- 
lation, in  this  time  of  such  agitation  in  religion,  made  it  indispen- 
sable to  decide  on  the  right  revelation,  and  the  criterion  for  this 
could  not  be  sought  in  turn  in  the  individual's  rational  knowledge, 
because  the  principle  of  revelation  would  be  thereby  injured.  This 
difficulty  made  itself  very  noticeable,  especially  in  the  Hellenistic 
line  of  thought.  Plutarch,  for  example,  who  regards  all  knowledge 
as  revelation,  follows  the  Stoic  division  of  theology  into  three  kinds, 
—  viz.  of  the  poets,  of  the  law-givers,  and  of  philosophers,  —  and 
would  concede  to  science  or  philosophy  the  supreme  decision  as  to 
religious  truth,8  declaring  himself  vigorously  against  superstition4 

1  Am.  Adv.  Gent.  H.  20  ff. 

2  Tertull.  De  Came  Chr.  5 ;  De  Prcescr.  7.    In  the  latter  passage  he  directs 
his  polemic  also  expressly  against  those  who  present  a  Stoic  or  Platonic  Chris- 
tianity.   He  is  the  extreme  opponent  of  the  Hellenising  of  dogma ;  he  knows 
no  compromise,  and  with  his  hot-blooded  nature  demands  unconditional  surren- 
der to  revelation.    In  a  still  more  popular  manner  Araobius  sets  forth  the  help- 
lessness of  natural  knowledge  (Adv.  Gent.  II.  74  5.). 

s  De  Isid.  68.  4  JDe  Superst.  14. 


226        Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Religious  Period.    [PART  II. 

(8€«rt8at/jtovw) ;  but  he  shows  Himself  to  be  ultimately  as  nai've  and 
credulous  as  his  time,  since  he  takes  up  into  his  writings  all  kinds 
of  tales  of  prophecies  and  miracles ;  and  the  incredible  absence  of 
criticism  with  which  the  later  Xeo-Platonists,  a  Jamblichus  and 
Proclus  proceeded  in  this  respect,  shows 'itself  as  the  consistent 
result  of  the  renunciation  of  the  thinker's  own  discernment,  —  a 
renunciation  which  the  need  of  revelation  brought  with  it  from  the 
beginning. 

Here  the  development  of  the  Church,  which  was  then  in  process 
of  organisation,  set  in  with  its  principle  of  tradition  and  historically 
accredited  authority.  It  regards  the  religious  documents  of  the  Old 
and  Xew  Testaments  as  entirely,  and  also  as  alone,  inspired.  It 
assumes  that  the  authors,  in  recording  this  highest  truth,  were 
always  in  a  state  of  pure  receptivity  in  their  relation  to  the  divine 
spirit,1  and  finds  the  verification  of  this  divine  origin,  not  in  the 
agreement  of  this  truth  with  the  knowledge  derived  from  human 
reason,  but  essentially  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  which  are 
therein  contained,  and  in  the  purposeful  connection  of  their  succession 
in  time, 

The  proof  from  prophecy,  which  became  so  extraordinarily  impor- 
tant for  the  further  development  of  theology,  arose  accordingly  from 
the  need  of  finding  a  criterion  for  distinguishing  true  and  false 
revelation.  Since  man  is  denied  knowledge  of  the  future  through 
natural  processes  of  cognition,  the  fulfilled  predictions  of  the  proph- 
ets serve  as  marks  of  the  inspiration,  by  means  of  which  they  have 
propounded  their  doctrines. 

To  this  argument  a  second  is  now  added.  According  to  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Church,  which  on  this  point  was  supported  chiefly  by 
Irenseus,2  Old  and  New  Testaments  stand  in  the  following  connec- 
tion :  the  same  one  God  has  revealed  himself  in  the  course  of  time 
to  man  in  a  constantly  higher  and  purer  manner,  corresponding  to 
the  degree  of  man's  receptive  capacity:  to  the  entire  race  he 
reveals  himself  in  the  rational  nature,  which,  to  be  sure,  may  be  mis- 
used ;  to  the  people  of  Israel,  in  the  strict  law  of  Moses ;  to  entire 
humanity  again,  in  the  law  of  love  and  freedom  which  Jesus  an- 
nounced.3 In  this  connected  succession  of  prophets  there  is  thus 
developed  the  divine  plan  of  education,  according  to  which  the  reve- 
lations of  the  Old  Testament  ase  to  be  regarded  as  preparations  for 

1  Just  Apol.  I.  31. 

2  Kef.  III.  12  j  IV.  11  ff. 

8  The  Alexandrian  theology  added,  as  fourth  phase  of  revelation,  the  "  eter- 
nal gospel,"  which  is  to  he  sought  in  the  pneumatic  interpretation  of  the  New 
Testament.  Cf.  the  carrying  out  of  these  thoughts  in  Lessing's  Education  of 
the  Human  Bace.  J 


CHAP.  2,  §18.]  Authority  and  Revelation  :  Neo-Platonism,Philo.  227 

tlie  New,  which  in  turn  confirms  them.  Here,  too,  in  patristic 
literature,  the  fulfilment  of  prophecies  is  regarded  as  the  connect- 
ing link  between  the  different  phases  of  revelation. 

These  are  the  forms  of  thought  in  which  the  divine  revelation 
became  fixed  for  the  Christian  Church  as  historical  authority.  Bufc 
the  fundamental  psychological  power  which  was  active  in  this  pro- 
cess remained,  nevertheless,  devotion  in  faith  to  the  person  of 
Jesus,  who,  as  the  sum  total  of  divine  revelation,  formed  the  centre 
of  Christian  life. 

6.  The  development  of  the  doctrine  of  revelation  in  the  Hellenistic 
philosophy  took  an  entirely  different  direction.  Here  the  scientific 
movement  lacked  the  living  connection  with  the  Church  community, 
and  therefore  the  support  of  a  historical  authority;  here,  therefore, 
revelation,  which  was  demanded  as  a  supplement  for  the  natural 
faculties  of  knowledge,  must  be  sought  in  an  immediate  illumination 
of  the  individual  by  the  deity.  On  this  account  revelation  is  here 
held  to  be  a  supra-rational  apprehension  of  divine  truth,  an  appre- 
hension which  the  individual  man  comes  to  possess  in  immediate  con- 
tact (a<£^)  with  the  deity  itself:  and  though  it  must  be  admitted 
that  there  are  but  few  who  attain  to  this,  and  that  even  these  attain 
only  in  rare  moments,  a  definite,  historically  authenticated,  special 
revelation,  authoritative  for  all,  is  nevertheless  here  put  aside. 
This  conception  of  revelation  was  later  called  the  mystic  conception, 
and  to  this  extent  Neo-Platonism  is  the  source  of  all  later  mysticism. 

The  origins  of  this  conception  again  are  to  be  sought  with  Philo. 
Tor  he  had  already  taught  that  all  man's  virtue  can  arise  and  con- 
tinue only  through  the  working  of  the  divine  Logos  within  us,  and 
that  the  knowledge  of  G-od  consists  only  in  the  renunciation  of  self, 
—  in  giving  up  individuality,  and  in  becoming  merged  in  the  divine 
Primordial  Being.1  Knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being  is  unity  of 
life  with  him,  —  immediate  contact.  The  mind  that  wishes  to  behold 
God  must  itself  become  God.2  In  this  state  the  soul's  relation  is 
entirely  passive  and  receptive ; 3  it  has  to  renounce  all  self-activity, 
all  its  own  thought,  and  all  reflection  upon  itself.  Even  the  w5s, 
the  reason,  must  be  silent  in  order  that  the  blessedness  of  the  per- 
ception of  G-od  may  come  upon  man.  In  this  state  of  ecstasy 
(iKoracris)  the  divine  spirit,  according  to  Philo,  dwells  in  man. 
Hence,  in  this  state,  he  is  a  prophet  of  divine  wisdom,  a  foreteller 
and  miracle-worker.  As  the  Stoa  had  already  traced  mantic  arts 

1  Phil.  Leg.  All.  48  e. ;  55  d.;  57  b.  (53-62  M.). 

2  'Airoflewflijj'cu  is  found  also  in  the  Hermetic  writings ;  Poemand.  10,  5  fL 
The  eeofoeai  (deificatio)  is  later  a  general  term  of  Mysticism. 

8  Cf.  Pint  De  Pyth.  Orac.  21  ff.  (404  ff.J. 


228      Hellenistic-Roman  Thought  :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 


to  the  consubstantiality  of  human  and  divine  spirits  (Trvcu/xara),  so 
too  the  Alexandrians  conceive  of  this  "deification"  of  man  from 
the  standpoint  of  his  oneness  in  essence  with  the  ground  of  the 
world.  All  thought,  Plotinus  teaches,  is  inferior  to  this  state  of 
ecstasy;  for  thought  is  motion,  —  a  desiring  to  know.  Ecstasy, 
however,  is  certainty  of  God,  blessed  rest  in  him  ;  *  man  has  share 
in  the  divine  &a>pt'a,  or  contemplation  (Aristotle)  only  when  he  has 
raised  himself  entirely  to  the  deity. 

Ecstasy  is  then  a  state  which  transcends  the  self-consciousness  of 
the  individual,  as  its  object  transcends  all  particular  determinate- 
ness  (cf.  §  20,  2).  It  is  a  sinking  into  the  divine  essence  with  an 
entire  loss  of  self-consciousness  :  it  is  a  possession  of  the  deity,  a 
unity  of  life  with  him,  which  mocks  at  all  description,  all  percep- 
tion, and  all  that  abstract  thought  can  frame.2 

How  is  this  state  to  be  attained  ?  It  is,  in  all  cases,  a  gift  of  the 
deity,  a  boon  of  the  Infinite,  which  takes  up  the  finite  into  itself, 
But  man,  with  his  free  will,  has  to  make  himself  worthy  of  this 
deification.  He  is  to  put  off  all  his  sensuous  nature  and  all  will 
of  his  own  ;  he  is  to  turn  back  from  the  multitude  of  individual 
relations  to  his  pure,  simple,  essential  nature  (aTrXwcns)  ;  3  the  ways 
to  this  are,  according  to  Proclus,  love,  truth,  and  faith  ;  but  it  is 
only  in  the  last,  which  transcends  all  reason,  that  the  soul  finds  its 
complete  unification  with  God,  and  the  peace  of  blessed  rapture.4  As 
the  most  effective  aid  in  the  preparation  for  this  operation  of  divine 
grace,  prayer  5  and  all  acts  6  of  religious  worship  are  commended. 
And  if  these  do  not  always  lead  to  the  highest  revelations  of  the 
deity,  they  yet  secure  at  least,  as  Apuleius  7  had  before  this  sup- 
posed, the  comforting  and  helpful  revelations  of  lower  gods,  and 
demons,  of  saints  and  guardian  spirits.  So,  also,  in  later  Neo- 
Platonism,  the  raptures  of  prophecy  which  the  Stoics  had  taught 
appear  as  lower  and  preparatory  forms  for  the  supreme  ecstasy  of 
deification.  For,  ultimately,  all  forms  of  worship  are  to  the  Neo- 
Platonist  but  exercises  symbolic  of  that  immediate  union  of  the 
individual  with  God. 

Thus  the  theory  of  inspiration  diverged,  in  Christianity  and  Neo- 
Platonism,  into  two  wholly  different  forms.  In  the  former,  divine 


1  Plot.  Ennead.  VI.  7. 

2  Ib.  V.  3. 

3  An  expression  which  is  found  even  with  Marcus  Aurelius  (Hobs  iavr.  IV. 
26),  and  which  Plotinus  also  employs  (Enn.  VI.  7,  35). 

*  Procl.  TheoL  Plat.  I.  24  f. 
6  Jambl.  in  Procl.  Tim.  64  C. 

6  De  Myst  JSg.  II.  11  (96). 

7  Apul.  De  Socr.  6  ff. 


CHAP.  2,  §  19.]    Spirit  and  Matter:  Stoics,  Neo-Pythagoream.    229 

revelation  is  fixed  as  historical  authority;  in  the  latter,  it  is  the 
process  in  which  the  individual  man,  freed  from  all  eternal  relation, 
sinks  into  the  divine  original  Ground.  The  former  is  for  the  Middle 
Ages  the  source  of  Scholasticism;  the  latter,  that  of  Mysticism. 


§19.  Spirit1  and  Matter, 

Among  the  arguments  in  which  the  felt  need  of  revelation  devel- 
ops in  the  Alexandrian  philosophy,  none  is  so  incisive  as  that  which 
proceeds  from  the  premise  that  man,  ensnared  in  the  world  of  sense, 
can  attain  to  knowledge  of  the  higher  spiritual  world  onlv  bv  super- 
natural help:  in  this  is  shown  the  religious  dualism  which  forms 
the  fundamental  mode  of  view  of  the  period.  Its  roots  are  partly 
anthropological,  partly  metaphysical :  the  Stoic  antithesis  of  reason 
and  what  is  contrary  to  reason  is  united  with  the  Platonic  distinction 
between  the  supersensuous  world,  which  remains  ever  the  same, 
and  the  sensuous  world  which  is  always  changing. 

The  identification  of  the  spiritual  and  the  immaterial,  which  was  in 
nowise  made  complete  with  Plato  although  he  prepared  the  way 
for  it,  had  been  limited  by  Aristotle  to  the  divine  self-consciousness. 
All  the  spiritual  and  mental  activities  of  man,  on  the  contrary,  were 
regarded,  even  by  Plato,  as  belonging  to  the  world  of  phenomena 
(yeveons),  and  remained  thus  excluded  from  the  world  of  incorporeal 
Being  (ouo-ta),  however  much  the  rational  might  be  opposed  to  the 
sensuous  in  the  interest  of  ethics  and  of  the  theory  of  knowledge ; 
and  while,  in  the  antagonistic  motives  which  crossed  in  the  Aristo- 
telian doctrine  of  the  vows,  the  attempt  had  been  made  to  regard 
Reason  as  an  immaterial  principle,  entering  the  animal  soul  from 
without,  the  development  of  the  Peripatetic  School  (cf.  §  15,  1)  at 
once  set  this  thought  aside  again.  It  was,  however,  in  the  doctrines 
of  Epicurus  and  the  Stoa  that  the  conscious  materialising  of  the 
psychical  nature  and  activities  attained  its  strongest  expression. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  ethical  dualism,  which  marked  off  as 
strongly  as  possible,  man's  inner  nature,  withdrawn  into  itself,  as 
over  against  the  sensuous  outer  world,  became  more  and  more 
sharply  accentuated,  and  the  more  it  took  on  religious  form,  the 
more  it  pressed,  also,  toward  a  theory  of  the  world  that  made  this 
opposition  its  metaphysical  principle. 

1  [The  German  "  Geist,"  corresponding  to  both  "mind"  and  "spirit,"  as 
used  in  this  period  leans  sometimes  to  one,  sometimes  to  the  other  meaning. 
In  view  of  the  prevailingly  religious  character  of  the  ideas  of  the  period  I  have 
usually  rendered  it  in  this  section  by  "  spirit,"  sometimes  by  the  alternative 
"mind  or  spirit."] 


280      Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.      [?ART  II 

1.  This  -relation  appears  in  clearest  form,  perhaps,  in  the  expres- 
sions of  the  later  Stoics,  who  emphasise  anthropological  dualism  so 
strongly  that  it  comes  into  palpable  contradiction  with  the  meta- 
physics of  the  school.  The  idea  of  the  oneness  of  man's  nature, 
which  the  Stoics  had  taught  hitherto,  had  indeed  been  already 
questioned  by  Posidonius,  when  he  expressed  the  Platonising 
opinion,  that  the  passions  could  not  arise  from  the  ^ye/ion/coi/,  but 
must  come  from  other  irrational  parts  of  the  soul.1  Now,  however, 
we  find  in  Seneca 2  a  bald  opposition  between  soul  and  "flesh  " ;  the 
body  is  only  a  husk,  it  is  a  fetter,  a  prison  for  the  mind.  So,  too, 
Epictetus  calls  reason  and  body  the  two  constituent  elements  of 
man,3  and  though  Marcus  Aurelius  makes  a  distinction  in  man's 
sensuous  nature  between  the  coarse  material  and  the  psychical 
breath  or  pneuma  which  animates  it,  it  is  yet  his  intention  to  sep- 
arate all  the  more  sharply  from  the  latter  the  soul  proper,  the 
rational  spirit  or  intelligence  (i/ovs  and  Siavota),  as  an  incorporeal 
being.4  In  correspondence  with  this,  we  find  in  all  these  men  an  idea 
of  the  deity,  that  retains  only  the  intellectual  marks  from  the  Stoic 
conception,  and  looks  upon  matter  as  a  principle  opposed  to  the  deity, 
hostile  to  reason.5 

These  changes  in  the  Stoa  are  due,  perhaps,  to  the  rising  influence 
of  2?eo-Pythagoreanism,  which  at  first  made  the  Platonic  dualism, 
with  its  motives  of  ethical  and  religious  values,  the  centre  of  its 
system.  By  the  adherents  of  this  doctrine  the  essential  difference 
of  soul  and  body  is  emphasised  in  the  strongest  manner,6  and  with 
this  are  most  intimately  connected,7  on  the  one  hand,  the  doctrine 
which  will  have  God  worshipped  only  spiritually,  as  a  purely 
spiritual  being,8  by  prayer  and  virtuous  intention,  not  by  outward 
acts, — and  on  the  other  hand,  the  completely  ascetic  morals  which 
aims  to  free  the  soul  from  its  ensnareinent  in  matter,  and  lead  it 
back  to  its  spiritual  prime  source  by  washings  and  purifications,  by 
avoiding  certain  foods,  especially  flesh,  by  sexual  continence,  and 
by  mortifying  all  sensuous  impulses.  Over  against  the  deity,  which 
is  the  principle  of  good,  matter  (fay)  is  regarded  as  the  ground  of 
all  evil,  propensity  toward  it  as  the  peculiar  sin  of  man. 


1  Cf .  Galen,  De  Hipp,  et  Plat.  IV.  3  ff. 

2  Senec.  Epist.  05,  22  ;  92,  13 ;  M  Marc,  24.  5. 
8  Epict.  Dissert.  I.  3,  3. 

*  Marc.  Aur.  Ned.  II.  2 ;  XII.  3. 

5  Senec.  Ep.  65.  24 ;  Epict.  Diss.  EL  8,  2 ;  Marc.  Aur.  Meet.  XII.  2. 

6  Claud.  Mam.  Dt  Strain  Anim.  11.  7. 

'  In  so  far  as  here,  too,  man  is  regarded  as  a  microcosm.    Ps.-Pythag.  in 
Phot.  Cod.  249,  p.  440  a. 

8  Apollonius  of  Tyana  (vcpl  eutriQv)  in  Eus.  Pnep.  28v.  IV.  13. 


CHAP.  2,  §  19.]     Spirit  and  Matter:  Philo,  Plutarch.  231 

We  meet  this  same  conception  ethically,  among  the  Essenes,  and 
theoretically,  everywhere  in  the  teaching  of  Philo.  He,  too,  dis- 
tinguishes between  the  soul,  which  as  vital  force  of  the  bodily 
organism  has  its  seat  in  the  blood,  and  the  pneuma,  which  as  ema- 
nation of  the  purely  spiritual  deity,  constitutes  the  true  essential 
nature  of  man.1  He,  too,  finds  that  this  latter  is  imprisoned  in  the 
body,  and  retarded  in  its  unfolding  by  the  body's  sensuous  nature 
(aur0«H$),  so  that  since  man's  universal  sinfulness3  is  rooted  in  this, 
salvation  from  this  sinfulness  must  be  sought  only  in  the  extirpa- 
tion of  all  sensuous  desires ;  for  him,  too,  matter  is  therefore  the 
corporeal  substratum,  which  has  indeed  been  arranged  by  the  deity 
so  as  to  form  the  purposive,  good  world,  but  which,  at  the  same 
time,  has  remained  the  ground  of  evil  and  of  imperfection. 

2.  The  Christian  Apologists7  idea  is  related  to  this  and  yet  differ- 
ent. "With  them  the  Aristotelian  conception  of  God  as  pure  intel- 
lect or  spirit  (vov?  TeXeios)  is  united  with  the  doctrine  that  God  has. 
created  the  world  out  of  shapeless  matter :  yet  here  matter  is  not 
regarded  immediately  as  an  independent  principle,  but  the  ground 
of  evil  is  sought  rather  in  the  perverted  use  of  freedom  on  the  part 
of  man  and  of  the  demons  who  seduce  him.  Here  the  ethical  and 
religious  character  of  the  dualism  of  the  time  appears  in  its  com- 
plete purity :  matter  itself  is  regarded  as  something  of  an  indiffer- 
ent nature,  which  becomes  good  or  evil  only  through  its  use  by 
spiritual  powers.  In  the  same  manner  Hellenistic  Platonists  like 
Plutarch,  proceeding  from  the  conception  of  matter  as  formless  !N"ot- 
being,  sought  the  principle  of  evil  not  in  it,  but  rather  in  a  force  or 
power,  standing  in  opposition  to  the  good  deity,8  —  a  force  which, 
to  a  certain  degree,  contends  with  the  deity  about  the  formation  of 
matter.  Plutarch  found  this  thought  in  the  myths  of  different 
religions,  but  he  might  also  have  referred  to  a  passage  where  Plato 
had  spoken  of  the  evil  world-soul  in  opposition  to  the  good.4 

Meanwhile,  the  tendency  to  identify  the  antithesis  of  good  and 
evil  with  that  of  mind  (or  spirit)  and  matter  asserts  itself  here  too, 
in  the  fact  that  the  essence  of  evil  is  sought  again  in  a  propensity 

1  In  this  connection  Philo  calls  irvevpa  that  which  among  the  Stoics,  Aristo- 
telians, and  Platonists  of  the  time  is  called  yofe ;  cf.  Zeller  V.*395,  3.  Yet  there 
occur  with  him  again  other  expressions  in  which,  quite  in  the  Stoic  fashion,  the 
pneuma  appears  as  air,  in  the  sense  of  a  most  refined  physical  reality.    Cf.  H. 
Siebeck,  Gesck,  d.  Psych.  I.  b  302  ff. 

2  It  is  also  characteristic  that  the  sinfulness  of  all  men,  a  doctnne  which 
is  completely  at  variance  with  the  old  Stoic  faith  in  the  realisation  of  the  ideal 
of  the  wise  man,  is  generally  acknowledged  by  the  Stoics  of  the  time  of  tne 
Empire,  and  regarded  as  motive  for  the  necessity  of  supernatural  help.    OL 
Seneca,  Benef.  I.  10  ;  VII.  27 ;  Epict.  Dissert.  II.  11, 1. 

»  Plut.  De  Isid.  46  ff. 
*  Plat.  Laws,  896  E. 


232      Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

toward  the  sensuous  and  fleshly,  —  toward  matter ;  while  the  good, 
on  the  contrary,  is  sought  in  love  to  the  purely  spiritual  deity. 
This  is  not  only  a  fundamental  feature  of  the  early  Christian  morals, 
but  it  is  found  also,  in  the  same  form,  among  the  Platonists  above 
mentioned.  For  Plutarch,  too,  liberation  from  the  body  is  the 
necessary  preparation  for  that  reception  of  the  working  of  divine 
grace  which  forms  the  goal  of  human  life,  and  when  Numenius 
carried  out  his  theory  further,  by  teaching  that,  as  in  the  universe, 
so  also  in  man,  two  souls,  one  good  and  one  evil,  contend  with  each 
other,1  he  yet  also  seeks  the  seat  of  the  evil  soul  in  the  body  and 
its  desires. 

In  these  doctrines,  also,  we  find  everywhere  emphasised,  not  only 
the  pure  spirituality  and  incorporeality  of  God,  but  likewise  the 
incorporeality  of  the  individual  spirit  or  mind.  With  Plutarch  this 
is  shown  once  more  in  the  form  that  he  would  separate  the  vovs,  the 
rational  spirit,  from  the  t^uxfy  which  possesses  the  sensuous  nature 
and  the  passions  together  with  the  power  to  move  the  body.  So,  too, 
Irenceus*  distinguishes  the  psychical  breath  of  life  (way  fo^s), 
which  is  of  a  temporal  nature  and  bound  to  the  body,  from  the  ani- 
mating spirit  (Trveufjja  £cuo7rotow),  which  is  in  its  nature  eternal. 

These  views  of  course  appear  everywhere  in  connection  with  the 
doctrines  of  immortality  or  of  the  pre-existence  and  transmigration 
of  souls,  of  the  Fall  through  which  or  as  a  punishment  for  which 
man  has  been  placed  in  matter,  and  of  the  purification  through  which 
he  is  to  free  himself  from  it  again ;  and  just  in  this,  too,  the  synthe- 
sis in  question  is  completed  more  and  more  effectively,  inasmuch  as 
the  immutable  Eternal  which  remains  ever  the  same  (the  Platonic 
OVCTUL)  is  recognised  in  spirit;  the  perishable  and  changeable  in  matter. 

3.  In  these  connections  we  find  developing  gradually  a  separa- 
tion of -the  two  characteristics  which  had  been  originally  united 
in  the  conception  of  the  soul,  —  the  physiological  and  the  psycholog- 
ical, the  characteristic  of  vital  force  and  that  of  the  activity  of  con- 
sciousness. As  in  the  scheme  that  had  already  been  employed  by 
Aristotle,  so  now,  side  by  side  with  the  "soul"  which  moves  the  body, 
ippears  the  "  spirit "  as  self -subsisting  and  independent  principle, 
md  in  this  spirit  is  found  no  longer  merely  a  general  rational  activ- 
ty,  but  the  proper  essence  of  the  individual  (as  also  of  the  divine) 
personality.  The  triple  division  of  man  into  body,  soul,  and  spirit 
s  introduced  in  all  lines,  in  the  most  various  modes  of  expression,3 

1  Jambl.  in  Stob.  Ed.  I.  894. 

2  Iren.  Adv.  Hcer.  V.  12,  2. 

*  Of  the  various  terminology  tyvxt,  anima,  irvevna,  spiritus,  animus,  eto.^  in 
fhich  these  doctrines  appear,  examples  have  already  been  given  above,  and 


CHAP.  2,  §  19.]        Spirit  and  Matter:  Plotinus.  233 

and  it  is  easily  understood  that  in  this  case,  the  boundaries,  on  the 
one  hand  between  soul  and  body,  and  on  the  other  to  a  still  greater 
degree  between  soul  and  spirit,  were  very  fluctuating ;  for  the  soul 
plays  here  the  part  of  a  mean  between  the  two  extremes;  matter  and 
spirit. 

An  immediate  consequence  of  this  was  that  a  new  and  deeper  idea 
could  be  gained  of  the  activities  of  consciousness,  which  now  as 
"mental"  or  "spiritual"  were  separated  from  the  physiological 
functions  of  the  soul.  For,  when  once  removed  in  essence  from  the 
corporeal  world,  the  spirit  could  not  be  thought  as  dependent  upon 
sensuous  influences,  either  in  its  activity  or  in  the  object  of  its 
activity;  and  while,  in  all  Greek  philosophy,  cognition  had  been 
regarded  as  the  perception  and  taking  up  of  something  given,  and 
the  attitude  of  thought  as  essentially  receptive,  now  the  idea  of 
mind  or  spirit  as  an  independent,  productive  principle  forces  its 
way  through. 

4.  The  beginnings  for  this  lie  already  in  the  Neo- Pythagorean 
doctrine,  in  so  far  as  in  it  the  spirituality  of  the  immaterial  world 
was  first  maintained.  The  immaterial  substances  of  Platonic  meta- 
physics, the  Ideas,  appear  no  longer  as  self-subsistent  essences,  but 
as  elements  constituting  the  content  of  intellectual  or  spiritual  activity; 
and  while  they  still  remain  for  human  cognition  something  given 
and  determining,  they  become  original  thoughts  of  God.1  Thus  the 
bodiless  archetypes  of  the  world  of  experience  are  taken  up  into 
the  inward  nature  of  mind ;  reason  is  no  longer  merely  something 
which  belongs  to  the  ovc-to.  or  which  is  only  akin  to  it,  it  is  the 
entire  owrta  itself;  the  immaterial  world  is  recognised  as  the  world  of 
mind  or  spirit5 

In  correspondence  with  this,  the  rational  spirit  or  intellect  (i/ors) 
is  defined  by  Plotinus5  as  the  unity  which  has  plurality  within 
itself,  i.e.  in  metaphysical  language,  as  duality  determined  by  unity 
but  in  itself  indeterminate  (cf.  §  20),  and  in  anthropological  lan- 

mfcht  very  easily  be  multiplied.  This  doctrine  was  developed  in  an  especially 
interesting  way  by  Origen  (De  Princ.  III.  1-5),  where  the  "soul"  is  treated 
partly  as  motive  power,  partly  as  faculty  of  ideation  and  desire,  while  the  spirit, 
on  the  contrary,  is  presented  as  the  principle  of  judging,  on  the  one  hand 
between  good  and  evil,  on  the  other  hand  between  true  and  false ;  in  this  alone, 
teaches  Origen,  consists  man's  freedom.  The  like  triple  division  appears  then 
with,  Plotinus  in  connection  with  his  whole  metaphysical  construction.  Enn. 
II.  9,  2.  Cf.  §  20. 

1  Cf.  Nicomachus,  Arithm.  Mr.  I.  6. 

2  With  this  change  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  Ideas  passed  over  to  the  rature, 
because  Plotinus,  and  with  him  all  Neo-Platonism,  accepted  it.   Yet  this  dad  not 
take  place  without  opposition.    Longinus  at  least  protested  against  it,  ana  Por- 
phyry as  his  disciple  wrote  a  treatise  of  his  own  5n  !£w  rov  vov  v^riiKe  rit  VOTJTO.. 
Porph.  Vit.  Plot.  18  £. 

»  Plot.  Enn.  V.  9,  6;  3,  15;  4,  2. 


234         Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

guage,  as  the  synthetic  function  which  produces  plurality  out  of  its 
higher  unity.  From  this  general  point  of  view  the  Neo-Platonists 
carried  out  the  psychology  of  cognition  under  the  principle  of  the 
activity  of  consciousness.  For  according  to  this,  the  higher  soul  can 
no  longer  be  looked  upon  as  passive,  but  must  be  regarded  as  essen- 
tially active  in  all  its  functions.1  All  its  intelligence  (cnWis)  rests 
upon  the  synthesis  (crw&cris)  of  various  elements ; 2  even  where  the 
cognition  refers  to  what  is  given  by  the  senses,  it  is  only  the  body 
which  is  passive,  while  the  soul  in  becoming  conscious  (cnWcrflecris 
and  TrapaKoXovQTjvis)  is  active ; 3  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  sensuous 
feelings  and  passions.  Thus  in  the  field  of  sensation  a  distinction 
is  made  between  the  state  of  excitation  and  the  conscious  perception 
of  this ;  the  former  is  a  passive  or  receptive  state  of  the  body  (or 
also  of  the  lower  soul);  the  latter  even  already  in  conscious  per- 
ception (avTL\vi\l/Ls)  is  an  act  of  the  higher  soul,  which  Plotinus 
describes  as  a  kind  of  bending  back  of  thought — reflection.* 

While  consciousness  was  thus  conceived  as  the  active  noting  of  the 
mind's  own  states,  functions,  and  contents,  —  a  theory,  which,  ac- 
cording to  Philoponus,  was  carried  out  especially  by  the  Nee-Pla- 
tonic Plutarch  also,  —  there  resulted  from  this  with  Plotinus  the 
conception  of  self-consciousness  (-rrapaKoXovB^Lv  cavroJ).5  His  conception 
of  this  was  that  the  intellect,  as  thought  active  and  in  motion 
),  has  for  its  object  itself  as  a  resting,  objective  thought 
:  intellect  as  knowledge,  and  intellect  as  Being,  are  in  this 
case  identical. 

But  the  conception  of  self-consciousness  takes  on  also  an  ethico- 
religious  colouring  in  accordance  with  the  thought  of  the  time.  The 
<rw«7is  is  at  the  same  time  oT^etS^o-ts  —  conscience,  i.e.  man's  knowl- 
edge, not  only  of  his  own  states  and  acts,  but  also  of  their  ethical 
worth,  and  of  the  commandment  by  the  fulfilment  of  which  the 
estimate  of  this  worth  is  governed ;  and  for  this  reason  the  doctrine 
of  self-consciousness  is  developed  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Church 
Fathers,  not  only  as  man's  knowledge  of  his  sins,  but  also  as  repent- 
ance (fjLe.Ta.vouL)  in  actively  combating  them. 

5.  The  conception  of  mind  or  spirit  as  self-active,  creative  principle 
did  not  stop  with  its  significance  for  psychology,  ethics,  and  theory 

1  Porph.  Sentent.  10,  19  et  al. 

2  Plot.  Enn.  IV.  3,  26. 

8  Ib.  IV.  4,  18  f.  The  term  <rwat<r87}<ris — whose  meaning  reminds  us  besides 
of  the  KOLvbv  akrOyrljpuv  in  Aristotle,  and  thus  ultimately  of  Plato,  Theaet.  184  f. 
—  is  found  in  similar  use  already  in  Alexander  Aphrodisias,  Qucest.  III.  7, 
p.  177,  and  so,  too,  Galen  employs  the  expression  Sidy  vans  to  designate  the 
becoming  conscious  of  the  change  in  the  bodily  organ  as  contrasted  with,  that 
change  itself. 

*  Plot.  Enn.  I.  4, 10.  e  Ib.  HI.  9. 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]  God  and  the  World.  235 

of  knowledge,  but  as  the  ancient  world  passed  out,  this  conception 
rose  to  be  the  dominant  thought  of  religious  metaphysics.  For  by 
making  the  attempt  to  derive  matter  also  from  this  creative  spirit, 
this  conception  offered  the  possibility  of  finally  overcoming  that 
dualism  which  formed  the  presupposition  of  the  whole  movement  of 
the  religious  thought  of  the  time. 

Hence  it  became  the  last  and  highest  problem  of  ancient  philoso- 
phy to  understand  the  world  as  a  product  of  spirit,  to  comprehend 
even  the  corporeal  world  with  all  of  its  phenomena  as  essentially 
intellectual  or  spiritual  in  its  origin  and  content.  The  spiritualisa- 
tion  of  the  universe  is  the  final  result  of  ancient  philosophy. 

Christianity  and  Xeo-Platonism,  Origen  and  Plotinus,  alike 
worked  at  this  problem.  The  dualism  of  spirit  and  matter  remains, 
indeed,  persisting  in  full  force  for  both  so  far  as  they  have  to  do 
with  the  conception  of  the  phenomenal  world,  and  especially  when 
they  treat  ethical  questions.  The  sensuous  is  still  regarded  as  that 
which  is  evil  and  alien  to  God,  from  which  the  soul  must  free  itself 
in  order  to  return  to  unity  with  pure  spirit.  But  even  this  dark 
spot  is  to  be  illumined  from  the  eternal  light,  matter  is  to  be  recog- 
nised as  a  creation  of  spirit.  The  last  standpoint  of  ancient  philos- 
ophy is  thus  spiritual  monism. 

But  in  the  solution  of  this  common  problem  the  philosophy  of 
Christianity  and  that  of  Neo-Platonism  diverge  widely;  for  this  de- 
velopment of  the  divine  spirit  into  the  world  of  phenomena,  even 
down  to  its  material  forms,  must  evidently  be  determined  by  the 
ideas  which  obtained  of  the  nature  of  God  and  of  his  relation  to  the 
world,  and  just  in  this  Hellenism  found  itself  working  under  pre- 
suppositions that  were  completely  different  from  those  of  the  doctrine 
of  the  new  religion. 

§  20.  God  and  the  World, 

The  peculiar  suspense  between  metaphysical  monism  and  ethico- 
religious  dualism,  which  defines  the  character  of  the  entire  Alex- 
andrian philosophy,  forces  together  all  the  thoughts  of  the  time, 
and  condenses  them  into  the  most  difficult  of  problems,  that  of  the 
relation  of  God  and  the  World. 

1.  This  problem  had  already  been  suggested  from  the  purely 
theoretical  side,  by  the  opposition  between  the  Aristotelian  and 
the  Stoic  philosophy.  The  former  maintained  the  transcendence 
of  God,  1.6.  his  complete  separation  from  the  world,  as  strongly  as 
the  latter  maintained  the  immanence  of  God,  i.e.  the  doctrine  that 
God  is  completely  merged  in  the  world.  The  problem,  and  the 
fundamental  tendency  adopted  in  its  solution,  may,  therefore,  be 


236       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II 

recognised  already  in  the  eclectic  mingling ]  of  Peripatetic  and  Stoic 
cosmology,  as  type  of  which,  the  pseudo-Aristotelian  treatise,  Con- 
cerning the  World  is  regarded.2  With  the  Aristotelian  doctrine 
that  the  essence  of  God  must  be  set  far  above  Nature  (as  the  sum- 
total  of  all  particular  things  which  are  moved),  and  especially  above 
the  mutation  of  earthly  existence,  is  connected  here  the  Stoic  en- 
deavour to  follow  the  working  of  the  divine  power  through  the  entire 
universe,  even  into  every  detail.  While,  accordingly,  the  world  was 
regarded  among  the  Stoics  as  God  himself,  while  Aristotle  saw  in 
it  a  living  being,  purposefully  moved,  whose  outermost  spheres 
were  set  in  revolution  only  by  longing  for  the  eternally  unmoved, 
pure  Form,  —  a  revolution  communicating  itself  with  ever-lessening 
perfection  to  the  lower  spheres,  —  here  the  macrocosm  appears  as 
the  system  of  individual  things  existing  in  relations  of  mutual 
sympathy,  in  which  the  power  of  the  supra-mundane  God  is  domi- 
nant under  the  most  varied  forms  as  the  principle  of  life.  The 
mediation  between  theism  and  pantheism  is  gained,  partly  by  the 
distinction  between  the  essence  and  the  power  of  God,  partly  by 
the  graded  scale  of  the  divine  workings,  which  descends  from  the 
heaven  of  the  fixed  stars  to  the  earth.  The  pneuma  doctrine  is 
united  with  the  Aristotelian  conception  of  God,  by  conceiving  of 
the  forces  of  jSTature's  life  as  the  workings  of  pure  Spirit.3 

This  turn,  however,  but  increased  the  difficulty  already  inherent 
in  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  the  action  of  the  deity  upon  the 
world.  For  this  action  was  regarded  as  consisting  in  the  motion  of 
matter,  and  it  was  hard  to  reconcile  this  materialisation  of  the 
divine  action  with  the  pure  spirituality  which  was  to  constitute  the 
essence  of  the  deity.  Even  Aristotle  had  not  become  clear  as  to  the 
relation  of  the  unmoved  mover  to  that  which  was  moved  (cf.  §  13.). 4 

2.  The  problem  became  more  severe  as  the  religious  dualism 
became  more  pronounced,  a  dualism  which,  not  satisfied  with  con- 
trasting God  as  spirit  with  matter,  the  supersensuous  sphere  with 
the  sensuous,  rather  followed  the  tendency  to  raise  the  divine  being 

1  Stratonism  as  a  transformation  of  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  in  the  direction, 
of  pantheistic  immanence,  a  transformation  allied  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Stoa 
has  been  treated  above,  §  15,  1. 

a  This  book  (printed  among  the  writings  of  Aristotle,  391  ff.)  may  perhaps 
have  arisen  in  the  first  century  A.D.  Apuleius  worked  it  over  into  Latin. 

3  Cf.  principally  Ch.  6,  397  b  9. 

r  *  These  difficulties  in  Aristotle's  case  became  condensed  in  the  concept  of  the 
a#tf.  i  or  since  the  "  contact "  of  the  mover  with  the  moved  was  regarded  as  the 
condition  of  motion,  it  was  necessary  to  speak  also  of  a  "  contact »  between  God 
and  the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars.  This,  however,  was  liable  to  objection  on 
account  of  the  purely  spiritual  essence  of  the  deity,  and  the  et^  in  this  case 

meanlns 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]    God  and  the  World :  Neo-Platonism.  237 

above  all  that  can  be  experienced  and  above  every  definite  content, 
and  thus  to  make  the  God  v:ho  is  above  the  world  also  a  God  above 
mind  or  spirit.  This  is  found  already  with  the  Neo- Pythagoreans, 
among  whom  a  wavering  between  various  stadia  of  dualism  lurks 
behind  their  mode  of  expression  in  the  symbolism  of  numbers. 
When  the  " One "  and  the  "indefinite  duality"  are  maintained  to  be 
principles,  the  latter  indeed  always  means  matter  as  the  impure,  as 
the  ground  of  the  imperfect  and  the  evil;  the  One,  however,  is 
treated  now  as  pure  Form,  as  spirit,  now  also  as  the  "cause  of 
causes"  which  lies  above  all  reason, — as  the  primordial  being 
which  has  caused  to  proceed  forth  from  itself  the  opposition  of  the 
derivative  One  and  duality,  of  spirit  and  matter.  In  this  case  the 
second  One,  the  first-born  One  (Trpwroyovov  ej>)  appears  as  the  perfect 
image  of  the  highest  One.1 

Inasmuch  as  mind  or  spirit  was  thus  made  a  product  of  the  deity, 
though  the  first  and  most  perfect  product,  this  effort  led  to  raising 
the  conception  of  the  deity  even  to  complete  absence  of  all  qualities. 
This  had  been  already  shown  in  Philo,  who  emphasised  so  sharply 
the  contrast  between  God  and  everything  finite  that  he  designated 
God  expressly  as  devoid  of  qualities  (aTroios2)  :  for  since  God  is 
exalted  above  all,  it  can  be  said  of  him  only  that  he  has  none  of  the 
finite  predicates  known  to  human  intelligence ;  no  name  names  him. 
This  type  of  thought,  later  called  "negative  theology,"  we  find  also 
among  those  Christian  Apologists  that  were  influenced  in  their  con- 
ceptions by  Philo,  especially  with  Justin,5  and  likewise  in  part 
among  the  Gnostics. 

The  same  meets  us  also  in  Neo-Platonism  in  a  still  more  intensi- 
fied form,  if  possible.  As  in  the  Hermetic  writings 4  God  had  been 
considered  as  infinite  and  incomprehensible,  as  nameless,  exalted 
above  all  Being,  as  the  ground  of  Being  and  Beason,  neither  of 
which  exists  until  created  by  him,  so  for  Plotinus,  the  deity  is  the 
absolutely  transcendent  primordial  being,  exalted  as  a  perfect  unity 
above  mind,  which,  as  the  principle  that  contains  plurality  already 
in  its  unity  (§  19,  4),  must  have  proceeded  forth  from  God  (and 
not  have  been  eternal) .  This  One,  TO  %v,  precedes  all  thought  and 
Being;  it  is  infinite,  formless,  and  "beyond"  (cirejcetva)  the  intel- 
lectual as  well  as  the  sensuous  world,  and  therefore  without  con- 
sciousness and  without  activity.5 

1  Nicomachus,  Theol.  Arithm.  p.  44. 

2  Phil.  Leg.  Alley.  47  a ;  Qu.  D.  JS.  Immut.  301  a. 

8  Just.  Apol  I.  61  ff.  *  Poemand.  4  f. 

5  It  is  easy  to  understand  how  a  state  of  ecstasy  devoid  of  will  and  conscious- 
ness and  raised  above  reason,  appeared  requisite  for  man's  relation  to  this  supra- 
rational'God-Being,  exalted  above  all  action,  will,  and  thought.  Cf.  above,  §  18,  6. 


238      Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [PART!!. 

Finally,  while  Plotimis  still  designates  this  inexpressible  First 
(TO  irp&Tov)  as  the  One,  which  is  the  cause  of  all  thought  and  of  all 
Being,  and  as  the  Good,  as  the  absolute  end  of  all  that  comes  to 
pass,  even  this  did  not  satisfy  the  later  members  of  the  school. 
Jamblichus  set  above  the  &  of  Plotinus  a  still  higher,  completely 
ineffable  One  (ravr^  app^ros  fyxn  l)9  and  Proclus  followed  him  in  this. 

3.  In  opposition  to  such  dialectical  subtilisations,  the  development 
of  Christian  thought  in  the  Church  preserved  its  impressive  energy 
bv  holding  fast  to  the  conception  of  God  as  spiritual  personality.     It 
did  this,  not  as  the  result  of  philosophical  reflection  and  reasoning, 
but  by  virtue  of  its  immediate  attachment  to  the  living  belief  of  the 
Church  community,  and  just  in  this   consisted  its  psychological 
strength,  its  power  in  the  world's  history.     This  faith  is  breathed  in 
the  3few  Testament;   this  is  defended  by  all  the   supporters  of 
patristic  theology,  and  just  by  this  are  the  limits  of  the  Christian 
doctrine  everywhere  denned,  as  against  the  Hellenistic  solutions  of 
the  chief  problem  in  the  philosophy  of  religion. 

Hellenism  sees  in  personality,  in  however  purely  spiritual  a  man- 
ner it  may  be  conceived,  a  restriction  and  a  characteristic  of  the 
finite,  which  it  would  keep  at  a  distance  from  the  Supreme  Being, 
and  admit  only  for  the  particular  gods.  Christianity,  as  a  living 
religion,  demands  a  jwsonal  relation  of  man  to  the  ground  of  the 
world  conceived  of  as  supreme  personality,  and  it  expresses  this 
demand  in  the  thought  of  the  divine  sonship  of  man. 

If,  therefore,  the  conception  of  personality  as  intrinsic  spiritual- 
ity (geistiger  Innerliclikeit)  expresses  the  essentially  new  result,  to 
yield  which,  theoretical  and  ethical  motives  intertwined  in  Greek 
and  Hellenistic  thought,  then  it  was  Christianity  which  entered 
upon  this  inheritance  of  ancient  thought,  while  Neo-Platonism 
turned  back  to  the  old  idea  that  saw  in  personality  only  a  transi- 
tory product  of  a  life  which  as  a  whole  is  impersonal.  It  is  the 
essential  feature  of  the  Christian  conception  of  the  world  that  it 
regards  the  person  and  the  relations  of  persons  to  one  another  as 
the  essence  of  reality. 

4.  In  spite  of  this  important  difference,  all  lines  of  the  Alexan- 
drian philosophy  were  confronted  by  the  same  problem,  that  of  plac- 
ing the  deity,  thus  taken  from  the  sensible  world,  in  those  relations 
which  religious  need  demanded.    For  the  more  deeply  the  opposi- 
tion between  God  and  the  world  was  felt,  the  more  ardent  became 
the  longing  to  overcome  it  —  to  overcome  it  by  a  knowledge  that 
should  understand  the  world  also  through  God,  and  by  a  life  that 
should  return  out  of  the  world  to  God. 

i  Damasc.  De  Princ.  43. 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]     Crod  and  the  World :  Christianity,  Gnostics.    239 

Hence  the  dualism  of  God  and  the  world,  as  well  as  that  of  spirit 
and  matter,  is  but  the  starting-point  —  taken  in  the  feelings  —  and 
the  presupposition  of  the  Alexandrian  philosophy:  its  goal  is 
everywhere,  theoretically  as  well  as  practically,  to  vanquish  this 
dualism.  Just  in  this  consists  the  peculiarity  of  this  period,  that 
it  is  anxious  to  close,  in  knowledge  and  will,  the  cleft  which  it  finds 
in  its  feelings. 

This  period,  to  be  sure,  produced  also  theories  of  the  world  in 
which  dualism  asserted  itself  so  predominantly  as  to  become  fixed 
as  their  immovable  basis.  Here  belong  primarily  Platonists  like 
Plutarch,  who  not  only  treated  matter  as  an  original  principle  side 
by  side  with  the  deity,  because  the  deity  could  in  nowise  be  the 
ground  of  the  evil,  but  also  assumed  beside  God,  the  "evil  world- 
soul  "  as  a  third  principle  in  the  formation  of  this  indifferent  matter 
into  a  world.  A  part  of  the  Gnostic  systems  present  themselves 
here,  however,  for  especial  consideration. 

This  first  fantastic  attempt  at  a  Christian  theology  was  ruled 
throughout  by  the  thoughts  of  sin  and  redemption,  and  the  funda- 
mental character  of  Gnosticism  consists  in  this,  that  from  the  point 
of  view  of  these  ruling  thoughts  the  conceptions  of  Greek  philos- 
ophy were  put  in  relation  with  the  myths  of  Oriental  religions. 
Thus  with  ValentinuSj  side  by  side  with  the  deity  (irpoirdr^p)  poured 
out  into  the  Pleroma  or  fulness  (TO  TrA^/ow/wi)  of  spiritual  forms, 
appears  the  Void  (TO  /cej/cojua),  likewise  original  and  from  eternity; 
beside  Form  appears  matter,  beside  the  good  appears  the  evil,  and 
though  from  the  self-unfolding  of  the  deity  (cf.  6,  below)  an  entire 
spiritual  world  has  been  formed  in  the  "fulness"  above  men- 
tioned, the  corporeal  world  is  yet  regarded  as  the  work  of  a  fallen 
^Eon  (cf.  §  21)  who  builds  his  inner  nature  into  matter.  So,  too, 
Saturninus  set  matter,  as  the  domain  of  Satan,  over  against  God's 
realm  of  light,  and  regarded  the  earthly  world  as  a  contested  bound- 
ary province  for  whose  possession  the  good  and  evil  spirits  strive 
by  their  action  upon  man ;  and  in  a  similar  manner  the  mythology 
of  Bardesanes  was  arranged,  which  placed  beside  the  "  Father  of 
Life  "  a  female  deity  as  the  receptive  power  in  the  formation  of  the 
world. 

But  dualism  reached  its  culmination  in  a  mixed  religion  which 
arose  in  the  third  century  under  the  influence  of  the  Gnostic  systems 
combined  with  a  return  to  the  old  Persian  mythology, — Mani- 
cJioeism.1  The  two  realms  of  good  and  evil,  of  light  and  darkness, 

1  The  founder,  Mani  (probably  240-280  A.D.),  regarded  his  doctrine  as  the 
consummation  of  Christianity  and  as  a  revelation  of  the  Paraclete.  He  fell 
a  victim  to  the  persecution  of  the  Persian  priests,  but  his  religion  soon  became 


240       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

of  peace  and  strife,  stand  here  opposed  as  eternally  as  their  princes, 
God  and  Satan.  Here,  too,  the  formation  of  the  world  is  conceived  of 
as  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil  elements,  —  brought  about  by  a  viola- 
tion of  the  boundaries ;  in  man  the  conflict  of  a  good  soul  belonging 
to  the  realm  of  light,  and  of  an  evil  soul  arising  from  darkness,  is 
assumed,  and  a  redemption  is  expected  that  shall  completely  sepa- 
rate both  realms  again. 

Thus  at  the  close  of  the  period  it  is  shown  in  the  clearest  manner 
that  the  dualism  of  the  time  rested  essentially  upon  ethico-religious 
motives.  By  adopting  as  their  point  of  view  for  theoretical  explana- 
tion the  judgment  of  worth,  in  accordance  with  which  men,  things, 
and  relations  are  characterised  as  good  or  bad,  these  thinkers  came 
to  trace  the  origin  of  the  thus  divided  universe  back  to  two  different 
causes.  In  the  proper  sense  of  the  judgment,  only  one  of  these 
causes,  that  of  the  good,  should  be  regarded  as  positive  and  have 
the  name  of  deity,  but  in  a  theoretical  aspect  the  other  also  fully 
maintains  its  claim  to  metaphysical  originality  and  eternity  (OVO-LQL). 
But  even  from,  this  relation  it  may  be  seen  that  as  soon  as  the  meta- 
physical relation  was  completely  adapted  to  the  ethical,  this  must  in 
itself  lead  to  a  removal  of  the  dualism. 

5.  In  fact,  dualism,  from  motives  that  were  most  peculiarly  its 
own,  produced  a  series  of  ideas  through  which  it  prepared  its  own 
overcoming.  For  the  sharper  the  antithesis  between  the  spiritual 
God  and  the  material  world,  and  the  greater  the  distance  between 
man  and  the  object  of  his  religious  longing,  the  more  the  need 
asserted  itself  of  bringing  about  a^ain,  by  intermediate  links,  a  union 
of  what  was  thus  separated.  The  theoretical  significance  of  this 
was  to  render  comprehensible  and  free  from  objections  the  action 
of  the  deity  upon  matter  alien  to  him  and  unworthy  of  him ;  prac- 
tically these  links  had  the  significance  of  serving  as  mediators 
between  man  and  God,  having  the  power  to  lead  man  out  of  his  sen- 
suous vileness  to  the  Supreme  Being.  Both  interests  were  alike 
suggestive  of  the  methods  by  which  the  Stoics  had  known  how  to 
utilise,  in  their  religion  of  Nature,  the  popular  faith  in  the  lower 
deities. 

This  mediation  theory  was  first  attempted  on  a  large  and  thorough 
plan  by  Philo,  who  gave  it  its  definite  direction  by  bringing  it  into 
close  relations,  on  the  one  hand,  with  the  Neo-Pythagorean  doctrine 
of  Ideas,  on  the  other  hand  with  the  doctrine  of  angels  in  his 

greatly  extended,  and  maintained  itself  in  vigour  far  on  into  the  Middle  Ages. 
We  are  best  instructed  with  regard  to  it  through  Augustine,  who  was  himself 
for  a  time  an  adherent  of  it.  Cf.  F.  C.  Baur,  Das  manichaische  Religions- 
system  (Tubingen,  1836);  0.  Flugel,  Mani  und  seine  Lehre  (Leips.  1862). 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]  &od  and  the  World :  Philo.  241 

religion.  The  mediating  powers,  in  considering  which  Philo  had  in 
mind  more  the  theoretical  significance  and  the  explanation  of  the 
influence  of  God  upon  the  world,  he  designates  according  to  the 
changing  point  of  view  of  his  investigation,  now  as  Ideas,  now  as 
acting  f  orceSj  or  again  as  the  angels  of  God ;  but  with  this  is  always 
connected  the  thought  that  these  intermediate  members  have  part 
in  God  as  in  the  world,  that  they  belong  to  God  and  vet  are  different 
from  him.  So  the  Ideas  are  regarded,  on  the  one  hand,  in  Xeo- 
Pythagorean  fashion  as  thoughts  of  God  and  content  of  his  wis- 
dom, but  again,  after  the  old  Platonic  thought,  as  an  intelligible 
world  of  archetypes,  created  by  God :  and  if  these  archetypes  are 
held  to  be  at  the  same  time  the  active  forces  which  shape  the  unor- 
dered matter  according  to  their  purposeful  meaning,  the  forces 
appear  in  this  case  sometimes  as  powers  so  independent  that  by 
assigning  them  the  formation  and  preservation  of  the  world,  all 
immediate  relation  between  God  and  the  world  is  avoided,  and  some- 
times again  as  something  attached  to  the  divine  essence  and  repre- 
senting it.  Finally,  as  angels  they  are  indeed  real  mythical  forms, 
and  are  designated  as  the  servants,  the  ambassadors,  the  messengers, 
of  God,  but  on  the  other  hand  they  represent  the  different  sides  and 
qualities  of  the  divine  essence,  which,  it  is  true,  is  as  a  whole  un- 
knowable and  inexpressible  in  its  depth,  but  which  reveals  itself 
just  in  them.  This  double  nature,  conditioned  by  the  fundamental 
thought  of  the  system  itself,  brings  with  it  the  consequence  that 
these  ideal  forces  have  the  significance  of  the  contents  of  general 
conceptions,  and  yet  are  at  the  same  time  furnished  with  all  the 
marks  of  personality ;  and  just  this  peculiar  amalgamation  of  scien- 
tific and  mythical  modes  of  thought,  this  indefinite  twilight  in  which 
the  entire  doctrine  remains,  is  the  essential  and  important  therein. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  last  inference,  with  which  Philo  con- 
cluded this  line  of  thought.  The  fulness  of  Ideas,  forces,  and 
angels  was  itself  in  turn  an  entire  world,  in  which  plurality  and 
motion  ruled:  between  it  and  the  one  unmoved,  changeless  deity 
there  was  need  of  still  a  higher  intermediate  link.  As  the  Idea  is 
related  to  the  individual  phenomena,  so  the  highest  of  the  Ideas 
(TO  yeviKWTaTov),  the  "Idea  of  the  Ideas,"  must  'be  related  to  the 
Ideas  themselves, — as  force  is  related  to  its  activities  in  the  world 
of  sense,  so  the  rational  World-force  in  general  must  be  related  to 
the  forces  :  the  world  of  angels  must  find  its  unitary  conclusion  in 
an  archangel.  This  sum-total  of  the  divine  activity  in  the  world, 
Philo  designates  by  the  Stoic  conception  of  the  Logos.  This  also 
appears  with  him,  on  this  account,  in  wavering,  changing  light. 
The  Logos  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the  divine  wisdom,  resting  within 


242        Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Religious  Period.    [PART  II. 

itself  (<ro#a  —  Xayos  Wwifcros ;  cf.  p.  200,  note  1),  and  the  producing 
rational  power  of  the  Supreme  Being;  it  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
Reason  as  coming  forth  from  the  deity  (Xoyos  irpofopLK&s,  "  uttered 
Reason"),  the  self-subsistent  image,  the  first-born  son,  who  is  not, 
as  is  God,  without  origin,  nor  yet  has  he  arisen,  as  have  we  men; 
he  is  the  second  (rod.1  Through  him  God  formed  the  world,  and  he 
is  in  turn  also  the  high  priest,  who,  through  his  intercession,  creates 
and  preserves  relations  between  man  and  the  deity.  He  is  know- 
able,  while  God  himself,  as  exalted  above  all  determination,  remains 
unknowable:  he  is  God  in  so  far  as  God  forms  the  life-principle 
of  the  world. 

Thus  the  transcendence  and  immanence  of  God  divide  as  separate 
potencies,  to  remain  united,  nevertheless;  the  Logos,  as  the  God 
within  the  world,  is  the  "  dwelling-place "  of  the  God  without  the 
world.  The  more  difficult  the  form  which  this  relation  assumes 
for  abstract  thought,  the  richer  the  imagery  in  which  it  is  set  forth 
by  Philo.2 

6.  With  this  Logos  doctrine  the  first  step  was  taken  toward 
filling  the  cleft  between  God  and  the  sensible  world  by  a  definite 
graded  succession  of  forms,  descending,  with  gradual  transitions, 
from  unity  to  plurality,  from  unchangeableness  to  changeableness, 
from  the  immaterial  to  the  material,  from  the  spiritual  to  the  sen- 
suous, from  the  perfect  to  the  imperfect,  from  the  good  to  the  bad ; 
and  when  this  series,  thus  arranged  by  rank,  was  conceived  of  at 
the  same  time  as  a  system  of  causes  and  effects  which  again  were 
themselves  causes,  there  resulted  from  this  a  new  exposition  of  the 
cosmogonic  process,  in  which  the  world  of  sense  was  derived  from 
the  divine  essence  by  means  of  all  these  intermediate  members. 
At  the  same  time,  the  other  thought  was  not  far  distant,  that  the 
stages  of  this  process  should  be  regarded  also  in  their  reverse  order, 
as  the  stages  by  which  man,  ensnared  in  the  world  of  sense,  becomes 
reunited  with  God.  And  so,  both  theoretically  and  practically,  the 
path  is  broken  on  which  dualism  is  to  be  overcome. 

A  problem  was  thus  taken  up  again  which  Plato  in  his  latest 
Pythagoreanising  period  had  had  in  mind,  and  the  oldest  Academi- 
cians as  well,  when  they  sought,  with  the  aid  of  the  number  theory, 


1  Philo  in  Ens.  Prop.  EV.  VII.  13,  1.    With  a  somewhat  stronger  emphasis 
upon  personality,  these  same  conceptions  are  found  in  Justin,  Apol.  I,  32 ;  Dial. 
c.  Tryph.  56  f . 

2  Connected  with  all  these  doctrines  is  the  fact,  that  with  Philo  the  spiritual 
in  the  world  of  experience  occupies  a  doubtful  position  between  the  immaterial 
and  the  material :  the  vovs  of  man,  the  faculty  of  thought  and  will,  is  a  part  of 
the  divine  Logos  (even  the  demons  are  designated  after  the  Stoic  analogy  as 
Xityot),  and  yet  it  is  again  characterised  as  finest  pneuma. 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]        God  and  the  World :  Gnostics.  243 

to  comprehend  how  Ideas  and  things  proceeded  forth  from  the 
divine  unity.  But  it  had  been  shown  at  that  time  that  this  scheme 
of  the  development  of  plurality  out  of  the  One,  as  regards  its 
relation  to  the  predicates  of  worth,  admitted  two  opposite  interpre- 
tations :  viz.  the  Platonic  mode  of  view,  defended  by  Xenocrates, 
that  the  One  is  the  good  and  the  perfect,  and  that  that  which  is 
derived  from  this  is  the  imperfect  and,  ultimately,  the  bad,  and  the 
opposing  theory,  held  by  Speusippus,  that  the  good  is  only  the  final 
product,  not  the  starting-point  of  the  development,  and  that  this 
starting-point  is  to  be  sought,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  indefinite,  the 
incomplete.1  It  is  customary  to  distinguish  the  above-described 
doctrines  as  the  system  of  emanation  and  the  system  of  evolution. 
The  former  term  arises  from  the  fact  that  in  this  system,  which  was 
decidedly  prevalent  in  the  religious  philosophy  of  Alexandrianism, 
the  separate  formations  of  the  world-producing  Logos  were  often 
designated  by  the  Stoic  term,  as  "emanations"  (d-oppotat)  of  the 
divine  essence. 

Yet  the  Alexandrian  philosophy  is  not  lacking  in  attempts  at 
evolutionary  systems.  In  particular,  these  were  especially  avail- 
able for  Ghiosticism;  for,  in  consequence  of  the  degree  to  which  it 
had  strained  the  dualism  of  spirit  and  matter,  this  system  was 
necessarily  inclined  to  seek  the  monistic  way  of  escape  rather  in  an 
indifferent,  original  ground,  which  divided  itself  into  the  opposites. 
Hence  where  the  Gnostics  sought  to  transcend  dualism,  —  aoid  this 
was  the  case  with  the  most  important  of  them,  —  they  projected 
not  only  a  cosmogonic  but  a  theogonic  process,  by  which  the  deity 
unfolded  himself  from  the  darkness  of  his  primeval  essence, 
through  opposition,  to  complete  revelation.  Thus,  with  Basileides, 
the  nameless,  original  ground  is  called  the  not  (yet)  existing  God 
(6  OVK  &v  0eos).  This  being,  we  hear,  produced  the  world-seed 
(7rw<r7r€pp,«x),  in  which  the  spiritual  forces  (wvrrjres)  lay  unordered 
side  by  side  with  the  material  forces  (d/wp^/a).  The  forming  and 
ordering  of  this  chaos  of  forces  is  completed  by  their  longing  for  the 
deity.  In  connection  with  this  process  the  various  "  sonships,"  the 
spiritual  world  (wrep/coo-fita),  separate  themselves  from  the  material 
world  (KOO-/AOS),  and  in  the  course  of  the  process  of  generation  all  the 
spheres  of  the  thus  developed  deity  ultimately  become  separate ; 
each  attains  its  allotted  place,  the  unrest  of  striving  ceases,  and  the 
peace  of  glorification  rests  over  the  All. 

Motives  from  both  systems,  that  of  evolution  and  that  of  emana- 
tion, appear  peculiarly  mingled  in  the  doctrine  of  VaZentinus.  For 

i  Of.  Arist.  Met.  XIV.  4,  1091  b  16 ;  XEL  7,  1072  1>  31. 


244      Hellenistic-Roman  Thought  :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II, 


here  the  spiritual  world  (rXijpoi/ia)  or  system  of  the  "jflons,"  the 
eternal  essences,  is  developed  first  as  an  unfolding  of  the  dark  and 
mysterious  primitive  Depth  (jBrflos)  to  self-revelation,  and  in  the 
second  place  as  a  descending  production  of  more  imperfect  forms. 
The  mythical  schema  in  this  is  the  Oriental  pairing  of  male  and 
female  deities.  In  the  highest  pair  or  "  syzygy  "  there  appears  side 
by  side  with  the  original  Ground  "  Silence  "  (criyi}  )  ,  which  is  also  called 
"Thought  "  (Iwota).  From  this  union  of  the  Original  Being  with 
the  capacity  of  becoming  conscious  there  proceeds  as  the  firstborn  the 
Spirit  (here  called  you?)  which  in  the  second  syzygy  has  as  its  object 
«  Truth,"  i.e.  the  intelligible  world,  the  realm  of  Ideas.  Thus,  having 
itself  come  to  full  revelation,  the  deity  in  the  third  syzygy  takes  the 
form  of  "Reason"  (Ao'yos)  and  "Life"  (Jon}),  and  in  the  fourth 
syzvgy  becomes  the  principle  of  external  revelation  as  "  Ideal  Man  " 
(3vBpwm)  and  "Community"  (eK/cA^a,  church).  While  the  de- 
scending process  has  thus  already  begun,  it  is  continued  still  farther 
by  the  fact  that  from  the  third  and  fourth  syzygies  still  other  ./Eons 
proceed,  which,  together  with  the  sacred  Eight,  form  the  entire 
Pleroma,  but  which  stand  farther  and  farther  removed  from  the 
original  Ground.  It  is  the  last  of  these  Mons,  "  Wisdom  "(cro<£ta), 
that,  by  sinful  longing  after  the  original  Ground,  gives  occasion  for 
the  separation  of  this  Longing  and  of  its  being  cast  into  the  mate- 
rial Void,  the  KCVW/IO,  there  to  lead  to  the  formation  of  the  earthly 
world. 

If  we  look  at  the  philosophical  thoughts  which  lie  back  of  these 
highly  ambiguous  myth-constructions,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that 
the  school  of  the  Valentinians  diverged  into  various  theories.  For 
in  no  other  system  of  that  time  are  dualistic  and  monistic  motives 
of  both  kinds,  from  the  system  of  evolution  as  well  as  from  that  of 
emanation,  so  intricately  mingled. 

7.  Clarified  conceptionally,  and  freed  from  mythical  apparatus, 
the  like  motives  appear  in  the  doctrine  of  Plotinus,  yet  in  such  a 
manner  that  in  the  system  as  completed  the  principle  of  emanation 
almost  entirely  crowds  out  the  other  two. 

The  synthesis  of  transcendence  and  immanence  is  sought  by 
Plotinus  also  in  the  direction  of  preserving  the  essence  of  God  as 
the  absolutely  one  and  unchangeable,  while  plurality  and  changea- 
bility belong  only  to  his  workings.1  Of  the  te  First,"  which  is  ex- 
alted above  all  finite  determinations  and  oppositions,  nothing  what- 
ever can  be  predicated  in  the  strict  sense  (cf.  above,  2).  It  is 

1  In  so  far  we  find  here,  coined  into  theological  form,  the  problem  of  the 
Eleatics  and  Heraclitus,  with  which  Greek  metaphysics  began,  —  a  problem 
which  also  determined  the  nature  of  Platonism. 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]      God  and  the  World :  Plotinus.  245 

only  in  an  improper  sense,  in  its  relation  to  the  world,  that  it  can 
be  designated  as  the  infinite  One,  as  the  Good,  and  as  the  highest 
Power  or  Force  (irpuT-q  8wa/us),  and  the  workings  of  this  Power 
which  constitute  the  universe  are  to  be  regarded,  not  as  ramifica- 
tions and  parts  into  which  thejsubstance  of  the  First  divides,  and  so 
not  as  "  emanations  "  in  the  proper  sense,  but  rather  as  overflowing 
by-products  which  in  nowise  change  the  substance  itself,  even 
though  they  proceed  from  the  necessity  of  its  essence. 

To  express  this  relation  in  figurative  form  Plotinus  employs  the 
analogy  of  light,  —  an  analogy  which,  in  turn,  has  also  an  influence 
in  determining  his  conception.  Light,  without  suffering  at  all  in  its 
own  essence  or  itself  entering  into  motion,  shines  into  the  darkness 
and  produces  about  itself  an  atmosphere  of  brightness  that  decreases 
in  intensity  more  and  more  from  the  point  which  is  its  source,  and 
finally  of  itself  loses  itself  in  darkness.  So  likewise  the  workings 
of  the  One  and  Good,  as  they  become  more  and  more  separate  from 
their  source,  proceeding  through  the  individual  spheres,  become 
more  and  more  imperfect  and  at  last  change  suddenly  into  the  dark, 
evil  opposite  —  matter. 

The  first  sphere  of  this  divine  activity  is,  according  to  Plotinus, 
mind  or  rational  spirit  (voSs),  in  which  the  sublime  unity  differen- 
tiates itself  into  the  duality  of  thought  and  Being,  i.e.  into  that  of 
consciousness  and  its  objects.  In  mind  the  essence  of  the  deity  is 
preserved  as  the  unity  of  the  thought-function  (vcfycns) ;  for  this 
thought  which  is  identical  with  Being  is  not  regarded  as  an  activity 
that  begins  or  ceases,  changing  as  it  were  with  its  objects,  but  as  the 
eternal,  pure  perception,  ever  the  same,  of  its  own  content,  which  is 
of  like  essence  with  itself.  But  this  content,  the  world  of  Ideas, 
the  eternal  Being  (ov<ra  in  the  Platonic  sense)  as  contrasted  with 
phenomena,  is,  as  intelligible  world  (KOO-^OS  vo^ros),  at  the  same  time 
the  principle  of  plurality.  For  the  Ideas  are  not  merely  thoughts 
'and  archetypes,  but  are  at  tjie  same  time  the  moving  forces  (vol 
Swaju-ets)  of  lower  reality.  Because,  therefore,  unity  and  variety 
are  united  in  this  intelligible  world  as  the  principles  of  persistence 
and  of  occurrence  and  change,  and  are  yet  again  separated,  the  fun- 
damental conceptions  (categories)  of  this  world  are  these  five,1  viz. 
Being  or  Existing  (TO  ov),  Rest  (ora<r«),  Motion  or  Change  (Kti^o-ts), 
Identity  (ravror^),  and  Difference  (IrepoT???).  Mind,  then,  as  a 
function  which  has  determinate  contents,  and  carries  plurality 
within  itself,  is  the  form  through  which  the  deity  causes  all  empiri- 


1  TTell  known  from  the  dialogue,  the  Sophist^  of  the  Corpus  Platonicum.    CL 
254  B.  ff. 


246       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [FART  II 

cal  reality  to  proceed  forth  from  itself:  God  as  productive  principle, 
as  ground  of  the  world,  is  mind  or  rational  spirit. 

But  spirit  needs  to  shine  out  in  a  similar  manner  in  order  to  pro- 
duce the  world  from  itself;  its  most  immediate  product  is  the  soul, 
and  this  in  turn  evinces  its  activity,  by  shaping  matter  into  cor- 
poreality. The  peculiar  position  of  the  "  soul "  therefore  consists 
in  this,  that  it,  perceiving  or  beholding,  receives  the  content  of 
spirit,  the  world  of  Ideas,  and  after  this  archetype  (efecSv)  forms 
the  world  of  sense.  Contrasted  with  the  creative  spirit,  it  is  the 
receptive,  contrasted  with  matter,  the  active  principle.  And  this 
duality  of  the  relations  toward  the  higher  and  the  lower  is  here  so 
strongly  emphasised  that  just  as  "spirit"  divided  into  thought  and 
Being,  so  the  soul,  for  Plotinus,  is  out  and  out  doubled :  as  sunk 
into  the  blissful  contemplation  of  the  Ideas  it  is  the  higher  soul, 
the  soul  proper,  the  ifnyrj  in.  the  narrower  sense  of  the  wordj  as 
formative  power,  it  is  the  lower  soul,  the  <£u'<ns  (equivalent  to  the 
Xoyos  crcre/3/wmKos  of  the  Stoics) . 

All  these  determinations  apply  on  the  one  hand  to  the  universal 
soul  (world-soul  —  Plato),  and  on  the  other  to  the  individual  souls 
which  have  proceeded  from  it  as  the  particular  forms  which  it  has 
taken  on,  especially  therefore  to  human  souls.  The  <j>v<ns,  the  for- 
mative power  of  Nature,  is  distinguished  from  the  pure,  ideal  world- 
soul  :  from  the  latter  emanate  the  gods,  from  the  former  the  demons. 
Beneath  man's  knowing  soul,  which  turns  back  to  the  spirit,  its 
home,  stands  the  vital  force  which  forms  the  body.  Thus  the  sepa- 
ration in  the  characteristics  of  the  concept  of  the  soul  —  a  separation 
which  developed  materially  from  dualism  (cf.  §  19,'  3)  —  is  here  de- 
manded formally  by  the  connected  whole  of  the  metaphysical  system. 

In  this  connection,  this  working  of  the  soul  upon  matter  is  of 
course  conceived  of  as  purposive,  that  is,  as  appropriate  or  adapted 
for  ends,  because  it  ultimately  goes  back  to  spirit  and  reason 
(Aoyos)  ;  but  since  it  is  a  work  of  the,  lower  soul,  it  is  regarded  as ' 
undesigned,  unconscious  direction,  which  proceeds  according  to 
natural  necessity.  As  the  outer  portions  of  the  rays  of  light  pene- 
trate into  the  darkness,  so  it  belongs  to  the  nature  of  the  soul  to 
illumine  matter  with  its  glory  which  arises  from  spirit  and  from 
the  One. 

This  maMer,  however,  —  and  this  is  one  of  the  most  essential 
points  in  the  metaphysics  of  Plotinus, — must  not  be  looked  upon 
as  a  corporeal  mass  subsisting  in  itself  beside  the  One ;  it  is,  rather, 
itself  without  body,  immaterial,1  Bodies  are  indeed  formed  out  of 

:  JSnnead.  III.  6,  7. 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]      God  and  the  World;  Plotinus.  34T 

it,  but  it  is  itself  no  body  ;  and  since  it  is  thus  neither  spiritual  nor 
corporeal  in  its  nature,  it  cannot  be  determined  by  any  qualities 
(airows).  But  for  Plotinus,  this  epistemological  indeterminateness 
has,  at  the  same  time,  the  force  of  metaphysical  indeterminateness. 
Matter  is  for  him  absolute  negativity,  pure  privation  (oW^o-ts), 
complete  absence  of  Being,  absolute  Non-being:  it  is  related  to  the 
One  as  darkness  to  light,  as  the  empty  to  the  full.  This  v\y  of 
the  N  eo-Platonists  is  not  the  Aristotelian  or  the  Stoic,  but  is  once 
more  the  Platonic  ;  it  is  empty,  dark  space.1  So  far  in  ancient 
thought  does  the  working  of  the  Eleatic  identification  of  empty 
space  with  ]Sf  on-being,  and  of  the  farther  extension  of  this  doctrine 
by  Democritus  and  Plato,  extend:  in  Xeo-Platonism,  also,  space 
serves  as  the  presupposition  for  the  multiplication  which  the  Ideas 
find  in  the  phenomenal  world  of  sense.  For  this  reason,  with 
Plotinus,  also,  the  lower  soul,  or  <£ro-is,  whose  office  it  is  to  shine 
out  upon  matter,  is  the  principle  of  divisibility,2  while  the  higher 
soul  possesses  the  indivisibility  which  is  akin  to  the  rational  spirit. 

In  this  pure  negativity  lies  a  ground  for  the  possibility  of  deter- 
mining by  a  predicate  of  worth  this  matter  thus  devoid  of  quali- 
ties ;  it  is  the  evil  As  absolute  want  (irevio.  vavreX.^),  as  the 
negation  of  the  One  and  of  Being,  it  is  also  the  negation  of 
the  Good,  durowta  ayaQov.  But  by  introducing  the  conception 
of  evil  in  this  manner,  it  receives  a  special  form  :  evil  is  not  itself 
something  positively  existent  ;  it  is  want,  or  deficiency  ;  it  is  lack 
of  the  Good,  Non-being.  This  conception  thus  formed  gave  Plotinus 
a  welcome  argument  for  theodicy;  if  the  evil  is  not,  it  need  not  be 
justified,  and  so  it  follows  from  the  sheer  conceptions  as  so  deter- 
mined that  all  that  is,  is  good. 

For  Plotinus,  therefore,  the  world  of  the  senses  is  not  in  itself 
evil  any  more  than  it  is  in  itself  good;  but  because  in  it  light 
passes  over  into  darkness,  because  it  thus  presents  a  mixture  of 
Being  and  Non-being  (the  Platonic  conception  of  yevoris  here  comes 
into  force  anew),  it  is  good  so  far  as  it  has  part  in  God  or  the 
Good;  i.e.  so  far  as  it  is;  and  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  evil  in  so  far 
as  it  has  part  in  matter  or  the  Evil  ;  i.e.  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  [has 
no  real,  positive  existence].  Evil  proper,  the  true  evil  (irptirov 
Ka/cov),  is  matter,  negation  ;  the  corporeal  world  can  be  called  evil 
only  because  it  is  formed  out  of  matter  :  it  is  secondary  evil  (Scrrcpov 

oV);  and  the  predicate  "  evil  "  belongs  to  souls  only  if  they  give 


1  Ennead.  III.  6,  18.  Universal  empty  space  forms  the  possibility  (foro«^ro^) 
for  the  existence  of  bodies,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  particular  spatial  deter- 
zninateness  is  conditioned  by  the  nature  of  the  bodies,  II.  4,  12. 

*  Ib.  III.  9,  1. 


248       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Religious  Period. 

themselves  over  to  matter.  To  be  sure,  this  entrance  into  matter 
belongs  to  the  essential  characteristics  of  the  soul  itself  j  the  soul 
forms  just  that  sphere  in  which  the  shining  forth  of  the  deity 
passes  over  into  matter,  and  this  participation  in  evil  is,  therefore, 
for  the  soul,  a  natural  necessity  which  is  to  be  conceived  of  as 
a  continuation  of  its  own  proceeding  forth  from  the  rational 
spirit.1 

By  this  distinction  of  the  world  of  sense  from  matter,  Plotinus 
was  able  to  do  justice,  also,  to  the  positive  element  in  phenomena.2 
For  since  the  original  power  works  through  spirit  and  soul  upon 
matter,  all  that  in  the  world  of  sense  really  exists  or  is,  is  evidently 
itself  soul  and  spirit.  In  this  is  rooted  the  spiritualisation  of  the 
corporeal  world,  the  idealising  of  the  universe,  which  forms  the 
characteristic  element  in  the  conception  of  Nature  held  by  Plotinus. 
The  material  is  but  the  outer  husk,  behind  which,  as  the  truly 
active  reality,  are  souls  and  spirits.  A  body  or  corporeal  substance 
is  the  copy  or  shadow  of  the  Idea  which  in  it  has  shaped  itself  to 
matter;  its  true  essence  is  this  spiritual  or  intellectual  element 
which  appears  as  a  phenomenon  in  the  image  seen  by  sense. 

It  is  in  such  shining  of  the  ideal  essence  through  its  sensuous 
phenomenon  that  beauty  consists.  By  virtue  of  this  streaming  of 
the  spiritual  light  into  matter  the  entire  world  of  the  senses  is 
beautiful,  and  likewise  the  individual  thing,  formed  after  its  arche- 
type. Here  in  the  treatise  of  Plotinus  on  beauty  (Ennead.  I.  6) 
this  conception  meets  us  for  the  first  time  among  the  fundamental 
conceptions  of  a  theory  of  the  world;  it  is  the  first  attempt  at 
a  metaphysical  aesthetics.  Hitherto  the"  beautiful  had  always 
appeared  only  in  homonomy  with  the  good  and  the  perfect,  and  the 
mild  attempts  to  separate  the  conception  and  make  it  independent, 
which  were  contained  in  Plato's  Symposium,  were  now  taken  up  again 
for  the  first  time  by  Plotinus  ;  for  even  the  theory  of  art,  to  which 
aesthetic  science  had  restricted  itself  as  it  appeared  most  clearly  in 
the  fragment  of  the  Aristotelian  Poetic,  considered  the  beautiful 
essentially  according  to  its  ethical  effects  (cf.  §  13,  14) .  Ancient 
life  must  run  its  entire  course,  and  that  turning  toward  the  inner 
life,  that  internalising,  as  it  were,  which  this  life  experienced  in  the 
religious  period,  must  be  completed,  to  bring  about  the  scientific 

1  Therefore,  though  Plotinus  in  his  ethics  emphasised  strongly  freedom  in 
the  sense  of  responsibility,  the  great  tendency  of  his  metaphysical  thought  is 
shown  just  in  this,  that  he  did  not  make  this  freedom  of  "power  to  the  con- 
trary ']  his  explaining  principle,  but  sought  to  understand  the  transition  of  the 
world  into  evil  as  a  metaphysical  necessity. 

2  Very  characteristic  in  this  respect  is  the  treatise  (Ennead.  II.  9)  which  he 
wrote  against  the  barbarian  contempt  of  Nature  shown  by  the  Gnostics. 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]       God  and  the  World :  Plotinus.  249 

consciousness  of  this  finest  and  highest  content  of  the  Grecian 
world;  and  the  conception  in  which  this  takes  place  is  on  this 
account  characteristic  for  the  development  from  which  it  comes 
forth;  the  beauty  which  the  Greeks  had  created  and  enjoyed  is 
now  recognised  as  the  victorious  power  of  spirit  in  externalising  its 
sensuous  phenomena.  This  conception  also  is  a  triumph  of  the 
spirit,  which  in  unfolding  its  activities  has  at  last  apprehended  its 
own  essential  nature,  and  has  conceived  it  as  a  world-principle. 

As  regards  the  phenomenal  world,  Plotinus  takes  a  point  of  view 
which  "must  be  designated  as  the  interpretation  of  Nature  in  terms  of 
psychical  life,  and  so  it  turns  out  that  with  reference  to  this  antithe- 
sis ancient  thought  described  its  course  from  one  extreme  to  the 
other.  The  oldest  science  knew  the  soul  only  as  one  of  Nature's 
products  side  by  side  with  many  others, — for  Neo-Platonism  the 
whole  of  Nature  is  regarded  as  real  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  soul. 

But  by  employing  this  idealistic  principle  for  explaining  individ- 
ual things  and  processes  in  the  world  of  sense,  all  sobriety  and 
clearness  in  natural  research  is  at  an  end.  In  place  of  regular, 
causal  connections  appears  the  mysterious,  dreamily  unconscious 
weaving  of  the  world-soul,  the  rule  of  gods  and  demons,  the  spirit- 
ual sympathy  of  all  things  expressing  itself  in  strange  relations 
among  them.  All  forms  of  divination,  astrology,  faith  in  miracles, 
naturally  stream  into  this  mode  of  regarding  Nature,  and  man 
seems  to  be  surrounded  by  nothing  but  higher  and  mysterious 
forces :  this  world  created  by  spirit,  full  of  souls,  embraces  him  like 
a  magic  circle. 

The  whole  process  in  which  the. world  proceeds  forth  from  the 
deity  appears,  accordingly,  as  a  timeless,  eternal  necessity,  and 
though  Plotinus  speaks  also  of  a  periodical  return  of  the  same 
particular  formations,  the  world-process  itself  is  yet  for  him  without 
beginning  or  end.  As  it  belongs  to  the  nature  of  light  to  shine 
forever  into  the  darkness,  so  God  does  not  exist  without  the  stream- 
ing forth  with  which  he  creates  the  world  out  of  matter. 

In  this  universal  life  of  spirit  the  individual  personality  vanishes, 
as  a  subordinate,  particular  phenomenon.  Released  from  the  all- 
soul  as  one  of  countless  forms  in  which  that  unfolds,  it  is  cast  into 
the  sensuous  body  out  of  the  purer  pre-existent  state,  on  account 
of  its  guilty  inclination  toward  what  is  void  and  vain,  and  it  is 
its  task  to  estrange  itself  from  the  body  and  from  material  essence 
in  general,  and  to  "purify"  itself  again  from  the  body.  Only  when 
it  has  succeeded  in  this  can  it  hope  to  traverse  backward  the  stages 
by  which  it  has  proceeded  forth  from  the  deity,  and  so  to  return  to 
the  deity.  The  first  positive  step  to  this  exaltation  is  civic  and 


250      Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

political  virtue,  by  which  man  asserts  himself  as  a  rationally  forma- 
tive force  in  the  phenomenal  -world ;  but  since  this  virtue  evinces 
itself  only  in  reference  to  objects  of  the  senses,  the  dianoetic  virtue 
of  knowledge  stands  far  above  it  (cf.  Aristotle),— the  virtue  by  which 
the  soul  sinks  into  its  own  spiritual  intrinsic  life.  As  a  help 
stimulating  to  this  virtue,  Plotinus  praises  the  contemplation  of  the 
beautiful,  which  finds  a  presentiment  of  the  Idea  in  the  thing  of 
sense,  and,  in  overcoming  the  inclination  toward  matter,  rises  from 
the  sensuously  beautiful  to  the  spiritually  beautiful.  And  even 
this  dianoetic  virtue,  this  esthetic  0cwpta  and  self-beholding -of  the 
spirit,  is  only  the  preliminary  stage  for  that  ecstatic  rapture  with 
which  the  individual,  losing  all  consciousness,  enters  into  unity  with 
the  ground  of  the  world  (§  18,  6).  The  salvation  and  the  blessed- 
ness of  the  individual  is  his  sinking  into  the  All-One. 

The  later  Neo-Platonists,  —  Porphyry  first,  and,  still  more,  Jamblichus  and 
Proclus,  —  in  the  case  of  this  exaltation  emphasise,  far  more  than  Plotinus,  the 
help  which  the  individual  finds  for  it  in  positive  religion  and  its  acts  of  worship. 
For  these  men  largely  increased  the  number  of  different  stages  through  which 
the  world  proceeds  forth  from  the  "  One,"  and  identified  them  with  the  forms 
of  the  deities  in  the  different  ethnic  religions  by  all  kinds  of  more  or  less  arbi- 
trary allegories.  It  was  therefore  natural,  in  connection  with  the  return  of  the 
soul  to  God,  since  it  must  traverse  the  same  stages  up  to  the  state  of  ecstatic 
deification,  to  claim  the  support  of  these  lower  gods :  and  thus  as  the  metaphys- 
ics of  the  Neo-Platonists  degenerated  into  mythology,  their  ethics  degenerated 
into  tkeurgic  arts. 

8.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  derivation  of  the  world  from  God  as 
set  forth  by  Plotinus,  in  spite  of  all  its  idealising  and  spiritualising 
of  Mature,  follows  the  physical  schema  of  natural  processes.  This 
streaming  forth  of  things  from  the  original  Power  is  an  eternal 
necessity,  founded  in  the  essence  of  this  Power ;  creation  is  a  pur- 
posive working,  but  unconscious  and  without  design. 

But  at  the  same  time,  a  logical  motive  comes  into  play  here,  which 
has  its  origin  in  the  old  Platonic  character  of  Ideas  as  class-concepts. 
For  just  as  the  Idea  is  related  to  individual  things  of  sense,  so  in 
turn  the  deity  is  related  to  Ideas,  as  the  universal  to  the  particular. 
God  is  the  absolute  universal,  and  according  to  a  law  of  formal 
logic,  in  accordance  with  which  concepts  become  poorer  in  contents 
or  intension  in  proportion  as  their  extension  increases  so  that  the 
content  0  must  correspond  to  the  extension  oo,  the  absolutely  uni- 
versal is  also  the  concept  of  the  "  First,"  void  of  all  content.  But 
if  from  this  First  proceed  first  the  intelligible,  then  the  psychical, 
and  finally  the  sensuous  world,  this  metaphysical  relation  corre- 
sponds to  the  logical  process  of  determination  or  partition.  This 
point  of  view,  according  to  which  the  more  general  is  throughout 
regarded  as  the  higher,  metaphysically  more  primitive  reality,  while 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]      God  and  the  World:  Proclus,  Christianity.    251 

the  particular  is  held  to  be,  in  its  metaphysical  reality  also,  a  deriv- 
ative product  from  the  more  general,  —  a  view  which  resulted  from 
hypostatising  the  syllogistic  methods  of  Aristotle  (cf.  §  12,  3)7  — 
was  expressed  among  the  older  Xeo-Platonists  principally  by 
Porphyry,  in  his  exegesis  of  Aristotle's  categories. 

Meanwhile  Proclus  undertook  to  carry  out  methodically  this 
logical  schema  of  emanation,  and  out  of  regard  for  this  principle 
subordinated  a  number  of  simple  and  likewise  unknowable  "henads" 
beneath  the  highest,  completely  characterless  2j/.  In  so  doing  he 
found  himself  under  the  necessity  of  demanding  a  proper  dialectical 
principle  for  this  logical  procession  of  the  particular  from  the  uni- 
versal. Such  a  schematism  the  systematiser  of  Hellenism  found  in 
the  logico-metaphysical  relation  which  Plotinus  had  laid  at  the  basis 
of  the  development  of  the  world  from  the  deity.  The  procession  of 
the  Many  forth  from  the  One  involves,  in  the  first  place,  that  the 
particular  remains  like  the  universal,  and  thus  that  the  effect  abides 
or  persists  within  the  cause ;  in  the  second  place,  that  this  product 
is  a  new  self-subsisting  entity  in  contrast  with  that  which  has  pro- 
duced it,  and  that  it  proceeds  forth  from  the  same ;  and  finally,  that 
by  virtue  of  just  this  antithetic  relation  the  individual  strives  to 
return  again  to  its  ground.  Persistence,  procession,  and  return  (povrj, 
rpooSos,  l-n-ia-Tpo^ri),  or  identity,  difference  and  union  of  that  which 
has  been  distinguished,  are  accordingly  the  three  momenta,  of  the 
dialectical  process  j  and  into  this  formula  of  emanistic  development, 
by  virtue  of  which  every  concept  should  be  thought  of  as  in  itself 
—  out  of  itself  —  returning  into  itself,  Proclus  pressed  his  entire 
combined  metaphysical  and  mythological  construction,  —  a  construc- 
tion in  which  he  assigned  to  the  systems  of  deities  of  the  different 
religions  their  place  in  the  mystical  and  magical  universe,  arranging 
them  in  the  series  divided  again  and  again  by  threes,  according  to 
his  law  of  the  determination  of  concepts.1 

9.  In  contrast  with  this,  the  peculiarity  of  Christian  philosophy 
consists  essentially  in  this,  that  in  its  apprehension  of  the  relation 
of  God  to  the  world,  it  sought  to  employ  throughout  the  ethical 
point  of  view  of  free,  creative  action.  Since  from  the  standpoint  of 
its  religious  conviction  it  held  fast  to  the  conception  of  the  person- 
ality of  the  Original  Being,  it  conceived  of  the  procedure  of  the 
world  forth  from  God,  not  as  a  physical  or  logical  necessity  of  the 

1  Personally,  Proclus  is  characterised  by  the  mingling  of  a  superabundant 
credulous  piety  with  a  logical  formalism  carried  even  to  pedantry,  a  combina- 
tion which  is  highly  interesting  psychologically.  Just  for  this  reason  he  is, 
perhaps,  the  most  pronounced  type  of  this  period  which  is  concerned  in  putting 
its  ardent  religiosity  into  a  scientific  system. 


252       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought ;  Religious  Period.     [PART  II 

unfolding  of  his  essence,  but  as  an  act  of  will,  and  in  consequence  of 
this  the  creation  of  the  world  was  regarded  not  as  an  eternal  processt 
but  as  a  fact  in  time  that  had  occurred  once  for  all.  The  conception, 
however,  in  which  these  motives  of  thought  became  concentrated, 
was  that  of  the  freedom  of  the  mil 

This  conception  had  had  at  first  the  meaning  (with  Aristotle) 
of  conceding  to  the  finite  personality  acting  ethically  the  capacity  of 
a  decision  between  different  given  possibilities,  independently  of 
external  influence  and  compulsion.  The  conception  had  then  taken 
on,  with  Epicurus,  the  metaphysical  meaning  of  a  causeless  activity 
of  individual  beings.  Applied  to  the  absolute,  and  regarded  as  a 
quality  of  God,  it  is  developed  in  the  Christian  philosophy  into  the 
thought  of  "  creation  out  of  nothing/'  into  the  doctrine  of  an  un- 
caused production  of  the  world  from  the  will  of  God.  Every  attempt 
at  an  explanation  of  the  world  is  thereby  put  aside ;  the  world  is 
because  God  has  willed  it,  and  it  is  such  as  it  is  because  God  has. 
willed  it  so  to  be.  At  no  point  is  the  contrast  between  Keo-Pla- 
toiiism  and  orthodox  Christianity  sharper  than  at  this. 

Meanwhile,  this  same  principle  of  the  freedom  of  the  will  is 
employed  to  overcome  the  very  difficulties  which  resulted  from  it. 
For  the  unlimited  creative  activity  of  the  omnipotent  God  forces 
the  problem  of  "  theodicy  "  forward  still  more  urgently  than  in  the 
other  theories  of  the  universe,  —  the  problem  how  the  reality  of 
evil  in  the  world  can  be  united  with  God's  perfect  goodness.  The 
optimism  involved  in  the  doctrine  of  creation,  and  the  pessimism  in- 
volved in  the  felt  need  of  redemption^  the  theoretical  and  the  practical, 
the  metaphysical  and  the  ethical  momenta  of  religious  faith  strike 
hard  against  each  other.  But  faith,  supported  by  the  feeling  of 
responsibility,  finds  its  way  of  escape  out  of  these  difficulties  in  the 
assumption  that  God  provided  the  spirits  and  human  souls  which 
he  created,  with  a  freedom  analogous  to  his  own,  and  that  through 
their  guilt  evil  came  into  the  good  world.1 

This  guilt,  the  thinkers  of  the  Church  find  not  to  consist  properly 
in  the  inclination  toward  matter  or  the  sensuous;  for  matter  as 
created  by  God  cannot  in  itself  be  evil.2  The  sin  of  free  spirits 
consists  rather  in  their  rebellion  against  the  will  of  God,  in  their 


1  This  is  expressed  abstractly  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  (Strom.  IV.  13,  605) 
in  the  form,  that  evil  is  only  an  action,  not  a  substance  (ofcr£o),  and  that  it  there- 
fore cannot  be  regarded  as  the  work  of  God. 

3  Just  for  this  reason  the  metaphysical  dualism  of  the  Gnostics  must  be  in  its 
principle  heterodox,  and  that,  too,  no  matter  whether  it  bore  the  stamp  rather 
of  Oriental  mythology  or  of  Hellenistic  abstract  thought  —  even  though  in  the 
ethical  consequences  which  it  drew.it  coincided  in  great  part  with  the  doctrine 
of  the  Church. 


CHAP.  2,  §  20.]        God  and  the  World:   Origen.  253 

longing  after  an  unlimited  power  of  self-determination,  and  only 
secondarily  in  the  fact  that  they  have  turned  their  lore  toward  God's 
creations,  toward  the  world  instead  of  toward  God  himself.  Here 
too,  therefore,  there  prevails  in  the  content  of  the  conception  of 
evil  the  negative  element  of  departure  and  falling  away  from  God ; 1 
but  the  whole  earnestness  of  the  religious  consciousness  asserts 
itself  in  this,  that  this  falling  away  is  conceived  of  not  merely  as 
absence  of  the  good,  but  as  a  positive,  perverted  act  of  will. 

In  accordance  with  this  the  dualism  of  God  and  the  world,  and 
that  of  spirit  and  matter,  become  indeed  deeply  involved  in  the 
Christian  theory  of  the  world.  God  and  the  eternal  life  of  the 
spirit,  the  world  and  the  transitory  life  of  the  flesh,  —  these  are 
here,  too,  sharply  enough  contrasted.  In  contradiction  with  the 
divine  pneuma  the  world  of  sense  is  filled  with  "hylic"  spirits,2 
evil  demons,  who  ensnare  man  in  their  pursuits  which  are  animated 
by  hostility  to  God,  stifle  in  him  the  voice  of  universal  natural  reve- 
lation, and  thereby  make  special  revelation  necessary ;  and  without 
departure  from  them  and  from  the  sensuous  nature  there  is  for  the 
early  Christian  ethics,  also,  no  rescue  of  the  soul  possible. 

But  still  this  dualism  is  not  regarded  as  being  in  its  intrinsic 
nature  either  necessary  or  original  It  is  not  the  opposition  be- 
tween God  and  matter,  but  that  between  God  and  fallen  spirits ;  it 
is  the  purely  inner  antagonism  of  the  infinite  and  the  finite  will.  In 
this  direction  Christian  philosophy  completed  through  Origen  the 
metaphysical  spiritualising  and  internalising  or  idealising  of  the 
world  of  the  senses.  In  it  the  corporeal  world  appears  as  completely 
permeated  and  maintained  by  spiritual  functions, — yes,  even  as  much 
reduced  to  spiritual  functions,  as  is  the  case  with  Plotinus;  but 
here  the  essential  element  in  these  functions  is  relations  of  icill 
As  the  passing  over  of  God  into  the  world  is  not  physical  necessity, 
but  ethical  freedom,  so  the  material  world  is  not  a  last  streaming 
forth  of  spirit  and  soul,  but  a  creation  of  God  for  the  punishment 
and  for  the  overcoming  of  sin. 

To  be  sure,  Origen,  in  developing  these  thoughts,  took  up  a  motive 
which  was  allied  to  Neo-Platonism,  a  motive  which  brought  him 
into  conflict  with  the  current  mode  of  thought  in  the  Church.  For 
strongly  as  he  held  fast  to  the  conception  of  the  divine  personality 
and  to  that  of  creation  as  a  free  act  of  divine  goodness,  the  scientific 
thought  which  desires  to  see  action  grounded  in  essence  was  yet 
too  strong  in  him  to  allow  him  to  regard  this  creation  as  a  causeless 


1  In  this  sense  even  Origen  could  call  the  evil  rb  ofa  6v  (in  Joh.  II.  7,  65). 

2  Tatian,  Orat.  ad  &rcec.  4. 


254       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [PART  U. 

act  taking  place  once  for  all  in  time.  The  eternal,  unchangeable 
essence  of  God  demands  rather  the  thought  that  he  is  creator  from 
eternity  even  to  all  eternity,  that  he  never  can  be  without  creating, 
that  he  creates  timelessly.1 

But  this  creation  of  the  eternal  will  is,  therefore,  only  one  that 
relates  to  eternal  Being,  to  the  spiritual  world  (owia).  In  this 
eternal  manner,  so  Origen  teaches,  God  begets  the  eternal  Son,  the 
Logos,  as  the  sum-total  of  his  world-thoughts  (tSca  tScaij/),  and 
through  him  the  realm  of  free  spirits,  which,  limited  within  itsejf, 
surrounds  the  deity  as  an  ever-living  garment.  Those  of  the  spirits 
that  continue  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  the  Creator  remain  in 
unchanged  blessedness  with  him ;  but  those  that  become  weary  and 
negligent,  and  turn  from  him  in  pride  and  vainglory,  are,  for  pun- 
ishment, cast  into  matter  created  for  this  purpose.  So  arises  the 
world  of  sense,  which  is,  therefore,  nothing  self-subsistent,  but 
a  symbolic  eternalisation  of  spiritual  functions.  For  what  may  be 
regarded  as  Real  in  it  is  not  the  individual  bodies,  but  rather  the 
spiritual  Ideas  which  are  present,  connected  and  changing  within 
them.2 

So,  with  Origen,  Platonism  becomes  united  with  the  theory  of 
the  creative  will.  The  eternal  world  of  spirits  is  the  eternal  prod- 
uct of  the  changeless  divine  will.  The  principle  of  the  temporal 
and  the  sensuous  (yo/eo-is)  is  the  changing  will  of  the  spirits. 
Corporeality  arises  on  account  of  their  sin,  and  will  vanish  again 
with  their  improvement  and  purification.  Thus  will,  and  the  rela- 

1  Orig.  De  Princ.  I.  2,  10  ;  III.  4,  3. 

2  This  idealising  of  the  world  of  sense  was  treated  in  great  detail,  quite  ac- 
cording to  the  Platonic  model,  by  the  most  important  of  the  Oriental  Church 
fathers,  Gregory  of  Nyssa  (331-394).    His  main  treatise  is  the  \6yos  /car^xT- 
rtfcfo.    Edition  of  his  works  by  Morellus  (Paris,  1675)  [Eng.  tr.  in  Vol.  V.,  2d 
series,  Lib.  Nicene  and  Post-Nicene  Fathers,  ed.  Schaff  and  Wace,  Oxford, 
Lond.,  and  NT.    1890].     Cf.  J.  Rupp,  G.  ties  Sischofs  von  N.  Leben  und 
Meinungen,  Leips.  1834.  — This  transformation  of  Nature  into  psychical  terms 
found  an  extremely  poetic  exposition  among  the  Gnostics,  particularly  with  the 
most  ingenious  among  them,  Valentinus.    The  origin  of  the  world  of  sense 
is  portrayed  as  follows  in  his  theogonic-cosmogonic  poetic  invention :  When 
the  lowest  of  the  -ffions,  Wisdom  (<ro<££a),  in  over-hasty  longing,  would  fain 
have  plunged  into  the  original  Ground  and  had  been  brought  back  again  to  her 
place  by  the  Spirit  of  Measure  (fyo$),  the  Supreme  God  separated  from  her  her 
passionate  longing  (irdflos)  as  a  lower  Wisdom  (K&TW  <ro0£a),  called  Achamoth, 
and  banished  it  into  the  "void"  (cf.  §  20,  4).    This  lower  <ro0fe,  nevertheless, 
impregnated  by  fyos  for  her  redemption,  bore  the  Demiurge  and  the  world  of 
sense.     On  this  account  that  ardent  longing  of  <ro$la  expresses  itself  in  all 
forms  and  shapes  of  this  world  ;  it  is  her  feelings  that  constitute  the  essence  of 
phenomena ;  her  pressure  and  complaint  thrills  through  all  the  life  of  Nature. 
From  her  tears  have  come  fountains,  streams,  and  seas ;  from  her  benumbing 
before  the  divine  word,  the  rocks  and  mountains ;  from  her  hope  of  redemption, 
light  and  ether,  which  in  reconciliation  stretch  above  the  earth.    This  poetic 
invention  is  farther  carried  out  with  the  lamentations  and  penitential  songs  of 
ffoQla.  in  the  Gnostic  treatise,  ULtrrts  <To<j>la. 


CHAP.  2,  §  21.]  Philosophy  of  History.  255 

tion  of  personalities  to  one  another,  in  particular  that  of  the  finite  to 
the  infinite  personality,  are  recognised  as  the  ultimate  and  deepest 
meaning  of  all  reality. 


§  21.    The  Problem  of  Universal  History. 

With  this  triumph  of  religious  ethics  over  cosmological  meta- 
physics, thus  sealed  by  Christianity,  is  connected  the  emergence  of 
a  farther  problem,  to  solve  which  a  number  of  important  attempts 
were  made  —  the  problem  of  the  philosophy  of  history. 

1.  Here  something  which  is  in  its  principle  new  comes  forward, 
as  over  against  the  Greek  view  of  the  world.  For  Greek  science 
had  from  the  beginning  directed  its  questions  with  reference  to  the 
Averts,  the  abiding  essence  (cf.  p.  73),  and  this  mode*  of  stating 
the  question,  which  proceeded  from  the  need  of  apprehending 
Nature,  had  influenced  the  progress  of  forming  conceptions  so 
strongly  that  the  chronological  course  of  events  had  always  been 
treated  as  something  of  secondary  importance,  having  no  meta- 
physical interest  of  its  own.  In  this  connection  Greek  science 
regarded  not  only  the  individual  man,  but  also  the  whole  human 
race,  with  all  its  fortunes,  deeds,  and  experiences,  as  ultimately  but 
an  episode,  a  special  formation  of  the  world-process  which  repeats 
itself  forever  according  to  like  laws. 

This  is  expressed  with  plain  grandeur  in  the  cosmological  begin- 
nings of  Greek  thought;  and  even  after  the  anthropological  tendency 
had  obtained  the  mastery  in  philosophy  the  thought  remained  in 
force  as  theoretical  background  for  every  projected  plan  of  the  art 
of  living,  that  human  life,  as  it  has  sprung  forth  from  the  unchang- 
ing process  of  Nature,  must  flow  again  into  the  same  (Stoa).  Plato 
had  indeed  asked  for  an  ultimate  end  of  earthly  life,  and  Aristotle 
had  investigated  the  regular  succession  of  the  forms  assumed  by 
political  life ;  but  the  inquiry  for  a  meaning  in  human  history  taken 
as  a  whole,  for  a  connected  plan  of  historical  development,  had 
never  once  been  put  forward,  and  still  less  had  it  occurred  to  any 
of  the  old  thinkers  to  see  in  this  the  intrinsic,  essential  nature  of 
the  world. 

The  most  characteristic  procedure  in  just  this  respect  is  that 
of  Neo-Platonism.  Its  metaphysics,  also,  follows  the  religious 
motive  as  its  guide;  but  it  gives  this  motive  a  genuine  Hellenic 
turn  when  it  regards  the  procession  of  the  imperfect  forth  from 
the  perfect  as  an  eternal  process  of  a  necessary  nature,  in  which 
the  human  individual  also  finds  his  place  and  sees  it  as  his  destiny 
to  seek  salvation  alone  by  himself  by  return  to  the  infinite. 


256      Hellenistic-Roman  Thought:  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

2.  Christianity,  however,  found  from  the  beginning  the  essence 
of  the  whole  world-movement  in  the  experiences  of  personalities: 
for  it  external  nature  was  but  a  theatre  for  the  development  of 
the  relation  of  person  to  person,  and  especially  of  the  relation  of  the 
finite  spirit  to  the  deity.  And  to  this  were  added,  as  a  further 
determining  power,  the  principle  of  love,  the  consciousness  of  the 
solidarity  of  the  human  race,  the  deep  conviction  of  the  universal 
sinfulness,  and  the  faith  in  a  common  redemption.  All  this  led  to 
regarding  the  history  of  the  fall  and  of  redemption  as  the  true 
metaphysical  import  of  the  world's  reality,  and  so  instead  of  an 
eternal  process  of  Nature,  the  drama  of  universal  history  as  an  on- 
ward flow  of  events  that  were  activities  of  free  will,  became  the  con- 
tent of  Christian  metaphysics. 

There  is-  perhaps  no  better  proof  of  the  power  of  the  impression 
which  the  personality  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  left,  than  the  fact 
that  all  doctrines  of  Christianity,  however  widely  they  may  other- 
wise diverge  philosophically  or  mythically,  are  yet  at  one  in  seeking 
in  him  and  his  appearance  the  centre  of  the  world's  history.  By  him 
the  conflict  between  good  and  evil,  between  light  and  darkness,  is 
decided. 

But  this  consciousness  of  victory  with  which  Christianity  believed 
in  its  Saviour  had  still  another  side :  to  the  evil  which  had  been 
overcome  by  him  belonged  also  the  other  religions,  as  by  no  means 
its  least  important  element.  For  the  Christian  mode  of  thought  of 
those  days  was  far  from  denying  the  reality  of  the  heathen  gods ;  it 
regarded  them  rather  as  evil  demons,  fallen  spirits  who  had  seduced 
man  and  persuaded  him  to  worship  them,  in  order  to  prevent  his 
returning  to  the  true  God.1 

By  this  thought  the  cojiflict  of  religions,  which  took  place  in  the 
Alexandrian  period,  acquires  in  the  eyes  of  Christian  thinkers  a 
metaphysical  significance :  the  powers  whose  struggling  forms  the 
world's  history  are  the  gods  of  the  various  religions,  and  the  history 
of  this  conflict  is  the  inner  significance  of  all  reality.  And  since 
every  individual  man  with  'his  ethical  life-work  is  implicated  in 
this  great  complex  process,  the  importance  of  individuality  becomes 
raised  far  above  the  life  of  sense,  into  the  sphere  of  metaphysical 
reality. 

3.  "With  almost  all  Christian  thinkers,  accordingly,  the  world's 
history  appears  as  a  course  of  inner  events  which  draw  after  them 
the  origin  and  fortunes  of  the  world  of  sense,  — a  course  which 
takes  place  once  for  all  It  is  essentially  only  Origen  who  holds  fast 

1  So  even  Origen ;  ci  Cont.  Gels.  III.  28. 


CHAP.  2,  §  21.]     Philosophy  of  History:  Christianity.  257 

to  the  fundamental  character  of  Greek  science  (cf.  p.  27,  ch.  1). 
so  far  as  to  teach  the  eternity  of  the  world-process.  Between  the 
two  motives,  the  Christian  and  the  Greek,  he  found  a  way  of  escape 
by  making  a  succession  of  temporal  worlds  proceed  forth  from  the 
eternal  spiritual  world,  which  he  regarded  as  the  immediate  creation 
of  God,  and  by  holding  that  these  temporal  worlds  take  their  origin 
with  the  declension  and  fall  of  a  number  of  free  spirits,  and  are  to 
find  their  end  with  the  redemption  and  restitution  of  the  same 


The  fundamental  tendency  of  Christian  thought,  on  the  contrary, 
was  to  portray  the  historical  drama  of  fall  and  redemption  as  a 
connected  series  of  events  taking  place  once  for  all,  which  begins 
with  a  free  decision  of  lower  spirits  to  sin,  and  has  its  turning- 
point  in  the  redemptive  revelation,  the  resolve  of  divine  freedom. 
In  contrast  with  the  naturalistic  conceptions  of  Greek  thought, 
history  is  conceived  of  as  the  realm  of  free  acts  of  personalities,  taking 
place  but  once,  and  the  character  of  these  acts,  agreeably  to  the  entire 
consciousness  of  the  time,  is  of  essentially  religious  significance. 

4.  It  is  highly  interesting  now  to  see  how  in  the  mythico- 
metaphysical  inventions  of  the  Gnostics^  the  peculiar  relation  of 
Christianity  to  Judaism  is  brought  to  expression  in  cosmogonic 
garb.  In  the  Gnostic  circles  the  so-called  Gentile  Christian  ten- 
dency is  predominant,  the  tendency  which  desires  to  define  the  new 
religion  as  sharply  as  possible,  as  over  against  Judaism,  and  this 
tendency  just  through  the  Hellenistic  philosophy  grows  to  the  most 
open  hostility  against  Judaism. 

The  mythological  form  for  this  is,  that  the  God  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, who  gave  the  Mosaic  law,  is  regarded  as  the  fashioner  of  the 
world  of  sense,  —  for  the  most  part  under  the  Platonic  name  of  the 
Demiurge,  —  and  is  assigned  that  place  in  the  hierarchy  of  cosmic 
forms  or  JEons,  as  well  as  in  the  history  of  the  universe,  which 
belongs  to  him  in  accordance  with  this  function. 

At  the  beginning  this  relation  is  not  yet  that  of  pronounced  oppo- 
sition. A  certain  Cerinthus  (about  115  A.D.)  had  already  distin- 
guished the  God  of  the  Jews  as  Demiurge,  from  the  Supreme  God 
who  was  not  defiled  by  any  contact  with  matter,  and  had  taught 
that  in  contrast  with  the  "law"  given  by  the  God  of  the  Jews, 
Jesus  had  brought  the  revelation  of  the  Supreme  God.2  So,  too, 


1  Orig.  De  Princ.  III.  1,  3.  These  worlds,  on  account  of  the  freedom  from 
which  they  proceed,  are  not  at  all  like  one  another,  but  are  of  the  most  mani- 
fold variety;  Ib.  II.  3',  3  f. 

3  A  distinction  which  Nmnenius  also  adopted,  evidently  under  Gnostic  influ- 
ences. Cf .  Euseb.  JPrcep.  JEo.  XI.  18. 


258      Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [PART  U. 

with  Saturninus,  the  God  of  the  Jews  appears  as  the  head  of  the 
seven  planetary  spirits,  who,  as  lowest  emanation  of  the  spiritual 
realm,  in  their  desire  to  rule  tore  away  a  portion  of  matter  to  form 
from  it  the  world  of  sense,  and  set  man  as  guardian  over  it.  But  a 
conflict  arises,  since  Satan,  to  conquer  back  this  part  of  his  kingdom, 
sends  against  man  his  demons  and  the  lower  "hylic"  race  of  men. 
In  this  conflict  the  prophets  of  the  Demiurge  prove  powerless  until 
the  Supreme  God  sends  the  JSon  vo9s  as  Saviour,  in  order  that  he 
may  free  pneumatic  men  and  likewise  the  Demiurge  and  his  spirits 
from  the  power  of  Satan.  This  same  redemption  of  the  Jewish  God 
also  is  taught  by  Basilides,  who  introduces  him  under  the  name  of 
the  "  great  Archon "  as  an  efflux  of  the  divine  world-seed,  as  head 
of  the  world  of  sense,  and  represents  him  as  made  to  tremble  by  the 
Supreme  God's  message  of  salvation  in  Jesus,  and  as  brought  to 
repentance  for  his  undue  exaltation. 

In  a  similar  manner,  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament,  with  Carpo- 
crates,  belongs  to  the  fallen  angels,  who,  commissioned  to  form  the 
world,  completed  it  according  to  their  own  caprice,  and  founded  sep- 
arate realms  in  which  they  got  themselves  reverenced  by  subordinate 
spirits  and  by  men.  But  while  these  particular  religions  are,  like 
their  Gods,  in  a  state  of  mutual  conflict,  the  Supreme  Deity  reveals 
in  Jesus  the  one  true  universal  religion  which  has  Jesus  as  its 
object,  even  as  he  had  already  before  made  revelation  in  the  great 
educators  of  humanity,  a  Pythagoras  and  a  Plato. 

In  more  decided  polemic  against  Judaism  Cerdo  the  Syrian 
further  distinguished  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament  from  that  of 
the  Xew.  The  God  announced  by  Moses  and  the  prophets,  as  the 
purposeful  World-fashioner  and  as  the  God  of  justice  is  accessible 
even  to  natural  knowledge  —  the  Stoic  conception;  the  God  re- 
vealed through  Jesus  is  the  unknowable,  the  good  God  —  the 
Philonic  conception.  The  same  determinations  more  sharply  defined 
are  employed  by  Mardon1  (about  150),  who  conceives  of  the  Chris- 
tian life  in  a  strongly  ascetic  manner,  and  regards  it  as  a  warfare 
against  the  Demiurge  and  for  the  Supreme  God  revealed  through 
Jesus,2  and  Marcion's  disciple  Apelles  even  treated  the  Jewish  God 

*  Cf.  Volkmar,  Philosophoumena  und  Mardon  ( Theol.  Jahrb.  Tubingen, 
1854).  Same  author,  Das  Evangelium  Marcion's  (Leips.  1852). 

2  An  extremely  piquant  mythological  modification  of  this  thought  is  found 
in  the  sect  of  the  Ophites,  who  gave  to  the  Hebraic  narrative  of  the  fall  the 
interpretation,  that  the  serpent  which  taught  man  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  knowl- 
edge in  Paradise  made  a  beginning  of  bringing  the  revelation  of  the  true  God 
to  man  who  had  fallen  under  the  dominion  of  the  Demiurge,  and  that  after 
man  had  on  this  account  experienced  the  wrath  of  the  Demiurge,  the  revela- 
tion had  appeared  victorious  in  Jesus.  For  this  knowledge  which  the  serpent 
desired  to  teach  is  the  true  salvation  of  man. 


CHAP.  2,  §  21.]    Philosophy  of  History :  Gnostics,  Patristics.     259 

as  Lucifer,  who  brought  carnal  sin  into  the  world  of  sense  which 
had  been  formed  by  the  good  "  Demiurge,"  the  highest  angel,  so  that, 
at  the  petition  of  the  Demiurge,  the  Supreme  God  sent  the  Re- 
deemer against  him. 

5.  In  contrast  with  this  view  we  find  the  doctrine  firmly  held, 
not  only  by  the  Recognitions,1  ascribed  to  Clement  of  Rome  (which 
arose  about  150  A.D.),  but  in  the  entire  orthodox  development  of 
Christian  doctrine,  that  the  Supreme  God  and  the  creator  of  the 
world,  the  God  of  the  New  and  the  God  of  the  Old  Testaments,  are 
the  same.  But  a  well-planned  educative  development  of  the  divine 
revelation  is  assumed,  and  in  this  the  history  of  salvation,  i.e.  the 
inner  history  of  the  world,  is  sought.  Proceeding  in  accordance 
with  the  suggestions  of  the  Pauline  epistles,2  Justin,  and  especially 
Irenseus,  took  this  standpoint.  The  theory  of  revelation  did  not 
become  complete  until  it  found  this  elaboration  in  the  philosophy 
of  history  (cf.  §  18). 

For  the  anticipations  of  Christian  revelation,  that  emerge  on  the 
one  hand  in  Jewish  prophecy,  on  the  other  in  Hellenic  philosophy, 
are  regarded  from  this  point  of  view  as  pedagogic  preparations  for 
Christianity.  And  since  the  redemption  of  sinful  man  constitutes, 
according  to  the  Christian  view,  the  sole  significance  and  value  of 
the  world's  history,  and  so  of  all  that  is  real  aside  from  God,  the 
well-ordered  succession  of  God's  acts  of  revelation  appears  as  the 
essential  thing  in  the  entire  course  of  the  world's  events. 

In  the  main,  corresponding  to  the  doctrine  of  revelation,  three 
stages  of  this  divine,  saving  activity  are  distinguished.3  As  divided 
theoretically  there  are,  first,  the  universal-human  revelation,  given 
objectively  by  the  purposiveness  of  Nature,  subjectively  through 
the  rational  endowment  of  the  mind ;  second,  the  special  revelation 
imparted  to  the  Hebrew  people  through  the  Mosaic  law  and  the 
promises  of  the  prophets ;  and  third,  the  complete  revelation  through 
Jesus.  Divided  according  to  time,  the  periods  extended  from  Adam 
to  Moses,  from  Moses  to  Christ,  from  Christ  to  the  end  of  the  world.* 
This  triple  division  was  the  more  natural  for  ancient  Christianity, 
the  stronger  its  faith  that  the  closing  period  of  the  world's  redemp- 

1  Edited  by  Gersdorf  (Leips.  1838).    Cf.  A.  Hilgenfeld,  Die  clementinischen 
JRecognitionen  und  Homilien  (Jena,  1848);    G.  Uhihorn,  Die  Homilien  und 
Eecognitionen  des  Cl.  E.  (Gottingen,  1854). 

2  Which  treat  the  "  law  "  as  the  "  schoolmaster  "  unto  Christ  (iraLdayuyfo  efr 
Xpurrov);  Gal.  iii.  24. 

8  This  had  been  done  in  part  already  by  the  Gnostics,  by  Basilides  at  least, 
according  to  Hippolytus. 

*The  later  (heretical)  development  of  eschatology  added  to  these  three 
periods  yet  a  fourth,  by  the  appearance  of  the  "  Paraclete."  Cf.,  e.g.,  Ter- 
tullian,  De  Virg.  Vel.  1,  p.  884  0. 


260       Hellenistie-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.     [PART  II. 

tion,  which  had  begun  with  the  appearance  of  the  Saviour,  would  be 
ended  in  a  very  short  time.  The  esckatological  hopes  are  an  essential 
constituent  of  the  early  Christian  metaphysics  ;  for  the  philosophy 
of  history  which  made  Jesus  the  turning-point  of  the  world's  history 
had,  as  by  no  means  its  slighest  support,  the  expectation  that  the 
Crucified  would  return  again  to  judge  the  world,  and  to  complete 
the  victory  of  light  over  darkness.  However  varied  these  ideas 
become  with  time  and  with  the  disappointment  of  the  first  hopes, 
however  strongly  the  tendencies  of  dualism  and  monism  assert 
themselves  here  also,  by  conceiving  of  the  last  Judgment  either  as 
a  definite  separation  of  good  and  evil,  or  as  a  complete  overcoming 
of  the  latter  by  the  former  (&roKaTacrTao-t$  ?ravT<uv  with  Origen),  and 
however  much  a  more  material  and  a  more  spiritual  view  of  blessed- 
ness and  unhappiness,  of  heaven  and  hell,  interplay  here  also,  — in 
every  ease  the  last  Judgment  forms  the  conclusion  of  the  work  of 
redemption,  and  so  the  consummation  of  the  divine  plan  of  salva- 
tion. 

6.  The  points  of  view  from  which  the  world's  history  is  regarded 
by  Christian  thinkers  are  thus  indeed  exclusively  religious ;  but  the 
more  general  principle  of  a  historical  teleology  gains  recognition 
within  them.  While  Greek  philosophy  had  reflected  upon  the  pur- 
posiveness  of  Xature  with  a  depth  and  an  energy  which  religious 
thought  could  not  surpass,  the  completely  new  thought  rises  here 
that  the  course  of  events  in  human  life  also  has  a  purposeful  mean- 
ing as  a  whole.  The  teleology  of  history  becomes  raised  above 
that  of  Xature,  and  the  former  appears  as  the  higher  in  worth,  in 
whose  service  the  latter  is  employed.1 

Such  a  conception  was  possible  only  for  a  time  that  from  a  ripe 
result  looked  back  upon  the  vivid  memory  of  a  great  development 
in  the  world's  history.  The  universal  civilisation  of  the  Roman 
Empire  found  dawning  in  the  self-consciousness  of  its  own  inner 
life  the  presentiment  of  a  purpose  in  that  working  together  of 
national  destinies  through  which  it  had  itself  come  into  existence, 
and  the  idea  of  this  mighty  process  was  yielded  especially  by  the 
continued  tradition  of  Greek  literature  embracing  a  thousand  years. 
The  religious  theory  of  the  world,  which  had  developed  from  this 
ancient  civilisation,  gave  to  that  thought  the  form  that  the  meaning 
of  the  historical  movement  was  to  be  sought  in  the  preparations  of 
God  for  the  salvation  of  man;  and  since  the  peoples  of  the  ancient 
civilisation  themselves  felt  that  the  time  of  their  efficient  working 
was  complete,  it  is  comprehensible  that  they  believed  they  saw  the 

i  Cf.  Irenaua,  Eef.  IV.  38,  4,  p.  702  f.  St. 


CHAP,  2,  §  21.]     Philosophy  of  Sistory :  Patristics.  261 

end  of  history  immediately  before  them,  where  the  sun  of  their  day 
was  sinking. 

But  hand  in  hand  with  this  idea  of  a  systematically  planned  unity 
in  human  history  goes  the  thought  of  a  unity  of  the  human  race, 
exalted  above  space  and  time.  The  consciousness  of  common  civil- 
isation, breaking  through  national  boundaries,  becomes  complete  in 
the  belief  in  a  common  revelation  and  redemption  of  all  men.  Inas- 
much as  the  salvation  of  the  whole  race  is  made  the  import  of  the 
divine  plan  for  the  world,  it  appears  that  among  the  provisions  of 
this  plan,  the  most  important  is  that  fellowship  (CKK^O-LO)  to  which 
all  members  of  the  race  are  called,  by  sharing  in  faith  the  same  work 
of  redemption.  The  conception  of  the  Church,  shaped  out  from  the 
life  of  the  Christian  community,  stands  in  this  connection  with  the 
religious  philosophy  of  history,  and  accordingly,  among  its  constitu- 
tive marks  or  notes,  universality  or  catholicity  is  one  of  the  most 
important. 

7.  In  this  way,  man  and  his  destiny  becomes  the  centre  of  the 
universe.  This  anthropocentric  character  distinguishes  the  Christian 
view  of  the  world  essentially  from  the  Xeo-Platonic.  The  latter, 
indeed,  assigned  a  high  metaphysical  position  to  the  human  individ- 
ual, whose  psychico-spiritual  nature  it  even  held  to  be  capable  of 
deification ;  it  regarded  the  purposeful  connected  whole  of  Nature 
also  from  the  (Stoic)  point  of  view  of  its  usefulness  for  man,  —  but 
never  would  Neo-Platonism  have  consented  to  declare  man,  who 
for  it  was  a  part  of  the  phenomena  in  which  divine  efficiency 
appears,  to  be  the  end  of  the  whole. 

Just  this,  however,  is  the  case  in  the  philosophy  of  the  Fathers. 
According  to  Irenceus,  man  is  the  end  and  aim  of  creation :  it  is  to 
him  as  a  knowing  being  that  God  would  reveal  himself,  and  for  his 
sake  the  rest,  the  whole  of  Nature,  has  been  created ;  he  it  is,  also, 
who  by  abuse  of  the  freedom  granted  him,  made  farther  revelation 
and  redemption  necessary;  it  is  he,  therefore,  for  whose  sake  all 
history  also  exists.  Man  as  the  highest  unfolding  of  psychical  life 
is,  as  Gregory  of  STyssa  teaches,  the^  crown  of  creation,  its  master 
and  king :  it  is  creation's  destiny  to  be  contemplated  by  him,  and 
taken  back  into  its  original  spirituality.  But  with  Origen,  too,  men 
are  just  those  fallen  spirits,  who,  for  punishment  and  improvement, 
have  been  clothed  with  the  world  of  sense:  Mature  exists  only  on 
account"  of  their  sin,  and  it  will  cease  again  when  the  historical 
process  has  attained  its  end  through  the  return  of  all  spirits  to  the 
Good. 

Thus  the  anthropological  movement,  which  at  first  forced  its  way 
into  Greek  science  only  as  a  shifting  of  the  interest,  as  a  change  in 


262       Hellenistic-Roman  Thought :  Religious  Period.    [PART  IL 

the  statement  of  the  problem,  developed  during  the  Hellenistic- 
Roman  period  to  be  more  and  more  the  real  principle  from  which 
the  world  was  considered,  and  at  last  in  league  with  the  religious 
need  it  took  possession  of  metaphysics.  The  human  race  has  gained 
the  consciousness  of  the  unity  of  its  historical  connection  and  re- 
gards the  history  of  its  salvation  as  the  measure  of  all  finite  things. 
What  arises  and  passes  away  in  space  and  time  has  its  true  signifi- 
cance only  in  so  far  as  it  is  taken  up  into  the  relation  of  man  to  his 
God. 

Being  and  Becoming  were  the  problems  of  ancient  philosophy 
at  its  beginning :  the  conceptions  with  which  it  closes  are  God  and 
the  human  race. 


PART  III. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES. 

Kousselot,  Etudes  sur  la  Philosophie  du  Moyen  Age.    Paris,  1840-42. 
B.  HaurSau,  De  la  Philosophie  Scholastique.    Paris,  1850. 
B.  HaurSau,  JSistoire  de  la  Philosophie  Scholastique.    Paris,  1872-80.     * 
A.  Stockl,  Geschichte  der  Philosophie  des  Mittelalters.     Mainz,  1864-66. 

WHEN  the  migration  of  the  peoples  broke  in  devastation  over  the 
Eoman  Empire,  and  the  latter  lacked  the  political  strength  to 
defend  itself  against  the  northern  barbarians,  scientific  civilisation, 
also,  was  in  danger  of  becoming  completely  crushed  out;  for  the 
tribes  to  whom  the  sceptre  now  passed  brought  still  less  mind  and 
understanding  for  the  finely  elaborated  structures  of  philosophy 
than  for  the  light  forms  of  Grecian  art.  And,  withal,  ancient  civ- 
ilisation was  in  itself  so  disintegrated,  its  vital  force  was  so  broken, 
that  it  seemed  incapable  of  taking  the  rude  victors  into  its  school. 

Thus  the  conquests  of  the  Greek  spirit  would  have  been  given 
over  to  destruction  beyond  hope  of  rescue,  if  in  the  midst  of  the 
breaking  down  of  the  old  world,  a  new  spiritual  power  had  not 
grown  strong,  to  which  the  sons  of  the  North  bowed,  and  which, 
with  firm  hand,  knew  how  to  rescue  for  the  future  the  goods  of 
civilisation,  and  preserve  them  during  the  centuries  of  subversion. 
This  power  was  the  Christian  ChurcJi.  What  the  State  could  not 
do,  what  art  and  science  could  not  achieve,  religion  accomplished. 
Inaccessible  still  for  the  fine  workings  of  aesthetic  imagination  and 
abstract  thought,  the  Germans  were  laid  hold  of  in  their  deepest 
feelings  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  which  worked  upon  them 
with  all  the  power  of  its  grand  simplicity. 

Only  from  this  point  of  religious  excitation,  therefore,  could  the 
process  of  the  appropriation  of  ancient  science  by  the  peoples  of 
the  Europe  of  to-day  begin  \  only  at  the  hand  of  the  Church  could 
the  new  world  enter  the  school  of  the  old.  The  natural  conse- 
quence, however,  of  this  relation  was,  that  at  first  only  that  portion 
of  the  intellectual  content  of  ancient  civilisation  remained  alive 


264  Medi&val  Philosophy.  [PART  IIL 

which  liad  been  taken  up  into  the  doctrine  of  the  Christian  Church, 
and  that  the  teaching  authority  rigidly  excluded  all  else,  and  espe- 
cially that  which  was  opposed  to  her.  By  this  means,  to  be  sure, 
confusion  in  the  youthful  mind  of  these  nations,  which  would  not 
have  been  able  to  comprehend  and  elaborate  much  and  many  kinds 
of  material,  was  wisely  guarded  against;  but  thereby  whole  worlds 
of  the  intellectual  life  sank  to  the  depth  from  which  they  could 
only  be  drawn  forth  again  long  after,  by  toil  and  conflict. 

The  Church  had  grown  to  its  great  task  of  becoming  the  educator 
of  the  European  nations,  first  of  all,  because  from  the  invisible 
beginnings  of  a  religious  society  it  had  developed  with  steadily 
growing  power  to  a  unified  organisation,  which  amid  the  dissolution 
of  political  life  presented  itself  as  the  only  power  that  was  firm  and 
sure  of  itself.  And  since  this  organisation  was  supported  by  the 
thought  that  the  Church  was  called  to  become  the  means  of  bring- 
ing the  salvation  of  redemption  to  all  humanity,  the  religious  edu- 
cation of  the  barbarians  was  a  task  prescribed  by  its  own  nature. 
But  the  Church  was  all  the  more  able  to  take  this  in  hand,  since  in 
her  inner  life  she  had  proceeded  with  the  same  certainty  amid 
numerous  deviating  paths,  and  had  attained  the  goal  of  a  unified 
and  completed  system  of  doctrine.  To  this  was  further  added  the 
especially  favourable  circumstance,  that  at  the  threshold  of  the  new 
epoch  she  was  presented  with  the  sum-total  of  her  convictions, 
worked  out  into  the  form  of  a  .thorough  scientific  system  by  a  mind 
of  the  first  order,  —  Augustine. 

Augustine  was  the  true  teacher  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Not  only 
do  the  threads  of  Christian  and  ISTeo-Platonic  thought,  the  ideas  of 
Origen  and  of  Plotinus,  unite  in  his  philosophy,  but  he  also  concen- 
trated the  entire  thought  of  his  time  with  creative  energy  about  the 
need  of  salvation  and  the  fulfilment  of  this  need  by  the  church 
community.  His  doctrine  is  the  philosophy  of  the  CJiristian  Church. 
Herewith  was  given,  in  pregnant  unity,  the  system  which  became 
the  basis  of  the  scientific  training  of  the  European  peoples,  and  in 
this  form  the  Romanic  and  Germanic  peoples  entered  upon  the 
inheritance  of  the  Greeks. 

But  for  this  reason  the  Middle  Ages  retraced  in  the  reverse  direc- 
tion the  path  which  the  Greeks  had  gone  over  in  their  relations  to 
science.  In  antiquity  science  had  arisen  from  the  pure  aesthetic  joy 
in  knowledge  itself,  and  had  only  gradually  entered  into  the  service 
of  practical  need,  of  ethical  tasks,  and  of  religious  longings.  The 
Middle  Ages  begins  with  the  conscious  subordination  of  knowledge 
to  the  great  ends  of  faith ;  it  sees  in  science  at  the  beginning  only 
the  task  of  the  intellect  to  make  clear  to  itself  and  express  in 


Mediaeval  Philosophy.  265 

abstract  thought  that  which  it  possesses  surely  and  unassailably 
in  feeling  and  conviction.  But  in  the  midst  of  this  work  the  joy 
in  knowledge  itself  wakes  anew,  at  first  timorously  and  uncertainly, 
then  with  ever-increasing  force  and  self-certainty ;  it  unfolds  itself 
at  first  scholastically,  in  fields  which  seem  to  lie  far  distant  from 
faith's  unassailable  sphere  of  ideas,  and  at  the  end  breaks  through 
victoriously  when  science  begins  to  define  her  limits  as  against 
faith,  philosophy 'hers  as  against  theology,  and  to  assume  a  con- 
scious independent  position. 

The  education  of  the  European  peoples,  which  the  history  of  the 
phjlosophy  of  the  Middle  Ages  sets  forth,  has  then  for  its  starting- 
point  the  Church  doctrine,  and  for  its  goal  the  development  of 
the  scientific  spirit.  The  intellectual  civilisation  of  antiquity  is 
brought  to  modern  peoples  in  the  religious  form  which  it  assumed 
at  its  close,  and  develops  in  them  gradually  the  maturity  for  prop- 
erly scientific  work. 

Under  such  conditions  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  the  history 
of  this  education  awakens  psychological  interest  and  an  interest 
connected  with  the  history  of  civilisation,  rather  than  presents  new 
and  independent  fruits  of  philosophical  insight.  In  the  appropria- 
tion of  the  presented  material  the  peculiar  personality  of  the 
disciple  may  assert  itself  here  and  there;  the  problems  and  con- 
ceptions of  ancient  philosophy  may,  therefore,  find  many  fine  trans- 
formations when  thus  taken  up  into  the  spirit  of  the  new  peoples, 
and  in  forging  out  the  new  Latin  terminology  in  the  Middle  Ages 
acuteness  and  depth  often  contend  emulously  with  pedantry  and 
insipidity  j  but  in  its  fundamental  philosophical  thoughts,  mediaeval 
philosophy  remains  enclosed  within  the  system  of  conceptions  of 
the  Greek  and  the  Hellenistic-Eoman  philosophy,  —  not  only  as 
regards  its  problems,  but  also  as  regards  their  solutions.  Highly 
as  we  must  estimate  the  worth  of  its  labours  for  the  intellectual 
education  of  European  peoples,  its  highest  achievements  remain  in 
the  last  instance  just  brilliant  productions  of  scholars  or  disciples, 
not  of  masters,  —  productions  in  which  only  the  eye  of  the  most 
refined  detailed  investigation  can  discover  the  gently  germinating 
beginnings  of  a  new  thought,  but  which  show  themselves  to  be,  on 
the  whole,  an  appropriation  of  the  world  of  thought  of  the  depart- 
ing antiquity.  Mediaeval  philosophy  is,  in  its  entire  spirit,  solely 
the  continuation,  of  the  Hellenistic-Roman,  and  the  essential  dis- 
tinction between  the  two  is  that  what  in  the  first  centuries  of  our 
era  had  been  coming  into  existence  amid  struggles  was,  for  the 
Middle  Ages,  given  and  regarded  as  something  in  the  main  complete 
and  definitive. 


266  Jtfediceval  Philosophy.  [PART  in. 

This  period,  in  which  the  humanity  of  to-day  was  at  school, 
lasted  a  full  thousand  years,  and  as  if  in  systematically  planned 
pedagogic  steps  its  education  proceeds  toward  science  by  the  suc- 
cessive addition  of  ancient  material  of  culture.  Out  of  the  antith- 
eses which  appear  in  this  material  grow  the  problems  of  philosophy, 
and  the  ancient  conceptions  tak'en  up  and  amplified  give  the  form 
to  the  scientific  theories  of  the  world  prevalent  in  the  Middle 
Ages. 

An  original  discord  exists  in  this  tradition  between  Neo-Platonism 
and  the  Church  doctrine  defended  by  Augustine,  —  a  discord  which 
indeed  was  not  equally  strong  at  all  points,  since  Augustine  in  very 
essential  points  had  remained  under  the  control  of  Neo-Platonism, 
and  yet  a  discord  which  amounted  to  an  opposition  with  reference 
to  the  fundamental  character  of  the  relation  of  philosophy  to  faith. 
The  system  of  Augustine  is  concentrated  about  the  conception  of 
the  Church  ;  for  it  philosophy  has  as  its  main  task  to  present  the 
Church  doctrine  as  a  scientific  system,  to  establish  and  develop  it  : 
in  so  far  as  it  prosecutes  this  task  mediaeval  philosophy  is  the 
science  of  the  schools,  Scholasticism.  The  Neo-Platonic  tendency, 
on  the  contrary,  takes  the  direction  of  guiding  the  individual, 
through  knowledge,  to  blessed  oneness  of  life  with  the  deity  :  in  so 
far  as  the  science  of  the  Middle  Ages  sets  itself  this  end  it  is  Mysti- 
cism. 

Scholasticism  and  Mysticism  accordingly  supplement  each  other 
without  being  reciprocally  exclusive.  As  the  intuition  of  the  Mystics 
may  become  a  part  of  the  Scholastic  system,  so  the  proclamation  of 
the  Mystics  may  presuppose  the  system  of  the  Scholastics  as  its 
background.  Throughout  the  Middle  Ages,  therefore,  Mysticism  is 
more  in  danger  than  Scholasticism  of  becoming  heterodox  ;  but  it 
would  be  erroneous  to  see  in  this  an  essential  mark  for  distinguish- 
ing between  the  two.  Scholasticism  is,  no  doubt,  in  the  main 
entirely  orthodox  ;  but  not  only  do  the  theories  of  the  Scholastics 
diverge  widely  in  the  treatment  of  dogmas  which  are  still  in 
the  process  of  formulation,  but  many  of  the  Scholastics,  even  in 
the  scientific  investigation  of  the  doctrines  which  were  given,  pro- 
ceeded to  completely  heterodox  theories,  the  expression  of  which 
brought  them  into  more  or  less  severe  conflicts  without  and  within. 
As  regards  Mysticism,  the  Neo-Platonic  tradition  often  forms  the 
theoretical  background  of  the  secret  or  open  opposition  offered  to 
the  monopolising  of  the  religious  life  on  the  part  of  the  Church;1 


.  »  teschichte  tier  religiosen  Aufklarung  im  Mittelalter,  %  vols. 

(Berlin,  187^-77)     Cf.  also  H.  v.  Eicken,  Geschichte  der  mittelaltertichen  Welt- 
anschauung (Stuttgart,  1888). 


Mediaeval  Philosophy.  267 

but  we  meet  on  the  other  hand  enthusiastic  Mystics  "who  feel  them- 
selves called  to  take  the  true  faith  into  their  protection  against  the 
excesses  of  Scholastic  science. 

It  appears  thus  to  be  inappropriate  to  give  to  the  philosophy  of 
the  Middle  Ages  the  general  name  of  "  Scholasticism."  It  might 
rather  prove,  as  the  result  of  a  more  exact  estimate,  that  in  the 
maintenance  of  scientific  tradition  as  well  as  in  the  slow  adaptation 
and  transformation  of  those  philosophical  doctrines  which  were 
effective  for  the  after  time,  a  part  belongs  to  Mysticism  which  is 
at  least  as  great  as  the  part  played  by  Scholasticism,  and  that  on  the 
other  hand  a  sharp  separation  of  the  two  currents  is  not  practicable 
in  the  case  of  a  great  number  of  the  most  prominent  philosophic 
thinkers  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

Finally,  it  must  be  added  that  even  when  we  put  together  Scholas- 
ticism and  Mysticism,  we  have  in  nowise  exhausted  the  character- 
istics of  mediaeval  philosophy.  While  the  nature  of  both  these 
tendencies  is  fixed  by  their  relation  to  the  religious  presuppositions 
of  thought,  —  in  the  one  case  the  established  doctrine  of  the  Church, 
in  the  other  personal  piety,  —  there  runs  along  side  by  side  with 
these,  especially  in  the  later  centuries  of  the  Middle  Ages  though 
noticeable  still  earlier,  a  secular  side-current  which  brings  in  an  in- 
creasing degree  the  rich  results  of  Greek  and  Roman  experience  of 
the  world,  to  science  building  itself  anew.  Here,  too,  at  the  outset 
the  effort  prevails  to  introduce  organically  into  the  Scholastic 
system  this  extensive  material  and  the  forms  of  thought  which  are 
dominant  in  it;  but  the  more  this  part  of  the  sphere  of  thought 
develops  into  an  independent  significance,  the  more  the  entire  lines 
of  the  scientific  consideration  of  the  world  become  shifted,  and 
while  the  reflective  interpretation  and  rationalisation  of  the  relig- 
ious feeling  becomes  insulated  within  itself,  philosophical  knowl- 
edge begins  to  mark  off  anew  for  itself  the  province  of  purely 
theoretical  investigation. 

From  this  multiplicity  of  variously  interwoven  threads  of  tradi- 
tion with  which  ancient  science  weaves  its  fabric  on  into  the  Middle 
Ages,  we  can  understand  the  wealth  of  colour  in  which  the  philosophy 
of  this  thousand  years  spreads  out  before  historical  research.  In 
the  frequent  exchange  of  friendly  and  hostile  contact,  these  elements 
of  a  tradition  changing  in  compass  and  content  from  century  to 
century  play  back  and  forth  to  form  ever  new  pictures ;  a  surprising 
fineness  in  the  transitions  and  shadings  becomes  developed  as  these 
elements  are  woven  together,  and  thus  there  is  developed  also  a 
wealth  of  life  in  the  work  of  thought,  which  manifests  itself  in  a 
considerable  number  of  interesting  personalities,  in  an  astonishing 


268  Mediaeval  Philosophy.  [PART  III 

amount  of  literary  production,  and  in  a  passionate  agitation  of  scien- 
tific controversies. 

Such  living  variety  in  form  has  as  yet  by  no  means  everywhere 
received  full  justice  at  the  hands  of  literary-historical  research,1  but 
the  main  lines  of  this  development  lie  before  us  clearly  and  dis- 
tinctly enough  for  the  history  of  philosophic  principles,  which 
nevertheless  finds  but  a  meagre  field  in  this  period  for  the  reasons 
already  adduced.  We  must,  indeed,  be  on  our  guard  against  aiming  to 
reduce  the  complex  movement  of  this  process  to  formulas  that  are 
all  too  simple,  and  against  overlooking  the  multitude  of  positive 
and  negative  relations  that  have  come  and  gone  in  shifting  forms 
between  the  elements  of  ancient  tradition  which  found  their  en- 
trance in  the  course  of  centuries  by  irregular  intervals  into  mediaeval 
thought. 

In  general,  the  course  of  science  among  the  European  peoples  of 
the  Middle  Ages  proceeded  along  the  following  lines. 

The  profound  doctrine  of  Augustine  had  its  first  efficiency,  not  in 
the  direction  of  its  philosophical  significance,  but  as  an  authoritative 
presentation  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Church.  Side  by  side  with  this 
a  Neo-Platonic  Mysticism  maintained  itself,  and  scientific  schooling 
was  limited  to  unimportant  compendiums,  and  to  fragments  of  the 
Aristotelian  logic.  Nevertheless,  a  logico-metaphysical  problem  of 
great  importance  developed  from  the  elaboration  of  the  logic, 
and  about  this  problem  arose  a  highly  vigorous  movement  of 
thought,  which,  however,  threatened  to  degenerate  into  barren  for- 
malism in  consequence  of  the  lack  in  knowledge  to  form  the  content 
of  thought.  In  contrast  with  this  the  Augustinian  psychology 
began  gradually  to  assert  its  mighty  force ;  and  at  the  same  time  the 
first  effects  of  contact  with  Arabian  science  disclosed  themselves,  a 
science  to  which  the  West  owed,  primarily  at  least,  a  certain  stimulus 
toward  employment  with  realities,  and  further  a  complete  widening 


1  The  grounds  for  this  lie,  certainly  in  part,  in  the  but  gradually  vanishing 
prejudices  which  long  stood  in  the  way  of  a  just  appreciation  of  the  Middle 
Ages ;  hut  in  no  less  a  degree  they  lie  also  in  this  literature  itself.  The  circum- 
stantial and  yet  for  the  most  part  sterile  prolixity  of  the  investigations,  the 
schematic  uniformity  of  the  methods,  the  constant  repetition  and  turning  of 
the  arguments,  the  lavish  expenditure  of  acuteness  upon  artificial  and  sometimes 
absolutely  silly  questions,  the  uninteresting  witticisms  of  the  schools,  — all  these 
are  features  which  perhaps  belong  inevitably  to  the  process  of  learning,  appro- 
priating, and  practising,  which  mediaeval  philosophy  sets  forth,  but  they  bring 
with  them  the  consequence  that  in  the  study  of  this  part  of  the  history  of  phi- 
losophy the  mass  of  the  material,  and  the  toil  involved  in  its  elaboration,  stand 
in  an  unfavourable  relation  to  the  real  results.  So  it  has  come  about  that  just 
those  investigators  who  have  gone  deeply,  with  industry  and  perseverance,  into 
mediaeval  philosophy  have  often  not  refrained  from  a  harsh  expression  of  ill- 
humour  as  to  the  object  of  their  research. 


MedioBval  Philosophy.  269 

and  transformation  of  its  horizon.  This  development  was  in  the 
main  attached  to  the  acquaintance  gained  by  such  by-ways  with  the 
entire  system  of  Aristotle,  and  the  immediate  consequence  of  this 
acquaintance  was  that  the  structure  of  Church  doctrine  was  pro- 
jected in  the  grandest  style  and  carefully  wrought  out  in  all  its 
parts  with  the  help  of  his  fundamental  metaphysical  conceptions. 
Meanwhile  Aristotelianism  had  been  accepted  from  the  Arabians 
(and  Jews)  not  only  in  their  Latin  translation,  but  also  with  their 
commentaries,  and  in  their  interpretation  which  was  under  strong 
Neo-Platonic  influence ;  and  while  by  this  means  the  ^"eo-Platonic 
elements  in  previous  tradition,  even  in  the  Augustinian  form,  found 
vigorous  confirmation  in  various  directions,  the  specific  elements  of 
the  Augustinian  metaphysics  were  forced  into  sharper  and  more 
energetic  expression,  in  violent  reaction  against  the  3Teo-Platonic 
tendency.  Thus  while  both  sides  lean  upon  Aristotelianism,  a  cleft 
in  scientific  thought  is  produced,  which  finds  its  expression  in  the 
separation  of  theology  and  philosophy.  This  cleft  became  widened 
by  a  new  and  not  less  complicated  movement.  Empirical  research 
in  medicine  and  natural  science  had  also  made  its  way  from  the 
East,  hand  in  hand  with  Aristotelianism ;  it  began  now  to  rise  also 
among  the  European  peoples ;  it  conquered  the  domain  of  psychology 
not  without  assistance  from  the  Augustinian  current,  and  favoured 
the  development  of  the  Aristotelian  logic  in  a  direction  which  led 
far  from  the  churchly  Aristotelian  metaphysics.  And  while  thus 
the  interwoven  threads  of  tradition  were  separating  on  all  sides,  the 
fine  filaments  of  new  beginnings  were  already  finding  their  way  into 
this  loosening  web. 

With  such  various  relations  of  mutual  support  or  retardation, 
and  with  such  numerous  changes  of  front,  the  thoughts  of  ancient 
philosophy  move  through  the  Middle  Ages ;  but  the  most  important 
and  decisive  turn  was  doubtless  the  reception  of  Aristotelianism^  which 
became  complete  about  the  year  1200.  This  divides  the  whole 
field  naturally  into  two  sections  which  in  their  philosophical  import 
are  so  related  that  the  interests  and  the  problems,  the  antitheses 
and  the  movements,  of  the  first  period  are  repeated  in  broader,  and 
at  the  same  time  deeper,  form  in  the  second.  The  relation  of  these 
two  divisions,  therefore,  cannot  be  generally  designated  in  this  case 
by  differences  in  the  subject  matter. 


CHAPTER  I.     FIRST  PERIOD. 

(UNTIL  ABOUT  1200.) 
W.  Kaulich,  Geschichte  der  scholastichen  Philosophic,  I.  Theil.    Prague,  1863. 

THE  line  of  thought  in  which  mediaeval  philosophy  essentially 
moved,  and  in  which,  it  continued  the  principles  of  the  philosophy 
of  antiquity,  was  prescribed  for  it  by  the  doctrine  of  Augustine. 
He  had  moved  the  principle  of  internality  (InnerlichTceit) ,  which 
had  been  preparing  in  the  whole  closing  development  of  ancient 
science,  for  the  first  time  into  the  controlling  central  position  of 
philosophic  thought,  and  the  position  to  which  he  is  entitled  in 
the  history  of  philosophy  is  that  of  the  beginner  of  a  new  line  of 
development.  For  the  bringing  together  of  all  lines  of  the  Patristic 
as  well  as  the  Hellenistic  philosophy  of  his  time,  which  he  com- 
pletely accomplished,  was  possible  only  as  these  were  consciously 
united  in  that  new  thought  which  was  itself  to  become  the  germ  of 
the  philosophy  of  the  future.  But  only  of  a  more  distant  future : 
his  philosophical  originality  passed  over  his  contemporaries  and  the 
immediately  following  centuries  without  effect.  Within  the  circuit 
of  the  old  civilisation  the  creative  power  of  thought  had  become 
extinguished,  and  the  new  peoples  could  only  gradually  grow  -into 
scientific  work. 

In  the  cloister  and  court  schools  which  formed  the  seats  of  this 
newly  beginning  civilisation,  permission  for  instruction  in  dialectic 
by  the  side  of  the  arts  most  necessary  for  the  training  of  the  clergy 
had  to  be  conquered  step  by  step.  For  this  elementary  logical 
instruction  they  possessed  in  the  first  centuries  of  the  Middle  Ages 
only  the  two  least  important  treatises  of  the  Aristotelian  Organon, 
J)e  Categoriis  and  De  Interpretatione,  in  a  Latin  translation  with 
the  introduction  of  Porphyry,  and  a  number  of  commentaries  of 
the  Neo-Platonic  time,  in  particular  those  of  Boethius.  For  the 
material  of  knowledge  (of  the  Quadrivium)  they  used  the  com- 
pendiums  of  departing  antiquity,  which  had  been  prepared  by 
Marcianus  Capella,  Cassiodorus,  and  Isidorus  of  Sevilla.  Of  the 

270 


CHAP.  1.]  First  Period.  271 

great  original  works  of   ancient    philosophy,   only  the  Platonic 
Timceus  in  the  translation  of  Chalcidius  was  known. 

Under  these  circumstances,  scientific  activity  in  the  schools  was 
mainly  directed  toward  learning  and  practising  the  schematism  of 
formal  logic,  and  the  treatment  even  of  the  material  parts  of  knowl- 
edge, in  particular  of  religious  dogma  which  was  indeed  regarded 
as  something  essentially  complete  and  in  its  contents  unassailable, 
took  the  direction  of  elaborating  and  setting  forth  what  was  given 
and  handed  down  by  tradition,  in  the  forms  and  according  to  the 
rules  of  the  Aristotelian-Stoic  logic.  In  this  process  the  main  em- 
phasis must  necessarily  fall  upon  formal  arrangement,  upon  the 
formation  and  division  of  class-concepts,  upon  correct  syllogistic 
conclusions.  Already  in  the  Orient  the  ancient  school  logic  had 
been  put  into  the  service  of  a  rigidly  articulated  development  of 
Church  doctrine  by  John  Damascenus,  and  now  this  took  place  in 
the  schools  of  the  West  also. 

Meanwhile  this  pursuit,  which  had  its  basis  in  the  conditions  of 
the  tradition,  had  not  only  the  didactic  value  of  a  mental  exercise 
in  the  appropriation  of  material,  but  also  the  consequence  that  the 
beginnings  of  independent  reflection  necessarily  took  the  direction 
of  an  inquiry  as  to  the  significance  of  logical  relations,  and  so  we 
find  emerging  early  in  the  Western  literature,  investigations  as  to 
the  relation  of  the  conception  on  the  one  hand  to  the  word,  and  on 
the  other  to  the  thing. 

The  problem  thus  formed  became  strengthened  by  a  peculiar  com- 
plication. By  the  side  of  the  Church  doctrine  there  persisted,  half 
tolerated  and  half  condemned,  a  mystical  transmission  of  Chris- 
tianity in  Neo-Platonic  form.  It  went  back  to  writings  which  had 
arisen  in  the  fifth  century,  but  which  were  ascribed  to  Dionysius 
the  Areopagite,  and  it  gained  wider  extension  when  these  writings 
were  translated  in  the  ninth  century  by  John  Scotus  Erigena,  and 
made  the  basis  of  his  own  doctrine.  In  this  doctrine,  however, 
a  main  point  was  that  identification  of  the  different  grades  of  ab- 
straction with  the  stages  of  metaphysical  reality,  which  had  been 
already  propounded  in  the  older  Platonism  and  in  Neo-Platonism 

(of.  §20,  8). 

In  consequence  of  these  incitements  the  question  as  to  the  meta- 
physical significance  of  logical  genera  became,  during  the  next  centuries, 
the  centre  of  philosophic  thought.  About  this  were  grouped  the 
other  logical  and  metaphysical  problems,  and  the  answer  given  to 
this  question  decided  the  party  position  of  individual  thinkers. 
Amid  the  great  variety  of  decisions  given  in  this  controversy  over 
universals,  three  tendencies  are  prominent:  JKeaZism,  which  main- 


272  Mediaeval  Philosophy.  [PART  III. 

tains  the  independent  existence  of  genera  and  species,  is  the  doctrine 
of  Anselm  of  Canterbury,  of  William  of  Champeaux,  and  of  the 
Platonists  proper,  among  whom  Bernard  of  Chartres  is  prominent ; 
Nominalism,  which  sees  in  universals  only  designations  or  terms 
which  apply  commonly,  is  defended  in  this  period  principally  by 
Eoscellinus;  finally  a  mediating  theory,  which  has  been  called 
Conceptualism  or  Sermonism,  is  attached  principally  to  the  name  of 
Ahelard. 

These  conflicts  came  to  an  issue  principally  in  the  endless  dispu- 
tations at  the  Paris  University,  which  for  this  period  and  on  into 
the  following  period  formed  the  centre  of  scientific  life  in  Europe ; 
and  these  battles,  conducted  with  all  the  arts  of  dialectical  dexterity, 
exercised  upon  this  age  a  fascinating  power  like  that  which  the 
disputes  of  the  Sophists  and  Socratic  circles  had  once  exercised 
upon  the  Greeks.  Here  as  there  the  unreflective  life  of  the  popular 
consciousness  was  awakened  to  thought,  and  here  as  there  wider 
circles  were  seized  by  a  feverish  thirst  for  knowledge,  and  by  a  pas- 
sionate desire  to  take  part  in  such  hitherto  unwonted  intellectual 
games.  Far  beyond  the  narrow  circles  of  the  clergy,  who  had  pre- 
viously been  the  transmitters  of  scientific  tradition,  the  impulse 
toward  knowledge,  thus  awakened,  forced  its  way  to  the  surface. 

But  this  excessive  vigour  in  dialectical  development  found  at  the 
same  time  manifold  opposition.  In  fact,  it  hid  within  itself  a  seri- 
ous danger.  This  brilliant  performance,  in  which  abstract  thought 
proved  its  power,  lacked  all  basis  of  real  knowledge.  With  its  dis- 
tinctions and  conclusigns  it  was  carrying  on  to  a  certain  extent  a 
juggler's  game  in  the  open  air,  which  indeed  set  the  formal  mental 
powers  into  beneficial  motion,  but  which,  in  spite  of  all  its  turns  and 
windings,  could  lead  to  no  material  knowledge.  Hence,  from  intelli- 
gent men  like  Gerbert,  who  had  received  information  from  the  empir- 
ical studies  of  the  Arabians,  went  out  the  admonition  to  abandon 
the  formalism  of  the  schools  and  turn  to  the  careful  examination 
of  Nature  and  to  the  tasks  of  practical  civilisation. 

But  while  such  a  call  still  echoed  mainly  unheard,  dialectic  met  a 
more  forcible  resistance  in  the  piety  of  faith  and  in  the  power  of  the 
Church.  The  result  was  inevitable  that  the  logical  working  over  of 
the  metaphysics  of  the  Church's  faith,  and  the  consequences  which 
were  developed  in  the  strife  about  universals,  — at  first  without  any 
reference  to  their  religious  bearing,  —  should  come  into  contradiction 
with  the  dogma  of  the  Church ;  and  the  more  this  was  repeated,  the 
more  dialectic  appeared  not  only  superfluous  for  the  simply  pious 
mind,  but  also  dangerous  to  the  interests  of  the  Church.  In  this 
spirit  it  was  attacked,  sometimes  with  extreme  violence,  by  the 


CHAP.  1.]  First  Period.  273 

orthodox  Mystics,  among  whom  the  most  combative  was  Bernard  of 
Clairvaux,  while  the  Yictorines  turned  back  from  the  excesses  of 
dialectical  arrogance  to  the  study  of  Augustine,  and  sought  to  bring 
out  the  rich  treasure  of  inner  experience  which  his  writings  con- 
tained, by  transferring  the  fundamental  thoughts  of  his  psychology 
from  the  metaphysical  to  the  empirical  sphere. 

Aurelius  Augnsttaus  (354-430),  born  at  Thagaste  m  ^umidia,  and  educated 
for  a  jurist  there  and  also  in  Madaura  in  Carthage,  passed  through  in  his  youth 
almost  all  phases  of  the  scientific  and  religious  movement  of  his  time.  He 
sought  at  first  in  Maniehseism.  religioiis  relief  for  his  burning  doubts,  then  fell 
into  the  Academic  Scepticism  which  he  had  early  absorbed  from  Cicero,  passed 
over  from  this  gradually  to  the  Neo-Platonic  doctrine,  and  was  at  last  won  by 
Ambrose,  Bishop  of  Milan,  for  Christianity,  whose  philosopher  he  was  to  become. 

As  priest,  and  later  as  bishop  at  Hippo  Regius,  he  was  unwearied  in  practical 
and  literary  activity  for  the  unity  of  the  Christian  Church  and  doctrine;  his 
doctrinal  system  was  developed  especially  in  the  Donatist  and  Pelagian  contro- 
Tersies.  Among  his  works  (in  Migne's  collection,  16  vols.,  Paris,  1835  ff.  [tr. 
ed.  by  Dods,  15  vols.,  Edin.  1871-77  ;  also  in  Schafi's  lib.,  Xicene  and  Post- 
Nicene  Fathers,  Vols.  1-8,  Buffalo,  1886-88]  )  those  of  chief  importance  for 
philosophy  are  his  autobiographical  Confessions,  and  further  Contra  Academi- 
cos,  De  Beata  Vita,  De  Ordine,  De  Quantitate  Aninice,  De  Libero  ArMtrio,  De 
Trinitate,  Soliloquia,  De  Immortalitate  Animce  f  De  Givitate  Dei.  —  Cf.  C.  Binde- 
mann,  Der.  hlg.  A.  (3  Bde.  1844-1869).  —  Fr.  BobrwgQT,  Kirchengeschichte  in 
JBwgraphien,  XL  Bd.  in  2  Thl.  (Stuttgart,  1877-78).  —  A.  Dorner,  A.  (Berlin, 
1873).  —  W.  Dilthey,  EMeitung  in  die  Geistesicissenschqften,  I.  (Leips.  1883), 
pp.  322  ff.  —  J.  Storz,  Die  Philos.  des  hlg.  A.  (lYeiburg,  1892). 


els  T&S  KCLTyyopLas  of  Porphyry  (ed.  by  Busse,  Berlin,  1887),  in 
its  translation  by  Boethius,  gave  the  external  occasion  for  the  controversy  over 
universals.  Boethius  (470-525),  aside  from  this,  exercised  an  influence  upon 
the  early  Middle  Ages  by  his  translations  and  commentaries  upon  the  two 
Aristotelian  treatises,  and  upon  a  number  of  Cicero's  writings.  In  addition  to 
his  books  there  were  still  others  which  circulated  under  the  name  of  Augustine. 
Cf.  Prantl,  Gesch.  d.  Log-  im  AbendL,  II.,  and  A.  Jourdain,  ftecherches  antiques 
sur  rUge  et  Porigine  des  traductions  latines  d1  Aristotle  (Paris,  2  ed.,  1843). 

Among  the  scientific  encyclopedias  of  departing  antiquity,  Marcianus  Capella 
(from  Carthage,  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century),  in  his  Satyricon  (ed.  by 
Eyssenhardt,  Leips.  1866),  after  his  whimsical  introduction  De  2?uptiis  Mercurti 
et  Philologies,  treats  the  seven  liberal  arts,  of  which,  as  is  well  known,  in.  the 
activity  of  the  schools  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  dialectic  formed  the  Triviuin, 
arithmetic,  geometry,  astronomy,  and  music,  including  poetics,  the  Quadrivium. 
A  valuable  commentary  on  Capella  was  written  later  by  Scotus  Erigena  (ed.  by 
B.  HaurSau,  Paris,  1861).  —  The  Institutiones  Dinnanim  et  Sascitlarium  Lec- 
tionum  and  De  Artibus  ac  Disciplinis  Litterarum  Liberalium  of  the  Senator  Cas- 
siodorus  (480-570,  Works,  Paris,  1588),  and  the  Originum  sire  Etymologiarum, 
LibriXX.  (in  Migne)  of  Isidorus  Hispalensis  (died  636)  are  already  completely 
upon  theological  ground.  John  Damascenus  (about  700)  in  his  1197777  yvtiffew 
(Works,  Venice,  1748)  gave  the  classical  example  for  the  employment  of  the 
ancient  school  logic  in  the  service  of  systematising  the  Church  doctrines. 

While  the  storms  of  the  national  migrations  were  blustering  upon  the  conti- 
nent, scientific  study  had  fled  to  the  British  Isles,  in  particular  to  Ireland,  and 
later  flourished  to  a  certain  extent  .in  the  school  at  York  under  the  Venerable 
Bede.  From  here  learned  education  was  won  back  to  the  continent  through 
Alcuin,  upon  the  inducement  of  Charles  the  Great  ;  beside  the  episcopal  and  the 
cloister  schools  arose  the  palatinal  school,  whose  seat  was  fixed  by  Charles  the 
Bald  at  Paris.  The  most  important  cloister  schools  were  those  of  Fulda  and 
Tours.  At  the  former  worked  Babanus  (Rhaban)  Maurus  (of  Mainz,  776-856  ; 
De  TJniverso,  Libri  XZT7.),  and  Eric  (Heiricus)  -of  Auxerre;  from  it  went  out, 
at  the  end  of  the  ninth  century,  Bemigius  of  Auxerre  and  the  probable  author 


274  Mediceval  Philosophy.  [PART  EL 

of  the  commentary  Super  Porphyrium  (printed  in  Cousin's  Outrages  Inedits 
&  Abelard,  Paris,  1836).  In  Tours  Alcuin  was  followed  by  the  Abbot  Frede- 
glsus,  whose  letter,  De  Xihilo  et  Tenebris,  is  preserved  (in  Migne,  Vol.  105). 
Later  the  cloister  at  St.  Gall  (Notker  Labeo,  died  1022)  formed  a  principal  seat 
oi  scientific  tradition. 

Cf .  also  for  the  literary  relations,  the  JSistoire  Litteraire  de  la  France. 

The  writings  ascribed  to  the  Areopagite  (cf.  Acts  of  the  Apostles,'  17 : 34), 
among  which  those  of  chief  importance  are  irepl  fj.v<rrtKTjs  9eo\oyias  and  ircpi  TTJS 
iepa/>x£as  ovpaviov  (in  Migne  ;  German  by  Engelhardt,  Sulzbach,  1823),  show  the 
same  mixture  of  Christian  and  Neo-Platonic  philosophy  which  appeared  fre- 
quently in  the  Orient  (the  result  of  Origen's  influence)  and  in  an  especially 
characteristic  form  in  the  Bishop  Synesius  (about  400  ;  cf.  K.  Volkmann,  S.  von 
Gyrene,  Berlin,  1869).  The  above-named  writings  of  the  Pseudo-Dionysius, 
which  probably  arose  in  the  fifth  century,  are  first  mentioned,  532,  and  their 
genuineness  is"  there  contested;  nevertheless,  this  was  defended  by  Maximus 
Confessor  (580-602  ;  De  Yariis  Difficilioribus  Locis  Patnun  Dionysii  et  Gregorii, 
ed.  Denier/ Halle,  1857). 

In  connection  with  this  Mysticism  develops  the  first  important  scientific 
personality  of  the  Middle  Ages,  John  Scotus  Erigena  (sometimes  Jerugena, 
from  Ireland,  about  810-880),  of  whose  life  it  is  certainly  known  that  he  was 
called  by  Charles  the  Bald  to  the  court  school  at  Paris,  and  was  for  a  time 
active  there.  He  translated  the  writings  of  the  Areopagite,  wrote  against 
Gottschalk  the  treatise  De  Pr%destmatione,  and  put  his  own  theories  into  his 
mam  work,  De  Dmsione  Xaturce  (German  by  Noack,  Leips.  1870-76).  The 
works  form  Vol.  122  in  Migne's  collection.  Cf.  J.  Huber,  J.  8.  E.  (Munich,  1861). 

Anselm  of  Canterbury  (1033-1109)  came  from  Aosta,  was  active  for  a  long 
time  in  the  Gorman  cloister  at  Bee,  and  was  called  to  become  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury  hi  1093.  Of  his  works  (Migne,  Vol.  155)  the  most  important  for 
philosophy  besides  the  treatise  Our  Deus  Homo?  are  the  Monologium  and  the 
Proslogiifm.  The  two  latter  are  edited  by  C.  Haas  (Tubingen,  18G3),  together 
with  the  refutation  of  a  monk,  Gaunilo  (in  the  cloister  Marmoutier  near  Tours), 
Liber  pro  Insipiente*  and  the  reply  of  Anselm.  Cf.  Ch.  Remusat,  A.  de  (7., 
tableau  de  la  vie  monastique  et  de  la  lutte  du  pouvoir  spirituel  avec  le  pouvoir 
temporel  an  21™  siecle  (2d  ed.,  Paris,  1868). 

"William  of  Champeaux  (died  1121  as  Bishop  of  Cnalons-sur-Marne)  was  a 
teacher  who  was  much  heard  at  the  cathedral  school  in  Paris,  and  established 
studies  there  in  the  Augustinian  cloister  at  St.  Victor.  We  are  chiefly  informed 
as  to  his  philosophical  views  by  his  opponent  Abelard ;  his  logical  treatise  is  lost. 
Cf.  E.  Michaud,  G-.  de  Ch.  et  les  ecoles  de  Pans  an  12me  siecle  (Paris,  1868). 

The  Flatonism  of  the  earlier  Middle  Ages  attached  itself  essentially  to  the 
Timazus,  and  under  the  influence  of  the  Neo-Platonic  interpretation  gave  to  the 
doctrine  of  Ideas  a  form  which  did  not  completely  correspond  to  the  original 
sense.  The  most  important  figure  in  this  line  is  Bernard  of  Chartres  (in  the 
first  half  of  the  twelfth  century).  His  work  De  Nundi  Universitate  sive  Mega- 
cosmus  et  Microcosmus  has  been  edited  by  C.  S.  Barach  (Innsbruck,  1876). 
William  of  Conches  (Magna  de  Naturis  Philosophia  ;  Dragmaticon  Philoso- 
phice)  and  Walter  of  Montagne  are  regarded  as  his  disciples.  Ad&ard  of 
Bath  also  wrote  in  the  same  spirit  (De  Eodem  et  Diverso  ;  Questiones  Naturales). 

Roscellinus  of  America  in  Brittany'  came  forward  as  teacher  at  various 
places,  especially  at  Locmenach  where  Abelard  was  his  hearer,  and  was 
obliged  to  retract  his  opinions  at  the  Council  at  Soissons.  Of  his  own  writings 
only  a  letter  to  Abelard  is  extant  (printed  in  the  Abhandl.  der  bair.  Akad.,  1851)  ; 
the  sources  for  his  doctrine  are  Anselm,  Abelard,  John  of  Salisbury. 

Abelard  (Abeillard) ,  the  most  impressive  and  energetic  personality  among 
the  thinkers  of  this  period,  was  born  1079  at  Pallet,  in  the  county  of  Nantes, 
and  was  a  pupil  of  William  of  Champeauz  and  of  Roscellinus.  His  own  activity 
as  a  teacher  was  developed  at  Melun  and  Corbeil,  and  most  successfully  in 
Paris  at  the  cathedral  school,  and  at  the  logical  school  St.  Genevifcve.  The 
misfortune  into  which  his  well-known  relationship  to  Heloise  plunged  him,  and 
the  conflicts  into  which  his  tea-ching  brought  him  with  the  Church  authority, 
chiefly  at  the  instigation  of  his  unwearied  prosecutor,  Bernard  of  Clairvauz 


CHAP.  1.]  First  Period.  275 

(Synods  at  Soissons  1121,  and  Sens  1141),  did  not  allow  the  restless  man  to 
attain  complete  clearness  in  his  mind,  and  impelled  him  to  seek  resting-places 
in  various  cloisters  :  he  died  1142  in  St.  Marcel,  near  ChjUons-sur-Saone.  Cf .  his 
Historic!,  Calamitatum  Jlearum,  and  his  correspondence  with  Heloise  (M.  Car- 
riere,  A.  u.  H.t  2d  ed.,  Giessen,  1853).  His  works  have  been  edited  by  V.  Cousin 
in  two  volumes  (Paris,  1849-59).  Among  these  the  most  important  are  his 
Dialectic,  Introductio  in  Theologium,  Theologia  Christiana,  Dialogus  inter 
PMlosophum,  Christianum  et  Judceum,  the  treatise  Sic  et  Son,  and  the  ethical 
treatise  Scito  Te  Ipsum.  Cf.  Ch.  d.  Eemusat,  Abelard  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1845). 

A  number  of  anonymous  treatises  (published  by  V.  Cousin)  occupy  a  position 
allied  to  that  of  Abelard.  Of  this  description  are  a  commentary  on  De  Interpre- 
tations, De  Intellectibus,  and  De  Genenbus  et  Speciebus  (the  latter  is  possibly 
from  Joscellinus,  a  Bishop  of  Soissons  who  died  1151),  Related  to  Abelard  is 
also  the  philosophico-theological  position  of  Gilbert  de  la  PorrSe  (Gilbertus 
Porretanus,  died  1154  as  Bishop  of  Poitiers),  who  taught  in  Chartres  and  Paris, 
and  was  drawn  into  the  prosecution  of  'Abelard  by  Bernard  of  Clairvaux, 
Besides  a  commentary  on  the  De  Tmutate  and  De  Ditabus  Xaturis  in  Christo 
of  Pseudo-Boethius,  he  wrote  the  De  sex  Principiis,  which  was  much  com- 
mented upon  later. 

The  consequences  of  the  tk  dialectic  "  that  were  objectionable  for  the  Church 
showed  themselves  at  an  early  date  especially  with  Berengar  of  Tours  (999- 
1088),  whose  doctrine  of  the  Sacrament  was  combated  by  Lanfranc  (1005- 
1089,  Anselm's  predecessor  at  Bee  and  Canterbury).  The  latter  is  probably 
the  author  of  the  treatise  formerly  ascribed  to  Anselm  and  printed  among  his 
works,  Mlucidarium  sire  Dialogus  Summam  Totius  Theologies  Complectens. 
In  this  compendium  the  effort  first  appears  to  give  the  whole  compass  of  what 
had  been  established  by  the  Church,  in  the  form  of  a  logically  arranged  text- 
book, putting  aside  dialectical  innovations.  Prom  this  proceeded  later  the 
works  of  the  Snmrrrists  [so  called  from  their  writings  which  took  the  form  of 
a  "Sum"  of  theology],  among  whom  the  most  important  is  Peter  Lombard 
(died  1164  as  Bishop  of  Paris).  His  Libri  IV*  Sententiarum  form  Vol.  192  in 
Migne.  Among  the  earlier  we  may  perhaps  mention  Robert  Pulleyn  (Robertus 
Pullus,  died  1150)  ;  among  the  later,  Peter  of  Poitiers  (died  1205)  and  Alanus 
Ryssel  ("ab  insulis"  ;  died  1203).  Cf.  on  him  Baumgartner  (Monster,  18(Jt>). 

Gerbert  (died  1003  as  Pope  Sylvester  H.)  has  the  merit  of  having  pointed 
out  energetically  the  necessity  of  the  study  of  mathematics  and  natural  science. 
He  became  acquainted  with  the  work  of  the  Arabians  while  in  Spain  and  Italy, 
and  acquired  an  amount  of  knowledge  that  made  him  an  object  of  amazement 
and  suspicion  to  his  contemporaries.  Cf.  K.  Werner,  @.  von  Aurillac,  die 
Kirche  und  Wissenschafi  seiner  Zeit  (2d  ed.,  Vienna,  1881).  Like  him  his 
disciple,  Tulbert  (died  1029  as  Bishop  of  Chartres),  called  men  back  from 
dialectic  to  simple  piety,  and  in  the  same  spirit  HUdebert  of  Lavardin  was 
active  (1057-1133,  Bishop  of  Tours). 

The  same  thing  was  done  upon  a  large  scale  by  the  orthodox  Mysticism  of 
the  twelfth  century.  As  its  most  zealous  supporter  we  are  met  by  Bernard  of 
Clairvaux  (1091-1153) .  Among  his  writings  those  prominent  are  De  Co ntemptu 
Mundi,  and  De  Gradibus  Eumilitatis  (ed.  by  Mabillon,  last  ed.,  Paris,  1839  1). 
Cf .  Neander,  Der  heilige  B.  und  seine  Zeit  (3d  ed.,  1865)  ;  Morison,  Life  and 
Times  of  St.  B.  (Lond.  1868)  ;  [R.  S.  Storrs,  B.  of  C.  (N.Y.  1892)]. 

Mysticism  became  scientifically  fruitful  among  the  Victorines,  the  conduc- 
tors of  the  cloister  school  of  St,  Victor,  in  Paris.  The  most  important  was  Hugo 
of  St.  Victor  (born  1096  as  Count  of  Blankenburg  in  the  Harz,  died  1141). 
Among  his  works  (in  Migne,  Vols.  175-177)  the  most  important  is  De  Sacra- 
mentis  Fidei  Christiana;  for  the  psychology  of  Mysticism  the  most  important 
works  are  the  Soliloguium  de  Arrha  Animce,  De  Area  Noe  and  De  Vanitate 
Mundi,  and  besides  these  the  encyclopedic  work  Eruditio  Didascalica.  —  Cf .  A. 
Liebner,  H.  v.  8t.  V.  und  die  theoloaischen  Richtungen  seiner  Zeit  (Leips.  1836). 

His  pupil,  Richard  of  St.  Victor  (a  Scot,  died  1173),  wrote  De  Stutu,  De 
Eruditione  Hominis  Interioris,  De  Preparation  Animi  ad  Contemplationem, 
and  De  Gratia .  Contemplationis.  His  works  form  Vol.  194  in  Migne.  Cf. 
W.  A.  Kaulich,  Die  Lehren  des  H.  und  E.  wn  St.  V.  (in  the  Abhandl  der 
Mhm.  Ges.  der  Wiss.,  1863  1).  His  successor,  Walter  of  St.  Victor,  disttn- 


276  Mediceval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  in. 

guished  himself  in  a  less  scientific  polemic  against  the  heretical  dialectic  (Jw 
Quattuor  Labyrinthos  Francias}. 

At  the  close  of  this  period  appear  the  beginnings  of  a  Humanist  reaction 
against  the  one-sidedness  of  the  work  of  the  schools,  in  John  of  Salisbury 
(Johannes  Saresberiensis,  died  1180  as  Bishop  of  Chartres),  whose  writings  Poli- 
craticus  and  Ifetalogicus  (Migne,  Vol.  199)  form  a  valuable  source  for  the 
scientific  life  of  the  time.  Cf.  C.  Schaarschmidt,  /.  S.  nach  Leben  und  Studien, 
Schnften  und  Philosophic  (Leips.  1862). 

§  22,  The  Metaphysics  of  Inner  Experience. 

The  philosophy  of  the  great  Church  teacher  Augustine  is  not 
presented  in  any  of  his  works  as  a  complete  system;  rather,  it 
develops  incidentally  in  all  his  literary  activity  in  connection  with 
the  treatment  of  various  subjects,  for  the  most  part  theological. 
But  from  this  work  as  a  whole  we  receive  the  peculiar  impression 
that  these  rich  masses  of  thought  are  in  motion  in  two  different 
directions,  and  are  held  together  only  by  the  powerful  personality 
of  the  man.  As  theologian  Augustine  throughout  all  his  investi- 
gations keeps  the  conception  of  the  Church  in  mind,  as  criterion ;  as 
philosopher  he  makes  all  his  ideas  centre  about  the  principle  of  the 
absolute  and  immediate  certainty  (Selbstgeidssheit)  of  consciousness. 
By  their  double  relation  to  these  two  fixed  postulates,  all  questions 
come  into  active  flux.  Augustine's  world  of  thought  is  like  an 
elliptic  system  which  is  constructed  by  motion  about  two  centres, 
and  this,  its  inner  duality,  is  frequently  that  of  contradiction.1 

It  becomes  the  task  of  the  history  of  philosophy  to  separate  from 
this  complicated  system  those  ideas  by  which  Augustine  far  tran- 
scended his  time  and  likewise  the  immediately  following  centuries, 
and  became  one  of  the  founders  of  modern  thought.  All  these  ideas, 
however,  have  their  ultimate  ground  and  inner  union  in  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  immediate  certainty  of  inner  experience  (selbstgewissen 
InnerUchkeit),  which  Augustine  first  expressed  with  complete  clear- 
ness, and  formulated  and  used  as  the  starting-point  of  philosophy. 
Under  the  influence  of  the  ethical  and  religious  interest,  metaphys- 
ical interest  had  become  gradually  and  almost  imperceptibly  shifted 
from  the  sphere  of  the  outer  to  that  of  the  inner  life.  Psychical 
conceptions  had  taken  the  place  of  physical,  as  the  fundamental 
factors  in  the  conception  of  the  world.  It  was  reserved  for  Augus- 
tine to  bring  into  full  and  conscious  use,  this,  which  had  already 
become  an  accomplished  fact  in  Origen  and  Plotinus.2 

1  It  is  unmistakable  that  Augustine  himself  ha  the  course  of  his  development 
transferred  the  emphasis  of  his  personality  more  and  more  from  the  philosophi- 
cal to  the  Church  centre.    This  comes  forward  with  especial  distinctness  in  his 
backward  look  over  his  own  literary  activity,  the  Retractationes. 

2  Aug.  De  Ver.  Eel.  39,  72.    Noli  foras  ire;  in  te  ipsum  redi:  IN  INTERIORE 
HOMI:N-E  habitat  veritas. 


CHAP.  1,  §  22.]  Metaphysics  of  Inner  Experience:  Augustine.  277 

This  tendency  toward  inner  experience  even  constitutes  his  pecu- 
liar literary  quality.  Augustine  is  a  virtuoso  in  self-observation 
and  self -analysis ;  he  has  a  mastery  in  the  portrayal  of  psychical 
states,  which  is  as  admirable  as  is  his  ability  to  analyse  these  in 
reflection  and  lay  bare  the  deepest  elements  of  feeling  and  impulse. 
Just  for  this  reason  it  is  from  this  source  almost  exclusively  that 
he  draws  the  views  with  which  his  metaphysics  seeks  to  compre- 
hend the  universe.  So  there  begins,  as  over  against  the  Greek 
philosophy,  a  new  course  of  development,  which  indeed,  during 
the  Middle  Ages,  made  but  little  progress  beyond  what  was  achieved 
by  Augustine  in  his  first  cast,  and  the  full  development  of  which  is 
not  to  be  found  until  the  modern  period. 

1.  This  makes  its  appearance  clearly  already  in  Augustine's 
doctrine  of  the  starting-point  of  philosophical  knowledge.  In  cor- 
respondence with  the  course  of  his  personal  development  he  seeks 
the  way  to  certainty  through  doubt,  and  in  this  process,  sceptical 
theories  themselves  must  break  the  path.  At  first,  to  be  sure,  with 
the  indomitable  thirst  of  his  ardent  nature  for  happiness,  he 
strikes  down  doubt  by  the  Socratic  postulate  that  the  possession  of 
truth  (without  the  presupposition  of  which  there  is  also  no  proba- 
bility) is  requisite  for  happiness,  and  therefore  is  to  be  regarded  as 
attainable:  but  with  greater  emphasis  he  shows  that  even  the 
sceptic  who  denies  the  external  reality  of  the  content  of  perception, 
or  at  least  leaves  it  undecided,  can  yet  not  involve  in  doubt  the 
internal  existence  of  the  sensation  as  such.  But  instead  of  con- 
tenting himself  with  the  relativistic  or  positivistic  interpretations 
of  this  fact,  Augustine  presses  forward  just  from  this  basis  to  victo- 
rious certainty.  He  points  out  that  together  with  the  sensation 
there  is  given  not  only  its  content,  which  is  liable  to  doubt  in  one 
direction  or  another,  but  also  the  reality  of  the  perceiving  subject, 
and  this  certainty  which  consciousness  has  in  itself  follows  first  of 
all  from  the  very  act  of  doubt.  In  that  I  doubt,  or  since  I  doubt, 
he  says,  I  know  that  I,  the  doubter,  am :  and  thus,  just  this  doubt 
contains  within  itself  the  valuable  truth  of  the  reality  of  the  con- 
scious 'being.  Even  if  I  should  err  in  all  else,  I  cannot  err  in  this  ; 
for  in  order  to  err  I  must  exist.1 

This  fundamental  certainty  extends  equally  to  all  states  of  con- 

1  Augustine  attributed  fundamental  importance  to  this  line  of  argument, 
which  he  frequently  worked  out  (De  Beata  Vita,  7 ;  Solil  IL  1  fi. ;  De  Ver\ 
Eel.  72  f.;  De  Trin.  X.  14,  etc.).  That  it,  however,  was  not  completely 
unknown  to  Greek  literature  also  is  proved  by  the  passage  (in.  6  f.)  of  the 
compilation  current  under  the  name  of  "Metaphysics  of  Herennios."  The 
source  of  this  passage  has  not  as  yet  been  discovered,  but  is  probably  late  Stoic. 
Cf.  on  this  E.  Heitz  in  Sitz.-Ber.  der  Bert.  Ak*  d.  TP1,  1889,  pp.  1167  ff. 


2T8  Medieval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  HE, 

sciousness  (cogitare),  and  Augustine  sought  to  show  that  all  the 
various  kinds  of  these  states  are  already  included  in  the  act  of 
doubt.  He  who  doubts  knows  not  only  that  he  lives,  but  also  that 
he  remembers,  that  he  knows,  and  that  he  wills :  for  the  grounds 
of  his  doubt  rest  upon  his  former  ideas ;  in  estimating  the  momenta 
of  the  doubt  are  developed  thought,  knowledge,  and  judgment;  and 
the  motive  of  his  doubt  is  only  this,  that  he  is  striving  after  truth. 
Without  particularly  reflecting  upon  this,  or  drawing  farther  con- 
clusions from  it,  Augustine  proves  hi  this  example  his  deep  insight 
into  the  psychical  life,  since  he  does  not  regard  the  different  kinds 
of  psychical  activity  as  separate  spheres,  but  as  the  aspects  of  one 
and  the  same  act,  inseparably  united  with  one  another.  The  soul 
is  for  him  —  and  by  this  he  rises  far  above  Aristotle,  and  also  above 
the  Xeo-Platonists — the  living  whole  of  personality,  whose  life  is 
a  unity,  and  which,  by  its  self-consciousness,  is  certain  of  its  own 
reality  as  the  surest  truth. 

2.  But  from  this  first  certainty  Augustine's  doctrine  at  once 
leads  farther,  and  it  is  not  only  his  religious  conviction,  but  also 
a  deep  epistemological  reflection,  that  makes  him  regard  the  idea 
of  God  as  immediately  involved  in  the  certainty  which  the  indi- 
vidual consciousness  has  of  itself.  Here,  too,  the  fundamental 
fact  of  doubt  is  of  authoritative  importance ;  in  this  case,  also,  it 
already  contains  implicitly  the  full  truth.  How  should  we  come 
to  question  and  doubt  the  perceptions  of  the  external  world  which 
force  themselves  upon  us  with  such  elementary  power,  asks  Augus- 
tine, if  we  did  not  possess,  besides  these,  and  from  other  sources, 
criteria  and  standards  of  truths  by  which  to  measure  and  examine 
these  perceptions  ?  He  who  doubts  must  know  the  truth,  for  only 
for  its  sake  does  he  doubt.1  In  reality,  continues  the  philosopher, 
man  possesses,  besides  sensation  (sensus),  the  higher  capacity  of 
reason  (intellectus,  ratio),  i.e.  of  the  immediate  perception  of  incor- 
poreal truths  5 2  under  the  latter  Augustine  understands,  not  only 
the  logical  laws,  but  also  the  norms  of  the  good  and  the  beautiful ; 
in  general,  all  those  truths  not  to  be  attained  by  sensation,  which 
are  requisite  to  elaborate  and  judge  what  is  given,  —  the  principles 
of  judging.3 


1  De  rer.  Eel.  39,  72  f. 

2  Aspectus  animi,  quo  per  se  ipsum  non  per  corpus  verum  intuetur :  De  Trin. 
II.  2,  2.     Of.  Contra  Acad.  IE.  13,  29. 

8  The  apprehension  of  these  intelligible  truths  by  human  consciousness  was 
at  the  first  designated  by  Augustine  quite  Platonically  dw£juw7<ns.  It  was  ortho- 
dox scruples  against  the  assumption  of  the  pre-existence  of  the  soul  that  led 
him  to  regard  the  reason  as  the  intuitive  faculty  for  the  incorporeal  world.  Cf . 
also  J.  Stortz,  Die  PhttosopMe  des  hi  Augustinus  (Freiburg  i.  B.  1882). 


CHAP,  l,  §  22.]   Metaphysics  of  Inner  Experience :  Augustine.  279 

Such,  norms  of  reason  assert  themselves  as  standards  of  judg- 
ment in  doubt  as  in  all  activities  of  consciousness;  but  they 
transcend,  as  something  higher,  the  individual  consciousness  into 
which  they  enter  in  the  course  of  time :  they  are  the  same  for  all 
•who  think  rationally,  and  experience  no  alteration  in  this  their 
worth.  Thus  the  individual  consciousness  sees  itself  attached  in  its 
own  function  to  something  universally  valid  and  far  reaching.1 

But  it  belongs  to  the  essence  of  truth  that  it  is  or  exists.  Augus- 
tine also  proceeds  from  this  fundamental  conception  of  the  ancient, 
as  of  every  nai've  theory  of  knowledge*  But  the  Being  or  existence 
of  those  universal  truths,  since  they  are  absolutely  incorporeal  in 
their  nature,  can  be  thought  only  as  that  of  the  Ideas  in  God  — 
after  the  Neo-Platonic  mode;  they  are  the  changeless  Forms  and 
norms  of  all  reality  (principales  fornicz  vel  rationes  rerum  stabiles 
atque  incommutabiles,  quce  in  dimno  intellectu  continentur) ,  and  the 
determinations  of  the  content  of  the  divine  mind.  In  "him  they 
are  all  contained  in  highest  union ;  he  is  the  absolute  unity,  the  all- 
embracing  truth ;  he  is  the  highest  Being,  the  highest  Good,  perfect 
Beauty  (unum,  verum,  bonum).  All  rational  knowledge  is  ulti- 
mately knowledge  of  God.  Complete  knowledge  of  God,  indeed, 
even  according  to  Augustine's  admission,  is  denied  to  human  insight 
in  the  earthly  life.  Perhaps  only  the  negative  element  in  our  idea 
of  him  is  completely  certain ;  and,  in  particular,  we  have  no  ade- 
quate idea  of  the  way  in  which  the  different  elements  of  divine 
truth  which  the  reason  beholds  are  united  in  him  to  form  the 
highest  real  unity.  For  his  incorporeal  and  changeless  essence 
(essentia)  far  transcends  all  forms  of  relation  and  association  that 
belong  to  human  thought ;  even  the  category  of  substance  applies 
to  him  as  little  as  do  the  rest.2 

3.  Directly  consistent  as  these  thoughts  are  with  Neo-Platonism,3 
their  Christian  character  is  yet  preserved  in  Augustine's  presenta- 
tion by  the  fact  that  the  religious  idea  of  the  deity  as  absolute 
personality  is  inseparably  fused  with  the  philosophical  conception 
of  the  deity  as  the  sum  and  essence  of  all  truth.  But  just  for  this 
reason  the  whole  Augustinian  metaphysics  is  built  up  upon  the 

1  De  Lib.  Arb.  II.  7  fl. 

2  The  essential  thing  in  this  is  the  insight,  that  the  categories  acquired  ill 
knowing  Nature  are  inadequate  for  the  peculiar  nature  of  spiritual  synthesis 
(according  to  which  the  divine  essence  should  be  thought).    The  new  categories 
of  internality  are,  however,  with  Augustine  only  in  the  process  of  coming  into 
existence ;  cf .  the  following. 

8  In  fact,  Augustine  seeks  throughout  to  identify  the  vovs  of  Plotinus  with  the 
\6yos  of  Origen ;  but  by  dropping  from  the  Nee-Platonic  doctrine  the  emanistic 
derivation  of  the  vovs  and  its  acquirement  of  independent  existence,  he  abrogates 
the  physical  schema  of  the  world  potencies  hi  favour  of  the  psychical. 


280  Medi&val  Philosophy :  first  Period.         [PART  ILL 

self-knowledge  of  the  finite  personality ;  that  is,  upon  the  fact  of 
inner  experience.  For  so  far  as  a  comprehension  of  the  divine 
essence  is  at  all  possible  for  man,  it  can  be  gained  only  after  the 
analogy  of  human  self-knowledge.  This,  however,  shows  the  fol- 
lowing fundamental  composition  of  the  inner  life :  the  permanent 
existence  of  spiritual  Being  is  given  in  the  sum-total  of  its  content 
of  consciousness,  or  reproducible  ideas ;  its  movement  and  living 
activity  consists  in  the  processes  of  uniting  and  separating  these 
elements  in  judgments ;  and  the  impelling  force  in  this  motion  is 
the  will,  directed  toward  the  attainment  of  highest  blessedness. 
Thus  the  three  aspects  of  psychical  reality  are  idea  (  Vorstellung), 
judgment,  and  will:  memoria,  intellectns,  yoluntas,1  and  Augustine  is' 
expressly  on  his  guard  against  conceiving  of  these  modes  of  func- 
tioning which  are  peculiar  to  personality,  as  the  properties  of 
bodies  are  conceived.  Just  as  little  do  they  mean  different  strata 
or  spheres  of  its  existence ;  they  form  in  their  indissoluble  unity 
the  substance  of  the  soul  itself.  In  accordance  with  these  relations 
thus  recognised  in  man's  mental  life,  Augustine  then  not  only  seeks 
to  gain  an  analogical  idea  of  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity,  but  recog- 
nises, also,  in  the  esse,  nosse,  and  velle  the  fundamental  determina- 
tions of  all  reality.  Being,  knowing,  and  willing  comprise  all 
reality,  and  in  omnipotence,  omniscience,  and  perfect  goodness,  the 
deity  encompasses  the  universe. 

The  outspoken  opinion  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  physical  (Aristotelian) 
categories  reminds  us  only  seemingly  of  Neo-Platonism,  whose  intelligible  cate- 
gories (cf.  p.  245),  as  well  as  its  entire  metaphysical  schema,  are  throughout 
physical.  It  is  Augustine  who  is  first  in  earnest  in  the  attempt  to  raise  the 
peculiar  forms  of  relation  characteristic  of  the  inner  nature,  to  metaphysical 
principles.  Aside  from  this,  his  cosmology  runs  on  in  the  track  laid  by  Neo- 
Platonism  without  peculiarities  worthy  of  mention.  The  doctrine  of  the  two 
worlds,  with  its  anthropological  correlates,  forms  here  the  presupposition. 
The  world  of  sense  is  known  through  perceptions,  the  intelligible  world  through 
the  reason,  and  these  two  given  constituents  of  knowledge  are  brought  into 
relation  with  each  other  by  intellectual  thought  (ratiocinatio^.  For  apprehend- 
ing Mature,  the  teleology  conditioned  by  the  doctrine  of  Ideas  presents  itself. 
The  corporeal  world  also  is  created  out  of  nothing  by  divine  power,  wisdom,  and 
goodness,  and  bears  in  its  beauty  and  perfection  the  sign  of  its  origin.  Evil 
(including  moral  evil,  yet^cf.  below)  is  here,  too,  nothing  properly  real ;  it  is 
not  a  thing,  but  an  act;  it  has  no  causa  efficiens,  but  only  a  causa  deficiens; 
its  origin  is  to  be  sought  not  in  the  positive  Being  (God),  but  in  the  lack  of 
Being  of  finite  natures ;  for  these  latter,  as  having  been  created,  possess  only 
a  weakened  and  therefore  a  defective  reality.  Augustine's  theodicy  stands  thus 
essentially  upon  the  ground  of  that  of  Origen  and  Plotinus. 

4.  A  farther  and  essential  consequence  of  placing  philosophy 
upon  a  consciously  anthropological  basis  is,  in  Augustine's  case,  the 
central  position  which  he  assigned  in  his  theory  of  the  universe  to 

1  The  same  triple  division  of  the  psychical  activities  is  found  among  the 
Stoics.  Cf.  p.  187. 


CHAP.  1,  §  22.]  Metaphysics  of  Inner  Experience :  Augustine.  281 

the  will  The  leading  motive  in  this  is  doubtless  the  man's  own 
experience ;  himself  a  nature  ardent  and  strong  in  will,  as  he  exam- 
ined and  scrutinised  his  own  personality  he  came  upon  the  will  as 
its  inmost  core.  On  this  account  the  will  is  for  him  the  essential 
element  in  all :  omnes  nihil  aliud  quam  voluntates  sunt. 

In  his  psychology  and  theory  of  knowledge  this  is  shown  especially 
in  the  fact  that  he  seeks  to  set  forth  on  all  sides  the  controlling 
position  of  the  will  in  the  entire  process  of  ideation  and  knowledge.1 
"While  with  reference  to  sense  perception  the  ]S"eo-Platonists  had 
distinguished  between  the  state  of  corporeal  stimulation  and  the 
becoming  conscious  of  the  same,  Augustine  demonstrates  by  an 
exact  analysis  of  the  act  of  seeing,  that  this  becoming  conscious  is 
essentially  an  act  of  will  (intentio  animi).  And  as  physical  atten- 
tion is  accordingly  a  matter  of  the  will,  so  too  the  activity  of  the 
inner  sense  (sensus  interior)  shows  a  quite  analogous  dependence 
upon  the  will  Whether  we  bring  our  own  states  and  actions  as 
such  to  our  consciousness  or  not,  depends  as  truly  upon  voluntary 
reflection  as  does  the  intentional  consideration  of  something  which 
belongs  to  our  memory,  and  as  does  the  activity  of  the  combining 
fantasy  when  directed  toward  a  definite  goal.  Finally,  the  thinking 
of  the  intellect  (ratiocinatio),  with  its  judging  and  reasoning,  is 
formed  completely  under  the  direction  of  the  purposes  of  the  will ; 
for  the  will  must  determine  the  direction  and  the  end  according  to 
which  the  data  of  outer  or  inner  experience  are  to  be  brought  under 
the  general  truths  of  rational  insight. 

In  the  case  of  these  cognitions  of  rational  insight  the  relation 
assumes  a  somewhat  more  involved  form,  for  in  its  relation  to  this 
higher  divine  truth  the  activity  of  the  human  mind  cannot  be  given 
the  same  play  as  in  the  case  of  its  intellectual  relation  to  the  outer 
world  and  to  its  own  inner  world.  This  is  true  even  on  philosophi- 
cal grounds,  for  according  to  the  fundamental  metaphysical  scheme 
the  active  part  in  the  causal  connection  must  belong  to  the  more 
universal  as  the  higher  and  more  efficient  Being  (Sein).  The  rela- 
tion of  the  human  mind  to  this  truth,  which  is  metaphysically  its 
superior,  can  in  the  main  be  only  a  passive  one.  The  knowledge  of 
the  intelligible  world  is  for  Augustine  also,  essentially — illumination, 
revelation.  Here,  where  the  mind  stands  in  the  presence  of  its  crea- 
tor, it  lacks  not  only  the  creative,  but  even  the  receptive  initiative. 
Augustine  is  far  from  regarding  the  intuitive  knowledge  of  the 
intelligible  truths  as  possibly  an  independent  production  of  the 

i  Gf .  principally  the  eleventh  book  of  the  treatise  De  Trinitatt,  and  beddes, 
especially  W.  Kahl,  Die  Lehre  vom  Prime*  des  WUhns  t>ei  Augustinut,  Dun* 
Seotus  und  Descartes  (Strassburg,  1886). 


282  Mediceval  Philosophy :  First  Period.  [PART  in. 

mind  out  of  its  own  nature ;  indeed,  he  cannot  even  ascribe  to  it  the 
same  spontaneity  of  attention  or  of  directing  its  conscionsness 
(intentio)  that  he  ascribes  to  the  empirical  cognitions  of  outer  and 
inner  perception :  he  must,  on  the  contrary,  regard  the  illumination 
of  the  individual  consciousness  by  the  divine  truth  as  essentially  an 
act  of  grace  (cf.  below),  in  the  case  of  which  the  individual  con- 
sciousness occupies  an  expectant  and  purely  receptive  attitude. 
These  metaphysical  considerations,  which  might  also  have  been 
possible  upon  the  basis  of  Xeo-Platonisin,  experience  in  Augustine's 
case  a  powerful  reinforcement  by  the  emphasis  which  he  laid  in  his 
theology  upon  the  divine  grace.  Knowledge  of  the  truths  of  reason 
is  an  element  in  blessedness,  and  blessedness  man  owes  not  to  his 
own  will,  but  to  that  of  God. 

Nevertheless  Augustine  here,  too,  sought  to  save  a  certain  co- 
operation for  the  will  of  the  individual,  at  least  at  first.  He  not 
only  emphasises  that  God  bestows  the  revelation  of  his  truths  upon 
him  only,  who  through  good  endeavour  and  good  morals,  i.e.  through 
the  qualities  of  his  will,  shows  himself  a  worthy  subject  for  this 
revelation ;  he  teaches  also  that  the  appropriation  of  divine  truth  is 
effected  not  so  much  by  insight,  as  through  faith  or  belief.  Faith 
or  belief,  however,  as  ideation  plus  assent,  though  without  the  act 
of  conception,  presupposes  indeed  the  idea  of  its  object,  but  contains 
in  the  factor  of  assent,  which  is  determined  by  no  intellectual  com- 
pulsion, an  original  volitional  act  of  the  affirming  judgment.  The 
importance  of  this  fact  extends  so  far,  in  Augustine's  opinion,  that 
not  only  in  divine  and  eternal  things,  but  also  in  the  human  and 
earthly  and  temporal  things,  this  conviction  produced  immediately 
by  the  will  yields  the  original  elements  of  thought.  The  insight 
which  conceives  and  comprehends  grows  out  of  these  elements  by 
means  of  the  combining  reflective  procedure  of  the  understanding. 
Thus  even  in  the  most  important  things,  i.e.  in  questions  of  salva- 
tion, faith  in  the  divine  revelation  and  in  its  appearance  in  the  tradi- 
tion of  the  Church— faith  dictated  by  the  good  will  — must  precede 
the  knowledge  which  appropriates  and  comprehends  it  intellectually. 
Full  rational  insight  is  indeed  first  in  dignity,  but  faith  in  revelation 
is  the  first  in  time. 

5.  In  all  these  considerations  of  Augustine,  the  central  point 
is  the  conception  of  the/reecfom  of  the  will,  as  a  decision,  choice,  or 
assent  of  the  will,  independent  of  the  functions  of  the  understand- 
ing, not  conditioned  by  motives  of  cognition,  but  rather  determining 
these  motives  without  grounds  in  consciousness  for  its  acts,  and 
Augustine  faithfully  exerted  himself  to  maintain  this  conception 
against  various  objections.  In  addition  to  the  consciousness  of 


CHAP.  1,  §  22.]   Metaphysics  of  Inner  Experience:  Augustine.  283 

ethical  and  religious  responsibility,  it  is  principally  the  cause  of 
the  divine  justice  that  he  here  aims  to  defend :  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  most  of  his  difficulties  arise  from  the  attempt  to  unite  un- 
caused action  whose  opposite  is  alike  possible  and  objectively  think- 
able, with  the  divine  prescience.  He  helps  himself  here  by  appealing 
to  the  distinction  between  eternity  (timelessness)  and  time.  In  an 
extremely  acute  investigation1  he  maintains  that  time  has  real  sig- 
nificance only  for  the  functions  of  inner  experience  as  they  measure 
and  compare :  its  significance  for  outer  experience  also  arises  only 
in  consequence  of  this.  The  so-called  foreknowledge  of  the  deity, 
which  is  in  itself  timeless,  has  as  little  causally  determining  power 
for  future  events  as  memory  has  for  those  of  the  past.  In  these 
connections,  Aristotle  is  justly  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  zealous 
and  forcible  defenders  of  the  freedom  of  the  will. 

But  in  opposition  to  this  view,  championed  essentially  with  the 
weapons  of  former  philosophy,  there  now  appears  in  Augustine's 
system  another  line  of  thought,  increasing  in  force  from  work  to 
work,  which  has  its  germ  in  the  conception  of  the  Church  and  in 
the  doctrine  of  its  redeeming  power.  Here  the  principle  of  histor- 
ical universality  encounters  victoriously  the  principle  of  the  abso- 
lute certainty  of  the  individual  mind.  The  idea  of  the  Christian 
Church,  of  which  Augustine  was  the  most  powerful  champion,  is 
rooted  in  the  thought  that  the  whole  human  race  is  in  need  of  re- 
demption. This  latter  idea,  however,  excludes  the  completely  unde- 
termined freedom  of  the  will  in  the  individual  man  5  for  it  requires 
the  postulate  that  every  individual  is  necessarily  sinful,  and  therefore 
in  need  of  redemption.  Under  the  overpowering  pressure  of  this 
thought,  Augustine  set  another  theory  by  the  side  of  Ms  theory  of 
freedom  of  the  will  which  was  so  widely  carried  out  in  his  philo- 
sophical writings ;  and  this  second  theory  runs  counter  to  the  first 
throughout. 

Augustine  desires  to  solve  the  question  as  to  the  origin  of  evil, 
which  is  so  important  for  him  personally,  and  to  solve  it  —  in. 
opposition  to  Manichseism — by  the  conception  of  the  freedom  of 
the  will,  in  order  to  maintain  in  this,  human  responsibility  and 
divine  justice ;  but  in  his  theological  system  it  seems  to  him  to  be 
sufficient  to  restrict  this  freedom  of  will  to  Adam,  the  first  man. 
The  idea  of  the  substantial  oneness  of  the  human  race — an  idea 
which  was  a  co-operating  element  in  the  faith  in  the  redemption  of 
all  by  the  one  Saviour  —  permitted  likewise  the  doctrine  that  in 


1  In  the  eleventh  bopk  of  the  Confessions.    Cf.  C.  Fortlage,  A.  De  Tempore 
Doctrina  (Heidelberg,  1836). 


284  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  m. 

the  one  man  Adam  all  humanity  had  sinned.  By  the  abuse  of  this 
freedom  of  the  will  on  the  part  of  the  first  man,  the  whole  human 
nature  has  been  so  corrupted  that  it  cannot  do  otherwise  than  sin 
( ?io?i  posse  non  peccare) .  This  loss  of  freedom  applies  without  ex- 
ception, to  the  whole  race  arising  from  Adam.  Every  man  brings 
with  him  into  the  world  this  corrupted  nature  which  is  no  longer 
capable  of  good  in  its  own  strength  or  freedom,  and  this  inherited 
sin  is  the  punishment  for  original  sin.  Just  from  this  it  follows 
that  all  men,  without  exception,  are  in  need  of  redemption  and  of 
the  Church's  means  of  grace.  One  as  little  as  another  deserves  to 
receive  this  grace:  therefore,  thinks  Augustine,  no  injustice  can 
be  seen  in  the  fact  that  God  bestows  this  grace,  to  which  no  one 
has  any  claim,  not  upon  all,  but  only  upon  some ;  and  it  is  never 
known  upon  whom.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  divine  justice 
demands  that,  at  least  in  the  case  of  some  men,  the  punishment  for 
Adam's  fall  should  be  permanently  maintained,  that  these  men, 
therefore,  should  remain  excluded  from  the  working  of  grace  and 
from  redemption.  Since,  finally,  in  consequence  of  their  corrupted 
nature,  all  are  alike  sinful  and  incapable  of  any  improvement  of 
themselves,  it  follows  that  the  choice  of  the  favoured  ones  takes 
place  not  according  to  their  worthiness  (for  there  are  none  worthy 
before  the  working  of  grace),  but  according  to  an  unsearchable 
decree  of  God.  Upon  him  whom  he  will  redeem  he  bestows  his 
revelation  with  its  irresistible  power :  he  whom  he  does  not  choose, 
—  he  can  in  nowise  be  redeemed.  Man  in  his  own  strength  cannot 
make  even  a  beginning  toward  the  good :  all  good  comes  from  God 
and  only  from  him. 

In  the  doctrine  of  predestination,  accordingly  (and  this  is  its  philo- 
sophical element),  the  absolute  causality  of  God  suppresses  the  free 
will  of  the  individual.  The  latter  is  refused  both  metaphysical 
independence  and  also  all  spontaneity  of  action ;  the  individual  is 
determined  either  by  his  nature  to  sin  or  by  grace  to  the  good.  So 
in  Augustine's  system  two  powerful  streams  of  thought  come  into 
violent  opposition.  It  will  always  remain  au  astonishing  fact  that 
the  same  man  who  founded  his  philosophy  upon  the  absolute  and 
independent  certainty  of  the  individual  conscious  mind,  who  threw 
the  plummet  of  the  most  acute  examination  into  the  depths  of  inner 
experience  and  discovered  in  the  will  the  vital  ground  of  spiritual 
personality,  found  himself  forced  by  the  interests  of  a  theological 
controversy  to  a  theory  of  the  doctrine  of  salvation  which  regards 
the  acts  of  the  individual  will  as  unalterably  determined  conse- 
quences, either  of  a  general  corruption  or  of  the  divine  grace. 
Individualism  and  universalism  in  the  conception  of  psychical  reality 


CHAP.  1,  §  22.]    Metaphysics  of  Inner  Experience :  Augustine.  285 

stand  here  in  bald  opposition,  and  their  clashing  contradiction  is 
scarcely  concealed  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  word  "  freedom/'  which, 
in  the  one  line,  is  defended  according  to  its  psychological  meaning, 
in  the  other,  according  to  its  ethico-religious  meaning.  The  oppo- 
sition, however,  of  the  two  motives  of  thought  which  here  lie  side  by 
side  so  irreconcilable,  had  influence  in  the  succeeding  development 
of  philosophy  until  long  past  the  Middle  Ages. 

6.  Tn  the  light  of  the  doctrine  of  predestination  the  grand  picture 
of  the  historical  development  of  humanity,  which  Augustine  drew 
in  the  manner  and  spirit  of  the  old  patristic  philosophy,  takes  on 
dark  colours  and  peculiarly  stiff,  inflexible  forms.  For  if  not  only 
the  course  of  the  history  of  salvation  taken  as  a  whole,  but  also, 
as  in  Augustine's  system,  the  position  which  every  individual  is  to 
occupy  within  it,  has  been  previously  fixed  by  divine  decree,  one 
cannot  rid  one's  self  of  the  gloomy  impression  that  all  man's  voli- 
tional life  in  history,  with  all  its  thirst  for  salvation,  sinks  to  a 
play  of  shadows  and  puppets,  whose  result  is  infallibly  fixed  from 
the  beginning. 

The  spiritual  world  throughout  the  whole  course  of  history  falls 
apart,  for  Augustine,  into  two  spheres,  —  the  realm  of  God  and  the 
realm  of  the  devil.  To  the  former  belong  the  angels  that  have  not 
fallen,  and  the  men  whom  God  has  chosen  for  his  grace ;  the  other 
embraces,  together  with  the  evil  demons,  all  those  men  who  are  not 
predestined  to  redemption,  but  are  left  by  God  in  the  state  of  sin  and 
guilt :  the  one  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the  other  that  of  the  world. 
The  two  occupy  in  the  course  of  history  a  relation  like  that  of  two 
different  races  which  are  mingled  only  in  outer  action,  while  in- 
ternally they  are  strictly  separate.  The  community  of  the  elect  has 
no  home  on  earth ;  it  lives  in  the  higher  unity  of  divine  grace.  The 
community  of  the  condemned,  however,  is  divided  within  itself  by 
discord;  it  fights  in  earthly  kingdoms  for  the  illusory  worth  of 
power  and  rule.  Christian  thought  at  this  stage  of  development 
is  so  little  able  to  master  the  reality  presented  by  the  world,  that 
Augustine  sees  in  the  historical  states  only  the  provinces  of  a  com- 
munity of  sinners  in  hostility  to  God,  condemned  to  quarrel  with 
one  another.  For  him,  in  fact,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  still  not  of 
this  world ;  and  the  Church  is  for  him  the  saving  institution  of  the 
divine  kingdom,  which  enters  the  temporal  life. 

The  course  of  the  world's  history  under  these  presuppositions 
is  so  conceived  that  we  find  a  division  entering  between  the  two 
realms,  which  becomes  sharper  and  sharper  in  the  course  of  history, 
and  ultimately  results  in  the  complete  and  definitive  separation  of 
the  same.  In  six  periods,  which  correspond  to  the  creative  days  of 


286  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  in. 

the  Mosaic  cosmogony  and  are  attached  to  dates  of  Israelitic  his- 
tory, Augustine  constructs  his  history  of  the  world.  In  this  process 
he  combines  a  depreciatory  estimate  of  the  Roman  world  with  slight 
understanding  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  Grecian.  The  decisive 
point  in  this  development  is  for  him,  also,  the  appearance  of  the 
Saviour,  "by  which  not  only  the  redemption  of  those  chosen  by  grace 
is  brought  to  completion  but  also  their  separation  from  the  children 
of  the  world.  With  this  begins  the  last  world-period,  whose  end  will 
be  the  Judgment :  then  after  the  stress  of  conflict  shall  enter  the  Sab- 
bath, the  peace  of  the  Lord  —  but  peace  only  for  the  elect;  for  those 
not  predestined  to  salvation  will  then  be  completely  separated  from 
the  saints,  and  entirely  given  over  to  the  pain  of  their  unhappiness. 

However  spiritually  sublime  (though  never  without  attendant 
physical  imagery)  the  conception  of  happiness  and  pain  here  pre- 
sented, —  and  this  sublimity  is  especially  noteworthy  in  the  thought 
of  unhappiness  as  a  weakening  of  Being,  due  to  the  lack  of  divine 
causality,  —  the  dualism  of  the  Good  and  the  Evil  is  yet  unmistak- 
ably, for  Augustine,  the  final  issue  of  the  world's  history.  The  man 
assailed  by  so  many  powerful  motives  of  thought  has  not  overcome 
the  Manickmsm  of  his  youthful  belief;  he  has  taken  it  up  into 
Christian  doctrine.  Among  the  Manichseans  the  antithesis  of 
good  and  evil  is  held  to  be  original  and  indelible :  with  Augustine 
this  antithesis  is  regarded  as  one  that  has  come  into  being,  and  yet 
as  one  that  is  ineradicable.  The  omnipotent,  omniscient,  supremely 
benevolent  God  has  created  a  world  which  is  divided  forever  into 
his  own  realm  and  that  of  Satan. 

7.  Among  the  complicated  problems  and  ideas  of  universal  his- 
torical importance  which  Augustinianism  contains,  there  is  still  one 
to  be  brought  forward.  It  lies  in  the  conception  of  blessedness  itself 
in  which  all  motives  of  his  thought  cross.  For,  strongly  as  Augus- 
tine recognised  in  the  will  the  inmost  motive  energy  of  human 
nature,  deeply  as  he  penetrated  the  striving  after  happiness  as  the 
impelling  motive  of  all  psychical  functions,  he  yet  remained  firmly 
convinced  that  the  satisfaction  of  all  this  stress  and  urging  is  to  be 
found  only  in  beholding  divine  truth.  The  highest  good  is  God ;  but 
God  is  the  truth,  and  one  enjoys  truth  by  beholding  it  and  resting  in 
its  contemplation.  All  urging  of  the  will  is  but  the  path  to  this 
peace  in  which  it  ceases.  The  last  task  of  the  will  is  to  be  silent  in 
the  gracious  working  of  divine  revelation, — to  remain  quiet  when 
the  vision  of  truth,  produced  from  above,  comes  over  it. 

Here  are  united  in  common  opposition  to  individualism  of  will, 
the  Christian  idea  of  the  absolute  causality  of  God,  and  the  contem- 
plative mysticism  of  the  Neo-Platonists.  From  both  sides,  the  same 


CHAP.  1,  §  23.]         Controversy  over  Universal.  287 

tendency  is  at  work  to  bring  about  the  conception  of  man's  sanctifi- 
cation  as  a  working  of  God  in  him,  as  a  becoming  filled  and  illumined 
by  the  highest  truth,  as  a  will-less  contemplation  of  the  one,  infinite 
Being.  Augustine,  indeed,  worked  out  forcibly  the  practical  conse- 
quences which  the  working  of  grace  should  have  in  the  earthly  life,  — 
purification  of  the  disposition  and  strictness  in  the  conduct  of  life,  — 
and  just  in  this  is  shown  the  comprehensive  breadth  of  his  personal 
nature  and  his  spiritual  vision.  He  develops  the  vigorous  energy  of 
his  own  combative  nature  into  an  ethical  doctrine,  which,  far  re- 
moved from  the  asceticism  of  3seo-Platonism  with  its  weariness  of 
life,  sets  man  in  the  midst  of  the  world-battle  between  Good  and 
Evil  as  a  brave  fighter  for  the  heavenly  kingdom.  But  the  highest 
reward  which  beckons  this  fighter  for  God  is  yet,  for  Augustine,  not 
the  restless  activity  of  the  will,  but  the  rest  of  contemplation.  For 
the  temporal  life,  Augustine  demands  the  full  and  never-resting 
exertion  of  the  struggling  and  acting  soul ;  for  eternity  he  offers  the 
prospect  of  the  peace  of  becoming  absorbed  in  divine  truth.  He 
indeed  designates  the  state  of  the  blessed  as  the  highest  of  the 
virtues,  as  love1  (charitas),  but  in  the  eternal  blessedness  where  the 
resistance  of  the  world  and  of  the  sinful  will  is  no  longer  to  be  over- 
come, where  love  has  no  longer  any  want  that  must  be  satisfied, 
there  this  love  is  no  longer  anything  other  than  a  God-intoxicated 
contemplation. 

In  this  duality,  also,  of  the  Augustinian  ethics,  old  and  new  lie 
close  together.  With  the  tense  energy  of  will  which  is  demanded 
for  the  earthly  life,  and  with  the  transfer  of  the  ethical  judgment 
so  as  to  make  it  apply  to  the  inner  disposition,  the  modern  man 
appears ;  but  in  the  conception  of  the  highest  goal  of  life  the  ancient 
ideal  of  intellectual  contemplation  retains  the  victory. 

Here  lies  in  Augustine's  doctrine  itself  a  contradiction  with  the 
individualism  of  the  will,  here  at  a  decisive  point  an  Aristotelian, 
Neo-Platonic  element  maintains  itself,  and  this  internal  opposition 
unfolds  itself  in  the  formation  of  the  problems  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

§  23.  The  Controversy  over  TJnlversals. 

Johannes  Saresberiensis,  Metalogicus,  II.  cap.  17  f. 

J.  H.  Lowe,  Der  Kampf  zwischen  Nominalismus  und  Realismus  im  Mittel- 
alter,  sein  Ursprung  und  sein  Verlauf  (Prague,  1876). 

The  schooling  in  formal  logic  which  the  peoples  that  entered 
upon  the  scientific  movement  at  the  beginning  of  the  Middle  Ages 

1  In  his  system  the  three  Christian  virtues,  faith,  hope,  and  love,  are  placed 
above  the  practical  and  dianoetic  virtues  of  Greek  ethics. 


288  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  first  Period.         [PART  in. 

were  obliged  to  undergo,  developed  in  connection  with,  the  question 
as  to  the  logical  and  metaphysical  significance  of  genera  and  species 
(uidversalia).  But  it  would  be  a  grave -mistake  to  suppose  that  this 
question  had  only  the  didactic  value  of  serving  as  a  subject  for 
mental  drill,  in  connection  with  which  the  rules  of  conceptional 
thought,  division,  judgment,  and  inference,  were  impressed  for  cen- 
turies upon  ever  new  and  increasing  throngs  of  scholars.  On  the 
contrary,  the  tenacity  with  which  the  science  of  the  Middle  Ages  — 
and  it  is  significant  that  this  occurred  independently  in  the  Orient 
as  well  as  in  the  Occident — held  fast  to  the  elaboration  of  this 
problem  in  endless  discussions,  is  rather  in  itself  a  proof  that  in  this 
question  a  very  real  and  very  difficult  problem  lies  before  us. 

In  fact,  when  Scholasticism,  in  its  timorous  beginnings,  made  the 
passage  in  Porphyry's  Introduction l  to  the  Categories  of  Aristotle 
which  formulated  this  problem,  the  starting-point  of  its  own  first 
attempts  at  thought,  it  hit  with  instinctive  sagacity  upon  precisely 
the  same  problem  which  had  formed  the  centre  of  interest  during 
the  great  period  of  Greek  philosophy.  After  Socrates  had  assigned 
to  science  the  task  of  thinking  the  world  in  conceptions,  the  ques- 
tion how  the  class-concepts,  or  generic  conceptions,  are  related  to 
reality,  became,  for  the  first  time,  a  chief  motive  of  philosophy.  It 
produced  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  Ideas  and  the  Aristotelian  logic  j 
and  if  the  latter  had  as  its  essential  content  (cf.  §  12)  the  doctrine 
of  the  forms  in  which  the  particular  is  dependent  upon  the  uni- 
versal, it  is  easy  to  understand  that  even  from  so  scanty  remains 
and  fragments  of  this  doctrine  as  were  at  the  service  of  the  earliest 
Middle  Ages,  the  same  problem  must  arise  with  all  its  power  for  the 
new  race  also.  And  it  is  likewise  easy  to  understand  that  the  old 
enigmatic  question  worked  upon  the  naive  minds  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  untrained  in  thought,  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  in  which  it 
worked  upon  the  Greeks.  In  fact,  the  delight  in  logical  dispute,  as 
this  developed  after  the  eleventh  century  at  the  schools  of  Paris, 
finds  its  counterpart  as  a  social  phenomenon  only  in  the  debates  of 
the  philosophers  at  Athens,  and  in  these  latter,  too,  as  numerous 
anecdotes  prove,  the  question  as  to  the  reality  of  universals,  which 
was  connected  with  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  played  a  leading  part. 

Nevertheless  the  problem  was  renewed  under  conditions  that 
were  essentially  less  favourable.  When  this  question  emerged  for 
the  Greeks,  they  possessed  a  wealth  of  proper  scientific  experience 

1  The  formulation  of  the  problem  in  the  translation  of  Bogthius  is  as  follows : 
"...  degeneribus  et  speciebus—sive  subsistant  sivein  solis  nudis  intellectibus 
posita  sint,  sine  subsistentia  corporalia  an  incorporalia,  et  utrum  separata  a 
sensibilibus  an  in  sensibilibus  posita  et  circa  hcec  consistentia.  . .  ." 


CHAP.  1,  §  23.]    Controversy  over  Universal^:  Scotus  Erigena.  289 

and  a  store  of  real  information  and  knowledge,  which,  if  not  always, 
yet  for  the  most  part  and  on  the  whole,  prevented  them  from  mak- 
ing their  discussion  solely  a  game  with  the  abstractions  of  formal 
logic.  But  mediaeval  science,  especially  in  its  beginnings,  lacked 
just  this  counterpoise,  and  on  this  account  was  obliged  to  move  so 
long  in  a  circle  with  the  attempt  to  construct  its  metaphysics  out 
of  purely  logical  considerations. 

That  the  Middle  Ages,  in  their  turn,  engaged  and  persisted  so 
pertinaciously  in  this  controversy  which  had  previously  been  waged 
principally  between  Plato  and  the  Cynics,  and  afterward  between 
the  Academy,  the  Lyceum,  and  the  Stoa,  was  not  due  solely  to  the 
fact  that  in  consequence  of  the  defective  character  of  their  tradi- 
tions the  thinkers  of  the  Middle  Ages  knew  as  good  as  nothing  of 
those  earlier  debates ;  it  had  yet  a  deeper  ground.  The  feeling  of 
the  peculiar,  intrinsic  worth  of  personality,  which  had  gained  so 
powerful  expression  in  Christianity  and  especially  in  the  Augustin- 
ian  doctrine,  found  the  liveliest  echo  and  the  strongest  sympathy 
among  precisely  those  tribes  which  were  called  to  become  the  new 
bearers  of  civilisation}  and  in  the  hearts  of  these  same  peoples 
surged  also  the  youthful  delight  in  richly  coloured  reality,  in  the 
living,  particular  appearance.  But  with  the  Church  doctrine  they 
received  a  philosophy  which,  with  the  measured  calm  of  Greek 
thought,  conceived  the  essential  nature  of  things  to  lie  in  universal 
connections,  a  metaphysics  which  identified  the  stages  of  logical 
universality  with  intensities  of  Being  of  varying  worths.  In  this 
lay  an  inconsistency  which  covertly  asserted  itself,  even  in  Augus- 
tinianism,  and  became  a  constant  stimulus  for  philosophical  reflec- 
tion. 

1.  The  question  as  to  the  individual's  ground  of  Being  or  exis- 
tence, from  which  mediaeval  thought  never  became  free,  was  the 
more  natural  for  it  just  at  its  beginning  in  proportion  as  the  Keo- 
Platonic  metaphysics  still  maintained  itself  under  the  veil  of  a 
Christian  mysticism.  Nothing  could  be  more  adapted  to  call  out 
the  contradiction  of  a  natural  individualism  than  the  high  degree 
of  consistency  with  which  Scotus  Erigena  carried  through  the  funda- 
mental thoughts  of  the  Neo-Platonic  Realism.  Perhaps  no  philoso- 
pher has  expressed  more  clearly  and  frankly  than  he  the  final 
consequences  of  the  metaphysics  which,  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
Socratic-Platonic  principle  that  the  truth,  and  therefore  also  Being, 
is  to  be  sought  in  the  universal,  identifies  the  stages  of  universality 
with  those  of  the  intensity  and  priority  of  Being.  The  universal 
(the  class-concept  or  logical  genus)  appears  here  as  the  essential  and 
original  reality,  which  produces  from  itself  and  contains  within  itself 


290  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PAST  in. 

the  particular  (the  species  and  ultimately  the  individual).  The 
universals  are,  therefore,  not  only  substances  (res;  hence  the  name 
"Realism"),  but,  as  contrasted  with  the  corporeal  individual  things, 
they  are  the  more  primitive,  the  producing  and  determining  sub- 
stances ;  they  are  the  more  Eeal  substances,  and  they  are  the  more 
Heal  in  proportion  as  they  are  the  more  universal.  In  this  conception, 
therefore,  the  logical  relations  of  concepts  immediately  become 
metaphysical  relations;  formal  arrangement  contains  real  signifi- 
cance. Logical  subordination  becomes  changed  into  a  production 
and  inclusion  of  the  particular  by  the  general ;  logical  partition  and 
determination  become  transformed  into  a  causal  process  by  means 
of  which  the  universal  takes  on  form  and  unfolds  itself  in  the 
particular. 

The  pyramid  of  concepts,  thus  raised  to  a  metaphysical  signifi- 
cance, culminates  in  the  concept  of  the  deity  as  the  most  universal. 
But  the  last  product  of  abstraction,  the  absolutely  universal,  is  that 
which  has  no  determinations  (cf.  p.  250),  Hence  this  doctrine 
becomes  identical  with  the  old  "negative  theology,"  according  to 
which  we  can  predicate  of  God  only  what  he  is  not ; x  and  yet  here, 
too,  this  highest  Being  is  designated,  quite  in  accord  with  the 
thought  of  Plotinus,  as  the  "uncreated,  but  self-creating  Nature." 
For  this  most  universal  Being  produces  out  of  itself  all  things; 
these,  therefore,  contain  nothing  else  than  its  manifestations,  and 
are  related  to  it  as  particular  specimens  or  instances  are  to  the 
class;  they  are  in  it  and  exist  only  as  its  modes  of  appearance. 
The  result  of  these  presuppositions  is  thus  a  logical  pantheism :  all 
things  of  the  world  are  "  theophanies  "  ;  the  world  is  God  developed 
into  the  particular,  proceeding  out  of  himself  to  take  on  a  definite 
form  (deiLS  explidtus).  God  and  the  world  are  one.  The  same 
"Mature"  (<£wris)  is,  as  creative  unity,  Goo^  and  as  created  plurality, 
the  world. 

The  process  of  unfolding  (egresstis)  proceeds  in  the  graded  scale 
of  logical  universality.  Out  of  God  comes  at  first  the  intelligible 
world  as  "the  Nature  which  is  created  and  itself  creates,"  the  realm 
of  universals,  of  Ideas  which  (as  vol  in  the  sense  of  Plotinus)  form 
the  working  forces  in  the  sensuous  world  of  phenomena.  The 
Ideas  are  built  up  as  a  heavenly  hierarchy  according  to  their  various 
grades  of  universality,  and  therefore  also  of  intensity  of  Being,  and 
in  connection  with  this  thought  Christian  Mysticism  constructs  a 

1  In  carrying  out  this  Philonic  thought  (cf.  p.  237)  the  Church  Fathers  had 
already  employed  a  course  of  thought  which  proceeds  by  successive  abstraction 
to  the  concept  of  God  as  the  undetermined.  Cf..  e.g.,  Clement  Alex.  Strom. 
V.  11  (689). 


CHAP.  1,  §  23.]  Controversy  over  Universals :  Scotus  Erigena.    291 

doctrine  of  angels  after  a  Neo-Platonic  pattern.  But  in  every  case 
beneath  the  mythical  covering  the  important  thought  is  really 
active,  that  real  dependence  consists  in  logical  dependence;  the 
logical  consequence,  by  which  the  particular  follows  from  the 
general,  is  spuriously  substituted  for  the  causal  relation. 

Hence,  then,  even  in  the  world  of  the  senses,  it  is  only  the  uni- 
versal that  is  properly  active  and  efficient :  corporeal  things,  as  a 
whole,  form  the  "Nature  which  is  created  and  does  not  itself 
create." 1  In  this  world  the  individual  thing  is  not  as  such  active ; 
it  is  rather  active  according  to  the  proportion  of  universal  attri- 
butes which  attain  manifestation  in  it.  The  individual  thing  of 
sense,  accordingly,  possesses  the  least  force  of  Being,  the  weakest 
and  completely  dependent  species  of  reality:  the  Xeo-Platonie 
Idealism  is  maintained  by  Scotus  Erigena  in  full. 

To  the  stages  of  unfolding  corresponds  in  a  reverse  order  the 
return  of  all  things  into  God  (regressus),  the  resolution  of  the 
world  of  individual  forms  into  the  eternal  primitive  Being,  the  dei- 
fication of  the  world.  So  thought,  as  the  final  goal  of  all  genera- 
tion and  change,  as  the  extinction  of  all  that  is  particular,  God  is 
designated  as  "  the  Mature  which  neither  is  created  nor  creates  " : 
it  is  the  ideal  of  motionless  unity,  of  absolute  rest  at  the  end  of  the 
world-process.  All  theophanies  are  destined  to  return  into  the 
unity  of  the  divine  All-Being, — that  unity  which  knows  no  dis- 
tinctions. Thus,  even  in  the  final  destiny  of  things,  the  superior 
reality  of  the  universal,  which  swallows  up  all  that  is  particular, 
preserves  itself. 

2.  As  in  antiquity  (cf.  §  11,  5),  so  here,  in  consequence  of  the 
effort  to  assure  truth  and  reality  to  universals,  the  peculiar  thought 
of  a  graded  scale  of  Being  appears.  Some  things  (universals),  is 
the  doctrine,  are  more  than  others  (particulars).  "Being"  is  looked 
upon  as,  like  other  qualities,  capable  of  comparison,  of  increase  and 
diminution ;  it  belongs  to  some  things  more  than  to  others.  So  it 
became  the  custom  to  think  that  the  concept  of  Being  (esse}  exfstere) 
has  a  relation  to  that  which  is  (essentia),  and  a  relation  of  diiferent 
degrees  of  intensity,  just  as  other  marks  and  qualities  are  related 
to  the  objects  in  which  they  are  formed.  As  a  thing  possesses  more 
or  less  extension?  force,  permanence,  so  it  has  also  more  or  less 
"Being";  and  as  it  can  receive  or  lose  other  qualities,  so  it  can 
receive  or  lose  that  of  Being.  This  line  of  thought,  peculiar  to 
Bealisin,  must  be  kept  in  mind  to  understand  a  great  number  of  the 

1  It  need  only  be  briefly  mentioned  that  this  "  division  of  Nature  "  obviously 
recalls  the  Aristotelian  distinction  of  the  unmoved  mover,  the  moved  mover, 
and  that  which  neither  moves  nor  is  moved.  Cf .  §  J3,  5. 


292  Mediceval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  III. 

metaphysical  theories  of  the  Middle  Ages.  It  explains,  in  the  first 
place,  the  most  important  doctrine  which  Realism  produced,  the 
ontological  argument  for  the  existence  of  God  which  Anselm  of  Can- 
terbury brought  forward. 

The  more  universality,  the  more  Reality.  From  this  it  follows 
that  if  God  is  the  most  universal  being,  he  is  also  the  most  Real ; 
if  he  is  the  absolutely  universal  being,  he  is  also  the  absolutely  Real 
being,  ens  realissimum.  He  has,  therefore,  according  to  the  concep- 
tion of  him,  not  only  the  comparatively  greatest  Reality,  but  also 
absolute  Reality ;  that  is,  a  Reality  than  which  a  greater  and  higher 
cannot  be  thought. 

But  through  the  whole  development  which  this  line  of  thought 
had  already  taken  in  antiquity,  we  find  that  the  worth-predicate  of 
perfection  was  inseparably  fused  with  the  conception  of  Being. 
The  degrees  of  Being  are  those  of  perfection;  the  more  anything 
is,  the  more  perfect  it  is,  and,  vice  versa}  the  more  perfect  anything 
is,  the  more  it  is.1  The  conception  of  the  highest  Being  is,  there- 
fore, also  that  of  an  absolute  perfection;  that  is,  of  a  perfection  such 
that  it  cannot  be  thought  higher  and  greater :  ens  perfectissimum. 

In  accordance  with  these  presuppositions,  Anselm  is  perfectly 
correct  in  his  conclusion  that,  from  the  mere  conception  of  God  as 
most  perfect  and  most  real  Being,  it  must  be  possible  to  infer  his 
existence.  But  to  do  this  he  attempts  various  modes  of  proof.  In 
his  Monologium  he  follows  the  old  cosmological  argument  that 
because  there  is  Being  at  all,  a  highest  and  absolute  Being  must 
be  assumed  from  which  all  else  that  exists  has  its  Being,  and  which 
itself  exists  only  from  itself,  according  to  its  own  essential  nature 
(as&itas).  Whereas  every  individual  existent  entity  can  be  also 
thought  as  non-existent,  and  therefore  owes  the  reality  of  its  essence 
not  to  itself,  but  to  another  (the  Absolute),  the  most  perfect  Being 
can  be  thought  only  as  being  or  existent,  and  exists  accordingly 
only  by  virtue  of  the  necessity  of  its  own  nature.  God's  essence 
(and  only  God's)  involves  his  existence.  The  nerve  of  this  argu- 
ment is  thus  ultimately  the  Eleatic  basal  thought,  ecmv  e*vai,  Being 
is,  and  cannot  be  thought  otherwise  than  as  being  or  existing. 

Anselm,  however,  involved  this  same  thought  in  a  peculiar  com- 
plication, while  he  intended  to  simplify  it  and  render  it  independent 
in  itself.  In  the  Proslogmm  he  entered  upon  the  ontological  argu- 
ment, properly  so  called,  which  maintains  that  without  any  reference 
to  the  Being  of  other  things,  the  mere  conception  of  the  most  per- 

1  A  principle  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  Augustine's  theodicy,  in  so  far  as  with 
both  the  existent  is  held  to  be  eo  ipso  good,  and  the  evil,  on  the  contrary,  as  not 
truly  existent. 


CHAP.  1,  §  23.]     Controversy  over  Universal:  Anselm.  293 

feet  Being  involves  its  Keality.  Inasmuch  as  this  conception  is 
thought,  it  possesses  psychical  reality  :  the  most  perfect  being  is  as 
a  content  in  consciousness  (esse  in  intellectu).  But  if  it  existed 
only  as  a  content  in  consciousness,  and  not  also  in  metaphysical 
reality  (esse  etiam  in,  re),  a  still  more  perfect  being  could  evidently 
be  thought,  which  should  possess  not  only  psychical,  but  also  meta- 
physical reality ;  and  thus  the  former  would  not  be  the  most  perfect 
being  possible.  It  belongs,  accordingly,  to  the  conception  of  the 
most  perfect  being  (quo  majus  cogitari  non  potest)  that  it  possesses 
not  only  reality  in  thought,  but  also  absolute  reality. 

It  is  obvious  that  Anselm  in  this  formulation  was  not  fortunate 
in  his  shift,  and  that  what  hovered  before  him  attained  in  this 
proof  but  a  very  awkward  expression.  For  it  takes  little  acuteness 
to  see  that  Anselm  proved  only  that  if  G-od  is  thought  (as  most 
perfect  being),  he  must  be  thought  also  necessarily  as  being  or 
existent,  and  cannot  be  thought  as  non-existent.  But  the  ontologi- 
cal  argument  of  the  Proslogium  did  not  show  even  in  the  remotest 
degree  that  God,  i.e.  that  a  most  perfect  being,  must  be  thought. 
The  necessity  for  this  stood  fast  for  Anselm  personally,  not  only 
because  of  the  conviction  of  his  faith,  but  also  by  the  cosmological 
argumentation  of  the  Monologium,  When  he  believed  that  he 
could  dispense  with  this  presupposition  and  with  the  help  of  the 
mere  conception  of  G-od  arrive  at  the  proof  of  his  existence,  he 
exemplified  in  typical  manner  the  fundamental  idea  of  Realism, 
which  ascribed  to  conceptions  without  any  regard  to  their  genesis 
and  basis  in  the  human  mind,  the  character  of  truth,  i.e.  of 
Eeality.  It  was  on  this  ground  alone  that  he  could  attempt  to 
reason  from  the  psychical  to  the  metaphysical  reality  of  the  concep- 
tion of  God. 

The  polemic  of  Gaunilo,  therefore,  in  a  certain  respect  hit  the 
vulnerable  point.  He  argued  that  according  to  the  methods  of 
Anselm,  in  quite  the  same  manner  the  reality  of  any  idea  whatever, 
e.g.  that  of  an  island,  if  the  mark  of  perfection  were  only  included 
within  it,  might  be  proved.  For  the  most  perfect  island,  if  it  were 
not  really  in  existence,  would  evidently  be  surpassed  in  perfection 
by  the  real  island,  which  should  possess  the  same  other  marks ;  the 
former  would  be  inferior  to  the  latter  in  the  attribute  of  Being. 
But  instead  of  showing  in  his  rejoinder,  as  might  have  been  ex- 
pected, that  the  conception  of  a  perfect  island  is  a  completely  unnec- 
essary arbitrary  fiction,  or  that  this  conception  contains  an  inner 
contradiction,  while  the  conception  of  the  most  real  being  is  neces- 
sary and  not  contradictory,  Anselm  expatiates  further  upon  his 
argument,  that  if  the  most  perfect  being  is  in  the  intellect,  it  must 
be  also  in  re. 


294  Mediceval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  IH. 

However  slight  tlie  cogency  of  this  attempted  proof  remains  for 
Mm  who  does  not,  as  Anselm  does  without  acknowledging  it,  regard 
the  conception  of  an  absolute  Being  as  a  necessity  of  thought,  the 
ontological  argument  is  yet  valuable  as  the  characteristic  feature  of 
mediaeval  Realism,  of  which  it  forms  the  most  consistent  expression. 
For  the  thought  that  the  highest  being  owes  its  reality  only  to  its 
own  essential  nature,  and  that  therefore  this  reality  must  be  capable 
of  being  proved  from  its  conception  alone,  is  the  natural  conclusion 
of  a  doctrine  which  traces  the  Being  of  things  of  perception  back  to 
a  participation  in  conceptions,  and  again  within  the  conceptions 
themselves  sets  up  a  graded  scale  of  reality,  employing  the  degree 
of  universality  as  the  standard. 

3.  "When  now  the  question  arose  as  to  the  kind  of  reality  which 
belongs  to  universals,  and  as  to  their  relation  to  the  individual 
things  known  to  the  senses,  mediaeval  Realism  found  itself  involved 
in  difficulties  quite  similar  to  those  which  had  faced  the  Platonic 
Realism.  The  thought  of  a  second,  higher,  immaterial  world,  which 
at  that  former  period  had  to  be  born,  was  now  indeed  received  as  a 
complete  and  almost  self-evident  doctrine,  and  the  religiously  dis- 
posed thinking  could  be  only  sympathetic  in  its  attitude  toward  the 
!N"eo-Platonic  conception  of  the  Ideas  as  contents  of  the  divine  mind. 
Following  the  pattern  of  the  Platonic  Timseus,  whose  mythical  mode 
of  presentation  was  favourable  to  this  conception,  Bernard  of 
CJiartres  sketched  an  imaginative  cosmogonic  work  of  fantastic 
grotesqueness,  and  we  find  with  his  brother  Theodoric,  attempts,  sug- 
gested by  the  same  source,  to  construct  a  symbolism  of  numbers, 
which  undertook  not  only,  as  was  done  in  other  instances,  to  develop 
the  dogma  of  the  Trinity,  but  also  to  develop  further  fundamental 
metaphysical  conceptions  out  of  the  elements  of  unity,  likeness,  and 
unlikeness.1 

In  addition  to  this  question  concerning  the  archetypal  reality  of 
the  Ideas  in  the  mind  of  Godj  the  question  is  also,  what  significance 
is  to  be  conceded  to  them  in  the  created  world.  Extreme  Realism, 
as  it  had  been  maintained  at  the  outset  by  William  of  Champeaux, 
taught  the  full  substantiality  of  the  class-concept  in  this  world  also ; 
the  universal  is  present  in  all  its  individuals  as  the  undivided 
essence,  everywhere  identical  with  itself.  The  class  accordingly 
appears  as  the  unitary  substance,  and  the  specific  marks  of  the  indi- 
viduals belonging  to  it  appear  as  the  accidents  of  this  substance. 
It  was  Abelard}s  objection  that  according  to  this  theory  mutually 
contradictory  accidents  would  have  to  be  ascribed  to  the  same  sub- 

i  Cf.  the  extracts  in  Haur6au,  Hist.  <Z.  L  ph.  sc.,  I.  396  2. 


CHAP.  1,  §  23.]      Controversy  over  Universals :  Realism.  295 

stance,  which  first  forced  the  defender  of  Eealism  to  give  up  this 
extreme  position  and  restrict  himself  to  the  defence  of  the  proposi- 
tion, that  the  class  exists  in  the  individuals,  indimdualiter ;l  i.e. 
that  its  universal,  identical  essence  clothes  itself  in  each  particular 
example  in  a  particular  substantial  Form.  This  view  was  in  touch 
with  the  conception  of  the  Neo-Platonists,  which  had  been  main- 
tained by  Boethius  and  Augustine  and  also  occasionally  mentioned 
in  the  literature  of  the  intervening  period,  and  its  exposition  moves 
readily  in  the  Aristotelian  terminology,  according  to  which  the 
universal  appears  as  the  more  indeterminate  possibility  which 
realises  itself  in  individuals  by  means  of  their  peculiar  Forms. 
The  conception  is  then  no  longer  substance  in  the  proper  sense,  but 
the  common  substratum  which  takes  on  different  forms  in  individ- 
ual instances. 

Walter  of  3fortagne  sought  to  remove  the  difficulty  in  another 
^av>  ^7  designating  the  individualising  of  the  classes  or  genera  to 
species,  and  of  the  species  to  individual  things,  as  the  entering  of 
the  substratum  into  different  states  (status),  and  yet  regarding 
these  states  as  realiter  specialising  determinations  of  the  universal. 

In  both  these  lines  of  thought,  however,  Eealism  was  only  with 
difficulty  held  back  from  a  final  consequence  which  at  the  first  lav 
in  nowise  within  the  purpose  of  its  orthodox  supporters.  The  re- 
lation of  the  universal  to  the  particular  might  be  regarded  as  the 
self-realising  of  the  substratum  into  individual  Forms,  or  as  its 
specialisation  into  individual  states, — in  either  case  one  came  ulti- 
mately in  the  ascending  line  of  abstract  conceptions  to  the  idea  of 
the  ens  generalissimum,  whose  self-realisations,  or  whose  modified 
states,  formed  in  descending  line  the  genera,  species,  and  individuals, 
i.e.  to  the  doctrine  that  in  all  phenomena  of  the  world  only  the  one 
divine  substance  is  to  be  seen.  PantJieism  inhered  in  the  blood  of 
Eealism  by  reason  of  its  !N"eo-Platonic  descent  and  was  always 
making  its  appearance  here  and  there ;  and  opponents  like  Abelard 
did  not  fail  to  cast  this  consequence  in  the  face  of  Eealism. 

Meanwhile  realistic  pantheism  did  not  come  to  be  expressly 
maintained  in  this  period;  on  the  other  hand,  Eealism  in  its  theory 
of  universals  found  an  instrument  for  establishing  some  of  the 
fundamental  dogmas,  and  therefore  rejoiced  in  the  approbation  of 
the  Church.  The  assumption  of  a  substantial  reality  of  the  logi- 
cal genera  not  only  seemed  to  make  possible  t  a  rational  exposi- 
tion of  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  but  also,  as  was  shown  by 
Anselm  and  Odo  (Odardus)  of  Cambrey,  proved  to  be  a  fit  phii- 

1  For  the  reading  "indiSerenter,17  cf.  Lowe,  op.  cit.,  49  ff.,  and  CL  Baumker, 
Arch.  f.  Gesch.  d.  Ph.,  X.  257. 


296  Mediceval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  III. 

osopMeal  basis  for  the  doctrines  of  inherited  sin  and  vicarious 
satisfaction. 

4.  On  the  same  grounds,  ve  find  at  first  the  reverse  lot  befalling 
Nominalism,  which  during  this  period  remained  more  repressed  and 
stifled.  Its  beginnings  *  were  harmless  enough.  It  grew  out  of  the 
fragments  of  Aristotelian  logic,  in  particular  out  of  the  treatise  De 
Categonis.  In  this  the  individual  things  of  experience  were  desig- 
nated as  the  true  " first"  substances,  and  here  the  logico-grainmatical 
rule  was  propounded  that  "substance"  could  not  be  predicate  in 
a  judgment :  res  non  predicatur.  Since  now  the  logical  significance 
of  universals  is  essentially  that  of  affording  the  predicates  in  the 
judgment,  (and  in  the  syllogism),  it  seemed  to  follow  —  this  the 
commentary  -Super  Porphyrium  had  already  taught  —  that  univer- 
sals could  not  be  substances. 

What  are  they,  then  ?  It  could  be  read  in  Marcianus  Capella  that 
a  universal  was  the  comprehension  of  many  particularities  by  one 
name  (nomen),  by  the  same  word  (vox);  but  a  word,  Boethius  had 
defined  as  a  "motion  of  the  air  produced  by  the  tongue."  With 
this  all  elements  of  the  thesis  of  extreme  Nominalism  were  given : 
universals  are  nothing  but  collective  names,  common  designations 
for  different  things,  sounds  (flatus  vocis),  which  serve  as  signs  for  a 
multiplicity  of  substances  or  their  accidents. 

In  what  degree  the  thus  formulated  Nominalism,  which  in  this 
extreme  form  must  have  ignored  even  the  real  occasions  for  such 
collective  names,  was  actually  propounded  and  defended  during  that 
period 2  can  no  longer  be  determined.5  But  the  metaphysics  of  indi- 
vidualism which  corresponds  to  such  a  theory  of  knowledge  meets  us 
clearly  and  firmly  with  the  claim  that  only  individual  things  are  to 
be  regarded  as  substances,  as  truly  real.  This  was  doubtless  most 
sharply  expressed  by  Moscellinus,  when  he  presented  it  in  a  two- 
fold aspect :  as  the  comprehension  of  many  individuals  under  the 
same  name  is  only  a  human  designation,  so,  too,  the  distinguishing 
of  parts  in  individual  substances  is  only  an  analysis  for  human 
thought  and  communication  ;*  the  truly  real  is  the  individual  thing, 
and  that  alone. 

1  Cf .  C.  S.  Barach,  Zur  Geschichte  des  Nominalismus  vor  Roscellin  (Vienna, 
1866). 

2  It  is  certain  that  this  did  not  as  yet  occur  in  the  beginnings  of  Nominalism 
(with  Eric  of  Auxerre,  with  the  author  of  the  commentary  Super  Porphyrium, 
etc.),  for  with  these  writers  we  find  at  the  same  time  the  expression  of  BoSthius 
that  genus  is  substantialis  simitttudo  ex  dwersis  speciebus  in  cogitatione  collecta. 

8  John  of  Salisbury  says  (Policr.  VII.  12  ;  cf.  Metal.  II.  17)  that  this  opinion 
vanished  again  with  its  author  Roscellinus. 

4  The  example  of  the  house  and  its  wall,  which,  according  to  Abelard  (Owt>r. 
Ined.  471),  he  employed  in  this  connection,  was  certainly  the  most  unfortunate 
that  could  be  thought  of.  How  inferior  such  considerations  are  to  the  begin- 
nings of  Greek  thought! 


CHAP.  1,  §  23.]     Controversy  over  Universal^  :  Nominalism.      297 

The  individual,  however,  is  that  which  is  given  in  the  world  of 
sensible  reality ;  hence  for  this  metaphysics,  knowledge  consists 
only  in  the  experience  of  the  senses.  That  this  sensualism  appeared 
in  the  train  of  Nominalism,  that  there  were  men  who  allowed  their 
thinking  to  go  on  entirely  in  corporeal  images,  we  are  assured,  not 
only  by  Anselm,  but  also  by  Abelard :  but  who  these  men  were 
and  how  they  carried  out  their  theory  we  do  not  learn. 

This  doctrine  became  momentous  through  its  application  to  theo- 
logical questions  by  Berengar  of  Tours  and  Eoscellinus.  The  one 
contested,  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Sacrament,  the  possibility  of  the 
transmutation  of  the  substance  while  the  former  accidents  were 
retained ;  the  second  reached  the  consequence  that  the  three  persons 
of  the  divine  Trinity  were  to  be  looked  upon  as  three  different 
substances,  agreeing  only  in  certain  qualities  and  workings  (tri- 
theism). 

5".  In  the  literary  development  of  these  antitheses  Eealism  passed 
current  as  Platonic,  Nominalism  as  Aristotelian.  The  latter  desig- 
nation was  evidently  much  more  distorted  than  the  former,  but 
when  we  consider  the  defective  nature  of  the  transmitted  material, 
we  can  understand  that  the  mediating  tendencies  which  thrust 
themselves  in  between  Eealism  and  Nominalism  introduced  them- 
selves with  the  endeavour  to  harmonise  the  two  great  thinkers  of 
antiquity.  Of  such  attempts,  two  are  chiefly  worthy  of  mention : 
from  the  party  of  Eealism  the  so-called  Indifferentism,  from  that  of 
Nominalism  the  doctrine  of  Abelard. 

As  soon  as  Eealism  abandoned  the  doctrine  of  the  separate 
existence  of  the  concepts  (the  Platonic  xwpurfufe)  and  supported 
only  the  "  universality,  in  re,'3  the  tendency  asserted  itself  to  con- 
ceive of  the  different  stages  of  universality  as  the  real  states  of  one 
and  the  same  substratum.  One  and  the  same  absolute  reality  is,  in 
its  different  " status"  animate  being,  man,  Greek,  Socrates.  As  the 
substratum  of  these  states  the  moderate  Eealists  regarded  the  uni- 
versal, and  ultimately  the  ens  realissimum;  it  was  therefore  a 
significant  concession  to  Nominalism  when  others  made  the  indi- 
vidual the  supporter  of  these  states.  The  truly  existent,  these 
latter  thinkers  conceded,  is  the  individual  thing,  but  the  individual 
thing  supports  within  itself  as  essential  determinations  of  its  own 
nature  certain  qualities  and  groups  of  qualities  which  it  h£s  in 
common  with  others.  This  real  similarity  (consimilitudo)  is  the 
indifferent  ("not  different")  element  in  all  these  individuals,  and 
thus  the  genus  is  present  in  its  species,  the  species  in  its  indi- 
vidual examples,  indifferenter.  Adelard  of  Bath  appears  as  the 
chief  supporter  of  this  line  of  thought,  yet  it  must  have  had  a 


296  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  III 

osopMcal  basis  for  the  doctrines  of  inherited  sin  and  vicarious 
satisfaction. 

4.  On  the  same  grounds,  we  find  at  first  the  reverse  lot  befalling 
Nominalism,  which  during  this  period  remained  more  repressed  and 
stifled.  Its  beginnings :  were  harmless  enough.  It  grew  out  of  the 
fragments  of  Aristotelian  logic,  in  particular  out  of  the  treatise  De 
Categories.  In  this  the  individual  things  of  experience  were  desig- 
nated as  the  true  ''first"  substances,  and  here  the  logico-grammatical 
rule  was  propounded  that  " substance"  could  not  be  predicate  in 
a  judgment :  res  non  predicatur.  Since  now  the  logical  significance 
of  universals  is  essentially  that  of  affording  the  predicates  in  the 
judgment,  (and  in  the  syllogism),  it  seemed  to  follow  —  this  the 
commentary  -Super  Porphyrium  had  already  taught  —  that  univer- 
sals could  not  be  substances. 

What  are  they,  then  ?  It  could  be  read  in  Marcianus  Capella  that 
a  universal  was  the  comprehension  of  many  particularities  by  one 
name  (nomen),  by  the  same  word  (vox);  but  a  word,  Boethius  had 
defined  as  a  "  motion  of  the  air  produced  by  the  tongue."  With 
this  all  elements  of  the  thesis  of  extreme  Nominalism  were  given : 
universals  are  nothing  but  collective  names,  common  designations 
for  different  things,  sounds  (Jlatus  vocis),  which  serve  as  signs  for  a 
multiplicity  of  substances  or  their  accidents. 

In  what  degree  the  thus  formulated  Nominalism,  which  in  this 
extreme  form  must  have  ignored  even  the  real  occasions  for  such 
collective  names,  was  actually  propounded  and  defended  during  that 
period2  can  no  longer  be  determined.3  But  the  metaphysics  of  indi- 
vidualism which  corresponds  to  such  a  theory  of  knowledge  meets  us 
clearly  and  firmly  with  the  claim  that  only  individual  things  are  to 
be  regarded  as  substances,  as  truly  real.  This  was  doubtless  most 
sharply  expressed  by  RosceUinus,  when  he  presented  it  in  a  two- 
fold aspect :  as  the  comprehension  of  many  individuals  under  the 
same  name  is  only  a  human  designation,  so,  too,  the  distinguishing 
of  parts  in  individual  substances  is  only  an  analysis  for  human 
thought  and  communication  j4  the  truly  real  is  the  individual  thing, 
and  that  alone. 

1  Cf.  C.  S.  Baiach,  Zur  G-eschichte  des  Nominalismus  vor  Eoscellin  ("Vienna, 
1866).  v  ' 

2  It  is  certain  that  this  did  not  as  yet  occur  in  the  beginnings  of  Nominalism 
(with  Eric  of  Auxerre,  with  the  author  of  the  commentary  Super  Porphyrium, 
etc.).  for  with  these  writers  we  find  at  the  same  time  the  expression  of  Bogthius 
that  genus  is  substantialis  similitudo  ex  dwersis  speciebus  in  cogitations  collecta. 

s/ohn  of  Salisbury  says  (Potter.  VII.  12 ;  cf .  Metal.  II.  17)  that  this  opinion 
vanished  again  with  its  author  Roscellinus. 

*  The  example  of  the  house  and  its  wall,  which,  according  to  Abelard  (Ouvr. 
Ined.  471),  he  employed  in  this  connection,  was  certainly  the  most  unfortunate 
that  could  be  thought  of.  How  inferior  such  considerations  are  to  the  begin- 
nings of  Greek  thought! 


CHAP.  1,  §  23.]     Controversy  over  Universal  :  Nominalism.       297 

The  individual,  however,  is  that  which  is  given  in  the  world  of 
sensible  reality ;  hence  for  this  metaphysics,  knowledge  consists 
only  in  the  experience  of  the  senses.  That  this  sensualism  appeared 
in  the  train  of  Nominalism,  that  there  were  men  who  allowed  their 
thinking  to  go  on  entirely  in  corporeal  images,  we  are  assured,  not 
only  by  Anselm,  but  also  by  Abelard :  but  who  these  men  were 
and  how  they  carried  out  their  theory  we  do  not  learn. 

This  doctrine  became  momentous  through  its  application  to  theo- 
logical questions  by  Berengar  of  Tours  and  Eoscellinus.  The  one 
contested,  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Sacrament,  the  possibility  of  the 
transmutation  of  the  substance  while  the  former  accidents  were 
retained ;  the  second  reached  the  consequence  that  the  three  persons 
of  the  divine  Trinity  were  to  be  looked  upon  as  three  different 
substances,  agreeing  only  in  certain  qualities  and  workings  (tri- 
theism). 

£  In  the  literary  development  of  these  antitheses  Realism  passed 
current  as  Platonic,  Nominalism  as  Aristotelian.  The  latter  desig- 
nation was  evidently  much  more  distorted  than  the  former,  but 
when  we  consider  the  defective  nature  of  the  transmitted  material, 
we  can  understand  that  the  mediating  tendencies  which  thrust 
themselves  in  between  Realism  and  Nominalism  introduced  them- 
selves with  the  endeavour  to  harmonise  the  two  great  thinkers  of 
antiquity.  Of  such  attempts,  two  are  chiefly  worthy  of  mention : 
from  the  party  of  Realism  the  so-called  Indifferentism,  from  that  of 
Nominalism  the  doctrine  of  Abelard. 

As  soon  as  Realism  abandoned  the  doctrine  of  the  separate 
existence  of  the  concepts  (the  Platonic  x^ptcr/ios)  and  supported 
only  the  "universalia  in  re^  the  tendency  asserted  itself  to  con- 
ceive of  the  different  stages  of  universality  as  the  real  states  of  one 
and  the  same  substratum.  One  and  the  same  absolute  reality  is,  in 
its  different  " status"  animate  being,  man,  Greek,  Socrates.  As  the 
substratum  of  these  states  the  moderate  Realists  regarded  the  uni- 
versal, and  ultimately  the  ens  realissimum;  it  was  therefore  a 
significant  concession  to  Nominalism  when  others  made  the  indi- 
vidual the  supporter  of  these  states.  The  truly  existent,  these 
latter  thinkers  conceded,  is  the  individual  thing,  but  the  individual 
thing  supports  within  itself  as  essential  determinations  of  its  own 
nature  certain  qualities  and  groups  of  qualities  which  it  ha's  in 
common  with  others.  This  real  similarity  (consimilitudo)  is  the 
indifferent  ("not  different")  element  in  all  these  individuals,  and 
thus  the  genus  is  present  in  its  species,  the  species  in  its  indi- 
vidual examples,  indifferenter.  Adelard  of  Bath  appears  as  the 
chief  supporter  of  this  line  of  thought,  yet  it  must  have  had  a 


298  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  First  Period.       [PART  m. 

wider  extension,  perhaps  -with  a  somewhat  stronger  nominalistic 
accent.1 

6.  But  it  was  Abelard 2  with  his  all-sided  activity  who  formed 
the  vigorous  centre  in  the  controversy  over  universals.  The  pupil 
and  at  the  same  time  the  opponent  both  of  Roscellinus  and  of 
TVilliam  of  Champeaux,  he  fought  Xominalism  and  Eealism  each 
by  means  of  the  other,  and  since  he  takes  the  weapons  of  his 
polemic  now  from  the  one  side  now  from  the  other,  it  could  not  fail 
to  result  that  his  position  should  be  interpreted  and  judged  oppo- 
sitely.3 And  yet  the  outlines  of  this  position  are  clear  and  dis- 
tinct before  us.  In  his  polemic  against  all  kinds  of  Eealism,  the 
thought  that  the  logical  consequence  of  Eealism  is  pantheism 
returns  so  frequently  and  energetically  that  we  must  see  in  it,  not 
merely  a  convenient  weapon  for  use  in  the  ecclesiastical  conditions 
then  prevailing,  but  rather  the  expression  of  an  individualistic  con- 
viction easy  to  understand  in  the  case  of  a  personality  so  energetic, 
self-conscious,  and  proudly  self-reliant.  But  this  individuality  had 
at  the  same  time  its  inmost  essence  in  clear,  sharp,  intellectual 
activity,  in  genuine  French  rationality.  Hence  its  no  less  powerful 
opposition  against  the  sensualistic  tendencies  of  Nominalism. 

Universals,  Abelard  teaches,  cannot  be  things,  but  just  as  little 
can  they  be  mere  words.  The  word  (vox)  as  a  complex  of  sounds, 
is  indeed  something  singular ;  it  can  acquire  universal  meaning  only 
mediately,  by  becoming  a  predicate  (sermo) .  Such  an  employment 
of  a  word  for  a  predicate  is  possible  only  through  conceptional 
thought  (conceptus),  which,  by  comparing  the  contents  of  percep- 
tion, gains  that  which  is  by  its  nature  adapted  to  become  a  predicate 
(quod  de  pluribus  natum  est  prcedicari)  *  The  universal  is  then  the 
conceptual  predicate  (Sermonism),  or  the  concept  itself  (Conceptual- 
ism)  .*  But  if  the  universal  as  such  gains  its  existence  first  in 
thought  and  judgment,  and  in  the  predicate  which  is  possible  only 
by  this  means,  and  exists  only  there,  it  is  not  therefore  entirely 
•without  relations  to  absolute  reality.  Universals  could  not  be  the 
indispensable  forms  of  all  knowledge,  as  they  in  fact  actually  are, 
if  there  were  not  something  in  the  nature  of  things  which  we 

*  According  to  the  statements  in  the  treatise  De  G-eneribus  et  JSpeciebus  and 
the  communications  of  Abelard  in  his  gloss  on  Isagoge.    It  seems,  too,  that  Wil- 
liam of  Chainpeaux  inclined  toward  Indifferentism  at  the  last. 

*  Cf.  S.  M.  Deutsch,  Peter  Abaelard,  ein  kritiscTier  Theolog.  des  zwolften 
JaJirhwultrts  (Leips.  1883). 

8  Thus  Ritter  makes  him  a  Realist ;  HaurSau,  a  Nominalist. 

*  Ct  Arist.  De  Tnterpr.  7,  17  a  39. 

6  It  seems  that  Abelard  at  different  times  emphasised  sometimes  the  one 
alternative,  sometimes  the  other,  and  perhaps  his  school  also  developed  differ- 
ently in  accordance  with  these  two  lines  of  thought. 


CHAP.  1,  §  23.]  Controversy  over  Universals  :  Abelard.  299 

apprehend  and  predicate  in  these  universals.  This  something  is  the 
likeness  or  similarity  (confonnitas)  of  the  essential  characteristics 
of  individual  substances.1  Not  as  numerical  or  substantial  identity, 
but  as  a  multiplicity  with  like  qualities,  does  the  universal 
exist  in  Nature,  and  it  becomes  a  unitary  concept  which  makes 
predication  possible,  only  when  it  has  been  apprehended  and  con- 
ceived by  human  thought.  Even  Abelard,  however,  explains  this 
likeness  of  character  in  a  multiplicity  of  individuals  upon  the 
hypothesis  that  God  created  the  world  according  to  archetypes  which 
he  carried  in  his  mind  (noys).  Thus,  according  to  his  view,  the 
universals  exist  firstly,  before  the  tilings,  as  conceptus  mentis  in  God ; 
secondly,  in  the  things,  as  likeness  of  the  essential  characteristics  of 
individuals ;  thirdly,  after  things,  in  the  human  understanding  as  its 
concepts  and  predicates  acquired  by  comparative  thought. 

Thus,  in  Abelard  the  different  lines  of  thought  of  the  time 
become  united.  But  he  had  developed  the  individual  elements  of 
this  theory  incidentally,  partly  in  connection  with  his  polemic,  and 
perhaps,  also,  at  different  times  with  varying  emphasis  on  this  or 
that  element :  a  systematic  solution  of  the  whole  problem  he  never 
gave.  As  regards  the  real  question  at  issue  he  had  advanced  so  far 
that  it  was  essentially  his  theory  that  became  the  ruling  doctrine  in 
the  formula  accepted  by  the  Arabian  philosophers  (Avicenna),  "uni- 
versalia  ante  multipUcitatem,  in  multiplicitate  et  post  multiplicitatem ;  " 
to  universals  belongs  equally  a  significance  ante  rem  as  regards  the 
divine  mind,  in  re  as  regards  Nature,  and  post  rem  as  regards  human 
knowledge.  And  since  Thomas  and  Duns  Scotus  in  the  main  agreed 
in  this  view,  the  problem  of  universals,  which,  to  be  sure,  has  not 
yet  been  solved,2  came  to  a  preliminary  rest,  to  come  again  into  the 
foreground  when  Nominalism  was  revived  (of.  §  27). 

1  Others,  who  in  the  main  had  the  same  thought,  e.g.  Gilbert  de  la  Porre"e, 
aided  themselves  with  the  Aristotelian  distinction  between  first  and  second 
substances,  or  between  substance  and  subsistence ;  yet  Gilbert  uses  the  latter 
terms  in  a  changed  meaning  as  compared  with  their  use  by  Abelard. 

2  Even  if  the  problem  as  to  the  universals  be  restricted,  according  to  the 
mode  of  Scholasticism,  to  the  reality  of  the  class-concepts,  the  problem  has 
gone  through  essentially  new  phases  in  its  further  development,  and  cannot  be 
regarded  as  finally  solved  by  the  position  taken  by  science  to-day.    Behind  this, 
however,  rises  the  more  general  and  more  difficult  question,  what  metaphysical 
significance  belongs  to  those  universal  determinations,  in  a  knowledge  of  which 
all  explanatory  science  practically  consists.    Cf.  H.  Lotze,  Logik  (Leips.  1874), 
§§  313-321.     [Eng.  tr.  ed.  by  B.  Bosanquet,  Oxford  and  N.Y.  1888.] 

To  the  investigators  of  to-day,  therefore,  who  would  throw  the  controversy 
over  universals  to  the  lumber  pile  of  past  theories,  or  treat  it  as  a  long-outgrown 
children's  disease,  so  long  as  they  do  not  know  how  to  state  with  complete 
certainty  and  clearness  in  what  consists  the  metaphysical  reality  and  efficiency 
of  that  which  we  call  a  law  of  Nature,  we  must  still  cry,  "mutoto  nomine  de  te 
fabula  narrata."  Cf.,  also,  0.  Leibmann,  Zur  Analysis  der  Wirklichkeit  (2d 
ed.,  Strassburg,  1880),  313  n%  471  ff.,  and  Gedanken  und  Thatsachen  (1  Heft, 
Strassburg,  1882),  89  ff. 


800  Mediaral  Philosophy  :  First  Period.        [PART  III 

7.  But  Abelard  lias  a  still  greater  significance  than  that  due  to 
this  central  position  in  the  controversy  over  universals,  for  he  mani- 
fested in  his  own  person,  and  expressed  in  typical  form,  the  attitude 
which  the  dialectic,  unfolding  in  connection  with  that  controversy, 
occupied  in  the  mental  and  spiritual  life  of  that  time.  He  is,  so 
far  as  it  was  possible  within  the  limits  of  the  ideas  of  his  time,  the 
spokesman  of  free  science,,  the  prophet  of  the  newly  awakened  im- 
pulse toward  real  and  independent  knowledge.  Abelard  (and  with. 
him  Gilbert)  is  first  of  all  a  rationalist;  thought  is  for  him  the  norm 
of  truth.  Dialectic  has  the  task  of  distinguishing  between  true 
and  false.  He  may,  indeed,  subject  himself  to  revelation  preserved 
in  tradition,  but,  he  says,  we  believe  divine  revelation  only  because  it 
is  reasonable.  Hence  dialectic  has,  in  his  case,  no  longer  really  the 
task  which  Anselm,  following  Augustine,  prescribed  it,  of  making 
the  content  of  faith  comprehensible  for  the  intellect  ;  he  demands 
for  it  also  the  critical  right  of  deciding  in  doubtful  cases  according 
to  its  own  rules.  Thus,  in  the  treatise  "Sic  et  Non"  he  set  the 
views  of  the  Church.  Fathers  over  against  each  other  to  their  recip- 
rocal disintegration  dialectically,  in  order  to  find  at  last  what  is 
worthy  of  belief  only  in  what  is  capable  of  proof.  So,  too,  in  his 
Dialog  us,  the  cognising  reason  appears  as  judge  over  the  various 
religions,  and  while  Abelard  regards  Christianity  as  the  ideal  con- 
summation of  the  history  of  religions,  there  are  expressions  in  his 
works  i  in  which  he  reduces  the  content  of  Christianity  to  the  origi- 
nal moral  law,  which  was  re-established  by  Jesus  in  its  purity. 
From  this  standpoint,  too,  Abelard  was  the  first  to  win  once  more 
a  free,  unbiassed  view  for  the  interpretation  of  antiquity.  Little 
as  he  knew  of  them,  he  was  an  admirer  of  the  Greeks  ;  he  sees  in 
their  philosophers  Christs  before  Christianity,  and  regarding  men 
like  Socrates  and  Plato  as  inspired,  he  asks  (reversing  the  thought 
of  the  Church  Fathers,  cf.  p.  223,  note  5)  whether  religious  tradi- 
tion may  not  perhaps  have  been  partly  created  by  these  philoso- 
phers. Christianity  is  regarded  by  him  as  the  philosophy  of  the 
Greeks  made  democratic. 

Abelard,  like  almost  all  the  "Enlighteners"  of  the  Middle  Ages,3 
was  an  obedient  son  of  the  Church.  But  if  this  fact  were  to  put  us 
in  error  as  to  the  significance  of  his  personality  in  the  line  just 
mentioned,  —  a  significance  rather  for  the  history  of  religion  and 
civilisation  than  as  producing  something  philosophically  new,  —  it 
would  be  sufficient  to  take  into  account  the  attacks  which  he  met. 


v  for  what  foUows  in  Reuter'  ®esch-  d*r  AtfMrung  im 

J/.~.dL.,  1.  loo  ff. 
2  A.   Harnack,  Dogmengesckichte,  III.-  322. 


CHAP.  1,  §  24.]  Dualism  of  Body  and  Soul  301 

In  fact.  his  controversy  with  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  is  the  conflict  of 
knowledge  with  faith,  of  reason  with  authority,  of  science  with  the 
Church.  And  if  Abelard  lacked  ultimately  the  weight  and  staying 
power  of  personality  to  prevail  in  such  a  contest,1  it  will  be  remem- 
bered, on  the  other  hand,  that  a  science  such  as  the  twelfth  century 
could  offer  —  even  aside  from  the  external  power  to  which  the 
Church  at  that  time  had  attained  —  must  have  been  inferior  to  the 
mighty  inward  strength  of  faith,  even  if  it  had  not  been  supported 
by  so  great  and  high  a  personality.  For  that  bold  postulate,  so  full 
of  the  future,  that  only  unprejudiced  scientific  insight  should  deter- 
mine faith,  —  what  means  did  it  then  possess  for  its  fulfilment  ? 
Its  only  means  were  the  hollow  rules  of  dialectic ;  and  the  content 
which  this  science  had  to  exhibit,  it  owed  just  to  that  tradition 
against  which  it  rebelled  with  its  intellectualistic  criticism.  This 
science  lacked  the  material  strength  to  carry  out  the  part  to  which 
she  felt  herself  called ;  but  she  set  herself  a  problem  which,  while 
she  herself  was  not  able  to  solve  it,- has  never  again  vanished  from 
the  memory  of  European  peoples. 

We  hear,  indeed,  of  the  disturbing  practices  of  those  who  would 
have  everything  treated  only  "scientifically.";2  complaints  multiply 
after  the  time  of  Anselm  over  the  growing  rationalism  of  the  Zeitgeist, 
over  the  evil  men  who  will  believe  only  what  they  can  comprehend 
and  prove,  over  the  Sophists  who,  with  impudent  dexterity,  know 
how  to  dispute  pro  et  contra,  over  the  "  deniers,"  who  from  ration- 
alists are  said  to  have  become  materialists  and  nihilists ;  —  but  not 
even  the  names  of  the  men  who  answer  to  this  description  have 
been  preserved,  to  say  nothing  of  their  doctrines.  And  just  this 
lack  in  proper  material  of  its  own  was  the  reason  that  the  dialectic 
movement,  whose  prince  was  Abelard,  in  spite  of  all  its  zeal  and  all 
its  acuteness,  ran  out  and  became  exhausted  without  direct  and 
immediate  results. 

§  24.  The  Dualism  of  Body  and  SouL 

On  these  grounds  it  is  explicable  that  in  the  twelfth  and,  in  part, 
even  in  the  eleventh  century,  we  find  the  feeling  of  the  unfruitful- 
ness  of  dialectic  as  widely  extended  as  the  feverish  impulse  to 
attain  through  it  to  true  knowledge.  A  tendency  that  indicates 
disillusion  is  manifested  in  this  period  by  the  side  of  the  ardent 
desire  for  knowledge.  Discontented  with  the  subtilties  of  dialectic, 
which,  even  in  men  like  Anselm,  had  laid  itself  under  obligation  to 

1  Cf.  Th.  Ziegler,  Abaelard's  Ethica,  in  Strassburg.  Abh.  z*  Philos.  (Freiburg, 
1884),  p.  221. 

2  »  Pun  philosophi." 


302  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  First  Period.         [PART  in. 

place  the  ultimate  mysteries  of  faith,  upon  a  rational  basis,  some 
plunged  from  unfruitful  theory  into  practical  life,  ;iin  das  Rauschen 
der  Zeit,  ins  Rollen  der  Begebenheit/' — into  the  rush  of  time,  the 
rolling  of  events,  —  others  plunged  into  a  revelry  in  supra-rational 
Mysticism ;  others,  finally,  into  diligent  work  in  empirical  research. 
AIL  the  opposites,  into  which  an  intellectual  activity  that  is  predom- 
inantly logical  can  pass  over,  develop  by  the  side  of  dialectic,  and 
take  their  position  against  it  in  a  more  or  less  firmly  concluded 
league,  —  Practice,  Mysticism,  and  Empiricism. 

There  resulted  from  this  at  first  a  peculiarly  distorted  relation  to 
scientific  tradition.  Aristotle  was  known  only  as  the  father  of 
formal  logic  and  master  of  dialectic,  and  in  consequence  of  this  igno- 
rance was  regarded  as  the  hero  of  the  purely  intellectual  mode  of 
considering  the  world.  Plato,  on  the  contrary,  was  known  partly 
as  the  creator  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas  (unwittingly  falsified  in 
accordance  with  Xeo-Platonic  processes),  partly,  by  virtue  of  the 
preservation  of  the  Timasus,  as  the  founder  of  a  philosophy  of 
Nature  whose  fundamental  teleological  character  found  the  live- 
liest assent  in  religious  thought.  Hence  when  Gferbert,  as  a  counter- 
poise against  the  pride  of  dialectic  in  which  he  himself  had  at  first 
made  some  not  very  successful  attempts,  commended  the  study  of 
Sature,  to  which  he  had  been  stimulated  by  the  example  of  the 
Arabians,  and  which  corresponded  to  his  own  vigorous  practical 
bent  toward  active  life,  he  could  count  on  approval  for  this  en- 
deavour only  among  men  who,  like  him,  were  working  toward  an 
extension  of  material  information,  and  who,  in  aid  of  this,  were 
appropriating  the  results  of  ancient  researches.  Thus  the  return  to 
antiquity  makes  here  its  first  appearance  as  the  source  of  material 
knowledge  in  opposition  to  the  Aristotelian  dialectic,  — a  first  weak 
Renaissance  which,  half  humanistic,  half  naturalistic,  aims  to  gain 
a  living  content  of  knowledge,1  G-erbert's  disciple,  Fulbert  (died 
1029),  opened  the  school  of  Chartres,  which,  in  the  following  period, 
became  the  seat  of  the  Platonism  that  was  intimately  associated 
with  the  study  of  Xature.  Here  worked  the  brothers  Theodoric 
and  Bernard  of  Chartres ;  from  this  school  William  of  Conches 
received  his  tendency.  In  their  writings  the  powerful  stimulus  of 
classical  antiquity  unites  with  the  interest  of  an  active  and  vigorous 

1  The  cloister  Monte  Cassino  in  Italy  formed  one  of  the  main  seats  of  this 
movement.  Here  (about  1050)  the  monk  Constantinus  Africanus  worked,  who, 
as  is  known  to  have  been  the  case  also  with  the  Platonist  Ad&ard  of  Bath, 
gathered  his  learning  on  his  journeys  in  the  Orient,  and  was  especially  active 
in  the  translation  of  medical  treatises  by  Hippocrates  and  Galen.  The  effects 
of  the  activity  in  this  cloister  are  shown  not  only  hi  literature,  but  also  in  the 
founding  of  the  famous  school  of  Salerno  in  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century. 


CHAP.  1,  §  24]     Body  and  Soul :  School  of  Ohartres.  303 

knowledge  of  Mature*  "We  see  here  one  of  the  most  peculiar  shift- 
ings  that  have  occurred  in  the  history  of  literature.  Plato  and 
Aristotle  have  exchanged  their  roles  :  the  latter  appears  as  the  ideal 
of  an  abstract  science  of  conceptions,  the  former  as  the  starting- 
point  for  a  concrete  knowledge  of  Xature.  The  knowledge  of  ex- 
ternal reality  that  meets  us  in  this  period  of  mediaeval  science  is 
attached  to  the  name  of  Plato.  So  far  as  there  is  a  natural  science 
in  this  age,  it  is  that  of  the  Platonists,  — of  a  Bernard  of  Chartres, 
of  a  William  of  Conches,  and  their  associates.1 

But  this  disposition  toward  concrete  reality,  which  makes  the 
Platonists  of  the  Middle  Ages  conspicuous  as  contrasted  with  the 
high-soaring  metaphysics  of  the  dialecticians,  assumed  still  another 
form,  which  was  much  more  valuable.  Incapable  as  yet  of  gaining 
from  outer  experience  better  results  than  those  already  at  its  hand 
in  the  transmitted  Greek  science;  the  empirical  impulse  of  the 
Middle  Ages  directed  its  activity  to  the  investigation  of  the  mental 
life,  and  unfolded  the  full  energy  of  real  observation  and  acute 
analysis  in  the  domain  of  inner  experience — in  psychology.  This  is 
the  field  of  scientific  work  in  which  the  Middle  Ages  attained  the 
most  valuable  results.2  In  this,  the  experience  of  practical  life  as 
well  as  that  of  the  sublimest  piety  was  filled  with  a  substantial  con- 
tent, and  as  such  set  itself  in  opposition  to  the  dialectical  play  of 
conceptions. 

1.  The  natural  leader  in  this  field  was  Augustine,  whose  psychologi- 
cal views  exercised  a  mastery  that  was  the  stronger  in  proportion  as 
his  views  were  interwoven  with  the  current  religious  conviction,  and 
in  proportion,  also,  to  the  slight  extent  to  which  the  Aristotelian 
psychology  was  known.  But  Augustine  had  maiDtained  in  his 
system  the  complete  dualism  which  regarded  the  soul  as  an  imma- 
terial substance,  and  man  as  a  union  of  two  substances,  body  and 
soul.  Just  for  this  reason  he  could  not  expect  to  gain  a  knowledge 
of  the  soul  from  its  relations  to  the  body,  and  took  with  full  con- 
sciousness of  his  procedure  the  standpoint  of  inner  experience. 

The  new  principle  of  method  which  had  thus  arisen  from  meta- 
physical presuppositions  could  unfold  itself  undisturbed  so  long  as 
the  monistic  metaphysical  psychology  of  the  Peripatetic  school  re- 


1  This  humanistic  natural  science  of  the  early  Middle  Ages  was  not  at  all 
discriminating  in  its  adoption  of  ancient  tradition ;  so,  for  example,  if  we  may 
trust  the  account  of  Walter  of  St.  Victor  (in  the  extracts  made  by  Bulaeus, 
Migne,  Vol.  190,  p.  1170),  William  of  Conches  regarded  an  atomistic  conception 
of  Nature  as  capable  of  union  with  his  Platonism.  (Migne,  Vol.  90,  pp.  1132  ft.)- 

2  Cf.  for  this  and  for  what  follows  (as  also  for  §  27,  later)  the  articles  by 
H.  Siebeck  in  Vols.  I.-IIL  of  the  Archiv  fur  Geschichte  der  Philosophic^  and 
also  in  Vols.  93,  94,  Zeitschrift  far  PMlos.  u.  philos.  £rit.  (1888-90). 


304  Jfe-di&val  Philosophy :  First  Period.        [PART  III. 

mained  unknown.  And  this  unfolding  was  furthered  emphatically 
by  those  needs  which  brought  the  Middle  Ages  to  psychology. 
Faith  sought  knowledge  of  the  soul  for  the  purpose  of  the  soul's 
salvation,  and  this  salvation  was  found  just  in  those  transcendent 
activities  through  which  the  soul,  estranged  from  the  body,  strives 
toward  a  higher  world.  It  was,  therefore,  principally  the  Mystics 
who  sought  to  spy  out  the  secrets  of  the  inner  life,  and  thus  became 
psychologists. 

Weightier  and  philosophically  more  significant  than  the  individual 
doctrines  propounded  in  this  line,  which  were  often  very  fantastic 
and  hazy,  is  the  fact  that  by  means  of  these  and  connected  theories, 
the  dualism  of  the  sensuous  vnd  super-sensuous  worlds  was  maintained 
in  its  full  strength,  and  thus  formed  a  strong  counterpoise  to  the 
Neo-Platonic  monism.  But  it  was  not  destined  to  exercise  this 
metaphysical  influence  till  later :  at  first,  in  the  more  limited  form 
of  the  anthropological  dualism  of  body  and  soul,  it  became  the 
starting-point  &i  psychology  as  the  science  of  inner  experience.1 

It  is,  therefore,  a  very  noteworthy  phenomenon  that  the  sup- 
porters of  this  psychology  as  "  natural  science  of  the  inner  sense," 
as  it  was  later  called,  are  precisely  the  same  men  who  are  faithfully 
exerting  themselves  to  gain  a  knowledge  of  the  outer  world  from  all 
available  material.  Having  turned  away  from  dialectic,  they  seek  a 
knowledge  of  what  is  real  in  experience,  a  philosophy  of  Nature ; 
but  they  divide  this  into  two  completely  separated  fields,  physica 
cofjpofls  and  physica  animce.  Among  the  Platonists  the  preference 
for  the  study  of  external  Nature  is  predominant,  among  the  Mystics 
that  for  the  study  of  the  internal  Nature.2 

2.  But  we  must  regard  as  the  characteristic,  the  essentially  new 
and  beneficial  mark  of  this  empirical  psychology,  the  endeavour, 
not  only  to  classify  the  psychical  activities  and  states,  but  to  appre- 
hend them  in  the  living  stream  of  mental  life,  and  to  comprehend 
their  development.  These  men  in  their  pious  feelings,  in  their 
struggles  for  the  enjoyment  of  divine  grace,  were  conscious  of  an 
inner  experience,  of  a  history  of  the  soul,  and  were  impelled  to  write 
this  history ;  and  while  in  so  doing  they  used  Platonic,  Augustinian, 

i  Cf.  also  K.  Werner,  Knsmologie  iind  Xaturlehre  des  scholastischen 
Molten,  mit  specifier  Beziehnny  ««/  Wilhelm  von  Conches;  and  DerEnt 
lanpsgang  der  mtelaltoteken  Psychologu  ron  Alcuin  bis  AttmL  Ma 

75>>  «*  *"*-*»»  c 

*  acquainted,  even  to  the  most  exact  detafl,  with  the  teachings  of  ancient         * 

°f  *"**-  »«**£   -lanat 


CHAP.  1,  §24.]          Body  and  Soul:   Victorines.  805 

and  Xeo-Platonic  conceptions  in  motley  mixture  to  designate  in- 
dividual facts,  the  essential  and  decisive  point  is  that  they  under- 
took to  exhibit  the  development  of  the  inner  life. 

'These  Mystics,  who  were  not  seeking  a  metaphysics  but  already 
possessed  one  in  their  faith,  were  not  much  troubled  by  the  ques- 
tion which  later  became  so  important,  of  how  this  duality  of  body 
and  soul  should  be  understood.  Hugo  of  St.  Victor  is  indeed  con- 
scious that  though  the  soul  is  lowest  in  the  immaterial  world,  and 
the  human  body  highest  in  the  material  world,  the  two  are  yet  so 
opposite  in  constitution  that  their  union  (unio)  remains  an  incom- 
prehensible enigma ;  but  he  thinks  that  in  this  very  fact  G-od  has 
shown,  and  desired  to  show,  that  for  him  nothing  is  impossible. 
Instead  of  racking  their  brains  dialetically  upon  this  point,  the 
Mystics  rather  assume  this  dualism  as  a  presupposition,  in  order  to 
isolate  the  soul  for  their  scientific  consideration,  and  to  observe  its 
inner  life. 

This  life,  however,  is,  for  Mysticism,  a  development  of  the  soul  to 
God,  and  so  this  first  form  of  the  psychology  of  the  inner  sense  is  the  his- 
tory of  salvation  in  the  individual  soul.  The  Mystics  regarded  the  soul 
essentially  as  Gfemuth  ["heart,"  the  seat  of  sentiment  and  feeling, 
rather  than,  intellect].  They  show  the  development  of  its  vital  pro- 
cess out  of  the  feelings,  and  prove  their  literary  virtuosoship  in  their 
depicting  of  the  states  and  movements  of  feeling.  They  are  also 
the  genuine  successors  of  Augustine  in  examining,  in  their  analysis 
of  this  process,  the  motive  forces  of  the  itill,  in  investigating  the 
decisions  of  the  will,  by  virtue  of  which  faith  conditions  the  course 
of  knowledge,  and  finally  in  the  fact  that  they  ultimately  regard  as 
the  highest  stage  in  the  soul's  development  the  mystical  contempla- 
tion of  God,  which,  to  be  sure,  is  here  held  to  be  the  same  with  lore. 
Such,  at  least,  was  the  activity  of  the  two  Victorines,  Hugo  and 
Eichard,  who  were  completely  sustained  by  the  spirit  of  science, 
while  in  the  case  of  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  the  practical  factor  of  the 
will  is  much  more  strongly  emphasised.  Bernard  is  unwearied  in 
denouncing  as  heathenish  that  pure  impulse  after  knowledge  for  its 
own  sake  which  comports  with  all  the  virtues  and  vices,  and  yet, 
even,  for  him,  the  last  of  the  twelve  stages  of  humility  is  that 
ecstasy  of  deification  with  which  the  individual  disappears  in  the 
eternal  essence,  "as  the  drop  of  water  in  a  cask  of  wine." 

The  psychology  of  knowledge,  also,  is  built  up  with  the  Victorines 
upon  Augustinian  lines.  Three  eyes  are  given  to  man, — the  eye  of 
flesh  to  know  the  corporeal  world,  the  eye  of  reason  to  know  himself 
in  his  inner  nature,  the  eye  of  contemplation  to  know  the  spiritual 
world  and  the  deity.  While,  then,  according  to  Hugo,  cogitatiof 


306  ZTediaval  Philosophy :  First  Period.        [PART  HI. 

meditatio*  and  contemp'atio  are  the  three  stages  of  intellectual  activ- 
ity, the  degree  to  which  he  emphasises  the  co-operation  of  the  imag- 
ination, (iiiwttihatf'o)  in  all  kinds  of  knowledge  is  interesting  and 
characteristic'  of  his  personality.  Even  contemplation  is  a  visio 
intellectuals,  a  mental  beholding  which  alone  grasps  the  highest 
truth  undistorted,  while  thought  is  not  capable  of  this. 

Old  and  new  are  thus  variously  mingled  in  the  writings  of  the 
Tietorines.  Fantasies  of  mystic  rapture  force  their  way  amid  the 
most  acute  observations  and  the  most  delicate  portrayals  of  the  psy- 
chical functions.  The  method  of  self-observation  doubtless  falls  here, 
too,  into  the  danger  of  leading  to  Schic&rmerei,1  or  ecstatic  enthusi- 
asm; but.  on  the  other  hand,  it  wins  much  fruit  of  its  own,  it 
breaks  up  the  soil  for  the  research  of  the  future,  and,  above  all,  it 
marks  oi?  the  field  on  which  modern  psychology  is  to  grow. 

3.  This  new  science  received  support  and  enrichment  likewise 
from  quite  another  direction :  a  side-result  of  the  controversy  over 
universals  —  and  that,  too,  not  the  worst  result  —  came  to  its  aid. 
When  Nominalism  and  Conceptualism  combated  the  doctrine  that 
universals  exist  in  themselves,  and  declared  the  species  and  genera 
to  be  subjective  creations  in  the  knowing  mind,  the  duty  fell  on 
them  of  making  intelligible  the  process  by  which  these  universal 
ideas  arise  in  the  human  mind.  They  found  themselves  thus  sent 
directly  to  the  empirical  study  of  the  development  of  ideas,  and  sup- 
plemented the  sublime  poesy  of  the  Mystics  with  results  which  were 
indeed  sober  and  dry,  but  all  the  more  valuable  on  that  account. 
For,  just  because  the  matter  in  hand  required  an  exhibition  of  the 
origin  of  purely  subjective  contents  of  thought,  which  -were  to  be 
explained  as  the  products  of  man's  development  in  time,  this  inves- 
tigation could  become  only  a  contribution  to  the  psychology  of  inner 
experience. 

The  very  thesis  of  extreme  -STominalism  afforded  its  opponents 
occasion  to  treat  the  relation  of  word  to  thought,  and  in  the  case  of 
Abelard  led  to  a  searching  investigation  of  the  co-operating  activity 
that  belongs  to  language  in  connection  with  the  development  of 
thought.  The  question  as  to  the  meaning  of  signs  and  designations 
iu  the  movement  of  ideas  was  by  this  means  raised  anew.  A  still 
deeper  entrance  into  the  heart  of  theoretical  psychology  -was  made 
by  the  investigation  which  is  conducted  as  to  the  necessary  connec- 
tion between  intellect  and  perception  in  the  treatise  De  Intellectibus. 
It  is  here  shown  how  sensation,  as  confused  idea  (confusa  conceptio), 
enters  into  the  perception  (imaginatio)  which  grasps  and  holds  it 

1  Cf.  Kant,  Antiiropologie,  §  4. 


CHAP.  1,  §  24.]     Body  and  Soul :  John  of  Salisbury.  307 

together  with  others,  and  remains  preserved  reproducible  in  this 
imagination ;  how,  then,  the  understanding  by  successively  running 
through  this  manifold  material  (discursive  activity)  elaborates  it  to 
concepts  and  judgments ;  and  how,  after  all  these  conditions  have 
been  fulfilled,  opinion,  faith,  and  knowledge  arise,  in  which  iilti- 
mately  the  intellect  knows  its  object  in  a  single  collective  perception 
or  intuition  (intuitive  activity). 

In  a  similar  way  John  of  Salisbury  set  forth  the  process  of 
psychical  development :  but  in  his  case  the  tendency  peculiar  to  the 
Augustinian  conception  of  the  soul  asserts  itself  most  strongly,  —  the 
tendency  to  regard  the  different  forms  of  activity  not  as  strata 
lying  above  one  another  or  beside  one  another,  but  as  ways  of 
functioning  in  which  the  same  living  unity  manifests  itself.  He 
sees  already  in  the  sensation,  and  in  a  higher  degree  in  perception 
or  imagination,  an  act  of  judgment;  and  as  union  of  the  newly 
entering  sensations  with  those  which  are  reproduced,  imagination 
contains  at  the  same  time  the  emotional  states  (passiones)  of  fear 
and  hope.  Thus  out  of  imagination  as  fundamental  psychical  state 
develops  a  twofold  series  of  states  of  consciousness;  in  the 
theoretical  series  appear  first,  opinion,  and  by  comparison  of 
opinions,  knowledge  and  rational  conviction  (ratio} ,  both  in  con- 
nection with  prudence  (prudentia),  which  is  an  operation  of  the 
will;  finally,  by  virtue  of  the  striving  after  calm  wisdom  (sapientia), 
we  have  the  contemplative  knowledge  of  the  intellect; — in  the 
practical  series  are  given  the  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  with  all 
their  diversifications  in  the  changing  states  of  life. 

Thus  with  John  we  have  indicated  the  whole  programme  of  the 
later  associational  psychology  in  which  his  countrymen  were  to 
become  leaders.  And  he  may  be  regarded  as  their  prototype  not 
only  in  his  problems,  but  also  in  the  mode  of  their  treatment.  He 
keeps  at  a  distance  from  the  speculations  of  dialectic  that  were  so 
alien  to  the  active  world ;  he  has  the  practical  ends  of  knowledge 
in  his  mind,  he  desires  to  find  his  way  in  the  world  in  which  man 
is  to  live,  and  above  all  in  man's  actual  inner  life,  and  brings  with 
him  into  philosophy  a  fineness  and  freedom  of -mind  character- 
istic of  the  man  of  the  world,  such  as  aside  from  him  we  do  not  find 
at  that  time.  He  owes  this  in  no  small  degree  to  the  education  of 
the  taste  and  of  sound  cosmopolitan  thought  which  classical  studies 
afford ;  and  in  this,  too,  his  countrymen  have  followed  him,  not  to 
their  injury.  He  is  the  precursor  of  the  English  Enlightenment  as 
Abelard  is  of  the  Trench.1 

1  Reuter,  op.  tit.,  II.  80,  sets  thus  Roger  Bacon  and  Abelard  over  against  each 
other;  yet  precisely  the  decisive  tendency  of  empirical  psychology  is  present 
more  strongly  in  the  case  of  John. 


308  Mediaeval  Philttop'hy :  First  Period.         [PART  III. 

4.  We  notice  finally  Alewrd's  ethics  as  a  peculiar  side-phenomenon 
in  this  process  of  making  more  rigid  the  contrast  of  outer  and  inner, 
and  of  transferring  the  scientific-  first  principle  to  the  inner  nature.1 
Its  very  title.  Sato  Te  I^nn,  announces  it  as  a  science  based  on 
inner  experience,  and  its  importance  consists  just  in  the  fact  that 
here  for  the  first  time  ethics  is  again  treated  as  a  proper  philo- 
sophical discipline,  and  freed  from  dogmatic  metaphysical  efforts.2 
This  is  true  of  this  ethics  although  it,  too,  proceeds  from  the 
Christian  consciousness  of  sin  as  its  fundamental  fact.  But  here 
it  strives  to  go  at  once  to  the  heart  of  the  matter.  Grood  and  evil, 
it  says,  consist  not  in  the  outward  act,  but  in  the  action's  inner 
cause.  Nor  yet  do  they  consist  in  the  thoughts  (suggestio),  feelings, 
and  desires  (dekctatio)  which  precede  the  decision  of  the  will,  but 
solely  in  this  resolve  or  consent  to  the  deed  (consensus).  For  the 
inclination  (vohmtas),  founded  in  the  whole  natural  disposition  and 
in  part  in  the  bodily  constitution,  which  may  lead  toward  good  or 
evil,  is  not  itself  in  the  proper  sense  good  or  evil.  Fault  or  error 
(vitium) — to  this  Abelard  reduces  inherited  sin — becomes  sin 
(p?ee(tfM?ttj  only  through  the  consensus.  But  if  this  is  present,  the 
sin  is  fully  and  completely  there  with  it,  and  the  bodily  executed 
action  with  its  external  consequences  adds  nothing  ethically. 

The  essence  of  the  moral  is  thus  placed  by  Abelard  solely  in  the 
resolve  of  the  will  (aninn  intentto).  But  what  now  is  the  norm 
according  to  which  this  resolve  of  the  will  is  to  be  characterised  as 
good  or  evil  ?  Here,  too,  Abelard  rejects  with  contempt  all  external 
and  objective  determination  by  a  law ;  he  finds  the  norm  of  judg- 
ment solely  within  the  deciding  individual,  and  it  consists  in  the 
agreement  or  non-agreement  with  the  conscience  (conscientia).  That 
action  is  good  which  is  in  accord  with  the  agent's  own  conviction  5 
that  only  is  bad  which  contradicts  this. 

And  what  is  conscience  ?  "Where  Abelard  teaches  as  a  philoso- 
pher, as  the  rationalistic  dialectician  that  he  was,  there  conscience 
is  for  him  (in  accordance  with  ancient  example,  Cicero)  the  natural 
moral  law,  which,  though  known  in  varying  degree,  is  common  to 
all  inm,  and  which,  as  Abelard  was  convinced,  was  wakened 
to  new  clearness  in  the  Christian  religion,  after  it  had  become  ob- 
scured through  human  sin  and  weakness  (cf,  above,  §  23,  7).  But 

^  i  Cf.  on  this  Th.  Ziegler  in  the  Strassbitryer  Abhdl.  z.    Phil.   (Freiburg, 

1  fro-i  ) . 

-  It  throws  a  surprising  light  upon  the  clearness  of  Abelard' s  thought  when 
he  incidentally  separates  the  metaphysical  conception  of  the  good  (perfection  = 
reality}  carefully  from  the  moral  conception  of  the  good,  with  which  alone  ethics 
has  to  do.  He  shows  in  this  that  he  had  penetrated  this  complication  of  prob- 
lems, one  of  the  most  intricate  in  history. 


CHAP.  1,  §  24.]  Body  and  Soul:  Alelard.  309 

for  the  theologian  this  lex  natumlis  is  identical  with  the  will  of  God.1 
To  follow  the  conscience  means,  therefore,  to  obey  God;  to  act  against 
the  conscience  is  to  despise  G-od.  But  where  the  import  of  the 
natural  moral  law  is  in  any  wise  doubtful,  the  only  resort  for  the 
individual  is  to  decide  according  to  his  conscience,  that  is,  according 
to  his  knowledge  of  the  divine  command. 

The  ethics  of  intention 2  which  was  presented  by  the  head  of  the 
dialecticians  and  Peripatetics  proves  itself  to  be  an  enhancement  of 
the  Augustinian  principles  of  internalisation  and  of  the  individual- 
ism of  the  will,  which  forces  its  way  out  of  the  system  of  the  great 
Church  teacher  and  beyond  its  bounds,  to  fruitful  operation  in  the 
future. 

1  In  his  theological  metaphysics  Abelard  seems  occasionally  to  have  gone  so 
far  as  to  reduce  the  content  of  the  moral  law  to  the  arbitrary  choice  of  the 
divine  will  (Commentary  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans*  II.  241). 

2  The  important  contrast  here  presented  in  various  directions  to  Church 
theory  and  practice  cannot  be  brought  out  here. 


CHAPTER  II.    SECOND  PERIOD. 

(AFTEB  ABOUT  1200.) 

Kar!  Werner,  TJfr  hi  Thomas  ton  Aquino.    3  vols.,  Regensburg,  1858  f£. 
Karl  Werner,  Die  Scholastik  des  sputeren  Ifittelalters.    3  vols.,  Vienna,  1881  ff. 

THE  felt  need  for  real  knowledge,  which  mastered  Western  science 
after  the  first  enthusiasm  for  dialectic  was  past,  was  very  soon  to 
find  a  satisfaction  of  unsuspected  extent.  Contact  with  the  Oriental 
civilisation  which  at  first  maintained  itself  victoriously  against  the 
shock  of  the  Crusades,  disclosed  to  the  peoples  of  Europe  new  worlds 
of  intellectual  life.  Arabian,  and  in  its  train  Jewish,  science l  made 
their  entry  into  Paris.  They  had  preserved  the  tradition  of  Greek 
thought  and  knowledge  more  immediately  and  more  completely  than 
had  the  cloisters  of  the  West.  A.  stronger  and  richer  stream  of 
scientific  material  poured  over  Bagdad  and  Cordova  than  over  Rome 
and  York.  But  the  former  brought  not  much  more  that  was  new 
with  it  than  did  the  latter.  Rather,  as  regards  thoughts  which  dis- 
cover or  establish  principles,  the  Oriental  philosophy  of  the  Middle 
Ages  is  still  poorer  than  the  European.  Only,  in  the  breadth  and 
quantity  of  tradition,  in  the  compass  of  learned  material  and  in 
the  extent  of  information  in  matters  of  science,  the  East  was  far 
superior,  and  these  treasures  now  passed  over  into  the  possession  of 
the  Christian  peoples. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  philosophy,  however,  the  matter  of 
chief  importance  was  that  Parisian  science  became  acquainted  not 

i  The  author  believes  that  he  may  and  ought  to  decline  to  give  a  full  exposi- 
tion of  the  Arabian  and  Jewish  philosophy  of  the  Middle  Ages  — ought  to,  in  so 
far  as  he  is  here  in  great  part  excluded  from  penetrating  to  the  original  sources, 
and  would  therefore  find  himself  forced  to  reproduce  others'  expositions  at 
second  hand,  —  may,  however,  because  that  which  passed  over  with  fructifying 
influence  into  European  science  from  this  large  literature — and  it  is  only  this 
element  that  could  be  treated  in  this  presentation  of  the  development  of  philos- 
ophy as  a  whole  —  is  found  to  be,  with  very  small  exceptions,  the  spiritual 
possession  of  antiquity,  of  the  Greek  or  the  Hellenistic  philosophy.  On  this 
account  there  will  be  given  only  a  brief  survey  of  the  Arabian  ajid  Jewish  phi- 
losophy in  the  Middle  Ages,  which  will  be  found  at  the  close  of  the  introductory 
material  of  this  chapter,  pp.  310-318. 

310 


CHAP.  2.]  Second  Period.  311 

only  with  the  entire  logic  of  Aristotle,  but  also  with  all  parts  of  his 
philosophy  that  furnished  material  knowledge.  By  this  "new 
logic  "  fresh  blood  was  infused  into  the  already  dying  dialectic,  and 
while  the  task  of  rationally  expounding  the  view  of  the  world  held 
by  faith  was  attacked  anew  and  with  a  matured  technique  of  thought, 
there  was  presented  at  the  same  time  an  almost  immeasurable  mate- 
rial for  arrangement  in  the  metaphysico-religious  system. 

Mediaeval  thought  showed  itself  abundantly  ready  for  the  problem 
thus  enhanced,  and  solved  it  under  the  after-working  of  the  impres- 
sion of  that  most  brilliant  period  in  the  development  of  the  papacy 
which  Innocent  III.  had  brought  about.  The  Xeo-Platonic- Arabian 
Aristotelianism,  which  at  the  first,  with  its  naturalistic  consequences, 
seemed  only  to  strengthen  the  rationalistic  courage  of  dialectic  to 
victorious  pride,  was  mastered  with  admirable  swiftness  and  bent  to 
the  service  of  the  system  of  the  Church.  This,  indeed,  was  possible 
only  in  a  form  in  which  the  intellectualistic  elements  of  Augustinian 
thought  and  those  allied  to  Neo-Platonism  gained  a  decided  pre- 
ponderance in  this  now  completely  systematic  development  of  a 
philosophy  conformed  to  the  doctrine  of  faith.  In  this  way  was 
completed  an  adjustment  and  arrangement  of  world-moving  thoughts 
upon  the  largest  and  most  imposing  scale  that  history  has  seen, 
and  that,  too,  without  the  creative  activity  of  any  properly  new 
philosophical  principle  as  its  impulse  toward  the  formation  of  a 
system.  The  intellectual  founder  of  this  system  was  Albert  of  Soil- 
stddt.  It  owes  its  organic  completion  in  all  directions,  its  literary 
codification,  and  thus  its  historical  designation,  to  TJiomas  Aquinas, 
and  finds  its  poetical  exposition  in  Dante's  Divine  Comedy. 

But  while  Hellenistic  science  and  Christian  faith  seemed  to  be 
brought  into  complete  harmony  in  Thomism,  the  opposition  between 
them  broke  forth  at  once  all  the  more  violently.  Under  the  influ- 
ence of  Arabian  doctrines,  the  pantheism  involved  in  the  logical 
consequence  of  Eealism  from  being  potential  became  actual  in  ex- 
tended circles,  and  immediately  after  Thomas,  his  fellow-Domin- 
ican, Master  Eckliart,  developed  scholastic  intellectualism  to  the 
heterodoxy  of  an  idealistic  Mysticism. 

Hence  it  is  comprehensible  that  Thomism  also  encountered  the 
resistance  of  a  Platonic- Augustinian  tendency,  which  indeed  gladly 
adopted  the  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  Nature  (as  had  been  the 
case  before)  and  the  perfection  of  the  logical  apparatus,  but  put 
aside  the  intellectualistic  metaphysics  and  developed  all  the  more 
energetically  the  opposite  elements  of  Augustinianism. 

This  tendency  reached  its  full  strength  in  the  acutest  and  deepest 
thinker  of  the  Christian  Middle  Ages,  Duns  Scotus,  who  brought  the 


312  Mediaeval  Philosophy.  [PART  III 

germs  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Trill,  contained  in  Augustine's 
system,  to  their  first  important  development,  and  so  from  the  meta* 
physical  side  gave  the  impulse  for  a  complete  change  in  the  direc- 
tion of  philosophical  thought.  With  him  religious  and  scientific 
interests,  whose  fusion  had  begun  in  the  Hellenistic  philosophy, 
begin  to  separate. 

The  reneical  of  2fominab'sm9  in  which  the  intellectual  movement 
of  the  last  century  of  the  Middle  Ages  culminated  in  an  extremely 
interesting  combination,  led  to  the  same  result  with  still  more  last- 
ing fqrce.  Dialectic,  which  had  anew  obtained  the  mastery  and 
was  Sam;  ting  itself  in  various  disputations,  developed  in  its  text- 
books on  logic  the  Aristotelian  schematism.  This  was  worked  out 
especially  on  the  grammatical  side,  and  there  developed  to  a  theory 
wliiea  attached  the  doctrine  of  judgment  and  the  syllogism  to  the 
view  thut  regarded  the  concepts  (termini)  as  subjective  signs  for 
really  existing  individual  things.  This  Tenninism  became  united 
in  Wll!  ''.nil  of  Occam  with  the  naturalistic  tendencies  of  the  Arabian- 
Arist.fMuin  theory  of  knowledge,  and  these  combined  combated 
Kealism,  which  had  been  maintained  alike  in  Thomism  and  Scotism. 
But  Termmism  also  became  united  with  the  Augustinian  doctrine 
of  tlie  will  into  a  powerful  individualism,  with  the  beginnings  of 
tLe  empiric!  psychology  which  studied  the  history  of  develop- 
ment, to  a  kind  of  idealism  of  the  inner  experience,  and  with  the 
natural  investigation  which  was  conquering  wider  and  wider  territory, 
to  an  empiricism  that  was  to  be  fruitful  in  the  future.  Thus  under 
the  scholastic  covering  were  sprouting  the  germs  of  new  thought. 

Here  and  there  in  this  extremely  diversified  movement  men  still 
vainly  appear  with  the  confidence  that  they  can  create  a  rational 
system  of  religious  metaphysics,  and  finally  a  man  of  the  signifi- 
cance of  S'ieolaus  Cvsanus  sought  vainly  to  force  all  these  elements 
of  a  new  secular  science  back  under  the  power  of  a  half  scholastic, 
half  mystic  intellectualism  :  it  was  just  from  his  system  that  those 
elements  exercised  an  influence  upon  the  future,  that  was  all  the 
stronger  because  of  his  work. 

The  reception  of  Aristotle  falls  in  the  century  1150-1250  (for  this  topic  see 
principally  the  work  of  A.  Jourdaiu,  cited  p.  273).  It  began  with  the  more  val- 
uable  parts  of  the  Onjcmon,  hitherto  unknown  'retea  —  nova  lontea).  and  pro- 
ceeded to  the  metaphysical,  physical,  and  ethical  books,  always  accompanied 
by  the  introduction  of  the  Arabian  explanatory  writings.  The  Church  slowly 
admitted  the  nw  logic,  although  dialectic  was  again  set  in  fluctuation  thereby 
for  it  soon  became  convinced  that  the  new  method  which  was  introduced  with 

,     v-  tbe  doctrme  of  &e  syllogism,  was  advantageous  for  presenting  its 
own  teachings,  ° 


«  J1?18-  s?ho]*stic  .me*h?d  **  ^€  P^per  sense  is  as  follows  :  a  text  used  as 
the  basis  for  discussion  is  broken  up  by  division  and  explanation  into  a  number 
of  propositions;  questions  are  attached  and  the  possible  answers  brought  to- 


CHAP.  2.]  Second  Period.  313 

gether ;  finally  the  arguments  to  be  adduced  for  establishing  or  refuting  these 
answers  are  presented  in  the  form  of  a  chain  of  syllogistic  reasoning,  leading 
ultimately  to  a  decision  upon  the  subject. 

This  scheme  was  first  employed  by  Alexander  of  Hales  (died  1245)  in  his 
Summa  Universes  Theologies,  with  a  mastery  which  was  far  superior  to  the 
mode  of  treatment  of  the  earlier  Suminists  in  wealth  of  contents,  clearness  of 
development,  and  definiteness  of  results,  and  was  scarcely  surpassed  even  later. 

An  analogous  change  in  method  was  worked  out  with  regard  to  the  material 
in  the  encyclopedias  of  natural  science  by  Vincent  of  Beauvais  (Vincentius 
Bellovacensis,  died  about  1265),  by  his  Speculum  Quadruplet,  and  Johannes 
Fidanza,  called  Bonaventura  (1221-1274),  did  the  same  work  for  the  doctrines 
of  Mysticism,  especially  those  of  the  Victormes.  Among  Bonaventura's  works 
the  Ileductio  Artium  ad  Theologiam  is  especially  characteristic.  Cf.  K.  Werner, 
Die  Psychologie  und  ErJcenntnisslehre  ties  B.  (Vienna,  187C). 

The  Church  proceeded  in  a  much  more  hesitating  manner  in  regard  to  Aris- 
totle's Metaphysics  and  Physics,  because  these  made  their  entrance  in  intimate 
connection  with  Averroism,  and  because  this  latter  theory  had  developed  to 
open  pantheism  the  Neo-Platonic  Mysticism  which  had  never  been  entirely 
forgotten  since  Scotus  Erigena.  As  the  defenders  of  such  a  system  appear 
Amaliich  of  Bena  near  Chartres,  and  David  of  Dinant,  about  1200,  concern- 
ing whose  doctrines  we  are  informed  only  by  later  writers,  especially  Albert 
and  Thomas.  With  the  widely  extended  sect  of  the  Amalricans,  which,  after 
the  Lateran  council  of  1215,  was  persecuted  with  fire  and  sword,  the  "Eternal 
G-ospel"  of  Joachim  Floris  was  also  connected.  Cf.  on  this  J.  X.  Schneider 
(Dillingen,  1873). 

The  judgment  of  condemnation  passed  upon  the  Averroistic  Pan-psychism 
(cf.  §  27)  applied  at  first  to  Aristotle  also.  It  is  the  service  of  the  two  men- 
dicant orders,  the  Dominicans  and  Franciscans,  to  have  broken  this  connec- 
tion, and  to  have  brought  over  the  power  of  the  Church  to  the  recognition  of 
the  Peripatetic  system.  By  a  long  conflict,  which  frequently  wavered  this  way 
and  that,  they  succeeded  in  founding  two  chairs  of  the  Aristotelian  philosophy 
at  the  University  of  Paris,  and  finally  in  having  them  taken  into  the  faculty 
(cf.  Kaufmann,  Gesch.  d.  Univ.,  I.  275  ff.).  After  this  victory  in  1254,  respect 
for  Aristotle  rose  fast,  until  he  became  the  highest  philosophical  authority.  He 
was  praised  as  the  forerunner  of  Christ  in  matters  of  Nature  as  was  John 
the  Baptist  in  matters  of  grace,  and  from  this  time  on  Christian  science  (like 
Averroes)  held  him  to  be  in  such  a  sense  the  incarnation  of  scientific  truth,  that 
in  the  following  literature  he  is  often  cited  only  as  "Philosophus." 

The  doctrine  of  the  Dominicans,  which  has  remained  until  the  present  time 
the  official  doctrine  of  the  Catholic  Church,  was  created  by  Albert  and  Thomas. 

Albert  of  Bollstadt  (Albertus  Magnus)  was  born  1193  at  Lauingen  in 
Swabia,  studied  in  Padua  and  Bologna,  taught  in  Cologne  and  Paris,  became 
Bishop  of  Regensburg,  and  died  in  Cologne  in  1280.  His  writings  consist  for 
the  most  part  of  paraphrases  and  commentaries  upon  Aristotle ;  aside  from  the 
Summa  his  Botany  is  particularly  of  independent  value  (De  Yegeta'bili'bus^ 
Libri  VII. ;  ed.  by  Meyer  and  Jessen,  Berlin,  1867).  Cf.  J.  Sighart,  Al.  Mag. 
sein  Leben  und  seine  Wissenschaft  (Regensburg,  1857)  ;  v.  Hertling,  Al.  JJag. 
un.d  die  Wissenschaft  seiner  Zeit  (in  Hist.-pol.  Blatter,  1874)  ;  J.  Bach,  AL 
Xag.  (Vienna,  1888). 

Thomas  of  Aquino,  born  1225  or  27  in  Roccasicca,  Lower  Italy,  was  edu- 
cated at  first  in  the  cloister  Monte  Cassino,  famous  of  old  for  study  in  natural 
science,  then  in  Naples,  Cologne,  and  Paris.  After  this  he  taught  alternately 
at  these  universities  and  also  at  Rome  and  Bologna,  and  died,  1274,  in  a  cloister 
near  Terracina.  Besides  minor  treatises,  his  works  contain  commentaries  on 
Aristotle,  on  the  Liber  de  Oansis  and  the  Sentences  of  Peter  Lombard,  and 
in  addition  to  these,  principally  the  Summa  Theologian  and  the  treatise  De 
veritate  jidei  Catholicce  contra  gentiles  {Summa  contra  gentiles}.  The  treatise 
De  Regimine  Principum  belongs  to  him  only  in  part.  From  the  very  copious 
literature  concerning  him,  the  following  may  be  named:  Ch.  Jourdain,  La 
Philosophie  de  St.  Th.  (Paris,  1858);  Z,  Gonzalez,  Studien  uber  die  Philos. 
des.  hi  Th.  v.  A.,  translated  from  the  Spanish  by  Kolte  (Regensburg,  1885); 
R.  Eucken,  Die  Philos.  d.  Th.  V.  A.  und  die  Cultus  der  Neuzeit  (Halle,  1886)  j 
A.  Frohschammer,  Die  Philosophie  des  Th.  v.  A.  (Leips.  1889). 


S14  Mediceval  Philosophy.  [PART  TIL 

The  philosophical  importance  of  Dante  Alighieri  has  been  best  recognised 
among  his  editors  by  Philalethes  in  the  commentary  on  his  translation  of  the 
Dirina  Commedia.  ^Besides  h:s  great  world-poem,  the  treatise  De  Honarchia 
should  not  be  forgotten  in  a  philosophical  consideration.  Cf.  A.  F.  Ozanam, 
D.  Pt  la  fhUosophie  Catholv^  an  13™  Siecle  ^  Paris,  1845);  G.  Baur,  Bo&hius 
tttt'i  Dante  ;'Leips.  liTS,. 

Interest  in  other  Thoinisrs.  whose  number  is  great,  is  only  literary-historical. 

To  the  Dominican  Order  belonged  also  the  father  of  German  Mysticism, 
Master  Eckhart,  a  y-ranirer  c  »ntemporary  of  Thomas.  Born  in  the  middle  of 
the  thirteenth  century,  probably  in  Saxony,  at  about  1300  he  was  Professor  of 
Piiilos'-'pliy  in  Paris,  became  then  Provincial  of  his  Order  for  Saxony,  lived  for 
a  time  in  Co'o  jie  anil  Strast'burc.  and  died  during  the  painful  discussions  con- 
cerning the  orth  -.<!'  oey  of  his  doctrine  in  1329.  The  extant  writings  (collected 
by  F,  PfeiSer,  II.  Leips.  1^57;  are  principally  sermons,  tracts,  and  aphorisms. 
Cf.  C.  Oman,  Rrfwtiat'trrn  rur  far  Reformation,  Vol.  II.  (Hamburg,  1842  j; 
W.  Prejer,  &wh*il  JMterhw  Jlystik  im  Mittdalter  (Leips.  1875,  1881)  ;  also 
the  different  editions  and  articles  by  S.  Denifle.  On  Eckhart  in  particular, 
J.  Badr,  1L*E.  far  r<ft?r  J.t.r  ileittschen  Speculation  (Vienna,  1864);  A.  Lasson, 
Jf.  E.  tl*r  JfystfAvr  'Berlin,  1868  -. 

In  Its  farther  development  German  Mysticism  branched  into  the  heresies  of 
the  Bernards  and  of  the  ••  Friends  of  God"'  of  Basle  ;  in  the  case  of  the  former  it 
led  to  the  most  radical  connection  with  the  Averroistic  pantheism.  It  took  the 
form  of  popular  preaching  with  John  Tattler  at  Strassburg  (1300-1361),  and 
of  poetic  song  with  Heinrich  Suso  of  Constance  (1300-1365).  Its  theoretical 
doctrines  maintained  themselves,  while  the  heterodoxy  was  diminished,  in  the 
T7i€07o£/>/"  {first  edited  by  Luther,  1516). 


The  Augustinian  Platonic  opposition  against  the  suspected  Aristotelianism 
of  the  Arabians  has  as  its  main  supporters  :  — 

William  of  Auvergne,  from  Aurillac,  teacher  and  Bishop  in  Paris,  where  he 
died  in  1240.  author  of  a  work  De  Vniverso.  He  is  treated  bv  K.  Werner,  Die 
FhP*w*phi?  ties  W.  r.  A.  (Vienna,  1873). 

Henry  of  G-hent  (Henrietta  Gandavensis,  Heinrich  Gcethals  of  Muda  near 
Ghent,  1217-1293,1,  the  v.iliant  defender  of  the  primacy  of  the  will  against 
TLr.iiiism.  Besides  a  theolopcal  compendium,  he  wrote  a  Summa  Qucestiomun 
,  and  principally  'CwotlUbrta  Theologica.  Cf  .  K.  Werner,  H.  i\  G.  als 
' 


3e$  tftrixWthen  Platom'smus  im  13  JahrhundeH  (Vienna,  1878). 
Richard  nf  Middletown  ^R.  de  Modiavia,  died  1300)  and  "William  de  la 
Marre,  the  author  of  a  violent  Corr-  ctorium  Fratris  Thomce,  may  also  be 
named  here.  In  the  following  centuries  an  Augustinian  theology  proper  main- 
tained itself  by  the  side  of  Thomism  and  Scotism.  ^Egydius  of  Colonna  is 
resiarded  as  its  leader  (^Eg.  Romanus,  1247-13K;).  Cf.  K.  Werner,  Schol.  d. 
spfe.  X.-A.,  III. 

The  sharpest  opposition  to  Thomism  grew  out  of  the  Franciscan  order. 
Roger  Bacon's  was  a  mind  fruitfully  stimulating  in  all  directions,  but  not 
appearing  in  a  fixed  and  definite  form  in  any  one  of  them.  He  was  born  in 
lL>14«  near  Ilchester,  educated  in  Oxford  and  Paris,  several  times  persecuted  on 
account  of  his  occupations  and  theories,  which  were  directed  hi  the  line  of 
natural  research,  protected  only  for  a  time  by  Pope  Clement  IV.,  and  died  soon 
a+\er  12P2.  His  doctrines  are  embodied  in  the  Opus  Mams  (ed.  by  Bridges, 
Uxijrd,  18H7),  and  in  the  form  of  extracts  in  iiis  Opus  Minus  (ed.  by  Brewer, 
Lond.  l^o'.h.  Cf.  E.  Charles,  J?.  J5.,  sa  rz>,  ses  outrages,  SPS  doctrines  (Paris, 
18*>1),  and  K.  Werner,  in  two  articles  on  his  psychology,  theory  of  knowledge, 
and  physics  (Vienna,  187y). 

The  most  important  thinker  of  the  Christian  Middle  Ages  was  Johannes 
Duns  Scotus.  His  home  (Ireland  or  Northumberland)  and  the  year  of  his 
birth,  which  was  about  1270,  are  not  certainly  known.  At  first  a  scholar  and 
teacher  in  Oxford,  he  then  won  high  reputation  at  Paris,  where  he  was  active 
after  1304,  and  in  1308  moved  to  Cologne,  where  he  died  soon  after  his  arrival 
—  all  too  early.  The  edition  of  his  works  prepared  by  his  Order  (12  vols., 
Lyons,  1639)  contains,  besides  the  genuine  writings,  much  that  is  not  genuine 
or  that  has  been  worked  over,  and  especially  transcripts  of  his  disputatious  and 


CHAP.  2.]  Second  Period.  315 

lectures.  To  the  latter  belongs  the  so-called  Opus  Parisiense,  which  forms  a  com- 
mentary upon  the  Sentences  of  the  Lombard.  The  Questiones  Quodlibetales  have 
a  similar  origin.  The  Opus  Oxoniense,  the  original  commentary  upon  the  Lom- 
bard, is  his  own  writing.  Besides  this  there  are  his  commentaries  upon  Aristo- 
telian writings  and  some  smaller  treatises.  His  doctrine  is  expounded  in  Werner 
and  Stockl.  No  exhaustive  monograph,  corresponding  to  his  importance,  exists. 

Among  his  numerous  adherents,  Francis  of  Mayro,  who  died  1325,  is  the  best 
known.  The  controversy  between  Thomists  and  Scotists  was  a  very  active  one 
at  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  brought  many  intermediate 
theories  into  the  field ;  but  soon  both  parties  had  to  make  common  cause  in 
defence  against  Terminism. 

Among  the  logical  school  books  of  the  later  Scholasticism,  the  most  influen- 
tial was  that  of  Petrus  Hispanus,  who  died  1277  as  Pope  John  XXI.  His 
Summuloe  Logicales  were  a  translation  of  a  Byzantine-Greek  text-book,  the 
JMvoij/Ls  els  rriv  'A/?«rror  £\ovs  XoytK^v  tiria-Triwv  by  Michal  Psellos  (in  the  eleventh 
century) .  Imitating  the  processes  in  this  latter  treatise  (7/>d/^ara  eypade  -ypa- 
<j>i5t  rexw^Oi  the  well-known  barbarous  mnemonic  designations  for  the  modes 
of  the  syllogism  were  introduced  in  the  Latin  version  (Barbara,  celarent.  etc.). 
Tenninism,  developed  in  the  nominalistic  direction  from  this  rhetorical  and 
grammatical  logic,  contrasted  itself  as  logica  moderna  with  the  logica  antiqua 
of  the  Realists,  including  both  Scotists  and  Thomists  under  this  latter  title. 

In  the  renewal  of  Nominalism  we  find  "William  Durandus  of  St.  Pour- 
eain,  who  died  1332  as  Bishop  of  Meaux,  and  Petrus  Aureolus,  who  died  at 
Paris,  1321,  the  former  coming  from  Thomism,  the  latter  from  Scotism.  ]VIuch 
more  important  is  William  of  Occam,  the  Abelard  of  the  second  period.  With 
a  broad  and  keen  vision  for  reality,  and  with  a  bold,  unresting  eagerness  for 
innovation,  he  unites  in  himself  all  the  elements  with  the  help  of  which  the 
new  science  forced  its  way  out  of  Scholasticism.  Born  in  a  village  in  the 
County  of  Surrey,  trained  under  Duns  Scotus,  he  became  Professor  at  Paris, 
then  took  an  active  part  in  the  conflicts  of  his  time  between  Church  and  State 
by  joining  "with  Philip  the  Fair  and  Lewis  of  Bavaria  in  combating  the  papacy, 
(Disputatio  inter  clericum  et  militem  super  potestcrte  ecdesiastica  proslatis  atque 
principibus  ternarum  commissa,  and  the  Defensorium  against  Pope  John  XXII.), 
and  died  1347  at  Munich.  There  is  no  complete  edition  of  his  works,  but  the 
most  important  are :  Summa  Totius  Logices,  JSxpositio  Aurea  sitper  Artem 
VetereTn,  Quodlibeta  Septem,  Oentllogium  Theologicum,  and  a  commentary  on 
Peter  Lombard.  Cf.  W.  A.  Schreiber,  Die  politischen  und  religiosen  Doctrinen 
unter  Ludwig  dem  Baier  (Landshut,  1858).  C.  Prantl,  Der  Universalienstreit 
im  dreizehnten  und  merzehnten  Jahrhundert  (Sitz.-Ber.  d?r  3Iunchener  Akad., 
1874).  Occam,  too,  still  waits  his  philosophically  competent  biographer. 

Of  the  supporters  of  terministic  Nominalism  in  the  fourteenth  century, 
Johannes  Buridan,  Rector  of  the  University  at  Paris,  and  co-founder  of  that  at 
Vienna,  and  Marsilius  of  Inghen,  one  of  the  first  teachers  at  Heidelberg,  are 
usually  named.  A  union  of  mystical  doctrines  with  the  nominalistic  rejection 
of  metaphysics  is  found  in  Pierre  d'Ailly  (Petrus  de  Alliaco,  1350-1425),  and  in 
Johannes  Gerson  (Charlier,  1363-1429). 

The  attempt  at  a  purely  rational  exposition  of  Church  doctrine  in  the  interest 
of  apologetics  and  propagation  was  made  by  Raymundus  Lullus  of  Catalonia 
(1235-1315),  who  is  principally  known  by  his  curious  discovery  of  the  "Great 
Art,"  that  is,  a  mechanical  device  which  by  combining  the  fundamental  concepts 
was  intended  to  present  the  system  of  all  possible  cognitions.  An  extract  from 
this  may  be  found  in  J.  E.  Erdmann,  History  of  Phil.,  I.  §  206  [Eng.  tr.  ed.  by 
Hough].  His  efforts  were  repeated  in  the  fifteenth  century  by  Raymond  of 
Sabunde,  a  Spanish  physician,  who  taught  in  Toulouse  and  gained  respect  by  his 
Theologia  Naturalis  (sive  Liber  Oreaturarum),  On  him  cf.  D.  Matzke  (Breslau, 
184d);  M.  Huttler  (Augsburg,  1851). 

The  philosophy  of  Nicolaus  disarms  CNicolaus  Chrypffs,  born  in  Kues  (Cusa) 
near  Trier,  1401,  died  as  Cardinal  and  Bishop  of  Brixen,  1464),  offers  an  inter- 
esting comprehensive  view  of  the  intellectual  condition  of  the  departing  Middle 
Ages.  The  main  treatise  bears  the  title  De  Docta  Ignorantia  (ed.  in  German 
together  with  his  other  most  important  writings  by  F.  A.  Scharpff,  Freiburg  i,  B. 
1862).  Cf.  R.  Falckenberg,  Grundzuge  der  Philos.  des  N.  v.  G.  (Breslau,  1880). 


316  Mediceval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PART  III. 


Brief  Survey  of  the  Arabian  and  Jewish  Philosophy  of  the  Middle 

Ages. 

Tliis  period  is  certainly  more  interesting  from  a  literary  and  historical  point 
of  view  Jhan  from  that  of  philosophy,  and  as  yet  no  competent  presentation  of 
the  period  as  a  whole  lias  been  made."  .Nor  has  complete  clearness  been  attained 
as  yet  by  investigation,  but  from  the  literature  concerning  it  the  following  are 
to  be  emphasised  :  — 

Moitaxuined  al  Sehahrestani,  History  nf  Religious  and  Philosophical  Sects 
m,i<>nfj  tf«?  Arris  (German  by  Haarbrticker.  Halle,  l&oO  f.);  A  Sehmolders, 
ZMVf/W^7  Phi]nsnjJt)'T  Arfbriiti  (Bonn,  1S3<^,  and  Essai  sur  les  Ecoles  Phi- 
lfiStyhin*tfft  cbez  its  Ar.  Paris,  ISiiT;  Fr.  Dieterici,  Die  Philosophic  der  AT.  im 
zi~lht<-n  J'thrhwltrt  ,S  H>fte,  Leips.  1865-76).  Cf.  also  Hainmer-Purgstall, 
G'$rh.  f?*-r  iiraltiMlttn  Littffdfnr. 

S.  Mnak.  ^ft'l'inijps  fa  i<hibwtphie  jmre  et  arabe  (Paris,  1859),  r,nd  the  same 
rmtli  T'S  articles  on  the  individual  philosophers  in  the  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences 
PhHtjtsffihfyif.8.  ~W~.  Wallace.  Art.  Arabian  Phil,  in  Enc.  Brit.,  Ueberweg, 


M.  Eisfer,  rfirlMtngen  iifar  die  j'tidischen  Phttosophen  des  Mttelalters  (3 
v,VU.,  Vienna,  1S7U-&T,  ;  M.  Joel,  Beitrage  snr  Geschichte  der  Philosophie  (Bres- 
lau,  ISTr);..  Cf.  also  Furst's  Bibliotheca  Judaica,  and  histories  of  Judaism  by 
Graetz  and  G-eiger. 

Close  as  the  relations  maybe  which  the  philosophy  of  the  two  civilised  Semitic 
peoples  sustained  to  their  religious  interests,  Arabian  science  especially  owes 
its  peculiar  character  to  the  circum  stance  that  its  founders  and  supporters 
were,  for  the  most  part,  not  members  of  the  clergy,  as  in  the  "West,  but  phf/si- 
ci'irts  t'cf.  F.  Wustenfeld,  Gesch.  dtr  arab.  Aerzte  und  Xaturforscher,  Gottmgen, 
1S40>  Thu,s  fr^m  the  beginning  the  study  of  ancient  medicine  and  natural 
science  -went  on  hand  in  hand  with  that  of  philosophy.  -Hippocrates  and  Galen 
wtre  as  much  Translated  (in  part  throuuh  the  medium  of  the  Syrian)  and  read 
,v  were  Plat  \  Aristi  .tie,  and  the  Xeo-Platonists.  Heuce  in  Arabian  metaphysics 
dLiier-Tii'  ;,«,  iihvay>  balanced  by  natural  philosophy.  But  well  as  this  was  adapted 
to  afford  ^>:it:lij  thought  a  broader  basis  of  knowledge  of  facts,  we  must  not, 
un  tLe  "thu^luiiitl.  rtvere.^timate  the  independent  achievements  of  the  Arabs  in 
ni'Hli'.'hie  an'i  natural  ^cieiiee.  Here,  too,  mediaeval  science  is  essentially  learned 
tradiil^n.  TUj  kiMwled^e  which  the  Arabs  were  later  able  to  deliver  to  the 
YTes^Lai.!  ita  i-triiriij,  in  tl^e  main,  in  the  books  of  the  Greeks.  Xor  did  even 
experiin^iital  knowledge  experience  an  essential  extension  through  the  Arabs' 
own  work  ;  only  in  some  neld*.  as.  for  example,  chemistry  and  mineralogy  and 
in  &ome  parts  oi  uiediohie,  r.y.  physiology,  do  they  appear  more  independent. 
In  their  method^  however,  in  their  principles  by  which  they  apprehend  the  uni- 
verse, and  in  their  entire  system  of  philosophical  conceptions,  they  stand,  so  far 
as  our  information  on  the  subject  readies,  entirely  under  the  combined  influence 
of  Aristoteliani^in  and  Xeo-Platoiiism  ;  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  Jews.  Nor 
can  it,  be  maintained  that  a  national  peculiarity  becomes  disclosed  in  their  appro- 
priation of  this  material.  It  is  rather  the  case  that  this  whole  scientific  culture 
was  artificially  grafted  upon  the  Arabian  civilisation,  it  can  strike  no  true  roots 
into  it,  and  after  a  short  period  of  bloom  it  withers  away  without  vital  force 
Jn  the  kstory  of  science  as  a  whole,  its  mission  is  only  to  give  back  in  part  to 
the  development  of  the  Western  mind  the  continuity  which  the  latter  had  itself 
temporarily  lost. 

From  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  appropriation  of  ancient  science  in  this  case 
also  was  completed  gradually  and  by  working  backward.  Beginning  with  the 
Aeo-PIatoaism  which  was  still  current  in  Syrian  tradition,  and  which  was 
received  with  sympathy  on  account  of  its  religious  colouring,  the  Arabian 
thinkers  proceeded  to  ascend  to  the  better  sources;  but  the  consequence 
remained  that  they  saw  Aristotle  and  Plato  through  the  spectacles  of  Plotinus 
aud  Proclus.  During  the  rule  of  the  Abassidse  an  active  scientific  life  prevailed 
m  Bagdad,  stimulated  especially  by  the  Caliph  Almamun  at  the  beginning  of 
the^  ninth  century.  The  Xeo-Platonists,  the  better  commentators,  almost  the 
entire  didactic  writings  of  Aristotle,  and  the  Bepublic,  Laws,  and  Timaiu  of 
Plato,  were  known  m  translations. 


CHAP.  2.]  Arabian  and  Jewish  Philosophy.  317 

The  first  distinctly  emerging  personalities,  Alkendi,  who  died  about  870.  ami 
Alfarabi,  who  died  950,  are  scarcely  to  be  distinguished  in  their  teachings  fivm 
the  Neo-Platonic  elucidators  of  Aristotle.  A  greater  importance  belongs  to 
Avicenna  (Ibn  Sina,  980-1037),  whose  ''Canon"  became  the  fundamental 
book  of  mediaeval  medicine  in  the  West,  as  well  as  in  the  East,  and  who  also 
exercised  a  powerful  influence  by  his  extremely  numerous  philosophical  writ- 
ings, especially  his  Metaphysics  and  Logic.  His* doctrine  comes  nearer  again  to 
pure  Aristotelianism,  and  perhaps  the  nearest  among  all  the  Arabians. 

But  the  extension  of  these  philosophical  views  was  regarded  with  jealous  eyes 
by  Mohammedan  orthodoxy,  and  the  scientific  movement  experienced  so  vio- 
lent persecutions  in  the  tenth  century  that  it  took  refuge  in  the  secret  league  of 
the  LtPure  Brothers."  Avicenna  himself  was  also  persecuted.  The  above- 
named  league  embodied  the  extremely  excellent  compass  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  time  in  a  number  of  treatises  (on  this  see  above,  Dieterici),  which  neverthe- 
less, in  contrast  with  Avioenna,  seem  to  show  a  stronger  leaning  toward  Nec- 
Platonism. 

Of  the  scientific  achievements  of  their  opponents  we  know  on  the  one  hand 
the  strange  metaphysics  of  the  orthodox  Motekallemm,  who,  as  against  the 
Aristotelian  and  Neo-Platonic  view  of  Nature  as  a  living  whole,  developed  an 
extreme  exaggeration  of  the  sole  causality  of  God,  and  resorted  to  a  distorted 
Atomism  hi  the  greatest  metaphysical  embarrassment ;  on  the  other  hand,  in 
the  writings  of  Algazel  (1059-1111,  Destructio  Philosophorum}  there  appears 
a  sceptical  and  mystical  analysis  of  philosophy. 

These  latter  tendencies  won  the  victory  in  the  Orient  the  more  readily,  as  the 
spiritual  exaltation  of  Mohammedanism  quickly  declined  in  that  quarter.  The 
continuance  of  Arabian  science  is  to  be  sought  in  Andalusia,  where  Mohamme- 
dan civilisation  found  its  short  after-bloom.  Here,  under  freer  conditions, 
philosophy  developed  to  vigorous  naturalism,  which  in  turn  bore  a  strongly 
Neo-Platonic  stamp. 

A  characteristic  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  knowledge  in  this  philosophy  is 
found  in  "the  Conduct  of  the  Solitary  by  Avempace,  who  died  1138,  and  similar 
thoughts  culminate  with  Abubacer  (Ibn  Tophail,  died  1185)  in  an  interesting 
comparison  of  natural  with  positive  religion,  lie  latter  author's  philosophi- 
cal romance  The  Living  One,  the  Son  of  the  Waking  One,  which  sets  forth  the 
intellectual  development  of  a  man  upon  a  lonely  island,  excluded  from  all  his- 
torical and  social  relations,  was  published  in  a  Latin  translation  by  Pocock  as 
Philosophus  Autodidactus  (Oxford,  1671  and  1700, —not  twenty  years  before  the 
appearance  of  Defoe's  Robinson  Crusoe!")  and  in  a  German  translation  as 
Der  Naturmensch  by  Eichhorn  (Berlin,  1783). 

But  the  most  important  and  independent  among  Arabian  thinkers  was 
Averroes,  who  was  born  1126  in  Cordova,  was  for  a  time  judge,  and  then 
physician  in  ordinary  to  the  Caliph,  was  driven  afterward  by  religious  perse- 
cution to  Morocco,  and  died  in  1198.  He  treated  in  paraphrases  and  longer  or 
shorter  commentaries,  which  were  printed  in  the  older  editions  of  Aristotle, 
almost  all  the  didactic  writings  of  Aristotle,  who  was  esteemed  by  him  as  the 
highest  teacher  of  truth.  Of  his  own  works  (Venice,  1553;  some  exist  now 
only  in  the  Hebrew  version)  the  refutation  of  Algazel,  Destructio  Destructions, 
is  most  important.  Two  of  his  treatises  on  the  relation  of  philosophy  and  the- 
ology have  been  published  in  German  translation  by  M.  J.  MiEler  (Munich, 
1875).  Cf.  E.  Renan,  Averroes  et  rAoerroisme  (3d  ed.,  Paris,  1869). 

"With  the  expulsion  of  the  Arabians  from  Spain  traces  of  their  philosophical 
activity  are  lost. 

Jewish  philosophy  of  the  Middle  Ages  is,  in  the  main,  an  accompaniment 
of  the  Arabian,  and  dependent  upon  it.  The  only  exception  to  this  is  the  Cab- 
bala, that  fantastic  secret  doctrine  whose  fundamental  outlines,  which,  to  "be 
sure,  were  later  much  elaborated,  show  the  same  peculiar  amalgamation  of 
Oriental  mythology  with  ideas  of  Hellenistic  science  as  does  Christian  Gnosti- 
cism, and  go  back  to  the  same  period  and  to  the  same  agitated  condition  of 
thought  attendant  upon  the  mingling  of  religions.  Cf.  A.  Pranck,  Systems  d& 
la  Kabbate  (Paris,  1842 ;  German  by  Jellinek,  Leips.  1844);  H.  Joel,  Die 
Seligionsphilosophie  des  Sohar  (Leips.  1849).  On  the  other  hand,  the  main 
works  of  Jewish  philosophy  were  originally  written  in  Arabic,  and  not  trans- 
lated into  Hebrew  until  a  relatively  late  time. 


S18  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.        [PART  in. 

The  book  of  Saadjab  Fajjumi  'died  942  j,  Concerning  Religions  and  Philoso- 
phies, which  aims  to  farnNh  an  apology  for  Jewish  doctrine,  is  related  to  the 
earliest  Arabian  Aristoteiiai^Lsiii,  and"  still  more  closely  to  the  free-thinking 
Mohammedan  tlieolo^iaiis.  the  ^-called  Mutazilin.  In  the  Neo-Platonic  line 
xve  meet  Aricebron  flbn  Gebirol,  a  Spanish  Jew  of  the  eleventh  century),  of 
win  >.>e  Funs  r##<  Hebrew  and  Latin  versions  are  extant.  Moses  Maimonides 
vlW5-liW  is  regarded  as  the  inosr  important  Jewish  philosopher  of  the  Middle 
Acres.  In  his  culture  and  doctrine  he  "belongs  to  the  phase  of  Arabian  doctrine 
which  has  Averrues  as  its  centre.  His  main  treatise,  Guide  to  the  Perplexed, 
-'.Di/ctor  Pf-r^jcy/m/i),  has  been  published  in  Arabic  and  French  with  a  com- 
iientary  by  Muck  ;3  v-xs.,  ParL«.*lS.">0-flO\  [Eng.  tr.  by  Friedlander.  Trtibner, 
Lund.]."  The  attachment  to  Avenues  is  still  closer  in  the  case  of  Gersonides 
;Levi  "ben  (ierso:i,  12^S-lo44; . 

Tlie  Jews,  by  means  of  their  widely  extended  mercantile  relations,  -were  the 
chief  contributors  to  the  extension  of  Oriental  philosophy  in  the  \Yest,  by  sale 
an  I  translation ;  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries  especially  their 
ss-.hwls  in  Southern  France  formed  the  medium  for  this  wide-reaching  activity. 

T.-»  the  Arabian  and  Jewish  literature,  which  was  taken  up  by  Christian 
sei^ice  about  12UU,  belongs  finally  a  number  of  pseudonymous  and  anonymous 
writing,  which  arose  in  The  latest  periods  of  Xeo-Platonism,  and  in  part  per- 
haps were  of  still  later  date.  Among  these  the  principal  are  the  Theology  of  Arts- 
t>  <th  [ Arabic  and  German  by  Dieterici,  Leips.  1882-83),  and  the  Liber  de  Cansis 
I)<  €*&.:ttw  pir&  bonftatfa).  an  extract  from  the  (rroixeiwo-w  Oeo\oyiK-fj  ascribed 
to  Pmcius,  published  in  Arabic,  Latin,  and  German  by  0.  BaoxLenhewer  (Frei- 


§  25.  The  Realm  of  Nature  and  the  Realm  of  Grace. 

Among  all  the  pliilosphers  of  the  Middle  Ages  ^e  find  existing, 
Trith  greater  or  less  clearness,  a  lively  feeling  of  the  twofold  tradi- 
tiun  which  forms  the  presupposition  of  their  thought.  In  the 
earlier  period  all  knowledge  and  thought  had  arranged  itself,  as  it 
were,  of  its  own  accord  within  the  system  of  religious  metaphysics  j 
and  now  there  appeared  by  the  side  of  this  a  powerful,  finely  articu- 
lated, coherent  body  of  thought  which  the  age,  thirsting  after  real 
contents  in  its  barren  dialectic,  was  ready  to  take  up  eagerly.  The 
manifold  relations  between  these  two  systems  which  mutually  laid 
hold  upon  one  another  and  interpenetrated,  determine  the  scientific 
character  of  the  last  centuries  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  the  general 
course  of  the  development  was,  that  these  antagonistic  systems, 
starting  from  an  attitude  of  abrupt  opposition,  strove  toward  recon- 
ciliation and  adjustment,  only  to  diverge  all  the  more  violently  after 
the  goal  seemed  to  have  been  reached.  This  course  of  things 
appeared  as  necessarily  in  the  conception  of  the  reciprocal  relations 
of  the  different  sciences,  as  in  the  view  of  the  ultimate  relations 
of  things.  In  both  lines  the  attempt  at  synthesis  was  followed  by 
a  separation  that  went  all  the  deeper. 

The  religious  thought  of  the  West,  whose  highest  problem  had 
been  to  understand  the  working  of  divine  grace,  was  confronted  by 
Oriental  philosophy  in  which  the  old  Grecian  philosophical  tendency 
toward  knowledge  of  Nature  had  at  last  attained  metaphysical 


CHAP.  2,  §  25.]         The  Two  Realms :  Averroism.  319 

supremacy :  and  here,  too,  again  the  process  of  appropriation  began 
with  the  adoption  of  the  last  consequences,  to  ascend  only  by 
degrees  back  to  the  premises. 

1.  Hence  the  form  in  which  Arabian  science  was  first  taken  up 
was  that  of  Averroism.  In  this,  however,  science  had  marked  off  its 
boundaries  in  the  most  definite  manner  as  against  positive  religion. 
This  had  taken  place  not  only  in  reaction  against  the  attacks  to 
which  the  philosophical  movement  in  the  East  had  been  subjected, 
but  still  more  in  consequence  of  the  great  mental  revolutions  which 
the  age  of  the  Crusades  experienced  through  the  intimate  contact 
of  the  three  monotheistic  religions.  The  more  ardently  these  relig- 
ions fought  in  the  sphere  of  historical  reality,  the  more  the  sharp- 
ness of  their  contrasting  doctrines  became  blunted  from  the  point 
of  view  of  theory.  Those  who  passed  through  this  conflict  of  relig- 
ions as  thinking  observers  could  not  resist  the  impulse  to  seek  the 
common  element  behind  the  differences,  and  to  establish  above  the 
fields  of  battle  the  idea  of  a  universal  religion.1  In  order  to  attain 
this,  every  form  of  special  historical  revelation  must  be  stripped  off, 
and  the  path  of  universally  valid  scientific  knowledge  must  be  taken. 
So  with  the  aid  of  Neo-Platonic  memories,  a  return  was  made  to  the 
thought  of  a  universal  religion,  founded  upon  science,  and  the  ulti- 
mate content  of  this  common  conviction  was  formed  by  the  moral  law. 
As  Abelard  in  his  own  way  had  already  reached  this  result,  so 
Eoger  Bacon  later,  under  Arabian  influences,  designated  morality  as 
the  content  of  the  universal  religion. 

This  scientific  natural  religion,  however,  had  had  stamped  upon  it 
more  and  more  by  the  Arabs  the  exclusive  character  of  an  esoteric 
doctrine.  The  distinction  originating  with  Philo,  and  current  in  the 
entire  patristic  thought,  between  a  verbal-historical  and  a  spiritually 
timeless  sense2  of  religious  documents  (cf.  §  18,  2)  here  became  the 
doctrine  that  positive  religion  is  an  indispensable  need  for  the  mass 
of  the  people,  while  the  man  of  science  seeks  the  real  truth  back  of 
religion,  and  seeks  it  only  there,  —  a  doctrine  in  which  Averroes 
and  Maiinonides  were  at  one,  and  which  completely  corresponded  to 
the  social  relations  of  Arabian  science.  For  Arabian  science  always 
moved  within  narrow  and  closed  circles,  and  as  a  foreign  growth 

1  The  court  of  the  highly  cultured  Hohenstaufen  Frederick  II.  in  Sicily 
appears  as  a  chief  seat  of  this  mode  of  thought,  and  in  general  of  the  exchange 
of  thought  between  East  and  West. 

2  Representing  this  opinion,  the  Eternal  G-ospel  of  Joachim  of  Floris  was 
circulated  among  the  Averroistic  Amalricans.    This  completed  for  the  entire 
compass  of  Christian  dogma,  the  transformation  of  everything  external  into  the 
internal,  all  the  historical  into  the  timelessly  valid:  the  "pneumatic  gospel"  of 
Origen  (cf.  §  18,  2)  was  asserted  to  have  here  attained  reality,  the  period  of  the 
"spirit "  to  have  begun.    Cf.  J.  N.  Schneider  (Dillingen,  1874). 


320  Jlediceval  Philosophy  :  Second  Period.       [PART  III, 

never  gained  true  sympathy  with  the  mass  of  the  people  :  Averroes, 
nevertheless,  expressly  honours  Aristotle  as  the  founder  of  this  high- 
est, most  universal  religion  of  the  human  race. 

Thus  in  line  with  this  thought,  Abuhacer  made  his  "  Man  in  a 
State  of  Xatiu-e"  who  had  attained  in  his  isolation  to  the  philosoph- 
ical knowledge  of  God.  come  into  contact  again  at  last  with  histori- 
cal humanity,  and  in  so  doing  discover  that  what  he  had  known 
clearly  and  in  abstract  thought,  is  here  believed  in  its  picturate 
wrappings,  and  that  what  holds  for  him  as  a  self-evident  demand  of 
the  reason  is  here  extorted  from  the  multitude  by  means  of  reward 
and  punishment. 

If  now  it  is  hereby  admitted  that  natural  and  revealed  religion 
have  ultimately  the  same  content,  it  still  follows  that  they  necessa- 
rily differ,  at  least  in  their  expression  of  the  common  truth,  —  that 
the  conceptions  which  form  the  expression  of  philosophical  religion 
are  not  understood  by  believers,  while  the  picturate  ideas  of  believ- 
ers are  not  regarded  as  the  full  truth  by  philosophers.    If,  then,  by 
theology,  we  understand  the  exposition  of  the  positive  doctrine  of 
religion,  arranged  and  defended  according  to  the  formal  laws  of 
science,  i.e.  Aristotelian  logic,  —  and  this  was  the  form  which  the 
relation  of  theology  to  religion  had  taken  in  the  West  as  in  the 
East—  -  it  follows  that  something  may  be  true  theologically  which 
is  not  true  philosophically,  and  vice  versa.    Thus  is  explained  that 
doctrine  of  the  twofold  truth,1  theological  and  philosophical,  which 
went  through  the  entire  later  Middle  Ages,  although  we  cannot 
exactly  fix  the  authorship  of  this  formula.2    It  is  the  adequate 
expression  of  the  mental  state  necessarily  brought  about  by  the 
opposition  of  the  two  authorities  under  which  the  Middle  Ages 
stood,  viz.  Hellenistic  science  and  religious  tradition  ;  and  while  at 
a  later  time  it  often  served  to  protect  scientific  theories  from  the 
persecution  of  the  Church,  it  was  for  the  most  part,  even  in  these 
cases,  the  honest  expression  of  the  inner  discord  in  which  just  the 
most  important  minds  of  the  age  found  themselves. 

2.  The  science  of  the  Christian  peoples  accepted  this  antithesis, 
and  while  the  doctrine  of  the  twofold  truth  was  expressly  pro^ 
claimed  by  bold  dialecticians  such  as  Simon  of  Tournay,  or  John  of 
Brescia,  and  was  all  the  more  rigidly  condemned  by  the  power  of 


Wahrheit  (Berlin,  1871). 

it  be  fixed  with  certainty  what  the  origin  of  that  widely  ex- 
on  T%  ^  Wh^h  *&™*  ^  founders  of  the  three  great  positive 
relgions  as  the  three  ^-deceivers"  of  mankind.  UnhistoricaL  as  is  every 
Enlightenment,  the  philosophical  opposition  of  that  day  could  explain  io  itself 
fve  cSt-e?1  mtereStS  ^  mjtMcal  WhiGh  COUld  not  stand  be*ore  compara, 


CHAP.  2,  §  25.]     The  Two  Realms :  Albert,  Thomas.  321 

the  Church;  the  leading  minds  could  not  evade  the  fact  that  philos- 
ophy, as  it  had  been  developed  under  the  influence  of  Aristotle  and 
the  Arabians,  was,  and  must  remain,  in  its  inner  nature,  alien  to 
precisely  those  doctrines  of  the  Christian  religion  which  were  spe- 
cific and  distinctive.  With  a  full  consciousness  of  this  opposition, 
Albert  proceeded  to  his  great  task.  He  understood  that  the  distinc- 
tion between  natural  and  revealed  religion,  which  he  found  in  exist- 
ence, could  no  longer  be  put  out  of  sight,  that  philosophy  and 
theology  could  no  longer  be  identified,  but  he  hoped  and  laboured 
with  all  his  strength  that  this  distinction  might  not  be  allowed  to 
become  a  contradiction.  He  abandoned  the  doctrine  that  the  "  mys- 
teries "  of  theology,  the  doctrines  of  the  Trinity  and  of  the  Incar- 
nation, can  be  made  rational,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he  corrected  in 
favour  of  the  Church  doctrine  the  teaching  of  the  "  Philosopher " 
on  such  important  points  as  the  question  concerning  the  eternity  or 
temporal  duration  of  the  world.  He  sought  to  show  that  all  which 
is  known  in  philosophy  by  the  "natural  light9'  (lumine  naturali) 
holds  good  also  in  theology,  but  that  the  human  soul  can  know 
completely  only  that,  the  principles  of  which  it  carries  within  itself, 
and  that,  therefore,  in  such  questions  as  those  in  which  philosophical 
knowledge  comes  to  no  finally  valid  decision  and  must  remain 
standing  before  the  antinomy  of  different  possibilities,  revelation 
gives  the  decision, — a  view  in  which  Albert  follows  mainly  the 
results  of  Maimonides.  Faith  is  meritorious  just  because  it  cannot 
be  proved  or  established  by  any  natural  insight.  Eevelation  is  above 
reason,  but  not  contrary  to  reason. 

This  standpoint  for  harmonising  natural  and  revealed  theology 
is  essentially  that  taken  by  Thomas,  although  he  seeks  to  limit  still 
more,  if  possible,  the  extent  of  that  which  is  to  be  withdrawn  from 
philosophical  insight  and  given  into  the  possession  of  faith.  Accord- 
ing to  the  fundamental  thoughts  of  his  system,  moreover,  he 
apprehends  this  relation  as  a  relation  of  different  stages  of 
development,  and  sees  accordingly,  in  philosophical  knowledge,  a 
possibility  given  in  man's  natural  endowment,  which  is  brought 
to  full  and  entire  realisation  only  by  the  grace  active  in  revela- 
tion. 

It  is  therefore  important  to  notice  that  Scholasticism,  just  in  this 
its  highest  point,  was  far  from  identifying  philosophy  and  theology, 
or  from  making  the  task  of  the  former,  as  has  often  been  repre- 
sented, an  unresting  comprehension  of  dogma.  This  conception 
belongs  to  the  beginnings  of  mediaeval  science,  e.g.  to  Anselm,  and 
is  found  sporadically  in  the  times  when  Scholasticism  was  entering 
upon  its  dissolution.  So,  for  example,  Raymundus  Lullus  projected 


322  MeJi&val  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PAET  in. 

Ms  "Great  Art"1  essentially  in  the  opinion  that  this,  by  making 
possible  a  systematic  explanation  of  all  truths,  will  be  adapted  to 
convince  all  ki  unbelievers  v  of  the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion. 
So,  too,  later,  Raymond  of  Sabunde  aimed  to  prove  -with  the  help  of 
Lull's  Art  that  if  God  has  revealed  himself  in  a  double  manner,  in 
the  Bible  (liler  scriptus)  and  in  Mature  (liber  vivus),  the  contents 
of  these  two  revelations,  of  which  the  one  lies  at  the  basis  of  theol- 
ogy, the  other  at  the  basis  of  philosophy,  must  evidently  be  the 
saiiie.  But  in  the  classical  time  of  Scholasticism  the  distinction 
between  natural  and  revealed  theology  was  always  kept  in  mind, 
and  was  drawn  the  more  sharply,  the  more  the  Church  had  occasion 
to  guard  against  the  confusion  of  its  doctrine  with  "  natural 
theology." 

3.  Hence  there  were  very  faithful  sons  of  the  Church  who 
broadened  again  the  cleft  between  philosophy  and  theology,  and  ulti- 
mately made  it  so  wide  that  it  could  not  be  bridged.  At  their  head 
stands  Duns  Seotus,  who  taught  that  theology  should  be  conceived 
and  treated  only  as  a  practical  discipline;  philosophy,  on  the  con- 
trary, as  pure  theory.  Hence  for  him  and  for  the  continuers  of  his 
doctrine,  the  relation  between  the  two  is  no  longer  that  of  supple- 
mentation, but  that  of  separation.  Between  the  two  opposing  terri- 
tories of  revelation  and  of  rational  knowledge,  natural  theology 
shrivels  into  an  extreme  poverty  of  domain.  The  compass  of  the 
mysteries  of  theology  that  are  inaccessible  for  natural  knowledge 
increases  more  and  more ;  with  Duns  Scotus  the  beginning  of  the 
created  world  in  time  and  the  immortality  of  the  human  soul  belong 
to  this  sphere ;  and  Occam  even  denies  the  cogency  of  the  usual 
arguments  with  which  rational  theology  was  wont  to  prove  the 
existence  of  God. 

This  criticism  is  rooted  essentially  in  the  purpose  to  assure  to 
faith  its  just  right,  and  in  this  purpose  it  is  completely  honest.  In 
connection  with  the  metaphysical  dualism  which  had  again  become 
pronounced  (see  below,  Xo.  5)  the  knowledge  of  the  understanding, 
bound  as  it  was  to  sense-perception,  seemed  incapable  of  searching 

1  This  wrong-headed,  and  yet  in  many  respects  interesting  and  therefore 
frequently  attempted,  discovery,  consisted  in  a  system  of  concentric  rings,  each 
of  which  bore  a  group  of  concepts  divided  into  circular  compartments.  By 
shifting  these  rings,  all  possible  combinations  between  concepts  were  to  be 
brought  about,  problems  given,  and  their  solutions  stated.  Thus  there  was  a 
Figura  A  (Dei)  which  contained  the  whole  theology,  a  Figura  Animse  which 
contained  psychology,  etc.  Mnemo-technic  attempts,  and  such  as  aim  at  the 
discovery  of  a  universal  language,  or  of  a  system  of  symbols  for  expressing 
philosophical  thoughts,  have  frequently  been  attached  to  this  ars  combinatoria. 
The  introduction  of  the  algebraic  method  of  reckoning  by  letters  is  also  con- 
nected with  these  efforts. 


CHAP.  2,  §  25.]   The  Two  Realms :  Duns  Scotus,  Occam.  323 

the  mysteries  of  the  supernatural  world.  Thus  men  like  Geison 
based  their  mystical  doctrine  precisely  upon  Nominalism.  The 
difference  between  philosophy  and  theology  is  necessary ;  the  con- 
tradiction between  knowledge  and  faith  is  unavoidable.  Bevelation 
has  its  source  in  grace,  and  has  the  divine  realm  of  grace  for  its  con- 
tent; rational  knowledge  is  a  natural  process  of  reciprocal  inter- 
action between  the  knowing  mind  and  the  objects  of  perception. 
Therefore,  though  Nominalism  escaped  from  the  scholastic  method 
with  diniculty,  and  was  late  in  reaching  its  goal,  it  necessarily 
ended  in  regarding  Nature  as  the  sole  object  of  science.  At  all 
events,  philosophy  now  set  itself  as  secular  science,  over  against 
theology  as  divine  science. 

So  Duns  Scotus  and  Occam  employed  language  which  externally 
is  quite  in  harmony  with  the  "  twofold  truth."  That  definition  of 
the  boundaries  was  intended  to  assert,  that  in  matters  of  faith  dia- 
lectic has  nothing  to  say.  But  it  could  not  fail  to  be  the  result, 
that  in  the  case  of  others,  this  separation  would  lead  to  the  oppo- 
site consequence  and  back  to  the  original  meaning  of  the  claim  of 
a  double  truth.  It  became  a  charter  of  liberty  for  the  "secular 
philosophy."  Dialectical  investigation  could  be  pursued  even  to 
the  boldest  propositions,  and  yet  all  offence  might  be  avoided  if  one 
only  added  that  the  proposition  was  so  secundum  rationem,  but  that 
secundum  fidem  the  opposite  was  of  course  true.  This  occurred  so 
frequently  that  the  Thomists  and  Lullists  became  zealous  against  it, 
In  the  case  of  many,  to  be  sure,  who  availed  themselves  of  this 
principle,  we  cannot  doubt  that  this  was  their  honest  opinion ;  but 
it  is  just  as  sure  that  others,  with  full  consciousness  of  their  pro- 
cedure, found  in  this  only  a  convenient  pretext,  in  order  to  present 
under  the  protection  of  this  restriction  the  doctrines  of  a  philosophy 
that  in  its  inner  spirit  was  at  variance  with  faith.  At  all  events, 
this  applies  to  the  school  of  the  Averroists  which  flourished  in 
Padua  toward  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century. 

4  Parallel  to  this  changeful  process  of  transformation  in  the 
relation  between  theology  and  philosophy,  and  in  closest  connection 
with  it,  goes  an  analogous  development  of  metaphysical  psychology, 
and  both  have  reference  in  like  measure  to  the  fundamental  relation 
between  the  supersensuous  and  the  sensuous  worlds.  Here,  too, 
dualism  is  the  starting-point,  and  afterwards  again  the  end.  This 
dualism  had  been  developed  to  an  especial  degree  of  sharpness  by 
the  Victorines  at  the  close  of  the  first  period.  In  this  Mysticism 
the  last  bonds  between  body  and  soul  were  cut,  and  reconciliation 
was  made  impossible.  The  spiritual  and  material  worlds  fell  apart 
as  separate  spheres  of  the  universal  reality. 


824:  Medieval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PART  HI. 

Xow.  however,  Aristotelianism  fulfilled  its  historical  mission  of 
overcoming  the  two-worlds  theory  in  Augustine,  as  formerly  in 
Plato.,  and  in  the  TJiomist  psychology  the  conception  of  development, 
and  of  the  gradual  building  up  of  phenomena,  was  intended  to 
bridge  that  separation.  While  Hugo  of  St.  Victor  had  drawn  the 
dividing  line  in  the  created  world  through  the  midst  of  man's  nature, 
by  emphasising  the  complete  impossibility  of  any  comparison  be- 
tween the  two  substances  there  brought  together,  the  human  soul 
was  now  to  be  understood  as  just  that  connecting  link,  through  the 
medium  of  which  the  two  worlds  come  into  organic  interaction  in 
the  one  course  of  development  of  all  things. 

Thomas  attains  this  result  by  an  extraordinarily  acute  transfor- 
mation of  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  Forms  and  their  relation  to 
matter.  The  material  and  the  immaterial  worlds  are  characterised 
by  the  fact  that,  in  the  latter,  pure  Forms  (formaz  separatee;  called 
also  subsistent  Forms)  are  real  or  actual  as  active  intelligences  with- 
out any  attachment  to  matter,  while  in  the  former,  Forms  realise 
themselves  only  in  union  with  matter  (inherent  Forms).  The  hu- 
man soul,  as  lowest  of  the  pure  intelligences,  is  a  forma  separata 
(on  which  rests  its  immortality)  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  entelechy 
of  the  body,  it  is  the  highest  of  those  Forms  which  realise  them- 
selves in  matter.  But  these  two  sides  of  its  nature  are  bound 
together  in  it  to  an  absolute  substantial  unity,  and  this  unity  is  the 
only  Form  which  is  at  the  same  time  subsistent  and  inherent.1  In 
this  way  the  series  of  individual  beings  proceeds  from  the  lowest 
Forms  of  material  existence,  on  past  plant  and  animal  life,  through 
the  human  soul,  with  uninterrupted  continuity  over  into  the  world 
of  pure  intelligences  —  the  angels,2  and  finally  to  the  absolute  Form 
— the  deity.  The  cleft  between  the  two  worlds  is  closed  in  Thomism 
by  this  central  position  of  metaphysical  psychology. 

5.  But  it  seemed  to  the  following  period  that  the  cleft  was  closed 
only  by  being  plastered  over,  as  it  were,  and  that  the  union  of  so 
heterogeneous  attributes  as  the  entelechy  of  the  body  and  the  sub- 
sistence of  a  pure  intelligence  was  more  of  a  load  than  the  con- 
ception of  individual  substance  was  able  to  bear.  Hence  Duns 
JScotus,  whose  metaphysics  likewise  moves  naturally  within  the 
Aristotelian  terminology,  introduced  an  (inherent)  forma  corporei- 
tatte  between  the  intelligent  soul,  which  he  too  designates  as  the 
«  essential  Form  "  of  the  body,  and  the  body  itself ;  and  thus  the 

1  In  this  is  concentrated  in  a  conception  the  anthropocentric  way  of  viewing 
the  world,  which  even  Thomism  did  not  overcome. 

2  Thomas  constructs  his  scale  of  forms  in  the  material  world  according  to 
Aristotle,  in  the  spiritual  world  according  to  Dionysius  the  Areopagite. 


CHAP.  2,  §  25.]     The  Two  Realms :  Thomas,  Scotus,  Occam.      325 

Augustinian  and  Yictorinian  separation  of  the  conscious  essence 
from  the  physiological  vital  force  was  again  re-established. 

Occam  not  only  made  this  distinction  his  own,  but,  forced  to 
insert  another  gradation,  analysed  the  conscious  soul  into  an  intel- 
lectual and  a  sensitive  part,  and  ascribed  real  importance  to  this 
separation.  It  seems  to  him  that  the  sensuous  activities  of  con- 
sciousness can  as  little  be  united  with  the  rational  nature  whose 
vocation  it  is  to  behold  the  immaterial  world,  as  can  the  form  and 
motion  of  the  body.  Thus  for  him  the  soul  is  split  up  into  a  num- 
ber of  individual  faculties,  to  determine  the  relation  of  which 
occasions  great  difficulties, 'especially  with  regard  to  their  spatial 
inter-relation. 

6.  The  essential  thing  in  this  is  that  the  world  of  conscious- 
ness and  that  of  corporeal  bodies  become  again  completely  sepa- 
rated ;  and  this  is  shown  especially  in  Occam's  theory  of  knowledge, 
which  proceeded  from  these  presuppositions  to  an  extremely  signifi- 
cant innovation. 

In  their  doctrine  of  the  "  species  intelligibiles  "  the  two  "Bealists," 
Thomas  and  Duns  Scotus,  had  alike  followed,  though  with  some  vari- 
ations, the  old  Greek  idea,  that  in  the  knowing  process,  by  means  of 
the  co-operation  of  the  soul  and  of  the  external  object,  a  copy  of 
the  latter  arises,  which  is  then  apprehended  and  beheld  by  the  soul. 
Occam  strikes  out  these  species  intelligibiles  as  a  useless  doubling *  of 
the  external  reality,  which  according  to  this  view,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
an  object  of  knowledge,  would  be  assumed  as  having  still  another 
existence  (in  psychical  reality).  But  by  this  act  sensuous  knowledge 
loses  for  him  its  character  of  being  a  copy  as  compared  with  its  object. 
An  idea  (conceptus,  intellectio  rei)  is  as  such  a  state  or  an  act  of  the 
soul  (passio  —  intentio  animce),  and  forms  in  this  a  sign  (signum) 
for  the  corresponding  external  thing.  But  this  inner  structure  is 
something  of  a  different  nature  from  the  outer  reality  of  which  it  is 
the  sign,  and  therefore  it  is  no  copy  of  it.  We  can  speak  of  a  "  re- 
semblance "  only  in  so  far* as  in  this  case  the  inner  reality  (esse 
objective  =  content  of  consciousness)  and  the  outer  reality  (esse  for- 
maliter  or  subjective  =  objective  reality  in  the  present  sense  of  the 
word  " objective" 2)  necessarily  relate  to  each  other,  and,  so  to  speak, 
form  corresponding  points  in  the  two  heterogeneous  spheres. 

Thus  the  beginning  of  a  psychological  and  epistemological  idealism 

1  According  to  his  methodical  principle :  entia  prceter  necessitate™  non  esse 
multiplicanda. 

2  The  terms  "  objective  "  and  "  subjective  "  in  the  Middle  Ages  have  accord- 
ingly a  meaning  exactly  the  reverse  of  that  which   they  have  in   present 
usage. 


326  Mediaeval  Philosophy;  Second  Period.       [PART  III. 

develops  among  the  Terminists  out  of  the  old  duality  of  mind 
and  body:  the  world  of  consciousness  is  another  world  than  the 
world  of  things.  What  is  found  in  the  former  is  not  a  copy,  but 
only  a  sign  for  something  without  which  corresponds  to  it.  Things 
are  other  than  our  ideas  (ideas)  of  them. 

7.  Lastly,  Augustine's  dualism  appeared  in  its  complete  bald- 
ness in  his  conception  of  Jtiatory.  The  realm  of  God  and  that  of  the 
devil,  the  Church  and  the  political  state,  here  confronted  each  other 
in  rigid  antithesis.  The  historical  conditions  of  which  this  doctrine 
was  the  reflex,  had  become  changed  completely  since  Augustine's 
day.  But  hitherto  the  Middle  Ages  had  not  only  lacked  historical 
conceptions  which  would  have  been  adapted  to  correct  this  doctrine, 
but  scientific  thought  had  been  employed  in  such  a  one-sidedly  theo- 
logical and  dialectical  manner,  that  ethical  and  social  problems  had 
remained  farther  outside  the  horizon  of  philosophers  than  had  phys- 
ical problems.  Aoid  yet  at  the  same  time,  history  was  seeing  move- 
ments of  such  grand  dimensions  that  science  also  must  necessarily 
take  a  position  with  regard  to  it.  If  she  was  able  to  do  this  in  the 
second  period  in  a  manner  completely  worthy  of  the  greatness  of 
the  subject,  she  owed  her  strength  for  this  again  to  the  Aristotelian 
system,  which  gave  the  means  into  her  hand  of  mastering  in  thought 
the  great  connected  structures  of  political  and  historical  life,  of 
arranging  in  her  metaphysics  these  forms  of  the  series  of  develop- 
ment, and  thus  of  putting  into  conceptions  the  mighty  import  of 
that  which  she  was  living  through.  Indeed,  in  this  line  in  which 
the  Arabian  commentators  had  not  gone  before  lies  the  most  brilliant 
achievement  of  mediseval  philosophy,1  and  since  Albert's  interest  lay 
more  on  the  side  of  physics,  the  chief  credit  here  falls  to  Thomas. 

Thomas  regards  the  political  state,  not  as  did  Augustine,  as  a  con- 
sequence of  the  fall,  but  as  a  necessary  member  in  the  world's  life. 
In  his  view,  therefore,  law  or  right  also  flows  from  the  divine  nature 
and  must  be  so  conceived ;  above  all  human  institutions  stands  the 
lex  natumlis,  upon  which  rest  morality  and  the  life  of  society.  In 
particular,  however,  as  is  proved  by  language,  by  the  need  of  help 
which  the  individual  feels,  and  by  the  impulse  toward  society,  man 
is  by  his  nature  destined  for  life  in  a  state.  The  end  of  the  state  is, 
according  to  Aristotle's  teaching,  to  realise  virtue,  and  from  this  end 
all  the  characteristics  of  the  state  are  to  be  developed  (in  philosoph- 
ical law  —  Natural  Eight  or  Law) .  But  —  and  here  the  new  thought 
begins  —  that  civic  virtue  to  which  the  state  should  educate  its 
citizens  does  not  exhaust  man's  destiny.  In  this  he  fulfils  only  his 

*  Cf.  W.  DHthey,  Einleitung  in  die  Geisteswissenschaften,  L  418  f . 


CHAP.  2,  §  25.]     The  Two  Realms :  Thomas,  Dante.  327 

purpose  as  an  earthly  being ;  Ms  higher  destiny  is  the  salvation 
which  grace  offers  him  in  the  community  of  the  Church.  But  as 
the  higher  everywhere  realises  itself  through  the  lower,  and  the 
lower  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  higher,  the  political  community  is 
to  be  the  preparation  for  that  higher  community  of  the  State  of 
God.  Thus  the  state  becomes  subordinate  to  the  Church  as  the 
means  to  the  end,  as  the  preparatory  to  the  complete.  The  com- 
munity of  the  earthly  life  is  the  school  for  that  of  the  heavenly  — 

PRJBAMBULA  GRATIS. 

By  the  side  of  the  teleology  of  Nature  which  Greek  philosophy  had 
worked  out,  patristic  thought  had  set  the  teleology  of  history  (cf.  § 
21,  6)  ;  but  the  two  had  remained  unconnected.  The  doctrine  of  the 
state  set  forth  by  Thomas  subordinates  the  one  to  the  other  in  a 
system  of  thought,  and  in  so  doing  completes  the  most  deeply  and 
widely  reaching  union  of  the  ancient  and  Christian  conceptions  of 
the  world  that  has  ever  been  attempted. 

"With  this  the  capstone  is  fitted  to  the  metaphysical  structure  of 
Thomism.  By  this  transition  from  the  community  of  Nature  into 
that  of  grace,  man  fulfils  the  task  which  his  position  in  the  universe 
assigns  him,  but  he  fulfils  it,  not  as  an  individual,  but  only  in  the 
race.  The  ancient  thought  of  the  state  lives  again  in  Christianity  ; 
but  the  state  is  no  longer  an  end  'in  itself,  it  is  the  best  means  for 
carrying  out  the  divine  world-plan.  Gratia  naturam  non  tollit  sed 
perficit. 

8.  But  even  this  highest  synthesis  did  not  long  endure.  As  in 
political  life,  so  also  in  theory,  the  relation  of  Church  and  state  took 
on  a  form  that  was  very  much  less  harmonious.  With  Dante  the 
relation  of  subordination  is  already  exchanged  for  that  of  co-ordina- 
tion. The  poet  shares  with  the  metaphysician  the  thought  that 
because  man's  destined  end  is  to  be  attained  only  in  the  race,  this 
makes  a  perfect  unity  in  political  organisation  requisite.  Both  de- 
mand the  universal  state,  the  "monarchia"  and  see  in  the  Empire  the 
fulfilment  of  this  postulate.  But  the  great  Ghibelline  cannot  think 
theocraticallyj  as  does  the  Dominican  monk ;  and  where  the  latter 
assigns  to  the  imperium  the  place  of  subordination  beneath  the  sacer- 
dotium,  the  former  sets  the  two  over  against  each  other  as  powers  of 
like  authority.  God  has  destined  man  for  earthly  and  for  heavenly 
happiness  in  like  measure :  to  the  former  he  is  conducted  by  the 
state,  by  the  natural  knowledge  of  philosophy ;  to  the  latter  he  is 
guided  by  the  Church,  by  means  of  revelation.  In  this  co-ordination 
the  joy  in  the  world,  characteristic  of  the  Renaissance,  bursts  forth 
as  victoriously  as  does  the  feeling  of  strength  which  belongs  to  the 
secular  state. 


328  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PART  III. 

And  along  this  line  the  development  proceeded.  When  the  graded 
scale  of  reality  constructed  by  Thomas  was  severed  in  the  midst  of 
man's  nature,  the  spiritual  and  political  powers  fell  apart,  as  did  the 
spiritual  and  corporeal  worlds;  and  the  theory  afforded  the  con- 
venient means  of  "banishing  the  sacerdotium  to  the  supra-mundane 
inner  nature,  and  putting  the  imperium  into  sole  control  within  ' 
the  world  of  sense.  TMs  is  precisely  the  point  of  view  from  which 
Occam,  in  his  Dispntatio  with  reference  to  the  controversy  between 
the  papacy  and  the  temporal  power,  took  his  position  upon  the  side 
of  the  latter.  Xor  yet  is  it  any  longer  possible,  in  accordance  with 
his  presuppositions,  to  base  the" theory  of  the  state  upon  the  realistic 
thought  of  the  human  race  as  a  whole,  bound  together  for  the  real- 
isation of  one  end.  The  Nominalist  sees  as  a  substantial  back- 
ground in  social  and  historical  life,  only  the  individuals  who  will, 
and  he  regards  state  and  society  as  products  of  interests  (bonum, 
commune).  In  theory,  as  in  life,  individualism  prevails.1 

§  26.  The  Primacy  of  the  Will  or  of  the  Intellect. 

\T.  Kahl,  Die  Lehre  vom  Primat  des  Willens  lei  Augu&tinus,  Duns  Scotus 
und  Dtscartes. 

In  closest  connection  with  all  these  general  questions  stands  a  spe- 
cial psychological  problem,  which  was  vigorously  discussed  through- 
out this  whole  period,  and  in  reference  to  which  the  points  of 
opposition  between  the  parties  of  the  time  may  be  recognised  upon  a 
smaller  scale,  but  all  the  more  sharply  focussed.  It  is  the  question 
whether  among  the  powers  of  the  soul  the  higher  dignity  belongs 
to  the  will  or  to  the  intellect  (utra  potentfa  nobflior).  It  takes  so 
broad  a  space  in  the  literature  of  this  period  that  the  attempt  might 
have  been  made  to  look  upon  the  psychological  antithesis  which 
unfolds  in  connection  with  it  as  the  leading  motive  of  the  whole 
period.  But  the  course  of  the  development  shows  too  clearly  that 
the  real  impelling  forces  lay  in  religious  metaphysics,  and  the 
rigidity  of  systematic  conception  which  distinguishes  the  philoso- 
phical doctrines  of  this  period  explains  sufficiently  why  it  is  that 
their  position  with  reference  to  an  individual  problem  may  appear 
as  typical  for  the  different  thinkers.  It  still  remains  characteristic 
that  this  problem  is  a  question  taken  from  the  domain  of  the  inner 
world. 

i  This  doctrine  of  Occam's  concerning  secular  power  and  law  is  followed  out 
to  me  extreme  consequence  of  the  omnipotence  of  the  state  by  Occam's  friend, 
Mamlius  of  Padua,  whose  treatise,  Defensor  Pads  (1346),  carries  out  in 
rigorous  lines  the  attempt  to  establish  the  theory  of  the  state  upon  the  utilitarian 
and  nommalistic  basis  usin<*  the  Epicurean  theory  of  compact  (above  §  14  ^ 


CHAP.  2,  §  26.]     Witt  and  Intellect:  Thomism,  Scotism.  329 

In  this  question,  also,  the  two  main  bodies  of  tradition,  Augus- 
tinianism  and  Aristotelianism,  were  not  at  one ;  but  their  relation  was 
here  in  nowise  that  of  an  outspoken  opposition.  For  Augustinianism 
the  question  was  in  general  awkwardly  stated.  For  in  this  system 
the  oneness  of  nature  in  the  personality  was  so  strongly  emphasised, 
and  the  inter-relation  of  the  different  sides  of  its  activity  was  so 
often  made  prominent,  that  a  relation  of  rank  in  the  proper  sense  was 
really  out  of  the  question.  But  on  the  other  hand,  especially  in  his 
doctrine  of  knowledge,  Augustine  had  assigned  to  the  will  as  the 
impelling  power  —  even  in  the  process  of  ideation  —  a  position 
so  central  that  it  was  not  shaken  in  its  importance  for  empirical 
facts,  even  though  the  Nee-Platonic  contemplation  of  the  deity  was 
maintained  as  the  final  goal  of  development.  On  the  contrary,  the 
intellectualism  of  the  Aristotelian  system  was  quite  undoubted, 
and  if  it  still  admitted  any  increase,  it  had  received  it  from  the 
Arabian  philosophy,  especially  from  Averroism.  Thus  antitheses 
presented  themselves  which  were  soon  enough  to  break  forth  to 
open  controversy. 

Thomism  in  this  point,  also,  followed  Aristotle  unconditionally, 
finding  at  its  side  in  this  case  the  nearly  related  German  Mysticism, 
and  as  its  opponents  the  Augustinians.  Scotists,  and  Occamists,  so 
that,  as  thus  grouped,  the  opposition  between  the  Dominicans  and 
the  Franciscans  finds  general  expression. 

1.  The  question  as  to  the  pre-eminence  of  the  will  or  of  the  intel- 
lect develops  at  first  as  a  purely  psychological  controversy,  and  de- 
mands a  decision  upon  the  point,  whether  in  the  course  of  the  psychical 
life  the  dependence  of  the  will's  decisions  upon  ideas,  or  that  of  the 
movements  of  ideas  upon  the  will,  is  the  greater.  It  was  there- 
fore adapted  to  further  the  beginnings  of  a  treatment  of  psychology 
that  concerned  itself  especially  with  the  history  of  mental  develop- 
ment (cf.  §  24),  and  it  would  have  been  able  to  do  this  in  a  higher 
degree  than  was  actually  the  case  if  it  had  not  always  been  trans- 
ferred to  the  ground  of  dialectic  or  to  the  metaphysical  domain. 
This  latter  transfer  occurred  principally  in  consequence  of  the  fact 
that  the  conception  of  freedom,  which  always  involves  ethical  and 
religious  questions,  was  looked  upon  as  the  point  in  controversy. 
Both  parties,  indeed,  desired  to  maintain  or  defend  man's  "freedom  " 
in  the  interest  of  responsibility ;  but  this  was  possible  only  as  they 
gave  different  meanings  to  the  word. 

Now,  in  individual  cases,  Thomas  admits  an  influence  of  the  will, 
not  only  upon  motion,  but  also  upon  affirmation  or  denial  of  ideas. 
In  particular,  he  recognises  absolutely  such  an  influence  in  belief. 
But  in  general  he  regards  the  will,  quite  according  to  the  ancient 


330  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PART  in. 

model,  as  determined  by  knowledge  of  the  good.  The  intellect  not 
only  apprehends  in  general  the  idea  of  the  good,  but  also,  in  each 
individual  case,  discerns  -what  is  good,  and  thereby  determines  the 
will.  The  will  necessarily  strives  for  that  which  is  known  to  be 
good ;  it  is  therefore  dependent  upon  the  intellect.  The  latter  is 
the  supremus  motor  of  the  psychical  life;  "rationality,"  so  said 
E&lmrt  also,  is  the  head  of  the  soul,  and  even  romantic  love 
(ki  J/?"/me")  clings  only  to  knowledge.  Freedom  (as  ethical  ideal) 
is  hence,  according  to  Thomas,  that  necessity  which  exists  upon  the 
basis  of  knowledge,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  (psychological)  freedom 
of  choice  (Jiwultas  electiva)  is  nevertheless  only  possible  by  reason 
of  the  fact  that  the  understanding  presents  to  the  will  various  pos- 
sibilities as  means  toward  its  end,  the  will  then  deciding  for  that 
which  is  known  to  be  best, — the  view  held  by  Albert  also.  This 
intelkctuaUstfc  determinism,  in  connection  with  which  Thomas  him- 
self always  insisted  that  the  decision  of  the  will  depends  only  upon 
purely  internal  knowing  activities,  was  extended  by  his  contemporary 
Gottfried  of  Fontaine  to  the  point  of  making  even  the  sensuous 
presentation  (pJiantasma)  the  causa  efflciens  of  the  will's  activity. 

But  the  opponents  made  their  attack  just  in  connection  with  this 
conception  of  necessary  determination.  The  rising  of  ideas,  so 
Het>ry  of  Ghent  had  already  taught,  and  after  him  Duns  Scotus,  and 
still  later  Owum,  is  a  natural  process,  and  the  will  becomes  un- 
avoidably entangled  in  this  if  it  is  to  be  completely  dependent  upon 
ideas.  But  with  this,  said  Scotus,  contingency  (i.e.  possibility  of 
being  otherwise  or  "  power  to  the  contrary  ")  in  the  will's  functions 
is  irreconcilable :  for  the  process  of  Nature  is  always  determined  in 
one  way ;  where  it  prevails  there  is  no  choice.  With  contingency, 
however,  responsibility  also  falls  to  the  ground.  Responsibility  can 
therefore  be  preserved  only  if  it  is  acknowledged  that  the  intellect 
exercises  no  compelling  power  over  the  will.  To  be  sure,  the  co- 
operation of  the  ideational  faculty  is  indispensable  in  the  case  of 
every  activity  of  the  will :  it  presents  the  will  its  objects  and  the 
possibilities  of  its  choice.  But  it  does  this  only  as  the  servant,  and 
the  decision  remains  with  the  master.  The  idea  is  never  more  than 
the  occasioning  cause  (causa per  accidens)  of  the  individual  volition; 
the  doctrine  of  Thomas  confuses  practical  consideration  with  pure 
intellect.  If  the  latter  gives  the  object,  the  decision  is  still  solely 
a  matter  of  the  will;  the  will  is  the  movens  per  se;  to  it  belongs 
absolute  self-determination. 

Indeterminism,  as  Scotus  and  Occam  teach  it,  sees  therefore  in  the 
will  the  fundamental  power  of  the  soul,  and  maintains  conversely, 
that  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  will  on  its  side  determines  the  develop- 


CHAP.  2,  §  26.]    Will  and  Intellect:  Thomism,  Scotism.  331 

ment  of  the  intellectual  activities.  Following  the  procedure  of 
Henry  of  Ghent,1  according  to  whom  the  theoretical  functions 
become  more  active  according  as  they  are  more  immaterial,  Scotus 
attempted  to  prove  the  proposition  just  stated,  in  a  highly  interest- 
ing manner.  The  natural  process,  he  says,  produces  as  the  first 
content  of  consciousness  (cogitatio  prima)  a  multitude  of  ideas 
which  are  more  or  less  confused  (confusce  —  indistinctce)  and  im- 
perfect. Of  these  only  those  become  distinct  (distincta)  and  perfect 
on  which  the  will,  which  in  this  process  is  determined  by  nothing 
further,  fixes  its  attention.  Scotus  also  teaches  at  the  same  time 
that  the  will  strengthens  in  their  intensity  these  ideas  which  it 
raises  from  the  confused  to  the  distinct  condition,  and  that  the 
ideas  to  which  the  will  does  not  apply  itself  ultimately  cease  to 
exist,  on  account  of  their  weakness. 

In  addition  to  these  psychological  arguments,  we  find  appearing 
in  the  controversy  appeals  to  the  authority  of  Anselrn  and  Aristotle 
on  the  one  side,  and  to  that  of  Augustine  on  the  other,  and  further 
a  series  of  other  arguments.  These  are  in  part  of  a  purely  dia- 
lectical nature.  Such  is  the  case  when  Thomas  claims  that 
the  verum  toward  which  the  intellect  aims  is  higher  in  rank  than  the 
bonum  toward  which  the  will  strives,  and  when  Scotus  doubts  the 
authority  for  this  gradation ;  and  so  again  when  Thomas  expresses 
the  opinion  that  the  intellect  apprehends  the  pure,  single  conception 
of  the  good,  while  the  will  is  concerned  only  with  the  special 
empirical  forms  assumed  by  the  good,  and  when  Henry  of  Ghent 
and  Scotus,  exactly  reversing  this  statement,  develop  the  thought 
that  the  will  is  always  directed  only  toward  the  good  as  such,  while 
the  understanding  has  to  show  in  what  the  good  consists  in  a 
particular  case.  With  such  variations  the  matter  was  later  tossed 
to  and  fro  a  great  deal,  and  Johannes  Buridan  is  an  example  of 
those  who  stand  undecided  between  determinism  and  indeterminism. 
For  the  latter  view  speaks  responsibility,  for  the  former  the  prin- 
ciple that  every  event  is  necessarily  determined  by  its  conditions. 

Other  arguments  which  become  interwoven  in  the  controversy 
trench  upon  the  more  general  domains  of  the  conceptions  of  the 
world  and  of  life. 

2.  To  this  class  belongs,  first  of  all,  the  transfer  of  the  question 
of  the  relative  rank  of  will  and  intellect  to  Bod.  The  extreme 
intellectualism  of  the  Arabians  had,  in  Averroes,  excluded  the 
faculty  of  will  from  the  Supreme  Being,  in  accordance  with  the 
Aristolelian  motif,  that  every  act  of  will  implies  a  want,  a  state  of 

1  "Whose  view  in  this  respect  Richard  of  Middletown  also  completely  adopted. 


332  Jlediceval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PART  IIL 

imperfection  and  dependence;  on  the  contrary  Avicebron,  who  ex- 
ercised a  strong  influence  npon  Duns  Scotus,  had  defended  the 
religious  principle  that  the  world  was  created  by  the  divine  will, 
and  in  a  similar  line  of  thought  William*  of  Auvergne  had  main- 
tained the  originality  of  the  will  as  existing  side  by  side  with  the 
intellect  in  the  essence  of  God  and  in  his  creative  activity.  These 
antitheses  were  now  continued  in  the  controversy  between  Thomism 
and  Scotism. 

Thomas,  indeed,  as  a  matter  of  course,  recognises  the  reality  of 
the  divine  will,  but  he  regards  it  as  the  necessary  consequence  of  the 
divine  intellect  and  as  determined  in  its  content  by  the  latter.  God 
creates  only  what  in  his  wisdom  he  knows  to  be  good ;  it  is  neces- 
sarily himself,  i.e.  the  ideal  content  of  his  intellect,  that  forms  the 
object  of  his  will ;  he  necessarily  wills  himself,  and  in  this  consists 
the  freedom,  determined  only  by  himself,  with  which  he  wills  indi- 
vidual things.  Thus  the  divine  will  is  bound  to  the  divine  wisdom, 
which  is  superior  to  it. 

But  just  in  this  the  opponents  of  Aquinas  see  a  limitation  of 
omnipotence  which  does  not  comport  with  the  conception  of  the 
ens  realissitnum.  A  will  seems  to  them  sovereign,  only  if  there  is 
for  it  no  kind  of  determination  or  restriction.  God  created  the 
world,  according  to  Scotus,  solely  from  absolute  arbitrary  will ;  he 
might  have  created  it,  if  he  had  so  willed,  in  other  forms,  relations, 
and  conditions ;  and  beyond  this  his  completely  undetermined  will, 
there  are  no  causes.  The  will  of  God  with  its  undetermined  crea- 
tive resolves  is  the  original  fact  of  all  reality,  and  no  further  ques- 
tions must  be  asked  as  to  its  grounds,  — even  as  the  decision  made 
by  the  will  of  a  finite  being  with  its  lioerum  arbitrium  indifferentice, 
when  placed  before  given  possibilities,  creates  in  every  instance  a 
new  fact  which  cannot  be  understood  as  necessary. 

3.  The  sharpest  formulation  of  this  antithesis  comes  to  light  in 
the  fundamental  metaphysical  principles  of  ethics.  On  both  sides 
the  moral  law  is  naturally  regarded  as  God's  command.  But 
Thomas  teaches  that  God  commands  the  good  because  it  is  good, 
and  is  recognised  as  good  by  his  wisdom ;  Scotus  maintains  that  it  is 
good  only  because  God  has  willed  and  commanded  it,  and  Occam 
adds  to  this  that  God  might  have  fixed  something  else,  might  have 
fixed  even  the  opposite  as  the  content  of  the  moral  law.  For 
Thomas,  therefore,  goodness  is  the  necessary  consequence  and  mani- 
festation of  the  divine  wisdom,  and  Eckhart  also  says  that  "be- 
neath the  garment  of  goodness "  the  essential  nature  of  God  is 
veiled;  intellectualism  teaches  the  perse'ltas  boni,  the  rationally  of 
the  good.  For  intellectualism,  morals  is  a  philosophical  discipline 


CHAP.  2,  §  26.]     Will  and  Intellect:  Thomism,  Seotism.  333 

whose  principles  are  to  be  known  by  the  "natural  light."  "Con- 
science "  (synteresis :)  is  a  knowledge  of  God  sub  ratione  bojii.  With 
Scotus  and  Occam,  on  the  contrary,  the  good  cannot  be  an  object  of 
natural  knowledge,  for  it  might  have  been  otherwise  than  it  is ;  it 
is  determined  not  by  reason,  but  by  groundless  will.  Nothing,  so 
Pierre  d'Ailly  teaches  with  extreme  consistency,  is  in  itself,  or 
per  se,  sin;  it  is  only  the  divine  command  and  prohibition  which 
make  anything  such,  —  a  doctrine  whose  range  is  understood  when 
we  reflect  that,  according  to  the  view  of  these  men,  God's  com- 
mand becomes  known  to  man  only  through  the  mouth  of  the 
Church. 

It  is  also  closely  connected  with  this  that  theology,  which  for 
Thomas  still  remained  a  "speculative"  science,  became  with  his 
opponents,  as  has  been  already  indicated  above  (§  25,  3),  a  "prac- 
tical "  discipline.  Albert  had  already  made  intimations  of  this  sort, 
Eichard  of  Middletown  and  Bonaventura  had  emphasised  the  fact 
that  theology  deals  with  the  emotions ;  Eoger  Bacon  had  taught 
that  while  all  other  sciences  are  based  on  reason  or  experience, 
theology  alone  has  for  its  foundation  the  authority  of  the  divine 
will:  Duns  Scotus  completed  and  fixed  the  separation  between 
theology  and  philosophy  by  making  it  a  necessary  consequence  of 
his  metaphysics  of  the  will. 

4  The  same  contrast  becomes  disclosed  with  like  distinctness 
in  the  doctrines  of  the  final  destiny  of  man,  of  his  state  in  eternal 
blessedness.  The  ancient  0€o>/>ta,  the  contemplation  of  the  divine 
majesty,  free  from  will  and  from  want,  had  in  Augustine's  teaching 
formed  the  ideal  state  of  the  pardoned  and  glorified  man,  and  this 
ideal  had  been  made  to  waver  but  little  by  the  doctrines  of  the  ear- 
lier Mystics.  ISTow  it  found  new  support  in  the  Aristotelian  intel- 
lectualism,  in  accordance  with  which  Albert  thought  that  man,  in  so 
far  as  he  is  truly  man,  is  intellect.  The  participation  in  the  divine 
being  which  man  attains  by  knowledge  is  the  highest  stage  of  life 
which  he  can  reach.  On  this  account  Thomas,  too,  sets  the  dianoetic 
virtues  above  the  practical,  on  this  account  the  visio  divinoe  essentice, 
the  intuitive,  eternal  vision  of  God,  which  is  removed  beyond  all 
that  is  temporal,  is  for  him  the  goal  of  all  human  striving.  From 
this  vision  follows  eo  ipso  the  love  of  God,  just  as  every  determinate 

1  This  word  (written  also  sinderesis,  scinderesis)  has,  since  Albert  of  Boll- 
stSdt,  occasioned  much  etymological  cudgelling  of  brains.  Since,  however, 
among  the  later  physicians  of  antiquity  (Sext.  Emp.)  r-^p^o-w  appears  as  a 
technical  term  for  "observation,"  it  may  be  that  o-i/pr^o-ty,  which  is  attested 
in  the  fourth  century,  originally  signified  "self-observation"  in  analogy  -with 
the  Neo-Platonic  usage  in  a-vvalo-Qyo-ts  or  trweLSTjo-is  (cf.  p.  234=) :  and  thus  took 
on  the  ethico-religious  sense  of  "conscience1' 


3B4  Mediceval  Philosophy ;  Second  Period.       [PART  in. 

state  of  the  -will  is  necessarily  attacked  to  the  corresponding  state 
of  the  intellect.  Just  this  tendency  of  Thomism  was  given  its  most 
beautiful  expression  by  Dante,  the  poet  of  the  system.  Beatrice  is 
the  poetic  embodiment  of  this  ideal,  for  all  time. 

Meanwhile  a  counter-current  manifests  its  force  on  this  point  also. 
Hugo  of  St.  Victor  had  characterised  the  supreme  angel  choir  by 
love,  and  the  second  by  wisdom ;  and  while  Bonaventura  regarded 
contemplation  as  the  highest  stage  in  the  imitation  of  Christ,  he 
emphasised  expressly  the  fact  that  this  contemplation  is  identical 
with  "love."  Duns  Scotus,  however,  taught  with  a  decided  polemi- 
cal tendency  that  blessedness  is  a  state  of  the  will,  and  that,  too,  of 
the  will  directed  toward  God  alone ;  he  sees  man's  last  glorification, 
not  in  contemplation,  but  in  love,  which  is  superior  to  contemplation, 
and  he  appeals  to  the  word  of  the  Apostle, £b  The  greatest  of  these  is 
love." 

Hence  as  Thomas  regarded  the  intellect,  and  Duns  Scotus  the 
will,  as  the  decisive  and  determining  element  of  man's  nature, 
Thomas  could  hold  fast  to  Augustine's  doctrine  of  the  gratia  irresisti- 
bilis,  according  to  which  revelation  determines  irresistibly  the  intel- 
lect and  with  it  the  will  of  man,  while  Duns  Scotus  found  himself 
forced  to  the  -'-synergistic''1  view,  that  the  reception  of  the  opera- 
tion of  divine  grace  is  to  a  certain  extent  conditioned  by  the  free  will 
of  the  individual.  So  the  great  successor  of  Augustine,  with  strict 
logical  consistency,  decided  against  the  Augustinian  doctrine  of  pre- 
destination. 

5.  On  the  other  hand,  the  intellectualism  of  Thomas  develops  its 
extreme  consequences  in  German  Mysticism,  whose  founder,  Eckhart, 
is  entirely  dependent  upon  the  teacher  of  his  Order  in  the  con- 
ceptional  outlines  of  his  doctrine.1  Eckhart  goes  far  beyond  his 
master  only  in  the  one  respect  that  as  a  much  more  original  person- 
ality he  is  unwearied  in  his  effort  to  translate  the  deep  and  mighty 
feeling  of  his  piety  into  knowledge,  and  thus  urged  on  by  his  inner 
nature  he  breaks  through  the  statutory  restrictions  before  which 
Thomas  had  halted.  Convinced  that  the  view  of  the  world  given  in 
the  religious  cousciousness  must  be  capable  of  being  made  also  the 
content  of  the  highest  knowledge,  he  sublimates  his  pious  faith  to  a 
speculative  knowledge,  and  in  contrast  with  the  pure  spirituality  of 
this  he  looks  upon  the  Church  dogma  as  only  the  external,  temporal 
symbol.  But  while  this  tendency  is  one  that  he  shares  with  many 

iCf.  S.  Denifle  in  the  ArcJiw  fur  Litterat.-  u.  Eult.-Gesch.  d.  M.-A..U. 
417  ff.  So  far,  therefore,  as  Eckhart  was  really  to  be  the  "Father  of  German 
speculation,"  this  speculation  had  its  source  in  Thomas  Aquinas  and  his  teacher 
Albert. 


CHAP.  2,  §  26.]  Will  and  Intellect :  Eckhart.  335 

other  systems,  it  is  his  peculiarity  that  he  does  not  wish  to  have  the 
inmost  and  truest  truth  kept  as  the  privilege  of  an  exclusive  circle, 
but  desires  rather  to  communicate  it  to  all  people.  He  believes 
that  the  right  understanding  for  this  deepest  essence  of  religious 
doctrine  is  to  be  found  precisely  in  connection  with  simple  piety,  l 
and  so  he  throws  down  from  the  pulpit  among  the  people  the  finest 
conceptions  constructed  by  science.  TVith  a  mastery  of  language 
that  marks  the  genius  he  coins  Scholasticism  into  impressive  preach- 
ing, and  creates  for  his  nation  the  beginnings  of  its  philosophical 
modes  of  expression, — beginnings  which  were  of  determining  in- 
fluence for  the  future. 

But  in  his  teaching  the  combined  mystical  and  intellectualistic 
elements  of  Thomism  become  intensified  by  the  Nee-Platonic  ideal- 
ism; which  had  probably  reached  him  through  the  medium  of  Scotus 
Erigena,  to  the  last  logical  consequence.  Being  and  knowledge  are 
one,  and  all  that  takes  place  in  the  world  is  in  its  deepest  essence  a 
knowing  process.  The  procedure  of  the  world  forth  out  of  God  is 
a  process  of  knowledge,  of  self-revelation,  —  the  return  of  things 
into  God  is  a  process  of  knowledge,  of  higher  and  higher  intuition. 
The  ideal  existence  of  all  that  is  real  —  so  at  a  later  time  said 
Nicolaus  Cusanus,  who  made  this  doctrine  of  Eckhart's  his  own  — 
is  truer  than  the  corporeal  existence  which  appears  in  space  and 
time. 

The  original  ground  of  all  things,  the  deity,  must  therefore  lie 
beyond  Being  and  knowledge  j 2  it  is  above  reason,  above  Being ;  it 
has  no  determination  or  quality,  it  is  "  Nothing."  But  this  "  deity  " 
(of  negative  theology)  reveals  itself  in  the  triune  God,3  and  the 
God  who  is  and  knows  creates  out  of  nothing  the  creatures  whose 
Ideas  he  knows  within  himself ;  for  this  knowing  is  his  creating. 
This  process  of  self-revelation  belongs  to  the  essence  of  the  deity  5 
it  is  hence  a  timeless  necessity,  and  no  act  of  will  in  the  proper 
sense  of  the  word  is  required  for  God  to  produce  the  world.  The 
deity,  as  productive  or  generative  essence,  as  "  un-natured  Mature  " 
[or  Nature  that  has  not  yet  taken  on  a  nature],  is  real  or  actual  only 
by  knowing  and  unfolding  itself  in  God  and  the  world  as  produced 


1  German  Mysticism  is  thus  connected  with  the  more  general  phenomenon, 
that  the  fast  increasing  externalisation  which  seized  upon  the  life  of  the  Chnrch 
in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries  drove  piety  everywhere  into  paths 
that  lay  outside  the  Church. 

2  Evidently  the  same  relation  that  subsisted  in  the  system  of  Plotinus  between 
the  %v  and  the  vovs,  a  relation  in  which  thought  and  Being  were  held  to  coincide. 

8  The  distinction  between  deity  and  God  (divinitas  and  deus}  was  made  dia- 
lectically  by  Gilbert  de  la  PorrSe  in  connection  with  the  controversy  over  uni- 
versals  and  its  relations  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity. 


336  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.        [PART  in. 

reality,  as  natured  Nature.1  God  creates  all  —  said  Xicolaus  Cusa- 
nus  — that  is  to  say,  he  is  all.  And  on  the  other  hand,  according 
to  Eckhart,  all  things  have  essence  or  substance  only  in  so  far 
as  they  are  themselves  God ;  whatever  else  appears  in  them  as 
phenomena,  their  determination  in  space  and  time, their  "here'"'  and 
"now  *?  {^ Hie  "  und  "'  jy«,v  hte  et  tutnc  with  Thomas),  is  nothing.2 

The  human  soul,  also,  is  therefore  in  its  inmost  nature  of  the 
divine  essence,  and  it  is  only  as  a  phenomenon  in  time  that  it 
possesses  the  variety  of  ;i  powers  r'  or  ^  faculties  "  with  which  it  is 
active  as  a  member  of  the  natura  natumta.  That  inmost  essence 
Eckhart  calls  the  c-  Spark," 3  and  hi  this  he  recognises  the  living 
point  at  which  the  world-process  begins  its  return. 

"For  to  the  u Becoming*7  corresponds  the  reverse  process,  the 
"Anti-becoming"  (>•  Enticerden"),  the  disappearing.  And  this, 
too,  is  the  act  of  knowledge  by  means  of  which  the  things 
which  have  been  made  external  to  the  deity  are  taken  back 
into  the  original  Ground.  By  being  known  by  man  the  world  of 
sense  finds  again  its  true  spiritual  nature.  Hence  human  cogni- 
tion, with  its  ascent  from  sense  perception  to  rational  insight,4 
consists  in  the  u' elimination  "  ("  Abseheideii  ")  of  plurality  and  mul- 
tiplicity; the  spiritual  essence  is  freed  from  its  enveloping  husks. 
And  this  is  man's  highest  task  in  the  temporal  life,  since  knowledge 
is  the  most  valuable  of  man's  powers.  He  should  indeed  be  also 
active  in  this  world,  and  thus  bring  his  rational  nature  to  assert 
itself  and  gain  control,  but  above  all  outer  action,  above  the  right- 
eousness of  works  which  belongs  to  the  sphere  of  sense,  stands  first 
the  "inner  work/'  cleanness  of  disposition,  purity  of  heart,  and 
above  this  in  turn  stands  retirement  or  "decease"  (Abgeschieden- 
heit)  and v;  poverty ''  of  soul,  the  complete  withdrawal  of  the  soul  from 
the  outer  world  into  its  inmost  essence,  into  the  deity.  In  the  act 
of  knowing  it  reaches  that  purposelessness  of  action,  that  action  not 
constrained  by  an  end,  that  freedom  within  itself,  in  which  its  beauty 
consists. 

But  even  this  is  not  perfect  so  long  as  the  knowing  process  does 
not  find  its  consummation.  The  goal  of  all  life  is  the  knowledge  of 

1  On  the  terms  natura  naturans  and  natura  naturata,  which  were  probably 
brought  into  use  by  Averroism  (cf.  §  27,  1),  cf.  H.  Siebeck,  Archw  f.  Gesch.  d. 
Phil,  III.  370  ff. 

2  Accordingly  without  accepting  the  dialectical  formulas,  Eckhart  treats  the 
Thomistic  doctrine  of  Ideas  quite  in  the  sense  of  the  strict  Realism  of  Scotus 
Erigena.     He  speaks  slightingly  of  the  Nominalists  of  his  time  as  tl  little 
masters." 

*  Also  the  "  Gemu'the"  or  Synteresis  =  scintilla  consciences. 

*  The  single  stages  of  this  process  are  developed  by  Eckhart  according  to  the 
Thomistic-Augustinian  scheme. 


CHAP.  2,  §  27.]  Problem  of  Individuality.  337 

God,  but  knowing  is  Being ;  it  is  a  community  of  life  and  of  Being 
with  that  which  is  known.  If  the  soul  would  know  God,  it  must 
be  God,  it  must  cease  to  be  itself.  It  must  renounce  not  only  sin 
and  the  world,  but  itself  also.  It  must  strip  off  all  its  acquired 
knowledge,  and  all  present  knowing  of  phenomena ;  as  the  deity  is 
"  Nothing,"  so  it  is  apprehended  only  in  this  knowledge  that  is  a 
not-knowing  —  docta  ignomntia,  it  was  later  called  by  Xicolaus;  and 
as  that  "Nothing"  is  the  original  ground  of  all  reality,  so  this  not- 
knowing  is  the  highest,  the  most  blessed  contemplation.  It  is  no 
longer  an  act  of  the  individual,  it  is  the  act  of  God  in  man ;  God 
begets  his  own  essence  within  the  soul,  and  in  his  pure  eternal 
nature  the  "Spark"  has  stripped  off  all  its  powers  through  which  it 
works  in  time,  and  has  effaced  their  distinction.  This  is  the  state 
of  supra-rational  knowing  when  man  ends  his  life  in  God,  —  the 
state,  of  which  Ficolaus  of  Cusa  said,  it  is  the  eternal  love  (charitas), 
which  is  known  by  love  (amore)  and  loved  by  knowledge. 

§  27.  The  Problem  of  Individuality. 

The  doctrine  of  German  Mystioism,  which  had  arisen  from  the 
deepest  personal  piety  and  from  a  genuine  individual  need  felt  in 
a  life  whose  religion  was  purely  internal,  thus  runs  out  into  an  ideal 
of  exaltation,  of  self-denial,  of  renunciation  of  the  world,  in  the 
presence  of  which  everything  that  is  particular,  every  individual 
reality,  appears  as  sin  or  imperfection,  as  had  been  the  case  in  the 
ancient  Oriental  view.  In  this  thought  the  contradiction  that  was 
inherent  in  the  depths  of  the  Augustinian  system  (cf.  p.  28T)  became 
fully  developed  and  immediately  palpable,  and  it  thus  becomes  evident 
that  the  Neo-Platonic  intellectualism,  in  whatever  form  it  appeared 
from  the  time  of  Augustine  to  that  of  Master  Eckhart,  was  in  itself 
alone  always  necessarily  inclined  to  contest  the  metaphysical  self- 
subsistence  of  the  individual,  while  the  other  party  maintained  this 
self-subsistence  as  a  postulate  of  the  doctrine  of  the  will.  Accord- 
ingly, when  in  connection  with  the  increase  of  intellectualism  the 
universalistic  tendency  increased  also,  the  counter-current  was  neces- 
sarily evoked  all  the  more  powerfully,  and  the  same  antithesis  in 
motives  of  thought  which  had  led  to  the  dialectic  of  the  controversy 
over  universals  (cf.  p.  289)  now  took  on  a  more  real  and  metaphys- 
ical form  in  the  question  as  to  the  ground  of  existence  in  individual 
beings  (principium  individuationis) . 

1.  The  stimulus  for  this  was  furnished  by  the  far-reaching  conse- 
quences to  which  universalism  and  intellectualism  had  led  among 
the  Arabians.  For  the  Arabians,  in  interpreting  the  Aristotelian 


338  Jfediceval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PART  ILL 

system,  had  proceeded  in  the  direction  which  had  been  introduced 
in  antiquity  by  Strato  (cf.  p.  179  f.j?  and  which  among  the  later  com- 
mentators had  been  maintained  chiefly  by  Alexander  of  Aphrodisias. 
This  direction  was  that  of  naturalism,  which  would  fain  remove 
from  the  system  of  the  Stagirite  even  the  last  traces  of  a  metaphys- 
ical separation  between  the  ideal  and  the  sensuous.  This  effort  had 
become  concentrated  upon  two  points  :  upon  the  relation  of  God  to 
the  world,  and  upon  that  of  the  reason  to  the  other  faculties.  In 
both  these  lines  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  Arabian  Peripatetic  doc- 
trine developed,  and  this  took  place  by  complicated  transformations 
of  the  Aristotelian  conceptions  of  Form  and  Matter. 

In  general,  we  find  in  this  connection  in  the  Andalusian  philoso- 
phy a  tendency  to  make  matter  metaphysically  self-subsistent.    It 
is  conceived  of,  not  as  that  which  is  merely  abstractly  possible,  but 
as  that  which  bears  within  itself  as  living  germs  the  Forms  peculiar 
to  it,  and  brings  them  to  realisation  in  its  movement.     At  the  same 
time  Acerroes,  as  regards  particular  cosmic  processes,  held  fast  to 
the  Aristotelian  principle  that  every  movement  of  matter  by  which 
it  realises  out  of  itself  a  lower  Form,  must  be  called  forth  by  a 
higher  Form,  and  the  graded  series  of  Forms  finds  its  termination 
above  in  Goa,  as  the  highest  and  first  mover.    The  transcendence 
of  God  could  be  united  with  this  view,  as  the  doctrine  of  Avicelron 
shows,  only  if  matter  were  regarded  as  itself  created  by  the  divine 
will.    But  on  the  other  hand,  this  same  Jewish  philosopher,  pro- 
ceeding from  the  same  presuppositions,  insisted  that  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  deity,  no  being  could  be  thought  of  otherwise  than  as 
connected  with  matter,  that  accordingly  even  the  spiritual  Forms 
need  for  their  reality  a  matter  in  which  they  inhere,  and  that  finally 
the  living  community  of  the  universe  demands  a  single  matter  as 
basis  for  the  entire  realm  of  Forms.    The  more,  however,  in  the 
system  of  Awrrote,  matter  was  regarded  as  eternally  in  motion 
within  itself,  and  as  actuated  by  unity  of  life,  the  less  could  the 
moving  Form  be  separated  from  it  realtor,  and  thus  the  same  divine 
All-being  appeared  on  the  one  hand  as  Form  and  moving  force 
(natura  naturana),  and  on  the  other  hand  as  matter,  as  moved  world 
(natura  natitrata). 

This  doctrine  with  regard  to  matter,  that  it  is  one  in  nature,  is 
informed  within,  and  is  eternally  in  motion  of  itself,  became  ex- 
tended with  Averroism  as  an  extremely  naturalistic  interpretation 
of  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle.  It  now  became  reinforced  by  those 
consequences  of  dialectical  Eealism  which  compelled  the  view  that 
God,  as  the  ens  generalissimum,  is  the  only  substance,  and  that  in- 
dividual things  are  but  the  more  or  less  transient  Forms  in  which 


CHAP.  2,  §  27.]   Problem  of  Individuality :  Averroes.  339 

this  single  substance  becomes  realised  (cf.  §  23).  The  Amalricans 
thus  teach  that  God  is  the  one  single  essence  (essentia)  of  all  things, 
and  that  creation  is  only  an  assuming  of  form  on  the  part  of  this 
divine  essence,  a  realising,  completed  in  eternal  movement,  of  all 
possibilities  contained  in  this  one  single  matter.  David  of  Dinant1 
establishes  this  same  pantheism  with  the  help  of  Avicebron's  con- 
ceptions, by  teaching  that  as  £'hyle'v  (i.e.  corporeal  matter)  is  the 
substance  of  all  bodies,  so  mind  (ratio  —  mens)  is  the  substance  of 
all  souls ;  that,  however,  since  God,  as  the  most  universal  of  all  es- 
sences, is  the  substance  of  all  things  whatever,  God,  matter,  and 
mind  are,  in  the  last  resort,  identical,  and  the  world  is  but  their 
self-realisation  in  particular  forms. 

2.  But  the  metaphysical  self-subsistence  of  the  individual  mind 
was  involved  in  doubt  by  yet  another  line  of  thought.  Aristotle 
had  made  the  i/ovs,  as  the  everywhere  identical  rational  activity, 
join  the  animal  soul  '-  irom  without/'  and  had  escaped  the  difficul- 
ties of  this  doctrine  because  the  problem  of  personality,  which 
emerged  only  with  the  Stoic  conception  of  the  ifye/AowKoV,  did  not 
as  yet  lie  within  the  horizon  of  his  thought.  But  the  commenta- 
tors, Greek  and  Arabian,  who  developed  his  system  did  not  shrink 
before  the  consequences  that  resulted  from  it  for  the  metaphysical 
value  of  mental  and  spiritual  individuality. 

In  the  thought  of  Alexander  of  Aplirodisias  we  meet,  under  the 
name  of  the  "passive  intellect"  (cf.  p.  150),  the  capacity  of  the  in- 
dividual psyche  to  take  up  into  itself,  in  accordance  with  its  whole 
animal  and  empirical  disposition,  the  operation  of  the  active  reason, 
and  this  intellectus  agens  (agreeably  to  the  naturalistic  conception  of 
the  whole  system)  is  here  identified  with  the  divine  mind,  which  is 
still  thought  only  as  "separate  Form"  (intellectus  separates).  But 
with  Simplicius,  in  accordance  with  the  Xeo-Platonic  metaphysics,  this 
intellectus  agens  which  realises  itself  in  man's  rational  knowledge 
has  already  become  the  lowest  of  the  intelligences  who  rule  the  sub- 
lunary world.2  This  doctrine  finds  an  original  development  in  the 
thought  of  Averroes.3  According  to  his  view,  the  intellectus  passivus 
is  to  be  sought  in  the  individual's  capacity  for  knowledge,  a  capacity 
which,  like  the  individual  himself,  arises  and  perishes  as  Form  of 
the  individual  body;  it  has  validity,  therefore,  only  for  the  indi- 
vidual, and  for  that  which  concerns  the  particular.  The  intellectus 

1  Following  the  Liber  de  Gausis  and  the  pseudo-Boethian  treatise  De  Uno  et 
Unitate;  clB.  Haur£au  in  the  Memoires  de  VAcad.  des  J?ismjtf.,XXIX.  (1877), 
and  also  A.  Jundt,  Histoire  du  Panth&isme  Populaire  au  M.-A.  (Paris,  1875). 

2 The  so-called  "Theology  of  Aristotle"  identifies  this  vovs  with  the  Xrf7os. 
For  particulars,  see  E.  Renan,  Ao.  et  VAo.,  II.  §  6  ff. 

8  Cf.  principally  his  treatise  De  Animos  Beatitudine. 


340  Mediaeval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PART  HI. 

agens}  on  the  contrary,  as  a  Form  existing  apart  from  empirical  in- 
dividuals and  independent  of  them,  is  the  eternal  generic  reason  of 
the  human  race,  which  neither  arises  nor  perishes,  and  which  con- 
tains the  universal  truths  in  a  manner  valid  for  all.  It  is  the  sub- 
stance of  the  truly  intellectual  life,  and  the  knowing  activity  of 
the  individual  is  but  a  special  manifestation  of  it.  This  (actual) 
knowing  activity  (as  intellectus  acquisitus)  is  indeed  in  its  con- 
tent, in  its  essence,  eternal,  since  in  so  far  it  is  just  the  active  rea- 
son itself ;  on  the  contrary,  as  empirical  function  of  an  individual 
knowing  process,  it  is  as  transitory  as  the  individual  soul  itself. 
The  completest  incarnation  of  the  active  reason  has,  according  to 
Averroes,  been  given  in  Aristotle.1  Man's  rational  knowing  is, 
then,  an  impersonal  or  supra-personal  function :  it  is  the  individual's 
temporal  participation  in  the  eternal  generic  reason.  This  latter  is 
the  unitary  essence  which  realises  itself  in  the  most  valuable  activi- 
ties of  personality. 

Intimations  of  this  pan-psyckism  occasionally  appear  in  the  train 
of  ZSeo-Platonie  Mysticism  at  an  earlier  period  in  Western  literature ; 
as  an  outspoken  and  extended  doctrine  it  appears  by  the  side  of 
Averroism  about  1200 ;  the  two  are  everywhere  named  in  conjunc- 
tion at  the  first  when  the  erroneous  doctrines  of  the  Arabian 
Peripatetic  thought  are  condemned,  and  it  is  one  main  effort  of 
the  Dominicans  to  protect  Aristotle  himself  from  being  confused 
with  this  doctrine.  Albert  and  Thomas  both  write  a  De  Unitate 
Intellectus  against  the  Averroists. 

3.  Pan-psychism  encounters  with  Christian  thinkers  an  oppo- 
sition in  which  the  determining  factor  is  the  feeling  of  the  meta- 
physical value  of  personality,  —  the  feeling  which  had  been  nour- 
ished by  Augustine.  This  is  the  standpoint  from  which  .men  like 
\Yilliam  of  Auvergne  and  Henry  of  Ghent  oppose  Averroes.  And 
this  is  also  the  real  reason  why  the  main  systems  of  Scholasticism 
—  in  diametrical  contrast  with  Eckhart's  Mysticism  —  did  not  allow 
the  Eealism  which  was  inherent  in  the  intellectualistic  bases  of 
their  metaphysics  to  come  to  complete  development.  Thomism 
was  here  in  the  more  difficult  case,  for  it  maintained  indeed,  follow- 
ing Avicenna-'s  formula  (cf.  p.  299),  that  universals,  and  therefore 
also  the  genus  "  soul,' '  exist  only  "  individualised,"  i.e.  in  the  indi- 
vidual empirical  examples  as  their  universal  essence  (quiddttas), 
but  it  ascribed  to  them,  nevertheless,  metaphysical  priority  in  the 
divine  mind.  It  was  therefore  obliged  to  explain,  how  it  comes 


1  And  with  this  the  unconditional  recognition  of  the  authority  of  the  Stagirite 
is  theoretically  justified  by  Averroes. 


CHAP.  2,  §  27.]    Problem  of  Individuality :  Thomism^  Scotism.  341 

about  that  this  one  essence  as  universal  matter  presents  itself  in 
such  manifold  forms.  That  is  to  say,  it  asked  after  the  PEINCIPIUM 
IXDIVIDTJATIONIS,  and  found  it  in  the  consideration  that  matter  in 
space  and  time  is  quantitatively  determined  (materia  signata).  In 
the  capacity  of  matter  to  assume  quantitative  differences  consists  the 
possibility  of  individuation,  i.e.  the  possibility  that  the  same  Form 
(e.g.  humanity)  is  actual  in  different  instances  or  examples  as  indi- 
vidual substances.  Hence,  according  to  Thomas,  pure  Forms  (sepa- 
ratee, sive  subsistentes)  are  individualised  only  through  themselves ; 
that  is,  there  is  but  one  example  which  corresponds  to  them.  Every 
angel  is  a  genus  and  an  individual  at  the  same  time.  The  inherent 
Forms,  on  the  contrary,  to  which  the  human  soul  also  belongs  in 
spite  of  its  subsistence  (cf.  p.  324),  are  actual  in  many  examples,  in 
accordance  with  the  quantitative  differences  of  space  and  time 
which  their  matter  presents. 

This  view  was  opposed  by  the  Franciscans,  whose  religious  and 
metaphysical  psychology  had  developed  in  intimate  relation  with 
Augustine's  teaching.  In  their  thought,  first  the  individual  soul, 
and  then,  with  a  consistent  extension  in  general  metaphysics, 
individual  beings  in  general,  are  regarded  as  self-subsisting  realities. 
They  rejected  the  distinction  of  separate  and  inherent  Forms. 
Bonaventura,  Henry  of  Ghent,  and  still  more  energetically  Duns 
Seotus,  maintained,  following  Avicebron,  that  even  intellectual 
Forms  have  their  own  matter,  and  Seotus  teaches  that  the  "  soul  "  is 
not  individualised  and  substantialised  only  after,  and  by  means  of, 
its  relation  to  a  definite  body,  as  Thomas  had  taught,  but  that  it  is 
already  in  itself  individualised  and  substantialised.  On  this  point 
Scotism  shows  a  discord  which  had  evidently  not  come  to  notice  in 
the  mind  of  its  author.  It  emphasises  on  the  one  hand,  in  the 
strongest  manner,  the  Eeality  of  the  universal,  by  maintaining  the 
unity  of  matter  (materia  primo-prima]  quite  in  the  Arabian  sense, 
and  on  the  other  hand  it  teaches  that  this  universal  is  only  actual 
by  being  realised  by  the  series  of  Forms  descending  from  the  uni- 
versal to  the  particular,  and  ultimately  by  means  of  the  definite 
individual  Form  (hoecceitas) .  This  individual  Form  is  therefore 
for  Duns  Seotus  an  original  fact;  no  farther  question  as  to  its 
ground  is  permissible.  He  designates  individuality  (both  in  the 
sense  of  individual  substance  and  in  that  of  individual  occurrence) 
as  the  contingent  (contingens)  ;  that  is,  as  that  which  is  not  to  be 
deduced  from  a  universal  ground,  but  is  only  to  be  verified  as  actual 
fact.  For  him,  therefore,  as  for  his  predecessor  Koger  Bacon,  the 
inquiry  for  the  principle  of  individuation  has  no  meaning :  the  indi- 
vidual is  the  "  last "  Form  of  all  reality,  by  means  of  which  alone 


342  Medieval  Philosophy  :  Second  Period.       [PART  III. 


universal  matter  exists,  and  the  question  rather  is,  hoTv,  in  presence 
of  the  fact  that  the  individual  being  with  its  determined  form  is 
the  only  Reality,  one  can  still  speak  of  a  Reality  of  universal 
"  natures/'1 

From  this  noteworthy  limitation  of  the  doctrine  of  Scotus  it 
becomes  explicable  that  while  some  of  its  adherents,  as  for  example 
Francis  of  Mayron,  proceeded  from  it  to  extreme  Realism,  it  sud- 
denlv  changed  with  Occam  into  the  renewal  of  the  nominalistic 
thesis*  that  only  the  individual  is  real  and  that  the  universal  is  but 
a  product  of  comparative  thought. 

4  The  victorious  development  which  Xominalism  experienced  in 
the  second  period  of  mediaeval  philosophy  rests  upon  an  extremely 
peculiar  combination  of  very  different  motives  of  thought.    In  the 
depths  of  this  stream  of  development  is  dominant  the  Augustiniau 
moment  of  feeling,  which  seeks  to  see  the  proper  metaphysical  value 
secured  to  the  individual  personality;  in  the  main  philosophical 
current  the  anti-Platonic  tendency  of  the  Aristotelian  theory  oJ 
knowledge,  now  just  becoming  known,  asserts  itself,  throwing  its 
influence  toward  conceding  the  value  of  ''first  substance"  to  th« 
empirical  individual  only  ;  and  on  the  surface  plays  a  logico-gram 
matical  schematism,  which  has  its  origin  in  the  first  operation  o 
the  Byzantine  tradition  of  ancient  thought.2    All  these  influence! 
become  concentrated  in  the  impassioned,  impressive  personality  o 
William  of  Occam. 

In  their  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  concepts  and  its  applicatioi 
to  the  judgment  and  syllogism,  the  text-books  of  "  modern  "  logic 
as  type  of  which  that  of  Petrus  Hispanus  may  serve,  lay  an  impoi 
tant  emphasis  upon  the  theory  of  "  supposition  "  in  a  manner  whic] 
is  not  without  its  precedent  in  antiquity.3  According  to  this  theor 
a  class-concept  or  term  (terminus)  may,  in  language,  and,  as  wa 
then  supposed,  in  logic  also,  stand  for  the  sum  of  its  species,  and 
species-concept  for  the  sum  of  all  its  individual  examples  (homo  = 
omnes  homines),  so  that  in  the  operations  of  thought  a  term  i 
employed  as  a  sign  for  that  which  it  means,  Occam  develops  Kon 
inalism  in  the  forms  of  this  Terminism*  (cf.  pp.  325  f).  Individuj 

1  This  method  for  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  universals,  peculiar  to  Dm 
Scotus,  is  usually  called  Formalism. 

2  In  fact,  we  may  see  in  the  working  of  the  text-book  of  Michael  Psellos  tl 
first  impetus  of  that  accession  of  ancient  material  of  culture  which  the  We 
received  by  way  of  Byzantium,  and  which  later  in  the  Renaissance  becan 
definitely  united  with  the  two  other  lines  of  tradition  that  came,  the  one  I 
way  of  Rome  and  York,  the  other  by  way  of  Bagdad  and  Cordova. 

8  The  reader  need  only  be  reminded  of  the  investigations  of  Philodemus  c 
signs  and  things  signified  (p.  162  ;  cf.  also  p.  198). 

*  Cf.  K.  Prantl  in  the  Sits.-Ber.  far  Munch.  Acad.,  1864,  II.  a  58  ff. 


CHAP.  2,  §  27.]     Problem  of  Individuality :  Terminism*  343 

things,  to  which  Occam,  following  Scotus,  concedes  the  Reality  of 
original  Forms,  are  represented  in  thought  by  us  intuitively,  without 
the  mediation  of  species  intelligibiles ;  but  these  ideas  or  mental  rep- 
resentations are  only  the  "natural"  signs  for  the  things  represented. 
They  have  only  a  necessary  reference  to  them,  and  hare  real  simi- 
larity with  them  as  little  as  any  sign  is  necessarily  like  the  object 
designated.  This  relation  is  that  of  "  first  intention.'7  But  now  as 
individual  ideas  stand  for  (supponunt)  individual  things,  so,  in 
thought,  speech,  and  writing,  the  "  undetermined "  general  ideas  of 
abstract  knowledge,  or  the  spoken  or  written  words  which  in  tart 
express  these  general  ideas,  may  stand  for  the  individual  idea.  This 
"  second  intention,"  in  which  the  general  idea  with  the  help  of  the 
word  refers  no  longer  directly  to  the  thing  itself,  but  primarily  to  the 
idea  of  the  thing,  is  no  longer  natural,  but  arbitrary  or  according 
to  one's  liking  (adplacitum  instituta).1  Upon  this  distinction  Occam 
rests  also  that  of  real  and  rational  science :  the  former  relates  imme- 
diately or  intuitively  to  things,  the  latter  relates  abstractly  to  the 
immanent  relations  between  ideas.  * 

It  is  clear,  according  to  this,  that  rational  science  also  presupposes 
K  real "  science  and  is  bound  to  the  empirical  material  presented  in 
the  form  of  ideas  by  this  real  science,  but  it  is  also  clear  that  even 
"  real "  knowledge  apprehends  only  an  inner  world  of  ideas,  which 
may  indeed  serve  as  "  signs  "  of  things,  but  are  different  from  things 
themselves.  The  mind  —  so  Albert  had  incidentally  said,  and  Xico- 
laus  Cusanus  at  a  later  time  carried  out  the  thought  —  knows  only 
what  it  has  within  itself;  its  knowledge  of  the  world,  terministic 
Nominalism  reasons,  refers  to  the  inner  states  into  which  its  living 
connection  with  the  real  world  puts  it.  As  contrasted  with  the  true 
essence  of  things,  teaches  Nicolaus  Cusanus,  who  committed  himself 
absolutely  to  this  idealistic  Nominalism,  human  thought  possesses 
only  conjectures,  that  is,  only  modes  of  representation  which  corre- 
spond to  its  own  nature,  and  the  knowledge  of  this  relativity  of  all 
positive  predicates,  the  knowledge  of  this  non-knowledge,  the  docta 
ignorantia,  is  the  only  way  to  go  beyond  rational  science  and  attain 
to  the  inexpressible,  signless,  immediate  community  of  knowledge 
with  true  Being,  the  deity. 

5.  In  spite  of  this  far-reaching  epistemological  restriction,  the 
real  vital  energy  of  Nominalism  was  directed  toward  the  develop- 
ment of  natural  science ;  and  if  its  results  during  the  fourteenth  and 
^fifteenth  centuries  remained  very  limited,  the  essential  reason  for  this 

1  The  agreement  of  this  with  the  contrast  "between  6foi$  and  0rf<rw,  which  had 
"been  asserted  also  in  the  ancient  philosophy  of  language  (Plato's  Cratylus), 
is  obvious. 


Mediaeval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.         [PART  EL 

was  tliat  the  scholastic  method  with  its  bookish  discussion  of  authori- 
ties, which  had  now  attained  full  perfection,  controlled  absolutely 
later  as  well  as  earlier  the  prosecution  of  science,  and  that  the 
new  ideas  forced  into  this  form  could  not  unfold  freely,  —  a  phe- 
nomenon, moreover,  which  continues  far  into  the  philosophy  of  the 
Renaissance.  For  all  that.  Duns  Scotus  and  Occam  gave  the  chief 
impetus  to  the  movement  in  which  philosophy,  taking  its  place 
beside  the  metaphysics  whose  interests  had  hitherto  been  essentially 
religious,  made  itself  again  a  secular  science  of  concrete,  actual  fact, 
-and  £>laced  itself  with  more  and  more  definite  consciousness  upon 
the  basis  of  empiricism.  "When  Duns  Scotus  designated  the  hcecceitas 
or  original  individual  Form,  as. contingent,  this  meant  that  it  was  to 
be  known,  not  by  logical  deduction,  but  only  by  actual  verification 
as  fact;  and  when  Occam  declared  the  individual  being  to  be  the 
alone  truly  Real,  he  was  thereby  pointing  out  to  "  real  science  "  the 
way  to  the  immediate  apprehension  of  the  actual  world.  But  in 
this  point  the  two  Franciscans  are  under  the  influence  of  Roger 
Bat'Qhi  who  with  all  Ms  energy  had  called  the  science  of  his  time 
from  authorities  to  things,  from  opinions  to  sources,  from  dialectic 
to  experience,  from  books  to  Nature.  At  his  side  in  this  movement 
stood  Albert,  who  supported  the  same  line  of  thought  among  the 
Dominican?,  knew  how  to  value  the  worth  of  original  observation 
and  experiment,  and  gave  brilliant  proof  in  his  botanical  studies 
of  the  independence  of  his  own  research.  But  strongly  as  Roger 
Bacon,  following  Arabian  models,  urged  quantitative  determinations 
in  observation,  and  mathematical  training,  the  time  was  not  yet 
ripe  for  natural  research.  Attempts  like  those  of  Alexander 
Xekkam  (about  1200),  or  those  of  Xicolaus  d'Autricuria,  at  a  later 
time  (about  1350),  passed  away  without  effect. 

The  fruitful  development  of  empiricism  during  this  period  was 
only  in  the  line  of  psychology.  Under  the  influence  of  the  Arabs, 
especially  of  Avicenna  and  of  the  physiological  optics  of  Alhacen, 
investigations  concerning  the  psychical  life  took  on  a  tendency 
directed  more  toward  establishing  and  arranging  the  facts  of  expe- 
rience. This  had  been  begun  even  by  Alexander  of  Hales,  by  his 
pupil.  Johann  of  Rochelle,  by  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  and  especially 
by  Albert :  and  in  the  system  of  Alfred  the  Englishman  (Alfred  de 
Sereshel,  in  the  first  half  of  the  thirteenth  century)  we  find  a 
purely  physiological  psychology  with  all  its  radical  consequences. 
These  stirrings  of  a  physiological  empiricism  would,  however,  have 
been  repressed  by  the  metaphysical  psychology  of  Thoniisin,  if  they 
had  not  found  their  support  in  the  Augustinian  influence,  which 
held  fast  to  the  experience  ichick  personality  has  of  itself,  as  its 


CHAP.  2,  §  27.]   Problem  of  Individuality :  Nicolaus  Cusanus.    345 

highest  principle.  In  this  attitude  Henry  of  Ghent,  especially,  came 
forward  in  opposition  to  Thomism.  He  formulated  sharply  the 
standpoint  of  inner  experience  and  gave  it  decisive  value;  particu- 
larly in  the  investigation  of  the  states  of  feeling.  Just  in  this 
point,  in  the  empirical  apprehension  of  the  life  of  feeling,  the 
theory  of  which  became  thus  emancipated  at  the  same  time  from 
that  of  the  will  and  that  of  the  intellect,  he  met  support  in  Roger 
Bacon,  who,  with  clear  insight  and  without  the  admixture  of  meta- 
physical points  of  view,  distinctly  apprehended  the  difference  in 
principle  between  outer  and  inner  experience. 

Thus  the  remarkable  result  ensued,  that  purely  theoretical  science 
developed  in  opposition  to  intellectualistic  Thomism,  and  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Augustinian  doctrine  of  the  self-certainty  of  person- 
ality. This  self-knowledge  was  regarded  as  the  most  certain  fact  of 
"real  science,"  even  as  it  appeared  among  the  nominalistic  Mystics 
such  as  Pierre  d'Ailly.  Hence  "real  science"  in  the  departing 
Middle  Ages  allied  itself  rather  to  active  human  life  than  to  Xature ; 
and  the  beginnings  of  a  "  secular  "  science  of  the  inter-relations  of 
human  society  are  found  not  only  in  the  theories  of  Occam  and 
Marsilius  of  Padua  (cf.  p.  328),  not  only  in  the  rise  of  a  richer, 
more  living,  and  more  "  inward  "  writing  of  history,  but  also  in  an 
empirical  consideration  of  the  social  relations,  in  which  a  Nicolas 
ffOresme,1  who  died  1382,  broke  the  path. 

6.  The  divided  frame  of  mind  in  which  the  departing  Middle 
Ages  found  itself,  between  the  original  presuppositions  of  its 
thought  and  these  beginnings  of  a  new,  experientially  vigorous 
research,  finds  nowhere  a  more  lively  expression  than  in  the  phil- 
osophy of  Nicolaus  Cusartm,  which  is  capable  of  so  many  interpre- 
tations. Seized  in  every  fibre  of  his  being  by  the  fresh  impulse  of 
the  time,  he  nevertheless  could  not  give  up  the  purpose  of  arrang- 
ing his  new  thoughts  in  the  system  of  the  old  conception  of  the 
world. 

This  attempt  acq[uires  a  heightened  interest  from  the  conceptions 
which  furnished  the  forms  in  which  he  undertook  to  arrange  his 
thoughts.  The  leading  motive  is  to  show  that  the  individual,  even 
in  his  metaphysical  separateness,  is  identical  with  the  most  uni- 
versal, the  divine  essence.  To  this  end  Nicolaus  employs  for  the 
first  time,  in  a  thoroughly  systematic  way,  the  related  conceptions 
of  the  infinite  and  the  finite.  All  antiquity  had  held  the  perfect  to 
be  that  which  is  limited  within  itself  and  had  regarded  only 
indefinite  possibility  as  infinite.  In  the  Alexandrian  philosophy, 

1  Cf.  concerning  him  W.  Eoscher,  Zeitschr.  f.  Staatswissenschaft,  1863, 305  ff. 


346  Mediceval  Philosophy :  Second  Period.       [PART  III 

on  the  contrary,  the  highest  being  was  stripped  of  all  finite  at- 
tributes. In  Plotinus  the  U0ne"  as  the  all-forming  power  is 
provided  with  an  unlimited  intensity  of  Being  on  account  of  the 
infinity  of  matter  in  which  it  discloses  itself;  and  also  in  Christian 
thought  the  power,  as  well  as  the  will  and  the  knowledge  of  God, 
had  been  thought  more  and  more  as  boundless.  Here  the  main 
additional  motive  was,  that  the  will  even  in  the  individual  is  felt 
as  a  restless,  never  quiet  striving,  and  that  this  infinity  of  inner  ex- 
perience was  exalted  to  a  metaphysical  principle.  But  Isicolaus  was 
the  first  to  give  the  method  of  negative  theology  its  positive  ex- 
pression by  treating  infinity  as  tfie  essential  characteristic  of  God  in 
antithesis  to  the  world.  The  identity  of  God  with  the  world, 
required  as  well  by  the  mystical  view  of  the  world  as  by  the 
naturalistic*  received,  therefore,  the  formulation  that  in  God  the 
same  absolute  Being  is  contained  infinitely,  which  in  the  world 
presents  itself  in  finite  forms. 

In  this  was  given  the  farther  antithesis  of  unity  and  plurality. 
The  infinite  is  the  living  and  eternal  unity  of  that  which  in  the 
finite  appears  as  extended  plurality.  But  this  plurality  —  and 
Cusanus  lays  special  weight  on  this  point — is  also  that  of  opposites. 
What  in  the  finite  world  appears  divided  into  different  elements, 
and  only  by  this  means  possible  as  one  thing  by  the  side  of  another 
in  space,  must  become  adjusted  and  harmonised  in  the  infinitude 
of  the  divine  nature.  God  is  the  unity  of  all  opposites,  the  coin- 
ddentia  oppOffltormn.1  He  is,  therefore,  the  absolute  reality  in 
which  all  possibilities  are  eo  tyso  realised  (possest,  can-is),  while 
each  of  the  many  finite  entities  is  in  itself  only  possible,  and  is  real 
or  actual  only  through  him. 2 

Among  the  oppositions  which  are  united  in  God,  those  between  him 
and  the  world,  —that  is.  those  of  the  infinite  and  the  finite,  and  of 
unity  and  plurality,  —  appear  as  the  most  important.  In  consequence 
of  this  union  the  infinite  is  at  the  same  time  finite ;  in  each  of  his 
manifestations  in  phenomena  the  unitary  deus  implicitus  is  at  the 
same  time  the  deus  explicitus  poured  forth  into  plurality  (cf.  p. 
290).  God  is  the  greatest  (maximum)  and  at  the  same  time  also 

1  Xicolaus  also  designates  his  own  doctrine,  in  contrast  with  opposing  sys- 
tems, as  a  coincidentia  oppositorum.  since  it  aims  to  do  justice  to  all  motives  of 
earlier  philosophy.    Cf.  the  passages  in  Palctenherg,  op.  cit.,  pp.  60  ff. 

2  Thomas  expressed  the  same  thought  as  follows :  God  is  the  only  necessary 
being,  i.e.  that  which  exists  by  virtue  of  its  own  nature  (a  thought  which  is  to  be 
regarded  as  an  embodiment  of  Anselm's  ontological  argument,  cf  ;  §  23,  2),  while 
in  the  case  of  all  creatures,  essence  (or  quiddiias— whatness)  is  really  separate 
from  existence  in  such  a  way  that  the  former  is  in  itself  merely  possible  and 
that  the  latter  is  added  to  it  as  realisation.    The  relation  of  this  doctrine  to  the 
fundamental  Aristotelian  conceptions,  actus  and  potently  is  obvious. 


CHAP.  2,  §  27.]  Problem  of  Individuality :  Nicolaus  Cusanus.    347 

the  smallest  (minimum).  But,  on  the  other  hand,  in  consequence 
of  this  union  it  follows  also  that  this  smallest  and  finite  is  in  its 
own  manner  participant  in  the  infinite,  and  presents  within  itself, 
as  does  the  whole,  a  harmonious  unity  of  the  many. 

Accordingly,  the  universe  is  also  infinite,  not  indeed  in  the  same 
sense  in  which  G-od  is  infinite,  but  in  its  own  way;  that  is,  it  is 
unlimited  in  space  and  time  (interminatum,  or  privitively  infinite). 
But  a  certain  infinity  belongs  likewise  to  each  individual  thing, 
in  the  sense  that  in  the  characteristics  of  its  essence  it  carries 
within  itself  also  the  characteristics  of  all  other  individuals.  All 
is  in  all:  omnia  ubique.  In  this  way  every  individual  contains 
within  itself  the  universe,  though  in  a  limited  form  peculiar  to  this 
individual  alone  and  differing  from  all  others.  In  omnibus  partibus 
relucet  totum.  Every  individual  thing  is,  if  rightly  and  fully  known, 
a  mirror  of  the  universe) — a  thought  which  had  already  been  ex- 
pressed incidentally  by  the  Arabian  philosopher  Alkendi. 

Naturally  this  is  particularly  true  in  the  case  of  man,  and  in  his 
conception  of  man  as  a  microcosm  Nicolaus  attaches  himself 
ingeniously  to  the  terministic  doctrine.  The  particular  manner  in 
which  other  things  are  contained  in  man  is  characterised  by  the 
ideas  which  form  in  him  signs  for  the  outer  world.  Man  mirrors 
the  universe  by  his  "  conjectures,"  by  the  mode  of  mental  repre- 
sentation peculiar  to  him  (cf.  above,  p.  343). 

Thus  the  finite  also  is  given  with  and  in  the  infinite,  the  individ- 
ual with  and  in  the  universal  At  the  same  time  the  infinite  is 
necessary  in  itself;  the  finite,  however  (following  Duns  Scotus),  is  - 
absolutely  contingent,  i.e.  mere  fact.  There  is  no  proportion 
between  the  infinite  and  the  finite ;  even  the  endless  series  of  the 
finite  remains  incommensurable  with  the  truly  infinite.  The  deri- 
vation of  the  world  from  God  is  incomprehensible,  and  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  finite  no  path  leads  to  the  infinite.  That  which 
is  real  as  an  individual  is  empirically  known,  its  relations  and  the 
oppositions  prevailing  in  it  are  apprehended  and  distinguished  by 
the  understanding,  but  the  perception  or  intuition  of  the  infinite 
unity,  which,  exalted  above  all  these  opposites,  includes  them  all 
within  itself,  is  possible  only  by  stripping  off  all  such  finite  knowl- 
edge, by  the  mystical  exaltation  of  the  docta  ignorantia.  Thus  the 
elements  which  Cusanus  desired  to  unite  fall  apart  again,  even  in 
the  very  process  of  union.  The  attempt  to  complete  the  mediasval 
philosophy  and  make  it  perfect  on  all  sides  leads  to  its  inner 
disintegration. 


PART  IY. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  RENAISSANCE. 

J.  E.  Erdmann,  Versnch  einer  wissenschaftlichen  Darstellung  der  Geschichte 
der  neueren  Phavsophie.    3  pts.,  in  6  yols.    Riga  and  Leips.  1834-53. 

H.  Ulrici,  Geschichte  und  Kritik  dtr  Principien  der  neueren  Philosophie.    2 
vols.    Leips.  1845. 

Kuno  Fischer,  Geschichtf  der  neueren  Philosophic  4th  ed.  Heidelb.  1897  5. 
[Eng.  tr.  of  Vol.  I.,  Descartes  and  His  School,  by  J.  P.  Gordy,  X.Y.  1877.] 

Ed.  Zeller,  Gwkichte  der  dtutschen  Philosophic  seit  Leibniz.  2d  ed.,  Berlin, 
1S75. 

"W.  Windelband,  Gescltichtc  der  neutron  Philosophic.  2  vols.  Leips.  2ded.  1899. 

R,  Falckenberg.  Gtschirhte  for  ntueren  Philvsvphie.  Leips.  1886.  [Eng.  tr.  by 
A,  C.  Annsstrrai^:,  X.Y.  l^i^.] 

J.  SdiaUer,  GwMrht*  dtr  yiitvtyJiilw&Jtte  scit  Bacon.   2  vols.    Leips.  1841-44. 

J.  Bamcami,  j&iV  Lthrnt.  ?fm  R>i;im.  Zelt  und  JlathematiJt  in  der  neueren  Phi- 
k*:.ji?,?p.  2v.Vi3.  Berlit.,  Ib'JS  f. 

F.  V..  render,  trrfftfiiehh  d-r  ^lilotfophls^hm  Jforal-,  Rechts-^  und  Staatslehre 
t'tr  JEnyJiimhr  ?/;«?  Fffinztwn.  Marburg,  1855. 

F.  Jodl,  Geschiehte  dtr  Ethu;  in  der  ntueren  Philosophie.  2  vols.  Stuttgart, 
1M-SI*. 

B.  Punjer,  Geschtchte  ifer  christUchr-n  Eellgionsphildsophie  seit  der  Reforma- 
tive. 2  Tols.  Braunschweig,  1SSO-83.  [Eng.  tr.  of  Vol.  L,  History  of  the 
Christ  inn  Fltfloxftphy  of  Religion  from  the  Reformation  to  Kant,  by  W. 
Hastie,  Edin.  and  X.Y.  1887.] 

[B.  F.  Bun,  History  of  Modern  Philosophy.    2  vols.    Chicago,  1892.] 

THE  antitheses  wliich  make  their  appearance  in  mediaeyal  philoso- 
phy at  the  time  of  its  close  have  a  more  general  significance ;  they 
show  in  theoretical  form  the  self-conscious  strengthening  of  secular 
civilisation  by  the  side  of  that  of  the  Church.  The  undercurrent, 
which  for  a  thousand  years  had  accompanied  the  religious  main 
movement  of  the  intellectual  life  among  the  Western  peoples, 
spelling  here  and  there  to  a  stronger  potency,  now  actually  forced 
its  way  to  the  surface,  and  in  the  centuries  of  transition  its  slowly 
wrested  victory  makes  the  essential  characteristic  for  the  beginning 
of  modern  times. 

Thus  gradually  developing  and  constantly  progressing,  modern 

S4S 


Philosophy  of  the  Renaissance.  349 

science  freed  itself  from  mediaeval  views,  and  the  intricate  process 
in  which  it  came  into  being  Trent  hand  in  hand  with  the  multifold 
activity  with  which  modern  life  in  its  entirety  began.  For  modern, 
life  begins  ever}'where  with  the  vigorous  development  of  details; 
the  tense  (lapidare)  unity  into  which  mediaeval  life  was  concen- 
trated, breaks  asunder  in  the  progress  of  time,  and  primitive  vigour 
bursts  the  band  of  common  tradition  with  which  history  had 
encircled  the  mind  of  the  nations.  Thus  the  new  epoch  announces 
itself  by  the  awakening  of  national  life;  the  time  of  the  world- 
empire  is  past  in  the  intellectual  realm  also,  and  the  wealth  and 
variety  of  decentralisation  takes  the  place  of  the  unitary  concen- 
tration in  which  the  Middle  Ages  had  worked.  Eome  and  Paris 
cease  to  be  the  controlling  centres  of  "Western  civilisation,  Latin 
ceases  to  be  the  sole  language  of  the  educated  world. 

In  the  religious  domain  this  process  showed  itself  first  in  the  fact 
that  Rome  lost  its  sole  mastery  over  the  Church  life  of  Christianity. 
Wittenberg,  Geneva,  London,  and  other  cities  became  new  centres 
of  religion.  The  inwardness  of  faith,  which  in  Mysticism  had 
already  risen  in  revolt  against  the  secularisation  of  the  life  of  the 
Church,  rose  to  victorious  deliverance,  to  degenerate  again  at  once 
into  the  organisation  which  was  indispensable  for  it  in  the  outer 
world.  But  the  process  of  splitting  into  various  sects,  which  set 
in  in  connection  with  this  external  organisation,  wakened  all  the 
depths  of  religious  feeling,  and  stirred  for  the  following  centuries 
the  passion  and  fanaticism  of  confessional  oppositions.  Just  by  this 
means,  however,  the  dominance  at  the  summit  of  scientific  life  of  a 
complete  and  definitive  religious  belief  was  broken.  What  had 
been  begun  in  the  age  of  the  Crusades  by  the  contact  of  religions 
•was  now  completed  by  the  controversy  between  Christian  creeds. 

It  is  -not  a  matter  of  accident  that  the  number  of  centres  of 
scientific  life  in  addition  to  Paris  was  also  growing  rapidly.  While 
Oxford  had  already  won  an  importance  of  its  own  as  a  seat  of 
the  Franciscan  opposition,  now  we  find  first  Vienna,  Heidelberg, 
Prague,  then  the  numerous  academies  of  Italy,  and  finally  the 
wealth  of  new  universities  of  Protestant  Germany,  developing  their 
independent  vital  forces.  But  at  the  same  time,  by  the  invention  of 
the  art  of  printing,  literary  life  gained  such  an  extension  and  such  a 
widely  ramifying  movement  that,  following  its  inner  impulse,  it 
was  able  to  free  itself  from  its  rigid  connection  with  the  schools, 
strip  off  the  fetters  of  learned  tradition,  and  expand  unconstrained 
in  the  forms  shaped  out  for  it  by  individual  personalities.  So 
philosophy  in  the  Eenaissance  loses  its  corporate  character,  and 
becomes  in  its  best  achievements  the  free  deed  of  individuals ;  it 


350  Philosophy  of  the  Renaissance.  [PART  IV. 

seeks  its  sources  in  the  broad  extent  of  the  real  world  of  its  own 
time,  and  presents  itself  externally  more  and  more  in  the  garb  of 
modern  national  languages. 

In  this  way  science  became  involved  in  a  powerful  fermentation. 
The  two-thousand-year-old  forms  of  the  intellectual  life  seemed  to 
have  been  outlived  and  to  have  become  unusable.  A  passionate,  and 
at  the  first,  still  unclear  search  for  novelty  filled  all  minds,  and 
excited  imagination  gained  the  mastery  of  the  movement.  But,  in 
connection  with  this*  the  whole  multiplicity  of  interests  of  secular 
life  asserted  themselves  in  philosophy, — the  powerful  development 
of  political  life,  the  rich  increase  in  outward  civilisation,  the  exten- 
sion of  European  civilisation  over  foreign  parts  of  the  world,  and 
not  least  the  world-joy  of  newly  awakened  art.  And  this  fresh  and 
living  wealth  of  new  content  brought  with  it  the  result  that  philos- 
ophy became  pre-eminently  subject  to  no  one  of  these  interests,  but 
rather  took  them  all  up  into  itself,  and  with  the  passing  of  time 
raised  itself  above  them  again  to  the  free  work  of-fenrfiing,  to  the 
ideal  of  knowledge  for  its  own  sake. 

The  iffrzr  birth  of  the  purtly  theoretiwl  spirit  is  the  true  meaning  of 
the  SL'wntitk1  ••  Renaissance,"  and  in  this  consists  also  its  kinship  of 
soffit  with  Greek  thought,  which  was  of  decisive  importance  for  its 
development.  The  subordination  to  ends  of  practical,  ethical,  and 
religious  life  which  had  prevailed  in  the  whole  philosophy  of  the 
Hellenistic-Boman  period  and  of  the  Middle  Ages,  decreased  mpre 
and  more  at  the  beginning  of  the  modern  period,  and  knowledge  of 
reality  appeared  again  as  the  absolute  end  of  scientific  research. 
Just  as  at  the  beginnings  of  Greek  thought,  so  now,  this  theoretical 
impulse  turned  its  attention  essentially  to  natural  science.  The 
modern  mind,  which  had  taken  up  into  itself  the  achievements  of 
later  antiquity  and  of  the  ^Middle  Ages,  appears  from  the  beginning 
as  having  attained  a  stronger  self-consciousness,  as  internalised,  and 
as  having  penetrated  deeper  into  its  own  nature,  in  comparison 
with  the  ancient  mind.  But  true  as  this  is,  its  first  independent 
intellectual  activity  was  the  return  to  a  disinterested  concep- 
tion of  Nature.  The  whole  philosophy  of  the  Renaissance  pressed 
toward  this  end,  and  in  this  direction  it  achieved  its  greatest 
results. 

Feeling  such  a  relationship  in  its  fundamental  impulse,  the 
modern  spirit  in  its  passionate  search  for  the  new  seized  at  first 
upon  the  oldest.  The  knowledge  of  ancient  philosophy  brought  out 
by  the  humanistic  movement  was  eagerly  taken  up,  and  the  systems  of 
Greek  philosophy  were  revived  in  violent  opposition  to  the  mediaeval 
tradition.  But  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  whole  movement  of 


Philosophy  of  the  Renaissance.  351 

history  this  return  to  antiquity  presents  itself  as  but  the  instinctive 
preparation  for  the  true  -work  of  the  modern  spirit,1  which  in  this 
Castalian  bath  attained  its  youthful  vigour.  By  living  itself  into  the 
world  of  Greek  ideas  it  gained  the  ability  to  master  in  thought  its 
own  rich  outer  life,  and  thus  equipped,  science  turned  from  the  sub- 
tility  of  the  inner  world  with  full  vigour  back  to  the  investigation 
of  Nature,  to  open  there  new  and  wider  paths  for  itself. 

The  history  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Kenaissance  is  therefore  in 
the  main  the  history  of  the  process  in  which  the  natural  science 
mode  of  regarding  the  world  is  gradually  worked  out  from  the 
humanistic  renewal  of  Greek  philosophy.  It  falls,  therefore,  appro- 
priately into  two  periods,  the  humanistic  period  and  the  natural 
science  period.  As  a  boundary  line  between  the  two  we  may  per- 
haps regard  the  year  1600.  The  first  of  these  periods  contains  the 
supplanting  of  mediaeval  tradition  by  that  of  genuine  Grecian 
thought,  and  while  extremely  rich  in  interest  for  the  history  of 
civilisation  and  in  literary  activity,  these  two  centuries  show  from, 
a  philosophical  point  of  view  merely  that  shifting  of  earlier  thoughts 
by  which  preparation  is  made  for  the  new.  The  second  period  in- 
cludes the  beginnings  of  modern  natural  research  which  gradually 
conquered  their  independence,  and  following  these  the  great  meta- 
physical systems  of  the  seventeenth  century. 

The  two  periods  form  a  most  intimately  connected  whole.  For 
the  inner  impelling  motive  in  the  philosophical  movement  of  Hu- 
manism was  the  same  urgent  demand  for  a  radically  new  knowledge 
of  the  world,  which  ultimately  found  its  fulfilment  in  the  process  in 
which  natural  science  became  established  and  worked  out  according 
to  principles.  But  the  manner  in  which  this  work  took  place,  and 
the  forms  of  thought  in  which  it  became  complete,  prove  to  be  in 
all  important  points  dependent  upon  the  stimulus  proceeding  from 
the  adoption  of  Greek  philosophy.  Modern  natural  science  is  the 
daughter  of  Humanism. 

1  In  this  respect  the  course  of  development  of  science  in  the  Renaissance  ran 
exactly  parallel  to  that  of  art.  The  line  which  leads  from  Giotto  to  Leonardo, 
Raphael,  Michael  Angelo,  Titian,  Du'rer,  and  Rembrandt,  passes  gradually  from 
the  reanimation  of  classical  forms  to  independent  and  immediate  apprehension 
of  Nature.  And  Goethe  is  likewise  proof  that  for  us  moderns  the  way  to 
Nature  leads  through  Greece. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  HTMA:NISTIC  PEBIOD. 

Jac.  Bnrckhardt,  Die  Cultur  der  Renaissance  in  Italien.    4th  ed.,  Leips.  1886. 
IThe  Civilisation  of  the  Renaissance.     Tr.by  S.  G.  C.  Middlemore,  Lond. 

1878  and  1890. 
Mor.  Caniere,  Die  philosophische  Weltanschauung  der  Reformationszeit.    2d  ed., 

Leips.  1887. 

A.  StockU  Geschichte  der  Philosophic  des  Mittdalters.    3d  vol.,  Mainz,  1866. 
[J.  A-  Symonds,  The  Renaissance  in  Italy.    5  pts.  in  7  vols.,  1875-86.] 

THE  continuity  in  the  intellectual  and  spiritual  development  of 
European  humanity  manifests  itself  nowhere  so  remarkably  as  in 
the  Renaissance.  At  no  time  perhaps  has  the  want  for  something 
completely  new,  for  a  total  and  radical  transformation,  not  only  in 
the  intellectual  life,  but  also  in  the  whole  state  of  society,  been  felt 
so  vigorously  and  expressed  so  variously  and  passionately  as  then, 
and  no  time  has  experienced  so  many,  so  adventurous,  and  so  ambi- 
tious attempts  at  innovation  as  did  this.  And  yet,  if  we  look  closely, 
and  do  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  deceived,  either  by  the  grotesque 
self-consciousness  or  by  the  naive  grandiloquence  which  are  the 
order  of  the  day  in  this  literature,  it  becomes  evident  that  the  whole 
multiform  process  goes  on  within  the  bounds  of  ancient  and  mediae- 
val traditions,  and  strives  in  obscure  longing  toward  a  goal  which 
is  an  object  rather  of  premonition  than  of  clear  conception.  It  was 
not  until  the  seventeenth  century  that  the  process  of  fermentation 
became  complete,  and  this  turbulent  mixture  clarified. 

The  essential  ferment  in  this  movement  was  the  opposition 
between  the  inherited  philosophy  of  the  Middle  Ages,  which  was 
already  falling  into  dissolution,  and  the  original  works  of  Greek 
thinkers  which  began  to  be  known  in  the  fifteenth  century.  A  new 
stream  of  culture  flowed  from  Byzantium  by  the  way  of  Florence 
and  Rome,  which  once  more  strongly  diverted  the  course  of  Western 
thought  from  its  previous  direction.  In  so  far  the  humanistic 
Renaissance,  the  so-called  re-birth  of  classical  antiquity,  appears  as 
a  continuation  and  completion  of  that  powerful  process  of  appropri- 

352 


CHAP.  1.]  Humanistic  Period.  353 

ation  presented  by  the  Middle  Ages  (cf.  pp.  264  ff.,  310  f.) ;  and  if  this 
process  consisted  in  retracing  in  reverse  order  the  ancient  move- 
ment of  thought,  it  now  reached  its  end,  inasmuch  as  essentially  all 
of  the  original  ancient  G-reek  literature  which  is  accessible  to-day, 
now  became  known. 

The  becoming  known  of  the  G-reek  originals,  and  the  spread  of 
humanistic  culture,  called  out  a  movement  of  opposition,  to  Scholas- 
ticism, at  first  in  Italy,  then  also  in  Germany,  France,  and  England. 
As  regards  subject-matter,  this  opposition  was  directed  against  the 
mediaeval  interpretations  of  Greek  metaphysics ;  as  regards  method, 
against  authoritative  deduction  from  conceptions  taken  as  assump- 
tions; as  regards  form,  against  the  tasteless  stiffness  of  monastic 
Latin :  and  with  the  wonderful  restoration  of  ancient  thought,  with 
the  fresh  imaginative  nature  of  a  life-loving  race,  with  the  refine- 
ment and  wit  of  an  artistically  cultivated  time  for  its  aids  this  oppo- 
sition won  a  swift  victory. 

But  this  opposition  was  divided  within  itself.  There  were  Plato- 
nists,  who  for  the  most  part  would  better  be  called  Neo-Platonists  j 
there  were  Aristotelians,  who,  in  turn,  were  again  divided  into  differ- 
ent groups,  vigorously  combating  one  another,  according  to  their 
attachment  to  one  or  another  of  the  ancient  interpreters.  There, 
too,  were  the  reawakened  older  doctrines  of  Greek  cosmology,  of 
the  lonians  and  Pythagoreans;  the  conception  of  Nature  held  by 
Democritus  and  Epicurus  rose  to  new  vigour.  Scepticism  and  the 
mixed  popular  and  philosophical  Eclecticism  lived  again. 

While  this  humanistic  movement  was  either  religiously  indiffer- 
ent or  even  engaged  together  with  open  "heathenism"  in  warfare 
against  Christian  dogma,  an  equally  violent  controversy  between 
transmitted  doctrines  was  in  progress  in  the  life  of  the  Church. 
The  Catholic  Church  intrenched  itself  against  the  assault  of  thought 
more  and  more  firmly  behind  the  bulwark  of  Thomism,  under  the 
leadership  of  the  Jesuits.  Among  the  Protestants,  Augustine  was  the 
leading  mind  —  a  continuation  of  the  antagonism  observed  in  the 
Middle  Ages.  But  when  dogmas  were  thrown  into  philosophical 
form  in  the  Protestant  Church,  the  Reformed  branch  remained 
nearer  to  Augustine,  while  in  the  Lutheran  Church,  in  consequence 
of  the  influence  of  Humanism,  a  tendency  toward  the  original  form 
of  the  Aristotelian  system  prevailed.  In  addition  to  these  ten- 
dencies, however,  German  Mysticism,  with  all  the  widely  ramified 
traditions  which  united  in  it  (ef.  §  26,  5),  maintained  itself  in  the 
religious  need  of  the  people,  to  become  fruitful  and  efficient  for  the 
philosophy  of  the  future,  more  vigorous  in  its  life  than  the  Church 
erudition  that  sought  in  vain  to  stifle  it. 


354  Philosophy  of  the  Renaissance.  [PART  IV. 

The  new  wMcli  was  being  prepared  in  these  various  conflicts  was 
the  consummation  of  that  movement  which  had  begun  with  Duns 
Scotus  at  the  culmination  of  mediaeval  philosophy,  viz.  the  separa- 
tion of  philosophy  from  theology.  The  more  philosophy  established 
itself  by  the  side  of  theology  as  an  independent  secular  science,  the 
more  its  peculiar  task  was  held  to  be  the  "knowledge  of  Nature.  In  this 
result  all  lines  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Renaissance  meet.  Philoso- 
phy shall  be  natural  science.  —  this  is  the  watchword  of  the  time. 

The  carrying  out  of  this  purpose,  nevertheless,  necessarily  moved 
at  first  within  the  traditional  modes  of  thought ;  these,  however, 
had  their  common  element  in  the  anthropocentric  character  of  their 
Weltanschauung,  which  had  been  the  consequence  of  the  develop- 
ment of  philosophy  as  a  theory  and  art  of  life.  Tor  this  reason  the 
natural  philosophy  of  the  Renaissance  in  all  its  lines  takes  for  its 
starting-point,  in  constructing  its  problems,  mans  position  in  the 
cosmos;  and  the  revolution  in  ideas  which  took  place  in  this  aspect, 
under  the  influence  of  the  changed  coDditions  of  civilisation,  became 
of  decisive  importance  for  shaping  anew  the  whole  theory  of  the 
world.  At  this  point  metaphysical  imagination  and  fancy  was  most 
deeply  stirred,  and  from  this  point  of  view  it  produced  its  cosmical 
poetry,  prototypal  for  the  future,  in  the  doctrines  of  Giordano 
Bruno  and  Jatoo  Boehme. 

The  fallowing  treat  in  general  the  revival  of  ancient  philosophy:  L.  Heeren, 
Gffhw  *lr  Studfrn  far  classischen  Litteratur  (Gottingen,  1797-1802)  ; 
G.  V-vrt,  £Hr  iriftlerfcl&untj  des  claasiscJien  Alterthums  (Berlin,  1880 f.). 

The  main  seai  of  Flatonism  was  the  Academy  of  Florence,  which  was 
founded  by  Cosmo  de'  Medici,  and  brilliantly  maintained  by  his  successors. 
The  impulse  for  this  had  been  giren  by  Georgius  Gemistus  Pletho  (1355-1450), 
the  author  of  numerous  commentaries  and  coinpendiuins,  and  of  a  treatise  in 
Greek  on  the  difference  between  the  Platonic  and  the  Aristotelian  doctrine. 
Cf.  Fr.  Schultze,  tf.  G.  P.  (Jena,  1874}.— Bessarion  (born  1403  in  Trebizond, 
died  as  Cardinal  of  the  Roman  church  in  Ravenna,  1472)  was  his  influential 
pupil.  Bessarion's  maia  treatise,  Adversus  Calumniatorem  Platonis,  appeared 
at  Rome,  1409.  Complete  Works  in  Migne's  coll.  (Paris,  1800).—  The  most 
important  members  of  the  Platonic  circle  were  Marsilio  Picino  of  Florence 
(1433-1499),  the  translator  of  tfce  works  of  Plato  and  Plotinns,  and  author 
of  a  Thedogto  Platontea  (Florence,  1482),  and  at  a  later  time,  Francesco 
Patrizzi  15iU-1507/,  who  brought  the  natural  philosophy  of  this  movement  to 
its  eonipletest  expression  in  his  Sow  de  Universis  Philosophia  (Ferrara,  1501) 

A  similar  instance  of  Xeo-Platonism  alloyed  with  Neo-Pythagorean  and 
ancient  Pythagorean  motives  is  afforded  by  John  Pico  of  Mirandola  (1463-94) , 

The  study  of  Aristotle  in  the  original  sources  was  promoted  in  Italy  by 
*""*?«&  ^f1^1"1  (1396-1484;    Comparatio  Platonis   et  Aristoielis, 

Lif i^l^f??^?^®3^  .(di*d  U78>>  *  Holland  and  Germany 


The  Aristotelians  of  the  Renaissance  (aside  from  the  churchly-scholastic 
re^ivided  into  the  tw"  partieJg  of  the  Averroists  and  the  Alezandrists. 
The  Iniveraity  of  Padua,  as  the  ehi-f  seat  of  Averroism,  was  also  the  place 
of  the  liveliest  controversies  between  the  two. 


CHAP.  1.]  Humanistic  Period.  355 

As  representatives  of  Averroism  we  mention  Nicoletto  Vernias  (died 
1499),  especially  Alexander  Achillini  of  Bologna  (died  1518  ;  works,  Venice, 
1545)  ;  further,  Augostino  Nifo  (1473-1546 ;  main  treatise,  De  Intellects,  et 
Dcemonibus;  Opuscula,  Paris,  1654),  and  the  Neapolitan  Zimara  (died  1532). 

To  the  Alexandrists  belong  Ermolao  Barbaro  of  Venice  (1454-1493  ; 
Compendium  Scientice  Naturalis  ex  Aristotele,  Venice,  1547),  and  the  most 
important  Aristotelian  of  the  Renaissance,  Pietro  Pomponazzi  ("born  1462  in 
Mantua,  died  1524  in  Bologna.  His  most  important  writings  are  De  Immortali- 
tate  Animce  with  the  Defensorium  against  ^iphus,  De  fato  libero  arbitrio  prce- 
destinatione providentia  del  libn  quinqite;  cf.  L.  Ferric-La  Psicologia  di  P.  P., 
Rome,  1877),  and  his  pupils,  Gasparo  Contarird  (died  1542),  Simon  Porta 
(died  1555),  and  Julius  Casar  Scaliger  (1484-1558). 

Among  the  later  Aristotelians,  Jacopo  Zabarella  (1532-1589),  Andreas 
Csesalpinus  (1519-1603),  Cesare  Cremonini  (1552-1631)  and  others  seem 
rather  to  have  adjusted  the  above  oppositions. 

Of  the  renewals  of  other  Greek  philosophers,  the  following  are  especially  to 
be  mentioned :  — 

Jcest  Lips  (1547-1606),  Manuductio  ad  Stoicam  Philosophiam  (Antwerp, 
1604),  and  other  writings ;  and  Caspar  Schoppe,  Elementa  Stoic®  Philosophies 
Moralis  (Mainz,  1606). 

Dav.  Sennert  (1572-1637),  Physica  (Wittenberg,  1618)  ;  Sebastian  Basso 
(Philosophia  Xaturalis  adversus  Aristotelem,  Geneva,  16:41)  ;  and  Johannes 
Magnemis,J>e??i0cn£Hs  Revimscens  (Pavia,  1646). 

Claude  de  B^rigard  as  renewer  of  the  Ionic  natural  philosophy  in  his 
Cerculi  Pisani  (Udine,  1643  ff.). 

Pierre  Gassendi  (1592-1655),  De  Vita  Moribus  et  Doctrina  Epicuri  (Ley- 
den,  1647)  [works,  Lyons,  1658],  and  lastly 

Emanuel  Maignarms  (1601-1671),  whose  Gursus  Philosophicus  (Toulouse, 
1652)  defends  Empedoclean  doctrines. 

The  following  wrote  in  the  spirit  of  the  ancient  Scepticism:  Michel  de 
Montaigne  (1533-1592 ;  Essais,  Bordeaux,  1580,  nett  editions,  Paris,  1865, 
and  Bordeaux,  1870)  [Eng.  tr.  by  Cotton,  ed.  by  Hazlitt,  Lond.  1872 ;  also  by 
Florio,  ed.  by  Morley,  Lond.  1887J,  Prangois  Sanchez  (1562-1632,  a  Portu- 
guese who  taught  in  Toulouse,  author  of  the  Tractatits  de  multum  nobili  et 
prima  unvcersali  scientia  quod  nihil  scitur,  Lyons,  1581 ;  ef.  L.  Gerkrath,  F.  S., 
Vienna,  1860),  Pierre  Charron  (1541-1603 ;  De  la  Sagesse,  Bordeaux,  1601)  ; 
later  Frangois  de  la  Motte  le  Vayer  (1586-1672,  Cinq  Dialogues,  Mons,  1673), 
Samuel  Sorbiere  (1615-1670,  translator  of  Sextus  Empiricus),  and  Simon 
Poucher  (1644-96,  author  of  a  history  of  the  Academic  Sceptics,  Paris,  1690). 

The  sharpest  polemic  against  Scholasticism  proceeded  from  those  Humanists 
who  set  against  it  the  Roman  eclectic  popular  philosophy  of  sound  common 
sense  in  an  attractive  form,  and  as  far  as  possible  in  rhetorical  garb.  Agricola 
is  to  be  mentioned  here  also,  with  his  treatise  De  Inventione  Dialectica  (1480). 
Before  him  was  Laurentius  Valla  (1408-1457  ;  Dialectics  Dispulationes  contra 
Aristoteleos,  Ven.  1490),  Ludovico  Vives  (born  in  Valencia,  1492,  died 
in  Brugge,  1546;  De  Disciplinis,  Brugge,  1531,  works,  Basel,  1555;  cf.  A. 
Lange  in  Schmidt's  Encycloptidie  der  Padagogih,  Vol.  IX.),  Marius  Nizolius 
(1498-1576;  De  veris  principiis  et  vera  rdtione  philosophandi<  Parma,  1553), 
finally  Pierre  de  la  Ram£e  (Petras  Ramus,  1515-1572,  Institutiones  Dialec- 
tics, Paris,  1543 ;  cf.  CIi.  Waddington,  Paris,  1849  and  1855). 

The  tradition  of  Thomistic  Scholasticism  maintained  itself  most  strongly 
at  the  Spanish  universities.  Among  its  supporters  the  most  prominent  was 
Prancis  Suarez  of  Granada  (1548-1617;  Disputationes  Metaphysics  1605, 
works,  26  vols.,  Paris,  1856-66;  cf.  K.  Werner,  8.  und  die  Scholastik  der 
letzten  Jahrhunderte,  Eegensburg,  1861)  ;  the  collective  work  of  the  Jesuits  of 
Coimbra,  the  so-called  Collegium  Conembricense,  is  also  to  be  mentioned. 

Protestantism  stood  from  the  beginning  in  closer  relation  to  the  humanistic 
movement.  In  Germany  especially  the  two  went  frequently  hand  in  hand ;  cf. 
K.  Hagen,  Deutschlands  litterarische  und  religiose  Verhaltnisse  im  Reforma- 
tionszeitalter,  3  vols.,  Frankfort,  1868. 

At  the  Protestant  universities  Aristotelianism  was  introduced  principally 


35G  The  Renaissance :  Humanistic  Period.        [PART  IV. 

by  Philip  Melanctaon.    In  the  edition  of  his  works  by  Bretschneider  and 


felder,  JT.  a?s  Prwptor  Gennanbe  .Berlin.  I860;. 

Luther  hiir^i  sto-.-d  much  nearer  the  position  of  Augustinianism  (cf .  Ch. 
WtL>S",  D'e  Chfht'iinjiP  Luther's,  Leips.  1S52;.  This  was  still  more  the  case 
«v:th  Calvin,  while  Zwingli  was  friendlier  inclined  toward  contemporaneous 
philosophy,  especially  the  Italian  Xeo-Platonism.  The  scientific  importance  of 
ail  three  preat  reformers  lies,  however,  so  exclusively  in  the  theological  field 
that  they  are  to  be  mentioned  here  only  as  essential  factors  of  the  general  intel- 
lectual nnvement  in  the  sixteenth  century. 

Protestant  Aristoteliauisin  found  its  opponents  in  Nicolans  Taurellus 
tJI547-l^>{,  Professor  in  Basel  and  Altorf;  Philosophies  Trinmphus,  Basel, 
1-573 ;  Alpes  C*sie,  Frankfort,  15',»7 ;  cf.  F.  X.  Schmidt-Schwarzenberg,  J\r.  T., 
Der  ertfe  tleutwhe  FhfliMi#h*  Erlansen,  1864),  further  in  Socinianism  founded 
by  Lelio  Sozzini  of  Sienna  f,  1523-1562)  and  his  nephew  Pausto  (1539-1604  ; 
cl  A.  Fock,  Der  Swiniftnistiiins,  Kiel,  1847,  and  the  article  S,  by  Herzog  in  his 
ThruL  jFwc.,  -d  ed.,  XIV.  377  S\  and  especially  hi  the  popular  movement  of 
Jjtyrftfrfcni.  Among  the  representatives  of  this  movement  are  prominent 
Andreas  Osiander^HvS-loo-J  ,  Caspar  Schwenckfeld  (1490-1561),  Sebas- 
tian Franck  (loOQ-154-j :  cf.  K.  Hagen,  yp.  tit.,  III.  chap.  5)  and  especially 
Valentine  Weigel  (15->i-loSS ;  LftfUusde  Vita  Bwtv,  Itiu6,  D*-r  gnldne  C 
1»513,  Vow  Qrt  tier  Writ,  ItflS,  Dialogue,  de  C?iristianismo,  1614t  Tv&0i 
1015  ;  cf.  J.  U.  <Jpel,  T.  ir.,  Leips.  :  '  " 


The  tendency  toward  natural  philosophy  in  attachment  to  2sic.  Cusanus 
appears  more  strongly  in  Charles*  Bouille  ;BuviiIus,  1470-1553 ;  De  Intdlectu 
and  I)?  &rnfft*is;  Dt  Sapient?*.  Cf.  J.  Dippel,  Versnch  einer  system.  Darstel-  • 
Zan.T  "?-r  Phi?o&  fas  C.  B.,  Wtirzbur^,  1801'),  and  Girolamo  Cardano  (1501- 
1576  ;  I><?  Vit'i  Prnpria,  JDt  Vnrittate  Reriim,  De  Subtilitate ;  works,  Lyons, 
1«>>3'.  Ci.  nn  tbis  and  the  fnlL  »winir,  Rixner  uud  Siber,  Leben  und  Lehrmeinun- 
gsn  *jvrilhi.itfr  Physifrr  im  10  niafl  7.  Jnhrhundert,  7  Hefte.  Sulzbach,  1819  fi.)- 

Tii*  most  brilliant  ani<  my;  the  Italian  natural  philosophers  is  Giordano  Bruno 
of  Xob,  In  Campania.  Born  in  1548,  and  reared  in  Naples,  he  met  so  much  sus- 
picion in  the  Dominican  Order,  into  which  he  had  entered,  that  he  fled,  and  from 
that  tiaie  on.  led  an  unsettled  life.  He  went  by  way  of  Rome  and  upper  Italy 
t,3  Uenoa.  Lyons,  Toulouse,  held  lectures  in  Paris  and  Oxford,  then  in  Witten- 
berg and  Helmstadt,  visited  also  Marburg,  Prague,  Frankfort,  and  Zurich,  and 
finally,  hi  Venice,  met  the  fate  of  coming  into  the  hands  of  the  Inquisition  by 
treachery.  He  was  delivered  to  Rome,  and  there,  after  imprisonment  for  sev- 
eral years,  was  burned,  IrtOO.  on  account  of  his  steadfast  refusal  to  retract. 
Hi?  Latin  works  (3  vols.,  Naples,  1S8«M»1)  concern  partly  the  Lullian  art  (esp. 
Df  ItA'ig inum  Sii/norum  tt  Idettrnm  Compositions))  and  in  part  are  didactic 
poems  or  metaphysical  treatises  tDe  Mtnarle  yumrrn  et  Figura;  De  Triplici 
Xininw) :  the  Italian  writing  f^ed.  by  A.  Wagner,  Leips.  1829,  new  ed.  by  P.  de 
Lagarde,  ^  vols.,  Gottingen,  ISSti)  are  partly  satirical  compositions  (H  Candelajo, 
L'.i  Cena  Jelle  Cineri,  Spaccio  Mia  B**tin  Trionfante,  German  by  Kuhlenbeck, 
Leips.  !&•&"»,  Cabala  del  Caralfo  Pegaseo),  and*  on  the  other  hand,  the  most 
complete  expositions  of  his  doctrines  :  Dinlogki  della  Causa  Principle  ed  Uno, 
German  by  Lasson  Berlin,  1872)  ;  De<jU  Eroici  Furori;  Del?  Infinite,  Universo 
e  Drf  Jlmi'li.  Cf.  Bartholmfess,  #.  JS.  (Paris,  1810  i)  ;  Dom.  Berti,  Vita  di  G.  B 
(Turin.  18»J7%  and  Docum^nti  Intorno  a  G.  B.  (Turin,  1880)  ;  Chr.  Sigwart  in 
Klehif-  Srfiriftrtt,  I.  (Freiburg  ISSft) ;  H.  Brunnhofer,  &.  J9.'s  Weltanschauung 
nnd  Vei-hanghiss  (Leips.  185:2).  [fit.  Bruno,  by  I.  Frith,  Lond.,  Triibner:  T. 
Whhaker  in  J/faJ,  Vol.  IX.]. 


see  J  t  T          } 7 

important  successor,  Tommaso  CampaneUa.  Born 
he  early  became  a  Dominican,  was  rescued  and  brought  to  France  after  many 
persecutions  and  an  imprisonment  of  several  years.  There  he  became  intimate 
with  the  Cartesian  circle,  and  died  in  Paris,  1639,  before  the  completion  of  the 


CHAP.  I,  §  28.]  The  Warring  Traditions.  357 

full  edition  of  his  writings,  which  was  to  he  called  Instauratio  Scientiarum.  A 
new  edition,  with  biographical  introduction  hy  d'Ancona  has  appeared  (Turin, 
1854).  Of  his  very  numerous  writings  may  he  mentioned:  Prodromus  Philos- 
ophic InxtaumnflK,  1617  ;  Realis  Philosophic  Paries  Quatuor  (with  the  ap- 
pendix, Chitas  Solis} ,  1623  ;  De  Monarchia  Hispanica,  1625 ;  Philosophies 
Ratwnalis  Paries  Quinque,  1638  ;  Unicersalis  Philosophies  sen  metaphysicarum 
rerumjuxta  propriaprincipiapartes  tres,  1638.  Cf.  Baldachini,  Tita  e  Filosojia 
di  T.  C.  (Naples,  1840  and  18-13) ;  Dom.  Berti,  Jfuoi-i  Documenti  di  T.  C. 
(Rome,  1881). 

Theosophical-mafrical  doctrines  are  found  with  John  Reuchlin  (1455-1522  ; 
DeVerbo  Jfirifico,  De  Arte  Cabbalistica),  Agrippa  of  Nettesheim  (1487-1535; 
De  OwuUa  Philosvphia;  De  Incertitudine  et  Vn  nit  ate  Scientiarum)  t  Francesco 
Zorzi  (1460-1540,  De  Harmonia  Ifundi,  Paris,  1549). 

A  more  important  and  independent  thinker  is  Theophrastus  Bomhastus  Par- 
acelsus of  Hohenheim  (horn  1493  at  Einsiedeln,  he  passed  an  adventurous  life, 
was  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  Basel,  and  died  in  Salzburg,  1541).  Among  his 
works  (ed.  hy  Huser,  Strassburg,  1616-18),  the  most  important  are  the  Opus 
Paramirum,  Die  grosse  Wundarznei,  and  De  Xatura  Eerum.  Cf.  R.  Eucken, 
Beitrage  zur  Gesch.  der  neueren  Philos.,  Heidelberg,  1886.  Of  his  numerous 
pupils  the  most  important  are  Joharm  Baptist  van  Helmont  (1577-1644  ;  Ger- 
man ed.  of  his  works,  1683),  and  his  son,  Franz  Mercurius,  also  Robert  Fludd 
(1574-1637,  Philosophia  Mosaica,  Guda,  1638),  and  others. 

The  most  noteworthy  deposit  of  these  movements  is  formed  by  the  doctrine 
of  Jacob  Boehme.  He  was  born,  1575,  near  Gorlitz,  absorbed  all  kinds  of 
thoughts  in  his  wanderings,  and  quietly  elaborated  them.  Settled  as  a  shoe- 
maker at  Gorlitz,  he  came  forward,  1610,  with  his  main  treatise  Aurora,  which 
at  a  later  time  after  he  had  been  temporarily  forced  to  keep  silence,  was  followed 
by  many  others,  among  them  especially  Yierzig  Fragen  von  der  Seele  (1620), 
JtTysterium Magnum  (1623),  Von  der  Gnademcahl  (1623).  He  died  1624.  Coll. 
works  ed.  by  Schiebler,  Leips.  1862.  Cf.  H.  A.  Fechner,  J.  5.,  sein  Leben  und 
seine  Schriften,  Gorlitz,  1853 ;  A.  Peip,  J.  B.  der  deutsche  Philosophy  Leips.  1860. 

§  28.  The  Struggle  between  the  Traditions. 

The  immediate  attachment  to  the  Greek  philosophy  which  became 
prevalent  in  the  Benaissanee,  was  hot  entirely  without  its  precedent 
in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  men  like  Bernard  of  Chartres  and  William 
of  Conches  (cf.  p.  302)  were  prototypes  of  the  union  of  an  increas- 
ing interest  for  knowledge  of  Nature  with  the  humanistic  move- 
ment. It  is  noteworthy,  and  characteristic  of  the  changing  fortune 
of  transmitted  doctrines,  that  now,  as  then,  the  union  between 
Humanism  and  natural  philosophy  attaches  itself  to  Plato,  and 
stands  in  opposition  to  Aristotle. 

1.  In  fact,  the  revival  of  ancient  literature  showed  itself  at  first 
in  the  form  of  a  strengthening  of  Platonism.  The  humanistic  move- 
ment had  been  flowing  on  since  the  days  of  Dante,  Petrarch,  and 
Boccaccio,  and  arose  from  the  interest  in  Eoman  secular  literature 
which  was  closely  connected  with  the  awakening  of  the  Italian 
national  consciousness;  but  this  current  could  not  become  a  vic- 
torious stream  until  it  received  the  help  of  the  impulse  from  with- 
out which  proceeded  from  the  removal  of  the  Byzantine  scholars  to 
Italy.  Among  these  the  Aristotelians  were  of  like  number  and  im- 
portance with  the  Platonists,  but  the  latter  brought  that  which  was 


358  The  Renaissance  :  Humanistic  Period.         [PART  IV. 

relatively  less  known,  and  therefore  more  impressive.  In  addition 
to  this,  Aristotle  was  regarded  in  the  West  as  the  philosopher  who 
was  in  agreement  with  the  Church  doctrine,  and  thus  the  opposition, 
which  longed  for  something  new,  hoped  much  more  from  Plato  ;  and 
still  furtLer  there  was  the  aesthetic  charm  that  comes  from  the  writ- 
ings of  the  great  Athenian,  and  for  which  no  time  was  more  keenly 
susceptible  than  this.  Thus  Italy  first  became  intoxicated  with  an 
enthusiasm  for  Plato  that  matched  that  of  departing  antiquity.  As 
if  to  connect  itself  immediately  with  this  latter  period,  the  Academy 
was  again  to  live  in  Florence,  and  under  the  protection  of  the 
Medicis  a  rich  scientific  activity  actually  developed  here,  in  which 
a  reverence  was  paid  to  the  leaders  like  Gemistus  Pletho  and  Bes- 
sarion  which  was  not  less  than  that  once  given  to  the  Scholarchs  of 
S^efj-Plaion  ism. 

But  the  relationship  with  this  latter  system  of  thought  went 
deeper;  the  Byzantine  tradition,  in  which  the  Platonic  doctrine  was 
received,  was  the  Xeo-Platonic  tradition.  What  at  that  time  was 
taught  in  Florence  as  Platonism  was  in  truth  Xeo-Platonism.  !Mar- 
silio  Fkiufj  translated  Plotinus  as  well  as  Plato,  and  his  u  Platonic 
Theology  "  was  not  much  different  from  that  of  Proclus.  So,  too, 
the  fantastic  natural  philosophy  of  Patrizzi  is  in  its  conceptional 
basis  nothing  nut  tiie  Xeo-Platonic  system  of  emanation;  but  it  is 
significant  that  in  this  case  the  dualistic  elements  of  Xeo-Plato- 
uisEL  are  entirely  stripped  off,  and  the  monistic  tendency  brought  out 
more  purely  and  fully.  On  this  account  the  Xeo-Platonist  of  the 
Eenaissance  places  in  the  foreground  the  beauty  of  the  universe;  on 
this  account  even  the  deity,  the  Unomnia  (One-all)  is  for  him  a 
sublime  world-unity  which  includes  plurality  harmoniously  within 
itself  ;  on  this  account  he  is  able  to  glorify  even  the  infinity  of  the 
universe  in  a  way  to  fascinate  the  fancy. 

2.  The  pantheistic  tendency,  which  is  so  unmistakable  in  this, 
was  enough  to  make  this  Platonism  an  object  of  suspicion  to  the 
Church,  and  thus  to  give  its  Peripatetic  opponents  a  welcome  in- 
strument with  which  to  combat  it;  and  an  instrument  that  was 
used  not  only  by  the  scholastic  Aristotelians,  but  also  by  the  others. 
On  the  other  hand,  to  be  sure,  the  Platonists  could  reproach  the 
new  humanistic  Aristotelianisin  for  its  naturalistic  tendencies,  and 
praise  their  own  tendency  toward  the  super-sensuous,  as  allied  to 
Christianity.  Thus  the  two  great  traditions  of  Greek  philosophy 
fought  their  battle  over  again,  while  each  charged  the  other  with 
its  unchristian  character.1  In  this  spirit  Pletho,  in  his 


1  Quite  the  same  relation  is  repeated  in  the  case  of  the  different  groups  of 
Aristotelians,  each  of  which  wished  to  be  regarded  orthodox,  —  even  at  the  price 


CHAP.  1,  §28.]  Warring  Traditions;  Platonists,  Aristotelians.  359 

ypacj>rj,  conducted  his  polemic  against  the  Aristotelians,  and  incurred 
thereby  condemnation  from  the  Patriarch  Gennadios  in  Constanti- 
nople; in  this  spirit  George  of  Trebizond  attacked  the  Academy, 
and  in  the  same  spirit,  though  milder,  Bessarion  answered  him. 
Thus  the  animosity  between  the  two  schools,  and  the  literary  stir 
it  produced  in  antiquity,  were  transferred  to  the  Renaissance,  and 
it  was  in  rain  that  men  like  Leonicus  Thomseus  of  Padua  (died 
1533)  admonished  the  combatants  to  understand  the  deeper  unity 
that  subsists  between  the  two  heroes  of  philosophy. 

3.  Meanwhile  there  was  absolutely  no  unity  among  the  Aristote- 
lians themselves.     The  Grecian  interpreters  of  the  Stagirite  and 
their  adherents  looked  down  with  as  much  contempt  upon  the 
Averroists  as  upon  the  Thomists.    Both  passed  for  them  in  like 
manner  as  barbarians ;  they  themselves,  however,  were  for  the  most 
part  prepossessed  in  favour  of  that  interpretation  of  the  Master 
which  was  closely  allied  to  Stratonism,  and  which  was  best  repre- 
sented among  the  commentators  by  Alexander  of  Aphrodisias.    Here, 
too,  one  transmitted  theory  stood  in  opposition  to  the  others.    The 
conflict  was  especially  severe  in  Padua,  where  the  Averroists  saw 
their  fortress  threatened  by  the  successful  activity  of  Pomponatius 
as  a  teacher.     The  main  point  of  controversy  was  the  problem 
of  immortality.    Neither  party  admitted  a  full,  individual  immor- 
tality, but  Averroism  believed  that  it  possessed  at  least  a  compensa- 
tion for  this  in  the  unity  of  the  intellect,  while  the  Alexandrists 
attached  even  the  rational  part  of  the  soul  to  its  animal  conditions, 
and  regarded  it  as  perishable  with  them.    Connected  with  this  were 
the  discussions  on  theodicy,  providence,  destiny  and  freedom  of  the 
will,  miracles  and  signs,  in  which  Pomponazzi  frequently  inclined 
strongly  to  the  Stoic  doctrine. 

In  the  course  of  time  this  dependence  upon  commentators  and 
their  oppositions  was  also  stripped  of,  and  the  way  prepared  for  a 
pure,  immediate  apprehension  of  Aristotle.  This  succeeded  best 
with  Csesalpinus,  who  avowed  his  complete  allegiance  to  Aristotle. 
An  equally  correct  understanding  of  the  Peripatetic  system  was 
gained  by  the  German  Humanists  from  a  philological  standpoint, 
but  following  Melancthon's  precedent  they  adopted  this  in  their 
own  doctrine  only  in  so  far  as  it  agreed  with  Protestant  dogma. 

4.  In  all  these  cases-  the  adoption  of  Greek  philosophy  led  to  an 
opposition  to  Scholasticism  as  regards  the  real  content  or  matter  of 

of  the  "  twofold  truth."  la  this  the  Averroists,  especially,  -were.ready.,  and  so 
it  came  about  that  one  of  them,  Nif  o,  had  himself  entrusted  "by  the  Pope  with 
the  refutation  of  Pomponazzi's  doctrine  of  immortality.  The  latter,  indeed,  also 
covered  himself  with  the  same  shield. 


360  The  Renaissance :  Humanistic  Period.         [PART  IV. 

the  opposing  systems.  Another  line  of  Hamanism,  which  was  more 
in  sympathy  with  Eoman  literature,  inclined  to  a  predominantly 
formal  opposition,  of  which  John  of  Salisbury  may  be  regarded  as 
a  mediaeval  forerunner.  The  taste  of  the  Humanists  rebelled  against 
the  barbarous  outward  form  of  mediaeval  literature.  Accustomed  to 
the  polished  refinement  and  transparent  clearness  of  the  ancient 
writers,  they  were  not  able  to  value  rightly  the  kernel  so  full  of 
-character,  which  lay  within  the  rough  shell  of  the  scholastic  termi- 
nology. The  minds  of  the  Eenaissance,  with  their  essentially  aes- 
thetic disposition,  had  no  longer  any  feeling  for  the  abstract  nature 
of  that  science  of  abstract  conceptions.  Thus  they  opened  the  battle 
in  all  directions,  with  the  weapons  of  jest  and  of  earnest ;  instead  of 
conceptions  they  demanded  things;  instead  of  artificially  constructed 
words,  the  language  of  the  cultivated  world ;  instead  of  subtle  proofs 
and  distinctions,  a  tasteful  exposition  that  should  speak  to  the 
imagination  and  heart  of  the  living  man. 

Laurentiits  Valla  was  the  first  to  make  this  cry  resound.  Agrio- 
ola  took  it  up  in  lively  controversy,  and  Erasmus  also  joined  in. 
The  models  of  these  men  were  Cicero  and  Quintilian,  and  when  at 
their  hand  the  method  of  philosophy  was  to  be  changed,  the  scho- 
lastic dialectic  was  dislodged  and  in  its  place  were  introduced  the 
principles  of  rhetoric  and  grammar.  The  true  dialectic  is  the 
science  of  discourse.1  The  "Aristotelian"  logic  therefore  becomes 
the  object  of  most  violent  polemic ;  the  doctrine  of  the  syllogism  is 
to  be  simplified  and  driven  from  its  com  man  ding  situation.  The 
syllogism  is  incapable  of  yielding  anything  new ;  it  is  an  unfruitful 
form  of  thought.  This  was  later  emphasised  by  Bruno,  Bacon,  and 
Descartes,  as  strongly  as  by  these  Humanists. 

But  the  more  closely  the  dominance  of  the  syllogism  was  con- 
nected with  dialectical  "  Eealism,"  the  more  nominalistic  and  termi- 
nistic  motives  connected  themselves  with  the  humanistic  opposition. 
This  shows  itself  in  the  cases  of  Vives  and  Nizolius.  They  are 
zealous  against  the  reign  of  universal  conceptions ;  in  this,  according 
to  Vives,  lies  the  true  reason  for  the  mediaeval  corruption  of  the 
sciences.  Universals,  Nizolius  teaches,2  are  collective  names  which 
arise  by  "comprehension,"  not  by  abstraction;  individual  things 
with  their  qualities  constitute  reality.  It  concerns  us  to  apprehend 
these,  and  the  secondary  activity  of  the  understanding  which  com- 
pares, is  to  be  carried  out  as  simply  and  unartificially  as  possible. 
Hence  all  metaphysical  assumptions,  which  have  made  so  great  a 

1  Petx.  Ramus,  Dialect.  Instik,  at  the  beginning. 

2  Mar.  tfizolius,  Ve  Ver.  Print.,  I.  4-7;  III.  7. 


CHAP.  1,  §  28.]   Warring  Traditions :  Humanist :s,  Hamus.          861 

difficulty  in  previous  dialectic,  must  be  banished  from  logic.  Em- 
piricism can  use  only  a  purely  formal  logic. 

The  "natural**  dialectic,  however,  was  sought  in  rhetoric  and 
grammar,  for,  Ramus  held,  it  should  teach  us  only  to  follow  in  our 
voluntary  thinking  the  same  laws  which,  according  to  the  nature  of 
reason,  control  also  our  involuntary  thinking,  and  present  themselves 
spontaneously  in  the  correct  expression  of  this  involuntary  process 
of  thought.  In  all  reflection,  however,  the  essential  thing  is  to 
discover  the  point  of  view  that  is  determinative  for  the  question, 
and  then  to  apply  this  correctly  to  the  subject.  Accordingly  Earaus, 
following  a  remark  of  Vives,1  divides  his  new  dialectic  into  the  doc- 
trines of  Inventio  and  Judicium.  The  first  part  is  a  kind  of  general 
logic,  which  yet  cannot  avoid  introducing  again  in  the  form  of  the 
"  loci "  the  categories,  such  as  Causality,  Inherence,  Genus,  etc.,  and 
thus,  enumerating  them  without  system,  falls  into  the  naive  meta- 
physics of  the  ordinary  idea  of  the  world.  The  doctrine  of  judgment 
is  developed  by  Ramus  in  three  stages.  The  first  is  the  simple  de- 
cision of  the  question  by  subsuming  the  object  under  the  discovered 
point  of  view ;  here  the  doctrine  of  the  syllogism  has  its  place, 
which  is  accordingly  much  smaller  than  formerly.  In  the  second 
place  the  judgment  is  to  unite  cognitions  that  belong  together  to  a 
systematic  whole,  by  definition  and  division  ;  its  highest  task,  how- 
ever, it  fulfils  only  when  it  brings  all  knowledge  into  relation  to 
God,  and  finds  it  grounded  in  him.  Thus  natural  dialectic  culminates 
in  theosophy.2 

Slight  as  was  the  depth  and  real  originality  of  this  rhetorical 
system,  it  yet  excited  great  respect  in  a  time  that  was  eager  for  the 
new.  In  Germany,  especially,  Eamists  and  anti-Eamists  engaged 
in  vehement  controversy.  Among  the  friends  of  the  system,  Jo- 
kannes  Sturm  is  especially  worthy  of  note,  a  typical  pedagogue  of 
Humanism,  who  set  the  task  for  education  of  bringing  the  scholar 
to  the  point  where  he  knows  things,  and  how  to  judge  concerning 
them  from  a  correct  point  of  view,  and  to  speak  in  cultivated 
manner. 

5.  A  characteristic  feature  of  this  movement  is  its  cool  relation 
toward  metaphysics ;  this  very  fact  proves  its  derivation  from  the 
Eoman  popular  philosophy.  Cicero,  to  whom  it  especially  attached 
itself,  was  particularly  influential  by  virtue  of  his  Academic  Scepti- 
cism or  Probabilisin.  Surfeit  of  abstract  discussions  alienated 
a  considerable  part  of  the  Humanists  from  the  great  systems  of 

1  Lud.  Vives,  De  Oausis  Oorr.  Art.  (first  part  of  De  Disciplinis),  III.  5. 

2  Cf.  E.  Laas,  Die  Padagogik  des  J.  St.  kritisch  und  historisch  beleuchtet 
(Berlin,  1872). 


362  The  Renaissance  :  Humanistic  Period.        [PART  IV. 

antiquity  also.  The  extension  of  religious  unbelief  or  indifferent- 
ism  was  an  additional  motive  to  make  scepticism  appear  in  many 
circles  as  the  right  temper  for  the  cultivated  man.  The  charm  of 
outer  life,  the  glitter  of  refined  civilisation,  did  the  rest  to  bring 
about  indifference  toward  philosophical  subtleties. 

This  scepticism  of  the  man  of  the  world  was  brought  to  its 
complete  expression  by  Montaigne.  With  the  easy  grace  and  fine- 
ness of  expression  of  a  great  writer,  he  thus  gave  French  literature 
a  fundamental  tone  which  has  remained  its  essential  character. 
Bur  this  movement  also  runs  in  the  ancient  track,  Whatever  of 
philosophical  thought  is  found  in  the  "Essays"  arises  from  Pyr- 
rhonism. Hereby  a  thread  of  tradition  which  had  for  a  long  time 
been  let  fall  is  again  taken  up.  The  relativity  of  theoretical  opin- 
ions and  ethical  theories,  the  illusions  of  the  senses,  the  cleft 
between  subject  and  object,  the  constant  change  in  which  both  are 
involved,  the  dependence  of  all  the  work  of  the  intellect  upon  such 
doubtful  data, — all  these  arguments  of  ancient  Scepticism  meet  us 
here,  not  in  systematic  form,  but  incidentally  in  connection  with 
the  discussion  of  individual  questions,  and  thus  in  a  much  more 
impressive  manner. 

Pyrrhonism  was  at  the  same  time  revived  in  a  much  more  scho- 
lastic form  ny  Studies,  and  yet  in  a  lively  manner,  and  not  without 
hope  thur  a  sure  insight  might  yet  at  some  time  be  allowed  to  man. 
He  concludes  individual  chapters,  and  the  whole  work,  with 
'"Seseift?  At  ego  nescio.  Quid?'9  To  this  great  "Quid.? "he  has 
indeed  given  no  answer,  and  guidance  to  a  true  knowledge  was  a 
debt  that  he  did  not  discharge.  But  he  left  no  doubt  as  to  the 
direction  in  which  he  sought  it.  It  was  the  same  which  Montaigne 
also  pointed  out :  science  must  free  itself  from  the  word-lumber  of 
the  wisdom  of  the  schools,  and  put  its  questions  directly  to  things 
themselves.  Thus  Sanchez  demands  a  new  knowledge,  and  has, 
indeed,  a  dim  foreboding  of  it,  but  where  and  how  it  is  to  be  sought 
he  is  not  prepared  to  say.  In  many  passages  it  seems  as  though  he 
would  proceed  to  empirical  investigation  of  Xature,  but  just  here  he 
cannot  get  beyond  the  sceptical  doctrine  of  outer  perception,  and  if 
he  recognises  the  greater  certainty  of  inner  experience,  this  inner 
experience  in  turn  loses  its  value  because  of  its  indefiniteness. 

Cfiarron  comes  forward  with  firmer  step,  since  he  keeps  before 
him  the  practical  end  of  wisdom.  Like  his  two  predecessors  he 
doxibts  the  possibility  of  certain  theoretical  knowledge;  in  this 
respect  all  three  set  up  the  authority  of  the  Church  and  of  faith : 
a  metaphysics  can  be  revealed  only ;  the  human  power  of  knowl- 
edge is  not  sufficient  for  it.  But,  proceeds  Charron,  the  human 


CHAP.  1,  §  28.]     Warring  Traditions  :  Sanchez^  Catholicism.     363 

knowing  faculty  is  all  the  more  sufficient  for  that  self-lcnoicledge 
which  is  requisite  for  the  moral  life.  To  this  self-knowledge 
belongs,  above  all,  the  humility  of  the  sceptic  who  has  no  confidence 
that  he  knows  anything  truly,  and  in  this  humility  is  rooted  the 
freedom  of  spirit  with  which  he  everywhere  withholds  his  theoretical 
judgment.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ethical  command  of  righteous- 
ness and  of  the  fulfilment  of  duty  is  known  without  a  doubt  in 
this  self-knowledge. 

This  diversion  toward  the  practical  realm,  as  might  be  expected 
from  the  general  tendency  of  the  time,  was  not  permanent.  The 
later  Sceptics  turned  the  theoretical  side  of  the  Pyrrhonic  tradi- 
tion again  to  the  front,  and  the  effect  which  resulted  from  this 
tendency  for  the  general  tone  of  the  time  applied  ultimately,  for  the 
most  part,  to  the  certainty  of  dogmatic  convictions. 

6.  The  Church  doctrine  could  no  longer  master  these  masses  of 
thought  whidh  now  made  their  way  so  powerfully  into  the  life  of 
this  period,  as  it  had  succeeded  in  doing  with  the  Arabian- Aristote- 
lian invasion:  this  new  world  of  ideas  was  too  manifold  and  too  full 
of  antitheses,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  assimilative  power  of  the 
Church  dogma  was  too  far  exhausted.  The  Roman  Church  limited 
itself,  therefore,  to  defending  its  spiritual  and  external  power  with 
all  the  means  at  its  disposal,  and  was  only  concerned  to  fortify  its 
own  tradition  and  make  it  as  sure  as  possible  within  itself.  In  this 
changed  form  the  Jesuits  now  performed  the  same  task  that  in  the 
thirteenth  century  had  fallen  to  the  mendicant  orders.  With  their 
help  the  definitive  and  complete  form  of  Church  dogma  was  fixed 
against  all  innovations  at  the  Council  of  Trent  (1563),  and  TJwmism 
declared  to  be  authoritative  in  essentials  for  philosophical  doctrine. 
Thereafter  there  could  be  no  more  any  question  as  to  changes  of 
principle,  but  only  as  to  more  skilful  presentations  and  occasional 
insertions.  In  this  way  the  Church  excluded  itself  from  the  fresh 
movement  of  the  time,  and  the  philosophy  dependent  upon  it  fell 
into  unavoidable  stagnation  for  the  next  following  centuries.  Even 
the  short  after-bloom  which  Scholasticism  experienced  about  1600 
in  the  universities  of  the  Iberian  peninsula  bore  no  real  fruit. 
Suarez  was  an  important  writer,  clear,  acute,  accurate,  and  with  a 
great  capacity  for  a  luminous  disposition  of  his  thoughts ;  he  sur- 
passes also,  to  a  considerable  degree,  most  of  the  older  Scholastics  in 
the  form  of  his  expression ;  but  in  the  content  of  his  doctrine  he  is 
bound  by  tradition,  and  a  like  constraint  will  be  understood  as  a 
matter  of  course  in  the  case  of  the  collective  work  of  the  Jesuits  of 
Coimbra. 

Over  against  this  form  of  religious  tradition,  another  now  made 


S6-4  The  Renaissance :  Humanistic  Period.       [PART  IV. 

its  appearance  in  the  Protestant  churches.  Here,  too,  the  opposition 
claimed  the  older  tradition,  and  put  aside  its  mediaeval  modifications 
and  developments.  The  Reformation  desired  to  renew  original  Chris- 
tianity as  against  Catholicism.  It  drew  the  circle  of  the  canonical 
books  narrower  again ;  putting  aside  the  Vulgate,  it  recognised  only 
the  Greek  text  as  authoritative ;  it  returned  to  the  Xicene  creed.  The 
controversy  over  dogmas  in  the  sixteenth  century  —  theoretically 
considered — hinges  upon  the  question,  which  tradition  of  Chris- 
tianity shall  be  the  binding  one. 

But  the  theological  antithesis  drew  the  philosophical  antithesis 
after  it,  and  here  again  a  relation  was  repeated  which  had  appeared 
at  many  points  during  the  Middle  Ages.  In  the  doctrine  of  Augus- 
tine, the  religious  need  found  a  deeper,  richer  satisfaction,  and  a 
more  immediate  expression  than  in  the  conceptions  worked  out  by 
the  Scholastics.  Earnestness  in  the  consciousness  of  sin,  passionate 
longing  for  redemption,  faith  that  was  internal  in  its  source  and 
its  nature,  —  all  these  were  traits  of  Augustine's  nature  which 
repeated  themselves  in  Luther  and  Calcin.  But  it  is  only  in  the 
doctrine  of  Calvin  that  the  permanent  influence  of  the  great  Church 
Father  is  shown ;  and  yet  just  by  this  means  an  antagonism  between 
TJtomism  and  August  fniaitiisvi  was  once  more  created,  which  evinced 
itself  as  especially  important  in  the  French  literature  of  the  seven- 
teenth century  (cf.  §  30  f.).  For  the  Catholics  under  the  guidance 
of  Jesuitism,  Thomas  was  the  ruling  authority;  for  the  Eeformed 
Churches,  and  for  the  freer  tendencies  in  Catholicism  itself,  Augus- 
tine held  the  same  position. 

German  Protestantism  followed  other  courses.  In  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Lutheran  dogma,  Luther's  genius  was  aided  by  the  co- 
operation of  Melancthon  and  thus  of  Humanism.  Little  as  the 
theoretico-sesthetical  and  religiously  indifferent  nature  of  the 
Humanists *  might  accord  with  the  mighty  power  of  Luther's  soul 
with  its  profound  faith,  he  was,  nevertheless,  obliged,  when  he  would 
give  his  work  scientific  form,  to  accommodate  himself  to  the  neces- 
sity of  borrowing  from  philosophy  the  conceptions  with  which  to  lay 
his  foundations.  Here,  however,  Kelancthon's  harmonising  nature 
came  in,  and  while  Luther  had  passionately  rejected  scholastic 
Aristotelianism,  his  learned  associate  introduced  humanistic  Aris- 
totelianism as  the  philosophy  of  Protestantism,  here,  too,  opposing 
the  older  tradition  to  the  remodelled  tradition.  This  original 
Aristotelianism  had  to  be  corrected  in  many  passages,  to  be  sure,  by 

1  On  the  relation  of  the  Reformation  and  Humanism  cf.  Th.  Ziesrler,  Gesch. 
-  "««•  II.  414  ff. 


CHAP.  1,  §  28.]     Warring  Traditions :  Protestantism.  365 

means  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  combination  of  doctrines  could  not 
reach  such  an  organic  union  as  had  been  attained  by  the  slow  ripen- 
ing of  Thomism  in  the  Middle  Ages ;  but  the  Peripatetic  system  was 
in  this  instance  treated  rather  as  but  a  supplement  to  theology  in  the 
department  of  profane  science,  and  for  this  end,  Melancthon  knew 
how  to  sift,  arrange,  and  set  forth  the  material  in  his  text-books  with 
so  great  skill  that  it  became  the  basis  for  a  doctrine  which  was  in 
the  main  one  in  its  nature,  and  as  such  was  taught  at  the  Protestant 
universities  for  two  centuries. 

7.  But  in  Protestantism  there  were  still  other  traditional  forces 
active.  Luther's  work  of  liberation  owed  its  origin  and  its  success 
not  least  to  Mysticism,  —  not  indeed  to  that  sublime;  spiritualised 
form  of  viewing  the  world  to  which  the  genius  o£  Master  Eckhart 
had  given  expression,  but  to  the  movement  of  deepest  piety  which, 
as  "practical  Mysticism,"  had  spread  from  the  Rhine  in  the  "League 
of  the  Friends  of  God,"  and  in  the  "Brothers  of  the  Common  Life." 
For  this  Mysticism,  the  disposition,  purity  of  heart,  and  the  imita- 
tion of  Christ  were  the  sole  content  of  religion;  assent  to  dog- 
mas, the  external  works  of  holiness,  the  whole  worldly  organisation 
of  Church  life,  appeared  to  be  matters  of  indifference  and  even 
hindrances :  the  believing  soul  demands  only  the  freedom  of  its  own 
religious  life, — a  demand  that  transcends  all  these  outward  works. 
This  was  the  inner  source  of  the  Keformation.  Luther  himself  had 
not  only  searched  Augustine,  he  had  also  edited  the  "  German  The- 
ology " :  and  his  word  let  loose  the  storm  of  this  religious  longing, 
with  which,  in  the  conflict  against  Borne,  an  impulse  of  national 
independence  was  also  mingled. 

But  when  the  Protestant  State  Church  became  again  consolidated 
in  the  fixed  forms  of  a  theoretical  system  of  doctrine,  and  clung  to 
this  the  more  anxiously  in  proportion  as  it  was  obliged  to  struggle 
for  its  existence  in  the  strife  of  Confessions,  then  the  supra-confes- 
sional  impulse  of  Mysticism  became  undeceived,  as  did  also  the 
national  consciousness.  The  theological  fixation  of  the  thought  of 
the  Eeformation  appeared  as  its  ruin,  and  as  Luther  had  once  waged 
his  warfare  against  the  "sophistry"  of  the  Scholastics,  so  now  a 
movement  of  Mysticism  that  was  quietly  stirring  farther  and  wider 
among  the  people,  directed  itself  against  his  own  creation.  In  men 
like  Osiander  and  Schwenckfeld  he  had  to  contend  against  parts  of 
his  own  nature  and  its  development.  But  in  this  movement  it 
became  evident  that  the  doctrines  of  mediaeval  Mysticism  had  been 
quietly  maintained  and  continued  in  legendary  form  amid  all  kinds 
of  fantastic  ideas  and  obscure  imagery.  The  Mysticism  which  comes 
to  light  in  the  teachings  of  men  like  Sebastian  FrancJc,  or  in  the 


866  The  Renaissance :  Humanistic  Period.         [PART  YL 

secretly  circulated  tracts  of  Valentine  Weigel.  has  its  support  in  the 
idealism  of  Eekhart,  which  transformed  all  the  outer  into  the  inner, 
all  the  historical  into  the  eternal,  and  saw  in  the  process  of  Xature 
and  history  but  the  symbol  of  the  spiritual  and  divine.  This  con- 
stituted, though,  frequently  in  strange  form,  the  deeper  ground  of 
the  battle  which  the  Mystics  of  the  sixteenth  century  waged  in 
Germany  against  the  "'•  letter ?;  of  theology. 

8.  Look  where  we  will  in  the  intellectual  movement  of  the  fif- 
teenth and  sixteenth  centuries,  we  see  everywhere  tradition  arrayed 
against  tradition,  and  every  controversy  is  a  battle  between  trans- 
mitted doctrines.  The  spirit  of  the  Western  peoples  has  now  taken 
up  into  itself  the  entire  material  which  the  past  offers  for  its  cul- 
ture, and  in  the  feverish  excitement  into  which  it  is  finally  put  by 
direct  contact  with  the  highest  achievements  of  ancient  science,  it 
struggles  upward  to  the  attainment  of  complete  independence.  It 
feels  sufficiently  hardened  to  execute  work  of  its  own,  and  overflow- 
ing with  its  wealth  of  thought,  it  seeks  new  tasks.  One  feels  the 
impulsive  blood  of  youth  pulsate  in  its  literature,  as  though  some- 
thing unheard  of,  something  which  had  never  before  been,  must 
now  come  into  being.  The  men  of  the  Renaissance  announce  to  us 
nothing  less  than  the  approach  of  a  total  renovation  of  science  and 
of  the  state  of  humanity.  The  warfare  between  the  transmitted 
doctrines  leads  to  a  surfeit  of  the  past;  learned  research  into  the 
old  wisdom  ends  with  throwing  aside  all  book-rubbish,  and  full  of 
the  youthful  joy  of  dawning,  growing  life,  the  mind  goes  forth  into 
the  cosmic  life  of  Xature  ever  young. 

The  classical  portrayal  of  this  temper  of  the  Eenaissance  is  the 
first  monologue  in  Goethe's  Faust 

§  29.  Macrocosm  and  Microcosm. 

By  Scotism  and  Terminism  the  faith -metaphysics  of  the  Middle 
Ages  had  become  disintegrated  and  split  in  twain:  everything 
supersensuous  had  been  given  to  dogma,  and  as  the  object  of  philos- 
ophy there  remained  the  world  of  experience.  But  before  thought 
had  as  yet  had  time  to  become  clear  as  to  the  methods  and  special 
problems  of  this  secular  knowledge,  Humanism,  and  with  it  above 
all.  the  Platonic  Weltanschauung,  burst  in.  Kb  wonder  that  the  solu- 
tion of  the  problem,  which  was  itself  at  first  seen  but  dimly,  was  first 
sought  in  connection  with  this  theory :  and  this  doctrine  must  have 
been  the  more  welcome,  especially  in  its  Neo-Platonic  form,  as  it 
showed  the  world  of  the  supersensuous  presageful  in  the  back- 
ground, but  made  the  particulars  of  the  world  of  sense  stand  out 


CHAP.  1,  §  29.]  Macrocosm  and  3Iicrocosm :  Bruno,  BoeJime.      367 

distinctly  in  purposefully  denned  outlines.  The  supersensuous 
itself,  and  all  therein  that  was  connected  with  man's  religious  life, 
might  be  cheerfully  set  off  to  theology ;  philosophy  could  dedicate 
itself  to  the  task  of  being  natural  science,  with  all  the  calmer  con- 
science in  proportion  as  it  followed  the  Xeo-Platonic  precedent  of 
apprehending  Mature  as  a  product  of  spirit,  and  thus  believed  that 
in  the  conception  of  the  deity  it  retained  a  point  of  unity  for  the 
diverging  branches  of  science,  the  spiritual  and  the  secular.  Did 
theology  teach  how  God  reveals  himself  in  the  Scripture,  it  was  now 
the  business  of  philosophy  to  apprehend  with  admiration  his  revela- 
tion in  Nature.  On  this  account  the  beginnings  of  modern  natural 
science  were  theosophical  and  thoroughly  Neo-Platonic. 

1.  The  characteristic  fact,  however,  is  that  in  this  revival  of 
Xeo-Platonism,  the  last  dualistic  motives  which  had  belonged  to  the 
same  were  also  completely  set  aside.  They  disappeared  together 
with  the  specifically  religious  interest  which  had  supported  them, 
and  the  theoretical  element  of  recognising  in  Mature  the  creative 
divine  power  came  forward  pure  and  unmixed.1  The  fundamental 
tendency  in  the  natural  philosophy  of  the  Renaissance  was  therefore 
the  fanciful  or  imaginative  conception  of  the  divine  unity  of  the  liv- 
ing Ally  the  admiration  of  the  macrocosm :  the  fundamental  thought 
of  Plotinus  of  the  beauty  of  the  universe  has  been  taken  up  by  no 
other  time  so  sympathetically  as  by  this ;  and  this  beauty  was  now 
also  regarded  as  a  manifestation  of  the  divine  Idea.  Such  a  view 
is  expressed  in  almost  entirely  Neo-Platonic  forms  by  Patrizzi,  in  a 
more  original  form  and  with  strongly  poetical  quality  by  Giordano 
Bruno,  and  likewise  by  Jacob  Boehme.  "With  Bruno  the  symbol  of 
the  all-forming  and  all-animating  primitive  light  is  still  dominant 
(cf.  p.  245) ;  with  Boehme,  on  the  contrary,  we  find  that  of  the 
organism ;  the  world  is  a  tree  which  from  root  to  flower  and  fruit 
is  permeated  by  one  life-giving  sap,  and  which  is  formed  and  ordered 
from  within  outward  by  its  own  germinal  activity ,2 

In  this  inheres  naturally  the  inclination  to  complete  monism  and 
pantheism.  Everything  must  have  its  cause,  and  the  last  cause  can 
be  but  one,  —  God.3  He  is,  according  to  Bruno,  at  the  same  time 
the  formal,  the  efficient,  and  the  final  cause ;  according  to  Boehme 
he  is  at  once  the  rational  ground  and  efficient  cause  ("  Urgrund " 
and  "Ursache")  of  the  world  (principium  and  causa  with  Bruno). 

1  In  a  certain  sense  this  might  also  be  expressed  by  saying  that  thereby  the 
Stoic  elements  of  Neo-Platonism  came  with  controlling  force  into  the  fore- 
ground. 

2  Of.  the  remarkable  agreement  between  Bruno,  Delia  Causa  Pr.  e.  Z7.,  II. 
(Lag.  1. 231  f.)  and  Boehme,  Aurora,  Vorrede. 

8  Aurora^  Chap.  ITL 


368  The  Renaissance :  Humanistic  Period.        [PAKT  IV, 

Hence  tlie  universe  is  also  nothing  but  "the  essential  nature  of  God 
himself  made  creatural." 2  And  yet  the  idea  of  the  transcendence 
of  God  is  here,  too.  connected  with  this  view,  as  it  had  been  in  Xeo- 
Platonism.  Boehme  holds  that  God  should  be  thought  not  as  a 
force  devoid  of  reason  and  "  science.-"  but  as  the  •'<  all-knowing,  all- 
seeing,  all-hearing,  all-smelling,  all-tasting ::  spirit:  and  Bruno  adds 
another  analogy  j  for  him  God  is  the  artist  who  works  unceasingly 
and  shapes  out  his  inner  nature  to  rich  life. 

Harmony  is  accordingly,  for  Bruno  also,  the  inmost  nature  of  the 
world,  and  he  who  can  apprehend  it  with  the  gaze  of  enthusiasm 
(as  does  the  philosopher  in  the  dialogues  and  poetic  inventions  Degli 
Ero>d  Furori),  for  him  the  apparent  defects  and  imperfections  of 
detail  vanish  in  the  beauty  of  the  whole.  He  needs  no  special  the- 
odicy ;  the  world  is  perfect  because  it  is  the  life  of  God,  even  down 
to  every  detail,  and  he  only  complains  who  cannot  raise  himself  to 
a  view  of  the  whole.  The  world-joy  of  the  sesthetic  Renaissance 
sings  philosophical  dithyrambs  in  Bruno's  writings.  A  universalistic 
optimism  that  carries  everything  before  it  prevails  in  his  poetic 
thought. 

2.  The  conceptions  which  lie  at  the  basis  of  this  unfolding  of  the 
metaphysical  fantasy  in  Bruno  had  their  source  in  the  main  in 
JN7'v>,V>«*  Cusamts,  whose  teachings  had  been  preserved  by  Charles 
Bouiile.  though  in  his  exposition  they  had  to  some  degree  lost  their 
vivid  freshness.  Just  this  the  Xolan  knew  how  to  restore.  He  not 
only  raised  the  principle  of  the  coincidentia  oppositorum  to  the  artis- 
tic reconciliation  of  contrasts,  to  the  harmonious  total  action  of 
opposing  partial  forces  in  the  divine  primitive  essence,  but  above  all 
he  gave  to  the  conceptions  of  the  infinite  and  tJie  finite  a  far  wider 
reaching  significance.  As  regards  the  deity  and  its  relation  to  the 
world,  the  Neo-Platonic  relations  are  essentially  retained.  God 
himself,  as  the  unity  exalted  above  all  opposites,  cannot  be  appre- 
hended through  any  finite  attribute  or  qualification,  and  there- 
fi  »re  is  unknowable  in  his  own  proper  essence  (negative  theology)  ; 
but  at  the  same  time  he  is  still  thought  as  the  inexhaustible,  infinite 
world-force,  as  the  natum  naturans^  which  in  eternal  change  forms 
and  "  unfolds  "  itself  purposefully  and  in  conformity  with  law,  into 
the  natura  naturetia.  This  identification  of  the  essence  of  God  and 
the  world  is  a  general  doctrine  of  the  natural  philosophy  of  the 
Eenaissance ;  it  is  found  likewise  in  Paracelsus,  in  Sebastian  Franek, 
in  Boehme,  and  finally  also  with  the  whole  body  of  the  "  Platonists." 
That  it  could  also  assume  an  extremely  naturalistic  form,  and  could 

1  Aurora,  Chap.  H. 


CHAP.  1,  §  29.]     Macrocosm  and  Microcosm :  Bruno.  369 

lead  to  the  denial  of  all  transcendence,  is  proved  by  the  agitative  and 
boastfully  polemical  doctrine  of  Vanini.1 

For  the  natura  naturata,  on  the  other  hand,  for  the  "universe  "  — 
the  sum-total  of  creatures — the  characteristic  of  true  "infinity"  is 
not  claimed,  but  rather  that  of  unlimitedmss  in  space  and  time. 
This  conception  gained  an  incomparably  clearer  form  and  more 
fixed  significance  by  the  Copernkan  theory.  "The  spherical  form  of 
the  earth  and  its  revolution  about  its  axis  had  been  a  familiar  idea 
to  Cusanus  as  well  as  to  the  old  Pythagoreans,  perhaps,  indeed,  • 
through  them ;  but  only  the  victoriously  proved  hypothesis  of  the 
motion  of  the  earth  about  the  sun  could  furnish  a  rational  basis  for 
the  completely  new  view  of  man's  position  in  the  universe,  which  is 
peculiar  to  modern  science.  The  anthropocentric  idea  of  the  world 
which  had  ruled  the  Middle  Ages  became  out  of  joint.  Man,  as 
well  as  the  earth,  must  cease  to  be  regarded  as  centre  of  the  universe 
and  centre  of  the  world.  Men  like  Fatrizzi  and  Boehme  also  raised 
themselves  above  such  "  restriction  "  on  the  basis  of  the  teaching  of 
Copernicus,  which  for  that  reason  was  condemned  by  the  dogmatic 
authorities  of  all  confessions ;  but  the  fame  of  having  thought  out 
the  Coperaican  system  to  its  end,  both  in  natural  philosophy  and  in 
metaphysics,  belongs  to  Giordano  Bruno. 

He  developed  from  this  system  the  theory  that  the  universe  forms 
a  system  of  countless  worlds,  each  of  which  moves  about  its  central 
sun,  leads  its  own  proper  life,  grows  from  chaotic  conditions  to  clear 
and  definite  formation,  and  again  yields  to  the  destiny  of  dissolution. 
The  tradition  of  Democritus  and  Epicurus  had  perhaps  a  share  in 
the  formation  of  this  conception  of  a  plurality  of  worlds  arising  and 
perishing  again ;  but  it  is  the  peculiar  feature  of  Bruno's  doctrine, 
that  he  regarded  the  plurality  of  solar  systems  not  as  a  mechanical 
juxtaposition,  but  as  an  organic  living  whole,  and  regarded  the  pro- 
cess of  the  growth  and  decay  of  worlds  as  maintained  by  the  pulse- 
beat  of  the  one  divine  All-life. 

3.  While  in  this  way  universalism,  with  its  bold  flight  into  spatial 
and  temporal  boundlessness,  threatened  to  claim  the  fantasy  entirely 
for  its  own,  there  was  an  effective  counterpoise  in  the  Peripatetic- 
Stoic  doctrine  of  the  analogy  between  macrocosm  and  microcosm) 
which  found  in  man's  nature  the  sum,  the  "  quintessence "  of  the 
cosmical  powers.  We  see  this  doctrine  reviving  in  the  most  varied 


1  Lucilio  Vanini  (born  1585  at  Naples,  burned  1619  at  Toulouse),  a  dissolute 
adventurer,  wrote  Amphitheatrum  ^Eternce  Promdentice  (Lyons,  1615)  and  2)e 
admirandis  nature  regince  deceque  mortalitim  arcanis  (Paris,  1616). 

2  Nicolaus  Copernicus,  De  Eewlutionibus   Orbium  Coslestium  (Nuremberg, 
1543). 


870  The  Renaissance :  Humanistic  Period.        [PART  IV. 

forms  during  the  Renaissance ;  it  controls  entirely  the  theory  of 
knowledge  at  this  period,  and  moreover  the  Xeo-Platonic  triple 
division  is  almost  universally  authoritative  in  connection  with  it, 
furnishing  a  scheme  for  a  metaphysical  anthropology.  One  can  know 
only  what  one  himself  is,  is  the  mode  in  which  this  was  expressed 
by  Valentine  Weigel :  man  knows  the  all  in  so  far  as  he  is  the  all. 
This  was  a  pervading  principle  of  Eckhart's  Mysticism.  But  this 
idealism  now  took  on  a  definite  form.  As  body,  man  belongs  to  the 
material  world;  indeed,  he  unites  within  himself,  as  Paracelsus,  and 
following  him  Weigel  and  Boehme  teach,  the  essence  of  all  material 
things  in  finest  and  most  compact  form.  Just  on  this  account  he  is 
competent  to  understand  the  corporeal  world.  As  intellectual  being, 
however,  he  is  of  i;  sidereal "  origin,  and  is  therefore  able  to  know 
the  intellectual  world  in  all  its  forms.  Finally,  as  a  divine 4i  spark," 
as  spnwntntn  vit&t  as  a  partial  manifestation  of  the  highest  princi- 
ple of  life,  he  is  also  able  to  become  conscious  of  the  divine  nature 
whose  image  he  is. 

A  mure  abstract  application  of  this  same  principle,  according  to 
which  all  knowledge  of  the  world  is  rooted  in  mans  knowledge  of 
himself,  is  found  in  the  thought  of  CampaneUa,  involving  not  the 
Xeo-Pl;itonic  separation  of  world-strata  (although  this  too  is  present 
in  CampaneLIa),  but  the  fundamental  categories  of  all  reality.  Man 
— is  the  thought  here  too — knows  in  the  proper  sense  only  himself, 
and  knows  all  else  only  from  and  through  himself.  All  knowledge 
is  perception  (sentire),  but  we  perceive,  not  the  things,  but  only 
the  states  into  which  these  set  us.  In  this  process,  however,  we 
learn  by  experience  that  inasmuch  as  we  are,  we  can  do  something, 
we  know  something  and  will  something,  and  further,  that  we  find 
ourselves  limited  by  corresponding  functions  of  other  beings.  From 
this  it  follows  that  power,  knowledge,  and  will  are  the  "  primali- 
ties  "  of  all  reality,  and  that  if  they  belong  to  God  in  an  unlimited 
degree,  he  is  known  as  all-powerful,  all-knowing,  and  all-good. 

4.  The  doctrine  that  all  knowledge  of  God  and  of  the  world  is 
ultimately  locked  up  in  man's  knowledge  of  himself,  is  nevertheless 
only  an  epistemological  inference  from  the  more  general  metaphys- 
ical principle  according  to  which  the  divine  nature  was  held  to  be 
fully  and  entirely  contained  in  each  of  its  finite  manifestations. 
Giordano  Bruno  follows  the  Cusan  also  in  holding  that  God  is  the 
smallest  as  well  as  the  greatest,  as  truly  the  vital  principle  of  the 
individual  being  as  that  of  the  universe.  And  accordingly  every 
individual  thing,  and  not  merely  man,  becomes  a  "  mirror "  of  the 
world-substance.  Each  without  exception  is  according  to  its  essen- 
tial nature  the  deity  itself,  but  each  in  its  own  way,  which  is 


CHAP.  1,  §  29.]  Macrocosm  and  Microcosm :  Campanella^  Bruno.  371 

different  from  all  the  rest.  This  thought  Bruno  incorporated  in  his 
conception  of  the  monad.  He  understood  "by  this  the  individual 
substance  (Einzehcesen),  which,  as  continually  "formed"  matter, 
constitutes  one  of  the  partial  manifestations  of  the  world-force,  in  the 
interaction,  of  which  the  world-life  consists.  It  is  living  from  the 
beginning,  and  is  imperishable ;  it  is  corporeal  as  well  as  spiritual 
in  its  nature.  Each  monad  is  a  form  in  which  the  Divine  Being 
finds  individual  existence,  a  finite  existence-form  of  the  infinite 
essence.  Since,  now,  there  is  nothing  but  God  and  the  monads,  the 
universe  is  animated  even  to  the  smallest  nook  and  corner,  and  the 
infinite  all-life  individualises  itself  at  every  point  to  a  special  and 
peculiar  nature.  It  results  from  this  that  each  thing,  in  the  move- 
ments of  its  life,  follows  in  part  the  law  of  its  special  nature,  and 
in  part  a  more  general  law,  just  as  a  planet  or  heavenly  body 
moves  at  the  same  time  on  its  own  axis  and  about  its  sun.  Cam- 
panella,  who  took  up  this  doctrine  also  in  connection  with  the 
Copernican  system,  designated  this  striving  toward  the  whole,  this 
tendency  toward  the  original  source  of  all  reality,  as  religion,  and 
spoke  in  this  sense  of  a  "  natural "  religion,  that  is  of  religion  as 
"natural  impulse,"  —  one  would  now  perhaps  say  centripetal  im- 
pulse,—  which  he  with  logical  consistency  ascribed  to  all  things  in 
general,  and  which  in  man  was  held  to  assume  the  special  form  of 
"rational"  religion;  that  is,  of  the  striving  to  become  one  with  God 
by  love  and  knowledge. 

This  principle  of  the  infinite  variability  of  the  divine  ground  of 
the  world  which  presents  itself  in  a  special  form  in  every  particular 
thing,  is  found  in  a  similar  form  also  with  Paracelsus.  Here,  as 
with  Nicolaus  Cusanus,  it  is  taught  that  all  substances  are  present 
in  everything,  that  each  thing  therefore  presents  a  microcosm,  and 
yet  that  each  has  also  its  special  principle  of  life  and  activity. 
This  special  mind  or  spirit  of  the  individual  is  called  by  Paracelsus 
the  Archeus ;  Jacob  Boehme,  to  whom  this  doctrine  passed  over,  calls 
it  the  Primus. 

With  Bruno  the  conception  of  the  monad  connects  itself  in  a  very 
interesting  manner,  though  without  further  effect  upon  his  physical 
views,  with  that  of  the  atom,  which  was  brought  to  him,  as  to  the 
earlier  period,  by  the  Epicurean  tradition  through  Lucretius.  The 
"  smallest " — in  metaphysics  the  monad,  in  mathematics  the  point 
— is  in  physics  the  atom,  the  indivisible  spherical  element  of  the 
corporeal  world.  Memories  of  the  Pythagorean  and  Platonic  theory 
6f  the  elements,  and  of  the  related  atomic  theory  of  Democritus, 
became  thus  alive  in  the  midst  of  Neo-Platonism ;  they  found  also 
an  independent  revival  with  men  like  Basso,  Sennert,  and  others, 


372  The  Renaissance :  Humanistic  Period.         [PART  IV. 

and  so  led  to  the  so-called  corpuscular  theory,  according  to  which 
the  corporeal  world  consists  of  inseparable  atom-complexes,  the  cor- 
puscles. In  the  atoms  themselves,  the  theory  assumed  in  connec- 
tion with  their  mathematical  form  an  original  and  unchangeable 
law  of  action,  to  which,  it  held,  the  mode  of  action  of  the  corpuscles 
is  also  to  Le  traced.1 

5.  Here  the  workings  of  mathematics  assert  themselves  in  the  old 
Pythagorean  form,  or  as  modified  by  Democritus  and  Plato.     The 
ultimate  constituents  of  physical  reality  are  determined  by  their 
geometrical  form,  and  the  qualitative  determinations  of  experience 
must  be  traced  back  to  this.    The  combination  of  elements  presup- 
poses numbers  and  their  order  as  the  principle  of  multiplicity.2 
Thus  spatial  forms  and  number-relations  again  make  their  appear- 
ance as  the  essential  and  original  in  the  physical  world,  and  thereby 
the  Aristotelian-Stoic  doctrine  of  the  qualitatively  determined  forces, 
of  the  inner  Forms  of  things,  of  the  quulitates  oceultce,  was  displaced. 
As  this  latter  doctrine  had  formerly  gained  the  victory  over  the 
principle  of  Pythagoras,  Democritus,  and  Plato,  so  it  must  in  turn 
yield  to  this :  and  herein  lies  one  of  the  most  important  prepara- 
tions for  the  origin  of  modern  natural  science. 

The  beginnings  of  this  are  found  already  with  Nicolaus  Cusanus ; 
Lut  now  they  receive  an  essential  strengthening  from  the  same 
fuiirce  from  which  their  presence  in  his  thought  is  explained: 
i^inely,  from  the  old  literature,  and  in  particular  from  the  Neo- 
Pytliagorean  writings.  Just  for  this  reason,  however,  they  still 
have  the  fantastic  metaphysical  garb  of  number-mysticism  and  num- 
ber-symbolism. The  book  of  Nature  is  written  in  numbers;  the  har- 
mony of  things  is  that  of  the  number-system.  All  is  arranged  by 
God  according  to  measure  and  number;  all  life  is  an  unfolding  of 
mathematical  relations.  But  just  as  in  antiquity,  so  here,  this 
thought  is  unfolded  at  first  as  an  arbitrary  interpretation  of  concep- 
tions, and  a  mysterious  speculation.  The  procedure  of  the  world 
forth  from  God?  from  the  construction  of  the  Trinity  on,  —  as,  for 
example,  in  the  attempt  of  Bouille, — is  again  to  be  conceived  as  the 
process  of  the  transformation  of  unity  into  the  number-system.  Such 
fantasies  were  followed  by  men  like  Cardan  and  Pico.  Eeuchlin 
added  further  the  mythological  creations  of  the  Jewish  Cabbala. 

6.  Thus  the  principle  which  was  destined  for  the  most  fruitful 
development  made  its  entrance  into  the  new  world  wrapped  again 
in   the    old    metaphysical   fantasticalness,  and   fresh  forces  were 

1  Cf.  K.  Lasswitz,  Geschichte  des  Atomismus,  I.  pp.  359  ff.  (Hamburg  and 
Leips.  1890).  v  * 

8  Of.  for  this  especially  G.  Bruno,  De  Triplici  Minimo. 


CHAP.  1,  §  29.]     Macrocosm  and  Microcosm :  Paracelsus.  373 

needed  to  strip  off:  this  covering,  and  free  it  for  its  right  working. 
Meanwhile,  however,  it  became  mingled  with  quite  other  efforts, 
which  likewise  had  their  origin  in  the  Xeo-Platonic  tradition.  To 
the  idea  of  a  universal  psychical  life,  to  the  fanciful  spiritualisation 
of  Xature,  belonged  also  the  impulse  to  interfere  in  the  course  of 
things  with  mysterious  means,  with  conjurations  and  magic  arts, 
and  so  to  guide  it  according  to  the  will  of  man.  Here,  too,  a  higher 
thought  hovered  before  the  fantastic  impulse  of  the  excited  age, 
—  the  thought  of  mastering  Mature  by  a  knowledge  of  the  forces 
working  in  it.  But  this  thought  was  also  received  in  the  wrappings 
of  ancient  superstition.  If,  as  was  the  case  with  the  Xeo-Platonists, 
the  life  of  Mature  was  regarded  as  a  dominance  of  spirits,  as  a  mys- 
teriously connected  system  of  internal  forces,  it  was  a  proper  aim 
to  make  these  subject  by  knowledge  and  will.  Thus  magic  became 
a  favourite  subject  of  thought  in  the  Renaissance,  and  science  again 
concerned  itself  with  the  task  of  bringing  system  into  superstition. 

Astrology,  with  its  influences  of  the  stars  upon  human  life,  the 
interpretation  of  dreams  and  signs,  necromancy,  with  its  conjura- 
tions of  spirits,  the  predictions  of  persons  in  the  ecstatic  state,  —  all 
these  elements  of  the  Stoic  and  Neo-Platonic  divination  were  then  in 
most  luxuriant  bloom.  Pico  and  Eeuchlin  brought  them  into  con- 
nection with  the  number-mysticism ;  Agrippa  of  Xettesheim  adopted 
all  the  sceptical  attacks  against  the  possibility  of  rational  science, 
in  order  to  seek  help  in  mystical  illuminations  and  secret  magic 
arts.  Cardan  proceeded  with  all  seriousness  to  the  task  of  deter- 
mining the  laws  of  these  operations,  and  Campanella  conceded  them 
an  unusually  wide  space  in  his  idea  of  the  world. 

Physicians  especially,  whose  vocation  demanded  an  interference 
in  the  course  of  Nature  and  might  seem  permitted  to  expect  special 
advantage  in  secret  arts,  showed  an  inclination  toward  these  magic 
arts.  Prom  this  point  of  view  Paracelsus  desired  to  reform  medi- 
cine. He  also  proceeds  from  the  sympathy  of  all  things,  from  the 
idea  of  the  universe  as  a  spiritually  connected  system.  He  finds 
the  essence  of  disease  in  the  injuring  of  the  individual  vital  prin- 
ciple, the  Archeus,  by  foreign  powers,  and  seeks  the  means  where- 
with to  free  and  strengthen  the  Archeus.  Since  this  latter  process 
must  come  about  by  a  corresponding  composition  of  materials,  all 
sorts  of  magical  drinks,  tinctures,  and  other  secret  remedies  must  be 
brewed,  and  thus  the  arts  of  alchemy  were  set  in  motion,  which,  in 
spite  of  all  its  fantastic  performances,  ultimately  yielded  a  number 
of  useful  results  for  chemical  knowledge  in  the  course  of  its  incred- 
ibly extended  pursuits. 

In  this  connection  the  fundamental  metaphysical  presupposition 


ST-i  The  Renaissance :  Humanistic  Period.       [PART  IV. 

of  the  unity  of  all  vital  force  led  of  itself  to  the  thought  that  there 
must  be  also  a  simple,  most  efficacious,  universal  remedy  for  the 
strengthening  of  every  Archeus  whatever,  a  panacea  against  all 
diseases  and  for  the  maintenance  of  all  the  vital  forces ;  and  con- 
nection with  the  macrocosmic  efforts  of  magic  nourished  the  hope 
that  the  possession  of  this  secret  would  lend  the  highest  magic 
power,  and  afford  the  most  desirable  treasures.  All  this  was  to  be 
achieved  by  the  "philosophers  stone";  it  was  to  heal  all  diseases, 
transmute  all  substances  into  gold,  conjure  all  spirits  into  the  power 
of  its  possessor.  And  thus  the  purposes  which  it  was  thought 
•would  be  satisfied  in  the  ventures  of  alchemy,  were  ultimately  very 
real  and  sober. 

7.  The  introduction  of  this  magical  view  of  Xature  into  the  subtle 
religious  system  of  German  Mysticism  constitutes  the  peculiar  feat- 
ure of  Boehmes  philosophy.  He,  too,  is  seized  by  the  thought  that 
philosophy  should  be  knowledge  of  Mature ;  but  the  deep  earnest- 
ness of  the  religious  need  which  lay  at  the  basis  of  the  German 
^Reformation  did  not  allow  him  to  content  himself  with  the  separa- 
tion of  religious  metaphysics  and  natural  science,  customary  at  Ms 
time,  and  he  sought  to  work  the  two  into  one  again.  Similar  efforts 
which  tended  to  transcend  the  dogmatic,  fixed  form  of  Protestant- 
ism, and  hoped  to  solve  the  problems  of  the  new  science  with  the 
aid  of  a  Christian  metaphysics,  throve  also  by  the  side  of  the  official 
Peripatetic  system.  Tanrelhts  aimed  to  produce  such  a  supra-con- 
fessional  philosophy  of  Christianity,  and  with  a  true  instinct  for  his 
purpose,  adopted  many  elements  of  the  Augustinian  doctrine  of  the 
will,  but  was  not  able  to  work  enough  real  material  from  the  inter- 
ests of  his  time  into  these  thoughts,  and  so  came  ultimately  rather 
to  a  complete  separation  of  empirical  research  from  all  metaphysics. 
A  similar  process  went  on  in  the  mystical  movement,  which  grew 
with  the  popular  opposition  against  the  new  orthodoxy  all  the  more 
in  proportion  as  the  latter  dried  and  hardened  within  itself.  The 
mystical  doctrines  also  remained  suspended  in  vague  generality  until 
the  teaching  of  Paracelsus  was  brought  to  them,  at  first  by  Weigel, 
and  then  completely  by  Boehme. 

In  Boehme's  doctrine  Xeo-Platonism  assumes  again  a  completely 
religious  colouring.  Here,  too.  man  is  regarded  as  the  microcosm 
from  and  by  which  the  bodily,  the  "  sidereal,"  and  the  divine  worlds 
can  be  known,  if  one  follows  the  right  illumination  and  is  not  mis- 
led by  learned  theories.  Self-knowledge,  nevertheless,  is  religious 
knowledge,  which  finds  the  opposition  of  good  and  evil  as  a  funda- 
mental trait  of  human  nature.  The  same  opposition  fills  the  whole 
world;  it  rules  in  heaven  as  on  earth,  and  since  God  is  the  sole 


CHAP.  I,  §  29.]     Macrocosm  and  Microcosm :  Soehme.  375 

cause  of  all,  this  opposition  must  "be  sought  in  him  also.  Boehme 
extends  the  coincidentia  oppositorum  to  the  extreme  limit,  and  finds 
the  ground  of  duality  in  the  necessity  of  the  self-revelation  of  the 
divine  Primordial  Ground.  As  light  can  be  revealed  only  in  con- 
nection with  darkness,  so  God's  goodness  can  be  revealed  only  in 
connection  with  his  anger.  Thus  Boehme  portrays  the  process  of 
the  eternal  self-generation  of  God,  describing  how  from  the  dark 
ground  of  Being  within  him  the  urgent  impulse  ("Drang"),  or  will, 
which  has  only  itself  for  its  object,  attains  self-revelation  in  the 
divine  wisdom,  and  how  that  which  has  thus  become  revealed  forms 
itself  into  the  world.  "While  the  theogonic  development  thus  passes 
over  immediately  into  the  cosmogonic,  the  effort  is  everywhere 
shown  in  this  latter  development  to  carry  the  fundamental  religious 
antithesis  into  the  physical  categories  of  the  system  of  Paracelsus. 
Thus  three  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  seven  forms,  or  "qitaUa" 
("  Qualen  "),  are  constructed,  which  ascend  from  the  material  forces 
of  attraction  and  repulsion  to  those  of  light  and  warmth,  and  from 
there  on  to  those  of  the  sensible  and  intellectual  functions.  To  this 
portrayal  of  the  eternal  nature  of  things  is  then  attached  the  history 
of  the  earthly  world,  which  begins  with  the  fall  of  Lucifer  and 
the  process  of  rendering  the  spiritual  essence  perceptible  to  the 
senses,  and  ends  with  the  overcoming  of  the  proud  infatuation 
("  Vergaftsein")  for  the  creature,  with  the  mystical  devotion  of 
man  to  the  deity,  and  ultimately  with  the  restoration  of  the  spiritual 
nature.  All  this  is  presented  by  Boehme  in  prophetic  discourse, 
full  of  deep  conviction,  with  a  unique  mingling  of  profundity  and 
dilettantism.  It  is  the  attempt  of  the  Eckhartian  Mysticism  to 
become  master  of  the  modern  interests  of  science,  and  the  first  still 
tentatively  uncertain  step  toward  raising  natural  science  into  an 
idealistic  metaphysics.  But  because  this  is  made  from  the  stand- 
point of  the  deepest  religious  life,  the  intellectualistic  features  of 
the  older  Mysticism  retreat,  with  Boehme,  more  into  the  background. 
TFhile  with  Eckhart,  the  world-process  both  in  its  arising  and  in  its 
passing  was  regarded  as  a  knowing  process,  with  Boehme  it  is  rather 
a  struggling  of  the  will  between  good  and  evil. 

8.  In  all  these  ways  the  result  of  the  separation  of  philosophy 
from  dogmatic  theology  always  was  that  the  knowledge  of  Kature 
that  was  sought  took  on  the  form  of  the  older  metaphysics.  This 
procedure  was  inevitable  so  long  as  the  desire  for  a  knowledge  of 
Mature  could  provide  neither  a  material  of  facts  which  it  had  itself 
acquired,  nor  new  conceptions  to  serve  as  forms  for  the  elaboration 
of  this  materiaL  As  a  prerequisite  for  this,  it  was  necessary  to  see 
the  inadequacy  of  metaphysical  theories,  and  putting  them  aside, 


376  The  Renaisscnice :  Humanistic  Period.        [PART  IV. 

to  turn  to  empiricism.  This  service  was  rendered  to  the  genesis  of 
modern  thought  by  the  tendencies  of  Nominalism  and  Terminism, 
in  part,  also,  by  the  rhetorical  and  grammatical  opposition  to  the 
science  of  the  schools,  and  also  by  the  revival  of  ancient  Scepticism. 

The  writings  of  Ludovico  Vives  must  be  regarded  as  a  common 
starting-point  for  these  various  efforts ;  but  they  prove  also  that 
the  importance  of  these  endeavours  is  essentially  negative  in  char- 
acter. In  place  of  the  obscure  words  and  arbitrary  conceptions  of 
metaphysics,  a  demand  is  made  in  nominalistic  fashion  for  the  im- 
mediate, intuitive  apprehension  of  things  themselves  by  experience  : 
but  the  remarks  as  to  the  manner  in  which  this  should  be  scientifi- 
cally set  about  are  meagre  and  uncertain ;  he  speaks  of  experiment, 
but  without  any  very  deep  insight  into  its  nature.  Quite  so  lies 
the  case  at  a  later  time  with  Sanchez.  And  if  the  artificial  subtle- 
ties of  the  syllogistic  method  were  attacked  with  great  hue  and  cry, 
this  line  of  thought  had  ultimately  only  the  Eamistic  fancies  of 
14  natural  logic  n  to  put  in  their  stead. 

Further,  this  empiricism,  just  by  virtue  of  its  origin  from  Termin- 
ism,  could  move  only  with  a  very  uncertain  step  in  the  presence  of 
external  Nature.  It  could  not  deny  the  background  of  Occam's 
dualism.  Sense-perception  was  held  to  be,  not  a  copy  of  a  thing, 
but  an  inner  state  of  the  subject  corresponding  to  the  presence  of 
the  thing.  These  scruples  could  be  only  strengthened  by  the 
theories  of  ancient  Scepticism,  for  this  added  the  doctrine  of  the 
deceptions  of  the  senses  and  the  consideration  of  the  relativity  and 
change  of  all  perceptions.  Hence  this  empiricism  of  the  Humanists 
now  also  threw  itself  more  upon  inner  perception,  which  was  univer- 
sally regarded  as  much  surer  than  outer  perception.  Tives  is  most 
fortunate  where  he  speaks  the  language  of  empirical  psychology; 
men  like  Nizolius,  Montaigne,  and  Sanchez  shared  this  view,  and 
Charron  gave  it  practical  significance.  Strenuously  as  all  these  urge 
toward  looking  at  things  themselves,  outer  perception  ultimately 
turns  out  comparatively  empty. 

•  How  little  certain  of  itself,  and  how  little  fruitful  in  principles 
this  empiricism  was  at  that  time,  is  shown  best  of  all  by  its  two 
main  representatives  in  Italy,  —  Telesio  and  Campanella.  The  former, 
one  of  the  most  stirring  and  influential  opponents  of  Aristotelianism^ 
is  everywhere  famous  even  in  his  own  time  (and  also  with  Bruno 
and  Bacon),  as  he  who  demanded  most  strongly  that  science 
should  build  only  on  the  basis  of  facts  perceived  by  the  senses.  He 
founded  in  Naples  an  academy  which  he  called  the  Academia  Cosen- 
tina,  after  the  name  of  his  home,  and,  in  fact,  contributed  much 
toward  the  cultivation  of  the  sense  for  empirical  natural  science. 


CHAP.  1,  §  29.]     Macrocosm  and  Microcosm :  Gampanella.         377 

But  if  we  look  to  see  how  lie  treats  Xature  "juzta  propria  principia" 
we  are  met  by  genuinely  physical  theories -which  from  few  observations 
hastily  leap  over  to  most  general  metaphysical  principles  quite  after 
the  fashion  of  the  ancient  Ionics.  The  dry-warm  and  the  moist-cold 
are  set  forth  as  the  two  opposing  fundamental  forces,  out  of  whose 
conflict  both  the  macrocosmie  and  the  microcosmic  life  are  to  be  ex- 
plained. This  same  inner  contradiction  appears  almost  more  promi- 
nent still  in  Campanella.  He  teaches  the  most  pronounced  sens- 
ualism. All  knowledge  is  for  him  a  "feeling"  (sentire)  ;  even 
recollection,  judgment,  and  inference  are  for  him  but  modified 
forms  of  that  feeling.  But  in  his  case  also,  sensualism  tilts  over 
into  psychological  idealism ;  he  is  far  too  good  a  Xominalist  not  to 
know  that  all  perception  is  but  a  feeling  of  the  states  of  the  percip- 
ient himself.  Thus  he  takes  his  starting-point  in  inner  experience, 
and  following  the  principle  of  the  analogy  of  macrocosmus  and 
microcosmus,  builds  upon  a  simple  apergu  (cf.  a"bove)  an  extended 
ontology.  Into  this  he  then  draws  also  the  quite  scholastic  antith- 
esis of  Being  and  Non-being  (ens  and  non-ens),  which,  following  the 
Xeo-Platonic  example,  is  identified  with  that  of  the  perfect  and 
imperfect,  and  between  the  two  he  spreads  the  variegated  meta- 
physical picture  of  a  world-system  arranged  in  successive  strata. 

So  tenaciously  do  the  long-wonted  habits  of  metaphysical  thought 
cling  everywhere  to  the  beginnings  of  the  new  research. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  ZfTATUBAL  SCIENCE  PERIOD. 

Damiron,  Essai  sitr  VHistoire  de  la  Philosophic  au  17™  Siecle.    Paris,  1846. 
Knno  Fischer,  Francis  Bacon  und  seine  Sachfolger.    2d  ed.,  Leips.  1875. 
Ch.  de  Remusat,  Histoire  de  la  Philosophic  en  Angleterre  depuis  Bacon  jusqu'b 
Locke.    '2  vols.,  Paris,  1875. 

Natural  science  acquired  its  decisive  influence  upon  the  develop- 
ment of  modern  philosophy  by  first  gaining  its  own  independence 
with  the  aid  of  a  conscious  use  of  a  scientific  method,  and  then  from 
this  position  being  ahle  to  determine  the  general  movement  of 
thought  as  regards  both  form  and  content.  In  so  far  the  develop- 
ment of  the  method  of  natural  science  from  Kepler  and  Galileo 
down  to  Xewton  is  not  indeed  itself  the  evolution  of  modern  philos- 
ophy, but  is  yet  that  series  of  events  in  reference  to  which  this 
evolution  constantly  proceeds. 

For  this  reason  the  positive  beginnings  of  modern  philosophy  are 
in  general  to  be  sought,  not  so  much  in  new  conceptions  with  new 
content,  as  in  methodical  reflection,  out  of  which,  with  the  progress 
of  time,  there  resulted  of  'course  new  material  and  so  new  points  of 
view  for  the  treatment  of  both  theoretical  and  practical  problems. 
But  at  first  the  points  of  departure  of  modern  thought  were  in  all 
cases  where  permanently  fruitful  conceptions  of  the  task  and  thereby 
conditioned  procedure  of  the  new  science  grew  out  of  the  humanistic 
opposition  against  Scholasticism,  and  out  of  the  excited  metaphysical 
fantasies  of  the  transitional  period. 

In  this  consists  from  the  outset  an  essential  difference  between 
modern  and  ancient  philosophy.  The  former  is  as  reflective  in  its 
1>eginning  as  the  latter  was  naive,  and  this  is  self-explaining,  since 
the  former  must  develop  out  of  those  traditions  which  the  latter 
created.  In  this  way  it  is  characteristic  of  the  greater  number  of 
the  systems  of  modern  philosophy  to  seek  the  path  to  the  real  or 
"material"  problems  by  considering  the  science  of  method  and  the 
theory  of  knowledge  j  and  in  particular  the  seventeenth  century  with 
respect  to  its  philosophy  may  be  characterised  as  a  strife  of  methods. 

378 


CHAP.  2.]  Natural  Science  Period.  379 

While,  however,  the  movement  of  the  humanistic  period  had 
in  the  main  taken  place  in  Italy  and  Germany,  the  cooler  and  more 
considerate  temper  of  the  two  western  civilised  peoples  now  became 
prominent.  Italy  was  made  dumb  by  the  counter-reformation,  Ger- 
many was  crippled  by  the  ruinous  war  between  the  confessions. 
England  and  France,  OIL  the  contrary,  experienced  in  the  seventeenth 
century  the  bloom  of  their  intellectual  civilisation,  and  between 
them  the  Netherlands  became  a  flourishing  seat  of  art  and  science. 

In  the  development  of  the  method  of  natural  science  the  lines  of 
empiricism  and  of  mathematical  theory  converged :  in  philosophical 
generalisation  the  two  came  forward  in  an  independent  attitude. 
The  programme  of  the  experience  philosophy  was  laid  down  by  Bacon, 
but  the  method  which  formed  its  fundamental  thought  was  not  car- 
ried out  by  him  in  the  fruitful  manner  which  he  had  anticipated. 
Much  more  comprehensive  was  the  form  in  which  Descartes  brought 
together  the  scientific  movement  of  his  time  to  establish  rationalism 
anew,  by  filling  the  scholastic  system  of  conceptions  with  the  rich 
content  of  the  Galilean  research.  From  this  resulted  far-reaching 
metaphysical  problems,  which  in  the  second  half  of  the  seventeenth 
century  called  forth  an  extraordinarily  vigorous  movement  of  philo- 
sophical thought,  —  a  movement  in  which  the  new  principles  entered 
into  manifold  antithetical  combinations  with  the  principles  of  mediae- 
val philosophy.  Out  of  the  Cartesian  school  rose  Occasionalism,  of 
which  Geuluicx  and  Malebranche  are  the  chief  representatives.  But 
the  complete  issue  of  this  development  was  found  in  the  two  great 
philosophical  systems  brought  forward  by  Spinoza  and  Leibniz. 

The  influence  which  the  powerful  development  of  theoretical  phil- 
osophy exercised  also  upon  the  treatment  of  practical  problems  shows 
itself  principally  in  the  field  of  the  philosophy  of  law  (or  right).  In 
this  department  Hobbes,  who  was  in  like  measure  a  disciple  of  Bacon 
and  of  Descartes,  and  as  such  marks  an  important  point  in  the  line 
of  development  of  methods  and  metaphysics  above  noted,  takes  the 
decisive  position  as  the  introducer  of  an  ethical  naturalism  which  is 
found  in  altered  form  even  with  his  opponents,  such  as  Herbert  oj 
Cherbury  and  Cumberland.  In  these  antitheses  the  problems  of  the 
philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  are  in  process  of  preparation. 

The  series  of  great  natural  scientists  who  exercised  an  immediate  influence 
also  upon  philosophical  questions  -was  opened  by  Johann  Kepler  (1561-1630) 
of  WeH,  a  town  in  Wiirttemberg,  who  died  in  Regensburg  after  a  life  spent  in 
struggle  with  need  and  anxiety.  Among  his  works  (ed.  by  Frisch,  Frankfurt, 
1858-71,  8  vols.),  the  most  important  are  Mysterium  Cosmographicum,  Harmo- 
nice  Hundi,  Astronomia  Nova  sen  Physica  Coslestis  Tradita  Commentates  de 
Motibus  Stella  Martis.  Cf .  Chr.  Sigwart,  Kleine  Schnften,  1. 182  ff. ;  R.  Eucken, 
Philos.  Monatsh.,  1878,  pp.  30  ft  —  In  immediate  attachment  to  him  stands 
Galileo- Galilei  (born  1564  at  Pisa,  died  1642  at  Arcetri).  His  works  were 


380  Philosophy  of  the  Renaissance.  [PART  IV. 

published  in  15  vols.  (Florence,  1842-56)  with  a  biographical  supplementary 
volume  "by  Arrago.  Vols.  11-14=  contain  the  Fisico-Mathpmatica  ;  among  which 
we  notice  II  Itoggiatore  (1628;  and  the  dialogue  on  the  Ptolemaic  and  the 
Copernican  systems  '1032).  Cf.  H.  Martin,  Galileo,  les  droits  de  la  science 
et  In  n&h'jtlii  d€$  sciences  'physiques  (Paris,  1668) ;  P.  Xatorp,  Gal  als  Philo- 
soph.  f  Phil  vs.  Monatsh.i  16-8:^  pp.  1933.).  Isaac  Newton  (1642-1727)  comes 
into  consideration  chieflv  on  account  of  his  Philosophise  Xuturalis  Principia 
MittenintiM  ','1687 ;  2d  "ed.  by  Cotes,  1718 ;  German  by  Golfers,  1872)  and 
his  O&ths  :'i7f~4;.— Of  his  contemporaries  we  notice  the  chemist,  Robert  Boyle 
'"1020-1001":  Chemista  Sctpticus;  Oriyo  Formarum  et  Qualitatiiiii ;  De  Ipsa 
JYtorr*..  and  the  Netherlander,  Christian  Huyghens  (1629-1695;  De  Causa 
Grai'itotis ;  De  Lumine}. 

Cf.  \V.  VThewell,  History  of  the  Inductive  Sciences  (Lond.  1837  ;  German  by 
Littrow,  Leips.  1839  nV,  ;  E.  F.  Apelt,  Die  Epochen  der  Creschichte  der  Jfensch- 
keit  (Jena,  1845  j ;  E.  Duhring,  Kritische  G-eschichte  der  Principien  der 
2£fchanik  (Leips.  1872)  ;  A.  Lange,  Gesch.  des  Materialism  us,  2d  ed.,  Iserlohn, 
1S73  [Eng.  tr.  History  of  Materialism  by  E.  C.  Thomas,  Lond.,  4th  ed.,  1892]  ; 
K.  Lasswitz,  Gesch.  der  Atomistik,  2  vols.  (Hamburg  and  Leips.  1890). 

Francis  Bacon,  Baron  of  Ferulam,  Viscount  of  St.  Albans,  was  born  in 
1561,  studied  in  Cambridge,  had  a  brilliant  career  under  the  reigns  of  Elizabeth 
and  James  L,  until,  as  the  result  of  political  opposition,  he  was  proceeded 
against,  convicted  of  venality,  and  deposed  from  the  position  of  Lord  High 
Chancellor.  He  died  1626.  The  latest  edition  of  his  works  is  that  by  Spedding 
and  Heath  (Load.  1857  S.).  Aside  from  the  Et&ays  (Sermones  Fideles)  the 
main  writings  are  De  Digmtate  et  Autjmentis  Stientiarum  (1623 ;  originally 
published  under  the  title,  The  Tfo  Books  r/f  Francis  Bacon  on  the  Projicience 
awl  Advanfenipntof  Learning,  D'tcme  and  Human,  1005)  and  Xuvum  Organon 
^citutiartim  (1020;  originally  under  the  title,  Cagitftta  et  Visa,  1612).1  Cf. 
Ch.  de  R^musat,  Bactm,  S<i  vie,  son  ttmps*  so,  philosophic  et  son  influence 
jtisyiCa  nun  juurs  ^Paris.  1854;  ;  H.  Heussler,  Fr.  B.  nnd  seine  geschichtliche 
StfVninj  'Breslau,  1S89,  ;  ^B-i&ni*  by  J.  Xiehol,  m  Blackwood^s  series,  Edin. 
l^S^  :  E*L  of  the  Aorxw  Or^mur.i  by  Fowler,  Oxford,  1878]. 

Kene  Descartes  -'Cartesius),  born  1590,  in  Touraine,  and  educated  in  the 
Jesuit  ftdwol  at  La  Fieehe,  was  originally  destined  for  a  soldier  and  took  part  in 
tLe  casQi'iiijns  of  Irtl8-l»>21  in  the  service  of  various  leaders,  but  then  betook 
himself  for  tiie  first  time  to  Paris,  and  later,  withdrew  for  many  years,  at  differ- 
ent places  in  the  Netherlands,  into  a  scientific  solitude,  which  he  kept  in  the 
most  diligent  and  careful  manner.  After  controversies  in  which  his  doctrine 
had  become  involved  at  the  universities  in  that  country  had  rendered  this  place 
of  residence  disagreeable,  he  accepted,  in  1649,  an  invitation  of  Queen  Christine 
of  Sweden  to  Stockholm,  where  he  died  the  following  year.  His  works  have 
been  collected  in  Latin  in  the  Amsterdam  editions  (1650,  etc.),  and  in  French 
by  V.  Cousin  (11  vols.,  Paris,  1824  fiY)  ;  the  important  writings  have  been  trans- 
lated into  German  by  Kuno  Fischer  (Mannheim,  1863)  [Eng.  tr.  of  the  Method, 
Jfeditatirmx  and  Selections  from  the  Principles  by  J.  Yeitch,  Edin.  and  Lond.. 
1st  ed.,  1*50-52.  10th  ed.,  1890 ;  of  the  Meditations  by  Lowndes,  Lond.  1878, 
also  in  J«nr.  Spec.  Phil,  Vol.  IV.,  1870,  by  W.  R.  Walker;  and  of  the  Rules  for 
the  Dtwtlnn  of  the  Mind,  with  selections  from  the  JfecVs,  The  World,  The 
Hussion*  ftf  the  Soul,  etc.,  by  H.  A.  P.  Torrey,  N.Y.  1892].  The  main  works 
are  Le  Xunde  ou  Traite  de  la  Lumiere  (posthumously  printed,  1654)  ;  Essays, 
1637,  aunutf  them  the  Discours  de  la  Methode  and  the  Dioptrics;  3Ieditatio7ies 
de  Pritda  Philosophic  1641,  supplemented  by  the  objections  of  various  savants 
and  Descartes'  replies ;  Principle  Philosophies,  1644;  Passions  de  ZMme,  1650. 
Cf.  F.  Bouillier,  Histoire  de  la  Philosophic  Carttsienne  (Paris,  1854)  ;  X.  Schmid- 

1  It  is  well  known  that  very  recently  much  noise  has  been  made  over  the 
discovery  that  Lord  Bacon  wrote  Shakspere's  works  also,  in  his  leisure  hours. 
To  fuse  two  great  literary  phenomena  into  one  may  have  something  alluring  in 
it,  but  in  any  case  a  mistake  has  been  made  in  the  person.  For  it  would  be 
much  more  probable  that  Shakspere  had  incidentally  composed  the  Baconian 
philosophy.  [The  Germans  seem  to  take  this  "  noise  "  much  more  seriously 
than  Shakspere's  countrymen.  — Tr.] 


CHAP.  2.]  Natural  Science  Period.  381 

schwarzenberg,  E.  D.  und  seine  Reform  tier  Philosophic  psordlinsren,  1850)  ; 
G.  Glogau  in  Zeitschr.  /.  Philos.,  187*8,  pp.  209  ff.  ;  P.  Xatorp,  DSs  Erkenntniss- 
theorie  (Marburg,  1882).  [Descartes  by  J.  P.  Mahafty  in  Blackwood's  series, 
Edin.  and  Phila.,  1881 ;  W.  Wallace,  Art.  Descartes  in  Enc.  Brit.;  H.  Sidgwick 
in  Mind,  Vol.  VII. ;  Khodes  in  Jour.  Spec.  Phil.,  XVII. 

Between  these  two  leaders  of  modern  philosophy  stands  Thomas  Hobbes, 
born  1588,  educated  at  Oxford,  who  was  early  drawn  over  to  France  by  his 
studies,  and  frequently  afterwards  returned  thither,  was  personally  acquainted 
with  Bacon,  Gassendi,  Campanella,  and  the  Cartesian  circle,  and  died  1679. 
Complete  edition  of  his  works,  English  and  Latin  by  Molesworth,  Lond.  1839  ff. 
His  first  treatise,  Elements  of  Laic,  Natural  and  Political  (1639),  was  pub- 
lished by  his  friends  in  1650,  in  two  parts.  Human  Mature  and  De  Corpore 
Politico.  He  published  previously  Elementa  Philosophic  de  Cfte,  1042  and  1647, 
and  further  Leviathan  or  The  Hatter,  Form,  and  Authority  of  Government,  1651. 
A  comprehensive  statement  is  given  in  the  Elementa  Philosophic  I.,  De  Cor- 
pore, II.,  De  Humine,  1668  (both  previously  in  English  in  1055  and  1658.  Cf. 
F.  Tonnies  in  Vierteljahrschr.  f.  ic.  Philos.,  1879  ff.  [ffobbes,  by  G.  C.  Robert- 
son in  Blackwood's  series,  Edin.  and  Phil.  1886,  also  Art.  Hobbes,  in  Enc. 
Bnt.  by  same  author.]  F.  Tonnies.  Holies  (Stuttgart,  1896). 

Of  the  Cartesian  School  (cf.  Bouillier,  op.  eft.)  are  to  be  noted  the  Jansen- 
ists  of  Port-Royal,  from  whose  circles  came  the  Loyique  ou  I'art  depenser  (1662), 
ed.  by  Anton  Arnauld  (1612-1694),  and  Pierre  Nicole  (1625-1695) ;  also  the 
Mystics,  Blaise  Pascal  (1623-1662 ;  'Penseessur  la  Religion  ;  cf.  the  monographs 
by  J.  G.  Dreydorff,  Leips.  1870  and  1875),  and  Pierre  Foiret  (1646-1719 ;  De 
Eruditions  friplici,  Solida  Superjiciaria  et  Falsa. 

The  development  to  Occasionalism  proceeds  gradually  in  Louis  de  la  Forge 
(TraitederEspritHumain.l^Q^Cla.nbers(l^2-lQQ6',  De  Conjunction  Corpo- 
ris  et  AnimcB  i nHom ine),  Cordemoy(£e  Discernement  du  Corps  et  de  VAme, 
1666),  but  finds  its  complete  development  independently  of  these  thinkers  in 
Arnold  Genlincx  (1625-1669 ;  a  university  teacher  in  Loewen  and  Ley  den). 
His  main  works  are  the  Ethics  (1665;  2d  ed.  with  notes,  1675);  Logic]  1662, 
and"  Methodus,  1663.  New  ed.  of  his  works  by  J.  P.  X.  Land  (3  vols.,  The 
Hague,  1891-3).  Cf.  E.  Pfleiderer,  A.  &.  als  Haupti-ertreter  der  occ.  Metaphysik 
vnd  EtMk  (Tubingen,  1882) ;  V.  van  der  Hseghen,  €r.  Etude  sur  sa  Vie,  sa 
Philosophic  et  ses  Ouvrages  (Luttich,  1886). 

From  the  Oratorium  founded  by  Cardinal  Berulle,  a  friend  of  Descartes,  to 
which  Gibieuf  also  belonged  (De  Libertate  Dei  et  Creaturce,  Paris,  1630),  went 
forth  Nicole  Malebranche  (1638-1715).  His  main  work,  De  la  Eecherche  de  la 
Verity  appeared  1675,  the  Entretiens  sur  la  Metaphysique  et  sur  la  Religion  in 
1688.  Coll.  works  by  J.  Simon  (Paris,  1871). 

Baruch  (Benedict  de)  Spinoza,  born  in  1632  at  Amsterdam  in  the  commu- 
nity of  Portuguese  Jews,  and  later  expelled  from  this  community  on  account 
of  his  opinions,  lived  in  noble  simplicity  and  solitude  at  various  places  in  Hol- 
land, and  died  at  The  Hague  1677.  He  had  published  an  exposition  of  the 
Cartesian  philosophy  with  an  independent  metaphysical  appendix  (1663)  and 
the  Tractatus  Theologico-politicus  (anonymously  in  1670),  After  his  death 
appeared  in  his  Opera  Posthwna  (1677),  his  main  work,  Ethica  More  Geometrico 
Demonstrata,  the  Tractatus  Politicus,  and  the  fragment  De  Intellectus  Emenda- 
tions. His  correspondence  and  his  recently  discovered  youthful  work,  Tractatus 
(brevis)  de  Deo  et  ffomine  ejusque  Felicitate,  also  come  into  consideration. 
On  the  latter  cf.  Chr.  Sigwart  (Tubingen,  1870).  The  best  edition  of  his  works 
is  that  by  Van  Vloten  and  Land  (2  vols.7  Amsterdam,  1882  f.).  Cf.  T.  Camerer, 
Die  Lehre  Sp.'s  (Stuttgart,  1877).  .[Spinoza,  by  J.  Caird,  Edin.  1888 ;  Spinoza 
by  Martineau,  Lond.  1883 ;  also  in  Types  of  Ethical  Theory,  Oxford,  1886 ;  F. 
Pollock,  Spinoza,  £K$  Life  and  Phil.,  Lond.  1880 ;  Seth,  Art.  Spinoza,  in  Enc. 
Brit.;  Arts,  in  Jour.  Spec.  Phil.,  Vols.  11  and  16,  by  Morris  and  Dewey ;  Eng. 
tr.  of  prin.  works  by  Elwes,  Bohn  Lib.,  1884,  of  the  Ethics  by  White,  Lond.  1883, 
and  of  Selections  by  Fullerton,  N.Y.  1892.] 

Of  philosophical  writers  in  Germany  who  attached  themselves  to  the  train  of 
the  movement  among  the  two  civilised  peoples  of  the  West  are  to  be  mentioned 
Joachim  Jung  (1587-1657 ;  Logica  Hamburgiensis,  1638);  cf.  G.  E.  Guhrauer, 


382  Tlie  Renaissance  :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

J.  J.  und  sein  Zeitalter  fStuttg.  and  Tub.  1859);  the  Jena  mathematician, 
Erhard  Weigel,  the  teacher  of  Leibniz  and  PuSendorf  ;  Walther  von  Tschirn- 
hansen  >^1051-170S;  lleditinn  Mentis  sire  Artis  Inveniendi  Pr&cepta  Gentralia, 
Amsterdam,  1087;,  and  Samuel  Puffendorf  (1632-161*4;  under  the  pseudonym 
Severinus  a  Monzambano,  De  Stmn  Rti  puUicw  Germanicce,  1667,  German  by 
H.  Bresslau,  Berlin,  1570  ;  De  Jure  Xtiturae  et  Gentium,  London,  1672). 

Leibniz  belongs  in  this  period,  not  only  in  point  of  tune,  but  also  as  regards 
the  origination  and  the  motives  of  his  metaphysics,  while  with  other  interests 
of  his  incredibly  many-sided  nature,  he  ranges  on  into  the  age  of  the  Enlighten- 
ment ;  cf.  on  this.  Part  V.  Here,  therefore,  we  have  to  consider  principally  his 
methodological  and  metaphysical  writings:  De  Principio  Individut,  1608;  De 
Arte  Comiinatoria.  1600  ;  JVora  Jfethodus  pro  Maximis  et  JLEwzniza,  1084  ;  De 
frientia  Fnhwsali  seu  Calculo  Philosophies  1684  (cf.  A,  Trendelenburg,  Hist. 
ijK>tr""je  zur  Philos.,  III.  1  fiV,;  De  Primce  Philosophic  Emendatione,  1694  ; 
Siiatttiie  JVbMWflM  de  la  Xatur?,  1605,  with  the  three  £daircissements  connected 
with  it,  ItfOG;  also  the  Jtfonadotogie,  1714,  the  Principes  de  la  Mature  et  de  la 
Grare,  1714,  and  a  great  pan  of  his  extended  correspondence.  Among  the 
editions  of  his  philosophical  writings  the  excellent  edition  by  J.  E.  Erdmann 
(Berlin,  1840)  has  now  been  surpassed  by  that  of  C.  J.  Gerhardt  (7  vols.,  Ber- 
lin. 1*7-5-91).  —  On  the  system  as  a  whole  cf.  L.  Eeuerbach,  Darstellung,  Ent- 
vteMung  und  Kritik  drr  'Letfmizischen  Philos.  (Ansbach,  1837),  A.  Nourisson, 
La  PhV  us.  de  L.  (Paris,  ISUU;;  E.  Wendt,  Die  Enticicklung  der  LSschen  Jl/b- 
naJenlehre  bis  169o  (Berlin,  1886).  [E.  Dillmanu,  Sine  neue  Darst.  der 
L.'schen  Honadenlehr^  Leips.  1801.  See  also  the  lit.  on  p.  444.] 

On  the  historical  and  systematic  relation  of  the  systems  to  one  another  :  H. 
C.  W.  Si?wart»  Ueber  ilen  Zusimmenhanr/  dr-s  ityinoztsmus  mit  d?r  cartes. 
Philns.  (Tfib.  181»>)  and  Die  Lefbnfz'sehe  Lehre  wn  der  prastabilirten  Harmonie 
in  threw  Zusnmmenhany  mit  fruhfren  Pfillosnphemen  (ib.  1822)  ;  C.  Schaar- 
sclnniilt,  Dwirfes  uwl  Spinm^  ,'B3nn,  1850}  ;  A.  Toucher  de  Careil,  Leibniz, 
Dtscrtrt'set  Spinnsn  TParis,  1803,  ;  E.  Pfleiderer,  L.  und  Geulincx  (Tub.  1884); 
E.  Z*ll*r,  Sitz.>Bt.r.  d.  £*rlin*r  Aktfd<  1S84,  pp.  673  ff.  ;  F.Tonnies,  Leibniz  und 
IfiMjrfl  in  Phi?  08.  MoiMfith  ;  1S&7,  pp.  ->17  ff.  ;  L.  Stein,  Leibniz  und  Spinoza 
(Berlin,  IS'*);.  [E.  Cainl.  Art  Cart^sinm^n,  in  Enc.  Brit.,  reprinted  in  Vol.  2 

's*  Land,  and  N.Y.  1692  ;  Sdisset's  Modern  Pantheism.'] 


Tc*  rhe  founders  of  the  philosophy  of  law  (cf.  C.  v.  Kaltenborn,  Die  Vorldufer 
(les  KIN**  fai'tins.  Leips.  1848;  and  R.  v.  Mohl,  Gesch,  und  Litteratur  der 
St>Hitttf>ff^e»8':Jt'tftfn^  Erlaugen,  1835-58)  belong  Xicolo  Maccltiavelli  (14C9- 
1327  :  U  Princii'e,  Diswrsi  sulla  prima  decade  di  Tito  Livio  ;  [Works,  tr.  by  C. 
E.  Dctmi  »ia.  Boston,  1888.]  Thomas  More  (1480-1535  ;  De  Optimo  Rei  publicce 
re  de  Sufa  InmtlaUtwhAoU})',  Jean  Bodin  (1530-  1597);  SixLitresde 


.  Starts-  H.  Rechtsgesrh.,  Breslau,  1880);  Hugo  de  Groot  (1583-1645  ; 
D*  Jure  Belli  rt  Pacts,  1045;  cf,  H.  Luden,  H.  (?.,  Berlin,  1806). 


of  the  Protestants  who  treat  of  the  philosophy  of  law  may  be  named,  be- 
sides Melancthon,  J.  Oldendorf  (Elementaris  Introductio,  1530),  2ttc.  Hemming 
Ley?  Xtitnrx,  1502),  Ben  -Winkler  (Principia  Juris,  1615)  ;  of  the  Catho- 
b^.r-ides Suarez,   Rob.   Bellarmin  (1342-1021  ;   De  Potestate  Pontiiicis  in 


side 
<De 
lics 


\  and  Mariana  (1537-1624  ;  De  Heye  et  Eeyis  Institutione}. 
Natural  religion  and  natural  morals  in  the  'seventeenth  century  found  in 
England  their  main  supporters  in  Herbert  of  Cherbury  (1581-1648  ;  Tractatus 
df  Yerttate,  1024  ;  De  Religions  Gentilium  Errorumque  apud  eos  Causis,  1663  ; 
on  him  Ch.  de  Remusat,  Paris,  1873),  and  Richard  Cumberland  (De  Legibus 
Xaturve.  Dttqnisitio  Philosophic^  Lond.  1672).  Among  the  Platonists  or  Neo- 
Platonists  of  England  at  the  same  time  are  prominent  Ralph  Cudworth  (1617- 
1688  ;  The  Intellectual  System  of  the  Vnirerse,  Lond.  1678,  Latin,  Jena,  1733) 
and  Henry  More  (1614-1687  ;  Encheiridion  Metaphysicum.  His  correspondence 
with  Descartes  is  printed  in  the  latter'  s  works,  Vol.  X.,  Cousin's  ed.).  [Phil 
of  Cudworth,  by  C.  E.  Lowrey,  with  bibliog.,  N.Y.  1884;  Tulloch's  National 
Theol.  and  Christian  Phil,  in  Eng.  in  HtU  Centl  TheophHus  Gale  and  his 
son,  Thomas  Gale,  may  be  added  to  the  authors  above. 


CHAP.  2,  §  30.]          Problem  of  Method :  Bacon.  888 

§  30.  The  Problem  of  Method. 

All  beginnings  of  modern  philosophy  have  in  common  an  impul- 
sive opposition  against  "Scholasticism/'  and  at  the  same  time  a 
naive  lack  of  understanding  for  the  common  attitude  of  dependence 
upon  some  one  of  its  traditions,  which  they  nevertheless  all  occupy. 
This  fundamental  oppositional  character  brings  with  it  the  conse- 
quence, that  in  all  cases  where  it  is  not  merely  wants  of  the  feelings, 
or  fanciful  views  that  are  set  over  against  the  old  doctrines,  reflec- 
tion on  new  methods  of  knowledge  stands  in  the  foreground.  Out  of 
the  insight  into  the  unf ruitfulness  of  the  "  syllogism,"  which  could 
merely  set  forth  in  proof  or  refutation  that  which  was  already 
known,  or  apply  the  same  to  a  particular  case,  arises  the  demand 
for  an  ars  inveniendi,  a  method  of  investigation,  a  sure  way  to  the 
discovery  of  the  new. 

1.  If  now  nothing  was  to  be  accomplished  with  the  help  of 
rhetoric,  the  nearest  expedient  was  to  attack  the  matter  by  the 
reverse  method,  proceeding  from  the  particular,  from  the  facts. 
This  had  been  coin  mended  by  Yives  and  Sanchez,  and  practised  by 
Telesio  and  Campanella.  But  they  had  neither  gained  full  confi- 
dence in  experience  nor  known  afterwards  how  to  make  any  right 
beginning  with  their  facts.  In  both  lines  Bacon  believed  that  he 
could  point  out  new  paths  for  science,  and  in  this  spirit  he  set  up 
his  "  Xew  Organon  "  as  over  against  the  Aristotelian. 

Everywfo.y  perception — he  confesses,  admitting  the  well-known 
scepHeaTarguments  —  offers,  indeed,_no  sure  basis  for  a Jrae  knowl- 
edge of  Xaturej  in  order  to  T5ecome~an  experience  that  can  be  used 
by  science  it  must  first  be  purified  from  all  the  erroneous  additions 
which  have  grown  together  with  it  in  our  involuntary  way  of  regard- 
ing things.  These  perversions  or  falsifications  of  pure  experience 
Bacon  calls  idols,  and  presents  his  doctrine  of  these  fallacious  images 
in  analogy  with  the  doctrine  of  the  fallacious  conclusions  in  the  old 
dialectic.1  There  are  first  the  "idols  of  the  tribe"  (idola  tribus), 
the  illusions  that  are  given  in  connection  with  human  nature  in 
general,  following  which  we  are  always  suspecting  an  order  and  an 
end  in  things,  making  ourselves  the  measure  of  the  outer  world, 
blindly  retaining  a  mode  of  thought  which  has  once  been  excited  by 
impressions,  and  the  like;  then  the  "idols  of  the  cave"  (idola 
specus) ,  by  reason  of  which  every  individual  by  his  natural  disposi- 
tion, and  his  situation  in  life,  finds  himself  shut  into  his  cave ; 2 

*  JVbtf.  Org.  I.  39  ff. 

2  Bacon's  strongly  rhetorical  language,  rich  in  imagery,  aims  by  this  term 
(cf.  De  Augm.  V.  ch.  4)  to  recall  Plato's  well-known  parable  of  the  Cave  (Rep. 


384  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.      [PABT  IV. 

then  the  "idols  of  tlie  market'7  (idola  /on'),  the  -errors  which  are 
everywhere  brought  about  by  intercourse  among  men,  especially  by 
language,  and  by  adherence  to  the  word  which  we  substitute  for  the 
idea;  filially,  the  -idols  of  the  theatre"  (idola  theatri),  the  illusory 
phantoms  of  theories  which  we  credulously  receive  from  human 
history  and  repeat  without  subjecting  them  to  any  judgment  of  our 
own.  In  this  connection  Bacon  finds  opportunity  to  direct  a  most 
violent  polemic  against  the  word-wisdom  of  Scholasticism,  against 
the  rule  of  authority,  against  the  anthropomorphism  of  earlier 
philosophy,  and  to  demand  a  personal  examination  of  things  them- 
selves, an  unprejudiced  reception  of  reality.  Nevertheless  he  does 
not  get  beyond  this  demand;  for  the  statements  as  to  how  the 
mem  ezperientia  is  to  be  gained  and  separated  from  the  enveloping 
husks  of  the  idols  are  extremely  meagre,  and  while  Baeon  teaches 
that  one  must  not  limit  himself  to  accidental  perceptions,  but  must 
set  about  his  observation  methodically,  and  supplement  it  by 
experiment1  which  he  thinks  out  and  makes  for  himself,  this  also  is 
but  a  general  designation  of  the  task,  and  a  theoretical  insight  into 
the  essential  nature  of  experiment  is  still  wanting. 

Quite  similar  is  the  case  with  the  method  of_jMiic&'0?^  which 
Bacon  proclaimed  as  the  only  correct  mode  of  elaborating  ;£acts. 
"With  its  aid  we  are  to  proceed  to  general  cognitions  (axioms),  in 
order  that  we  may  ultimately  from  these  explain  other  phenomena. 
In  this  activity  the  human  mind,  among  whose  constitutional  errors 
is  over-hasty  generalisation,  is  to  be  restrained  as  much  as  possible ; 
it  is  to  ascend  quite  gradually  the  scale  of  the  more  general,  .up  to 
the  most  general.  Healthy  and  valuable  as  these  prescriptions  are, 
we  are  the  more  surprised  to  find  that  with  Bacon  their  more  de- 
tailed carrying  out  is  completed  in  conceptions  and  modes  of  view 
which  are  entirely  scholastic.2 

All  knowledge  of  Xature  has  for  its  end  to  understand  the  causes 
of  things.  Causes,  however,  are  — according  to  the  old  Aristotelian 
scheme  — formal,  material,  efficient,  or  final.  Of  these  only  the 
"formal"  causes  come  into  consideration;  for  all  that  takes  place 
has  its  grounds  in  the  "  Forms,"  in  the  "  natures  "  of  things.  Hence 
when  Bacon's  Induction  searches  for  the  "Form"  of  phenomena, 
e.g.  for  the  Form  of  heat,  Form  is  here  understood  quite  in  the 
sense  of  Scotism  as  the  abiding  essence  or  nature  of  phenomena. 
The  Form  of  that  which  is  given  in  perception  is  composed  out  of 

514'),  which  is  the  more  unfortunate  as,  in  the  Platonic  passage,  it  is  precisely 
the  general  limited  nature  of  knowledge  by  the  senses  that  is  dealt  with 

1  JVbr.  Org.  I.  82. 

a  Cf .  the  circumstantial  exposition  in  the  second  book  of  the  Nov.  Org 


CHAP.  2,  §  30.]  Problem  of  Method :  Bacon.  385 

simpler  " Forms"  and  their  "differences,"  and  these  it  is  important 
to  discover.  To  this  end  as  many  cases  as  possible  in  which  the 
phenomenon  in  question  appears,  are  brought  together  into  a  tabula 
prcesentice,  and  in  like  manner,  those  in  which  the  phenomenon  is 
lacking  are  brought  together  into  a  tabula  absentia;  to  these  is 
added,  in  the  third  place,  a  tabula  graduum,  in  which  the  varying 
intensity  with  which  the  phenomenon  appears  is  compared  with  the 
varying  intensity  of  other  phenomena.  The  problem  is  then  to  be 
solved  by  a  progressive  process  of  exclusion  (exdusio) .  The  Form 
of  heat,  for  example,  is  to  be  that  which  is  everywhere  present 
where  heat  is  found,  which  is  nowhere  where  heat  is  lacking,  and 
which  is  present  in  greater  degree  where  there  is  more  heat,  and 
in  lesser  degree  where  there  is  less  heat.1  What  Bacon  presents 
accordingly  as  Induction  is  certainly  no  simple  enumeration,  but 
an  involved  process  of  abstraction,  which  rests  upon  the  meta- 
physical assumptions  of  the  scholastic  Formalism2  (cf.  §  27,  3);  the 
presage  of  the  new  is  still  quite  embedded  in  the  old  habits  of 
thought. 

2.  It  is  accordingly  comprehensible  that  Bacon  was  not  the  man 
to  bring  to  the  study  of  Mature  itself  methodical  or  material 
furtherance :  but  this  derogates  nothing  from  his  philosophical 
importance,3 which  consists  just  in, this,  that  he  demanded  the  gen- 
eral application  of  a  principle,  to  which  he  yet  was  unable  to  give 
any  useful  or  fruitful  form  in  the  case  of  the  most  immediate 
object  for  its  use :  namely,  the  knowledge  of  the  corporeal  world. 
He  had  iinde.KtcwdJhatjbhe  new  science  must  turn  from  the  endless 
discussion  of  conceptions  back  to  things  themselves,  that  it  can 
buiKToiiIy  upon  direct  perception,  and  that  it  must  rise  from  this 
only  cautiously  and  gradually  to  the  more  abstract, 4  and  he  had 
understood  no  less  clearly  that  in  the  case  of  this  Induction,  the 
point  at  issue  was  nothing  other  than  the  discovery  of  the  simple 

1  In  which  case  it  turns  out  that  the  Form  of  heat  is  motion,  and,  indeed,  a 
motion  which  is  expansive,  and  thus  divided  by  inhihition  and  communicated 
to  the  smaller  parts  of  the  body  [motus  expansivics,  cohibitus  et  nitens  per  partes 
•minores]. 

-  Cf .  Chr.  Sigwart,  Logik,  II.  §  93,  3. 

8  Cf.  Chr.  Sigwart  in  the  Prenss.  Jahrb.,  1863,  93  fL 

4  The  pedagogical  consequences  of  the  Baconian  doctrine  as  contrasted  with 
Humanism,  with  which,  in  general,  the  movement  of  natural  science  came  in 
conflict  in  this  respect,  were  drawn  principally  by  Amos  Comenius  (1592-1671). 
His  Didactica  Mag  no,  presents  the  course  of  instruction  as  a  graded  ascent  from 
the  concrete  and  perceptive  to  the  more  abstract ;  his  Orbis  Pictus  aims  to  give 
for  the  school  a  perceptional  basis  for  instruction  about  things  ;  his  Janua  Lin- 
guarwm,  Iteserrata,  finally,  aims  to  have  the  learning  of  foreign  languages 
arranged  so  as  to  be  taught  only  as  it  is  requisite  as  a  means  for  acquiring 
knowledge  about  things.  The  pedagogical  views  of  Eattich  are  similar  (1571- 
1035). 


386  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

elements  of  reality,  from  the  "nature"  of  which,  in  their  regular 
relation  and  connection,  the  whole  compass  of  what  we  perceive  is 
to  be  explained.  Induction,  he  thought,  will  find  the  Forms  by  which 
Nature  must  be  interpreted.  But  while  in  his  cosmology  he  did  not 
get  far  bevond  an  adherence  to  the  traditional  atomism,  and  even 
shut  himself  up  against  the  great  achievement  of  the  Copernican 
theory,  he  demanded  that  his  empirical  principle  should  be  applied 
also  to  knowledge  of  man.  Not  only  the  bodily  existence  in  its 
normal  and  abnormal  vital  processes,  but  also  the  movement  of 
ideas  and  of  activities  of  the  will,  especially  also  the  social  and 
political  system, — all  these  should  be  examined  as  to  their  mov- 
ing forces  ("  Forms ")  by  the  method  of  natural  science,  and  ex- 
plained without  prejudice.  The  anthropological  and  social  naturalism 
which  Bacon  announces  in  the  encyclopaedic  remarks  of  his  work 
De  Augmentis  Scientiariim,  contains  examples  of  programmes *  for 
many  branches  of  knowledge,  and  proceeds  everywhere  from  the 
fundamental  purpose  to  understand  man  and  all  the  activities  of 
his  life  as  a  product  of  the  same  simple  elements  of  reality  which 
also  lie  at  the  basis  of  external  Nature. 

Still  another  element  comes  to  light  in  this  anthropological  inter- 
est. To  understand  man  is  not,  for  Bacon,  an  end  in  itself,  any 
more  than  it  is  such  to  understand  Nature.  His  entire  thought  is 
rather  subordinated  to  a  practical  end,  and  this  he  conceives  in  the 
grandest  form.  All  human  knowledge  has  ultimately  for  its  sole 
task  to  procure  for  man  dominion  over  the  world  by  his  knowledge 
of  the  work!  Knowledge  is  power,  and  is  the  only  lasting  power. 
While  therefore  magic  with  fantastic  arts  sought  to  make  itself 
master  of  the  working  forces  of  Nature,  this  blind  endeavour  became 
clarified  with  Bacon  to  the  insight  that  man  can  owe  his  mastery 
over  things  only  to  a  sober  investigation  of  their  true  essence.  For 
him,  therefore,  the  interpretatio  natures  is  only  the  means  of 
subjecting  nature  to  the  human  mind,  and  his  great  work  for  the 
u  Kenovation  of  the  Sciences" —  Listauratio  Magna,  "  Temporis  Par- 
tits  Jfaziaiua'9 — bears  also  the  title  De  Eegno  Hominis. 

In  this,  Bacon  expressed  what  was  moving  the  heart  of  thousands 
at  his  time,  under  the  impress  of  great  events.  "With  that  series 
of  discoveries  beyond  1&e  seas,  where  through  mistakes,  adventures, 
and  crimes,  man  had  at  last  for  the  first  time  taken  complete  pos- 
session of  his  planet,  with  inventions  such  as  those  of  the  mariner's 
compass,  of  gunpowder,  and  of  the  art  of  printing,2  a  mighty 

1  If  we  could  therefore  regard  as  accomplished  all  that  Bacon  sets  before  him 
in  prospect,  we  might  find  with  him  the  entire  natural  science  of  to-day. 

a  Cf.  0.  Peschel,  Gesch*  ties  Zeitolters  der  Entdeckungen,  2d  ed.,  Leips.  1879. 


CHAP.  2,  §  30.]  Problem  of  Method :  Bacon.  387 

change  had  been  introduced  within  a  short  time  into  the  greater  as 
well  as  the  lesser  life  of  man.  A  new  epoch  of  civilisation  seemed 
to  be  opened,  and  an  exotic  excitement  seized  upon  men's  fancy. 
Unheard-of  things  should  succeed;  nothing  was  to  be  impossible 
any  longer.  The  telescope  disclosed  the  mysteries  of  the  heavens, 
and  the  powers  of  the  earth  began  to  obey  the  investigator. 
Science  would  be  the  guide  of  the  human  mind  in  its  victorious 
journey  through  Xature.  By  her  inventions,  human  life  should  be 
completely  transformed.  What  hopes  in  this  respect  set  free  the 
fancy  for  its  flights  we  see  from  Bacon's  Utopian  fragment  of  the 
JVbi'a  Atlantis ,  and  also  from  Campanella's  Civitas  Solis.  The 
English  Chancellor,  however,  held  that  the  task  of  the  knowledge 
of  Xature  was  ultimately  to  make  of  invention,  which  had  hitherto 
been  for  the  most  part  a  matter  of  chance,  a  consciously  exercised 
art.  To  be  sure,  he  gave  life  to  this  thought  only  in  the  fantastic 
picture  of  Solomon's  house,  in  his  Utopia ;  he  guarded  himself  from 
seriously  carrying  it  out ;  but  this  meaning  which  he  attributed  to 
the  ars  inveniendi  made  him  an  opponent  of  purely  theoretical  and 
"  contemplative  "  knowledge ;  just  from  this  point  of  view  did  he 
combat  Aristotle  and  the  unfruitfulness  of  monastic  science.  In. 
his  hand  philosophy  was  in  danger  of  falling  from  the  rule  of  a 
religious  end  under  that  of  technical  interests. 

But  the  issue  proved  again  that  the  golden  fruits  of  knowledge 
ripen  only  where  they  are  not  sought.  In  his  haste  for  utility 
Bacon  missed  his  goal,  and  the  intellectual  creations  which  have 
enabled  natural  science  to  become  the  basis  of  our  external  civilisa- 
tion proceeded  from  the  superior  thinkers,  who,  with  pure  disinter- 
ested thought,  and  without  any  eagerness  to  improve  the  world, 
desired  to  understand  the  order  of  Mature  which  they  admired. 

3.  His  tendency  to  ward  the  practical  end  of  invention  blinded 
Bacon  to  the  theoretical  value  of  mathematics.  This  value  had  at 
first  come  to  consciousness  in  the  fantastic  forms  which  praised  the 
number-harmony  of  the  universe  in  jSTeo-Platonic  exuberance  (cf. 
§  29,  5),  imitating  the  Pythagorean  methods.  The  great  investiga- 
tors of  Nature  set  out  from  a  like  admiration  for  the  beauty  and 
order  of  the  universe ;  but  the  new  in  their  teachings  consists  in 
just  this,  that  they  no  longer  seek  this  mathematical  significance  of 
the  cosmical  order  in,  symbolic  number-speculations,  but  aim  to 
understand  and  prove  it  from  facts.  Modern  investigation  of  Xature 
was  born  as  empirical  Pythagoreanism.  This  problem  had  been  seen 
already  by  Leonardo  da  Vinci1  —  to  have  been  the  first  to  solve  it 

1  Cf.  with  regard  to  him*  as  a  philosopher,  K.  Prantl,  Sitz.-B&r.  der  Mfin- 
chener  Akad.,  1885,  1  ff. 


888  The  SenuUsance  :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

is  the  glorvof  Kephr.  The  psychological  motive  of  his  research 
was  the  philosophical  conviction  of  the  mathematical  order  of  the 
universe,  and  he  verified  his  conviction  by  discovering  the  laws  of 
planetary  motion  Toy  means  of  a  grand  induction. 

In  this  procedure  it  became  evident,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  true 
task  of  induction  in  natural  science  consists  in  finding  out  that 
mathematical  relation  which  remains  the  same  in  the  entire  series 
of  the  phenomena  determined  by  measurement,  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  the  object,  in  connection  with  which  this  task  can  be 
performed  by  research,  is  none  other  than  motion.  The  divine 
arithmetic  and  geometry  which  Kepler  sought  in  the  universe  was 
found  in  the  laws  of  occurrence  and  change  (Gescheliens) .  Proceed- 
ing from  this  principle,  with  a  more  distinct  methodical  conscious- 
ness, Galileo  created  mechanics  as  the  mathematical  theory  of  motion. 
It  is  extremely  instructive  to  compare  the  thoughts  which  the  latter 
presents  in  the  Sagyiatore  with  Bacon's  interpretation  of  Mature. 
Both  aim  to  analyse  into  their  elements  the  phenomena  given  in  per- 
ception, in  order  to  explain  phenomena  from  the  combination  of 
these  elements.  But  where  Bacon's  Induction  seeks  the  "  Forms, " 
Galileo's  method  of  resolution  (analysis)  searches  out  the  simplest 
processes  of  motion  capable  of  mathematical  determination;  and 
while  interpretation  with  the  former  consists  in  pointing  out  how 
the  natures  co-operate  to  form  an  empirical  structure,  the  latter 
shows  in  liis  method  of  composition  (synthesis)  that  the  mathemati- 
cal theory  under  the  presupposition  of  the  simple  elements  of 
motion  leads  to  the  same  results  which  experience  exhibits.1  From 
this  standpoint  experiment  also  acquires  quite  another  significance : 
it  is  not  merely  a  shrewd  question  put  to  Mature,  but  is  the  intelli- 
gent and  intentional  interference  by  which  simple  forms  of  occur- 
rence are  isolated  in  order  to  subject  them  to  measurement.  Thus, 
all  that  Bacon  had  merely  presaged  receives  with  Galileo  a  definite 
significance  usable  for  the  investigation  of  Nature,  by  means  of  the 
mathematical  principle  and  its  application  to  motion ;  and  in  accord- 
ance with  these  principles  of  mechanics  Newton  was  able  by  his 
hypothesis  of  gravitation  to  give  the  mathematical  theory  for  the 
explanation  of  Kepler's  laws. 

With  this,  the  victory  of  the  principle  of  Democritus  and  Plato, 
that  the  sole  object  which  true  knowledge  of  Mature  can  deal  with 
is  what  is  capable  of  quantitative  determination,  was  sealed  in  a 
completely  new  form ;  but  this  time  the  principle  was  applied  not 
to  the  Being,  but  to  the  Becoming  or  change  in  Nature,  Scientific 

1  This  methodical  standpoint  Hot>"bes  makes  entirely  his  own  (of.  De  Corp. , 
ch.  0),  and  indeed  in  expressly  rationalistic  antithesis  to  the  empiricism  of  Bacon. 


CHAP.  2,  §  30.]     Problem  of  Method :  Galileo,  ffobbes. 

insight  reaches  as  far  as  the  mathematical  theory  of  motion  extends. 
Exactly  this  standpoint  of  the  Galilean  physics  is  taken  in  theoreti- 
cal philosophy  by  Hobbes.1  Geometry  is  the  only  certain  discipline ; 
all  knowledge  of  Mature  is  rooted  in  it.  "We  can  know  only  such 
objects  as  we  can  construct,  so  that  we  derive  all  further  conse- 
quences from  this  our  own  operation.  Hence  knowledge  of  all 
things,  in^so  far  as  it  is  accessible  for  us,  consists  in  tracing  back 
what  is  perceived  to  motion  of  bodies  in  space.  Science  has  to 
reason  Trom  phenomena  to  causes,  and  from  these  latter  in  turn  to 
their  effects :  but  phenomena  are,  in  their  essence,  motions  j  causes 
are  the  simple  elements  of  motion,  and  effects  are  again  motions. 
Thus  arises  the  apparently  materialistic  proposition :  philosophy  is 
the  doctrine  of  the  motion  of  bodies !  This  is  the  extreme  conse- 
quence of  the  separation  of  philosophy  from  theology,  which  began 
with  the  English  Franciscans. 

The  essential  result  for  philosophy  in  these  methodical  begin- 
nings of  natural  research  is,  therefore,  twofold:  empiricism  was 
corrected  by  mathematics,  and  the  shapeless  Pythagoreanism  of  the 
humanistic  tradition  was  made  by  empiricism  definite  mathemati- 
cal theory.  These  lines  meet  and  are  bound  together  in  Galileo. 

4.  In  mathematical  theory,  accordingly,  was  found  that  rationed 
factor  which  Giordano  Bruno  had  demanded  in  his  treatment  of  the 
Copernican  doctrine  for  a  critical  elaboration  of  sense  perception.2 
Eational  science  is  mathematics.  Proceeding  from  this  conviction, 
Descartes  undertook  his  reform  of  philosophy.  Educated  in  the 
Scholasticism  of  the  Jesuits,  he  had  attained  the  personal  convic- 
tion 3  that  satisfaction  for  an  earnest  craving  for  truth  was  to  be  found 
neither  in  metaphysical  theories  nor  in  the  learned  polymathy  of 
the  empirical  disciplines,  but  in  mathematics  alone ;  and  by  follow- 
ing the  pattern  of  mathematics,  —  himself,  as  is  well  known,  a  cre- 
ative mathematician, — he  thought  to  transform  all  the  rest  of  human, 
knowledge  :  his  philosophy  aims  to  be  a  universal  mathematics.  In 
the  generalisation  of  the  Galilean  principle  requisite  for  this  pur- 
pose, some  of  the  factors  which  made  the  principle  fruitful  for  the 
special  tasks  of  natural  research  fell  away,  so  that  Descartes'  teach- 
ing is  not  usually  counted  as  an  advance  in  the  history  of  physics; 
but  the  power  of  his  influence  upon  the  philosophical  development, 
in  which  he  was  the  ruling  mind  for  the  seventeenth  century  and 
beyond,  was  all  the  greater. 

To  those  methodical  thoughts  which  are  common  to  Bacon  and 

1  Cf.  the  beginning  of  De  Corpore. 

2  G.  Bruno,  DeW  Inf.  Univ.  e  Mond.  1  in.  (L.  307  f.). 

8  Cf.  the  fine  exposition  in  the  Discours  de  la  Mfahode. 


390  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IT. 

Galileo,  Descartes  added  a  postulate  of  the  greatest  importance :  lie 
demanded  that  the  method  of  induction  or  resolution  should  lead  to 
a  single  principle  of  highest  and  absolute  certainty,  from  which  after- 
wards, by  the  method  of  composition,  the  whole  compass  of  experi- 
ence must  find  its  explanation.  This  demand  was  entirely  original, 
and  had  its  root  in  the  felt  need  for  a  systematic,  connected  whole 
of  all  human  knowledge ;  it  rested  ultimately  upon  his  surfeit  of 
the  traditional  reception  of  historically  collected  knowledge,  and 
upon  his  longing  for  a  new  philosophical  creation  from  one  mould. 
Descartes  will,  then,  by  an  inductive  enumeration  and  a  critical 
sifting  of  all  ideas,  press  forward  to  a  single,  certain  point,  in  order 
from  this  point  to  deduce  all  further  truths.  The  first  task  of  phil- 
osophy is  analytic,  the  second  synthetic. 

The  classical  carrying  out  of  this  thought  is  presented  in  the 
Meditations.  The  philosopher  portrays  his  struggle  after  truth  in 
a  dramatic  dialogue  with  himself.  Proceeding  from  the  principle 
"  de  omnibus  dubitandum/'  the  whole  circuit  of  ideas  is  reviewed 
on  all  sides,  and  in  the  process  we  meet  the  whole  apparatus  of 
sceptical  arguments.  We  experience  the  change  of  opinions  and  the 
deceptions  of  the  senses  too  often,  says  Descartes,  to  permit  of  our 
trusting  them.  In  the  face  of  the  variety  of  impressions  which  the 
same  object  makes  under  different  circumstances,  it  is  not  possible 
to  decide  which  of  these  impressions,  and,  indeed,  whether  any  one 
of  them,  contains  the  true  essence  of  the  thing ;  and  the  liveliness 
and  sureness  with  which  we  Ctin  dream  in  our  actual  experience 
must  excite  in  us  the  scruple  which  can  never  be  completely  set 
aside,  as  to  whether  we  are  not  perhaps  dreaming  even  when  we 
believe  that  we  are  awake  and  perceiving.  Meanwhile,  at  the  basis 
of  all  the  combinations  which  the  imagination  can  produce  lie  the 
simple  elementary  acts  of  consciousness,  and  in  connection  with 
these  we  meet  with  truths  of  which  we  are  undeniably  obliged  to 
say  that  we  cannot  help  recognising  them,  as,  for  example,  the 
simple  propositions  of  arithmetic  2x2  =  4,  and  the  like.  But 
how  if  now  we  were  so  constituted  that  from  our  very  nature  we 
must  necessarily  err  ?  how  if  some  demon  had  created  us,  whose 
pleasure  it  was  to  give  us  a  Eeason  that  would  necessarily  deceive 
while  it  supposed  itself  to  be  teaching  the  truth  ?  Against  such  a 
delusion  we  should  be  defenceless,  and  this  thought  must  make  us 
mistrustful  even  with  reference  to  the  most  evident  utterances  of 
reason. 

After  fundamental  doubt  has  been  thus  pressed  even  to  the  far- 
thest extreme,  it  proves  that  the  doubt  breaks  off  its  own  point, 
that  it  itself  presents  a  fact  of  completely  unassailable  certainty : 


CHAP.  2,  §  30,]      Problem  of  Method :  Descartes.  391 

in  order  to  doubt,  in  order  to  dream,  in  order  to  be  deceived,  I  must 
be.  Doubt  itself  proves  that  I,  as  a  thinking  conscious  being  (res 
cogitans),  exist.  The  proposition  cogito  sum  is  true  as  often  as  I 
think  or  pronounce  it.  And,  indeed,  the  certainty  of  Being  is  con- 
tained in  none  of  my  activities  except  that  of  consciousness.  That 
I  go  to  walk  I  can  imagine  in  my  dream : l  that  I  am  conscious  can- 
not be  merely  my  imagination,  for  imagination  is  itself  a  kind  of 
consciousness.2  The  certainty  of  the  Being  or  existence  of  conscious- 
ness is  the  one  fundamental  truth  which  Descartes  finds  by  the 
analytic  method. 

Rescue  from  doubt  consists  therefore  in  the  Augustinian  argument 
of  the  Reality  of  the  conscious  nature  or  essence  (cf.  §  22,  1).  But 
its  application  with  Descartes3  is  not  the  same  as  with  Augustine 
himself  and  with  the  great  number  of  those  on  whom  his  doctrine 
was  influential  just  in  the  transition  period.  For  Augustine,  the 
self-certainty  of  the  soul  was  valued  as  the  surest  of  all  experiences, 
as  the  fundamental  fact  of  inner  perception  by  means  of  which  the 
latter  obtains  for  the  theory  of  knowledge  a  preponderance  over 
outer  perception.  Thus  —  not  to  recall  again  Charron's  moralising 
interpretation  —  Campanella  particularly  had  employed  the  Augus- 
tinian principle  when,  not  unlike  the  great  Church  Father,  he  gave 
to  the  elements  of  this  experience  of  self  the  meaning  of  metaphysi- 
cal prime  elements  (cf.  §  29, 3),  In  a  completely  analogous  manner 
—  not  to  speak  of  Locke 4  —  Tscliirnhausen,  in  a  supposed  adherence 
to  Descartes,  had  later  regarded  self-knowledge  as  the  experientia  evi- 
dentissima?  which  is  therefore  to  serve  as  the  a  posteriori  beginning  of 
philosophy  (cf.  below,  !N"o.  7),  so  that  from  it  all  further  knowledge 
can  be  constructed  a  priori;  for  in  self-knowledge  is  contained  the 
threefold  truth,  that  we  are  effected  by  some  things  well  and  by 
others  ill,  that  we  understand  some  and  not  others,  and  that  in  the 
process  of  ideation  we  occupy  a  passive  attitude  with  reference  to 


1  Descartes'  reply  to  Gassendi's  objection  (V.  2)  ;  cf.  Princ.  Phil.  I.  9. 

2 The  ordinary  translation  of  cogitare,  cogitatio  by  "think"  (Denkeri)  is 
liable  to  occasion  misunderstanding,  since  Denken  in  German  [and  the  same  is 
true  of  think,  in  English,  at  least  in  philosophical  terminology]  signifies  a  par- 
ticular kind  of  theoretical  consciousness.  Descartes  himself  elucidates  the  mean- 
ing of  cogitare  (Med.  III. ;  Princ.  Phil  I.  9), by  enumeration:  he  understands 
by  it  to  doubt,  affirm,  deny,  understand,  will,  abhor,  imagine,  feel  a  sensation, 
etc.  Eor  that  which  is  common  to  all  these  functions  we  have  in  German 
scarcely  any  word  but  "  Bewusstsein"  [consciousness].  The  same  is  also  true 
with  regard  to  Spinoza's  use  of  the  term  ;  cf.  his  Princ.  Phil  Cart.  I.,  Prop.  IV., 
SchoL,  and  also  Eth.  II. ,  Ax.  III.,  and  elsewhere. 

8  Who  besides,  at  the  outset,  seems  not  to  have  known  the  historical  origin  of 
this  argument.  Cf.  Obj.  IV.,  and  Besp. 

*  Cf.  below,  §§  83  f . 

*  Tschirnhausen,  Med.  Ment.  (1695),  pp.  290-94. 


392  TJie  Renaissance:  Natural  Seience  Period.     [?AKT  IV, 

the  outer  world,  —  three  points  of  attachment  for  the  three  rational 
sciences,  ethics,  logic,  and  physics. 

5.  With  Descartes,  on  the  contrary,  the  proposition  cogito  sum 
has  not  so  much  the  meaning  of  an  experience,  as  rather  that  of  the 
first  fundamental  rational  truth.  Xor  is  its  evidence  that  of  an  infer- 
ence,1 but  that  of  immediate  intuitive  certainty.  The  analytic  method 
seeks  here,  as  with  Galileo,  the  simple,  self-intelligible  elements,  out 
of  which  all  else  is  to  be  explained  ;  but  while  the  physicist  discovers 
the  perceptional  elementary  form  of  motion,  which  is  to  make  com- 
prehensible all  that  takes  place  in  the  corporeal  world,  the  meta- 
physician is  hunting  for  the  elementary  truths  of  consciousness.  In 
this  consists  the  rationalism  of  Descartes. 

This  rationalism  expresses  itself  in  the  fact  that  the  superiority 
of  self-consciousness  is  found  in  its  complete  clearness  and  distinct- 
ness. and  in  the  fact  that  Descartes  propounded  as  his  principle  for 
the  synthetic  method  the  maxim,  Everything  must  be  true  which  is  as 
dear  and  distinct  as  self-consciousness,  i.e.  which  presents  itself  before 
the  mind's  vision  as  surely  and  underivably  as  the  mind's  own  exist- 
ence. ik  Clear  n  is  defined  by  Descartes  2  as  that  which  is  intuitively 
present  and  manifest  to  the  mind,  "  distinct  "  as  that  which  is  en- 
tirely clear  in  itself  and  precisely  determined.  And  those  mental 
presentations  —  or  ideas,8  as  he  calls  them  after  the  manner  of  later 
Scholasticism  —  which  are  in.  this  sense  clear  and  distinct,  whose 
evidence  is  not  to  be  deduced  from  any  others,  but  is  grounded 
solely  in  themselves,  he  calls  innate  ideas.4  With  this  expression 
he  indeed  incidentally  connects  also  the  psycho-genetic  thought  that 
these  ideas  are  imprinted  upon  the  human  soul  by  God,  but  for  the 
most  part  he  desires  to  give  only  the  epistemological  significance  of 
immediate,  rational  evidence, 

These  two  meanings  are  peculiarly  mingled  in  Descartes'  proofs 
for  the  existence  of  God,  which  form  an  integrant  constituent  of  his 
•Jieory  of  knowledge,  in  so  far  as  this  "idea"  is  the  first  for  which, 
a  the  synthetic  procedure  of  his  method  a  clearness  and  distinct- 
less  or  intuitive  evidence  of  the  "  natural  light,"  equal  to  that  of 
elf-consciousness,  is  claimed.  The  new  (so-called  Cartesian)  proof 
rhich  he  introduces  in  this  connection,5  has  a  multitude  of  scholastic 


.       Ob).  II.  2  f^^  PhUt  L  45. 

*  [German  Idee.    I  follow  the  ordinary  English  usage  in  spelling  the  word  as 
jed  by  Descartes  without  a  capital.] 

*  Cf.  E.  Grimm,  D.'$  Lehre  von  den  angeborenen  Ideen  (Jena,  1873),  and  also 
Natorp,  DSs  Erkenntnisstkeorie  (Marburg,  1882).    That  innatus  is  better 

instated  by  emgeboren  than  by  the  usual  angeboren  has  been  remarked  by 
Eucken,  G&cJiicMe  und  KritVc  der  Qrundteffryfe  tier  Gegenwart,  p.  73. 
6  3ftd.  III. 


CHAP.  2,  §  30.]       Problem  of  Method :  Descartes.  393 

assumptions.  He  argues  that  the  individual  self-consciousness 
knows  itself  to  be  finite,  and  therefore  imperfect  (according  to  the 
old  identification  of  determinations  expressing  value  with  ontological 
gradations),  and  that  this  knowledge  can  be  derived  only  from  the 
conception  of  an  absolutely  perfect  being  (ens perfect issi mum) .  This 
latter  conception  which  we  find  within  us  must  have  a  cause  which, 
nevertheless,  is  not  to  be  found  within  our  own  selves,  nor  in  any 
other  finite  things.  For  the  principle  of  causality  requires  that  at 
least  as  much  Reality  be  contained  in  the  cause  as  there  is  in  the 
effect.  This  —  in  the  scholastic  sense  —  realistic  principle  is  now 
applied,  in  analogy  to  Anselnrs  argument,  to  the  relation  of  the 
idea  in  the  mind  (esse  in  intellects  or  esse  objective)  to  the  Real 
(esse  in  re  or  esse  formaliter),  in  order  to  give  the  inference  that  we 
should  not  have  the  idea  of  a  most  perfect  being  if  the  idea  had  not 
been  produced  in  us  by  such  a  being  himself.  This  anthropologico- 
metaphysical  proof  has  then  with  Descartes  the  significance  that 
by  it  that  former  sceptical  hypothetical  phantom  of  a  deceiving 
demon  is  again  destroyed.  For  since  the  perfection  of  God  involves 
his  veracity,  and  it  is  impossible  that  he  should  so  have  created  us 
that  we  should  necessarily  err,  confidence  in  the  lumen  naturale,  that 
is,  in  the  immediate  evidence  of  rational  knowledge,  is  restored,  and 
thus  definitively  grounded.  Thus  modern  rationalism  is  introduced 
by  Descartes  by  the  circuitous  route  of  Scholasticism.  For  this 
proof  gives  the  charter  for  acknowledging  with  complete  certainty 
as  true  all  propositions  which  manifest  themselves  in  clear  and  dis- 
tinct light  before  the  reason.  Here  belong,  firstly,  all  truths  of 
mathematics,  but  here  belongs  also  the  ontological  proof  for  the 
existence  of  God.  For  with  the  same  necessity  of  thought  —  thus 
Descartes  takes  up  Anselm's  argument1 — with  which  the  geometri- 
cal propositions  with  regard  to  a  triangle  follow  from  the  definition 
of  the  triangle,  it  follows  from  the  mere  definition  of  the  most  Eeal 
being  that  the  attribute  of  existence  belongs  to  him.  The  possibility 
of  thinking  God  suffices  to  prove  his  existence. 

In  this  way  it  follows  from  the  criterion  of  clearness  and  distinct- 
ness, that  of  finite  things  also,  and  especially  of  bodies,  so  much  can 
be  known  as  is  clearly  and  distinctly  perceived.  But  this  is  for 
Descartes  the  mathematical  element,  and  is  limited  to  the  quantitative 
determinations,  while  all  the  sensuous-qualitative  elements  in  percep- 
tion are  regarded  by  the  philosopher  as  unclear  and  confused.  On  this 
account  metaphysics  and  the  theory  of  knowledge  terminate  for  him, 
too,  in  a  mathematical  physics.  He  designates z  the  sensuous  appre- 

i  Med.  V.  2  Med.  VI. 


39-i  The  li'.n.L*+<.itc"t  :  X'Jtural  Science  Period.     [PART  IT. 

hension  of  the  qualitative,  ••  imagination  "  (imaginaiio).  The  appre- 
hension of  that  which  car:  be  mathematically  constructed  he  terms,  on 
the  other  ituii-l.  "iut^IIecrjuV/'  knowledge  (intelletfio),  and  strongly  as 
Lt  liiiows  how  to  prize  the  help  which  experience  gives  in  the  former, 
a  i-^-uLy  scientific  insight  rests,  in  his  opinion,  only  upon  the  latter. 

The  Jiatisetion  between  distinct  and  confused  presentations 
(which  goes  back  to  Dnns  Scorns  and  farther)  serves  Descartes 
also  to  solve  the  ^ff^.m  of  error,  which  results  for  him  out  of  his 
principle  of  tLe  reiwii'is  dei\  because  it  does  not  seem  possible  to 
^ee  Low,  in  accordance  with  that  principle,  perfect  deity  could  so 
arrange  human  nature  as-  to  allow  it  to  err  at  all.  Here  Descartes 
Litres  himself1  by  a  peculiarly  limited  doctrine  of  freedom,  which 
LiigLt  be  consistent  with  either  Thomistic  determinism  or  Scotist 
indeteiininisin.  It  is  assumed,  that  is,  that  only  clear  and  distinct 
presentations  exercise  so  cogent  and  compelling  a  power  upon  the 
mind  that  it  cannot  avoid  recognising  them,  while  with  reference  to 
the  unclear  and  confused  presentations  it  retains  the  boundless  and 
groundless  activity  of  the  liberum  arbitrium  indifferentioe  (its  farthest- 
reaching  power,  which  in  the  Scotist  fashion  is  set  in  analogy  -with 
the  freedom  of  God).  Thus  error  arises  when  affirmation  and  nega- 
tion follow  arbitrarily  (without  rational  ground)  in  the  case  of 
unclear  and  indistinct  material  for  judgment.2  The  demand  which 
follows  from  this  of  withholding  judgment  in  all  cases  where  a  suffi- 
ciently clear  and  distinct  insight  is  not  present  recalls  too  distinctly 
the  ancient  eVo^'  ("suspense")  to  permit  us  to  overlook  the  rela- 
tionship of  this  theory  of  error,  with  the  doctrines  of  the  Sceptics 
and  Stoics  as  to  the  ory/carafeo-ts  (cf  .  pp.  167,  208)  ,8  In  fact,  Descartes 
recognised  distinctly  the  will-factor  in  judgment  (agreeing  here, 
too,  with  the  epistemology  of  Augustine  and  Duns  Scotus),  and 
Spinoza  followed  him  in  this,  so  far  as  to  designate  affirmation  or 
denial  as  a  necessary  characteristic  of  every  idea,  and  thus  to  teach. 
that  man  cannot  think  without  at  the  same  time  willing.4 

6.  Descartes'  mathematical  reform  of  philosophy  had  a  peculiar 
fate.  Its  metaphysical  results  began  a  rich  and  fruitful  develop- 
ment; its  tendency  as  regards  method,  however,  soon  became  sub- 


. 

3  Error  appears  accordingly  as  an  act  of  free  will  parallel  to  the  act  of  sin, 
aud  thus  as  guilt  ;  it  is  the  guilt  or  fault  of  self-deception.  This  thought  ms 
carried  out  particularly  by  Malebranche  (Entret.  III.  1). 

8  This  relationship  extends  consistently  to  Descartes'  ethics  also.  From  the 
clear  and  distinct  knowledge  of  reason  follows  necessarily  right  willing  and  act- 
ing ;  from  the  obscure  and  "confused  impulses  of  the  sensibUity  result  practically 
sin  and  theoretically  error,  by  abuse  of  freedom.  The  ethical  ideal  is  the 
Soeratic-Stoic  ideal  of  the  rule  of  reason  over  the  sensibility. 

*  Mh.  IL,  Prop.  49. 


CHAP.  2,  §  30.]      Problem  of  Method :  Cartesians.  395 

jected  to  a  misunderstanding  which  exactly  reversed  its  meaning. 
The  philosopher  himself  desired  to  see  the  analytical  method  em- 
ployed in  a  great  proportion  of  instances,  even  in  the  case  of  par- 
ticular problems,  and  thought  of  the  synthetic  method  as  a  progress 
in  discovery  from  one  intuitive  truth  to  another.  His  disciples, 
however,  confounded  the  creatively  free  intellectual  activity,  which 
Descartes  had  in  mind,  with  that  rigidly  demonstrative  system  of 
exposition  which  they  found  in  Euclid's  text-book  of  geometry.  The 
monistic  tendency  of  the  Cartesian  methodology,  the  fact  that  it  set 
up  a  highest  principle  from  which  all  other  certainty  should  follow, 
favoured  this  exchange,  and  out  of  the  new  method  of  investigation 
there  came  into  being  again  an  ars  demonstration.  The  ideal  of 
philosophy  appeared  to  be  the  task  of  developing  from  its  funda- 
mental principle  all  its  knowledge  as  a  system  of  as  rigidly  logical 
consistency  as  that  with  which  Euclid's  text-book  deduces  geome- 
try with  all  its  propositions  from  axioms  and  definitions. 

A  request  of  this  sort  had  been  answered  by  Descartes  with  a 
tentative  sketch,  though  with  express  reference  to  the  doubtfulness 
of  this  transfer;1  but  the  allurement  to  find  the  significance  of 
mathematics  for  philosophical  method  in  the  circumstance,  that  it  is 
the  ideal  of  demonstrative  science,  seems  only  to  have  been  strength- 
ened thereby.  At  least,  it  was  in  this  direction  that  the  influence 
of  the  Cartesian  philosophy  proved  strongest  for  the  following 
period.  In  all  the  change  of  epistemological  investigations  until 
far  into  the  eighteenth  century  this  conception  of  mathematics  was 
a  firmly  established  axiom  for  all  parties.  Indeed,  it  became  even 
a  lever  for  scepticism  and  mysticism,  under  the  direct  influence  of 
Descartes,  in  the  case  of  men  like  Pascal  Since  no  other  human 
science,  so  the  latter  argued,  neither  metaphysics  nor  the  empirical 
disciplines,  can  attain  mathematical  evidence ;  man  must  be  modest 
in  his  efforts  after  rational  knowledge,  and  must  the  more  follow 
the  impulse  of  his  heart  toward  presageful  faith,  and  the  feeling  of 
tact  which  belongs  to  a  noble  conduct  of  life.  The  Mystic  Poiret 
(influenced  by  Boehme),  also,  and  the  orthodox  sceptic  Huet,2 
turned  away  from  Cartesianisrn  because  it  could  not  pause  in  its 
programme  of  universal  mathematics. 

Positive  beginnings  toward  a  transformation  of  the  Cartesian 
method  into  the  Euclidean  line  of  proof are  found  in  the  Port-Boy  al 


1  Resp.  ad  Obj.  H 

2  Pierre  Daniel  Suet  (1630-1721),  the  learned  Bishop  of  Avranches,  wrote 
Censura  Philosophies  Cartesians  (1689),  and  Traite  de  la  Faiblesse  de  VlSsprit 
Eumain  (1723).     His  Autobiography  (1718)  is  also  instructive  on  the  point 
mentioned  above.     Cf.  on  him  Ck.  Bartholmess  (Paris,  1850). 


396  The  Renaissance ;  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

logic  and  in  the  logical  treatises  of  Geulincx ;  but  in  the  system  of 
Spinoza  this  methodical  schematism  stands  before  us  complete  and 
perfect  as  from  one  mould.  He  first  gave  an  exposition  of  the  Car- 
tesian philosophy  "  more  geometrico,"  by  developing  the  content  of 
the  system  step  by  step  in  propositions,  after  first  setting  up  defini- 
tions^and  axioms.  Each  of  these  propositions  was  proved  from  the 
definitions,  axioms,  and  preceding  propositions ;  while  corollaries 
and  scholia  giving  freer  elucidations  were  added  to  certain  of  the 
propositions.  Into  this  same  rigid,  unwieldy  form  Spinoza  pressed 
his  own  philosophy  also  in  the  Ethics,  and  believed  that  it  was  thus 
as  surely  demonstrated  as  the  Euclidean  system  of  geometry.  This 
presupposed  not  only  the  flawless  correctness  of  the  demonstrative 
process,  but  also  an  unambiguous  evidence  and  an  unassailable 
validity  of  the  definitions  and  axioms.  A  look  at  the  beginning  of 
the  Ethics  (and  not  only  of  the  first,  but  also  of  the  following 
books)  suffices  to  convince  one  of  the  ntiivett  with  which  Spinoza 
brings  forward  the  complicated  and  condensed  constructions  of 
scholastic  thought  as  self-evident  conceptions  and  principles,  and 
thereby  anticipates  implicitly  his  whole  metaphysical  system. 

This  geometrical  method  has,  however,  in  Spinoza's  thought — and 
In  this  consists  its  psycho-genetic  justification — at  the  same  time 
its  material  as  well  as  formal  significance.  The  fundamental  re- 
ligious conviction  that  all  things  necessarily  proceed  from  the 
unitary  essence  of  God  seemed  to  him  to  require  a  method  of  philo- 
sophical knowledge,  which  in  the  same  manner  should  derive  from 
the  idea  of  God  the  ideas  of  all  things.  In  the  true  philosophy  the 
order  of  ideas  ought  to  be  the  same  as  the  real  order  of  things.1  But 
from  this  it  follows  of  itself  that  the  real  process  of  the  procedure 
of  things  forth  from  God  must  be  thought  after  the  analogy  of  the 
logical  procedure  of  the  consequent  from  its  ground  or  reason,  and 
thus  the  character  of  the  method  which  Spinoza  fixed  upon  for  the 
problem  of  philosophy  involved  in  advance  the  metaphysical  char- 
acter of  its  solution  j  cf .  §  31. 

7.  Little  as  men  dared,  in  the  immediately  following  period,  to 
make  the  content  of  the  Spinozistic  philosophy  their  own,  its  method- 
ical form  exercised,  nevertheless,  an  impressive  influence :  and  the 
more  the  geometrical  method  became  settled  in  the  philosophy  of 
the  schools,  the  more  the  syllogistic  procedure  entered  again  with  it, 
since  all  knowledge  was  to  be  deduced  from  the  highest  truths  by 

1  The  view  that  true  knowledge  as  genetic  definition  must  repeat  the  process 
by  which  its  object  arises  was  carried  out  especially  by  Tschirnhausen,  who  did 
not  shrink  from  the  paradox  that  a  complete  definition,  of  laughter  must  be  able 
to  produce  laughter  itself !  (Jferf.  Jfen£.,  67  f.) 


CHAP.  2,  §  30.]     Problem  of  Method :  Spinoza,  Leibniz.  897 

regular  inferences.  Especially  did  the  mathematically  schooled 
Cartesians  in  Germany  take  up  the  geometrical  method  along  this 
line :  this  was  done  by  Jung  and  Weigel,  and  the  academic  impulse 
to  the  preparation  of  text-books  found  in  this  method  a  form  with 
which  it  could  have  the  utmost  sympathy.  In  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury Christian  Wolf  (cf.  Part  V.)  pursued  this  line  in  the  most 
comprehensive  manner  with  his  Latin  text-books,  and  for  the  sys- 
tematisation  of  a  firmly  established  and  clearly  thought  out  material 
there  could  be  in  fact  no  better  form.  This  was  shown  when  Puffen- 
dorf  undertook  to  deduce  the  entire  system  of  Natural  Eight  by  the 
geometrical  method,  as  a  logical  necessity  from  the  single  principle 
of  the  need  of  society. 

TVhen  this  view  was  in  process  of  coming  into  existence  Leibniz 
came  into  sympathy  with  it  under  the  especial  influence  of  Erhard 
"Weigel,  and  was  at  the  beginning  one  of  its  most  consistent  sup- 
porters. He  not  only  made  the  jest  of  giving  this  unwonted  garb 
to  a  political  brochure,1  but  was  seriously  of  the  opinion  that  philo- 
sophical controversies  would  find  their  end  for  the  first  time  when 
a  philosophy  could  once  make  its  appearance  in  as  clear  and  certain 
a  form  as  that  of  a  mathematical  calculation.2 

Leibniz  pursued  this  thought  very  energetically.  The  stimulus 
of  Hobbes,  who  also  —  though  with  quite  another  purpose,  cf.  §  31, 2 
—  declared  thinking  to  be  a  reckoning  with  the  conceptional  signs 
of  things,  may  have  been  added;  the  Art  of  Lull  and  the  pains 
which  Giordano  Bruno  had  taken  with  its  improvement  were  well 
known  to  him.  In  Cartesian  circles,  also,  the  thought  of  transform- 
ing the  mathematical  method  to  a  regular  art  of  invention  had  been 
much  discussed :  besides  Joachim  Jung,  the  Altorf  Professor  Joh. 
Christopher  Sturm,3  had  also  exercised  an  influence  upon  Leibniz  in 
this  respect.  Finally,  the  thought  of  expressing  the  fundamental 
metaphysical  conceptions,  and  likewise  the  logical  operations  of 
their  combination  after  the  manner  of  the  mathematical  sign-lan- 
guage by  definite  characters,  seemed  to  offer  the  possibility  of  writ- 
ing a  philosophical  investigation  in  general  formulae,  an'd  by  this 
means  raising  it  beyond  the  capability  of  being  expressed  in  a 
definite  language  —  an  effort  toward  a  universally  scientific  lan- 
guage, a  "Lingua  Adamica"  which  likewise  appeared  at  the  time 


1  In  the  pseudonymous  Specimen  demonstrationumpoliticarum  pro  rege  Polo- 
norum  eligendo  (1669),  he  proved  by  "geometrical  method'*  in  sixty  proposi- 
tions and  demonstrations  that  the  Count  Palatine  of  Neuburg  must  be  chosen 
king  of  the  Poles. 

*De  Scientia  Universal!  seu  Calculo  Philosophico  (1684). 

8  The  author  of  a  Compendium  Unwersalium  seu  Metaphysics  Euclidece. 


898  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PAUT  IY. 

of  Leibniz  in  numerous  supporters.1  So,  too,  Leibniz  busied  himself 
to  an  extraordinary  degree  with  the  thought  of  a  characteristica  uni- 
versalis*  and  a  method  of  philosophical  calculus.2 

The  essential  outcome  of  these  strange  endeavours  was,  that  an 
attempt  was  necessarily  made  to  establish  those  highest  truths, 
from  the  logical  combination  of  which  all  knowledge  was  to  be 
deduced.  So  Leibniz,  like  Galileo  and  Descartes,  must  proceed  to 
search  out  that  which,  as  immediately  and  intuitively  certain,  forces 
itself  upon  the  mind  as  self-evident,  and  by  its  combinations  grounds 
all  derived  knowledge.  In  the  course  of  these  reflections  Leibniz 
stumbled  upon  the  discovery3  (which  Aristotle  had  made  before 
Liia).  that  there  are  two  completely  different  kinds  of  this  intuitive 
knowledge:  universal  truths  self-evident  to  reason,  and  facts  of 
experience.  The  one  class  has  timeless  validity ;  the  other,  validity 
for  a  single  instance :  verites  eternelles  and  veritis  defait.  Both  have 
in  common  that  they  are  intuitively  certain,  i.e.  are  certain  in  them- 
selves and  not  by  deduction  from  anything  elsej  they  are  called, 
therefore,  primce  veritates,  or,  also,  primes  possibilitates,  because  in 
them  the  possibility  of  all  that  is  derivative  has  its  ground.  For 
the  "possibility"  of  a  conception  is  known  either  by  a  "causal 
definition  "  which  derives  the  same  from  the  first  possibilities,  that 
is,  a  priori ;  or  by  the  immediate  experience  of  its  actual  existence, 
that  is,  a  posteriori 

These  two  kinds  of  ''''primitive  truths"  —  the  rational  and  the 
empirical,  as  we  see  —  Leibniz  attached  in  a  very  interesting  manner 
to  the  two  Cartesian  marks  of  intuitive  self-evidence,  clearness  and 
distinctness.  To  this  end  he  shifts  to  a  slight  extent  the  meaning 
of  both  expressions.*  That  idea  is  clear  which  is  surely  distin- 
guished from  all  others  and  so  is  adequate  for  the  recognition  of  its 
object ;  that  idea  is  distinct  which  is  clear  even  to  its  particular 
constituent  parts  and  to  the  knowledge  of  their  combination. 
According  to  this,  the  a  priori,  " geometrical "  or  "metaphysical" 
eternal  truths  are  clear  and  distinct ;  while  on  the  other  hand  the 
a  posteriori,  or  the  truths  relating  to  facts,  are  clear,  indeed,  but  not 
distinct.  Hence  the  former  are  perfectly  transparent,  conjoined 
with  the  conviction  of  the  impossiblity  of  the  opposite,  while  in  the 
case  of  the  latter  the  opposite  is  thinkable.  In  the  case  of  the 
former  the  intuitive  certainty  rests  upon  the  Principle  of  Contradic- 


1  Such  attempts  had  been  projected  by  J.  J.  Becker  (1661).  G.Dalgarn  (1661), 
Athanasius  Kircher  (1603),  and  J.  Wilkins  (1668). 

2  Cf.  A.  Trendelenburg,  Historische  Beitrage  zu  Philosophie,  Vols.  H,  HI. 
8  Meditatfanes  fa  Cognition*  Veritate  ft  Ideis  (1684). 

*  Ib.  at  the  beginning,  Erd^s.  ed.,  p.  79. 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]  Substance  and  Causality.  399 

tion;  in  the  case  of  the  latter  the  possibility  guaranteed  by  the 
actual  fact  needs  still  an  explanation  in  accordance  with  the  Prin- 
ciple of  Sufficient  Reason. 

At  the  beginning,  Leibniz  intended  this  distinction  only  with 
reference  to  the  imperfection  of  the  human  understanding.  In  the 
case  of  rational  truths  we  see  into  the  impossibility  of  the  opposite; 
with  empirical  truths  this  is  not  the  case,  and  we  must  content  our- 
selves with  establishing  their  actuality  : 1  "but  the  latter  also,  in  the 
natura  rerum  and  for  the  divine  understanding,  are  so  grounded 
that  the  opposite  is  impossible,  although  it  remains  thinkable  for 
us.  If  Leibniz  compared  this  distinction  with  that  of  commensur- 
able and  incommensurable  magnitudes,  he  meant  at  the  beginning 
that  incommensurability  lies  only  in  man's  limited  knowing  capacity. 
But  in  the  course  of  his  development  this  antithesis  became  for 
him  an  absolute  one;  it  gained  metaphysical  significance.  Leibniz 
now  distinguished  realiter  between  an  unconditional  necessity,  which 
involves  the  logical  impossibility  of  the  opposite,  and  a  conditional 
necessity,  which  has  "  only  "  the  character  of  a  matter  of  fact.  He 
divided  the  principles  of  things  into  those  of  which  the  opposite  is 
unthinkable,  and  those  of  which  the  opposite  is  thinkable :  he  dis- 
tinguished metaphysically,  also,  between  necessary  and  contingent 
truths.  This,  however,  cohered  with  metaphysical  motives,  which 
arose  from  an  after-working  of  the  Scotist  theory  of  the  contin- 
gency of  the  finite,  and  overthrew  the  geometrical  method. 

§  31.  Substance  and  Causality. 

The  real  [as  contrasted  with  formal]  result  of  the  new  methods 
was  in  metaphysics,  as  in  natural  science,  a  transformation  of  the 
fundamental  ideas  of  the  nature  of  things,  and  of  the  mode  of 
their  connection  in  the  processes  of  Nature :  the  conceptions  of  sub- 
stance and  causality  acquired  a  new  content.  But  this  change 
could  not  proceed  so  radically  in  metaphysics  as  in  natural  science. 
In  this  latter  more  limited  realm,  after  the  Galilean  principle  had 
once  been  found,  it  was  possible  in  a  certain  measure  to  begin  ab  ovo 
and  produce  a  completely  new  theory :  in  the  more  general  philo- 
sophical doctrines  the  power  and  authority  of  tradition  were  much  too 
great  to  make  it  possible  or  permissible  that  it  should  be  completely 
set  aside. 

This  distinction  asserted  itself  already  in  connection  with  the 
delicate  relation  sustained  to  religious  conceptions.  Natural  science 

1  The  Aristotelian  distinction  of  5t6n  and  ST.. 


400  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

could  isolate  itself  absolutely  from  theology,  and  maintain  toward 
it  an  attitude  of  complete  indifference :  metaphysics,  by  its  concep- 
tion of  the  deity  and  by  its  theory  of  the  mental  or  spiritual 
world,  was  brought  again  and  again  into  hostile  or  friendly  contact 
with  the  religious  sphere  of  ideas.  A  Galileo  declared  that  the 
investigations  of  physics,  whatever  their  result  might  be,  had  not 
the  least  thing  to  do  with  the  teaching  of  the  Bible,1  and  a  Xewtou 
was  not  prevented  by  his  mathematical  natural  philosophy  from 
burying  himself  with  the  most  ardent  piety  in  the  mysteries  of  the 
Apocalypse.  But  the  metaphysicians,  however  indifferent  their 
thought  as  regards  religion,  and  however  strictly  they  might  prose- 
cute their  science  in  the  purely  theoretical  spirit,  were  still  always 
obliged  to  consider  that  they  had  to  do  with  objects  concerning 
which  the  Church  doctrine  was  fixed.  This  gave  modern  philosophy 
a  somewhat  delicate  position:  medieeval  philosophy  had  brought  to 
the  objects  of  Church  dogma  an  essentially  religions  interest  of  its 
own  as  well ;  modern  philosophy  regarded  them,  if  at  all,  from  the 
theoretical  standpoint  only.  Hence  those  felt  themselves  most 
secure  who,  like  Bacon  and  Hobbes,  restricted  philosophy  also 
entirely  to  natural  research,  declined  to  enter  upon  a  metaphysics 
proper,  and  were  willing  to  let  dogma  speak  the  only  words  with 
regard  to  the  deity  and  the  super-sensible  destiny  of  man.  Bacon 
did  this  with  large  words  behind  which  it  is  difficult  to  recognise 
bis  true  disposition ; 2  Hobbes  rather  let  it  be  seen  that  his  natural- 
istic opinion,  like  the  Epicurean,  saw  in  ideas  as  to  the  supernatural 
a  superstition  resting  upon  a  defective  knowledge  of  Xature,  —  a 
superstition  which  by  the  regulation  of  the  state  becomes  the  bind- 
ing authority  of  religion.3  Much  more  difficult,  however,  was  the 
position  of  those  philosophers  who  held  fast  to  the  metaphysical 
conception  of  the  deity  in  their  very  explanation  of  Mature ;  Des- 
cartes' whole  literary  activity  is  filled  with  an  anxious  caution 
directed  toward  avoiding  every  offence  to  religion,  while  Leibniz 
could  attempt  to  carry  through  in  a  much  more  positive  manner  the 
conformity  of  his  metaphysics  to  religion ;  and  on  the  other  hand 
the  example  of  Spinoza  showed  how  dangerous  it  was  if  philosophy 
openly  brought  to  the  front  the  difference  between  its  conception  of 
God  and  the  dogmatic  conception. 

1.  The  main  difficulty  of  the  case  inhered  in  the  circumstance 
that  the  new  methodical  principle  of  mechanics  excluded  all  tracing  of 

1  Cf .  the  letter  to  the  Grand  Duchess  Christine,  Op.  n.  26  S. 

2  De  Augm.  Scient.  IX.,  where  the  supernatural  and  incomprehensible  is  set 
forth  as  the  characteristic  and  serviceable  quality  of  faith. 

g  Leviathan,  I.  G ;  cf.  the  drastic  expression,  ib.  IV.  32. 


CHAP,  2,  §  31.]         Substance  and  Causality :  Bacon.  401 

corporeal  phenomena  back  to  spiritual  forces.  Mature  was  despiritu- 
alised;  science  would  see  in  it  nothing  but  the  movements  of  smallest 
bodies,  of  which  one  is  the  cause  of  the  other.  No  room  remained 
for  the  operation  of  supernatural  powers.  So  first  of  all,  at  one 
stroke,  magic;  astronomy,  and  alchemy,  in  which  the  Neo-Platonic 
ghosts  and  spirits  had  held  sway,  became  for  science  a  standpoint  of 
the  past.  Leonardo  had  already  demanded  that  the  phenomena  of  the 
external  world  should  be  explained  by  natural  causes  only ;  the  great 
systems  of  the  seventeenth  century  without  exception  recognise  only 
such,  and  a  Cartesian,  Balthasar  Bekker,  wrote  a  book 1  to  show  that 
in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  modern  science,  all  appear- 
ances of  ghosts,  conjurations,  and  magic  arts  must  be  reckoned  as 
injurious  errors,  —  a  word  of  admonition  which  was  very  much  in 
place  in  view  of  the  luxuriant  superstition  of  the  Eenaissance. 

But  with  the  spirits,  teleology,  also,  was  obliged  to  give  place. 
The  explanation  of  natural  phenomena  by  their  purposiveness 
always  came  ultimately  in  some  way  or  other  to  the  thought  of  a 
spiritual  creation  or  ordering  of  things,  and  so  was  contradictory 
to  the  principle  of  mechanics.  At  this  point  the  victory  of  the 
system  of  Democritus  over  the  natural  philosophy  of  Plato  and 
Aristotle  was  most  palpable ;  this,  too,  was  emphasised  most  forcibly 
by  the  new  philosophy.  Bacon  counted  the  teleological  mode  of 
regarding  Nature  as  one  of  the  idols,  and,  indeed,  as  one  of  the 
dangerous  idols  of  the  tribe, — the  fundamental  errors  which  become 
a  source  of  illusion  to  man  through  his  very  nature :  he  taught  that 
philosophy  has  to  do  only  with  formal  or  efficient  causes,  and  ex- 
pressed his  restriction  of  philosophy  to  physics  and  his  rejection  of 
metaphysics  precisely  by  saying  that  the  explanation  of  Nature  is 
physics  if  it  concerns  causes  efficientes,  metaphysics  if  it  concerns 
causce  Jinales.2  In  the  case  of  Hobbes,  who  was  the  disciple  of 
Bacon  and  Galileo,  the  same  view  is  self-explaining.  But  Descartes, 
also,  desires  to  see  all  final  causes  kept  at  a  distance  from  the 
explanation  of  Nature  —  he  declares  it  audacious  to  desire  to  know 
the  purposes  of  G-od.3  Much  more  open,  and  keenest  by  far,  is  the 
polemic  of  Spinoza*  against  the  anthropomorphism  of  teleology. 
In  view  of  his  idea  of  God  and  God's  relation  to  the  world,  it  is 
absurd  to  speak  of  ends  of  the  deity,  and  especially  of  such  as  have 
reference  to  men ;  where  all  follows  with  eternal  necessity  from  the 
essential  nature  of  the  deity,  there  is  no  room  for  an  activity  accord- 
ing to  ends.  The  English  Neo-Platonists,  such  as  Cudworth  and 

1  Balthasar  Setter  (1634-1698),  De  Setoverte  WereU  (1690). 

2  De  Augm,  HI.  4. 

*  Cf .  principally  Eih.  I.  Append. 


402  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

Henrv  More,  combated  this  fundamental  mechanico-antiteleological 
feature  of  the  new  metaphysics  with  all  the  eloquence  of  the  old 
arguments,  but  without  success.  The  teleological  conviction  was 
obliged  to  renounce  definitively  the  claim  of  affording  scientific 
explanation  of  particular  phenomena.,  and  only  in  the  metaphysical 
conception  of  the  whole  did  Leibniz  (cf.  below,  Xo.  8),  and  similarly 
a  part  of  the  English  students  of  Xature,  find  ultimately  a  satisfac- 
tory adjustment  between  the  opposing  principles. 

ivith  the  exclusion  of  the  spiritual  from  the  explanation  of 
Nature,  still  a  third  element  of  the  old  view  of  the  world  fell  away, 
viz.  the  thought  of  the  difference  in  kind  and  in  value  of  the 
spheres  of  Xature,  as  it  had  been  embodied  most  distinctly  in 
the  Xeo-Platonic  graded  realm  of  things,  following  the  ancient 
Pythagorean  precedent.  In  this  respect  the  fantastic  natural 
philusophy  of  the  Renaissance  had  already  done  a  forcible  work  of 
preparation.  The  Stoic  doctrine  of  the  omnipresence  of  all  sub- 
stances at  every  point  of  the  universe  had  been  revived  by  Xicolaus 
Cusauus ;  but  it  was  in  connection  with  the  victory  of  the  Coperni- 
can  system,  as  we  see  in  Bruno,  that  the  idea  of  the  homogeneity  of 
all  parts  of  the  universe  first  completely  forced  its  way  to  recogni- 
tion. The  sublunary  world  could  no  longer  be  contrasted  as  the 
realm  of  imperfection,  with  the  more  spiritual  spheres  of  the  stellar 
heaven;  matter  and  motion  are  alike  in  both.  It  was  from  this 
thought  that  Kepler  and  Galileo  proceeded,  and  it  became  complete 
when  Xewton  recognised  the  identity  of  force  in  the  fall  of  the 
apple  and  the  revolution  of  the  stars.  For  modern  science,  the  old 
distinction  in  essence  and  in  value  between  heaven  and  earth  exists 
no  longer.  The  universe  is  one  in  nature  throughout.  This  same 
view,  moreover,  presented  itself  in  opposition  to  the  Aristotelian 
and  Thomistic  development  system  of  flatters  and  Porms.  It  did 
away  with  the  whole  army  of  lower  and  higher  forces — the  much 
combated  qualitates  occultw;  it  recognised  the  mechanical  principle 
of  motion  as  the  only  ground  of  explanation  for  all  phenomena,  and 
therefore,  removed  also  the  distinction  in  principle  between  the  ani- 
mate and  the  inanimate.  Though  here  Neo-Platonism  had  co- 
operated toward  overcoming  this  antithesis  by  its  view  of  the 
animation  of  the  entire  universe,  the  reverse  task  now  arose  for 
the  Galilean  mechanics,  namely,  that  of  explaining  mechanically 
the  phenomena  of  life  also.  The  discovery  of  the  mechanism  of  the 
circulation  of  the  blood  by  Harvey1  (1626)  gave  to  this  tendency  a 

1  In  which  he  had  been  anticipated  by  Michael  Servetus  (burned  1553  in 
Geneva  by  Calvin's  instrumentality). 


CHAP.  2,  §31.]      Substance  and  C'ausality:  Descartes,  Locke.     403 

vigorous  impulse ;  Descartes  expressed  it  in  principle  in  his  state- 
ment that  the  bodies  of  animals  are  to  be  regarded  scientifically  as 
most  complex  automata,  and  their  vital  activities  as  mechanical 
processes.  Hobbes  and  Spinoza  carried  out  this  thought  more 
exactly;  a  zealous  study  of  reflex  motions  began  in  the  medical 
schools  of  France  and  the  Netherlands,  and  the  conception  of  the 
soul  as  vital  force  became  completely  disintegrated.  Only  the 
Platonists  and  the  adherents  of  the  vitalism  of  Paracelsus  and 
Boehme,  such  as  Van  Helniont,  held  fast  to  this  conception  in  the 
old  manner. 

2.  This  mechanistic  despiritaalisation  of  Xature  corresponded 
completely  to  that  dualistic  theory  of  the  world,  which  from  episte- 
mological  motives  had  been  in  course  of  preparation  in  terministic 
Nominalism,  — the  theory  of  a  total  difference  between  the  inner  and 
the  outer  world.  To  the  knowledge  of  their  qualitative  difference 
was  now  added  that  of  their  real  and  causal  separateness.  The 
world  of  bodies  appeared  not  only  quite  different  in  kind  from  that 
of  mind,  but  also  as  entirely  sundered  from  it  in  its  existence 
and  in  the  course  of  its  motions.  The  doctrine  of  the  intellectuality 
of  the  sense  qualities,  revived  in  the  philosophy  of  the  Renaissance 
by  the  Humanists,  had  contributed  an  extraordinary  amount  toward 
sharpening  the  above  antithesis.  The  doctrine  that  colours,  tones, 
smells,  tastes,  and  qualities  of  pressure,  heat,  and  touch  are  not 
real  qualities  of  things,  but  only  signs  of  such  in  the  mind,  had 
passed  over  from  the  Sceptical  and  Epicurean  literature  into  most  of 
the  doctrines  of  modern  philosophy  with  a  repetition  of  the  ancient 
illustrations.  Vives,  Montaigne,  Sanchez,  and  Campanella  were  at 
one  in  this ;  Galileo,  Hobbes,  and  Descartes  revived  the  teaching  of 
Democritus,  that  to  these  qualitative  differences  of  perception  noth- 
ing but  quantitative  differences  correspond  in  the  natura  rerum,  and 
this  in  such  a  way  that  the  former  are  the  inner  modes  of  mentally 
representing  the  latter.  Descartes  regarded  sense  qualities  as  ob- 
scure and  confused  ideas,  while  the  conception  of  the  quantitative 
determinations  of  the  outer  world,  on  account  of  its  mathematical 
character,  was  for  him  the  only  clear  and  distinct  idea  of  them. 

According  to  Descartes,  therefore,  not  only  the  sensuous  feelings, 
but  also  the  contents  of  sensation,  belong  not  to  the  spatial,  but  to 
the  psychical  world  only,  and  represent  in  this  sphere  the  geomet- 
rical structures  of  which  they  are  the  signs.  In  our  examination  of 
an  individual  object  we  can,1  to  be  sure,  gain  a  knowledge  of  this 


1  Ct  Med.  YL  which  allows  perhaps  the  plainest  view  of  the  very  close 
relation  which  Descartes'  physical  research  had  to  experience. 


404  The  Renaissance  ;  Natural  Science  Period.     [PAET  IV. 

true  mathematical  essence  of  bodies  only  by  the  aid  of  perceptions, 
and  in  these  .perceptions  the  true  mathematical  essence  is  always 
alloyed  with  the  qualitative  elements  of  the  "  imagination."  But 
just  in  this  consists  the  task  of  physical  research,  to  dissolve  out 
this  real  essence  of  bodies  from  the  subjective  modes  of  our  mental 
representation  by  means  of  reflection  upon  the  clear  and  distinct  ele- 
ments of  perception.  John  Locke,  who  later  adopted  and  made 
popular  this  view  of  Descartes,  designated1  those  qualities  which 
belong  to  bodies  in  themselves  as  primary,  and  called  those  sec- 
ondary, on  the  other  hand,  which  belong  to  a  body  only  by  virtue  of 
its  action  upon  our  senses.2  Descartes  allowed  as  primary  qualities 
only  shape,  size,  position,  and  motion,  so  that  for  him  the  physical 
body  coincided  with  the  mathematical  (cf.  below,  2s  o.  4),  In  order 
to  maintain  a  distinction  between  the  two,  Henry  More,3  on  the  con- 
trary, demanded  that  impenetrability,  regarded  as  the  property  of 
filling  space,  should  also  be  reckoned  to  the  essential  nature  of  bodies, 
and  Locke,4  in  accordance  with  this  view,  took  up  "solidity"  into 
the  class  of  primary  qualities. 

TFith  Hobbes 5  these  thoughts  become  modified  more  in  accordance 
with  the  terministic  conception.  He  regards  space  (&$  phantasma 
rei  existentis)  and  time  (as  phantasma  motus)  as  also  modes  of  men- 
tal representation,  and  it  is  just  because  we  can  therefore  construct 
tuese  ourselves  that  mathematical  theory  has  the  advantage  of  being 
the  sole  rational  science.  But  instead  of  drawing  phenomenalistic 
conclusions  from  this  premise,  he  argues  that  philosophy  can  treat 
only  of  bodies,  and  must  leave  everything  spiritual  to  revelation. 
Scientific  thought  consequently  consists,  for  him,  only  in  the  imma- 
nent combination  of  signs.  These  are  partly  involuntary  in  percep- 
tions, partly  arbitrary  in  words  (similarly  Occam,  cf.  §  27,  4).  It 
is  only  by  means  of  the  latter  that  general  conceptions  and  proposi- 
tions become  possible.  Our  thinking  is  hence  a  reckoning  with 
verbal  signs.  It  has  its  truth  in  itself  and  stands  as  something 
completely  heterogeneous  by  the  side  of  the  outer  world  to  which 
it  relates. 

3.  All  these  suggestions  become  compressed  in  the  system  of 
Descartes  to  form  the  doctrine  of  the  dualism  of  substances.  The 
analytic  method  was  intended  to  discover  the  simple  elements  of 
reality  which  were  self-explanatory  and  not  susceptible  of  farther 

1  Essay,  Human  Uiiderstanding,  II.  8,  §  23  f. 

2  As  tertiary  qualities,  Locke  added  further  the  "powers"  for  the  operation 
of  one  body  upon  others. 

8  Desc.  (Eur.  (C.),  X.  pp.  181  ff. 

4  Essay,  II.  4, 

6  Human,  Mature,  chs.  2-5 ;  Leviathan,  chs.  4fE. 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]    Substance  and  Carnality :  Holies^  Descartes.   405 

deduction.  Descartes  discovered  that  all  that  can  be  experienced  is 
a  species  either  of  spatial  or  of  conscious  Being  or  existence.  Spa- 
tiality,  or  the  quality  of  filling  space,  and  consciousness  ("  extension  " 
and  "thought"  according  to  the  usual  translation  of  extensio  and  cogi- 
tatio)  are  the  ultimate,  simple,  original  attributes  of  reality.  All 
that  is  is  either  spatial  or  conscious.  For  these  two  prime  predi- 
cates are  related  disjunctively.  "What  is  spatial  is  not  conscious ; 
what  is  conscious  is  not  spatial.  The  self-certainty  of  mind  is  only 
that  of  the  personality  as  a  conscious  being.  Bodies  are  real  in  so 
far  as  they  have  in  themselves  the  quantitative  determinations  of 
spatial  existence  and  change,  of  extension  and  motion,  All  things 
are  either  bodies  or  minds;  substances  are  either  spatial  or  con- 
scious :  res  extensce  and  res  cogitantes. 

The  world  falls  thus  into  two  completely  different  and  completely 
separated  realms:  that  of  bodies  and  that  of  minds.  But  in  the 
background  of  this  dualism  there  stands  in  the  thought  of  Descartes 
the  conception  of  the  deity  as  the  ens  perfectissimutn  or  perfect  sub- 
stance. Bodies  and  minds  are  finite  tilings;  God  is  infinite  Being,1 
The  Meditations  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  that  Descartes  ac- 
cepted the  conception  of  God  quite  in  accordance  with  the  inter- 
pretation of  scholastic  Realism.  The  mind  in  its  own  Being,  "which 
it  recognises  as  a  limited  and  imperfect  one,  apprehends  with  the 
same  intuitive  certainty  the  Eeality  of  the  perfect,  infinite  Being 
also  (cf.  above,  §  30,  5).  To  the  ontological  argument  is  added  the 
relation  of  God  and  the  world  in  the  form  brought  forward  by 
Kicolaus  Cusanus,  namely,  that  of  the  antithesis  of  the  infinite  and 
the  finite.  But  the  above-mentioned  relationship  with  the  Eealism 
of  the  Middle  Ages  appears  most  distinctly  in  the  development  of 
metaphysics  that  succeeded  Descartes :  for  the  pantheistic  conse- 
quences of  this  presupposition,  which  had  been  carefully  held  back 
in  the  scholastic  period,  were  now  spoken  out  with  complete  clear- 
ness and  sureness.  And  if  we  find  in  the  doctrines  of  Descartes' 
successors  a  strong  similarity  with  those  which  in  the  Middle  Ages 
could  lead  but  a  more  or  less  repressed  existence,  this  is  intelligible 
even  -without  the  assumption  of  a  direct  historical .  dependence, 
merely  by  the  pragmatic  connection  and  the  logical  necessity  of  the 
conclusions. 

4.  The  common  metaphysical  name  of  "substance,"  applied  to 
God  in  the  infinite  sense,  and  to  minds  and  bodies  in  a  finite  sense, 
could  not  permanently  cover  the  problems  which  were  hidden  be- 

1  So  likewise  Malebranche  said  (Bech.  III.  2, 9  a.  E.)  that  God  could  properly 
be  called  only  Celui  qui  est,  he  is  Vetre  satis  restriction,  tout  etre  infini  est 
unwersel. 


406  The  HwtiMtnte  :  Natural  Science  Period.       [PART  IV. 


neath  it.  The  conception  of  substance  had  come  into  a  state  of  flux, 
and  needed  further  re-shaping.  It  had  almost  lost  touch  with 
the  idea  of  "  thing,"  the  category  of  inherence  ;  for  just  the  combi- 
nation of  a  multiplicity  of  determinations  into  the  idea  of  a  unitary 
concrete  entity,  which  is  essential  to  this  category,  was  completely 
lacking  in  Descartes'  conception  of  finite  substances,  since  these 
were  held  to  be  characterised  by  one  fundamental  quality,  spatiality 
or  consciousness.  All  else  that  was  found  in  substances  must  there- 
fore be  regarded  as  a  modification  of  its  fundamental  quality,  of  its 
attribute.  All  qualities  and  states  of  bodies  are  modes  of  their  spa- 
tiality or  extension  :  all  qualities  and  states  of  mind  are  modes  of 
consciousness  (modi  cogitandi). 

It  is  involved  in  this  that  all  particular  substances  belonging  to 
either  class,  all  bodies  on  the  one  hand  and  all  minds  on  the  other, 
are  alike  in  their  essence,  their  constitutive  attribute.  But  from 
this  it  is  only  a  step  farther  to  the  idea  in  which  this  likeness  is 
thought  as  metaphysical  identity.  All  bodies  are  spatial,  all  minds 
are  conscious  ;  individual  bodies  are  distinguished  from  one  another 
only  by  different  modes  of  spatiality  (form,  size,  situation,  motion)  ; 
individual  minds  are  distinguished  from  one  another  only  by  differ- 
ent modes  of  consciousness  (ideas,  judgments,  activities  of  will). 
Individual  bodies  are  modes  of  spatiality,  individual  minds  are 
modes  of  consciousness.  In  this  way  the  attribute  obtains  meta- 
physical preponderance  over  individual  substances,  which  now 
appear  as  its  modifications  ;  the  res  extensce  become  modi  extensionis  ; 
the  res  cogftautes.  modi  cogitation]  s. 

Descartes  himself  drew  this  conclusion  only  in  the  domain  of  nat- 
ural philosophy,  to  which  in  general  he  restricted  the  carrying  out  of 
his  metaphysical  doctrine  in  its  principles.  Here,  however,  the 
general  conception  of  modification  took  on,  of  itself,  a  definite  sig- 
nificance, and  one  capable  of  apprehension  by  perception  or  imagina- 
tion, viz.  that  of  limitation  (determinatio)  .  Bodies  are  parts  of  space, 
limitations  of  the  universal  space-filling  quality  or  extension.1  Hence 
for  Descartes  the  conception  of  body  coincides  with  that  of  a  limited 
spatial  magnitude.  A  body  is,  as  regards  its  true  essence,  a  portion 
of  space.  The  elements  of  the  corporeal  world  are  the  "  coi-pusdes,"  2 

1  Cf.  Princ.  Phil.  IL  9  f.,  where,  at  the  same  time,  it  appears  quite  clearly 
that  this  relation  of  the  individual  body  to  universal  space  is  made  equivalent 
to  that  of  individual  and  species. 

2  For  the  corpuscular  theory,  Descartes  found  many  suggestions  in  Bacon, 
Hobbes,  Basso,  Sennert,  and  others.    The  variety  in  the  development  of  this 
theory,  which  rests  upon  the  dialectic  between  the  mathematical  and  the  physi- 
cal momenta,  has  more  interest  for  natural  science  than  for  philosophy.    An 
excellent  exposition  is  found  in  Lasswitz,  Geschichte  der  AtomistiJc. 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]     Substance  and  Causality :  Malebranche.  407 

i.e.  the  firm  spatial  particles  which  realiter  are  no  longer  divisible : 
as  mathematical  structures,  however,  they  are  infinitely  divisible; 
that  is,  there  are  no  atoms.  From  these  presuppositions  follow, 
likewise,  for  Descartes,  the  impossibility  of  empty  space,  and  the 
infinitude  of  the  corporeal  world. 

Tor  the  mental  world  the  analogous  claim  was  pronounced  by 
Jfalebmncke.  In  connection  with  the  epistemological  motives  (cf. 
below,  No.  8)  which  made  it  seem  to  him  that  no  knowledge  of 
things  is  possible  except  in  God,  he  came  *  to  the  conception  of  the 
raison  wiwerseUe,  which,  as  being  alike  in  all  individual  minds,  can- 
not belong  to  the  modes  of  the  finite  mind,  but  is  rather  that  of 
which  finite  minds  are  themselves  modifications,  and  can,  just  on 
this  account,  be  none  other  than  an  attribute  of  God.  God  is  in  so 
far  the  "  place  of  minds  "  or  spirits,  just  as  space  is  the  place  of 
bodies.  Here,  also,  as  the  expression  proves,  the  relation  which 
obtains  in  conceptions  between  the  universal  and  the  particular 
underlies  the  thought,  and  following  the  analogy  of  the  Cartesian 
conception  of  space  and  body  this  relation  is  thought  in  percep- 
tional or  picturate  terms  as  participation?  All  human  insight  is  a 
participation  in  the  infinite  Beason,  all  ideas  of  finite  things  are  but 
determinations  of  the  idea  of  God,  all  desires  directed  toward  the 
particular  object  are  but  participations  in  that  love  toward  God  as 
the  ground  of  its  essence  and  life,  which  necessarily  dwells  in  the 
finite  mind.  To  be  sure,  Malebranche  came  into  a  very  critical 
situation  by  thus  making  the  finite  mind  disappear  completely  in 
the  universal  divine  mind,  as  its  modification.  For  how,  in  accord- 
ance with  this,  should  he  explain  the  self -subsistence  and  self- 
activity  which  it  seemed  were  quite  notoriously  present  in  those 
inclinations  and  volitions  of  man  which  opposed  God?  In  this 
difficulty  nothing  availed  but  the  word  "freedom,"  in  using  which 
Malebranche  was  indeed  obliged  to  confess  that  freedom  was  an 
impenetrable  mystery.3 

5.  In  this  course  of  thought  pursued  by  Malebranche  appears 
clearly  the  inevitable  logical  consistency  with  which  the  attributes, 
which  were  regarded  by  Descartes  as  the  common  essence  belonging 
to  either  of  the  two  classes  of  finite  substances,  could  ultimately  be 
thought  only  as  the  attributes  of  the  infinite  substance  or  deity.  But 
precisely  in  this  point  consists  the  fundamental  motive  of  Spi- 
nozism,  which  developed  along  this  line  out  of  Cartesianism  directly 
and  at  the  outset,  and  at  the  same  time  developed  to  the  farthest 


1  Rech.  de  la  Ver.  IH  2,- 6 ;  tintret,  1. 10. 

2  Recall  the  Platonic  /ttfefr !  3  Cf.  above,  p.  394,  note  & 


408  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

consequence.  Spinozism  likewise  holds  as  firmly  to  the  qualitative 
as  to  the  causal  dualism  of  spatiaiity  and  consciousness.  The  spa- 
tial and  the  spiritual  worlds  are  entirely  heterogeneous  and  abso- 
lutely independent  of  each  other.  But  the  whole  endless  series  of 
bodies,  with  their  divisions,  forms,  and  motions,  are  only  the  modes 
of  extension,  just  as  the  endless  series  of  minds  with  their  ideas 
and  volitions  are  only  the  modes  of  consciousness.  Hence  these 
finite  ;*  things  "  are  no  longer  entitled  to  the  name  of  "  substance.53 
That  only  can  be  called  substance,  whose  attributes  are  extension 
and  consciousness  themselves,  viz.  the  infinite  existence  or  Being, 
the  deity.  But  its  essence,  in  turn,  cannot  be  exhausted  in  these 
two  attributes  which  are  accessible  to  human  experience ;  the  ens 
reaUssimitm  involves  within  itself  the  actuality  of  the  infinite  num- 
ber of  ail  possible  attributes. 

The  ultimate  ground  of  this  position  also  lies  in  the  scholastic- 
realistic  conception  of  the  most  real  being.  Spinoza's  definition  of 
substance  or  the  deity,  as  the  essence  (essentia)  which  involves  its 
own  existence,  is  only  the  condensed  expression  of  the  ontological 
proof  for  the  existence  of  God:  the  "ase'ttas"  is  preserved  in  the 
term  " causa  sui" /  substance  as  that  "quod  in  se  est  et  per  se  con- 
cipitur"  is  again  but  another  transcription  of  the  same  thought. 
Proceeding  from  these  definitions,  the  proof  for  the  oneness  and 
infinitude  of  substance1  followed  as  a  matter  of  course. 

That,  however,  we  have  here  to  do  with  an  entirely  realistic 
course  of  thought  becomes  clearly  manifest  from  Spinoza's  doctrine 
of  the  nature  of  substance  itself  and  of  its  relation  to  the  attributes. 
For  the  Spinozistic  system  says  absolutely  nothing  of  substance  or 
of  the  deity  farther  than  the  formal  determinations  contained  in  the 
conception  of  the  ens  reaUssimum,  of  absolute  Being.  Every  predi- 
cate expressing  any  content  is,  on  the  contrary,  expressly  denied : 
and  in  particular  Spinoza  is  especially  careful  to  refuse 2  to  the  divine 
essence  the  modifications  of  consciousness,  such  as  intellectual  cog- 
nition {intellectus,  Erkenntniss]  and  will.  Just  as  little  of  course 
does  he  recognise  the  modifications  of  extension  as  being  predicates 
of  the  divine  essence,  though  he  had  no  polemical  inducement  to 
express  this  especially.  God  himself  is  therefore  neither  mind 
nor  body ;  of  him  it  can  only  be  said,  that  he  is.  It  is  evident  that 
the  old  principle  of  negative  theology  is  here  present  with  a  changed 
form  of  expression.  Knowledge  of  all  finite  things  and  states  leads 
to  two  highest  universal  conceptions :  space-filling  quality  or  exten- 
sion, and  consciousness.  To  both  of  these  a  higher  metaphysical 

1  Eth.  I  Props.  1-14.  2  ID.  I.  31. 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]     Substance  and  C'ausality:  Spinoza,  409 

dignity  is  ascribed  than  to  finite  things ;  they  are  the  attributes, 
and  the  things  are  their  modes.  But  if  the  process  of  abstraction 
now  rises  from  these  two  determinations,  the  last  which  contain  any 
content,  to  the  most  general,  to  the  ens  general*  ssi  mum,  then  all 
definite  content  falls  away  from  the  conception  of  this  being,  and 
only  the  empty  Form  of  substance  is  left.  For  Spinoza,  also,  the 
deity  is  all  and  thus  —  nothing.  His  doctrine  of  God  lies  quite 
along  the  path  of  Mysticism.1 

But  if  God  is  thus  the  general  essence  of  finite  things,  he  does 
not  exist  otherwise  than  in  them  and  with  them.  This  applies  first 
of  all  to  the  attributes.  God  is  not  distinct  from  them,  and  they  are 
not  distinct  from  him,  just  as  the  dimensions  of  space  are  not  dis- 
tinct from  space  itself.  Hence  Spinoza  can  say  also  that  God  con- 
sists of  countless  attributes,  or  Deus  SITE  omnia  ejus  attributa.2  And 
the  same  relation  is  afterwards  repeated  between  the  attributes  and 
the  modes.  Every  attribute,  because  it  expresses  the  infinite  essence 
of  God  in  a  definite  manner,  is  again  infinite  in  its  own  way ;  but 
it  does  not  exist  otherwise  than  with  and  in  its  countless  modifica- 
tions. God  then  exists  only  in  things  as  their  universal  essence, 
and  they  only  in  him  as  the  modes  of  his  reality.  In  this  sense 
Spinoza  adopts  from  !N"icolaus  Cusanus  and  Giordano  Bruno  the 
expressions  natura  naturans  and  natura  natumta.  God  is  Xature  : 
as  the  universal  world-essence,  he  is  the  natura  naturans;  as  sum- 
total  of  the  individual  things  in  which  this  essence  exists  modified, 
he  is  the  natura  naturata.  If  in  this  connection  the  natura  naturans 
is  called  occasionally  also  the  efficient  cause  of  things,  this  creative 
force  must  not  be  thought  as  something  distinct  from  its  workings ; 
this  cause  exists  nowhere  but  in  its  workings.  This  is  Spinoza's 
complete  and  unreserved  pantheism. 

Finally  this  relation  is  repeated  yet  again  in  the  distinction  which 
Spinoza  establishes  between  the  infinite  and  the  finite  modes.3  If 
each  of  the  countless  finite  things  is  a  mode  of  God,  the  infinite 
connection  or  coherence  which  exists  between  them  must  also  be 
regarded  as  a  mode,  and,  indeed,  as  an  infinite  mode.  Spinoza  affirms 
three  of  these.4  The  deity  as  the  universal  world-thing  appears  in 
individual  things,  which  are  finite  modes ;  to  them  corresponds  as 

1  To  this  corresponds  also  his  theory  of  cognition  with  its  three  stages, 
which  sets  "intuition,"  as  the  immediate  apprehension  of  the  eternal  logical 
resulting  of  all  things  from  God,  as  knowledge  sub  specie  ceternitatis,  above 
perception  and  the  activity  of  the  intellect. 

2  Which,  however,  is  in  nowise  to  be  interpreted  as  if  the  attributes  were 
self-subsistent  prime  realities  and  "God"  only  the  collective  name  for  them 
(as  K.  Thomas  supposed,  8p.  ats  MetapJiysiker,  Konigsberg,  1840).    Such  a 
crassly  nominalistic  cap-stone  would  press  the  whole  system  out  of  joint. 

I.  23  and  30  fl.  4  JEp.  64  (Op.  II.  219). 


•ilO          The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.       [PART  IT. 

infinite  mode  the  universe.  In  the  attribute  of  extension  the  finite 
modes  are  the  particular  space-forms :  the  infinite  mode  is  infinite 
space,  or  matter1  itself  in  its  motion  and  rest.  For  the  attribute  of 
consciousness,  the  intellectus  infinitus*  stands  beside  the  particular 
functions  of  ideation  and  will.  Here  Spinoza  reminds  us  imme- 
diately of  the  realistic  pantheism  of  David  of  Dinant  (of.  §  27,  1). 
His  metaphysics  is  the  last  word  of  mediaeval  Realism.3 

6*  \Yith  these  motives  relating  to  the  problem  of  the  qualitative 
difference  of  substances  modern  philosophy  struggled  out  of  its 
dualistic  presuppositions  to  a  monistic  adjustment ;  but  at  the 
same  time,  still  more  powerful  motives  became  mingled  in  the 
process,  — motives  which  grew  out  of  the  real  and  causal  separation 
of  the  spatial  and  the  conscious  worlds.  At  first,  indeed,  it  was  the 
principles  of  mechanics  themselves  which  demanded  the  attempt  to 
isolate  completely  the  course  of  events  in  each  of  the  two  spheres 
o£  finite  substances. 

This  succeeded  in  the  corporeal  world  in  a  relatively  simple 
manner.  In  this  domain,  the  idea  of  cause  had  acquired  a  completely 
new  significance  through  Galileo.  According  to  the  scholastic  con- 
ception (which  even  in  Descartes'  Meditations,  in  a  decisive  passage, 
was  still  presented  with  axiomatic  validity)  causes  were  substances 
or  things,  while  effects,  on  the  other  hand,  were  either  their  activities 
ur  were  other  substances  and  things  which  were  held  to  come  about 
only  by  such  activities :  this  was  the  Platonic-Aristotelian  concep- 
tion of  the  atrta.  Galileo,  on  the  contrary,  went  back  to  the  idea  of 
the  older  Greek  thinkers  (cf.  §  o),  who  applied  the  causal  relation 
only  to  the  states — that  meant  now  to  the  motions  of  substances  — 
not  to  the  Being  of  the  substances  themselves.  Causes  are  motions, 
and  effects  are  motions.  The  relation  of  impact  and  counter-impact, 
of  the  passing  over  of  motion  from  one  corpuscle  to  another,*  is  the 
original  fundam ental  form  of  the  causal  relation,  the  form  which  is 
clear  to  perception  or  imagination  (anschaulicJi) ,  is  intelligible  in 

1  This  equivalence  holds  good  with  Spinoza  as  well  as  with  Descartes. 

2  This  intettertius  iniltdtus  appears  again  in  the  ethical  part  of  the  Spinozistic 
system  as  amor  inteUfrtualts  quo  dens  se  ipsum  amat.    In  both  cases  Male- 
branehe's  '•  ratsnn  uniwrnelle'"  amounts  to  the  same  thing. 

a  Geulincx  also,  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  of  Spinoza  and  Malebranche, 
regards  finite  bodies  and  minds  as  only  "  limitations,"  "prcecisiones"  of  the 
universal  infinite  body  and  the  divine  mind.  Cf.  Met.  p.  66.  If  we  think  away 
limitation  from  ourselves,  he  says,  ib.  237  3.,  there  is  left  —  God. 

*  Hence  for  Descartes  the  mechanical  principle  excluded  possibility  of  action 
at  a  distance,  just  as  it  excluded  empty  space.  This  forced  him  to  the  artificial 
hypotheses  of  the  vortex  theory,  by  which  he  aimed  to  give  a  physical  ground  for 
the  Copernican  view  of  the  world  (popular  exposition  by  Fontenelle,  JSntretiens 
sur  la  Plurality  ties  Mondes,  1686).  The  grounds  on  which  this  doctrine  was 
displaced  by  the  Newtonian  theory  of  gravitation  are  no  longer  philosophical, 
but  purely  physical  in  their  nature. 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]    Substance  and  Causality  :  Galileo,  Descartes.  411 

itself,  and  explains  all  others.  And  the  question  as  to  the  nature 
of  this  fundamental  relation  was  answered  by  the  principle  of  math- 
ematical equality ',  which,  in  turn,  passed  over  into  that  of  metaphysi- 
cal identity.  So  much  motion  in  the  cause,  so  much  in  the  effect 
also.  Descartes  formulated  this  as  the  laic  of  the  conservation  of 
motion  in  Mature.  The  sum  of  motion  in  Xature  remains  always 
the  same :  what  a  body  loses  in  motion  it  gives  to  another.  As 
regards  the  amount  of  motion,  there  is  in  Xature  nothing  new, 
especially  no  impulse  from  the  spiritual  world.1  Even  for  the  king- 
dom of  organisms  this  principle  was  carried  through,  at  least  as  a 
postulate,  though  as  yet  with  very  weak  grounds.  Animals,  also, 
are  machines  whose  motions  are  evoked  and  determined  by  the 
mechanism  of  the  nervous  system.  Descartes  thought  of  this 
mechanism  more  precisely  (and  with  him  Hobbes  and  Spinoza)  as 
a  motion  of  finest  (gaseous)  substances,  the  so-called  spiritus  ani- 
males,2  and  sought  the  point  of  transition  from  the  sensory  to  the 
motor  nervous  system  in  man,  in  a  part  of  the  brain  which  has  no 
correlative,  i.e.  is  a  single  and  not  a  paired  organ,  the  pineal  gland  or 
conarium. 

The  other  part  of  the  task  proved  much  more  difficult :  namely, 
that  of  understanding  the  mental  life  without  any  relation  to  the 
corporeal  world.  Easy  and  clear  to  perception  as  was  the  action  of 
one  body  upon  another,  it  did  not  yield  a  mode  of  representing  an 
incorporeal  connection  between  different  minds,  that  could  be  used 
scientifically.  Spinoza,  for  example,  expressed  the  general  meta- 
physical postulate  very  energetically,  when  he  promised  in  entering 
upon  the  third  book  of  the  Ethics,  that  he  would  treat  the  actions 
and  desires  of  man  as  if  lines,  surfaces,  and  bodies  were  the  subject 
of  discussion ;  for  the  important  thing  is  neither  to  asperse  them  nor 
to  deride  them,  but  to  understand  them.  But  the  solution  of  this 
problem  was  limited  in  advance  to  investigating  the  causal  connec- 
tion between  the  activities  of  consciousness  in  the  individual  mind : 
dualism  demanded  a  psychology  free  from  all  physiological  constitu- 
ents. It  is  all  the  more  characteristic  of  the  predominance  of  the 
spirit  of  natural  science  in  the  seventeenth  century,  that  it  attained 
this  psychology  demanded  by  the  theory,  only  in  the  most  limited 
degree.  And  even  the  beginnings  toward  this  are  ruled  by  the 
endeavour  to  apply  the  methodical  principle  of  mechanics,  which 

1  Hence  Hobbes  excluded  from  physics  the  Aristotelian  and  Thomistic  concep- 
tion of  the  unmoved  mover,  while  Descartes,  who  in  this  point  also  proceeded 
more  metaphysically,  made  motion  to  have  been  communicated  to  matter  at  the 
beginning  by  G-od. 

2  An  inheritance  from  the  physiological  psvchology  of  the  Greeks,  in  particu- 
lar from  that  of  the  Peripatetics. 


412  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

was  celebrating  its  triumphs  in  the  theory  of  outer  experience,  to 
the  comprehension  of  the  inner  world  also. 

For  just  as  the  investigation  of  Xature  from  Galileo  to  Xewton 
directed  its  energies  toward  finding  out  the  simple  fundamental 
form  of  corporeal  motion,  to  which  all  complex  structures  of  outer 
experience  could  be  reduced,  so  Descartes  desired  to  establish  the 
fundamental  forms  of  psychical  motion,  out  of  which  the  multiplic- 
itv  of  inner  experiences  would  become  explicable.  In  the  theoreti- 
cal domain  this  seemed  attained  by  establishing  the  immediately 
evident  truths  (the  innate  ideas) ;  in  the  practical  field  there  grew 
out  of  this  demand  the  new  problem  of  a  statics  and  a  mechanics  of 
the  mo  cements  of  feeling  (Grem&thsbeicegungeri) .  In  this  spirit  Des- 
cartes and  Spinoza  produced  their  natural  history  of  the  emotions 
(A/ecte)  and  passions,1  the  latter  author  by  combining  the  thoughts 
of  the  former  with  those  of  Hobbes.  Thus  Descartes  derives  the 
whole  host  of  particular  passions,  as  species  and  sub-species,  from 
the  six  fundamental  forms  of  wonder  (aclmiratio),  love,  and  hate, 
desire  (desir),  pleasure  and  pain  [or  joy  and  sadness.  Lust  und 
Vnlusf]  (Iwtitia  —  tristitia) ;  thus  Spinoza  develops  his  system  of 
the  emotions  out  of  desire,  pleasure,  and  pain  (appetitus,  Icetitia, 
tfistitia)  by  pointing  out  the  ideational  processes  in  connection 
with  which  these  emotions  have  become  transferred  from  their 
original  object,  the  self-preservation  of  the  individual,  to  other 
lm  ideas/" 

A  peculiar  side-attitude  is  taken  in  this  regard  by  the  two  English 
thinkers.  For  J5aco?i  and  Hobbes,  a  mechanical  conception  of  the 
mental  is  the  more  natural  in  proportion  as  they  endeavour  to 
draw  the  mental  more  closely  into  the  circle  of  the  physical.  Both, 
that  is,  regard  the  empirical  psychical  life,  and  therefore,  also,  the 
sphere  of  consciousness  which  in  Descartes'  system  was  to  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  corporeal  world,  as  something  which  essen- 
tially belongs  thereto  j  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  set  over  against 
the  whole  world  of  perception  rather  a  something  spiritual  [spirit- 
ual in  the  religious  sense,  Geistlickes']  than  a  something  mental  or 
intellectual  [Geistiges"].  Ideas  and  volitions  as  they  are  known  by 
experience  are  held  fco  be  at  bottom  activities  of  the  body  also,  and 
if  besides  these  we  speak  yet  of  an  immortal  soul  (spiraculum),  of 
a  spiritual  world  and  of  the  divine  mind  or  spirit,  this  should  fall 
to  the  province  of  theology.  But  according  to  this  view  the  natural 
science  theory  cannot  be  characterised  much  otherwise  than  as  an 


*  Descartes,  Les  Passions  de  rime;  Spinoza,  Eth.  III.,  and  Tract.  Brev.  II 
6ff.    Cf.  below,  No.  7. 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]    Substance  and  Causality:  Descartes,  Holies.    413 

anthropological  materialism;  for  it  aims  to  understand  the  entire 
series  of  empirical  psychical  activities  as  a  mechanical  process  con- 
nected with  the  bodily  functions.  This  problem  was  propounded  by 
Bacon  5  Hobbes  attempted  to  solve  it,  and  in  doing  so  became  the 
father  of  the  so-called  associational  psychology.  With  the  same 
outspoken  sensualism  as  Campanella,  of  whose  deductions  his  own 
frequently  remind  us,  —  especially  with  regard  to  the  mechanism  of 
ideas,  —  he  seeks  to  show  that  sense-impressions  give  the  only  ele- 
ments of  consciousness,  and  that  by  their  combination  and  trans- 
formation memory  and  thought  also  come  about.  In  the  practical 
domain  the  impulse  toward  self-preservation  and  the  feelings  of 
pleasure  and  pain  which  arise  in  connection  with  impressions  are 
then  characterised  analogously  as  the  elements  out  of  which  all 
other  feelings  and  activities  of  will  arise.  Hobbes,  too,  projected 
thus  a  "natural  history"  of  the  emotions  and  passions,  and  this 
was  not  without  influence  upon  that  of  Spinoza,  whose  theory  of 
the  emotions  is  always  looking  towards  the  other  attribute  [i.e. 
extension]. 

Prom  these  presuppositions  of  method  the  denial  of  the  freedom 
of  the  will  in  the  sense  of  indeterminism  followed  with  inexorable 
consistency  for  Hobbes  and  for  Spinoza.  Both  attempted — and 
Spinoza  did  it  in  the  baldest  form  that  can  be  conceived  —  to  exhibit 
the  strict  necessity  which  prevails  even  in  the  course  of  the  process 
of  motivation :  they  are  types  of  determinism.  For  Spinoza,  there- 
fore, there  is  no  freedom  in  the  psychological  sense.  Freedom  can 
mean  only,  on  the  one  hand,  metaphysically,  the  absolute  Being  of 
the  deity  determined  by  nothing  but  itself,  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
ethically,  the  ideal  of  the  overcoming  of  the  passions  through 
reason. 

7.  In  this  it  became  already  evident  that  in  the  presence  of  the 
facts  of  psychology,  that  absolute  separation  between  the  corporeal 
and  the  mental  world  which  metaphysics  demanded  was  not  to  be 
maintained.  But  Descartes  himself  met  quite  the  same  experience. 
The  nature  of  the  mind  itself  might,  indeed,  explain  the  clear  and 
distinct  ideas  and  the  forms  of  the  rational  will  which  resulted 
from  these,  but  it  could  not  explain  the  obscure  and  confused  ideas, 
and  the  emotions  and  passions  connected  with  them.  These  present 
themselves  rather  as  a  disturbance  of  tTie  mind1  (perturbationes 
animi),  and  since  this  perturbation  which  gives  occasion  for  the 

1  This  is  the  interest,  not  only  ethical,  but  also  theoretical,  which  induced  Des- 
cartes to  treat  states  psychologically  so  different  as  emotions  and  passions,  from 
the  same  point  of  view  and  in  one  line.  Cf .  for  the  following  Passions  de  VAme, 
L,  and  Meds.  Y.  and  VL 


414  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV, 

abuse  of  freedom  (cf.  above,  §  SO,  5)  cannot  be  due  to  God,  its 
origin  must  be  sought  ultimately  in  an  influence  exercised  by  the 
lady.  In  the  disturbances  of  the  feeling  there  is,  therefore,  for 
Descartes  an  indubitable  fact,  which  cannot  be  explained  from  the 
fundamental  metaphysical  principles  of  his  system.  Here,  there- 
fore, the  philosopher  sees  himself  forced  to  recognise  an  exceptional 
relation,  ana  he  adjusts  this  for  himself  in  a  way  that  had  been 
foreshadowed  by  the  anthropology  of  the  Victorines  (cf.  §  24,  2). 
The  nature  (nature.)  of  man,  he  teaches,  consists  in  the  inner  union 
of  tc:o  hettt'oyeneous  substances*  a  mind  and  a  body,  and  this  marvel- 
lous (i.e.  metaphysically  incomprehensible)  union  has  been  so 
arranged  by  God's  will  that  in  this  single  case  the  conscious  and 
the  spatial  substances  act  upon  each  other.  Animals  remain,  for 
Descartes,  bodies  ;  their  "  sensations  "  are  only  nervous  movements, 
out  of  which  stimulations  of  the  motor  system  arise  in  accordance 
with  the  reflex  mechanism.  In  the  human  body,  however,  the 
mental  substance  is  present  at  the  same  time,  and  in  consequence 
of  this  co-existence  the  storm  of  the  animal  spirits  in  the  pineal 
gland  excites  a  disturbance  in  the  mental  substance  also,  which 
manifests  itself  in  the  latter  as  an  unclear  and  indistinct  idea,  i.e. 
as  sense-perception,  as  emotion,  or  as  passion.1 

With  the  disciples,  the  systematic  impulse  was  greater  than  with 
the  master.  They  found  in  this  bifluxus  ^Ayszcws  between  mind 
and  body  the  vulnerable  point  in  the  Cartesian  philosophy,  and  ex- 
erted themselves  to  set  aside  the  exception  which  the  philosopher 
had  been  obliged  to  assert  in  the  anthropological  facts.  This,  how- 
ever, did  not  go  on  without  effecting  a  new,  and  in  a  certain  sense 
regressive,  alteration  in  the  conception  of  causality,  in  that  the 
metaphysical  moment  once  more  gained  preponderance  over  the  me- 
chanical. The  immanent  causal  processes  of  the  spatial  and  of  the 
conscious  worlds  were  regarded  as  intelligible  in  themselves ;  but 
the  transcendent  causal  process  from  one  of  these  worlds  into  the 
other  formed  a  problem.  Xo  difficulty  was  found  in  ( the  idea  that 
one  motion  transformed  itself  into  another  or  that  one  function  of 

1  On  this  Descartes  then  builds  his  Ethics.  In  such  perturbations  the  mind 
occupies  a  passive  attitude,  and  it  is  its  task  to  free  itself  from  these  in  clear 
and  distinct  knowledge.  Spinoza  carried  out  this  inteUectualistic  morals  in  an 
extremely  grand  and  impressive  manner  (Eth.  IV.  and  V.).  The  antithesis  of  an 
active  and  passive  attitude  of  the  finite  mind  is  indeed  gained  from  the  stand- 
point of  his  metaphysics  only  artificially  (Eth.  III.,  Def.  2) :  but  he  carried 
through  with  compelling  consistency  the  thought,  that  the  overcoming  of  the 
passions  follows  from  a  knowledge  of  them,  from  the  insight  into  the  necessary 
divine  system  of  all  things ;  he  taught  that  human  nature  must  perfect  itself  in 
the  blessedness  of  the  act  ire  emotions  which  consist  only  in  the  activity  of  the 
pure  impulse  toward  knowledge  (Eth.  V.  15  ff.),  and  thus  set  up  an  ideal  of 
life  which  reaches  the  height  of  the  Greek  tewpfa. 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]     Substance  and  Causality:  Geulincx.  415 

consciousness — for  example,  a  thought — should  pass  over  into  an- 
other :  but  it  seemed  impossible  to  understand  how  sensation  should 
come  out  of  motion,  or  motion  out  of  will.  Physical  and  logical  caus- 
ality seemed  to  offer  no  difficulty ;  so  much  the  greater  was  that 
presented  by  psycho-physical  causality.  In  the  case  of  the  latter  the 
consciousness  dawned  that  the  relation  of  equality  or  identity 
between  cause  and  effect,  by  means  of  which  mechanical  and  logi- 
cal dependence  seemed  intelligible,  does  not  exist.  Hence  an 
inquiry  must  here  be  made  for  the  principle  by  which  the  two  ele- 
ments of  the  causal  relation,  cause  and  effect,  which  do  not  in  them- 
selves belong  together,  are  connected  with  each  other.1  Where  this 
principle  was  to  be  sought  could  not  be  a  matter  of  doubt  for  the 
disciples  of  Descartes :  God,  who  produced  the  union  of  the  two 
substances  in  man's  nature,  has  also  so  arranged  them  that  the 
functions  of  the  one  substance  are  followed  by  the  corresponding 
functions  of  the  other.  But  on  this  account  these  functions  in 
their  causal  relation  to  one  another  are  not  properly,  and  in  their 
own  nature,  efficient  causes,  but  only  occasions  in  connection  with 
which  the  consequences  determined  by  divine  contrivance  appear  in 
the  other  substance, — not  causa  efficientes,  but  causce  occasionales. 
The  true  "cause"  for  the  causal  connection  between  stimuli  and 
sensations,  and  between  purposes  and  bodily  movements,  is  God. 

Such  considerations  are  multiplied  in  the  whole  development  of 
the  Cartesian  school.  Clauberg  brings  them  into  use  for  the  theory 
of  perceptions,  Cordemoy  for  that  of  purposive  motion ;  their  full 
development  is  attained  in  the  "  Ethics  "  of  Geulincx.  Yet  in  the 
latter  author  doubt  is  not  entirely  excluded  as  to  whether  God's 
causality  in  this  connection  is  regarded  as  a  special  intervention  in 
each  individual  case,  or  as  a  general  and  permanent  arrangement. 
In  some  passages,  indeed,  the  former  is  the  case,3  but  the  spirit  of 
the  doctrine,  taken  as  a  whole,  doubtless  involves  the  latter.  Geu- 
lincx  expresses  himself  most  clearly  in  the  illustration  of  the  clocks :  * 
as  two  clocks  which  have  been  made  alike  by  the  same  artificer 
continue  to  move  in  perfect  harmony,  "  absque  idla  causalitate  qua 
alterum  hoc  in  altero  causat,  sed  propter  meram  dependentiam,  qua 
utrumque  ab  eadem  arte  et  simili  industria  constitutum  est"  so  the 


1  That  the  fundamental  difficulty  in  all  causal  relations  was  in  this  actually 
stumbled  upon,  first  became  clear  at  a  later  time  through  Hume.    Ci  §  34. 

2  For  example,  in  the  analogy  of  the  child  in  the  cradle,  Eth.  123.    It  seems, 
besides,  that  the  first  edition  of  the  Ethics  (1665),  in  fact,  introduced  more  the 
deus  ex  machina,  while  the  annotations  added  in  the  second  edition  (1675)  pre- 
sent throughout  the  profounder  view. 

.,  p.  124,  note  19. 


416  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

corresponding  functions  of  mind  and  body  follow  each  other  in 
accordance  with  the  world-order  once  determined  by  God.1 

8.  This  anthropological  rationale  of  Occasionalism  fits  from  the 
beginning  into  a  more  general  metaphysical  course  of  thought.  The 
Cartesian  system  already  contained  the  premises  for  the  inference 
that  in  the  case  of  all  that  takes  place  in  finite  substances,  the  effi- 
cient principle  derives,  not  from  these  substances  themselves,  but  from 
the  deity.  Thinking  in  minds  takes  place  by  means  of  the  inborn 
ideas  which  God  has  given  them ;  to  the  corporeal  world  he  has 
communicated  a  quantum  of  motion  which  changes  only  in  its  dis- 
tribution, among  the  individual  corpuscles,  but  in  the  case  of  the 
individual  body  it  is,  so  to  speak,  only  temporarily  concealed. 
Blinds  can  create  new  ideas  as  little  as  bodies  can  create  new  mo- 
tion ;  the  sole  cause  is  God. 

The  Cartesians  had  all  the  more  occasion  to  emphasise  the  sole 
causality  of  God,  as  their  doctrine  encountered  violent  contradiction 
in  the  orthodoxy  of  both  Confessions,  and  became  involved  in  the 
theological  controversies  of  the  time.  Friend  and  foe  had  quickly 
recognised  the  relationship  of  Cartesianisin  with  the  doctrine  of 
Augustine;2  and  while  on  this  account  the  Jansenists  and  the 
Fathers  of  the  Oratory,  who  lived  in  the  Augustinian-Scotist  atmos- 
phere, were  friendly  to  the  new  philosophy,  the  orthodox  Peripa- 
tetics, and  especially  the  Jesuits,  made  war  upon  it  all  the  more 
violently.  Thus  the  old  opposition  between  Augustianism  and  TJwm- 
ism  came  out  in  the  controversy  over  Cartesianism.  The  conse- 
quence was  that  the  Cartesians  brought  into  the  foreground  as  far 
as  possible  those  elements  in  which  their  doctrine  was  allied  to  the 
Augustinian.  So  Louis  de  la  Forge 3  attempted  to  prove  the  com- 
plete identity  of  Cartesianism  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Church 
Father,  and  emphasised  especially  the  fact  that  according  to  both 
thinkers  the  sole  ground  of  all  that  takes  place  in  bodies  as  well  as 
minds  is  God.  Just  this  was  later  designated  by  Makbranche4  as 
the  sure  mark  of  a  Christian  philosophy,  while  the  most  dangerous 

1  If,  therefore,  Leibniz,  when  he  later  claimed  for  his  "pre-established  har- 
mony "  (JEdairc.  2  and  3)  this  same  analogy  in  frequent  use  at  that  time,  charac- 
terised the  Cartesian  conception  by  an  immediate  dependence  of  the  two  clocks 
upon  one  another,  and  the  Occasionalistic  by  a  constantly  renewed  regulation  of 
the  clocks  on  the  part  of  the  clock-maker,  this  was  applicable  at  most  to  some 
passages  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Ethics  of  Geulincx. 

2  Kinship  and  opposition  apply  also  to  still  other  points.    Descartes  and  the 
priests  of  the  Oratory  (Gibieuf,  Malebranche)  are  at  one  against  Thomism  in 
the  Augustinian  and  Scotist  doctrine  of  the  boundless  freedom  of  the  deity ; 
they  maintain  again  that  the  good  is  good  because  God  so  willed  it,  not  per  se 
(cf.  §  26,  2,  3),  etc. 

3  Trait,  fa  VJSspr.  Hum.,  Pref."  *  Recherche,  VL  2,  3. 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]  Substance  and  Causality :   Occasionalism.  417 

error  of  heathen  philosophy  consists  in  the  assumption  of  metaphys- 
ical self-subsistence  and  capacity  for  spontaneous  action  on  the  part 
of  finite  things. 

AYitli  Geulincx,  likewise,  all  finite  things  are  deprived  of  the 
causal  moment  or  element  of  substantiality.  In  this  he  proceeds 
from  the  principle l  that  one  can  himself  do  that  only  of  which  he 
knows  how  it  is  done.  From  this  it  follows  in  the  anthropological 
field,  that  the  mind  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  bodily  movements  — 
no  one  knows  how  he  sets  to  work  even  but  to  raise  his  arm ;  it 
follows  farther  in  the  cosmological  field,  that  bodies  which  have  no 
ideas  whatever  cannot  operate  at  all,  and  finally,  for  the  theory  of 
knowledge,  that  the  cause  of  perceptions  is  to  be  sought  not  in  the 
finite  mind  —  for  this  does  not  know  how  it  comes  to  perceive  — 
nor  in  bodies ;  therefore  it  is  to  be  sought  only  in  God.  He  pro- 
duces in  us  a  world  of  ideas  which  in  its  wealth  of  qualities  is  much 
richer  and  more  beautiful  than  the  actual  corporeal  world  itself.2 

The  epistemological  motif  finds  finally  with  Malebranche 3  a  still 
more  profound  apprehension.  Cartesian  dualism  makes  a  direct 
knowledge  of  the  body  by  mind  absolutely  impossible :  such  a  knowl- 
edge is  excluded  not  only  because  no  influxus  physicus  is  possible 
between  the  two,  but  also  because,  in  view  of  the  total  heterogeneity 
of  the  two  substances,  it  is  not  possible  to  see  how  even  an  idea  of 
the  one  is  thinkable  in  the  other.  In  this  respect,  also,  mediation 
is  possible  only  through  the  deity,  and  Malebranche  takes  refuge  in 
the  Neo-Platonic  world  of  Ideas  in  God.  Man  does  not  know  bodies ; 
he  knows  their  Ideas  in  God.  This  intelligible  corporeal  icorld  in  God 
is,  on  the  one  hand,  the  archetype  of  the  actual  corporeal  world  cre- 
ated by  God,  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  archetype  of  those  ideas 
which  God  has  communicated  to  us  of  this  actual  corporeal  world. 
Our  knowledge  is  like  the  actual  bodies,  just  as  two  magnitudes 
which  are  equal  to  a  third  are  equal  also  to  each  other.  In  this 
sense  Malebranche  understood  that  philosophy  teaches  that  we 
behold  all  things  in  God. 

9.  Quite  different  was  the  solution  which  Spinoza  gave  to  the 
Occasionalistic  problems.  The  explanation  of  any  mode  of  the  one 
attribute  by  a  mode  of  the  other  was  excluded  by  the  conception  of 


i£th.,p.  113;  Jfrt.,p.  26. 

2  The  remnant  of  self-activity  in  finite  beings  that  remains  in  the  system  of 
Geulincx  consists  in  the  immanent  mental  activity  of  man.  Cf.  Eth.  121  f. 
The  "  autology,"  or  inspectio  suf,  is,  therefore,  not  only  the  epistemological 
starting-point  of  the  system,  but  also  its  ethical  conclusion.  Man  has  nothing 
to  do  in  the  outer  world.  TJbi  niJiil  vales,  ibi  nihil  velis.  The  highest  virtue  is 
a  modest  contentment,  submission  to  God's  will  —  humility,  despectio  sui. 

*  Recli.  III.  2. 


418  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PAST  IV, 

the  attribute  as  lie  had  defined  it  (see  above,  Xo.  o)  ;  it  held  of  the 
attribute  as  of  substance,1  in  se  est  et  per  se  concipitur.  Accordingly 
there  could  be  no  question  of  the  dependence  of  the  spatial  upon 
consciousness,  or  vice  versa;  the  appearance  of  such  a  dependence 
which  presents  itself  in  the  anthropological  facts  needed,  therefore, 
another  explanation,  and  as  a  matter  of  course  this  was  to  be  sought 
by  the  aid  of  his  conception  of  God.  If,  however,  the  doctrine  that 
God  is  the  sole  cause  of  all  that  takes  place  is  for  this  reason  found 
also  with  Spinoza,  his  agreement  with  the  Occasionalists  exists  only 
in  the  motive  and  the  word,  but  not  in  the  meaning  or  spirit  of  the 
doctrine.  For  according  to  Geulincx  and  Malebranche,  God  is  the 
creator ;  according  to  Spinoza,  he  is  the  universal  essence  or  nature 
of  things ;  according  to  the  former,  God  creates  the  world  by  his 
will ;  according  to  the  latter,  the  world  follows  necessarily  from  the 
nature  of  God  [or  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  nature  of  God]. 
In  spite  of  the  likeness  in  the  word  cawsa,  therefore,  the  causal  rela- 
tion is  really  thought  here  in  a  sense  entirely  different  from  that 
which  it  has  there.  With  Spinoza  it  means  not,  u  God  creates  the 
world/'  but,  "  he  is  the  world." 

Spinoza  always  expresses  his  conception  of  real  dependence,  of 
causality,  by  the  word  "  follow JJ  (sequi,  consequi)  and  by  the  addi- 
tion, tk  as  from  the  definition  of  a  triangle  the  equality  of  the  sum 
of  its  angles  to  two  right  angles  follows."  The  dependence  of  the 
world  upon  God  is,  therefore,  thought  as  a  matJiematicdl  consequence* 
This  conception  of  the  causal  relation  has  thus  completely  stripped 
o2  the  empirical  mark  of  "producing 3J  or  "  creating  "  which  played 
so  important  a  part  with  the  Occasionalists,  and  replaces  the  percep- 
tional idea  of  active  operation  with  the  logico-mathematical  relation 
of  ground  and  consequent  [or  reason  and  consequent;  Grrund  und 
Frige].  Spinozism  is  a  consistent  identification  of  the  relation  of 
cause  and  effect  with  that  of  ground  and  consequent.  The  causality 
of  the  deity  is,  therefore,  not  in  time,  but  is  eternal,  that  is,  timeless  j 
and  true  knowledge  is  a  consideration  of  things  sub  quadam  ceterni- 
tatis  specie.  This  conception  of  the  relation  of  dependence  resulted 
of  itself  from  the  conception  of  the  deity  as  the  universal  essence  or 
nature :  from  this  nature  all  its  modifications  follow  timelessly,  just 
as  all  propositions  of  geometry  follow  from  the  nature  of  space. 
The  geometrical  method  knows  no  other  causality  than  that  of  the 
"eternal  consequence";  for  rationalism,  only  that  form  of  depend- 
ence which  is  peculiar  to  thought  itself,  namely,  the  logical  proced- 

1  Eth.  L,  Prop.  10. 

*  CL  Schopenhauer,  Ueber  die  vierfache  Wurzel  ties  Satzes  vom  zureichenden 
ch.  6.    [Fourfold  Eoot^  etc.,  JBohn  Lib.] 


CHAP. 2,  §31.]     Substance  and  Causality:  Spinoza.  419 

ure  of  the  consequent  from  its  antecedent  reason,  passes  as  in  itself 
intelligible,  and  on  this  account  as  the  schema  also  for  events  or 
cosmic  processes :  *  real  dependence  also  should  be  conceived  neither 
mechanically  nor  teleologically,  but  only  logico-mathematically. 

But  now,  as  in  geometry,  all  follows  indeed  from  the  nature  of 
space,  and  yet  each  particular  relation  is  fixed  by  other  particular 
determinations,  so,  too,  in  the  Spinozistic  metaphysics  the  neces- 
sary procedure  of  things  forth  from  God  consists  in  the  determina- 
tion of  every  individual  finite  entity  by  other  finite  things.  The 
sum  of  finite  things  and  the  modes  of  each  attribute  form  a  chain 
of  strict  determination,  a  chain  without  beginning  and  without  end. 
The  necessity  of  the  divine  nature  rules  in  all ;  but  no  mode  is  nearer 
to  the  deity,  or  farther  from  the  deity,  than  is  any  other.  In  this 
the  thought  of  Xicolaus  Cusanus  of  the  incommensurability  of  the 
finite  with  the  infinite  asserts  itself  —  no  series  of  stages  of  emana- 
tion leads  from  God  down  to  the  world :  everything  finite  is  deter- 
mined again  by  the  finite,  but  in  all  God  is  the  sole  ground  of  their 
essence  or  nature. 

If  this  is  the  case,  the  unity  of  essence  must  appear  also  in  the 
relation  of  the  attributes,  however  strictly  these  may  be  separated 
qualitatively  and  causally.  It  is  still  the  same  divine  essence  which 
exists  here  in  the  form  of  extension,  and  there  in  the  form  of  con- 
sciousness. The  two  attributes  are  then  necessarily  so  related  to 
each  other  that  to  every  mode  of  the  one  a  definite  mode  of  the 
other  corresponds.  This  correspondence  or  parallelism  of  the  attri- 
butes solves  the  enigma  of  the  connection  of  the  two  worlds :  ideas 
are  determined  only  by  ideas,  and  motions  only  by  motions ;  but  it 
is  the  like  cosmic  content -of  the  divine  essence  which  forms  the  con- 
nection of  the  one  class,  and  also  that  of  the  other ;  the  same  con- 
tent is  in  the  attribute  of  consciousness  as  in  the  attribute  of 
extension.  This  relation  is  presented  by  Spinoza  in  accordance 
with  the  scholastic  conceptions  of  the  esse  in  intellect u  and  the  esse 
in  re.  The  same  that  exists  in  the  attribute  of  consciousness  as- 
object  (objective) ,  as  the  content  of  our  ideas,  exists  in  the  attribute 
of  extension  as  something  actual,  independent  of  any  idea  or  mental 
representation  (formaliter)  .2 

1  Spinoza's  pantheism  has  therefore  the  closest  resemblance  to  the  scholastic 
mystical  -Realism  of  Scotus  Erigena  (cf.  §  23,  1),  only  that  in  the  latter's 
system  it  is  still  more  the  case  that  the  logical  relation  of  the  general  to  the 
particular  forms  the  only  schema ;  from  this  resulted,  in  his  case,  the  emanistic 
character  which  is  lacking  in  Spinoza. 

2  But  neither  of  these  two  modes  of  existence  is  more  original  than  the  other, 
or  forms  a  prototype  for  the  other :  both  express  equally  the  nature  of  God 
(exprimere}.    Hence  an  idealistic  interpretation  of  Spinoza  is  as  incorrect  as 
a  materialistic,  although  both  might  be  developed  out  of  his  system. 


120  The  Renaissance  :  Natural  Science  Period.     [?AHT  IV. 

Spinoza's  conception,  then,  is  this :  every  finite  thing  as  a  mode 
of  'the  divine  essence,  e.g.  man,  exists  in  like  measure  in  both  attri- 
butes, as  mind  and  as  body:  and  each  of  its  particular  functions 
belongs  also  in  like  measure  to  both  attributes,  as  idea  and  as 
motion.  As  idea,  it  is  determined  by  the  connection  of  ideas,  as 
motion  by  that  of  motions :  but  in  both,  the  content  is  the  same  by 
virtue  of  the  correspondence  of  the  attributes.  TJie  human  mind  is 
the  idea  (Idee]  of  the  human  focty.  both  as  a  whole  and  in  detail,1 

10.  The  conclusion  of  this  movement  of  thought  which  had 
passed  through  so  many  divarications  was  reached  in  the  meta- 
physical system  of  Leibniz.— a.  system  which  is  equalled  by  none 
in  the  entire  history  of  philosophy  in  all-sidedness  of  motives  and 
in  power  of  adjustment  and  combination.  It  owes  this  importance 
not  only  to  the  extensive  learning  and  the  harmonising  mind  of  its 
author,  but  especially  to  the  circumstance  that  he  was  at  home  in 
the  ideas  of  ancient  and  mediaeval  philosophy  with  as  deep  and  fine 
an  understanding  of  their  significance  as  he  had  for  the  conceptions 
formed  by  the  modern  study  of  Xature.2  Only  the  inventor  of  the 
differential  calculus,  who  had  as  much  understanding  for  Plato  and 
Aristotle  as  for  Descartes  and  Spinoza,  who  knew  and  appreciated 
Thomas  and  Duns  Scotus  as  well  as  Bacon  and  Hobbes, — only  he 
could  become  the  creator  of  the  i:  pre-established  harmony." 

The  reconciliation  of  the  mechanical  and  the  teleological  views  of  the 
woM.  and  with  this  the  uniting  of  the  scientific  and  the  religious 
interests  of  his  time,  was  the  leading  motive  in  the  thought  of  Leib- 
niz. He  wished  to  see  the  mechanical  explanation  of  Mature,  the 
formulation  of  which  in  its  scientific  conceptions  he  himself  essen- 
tially furthered,  carried  through  to  its  full  extent,  and  at  the  same 
time  he  east  about  for  thoughts  by  the  aid  of  which  the  purposeful 
living  character  of  the  universe  might  nevertheless  remain  compre- 
hensible. The  attempt  must  therefore  be  made — an  attempt  for 
which  there  were  already  intimations  in  the  doctrine  of  Descartes  — 
to  see  whether  the  whole  meshanical  course  of  events  could  not  be 
ultimately  traced  back  to  efficient  causes,  whose  purposeful  nature 
should  afford  an  import  and  meaning  to  their  working  taken  as  a 
whole.  The  whole  philosophical  development  of  Leibniz  has  the 
aim  to  substitute  for  the  corpuscles,  "  entelechies,"  and  to  win  back 
for  the  indifferent  God  of  the  geometrical  method  the  rights. of  the 
Platonic  alrta.  The  ultimate  goal  of  his  philosophy  is  to  under- 

1  The  difficulties  -which  arose  in  this  connection  from  self-consciousness,  and 
those  also  from  the  postulate  of  the  countless  attributes,  Spinoza  did  not  solve : 
cf.  the  correspondence  with  Tschirnhausen,  Op.  II.  219  f. 

2  Cf.  Syst.  JVbifr.  10.  -      * 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]     Substance  and  Causality  :  Leibniz.  421 


stand  the  mechanism  of  the  cosmic  processes  as  the  means 
nomenal  form  by  which  the  living  content  or  import  of  the  world 
realises  itself.  For  this  reason  he  could  no  longer  think  "cause  "  as 
only  "Being,"  could  no  longer  think  God  merely  as  ens  perfectissi- 
mum,  could  no  longer  think  <fc  substance  "  as  characterised  merely  by 
an  attribute  of  unchangeable  existence,  and  could  no  longer  think  its 
states  merely  as  modifications,  determinations,  or  specifications  of 
such  a  fundamental  quality:  cosmic  processes  or  change  became 
again  for  him  active  working  (Wirken)  ;  substances  took  on  the 
meaning  of  forces?  and  the  philosophical  conception  of  God  also 
had,  for  its  essential  characteristic,  creative  force.  This  was  Leib- 
niz' fundamental  thought,  that  this  creative  force  evinces  itself  in 
the  mechanical  system  of  motions. 

Leibniz  attained  this  dynamical  standpoint  first  in  his  theory  of 
motion,  and  in  a  way  which  of  itself  required  that  the  same  stand- 
point should  be  carried  over  into  metaphysics.2  The  mechanical 
problem  of  inertia  and  the  process  begun  by  Galileo  of  resolving 
motion  into  infinitely  small  impulses,  which  together  formed  the 
starting-point  for  the  authoritative  investigations  in  natural  science 
by  Huyghens  and  Xewton,  led  Leibniz  to  the  principle  of  the  infini- 
tesimal calculus,  to  his  conception  of  the  "vis  viva,"  and  es- 
pecially, to  the  insight  that  the  essential  nature  of  bodies,  in  which 
the  ground  of  motion  is  to  be  sought,  consists  not  in  extension,  nor 
yet  in  their  mass  (impenetrability),  but  in  their  capacity  to  do 
work,  —  in  force.  But  if  substance  is  force,  it  is  super-spatial  and  im- 
material. On  this  account  Leibniz  finds  himself  compelled  to  think 
even  corporeal  substance  as  immaterial  force.  Bodies  are,  in  their 
essential  nature,  force;  their  spatial  form,  their  property  of  filling 
space  and  their  motion  are  effects  of  this  force.  The  substance  of 
bodies  is  metaphysical.3  In  connection  with  Leibniz3  doctrine  of 
knowledge  this  purports  that  rational,  clear,  and  distinct  cognition 
apprehends  bodies  as  force,  while  sensuous,  obscure,  and  confused 
cognition  apprehends  them  as  spatial  structures.  Hence,  for  Leib- 
niz, space  is  neither  identical  with  bodies  (as  in  Descartes),  nor  the 
presupposition  for  them  (as  with  Newton),  but  a  force-product  of 
substances,  a  phenomenon  bene  fundatum,  an  order  of  co-existence,  — 


1  La  substance  est  nn  §tre  capable  d' action.    Princ.  de  la  Nat.  et  de  la  GrG.ce, 
1.     Cf.  Syst.  Nowo.  2  f .,  "  Force  primitive." 

2  Syst.  Nou'o.  3. 

8  "With  this  the  co-ordination  of  the  two  attributes,  extensio  and  cogitatio,  was 
again  abolished ;  the  world  of  consciousness  is  the  truly  actual,  the  world  of 
extension  is  phenomenon.  Leibniz  sets  the  intelligible  world  of  substances  over 
against  the  phenomena  of  the  senses  or  material  world  in  a  completely  Platonic 
fashion  (Now.  Ess.  IV.  3).  Cf.  §  33  f. 


422  The  Renaissance  :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IY. 

not  an  absolute  reality,  but  an  ens  mentak.1  And  the  same  holds 
true,  mutatis  mutandis,  of  time.  From  this  it  follows  further,  that 
the  laws  of  mechanics  which  refer  to  these  spatial  manifestations 
of  bodies  are  not  rational,  not  "geometrical"  truths,  but  truths 
which  relate  to  matters  of  fact,  and  are  contingent.  They  could  be 
thought  otherwise  [i.e.  the  opposite  is  not  inconceivable].  Their 
ground  is  not  logical  necessity,  but  —  purposiveness  or  appropriate- 
Bess.  They  are  lots  de  convenance;  and  have  their  roots  in  the  choix 
de  la  sagesse.2  God  chose  them  because  the  purpose  of  the  world 
would  be  best  fulfilled  in  the  form  determined  by  them.  If  bodies 
are  machines,  they  are  such  in  the  sense  that  machines  are  purpos- 
ively  constructed  works.3 

11.  Thus  again  in  Leibniz,  but  in  a  maturer  form  than  in  Neo- 
Platonism,  life  becomes  the  principle  for  explaining  Nature;  his 
doctrine  is  vitalism.  But  life  is  variety,  and  at  the  same  time  unity. 
The  mechanical  theory  led  Leibniz  to  the  conception  of  infinitely 
many  individual  forces,  metaphysical  points,4  as  likewise  to  the 
idea  of  their  continuous  connection.  He  had  originally  leaned 
toward  the  atomic  theory  of  Democritus  and  the  nominalistic  meta- 
physics ;  the  Occasionalist  movement,  and  above  all,  the  system  of 
Spinoza,  made  him  familiar  with  the  thought  of  the  All-unity  ;  and 
he  found  the  solution,  as  Xicolaus  Cusanus  and  Giordano  Bruno  had 
found  it  before,  in  the  principle  of  the  identity  of  the  part  with  the 
whole.  Each  force  is  the  world-force,  the  cosmic  force,  but  in  a 
peculiar  phase  ;  every  substance  is  the  world-substance,  but  in  par- 
ticular form.  Hence  Leibniz  gives  to  the  conception  of  substance 
just  this  meaning:  it  is  unity  in  plurality.5  This  means  that  every 
substance  in  every  state  "  represents"  the  multitude  of  other  sub- 
stances, and  to  the  nature  of  "representing"  belongs  always  the 
unifying  of  a  manifold.6 

"With  these  thoughts  are  united,  in  the  system  of  Leibniz,  the 

1  Cf.  chiefly  the  correspondence  with  des  Bosses. 

2  Princ.  11.  3  ib.  3. 

*  Syst.  .Your.  11.  «  Monad.  13-16. 

6  Leibniz  is  here  served  a  very  good  turn  (cf.  op.  eft.)  by  the  ambiguity  in 
the  word  "  representation  "  (which  applies  also  to  the  German  "vorstellen  "  [and 
to  the  English  u  representation"]),  in  accordance  with  which  the  word  means, 
on  the  one  hand,  to  supply  the  place  of  or  serve  as  a  symbol  of,  and  on  the 
other  hand,  the  function  of  consciousness.  That  every  substance  "repre- 
sents "  the  rest  means,  therefore,  on  the  one  hand,  that  all  is  contained  in  all 
- 


,  ,  , 

(Leibniz  cites  the  ancient  o-fyirpoia.  v&vra  and  also  the  omnia  ubique  of  the 
Renaissance),  and  on  the  other  hand,  that  each  substance  "  perceives"  all  the 
rest.  The  deeper  sense  and  justification  of  this  ambiguity  lies  in  the  fact  that 
we  cannot  form  any  clear  and  distinct  idea  whatever  of  the  unifying  of  a 
manifold,  except  after  the  pattern  of  that  kind  of  connection  which  we  expe- 
rience within  ourselves  in  the  function  of  consciousness  (u  synthesis  "  in  Kant's 
phraseology). 


CHAP.  2,  §  31.]     Substance  and  Causality :  Leibniz.      -  423 

postulates  which  had  been  current  in  the  metaphysical  movement 
since  Descartes;  namely,  that  of  the  isolation  of  substances  with 
reference  to  one  another,  and  that  of  the  correspondence  of  their 
functions  having  its  origin  in  the  common  world-ground.  Both  motifs 
are  most  perfectly  brought  out  in  the  Jfonadology.  Leibniz  calls  his 
force-substance  monad,  —  an  expression  which  might  have  come  to 
Mm  along  various  lines  of  Renaissance  tradition.  Each  monad  is 
with  reference  to  the  rest  a  perfectly  independent  being,  which  can 
neither  experience  nor  exercise  influence.  The  monads  "have  no 
windows,"  and  this  "  windowlessness "  is  to  a  certain  extent  the 
expression  of  their  "metaphysical  impenetrability." 1  But  this 
quality  of  being  completely  closed  to  outward  influence  receives 
first  of  all  a  positive  expression  from  Leibniz  in  his  declaration 
that  the  monad  is  a  purely  internal  principle : 2  substance  is  hence  a 
force  of  immanent  activity :  the  monad  is  not  physical,  but  psychical 
in  its  nature.  Its  states  are  representations  (Vorstellungen),  and 
the  principle  of  its  activity  is  desire  (ogp&ftz07i);the  "tendency"  to 
pass  over  from  one  representation  to  another.8 

Each  monad  is  nevertheless,  on  the  other  hand,  a  "mirror  of  the 
world " ;  it  contains  the  whole  universe  as  a  representation  within 
itself;  in  this  consists  the  living  unity  of  all  things.  But  each  is 
also  an  individual,  distinct  from  all  others.  For  there  are  no  two 
substances  in  the  world  alike.4  If  now  the  monads  are  not  distin- 
guished by  the  content  which  they  represent,  —  for  this  is  the  same 
with  all,5  —  their  difference  can  be  sought  only  in  their  mode  of 
representing  this  content,  and  Leibniz  declares  that  the  difference 
between  the  monads  consists  only  in  the  different  degree  of  clearness 
and  distinctness  with  which  they  "  represent "  the  universe.  Descartes' 
epistemological  criterion  thus  becomes  a  metaphysical  predicate  by 
reason  of  the  fact  that  Leibniz,  like  Duns  Scotus  (cf.  p.  331),  con- 
ceives of  the  antithesis  of  distinct  and  confused  as  an  antithesis  in 
the  force  of  representation  or  in  intensity.  Hence  the  monad  is  re- 
garded as  active  in  so  far  as  it  represents  clearly  and  distinctly,  as 
passive  in  so  far  as  it  represents  obscurely  and  confusedly : 6  hence, 
also,  its  impulse  (appetition}  is  directed  toward  passing  from  obscure 

1  Monad.  7,    Cf.  Syst.  Nouv.  14, 17. 

*  Monad.  II.  s  Ib.  15-19. 

4  Leibniz    expressed  this   as   the  principium  identitatis  indiscernibiiium 
(Monad.  9). 

5  Here,  to  be  sure,  Leibniz  overlooked  the  fact  that  no  real  content  is  reached 
in  this  system  of  mutual  representation  of  substances.   The  monad  a  represents 
the  monads  ft,  c,  <Z,  .  .  .  x.    But  what  is  the  monad  b  ?    It  is  in  turn  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  monads  a,  c,  tf,  .  .  .  x.    The  same  is  true  for  c,  and  so  on  in 
infinitum. 

6  Monad.  49. 


4*24  The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

to  clear  representations,  aiui  the  -clearing  up"  of  its  own  content  is 
the  goal  of  its  life.  To  this  above-mentioned  intensity  of  the  repre- 
sentations Leibniz  applies  the  mechanical  principle  of  infinitely 
small  impulses:  he  calls  these  infinitely  small  constituent 'parts  of 
the  representative  life  of  the  monads  pet  ttes  perceptions,1  and  needs 
this  hypothesis  to  explain  the  fact,  that  according  to  his  doctrine  the 
monad  evidently  has  very  many  more  representations  than  it  is  con- 
scious of  (cf.  below,  §  33).  In  the  language  of  to-day  thepetites  per- 
ceptions would  be  unconscious  mental  states  (Vorstellungen) . 

Of  such  differences  in  degree  of  clearness  and  distinctness  there 
are  infinitely  many,  and  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  continuity  — 
naftrra  nonfadt  saltum  —  the  monads  form  an  uninterrupted  graded 
series,  a  great  system  of  development,  which  rises  from  the  "  simple" 
monads  to  souls  and  minds.2  The  lowest  monads,  which  represent 
onlv  obscurely  and  confusedly,  i.e.  unconsciously,  are  therefore  only 
passive ;  they  form  matter.  The  highest  monad,  which  represents 
the  universe  with  perfect  clearness  and  distinctness,  —  just  for  this 
reason  there  is  but  one  such, — and  is  accordingly  pure  activity,  is 
called  the  central  monad —  God.  Inasmuch  as  each  of  these  monads 
lives  out  its  own  nature,  they  all  harmonise  completely  with  each 
other  at  every  moment3  by  virtue  of  the  sameness  of  their  content, 
and  from  this  arises  the  appearance  of  the  action  of  one  substance 
upon  others.  This  relation  is  the  harmonie preetablie  des  substances 
—  a  doctrine  in  which  the  principle  of  correspondence,  introduced 
by  Geulinex  and  Spinoza  for  the  relation  of  the  two  attributes, 
appears  extended  to  the  totality  of  all  substances.  Here  as  there, 
however,  the  principle  as  carried  out  involves  the  uninterrupted 
determination  in  the  activity  of  all  substances,  the  strict  necessity 
of  all  that  takes  place,  and  excludes  all  chance  and  all  freedom  in 
the  sense  of  uncaused  action.  Leibniz  also  rescues  the  conception 
of  freedom  for  finite  substances  only  in  the  ethical  meaning  of  a 
control  of  reason  over  the  senses  and  passions.4 

The  pre-established  harmony — this  relationship  of  substances  in 
their  Being  and  life — needs,  however,  a  unity  as  the  ground  of  its 
explanations,  and  this  can  be  sought  only  in  the  central  monad* 
God,  who  created  the  finite  substances,  gave  to  each  its  own  content 

1  Ib.  21. 

2  Princ.  4.    In  this  connection  the  "  soul "  is  conceived  of  as  the  central 
monad  of  an  organism,  in  that  it  represents  most  distinctly  the  monads  consti- 
tuting this,  and  accordingly  only  with  a  lesser  degree  of  distinctness  the  rest  of 
the  universe.    Monad.  61  ff. 

8  Syst.  JVOHF.  14. 

*  JSo  magis  est  Ubertas  quo  magis  agitur  ex  ratione,  etc,  Leibniz,  De  Libert. 
(Op.,  Erd.  ed.,  669). 


CHAP.  2,  §  32.  J  Natural  Right.  425 

in  a  particular  grade  of  representative  intensity,  and  thereby  so 
arranged  all  the  monads  that  they  should  harmonise  throughout. 
And  in  this  necessary  process  in  which  their  life  unfolds,  they 
realise  the  end  of  the  creative  Universal  Spirit  in  the  whole 
mechanical  determination  of  the  series  of  their  representations. 
This  relation  of  mechanism  to  teleology  makes  its  way  finally,  also, 
into  the  epistemological  principles  of  Leibniz.  The  deity  and  the 
other  monads  sustain  the  same  relation  to  each  other  as  the  infinite 
aud  finite  substances  sustain  in  the  system  of  Descartes.  But  for 
the  rationalistic  conception  of  things,  only  the  infinite  is  a  necessity 
of  thought,  while  the  finite,  on  the  contrary,  is  something  "  contin- 
gent,"  in  the  sense  that  it  might  also  be  thought  otherwise,  that  the 
opposite  contains  no  contradiction  (cf.  above,  §  30,  7).  Thus  the 
antithesis  of  eternal  and  necessary  truths  takes  on  metaphysical 
significance  :  only  God's  Being  is  an  eternal  truth;  he  exists,  accord- 
ing to  the  principle  of  contradiction,  with  logical  or  absolute  necessity. 
Finite  things,  however,  are  contingent;  they  exist  only  in  accordance 
with  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason,  by  virtue  of  their  determina- 
tion by  another;  the  world  and  all  that  belongs  to  it  has  only 
conditioned,  hypothetical  necessity.  This  contingency  of  the-  world, 
Leibniz,  in  agreement  with  Duns  Scotus,1  traces  back  to  the  icill  of 
God.  The  world  might  have  been  otherwise ;  that  it  is  as  it  is,  it 
owes  to  the  choice  which  God  made  between  the  TQ&TIJ  possibilities? 
Thus  in  Leibniz  all  threads  of  the  old  and  the  new  metaphysics 
run  together.  With  the  aid  of  the  conceptions  formed  in  the  school 
of  mechanics  he  formulated  the  presages  of  the  philosophy  of  the 
Renaissance  into  a  systematic  structure,  where  the  ideas  of  Greece 
found  their  home  in  the  midst  of  the  knowledge  acquired  by  modern 
investigation. 

§  32.    Natural  Eight. 

The  Philosophy  of  Eight  of  the  Renaissance  was  also  dependent, 
on  the  one  hand,  upon  the  stimulus  of  Humanism,  and  on  the  other, 
upon  the  needs  of  modern  life.  The  former  element  is  shown  not 
only  in  the  dependence  upon  ancient  literature,  but  also  in  the  re- 
vival of  the  ancient  conception  of  the  state,  and  in  the  attachment 
to  its  traditions ;  the  latter  make  their  appearance  as  a  theoreti- 
cal generalisation  of  those  interests,  in  connection  with  which  the 

1  The  relations  of  Leibniz  to  the  greatest  of  the  Scholastics  are  to  be  recog- 
nized not  only  in  this  point,  but  also  in  many  others ;  though  as  yet  they  have 
unfortunately  not  found  the  consideration  or  treatment  that  they  deserve. 

2  Cf.,  however,  in  addition,  below,  §  35. 


426  The  Renaissance:  Natural  Science  Period.      [PART  IY. 

secular  states  during  this  period  took  on  the  form  of  autonomous 
life. 

1.  All  these  motives  show  themselves  first  in  MaccliiavellL  In 
his  admiration  of  Rome,  the  Italian  national  feeling  speaks  imme- 
diatelv,  and  it  was  from  the  study  of  ancient  history  that  he  gained 
his  theory  of  the  modern  state,  at  least  as  regards  its  negative  side. 
He  demanded  the  complete  independence  of  the  state  from  the 
Church,  and  carried  Dante's  Ghibelline  doctrine  of  the  state  to  its 
farthest  consequence.  He  combats  the  temporal  sovereignty  of  the 
Papacy  as  the  permanent  obstacle  to  an  Italian  national  state,  and 
so  that  separation  between  the  spiritual  and  the  secular,  which  is 
common  to  all  the  beginnings  of  modern  thought,  is  completed  for 
the  practical  field  in  his  system,  as  it  had  been  before  with  Occam 
and  ilarsilius  of  Padua  (cf.  p.  328).  The  consequence  of  this, 
however,  as  with  the  Xominalists  just  mentioned,  was  that  the  state 
was  conceived  not  teleologically,  but  in  purely  naturalistic  fashion 
as  a  product  of  needs  and  interests.  "From  this  fact  is  explained 
the  singleness  of  aim  and  regardlessness  with  which  Macchiavelli 
carried  out  his  theory  of  the  acquisition  and  preservation  of  princely 
power,  and  with  which  he  treated  politics  solely  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  warfare  of  interests. 

The  relation  of  church  and  state,  moreover,  excited  an  especial 
interest  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  because  it  played 
a  part  that  was  always  important  and  often  decisive  in  the  conflicts 
and  shiftings  of  confessional  oppositions.  Here  an  interesting 
exchange  of  conceptions  came  about.  The  Protestant  view  of  the 
world,  which  in  accordance  with  its  first  principle  changed  the 
mediaeval  distinction  in  value  between  the  spiritual  and  the  secular, 
and  removed  the  ban  of  the  "profane"  from  the  secular  spheres 
of  life,  saw  in  the  state  also  a  divine  order  j  and  the  Reformation 
Philosophy  of  Right,  under  the  lead  of  Melancthon,  limited  the  right 
of  the  state  more  by  the  right  of  the  invisible,  than  by  the  claims 
of  the  visible  Church ;  indeed,  the  divine  mission  of  the  magistrates 
afforded  a  valuable  support  for  the  Protestant  State-church.  Much 
less  could  the  Catholic  Church  feel  itself  under  obligation  to  the 
modern  state;  and  although  it  thereby  departed  from  Thomism,  it 
allowed  itself  to  be  pleased  by  such  theories  as  those  of  Bellarmin 
and  ^lariana,  in  which  the  state  was  conceived  of  as  a  work  of 
human  composition  or  as  a  compact.  For  with  this  theory  the  state 
lost  its  higher  authority,  and  to  a  certain  extent  its  metaphysical 
root;  it  appeared  capable  of  abolition ;  the  human  will  which  had 
created  it  might  dissolve  it  again,  and  even  its  supreme  head  was 
deprived  of  his  absolute  inviolability.  While  the  Protestants  re- 


CHAP.  2,  §  32.]      Natural  Right :  Haeckiavelli,  Reformers.        427 

garded  the  state  as  an  immediate  divine  order,  for  the  Catholics,  as 
being  a  human  arrangement,  it  needed  the  sanction  of  the  Church 
and  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  valid  where  this  was  lacking ;  but 
it  should  retain  this  sanction  only  when  it  placed  itself  at  the  service 
of  the  Church.  So  Campanelk  taught  that  the  Spanish  Empire 
(monarchia)  had  as  its  task  to  place  the  treasures  of  foreign  parts 
of  the  world  at  the  disposal  of  the  Church  for  her  contest  with  the 
heretics. 

2.  But  in  time  these  oppositions  in  the  philosophy  of  rights 
yielded  to  confessional  indifferentism,  which  had  attained  the  mas- 
tery in  theoretical  science  also,  and  since  the  state  was  regarded  as 
essentially  an  order  of  earthly  things,  the  relation  of  man  to  God 
fell  outside  its  sphere  of  action.  Philosophy  demanded  for  the 
citizen  the  right  which  she  claimed  for  herself,  the  right  of  a  free, 
individual  attitude  toward  the  religious  authorities  of  the  time,  and 
became  thereby  the  champion  of  toleration.  The  state  has  not  to 
trouble  itself  about  the  religious  opinion  of  individuals,  the  right  of 
the  citizen  is  independent  of  his  adherence  to  this  or  that  confes- 
sion: this  demand  was  the  necessary  result  of  the  confessional 
controversies  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  which  had 
heaved  and  tossed  so  passionately  to  and  fro.  In  this  view  unbe- 
lieving indifference,  and  positive  conviction  which  had  to  defend 
itself  against  political  authority  of  the  opposite  creed,  came  to  an 
agreement. 

In  this  spirit  Macchiavelli  had  already  written  against  the  sole 
authority  of  the  Eoman  Church ;  but  it  was  by  Thomas  More  that 
the  principle  of  toleration  was  first  proclaimed  in  its  completeness. 
The  inhabitants  of  his  happy  island  belong  to  the  most  varied  con- 
fessions, which  all  live  peacefully  side  by  side  without  any  polit- 
ical importance  being  attributed  to  the  variety  of  their  religious 
views.  They  have  even  united  upon  a  common  worship,  which  each 
party  interprets  in  its  own  sense,  and  supplements  by  special  forms 
of  worship.  So,  too,  Jean  Bodin,  in  his  HeptaplomereSj  makes 
highly  educated  typical  representatives,  not  only  of  the  Christian 
confessions,  but  also  of  Judaism,  Mohammedanism,  and  Heathen- 
dom, find  a  form  of  worshipping  God,  which  is  equally  satisfactory 
to  all.  Finally,  in  a  more  abstract  manner,  Hugo  Grotius  com- 
pletely separated  divine  and  human  right  in  the  sharp  distinctness 
with  which  he  presented  the  principles  of  the  philosophical  science 
of  rights,  basing  divine  right  upon  revelation  and  human  right  upon 
reason;  demanding  at  the  same  time,  however,  an  equally  sharp 
and  thoroughgoing  separation  of  the  spheres  of  life  to  which  they 
apply. 


428  The  Renaissance  :  Natural  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

But  the  classical  *•  Doomsday  Book  "  for  the  toleration  movement 
was  Spinoza's  TJieologlco-polltical  Tractate,  which  went  to  the  root  of 
the  much-treated  matter.  Utilising  many  thoughts  and  examples 
from  the  older  Jewish  literature  influenced  by  Averroism,  this  work 
demonstrated  that  religion,  and  especially  the  religious  documents, 
hare  neither  the  province  nor  the  design  of  teaching  theoretical 
truths,  and  that  the  essence  of  religion  consists  not  in  the  recogni- 
tion of  particular  dogmas,  but  in  the  disposition  and  the  will  and 
action  determined  by  it.  From  this  it  follows  incontestably  that 
the  state  has  still  less  ground  or  right  to  trouble  itself  about  the 
assent  of  its  citizens  to  particular  dogmas,  and  that  it  should  rather 
by  virtue  of  its  real  authority  restrain  every  attempt  toward  a  con- 
straining of  the  conscience,  which  may  proceed  from  any  of  the 
ecclesiastically  organised  forms  of  religious  life.  The  mystically 
profound  religious  nature  of  Spinoza  alienated  him  from  the  dog- 
matic government  of  the  churches  and  from  belief  in  the  literal 
statements  of  their  historical  documents.  He  asserted  the  principle 
that  religious  books,  like  all  other  phenomena  of  literature,  must  be 
historically  explained  as  to  their  theoretical  import,  that  is,  must  be 
understood  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  intellectual  condition  of 
their  authors,  and  that  this  historical  criticism  takes  away  from 
those  former  theoretical  views  their  binding  and  normative  signifi- 
cance for  a  later  time, 

3.  With  the  political  and  churchly  political  interests  became 
associated  the  social    Xo  one  gave  them  a  more  eloquent  expression 
than  Thomas  More.    After  a  thrilling  portrayal  of  the  misery  of 
the  masses  the  first  book  of  the  Utopia  comes  to  the  conclusion  that 
society  would  do  better  if  instead  of  the  Draconian  justice  with  which 
she  punishes  the  violation  of  her  laws,  she  should  stop  the  sources  of 
crime.    The  author  maintains  that  the  greater  part  of  the*  guilt  for 
the  wrong-doing  of  the  individual  is  due  to  the  perverted  arrange- 
ment of  the  whole.    This  latter  consists  in  the  inequality  of  property 
brought  about  by  the  use  of  money,  for  this  inequality  gives  occasion 
to  all  the  aberrations  of  passion,  of  envy,  and  of  hatred.    The  ideal 
picture  of  the  perfect  state  of  society  upon  the  island  of  Utopia, 
which  More  sketches  in  contrast  to  the  present  condition,  is  in  its 
main  features  an  imitation  of  the  ideal  state  of  Plato.     This  human- 
istic  revival  is,  however,  distinguished  from  its  prototype  in  a 
manner  characteristic  for  modern  socialism,  by  its  abolition  of  class- 
distinctions,  which  seemed  necessary  to  the  ancient  thinker  in  conse- 
quence of  his  reflection  upon  the  actually  given  difference  in  the 
intellectual  and  moral  status  of  individuals.    In  an  abstraction 
that  was  a  prototype  for  the  succeeding  development  More  proceeded 


CHAP.  2,  §  32.]      Natural  Riyht :  Spinoza,  Jfore,  Bacon.          429 

from  the  thought  of  the  equality  of  all  citizens  before  the  laic,  and 
changed  into  an  equality  of  claim  or  title  for  all  citizens  those  forms 
of  community  which  Plato  had  demanded  of  the  ruling  classes  as  a 
renunciation  of  the  natural  impulses  toward  an  individual  sphere  of 
interests.  With  Plato  the  preferred  classes  were  to  renounce  all 
private  property  in  order  to  devote  themselves  entirely  to  the  gen- 
eral weal :  with  More  the  abolition  of  private  property  is  demanded 
as  the  surest  means  for  doing  away  with  crime,  and  is  based  upon 
the  equality  of  title  which  all  have  to  the  common  possession.  But 
at  the  same  time  the  English  Chancellor  still  holds  fast  to  the  ideal 
model  of  the  ancient  philosopher,  in  so  far  as  to  treat  this  entire 
equality  in  the  division  of  material  interests,  as  the  indispensable 
basis  for  making  it  possible  to  all  citizens  to  enjoy  in  like  measure 
the  ideal  goods  of  society,  science,  and  art.  A  normal  working  day 
of  six  hours  for  all  members  of  society  will  be  enough,  he  thinks,  to 
satisfy  all  external  needs  of  the  community:  the  remaining  time 
should  remain  free  for  every  one  for  nobler  employment.  With  these 
characteristics  the  programme  for  all  the  higher  forms  of  modern 
socialism  grows  in  the  thought  of  More  out  of  the  Platonic  project. 

But  the  spirit  of  the  Eenaissance  was  animated  by  much  more 
worldly  interests.  Stimulated  by  the  magic  of  discoveries,  dazzled 
by  the  glitter  of  inventions,  it  set  itself  the  task  of  transforming  by 
its  new  insights  the  whole  outer  condition  of  human  society  as 
related  to  the  natural  conditions  of  life,  and  saw  before  itself  an 
ideal  of  comfort  for  human  life,  which  should  develop  from  a  com- 
plete and  systematic  use  of  the  knowledge  and  control  of  JSTature 
made  possible  by  science.  All  social  injuries  will  be  healed  by 
raising  human  society,  by  means  of  the  scientific  advancement  of 
external  civilisation,  beyond  all  the  cares  and  all  the  need  which 
now  vex  it.  A  few  inventions  like  the  compass,  the  art  of  printing, 
and  gunpowder,  says  Bacon,  have  sufficed  to  give  human  life  new 
motion,  greater  dimensions,  mightier  development.  What  trans- 
formations stand  before  us  when  invention  once  becomes  an  intel- 
ligently exercised  art !  The  social  problem  is  thus  transferred  to 
an  improvement  of  the  material  condition  of  society. 

In  Bacon's  New  Atlantis1  a  happy  island-people  in  carefully 
guarded  seclusion  is  brought  before  us,  which  by  skilful  regula- 
tions receives  information  of  the  progress  in  civilisation  made  by 
all  other  peoples,  and  at  the  same  time,  by  the  systematic  prosecu- 
tion of  research,  discovery,  and  invention,  raises  to  the  highest 


1  The  title  of  this  Utopia  and  much  else  in  it  is  a  reminiscence  of  Plato's 
fragment,  Critias  (113  f.). 


430  The  Renaissance ;  Natural  Science  Period.      [PART  IV. 

point  the  control  of  Nature  for  the  practical  interests  of  human  life. 
All  kinds  of  possible  and  impossible  inventions  are  related  in  fan- 
tastic prophecy,1  and  the  whole  activity  of  the  •'•  House  of  Solomon  " 
is  directed  toward  improving  the  material  state  of  society,  while  the 
portrayal  of  the  political  relations  is  only  superficial  and  unim- 
portant. 

In  Campanella's  State  of  the  Sun,  on  the  other  hand,  in  which  the 
after-effects  of  More's  Utopia  are  very  noticeable,  we  come  to  a  com- 
plete project  of  the  socialistic  future  state,  which  is  even  pedanti- 
cally ordered  down  to  all  of  its  minor  relations.  This  state  does  not 
shrink  in  any  direction  from  the  most  extreme  violence  to  the  free- 
dom of  the  individual's  life.  From  the  mathematically  delineated 
plan  of  the  imperial  city  to  the  division  of  hours  for  daily  work* 
and  enjoyment,  the  determination  of  professions,  the  pairing  of  the 
men  and  women,  the  astrologicaJly  predetermined  hour  for  sexual 
unions,  —all  takes  place  here  from  an  arrangement  by  the  state  for 
the  welfare  of  the  whole,  and  an  extended,  carefully  worked  out 
system  of  bureaucracy  (in  which  there  is  an  admixture  of  metaphys- 
ical motives)3  is  built  up  upon  the  graded  knowledge  of  the  citizens. 
The  more  any  one  knows,  the  more  power  he  ought  to  have  in  the 
state,  in  order  to  rule  and  improve  by  his  knowledge  the  course  of 
Xature.  The  points  of  view  in  this  improvement  look  essentially 
toward  external  civilisation  in  Campanella's  system  also.  With 
him,  indeed,  four  hours  of  daily  labour  should  suffice  on  the  average 
to  assure  the  good  cheer  of  society,  and  upon  this  prosperity  all 
should  have  a  like  claim. 

4  In  spite  of  all  that  is  fantastic  and  whimsical,3  the  thought 
nevertheless  asserts  itself  in  Campanella's  State  of  the  Sun,  still 
more  than  in  More's  Utopia,  that  the  state  should  be  an  artificial 
product  of  human  insight  for  the  removal  of  social  injuries.  Neither 
writer  desired  to  set  up  a  mere  creation  of  fancy,  any  more  than  did 
Plato ;  they  believe  in  the  possibility  of  realising  "the  best  political 
constitution  "  by  rational  reflection  upon  an  order  of  social  relations 

1  In  addition  to  the  microscope  and  the  telescope,  the  microphone  and  tele- 
phone are  not  wanting;  there  are  giant  explosive  materials,  flying-machines, 
all  sorts  of  engines  with  air  and  water  power,  and  even  "some  kinds"  of 
perpetual  motion !    But  the  author  lays  special  value  upon  the  fact  that  by 
better  culture  of  plants  and  animals,  by  unsuspected  chemical  discoveries,  by 
baths  and  air-cures,  diseases  are  to  be  banished  and  life  prolonged ;  experiments 
on  animals  are  also  introduced  in  the  interest  of  medicine. 

2  Beneath  the  supreme  ruler,  —  Sol  or  Metaphysicus,  — who  must  embody  all 
knowledge  within  himself,  stand  first  of  all  three  princes,  whose  spheres  of 
activity  correspond  to  the  three  "  primaries "  of  Being,  Power,  Wisdom  and 
Love  (cf.  §  29,^  3),  etc. 

^  *  Fantastic  is  especially  the  strong  element  of  astrological  and  magical  super- 
stition ;  whimsical,  his  monkish  rude  treatment  of  the  sexual  relations. 


CHAP.  2,  §  32.]     Natural  Right :  Campanella,  G-rotius.  431 

that  shall  be  in  accordance  with  Xature.  In  this,  to  be  sure,  they 
encountered  much  opposition.  Cardanus  combated  Utopias  on 
principle,  and  in  their  stead  commended  to  science  the  task  of 
comprehending  the  necessity  with  which  the  actual  states  of  history 
develop  in  their  special  definite  nature,  out  of  the  character,  the 
relations  of  life,  and  the  experiences  of  peoples ;  he  would  have 
them  regarded  as  natural  products  like  organisms,  and  would  apply 
to  their  conditions  the  medical  categories  of  health  and  disease. 
Iii  a  larger  way,  and  free  from  the  Pythagorean  astrology  in  which 
the  mathematician  Cardanus  indulged,  but  with  a  strongly  con- 
structive fancy,  the  practical  statesman  Bodin  attempted  to  under- 
stand the  manifold  character  of  historical  reality  as  manifested  in 
political  life. 

But  the  tendency  of  the  time  was  much  more  toward  seeking  a  right 
founded  in  Xature  for  all  times  and  relations  alike,  and  to  be  recog- 
nised by  reason  alone :  although  a  man  like  Albericus  Gentilis  desired 
to  reduce  the  principles  of  private  right  to  physical  laws  by  analogies 
of  childlike  crudeness.  A  firmer  and  more  fruitful  ground  was 
gained  when  human  nature,  instead  of  general  "Xature,"  was  taken 
as  a  starting-point.  This  was  done  by  Hugo  Grotius.  Like  Thomas 
Aquinas,  he  found  the  fundamental  principle  of  natural  right  in  the 
social  need,  and  found  the  method  for  its  development  in  logical 
deduction.  That  which  reason  recognises  as  agreeing  with  man's 
social  nature  aoid  following  therefrom  —  in  this  consists  the  jus 
naturale1 — that  cannot  be  changed  by  any  historical  mutation. 
The  thought  of  such  an  absolute  right,  which  exists  only  by  its 
foundation  in  reason,  and  which  exists  independently  of  the  politi- 
cal power  and  rather  as  the  ultimate  ground  of  this  power,  was 
brought  home  to  Grotius  by  the  analogy  of  international  law  with 
which  his  investigation  was  primarily  concerned.  On  the  other 
hand,  however,  by  virtue  of  this  material  principle,  private  right  be- 
came the  authoritative  presupposition  for  political  right  also.  The 
satisfaction  of  individual  interests,  protection  of  life  and  property, 
appeared  as  the  essential  end  to  be  subserved  by  the  ordering  of 
rights.  Formally  and  methodically,  on  the  contrary,  this  philo- 
sophical system  of  rights  was  entirely  deductive ;  it  aimed  only  to 
draw  the  logical  consequences  of  the  principle  of  society.  In  like 
manner  Hobbes  also  regarded  the  corpus  politicum  as  a  machine 
capable  of  being  deduced  from  the  conception  of  its  end  by  pure 
intellectual  activity,  and  the  philosophical  doctrine  of  rights  as  a 
perfect  demonstrable  science.  At  the  same  time  this  field  seemed 

1  De  Jure  Bell,  et  Pac.  I. 1, 10. 


432          The  Renaissance :  Natural  Science  Period.       [PART  IV. 

adapted  in  a  pre-emineat  degree  to  the  application  of  the  geometri- 
cal method,  and  Pufendorf  introduced  the  whole  apparatus  of  this 
method  by  combining 'Grot  ins  and  Hobbes,  and  developing  the  whole 
system  synthetically  from  the  thought  that  the  individual's  instinct 
toward  self-preservation  could  be  rationally  and  successfully  fulfilled 
only  by  satisfying  his  social  need.  In  this  form  natural  right  per- 
sisted as  the  ideal  of  a  "'geometrical"  science  until  far  on  into 
the  eighteenth  century  (Thomasius,  Wolff,  indeed,  even  to  Fichte 
and  Schelling),  and  survived  the  general  decline  of  the  Cartesian 
principle. 

5.  Looking  now  at  the  contents  rather  than  at  the  form,  we  find 
that  the  ultimate  ground  of  public  life  and  of  social  coherence  was 
placed  in  the  interests  of  individuals:  the  mechanics  of  the  state 
found  in  the  character  of  the  impulses  of  the  individual  man  that 
self-intelligible  and  simple  element,1  out  of  which  the  complex 
structures  of  life  viewed  as  a  subject  of  law  and  rights  (Eechtslebens) 
might  be  explained  in  accordance  with  the  Galilean  principle.  With 
this  the  doctrine  of  the  state  also  went  back  to  the  Epicurean  theory  of 
social  atomism2  (cf.  pp.  174  f.),  and  the  synthetic  principle  by  which 
the  origin  of  the  state  was  to  be  understood  was  the  contract.  From 
Occam  and  Marsilius  down  to  Rousseau,  Kant,  and  Fichte,  this  con- 
tract theory  was  dominant  in  political  philosophy.  Grotius  and 
Hobbes  devoted  themselves  to  carrying  it  out  in  the  most  careful 
manner.  To  the  political  contract  by  which  the  individuals  unite 
themselves  to  a  community  of  interests,  is  attached  the  contract  of 
sovereignty  or  subjection,  by  means  of  which  the  individuals  hand 
over  their  rights  and  authority  to  the  magistracy.  This  proved  to 
be  a  general  frame  in  which  the  most  varied  political  theories  fitted. 
While  Grotius,  and  likewise  Spinoza,  found  the  interests  of  the 
citizens  to  be  best  guaranteed  by  an  aristocratic  republican  constitu- 
tion, Hobbes  could  deduce  from  the  same  presupposition  his  theory 
of  a  purely  secular  absolutism,  according  to  which  the  political  power 
should  be  inviolably  united  in  one  personality,  the  universal  will  in 
the  individual  will  of  the  sovereign. 

In  closest  connection  with  the  contract  theory  appears  the  devel- 
opment of  the  conception  of  sovereignty.  The  source  of  all  power, 
according  to  this  theory,  is  the  popular  will,  from  which  the  politi- 
cal contract  and  the  contract  of  submission  have  proceeded;  the 
proper  bearer  of  tire  sovereignty  is  the  people.  Meanwhile  the  con- 

1  The  term  "conatus"  applies  in  this  sense  to  both  domains,  the  physical 
and  the  psychical,  with  Hobbes  and  Spinoza. 

2  As  in  the  theoretical  domain,  so  also  in  the  practical,  the  principle  of 
Democritus  and  Epicurus  obtains  with  great  efforts  a  late  victory. 


CHAP.  2,  §  32.]       Natural  Right :   Contract  Theory.        -          48S 

tract  and  the  transfer  of  right  and  power  completed  thereby,  are 
regarded  by  some  writers  as  irrevocable,  and  by  others  as  capable 
of  recall.  So  Bodin,  in  spite  of  his  doctrine  of  popular  sovereignty, 
maintains  the  unlimited  character  and  unconditional  authority  of 
the  royal  poorer,  the  inviolability  of  the  ruler  and  the  unjustifia- 
bility  of  all  opposition  against  him  ;  with  ffobbes  the  sovereignty 
of  the  people  is  still  more  completely  absorbed  into  that  of  the 
monarch,  whose  will  here  stands  quite  in  the  sense  of  the  Tetat  cest 
moi  as  the  sole  source  of  rights  in  the  positive  political  life.  In  oppo- 
sition to  this  view,  and  decidedly  more  consistent  in  view  of  their 
presupposition,  the  {i  monarchomachischen  [opposed  to  an  absolute 
monarchy]  theories,''  whose  chief  representative  besides  Buchanan 
(1506-1582)  and  Languet  (1518-1581)  was  Althus  of  Lower  Sax- 
ony, maintained  that  the  governmental  contract  becomes  liable  to 
dissolution  as  soon  as  the  sovereign  ceases  to -rule  rightly,  i.e.  in  the 
interest  and  according  to  the  will  of  the  people.  If  the  contract  is 
broken  on  one  side,  it  is  no  longer  binding  for  the  other  party; 
in  this  situation  the  sovereignty  returns  again  to  its  original  bearers. 
If  man  has  made  the  state  with  a  purpose  and  under  reflection,  then 
he  abolishes  it  again  when  it  becomes  evident  that  it  has  failed  to 
fulfil  its  purpose.  Thus  the  Renaissance  is  already  providing  in 
advance  the  theory  of  revolution.1 

All  these  theories,  however,  received  their  especial  colouring  from 
motives  growing  out  of  the  particular  relations  of  church  and  state,  — 
a  colouring  which  depended  upon  the  question  whether  the  unre- 
stricted power  of  the  ruler  was  felt  as  dangerous  or  as  beneficial  in 
consequence  of  his  relation  to  the  Confessions.  The  most  radical 
standpoint  in  real  politics  was  taken  by  Hobbes  by  virtue  of  his 
religious  indifferentism  :  religion  is  a  private  opinion,  and  only  that 
opinion  which  the  sovereign  professes  has  political  standing  or  value. 
"No  other  religion  or  Confession  can  be  tolerated  in  public  life. 
Hobbes  gave  the  philosophical  theory  for  the  historical  cujus  regio 
illius  religio.  And  Spinoza  attached  himself  to  him  in  this.  He 
stood  for  freedom  of  thought  and  against  all  compulsion  of  con- 
science, but  for  him  religion  was  only  a  matter  of  knowledge  and 
disposition  j  for  the  public  manifestation  of  religious  feeling  in  the 
church  and  in  public  worship,  it  was  in  the  interest  of  order  and 
peace  that  only  the  form  fixed  by  the  magistracy  should  obtain.  In 
a  more  positive  sense  the  Protestant  Philosophy  of  Eight  declared  for 

1  These  principles  were  defended  with  special  application  to  the  English  con- 
ditions of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  to  the  right  of  the  "Re volution"  of 
that  time  by  the  poet  John  Milton  (Defensio  pro  Populo  Anglicano,  1651),  and 
"by  Algernon  Sidney  (Discourses  of  Government,  1683). 


434          The  Renaissance  :  Natural  Science  Period.       [PART  IY. 

tlie  sovereignty  in  church  and  state  of  the  kingdom  existing  by  the 
grace  of  God ;  -while  in  this  school,  also,  as  for  example  in  the  case 
of  Althus,  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  was  defended  as  over 
against  a  magistracy  holding  another  creed.  The  same  motive  was 
decisive  where  the  Jesuits  maintained  that  the  magistracy  might  be 
removed  and  that  the  assassination  of  the  prince  was  excusable 
(cf.  above). 

6.  In  the  case  of  Hobbes  the  rationale  of  the  contract  theory 
rested  on  more  general  motives.  If  the  social  and  political  life  was" 
to  be  comprehended  from  the  point  of  view  of  "  human  nature,"  the 
English  philosopher  found  the  fundamental,  all-determining  charac- 
teristic of  human  nature  in  the  impulse  toward  self-preservation  or 
eyoism,  the  simple,  self-evident  principle  for  explaining  the  entire 
volitional  life.  Here  his  materialistic  metaphysics  and  sensualistio 
psychology  (cf .  §  31)  made  it  appear  that  this  instinct  toward  self- 
preservation,  in  its  original  essence,  was  directed  only  toward  the 
preservation  and  furtherance  of  the  sensuous  existence  of  the  indi- 
vidual. All  other  objects  of  the  will  could  serve  only  as  means  to 
bring  about  that  supreme  end.  Agreeably  to  this  principle,  also, 
there  was  no  other  norm  of  judgment  for  man  as  a  natural  being 
than  that  of  furtherance  or  hindrance,  of  profit  or  of  harm:  the 
distinction  of  good  and  evil,  of  right  and  wrong,  is  not  possible 
upon  the  standpoint  of  the  individual,  but  only  upon  the  social 
standpoint  where  the  common  interest  instead  of  the  individual's 
interest  forms  the  standard.  So  egoism  became  the  principle  of  all 
practical  philosophy;  for  if  the  individual's  instinct  toward  self- 
preservation  was  to  be  restricted  and  corrected  by  the  command  of 
the  state,  yet  this  state  itself  was  regarded  as  the  most  ingenious 
and  perfect  of  all  the  contrivances  which  egoism  had  hit  upon  to 
attain  and  secure  its  satisfaction.  The  state  of  nature,  in  which  the 
egoism  of  each  stands  originally  opposed  to  the  egoism  of  every 
other,  is  a  war  of  all  against  all:  to  escape  this  the  state  was 
founded  as  a  contract  for  the  mutual  warrant  of  self-preservation. 
The  social  need  is  not  original :  it  only  results  necessarily  as  the 
most  efficient  and  certain  means  for  the  satisfaction  of  egoism. 

Spinoza  adopted  this  doctrine,  but  gave  it  a  more  ideal  signifi- 
cance by  introducing  it  into  his  metaphysics.  "  Suum  esse  con- 
servare "  is  for  him  also  the  quintessence  and  fundamental  motive 
or  all  willing.  But  since  every  finite  mode  belongs  equally  to  both 
attributes,  its  impulse  toward  self-preservation  is  directed  as  well 
toward  its  conscious  activity,  i.e.  its  knowledge,  as  toward  its  main- 
tenance in  the  corporeal  world,  Le.  its  power.  This  individual 
striving,  interpreted  along  the  lines  of  the  Baconian  identity  of 


CHAP.  2,  §  32.]      Natural  Right :  Hobbes,  Cambridge  Men.       435 

knowledge  and  power,  forms  for  Spinoza  the  ground  of  explanation 
for  the  empirical  life  of  the  state,  in  accordance  with  the  principle 
that  each  one's  right  extends  as  far  as  his  power.  In  this  process 
of  explanation  Spinoza  moves  mainly  in  the  lines  of  Hobbes,  and 
deviates  from  him  only,  as  noticed  above,  in  his  view  as  to  the  best 
form  of  constitution.  This  same  complication  of  conceptions,  how- 
ever, presents  itself  to  Spinoza  as  affording  also  a  starting-point  for 
his  niystico-religious  ethics.  For  since  the  true  "esse"  of  every 
finite  thing  is  the  deity,  the  only  perfect  satisfaction  of  the  impulse 
toward  self-preservation  is  to  be  found  in  "love  to  God,"  That 
Malebranche,  who  spoke  so  vehemently  of  the  "atheistical  Jew," 
taught  the  same  in  slightly  different  words  — "  mit  ein  Mschen 
anderen  Worten" — has  already  been  mentioned  (§  31,  4). 

7.  Hobbes'  theory  of  egoism — the  "selfish  system,"  as  it  was 
later  termed  for  the  most  part  —  found  vigorous  opposition  among 
his  countrymen.1  The  reduction  of  all  activities  of  the  will,  without 
any  exception,  to  the  impulse  toward  self-preservation  excited  both 
ethical  revolt  and  the  theoretical  contradiction  of  psychological  expe- 
rience. "  The  warfare  against  Hobbes  was  undertaken  primarily  by 
the  Neo-Platonist  school  of  Cambridge,  whose  chief  literary  repre- 
sentatives were  Ealph  Cudicorth  and  Henry  More.  In  this  contro- 
versy the  antithesis  of  Averts  and  0«ns  developed  after  the  ancient 
prototype.  For  Hobbes,  right  and  moral  order  arose  from  social 
institution;  for  his  opponents  they  were  original  and  immediately 
certain  demands  of  !Nature.  Both  parties  opposed  the  lex  naturalis 
to  the  theological  dogmatic  grounding  of  practical  philosophy  :  but 
for  Hobbes  natural  law  was  the  demonstrable  consequence  of  intel- 
ligent egoism ;  for  the  "  Platonists  "  it  was  an  immediate  certainty, 
innate  in  the  human  mind. 

Cumberland  proceeded  against  Hobbes  in  the  same  line.  He 
would  have  man's  social  nature  regarded  as  being  as  original  as  his 
egoism :  the  "  benevolent "  altruistic  inclinations,  whose  actual  ex- 
istence is  not  to  be  doubted,  are  objects  of  direct  self-perception 
which  have  an  original  independence  of  their  own ;  the  social  need 
is  not  the  refined  product  of  a  shrewd  self-seeking,  but  —  as  Hugo 
G-rotius  had  conceived  of  it  —  a  primary,  constitutive  characteristic 
of  human  nature.  While  egoism  is  directed  toward  one's  own 
private  weal,  the  altruistic  motives  are  directed  toward  the  uni- 
versal weal,  without  which  private  weal  is  not  possible.  This 
connection  between  the  welfare  of  the  individual  and  that  of  the 


1  Of.  J.  Tullocti,  Rational  Theology  and  Christian  Philosophy  in  England  in 
the  27th  Cent.  (Loud.  1872). 


436  The  Renaissance  :  Xatufal  Science  Period.     [PART  IV. 

public,  which  in  Hoboes  appeared  as  due  to  the  shrewd  insight 
of  man,  is  regarded  by  Cumberland  as  a  provision  of  God,  whose 
commandment  is  hence  considered  to  be  the  authoritative  principle 
for  obeying  those  demands  which  express  themselves  in  the  benevo- 
lent inclinations. 

To  the  side  of  this  natural  morality  of  reason,  which  was  thus 
defended  against  orthodoxy  on  the  one  hand  and  sensualism  on  the 
other,  came  the  natural  religion  of  reason,  which  had  been  set  up 
by  Herbert  of  Clrtrlury  in  opposition  to  these  same  two  positions. 
Beiigion  also  shall  be  based  neither  upon  historical  revelation  nor 
upon  human  institution ;  it  belongs  to  the  inborn  possession  of  the 
human  mind.  The  consensus  gentium  —  so  argues  Herbert  in  the 
manner  of  the  ancient  Stoics  —  proves  that  belief  in  the  deity  is 
a  necessary  constituent  of  the  human  world  of  ideas,  a  demand 
of  reason  ;  but  on  this  account  that  only  which  corresponds  to  those 
demands  of  the  reason  can  stand  as  true  content  of  religion,  as 
contrasted  with  the  dogmas  of  religions. 

Thus  the  questions  of  practical  philosophy  which  appear  in 
English  literature  in  the  very  lively  discussion  excited  by  Hobbes, 
gradually  became  transferred  to  the  psychological  realm.  What  is 
the  origin  of  right,  morals,  and  religion  in  the  human  mind  ?  —  so 
runs  the  problem.  TTith  this,  however,  the  movements  of  the 
philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  are  introduced. 


PAET  Y. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  ENLIGHTENMENT. 

In  addition  to  the  literature  cited  on  p.  348,  cf . 

Leslie  Stephen,  History  of  English  Thought  in  the  18th  Cent.    Lond.  1876. 

J.  Mackintosh,  On  the  Progress  of  Ethical  Philosophy  during  the  27th  and, 

ISth  Centuries.    Edin.  1872. 
Ph.  Damiron,  Memoirespour  servir  a  VSistoire  de  la  Philosophic  ait  18me  Siecle. 

3  vote.,  Paris  1858-04. 

E.  Zeller,  Geschichte  far  deutschen  Philosophie  seit  Leibniz.    Miinehen,  1873. 
Also  H.  Hettner,  Litter  at  urgeschichte  ties  18.  Jo.hr.    3  parts. 

THE  natural  rhythm  of  intellectual  life  brought  with  it  the  result 
that  in  the  modern  as  in.  the  Greek  philosophy  a  first  cosmologico- 
metaphysical  period  was  followed  by  a  period  of  an  essentially 
anthropological  character,  and  that  thus  once  more  the  newly 
awakened,  purely  theoretical  efforts  of  philosophy  must  yield  to  a 
practical  conception  of  philosophy  as  "world-wisdom"  In  fact,  all 
features  of  the  Greek  sophistic  movement  are  found  again  with 
ripened  fulness  of  thought,  with  broadened  variety,  with  deepened 
content,  and,  therefore,  also,  with  added  energy  in  their  antitheses 
in  the  Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment,  which  coincides  approxi- 
mately in  time  with  the  eighteenth  century.  In  the  place  of  Athens 
now  appears  the  whole  breadth  of  the  intellectual  movement  among 
European  civilised  peoples,  and  scientific  tradition  counts  now  as 
many  thousands  of  years  as  it  then  counted  centuries;  but  the 
tendency  as  a  whole  and  the  objects  of  thought,  the  points  of  view 
and  the  results  of  the  philosophising,  show  an  instructive  similarity 
and  kinship  in  these  two  periods  so  widely  separated  in  time  and 
so  different  in  the  civilisations  which  formed  their  background. 
There  prevails  in  both  the  same  turning  of  thought  toward  the 
subject's  inner  nature,  the  same  turning  away  from  metaphysical 
subtlety  with  doubt  and  disgust,  the  same  preference  for  an  em- 
pirical genetic  consideration  of  the  human  psychical  life,  the  same 
inqjiiry  as  to  the  possibility  and  the  limits  of  scientific  knowledge, 

437 


438  Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment.  [?AKT  V. 

and  the  same  passionate  interest  in  the  discussion  of  the  prob- 
lems of  life  and  society.  Xo  less  characteristic,  lastly,  for  both 
periods  is  the  penetration  of  philosophy  into  the  broad  circles  of 
general  culture  and  the  fusion  of  the  scientific  with  the  literary 
movement. 

But  the  basis  for  the  Enlightenment  of  the  eighteenth  century 
was  given  in  the  general  features  of  a  secular  view  of  life,  as  they 
had  been  worked  out  during  the  Eenaissance  by  the  fresh  move- 
ments in  art,  religion,  politics,  and  natural  research.  "While  these 
had  found  their  metaphysical  formulation  in  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury, the  question  now  came  again  into  the  foreground,  how  man 
should  conceive,  in  the  setting  of  the  new  Weltanschauung ,  his  own 
nature  and  his  own  position :  and  in  the  presence  of  the  value  set 
upon  this  question,  the  interest  in  the  various  metaphysical  concep- 
tions in  which,  the  new  Weltanschauung  had  been  embodied,  retreated 
more  and  more  decidedly  into  the  background.  Men  contented 
themselves  with  the  general  outlines  of  metaphysical  theories,  in 
order  to  employ  themselves  the  more  thoroughly  with  the  questions 
of  human  life ;  and  all  the  doctrines  of  the  Enlightenment  which 
offer  such  a  vehement  polemic  against  speculation  are,  in  truth, 
working  from  the  beginning  with  a  metaphysics  of  the  "  sound  corn- 
won  sense ;j  which  at  last  raised  its  voice  so  high,  and  which  ulti- 
mately only  assumed  as  self-evident  truth  that  which  had  fallen  to 
it  from  the  achievements  of  the  labour  of  preceding  centuries. 

The  beginnings  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  are  to  be 
sought  in  England,  where,  in  connection  with  the  well-ordered  con- 
ditions which  followed  the  close  of  the  period  of  the  revolution,  a 
powerful  upward  movement  of  literary  life  claimed  philosophy  also 
in  the  interests  of  general  culture.  From  England  this  literature 
was  transplanted  to  France.  Here,  however,  the  opposition  of  the 
ideals  which  it  brought  with  it  to  the  social  and  political  status, 
worked  in  such  a  way  that  not  only  was  the  presentation  of  the 
thoughts  more  excited  and  vehement  from  the  outset,  but  the 
thoughts  themselves  also  take  on  a  sharper  point,  and  turn  their 
negative  energy  more  powerfully  against  the  existing  conditions  in 
Church  and  state.  At  first  from  France,  and  then  from  the  direct 
influence  of  England,1  also,  Germany  received  the  ideas  of  the 
Enlightenment,  for  which  it  had  already  received  an  independent 
preparation  in  a  more  theoretical  manner:  and  here  these  ideas 
found  their  last  deepening,  and  a  purification  and  ennobling  as  well, 

1  Cf .  G.  Zart,  Der  Einfluss  for  englischen  Philosophen  auf  die  deutsche  Philos. 
des  18.  Jahrfi.  (Berlin,  1881). 


Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment.  439 

as  they  came  to  an  end  in  the  German  poetry  with  which  the 
Renaissance  of  classical  Humanism  was  completed. 

John  Locke  became  the  leader  of  the  English  Enlightenment  by 
finding  a  popular  form  of  empirico-psychological  exposition  for  the 
general  outlines  of  the  Cartesian  conception  of  the  world.  While 
the  metaphysical  tendency  of  the  system  brought  forth  an  idealistic 
after-shoot  in  J3erkeley}  the  anthropologico-genetic  mode  of  con- 
sideration extended  quickly  and  victoriously  to  all  problems  of 
philosophy.  Here  the  opposition  between  the  sensualistic  associa- 
tional  psychology  and  the  nativistic  theories  of  various  origin  con- 
tinued to  have  a  decisive  influence  upon  the  course  of  development. 
It  controlled  the  vigorous  movement  in  'moral  philosophy,  and  the 
development  of  deism  and  natural  religion,  which  was  connected 
with  it ;  and  it  found  its  sharpest  formulation  in  the  epistemological 
field,  where  the  most  consistent  and  deepest  of  English  thinkers, 
David  Hume,  developed  empiricism  to  positivism,  and  thereby  called 
forth  the  opposition  of  the  Scottish  school 

The  pioneer  of  the  French  Enlightenment  was  Pierre  Bayle,  whose 
Dictionnaire  turned  the  views  of  the  cultivated  world  completely  in 
the  direction  of  religious  scepticism;  and  it  was  along  this  line 
chiefly  that  the  English  literature  was  then  taken  up  in  Paris. 
Voltaire  was  the  great  writer,  who  not  only  gave  this  movement  its 
most  eloquent  expression,  but  also  presented  the  positive  elements 
of  the  Enlightenment  in  the  most  emphatic  manner.  But  the 
development  pressed  with  much  greater  weight  toward  the  negative 
side.  In  the  common  thinking  of  the  Encyclopaedists  became  com- 
pleted step  by  step  the  change  from  empiricism  to  sensualism,  from 
naturalism  to  materialism,  from  deism  to  atheism,  from  enthusiastic 
to  egoistic  morals.  In  opposition  to  such  an  Enlightenment  of  the 
intellect,  whose  lines  all  converge  in  the  positivism  of  Qondillac, 
there  appeared  in  Rousseau  &  feeling-philosophy  of  elemental  power, 
leading  to  the  intellectual  shaping  of  the  Revolution. 

Germany  was  won  for  the  Enlightenment  movement  by  the 
Leibnizian  philosophy  and  the  great  success  which  Wolff  achieved, 
in  his  activity  as  a  teacher,  in  developing  and  transforming  it,  but 
here,  in  consequence  of  the  lack  of  a  unifying  public  interest,  the 
tendency  toward  individual  culture  was  predominant.  For  the  ends 
of  this  individual  culture,  the  ideas  of  the  "philosophical  century  " 
were  elaborated  in  psychological  and  epistemological  as  well  as  in 
the  moral,  political,  and  religious  fields  with  great  multiplicity,  but 
without  any  new  creation  of  principles  until  fresh  life  and  higher 
points  of  view  were  brought  by  the  poetical  movement  and  the  great 
personalities  of  its  bearers,  Lessing  and  Herder,  to  the  dry  intelli- 


440  Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment.  [PART  V. 

gence  with  which,  a  boastful  popular  philosophy  had  extended  itself, 
especially  in  connection  with  the  Berlin  Academy.1  This  circum- 
stance kept  the  German  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century  from 
losing  itself  in  theoretico-sceptical  self-disintegration  like  the  Eog- 
lish,  or  from  being  shattered  in  practical  politics  like  the  French :  by 
contact  with  a  great  literature  teeming  with  ideas  a  new  great 
epoch  of  philosophy  was  here  prepared. 

John  Locke,  "born  1632,  at  Wrington  near  Bristol,  was  educated  at  Oxford, 
and  became  involved  in  the  changeful  fortunes  of  the  statesman  Lord  Shaftes- 
bury.  He  returned  home  from  exile  in  Holland  with  William  of  Orange  in 
IfiSS,  filled  several  high  political  offices  under  the  new  government  which  he 
also  often  publicly  defended,  and  died  while  living  in  the  country  at  leisure,  in 
17<>4.  His  philosophical  work  bears  the  title  An  Essay  concerning  Human 
Vn'ler&tfincKnff  (1690)  ;  besides  this  are  to  be  mentioned  Some  Thoughts  on 
EdHMtfan  (ItiOS),  The  Reasonableness  of  Christianity  (1695),  and,  among  his 
posthmnuus  works,  Of  the  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.  Cf.  Fox  Bourne, 
The  Life  of  J.  L.  (Lond.  and  X.Y.  ISTtf)  ;  Th.  Fowler,  J.  L.  (Lond.  1880); 
[ZoeA'e]  by"  A.  C.  Fraser,  Blackwood  series,  Edin.  and  Phila.  1890,  and  article 
Liicke  in  Enc.  Brit.;  T.  H.  Green  in  his  Int.  tf>  Biihie;  J.  Dewey,  Leibniz's 
.Yeir  Eswis,  Chicago,  1888  ;  Edition  of  his  works  by  Low,  1771,  also  ed.  Lond. 
1853  :  Philos.  wks.  in  Bohn  Lib.  Crit.  ed.  of  the  Essay  by  Fraser,  1894], 

Georize  Berkeley  was  born  in  Killerin,  Ireland,  in  1085.  took  part  as  a  clergy- 
man in  missionary  and  colonisation  attempts  in  America, ,  became  Bishop  of 
Cloyne  17o4,  and  died  1755.  His  Theory  of  Vision  (1709)  was  a  preparation 
for  his  Treatise  on  the  PrinL-i^s  of  Human  Knoichdye  (1710).  This  main 
work  was  later  followed  by  the  Thw  Dialogues  between  Hylas  and  Philonous, 
and  by  Alciphnm  or  the  Minute  Philosopher.  Edition  of  his  works  by  Fraser, 
4  vols.,  Lond.  1871 ;  the  same  writer  has  also  given  a  good  exposition  of  his 
thought  as  a  whole  (Blackwood  series,  Edin.  and  Lond.  1881).  Cf.  Collyns 
Simon,  Cntrersal  Immaterialism,  Lond.  18(52. 

The  Associational  Psychology  found  its  chief  supporters  in  Peter  Brown 
(died  1735  Bishop  of  Cork;  Tfie  Procedure,  Extent,  and  Limits  of  Human  Un- 
atrgtmvling.  1710),  David  Hartley  (1704-1757  ;  De  Mvtus  Sensns  et  Idearum 


Inquiry  into  the  Relation  of  Cause  find  Effect.  1804  ;  posthumously,  the  Lectures 
ftn  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,  1820,  delivered  in  Edinburg).    Cf.  Br. 
chaelan 


,  .        .      . 

^rtftfy  u.  Priestley  <th  Begrlinder  ties  Associationismus  (Halle,1882)  • 
L.  Ferri,  Sulto  Dottrina  Ptichvlogica  ddr  Associasione,  Sagqfo  Storico  e  Critico 
(Rome,  1878)  [Fr.  tr.  Paris,  1883.  Cf.  also  Hartley  and  James  Mill  by  G 
k.  Bower,  Lond.  1881.  For  bibliography  for  the  writers  mentioned  in  this  and 
the  following  paragraphs  consult  Porter's  appendix  to  Eng.  tr.  Ueberweg's 

ZltaT.  JL  /iZt.J. 

Of  the  opponents  to  this  movement  who  Platonise  in  the  older  manner 
Richard  Price  (1723-1791)  became  known  especially  by  his  controversy  with 
A  nestisy  i  —  — 

Priestley,  The  Voctrine  of  Philosophical  Necessity  (1777);  Price,  Letters  on 
Materialism  >,  and  Philosophical  Necessity;  Priestley,  Free  Discussions  of  the 
Doctnnes  of  Materialism  (1778). 

P  a-Cfifi^-  Barthobn^  Histotre  Philosophique  de  VAcademie  de  Prusse, 

fculS  t  loOu. 


Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment. 

Among  the  English  moral  philosophers,  Shaftesbury  (Anthony  Ashley 
Cooper,  1671-1713)  takes  a  most  important  place.  His  -writings  were  collected 
under  the  title,  Characteristics  of  JItn,  Manners,  Opinions  awl  Times  ,'1711;. 
Cf.  G.  v.  Gizycki.  Die  Philosophic  Sh.'s  CLeips.  and  Heidelberg  1870;.  — After 
him  various  groups  diverge.  The  intellectual istic  tendency  is  represented  by 
Samuel  Clarke  (1675-1729 ; _A  Demonstration  of  the  Being  and  Attributes  nf 


sented  by  Francis  Hutcheson  (1694-1747  ;  Inquiry  into  the  Orfttiml  of  our 
Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue,  1725 ;  A  System  of  Moral  Philosophy.  175*5;  cf. 
Th.  Fowler,  Shaftesbury  and  Hutcheson,  Lond.  1882)  ;  Henry  Home,  pseud, 
for  Lord  Kames  (1600-1782  ;  Essays  on  the  Principles' of  MarvlUy  and  Natural 
Religion,  1751 ;  Elements  of  Criticism.  1762)  ;  Edmund  Burke  (1730-1797  ; 
Philosophical  Inquiry  into  the  Origin' of  our  Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beauti- 
ful, 1756)  ;  Adam  Ferguson  (1724-1S16 ;  Institutions  r,f  Moral  Philosophy, 
1769),  and  in  a  certain  sense  also,  Adam  Smith  (1723-1790  ;  Theory  of  floral 
Sentiments,  1759)  ;  the  principle  of  authority  was  defended  by  Joseph  Butler 
(1092-1752 ;  Sermons  upon  Human  Mature,  1726)  [Butler,  in  Blaekwood  series 
by  YT.  L.  CoUins,  1881],  and  William  Paley  (174S-1805;  Principles  of  Mural 
and  Political  Philosophy,  1785).  The  ethics  of  the  associonational  psychology 
was  developed  chiefly  by  Jeremy  Bentham  (1748-1832 ;  Introduction  to  the 
Principles  of  Morals  and  Legislation,  1780;  Traite  de  Legislation  Civile  et 
Penale,  brought  together  by  E.  Dumont,  18U1 ;  Deontology,  ed.  by  J.  Bowring, 
1834  j  works  in  11  vols.,  Edin.  1843).  — In  a  peculiar  isolated  position  appears 
Bernhard  cle  Mandeville  (1670-1733 ;  The  Fnble  of  the  Bees,  or  Private  rices 
made  Public  Benefits,  1706,  later  with  illustrative  dialogues,  1728  ;  Inquiry  into 
the  Origin  of  Moral  Virtue,  1732  ;  Free  Thoughts  on  Religion,  Church,  Gottrn- 
ment,  1720).  On  him  cf.  P.  Sakmann  (Freiburg,  1898). 

The  literature  of  Deism  coincides,  for  the  most  part,  with  the  above-named 
literature  of  moral  philosophy ;  but  in  addition  to  those  named  the  following 
writers  are  also  prominent :  John  Toland  (1070-1722;  Christianity  not  Myste- 
rious, 1696 ;  Letters  to  Serena,  1704 ;  Adeisidwmon,  1709  ;  Pantheisticon,  1710)  ; 
Anthony  Collins  (1676-1729  ;  A  Discourse  of  Free  Thinking,  1713) ;  Matthew 
Tindal  (1656-1733 ;  Christianity  as  Old  as  the  Creation,  1730)';  Thomas  Chubb 
(1679-1747  ;  A  Discourse  concerning  Season  irith  Reyard  to  Religion,  1730)  ; 
Thomas  Morgan  (died  1743  ;  The  Moral  Philosopher,  3  parts,  1737  ff.)  ;  finally, 
Lord  Bolingbroke  (1672-1751) ;  works  ed.  by  Mollet  in  5  vols.,  1753  i ;  cf. 
F.  v.  Raumer,  Abhandl.  de r  Be rl.  Akad.  1840).—  Cf.  V.  Lechler,  G-eschichte  des 
.englischen  Deismus  (Stuttgart  and  Tub.  1841). 

England's  greatest  philosopher  is  David  Hume,  born,  1711,  in  Edinburg,  and 
educated  there.  After  he  had  spent  some  time  as  merchant,  he  lived  for  several 
years  in  France,  occupied  in  study,  and  composed  his  work  of  genius,  the 
Treatise  on  Human  Nature  (printed  1789  f.).  The  failure  of  this  book  induced 
him  to  work  it  over  and  publish  it  under  the  title  Inquiry  concerning  Human 
Understanding,  as  a  second  volume  of  his  more  successful  Essays,  Moral,  Politi- 
cal and  Literary  (1748),  and  to  add  An  Inquiry  concerning  the  Principles  of 
Morals  (1751),  and  also  The  Xatural  History  of  Religion  (1755).  As  librarian 
of  the  Advocates1  Library  in  Edmburg  he  found  opportunity  to  write  his  History 
of  England.  After  a  stay  in  Paris,  where  he  received  great  honour  and  came 
into  connection  with  Rousseau  among  others,  he  was  for  some  time  Under- 
secretary of  State  in  the  Foreign  Office,  but  finally  returned  to  Edinburg,  where 
he  died,  1776.  The  Dialogues  concerning  Natural  Religion  and  some  smaller 
treatises  appeared  posthumously.  Ed.  of  his  works  by  Green  and  Grose  in 
4  vols.  (Lond.  1875).  His  autobiography  was  published  by  his  friend,  Adam 


T.  Huxley,  D.  H.  (Lond.  1879)  ;  Fr.  Jodl,  Leben,  u.  Phjlosophie  D.  HSs  (Halle, 
1872)  ;  A.  Meinong,  Hume-Studien  (Vienna,  1877,  1882)  ;  G.  v.  Gizycki,  Die 
Ethik  D.  H.'s  (Breslau,  1878).  [W.  Knight,  Blackwood  series,  1886;  esp. 
Int.  by  T.  H.  Green  in  his  ed.  of  the  works.  Selby-Bigge  eds.  of  the  Treatise 
(1888)  and  the  Enquiry  (with  Introd.  1894),  Clar.  Press,  are  excellent. 


442  Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment.  [PABT  V. 

Tlie  Scottish  School  was  founded  by  Thomas  Held  (1710-1796,  Professor 
at  Glasgow  ;  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Hind  on  the  Principles  of  Common  Sense, 
1704 ;  Essays  on  tht  Intellectual  Powers  of  Mant  1785 ;  Essays  on  the  Active 
Pmcers  of  Man,  1788,  complete  ed.  by  W.  Hamilton,  Edin.  1827).  [Selections 
ed.  by  E~  H.  Sn'eath,  N.Y.  1802,  contains  bibliog,  Cf.  A.  Seth,  Scottish  Philoso- 
phy, ~Edin.  and  Lond.  1885.  and  art.  Reid  in  JSnc.  Brit.']  Besides  James 
Oswald  /died  1793,  Appeal  to  Common  Sense  in  Behalf  of  Religion,  1766) 
and  James  Beattie  (died  1805.  Essay  on  the  Xoture  and  Immutability  of  Truth, 
1770),  the  school  had  its  chief  academical  and  literary  representative  in  Dugald 
Stewart  (1753-1828,  Professor  in  Edinburg ;  Elements  of  the  Philosophy  of  the 
Human  Mind,  3  parts,  1792-1S27  ;  ed.  of  his  works  by  \V.  Hamilton,  10  vols., 
Edin.  1854  ft.). 

Pierre  Bayle,  the  type  of  sceptical  polyhistory,  born  1647  at  Carlat,  led 
a  life  disquieted  by  twice  changing  his  Confession,  was  finally  a  professor  in 
Sedan  and  "Rotterdam,  and  died  1706.  His  influential  life  work  is  embodied  in 
his  Dictiunnaire  Hisfarique  <>t  Critique  (1095  and  1697).  Cf.  L.  Feuerbach,  P. 
Bayle  nach  seinen  fur  die  Geschtehte  der  Philosophie  und  Menschheit  interessan- 
testeti  Momthten,  Ansbach.  1833. 

Of  the  works  of  Voltaire  (Francois  Arouet  le  Jeune,  1694-1778 ;  the  main 
events  of  his  literary  life  are 'his  night  to  London,  his  stay  with  the  Marquise 
du  Chateiet  in  Cirey,  his  visit  with  "Frederick  the  Great  in  Potsdam,  and  his 
rest  in  old  age  at  the  country  seat  Ferney,  near  Geneva),  the  following  are 
principally  to  be  considered  here :  Lcttres  sur  Us  Anglais  (1784),  Metaphysique 
fa  Xeirton  (1740),  Elements  de  la  Philosophic  de  Xeicton  mis  a  la  Portee  de 
tcmt  le  Monde  (1741  /,  Examen  important  de  Mi/lord  Bnlingbroke  (1736),  Can- 
dlde  on  sur  V  Oflimisme  fl7b~),Dictio)tnaire  Philosophique  (1764),  Le  Philosophe 
Itjuitraut  :'17t>7;,  S^tnse  an  Systeme  de  la  Mature  (1777),  the  poem  Les 
ti't&eniea,  etc.  Cf.  E.  Bersot,  La  Philosophie  de  F.  (Paris,  1848);  D.  F.  Strauss, 
V.  /Leips.  1870);  J.  Morley,  F.  (Lond.  and  N.Y.  1872). 

More  sceptical  in  metaphysical  aspects  appear  natural  scientists  and  mathe- 
maticians such  as  Manpertniis  (1098-1759 ;  active  in  connection  with  the 
Berlin  Academy;  Easai  de  Philosophie  Morale,  1750;  Essai  de  Cosmologie, 
1751 ;  controversial  writings  between  him  and  the  Wolffian,  S.  Konig,  collected 
Leips.  175S),  or  cTAlembert  (Melanges  de  Litterature,  d'Histoire  et  de  Philoso- 
phie* 1752);  others  proceed  more  naturalistically,  such  as  Buffon  (1708-1788; 
Histoire  Xaturelle  G-entrale  et  Particuliere,  1749  S.)  and  Jean  Battiste  Robinet 
(1735-1820;  De  la  yature,  1761 ;  Considerations  Philosophises  de  la  Cfrada- 
timi  Xatnrdle  des  Formes  d'Etre  1767). 

Sensualism  appears  in  connection  with  materialism  in  Julien  Offrai  de 
Iiamettrie  (1709-1751;  Eistoire  Naturelle,  de  VAme,  1745;  KHomme  Machine, 
1748  ;  UArtde  Jnuir,  1751 ;  (Enrres,  Berlin,  1751  j  on  him  F.  A.  Lange,  Gesch. 
des  Mater.,  I.  326  ff.  [Eng.  tr.  Hist,  of  Mater.,  Vol.  II.  49  ff.]  ;  Ngrge  Qu6pat, 


.,1864).     __. 

last  representatives  of  these  theories  are,  on  the  one  hand,  Pierre  Jean  George 
Cabauis  (1757-1808 ;  Les  Rapports  du  Physique  et  du  Moral  de  I'Homme,  1802  ; 
QZuvres,  Paris,  1821-25),  on  the  other  side,  Antoine  Louis  Claude  Destutt  de 
Tracy  (1754-1836;  Elements  tfldeologie,  in  4  parts,  1801-15,  together  1826).  — 
Cf.  Fr.  Picavet,  Les  Ideologues  (Paris,  1891). 

The  literary  concentration  of  the  Enlightenment  movement  in  France  was  the 
Encyclopaedia  (Encyclopedic  OIL  Dictionnaire  Raisonne  des  Sciences,  des  Arts  et 
dfs  Metiers,  28  voK,  1752-1772,  supplement  and  index,  7  vols.,  extending  to  1780). 
Besides  d'Alembert,  who  wrote  the  introduction,  the  editor  and  intellectual 
head  of  the  circle  from  which  it  proceeded  was  Denis  Diderot  (1713-1784  * 
Pensees  Philosophiques,  1746  ;  Pensees  sur  r Interpretation  de  la  Nature,  1754  ; 
of  the  posthumous  publications  the  Promenade  d'un  Sceptique,  the  Entretien 


Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  443 

d'Alembert  et  de  Diderot,  and  the  Ewe  rTAlembert  are  to  be  emphasised; 
worthy  of  mention  also  is  the  Essai  de  Peinture;  (Euvres  Completes.  Paris, 
1875,  20  vols. ;  cf.  K.  Rosenkranz,  Z>.,  sein  Lebtn  und  seine  Werke,  Leips.  1800 ; 
J.  Morley,  D.  and  the  Encyclopedists^  Lond.  1878%  Further  collaborators  upon 
the  Encyclopaedia  (aside  from  Voltaire  and  Rousseau,  who  became  separated 
from  the  work  at  an  early  date)  were  Xurgot  (article  Existence} ,  Daubenton. 
Jaucourt,  Duclos,  Grimm,  Holbach,  etc.  From  the  same  circle  (-lLes  Pltilo- 
sophes")  proceeded  later  the  Systeme  de  la  Nature  fpseud.  author,  Mirabeau, 
1770),  which  is  in  the  main  to  be  attributed  to  Dietrich  von  Holbach  (1723-1789, 
from  the  Palatinate ;  Le  bon  Sens  ou  Ideas  Xatureltes  opposes  auz  Idees  Sur- 
naturelles,  1772  ;  Elements  de  la  Morale  Vnt^rsfUe,  1776,  etc.)-  [On  the 
Sy steme  de,  la  Nature  cf.  Lange,  Hist,  of  J/cz?.,  II.  92  fi.l  With  him  co-oper- 
ated Grimm  (1723-1807  ;  Correspondence  Litteraire,  1S12~),  the  mathematician 
Lagrange,  the  Abb6  Galiani,  Naigeon,  and  others;  the  concluding  chapter, 
"AbregS  du  Code  de  la  Nature."  is  perhaps  from  Diderot's  pen;  Helv&ius 
wrote  a  very  popular  exposition,  "Vrai  Sens  du  Systeme  de  la  Nature,"  1771. 
The  same  writer^  (Claude  Adrien  Helvetius,  1715-1771)  gave  the  sharpest  expres- 

isociational  psychology  in  his  much  read 
posthumous  work,  be  VJBomme  de  ses 


sion  to  the  morals  of  the  sensualistic  associational  psychology  in  his  much  read 
book,  De  V Esprit  (1758 ;  cf.  also  his  posthumous  work,  be  VJBomi 


Facultes  et  de  son  Education,  1772). 

The  theory  of  English  constitutionalism  was  adopted  in  France  by  Montes- 
quieu (1689-1755  j  Lettres  Persanes,  1721  j  De  V Esprit  des  Lois,  1748;.  Social 
problems  were  treated  on  the  one  side  by  the  so-called  Physiocrats  such  as 
Quesnay  (Tableaux  tfconomiques,  1758; ;  Turgot  (Reflexions  sur  la  Forma- 
tion et  la  Distribution  des  Richesses,  1774,  opposed  by  Galiani,  Dialogues  sur  le 
Commerce  des  Bles)  and  others,  on  the  other  side  by  the  Communists  such  as 
Morelly  (  Code  de  In  Nature,  1755) ,  and  Mably,  the  brother  of  Condillac  (De 
la  Legislation  ou  Principes  des  Lois,  1776. 

The  most  notable  figure  of  the  French  Enlightenment  was  Jean  Jacques 
Rousseau  (born,  1712,  in  Geneva,  died,  1778,  hi  Ermenonville  after  an  adven- 
turous life,  which  toward  the  end  was  troubled  by  melancholy  and  hallucinations 
of  persecution) .  His  main  writings  —  aside  from  the  autobiographical  Confes- 
sions [tr.,  Lond.  1876]  — are  Discours  sur  les  Sciences  et  les  Arts  (1750),  Dis- 
cours  sur  V  Origine  et  les  Fondemens  de  VInjaalite  parmi  les  Homines  (1773), 
La  Nouvelle  Heloise  (1761),  fimile  ou  sur  V Education  (1762)  [abr.  tr.,  Boston, 
1885],  Du  Contrat  Social  (1762).  Cf.  F.  Brockerhoff,  J?.,  sein  Leben  und  seine 
Werke  (Leips.  1863  and  1874) ;  E.  Feuerlein  in  "  Der  Gedanke  "  (Berlin,  18C6)  ; 
L.  Moreau,  J.  J.  E.  et  le  Siecle  Philosophique  (Paris,  1870)  ;  J.  Morley,  J.  J.  J?. 
(Lond.  1873) ;  E.  Fester,  22.  und  die  deutsche  Geschichtsphilosophie  (Stuttgart, 
1890)  ;  [E.  Caird,  J?.  in  Essays,  Vol.  I.]. 

The  philosophical  theory  of  the  Revolution  was  developed  chiefly  by 
Charles  Francois  de  St.-Lambert  (1716-1803  ;  Principes  des  3Ioenrs  chez  toutes 
les  Nations  ou  Catechisme  Universel,  1798),  Const.  Fr.  Chasseboeuf  Comte  de 
Volney  (1757-1820;  LesRuines,  1791;  La  Loi  XatureUe  ou  Principes  Phy- 
siques de  la  Morale,  deduits  de  F  Organisation  de  VSomme  et  de  VUnivers  ou 
Catechisme  du  Citoyen  Fran$ais,  1793),  Marie  Jean  Ant.  Me.  de  Condorcet 
(1743-1794 ;  Esquisse  d'un  Tableau  Sistorique  du  Progres  de  V Esprit  Sumain, 
1795),  Dommique  G-arat  (1749-1833;  cf.  Conte  Eendu  des  Seances  des  Bcoles 
Normales,  II.  1-40),  Cf.  L.  Ferraz,  La  Philosophie  de  la  Revolution  (Paris, 
1890). 

Gottfried  Wilhelm  Leibnia,  the  many-sided  founder  of  G-erman  philosophy, 
was  born,  1646,  in  Leipsic,  studied  there  and  at  Jena,  received  his  degree  in 
Altorf ,  and  was  then,  through  his  acquaintance  with  Boyneburg,  drawn  into  the 
diplomatic  service  of  the  Elector  of  Mayence.  In  this  service,  pursuing  political 
and  scientific  plans  of  his  own,  he  travelled  as  a  member  of  an  embassy  to  Paris 
and  London,  with  an  incidental  visit  to  Spinoza  in  The  Hague,  and  then  entered 
the  service  of  the  court  of  Hanover  and  Brunswick  as  librarian  and  court  his- 
torian. In  all  these  positions  he  was  active  in  his  public  and  diplomatic  capacity 
in  the  interests  of  the  German  national  spirit  and  of  peace  between  the  Confes- 
sions. Later  he  lived  at  the  court  of  the  first  Prussian  Queen  Sophie  Charlotte, 
a  Hanoverian  princess,  in  Charlottenberg  and  Berlin,  where  the  Academy  was 
founded  under  his  direction ;  afterwards  he  lived  for  some  time  in  Vienna,  to 


444:  Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment.     '        [PART  V. 

ccmsuK  archives.  Here  he  gave  the  stimulus  for  the  foundation  of  an  academy, 
a  project  which  was  later  carried  out,  and  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy  was  also 
due  to  his  influence.  He  died,  1716.  at  Hanover.  The  manifold  nature  of  his 
activity,  and  the  way  in  which  his  life  was  split  up,  is  shown  also  in  the  fact  that 
his  scientific  views  are,  for  the  most  part,  deposited  only  in  fragmentary  essays, 
and  in  an  incredibly  extensive  correspondence.  The  best  edition  of  his  philo- 
sophical writings  is*  the  most  recent  by  C.  J.  Gerhardt,  7  vols.  (Berlin,  1875-90). 
The  metaphysical  treatises  have  been  cited  above  (p.  382).  For  his  ^influence 
upon  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment,  the  following  come  chiefly  into  con- 
sideration, aside  from  the  correspondence  with  Bayle  and  Clarke:  Eject's  de 
TJttodicte  sitr  la  Bout?  de  Dint,  la  Liberte  'de  1'Hoiiime  et  V  Origin?  du  3fal 
(Amsterdam,  1710,,  and  the  Xouwaiu  Essais  sur  VEnttndcmr.nt  Hunntin,  first 
published  in  1705,  by  Raspe.  Cf.  G.  E.  Guhrauer,  (T.  JF.  Frhr.  IT.  L.  i.  Breslau, 
1842''  ;  E.  Pflei-ierer,  L.  als  Pfitrint*  Staatsmann  uml  Bndunt.'fttrflger  (Leips. 
1870);  art.  L.  in  Ersrh  itm1  t-f-ni^er's  Enc..  by  W.  WindelbMid  ;  L.  Feuer- 
bach',  Darstellwifi,  Entweklnng  mi<l  Kritik  far  L.'achen  Phil,  (Aii<bach,  1844)  ; 
E.  Sourisson,  La  Philnsrtphie'Oe  L.  ;Paris,  I860)  ;  L.  Grote,  L.  uttd  seine  Zeit 
(Hanover,  l&Ci*.-;  o.  Caspari,  L.'s  Phllf>s*yliie  (Leips.  1870);  J.  T.  Merz,  L. 
<vLunrL  1834  r,  rJ.  Dewey,  L*frn&s  Xeir  Essays,  Chicago,  1888;  art.  Leibniz 
in  EtK.  Bri?.<  by  Sorley}  Eng.  tr.  of  L^.  Phil  Works,  by  G.  M.  Duncan,  New 
Haven,  1&W  ;  of  the  Xw  Erwt'j^  by  A.  G.  Langley,  Lond.  and  N.  Y.  1893]. 
Among  the  most  influential  :'  EnHghteners  "  in  Germany  was  Leibniz's  con- 


temporary and  fellow-countryman,  Christian  Thomasius  (1055-1728  lEtrilei- 
tHK'j  zur'VtfnwftWirtf,  JLntJtihritMt  dcr  Vernunfttehw,  both  in  1G91  ;  Einl.  zur 
$W*  Hl'-fa  ,  1002*;  JL'tffuhrnnff  d.  Sitt*itlvhre,  1090;  Fundamenta  Juris  Xaturce 
ft  titnt'i'iui  *-jc  Sfitsu  Co  ni  aw  iii  Deducts  1705  ;  cf.  A.  Luden,(7.  Th.,  Berlin.  1805). 
The  centre  of  scientific  life  in  Germany  during  the  eighteenth  century  was 
frnntd  by  the  teaching  and  school  of  Christian  Wolff.  He  was  born,  1G79, 
IE  Bre-lJii,  studied  at  Jena,  was  Privat-docent  at  Leipsic,  and  taught  in  Halle 
until  lie  wtw  ilriven  away  m  1723  at  the  instigation  of  his  orthodox  opponents  ; 
he  then  became  Professor  at  Marburg.  In  1740  Frederick  the  Great  called  'him 
kick  to  Halle  with  great  honour,  and  he  was  active  there  until  his  death  in 
17o4.  He  treated  the  entire  compass  of  philosophy  in  Latin  and  German  text- 
bo-  skrf  ;  the  latter  all  bear  the  title  Verniinftfge  GedanJcen  ["  Rational  Thoughts," 
treating  psycholniry,  metaphysics,  physics,  physiology,  botany,  astronomy, 
erlii*?*-,  "polities,  etc.]  ;  in  detail:  run  den  Krfiften  des  menschUchcn  Verstandes, 
1712  ;  r<n>  (rtttt,  for  \Vt>lt  unit  far  tieele  dps  3fenschen^  auch  alien  Dinrjen  iller- 
/<»?»//•?,  1710;  ct,,i  tier  J&nsrken  Thnn  und  Lassen.  1720;  rowi  gesellschaftlichen 
Lrfjf-n  for  MeHachen,  1721;  ry»  den  Wirl'unyen  der  Xatur,  1723;  von  den 
Abai^hteii  ^tr  nattlrlichen  Dinge*  1724;  ro»  den  Theilen  der  JkfenscJien,  Thiere 
nn<l  PJ'iitsrn,  1725.  The  Latin  works,  Phtlosnphiu  llationalis  sive  Loyica, 
171*:  Pft'l^'fJtia  Prinw  sir?  Ontologia*  1728;  Cosmoloffia,  1731;  Psycholo- 
yia  Euty>riccr.  17JI52;  Ratiomtlis,  17^4;  Tfieolvgia  XttturaUs,  17;JO;  Philosophic 
Pf  act  ten  fnifffsitlis.  1738;  Jus  Xatu>u\  1740ft*.;  Jus  Gentium,  1749;  Philo- 


S'yltia  J/o/or/fe,  posthumoasly  pub.,  1750.  —  Cf.  K.  G.  Ludovici,  Ausfuhrliclier 
Entmtrfi'iHrr  voltetundifffin  Htitvrieikr  WoljTschen  Philosophie  (Leips.  1730  ff.). 
Also  \V.  L.  G.  v.  Ebtrsteiu,  Versnch  einer  (rtschichte  derLogik  iind  Metaphysik 
b*i  den  Dcttisehen  eon  Le'&iiiz  an  (Halle,  1700). 


Eratt  tir'imde  der  gesamnitm  irdtweisshpit,  1734)  ;  Alex.  Baumgarten  (1714- 
1702;  3Ittap?iymii'fi,  1730;  JEsthrticrii  1750-58). 

As  representatives  of  the  geometrical  method  appear  M.  G.  Hanson  (1683- 
1752 ;  Ars  Inreniendi,  1727)  and  G.  Ploucquet  (1716-1790 ;  cf.  A.  F.  Bock, 


Chr.  A.  Crusius  (1712-1775 ;  Entwurf  der  nothwendigen  Vernunftwahrheiten^ 
1745 ;  Weg  zur  Creioissheit  und  Zuverlassiykeit  der  menschlichen  Erkenntniss, 
1747.)  An  eclectic  intermediate  position  is  taken  by  J.  Pr.  Budde  (1667-1729 ; 


Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment.        .  445 

Institutions  FhtloRnphia*  Eclectics: ,1705}  and  by  the  historians  of  philosophy,  J.J. 
Brucker  and  D.  Tiedmann,  and  also  by  Juh.  Lossiua  Die  phi/sicken  Crsaclten 
des  Wahren,  1775)  and  A.  Platner  (1744-181*;  Philos^htsihe  AphvriatMji, 
1776  and  1782).  V  . 

Of  more  independent  importance  are  J.  H.  Lambert  'born,  172S.  at  Mfil- 
hausen,  died,  1777,  in  Berlin  ;  Kutsmnloyinche  Briefs  1761  ;  Xeitf-s  Oi'iMn»n, 
17(34;  Architefctonik,  1771)  and  Sic.  Tetens  '1730-lSUo ;  Philosophised  Ver- 
suche  liber  die  MenschUche  Xatur  und  ihr*  jEittm'cklnng,  1770  f. ;  cf.  Fr.  Harms, 
Uttber  die  Psycholoyie  des  X.  r.,  Berlin,  1667 j.  Both  stand  in  literary  connec- 
tion with  Kant  (cf.  Part  VI.  ch.  1),  whose  pre-critical  writings  belong  like- 


keit  der  vi?r  syllogistischen  Fiyuren^  1702  ;  Der  einzvj 
zu  einer  Demonstration  des  Daseins  Gottes,  1703  ;  Verswk.  fan  Beffri/ far  nega- 
tive n  Grossen  in-  die  IVeltveisheit  eimufuhren,  1703 ;  Utter  die  DviitUchkeit  der 
Grundsatze  der  natiirlichen  Theolugie  und  Moral  1704 ;  BKoliarttungen  llltr 
das  G-eftthl  des  Schonen  und  Erhabenen,  1764 ;  Tf flume  tines  (-feteiersehers, 
ertalitert  durch  Triiume  der  Jtetaphy#tt\  1706;  Dt  Xundi  Sensibilis  atque 
InteUigibiUs  Forma  et  Principiis,  1770,  Cf.  R.  Zimmerman,  Lambert  far  Vor- 
gtinger  EawCs,  1879.  [On  Lambert  and  Tetens,  cf.  A.  Rithl,  Der  philoso- 
phische  Eriticismus,  Leips.  1876.  For  the  pre-critical  writings  of  Kant,  E. 
Caird,  The  Critical  Philosophy  of  Immanuel  Kant,  Glasgow,  Lond.,  and  N.Y. 
1889,  Fischer's  Kant;  Cohen,  Die  systematttcken  Begri/e  in  Kant's  rorkrit- 
ischen  Schriften,  and  the  works  cited  in  first  par.,  p.  -530.] 

Deisni  found  a  vigorous  and  instructive  support  in  Germany  among  numer- 
ous Wolm'ans,  though  nothing  new  in  principle  was  added.  Characteristic  of 
this  was  the  translation  of  the  Bible  by  Lorens  Schmidt.  The  standpoint  of 
historical  criticism  of  the  biblical  writings  was  maintained  by  Salomon  Semler 
(1725-1791).  The  sharpest  consequences  of  the  deistic  criticism  were  drawn 
by  Samuel  Reimania  (1609-1768;  Alhandlungen  vun  den  vornehtnsten  Wakr- 
heiten  der  natllrlichen  Religion,  1754  ;  Setrachtung  liber  die  Triebe  der  Tkiere, 
1760,  especially  his  Schuizschrift  fur  die  rernun/tigen  Verehrer  Gottes,  1767 
[not  pub.],  from  which  Lessing* edited  the  "  WoifenbUttler  Fragmented'  and, 
in  more  recent  time,  Dav.  Fr.  Strauss  edited  an  extract,  Leips.  1862).  Joh. 
Chr.  Edelmann  was  a  Spinozistic  free-thinker  (160&-1767).  Cf.  K.  Monckeberg, 
Eeimarus  und  Edelmann  (Hamburg,  1867). 

The  movement  of  the  so-called  Pietism,  allied  to  Mysticism,  which  was 
begun  by  Spener  (1635-1705),  and  carried  forward  with  organising  energy 
by  Aug.  Herm.  Francke  (1063-1727),  had  only  an  indirect  influence  upon  phil- 
osophy during  this  period  j  at  a  still  farther  distance  stand  the  more  isolated 
members  of  mystic  sects  such  as  Gottfried  Arnold  (1606-1714)  and  Conrad 
Dippel  (1673-1734). 

Empirical  psychology  was  represented  among  the  Germans  in  the  eigh- 
teenth century  by  numerous  names,  comprehensive  collections,  text-books,  and 
special  investigations.  There  are  Casimir  von  Creuz  (1724-1770),  Joh.  Gottl. 
Kriiger  (Versuch  einer  experimentalen  Seelenlehre,  1756),  J.  J.  Hentsch  (Ver- 
such  ilber  die  Folr/e  der  Veranderung  der  Seele,  1726),  J.  Fr.  Weiss  (De  Saturn 
Animi  et  Potissimum  Cordis  Humani,  1761),  Fr.  v.  Irwing  (JSrfahrungen 
und  Untersuchunffen,  ilber  den  Jfenschen,  1777  ff.)  et  aL  The  "Itagazinzur 
Erfahrungsseelenlehre,"  edited  by  Moiitz  (1785-1793),  formed  a  place  for  col- 
lecting contributions  to  this  favourite  science.  Further  literature  in  K.  Fortlage, 
System  der  Psychologic,  I.  42  f . 

A  theory  of  art  upon  the  basis  of  empirical  psychology  is  found  in  Baum- 
garten's  pupil,  G.  Fr.  Meier  (1718-1777),  and  especially  in  Joh.  Georg  Sul- 
zer  (1720-1779 ;  Theorie  der  angenehmen  Empfindungen,  1762 ;  Vermischte 
8chnften,  1773  ff. ;  Allgemeine  Theorie  der  schonen  Kunste,  1771-1774,  a 
lexicon  of  aesthetics). 

Of  the  Popular  Philosophers  may  be  mentioned  Moses  Mendelssohn 
(1729-1786;  Briefe  ilber  die  Empfindungen,  1755;  Ueber  die  Emdens  in  den 
Afetaphysischen  Wissenschaften,  1764 ;  Phaedon^  1767 ;  Morgenstunden,  1785 ; 
Werke,  ed.  by  Brasch,  Leips.  1881),  the  book-deale^  Fr.  Nicolai  (1733-1811), 
who  published  successively  the  Bibliothek  der  schonen  Wissenschaften,  the 


446  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions, 

Briefe  die  neueste  deutsche  Literatur  betrejfend,  the  AUgemeine  deutsche  Biblio- 
thek,  and  the  Neue  AUgemeine  deutsche  Bibliothek;  further  J.  Aug.  Eberhard 
^1738-1809),  Joh.  Bernh.  Basedow  (1723-1790),  Thomas  Abbt  (1738-1766), 
Job.  Jac.Bngel  (1741-1802:  editor  of  the  Philosoph  fur  die  Welt),  J.  J.  H. 
Peder  (1740-1821),  Chr.  Meiners  (1747-1810),  Chr.  Garve  (1742-1798). 

A  highly  interesting  position  personally  is  occupied  by  Frederick  the  Great, 
the  Philosopher  of  Sanssouci.  On  him,  cf .  Ed.  Zeller,  Fr.  d.  Gr,  als.  Philosoph 
(Berlin,  1886). 

Of  Leasing"  s  writings  those  of  chief  importance  for  the  history  of  philosophy 
are  the  Hamburger  Dramaturgic,  the  Erziehung  des  menschen  Geschlechts, 
the  Wf'lfenb'iUtler  Fra<jniente,  and  the  theological  controversial  \vritings.  Cf. 
Hob.  Zimmerman,  Leibniz  und  Lessing  (titudien  und  EritikeR,  I.  126  ff.)  ; 
E.  Zirngiebl,  Der  Jaeobi-lfenddssoTin'sche  Streit  uber  Lessiwfs  Spinosismus 
f Munich,  1861) ;  C.  Hebler,  Leasing- Stwlwn  (Berr.,  1802) ;  W.  Dilthey  (Preuss. 
Jahrb.  1879;.  [Eng.  tr.  of  the  Ham.  Dram,  and  Education  of  Human  Race 
in  BuhnLib.;  of  Laoccoon,  by  Phillimore,  Lond.  1875 ;  cf.  Sime,  Lessing ',  Lond. 
1673,  1870.] 

Among  Herder's  writings  belong  in  this  period,  Ueber  den  Ursprung  der 
Sf>rci<:hp^l~~-2 ;  Auch  erne ' Philosophie  der  Geschichte  der  Menschheit,  1774; 
Vom  Erkenmn  und  Em^iivleii  der  meiischlichen  Seele,  1778 ;  Ideen  zur 
Philftwphte  der  freschictite  der  Mensrhheit*  1784  ff.  [Eng.  tr.,  Lond.  1800]  ; 
Gott,  Crwprfiche  uber  Spiiufsa"s  System,  1787 ;  Briefe  zur  Beforderung  der 
Hum'imt'it,  1793  ff.  .''on  his  later  philosophical  literary  activity,  cf.  below,  Part 
VI.  ch.  2;.  Cf.  R.  Haym,  H.  nach  seinem  Leben  und  seinen  Werken  (Berlin, 
1877-80)  ;  E.  Melzer,  H.  als  Crexchichtsphilosvph  (Neisse,  1872)  ;  M.  Kronen- 
berg.  H."s  Philosophie  (Heidi.  1889)  [art.  Herder  in  Enc.  Brit,  by  J.  Sully]. 

Cf.  also  J.  Witte,  Die  Philosophie  unserer  Dichterkeroen  (Bonn,  1880). 


CHAPTEE  I. 

THE  THEORETICAL  QUESTIONS. 

"  THE  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man."  This  word  of  Pope's 
is  characteristic  of  the  whole  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment,  not 
only  in  the  practical  sense  that  this  philosophy  finds  the  ultimate 
end  of  all  scientific  investigation  to  be  always  man's  "  happiness," 
but  also,  in  the  theoretical  point  of  view,  in  so  far  as  this  philosophy, 
as  a  whole,  aims  to  base  all  knowledge  upon  the  observation  of  the 
actual  processes  of  the  psychical  life.  After  Locke  had  set  up  the 
principle,1  that  prior  to  all  metaphysical  considerations  and  contro- 
versies the  general  question  must  be  decided  of  how  far  human 
insight  reaches,  and  that  this  in  turn  is  possible  only  by  exact  exhi- 
bition of  the  sources  from  which  knowledge  derives,  and  of  the 
course  of  development  by  which  it  is  brought  about,  —  from  that 
time  epistemology,  the  theory  of  knowledge,  was  brought  into  the 
front  rank  of  philosophical  interests,  and  at  the  same  time  empirical 
psychology  was  recognised  as  the  authoritative  and  decisive  court  of 
last  resort  for  epistemology.  The  legitimate  reach  of  human  ideas 
should  be  judged  by  the  way  in  which  they  arise.  Thus  experiential 
psychology  with  all  the  tacit  assumptions  which  are  customary  in 
it  becomes  at  once  the  basis  of  the  whole  philosophical  view  of  the 
world,  and  the  favourite  science  of  the  age,  and  is  at  the  same  time 
the  instrument  of  mediation  between  science  and  general  literature. 
As  in  this  latter  field,  the  predominant  characteristic  among  both 
Englishmen  and  Germans  was  that  of  depicting  minds  and  reflect- 
ing or  viewing  one's  self  in  the  literary  looking-glass,  so  philosophy 
should  draw  only  the  image  of  man  and  of  the  activities  of  his  con- 
sciousness. Societies  for  the  "observation  of  man  "  were  founded, 
all  sorts  of  dilettante  accounts  of  remarkable  experiences  were  gar- 
nered in  large  "magazines,"  and  the  government  of  the  French 
Republic  in  its  official  system  of  instruction,2  replaced  "philoso- 
phy "  by  the  sounding  title,  "Analyse  de  Tentendeinent  humain." 

1  Introduction  to  the  Essay.    Cf .  M.  Drobiseh,  Locke,  Der  Vorlaufer  Kant's 
(Zeitschr.  /.  exacte  Philosophic,  1861) . 

2  Cf.  the  highly  amusing  Seances  des  JS  coles  Normal,  first  year. 

447 


448  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.     [PARTY. 

While  accordingly  among  the  theoretical  questions  of  the  Enlight- 
enment philosophy,  those  as  to  the  origin,  development,  and  know- 
ing power  of  human  ideas  stood  uppermost,  these  were  from  the 
beginning  placed  beneath  the  presupposition  of  popular  metaphysics, 
viz.  that  of  na'lce  realism.  There,  "without,"  is  a  world  of  things, 
of  botlies  or  of  who  knows  what  else,  —  and  here  is  a  mind  which  is 
to  know  them.  How  do  the  ideas,  which  reproduce  within  the  mind 
that  world  of  things,  get  into  it  ?  This  way  of  stating  the  problem 
of  knowledge,  which  is  like  that  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  controls  the 
theoretical  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century  completely,  and 
attains  in  it  both  most  perfect  formulation  and  decisive  disintegra- 
tion. Just  in  this  respect  the  Cartesian  metaphysics  with  its  dualism 
of  congous  cmd  corporeal  substances  takes  a  controlling  position 
through  the  entire  age  of  the  Enlightenment,  and  the  popular 
empirical  mode  of  expression  in  which  it  was  presented  by  Locke, 
made  this  author  the  leader  of  the  new  movement.  The  methodical 
and  metaphysical  considerations  which  had  reached  a  great  develop- 
ment, and  one  full  of  character  in  Descartes'  important  disciples, 
were  now  translated  into  the  language  of  empirical  psychology,  and 
so  arranged  for  the  comprehension  of  the  ordinary  mind. 

In  connection  with  this,  however,  the  terminism  which  was  in- 
herent in  all  modern  philosophy,  and  which  had  been  fostered 
especially  in  England  (Hobbes),  forced  its  way  victoriously  to  the 
surface;  the  qualitative  separation  of  the  content  and  forms  of 
consciousness  from  the  "  outer  world,3'  to  which  alone  they  were 
nevertheless  held  to  relate,  was  carried  farther  and  deeper,  step  by 
step,  until  it  at  last  reached  its  extreme  consequence  in  Hume's 
positivism.  To  the  scientific  dissolution  which  metaphysics  thus 
experienced,  corresponded  in  turn  a  popularly  practical  and  preten- 
tiously modest  turning  away  from  all  speculation  of  more  than 
ordinary  refinement,  or  an  all  the  more  express  profession  of 
adherence  to  the  truths  of  sound  common  sense. 

Whatever  metaphysical  interest  remained  vigorous  in  the  En- 
lightenment literature  attached  itself  to  the  religious  consciousness 
and  to  those  endeavours  which  hoped  to  attain  out  of  the  strife  of 
religious  Confessions  to  a  universal  and  rational  conviction.  In  the 
deism  which  extended  over  Europe  from  the  English  free-thinking 
movement,  the  positive  views  of  the  world  and  of  life  of  the  En- 
lightenment period  became  concentrated,  and  while  these  convic- 
tions at  the  outset  developed  out  of  the  connection  with  the  natural 
science  metaphysics  of  the  preceding  century,  and  in  consequence 
of  this  devoted  an  especially  lively  interest  to  the  problems  of 
teleology,  they  became  shifted  with  time  more  and  more  from  the 


CHAP.  1,  §  33.]     Innate  Ideas:  Cambridge  Plato/lists.  449 

metaphysical  to  the  moral,  from  the  theoretical  to  the  practical 
domain. 

§  33.    Innate  Ideas. 

With  regard  to  the  question  as  to  the  origin  of  ideas  the  philoso- 
phy of  the  Enlightenment  found  already  in  the  field  the  sharply 
pronounced  antithesis  of  Sensualism  and  Rationalism. 

1.  The  first  of  these  had  been  defended  by  Hobbes  on  the  theo- 
retical as  also  upon  the  practical  domain,  inasmuch  as  he  held  man, 
in  so  far  as  he  is  an  object  of  scientific  knowledge,  to  be  an  entirely 
sensuous  being,  bound  to  the  sensations  and  impulses  of  the  body. 
All  ideas,  in  his  view,  have  their  origin  in  the  activity  of  the  senses, 
and  the  mechanism  of  association  was  held  to  explain  the  arising  of 
all  other  psychical  structures  from  these  beginnings.  Such  doctrines 
seemed  to  bring  in  question  the  super-sensuous  dignity  of  man,  and 
that  not  only  in  the  eyes  of  the  orthodox  opponents  of  Hobbes ;  the 
same  motive  determined  the  Xeo-Platonists  also  to  lively  opposi- 
tion. Cudworth  especially  had  distinguished  himself  in  this  respect ; 
in  his  combating  of  atheism *  he  had  Hobbes  in  mind  as  one  of  his 
main  opponents,  and  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  that  all  human 
ideas  arise  from  the  operation  of  the  outer  world  upon  the  mind, 
he  appeals  especially  to  mathematical  conceptions.  The  corporeal 
phenomena  never  completely  correspond  to  these ;  the  most  we  can 
say  is  that  they  resemble  them.2  In  treating  the  conception  of  God, 
on  the  other  hand,  he  lays  claim  to  the  argument  of  the  consensus 
gentium,  and  carries  it  out3  in  most  extensive  manner  to  show  that 
this  idea  is  innate.  In  like  manner,  Herbert  of  Cherbury  had  already 
grounded  all  the  main  doctrines  of  natural  religion  and  morals  by 
the  aid  of  the  Stoic  and  Ciceronian  doctrine  of  the  communes  notitice. 

The  doctrine  of  innate  ideas  was  conceived  in  a  somewhat  differ- 
ent sense  by  Descartes 4  and  his  disciples.  Here  the  psychological 
question  as  to  the  origin  of  ideas  was  less  in  mind,  although  this 
question,  too,  at  a  decisive  passage  in  the  Meditations  (Med.  III.) 
received  the  answer  that  the  innateness  of  the  idea  of  God  was 
to  be  conceived  of  as  a  sign  which  the  creator  had  imprinted  upon 
his  creature;  but  on  the  whole  the  great  metaphysician  had  laid 
more  weight  upon  the  point  that  the  criterion  of  innateness  consists 
in  immediate  evidence  or  certainty.  Hence  he  had  finally  extended 
the  designation  (almost  stripped  of  the  psychological  meaning  be- 

1  In  the  Systema  Intellectual,  especially  at  the  close,  V.  5,  28  fi. 

2Ib.  Y.  1,  108  fi.  (p.  905  ff.  Mosh.). 

a  The  whole  fourth  chapter  is  devoted  to  this  task. 

*  Cf .  E.  Grimm,  Descartes'1  Lehre  von  den  angeborenen  Ideen,  Jena,  1873. 


450  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

longing  to  it  at  the  outset)  of  the  Latin  idea  innate  to  all  that 
lumine  naturali  dare  et  distincte  percipitur.  Direct  assent  had  been 
adduced  by  Herbert  of  Cherbury  also  as  the  characteristic  mark  of 
innate  ideas.1 

2.  Locke  s  polemical  attitude  toward  the  maintenance  of  innate 
ideas  has,  indeed,  an  epistemological  purpose,  but  is  really  deter- 
mined only  by  the  psycho-genetic  point  of  view.  He  asks  primarily 
only  whether  the  soul  at  its  birth  brings  complete  knowledge  into 
the  world  with  it,  and  finds  this  question  deserving  of  a  negative 
answer.2  In  consequence  of  this  the  development  of  the  thesis 
••Xo  innate  principles  in  the  mind"  in  the  first  book  of  Locke's 
Essay  is  directed  less  against  Descartes  than  against  the  English 
Xeo-Platonists.3  It  combats  first  of  all  the  consensus  gentium,  by  an 
appeal  to  the  experience  of  the  nursery  and  of  ethnology ;  it  finds 
that  neither  theoretical  nor  practical  principles  are  universally 
known  or  acknowledged,  Xor  does  it  except  from  this  demonstra- 
tion (with  an  express  turn  against  Herbert)  even  the  idea  of  God, 
since  this  is  not  only  very  different  among  different  men^  but  is  even 
entirely  lacking  with  some.  Xor  does  Locke  allow  the  evasion 
suggested  by  Henry  More,4  that  innate  ideas  might  be  contained  in 
the  soul  not  actually,  but  implicitly :  this  could  only  mean,  accord- 
ing to  Locke,  that  the  soul  is  capable  of  forming  and  approving 
them,  —  a  mark  which  would  then  hold  for  all  ideas.  The  imme- 
diate assent,  finally,  which  was  held  to  characterise  that  which  is 
innate,  does  not  apply  in  the  case  of  the  most  general  abstract 
truths,  just  where  it  is-  wanted;  and  where  this  immediate  assent 
is  found  it  rests  upon  the  fact  that  the  meaning  of  the  words  and  of 
their  connection  has  been  already  apprehended  at  an  earlier  time.5 

Thus  the  soul  is  again  stripped  of  all  its  original  possessions :  at 
birth  it  is  like  an  unwritten  sheet  (cf.  p.  203), — white  paper  void, 
of  all  characters.6  In  order  to  prove  this  positively,  Locke  then 
pledges  himself  to  show  that  all  our  "ideas"7  arise  from  experience. 
Here  he  distinguishes  simple  and  complex  ideas  in  the  assumption 
that  the  latter  arise  out  of  the  former :  for  the  simple  ideas,  how- 

1  De  Fmtate  (1650),  p.  76. 

2  In  which,  moreover,  Descartes  completely  agreed  with  him,  for  it  was  Des- 
cartes' opinion  also  that  it  was  not  to  be  assumed  that  the  mind  of  the  child 
pursues  metaphysics  in  its  mother's  womb.     Qp.  (C.)  VIII.  269. 

s  Cf.  (and  also  for  the  following)  G.  Geil,  Die  Abhangigkeit  Locke's  wn 
Descartes  (Strassburg,  1887). 

*  H.  More,  Antidot.  adv.  Ath.  L  3  and  7,  and  Locke,  I  2,  22.    Cf.  Geil,  op. 

Clt*f  p.  "lUp 

fi  Locke,  L  2,  23 1  «  Ib.  II.  1  2 

7  The  term  "idea'*  had  lost  its  Platonic  sense  already  in  later  Scholasticism 

and  taken  on  the  more  general  meaning  of  any  mental  modification  whatever 

(Vorstellung). 


CHAP.  1,  §  33.]  Innate  Ideas :  Locke.  451 

ever,  he  announces  two  different  sources :  sensation  and  reflection, 
outer  and  inner  perception.  Under  sensation  he  understands  the 
ideas  of  the  corporeal  world,  brought  about  by  the  medium  of  the 
bodily  senses  j  tinder  reflection,  on  the  other  hand,  the  knowledge 
of  the  activities  of  the  soul  itself  called  out  by  the  above  process. 
Psycho-genetically,  therefore,  these  two  kinds  of  perception  are  so 
related  that  sensation  is  the  occasion  and  the  presupposition  for 
reflection, — as  regards  their  matter  or  content  the  relation  is,  that 
all  content  of  ideas  arises  from  sensation,  while  reflection,  on  the 
contrary,  contains  the  consciousness  of  the  functions  performed  in 
connection  with  this  content. 

3.  To  these  functions,  however,  belonged  also  all  those  by  means 
of  which  the  combination  of  the  elements  of  consciousness  into 
complex  ideas  takes  place,  i.e.  all  processes  of  thought.  And  here 
Locke  left  the  relation  of  the  intellectual  activities  to  their  original 
sensuous  contents  in  a  popular  indefiniteness  which  gave  occasion 
to  the  most  various  re-shapings  of  his  teaching  soon  after.  Eor,  on 
'the  one  hand,  those  activities  appear  as  the  "faculties"  of  the  mind, 
which  in  reflection  becomes  conscious  of  these  its  own  modes  of 
functioning  (as  for  example,  the  capacity  of  having  ideas  itself,1 
"  perception,"  is  treated  as  the  most  original  fact  of  reflection,  to 
understand  which  every  one  is  sent  to  his  own  experience) ;  on  the 
other  hand,  the  mind,  even  in  these  relating  activities,  such  as 
recollecting,  distinguishing,  comparing,  connecting,  etc.,  is  regarded 
throughout  as  passive  and  bound  to  the  content  of  the  sensation. 
Hence  it  was  possible  for  the  most  various  views  to  develop  out  of 
Locke's  doctrine,  according  to  the  varying  degree  of  self-activity 
which  was  ascribed  to  the  mind  in  its  process  of  connecting  its 
ideas. 

Of  particular  interest  in  this  connection,  by  reason  of  the  problems 
of  epistemology  and  metaphysics  derived  from  the  Middle  Ages,  was 
the  development  of  the  abstract  ideas  out  of  the  data  of  sensation. 
Like  the  greater  part  of  English  philosophers,  Locke  was  an  ad- 
herent of  Nominalism,  which  professed  to  see  in  general  concepts 
nothing  but  internal,  intellectual  structures.  In  explaining  these 
general  ideas,  however,  Locke  made  more  account  of  the  co-opera- 
tion of  "signs,"  and 'in  particular  of  language.  Signs  or  words, 
when  attached  more  or  less  arbitrarily  to  particular  parts  of  ideas, 
make  it  possible  to  lay  special  stress  upon  these  parts  and  bring 
them  out  from  their  original  complexes,  and  thereby  render  possible 
the  farther  functions  by  which  such  isolated  and  fixed  contents  of 

1  Essay,  II.  9,  1 t 


452  The  Enlightenment :  TJieoretieal  Questions.     [PART  V 

consciousness  are  put  into  logical  relations  to  one  another.1  Hence 
for  Locke,  as  formerly  for  the  Epicureans,  and  then  for  the  Ter- 
uiinists.  logic  was  coincident  with  the  science  of  signs,  semiotics* 
Bv  this  means  room  was  gained  for  a  demonstrative  science  of  con- 
ceptions and  for  all  abstract  operations  of  the  knowing  mind,  quite 
in  the  spirit  of  Occam,  in  spite  of  the  sensualistic  basis  upon  which 
all  content  of  ideas  was  held  to  rest.  None  of  these  determinations 
were  philosophically  new,  nor  has  their  exposition  in  Locke  any 
originality  or  independent  power  of  thought :  it  is,  however,  smooth 
and  simple,  of  agreeable  transparency  and  easy  to  understand;  it 
despises  all  scholastic  form  and  learned  terminology,  glides  skilfully 
over  and  away  from  all  deeper  problems,  and  thus  made  its  author 
one  of  the  most  extensively  read  and  influential  writers  in  the  history 
of  philosophy. 

•i.  Strongly  as  Locke  had  emphasised  the  independent  existence 
of  inner  experience  by  the  side  of  the  outer  (as  followed  from  his 
metaphysical  attachment  to  Descartes,  on  which  see  below,  §  34,  1), 
lie  yet  made  the  dependence  of  reflection  upon  sensation,  as  regards 
origin  and  content,  so  strong  that  it  proved  the  decisive  factor  in 
the  development  of  his  doctrine.  This  transformation  to  complete 
sensualism  proceeded  along  different  paths. 

In  the  epistemological  and  metaphysical  development  of  Nomi- 
nalism this  transformation  led  with  Locke's  English  successors  to 
extreme  consequences.  Berkeley 3  not  only  declared  the  doctrine  of 
the  Eeality  of  abstract  conceptions  to  be  the  most  extraordinary  of 
all  errors  in  metaphysics,  but  also — like  the  extreme  Nominalists 
of  the  Middle  Ages  —  denied  the  existence  of  abstract  ideas  within 
the  mind  itself.  The  illusory  appearance  of  such  ideas  arises  from 
the  use  of  -words  as  general  terms ;  but  in  truth,  even  in  connection 
with  such  a  word,  "we  always  think  merely  the  sensuous  idea,  or  the 
group  of  sensuous  ideas,  which  at  the  beginning  gave  rise  to  that 
term.  Every  attempt  to  think  the  abstract  alone  shatters  upon  the 
sensuous  idea,  "which  always  remains  as  the  sole  content  of  intellectual 
activity.  For  even  the  remembered  ideas  and  partial  ideas  which 
can  be  separated  out,  have  no  other  content  than  the  original  sense- 

1  The  development  of  these  logical  relations  between  the  ideational  contents 
which  have  been  singled  out  and  fixed  by  means  of  the  verbal  signs,  appears 
with  Locke,  under  the  name  of  the  lumen  naturale,  Descartes  had  understood 
by  this  as  well  intuitive  as  also  demonstrative  knowledge,  and  had  set  all  this 
natural  knowing  activity  over  against  revelation ;  Locke,  who  treats  the  intuitive 
with  terministic  reserve  (cf.  §  34,  1),  restricts  the  signification  of  the  "light  of 
nature"  to  the  logical  operations  and  to  the  consciousness  of  the  principles 
which  obtain  in  these,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  thinking  faculty. 

3  Essay,  IV.  21,  4. 

3  Princ.  of  Human  Knowledge,  5  ff. 


CHAP.  1,  §  33.]       Innate  Ideas:  Berkeley,  Hume.  453 

impressions,  because  an  idea  can  never  copy  anything  else  tLan 
another  idea.  Abstract  ideas,  therefore*  are  a  fiction  of  the  schools ; 
in  the  actual  activity  of  thought  none  but  sensuous  particular  ideas 
exist,  and  some  of  these  can  stand  for  or  represent  others  similar  to 
them,  on  account  of  being  designated  by  the  same  term. 

David  Hume  adopted  this  doctrine* in  its  full  extent,  and  on  the 
ground  of  this  substituted  for  Locke?s  distinction  of  outer  and  inner 
perception  another  antithesis  with  altered  terminology,  viz.  that 
of  the  original  and  the  copied.  A  content  of  consciousness  is  either 
original  or  the  copy  of  an  original,  —  either  an  kg impression^  or  an 
"  idea"  All  ideas,  therefore,  are  copies  of  impressions,  and  there 
is  no  idea  that  has  come  into  existence  otherwise  than  by  being  a 
copy  of  an  impression,  or  that  has  any  other  content  than  that 
which  it  has  received  from  its  corresponding  impression.  It  ap- 
peared, therefore,  to  be  the  task  of  philosophy  to  seek  out  the  orig- 
inal for  even  the  apparently  most  abstract  conceptions  in  some 
impression,  and  thereby  to  estimate  the  value  for  knowledge  which 
the  abstract  conception  has.  To  be  sure,  Hume  understood  by  im- 
pressions by  no  means  merely  the  elements  of  outer  experience; 
he  meant  also  those  of  inner  experience.  It  was,  therefore,  accord- 
ing to  Locke's  mode  of  expression,  the  simple  ideas  of  sensation 
and  reflection  which  he  declared  to  be  impressions,  and  the  wide 
vision  of  a  great  thinker  prevented  him  from  falling  into  a  short- 
sighted sensualism. 

o.  A  development  of  another  sort,  which  yet  led  to  a  related  goal, 
took  place  in  connection  with  the  aid  of  physiological  psychology. 
Locke  had  only  thought  of  sensation  as  dependent  upon  the  activity 
of  the  bodily  senses,  but  had  regarded  the  elaboration  of  sensation 
in  the  functions  underlying  reflection  as^  a  work  of  the  mind;  and 
though  he  avoided  the  question  as  to  immaterial  substance,  he  had 
throughout  treated  the  intellectual  activities  in  the  narrower  sense 
as  something  incorporeal  and  independent  of  the  body.  That  this 
should  be  otherwise  regarded,  that  thinkers  should  begin  to  consider 
the  physical  organism  as  the  bearer  or  agent  not  only  of  the  simple 
ideas,  but*  also  of  their  combination,  was  easily  possible  in  view  of 
the  indecisive  ambiguity  of  the  Lockian  doctrines,  but  "was  still 
more  called  out  by  one-sided  conclusions  drawn  from  Cartesian  and 
Spinozistic  theories. 

Descartes,  namely,  had  treated  the  whole  psychical  life  of  the 
animal  as  a  mechanical  process  of  the  nervous  system,  while  he  had 
ascribed  the  human  psychical  life  to  the  immaterial  substance,  the 
res  cogitans.  The  more  evident  the  completely  sensuous  nature  of 
human  ideation  now  seemed  in  consequence  of  Locke's  investigation, 


454  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  Y. 

the  nearer  lay  the  question  whether  it  was  possible  to  maintain  the 
position,  that  the  same  processes  which  in  the  animal  seemed  capa- 
ble of  being  understood  as  nervous  processes,  should  be  traced  back 
in  the  case  of  man  to  the  activity  of  an  immaterial  psychical  sub- 
stance. —  From  another  siue?  Spinoza's  parallelism  of  the  attributes 
worked  in  the  same  direction  (cf.  above,  §  31,  9).  According  to 
this  view  a  process  in  the  bodily  life  corresponds  to  every  process  of 
the  psychical  life,  without  either  process  being  the  cause  of  the 
other,  or  one  process  being  the  original  and  the  other  the  derived. 
(Such,  at  least,  was  the  thought  of  the  philosopher  himself.)  This 
had  now  been  conceived  of  at  first  by  its  opponents  as  materialism, 
as  if  Spinoza  meant  that  the  fundamental  process  was  the  bodily, 
and  the  psychical  process  only  its  accompanying  phenomenon.  But 
among  its  adherents  also,  both  physicians  and  natural  scientists, 
such  as  the  influential  Boerhace  of  Leyden,  a  mode  of  thought  in- 
clining strongly  toward  materialism  soon  substituted  itself  for  the 
master's  doctrine.  This  took  place  in  connection  with  the  expe- 
riences of  experimental  physiology  which,  following  Descartes' 
stimulus,  employed  itself  largely  with  a  study  of  reflex  movements. 

It  is  interesting  that  the  consequences  of  these  combinations  of 
thought  appeared  in  literary  form  first  in  Germany.  Here  as  early 
as  1607  a  physician  named  Pancratius  Wolff  taught  in  his  Cogita- 
tiones  Jfedico-legales  that  thoughts  are  mechanical  activities  of  the 
human  body,  especially  of  the  brain,  and  in  the  year  1713  appeared 
the  anonymous  Correspondence  concerning  the  Nature  of  the  Soid 
(Brieficecksel  vom  Wesen  der  Seele),1  in  which,  screened  by  pious 
refutations,  the  doctrines  of  Bacon,  Descartes,  and  Hobbes  are  car- 
ried out  to  an  anthropological  materialism.  A  distinction  of  degree 
only  is  recognised  between  the  psychical  life  of  the  animal  and  that 
of  man ;  ideas  and  activities  of  the  will  are  without  exception  re- 
garded as  functions  of  excited  nerve-fibres,  and  practice  and  educa- 
tion are  given  as  the  means  by  "which  the  higher  position  of  man 
is  reached  and  maintained. 

In  England  the  procedure  was  more  cautious.  In  a  way  similar 
to  that  in  which  Locke  had  carried  out  the  Baconian  programme,  men 
now  studied  primarily  the  internal  mechanism  of  the  psychical  activ- 
ities, and  the  development  of  the  higher  out  of  the  elementary  states 
according  to  purely  psychological  laws :  such  was  the  work  of  Peter 
Brown  in  the  epistemological  field,  and  that  of  others  upon  the 
domain  of  the  activities  of  the  will.  In  the  same  manner  proceeded 

1  Of  which  Lange  gives  an  account,  Gesch.  des  Mat,,  I.  319  ff.  (2d  ed.  [Eng. 
tT.,Mistor;/ of  Materialism,  II.  37  ff.] ).  ^  L  * 


CHAP.  1,  §  33.]        Innate  Ideas:  Hartley,  Lamettrie.  455 

David  Hartley  also,  who  brought  into  common  use  the  expression 
association  l  (which  had  already  been  used  before  this)  for  the  com- 
binations and  relations  which  arise  between  the  elements.  He  wished 
to  conceive  these  relations,  which  he  analysed  with  all  the  care  of  a 
natural  scientist,  solely  as  psychical  processes,  and  held  fast  to  their 
complete  incomparableness  with  material  processes,  even  with  the 
most  delicate  forms  of  corporeal  motion.  But  he  was  also  a  physi- 
cian, and  the  connection  of  the  mental  life  with  the  states  of  the 
body  was  so  clear  to  him  that  he  made  the  constant  correspondence 
of  the  two  and  the  mutual  relationship  of  the  psychical  functions 
and  the  nervous  excitations,  which,  at  that  time,  were  termed  "  vibra- 
tions"* the  main  subject-matter  of  his  psychology  of  association. 
In  this  -work  he  held  fast  to  the  qualitative  difference  between  the 
two  parallel  series  of  phenomena  and  left  the  metaphysical  question, 
as  to  the  substance  lying  at  their  basis,  undecided :  but  with  refer- 
ence to  causality  he  fell  insensibly  into  materialism,  in  that  he  con- 
ceived of  the  mechanism  of  the  nervous  states  as  ultimately  the 
primary  event,  and  that  of  the  psychical  activities  as  only  the  phe- 
nomenon accompanying  this  event.  To  simple  nervous  excitations 
correspond  simple  sensations  or  desires ;  to  complex,  complex.  This 
scientific  theory,  to  be  sure,  involved  him  in  serious  contradictions 
with  his  pious  faith,  and  the  "  Observations "  show  how  earnestly 
and  fruitlessly  he  struggled  between  the  two.  Quite  the  same  is 
true  of  Priestley,  who  even  made  the  farther  concession  to  material- 
ism of  letting  fall  the  heterogeneity  between  the  psychical  and 
bodily  processes,  and  desiring  to  replace  psychology  completely  by 
nerve  physiology.  On  this  account  he  also  abandoned  entirely  the 
standpoint  of  inner  experience  defended  by  the  Scots,  but  at  the 
same  time  desired  to  unite  with  his  system  the  warmly  supported 
conviction  of  a  teleological  deism. 

Anthropological  materialism  was  worked  out  in  its  baldest  form 
by  the  Frenchman,  Lamettrie.  Convinced  by  medical  observations 
upon  himself  and  others  of  the  complete  dependence  of  the  mind 
upon  the  body,  he  studied  the  mechanism  of  life  in  animals  and  men, 
following  Boerhave;s  suggestions,  and  Descartes'  conception  of  the 
former  seemed  to  him  completely  applicable  to  the  latter  also.  The 
distinction  between  the  two,  which  is  only  one  of  degree,  permits 
for  human  psychical  activities  also  no  other  explanation  than  that 
they  are  mechanical  functions  of  the  brain.  On  this  account  it  is 

1  In  the  later,  especially  the  Scottish  literature,  and  in  particular  with  Thomas 
Brown,  the  expression  "  association"  is  often  replaced  by  suggestion. 

2  Instead  of  this  term  Erasmus  Darwin  introduced  the  expression,  "  motions 
of  the  sensorium." 


456  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions,      [PARTY. 

an  encroaclunent  of  metaphysics  to  ascribe  to  the  "mind"  a  sub- 
stantiality of  its  OTTO  in  addition  to  that  of  matter.  The  conception 
of  matter  as  that  of  a  body  "which  is  in  itself  dead  and  needs  mind 
or  spirit  as  its  moving  principle,  is  an  arbitrary  and  false  abstrac- 
tion :  experience  shows  that  matter  moves  itself  and  lives.  It  is 
just  Descartes7  mechanics  which  has  proved  this,  says  Lamettrie, 
and  therefore  the  inevitable  consequence  of  this  mechanics  is  mate- 
rialism. And  that  all  psychical  life  is  only  one  of  the  functions  of 
the  body,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  not  a  single  content  is  found 
in  the  mental  life  which  is  not  due  to  the  excitation  of  some  one  of 
the  senses.  If  we  think  of  a  man  as  the  Church  Father  Arnobius 
proposed,  —  so  writes  Lamettrie,1  to  establish  his  sensualism  which 
had  developed  from  Locke,  —  who  from  his  birth  on  had  been  excluded 
from  all  connection  with  his  kind,  and  restricted  to  the  experience 
of  a  few  senses,  we  should  find  in  him  no  other  ideational  contents 
than  those  brought  to  him  through  just  these  senses. 

6.  Less  important  in  principle,  but  all  the  more  widely  extended 
in  the  literary  world,  were  the  other  re-shapings  which  Locke's 
doctrine  experienced  in  France.  Voltaire,  who  domesticated  it 
among  his  countrymen  by  his  Lettres  sur  les  Anglais,  gave  it  a  com- 
pletely sensualistic  stamp,  and  even  showed  himself — though  with 
sceptical  reserve  —  not  disinclined  to  entrust  to  the  Creator  the 
power  of  providing  the  I,  which  is  a  corporeal  body,  with  the 
capacity  of  thinking  also.  This  sceptical  sensualism  became 
the  fundamental  note  of  the  French  Enlightenment.2  Condillac, 
who  at  the  beginning  had  only  expounded  Locke's  doctrine  and 
defended  it  against  other  systems,  professed  his  adherence  to  this 
sceptical  sensualism  in  his  influential  Traite  des  Sensations. 
Whatever  the  mind  may  be,  the  content  of  its  conscious  activities 
is  derived  solely  from  sense-perception.  Condillac  develops  the 
theory  of  associational  psychology  in  connection  with  the  fiction 
of  a  statue,  which,  equipped  only  with  capacity  of  sensation,  receives 
one  after  another  the  excitations  of  the  different  senses  which  are 
added  to  it,  and  by  this  means  gradually  unfolds  an  intellectual 
life  like  that  of  man.  Here  the  fundamental  idea  is  that  the  mere 
co-existence  of  different  sensations  in  the  same  consciousness  brings 
with  it  of  itself  the  sensation  of  their  relation  to  each  other  and  to  the 

i  At  the  close  of  the  ffistoire  NaturelU  de  rime.    Cf .  also  above,  p.  225, 
note  1. 

^The  same  mode  of  thought  asserts  itself  also  in  the  beginnings  of  aesthetic 
criticism  in  the  form  of  the  principle  that  the  essence  of  all  art  consists  in  the 
"imitation  of  beautiful  Nature."  The  type  of  this  conception  was  E.  Batteux 
(1713-1780)  with  his  treatise,  Les  Beaux  Arts  reduits  a  un  meme  Principe 


CHAP.  1,  §  33.]     Innate  Ideas :  Condillac,  Diderot.  457 

object  or  the  self.  In  accordance  with  this  principle  the  process  is 
depicted  by  which  all  the  manifold  psychical  activities  become 
unfolded  out  of  perception :  in  the  theoretical  series,  by  virtue  of  the 
differences  in  intensity  and  in  repetition  of  sensations,  there  grow 
successively  attention,  recognising  recollection,  distinction,  com- 
parison, judgment,  inference,  imagination,  and  expectation  of  the 
future;  and  finally  with  the  help  of  signs,  especially  those  of 
language,  arise  abstraction  and  the  grasping  of  general  principles. 
But  in  addition  to  sensation,  perception  has  also  the  feeling-element 
of  pleasure  and  pain,  and  out  of  this,  in  connection  with  the  move- 
ment of  ideas,  develop  desire,  love  and  hate,  hope,  fear.1  and  —  as 
the  result  of  all  such  changes  of  the  practical  consciousness  — 
finally;  the  moral  will.  So  knowledge  and  morality  grow  upon  the 
soil  of  the  sensibility. 

This  systematic  construction  had  great  success.  The  systematic 
impulse,  which  was  repressed  in  the  metaphysical  field  (cf.  §  34,  7), 
threw  itself  with  all  the  greater  energy  upon  this  "analysis  of  the 
hurn-an  mind"  as  a  substitute ;  and  as  Condillac  himself  had  already 
woven  many  acute  observations  into  his  exposition  of  the  develop- 
ment process,  so  a  whole  throng  of  adherents  found  opportunity  to 
take  part  in  the  completion  of  this  stiucture  by  slight  changes  and 
shiftings  of  the  phases,  by  innovations  in  nomenclature  and  by 
more  or  less  valuable  deductions.  The  Government  of  the  Revolu- 
tion  recognised  as  philosophy  only  this  study  of  the  empirical 
development  of  intelligence,  and  Destutt  de  Tracy  gave  it  later  the 
name  " Ideology" 2  So  it  came  about  that  at  the  beginning  of  our 
century  philosophers  were  in  France  usually  called  ideologists. 

7.  With  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  mind  in  which  these  trans- 
formations of  sensation  (sentir)  were  held  to  take  place,  a  great  part 
of  the  ideologists  remained  by  Condillac's  positivistic  reserve ;  others 
went  on  from  Voltaire's  problematical  to  Lamettrie's  assertive  mate- 
rialism, —  at  first,  in  Hartley's  fashion  emphasising  the  thorough- 
going dependence  of  combinations  of  ideas  upon  nervous  processes, 
then  with  express  maintenance  of  the  materiality  of  the  psychical 
activities.  This  development  is  most  clearly  to  be  seen  in  the  case 
of  Diderot.  He  set  out  from  the  position  of  Shaftesbury  and  Locke, 
but  the  sensualistic  literature  became  more  potent  from  step  to  step 

1  In  the  development  of  the  practical  series  of  conscious  acts,  the  influence  of 
Descartes'  and  Spinoza's  theory  of  the  emotions  and  passions  asserted  itself 
with  Condillac  and  his  disciples,  as  also  in  part  among  the  English  associa- 
tional  psychologists. 

2  It  is  not  impossible  that  this  nomenclature  in  case  of  de  Tracy  was  intended 
to  be  the  counterpart  to  Pichte's  "  Wissenschaftslehre," —  Science  of  Knowl- 
edge (cf.  below,  Part  VI.  ch.  2). 


458  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.     [PART  V. 

in  the  E-iitor  of  the  Encyclopaedia  3  he  followed  up  the  hypotheses 
of  Lylozoism1  (ct1.  below.  £  34.  9),  and  finally  took  part  in  the  com- 
position of  the  Systeme  de  hi  Mature.  This  work  set  forth  the 
human  psychical  activities  within  the  framework  of  its  metaphysics 
as  the  line  invisible  motions  of  the  nerves,  and  treated  their  genetic 
process  just  as  Lamettrie  had  done.  Among  the  later  ideologists 
Cab" H is  is  prominent  in  this  respect  by  the  newness  of  his  physio- 
lugical  point  of  view ;  he  takes  account  of  the  progress  of  natural 
science  in  so  far  as  to  seek  the  conditions  of  the  nerves,  to  which 
man's  psychical  states  (le  moral)  must  be  referred,  no  longer  merely 
in  mechanical  motions,  but  in  chemical  changes.  Ideation  is  the 
secretion  of  the  brain,  just  as  other  secretions  are  produced  by  other 
organs. 

In  opposition  to  this,  another  line  of  ideology  held  fast  to  Locke's 
principle  that  all  content  of  ideas  may  indeed  be  due  to  the  senses, 
but  that  in  the  functions  directed  toward  combining  such  content 
the  peculiar  character  of  the  miners  nature  shows  itself.  The  leader 
of  this  line  of  thought  was  Bonnet  He,  too,  in  a  manner  similar  to 
that  of  Condillac,  adopts  the  mode  of  consideration  commended  by 
Lamettrie,  adverting  to  Arnobius,  but  he  is  much  too  well-schooled 
as  an  investigator  of  Xature  to  fail  to  see  that  sensation  can  never 
be  resolved  into  elements  of  motion,  that  its  relation  to  physical 
states  is  synthetic,  but  not  analytic.  Hence  he  sees  in  the  mechanism 
of  the  nervous  system  only  the  causa  occasionalis  for  the  spontaneous 
reaction  of  the  mind)  and  the  substantiality  of  the  mind  seems  to  him 
to  be  proved  by  the  unity  of  consciousness.  He  connects  with  this 
theory  all  sorts  of  fantastic  hypotheses.2  Religious  ideas  speak  in 
his  assumption  of  the  immaterial  mind-substance,  but  sensualism 
admits  an  activity  of  this  substance  only  in  connection  with  the 
body ;  for  this  reason,  in  order  to  explain  immortality  and  the  un- 
interrupted activity  of  the  mind,  Bonnet  helps  himself  by  the 
hypothesis  of  an  sethereal  body  which  is  joined  essentially  with  the 
soul  and  takes  on  a  coarser  material  external  organism,  according  to 
its  dwelling-place  in  each  particular  case. 

This  union  of  sensualism  with  the  maintenance  of  self-subsistent 
substantiality  and  capacity  of  reaction  on  the  part  of  the  mind 
passed  over  to  Bonnet's  countryman,  Rousseau,  who  combated  with 
its  aid  the  psychological  theories  of  the  Encyclopaedists.  He  found 
that  this  characteristic  quality  of  the  mind,  the  unity  of  its  function, 
evinces  itself  in  feeling  (sentiment),  and  opposed  this  original  natu- 

1  The  decisive  transition-writing  is  <2'  Alemberfs  Dream 

2  In  the  Palingemsies  PMosophiques. 


CHAP.  1,  §  33.]     Innate  Ideas:  Bonnet,  Rousseau*  Reid.  459 

ralness  of  its  essence  to  the  cold  and  indifferent  mechanism  of  ideas, 
which  would  debase  the  mind  to  an  unconditional  dependence  upon 
the  outer  world.  The  feeling  of  indivldtwli'ty  rebelled  with  him 
against  a  doctrine  according  to  which  there  is  nothing  in  manrs 
consciousness  but  the  play,  as  if  upon  an  indifferent  stage,  of  a  mass 
of  foreign  contents  accidentally  coming  together,  which  unite  and 
then  separate  again.  He  wished  to  bring  out  the  thought  that  it  is 
not  the  case  that  the  mental  life  merely  takes  place  within  us,  but 
that  it  is  rather  true  that  we  are  ourselves  present  as  actively  deter- 
mining personalities.  This  conviction  dictated  Eousseau's  opposi- 
tion to  the  intellectualistic  Enlightenment,  which  in  the  sensualism 
of  Condillac  and  of  the  Encf  clopsedists  wished  to  regard  man's  inner 
life  as  only  a  mechanical  product  of  sensational  elements  excited 
from  without :  to  psychological  atomism  Rousseau  opposes  the 
principle  of  the  Monadology. 

In  the  same  manner,  and  perhaps  not  without  influence  from 
Eousseau  in  his  arguments,  St.  Mai-tin  raised  his  voice  against  the 
prevailing  system  of  Condillac ;  he  even  came  out  of  his  mystical 
retreat  to  protest  in  the  sessions  of  the  Ecoks  Normales1  against 
the  superficiality  of  sensualism.  The  ideologists,  he  says,  talk  a 
great  deal  about  human  nature;  but  instead  of  observing  it  they 
devote  their  energies  to  put  it  together  (composer).  . 

8.  The  Scottish  philosophers  are  the  psychological  opponents  of 
sensualism  in  all  its  forms.  The  common  ground  on  which  this 
contrast  developed  is  that  of  psychology  regarded  as  philosophy. 
For  Reid,  also,  and  his  disciples  seek  the  task  of  philosophy  in  the 
investigation  of  man  and  his  mental  capacities ;  indeed,  they  fixed 
still  more  energetically  and  one-sidedly  than  the  various  schools  of 
their  opponents  the  methodical  point  of  view  that  all  philosophy 
must  be  empirical  psychology.  But  this  view  of  the  human  physi- 
cal activity  and  its  development  is  diametrically  opposed  to  that 
of  the  sensualists.  The  latter  hold  the  simple,  the  former  the  com- 
plex, the  latter  the  individual  ideas,  the  former  the  judgments,  the 
latter  the  sensuous,  the  former  the  internal,  the  latter  the  particular, 
the  former  the  general,  to  be  the  original  content  of  the  mind's 
activity.  Eeid  acknowledges  that  Berkeley's  idealism  and  Hume's 
scepticism  are  as  correct  consequences  from  Locke's  principle  as  is 
Hartley's  materialism  5  but  just  the  absurdity  of  these  consequences 
refutes  the  principle. 

In  opposition  to  this,  Eeid  will  now  apply  the  Baconian  method 
of  induction  to  the  facts  of  inner  perception  in  order  to  attain  by  an 

1  Stances  des  tfc.  Norm.,  III.  61  ff. 


460  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.      [PARTY. 

analysis  of  these  to  the  original  truths,  which  are  given  from  the 
beginning  in  connection  with  the  nature  of  the  human  mind,  and 
which  assert  themselves  in  the  development  of  its  activities  as 
determining  principles.  Thus,  putting  aside  all  help  of  physiology, 
the  fundamental  science  psychology  shall  be  perfected  as  a  kind  of 
natural  science  of  inner  observation.  In  the  solution  of  this  task, 
Eeid  himself,  and  after  him  especially  Dugald  Stewart,  develop  a 
considerable  breadth  and  comprehensiveness  of  vision  in  the  appre- 
hension of  the  inner  processes  and  a  great  acuteness  in  the  analysis 
of  their  essential  content :  a  multitude  of  valuable  observations  on 
the  genetic  processes  of  the  mental  life  is  contained  in  their  exten- 
sive investigations.  And  yet  these  investigations  lack  in  fruitful- 
ness  of  ideas  as  well  as  in  energetically  comprehensive  cogency. 
For  they  everywhere  confuse  the  demonstration  of  that  which  can 
be  discovered  as  universally  valid  content  in  the  psychical  func- 
tions, with  the  assumption  that  this  is  also  genetically  the  original 
and  determining :  and  since  this  philosophy  has  no  other  principle 
than  that  of  psychological  fact,  it  regards  without  criticism  all  that 
can  in  this  manner  be  demonstrated  to  be  actual  content  of  mental 
activity,  as  xelf-evident  truth.  The  sum-total  of  these  principles  is 
designated  as  common  sense,  and  as  such  is  held  to  form  the  supreme 
rule  for  all  philosophical  knowledge. 

9.  In  the  philosophy  of  the  German  Enlightenment  all  these 
tendencies  mingle  with  the  after- workings  of  the  Cartesian  and 
Leibnizian  rationalism.  The  twofold  tendency  in  the  method  of 
this  latter  system  had  taken  on  a  fixed  systematic  form  through 
the  agency  of  Christian  Wolff.  According  to  him,  all  subjects 
should  be  regarded  both  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  eternal 
truths  and  from  that  of  the  contingent  truths :  for  every  province 
of  reality  there  is  a  knowledge  through  conceptions  and  another 
through  facts,  an  a  priori  science  proceeding  from  the  intellect  and 
an  a  posteriori  science  arising  from  perception.  These  two  sciences 
were  to  combine  in  the  result  in  such  a  way  that,  for  example,  em- 
pirical psychology  must  show  the  actual  existence  in  fact  of  all 
those  activities  which,  in  rational  psychology,  were  deduced  from 
the  metaphysical  conception  of  the  soul,  and  from  the  "faculties" 
resulting  from  this  conception.  On  the  other  hand,  following  Leib- 
niz's precedent,  the  distinction  in  value  of  the  two  modes  of  knowl- 
edge was  so  far  retained  as  to  regard  only  the  intellectual  knowledge 
as  clear  and  distinct  insight,  while  empirical  (or,  as  they  said  at 
that  time,  historical)  knowledge  was  regarded  as  a  more  or  less 
obscure  and  confused  idea  of  things. 
Psychologically,  the  two  kinds  of  knowledge  were  divided,  in 


CHAP.  1,  §33.]         Innate  Ideas :   Wolff.  Lambert.  461 

accordance  with  the  Cartesian  model,  into  the  idece  innatoe  and  the 
idea  adventitiuz.  Yet  Wolff  himself,  agreeably  to  the  metaphysical 
direction  of  his  thought,  laid  less  weight  upon  the  genetic  element. 
But  the  opposite  was  the  case  with  his  adherents  and  opponents, 
who  were  already  standing  under  the  influence  of  the  French  and 
English  theories.  The  general  course  of  the  development  was  that 
the  importance  which  Leibniz  and  Wolff  had  conceded  to  empiricism 
was  increased  more  and  more  by  the  penetration  of  the  Lockian 
principles.  The  psychological  method  gained  the  preponderance 
over  the  metaphysico-ontological  step  by  step,  and  within  the  psy- 
chological method  increasing  concessions  were  made  to  sensualism, 
of  such  a  nature  that  ultimately  not  only  earnest  men  of  science 
like  Kudiger  and  Lossius,  but  especially  a  great  part  of  the  i;  popu- 
lar philosophers  "  supported  completely  the  doctrine  that  all  human 
ideas  arise  from  sense-perception.  The  motley  and  irregular  series 
of  stages  in  which  this  process  completed  itself  has  only  a  literary- 
historical  interest,1  because  no  new  arguments  came  to  light  in  con- 
nection with  it. 

Only  one  of  these  men  used  the  psyehologico-epistemological 
dualism  which  prevailed  in  the  German  philosophy  of  the  Enlight- 
enment, to  make  an  original  and  fruitful  turn.  Heinrich  Lambert, 
who  was  fully  abreast  of  the  natural  science  of  his  time,  had 
grown  into  intelligent  sympathy  with  the  mathematico-logical 
method  as  completely  as  he  had  into  an  insight  into  the  worth  of 
experience :  and  in  the  phenomenology  of  his  'Neic  Organon,  in 
attempting  to  fix  the  limits  for  the  psychological  significance  of 
these  two  elements  of  knowledge,  he  disposed  the  mixture  of  the. 
a  priori  and  a  posteriori  constituents  requisite  for  knowing  reality, 
in  a  way  that  led  to  the  distinction  of  form  and  content  in  ideas.  The 
content-elements  of  thought,  he  taught,  can  be  given  only  by  per- 
ception :  but  their  mode  of  connection,  the  form  of  relation  which 
is  thought  between  them,  is  not  given  from  without,  but  is  a  proper 
activity  of  the  mind.  This  distinction  could  be  read  out  of  Locke's 
ambiguous  exposition : 2  but  no  one  had  conceived  it  so  sharply  and 
precisely  from  this  point  of  view  as  Lambert.  And  this  point  of 
view  was  of  great  importance  for  the  genetic  consideration  of  the 
ideas  of  the  human  mind.  It  followed  from  it,  that  it  was  neither 
possible  to  derive  the  content  from  the  mere  form,  nor  the  form  of 
knowledge  from  the  content.  The  first  refuted  the  logical  rational- 

1  Cf.  W.  Windelband,  Gesch.  d.  neueren  Philosophic,  I.  §§  53-55. 

2  Cf.  the  demonstration  in  G.  Hartenstein,  Locke's  Lehre  von  der  mensrh- 
lichen  Erkenntniss  in    Vergleichuny  mit  Leibniz*  Krttik  derselben    (Leips. 
1861,  Abhandl.  d.  sachs.  Ges.  d.  Wtesensch.). 


462  The  Enlightenment :  TJieoretical  Questions.     [PART  V. 

ism  -with  winch  Wol^  would  spin  all  ontology  and  metaphysics  out 
from  the  most  general  principles  of  logic,  and  ultimately  from  the 
one  principle  of  contradiction ;  the  other  took  the  basis  away  from 
sensualism,  which  thought  that  with  the  contents  of  perception  the 
knowledge  also  of  their  relations  was  immediately  given.  Out  of 
this  grew  for  the  "  improvement  of  metaphysics "  the  task  of  dis- 
solving  out  these  relating  forms  from  the  total  mass  of  experience, 
and  of  making  clear  their  relation  to  content.  But  Lambert  sought 
in  vain  for  a  single  unifying  principle  for  this  purpose,1  and  his 
"  JLrcliitektonik*'  finally  contented  itself  with  making  a  collection 
of  them  not  based  on  any  internal  principle. 

10.  While  all  these  theories  as  to  the  origin  of  human  ideas  were 
flying  about  in  the  literary  market,  the  reconciling  word  upon  the 
problem  of  innate  ideas  had  been  long  spoken;  but  was  waiting  in  a 
manuscript  in  the  Hanoverian  library  for  the  powerful  effect  which 
its  publication  was  to  produce.  Leibniz,  in  his  Nouveaux  Essais, 
had  provided  the  Lockian  ideology  with  a  critical  commentary  in 
detail,  and  had  embodied  within  it  the  deepest  thoughts  of  his  phi- 
losophy and  the  finest  conclusions  of  his  Monadology. 

Among  the  arguments  with  which  Locke  combated  the  doctrine 
that  ideas  were  innate,  had  been  that  with  which  he  maintained 
that  there  could  be  nothing  in  the  mind  of  which  the  mind  knew 
nothing.  This  principle  had  also  been  pronounced  by  him 2  in  the 
form  that  the  soul  thinks  not  always.  By  this  principle  the  Car- 
tesian definition  of  the  soul  as  a  res  cogitans  was  brought  into  ques- 
tion :  for  the  essential  characteristic  of  a  substance  cannot  be  denied 
it  at  any  moment.  In  this  sense  the  question  had  been  often  dis- 
cussed between  the  schools.  Leibniz,  however,  was  pointed  by  his 
Monadology  to  a  peculiar  intermediate  position.  Since,  in  his  view, 
the  soul,  like  every  monad,  is  a  "  representing  "  power,  it  must  have 
perceptions  at  every  moment:  but  since  all  monads,  even  those 
which  constitute  matter,  are  souls,  these  perceptions  cannot  pos- 
sibly all  be  clear  and  distinct.  The  solution  of  the  problem  lies, 
therefore,  again  in  the  conception  of  unconscious  representations  or 
petttes  perceptions  (cf.  above,  §  31).  The  soul  (as  every  monad) 
always  has  ideas  or  representations,  but  not  always  conscious,  not 
always  clear  and  distinct  ideas ;  its  life  consists  in  the  development 
of  the  unconscious  to  conscious,  of  the  obscure  and  confused  to  clear 
and  distinct  ideas  or  representations.  ' 

In  this  aspect  Leibniz  now  introduced  an  extremely  significant 

1  This  is  best  seen  in  his  interesting  correspondence  with  Kant,  printed  in 
the  works  of  the  latter. 

2  Essay  II.  1, 10  f. 


CHAP.  1,  §  33.]  Innate  Ideas :  Leilniz.  463 

conception  into  psychology  and  epistemology.  He  distinguished 
between  the  states  in  which  the  soul  merely  has  ideas,  and  rhose  in 
which  it  is  conscious  of  them.  The  former  he  designated  as  percep- 
tion, the  latter  as  apperception.1  He  understood,  therefore,  by 
apperception  the  process  by  which  unconscious,  obscure,  and  con- 
fused representations  are  raised  into  clear  and  distinct  consciousness, 
and  thereby  recognised  by  the  soul  as  its  own  and  appropriated  by 
self-consciousness.  The  genetic  process  of  the  psychical  life  consists 
in  the  changing  of  unconscious  into  conscious  /presentations  or  ideas, 
in  taking  up  perceptions  into  the  clearness  and  distinctness  of  self- 
consciousness.  In  the  light  of  the  Monadology  Leibniz's  methodo- 
logical view  of  the  empirical  or  contingent  truths  (cf.  §  30,  7)  took 
on  a  peculiar  colouring.  The  fact  that  the  monads  have  no  windows 
makes  it  impossible  to  conceive  of  perception  metaphysically  as  a 
working  of  things  upon  the  soul : 2  the  ideas  of  sense,  or  sense-pres- 
entations, must  rather  be  thought  as  activities  which  the  soul,  by 
virtue  of  the  pre-established  harmony,  develops  in  an  obscure  and 
confused  manner  (as  ,pe?#es  perceptions),  and  the  transformation 
which-  takes  place  in  them  can  be  regarded  only  as  a  process  of 
making  them  distinct  and  of  clearing  them  up,  —  as  a  taking  up  into 
self-consciousness,  as  apperception. 

Sensibility  and  understanding,  the  distinction  between  which  with 
Leibniz  coincides  with  that  of  different  degrees  of  clearness  and 
distinctness,  have,  therefore,  in  his  view,  the  same  content,  only 
that  the  former  has  in  obscure  and  confused  representation 
what  the  latter  possesses  as  clear  and  distinct.  Nothing  comes 
into  the  soul  from  without;  that  which  it  consciously  represents 
has  been  already  unconsciously  contained  within  it:  and  on  the 
other  hand,  the  soul  cannot  bring  forth  anything  in  its  conscious 
ideas  which  has  not  been  within  it  from  the  beginning.  Hence 
Leibniz  must  decide  that  in  a  certain  sense,  that  is,  unconsciously, 
all  ideas  are  innate ;  and  that  in  another  sense,  that  is,  consciously,  no 
idea  is  innate  in  the  human  soul.  He  designates  this  relation,  which 
had  been  previously  sketched  in  the  principles  of  the  Monadology, 
by  the  name  virtual  innateness  of  ideas. 

This  thought,  which  is  at  once  treated  as  the  controlling  point  of 
view  at  the  opening  of  the  New  Essay rs,  is  carried  out  especially 
with  reference  to  the  universal  or  eternal  truths.  This  was  indeed 
the  burning  question :  here  the  one  party  (the  Neo-Platonists,  and 
in  part  the  Cartesians)  maintained  that  these  were  innate  "actu- 

1  Princ.  de  la  Nat.  et  de  la  Grace,  4,  where  the  relationship  with  the  Lockian 
reflection  comes  out  strongly ;  Nouv,  Ess.  IT.  9,  4. 

2  N.  E.  IV.  4,  5. 


464  TJie  Enlightenment:  TJi  tore  ti  col  Questions.      [PARTY. 

ally,"  as  fully  formed  (feriige)  truths;  the  others  (Hobbes,  and 
in  part  Locke)  wold  explain  them  from  the  co-operation  of  sensa- 
tional elements.  Leibniz,  however,  carries  out  the  thought  that 
such  principles  are  contained  already  in  perception,  as  petites  percep- 
tions, that  is,  as  the  i/ivohnttary  forms  of  relating  thought,  but  that 
after  this  unconscious  employment  of  them  they  are  apperceived, 
that  is,  raised  to  clear  and  distinct  consciousness  and  so  recognised 
in  connection  vita  experience.  The  form  of  the  soul's  activity 
which  is  afterwards  brought  to  clearness  and  distinctness  of  intel- 
lectual apprehension  as  a  universal  principle,  an  eternal  truth, 
inheres  already  in  the  sensuous  representation,  though,  unclear  and 
confused.  Hence  while  Locke  had  appropriated  for  his  own  use  the 
scholastic  principle  niMl  est  in  intellectu  quod  non  fuerit  in  sensu, 
Leibniz  adds  thereto  nisi  intellectus  zjjse.1 

11.  "When  the  3fouveaux  Essais  were  printed  in  1765,  they  excited 
great  attention.  Lessing  was  translating  them.  That  the  life  of 
the  soul  transcends  all  that  is  clear  and  distinctly  conscious,  and  is 
rooted  in  obscurely  presaged  depths,  was  an  insight  of  the  highest 
value  for  the  literature  which  was  just  struggling  out  of  the  intel- 
lectual dryness  of  the  Enlightenment,  and  out  of  insipid  correctness 
to  an  unfolding  full  of  genius.  —  and  an  insight  all  the  more  valua- 
ble as  coming  from  the  same  thinker  that  Germany  honoured  as  the 
father  and  hero  of  its  Enlightenment.  In  this  direction  Leibniz 
worked  especially  upon  Herder :  we  see  it  not  only  in  his  aesthetic 
views,2  but  still  more  in  his  prize  essay  "  On  the  Knowing  and  Peel- 
ing of  the  Human  Soul." 

Under  the  preponderance  of  the  methodological  point  of  view,  the 
Leibnizo-Wolffian  school  had  strained  the  opposition  between  rational 
and  empirical  knowledge  as  far  as  possible,  and  had  treated  under- 
standing and  sensibility  as  two  separate  faculties.  The  Berlin 
Academy  had  wished  to  see  the  mutual  relation  of  these  two  sepa- 
rated powers,  and  the  share  which  each  has  in  human  knowledge, 
investigated:  Herder  played  the  true  Leibniz  — as  the  latter  had 
developed  himself  in  the  Xbuveaux  Essais — against  the  prevailing 
system  of  the  schools  when  he  emphasised  in  his  treatise  the  living 
unity  of  man's  psychical  life,  and  showed  that  sensibility  and  under- 
standing are  not  two  different  sources  of  knowledge,  but  only  the 
different  stages  of  one  and  the  same  living  activity  with  which  the 
monad  comprehends  the  universe  within  itself.  All  the  ideas  with 
which  the  soul  raises  itself  in  its  development,  step  by  step>  from  the 
consciousness  of  its  immediate  environment  to  the  knowledge  of 

.  Ess.  IL  1,  2.          2  Of.  principally  the  fourth  Kritische  Waldchen. 


CHAP.  1,  §  38.]         Innate  Ideas :  Herder*  Kant.  465 

the  harmony  of  the  universe,  are  innate  within  the  sou!  as  internal 
powers.  This  deeper  unity  of  sensibility  and  understanding.  Herder 
called  feeling;  and  in  this  also  in  his  inquiry  as  to  the  £k Origin  of 
Language,"  he  found  the  function  which  embraces  all  senses  like  a 
unity,  and  by  means  of  which,  the  psycho-physical  mechanism  of 
producing  and  hearing  sounds  (Tomns  and  Horens)  is  raised  to 
become  the  expression  of  thought. 

12.  More  important  still  was  another  effect  of  the  work  of  Leib- 
niz, It  was  no  less  a  thinker  than  Kant  who  undertook  to  build  up 
the  doctrine  of  the  Nouveaux  Essais  into  a  system  of  epistemology 
(cf.  §  34,  12).  The  Konigsberg  philosopher  was  stimulated  by  that 
work  to  one  of  the  most  important  turns  in  his  development,  and 
completed  it  in  his  Inaugural  Dissertation.1  He  had  already  grown 
out  of  the  Wolffian  school-metaphysics  and  had  been  long  employed 
with  the  examination  of  the  empirical  theories,  and  yet  could  not 
satisfy  himself  with  them.2  On  the  contrary,  he  was  proceeding  in 
the  direction  of  establishing  metaphysics  upon  a  new  basis,  and  was 
following  Lambert's  attempts  to  make  a  beginning  at  the  work  in 
connection  with  the  distinction  of  form  and  content  in  knowledge. 
!N"ow  Leibniz  showed  with  reference  to  the  "  eternal  truths  "  that 
they  inhered  already  as  involuntary  relating  forms  within  sense 
experience  itself,  to  be  raised  and  brought  to  clear  and  distinct  con- 
sciousness by  the  reflection  of  the  understanding.  This  principle  of 
virtual  innateness  is  the  nerve  of  Kant's  Inaugural  Dissertation :  the 
metaphysical  truths  lie  in  the  soul  as  laws  of  its  activity,3  to  enter 
into  active  function  on  occasion  of  experience,  and  then  to  become 
object  and  content  of  the  knowledge  of  the  understanding. 

Kant  now  applies  this  point  of  view  in  a  new  and  fruitful  manner 
to  sensuous  knowledge.  From  methodical  reasons  he  opposed  this  to 
intellectual  knowledge  much  more  sharply  even  than  the  TVolffians : 
but  on  this  account  the  question  for  him  was,  whether  there  are 
perhaps  in  the  world  of  the  senses  just  such  original  form-relations 
as  had  been  pointed  out  in  the  intellectual  world  by  Leibniz  and 
recognised  by  Kant  himself  (cf.  §  8,  and  the  whole  Sectio  IV.  of  the 
treatise  De  mundi  sensibilis  et  intelligibilis  forma,  et  principiis) :  and 
thus  he  discovered  the  "  pure  Forms  of  the  sensibility  "  —  space  and 
time.  They  are  not  innate  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  acquired,  yet 
not  abstracted  from  the  data  of  sensibility,  but  ab  ipsa,  mentis 

1  The  dependence  of  this  essay  upon  the  Nbwoeavx  Essais  has  been  shown  "by 
W.  Windelband,  Vierteljahrschr.  f.  wissenseh.  Philos.,  L,  1876,  pp.  234  ff. 

2  This  is  best  proved  by  the  essay  which  apparently  stands  farthest  removed 
from  metaphysics,  The  Dreams  of  a  Ghost  Seer.    Cf.  also  Part  VI.  ch.  1. 

8  De  Mundi  Sens,  et  Int.,  §  6 :  dantur  per  ipsam  naturam  intellectus.  Ct 
§  8,  also  the  corollary  to  §  3. 


466  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.      [PARTY. 

actione  secundum  perpetuas  leges  sensa  sua  coordinante  [from  tiie 
very  action  of  the  mind  co-ordinating  its  sensations  according  to 
perpetual  laws],  and  like  the  intellectual  Forms  they  are  recognised 
by  attending  to  the  mind's  activity  on  occasion  of  experience,  —  the 
business  of  mathematics. 

Another  formulation  was  given  to  the  principle  of  virtual  innate- 
ness  by  Tttens.  He  wrote  his  essays  on  human  nature  and  its 
development  under  the  impression  received  from  Kant's  Inaugural 
Dissertation.  He,  too,  declares  that  the  "acts  of  thought "  are  the 
first  original  relation-thoughts  (Verhtiltnissyedanken) :  we  learn 
them  by  applying  them  when  we  think;  and  thus  they  prove 
themselves  to  be  the  natural  laws  of  thought.  The  universal  prin- 
ciples which  lie  at  the  basis  of  all  philosophical  knowledge  are, 
accordingly,,  ' :  subjective  necessities  "  in  which  the  essential  nature 
of  the  thinking  soul  itself  comes  to  consciousness. 

§  34  Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World. 

The  background  of  all  these  theories  is  their  epistemological  pur- 
pose. This,  however,  assumes  from  the  beginning  a  somewhat 
narrower  place  under  the  presupposition  of  the  naive  realism  which 
became  attached  to  the  Cartesian  metaphysics.  The  principle  of 
the  cogito  ergo  sum  made  the  self-knowledge  of  the  mind's  nature 
appear  as  the  original  certainty,  as  that  which  was  self-evident  and 
immediately  free  from  doubt ;  but  the  greater  the  difference  in  kind 
which  was  conceived  to  exist  between  the  world  of  consciousness 
and  that  of  space  and  bodies,  the  greater  the  difficulties  that  pre- 
sented themselves  with  reference  to  the  possibility  of  knowing  this 
latter  world.  This  fact  was  taught  at  once  by  the  metaphysical 
development  immediately  after  Descartes  (cl  §  31),  and  the  same 
was  now  repeated  in  the  most  various  forms  in  connection  with  the 
translation  of  these  same  thoughts  into  the  language  of  empirical 
psychology  and  sensualism. 

There  is  thus  in  the  epistemology  of  modern  philosophy  from  its 
beginning  a  superiority  attributed  to  inner  experience,  by  virtue  of 
which  knowledge  of  the  outer  icorld  becomes  problematical.  In  this  an 
after-working  of  the  Terminism,  with  which  the  ]VIiddle  Ages  had 
ended,  asserts  itself  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  modern  thought 
as  a  determining  mode  of  view:  the  heterogeneity  of  the  outer 
and  inner  worlds  gives  the  mind  a  proud  feeling  of  a  substantial 
quality  peculiar  to  itself  as  contrasted  with  things,  but  at  the  same 
time  a  certain  degree  of  uncertainty  and  doubtfulness  in  orienting 
itself  in  this  world  which  is  to  it  strange  and  foreign.  In  this  way 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]     Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World :  Locke.  467 

the  very  statement  of  the  'fundamental  problem  in  the  philosophy  of 
the  Enlightenment  shows  itself  to  be  an  echo  of  that  deepening 
of  the  mind  within  itself,  that  placing  of  consciousness  upon  an  inde- 
pendent basis  over  against  the  outer  world,  with  which  the  ancient 
philosophy  ended  its  course.  In  this  was  rooted  the  power  of  the 
Augustinian  spirit  over  modern  philosophy. 

1.  The  preponderance  of  the  inner  experience  asserts  itself  very 
strongly  also  with  Locke,  although  in  principle  he  placed  sensation 
and  reflection  upon  an  equality  psychologically,  and  in  his  genetic 
theory-'  n  made  the  latter  dependent  upon  the  former.  But  in 
assign^  the  epistemological  values  this  relation  is  at  once  reversed 
in  the  spirit  of  the  Cartesian  principles.  Tor  the  dualism  of  finite 
substances  which  the  great  Trench  metaphysician  had  propounded  is 
quietly  introduced  by  Locke  in  conjunction  with  the  dualism  of  the 
sources  of  experience :  sensation  is  designed  to  furnish  knowledge  of 
the  corporeal  outer  world,  reflection  to  give  knowledge  of  the  activities 
of  the  mind  itself :  and  in  this  consideration  it  is  naturally  found 
that  the  latter  is  much  more  suited  to  its  task  than  the  former. 
Our  knowledge  of  our  own  states  is  intuitive  and  the  most  certain  of 
all;  and  with  a  knowledge  of  our  states  we  are  at  the  same  time 
perfectly  and  undoubtedly  sure  of  our  own  existence  also.  Locke 
presents  this  doctrine  of  the  certainty  of  knowledge  of  self  with 
an  almost  verbal  adherence  to  Descartes.1  With  reference  to  our 
knowledge  of  the  corporeal  world,  on  the  other  hand,  his  attitude 
is  much  more  reserved.  Such  a  knowledge  is  possible  only  through 
sensation ;  and  although  it  still  deserves  the  name  knowledge,  it  yet 
lacks  complete  certainty  and  adequacy.  Primarily,  it  is  only  the 
presence  of  the  idea  in  the  mind  that  is  intuitively  certain ;  that  a 
thing  corresponds  to  the  idea  is  not  intuitively  certain,  and  demon- 
stration can  at  most  teach  that  there  is  a  thing  there,  but  can 
predicate  nothing  concerning  this  thing. 

To  be  sure,  Locke  is  not  at  all  in  agreement  with  himself  on  this 
point.  In  connection  with  his  theory  of  the  ideas  of  sensation,  he 
adopts  the  doctrine  of  the  intellectual  nature  of  the  sense  qualities 
quite  in  the  form  worked  out  by  Descartes  (cf.  §  31,  2),  designates 
them  happily  by  the  distinction  of  primary  and  secondary  qualities, 
adds,  as  tertiaiy  qualities,  such  powers  as  express  the  relation  of  one 
body  to  another,  declares  primary  qualities  to  be  those  which  really 
belong  to  bodies  in  themselves,  and  reckons,  also,  impenetrability 
in  this  class,  in  addition  to  those  assigned  to  it  by  Descartes.  As 
compared  with  the  doctrine  of  Hobbes,  this  is  in  its  essence  a 

1  Essay  IV.  9,  3. 


468  The  Enlightenment  :  Theoretical  Questions.      [PARTY. 

decided  relapse  into  the  mode  of  thought  of  Democritus  and  EpicuruSj 
as  is  shown,  also,  in  the  fact  that  Locke  follows  the  theory  of 
images  in  tracing  stimulations  to  the  affection  of  the  nerves  by 
minute  particles  streaming  out  from  objects.1  On  the  whole,  there- 
fore, the  fundamental  Cartesian  basis  of  -mathematical  knowledge 
of  Xature  is  here  reaffirmed  and  even  more  widely  extended. 

But  Locke's  decision  in  connection  with  his  analysis  of  the  idea 
of  substance  has  an  entirely  different  purport.    Like  Occam,  he 
distinguishes  from  intuitive  knowledge  and  knowledge  given  by 
sensation,  demonstrative  knowledge:  this  has  to  do,  not  with  the 
relation  of  ideas  to  the  outer  world,  but  with  the  relation  of  ideas 
to  one  another.    In  its  value  as  knowledge  it  stands  after  the  intui- 
tive, but  superior  to  the  sensitive.2    Demonstrative  thinking  is  then 
conceived  of  entirely  terministicaUy*  something  as  in  the  case  of 
Hobbes,  as  a  reckoning  with  concept  signs.    The  necessity  attach- 
ing to  the  demonstration  holds  only  within  the  world  of  ideas  ;  it 
concerns,  as  one  class,  general  or  abstract  ideas  to  which  no  proper 
reality  corresponds  in  natura  rerum.    If  ideas  are  once  present, 
judgments  may  be  formed  concerning  the  relations   which  exist 
between  them,  quite  apart  from  any  reference  to  the  things  them- 
selves; and  it  is  with  such  judgments  alone  that  demonstrative 
knowledge  has  to  do.    Such  "complex"  ideas  are  thought-things, 
which,  after  they  have  been  fixed  by  definition,  can  enter  into  the 
union  with  others  determined  in  each  case  by  the  respective  con- 
tents, without  thereby  acquiring  any  relation  to  the  outside  world. 
Among  these  modes  of  union,  that  which  is  expressed  by  the  idea 
of  substance  (the  category  of  inherence)  is  conspicuous  in  an  especial 
manner.    For  all  other  contents  and  relations  can  be  thought  only 
as  belonging  to  some  substance.  This  relation,  therefore,  has  Eeality, 

—  the  idea  of  substance  is,  according  to  Locke's  expression,  ectypal, 

—  but  only  in  the  sense  that  we  are  forced  to  assume  a  real  substrate 
for  the  modes  given  in  particular  ideas,  without  being  able  to  make 
any  assertion  as  to  what  this  substrate  itself  is.    Substance  is  the 
supporter,  itself  unknown,  of  known  qualities,  which  we  have  occa- 
sion to  assume  belong  together. 

This  view  that  substances  are  unknowable  does  not,  indeed, 
hinder  Locke  from  taking  in  hand  at  another  passage,3  in  an  entirely 
Cartesian  fashion,  a  division  of  all  substances  into  "cogitative  and 
incogitative."  On  the  other  hand,  he  applies  the  view  to  his  treat- 


ndrtfin  -h  1  Rtii^auer'  Zv  Vorgeschichte  des  ttwlismus 

2  Ib  IV  ?     (Freit«ttg,  1882),  and  Gefl,  op.  cit.,  pp.  66  ft 

3Ib.*II."23,29;  IV.  10,  9. 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]    Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World :  Berkeley.         *±oy 

ment  of  the  cogito  ergo  sum.  This  principle  he  carries  over  entirely 
from  the  metaphysical  realm  into  that  of  empirical  psychology. 
Self-certainty  is  for  him  that  of  the  "  internal  sense  "  ;  intuition  in 
this  case  refers  only  to  our  states  and  activities,  not  to  our  essence  ; 
it  shows  us,  indeed,  immediately  and  without  doubt,  that  we  are, 
but  not  what  we  are.  The  question  as  to  the  substance  of  the  soul 
(and  accordingly  the  question  also  as  to  its  relation  to  the  body)  is 
as  incapable  of  an  answer  as  the  question  as  to  the  "  what "  of  any 
substance  whatever. 

Nevertheless,  Locke  holds  it  to  be  possible  to  gain  a  demonstrative 
certainty  of  the  existence  of  God.  For  this  purpose  he  adopts  the 
first  of  the  Cartesian  proofs  (cf.  §  30,  5)  in  a  somewhat  modified 
form,  and  adds  the  ordinary  cosmological  argument.  An  infinite, 
eternal,  and  perfect  being  must  be  thought,  an  ultimate  cause  of 
finite  substances  of  which  man  intuitively  knows  himself  to  be  one. 

So  manifold  and  full  of  contradictions  are  the  motifs  which  cross 
in  Locke's  doctrine  of  knowledge.  The  exposition,  apparently  so 
easy  and  transparent,  to  which  he  diluted  Carte  sianism,  glides  over 
and  away  from  the  eddies  which  come  up  out  of  the  dark  depths  of 
its  historical  presuppositions.  But  as  the  ambiguous,  indeterminate 
nature  of  his  psychology  unfolded  itself  in  the  antithesis  in  the  fol- 
lowing developments,  so,  too,  this  epistemological  metaphysics  offered 
points  of  departure  for  the  most  varied  transformations. 

2.  The  very  first  of  these  shows  an  audacious  energy  of  one-sided- 
ness  in  contrast  with  the  indecisiveness  of  Locke.  Berkeley  brought 
the  ascendency  of  inner  experience  to  complete  dominance  by  putting 
an  end  to  the  wavering  position  which  Locke  had  taken  upon  the 
question  as  to  the  knowledge  of  bodies.  This  he  did  with  the  aid 
of  his  extreme  Nominalism  and  with  a  return  to  the  doctrines  of 
Hobbes.  He  demolished  the  conception  of  corporeal  substance.  Ac- 
cording to  the  distinction  of  primary  and  secondary  qualities,  it  was 
held  that  a  part  of  that  complex  of  ideas  which  perception  presents 
us  as  a  body  should  be  separated  out,  and  another  part  retained  as- 
alone  real;  but  this  distinction,  as  Hobbes  had  already  taught 
(cf.  §  31,  2),  is  in  the  nature  of  the  case  erroneous.  The  "mathe- 
matical" qualities  of  bodies  are  as  truly  ideas  within  us  as  the 
sense  qualities,  and  Berkeley  had  demonstrated  exactly  this  point 
with  analogous  arguments  in  his  Theory  of  Vision.  He  attacks  the 
warrant  of  the  distinction  of  Descartes  (and  of  Democritus).  But 
while,  according  to  this  view,  all  qualities  of  bodies  without  excep- 
tion are  ideas  in  us,  Locke  has  retained  as  their  real  supporter  a 
superfluous  unknowable  "substance"  ;  in  a  similar  way  others  speak 
of  matter  as  the  substrate  of  sensible  qualities. 


470  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.      [PART  V. 

But  in  all  these  cases,  says  Berkeley,  it  is  demanded  of  us  to 
regard  an  abstraction  as  the  only  actual  reality.  Abstract  ideas, 
however,  do  not  exist.  — they  do  not  exist  even  in  the  mind,  to  say 
nothing  of  existing  in  natura  renim.  Locke  was  then  quite  right  in 
saying  that  no  one  could  know  this  "'substance  ":  no  one  can  even 
think  it;  it  is  a  fiction  of  the  schools.  For  the  nai've  consciousness, 
for  "  common  sense/'  whose  cause  Berkeley  professes  to  maintain 
against  the  artificial  subtlety  of  philosophers,  bodies  are  just  exactly 
what  is  perceived,  no  more  and  no  less ;  it  is  only  the  philosophers 
who  seek  for  something  else  behind  what  is  perceived,  —  something 
mysterious,  abstract,  of  which  they  themselves  cannot  say  what  it 
is.  For  the  unperverted  mind,  body  is  what  one  sees,  touches, 
tastes,  smells,  and  hears :  its  esse  is  percipL 

Body  is  then  nothing  but  a  complex  of  ideas.  If  we  abstract  from 
a  cherry  all  the  qualities  which  can  be  perceived  through  any  of  the 
senses,  what  is  left  ?  Nothing.  The  idealism  which  sees  in  a  body 
nothing  farther  than  a  bundle  of  ideas  is  the  view  of  the  common 
man;  it  should  be  that  of  philosophers  also.  Bodies  possess  no 
other  reality  than  that  of  being  perceived.  It  is  false  to  suppose 
that  there  is  in  addition  to  this  a  substance  inherent  within  them, 
which  kb  appears  "  in  their  qualities.  They  are  nothing  but  the  sum 
of  these  qualities. 

In  reply  to  the  question  that  lies  close  at  hand,  in  what  the  differ- 
ence consists  between  the  "real"  or  actual  body  and  that  which  is 
only  imagined  or  dreamed  of,  if  all  bodies  are  only  perceived, 
Berkeley  answers    with  a  spiritualistic  metaphysics.      The  ideas 
which  constitute  the  existence  of  the  outer  world  are  activities  of 
spirits.     Of  the  two  Cartesian  worlds  only  one  has  substantial 
existence ;  only  the  res  cogitantes  are  real  substances,  the  res  extensa 
are  their  ideas.    But  to  finite  spirits  the 'ideas  are  given,  and  the 
origin  of  all  ideas  is  to  be  sought  only  in  the  infinite  Spirit,  in  God. 
The  reality  of  bodies  consists,  therefore,  in  this,  that  their  ideas  are 
communicated  by  God  to  finite  spirits,  and  the  order  of  succession 
in  which  God  habitually  does  this  we  call  laws  of  Nature.    Hence 
Bishop  Berkeley  finds  no  metaphysical  difficulty  in  supposing  that 
God  under  certain  circumstances  departs  from  the  usual  order  for 
some  especial  end,  and  in  this  case  man  speaks  of  miracles.     On  the 
other  hand,  a  body  is  unreal  which  is  presented  only  in  the  indi- 
vidual mind  according  to  the  mechanism  of  memory  or  imagination, 
and  without  being  at  the  same  time  communicated  to  the  mind  by 
God.    And  finally,  since  the  actual  corporeal  world  is  thus  changed 
into  a  system  of  ideas  willed  by  God,  the  purposiveness  which  its 
arrangement  and  the  order  of  its  changes  exhibit  gives  rise  to  no 
further  problem. 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]     Knowledge  of  the,  Outer  World:   Collier.  471 

The  parallelism  between  this  inference  from  Locke  and  that 
which  Malebranche  had  drawn  from  Descartes  is  unmistakable ;  and 
Malebranche  and  Berkeley  are  also  at  one  in  holding  that  God  alone 
is  the  active  force  in  the  world,  and  that  no  individual  thing  is 
efficiently  operative  (cf.  §  31,  8).  It  is  extremely  interesting  to  see 
how  the  extreme  Eealism  of  the  Frenchman  and  the  extreme 
Nominalism  of  the  Englishman  amount  to  the  same  thing.  The 
grounds  on  which  the  views  are  based  could  not  be  more  different : 
the  result  is  the  same.  For  what  still  separated  the  two  could  be 
easily  removed  out  of  the  way.  This  was  proved  by  a  contemporary 
and  countryman  of  Berkeley's,  Arthur  Collier  (1680-1732)  in  his 
interesting  treatise  Clems  Universalis.1  Malebranche,2  indeed,  as  a 
Cartesian,  had  not  directly  demurred  to  the  reality  of  the  corporeal 
world,  but  had  held  that  we  could  understand  the  knowledge  of  this 
world  by  man,  only  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  ideas  of  bodies  in 
God  are  the  common  original,  in  accordance  with  which  God  pro- 
duces, on  the  one  hand,  the  actual  bodies,  and,  on  the  other,  the 
ideas  of  these  bodies  in  finite  minds.  Collier  showed  now  that  in 
this  theory  the  reality  of  the  corporeal  world  played  a  completely 
superfluous  role:  since  no  actual  relation  between  the  corporeal 
world  and  human  ideas  is  assumed,  the  value  of  human  ideas  for 
knowledge  remains  quite  the  same  if  we  posit  only  an  ideal  cor- 
poreal world  in  God,  and  regard  this  as  the  real  object  of  human 
knowledge. 

The  idealism,  which  proceeded  in  this  way  from  the  cogito  ergo 
sum  along  several  paths,  was  attended  by  still  another  paradox  as 
a  by-product,  which  is  occasionally  mentioned  in  the  literature  of 
the  eighteenth  century  without  any  definite  name  or  form.  Each 
individual  mind  has  certain,  intuitive  knowledge  only  of  itself  and 
of  its  states,  nor  does  it  know  anything  of  other  minds  except 
through  ideas,  which  refer  primarily  to  bodies  and  by  an  argument 
from  analogy  are  interpreted  to  indicate  minds.  If,  however,  the 
whole  corporeal  world  is  only  an  idea  in  the  mind,  every  individual 
is  ultimately  certain  only  of  his  own  existence ;  the  reality  of  all 
else,  all  other  minds  not  excluded,  is  problematical  and  cannot  be 
demonstrated.  This  doctrine  was  at  that  time  designated  as 
Egoism,  now  it  is  usually  called  Solipsism.  It  is  a  metaphysical 

1  The  alternative  title  of  the  book  reads,  A  New  Inquiry  after  Truth,  being 
a  Demonstration  of  the  Non-Existence  or  Impossibility  of  an  External  World 
(Lond.  1123).    It  was  edited  together  with  Berkeley's  treatise  in  the  German 
"  Collection  of  the  Principal  Writings  which  deny  the  Reality  of  their  own 
Body  (  //)  and  of  the  whole  Corporeal  World,"  by  Eschenbach  (Rostock,  1756). 

2  Whose  doctrine  had  become  known  in  England  by  the  agency  especially  of 
John  Norris  (Essai  d'un  Theorie  du  Monde  Ideal,  Lond.  1704). 


472  Flie  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

sport  which  must  be  left  to  the  taste  of  the  individual;  for  the 
solipsist  refutes  himself  by  beginning  to  prove  his  doctrine  to 
others. 

Thus,  following  in  the  train  of  the  Meditations,  in  which  Descartes 
recognised  self-consciousness  as  the  rescuing  rock  in  the  sea  of 
doubt,  the  result  was  finally  reached  which  Kant  later  characterised 
as  a  scandal  to  philosophy ;  namely,  that  a  proof  was  demanded  for 
the  realiEy  of  the  outer  world,  and  none  adequate  could  be  found. 
The  French  materialists  declared  that  Berkeley's  doctrine  was  an 
insane  delusion,  but  was  irrefutable. 

3.  The  transformation  of  Locke's  doctrine  by  Berkeley  leads 
farther  in  a  direct  line  to  Hume's  theory  of  knowledge.  To  the 
noininalistie  denial  of  abstract  ideas  the  penetrative  and  profound 
Scot  attached  his  distinction  of  all  intellectual  functions  into  im- 
pressions, and  ideas  which  are  copies  of  impressions ;  and  coincident 
with  his  distinction  is  that  of  intuitive  and  demonstrative  knowl- 
edge. Each  kind  of  knowledge  has  its  own  kind  of  certainty. 
Intuitive  knowledge  consists  simply  in  the  affirmation  of  actually 
present  impressions.  What  impressions  I  have,  I  can  declare  with, 
absolute  certainty.  I  can  make  no  mistake  in  this,  in  so  far  as  I 
keep  within  the  bounds  of  simply  stating  that  I  have  a  perception 
possessing  this  or  that  simple  or  complex  content,  without  adding 
any  conceptions  which  would  put  any  interpretation  upon  this 
content. 

As  among  the  most  important  of  these  impressions  which  have 
immediate  intuitive  certainty  Hume  reckons  the  relations  in  space 
and  time  of  the  contents  of  sensation,  — the  fixing  of  the  co-exist- 
ence or  succession  of  elementary  impressions.  The  spatial  order  in 
which  the  contents  of  perception  present  themselves  is  undoubtedly 
given  immediately  with  the  contents  themselves,  and  we  likewise 
possess  a  sure  impression  as  to  whether  the  different  contents  are 
perceived  at  the  same  time  or  in  succession.  Contiguity  in  space 
and  time  is  therefore  intuitively  given  together  with  the  impres- 
sions, and  of  these  facts  the  human  mind  possesses  a  knowledge 
which  is  perfectly  certain  and  in  nowise  to  be  questioned.  Only, 
in  characterising  Hume's  doctrine,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
this  absolutely  certain  matter-of-fact  quality,  which  belongs  to 
impressions,  is  solely  that  of  their  presence  as  mental  states.  In 
this  meaning  and  restriction  intuitive  knowledge  embraces  not  only 
the  facts  of  inner  experience,  but  also  those  of  outer  experience,  but 
at  the  price  of  recognising  that  the  latter  are  properly  only  species 
of  the  former, — a  knowledge,  that  is,  of  mental  states. 
Contiguity  in  space  and  time  is,  however,  but  the  most  elementary 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]        Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World :  Hume.          473 

form  of  association  between  perceptions ;  besides  this  Hume  reckons 
two  other  laws,  those  of  resemblance  (or  contrast,  respectively)  and 
causality.  As  regards  the  former  of  these  two  forms  of  relation, 
we  have  a  clear  and  distinct  impression  of  the  likeness  or  unlike- 
ness  of  sensations,  and  of  the  different  degrees  of  these  ;  it  consists 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  degree  of  resemblance  in  our  own  (sensi- 
tive) action,  and  belongs  therefore  to  the  impressions  of  the  inner 
sense,  which  Locke  called  reflection.  On  this  is  based,  consequently, 
a  demonstrative  knowledge  of  complete  certainty;  it  concerns  the 
forms  of  that  comparison  between  magnitudes  which  we  perform 
upon  the  given  contents  of  our  ideas,  and  is  nothing  but  an  analysis 
of  the  regularity  with  which  this  takes  place.  This  demonstrative 
science  is  mathematics  ;  it  develops  the  laws  of  equality  and  propor- 
tion with  reference  to  numbers  and  space,  and  Hume  is  inclined  to 
concede  a  still  higher  epistemological  value  to  arithmetic  than  to 
geometry.1 

4.  But  mathematics  is  also  the  sole  demonstrative  science;  and  is 
that  just  because  it  relates  to  nothing  else  than  the  possible  rela- 
tions between  contents  of  ideas,  and  asserts  nothing  whatever  as  to 
any  relation  of  these  to  a  real  world.  In  this  way  the  terministic 
principle  of  Hobbes  (cf.  §  30,  3)  is  in  complete  control  with  Hume, 
but  the  latter  proceeds  still  more  consistently  with  his  limitation  of 
this  theory  to  pure  mathematics.  For  Hume  declares  that  no  asser- 
tion respecting  the  external  world  is  capable  of  demonstration ;  all 
our  knowledge  is  limited  to  the  ascertaining  and  verifying  of 
impressions,  and  to  the  relations  of  these  mental  states  to  each 
other. 

Hence  it  seems  to  Hume  an  unauthorised  trenching  of  thought 
beyond  its  own  territory,  when  the  resemblance  between  ideas  is 
interpreted  as  meaning  metaphysical  identity;  this  is  the  case  in 
every  employment  of  the  conception  of  substance.  Whence  is  this 
conception  ?  It  is  not  perceived,  it  is  not  found  as  a  content  either 
in  particular  sensations  or  in  their  relations;  substance  is  the 
unknown,  indescribable  support  of  the  known  contents  of  ideas. 
Whence  this  idea  for  which  no  impression  is  to  be  found  in  the 
whole  circuit  of  sensations  as  its  necessary  original  ?  Its  origin  is 
to  be  sought  in  reflection.  It  is  the  copy  of  a  frequertly  repeated 
conjunction  of  ideas.  By  the  repeated  being  together  of  impres- 
sions, by  the  custom  of  the  like  icleational  process  there  arises  by 
virtue  of  the  law  of  association  of  ideas  the  necessity  of  the  idea  of 
their  co-existence,  and  the  feeling  of  this  associative  necessity  of  the 

*  Treat.  I.  2, 1 ;  I.  3,  1. 


474  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

ideational  process  is  thought  as  a  real  belonging  together  of  the 
elements  of  association,  i.e.  as  substance. 

The  thought-form  of  inherence  is  thus  psychologically  explained, 
and  at  the  same  time  epistemologieally  rejected;  nothing  corre- 
sponds to  it  further  than  the  feeling  of  a  likeness  in  the  ideational 
conjunction ;  and  since  we  can  never  know  anything  of  existence 
except  by  immediate  sense-perception,  the  Reality  of  the  idea  of 
substance  is  incapable  of  proof.  It  is  clear  that  Hume  thus  makes 
Berkeley's  doctrine  his  own.  so  far  as  it  concerns  corporeal  things. 
But  Berkeley  had  but  half  done  his  work  upon  the  idea  of  substance. 
He  found  that  bodies  are  only  complexes  of  sensations ;  that  their 
being  is  identical  with  their  being  perceived ;  that  there  is  no  sense 
or  meaning  in  hypostatising  their  belonging  together,  as  an  unknown 
substance :  but  he  let  the  psychical  substances,  spirits,  the  res  coyi- 
tantesi  stand ;  he  regarded  them  as  the  supports  or  agents  in  which 
all  these  ideational  activities  inhere.  Hume's  argument  applies  to 
this  latter  class  also.  What  Berkeley  showed  of  the  cherry  is  true 
also  of  the  £;  self."  Inner  perception,  also  (such  was  the  form  which 
it  had  actually  taken  on  already  with  Locke;  cf.  above,  'No.  1), 
shows  only  activities,  states,  qualities.  Take  these  away,  and  noth- 
ing remains  of  Descartes'  res  cogitans  either:  only  the  "custom " of 
constant  conjunction  of  ideas  in  imagination  is  at  the  basis  of  the 
conception  of  a  "mind";  the  self  is  only  a  "  bundle  of  perceptions."1 

The  same  consideration  holds  also,  mutatis  mutandis,  for  causality, 
that  form  under  which  the  necessary  connection  between  contents 
of  ideas  is  usually  thought :  bur  this  is  neither  intuitively  nor  de- 
monstratively certain.  The  relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  not  per- 
ceived ;  all  that  we  can  perceive  by  the  senses  is  the  relation  in 
time,  according  to  which  one  regularly  follows  the  other.  If,  now, 
thought  interprets  this  sequence  into  a  consequence,  this  post  hoc 
into  a  propter  hoc,2  this  too  has  no  basis  in  the  content  of  the  ideas 
causally  related  to  each  other.  From  a  "cause"  it  is  not  possible 
to  deduce  logically  its  "effect " ;  the  idea  of  an  effect  does  not  con- 
tain within  it  that  of  its  cause.  It  is  not  possible  to  understand 
the  causal  relation  analytically.3  Its  explanation  is,  according  to 

1  Treat.  L,  Part  IV.    The  objectionable  consequences  which  resulted  from 
this  for  religious  metaphysics  perhaps  occasioned  Hume,  when  working  over 
his  Treatise  into  the  Essays,  to  let  drop  this  which  cut  most  deeply  of  all  his 
investigations. 

2  In  this  respect  Hume  had  a  forerunner  in  his  countryman  Joseph  Glanvil 
(1636-1680),  who  combated  the  mechanical  natural  philosophy  from  the  stand- 
point of  orthodox  scepticism  in  his  Scepsis  Scientifica,  1665. 

9  The  same  thought  lay  already  at  the  basis  of  the  Occasionalistic  meta- 
physics (cf.  §  81,  7);  for  the  essential  reason  for  its  taking  refuge  in  mediation 
by  the  will  of  God  was  the  logical  incompreheTisilility  of  the  causal  relation. 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]      Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World:  Hume.         475 

Hume,  to  be  gained  by  means  of  association  of  ideas.  Through  the 
repetition  of  the  same  succession  of  ideas,  and  the  custom  of  finding 
them  follow  each  other,  an  inner  necessity  or  compulsion  arises  of 
imagining  and  expecting  the  second  after  the  first;  and  the  feeling 
of  this  inner  necessity  with  which  one  idea  calls  up  another  is  inter- 
preted as  a  real  objective  necessity,  as  if  the  object  corresponding 
to  the  first  idea  forced  that  corresponding  to  the  other  to  a  real 
existence  in  natura,  rerum.  The  impression  in  this  case  [of  which 
the  idea  of  cause  and  effect  is  a  copy]  is  the  necessary  relation 
between  the  ideational  activities  [activities  of  the  "imagination"], 
and  from  this  arises,  in  the  idea  of  causality,  the  idea  of  a  neces- 
sary relation  between  the  ideational  contents  [i.e.  that  A  causes  B  ; 
whereas  the  case  really  is  that  the  idea  of  A  causes  the  idea  of  B, 
i.e.  recalls  it  by  the  law  of  association]. 

[In  view  of  the  extreme  condensation  of  the  above  statement,  a  fuller  outline 
of  Hume's  discussion  of  causality  may  be  useful.  As  found  in  the  Treatise  it 
is  briefly  as  follows:  All  knowledge  as  to  matters  of  fact  ('probability"),  if 
it  goes  beyond  the  bare  present  sensation,  depends  on  causation.  This  contains 
three  essential  elements,  —  contiguity,  succession,  and  necessary  connection.  We 
can  explain  the  first  two  (i.e.  can  find  the  impression  from  which  they  come), 
but  no  impression  of  sensation  can  be  found  for  the  third  and  most  impor- 
tant. To  aid  in  the  search  for  its  origin  we  examine  the  principle  both  in  its 
general  form  and  in  its  particular  application,  asking  (1),  why  we  say  that 
whatever  begins  to  exist  must  have  a  cause,  and  (2),  why  we  conclude  that 
a  particular  cause  must  necessarily  have  a  particular  effect. 

(1)  Examination  of  the  first  gives  the  negative  result  that  the  principle  is  not 
intuitively  or  demonstratively  certain  (the  opposite  is  not  inconceivable),  hence 
it  is  not  derived  purely  a  priori,  i.e.  by  analysing  relations  between  ideas ; 
therefore  it  must  be  from  experience.—  (2)  But  how  from  experience 9  Taking 
for  convenience  the  second  question  stated  above,  the  particular  instead  of  the 
general,  it  is  evident  (a)  that  the  senses  cannot  tell  that  a  particular  effect  will 
follow  a  given  cause  ;  they  are  limited  to  the  present.  Nor  (&)  can  such  knowl- 
edge as  to  future  events  be  gained  by  reasoning  on  experience,  as  this  would 
involve  knowing  that  instances  of  which  we  have  had  no  experience  must 
resemble  those  of  which  we  had  experience  (would  assume  the  uniformity  of 
Nature),  (c)  Therefore  the  principle  apparently  must  come  from  the  only 
remaining  faculty,  imagination.  This  seems  at  first  impossible,  in  view  of  the 
strong  belief  which  attaches  to  these  ideas  (e.g.  that  fire  will  burn),  in  contra- 
distinction from  ordinary  ideas  of  fancy.  The  question  as  thus  shifted  now 
becomes :  (3)  How  explain  the  fact  that  we  believe  that  a  particular  effect  will 
follow  a  given  cause  ?  The  only  difference  between  the  ideas  of  the  senses  and 
memory  (in  which  we  believe)  and  those  of  fancy  (in  which  we  do  not)  is  that 
of  the  feeling  joined  with  them.  The  ideas  of  memory  are  more  strong  and 

The  same  was  also  recognised  by  Kant  in  his  "Attempt  to  introduce  the  Concep- 
tion of  Negative  Quantities  into  Philosophy  "  (cf.  the  general  remark  at  the  close) 
in  a  manner  essentially  in  agreement  with  Hume.  And  finally,  Thomas  Brown 
(On  Cause  and  Effect},  who  also  is  not  disinclined  to  Occasionalism  (cf.  op.  cit., 
pp.  108  ff.),  in  a  very  interesting  way  deduces  psychologically,  and  at  the  same 
time  rejects  epistemologically  (ib.  184  ff.),  the  demand  for  an  "explaining11  or 
"understanding"  of  the  actual  succession  of  facts  in  time.  Perception  shows 
causes  and  effects  roughly.  The  explanation  of  the  process  consists,  then,  in  its 
analysis  into  particular,  simple  and  elementary  causal  relations.  By  this  means 
the  illusion  arises  as  if  these  latter  must  be  yet  again  made  analytically  com- 
prehensible. 


476  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

lively.  Hence  the  problem  is.  What  makes  the  idea  (e.g.  that  fire  will  burn)  so 
"lively"  that  I  believe  in  it  ?  and  the  solution  is,  that  as  I  find  this  belief 
arising  not  from  a  single  instance,  but  only  from  the  constant  conjunction  of 
the  two  impressions,  the  liveliness  must  be  due  to  custom,  i.e.  to  the  habitual 
association  of  the  ideas.  k-  All  probable  reasoning  is  nothing  but  a  species  of 
sensation."" 

This  same  doctrine  explains  the  origin  of  the  idea  of  necessary  connection. 
For  tliis  does  not  arise  from  one  instance,  but  from  several.  Repetition  dis- 
covers nothing  new.  nor  does  it  produce  anything  new  in  the  objects,  but  it  dbes 
produce  something  in  the  mind,  viz.  a  determination  to  pass  from  one  object  to 
its  usual  attendant.  The  idea  of  necessity  must  arise  from  some  impression. 
There  is  no  external  impression  that  can  give  rise  to  it,  hence  it  must  be  an  im- 
pression of  reflection,  and  the  only  one  available  is  that  propensity  which  custom 
pr,  iduces  to  pass  from  an  object  to  the  idea  of  its  usual  attendant.  Necessity  is 
something  that  exists  in  the  mind,  not  in  objects.  This  is  confirmed  by  compar- 
ative psychology  (animals  infer  from  experience  through  custom),  by  the  theory 
of  probabilities"  and  (in  the  Inquiry}  by  the  freedom  of  the  will,  since  belief 
may  be  reached  in  all  these  without  necessarily  holding  to  any  objective  neces- 
sary connection. —  ZV.] 

In  this  way,  Hume's  theory  of  knowledge  disintegrates  the  two 
fundamental  conceptions  about  which  the  metaphysical  movement 
of  the  seventeenth  century  had  revolved.  Substance  and  causality 
are  relations  between  ideas,  and  cannot  be  proved  or  substantiated 
either  by  experience  or  by  logical  thought:  they  rest  upon  the 
fictitious  substitution  of  impressions  derived  from  reflection,  for 
those  of  sensation.  But  with  this,  the  ground  is  completely  taken 
from  under  the  feet  of  the  ordinary  metaphysics,  and  in  its  place 
appears  only  epistemology.  The  metaphysics  of  things  gives  place 
to  a  metaphysics  offaioidedge. 

6.  Hume's  contemporaries  characterised  this  result  of  his  investi- 
gations —  especially  out  of  regard  for  its  consequences  with  respect 
to  religious  metaphysics  (cf.  §  35,  6)— as  Scepticism:  yet  it  is 
essentially  different  from  those  doctrines  to  which  this  name  his- 
torically belongs.  The  settling  of  facts  by  sense-experience  is,  for 
Hume,  intuitive  certainty  j  mathematical  relations  pass  for  demon- 
strative certainty:  but,  as  for  all  alleged  assertions  by  means  of 
conceptions  ["by  abstract  reasoning"]  with  reference  to  a  reality 
other  than  that  belonging  to  ideas  [a  concerning  matter  of  fact  and 
existence"],  Hume  cries,  "Into  the  fire  with  it!"  There  is  no 
knowledge  of  what  things  are  and  how  they  work :  we  can  say  only 
what  we  perceive  by  sensation,  what  arrangement  in  space  and  time 
and  what  relations  of  resemblance  we  experience  between  them. 
This  doctrine  is  absolutely  consistent  and  honest  empiricism:  it 
demands  that  if  the  only  source  of  knowledge  is  perception,  nothing 
further  shall  be  mingled  with  this  than  what  it  actually  contains. 
With  this,  all  theory,  all  examination  of  cause,  all  doctrine  of  the 
"true  Being"  behind  "phenomena"  is  excluded.1  If  we  characterise 

1  Berkeley  is,  therefore,  correctly  understood  only  from  the  point  of  view  of 


CHAP.  1,  §  31.]      Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World :  Hume.  477 

this  standpoint  as  Positivism,  in  accordance  with  the  terminology  of 
our  century,  we  may  say  that  its  systematic  basis  was  established 
by  Hume. 

But  England's  deepest  thinker  gave  to  this  radical  theory  of 
knowledge  a  characteristic  supplement.  The  associations  of  ideas 
which  lie  at  the  basis  of  the  concept-ions  of  substance  and  causality 
are,  indeed,  attended  by  neither  intuitive  nor  demonstrative  certainty; 
instead  of  this,  however,  they  are  accompanied  by  a  conviction  which 
has  its  roots  in  feeling,  a  natural  belief,  which,  unperverted  by  any 
theoretical  reflections,  asserts  itself  victoriously  in  man's  practical 
procedures,  and  is  completely  adequate  for  the  attainable  ends  of 
life  and  for  the  knowledge  relating  to  these.  On  this  rests  the 
experience  of  daily  life.  To  question  this  never  came  into  Hume's 
mind :  he  only  wishes  to  prevent  this  from  playing  the  role  of  an 
experimental  science,  for  which  It  is  inadequate.  With  the  entire 
earnestness  of  philosophical  depth  he  unites  an  open  vision  for  the 
needs  of  practical  life. 

7.  For  the  reception  of  this  positivism  the  intellectual  temper 
was  less  favourable  in  England  than  in  France.  Here  the  renuncia- 
tion of  any  attempt  at  a  metaphysics  of  things  lay  already  prepared 
in  the  fundamental  sceptical  tendency  which  had  made  its  appear- 
ance so  repeatedly  from  the  Cartesian  philosophy ;  and  the  preva- 
lence of  this  temper  had  been  especially  furthered  by  Bayle,  whose 
criticism  was,  indeed,  in  principle  directed  chiefly  against  the  rational 
grounding  of  religious  truths ;  but  at  the  same  time  applied  to  all 
knowledge  reaching  beyond  the  sensuous,  and  therefore  to  all  meta- 
physics. Besides  this,  there  was  in  the  French  literature  a  freer 
tendency  that  belongs  to  men  of  the  world,  which  had  likewise  been 
furthered  by  Bayle,  and  at  the  same  time  by  the  influence  of  Eng- 
lishmen, —  a  tendency  which  would  strip  off  the  fetters  of  the  system 
of  the  schools,  and  demanded  the  immediate  reality  of  life  instead  of 
abstract  conceptions.  Thus  Bacon's  doctrine,  with  its  limitation 
of  science  to  physical  and  anthropological  experience,  became  more 
efficacious  in  France  than  in  his  own  home.  The  "  point  de  systeme  " 
meets  us  here  at  every  step ;  no  one  any  longer  wishes  to  know 
anything  of  the  "  causes  premieres,"  and  this  Baconian  platform 
with  all  its  encyclopedic  and  programmatic  extension  was  laid  down 
by  d'Alembert  as  the  philosophical  basis  of  the  Encyclopaedia.1 

Hume :  his  idealism  is  half  positivism.  He  lays  especial  weight  upon  the  point 
that  behind  the  ideas  of  bodies  we  are  not  still  to  seek  for  something  abstract, 
something  existent  in  itself.  If  this  principle  he  extended  to  minds,  we  have 
Hume's  doctrine  ;  for  with  the  fall  of  Berkeley's  spiritualistic  metaphysics,  the 
order  of  phenomena  willed  by  God,  to  which  he  had  reduced  causality,  falls  also. 
1  In  the  Discours  Preliminaire. 


478  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questiojis,      [PAKT  V. 

In  Germany  the  Wolfiian  system  was  opposed  with  the  "point  de 
syst$me '"  by  men  like  Crousaz  and  Maupertuis  on  grounds  of  taste, 
and,  in  fact,  the  pedantry  of  this  text-book  philosophy  offered  many 
points  of  attack.  In  contrast  with  this  the  German  Popular  Philos- 
ophy prided  itself  upon  its  absence  of  system;  as  developed  by 
Mendelssohn  it  would  refrain  from  all  subtleties  as  to  that  which 
cannot  be  experienced,  and  employ  itself  the  more  with  that  which 
is  useful  for  men.  And,  lastly,  we  find  a  fine  example  of  harmony 
with  this  temper  in  Kant's  Dreams  of  a  Ghost-Seer,  where  he  lashes 
the  architects  of  various  artificial  worlds  of  thought  with  sharp 
irony,  and  pours  out  copious  scorn  upon  metaphysical  endeavour 
with  a  gallows-humour  which  touches  his  own  inclination  in  a 
most  sensitive  point.  Among  the  German  poets  Wieland  is  in  this 
same  spirit  the  witty  anti-metaphysician. 

8.  A  very  peculiar  turn  was  taken  by  positivism,  finally,  in  the 
later  doctrine  of  Condillac.    In  him  converge  the  lines  of  the  French 
and  the  English  Enlightenment,  and  he  finds  a  positivistic  synthesis 
of  sensualism  and  rationalism,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  most 
perfect  expression  of  modern  terminism.    His  Logic 1  and  his  post- 
humous Langue  des  Cakuls  developed  this  doctrine.    It  is  built  up 
essentially  upon  a  theory  of  "  signs  "  (signes).2    Human  ideas  are  aU 
of  them  sensations,  or  transformations  of  such,  and  for  these  no 
especial  powers  of  the  soul  are  needed.3    All  knowledge  consists  in 
the  consciousness  of  the  relations  of  ideas,  and  the  fundamental 
relation  is  that  of  equality.    The  business  of  thinking  is  only  to 
bring  out  the  relations  of  equality  between  ideas.4    This  is  done  by 
analysing  the  complexes  of  ideas  into  their  constituent  elements 
and  then  putting  them  together  again :  decomposition   des  ph6no- 
menes  and  composition  des  idees.     The  isolation  of  the  constituent 
elements  which  is  requisite  for  this  can,  however,  be  effected  only 
with  the  aid  of  signs  or  language.    All  language  is  a  method  for 
the  analysis  of  phenomena,  and  every  such  method  is  a  "language." 
The  different  kinds  of  signs  give  different  "  dialects"  of  the  human 
language:    as  such  Condillac  distinguishes  five,— the  fingers  (ges- 
tures), sound-language,  numbers,  letters,  and  the  signs  of  the  infini- 
tesimal calculus,    Logic3  as  the  universal  grammar  of  all  these 

1  A  text-book  for  "  Polish  professors." 

2  After  the  Langue  des  Qalculs  became  known,  the  Institute  of  Paris  and  the 
Berlin  Academy  gave  out,  almost  at  the  same  time,  the  theory  of  signs  as  the 
subject  for  their  prizes.    At  both  places  a  great  number  of  elaborations  were 
presented,  mostly  of  very  inferior  value. 

*  This  CondUlac  maintains  against  Locke,  and  indeed  already  in  his  Traite 
des  Sensations,  and  his  school  do  the  same  against  the  Scots 

*  In  these  determinations  He  suggestions  from  Hobbes  as  well  as  from  Hume. 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]     Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World:  Condillac.      479 

languages,  determines,  therefore,  mathematics  also,  and  indeed  the 
higher  as  well  as  the  elementary,  as  special  cases. 

All  science  thus  contains  only  transformations.  The  thing  to  be 
done  is  always  to  make  out  that  the  unknown,  which  one  is  seeking, 
is  really  something  already  known;  that  is,  to  find  the  equation 
which  shall  put  the  unknown  x  equal  to  a  composition  of  ideas :  it 
is  just  for  this  end  that  the  structures  of  perception  must  be 
previously  decomposed.  It  is  evident  that  this  is  but  a  new 
generalising  mode  of  expression  for  Galileo's  doctrine  of  the  method 
of  resolution  and  composition;  but  it  rises  here  upon  a  purely 
sensualistic  basis ;  it  denies  the  constructive  element  which  Hobbes 
had  so  sharply  emphasised  and  makes  of  thinking  a  reckoning  with 
only  given  quantities.  In  doing  this  it  rejects  all  thought  of  a 
relation  of  these  data  to  metaphysical  reality,  and  sees  in  scientific 
knowledge  only  a  structure  built  up  of  equations  between  contents 
of  ideas  in  accordance  with  the  principle  le  mime  est  le  meme.  The 
human  world  of  ideas  is  completely  isolated  within  itself,  and  truth 
consists  only  in  the  equations  that  can  be  expressed  within  this 
world  by  "  signs." 

9.  Indifferent  as  this  Ideology  professed  to  be  metaphysically,  its 
sensualistic  basis,  nevertheless,  involved  a  materialistic  metaphysics. 
Even  though  nothing  was  to  be  said  as  to  the  reality  corresponding 
to  sensations,  there  still  remained  in  the  background  the  popular 
idea  that  sensations  are  produced  by  bodies.  On  this  account  the 
cautious  restraint  that  belonged  to  these  positivistic  consequences 
of  sensualism,  needed  only  to  be  neglected  to  convert  the  anthropo- 
logical materialism,  which  had  developed  in  the  psychological 
theories,  into  a  metaphysical  and  dogmatic  materialism.  And  so 
Lamettrie  spoke  out  with  coquettish  recklessness  what  many  others 
did  not  dare  to  confess  to  themselves,  to  say  nothing  of  confessing 
or  defending  it  openly. 

But  other  lines  of  thought  in  natural  science,  independently  of 
ideology,  were  also  driving  toward  materialism.  Lamettrie  had 
very  rightly  seen  that  the  principle  of  the  mechanical  explanation 
of  Nature  would  ultimately  tolerate  nothing  in  addition  to  matter 
moved  by  its  own  forces :  long  before  Laplace  gave  the  well-known 
answer  that  he  did  not  need  the  "  hypothesis  of  the  deity  "  French 
natural  philosophy  had  attained  this  standpoint.  That  the  world 
of  gravitation  lives  in  itself  was  Newton's  opinion  also;  but  he 
believed  that  the  first  impulse  for  its  motions  must  be  sought  in  an 
action  of  God.  Kant  went  a  step  farther  when  he  cried  in  his 
Natural  History  of  the  Heavens.  "  Give  me  matter,  and  I  will  build 
you  a  world."  He  pledged  himself  to  explain  the  whole  universe 


480  The  Enlightenment:  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

of  the  fixed  stars  after  the  analogy  of  the  planetary  system,1  and 
traced  the  origination  of  the  individual  heavenly  bodies  out  of  a 
fiery-fluid  primitive  condition  solely  to  the  opposed  working  of  the 
two  fundamental  forces  of  matter,  attraction  and  repulsion.  But 
Kant  -was  convinced  that  the  explanation  which  is  sufficient  for  solar 
svstems  shatters  when  applied  to  the  blade  of  grass  and  the 
caterpillar :  the  organism  seems  to  him  to  be  a  miracle  ( Wunder)  in 
the  world  of  mechanics. 

The  French  philosophy  of  Nature  sought  to  overcome  this  obstacle 
also,  and  to  put  the  problem  of  organisation  out  of  the  world.  Among 
the  countless  atom-complexes,  it  taught,  there  are  also  those  which 
possess  the  capacity  of  preserving  and  propagating  themselves. 
Buffo  it,  who  pronounced  and  carried  through  with  full  energy  this 
frequently  expressed  thought,  gave  to  such  atom-complexes  the  name 
Offjotik  molecules,  and  by  assuming  this  conception  all  organic  life 
might  be  regarded  in  principle  as  an  activity  of  such  molecules,  which 
develops  according  to  mechanical  laws,  in  contact  with  the  external 
world.2  This  had  been  already  done  by  Spinoza,  of  whose  theory  of 
Xature  Buffon  frequently  reminds  us ;  the  latter,  also,  speaks  of  God 
and  "  Nature  "  as  synonyms.  This  naturalism  found  in  mechanics, 
accordingly,  the  common  principle  for  all  corporeal  occurrence. 
But  if  now  ideology  taught  that  ideas  and  their  transformations 
should  be  regarded  as  functions  of  organisms,  if  it  no  longer  was 
regarded  as  impossible,  but  more  and  more  seemed  probable,  that 
the  thing  which  thinks  is  the  same  that  is  extended  and  moves, 
if  Hartley  and  Priestley  in  England  and  Lamettrie  in  France 
showed  that  a  change  in  consciousness  is  a  function  of  the  nervous 
system,  — it  was  but  a  step  from  this  to  teach  that  ideas  with  all 
their  transformations  form  only  a  special  case  of  the  mechanical 
activity  of  matter,  only  a  particular  kind  of  its  forms  of  motion. 
While  Voltaire  had  expressed  the  opinion  that  motion  and  sensation 
might  perhaps  be  attributes  of  the  same  unknown  substance,  this 
hylozoism  changed  suddenly  into  decided  materialism  as  soon  as- 
the  dependence  of  the  psychical  upon  the  physical  was  given  the 
new  interpretation  of  a  likeness  in  kind  between  the  two,  and  it  is 
often  only  by  soft  and  fine  shades  of  expression  that  the  one  is 


1  The  suggestion  for  this  brilliant  astro-physical  hypothesis,  to  which  Lam- 
bert also  came  very  near  in  his  Kosmologischen  Briefen,  and  which  was  devel- 
oped later  in  a  similar  manner  by  Laplace,  was  due  perhaps  to  a  remark  by 
Buffon.    Cf.  0.  Liebmann,  Zur  Analysis  der  WirJclichkeit,  2d  ed.,  p.  376. 

2  This  principle  of  Bufion  was  further  developed  later  by  Lamarck  (Philoso- 
phic Zoologiqne,  Paris,  1809),  who  attempted  to  explain  the  transformation 
of  organisms  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  forms  by  a  mechanical  influence  of 
the  outer  world,  by  adaptation  to  the  environment. 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]  Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World  :  Materialism.     481 

converted  into  the  other.  This  transition  is  presented  in  the 
-writings  of  Robinet.  He  gives  a  metaphysical  flight  to  the  philos- 
ophy of  Nature.  Finding  support  in  the  development  system  of  the 
Leibnizian  Monadology,  he  regards  the  graded  scale  of  things  as  an 
infinite  multiplicity  of  forms  of  existence,  in  which  the  two  factors 
of  corporeality  and  psychical  function  are  mixed  in  all  the  different 
relations  possible,  so  that  the  more  the  nature  of  a  particular  thing 
unfolds  in  the  one  direction,  the  less  is  its  activity  in  the  other. 
This  holds  true,  also,  according  to  Eobinet,  in  the  case  of  the  vital 
movements  of  individual  creatures ;  the  force  which  they  use  men- 
tally is  lost  physically,  and  conversely.  Regarded  as  a  whole, 
however,  the  psychical  life  appears  as  a  special  form  which  the 
fundamental  material  activity  of  things  is  able  to  assume,  to  be  later 
translated  back  again  into  its  original  form.  Robinet  thus  regards 
ideas  and  activities  of  the  will  as  mechanical  transformations  of  the 
nervous  activity  which  can  be  changed  back  again  into  that.  Noth- 
ing takes  place  psychically  which  was  not  predisposed  in  the  physi- 
cal form ;  and  the  body,  accordingly,  receives  in  psychical  impulses 
only  the  reaction  of  its  own  motion. 

In  the  Systeme  de  la  Nature  materialism  appears  at  last  undis- 
guised as  a  purely  dogmatic  metaphysics.  It  introduces  itself  with 
the  Epicurean  motive  of  wishing  to  free  man  from  fear  of  the  super- 
sensuous.  It  shall  be  shown  that  the  supersensuous  is  only  the 
invisible  form  of  activity  of  the  sensuous.  No  one  has  ever  been 
able  to  think  out  anything  of  a  supersensuous  character  that  was 
not  a  faded  after-image  of  the  material.  He  who  talks  of  idea  and 
will,  of  soul  and  God,  thinks  of  nervous  activity,  of  his  body  and 
the  world  over  again  in  an  abstract  form.  For  the  rest,  this  "Bible 
of  Materialism"  presents  no  new  doctrines  or  arguments  in  its  pain- 
fully instructive  and  systematically  tedious  exposition  :  yet  a  certain 
weight  in  its  conception  taken  as  a  whole,  a  greatness  of  stroke  in 
drawing  the  lines  of  its  Weltanschauung,  a  harsh  earnestness  of  pre- 
sentation, is  not  to  be  mistaken.  This  is  no  longer  a  piquant  play 
of  thoughts,  but  a  heavy  armed  attack  upon  all  belief  in  the  imma- 
terial world. 

10.  In  spite  of  psycho-genetic  opposition,  the  problem,  of  knowl- 
edge as  conceived  by  the  supporters  of  "  innate  ideas  "  was  not  all 
too  unlike  the  view  which  obtained  with  the  sensualists.  The  dual- 
istic  presupposition  assumed  by  both  classes  made  it  difficult  for 
the  latter  to  understand  the  conformity  which  the  ideas  called  out 
in  the  mind  by  bodies  bear  to  the  bodies  themselves.  But  it  seemed 
almost  more  difficult  still  to  understand  that  the  mind  should  cog- 
nise a  world  independent  of  it,  by  means  of  the  development  of  the 


482  The  Enlightenment:  Tlteoretical  Questions,      [PARTY. 

thought-forms  which  are  grounded  in  its  own  nature.  And  yet 
exactly  this  is  an  assumption  so  deeply  rooted  in  human  thought, 
that  it  passes  for  the  most  part  as  self-evident  and  a  matter  of 
course,  not  only  for  the  naive  consciousness,  but  also  for  philo- 
sophical reflection.  It  was  the  mission  of  the  Terrninism,  whose 
after-workings  were  active  in  modern  philosophy,  to  shake  this  fun- 
damental dogmatic  conviction,  and  push  forward  for  consideration 
the  question  as  to  the  ground  of  that  conformity  between  necessity 
of  thought,  on  the  one  hand,  and  reality  on  the  other.  Even  Des- 
cartes had  found  it  necessary  to  support  the  knowing  power  of  the 
lumen  natumle  by  the  vercicitas  clei,  and  thereby  had  shown  the  only 
way  which  the  metaphysical  solution  of  the  problem  could  take. 

To  be  sure,  where  that  philosophical  impulse  was  lacking  which 
directs  its  ftzv/w^ctv  —  its  wonder — upon  just  that  which  is  appar- 
ently self-evident  and  a  matter  of  course,  the  difficulty  just  men- 
tioned weighed  less  heavily.    This  was  the  case  with  Wolff,  in  spite 
of  all  his  power  of  logical  clearness  and  systematic  care,  and  with 
the  Scots,  in  spite  of  all  their  fineness  of  psychological  analysis. 
The  former  proceeds  to  deduce,  more  geometrico,  an  extensive  ontol- 
ogy, and  a  metaphysics  with  its  parts  relating  to  God,  to  the  world, 
and  to  the  soul,  all  from  the  most  general  formal  laws  of  logic,  — 
from  the  principle  of  contradiction  and  that  of  sufficient  reason  (and 
this  second  principle  is  even  to  be  reduced  to  the  first).     Wolff, 
indeed,  stands  so  completely  within  the  bounds  of  this  logical 
schematism  that  the  question  never  seems  to  occur  to  him  at  all, 
whether  his  whole  undertaking — namely,  that  of  spinning  "a  sci- 
ence of  all  that  is  possible,  in  so  far  as  it  is  possible  "  out  of  logical 
propositions— is  authorised  in  the  nature  of  the  case.    This  problem 
was  concealed  for  him  the  more  as  he  confirmed  every  rational 
science  by  an  empirical  science  [e.g.  Eational  by  Empirical  Psychol- 
ogy, etc.], —an  agreement,  indeed,  which  was  possible  only  because 
his  a  priori  construction  of  metaphysical  disciplines  borrowed  from 
experience  step  by  step,  though  the  loan  was  unnoticed.    Neverthe- 
less, this  system,  which  was  blessed  with  so  many  disciples,  had  the 
great  didactic  value  of  setting  up  and  naturalising  strictness  in 
thought,  clearness  of  conceptions,  and  thoroughness  in  proof,  as  the 
supreme  rules  for  science,  and  the  pedantry  which  unavoidably  stole 
in  with  these  found  a  sufficient  counterpoise  in  other  intellectual 
forces. 

The  Scottish  philosophy  contented  itself  with  seeking  out  the 
principles  of  sound  common  sense.  Every  sensation  is  the  sign  — 
Reid  too,  thinks  as  terministically  as  this— of  the  presence  of  an 
object;  thinking  guarantees  the  reality  of  the  subject;  whatever 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]     Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World:  Leibniz.          483 

actually  comes  into  being  must  have  a  cause,  etc.  Such  principles 
are  absolutely  certain;  to  deny  them  or  even  to  doubt  them  is 
absurd.  This  is  especially  true,  also,  of  the  principle  that  what  the 
understanding  recognises  clearly  and  distinctly  is  necessarily  so. 
In  this  is  formulated  the  general  principle  of  a  philosophical  atti- 
tude which  is  called  dogmatism  (after  Kant),  unconditional  confi- 
dence in  the  agreement  of  thought  with  reality.  The  above  examples 
of  the  particular  principles  show  how  eclectically  this  common  sense 
sought  to  gather  its  fundamental  truths  from  the  different  systems 
of  philosophy.  In  this  respect  the  "gesunde  Menschenverstand " 
[sound  common  sense]  of  the  German  popular  philosophers  was 
entirely  in  accord  with  it.  Mendelssohn,  like  Keid,  was  of  the 
opinion  that  all  extremes  in  philosophy  were  errors,  and  that  the 
truth  lay  in  the  mean  position :  every  radical  view  has  a  germ  of 
truth  which  has  been  forced  artificially  to  a  one-sided  and  diseased 
development.  A  sound,  healthy  thinking  (Nicolai,  especially,  lays 
weight  on  this  predicate)  does  justice  to  all  the  different  motives 
and  so  finds  as  its  philosophy — the  opinion  of  the  average  man. 

11.  In  the  mind  of  Leibniz  the  problem  was  solved  by  the 
hypothesis  of  the  pre-established  harmony.  The  monad  knows  the 
world  because  it  is  the  world :  the  content  which  it  represents  is 
from  the  beginning  the  universe,  and  the  law  of  the  monad's  activity 
is  the  law  of  the  world.  On  account  of  its  "  having  no  windows  " 
it  has  no  experience  at  all  in  the  proper  sense:  nevertheless  the 
possibility  of  knowing  the  world  is  so  established  in  its  very  essence 
that  all  its  states  must  be  regarded  as  just  such  a  knowledge.  There 
is,  accordingly,  no  difference  between  intellect  and  sensibility,  either 
as  regards  the  objects  to  which  they  refer,  or  as  regards  the  way  in 
which  consciousness  relates  itself  to  these  objects :  the  only  differ- 
ence is  that  sensibility  cognises  the  indistinct  phenomenal  form, 
while  intellect  cognises  the  true  essence  of  things.  From  a  scientific 
point  of  view,  therefore,  knowledge  by  the  senses  was  treated  partly 
as  the  imperfect,  preliminary  stage,  partly  as  the  indistinct  anti-type 
for  the  intellect's  insight :  the  "  historical "  sciences  were  regarded 
either  as  preparations  for  the  philosophical,  or  as  lower  appendages. 

From  this  relation  a  peculiar  consequence  resulted.  The  sensuous 
mode  of  representation,  too,  has  a  certain  peculiar  perfection  of  its 
own,  which  differs  from  the  clearness  and  distinctness  of  intellectual 
knowledge  in  apprehending  the  phenomenal  form  of  its  object  with- 
out any  consciousness  of  grounds  or  reasons  :  and  in  this  perfection, 
characteristic  of  sensuous  knowledge,  Leibniz l  had  set  the  feeling  of 

i  Cf .  esp.  JPrinc.  de  la  Nat.  et  de  la  Grftce,  17. 


484  The  Enlightenment  ;  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

the  beaut  if  iiL    When,  now,  one  of  \Volifs  disciples,  Alexander  Baum- 
garten,  in  whom  tlie  architectonic  impulse  toward  systematisation. 
was  developed  to  a  particularly  high  degree,  wished  to  place  by  the 
side  01  logic  as  the  science  of  the  perfect  use  of  the  intellect,  a  corre- 
sponding science  of  the  perfection  of  sensation,  an  cestfietics,  this  dis- 
cipline took  on  the  form  of  a  science  of  the  beautiful.1  Thus  aesthetics,2 
as  a  branch  of  philosophical  knowledge,  grew  up,  not  out  of  interest 
in  its  subject-matter,  but  with  a  decided  depreciation  of  it  ;  and  as  a 
kk  step-sister  v  [lit.  poatkumous:  nachyeborene  Schicester']  of  logic  she 
was  treated  by  the  latter  with  very  little  understanding  for  her  own 
peculiar  nature,  and  with  a  cool  intellectual  pedantry.    Moreover, 
this  last-named  rationalist,  who  followed  Leibniz  in  regarding  the 
actual  world  as  the  best,  and  therefore,  as  the  most  beautiful  among 
all  possible  worlds,  could  set  up  no  other  principle  for  the  theory  of 
art  than  the  sensualistic  one  of  imitating  Mature,  and  developed 
this  principle  essentially  into  a  tedious  poetics.    But  in  spite  of  this, 
it  remains  Baumgarten's  great  service  to  have  treated  the  beautiful 
again,  and  for  the  first  time  in  modern  philosophy,  in  a  systematic 
way  from  the  general  conceptions  of  philosophy,  and  by  so  doing  to 
have  founded  a  discipline  that  was  destined  to  play  so  important  a 
part  in  the  further  development  of  philosophy,  especially  in  that  of 
Germany. 

12.  The  Leibnizo-"\Volffian  conception  of  the  relation  between 
sense  and  understanding,  and  especially  the  geometrical  method 
introduced  for  rational  knowledge,  encountered  numerous  opponents 
in  the  German  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century,  whose  opposi- 
tion proceeded  not  only  from  the  incitements  of  English  and  French 
sensualism  and  empiricism,  but  from  independent  investigations  as  to 
the  methodical  and  epistemological  relation  between  mathematics  and 
philosophy. 

In  this  latter  line  Riidiger,  and,  stimulated  by  him,  Crusius,  con- 
tended most  successfully  against  the  Wolffian  doctrine.  In  opposi- 
tion to  Wolff's  definition  of  philosophy  as  the  science  of  the  possible, 
Eiidiger  asserted  that  its  task  is  to  know  the  actual  Mathematics, 
and,  therefore,  also  a  philosophy  which  imitates  the  methods  of 
mathematics,  have  to  do  only  with  the  possible,  with  the  contradic- 
tionless  agreement  of  ideas  with  one  another;  a  true  philosophy 
needs  the  real  relation  of  its  conceptions  to  the  actual,  and  such  a 


I  Su  H*  Lotze'  Gesch'  aer  Aetthetik  in  DeuUchland  (Munich,  1868) 

The  name  "esthetics"  was  then  adopted  at  a  later  time  by  Kant,  after 
some  resistance  at  first,  for  the  designation  of  the  philosophical  doctrine  of  the 


CHAP.  1,  §  34.]      Knowledge  of  the  Outer  World:  Kant.  485 

relation  is  to  be  gained  only  by  perception.  Crusius  made  this 
point  of  view  his  own ;  and  although  he  thought  in  a  less  sensual- 
istic  manner  than  his  predecessor,  he  yet  criticised  in  a  quite  similar 
manner  from  that  point  of  view  the  effort  of  the  geometrical  method 
to  know  reality  by  employing  only  logical  forms.  He  rejected  the 
ontological  proof  for  the  existence  of  God,  since  out  of  conceptions 
alone  existence  can  never  be  inferred ;  existence  (as  Kant  expressed 
it)  cannot  be  dug  out  of  ideas.  In  the  same  line,  also,  was  the 
exact  distinguishing  between  the  real  relation  of  causes  and  effects 
and  the  logical  relation  of  ground  and  consequent,  which  Crusius 
urged  in  his  treatment  of  the  principle  of  ground  or  reason.  For 
his  own  part  he  used  this  difference  between  real  and  ideal  grounds 
to  oppose  the  Leibnizo-Wolffian  determinism,  and  especially  to  set 
up  the  Scotist  conception  of  the  unrestricted  free  will  of  the 
Creator,  in  opposition  to  the  Thomist  conception  of  the  relation 
between  the  divine  will  and  the  divine  intellect,  which  the  rational- 
ists maintained.  The  turning  away  from  natural  religion,  which 
lay  in  all  these  inferences,  made  the  stricter  Protestant  orthodoxy 
favourably  disposed  toward  the  doctrine  of  Crusius. 

The  investigation  as  to  the  fundamental  difference  in  method 
between  philosophy  and  mathematics,  that  cut  deepest  and  was 
most  important  in  results,  was  that  undertaken  by  Kant,  whose 
writings  very  early  refer  to  Crusius.  But  in  his  prize  treatise  On 
the  Clearness  of  the  Principles  of  Natural  Theology  and  Morals  he 
brings  a  decisive  statement.  The  two  sciences  are  related  as  oppo- 
site in  every  respect.  Philosophy  is  an  analytic  science  of  concep- 
tions, mathematics  a  synthetic  science  of  magnitudes:  the  former 
receives  its  conceptions,  the  latter  constructs  its  magnitudes;  the 
former  seeks  definitions,  the  latter  sets  out  from  definitions ;  the 
former  needs  experience,  the  latter  does  not ;  the  former  rests  upon 
the  activity  of  the  understanding,  the  latter  upon  that  of  the  sensibil- 
ity. Philosophy,  therefore,  in  order  to  know  the  real,  must  proceed 
zetetically:  it  must  not  try  to  imitate  the  constructive  method  of 
mathematics. 

With  this  fundamental  insight  into  the  sensuous  character  of  the 
cognitive  foundations  of  mathematics,  Kant  exploded  the  system  of 
the  geometrical  method.  For,  according  to  his  view,  sensibility  and 
understanding  can  no  longer  be  distinguished  as  lower  and  higher 
grades  of  clearness  and  distinctness  in  knowledge.  Mathematics 
proves  that  sensuous  knowledge  can  be  very  clear  and  distinct,  and 
many  a  system  of  metaphysics  proves  that  intellectual  knowledge 
may  be  very  obscure  and  confused.  The  old  distinction  must  there- 
fore be  exchanged  for  another,  and  Kant  attempts  a  substitute  by 


486  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

defining  sensibility  as  the  faculty  of  recepticity.  understanding  as 
that  of  spontaneity.  He  does  this  in  his  Liaugural  Dissertation,  and 
upon  this  builds  a  new  system  of  episteniology,3  leaning  upon  the 
psychological  principle  of  virtual  innateness  (of,  §  S3,  12). 

The  main  outlines  of  the  system  are  the  following :  the  Forms  of 
the  sensibility  are  space  and  time ;  those  of  the  understanding  are 
the  most  general  conceptions.  Out  of  reflection  upon  the  one  class 
arises  mathematics ;  upon  the  other  class,  metaphysics ;  — both  a  priori 
sciences  of  unconditional  certainty.  But  Forms  of  (receptive)  sen- 
sibility give  only  the  necessary  knowledge  of  the  appearance  of 
things  in  the  human  mind  (mundits  sensibilis  phenomenon) ;  the 
Forms  of  the  understanding,  on  the  contrary,  give  adequate  knowl- 
edge of  the  true  essential  nature  of  things  (mundus  mtelligibilis  nou- 
men  >n).  That  these  Forms  of  the  understanding  are  able  to  do  this 
is  due  to  the  fact,  that  the  understanding,  as  well  as  things  them- 
selves, has  its  origin  in  the  divine  mind;  that  we,  therefore,  by 
means  of  it,  see  things  to  a  certain  extent  "  in  God." 2 

§  35.  Natural  Eeligion. 

The  epistemological  motives  which  ruled  the  eighteenth  century 
were  not  in  general  favourable  to  metaphysics :  if,  in  spite  of  this, 
they  brought  their  sceptical  and  positivistic  tendency  to  complete 
expression  in  but  few  instances,  this  was  due  to  the  religious  inter- 
est which  expected  from  philosophy  a  decision  as  to  its  problems. 
The  religious  unrest  and  wars  from  which  Germany,  France,  and 
England  had  suffered,  and  the  quarreling  over  dogmas  which  had 
been  connected  with  them,  had  been  followed  already  in  the  seven- 
teenth century  by  a  feeling  of  surfeit  and  disgust  for  the  distinc- 
tions in  creeds:  the  "wretched  century  of  strife,"  as  Herder  called 
it,  longed  for  peace.  In  England  the  temper  of  the  Latttudinarians 
extended  itself,  and  on  the  continent  efforts  toward  union  were  taken 
up  again  and  again  in  spite  of  frequent  failure.  Bossuet  and  Spinola 
on  one  side,  and  Leibniz  on  the  other,  worked  long  in  this  direction : 
the  latter  projected  a  systema  theologicum,  which  should  contain  the 
fundamental  doctrines  of  Christianity  common  to  all  three  Confes- 
sions, and  when  the  negotiations  with  the  Catholics  no  longer 

1The  system  of  tlie  Inaugural  Dissertation  is  only  one  stage  in  Kant's 
development ;  lie  gave  it  up  again  forthmth ;  hence  it  belongs  in  his  pre-critical 
time  aud  in  this  period. 

2  This  doctrine,  presented  with  an  appeal  to  Malebranche  (Sectio  IV.),  is 
accordingly  just  the  system  of  the  pre-established  harmony  between  knowledge 
and  reality  which  Kant  later  rejected  so  energetically  (Letter  to  M.  Herz, 
.belD.  21 }  17  <  2}. 


CHAP.  1,  §  35.]       Natural  Relic/ion  :  Locke,  Deism.  487 

offered  any  hope,  he  attempted,  at  least,  to  employ  Ms  relations  to 
the  courts  of  Hanover  and  Berlin  to  bring  about  a  union  between 
the  Lutherans  and  the  Eeformed  body,  —  this,  too,  indeed  without 
any  immediate  result. 

Locke,  on  the  other  hand,  in  his  three  Letters  concerning  Tolera- 
tion, brought  together  the  thoughts  of  the  toleration  movement  into 
the  theory  of  the  "  free  church  in  the  free  state,"  —  into  the  demand 
that  the  modern  state,  raised  above  all  Church  tutelage,  should  tol- 
erate and  protect  every  religions  belief  as  personal  opinion,  and 
every  religious  society  as  a  free  association,  in  so  far  as  it  does  not 
threaten  to  disturb  political  order. 

But  the  more  the  union  was  thwarted  by  the  resistance  of  theo- 
logians, the  more  nourishment  came  to  the  life  of  the  Mystic  sects, 
whose  supra-conf essional  tendencies  were  in  harmony  with  the  efforts 
toward  union,  and  which  spread  in  the  eighteenth  century  with  a 
multitude  of  interesting  manifestations.  The  Pietism  founded  by 
Spener  and  Prancke  kept  nearest  to  the  Church  life,  and  was  there- 
fore most  successful.  This,  nevertheless,  allows  a  certain  indif- 
ference toward  dogmatic  faith  to  appear,  but  in  compensation  lays 
all  the  more  weight  upon  the  increase  of  personal  piety  and  upon 
the  purity  and  religions  colouring  of  conduct. 

1.  In  connection  with  all  these  movements  stands  the  tendency 
of  the  Enlightenment  philosophy  toward  establishing  the  universal, 
"  true  "  Christianity  by  means  of  philosophy.  True  Christianity  is  in 
this  sense  identified  with  the  religion  of  reason,  or  natural  religion, 
and  is  to  be  dissolved  out  from  the  different  forms  of  positive, 
historical  Christianity.  At  first,  such  a  universal  Christianity  was 
still  allowed  the  character  of  a  revealed  religion,  but  the  complete 
agreement  of  this  revelation  with  reason  was  maintained.  This 
was  the  position  taken  by  Locke  and  Leibniz,  and  also  by  the 
latter' s  disciple,  Wolff.  They  conceive  the  relation  between  natural 
and  revealed  religion  quite  in  accordance  with  the  example  of 
Albert  and  Thomas  (cf.  p.  321) :  revelation  is  above  reason,  but  in 
harmony  with  reason;  it  is  the  necessary  supplement  to  natural 
knowledge.  That  is  revealed  which  the  reason  cannot  find  out  of 
itself,  but  can  understand  as  in  harmony  with  itself  after  the  revela- 
tion has  taken  place. 

Proceeding  from  this  idea,  the  Sotinians  had  already  taken  a  step 
further.  They,  too,  recognised  very  vigorously  the  necessity  of 
revelation ;  but  they  emphasised,  on  the  other  hand,  that  nothing 
can  be  revealed  that  does  not  prove  accessible  to  rational  knowledge. 
Hence  only  what  is  rational  in  the  religious  documents  is  to  be 
regarded  as  revealed  truth ;  i.e.  reason  decides  what  shall  be  held  to 


488  The  Enlightenment :   Theoretical  Questions.      [PART  V. 

be  revelation.  From  this  standpoint  the  Socinians  separated  the 
Trinity  and  the  Incarnation  from  the  content  of  revelation,  and 
in  general  transferred  revelation  from  the  realm  of  theoretical 
truths  to  an  entirely  different  field.  They  comprehend  religion 
under  the  characteristic  of  laic,  and  this  constitutes  their  peculiar 
position.  What  God  reveals  to  man  is  not  a  metaphysics,  but  a  laic. 
This  he  did  in  Closes,  and  so  in  Christ  he  gave  a  new  law.  But  if 
religion  objectively  is  law-giving,  subjectively  it  is  fulfilling  the 
law,  —  not  an  acceptance  of  theoretical  doctrines,  nor  even  merely  a 
moral  disposition,  but  subjection  to  the  law  revealed  by  God  and 
a  keeping  of  all  its  prescriptions.  This  alone  has  been  made  by 
God  the  condition  of  eternal  blessedness  — a  juridical  conception  of 
religion,  which,  with  its  resort  to  the  principle  of  the  boundless 
authority  of  what  is  determined  by  divine  power,  seems  to  contain 
strongly  Seotist  elements. 

2.  If,  however,  the  criterion  of  revelation  is  ultimately  to  lie 
solely  in  the  rationality  of  the  same,  the  completely  consistent 
result  of  this  theory  is,  that  historical  revelation  should  be  set  aside 
as  superfluous,  and  natural  religion  alone  retained.     This  was  done 
by  the  English  Deists;  and  Toland  is  their  leader  in  so  far  as  he 
first  undertook  to  strip  Christianity,  i.e.  the  universal  religion  of 
reason,  of  all  mysteries,  and  reduce  it,  as  regards  the  knowledge 
which  it  contains,  to  the  truths  of  the  "natural  light,"  i.e.  to  a 
philosophical  theory  of  the  world.    But  the  content  which  the 
Enlightenment  philosophy  sought  to  give  to  this,  its  religion  of 
Xature,  had  two  sources, — theoretical  and  practical  reason.    As 
regards  the  first,  Deism  contains  a  metaphysics  based  upon  natural 
philosophy;  in  the  second  aspect  it  involves  a  theory  of  the  world 
from  the  point  of  view  of  moral  philosophy.    In  this  way  the  natural 
religion  of  the  Enlightenment  was  involved  in  the  movement  of 
theoretical,  and  also  in  that  of  practical  problems :  these  its  two 
elements  stood  in  close  connection,  but  fdund  each  a  particular 
development,  so  that  they  could  diverge  and  become  mutually 
isolated.     The  relation  between  these  two  constituents  was   as 
determining  in  its  influence  for  the  history  of  natural  religion  as 
was  the  common  relation  which  they  sustained  to  the  positive 
religions. 

The  complete  union  of  the  two  elements  is  found  in  the  most 
important  thinker  of  this  movement,  Shqftesbury.  The  centre  of 
his  doctrine  and  of  his  own  nature  is  formed  by  what  he  himself 
called  enthusiam,  —enthusiasm  for  all  that  is  true,  good,  and  beau- 
tiful, the  elevation  of  the  soul  above  itself  to  more  universal  values, 
the  living  out  of  the  whole  peculiar  power  of  the  individual  by  the 


CHAP.  1,  §  35.]      Natural  Religion :  Toland,  Shaft  eslitry.         489 

devotion  to  something  higher.  Nor  is  religion  anything  else:  a 
life  of  increased  and  enhanced  personality,  a  knowing  one's  self  to 
be  one  with  the  great  connected  all  of  reality.  But  this  noble  pas- 
sion, like  every  other,  grows  from  admiration  and  strong  emotion  to 
love.  The  source  of  religion  is,  therefore,  objectively  as  well  as 
subjectively,  the  harmony  and  beauty  and  perfection  of  the  universe ; 
the  unavoidable  impression  received  from  this  perfection  awakens 
enthusiasm.  With  a  warm  heart  Shaftsbury  portrays  the  order  of 
things,  the  purposiveness  of  their  inter-play,  the  beauty  of  their 
formation,  the  harmony  of  their  life,  and  shows  that  there  is  noth- 
ing in  itself  evil —  nothing  which  entirely  misses  its  mark.  What- 
ever appears  an  evil  in  one  system  of  individuals,  proves  itself  in 
another,  or  in  a  higher  connection,  to  be  still  a  good,  as  a  necessary 
member  in  the  purposeful  structure  of  the  whole.  All  imperfection 
of  the  particular  vanishes  in  the  perfection  of  the  universe ;  every 
discord  is  lost  in  the  harmony  of  the  world. 

This  universal  optimism,  whose  theodicy  is  in  its  conceptions  com- 
pletely Neo-Platonic  in  character,  knows  therefore  but  one  proof 
for  the  existence  of  God,  the  physico-tlieological.  Nature  bears 
everywhere  the  marks  of  the  artist,  who  has  unfolded  the  loveli- 
ness of  his  own  nature  in  the  charm  of  phenomena  with  the  highest 
intelligence  and  sensitiveness.  Beauty  is  the  fundamental  concep- 
tion of  this  Weltanschauung.  Its  admiration  of  the  universe  is 
essentially  aesthetic,  and  the  taste  of  the  cultivated  man  is,  for 
Shaftsbury,  the  basis  of  both  religious  and  moral  feeling.  For 
this  reason  his  teleology  also  is  the  tasteful  one  of  artistic  apprehen- 
sion ;  like  Giordano  Bruno  he  seeks  the  purposiveness  of  the  uni- 
verse in  the  harmonious  beauty  of  each  of  its  individual  structures. 
All  that  is  petty  and  utilitarian  in  teleological  thought  is  here 
stripped  off,  an<J  a  wave  of  poetic  world-glorification  that  carries  all 
before  it  goes  through  Shaftesbury's  writings.  It  was  on  this 
account  that  they  worked  so  powerfully  upon  the  German  poets, 
upon  Herder,1  and  upon  Schiller.2 

3.  Few,  indeed,  of  the  philosophers  of  the  Enlightenment  stand 
upon  this  height.  Voltaire  and  Diderot3  allowed  themselves  at 
first  to  be  swept  along  to  such  an  enthusiastic  view  of  the  world. 
Maupertuis  and  Eobinet  had  also  something  of  the  universalistic 
tendency ;  in  Germany,  Beimarus  in  his  reflections  concerning  the 
mechanical  instincts  of  animals,  shows  at  least  a  sensibility  for  the 
artistically  delicate  detailed  work  of  Nature  and  for  the  internal 

1  Herder,  Vom  ErJcennen  itnd  Empfiiiden. 

2  Schiller,  Philisophische  Brief e  (Julius). 

8  Particularly  in  the  Pensees  Philosophiques. 


490  The  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.     [PART  V. 

end  which  she  realises  in  her  organic  structures.     But  the  great 
mass  of  the  philosophical  writers  of  the  eighteenth  century  is  so 
controlled  by  the  anthropological  interest  and  the  practical  aims  of 
philosophy  that  it  investigates  rather  the  uses  which  the  arrangement 
of  the  universe  and  the  activities  of  its  parts  yield  for  the  wants  of 
man ;  and  if  those  of  higher  temper  have  in  view  principally  the 
furthering  and  perfecting  of  the  moral  nature,  they  still  do  not 
despise  the  point  of  view  of  usefulness  and  every-day  "  happiness.'1 
Thus  aesthetic  teleology  is  cut  off  by  the  Stoic  doctrine  of  utility, 
and  the  technical  analogy,  with  which  men  like  Leibniz,  Newton, 
and  Clarke  had  thought  of  the  subordination  of  mechanism  to  teleol- 
ogy, could  not  but  be  favourable  to  this  utilitarian  conception.    For 
the  purposiveness  of  machines  consists  just  in  yielding  an  advan- 
tage, just  in  the  fact  that  their  product  is  something  else,  something 
in  addition  to  their  own  working.    And  this  analogy  was  quite 
welcome  also  to  the  '•  Enlighteners,"  who  frequently  praised  the 
harmony  of  their  philosophy  with  natural  science  5  they  employed 
this  mode  of  view  as  against  the  conception  of  miracle  found  in 
positive  religion,    Eeimarus,  too,  held  that  only  bunglers  need  to 
assist  their  machines  afterwards,  and  that  it  is  unworthy  of  perfect 
intelligence  to  come  into  such  a  position.    But  if  it  was  asked  what 
the  end  of  the  world-machine  is,  the  answer  of  the  Enlightenment 
was,  the  happiness  of  man,  or  perhaps  at  most,  that  of  created  beings 
in  general.    This  trade  in  the  small  wares  of  usefulness  (Niitzlich- 
keitskrciaierei)  was  carried  out  in  the  most  tasteless  manner  in  the 
German  Enlightenment.    Wolff's  empirical  teleology  (Designs  of 
Natural  Tilings)  excites  one's  mirth  by  the  petty  points  of  view 
which  he  assigns  to  the  creative  intelligence,  and  the  Popular  Phil- 
osophers vied  with  each  other  in  portraying  in  broad  and  pleasing 
pictures  the  neat  and  comfortable  way  in  which  this  universe  is 
fitted  up  for  the  homo  sapiens,  and  how  well  one  may  live  in  it  if 
he  bears  himself  well. 

A  nobler  thought,  even  at  that  time,  was  that  of  Kant,  when  in 
his  Natural  History  of  the  Heavens  he  adopted  the  Leibnizo-New- 
tonian  conception,  but  left  behind  all  that  talk  about  the  use  of  the 
world  for  man,  and  directed  his  look  toward  the  perfection  which 
displays  itself  in  the  infinite  multiplicity  of  the  heavenly  bodies, 
and  in  the  harmony  of  their  systematic  constitution,*  and  with  him, 
by  the  side  of  the  happiness  of  creatures,  appears  always  their 
ethical  perfecting  and  elevation.  But  he,  too,  esteems  the  physico- 
theological1  proof  for  the  existence  of  God  as  that  which  is  the  most 

1  This  term  points  tack  into  the  seventeenth  century,  and  seems  to  have 


CHAP.  1,  §  35.]      Natural  Religion  :  Kant,  Leibniz.  491 

impressive  for  man,  though,  he  grants  strict  cogency  as  little  to  this 
as  to  the  cosmological  and  ontological.  The  popular  philosophy,  on 
the  contrary,  had  its  favourite  just  in  this  proof,  and  it  forms  a  gen- 
eral characteristic  of  natural  religion. 

4.  The  presupposition  of  this  course  of  thought  was  the  convic- 
tion that  the  world  is  really  so  perfect  and  purposive  as  to  support 
the  proof  in  question.  Believing  souls  brought  this  conviction  with 
them,  and  the  literature  of  the  eighteenth  century  proves  that  it  was 
assumed  without  question  in  wide  circles  as  a  valid  premise  of  the 
argument ;  sceptical  minds  demanded  that  this  also  should  be  dem- 
onstrated, and  so  roused  the  problems  of  theodicy.  In  most  cases 
the  Enlightenment  philosophy  resorted  here  to  the  same  (ancient) 
arguments  which  Shaftesbury  brought  into  the  field,  but  the  scep- 
tical-orthodox method,  of  pointing  to  the  limited  nature  of  human 
knowledge  and  to  the  darkness  in  the  ways  of  Providence,  was  not 
despised. 

A  new  turn  was  given  to  theodicy  by  Leibniz.  He  had  been 
brought  by  Bayle's  incisive  criticism  to  the  necessity  of  adding 
experimental  proof  to  his  system  of  Monadology  by  showing  the 
perfection  of  the  universe.  Setting  in  motion  to  this  end  the  high- 
est conceptions  of  his  metaphysics,  he  attempted  to  show  that  the 
actual  presence  of  evil  in  the  world  does  not  make  out  a  case  against 
its  having  originated  from  an  all-good  and  all-powerful  creative 
activity.  Physical  evil,  he  maintains,  is  a  necessary  consequence 
of  moral  evil  in  the  ethical  world  order ;  it  is  the  natural  punish- 
ment of  sin.  Moral  evil,  however,  has  its  ground  in  the  finiteness 
and  limitation  of  creatures,  and  this  latter  is  metaphysical  evil  As 
a  finite  thing  the  monad  has  obscure  and  confused  sensuous  repre- 
sentations or  ideas,  and  from  these  follow  necessarily  the  obscure 
and  confused  sensuous  impulses,  which  are  the  motives  to  sin.  The 
problem  of  theodicy  is  thus  reduced  to  the  question,  Why  did  God 
create  or  permit  metaphysical  evil  ? 

The  answer  to  this  question  is  very  simple.  Finiteness  belongs 
to  the  conception  of  a  created  being;  limitation  is  the  essential 
nature  of  all  creatures.  It  is  a  logical  necessity  that  a  world  can 
exist  only  out  of  finite  beings  which  reciprocally  limit  each  other 
and  are  determined  by  their  creator  himself.  But  finite  beings  are 
imperfect.  A  world  that  should  consist  of  nothing  but  perfect 
beings  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  And  since  it  is  also  an  "  eter- 
nal," that  is,  a  conceptional  or  rational  truth,  that  out  of  metaphysi- 

arisen  from  the  Neo-Platonic  circles  in  England.  Samuel  Parker  published  in 
1669  Tentamina  Physico-theologiea  de  Deo,  and  William  Derhctm,  in  1713,  a 
Physico-theology '. 


Tit*  Enlightenment :  Theoretical  Questions.      [PART  V. 

cal  evil  follows  first  moral  and  further  physical  evil,  that  out  of 
tiniteness  follows  sin,  ami  out  of  sin  sorrow,  it  is  then  a  logical 
necessity  that  a  world  without  evil  is  unthinkable.  However  much, 
therefore,  the  goodness  of  Gud  might  desire  to  avoid  evil,  the 
divine  wisdom,  the  "region  des  verites  eternelles"  makes  a  world 
without  evil  an  impossibility.  Metaphysical  truths  are  independ- 
ent of  the  divine  will;  the  latter  in  its  creative  activity  is  bound 
to  them. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  goodness,  which  belongs  to  the  con- 
ception of  God  as  truly  as  does  his  wisdom,  is  a  guarantee  that  the 
evils  are  as  few  as  possible.  The  world  is  contingent,  i.e.  it  may  be 
thought  as  being  other  than  it  is.  There  is  an  infinite  number  of 
possible  worlds,  none  of  them  entirely  without  evil,  but  some 
af ected  with  much  more  numerous  and  heavy  evils  than  others. 
If  now  from  among  all  these  possible  worlds,  "which  God's  wisdom 
spread  out  before  him,  he  created  this  actual  world,  it  can  only  have 
been  the  choice  of  the  best  that  guided  him  in  so  doing;  he  has 
made  real  the  one  which  contains  the  least  and  the  fewest  evils. 
The  contingency  of  the  world  consists  in  the  fact  that  it  exists,  not 
with  metaphysical  necessity,  but  through  a  choice  exercised  among 
many  possibilities ;  and  since  this  choice  proceeds  from  the  all-good 
will  of  G-od,  it  is  unthinkable  that  the  world  is  any  other  than  the 
best.  Theodicy  cannot  proceed  to  deny  the  evil  in  the  world,  for 
evil  belongs  to  the  very  idea  of  the  world ;  but  it  can  prove  that  this 
world  contains  as  little  evil  as  is  in  any  way  possible  in  accordance 
with  metaphysical  law.  God's  goodness  would  gladly  have  pro- 
duced a  world  without  evil,  but  his  wisdom  permitted  him  only  the 
best  among  possible  worlds. 

Hence  arises  the  common  expression,  optimism.  Whether  this 
experimental  proof  of  the  physico-theological  view  of  the  world 
succeeds,  may  be  left  undecided.  The  eighteenth  century  con- 
ceived of  the  matter  as  though  it  was  the  essential  aim  of  Leibniz 
to  prove  that  the  world  is  the  most  perfect  that  can  be  thought  j 
that  he  did  this  only  under  the  presupposition  of  the  metaphysical 
necessity  of  evil,  was,  in  characteristic  fashion,  scarcely  noted  in 
the  literature  of  that  time,  which  itself  was  through  and  through 
"  optimistic  "  in  its  thought.  In  a  historical  aspect  the  most  note- 
worthy thing  in  this  theodicy  is  the  peculiar  mixture  of  Thomist 
and  Scotist  metaphysics.  The  world  is  such  as  it  is  only  because 
God  has  so  willed  it ;  by  virtue  of  his  omnipotence  he  might  have 
chosen  another;  but  in  the  choice  of  the  possibilities  before  him 
the  divine  will  is  bound  to  the  divine  intellect  as  the  "eternal 
truths.''  Above  all  reality  hovers  the  fate  prescribed  by  logic. 


CHAP.  1,  §  35.]    Natural  Religion  :   Voltaire,  Diderot.  498 

5.  In  the  forms  hitherto  developed  the  teachers  of  natural  religion 
believed  that  they  could  attain  along  the  physico-theological  path  to 
the  conception  of  the  deity  as  creative  intelligence,  and  for  this 
phase  of  the  development  the  name  Deism  is  customarily  employed. 
The  conception  of  God  as  personality,  which  survived  in  this  pro- 
cedure as  the  last  remnant  from  positive  religion,  offered  a  hold  for 
the  moral  side  also  of  natural  religion,  and  in  turn  found  in  that  its 
support.  But  where  only  the  theoretical  element  was  pursued,  nat- 
ural religion  found  itself  involved  in  the  course  of  development 
taken  by  naturalistic  metaphysics,  and  found  in  this  finally  its 
downfall.  Toland  already  gave  a  completely  pantheistic  turn  to  the 
admiration  of  Nature,  which  for  him  constituted  the  essential  con- 
tent of  religious  feeling,  and  with  the  hylozoism  which  developed 
among  the  French  natural  scientists  (cf.  §  34,  9)  the  transcendence 
of  God,  as  well  as  his  personality,  was  at  an  end ;  and  when  then 
the  complete  dominance  of  the  mechanical  explanation  of  Nature 
was  proclaimed,  when  the  organic  world  also  was  recognised  as  in 
principle  the  product  of  the  universal  mechanism  of  Nature,  the 
physico-theological  proof  lost  its  power  over  the  mind.  In  addition 
to  this  the  premises  of  the  argument  were  questioned.  The  Lisbon 
earthquake  (1755)  which  shocked  all  Europe  made  many  waver  in 
their  ideas  of  the  perfection  and  adaptedness  of  the  world's  ar- 
rangement ;  the  indifference  with  which  Nature  destroys  human  life 
and  all  its  content  of  ends  and  worth  seemed  to  speak  much  more 
for  a  blind  necessity  in  all  that  takes  place  than  for  a  teleological 
disposition  of  the  world-process.  Yoltaire,  in  whom  this  revolution 
in  point  of  view  became  complete,  began  in  Candide  to  make  sport 
of  the  "  best  of  possible  worlds/7  and  the  element  of  natural  philos- 
ophy in  natural  religion  crumbled  to  pieces. 

The  jSysteme  de  la  Nature  drew  the  last  consequences  with  its 
atheism  and  materialism.  All  adaptation,  all  order  of  Nature,  is  only 
a  phenomenon  in  the  human  mind.  Nature  itself  knows  only  the 
necessity  of  atomic  motion,  and  in  it  there  are  no  worth-determina- 
tions,  which  are  dependent  upon  ends  or  norms  of  value.  Nature's 
conformity  to  law  is  active  with  the  same  rigour  in  those  things 
which  appear  to  us  aimless  or  unpurposive,  irregular  or  anomalous, 
as  in  the  things  which  we  judge  with  reference  to  their  agreement 
with  our  designs  or  customs,  and  approve  as  purposeful.  The  wise 
man  should  make  this  indifference  of  Nature  his  own ;  he  should  see 
through  the  relativity  of  all  conceptions  of  ends;  there  is  no  real 
norm  or  order.  This  principle  was  applied  by  Diderot  to  aesthetics. 
The  correctness  of  Nature  is  accordingly  the  only  thing  that  art 
should  display,  the  only  thing  that  it  should  grasp  and  give  back ; 


494  The  Enlightenment:   Tlieoretieal  Questions.      [PARTY. 

beauty  is  one  of  those  valuations  which  have  no  objective  validity. 
Materialism  knows  only  an  art  void  of  ideals,  only  the  indifferent 
copy  of  any  reality  whatever. 

6.  While  the  foundations  of  Deism  based  on  natural  philosophy 
were  thus  crumbling  from  within,  its  episteniologieal  basis  began 
also  to  waver :  for  all  attacks  upon  the  possibility  of  a  metaphysics 
struck  also  at  that  of  a  natural  religion,  which  indeed  in  its  contents 
exhibited  but  a  survival  of  religious  metaphysics.  In  this  respect 
the  Bcwow'an  system  was  the  most  dangerous  foe  of  the  deistic  doc- 
trine. It  allowed  religion  to  stand  only  as  revelation  and  combated 
the  possibility  of  knowing  its  doctrines  by  the  aid  of  reason,  or  even 
of  merely  bringing  them  into  accord  with  reason.  Xo  one  supported 
this  standpoint  more  energetically  than  Pierre  Bayle.  He  worked 
systematically  to  show  that  all  dogmatic  doctrines  were  contrary  to 
reason;  he  laid  bare  their  contradictions  with  penetrating  keenness; 
he  sought  to  prove  that  they  were  absurd  for  the  natural  reason. 
But  he  uncovered,  also,  the  weak  points  in  Deism ;  he  denied  the 
cogency  of  the  philosophical  arguments  for  the  existence  of  God  and 
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  took  special  occasion  in  connection 
with  the  problems  of  theodicy  to  prove  the  inadequacy  of  the  "  nat- 
ural light "' :  even  in  controversy  with  Leibniz  he  was  not  worsted. 
Eeligion  is,  therefore,  possible  for  him  only  as  positive  revelation 
in  contradiction  with  philosophical  knowledge.  He  defends  with 
all  keenness  the  twofold  truth.  And  therefore,  although  perhaps 
for  himself  he  might  have  credit  for  a  faith  contrary  to  reason,  — 
Ms  writings  and  especially  the  articles  of  his  much  read  Dictionnaire 
were  not  less  dangerous  to  the  theoretical  doctrines  of  positive  relig- 
ion than  to  those  of  Deism. 

Finally  Hume,  also,  on  epistemological  grounds  dissolved  the 
union  "which  the  other  English  empiricists  and  nominalists,  and 
indeed,  even  the  materialists,  like  Hartley  and  Priestley,  sought  to 
maintain  with  natural  religion.  If  there  is  no  metaphysics  of  things 
at  all,  philosophical  religion  falls  also.  Hume,  indeed  (as  Cleanthes 
in  the  dialogue),  acknowledges  in  the  spirit  of  his  practical  prob- 
abilism  that  the  world  on  the  whole  makes  the  incontestable  impres- 
sion of  purposiveness  and  rational  order,  and  finds,  therefore,  that 
that  belief,  on  which  all  our  experience  rests,  is  applicable  also  to 
the  (physico-theological)  assumption  of  a  unity  in  creation  and  in 
the  direction  of  the  whole.  But  from  the  standpoint  of  science 
(as  Philo)  he  cannot  regard  this  belief  as  capable  of  being  estab- 
lished by  reason.  In  particular  he  asserts,  in  accordance  with  the 
principles  of  the  theory  of  probability,  that  it  is  quite  explicable, 
even  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  purely  mechanical  theory,  that  amid 


CHAP.  1,  §  35.]       Natural  Religion :  Bayle,  Hume.  495 

the  countless  combinations  of  atoms,  one  -which  was  durable,  pur- 
posive, and  veil  ordered  should  at  last  come  about  and  become  fixed. 
So  the  case  remains  with  a  problematical  decision.  Natural  religion 
is  a  reasonable  mode  of  view  for  the  practical  man,  but  it  should 
not  profess  to  be  a  scientific  doctrine, 

7.  The  more  the  metaphysical  factor  in  Deism  retreated  for  these 
or  other  reasons,  the  more  the  "  true  Christianity,"  which  Deism 
professed  to  be,  became  restricted  to  a  moral  conviction.  This  had 
been  already  prepared  by  Herbert  of  Cherbury,  who  stood  farther 
removed  from  natural  philosophy,  and  had  been  quite  definitely 
expressed  by  Spinoza.  According  to  this  view  the  essence  of 
religion  consists  in  moral  action,  and  the  religious  life  has  for  its 
true  content,  deliberation  upon  duty,  and  the  seriousness  of  a  con- 
duct of  life  determined  by  this.  This  in  itself  alone  gave  but  very 
pale  and  vanishing  lines  for  a  Weltanschauung.  There  remained  an 
indefinite  idea  of  an  all-good  God,  who  created  man  for  happiness, 
who  should  be  worshipped  by  a  virtuous  life,  and  who  will  exercise 
an  equalising  justice  in  an  eternal  life,  so  that  such  virtue  will 
receive  the  reward  which  is  lacking  to  it  here.  No  one  will  fail  to 
notice  the  pure,  noble  thought  which  lived  in  this  moralising  Deism, 
or  the  high  value  which  belongs  to  it  historically,  because  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  one-sidedness  and  strife  of  confessional  zeal  it  brought 
the  ideals  of  toleration  and  philanthropy,  respect  for  the  purely 
human  appreciation  of  the  ethical  disposition,  and  modesty  in  per- 
sonal opinion,  to  a  position  of  honour  in  literature  and  social  life. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  true  that  there  has  never  been  a 
more  meagre  form  of  religious  life  than  this.  Its  religion  has  no 
taste  of  earth;  and  with  the  mysteries  which  the  Enlightenment 
would  not  tolerate,  understanding  for  the  depths  of  religious  life 
was  lost  also.  There  is  nothing  more  of  anxiety  for  the  souFs  salva- 
tion, of  the  struggle  for  redemption,  of  the  ardent  feeling  of  deliver- 
ance. Deism,  therefore,  failed  in  vital  religious  power;  it  was  an 
artificial  product  of  cultured  society,  and  when  the  German  En- 
lighteners  wrote  books  to  preach  the  deistic  morals  to  children, 
they  only  proved  how  little  they  understood  of  real  religion. 

Among  the  great  mass  of  the  supporters  of  this  standpoint  in 
the  "popular  philosophy"  all  possible  degrees  of  uncertainty  prevail 
as  to  how  far  those  moral  remnants  of  the  religious  view  of  the 
world  are  still  capable  of  a  theoretical  grounding,  and  how  far  they 
are  to  be  regarded  as  merely  constituents  of  the  ethical  conscious- 
ness. Full  clearness  on  this  point  rules  in  Voltaire's  later  thought. 
Here  he  has  been  so  far  seized  upon  by  Bayle's  scepticism  as  to 
acknowledge  no  longer  any  metaphysical  authorisation:  the  deity 


496  The  Edijhttni^nt :  Theoretical  Questions.       [PART  Y. 

and  immortality  are  now  for  iiiin  only  valid  as  postulates  of  the 
moral  feeling;  faith  in  them  is  regarded  as  only  the  condition  for 
moral  action.  If  this  belief  should  perish,  the  motives  for  honest 
conduct,  and  thus  the  foundations  of  social  order,  would,  he  thinks, 
perish  with  it:  si  Dim  neristait  pas,  il faudndt  Tinventer. 

8.  Different  as  are  these  individual  forms  in  which  natural  relig- 
ion developed,  they  all  agree  on  one  point — in  their  depreciatory 
criticism  of  positive  religions.  Only  that  is  regarded  as  true  in 
these  religions,  in  which  they  all  agree  with  each  other  and  with 
natural  religion ;  all  that  is  taught  beyond  this,  with  an  appeal  to  a 
special  revelation,  the  deists  turn  from  the  door,  and  it  was  pre- 
cisely in  this  respect  that  they  called  themselves  free  thinkers.  The 
claims  made  by  the  revelational  doctrine  encountered,  therefore,  an 
especially  vigorous  contradiction.  Collins  refuted  the  proof  from 
prophecy,  Woulston  the  proof  from  miracles, — both  by  seeking  to 
give  for  the  corresponding  accounts  in  the  religious  documents  a 
natural  explanation  so  far  as  possible.  This  attempt,  which  aimed 
not  to  involve  in  doubt  the  credibility  of  the  biblical  narratives,  but 
to  explain  them  by  purely  natural  causes,  frequently  in  a  very  fan- 
tastic fashion  and  excluding  all  that  is  mysterious  and  supernatural, 
has  been  characterised  and  employed  in  Germany  especially  as 
rationalistic  interpretation.  It  was  here,  too,  that  Heimarus,  in  his 
Schntzschfift,  proceeded  in  the  sharpest  manner  against  the  possi- 
bility of  revelation,  which  he  declared  to  be  superfluous,  unthinkable, 
and  untrue.  Others  directed  their  criticism  against  individual  doc- 
trines of  dogmatics.  Diderot  attacked  the  moral  attributes  in  the 
Christian  conception  of  God,  and  Voltaire  exercised  his  wit  in  un- 
sparing derision  of  the  dogmas  and  ceremonies  of  all  religions  and 
Confessions. 

But  in  his  case  also  there  was  at  bottom  the  earnest  thought, 
that  all  these  additions  of  the  positive  religions  were  so  many 
obscurations  and  corruptions  of  the  true  religion,  for  which,  like 
the  other  deists,  he  felt  called  to  contend.  They  were  filled  with 
the  conviction  that  natural  religion  is  an  inheritance  of  all  men,  a 
conviction  set  within  the  nature  of  man  himself,  and  that  it  was, 
therefore,  the  original  state  of  the  religious  life.  From  .this  point 
of  view  all  positive  religions  appear  as  depraved  forms  which  have 
entered  in  the  course  of  history,  and  a  progress  in  the  history  of 
religion  consists,  therefore,  in  every  case  in  nothing  but  a  return 
to  the  primitive,  pure,  and  uncorrupted  religion.  Hence  according 
to  Tmdal  the  true  Christianity,  which  coincides  with  Deism,  is  as 
old  as  creation.  Jesus  did  not  bring  a  revelation,  he  only  rehabili- 
tated the  true  worship  of  God  in  the  face  of  the  decay  of  the 


CHAP.  1,  §  35.]     Natural  Religion :  Deists,  Hume.  497 

ancient  religions ;  but  the  Christian  churches  have  again  corrupted 
his  work,  and  free-thinking  desires  to  return  to  him.  So,  too,  Lessing 
distinguished  between  Christianity  and  the  religion  of  Christ. 

If  now  it  was  asked,  what  were  the  causes  that  brought  about 
this  distortion  of  true  religion,  the  Enlighteners  were  entirely 
devoid  of  any  historical  comprehension  for  these :  what  they  held 
to  be  false  seemed  to  them  possible  only  through  voluntary  inven- 
tion. They  were  so  strongly  convinced  of  the  evidence  that  their 
Deism  was  the  only  true  system,  that  all  other  teachings  seemed  to 
them  explicable  only  by  lying  and  deceit,  and  that  the  proclaimers 
of  these  seemed  to  have  acted  only  in  their  own  interests.  It  is 
then  the  general  doctrine  of  the  deists  that  the  historical  basis  of 
positive  religions  is  invention  and  deceit.  Even  Shaftesbury  knew 
no  other  way  of  explaining  how  enthusiasm,  which  constitutes  true 
religion,  could  be  distorted  to  the  fanaticism  of  superstition.  The 
hatred  of  priests  felt  by  the  Enlighteners  was  most  sharply  ex- 
pressed on  this  point  also  in  the  Scliutzsclirift  of  Eeimarus. 

9.  Such  incapacity  to  do  justice  to  the  historical  nature  of  posi- 
tive religions  agreed  well  with  the  universal  lack  in  historical  sense 
and  understanding  which  was  peculiar  to  the  whole  philosophy  of 
the  Enlightenment.  This  had  its  ground  in  the  fact  that  modern 
thought  had  made  its  growth,  hand  in  hand  with  natural  science, 
in  investigating  that  which  is  either  timelessly  or  always  valid. 
Only  in  a  few  instances  was  this  ban  broken  through. 

This  was  done  first  and  with  clearest  consciousness  by  David 
Hume.  While  he  found  that  religion  cannot  be  based  upon  demon- 
strative rational  knowledge,  he  showed  also  that  the  question  as 
to  the  origin  of  religion  in  the  human  mind  must  be  completely 
separated  from  the  speculative  investigation.  This  new  question 
he  treated  solely  in  accordance  with  psychological  principles,  as  a 
"Natural  History  of  Religion"  He  shows  how  in  the  primitive 
apprehension  of  Nature  and  in  the  feelings  of  fear  and  hope,  of 
terror  and  of  blessing,  which  are  associated  with  it,  and  in  the  com- 
parison of  the  course  of  Nature  with  the  vicissitudes  of  human  life, 
there  lay  the  incitements  to  the  formation  of  ideas  of  higher  beings, 
and  to  worship  designed  to  appease  or  to  flatter.  The  natural, 
primitive  form  of  religion  is,  therefore,  polytheism,  which  thinks 
and  treats  these  higher  powers  in  a  completely  anthropomorphic 
manner.  But  the  manifold  forms  assumed  by  myth  fuse  in  accord- 
ance with  the  laws  of  the  association  of  ideas ;  myths  pass  over  into 
each  other,  and  ultimately  the  whole  body  of  religious  ideas  becomes 
condensed  into  the  belief  in  a  single  divine  being,  to  whom  the  pur- 
poseful order  of  the  universe  is  due, — a  faith,  to  be  sure,  which 


498  The  Enlightenment  :  Theoretical  Questions.      [PART  V. 

cannot  preserve  itself  in  a  pure  form,  but  is  associated  in  various 
-ways  with  its  original  presuppositions.  The  history  of  religion  is 
the  gradual  transformation  of  polytheism  into  monotheism,  and  its 
result  coincides  with  that  teleological  view  of  the  world  which 
Hume  had  developed  as  the  view  of  the  intelligent  man,  not,  indeed, 
capable  of  scientific  proof,  but  bound  up  with  the  natural  feeling  of 
belief. 

This  mode  of  apprehending  the  subject  from  the  point  of  view  of 
psychology  and  the  history  of  civilisation  was  reinforced  by  that 
from  the  point  of  view  of  philology  and  the  history  of  literature, 
which  found  expression  in  the  historical  biblical  criticism  founded  by 
Salomon  Semler.  This  began  to  carry  out  the  thought  formulated 
by  Spinoza,1  that  the  biblical  books  must  be  treated  just  as  other 
writings  as  regards  their  theoretical  contents,  their  origin,  and  their 
history  ;  that  they  must  be  understood  from  the  point  of  view  of 
their  time  and  the  character  of  their  authors.  Semler  directed  par- 
ticular attention  to  the  point  that  the  different  parties  of  the  early 
Christians  find  expression  in  the  books  of  the  !N"ew  Testament. 
While  it  may  be  that  the  hypotheses  to  which  he  came  in  this 
respect  have  been  left  behind  by  later  science,  it  is  nevertheless  true 
that  a  scientific  way  out  of  the  radicalism  into  which  the  deistic 
movement  had  run  was  here  shown,  and  Semler  therefore  raised  his 
voice  against  the  spokesmen  of  the  Enlightenment. 

Lessiug  took  part  in  these  questions  from  still  another  side.  He 
was  certainly  not  the  man  to  make  his  conviction  bend  to  a  tenet; 
he  saw  through  and  rejected,  as  few  others,  the  limitation  which 
will  find  its  sole  truth  in  that  which  has  been  transmitted  histori- 
cally; but  he  guarded  himself  well  from  playing  the  judge,  who 
now,  after  thousands  of  years,  shall  decide  as  to  the  genuine- 
ness of  the  three  rings.  But  it  is  not  merely  this  that  separates 
him  from  the  great  mass  of  the  Enlighteners  ;  he  is  himself  a  deep, 
religious  nature,  and,  like  Herder,2  sees  in  religion  a  living  relation 
of  man  to  God,  and  God  to  man.  Hence  religion  is  not  possible  with- 
out revelation,  and  the  history  of  religions  is  the  series  of  the  revela- 
tions of  God,  is  the  education  of  the  human  race  by  God.  Lessing 
assumes  the  well-planned  succession  of  these  revelations  to  be  such, 

In  what  degree  Spinoza's  writings  were  known  to  the  religious  Enlighteners 
if??  aiPP^aJS'  ^Z0^1  things>  from  the  interestin|  fact  that  Lorenz 
6r  Wrheim  tra*slati°*  °*  the  Biblefis  the  anonymous 

under  the  mask  of  a  "Refutation  of  the  Doctrine  of 

^  Christian  Wolff>"  an  exc^n*  translation 


i  o>    an  excn    transaton 

of  Spinoza  hEikua  is  offered,  and  finally  only  a  few  paragraphs  from  Wolffa 

*  rf  fT'^f  fe5Ppendld  *rinted  ftwWort  and  Mps.  1744). 
Cf.  Herder's  treatise  on  the  Aelteste  Urkunde  des  Menschengeschlechts. 


CHAP.  1,  §  35.]    Natural  Religion :  Lessin^  Herder.  499 

that  the  deeper  meaning  of  each  is  unfolded  more  clearly  and  dis- 
tinctly in  that  which  follows.  So  even  the  Xew  Testament,  the 
second  elementary  book,  over  which  the  more  advanced  scholar  now 
"  stamps  and  glows,"  gives  us  a  premonition  of  an  eternal  gospel. 
In  carrying  out  this  thought  of  Origen's,1  Lessing  indicates  in  but 
a  tentative  manner  indefinite  lines  which  lie  in  the  direction  of  a 
mystico-speculative  interpretation  of  dogmas. 

1  Education  of  the  Human  Race,  §  72  fi. 


CHAPTER  H. 

PRACTICAL  QUESTIONS. 

THE  natural  religion  of  the  eighteenth  century  sought  in  morals 
the  support  which  a  metaphysics  of  the  natural-science  sort  could 
not  permanently  afford  it.  This  was  possible  by  reason  of  the  fact, 
that  in  the  meantime  this  branch  also  of  philosophical  investigation 
had  won  its  complete  independence  of  positive  religion.  And  in 
fact,  this  freeing  process,  which  had  already  begun  in  the  train  of 
the  religiously  indifferent  metaphysics  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
had  completed  itself  in  a  relatively  speedy  and  simple  manner.  But 
the  peculiar  character  of  the  new  age  asserted  itself  here  also,  in  the 
very  early  transfer  of  the  point  of  interest  in  these  investigations  to 
the  psychological  domain ;  and  here  philosophy  encountered  the  lit- 
erary inclination  of  the  age,  which  was  directed  toward  a  profounder 
employment  of  man  with  himself,  toward  an  overhauling  of  his  feel- 
ings and  an  analysing  of  his  motives,  and  toward  the  "sentimental" 
fostering  of  personal  relations.  The  individual  revelling  in  his  own 
inner  life,  the  monad  enjoying  self,  is  the  characteristic  phenomenon 
of  the  age  of  the  Enlightenment.  .The  individualism  of  the  Benais- 
sance,  which  in  the  seventeenth  century  had  been  repressed  by  exter- 
nal forces,  now  broke  forth  again  with  a  more  inward  power  from 
the  stiff  dignity  of  ceremonious,  formal  life:  bounds  were  to  be 
broken  through,  externalities  cast  away,  and  the  pure,  natural  life 
of  man  brought  out. 

But  the  more  important  the  individual  thus  became  to  himself,  and 
the  more  many-sided  his  view  in  weighing  questions  regarding  the 
import  of  his  true  happiness,  the  more  morality,  society,  and  the 
state  became  to  him  a  problem.  How  comes  the  individual  —  so 
runs  the  fundamental  practical  question  of  the  Enlightenment  phil- 
osophy— to  a  life  connected  with  others,  which  extends  in  influence 
and  authority  beyond  the  individual  himself  ?  Through  all  the  ani- 
mated discussions  of  these  problems  goes,  as  a  tacit  assumption,  the 
view  that  the  individual  in  his  natural  (as  it  was  always  conceived) 
determinate  character  is  the  original  datum,  is  that  which  is  self- 

500 


CHAP.  2.]  Practical  Questions.  501 

intelligible,  and  that  all  the  relations  which  go  beyond  the  individual 
are  to  be  explained  from  him  as  a  starting-point.  In  so  far  the  natu- 
ralistic metaphysics  of  the  seventeenth  century  —  thought  here  more 
after  the  analogy  of  atomism,  there  more  after  that  of  the  Monad- 
ology  —  forms  the  background  for  the  morals  of  the  eighteenth. 

The  constantly  progressing  process  in  which  these  presuppositions 
became  more  clear  and  distinct  brought  with  it  the  result,  that  the 
principles  of  ethics  found  a  valuable  clearing  up  in  the  discussions 
of  this  period.  For  inasmuch  as  the  ethical  life  was  regarded 
as  something  added  to  the  natural  essence  of  the  individual,  as  some- 
thing that  must  first  be  explained,  it  was  necessary,  on  the  one  hand, 
to  establish  by  an  exact  discrimination  what  the  thing  to  be  ex- 
plained really  is,  and  on  the  other  hand,  to  investigate  on  what  the 
worth  and  validity  of  the  ethical  life  rests :  and  the  more  morality 
appeared  to  be  something  foreign  to  the  natural  essence  of  the  indi- 
vidual, the  more  the  question  as  to  the  motives  which  induce  man 
to  follow  ethical  commands  asserted  itself,  side  by  side  with  the 
question  as  to  the  ground  of  the  validity  of  those  commands.  And 
so  three  main  questions  appeared,  at  the  beginning  much  involved, 
and  then  becoming  complicated  anew:  what  is  the  content  of 
morality  ?  on  what  rests  the  validity  of  the  moral  laws  ?  what 
brings  man  to  moral  action  ?  The  principles  of  morals  are  set  forth 
according  to  the  three  points  of  view  of  the  criterion,  the  sanction, 
and  the  motive.  This  analysis  and  explanation,  however,  showed 
that  the  various  answers  to  these  separate  questions  were  capable  of 
being  combined  with  each  other  in  the  most  various  ways :  so  the 
clearing  and  separating  process  above  named  results  precisely  from 
the  motley  variety  and  changing  hues  exhibited  by  the  doctrines  of 
moral  philosophy  in  the  eighteenth  century.  Shaftesbury  stands  in 
the  centre  of  the  movement  as  the  mind  that  stimulates  in  all  direc- 
tions and  controls  in  many  lines ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  move- 
ment reaches  no  definite  conclusion  in  this  period,  on  account  of  the 
differences  in  the  statements  of  the  question  (cf .  §  39) . 

A  typical  feature  of  the  fundamental  individualistic  tendency  of 
this  ethics  was  the  repeatedly  renewed  consideration  of  the  relation 
of  virtue  and  happiness :  the  final  outcome,  expressed  more  or  less 
sharply,  was  that  the  satisfaction  of  the  individual's  impulses  was 
raised  to  be  the  standard  of  value  for  the  ethical  functions.  The 
system  of  practical  philosophy  built  up  upon  this  principle  is 
Utilitarianism,  the  varied  development  of  which  forms  the  centre  in 
the  complicated  courses  of  these  reflections. 

But  out  of  this  arose  the  much  more  burning  question,  as  regards 
the  political  and  social  order,  —  the  question,  namely,  as  to  the  value 


502  The  Enlightenment :  Practical  Questions.         [PAET  V. 

for  happiness  of  the  social  union,  of  public  institutions  and  their 
historical  development.  That  which  exists  and  has  come  into  being 
historically  has  lost  once  more  its  immediate  validity  and  naive 
valuation :"  it  should  justify  itself  before  the  critical  consciousness, 
and  prove  its  right  to  existence  by  the  advantages  which  it  yields 
for  the  happiness  of  individuals.  From  this  point  of  view  was 
developed  the  political  and  social  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury; upon  this  standpoint  this  philosophy  assumed  its  critical 
attitude  toward  historical  reality,  and  in  accordance  with  this 
standard,  finally,  it  examined  the  results  of  the  historical  progress  of 
human  civilisation.  The  worth  of  civilisation  itself  and  the  relation 
ofSature  and  history  became  thus  a  problem  which  received  its  most 
impressive  formulation  from  Rousseau,  and  which,  in  opposition  to 
the  movements  excited  by  him,  and  in  conjunction  with  the  con- 
vulsions of  the  Revolution,  gave  form  to  the  beginnings  of  the 
Philosophy  of  History. 


§  36.  The  Principles  of  Morals. 

Jr.  Schleiermacher,  Gnmtilinien  einer  Erttik  der  Usherigen  Sittenlehre  (1803), 

W.  W.  III.  Vol.  1. 

H.  Sidgwick,  The  Methods  of  Ethics  (4th  ed.,  Lond.  and  N.Y.  1890). 
[J.  ilartineau,  Types  of  Ethical  Theory,  Vol.  II.] 
[W.L.  Courtney,  Constructive  Ethics  (Lond.  1886).] 

THE  most  fruitful  incitements  to  the  discussion  of  ethical  prob- 
lems proceeded  in  both  positive  and  negative  directions  from  Hobbes. 
The  " selfish  system"  propounded  by  him  extended  its  influence 
throughout  the  entire  eighteenth  century.  It  was  carried  out  into 
all  of  its  consequences,  and  was  an  ever-powerful  stimulus  to  draw 
out  opposing  theories,  which  just  for  this  reason  were  also  dependent 
upon.  it.  In  a  certain  sense  this  is  true  of  Cumberland,  who  indeed 
defended  the  validity  of  ethical  laws  as  eternal  truths  in  opposition 
to  psychological  relativity,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  would  have  the 
universal  welfare  regarded  as  their  essential  and  determining  con- 
tent. 

1.  The  position  of  Locke  with  reference  to  these  questions  is  still 
less  definitely  formulated  than  his  attitude  with  regard  to  theoreti- 
cal questions.  Xo  doubt  the  treatment  of  practical  principles 
occupies  almost  the  larger  space  in  his  attack  upon  "innate  ideas," 
as  is  natural  from  the  fact  that  his  opposition  is  there  directed 
against  the  Platonism  of  the  Cambridge  school.  But  the  positive 
indications  upon  ethical  subjects  (and  indeed  there  is  nothing  that 
goes  beyond  indications),  which  are  found  scattered  through  his 


CHAP.  2,  §  36.]          Principles  of  JIoruix :  Locke.  503 

writings,  do  not  in  any  important  degree  transcend  mere  psycholo- 
gism.  Locke  regards  the  moral  judgment  as  demonstrative  knowl- 
edge, because  it  has  for  its  object  a  relation,  namely,  the  agreement 
or  non-agreement  of  a  man's  action  with  a  laic  [•'<  conformity  or 
disagreement  men's  voluntary  actions  have  to  a  rule,  to  which  they 
are  referred,  and  "by  which  they  are  judged  of"].1  Accordingly  the 
imperative  character  seems  essential  for  ethics.  The  existence  of 
such  norms,  however,  presupposes  not  only  a  law-giver,  but  also  his 
power  to  visit  obedience  to  his  laws  with  a  reward,  and  disregard  of 
them  with  punishment ;  for  only  through  the  expectation  of  these 
consequences,  Locke  holds,  can  a  law  work  upon  the  will. 

If  the  philosopher  was  certain  of  not  deviating  from  the  "  com- 
mon sense  "  of  the  average  man  with  such  principles,  he  was  equally 
secure  in  the  three  instances  which  he  adduces  of  the  law-giving 
authority,  —  public  opinion,  the  state,  and  God.  And  in  the  high- 
est of  these  instances  he  found  again  the  point  of  attachment  for 
the  remnant  of  Cartesian  metaphysics  which  his  empiricism  had 
preserved.  For  identically  the  same  will  of  God  is  known  by  reve- 
lation and  by  the  "  natural  light "  (according  to  Locke's  philosophy 
of  religion;  cf.  §  35,  1).  The  law  of  God  is  the  law  of  Mature.  But 
its  content  is,  that  the  order  of  Nature  fised  by  God  attaches  inju- 
rious consequences  to  certain  actions,  and  useful  consequences  to 
others,  and  that  therefore  the  former  are  forbidden,  the  latter  com- 
manded. Thus  the  moral  law  gains  a  metaphysical  root  without 
losing  its  utilitarian  content. 

2.  The  need  of  a  metaphysical  basis  of  morals  asserted  itself  also 
in  other  forms,  and  in  part  in  a  still  stronger  degree,  though  it  was 
common  to  the  whole  Cartesian  school  to  regard  right  will  as  the 
necessary  and  inevitable  consequences  of  right  insight.  In  this 
respect  Cartesianism  was  seconded  by  the  whole  throng  of  Platonists, 
who  were  so  hostile  to  it  in  natural  philosophy  —  at  first,  Henry 
More2  and  Cudworth,3  later,  especially,  Eichard  Price.4  They  all 
proceeded  from  the  thought  that  the  moral  law  is  given  with  the 
inmost  nature  of  reality  which  has  proceeded  forth  from  God,  and 
that  it  is  therefore  written  with  eternal  and  unchangeable  letters  in 
every  reasonable  being.  With  much  enthusiasm  but  with  few  new 
arguments,  they  defended  the  Stoic-Platonic  doctrine  in  its  Christian- 
theistic  transformation. 


1  Cf.  Essay  cone.  Hum.  Un.,  II.  28,  4  ff. 

2  Encheindion  Ethicum  (1667). 

8  Whose  Treatise  concerning  Eternal  and  Immutable  Morality  was  first  pub- 
lished by  Chandler,  in  1731. 

*  Questions  and  Difficulties  in  Morals  (Lond.  1758). 


504  The  Enlightenment:  Practical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

This  intettectudlism,  in  connection  with  rationalistic  metaphysics, 
took  a  direction  that  was  widely  removed  from  the  Scotist  recourse 
to  the  divine  will  which  had  been  revived  by  Descartes  and  still 
more  by  Locke,  and  instead  of  this  proceeded  to  determine  the 
content  of  the  moral  law  solely  by  metaphysical  relations,  and, 
accordingly,  in  the  last  instance,  by  logical  criteria.  Just  in  this 
appeared  its  contrast  to  all  the  psychologically  influenced  theories, 
which,  in  some  form  or  other,  always  returned  to  feelings  of  pleas- 
ure and  pain  as  the  central  nerve  of  ethical  determinations.  This 
is  clearest  in  the  case  of  Clarke,  who  professed  to  find  the  objective 
principle  of  morals  in  the  £t fitness  »  of  an  action  to  its  determining 
relations,  and  who  claimed  for  the  knowledge  of  this  fitness  a  self- 
evidence  analogous  to  the  knowledge  of  mathematical  truth,  and  in 
the  Cartesian  spirit  was  convinced  that  the  feeling  of  obligation, 
by  which  the  will  is  determined  to  the  appropriate  action,  develops 
inevitably  from  such  an  insight  into  the  fitness  of  things.  Ethical 
inferiority,  accordingly,  appeared  quite  in  the  ancient  fashion  (cf. 
§  7,  C)  to  be  the  result  of  ignorance  or  of  erroneous  opinion.  Wol- 
htston,  stimulated  by  Clarke,  gave  to  the  same  thought  the  turn, 
that  since  every  action  involves  a  (theoretical)  judgment  as  to  its 
underlying  relations,  the  decision  as  to  whether  the  act  is  right  or 
wrong  in  the  ethical  sense  depends  upon  the  rightness  (correctness) 
or  wrongiiess  of  this  judgment. 

3.  Pierre  Bayle  takes  a  peculiar  position  with  reference  to  these 
questions :  he  supports  a  rationalism  without  any  metaphysical  back- 
ground. In  his  case  the  interest  of  fixing  morals  upon  a  firm  basis,, 
as  opposed  to  all  dependence  upon  dogmatic  doctrines,  was  active  in 
the  strongest  and  most  radical  manner.  While  in  declaring  meta- 
physical knowledge  in  general  to  be  impossible  he  opposed  the 
rational  grounding  of  natural  religion  as  well  as  that  of  positive 
dogma,  he  yet  gave  back  with  full  hands  to  the  "  reason "  in  the 
practical  domain  what  he  had  taken  from  it  in  the  theoretical  realm. 
Incapable  of  knowing  the  essence  of  things,  the  human  reason  is, 
according  to  him,  completely  furnished  with  the  consciousness  of 
its  duty:  powerless  without,  it  is  complete  master  of  itself.  What 
it  lacks  in  science  it  has  in  conscience :  a  knowledge  of  eternal  and 
unchangeable  truth. 

The  ethical  reason,  Bayle  holds  therefore,  remains  everywhere 
the  same,  however  different  men,  peoples,  and  times  may  be  in  their 
theoretical  insight.  He  teaches  for  the  first  time  with  clear  con- 
sciousness the  practical  reason's  complete  independence  of  the  theo- 
retical; but  this,  too,  he  is  glad  to  bring  to  its  sharpest  point  with 
reference  to  theology.  Bevelation  and  faith  are  regarded  by  him  in 


CHAP.  2,  §36.]    Principles  of  Morals :   Clarke,  Bayle.  505 

the  Catholic  manner  as  essentially  theoretical  illumination,  and  just 
on  this  account  they  seem  to  him  to  be  indifferent  for  morality.  He 
admired  the  ethical  excellence  of  ancient  heathenism,  and  believed 
in  the  possibility  of  a  morally  well-ordered  community  of  atheists. 
While,  therefore,  his  theoretical  scepticism  might  seem  favourable 
to  the  Church,  his  moral  philosophy  was  necessarily  attacked  as  her 
most  dangerous  foe. 

If  the  ethical  principles  were  in  this  discussion  proclaimed  by 
Bayle  also  as  "  eternal  truths,"  he  did  it  in  the  original  Cartesian 
sense,  whe*e  interest  centered  not  so  much  about  the  psychological 
question  of  innateness.  as  rather  about  the  epistemological  point  of 
view  of  immediate  evidence  not  brought  about  through  the  medium 
of  logic.  In  this  sense  the  virtual  innateness  of  ethical  truths  was 
held  of  course  by  Leibniz,  and  it  was  in  the  spirit  of  both  that  Vol- 
taire, who  approached  Bayle's  standpoint  the  more  in  proportion  as 
his  attitude  toward  metaphysics  became  more  sceptical  (cf.  §  35,  5), 
said  of  the  ethical  principles  that  they  were  innate  in  man  just  as 
his  limbs  were :  he  must  learn  to  use  both  by  experience. 

4.  Bayle  very  likely  had  the  support  of  general  opinion  when  he 
ascribed  to  the  ethical  convictions  a  worth  exalted  above  all  change 
and  all  difference  of  theoretical  opinions;  but  he  was  successful, 
perhaps,  just  because  he  treated  those  convictions  as  something 
known  to  all,  and  did  not  enter  upon  the  work  of  bringing  their 
content  into  a  system,  or  of  expressing  them  as  a  unity.  Whoever 
attempted  this  seemed  hardly  able  to  dispense  with  a  principle 
taken  either  from  metaphysics  or  from  psychology. 

Such  a  determination  of  the  conceptions  of  morality  by  a  principle 
was  made  possible  by  the  metaphysics  of  Leibniz,  though  it  was  only 
prepared  by  him  incidentally  and  by  way  of  indications,  and  was 
first  carried  out  by  Wolff  in  systematic,  but  also  in  cruder  forms. 
The  Monadology  regards  the  universe  as  a  system  of  living  beings, 
whose  restless  activity  consists  in  unfolding  and  realising  their 
original  content.  In  connection  with  this  Aristotelian  conception 
the  Spinozistic  fundamental  idea  of  the  "  suum  esse  conservare  "  (cf. 
§  32,  6)  becomes  transformed  into  that  of  a  purposeful  vocation 
or  destiny,  which  Leibniz  and  his  German  disciples  designated  as 
perfection.1  The  "law  of  Nature,"  which  for  this  ontology  also  is 
coincident  with  the  moral  law,  is  the  striving  of  all  beings  toward 
perfection.  Since  now  every  process  of  perfecting,  as  such,  is  con- 
nected with  pleasure,  and  every  retrogression  in  life's  development 
with  pain,  there  follows  from  this  the  ancient  identification  of  the 
ethically  good  with  well-being  or  happiness. 

1  Leibniz,  Monad.  41  ff. 


506  The  Enlightenment :  Practical  Questions.         [PARTY. 

Natural  law,  therefore,  demands  of  man  that  he  should  do  all 
that  serves  his  perfection,  and  forbids  all  that  threatens  to  bring 
him  loss  in  his  perfection.  From  this  thought  Wolff  develops  the 
whole  system  of  duties,  bringing  to  his  aid  especially  the  principle 
of  mutual  furtherance:  man  needs  for  his  own  perfecting  other 
men,  and  works  toward  his  own  perfection  in  helping  them  toward 
the  fulfilment  of  their  vocation.  In  particular,  however,  it  followed 
from  these  premises  that  man  must  know  what  truly  conduces  to 
his  perfecting;  for  not^all  that  is  momentarily  felt  to  be  a  further- 
ance of  life  proves  truly  and  permanently  a  step  toward  perfection. 
Hence  morality  is  throughout  in  need  of  ethical  knowledge,  —  of 
right  insight  into  the  nature  of  man  and  things.  From  this  point  of 
view  the  enlightenment  or  "clearing  up"  of  the  understanding  appears 
the  pre-eminent  ethical  task.  With  Leibniz  this  follows  immediately 
from  the  conception  of  the  monad.1  The  monad  is  the  more  perfect, 
—  and  perfection  Leibniz  defines  in  genuine  scholastic  fashion  as 
grandeur  de  la  realite  positive,  —  the  more  it  shows  its  activity  in 
clear  and  distinct  representations;  the  natural  law  of  its  develop- 
ment is  the  clearing  up  of  its  original  obscure  representative  content 
(cf.  §  31,  11).  WolfFs  circumstantial  deduction  takes  rather  the 
form  of  pointing  out  in  experience  the  useful  consequences  of 
knowledge.  It  remains  thus  quite  within  the  setting  of  the  homely 
aim  which  the  German  teacher-philosopher  (Kathederphilosoph)  set 
before  his  scientific  work,  viz.  to  make  philosophy  usable  and  prac- 
tically efficient,  by  clearness  of  conceptions  and  plainness  of  proofs. 

5.  This  tendency  Wolff  had  adopted  from  his  teacher  Thomasius, 
the  father  of  the  Enlighteners,  a  man  who  was  indeed  wanting  in 
the  pre-eminence  that  characterised  the  mind  of  Leibniz,  but  was 
given  all  the  more  an  understanding  for  the  wants  of  his  time,  a 
capacity  for  agitation,  and  a  spirit  for  efforts  toward  the  public 
good.  Intellectual  movements  of  the  Renaissance  that  had  been 
checked  in  the  seventeenth  century  revived  again  at  its  close. 
Thomasius  would  transplant  philosophy  from  the  lecture  hall  into 
real  life,  — put  it  into  the  service  of  the  general  weal  j  and  since  he 
understood  little  of  natural  science,  his  interest  turned  toward 
criticism  of  public  institutions.  Reason  only  should  rule  in  the  life 
of  the  whole,  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  individual :  so  he  fought  honour- 
ably and  victoriously  against  superstition  and  narrowness,  against 
torture  and  witch-trials.  Enlightenment  in  the  sense  of  Thomasius 
is  hence  far  from  having  the  metaphysical  dignity  which  Leibniz 
gave  it.  It  gains  its  value  for  individuals  and  for  society  first  by 
the  uses  which  it  yields  and  which  can  be  expected  from  it  alone. 

1  Cf.  Leibniz,  Monad.  48  ff. 


CHAP.  2,  §36.]   Principles  of  Morals ;    Wolff,  Thomasius.  507 

Perfection  and  utility  are  accordingly  the  two  characteristics  -which 
-with  Wolff  make  Enlightenment  an  ethical  principle.  The  former 
comes  out  more  strongly  in  connection  with  the  general  metaphysical 
basis ;  the  latter  in  the  particular  building  out  of  the  system.  And 
in  the  same  way  this  duality  of  criteria  goes  through  Wolffs  school 
and  the  whole  popular  philosophy, —  only,  the  more  superficial  the 
doctrines  become,  the  broader  the  space  taken  by  utility.  Even 
Mendelssohn  gives  as  the  reason  for  turning  aside  from  all  deeper 
and  more  refined  subtilty,  that  philosophy  has  to  treat  only  just  so 
much  as  is  necessary  for  man's  happiness.  But  because  this  eudse- 
monism  of  the  Enlightenment  had  from  the  outset  no  higher  point 
of  view  than  that  of  the  education  and  -welfare  of  the  average  man, 
it  fell  into  another  limitation,  the  most  jejune  philistinism  and  sen- 
sible, prosaic  commonplace.  This  might  be  in  place  and  most 
beneficial  in  effect  in  a  certain  stratum  of  popular  literature,  not 
high,  indeed,  but  broad;  but  -when  such  a  success  on  the  part  of  the 
Enlighteners  "went  to  their  heads,"  when  they  applied  the  same 
measuring  rod  to  the  great  phenomena  of  society  and  history,  when 
this  excessive  pride  of  the  empirical  understanding  would  allow 
nothing  to  stand  except  -what  it  had  known  "clearly  and  distinctly," 
'  then  the  noble  features  of  the  Enlightenment  became  distorted  to 
that  well-intentioned  lack  of  comprehension,  as  type  of  which 
Friedrich  Nicolai,  -with  all  his  restless  concern  for  the  public  good, 
became  a  comic  figure.1 

6.  The  great  mass  of  the  German  Enlighteners  did  not  suspect 
how  far  they  were  wandering  from  the  living  spirit  of  the  great 
Leibniz  with  this  dry  utility  of  abstract  rules.  Wolff,  indeed,  had 
already  let  the  pre-established  harmony  fall  metaphysically  also, 
and  so  proved  that  the  finest  meaning  of  the  Monadology  had  re- 
mained hidden  from  him.  Hence  he  and  his  successors  had  no 
comprehension  for  the  fact,  that  Leibniz's  principle  of  perfection 
made  the  unfolding  of  the  content  of  the  individual  life  and  the  shap- 
ing out  of  its  dimly  felt  originality,  the  task  of  the  ethical  life,  in 
the  same  degree  as  his  metaphysics  asserted  the  peculiar  nature  of 
each  individual  being  in  the  face  of  all  others.  This  side  of  the 
matter  first  came  into  power  in  Germany,  when  the  period  of  genius 
dawned  in  literature,  and  the  passionate  feeling  of  strongly  indi- 
vidual minds  sought  its  own  theory.  The  form  which  it  then  found 
in  Herder's  treatises,  and  likewise  in  Schiller's  Philosophical  Letters, 
was,  however,  much  more  strongly  determined  by  another  doctrine 


1  Cf.  ITichte.  Fr.  Nicola? s  Leben  und  sonderbare  Meinungen  (1801),  W.  W. 
VIII.  1  fl. 


508  The  Ehliylitenrnmt :  Practical  Questions.      [PARTY. 

than  it  was  by  Leibniz,  —  by  a  doctrine  -which,  in  spite  of  the  dif- 
ference in  the  conceptions  in  which  it  was  carried  out,  had  in  its 
ethical  temper  the  closest  relationship  with  that  of  the  German 
metaphysician. 

Shaftesbury  had  given  to  the  idea  of  perfection  a  form  that  was 
less  systematic  but  ail  the  more  impressive  and  clear  to  the  imagi- 
nation. The  ancient  conception  of  life,  in  accordance  with  which 
morality  coincides  with  the  undisturbed  unfolding  of  man's  true  and 
natural  essence,  and  therefore  with  his  true  fortune,  was  directly 
congenial  to  him  and  became  the  living  basis  of  his  thought.  Hence, 
with  Shaftesbury.  the  ethical  appears  as  the  truly  human,  as  the 
flower  of  man:s  life,  as  the  complete  development  of  his  natural 
endowments.  In  this  is  fixed  at  the  outset  Shaftesbury's  attitude 
toward  Cumberland  and  Hobbes.  He  cannot,  like  the  latter,  regard 
egoism  as  the  sole  fundamental  characteristic  of  the  natural  man ; 
he  rather  agrees  with  the  former  in  recognising  the  altruistic  incli- 
nations as  an  original  inborn  endowment.  But  neither  can  he  see 
in  these  inclinations  the  sole  root  of  morality ;  to  him  morality  is 
the  completion  of  the  entire  man,  and  therefore  he  seeks  its  principle 
in  symmetrical  development  and  in  the  harmonious  interaction  of  the 
two  systems  of  impulses.  This  theory  of  morals  does  not  demand 
the  suppression  of  one's  own  weal  in  favour  of  that  of  others  ;  such 
a  suppression  appears  to  it  to  be  necessary  only  in  the  lower  stages 
of  development :  the  fully  cultivated  man  lives  as  truly  for  himself 
as  for  the  whole,1  and  just  by  unfolding  his  own  individual  charac- 
ter does  he  set  himself  as  a  perfect  member  in  the  system  of  the 
universe.  Here  Shaftesbury's  optimism  expresses  itself  most  fully 
in  his  belief,  that  the  conflict  between  the  egoistic  and  the  altruistic 
motives,  which  plays  so  large  a  part  in  the  lower  strata  of  humanity, 
must  be  completely  adjusted  in  the  ripe,  mature  man. 

But  for  this  reason  the  ethical  ideal  of  life  is  with  this  thinker 
an  entirely  personal  one.  Morality  consists  for  him,  not  in  the 
control  of  general  maxims,  not  in  the  subordination  of  the  individ- 
ual's will  to  norms  or  standards,  but  in  the  rich  and  full  living  out 
of  an  entire  individuality^  It  is  the  sovereign  personality  which 
asserts  its  ethical  right,  and  the  highest  manifestation  in  the  ethical 
realm  is  the  virtuososliip,  which  allows  none  of  the  forces  and  none 
of  the  lines  of  impulse  in  the  individual's  endowment  to  be  stunted, 


1  Pope  compared  this  relation  with  the  double  motion  of  the  planets  about  the 
sun  and  their  own  axes  (Essay  on  Man,  HL  314  H).  Moreover,  it  was  through 
the  same  poet  that  Shaftesbury's  theory  of  life  worked  on  Voltaire,  while 
Diderot  (in  his  work  upon  the  Inquiry  concerning  Virtue  and  Merit}  attached 
himself  directly  to  Shaftesbury. 


CHAP.  2,  §  36.]  Principles  of  Morals :  SJiaftesbury,  ffutckeson.   509 

but  brings  all  the  manifold  relations  into  harmony  in  a  perfect  con- 
duct of  life,  and  thus  brings  about  both  the  individual's  happiness 
and  his  most  efficient  working  for  the  welfare  of  the  whole.  Thus 
the  Greek  ideal  of  the  kalokayathia  finds  a  new  expression  in  the 
Weltanschauung  of  the  jNIonadology  (cf.  §  7,  5). 

7.  While  the  moral  principle  has  thus  with  Shaftesbury  already 
received  an  sesthetical  colouring  in  its  contents,  this  colouring  ap- 
pears consistently  in  a  yet  stronger  degree  when  he  deals  with  the 
question  as  to  the  source  of  knowledge  for  ethical  tasks.  This  source, 
by  metaphysicians  and  sensualists  alike,  was  found  in  rational  knowl- 
edge either  of  the  nature  of  things  or  of  the  empirically  useful :  in 
both  cases  principles  resulted  that  were  capable  of  demonstration 
and  universally  valid.  The  morals  of  virtuosoship,  on  the  contrary, 
must  take  its  individual  life-ideal  from  the  depths  of  the  individual 
nature ;  for  it  morality  was  grounded  upon  feeling.  The  ethical 
judgments  by  which  man  approves  those  impulses  which  Mature  has 
implanted  within  him  to  further  his  own  and  others'  weal,  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  disapproves  the  "unnatural"  impulses  that  work  against 
those  ends,  —  these  judgments  rest  on  man's  ability  to  make  his 
own  functions  the  object  of  study,  i.e.  upon  " reflection  "  (Locke); 
they  are  not  merely,  however,  a  knowledge  of  one's  own  states,  but 
are  emotions  of  reflection,  and  as  such  they  form  within  the  "inner 
sense  "  the  moral  sense. 

Thus  the  psychological  root  of  the  ethical  was  transplanted  from 
the  field  of  intellectual  cognition  to  the  feeling-side  of  the  soul,  and 
set  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  aesthetic.  The  good  appeared 
as  the  beautiful  in  the  world  of  will  and  action :  it  consists,  like  the 
beautiful,  in  a  harmonious  unity  of  the  manifold,  in  a  perfect  devel- 
opment of  the  natural  endowments ;  it  satisfies  and  blesses  as  does 
the  beautiful;  it  is,  like  the  beautiful,  the  object  of  an  original 
approval  fixed  in  man's  deepest  nature.  This  parallel  ruled  the 
literature  of  the  eighteenth  century  from  Shaftesbury  on :  "  taste  " 
is  the  fundamental  faculty  ethically  as  aesthetically.  This  was 
perhaps  most  distinctly  expressed  by  Hutcheson,  but  with  a  turn 
which  to  some  degree  led  away  again  from  Shaftesbury's  individual- 
ism. For  he  understood  by  the  "moral  sense" — in  the  purely 
psychological  meaning  of  "innateness"  —  an  original  faculty,  essen- 
tially alike  in  all  men,  and  with  the  function  of  judging  what 
is  ethically  to  be  approved.  The  metaphysical  accessories  of  the 
Platonists  and  Cartesians  were  gladly  thrown  overboard,  and  in 
their  stead  he  held  fast  the  more  eagerly  —  especially  in  opposition 
to  the  "selfish  system" — to  the  principle  that  man  possesses  a 
natural  feeling  for  the  good  as  for  the  beautiful,  and  declared  the 
analysis  of  this  feeling  to  be  the  business  of  philosophy. 


510  The  EnUylitenment  :  Practical  Questions.       [PART  Y. 

The  carrying  over  of  this  principle  into  the  theoretical  domain 
led  in  the  Scottish  School  (cf.  §  33,  8)  to  making  the  True  parallel  with 
the  Good  and  the  Beautiful,  as  the  object  of  original  approval,  and 
thus  assuming  in  ••'  common  sense  ;:  a  kind  of  "logical  sense."  But 
the  principle  of  feeling  as  source  of  knowledge  was  proclaimed  in  a  far 
more  pronounced  manner  by  Rousseau,  who  based  his  deism  upon 
the  uneorrupted,  natural  feeling1  of  man,  in  opposition  to  the  cool 
intellectual  analysis  with  which  the  purely  theoretical  Enlighten- 
ment treated  the  religious  life.  This  feeling-philosophy  was  carried 
out  in  a  very  indefinitely  eclectic  manner  by  the  Dutch  philosopher, 
Franz  Heiiisterlmys  (of  Groeningen,  1720-1790),  and  with  quaint 
singularity  by  the  talented  enthusiast,  Hamann,  the  "  Wizard  of  the 
" 


8.  It  was,  however,  in  the  fusion  of  ethical  and  cesthetic  investiga- 
tions that  the  above  theory  of  the  feelings,  prepared  by  Shaftesbury 
and  Hutcheson,  made  its  influence  most  felt.  The  more  the  eudse- 
monistic  morals  was  treated  in  a  manner  intelligible  to  the  common 
inindj  the  more  convenient  it  was  for  it  to  be  able  to  invest  the 
moral  commands,  as  the  object  of  a  natural  pleasure,  with  the  garb 
of  grace  and  attractiveness,  and  to  be  permitted  to  commend  the 
good  to  the  taste  as  something  akin  to  the  beautiful.  The  Scottish 
School,  also,  was  not  far  from  this  mode  of  view,  and  Ferguson 
developed  Shaftesbury's  ideas  in  this  manner  with  especial  reference 
to  the  Leibnman  fundamental  conception  of  perfection.  The  effect 
of  this  complication  of  thought  for  cesthetics,  however,  was  that  the 
beginnings  toward  a  metaphysical  treatment,  which  Shaftesbury 
had  brought  to  the  problems  of  the  beautiful  from  the  system  of 
Plotinus,  became  completely  overshadowed  by  the  psychological 
method.  The  question  asked  was  not,  what  the  beautiful  is,  but 
how  the  feeling  of  the  beautiful  arises  ;  and  in  the  solution  of  this 
question  the  explanation  of  the  aesthetic  was  brought  into  more  or 
less  close  connection  with  ethical  relations.  This  shows  itself,  too, 
in  the  case  of  those  writers  upon  aesthetics  who  stood  closer  to 
the  sensnalistic  psychology  than  did  the  Scots.  Thus  Henry  Home 
conceives  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  beautiful  as  a  transition  from  the 
purely  sensuous  pacification  of  desires  to  the  moral  and  intellectual 
joys,  and  holds  that  the  arts  have  been  "invented"  for  that  refine- 
ment of  man's  sensuous  disposition  which  is  requisite  for  his  higher 

1  Cf.  the  creed  of  the  Savoyard  Vicar  in  tfrnile,  IV.  201  ff. 

2  Johann  Georg  Hamann  (of  Konigsberg,  1730-1788  ;  collected  writings  ed. 
by  Gildemeister,  Gotha,  1857-73)  combines  this  line  of  thought  with  a  pietism 
not  far  removed  from  orthodoxy  in  his  thoughtful,  but  illogical  and  unclear 
form  of  expression. 


CHAP.  2,  §  36.]    Principles  of  Morals :  Home,  Burke.  511 

destiny.  He  seeks,  therefore,  the  realm  of  the  beautiful  in  the 
higher  senses,  hearing  and  especially  sight,  and  finds  as  the  basis, 
a  taste  common  to  all  men  for  order,  regularity,  and  combination  of 
the  manifold  into  a  unity.  When  he  then  further  distinguishes 
between  the  "intrinsic"  beauty  which  is  immediately  an  "object 
of  sense,"  and  the  beauty  of  "  relation,"  these  relations  look  essen- 
tially toward  what  is  for  the  common  good  ethically,  in  the  ser- 
vice of  which  beauty  is  thus  placed.1  Even  Edmund  Burke,  in  his 
effort  to  derive  the  aesthetic  from  elementary  states  of  sensation 
in  accordance  with  the  method  of  associational  psychology,  is  very 
strongly  dependent  upon  the  form  given  to  the  problems  by  contem- 
porary moral  philosophy.  His  attempt  to  determine  the  relation 
of  the  beautiful  to  the  sublime  —  a  task  at  which  Home,  also,  had 
laboured,  though  with  very  little  success 2  —  proceeds  from  the 
antithesis  of  the  selfish  and  the  social  impulses.  That  is  held  to 
be  sublime  which  fills  us  with  terror  in  an  agreeable  shudder,  "a 
sort  of  delightful  horror,"  while  we  are  ourselves  so  far  away  that 
we  feel  removed  from  the  danger  of  immediate  pain :  that  is  beau- 
tiful, on  the  contrary,  which  is  adapted  to  call  forth  in  an  agreeable 
manner  the  feelings  either  of  sexual  love  or  of  human  love  in 
general. 

In  a  manner  similar  to  that  of  Home,  Suher  placed  the  feeling  of 
the  beautiful  midway  between  that  of  the  sensuously  agreeable  and 
that  of  the  good,  forming  thus  a  transition  from  the  one  to  the  other. 
The  possibility  of  this  transfer  he  found  in  the  intellectual  factor 
which  co-operates  in  our  apprehension  of  the  beautiful :  it  appeared 
to  him — following  the  view  of  Leibniz  (cf.  §  34,  11) — as  the 
feeling  of  harmonious  unity  in  the  manifold  perceived  by  the  senses. 
But  just  by  reason  of  these  presuppositions,  the  beautiful  was  for 
him  valuable  and  perfect  only  when  it  was  able  to  further  the 
moral  sense.  Art,  also,  is  thus  drawn  into  the  service  of  the  morals 
of  the  Enlightenment,  and  the  writer  on  aesthetics,  who  was  so  long 
celebrated  in  Germany,  shows  himself  but  a  mechanical  handicrafts- 
man of  Philistine  moralising  in  his  conception  of  art  and  its  task. 
How  infinitely  freer  and  richer  in  esprit  are  the  "  Observations " 
which  Ko/nt  instituted  "  concerning  the  Peeling  of  the  Beautiful  and 
the  Sublime,"  at  the  time  when  he,  too,  pursued,  from  the  psycho- 
logical standpoint,  and  with  admirable  knowledge  of  the  world,  the 

1  For  more  detailed  treatment,  see  .the  art.  Home  (Kames)  by  W.  Windel- 
band  in  JErsch  und  Gruber'1*  Enc.,  Vol.  H.  32,  213  f. 

2  According  to  Home  the  beautiful  is  sublime  if  it  is  great.    The  antithesis 
between  the  qualitatively  and  the  quantitatively  pleasing  seems  to  lie  at  the 
basis  of  his  unclear  and  wavering  characterisations. 


512  The  Enlightenment :  Practical  Questions.       [PART  Y. 

fine  ramifications  of  the  ethical  and  esthetic  life  in  individuals, 
families,  and  peoples ! 

Finally  tLese  thoughts  gave  occasion  in  Germany  to  a  change  in 
psychological  theory  that  was  rich  in  results.  Before  this  it  had 
been  the  custom  to  divide  the  psychical'  activities  according  to  the 
Aristotelian  example  into  theoretical  and  practical.  But  now  the 
feelings,  which  became  thus  recognised  in  their  various  significance, 
seemed  incapable  of  being  brought  either  into  the  group  of  knowing, 
or  into  that  of  willing,  without  disadvantage  ;  it  seemed  rather  that 
the  feelings,  as  a  peculiar  mode  of  expression,  in  part  lay  at  the 
basis,  and  in  part  followed,  both  of  the  above  functions  of  the  soul. 
Here,  too,  the  suggestion  came  from  the  Leibnizian  Monadology. 
Snlzer,  in  his  Berlin  lectures,1  seems  first  to  have  pointed  out  that 
the  obbcure,  primitive  states  of  the  monad  should  be  separated  from 
the  developed  forms  of  life  seen  in  completely  conscious  knowing 
and  willing,  and  he  already  found  the  distinguishing  characteristic 
of  these  obscure  states  to  be  the  conditions  of  pleasure  and  pain  given 
with  them.  This  was  done  also,  in  a  similar  way,  from  Leibnizian 
presuppositions  by  Jacob  Friedrich  Weiss.2  Mendelssohn  (1755) 
first  named  these  states  Empjindungen 8  [sensations],  and  later  the 
same  author  designated  the  psychical  power,  which  lies  at  their 
common  basis,  as  the  faculty  of  approval  (Billigungsvermogen)  .4  But 
the  decisive  influence  on  terminology  was  exercised  by  Tetens  and 
Kant.  The  former  substituted  for  sensations  (Empfindungeri)  the 
expression  feelings  (Fitldungen  or  Grefuhle)  ,5  and  Kant  used  the  latter 
almost  exclusively.  It  was  he,  too,  who  later  made  the  triple  divis- 
ion of  the  psychical  functions  into  ideation,  feeling,  and  willing  (  Vor- 
stellen,  Fiffilen,  und  Wollen)  the  systematic  basis  of  his  philosophy,6 
and  since  then  this  has  remained  authoritative,  especially  for 
psychology. 

9.  The  counter-current,  which  proceeded  from  Holies  and  declared 
the  profit  or  injury  of  the  individual  to  be  the  sole  possible  content 
of  the  human  will,  maintained  itself  in  the  face  of  all  these  develop- 
ments. In  this  theory,  the  criterion  of  ethical  action  was  sought  in 
a  purely  psychological  manner  in  the  consequences  of  such  action 

1 1751  f.    Printed  in  the  Vermischtcn  Schriften  (Berlin,  1773). 

2  J.  F.  Weiss,  De  Natura  Animi  et  potissimum  Gordis  Humani  (Stuttgart, 
1761). 

3  In  this  Mendelssohn,  with  his  Letters  concerning  the  Sensations,  refers 
directly  to  Shaftesbury. 

*  Cf.  Mendelssohn,  Morgenstunden,  1785,  ch.  7  (W.  1. 352). 

5  Cf.  Tetens,  Versuche,  X.  pp.  625  ff. 

6  In  the  article  written  between  1780  and  1790  designed  at  first  as  an  intro- 
duction to  the  Critique  of  Judgment  which  has  passed  over  into  his  writings 
under  the  title  Ueber  Philosophic  foerhaiipt.    Cf.  Pt.  VI.  ch.  1. 


CHAP.  2,  §  36.]     Principles  of  Morals:  Utilitarianism.  -  513 

for  the  advantage  of  our  fellow-men.  Morality  exists  only  within 
the  social  body.  The  individual,  if  by  himself  and  alone,  knows 
only  his  own  weal  and  woe ;  but  in  society  his  actions  are  judged 
from  the  point  of  view  of  whether  they  profit  or  injure  others,  and 
this  alone  is  regarded  as  the  standpoint  of  ethical  judgment.  This 
conception  of  the  ethical  criterion  corresponded  not  only  to  the 
common  view,  but  also  to  the  felt  need  of  finding  for  ethics  a  basis 
that  should  be  destitute  of  metaphysics,  and  rest  purely  on  empiri- 
cal psychology.  Cumberland  and  Locke  even  acceded  to  it  in  the 
last  resort,  and  not  only  the  theological  moralists  like  Butler  and 
Paley,  but  also  the  associational  psychologists  like  Priestley  and 
•Hartley,  attached  themselves  to  it.  The  classical  formula  of  this 
tendency  was  gradually  worked  out.  An  action  is  ethically  the 
more  pleasing  in  proportion  as  it  produces  more  happiness,  and  in 
proportion  as  the  number  of  men  who  can  share  this  happiness 
becomes  greater :  the  ethical  ideal  is  the  greatest  happiness  of  the 
greatest  number.  This  became  the  watch-word  of  Utilitarianism. 

This  formula,  however,  suggested  the  thought  of  determining 
quantitatively  the  ethical  values  for  individual  cases  and  relations. 
The  thought  of  Hobbes  and  Locke,  of  grounding  a  knowledge  of  a 
strictly  demonstrative  ethics  upon  the  utilitarian  principle,  seemed 
thereby  to  have  found  a  definite  form,  welcome  to  the  natural-science 
mode  of  thinking.  This  enticement  was  pursued  by  Bentham,  and 
ia  this  consists  the  peculiar  element  of  utilitarian  thought  as  carried 
out  by  him,  — a  work  which  he  performed  with  a  warm  feeling  for 
the  public  good,  and  which  was  later  much  referred  to.  The  point 
is  to  find  exact,  definite  points  of  view,  according  to  which  the  value 
of  every  mode  of  action  for  the  weal  of  the  actor  himself  and  of  the 
community  to  which  he  belongs,  can  be  determined, — partly  in  itself, 
partly  in  its  relation  to  other  modes  of  conduct;  and  Bentham  in 
this  table  of  values  and  their  opposites,  with  an  extensive  consid- 
eration of  both  individual  and  social  relations  and  needs,  sketches  a 
scheme  of  a  pleasure  and  pain  balance  for  reckoning  the  useful  and 
injurious  consequences  of  human  activities  and  institutions.  As 
with  Hume  (cf.  below,  No.  12),  the  reckoning  of  the  ethically  val- 
uable falls  to  the  province  of  the  measuring  intellect ;  but  the  factors 
with  which  it  operates  in  this  process  are  solely  the  feelings  of 
pleasure  and  pain. 

10.  The  close  connection  in  which  this  utilitarianism  stood  his- 
torically after  Hobbes  with  the  selfish  system— that  is,  with  the 
assumption  of  the  essentially  egoistic  character  of  human  nature 
—led  necessarily  to  the  separation  of  the  question  as  to  the  criterion 
of  morality  and  the  kind  of  knowledge  by  which  it  is  apprehended, 


514  The  Enlightenment:  Practical  Questions.      [PART  V. 

from  that  as  to  the  sanction  of  the  moral  commands  and  the  motives 
for  obeying  them.  For  the  metaphysical  theories,  the  sanction  of 
the  ethical  commands  lay  in  the  eternal  truths  of  the  law  of  Nature : 
and  psychologically,  also,  there  seemed  to  be  no  further  and  especial 
motive' needed  for  the  effort  toward  perfection,  for  the  living  out  of 
the  personality,  for  the  following  of  innate  ethical  inclinations; 
morality  was  self-explaining  under  such  presuppositions.  But  he 
who  thought  more  pessimistically  of  man,  he  who  held  him  to  be  a 
being  determined  originally  and  in  his  own  nature  solely  by  regard 
to  his  own  weal  or  woe,— he  must  ask  with  what  right  an  altruistic 
way  of  acting  is  required  of  such  a  being,  and  by  what  means  such 
a  being  can  be  determined  to  obedience  to  this  requirement.  If- 
morality  was  not  of  itself  inherent  in  man's  nature,  it  must  be 
declared  how  it  comes  into  him  from  without. 

Here,  now,  the  principle  of  authority,  already  adduced  by  Hobbes 
and  Locke,  performed  its  service.  Its  most  palpable  form  was  the 
theological;  it  was  carried  out  with  more  finely  wrought  conceptions 
by  Butler,  and  in  a  crude  manner,  intelligible  to  the  common  mind, 
by  Paley.  Utility  is  for  both  the  criterion  of  ethical  action,  and  the 
divine  command  is  for  both  the  ground  of  the  ethical  requirements. 
But  while  Butler  still  seeks  the  knowledge  of  tins  divine  will  in  the 
natural  conscience  —  his  re-interpretation  of  Shaftesbury's  emotions 
of  reflection,  for  which  he  himself  uses  also  the  term  "  reflection  "  — 
for  Paley,  it  is  rather  the  positive  revelation  of  the  divine  will  that 
is  authoritative ;  and  obedience  to  this  command  seems  to  him  explic- 
able only  because  the  authoritative  power  has  connected  its  com- 
mandment with  promises  of  reward  and  threatenings  of  punishment. 
This  is  the  sharpest  separation  of  ethical  principles,  and  that  perhaps 
which  corresponds  most  to  the  "common  sense"  of  the  Christian 
world.  The  criterion  of  the  moral  is  the  weal  of  one's  neighbour ; 
the  ground  of  our  knowledge  of  the  moral  is  the  revealed  will  of 
God ;  the  real  ground  which  supplies  the  sanction  is  the  will  of  the 
Supreme  Being  j  and  the  ethical  motive  in  man  is  the  hope  of  the 
reward,  and  the  fear  of  the  punishment,  which  God  has  fixed  for 
obedience  and  disobedience. 

11.  Paley  thus  explained  the  fact  of  ethical  action  by  the  hypoth- 
esis that  man,  in  himself  egoistic,  is  brought  at  last  by  the  agency 
of  the  equally  egoistic  motives  of  hope  and  fear,  and  by  the  round- 
about way  of  a  theological  motivation,  to  the  altruistic  mode  of 
action  commanded  by  God.  The  sensualistic  psychology  substituted 
for  the  theological  agency  the  authority  of  the  state  and  the  con- 
straining forces  of  social  life.  If  the  will  of  man  is  in  the  last 
resort  always  determinate  only  by  his  own  weal  and  woe,  his  altru- 


CHAP.  2,  §  36.]      Principles  of  Morals:  Sutler,  Paley.  515 

istic  action  is  comprehensible  only  on  the  supposition  that  he  sees 
in  it  the  surest,  simplest,  and  most  intelligent  means  under  the 
given  relations  for  bringing  about  his  own  happiness.  While,  there- 
fore, the  theological  utilitarians  held  that  the  natural  egoism  should 
be  tamed  by  the  rewards  of  heaven  and  punishments  of  hell,  it 
seemed  to  the  empiricists  that  the  order  of  life  arranged  by  the 
state  and  society  was  sufficient  for  this  purpose.  Man  finds  himself 
in  such  relations  that  when  he  rightly  reflects  he  sees  that  he  will 
find  his  own  advantage  best  by  subordination  to  existing  morals 
and  laws.  The  sanction  of  ethical  demands  lies,  accordingly,  in  the 
legislation  of  the  state  and  of  public  morality  which  is  dictated  by 
the  principle  of  utility,  and  the  motive  of  obedience  consists  in 
the  fact  that  each  one  thus  finds  his  own  advantage.  Thus  Man- 
deville,  Lamettrie,  and Helcetius  developed  the  "selfish  system";  La- 
mettrie,  especially,  with  tasteless  cynicism  that  savoured  of  a 
desire  for  admiration,  seeking  to  exhibit  "  hunger  and  love  "  in 
their  lowest  sensuous  meaning  as  the  fundamental  motives  of  all 
human  life— a  wretched,  because  artificial,  imitation  of  ancient 
Hedonism. 

Morality,  accordingly,  appears  to  be  only  eudsemonistic  shrewd- 
ness, the  polished  egoism  of  society,  the  refined  cunning  of  the  man 
who  is  familiar  with  life,  and  has  seen  that  to  be  happy  he  can 
pursue  no  better  path  than  to  act  morally,  even  if  not  to  'be,  moral. 
This  view  frequently  finds  expression  in  the  Enlightenment  philos- 
ophy as  the  governing  principle  of  "the  world"  of  that  day: 
whether  it  be  as  the  naive,  cynical  confession  .of  a  writer's  own  dis- 
position, as  in  Lord  Chesterfield's  well-known  letters  to  his  son,  — 
or  in  the  form  of  moralising  reflections,  as  in  Labrwylre's  "  Charac- 
t&res"  (1680),  and  in  La  Rochefoucauld? s  "Reflections"  (1690), 
where  the  mask  is  unsparingly  torn  off  from  man's  ethical  behaviour, 
and  naked  egoism  is  disclosed  as  the  sole  impelling  motor  every- 
where,— or  finally  as  bitter  satire,  as  with  Swift,  where  the  true 
nature  of  the  human  beast  is  finally  discovered  by  Gulliver  among 
t  the  Yahoos. 

|  Hand  in  hand  with  this  gloomy  conception  of  the  natural  mean- 
I  ness  of  man  the  view  goes  through  the  age  of  the  Enlightenment 
that  man's  education  to  ethical  action  has  to  appeal  to  just  this  low 
system  of  impulses,  working  through  power  and  authority,  with  the 
aid  of  fear  and  hope.  This  shows  itself  characteristically  even  with, 
those  who  claim  for  the  mature  and  fully  developed  man,  a  pure 
morality  raised  above  all  egoism.  So,  for  example,  Shaftesbury 
finds  positive  religion  with  its  preaching  of  rewards  and  punish- 
ments quite  good  enough  for  the  education  of  the  great  mass.  So, 


516  The  Enlightenment:  Practical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

too,  Prussia's  philosophical  king  Frederick  the  Great,1  who  for  him- 
self had  a  consciousness  of  duty  so  strict  arid  pure  and  free  from  all 
selfish  considerations,  and  declared  such  to  be  the  highest  ethical 
good,  yet  thought  that  in  the  case  of  the  education  which  the  state 
gives  to  men  it  should  start  with  their  closest  interests,  however 
low  these  might  be ;  for  he  granted  to  the  Encyclopaedists  that  man 
as  a  genus  is  never  to  be  determined  by  anything  else  than  by  his 
own  personal  interests.  In  this  respect  the  French  Enlighteners, 
especially,  sought  to  analyse  the  motives,  by  awakening  which  the 
state  can  win  the  citizens  to  care  for  the  interests  of  the  whole. 
Montesquieu  showed  with  fine  psychology  how  different  the  forms 
are  which  this  relation  takes  under  different  forms  of  constitution. 
Lamettrie  pointed,  as  Mandeville  had  already  done,  to  the  sense  of 
honour  or  repute  as  the  most  powerful  factor  in  the  social  sentiment 
among  civilised  peoples,  and  Helvetius  carried  out  this  thought 
farther. 

But  if  the  sensualistic  psychology  thus  looked  for  man's  ethical 
education  from  the  state  alone,  the  degree  of  success  with  which 
this  was  accomplished  must  serve  as  a  standard  for  estimating  the 
value  of  public  institutions.  This  consequence  was  drawn  by 
Holbach,  and  the  most  winning  feature  of  this  dry  book  is  perhaps 
the  honourableness  and  energy  with  which  it  tries  to  show  how  little 
the  rotten  conditions  of  the  public  life  of  that  time  were  adapted  to 
raise  the  citizen  above  the  meanness  of  selfish  endeavours. 

12.  Hume's  moral  philosophy  may  be  regarded  as  the  most  com- 
plete embodiment  of  this  movement,  and  as  the  most  refined  consid- 
eration of  the  motives  that  contend  within  it.  It,  too,  stands 
completely  upon  the  basis  of  the  psychological  method :  man's 
ethical  life  is  to  be  understood  by  a  genetic  investigation  of  his 
passions,  feelings,  and  volitions.  The  most  significant  element  in 
Hume's  teaching  is  the  separation  of  utilitarianism  from  the  selfish 
system.  The  criterion  of  ethical  approval  and  disapproval  is,  for 
him,  too,  the  effect  which  the  quality  or  action  to  be  judged  is 
adapted  to  produce  in  the  form  of  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain, 
and,  like  the  ancients  and  Shaftesbury,  he  interprets  this  in  the 
widest  sense,  inasmuch  as  he  regards  as  objects  of  ethical  pleasure, 
not  only  the  "social  virtues,"  such  as  justice,  benevolence,  etc.,  but 
also  the  "natural  abilities," 2  such  as  prudence  or  sagacity,  fortitude, 
energy,  etc.  But  we  feel  this  approval,  even  when  these  qualities 

1  Cf.  especially  what  is  adduced  by  E.  Zeller,  F.  d>  &  als  Philosophy  pp 
67  ff.,  105  ff.,  and  also  especially  Frederick's  "Antimacchiavelli." 

2  Here,  too,  the  old  ambiguity  of  virtus  (virtue)  =  moral  virtue,  and  alsc 
ability  or  excellence,  plays  a  part. 


CHAP.  2,  §  36.]     Principles  of  Morals :  Hume,  Smith.  517 

are  completely  indifferent  to  our  own  welfare,  or  indeed  even  inju- 
rious to  the  same;  and  this  cannot  possibly  be  traced  back  to 
egoism  through  the  medium  of  mere  psychological  association.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  relation  which  these  judgments  sustain  to  the 
complicated  relations  of  experience  forbids  the  assumption  of  their 
innateness.  They  must  rather  be  reduced  to  a  simple,  elementary 
form,  and  this  is  sympathy*  i.e.  primarily  our  capacity  to  feel 
with  another  his  weal  or  woe  as  our  own,  at  least  in  a  weakened 
form.  Such  sympathetic  feelings,  however,  are  not  only  the 
impulsive  grounds  of  moral  judgments,  but  also  the  original  motives 
of  moral  action,  for  the  feelings  are  the  causes  of  the  decisions  of 
the  will.  Still,  these  original  impulses  alone  are  not  adequate  to 
explain  ethical  judgment  and  action.  Tor  the  more  complicated 
relations  of  life,  there  is  need  of  a  clarification,  ordering,  and  com- 
parative valuation  of  the  factors  of  feeling,  and  this  is  the  business 
of  reason.  From  the  reflection  of  reason  arise,  therefore,  in  addition 
to  the  natural  and  original  values,  derivative  "  artificial "  virtues,  as 
the  type  of  which  Hume  treats  justice  and  the  whole  system  of 
standards  of  rights  and  law — in  this,  evidently,  still  dependent 
upon  Hobbes.  But  in  the  last  resort  these  principles,  also,  owe 
their  ability  to  influence  judgment  and  volition,  not  to  rational 
reflection  as  such,  but  to  the  feelings  of  sympathy  to  which  this 
appeals. 

Thus  the  crude  conception  of  a  "moral  sense"  is  refined  by 
Hume's  investigation  to  a  finely  articulated  system  of  moral  psy- 
chology with  its  carefully  differentiated  conceptions,  as  the  centre 
of  which  we  find  the  principle  of  sympathy.  A  farther  step  in 
carrying  out  this  same  theory  was  taken  in  the  ethical  work  of 
Adam  Smith.  As  against  the  externality  with  which  ordinary 
utilitarianism  had  placed  the  criterion  of  ethical  judgment  in  the 
pleasurable  or  painful  consequences  of  the  act,  Hume  had  energet- 
ically directed  attention  to  the  fact,  that  ethical  approval  or  disap- 
proval concerns  rather  the  disposition  manifesting  itself  in  the 
action,  in  so  far  as  this  aims  at  the  consequences  in  question. 
Hence  Smith  found  the  essence  of  sympathy,  not  only  in  the 
capacity  of  feeling  these  consequences  with  the  one  who  experiences 
them,  but  also  in  the  ability  to  transfer  one's  self  into  the  disposi- 
tion or  sentiment  of  him  who  acts,  and  to  feel  his  motives  with  him. 
And  extending  farther  and  farther  the  thought  of  transfer  through 
sympathy,  ,the  judgment  which  the  individual  pronounces  upon  him- 
self in  the  conscience  is  then  conceived  as  a  reflex,  mediated  through 

i  Of.  Treatise,  II.  1,  11,  and  II.  2,  5. 


518  TJie  Enlightenment :  Practical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

feelings  of  sympathy,  of  the  judgment  which  he  receives  from 
others  and  exercises  upon  others. 

All  phenomena  of  the  ethical  life  are  thus  rooted,  according  to 
Hume  and  Smith,  in  the  social  life,  whose  psychological  basis  is 
sympathy,  and  the  founder  of  political  economy,  with  his  great 
philosophical  friend,  sees  in  the  mechanism  of  sympathetic  transfers 
of  feeling  an  adjustment  of  individual  interests  similar  to  that  which 
he  believed  himself  to  have  discovered  in  the  realm  of  the  exchange 
of  external  goods,  which  is  conducted  with  reference  to  the  strait- 
ness  of  the  conditions  of  life,  in  the  mechanism  of  supply  and 
demand  in  connection  with  the  competition  of  labour.1  But  with 
these  insights  into  the  thoroughgoing  dependence  of  the  individual 
upon  a  social  body,  which  he  does  not  create,  but  in  which  he  finds 
himself  actually  placed,  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  is 
already  pointing  beyond  itself. 

§  37.  The  Problem  of  Civilisation. 

The  fundamental  thought,  which  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlight- 
enment would  hold  as  to  the  great  institutions  of  human,  society  and 
its  historical  movement,  was  prescribed  for  it  in  advance,  partly  by 
its  dependence  upon  natural-science  metaphysics,  and  partly  by  its 
own  psychological  tendency.  This  was  to  see  in  these  institutions 
the  products  of  the  activities  of  individuals  5  and  from  this  followed 
the  tendency  to  single  out  those  interests  whose  satisfaction  the 
individual  may  expect  from  such  general  social  connections  when 
once  these  exist,  and  to  treat  them  in  a  genetic  mode  of  explanation 
as  the  motives  and  sufficient  causes  for  the  origin  of  the  institutions 
in  question,  while  at  the  same  time  regarding  them  from  a  critical 
point  of  view,  as  the  standard  for  estimating  the  value  of  the  same. 
Whatever  was  regarded  as  having  been  intentionally  created  by 
men  should  show  also  whether  it  was  then  really  fulfilling  their 
purposes. 

1.  This  conception  was  guided  into  the  political  and  juristic  track 
primarily  by  Hobbes.  The  state  appeared  as  the  work  of  individuals, 
constructed  by  them  under  the  stress  of  need,  when  in  a  condition 
of  war  with  each  other  and  in  fear  for  life  and  goods.  With  its  whole 
system  of  rights,  it  was  regarded  as  resting  upon  the  compact  which 
the  citizens  entered  into  with  each  other  from  the  above  motives. 
The  same  Epicurean  compact-theory,  which  had  revived  in  the  later 
Middle  Ages,  passed  over  with  Nominalism  into  modern  philosophy 

1  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations  (Lond.  1776). 


CHAP.  2,  §  37.]     Problem  of  Civilisation :  Compact-Theory.      519 

and  extended  its  influence  over  the  whole  eighteenth  century.  But 
the  artificial  construction  of  absolutism,  which  Hobbes  had  erected 
upon  it,  gave  place  more  and  more  in  consequence  of  political  events 
to  the  doctrines  of  popular  sovereignty.  This  lay  at  the  basis  of  the 
English  Constitution  of  1688,  as  well  as  at  that  of  the  theoretical  shap- 
ing which  Locke  gave  the  same  in  his  doctrine  of  the  separation  and 
equilibrium  of  the  three  departments  of  the  state,  the  legislative, 
executive,  and  federative.  It  controlled,  also,  as  an  ideal  require- 
ment, the  writings  of  Montesquieu,  who,  in  considering  the  rotten 
administration  of  law  at  his  time,  would  have  complete  independ- 
ence given  to  the  judicial  power,  while  he  thought  of  the  executive 
and  federative  departments  (as  administration  within  and  without, 
respectively)  as  united  in  the  one  monarchical  head.  It  "was  finally 
carried  out  to  a  complete  system  of  democracy  in  Rousseau's  Con- 
trat  Social,  in  which  the  principle  of  transfer  and  representation 
was  to  be  limited  as  much  as  possible,  and  the  exercise  of  the  sov- 
ereignty also  to  be  assigned  directly  to  the  whole  body  of  the  peo- 
ple. In  all  these  transformations  of  the  doctrine  of  Hobbes,  the 
influence  of  the  realities  of  historical  politics  is  obvious,  but  the 
antithesis  between  Hobbes  and  Eousseau  has  also  its  theoretical 
background.  If  man  is  regarded  as  by  nature  essentially  egoistic, 
he  must  be  compelled  to  keep  the  social  compact  by  the  strong  arm 
of  the  state :  if  he  is  regarded  as  originally  good  and  social  in  his 
feelings,  as  by  Eousseau,  it  is  to  be  expected  of  him  that  he  will  of 
himself  always  take  part  in  carrying  out,  in  the  interest  of  the 
whole,  the  life  prescribed  by  the  compact. 

It  is  interesting  now  to  see  that  the  compact-theory  in  the 
eighteenth  century  communicated  itself  also  to  those  theories  of 
the  philosophy  of  right  which  did  not  have  a  merely  psychological 
basis.  The  "natural  right"  of  this  time  proceeds  also  from  the 
right  of  the  individual,  and  seeks  to  derive  from  this  the  rights  of 
individuals  in  their  relation  to  each  other.  Yet  in  carrying  out  this 
principle  two  different  tendencies  show  themselves  in  German  phil- 
osophy, leading  to  results  that  were  extremely  characteristic  in 
their  differences.  Leibniz  had  derived  the  conceptions  of  right  (or 
law)  from  the  most  general  principles  of  practical  philosophy,  fol- 
lowing the  example  of  the  ancients.1  Wolff  followed  him  in  this 
respect  also,  but  made  it  on  this  account  the  end  of  the  political 
compact  to  secure  the  mutual  furtherance  of  individuals  in  behalf 
of  their  mutual  perfecting,  enlightening,  and  happiness ;  according 


1  Cf.  his  introduction  to  the  Codex  Juris  Gentium  Diplomaticus  (1693), 
VForks  (Bid.),  118  ff. 


520  The  Enlightenment:  Practical  Questions.       [FART  V. 

to  him,  therefore,  the  state  has  to  care,  not  merely  for  external 
safety,  but  also  for  the  general  welfare  in  the  broadest  extent. 
The  consequence  of  this  is  that  Wolff  assigns  to  the  state  the  right 
and  duty  of  a  thorough  tutelage  of  the  great  mass  of  unenlightened 
men  who  are  controlled  by  error  and  passion,  and  of  intermeddling 
even  in  their  private  relations  in  the  way  of  education.  Thus  Wolff 
gave  the  theory  for  that  "  paternal "  despotism  of  the  benevolent 
police-state  under  which  the  G-ermans  of  his  time  lived  with  very 
mixed  feelings. 

The  exactly  opposite  result  attached  itself  theoretically  to  the 
separation  of  the  philosophy  of  right  from  morals,  for  which  the 
way  had  already  been  prepared  by  Tkomasius,  with  his  sharp  parting 
of  thejttstem  and  the  honestum.  In  this  line  the  disciple  of  Tho- 
masius,  Gundling  (1671-1729),  maintained  that  right  or  law  was  to  be 
treated  solely  as  the  ordering  of  the  external  relations  of  individuals, 
that  it  has  for  its  end  the  preservation  of  peace  without,  and  there- 
fore its  decrees  can  be  enforced  only  as  to  outward  relations.  This 
limitation  of  the  state's  activity  to  the  external  protection  of  law 
evidently  corresponded  most  fully  to  the  dualistic  spirit  of  the 
Enlightenment.  If  the  individual  has  conformed  to  the  political 
compact  only  from  need  and  want,  he  will  evidently  be  inclined  to 
make  as  few  concessions  to  the  state  as  possible,  and  will  be  willing 
to  sacrifice  to  it  of  his  original  "  rights  "  only  so  much  as  is  uncondi- 
ditionally  requisite  for  the  end  which  it  is  to  fulfil.  This  was  not 
merely  the  thought  of  the  Philistine  citizen,  who  is  indeed  ready  to 
call  for  the  police  at  once  when  anything  is  the  matter,  but  privately 
regards  the  order  of  the  laws  as  an  enemy  that  must  be  kept  from 
his  throat  as  much  as  possible;  it  was  also  the  feeling  of  the  En- 
Hghtener  of  high  intellectual  development,  who  had  for  his  rich 
inner  life  only  the  interest  of  being  able  to  devote  himself  unmo- 
lested to  the  enjoyments  of  art  and  science.  In  fact,  the  petty 
spirit  of  the  small  German  states,  with  its  lack  of  ideals,  must 
necessarily  produce  the  indifference  toward  public  life  which  thus 
found  its  theoretical  expression.  The  lowest  stage  which  the  de- 
preciation of  the  state  reached  in  this  respect  among  the  cultured 
classes  is  perhaps  best  characterised  by  William  von  Humboldfs 
"  Ideas  toward  an  Attempt  to  determine  the  Bounds  of  the  Operation 
of  the  State/71  Here  every  higher  interest  of  man  is  carefully  ex- 
cluded from  the  province  of  the  state's  authority,  and  the  task  of 
public  government  is  restricted  to  the  lower  service  of  protecting 
the  life  and  property  of  the  citizen. 

1  Written  1792,  published  1851  by  E.  Cauer. 


CHAP.  2,  §  37.]      Problem  of  Civilisation  :  Voltaire.  521 

2.  If  in  this  respect  German  philosophy  remained  quite  indif- 
ferent toward  the  actual  political  condition,  on  the  other  hand 
there  appeared  in  it  also  the  general  tendency  of  the  Enlightenment 
to  order  the  life  of  society,  as  that  of  the  individual,  according  to 
the  principles  of  philosophy.  If  it  is  glory  enough  for  this  period 
to  have  successfully  cleared  away  much  historical  lumber  that  had 
accumulated  in  the  house-keeping  of  European  peoples,  Thomasius 
and  Wolff,  Mendelssohn  and  Nicolai,  certainly  deserve  credit  for 
their  share  in  the  work  (cf.  §  36,  5).  But  this  side  of  the  matter 
came  forward  in  an  incomparably  more  powerful  and  efficient 
degree  with  the  French  Enlighteners.  It  is  enough  here  to  recall 
Voltaire,  who  appeared  as  a  literary  power  of  the  first  rank,  work- 
ing unweariedly  and  victoriously  for  reason  and  justice.  But  the 
contest  which  he  carried  on  to  a  certain  extent  before  the  bar  of 
public  opinion  of  all  Europe  was  taken  up  in  detail  by  his  fellow- 
countrymen,  in  a  criticism  of  social  institutions  and  by  proposals 
for  their  improvement :  in  a  broad  and  often  passionate  discussion 
philosophical  reflection  proceeds  to  the  task  of  reforming  the  state. 
And  here  the  weakness  of  the  Enlightenment  at  once  appears  side 
by  side  with  its  strength.  As  always,  it  takes  the  standards  of  its 
criticism  for  existing  institutions,  and  of  its  proposals  for  their 
change,  from  the  universal,  eternal  nature  of  man  or  of  things; 
thus  it  loses  from  sight  the  authorisation  and  vital  force  of  histori- 
cal reality,  and  believes  that  it  is  only  needed  to  make  a  tabula  rasa 
of  the  existing  conditions  wherever  they  show  themselves  contrary 
to  reason,  in  order  to  be  able  to  build  up  society  entire  in  accordance 
with  the  principles  of  philosophy.  In  this  spirit  the  literature  of 
the  Enlightenment,  especially  in  Erance,  prepared  for  the  actual 
break  with  history,  —  the  Revolution.  Typical  in  this  was  the  pro- 
cedure of  Deism  which,  because  none  of  the  positive  religions  with- 
stood its  " rational"  criticism,  would  abolish  them  all  and  put  in 
their  place  the  religion  of  Nature. 

So  then  the  French  Eevolution,  too,  attempted  to  decree  the 
abstract  natural  state  of  "liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity,"  the 
realisation  of  "human  rights"  according  to  Kousseau's  /Social 
Contract.  And  numerous  pens  of  very  moderate  quality  hastened 
to  justify  and  glorify  the  procedure.1  It  is  for  the  most  part  a 
superficial  Epicureanism  standing  upon  the  basis  of  Condillac's 
positivism  that  acts  as  spokesman.  Thus  Volney  seeks,  with  the 
Systeme  de  la  Nature,  the  source  of  all  the  evils  of  society  in  the 

1  The  preference  for  the  catechism,  a  form  designed  for  education  in  the 
Church,  is  characteristic  of  this  literature. 


522  The  Enlightenment :  Practical  Questions.      [PART  V. 

igBorance  and  covetousness  of  man,  whose  capacity  for  perfection 
has  hitherto  been  restrained  by  religions.  When  all  "illusions'3 
shall  be  frightened  away  with  these  religions,  then  the  newly 
organised  society  will  have  as  its  supreme  rule  of  conduct,  that 
'•good"  is  only  "what  furthers  the  interests  of  man,  and  the  cate- 
chism for  the  citizen  is  comprehended  in  the  rule  "Conserve  toi  — 
instruis  toi  — modere  toi  — vis  pour  tes  sernblables,  afin  qu'ils  vivent 
pour  toi."1  Still  more  materialistic  is  the  form  in  which  the  theory 
of  the  Revolution  appears  with  St.  Lambert,  from  whom  the  defini- 
tion that  was  much  discussed  in  later  literature  comes :  "  L'honime 
est  une  masse  organised  et  sensible ;  il  re^oit  ^intelligence  de  ce  qui 
Fenvironne  et  de  ses  besoins."2  With  the  most  superficial  con- 
sideration of  history,  he  celebrates  in  the  Revolution  the  final 
victory  of  reason  in  history,  and  at  the  same  time  this  Epicurean 
deduces  that  the  democratic  beginnings  of  this  great  event  will  be 
completed  in  Csesardom!  The  extreme  pitch  of  self-complacent 
boasting  in  this  aspect  of  parliamentary  dilettantism  was  reached 
by  Garat  and  Lancelin* 

In  contrast  with  these  glittering  generalities  and  declamations 
over  the  welfare  of  the  people  and  the  reign  of  reason,  the  earnest 
reality  with  which  Bentham  sought  to  make  the  utilitarian  principle 
useful  for  legislation,  appears  in  an  extremely  favourable  light. 
This  work  he  sought  to  accomplish  by  teaching  the  application  of 
the  quantitative  determination  of  pleasure  and  pain  values  (cf. 
§  36,  9)  to  the  consideration  of  the  ends  of  particular  statutes,  with 
a  careful  regard  to  the  existing  conditions  in  every  case.4  Just  in 
this  he  showed  his  insight  into  the  fact  that  in  the  political  move- 
ment the  question  at  issue  is  not  merely  that  of  political  rights,  but 
above  all  that  of  social  interest,  and  along  just  this  line  an  enthu- 
siastic and  successful  champion  of  the  Revolution  arose  in  Godwin? 
who  was  not  uninfluenced  by  Bentharn.  But  along  other  lines,  too, 

1  Yolney,  at  the  close  of  the  Catechisme,  CEuvr.,  I.  310. 

2  St.  Lambert,  Catfch.  Introd.,  GEuvr.,  I.  53.    For  the  characterisation  of 
this  literature  it  should  not  remain  unmentioned  that  in  St.  Lambert's  cate- 
chism the  Analyse  de  Vhomme  is  followed  in  a  second  book  by  an  Analyse  de 
la  —  frmme. 

3  The  organ  of  this  movement  most  worthy  of  esteem  was  the  Decade  Philo- 
sophique,  which  saw  and  defended  in  the  Revolution  the  triumph  of  the  philoso- 
phy of  the  eighteenth  century.    Cf.  Picavet,  Ideologues,  86  ff . 

*  It  is  the  more  to  be  lamented  that  Bentham  later  in  his  Deontology  at- 
tempted to  give  a  kind  of  popular  catechism  of  the  utilitarian  morals,  which, 
in  radical  one-sidedness,  in  rancour  and  lack  of  understanding  for  other  moral 
systems,  equals  the  worst  products  of  the  time  of  the  Revolution. 

5  William  Godwin  (1756-1836)  published  his  Inquiry  concerning  Political 
Justice  and  its  Influence  on  General  Virtue  and  Happiness  in  1793.  Cf.  C. 
Kegan  Paul,  W.  Godwin,  his  Friends  and  Contemporaries.  Lond.  1876,  and  L. 
Stephen,  English  Thought,  II.  264  ff. 


CHAP.  2,  §  37.]      Problem  of  Civilisation  :  France.  523 

the  social  storm  is  heard  in  the  literature  of  the  Kevolution,  as  dull 
thunder  still  dying  away  in  the  distance.  The  investigations  con- 
cerning the  problems  of.  political  economy,  which  in  France  especially 
were  chiefly  promoted  by  the  pliysiocratic  school,  became  more  and 
more  comprehensive,  and  were  grounded  with  increasing  indepen- 
dence upon  empirical  principles.  But  while  the  theory  of  the 
state  demanded,  above  all,  security  of  possessions,  there  rose,  from 
the  depth  of  society,  the  question  as  to  the  right  of  personal  property ; 
and  while  the  philosophers  considered  with  more  and  more  dissen- 
sion the  problem,  how  the  interests  of  the  community  could  be 
reconciled  with  those  of  the  individual  (cf.  below),  the  thought 
forced  its  way  to  the  surface  that  the  ground  of  all  evil  with  the 
human  race  lies  in  the  striving  after  individual  possessions,  and 
that  a  social  morality  and  a  moral  society  will  begin  with  the  denun- 
ciation of  this  original  sin,  and  not  till  then.  Such  communistic 
ideas  were  thrown  to  the  world  by  Mably  and  Horelly,  and  a  Babeuf 
made  the  first  abortive  conspiracy  to  carry  out  these  ideas,  under 
the  Directory. 

3.  But  the  social  question  had  already  before  this  cast  up  its 
waves  from  its  lowest  depth.  The  contrast  between  the  classes 
representing  luxurious  wealth  and  most  wretched  poverty,  which 
had  so  great  importance  among  the  causes  of  the  Revolution,  might 
indeed  at  first  be  more  palpable  and  effective ;  but  it  first  acquired 
its  full  sharpness  by  virtue  of  the  antithesis  between  culture  and 
non-culture}  which  was  linked  with  it  by  the  whole  development  of 
European  life,  and  this  separating  chasm  was  deepest  and  baldest 
in  the  age  of  the  Enlightenment.  The  more  the  age  plumed  itself 
upon  its  "culture,"  the  more  evident  it  became  that  this  was  in  the 
main  a  privilege  of  the  property-owning  class.  In  this  point,  too, 
English  Deism  had  led  the  way  with  typical  frankness.  The 
religion  of  reason  should  be  reserved  for  the  cultivated  man,  just 
as  the  free,  beautiful  morality  should  be :  for  the  ordinary  man,  on 
the  other  hand,  SJiaftesbury  held,  the  promises  and  threatenirigs  of 
positive  religion  must  remain  standing  as  a  wheel  and  gallows. 
Toland,  too,  had  presented  his  cosmopolitan  natural  worship  as  an 
"esoteric"  doctrine,  and  when  the  later  Deists  began  to  carry  these 
ideas  among  the  people  in  popular  writings,  Lord  Bolingbroke,  him- 
self a  free-thinker  of  the  most  pronounced  kind,  declared  them  to 
be  a  pest  of  society,  against  which  the  sharpest  means  were  the  best. 
Among  the  German  Deists,  also,  men  like  Semler  would  have  a  very 
careful  separation  made  between  religion  as  a  private  matter  and 
religion  as  a  public  order. 

The  French  Enlightenment,  as  the  relation  of  Voltaire  to  Boling- 


524  The  Enlightenment:  Practical  Questions.       [PART  V. 

broke  shows,  was  from  the  beginning  decidedly  more  democratic. 
Indeed,  it  had  the  agitative  tendency  to  play  off  the  enlighten- 
ment of  the  masses  against  the  exclusive  self-seeking  of  the  upper 
ten  thousand.  But  with  this  was  completed  a  revolution,  by  virtue 
of  which  the  Enlightenment  necessarily  turned  against  itself.  For 
if  in  those  strata  in  which  it  first  took  hold  "culture"  or  civilisa- 
tion had  such  consequences  as  appeared  in  the  luxury  of  the  "higher" 
classes,  if  it  had  been  able  to  do  so  little  in  the  way  of  yielding 
fruits  that  could  be  used  for  the  needs  of  the  masses  also,  its  value 
must  appear  all  the  more  doubtful  the  more  philosophy  regarded 
the  "greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number"  as  the  proper 
standard  for  the  estimation  of  things  and  actions. 

In  this  connection  the  problem  of  civilisation  shaped  itself  out  for 
modern  philosophy :  the  question  whether  and  how  far  civilisation, 
i.e.  intellectual  improvement  (which  is  a  historical  fact),  and  the 
change  in  human  impulses  and  in  the  relations  of  human  life,  which 
has  been  connected  with  it  —  whether  and  in  how  far  this  civilisa- 
tion has  served  to  further  the  moral  order  and  man's  true  happiness. 
The  more  proudly  and  self-complacently  the  average  Enlightener 
praised  the  progress  of  the  human  mind3  which  had  reached  in  him 
its  summit  of  a  clear  and  distinct  rational  life  in  theory  and  prac- 
tice, the  more  burning  and — uncomfortable  this  question  became. 

It  is  raised  first,  though  not  in  a  direct  and  square  statement,  by 
3fandeviUe.  In  his  psychology  an  extreme  adherent  of  the  selfish 
system,  he  sought  to  show,  as  against  Shaftesbury,  that  the  whole 
life  and  charm  of  the  social  system  rests  solely  upon  the  struggle 
which  self-seeking  individuals  carry  on  in  their  own  interests  —  a 
principle  which  worked  also  upon  Adam  Smith  in  his  doctrine  of 
supply  and  demand.1  If  we  should  think  of  man  as  stripped  bare 
of  all  egoistic  impulses  (this  is  the  meaning  of  the  Fable  of  the  Bees), 
and  provided  only  with  the  "moral"  qualities  of  altruism,  the  social 
mechanism  would  stand  still  from  pure  absence  of  regard  for  self. 
The  motive  power  in  civilisation  is  solely  egoism,  and,  therefore, 
we  must  not  be  surprised  if  civilisation  displays  its  activity,  not 
by  heightening  the  moral  qualities,  but  only  by  refining  and  dis- 
guising egoism.  And  the  individual's  happiness  is  as  little  enhanced 
by  civilisation  as  his  morality.  If  it  were  increased,  the  egoism, 
on  which  the  progress  of  civilisation  rests,  would  be  thereby  weak- 
ened. In  truth,  it  appears,  rather,  that  every  improvement  of  the 
material  condition,  brought  about  by  intellectual  advance,  calls  forth 
new  and  stronger  wants  in  the  individual,  in  consequence  of  which 

1  Of.  Lange,  Gesch.  d.  Mater.,  I.  285  [Eng.  tr.  I.  295 J. 


CHAP.  2,  §  37.]  Problem  of  Civilisation :  Ufandeville,  EOUSBBCLU.   525 

he  becomes  more  and  more  discontented ;  and  so  it  turns  oat  that 
the  apparently  so  brilliant  development  of  the  whole  is  accomplished 
only  at  the  cost  of  the  morality  and  happiness  of  the  individual. 

4.  In  Mandeville  these  thoughts  appear  in  a  mild  suggestion,  and 
at  the  same  time,  in  the  repelling  form  of  a  cynical  commendation 
of  the  egoism,  whose  "  private  vices  "  are  "  public  benefits."  They 
attained  an  importance  for  world-literature  through  the  brilliant 
turn  given  them  by  Rousseau.  "With  him  the  question  concerned 
nothing  more  and  nothing  less  than  the  worth  of  all  human 
history  —  its  worth  for  the  morality  and  happiness  of  individuals. 
And  he  cast  into  the  face  of  the  Enlightenment  the  reproach  that 
all  growth  in  knowledge,  and  all  refinement  of  life,  had  but  made 
man  more  and  more  untrue  to  his  true  vocation  and  his  true  nature. 
History  with  its  artificial  structure  of  civilised  society  has  deterio- 
rated man : 1  he  came  forth  from  the  hand  of  Nature  good  and  pure, 
but  his  development  has  separated  him  from  Nature  step  by  step. 
The  beginning  of  this  "degeneration"  Eousseau,  in  his  second  Dis- 
course, found  in  the  creation  of  property,  which  had  for  its  result  the 
division  of  labour,  and  with  this  the  separation  of  the  classes  and,  ulti- 
mately, the  awakening  of  all  evil  passions  ;  this  it  was  that  enlisted 
the  work  of  the  intellect  permanently  in  the  service  of  self-seeking. 

In  comparison  with  this  unnatural  condition  of  civilised  barbarism 
the  state  of  Nature  appears  at  first  as  the  lost  paradise,  and  in  this 
sense  the  sentimental  yearning  of  a  time  intellectually  and  morally 
blas£  found  its  nourishment  in  Rousseau's  writings,  above  all  in  the 
New  Heloise.  The  ladies  of  the  salon  were  carried  away  with  enthu- 
siasm for  the  Gessnerian  pastoral  idyl;  but  on  this  account  they 
mis-heard  the  admonition  of  the  great  Genevan. 

Eor  he  did  not  wish  to  lead  back  to  that  state  of  Nature  which 
had  no  society.  He  was  convinced  that  man  is  provided  by  his 
creator  with  a  capacity  for  being  perfected  (perfectibilite)  which 
makes  the  development  of  his  natural  endowment  both  a  duty  and 
a  natural  necessity.  If  this  development  has  been  guided  into 
wrong  paths  by  the  historical  process  which  has  hitherto  prevailed, 
and,  therefore,  has  led  to  demoralisation  and  wretchedness,  history 
must  be  begun  anew;  in  order  to  find  the  right  way  toward  his  devel- 
opment man  must  return  from  the  unnatural  condition  of  intellectual 
pride  to  the  simple  natural  state  of  feeling,  from  the  narrowness 
and  falsehood  of  relations  of  society  to  his  pure  unstunted  self. 
For  this  end,  according  to  Bousseau,  humanity  as  a  whole  needs  a 

1-The  English  Deists'  conception  of  the  history  of  religion  (of.  §  35,  8)  is 
extended  by  Eousseau  to  all  history. 


526  The  Enlightenment:  Practical  Questions.       [PARTY. 

political  constitution,  which,  affords  the  individual  full  freedom  of 
personal  activity  in  connection  with  the  life  of  the  whole  body,  and 
in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  equality  of  rights ;  and  as  indi- 
viduals, humanity  needs  an  education,1  which  allows  the  natural 
endowments  of  the  individual  to  unfold  from  his  own  vitality 
without  constraint.  The  optimism,  which  Eousseau  finds  in  the 
constitution  of  the  natural  God-descended  nature  of  man,  makes 
him  hope  that  our  condition  will  be  better,  the  more  freely  and 
naturally  we  can  develop. 

5.  While  we  thus  find  Eousseau  in  lively  opposition  to  the  his- 
torical development,  and  in  the  zealous  endeavour  to  put  in  its  stead 
a  new  development  "according  to  Xature,"  the  last  reconciling 
synthesis  of  the  ideas  of  the  Enlightenment  is  the  endeavour  to 
understand  the  previous  course  of  human  history  itself  as  the 
natural  development  of  human  nature;  in  this  thought  the  phil- 
osophy of  the  eighteenth  century  strips  off  all  its  one-sided- 
ness  and  reaches  its  highest  consummation.  The  first  stirring  of 
this  is  found  in  an  isolated  appearance  of  Italian  literature,  with 
J7co.s  Influenced  by  the  Neo-Platonie  metaphysics  of  the  Eenais- 
sance,  especially  by  Campanella,  and  educated  by  Bodin  and  Grotius, 
he  had  grasped  the  idea  of  a  general  natural  law  of  the  development 
of  life,  which  manifests  itself  in  the  history  of  peoples  as  well  as  in 
that  of  individuals,  and  with  great  learning  had  sought  to  prove 
this  principle  of  the  identity  of  all  natural  development.  But  if  in 
such  a  conception  of  the  naturally  necessary  correspondences  between 
the  different  historical  systems  and  the  fundamental  biological 
scheme,  the  thought  of  a  purposeful  inter-relation  of  the  destinies 
of  nations  had  remained  foreign  to  him,  this  had  previously  found 

iln  its  details  Rousseau's  iSmfle  frequently  uses  the  "Thoughts,"  which 
Locke  had  advanced  with  a  much  more  limited  purpose  for  the  education  of  a 
young  man  of  higher  station  in  society :  there,  too,  the  complete  development 
of  the  individuality  was  the  main  thing,  from  which  the  turning  away  from 
learned  one-sidedness,  the  direction  of  attention  to  the  real  and  practical,  the 
appeal  to  perception  and  the  use  of  individual  instead  of  general  truths  in 
instruction  and  education,  followed  as  a  matter  of  course.  These  principles, 
thought  out  for  the  Englishman  of  superior  rank,  Rousseau  adopts  as  elements 
in  an  education  which  sought  to  develop  in  man,  not  the  member  of  a  definite 
class  or  of  a  future  profession,  but  only  "the  man."  In  this  spirit  his  peda- 
gogical doctrines  passed  over  to  the  school  of  German  philanthropy,  which,  under 
the  lead  of  Basedow  (1723-1790),  combined  the  principle  of  natural  develop- 
ment with  that  of  utility,  and  thought  out  the  appropriate  forms  of  an  education 
for  a  community  by  which  the  individual  should  be  trained  to  become  by  the 
natural  way  a  useful  member  of  human  society. 

2  Giov.  Battista  Vtco  (1668-1744)  became  influential  chiefly  through  his 
PrincipJ  ffuna  scienza  nuova  &  intorno  alia  commune  natura  delle  nazwni 
(l*2o).  Cf.  K.  Werner,  Giambattista  V.  als  Philosoph  und  f/elehrter  Forscher 
O  lenna,  1879)  ;  R.  Flint,  Vico  (Edin.  and  Lond.  1884);  and  likewise  for  the 
following,  Flint,  The  Philosophy  of  History  in  Europe,  Yol.  I.,  new  ed.,  1893. 


CHAP.  2,  §  37.]     Problem  of  Civilisatio?i:  Vico,  Herder.  527 

all  the  more  forcible  support  in  Bossuet.1  The  French  prelate  con- 
tinues the  patristic  philosophy  of  history ,  which  had  pushed  the 
Eedemption  into  the  centre  of  the  world's  events.  He  would  have 
the  christianising  of  modern  nations  through  the  empire  of  Charles 
the  Great,  regarded  as  the  concluding  and  decisive  epoch  of  uni- 
versal history,  the  whole  course  of  which  is  the  work  of  divine 
providence,  and  the  goal  of  which  is  the  dominance  of  the  one 
Catholic  Church.  Such  a  theological  view  of  the  world  and  of 
history  had  now,  indeed,  been  energetically  put  aside  by  modern 
philosophy,  but  the  meagreness  of  the  results  yielded  for  the  con- 
sideration of  history  by  the  treatment  of  human  society  from  the 
point  of  view  of  individual  psychology  is  seen  in  the  trivial  lucu- 
brations of  Iselin?  in  spite  of  his  leaning  upon  Eousseau. 

It  was  in  a  mind  of  Herders  universal  receptiveness  and  fineness 
of  feeling  that  Eousseau's  ideas  first  found  in  this  respect,  also,  a 
fruitful  soil.  But  his  optimism,  which  had  matured  in  the  atmos- 
phere of  Leibniz  and  Shaftesbury,  did  not  allow  him  to  believe  in 
the  possibility  of  that  aberration  which  the  Genevan  would  regard 
as  the  nature  of  previous  history.  He  was  rather  convinced  that  the 
natural  development  of  man  is  just  that  which  has  taken  place  in 
history.  While  Rousseau's  conception  of  man's  perfectibility  was 
treated  by  the  Genevan's  French  adherents,  such  as  St.  Lambert, 
and  especially  Condorcet,  as  the  voucher  for  a  better  future,  and  as 
an  infinite  perspective  toward  the  perfecting  of  the  race,  Herder 
used  it — against  Eousseau  —  as  a  principle  of  explanation  for  the 
past,  also,  of  the  human  family.  History  is  nothing  but  the  unin- 
terrupted progress  of  natural  development  • 

This  concerned,  above  all,  the  beginning  of  history.  The  begin- 
ning of  the  life  of  society  is  to  be  understood,  not  as  an  arbitrary 
act,  whether  of  human  reflection  or  of  divine  determination,  but  as  a 
gradually  formed  result  of  the  natural  connection.  It  has  neither 
been  invented  nor  commanded,  but  has  become.  Characteristically 
enough,  these  opposing  views  as  to  the  origin  of  history,  asserted 
themselves  earliest  in  theories  of  language.  The  individualism  of 
associational  psychology  saw  in  language,  as  is  manifest  particularly 
in  the  case  of  Condillac,3  an  invention  of  man, — supra-naturalism, 
defended  in  Germany  by  JSussmilch 4  saw  a  divine  inspiration ;  here 

1  Jacques  B6nigne  Bossuet  (1627-1704),  the  celebrated  eloquent  divine,  wrote 
the  Discours  sur  rHistoire  Universelle  (Paris,  1681)  originally  for  the  instruc- 
tion of  the  Dauphin. 

*  Isaak  Iselin  of  Basle  (1728-1782)  published  in  1764  his  Philosophischen 
Muthmassungen  uber  die  Geschichte  des  Mensohheit,  2  vols, 

8  Logiqtie  and  Langue  des  Calculs. 

4  Beweis,  dass  der  Ursprung  der  menschlichen  Sprache  gottlich  sei  (Berlin, 
1766). 


528  The  Enlightenment :  Practical  Questions.       [PARTY. 

Rousseau  had  already  spoken  the  word  of  solution  when  he  saw  in 
language  a  natural,  involuntary  unfolding  of  man's  essential  nature.1 
Herder  not  only  made  this  conception  his  own  (cf.  above,  §  33, 
11),  but  he  extended  it  also  consistently  to  all  man's  activities  in 
civilisation.  He  proceeds,  therefore,  in  his  philosophy  of  history 
from  the  point  of  view  of  man's  position  in  Nature,  from  that  of 
the  conditions  of  life  which  the  planet  affords  him,  and  from  that 
of  his  peculiar  constitution,  to  understand  from  these  sources  the 
beginnings  and  the  direction  of  his  historical  development :  and  in 
the  progress  of  his  exposition  of  universal  history  he  makes,  like- 
wise, the  peculiar  character  of  each  people  and  of  its  historical  sig- 
nificance proceed  from  its  natural  endowments  and  relations.  But 
at  the  same  time  the  developments  of  the  various  nations  do  not 
fall  apart  in  his  treatment,  as  was  still  the  case  with  Vico :  on  the  con- 
trary, they  are  all  arranged  organically  as  a  great  chain  of  ascend- 
ing perfection.  And  they  all  form  in  this  connected  whole  the 
ever-maturer  realisation  of  the  general  constitution  of  human  nature, 
As  man  himself  is  the  crown  of  creation,  so  his  history  is  the 
unfolding  of  human  nature.  The  Idea  of  Humanity  explains  the 
complicated  movement  of  national  destinies. 

In  this  consideration,  the  unhistorical  mode  of  thinking  which 
had  characterised  the  Enlightenment  was  overcome :  every  form  in 
this  great  course  of  development  was  valued  as  the  natural  product 
of  its  conditions,  and  the  "  voices  of  the  peoples  "  united  to  form 
the  harmony  of  the  world's  history,  of  which  humanity  is  the  theme. 
And  out  of  this  sprang  also  the  task  of  the  future,  — to  bring  to 
ever  richer  and  fuller  development  all  the  stirrings  of  human 
nature,  and  to  realise  in  living  unity  the  ripe  fruits  of  the  historical 
development.  In  the  consciousness  of  this  task  of  the  "  world- 
literature,"  far  from  all  the  pride  of  the  meaner  Enlightenment, 
full  of  the  presage  and  anticipation  of  a  new  epoch,  Schiller  could 
call  out,  in  valedictory  to  the  "philosophical  century,"  the  joyful 
words:  — 

"  Wie  schon,  o  Mensch,  mit  deinem  Palmenzweige 

Stehst  du  an  des  Jahrhunderts  Neige 

In  edler,  stoker  Mannlichkeit  I "  a 

1  With  Ms  arguments,  though  in  part  of  another  opinion,  St.  Martin  the 
Mystic  attacked  the  crude  presentation  of  CondiUac's  doctrine  bv  Garat  •  cf. 
Seances  des  Ecoles  Normales,  HI.  61  ff. 

2  In  rude  paraphrase : 

How  fair,  0  man,  with  victory's  palm, 
Thou  standest  at  the  century's  wane 
In  noble  pride  of  manliness. 


PART  YI. 

THE  GERMAN  PHILOSOPHY. 

To  the  literature  cited  on  pp.  348  and  437,  we  add :  — 

H.  M.  Chalybaeus,  Historische  JEntwicklung  der  speculativen  Philosophie  von 

Kant  bis  Hegel.    Dresden,  1837.     [Tr.  Edin.  and  Andover,  1854.] 
F.  K.  Biedermann,  Die  deutsche  Philosophie  von  Kant  lis  auf  unsere   Tage. 

Leips.  1842  f . 
K.  L.  Michelet,  JEntwickelungsgeschichte  der  neuesten  deutschen  Philosophie. 

Berlin,  1843. 

C.  Fortlage,  Genetische  Geschichte  der  Philosophie  seit  Kant.    Leips.  1852. 
0.  Liebmann,  Kant  und  die  Epigonen.    Stuttgart,  1865. 
Fr.  Harms,  Die  Philosophie  seit  Kant.    Berlin,  1876. 
A.  S.  Willm,  Histoire  de  la  Philosophie  Allemande  depute  Kant  jusgu'a  Hegel. 

Paris,  1846  f£. 

H.  Lotze,  Geschichte  der  ^Esthetik  in  Deutschland.    Munich,  1868. 
E.  Flint,  Philosophy  of  History  in  Europe,  I.    Edin.  and  Lond.  1874. 
R.  Fester,  Rousseau  und  die  deutsche  Geschichtsphilosophie.     Stuttgart,  1890. 
[J.  Eoyce,  The  Spirit  of  Modern  Philosophy.    Boston,  1892.] 

A  fortunate  union  of  various  intellectual  movements  produced 
in  Germany,  during  the  close  of  the  preceding  and  at  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century,  a  bloom  of  philosophy,  which  in  the  history 
of  European  thought  can  be  compared  only  with  the  great  develop- 
ment of  Greek  philosophy  from  Socrates  to  Aristotle.  In  a'  devel- 
opment, powerful  alike  in  its  intensity  and  extent,  the  German 
mind  during  the  short  span  of  four  decades  (1780-1820)  produced  a 
wealth  of  systems  of  philosophical  Weltanschauung,  grandly  pro- 
jected on  all  sides,  such  as  has  at  no  other  time  been  compressed 
within  so  narrow  a  space ;  and  in  all  of  these  the  thoughts  of  pre- 
ceding philosophy  combine  to  form  characteristic  and  impressive 
structures.  They  appear  in  their  totality  as  the  ripe  fruit  of  a  long 
growth,  out  of  which  germs  of  a  new  development,  as  yet  scarcely 
recognisable,  are  to  spring. 

This  brilliant  phenomenon  had  its  general  cause  in  the  incompar- 
able vigour  and  spirit  with  which  the  German  nation  at  that  time 
took  up  again  with  new  strength,  and  carried  to  its  completion,  the 
movement  of  civilisation  which  began  in  the  Eenaissance  and  had 

529 


530  The  German  Philosophy.  [PART  VL 

been  interrupted  by  external  force.  Germany  attained  the  summit 
of  its  inner  development  at  the  same  time  that  its  outer  history 
reached  its  lowest  condition,  —  a  process  that  has  no  equal  in  history. 
"When  it  lay  politically  powerless,  it  created  its  world-conquering 
thinkers  and  poets.  Its  victorious  power,  however,  lay  just  in  the 
league  between  philosophy  and  poetry.  The  contemporaneousness  of 
Kant  and  Goethe,  and  the  combination  of  their  ideas  by  Schiller,  — 
these  are  the  decisive  characteristics  of  the  time. 

The  history  of  philosophy  at  this  point  is  most  intimately  inter- 
woven with  that  of  general  literature,  and  the  lines  of  mutual  rela- 
tion and  stimulus  run  continuously  back  and  forth.  This  appears 
characteristically  in  the  heightened  and  finally  decisive  significance 
which  fell  in  this  connection  to  the  problems  and  conceptions  of 
esthetics.  Philosophy  found  thus  opened  before  her  a  new  world, 
into  which  she  had  hitherto  had  but  occasional  glimpses,  and  of 
which  she  now  took  possession  as  of  the  Promised  Land.  In  their 
matter  as  well  as  their  form,  aesthetic  principles  gained  the  mastery, 
and  the  motives  of  scientific  thought  became  interwoven  with  those 
of  artistic  vision  to  produce  grand  poetical  creations  in  the  sphere 
of  abstract  thought. 

The  ensnaring  magic  which  literature  thus  exercised  upon  philos- 
ophy rested  mainly  upon  its  historical  universality.  With  Herder 
and  Goethe  begins  what  we  call,  after  them,  world-literature;  the 
conscious  "working  out  of  true  culture  from  the  appropriation 
of  all  the  great  thought-creations  of  all  human  history.  The  Ko- 
mantie  School  appears  in  Germany  as  the  representative  of  this 
work.  And,  in  analogy  to  this,  philosophy  also  developed  out  of  a 
wealth  of  historical  suggestions ;  it  resorted  with  conscious  deep- 
ening of  thought  to  the  ideas  of  antiquity  and  of  the  Renaissance, 
it  plunged  intelligently  into  what  the  Enlightenment  had  shown, 
and  ended  in  Hegel  by  understanding  itself  as  the  systematically 
penetrating  and  formative  comprehension  of  all  that  the  human 
mind  had  hitherto  thought. 

But  for  this  mighty  work  it  needed  a  new  conceptional  basis, 
without  which  all  those  suggestions  from  general  literature  would 
have  remained  without  effect.  This  philosophical  power  to  master 
the  ideal  material  of  history  dwelt  within  the  doctrine  of  Kant,  and 
this  is  its  incomparably  high  historical  importance.  Kant,  by  the 
newness  and  the  greatness  of  his  points  of  view,  prescribed  to  the 
succeeding  philosophy  not  only  its  problems,  but  also  the  means  for 
their  solution.  His  is  the  mind  that  determines  and  controls  on  all 
sides.  The  work  of  his  immediate  successors,  in  which  his  new 
principle  unfolded  itself  in  all  directions  and  finished  its  life  histor- 


The  German  Philosophy.  531 

ically  with  an  assimilation  of  earlier  systems,  is  best  comprehended 
in  accordance  with  its  most  important  characteristic,  under  the  name 
of  Idealism. 

Hence  we  treat  the  history  of  the  German  Philosophy  in  two 
chapters,  of  which  the  first  embraces  Kant,  and  the  second  the  de- 
velopment of  idealism.  In  the  thought  symphony  of  those  forty 
years  the  Kantian  doctrine  forms  the  theme,  and  idealism  its 
development. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  CEITIQTJE  OF  EJSASON. 

C.  L.  Reinhold,  Briefe  liber  die  Kantische  Philosophic  (Deutsch.  Merkur, 

17861).    Leips.  1790ft 

V.  Cousin,  Lemons  sitr  la  Philosophic  de  Rant.    Paris,  1842. 
31.  Desdouiis,  La  Philosuphie  de  Kant,  d'apres  les  Trois  Critiques.  Paris,  1876. 
E.  Caird,  The  Philosophy  of  Kant.    Lond.  1876. 
[E.  Caird,  The   Critical  Philosophy  of  I.  Kant,  Glasgow,  Lond.,  and  N.Y., 

2  vols.,  1889.] 

C.  Cantoni,  Em.  Kant  (3  vols.).  Milan,  1879-1884. 
W.  Wallace,  Kant.  Oxford,  Edin.,  and  Lond.  1882. 
J,  B.  Meyer,  KanVs  Psychologic.  Berlin,  1870. 

THE  pre-eminent  position  of  the  Konigsberg  philosopher  rests 
upon  the  fact  that  he  took  up  into  himself  the  various  motives  of 
thought  in  the  literature  of  the  Enlightenment,  and  by  their  recipro- 
cal supplementation  matured  a  completely  new  conception  of  the 
problem  and  procedure  of  philosophy.  He  passed  through  the 
school  of  the  Wolffian  metaphysics  and  through  an  acquaintance 
with  the  German  popular  philosophers;  he  plunged  into  Hume's 
profound  statement  of  problems,  and  was  enthusiastic  for  Bousseau's 
gospel  of  Mature ;  the  mathematical  rigour  of  the  Newtonian  natural 
philosophy,  the  fineness  of  the  psychological  analysis  of  the  origin 
of  human  ideas  and  volitions  found  in  English  literature,  Deism 
from  Toland  and  Shaffcesbury  to  Voltaire,  the  honourable  spirit  of 
freedom  with  which  the  French  Enlightenment  urged  the  improve- 
ment of  political  and  social  conditions, —  all  these  had  found  in  the 
young  Kant  a  true  co-worker,  full  of  conviction,  who  with  a  rich 
knowledge  of  the  world  and  admirable  sagacity,  and  also,  where  it 
was  in  place,  with  taste  and  wit,  though  far  from  all  self-compla- 
cency and  boasting,  united  typically  within  himself  the  best  features 
of  the  Enlightenment. 

But  it  was  in  connection  with  the  difficulties  of  the  problem  of 
"knowledge  that  he  wrought  out  from  all  these  foundation  elements 
the  work  which  gave  him  his  peculiar  significance.  The  more  he 

532 


CHAP.  1.]  The  Critique  of  Reason.  533 

had  originally  prized  metaphysics  just  because  it  claimed  to  give  scien- 
tific certainty  to  moral  and  religious  convictions,  the  more  lasting 
was  its  working  upon  him  when  he  was  forced  to  become  convinced 
by  his  own  progressive  criticism  in  his  constant  search  for  truth, 
how  little  the  rationalistic  school  system  satisfied  that  claim  which 
it  made.  But  the  more,  also,  was  his  vision  sharpened  for  the 
limitations  of  that  philosophy  which  empiricism  developed  by  the 
aid  of  psychological  method.  In  studying  David  Hume  this  came 
to  his  consciousness  in  such  a  degree  that  he  grasped  eagerly  for  the 
aid  which  the  Nouveaux  Ussais  of  Leibniz  seemed  to  offer  toward 
making  a  metaphysical  science  possible.  But  the  epistemological 
system,  which  he  erected  upon  the  principle  of  virtual  innateness 
extended  to  mathematics  (cf.  pp.  465  f.  and  485  f.),  very  soon  proved 
its  untenability,  and  this  led  him  to  the  tedious  investigations 
which  occupied  him  in  the  period  from  1770  to  1780,  and  which 
found  their  conclusion  in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason. 

The  essentially  new  and  decisive  in  this  was  that  Kant  recog- 
nised the  inadequacy  of  the  psychological  method  for  the  solution  of 
philosophical  problems,1  and  completely  separated  the  questions 
which  surround  the  origin  and  the  actual  development  of  man's 
rational"  activities,  from  those  which  relate  to  their  value.  He  shared 
permanently  with  the  Enlightenment  the  tendency  to  take  the 
starting-point  of  his  investigations,  not  in  our  apprehension  of 
things,  which  is  influenced  by  most  various  presuppositions,  but 
in  considering  the  reason  itself;  but  he  found  in  this  latter 
point  of  view  universal  judgments  which  extend  beyond  all  expe- 
rience, whose  validity  can  neither  be  made  dependent  upon  the 
exhibition  of  their  actual  formation  in  consciousness,  nor  grounded 
upon  any  form  of  innateness.  It  is  his  task  to  fix  upon  these  judg- 
ments throughout  the  entire  circuit  of  human  rational  activity,  in 
order  from  their  content  itself  and  from  their  relations  to  the 
system  of  the  rational  life  determined  by  them,  to  understand  their 
authority  or  the  limits  of  their  claims. 

This  task  Kant  designated  as  the  Critique  of  Reason,  and  this 
method  as  the  critical  or  transcendental  method;  the  subject-matter 
to  which  this  method  was  to  be  applied  he  considered  to  be  the 
investigation  as  to  the  possibility  of  synthetic  judgments  a  priori? 

1  Cf .  the  beginning  of  the  transcendental  deduction  of  the  pure  conceptions 
of  the  understanding  in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  II.  118  ff. 

2  This  expression  took  form  gradually  in  connection  with  the  origination  of 
the  Kr.  d.  r.  F.  through  the  importance  which  the  conception  of  synthesis 
acquired.    Cf .  §  38.     Kant  develops  the  ahove  general  formula  in  his  introduc- 
tion to  the  Critique  in  the  following  way :  judgments  are  analytical  when  the 
relation  of  the  predicate  to  the  subject,  which  is  therein  asserted,  has  its  ground 


534  The  German  Philosophy.  [PART  VL 

This  rests  upon  the  fundamental  insight  that  the  validity  of  the 
principles  of  reason  is  entirely  independent  of  how  they  rise  in  the 
empirical  consciousness  (whether  of  the  individual  or  of  the  race). 
All  philosophy  is  dogmatic,  which  seeks  to  prove  or  even  merely  to 
judge  of  this  validity  by  showing  the  genesis  of  those  principles 
out  of  elements  of  sensation,  or  by  their  innateness,  whatever  the 
metaphysical  assumptions  in  the  case  may  be.  The  critical  method, 
or  transcendental  philosophy,  examines  the  form  in  which  these 
principles  actually  make  their  appearance,  in  connection  with  the 
capacity  which  they  possess  of  being  employed  universally  and 
necessarily  in  experience. 

Prom  this  there  followed  for  Kant  the  task  of  a  systematic  inves- 
tigation of  reason's  functions  in  order  to  fix  upon  their  principles, 
and  to  examine  the  validity  of  these ;  for  the  critical  method,  which 
was  first  gained  in  episternology,  extended  its  significance  of  itself 
to  the  other  spheres  of  the  reason's  activity.  But  here  the  newly 
acquired  scheme  of  psychological  division  (cf.  p.  512,  note  6)  proved 
authoritative  for  his  analysis  and  treatment  of  philosophical  problems, 
As  thinking,  feeling,  and  willing  were  distinguished  as  the  funda- 
mental forms  in  which  reason  expresses  itself,  so  the  criticism  of 
reason  must  keep  to  the  division,  thus  given ;  it  examined  separately 
the  principles  ofknoicledge,  of  morality,  and  of  the  working  of  things 
upon  the  reason  through  the  medium  of  feeling,  —  a  province  inde- 
pendent of  the  other  two. 

Kant's  doctrine  is  accordingly  divided  into  a  theoretical,  a  practi- 
cal, and  an  cesthetical  part,  and  his  main  works  are  the  three  Critiques, 
of  the  Pure  Reason,  of  the  Practical  Reason,  and  of  the  Judgment. 

Zmmantiel  Kant,  torn  April  22,  1724,  at  Konigsberg,  Prussia,  the  son  of 
a  saddler,  was  educated  at  the  Pietistic  Collegium  ITridericianum,  and  attended 
in  17-40  the  University  of  his  native  city  to  study  theology ;  but  subjects  of 
natural  science  and  philosophy  gradually  attracted  him.  After  concluding  his 
studies,  he  was  a  private  teacher  in  yarious  families  in  the  vicinity  of  Konigs- 
berg  from  1746  to  1755,  habilitated  in  the  autumn  of  1755  as  Pnvatdocenfm 

in  the  concept  itself  which  forms  the  subject  ("explicative  judgments"); 
synthetical,  when  this  is  not  the  case,  so  that  the  addition  of  the  predicate  to 
the  subject  must  have  its  ground  in  something  else  which  is  logically  different 
from  both  ("ampliative  judgments").  This  ground  is,  in  the  case  of  syn- 
thetical judgments  a  posteriori  ("judgments  of  perception,"  cf.  Prolegom- 
ena, §  18,  III.  215 1),  the  act  of  perception  itself ;  in  the  case  of  synthetical 
judgments  a  priori,  on  the  contrary,  i.e.  of  the  universal  principles  employed 
for^the^ interpretation  of  experience,  it  is  something  else ;  what  it  is  is  just  that 
which  is  to  be  sought.  A  priori  is,  with  Kant,  not  a  psychological,  but  a  purely 
epistemological  mark  j  it  means  not  a  chronological  priority  to  experience,  but 
a  universality  and  necessity  of  validity  in  principles  of  reason  which  really  traiir 
scends  all  experience,  and  is  not  capable  of  being  proved  by  any  experience  [i.e. 
a  IngicaJ,  not  a  chronological  priority].  No  one  who  does  not  make  this  clear 
to  himself  has  any  hope  of  understanding  Kant. 


CHAP.  1.]  Tlie  Critique  of  Reason.  535 

the  philosophical  faculty  of  Konigsberg  University,  and  was  made  full  Professor 
there  in  1770.  The  cheerful,  brilliant  animation"  and  versatility  of  his  middle 
years  gave  place  with  time  to  an  earnest,  rigorous  conception  of  life  and  to  the 
control  of  a  strict  consciousness  of  duty,  which  manifested  itself  in  his  unremit- 
ting labour  upon  his  great  philosophical  task,  in  his  masterful  fulfilment  of  the 
duties  01  his  academic  profession,  and  in  the  inflexible  rectitude  of  his  life,  which 
was  not  without  a  shade  of  the  pedantic.  The  uniform  course  of  his  solitary  and 
modest  scholar's  life  was  not  disturbed  by  the  brilliancy  of  the  fame  that  fell  upon 
his  life's  evening,  and  only  transiently  by  the  dark  shadow,  that  the  hatred  of 
orthodoxy,  which  had  obtained  control  under  Frederick  William  II. ,  threatened 
to  cast  upon  his  path  by  a  prohibition  upon  his  philosophy.  He  died  from 
weakness  of  old  age  on  the  12th  of  February,  1804. 

Kant's  life  and  personality  after  his  earlier  works  has  been  drawn  most 
completely  by  Kuno  Fischer  (GescJi.  cl  neueren  Philos.,  III.  and  IV.,  4th  ed. 
Heidelb.  1809)  ;  E.  Arnoldt  has  treated  of  his  youth  and  the  first  part  of  his 
activity  as  a  teacher  (Konigsberg,  1882);  [J.  H.  W.  Stuckenberg,  Life  of  Kant, 
Lond.  1882]. 

The  change  which  was  taking  place  in  the  philosopher  toward  the  end  of  the 
seventh  decade  of  the  eighteenth  century  appears  especially  in  his  activity  as 
a  writer.  His  earlier  "  pre- critical "  works  (of  which  those  most  important 
philosophically  have  been  already  cited,  p.  445)  are  distinguished  by  easy- 
flowing,  graceful  presentation,  and  present  themselves  as  admirable  occasional 
writings  of  a  man  of  fine  thought  who  is  well  versed  in  the  world.  His  later 
works  show  the  laboriousness  of  his  thought  and  the  pressure  of  the  contending 
motifs,  both  in  the  form  of  the  investigation  with  its  circumstantial  heaviness 
and  artificial  architectonic  structure,  and  in  the  formation  of  his  sentences, 
which  are  highly  involved,  and  frequently  interrupted  by  restriction.  Minerva 
frightened  away  the  graces  ;  but  instead,  the  devout  tone  of  a  deep  thought  and 
an  earnest  conviction  which  here  and  there  rises  to  powerful  pathos  and  weighty 
expression  hovers  over  his  later  writings. 

For  Kant's  theoretical  development,  the  antithesis  between  the  Leibnizo- 
Wolffian  metaphysics  and  the  Newtonian  natural  philosophy  was  at  the  begin- 
ning of  decisive  importance.  The  former  had  been  brought  to  his  attention  at 
the  University  by  Knutzen  (of.  p.  444),  the  latter  by  Teske,  and  in  his  growing 
alienation  from  the  philosophical  school-system,  his  interest  for  natural  science, 
to  which  for  the  time  he  seemed  to  desire  to  devote  himself  entirely,  co-operated 
strongly.  His  first  treatise,  1747,  was  entitled  Thoughts  upon  the  True  Estima- 
tion of  the  Vis  Viva^  a  controverted  question  between  Cartesian  and  Leibnizian 
physicists ;  his  great  work  upon  the  General  Natural  History  and  Theory  of 
the  Heavens  was  a  natural  science  production  of  the  first  rank,  and  besides 
small  articles,  his  promotion  treatise,  De  Igne  (1755),  which  propounded  a 
hypothesis  as  to  imponderables,  belongs  here.  His  activity  as  a  teacher  also 
showed,  even  on  into  his  later  period,  a  preference  for  the  subjects  of  natural 
sciences,  especially  for  physical  geography  and  anthropology. 

In  theoretical  philosophy  Kant  passed  through  many  reversals  (mancherlei 
Umlcippungen}  of  his  standpoint  (cl  §§  33  and  34).  At  the  beginning  (in  the 
Physical  Monadology}  he  had  sought  to  adjust  the  opposition  between  Leibniz 
and  Newton,  in  their  doctrine  of  space,  by  the  ordinary  distinction  of  things-in- 
themselves  (which  are  to  be  known  metaphysically),  and  phenomena,  or  things 
as  they  appear  (which  are  to  be  investigated  physically)  ;  he  then  (in  the  writ- 
ings after  1760)  attained  to  the  insight  that  a  metaphysics  in  the  sense  of 
rationalism  is  impossible,  that  philosophy  and  mathematics  must  have  diametri- 
cally opposed  methods,  and  that  philosophy  as  the  empirical  knowledge  of  the 
given  cannot  step  beyond  the  circle  of  experience.  But  while  he  allowed  him- 
self to  be  comforted  by  Voltaire  and  Rousseau  for  this  falling  away  of  meta- 
physical insight,  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  "natural  feeling"  for  the 
right  and  holy,  he  was  still  working  with  Lambert  at  an  improvement  of  the 
method  of  metaphysics,  and  when  he  found  this,  as  he  hoped,  by  the  aid  of 
Leibniz's  Npuveam  Essais,  he  constructed  in  bold  lines  the  mystico-dogmatic 
system  of  his  Inaugural  Dissertation. 

The  progress  from  there  on  to  the  System  of  Critidsm  is  obscure  and  contro- 
verted. Cf .  concerning  this  development,  in  which  the  time  in  which  he  was 
influenced  by  Hume  and  the  direction,  which  that  influence  took  are  especially 


536  German  Philosophy :  Kant's  Critique.       [PART  VL 

in  question,  the  following:  Fr.  Michelis,  Kant  wr  und  nach  1770  (Braunsberg, 
1871)  •  Fr  Panlsen,  Versuck  einer  Enticicklungsgeschichte  der  kantischen 
Erkenntnisstheorie  (Leips.  1875) ;  A.  Riehl,  Geschichte  und  Methode  des  phi- 
losnphischen  Kriticismus  (Leips.  1876);  B.  Erdmann,  KanVs  Ariticismus 
(Leips.  1878);  W.  Windelband,  Die  verschiedenen  Phasen  der  kantischen 
Lehre  torn  Ding-an-sich  (Vierteljahrschr.  f.  wissensch.  Philos.,  1876).  Cf.  also 
the  writings  by  K.  Dieterich  on  Kant's  relation  to  Newton  and  Rousseau  under 
the  title  Die'kantische  Philosophic  in  ihrer  inneren  Entwicklungsgeschichte, 
Freiburg  i.  B.  1885. 

From  the  adjustment  of  the  various  tendencies  of  Kant's  thought  proceeded 
the  "Doomsday-book"  of  German  philosophy,  the  Critique  of  Pure  Season 
(Riga.  1761).  It  received  a  series  of  changes  in  the  second  edition  (1787),  and 
these  became  the  object  of  very  vigorous  controversies  after  attention  had  been 
called  to  them  by  Schelling  (W.,  Y.  196)  and  Jacobi  ( W.,  II.  291).  Cf.  concern- 
ing this,  the  writings  cited  above.  H.  Vaihinger,  Commentar  zu  K.  K.  d.  r.  Y. 
(Vol.  L,  Stuttgart,  1887  [Vol.  II.,  1892]),  has  diligently  collected  the  literature. 
Separate  editions  of  the  Kritik,  by  K.  Kehrbach,  upon  the  basis  of  the  first  edi- 
tion, and  by  B.  Erdmann  [and  E.  Adickes]  upon  the  basis  of  the  second 
edition.  [Eng.  tr.  of  the  Critique  (2d  ed.),  by  Meiklejohn,  in  the  Bonn  Library, 
and  by  Max  Muller  (text  of  1st  ed.  with  supplements  giving  changes  of  2d  ed.), 
Lond.  1881 ;  Paraphrase  and  Commentary  by  Mahafiy  and  Bernard,  2d  ed., 
Lond.  and  X.Y.  1889 ;  partial  translations  in  J".  H.  Stirling's  Text-book  to  Kantt 
and  in  Watson's  Selections,  Lond.  and  N.Y.  1888.  This  last  contains  also  ex- 
tracts from  the  ethical  writings  and  from  the  Critique  of  Judgment.'] 

The  additional  main  writings  of  Kant  in  his  critical  period  are :  Prolegomena 
zu  dner  j^den  kunftigen  Metaphysik,  1783;  Grundlegung  zur  Metaphysik  der 
Sitten,  1785;  Metaphysische  Anfangsgrunde  der  Naturwissenschaft,  1785; 
Kritik  der  praktischen  Vernunft,  1788 ;  Kritik  der  Urtheilskraft,  1790 ;  Die 
Religion  innerhalb  der  Grenzen  der  llossen  Vernunft,  1793;  Zum  ewigen  Frie- 
den,  1795 ;  Metaphysische  Anfangsgrunde  der  Rechts-  und  Tugendlehre,  1797  ; 
Der  Streit  der  Fakultaten,  1798 ;  [Eng.  tr.  of  the  Prolegomena,  by  Mahaffy  and 
Bernard,  Lond.  and  N.Y.  1889 ;  of  the  Prolegomena  and  Metaphysical  Founda- 
tions of  Xatnml  Science,  by  Bax,  Bohn  Library ;  of  the  ethical  writings,  includ- 
ing the  first  part  of  the  Religion  within  the  Bounds  of  Pure  Reason,  by  T.  K. 
Abbott,  4th  ed.,  Lond.  1889 ;  of  the  Critique  of  Judgment,  by  J.  H.  Bernard, 
Lond.  and  N.Y.  1892;  of  the  Philosophy  of  Law,  by  W.  Hastie,  Edin.  1887; 
Principles  of  Politics,  including  the  essay  on  Perpetual  Peace,  by  W.  Hastie, 
Edin.  1891. "  The  contents  of  Kant's  Essays  and  Treatises,  2  vols.,  Lond.  1798, 
is  given  in  Ueberwg,  II.  138  (Eng.  tr.)]. 

Complete  editions  of  his  works  have  been  prepared  by  K,  Rosenkranz  and 
P.  W.  Schubert  (13  vols.,  Leips.  1833  ff.),  G.  Hartenstein  (10  vols.,  Leips. 
1838  f.,  and  recently  8  vols.,  Leips.  1867  ff.),  and  J.  v.  Kirchmann  (in  the 
Philos.  Biblioth.).1  They  contain,  besides  his  smaller  articles,  etc.,  his  lectures 
upon  logic,  pedagogy,  etc.,  and  his  letters.  A  survey  of  all  that  has  been 
written  by  Kant  (including  also  the  manuscript  of  the  Transition  from  Meta- 
physics to  Physics,  which  is  without  value  for  the  interpretation  of  his  critical 
system)  is  found  in  Ueberweg-Heinze,  in.  §  24 ;  there,  too,  the  voluminous 
literature  is  cited  with  great  completeness.  Of  this  we  can  give  here  only  a 
choice  of  the  best  and  most  instructive ;  a  survey  of  the  more  valuable  literature, 
arranged  according  to  its  material,  is  offered  by  the  article  Kant,  by  W.  Windel- 
band  in  Ersch  und  Qruber's  Enc.  [The  Journal  of  Speculative  Philosophy 
contains  numerous  articles  upon  Kant.  We  may  mention  also  Adamson,  The 
Philosophy  of  Kant,  Edin.  1879 ;  art  Kant,  in  Enc.  Brit.,  by  the  same  author ; 
arts,  in  Mnd,  Vol.  VL,  by  J.  Watson,  and  in  Philos.  Review,  1893,  by  J.  G. 
Schumann. — E.  Adickes  has  begun  an  exhaustive  bibliography  of  the  German 
literature  in  the  Philos.  Review,  1893.] 

i  The  citations  refer  to  the  older  Hartenstein  edition  In  the  case  of  many 
works  the  convenient  editions  by  K.  Kehrbach  (Reclam.  Bi&.)  make  easy  the 
transfer  of  the  citations  to  the  other  editions. 


CHAP.  1,  §  38.]  Object  of  Knowledge.  537 


§  38.  The  Object  of  Knowledge. 

Erh.  Schmid,  Eritik  der  reinen  Vernunft  im  Grundrisse.    Jena,  1786. 

H.  Cohen,  Kantfs  Theorie  der  Erfahrung.    Berlin,  1871. 

A.  Holder,  Darstellung  der  kantischen  Erkenntnisstheorie.    Tubingen,  1873. 

A.  Stadler,  Die  Grundsdtse  der  reinen  Erkenntnisstheorie  in  der  kantischen 

Philosophic.    Leips.  1876. 
Job.  Volkelt,  I.  KanV  s  Erkenntnisstheorie  nach  ihren  Grundprincipien  analysirt. 

Leips.  1879. 
E.  Pfieiderer,  Kantischer  Kriticismus  und  englische  Philosophic.    Tubingen, 

1881. 

J.  Hutchinson  Stirling,  Text-Book  to  Kant.    Edin.  and  Lond.  1881. 
Seb.  Turbiglio,  Analisi,  Storia,  Critica  della  Ragione  Pura.    Eome,  1881. 
G.  S.  Morris,  Kant's  Critique  of  Pure  Season,  Chicago,  1882. 
Pr.  Staudinger,  Xoumena.    Darmstadt,  1884. 
[K.  Pischer's  Criticism  of  Kant,  trans,  by  Hough.    Lond.  1888.] 
[J.  Watson,  Kant  and  his  English  Critics.     Lond.  1886.] 
[H.   Yaihinger,    Commentar  zu  Kant's  Kritik  d.   r.   Vernunft,   II.    (on  the 

JSsthetic).    Stuttgart,  1892.] 

Kant's  theory  of  knowledge  followed  with  tenacious  consistency 
from  the  statement  which  modern  Terminism  had  given  to  problems 
of  knowledge  (cf.  pp.  466  and  482).  The  philosopher  had  grown  up 
in  the  naive  realism  of  the  Wolffian  school,  which  without  close 
scrutiny  regarded  logical  necessity  and  reality  as  identical ;  and  his 
liberation  from  the  ban  of  this  school  consisted  in  his  'seeing  the 
impossibility  of  determining  out  of  "  pure  reason,"  i.e.  through  mere 
logical  operations  with  conceptions,  anything  whatever  as  to  the 
existence x  or  the  causal  relation 2  of  real  things.  The  metaphysi- 
cians are  the  architects  of  many  a  world  of  thought  in  the  air; 8  but 
their  structures  have  no  relation  to  reality.  Kant  now  sought  this 
relation  first  in  the  conceptions  given  through  experience,  since  the 
genetic  connection  of  these  with  the  reality  to  be  known  by  science 
seemed  immediately  evident,  but  he  was  shaken  from  this  "dog- 
matic slumber"  by  Hume,*  who  demonstrated  that  precisely  the 
constitutive  Forms  of  the  conceptional  knowledge  of  reality,  espec- 
ially the  Form  of  causality,  are  not  given  in  perception,  but  are 

1  Cf.  Kant's  Sole  Possible  Proof  for  the  Existence  of  God. 

2  Cf.  the  Essay  on  Negative  Magnitudes,  especially  the  conclusion  (W.,  I. 

59  fi.)- 

8  Dreams  of  a  Ghost  Seer,  I.  3 ;  W.,  III.  75. 

4  In  connection  with  this  frequently  mentioned  confession  of  Kant,  it  is  for 
the  most  part  disregarded  that  he  characterised  as  " dogmatic"  not  only 
rationalism,  hut  also  the  empiricism  of  the  earlier  theory  of  knowledge,  and 
that  the  classical  passage  at  which  he  uses  this  expression  (in  the  preface  to 
the  Prolegomena,  W.,  III.  170  1")  does  not  contrast  Hume  with  Wolff,  but  with 
Locke,  Reid,  and  Beattie  only.  The  dogmatism  from  which,  therefore, 
Kant  declared  that  he  had  been  freed  through  Hume  was  that  of  empiricism. 


538  German  Philosophy:  Kant's  Critique.        [PART  VI. 

products  of  the  mechanism  of  association  without  any  demonstrable 
relation  to  the  real,  Beality  was  not  to  be  known  from  the  «  given  " 
conceptions,  either.  And  then  Kant,  prompted  by  Leibniz,  deliber- 
ated once  more  whether  the  purified  conception  of  virtual  innate- 
ness,  with  the  aid  of  the  -pre-established  harmony"  grounded  in 
God  between  the  monad  which  knows  and  the  monad  which  is  to  be 
known,  might  not  solve  the  mystery  of  the  relation  of  thought  and 
Being,  and  in  his  Inaugural  Dissertation  he  had  convinced  himself 
that  this  was  the  solution  of  the  problem.  But  cool  reflection 
soon  showed  that  this  pre-established  harmony  was  a  metaphysical 
assumption,  incapable  of  proof  and  unable  to  support  a  scientific 
system  of  philosophy.  So  it  appeared  that  neither  empiricism  nor 
rationalism  had  solved  the  cardinal  question,  —  the  relation  of  knowl- 
edge to  its  object,  in  what  does  it  consist  and  on  what  does  it  rest  ? l 

1.  Kant's  own,  long-weighed  answer  to  this  question  is  the  Critique 
of  Pure  Reason.  In  its  final  systematic  form,  which  found  an  ana- 
lytical explication  in  the  Prolegomena,  his  criticism  proceeds  from 
ihsfactof  the  actual  presence  of  synthetic  judgments  a  priori  in  three 
theoretical  sciences ;  viz.  in  mathematics,  in  pure  natural  science,  and 
in  metaphysics;  and  the  design  is  to  examine  their  claims  to  universal 
and  necessary  validity. 

In  this  formulation  of  the  problem  the  insight  into  the  nature  of 
reason's  activity,  which  Kant  had  gained  in  the  course  of  his  critical 
development,  came  into  play.  This  activity  is  synthesis,  i.e.  the 
uniting  or  unifying  of  a  manifold.2  This  conception  of  synthesis 8  is 
a  new  element  which  separates  the  Critique  from  the  Inaugural  Dis- 
sertation; in  it  Kant  found  the  common  element  between  the  Forms 
of  the  sensibility  and  those  of  the  understanding,  which  in  his 
exposition  of  1770  were  regarded  as  entirely  separate,  in  accordance 
with  their  characteristic  attributes  of  receptivity  and  spontaneity 
respectively.4  It  now  appeared  that  the  synthesis  of  the  theoretical 

1  Kant's  letter  to  Marcus  Herz,  Feb.  21,  1772. 

-  This  frequently  repeated  definition  makes  the  fundamental  conception  of 
of  the  critical  doctrine  of  knowledge  appear  in  closest  proximity  to  the  funda- 
mental metaphysical  conception  of  the  Monadology.  Cf.  §  31,  11. 

8  TVTiich  is  introduced  in  the  Transcendental  Analytic  in  connection  with  the 
doctrine  of  the  categories.  Sections  10  and  16  (of  the  first  edition  of  the 
Critique}. 

4  Hence  the  conception  of  synthesis  in  the  present  form  of  the  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason  comes  in  collision  with  the  psychological  presuppositions  which 
passed  over  to  the  Critique  out  of  the  German  working-over  of  the  Inaugural 
Dissertation,  -which  forms  the  Transcendental  ^Esthetic  and  the  beginning  of  the 
Transcendental  Logic  (this  was  originally  to  have  appeared  immediately  after 
1770  under  the  title  Limits  of  the  Sensibility  and  of  the  Understanding').  In 
the  Prolegomena  these  psychological  presuppositions  became  obliterated. 
Earlier,  sensibility  and  understanding  were  set  over  against  each  other  as 
receptivity  and  spontaneity ;  but  space  and  time,  the  pure  Forms  of  the  sensi- 


CHAP.  1,  §  38.]       Object  of  Knowledge :  Synthesis.  589 

reason  completes  itself  in  three  stages :  the  combination  of  sensa- 
tions into  perceptions  takes  place  in  the  Forms  of  space  and  time ; 
the  combination  of  the  perceptions  into  experience  of  the  natural 
world  of  reality  takes  place  by  means  of  concepts  of  the  understand- 
ing ;  the  combination  of  judgments  of  experience  into  metaphysical 
knowledge  takes,  place  by  means  of  general  principles,  which  Kant 
calls  Ideas.  These  three  stages  of  the  knowing  activity  develop, 
therefore,  as  different  Forms  of  synthesis,  of  which  each  higher 
stage  has  the  lower  for  its  content.  The  critique  of  reason  has  to 
investigate  what  the  especial  Forms  of  this  synthesis  are  in  each 
stage,  and  in  what  their  universal  and  necessary  validity  consists. 

2.  As  regards  mathematics,  the  conception  of  the  Inaugural  Dis- 
sertation fits  aptly,  in  the  main,  into  the  critique  of  reason.  Mathe- 
matical propositions  are  synthetic ;  they  rest  in  the  last  resort  upon 
construction  in  pure  perception,  not  upon  the  development  of  con- 
ceptions. Their  necessity  and  universal  validity,  which  cannot  be 
established  by  any  experience,  is,  therefore,  to  be  explained  only  if 
an  a  priori  principle  of  perception  lies  at  their  basis.  Kant,  there- 
fore, shows  that  the  general  ideas  of  space  and  time,  to  which  all 
insights  of  geometry  and  arithmetic  relate,  are  "  pure  Forms  of  per- 
ception" or  "perceptions  a  priori."  The  ideas  of  the  one  infinite 
space  and  of  the  one  infinite  time  do  not  rest  upon  the  combination 
of  empirical  perceptions  of  finite  spaces  and  times;  but  with  the 
very  attributes  of  limit  in  the  "beside-of-one-another"  and  "after- 
one-another"  (co-existence  and  succession),  the  whole  of  space  and 
the  whole  of  time  respectively  are  already  involved  in  the  empirical 
perception  of  particular  space  and  time  magnitudes,  which  can  accord- 
ingly be  presented  to  the  mind  only  as  parts  of  space  in  general 
and  of  time  in  general.  Space  and  time  cannot  be  "concepts," 
since  they  relate  to  an  object  which  is  only  a  single,  unique  object, 
and  which  is  not  thought  as  complete,  but  is  involved  in  an  infinite 
synthesis ;  and  further,  they  are  related  to  the  ideas  of  finite  magni- 
tudes, not  as  class-concepts  are  to  their  particular  examples,  but  as 
the  whole  to  the  part.  If  they  are,  accordingly,  pure  perceptions 
(Anschauungen),  i.e.  perceptions  not  founded  upon  empirical  percep- 
tions (  Wahrnehrnungen),  but  lying  at  the  basis  of  all  empirical  per- 
ceptions,1 then  they  .are,  as  such,  necessary ;  for  we  can  indeed  think 

bility,  were  indeed  the  principles  of  the  synthetical  ordering  of  the  sensations, 
and  thus  belonged  under  the  general  conception  of  synthesis,  i.e.  spontaneous 
unity  of  the  manifold.  Thus  the  conception  of  synthesis  hurst  the  psychological 
schema  of  the  Inaugural  Dissertation. 

1  Here  once  more  it  must  be  recalled  that  it  is  but  a  perverted  and  completely 
erroneous  conception  of  Kant  to  conceive  of  this  ** lying  at  the  basis  of"  or 
"  preceding,"  as  referring  to  time.  The  nativism,  which  holds  space  and  time 


540  G-erman  Philosophy :  Kanfs  Critique.        [PAST  YL 

'  everything  away  from  them,  but  cannot  think  them  away.  They 
are  the  given  Forms  of  pure  perception  from  which  we  cannot  escape, 
the  laics  of  relations,  in  which  alone  we  can  mentally  represent  with 
synthetic  unity  the  manifold  of  sensations.  And  further,  space  is 
the  form,  of  the  outer  sense,  time  that  of  the  inner  sense ;  all  objects 
of  the  particular  senses  are  perceived  as  spatial,  all  objects  of  self- 
perception  as  in  time. 

If,  then,  space  and  time  are  the  "unchangeable  Form  of  our  sensu- 
ous receptivity,"  cognitions  determined  by  these  two  kinds  of  per- 
ception without  any  regard  to  the  particular  empirical  content, 
possess  universal  and  necessary  validity  for  the  entire  compass  of 
all  that  we  can  perceive  and  experience.  In  the  realm  of  the  sensi- 
bility,—  so  the  "  Transcendental  JEsthetic"  teaches, — the  only 
object  of  a  priori  knowledge  is  the  Form  of  the  synthesis  of  the  man- 
ifold given  through  sensation,  —  the  law  of  arrangement  in  space  and 
time.  But  the  universality  and  necessity  of  this  knowledge  is  intel- 
ligible only  if  space  and  time  are  nothing  but  the  necessary  Forms  of 
mans  sensuous  perception.  If  they  possessed  a  reality  independent 
of  the  functions  of  perception,  the  a  priori  character  of  mathematical 
knowledge  would  be  impossible.  Were  space  and  time  themselves 
things  or  real  properties  and  relations  of  things,  then  we  could  know 
of  them  only  through  experience,  and,  therefore,  never  in  a  univer- 
sal and  necessary  way.  This  last  mode  of  knowledge  is  possible 
only  if  they  are  nothing  but  the  Form  under  which  all  things  in  our 
perception  must  appear.1  According  to  this  principle  the  a  priori 
and  the  phenomenal  become  for  Kant  interchangeable  conceptions. 
TJie  only  universal  and  necessary  element  in  man's  knowledge  is  the 
Form  under  ichich  things  appear  in  it  Eationalism  limits  itself  to 
the  Form,  and  holds  good  even  for  this  only  at  the  price  of  the 
"subjectivity"  of  the  same. 

3.  While  ELant  would  thus  have  the  spatial  and  chronological  re- 
lations of  objects  of  perception  regarded  as  wholly  a  mode  of  mental 
representation,  which  does  not  coincide  with  the  reality  of  things 
themselves,  he  distinguished  this  conception  of  their  ideality  very 
exactly  from  that  "  subjectivity  of  the  qualities  of  sense  "  which  was 
held  by  him,  as  by  all  philosophy  after  Descartes  and  Locke,  to  be 
self-evident*2  And  the  point  at  issue  here  again  is  solely  the  ground 
of  the  phenomenality.  As  regards  colour,  taste,  etc.,  the  phenome- 
nality  had  been  based,  since  the  time  of  Protagoras  and  Democritus, 

to  be  inborn  ideas,  is  un-Kantian  throughout,  and  stands  in  contradiction  to 
express  declarations  of  the  philosopher  (cf.,  e.ff.,  above,  p.  465  f.). 

1  This  thought  is  developed  \vith  especial  clearness  in  the  Prolegomena,  §  9. 

2  Cf .  Critique,  §  3,  b.  W,}  II.  68. 


CHAP.  1,  §  38.]    Object  of  Knowledge :  Space  and  Time.  541 

upon  the  difference  and  relativity  of  impressions ;  for  the  Forms  of 
space  and  time,  Kant  deduces  their  phenomenality  precisely  from 
their  invariability.  For  him,  therefore,  the  qualities  of  sense 
offered  only  an  individual  and  contingent  mode  of  representation ; 
-while  the  Forms  of  space  and  time,  on  the  other  hand,  present 
a  universal  and  necessary  mode  in  zvhich  things  appear.  All  that 
perception  contains,  is,  indeed,  not  the  true  essence  of  things,  but 
an  appearance  or  phenomenon;  but  the  contents  of  sensation  are 
"  phenomena  "  in  quite  another  sense  than  that  in  which  the  Forms 
of  space  and  time  are  such;  the  former  have  worth  only  as  the 
states  of  the  individual  subject,  the  latter  as  "  objective  "  Forms  of 
perception  for  all.  Even  on  this  ground,  therefore,  Kant,  too,  sees 
the  task  of  natural  science  to  lie  in  the  reduction  of  the  qualitative 
to  the  quantitative,  in  which  alone  necessity  and  universal  validity 
can  be  found  upon  a  mathematical  basis,  agreeing  in  this  with 
Democritus  and  Galileo ;  but  he  differed  from  his  predecessors  in 
holding  that,  philosophically  considered,  even  the  mathematical  mode 
of  representing  Nature  can  be  regarded  only  as  an  appearance  and 
phenomenon,  though  in  the  deeper  sense  of  the  word*  Sensation 
gives  an  individual  idea,  mathematical  theory  gives  a  necessary, 
universally  valid  perception  of  the  actual  world;  but  both  are 
merely  different  stages  of  the  phenomenal  appearance,  behind  which 
the  true  thing-in-itself  remains  unknown.  Space  and  time  hold 
without  exception  for  all  objects  of  perception,  but  for  nothing 
beyond ;  they  have  "  empirical  reality  "  and  "  transcendental  ideality" 

4.  The  main  advance  of  the  Critique  of  Reason  beyond  the  Inau- 
gural Dissertation  consists  in  the  fact  that  these  same  principles  are 
extended  in  a  completely  parallel  investigation  to  the  question  as 
to  the  epistemological  value  which  belongs  to  the  synthetic  Forms 
of  the  activity  of  the  understanding.1 

Natural  science  needs  besides  its  mathematical  basis  a  number  of 
general  principles  as  to  the  connection  of  things.  These  principles, 
such  as  that  every  change  must  have  its  cause,  are  of  a  synthetic 
nature,  but,  at  the  same  time,  are  not  capable  of  being  established 
by  experience,  though  they  come  to  consciousness  through  experi- 
ence, are  applied  to  experience,  and  find  there  their  confirmation. 
Of  such  principles  a  few  have  indeed  been  incidentally  propounded 
and  treated  hitherto,  and  it  remains  for  the  Critique  itself  to  dis- 
cover the  "system  of  principles,"  but  it  is  clear  that  without  this 
basis  the  knowledge  of  Nature  would  be  deprived  of  its  necessary 


1  This  parallelism  is  seen  most  plainly  by  comparing  §§9  and  14  of  the 
Prolegomena. 


542  G-erman  Philosophy :  Kant's  Critique.         [PART  VI. 

and  universal  validity.  For  "Nature"  is  not  merely  an  aggregate 
of  spatial  and  temporal  Forms,  of  corporeal  shapes  and  motions, 
but  a  connected  system,  which  we  perceive  through  our  senses,  but 
think  at  the  same  time  through  conceptions.  Kant  calls  the  faculty 
of  thinking  the  manifold  of  perception  in  synthetic  unity,  the 
Understanding;  and  the  categories  or  pure  conceptions  of  Understand- 
ing are  the  Forms  of  the  synthesis  of  the  Understanding,  just  as  space 
and  time  are  the  Forms  of  the  synthesis  of  perception. 

If  now  Nature,  as  object  of  our  knowledge,  were  a  real  connected 
system  of  things,  independent  of  the  functions  of  our  reason,  we 
could  know  of  it  only  through  experience  and  never  a  priori;  a  uni- 
versal and  necessary  knowledge  of  Mature  is  possible  only  if  our 
conceptional  Forms  of  synthesis  determine  Nature  itself.  If  Nature 
prescribed  laws  to  our  understanding,  we  should  have  only  an 
empirical,  inadequate  knowledge ;  an  a  priori  knowledge  of  Nature 
is  therefore  possible  only  if  the  case  be  reversed  and  our  understanding 
prescribes  laics  to  Nature.  But  our  understanding  cannot  determine 
Nature  in  so  far  as  it  exists  as  a  thing-in-itself,  or  as  a  system  of 
things-in-thems elves,  but  only  in  so  far  as  it  appears  in  our  thought. 
A  priori  knowledge  of  Nature  is  therefore  possible  only  if  the  con- 
nection ichich  we  think  between  perceptions  is  also  nothing  "but  our  mode 
of  ideation;  the  conceptional  relations  also,  in  which  Nature  is  an 
object  of  our  knowledge,  must  be  only  "phenomenon." 

5.  In  order  to  attain  this  result,  the  Critique  of  Reason  proceeds 
first  to  assure  itself  of  these  synthetic  Forms  of  the  understanding 
in  systematic  completeness.  Here  it  is  clear  from  the  outset  that 
we  have  not  to  do  with  those  analytic  relations  which  are  treated  'in 
formal  logic,  and  grounded  upon  the  principle  of  contradiction.  For 
these  contain  only  the  rules  for  establishing  relations  between  con- 
ceptions according  to  the  contents  already  given  within  them.  But 
such  modes  of  combination  as  are  present  when  we  affirm  the  rela- 
tion of  cause  and  effect,  or  of  substance  and  accident,  are  not  con- 
tained in  those  analytical  Forms — just  this  had  been  shown  by 
Hume.  Kant  discovers  here  the  completely  new  task  of  transcendental 
logic.1  Side  by  side  with  the  (analytic)  Forms  of  the  understanding, 
in  accordance  with  which  the  relations  of  conceptions  which  are 
given  as  to  their  contents  are  established,  appear  the  synthetic  Forms 
of  understanding }  through  which  perceptions  are  made  objects  of 
conceptional  knowledge.  Images  of  sensation,  co-ordinate  in  space 
and  changing  in  time,  become  "  objective  "  only  by  being  thought  as 

5  Cf.  M.  Steckelmacher,  Dieformale  Logik  KanVs  in  ihren  Beziehungen  zur 
transscendentalen  (Breslau,  1878). 


CHAP.  1,  §  38.]      Object  of  Knowledge :  Categories.  543 

things  with,  abiding  qualities  and  changing  states  \  but  this  relation 
expressed  by  means  of  the  category  inheres  analytically  neither  in  the 
perceptions  -  nor  in  their  perceptional  relations  as  such.  In  the  ana- 
lytic relations  of  formal  logic  thinking  is  dependent  upon  its  objects, 
and  appears  ultimately  with  right  as  only  a  reckoning  with  given 
magnitudes.  The  synthetic  Forms  of  transcendental  logic,  on  the 
contrary,  let  us  recognise  the  understanding  in  its  creative  function 
of  producing  out  of  perceptions  the  objects  of  thought  itself. 

At  this  point,  in  the  distinction  between  formal  and  transcen- 
dental logic,  appears  for  the  first  time  the  fundamental  antithesis 
between  Kant  and  the  conceptions  of  the  Greek  theory  of  knowl- 
edge which  had  prevailed  up  to  his  time.  The  Greek  theory 
assumed  "the  objects"  as  " given"  independently  of  thought,  and 
regarded  the  intellectual  processes  as  entirely  dependent  upon  the 
objects ;  at  the  most  it  was  the  mission  of  the  intellectual  processes 
to  reproduce  these  objects  by  way  of  copy,  or  allow  themselves  to 
be  guided  by  them.  Kant  discovered  that  the  objects  of  thought 
are  none  other  than  the  products  of  thought  itself.  This  spontaneity 
of  reason  forms  the  deepest  kernel  of  his  transcendental  idealism. 

But  while  he  thus  with  completely  clear  consciousness  set  a  new 
epistemological  logic  of  synthesis  by  the  side  of  the  analytical  logic 
of  Aristotle,  which  had  as  its  essential  content  the  relations  involved 
in  subsuming  ready-made  conceptions  under  each  other  (cf.  §  12), 
he  yet  held  that  both  had  a  common  element,  viz:  the  science  of 
judgment.  In  the  judgment  the  relation  thought  between  subject 
and  predicate  is  asserted  as  holding  objectively  j  all  objective  think- 
ing is  judging.  Hence  if  the  categories  or  radical  conceptions  of  the 
understanding  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  relating  forms  of  the 
synthesis  by  which  objects  arise,  there  must  be  as  many  categories 
as  there  are  kinds  of  judgments,  and  every  category  is  the  mode  of 
connecting  subject  and  predicate  which  is  operative  in  its  own  kind 
of  judgment. 

Kant  accordingly  thought  that  he  could  deduce  the  table  of  the 
categories  from  that  of  the  judgments.  He  distinguished  from  the 
four  points  of  view  of  Quantity,  Quality,  Eelation,  and  Modality, 
three  kinds  of  judgments  for  each:  Universal,  Particular,  Singular, 
—  Affirmative,  Negative,  Infinite,  —  Categorical,  Hypothetical,  Dis- 
junctive,—  Problematic,  Assertoric,  Apodictic;  and  to  these  were 
to  correspond,  the  twelve  categories :  Unity,  Plurality,  Totality,  — 
Reality,  Negation,  Limitation,  —  Inherence  and  Subsistence,  Caus- 
ality and  Dependence,  Community  of  Reciprocity,  —  Possibility  and 
Impossibility,  Existence  and  Non-existence,  Necessity  and  Con- 
tingency. The  artificiality  of  this  construction,  the  looseness  of 


German  Philosophy :  Want's  Critique.         [PART  VI. 

the  relations  between  Forms  of  judgment  and  categories,  the  un- 
equal value  of  the  categories,  —  all  this  is  evident,  but  Kant 
unfortunately  had  so  much  confidence  in  this  system  that  he  treated 
it  as  the  architectonic  frame  for  a  great  number  of  his  later 
investigations. 

6.  The  most  difficult  part  of  the  task,  however,  was  to  demon- 
strate in  the  "Transcendental  Deduction  of  the  Pure  Conceptions 
of  the  Understanding"  how  the  categories  "make  the  objects  of 
experience."  The  obscurity  into  which  the  profound  investigation 
of  the  philosopher  necessarily  came  here  is  best  brightened  up  by 
a  fortunate  idea  of  the  Prolegomena.  Kant  here  distinguishes  judg- 
ments of  perception,  i.e.  those  in  which  only  the  relation  of  sensations 
in  space  and  time  for  the  individual  consciousness  is  expressed,  and 
judgments  of  experience,  i.e.  those  in  which  such  a  relation  is 
asserted  as  objectively  valid,  as  given  in  the  object;  and  he  finds 
the  difference  in  epistemological  value  between  them  to  be,  that 
in  the  judgment  of  experience  the  spatial  or  temporal  relation  is 
regulated  and  grounded  by  a  category,  a  conceptional  connection, 
whereas  in  the  mere  judgment  of  perception  this  is  lacking.  Thus, 
for  example,  the  succession  of  two  sensations  becomes  objective  and 
•universally  valid  when  it  is  thought  as  having  its  ground  in  the 
fact  that  one  phenomenon  is  the  cause  of  the  other.  All  particular 
constructions  of  the  spatial  and  temporal  synthesis  of  sensations 
become  objects  only  by  being  combined  according  to  a  rule  of  the 
understanding.  In  contrast  with  the  individual  mechanism  of 
ideation,  in  which  individual  sensations  may  order  themselves, 
separate  and  unite  in  any  way  whatever,  stands  objective  think- 
ing, which  is  equally  valid  for  all,  and  is  bound  to  fixed,  co- 
herent, ordered  wholes,  in  which  the  connections  are  governed  by 
conceptions. 

This  is  especially  true  in  the  case  of  relations  in  time.  For  since 
phenomena  of  outer  sense  belong  to  the  inner  sense  as  "  determina- 
tions of  our  mind,"  all  phenomena  without  exception  stand  under 
the  Form  of  the  inner  sense,  i.e.  of  time.  Kant,  therefore,  sought 
to  show  that  between  the  categories  and  the  particular  Form  of 
perception  in  time  a  "schematism"  obtains,  which  first  makes  it 
possible  at  all  to  apply  the  Forms  of  the  understanding  to  the 
images  of  perception,  and  which  consists  in  the  possession  by  every 
individual  category  of  a  schematic  similarity  with  a  particular  form  of 
the  time  relation.  In  empirical  knowledge  we  use  this  schematism 
to  interpret  the  empirically  perceived  time  relation  by  the  correspond- 
ing category  [e.g.  to  apprehend  regular  succession  as  causality] ; 
transcendental  philosophy,  conversely,  has  to  seek  the  justification 


CHAP.  1,  §  38.]      Object  of  Knowledge :  Experience.  545 

of  this  procedure  in  the  fact  that  the  category,  as  a  rule  of  the 
understanding,  gives  the  corresponding  time  relations  a  rational 
basis  as  object  of  experience. 

In  fact,  the  individual  consciousness  finds  in  itself  the  contiast 
between  a  movement  of  ideas  (say  of  the  fancy),  for  ^hich  it  claims 
no  validity  beyond  its  own  sphere,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  an  activ- 
ity of  experience,  in  the  case  of  which  it  knows  itself  to  be  bound 
in  a  way  that  is  likewise  valid  for  all  others.  Only  in  this  depend- 
ence consists  the  reference  of  thought  to  an  object.  But  if  it  was 
now  recognised  that  the  ground  of  the  objective  validity  of  the 
time  (and  space)  relation  can  rest  only  in  its  determination  by  a 
rule  of  the  understanding,  it  is  on  the  other  hand  a  fact  that 
the  consciousness  of  the  individual  knows  nothing  of  this  co-opera- 
tion of  the  categories  in  experience,  and  that  he  rather  accepts  the 
result  of  this  co-operation  as  the  objective  necessity  of  his  appre- 
hension of  the  synthesis  of  sensations  in  space  and  time. 

The  production  of  the  object,  therefore,  does  not  go  on  in  the 
individual  consciousness,  but  lies  already  at  the  basis  of  this  con- 
sciousness j  for  this  production,  a  higher  common  consciousness  must 
therefore  be  assumed,  which  comes  into  the  empirical  consciousness 
of  the  individual,  not  with  its  functions,  but  only  with  their  result. 
This  Kant  termed  in  the  Prolegomena,  consciousness  in  general;  in 
the  Critique,  transcendental  apperception,  or  the  "I"  [or  "self" 
or  "e0o"]. 

Experience  is  accordingly  the  system  of  phenomena  in  which  the 
spatial  and  temporal  synthesis  of  sensation  is  determined  by  the  rules 
of  the  understanding.  Thus  "Nature  as  phenomenon"  is  the  object 
of  an  a  priori  knowledge  j  for  the  categories  hold  for  all  experience, 
because  experience  is  grounded  only  through  them. 

7.  The  universal  and  necessary  force  and  validity  of  the  cate- 
gories find  expression  in  the  Principles  of  the  Pure  Understanding, 
in  which  the  conceptional  Forms  unfold  themselves  through  the 
medium  of  the  schematism.  But  here  it  is  at  once  evident  that  the 
main  weight  of  the  Kantian  doctrine  of  the  categories  falls  upon 
the  third  group,  and  thus  upon  those  problems  in  which  he  hoped 
"to  solve  Hume's  doubt."  Prom  the  categories  of  Quantity  and 
Quality  result  only  the  "Axiom  of  Perception,"  that  all  phenomena 
are  extensive  magnitudes,  and  the  "Anticipations  of  Empirical 
Perception  "  according  to  which  the  object  of  sensation  is  an  inten- 
sive magnitude ;  in  the  case  of  Modality  there  result  only  definitions 
of  the  possible,  actual,  and  necessary,  under  the  name  of  the  "  Postu- 
lates of  Empirical  Thought."  On  the  other  hand,  the  Analogies  of 
Experience  prove  that  in  Nature  substance  is  permanent,  and  that 


546  German  Philosophy:  Kan? 8  Critique.         [PART  YI. 

its  quantum  can  be  neither  increased  nor  diminished,  that  all 
changes  take  place  according  to  the  law  of  cause  and  effect,  and  that 
all  substances  are  in  thorough-going  reciprocity  or  inter-action. 

These,  therefore,  are  the  universally  and  necessarily  valid  prin- 
ciples and  highest  premises  of  all  natural  science,  which  are  tun- 
versallv  and  necessarily  valid  without  any  empirical  proof;  they 
contain  what  Kant  calls  the  metaphysics  of  Nature.  In  order  that 
they  may  he  employed,  however,  upon  the  Nature  given  through 
our  senses,  they  must  pass  through  a  mathematical  formulation, 
because  Nature  is  the  system  of  sensations  perceived  in  the  Forms 
of  space  and  time  and  ordered  according  to  the  categories.  This 
transition  is  effected  through  the  empirical  conception  of  motion,  to 
which  all  occurrence  and  change  in  Nature  is  theoretically  to  be 
reduced.  At  least,  science  of  Nature,  in  the  proper  sense,  reaches 
only  so  far  as  we  can  employ  mathematics :  hence  Kant  excluded 
psychology  and  chemistry  from  natural  science  as  being  merely 
descriptive  disciplines.  The  "Metaphysical  Elements  of  Natural 
Science J'  contain,  accordingly,  all  that  can  be  inferred  universally 
and  necessarily  concerning  the  laws  of  motion,  on  the  ground  of  the 
categories  and  of  mathematics.  The  most  important  point  in  Kant's 
philosophy  of  Nature,  as  thus  built  up,  is  his  dynamic  theory  of  mat- 
ter, in  which  he  now  deduces  from  the  general  principles  of  the 
Critique  the  doctrine  already  laid  down  in  the  "Natural  History  of 
the  Heavens,"  that  the  substance  of  that  which  is  movable  in  space 
is  the  product  of  two  forces  which  maintain  an  equilibrium  in  a 
varying  degree,  — those  of  attraction  and  repulsion. 

8.  But  in  accordance  with  Kant's  presuppositions,  the  above 
metaphysics  of  Nature  can  be  only  a  metaphysics  of  phenomena : 
and  no  other  is  possible,  for  the  categories  are  Forms  for  relating, 
and  as  such  are  in  themselves  empty ;  they  can  refer  to  an  object 
only  through  the  medium  of  perceptions,  which  present  a  manifold 
content  to  be  combined.  This  perception,  however,  is,  in  the  case 
of  us  men,  only  the  sensuous  perception  in  the  forms  of  space  and 
time,  and  as  a  content  for  their  synthetic  function  we  have  only 
that  given  in  sensations.  Accordingly,  the  only  object  of  human 
knoidedge  is  experience,  i.e.  phenomenal  appearance ;  and  the  divis- 
ion of  objects  of  knowledge  into  phenomena  and  noumena,  which 
has  been  usual  since  Plato,  has  no  sense.  A  knowledge  of  things-in- 
themselves  through  "  sheer  reason,"  and  extending  beyond  experi- 
ence, is  a  nonentity,  a  chimera. 

But  has,  then,  the  conception  of  the  thing-in-itself  any  rational 
meaning  at  all  ?  and  is  not,  together  with  this,  the  designation  of 
all  objects  of  our  knowledge  as  "  phenomena,"  also  without  meaning  ? 


CHAP.  1,  §  38.]      Object  of  Knowledge :  Thing-iifirltself,  547 

This  question  was  the  turning-point  of  Kant's  reflections.  Hitherto 
all  that  the  naive  conception  of  the  world  regards  as  "  object "  has 
been  resolved  partly  into  sensations,  partly  into  synthetic  Forms  of 
perception  and  of  the  understanding;  nothing  seems  to  remain 
besides  the  individual  consciousness  as  truly  existing,  except  the 
"consciousness  in  general/'  the  transcendental  apperception.  But 
where,  then,  are  the  "  things,"  of  which  Kant  declared  that  it  had 
never  come  into  his  mind  to  deny  their  reality  ? 

The  conception  of  the  tliiny-in-itsdf  can,  to  be  sure,  no  longer  have 
a  positive  content  in  the  Critique  of  Reason,  as  it  had  with  Leibniz, 
or  in  Kant's  Inaugural  Dissertation;  it  can  no  longer  be  the  object 
of  purely  rational  knowledge,  it  can  no  longer  be  an  "  object "  at  all. 
But  it  is  at  least  no  contradiction,  merely  to  think  it.  Primarily, 
purely  hypothetically,  and  as  something  the  reality  of  which  is 
neither  to  be  affirmed  nor  to  be  denied,  —  a  mere  "  problem." 
Human  knowledge  is  limited  to  objects  of  experience,  because  the 
perception  required  for  the  use  of  the  categories  is  in  our  case  only 
the  receptive  sensuous  perception  in  space  and  time.  If  we  suppose 
that  there  is  another  kind  of  perception,  there  would  be  for  this 
other  objects,  likewise,  with  the  help  of  the  categories.  Such  objects 
of  a  non-human  perception,  however,  remain  still  only  phenomena, 
though  this  perception  again  might  be  assumed  as  one  which 
arranges  the  given  contents  of  sensation  in  any  manner  whatever. 
Nevertheless,  if  one  should  think  of  a  perception  of  a  non-receptive 
kind,  a  perception  which  synthetically  produced  not  only  its  Forms, 
but  also  its  contents,  —  a  truly  "productive  imagination,"  —  its 
objects  would  necessarily  be  no  longer  phenomena,  but  things-in- 
themselves.  Such  a  faculty  would  deserve  the  name  of  an  intellect- 
ual perception  (or  intuition),  or  intuitive  intellect;  it  would  be  the 
unity  of  the  two  knowing  faculties  of  sensibility  and  understand- 
ing, which  in  man  appear  separated,  although  by  their  constant 
reference  to  each  other  they  indicate  a  hidden  common  root.  The 
possibility  of  such  a  faculty  is  as  little  to  be  denied  as  its  reality 
is  to  be  affirmed ;  yet  Kant  here  indicates  that  we  should  have  to 
think  a  supreme  spiritual  Being  in  this  way.  Noumena,  or  things- 
in-themselves,  are  therefore  thinkable  in  the  negative  sense  as  objects  of 
a  non-sensuous  perception,  of  which,  to  be  sure,  our  knowledge  can 
predicate  absolutely  nothing, — they  are  thinkable  as  limiting  con- 
ceptions of  experience. 

And  ultimately  they  do  not  remain  so  completely  problematical 
as  would  at  first  appear.  For  if  we  should  deny  the  reality  of 
things-in-themselves,  "all  would  be  immediately  resolved  into 
phenomena,"  and  we  should  thus  be  venturing  the  assertion  that 


548  German  Philosophy:  Kanfs  Critique.         [PART  VI. 

nothing  is  real  except  what  appears  to  man,  or  to  other  sensuously 
receptive  beings.  But  this  assertion  would  be  a  presumption  com- 
pletely incapable  of  proof.  TranscendeDtal  idealism  must,  therefore, 
not  deny  the  reality  of  noumena;  it  must  only  remain  conscious 
that  they  cannot  in  any  'wise  become  objects  of  human  knowledge. 
Things-in-themselves  must  be  thought,  but  are  not  knowable.  In 
this  way  Kant  won  back  the  right  to  designate  the  objects  of  human 
knowledge  as  "only  phenomena." 

9.  With  this  the  way  was  marked  out  for  the  third  part  of  the 
critique  of  the  reason,  the  Transcendental  Dialectic^  A  metaphysics 
of  that  which  cannot  be  experienced,  or,  as  Kant  prefers  to  say,  of 
the  supersensuous,  is  impossible.  This  must  be  shown  by  a  criticism 
of  the  historical  attempts  which  have  been  made  with  this  in  view, 
and  Kant  chose,  as  his  actual  example  for  this,  the  Leibnizo-Wolffian 
school-metaphysics,  with  its  treatment  of  rational  psychology,  cos- 
mology, and  theology.  But  at  the  same  time,  it  must  be  shown  that 
that  which  is  incapable  of  being  experienced,  which  cannot  be 
known,  must  yet  necessarily  be  thought ;  and  the  transcendental 
illusion  must  be  discovered,  by  which  even  the  great  thinkers  have 
at  all  times  been  seduced  into  regarding  this,  which  must  necessarily 
be  thought,  as  an  object  of  possible  knowledge. 

To  attain  this  end  Kant  proceeds  from  the  antithesis  between  the 
activity  of  the  understanding  and  the  sensuous  perception  by  the 
aid  of  which  alone  the  former  produces  objective  knowledge. 
The  thinking,  which  is  determined  by  the  categories,  puts  the  data 
of  the  sensibility  into  relation  with  one  another  in  such  a  way,  that 
every  phenomenon  is  conditioned  by  other  phenomena :  but  in  this 
process  the  understanding,  in  order  to  think  the  individual  phenom- 
enon completely,  must  needs  grasp  the  totality  of  the  conditions  by 
which  this  particular  phenomenon  is  determined  in  its  connections 
with  the  whole  experience.  But,  in  view  of  the  endlessness  of  the 
world  of  phenomena  in  its  relation  to  space  and  time,  this  demand 
cannot  be  fulfilled.  For  the  categories  are  principles  of  relation 
between  phenomena;  they  cognise  the  conditionality  or  conditional 
character  of  each  phenomenon  only  by  means  of  other  phenomena, 
arid  demand  for  these  again  insight  into  their  conditional  nature  as 
determined  by  others,  and  so  on  to  infinity.2  Out  of  this  relation 

1  As  regards  the  subject  matter,  the  Transcendental  ^Esthetic,  Analytic,  and 
Dialetic,  as  the  Introduction  shows,  form  the  three  main  co-ordinate  parts  of 
the  Critique;  the  formal  schematism  of  the  division  which  Kant  imitated  from 
the  arrangement  of  logical  text-books  usual  at  that  time,  is,  on  the  contrary, 
entirely  irrelevant.    The  "Doctrine  of  Method"  is  in  fact  only  a  supplement 
ertremely  rich  in  fine  observations. 

2  Cf.  the  similar  thoughts  in  Nicolaus  Cusanus  and  Spinoza,  though  there 
metaphysically  applied ;  above,  pp.  347  and  419. 


CHAP.  1,  §  38.]  Object  of  Knowledge :  Ideas.  549 

between  understanding  and  sensibility  result  for  human  knowledge 
necessary  and  yet  insoluble  problems;  these  Kant  calls  Ideas,  and 
the  faculty  requisite  for  this  highest  synthesis  of  the  cognitions 
of  the  understanding  he  designates  as  Reason  in  the  narrower 
sense. 

If  now  the  reason  will  represent  to  itself  as  solved,  a  problem 
thus  set,  the  sought  totality  of  conditions  must  be  thought  as  some 
thing  unconditioned,  which,  indeed,  contains  in  itself  the  conditions 
for  the  infinite  series  of  phenomena,  but  which  is  itself  no  longer 
conditioned.  This  conclusion  of  an  infinite  series,  which  for  the 
knowledge  of  the  understanding  is  in  itself  a  contradiction,  must 
nevertheless  be  thought,  if  the  task  of  the  understanding,  which 
aims  at  totality  in  connection  with  the  infinite  material  of  the  data 
of  the  senses,  is  to  be  regarded  as  performed.  The  Ideas  are  hence 
ideas  or  mental  representations  of  the  unconditioned,  which  must 
necessarily  be  thought  without  ever  becoming  object  of  knowledge, 
and  the  transcendental  illusion  into  which  metaphysics  falls  con- 
sists in  regarding  them  as  given,  whereas  they  are  only  imposed  or 
set  as  a  task  (aufgegeben).  In  truth  they  are  not  constitutive  prin- 
ciples through  which,  as  through  the  categories,  objects  of  knowl- 
edge are  produced,  but  only  regulative  principles,  by  which  the 
understanding  is  constrained  to  seek  for  farther  and  farther  con- 
necting links  in  the  realm  of  the  conditioned  of  experience. 

Of  such  Ideas  Kant  finds  three ;  the  unconditioned  for  the  totality 
of  all  phenomena  of  the  inner  sense,  of  all  data  of  the  outer  sense, 
of  all  the  conditioned  in  general,  is  thought  respectively  as  the  soul, 
the  world,  and  God. 

10.  The  criticism  of  rational  psychology  in  the  "  Paralogisms  of 
Pure  Eeason "  takes  the  form  of  pointing  out  in  the  usual  proofs 
for  the  substantiality  of  the  soul,  the  quaternio  terminorum  of  a 
confusion  of  the  logical  subject  with  the  real  substrate ;  it  shows 
that  the  scientific  conception  of  substance  is  bound  to  our  perception 
of  that  which  persists  in  space,  and  that  it  is  therefore  applicable 
only  in  the  field  of  the  external  sense,  and  maintains  that  the  Idea 
of  the  soul  as  an  unconditioned  real  unity  of  all  phenomena  of  the 
inner  sense,  is  indeed  as  little  capable  of  proof  as  it  is  of  refutation, 
but  is  at  the  same  time  the  heuristic  principle  for  investigating  the 
inter-connections  of  the  psychical  life.  

In  a  similar  way,  the  section  on  the  "  Ideal  of  the  Reason  "  treats 
the  Idea  of  God.  Carrying  out  with  greater  precision  his  earlier 
treatise  on  the  same  subject,  Kant  destroys  the  cogency  of  the 
arguments  brought  forward  for  the  existence  of  God.  He  combats 
the  right  of  the  ontological  proof  to  infer  existence  from  the  concep- 


550  German  Philosophy :  Kant's  Critique.        [PART  YL 

tion  alone ;  he  shows  that  the  cosmological  proof  involves  a  petitio 
principii  when  it  seeks  the  "first  cause "  of  all  that  is  "contingent " 
in  an  -absolutely  necessary  v  being;  he  proves  that  the  teleological 
or  physico-theoloykal  argument  at  the  best  — granted  the  beauty, 
harmony,  and  purposiveness  or  adaptation  of  the  universe  —  leads 
to  the  ancient  conception  of  a  wise  and  good  "  Architect  of  the 
world."  But  he  emphasises  that  the  denial  of  God's  existence  is  a 
claim  which  steps  beyond  the  bounds  of  our  experiential  knowledge, 
and  is  as  incapable  of  proof  as  the  opposite,  and  that  rather  the 
belief  in  a  living,  Real  unity  of  all  reality  constitutes  the  only 
powerful  motive  for  empirical  investigation  of  individual  groups  of 
phenomena. 

^lost  characteristic  by  far,  however,  is  Kant's  treatment  of  the 
Idea  of  the  world  in  the  Antinomies  of  Pure  Reason.  These 
antinomies  express  the  fundamental  thought  of  the  transcendental 
dialectic  in  the  sharpest  manner,  by  showing  that  when  the  universe 
is  treated  as  the  object  of  knowledge,  propositions  which  are 
mutually  contradictory  can  be  maintained  with  equal  right,  in  so 
far  as  we  follow,  on  the  one  hand,  the  demand  of  the  understanding 
for  a  completion  of  the  series  of  phenomena,  and  on  the  other,  the 
demand  of  the  sensuous  perception  for  an  endless  continuance  of 
the  same.  Kant  proves  hence,  in  the  "thesis,"  that  the  world  must 
have  a  beginning  and  end  in  space  and  time,  that  as  regards  its 
substance  it  presents  a  limit  to  its  divisibility,  that  events  in  it 
must  have  free,  i.e.  no  longer  causally  conditioned,  beginnings,  and 
that  to  it  must  belong  an  absolutely  necessary  being,  God;  and  in 
the  antithesis  he  proves  the  contradictory  opposite  for  all  four  cases. 
At  the  same  time  the  complication  is  increased  by  the  fact  that  the 
proofs  (with  one  exception)  are  indirect,  so  that  the  thesis  is  proved 
by  a  refutation  of  the  antithesis,  the  antithesis  by  refutation  of  the 
thesis ;  each  assertion  is  therefore  both  proved  and  refuted.  The 
solution  of  the  antinomies  in  the  case  of  the  first  two,  the  "mathe- 
matical," takes  the  form  of  showing  that  the  principle  of  excluded 
third  loses  its  validity  where  something  is  made  the  object  of  knowl- 
edge, which  can  never  become  such,  as  is  the  case  with  the  universe. 
In  the  case  of  the  third  and  fourth  antinomies,  the  "  dynamical," 
which  concern  freedom  and  God,  Kant  seeks  to  show  (what,  to  be 
sure,  is  impossible  in  a  purely  theoretical  way),  that  it  is  perhaps 
thinkable  that  the  antitheses  hold  true  for  phenomena,  and  the 
theses,  on  the  other  hand,  for  the  unknowable  world  of  things-in- 
themselves.  For  this  latter  world,  it  is  at  least  not  a  contradiction 
to  think  freedom  and  God,  whereas  neither  is  to  be  met  with,  it  is 
certain,  in  our  knowledge  of  phenomena. 


CHAP.  1,  §  39.]  The  Categorical  Imperative.  551 


§  39.  The  Categorical  Imperative, 

H.  Cohen,  Kant's  Begrundung  der  Ethik.    Berlin,  1877. 

E.  Arnoldt,  Kant's  Idee  vom  hochsten  G-ut.     Konigsberg,  1874. 

B.  Piinjer,  Die  Religionsphilosophie  Kanffs.    Jena,  1874. 

[N.  Porter,  Kant's  Ethics.     Chicago,  1886.] 

[J.  G.  Schurmann,  Kantian  Ethics  and  the  Ethics  of  Evolution.    Lond.  1882.] 

The  synthetic  function  in  the  theoretical  reason  is  the  combine 
tion  of  mental  presentations  into  perceptions,  judgments,  and  Ideas. 
The  practical  synthesis  is  the  relating  of  the  will  to  a  presented  con- 
tent, by  which  this  latter  becomes  an  end.  This  relating  Form  Kant 
carefully  excluded  from  the  primary  conceptions  of  the  knowing 
understanding ;  it  is  instead  the  fundamental  category  of  the  practical 
use  of  the  reason.  It  gives  no  objects  of  knowledge,  but  instead, 
objects  of  will. 

1.  For  the  critique  of  the  reason  there  rises  from  this  the  prob- 
lem, whether  there  is  a  practical  synthesis  a  priori,  that  is,  whether 
there  are  necessary  and  universally  valid  objects  of  willing;  or  whether 
anything  is  to  be  found  which  the  reason  makes  its  end  or  demands 
a  priori,  without  any  regard  to  empirical  motives.    This  universal  and 
necessary  object  of  the  practical  reason  we  call  the  moral  law. 

For  it  is  clear  for  Kant  from  the  outset,  that  the  activity  of  pure 
reason  in  proposing  ends  to  itself,  if  there  is  any  such  activity,  must 
appear  as  a  command,  in  the  form  of  the  imperative,  as  over  against 
"  the  empirical  motives  of  will  and  action.  The  will  directed  toward 
the  particular  objects  and  relations  of  experience  is  determined  by 
these  and  dependent  upon  them ;  the  pure  rational  will,  on  the  con- 
trary, can  be  determined  only  through  itself.  It  is  hence  necessarily 
directed  toward  something  else  than  the  natural  impulses,  and  this 
something  else,  which  the  moral  law  requires  as  over  against  our 
inclinations,  is  called  duty. 

Hence  the  predicates  of  ethical  judgment  concern  only  this  kind 
of  determination  of  the  will;  they  refer  to  the  disposition^  not  to 
the  act  or  to  its  external  consequences.  Nothing  in  the  world,  says 
Kant/  can  be  called  good  without  qualification  except  a  Good  Will ; 
and  this  remains  good  even  though  its  execution  is  completely 
restrained  by  external  causes.  Morality  as  a  quality  of  man  is  a 
disposition  conformable  to  duty. 

2.  But  it  becomes  all  the  more  necessary  to  investigate  as  to 

*  Grundlegung  zttr  Metaphysik  der  Sitten,  I.  (W.,  IV.  10  E.)  ;  Abbott,  p.  9. 


552  German  Philosophy:  Kanfs  Critique.          [PART  VI. 

whether  there  is  such  an  a  priori  command  of  duty,  and  in  what 
consists  a  law,  to  which  obedience  is  required  by  the  reason  quite 
independently  of  all  empirical  ends.  To  answer  this  question  Kant 
proceeds  from  the  teleological  connections  of  the  actual  volitional 
life.  Experience  of  natural  causal  connections  brings  with  it  the 
consequence,  that  we  are  forced  to  will  according  to  the  synthetic 
relation  of  end  and  means,  one  thing  for  the  sake  of  another.  From 
practical  reflection  on  such  relations  arise  (technical)  rules  of  dex- 
terity and  (« practical ")  counsels  of  prudence.  They  all  assert, 
"It  you  will  this  or  that,  then  you  must  proceed  thus  or  so."  They 
are  on  this  account  hypothetical  imperatives.  They  presuppose  a 
volition  as  actually  present  already,  and  demand  on  the  ground  of 
this  the  further  act  of  will  which  is  required  to  satisfy  the  first. 

But  the  moral  law  cannot  be  dependent  upon  any  object  of  will 
already  existing  in  experience,  and  moral  action  must  not  appear  as 
means  in  service  of  other  ends.  The  requirement  of  the  moral 
command  must  be  propounded  and  fulfilled  solely  for  its  own  sake. 
It  does  not  appeal  to  what  the  man  already  wishes  on  other  grounds, 
but  demands  an  act  of  will  which  has  its  worth  in  itself  only,  and 
the  only  truly  moral  action  is  one  in  which  such  a  command  is 
fulfilled  without  regard  to  any  other  consequences.  The  moral  law 
is  a  command  absolute,  a  categorical  imperative.  It  holds  uncondition- 
ally and  absolutely,  while  the  hypothetical  imperatives  are  only 
relative. 

If  now  it  is  asked,  what  is  the  content  of  the  categorical  impera- 
tive, it  is  clear  that  it  can  contain  no  empirical  element :  the  demand1 
of  the  moral  law  does  not  stand  in  relation  to  the  "  matter  of  the 
act  of  will."  For  this  reason  happiness  is  not  adapted  to  be  the 
principle  of  morals,  for  the  striving  after  happiness  is  already 
present  empirically,  it  is  not  a  demand  of  reason.  Eudaemonistio 
morals  leads,  therefore,  to  merely  hypothetical  imperatives ;  for  it, 
the  ethical  laws  are  only  "  counsels  of  prudence  or  sagacity  "  advis- 
ing the  best  method  of  going  to  work  to  satisfy  the  natural  will. 
But  the  demand  of  the  moral  law  is  just  for  a  will  other  than  the 
natural  will;  the  moral  law  exists  for  a  higher  purpose  than  to 
make  us  happy.  If  Nature  had  wished  to  place  our  destiny  and 
vocation  in  happiness,  it  would  have  done  better  to  equip  us  with 
infallible  instincts  than  with  the  practical  reason  of  conscience, 
which  is  continually  in  conflict  with  our  impulses.1  The  "  happiness 
morals  "  is  even,  for  Kant,  the  type  of  false  morals,  for  in  this  the 
law  always  is  that  I  should  do  something  because  I  desire  something 

1  Grundlegung  sur  Metapliysik  far  Sitten,  IY.  12  i;  Abbott,  p.  11. 


CHAP.  1,  §  39.]     Categorical  Imperative :  Autonomy,  553 

else.  Every  such  system  of  morals  is  heteronomous ;  it  makes  the 
practical  reason  dependent  upon  some  thing  given  outside  of  itself, 
and  this  reproach  applies  to  all  attempts  to  seek  the  principle  of 
morality  in  metaphysical  conceptions,  such  as  that  of  perfection. 
The  theological  morals  is  completely  rejected  by  Kant  with  the 
greatest  energy,  for  it  combines  all  kinds  of  heteronomy  when  it 
sees  the  sanction  in  the  divine  will,  the  criterion  in  utility,  and  the 
motive  in  the  expectation  of  reward  and  punishment. 

3.  The  categorical  imperative  must  be  the  expression  of  the 
autonomy  of  the  practical  reason,  i.e.  of  the  pure  self-determination 
of  the  rational  will.  It  concerns,  therefore,  solely  the  Form  of 
willing,  and  requires  that  this  should  be  a  universally  valid  law. 
The  will  is  heteronomous  if  it  follows  an  empirically  given  impulse ; 
it  is  autonomous  only  where  it  carries  out  a  law  given  it  by  itself. 
The  categorical  imperative  demands,  therefore,  that  instead  of  act- 
ing according  to  impulses  we  should  rather  act  according  to  maxims, 
and  according  to  such  as  are  adapted  for  a  universal  legislation  for 
all  beings  who  will  rationally.  "  Act  as  if  the  maxim  from  ivhiofi 
you  act  were  to  become  through  your  ivill  a  universal  law  of 
nature" 

This  purely  formal  principle  of  conformity  to  law  gains  a  mate- 
rial import  by  reflection  upon  the  various  kinds  of  worths.  In  the 
kingdom  of  ends  that  which  is  serviceable  for  some  end,  and  can 
therefore  be  replaced  by  something  else,  has  a  price,  but  that  only 
has  ivorth  or  dignity,  which  is  absolutely  valuable  in  itself,  and  is 
the  condition  for  the  sake  of  which  other  things  may  become  valu- 
able. This  worth  belongs  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  moral  law 
itself,  and,  therefore,  the  motive  which  stimulates  man  to  obey  this 
law  must  be  nothing  but  reverence  for  the  law  itself.  It  would  be 
dishonoured  if  it  were  fulfilled  for  the  sake  of  any  external  advan- 
tage. The  worth  or  dignity  of  the  moral  law,  moreover,  passes  over 
to  the  man  who  is  determined  by  this  alone  in  the  whole  extent  of 
his  experience,  and  is  able  to  determine  himself  by  the  law  itself, 
to  be  its  agent,  and  to  identify  himself  with  it.  Hence  reverence  for 
the  worth  of  man  is  for  Kant  the  material  principle  of  moral  science. 
Man  should  do  his  duty  not  for  the  sake  of  advantage,  but  out  of 
reverence  for  himself 3  and  in  his  intercourse  with  his  fellow-man  he 
should  make  it  his  supreme  maxim,  never  to  treat  him  as  a  mere 
means  for  the  attainment  of  his  own  ends,  but  always  to  honour  in 
him  the  worth  of  personality. 

From  this  Kant  deduces  a  proud  and  strict  system  of  morals  *  in 

1  Metaphysische  Anfangsgriinde  der  Tugendlehre,  W.,  V.  221  ff. 


552  German  Philosophy:  Kan€s  Critique.          [PART  VI. 

-whether  there  is  such  an  a  priori  command  of  duty,  and  in  what 
consists  a  law,  to  which  obedience  is  required  by  the  reason  quite 
independently  of  all  empirical  ends.  To  answer  this  question  Kant 
proceeds  from  the  teleological  connections  of  the  actual  volitional 
life.  Experience  of  natural  causal  connections  brings  with  it  the 
consequence,  that  we  are  forced  to  will  according  to  the  synthetic 
relation  of  end  and  means,  one  thing  for  the  sake  of  another.  From 
practical  reflection  on  such  relations  arise  (technical)  rules  of  dex- 
terity and  ("practical")  counsels  of  prudence.  They  all  assert, 
"  If  you  will  this  or  that,  then  you  must  proceed  thus  or  so."  They 
are  on  this  account  hypothetical  imperatives.  They  presuppose  a 
volition  as  actually  present  already,  and  demand  on  the  ground  of 
this  the  further  act  of  will  which  is  required  to  satisfy  the  first. 

But  the  moral  law  cannot  be  dependent  upon  any  object  of  will 
already  existing  in  experience,  and  moral  action  must  not  appear  as 
means  in  service  of  other  ends.  The  requirement  of  the  moral 
command  must  be  propounded  and  fulfilled  solely  for  its  own  sake. 
It  does  not  appeal  to  what  the  man  already  wishes  on  other  grounds, 
but  demands  an  act  of  will  which  has  its  worth  in  itself  only,  and 
the  only  truly  moral  action  is  one  in  which  such  a  command  is 
fulfilled  without  regard  to  any  other  consequences.  The  moral  law 
is  a  command  absolute,  a  categorical  imperative.  It  holds  uncondition- 
ally and  absolutely,  while  the  hypothetical  imperatives  are  only 
relative. 

If  now  it  is  asked,  what  is  the  content  of  the  categorical  impera- 
tive, it  is  clear  that  it  can  contain  no  empirical  element :  the  demand1 
of  the  moral  law  does  not  stand  in  relation  to  the  "  matter  of  the 
act  of  will."  For  this  reason  happiness  is  not  adapted  to  be  the 
principle  of  morals,  for  the  striving  after  happiness  is  already 
present  empirically,  it  is  not  a  demand  of  reason.  Eudaemonistic 
morals  leads,  therefore,  to  merely  hypothetical  imperatives  ;  for  it, 
the  ethical  laws  are  only  "  counsels  of  prudence  or  sagacity  "  advis- 
ing the  best  method  of  going  to  work  to  satisfy  the  natural  will. 
But  the  demand  of  the  moral  law  is  just  for  a  will  other  than  the 
natural  will;  the  moral  law  exists  for  a  higher  purpose  than  to 
make  us  happy.  If  Mature  had  wished  to  place  our  destiny  and 
vocation  in  happiness,  it  would  have  done  better  to  equip  us  with 
infallible  instincts  than  with  the  practical  reason  of  conscience, 
which  is  continually  in  conflict  with  our  impulses.1  The  "  happiness 
morals  "  is  even,  for  Kant,  the  type  of  false  morals,  for  in  this  the 
law  always  is  that  I  should  do  something  because  I  desire  something 

1  Gruncttegung  zur  Metaphysik  tier  Sitten,  IV.  12  f.;  Abbott,  p.  11. 


CHAP.  1,  §  39.]     Categorical  Imperative :  Autonomy.  553 

else.  Every  such,  system  of  morals  is  heteronomous ;  it  makes  the 
practical  reason  dependent  upon  some  thing  given  outside  of  itself, 
and  this  reproach  applies  to  all  attempts  to  seek  the  principle  of 
morality  in  metaphysical  conceptions,  such  as  that  of  perfection. 
The  theological  morals  is  completely  rejected  by  Kant  with  the 
greatest  energy,  for  it  combines  all  kinds  of  heteronorny  when  it 
sees  the  sanction  in  the  divine  will,  the  criterion  in  utility,  and  the 
motive  in  the  expectation  of  reward  and  punishment. 

3.  The  categorical  imperative  must  be  the  expression  of  the 
autonomy  of  the  practical  reason,  i.e.  of  the  pure  self-determination 
of  the  rational  will.  It  concerns,  therefore,  solely  the  Form  of 
willing,  and  requires  that  this  should  be  a  universally  valid  law. 
The  will  is  heteronomous  if  it  follows  an  empirically  given  impulse ; 
it  is  autonomous  only  where  it  carries  out  a  law  given  it  by  itself. 
The  categorical  imperative  demands,  therefore,  that  instead  of  act- 
ing according  to  impulses  we  should  rather  act  according  to  maxims, 
and  according  to  such  as  are  adapted  for  a  universal  legislation  for 
all  beings  who  will  rationally.  "  Act  as  if  the  maxim  from  whidi 
you  act  were  to  "become  through  your  will  a  universal  law  of 
nature" 

This  purely  formal  principle  of  conformity  to  law  gains  a  mate- 
rial import  by  reflection  upon  the  various  kinds  of  worths.  In  the 
kingdom  of  ends  that  which  is  serviceable  for  some  end,  and  can 
therefore  be  replaced  by  something  else,  has  a  price,  but  that  only 
has  worth  or  dignity,  which  is  absolutely  valuable  in  itself,  and  is 
the  condition  for  the  sake  of  which  other  things  may  become  valu- 
able. This  worth  belongs  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  moral  law 
itself,  and,  therefore,  the  motive  which  stimulates  man  to  obey  this 
law  must  be  nothing  but  reverence  for  the  law  itself.  It  would  be 
dishonoured  if  it  were  fulfilled  for  the  sake  of  any  external  advan- 
tage. The  worth  or  dignity  of  the  moral  law,  moreover,  passes  over 
to  the  man  who  is  determined  by  this  alone  in  the  whole  extent  of 
his  experience,  and  is  able  to  determine  himself  by  the  law  itself, 
to  be  its  agent,  and  to  identify  himself  with  it.  Hence  reverence  for 
the  worth  of  man  is  for  Kant  the  material  principle  of  moral  science. 
Man  should  do  his  duty  not  for  the  sake  of  advantage,  but  out  of 
reverence  for  himself,  and  in  his  intercourse  with  his  fellow-man  he 
should  make  it  his  supreme  maxim,  never  to  treat  him  as  a  mere 
means  for  the  attainment  of  his  own  ends,  but  always  to  honour  in 
him  the  worth  of  personality. 

From  this  Kant  deduces  a  proud  and  strict  system  of  morals  *  in 

1  Metaphysische  Anfangsgrunde,  der  Tugendlehre,  W.,  Y.  221  ff. 


554  German  Philosophy :  Kant's  Critique.         [PART  VI. 

which,  as  set  forth,  in  his  old  age,  we  cannot  fail  to  discern  the 
features  of  rigourisin  and  of  a  certain  pedantic  stiffness.  But  the 
fundamental  characteristic  of  the  contrast  between  duty  and  incline 
tion  lies  deeply  rooted  in  his  system.  The  principle  of  autonomy 
recognises  as  moral,  only  acts  of  will  done  in  conformity  to  duty, 
and  wholly  out  of  regard  for  maxims ;  it  sees  in  all  motivation  of 
moral  action  by  natural  impulses  a  falsification  of  pure  morality. 
Only  that  which  is  done  solely  from  duty  is  moral.  The  empirical 
impulses  of  human  nature  are,  therefore,  in  themselves,  ethically 
iildifferent ;  but  they  become  bad  as  soon  as  they  oppose  the  demand 
of  the  moral  law,  and  the  moral  life  of  man  consists  in  realising  the 
command  of  duty  in  the  warfare  against  his  inclinations. 

4  The  self-determination  of  the  rational  will  is,  therefore,  the 
supreme  requirement  and  condition  of  all  morality.  But  it  is  impos- 
sible in  the  realm  of  the  -experience  which  is  thought  and  known 
through  the  categories :  for  this  experience  knows  only  the  deter- 
mination of  each  individual  phenomenon  by  others ;  self-determina- 
tion, as  the  power  to  begin  a  series  of  the  conditioned,  is  impossible 
according  to  the  principles  of  cognition.  This  power  with  reference 
to  the  will  we  call  freedom,  as  being  an  action  which  is  not  conditioned 
by  others  according  to  the  schema  of  causality,  but  which  is  deter- 
mined only  through  itself,  and  is  on  its  part  the  cause  of  an  endless 
series  of  natural  processes.  Hence  if  the  theoretical  reason,  whose 
knowledge  is  limited  to  experience,  had  to  decide  as  to  the  reality 
of  freedom,  it  would  necessarily  deny  it,  but  would  thereby  reject 
also  the  possibility  of  the  moral  life.  But  the  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason  has  shown  that  the  theoretical  reason  cannot  assert  any- 
thing whatever  as  to  things-in-themselves,  and  that,  accordingly, 
there  is  no  contradiction  in  thinking  the  possibility  of  freedom  for 
the  supersensuous.  But  as  it  is  evident  that  freedom  must  necessa- 
rily be  real  if  morality  is  to  be  possible,  the  reality  of  things-in-them- 
selves and  of  the  supersensuouSj  which  for  the  theoretical  reason  must 
remain  always  merely  problematical,  is  herewith  guaranteed. 

This  guarantee  is,  to  be  sure,  not  that  of  a  proof,  but  that  of  a 
postulate.  It  rests  upon  the  consciousness;  thou  canst,  for  thou 
oughtest.  Just  so  truly  as  thou  feelest  the  moral  law  within  thee, 
so  truly  as  thou  believest  in  the  possibility  of  following  it,  so  truly 
must  thou  also  believe  in  the  conditions  for  this,  viz.  autonomy  and 
freedom.  Freedom  is  not  an  object  of  knowledge,  but  an  object  of 
faith,  —  but  of  a  faith  which  holds  as  universally  and  necessarily  in 
the  realm  of  the  supersensuous,  as  the  principles  of  the  understand- 
ing hold  in  the  realm  of  experience,  —  an  a  priori  faith. 
Thus  the  practical  reason  becomes  completely  independent  of  the 


CHAP.  1,  §  39.]     Categorical  Imperative :  Freedom.  555 

theoretical.  In  previous  philosophy  "  the  primacy  "  of  the  theoreti- 
cal over  the  practical  reason  had  prevailed;  knowledge  had  been 
assigned  the  work  of  determining  whether  and  how  there  is  freedom, 
and  accordingly  of  deciding  as  to  the  reality  of  morality.  Accord- 
ing to  Kant,  the  reality  of  morality  is  the  fact  of  the  practical  reason, 
and,  therefore,  we  must  believe  in  freedom  as  the  condition  of  its 
possibility,  From  this  relation  results,  for  Kant,  the  primacy  of  the 
practical  over  the  theoretical  reason;  for  the  former  is  not  only  capa- 
ble of  guaranteeing  that  which  the  latter  must  decline  to  vouch  for, 
but  it  appears  also  that  the  theoretical  reason  in  those  Ideas  of  the 
unconditioned  in  which  it  points  beyond  itself  (§  38,  9)  is  deter- 
mined by  the  needs  of  the  practical  reason. 

Thus  there  appears  with  Kant,  in  a  new  and  completely  original 
form,  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  the  two  worlds  of  the  sensuous  and  the 
supersensuous,  of  phenomena  and  things-in-themselves.  Knowledge 
controls  the  former,  faith  the  latter ;« the  former  is  the  realm  of 
necessity,  the  latter  the  realm  of  freedom.  The  relation  of  antithesis 
and  yet  of  mutual  reference,  which  exists  between  these  two  worlds, 
shows  itself  best  in  the  nature  of  man,  who  alone  belongs  in  like 
measure  to  both.  So  far  as  man  is  a  member  of  the  order  of  Nature 
he  appears  as  empirical  character — i.e.  in  his  abiding  qualities  as  well 
as  in  his  individual  decisions  —  as  a  necessary  product  in  the  causal 
connection  of  phenomena;  but  as  a  member  of  the  supersensuous 
world  he  is  intelligible  character,  i.e.  a  being  whose  nature  is  decided 
by  free  self-determination  within  itself.  The  empirical  character  is 
only  the  manifestation,  which  for  the  theoretical  consciousness  is 
bound  to  the  rule  of  causality,  of  the  intelligible  character,  whose 
freedom  is  the  only  explanation  of  the  feeling  of  responsibility  as  it 
appears  in  the  conscience. 

5.  But  freedom  is  not  the  only  postulate  of  a  priori  faith.  The 
relations  between  the  sensuous  and  the  moral  world  demand  yet 
a  more  general  bond  of  connection,  which  Kant  finds  in  the  concep- 
tion of  the  highest  good.1  The  goal  of  the  sensuous  will  is  happiness; 
the  goal  of  the  ethical  will  is  virtue ;  these  two  cannot  sustain  to 
each  other  the  relation  of  means  to  end.  The  striving  after  happi- 
ness does  not  make  an  act  virtuous ;  and  virtue  is  neither  permitted 
to  aim  at  making  man  happy,  nor  does  it  actually  do  so.  Between 
the  two  no  causal  relation  exists  empirically,  and  ethically  no  teleo- 
logical  connection  can  be  permitted  to  enter.  But  since  man  belongs 
as  well  to  the  sensuous  as  to  the  ethical  world,  the  "highest  good" 
must  consist  for  him  in  the  union  of  virtue  and  happiness.  This 

1  Critique  ofPrac.  Reason,  Dialectic,  W.,  IX.  225  ff.;  [Abbott,  202  ff.]. 


556  German  Philosophy:  Kanfs  Critique.         [PART  VL 

last  synthesis  of  practical  conception,  however,  can  be  morally 
thought  only  in  the  form  that  virtue  alone  is  worthy  of  happiness. 

The  demand  of  the  moral  consciousness,  here  expressed,  is  never- 
theless not  satisfied  by  the  causal  necessity  of  experience.  Natural 
law  is  ethically  indifferent,  and  affords  no  guarantee  that  virtue 
will  necessarily  lead  to  happiness;  on  the  contrary,  experience 
teaches  rather  that  virtue  requires  renunciation  of  empirical  happi- 
ness, and  that  want  of  virtue  is  capable  of  being  united  with  tem- 
poral happiness.  If,  therefore,  the  ethical  consciousness  requires 
the  reality  of  the  highest  good,  faith  must  reach  beyond  the  empirical 
life  of  man,  and  beyond  the  order  of  Kature,  on  into  the  super- 
sensuous.  It  postulates  a  reality  of  personality  which  extends 
beyond  the  temporal  existence  —  the  immortal  life  —  and  a  moral 
order  of  the  universe,  which  is  grounded  in  a  Supreme  Eeason  —  in 
God. 

Kant's  moral  proof  for  freedom,  immortality,  and  God  is,  there- 
fore, not  a  proof  of  knowledge,  but  of  faith.  Its  postulates  are  the 
conditions  of  the  moral  life,  and  their  reality  must  be  believed  in 
as  fully  as  the  reality  of  the  latter.  But  with  all  this  they  remain 
knowable  theoretically,  as  little  as  before. 

6.  The  dualism  of  Nature  and  morality  appears  with  Kant  in  its 
baldest  form  in  his  Philosophy  of  Religion,  the  principles  of  which, 
agreeably  to  his  theory  of  knowledge,  he  could  seek  only  in  the 
practical  reason ;  universality  and  necessity  in  relation  to  the  super- 
sensuous  are  afforded  only  by  the  ethical  consciousness.  Only  that 
can  be  a  priori  in  religion,  which  is  based  upon  morals.  Kant's 
religion  of  reason  is,  therefore,  not  a  natural  religion,  but  "  moral 
theology."  Eeligion  rests  upon  conceiving  moral  laws  as  divine 
commands. 

This  religious  form  of  morality  Kant  develops  once  more  from 
the  twofold  nature  of  man.  There  are  in  him  two  systems  of  im- 
pulses, the  sensuous  and  the  moral ;  on  account  of  the  unity  of  the 
willing  personality  neither  can  be  without  relation  to  the  other. 
Their  relation  should  be,  according  to  the  moral  demand,  that  of 
the  subordination  of  the  sensuous  impulses  to  the  moral;  but  as 
a  matter  of  fact,  according  to  Kant,  the  reverse  relation  naturally 
obtains  with  man,1  and  since  the  sensuous  impulses  are  evil  as  soon 
as  they  even  merely  resist  the  moral,  there  is  in  man  a  natural  bent 


1  The  pessimistic  conception  of  man's  natural  essence  doubtless  has  with 
Kant  its  occasion  in  Ms  religious  education ;  but  he  guards  himself  expressly 
against  the  identification  of  his  doctrine  of  the  radical  evil  with  the  theological 
conception  of  hereditary  sin;  cf.  Rel  innerh.  d.  Grenze  d.  r.  F.,  I.  4 ;  W.,  VI. 
201  ff.  j  [Abbott,  p.  347]. 


CHAP.  1,  §  39.]     Categorical  Imperative :  Religion,  Law.  557 

to  evil.  This  "radical  evil"  is  not  necessary;  for  otherwise  there 
would  be  no  responsibility  for  it.  It  is  inexplicable,  but  it  is  a  fact; 
it  is  a  deed  of  intelligible  freedom.  The  task  which  follows  from 
this  for  man  is  the  reversal  of  the  moving  springs,  which  is  to  be 
brought  about  by  the  warfare  between  the  good  and  evil  principle 
within  him.  But  in  the  above-described  perverted  condition,  the 
brazen  majesty  of  the  moral  law  works  upon  man  with  a  terror  that 
dashes  him  down,  and  he  needs,  therefore,  to  support  his  moral 
motives,  faith  in  a  divine  power,  which  imposes  upon  him  the  moral 
law  as  its  command,  but  also  grants  him  the  help  of  redeeming  love  to 
enable  him  to  obey  it. 

From  this  standpoint  Kant  interprets  the  essential  portions  of 
Christian  doctrine  into  a  "pure  moral  religion,"  viz.  the  ideal  of 
the  moral  perfection  of  man  in  the  Logos,  redemption  through 
vicarious  love,  and  the  mystery  of  the  new  birth.  He  thus  restores 
to  their  rightful  place,  from  which  they  had  been  displaced  by  the 
rationalism  of  the  Enlightenment,  the  truly  religious  motives  which 
are  rooted  in  the  felt  need  of  a  redemption,  —  though  he  does  this 
in  a  form  which  is  free  from  the  historical  faith  of  orthodoxy.  But 
the  true  Church,  for  him  also,  is  only  the  invisible,  the  moral  king- 
dom of  God,  the  ethical  community  of  the  redeemed.  The  historical 
manifestations  of  the  moral  community  of  men  are  the  Churches ; 
they  need  the  means  of  revelation  and  of  "  statutory "  faith.  But 
they  have  the  task  of  putting  this  means  into  the  service  of  the 
moral  life,  and  if  instead  of  this  they  lay  the  main  weight  upon  the 
statutory,  they  fall  into  service  for  a  reward,  and  into  hypocrisy.^ ,.  - 

7.  It  is  connected  with  his  restriction  of  ethical  judgment  by 
making  it  apply  only  to  the  disposition,  that  in  his  Philosophy  of 
Right  Kant  pursued  that  direction  which  treats  the  same,  so  far 
as  possible,  independently  of  morals.  Kant  distinguished  (even 
with  regard  to  ethical  valuation)  between  morality  of  disposition  and 
legality  of  action,  between  voluntary  obedience  to  the  moral  law 
and  external  conformity  of  action  to  what  is  demanded  by  posi- 
tive law.  Actions  are  subject  to  compulsion,  dispositions  never. 
While  morals  speaks  of  the  duties  of  the  disposition,  law  or  right 
is  employed  with  the  external  duties  of  action  which  can  be  en- 
forced, and  does  not  ask  as  to  the  disposition  with  which  they  are 
fulfilled  or  broken. 

And  yet  Kant  makes  freedom,  which  is  the  central  conception  of 
his  whole  practical  philosophy,  the  basis  also  of  his  science  of  right. 
For  right  or  law  is  also  a  demand  of  the  practical  reason,  and  has  in 
this  its  a  priori,  valid  principle :  it  cannot  therefore  be  deduced  as 
a  product  of  empirical  interest,  but  must  be  understood  from  the 


558  G-tr man  Philosophy:  Kanfs  Critique.         [?ART  VI, 

general  rational  vocation  or  destiny  of  man.  This  latter  is  the 
vocation  to  freedom.  The  community  of  men  consists  of  those 
beings  that  are  destined  for  ethical  freedom,  but  are  yet  in  the 
natural  state  of  caprice  or  arbitrary  will,  in  which  they  mutually 
disturb  and  check  each  other  in  their  spheres  of  activity.  Law  has 
for  its  task  to  establish  the  conditions  under  which  the  will  of  the 
one  can  be  united  with  the  will  of  another  according  to  a  universal 
law  of  freedom,  and,  by  enforcing  these  conditions,  to  make  s.ure  ' 
the  freedom  of  personality. 

From  this  principle  follows  analytically,  according  to  Kant's 
deduction,  all  private  law,  public  law,  and  international  law.  At 
the  same  time,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  how  the  principles  of  his 
theory  of  morals  are  everywhere  authoritative  in  this  construction. 
Thus,  in  private  law  it  is  a  far-reaching  principle  —  corresponding 
to  the  categorical  imperative  —  that  man  must  never  be  used  as  a 
thing.  So,  too,  the  penal  law  of  the  state  is  grounded  not  by  the 
task  of  maintaining  the  state  of  right,  but  by  the  ethical  necessity 
of  retribution. 

Law  in  a  state  of  nature  is  therefore  valid  only  in  a  provisory 
way;  it  is  completely,  or,  as  Kant  says,  peremptorily,  valid,  only 
when  it  can  be  certainly  enforced,  that  is,  in  the  state.  The  supreme 
rule  for  justice  in  the  state,  Kant  finds  in  this,  that  nothing  should 
be  decreed  and  carried  out  which  might  not  have  been  resolved 
upon  if  the  state  had  come  into  existence  by  a  contract.  The  con- 
tract theory  is  here  not  an  explanation  of  the  empirical  origin  of 
the  state,  but  a  norm  for  its  task.  This  norm  can  be  fulfilled  with 
any  kind  of  constitution,  provided  only  law  really  rules,  and  not 
arbitrary  caprice.  Its  realisation  is  surest  if  the  three  public 
functions  of  legislation,  administration  and  judicial  procedure  are 
independent  of  each  other,  and  if  the  legislative  power  is  organised 
in  the  "republican"  form  of  the  representative  system,  —  a  pro- 
vision which  is  not  excluded  by  a  monarchical  executive.  It  is  only 
by  this  means,  Kant  thinks,  that  the  freedom  of  the  individual  will 
be  secured,  so  far  as  this  can  exist  without  detriment  to  the  freedom 
of  others ;  and  not  until  all  states  have  adopted  this  constitution  can 
the  state  of  Nature  in  which  they  now  find  themselves  in  their  rela- 
tions to  each  other,  give  place  to  a  state  of  law.  Then,  too,  the  law 
of  nations,  which  is  now  only  provisory,  will  become  "  peremptory." 

Upon  foundations  of  philosophy  of  religion  and  philosophy  of 
law  is  built  up,  finally,  Kant's  theory  of  history.1    This  took  form 

1  Cf.  besides  the  treatises  cited  on  pp.  417-422,  the  treatises,  Idea  of  a  Uni- 
versal History  from  a  Cosmopolitical  Point  of  View  (1784)  [tr.  by  Hastie  in 


CHAP.  1,  §  40.]  Natural  Purposiveness.  559 

in  dependence  upon  the  theories  of  Rousseau  and  Herder,  a  depend- 
ence which  follows  from  the  antithesis  between  those  authors. 
Kant  can  see  in  history  neither  the  aberration  from  an  originally 
good  condition  of  the  human  race,  nor  the  necessary,  self-intelligible 
development  of  man's  original  constitution.  If  there  ever  was  a 
primitive  paradisiacal  state  of  humanity,  it  was  the  state  of  inno- 
cence in  which  man,  living  entirely  according  to  his  natural  impulses, 
was  as  yet  entirely  unconscious  of  his  ethical  task.  The  beginning 
of  the  ivork  of  civilisation,  however,  was  possible  only  through  a  break 
with  the  state  of  Nature,  since  it  was  in  connection  with  its  trans- 
gression that  the  moral  law  came  to  consciousness.  This  (theoret- 
ically incomprehensible)  "Fall"  was  the  beginning  of  history. 
Natural  impulse,  previously  ethically  indifferent,  now  became  evil, 
and  was  to  be  opposed. 

Since  then  the  progress  of  history  has  consisted  not  in  a  growth  of 
human  happiness,  but  in  approximation  to  ethical  perfection,  and  in 
the  extension  of  the  rule  of  ethical  freedom.  With  deep  earnestness 
Kant  takes  up  the  thought  that  the  development  of  civilisation  suc- 
ceeds only  at  the  cost  of  individual  happiness.  He  who  takes  this 
latter  for  his  standard  must  speak  only  of  a  retrogression  in  history. 
The  more  complicated  relations  become,  the  more  the  vital  energy 
of  civilisation  grows,  by  so  much  the  more  do  individual  wants 
increase,  and  the  less  is  the  prospect  of  satisfying  them.  But  just 
this  refutes  the  opinion  of  the  Enlighteners,  as  if  happiness  were 
man's  vocation.  The  ethical  development  of  the  whole,  the  control 
of  practical  reason,  grows  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  the  empirical  satis- 
faction of  the  individual.  And  since  history  represents  the  outer 
social  life  of  humanity,  its  goal  is  the  completion  of  right  and  law, 
the  establishing  of  the  best  political  constitution  among  all  peoples, 
perpetual  peace  —  a  goal  whose  attainment,  as  is  the  case  with  all 
ideals,  lies  at  an  infinite  distance. 


§  40.  Natural  Purposiveness. 

A.  Stadler,  Kant's  Teleologie,    Berlin,  1874. 

H.  Cohen,  KanVs  Begrundung  der  JEsthetik.   Berlin,  1889. 

[J.  H.  Tufts,  The  Sources  and  Development  of  Kant's  Teleology.  Chicago,  1892.] 

By  his  sharp  formulation  of  the  antithesis  of  Nature  and  Free- 
dom, of  necessity  and  purposiveness  (or  adaptation  to  ends),  the 


Principles  of  Polities']  ;  Recension  von  Herder's  Ideen  (1785) ;  Muthmasslicher 
Anfang  der  Weltgeschfahte  (1786)  ;  Das  Ende  aller  Dinge  (1794). 


560  German  Philosophy  :  Kant's  Critique.         [PART  VI. 

theoretical  and  practical  reason  diverge  so  -widely  in  Kant's  system, 
that  the  unity  of  the  reason  seems  endangered.  The  critical  phil- 
osophy needs~  therefore,  in  a  manner  that  prefigures  the  methodical 
development  of  its  system,1  a  third  principle  that  shall  afford  a  defin- 
itive mediation,  and  in  which  the  synthesis  of  the  above  opposites 
shall  be  effected. 

1.  Psychologically,  the  sphere  in  which  this  problem  is  to  be 
solved  can,  in  accordance  with  the  triple  division  adopted  by  Kant 
(cf.  §  36,  8)  ,  be  only  the  faculty  of  feeling  or  "  approval"  This,  in  fact, 
takes  an  intermediate  position  between  ideation  and  desire.  Feeling 
or  approval  presupposes  a  complete  idea  of  the  object,  —  complete 
in  the  theoretical  sense,  —  and  sustains  a  synthetic  relation  to  this  ; 
and  this  synthesis  as  a  feeling  of  pleasure  or  pain,  or  as  approval  or 
disapproval,  always  expresses  in  some  way  that  the  object  in  ques- 
tion is  felt  by  the  subject  to  be  either  purposive,  i.e.  adapted  to  its 
end,  or  not  to  the  purpose. 

The  standard  of  this  valuation  may  have  existed  beforehand  as  a 
conscious  design,  forming  thus  a  case  of  intentional  volition,  and  in 
such  cases  the  objects  are  termed  useful  or  injurious  ;  but  there  are 
also  feelings  which,  without  being  referred  to  any  conscious  purposes 
whatever,  characterise  their  objects  immediately  as  agreeable  or  dis- 
agreeable, and  in  these  also  a  determination  with  reference  to  an 
end  must  be  somehow  authoritative. 

The  critique  of  the  reason,  accordingly,  has  to  ask,  Are  there 
feelings  a  priori,  or  approvals  that  have  universal  and  necessary  valid- 
ity? and  it  is  clear  that  the  decision  upon  this  case  is  dependent 
upon  the  nature  of  the  ends  which  determine  the  feelings  and 
approvals  in  question.  With  regard  to  the  purposes  of  the  will,  this 
question  has  been  already  decided  by  the  Critique  of  the  Practical 
Reason;  the  only  end  of  the  conscious  will  which  has  a  priori 
validity  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  categorical  imperative,  and  on  this 
side,  therefore,  only  the  feelings  of  approval  or  disapproval  in  which 
we  employ  the  ethical  predicates  "  good  "  and  "  bad,"  can  be  regarded 
as  necessary  and  universally  valid.  Tor  this  reason  the  new  prob- 
lem restricts  itself  to  the  a  priori  character  of  those  feelings  in 
which  no  conscious  purpose  or  design  precedes.  But  these,  as  may 
be  seen  from  the  beginning,  are  the  feelings  of  the  Beautiful  and  the 
Sublime. 

2.  But  the  problem  widens  upon  another  side,  when  we  take  into 
consideration  the  logical  functions  which  are  concerned  in  all  feel- 


r %  ?°te  at  the  close  of  the  ^froduction  of  the  Critique  of  Judgment,  W., 


er 

VII.  oo  I. 


CHAP.  1,  §  40.]    Natural  Purposiveness :  the  Judgment.  561 

ings  and  approvals.  The  judgments  in  which  these  are  expressed 
are  evidently  all  synthetic.  Predicates  such  as  agreeable,  useful, 
beautiful,  and  good,  are  not  analytically  contained  in  the  subject, 
but  express  the  worth  of  the  object  with  reference  to  an  end ;  they 
are  estimations  of  adaptation,  and  contain  in  all  cases  the  subor- 
dination of  the  object  to  its  end.  Now  in  the  psychological  scheme 
which  lies  at  the  basis  of  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  Kant  desig- 
nates the  faculty  of  subsuming  the  particular  under  the  general  by 
the  name  Judgment.  And  this,  too,  was  regarded  as  playing  among 
the  theoretical  functions,  also,  the  mediating  part  between  Reason 
and  Understanding,  in  such  a  sort  that  the  former  gives  principles, 
the  latter  objects,  while  the  Judgment  performs  the  task  of  applying 
the  principles  to  the  objects. 

But  in  its  theoretical  use  the  Judgment  is  analytical,  since  it 
determines  its  objects  by  general  conceptions  according  to  rules 
of  formal  logic ;  the  attainment  of  a  correct  conclusion  depends  only 
on  finding  the  appropriate  minor  for  a  given  major,  or  vice  versa. 
In  contrast  with  this  determining  Judgment,  which  thus  needs  no 
"  Critique,"  Kant  sets  the  reflecting  Judgment,  in  the  case  of  which 
the  synthesis  consists  just  in  subordination  to  an  end.  And  accord- 
ingly the  problem  of  the  Critique  of  the  Judgment  takes  this  formu- 
lation :  7s  it  a  priori  possible  to  judge  Nature  to  be  adapted  to  an  end? 
Evidently  this  is  the  highest  synthesis  of  the  critical  philosophy ; 
the  application  of  the  category  of  the  practical  reason  to  the  object  of 
the  theoretical.  It  is  clear  from  the  outset  that  this  application  itself 
can  be  neither  theoretical  nor  practical,  neither  a  "knowing  nor  a 
willing :  it  is  only  a  looking  at  Nature  from  the  point  of  view  of  pur- 
posiveness  or  adaptation  to  ends. 

If  the  reflecting  Judgment  gives  to  this  contemplation  the  direc- 
tion of  judging  Nature  with  regard  to  her  adaptation  to  the  contem- 
plating subject  as  such,  it  proceeds  cesthetically,  i.e.  having  regard  to 
our  mode  of  feeling  or  sensibility ;  *  if,  on  the  contrary,  it  regards 
Nature  as  if  she  were  purposive  in  herself,  then  it  proceeds  teleologi- 
cally  in  the  narrower  sense,  and  so  the  Critique  of  the  Judgment  is 
divided  into  the  investigation  of  aesthetic  and  teleological  prob- 
lems. 

3.  In  the  first  part  Kant  is  primarily  concerned  to  separate  the 
cesthetic  judgment  with  exactness  from  the  kinds  of  judgments  of 
feeling  or  approval  which  border  upon  it  on  both  sides,  and  to  this 
end  he  proceeds  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  feeling  of  the  beauti- 


wwweise ;  thus  Kant  justifies  his  change  in  terminology,  W.,  VII. 
if.  IL  60  f .  and  above,  p.  483  f. 


562  G-erman  Philosophy:  Kant's  Critique.        [PART  VL 

ful  The  beautiful  shares  with  the  good  the  a  priori  character,  but 
the  good  is  that  which  agrees  with  the  end  presented  as  a  norm  in 
the  moral  law,  while  the  beautiful,  on  the  contrary,  pleases  without 
a  conception.  For  this  reason,  also,  it  is  impossible  to  set  up  a 
universal  criterion  which  shall  contain  a  content  according  to  which 
beauty  shall  be  judged  with  logical  clearness.  An  aesthetic  doctrine 
is  impossible;  there  is  only  a  "Critique  of  the  Taste,"  that  is,  an 
investigation  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  a  priori  validity  of  aesthetic 
judgments. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  beautiful  shares  with  the  agreeable  its 
conceptionless  quality,  the  absence  of  a  conscious  standard  of 
judgment,  and,  therefore,  the  immediacy  of  the  impression.  But 
the  distinction  here  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  agreeable  is  something 
individually  and  contingently  gratifying,  whereas  the  beautiful 
forms  the  object  of  universal  and  necessary  pleasure.1  The  princi- 
ple that  there  is  no  disputing  over  tastes,  is  true  only  in  the  sense 
that  in  matters  of  taste  nothing  is  to  be  effected  by  proofs  with  con- 
ceptions, but  this  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  an  appeal  to 
universally  valid  feelings. 

Finally,  the  beautiful  distinguishes  itself  from  both  the  good  and 
the  agreeable,  in  that  it  is  the  object  of  a  completely  disinterested 
pleasure.  This  appears  in  the  circumstance  that  the  empirical  reality 
of  its  object  is  a  matter  of  complete  indifference  for  the  aesthetic 
judgment.  The  hedonic  feelings  all  presuppose  the  material  presence 
of  the  phenomena  which  excite  them  ;  ethical  approval  or  disapproval 
concerns  just  the  realisation  of  the  moral  end  in  willing  and  acting  ; 
the  aesthetic  feelings,  on  the  contrary,  require  as  their  condition  a 
pure  delight  in  the  mere  represented  image  of  the  object,  whether  the 
same  is  objectively  present  for  knowledge  or  not.  The  aesthetic  life 
lacks  the  power  of  the  feelings  of  personal  weal  and  woe,  just  as  it 
lacks  the  earnestness  of  a  universally  worthy  work  for  ethical  ends  ; 
it  is  the  mere  play  of  ideas  in  the  imagination. 

Such  a  delight  which  relates  not  to  the  object,  but  only  to  the 
image  of  the  object,  cannot  concern  the  objective  material  of  the  object, 

—  for  this  always  stands  in  relation  to  the  interests  of  the  subject, 

—  but  only  the  form  in  which  the  object  is  presented  to  the  mind; 
and  in  this,  therefore,  if  anywhere,  is  to  be  sought  the  ground  of  the 
a  priori  synthesis  which  belongs  to  the  aesthetic  judgments.     The 
purposiveness  of  aesthetic  objects  cannot  consist  in  their  adaptation 
to  some  interest  or  other  ;  it  can  be  only  in  their  adaptation  to  the 


,c/CfVF'  -%?cke'  Kant's  Vnterscheidung  fas  SMnen  vom  Angenehmen 
Otrassbuig,  1889),  where  the  analogy  to  the  judgments  of  perception  and  of 
experience  is  emphasised. 


CHAP.  1,  §40.]       Natural  Purposiveness :  Beauty.  563 

knowing  Forms,  by  the  aid  of  which  they  are  imaged  in  the  mind. 
But  the  faculties  which  are  active  in  presenting  every  object  are 
sensibility  and  understanding.  The  feeling  of  beauty  arises,  there- 
fore, in  connection  with  those  objects  in  the  apprehension  of  which 
in  the  imagination  sensibility  and  understanding  co-operate  in 
harmonious  manner.  Such  objects  are  purposive  with  regard  to 
their  working  upon  our  ideational  activity,  and  to  this  relates  the 
disinterested  delight  which  manifests  itself  in  the  feeling  of  their 
beauty.1 

But  this  relation  to  the  formal  principles  of  objective  ideation 
has  its  ground,  not  in  merely  individual  activities,  but  in  the 
"consciousness  in  general,"  in  the  "  supersensuous  substrate  of 
humanity."  On  this  account  the  feeling  of  a  fitness  or  purposive- 
ness  of  objects  with  reference  to  this  consciousness  in  general  is 
universally  communicable,  though  not  capable  of  proof  by  concep- 
tions, and  from  this  is  explained  the  a  priori  character  of  the 
aesthetic  judgments. 

4.  While  the  "undesigned  fitness"  or  appropriateness  of  the 
beautiful  is  thus  set  in  relation  with  the  working  of  the  object  upon 
the  cognitive  functions,  Kant  conceives  the  nature  of  the  sublime 
from  the  point  of  view  of  an  adaptation  of  the  working  of  the  object 
to  the  relation  between  the  sensuous  and  supersensuous  parts  of 
human  nature. 

While  the  beautiful  signifies  a  delightful  rest  in  the  play  of  the 
knowing  faculties,  the  impression  of  the  sublime  is  effected  through 
the  medium  of  a  painful  feeling  of  inadequacy.  In  the  presence  of 
the  immeasurable  greatness  or  overpowering  might  of  objects,  we 
feel  the  inability  of  our  sensuous  perception  to  master  them,  as  an 
oppression  and  a  casting  down;  but  the  supersensuous  power  of 
our  reason  raises  itself  above  this  our  sensuous  insufficiency.  If 
here  the  imagination  has  to  do  only  with  extensive  magnitudes,  — 
the  mathematically  sublime,  —  then  the  firmly  shaping  activity  of 
the  theoretical  reason  gains  the  victory ;  but  if,  on  the  contrary,  it 
has  to  do  with  the  relations  of  power, — the  dynamically  sublime, — 
then  the  superiority  of  our  moral  worth  to  all  the  power  of  Nature 
comes  to  consciousness.  In  both  cases  the  discomfort  over  our  sen- 
suous inferiority  is  richly  outweighed  and  overcome  by  the  triumph, 
of  our  higher  rational  character.  And  since  this  is  the  appropriate 


1  [A  fragment  published  "by  Reicke  in  his  Lose  Blatter  aus  Ean&s  Nachlass 
(B.  II.  p.  112)  shows  that  Kant  at  one  time  connected  this  adaptation  with  the. 
psychological  and  physiological  conception  of  a  general  furtherance  of  life, 
whether  through  the  senses  or  through  the  play  of  intellectual  faculties.    Cf, 
J.  H.  Tufts,  op.  cit.,  p.  35  f.] 


564  German  Philosophy :  Kant's  Critique.         [PART  VI. 

relation  of  the  two  sides  of  our  being,  these  objects  have  an  exalting, 
«  subliming"  effect,  and  produce  the  feeling  of  a  delight  of  the  reason, 
and  this  feeling,  again,  because  it  is  based  only  upon  the  relation  of 
our  ideational  Forms,  is  universally  communicable  and  of  a  priori 
operation. 

5.  Kant's  aesthetic  theory,  accordingly,  in  spite  of  its  "subjec- 
tive v  point  of  departure,  takes  essentially  the  course  of  an  explana- 
tion of  the  beautiful  and  the  sublime  in  Nature;  and  determines  the 
same  through  the  relation  of  the  ideational  Forms.  Hence  the 
philosopher  finds  pure  beauty  only  where  the  aesthetic  judgment 
relates  solely  to  forms  that  have  no  meaning.  Where  with  the 
delight  there  is  mingled  a  regard  for  the  meaning  of  the  forms  for 
any  norm  whatever,  however  indefinite,  there  we  have  dependent 
beauty.  This  appears  everywhere  where  the  aesthetic  judgment  is 
directed  toward  objects  in  which  our  thought  puts  a  reference  to  an 
end.  Such  norms  of  dependent  beauty  rise  necessarily  as  soon  as  we 
contemplate  in  the  individual  phenomenon  the  relation  to  the  class 
which  it  represents.  There  is  no  norm  of  beauty  for  landscapes, 
arabesques,  or  flowers,  but  there  may  be  such  perhaps  for  the  higher 
types  of  the  organic  world.  Such  norms  are  sesthetic  ideals,  and  the 
true  ideal  of  the  sesthetic  judgment  is  man. 

The  presentation  of  the  ideal  is  artt  the  power  of  sesthetic  produc- 
tion. But  while  this  is  a  function  of  man  which  is  performed  with 
reference  to  an  end,  its  product  will  make  the  impression  of  the  beau- 
tiful only  when  it  appears  as  undesigned,  disinterested,  and  free 
from  the  attempt  to  represent  a  conception,  as  is  the  case  with  the 
beauty  of  Nature.  Technical  art  produces  structures  corresponding 
to  definite  ends  according  to  rules  and  designs,  —  structures  which 
are  adapted  to  satisfy  definite  interests.  Fine  art  must  work  upon 
the  feeling  as  does  a  purposeless  product  of  Nature;  it  must  "be 
able  to  be  regarded  as  Nature." 

This,  therefore,  is  the  secret  of  artistic  creation,  and  the  character- 
istic element  in  it,  viz.  that  the  mind  which  builds  with  a  purpose 
works,  nevertheless,  in  the  same  way  as  Nature,  which  builds  with- 
out designs  and  disinterestedly.  The  great  artist  does  not  create 
according  to  general  rules;  he  creates  the  rules  themselves  in  his 
involuntary  work;  he  is  original  and  prototypal.  Genius  is  an  in- 
telligence that  works  like  Nature. 

In  the  realm  of  man's  rational  activity  the  desired  synthesis  of 
freedom  and  nature,  of  purposiveness  and  necessity,  of  practical  and 
theoretical  function,  is  then  represented  by  genius,  which  with 
undesigning  purposiveness  or  appropriateness  creates  the  work  of 
fine  art. 


CHAP.  1,  §  40.]      Natural  Purposiveness :   Organisms.  565 

6.  In  the  Critique  of  the  Tekological  Judgment  the  most  promi- 
nent task  is  to  establish  the  relations  which,  from  the  points  of  view 
of  transcendental  idealism,  exist  between  the  scientific  explanation 
of  Nature  and  the  consideration  of  the  adaptation  that  dwells  within 
her.  The  theory  of  natural  science  can  in  all  lines  be  only  mechanical. 
"End"  (Ziceck)  is  not  a  category  or  a  constitutive  principle  of 
objective  knowledge :  all  explanation  of  Nature  consists  in  pointing 
out  the  causal  necessity  with  which  one  phenomenon  produces 
another ;  a  phenomenon  can  never  be  made  intelligible  by  emphasis- 
ing its  adaptation  or  fitness.  Such  "  lazy  "  teleology  is  the  death  of 
all  philosophy  of  Nature.  The  apprehension  of  purposiveness  can, 
therefore,  never  profess  to  be  an  act  of  knowledge. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  standpoint  of  the  mechanical  explana- 
tion of  Nature  would  give  us  the  right  to  completely  reject  teleologi- 
cal  consideration  of  Nature,  only  in  case  we  were  in  a  position  to 
make  intelligible  with  the  aid  of  scientific  conceptions  the  whole 
system  of  experience,  even  to  the  last  remnant,  in  principle  at  least. 
But  should  points  be  found  where  scientific  theory  is  inadequate  for 
the  explanation  of  the  given  material,  not  indeed  on  account  of  the 
limited  nature  of  the  material  hitherto  available  in  human  experi- 
ence, but  on  account  of  the  permanent  form  of  the  principle  which 
determines  this  material,  then  in  these  points  the  possibility  of 
supplementing  our  knowledge  by  a  teleological  consideration  must 
be  conceded,  if,  at  the  same  time,  it  appears  that  that  which  is 
mechanically  inexplicable  makes  upon  us  the  inevitable  impression 
of  the  purposive.  Critical  teleology  can,  therefore,  concern  only  the 
limiting  conceptions  of  the  mechanical  explanation  of  Nature. 

The  first  of  these  is  Life.  A  mechanical  explanation  of  the  organ- 
ism has  not  only  not  yet  succeeded,  but  it  is,  according  to  Kant, 
impossible  in  principle.  All  life  can  be  explained  only  through 
other  life.  We  are  to  understand  the  individual  functions  of  organ- 
isms through  the  mechanical  connection  of  their  parts  with  each 
other  and  with  the  environment;  but  we  shall  always  be  obliged  to 
bring  into  our  account  the  peculiar  nature  of  organised  matter  and 
its  capacity  of  reaction,  as  a  factor  incapable  of  further  reduction. 
An  archseologist  of  Nature  may  trace  back  the  genealogy  of  life,  the 
origination  of  one  species  from  another  according  to  mechanical  prin- 
ciples as  far  as  possible ; 1  he  will  always  be  obliged  to  stop  with  an 
original  organisation  which  he  cannot  explain  through  the  mere 
mechanism  of  inorganic  matter. 


1  The  passages,  in  which  Kant  anticipated  the  latter  theory  of  descent,  are 
collected  in  Fr.  Schultze,  Kant  und  Darwin  (Jena,  1874). 


566  German  Philosophy :  Kant's  Critique.         [PART  VI. 

This  explanation  is  impossible  because  the  essential  nature  of  an 
organism  is,  that  the  whole  is  determined  by  the  parts  just  as  the 
part  is  determined  by  the  whole,— that  every  member  is  both  cause 
and  effect  of  the  whole.  This  reciprocal  causality  is  incomprehen- 
sible mechanically :  the  organism  is  the  miracle  in  the  world  of 
experience.1  It  is  just  this  inter-related  play  of  forms  and  forces 
which  in  the  organism  makes  the  impression  of  the  purposive,  or  of 
adaptation  to  an  end.  Therefore  the  teleological  view  of  organisms 
is  necessary  and  universally  valid.  But  it  must  never  profess  to  be 
anything  else  than  a  mode  of  consideration.  Thought  must  never 
be  satisfied  with  this  in  an  individual  case ;  but  the  insight  into  this 
purposeful  activity  must  rather  serve  as  a  heuristic  principle  for 
seeking  out  the  mechanical  connections  by  which  this  purposeful 
vitality  realises  itself  in  each  particular  case. 

7.  A  second  limit  of  the  knowledge  of  Nature  Kant  designates 
by  the  name  of  the  Specification  of  Nature.  From  pure  reason  arise 
the  general  Forms  of  the  uniformity  of  Nature  [i.e.  causality,  etc.], 
but  only  these.  The  particular  laws  of  Nature  do  indeed  range 
themselves  beneath  those  general  laws,  but  do  not  follow  from  them. 
Their  particular  content  is  only  empirical,  i.e.  from  the  standpoint 
of  pure  reason  it  is  contingent,  and  has  only  the  force  and  validity 
of  an  actual  matter  of  fact,2  [not  that  of  a  priori  necessity].  It  is 
never  to  be  understood  why  there  is  just  this  and  not  some  other 
content.  But  at  the  same  time,  this  particular  aspect  of  Nature 
proves  completely  purposive;  on  the  one  hand,  with  reference  to 
our  knowledge,  since  the  wealth  of  the  matter  of  fact  in  our  experi- 
ence shows  itself  to  be  adapted  to  be  ordered  under  the  a  priori 
Forms  of  experience, — and  on  the  other  hand,  as  purposive  in  itself, 
also,  inasmuch  as  the  whole  varied  multiplicity  of  the  given  fits 
together  to  form  a  concrete  world  of  reality,  which  is  objectively 
unitary. 

In  this  lie  the  reasons  a  priori  for  regarding  Nature  as  a  whole 
from  the  point  of  mew  of  purposiveness,  and  for  seeing  in  the  vast 
mechanism  of  her  causal  connections  the  realising  of  a  supreme  end 
of  reason.  But  in  accordance  with  the  primacy  of  the  practical 
reason,  this  end  can  be  none  other  than  the  moral  law,  and  thus  the 
teleological  consideration  issues  in  the  moral  faith  in  the  divine 
world-order. 

Finally,  if  we  consider  Nature  as  purposive,  in  the  sense  that  in 

1  Cf.  above,  p.  480. 

2  Here  Kant  joins  on  in  an  extremely  interesting  manner  to  the  latest  specu- 
lations of  ,the  Leibnizian  Monadology ;  cf.  above,  p.  425  [cf.  further  on  this  point 
Ueber  eine  Entdeckung,  etc.,  and  J.  Dewey,  Leibniz's  New  Essays,  last  chapter] 


CHAP.  1,  §  40.]  Natural  Purposiveness.  567 

it  the  universal  Forms  and  the  particular  contents  completely  har- 
monise with  each  other,  then  the  divine  mind,  as  the  reason  which 
creates  the  content  at  the  same  time  with  its  Forms,  appears  as 
intellectual  perception  or  intuitive  understanding.1  In  this  conception 
the  ideas  of  the  three  Critiques  run  together. 


1  Critique  of  Judg.,  §  77.    Cf.  G.  Thiele,  KanTs  Intellectuelle  Anschauung 
(Halle,  1876). 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF   IDEALISM. 

R.  Haym,  Die  romantische  Schule.    Berlin,  1870. 
[A.  Seth,  From  Kant  to  HegeL    Lond.  1882.] 

THE  development  of  the  principles  won  by  Kant,  to  the  compre- 
hensive systems  of  German  philosophy,  took  place  under  the  co- 
operation of  Very  different  kinds  of  circumstances.  Externally,  it 
was  of  primary  importance  that  the  doctrine  of  criticism,  after 
at  first  experiencing  the  fortune  of  being  neglected  and  misunder- 
stood, was  first  raised  as  a  standard  by  the  leading  spirits  of  the 
University  of  Jena,  and  made  the  centre  of  a  brilliant  teaching 
activity.  But  in  this  lay  the  incitement  to  build  out  a  unified  and 
impressive  system  of  instruction,  the  foundations  of  which  Kant  had 
laid  by  a  careful  separation  and  fine  arrangement  of  philosophical 
problems.  The  systematic  impulse  ruled  philosophical  thought  at 
no  period  so  energetically  as  at  this,  and  this  was  due  in  good  part 
to  the  desires  of  an  audience  in  a  state  of  high  and  many-sided 
excitement,  which  demanded  from  the  teacher  a  complete  scientific 
Weltanschauung. 

But  in  Jena  philosophy  found  itself  close  by  Weimar,  the  resi- 
dence of  Goethe,  and  the  main  literary  city  of  Germany.  In  constant 
personal  contact,  poetry  and  philosophy  mutually  stimulated  each 
other,  and  after  Schiller  had  joined  the  thoughts  of  the  two,  their 
interaction  became  constantly  more  intimate  and  deep  with  their 
rapid  forward  movement, 

A  third  factor  was  of  a  purely  philosophical  nature.  A  coinci- 
dence that  was  rich  in  results  willed  that  just  at  the  time  when  the 
Critique  of  Eeason  of  the  "all-crushing"  Konigsberger  began  to 
break  its  path,  the  most  firmly  articulated  and  most  influential  of 
all  metaphysical  systems,  the  type  of  "dogmatism,"  became  known 
in  Germany — Spinozism.  Through  the  strife  between  Jacobi  and 
Mendelssohn,  which  related  to  Lessing's  attitude  to  Spinoza,  the 
latter's  doctrine  was  brought  into  the  most  lively  interest,  and  thus, 

568 


CHAP.  2.]  The  Development  of  Idealism.  569 

in  spite  of  the  deep  opposition  which  prevails  between  the  two, 
Kant  and  Spinoza  became  the  two  poles  about  which  the  thought 
of  the  following  generation  moved. 

The  predominance  of  the  Kantian  influence  may  be  chiefly  recog- 
nised in  that  the  common  character  of  all  these  systems  is  idealism;1 
they  all  develop  out  of  the  antagonistic  thoughts  which  were  inter- 
woven in  Kant's  treatment  of  the  conception  thing-in-itself.  After 
a  short  time  of  critical  hesitation,  Fichte,  ScMling,  and  Hegel  took 
the  lead  in  the  unresting  effort  to  understand  the  world  as  a  System 
of  Reason.  Over  against  the  bold  energy  of  metaphysical  specula- 
tion of  these  thinkers,  which  was  extended  by  numerous  disciples 
to  a  many-coloured  variety,  there  appears  in  men  like  Schleiermacher 
and  Herbart  the  Kantian  reminder  of  the  limits  of  human  knowl- 
edge; while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  same  motive  unfolded  in  the 
construction  of  a  Metaphysics  of  the  Irrational  in  Schelling's  later 
doctrine,  and  with  Schopenhauer. 

Common  to  all  these  systems,  however,  is  the  all-sidedness  of 
philosophical  interest,  the  wealth  of  creative  thoughts,  the  fineness 
of  feeling  for  the  needs  of  modern  culture,  and  the  victorious  power 
of  an  elaboration  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  principle,  of  the  his- 
torical material  of  ideas. 

The  Critique  of  the  Pure  Season  found  little  regard  at  first,  and  then  later 
violent  opposition.  The  most  important  impetus  to  this  was  given  by  Friedrich 
Heinrich  Jacob!  (1743-1819,  finally  President  of  the  Munich  Academy).  His 
main  treatise  bears  the  title,  David  Hume  liber  den  Glauben,  oder  Idealismus 
und  Realismus  (1787)  ;  in  addition  to  this  the  treatise  TJeber  das  Unternehmen 
des  Kriticismus  die  Vernunft  zu  Verstande  su  bringen  (1802).  The  treatise 
Von  den  gottlichen  Dingen  und  ihrer  Offenbarung  (1811)  was  directed  against 
Schelling.  Cf.  also  his  introduction  to  his  philosophical  writings  in  the  second 
volume  of  the  complete  edition  (6  vols.,  Leips.  1812-1825).  His  main  disciple 
was  Fr.  Koppen  (1775-1858  ;  Darstellung  des  Wesens  der  PhilosopMe,  Nurem- 
berg, 1810  ;  cf,  on  him  the  art.  K.  by  W.  Windelband  in  Ersch  u.  Grniber's  JEnc.). 

As  further  opponents  of  Kant  are  to  be  named  Gottlob  Ernst  Schulze 
(1761-1823),  the  author  of  the  anonymous  writing,  Jfinesidemus  oder  uber  die 
Fundamente  der  Elementarphilosophie  (1792),  and  of  a  Eritik  der  theoretischen 
Philosophie  (Hamburg,  1801)  ;  J.  G.  Hamann  (cf.  above,  p.  510),  whose 
"review"  of  the  Critique  was  first  printed  in  1801  in  Reinhold's  Beitragen, 

1  Let  it  be  remarked  here  at  the  outset  that  not  only  the  main  series  of  the 
development  from  Reinhold  to  Fichte,  Schelling,  Krause,  Schleiermacher,  and 
Hegel  is  idealistic,  but  also  the  series  which  is  usually  opposed  to  this,  Herbart 
and  Schopenhauer,  in  so  far,  that  is,  as  by  "idealism"  is  understood  the 
dissolution  or  resolution  (Auflosung)  of  the  world  qf  experience  in  the  process 
of  consciousness.  Herbart  and  Schopenhauer  are  "idealists"  in  the  same 
degree  as  Kant;  they  posit  things-in-themselves,  but  the  world  of  the  senses 
is  to  them  also  a  "phenomenon  of  consciousness."  With  Schopenhauer  this 
is  usually  noted.  With  Herbart,  on  the  contrary,  the  circumstance  that  he 
called  the  things-in-themselves  "Reals"  (Realen),  in  connection  with  the  fact 
that  for  entirely  other  reasons  he  opposed  the  Fichte-Hegel  line  of  thought, 
has  led  to  the  completely  distorted  and  misleading  mode  of  expression  which 
has  run  through  all  previous  text-books  of  the  history  of  philosophy,  of  terming 
his  doctrine  "realism,"  and  him  in  opposition  to  the  "  idealists  "  a  "realist." 


570  German  Philosophy.  [PART  VI. 

and  G.  Herder  in  his  treatise,  Verstand  und  Vernunft,  eine  Metakritik  zur 
Kritik  der  reinen  Yermurft  riTOQ),  also  in  thp  KfiUi^n^  1800. 

Jac.  Sig.  Beck  a7til-l842 ;  Einzig  mvgltcher  titandpunkt,  aus  welchem  die 
kritisc'he  "Phllos^hie  beurtheilt  werften  muss,  Riga,  1796)  worked  more  posi- 
tively in  the  development  of  the  Kantian  doctrine,  as  did  also  Salomon  Maimon 
(died  1800;  Versuch  einer  Transscendmtalpliilosoyliie,  1790;  Versuch  einer 
neuen  Lngik,  17U4;  Die  Eategomn  des  Aristoteles,  1794;  cf.  J.  Witte,  8.  M., 
Berlin,  1870). 

In  Jena  the  Kantian  philosophy  was  introduced  by  Professor  Erh.  Schmid ; 
its  main  organ  was  the  Allgeiiieine  Littemturztitunfj,  which  appeared  there  after 
1785,  edited  by  Schutz  and  Hufeland.  The  greatest  success  for  extending  the 
doctrine  of  Criticism  was  gained  by  K.  L.  Reinhold's  Brief e  ttber  die  kaJitische 
Philosophic  which  first  appeared  in  Wieland's  Deutscher  Merkur  (1786). 

The  same  author  begins  also  the  series  of  re-shapings  and  transformations 
of  the  doctrine.  Karl  Leonh.  Reinhold  (1758-1823 ;  fled  from  the  cloister  of 
the  Barnabites  in  Vienna ;  1788,  Professor  in  Jena ;  from  1794  Professor  in 
Kiel)  wrote  Yersuch  einer  neuen  Theorie  des  menschlichen  VorsteUungsvermo- 
gens  (Jena,  1789)  and  Das  Fundament  des  philosophischen  Wissens  (1791). 
Later,  after  many  changes  in  his  standpoint,  he  fell  into  fantasticalness  and  was 
forgotten.  His  teaching  presented  in  his  Jena  period  gave  in  crude  outlines 
a  superficially  systematic  exposition,  which  soon  became  the  school-system  of 
the  ^Kantians/'  To  tear  from  forgetfulness  the  names  of  these  numerous 
men  is  not  for  this  place. 

Much  finer,  richer,  and  more  independent  was  the  work  which  Er.  Schiller 
gave  to  Kant's  ideas.  Of  his  philosophical  writings  are  here  principally  to  be 
named  On  Grace  and  Dignity,  1793 ;  On  the  Sublime,  1793 ;  Letters  upon  the 
jEsthetical  Education  of  Jfa»,  1795 ;  On  Naive  and  Sentimental  Poetry,  1796 
[Eng.  tr.  Bonn  Library].  In  addition  to  these  the  philosophical  poems  such  as 
Die  Kiinstler,  Ideal  und  Leben,  and  the  correspondence  with  Korner,  Goethe, 
and  W.  v.  Humboldt.  Cf.  K.  Tomaschek,  Sch.  in  seinem  Verhaltniss  zur 
Wissenschaft,  Vienna,  1802 ;  K.  Twesten,  Sch.  in  seinem  Verhaltniss  zur  Wis- 
senschaft,  Berlin,  1863 ;  Kuno  Fischer,  Sch.  als  Philosoph,  2d  ed.,  1891  j  Fr. 
Ueberweg,  Sch.  als  Historiker  und  Philosophy  pub.  by  Brasch,  Leips,  1884. 

Johann  Gottlieb  Pichte,  born  1762,  at  Rammenau  in  Lusatia,  educated  in 
the  "  Princes'  School "  at  Pforta  and  at  the  University  of  Jena,  after  he  had 
experienced  many  changes  of  fortune  as  a  private  teacher  and  had  become 
famous  by  his  Kritih  aller  Offenbantng,  which  appeared  by  chance  anony- 
mously, and  was  universally  ascribed  to  Kant  (1792),  was  called  in  1794,  while 
living  in  Zurich,  to  become  Reinhold' s  successor  as  Professor  at  Jena.  After  a 
brilliant  activity  there,  he  was  dismissed  in  1799,  on  account  of  the  "atheism 
controversy  "  (cf.  his  Appellation  an  das  Publicum  and  the  G-erichtliche  Verant- 
wortungsschrijV),  and  went  to  Berlin,  where  he  came  into  connection  with  the 
Romanticists.  In  1805  he  was  for  a  time  assigned  to  the  University  of  Erlangen ; 
in  1806  he  went  to  Konigsberg,  and  then  returned  to  Berlin,  where  in  the  winter 
of  1807  to  1808  he  delivered  the  Reden  an  die  deutsche  Nation.  At  the  newly 
founded  Berlin  University  he  acted  as  Professor  and  as  the  first  Rector.  He 
died,  1814,  of  hospital  fever.  His  main  writings  are  Qrundlage  der  gesammten 
Wissenschaftslehre,  1794;  Grundriss  des  mgenthilmlichen  der  Wissenschafts- 
lehret  1795  [these  two,  together  with  other  minor  works,  are  translated  by 
A.  E.  Kroeger,  under  the  title  The  Science  of  Knowledge,  Lond.  1889]  ;  Natur- 
recht,  1796  [tr.  by  A.  E.  Koeger,  The  Science  of  Rights,  Lond.  1889]  ;  the 
two  Introductions  to  the  Wissenschaftslehre,  1797  ;  System  der  Sitienlehre,  1798 ; 
Die  Bestimmitng  des  Menschen,  1800;  Der  geschlossene  Handelsstaat,  1801; 
'Ueber  das  Wesen  des  Gelehrten,  1805;  Grundsilge  des  gegenwdrtigen  Zeitalters, 
1800 ;  Anweisung  zum  seligen  Leben,  1806  [of  the  Iztst  five  all  but  the  second 
are  trans,  by  W.  Smith,  JMchte's  Popular  Works,  Lond.  1889.  There  are  also 
translations  and  criticisms  in  Jour,  of  Spec.  Phil] ;  Works,  8  vols..  Berlin. 
JoiSJ f- LPoat-  works»  3  vols-»  Bonn»  1834  i  Life  and  Correspondence,  Sulzbach, 
1830;  Correspondence  with  Schelling,  Leips.  1856;  cf.  J.  H.  Lowe,  Die  Philos 
Fichte's,  Stuttgart,  1862 ;  R.  Adamson,  Fichte,  Lond.  1881 ;  [also  art.  in  JSnc. 
JSrit.;  C.  C.  Everett,  Fiehte's  Science  of  Knowledge,  Chicago,  1883]. 


CHAP.  2.]  Development  of  Idealism.  571 

Friedrich  Wilhelm  Joseph  Schelling,  born,  1775,  at  Leonberg  in  TTtirtem- 
berg,  came  to  Leipsic  in  1796  after  his  education  in  Tubingen,  was  made  Pro- 
fessor in  Jena  in  1798,  and  in  Wiirzburg  in  1803.  Called  in  1806  to  the  Munich 
Academy,  and  for  a  time  (1820-1826)  active  at  the  Erlangen  University,  he 
entered  in  18*27  the  newly  founded  University  of  Munich.  "From  here  he  ac- 
cepted, in  1840,  a  call  to  Berlin,  where  he  soon  gave  up  his  activity  as  a  teacher. 
He  died  in  1854  in  Ragaz.  Cf.  A.US  SchSs  Leben  in  Bripfen,  ed.  by  Plitt,  Leips. 
1869  f. ;  Caroline,  Briefe,  etc.,  ed.  by  G.  Waitz,  Leips.  1871.  Schilling's  devel- 
opment as  philosopher  and  author  falls  into  five  periods :  (1)  Philosophy  of 
Nature,  Ideen  zu  einer  Philos.  der  JVata/%  1797;  Von  der  Weltseele,  1798; 
Erster  Entwurf  ernes  Systems  der  NaturpMosnpJiie,  1799 ;  (2)  JEsthetic  Ideal- 
ism, Der  transcendental  Idealismus,  1800 ;  Vorlesungen  Uber  die  Philosophie 
der  Kunst;  (3)  Absolute  Idealism,  Darstellung  meines  Systems  der  Philosophic, 
1801 ;  Bruno,  oder  uber  das  natiirliche  und  gottliche  Princip  der  Dinge,  1802 ; 
Vorlesungen  uber  die  Methode  des  akademischen  Studiums,  1803;  (4)  his 
Doctrine  of  Freedom,  Philosophie  und  Religion,  1804;  Untersuchungen  uber 
das  Wesen  der  menschlichen  Freiheit,  1809 ;  Denkmal  der  Schrift  JacobVs  von 
den  gottlichen  Dingen,  1812;  (5)  Philosophy  of  Mythology  and  Revelation, 
Lectures  in  Part  II.  of  the  writings;  Collected  works,  14  vols.,  Stuttg.  and 
Augsb.  1856-1861 ;  [J.  Watson,  Spelling's  Transcendental  Idealism,  Chicago, 
Griggs  series]. 

Among  the  thinkers  who  stood  in  close  relation  to  Schelling  may  be  noticed, 
of  the  "Romantic  School,  Fr.  Schlegel  (1772-1829 ;  Characteristics  and  Criti- 
cisms in  the  "Athenaeum,"  1799  f. ;  Lucinde,  1799;  Philosophical  Lectures,  in 
the  years  1804-6,  ed.  by  Windischmann,  1836  f. ;  Complete  writings,  15  vols., 
Vienna,  1846  [Eng.  tr.  of  the  Philosophy  of  History  and  of  the  Philosophy  of 
Life  and  of  Language  in  Bohn  Library])  and  Novalis  (Fr.  v.  Hardenberg, 
1772-1801),  also  K.  W.  F.  Solger  (1780-1819;  Erwin,  1815;  Philosophische 
Gresprache,  1817 ;  Vorlesiingen  uber  ^Esthttik,  ed.  by  Heyse,  1829)  ;  further, 
Lor.  Oken  (1779-1851;  Lehrbuch  der  Naturphilosophie,  Jena,  1809;  cf.  A. 
Ecker,  L.  0.,  Stuttgart,  1880) ;  H.  Steffens  (1773-1845;  a  Norwegian,  Grund- 
zilge  der  philosophischen  Naturwissenschaft,  1806),  G.  H.  Schubert  (1780- 
1860 ;  Ahndungen  einer  allg.  Geschichte  des  Lebens,  1806  i),  Franz  Baader 
(1765-1841 ;  Fermenta  Cognitionis,  1822  ff.  ;  Speculative  Dogmatik,  1827  ff. 
Complete  writings  with  a  biography  ed.  by  Fr.  Hoffmann,  Leips.  1851  ff.)  ; 
and  finally,  K.  Chr.  Fr.  Krause  (1781-1832  ;  Entwurf  des  Systems  der  Philoso- 
phie, 1804 ;  Urbild  der  JUenschheit,  1811 ;  Abriss  des  Systems  der  Philosophie, 
1825 ;  Vorlesungen  uber  das  System  der  Philosophie,  1828.  Some  years  since  an 
inexhaustible  body  of  material  has  appeared  from  his  literary  remains,  ed.  by 
P.  Hohlf eld  and  A.  Wunsche.  Cf.  B.  Eucken,  Zur  Erinnerung  an  K. ,  Leips. 
1881). 

Georg  Wilhelm  Friedrich  Hegel,  Schilling's  older  friend,  was  born,  1770, 
in  Stuttgart,  studied  in  Tubingen,  was  a  private  teacher  in  Berne  and  Frank- 
fort, and  began,  in  1801,  his  activity  as  a  teacher  in  Jena,  where,  in  1805,  he 
became  Professor  Extraordinary.  After  1806  he  became  editor  of  a  review 
in  Bamberg,  and  in  1808  Gymnasium  Director  in  Nuremberg.  In  1816  he  went 
as  Professor  to  Heidelberg;  in  1818  from  there  to  Berlin,  where  he  worked 
until  his  death  in  1831  as  the  head  of  a  school  which  extended  with  greater  and 
greater  brilliancy.  Besides  the  articles  published  in  the  Kritische  Journal  der 
Philosophic,  which  he  edited  in  connection  with  Schelling,  he  published  Phano- 
me?iologie  des  Greistes  (1807)  [tr.  of  chs.  1,  2,  and  3  in  Jour.  Spec.  Phil.,  Vol. 
II.;  tr.  in  prep,  by  J.  Royce,  Holt  &  Co.,  N.Y.];  Wissenschaft  der  Logik 
(1812  ff.)  [tr.  of  Vol.  II.  by  W.  T.  Harris,  Hegel's  Doctrine  of  Reflection]  ; 
Encyclopadie  der  philosophischen  Wissenschaften  (1817)  [of  this  the  Logic  is 
trans,  with  Prolegomena  ,by  W.  Wallace,  Clar.  Press,  1874,  2d  ed.,  in  2  vols., 
1892]  ;  Orundlinien  der  Philosophie  des  ReMs  (1821).  After  1827  the  Jahr- 
bucher  fur  wissenschaftliche  Sritik  was  the  organ  of  his  school.  His  works, 
including  his  lectures  edited  by  his  students,  were  published  in  18  vols.  (Berlin, 
1832  ff.)  [trans,  of  the  Philosophy  of  History,  by  J.  Sibree,  Bohn  Library  ;  of  the 
Introd.  to  Phil  of  Art,  by  B.  Bosanquet  (Lond.  1886) ;  of  the  Phil  of  Art,  abr. 
by  W.  Hastie  (Edin.)7  and  of  the  second  part  of  the  same  in  Jour.  Spec.  Phil, 
Vols.  V.-XIII. ;  of  the  History  of  Philosophy,  by  E.  S.  Haldane,  in  3  vols., 


572  G-erman:  Development  of  Idealism.  [PART  VL 

Vol.  L  'Lond.  1892) ;  of  the  Phil  of  Religion  and  of  the  State,  in  part  in  Jour. 
Spec.  Phil.,  Vols.  XV.-XXI.].    From  the  very  extensive  literature  we  may 


Holdtrltn.  SclidUng  und  Hegel  in  ikren  schicdbischen  Jugendjahren  (Stuttgart, 
1877'  iTke  Secret  "of  Hegel,  by  J.  H.  Stirling  (Lond.  1805),  2  vols. ;  Hegel,  by 
E.  Caird  (Edin.  and  Lond.  18S3X ;  Hegelianism  and  Personality,  by  Seta  (Edin. 
and  Lund.,  2d  ed..  1803) ;  Critical  Expositions  in  Griggs  series  (Chicago) ;  of 
the  ^Esthetics,  by  J.  S.  Kedney  (1885) ;  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  State  and  of 
History*  by  G.  S.  Morris  (1887)  ;  and  of  the  Logic,  by  W.  T.  Harris  (1890) ; 
numerous  articles  in  the  Jour.  Spec.  Phil,  cited  in  lastHiamed  work]. 

Friedrich  Ernst  Daniel  Schleiermacher,  born,  1768,  in  Breslau,  educated  at 
the  Herrnhuter  educational  institutions  in  Niesky  and  Barby,  and  at  the 
University  of  Halle,  after  private  positions  took  a  vicarship  in  Lundstoerg,  and 
in  171KJ  bei?an  his  duties  as  preacher  at  the  Berlin  CharitS.  In  1802  he  went 
as  court  preacher  to  Stolpe;  in  1804  as  Professor  Extraordinary  to  Halle;  in 
1806  returned  to  Berlin,  where  in  1809  he  became  preacher  at  the  Dreifaltigkeits- 
kin-he;  and  in  1810  Professor  at  the  University.  He  acquitted  himself  well 
in  both  offices,  occupying  at  the  time  a  successful  position  in  the  ecclesiastical 
movement  (Union)  until  his  death  in  1834.  His  philosophical  writings  form 
the  third  part  of  his  works  collected  after  his  death  (Berlin,  1835  S.).  They 
contain  his  lectures  on  Dialectic,  ^Esthetic,  etc. ;  among  his  writings  are  to 
he  mentioned :  Reden  liber  die  Religion  an  die  G-ebildeten  unter  ihren  Verachtern, 
(1799) ;  Honologen  (1800) ;  Grundlinien  einer  Kritik  der  bisherigen  Sittenlehre 
(1803).  The  most  important  work,  the  Ethik,  is  given  in  the  coll.  works,  in 
the  edition  by  Al.  Schweizer ;  it  is  also  published  in  an  edition  by  A.  Twesten 
(Berlin,  18-41).— Cf.  Aus  SchSs  Leben  in  Brief  en,  ed.  by  L.  Jonas  and  W.  Dil- 
they,  4  vols.  (Berlin,  1858-1863)  ;  W.  Dilthey,  Leben,  Schleiermacher' s,  Vol.  I. 
^Be'rlin,  1870)  [art.  &  in  Enc.  Brit.,  J.  F.  Smith]. 

Johann  Friedrich  Herbart,  born,  1776,  at  Oldenburg,  educated  there  and  at 
the  Jena  University,  for  a  time  private  teacher  in  Berne  and  acquainted  with 
Pestalozzi,  became  in  1802  Privatdoeent  in  Gottingen,  was  from  1809  to  1833 
Professor  in  Konigsberg,  and  then  returned  to  Gottingen  as  Professor,  where 
he  died,  1841.  His  main  writings  are:  Hauptpunkte  der  Metaphysik  (1806) ; 
AttyemtiiwprafctischePhttoMphie  (1808) ;  EinleUung  in  die  Philosophic  (1813)  ; 
Lehrbuch  zur  Psychologie  (1810)  [Eng.  tr.  by  M.  K.  Smith,  N.Y.  1891]  ;  Psycho- 
logic als  Wissenschafl  (1824  1).  Complete  edition  by  G.  Hartenstein,  12  vols. 
(Leipti.  1830  f£.) ;  in  process  of  appearance,  ed.  by  K.  Kehrbach,  since  1882.  The 
pedagogical  writings  have  been  edited  by  0.  Willmann  in  2  vols.  (Leips.  1873 
and  1875).  Cf.  G.  Hartenstein,  Die  Problems  und  Grundlehren  der  allgemeinen 
Mftaphysik  (Leips.  1830)  ;  J.  Kaftan,  gotten  und  Sein  (Leips.  1872) ;  J.  Cape- 
sius,  Da>  Hetnphysik  Herlartfs  (Leips.  1878)  [Ward,  art.  Herbart,  in  JS'wc. 
Brit.]. 

Arthur  Schopenhauer,  bnm  1788  in  Danzic,  passed  over  somewhat  late  to 
philosophical  life,  studied  in  Gottins^n  and  Berlin,  received  his  degree  in  1813 
at  Jena  with  his  treatise  on  the  Fourfold  Root  of  the  Principle  of  Sufficient 
Reason,  lived  for  a  time  at  AVeimar  and  Dresden,  habilitated  as  Privatdoeent 
in  Berlin  in  1820,  but  withdrew  after  he  had  won  no  success  in  a  work  as 
teacher  which  was  frequently  interrupted  by  journeys,  and  spent  the  rest  of  his 
life  in  private,  after  1831,  in  Frankfort  on  the  Main,  where  he  died  in  1860. 
His  main  work  is  Die  Welt  als  Will?,  und  Vorstellung,  1819  [The  World  as 
Will  and  as  JWea,  tr.  by  E.  B.  Haldane  and  J.  Kemp,  Lond.  and  Boston,  3 
vols.,  1884-86].  To  this  were  attached  Ueber  den  Willen  in  der  Natur,  1836  • 
Die  leiden  Grundprobleme  der  Et/iik,  1841 ;  finally,  Parerga  und  Paralipomena, 
1851.  Complete  edition  in  6  vols.  (Leips.  1873  1),  and  since  then  frequently 
edited.  [Tr,  of  the  Fourfold  Boot  and  of  On  the  Will  in  Nature,  by  K  Hille- 
brand,  Bonn  Library,  2d  ed.,  1891 ;  of  selected  essays  by  Bax,  Bohn  Library,  also 
by  T.  B.  Saunders,  5  vols.,  Lond.  and  N.Y.,  3d  ed.,  1892.]  Cf.  W.  Gwinner, 
Sch.'s  Leben,  2d  ed.  (Leips.  1878) ;  J.  Frauenstadt,  Briefe  uber  die  SchSsche 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]  Thing-in-Itself  :  Jacoli.  573 

Philosophie  (Leips.  1854)  ;  R.  Seydel,  SchSs  System  (Leips.  1857)  ;  A.  Haym, 
A.  Sch.  (Berlin,  1864)  ;  G.  Jellinek,  Die  Weltanschauung  en  Leibniz''  und 
Schopenhauer's  (Leips.  1872)  [H.  Zimmern,  Schopenhauer,  Bis  Life  and  Phil.. 
Lond.  1876  ^  J.  Sully,  Pessimism,  2d  ed.,  Lond.  1891  ;  Adamson  in'j/frM?,  1S76]. 
_  By  the  side  of  the  main  metaphysical  development  runs  a  psychological 
side-line,  a  series  of  schools  which,  in  an  eclectic  way,  frequently  approached 
the  doctrines  of  the  great  systems  by  the  path  of  the  psychological  method. 
Such  is  the  relation  to  Kant  and  Jacobi  of  J.  Fr.  Pries  (1773-1843  ;  Reinhold, 
Fichte  und  Schelling,  1803;  Wissen,  Glaube  und  Ahndung,  1805;  Xeue  Kritik 
der  Vernunft,  1807  ;  Psychische  Anthropologie,  1820  f  .  Cf.  Kuno  Fischer,  Die 
beiden  kantischen  Schulen  in  Jena,  Acad.  Address,  Stutter.  1862),—  to  Kant  and 
Fichte  of  Wilh.  Traug.  Kmg  (1770-1842  ;  Organon  "der  Philosophic,  1801  ; 
Handworterbuch  der  philos.  Wissenschaften,  1827  ff.),  —  to  Fichte  and  Schelling 
of  Fried.  Bouterwek  (1766-1828;  Apodiktik,  1799;  ^Esthetik,  1806),—  and 
finally,  to  Herbart  of  Fr.  Beneke  (1798-1854  ;  Psycho!  ogische  Skizzen,  1825 
and  1827  ;  Lehrbuch  der  Psychologic,  als  Xaturicissenschaft,  1832  ;  3fetaphysik 
und  Religionsphilosophie,  1840  ;  Die  neue  Psychologic,  1845). 


1  4Lhc 


The  compelling  power  which.  Kant's  philosophy  gained  over  the 
minds  and  hearts  of  men  was  due  chiefly  to  the  earnestness  and 
greatness  of  its  ethical  conception  of  the  world  ;  l  the  progress  of 
thought,  however,  attached  itself  primarily  to  the  new  form  which 
had  been  given  to  the  principles  of  the  theory  of  knowledge  in  the 
Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason.  Kant  took  the  antithesis  of  phenom- 
ena and  noumena  from  earlier  philosophy;  but  by  his  transcen- 
dental analytic  he  widened  the  realm  of  phenomena  to  include  the 
whole  compass  of  human  knowledge,  and  the  thing-in-itself  survived 
only  as  a  problematical  conception,  like  a  rudimentary  organ,  which 
might  be  indeed  characteristic  for  the  historical  genesis  of  this 
theory  of  knowledge,  but  which  performed  no  living  function  in  it. 

1.  This  was  first  seen  by  Jacobi,  when  he  confessed  that  without 
the  presupposition  of  realism  one  could  not  enter  the  Kantian 
system,  and  with  the  same  could  not  remain  in  it  ;  2  for  the  concep- 
tion of  the  sensibility  introduced  at  the  beginning  involves  the 
causal  relation  of  being  affected  by  things-in-themselves,  —  a  rela- 
tion which,  according  to  the-  doctrine  of  the  analytic  that  categories 
must  not  be  applied  to  things-in-themselves,  it  is  forbidden  to  think. 
In  this  contradiction  of  professing  to  think  things-in-themselves 
and  yet  of  not  being  permitted  to  think  them,  the  whole  critique  of 
the  reason  moves  ;  and  at  the  same  time  this  contradictory  assump- 
tion does  not  at  all  help  to  guarantee  to  our  knowledge  of  phe- 
nomena even  the  slightest  relation  to  truth.  For,  according  to 
Kant,  the  mind  presents  to  itself  in  thought  "neither  itself  nor 

1  This  is  especially  to  be  recognised  from  Reinhold'  s  Brief  en    uber   die 
leant.  Ph. 

2  Jacobi,  W.,  II.  304. 


574  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

other  things,  but  solely  and  alone  that  which  is  neither  what  the 
mind  is  itself,  nor  what  other  things  are." 1  The  faculty  of  cogni- 
tion hovers  between  a  problematical  X  of  the  subject  and  an  equally 
problematical  X  of  the  object.  The  sensibility  has  nothing  behind 
it,  and  the  understanding  nothing  before  it;  "in  a  twofold  en- 
chanter's smoke,  called  space  and  time,  rise  the  ghostly  forms  of 
phenomena  or  appearances  in  which  nothing  appears."2  If  we 
assume  things,  Kant  teaches  that  knowledge  has  not  the  least  to  do 
with  them.  The  critical  reason  is  a  reason  busy  about  pure  noth- 
ing, i.e.  only  about  itself.  If,  therefore,  criticism  will  not  fall  into 
nihilism  or  absolute  scepticism,  the  transcendental  idealist  must 
have  the  courage  to  assert  the  "strongest"  idealism;3  he  must 
declare  that  only  phenomena  are. 

In  the  claim  that  what  Kant  calls  the  object  of  knowledge  is  in 
truth  "  nothing,"  inheres  as  a  presupposition  the  same  naive  realism, 
the  destruction  of  which  was  the  great  service  of  the  transcendental 
analytic ;  and  the  same  realism  determines  also  the  episteuiology  of 
Faith,  which  Jacobi  opposes  to  "the  transcendental  uncertainty," 
not  without  being  entirely  dependent  upon  it.  All  truth  is  knowl- 
edge of  the  actual ;  but  the  actual  asserts  itself  in  human  con- 
sciousness not  through  thought,  but  through  feeling;  just  Kant's 
experiment  proves  that  thought  alone  moves  in  a  circle  out  of  which 
there  is  no  access  to  actuality,  in  an  endless  series  of  the  condi- 
tioned in  which  no  unconditioned  is  to  be  found.  The  fundamental 
law  of  causality  may  indeed  be  formulated  in  exactly  this  manner, 
viz.  there  is  nothing  unconditioned.  Knowledge,  therefore,  or  thought 
that  can  be  demonstrated,  is  in  its  very  nature,  as  Jacobi  says, 
Spinozism, — a  doctrine  of  the  mechanical  necessity  of  all  that  is 
finite:  and  it  is  the  interest  of  science  that  there  be  no  God, — 
indeed,  a  God  who  could  be  known  would  be  no  God.4  Even  he 
who  is  in  his  heart  a  Christian  must  be  in  his  head  a  heathen ;  he 
who  will  bring  into  his  intellect  the  light  which  is  in  his  heart 
quenches  it.5  But  this  knowledge  is  only  a,  mediate  knowing  j  the 
true,  immediate  knowing  is  feeling;  in  this  we  are  truly  one  with  the 
object,6  and  possess  it  as  we  possess  ourselves  in  the  certainty  of 
a  faith  that  has  no  proof.7  This  feeling,  however,  as  regards  its 
objects,  is  of  a  twofold  kind:  the  reality  of  the  sensuous  reveals 
itself  to  us  m  perception,  that  of  the  supersensuous  in  the  "reason." 

1  Allmll,  XT.  j  W.,  1. 121.  2  w   in.  Ill  f. 

8  W.,  II.  310.  4  W.,  IH.  384. 

5  To  Hamann,  I.  367.  e  W.,  II.  175. 

7  Hume's  conception  of  belief  and  his  distinction  of  impressions  and  ideas 
(here  called  Vorstellungeri)  experience  in  this  a  noteworthy  transformation. 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]        Thing-in-Itself :  Fries,  ReinMd.  575 

For  tliis  supra-natural  sensualism,  therefore,  "  reason  "  signifies  the 
immediate  feeling  of  the  reality  of  the  supersensuous,  of  God,  free- 
dom, morality,  and  immortality.  In  this  limitation  Kant's  dualism 
of  theoretical  and  practical  reason  and  of  the  primacy  of  the  latter 
return  in  Jacobi,1  to  be  placed  in  the  service  of  a  mystical  extrava- 
gance of  feeling,  which  manifests  itself  also  in  the  character  of 
a  style  which  is  warm  and  full  of  spirit,  but  rhapsodical  and  more 
given  to  assertion  than  to  proof. 

This  same  fundamental  conception,  brought  somewhat  nearer  to 
Kant,  appears  with  Fries.  In  demanding  that  the  knowledge  of  the 
a  priori  forms  to  which  the  critical  philosophy  aspired  must  itself 
arise  a  posteriori,  through  inner  experience,  and  therefore  that  Kant's 
results  must  be  established  or  set  right  by  an  "anthropological" 
critique,  he  rested  upon  the  conviction  that  the  immediate,  proper 
cognitions  of  the  reason  are  given  originally  in  an  obscure  form 
through  the  feeling,2  and  transformed  into  intellectual  knowledge 
only  by  means  of  reflection.  This  Leibnizian  body  ends,  however, 
in  the  critical  tail,  since  the  perceptional  and  conceptional  Forms  of 
this  reflection  are  regarded  as  only  an  expression  of  the  phenomenal 
mode  in  which  the  above  original  truth  [as  experienced  in  feeling] 
appears  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  body  received  a  Kant-Jacobi  head, 
when  the  limitation  of  knowledge  to  these  phenomenal  Forms  had 
set  over  against  it  the  immediate  relation  of  moral  faith  to  things- 
in-themselves,  while  at  the  same  time — with  a  decided  attachment 
to  the  Critique  of  Judgment  —  the  aesthetic  and  religious  feelings 
had  ascribed  to  them  the  significance  of  a  presage  (Ahndung) 
that  the  Being  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  phenomena  is  just  that  to 
which  the  practical  reason  relates. 

2.  The  untenability  of  the  Kantian  conception  of  the  thing-in-itself, 
so  keenly  recognised  by  Jacobi,  became  palpable  to  a  certain  extent 
when  Reinliold  in  his  Elementary  Philosophy  made  the  attempt  to 
present  the  critical  doctrine  in  a  systematic  unity.  He  admired 
Kant  and  adopted  entirely  his  solutions  of  the  individual  problems, 
but  missed  in  him  the  formulation  of  a  simple,  fundamental  princi- 
ple from  which  all  particular  insights  might  be  deduced.  Through 
the  fulfilment  of  this  (Cartesian)  demand,3  opposing  private  opinions 
would  be  at  last  replaced  by  the  philosophy,  —  Philosophy  without 
any  surname.  He  himself  believed  that  he  had  found  this  principle 
in  the  principle  which  he  supposed  to  be  quite  free  from  presuppo- 
sitions,— that  in  consciousness  every  idea  is  distinguished  by  the 


i  W.,  III.  351  ff.  2  Fries,  Neue  Eritik,  I.  206. 

s  Reinhold,  Beitrage,  I.  91  S. 


576  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  YI. 

consciousness  of  subject  and  object,  and  is  related  to  both  (Principle 
of  Consciousness).1  Hence  there  inheres  in  every  idea  something 
that  belongs  to  the  subject  and  something  that  belongs  to  the 
object.  From  the  object  conies  the  manifold  of  the  material,  from 
the  subject  the  synthetic  unity  of  the  Form.  From  this  it  follows 
that  neither  the  object  in  itself,  nor  the  subject  in  itself,  is  know- 
able,  but  only  the  world  of  consciousness  which  hovers  between  the 
two;  from  this  results  further  the  opposition  of  the  (sensuous) 
material  imjndse  and  of  the  (ethical)  Form  impulse;  in  the  former 
the  heteronomy  of  the.  dependence  of  the  will  upon  things  may  be 
recognised ;  in  the  latter  the  autonomy  of  the  will  directed  toward 
the  formal  conformity  to  law. 

In  this  crude  form  the  Kantian  School  propagated  the  doctrine  of 
the  master ;  all  the  fineness  and  profound  meaning  of  the  analytic 
of  the  "  object "  had  become  lost,  and  the  only  substitute  was  Eein- 
hold's  effort  to  find  in  the  "ideational  faculty"  (Vorstellungsver- 
mogen).  or  "consciousness,"  the  deeper  unity  of  all  the  different 
cognitive  powers  which  Kant  had  separated  from  each  other  as 
Sensibility,  Understanding,  Judgment,  and  E/eason.  In  so  far  the 
<•'  fundamental  philosophy  "  opposed  with  a  positive  hypothesis  the 
objections  which  the  sharp  separation  of  the  sensibility  and  the  under- 
standing in  the  Kantian  doctrine  encountered  with  many  contempora- 
ries. This  separation  presented  itself  in  the  exposition  determined 
by  the  after-working  of  the  Inaugural  Dissertation  (cf .  p.  538,  note 
4),  still  more  strongly  than  the  spirit  of  the  Critique  of  Heason 
required,  and  became  at  the  same  time  still  more  palpable  by  the 
dualism  of  the  practical  philosophy.  So  the  tendency  was  awak- 
ened tp  replace  the  sensibility  again  in  its  rights  as  against  Kant, 
and  the  Leibnizian  doctrine  of  the  gradual  transition  from  the  func- 
tions of  sense  to  those  of  reason  proved  the  source  of  a  powerful 
counter-current  against  Kant's  "dissection"  of  the  soul,  — a  dissec- 
tion more  apparent  than  serious.  Hamann  in  his  review,  and  in 
conjunction  with  him,  Herder  in  his  Metakritik,  urged  this  against 
the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  Both  lay  chief  emphasis  upon  lan- 
guage as  the  fundamental,  unitary,  sensuous-intellectual  work  of 
the  reason,  and  seek  to  show  how  from  the  first  "  splitting  apart " 
of  sensibility  and  understanding  all  the  other  chasms  and  dualisms 
of  the  critical  philosophy  necessarily  followed.2 

1  Nem  Theorie  des  Vorst.,  pp.  201  fi. 

*  Herder,  MetakritiJc,  14,  111.  Works  in 40  vote., XXXVII.  333  ff.  Moreover, 
this  thought  as  Herder  presented  it  in  the  Metafcritik,  a  silly  composition  of 
personal  irritation,  was  for  a  long  time  a  positively  impelling  moment  in  the 
development.  Cf.  §42. 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]  Thing-in-Itself  :  Schulze.  f  77 

3.  The  weak  points  in  Reinhold's  system  could  not  escape  the 
sceptics,  but  their  attacks  applied  at  the  same  time  to  Kant  himself. 
They  were  united  most  effectively  in  Schulze's  ^Snesidemus.  He 
shows  that  the  critical  method  ensnares  itself  by  setting  for  itself 
a  task,  the  solution  of  which  is  according  to  its  own  results  im- 
possible. Tor  if  the  Critique  seeks  the  conditions  which  lie  at  the 
basis  of  experience,  these  conditions  are  yet  not  themselves  objects 
of  experience  (a  conception  which  certainly  corresponded  better 
with  Kant's  meaning  than  did  Fries'  attempt  at  a  psychological 
discovery  of  the  a  priori)  :  the  critical  method  demands,  therefore, 
that  philosophical  knowledge,  at  all  events  a  thinking  in  categories, 
shall  go  beyond  experience;  and  just  this  the  Analytic  declares 
impermissible.  In  fact,  the  "reason"  and  each  of  the  knowing 
faculties,  as  sensibility,  understanding,  etc.,  is  a  thing-in-itself,  an 
imperceptible  ground  of  the  empirical  activities  of  the  kind  of 
cognition  in  question;  and  of  all  these  things-in-theins  elves  and 
their  relations  to  each  other  and  to  experience,  the  critical  philoso- 
phy —  the  metaphysics  of  knowledge  —  offers  a  very  circumstantial 
body  of  information.  To  be  sure,  this  information  is,  if  closely 
examined,  very  slight;  for  such  a  "faculty"  is  ultimately  thought 
only  as  an  unknown  common  cause  of  empirical  functions,  and  is 
to  be  characterised  only  through  these  its  workings. 

"jEnesidemus"  develops  this  criticism  in  connection  with  Eein- 
hold's conception  of  the  "ideational  faculty";1  he  shows  that  we 
explain  nothing  at  all,  when  we  postulate  over  again  the  content 
of  that  which  is  to  be  explained,  provided  with  the  problematical 
mark  "power"  or  "faculty."  Schulze  thus  turned  against  the 
"faculty  theory,"  which  was  employed  by  the  empirical  psycholo- 
gists of  the  Enlightenment  in  rather  a  thoughtless  manner.  It  is 
only  descriptively  that  there  is  any  sense  in  comprehending  like 
phenomena  of  the  psychical  life  under  one  generic  conception  ;  but 
to  hypostatise  this  conception  to  a  metaphysical  power  —  this  is 
a  mythological  treatment  of  psychology.  With  this  watch-word 
Herbart2  extended  the  criticism  of  Schulze  to  the  whole  earlier 
psychological  theory,  and  Beneke  also  saw  in  the  bringing  into 
prominence  of  this  conception  the  essential  progress  towards  a 
natural  science  of  the  soul  ;  i.e.  the  associational  psychology.3 

For  Schulze,  this  is  only  one  of  the  elements  in  a  proof  that  the 
critical  philosophy,  while  aiming  to  prove  the  authority  of  the 
causal  conception  as  against  Hume,  professes  to  limit  the  same 


d.,  p.  98. 

2  Herbart,  Lehrb.,  z.  Psych.,  §  3  ;  W.,  V.  8  and  elsewhere, 
8  Beneke,  Neue  Psych.,  pp.  34  ff. 


578  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  VI. 

to  experience,  and  yet  everywhere  makes  the  assumption  of  a 
causal  relation  between  experience  and  that  which  "lies  at  its 
basis."  Here,  too,  belongs  of  course  the  contradiction,  already 
exhibited  by  Jacobi,  in  the  conception  of  the  thing-in-itself  by 
which  the  "sensibility"  is  said  to  be  affected.  Every  attempt  of 
the  Critique  of  Pare  Reason  to  go  beyond  the  circuit  of  experience, 
even  merely  problematically,  is  judged  in  advance  by  itself.1 

4  The  first  attempt  to  transform  the  conception  of  the  thing-in- 
itself,  untenable  in  its  Kantian  shape,  proceeded  from  Salomon 
Zlaimon.  He  saw  that  the  assumption  of  a  reality  to  be  placed 
outside  of  consciousness  involves  a  contradiction.  What  is  thought 
is  in  consciousness;  to  think  of  a  something  outside  of  consciousness 
is  as  imaginary  as  it  would  be  mathematics  to  regard  the  require- 
ment V—  a  as  a  real  quantity.  Tlie  thing-in-itself  is  an  impossible 
conception.  But  what  was  the  inducement  to  form  it  ?  It  lay  in 
the  need  of  explaining  the  given  in  consciousness.2  It  meets  us,  that 
is  to  say,  in  our  ideas  of  the  antithesis  between  the  Form  which  we 
ourselves  create  and  are  conscious  of  creating,  and  the  material 
which  we  only  find  present  in  us,  without  knowing  how  we  come 
by  it.  Of  the  Forms  we  have,  therefore,  a  complete  consciousness ;  of 
the  matter,  on  the  contrary,  only  an  incomplete  consciousness;  it  is 
something  that  is  in  consciousness,  without  being  produced  with  con- 
sciousness. But  since  nothing  outside  of  consciousness  is  thinkable, 
the  given  can  be  defined  only  by  the  lowest  grade  of  the  complete- 
ness of  consciousness.  Consciousness  can  be  thought  as  diminishing 
through  an  infinite  number  of  intermediate  stages  down  to  nothing, 
and  the  idea  of  the  limit  of  this  infinite  series  (comparable  to  the 
V3)  is  that  of  the  merely-given,  the  thing-in-itself.  Things-in-them- 
selves  are,  therefore,  as  Maimon  says  with  direct  reference  to  Leibniz 
— petites  perceptions ;  cf.  p.  424  — differentials  of  consciousness?  The 
thing-in-itself  is  the  limiting  conception  for  the  infinite  decreasing 
series  from  complete  consciousness  down  —  an  irrational  quantity. 
The  consequence  of  this  fundamental  assumption  with  Maimon  is, 
that  of  the  given  there  can  always  be  only  an  incomplete  knowledge, 
as  there  is  only  an  incomplete  consciousness,4  and  that  complete 

1  The  author  of  the  ^Jnesidemus  repeated  the  thoughts  of  his  polemic   in 
most  concise  and  comprehensive  manner  in  his  Kritik  der  theoretischen  Philoso- 
phic (II.  549  ff.),  —  a  work,  moreover,  which  contains  not  only  an  analysis  of 
the  Critique  of  Pure  Season  (L  172-682),  which  is  one  of  the  best  even  to  the 
present  day,  but  also  a  criticism  of  the  same,  supported  by  deep  historical 
understanding  (found  II.  126-722).   Cf.  on  the  relation  to  Leibniz,  II.  176  ft, 

2  Maimon,  Transscendentalphilos.,  pp.  419  f. 
8  Ib.  27  ff. 

4  Cf .  the  contingency  of  the  world  with  Leibniz  and  the  specification  of 
Nature  with  Kant,  pp.  398  i,  566. 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]          Thing-m-Itself :  Maimon,  FicJite.  579 

knowledge  is  limited  to  the  knowledge  of  the  autonomous  Forms  of 
the  theoretical  consciousness,  to  mathematics  and  logic.  In  his 
esteem  for  these  two  demonstrative  sciences  Maimon's  critical  scep- 
ticism is  in  harmony  with  Hume ;  with  regard  to  their  theories  of 
the  knowledge  of  that  which  is  empirically  given  they  diverge 
diametrically. 

With  this,  however,  it  had  become  clear  that  the  investigations  of 
the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  require  a  new  conception  of  the  relation 
of  consciousness  and  Being.  Being  is  to  be  thougJit  only  in  conscious- 
ness, only  as  a  kind  of  consciousness.  Thus  the  prophecy  of  Jacobi 
begins  to  be  fulfilled;  Kant's  doctrine  urges  toward  the  "strongest 
idealism." 

This  is  seen  in  a  disciple  who  stood  in  the  closest  relations  to 
Kant  himself:  Sigismund  Beck.  He  found1  the  "Only  Possible 
Standpoint  for  Estimating  the  Critical  Philosophy"  in  this,  that 
the  datum  of  the  individual  consciousness,  given  it  as  "  object/3  is 
made  the  content  of  an  " original"  supra-individual 2  consciousness, 
which  for  this  reason  is  authoritative  for  the  truth  of  the  empirical 
knowing  process.  In  the  place  of  the  things-in-themselves  he  set 
Kant's  "  consciousness  in  general."  But  he  explained  to  himself  in 
this  way  the  a  priori  character  of  the  pure  conceptions  and  catego- 
ries :  the  given  in  the  sensuous  manifold  remained  for  him  also  the 
unsolved  remnant  of  the  Kantian  problem. 

5.  The  full  idealistic  disintegration  of  the  conception  of  the 
thing-in-itself  was  the  work  of  Ficlite.  We  may  best  understand 
the  matter  by  following  the  course  of  thought  in  his  introductions 
to  his  Science  of  Knowledge?  which  attaches  itself  directly,  in  a 
free  reproduction,  to  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  Kantian  doctrine, 
—  the  transcendental  deduction,  —  and  illumines  with  complete  clear- 
ness the  culmination  of  the  movement  of  thought  here  considered. 

The  fundamental  problem  of  philosophy  —  or,  as  Fi  elite  calls  it, 
just  on  this  account,  of  the  Wissenscliaftslehre  [lit.  "doctrine  of 
science,"  where  science  has  the  twofold  meaning  of  knowledge  as 
a  mental  act,  and  knowledge  as  a  body  of  truth  =  philosophy  (cf. 
p.  94,  note  2,)] —  is  given  in  the  fact,  that  in  contrast  with  the  ideas  of 
individual  consciousness,  which  may  come  and  go  in  a  voluntary 
and  contingent  manner,  another  set  of  our  ideas  maintain  them- 
selves there,  and  these  latter  are  characterised  by  a  feeling  of  neces- 
sity that  can  be  distinguished  with  entire  certainty.  To  make  this 
necessity  intelligible  is  the  chief  task  of  philosophy  or  the  Science 


1  3d  vol.  of  his  Erlauternder  Auszug,  from  Kant's  writing  (Leips.  1796). 

2  Ib.  p.  120  ff.  *  Mchte's  W-,  I.  419  ff. 


580  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism. 

of  Knowledge.  We  call  the  system  of  those  ideas  which  emerge 
with  the  feeling  of  necessity  experience ;  the  problem  runs,  there- 
fore, "  What  is  the  ground  of  experience  ?  "  To  its  solution,  there 
are  only  two  paths.  Experience  is  an  activity  of  consciousness 
directed  toward  objects;  it  can  therefore  be  derived  only  from 
things  or  from  the  consciousness.  In  the  one  case  the  explanation 
is  dogmatic,  in  the  other  idealistic.  Dogmatism  regards  conscious- 
ness as  a  product  of  things  j  it  traces  the  activities  of  intelligence 
also  back  to  mechanical  necessity  of  the  causal  relations ;  if  con- 
sistently thought,  therefore,  it  cannot  end  otherwise  than  fatalisti- 
cally and  materialistically.  Idealism,  on  the  contrary,  sees  in 
things  a  product  of  consciousness,  of  a  free  function  determined 
only  by  itself  ;  it  is  the  system  of  freedom  and  of  deed.  These  two 
modes  of  explanation,  each  of  which  is  consistent  in  itself,  are  in 
such  thorough-going  contradiction  to  each  other  and  so  irreconcil- 
able that  Fichte  regards  the  attempt  of  syncretism,  to  explain  expe- 
rience by  dependence  both  upon  things-in-themselves  and  upon  the 
reason,  as  a  failure  from  the  outset.  If  one  will  not  fall  a  victim  to 
sceptical  despair,  he  must  choose  between  the  two. 

This  choice,  since  both  present  themselves  logically  as  equally 
consistent  systems,  will  primarily  depend  "on  what  sort  of  a  man 
one  is"1  ("icas  fur  ein  Menscli  man  ist");  but  while  the  ethical 
interest  thus  already  speaks  for  idealism,  there  is  still  a  theoretical 
consideration  which  comes  to  its  aid.    The  fact  of  experience,  in 
the  constant  reciprocal  relation  of  "  being  "  and  "  being  conscious " 
{Sein  und  Beicusstseiri),  consists  in  this,  that  the  "real  series'9  of 
objects  is  perceived  in  the  "ideal"  series  of  mental  representations.2 
This  "doubleness  "  dogmatism  cannot  explain;  for  the  causality  of 
things  is  only  a  simple  series  (of  "mere  being  posited").     The 
repetition  of  Being  in  consciousness  (or  in  the  being  conscious)  is 
incomprehensible,  if  the  being  is  to  serve  as  a  ground  of  explanation 
for  being  conscious.    On  the  contrary,  it  belongs  to  the  very  nature 
of  intelligence  "to  see  itself."    Consciousness,  in  that  it  acts  or  func- 
tions, knows  also  that  it  acts  and  what  it  does ;  in  conjunction  with 
the  real  (primary)  series  of  its  own  functions  it  produces  always  at 
the  same  time  the  ideal  (secondary)  series  of  the  knowledge  of 
these  functions.    If,  therefore,  consciousness  yields  the  sole  ground 
of  explanation  for  experience,  it  does  this  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  the 

1  Pickfe's  W.t  I.  434. 

2  If  the  antithesis  of  dogmatism  and  idealism  points  "back  to  the  Kantian 

Sf?&°f  ?atl™  *nd  Ff ed,°m'  *  whieh  <«tion,  moreover,  the  system 
of  the  necessity  of  thmgs  already  appears  with  a  strong  Spinozist ic  character, 
the  systematic  influence  of  Spinoza's  doctrine  concerning  the  two  attributes 
asserts  itself  for  the  first  time  in  this  relation  of  the  two  series  ««*»DUWB 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]          Thing-in-itself :  Fichte,  Krug.  581 

activity  which  perceives  itself  and  is  reflected  back  into  itself,  i.e. 
as  self-consciousness.  The  science  of  knowledge  has  to  show  that  all 
consciousness  (of  experience)  which  is  directed  toward  something 
else  —  toward  a  Being,  toward  objects,  toward  things  —  has  its  root 
in  the  original  relation  of  consciousness  to  itself. 

The  principle  of  idealism  is  self-consciousness;  in  a  subjective, 
methodical  aspect,  in  so  far  as  the  science  of  knowledge  aims  to 
develop  all  of  its  insights  from  the  intellectual  perception  alone,  with 
which  consciousness  accompanies  its  own  activities,  from  reflection 
upon  that  which  consciousness  knows  of  its  own  deed,  —  in  objec- 
tive, systematic  aspect,  in  so  far  as  in  this  way  those  functions  of 
intelligence  are  to  be  pointed  out,  by  means  of  which  that  which 
in  common  life  is  called  thing  and  object,  and  in  the  dogmatic 
philosophy  thing-in-itself,  is  produced.  This  last  conception,  that 
of  the  thing-in-itself,  which  is  through  and  through  contradictory, 
is  thus  resolved  to  its  last  remnant ;  all  Being  is  comprehensible 
only  as  product  of  reason,  and  the  subject-matter  of  philosophical 
knowledge  is  the  system  of  the  reason  (cf.  §  42). 

For  Fichte  and  his  successors,  the  conception  of  the  thing-in- 
itself  thus  became  indifferent,  and  the  old  antithesis  between  Being 
and  consciousness  sank  to  the  secondary  significance  of  an  immanent 
relation  within  the  activities  of  the  reason.  An  object  exists  only 
for  a  subject ;  and  the  common  ground  of  both  is  the  reason,  the  J 
which  perceives  itself  and  its  action.1 

6.  While  the  main  development  of  German  metaphysics  followed 
this  Fichtean  tendency,  the  syncretism  above  mentioned  did  not  re- 
main without  supporters  whom  the  Wissenschaftslehre  had  thrust  from 
the  threshold.  Its  metaphysical  type  had  been  stamped  out  by  Bein- 
hold ;  but  it  was  likewise  close  at  hand  for  all  who  took  their  point 
of  departure  from  the  individual  consciousness  with  the  psychological 
method,  and  believed  that  they  found  the  individual  consciousness 
equally  dependent  upon  the  Eeal  and  upon  the  universal  essence  of 
the  intellect.  The  " transcendental  synihetism"  which  Krug  taught, 
may  be  conceived  of  as  an  example  of  this  mode  of  view.  For  him, 
philosophy  is  an  explanation  of  self  by  means  of  the  reflection  of 
the  "  I "  upon  the  "  facts  of  consciousness."  But  in  this  the  primi- 
tive fact  proves  to  be  the  transcendental  synthesis,  that  real  and 
ideal  are  posited  in  consciousness  as  equally  original  and  in  relation 
to  each  other.2  We  know  Being  only  in  so  far  as  it  appears  in  con- 
sciousness, and  consciousness  only  in  so  far  as  it  refers  to  Being; 

1  Cf.  also  Schelling's  youthful  opuscule,  Vom  Ich  als  Princip  der  Philosophic, 
W.,  1. 151  ff. 

2  Krug,  Fundamentalphilosophie,  pp.  106  fi. 


582  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism,          [PART  VI. 

but  both  are  objects  of  an  immediate  knowledge  just  as  is  the  com- 
munity existing  between  them  in  our  world  of  ideas. 

These  thoughts  found  a  finer  turn  given  them  in  Schleiermacher '$ 
dialectic.    All  knowledge  has  as  its  end  to  establish  the  identity  of 
'Being  and  thinking;  for  the  two  emerge  in  human  consciousness 
separate,  as  its  real  and  ideal  factors,  perception  and  conception, 
organic  and  intellectual  functions.    Only  their  complete  adjustment 
would  give  knowledge,  but  they  remain  always  in  a  state  of  differ- 
ence.   In  consequence  of  this,  science  is  divided  with  reference  to 
its  subject  matter  into  physics  and  ethics,  with  reference  to  its 
methods  into  empirical  and  theoretical  disciplines ;  natural  history 
and  natural  science,  history  of  the  world,  and  science  of  morals.    In 
all  these  particular  disciplines  one  or  the  other  of  the  two  factors 
has  the  predominance,1  materially  or  formally,  although  the  oppo- 
sites  strive  toward  each  other  — the  empirical  branches  of  knowledge 
toward  rational  articulation,  the  theoretical  towards  an  understand- 
ing of  the  facts,  physics  towards  the  genesis  of  the  organism  and 
of  consciousness   out  of  the  corporeal  world,  ethics  towards  the 
control  and  inter-penetration  of  the  sensuous  by  the  will,  which  acts 
according  to  ends.    But  the  complete  adjustment  of  the  real  and  the 
ideal  is  nowhere  attained  in  actual  cognition ;  it  forms  rather  the 
absolute,  unconditioned,  infinitely  removed  goal  of  the  thinking 
which  desires  to  become  knowledge,  but  will  never  completely  suc- 
ceed.2   Hence  philosophy  is  the  science  not  of  knowledge,  but  of 
knowledge  in  a  perpetual  state  of  becoming,  —  dialectic. 

But  just  for  this  reason  it  presupposes  the  reality  of  this  goal 
which  is  never  to  be  attained  in  human  knowledge;  the  identity  of 
thought  and  Being.  This  Schleiermacher,  with  Spinoza  (and  Schell- 
ing),  calls  God.  It  cannot  be  an  object  of  the  theoretical  reason, 
and  just  as  little  can  it  be  such  of  the  practical  reason.  We  do  not 
know  God,  and  therefore  we  cannot  order  our  ethical  life  with  refer- 
ence to  him.  Religion  is  more  than  knowing  and  right-doing ;  it  is 
the  community  of  life  with  the  highest  reality,  in  which  Being  and 
consciousness  are  identical.  This  communion,  however,  emerges 
only  in  the  feeling,  in  the  "pious"  (Jrommn)  feeling  of  an  "abso- 
lute" dependence  upon  the  infinite  world-ground  which  cannot  be 
exhausted  by  thought  (cf.  §  42,  6).  Spinoza's  God  and  Kant's 
thmg-in-itself  coincide  in  the-  infinite,  but  thus  are  raised  above  all 
human  knowledge  and  will,  and  made  the  objects  of  a  mystical  feel- 
ing  whose  delicate  vibrations  harmonise  in  Schleiermacher  (as  in 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]        Thing-in-Itself :  Schleiermacher.  583 

a  somewhat  different  form  in  Fries,  also)  with  the  inwardness  of 
the  religious  life  among  the  Moravians. 

Thus  the  traditions  of  Mysticism  pass  through  Pietism  —  in 
which  the  orthodox  tendency  toward  a  coarser  view  became  more 
and  more  prominent  after  Spener  and  Francke,  and  so  called  forth 
the  opposition  of  the  Brothers  of  the  Common  Life  —  up  to  the 
summits  of  the  idealistic  development ;  and  indeed  the  doctrine  of 
Eckhart  and  the  transcendental  philosophy  are  in  close  touch  in  the 
spirit  which  desires  to  transpose  all  the  outer  into  the  inner ;  both 
have  a  genuinely  Germanic  savour,  they  seek  the  world  in  the 
"  Gemuth  "  [the  mind  as  the  seat  of  the  feeling  and  sentiments]. 

7.  In  putting  aside  the  possibility  of  a  scientific  knowledge  of 
the  world-ground  Schleiermacher  remained  nearer  to  Kant,  but  the 
intuition  of  religious  feeling  which  he  substituted  was  all  the  more 
dependent  upon  Spinoza  and  upon  the  influences  which  the  latter 
had  exercised  upon  the  idealistic  metaphysics,  after  Fichte's  Science 
of  Knowledge.  This  monism  of  the  reason  (cf.  the  development  in 
§  42)  Herbart  combated  by  an  entirely  different  re-shaping  of  the 
Kantian  conception  of  the  thing-in-itself.  He  desired  to  oppose 
the  dissolution  of  this  conception,  and  found  himself  forced  thereby 
to  the  paradox  of  a  metaphysics  of  things-in-thems elves,  which  yet 
should  hold  fast  to  their  unknowableness.  The  contradictions  of 
the  transcendental  analytic  appear  here  grotesquely  magnified. 

This  is  the  more  noteworthy  as  the  retrogressive  tendency  which 
has  been  ascribed  to  Herbart's  doctrine,  perhaps  in  contrast  with 
the  idealistic  innovations,  developed  itself  in  his  attack  upon  Kant's 
transcendental  logic  (cf.  §  38,  5).  Herbart  saw  in  this  with  right 
the  roots  of  idealism.  It  teaches,  indeed,  the  Forms  with  which  the 
"Understanding"  produces  the  world  of  objects,  and  in  Fichte's 
"  I "  we  only  have  in  a  completely  developed  form  that  which  in 
germ  was  in  Kant's  "  consciousness  in  general "  or  "  transcendental 
apperception."  Herbart's  inclination  toward  the  earlier  philosophy 
consists  in  this,  that  he  denies  the  creative  spontaneity  of  conscious- 
ness, and,  like  the  associational  psychologists,  finds  it  determined 
and  dependent  in  both  Form  and  content  from  without.  He  opposes 
also  the  virtual  innateness  which  had  propagated  itself  from  Leibniz 
on  through  the  Inaugural  Dissertation  into  the  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason :  the  forms  of  relation  expressed  in  the  categories  are  for 
him,  like  space  and  time,  products  of  the  ideational  mechanism.  As 
regards  the  psycho-genetic  questions,  he  stands  entirely  upon  the 
platform  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  For  this  reason 
he  knows  no  other  logic  than  the  formal  logic  whose  principle  is  the 
principle  of  contradiction,  i.e.  the  prohibition  to  commit  a  contra- 


584  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  VI. 

diction.    The  supreme  principle  of  all  thought  is,  that  which  con- 
tradicts itself  cannot  be  truly  real  or  actual.1 

Now  it  is  evident  that  the  conceptions  in  which  we  think  experi- 
ence are  full  of  internal  contradictions;  we  assume  things,  which 
are  to  be  identical  with  themselves  and  yet  made  equal  to  a  variety 
of  attributes ;  we  speak  of  alterations  in  which  that  which  is  equal 
to  itself  is  successively  different ;  we  trace  all  inner  experience  back 
to  an  "I"  or  "self  which  as  that  "which  mentally  represents 
itself"  (sick  selbst  Vorstellende)  involves  an  infinite  series  in  the 
subject  as  well  as  in  the  object, — we  trace  all  outer  experience 
back  to  a  matter,  in  the  idea  of  which  the  attributes  of  the  discrete 
and  the  continuous  are  at  variance.  This  experience  can  be  only 
phenomenon ;  but  this  phenomenon  must  have  at  its  basis  something 
real  which  is  free  from  contradictions,  seeming  things  must  have 
absolute  "Reals"  (Reale),  seeming  occurrence  and  change  a  real 
occurrence  and  change.  Whatever  seeming  there  is,  there  is  just  so 
much  indication  of  Being.  To  discover  this  is  the  task  of  philoso- 
phy ;  it  is  a  working  over  of  the  conceptions  of  experience  which  are 
given  and  which  must  be  re-shaped  according  to  the  rules  of  formal 
logic,  until  we  know  the  reality  that  has  no  internal  contradictions. 

The  general  means  to  this  end  is  the  method  of  relation.  The 
fundamental  form  of  contradiction  always  is,  that  something  simple 
is  thought  as  having  differences  (the  synthetic  unity  of  the  mani- 
fold in  Kant).  This  difficulty  can  be  removed  only  by  assuming  a 
plurality  of  simple  beings,  through  the  relation  of  which  to  each 
other  the  " illusion"  of  the  manifold  or  changeable  is  produced  in 
any  individual  object.  Thus  the  conception  of  substance  can  be 
maintained  only  if  we  suppose  that  the  various  qualities  and  chang- 
ing states  which  substance  is  said  to  unite,  concern  not  substance 
itself,  but  only  the  relation  in  which  it  successively  stands  to  other 
substances.  The  things-in-themselves  must  be  many ;  from  a  single 
thing-in-itself  the  multiplicity  of  qualities  and  states  could  never  be 
understood.  But  each  of  these  metaphysical  things  must  be  thought 
as  entirely  simple  and  unchangeable;  they  are  called  by  Herbart, 
"Reals"  (Realeri).  All  qualities  which  form  the  characteristics  of 
things  in  experience  are  relative,  and  make  these  characteristics 

1  Cf.  Einleitung  in  die  Philos,,  W.,  I.  72-82.  The  historical  stimulus  to  this 
sharp  presentation  of  the  principle  of  contradiction  was  no  doubt  the  deprecia- 
tion which  this  principle  found  in  the  dialectic  method  (cf.  §  42,  1)  ;  logically, 
however,  Herbartfs  doctrine  (with  the  exception  of  his  treatment  of  the  " I" 
conception)  is  entirely  independent  of  it.  The  Eleatic  element  in  the  Herbar- 
tian  philosophy  (cf.  I.  225)  is  given  with  the  postulate  of  Being  void  of  contra- 
dictions, and  to  this  circumstance  the  philosopher,  who  otherwise  had  little 
historical  disposition,  owed  his  fineness  of  feeling  for  the  metaphysical  motive 
in  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  Ideas.  Cf .  I.  237  ff.  and  XII.  61  E. 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]  Thing-m-Itself :  Herbart.  585 

appear  only  in  relation  to  other  things  5  the  absolute  qualities  of  the 
Eeals  are,  therefore,  unknowable. 

8.  But  they  must  be  thought  as  the  ground  which  determines 
the  qualities  that  appear ;  and  likewise  we  must  assume  as  ground 
of  the  seeming  changes  which  the  mutation  of  qualities  exhibits  in 
the  case  of  empirical  things,  an  actual  process  or  occurrence,  a  change 
of  relations  between  the  Eeals.  Here,  however,  this  whole  artificial 
construction  of  that  which  lies  beyond  experience  began  to  waver. 
For  the  Eleatic  rigidity  of  these  Reals  in  nowise  permits  us  to  form 
an  idea  of  the  kind  of  "actual  relations"  which  are  held  to  obtain 
between  them.  First  of  all,  these  cannot  be  spatial  ; x  space  and 
time  are  products  of  the  series  formed  by  ideas,  products  of  the 
psychical  mechanism,  and  hence  phenomenal  for  Herbart  in  almost 
a  higher  degree  than  for  Kant.  Only  in  a  transferred  sense  can  the 
changing  relations  of  substances  be  termed  a  "  coming  and  going  in 
the  intelligible  space " ;  what  they  are  themselves  the  Herbartian 
doctrine  has  no  term  to  express.  Only,  in  a  negative  direction  it  is 
obliged  to  make  a  questionable  concession.  Every  Eeal  has  only 
simple  and  unchangeable  determinations:  the  relation,  therefore, 
which  exists  or  arises  between  two  Eeals  is  not  essential  to  either, 
and  has  not  its  basis  in  either.  A  tertium  quid,  however,  which  this 
relation  would  postulate,  is  not  to  be  discovered  in  this  metaphys- 
ics.2 Hence  the  relations  which  the  Eeals  sustain  to  each  other, 
and  from  which  the  appearance  of  things  and  their  relations  are 
said  to  follow,  are  called  "  contingent  views "  (zufallige  Ansichten) 
of  the  Eeals ;  and  Herbart's  meaning  in  several  passages  is  scarcely 
to  be  understood  otherwise  than  that  consciousness  is  the  intelligible 
space  in  which  the  above  relations  between  the  Eeals  obtain,  that 
the  real  process  or  occurrence,  also,  is  some  thing  which  itself  only 
"takes  place  for  the  spectator"  as  "objective  seeming."3  If  we 
add  to  this,  that  the  "Being"  of  the  Eeals  or  absolute  qualities  is 

1  Not  only  in  this  point  do  Herbart's  Reals  distinguish  themselves  from  the 
atoms  of  Democritus,  with  which  they  have  the  common  basis  of  a  pluralistic 
re-shaping  of  the  Eleatic  conception  of  Being,  but  also  by  the  difference  in 
(unknowable)  quality,  in  the  place  of  which  atomism  allows  only  quantitive 
differences.  Just  as  little  are  the  Reals  to  be  confused  with  Leibniz's  monads, 
with  which  indeed  they  share  their  absence  of  windows,  but  not  the  attribute 
of  being  a  unity  of  the  manifold.  With  the  Platonic  Ideas,  they  have  in  com- 
mon the  attributes  of  the  Eleatic  Being,  but  not  the  character  of  class-concepts. 
.  2  In  this  gap  of  his  metaphysics  Herbart  inserted  his  philosophy  of  religion  ; 
for  since  there  is  no  knowledge  of  the  real  ground  of  the  relations  between  the 
Reals,  from  which  the  world  of  phenomena  proceeds,  the  impression  of  pur- 
posiveness  which  the  latter  makes  permits  us  to  believe,  in  a  manner  which  is 
theoretically  unassailable,  upon  a  supreme  intelligence  as  the  ground  of  these 
relations,  —  a  very  pale  revival  of  the  old  physico-theological  proof. 

3  Cf.  W.,  IV.  93  ff.,  127-132, 233,  240  1,  248  ff. ;  see  also  E.  Zeller,  Gesch.  d\ 
deutsch.  Philos.,  844. 


586  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  VI 

defined  by  Herbart  as  »  absolute  position"  Le.  as  a  "Seteung,"1*  pos- 
iting in  which  Being  is  at  rest,  and  which  is  not  taken  back,  we  have 
opening  before  us  the  perspective  into  an  "  absolute  "  idealism. 

This  was,  indeed,  carried  out  by  Herbart  still  less  than  by  Kant ; 
here,  too,  it  would  have  led  to  absolute  contradiction.  For  the 
theory  of  Reals  aims  to  deduce  consciousness  also,  as  a  consequence, 
emerging  in  the  realm  of  phenomena,  of  the  "co-existence  of  the 
Eeals."  The  Eeals  are  held  to  reciprocally  "disturb"  each  other, 
and  to  call  forth  in  each  other  as  reactions  against  these  disturb- 
ances, inner  states  which  have  the  significance  of  self-preserva- 
tions.1'' Such  self-preservations  are  immediately  known  to  us  as 
those  by  the  aid  of  which  the  unknown  Eeal  of  our  soul  maintains 
itself  against  disturbance  by  other  Reals  \  they  are  ideas  (Vorstellun- 
gen).  The  soul  as  a  simple  substance  is  naturally  unknowable; 
psychology  is  only  the  science  of  its  self-preservations.  These,  the 
ideas,  sustain  within  the  soul,  which  simply  furnishes  the  indiffer- 
ent stage  for  their  co-existence,  once  more  the  relations  of  Eeals ; 
they  disturb  and  inhibit  each  other,  and  the  whole  course  of  the 
psychical  life  is  to  be  explained  from  this  reciprocal  tension  of  ideas. 
By  their  tension  the  ideas  lose  in  intensity ;  and  the  consciousness 
depends  upon  the  degree  of  intensity.  The  lowest  degree  of 
strength,  which  the  ideas  can  have  and  still  be  regarded  as  actual, 
is  the  threshold  of  consciousness,  If  the  ideas  are  pressed  by  others 
below  this  threshold,  they  change  into  impulse.  Hence  the  essential 
nature  of  those  psychical  states  which  are  called  feeling  and  will  is 
to  be  sought  in  the  inhibitory  relations  of  ideas.  All  these  relations 
must  be  developed  as  a  "statics  and  mechanics  of  ideas,"3  and  since 
we  have  to  do  here  essentially  with  the  determining  of  differences  of 
force,  this  metaphysical  psychology  must  take  on  the  form  of  a  mathe- 
matical theory  of  the  mechanism  of  ideas*  Herbart  lays  particular 

1  Cf.  W.,  IV.  71  fl. 

2  The  "swim  esse  conservare,"  with  Hobbes  and  Spinoza  the  fundamental  in- 
stinct of  individuals,  appears  with  Herbart  as  the  metaphysical  activity  of  the 
Reals,  "by  virtue  of  which  they  produce  the  world  of  seeming,  i.e.  experience. 

3  On  this  metaphysical  basis  Herbart  erected  the  structure  of  an  immanent 
associational  psychology.    The  assumption  of  a  mechanical  necessity  of  the 
ideational  process,  and  the  view  that  the  volitions  follow  from  this  as  likewise 
necessary  relations,  proved  a  fortunate  basis  for  a  scientific  theory  of  pedagog- 
ics,— a  discipline  which  Herbart  made  also  dependent  upon  ethics,  since  the 
latter  teaches  the  goal  of  education  (the  formation  of  ethical  character),  while 
psychology  teaches  the  mechanism  through  which  this  is  realised.    In  a  similar 
way  Beneke,  who  took  the  standpoint  of  associational  psychology  without  Her- 
bart's  metaphysics,  found  the  path  to  a  systematic  pedagogics. 

4  In^carrying  out  this  thought  Herbart  assumed  that  ideas  in  their  reciprocal 
inhibitions  lose  in  intensity  as  much  as  the  weakest  of  them  possesses,  and  that 
this  inhibition-sum  is  divided  among  the  individual  ideas  in  inverse  ratio  to 
their  original  strength,  so  that  if  in  the  simplest  case,  a  >  &,  a  is  reduced  Toy 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]  Thing-in-Itself  :  Herlart.  587 

weight  upon  tlie  investigation  of  the  process  by  which  newly  entering 
ideas  are  "assimilated,"  ordered,  formed,  and  in  part  altered,  by  the 
ideas  already  present  ;  he  employs  for  this  the  expression  appercep- 
tion (first  coined  by  Leibniz  ;  cf.  p.  463),  and  his  theory  of  this  takes 
the  form  of  an  explanation  of  the  "  I  "  or  "  self  "  by  associational 
psychology.  The  "I"  is  thought  as  the  moving  point  in  which  the 
apperceiving  and  apperceived  ideas  continually  converge. 

While  the  self-preservation  of  the  Eeal  which  constitutes  the  soul, 
against  disturbance  by  other  Reals  thus  produces  the  phenomena 
of  the  ideational  life,  the  reciprocal  self-preservation  and  "  partial 
inter-penetration"  of  several  Eeals  produce  for  the  consciousness  of 
the  spectator  the  "objective  seeming  or  illusion"  of  matter.  The 
various  physical  and  chemical  phenomena  are  here  tortured  out  of 
the  metaphysical  presuppositions  with  an  unspeakably  toilsome 
deduction,1  —  an  attempt  forgotten  to-day,  which  remained  as  desti- 
tute of  results  in  natural  science  as  in  philosophy. 

9.  Another  Gottingen  professor,  Bouterwelc,  attacked  the  thing-in- 
itself  with  other  weapons.  He  show.ed  in  his  Apodiktik,  that  if  the 
doctrines  of  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  are  to  be  taken  in  earnest, 
nothing  remains  for  the  "object  to  which  the  subject  necessarily 
relates"  except  a  completely  inconceivable  X.  We  cannot  talk  of  a 
thing-in-itself  or  of  things-in-themselves  ;  for  in  this  are  involved 
already  the  categories  of  Inherence,  of  Unity  and  Plurality,2  and  of 
Reality,  which  hold  good  only  for  phenomena.  The  transcendental 
philosophy  must  become  "negative  Spinozism."  3  It  can  teach  only 
that  to  the  "consciousness  in  general"  a  "something  in  general" 
corresponds,  concerning  which  nothing  whatever  is  to  be  affirmed  in 
absolute  knowledge.  (Cf.  with  regard  to  Spinoza,  above,  pp.  408  f.). 
On  the  other  hand,  this  absolutely  real  asserts  itself  in  all  relative 
knowledge  through  the  consciousness  of  willing*  For  this  shows 
everywhere  the  living  force  of  individuality.  We  know  of  the  subject 
because  it  wills  something,  and  of  the  object  because  it  furnishes 

the  inhibition  to  "*  +  g&  ~  b'2  and  &  to     &2  .    Cf.  on  this  arbitrarily  axiomatic 


assumption  and  on  the  mistaken  nature  of  the  whole  "psychological  calculus,'* 
A.  Lange,  Die  Grundlegung  der  mathematischen  Psychologic,  Duisburg,  1865. 

1  AUgem.  Afetaphysik,  §§  240  ff.,  331  fi.  ;  TT.,  IV.  147  fl.,  327  fit.    In  Herbart's 
metaphysics  the  branching  out  of  general  ontology  into  the  beginnings  of  psy- 
chology and  natural  philosophy  '  is  designated  by  the  names  Eidology  and 
Synechology. 

2  Cf.  esp.  Apodiktik,  I.  261,  392  fl. 
»  Ib.  385  ff. 

4  Following  the  example  of  Kant  and  Fichte,  Bouterwek  ends  his  theoretical 
Apodiktik  in  scepticism  or  in  completely  abstract-formal,  absolute  knowledge  ; 
it  is  the  "practical"  apodictic  which  first  gains  a  relation  of  its  content  to 
reality. 


588  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VL 

resistance  to  this  Trill.  The  antithesis  of  force  and  resistance  thus 
furnishes  a  common  basis  to  the  knowledge  of  the  reality  of  our- 
selves, and  to  that  of  the  reality  of  other  things,  —  of  the  I  and  the 
Xot-I.1  This  doctrine  Bouterwek  would  have  called  absolute  Virtu- 
alism.  We  know  our  own  reality  in  that  we  will,  and  the  reality  of 
other  things  in  that  our  will  finds  in  them  a  resisting  force.  The 
feeling  of  resistance  refutes  pure  subjectivism  or  solipsism,  but  this 
relative  knowledge  of  the  particular  forces  of  the  real  is  supple- 
mented by  the  consciousness  of  our  own  willing  to  form  a  merely 
empirical  science.2 

This  thought  of  his  Gottingen  teacher  was  developed  by  Schopen- 
hauer, under  the  influence  of  Fichte,  to  a  metaphysics.  With  a  bold 
leap  he  swings  himself  up  from  the  position  of  Virtualism  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  essential  nature  of  all  things.  We  recognise  the 
will  within  us  as  the  true  reality,  and  the  resistance  from  which  we 
know  the  reality  of  other  things  must,  therefore,  be  likewise  will.* 
This  is  demanded  by  the  "  metaphysical  need  "  of  a  unitary  explana- 
tion for  all  experience.  The  w>rld  "  as  idea  "  can  be  only  phenome- 
non ;  an  object  is  possible  only  in  the  subject  and  determined  by 
the  Forms  of  the  subject.  Hence  the  world  in  man's  idea  or  mental 
representation  (as  "  phenomenon  of  the  brain,"  as  Schopenhauer  has 
often  said  with  a  dangerously  contradictory  laxity  of  expression) 
appears  as  a  manifold  ordered  in  space  and  time,  a  manifold  whose 
connection  can  be  thought  only  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of 
causality,  —  the  only  one  of  the  Kantian  categories  which  Schopen- 
hauer can  admit  to  an  originality  of  the  same  rank  as  that  which 
belongs  to  the  pure  perceptions.  Bound  to  these  Forms,  conceptional 
knowledge  can  have  for  its  object  only  the  necessity  which  prevails 
between  individual  phenomena :  for  causality  is  a  relation  of  phe- 
nomena to  each  other;  science  knows  nothing  absolute,  nothing 
unconditioned;  the  guiding  thread  of  causality,  which  leads  from 
one  condition  to  the  other,  never  breaks  off  and  must  not  be  broken 
off  arbitrarily.3  The  conceptional  work  of  science  can,  therefore,  in 
nowise  raise  itself  above  this  infinite  series  of  phenomena ;  only  an 
intuitive  interpretation  of  the  whole  world  of  ideas,  a  look  of  genius 
over  experience,  an  immediate  apprehension,  can  penetrate  to  the 
true  essence,  which  appears  in  our  ideas  as  the  world  determined  in 
space  and  time  and  by  causality.  This  intuition,  however,  is  that 
,1)y)which  the  knowing  subject  is  given  immediately  through  itself  as 
will  This  word  solves,  therefore,  the  mystery  of  the  outer  world 

1  Apodiktik  II.  62  ft  2  j^  0t  37  ^ 

*  In  this  Schopenhauer  is  in  complete  agreement  with  Jacob!  (cf.  above, 


CHAP.  2,  §  41.]          Thing-inrltself :  Schopenhauer.  589 

also.  For  we  must  apprehend  the  significance  of  all  that  is  given  to 
us  immediately  in  space  and  time  as  idea,1  according  to  this  analogy 
of  the  only  thing  which  is  immediately  given.  The  thing-in-itself  is 
the  Will. 

The  word  "  will "  as  here  used  must  indeed  be  taken  in  an  ex- 
tended sense.  In  men  and  in  animals  the  will  appears  as  motiva- 
tion determined  through  ideas,  in  the  instinctive  'and  vegetative  life 
of  the  organism  as  susceptibility  to  stimulation,  in  the  rest  of  the 
world  of  experience  as  mechanical  processes.  The  meaning  which 
is  common  to  these  different  internal  or  external  kinds  of  causality, 
should  be  designated  a  potion  as  will.,  in  accordance  with  that  form 
in  which  alone  it  is  immediately  known  to  us.  Accordingly  the 
philosopher  emphasises  expressly  the  point,  that  the  particular 
peculiarities  with  which  the  will  is  given  in  human  self-perception, 
i.e.  its  motivation  through  ideas  and  conceptions,  must  be  kept  quite  " 
apart  from  our  notion  of  the  will  as  thing-in-itself,  — a  requirement 
which  it  was,  indeed,  hard  enough  for  Schopenhauer  himself  to 
fulfil. 

At  the  same  time,  however,  the  relation  between  thing-in-itself 
and  phenomenon  must  not  be  thought  according  to  the  rule  of  the 
understanding,  i.e.  causally.  The  thing-in-itself  is  not  the  cause  of 
phenomena.  Even  in  the  case  of  man  the  will  is  not  the  cause  of 
his  body  or  of  the  bodily  activities ;  but  the  same  reality,  which  is 
given  us  mediately,  through  our  ideas  in  space  and  time  perception, 
as  body,  and  which  in  cognition  is  conceived  as  something  causally 
necessary  and  dependent  upon  other  phenomena, — this  is  im- 
mediately given  as  will.  Because  the  thing-in-itself  is  not  subject 
to  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason,  we  have  the  paradox,  that  man 
feels  himself  as  will  immediately  free,  and  yet  in  idea  knows  him- 
self to  be  necessarily  determined.  So  Schopenhauer  adopts  Kant's 
doctrine  of  intelligible  and  empirical  character.  In  the  same  way, 
however,  phenomenal  Nature  must  everywhere  be  regarded  as 
objectification  ;  that  is,  as  the  perceptional  and  conceptional  mode  of 
representation  of  the  will  or  the  immediately  real,  and  must  not 
be  regarded  as  the  product  of  the  latter.  The  relation  of  essence 
to  phenomenon  is  not  that  of  cause  and  effect. 

Further,  the  will  as  thing-in-itself  can  be  only  the  one,  universal 
"world-will."  All  plurality  and  multiplicity  belong  to  perception 
in  space  and  time ;  these  latter  are  the  prindpium  individuationis. 
Hence  things  are  different  and  separate  from  each  other  only  as 
phenomena  —  in  idea  and  cognition ;  in  their  true  essence  they  are 

i  Cf.  World  as  Will,  etc.,  II.  §§  18-23. 


590  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  VL 

all  the  same.  The  will  is  the  tv  /cat  irav.  Here  lies  for  Schopen- 
hauer the  metaphysical  root  of  morals.  It  is  the  deception  of  the 
phenomenal  that  makes  the  individual  distinguish  his  own  weal 
and  woe  from  that  of  other  individuals;  and  brings  the  two  into 
opposition :  in  the  f uudamental  moral  feeling  which  feels  another's 
sorrows  as  one?s  own — in  sympathy,  the  transcendental  unity  of  will 
of  all  reality  comes  to  light. 

Finally,  the  will  can  have  for  its  object  no  particular  content  that 
can  be  empirically  presented  in  consciousness;  for  every  such 
content  belongs  already  to  its  "objectivity."  The  world-will  has 
only  itself  for  its  object ;  it  wills  only  to  will.  It  wills  only  to  be 
actual;  for  all  that  actually  is,  is  itself  only  a  willing.  In  this 
sense  Schopenhauer  calls  it  the  will  to  live.  It  is  the  thing-in-itself 
which  ever  gives  birth  to  itself  in  timeless,  eternal  process,  and  as 
such  it  is  represented  in  the  restless  mutation  of  phenomena. 


§  42.  The  System  of  Reason. 

The  direction  which  the  main  line  of  the  idealistic  development 
was  to  take  was  prescribed  by  the  principle  from  which  Fichte 
made  bold  to  throw  overboard  the  conception  of  the  thing-in-itself. 
The  relation  of  Being  and  consciousness  can  be  explained  only  out 
of  consciousness,  and  by  the  fact  that  consciousness  "looks  at  its 
own  action"  and  creates  thereby  at  once  the  real  and  the  ideal 
series  of  experience  —  objects  and  the  knowledge  of  them.  The 
problem  of  the  Wissenschaftslehre  is,  therefore,  to  comprehend  the 
world  as  a  necessary  connected  whole  of  rational  activities,  and 
the  solution  can  proceed  only  by  reflection  on  the  part  of  the  philos- 
ophising reason  upon  its  own  action  and  upon  that  which  is  requi- 
site therefor.  The  necessity,  therefore,  which  prevails  in  this 
system  of  reason  is  not  causal  but  teleologicaL  The  dogmatic  system 
understands  the  intelligence  as  a  product  of  things,  the  idealistic 
develops  intelligence  as  an  inherently  purposeful  connection  of  acts, 
some  of  which  serve  to  produce  objects.  The  progress  of  philo- 
sophical thought  should  not  take  the  form,  that  because  something 
is,  therefore  something  else  is  also,  but  should  rather  shape  itself 
after  the  guiding  principle  that  in  order  that  something  may  take 
place,  something  else  must  take  place  also.  Every  act  of  reason  has 
a  task;  to  perform  this  it  needs  other  acts  and  thus  other  tasks; 
the  connected  series  of  all  activities  for  the  fulfilment  of  all  tasks, 
taken  as  a  purposeful  unity,  is  the  system  of  the  reason,  the 
"history  of  consciousness."  The  ground  or  reason  of  all  Being  lies 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]         System  of  Reason ;  Dialectic.  591 

in  the  ought ;  that  is,  in  the  activity  of  self-consciousness  directed 
toward  an  end. 

The  schema  for  carrying  out  this  thought  is  the  dialectical  method. 
If  the  world  is  to  be  comprehended  as  reason,  the  system  of  reason 
must  be  developed  from  an  original  task;  all  particular  acts  of 
intelligence  must  be  deduced  as  means  to  its  performance.  This 
act  [lit.  "deed-act,"  Tliathandlung]  is  self-consciousness.  A  begin- 
ning without  assumptions,  such  as  philosophy  needs,  is  not  to  be 
found  by  means  of  an  assertion  or  proposition,  but  by  means  of  a 
demand,  which  every  one  must  be  able  to  fulfil :  "  Think  thyself! " 
And  the  whole  business  of  philosophy  consists  in  making  clear 
what  takes  place  in  this  act,  and  what  is  requisite  for  it.  But  this 
principle  can  lead  on  farther,  only  so  long  as  it  is  shown  that 
between  that  which  should  take  place  and  that  which  does  take 
place  to  this  end,  there  is  still  a  contradiction,  out  of  which  the  new 
task  results,  and  so  on.  The  dialectical  method  is  a  system  in 
which  every  problem  or  task  creates  a  new  one.  There  is  in  the 
reason  itself  a  resistance  to  the  result  it  seeks  to  achieve,  and  to 
overcome  this  resistance  it  unfolds  a  new  function.  These  three 
momenta  are  designated  as  Thesis,  Antithesis,  and  Synthesis. 

If  Kant  had  maintained  the  necessity  of  insoluble  problems  of 
reason  for  his  explanation  and  criticism  of  metaphysics,  the  idealis- 
tic metaphysics  now  makes  this  thought  a  positive  principle.  By 
this  means  the  reason's  world  becomes  an  infinity  of  self-production, 
and  the  contradiction  between  the  task  and  the  actual  doing  is 
declared  to  be  the  real  nature  of  the  reason  itself.  This  contradic- 
tion is  necessary  and  cannot  be  abolished.  It  belongs  to  the  essen- 
tial nature  of  the  reason ;  and  since  only  the  reason  is  real,  the  con- 
tradiction is  thus  declared  to  be  real.  Thus  the  dialectical  method, 
this  metaphysical  transformation  of  Kant's  transcendental  logic, 
came  into  stronger  and  stronger  opposition  to  formal  logic.  The 
rules  of  the  understanding,  which  have  their  general  principle  in 
the  principle  of  contradiction,  are  adequate,  perhaps,  for  the  ordi- 
nary elaboration  of  perceptions  into  conceptions,  judgments,  and 
conclusions;  for  the ' intellectual  perception  of  the  philosophising 
reason  they  do  not  suf&ce,  before  the  problems  of  "  speculative  con- 
struction "  they  sink  to  a  relative  importance. 

This  doctrine  asserts  itself  already  in  the  first  exposition  which 
Fichte  gave  to  his  Science  of  Knowledge ; *  it  was  then  spoken  out 
more  and  more  boldly  by  disciples  and  associates  like  Fr.  Schlegel, 
and,  ultimately,  the  speculative  reason  affected  a  superiority  to  the 

1  Grundlage  der  ges.  W.-L.,  §  1 ;  W.,  I.  92  ff.  [Kroeger's  tr.,  pp.  G3  ff.]. 


592  Grermany:  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  VI. 

« reflective  philosophy  of  the  understanding3'  hemmed  in  within 
the  principle  of  contradiction.  Schelling1  appealed  to  the  coinci- 
dentia,  oppositomm  of  Xicolaus  Cusanus  and  Giordano  Bruno,  and 
Hegel2  sees  in  the  triumph  of  the  "narrow  understanding"  over 
the  reason  the  hereditary  error  of  all  earlier  philosophy.3  Meta- 
physics, of  which  Kant  has  shown  that  it  is  not  possible  for  the 
understanding,  seeks  an  organ  of  its  own  in  intellectual  perception  or 
intuition,  and  a  form  of  its  own  in  the  dialectical  method.  The 
productive  synthesis  of  the  manifold  must  keep  its  unity  above  the 
antitheses  into  which  it  divides  itself.  It  is  the  essential  nature 
of  mind  or  spirit  to  disunite  itself,  and  from  this  state  of  being  rent 
apart,  to  return  back  to  its  original  unity. 

This  triplicity  rests  entirely  upon  the  above  (Fichtean)  funda- 
mental characterisation  of  the  mind  as  that  which  beholds  itself. 
The  reason  is  not  only  "in-itself "  as  a  simple  ideal  reality,  but  also 
"for-itself";  it  appears  to  itself  as  "something  other,  alien";  it 
becomes  for  itself  an  object  different  from  the  subject,  and  this 
otherness  is  the  principle  of  negation.  The  doing  away  with  this 
difference,  the  negation  of  the  negation,  is  the  synthesis  of  the  two 
moments  above  named.  These  are  annulled  or  sublated  [_"aufge- 
Tioben^  which  has  no  exact  English  equivalent ;  Bosanquet  suggests 
"put  by"]  in  the  threefold  aspect  that  their  one-sided  force  is 
overcome,  their  relative  meaning  is  preserved,  and  their  original 
sense  transmuted  into  a  higher  truth.  Following  this  scheme  of 
the  «in-itself,"  "for-itself,"  and  "  in-and-f or-itself »  (An-sich,  fflr- 
sich,  An~und-fiir-skh) .  Hegel  developed  his  dialectical  method  with 
great  virtuosoship  by  making  each  conception  "  turn  into  its  oppo- 
site," and  from  the  contradiction  of  the  two  making  the  higher  con- 
ception proceed,  which  then  experienced  the  same  fortune  of  finding 
an  antithesis  which  required  a  still  higher  synthesis,  and  so  on.  The 
Master  himself,  in  his  employment  of  this  method,  particularly  in 
the  PJia&nomenology  and  in  the  Logic,  worked  in  an  astonishing 
wealth  of  knowledge,  a  quite  unique  fineness  of  feeling  for  concep- 
tional  connections,  and  a  victorious  power  of  combining  thought, 
while  occasionally  his  profundity  passed  over  into  obscurity  and 
schematic  word-building.  In  the  case  of  his  disciples,  a  philosophical 
jargon  grew  out  of  this,  which  pressed  all  thought  into  the  triple 
scheme,  and  by  the  thoughtless  externality  with  which  it  was  used, — 

1  Sixth  Vorl.  uber  Meth.  d.  ak.  St.,  W.,  V.  267  ff. 

2  Cf.  esp,  his  article  on  Glauben  und  Wissen,  W.,  I  21  if. 

3  It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  we  best  can  understand  Herbart's  polemic 
against  absolute  idealism.    He,  too,  finds  contradictions  in  the  fundamental 
conceptions  of  experience,  but  just  on  this  account  they  ought  to  be  worked 
over  until  the  contradictionless  reality  is  recognised ;  cf.  above,  §  41,  7. 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]  System  of  Reason  :  Fichte.  593 


and  used  for  a  time  in  widely  extended  circles,  —  it  was  all  too 
adapted  to  discredit  philosophy  as  an  empty  bombast.1 

2.  The  system  of  reason  with  Fichte,  in  the  first  period  of  his 
philosophical  activity  (about  1800),  is,  in  its  content  also,  in  full 
accord  with  the  above  method.  The  original  "act"  (Thathandlung) 
of  self-consciousness,  which  is  determined  by  nothing  except  itself, 
is  that  the  "  I"  or  self  can  only  be  "posited"  by  being  distinguished 
from  a  "  Not-I"  or  "not-self."  Since,  however,  the  not-self  is  posited 
only  in  the  self,  —  i.e.  historically  expressed,  the  object  posited  only 
in  consciousness,  —  the  self  and  the  not-self  (i.e.  subject  and  object) 
must  reciprocally  determine  each  other  within  the  "  I  "  or  self.  From 
this  results  the  theoretical  or  the  practical  series  of  self-conscious- 
ness, according  as  the  ISTot-I  or  the  "  I  "  is  the  determining  part. 

The  functions  of  the  theoretical  reason  are  now  developed  by 
Tichte  in  the  following  manner  :  The  particular  stages  result  from 
the  reflection  of  consciousness  upon  its  own  previously  determined 
action.  By  virtue  of  its  own  activity,  which  is  limited  by  nothing 
external,  it  presses  beyond  every  bound  which  the  "  I  "  has  set  for 
itself  in  the  Not-I  as  object.  The  pure  perceptions,  space  and 
time,  the  categories  as  rules  of  the  understanding,  and  the  principles 
of  the  reason,  are  treated  as  the  several  forms  of  this  self-determin- 
ing. In  place  of  the  antitheses  which  Kant  had  set  up  between 
these  particular  strata,  Fichte  set  the  principle,  that  in  each  higher 
stage  the  reason  apprehends  in  purer  form  what  it  has  accomplished 
in  the  lower  stage.  Knowing  is  a  process  of  self-knowledge  on  the 
part  of  the  reason,  beginning  with  sense  perception  and  ascending 
to  complete  knowledge.2  But  this  whole  series  of  the  theoretical 
reason  presupposes  an  original  "  self-limitation  "  of  the  I.  If  this 
is  given,  the  entire  series  is  comprehensible  in  accordance  with  the 
principle  of  self-perception  ;  for  every  activity  has  its  object  and 
its  reason  in  the  preceding.  The  first  self-limitation  has  its  ground 
in  no  preceding  act,  and  therefore,  theoretically,  no  ground  what- 
ever. It  is  a  groundless,  free  activity,  but  as  such,  the  ground  of  all 
other  activities.  This  groundless  [undetermined]  free  act  is  sen- 
sation. It  falls  into  consciousness,  therefore,  only  in  its  content, 
which  is  to  be  taken  up  into  perception  ;  as  act  it  is,  like  all  that  has 

1  Cf.  the  humorous  portrayal  in  G.  Rumelin,  Reden  und  Aufsatze,  pp.  47-50, 
Freiburg,  1888. 

2  Without  any  directly  visible  influence  from  Leibniz,  his  conception  of  the 
relation  of  the  different  knowing  faculties  asserts  itself  here  in  contrast  with 
the  Kantian  separation.    Only  it  is  to  be  noted  that  this  "  history  of  the  devel- 
opment of  reason  "  is,  with  Leibniz,  determined  causally,  with  Fichte  teleologi- 
cally.   What  Hamann  and  Herder  (cf.  above,  p.  576)  demanded  as  a  requirement 
of  the  unity  of  intelligence  in  the  Leibnizian  sense,  Fichte  and  Schelling  had 
meanwhile  performed  in  quite  another  sense. 


594:  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  VI, 

no  ground,  unconscious.1  In  this  consists  its  "  givenness,"  by  virtue 
of  which  it  appears  as  foreign  and  coming  "from  without."  In 
place  of  the  thing-in-itself  comes,  therefore,  the  unconscious  self- 
limitation  of  the  I.  Fichte  calls  this  activity  the  2»'oductive  imagina- 
tion. It  is  the  world-producing  activity  of  the  reason. 

For  sensation  there  is  then  no  ground  which  determines  it;  it 
is  there  with  absolute  freedom,  and  determines  on  its  part  all 
knowledge  as  regards  content.  Hence  it  can  be  comprehended  only 
through  its  end  —  in  the  practical  Wissenschaftslehre,  which  has 
to  investigate  to  what  end  the  self  limits  itself.  This  is  only  to 
be  understood  if  we  regard  the  I  or  self,  not  as  resting  Being,  but 
as  in  its  nature  infinite  activity  or  impulse.  For  since  all  action  is 
directed  toward  an  object  in  connection  with  which  it  develops, 
so  the  self,  which  finds  its  object  not  given  to  it,  as  is  the  case 
with  the  empirical  will,  must,  in  order  to  remain  impulse  and  action, 
set  objects  for  itself.  This  takes  place  in  sensation :  sensation  has 
no  ground,  but  only  the  end  of  creating  for  the  impulse  of  the  self 
a  limit  beyond  which  the  self  passes  in  order  to  become  object  for 
itself.  The  actual  world  of  experience,  with  all  its  things,  and  with 
the  "Reality"  which  it  has  for  the  theoretical  consciousness,  is 
only  the  material  for  the  activity  of  the  practical  reason. 

The  inmost  essence  of  the  ego,  .therefore,  is  its  action,  directed 
only  toward  itself,  determined  only  by  itself, — the  autonomy  of  the 
etliical  reason.  The  system  of  reason  culminates  in  the  categorical 
imperative.  The  I  is  the  ethical  will,  and  the  world  is  the  material 
of  duty  put  into  sensuous  form.  It  is  there,  to  the  end  that  we  may 
be  active  in  it.  It  is  not  that  Being  is  the  cause  of  doing,  but 
Being  is  brought  forth  for  the  sake  of  the  doing.  All  that  is,  is 
only  to  be  understood  or  explained  from  the  point  of  view  of  that 
which  it  ought  to  be  (soil) . 

The  demand  of  the  Wissenschaftslehre,  so  paradoxical  for  the 
ordinary  consciousness,2  amounts,  accordingly,  to  robbing  the  category 

1  The  paradox  of  the  "unconscious  activities  of  consciousness"  lies  in  the 
expression,  not  in  the  thing.    German  philosophers  have  frequently  been  very 
unfortunate  in  their  terminology,  most  unfortunate  precisely  where  they  wished 
to  give  German  words  a  new  meaning.    Pichte  not  only  uses  consciousness 
and  self-consciousness  promiscuously,  but  he  understands  by  consciousness, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  actual  idea  or  mental  presentation  of  the  individual  or  the 
empirical  ego  (hence  in  this  sense  "unconscious,"  bewusstlos*),  and  on  the 
other  hand,  the  functions  of  the  "consciousness  in  general,"  of  the  transcen- 
dental apperception  or  the  "universal  ego  or  self"  (in  this  sense  he  speaks  of 
"  history  of  consciousness  ")..    In  these  verbal  relations  rests  a  good  part  of  the 
difficulty  of  Fichte' s  exposition  and  of  the  misunderstanding  which  it  has 
called  forth. 

2  In  this  spirit  Fr.  E.  Jacobi  protested  against  this  knitting,  not  indeed  of  the 
stocking,  but  of  the  knitting  (W.,  III.  24  fl.).    Cf,,  on  the  other  hand,  C.  Fort- 
lage,  JBeitrage  zur  PsycUologie  (Leips.  1875),  pp.  40 1 


CHAP.  2,  §  12.]         System  of  Reason :  Fichte.  595 

of  substantiality  of  the  fundamental  significance  which,  it  has  in  the 
naive,  sensuous  view  of  the  "world.  In  this  a  something  that  "is," 
a  "Being"  (" Seiendes")  is  always  thought  as  support  and  cause  of 
activities ;  in  Fichte's  thought  the  "  doing "  or  action  is  conceived 
as  the  original,  and  Being  is  regarded  as  only  the  means  posited  for 
that  end.  This  antithesis  came  sharply  to  light  in  the  atheism 
controversy,  which  had  so  important  consequences  for  Fichte  per- 
sonally. The  Wissenschaftslehre  could  not  allow  God  to  be  regarded 
as  "substance";  in  this  case  he  would  necessarily  be  something 
derived ;  it  could  seek  the  metaphysical  conception  of  God  only  in 
the  "Universal  Ego  or  Self"  (allge/neinen  Ich),  in  the  absolutely 
free,  world-creating  action;  and  in  clear  contrast  to  the  natura 
naturans  of  dogmatism  it  calls  G-od  the  Moral  World-order,1  the 
ordo  ordinans. 

Accordingly,  the  chief  philosophical  discipline  for  Fichte  is  moral 
science.  Projected  before  Kant's  Metaphysics  of  Morals,  Fichte's 
•  system  takes  from  the  same  the  categorical  imperative  in  the 
formula  "  act  according  to  thy  conscience,"  for  the  starting-point  of 
a  strictly  carried  out  science  of  duties,  which  develops  the  general 
and  particular  tasks  of  man  from  the  opposition  appearing  in  the 
empirical  self  between  the  natural  impulse  and  the  moral  impulse. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Kantian  rigour  is  softened  by  the  fact,  that 
man's  sensibility,  also,  is  permitted  to  assert  its  rights  as  product 
of  reason.  The  dualism  still  survives,  but  it  is  already  on  the  way 
toward  being  overcome,  and  in  the  thought  that  the  purposeful 
connected  whole  of  the  reason  assigns  each  of  its  members  a  voca- 
tion prescribed  by  its  natural  manifestation,  ethical  theory  is  brought 
to  an  elaboration  of  the  "  material  for  the  fulfilment  of  duty/3  which 
is  much  more  penetrating  and  gives  a  deeper  value  to  the  data  of 
experience.  This  shows  itself  in  Fichte's  exposition  of  professional 
duties,  in  his  nobler  conception  of  marriage  and  family  life,  in  the 
finer  penetration  of  his  ethical  investigations  into  the  manifold 
relations  of  human  life. 

The  like  is  true,  also,  of  Fichte's  treatment  of  the  problems  of 
public  life.  A  youthful  energy  masters  the  Kantian  fundamental 
thoughts  here,  and  gives  them  a  much  more  impressive  formulation 
than  they  could  receive  from  Kant  himself,  who  undertook  the 
systematic  carrying  out  of  these  thoughts,  only  in  his  old  age.  The 
reciprocal  limitation  of  spheres  of  freedom  in  the  outer  social  life  of 
individuals  is,  for  Fichte  also,  the  principle  of  Natural  Eight.  As 
"primitive  rights"  he  regarded  the  claims  of  the  individual  to 

i  Fichte,  W.,  V.  182  fl.,  210  fl. 


596  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism.  [PART  VI. 

freedom  of  his  body  as  the  organ  for  performance  of  duty,  of  his 
property  as  being  the  external  sphere  of  operation  to  this  end,  and 
finally  of  his  self-preservation  as  personality.    But  these  primitive 
rights  become  efficient  as  compulsory  rights  or  laws  only  through 
the  authority  of  (positive)  laws  in  the  state.     The  idea  of  the  com- 
pact  which  is  at  the  basis  of  the  state,  Fichte  analyses  into  the 
citizen,  the  property,  and  the  defence  contract.    It  is  interesting  in 
this  connection  to  see  how  these  thoughts  culminate  in  his  politics 
in  the  principle,  that  the  state  has  to  make  provision  that  every  one 
may  be  able  to  live  by  his  work,  —  the  doctrine,  named  after  him,  of 
the  so-called  right  to  work.1    Work  is  the  duty  of  the  moral  person- 
ality, the  condition  of  existence  of  the  physical ;  it  must  uncondi- 
tionally be  furnished  by  the  state.    Hence  the  regulation  of  the 
relations  of  labour  must  not  be  left  to  the  natural  working  of  supply 
and  demand  (as  according  to  Adam  Smith),  and  the  profits  of  labour 
must  not  be  left  to  tho  mechanism  of  society's  war  of  interests,  but 
the  rational  law  of  the  state  must  enter  here.     From  the  point  of 
view  of  this  thought,  with  a  careful  consideration  of  the  conditions 
given  by  experience,2  Fichte  projected  his  ideal  of  the  socialistic  state 
as  "the  complete  industrial  state"  (geschlossenen  Handelsstaates) , 
which  itself  takes  in  hand  all  production  and  manufacturing,  and  all 
trade  with  foreign  countries,  in  order  to  assign  to  each  citizen  his 
work  and  also  the  full  revenue  for  his  work.    The  powerful  idealism 
of  the  philosopher  did  not  shrink  from  a  deep  system  of  compulsion, 
if  he  could  hope  to  assure  to  every  individual  thereby  a  sphere  for 
the  free  fulfilment  of  duty. 

3.  The  problem  of  conceiving  the  universe  as  a  system  of  reason 
was  solved  in  the  main  in  the  Science  of  Knowledge  by  the  method 
of  deducing  the  external  world  of  the  senses  as  a  product,  appearing 
in  the  empirical  ego,  of  the  "consciousness  in  general "j  in  this 
sense  Fichte's  doctrine,  like  Kant's,  was  later  characterised  as1"  sub- 
jective idealism."  Fiehte's  meaning  in  this,  however,  was  through- 
out that  "Nature,"  which  it  was  his  intention  to  have  posited  as  an 
organic  whole,3  should  possess  the  full  significance  of  an  objective 
product  of  reason,  in  contrast  with  the  ideas  of  individuals  j  to  set 
this  forth  he  lacked  the  penetrating  knowledge  of  his  subject  which 
he  possessed  in  the  case  of  the  relations  of  human  life.  Thus  it  was 
a  supplementing  of  this  work,  that  was  welcome  to  Fichte  also, 

*  Naturrecht,  §  18 ;  W.,  HI.  210  ff. ;  GeschL  tfandelsst.,  I.  1 :  WM  in.  400  ff. 
2  Cf.  G.  Schmoller,  Studie  uber  J.  G.  Fichte  in  Hildebrand's  Jahrb.  f.  Nat. 

u.  8tat.,  1865;  also  W.  Wmdelbaad,  Fichte^ $  Idee  des  deutsehen  Staates  (Frei- 
burg, 1890).  v 

*  Ftehte,  W.,  IV.  115. 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]         System  of  Reason :  ScMling.  597 

when  Schelling  undertook  to  solve  the  other  part  of  the  problem  and 
took  up  in  earnest  the  thought  of  constructing  or  deducing  Nature 
as  the  objective  system  of  reason.  According  to  the  Science  of 
Knowledge  and  Kant's  Philosophy  of  Nature  this  was  possible  only 
if  Nature  could  be  successfully  comprehended  as  a  connected  whole 
of  forces,  having  their  ultimate  end  in  a  service  toward  the  realisa- 
tion of  the  reason's  command.  The  starting-point  for  this  construc- 
tion was  necessarily  Kant's  dynamic  theory,  which  derived  the 
existence  of  matter  from  the  relation  of  the  forces  of  attraction  and 
repulsion  (cf.  §  38,  7),  and  its  goal  was  given  by  that  manifestation 
of  Nature  in  which  alone  the  practical  reason  evinces  itself  —  the 
human  organism.  Between  the  two  the  whole  wealth  of  Nature's 
forms  and  functions  must  be  spread  out  as  a  life  in  unity,  whose 
rational  meaning  was  to  be  sought  in  the  organic  growth  of  the  final 
goal  out  of  the  material  beginnings.  Nature  is  the  ego,  or  self,  in 
process  of  becoming  —  this  is  the  theme  of  Sehelling's  Philosophy 
of  Nature.  This  task,  which  had  its  basis  in  philosophical  premises, 
seemed  at  the  same  time  set  by  the  condition  of  natural  science, 
which  had  once  again  reached  the  point  where  scattered  detail-work 
craved  a  living  conception  of  Nature  as  a  whole.  And  this  craving 
asserted  itself  the  more  vigorously,  as  the  progress  of  empirical 
science  gave  little  satisfaction  to  the  highly  pitched  expectations 
which  had  been  set  upon  the  principle  of  the  mechanical  explanation 
of  Nature  after  the  seventeenth  century.  The  derivation  of  the 
organic  from  the  inorganic  remained,  as  Kant  stated,  problematical,  to 
say  the  least;  a  genetic  development  of  organisms  on  this  basis 
was  a  vexed  question ;  for  the  theory  of  medicine,  which  was  then 
passing  through  a  great  movement,  no  key  had  as  yet  been  found  by 
which  it  could  be  fitted  into  the  mechanical  conception  of  the  world ; 
now  came,  also,  the  discoveries  of  electric  and  magnetic  phenomena, 
for  which  at  that  time  it  could  not  be  anticipated  that  it  would  be 
pqssible  to  subsume  their  peculiar  mysterious  qualities  under  the 
point  of  view  of  the  Galilean  mechanics.  In  contrast  with  this, 
tipinoza  had  made  his  powerful  impression  upon  the  minds  of  men 
just  because  he  thought  all  Nature,  man  not  excluded,  as  a  con- 
nected unity,  in  which  the  divine  Being  manifests  itself  in  all 
its  fulness,  and  for  the  development  of  German  thought  it  became 
of  decisive  importance  that  Goethe  made  this  conception  his  own. 
The  poet,  indeed,  as  we  find  it  best  expressed  in  his  splendid  apho- 
risms Die  Natur,  reinterpreted  this  view  in  his  own  way ;  in  the 
stead  of  the  "  mathematical  consequence  "  and  its  mechanical  neces- 
sity he  set  the  concrete  idea  of  a  living  unity  of  Nature,  in  which  the 
Weltanschauung  of  the  Eenaissance  was  revived,  though  without  a 


598  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

i> 

formulation  in  abstract  thought.  This  poetic  Spinozism J  became  an 
essential  link  in  the  development  of  the  idealistic  systems. 
•  All  these  motives  come  into  play  in  Spelling's  Philosophy  of 
Mature :  as  a  result  its  central  conception  is  life,  and  it  makes  the 
attempt  to  consider  Nature  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  organism, 
and  to  understand  the  connection  of  its  forces  from  the  ultimate 
end  of  the  production  of  organic  life.  Nature  is  not  to  be  described 
and  measured,  but  the  meaning  and  significance  which  belong  to  its 
particular  phenomena  in  the  purposeful  system  of  the  whole  are  to 
be  understood.  The  "categories  of  Nature "  are  the  forms  or  shapes 
in  which  the  reason  sets  itself  as  objective  to  itself;  they  form  a 
system  of  development  in  which  every  particular  phenomenon  finds 
its  logically  determined  place.  In  carrying  out  this  idea  Schelling 
was  of  course  dependent  upon  the  condition  of  the  natural  science 
of  his  time.  Of  the  connection  of  forces,  of  their  transformation 
into  each  other,  which  was  the  principal  point  of  interest  for  his 
purpose,  ideas  at  that  time  were  still  very  imperfect,  and  the 
philosopher  did  not  hesitate  to  fill  out  the  gaps  of  knowledge  by 
hypotheses,  which  he  took  from  the  a  priori  construction  of  the 
teleological  system.  In  many  cases  these  theories  proved  valuable 
heuristic  principles  (cf.  above,  p.  566),  in  others  they  proved  false 
paths  by  which  investigation  could  attain  no  useful  results. 

The  element  in  the  Philosophy  of  Nature,  which  is  of  historical 
significance,  is  its  opposition  to  the  dominance  of  the  Democritic- 
Galilean  principle  of  the  purely  mechanical  explanation  of  Nature. 
Quantitative  determination  is  here  again  regarded  as  only  external 
form  and  appearance,  and  the  causal  mechanical  connection  as  only 
the  mode  of  representation  which  conforms  to  the  understanding. 
The  meaning  of  the  structures  of  Nature  is  the  significance  which 
they  have  in  the  system  of  the  development  of  the  whole.  If,  there- 
fore, Schelling  turned  his  look  toward  the  relationship  of  forms  in 
the  organic  world,  if  he  used  the  beginnings  of  comparative  mor- 
phology, in  which  Goethe  played  so  important  a  role,  in  order  to  ex- 
hibit the  unity  oftlwplan  which  Nature  follows  in  the  succession  of 
animate  beings,  yet  this  connected  system  was  not  for  him,  or  for 
his  disciples  such  as  OJcen,  properly  a  causal  genesis  in  time,  but  the 
expression  of  a  gradually  succeeding  fulfilment  of  the  end.  In  the 
different  orders  of  animate  beings  we  see  in  separate  forms,  accord- 
ing to  Oken,  what  Nature  intends  with  the  organism,  and  what  she 
first  reaches  completely  in  man.  This  teleological  interpretation 

1  It  took  Herder  prisoner  also,  as  is  proved  by  his  conversations  on  Spinoza's 
system  under  the  title  Gott  (1787), 


CHAP.  2,  §  42 j     System  of  Reason  :  Schelling,  Goethe.  599 

does  not  exclude  a  causal  relation  in  time,  but,  with  Schelling  and 
Oken  at  least,  it  does  not  include  it.  It  is  not  their  point  to  ask 
whether  one  species  has  arisen  from  another;  they  only  wish  to 
show  that  one  is  the  preliminary  stage  for  that  which  the  other 
accomplishes.1 

From  this  we  can  understand  why  the  mechanical  explanation  of 
Nature,  which  has  again  attained  the  victory  in  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury, is  wont  to  see  in  the  period  of  the  Philosophy  of  Nature,  only 
a  fit  of  teleological  excess,  now  happily  overcome,  which  checked 
the  quiet  work  of  investigation.  But  the  chronicles  of  the  contro- 
versy, which  since  the  time  of  Democritus  and  Plato  has  filled  the 
history  of  the  mode  of  conceiving  Nature,  are  not  yet  closed,  even 
to-day.  The  reduction  of  the  qualitative  to  the  quantitative,  which 
presses  forward  victoriously  under  the  flag  of  mathematics,  has 
repeatedly  encountered  the  need  which  seeks  behind  motions  in 
space  a  reality  of  rational  meaning.  This  felt  need  of  a  living  con- 
tent of  Nature  Schelling's  theory  aimed  to  meet,  and  for  this  reason 
the  great  poet,  who  endeavoured  to  demonstrate  as  the  true  reality 
in  the  charming  play  of  colours  not  a  vibration  of  atoms,  but  a  some- 
thing that  is  originally  qualitative,  felt  drawn  toward  it.  This  is 
the  philosophical  meaning  of  Goethe's  "  Theory  of  Colours." 

With  Schelling  the  system  of  Nature  is  ruled  by  the  thought  that 
in  it  the  objective  reason  struggles  upward  from  its  material  modes 
of  manifestation,  through  the  multitude  of  forms  and  transforma- 
tions of  forces,  up  to  the  organism  in  which  it  comes  to  conscious- 
ness.3 Sensitive  beings  form  the  termination  of  the  life  of  Nature ; 
with  sensation  the  system  of  the  Science  of  Knowledge  begins. 
The  devious  way  which  Nature  pursues  to  this  goal  is  frequently 
altered  in  details  in  the  various  remodellings  which  Schelling  gave 
to  his  Philosophy  of  Nature,  but  in  its  main  outlines  it  remained 
the  same.  In  particular,  it  was  the  conception  of  duality,  of  the 
opposition  of  forces  which  negate  each  other  in  a  higher  unity,  that 
formed  the  fundamental  schema  of  his  "  construction  of  Nature,"  — 
a  conception  due  to  the  Science  of  Knowledge,  —  and  from  this 
point  of  view  the  polarity  in  electric  and  magnetic  phenomena  which 

1  The  "  interpretation  "  of  phenomena  was,  to  be  sure,  a  dangerous  principle 
from  a  scientific  point  of  view ;  it  opened  the  gates  of  the  Philosophy  of  Nature 
to  poetic  fancy  and  brilliant  flashes.    These  guests  forced  their  way  in  even 
with  Schelling,  but  still  more  with  his  disciples,  such  as  Novalis,  Stiffens,  and 
Schubert-    In  the  case  of  Novalis  especially  we  have  a  magical,  dreamy  sym- 
bolism of  Nature  in  a  play  which  is  admirable  in  poetry  but  questionable  in 
philosophy. 

2  The  poetry  of  this  fundamental  thought  was  expressed  in  most  character- 
istic form  by  Schelling  himself  in  the  beautiful  verses  which  are  printed  in 
ScKls  Leben  in  Briefen,  L  282  fi. 


gOO  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

busied  Spelling's  contemporaries  as  a  newly  found  enigma  was 
particularly  significant  for  Mm. 

4.  When  Sehelling  wished  to  place  beside  his  Philosophy  of 
Nature  an  elaboration  of  his  own  of  the  Science  of  Knowledge, 
under  the  name  of  "Transcendental  Idealism,"  an  important  change 
had  taken  place  in  the  common  thought  of  the  Jena  idealists,  to 
which  he  now  gave  the  first  systematic  expression.  The  impetus 
to  this  came  from  Schiller,  and  from  the  development  which  he  had 
given  to  the  thoughts  of  the  Critique  of  Judgment.  It  had  become 
plainer  step  by  step  that  the  system  of  reason  must  become  perfected 
for  idealism  in  the  aesthetic  function,  and  in  place  of  the  ethical 
idealism  which  the  Science  of  Knowledge  taught,  and  the  physical 
idealism  which  the  Philosophy  of  Nature  presented,  appeared  now 
(esthetic  idealism. 

The  re-shaping,  so  rich  in  results,  which  Kant's  thoughts  experi- 
enced through  Schiller,  by  no  means  concerned  merely  the  aesthetic 
questions  which  lay  nearest  the  poet,  but  likewise  the  ethical  ques- 
tions and  those  pertaining  to  the  history  of  philosophy,  and  there- 
with the  whole  system  of  reason.  For  Schiller's  thoughts,  even 
before  his  acquaintance  with  Kant, — as  is  shown  among  other 
things  by  his  poem,  Die  Kunstler,  — had  been  turned  to  the  prob- 
lem of  the  significance  of  art  and  the  beautiful  in  the  whole  con- 
nected system  of  man's  rational  life  and  its  historical  development, 
and  by  solving  this  problem  with  Kantian  conceptions  he  gave  to 
the  idealism  of  the  Science  of  Knowledge  a  decisive  turn. 

This  began  with  the  new  Forms  which  Schiller  found  for  Kant's 
conception  of  beauty.  The  synthesis  of  the  theoretical  and  the 
practical  in  the  aesthetic  reason  (cf.  §  40,  2)  could  perhaps  find  no 
more  fortunate  expression  than  in  Schiller's  definition  of  beauty  as 
freedom  in  phenomenal  appearance.1  It  asserts  that  aesthetic  con- 
templation apprehends  its  object  without  subjecting  it  to  the  rules 
of  the  cognising  understanding  j  it  is  not  subsumed  under  concep- 
tions, and  we  do  not  ask  for  the  conditions  which  it  has  in  other 
phenomena.  It  is  perceived  as  if  it  were  free.  Schopenhauer  after- 
wards expressed  this  in  the  form  that  the  enjoyment  of  the  beautiful 
is  the  contemplation  of  the  object  in  independence  of  the  principle 
of  sufficient  reason.  Schiller  later  laid  still  more  weight  upon  the 
point  that  the  aesthetic  process  is  as  independent  of  the  practical 
reason  as  of  the  theoretical.  The  beautiful  (in  distinction  from  the 
agreeable  and  the  good)  is  as  little  an  object  of  the  sensuous  as  it 

1  Cf.  chiefly  the  letters  to  KSrner  of  February,  1793,  also  the  sketch  on 
"The  Beautiful  in  Art,"  printed  with  the  letter  of  the  20th  of  June  of  that 
same  year, — all  fragments  of  the  dialogue  Kallias  which  was  not  completed. 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]          System  of  Reason :  Schiller.  601 

is  of  the  moral  impulse ;  it  lacks  that  quality  of  -want  or  need  which 
belongs  to  the  life  of  empirical  impulse,  just  as  it  lacks  the  earnest- 
ness of  the  practical  reason.  In  the  aesthetic  life  the  play  impulse 
unfolds  itself ;  *  every  stirring  of  the  will  is  silent  in  disinterested 
contemplation.  In  this,  too,  Schiller  was  followed  by  Schopenhauer, 
when  the  latter  found  the  happiness  of  the  aesthetic  condition  in  the 
overcoming  of  the  unhappy  will  to  live,  in  the  activity  of  the  pure, 
willess  subject  of  knowledge.2 

From  this  Schiller  concluded  in  the  first  place  that  wherever  we 
have  to  do  with  educating  man,  subject  to  his  sensuous  nature,  to  a 
condition  where  he  shall  will  morally,  the  sesthetic  life  offers  the 
most  effective  means  to  this  end.  Kant  had  designated  the  "  rever- 
sal of  motives  "  as  the  ethical  task  of  man  (cf.  above,  §  39,  6) ;  for 
the  transition  from  the  sensuous  to  the  ethical  determination  of  the 
will  he  offered  man,  as  an  aid,  religion;  Schiller  offered  art.3  Faith 
and  taste  cause  man  to  act  legally,  at  least,  when  he  is  not  yet  ripe 
for  morality.  In  intercourse  with  the  beautiful  the  feelings  become 
refined,  so  that  natural  rudeness  vanishes,  and  man  awakes  to  his 
higher  vocation.  Art  is  the  fostering  soil  for  science  and  morality. 
Such  was  the  teaching  of  Schiller  in  the  Artists;  his  Letters 
on  the  ^Esthetic  Education  of  the  Hitman  Race  go  deeper.  The 
sesthetic  condition,  or  state  (Staat),  because  it  is  the  completely 
disinterested  state,  destroys  the  sensuous  will,  also,  and  thus  makes 
room  for  the  possibility  of  the  moral  will ;  it  is  the  necessary  point 
of  transition  from  the  physical  state,  ruled  by  needs,  into  the  moral 
state.  In  the  physical  state  man  endures  the  power  of  Nature ;  in 
the  sesthetic  state  he  frees  himself  from  it ;  and  in  the  moral  state 
he  controls  it. 

But  already  in  the  Artists  the  beautiful  had  been  assigned  a 
second  higher  task  of  ultimately  giving  also  the  culmination  and 
completion  to  moral  and  intellectual  cultivation,  and  in  building  this 
thought  into  the  critical  system  the  poet  passes  over  from  supple- 
menting to  transforming  the  Kantian  doctrine.  The  two  sides  of 
human  nature  are  not  reconciled  if  the  moral  impulse  is  obliged  to 
overcome  the  sensuous  impulse.  In  the  physical  and  in  the  "moral" 
state  one  side  of  human  nature  is  always  suppressed  in  favour  of  the 


1  The  attempt  which  Schiller  makes  in  his  Letters  concerning 
Education  (11  f.)  to  lay  a  basis  for  this  in  transcendental  psychology  remind 
us  strongly  of  the  Reinhold-Fichte  time  when  "Jena  whirred  with  the  buzz 
of  Form  and  Matter." 

2  World  as  Will:  etc.,  I.  §§  36-38.     In  this  connection  Schopenhauer  no 
doubt  claims  the  same  value  for  scientific  knowledge.    Cf.  §  43,  4. 

8  Cf .  the  conclusion  of  the  essay,  Ueber  den  moralischen  Nutzen  asthetischer 
Sitten. 


602  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  VL 

other.  We  have  a  complete  manhood  only  where  neither  of  the  two 
impulses  prevails  over  the  other.  Man  is  truly  man,  only  where  he 
plays,  where  the  war  within  him  is  silent,  where  his  sensuous  nature 
is  exalted  to  so  noble  a  sentiment  or  sensibility  that  it  is  no  longer 
needful  for  him  to  will  loftily.  The  Kantian  rigorism  holds  where- 
ever  sensuous  inclination  stands  over  against  duty :  but  there  is  the 
higher  ideal  of  the  "schone  Seek"  —  the  beautiful  soul  —  which  does 
not  know  this  internal  conflict  because  its  nature  is  so  ennobled  that 
it  fulfils  the  moral  law  from  its  own  inclination.  And  just  this 
ennobling  is  gained  by  man,  only  through  aesthetic  education. 
Through  it  alone  is  the  sensuous-supersensuous  discord  in  human 
nature  abolished  j  in  it  alone  does  complete,  full  manhood  come  to 
realisation. 

o.  In  the  ideal  of  the  "schone  8eele"  the  " virtuosoship "  of 
Shaftesbury  overcomes  the  Kantian  dualism.  The  completion  of 
man  is  the  aesthetic  reconciliation  of  the  two  natures  which  dwell 
within  him ;  culture  is  to  make  the  life  of  the  individual  a  work  of 
art,  by  ennobling  what  is  given  through  the  senses  to  full  accord 
with  the  ethical  vocation.  In  this  direction  Schiller  gave  expres- 
sion to  the  ideal  view  of  life  characteristic  of  his  time  in  antithesis 
to  the  rigorism  of  Kant,  and  the  aesthetic  Humanism  which  he  thus 
wrested  from  abstract  thought  found  besides  his,  a  wealth  of  other 
characteristic  manifestations.  In  them  all,  however,  Goethe  appeared 
as  the  mighty  personality,  who  presented  in  living  form  this  ideal 
height  of  humanity  in  the  aesthetic  perfection  of  his  conduct  of  life, 
as  well  as  in  the  great  works  of  his  poetic  activity. 

In  this  conception  of  the  genius  Schiller  was  first  joined  by  Wil- 
liam von  Humboldt.1  He  sought  to  understand  the  nature  of  great 
poems  from  this  point  of  view ;  he  found  the  ideal  of  man's  life  in 
the  harmony  of  the  sensuous  and  the  moral  nature,  and  in  his  treatise 
which  laid  the  foundations  for  the  science  of  language 2  he  applied 
this  principle  by  teaching  that  the  nature  of  language  is  to  be  under- 
stood from  the  organic  interaction  of  the  two  elements. 

An  attitude  of  sharper  opposition  to  the  Kantian  rigorism  had 
already  been  taken,  in  the  Shaftesbury  spirit,  by  Jacobi  in  his 
romance  patterned  after  Goethe's  personality,  "Allwill's  Brief samm- 
lung."  The  moral  genius  also  is  "exemplary"  ;  he  does  not  subject 
himself  to  traditional  rules  and  maxims,  he  lives  himself  out  and 
thereby  gives  himself  the  laws  of  his  morality.  This  "ethical 
Nature  "  is  the  highest  that  the  circuit  of  humanity  affords. 

1  Born  1767,  died  1835.     Works,  7  vols.  (Berlin,  1841  ff.).     Aside  from 
the  correspondence,  especially  that  with  Schiller,  cf.  principally  the  JEstheti- 
sr,hen  Versuche  (Brunswick,  1799).    Also  Rud.  Haym,  W.  «.  H.  (Berlin,  1856). 

2  Ufber  die  Kawi-Sprache  (Berlin,  1836). 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]      System  of  Reason :  Romanticists.  603 

Among  the  Romantic  School  this  ethical  "geniality"  in  theory 
and  practice  came  to  its  full  pride  of  luxuriant  efflorescence.  Here 
it  developed  as  an  aesthetic  aristocracy  of  culture  in  opposition  to  the 
democratic  utility  of  the  Enlightenment  morals.  The  familiar  word 
of  Schiller's  as  to  the  nobility  in  the  moral  world  was  interpreted 
to  mean,  that  the  Philistine,  with  his  work  ruled  by  general  prin- 
ciples, has  to  perform  his  definite  action  determined  by  ends,  while 
the  man  of  genius,  free  from  all  external  determination  by  purposes 
and  rules,  merely  lives  out  his  own  important  individuality  as  a 
something  valuable  in  itself,  —lives  it  out  in  the  disinterested  play 
of  his  stirring  inner  life,  and  in  the  forms  shaped  out  by  his  own 
ever-plastic  imagination.  In  his  morals  of  genius,  the  sensibility 
(Sinnliclikeit)  in  the  narrowest  significance  of  the  word  is  to  come 
to  its  full,  unstunted  right,  and  by  aesthetic  enhancement  is  to  become 
equal  in  rank  to  the  finest  stirrings  of  the  inner  nature,  —  a  sublime 
thought,  which  did  not  prevent  its  carrying  out  in  Schlegel's  Lu- 
cinde  from  running  out  into  sensual  though  polished  vulgarity. 

Schleiermachers  ethics  brought  back  the  Eomantic  morals  to  the 
purity  of  Schiller's  intention.1  It  is  the  complete  expression,  of  the 
life-ideal  of  that  great  time.  All  ethical  action  seems  to  it  to  be 
directed  toward  the  unity  of  Reason  and  Nature.  By  this  is  deter- 
mined in  general  the  moral  law,  which  can  be  none  other  than  the 
natural  law  of  the  reason's  life  ;  by  this  is  also  determined  in  detail 
the  task  of  every  individual,  who  is  to  bring  this  unity  to  expression, 
in  a  special  way,  proper  only  for  Mm.  In  the  systematic  carrying- 
out  of  this  thought,  Schleiermacher  distinguishes  (according  to  the 
organic  and  the  intellectual  factors  of  intelligence,  cf.  §  41,  6)  the 
organising  and  the  symbolising  activities,  according  as  the  unity 
of  Nature  and  Eeason  is  procured  by  striving,  or  is  presupposed, 
and  thus  result  in  all  four  fundamental  ethical  relations,  to  which 
correspond  as  goods,  the  state,  society,  the  school,  and  the  Church. 
From  these  the  individual  has  to  develop  in  self-activity  to  a 
harmonious  life  of  his  own. 

Finally,  Herbart,  also,  reduced  ethical  theory  to  the  aesthetic  reason 
in  a  completely  independent  manner;  for  him,  morals  is  a  branch 
of  general  aesthetics.  Besides  the  theoretical  reason,  which  contains 
the  principles  for  knowledge  of  Being,  he  recognises  as  original  only 
the  judging  or  estimation  of  the  existent  in  accordance  with  o&stlietic 
Ideas.  This  estimation  has  to  do  with  the  will  and  the  needs  of 
the  empirical  self  as  little  as  has  the  knowing  activity;  "Judgments 
of  taste  "  hold  necessarily  and  universally  with  direct  self-evidence, 

1  Cf.  also  Schleiermacher' s  Vertraute  Briefe  uber  die  Lucinde  (1800). 


604  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism.          [PART  VL 

and  always  refer  to  the  relations  in  the  existent:  these  have  an 
original  pleasure  or  displeasure  inherent  in  them.  The  application 
of  these  principles  to  the  narrower  field  of  the  aesthetic  is  only 
indicated  by  Herbart :  ethics,  on  the  contrary,  is  regarded  by  him 
as  the  science  of  the  judgments  of  taste  pronounced  upon  the  rela- 
tions of  human  will.  It  has  not  to  explain  anything  —  that  is  the 
business  of  psychology ;  it  has  only  to  settle  the  norms  by  which 
the  judgment  mentioned  above  is  passed.  As  such  norms,  Herbart 
finds  the  five  ethical  Ideas,— Freedom,  Affection,  Benevolence,  Eight, 
and  Equity,  — and  according  to  these  he  seeks  to  arrange  the  sys- 
tems of  the  moral  life,  while  for  his  genetic  investigation  he  always 
employs  the  principles  of  the  associational  psychology,  and  thus 
in  the  statics  and  mechanics  of  the  state  undertakes  to  set  forth 
the  mechanism  of  the  movements  of  the  will,  by  which  the  social 
life  of  man  is  maintained. 

6.  Prom  Schiller's  aesthetic  morals  resulted,  also,  a  philosophy  of 
history,  which  made  the  points  of  view  of  Kousseau  and  Kant  appear 
in  a  new  combination.  The  poet  unfolded  this  in  an  entirely  char- 
acteristic manner  in  his  essays  on  Native  and  Sentimental  Poetry, 
by  gaining  the  fundamental  sesthetic  conceptions  from  bringing 
forward  historical  antitheses,  and  constructing  a  general  plan  of 
their  movement.  The  different  ages  and  the  different  kinds  of  poetry 
are  characterised,  in  his  view,  by  the  different  relations  sustained 
by  the  spirit  to  the  realm  of  Nature  and  the  realm  of  Freedom. 
As  the  "  Arcadian "  state,  we  have  that  where  man  does  what  is  in 
accordance  with  the  moral  order  instinctively,  without  command- 
ment, because  the  antithesis  of  his  two  natures  has  not  yet  unfolded 
in  consciousness :  as  the  Elysian  goal,  we  have  that  full  consumma- 
tion in  which  his  nature  has  become  so  ennobled  that  it  has  again 
taken  up  the  moral  law  into  its  will.  Between  the  two  lies  the 
struggle  of  the  two  natures, — the  actual  life  of  history. 

Poetry,  however,  whose  proper  task  it  is  to  portray  man,  is  every- 
where determined  by  these  fundamental  relations.  If  it  makes  the 
sensuous,  natural  condition  of  man  appear  as  still  in  harmonious 
unity  with  his  spiritual  nature,  then  it  is  na'iue;  if,  on  the  contrary, 
it  sets  forth  the  contradiction  between  the  two,  if  in  any  way  it 
makes  the  inconsistency  between  the  reality  and  the  ideal  in  man 
appear,  then  it  is  sentimental,  and  may  be  either  satirical  or  elegiac 
or,  also,  in  the  form  of  the  idyl.  The  poet  who  is  himself  Nature 
presents  Nature  naively ;  he  who  possesses  her  not  has  the  senti- 
mental interest  in  her  of  calling  back,  as  Idea  in  poetry,  the  Nature 
that  has  vanished  from  life.  The  harmony  of  Nature  and  Reason 
is  given  in  the  former,  set  as  a  task  in  the  latter— there  as  reality, 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]      System  of  Season :  Schiller,  Solilegel  605 

here  as  ideal.  This  distinction  between  the  poetic  modes  of  feeling 
is,  according  to  Schiller,  characteristic  also  for  the  contrast  between 
the  ancient  and  the  modern.  The  Greek  feels  naturally,  the  modern 
man  is  sensible  of  Nature  as  a  lost  Paradise,  as  the  sick  man  is 
sensible  of  convalescence.  Hence  the  ancient  and  naive  poet  gives 
Nature  as  she  is,  without  his  own  feelings ;  the  modern  and  senti- 
mental only  in  relation  to  his  own  reflection :  the  former  vanishes 
behind  his  object,  as  the  Creator  behind  his  works ;  the  latter  shows 
in  the  shaping  of  his  material  the  power  of  his  own  personality 
striving  toward  the  ideal.  There  realism  is  dominant ;  here  ideal- 
ism ;  and  the  last  summit  of  art  would  be  the  union  in  which  the 
naive  poet  should  set  forth  the  sentimental  material.  So  Schiller 
sketched  the  form  of  his  great  friend,  the  modern  Greek. 

These  principles  were  eagerly  seized  upon  by  the  Romanticists. 
Virtuosos  of  the  reviewer's  art,  such  as  were  the  ScMegels,  rejoiced 
in  this  philosophical  schema  for  criticism  and  characterisation,  and 
introduced  it  into  their  comprehensive  treatment  of  the  history  of 
literature.  In  this  Frederick  Schlegel  gave  Schiller's  thoughts  the 
specifically  romantic  flavour,  for  which  he  knew  how  to  use  Fichtean 
motifs  with  ready  superficiality.  While  he  designated  the  antithe- 
sis propounded  by  Schiller  with  the  new  names  classic  and  romantic, 
he  remodelled  it  materially,  also,  by  his  doctrine  of  irony.  The 
classic  poet  loses  himself  in  his  material ;  the  romantic  poet  hovers 
as  a  sovereign  personality  above  it ;  he  annuls  matter  by  the  form. 
In  going  with  his  free  fancy  beyond  the  material  which  he  posits, 
he  unfolds,  in  connection  with  it,  merely  the  play  of  his  genius, 
which  he  limits  in  none  of  its  creation.  Hence  the  romantic  poet 
has  a  tendency  to  the  infinite,  toward  the  never  complete :  he  him- 
self is  always  more  than  any  of  his  objects,  and  just  in  this  the 
irony  evinces  itself.  For  the  infinite  doing  of  the  ethical  will,  of 
which  Fichte  taught,  the  Eomanticist  substitutes  the  endless  play 
of  the  fancy,  which  creates  without  purpose,  and  again  destroys. 

The  elements  in  Schiller's  doctrine  that  concern  the  philosophy 
of  history  found  their  full  development  in  Fichte,  from  whom  they 
borrowed  much.  As  the  result  of  their  influence  he  allowed  the 
antitheses  of  his  Wissenschaftslehre  to  become  reconciled  in  the 
sesthetic  reason.  Already  in  his  Jena  lectures  on  the  Nature  of 
the  Scholar,  and  in  the  treatment  which  the  professional  duties 
of  the  teacher  and  the  artist  found  in  the  "System  of  Ethics"  we 
hear  these  motifs ;  in  his  Erlangen  lectures  they  have  become  the 
ruling  theme.  When  he  proceeded  to  draw  the  "  Characteristics  of 
the  Present  Age}"  he  did  it  in  the  pithy  lines  of  a  construction  of 
universal  history.  As  the  first  ("Arcadian")  state  of  mankind 


606  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

appears  that  of  rational  instinct  or  •  instinctive  reason  ("Vernunftin* 
stinct"),  as  tlie  representatives  of  which  a  normal  people  is  assumed. 
In  this  age  the  universal  consciousness  is  dominant  over  and  in 
individuals  with  immediate,  uncontested  certainty  of  natural  neces- 
sity; but  it  is  the  vocation  of  the  free  individual  ego  to  tear  himself 
loose  from  this  government  of  custom  and  tradition,  and  follow 
his  own  impulse  and  judgment.  With  this,  however,  begins  the 
age  of  sinfulness.  This  sinfulness  becomes  complete  in  the  intel- 
lectual and  moral  crumbling  of  social  life,  in  the  anarchy  of  opin- 
ions, in  the  atomism  of  private  interests.  With  clear  strokes  this 
"complete  sinfulness JJ  is  characterised  as  the  theory  and  practice  of 
the  Enlightenment.  The  community  of  mankind  has  here  sunk  to 
the  "'state  based  upon  needs"  ("Nothstaat"),  which  is  limited  to 
making  it  externally  possible  for  men  to  exist  together, — and 
ought  to  be  so  limited,  since  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  any  of  man's 
higher  interests,  —  morality,  science,  art,  and  religion, — and  must 
leave  them  to  the  sphere  of  the  individual's  freedom.  But  for  this 
reason  the  individual  has  no  living  interest  in  this  "actual"  state; 
his  home  is  the  world,  and  perhaps  also  at  any  moment  the  state 
which  stands  at  the  summit  of  civilisation.1  This  civilisation,  how- 
ever, consists  in  the  subordination  of  individuals  to  the  known  law 
of  reason.  Out  of  the  sinful,  arbitrary  free-will  of  individuals  must 
rise  the  autonomy  of  the  reason,  the  self-knowledge  and  self-legisla- 
tion of  the  universally  valid,  which  is  now  consciously  dominant  in 
the  individual.  With  this  the  age  of  the  rule  of  reason  will  begin, 
but  it  will  not  be  complete  until  all  the  powers  of  the  rationally 
matured  individual  are  placed  at  the  service  of  the  whole  in  the 
"  true  state,"  and  so  the  commandment  of  the  common  conscious- 
ness is  again  fulfilled  without  resistance.  This  ("Elysian")  final 
state  is  that  of  rational  art  or  artistic  reason  ("Vernunftkunst"). 
It  is  the  ideal  of  the  "  scJwne  JSeele "  carried  over  to  politics  atid 
history.  To  bring  about  this  age,  and  in  it  to  lead  the  community, 
the  "  kingdom,"  by  reason,  is  the  task  of  the  "  teacher,"  the  scholar, 
and  the  artist.2 

The  tf  beginning  of  the  rule  of  reason"  ITichte's  vigorous  idealism 
saw  just  where  sinfulness  and  need  had  risen  to  the  highest  point. 
In  his  "Addresses  to  the  German  Nation"  he  praised  his  people 

1  The  classical  passage  for  the  cosmopolitanism  of  the  culture  of  the  eighteenth 
century  is  found  in  Fichte,  W.,  VII.  212. 

2  In  the  religious  turn  which  Pichte's  thought  takes  at  the  close,  this  picture 
of  the  ideal  civilised  state  of  the  future  takes  on  more  and  more  theocratic 
features :  the  scholar  and  artist  have  now  become  the  priest  and  seer.     Cf.  W., 
IV.  453  ft,  and  Nachgel  Werke,  III.  417  fl. 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]    System  of  Reason :  Fichte,  ScMling.  ^07 

as  the  only  one  that  still  preserves  its  originality  and  is  destined 
to  create  the  true  civilised  state.  He  cries  to  his  people  to  bethink 
itself  of  this  its  vocation,  on  which  the  fate  of  Europe  is  hanging, 
to  raise  itself  from  within  by  a  completely  new  education  to  the 
kingdom  of  reason,  and  to  give  back  freedom  to  the  world. 

7.  The  point  of  view  of  the  aesthetic  reason  attained  full  mastery 
in  the  whole  system  of  the  idealistic  philosophy  through  Schelling. 
In  his  working  out  of  the  "  Transcendental  Idealism  "  he  developed 
the  Fichtean  antithesis  of  the  theoretical  and  practical  Wissen- 
sclmftslelire  by  the  relation  between  the  conscious  and  unconscious 
activity  of  the  self  (cf.  above,  Xo.  2).  If  the  conscious  is  de- 
termined by  the  unconscious,  the  self  is  theoretical ;  in  the  reverse 
case  it  is  practical.  But  the  theoretical  self,  which  looks  on  at  the 
productiveness  of  the  unconscious  reason,  manifested  in  feeling, 
perceiving,  and  thinking,  never  comes  to  an  end  with  this,  and  the 
practical  self,  also,  which  re-shapes  and  transforms  the  unconscious 
reality  of  the  cosmos  in  the  free  work  of  individual  morality,  of 
political  community,  and  of  historical  progress,  has  the  goal  of  its 
activity  in  the  infinite.  In  neither  series  does  the  whole  essential 
nature  of  the  reason  ever  come  to  its  full  realisation.  This  is 
possible  only  through  the  unconscious-conscious  activity  of  the  artistic 
genius,  in  which  the  above  antitheses  are  abolished.  In  the  un- 
designed appropriateness  of  the  creative  activity,  whose  product 
is  freedom  in  phenomenal  appearance,  the  highest  synthesis  of  all 
activities  of  reason  must  be  sought.  Kant  had  denned  genius  as 
the  intelligence  that  works  like  Mature;  Schiller  had  characterised 
the  esthetic  condition  of  play  as  the  truly  human;  Schelling 
declared  the  aesthetic  reason  to  be  the  capstone  of  the  idealistic 
system.  The  work  of  art  is  that  phenomenon  in  which  the  reason 
attains  purest  and  fullest  development ;  art  is  the  true  organon  of 
philosophy.  It  is  in  art  that  the  "spectator  thought"  has  to  learn 
what  reason  is.  Science  and  philosophy  are  one-sided  and  never 
completed  series  of  the  development  of  the  subjective  reason  j  only 
art  is  complete  in  all  its  works  as  entirely  realised  reason. 

After  he  had  written  the  Transcendental  Idealism  Schelling 
delivered  in  Jena  his  lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  Art,  which 
carried  out  this  fundamental  thought  with  an  intelligent  apprecia- 
tion for  artistic  character  and  mode  of  production,  that  showed 
admirable  fineness  and  acuteness  especially  in  its  treatment  of 
poetry.  These  lectures,  not  printed  at  that  time,  determined  the 
whole  subsequent  development  of  aesthetics  by  their  influence  upon 
the  Jena  circle.  As  published  later  they  present  that  form  which 
Schelling  gave  them  some  years  after,  when  delivering  them  in 


60S  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

•Wurzburg.    In  this  later  form :  the  change  in  general  point  of  view, 
to  which  the  philosopher  had  meanwhile  advanced,  asserts  itself 

still  more. 

8.  The  esthetic  motif  was  active  also,  at  least  formally,  in  that 
a  common  systematic  basis  was  sought  for  the  Philosophy  of  Nature 
and  the  Transcendental  Philosophy.  The  former  treated  the  objec- 
tive, the  latter  the  subjective  reason;  the  two,  however,  must  be 
indentical  in  their  ultimate  essence;  whence  this  phase  of  idealism 
is  called  the  System  of  Identity  (Identitat-system).  According  to 
this,  a  common  principle  is  required  for  Nature  and  the  self.  In 
the  treatise  which  Schelling  entitled  "  Exposition  of  my  System 
of  Philosophy,"  this  common  principle  is  called  the  "Absolute 
Reason"  or  the  "Indifference  of  Nature  and  Spirit,  of  object  and 
subject " ;  for  the  highest  principle  can  be  determined  neither  as 
real  nor  as  ideal;  in  it  all  antitheses  must  be  obliterated.  The 
"Absolute"  is  here  as  undetermined  in  its  content,2  with  Schelling, 
as  in  the  old  "negative  theology/3  or  as  in  Spinoza's  "substance." 
With  the  latter  conception  it  has  in  common  the  property,  that  its 
phenomenal  manifestation  diverges  into  two  series,  the  real  and  the 
ideal,  Nature  and  Spirit  or  Mind.  This  kinship  with  Spinoza  as 
regards  his  thought,  Schelling  strengthened  by  formal  relationship, 
imitating  in  his  Exposition  the  schematism  of  the  Ethics. 
Nevertheless  this  idealistic  Spinozism  is  different  throughout  from 
the  original  in  its  conception  of  the  world.  Both  desire  to  set  forth 
the  eternal  transmutation  of  the  Absolute  into  the  universe;  but 
in  this  Spinoza  regards  the  two  attributes  of  materiality  and  con- 
sciousness as  completely  separate,  and  each  finite  phenomenon  as 
belonging  solely  to  one  of  the  two  spheres.  Schelling,  however, 
requires  that  "Reality"  and  "Ideality"  must  be  contained  in  every 
phenomenon,  and  construes  particular  phenomena  according  to  the 
degree  in  which  the  two  elements  are  combined.  The  dialectical 
principle  of  absolute  idealism  is  the  quantitative  difference  between  the 
real  and  the  ideal  factors  ;  the  Absolute  itself  is  just  for  this  reason 
complete  indifference.3  The  real  series  is  that  in  which  the  objective 
factor  predominates  ("  iiberwiegt") ;  it  leads  from  matter  through 
light,  electricity,  and  chemism  to  the  organism  —  the  relatively 
spiritual  manifestation  of  Nature.  In  the  ideal  series  the  subjective 
factor  predominates.  In  it  the  development  proceeds  from  morality 

1  In  the  coll.  works,  V.  353  ff.,  first  printed  1859. 

2  Schelling's  disciple,  Oken,  expressed  this  very  characteristically  when  he 
placed  the  Absolute,  already  called  God  by  him,  =  ±0. 

8  Schelling  illustrates  this  schematically  by  the  example  of  the  magnet,  in 
the  different  parts  of  which  north  and  south  magnetism  are  present  with  vary- 
ing intensities. 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]         System  of  Eeason :  Spelling.  609 

and  science  to  the  work  of  art,  the  relatively  most  natural  appear- 
ance in  the  realm  of  Spirit.  And  the  total  manifestation  of  the 
Absolute,  the  universe,  is,  therefore,  at  once  the  most  perfect  organ- 
ism and  the  most  perfect  work  of  art.1 

9.  In  this  system  Schelling  would  comprehend  the  entire  issue  of 
the  investigations  which  had  previously  diverged  in  various  direc- 
tions. The  different  stages  of  the  self-differentiation  of  the  Absolute 
he  termed  at  first,  "  potencies,"  but  soon  introduced  another  name, 
and  at  the  same  time  another  conception  of  the  matter.  This  was 
connected  with  the  religions  turn  vrhich  the  thinking  of  the  Koman- 
ticists  took  at  about  the  close  of  the  last  and  the  beginning  of  the 
present  century.  The  incitement  to  this  came  from  SchleiermacJier. 
He  proved  to  the  "  Cultured  Despisers  of  Eeligion,"  that  the  system 
of  reason  can  become  complete  only  in  religion.  In  this,  too,  was  a 
victory  for  the  aesthetic  reason.  For  what  Schleiermacher  then 
preached  as  religion  (cf.  §  41,  6)  was  not  a  theoretical  or  practical 
behaviour  of  man,  but  an  aesthetic  relation  to  the  World-ground,  the 
feeling  of  absolute  dependence.  Therefore,  religion,  too,  was  in  his 
view  limited  to  pious  feeling,  to  the  complete  permeation  of  the 
individual  by  this  inward  relation  to  the  universal,  and  put  aside  all 
theoretical  form  and  practical  organisation.  For  the  same  reason 
religion  was  held  to  be  an  individual  matter,  and  positive  religion 
was  traced  back  to  the  "  religious  genius  "  of  its  founder.  In  view 
of  this  kinship  we  can  understand  the  influence  which  Schleier- 
macher's  "  Reden  "  exercised  upon  Romanticism :  to  this  is  due  the 
inclination  of  the  latter  to  expect  from  religion  the  unitary  solution 
of  all  problems  of  mankind,  to  desire  to  bring  in  it  the  separated 
spheres  of  the  activity  of  civilisation  into  inner  and  intimate  union 
again,  and,  finally,  to  seek  the  eternal  welfare  of  all  in  that  rule  of 
religion  over  all  spheres  of  life,  which  obtained  in  the  Middle 
Ages.  As  Schiller  created  an  idealised  Greece,  so  the  later  Bornan- 
ticists  created  an  idealised  Middle  Ages. 

Schelling  followed  this  line  of  thought  with  great  acuteness  and 
fineness  of  feeling.  Like  Spinoza,  he  now  named  the  Absolute  "  God  " 
or  the  "Infinite,"  and  likewise  as  Spinoza  had  inserted  the  attri- 
butes and  the  "infinite  modes "  (ef.  p.  409  f .)  between  "substance  "  and 
the  particular  finite  realities,  so  the  "potencies  "  are  now  regarded  as 
the  eternal  forms  of  the  phenomenal  manifestation  of  God,  while 
the  empirical  particular  phenomena  are  the  finite  copies  of  these. 
But  when  in  this  sense  they  were  also  termed  by  Schelling 
Ideas  (in  his  Bruno  and  in  his  •  Method  of  Academical  Study) 

i  W.,  I,  4,  423. 


08  Germany:  Development  oj  J.aeaww*.        L*-  —  •  *• 

Viirzburg,    In  this  later  form J  the  change  in  general  point  of  view, 
3  which  the  philosopher  had  meanwhile  advanced,  asserts  itself 

till  more. 

8.  The  esthetic  motif  was  active  also,  at  least  formally,  in  that 
,  common  systematic  basis  was  sought  for  the  Philosophy  of  Nature 
md  the  Transcendental  Philosophy.  The  former  treated  the  objec- 
ive,  the  latter  the  subjective  reason;  the  two,  however,  must  be 
ndentical  in  their  ultimate  essence;  whence  this  phase  of  idealism 
s  called  the  System  of  Identity  (Identitcit- system).  According  to 
Ms,  a  common  principle  is  required  for  Mature  and  the  self.  In 
;he  treatise  which  Schelling  entitled  « Exposition  of  my  System 
Df  Philosophy,"  this  common  principle  is  called  the  "Absolute 
Reason"  or  the  "Indifference  of  Nature  and  Spirit,  of  object  and 
subject'';  for  the  highest  principle  can  be  determined  neither  as 
real  nor  as  ideal;  in  it  all  antitheses  must  be  obliterated.  The 
"Absolute"  is  here  as  undetermined  in  its  content,2  with  Schelling, 
as  in  the  old  "negative  theology,"  or  as  in  Spinoza's  "substance." 
With  the  latter  conception  it  has  in  common  the  property,  that  its 
phenomenal  manifestation  diverges  into  two  series,  the  real  and  the 
ideal,  Nature  and  Spirit  or  Mind.  This  kinship  with  Spinoza  as 
regards  his  thought,  Schelling  strengthened  by  formal  relationship, 
imitating  in  his  Exposition  the  schematism  of  the  Ethics. 
Nevertheless  this  idealistic  Spinozism  is  different  throughout  from 
the  original  in  its  conception  of  the  world.  Both  desire  to  set  forth 
the  eternal  transmutation  of  the  Absolute  into  the  universe;  but 
in  this  Spinoza  regards  the  two  attributes  of  materiality  and  con- 
sciousness as  completely  separate,  and  each  finite  phenomenon  as 
belonging  solely  to  one  of  the  two  spheres.  Schelling,  however, 
requires  that  "Beality  "  and  "Ideality"  must  be  contained  in  every 
phenomenon.,  and  construes  particular  phenomena  according  to  the 
degree  in  which  the  two  elements  are  combined.  The  dialectical 
principle  of  absolute  idealism  is  the  quantitative  difference  between  the 
real  and  the  ideal  factors  ;  the  Absolute  itself  is  just  for  this  reason 
complete  indifference.3  The  real  series  is  that  in  which  the  objective 
factor  predominates  ("  uberwiegt") ;  it  leads  from  matter  through 
light,  electricity,  and  chernism  to  the  organism  —  the  relatively 
spiritual  manifestation  of  Nature.  In  the  ideal  series  the  subjective 
factor  predominates.  In  it  the  development  proceeds  from  morality 

1  In  the  coll.  works,  V.  353  if.,  first  printed  1859. 

2  Schelling's  disciple,  Oken,  expressed  this  very  characteristically  when  he 
placed  the  Absolute,  already  called  God  by  him,  =  ±0. 

8  Schelling  illustrates  this  schematically  by  the  example  of  the  magnet,  in 
the  different  parts  of  which  north  and  south  magnetism  are  present  with  vary- 
ing intensities. 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]         System  of  Season :  Schelling.  609 

and  science  to  the  work  of  art,  the  relatively  most  natural  appear- 
ance in  the  realm  of  Spirit.  And  the  total  manifestation  of  the 
Absolute,  the  universe,  is,  therefore,  at  once  the  most  perfect  organ- 
ism and  the  most  perfect  work  of  art.1 

9.  In  this  system  Schelling  would  comprehend  the  entire  issue  of 
the  investigations  which  had  previously  diverged  in  various  direc- 
tions. The  different  stages  of  the  self-differentiation  of  the  Absolute 
he  termed  at  first,  "  potencies,"  but  soon  introduced  another  name, 
and  at  the  same  time  another  conception  of  the  matter.  This  was 
connected  with  the  religious  turn  which  the  thinking  of  the  Koman- 
ticists  took  at  about  the  close  of  the  last  and  the  beginning  of  the 
present  century.  The  incitement  to  this  came  from  Schleiermacher. 
He  proved  to  the  "  Cultured  Despisers  of  Keligion,"  that  the  system 
of  reason  can  become  complete  only  in  religion.  In  this,  too,  was  a 
victory  for  the  cestJietic  reason.  For  what  Schleierinacher  then 
preached  as  religion  (cf.  §  41,  6)  was  not  a  theoretical  or  practical 
behaviour  of  man,  but  an  aesthetic  relation  to  the  World-ground,  the 
feeling  of  absolute  dependence.  Therefore,  religion,  too,  was  in  his 
view  limited  to  pious  feeling,  to  the  complete  permeation  of  the 
individual  by  this  inward  relation  to  the  universal,  and  put  aside  all 
theoretical  form  and  practical  organisation.  For  the  same  reason 
religion  was  held  to  be  an  individual  matter,  and  positive  religion 
was  traced  back  to  the  "  religious  genius  "  of  its  founder.  In  view 
of  this  kinship  we  can  understand  the  influence  which  Schleier- 
macher's  "  Reden  "  exercised  upon  Bbmanticism :  to  this  is  due  the 
inclination  of  the  latter  to  expect  from  religion  the  unitary  solution 
of  all  problems  of  mankind,  to  desire  to  bring  in  it  the  separated 
spheres  of  the  activity  of  civilisation  into  inner  and  intimate  union 
again,  and,  finally,  to  seek  the  eternal  welfare  of  all  in  that  rule  of 
religion  over  all  spheres  of  life,  which  obtained  in  the  Middle 
Ages.  As  Schiller  created  an  idealised  Greece,  so  the  later  Eoman- 
ticists  created  an  idealised  Middle  Ages. 

Schelling  followed  this  line  of  thought  with  great  acuteness  and 
fineness  of  feeling.  Like  Spinoza,  he  now  named  the  Absolute  "  God  " 
or  the  "Infinite,"  and  likewise  as  Spinoza  had  inserted  the  attri- 
butes and  the  "  infinite  modes  "  (cf .  p.  409  f . )  between  "  substance  "  and 
the  particular  finite  realities,  so  the  "potencies  "  are  now  regarded  as 
the  eternal  forms  of  the  phenomenal  manifestation  of  God,  while 
the  empirical  particular  phenomena  are  the  finite  copies  of  these. 
But  when  in  this  sense  they  were  also  termed  by  Schelling 
Ideas  (in  his  Bruno  and  in  his  'Method  of  Academical  Study) 

iW.,I.  4,  423. 


310  G-ermany :  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

another  influence  still  comes  to  light  in  this.  Sehleiermacher  and 
Hegel,  the  latter  of  whom  had  exerted  a  personal  influence  upon 
Schelling  since  1801,  both  pointed  to  Plato;  hut  the  philosophical 
knowledge  of  that  time 1  still  saw  Plato's  doctrine  through  the  spec- 
tacles of  jtfeo-Pfatomsm,  which  conceived  of  the  Ideas  as  God's  vision 
or  intuition  of  himself  (Selbstanschauung  Gottes).  And  so  Schelling's 
doctrine  turned  back  into  a  Neo- Platonic  Idealism,  according  to 
which  the  "Ideas"  formed  the  intermediate  link  through  which 
the  Absolute  became  transformed  into  the  world. 

This  religious  idealism  of  Schelling's  doctrine  of  Ideas  has  a 
number  of  parallel  and  succeeding  phenomena.  The  most  interest- 
ing of  these  personally  is  Fichte's  later  doctrine,  in  which  he  paid  to 
the  victory  of  Spinozism  the  tribute  of  making  the  infinite  impulse 
of  the  I  proceed  forth  from  an  "absolute  Being  "  (Sein)  and  be  di- 
rected toward  the  same.  For  finite  things,  he  held  fast  to  his  deduc- 
tion of  them  as  products  of  consciousness ;  but  the  infinite  activity 
of  this  consciousness  he  now  deduced  from  the  end  of  "imitating" 
an  absolute  Being,  the  deity,  and  hence  the  vocation  and  destiny  of 
man  appeared  to  him  no  longer  the  restless  activity  of  categorical 
imperative,  but  the  "blessed  life"  of  sinking  into  a  contemplation 
of  the  divine  original,  —  a  mystical  dying  note  of  the  mighty 
thinker's  life,  which  makes  the  victory  of  the  aesthetic  reason 
appear  in  its  full  magnitude. 

^  The  religious  motif  was  followed  still  farther  by  Schelling's  dis- 
ciple Krause.  He  wished  to  combine  the  pantheistic  Weltanschauung 
of  idealism,  which  Schelling  even  at  that  time  still  defended  (in 
Spinozistic  fashion),  with  the  conception  of  divine  personality.   He, 
too,  regards  the  world  as  the  development  of  the  divine  "essence," 
which  is  distinctly  stamped  out  in  the  Ideas;  but  these  ideas  are 
the  intuition  which  the  supreme  personality  has  of  himself.    Essence 
(Wesen)— this  is  Krause's  term  for  God  — is  not  indifferent  Eea- 
son,  but  the  personal,  living  ground  of  the  world.    In  his  farther 
carrying  out  of  the  system,  which  was  characterised  as  "Panen- 
theism,"  Krause  has  scarcely  any  other  originality  than  the  very 
objectionable  one  of  presenting  the  thoughts  common  to  the  whole 
idealistic  development  in  an  unintelligible  terminology,  which  he 
himself  invented,  but  declared  to  be  pure  German.    He  carries 
out,  especially,  his  conception  of  the  entire  life  of  reason  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  "  Gliedbau"  (in  German,  organism).    He  not 
only,  like  Schelling,  regards  the  universe  as  a 


CHAP.  2,  §  42,]     System  of  Reason :  Krause,  Hegel.  611 

(divine  organism),  but  also  regards  the  structures  of  society  as 
continuations  of  the  organic  vital  movement  beyond  the  individual 
man ;  every  union  (Bund)  is  such  a  "  Gliedbau"  and  inserts  itself 
again  into  a  higher  organism  as  a  member  (Gflied),  and  the  course 
of  history  is  the  process  of  the  production  of  more  and  more  perfect 
and  comprehensive  unions. 

For  the  Romantic  aesthetics,  finally,  Schelling's  new  doctrine  gave 
rise  to  the  result  that  the  ISTeo-Platonic  conception  of  beauty,  as 
phenomenal  manifestation  of  the  Idea  in  the  sensuous,  became  again 
recognised  as  authoritative.  The  relation  of  inadequacy  between 
the  finite  appearance  and  the  infinite  Idea  agreed  with  Schlegel's 
principle  of  irony,  and  these  thoughts  Solger,  especially,  made  the 
basis  of  his  theory  of  art. 

10.  The  consummation  of  this  whole  rich  and  varied  development 
is  formed  by  Hegel's  logical  idealism.  He  signifies  in  the  main 
a  return  from  Schelling  to  Fichte,  a  giving  up  of  the  thought  that 
the  living  wealth  of  the  world  can  be  derived  or  deduced  from  the 
"Nothing"1  of  absolute  indifference,  and  the  attempt  to  raise  this 
empty  substance  again  to  spirit?  —  to  the  self-determined  subject. 
Such  knowledge,  however,  cannot  have  the  form  of  intuition  or 
immediate  perception  (Anschamtng),  which  Fichte  and  Schelling 
had  claimed  for  the  Ego  or  the  Absolute,  but  only  that  of  the  con- 
cqption  or  notion  (Begriff).  If  all  that  is  real  or  actual  is  the  mani- 
festation of  spirit  or  mind,  then  metaphysics  coincides  with  the 
logic3  which  has  to  develop  the  creative  self -movement  of  spirit  as 
a  dialectical  necessity.  The  conceptions  into  which  mind  or  spirit 
takes  apart  and  analyses  its  own  content  are  the  categories  of  reality, 
the  forms  of  the  cosmic  life ;  and  the  task  of  philosophy  is  not  to 
describe  this  realm  of  forms  as  a  given  manifold,  but  to  comprehend 
them  as  the  moments  of  a  single  unitary  development.  The  dialec- 
tical method,  therefore,  serves,  with  Hegel,  to  determine  the 
essential  nature  of  particular  phenomena  by  the  significance  which 
they  have  as  members  or  links  in  the  self-unfolding  of  spirit. 
Instead  of  Spirit  (Geist)  Hegel  also  uses  Idea  or  God.  It  is  the 
highest  task  that  has  ever  been  set  philosophy,  to  comprehend  the 
world  as  a  development  of  those  principles  or  determinations  which 
form  the  content  of  the  divine  mind. 

1  Hegel,  Phanomen.  Vorr.,  W.,  II.  14.  ,,-,,,.  .,  „ 

2  [Geist,  as  in  §  20,  has  the  connotation  of  both  "mind"  and  "spirit." 
The  former  seems  more  appropriate  where  logical  relations  are  under  considera- 
tion, though  the  latter  is  usually  retained  for  the  sake  of  uniformity.] 

s  This  metaphysical  logic  is  of  course  not  formal  logic,  but  in  its  determining 
principle  is  properly  Kant's  transcendental  logic.  The  only  difference  is  that 
the  "  phenomenon  "  is  for  Kant  a  human  mode  of  representation,  for  Hegel  an 
objective  externalising  of  the  Absolute  Spirit. 


612  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

In  this,  Hegel  sustains  not  only  to  the  German  philosophy,  but  to 
the  whole  earlier  intellectual  movement,  a  relation  similar  to  that 
of  Proclus  to  Greek  thought :  l  in  the  "  schema  of  trinities  "  of  Posi- 
tion, Negation,  and  Sublation  or  Reconciliation,  all  conceptions  with 
which  the  human  mind  has  ever  thought  reality  or  its  particular 
groups,  are  woven  together  into  a  unified  system.  Each  retains  its 
assigned  place,  in  which  its  necessity,  its  relative  justification,  is  said 
to  become  manifest :  but  each  proves  by  this  same  treatment  to  be 
only  a  moment  or  factor  which  receives  its  true  value  only  when  it 
has  been  put  in  connection  with  the  rest  and  introduced  into  the 
whole.  It  is  to  be  shown  that  the  antitheses  and  contradictions  of 
conceptions  belong  to  the  nature  of  mind  itself,  and  thus  also  to  the 
essential  nature  of  the  reality  which  unfolds  from  it,  and  that  their 
truth  consists  just  in  the  systematic  connection  in  which  the  cate- 
gories follow  from  one  another.  "The  phenomenon  is  the  arising 
and  passing  away,  which  itself  does  not  arise  and  pass  away,  but 
'  is J  in-itself,  and  constitutes  the  reality  and  movement  of  the  life 
of  truth." 2 

Hegel's  philosophy  is,  therefore,  essentially  historical)  a  systematic 
elaboration  of  the  entire  material  of  history.  He  possessed  both  the 
necessary  erudition  and  also  the  combining  power  and  fineness  of 
feeling  for  the  discovery  of  those  logical  relations  which  were  of 
importance  for  him.  The  interest  in  his  philosophy  lies  less  in  the 
individual  conceptions,  which  he  took  from  the  intellectual  labours  of 
two  thousand  years,  than  in  the  systematic  combination  which  he 
brought  about  between  them :  and  just  by  this  means  he  knew  how 
to  portray  in  masterly  manner  the  meaning  and  significance  of  indi- 
yidual  details,  and  to  throw  a  surprising  light  upon  long-standing 
structures  of  thought.  He,  indeed,  displayed  in  connection  with 
his  data  the  arbitrariness  (Willkur)  of  [a  priori]  constructive  thought) 
which  presents  the  actual  reality,  not  as  it  offers  itself  empirically,  but 
as  it  ought  to  be  in  the  dialectical  movement,  and  this  violation  of  the 
actual  matter  of  fact  might  be  objectionable  where  the  attempt  was 
made  to  bring  empirical  material  into  a  philosophical  system,  as  in 
the  philosophy  of  Mature,  the  history  of  philosophy,  and  history  in 
general.  All  the  more  brilliant  did  the  power  of  the  thinking  sat- 
urated by  the  historical  spirit  prove  in  those  fields  where  it  is  the 
express  province  of  philosophical  treatment,  merely  to  reflect  on 

1  Cf .  above,  §  20,  8. 

2  This  Heracliteanism,  which  was  inherent  already  in  tfichte's  doctrine  of 
action  (cf.  above,  p.  594  f.),  found  its  most  vigorous  opponent  in  Herbart's 
Eleaticism  (cf.  §  41,  7  f.).    This  old  antithesis  constitutes  the  essential  element 
in  the  relation  of  the  two  branches  of  German  idealism  (cf.  above,  p.  584,  note). 


CHAP.  2,  §  42.]  System  of  Reason :  Hegel  613 

undoubted  data,  but  not  to  give  any  account  of  empirical  reality. 
So  Hegel  gave  as  sesthetics  a  historical  structure  built  up  of  the 
esthetic  ideals  of  mankind.-  Following  Schiller's  method,  and  attach- 
ing himself  also  materially  to  Schiller's  results,  he  displayed  all  the 
fundamental  systematic  conceptions  of  this  science  in  the  well- 
arranged  series  of  the  symbolic,  the  classic,  and  the  romantic,  and 
likewise  divided  the  system  of  the  arts  into  architecture,  sculpture, 
painting,  music,  and  poetry.  So,  too,  from  the  fundamental  concep- 
tion of  religion  as  being  the  relation  of  the  finite  to  the  absolute 
Spirit  in  the  form  of  imaginative  representation  (Vorstellung)  his 
philosophy  of  religion  develops  the  stages  of  its  positive  realisation 
in  the  natural  religion  of  magic,  fire  worship,  and  animal  symbolism, 
in  the  religion  of  spiritual  individuality  of  the  sublime,  the  beautiful, 
and  the  intellectual,  and  finally  in  the  absolute  religion  which  repre- 
sents God  as  what  he  is,  the  triune  Spirit.  Here,  with  a  deep-going 
knowledge  of  his  material,  Hegel  has  everywhere  drawn  the  main 
lines  in  which  the  empirical  treatment  of  these  same  subjects  later 
moved,  and  set  up  the  philosophical  categories  for  the  general  con- 
sideration of  historical  facts  as  a  whole. 

The  same  is  true,  also,  of  his  treatment  of  universal  history. 
Hegel  understood  by  Objective  Spirit  the  active  and  influential  living 
body  of  individuals,  which  is  not  created  by  these,  but  rather  forms 
the  source  from  which  they  proceed  as  regards  their  spiritual  life. 
The  abstract  form  of  this  body  is  called  Right;1  it  is  the  Objective 
Spirit  "  in  itself."  The  subjection  of  the  subjective  disposition  of 
the  individual  to  the  commands  of  the  common  consciousness  the 
philosopher  calls  "morality,"  while  he  retains  the  name  of  "  Sittlich- 
keit "  [social  morality  or  the  moral  order]  for  the  realisation  of  the 
common  consciousness  in  the  State.  In  the  immanent  living  activity 
of  the  human  reason,  the  state  is  the  highest ;  beyond  this  are  only 
art,  religion,  and  science,  which  press  forward  to  the  Absolute 
Spirit.  The  state  is  the  realisation  of  the  ethical  Idea ;  it  is  the 
spirit  of  the  people  become  visible ;  it  is  in  its  Idea  the  living  work 
of  art,  in  which  the  inwardness  of  the  human  reason  comes  forth 
into  outer  manifestation.  But  this  Idea,  from  which  the  system  of 
the  forms  and  functions  of  political  life  derives,  appears  in  the 
actual  world  only  in  the  iudividual  structures  of  the  states  which 
arise  and  pass  away.  Its  only  true  and  full  realisation  is  universal 
history,  in  which  the  peoples  enter  successively,  to  live  out  their 
spirit  in  the  work  of  state  formation,  and  then  retire  from  the  stage. 


1  Hence  Hegel  treats  the  doctrine  of  Objective  Spirit  under  the  title  Philoso- 
phy of  Right  (Rechtsphilosophie). 


614  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.        [PART  VI. 

So  every  epoch  is  characterised  by  the  spiritual  predominance  of  a 
definite  people,  which  imprints  the  sign  of  its  peculiar  character 
upon  all  the  activities  of  civilisation.  And  if  it  is  the  task  of  his- 
tory as  a  whole  to  understand  this  connected  order,  then  politics,  too, 
must  not  suppose  that  it  can  construct  and  decree  a  political  life 
from  abstract  requirements;  it  must,  rather,  seek  in  the  quiet 
development  of  the  national  spirit  the  motives  of  its  political  move- 
ment. So  in  Hegel,  the  "Philosopher  of  the  Restoration,"  the 
historical  Weltanschauung  turns  against  the  revolutionary  doctrinair- 
ism  of  the  Enlightenment. 

Hegel  is  less  successful  in  the  treatment  of  questions  of  natural 
philosophy  and  psychology ;  the  energy  of  his  thought  lies  in  the 
domain  of  history.  The  external  scheme  of  his  system,  as  a  whole, 
is  in  large  the  following:  the  Spirit  in  itself  (Geist  an  sich),  i.e.  in 
its  absolute  content,  is  the  realm  of  the  categories ;  this  is  treated 
by  the  Logic  as  the  doctrine  of  Being,  of  Essence,  and  of  Concep- 
tion or  Xotion.  Spirit  for  itself  (Geist  fur  sich),  i.e.  in  its  otherness 
and  self-estrangement  or  externalisation,  is  Nature,  the  forms  of 
which  are  treated  in  Mechanics,  Physics,  and  Organics.  The  third 
main  part  treats,  as  Philosophy  of  Spirit,  the  Spirit  in  and  for  itself 
(an  und  filr  sick),  i.e.  in  its  conscious  life  as  returning  to  itself; 
here  three  stages  are  distinguished,  viz.  the  Subjective  (individual) 
Spirit ;  the  Objective  Spirit  as  Eight,  Morality,  State,  and  History ; 
finally,  the*  Absolute  Spirit  as  pure  perception  (Anschauimg)  in 
Art,  as  imaginative  representation  (Vorstellung)  in  Religion,  as 
conception  (Begriff)  in  the  History  of  Philosophy. 

He  repeats,  in  all  these  parts  of  his  philosophy,  not  only  the 
formal  dialectic  of  the  construction  of  his  conceptions,  but  also 
the  material  which  constitutes  the  contents  of  the  successive  con- 
ceptions. So  the  Logic  in  its  second  and  third  parts,  develops 
already  the  fundamental  categories  of  the  Philosophy  of  Nature 
and  of  Spirit ;  so  the  development  of  the  aesthetic  ideals  constantly 
points  toward  that  of  the  religious  Vorstellung&n ;  and  so  the  whole 
course  of  the  Logic  is  parallel  to  his  History  of  Philosophy.  Just 
this  relation  belongs  to  the  essential  nature  of  the  system  of  reason, 
which  here  embraces  not  only,  as  with  Kant,  the  Forms,  but  also 
the  content,  and  aims  to  unfold  before  its  view  this  content  in  the 
variety  of  the  "forms  of  the  actual  world  of  reality,"  although  this 
content  is  ultimately  everywhere  the  same  with  itself.  The  course 
of  development  is  always  the  same,  viz.  that  the  "Idea,"  by  dif- 
ferentiating and  becoming  at  variance  with  itself,  "  comes  to  itself.39 
Hence  the  categories  progress  from  the  Being  which  has  no  content 
to  the  inner  Essence,  and  from  there  to  the  Idea  which  understands 


CHAP.  2,  §  43.]         Metaphysics  of  the  Irrational  615 

itself ;  hence  the  forms  of  the  empirical  world  ascend  from  matter 
to  the  imponderables,  then  to  the  organism,  consciousness,  self- 
consciousness,  reason,  right,  morality,  and  the  social  morality  of  the 
state,  successively,  to  apprehend  the  Absolute  Spirit  in  art,  religion, 
and  science ;  hence  the  history  of  philosophy  begins  with  the  cate- 
gories of  material  existence,  and  becomes  complete  after  all  its 
fortunes  in  the  doctrine  of  the  self-comprehending  Idea;  hence, 
finally,  the  entrance  into  this  "  system  of  the  reason,"  also,  will  best 
be  found  by  making  it  clear  to  one's  self  how  the  human  mind 
begins  with  the  sensuous  consciousness,  and  by  the  contradictions 
of  this  is  driven  to  an  ever  higher  and  deeper  apprehension  of  itself, 
until  it  finds  its  rest  in  philosophical  knowledge,  in  the  science  of 
the  conception.  The  inter-relation  of  all  these  developments  Hegel 
has  set  forth  with  obscure  language  and  many  mysterious  and 
thoughtful  intimations,  in  his  Phenomenology. 

In  this  system  of  reason  every  particular  has  its  truth  and  reality 
only  in  its  being  a  moment  in  the  development  of  the  whole.  Only 
as  such  is  it  real  in  concrete,  and  only  as  such  is  it  comprehended 
by  philosophy.  But  if  we  take  it  abstractly,  if  we  think  it  in  its 
isolation,  in  which  it  exists  not  realiter,  but  only  according  to  the 
subjective  apprehension  of  the  understanding,  then  it  loses  that 
connection  with  the  whole,  in  which  its  truth  and  actual  reality 
consists:  then  it  appears  as  accidental  and  without  reason.  But 
as  such,  it  exists  only  in  the  limited  thinking  of  the  individual 
subject.  For  philosophical  knowledge,  the  principle  holds,  that 
what  is  reasonable  is  real,  and  what  is  real  is  reasonable.1  The 
System  of  Eeason  is  the  sole  reality. 

§  43.  The  Metaphysics  of  tlie  Irrational. 

The  "dialectic  of  history"  willed  it  that  the  System  of  Eeason 
should  also  change  into  its  opposite,  and  that  the  insight  into  the 
insurmountability  of  the  barriers  which  the  attempt  to  deduce  all 
phenomena  from  one  fundamental  principle  necessarily  encounters, 
caused  other  theories  to  arise  close  beside  the  idealistic  doctrines 
already  treated ;  and  these  other  theories  found  themselves  thereby 
forced  to  maintain  the  unreason  of  the  World-ground.  The  first  to 
pass  through  this  process  was  the  many-sided  agent  of  the  main 
development,  the  Proteus  of  idealism,  Schelling.  The  new  in  this 
movement  is  not  the  knowledge  that  the  rational  consciousness 
always  has  ultimately  something  for  its  content,  which  it  simply 

iVomde  zur  Eechtsphilos.,  W.,  VIII.  17. 


616  Germany  :  Development  of  Idealism.  [PART  VL 

finds  present  within  itself,  without  being  able  to  give  any  account 
of  it  :  such  limiting  conceptions  were  the  transcendental  X  as  thing- 
in-itself,  with  Kant  ;  as  differential  of  consciousness,  with  Maimon  ; 
as  a  free  act  without  rational  ground,  in  Fichte.  The  new  was, 
that  this  which  could  not  be  comprehended  by  the  reason,  and 
which  resisted  its  work,  was  now  also  to  be  thought  as  something 
irrational 

1.   Schelling  was  forced  upon  the  path  of  irrationalism,  remarka- 
bly enough,  by  taking  up  the  religious  motif  into  his  absolute  ideal- 
ism (§  42,  9).    If  "the  Absolute"  was  thought  no  longer  merely 
in  Spinozistic  fashion,  as  the  universal,  indifferent  essence  of  all 
phenomena,  if  the  divine  and  the  natural  principle  of  things  were 
distinguished,  so  that  the  eternal  Ideas  as  the  Forms  of  the  divine 
self  -perception  were  assigned  a  separate  existence  beside  finite  things, 
then  the  transmutation  of  God  into  the  world  must  again  become  a 
problem.    This  was  really  Hegel's  problem  also,  and  the  latter  was 
right  when  he  taught  later  that,  in  his  view,  philosophy  has  the  same 
task  as  theology.     He  aided  himself  with  the  dialectical  method 
which  aimed  to  show  in  the  form  of  a  higher  logic,  how  the  Idea 
agreeably  to  its  own  conceptional  essence  releases  itself  to  "  other- 
ness" (Anderssein)  ,  i.e.  to  Nature,  to  finite  phenomenal  appearance. 
Schelling  sought  to  solve  the  same  problem  by  the  method  of 
theosophy,  i.e.  by  a  mystico-speculative  doctrine,  which  transposed 
philosophical  conceptions  into  religious  intuitions.    His  happening 
upon  this  method  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  problem  met  him  in 
the  form  of  an  attempt  to  limit  philosophy  by  religion.    He  obligated 
himself,  in  a  vigorous  reaction  against  this  in  the  name  of  philoso- 
phy, to  solve  the  religious  problem  also.    This,  indeed,  could  only 
be  done  if  philosophy  passed  over  into  theosophical  speculations. 

A  disciple  of  the  System  of  Identity,  Eschenmayer,1  showed  that 
philosophical  knowledge  can  indeed  point  out  the  reasonableness  of 
the  world,  and  its  agreement  with  the  divine  reason,  but  cannot  show 
how  this  world  attains  the  self-subsistent  existence  with  reference 
to  the  deity,  which  it  has  in  finite  things.  Here  philosophy  ceases 
and  religion  begins.  In  order  to  vindicate  this  domain  also  for 
philosophy,  and  restore  the  old  unity  between  philosophy  and  relig- 
ion, Schelling  lays  claim  to  specifically  religious  intuitions  as  philo- 
sophical conceptions,  and  so  re-shapes  them  in  accordance  with  this 
claim  that  they  appear  usable  for  both  disciplines  :  in  doing  which 
lie  makes  a  copious  use  of  Kant's  philosophy  of  religion. 


Uebergange  zur  JVfcte- 


CHAP.  2,  §  43.]     Metaphysics  of  the  Irrational :  Schelling.          617 

In  fact,1  there  is  no  continuous  transition  from  the  Absolute  to 
the  concrete  reality ;  the  origin  of  the  world  of  sense  from  God  is 
thinkable  only  by  a  leap  (Sprung),  a  breaking  off  from  the  condition 
of  absoluteness.  A  ground  for  this  —  Schelling  still  teaches  here  — 
is  to  be  found  neither  in  the  Absolute  nor  in  the  Ideas :  but  in  the 
nature  of  the  latter  the  possibility  at  least  is  given.  For  to  the 
Ideas  as  the  "  antitype  "  or  counterpart  of  the  Absolute,  in  which  it 
beholds  itself,  the  self-subsistence  of  the  archetype  communicates 
itself,  — the  freedom  of  that  which  is  in  itself  ("In-sich-selbst-seins"). 
In  this  lies  the  possibility  of  the  falling  away  of  the  Ideas>from  God, 
of  their  assuming  metaphysical  independence,  by  which  they  become 
actual  and  empirical,  i.e.  finite.  But  this  falling  away  is  not  neces- 
sary and  not  comprehensible :  it  is  a  fact  without  rational  ground; 
not,  however,  a  single  event,  but  as  timeless  and  eternal  as  the  Abso- 
lute and  the  Ideas.  We  see  that  the  religious  colouring  of  this  doc- 
trine comes  from  Kant's  theory  of  the  radical  evil  as  a  deed  of  the 
intelligible  character,  while  the  philosophical,  on  the  contrary,  comes 
from  Fichte's  conception  of  the  free  acts  of  the  ego,  which  have  no 
rationale.  On  this  apostasy,  therefore,  rests  the  actualisation  of  the 
Ideas  in  the  world.  Hence  the  content  of  the  actual  reality  is  rational 
and  divine ;  for  it  is  God's  Ideas  that  are  actual  in  it :  their  being 
actual,  however,  is  apostasy,  sin,  and  unreason.  This  reality  of  the 
Ideas  external  to  God  is  Nature.  But  its  divine  essence  strives  back 
to  the  original  ground  and  archetype,  and  this  return  of  things  into 
God  is  history,  the  epic  composed  in  the  mind  of  God,  whose  Iliad 
is  the  farther  and  farther  departure  of  man  from  God,  and  whose 
Odyssey  is  his  return  to  God.  Its  final  purpose  is  the  reconciliation 
of  the  apostasy,  the  reuniting  of  the  Ideas  with  Gdd,  the  cessation  of 
their  self-subsistence.  Individuality  also  experiences  this  change 
of  fortunes :  its  selfness  (Ichheit)  is  intelligible  freedom,  self-deter- 
mination—  breaking  loose  from  the  Absolute:  its  deliverance  is  a 
submergence  in  the  Absolute. 

In  similar  manner  Frederick  Schlegel2  made  the  "triplicity"  of 
the  infinite,  the  finite,  and  the  return  of '  the  finite  to  the  infinite, 
the  principle  of  his  later  theory,  which  professed  to  maintain  the 
contradictions  of  the  actual  as  a  fact,  to  explain  them  from  the 
fall,  and  to  reconcile  them  through  subjection  to  divine  revelation ; 
but  merely  concealed,  with  great  pains,  the  philosophical  impotence 
of  its  author  under  the  exposition  employed. 

1  Schelling,  Religion  und  Philosophic,  W.,  I.  0,  pp.  38  ff. 

2  In  the  Philosophische  Vorlesungen,  edited  lay  Windischmann  (1804-1806), 
and  likewise  later  in  the  Philosophic  des  Lebens  and  the  Philosophie  der 
Geschichte  (1828-1829). 


618  Germany:  Development  of  Idealism.  [PART  VI. 

2.  The  subtlety  of  Schetting,  on  the  contrary,  could  not  free  itself 
from  the  once-discovered  problem.  The  monism,  which  had  always 
controlled  his  thought,  forced  him  to  the  question,  whether  the 
ground  of  the  falling  away  was  not  ultimately  to  be  found  in  the 
Absolute  itself:  and  this  could  be  affirmed  only  if  the  irrational 
was  transferred  to  the  essence  of  the  Absolute  itself.  Prom  the  point 
of  view  of  this  thought,  Schelling  became  friendly  to  the  mysticism 
of  Jacob  Boehme  (cf.  p.  374  f.).  This  was  brought  near  to  him  by 
his  intercourse  with  Franz  von  Baader.  The  latter  himself  had 
received  Ms  stimulus  both  from  Boehme  and  from  Boehine's  French, 
prophet  St.  Martin,1  and,  holding  fast  to  the  Catholic  faith,  had 
elaborated  his  mysticism  with  obscure  fantastic  genius  and  un- 
methodical appropriation  of  Kantian  and  Pichtean  thoughts.  The 
original  idea  that  stirred  within  him.  was,  that  the  course  of  the 
life  of  man,  who  is  the  image  of  G-od,  and  who  can  know  of  himself 
only  so  much  as  God  knows  of  him,  must  be  parallel  to  the  self- 
development  of  God.  Since,  now,  man's  life  is  determined  by  the 
fall  as  its  beginning  and  redemption  as  its  goal,  the  eternal  self- 
generation  of  God  must  consist  in  God's  unfolding  himself  out  of 
his  dark,  irrational,  primitive  essence,  through  self-revelation  and 
self-knowledge,  to  absolute  reason. 

Under  such  influences  Schelling  also  began  in  his  treatise 2  on 
freedom  (1809)  to  speak  of  an  Urgrund,  Ungrund}  or  Abgrund  [pri- 
mordial ground,  unreason,  or  abyss]  in  the  divine  nature,  which  is 
depicted  as  mere  Being,  and  absolute  primordial  accident  ("  Urzu- 
fatt''),  as  a  dark  striving,  an  infinite  impulse.  It  is  the  uncon- 
scious will,  and  all  actual  reality  is  in  the  last  instance  will.  This 
will,  directed  onty  toward  itself,  creates  as  its  self-revelation  the 
Ideas,  the  image  in  which  the  will  beholds  itself  —  the  reason. 
Out  of  the  interaction  of  the  ever  dark  and  blind  urgency  and  its 
ideal  self-beholding  proceeds  the  world,  which  as  Nature  permits 
us  to  recognise  the  conflict  between  purposive  formation  and  irra- 
tional impulse,  and  as  historical  process  has  for  its  content  the 
victory  of  the  universal  will  revealed  in  reason,  over  the  natural 

1  St.  Martin  (1743-1803),  "Le  philosophe  inconnu,"  the  stem  opponent  of 
the  Enlightenment  and  of  the  Revolution,  was  seized  through  and  through  by 
Boehme's  teachings,  and  translated  his  Aurora.    Of  his  writings,  the  most 
important  are  UHomme  de  Desir  (1700),  Le  Noivoel  ffomm*  (1700),  and  De 
V Esprit  dcs  Choses  (1801)-;  the  most  interesting  perhaps  in  the  strange*  work, 
Le  Crocodile,  on  guerre  du  bien  ft  (In  mal  arrive?  smts  la  regne  <1e  Lout*  XV., 
poeme  epicwnagique  (1799).    Cf .  A.  Franck,  La  Fhflosophte  Myttttqu*  en  France 
(Paris,  1800) ;  also  y.  Osten-Sacken,  Fr.  Baader  und  St.  Martin  (Leips.  1800). 

2  This  later  doctrine  of  Spelling's  is  accordingly  usually  called  the  Doctrine 
of  Freedom,  as  the  earlier  is  called  the  System  of  Identity.    Schelling,  Unters. 
uber  die  Preiheit,  W.,  I.  7,  376. 


CHAP.  2,  §  43.]     Metaphysics  of  the  Irrational :  Schelling.          619 

unreason  of  the  particular  will.  In  this  way  the  development  of 
the  actual  leads  from  the  unreason  of  the  primordial  will  (deus 
implicit  us)  to  the  self-knowledge  and  self-determination  of  reason 
(deus  explicitus)  -1 

3.  Thus  at  last  religion  became  for  Schelling  the  "organon  of  phil- 
osophy/7 as  art  had  been  earlier.  Since  the  process  of  God's  self- 
development  goes  on  in  the  revelations,  with  which  in  the  human 
mind  he  beholds  himself,  all  momenta  of  the  divine  nature  must 
appear  in  the  succession  of  ideas  which  man  in  his  historical 
development  has  had  of  God.  Hence  in  the  Philosophy  of  Mythol- 
ogy and  Revelation,  the  work  of  Schelling's  old  age,  the  'knowledge 
of  God  is  gained  from  the  history  of  all  religions :  in  the  progress 
from  the  natural  religions  up  to  Christianity  and  its  different  forms 
the  self-revelation  of  God  makes  its  way  from  dark  primordial  will 
to  the  spirit  of  reason  and  of  love.  God  develops  or  evolves  in 
and  by  revealing  himself  to  men.2 

In  its  methodical  form  this  principle  reminds  us  strongly  of 
Hegel's  conception  of  the  history  of  philosophy,  in  which  "the  Idea 
comes  to  itself,"  and  the  happy  combination  and  fineness  of  feeling 
with  which  Schelling  has  grouped  and  mastered  the  bulky  material 
of  the  history  of  religions  in  these  lectures  shows  itself  throughout 
akin  and  equal  in  rank  to  the  Hegelian  treatment.  But  the  funda- 
mental philosophical  conception  is  yet  entirely  different.  Schelling 
terms  the  standpoint  of  this  his  latest  teaching,  metaphysical  em- 
piricism. His  own  earlier  system  and  that  of  Hegel  he  now  calls 
negative  philosophy :  this  philosophy  may  indeed  show  that  if  God 
once  reveals  himself,  he  does  it  in  the  forms  of  natural  and  historical 
reality  which  are  capable  of  dialectical  a  priori  construction.  But 
that  he  reveals  himself  and  thus  transmutes  himself  into  the  world, 
dialectic  is  not  able  to  deduce.  This  cannot  be  deduced  at  all ;  it  is 
only  to  be  experienced,  and  experienced  from  the  way  in  which  Gfod 
reveals  himself  in  the  religious  life  of  mankind.  To  understand  from 
this  process  God  and  his  self-evolution  into  the  world  is  the  task  of 
positive  philosophy. 

Those  who  both  immediately  and  later  derided  Schelling's  Phil- 
osophy of  Mythology  and  Revelation  as  "  Gnosticism "  scarcely 
knew,  perhaps,  how  well  founded  the  comparison  was.  They  had 
in  mind  only  the  fantastic  amalgamation  of  mythical  ideas  with 
philosophical  conceptions,  and  the  arbitrariness  of  cosmogonic  and 
theogonic  constructions.  The  true  resemblance,  however,  consists 


i  Of.  above,  p.  290  f. 

8  Cf.  Constantin  Frantz,  Spelling's  Positive  Philosophic  (Cothen,  1879  f.). 


620  Germany :  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

in  this,  that  as  the  Gnostics  gave  to  the  warfare  of  religions,  in  the 
midst  of  which  they  were  standing,  the  significance  of  a  history  of 
the  universe  and  the  divine  powers  ruling  in  it,  so  now  Schelling 
set  forth  the  development  of  human  ideas  of  God  as  the  develop- 
ment of  God  himself. 

4.  Irrationalism  came  to  its  full  development  in  Schopenhauer  by 
the  removal  of  the  religious  element.  The  dark  urgency  or  instinct 
directed  only  toward  itself  appears  with  him  under  the  name  of 
the  will  to  live,  as  the  essence  of  all  things,  as  the  thing-in-itself 
(cf.  §  41,  9).  In  its  conception,  this  will,  directed  only  towards 
itself,  has  a  formal  resemblance  to  Fichte's  "infinite  doing,"  just  as 
was  the  case  with  SchlegePs  irony  (cf.  §  42,  5)  :  but  in  both  cases 
the  real  difference  is  all  the  greater.  The  activity  directed  solely 
toward  itself  is  with  Fichte  the  autonomy  of  ethical  self-determina- 
tion, with  Schlegel  the  arbitrary  play  of  fancy,  with  Schopenhauer 
the  absolute  unreason  of  an  objectless  will  Since  this  will  only 
creates  itself  perpetually,  it  4s  the  never  satisfied,  the  unhappy  will : 
and  since  the  world  is  nothing  but  the  self-knowledge  (self-revelation. 
— objectification)  of  this  will,  it  must  be  a  world  of  misery  and 
suffering. 

Pessimism,  thus  grounded  metaphysically,  is  now  strengthened 
by  Schopenhauer1  by  means  of  the  hedonistic  estimate  of  life  itself. 
All  human  life  flows  on  continually  between^ willing  and  attaining. 
But  to  will  is  pain,  is  the  ache  of  the, "  not-yet-satisfied."  Hence 
pain  is  the  positive  feeling,  and  pleasure  consists  only  in  the  removal 
of  a  pain.  Hence  pain  must  preponderate  in  the  life  of  will  under 
all  circumstances,  and  actual  life  confirms  this  conclusion.  Compare 
the  pleasure  of  the  beast  that  devours  with  the  torture  of  the  one 
that  is  being  devoured  —  and  you  will  be  able  to  estimate  with 
approximate  correctness  the  proportion  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  the 
world  in  general.  Hence  man's  life  always  ends  in  the  complaint; 
that  the  best  lot  is  never  to  be  born  at  all. 

If  life  is  suffering,  then  only  sympathy  can  be  the  fundamental 
ethical  feeling  (*cf.  §  41,  9).  The  individual  will  is  immoral  if  it 
increases  the  hurt  of  another,  or  also  if  it  is  merely  indifferent 
toward  it ;  it  is  moral  if  it  feels  another's  hurt  as  its  own  and  seeks 
to  alleviate  it.  From  the  standpoint  of  sympathy  Schopenhauer 
gave  his  psychological  explanation  of  the  ethical  life.  But  this 
alleviation  of  the  hurt  is  only  a  palliative ;  it  does  not  abolish  the 
will,  and  with  the  will  its  unhappiness  persists.  "  The  sun  burns 
perpetual  noon."  The  misery  of  life  remains  always  the  same; 

1  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  I.  §§  56  fl. ;  n.  ch.  46 ;  Parerga,  IT.  ch.  11  f. 


CHAP.  2,  §  43.]     Metaphysics  of  the  Irrational :  Schopenhauer.    621 

only  the  form  in  -which  it  is  represented  in  idea  alters.  The  special 
shapes  change,  but  the  content  is  always  the  same.  Hence  there 
can  be  no  mention  of  a  progress  in  history ;  intellectual  perfecting 
alters  nothing  in  the  will  which  constitutes  the  essential  nature  of 
man.  History  shows  only  the  endless  sorrow  of  the  will  to  live, 
which  with  an  ever-new  cast  of  characters  constantly  presents  the 
same  tragi-comedy  before  itself.1  On  this  ground  the  philosophy  of 
Schopenhauer  has  no  interest  in  history ;  history  teaches  only  indi- 
vidual facts  ;  there  is  no  rational  science  of  it. 

A  deliverance  from  the  wretchedness  of  the  will  would  be  possible 
only  through  the  negation  or  denial  of  the  will  itself.  But  this  is 
a  mystery.  For  the  will,  the  ev  /cat  TCO.V  —  the  one  and  all  —  the  only 
Eeal,  is  indeed  in  its  very  nature  self -affirmation ;  how  shall  it  deny 
itself  ?  But  the  Idea  of  this  deliverance  is  present  in  the  mystical 
asceticism,  in  the  mortification  of  self,  in  the  contempt  of  life  and 
all  its  goods,  and  in  the  peace  of  soul  that  belongs  to  an  absence 
of  wishes.  This,  Schopenhauer  held,  is  the  import  of  the  Indian 
religion  and  philosophy,  which  began  to  be  known  in  Europe  about 
his  time.  He  greeted  this  identity  of  his  teaching  with  the  oldest 
wisdom  of  the  human  race  as  a  welcome  confirmation,  and  now 
called  the  world  of  idea  the  veil  of  Maia,  and  the  negation  of  the 
will  to  live  the  entrance  into  Nirvana.  But  the  unreasonable  will 
to  live  would  not  let  the  philosopher  go.  At  the  close  of  his  work 
he  intimates  that  what  would  remain  after  the  annihilation  of  the 
will,  and  with  that,  of  the  world  also,  would  be  for  all  those  who 
are  still  full  of  will,  certainly  nothing;  but  consideration  of  the  life 
of  the  saints  teaches,  that  while  the  world  with  all  its  suns  and 
milky  ways  is  nothing  to  them,  they  have  attained  blessedness  and 
peace.  "  In  thy  nothing  I  hope  to  find  the  all." 

If  an  absolute  deliverance  is  accordingly  impossible, — were  it 
ever  possible,  then  in  view  of  the  ideality  of  time  there  could  be  no 
world  whatever  of  the  affirmation  of  the  will,  — there  is  yet  a  rela- 
tive deliverance  from  sorrow  in  those  intellectual  states  in  which 
the  pure'willess  subject  of  knowing  is  active,  via  in  disinterested 
contemplation  and  disinterested  thought.  The  object  for  both  of 
these  states  he  finds  not  in  particular  phenomena,  but  in  the  eternal 

1  Hence  the  thought  of  grafting  the  optimism  of  the  Hegelian  development 
system  on  this  will-irrationalism  of  Schopenhauer's  after  the  pattern  of  Schil- 
ling's Doctrine  of  Freedom  was  as  mistaken  as  the  hope  of  reaching  speculative 
results  by  the  method  of  inductive  natural  science.  And  with  the  organic 
combination  of  the  two  impossibilities,  even  a  thinker  so  intelligent  and  so  deep 
and  many-sided  in  his  subtle  investigations  as  Edward  von  Hartmann,  could 
have  only  the  success  of  a  meteor  that  dazzles  for  a  brief  period  (Die  Philoso- 
phie  des  Unbewussten,  Berlin,  1869)  [Eng.  tr.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious, 
by  E.  C.  Coupland,  Lond.  1884]. 


Germany:  Development  of  Idealism.         [PART  VI. 

Forms  of  the  objectification  of  the  will  — the  Ideas.  This  Platonic 
(and  Schellingian)  element,  however  (as  is  the  case  also  with  the 
assumption  of  the  intelligible  character),  fits  with  extreme  difficulty 
into  Schopenhauer's  metaphysical  system,  according  to  which  all 
particularising  of  the  will  is  thought  as  only  an  idea  in  space  and 
time  ;  but  it  gives  the  philosopher  opportunity  to  employ  Schiller's 
principle  of  disinterested  contemplation  in  the  happiest  manner  to 
complete  his  theory  of  life.  The  will  becomes  free  from  itself 
when  it  is  able  to  represent  to  itself  in  thought  its  objectification 
without  any  ulterior  purpose.  The  misery  of  the  irrational  World- 
will  is  mitigated  by  morality ;  in  art  and  science  it  is  overcome. 


PAET  YIL 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY. 

M.  J.  Monrad,  Denkrichtunyen  der  neueren  Ze.it.    Bonn,  1879. 
A.  Franck,  Philosophes  Muclernes,  Strangers  et  Francis.    Paris,  1873. 
R.  Eucken,  Geschichte  und  Kritik  der  Grundbegri/e  der  Gegenwart.    Leips. 
1878.    2d  ed.  1892. 

E.  v.  Hartinann,  Kritische  Wander  my  durch  die  Philosophic  der  Gegenwart. 
Leips.  1890. 

W.  Dilthey,  Archto  fur  Geschichte  der  Philosophic.    Vol.  XL  pp.  551  ff. 

H.  Siebert,   Geschichte  der  neueren  deutschen  Philosophic  seit  Hegel.     Got- 

tingen,  1808. 
Ph.  Damiron,  Essai  sur  VHistoire  de  la  Philosophie  en  France  au  19*  Siecle. 

Paris,  1834. 
H.  Taine,  Les  Philosophes  Classiques  Franqais  ait  19*  Siecle.    Paris,  1857. 

F.  Ravaisson,  La  Philosophie.  en  France  au  19e  Siecle.    Paris,  18G8. 

L.  Ferraz,  Histoire  de  la  Philosophie  en  France  au  19e  Siecle,  3  vols.    Paris, 

1880-1889. 

P.  Janet,  Les  Maitres  de  la  Pensee  Moderne.    Paris,  1883. 
E.  De  Roberty,  La  Philosophie  du  Siecle.    Paris,  1891. 
Oh.  Adam,  La  Philosophie  en  France,  pr.  Moitie  du  19*  Siecle.    Paris,  1894. 
L.  Liard,  Les  Logiciens  Anglais  Contemporains.    Paris,  1878. 
Th.  Ribot,  La  Psychologie  Anylaise  Contempomine.    Paris,  1870. 
1).  Masson,  Recent  English  Philosophy,  3d  ed.    Lond.  1877. 
Har.  Hofding,  Einleitung  in  die  enylische  Philosophie  der  Gegenwart.    Leips. 

1890. 
L.  Ferri,  Essai  sur  VHistoire  de  la  Philosophie  en  Italie  au  J.96  Siecle.    Paris, 

18BO. 

K.  Werner,  Die  italienische  Philosophie  des  19.  Jahrhunderts.    Vienna,  1884  ff. 
[0.  Pfleiderer,  The  Development  of  Rational  Theology  since  Kant.    Lond.  and 

N.Y.  1891.] 

[L.  Stephen,  The  English  Utilitarians,  3  vols.    Lond.  and  KY.  1900.] 
[J.  T.  Merz,  A  History  of  European  Thought  in  the  19th  Century,  Vol.  I. 

1800.] 

The  history  of  philosophical  principles  is  dosed  with  the  develop- 
ment of  the  German  systems  at  the  boundary  between  the  eighteenth 
and  the  nineteenth  centuries.  A  survey  of  the  succeeding  development 
iu  which  we  are  still  standing  to-day  has  far  more  of  literary-his- 
torical than  of  properly  philosophical  interest.  For  nothing  essen- 
tially and  valuably  new  has  since  appeared.  The  nineteenth  century 
is  far  from  being  a  philosophical  one ;  it  is,  in  this  respect  perhaps, 

023 


624  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

to  be  compared  with  the  third  and  second  centuries  B.C.  or  the  four- 
teenth and  fifteenth  A.D.  To  speak  in  Hegel's  language,  one  might 
say  that  the  Weltgeist  of  our  time,  so  busy  with  the  concrete  reality 
and  drawn  toward  the  outer,  is  kept  from  turning  inward  and  to 
itself,  and  from  enjoying  itself  in  its  own  peculiar  home.1  The 
philosophical  literature  of  the  nineteenth  century  is,  indeed,  exten- 
sive enough,  and  gives  a  variegated  play  of  all  the  colours ;  the  seed  of 
Ideas,  which  has  been  wafted  over  to  us  from  the  days  of  the  flower  of 
the  intellectual  life,  has  grown  luxuriantly  in  all  spheres  of  science 
and  public  life,  of  poetry  and  of  art ;  the  germinant  thoughts  of  history 
have  been  combined  in  an  almost  immeasurable  wealth  of  changing 
combinations  into  many  structures  of  personally  impressive  detail, 
but  even  men  like  Hamilton  and  Comte,  like  Eosmini  and  Lotze, 
have  their  ultimate  significance  only  in  the  energy  of  thought  and 
fineness  of  feeling  with  which  they  have  surveyed  the  typical  con- 
ceptions and  principles  of  the  past,  and  shaped  them  to  new  life  and 
vigour.  And  the  general  course  of  thought,  as  indicated  by  the 
problems  which  interest  and  the  conceptions  that  are  formed  in  our 
century,2  moves  along  the  lines  of  antitheses  that  have  been  trans- 
mitted to  us  through  history,  and  have  at  most  been  given  a  new 
form  in  their  empirical  expression. 

For  the  decisive  factor  in  the  philosophical  movement  of  the 
nineteenth  century  is  doubtless  the  question  as  to  the  degree  of 
importance  which  the  natural-science  conception  of  phenomena  may 
claim  for  our  view  of  the  world  and  life  as  a  whole.  The  influence 
which  this  special  science  had  gained  over  philosophy  and  the 
intellectual  life  as  a  whole  was  checked  and  repressed  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  nineteenth  century,  to  grow  again  afterwards  with  all 
the  greater  power.  The  metaphysics  of  the  seventeenth,  and  there- 
fore the  Enlightenment  of  the  eighteenth  century,  were  in  the  main 
under  the  dominance  of  the  thinking  of  natural  science.  The  con- 
ception of  the  universal  conformity  to  law  on  the  part  of  all  the 
actual  world,  the  search  for  the  simplest  elements  and  forms  of 
occurrence  and  cosmic  processes,  the  insight  into  the  invariable 
necessity  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  change, — these  determined 
theoretical  investigation.  The  "natural"  was  thus  made  a  general 
standard  for  measuring  the  value  of  every  particular  event  or  expe- 

1  Hegel,  Berliner  Antrittsrede,  W.,  VI.,  XXXV. 

2  To  the  literary-historical  interest  in  this  field,  which  is  so  hard  to  master 
on  account  of  its  multiplicity,  the  author  has  been  devoting  the  labor  of  many 
years.    The  product  of  this  he  is  now  permitted  to  hope  soon  to  present  as 
special  parts  of  the  third  (supplementary)  volume  of  his  Geschichte  der  neueren 
PMosophie  (2d  ed.    Leips.  1899).    In  this  can  be  carried  out  in  detail  and 
proved  what  here  can  only  be  briefly  sketched. 


Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.  625 

rience.  The  spread  of  this  mechanical  way  of  regarding  the  world 
was  met  by  the  German  Philosophy  with  the  fundamental  thought, 
that  all  that  is  known  in  this  way  is  but  the  phenomenal  form  and 
vehicle  of  a  purposefully  developing  inner  world,  and  that  the  true 
comprehension  of  the  particular  has  to  determine  the  significance 
that  belongs  to  it  in  a  purposeful  connected  whole  of  life.  The 
historical  Weltanschauung  was  the  result  of  the  work  of  thought 
which  the  System  of  Reason  desired  to  trace  out. 

These  two  forces  contend  with  each  other  in  the  intellectual  life 
of  our  century.  And  in  the  warfare  between  them  all  arguments 
from  the  earlier  periods  of  the  history  of  philosophy  have  been  pre- 
sented in  the  most  manifold  combinations,  but  without  bringing  any 
new  principles  into  the  field.  If  the  victory  seems  gradually  to 
incline  toward  the  side  of  the  principles  of  Democritus,  there  are 
two  main  motifs  favourable  to  this  in  our  decades.  The  first  is  of 
essentially  intellectual  nature,  and  is  the  same  that  was  operative 
in  the  times  of  intellectual  life  of  previous  centuries:  it  is  the 
simplicity  and  clearness  to  perception  or  imagination  (anschauliche 
Einfachheit),  the  certainty  and  definiteness  of  the  natural-science 
knowledge.  Formulated  mathematically  and  always  demonstrable 
in  experience,  this  promises  to  exclude  all  doubt  and  opinions,  and 
all  trouble  of  interpretative  thought.  But  far  more  efficient  in  our 
day  is  the  evident  utility  of  natural  science.  The  mighty  trans- 
formation in  the  external  relations  of  life,  which  is  taking  place 
with  rapid  progress  before  our  eyes,  subjects  the  intellect  of  the 
average  man  irresistibly  to  the  control  of  the  forms  of  thought  to 
which  he  owes  such  great  things,  and  on  this  account  we  live  under 
the  sign  of  Baconiaimm  (cf.  above,  p.  386  f.). 

On  the  other  hand,  the  heightened  culture  of  our  day  has  kept 
alive  and  vital  all  questions  relating  to  the  value  which  the  social 
and  .historical  life  has  for  the  individual.  The  more  the  political 
and  social  development  of  European  humanity  has  entered  upon  the 
epoch  when  the  influences  of  masses  make  themselves  felt  in  an 
increasing  degree,  and  the  more  pronounced  the  power  with  which 
the  collective  body  asserts  its  influence  upon  the  individual,  even 
in  his  mental  and  spiritual  life,  the  more  does  the  individual  make 
his  struggle  against  the  supremacy  of  society,  and  this  also  finds 
expression  in  the  philosophic  reflections  of  the  century.  The  con- 
test between  the  views  of  the  world  and  of  life  which  spring  respec- 
tively from  history  and  from  natural  science,  has  gone  on  most 
violently  at  the  point  where  the  question  will  ultimately  be  decided, 
in  what  degree  the  individual  owes  what  makes  his  life  worth  living 
to  himself,  and  in  what  degree  he  is  indebted  to  the  influences  of  the 


626  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.        [PART  VII. 

environing  whole.    Universalisni  and  individualism,  as  in  the  time 
of  the  Renaissance,  have  once  more  clashed  in  violent  opposition. 

If  we  are  to  bring  ont  from  the  philosophical  literature  of  this 
century  and  emphasise  those  movements  in  which  the  above  charac- 
teristic antithesis  has  found  its  most  important  manifestation,  we 
have  to  do  primarily  with  the  question,  in  what  sense  the  psychical 
life  can  be  subjected  to  the  methods  and  concepts  of  natural  science ; 
for  it  is  in  connection  with  this  point  that  the  question  must  first  be 
decided  of  the  right  of  these  methods  and  concepts  to  absolute  sov- 
ereignty in  philosophy.  For  this  reason  the  question  as  to  the  task, 
the  method,  and  the  systematic  significance  of  pMjclwlocjy  has  never 
been  more  vigorously  contested  than  in  the  nineteenth  century,  and 
the  limitation  of  this  science  to  a  purely  empirical  treatment  has 
appeared  to  be  the  only  possible  way  out  of  the  difficulties.  Thus 
psychology,  as  the  latest  among  the  special  disciplines,  has  com- 
pleted its  separation  from  philosophy,  at  least  as  regards  the  funda- 
mental principles  of  its  problem  and  method. 

This  procedure  had  more  general  presuppositions.  In  reaction 
against  the  highly  strained  idealism  of  the  German  philosophy,  a 
broad  stream  of  materialistic  Weltanschauung  flows  through  the  nine- 
teenth century.  This  spoke  out  about  the  middle  of  the  period,  not 
indeed  with  any  new  reasons  or  information,  but  with  all  the  more 
passionate  emphasis.  Since  then  it  has  been  much  more  modest  in 
its  claims  to  scientific  value,  but  is  all  the  more  effective  in  the  garb 
of  sceptical  and  positivist  caution. 

To  the  most  significant  ramifications  of  this  line  of  thought 
belongs  without  doubt  the  endeavour  to  regard  the  social  life,  the 
historical  development,  and  the  relations  of  mental  and  spiritual  exist- 
ence, from  the  points  of  view  of  natural  science.  Introduced  by  the 
unfortunate  name  of  Sociology,  this  tendency  has  sought  to  develop 
a  peculiar  kind  of  the  philosophy  of  history,  which  aims  to  extend 
upon  a  broader  basis  of  fact  the  thoughts  which  were  suggested 
toward  the  close  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  (see  §  37). 

But  on  the  other  hand,  the  historical  view  of  the  world  has  not 
failed  to  exercise  its  powerful  influence  upon  natural  science.  The 
idea  of  a  history  of  the  organic  world,  which  was  postulated  in  the 
philosophy  of  nature,  early  in  the  century,  has  found  a  highly 
impressive  realization  in  empirical  investigation.  The  methodical 
principles,  which  had  led  to  the  philosophy  of  Nature,  extended  as 
if  spontaneously  to  other  fields,  and  in  the  theories  of  evolutioii  the 
historical  and  the  scientific  views  of  the  world  seem  to  approximate 
as  closely  as  is  possible  without  a  new  philosophic  idea,  which  shall 
reshape  and  reconstruct. 


Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Qentury.  627 

?rom  the  side  of  the  individual,  finally,  the  suggestions  which 
re  inherent  in  the  problem  of  civilization  as  this  was  treated  by 

eighteenth  century,  temporarily  brought  the  question  as  to  the 
rth  of  life  into  the  centre  of  philosophic  interest.  A  pessimistic 
iper  had  to  be  overcome  hi  order  that  from  these  discussions  the 
•per  and  clearer  question  as  to  the  nature  and  content  of  values  in 
teral  should  be  separated  and  brought  to  clear  recognition.  And 
it  was  that  philosophy,  though  by  a  remarkably  devious  path,  was 
,bled  to  return  to  Kant's  fundamental  problem  of  values  which 

universally  valid. 

''rora  the  philosophical  literature  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  following 
n  points  may  he  emphasized :  — 

n  France  Ideology  divided  into  a  more  physiological  and  a  more  psycho- 
cal  branch.  In  the  line  of  Cahanis  worked  principally  the  Paris  physicians, 
\  as  Ph.  Pinel  (1745-1820;  Nvsogrctphie  Philosophiqite,  1798),  F.  J.  V. 
>ussais  (1772-1838 ;  Traite  de  Phi/sioloyie,  1822  1 ;  Traite  de  V Irritation 
<>  la  Fulie,  1828),  and  the  founder  of  Phrenology,  Fr.  Jos.  Gall  (1758-1828 ; 
hftrclies  sur  2e  Systeme  Nerveux  en  general  et  sur  cehd  du  Cerwau  ?n  parti- 
er,  180!),  which  was  edited  in  conjunction  with  Spurzheim) . — The  an- 
L'sis  to  this,  physiologically,  was  formed  hy  the  school  of  Montpellier : 
-fchez  (1734-1800  ;  Nouveaux  Elements  tie  la  Science  dp  PHomme,  2d  ed., 
j).  Associated  with  this  school  were  M.  F.  X.  Bichat  (1771-1802; 
herches  Physiolnyiques  sur  la  Vie  et  la  Mort,  1800),  Bertrand  (1795-1831 ; 
rite  du  Somnamlulisme,  1823),  and  Buisson  (1706-1805;  DP  la  Division 
ilus  Naturdle  des  Phenomenes  Physioluffiques,  1802).  Corresponding  to 
was  the  development  of  Ideology  with  Daube  (Essai  d"*  Ideologie,  IbOS), 
especially  with  Pierre  Laromiguikre  (1750-1837  ;  Lrrons  de,  Philosophic, 
5-1818)  and  his  disciples,  Fr.  Thurot  (1708-1832;  De  V  Entendement  et  de 
ttatxon,  1830)  and  J.  J.  Cardaillac  (17GG-1845 ;  Etudes  Elementaires  de 
losophie,  1830).— Cf.  Picavet,  Les  Ideologues  (Paris,  1891). 
L  Hue  of  extensive  historical  study  and  of  deeper  psychology  begins  with 
J.  Deg&rando  (1772-1842  ;  De,  la  t-reneration  des  Connaissances  Ilumaines, 
lin,  1802;  Histoire  Compare?  (?<»«  fttjstfawtt  (If  Philosaphie,  1804)  and  has 
lead  in  Fr.  P.  Gonthier  Maine  de  Birau  (170<i-1824  ;  De  la  Decomposition 
a  Pensee,  18J5  ;  Les  Rapports  du  Physique  ct  du  Moral  de  VHomme,  printed 
i ;  Eiwaisur  les  Fondeimnts  de  laPatycftoJoffip,  1812  ;  GSuvres  Philosophiqiies, 
ed  by  V.  Cousin,  1841  ;  CEfowm  InedittR,  edited  hy  E.  Naville,  1859 ;  2fou- 
es  (Etwres  Inedites,  edited  by  A.  Bertrand,  1887).  The  influences  of  the 
fctish  and  German  philosophy  discharge  into  this  line  (represented  also  hy 
M.  Ampere)  through  P.  Provost  (17,51-1830),  Ancillon  (17«ft-1837), 
?-er-CoUard  (1703-1845),  Jouflroy  (1700-1842),  and  above  all,  Victor 
isin  (1702-1807;  Introduction  a  rilistmrfi  Generate  do.  la  Philosuphie,  7th 
1872  ;  Dn  Vrai,  du  Beau  et  d?r  Bien^  1845  ;  complete  works,  Paris,  184(>  ff.  ; 
E.  Fuchs,  Die  Philos.  V.  C.'«,  Berlin,  1847  ;  J.  Elaux,  La  PMlosophie  de  M. 
sato,  Paris,  1804).  The  numerous  school,  founded  hy  Cousin,  which  was 
'cially  noted  through  its  historical  labours,  is  called  the  Spiritualistic  or 
flcttc  School.  It  was  the  official  philosophy  after  the  July  Revolution,  and  is 
•art  still  such.  To  its  adherents  who  have  been  active  in  the  historical  field, 
Te  their  work  has  been  characterised  by  thoroughness  and  literary  taste, 
>ii£  Ph.  Bamiron,  Jul.  Simon,  E.  Vacherot,  H.  Martin,  A.  Chaignet,  Ad. 
nek,  B.  Haureau,  Ch.  Bartholm&ss,  E.  Saisset,  P.  Janet,  E.  Caro,  etc.  F. 
caisson  has  risen  from  the  school  to  a  theoretical  standpoint  which  is  in  a 
am  sense  his  own.  (Morale  et  metapliysique,  in  the  Bevue  de  Met.  et  de  Mor. 

ts  principal  opponents  were  the  philosophers  of  the  Church  party,  whose 
>rv  is  known  as  Traditionalism.  Together  with  Chateaubriand  (Le  Genie 
Christianisme,  1802),  Jos.  de  Maistre  (1753-1821;  Essai  sur  le  Principe 


628  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century*       [PART  VII. 

Generateur  des  Constitutions  Pnlitiqups.  1810  ;  Soirees  de  St.  Petersburg,  1821  ; 
Du  Pope,  1829;  cf.  on  him  Fr.  Paulhan,  Paris,  1893)  and  J.  Frayssinons 
(1765-1841;  Defense  du  Christianisme,  1823),  V.  G.  A.  de  Bouald  (1753-1841; 
Theorie  du  Pttuvnir  Politique  et  Reliyieux*  1700  ;  Essai  Analytiqite  sur  les  Lois 
yaturelles  dp  VOrdre  Social,  1800*;  Du  Dirurce,  1801;  De,  la  Philosophie 
Morale  et  PoUtiyue  du  IS6  siecle;  complete  \\orks,  15  vols.,  Paris,  Ibltf  it) 
stands  here  in  the  foreground.  The  traditionalism  of  P.  S,  Ballanche  is 
presented  in  a  strangely  fantastic  fashion  (1776-1847  ;  Essai  sur  les  Institutions 
Societies,  1817  ;  La  Palingenesis  Sociale ;  complete  works,  5  vols.,  Paris,  1888). 
In  the  beginning  H.  F.  R.  de  Lamennais  (1782-1854)  also  supported  this  line  in 
his  Essai  sur  f Indifference  en  Matiere  de  Religion  (1817) ;  later,  having  fallen 
out  with  the  Church  (Parole  (Tun  Cruyant,  1884),  he  presented  in  the  Esquisse 
cTiuie  Philosophie  (4  void.,  1841-1846)  a  comprehensive  system  of  philosophy, 
-which  had  for  its  prototype  partly  the  Schellingian  System  of  Identity  and 
partly  the  Italian  Ontologism. 

Among  the  philosophical  supporters  of  Socialism  (cf.  L.  Stein,  Geschichte 
der  socialen  Beicegung  in  Frankreich,  Leips.  1849  ft'.)  the  most  important  is 
Cl.  H.  de  St.  Simon  (1760-lb2£ ;  Introduction  aux  Travaux  Scientifiques  du 
19*  siede,  1807  ;  Reorganisation  de  la  tiociete  Europeenne,  1814  ;  Systeme  In- 
dustriel.  1821  f. ;  Xouzeau  Christianisme,  1825 ;  CEui-res  choisies,  3  vols.,  1859). 
Of  his  successors  may  be  mentioned,  Baaard  (Doctrine  de  St.  Simon,  1820), 
B.  Enfantin  (1796-1864;  La  Religion  St.  Simonienne,  1801),  Pierre  Leroux 
(1798-1871 ;  Refutation  de  VEclectitisme,  1839;  De  VHumanite,  1840),  and  Ph. 
Buchez  (17t>t5-1866 ;  Essai  d'un  Tmit'e,  Complet  de  Philosophie  au  Point  de 
\\e  du  Cathuhcisme  et  du  Progres,  1840). 

Aug.  donate  occupies  a  most  interesting  position  apart.  He  was  born  in 
Montpellier  in  17(J8  and  died  alone  in  Paris  in  1857 :  Cours  du  Philosophie 
Positive  (6  vols.,  Paris,  1840-1842)  [Eng.  tr.,  or  rather  a  condensation  and  repro- 
duction by  H.  Martineau,  The  Positive  Philosophy  of  A.  Comte,  2  vols.,  Lond. 
1853]  ;  Systems  de  Politique  Positive  (Paris,  1851-1854)  ;  The  Positive  Polity 
and  certain  earlier  works,  trans,  by  various  authors,  4  vols.,  Lond.  1870-1878; 
Catechisme  Positieiste  (1853) ;  cf.  Littre",  C.  at  la  Philosophie  Positive,  Paris, 
1868 ;  J.  S.  Mill,  C.  and  Positivism,  Lond.  1805  •  J.  Rfcr,  ^  c.  La  Philosophie 
Positive  Resttmee,  Paris,  1881 ;  E.  Caird,  The  Social  Philosophy  and  Religion 
of  C'.,  Glasgow,  1885. 

In  the  following  period  Comte's  position  became  more  influential  and  in  part 
controlling.  E.  Littrd  (I80l-lb8l ;  La  Science  au  Point  de  Vue  Philosophique, 
Paris,  1873)  defended  his  positivism  in  systematic  form.  A  freer  adaptation  of 


de  la  Science,  1890).  Under  Comte's  influence,  likewise,  has  been  the  develop- 
ment of  empirical  psychology.  Th.  Ribot,  editor  of  the  Revue  Philosophique 
is  to  be  regarded  as  the  leader  in  this  field.  In  addition  to  his  historical  works 
on  English  and  German  psychology,  his  investigations  with  regard  to  heredity 
and  abnormal  conditions  of  memory,  will,  personality,  etc.,  may  be  noted. 

^  In  part  also  Sociology  stands  under  Comte's  influence,  as  R.  Worms,  G. 
larde,  E.  Durkheim,  and  others  have  striven  to  work  it  out  (cf.  Annee  Sociolo- 
gique,  pub.  since  1894).  Finally,  evolutionary  theories  belong  in  this  connection 
which  have  been  especially  carried  out  by  J.  M.  Guyau  (1854-1888  ;  Esqnisxe 
d'une  Xorale,  1885;  Virreligion  de  Vavenir,  1887;  Part,  au  point  de  vne 
toctologtque,  1889)  [Problemes  de  VEsthetique  Qontemporaine,  1897]. 

By  far  the  most  important  among  the  present  representatives  of  philosophy  in 
France  .is  Ch.  Renouvier  (bora  1818;  Essais  de  Critique  Generate,  2d  ed., 
i*Jr  ?;!^Te  ??!!*  MfvVtort™  Systematique  fas  Doctrines  Philoso- 
P£q  J\  l*™  Pfolosophie  Analytique  de  VHistoire,  1890;  La  Nouvelle 
Monadologie  1899).  The  synthesis  of  Kant  and  Comte  which  he  has  sought  to 
eftect  has  its  literary  organ  in  the  Annee  PhilosopMque  (published  since  1889). 


pT.1  7e  ^Sflociational  Psychology  continues  through  Thomas 

ff  T  £,™f   u-  ^h°^Be}*£am  (1750~18^  ;  Clements  of  the  Philosophy 
of  the  Suman  Mind,  1801),  John  Pearn  (First  Lines  of  the  Human  Mind, 


Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.  629 

1820),  and  many  others;  finds  support  here  also  in  physiological  and  phreno- 
logical theories  as  with  G.  Combe  (A  System  of  Phrenology,  Edin.  1825),  Sam. 
Bailey  (Essays  on  the  Pursuit  of  Truth,  1829 ;  The  Theory  of  Reasoning, 
1851 ;  Letters  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind  1855)  and  Harriet  Mar- 
tineau  (Letters  on  the  Laws  of  Man's  Nature  and  Development,  1851),  and 
reaches  its  full  development  through  James  Mill  (Analysis  of  the  Phenomena 
of  the  Human  Mind,  1829),  and  his  son,  J.  Stuart  Mill  (1806-1873  ;  System 
of  Logic  Ratiocinative  and  Inductive,  1848 ;  Principles  of  Political  Economy, 
18-18 ;  On  Liberty,  1S50 ;  Utilitarianism,  1808 ;  Examination  of  Sir  W. 
Hamilton's  Philosophy,  1865 ;  Autobiography,  1873;  Posthumously,  Essays  on 
Religion,  1874;  Collected  Dissertations  and  Discussions,  X.  Y.,  1882;  Useful 
ed.  of  Ethical  Writings  by  Douglas,  Edin.  1897.  Cf.  H.  Taine,  Le  Positivisme 
Anglais,  Paris,  1864  [Eng.  tr.  by  Haye ;  Cuurtney,  Life  of  M.,  and  Meta- 
physics ofj.  &  M.  ;  Bain,  J.  S.  M.  1882],  Douglas,  J.  8.  M.,  A  Study  of  his 
Philos.,  Edin.  1895).  Closely  connected  with  this  line  ojf  thought  stands  Alex. 
Bain  (The  Senses  and  the  Intellect,  1850,  3d  ed.  18C8 ;  Mental  and  Moral 
Science,  1868,  3d  ed.  1872,  Pt.  II,  1872  ;  The  Emotions  and  the  Will  1859,  3d 
ed.  1875  ;  Mind  and  Body,  3d  ed.  1874, 

The  related  Utilitarianism  is  represented  by  T.  Cogan  ( Philosophical  Treatise 
on  the  Passions  1802;  Ethical  Questions,  1817),  John  Austin  (1790-1859; 
The  Philosophy  of  Positive  Law,  1832),  G.  Cornwall  Lewis  (A  Treatise  on  the 
Methods  of  Observation  and  Reasoning  in  Politics,  1852).  [As  representatives 
of  Utilitarianism,  in  addition  to  Mill,  and  Bain,  op,  cit.  above,  H.  Sidgwick, 
Methods  of  Ethics,  Loud.  1874,  tith  ed.  1901,  and  T.  Fowler,  Principles  of 
Morals,  Lond.  1880  f.,  should  also  be  mentioned. 

Scottish  Philosophy,  after  Dugald  Stewart  and  James  Mackintosh  (1764- 
1832 ;  Dissertation  on  the  Progress  of  Ethical  Philosophy,  1830),  had  at  first 
unimportant  supporters  like  Abercrombie  (1781-1840  ;  Inquiry  concerning  the 
Intellectual  Powers,  1830 ;  Philosophy  of  the  Moral  Feelings,  1833)  and 
Chalmers  (1780-1847),  and  -was  especially  as  academical  instruction  brought 
into  affiliation  with  the  eclecticism  of  Cousin  by  Henry  Calderwood  (Philoso- 
phy of  the  Infinite,  1854),  S.  Morell  (An  Historical  and  Critical  View  of  the 
Speculative  Philosophy  of  Europe  in  the  Wth  Century,  1840),  also  H.  Wedg- 
wood (On  the  Development  of  the  Understanding,  1848). 

The  horizons  of  English  thought  were  widened  by  acquaintance  with  the 
German  literature,  to  which  Sam.  Tayl.  Coleridge  (1772-1834),  W.  Words- 
worth (1770-1850),  and  especially  Thomas  Carlyle  (1705-1881;  Past  and 
Present,  1843  [the  articles  on  various  German  thinkers  and  the  Sartor  Resai^tus 
belong  here  also])  contributed.  In  philosophy  this  influence  made  itself  felt 
primarily  through  Kant,  whose  theory  of  cognition  influenced  J.  Herschel  (On 
the  Study  of  Natural  Philosophy,  18:31),  and  especially  W.  Whewell  (Phi- 
losophy of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  1840). 

In  intelligent  reaction  against  this  influence,  Scottish  philosophy  experienced 
a  valuable  re-shaping  at  the  hands  of  Sir  William  Hamilton  (1788-1850  ;  Dis- 
cussions on  Philosophy  «nd  Literature,  1852  ;  On  Truth  and  Error,  ISfiO  ;  Lec- 
tures on  Metaphysics  and  Logic,  1859  ;  Editions  ofReitfs  and  Stewart's  Works; 
cf.  J.  Veitch,  S.  W.  11.,  The  Man  and  his  Philosophy,  Edin.  and  Lond.  1883 
[Memoir  in  2  vols.,  1809,  by  same  author]).  In  his  school  Agnosticism  proper, 
supported  principally  by  H.  L.  Mansel  (1820-1871  ;  Metaphysics  or  the  Phi- 
losophy of  Consciousness,  I860),  is  separated  from  a  tendency  inclining  toward 
eclectic  metaphysics:  J.  Veitch,  U.  Lowndes  (Introduction  to  the  Philosophy 
of  Primary  Beliefs,  1805),  Leechman,  McCosh,  and  others. 

Following  a  suggestion  from  one  aspect  of  Hamilton's  thought,  a  movement 
arose  which  sought  to  develop  formal  logic  as  a  calculus  of  symbols.  To  this 
movement  belong  G.  Boole  (The  Mathematical  Analysis  of  Logic,  1847;  An 
Analysis  of  the  Laws  of  Tliought,  1854)  ;  De  Morgan  (Formal  Logic,  1847)  ; 
Th.  Spencer  Baynes  (An  Essay  on  the  Few  Analytic  of  Logical  Forms,  1850)  ; 
W.  Stanley  Jevons  (Pure  Logic,  1804;  Principles  of  Science,  1874)  ;  J.  Venn 
(Symbolic  Logic,  1881 ;  Logic  of  Chance,  1876  ;  Principles  of  Logic,  1889) 
[C.  S.  Peirce,  Algebra  of  Logic,  1867  ;  Ladd  and  Mitchell,  in  Studies  in  Logic, 
ed.  by  Peirce,  Boston,  1883].  Compare  on  this  A.  Riehl  ( Vierteljahrsschr.  f. 
wins,  Philos.  1877)  and  L.  Liard  (Les  Logiciens  Anglais  Contemporains,  1878). 

The  combined  influence  of  Kant  and  the  later  German  theism  impressed  the 


630  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

philosopher  of  religion,  Jame?  Martineau  ('who  is  also  the  most  prominent 
recent  representative  of  intuitionidt  ethics  [  Types  of  Ethical  Theory,  1885  ;  A 
StnOy  of  Reliyiun.  1888  :  Meat  vf  Authority  ut,  ReU  181)0];  cf.  A.  W,  Jackson, 
J.  X.,  Boston,  1901V},  and  likewise  F.  VT.  Newman  ( Vie  Soul  etc.,  1849 ;  WK>- 
ism,  1858),  A.  C.  Eraser  and  others.  Since  Hutchinson  Stirling  (The  Secret 
of  #^Z,'lSt55;  Wltat  is  Thought  ?  1900)  German  idealism  in  its  whole  develop- 
ment and  in  its  metaphysical  aspect,  particularly  in  the  Hegelian  form,  has  called 
forth  a  vigorous  idealistic  movement,  of  which  the  leading  representative  was 
the  late  Thomas  Hill  Green  (1830-1682),  Professor  at  Oxford.  [His  Introd. 
to  Hume  was  followed  hy  criticisms  on  Lewes  and  Spencer  and  (posthumously) 
by  the  Prtylerjomena  to  Ethics.  18h£.  and  complete  works  (except  the  Proleg,}, 
3"  vols.,  Lond.  and  X.  Y.  1885,  1886,  1888;  cf.  W.  H.  Fairbrother,  The  Phi- 
losophy of  T.  H.  Cr.,  Lond.  1896.]  In  sympathy  with  this  idealistic  and  more 
or  less  Hegelian  interpretation  of  Kantian  principles  are  F.  H.  Bradley  (Logic, 
Lond.  1880;  Ethical  Studies,  1870;  Appearance  and  Reality,  1893),  B.  Bosau- 
quet  (Logic,  2  vols.,  18SS  ;  Hist  of  JBtthetics,  1892  ;  Philos.  of  the.  State,  1800, 
etc.)  ;  J.  Caird  (Introduction  to  the  Philosophy  of  Religion,  1880)  ;  E.  Caird 
(Critical  Phil  of  Kant,  2  vols.,  1889 ;  Ewaya,  2  vols.*  1892 ;  Evolution  of  Religion, 
189;));  Seth  and  Haldane  (Essays  in  Phil  Criticism,  1883)  ;  J.  Mackenzie 
(Social  Philosophy,  1890).  Cf.  A.  Seth,  Hegelianism  and  Personality,  1887, 
and  the  review  of  this  in  3find,  by  D.  G.  Ritchie. 

These  movements  above  noted  stand  under  the  principle  of  Evolution;  the 
same  principle  became  authoritative  for  the  investigation  of  organic  nature 
through  Charles  Darwin  (Origin  of  Species  by  Means  of  Natural  Selection, 
1839;  Descent  of  Man,  1871;  The  Expression  of  the  Emotions,  1872).  The 
same  principle  was  formulated  in  more  general  terms  and  made  the  basis  of  a 
comprehensive  System  of  Synthetic  Philosophy  by  Herbert  Spencer  (born 
1820),  First  Principles,  1862, 6th  ed.  1901;  Principles  of  Psychology,  1855,  5th  ed. 
1890;  Principles  of  Bioloyy,  1804-1807,  4th  ed.  1888;  Principles  of  Sociology 
1876-1896  ;  Principles  of  Ethics,  1879-1893.  Cf.  on  him  0.  Gaupp,  Stuttgart, 
1897  [T.  H.  Green,  in  HVAs;  F.  H.  Collins,  Epitome  of  the  Synthetic  Philoso- 
phy, 1880.]  Huxley,  Wallace,  Tyndall,  G.  H.  Lewes  (Problems  of  Life  and 
-IRnd,  3d  ed.  1874),  belong  in  the  mam  to  this  tendency. 

[Other  works  in  evolutionary  ethics  are,  L.  Stephen,  The  Science  of  Ethics, 
Lond.  1882;  S.  Alexander,  Moral  Order  and  Progress,  Lond.  1889;  C.  M. 
"Williams,  TJie  Ethics  of  Evolution,  Lond.  and  N.Y.  1893.  This  last  contains 
useful  summaries  of  the  chief  works.] 

[In  America  idealistic  lines  of  thought  were  introduced  (in  opposition  to  the 
prevalent  Scottish  philosophy)  through  the  medium  of  Coleridge's  interpretation 
of  Kant,  by  James  Marsh  (1829)  and  Henry's  trans,  of  V.  Cousin's  Lectures  on 
Locke  (1834),  more  directly  from  Germany  by  L.  P.  Hickok  (Rational  7>w- 
thology,  1848 ;  Emp.  Psych.,  1854  (rev.  ed.  by  J.  H.  Seelye,  1882)  ;  Moral 
Science,  1853  (rev.  ed.  by  J.  H.  Seelye),  etc.).  W.  T.  Harris,  in  the  Jow. 
Spec.  Philosophy,  and  elsewhere,  has  done  an  important  work  in  the  same  lino. 
<»t  more  recent  writers,  J*.  Royce  (The  EeUgions  Aspect  of  Philosophy,  1885  • 
Spirit  of  Modern  Philos.,  1802;  The  World  and  the  Individual,  1900),  j' 
Bewey  (Psychology,  1880  ;  Outlines  of  Ethics,  1891),  are  closer  to  the  sc-hool 
of  Green,  while  G.  T.  Ladd  (Phy*.  Psychology,  1887  ;  Introd  to  Phil,  1801  • 
Psychology  Descriptive  and  Explanatory,  1894 ;  Philos.  of  Mind.  1805  :  PliiJott 
nf  Knowledge,  1897 ;  A.  Theory  of  Reality,  1809)  and  B.  P.  Bowne  (Mt>ui- 
fhysics,  Psychological  Theory,  Ethical  Theory,  etc.)  stand  nearer  to  Lotze 
Onnond  (The  Foundations  of  Knowledge,  1900)  combines  idealistic  motive 
with  those  of  Scottish  thought.  The  extremely  suggestive  work  of  W.  James 
(i&jctwlogy,  2  vols.,  1890)  should  also  be  mentioned,  and  as  representatives 
ot  the  modern  treatment  of  this  science,  in  addition  to  the  works  of  Ladd  and 
fnTVioS;*?^  J'  ^^dwin  (toyrtolow,  2  vols.,  1890  f.;  MrtalDwcl- 
opment,  1895-1897)  and  G.  S.  Hall  (in  Jim.  Jour.  Psychology)  may  be  naumcl 
as  American  writers,  and  Jas.  Ward  (art.  Psychology  in  Em.  Brit.),  H.  H. 
Hodgson  (Time  and  Space,  1865  ;  The  Philosophy  of  Reflection,  1878  Met* 
physics  ofMxpmenceim),  James  Sully  (The  Human  Miml,  2  vols.,  1802? 
and  G.  P.  Stout  (Analytic  Psychology,  1896)  as  Englishmen.  Darwin 
Romanes,  and  Lloyd  Morgan  have  treated  comparative  psychology 
ZteMf  of  Psychology  and  Philosophy,  ed.  by  J.  M.  Baldwii  with 


Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.  631 

tion  of  British  and  American  writers,  will  give  historical  material  as  well  as 
definitions  (in  press).] 

The  Italian  philosophy  of  the  nineteenth  century  has  been  determined  still 
more  than  the  French  by  political  motives,  and  in  the  content  of  the  thoughts 
that  have  been  worked  over  for  these  ends,  it  has  been  dependent  partly  upon 
French,  partly  upon  German,  philosophy.  At  the  beginning  the  Encyclopae- 
dists' view  of  the  world,  both  in  its  practical  and  its  theoretical  aspects,  was 
dominant  in  men  like  Gioja  (1760-1829)  or  his  friend,  Rornagnosi  (1701- 
1835),  while  as  early  as  Pasquale  Galuppi  (1771-184-6  ;  Sayyio  Filosofico  suUa 
Critica  delle  Conoscenze  Umunp,  1&20  If.  ;  Filosniia  dell  a  Volonta,  *1832  ff.) 
Kantian  influences  assert  themselves,— to  be  sure,  tinder  the  psychologistic 
form  of  the  Leibnizian  virtual  innateness. 

At  a  later  period  philosophy,  which  was  mainly  developed  by  the  clergy,  was 
influenced  essentially  by  the  political  alliance  of  the  Papacy  with  democratic 
Liberalism,  inasmuch  as  Rationalism  wished  to  unite  itself  with  revealed  faith. 
The  most  characteristic  representative  of  this  tendency  and  the  most  attractive 
personally  was  Antonio  Rosmini-Serbati  (1707-1855;  Xiwvo  Sagffiv  suit'  Ori- 
aine  delle  Idee,  1830  ;  Principli  Mia  Rrienza  Morale,  1831  ;  Posthum,  Teosojia, 
1859  ff, ;  Bagnio  Storico-Critico  uulle  Cuteyorie  e  la  Dialettica,  1884)  [Eng.  tr. 
of  the  first,  'Origin  of  Ideas,  3  vols.,  Lond.  1883  f.  ;  also  RSs  Philos.  System^  by 
T.  Davidson,  with  int.  bibliog.,  etc.,  Loud.  1882  ;  Psychology,  3  vols.,  Lund,  and 
Boston,  1884-1880],  Cf.  on  him  F.  X.  Kraus  (Dnitsche  Rundschau,  1890).  The 
combination  of  Platonic,  Cartesian,  and  Schellingian  ideas  proceeds  in  still 
more  pronounced  lines  to  an  Ontologism,  i.e.  an  a  priori  science  of  Being, 
in  Vinceuzo  Gioberti  (1801-1852;  Dc.<jli  Erron  Filosojiw  di  Eosmini,  1842; 
Introduzione  alia  Filoxojia,  1840  ;  Pruitilrnjia,  1857.  Cf,  B.  Spaventa,  La  Filo- 
sojia  di  6r.,  1803).  Terenzo  Mamiani  passed  through  this  entire  development 
(1800-1885;  Confessioni  di  itn  Jletiiflstcn,  1805);  Luigi  Ferri  (1826-1895), 
Labanca,  Bonatelli,  and  others  followed  it,  though  influenced  also  by  German 
and  French  views. 

As  opponents  this  tendency  found,  on  the  one  hand,  the  rigid  Orthodoxism 
of  Ventura  (1792-1801),  Tapparelli  and  Liberatore  (Delia  Conoscenza  2ntd- 
letuale,  1865),  and,  on  the  other  hand,  politically  radical  Scepticism,  as  repre- 
sented by  Guiseppe  Ferrari  (1811-1800;  La  Filosojia  delle  Rwohizioni,  1851) 
and  Antonio  Francki  (La  Reliyione,  del  10.  tiecolo,  1853).  The  Kantian 
philosophy  was  introduced  by  Alf.  Testa  (1784-18(10 ;  Delia  Critica  dclla 
Rfifjione  Pura,  1840  ff.),  and  more  successfully  by  C.  Cantoni  (born  1840  ;  cf. 
above,  p.  532),  F.  Tocco,  S.  Turbiglio,  and  others.  Hegel's  doctrine  was  intro- 
duced by  A.  Vera  (1813-1885),  B.  Spaventa  (1817-1883),  and  Fr.  Florentine, 
and  Comte's  positivism  by  Cataneo,  Ardigo,  and  Labriola.  [Cf.  for  this  Italian 
thought  the  App.  in  Ueberweg's  Hist.  Phil,  Eng.  tr.,  Vol.  II.  401  ff.] 

In  Germany  (cf,  J.  E.  Erdmann,  History  of  Phil  [Eng.  tr.  Vol.  III.] 
§  331  ft'.)  the  first  development  was  that  of  the  great  philosophic  schools  in  the 
third  and  fourth  decades  of  the  century.  Herbart's  following  proved  the  most 
complete  in  itself  and  firmest  in  its  adherence.  In  it  were  prominent :  M. 
Drobisch  (Bpligfatifiphiltmophtfi  1840 ;  Ptfychtdvyte,  1842  ;  Die  moraUwJte 
Statistik  und  die  menschlichc  Willvnsfreihcit,  1807),  R.  Zimmermarm  (JEs- 
tJietifc,  Vienna,  1805),  L.  Striimpell  (Hauptpunkte  der  Metaphyttik,  18.10; 
EihlGitunfj  in  die  Philosophic,  1880),  T.  Ziller  (Einleitung  in  die  AUyemewe 
Padagoyiic,  1856).  A  special  divarication  of  the  school  is  formed  by  the 
so-called  Volkerpsychologie  [Comparative  or  Folk-Psychology],  as  opened  by 
M.  Lazarus  (Lvfon  der  Seele,  1856  f.)  and  H.  Steinthal  (Alritui  der  fytmck- 
wissennchajl,  I.;  JBinlrttwig  in  die.  Psychologic  und  Spmcliwiwenstfwfti  1871) ; 
cf.  their  common  programme  in  Vol.  I.  of  the  ZeUschrifl  fur  Volkerpsycholoyie 
u nd  Sprachwisse  nsch  aft. 

The  Hegelian  School  had  rich  experience  in  its  own  life  of  the  blessing  of 
dialectic  ;  it  split  even  in  the  Thirties  upon  religious  antitheses.  The  important 
historians  of  philosophy,  Zeller  and  Prantl,  Erdmann  and  Kuno  Fischer, 
went  their  way,  not  confused  by  this.  Between  the  two  parties,  with  a  consid- 
erable degree  of  independent  thinking,  stand  K.  Rozenkranz  (1805-1879; 
Wissenschaft  der  loyischen  Idee,  1858  f .)  and  Friedrich  Theodor  Viaoher  (1807- 
1887;  J&sthetiki  1846-1858;  Auch  Einer,  1879). 


632  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

The  "right  wing"  of  the  Hegelian  school,  which  resisted  a  pantheistic  inter- 
pretation of  the  master,  and  emphasised  the  metaphysical  importance  of  per- 
sonality, attracted  those  thinkers  who  stood  in  a  freer  relation  to  Hegel,  and 
maintained  Fichtean  and  Leibnizian  motifs.  Such  were  I.  H.  Fichte  (son  of 
the  creator  of  the  Wissenschaftslehre,  1797-1879  ;  Beitraye  zur  Oharacteristik 
der  neueren  Philosophic,  1829  ;  Ethik,  1850  ff.  ;  Anthropuloyie,  1850),  C.  Fort- 
lage  (1806-1881;  Astern  der  Psychologie,  1855),  Christ.  Weisse  (1801-1860; 
System  der  JEsthetik,  1830  and  1871  ;  ttrundzllye  der  Metaphysik,  1835  ;  Das 
philosophische  Problem  der  Gegemcart,  1842  ;  Philosophie  des  Christenthums, 
1855  ff.),  H.  Ulrici  (1806-1884;  Das  Grundprincip  der  Philosophic,  1845  f  .  ; 
Gott  und  die  Natw\  1861;  Gott  und  der  Mensch,  1806);  further,  E.  Trahn- 
dorf  (1782-1863;  JEsthetik,  1827),  Mor.  Carriere  (1817-1895;  ^Esthetik,  1859, 
3d  ed.  1885  ;  Die  Kunst  im  Zusammenhany  der  Kulturentwick  tinny,  5  vols.). 
Related  to  these  was,  on  the  one  side,  R.  Rothe  (1797-1807  ;  Theolor/ische 
Ethik,  2d  ed.  1867-1871  ;  cf.  on  his  speculative  system,  H.  Holtzmann,  1899), 
who  interwove  many  suggestions  from  the  idealistic  development  into  an  origi- 
nal mysticism,  and  on  the  other  side  A.  Trendelenburg,  who  set  the  concep- 
tion of  "  Motion  "  in  the  place  of  Hegel's  dialectical  principle,  and  thought 
thereby  to  combat  Hegel's  philosophy.  His  merit,  however,  lies  in  the  stimulus 
which  he  gave  to  Aristotelian  studies  (1802-1872  ;  Logische  Untersuchunyen, 
1840;  Naturrecht,  1860). 

To  the  4L  Left"  among  the  Hegelians  belong  Arnold  Huge  (1802-1880  ;  joint 
editor  with  Echtermeyer  of  the  Halle"1  sche  JahrMicher,  1838-1840,  and  of  the 
Deutsche  Jahrbucher,  1841  f.;  coll.  writings  in  10  vols.,  Mannheim,  1840  ff.), 
LudwigPeuerbach  (1804-1872  ;  Gedanken  ilber  Tod  und  Unsterblichkeit,  1830; 
Philosophic  und  Christenthum,  1839  ;  Wesen  des  Ghristenthums,  1841  ;  ttVb-ni 
der  Religion,  1845  ;  Theogonie,  1857  ;  Works,  10  vols.,  Leips.  1840  ff.).  Cf.  K. 
Grim  (£.  F.,  Leips.  1874),  David  Friedrich  Strauss  (1808-1874  ;  Das  Leben 
Jesu,  1835  ;  (Jhristliche  Glaubenslehre,  1840  f.  ;  Der  Alte  und  der  neue  Glaube, 
1872  ;  Works,  12  vols.,  Berlin,  1870  ff.).  Cf.  A.  Hausrath,  D.  F.  Str.  und  die 
Theologie  seiner  Zeit  (Heidelberg,  1876  and  1878). 

From  the  Materialism  controversy  are  to  be  mentioned  :  K.  Moleschott 
(Kreislanf  dc*  Lebens,  1852),  Rudolph  Wagner  (Ueber  Wiswn  und  Gl<nil>en, 
1854;  Der  Kampf  um  die  Seele,  1857),  C.  Vogt  (Kuhlenflaube  uvd  iriswn- 
schaft,  1854;  Vorlesunfjen  liber  den  Menschen,  1863),  L.  Buchner  (Kraft  iind 
Stof*  1855)  [Force  and  Matter,  Lond.]. 

Related  to  this  materialism  was  the  development  of  the  extreme  Sensualism 
in  the  form  in  which  it  w«os  presented  by  H.  Czolbe  (1819-1873  ;  N<>u<>  D«,r- 
steUung  des  Sensualismus,  1855;  Grundzucje  drr  extensionaleu  ErkwHtHixb- 
theorie,  1875),  and  by  F.  Ueberweg  (1820-1871),  who  was  originally  more 


closely  related  to  Beneke  (cf.  A.  Lange,  History  of  MatcrialiMn,  II.).  In  a 
similar  relation  stood  the  so-called  Zionism  which  E.  Haeckel  (born  1834; 
Natnrliche  Schopfungsgeschichte,  1868  ;  Weltmthsel,  5th  ed.  1000  :  cf.  Loofs, 
Anti-Haeckel,  1900,  and  Fr.  Paulsen,  K'  H.  als  Philosoph.  PMUM.  Jahrb. 
19UO)  has  attempted  to  develop,  and  finally  the  socialistic  Philosophy  of  His- 
tory, whose  founders  are  Fr.  Engels  (Ludwig  Feuerbach  und  tier  Auwjdny  der 
klassischen  deutschen  Philosophie^  1888;  Der  Ursprung  der  Fttmiltt^dM  Pri- 
vateiyenthums  und  des  titaates,  1884)  and  Karl  Marx  (Dan  KapHal,  18G7  ff., 
Capital,  1891);  cf.  on  Engels  and  Marx,  R.  Stammler,  Wirthsdictft  und  Merlti, 
1896  ;  L.  Wolfmann,  Der  historische  Materialismus,  1900. 

By  far  the  most  important  among  the  epigones  of  the  German  Philosophy 
was  Rudolph  Henn.  Lotze  (1817-1881  ;  Mttaphytik,  1841  ;  Lo<jik,  1842  ;  JMctii- 
ciniache  Psychologie,  1842;  MikroTtosmus,  1850ff.;  System  der  Philosophic,  1. 
Loyik,  1874  ;  II.  Metaphysik,  1879)  [Microcosmus,  tr.  by  Hamilton  and  Jones, 
Edin.  and  N.  Y.  1885  ;  Logic,  and  Metaphysics,  2  vols.  each,  tr.  cd.  by  B.  Bosan- 
quet,  Oxford,  1884,  also  1888;  Outlines,  ed.  by  G.  T.  Ladd,  Boston,  1885  ff.]. 
Cf.  0.  Caspari,  H.  L.  in  seiner  Stellung  zur  deutschen  Philosophic  (1883); 
E.  v.  Hartmann,  L?s  Philosophie  (Berlin,  1888);  H.  Jones,  Philos.  of  /,.,  181)5. 

Interesting  side  phenomena  are:  G.  T.  Fechner  (1801-1887  ;  Nanna,  1848; 
Physical,  und  philos.  Atomerilehre,  1855  ;  Elemente  der  Pnychophi/«ik,  1800  ; 
Drei  Motive  des  Glaubens,  1863  ;  VorscJiule  der  jEsthetik,  1876  ;  Die  T<i()man- 
sicht  gegenuler  der  Nachtansicht,  1879)  and  Eug.  Duhring  (born  1833  •  NaMlr- 
liche  Dialektik,  1865;  Worth  desLebens,  1865;  Logikund  Wissenschaftstheorte, 


Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.  633 

1878).  — The  following  from  the  Catholic  side  have  taken  part  in  the  develop- 
ment of  philosophy :  FT.  Hermes  (1775-1831 ;  Einleitung  in  die  christkatho- 
lische '  Theologie,  1819),  Bernh.  Bolzano  (1781-1848 ;  Wissenschaftslehre, 
1837),  Auton  Giinther  (1785-1803;  Ges,  Schriften,  Vienna,  1881),  and  Wil- 
helm  Rosenkrantz  (1824-1874;  Wissenschaft  des  Wissens,  1866). 

Philosophic  interest  in  Germany,  which  was  much  crippled  about  the  middle 
of  the  century,  has  strongly  revived,  owing  to  the  union  of  the  study  of  Kant  with 
the  demands  of  natural  science.  The  former,  called  forth  by  Kuno  Fischer's 
work  (18GO) .  evoked  a  movement  which  has  been  characterized  in  various  aspects 
as  Neo-Kantianism.  To  it  belong,  as  principal  members,  A.  Lange  (1828- 
1875 ;  History  of  Materialism,  I860)  and  0.  Liebmann  (born  1840 ;  Analysis 
der  Wirklichkeit,  3  Aufl.,  1900).  In  theology  it  was  represented  by  Alb. 
Ritschl  (  Theologie  undMetaphysik,  1881).  [A.  T.  Swing,  Theol.  of  A.  It.  1901.] 

Theoretical  Physics  became  significant  for  philosophy  through  the  work  prin- 
cipally of  Rob.  Mayer  (Bemerkungen  ilber  die  Krilfte  der  unbelelten  Natur, 
1845 ;  Ueber  das  mechanische  ^Equivalent  der  Warme,  1850 ;  cf.  on  him  A. 
Riehl  in  the  Svjwan-Alhmidlunyen,  1900)  and  H.  Helmholtz  (Physiologische 
Optik,  1886;  Sensations  of  Tone,  1875;  Thatsachen  der  Wahrnehmung,  1879). 

Beginning  with  physiology,  Willhelin  Wundt  (born  1837)  has  developed  a 
comprehensive  system  of  philosophy.  From  his  numerous  writings  may  be  men- 
tioned Grundzuge  der  physiologischen  Psycholocjie,  1873 1,  4th ed.  1893  [Outlines 
of  Physiological  Psychology,  Eng.  tr.  in  prep,  by  E.  Titchenor]  ;  Logik,  1880  f.; 
Ethik,  1880  [Eng.  tr.  by  Titchenor,  Washburn,  and  Gulliver]  ;  The  Facts  of 
the  Moral  Life,  Ethical  Si/stems,  1897  ;  Principles  of  Morality,  1901  ;  System 
der  Philosophic,  1889  ;  Grundris*  der  Psychologie,  1897  [Eng.  tr.  by  Judd,  Out- 
lines of  Psychology,  1897];  Volkerpsychologie,  1900. 

The  Kantian  theory  of  knowledge  was  met  by  Realism  in  J.  v.  Kirchmann 
(Philosophic  des  Wissens,  1804),  and  by  Positivism  in  C.  Goring  (System  der 
kritischen  Philosophie,  1874 f.),  E.  Laas  (Idealismus  und  Positivismus,  1879  ff.), 
and  in  part  too  in  A.  Riehl  (Der  philosophische  J^riticismus,  1876  ft.  [Eng. 
tr.  of  Part  III.  by  A.  Fairbanks,  1894,  Science  and  Metaphysics]}.  A  similar 
tendency  was  followed  by  R.  Avenarius  (Kritik  der  reinen  Erfahrung,  1888- 
1890  ;  Der  menschliche  Weltlecjriff,  1891). 

As  in  the  first-named  authors  the  concepts  of  natural  science  were  especially 
authoritative,  so  on  the  other  hand  the  interests  of  the  historical  view  of  the 
world  have  normative  value  for  investigators  such  as  Rudolf  Eupken  (Die  Ein- 
he.it  des  Geisteslebens,  1888  ;  Der  Kampf  um  einen  geistiyen  Lelensinhalt,  1896), 
H.  Glogau  (Abriss  der  philosophischen  Grnndwissenschaften,  1880),  and  W. 
Dilthey  (Einleitung  in  die  Geisteswissenschaflen,  1883). 

A  mediating  standpoint  is  taken  by  Christian  Sigwart  (Logik,  2d  ed.  1893 ; 
[Eng.  tr.  by  Helen  Bendy,  18951). 

Two  authors  who  occupy  a  position  in  closer  relation  to  general  literature 
are:  — 

E.  v.Hartmann  (born  1842),  who  excited  general  attention  by  his  Philosophy 
of  the  Unconscious,  1809  [Eng.  tr.  by  Coupland,  1884].  This  was  followed 
"b'y  a  long  series  of  writings,  of  which  the  most  important  are  Das  Unbewusste 
voni  Stamlpunkt  der  Desccndenztheorie,  1872;  Phanomenologie  des  sittlichen 
BrwuMtmns,  1879  ;  Die  Religion  des  Geistea,  1882  ;  sExthetik,  188Cf. ;  Katego- 
rienlehre,  1897;  Geschichte  der  Metaphysik,  1900.  These  works  represent  a 
more  and  more  completely  scientific  standpoint.  As  representing  a  popular 
philosophy,  in  part  pessimistic,  in  part  mystical,  may  be  named  as  typical, 
Mainlander  (Philosophie  d?r  Erloswig,  1874  f.)  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the 
other,  Duprel  (Philosophie  der  Mytiik,  1884  f.). 

Fr.  Wilh.  Nietzsche  (1844-1900),  whose  development  in  its  changing  stages 
is  characterised  by  the  following  selection  from  his  numerous  writings,  of  which 
the  complete  edition  is  published  in'Leipsic,  1895  ff. :  Die  Cfelurt  der  Tragodie 
atis  dem  G-eiste  der  Mitsik.  1872;  Unzrityem'dsse  Betrachtungen,  1873-1876; 
Mmschliches—Allzumenschliches,  187G-1880  ;  Also  sprach  Zarathustra,  1883  f.; 
Jenseits  von  Gut  und  Bose,  1886 ;  Zur  (renealogie  der  Moral,  1887 ;  Gotzendam- 
meruny,  1889.  [Eng.  tr.  by  A.  Tille,  1896  ff.,  Tints  spake  Zarathustra  ;  Beyond 
Good  and  Bad ;  Genealogy  of  Morals.]  Cf.  Al.  Riehl,  Nietzsche,  Stuttgart, 
2d  ed.  1897.  [P.  Cams  in  The  Monist,  IX.  5723.;  G.  K  Dolson  in  Cornell 
Cont.  to  Phil,  III,] 


634  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century        [PART  VII. 

§  M.  The  Controversy  over  the  Soul. 

A  characteristic  change  in  the  general  scientific  relations  during 
the  nineteenth  century  has  been  the  constantly  progressing  loosening 
and  separation  of  psychology  from  philosophy?  which  may  now  be 
regarded  as  in  principle  complete.  This  followed  from  the  rapid 
decline  of  metaphysical  interest  and  metaphysical  production,  which 
appeared  in  Germany,  especially,  as  a  natural  reaction  from  the  high 
tension  of  speculative  thought.  Eobbed  thus  of  a  more  general  base 
of  support,  in  its  effort  to  give  itself  a  firm  footing  as  purely  empir- 
ical science,  psychology  had  at  first  but  little  power  of  resistance 
against  the  inroad  of  the  method  of  natural  science,  according  to 
which  it  should  be  treated  as  a  special  province  of  physiology  or 
general  biology.  About  this  question  a  number  of  vigorous  move- 
ments grouped  themselves. 

1.  At  the  beginning  of  the  century  a  brisk  interchange  of  thought 
obtained  between  the  French  Ideology  and  the  later  developments 
of  the  English  Enlightenment  philosophy  which  had  split  into  asso- 
ciational  psychology  and  the  common  sense  doctrine :  in  this  inter- 
change, however,  France  bore  now  the  leading  part.     Here  the 
antithesis  which  had  existed  in  the  French  sensualism  from  the  be- 
ginning between  Condillae  and  Bonnet  (cf.  p.  458),  came  out  more 
sharply.    With  Destutt  de  Tracy,  and  even  as  yet  with  Laromiguiere, 
it  does  not  come  to  a  sharp  decision.    On  the  other  hand,  Oabanis  is  the 
leader  of  the  materialistic,  line :  his  investigation  as  to  the  interconnec- 
tion of  the  physical  and  the  psychical  (moral)  nature  of  man,  after  con- 
sidering the  various  influences  of  age,  sex,  temperament,  climate,  etc., 
comes  to  the  result  that  the  psychical  life  is  everywhere  determined  by 
the  body  and  its  physical  relations.    With  the  organic  functions  thus 
reduced  solely  to  mechanical  and  chemical  processes,  at  least  in  prin- 
ciple, it  seemed  that  the  soul,  now  superfluous  as  vital  force,  had  also 
outlived  its  usefulness  as  the  agent  and  supporter  of  consciousness. 
In  carrying  out  these  thoughts  other  physicians,  for  example 
Broussais,  gave  to  materialism  a  still  sharper  expression :  the  intel- 
lectual activity  is  "one  of  the  results"  of  the  brain  functions. 
Hence  men  eagerly  seized  upon  the  strange  hypothesis  of  phre- 
nology^ with  which  Gall  professed  to  localise  at  definite  places  in 
the  brain  all  the  particular  "faculties/3  which  empirical  psychology 
had  provided  up  to  that  time.    It  was  not  merely  an  interesting 
diversion  to  hear  in  public  that  a  more  or  less  vigorous  development 
of  special  psychical  powers  could  be  recognised  in  the  skull ;   the 

!  Cf.  W.  Windelband,  Ueber  den  gegenwartigen  Stand  der  psychologischen 
Forschung  (Leips.  1876). 


§  44.]  Controversy  over  the  Soul :  Ideology.  635 

thought  was  connected  "with  this,  especially  among  physicians,  that 
now  the  materiality  of  the  so-called  soul-life  was  discovered,  with- 
out doubt.  In  England  especially,  as  is  shown  by  the  success  of 
Combe's  writings,  the  phrenological  superstition  called  out  very 
great  interest  and  promoted  a  purely  physiological  psychology,  in 
the  line  of  that  of  Hartley.  It  was  John  Stuart  Mill  who  first 
brought  his  countrymen  back  to  Hume's  conception  of  associational 
psychology.  Without  asking  what  matter  and  mind  are  in  them- 
selves, the  student  should  proceed  from  the  fact  that  the  corporeal 
and  mental  states  form  two  domains  of  experience,  completely  inca- 
pable of  comparison,  and  that  psychology  as  the  science  of  the  laics  of 
mental  life  must  study  the  facts  of  the  latter  in  themselves,  and  may 
not  reduce  them  to  the  laws  of  another  sphere  of  existence.  Alex- 
ander Bain,  attaching  himself  to  Mill's  standpoint,  developed  the 
associational  psychology  farther.  His  especial  contribution  was  to 
point  out  the  significance  of  the  muscular  sensations,  in  which  the 
fundamental  facts  of  the  mental  life  which  correspond  to  spontane- 
ous bodily  motion  are  to  be  found.  This  associational  psychology 
has  thus  nothing  in  common  with  a  materialistic  view  of  the  soul ; 
nevertheless  the  mechanism  of  ideas  and  impulses  is  the  only  prin- 
ciple recognised  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  the  mental  processes. 
2.  The  opposition  to  the  materialistic  psychology  comes  much 
more  sharply  to  the  fore  in  those  lines  of  thought  which  emphasise 
the  activity  of  consciousness  as  a  unity.  Following  de  Tracy's 
example  Laromiguifrre's  Ideology  distinguished  carefully  between 
the  "  modifications,"  which  are  the  mere  consequence  of  bodily  exci- 
tations, and  the  "  actions  "  of  the  soul,  in  which  the  soul  proves  its 
independent  existence,  even  in  perception.  In  the  school  of  Mont- 
pellier  they  still  believed  in  the  "vital  force."  Barthez  regarded 
this  as  separate  from  body  and  soul,  as  a  something  completely 
unknown :  Bichat  distinguished  the  "  animal "  from  the  "  organic  " 
life  by  the  characteristic  of  spontaneous  "reaction."  This  element 
in  psychology  came  to  full  development  through  Maine  de  Biran. 
The  acute,  subtle  mind  of  this  philosopher  received  many  suggestions 
from  English  and  German  philosophy ;  with  reference  to  the  latter 
his  acquaintance  with  Kant's  and  Fichte's  doctrines  —  though  only 
a  superficial  one  —  and  with  the  virtualism  of  Bouterwek,  who  was 
named  with  remarkable  frequency  in  Paris,  is  to  be  emphasised.1 

1  The  lines  of  communication  were  here  not  merely  literary  (Villers, 
Dege*rando,  etc.),  "but  in  a  strong  degree  personal.  Of  great  importance  among 
other  things  was  the  presence  of  the  Schlegels  in  Paris,  especially  the  lectures 
of  Frederick  Schlegel.  In  Paris  itself  the  society  of  Auteuil,  to  which  also  the 
Swiss  embassador  Stapfer,  a  prominent  medium  of  influence,  belonged,  was  of 
importance. 


636  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

The  fundamental  fact  on  which  Elaine  de  Biran  bases  his  theory, 
later  called  apiritvatism.  is  that  in  the  itill  we  immediately  experi- 
ence at  once  our  own  activity  and  the  resistance  of  the  "  Non-Moi" 
(primarily  our  own  body).    The  reflection  of  personality  upon  this 
its  own  activity  forms  the  starting-point  of  all  philosophy:  inner 
experience  furnishes  the  form,  experience  of  that  which  resists  fur- 
nishes the  matter.    From  this  fundamental  fact  the  conceptions 
force,  substance,  cause,  unity,  identity,  freedom,  and  necessity  are 
developed.    Thus  Maine  de  Biran  builds  upon  psychology  a  meta- 
physical system,  which  frequently  reminds  of  Descartes  and  Male- 
branche,  but  replaces  the  cogito  ergo  sum,  by  a  volo  ergo  sum;  just 
for  this  reason  he  exerts  himself  especially  to  fix  securely  the 
boundary  lines  between  psychology  and  physiology,  and  particularly 
to  exhibit  the  conception  of  inner  experience  (sens  intime)  as  the 
clear  and  self-evident  basis  of  all  mental  science,  of  which  the  self- 
consciousness  of  the  willing  and  choosing  personality  appeared  to 
him  to  be  the  fundamental  principle.    These  significant  thoughts, 
directed  against  the  naturalistic  one-sideclness  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  were  supplemented  by  Maine  de  Biran  for  his  own  faith 
by  a  mystical  turn,  which  finds  the  highest  form  of  life  in  the 
giving  up  and  losing  of  personality  in  the  love  of  God.     This  sup- 
pleinentation  was  made  especially  toward  the  close  of  his  life.    His 
scientific  doctrine,  on  the  contrary,  found  further  points  of  contact, 
in  part  with  the  Scottish,  and  in  part  with  the  German  philosophy, 
through  his  friends,  such  as  Ampere,  Jouffroy,  and  Cousin.    In  this 
process,  much  of  the  original  character  was  lost  in  consequence  of 
the  eclectic  appropriation  of  material.    This  was  shown  externally 
in  the  fact  that  his  theory,  as  thus  modified,  especially  in  the  in- 
structional form  which  it  received  through  Cousin,  was  freely  called 
Spiritualism.    In  fact,  the  original  character  of  the  theory,  whidi 
might  better  have  been  called  Voluntarism,  was  changed  by  the 
intellectualistic  additions  which  Cousin  especially  brought  to  it 
from  the  German  philosophy  of  identity.    At  a  later  time,  Kavais- 
son,  and  in  a  still  more  independent  fashion,  closely  related  to  the 
Kantian  criticism,  Eenouvier,  sought  to  hark  back  from  eclecticism 
to  Maine  de  Biran.1 

3.  Voluntarism  has  been  on  the  whole,  perhaps,  the  most  strongly 
marked  tendency  of  the  psychology  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  is 
the  form  in  which  empirical  science  has  appropriated  Kant's  and 

1A  similar  position  is  occupied  in  Italy  by  Gallupi.  Among  the  "facts  of 
consciousness"  which  he  makes  the  basis  of  philosophy,  he  regards  the  au- 

"  *6  d 


§  44.]  Controversy  over  the  Soul :  Voluntarism.  637 

Fichte's  transfer  of  the  standpoint  of  philosophy  from  the  theoretical 
over  to  the  practical  reason.  In  Germany  the  principal  influences  on 
this  side  have  been  Fichte's  and  Schopenhauer's  metaphysics.  Both 
these  authors  make  the  essential  nature  of  man  to  consist  in  the  will, 
and  the  colouring  which  such  a  point  of  view  gives  to  the  whole  the- 
ory of  the  world  could  only  be  strengthened  by  the  course  of  German 
history  in  our  century,  and  by  the  transformation  in  the  popular 
mind  which  has  accompanied  it.  The  importance  of  the  practical, 
which  has  been  enhanced  to  the  highest  degree,  and  the  repression 
of  the  theoretical,  which  is  not  without  its  dangers,  have  appeared 
more  and  more  as  the  characteristic  features  of  the  age. 

This  tendency  made  its  appearance  in  a  scientific  form  with 
Beneke,  who  in  spite  of  his  dependence  in  part  upon  English  philos- 
ophy and  in  part  upon  Herbart,  gave  a  peculiar  turn  to  his  exposi- 
tion of  the  associational  psychology  (cf.  above,  p.  586)  by  conceiving 
the  elements  of  the  mental  life  as  active  processes  or  impulses 
(Triebe).  He  called  them  "elementary  faculties"  (Urvermogeri), 
and  maintained  that  these,  originally  set  into  activity  by  stimuli, 
bring  about  the  apparently  substantial  unity  of  the  psychical  nature 
by  their  persistence  as  traces  (Spuren),  and  by  their  reciprocal  adjust- 
ment in  connection  with  the  continual  production  of  new  forces,  The 
soul  is  accordingly  a  bundle  —  not  of  ideas,  as  with  Hume,  but  — 
of  impulses,  forces,  and  "faculties."  On  the  other  hand,  all  real 
significance  is  denied  to  the  faculties  in  the  older  sense  of  classifica- 
tions of  the  nrental  activities  (cf.  above,  p.  577).  To  establish  this 
doctrine  inductively  by  a  methodical  elaboration  of  the  facts  of  inner 
perception  is  regarded  by  Beneke  as  the  only  possible  presupposition 
for  the  philosophical  disciplines,  such  as  logic,  ethics,  metaphysics, 
and  the  philosophy  of  religion.  In  this  procedure  he  passes  on  to  a 
theory  of  the  values  which  belong  to  stimuli  (the  so-called  "things"), 
on  account  of  the  increase  or  diminution  of  the  impulses. 

Fortlage  gave  metaphysical  form  to  the  psychological  method  and 
theory  of  Beneke,  by  incorporating  it  into  Fichte's  Science  of  Know- 
ledge. He,  too,  conceives  of  the  soul  and  all  things  in  their  relations 
as  a  system  of  impulses  or  forces,  and  perhaps  no  one  has  carried 
through  so  sharply  as  he  the  conception  that  the  source  of  substantial 
existence  is  the  activity  of  the  will,  —  an  activity  which  is  devoid  of 
any  substrate.1  He  regarded  the  essential  nature  of  the  psychical  pro- 
cesses as  follows :  From  original  functions  arise  contents  which  grow 
into  synthetic  union,  remain,  become  established,  and  thus  produce 
the  forms  of  psychical  reality.  He  thus  pointed  out  once  more  the  way 

i  Cf.  C.  Fortlage,  Beitrdge  zur  Psychologie  (Leips.  1875),  p.  40. 


638  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

by  which  alone  metaphysics  can  be  freed  from  the  schema  of  material 
processes  which  are  conceived  as  movements  of  unchangeable  sub- 
stances, such  as  atoms.  But,  at  the  same  time,  there  were  in  these 
theories  suggestions  for  the  thought  that  the  processes  of  ideation, 
of  attention,  and  of  evaluation  in  judgments,  must  be  regarded  as 
functions  of  the  "impulse"  which  issues  in  question  and  assent  or  re- 
jection. In  the  later  development,  indeed,  the  psychological  analysis 
of  the  thinking  process  has  penetrated  even  to  the  realm  of  logic, 
and  here  has  often  averted  attention  from  the  proper  problems  of 
that  science.  In  the  last  decades  especially,  psychology  as  method 
and  theory  has  had  a  luxurious  development  similar  to  that  in  the 
eighteenth  century,  and  in  its  degenerate  forms  it  has  led  to  the 
same  manifestations  of  the  most  superficial  popular  philosophy. 

4.  In  England,  also,  the  traditional  psychological  method  and 
standpoint  remain  in  control;  nor  was  this  dominance  essentially 
affected  by  the  transformation  which  Hamilton  gave  to  the  Scottish 
tradition  under  the  influence  of  German  philosophy  and  particularly 
of  Kant.    He,  too,  defends  the  standpoint  of  inner  experience  and 
regards  it  as  affording  the  standard  for  all  philosophical  disciplines. 
Necessity  and  universality  are  to  be  found  only  in  the  simple,  imme- 
diately intelligible  facts  of  consciousness  which  are  present  in  every 
one.    But  in  these  facts  —  and  to  these  belong  also  all  individual 
perceptions  of  the  presence  of  an  external  thing  —  it  is  only  the. 
finite,  in  finite  relations  and  conditions,  which  comes  to  our  knowl- 
edge.   It  is  in  this  sense,  and  without  reference  to  tire  Kantian  con- 
ception of  the  phenomenal,  that  human  knowledge  is  regarded  by 
Hamilton  as  limited  to  experience  of  the  finite.    Of  the  Infinite  and 
Absolute,  t.e.9  of  God,  man  has  only  a  moral  certainty  of  faith.    Sci- 
ence, on  the  contrary,  has  no  knowledge  of  this  "  Unconditioned," 
because  it  can  think  only  what  it  first  distinguishes  from  another  in 
order  then  to  relate  it  to  another  (cf.  Kant's  conception  of  synthesis). 
Mansel  brought  this  "  Agnosticism  "  into  the  service  of  revealed 
theology,  making  a  still  stronger  and  more  sceptical  employment  of 
the  Kantian  theory  of  knowledge.    He  shows  that  religious  dogmas 
are  absolutely  incomprehensible  for  human  reason,  and  maintains 
that  just  on  this  account  they  are  also  incapable  of  attack.    Ihe 
unknowableness  of  the  "Absolute"  or  the  "Infinite,"  as  Hamilton 
had  taught  it,  still  plays  an  important  rdle  in  other  philosophical 
tendencies  in  England;  e.g.  in  Herbert  Spencer's  system  (cf.  below, 


As  set  over  against  psychology,  which  has  to  do  only  with  the 
facts  of  consciousness,  Hamilton  treats  logic,  aesthetics,  and  ethics, 
which  correspond  to  the  three  classes  of  psychical  phenomena,  as  the 


Controversy  over  the  Soul :  Hamilton.  639 

theory  of  the  laws  under  which  facts  stand ;  yet  he  does  not  attain 
complete  clearness  as  to  the  normative  character  of  this  legislation, 
and  so  the  philosophical  disciplines  also  remain  entangled  in  the 
method  of  psychology.  In  working  out  his  system,  Hamilton's 
logical  theory  became  one  of  the  most  clearly  defined  produc- 
tions of  formal  logic.  The  problem  of  logic  for  him  is  to  set  forth 
systematically  the  relations  which  exist  between  concepts,  and  he 
limits  the  whole  investigation  to  relations  of  quantity,  going  quite 
beyond  the  principle  of  the  Aristotelian  analysis  (cf.  above,  pp.  135  f .). 
Eveiy  judgment  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  equation,  which  declares 
what  the  relation  is  between  what  is  comprised  in  the  one  concept, 
and  what  is  comprised  in  the  other.  For  example,  a  judgment  of 
subordination,  "  the  rose  is  a  flower/'  must  take  the  form  :  "  All  S 
=  some  P,"  "  all  roses  =  some  flowers."  The  peculiarity  of  this  is 
that  the  predicate  is  "  quantified/'  whereas  previous  logical  theory 
has  quantified  the  subject  only.  When  all  judgments  were  thus 
reduced  to  the  form  of  equations,  obtaining  between  the  contents  of 
two  concepts,  inferences  and  conclusions  appeared  to  be  operations 
of  reckoning,  performed  with  given  magnitudes.  This  seemed  to 
be  the  complete  carrying  through  of  the  principle  of  the  terminis- 
tic  logic,  as  it  was  formulated  by  Occam  (cf.  above,  p.  342),  Hobbes 
(p.  404),  and  Coudillac  (p.  478).  The  new  analysis  or  logical  cal- 
culus has  spread  since  the  time  of  Hamilton,  and  become  a  broad 
field  for  the  intellectual  gymnastics  of  fruitless  subtlety  and  ingenu- 
ity. For  it  is  evident  that  such  a  logic  proceeds  from  onty  a  single 
one  among  the  numerous  relations  which  are  possible  between  con- 
cepts and  form  the  object  of  judgments.  Moreover,  the  relation  in 
question  is  one  of  the  least  important ;  the  most  valuable  relations 
of  logical  thought  are  precisely  those  which  fall  outside  this  kind  of 
analysis.  But  the  mathematical  exactness  with  which  this  logic  has 
seemed  to  develop  its  code  of  rules  has  enlisted  in  its  behalf  a  series 
of  vigorous  investigators,  and  that  not  merely  in  England.  They 
have,  however,  overlooked  the  fact  that  the  living,  actual  thought 
of  man  'knows  nothing  of  this  whole  formal  apparatus,  so  neatly 
elaborated. 

5,  In  the  debates  over  these  questions  in  France  and  England  the 
religious  or  theological  interest  in  the  conception  of  the  substance  of 
the  soul  is  naturally  always  a  factor :  the  same  interest  stood  in  the 
foreground  in  the  very  violent  controversies  which  led  in  Germany 
to  the  dissolution  of  the  Hegelian  school.  They  turned  essentially 
about  the  personality  of  God  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Hegel- 
ianism  could  not  continue  as  "  Prussian  state-philosophy  "  unless  it 
maintained  the  "identity  of  philosophy  with  religion."  The  am- 


640  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

biguous  mode  of  expression  of  the  master,  who  had  no  direct  interest 
in  these  questions,  enveloped  as  it  was  in  the  dialectical  formalism, 
favoured  this  contest  as  to  the  orthodoxy  of  his  teaching.  In  fact, 
the  so-called  u  right  wing ?:  of  the  school,  to  which  prominent 
theologians  like  Gabler,  Goschel,  and  Hinrichs  belonged,  tried  to 
keep  this  orthodox}- :  but  while  it  perhaps  might  remain  doubtful 
how  far  the  u  coming-to-itself  of  the  Idea  "  was  to  be  interpreted  as 
the  personality  of  God,  it  became  clear,  on  the  other  side,  that  in  the 
system  of  perpetual  Becoming  and  of  the  dialectical  passing  over 
of  all  forms  into  one  another,  the  finite  personality  could  scarcely 
raise  a  plausible  claim  to  the  character  of  a  "substance"  and  to 
immortality  in  the  religious  sense. 

This  motive  forced  some  philosophers  out  of  the  Hegelian  school 
to  a  "  tlieistiG'"  view  of  the  world,  which,  like  that  of  Maine  de  Biran, 
had  for  its  centre  the  conception  of  personality,  and  with  regard  to 
finite  personalities  inclined  to  the  Leibnizian  Monadology.  The 
younger  Fichte  termed  these  mental  or  spiritual  realities  Urpositionen 
[prime-positions].  The  most  important  carrying-out  of  the  thought 
of  this  group  was  the  philosophical  system  of  Chr.  Weisse,  in  which 
the  conception  of  the  possible  is  placed  ontologically  above  that  of 
Being,  to  the  end  of  deriving  all  Being  from  freedom,  as  the  self- 
production  of  personality  (Fichte). 

In  the  relation  between  the  possible  and  the  actual,  we  have  here 
repeated  the  antithesis  set  up  by  Leibniz,  between  the  v4rit£s  eter- 
nellesj  and  the  Writes  defait,  and  likewise  the  problems  which  Kant 
brought  together  in  the  conception  of  the  "  specification  of  Nature  " 
(of.  above,  p.  566).  Within  the  "  possibilities "  which  cannot  be 
thought  away,  the  actual  is  always  ultimately  such  that  it  might  be 
conceivably  otherwise ;  i.e.  it  is  not  to  be  deduced,  it  must  be  re- 
garded as  given  through  freedom.  Law  and  fact  cannot  be  reduced 
to  each  other. 

Carrying  out  this  view  in  a  more  psychological  manner,  Ulrici 
regarded  the  self  as  the  presupposition  for  the  distinguishing  activ- 
ity, with  which  he  identified  all  consciousness,  and  out  of  which  he 
developed  his  logical,  as  well  as  his  psychological,  theory. 

6.  The  orthodoxy,  which  at  the  time  of  the  Restoration  was  grow- 
ing in  power  and  pretension,  was  attacked  by  the  counter-party  with 
the  weapons  of  Hegelianism,  and  in  this  contest  Kuge  served  as 
leader  in  public  support  of  both  religious  and  political  liberalism. 
How  pantheistically  and  Spinozistically  the  idealistic  system  was 
apprehended  by  this  wing  is  best  seen  from  Feuerbach's  ThougJOs  on 
Death  and  Immortality,  where  the  divine  infinitude  is  praised'as  the 
ultimate  ground  of  man's  life,  and  man's  disappearance  in  the  same 


§  41.]  Controversy  over  the  Soul :  Materialism.  641 

as  the  true  immortality  and  blessedness.  Prom  this  ideal  pantheism 
Feuerbach  then  rapidly  advanced  to  the  most  radical  changes  of  his 
doctrine.  He  felt  that  the  panlogistic  system  could  not  explain 
the  individual  things  of  Nature :  though  Hegel  had  called  Nature 
the  realm  of  the  accidental  or  contingent,  which  is  incapable  of 
keeping  the  conception  pure.  This  inability,  thought  Feuerbach, 
inheres  rather  in  the  conception  which  man  makes  to  himself  of 
things :  the  general  conceptions  in  which  philosophy  thinks  are  no 
doubt  incapable  of  understanding  the  real  nature  of  the  individual 
thing.  Therefore  Feuerbach  now  inverts  the  Hegelian  system,  and 
the  result  is  a  nominalistic  materialism.  The  actual  reality  is  the 
individual  known  to  the  senses ;  everything  universal,  everything 
mental  or  spiritual,  is  but  an  illusion  of  the  individual.  Mind  or 
spirit  is  "  Nature  in  its  otherness."  In  this  way  Feuerbach  gives 
his  purely  anthropological  explanation  of  religion.  Man  regards  his 
own  generic  nature  —  what  he  wishes  to  be  himself  —  as  God. 

This  "theory  of  the  wish,"  is  to  free  humanity  from  all  supersti- 
tion and  its  evil  consequences,  after  the  same  fashion  as  the  theory 
of  Epicurus  (cf.  above,  p.  188).  The  epistemology  of  this  "philoso- 
phy of  the  future"  can  be  only  sensualism;  its  ethics  only  eudse- 
monisni:  the  impulse  to  happiness  is  the  principle  of  morals,  and 
the  sympathetic  participation  in  the  happiness  of  another  is  the 
fundamental  ethical  feeling. 

After  materialism  had  shown  so  illustrious  a  metaphysical  "pedi- 
gree, others  employed  for  its  advantage  the  anthropological  mode  of 
argument  which  had  been  in  use  in  French  literature  since  Lamettrie, 
and  which  seemed  to  become  still  stronger  through  the  progress  of 
physiology.  Feuerbach  had  taught :  man  is  what  he  eats  (ist  was  er 
issf)  !  And  so  once  more  the  dependence  of  the  mind  upon  the  body 
was  interpreted  as  a  materialising  of  the  psychical  activity ;  thinking 
and  willing  were  to  be  regarded  as  secretions  of  the  brain,  similar  to 
the  secretions  of  other  organs.  A  companion  for  this  theory  appeared 
in  the  guise  of  a  purely  sensualistic  theory  of  knowledge,  as  it  was 
developed  by  Czolbe  independently  of  metaphysical  assumptions; 
although  at  a  later  time  Czolbe  himself  reached  a  view  of  the  world 
which  bordered  closely  upon  materialism.  For,  since  he  regarded 
knowledge  as  a  copy  of  the  actual,  he  came  ultimately  to  ascribe  to 
ideas  themselves  spatial  extension,  and,  in  general,  to  regard  space 
as  the  supporter  of  all  attributes,  giving  it  the  place  of  Spinoza's 
substance. 

So  the  materialistic  mode  of  thought  began  to  spread  in  Germany 
also,  among  physicians  and  natural  scientists,  and  this  condition  of 
affairs  came  to  light  at  the  convention  of  natural  scientists  at  Got- 


642  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VIL 

tingen  in  1854.  The  contradiction  between  the  inferences  of  natural 
science  and  the  « needs  of  the  heart"  (GemiitK)  became  the  theme  of 
a  controversy  which  was  continued  in  writing  also,  in  which  Carl 
Voyt  championed  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  the  mechanical  view  of 
the  world,  while  Rudolph  Wagner,  on  the  contrary,  professed  to  gain 
at  the  bounds  of  human  knowledge  the  possibility  for  a  faith  that 
rescued  the  soul  and  its  immortality.  This  effort,1  which  with 
extreme  unaptness  was  termed  rt  book-keeping  by  double  entry/'  had 
subsequently  its  chief  effect  in  creating  among  natural  scientists  who 
saw  through  the  one-sidedness  of  materialism,  but  could  not  befriend 
the  teleology  of  idealism,  a  growing  inclination  toward  Kant,  into 
whose  thing-in-itself  they  thought  the  needs  of  the  heart  and  soul 
might  be  permitted  to  make  their  escape.  When,  then,  in  1860, 
Kuno  Fischer's  brilliant  exposition  of  the  critical  philosophy  ap- 
peared, then  began  the  "return  to  Kant"  which  was  afterwards 
destined  to  degenerate  into  literary-historical  micrology.  To  the 
natural-science  temper,  out  of  which  it  arose,  Albert  Lange's  History 
of  Materialism  gave  expression. 

Many  misunderstandings,  to  be  sure,  accompanied  this  move- 
ment when  even  great  natural  scientists  like  Helmholtz 2  confused 
transcendental  idealism  with  Locke's  theory  of  signs  aiid  doctrine 
of  primary  and  secondary  qualities.  Another  misunderstanding 
appeared  somewhat  later,  when  a  conspicuous  school  of  theology, 
under  the  leadership  of  Ritschl,  adopted  the  doctrine  of  the  "  thing- 
in-itself,"  in  a  form  analogous  to  the  position  of  English  agnosticism. 

The  philosophical  revival  of  Kantianism,  which  has  permeated 
the  second  half  of  the  century,  especially  since  Otto  Liebmann's 
impressive  book,  Kant  and  the  Epigones  (1865),  presents  a  great 
variety  of  views,  in  which  we  find  repeated  all  shades  of  tho  oppos- 
ing interpretations  which  Kant's  theory  met  at  its  first  appearance. 
The  empirical  and  the  rationalistic  conceptions  of  knowledge  and 
experience  have  come  again  into  conflict,  and  their  historical,  as  well 
as  their  systematic,  adjustment  has  been  the  ultimate  ground  of  the 
pragmatic  necessity  which  has  brought  about  gradually  a  return  to 
Fichte.  To-day  there  is  once  more  an  idealistic  metaphysics  in 
process  of  formation,  as  the  chief  representative  of  which  we  may 
regard  Rudolf  Eucken. 

1  It  is  not  without  interest  to  note  the  fact  that  this  motif  was  not  far  removed 
from  the  French  materialists.  Of  Cabanis  and  of  Broussais  we  have  expressions, 
made  at  the  close  of  their  life,  which  are  in  this  spirit,  and  even  of  a  mystical 
tendency. 

Helmholtz,  P/zysfoZo^c^  Qptfife,  25,  and,  especially,  T7te  Facts  of 
jDrl,  1879 j. 


§44.]  Controversy  over  the  Soul :  Lotze.  643 

But  in  all  these  forms,  this  Nee-Kantian  movement,  with  its 
earnest  work  upon  the  problem  of  knowledge,  has  had  the  result  of 
rendering  the  superficial  metaphysics  of  materialism  evidently  inad- 
equate and  impossible,  and  hence  has  led  to  its  rejection.  Even 
where  Kant's  doctrine  was  given  an  entirely  empirical,  and  indeed 
positivisbic  turn,  or  even  in  the  fantastic  reasonings  of  so-called 
"  solipsism,"  the  thought  of  regarding  consciousness  as  an  accessory 
function  of  matter  was  rejected  as  an  absurdity.  Eather  we  find 
the  opposite  one-sided  view  that  primary  reality  is  to  be  ascribed 
only  to  inner  perception,  in  contrast  with  outer  perception. 

Materialism  was  thus  overcome  in  science;  it  lives  in  popular  expo- 
sitions, such  as  Buchner's  "  Force  and  Matter  "  (Kraft  und  Staff),  or 
in  the  more  refined  form  of  Strauss's  "  Old  and  New  Faith  " *  (Alter 
und  neuer  Glaube);  it  lives  on  also  as  theory  of  life  in  just  those 
circles  which  love  to  enjoy  the  "  results  of  science  "  from  the  most 
agreeable  hand.  For  this  superficial  culture,  materialism  has  found 
its  characteristic  exposition  in  HaeckePs  works  and  his  so-called 
ec  monism." 

For  psychology  as  science,  however,  it  became  necessary  to  re- 
nounce the  conception  of  a  soul-substance  for  the  basis  as  well  as 
for  the  goal  of  its  investigation,  and  as  a  science  of  the  laws  of  the 
psychical  life  to  build  only  upon  inner  or  outer  experience.  So  we 
came  by  our  "  psychology  without  a  soul,"  which  is  free  from  all 
metaphysical  assumptions  —  or  means  to  be. 

7.  A  deeper  reconciliation  of  the  above  antitheses  was  given  by 
Lotze  from  the  fundamental  thoughts  of  German  idealism.  The 
vital  and  formative  activity  which  constitutes  the  spiritual  essence 
of  all  this  real  world  has  as  its  end,  the  good.  The  mechanism 
of  nature  is  the  regular  form  in  which  this  activity  works  in  the 
realisation  of  its  end.  Natural  science  has  doubtless  no  other  prin- 
ciple than  that  of  the  mechanical,  causal  connection,  and  this  principle 
is  held  to  apply  to  organisms  also ;  but  the  beginnings  of  metaphysics, 
like  those  of  logic,  lie  only  in  ethics.  In  carrying  out  this  teleological 
ifodlism,  motifs  from  all  the  great  systems  of  German  philosophy 
accord  to  a  new,  harmonious  work;  every  individual  real  entity  has 
its  essential  nature  only  in  the  living  relations  in  which  it  stands  to 
other  real  entities;  and  these  relations  which  constitute  the  con- 
nected whole  of  the  universe  are  possible  only  if  all  that  is,  is 
grounded  as  a  partial  reality  in  a  substantial  unity,  and  if  thus  all 

1  The  evidence  of  descent  from  the  Hegelian  dialectic  is  seen  also  in  this,  the 
most  ingenious  form  which  materialism  can  find,  —  L.  Knapp's  Eechtsphiloso- 
phie  (1857)  might  perhaps  be  classed  with  it, — for  all  higher  forms  of  mental 
life  are  treated  as  the  striving  of  nature  to  go  beyond  herself. 


644  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

that  takes  place  between  individuals  is  to  be  apprehended  as  pur- 
poseful realisation  of  a  common  life  goal.  By  the  powerful  uni- 
versality with  which  he  mastered  the  material  of  facts  and  the  forms 
of  scientific  elaboration  in  all  the  special  disciplines  Lotze  was 
specially  fitted  to  carry  out  fully  this  fundamental  metaphysical 
thought,  and  in  this  respect,  also,  his  personality  as  well  as  what  he 
taught,  joins  worthily  on  to  the  preceding  epoch.  His  own  attitude 
is  best  characterised  by  its  conception  of  knowledge  as  a  vital  and 
purposive  interaction  between  the  soul  and  the  other  "  substances." 
The  "  reaction "  of  the  soul  is  combined  with  the  excitation  which 
proceeds  from  "things/5  On  the  one  side,  the  soul  develops  its  own 
nature  in  the  forms  of  perception,  and  in  the  general  truths  which 
come  to  consciousness  with  immediate  clearness  and  evidence  on  the 
occasion  of  the  stimulus  from  things ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  partici- 
pation of  the  snbject  makes  the  world  of  ideas  a  phenomenal  appear- 
ance. But  this  appearance  or  phenomenal  manifestation,  as  the 
purposive  inner  life,  is  by  no  means  mere  illusion.  It  is  rather  a 
realm  of  worths  or  values,  in  which  the  good  is  realising  itself.  The 
•coming  to  actual  reality  of  this  world  of  consciousness  is  the  most 
important  result  of  the  interaction  of  substances.  It  is  the  ulti- 
mate and  truest  meaning  of  the  world-process.  From  these  funda- 
mental thoughts,  Lotze,  in  his  Logic,  has  conceived  the  series  of 
forms  of  thought  as  a  systematic  whole,  which  develops  out  of  the 
problems  or  tasks  of  thinking.  In  his  Metaphysics,  he  has  developed 
and  defined  his  view  of  the  world  with  fineness  and  acuteness  in  his 
treatment  of  conceptions,  and  with  most  careful  consideration  in  all 
directions.  The  view  is  that  of  teleological  idealism.  The  third 
part  of  the  system,  the  ethics,  has  unfortunately  not  been  completed 
in  this  more  rigorous  form.  As  a  substitute,  we  have  the  convic- 
tions of  the  philosopher  and  his  mature  comprehension  of  life  and 
history  presented  in  the  fine  and  thoughtful  expositions  of  the 
Microcosmus. 

8.  Another  way  of  escape  from  the  difficulties  of  the  natural- 
science  treatment  of  the  psychical  life  was  chosen  by  Fechner.  He 
would  look  upon  body  and  soul  as  the  modes  of  phenomenal  mani- 
festation—  completely  separated  and  different  in  kind,  but  in  constant 
correspondence  with  each  other  —  of  one  and  the  same  unknown 
reality ;  and  follows  out  this  thought  in  the  direction,  that  every 
physical  connection  has  a  mental  series  or  system  of  connections 
corresponding  to  it,  although  the  latter  are  known  through  percep- 
tion only  in  the  case  of  our  own  selves.  As  the  sensations  which, 
correspond  to  the  excitation  of  particular  parts  of  the  nervous  sys- 
tem, present  themselves  as  surface  waves  in  the  total  wave  of  our 


§  44.]  Controversy  over  the  Soul :  Fechner.  645 

individual  consciousness,  so  we  may  conceive  that  the  consciousness 
of  a  single  person  is  in  turn  but  the  surface  wave  of  a  more  general 
consciousness,  —  say  that  of  the  planetary  mind :  and  if  we  continue 
tjiis  line,  we  come  ultimately  to  the  assumption  of  a  universal  total- 
consciousness  in  God,  to  which  the  universal  causal  connection  of  the 
atoms  corresponds.  Moreover,  according  to  Fechner,  the  connection 
of  inner  and  outer  experience  in  our  consciousness  makes  it  possible 
to  investigate  the  laws  of  this  correspondence.  The  science  of  this 
is  psycho-physics.  It  is  the  first  problem  of  this  science  to  find  out 
methods  for  measuring  psychical  quantities,  in  order  to  obtain  laws 
that  may  be  formulated  mathematically.  Fechner  brings  forward 
principally  the  method  of  just  perceptible  differences,  which  defines 
as  the  unit  of  mass  the  smallest  difference  that  is  still  perceptible 
between  intensities  of  sensation,  and  assumes  this  to  be  equal 
everywhere  and  in  all  cases. 

On  the  basis  of  this  assumption,  which  to  be  sure  is  quite  arbi- 
trary, it  seemed  possible  to  give  a  mathematical  formulation  to  the 
so-called  "  Weber-Fechner  law."  This  was  stated  as  follows :  The 
intensities  of  different  sensations  are  to  each  other  as  the  logarithms 
of  the  intensities  of  their  stimuli.  The  hope  was  thus  awakened 
by  Fechner  that  through  the  indirect  measurement  of  psychical 
magnitudes  a  mathematical  statement  could  be  given  by  scientific 
methods  for  the  psycho-physical,  perhaps  even  for  the  psychological 
laws,  and  in  spite  of  the  numerous  and  serious  objections  which  it 
encountered,  this  hope  has  had  great  success  in  promoting  experi- 
mental study  during  the  past  decades  in  many  laboratories  estab- 
lished for  this  purpose.  Yet  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  outcome  for 
a  new  and  deeper  comprehension  of  the  mental  life  has  kept  pace 
with  the  activity  of  experimentation.1 

The  revival  of  the  Spinozistic  parallelism  has  likewise  met  greater 
and  greater  difficulties.  With  Fechner  it  was  dogmatically  intended 
since  he  claimed  complete  metaphysical  reality  for  the  contents  of 
sense-perception.  He  called  this  view  the  "day  view,"  and  set  it 
over  against  the  "  night  view  "  of  the  phenomenalism  which  is  found 
in  natural  science  and  philosophy.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  con- 
ceived the  parallelism  in  a  more  critical  fashion,  assuming  that 
mind  and  body,  with  all  their  states  and  activities,  are  only  the 
different  manifestations  of  one  and  the  same  real  unity.  But  as 
a  result  of  the  vigorous  discussions  which  this  question  has  awak- 

1  With  reference  to  controversies  upon  these  points,  it  is  simplest  to  refer  to 
Fechner  himself,  Revision  der  Hauptpunkte  der  Psychophysik  (Leips.  1882). 
In  addition  we  may  refer  especially  to  H.  Miinsterberg,  Ueber  Aufgdben  und 
Methoden  der  Psychologie  (Leips.  1891)  [Psychologie,  1900]. 


646  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

ened,1  'it  has  become  increasingly  evident  that  such  a  parallelism  is 
untenable  in  any  form. 

This  is  seen  in  the  case  of  the  investigator  who  has  been  most 
active  in  the  extension  of  psycho-physical  study,  Wilhelm  "VVundt. 
He  has  gone  on  in  the  development  of  his  thought  from  a  «  Physio- 
logical Psychology '*  to  a  -System  of  Philosophy."  This  latter 
work  regards  the  world  as  an  interconnected  whole  of  active  indi- 
vidualities which  are  to  be  conceived  in  terms  of  will.  Wundt  employs 
in  his  metaphysics  the  conception  of  activity  without  a  substrate, 
which  we  have"  met  in  Fichte  and  Fortlage,  and  limits  the  applica- 
tion of  the  conception  of  substance  to  the  theories  of  natural  science. 
The  interaction  between  the  activities  of  these  wills  produces  in 
organic  beings  higher  unities  of  will,  and  at  the  same  time,  various 
stages  of  central  consciousness ;  but  the  idea  of  an  absolute  world- 
will  and  world-consciousness,  which  arises  from  these  premises  in 
accordance  with  a  regulative  principle  of  our  thought,  lies  beyond 
the  bounds  of  the  capacity  of  human  knowledge. 

9.  Voluntarism  has  thus  grown  stronger  and  stronger,  especially 
in  its  more  general  interpretation,  and  has  combated  the  intel- 
lectualism  which  was  regarded  as  a  typical  feature  in  the  most 
brilliant  period  of  German  neo-humanism.  As  a  result  of  this  con- 
flict we  find  emerging  the  same  problem  as  to  the  relative  primacy 
of  the  will  or  the  intellect  which  occupied  so  vigorously  the  dia- 
lectical acuteness  of  the  scholastics  (cf.  above,  §  20).  That  this 
problem  actually  arose  from  the  antagonistic  development  within 
the  system  of  idealism  was  seen  most  clearly  by  Ednard  von  Hart- 
vnann.  His  "Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious"  proceeds  from  a 
synthesis  of  Hegel,  on  the  one  hand,  with  Schopenhauer  and  the 
later  thought  of  Schelling,  on  the  other.  Its  purpose  was  to  bring 
together  once  more  the  rational  and  irrational  lines  of  idealism. 
Hartmann  attempts  by  this  means  to  ascribe  to  the  one  World-Spirit 
both  irill  and  idea  (the  logical  element),  as  coordinated  and  inter- 
related attributes.  In  calling  the  absolute  spirit  the  "Unconscious," 
Hartmann  attributes  to  the  concept  of  consciousness  an  ambiguity 
like  that  which  Schopenhauer  ascribed  to  the  will ;  for  the  activities 
of  the  "  Unconscious "  are  functions  of  will  and  ideation  which  are 
indeed  not  given  in  any  empirical  consciousness,  but  yet  presuppose 
some  other  consciousness  if  we  are  to  think  of  them  at  all.  This 


1 A  critical  survey  of  the  literature  on  the  question  is  given  by  E.  Busse  in 
the  f  kilos.  Abhandlungen  zur  Sigwart's  70.  Gebnrtstag  (Tubingen,  1000)  Cf. 
also  especially  the  investigation  by  H.  Rickert  in  the  same  volume.  [Of.  also  the 
arts,  by  Erhardt,  Busse,  Paulsen,  KSnig,  and  Wentscher,  in  ZaitMhr.  f.  Philos., 
Vois.  114-117,  and  A.  K.  Rogers,  in  Univ.  of  Chicago  Cont.  to  P7ii7.,  1800.] 


§  44.]  Controversy  over  the  Soul :  Hartmann.  647 

higher  consciousness,  which  is  called  Unconscious,  and  is  to  form  the 
common  ground  of  life  in  all  conscious  individuals,  Hartmann  seeks 
to  exhibit  as  the  active  essence  in  all  processes  of  the  natural  and 
psychical  life;  it  takes  the  place  of  Schopenhauer's  and  Schelling's 
Will  in  Nature,  and  likewise  of  the  vital  force  of  former  physi- 
ology and  the  "  Entelechies  "  of  the  System  of  Development.  The 
Unconscious  unfolds  itself  above  all  in  the  teleological  inter-rela- 
tions of  organic  life.  In  this  respect  Hartmann  has  controverted 
materialism  'very  efficiently,  since  his  theory  everywhere  points  to 
the  unitary  mental  or  spiritual  ground  of  things.  To  this  end  he 
employed  a  wealth  of  knowledge  in  the  fields  of  natural  science, 
and  that  too  in  the  most  fortunate  manner,  although  it  was  an  illu- 
sion to  suppose  that  he  was  winning  his  "  speculative  results  by  the 
inductive  methods  of  natural  science."  At  all  events,  the  interest 
which  he  borrowed  from  the  natural  sciences  in  combination  with 
an  attractive  and  sometimes  brilliant  exposition,  contributed  much 
to  the  extraordinary,  though  transient,  success  of  the  "  Philosophy 
of  the  Unconscious  " ;  its  greatest  attractiveness  lay  in  the  treatment 
of  pessimism  (cf.  below,  §  46),  and  along  this  line  it  was  followed 
by  a  train  of  popular  philosophical  literature  which  was  for  the 
most  part  of  very  inferior  quality. 

Hartmann  himself  made  extensive  historical  studies,  and  with 
their  aid  extended  his  fundamental  metaphysical  thoughts  to  the 
fields  of  ethics,  aesthetics,  and  philosophy  of  religion ;  then  he  pro- 
ceeded to  work  out  a  rigorous  dialectic  system  in  his  Theory  of  the 
Categories.  This  is  the  most  systematic  work  of  a  constructive  char- 
acter in  the  field  of  abstract  concepts  which  has  appeared  during 
the  last  decades  in  Germany,  —  a  work  which  has  been  supplemented 
by  a  historical  and  critical  basis  in  his  History  of  Metaphysics.1 

The  Theory  of  the  Categories,  which  is  no  doubt  Hartmann's  main 
work  from  a  scientific  standpoint,  seeks  to  gain  a  common  formal 
basis  for  the  disciplines  of  philosophy  by  tracing  all  the  relating 
principles  employed  by  the  intellect,  whether  in  perception  or  in 
reflection,  through  the  subjective  ideal  field  of  the  theory  of  knowl- 
edge, the  objective  real  field  of  the  philosophy  of  nature,  and  the 
metaphysical  realm.  In  the  fineness  of  its  dialectical  references, 
and  in  the  wealth  of  interesting  outlooks  upon  the  fields  of  reality, 
it  presents  a  unique  counterpart  to  Hegel's  Logic.  As  Hegel  devel- 
oped dialectically  the  whole  process  in  which  the  Idea  changes  over 
into  Nature,  in  which  the  concept  leaves  itself  and  becomes  "other," 
so  Hartmann  shows,  in  the  case  of  every  category,  the  transforma- 

i  Geschichte  der  Metaphysik  (2  parts,  Leips.  1899-1900). 


648  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VIL 

tion  which  the  "logical"  experiences  by  its  relation  to  the  "non- 
logical'''  element  of  reality,  which  arises  from  the  Will.  Here,  too, 
the  world  appears  as  divided  within  itself,  as  the  conflict  of  Keason 
against  will. 

§  45.  Nature  and  History. 

The  dualism  of  the  Kantian  Weltanschauung  is  reflected  in  the 
science  of  the  nineteenth  century  by  the  peculiar  tension  in  the  rela- 
tion between  science  of  Nature  and  science  of  mind.  At  no  earlier 
time  has  this  antithesis  been  so  current  as  respects  both  material 
and  methods,  as  in  ours;  and  from  this  circumstance  a  number  of 
promising  new  shif tings  have  arisen.  If  from  the  domain  of  mental 
science  we  take,  as  has  been  shown,  the  contested  province  of  psychol- 
ogy, we  then  have  remaining  over  against  "Nature,"  what  corre- 
sponds still  more  to  Kantian  thought — the  social  life  and  its  historical 
development  in  its  full  extent  in  all  directions.  The  thinking  of 
natural  science,  pressing  forward  in  its  vigorous  career  of  annex- 
ation, from  the  nature  of  the  case  easily  found  points  in  the  social 
phenomena  as  it  had  previously  found  in  the  psychological,  where  it 
might  set  the  levers  of  its  mode  of  consideration,  so  that  a  struggle 
became  necessary  upon  this  field,  similar  to  that  which  had  taken 
place  on  account  of  the  soul ;  and  thus  the  earlier  antithesis  culmi- 
nated in  that  between  natural  science  and  historical  science. 

1.  The  first  form  in  which  the  struggle  between  the  natural  science 
and  the  historical  Weltanschauung  was  fought  out,  was  the  successful 
opposing  of  the  Revolution  Philosophy  by  the  French  Traditionalism. 
After  St.  Martin  and  de  Maistre  had  set  forth  the  Revolution  as  the 
judgment  of  God  upon  unbelieving  mankind,  de  Bonald  proceeded  to 
oppose  to  the  social  theories  of  the  eighteenth  century,  which  he  too 
held  responsible  for  the  horrors  of  the  Reign  of  Terror,  the  theory  of 
the  clerical-legitimist  Restoration.  Unschooled  in  abstract  thought, 
a  dilettante,  especially  in  his  predilection  for  etymology,  he  was  in- 
fluential by  the  warmth  of  his  presentation  and  by  the  weight  of  the 
principle  which  he  defended.  It  was  the  mistake  of  the  Enlighten- 
ment, he  taught,  to  suppose  that  the  reason  could  from  its  own  re- 
sources find  out  truth  and  organise  society,  and  to  leave  to  the  liking 
of  individuals  the  shaping  of  their  social  life.  But  in  truth  all  intellec- 
tual and  spiritual  life  of  man  is  a  product  of  historical  tradition.  For 
it  is  rooted  in  language.  Language,  however  (and  just  here  Condil- 
lacism  is  most  vigorously  opposed),  was  given  man  by  God  as  the  first 
revelation;  the  divine  "Word"  is  the  source  of  all  truth.  Human 
knowledge  is  always  only  a  participating  in  this  truth ;  it  grows  out 
of  conscience,  in  which  we  make  that  which  holds  universally,  our 


§  45.]  Nature  and  History :  Traditionalism.  649 

own.  But  the  bearer  of  the  tradition  of  the  divine  word  is  the 
Church :  her  teaching  is  the  God-given,  universal  reason,  propagated 
on  through  the  centuries  as  the  great  tree  on  which  all  the  genuine 
fruits  of  human  knowledge  ripen.  And  therefore  this  revelation  is 
the  only  possible  foundation  of  society.  The  arrogance  of  the  indi- 
viduals who  have  rebelled  against  this  has  found  its  expiation  in  the 
dissolution  of  society,  and  it  is  now  in  point  to  build  society  once 
more  upon  the  eternal  basis :  this  was  also  the  thought  which  held 
loosely  together  the  obscure  and  strange  fancies  of  Ballanche. 

2.  The  philosophical  factor  in  this  church-political  theory  was, 
that  the  generic  reason  realising  itself  in  the  historical  development 
of  society  was  recognised  as  the  ground  of  the  intellectual  and  spir- 
itual life  of  individuals:   if  the  theological  views  were  distracted 
from  this  Traditionalism,  the  reader  found  himself  hard  by  Hegel's 
conception  of  the  Objective  Spirit.     Hence  it  was  extremely  humor- 
ous when  Victor  Cousin,  while  adopting  German  philosophy  on  just 
this  side,  to  a  certain  extent  took  from  the  Ultra-montanes  the  cream 
of  their  milk.    Eclecticism  also  taught  a  universal  reason,  and  was 
not  disinclined  to  see  in  it  something  similar  to  the  Scottish  "  com- 
mon sense,"  to  which,  however,  it  still  did  not  deny  a  metaphysical 
basis,  fashioned  according  to  Schelling  and  Hegel.    When,  there- 
fore, Lamennais,  who  at  the  beginning  had  been  a  traditionalist  and 
had  then  passed  through  the  school  of  the  German  philosophy,  treated 
the  doctrine  of  Ideas  in  his  Esquisse  d'une  Philosophic,  he  could  fully 
retain  the  above  theory  of  the  conscience,  so  far  as  its  real  content 
was  concerned. 

Quite  another  form  was  assumed  by  the  doctrine  of  Objective 
Spirit,  where  it  was  apprehended  purely  psychologically  and  empiri- 
cally. In  the  mental  life  of  the  individual,  numerous  processes  go 
on,  which  rest  solely  upon  the  fact  that  the  individual  never  exists 
at  all  except  as  member  of  a  psychical  interconnected  whole.  This 
interacting  and  overreaching  life,  into  which  each  one  grows,  and 
by  virtue  of  which  he  is  what  he  is,  evinces  itself  not  by  conformity 
to  natural  laws,  as  do  the  general  forms  of  the  psychical  processes : 
it  is  rather  of  a  historical  character,  and  the  general  mind  which  lies 
at  the  basis  of  individual  life  expresses  itself  objectively  in  language, 
in  customs  and  morals,  and  in  public  institutions.  Individual  psy- 
chology must  be  broadened  to  a  social  psychology  by  a  study  of  these. 
This  principle  has  been  propounded  by  Lazarus  and  Steinthal,  and 
the  eminently  historical  character  which  this  must  have  when  car- 
ried out  they  have  indicated  by  the  otherwise  less  fortunate  name 
of  Volkerpsychologie  [Folk  or  Comparative  Psychology]. 

3.  One  must  take  into  account  the  fundamental  social  thought  of 


650  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

Traditionalism  to  understand  the  religious  colouring  which  is  char- 
acteristic of  French  social  ISM  since  tit.  Simon,  in  contrast  with  the 
social-political  theories  of  the  last  century.  St.  Simon's  theory, 
however,  stands  not  only  under  the  pressure  of  the  religious  zeal 
which  was  growing  to  become  a  new  social  and  political  power,  but 
also  in  lively  relations  to  German  philosophy,  and  indeed  to  its 
dialectic.  All  this  passed  over  to  his  disciple,  Auguste  Comte, 
whose  thought  passed  through  an  extremely  peculiar  course  of 
development. 

He  aims  at  nothing  more  or  less  than  a  complete  reform  of  human 
society.  He,  too,  regards  it  as  an  evident  conclusion  that  with  the 
Revolution,  the  Enlightenment,  which  was  its  cause,  has  become 
bankrupt.  Like  the  Traditionalists,  he  fixes  the  responsibility  for 
this  upon  the  independence  of  individuals,  upon  free  investigation 
and  autonomy  in  the  conduct  of  life.  From  these  follow  anarchy 
of  opinions  and  anarchy  of  public  life.  The  salvation  of  society  is 
to  be  sought  only  in  the  dominance  of  scientific  knowledge.  T^e 
must  find  once  more,  and  along  securer  lines,  that  subordination  of 
all  the  activities  of  life  beneath  a  universally  valid  principle  which 
was  approximately  attained  in  the  grand  but  premature  catholic  sys- 
tem of  the  Middle  Ages.  In  place  of  theology  we  must  set  positive 
science,  which  tolerates  freedom  of  faith  as  little  as  theology  toler- 
ated it  in  the  Middle  Ages.  This  Bom  antic  element  determined 
Comte;s  theory  throughout.  It  is  shown  not  only  in  his  philosophy 
of  history  by  his  enthusiastic  portrayal  of  the  mediaeval  system  of 
society,  not  only  in  his  projected  "Eeligion  of  Humanity"  and  its 
cultus,  but  above  all  in  his  demand  for  a  concurrent  spiritual  and 
secular  authority  for  the  new  social  order.  The  new  form  of  the 
social  order  was  to  proceed  from  the  creative  activity  of  the  powvoir 
spirituel,  and  Comte  made  fantastic  attempts  toward  this  -by  estab- 
lishing his  "Western  Committee."  As  he  thought  of  himself  as  the 
chairman  of  this  committee,  so  he  trusted  to  himself  the  establish- 
ment of  the  new  teaching.  But  the  positive  philosophy  on  which 
the  new  social  order  was  to  arise  was  nothing  other  than  the  ordered 
system  of  the  positive  sciences. 

Comte's  projected  positive  system  of  the  sciences  first  of  all  pushes 
Hume's  and  Condillac's  conception  to  the  farthest  point.  Not  only 
is  human  knowledge  assigned  for  its  province  to  the  reciprocal  rela- 
tions of  phenomena,  but  there  is  nothing  absolute  whatever,  that 
might  lie  unknown,  as  it  were,  at  the  basis  of  phenomena.  The  only 
absolute  principle  is,  that  all  is  relative.  To  talk  of  first  causes  or 
ultimate  ends  of  things  has  no  rational  sense.  But  this  relativism 
(or,  as  it  has  later  been  termed,  "  correlativism  ")  is  forfeited  at  once 


§  45.]  Nature  and  History :  Comte*  651 

to  the  universalistic  claim  of  the  thinking  of  mathematical  natural 
science,  when  science  is  assigned  the  task  of  explaining  all  these 
relations  from  the  point  of  view  that  in  addition  to  individual  facts 
we  must  discover  and  establish  also  the  order  of  these  facts  as  they 
repeat  themselves  in  time  and  space.  This  order  we  may  call  "gen- 
eral fact/'  but  nothing  more.  Thus  positivism  seeks  by  "  laws  "  — 
this  is  Comte's  usual  name  for  general  facts  —  not  to  explain  the 
particular  facts,  but  only  to  establish  their  recurrence.  From  this 
is  supposed  to  come  foresight  for  the  future,  as  the  practical  outcome 
of  science,  —  savoir  pour  prtvoir, —  although  such  foresight  is  quite 
unintelligible  and  unjustifiable  under  his  presuppositions.  This  con- 
ception of  Comte's  has  found  assent  not  only  with  philosophers  like 
0.  Goring,  who  appropriated  it  especially  for  his  theory  of  causality, 
but  also  to  some  degree  among  natural  scientists,  particularly  with 
the  representatives  of  mechanics,  such  as  KircWwff  and  Mach.  Their 
tendency  is  to  exclude  the  conception  of  efficient  agency  from  the 
scientific  theory  of  nature,  and  to  reach  the  elimination  of  "  force  " 
on  the  basis  of  a  mere  "  description  "  or  discovery  of  the  most  ade- 
quate "  image."  This  has  been  attempted  by  H.  Hertz  in  his  Prin~ 
ciples  of  MecJianics.  Similar  thoughts  have  been  spun  out  into  the 
unspeakably  tedious  terminologies  of  his  "Empirio-Criticism,"  by 
Richard  Avenarius,  who  has  employed  the  generalisations  of  an  ab- 
stract dialectic,  and  seeks  to  demonstrate  all  philosophical  conceptions 
of  the  world  to  be  needless  variations  of  one  original  world-concep- 
tion of  pure  experience,  which  is  to  be  once  more  restored. 

4.  Phenomena,  according  to  Conrte,  both  individual  and  general, 
are  in  part  simple,  in  part  more  or  less  complicated.  Knowledge  of 
the  simpler  must  precede  that  of  the  more  complex.  For  this  reason 
he  arranges  the  sciences  in  a  hierarchy  which  proceeds  step  by  step 
from  the  simple  to  the  complex.  Mathematics  is  followed  by 
astronomy,  then  by  physics,  chemistry,  biology  which  includes 
psychology,  and  finally  by  "  sociology."  This  relation,  nevertheless, 
is  not  to  be  conceived  as  if  every  following  discipline  was  supposed 
to  be  deduced  from  the  preceding  discipline  or  disciplines;  it 
merely  presupposes  these  in  the  sense  that  their  more  complicated 
facts  include  within  themselves  the  more  elementary  facts;  the 
completely  new  facts  add  their  own  peculiar  combination  and  nature 
to  those  more  elementary  facts.  So,  for  example,  biology  presupposes 
physical  and  chemical  processes,  but  the  fact  of  life  is  something 
completely  new,  and  incapable  of  deduction  from  these  processes; 
it  is  a  fact  which  must  be  verified  by  biological  observation.  Such, 
too,  is  the  relation  of  sociology  to  the  five  preceding  disciplines. 
Following  this  principle  Comte's  social  statics  declines  with  charac- 


652  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

teristic  emphasis  to  derive  sociality  from  the  individual,  as  was  done 
in  the  Enlightenment  philosophy.  The  social  nature  is  an  original 
fact,  and  the  first  social  phenomenon  is  the  family.  Still  more  inde- 
pendent is  his  social  dynamics,  which  without  psychological  explana- 
tion sets  itself  the  task  of  discovering  the  natural  law  of  tJie  history 
of  society.  Comte  finds  this  in  the  principle  of  the  three  stages,  which 
society  necessarily  passes  through  (an  aper$ut  which  had  been  antici- 
pated\y  d'Alembert  and  Turgot  as  well  as  by  Hegel  and  Cousin). 
Intellectually,  man  passes  out  of  the  theological  phase,  through  the 
metaphysical,  over  into  the  positive.  In  the  first  he  explains  phe- 
nomena by  supernatural  powers  and  beings  thought  in  anthropo- 
morphic guise,  in  the  second  by  general  concepts  [e.g.  force,  etc.] 
which  he  constructs  as  the  essence  working  behind  phenomena ;  in 
the  positive  stage  he  comprehends  the  particular  only  by  the  actually 
demonstrable  conditions,  from  which  it  follows  according  to  a  law 
verifiable  experimentally.  To  this  universal  law  of  the  mental  life 
are  subject  all  special  processes  into  which  the  same  divides,  and 
likewise  the  movement  of  human  history  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  the 
intellectual  process  is  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  course  of 
development  in  the  external  organisation  of  society,  which  passes 
out  of  the  priestly,  warlike  condition,  through  the  rule  of  the  jurists 
(Ityistes),  to  the  "  industrial "  stage. 

The  very  circumstantial  philosophy  of  history  which  Comte  here 
carries  out,  interesting  in  particular  points,  but  on  tke  whole  com- 
pletely arbitrary  and  often  distorted  by  ignorance  and  prejudice,  is 
to  be  estimated  solely  as  a  construction  undertaken  for  his  reforma- 
tory purpose.  The  victory  of  the  positive  view  of  the  world,  and  at 
the  same  time  of  the  industrial  order  of  life,  is  the  goal  of  the  his- 
torical development  of  European  peoples.  At  this  goal  "the  great 
Thought,  viz. :  positive  philosophy,  will  be  wedded  with  the  great 
Power,  the  proletariate." * 

But  as  if  the  law  of  the  circuit  of  the  three  phases  was  to  be  first 
verified  in  the  case  of  its  author,  Comte  in  the  last  ("  subjective  ") 
period  of  his  thinking  fell  back  into  the  theological  stage,  making 
mankind  as  Grand-etre  the  object  of  a  religious  veneration  or  wor- 
ship, as  whose  high  priest  he  imitated  the  whole  apparatus  of  worship 
of  the  saints,  with  a  positivist  remodelling.  Among  these  phantastic 
products  of  the  imagination  the  history  of  philosophy  can  at  most 
consider  only  the  motive  which  guided  Comte  in  his  later  course* 
He  best  set  this  forth  in  the  General  View  of  Positivism,  which  is 

1  Cf.  on  Comte,  among  recent  works,  Tschitscherin,  Philosovhtsche  For- 
schungen,  tr.  from  the  Russian  (Heidelberg,  1899). 


§  45.]  Nature  and  History :  Oomte.  653 

reprinted  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Positive  Polity.  This  shows  him 
turning  aside  from  the  outspoken  individualism  which  had  shown 
itself  in  his  earlier  conviction  that  positive  science  as  such  would  be 
sufficient  to  bring  about  the  reform  of  society.  He  has  now  seen 
that  the  positive  philosophy  may  indeed  teach  how  the  new  order  of 
things  is  to  appear,  but  that  the  work  of  bringing  about  this  new 
order  can  be  achieved  only  by  the  "  affective  principle" — ike  feeling. 
Whereas  he  had  formerly  taught  that  the  specifically  human,  as 
it  develops  in  history,  is  to  be  sought  in  the  predominance  of  the  in- 
telligence over  the  feelings,  it  is  from  the  predominance  of  the 
heart  over  the  intellect  that  he  now  expects  the  fulfilment  of  his 
hopes  which  he  formulates  as  V amour  pour  principe,  Vordre  pour  base, 
le  progr&s  pour  but.1  And  since  Gall  has  shown  that  the  preeminence 
of  heart  over  intellect  is  a  fundamental  characteristic  of  the  brain  of 
woman,  Comte  bases  on  this  his  worship  of  woman,  which  he  would 
make  an  essential  constituent  in  the  religion  of  humanity.  He  who 
had  begun  with  the  proud  announcement  of  a  positivist  papacy  ended 
with  an  appeal  to  the  proletariate  and  the  emancipation  of  woman. 

5.  It  is  in  accord  with  the  practical,  i.e.  political,  ends  which 
Comte  followed,  that  in  history  also  general  facts  or  laws  appeared 
to  him  more  important  than  particular  facts.  He  believed  that  in 
the  realm  of  history  a  foresight  (prevoyance)  should  guide  and 
direct  action.  But  apart  from  this  theory  and  in  spite  of  the  one- 
sidedness  of  his  education  along  the  lines  of  mathematics  and  natu- 
ral science,  Comte  was  yet  sufficiently  broad-minded  to  understand 
and  to  preserve  the  distinctive  character  of  the  different  disciplines, 
and  as  he  had  already  attempted  to  secure  for  biology  its  own  dis- 
tinctive methods,  he  expressly  claimed  for  his  sociology  the  "his- 
torical method."  In  the  biological  field  the  series  of  successive 
phenomena  in  a  race  of  animals  is  only  an  external  evolution  which 
does  not  alter  or  concern  the  permanent  character  of  the  race  (hence, 
Comte  was  throughout  an  opponent  of  Lamarck's  theory).  In 
sociology  we  have  to  do  with  an  actual  transformation  of  the  human 
race.  This  has  been  brought  about  through  the  changing  vicissi- 
tudes of  generations  and  the  persisting  cumulation  of  definite  life 
processes  which  has  been  made  possible  thereby.  The  historical 
method  is  to  return  to  general  facts,  and  thus  observation  is  to  be 
guided  by  theory,  so  that  historical  investigation  will  yield  only  a 
construction  based  upon  a  philosophy  of  history.  It  was  thus  per- 
haps not  quite  in  Comte' s  meaning,  but  nevertheless  it  was  a  con- 
sequence of  his  teaching,  when  the  effort  was  made  here  and  there 

1  "  Love  for  the  principle,  order  for  the  basis,  progress  for  the  end." 


654:  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

to  raise  history  to  the  plane  of  a  natural  science.    John  Stuart  Mill 
called  attention  to  this  in  his  methodology.     Schopenhauer  had 
denied  to  history  the  character  of  a  science  on  the  ground  that  it 
teaches  only  the  particular  and  nothing  of  the  universal.    This 
defect  seemed  now  to  be  remedied  in  that  the  effort  was  made  to 
press  forward  beyond  the  description  of  particular  events   to  the 
general  facts.    The  most  impressive  attempt  of  this  sort  was  made 
by  Comte's  English  disciple,  Thomas  Buckle.    In  his  History  of 
Civilisation  in  England  (1857),  Buckle  defined  the  task  of  historical 
science  as  that  of  seeking  the 'natural  laws  of  the  life  of  a  people. 
Por  this  purpose  Buckle  found  in  those  slow  changes  of  the  social 
conditions  which  are  recorded  in  the  statistical  tables,  much  more 
usable  and  exact  material  than  in  the  recital  of  particular  events  to 
which  the  old  chronicle  forms  of  historical  writing  had  been  limited. 
Here  the  proper  sense  of  the  antithesis  is  disclosed:  on  the  one 
hand  the  life  of  the  masses  with  the  changes  taking  place  conform- 
ably to  general  law— on  the  other  hand  the  independent  value  of 
that  which  presents  itself  but  once,  and  is  determined  within  itself. 
In  this  respect  the  essence  of  the  historical  view  of  the  world  has 
been  by  no  one  so  deeply  apprehended,  and  so  forcibly  and  warmly 
presented,  as  by  Carlyle,  who  worked  himself  free  from  the  phi- 
losophy of  enlightenment  by  the  assistance  of  the  German  idealism 
and  laboured  unweariedly  for  the  recognition  of  the  archetypal  and 
creative  personalities  of  history,  —  for  the  comprehension  and  ven- 
eration of  "  heroes. " 

In  these  two  extremes  are  seen  anew  the  great  antitheses  in  the 
conception  of  the  world  which  were  already  prevalent  iii  the  Renais- 
sance, but  which  had  not  at  that  time  attained  so  clear  and  methodi- 
cal an  expression.    We  distinguished  in  that  period  a  historical 
century,  and  a  century  of  natural  science,  in  the  sense  that  the  new 
investigation  of  nature  emerged  from  the  conflict  of  'traditions  as 
the  most  valuable  outcome  (cf.  Part  IV.).    Prom  the  victory  of  the 
methods  and  conceptions  of  natural  science  resulted  the  great  meta- 
physical systems,  and  as  their  sequence  the  tinhistovical  modo  of 
thought  characteristic  of  the  Enlightenment,    In  opposition  to  this 
the  German  philosophy  set  its  historical  view  of  the  world.     It  is  to 
be  noted  that  the  almost  complete  counterpart  of  this  antithesis  is 
found  in  the  psychological  realm  in  the  antithesis  between  Intclloc- 
tualism  and  Voluntarism.    On  this  account  the  attempt  which  has 
been  made  during  the  last  decade  to  introduce  the  so-called  scien- 
tific1 method  into  history,  is  not  in  accord  with  the  development  of 

^[Naturwissenschaftliche.    In  English  the  term  "science"  is  so  commonlv 
used  as  the  equivalent  of  "natural  science"  that  the  confusion  object™  in 


§  45.]  Nature  and  History :  Qarlyh,  Marx.  655 

psychology  during  our  century.  It  is  indeed  not  the  great  histo- 
rians who  have  fallen  victims  to  this  mistake,  but  here  and  there 
some  who  have  either  been  too  weak  to  stand  against  the  watch- 
words of  the  day,  or  have  made  use  of  them  for  popular  effect.  In 
this  so-called  scientific1  treatment  of  historical  structures  or  pro- 
cesses the  misuse  of  comparisons  and  analogies  is  especially  unde- 
sirable —  as  if  it  were  a  genuine  insight  to  call  society  an  organism ; 3 
or  as  if  the  effect  of  one  people  upon  another  could  be  designated  as 
endosmose  and  exosmose ! 

The  introduction  of  natural-science  modes  of  thought  into  history 
has  not  been  limited  to  this  postulate  of  method  which  seeks  to  as- 
certain the  laws  of  the  historical  process ;  it  has  also  had  an  influ- 
ence upon  the  contents.  At  the  time  when  Feuerbach's  Materialism, 
which  was  a  degenerate  product  of  the  Hegelian  dialectic  (of.  above, 
§  44,  6),  was  yet  in  its  vigour,  Marx  and  Engels  created  socialism's 
materialistic  philosophy  of  history,  in  which  motives  from  Hegel  and 
from  Conite  cross  in  peculiar  manner.  The  meaning  of  history  they 
too  find  in  the  "  processes  of  social  life."  This  collective  life,  how- 
ever, is  essentially  of  an  economic  nature.  The  determining  forces 
in  all  social  conditions  are  the  economic  relations ;  they  form  the 
ultimate  motives  for  all  activities.  Their  change  and  their  develop- 
ment are  the  only  conditioning  forces  for  public  life  and  politics,  and 
likewise  for  science  and  religion.  All  the  different  activities  of 
civilisation  are  thus  only  offshoots  of  the  economic  life,  and  all 
history  should  be  economic  history. 

6.  If  history  has  had  to  defend  its  autonomy  against  the  destruction 
of  the  boundary  lines  which  delimit  it  from  the  sciences,  the  natural 
science  of  the  nineteenth  century  has  conversely  contained  an  emi- 
nently historical  factor  which  has  attained  a  commanding  influence,  viz. 
the  evolutionary  motive.  In  fact  we  find  the  natural  science  of  to-day 
in  its  general  theories,  as  well  as  in  its  particular  investigations,  de- 
termined by  two  great  principles  which  apparently  stand  in  opposition 
to  each  other,  but  which  in  truth  reciprocally  supplement  each  other, 
viz.  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  and  that  of  evolution. 

The  former  has  been 'found  by  Robert  Mayer,  Joule,  and  Helin- 
holtz  to  be  the  only  form  in  which  the  axiom  of  causality  can  be  used 
by  the  physical  theory  of  to-day.  The  epistemological  postulate  that 
there  is  nothing  new  in  nature,  but  that  every  following  phenomenon 


the  text  is  all  the  more  likely  to  occur.  Of  course  the  author  is  objecting  not  to 
scientific  methods,  but  to  the  assumption  that  the  scientific  method  for  natural 
science  is  the  proper  scientific  method  for  history.] 

2  [But  cf.  on  this,  Kant,  Critique  of  Judgment,  §  65.    Cf.  also  Lapie  in  Rev 
de  Met.  et  de  la  Morale,  May,  1895.] 


656  Philowphy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

is  only  a  transformation  of  that  which  precedes,  was  formulated  by 
Descartes  as  the  law  of  the  Conservation  of  Motion  (cf.  above,  p.  411), 
by  Leibniz  as  the  law  of  Conservation  of  Force  (p.  421),  by  Kant  as 
that  of  the  Conservation  of  Substance  (pp.  545  f.).  The  discovery  of 
the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  and  the  distinction  between  the 
concepts  of  kinetic  and  potential  energy,  made  possible  the  formula- 
tion that  the  sum  of  energy  in  nature  is  quantitatively  unchangeable, 
and  only  qualitatively  changeable,  and  that  in  every  material  system 
which  is  regarded  as  complete  or  closed  within  itself,  the  spatial 
distribution  and  direction  of  the  kinetic  and  potential  energy  at  any 
time  is  absolutely  determined  by  the  law  just  stated.  It  is  not  to  be 
overlooked  that  in  this  statement  the  exclusion  of  other  than  mate- 
rial forces  from  the  explanation  of  nature  is  made  still  more  sharply 
than  with  Descartes ;  on  the  other  hand,  however,  signs  are  already 
multiplying  that  a  return  to  the  dynamic  conception  of  matter  has 
been  thereby  introduced,  such  a  conception  as  was  demanded  by 
Leibniz,  Kant,  and  Schelling  (cf.  above,  §  38,  7). 

7.  The  principle  of  evolution  had  many  lines  of  preparation  in 
modern  thought     In  philosophic  form  it  had  been  projected  by 
Leibniz  and  Schelling,  although  as  a  relation  between  concepts,  and 
not  as  a  process  taking  place  in  time  (so  with  Aristotle ;  cf.  §  13) ; 
and  among  Schilling's  disciples  it  was  OJoen  who  began  to  regard  the 
ascending  of  classes  and  species  in  the  realm  of  organic  life  as  a  pro- 
cess in  time.     With  the  aid  of  comparative  morphology,  to  wliicih 
also  Goethe's  studies  had  contributed,  Oken  dared  that "  adventure  " 
in  the  "archseology  of  nature"  of  which  Kant  had  spoken  (p.  &>/>). 
All  organisms  are  regarded  as  variously  formed  "protoplasm"  (£/?•- 
sclileim),  and  the  higher  have  proceeded  from  the  lower  by  an. 
increasing  multiplication  of  protoplasmic  vesicles.    At  the  same  time 
(1809),  in  his  PhilosopMe  Zoologique,  Lamarck  gave  the  first  system- 
atic exposition  of  the  theory  of  descent.    He  explained  the  relation- 
ship of  organisms  by  descent  from  a  common  original  form,  and  their 
differences,  in  part  by  the  direct  effect  of  environment,  and  in  part 
by  the  indirect  effect  of  environment  which  operates  by  calling  for 
a  greater  nse  of  some  organs  and  a  less  use  of  others.    This  use 
modifies  structures,  and  the  modifications  in  structure  are  inherited. 
The  variations  in  species  which  become  stable  were  thus  explained 
by  the  alternating  influences  of  heredity  and  adaptation.    To  these 
factors  of  explanation  Charles  Darwin  added  the  decisive  factor  of 
natural  selection.    Organisms  tend  to  increase  at  a  far  higher  rate 
than  the  available  means  of  nutrition.    Hence  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence.   Those  plants  or  animals  which  vary  in  a  direction  that  favours 
them  in  this  struggle  will  survive. 


§  45.]  Nature  and  History :  Darwin.  657 

The  presuppositions  of  the  theory,  therefore,  are  the  two  princi- 
ples of  heredity  and  variability;  an  additional  element  was  the 
assumption  of  great  periods  of  time  for  the  accumulation  of  indefi- 
nitely small  deviations,  an  assumption  which  was  made  possible  by 
contemporaneous  geological  investigations. 

This  biological  hypothesis  at  once  gained  more  general  signifi- 
cance in  that  it  promised  a  purely  mechanical  explanation  of  the 
adaptations  or  purposive  elements  which  constitute  the  problems  of 
organic  life,  and  it  was  believed  that  thereby  the  necessity  of  the 
progress  of  nature  to  higher  and  higher  forms  had  been  understood. 
The  "  purposive "  had  been  mechanically  explained  in  the  sense  of 
that  which  is  capable  of  survival  —  that  is,  of  that  which  can  main- 
tain and  propagate  itself — and  it  was  supposed  that  the  same 
explanation  could  be  applied  to  everything  else  which  appears  pur- 
posive in  other  relations,  especially  to  that  which  is  purposive  in  a 
normative  respect.  So  the  theory  of  selection  following  Darwin's 
own  suggestions  was  very  soon  applied  on  many  sides  to  psychology, 
sociology,  ethics,  and  history,  and  was  pressed  by  zealous  adherents 
as  the  only  scientific  method.  Few  were  clear  on  the  point  that 
nature  was  thereby  placed  under  a  category  of  history,  and  that  this 
category  had  experienced  an  essential  change  for  such  an  applica- 
tion. For  the  evolutionary  theory  of  natural  science,  including  the 
theory  of  natural  selection,  can  indeed  explain  alteration  but  not 
progress;  it  cannot  give  the  rational  ground  for  regarding  the  result 
of  the  development  as  a  "higher/'  that  is,  a  more  valuable  form. 

8.  In  its  most  universal  extent  the  principle  of  evolution  had 
already  been  proclaimed  before  Darwin  by  his  countryman  Herbert 
Spencer,  and  had  been  made  the  fundamental  conception  of  the  lat- 
ter's  System  of  Synthetic  Philosophy,  in  which  many  threads  of 
English  philosophy  are  brought  together.  He  proceeds  from  agnos- 
ticism in  so  far  as  he  declares  the  Absolute,  the  Unconditioned,  the 
Unitary  Being,  which  he  is  also  fain  to  call  Force,  to  be  unknowable. 
Beligion  and  philosophy  have  laboured  in  vain  to  conceive  this  in 
definite  ideas ;  for  us  it  is  by  the  very  nature  of  the  case  incapable 
of  determination.  Human  knowledge  is  limited  to  an  interpretation 
of  phenomena,  that  is,  to  the  manifestations  of  the  Unknowable. 
Philosophy  has  only  the  task  of  generalising  the  results  of  the 
particular  sciences,  and  putting  these  generalised  results  together 
into  the  simplest  and  most  complete  totality  possible. 

The  fundamental  distinction  in  phenomena  Spencer  designates  as 
that  of  the  "vivid"  and  the  "faint"  manifestations  of  the  Un- 
knowable, i.e.  of  impressions  and  ideas.  This  indicates  an  attach- 
ment to  Hume  which  is  not  fortunate  (cf .  above,  p.  453).  From  this 


658  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PAST  VII. 

starting-point,  although  Spencer  rightly  rejects  the  reproach  of 
materialism,  he  yet  introduces  a  turn  in  his  view  of  the  world  which 
directs  preeminent  interest  to  the  character  of  physical  phenomena. 
For  an  examination  of  all  the  particular  sciences  is  supposed  to 
yield  the  result  that  the  fundamental  form  in  which  the  Absolute 
manifests  itself  is  evolution.  And  by  evolution  Spencer  under- 
stands  — following  a  suggestion  of  the  scientist,  von  Baer  — the 
tendency  of  all  natural  structures  to  pass  over  from  the  homoge- 
neous to  the  heterogeneous.  This  active  variation  in  which  the 
ever-active  force  manifests  itself  consists  in  two  processes,  which  in 
cooperation  with  each  other  constitute  evolution,  and  which  Spencer 
designates  as  differentiation  and  integration.  On  the  one  hand,  by 
virtue  of  the  plurality  of  effects  which  belong  to  every  cause,  the 
simple  passes  into  a  manifold;  it  differentiates  and  individualises 
itself;  it  divides  and  determines  itself  by  virtue  of  the  fulness  of 
relations  into  which  it  enters.  On  the  other  hand,  the  thus  sepa- 
rated individual  phenomena  come  together  again  to  form  firm  com- 
pounds and  functional  systems,  and  through  these  integrations  new 
unities  arise  which  are  higher,  richer,  and  more  finely  articulated 
than  the  original.  So  the  animal  organism  is  a  higher  unity  than 
the  cell ;  society  is  a  higher  "  individual "  than  a  single  man. 

This  schema  is  now  applied  by  Spencer  to  all  material  and  spir- 
itual processes,  and  with  tireless  labour  he  has  sought  to  enforce  it 
in  the  case  of  the  facts  of  all  the  particular  sciences.  Physics  and 
chemistry  are  refractory ;  they  stand  under  the  law  of  the  conser- 
vation of  energy.  But  astrophysical  theory  shows  the  differentia- 
tion of  the  original  gas  into  the  suns  and  the  peripheral  structures 
of  the  planets  with  their  satellites,  and  likewise  the  corresponding 
integration  in  the  articulated  and  ordered  system  of  motion  which 
all  these  bodies  maintain.  It  is,  however,  in  biology  and  sociology 
that  the  system  attains  full  unfolding.  Life  is  regarded  by  Spencer 
as  a  progressive  adaptation  of  inner  to  outer  relations.  Prom  this 
the  individualising  growth  of  a  single  organism  is  explained,,  and 
from  the  necessary  variations  of  the  latter  according  to  the  method 
of  the  theory  of  selection  is  explained  the  alteration  of  species. 

Social  life  also  in  its  whole  historical  course  is  nothing  other  than 
the  progressive  adaptation  of  man  to  his  natural  and  plastic  environ- 
ment. The  perfecting  which  the  race  wins  thereby  rests  upon  the 
dying  out  of  the  unfit  and  upon  the  survival  of  the  fit  functions. 
From  the  standpoint  of  this  doctrine  Spencer  seeks  also  to  decide 
the  old  strife  between  rationalism  and  empiricism  upon  both  the 
logical  and  ethical  fields.  As  against  the  associational  psychology 
he  admits  that  there  are  for  the  individual  immediately  evident 


§  45.]  Nature  and  History  :  Spencer.  659 

principles,  and  truths  which  are  innate  in  the  sense  that  they  cannot 
be  explained  by  the  experience  of  the  individual.  But  the  strength 
with  which  these  judgments  assert  themselves  so  that  consciousness 
finds  it  impossible  to  deny  them,  rests  upon  the  fact  that  they  are 
the  intellectual  and  emotional  habits  acquired  by  the  race,  which 
have  proved  themselves  to  be  adapted  to  further  the  race,  and  have 
maintained  themselves  on  this  ground.  The  a  priori  is  everywhere 
an  evolutionary  product  of  heredity.  So  in  particular  for  morals, 
everything  in  the  form  of  intelligent  feeling  and  modes  of  will  sur- 
vives which  is  adapted  to  further  the  self-preservation  and  develop- 
ment of  the  individual,  of  society,  and  of  the  race. 

Finally  every  particular  development  reaches  its  natural  end  when 
a  condition  of  equilibrium  has  been  gained  in  which  the  inner  rela- 
tions are  everywhere  completely  adapted  to  the  outer,  so  that  the 
capacity  for  further  articulation  and  variation  has  been  exhausted. 
It  is,  therefore,  only  by  external  influence  that  such  a  system  can  be 
destroyed  and  disturbed,  so  that  its  individual  parts  may  enter  into 
new  processes  of  evolution.  On  the  contrary  Spencer  strives  against 
the  assumption  of  the  possibility  that  the  whole  universe,  with  all 
the  particular  systems  which  it  contains,  can  ever  come  to  a  perfect 
and  therefore  permanent  condition  of  equilibrium.  He  thus  con- 
tradicts those  investigators  who  have  regarded  as  theoretically  possi- 
ble such  a  distribution  of  energies  as  to  exclude  all  alterations  j  this 
is  due  ultimately  to  the  fact  that  Spencer  regards  the  Unknowable 
as  the  ever  self-manifesting  force,  and  regards  evolution  itself  as 
the  most  universal  law  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Unknowable. 

9.  Taken  all  in  ^all  Spencer's  development  of  the  principle  of 
evolution  is  throughout  of  a  cosmological  character,  and  in  this  is 
shown  just  the  alteration  in  this  controlling  principle  which  is  due 
to  the  prevalence  of  natural  science  in  our  century.  This  is  seen, 
most  clearly  by  comparing  Hegel  and  Spencer.  With  the  former, 
evolution  is  the  nature  of  the  self-revealing  spirit ;  with  the  latter, 
it  is  the  law  of  the  successive  manifestations  of  an  unknowable 
force.  To  speak  in  HegePs  language  (cf.  p.  611),  the  subject  has 
again  become  substance.  In  fact  the  Unknowable  of  Spencer 
•resembles  most  that  "indifference  of  real  and  ideal"  which  Schel- 
ling  designated  as  the  Absolute.  This  analogy  would  lead  us  to 
expect  that  the  cosmological  form  of  the  principle  of  evolution  will 
not  be  the  final  one,  and  that  the  historical  standpoint  and  method, 
as  the  appropriate  home  of  this  principle,  will  give  the  permanent 
form  which  it  will  take  in  philosophy.  In  England  itself,  and  still 
more  in  America,  a  decided  turn  toward  Hegel  is  to  be  noticed  since 
the  impressive  book  of  Hntchinson  Stirling  and  Wallace's  excellent 


658  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PAKT  VII. 

starting-point,  although  Spencer  rightly  rejects  the  reproach  of 
materialism,  he  yet  introduces  a  turn  in  his  view  of  the  world  which 
directs  preeminent  interest  to  the  character  of  physical  phenomena. 
For  an  examination  of  all  the  particular  sciences  is  supposed  to 
yield  the  result  that  the  fundamental  form  in  which  the  Absolute 
manifests  itself  is  evolution.  And  by  evolution  Spencer  under- 
stands—  following  a  suggestion  of  the  scientist,  von  Baer  —  the 
tendency  of  all  natural  structures  to  pass  over  from  the  homoge- 
neous to  the  heterogeneous.  This  active  variation  in  which  the 
ever-active  force  manifests  itself  consists  in  two  processes,  which  in 
cooperation  with  each  other  constitute  evolution,  and  which  Spencer- 
designates  as  differentiation  and  integration.  On  the  one  hand,  by 
virtue  of  the  plurality  of  effects  which  belong  to  every  cause,  the 
simple  passes  into  a  manifold;  it  differentiates  and  individualises 
itself;  it  divides  and 'deter  mines  itself  by  virtue  of  the  fulness  of 
relations  into  which  it  enters.  On  the  other  hand,  the  thus  sepa- 
rated individual  phenomena  come  together  again  to  form  firm  com- 
pounds and  functional  systems,  and  through  those  integrations  new 
unities  arise  which  are  higher,  richer,  and  more  finely  articulated 
than  the  original.  So  the  animal  organism  is  a  higher  unity  than 
the  cell ;  society  is  a  higher  "  individual "  than  a  single  man. 

This  schema  is  now  applied  by  Spencer  to  all  material  and  spir- 
itual processes,  and  with  tireless  labour  he  has  sought  to  enforce  it 
in  the  case  of  the  facts  of  all  the  particular  sciences.  Physics  and 
chemistry  are  refractory;  they  stand  under  the  law  of  the  conser- 
vation of  energy.  But  astrophysical  theory  shows  the  differentia- 
tion of  the  original  gas  into  the  suns  and  the  peripheral  structures 
of  the  planets  with  their  satellites,  and  likewise  the  corresponding 
integration  in  the  articulated  and  ordered  system  of  motion  which 
all  these  bodies  maintain.  It  is,  however,  in  biology  and  sociology 
that  the  system  attains  full  unfolding.  Life  is  regarded  by  Spencer 
as  a  progressive  adaptation  of  inner  to  outer  relations.  From  this 
the  individualising  growth  of  a  single  organism  is  explained,,  and 
from  the  necessary  variations  of  the  latter  according  to  the  method 
of  the  theory  of  selection  is  explained  the  alteration  of  species. 

Social  life  also  in  its  whole  historical  course  is  nothing  othor  than 
the  progressive  adaptation  of  man  to  his  natural  and  plastic  environ- 
ment. The  perfecting  which  the  race  wins  thereby  rests  upon  the 
dying  out  of  the  unfit  and  upon  the  survival  of  the  fit  functions. 
From  the  standpoint  of  this  doctrine  Spencer  seeks  also  to  decide 
the  old  strife  between  rationalism  and  empiricism  upon  both  the 
logical  and  ethical  fields.  As  against  the  associational  psychology 
he  admits  that  there  are  for  the  individual  immediately  evidenl 


§  45.]  Nature  and  History :  Spencer.  659 

principles,  and  truths  which  are  innate  in  the  sense  that  they  cannot 
be  explained  by  the  experience  of  the  individual.  But  the  strength 
with  which  these  judgments  assert  themselves  so  that  consciousness 
finds  it  impossible  to  deny  them,  rests  upon  the  fact  that  they  are 
the  intellectual  and  emotional  habits  acquired  by  the  race,  which 
have  proved  themselves  to  be  adapted  to  further  the  race,  and  have 
maintained  themselves  on  this  ground.  The  a  priori  is  everywhere 
an  evolutionary  product  of  heredity.  So  in  particular  for  morals, 
everything  in  the  form  of  intelligent  feeling  and  modes  of  will  sur- 
vives which  is  adapted  to  further  the  self-preservation  and  develop- 
ment of  the  individual,  of  society,  and  of  the  race. 

Finally  every  particular  development  reaches  its  natural  end  when 
a  condition  of  equilibrium  has  been  gained  in  which  the  inner  rela- 
tions are  everywhere  completely  adapted  to  the  outer,  so  that  the 
capacity  for  further  articulation  and  variation  has  been  exhausted. 
It  is,  therefore,  only  by  external  influence  that  such  a  system  can  be 
destroyed  and  disturbed,  so  that  its  individual  parts  may  enter  into 
new  processes  of  evolution.  On  the  contrary  Spencer  strives  against 
the  assumption  of  the  possibility  that  the  whole  universe,  with  all 
the  particular  systems  which  it  contains,  can  ever  come  to  a  perfect 
and  therefore  permanent  condition  of  equilibrium.  He  thus  con- 
tradicts those  investigators  who  have  regarded  as  theoretically  possi- 
ble such  a  distribution  of  energies  as  to  exclude  all  alterations ;  this 
is  due  ultimately  to  the  fact  that  Spencer  regards  the  Unknowable 
as  the  ever  self-manifesting  force,  and  regards  evolution  itself  as 
the  most  universal  law  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Unknowable. 

9.  Taken  all  in  all  Spencer's  development  of  the  principle  of 
evolution  is  throughout  of  a  cosmological  character,  and  in  this  is 
shown  just  the  alteration  in  this  controlling  principle  which  is  due 
to  the  prevalence  of  natural  science  in  our  century.  This  is  seen 
most  clearly  by  comparing  Hegel  and  Spencer.  With  the  former, 
evolution  is  the  nature  of  the  self-revealing  spirit ;  with  the  latter, 
it  is  the  law  of  the  successive  manifestations  of  an  unknowable 
force.  To  speak  in  Hegel's  language  (cf.  p.  611).  the  subject  has 
again  become  substance.  In  fact  the  Unknowable  of  Spencer 
resembles  most  that  "indifference  of  real  and  ideal"  which  Schel- 
ling  designated  as  the  Absolute.  This  analogy  would  lead  us  to 
expect  that  the  cosmological  form  of  the  principle  of  evolution  will 
not  be  the  final  one,  and  that  the  historical  standpoint  and  method, 
as  the  appropriate  home  of  this  principle,  will  give  the  permanent 
form  which  it  will  take  in  philosophy.  In  England  itself,  and  still 
more  in  America,  a  decided  turn  toward  Hegel  is  to  be  noticed  since 
the  impressive  book  of  Hutchinson  Stirling  and  Wallace's  excellent 


660  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

introduction  of  Hegel's  logic.  In  Germany,  Kuno  Fischer's  exposi- 
tion of  Hegel's  doctrine,  which  is  now  just  reaching  completion,  will 
dissipate  prejudices  which  have  hitherto  stood  in  the  way  of  its  just 
valuation,  and  by  stripping  off  the  terminology  which  has  become 
foreign  to  us,  will  cause  this  great  system  of  evolution  to  appear  in 
full  clearness. 

The  same  tendency  to  win  back  the  historical  form  for  the  thought 
of  evolution  is  found  in  the  logical  and  epistemological  efforts  which 
have  as  their  goal  what  Dilthey  has  denoted  with  a  fortunate  expres- 
sion, a  "critique  of  the  historical  reason."  The  aim  is  to  break 
through  that  one-sidedness  which  has  attached  to  logic  since  its 
Greek  origins,  and  which  prescribes  as  the  goal  and  norm  of  logical 
laws  in  their  formal  aspect  the  relation  of  the  universal  to  the  par- 
ticular (cf.  §  12),  and  for  the  content  and  material  of  those  laws  the 
knowledge  of  nature.  Under  these  presuppositions  stand  not  only 
the  extreme  of  mathematical  logic  (cf.  §  44,  4),  but  also  the  impor- 
tant works  of  John  Stuart  Mill  and  Stanley  Jevons,  which  are  to 
be  characterised  essentially  as  the  logical  theory  of  natural  science. 
Over  against  this,  the  elaborations  of  logical  science  by  Lotze  and 
Sigwart,  especially  in  the  latter's  second  edition,  show  a  much  more 
universal  stamp,  and  in  connection  with  the  movement  of  historical 
idealism  which  has  its  attachments  to  the  Fichtean  view  of  the  world 
(cf.  §  44,  6),  a  deeper  comprehension  of  the  logical  forms  of  histori- 
cal science  is  on  the  way ;  such,  for  example,  as  we  find  in  Eickert's 
investigations  regarding  the  limitations  of  the  concepts  of  natural 
science.1 

§  46.  The  Problem  of  Values. 

While  the  end  of  the  century  finds  us  in  the  yet  unadjusted  strife 
between  the  historical  and  the  natural:science  standards,  we  see  just 
in  this  continuation  of  an  inherited  antithesis  how  little  the  philoso- 
phy of  this  period  has  been  able  to  win  a  real  progress  in  its  princi- 
ples. Its  great  and  varied  industry  has  been  rather  at  the  periphery, 
and  in  the  work  of  adjusting  relations  with  the  special  sciences, 
while  the  central  development  falls  prey  to  a  certain  stagnation 
ivhich  must  be  simply  put  up  with  as  a  fact  easily  comprehensible 
historically.  The  exhaustion  of  metaphysical  energy  and  the  high 
tide  of  empirical  interests  give  a  completely  satisfactory  explana- 
tion. For  this  reason  we  can  readily  understand  that  the  philoso- 
phy of  the  nineteenth  century  shows  a  rich  development  along  the 
bounding  provinces  in  which  it  comes  in  contact  with  the  empirical 
disciplines,  as  in  psychology,  philosophy  of  nature,  anthropology, 

1  H.  Rickert,  Gfrenzen  far  naturwissenschaftUchen  Begrffisbtldung,  1800. 


§  46.]  Problem  of  Values  :   Utilitarianism.  661 

philosophy  of  history,  philosophy  of  law  and  philosophy  of  reli- 
gion, while  on  the  contrary  it  makes  the  impression  of  an  eclectic 
and  dependent  attitude  in  the  fundamental  disciplines.  Surely  this 
is  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  fact  that  it  suffers  from  the 
repressive  wealth  of  traditions  which  have  attained  complete  histori- 
cal consciousness.  It  is  in  accord  with  this  that  no  earlier  time  has 
seen  such  a  luxuriant  and  fruitful  growth  in  the  study  of  the  history 
of  philosophy.  But  there  is  need  of  a  new  central  reconstruction  if 
philosophy  is  to  meet  in  satisfactory  manner  the  wants  which  in 
recent  time  come  once  more  for  satisfaction  from  the  general  con- 
sciousness and  from  the  special  sciences.1 

The  direction  in  which  the  solution  of  this  problem  is  to  be  sought 
is  determined  on  the  one  hand  by  the  predominance  of  that  volun- 
tarism which  extends  from  psychology  into  general  metaphysical 
theories  (§  44),  and  on  the  other  by  the  circumstance  that  the  two 
forms  of  the  principle  of  evolution  (§  45),  viz.  the  historical  and 
that  of  natural  science,  are  distinguished  from  each  other  by  their 
different  attitudes  toward  the  determinations  of  value.  In  addition 
the  mighty  upward  sweep  in  the  conditions  of  life  which  Europeans 
have  experienced  in  this  century  has  worked  at  once  destructively 
and  constructively  upon  general  convictions.  Civilisation,  caught  in 
this  movement  of  rapid  enhancement  and  extension,  is  urged  on  by 
a  deeper  demand  for  comprehension  of  itself,  and  from  the  problem 
of  civilisation  which  made  its  appearance  in  the  Enlightenment  (cf. 
§  37)  a  movement  has  developed  for  which  the  "  transformation  and 
re-valuation  of  all  values  "  (Umwertung  aller  Werthe)  has  become  the 
watchword. 

1.  The  characteristic  trait  in  this  is  that  in  the  foreground  of  all 
ethical  considerations  the  relation  of  the  individual  to  society  stands 

iThat  the  Catholic  Church  has  sought  to  solve  this  problem  by  a  revival  of 
Thomism  is  well  known,  and  does  not  need  to  be  further  set  forth  here.  Nor  on 
this  account  do  we  need  to  cite  the  numerous  Thomists  (mostly  Jesuits)  in  Italy, 
France,  Germany,  Belgium,  and  Holland.  In  theory  they  represent  no  new 
principles,  but  at  most  seek  to  build  out  the  old  doctrine  in  details  so  that  it  may 
appear  m  some  manner  adapted  to  modern  knowledge,  in  particular  to  modern 
science  of  nature.  But  the  freer  tendencies  of  Catholic  philosophy,  which  are 
usually  called  Ontolofiism,  have  created  nothing  new  and  fruitful.  They  attach 
themselves  for  the  most  part  to  the  Platouism  of  Malebranche,  and  point  back  to 
Augustine,  so  that  the  antagonism  which  we  noted  in  the  Middle  Ages  and  in  the 
Renaissance  is  repeated  again  (cf.  pp.  304,  416.)  The  finest  presentation  of 
Ontologism  was  found  in  the  Italians,  Rosmini  and  Gioberti ;  the  former  gave 
it  a  sort  of  psychological  basis;  the  latter  a  purely  metaphysical  form  (L'ente 
crea  Vesistente).  In  Germany  Giinther  introduced  into  it  certain  elements  of 
the  idealistic  speculations,  especially  of  Fichte's  doctrine ;  in  France,  Gratry 
from  this  standpoint  combats  especially  the  eclecticism  of  Cousin,  and  in  this 
eclecticism  he  combats  Hegelianism  and  the  "pantheism"  which  he  finds  in 
both  (cf.  tftude  sur  la  Sophistique  Contemporaine,  lettre  a  M.  Vacherot, 
Paris,  1851). 


662  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

forth  in  much  more  conscious  and  explicit  form  than  ever  before,  — 
whether  in  the  positive  form  that  the  subordination  of  the  individual 
to  society  is  presented  and  grounded  in  some  manner  as  the  norm  of 
all  valuation,  or  whether  it  be  in  the  negative  form  that  the  resist- 
ance of  the  individual  to  the  oppressing  weight  of  the  species  is 
praised  and  justified. 

The  first  form  is  that  which  has  been  transmitted  from  the  phi- 
losophy of  the  Revolution  and  from  Utilitarianism,  especially  in  the 
stamp  given  to  it  by  Benthani  (cf.  p.  522).  This  Utilitarianism  goes 
through  the  popular  literature  of  the  century  as  a  broad  stream  in 
•which  the  standard  of  the  public  good  is  taken  as  a  matter  of  course 
•without  deep  analysis  of  its  meaning.  It  is  characterised  for  the 
most  part  by  limiting  its  care  "  for  the  greatest  happiness  of  the 
greatest  number  "  to  man's  earthly  welfare ;  the  mental  and  spiritual 
goods  are  not  indeed  denied,  but  the  measure  of  all  valuation  is 
found  in  the  degree  of  pleasure  or  pain  which  a  circumstance,  a 
relation,  an  act,  or  a  disposition  may  call  forth.  Theoretically,  this 
doctrine  rests  on  the  unfortunate  inference  of  the  associational  psy- 
chology, that  because  every  satisfied  desire  is  accompanied  with 
pleasure  the  expectation  of  the  pleasure  is,  therefore,  the  ultimate 
motive  of  all  willing,  and  every  particular  object  is  willed  and  valued 
only  as  means  for  gaining  this  pleasure.  This  formal  eudaenionism 
was  earlier  forced  either  to  regard  the  altruistic  impulses  as  equally 
original  with  the  egoistic,  or  to  make  them  proceed  from  the  egoistic 
through  the  experiences  which  the  individual  undergoes  in  social  life. 
In  contrast  with  this  the  noteworthy  transformation  which  Utili- 
tarianism has  experienced  in  recent  time  consists  in  its  combination 
with  the  principle  of  evolution,  as  has  already  been  mentioned  in  the 
case  of  Spencer's  doctrine  (cf.  §  45,  8).  The  valuation  of  altruism 
from  the  standpoint  of  social  ethics  appears  according  to  this  new 
point  of  view  to  be  the  result  of  the  process  of  evolution,  inasmuch  as 
only  those  social  groups  have  maintained  themselves  in  the  struggle 
for  existence  whose  individual  members  have  achieved  altruistic 
thought  and  action  in  a  relatively  high  degree.?  The  history  of 
morals  is  a  struggle  of  values  or  "ideals,"  from  which  we  may  in 
part  explain  the  relativity  of  historical  systems  of  morals,  and  in 
part  their  converging  development  to  a  universal  human  ethics. 
These  fundamental  thoughts  of  evolutionary  ethics  have  been  car- 
ried out  in  many  detailed  expositions  j  among  their  representatives 

1  Benjamin  Kidd,  Social  Evolution,  London,  1805,  has  attempted  to  determine 
the  nature  of  religion  sociologically  by  considering  the  part  which  ideas  of  the 
supernatural  have  played  in  this  evolutionary  process  —  a  genuinely  English 
undertaking. 


§  46.]  Problem  of  Values :  Bentham.  663 

may  be  mentioned,  in  France,  Fouillee,  in  Germany,  Paul  See,  whose 
evolutionary  theory  of  conscience  excited  attention  for  a  time,  and 
G.  H.  Schneider. 

[Before  passing  to  the  continental  representatives  of  Utilitarian- 
ism it  will  be  instructive  to  consider  more  fully  the  changes  which 
have  been  effected  in  British  theories  both  within  and  without  the 
so-called  Utilitarian  school.1  These  changes  affect  the  standard  of 
value,  the  motives  to  which  ethical  appeal  is  made,  and  the  relation 
which  the  individual  is  conceived  to  sustain  to  the  social  body ;  their 
nature  shows  the  influence  of  the  close  relation  which  ethical  theory 
in  England  has  always  sustained  to  social  and  political  conditions. 
During  the  century  England  has  seen  an  almost  continuous  effort 
toward  social  and  political  reform.  This  movement  has  aimed  at 
an  extension  of  political  privilege,  and  at  making  possible  a  higher 
standard  of  living  for  the  less  fortunate  members  of  society.  It  has 
thus  been  democratic  in  so  far  as  it  has  insisted  upon  the  widest  par- 
ticipation in  the  goods  of  civilisation ;  but  by  emphasising  not  merely 
material  comforts,  but  also  political  rights,  social  justice,  and  educa- 
tional opportunities,  it  has  tended  to  measure  human  welfare,  not  so 
much  in  terms  of  feeling  as  in  terms  of  "  dignity "  and  fulness  of 
life  or  "self-realisation."  The  movement  along  these  two  direc- 
tions has  been  due  in  part  to  the  influence  of  German  idealism  as 
transmitted  through  Coleridge,  Carlyle,  and  later  through  Green  and 
others,  but  the  immanent  forces  of  social  progress  have  had  a  deci- 
sive influence  in  the  same  direction. 

As  has  been  pointed  out  (pp.  513  f.),  a  general  tendency  of  British 
theory  has  been  to  unite  a  social  standard  or  criterion  of  moral  value 
with  an  individualistic,  and  even  egoistic  theory  of  motives.  This 
seemed  the  more  possible  to  Bentham,  because  in  the  individualistic 
language  of  his  day  the  community  was  denned  as  a  "  fictitious  body 
composed  of  individual  persons  who  are  considered  as  constituting, 
as  it  were,  its  members."  The  interest  of  the  community,  then,  "  is 
the  sum  of  the  interests  of  the  several  members  who  compose  it." 
Hence  it  might  seem  that  one  way  to  promote  the  interest  of  the 
community  would  be  for  every  man  to  seek  his  own  interest.  If, 
however,  it  should  be  necessary  to  bring  pressure  to  bear  upon  the 
individual  in  order  to  keep  him  from  interfering  with  the  interests 
of  others,  Bentham  conceived  that  the  principal  reliance  should  be 
placed  upon  what  he  called  the  four  sanctions,  which  he  specified 
as  the  physical,  political,  moral,  and  religious,  meaning  by  these  the 


1  The  material  from  this  point  to  the  paragraph  numbered  "  2  "  on  p.  670  has 
been  added  by  the  translator. 


664  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

pleasures  and  pains  derived  from  physical  sources,  from  the  penal- 
ties of  law,  from  public  opinion,  or  from  belief  in  divine  rewards  and 
punishments.  It  is  for  pain  and  pleasure  alone  "  to  point  out  what 
we  ought  to  do,  as  well  as  to  determine  what  we  shall  do,"  and  the 
ambiguity  in  the  terms  "pain"  and  "pleasure,"  according  to  which 
they  mean  in  the  one  case  pleasure  or  pain  of  the  community,  and  in 
the  other  case  pleasure  or  pain  of  the  agent,  permits  Bentham  to 
suppose  that  he  is  maintaining  a  consistent  hedonistic  theory.  But 
there  were  two  other  important  qualifications  in  this  hedonistic  and 
individualistic  theory.  In  the  first  place  he  intimates  that  the  indi- 
vidual may  seek  public  pleasure  as  well  as  private,1  thus  giving  the 
theoretical  statement  of  the  principle  which  governed  his  own  life, 
directed  as  it  was  toward  the  public  interest.  In  the  next  place,  the 
maxim  which  Bentham  used  to  interpret  the  phrase,  "  greatest  good 
of  the  greatest  number,"  was,  "  everybody  to  count  for  one,  nobody 
for  more  than  one."  This,  while  apparently  a  principle  of  extreme 
individualism,  was  really  a  recognition  of  individual  rights,  and  was 
based  upon  fairness  rather  than  upon  a  purely  hedonistic  standpoint. 
It  is  thus  essentially  a  social  principle,  and  a  demand  that  the 
pleasure  which  "determines  what  we  should  do"  shall  be  not  merely 
a  maximum,  but  a  particular  kind  of  pleasure,  regulated  not  by  con- 
siderations of  quantity,  but  by  principles  of  fairness  and  justice.  A 
further  inadequacy  of  Bentham's  theory  to  account  for  1  tenth  am 's 
practice  appears  in  his  famous  definition  that  in  estimating  pleasures 
and  pains  we  must  consider  quantity  only,  —  "  push-pin  is  as  good 
as  poetry."  But  Bentham's  own  activity,  if  not  primarily  directed 
toward  poetry,  was  at  least  as  little  directed  toward  push-pin  for 
himself  or  for  others.  His  whole  life-work  was  given  toward  pro- 
moting legislative  and  social  reform,  toward  securing  rights  and 
justice;  and  although  he  had  little  appreciation  of  certain  of  the 
finer  values  of  art  and  culture,  he  was  at  least  as  little  as  his  suc- 
cessor, Mill,  to  be  explained  by  the  hedonistic  formula. 

The  theoretical  individualism  of  the  hedonistic  standard  for  meas- 
uring the  values  of  human  life  and  the  motives  for  moral  action 
found  vigorous  and  successful  opposition  in  the  work  of  Coleridge 
and  Carlyle.  The  former  exerted  his  influence  primarily  in  the 
religious  field,  and  in  special  opposition  to  the  theories  of  motive 
and  obligation  propounded  by  Paley  (p.  514,  above),  which  had  wide 
currency  in  educational  and  religious  circles.  According  to  Paley, 
the  only  difference  between  prudence  and  duty  is  that  in  the  one  we 


1  "Such  pleasures  seek,  if  private  be  thy  end.    If  it  be  public,"  etc.    Cf. 
J.  Dewey,  Study  of  Ethics. 


§46.]  Problem  of  Values :  Coleridge,  Carlyle.  665 

consider  the  gain  or  loss  in  the  present  world ;  in  the  other,  we  con- 
sider also  gain  or  loss  in  the  world  to  come.  Obligation,  according  to 
Paley,  means  to  be  urged  by  a  violent  motive,  resulting  from  the 
command  of  another.  Against  these  positions  Coleridge  urged  that 
while  man  as  a  mere  animal,  or  as  a  being  endowed  merely  with 
"  understanding,"  may  know  only  motives  which  spring  from  the 
calculations  of  pleasures  and  pains,  man  as  rational  may  hear  another 
voice  and  respond  to  higher  appeals.  It  is,  in  fact,  in  just  this 
distinction  that  we  find  the  difference  between  prudence  and  true 
morality.  The  written  works  of  Coleridge  were  few  and  fragmen- 
tary, but  his  personal  influence  upon  the  literary,  religious,  and 
philosophical  thought  of  his  own  and  the  succeeding  period,  in  both 
Britain  and  America,  has  been  powerful  and  far-reaching. 

The  criticism  of  Carlyle  was  directed  against  "  Benthamism."  Its 
individualism  of  motive  seemed  to  Carlyle  adapted  to  aggravate 
rather  than  to  heal  the  disease  of  the  age.  The  economic  develop- 
ment had  been  steadily  in  the  direction  of  greater  individualism.  It 
had  substituted  the  wage-system  for  the  older  personal  relation. 
What  Carlyle  felt  to  be  needed  was  the  deeper  sense  of  social  unity, 
a  stronger  feeling  of  responsibility.  Now  the  pursuit  of  happiness 
is  essentially  an  individualising  force,  —  "the  man  who  goes  about 
pothering  and  uproaring  for  his  happiness,  he  is  not  the  man  that 
will  help  us  to  get  our  knaves  and  dastards  arrested ;  no,  he  is  rather 
on  the  way  to  increase  the  number — by  at  least  one  unit."  A  true 
social  organisation  can  be  secured  only  if  the  individualistic  and 
commercial  theory  of  interests  is  abandoned.  This  leads  at  once  to 
the  other  point  of  Caiiyle's  attack,  —  measurement  of  value  in  terms 
of  pleasure  and  happiness.  Instead  of  a  "  greatest  happiness  prin- 
ciple," a  "  greatest  nobleness  principle  "  must  be  substituted.  Man 
cannot  be  satisfied  with  the  results  of  attempts  to  give  him  pleasure 
if  these  aim  simply  at  pleasure.  "  Man's  unhappiness  comes  of  his 
greatness ;  it  is  because  there  is  an  infinite  in  him  which  he  cannot 
quite  bury  under  the  finite.  The  shoe-black  also  has  a  soul  quite 
other  than  his  stomach,  and  would  require  for  his  permanent  satis- 
faction and  saturation  God's  Infinite  Universe."  It  is  to  the  heroes 
that  we  must  look  for  our  ideals  of  human  life.  It  is  in  work  rather 
than  in  pleasure  that  the  end  of  human  life  is  to  be  achieved. 

It  was  in  the  thought  of  John  Stuart  Mill  that  the  fusion  of  utili- 
tarian and  idealistic  principles  found  its  most  instructive  illustration. 
The  social  philosophy  of  Comte  and  a  personal  character  actuated  by 
high  ideals  of  duty  and  ardent  for  the  promotion  of  public  welfare 
conspired  with  the  influences  already  named  to  secure  this  result. 
Educated  by  his  father,  James  Mill,  in  the  principles  of  associational 


666  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century       [PART  VII. 

psychology,  associated  with  Eicardo,  the  representative  of  an  indi- 
vidualistic economic  theory,  and  with  Bentham,  he  inherited  thus  a 
theory  of  human  nature  and  a  method  of  analysis  from  which  he 
never  completely  freed  himself ;  but  on  the  other  hand  he  introduced 
into  the  scheme  a  new  content  which  led  him  to  transcend  the  hedo- 
nistic position.1  First  as  regards  the  object  of  desire.  It  had  been  the 
position  of  the  associationalists  that  the  individual  desires  originally 
pleasure,  and  pleasure  only.  This  is  the  only  intrinsic  good.  It  was 
held  that  other  objects,  however,  might  become  associated  with  the 
individual's  happiness,  and  thus  become  independent  objects  of 
desire.  In  this  theory  it  would  be  the  purpose  of  moral  training  so 
to  associate  the  public  good  with  the  private  good  of  the  individual 
that  he  would  come  to  desire  the  public  welfare.  Taught  by  his  own 
experience  that  such  external  associations  had  no  permanent  motive 
power,  Mill  was  led  to  reject  this  theory,  and  to  state  the  hedonistic 
paradox  that  to  find  pleasure  one  must  not  consciously  seek  it.  Of 
greater  significance  for  our  present  purpose  is  Mill's  theory  of  the 
motives  to  moral  action.  On  the  one  hand  he  retains  so  much  of 
the  eighteenth  century  atomistic  view  of  conduct  as  to  affirm  that  "  the 
motive  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  morality  of  the  action,  though 
much  with  the  morality  of  the  agent."  He  still  retains  the  doctrine 
of  the  external  sanctions  without  stating  explicitly  that  however 
useful  these  may  be  to  control  the  non-moral  or  immoral,  until  other 
motives  get  a  foothold,  they  are  not  moral  motives.  But  on  the 
other  hand  he  lays  far  greater  stress  upon  the  u  internal  "  sanctions 
of  duty.  This  feeling  of  duty,  in  turn,  though  strengthened  by  edu- 
cation and  association,  has  as  its  ultimate  foundation  the  "social 
feelings  of  mankind."  It  is  because  man  naturally  "  never  conceives 
himself  otherwise  than  as  a  member  of  a  body  "  that  the  interest  of 
the  community  is  the  interest  of  the  individual.  The  principle  of 
sympathy  which  had  served  alternately  as  a  means  of  psychological 
analysis  and  as  a  term  for  the  broader  social  impulse,  was  given  its 
most  important  place  as  that  on  which  rests  "the  possibility  of  any 
cultivation  of  goodness  and  nobleness  and  the  hope  of  their  ultimate 
entire  ascendency.'3 

Finally,  Mill  transcends  the  hedonistic  criterion  of  value.  While 
maintaining  that  the  mental  pleasures  are  superior  to  the  bodily 
pleasures  on  purely  quantitative  grounds,  he  asserts  that,  quite 
apart  from  questions  of  quantity,  some  kinds  of  pleasure  are 
more  desirable  and  valuable  than  others.  The  test  for  pleasure, 

1  In  addition  to  the  Utilitarianism,  the  Autobiography,  the  essays  on  Bentham 
and  Coleridge  and  On  Liberty  are  of  special  interest. 


§46.]  Problem  of  Values:  Hill,  Spencer.  667 

whether  we  seek  to  measure  its  intensity  or  its  quality,  must  in  any 
case  be  subjective;  and  the  question  as  to  which  of  two  pleasures 
is  the  better  must  be  decided  by  those  who  have  had  experience  of 
both.  Instead,  therefore,  of  using  pleasure  as  the  standard  for 
value,  Mill,  like  Plato,  would  appeal  to  "experience  and  wisdom 
and  reason"  as  judges.  Instead  of  pleasure  as  standard,  we  have 
rather  a  standard  for  pleasure.  If,  then,  we  ask  what  these  "  com- 
petent judges  "  will  assign  as  the  highest  values,  we  may  find  differ- 
ent names,  such  as  love  of  liberty  and  love  of  power,  etc.,  but  the 
most  "appropriate  appellation  is  the  sense  of  dignity."  "It  is 
better  to  'be  a  human  being  dissatisfied  than  a  pig  satisfied ;  better 
to  be  Socrates  dissatisfied  than  a  fool  satisfied."  And  in  the  fur- 
ther development  of  this  principle  of  valuation  Mill  even  goes 
beyond  Carlyle's  position  by  declaring  that  to  do  without  happiness 
is  now  done  involuntarily  by  nineteen- twentieths  of  mankind,  and 
often  has  to  be  done  voluntarily  by  the  hero  or  the  martyr,  who  in 
sacrificing  his  own  happiness  for  that  of  others  displays  the  "  high- 
est virtue  which  can  be  found  in  man." 

A  similar  conflict  between  hedonistic  and  other  standards  of  value 
is  evident  in  the  ethical  system  of  Herbert  Spencer.  On  the  one 
hand,  following  the  tradition  of  a  hedonistic  psychology,  Spencer 
maintains  that  life  is  good  or  bad  according  as  it  does  or  does  not 
bring  a  surplus  of  agreeable  feeling.  The  only  alternative  to  this 
test  is  to  reverse  the  hypothesis  and  suppose  that  pain  is  good  and 
pleasure  is  bad.  No  other  standard  of  value  can  be  admitted. 
This  position  is  fortified  by  the  biological  law  that  if  creatures 
should  find  pleasure  in  what  is  hurtful,  and  pain  in  what  is  advan- 
tageous, they  would  soon  cease  to  exist.  On  the  other  hand,  Spen- 
cer propounds  also  a  standard  of  value  which  does  not  easily 
conform  to  the  test  of  pleasure  and  pain.  According  to  this 
standard  the  highest  conduct  is  that  which  conduces  to  "  the  great- 
est breadth,  length,  and  completeness  of  life  " ;  the  highest  stage  in 
evolution  is  that  reached  when  "conduct  simultaneously  achieves 
the  greatest  totality  of  life  in  self,  in  offspring,  and  in  fellow-men." 
The  subjective  standard  of  pleasurable  feeling  and  the  objective 
standard  of  fulness  of  life  are  thus  set  over  against  each  other.  The 
attempt  is  made  to  bring  them  together  by  showing  that  the  bio- 
logical development  has  necessarily  brought  about  a  harmony 
between  pleasure  and  progress,  but  on  the  other  hand  it  is  admitted 
that  a  condition  of  progress  involves  a  lack  of  adaptation  between 
the  individual  and  the  environment.  It  would  therefore  seem  that, 
however  well-suited  pleasure  might  be  as  a  test  for  the  static  indi- 
vidual, it  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  test  of  value  for  the  guidance  of 


668  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

a  progressive  being.  Hence  Spencer  maintains  that  the  perfect 
application  of  his  test  supposes  an  ideal  humanity.  A  consistent 
hedonism  would  require  that  the  test  of  such  an  ideal  humanity 
be  solely  the  continuity  and  intensity  of  pleasurable  feeling 
attained,  but  the  numerous  recognitions  of  more  objective  fac- 
tors make  it  improbable  that  Spencer  would  regard  merely  sen- 
tient beings  deprived  of  all  active  faculties  as  the  highest  type  of 
evolution. 

The  employment  by  Spencer  of  the  principles  of  evolution  as 
affording  a  moral  standard  leads  to  an  interesting  complication  of 
the  problems  considered  under  §  45  with  the  problem  of  the  indi- 
vidual in  relation  to  society.  On  the  one  hand,  as  already  noted 
(p.  662),  the  social  sentiments  and  related  moral  principles  are 
regarded  by  Spencer  as  finding  their  basis  in  the  evolutionary  pro- 
cess. These  social  qualities  subserve  the  welfare  of  the  family  or 
species,  and  aid  it  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  is  maintained  that  the  fundamental  law  of  progress  is  that  "  each 
individual  shall  take  the  consequences  of  his  own  nature  and 
actions :  survival  of  the  fittest  being  the  result."  Among  gregarious 
creatures  the  freedom  of  each  to  act  has  to  be  restricted  by  the  pro- 
vision that  it  shall  not  interfere  with  similar  freedom  on  the  part 
of  others.  Progress  is  therefore  dependent  upon  giving  the  greatest 
possible  scope  to  individual  freedom.  With  Beutham  and  Mill  the 
maxim  "everybody  to  count  for  one,  nobody  for  more  than  one" 
had  represented  a  socialising  of  the  criterion  and  ideal.  In  Spen- 
cer's opinion  this  represents  an  undue  emphasis  upon  equality; 
from  this  to  communism  the  step  is  only  one  from  theory  to  prac- 
tice. "  Inequality  is  the  primordial  idea  suggested  "  by  evolution ; 
equality,  as  suggested  in  the  need  of  restriction,  is  secondary, 
From  this  individualistic  interpretation  of  evolution  Spencer  opposes 
not  only  communism,  in  property,  but  the  assumption  by  tho  State 
of  any  functions  beyond  that  of  securing  "justice"  to  the  indi- 
vidual. The  State  should  keep  the  individual  from  interfering 
with  the  freedom  of  other  individuals.  The  State  is  thus  essentially 
negative  in  its  significance.  Man  in  his  corporate  capacity  may  not 
realise  a  positive  moral  value  in  the  pursuit  of  common  good.  But 
while  agreeing  thus  with  the  views  of  G-undling  and  von  Humboldt 
(cf.  p.  520),  Spencer  insists  that,  in  denying  the  possibility  of  reach- 
ing positive  values  through  the  State,  he  aims  to  secure  these  values 
more  efficiently  by  voluntary  and  private  action.  "Beneficence" 
belongs  to  the  family  virtues;  "justice"  to  the  State.1 

1  Cf.  Ethics,  Vol.  II.,  The  Man  vs.  the  State,  and  Essays,  Vol.  III. 


§  46.]  Problem  of  Values :  Huxley  ^  Green.  669 

The  relation  of  evolutionary  processes  to  the  problem  of  moral 
values  has  been  most  sharply  formulated  by  Huxley.1  In  opposi- 
tion to  certain  philosophical  writers  who  find  in  the  evolutionary 
process  a  moral  standard,  Huxley  points  out  with  great  vigour  and 
incisiveness  the  distinction  between  the  "cosmic  process"  and 
the  "  ethical  process."  The  attempt  to  find  in  the  "  cosmic  pro- 
cess" an  ethical  standard  is  based  upon  the  ambiguity  in  the 
phrase  "  survival  of  the  fittest."  Fittest,  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to 
say,  is  not  synonymous  with  ethically  best.  If  the  temperature 
of  the  earth  should  be  reduced,  the  survival  of  the  fittest  would 
mean  a  return  to  lichens  and  diatoms. 

The  ethical  process  must  find  its  standard  not  in  the  cosmic  pro- 
cess, but  in  the  moral  ideals  of  man.  Its  principle  is  not  that  of 
the  survival  of  the  fittest,  but  that  of  fitting  as  many  as  possible 
to  survive.  The  duty  of  man  is  not  to  conform  to  the  cosmic  pro- 
cess, but  to  combat  it.  In  a  sense  it  may  be  admitted  that  the  moral 
process  is  a  part  of  the  cosmic  process,  but  the  important  point  is 
that  the  moral  process  cannot  take  its  standards  from  the  non-moral 
parts  of  the  cosmic  process,  and  the  theory  of  government  which 
Spencer  would  derive  from  this  is  characterised  by  Huxley  as 
"administrative  nihilism."  2 

The  opposition  to  an  ethical  theory  based  upon  the  conceptions  of 
natural  science,  has  received  its  most  thorough-going  expression  in 
the  work  of  T.  H.  Green.  Previous  English  sympathisers  with 
German  idealism  had  for  the  most  part  appropriated  results 
without  attempting  for  themselves  the  "labour  of  the  notion." 
Believing  that  current  theories  of  evolution  and  ethics  were 
repeating  the  fallacies  of  Hume  in  another  form,  Green  set  himself 
the  task  of  criticising  those  fallacies  and  of  re-stating  the  conditions 
under  which  any  experience,  and  especially  any  moral  experience, 
is  possible.  The  central,  fundamental,  and  determining  conception 
is  found  in  self-consciousness.  Questions  as  to  freedom,  desire,  and 
ideals  must  be  stated  in  terms  of  self-consciousness,  and  not  in 
physical  concepts,  if  they  are  to  be  intelligible. '  Nor  can  self- 
consciousness  be  explained  in  terms  of  the  unconscious,  or  as 
developing  from  the  unconscious.  It  seems  rather  to  be  compre- 
hensible only  as  the  reproduction  in  man  of  an  eternal  conscious- 
ness. This  has  an  important  bearing  on  the  determination  of  the 
moral  ideal.  In  the  first  place  it  requires  that  the  end  or  ideal 
shall  always  be  some  desirable  state  of  self.  In  this  it  seems  to 

1  In  his  Romanes  lecture,  1803.    Reprinted  as  Evolution  and  Ethics,  1894, 
Cf.  J.  Dewey,  Evolution  and  Ethics,  Monist,  VIII.  321  fi. 

2  Critiques  and  Addresses, 


670  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

approach  hedonism,  but  whereas  hedonism  holds  that  pleasure  makes 
a  state  or  an  object  desirable,  Green  insists  that  the  pleasure  follows 
the  attainment  of  desire,  and  that  what  a  being  desires  is  determined 
by  the  nature  of  the  being.  Man  desires  the  full  realisation  of  him- 
self, and  "  in  it  alone  he  can  satisfy  himself."  The  good  is  therefore- 
a  personal  good.  It  is  also  a  common  or  social  good.  "  Without 
society,  no  persons/''  While  therefore  it  may  not  be  possible  to- 
state  definitely  the  specific  characteristics  of  the  "best  state  of 
man,"  history  shows  that  man  has  bettered  himself  through  insti- 
tutions and  habits  which  make  the  welfare  of  all  the  welfare  of 
each,  and  through  the  arts  which  make  nature  the  friend  of  man." 
It  is  in  political  society  that  self-consciousness  finds  fullest  develop- 
ment. The  institutions  of  "  civil  life  give  reality  to  the  capacities 
of  will  and  reason  and  enable  them  to  be  really  exercised."  1 

The  ultimate  justification  of  all  rights  is  that  they  serve  a  moral 
end  in  the  sense  that  the  powers  secured  in  them  are  essential  to  the- 
fulfilment  of  man's  vocation  as  a  moral  being,  i.e.  as  a  being  who  in 
living  for  himself  lives  for  other  selves.  With  Green's  definition 
may  be  compared  Spencer's  formulation  of  the  ideal  as  "  complete- 
ness of  life."  It  is  a  striking  illustration  of  the  strong  relation 
which  British  ethical  theory  has  always  maintained  to  British  life, 
that  two  thinkers  from  such  opposite  standpoints  should  approach 
so  near  in  actual  statement. 

2.  Turning  now  to  continental  theories,  we  note  that]  the  con- 
ception of  life  which  corresponds  to  this  utilitarian  social  ethics  is- 
throughout  an  optimistic  affirmation  of  the  world.  Life  as  an 
evolutionary  process  is  the  sum  total  of  all  goods,  and  the  progress- 
to  the  more  perfect  is  the  natural  necessity  of  the  actual  world;  the- 
strengthening  and  broadening  of  life  is  as  well  the  moral  law  as  the- 
law  of  nature.  This  consequence  has  been  carried  out  with  the  most 
refinement  and  warmth,  and  not  without  a  religious  turn  by  Guyau. 
He  finds  the  highest  meaning  and  enjoyment  of  individual  existence 
in  the  conscious  unity  of  life  with  society,  and  beyond  this  with  the 
universe. 

But  even  without  the  evolutionary  supplement,  naturalism  and 
materialism  had  asserted  their  joyous  optimism  and^  directed  it 
against  every  kind  of  morals  which  avoids  or  renounces  the  world, 
especially  against  the  religious  forms  of  such  ethical  theories.  This, 
was  shown  already  in  the  case  of  Feiterlctch,  who  set  for  his  philo- 
sophical activity  the  task  of  making  man  a  "free,  self-conscious. 

1  These  principles  are  further  developed  by  B.  Bosanquet,  T/ie  Philosophical 
Theory  of  the  State,  1899. 


§  46.]  Problem  of  Values ;  Diihring.  671 

citizen  of  the  earth."1  The  will  is  for  him  identical  with  the 
impulse  to  happiness,  and  happiness  is  nothing  else  than  "life, 
normal,  sound,  without  defect."  Hence  the  impulse  to  happiness  is 
the  foundation  of  morals ;  the  goal,  however,  consists  in  the  vital 
and  active  combination  of  the  striving  toward  one's  own  happiness 
with  that  toward  the  happiness  of  others.  In  this  positive  action  of 
willing  the  welfare  of  others  lies  the  root  of  sympathy  also.  Virtue 
stands  in  contradiction  with  only  that  form  of  happiness  which  seeks 
to  be  happy  at  the  expense  of  others.  On  the  other  hand,  virtue  has 
a  certain  degree  of  happiness  as  its  indispensable  presupposition,  for 
the  pressure  of  want  forces  the  impulse  to  happiness  irresistibly 
and  one-sidedly  toward  the  egoistic  side.  Just  on  this  account 
human  morality  can  be  furthered  only  by  the  improvement  of  man- 
kind's external  situation  —  a  thought  from  which  Feuerbach  proceeds 
to  very  far-reaching  demands.  His  moral  sensualism  is  supported 
by  the  firm  conviction  that  historical  development  lies  along  the 
line  of  his  postulates,  and  with  all  his  pessimistic  and  often  bitter 
estimate  of  the  present  he  combines  a  strongly  hopeful  optimism  for 
the  future.  Man,  as  a  bodily  personality,  with  Ms  sensuous  feeling 
and  willing,  is  for  him  the  sole  truth ;  when  set  over  against  this 
truth  all  philosophic  theories,  echoes  as  they  are  of  theological 
theories,  collapse  into  nothing. 

Another  optimistic  materialist  is  Eugen  Diihring,  who  has  made 
a  peculiar  "  philosophy  of  reality "  the  basis  of  his  estimation 
of  the  "  worth  of  life."  The  anti-religious  character  of  this  kind  of 
world-affirmation  appears  here  much  more  clearly  than  in  the  case  of 
Feuerbach.  Dlihring  sees  in  the  pessimism  of  the  60's  and  70's,  which 
he  has  opposed  with  bitter  relentlessness,  the  romantic  continuation 
of  the  attitudes  of  Christianity  and  Buddhism,  which  are  hostile 
to  the  world.  He  regarded  the  "  superstitious  "  ideas  of  the  "  other 
world,"  or  the  "  beyond,"  as  the  real  ground  of  the  lack  of  apprecia- 
tion for  the  actual  world  of  reality ;  only  when  all  superstitious 
belief  in  supernatural  beings  has  been  banished  will  the  true  and 
immanent  worth  of  life  be  completely  enjoyed,  in  his  opinion.  True 
knowledge  apprehends  reality  exactly  as  it  is,  just  as  it  lies  imme- 
diately before  human  experience  ;  it  is  delusion  to  seek  still  another 
behind  it.  And  even  as  with  knowledge,  so  also  with  values,  they 
must  be  found  in  what  is  given ;  the  only  rational  is  reality  itself. 
Already  in  the  conceptions  of  infinity  Duhring  detects  — not  so 
incorrectly  —  a  going  beyond  what  is  given*,  for  him,  therefore,  the 

i  Of.  particularly  the  fragment  published  by  K.  Griin,  L.  Feuerbach  in 
Seinem  Brief wtchsd  und  Nachlass.,  II.  253  ff.,  in  which  Feuerbach  declares  his 
position  as  against  Schopenhauer. 


672  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

actual  world  is  limited  in  magnitude  and  number.  But  it  bears 
within  itself  all  the  conditions  of  self-satisfying  happiness.  Even 
the  view  that  there  is  a  lack  of  sufficient  means  of  life,  on  which 
Darwin  grounded  his  doctrine  of  the  struggle  for  existence  and  his 
theory  of  selection,  is  controverted  by  Duliring  in  a  most  vigorous 
fashion,  although  he  is  not  hostile  to  the  theory  of  descent  and  the 
principle  of  evolution.  On  the  basis  of  these  conceptions  Duliring 
seeks  to  refute  pessimism  by  demonstrating  that  man's  enjoyment 
of  life  is  spoiled  only  by  the  bad  arrangements  and  customs  which 
owe  their  origin  to  ideas  of  the  supernatural.  It  is  the  mission  of 
the  philosophy  of  reality  alone  to  produce  healthy  life  from  healthy 
thought,  and  to  create  the  satisfaction  of  a  disposition  based  on  a 
noble  humanity,  capacities  for  which  have  been  given  by  nature 
herself  in  the  sympathetic  affections.  Although  Duhring  has  de- 
claimed thus  sharply  and  with  irritation  against  the  present  social 
system,  he  has  enlisted  himself  energetically  in  defence  of  the 
reasonableness  of  the  actual  world  as  a  whole.  As  he  has  theoreti- 
cally maintained  the  identity  of  the  forms  of  human  perception  and 
thought  with  the  laws  of  reality,  so  he  has  also  convinced  himself 
that  this  same  reality  contains  all  the  conditions  for  ultimately 
realising  the  values  presented  in  the  rational  consciousness.  For 
this  rational  consciousness  of  ours  is  in  the  last  analysis  nothing 
more  than  the  highest  form  of  the  life  of  nature. 

3.  All  these  kinds  of  positivistic  optimism  make  the  most  instruc- 
tive variations  in  the  Hegelian  principle  of  the  identity  of  the  real 
and  the  rational  (p.  615) ;  all  of  them  show  besides  a  trace  of  that 
faith  in  the  goodness  of  nature  which  was  characteristic  of  Rousseau, 
and  in  their  hope  for  a  better  future  of  the  human  race  they  incline 
to  give  an  evolutionary  stamp  to  the  thought  of  man's  unlimited 
capacity  for  perfection,  which  the  philosophy  of  the  French  Revolu- 
tion had  produced  (cf.  p.  525).  All  the  more  characteristic  is  it 
that  the  last  factor  has  given  an  essentially  altered  form  to  the 
opposite  conception,  viz.  pessimism. 

In  themselves  optimism  and  pessimism,  as  answers  to  the  hedonic 
question,  whether  the  world  contains  more  pleasure  or  pain,  are 
equally  pathological  phenomena.  This  is  true  especially  in  the  form 
in  which  these  enter  as  factors  into  general  literature.  For  science 
this  question  is  as  unnecessary  as  it  is  incapable  of  answer.  The 
controversy  gams  philosophic  significance  only  because  it  is  brought 
into  connection,  with  the  question  as  to  the  rationality  or  irrationality 
of  the  world-ground,  as  it  had  already  been  brought  by  Leibniz  along 
one  line  and  by  Schopenhauer  along  another.  But  in  both  cases  it 
was  completely  impossible  to  make  the  hedonistic  origin  of  the 


§46.]  Problem  of  Values:  Hartmann.  673 

problem  disappear  by  the  metaphysical  transformation  which  was 
given  to  it. 

The  pessimistic  temper  which  prevailed  in  Germany  in  the  first 
decade  of  the  second  half  of  our  century  had  its  easily  recognisable 
grounds  in  political  and  social  relations,  and  the  eager  reception  and 
welcome  of  Schopenhauer's  doctrines,  supported  by  the  brilliant 
qualities  of  the  writer,  are  usually  regarded  as  easily  intelligible  for 
that  reason.  It  is  more  remarkable  and  serious  that  this  temper  has 
outlasted  the  year  1870,  and  indeed  that  precisely  in  the  following 
decade  it  unburdened  itself  in  an  unlimited  flood  of  tirades  of  a 
popular  philosophical  sort,  and  for  a  time  has  completely  controlled 
general  literature.  Considered  from  the  standpoint  of  the  history  of 
civilisation,  this  fact  will  be  regarded  as  a  manifestation  of  relaxation 
and  surfeit ;  the  part  which  the  history  of  philosophy  has  in  the 
movement  is  connected  with  the  brilliant  and  misleading  "Philos- 
ophy of  the  Unconscious."  Eduard  von  Hartmann  found  a  witty 
synthesis  between  Leibniz  and  Schopenhauer  on  the  basis  of  his 
metaphysics,  which  regarded  the  world-ground  as  a  complex  resultant 
of  the  irrational  will  and  of  the  "  logical  element "  (cf .  §  44,  9).  This 
synthesis  was  that  this  world  is  indeed  the  best  of  all  possible 
worlds,  but  nevertheless  that  it  is  still  so  bad  that  it  would  have 
been  better  if  there  had  been  none  at  all.  The  mixture  of  teleologi- 
cal  and  dysteleological  views  of  nature  which  had  passed  by  inheri- 
tance from  Schelling  to  Schopenhauer  (pp.  618  if.)  appears  here  with 
Hartmann  in  grotesque  and  fanciful  development;  and  the  contra- 
diction is  to  be  solved  by  the  theory  that  after  the  irrational  will 
has  once  taken  its  false  step  of  manifesting  itself  as  life  and  actual 
existence,  this  life-process  goes  on  in  a  progressive  development 
whose  ripest  meaning  is  the  insight  into  the  unreason  of  the  "  will  to 
live."  The  rational  element  in  this  life-process  will  then  consist  in 
denying  that  unreason,  in  retracing  the  act  of  world-origination,  and 
in  redeeming  the  will  from  its  own  unhappy  realisation. 

On  this  account  Hartmann  found  the  essential  nature  of  the 
"rational"  consciousness  to  lie  in  seeing  through  the  "illusions" 
with  which  the  irrational  pressure,  of  the  will  produces  just  what 
must  make  it  unhappy,  and  out  of  this  relation  he  developed  the 
ethical  task  that  each  one,  should  co-operate  to  save  the  world-will 
•by  the  denial  of  illusions.  He  developed  also  the  thought  of  funda- 
mental importance  for  the  philosophy  of  history  that  all  work  of 
civilisation  should  be  directed  toward  this  goal  of  salvation.  The 
development  of  the  irrational  will  ought  to  have  the  annihilation  of 
this  will  as  its  rational  goal ;  hence  Hartmann  approves  all  work  of 
civilisation  because  its  ultimate  end  is  the  annihilation  of  life  and 


674  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

the  redemption  of  the  will  from  the  unhappiness  of  existence.  In 
this  respect  he  comes  into  contact  with  Mainlander,  who  with  him 
and  after  him  worked  out  Schopenhauer's  theory  to  an  ascetic  "  Phi- 
losophy of  Salvation";  but  with  Hartmann  these  thoughts  take  on 
the  colouring  of  an  evolutionary  optimism  which  shows  a  much 
deeper  intelligence  for  the  earnestness  and  wealth  of  historic 
development  than  we  find  with  Schopenhauer.  And  as  von  Hart- 
mann has  anonymously  given  the  best  criticism  of  his  "  Philosophy 
of  the  Unconscious,"  from  the  standpoint  of  the  theory  of  descent, 
so  in  his  own  development  the  shell  of  pessimism  has  been  gradually 
stripped  off  and  the  positive  principle  of  evolution  has  emerged  as 
the  essential  thing.  In  him,  too,  Hegel  has  triumphed  over  Schopen- 
hauer. 

4.  All  these  theories  of  life,  whose  typical  extremes  were  here  set 
over  against  each  other,  vary  indeed  with  regard  to  their  recognition 
and  gradation  of  individual  values  and  goals,  but  they  coincide  in 
recognising  on  the  whole  the  prevailing  moral  code,  and  in  particular 
the  altruism  which  is  its  chief  constituent.  Their  differences  con- 
cern rather  the  general  formulation,  or  the  sanction,  or  the  motive 
of  morality,  than  morality  itself.  Even  the  more  radical  tendencies 
seek  only  to  free  human  ethics  from  the  perversions  which  it  is  said 
to  have  experienced  in  certain  historical  systems,  or  in  their  sur- 
vivals and  their  after  effects ;  and  through  all  the  doctrines  already 
mentioned  goes  a  strongly  democratic  tendency  which  sets  the  weal 
of  the  whole  above  everything  else,  and  estimates  the  worth  of  the 
individual  much  lower  than  was  the  case  in  the  great  period  of  Ger- 
man philosophy.  A  tendency  to  hero-worship,  like  that  of  Carlyle 
(cf.  p.  654),  is  quite  isolated  in  our  century;  far  more  prevalent  is 
the  theory  of  the  milieu  or  environment  which  Taine  brought  into 
circulation  for  the  history  of  the  mind,  and  which  is  inclined  to 
minimise  the  part  which  the  individual  bears  in  the  historical  move- 
ment as  contrasted  with  the  influence  of  masses. 

We  cannot  fail  to  recognise  that  such  theories  correspond  com- 
pletely to  certain  political,  social,  literary,  and  artistic  conditions 
and  obvious  manifestations  of  modern  life;  hence  it  is  easier  to 
understand  why,  here  and  there,  the  reaction  of  individualism  in. 
an  especially  passionate  form  has  made  its  appearance.  Wo  must 
insist,  in  the  first  place,  that  over  against  that  type  of  assiduous 
striving  which  permits  itself  to  be  driven  by  every  tide  of  influence, 
the  individualistic  idea  of  culture  which  belongs  to  that  great  period, 
now  somewhat  depreciatingly  denoted  Romanticism,  has  in  no  wise 
so  completely  died  out  as  is  supposed.  It  lives  on  in  many  highly 
developed  personalities  who  do  not  find  it  necessary  to  make  a  dis- 


§  46.]  Problem  of  Values :  Stirner,  Bahnsen.  675 

play  with  it  in  literature;  for  the  theory  of  this  ideal  has  been 
expressed  by  Fichte,  Schiller,  and  Schleiermacher.  And  just  for 
this  reason  it  does  not  make  common  cause  with  the  artificial  para- 
doxes which  radical  individualism  loves  to  present  on  occasion. 

The  most  robust  example  of  such  paradoxes  came  from  the  He- 
gelian "  left,"  in  the  fantastic  book  of  M.  Stirner  (Kaspar  Schmidt, 
1806-1856),  The  Individual  and  his  Property l  (1844).  Stirner  is  re- 
lated to  Feuerbach  as  Feuerbach  is  to  Hegel:  he  draws  the  conclu- 
sion which  would  completely  invert  the  premises.  Feuerbach  had 
looked  upon  "spirit"  or  the  "idea"  as  the  "other-being  of  Na- 
ture," and  as  abstract  and  unreal  as  the  theological  ghost.  He  had 
declared  the  only  reality  to  be  man,  living  man  of  flesh  and  blood  ; 
but  his  ethics  aimed  toward  humanity,  active  love  to  humanity. 
What  is  mankind?  asks  Stirner.  A  general  idea,  an  abstraction  — 
a  last  shadow  of  the  old  ghost  which  is  still  walking,  even  in  Feuer- 
bach's  system.  The  true  concrete  reality  is  the  individual — the 
autocratic  personality.  .  Such  a  personality  makes  its  world  both  in 
its  acts  of  ideation  and  in  its  acts  of  will ;  therefore  its  ownership 
extends  as  far  as  its  will  extends.  It  recognises  nothing  above 
itself;  it  knows  no  other  weal  than  its  own,  and  serves  no  alien  law 
or  alien  will.  For  in  truth  there  is  •  nothing  for  it  except  itself. 
Thus  by  reversing  Fichte's  doctrine  of  the  "  universal  ego,"  Stirner 
attains  to  "  egoism  "  in  both  the  theoretical  and  the  practical  sense 
of  the  word.  He  plays  the  "  solipsist " 2  and  preaches  unscrupulous 
self-seeking,  —  Ic7i  hab}  mein'  8achJ  anf  nichts  gesteUt*  All  this 
sounded  like  an  artificial  cynicism,  and  it  was  a  matter  of  doubt 
whether  the  book  was  intended  to  be  taken  seriously.  At  all  events 
it  soon  lost  the  interest  which  it  momentarily  excited,  and  fell 
into  an  oblivion  from  which  it  has  only  recently  been  rescued.  But 
when,  as  now,  there  is  a  disposition  to  see  in  it  a  first  cry  of  distress 
from  the  individual  repressed  by  the  mass,  it  ought  not  to  be  ignored 
that  the  "  individual "  who  was  here  seeking  to  emancipate  himself 
from  the  community  did  not  give  any  indication  of  a  peculiar  value 
which  would  have  justified  him  in  any  such  emancipation.  His  sole 
originality  consisted  in  the  courage  of  paradox. 

5.  Another  bizarre  form  of  individualism  was  developed  from 
Schopenhauer's  metaphysics  of  the  will,  by  Julius  Bahnsen.  Here 
the  "unreason"  of  the  will  is  taken  with  complete  seriousness,  but 
the  pantheistic  aspect  of  the  "one  only  will"  is  stripped  away. 

1  Der  Einzige  und  sein  Eigenthum. 

2  Cf.  above,  p.  471.  8 1  care  for  nothing. 

4  Bettriiye  &ur  CharaJcterologie  (1867)  j  Der  Widerspruch  im  Wissen  und 
Wesen  der  Welt  (1881-1882). 


676  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

We  know  only  individuals  who  will,  and  Bahnsen  sees  in  them  the 
independent  elementary  potencies  of  reality,  beyond  which  no  higher 
principle  is  to  be  assumed.  The  separate  and  self-sufficient  exist- 
ence of  finite  personalities,  which  iBahnsen  also  calls  "  Henads,"  has 
never  been  so  sharply  formulated  as  in  this  atheistic  atomism  of  the 
will.  Each  of  these  "wills"  is,  moreover,  divided  within  itself  into 
two,  and  in  this  consists  its  unreason  and  its  unhappiness.  This 
contradiction  belongs  to  the  essence  of  the  will ;  the  will  is  the  "  as- 
serted contradiction,"  and  this  is  the  true  dialectic,  "  the  real  dialec- 
tic," This  contradiction,  however,  cannot  be  grasped  by  logical 
thinking  5  hence  all  the  effort  which  the  will  makes  to  know  the 
world  is  in  vain.  Logical  thinking  which  excludes  contradiction  is 
incapable  of  understanding  a  world  which  consists  of  intrinsically 
contradictory  wills.  The  contradiction  between  the  world  and  the 
intellect  makes  impossible  even  the  partial  salvation  which  Schopen- 
hauer admitted,1  and  the  indestructible  individual  will  must  there- 
fore endure  forever  the  suffering  of  self-laceration  in  ever  new 
existences.  At  so  high  a  price  is  the  metaphysical  dignity  pur- 
chased, which  personality  here  receives  as  its  "  intelligible  charac- 
ter." The  living  out  of  this  "intelligible  character,"  purposeless 
and  futile  as  it  really  is,  forms  the  principle  of  all  values. 

Since  the  theory  of  knowledge  involved  in  this  "  real  dialectic*" 
maintains  that  logical  thinking  and  reality  with  its  contradictions 
have  no  common  measure,  the  fantasies  of  this  "  misorableism  "  make 
no  claim  to  scientific  validity;  they  are  only  the  expression  of  the 
gloomy  mood  of  the  individual  who  is  caught  in  the  conflict  of  his 
own  will,  They  form  the  melancholy  counterpart  to  the  pert  frivol- 
ity of  Stirner's  individual.  Both  show  what  result  may  be  expected 
if  "  philosophy  "  takes  moods  which  constitute  the  peculiar  nature 
of  pessimism  and  optimism  as  a  basis  for  serious  conclusions, 

This  is  still  more  recognisable  in  the  case  of  the  great  influence 
which  has  been  exercised  in  the  last  decade  upon  the  view  of  life 
and  its  literary  expression  by  the  poet,  Friedrick  Nietzsche.  Many 
factors  combine  to  form  this  influence:  the  fascinating  beauty  of 
language  which  ensnares  and  intoxicates  even  where  the  content 
passes  over  into  enigmatic  suggestions  j  a  mysterious  symbolism 
which,  in  "Thus  spake  Zarathustra,"  permits  the  author  to  revel  in 
obscurity  and  indefiniteness ;  the  aphoristic  form  of  expression 
which  never  requires  the  reader  to  think  coherently  in  scientific 
terms,  but  rather  leaves  him  to  determine  for  himself  how  much 
stimulus  and  suggestion  he  will  utilise,  and  thus  decide  the  degree 

1  Cf.  p.  621. 


§40.]  (          Problem  of  Values:  Nietzsche.  677 

iu  which  he  will  expect  himself  to  enjoy  the  surprising  hits,  the  brill- 
iant formulations,  the  happy  comparisons,  and  paradoxical  combi- 
nations. But  all  these  elements  are  unimportant  in  comparison  "with 
the  immediate  impression  of  the  personality  of  the  writer.  We  meet 
an  individual  of  the  highest  culture,  and  of  a  thoroughly  original 
stamp,  who  experiences  all  the  tendencies  of  the  time,  and  suffers 
from  the  same  unsolved  contradictions  by  which  the  time  itself  is 
out  of  joint.  Hence  the  echo  which  his  language  has  found; 
hence  the  danger  of  his  influence3  which  does  not  heal  the  sickness 
of  his  age,  but  increases  it. 

The  two  factors  of  the  inner  antagonism  of  his  own  nature 
Nietzsche  himself  has  called  the  "Dionysus"  and  the  "Apollo." 
It  is  the  antithesis  between  voluntarism  and  intellectualism,  be- 
tween Schopenhauer's  will  and  Hegel's  idea.  It  appears  here  in 
an  individual  of  the  highest  intellectual  culture  and  aesthetic  pro- 
ductiveness, who  is  able  to  apprehend  history  and  life  with  the 
greatest  delicacy  and  to  reproduce  them  poetically  with  equal  fine- 
ness of  feeling.  But  science  and  art  have  not  saved  this  individual 
f r,om  the  dark  "  will  to  live  " ;  deep  within  stirs  a  passionate,  com- 
pelling impulse  toward  wild  deeds,  toward  the  achieving  and  unfold- 
ing of  power.  His  is  the  case  of  a  nervous  professor  who  would 
fain  be  a  wild  tyrant,  and  who  is  tossed  back  and  forth  between  the 
quiet  enjoyment  of  the  goods  of  the  highest  culture  on  the  one  hand, 
and  that  mysterious,  burning  demand  for  a  life  of  passion  on  the 
other.  Now  he  luxuriates  in  serene  blessedness  of  aesthetic  contem- 
plation and  artistic  production;  now  he  casts  all  this  aside  and 
asserts  his  impulses,  his  instincts,  his  passions.  Sensual  enjoyment, 
as  such,  has  never  been  a  value  for  him  —  this  is  shown  in  the 
height  and  purity  of  his  nature.  The  enjoyment  which  he  seeks  is 
either  that  of  knowing  or  that  of  power.  In  the  struggle  between 
the  two  he  has  been  crushed — the  victim  of  an  age  which  is  satisfied 
no  longer  by  the  impersonal  and  superpersonal  values  of  intellec- 
tual, aesthetic,  and  moral  culture,  but  thirsts  again  for  the  bound- 
less unfolding  of  the  individual  in  a  life  of  deeds.  Caught  in  the 
struggle  between  its  reason  inherited  from  the  past  and  its  passion 
thirsting  for  the  future,  it  and  all  of  value  that  it  possesses  are  torn 
and  ground.  The  artistic  expression  of  a  nature  thus  rent  and  torn 
is  the  charm  of  Nietzsche's  writings. 

In  his  first  period,  which  contains  the  following  in  germ,  the 
conflict  between  the  two  motive  forces  has  not  yet  come  to  open 
outbreak  ;  rather  we  find  him  applying  Schopenhauer's  fundamental 
thoughts  to  the  origin  of  Greek  tragedy  and  to  Kichard  Wagner's 
musical  drama,  and  thus  presenting  art  as  the  source  of  salva- 


678  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.       [PART  VII. 

tion  from  the  torture  of  the  will.  But  even  at  that  time  it  was  his 
thought  that  out  of  this  tragic .  temper  a  new,  a  higher  culture 
should  be  brought  forth ;  a  prouder  race  should  emerge,  of  bold  and 
splendidly  audacious  will  which  would  victoriously  burst  the  bonds 
of  the  present  intellectual  and  spiritual  life,  and  even  at  that  period 
this  bent  toward  originality  and  independence  threw  overboard  the 
ballast  of  the  historic  period.  No  condition  and  no  authority  is  to 
repress  this  artistic  civilisation ;  aesthetic  freedom  is  to  be  cramped 
neither  by  knowledge  nor  by  life. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  that  when  these  thoughts  began  to 
clarify  themselves  the  philosophic  poet  followed  for  a  time  along 
the  path  of  intellectualisrn.  Science  is  the  free  spirit  which  casts 
off  all  fetters  and  recognises  nothing  above  itself  5  but  she  is  such 
only  when  she  makes  the  "  real  "  man  free,  placing  him  oil  his  own 
feet,  independent  of  everything  that  is  above  the  senses  or  apart 
from  the  senses.  This  science  which  Nietzsche  would  now  make 
the  bearer  of  the  essence  of  culture  is  positive  science,  —  no  meta- 
physics, not  even  the  metaphysics  of  the  will ;  hence  he  dedicates 
his  book  "for  free  spirits'7  to  the  memory  of  Voltaire,  and  while 
he  had  earlier  turned  Wagner  from  Feuerbach  to  Schopenhauer, 
now  he  himself  goes  the  reverse  way.  He  comes  into  agreement 
with  the  utilitarian  ethics  of  Paul  Ree;  he  believes  in  the  possi- 
bility of  the  purely  scientific  culture.  He  even  goes  so  far  as  to 
see  in  knowledge  the  highest  and  best  aim  of  life.  Knowledge  is 
for  him  the  true  joy,  and  the  whole  freshness  of  delight  in  the  joys 
of  the  world  and  of  life  which  is  found  in  0ea>/>«i  (contemplation)  — 
an  enjoyment  of  the  present  actual  world  which  is  at  once  esthetic 
and  theoretical  —  is  the  fundamental  note  of  this  period,  the  most 
fortunate  period  which  was  granted  to  him. 

Then  the  Dionysus  element  of  passion  came  to  expression  as  an 
uncontrollable  longing  for  strong, '  masterful,  unsympathetic  living 
out  of  personality,  which  throws  down  all  that  would  stand  in  its 
path.  The  strongest  impulse  of  man  is  the  will  for  power.  It  is  for 
him  to  assert  this.  But  this  unconditional  assertion  bursts  the 
system  of  values  in  which  our  civilisation,  up  to  this  time,  has 
enmeshed  itself ;  the  new  ideal  is  in  this  sense  "  beyond  good  and 
bad/' l  The  will  for  power  knows  no  bonds  which  prescribe  what  is 
"permitted";  for  it,  everything  is  good  which  springs  from  power 
and  increases  power;  everything  is  bad  which  springs  from  weak- 
ness and  weakens  power.  So  also  in  our  judgments,  in  knowledge 


1  Jenseits  von  Gut  und  Bose,  the  title  of  one  of  Nietzsche's  books,  translated 
by  A.  Tille. 


§46.]  Problem  of  Values:  Nietzsche.  679 

and  in  conviction,  the  important  thing  is  not  whether  they  are 
"  true,"  but  whether  they  help  us,  -whether  they  further  our  life  and 
strengthen  our  mind.  They  have  worth  only  if  they  make  us  strong. 
Hence,  conviction  also  may  and  must  change  as  life  unfolds  its 
changes  (as  was  the  case  in  part  with  Nietzsche  himself).  Man 
chooses  what  he  needs ;  'the  value  of  knowing  also  lies  beyond  true 
and  false.  Here  begins,  therefore,  the  overturning  and  re-valuation 
of  all  values  (Umwerthung  aller  Wertke).  Here  the  philosopher  be- 
comes a  reformer  of  morals,  the  legislator  the  creator  of  a  new  civili- 
sation. In  the  third  period  of  his  development  Nietzsche  was  full 
of  the  consciousness  of  this  task. 

From  this  standpoint  he  sets  up  the  ideal  of  the  over-man  (Ueber- 
mensch)  in  contrast  with  the  ordinary,  everyday  man  of  the  com- 
mon herd.  Will  for  power  is  will  for  mastery,  and  the  most 
important  mastery  is  that  of  man  over  man.  Hegel  once  said  that 
of  all  great  things  which  the  world's  history  shows,  the  greatest  is 
the  mastery  of  one  free  will  over  others.  It  recalls  this  saying 
when  Nietzsche  develops  his  new  idea  of  civilisation  from  the 
antithesis  between  the  "morals  of  masters"  and  "morals  of  slaves." 
All  the  brutality  of  trampling  down  those  who  may  be  in  the  way, 
all  the  unfettering  of  the  primitive  beast  in  human  nature,  appear 
here  as  the  right  and  duty  of  the  strong.  The  strong  man  unfolds 
and  defends  the  energy  of  living  as  against  the  scantiness  and 
meagreness  of  renunciation  and  humility.  The  morality  of  slaves, 
therefore,  coincides  essentially  with  the  ascetic  nature  of  the  super- 
naturalism  which  Nietzsche  had  formerly  combated,  and  the  positive 
connection  of  the  transition  period  with  his  third  period  consists  in 
the  "joyous  "  assertion  of  a  world-conquering  thirst  for  living. 

Nevertheless  the  ideal  for  the  "over-man"  remains  -veiled  in 
poetic  dimness  and  indefiniteness.  According  to  the  original  ten- 
dency, the  over-man  is  the  great  individuality  which  asserts  its 
primitive  rights  over  against  the  mass.  The  common  herd  of  the 
"  far  too  many  "  (Viel-zu-Viele)  exists  only  to  the  end  that  out  of  it  as 
rare  instances  of  fortune  may  rise  the  over-men.  These,  from  century 
to  century,  recognize  each  other  as  bearers  of  all  the  meaning  and 
worth  that  is  to  be  found  in  all  this  confused  driving  of  disordered 
forces.  The  genius  is  the  end  and  aim  of  history,  and  it  is  in  this 
that  his  right  of  mastery  as  over  against  the  Philistine  has  its  root. 
But  according  to  another  tendency  the  over-man  appears  as  a  higher 
type  of  the  human  race,  who  is  to  be  bred  and  trained — as  the 
strong  race  which  enjoys  its  strength  of  mastery  in  the  powerful 
unfolding  of  life,  free  from  the  restraints  and  self-disturbing  ten- 
dencies of  the  slavish  morality,  In  both  cases  Nietzsche's  ideal  of 


680  Philosophy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.      [PART  VII. 

the  over-man  is  alike  aristocratic  and  exclusive,  and  it  is  a  sharp 
penalty  for  the  poetic  indefiniteness  and  symbolic  ambiguity  of  his 
aphorisms  that  his  combating  of  "slavish  morality"  and  of  its 
supernatural  foundations  has  made  him  popular  with  just  the  very 
ones  who  would  be  the  first  to  strike  from  the  over-man  the  head  by 
which  he  towers  above  the  common  herd  of  the  "  too  many." 

Between  the  two  lines  along  which  the  ideal  of  the  over-man 
develops,  the  author  has  not  come  to  a  clear  decision.  Zarathustra 
mingles  them  together,  with  wavering  lines  of  transition.  It  is  clear 
that  the  one  form  is  an  echo  of  the  romantic  ideal  of  the  genius  as 
the  other  borrows  from  sociological  evolution.  But  the  thought 
of  an  elevation  of  the  human  type  through  the  agency  of  philosophy 
reminds  us  of  the  postulates  of  German  idealism. 

The  remark  is  quite  just  that  from  this  conception  of  the  doctrine 
of  the  over-man  the  step  to  Fichte  would  not  have  been  a  long  one. 
That  Nietzsche  could  not  take  it  was  due  to  the  fact  that  he  had  in 
his  nature  too  much  of  SchlegePs  "  genius,"  which  treats  all  expe- 
riences from  the  standpoint  of  irony  (p.  605).  This  made  him  unable 
to  find  his  way  back  from  the  individual  mind  to  the  "  universal 
ego  "  —  to  the  conception  of  values  which  assert  their  validity  over 
all. 

7.  The  revolt  of  boundless  individualism  culminates  in  the  claim 
that  all  values  are  relative.  Only  the  powerful  will  of  the  over-man 
persists  as  the  absolute  value,  and  sanctions  every  means  which  it 
brings  into  service.  For  the  "higher"  man  there  is  no  longer  any 
form  or  standard,  either  logical  or  ethical.  The  arbitrary  will  of  the 
over-man  has  superseded  the  "autonomy  of  reason" — this  is  the 
course  from  Kant  to  Nietzsche  which  the  nineteenth  centuiy  has 
described. 

Just  this  determines  the  problem  of  the  future.  Eelativism  is 
the  dismissal  and  death  of  philosophy.  Philosophy  can  live  only  as 
the  science  of  values  which  are  universally  valid.  It  will  no  longer 
force  its  way  into  the  work  of  the  particular  sciences,  where 
psychology  also  now  belongs.  Philosophy  has  neither  the  craving 
to  know  over  again  from  her  standpoint  what  the  special  sciences 
have  already  known  from  theirs,  nor  the  desire  to  compile  and 
patch  together  generalisations  from  the  ''more  general  results" 
of  the  separate  disciplines.  Philosophy  has  its  own  field  and 
its  own  problem  in  those  values  of  universal  validity  which  are 
the  organising  principle  for  all  the  functions  of  culture  and  civili- 
sation and  for  all  the  particular  values  of  life.  But  it  will  de- 
scribe ^  and  explain  these  values  only  that  it  may  give  an  account 
of  their  validity;  it  treats  them  not  as  facts  but  as  norms.  Hence 


§46.]  The  Problem  of  Values.  681 

it  will  have  to  develop  its  task  as  a  "giving  of  laws  " — not  laws  of 
arbitrary  caprice  which  it  dictates,  but  rather  laws  of  the  reason, 
which  it  discovers  and  comprehends.  By  following  the  path  toward 
this  goal  it  seems  to  be  the  aim  of  the  present  movement,  divided 
within  itself  as  it  often  is,  to  win  back  the  important  conquests  of 
the  great  period  of  German  philosophy.  Since  Lotze  raised  the  cow- 
ception  of  value  to  a  place  of  prominence,  and  set  it  at  the  summit  of 
logic  and  metaphysics  as  well  as  of  ethics,  many  suggestions  toward 
a  "theory  of  values,"  as  a  new  foundation  science  in  philosophy,  have 
arisen.  It  can  do  no  harm  if  these  move  in  part  in  the  psychologi- 
cal and  sociological  realm,  provided  it  is  not  forgotten  that  in  estab- 
lishing facts  and  making  genetic  explanations  we  have  only  gained 
the  material  upon  which  philosophy  itself  must  perform  its  task  of 
criticism. 

But  a  no  less  valuable  foundation  for  this  central  work  is  formed 
by  the  history  of  philosophy,  which,  as  Hegel  first  recognised,  must 
be  regarded  in  this  sense  as  an  integrant  part  of  philosophy  itself. 
For  it  presents  the  process  in  which  European  humanity  has 
embodied  in  scientific  conceptions  its  view  of  the  world  and  judg- 
ment of  human  life. 

In  this  process  particular  experiences  have  furnished  the  occasions, 
and  special  problems  of  knowledge  have  been  the  instrumentalities, 
through  which  step  by  step  reflection  has  advanced  to  greater  clear- 
ness and  certainty  respecting  the  ultimate  values  of  culture  and 
civilisation.  In  setting  forth  this  process,  therefore,  the  history  of 
philosophy  presents  to  our  view  the  gradual  attainment  of  clearness 
and  certainty  respecting  those  values  whose  universal  validity  forms 
the  problem  and  field  of  philosophy  itself. 


APPENDIX. 

P.  12.    Line  15.    Add:  — 

On  the  pragmatic  factor,  cf.  C.  Herrmann,  Der  pragmatische  Zusammenhang 
in  der  G-eschichte  der  Philosophie  (Dresden,  1863). 

P.  12.  Line  10  from  foot  of  the  text.  Add  as  foot-note,  affixed 
to  the  word  "  positive  " :  — 

A  similar,  but  quite  mistaken  attempt  has  been  recently  made  in  this  direc- 
tion by  Fr.  Brentano,  Die  vier  Phasen  in  der  Philosophie  und  ihr  gegemoartiger 
Stand  (Vienna,  1895).  Here  belong  also  the  analogies,  always  more  or  less 
artificial,  which  have  been  attempted  between  the  course  of  development  in  the 
ancient  and  that  in  the  modern  philosophy.  Cf.  e.g.  v.  Reichlin-Meldegg,  Der 
Parallelismus  der  alten  undneueren  Philosophie  (Leips.  and  Heidelb.  1865). 

P.  16.     Line  6  from  foot  of  text,  add :  — 

In  all  previous  expositions  of  the  history  of  philosophy,  whether  upon  a  larger 
or  smaller  scale,  a  chronological  arrangement  has  been  adopted,  following  the 
order  and  succession  of  the  more  important  philosophies  and  schools.  These 
various  arrangements  have  differed  only  in  details,  and  these  not  always  impor- 
tant. Among  the  most  recent  might  be  named  in  addition,  that  of  J.  Bergman  n, 
whose  treatment  shows  taste  and  insight  (2  vok,  Berlin,  1802).  A  treatment 
marked  by  originality  and  fineness  of  thought,  in  which  the  usual  scheme  has 
been  happily  broken  through  by  emphasis  upon  the  great  movements  and  inter- 
relations of  the  world's  history,  is  presented  by  R.  Eucken,  Lie  Lebensanschati- 
ungen  der  grossen  Denker  (2d  ed.,  Leips,  1898). 

P.  23.    To  the  foot-note,  add :  — 

Windischmann,  earlier  (Die  Philosophie  im  Fortgang  der  Weltgeschichte, 
Bonn,  1827-1834),  and  recently  P.  Deussen  (Allgemeine  Geschichte  der  Philoso- 
phie, I.  1,  Leips.  1894)  have  made  a  beginning  toward  the  work  of  relating  this 
Oriental  thought  to  the  whole  history  of  philosophy. 

P.  24    Line  8.    Affix  as  foot-note :  — 

E.  Rohde  has  set  forth  with  great  insight  and  discrimination  the  rich  sugges- 
tions for  philosophy  in  the  following  period,  which  grew  out  of  the  transforma- 
tions of  the  religious  ideas  (Psyche,  2d  ed.,  1897). 

P.  27.     To  the  lit.  on  the  Period,  add :  — 

A.  Fairbanks,  TJie  First  Philosophers  of  Greece,  N.Y.  1898. 

P.  30.    Line  30.    To  the  notice  of  Heraclitus,  add  :  — 

He  was  apparently  the  first  who,  from  the  standpoint  of  scientific  insight, 
undertook  to  reform  the  public  life  and  combat  the  dangers  of  anarchy.  Him- 
self an  austere  and  rigorous  personality,  he  preached  the  law  of  order,  which 
ought  to  prevail  in  human  life  as  in  nature. 


684  Appendix. 

P.  30.    Line  19  from  the  foot.    To  the  notice  of  Anaxagoras,  add:  — 

His  scientific  employments  were  essentially  astronomical  in  their  nature. 
Neglecting  earthly  interests,  he  is  said  to  have  declared  the  heavens  to  be  his 
fatherland,  and  the  observation  of  the  stars  to  be  his  life  work.  Metrodorus  and 
Archelaus  are  named  as  his  disciples. 

P.  42.     Foot-note  1.    Relating  to  the  vovs  of  Anaxagoras,  add :  — 

Cf.,  however,  M.  Heinzein  the  Ber.  d.  Sachs.  Ges.  d.  Wiss.,  1890. 

P.  46.  Last  line  of  text.  To  the  word  "  curved,"  affix  as  foot- 
note :  — 

The  tradition  (Arist.,  loc.  eft.)  shows  this  collocation  ;  whereas,  from  the 
cosmology  of  the  Pythagoreans  and  likewise  from  that  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  we 
should  expect  the  reverse  order. 

P.  55.     To  the  notice  of  Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  add :  — 

He  was  the  most  important  of  the  eclectics  of  the  fifth  century.  So  little  is 
known  as  to  his  life  that  it  is  even  doubtful  whether  Apollonia  was  bis  home. 
Of  his  writings,  even  Simplicius  had  only  the  irepl  <f>6<re<a$  before  him  (Phys., 
32  V.  151,  24  D). 

P.  62.     Add  to  foot-note  1 :  — 

because  in  this  phase  of  Greek  thought  they  run  along  as  yet  unrelated  lines  of 
thought,  side  by  side  with  the  theories  of  natural  science.  Only  the  Pythago- 
reans seem  as  yet  to  have  begun  the  combination  between  theology  and  phi- 
losophy, which  later  became  through  Plato  a  controlling  influence. 

P.  68.  Prefix  to  par.  4,  which  begins  with  "But  while,"  the 
following  sentence :  — 

A  preparation  for  this  transition  was  made  by  the  circumstance 
that  even  in  the  investigation  of  nature,  interest  in  fundamental 
principles  had  grown  weaker  after  the  first  creative  development, 
and  science  had  begun  to  scatter  her  labours  over  special  fields. 

P,  71.   To  the  personal  notice  of  Socrates,  add :  — 

He  considered  this  enlightenment  of  himself  and  fellow-citizens  a  divine  voca- 
tion (Plato's  Apology),  giving  this  work  precedence  even  over  his  care  of  his 
family  (Xanthippe).  He  gathered  about  him  the  noblest  youth  of  Athens,  such 
as  Alcibiades,  who  honoured  in  him  the  ideal  and  the  teacher  of  virtue.  He 
appeared  thus  as  leader  of  an  intellectual  aristocracy,  and  just  by  this  means 
came  into  opposition  to  the  dominant  democracy.  [K.  Joel,  Der  vchte  u.  d. 
Xenophontiscbe  Sokrates,  Vol.  I.,  Berlin,  1893.  Vol.  II.  in  2  pts.,  1001.  Kralik, 
Sokrates,  1899.] 

P.  96.    Line  23.  Insert  after  Plato :  — 

And  of  their  materialism  which  he  so  vigorously  opposed, 

P.  102.   At  close  of  par.  4,  insert :  — 

This  personal  influence  he  himself  regarded  as  the  most  important  part  of  his 
activity.  For  scientific  investigation  was  only  one  side  of  his  rich  nature.  The 
demand  for  ethical  teaching  and  for  political  and  social  efficiency  had  a  still 
stronger  life  within  him.  He  had  an  open  vision  for  the  evils  of  his  time.  He 
united  an  adherence  to  the  aristocratic  party  with  an  activity  in  the  direction 
indicated  by  Socrates,  and  never  quite  gave  up  the  hope  of  reforming  the  life  of 
his  time  through  his  science.  To  this  was  added  as  a  third  element  in  his  per- 
sonality that  pre-eminent  artistic  disposition  which  could  clothe  his  ideals  with 
poetic  exposition  in  the  most  splendid  language. 


Appendix.  685 

P.  103.   To  references  on  Plato,  add :  — 

P.  Lutowslawski,  Origin  and  Growth  of  Plato' s  Logic  (1897). 
[R.  L.  Nettleship,  Philos.  Lectures,  ed.  by  Bradley  and  Benson,  1897.    W 
Windelbaud,  Plato,  Stuttgart,  1900.] 

P.  104.   After  first  par.,  insert :  — 

In  comparison  with  the  high  flight  of  Plato,  the  personality  and  life-work  of 
Aristotle  appear  throughout  of  cooler  and  soberer  type.  But  if  he  lacks  the 
impulse  toward  an  active  influence  in  public  life,  and  also  the  poetic  charm  of 
diction  and  composition,  he  has,  instead,  all  the  more  effective  a  substitute  in 
the  power  of  thought  with  which  he  surveys  and  masters  his  field,  in  the  clarity 
and  purity  of  his  scientific  temper,  in  the  certainty  and  power  with  which  he 
disposes  and  moulds  the  results  gathered  from  the  intellectual  labours  of  many 
contributors.  Aristotle  is  an  incarnation  of  the  spirit  of  science  such  as  the 
world  has  never  seen  again,  and  in  this  direction  his  incomparable  influence  has 
lain.  He  will  always  remain  the  leading  thinker  in  the  realm  of  investigation 
which  seeks  to  comprehend  reality  with  keen  look,  unbiassed  by  any  interest 
derived  from  feeling. 

R  104.  Line  10.  Af ter  " knowledge,"  insert :  — 

The  recently  discovered  main  fragment  of  his  IloXtreta  rQv  'ke-qvaluv  is  a  valu- 
able example  of  the  completeness  of  this  part,  also,  of  his  literary  work.  In  the 
main  only  his  scientific,  etc. 

P.  104.  [Especially  valuable  in  the  recent  literature  upon  Aristotle  are  :  H. 
Meier,  Die  Syllogistik  des  Aristoteles.  Vol.  I,  1896,  Vol.  II.  in  2  pts.,  1900  ;  G. 
Rodier,  Aristote,  Traite  de  VAme,  tract  et  annotee.  2  vols.,  Paris,  1900.  Cf.  also 
W.  A.  Hammond,  AS 8  Psychology:  The  De  Anima  and  Parca  Nat.,tr.  with 
Int.  and  Notes,  Lond.  and  N.Y.  1901 ;  H.  Siebeck,  A.,  Stuttgart,  1899.] 

P.  112.  As  note  to  close  of  first  par.,  attached  to  -words  "  in  the 
middle  " :  — 

Cf.,  however,  on  this,  A.  Goedeke-Meyer,  Die  Naturphilosophie  Epiku^s  in 
ihrem  Verhdltnias  zu  Demokrit,  Strassburg,  1897. 

P.  119.  Line  17.  After  "back,"  insert:  — 

according  to  the  general  laws   of    association   and  reproduction 
(Phaedo,  72  ff.). 

P.  123.  Insert  after  the  first  par.  tinder  6,  the  following  par. :  — 
This  completely  new  attempt  on  Plato's  part  was  supported  by  the 
theological  doctrines  which  he  was  able  to  take  from  the  Mysteries  of 
Dionysus.  Here  the  individual  soul  was  regarded  as  a  "  daimon  "  or 
spirit  which  had  journeyed  or  been  banished  from  another  world  into 
the  body,  and  during  its  earthly  life  maintained  mysterious  emo- 
tional relations  to  its  original  home.  Such  theological  ideas  were 
brought  by  the  philosopher  into  his  scientific  system,  not  without 
serious  difficulties. 

P.  135.  Note  attached  to  the  word  "not"  in  line  11  (from 
foot) : — 

For  Aristotle  means  nothing  else,  even  where,  as  is  frequently  the  case  in  the 
Analytics,  he  expresses  the  relation  by  saying  that  "the  question  is  whether  the 
one  concept  is  affirmed  or  predicated  (KaT^yopeiv)  of  the  other. 


686  Appendix. 

P.  142.  After  the  first  sentence  in  the  last  par.,  insert:  — 
"  The  subordination  of  the  single  thing  under  the  general  concept 
is  for  him  too,  not  an  arbitrary  act  of  the  intellect  in  its  work  of 
comparison;  it  is  an  act  of  knowledge  which  takes  us  into  the 
nature  of  things  and  reproduces  the  actual  relations  which  obtain 
there." 

P.  148.    Line  3.    After  "  world,"  insert :  — 

Every  element  has  thus  its  "natural"  motion  in  a  certain  direc- 
tion and  its  "  natural "  place  in  the  universe.  Only  by  collision  with 
others  (ftia)  is  it  turned  aside  or  crowded  out. 

P.  162.     Before  second  par.,  insert :  — 

"  In  the  history  of  the  Stoa  we  have  to  distinguish  an  older  period  which  was 
predominantly  ethical,  a  middle  period  which  was  eclectic,  and  a  later  period 
which  was  religious." 

P.  162.    To  references  on  Stoicism,  add :  — 
A.  Schmekel,  Die  mittlere  Stoa  (Berlin,  1892). 

P.  162.    Line  6  from  foot.    To  references  on  Lucretius,  add :  — 
R.  Heinze's  Com.  on  3d  Book  (Leips.  1877). 

P.  163.    Line  20.    Add:  — 

Cf.  E.  Pappenheim  (Berlin,  1874  t,  Leips.  1877  and  1881). 

P.  163.    To  references  on  Scepticism,  add :  — 

V.  Brochard,  Les  Sceptiques  Grecs  (Paris,  1887).  [M.  M,  Patrick,  Sextus 
Empiricus  and  Greek  Scepticism  (contains  trans,  of  the  u  Pyrrhonic  Sketches," 
Camb.  and  Lond.  1899).] 

P.  163.    Line  35.    After  "  principle,"  insert :  —     . 

Cicero  stands  nearest  to  the  position  of  Probabilism  as  maintained  by  the 
Academy.  See  below,  §  17,  7. 

P.  163.    To  the  material  before  §  14,  add :  — 

A  popular  moral  eclecticism  was  represented  by  certain  preachers  of  morals 
who  were  more  or  less  closely  related  to  the  principles  of  the  Cynics.  These 
scourged  the  social  and  moral  conditions  of  the  Hellenistic  and  later  of  the 
Roman  world  with  harsh  and  outspoken  criticism.  Among  them  w«re  Teles  (cf. 
v.  Wilamowitz-Mailendorf,  Philologisc.lie,  Untersuchunrfc.n,  IV.,  202  ff. ;  Frwj- 
ments,  ed.  by  0.  Hense,  Freiburg,  1899),  Bion  of  Borysthcnes  (cf.  H.  lionize, 
de  Horatio  Bionis  Imitatore,  Bonn,  1889)  of  a  later  period,  Demc-triiis,  Oono- 
maos,  and  Demonax.  Cf .  J.  Bernaya,  Lukian  und  die  Kynifar  (Borlin,  1879). 
In  this  connection  Dio  Chrysostomos  is  also  to  be  named.  Cf.  H.  v.  Arnim 
(Berlin,  1898). 

P  174.    Line  8.    Add  to  this  paragraph :  — 

In  many  cases,  however,  notably  in  the  Imperial  age  of  Rome, 
this  maxim  appears  as  the  easily  intelligible  principle  of  the  honour- 
able man  who  finds  himself  repelled  by  the  corruption  and  partisan 
self-seeking  of  political  life,  and  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  it 


Appendix.  687 

P.  181.     Add  to  the  second  par.  the  following  (in  part  new) :  — 

Nevertheless,  inasmuch  as  they,  like  Heraclitus,  treated  the  neces- 
sary course  of  events  and  providence  as  equivalent  terms,  the  Stoic 
formulation  of  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason  (i.e.  that  everything 
which  comes  to  be  has  a  ground  or  reason)  may  also  be  expressed  in 
the  form  that  not  even  the  least  thing  in  the  world  can  be  otherwise 
than  in  accord  with  the  decree  of  Zeus. 

P.  186.     Line  8  from  foot  of  text,  after  "Heraclitus"  insert: 

"and  in  part  to  the  later  philosophy  of  nature  as  influenced  by 
him.     (Pseudo-Hippoc.  7rc.pl  Stair??? ;  cf .  above  p.  67,  note  1.) 

P.  189.     Line  12  from  foot,  add  the  following :  — 

Finally  this  web  of  syncretistic  theology  received  the  metaphysi- 
cal strand,  to  which  the  Older  Academy  with  Pythagorean  tenden- 
cies (especially  Xenocrates)  had  begun  to  attach  the  hierarchy  of 
mythical  forms  (cf.  §  11,  5).  The  combination  of  all  these  theo- 
logical tendencies  was  completed  in  the  middle,  eclectic  Stoa,  espe- 
cially through  Posidonius. 

P.  204.    Note  4,  add:  — 

Hence  Epicurus  did  not  regard  it  necessary  to  decide  on  theoretical  grounds 
between  different  modes  of  explaining  particular  phenomena :  the  one  mode  was 
no  more  valid  (ov  /uaAXov)  than  the  other,  to  use  the  sceptical  phrase. 

P.  210.     Line  20.    Add:  — 
trans,  as  Harnack's  History  of  Doctrine,  by  N.  Buchanan,  Lond.  1894. 

P.  210.    Add  to  references :  — 

Fr.  Susemihl,  Geschichte  der  griechischen  Litteratur  in  der  Alexandrinerzeit 
(2  vols.,  Leips.  1891). 

P.  216.    Line- 26.    To  the  lit,  add :  — 

H.  v.  Arnim,  Dion  wn  Prusa  (Leips.  1896),  pp.  4-114. 

P.  216.    Line  16  from  foot.    To  the  notice  of  Galen,  add :  — 

He  was  frequently  referred  to  as  philosophical  authority  in  the  humanistic 
literature  of  the  Renaissance.    His  treatise,  De  placAtis  Hippocratis  et  Platonis, 
has  been  edited  by  J.  Muller  (Leips.  1874),  the  Protrepticus,  by  G.  Kaibel  (Leips. 
1894),  the  tiwyuyi)  5ia\e/cr^,  by  C.  Kalbfleisch  (Leips.  1896).    J.  MiiUer  has' 
discussed  the  irepl  &iro8el£eus. 

P.  217.     LineS.    Add:  — 

Of  the  new  Berlin  ed.  of  Philo,  by  L.  Cohn  and  P.  Wendland,  Vols.  I.  and  IL 
have  appeared  (1800-1897). 

P.  217.    Line  14.    To  the  lit.  on  Justin  Martyr,  add:  — 
H.  VeU  (Strassburg,  1893). 


688  Appendix. 

P.  217.    Line  20  from  foot.    To  the  notice  of  Tertullian,  add :  — 
He  was  a  partisan  whose  hot-beaded  fanaticism  did  not  shrink  from  any  para- 

doxical  consequence. 

P.  217.    Line  3  from  foot.    To  the  notice  of  Clement,  add :  — 
"With  iron  will  and  tireless  activity  he  united  the  peaceful  and  conciliatory 

spirit  of  scientific  culture,  with  which  he  sought  to  exercise  an  influence  in  the 

passionate  ecclesiastical  controversies  of  his  time. 

P.  218.    Line  15.    To  the  notice  of  Plotinus,  add :  —  ' 
A  fine,  noble  nature,  in  whom  the  deep  inwardising  and  spiritualising  of  life, 
which  was  the  most  valuable  result  of  ancient  civilisation,  found  its  best  embodi- 
ment. 

P.  218.    Line  29.    Add:  — 

Porphyry's  EiVa7wy^  ek  T&S  Kar^opfas  was  usually  known  in  the  Middle  Ages 
by  the  title  de  quinque  vocibus. 

P.  224.    Line  3.    Add  a  footnote :  — 

Similarly  in  the"  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  the  relation  of  Jesus  to  the  angels 
is  set  forth  in  the  manner  in  which  it  is  presented  by  Philo. 

P,  234.    Line  3  from  foot  of  text,  add :  — 

This  transition  is  also  connected  with  the  fact  that  in  the  Chris- 
tian view  the  activity  of  consciousness  just  described  was  considered 
less  from  the  theoretical  than  from  the  practical  standpoint.  The 
freedom  of  the  will  is  here  the  central  conception.  The  Oriental 
Church  fathers  in  part  stood  nearer  the  intellectualism  of  the  Hel- 
lenistic philosophy,  or  at  least  made  concessions  to  it  j  ou  the  other 
hand,  among  the  western  teachers  of  the  Church  who  were  in  closer 
touch  with  Eome  the  will  was  most  strongly  emphasised  in  both 
psychology  and  theology.  Among  the  latter  the  tendency  is  domi- 
nant to  regard  the  spiritual  or  immaterial  principle  as  passive  and 
determined  by  its  object  in  so  far  as  it  is  knowledge,  but  as  active 
and  determining  in  so  far  as  it  is  will. 

P.  238.  After  line  6,  insert  the  following  paragraph :  — 
In  this  connection  the  conception  of  the  infinite  underwent  a 
transformation  which  gave  it  a  radically  different  value  (of.  Jon. 
Cohn,  Oeschichte  des  Unendlichkeit&probkms,  Leips.  1806).  The  mind 
of  the  Greeks,  directed  as  it  was  upon  measure  and  definite  limita- 
tion, had  originally  looked  upon  the  infinite  as  the  incomplete  and 
imperfect;  it  was  only  with  reluctance  tkat  when  considering  the 
infinitude  of  space  and  time  metaphysics  had  allowed  itself  to 
ascribe  to  the  infinite  a  second  subordinate  kind  of  reality,  as  was 
done  by  the  Pythagoreans,  the  Atomists,  and  Plato  —  aside  from 
the  isolated  case  of  Anaximander,  whose  influence  lay  in  another 
direction.  Kow,  infinitude  had  become  the  only  predicate  which 


Appendix.  689 

could  be  ascribed  to  the  highest  reality  or  to  the  deity,  as  over 
against  the  finite  things  of  the  world.  Even  the  " negative  "  -tlteolo^y 
could  permit  this  expression.  The  name  "infinite"  must  be  applied 
to  the  divine  power  which  in  the  Stoic  and  N"eo-Pyfcl.agoirean  phi- 
losophy of  nature  was  regarded  as  the  essence  pervading  and 
informing  the  world  with  its  workings  ;  to  the  One  from  -which 
Neo-Platonism  regarded  worthy  of  the  world's  forms  as  flowing 
forth;  to  the  creative  divine  will  which,  according  to  Christian 
teaching,  had  called  forth  the  world  from  nothing,  and  thus  shown 
its  freedom  from  all  limitation;  and  finally  to  this  supreme  person- 
ality himself  in  contrast  with  finite  persons.  Thus  thromgh  this 
final  development  of  ancient  philosophy  the  conception  of  the  in- 
finite became  the  constituent  mark  of  the  highest  metaphysical 
reality;  it  belongs  not  only  to  the  universe  as  extended,  in  space, 
but  also  to  the  inmost  essence  of  things,  and,  above  all,  to  ttte  deity. 
This  latter  fusion  became  so  fixed  and  sure  that  today  it  appears 
entirely  a  matter  of  course  in  the  sphere  of  thought,  as  \rell  as  in 
that  of  feeling,  to  conceive  of  the  supreme  being  as  the  Infinite,  in 
contrast  with  all  finite  things  and  relations. 

P.  256.  Line  11.  To  the  phrase  "drama  of  universal  History" 
affix  the  following  foot-note :  — 

This  expression  has  in  this  connection,  as  -we  see,  a  broadei  meaning  and 
one  which  conforms  much  more  to  the  meaning  of  the  w>rds,  titan  in  its 'ordi- 
nary use. 

P.  263.    To  the  literature  of  the  period,  add :  — 

B.  Haure'au,  Notices  et  Extraits  de  quelques  Manuscripts  tie  U  Ri&Uotheque 
National*.  6  vols.,  Paris,  1800-1893;  H,  Denifle  and  E,  Chatelain,  Chartula- 
rium  UnivvrsWitls  Parisietms.  2  vols,  Paris,  1890-1894;  E,  DenifLe  and  Fr 
Ehrle,  Arch.  f.  Litt.  u.  Kirch.  Gesch.  d.  MittelaUers,  1885  ff. 

P.  273.    Line  13.    To  the  notice  of  Augustine,  add :  — 

His  youth  was  in  part  wild  and  irregular.  His  father,  Patrieius,  belonged  to 
the  old  religion  ;  his  mother,  Monica,  to  Christianity.  To  a  deeply  passionate 
nature  he  joined  not  only  dialectical  skill  and  keen  intelligence,  but  also  phil- 
osophical subtlety  and  a  wide  intellectual  and  spiritual  vision,  which  was 
narrowed  only  at  the  last  by  ecclesiastical  partisanship.  He  was  made  bishop 
301. 

P.  274.    Line  19. 

"Eriugena"  is  given  as  first  form  of  the  name,  with  "Erigena"  and  "  Jeru- 
gena"  as  variants. 

P.  274.    Line  17,  from  foot,  add :  — 

Recently  his  authorship  has  been  doubted  and  the  -work  assigned  to  a  Bern- 
hard  Silvestris  (also  Bernhard  of  Tours). 

P.  274.    Line  14,  from  foot,  add :  — 

Cf,  A.  Clerval,  Les  flecks  de  Chartres  auMoyen^ge  (Chartres,  1895). 


690  Appendix. 

P.  275.  Line  5.  To  the  notice  of  Abelard,  add :  — 
The  dialectical  virtuosoship  to  which  he  owed  his  success  and  his  fame  de- 
ceived both  him  and  his  time  as  to  the  slightuess  of  his  know  edge.  On  the 
other  hand  the  freer  and  bolder  convictions  which  he  had  gained  m  the  ethical 
and  reli<nous  field  by  the  keenness  of  his  intellect  could  not  overcome  the  coun- 
ter-tendencv  of  his  age,  because  they  did  not  find  sufficient  support  in  his  vain 
and  weak  personality.  In  addition  to  the  ed.  in  two  vols.  of  his  work,  Cousin 
has  edited  also  Outrages  inedits  (Paris,  1836).  Cf.  S.  M,  Deutsch,  P.  A.  ein 
kritischer  Theolog.  des  12  Jahrhunderts  (Leips.  1883);  A.  Hausrath,  Peter 
Abalard  (Leips.  1893). 

P.  313.    Line  25.    To  the  lit.  on  the  Amalricans,  add :  — 

Cf.  the  Treatise  against  the  Amalricans,  ed.  by  Cl.  Baumker  (Jahrb.f.  Philos. 
u.  spec.  TheoL,  VIL,  Paderborn,  1893). 

P.  313.    Line  15  from  foot.    To  the  lit.  on  Albert,  add :  — 
V.  Hertling,  A.  M.  Beitrage  zu  seiner  Wurdigung  (C51n,  1880). 
P.  316.  To  the  general  lit.  add :  — 
[T.  J.  de  Boer,  Gesch.  d.  Philos.  in  Islam  (Stuttgart,  1901).] 
P.  317.    Add  to  third  par. :  — 

Cf.  T.  de  Boer,  Die  Widerspniche  d.  Philosophic  nach  Algazalli  und  ihr  Au$- 
gleich  durch  IbnJRoschd  (Strassburg,  1894). 

P.  320.    Line  11,  add:  — 

But  the  "  natural "  man  finds  that  even  among  a  highly  developed 
people  the  pure  teaching  of  the  natural  religion  meets  in  most  cases 
only  misunderstanding  and'  disfavour.  He  turns  back  to  his  isola- 
tion with  the  one  friend  -whom  he  has  gained  (cf.  Pocock's  ed. 
pp.  192  ff.). 

P.  330.    Line  3  from  foot.    To  "  Scofcus,"  affix  the  reference :  — 

Cf.  H.  Siebeck,  Die  Willenslehre  bei  Duns  Scotus  u,  semen  Nachfolgern* 
Zeitschrf.  Philos.  Vol.  112,  pp.  179  ff. 

P.  331.    Line  9  from  foot,  add :  — 

It  was  a  great  service  on  the  part  of  Buridan  that,  in  order  to 
grasp  the  problem  more  exactly,  he  sought  to  state  the  question 
once  more  in  purely  psychological  terms.  He  sought  to  do  justice 
to  the  arguments  on  each  side,  and  made  it  his  purpose  to  develop 
the  conception  of  ethical  freedom,  in  which  indift'erentism  should 
lose  the  element  of  arbitrary  caprice,  and  determinism  should  lose 
the  character  of  natural  necessity.  Nevertheless,  he  did  not  succeed 
in  completely  clearing  up  the  complication  of  problems  which  inhere 
in  the  word  "  freedom." 

P.  333.    Foot-note  on  word  "  synteresis,"  add :  — 
Cf.,  however,  recently,  H.  Siebeck  in  Arch.f.  Gesch.  d.  Philos.,  X.  520  ft 
P.  339.    Foot-note  1.    For  "  and  the  pseudo,"  read :  — 
"and  perhaps  the  pseudo.1' 


Appendix.  691 

P.  342.    Line  24.    Affix  to  "  Occam,"  the  reference :  — 

Cf.  H.  Siebeck,  Occam's  Erkenntnisslehre  in  ihrer  historischer  Stelluna 
(Arch.  f.  Gesch.  d.  Philos.,  X.  317  ff.).  y 

P.  348.     To  the  lit.,  add:  — 

W.  Windelband,  Geschichte  d,  neueren  Philosophic,  2d  ed.  Vols.  I.  II.  1899  • 
H.  HofEding,  History  of  Modern  Philosophy  (Eng.  tr.  by  B.  Meyer,  Lond.  and 
N.Y.  1900)  ;  K.  Lasswitz,  G-eschichte  der  Atomistik  vom  Mittelalter  bis  Newton. 
2  vola.,  Hamburg,  1889-1890  [W.  Graham,  English  Political  Philosophy  from 
Holbes  to  Maine,  Lond.  and  N.Y.  1900].  *  *  J 

P.  352.     To  the  lit.,  add :  — 

•    W.  Dilthey,  Auffassang  und  Analyse  des  Menschen  in  25  and  16  Jahr. 
(Arch.f.  Gesch.  d.  Philos.,  IV.,  V.). 

P.  356.    Line  5,  add:  — 

H.  Maier,  M.  als  Philosoph  (Arch.f.  Gesch.  d.  Philos.,  X.,  XI.). 

P.  356.     Line  22,  from  foot,  insert :  — 

The  unsettled  character  of  his  life  was  in  part  due  to  his  own  character.  He 
combined  a  proud  flight  of  imaginative  thought  and  an  enthusiastic ,  devotion  to 
the  new  truth — especially  to  the  Copernican  system — for  which  he  had  to 
suffer,  with  unbridled  passionateness,  ambitious  boastfulness  and  keen  pleasure 
in  agitation.  On  his  Italian  and  Latin  writings,  cf.  recently,  F.  Tocco  (Florence, 
1889,  and  Naples,  1891)  j  cf.  also  Dom  Berti,  G.  JB.,  sua  Vita  e  sua  Dottrine 
(Rome,  1889). 

P.  357.    Line  3.    To  the  notice  of  Campanella,  add :  — 

In  him,  too,  we  find  learning,  boldness  of  thought,  and  desire  of  innovation 
mingled  with  pedantry,  fancifulness,  superstition,  and  limitation.  Cf.  Chr. 
Sigwart,  Eieine  Schriften,  I.  (Freib.  1889). 

P.  362.    Line  1.    After  "  also,"  insert :  — 

Popular  Stoicism  had  a  considerable  number  of  adherents  among 
the  Renaissance  writers  on  account  of  its  moral  and  religious  doc- 
trines, which  were  independent  of  positive  religion. 

P  367,    Hotel.    Add:  — 

Indeed,  the  humanistic  reaction  favoured  Stoicism  directly  as  against  the  more 
medieval  Neo-Platonism. 

P.  378.    To  the  lit.,  add:  — 

W.  Dilthey,  Das  naturliche  System  der  Geisteswissenschaften  in  17  Jahrh. 
(Arch.f.  0<wcA.  d.  Philos.,  V.,  VI.,  VIL). 

P.  379.    Last  line.    To  the  notice  of  Galileo,  add:  — 

His  quiet,  nnimpassioned  advocacy  of  the  investigation  of  nature,  which  had 
been  newly  achieved  and  given  its  conceptionai  formulation  by  himself,  could 
not  shield  him  from  the  attacks  of  the  Inquisition,  He  purchased  peace  and  the 
right  to  further  investigation,  which  was  all  that  he  cared  for,  by  extreme  sub- 
jection. Cf.  C.  Prantl,  Galileo  und  Kepler  als  Logiker  (Munich,  1875). 

P.  380.    Line  9.    To  lit.  on  I.  Newton,  add :  — 

F.  R.  Rosenberger,  /.  N.  und  seine  physikalischen  Principien  (Leips.  1895). 


690  Appendix. 

P.  275.  Line  5.  To  the  notice  of  Abelard,  add :  — 
The  dialectical  virtuosoship  to  which  he  owed  his  success  and  his  fame  de- 
ceived both  him  and  his  time  as  to  the  slightness  of  his  knowledge.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  freer  and  holder  convictions  which  he  had  gained  m  the  ethical 
and  religious  field  by  the  keenness  of  his  intellect  could  not  overcome  the  coun- 
ter-tendency of  his  age,  because  they  did  not  find  sufficient  support  in  his  vain 
and  weak  personality.  In  addition  to  the  ed.  in  two  vols.  of  his  work,  Cousin 
has  edited  also  Outrages  inedits  (Paris,  1836).  Cf.  S.  M.  Deutsch,  P.  A.  ein 
Tfritischer  Theolog.  des  12  Jahrhunderts  (Leips.  1883);  A.  Hausrath,  Peter 
Abdlard  (Leips.  1893). 

P.  313.    Line  25.    To  the  lit.  on  the  Amalricans,  add  :  — 
Cf.  the  Treatise  against  the  Amalricans,  ed.  by  Cl.  Baumker  (Jahrb.f.  Philos. 
u.  spec.  Theol.,  VIL,  Paderborn,  1893). 

P.  313.    Line  15  from  foot.    To  the  lit.  on  Albert,  add :  — 
V.  Hertling,  A.  M.  Beitrage  zu  seiner  Wurdigung  (Coin,  1880). 
P.  316.   To  the  general  lit.  add :  — 
[T.  J.  de  Boer,  Gesch.  d.  Philos.  in  Islam  (Stuttgart,  1901).] 
P.  317.    Add  to  third  par. :  — 

Cf.  T.  de  Boer,  Die  Widersprilche  d.  Philosophic  nach  Algazalli  und  ihr  Aus~ 
gleich  durch  Ibn  Eoschd  (Strassburg,  1894). 

P.  320.    Line  11,  add:  — 

But  the  "  natural "  man  finds  that  even  among  a  highly  developed 
people  the  pure  teaching  of  the  natural  religion  meets  in  most  oases 
only  misunderstanding  and'  disfavour.  He  turns  back  to  his  isola- 
tion with  the  one  friend  whom  he  has  gained  (of.  Pocock's  ed. 
pp.  192  ft)- 

P.  330.    Line  3  from  foot.    To  "  Scotus,"  affix  the  reference :  — 

Cf.  H.  Siebeck,  Die  Willenslehre  lei  Duns  Scotus  u.  seinen  Nachfolyern, 
Zeitschrf.  Philos.  Vol.  112,  pp.  179  ft. 

P.  331.    Line  9  from  foot,  add :  —      ' 

It  was  a  great  service  on  the  part  of  Buridan  that,  in  order  to 
grasp  the  problem  more  exactly,  he  sought  to  state  the  question 
once  more  in  purely  psychological  terms.  He  sought  to  do  justice 
to  the  arguments  on  each  side,  and  made  it  his  purpose  to  develop 
the  conception  of  ethical  freedom,  in  which  indift'erentism  should 
lose  the  element  of  arbitrary  caprice,  and  determinism  should  lose 
the  character  of  natural  necessity.  Nevertheless,  he  did  not  succeed 
in  completely  clearing  up  the  complication  of  problems  which  inhere 
in  the  word  "  freedom." 

P.  333.    Foot-note  on  word  "  synteresis,"  add :  — 
Cf.,  however,  recently,  H.  Siebeck  mArch.f.  Gesch.  d.  Philos.,  X.  620  fit. 
P.  339.    Foot-note  1.    For  "  and  the  pseudo,"  read :  — 
"and  perhaps  the  pseudo." 


Appendix.  691 

P.  342.    Line  24.    Affix  to  "  Occam,"  the  reference  :  — 

Cf.  H.  Siebeck,  Occam's  Erkenntnisslehre  in  ihrer  historischer  Stellung 
(Arch.  f.  Gesch.  d.  Philos.,  X.  317  ff.)- 

P.  348.    To  the  lit.,  add:  — 

W.  Windelband,  Geschichte  d.  neueren  Philosophic,  2d  ed.  Vols.  I.  II.  1899  ; 
II.  H  off  ding,  History  of  Modern  Philosophy  (Eng.  tr.  by  B.  Meyer,  Lond.  and 
N.Y.  1900)  ;  K.  Lasswitz,  Geschichte  der  Atomistik  vom  Mittelalter  bis  Newton. 
2  vols.,  Hamburg,  1889-1890  [W.  Graham,  English  Political  Philosophy  from 
Jlobbes  to  Maine,  Lond.  and  N.Y.  1900]. 

P.  352.     To  the  lit.,  add  :  — 

•    W.  Dilthey,  Auffassang  und  Analyse  des  Menschen  in  15  and  16  Jahr. 
(Arch.  /.  Gesch.  d.  Philos.,  IV.,  V.). 

P.  356.    Line  5,  add:  — 

H.  Maier,  M.  als  Philosoph  (Arch.f.  Gesch.  d.  Philos.,  X.,  XL). 

P.  356.     Line  22,  from  foot,  insert  :  — 

The  unsettled  character  of  his  life  was  in  part  due  to  his  own  character.  He 
combined  a  proud  flight  of  imaginative  thought  and  an  enthusiastic  .  devotion  to 
the  new  truth  —  especially  to  the  Copernican  system  —  for  which  he  had  to 
suffer,  with  unbridled  passionateness,  ambitious  boastfulness  and  keen  pleasure 
in  agitation.  On  his  Italian  and  Latin  writings,  cf.  recently,  F.  Tocco  (Florence, 
1889,  and  Naples,  1891)  ;  cf.  also  Dom  Berti,  G.  J3.,  sua  Vita  e  sua  Dottrine 
(Rome,  1889). 

P.  357.    Line  3.    To  the  notice  of  Campanella,  add  :  — 

In  him,  too,  we  find  learning,  boldness  of  thought,  and  desire  of  innovation 
mingled  with  pedantry,  fancifulness,  superstition,  and  limitation.  Cf.  Chr. 
Sigwart,  Kteine  Schriflen,  I.  (Freib.  1889). 

P.  302.     Line  1.    After  "  also,"  insert  :  — 

Popular  Stoicism  had  a  considerable  number  of  adherents  among 
the  Renaissance  writers  on  account  of  its  moral  and  religious  doc- 
trines, which  were  independent  of  positive  religion. 

P  367.    Notel.    Add:  — 

Indeed,  the  humanistic  reaction  favoured  Stoicism  directly  as  against  the  more 
medieval  Neo-Platouism. 

P.  378.    To  the  lit.,  add:  — 

W.  Dilthey,  Das  natilrliche  System  der  Geisteswissenschaften  in  17  Jahrh. 
.  Gesch.  d.  Pliilos,,  V.,  VL,  VII). 


P.  379.    Last  line.    To  the  notice  of  Galileo,  add  :  — 

His  quiet,  nnimpassioned  advocacy  of  the  investigation  of  nature,  which  had 
been  newly  achieved  and  given  its  conceptional  formulation  by  himself,  could 
not  shield  him  from  the  attacks  ,  of  the  Inquisition.  He  purchased  peace  and  the 
right  to  further  invefitigntion,  which  was  all  that  he  cared  for,  by  extreme  sub- 
jection. Cf.  C.  Prantl,  Galileo  und  Kepler  als  Logiker  (Munich,  1875). 

P.  380.    Line  9.    To  lit.  on  I.  Newton,  add  :  — 

F.  R.  Roscnberger,  I.  N.  und  seine  physikalischen  Principien  (Leips.  1895). 


692  Appendix. 

P.  380.    Line  18.    To  the  lit.  add :  — 

E.  Mach,  Die  Mechamk  in  ihrer  Entwicklitng  (Leips.  1883).  H.  Hertz,  Die 
Principien  der  Mechanik,  Introd.,  pp.  1-47  (Leips.  1894). 

P.  380.     To  the  notice  of  Bacon,  add :  — 

The  unfavourable  aspects  of  his  personal  character,  which  had  their  origin  in 
political  rivalry,  fall  into  the  background  in  comparison  with  the  insight  which 
filled  his  life,  that  man's  power,  and  especially  his  power  over  nature,  lies  only 
in  scientific  knowledge.  In  a  grandiloquent  fashion,  which  was  in  conformity 
with  the  custom  of  his  time,  he  proclaimed  it  as  the  task  of  science  to  place 
nature  with  all  her  forces  at  the  service  of  man  and  of  the  best  development  of 
social  life. 

P.  380.    To  the  notice  of  Descartes,  add :  — 

A  complete  edition  of  his  works  is  appearing  under  the  auspices  of  the  Paris 
Academy.  The  main  characteristics  of  his  nature  are  found  in  the  passion  for 
knowledge,  which  turns  aside  from  all  outer  goods  of  life,  in  his  zeal  for  self- 
instruction,  in  his  struggle  against  self-delusion,  in  his  abhorrence  of  all  public 
appearance  and  of  the  conflicts  connected  therewith,  in  the  calm  pre-eminence 
of  the  purely  intellectual  life,  and  in  the  complete  earnestness  which  springs 
from  sincerity. 

P.  381.    To  the  notice  of  Spinoza,  add :  — 

In  proud  independence,  he  satisfied  his  modest  needs  by  his  earnings  from 
the  polishing  of  optical  glasses.  Untroubled  by  the  hatred  and  opposition  of  the 
world,  and  not  embittered  by  the  untrustworthiness  of  the  few  who  called  them- 
selves his  friends,  he  lived  a  life  of  thought  and  disinterested  intellectual  labour, 
and  found  his  compensation  for  the  transitory  joys  of  the  world,  which  he 
despised,  in  the  clearness  of  knowledge,  in  the  intelligent  comprehension  of 
human  motives,  and  in  the  devoted  contemplation  of  the  mysteries  of  the  divine 
nature.  [J.  Freudenthal,  Lebensgeschichte  SpSs,  Leips.  1899;  v.  d.  Liude, 
B.  Sp.  Bibliographic ,  Gravenhage,  1871.] 

P.  381.    Line  24.    To  the  lit.  on  Pascal,  add :  — 

G.  Droz  (Paris,  1886). 

P.  381.    Line  36.    To  the  lit.  on  Geulincx,  add :  — 

J.  P.  N.  Land,  Am.  Geulincx  und  seine  Philosophie  (The  Hague,  1805). 

P.  413.    To  the  foot-note,  add :  — 

Descartes'  conception  of  these  perturbations  reminds  us  in  many  ways  of 
Stoicism,  whicli  was  brought  to  him  by  the  whole  humanistic  literature  of  his 
time.  Just  on  this  account  the  modern  philosopher  fell  into  the  same  difficul- 
ties respecting  theodicy  and  freedom  of  the  will  which  had  vexed  the  iStoa. 
Cf.  above,  §  16.  His  ethics  was  likewise  related  to  that  of  the  Stoics. 

P.  425.     Under  §  32.    As  lit.  on  this  topic :  — 

T.  H.  Green,  Principles  of  Political  Obligation,  Wks.,  Vol.  II.,  and  sepa- 
rately, 1895 ;  D.  G.  Ritchie,  Natural  Eights,  Lond,  and  N.  Y.  1896 ;  J.  II. 
Tufts  and  H.  B.  Thompson,  The  Individual  and  his  Relation  to  Society  as  re- 
flected in  British  Ethics  (Chicago,  1898). 

P.  440.    To  the  notice  of  Locke,  add :  — 

Plain  good  sense  and  sober  charity  are  the  main  traits  of  his  intellectual  per- 
sonality,- but  corresponding  to  these  there  is  also  a  certain  meagreness  of 
thought  and  a  renunciation  of  the  philosophical  impulse  in  the  proper  sense. 
In  spite  of  this,  the  courage  of  his  triviality  made  him  popular,  and  so  made 
mm  leader  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment. 


Appendix.  693 

P.  441.    To  the  notice  of  Shaftesbury,  add  :  — 

He  was  one  of  the  foremost  and  finest  representatives  of  the  Enlightenment. 
Humanistic  culture  is  the  basis  of  his  intellectual  and  spiritual  nature.  In  this 
rests  the  freedom  of  his  thought  and  judgment,  as  well  as  the  taste  with  which 
he  conceives  and  presents  his  subject.  lie  himself  is  a  conspicuous  example 
for  his  ethical  teaching  of  the  worth  of  personality.  [B.  Rand  has  recently  pub- 
lished The  Life,  Letters,  and  Philosophical  Regimen,  Lond.  and  N.  Y.  1900. 
The  Regimen  consists  of  a  series  of  exercises  or  meditations  patterned  after 
those  of  Epictetus  and  Marcus  Aurelius.  It  shows  a  closer  dependence  upon 
ancient,  particularly  Stoic,  thought  than  is  manifest  in  the  Characteristics.} 

P.  441.    To  the  lit.  on  Adam  Smith,  add:  — 

[Hasbach,  Untersuchungen  ilber  Adam  Smith  (Leips,  1891)  ;  Zeyss,  A.  S. 
(Leips.  1889)  ;  Oncken,  Smith  und  Kant  (1877)  ;  Schubert,  in  Wundfs  Stu- 
dies, VI.  552  ff.] 

P.  441.    To  the  notice  of  Hume,  add  :  — 

Cool  and  reflective,  clear  and  keen,  an  analyst  of  the  first  rank,  with  un- 
prejudiced and  relentless  thought,  he  pressed  forward  to  the  final  presupposi- 
tions upon  which  the  English  philosophy  of  modern  times  rested.  And  this  is 
the  reason  why,  in  spite  of  the  caution  of  his  utterances,  he  did  not  at  first  find 
among  his  countrymen  the  recognition  which  he  deserved. 

P.  441.     To  the  lit.  on  English  Moral  Philosophy,  add:  — 

[Selby-Bigge,  British  Moralists  (Clar.  Press,  1807),  contains  reprints  of  the 
most  important  ethical  writings  of  nearly  all  the  writers  of  this  period,  with 
Introd.] 

P.  442.    To  the  lit.  on  the  Scottish  School,  add:  — 

McCosli,  The,  Scottish  Philosophy  ;  on  the  preceding  development,  E.  Grimm, 
Zur  (fewhlchtv  des  Erkunitiiuttti-j)  rob  terns  von  Bacon  zu  Hume  (Leips.  1890). 

P,  442.    To  the  notice  of  Voltaire,  add  :  — 

For  the  history  of  philosophy,  the  moat  important  elements  in  Voltaire's 
natures  fire  his  honest  enthusiasm  for  justice  and  humanity,  his  fearless  cham- 
pionship for  reason  in  public  life,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  incomparable 
inllnenr.e  which  he  exercised  upon  the  general  temper  of  his  age  through  the 
magic  of  his  animated,  striking  style.  G.  Desuoiresterres,  V.  et  la  tiociete  au 
IS  ASVficto  (Paris,  1873). 


P,  444.    To  the  notice  on  Leibniz,  add:  — 

Leibniz  was  one  of  the  greatest  savants  who  have  ever  lived.  There  was  no 
department  of  science  in  which  ho  did  not  work,  and  that  with  suggest!  veness. 
This  uiiiVGrsolium  asserted  itself  ex^erywhere  in  a  conciliatory  tendency,  as  the 
attempt  to  reconcile  existing  oppositions.  This,  too,  was  his  work  in  political 
and  ecclesiastical  fields. 

P.  445.    Line  4.    Add  :  -* 

On  Platnor'H  relation  to  Kant,  cf.  M.  Ileinze  (Leips.  1880)  ;  P.  Rohr  (Gotha, 
1800)  ;  P.  Bergemaim  (Halle,  1801)  ;  W.  Wresclmer  (Leips.  1893). 

P.  445.  Line  11  from  foot.  To  the  lit.  on  Empirical  Psychology, 
add:  — 

M.  Devoir,  GescUiehte  far  ncuenn  deutschen  Psychologic.  Vol.  I.  (Berlin, 
1804,  New  ed.  in  press). 


694  Appendix. 

P.  452.    To  the  foot-note,  add :  — 

In  the  field  of  demonstrative  knowledge,  Locke  makes  far-reaching  conces- 
sions to  rationalism,  as  it  was  known  to  him  from  the  Cambridge  school ;  e ,g. 
he  even  regarded  the  cosniological  argument  for  the  existence  of  God  as  possible, 

P.  488.    Line  24.    After  "  world  "  insert :  — 

This  theory  was,  in  his  case,  none  other  than  the  imaginative  view 
of  Nature,  which  had  been  taken  over  from  the  Italian  Renaissance 
by  the  English  Neo-Platonists.  In  his  Pantheist  icon,  Toland  pro- 
jected a  sort  of  cultus  for  this  natural  religion,'  whose  sole  priestess 
should  be  Science,  and  whose  heroes  should  be  the  great  historical 
educators  of  the  human  mind. 

P.  502.    To  the  lit.  under  §  36,  add :  — 

J.  H.  Tufts,  The  Individual  and  his  Relation  to  Society  as  reflected  in  British 
Ethics.  Part  II.  (Chicago,  in  press.) 

P.  517.     Line  7. 

[The  conception  of  "  sympathy  "  in  the  Treatise  is  not  the  same  as 
in  the  Inquiry.  In  the  Treatise  it  is  a  psychological  solvent  like 
Spinoza's  "  imitation  of  emotions,"  and  =  "contagiousness  of  feeling." 
In  the  Inquiry  it  is  opposed  to  selfishness,  and  treated  as  an  impulse 
=  benevolence;  cf.  on  this,  Green,  Int.,  Selby-Bigge,  Inquiry.} 

P.  521.  Line  6  from  foot.  To  the  words  "  human  rights,"  add  the 
reference :  — 

G.  Jellinek,  Die  Erkldrung  der  Menschenrechte  (Heidelb.  1890) ;  [D.  G. 
Ritchie,  Natural  Riyhts,  Lond.  and  N.Y.,  1895 ;  B.  Bosanquet,  The  JP/iilos. 
Theory  of  the  State,  Lond.  and  N.Y.,  1899.] 

P.  522.   Foot-note  3. 

Cf.  Comte  rendu  des  Seances  des  Ecoles  Normales.    Vol.  1. 

P.  527.  Line  11  from  foot  of  text,  add  :  — 

By  this  definition  of  history  the  principles  of  investigation  in  natural  science 
and  those  appropriate  to  history  were  no  longer  distinguished,  and  the  contrasts 
between  mechanical  and  teleological  standpoints  were  obliterated  in  a  way 
•which  necessarily  called  out  the  opposition  of  so  keenly  methodical  a  tl linker  as 
Kant.  (Cf.  his  review  of  Herder's  book,  Ideas  toward  the  Philosophy  of  the 
History  of  Mankind,  in  the  Jen.  Allg.  Litt,  Zty.,  1785.)  On  the  oilier  hand,  a 
harmonising  thought  -was  thus  won  for  the  theory  of  the  world,  quite  in  accord 
with  the  Leibnizian  Monadology,  and  this  has  remained  as  an  influential  postu- 
late and  a  regulative  idea  for  the  further  development  of  philosophy. 

P.  529.  To  the  lit.,  add :  — 

E.  von  Hartmann,  Die  deutsche  Aesthetic  seit  Kant  (Berlin,  1880).  Julian 
Schmidt,  G-eschichte  der  deutschen  Litteratur  von  Leibniz  Ms  auf  unw.rtr  %eit* 
[Kuno  Francke,  Social  Forces  in  German  Literature,  2d  ed.,  N.Y.  18D7.] 

P.  530.   Line  8,  add:  — 

Through  this  participation  in  the  work  of  the  highest  culture,  in  which  litera- 
ture and  philosophy  gave  each  to  the  other  furtherance  toward  the  brilliant  cre- 
ations of  the  time,  the  German  people  became  anew  a  nation.  In  this  it  found 


Appendix.  695 

once  more  the  essence  of  its  genius  ;  from  it  sprang  intellectual  and  moral  forces 
through  which,  during  the  past  century,  it  has  been  enabled  to  assert  in  the 
world  the  influence  of  this,  its  newly  won  nationality. 

P.  632.   To  the  lit,  add:  — 

Fr.  Paulsen,  /.  Kant,  sein  Lvben  und  seine  Lehre,  Stuttgart,  1898. 

P.  535.   To  the -notice  of  Kant,  add  :  — 

His  activity  as  a  teacher  extended  not  only  over  philosophical  fields,  but  also 
to  anthropology  and  physical  geography ;  and  just  in  these,  by  his  suggestive, 
discriminating,  and  brilliant  exposition,  his  influence  extended  far  beyond  the 
bounds  of  the  university.  In  society  he  was  regarded  with  respect,  and  his  fel- 
low-citizens sought  and  found  in  him  kindly  instruction  in  all  that  excited  gen- 
eral interest. 

P.  536.   To  the  lit.,  add  :  — 

Among  the  publications  of  Kant's  Lectures  the  most  important  are  the 


Philos.  Monatxhcfte,  Vol.  XIX.,  and  M.  Heinze,  AVs  Vorleaungen  uber 


published  Manuscripts  ;  IV.  Lectures.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  of  the  Correspondence 
have  appeared,  ed.  by  Reicke  (Berlin,  1000;.]  The  Kant  Studien,  ed.  by  H. 

Vailiinger  (1800 ),  gives  the  most  complete  information  regarding  recent 

literature.  [Recent  translations  are  Kant's  Cosmogony  (Glasgow,  1900),  by  W. 
Hastie  ;  Drntms  of  a  fynrft  8wr  (Lond.  and  N.Y.,  1900),  by  Goerwitz  ;  The 
Inaugural  Dimwtation  of  1770,  by  Eckhoff  (N.Y.,  1804).] 

P.  537.     To  the  lit.,  add :  — 

K.  Adickcs,  Kantfs  fiystnnaMk  ala  systembildender  Factor  (Berlin,  1887),  and 
Kantxtudirn  (1894)  ;  E.  Arnoldt,  KritiM\h<>.  JSxcurs?,  tm  Gebiet  der  Kantforschung, 
Kouigsbertf,  1894. 

[J.  G,  Schumann  in  Philos.  Review,  Vols.  VII,,  VIIL] 

P.  551.    To  the  lit.,  add:  — 

A.  llegler,  Die.  Psycholcxjit  in  Kant's  Ethik,  Freiburg  i.  Br.  1891. 

W.  Forster,  Der  EnMddunysujang  der  kantischen  Mthik,  Berlin,  1894. 

P.  557.    Line  18  from  foot,  insert  as  a  new  paragraph :  — 

"The  Communion  of  Saints,"  on  the  contrary,  the  ethical  and 
religious  union  of  the  human  race,  appears  as  the  true  highest  good 
of  the  practical  reason.  This  reaches  far  beyond  the  subjective  and 
individual  significance  of  a  combination  between  virtue  and  hap- 
piness, and  has  for  its  content  the  realisation  of  the  moral  law  in  the 
development  of  the  human  race  —  the  Kingdom  of  God  upon  earth. 
(Of.  Critique  of  Judgment,  §§85  if.,  Religion  within  the  Bounds  of 
Mere  Iteason,  3d  part  (t.  2  ff.). 

P.  559.    To  the  lit.  under  §  40,  add :  — 

[V.  Basch,  Essai  critique  sur  VEsthttique  de  Kant,  Paris,  1896.] 


696  Appendix. 

P.  564.    Last  line.    To  "  fine  art/'  attach  as  note  :  — 

On  the  historical  connections  of  the  theories  here  developed  by  Kant  within 
the  framework  of  his  system,  cf.  P.  Schlapp,  Die  Anfange  der  Kritik  des 
Greschmacks  itnd  des  Genies  (Gottingen,  1899). 

P.  569.    Line  14  from  foot  of  text,  add  :  — 

Jacobi  was  in  youth  a  friend  of  Goethe.  He  was  a  typical  personality  for  the 
development  of  the  German  life  of  feeling  in  its  transition  from  the  time  of 
"  Storm  and  Stress,"  over  into  the  Romantic  movement.  He  was  the  chief  rep- 
resentative of  the  principle  of  religious  sentimentality.  Cf.  on  his  theory  Fr 
Harms  (Berlin,  1876). 

P.  570.    Line  6.    Add:  — 

On  Beck,  cf.  W.  Dilthey  in  Arch.  f.  Gesch.  cl  Philos.,  II.  002  ff.  On  Maimon, 
cf.  A.  Molzner  (Greifswald,  1890). 

P.  570.    Line  18.    To  the  notice  of  Reinhold,  add  :  — 

He  was  an  ardent,  "but  not  an  independent,  man.  His  capacity  to  appreciate 
and  adopt  the  work  of  another,  and  a  certain  skill  in  formulation,  enabled  him 
to  render  the  Kantian  philosophy  a  great  service  which  was  not,  however,  with- 
out its  drawbacks.  In  this  consisted  the  importance  of  his  Jena  period. 

P.  570.    Line  33.    To  the  lit.  on  Schiller,  add  :  — 


,  .  ,  ,          ; 

mann,  Kanfs  und  Sch.'s  JBegrundung  der  Aesthetik,  Munich,  ]8ar>. 

P.  570.    Line  14  from  foot.    To  the  notice  of  Fichte,  add  :  — 

As  he  worked  his  own  way  out  of  difficult  conditions  with  great  energy,  HO 
his  whole  life  was  filled  with  a  thirst  for  achievement  and  for  the  improvement 

'  *0  ref°m  ^  ™  and 


nmvprf  -,  an 

SL  I    *  A   £       P1*1^1?163  of  Kant's  teachin^-    ^  is  as  orator  and  preacher 
that  he  finds  his  most  efficient  activity.   High-flying  plans,  without  regard  to  the 

OD    a?toften1  Perh^ps'  without  sufficieut  knowledge  of  the  datl? 
of  his  restless  efforts,  in  which  his  "Philosophy  ?of  the  Will'' 
u^sand  self-forgetful  character  of  hi«  idedta  to 
f  ddresses  to  the  German  Natio"  "  (1807),  in  wh  ch 
t0  return  to  their  ^e  ™OP  nature, 


P.  571.    Line  8.    To  the  notice  of  Schelling,  add  :  — 


'  Appendix.  697 

P.  571.    Line  33.     Insert :  — 

J.  J.  Wagner  (1775-1841,  System  der  Idealphilosophie,  1804,  Organon  der 
menschlichen  Erkenntniss,  1830). 

P.  571.    Line  4  from  foot.    To  the  notice  of  Hegel,  add :  — 

Hegel  was  of  a  thoroughly  didactic  nature,  with  a  tendency  to  schematise. 
An  extremely  rich  and  thorough  knowledge,  which  was  deeper  and  more  com- 
prehensive in  the  realms  of  history  than  in  those  of  natural  science,  was  ordered 
and  arranged  in  his  thought  according  to  a  great  systematic  plan.  Imagination 
and  practical  ends  fall  far  into  the  background  in  his  life,  in  comparison  with 
the  purely  intellectual  need  of  comprehending  all  human  knowledge  as  a  histori- 
cal necessity  and  a  connected  whole.  This  didactic  uniformity  appears  also  in 
the  construction  of  his  terminology,  and  has  both  its  good  and  its  bad  side.  Cf. 
H.  Ulrici,  Ueber  Princip  und  Methode  der  H.  Schen  Philos.  (Leips.  1841); 
P.  Barth,  Die  Geschichtxphilos,  J£',s  (Leips.  1890).  [Recent  translations  of  Phi- 
losophy of  Mind,  by  W.  Wallace,  Clar.  Press,  1894  ;  Philosophy  of  fieligion,  by 
Speirs  and  Sanderson,  Lond,  1805;  Philosophy  of  Right,  by  S.  W.  Dyde,  1896. 
Cf.  J.  MacTaggart,  Studies  in  the.  Heyelian  Dialectic,  1896 ;  G.  Noel,  La  Log- 
ique  de  IL,  Paris,  1897.]  Kuuo  Fischer's  work  on  Hegel  is  now  in  press  as  the 
8th  vol.  of  the  "  Jubilee  Edition  "  of  his  Geschichte  der  neueren  Philosophic, 
and  has  progressed  in  its  brilliant  exposition  so  far  as  to  include  the  Logic. 

P.  572.    To  the  notice  of  Schleiermacher,  add :  — 

Schleiermacher's  kindly  nature,  which  was  particularly  skilful  in  fine  and 
delicate  adjustments,  is  developed  especially  in  the  attempt  to  harmonise  the 
{esthetic  and  philosophical  culture  of  his  time  with  the  religious  consciousness. 
With  delicate  hand  he  wove  connecting  threads  between  the  two,  and  removed 
in  the  sphere  of  feeling  the  opposition  which  prevailed  between  the  respective 
theories  and  conceptions.  Cf.  I).  Sclienkel,  Sch.,  Elberfeld,  1808;  W.  Dilthey, 
Lelwn  tfcM.'w,  Bd.  I.  Berlin,  1870 ;  A.  Kitechl,  ScWs  Raden  ill.  d.  ReL,  Bonn, 
1875 ;  F.  Bachmaim,  Die  Entwiclduny  der  Ethik  #c/iZ.'s,  Leips.  1892.  [Eng.  tr. 
of  the  On  Religion,  by  Oman  (Lond.  1893).  J 

P.  572.     To  the  notice  of  Herbart,  add :  — 

Ilerbart's  philosophical  activity  was  conspicuous  for  its  keenness  in  concept- 
ual thought  and  for  its  polemic  energy.  Whatever  he  lacked  in  wealth  of  per- 
ceptual material  and  in  {esthetic  mobility  was  made  up  by  an  earnest  disposition 
and  a  lofty,  calm,  and  clear  conception  of  life,  I  Us  rigorously  scientific  manner 
made  him  for  a  long  tiruo  a  successful  opponent  of  the  dialectical  tendency  in 
philosophy. 

P.  573,    Line  4.    To  the  notice  of  Schopenhauer,  add :  — 

Of  the  recent  editions  of  his  works  the  most  carefully  edited  is  that  of  E. 
GriHcbauh.  Schopenhauer's  peculiar,  contradictory  personality  and  also  his 
teaching  have  been  most  deeply  apprehended  by  Kuuo  Fischer  (9th  vol.  of  the 
Gwch.  d,  nc'itnen  Philos,  SJd  ed.,  1898). 

His  capriciously  passionate  character  was  joined  with  a  genius  and  freedom 
of  intellectuality  which  enabled  him  to  survey  and  comprise  within  one  view  a 
great  wealth  of  learning  and  information,  and  at  the  same  time  to  present  with 
artistic  completeness  the  view  of  the  world  and  of  life  which  he  had  thus  found. 
AH  one  of  the  greatest  philosophical  writers,  Schopenhauer  has  exercised  the 
strongest  influence  through  IUH  skill  in  formulation  and  his  language,  which  is 
free,  from  ail  the  pedantry  of  learning,  and  appeals  to  the  cultivated  mind  with 
brilliant  suggcstiveness,  IE  he  deceived  himself  as  to  his  historical  position  in 
the  Post-Kantian  philosophy,  and  thereby  brought  himself  into  an  almost 
pathological  solitariness,  ho  has  nevertheless  given  to  many  fundamental 
thoughts  of  this  whole  development  their  most  fortunate  and  effective  form. 
Cf.  W.  Wallace,  Sc.h.  (London,  1891),  R.  Lehmann,  Sch.,  etn  Beitr&g  zur 
Pwjcholofjie  der  Mrtaphysik  (Berlin,  1804).  [W.  Caldwell,  SSs  System  in  its 
Philosophical  ffignt&canee  (Lond.  and  N.Y.  189C).  J,  Volkelt,  Sch.  (Stuttgart, 
1900).] 


698  Appendix. 

P.  573.    Line  14.    After  the  parenthesis,  insert :  — 

—  to  Schelling  of  J.  P.  V.  Troader  (1780-1866,  Naturlehre  des  menschlichen 
Erkennens,  1828). 

P.  585.    Foot-note  2,  add :  — 

Cf.  A.  Schoel,  Jff.'s  Philos.  Lehrt  von  der  Religion  (Dresden,  1884). 

P.  586.    Note  3.    Line  7.    Insert:  — 

The  theory  thus  given  its  scientific  foundation  and  development  by  Herbart 
became  the  point  of  departure  for  the  whole  pedagogical  movement  in  Germany 
during  the  nineteenth  century,  whether  the  direction  taken  was  one  of  friendly 
development  or  of  hostile  criticism.  A  literature  of  vast  extent  has  been  called 
out  by  it,  for  which  histories  of  pedagogy  may  be  consulted. 

P.  588.    Line  14  from  foot.    Affix  to  this  the  reference :  — 

Cf.  Schopenhauer's  essay  On  the  Fourfold  Root  of  the  Principle,  of  Sufficient 
Beason,  and  his  Criticism  of  the  Kantian  Philosophy  (in  Vol.  U.  of  the  Eug.  tr.)» 

P.  592.    Line  9  from  foot  of  the  text.    Affix  the  reference :  — . 
Cf.  E.  v.  Hartmann,  Ueber  die  dialektische  Methode  (Berlin,  18G8). 

P.  599.    Line  21. 

See  Jac.  Stilling  in  the  Strassburger  Goethevortragen  (1899),  pp.  149  ft 


INDEX. 

NOTE.  — Figures  enclosed  in  parentheses  indicate  pages  of  the  text  to  which 
supplementary  matter  has  been  added  in  the  Appendix.  Thus,  under  "Abe- 
lard,"  690  (275)  indicates  that  on  page  690  will  be  found  material  supplement- 
ary to  that  on  page  275. 


Abbt,  446. 

Abelard,  life  and  writings,  274,  690 
(275)  ;  theory  of  universals  (concep- 
tualism),  272,  294,  298  f.  ;  rational- 
ism arid  independence,  300  f.,  307  ; 
psychology,  300  f.  ;  ethics,  308  f.  ; 
religion,  319. 

Abercrouibie,  629. 

Absolute,  applied  to  the  Ideas,  Plato, 
128 ;  to  the  pure  Form,  Aristotle, 
L45  f.  ;  to  the  One,  Plotinus,  238  ; 
to  God,  Anselin,  293  f. ;  Schelling, 
608,  617  f .  ;  unknowable,  Hamilton, 
638  ;  and  Spencer,  657. 

Absolutism,  political,  432  f. 

Abstract  ideas,  see  Ideas. 

Abubacer,  317,  320. 

Academicians,  164. 

Academy,  Older,  101,  103,  159,  687 
(189)  (see  also  under  names  of  its 
adherents)  ;  Middle,  103,  161  i,  207 
(see  also  Arcesilaus  and  Carneades)  ; 
New,  103,  102. 

Achillini,  355. 

Acosmism,  38. 

Actual  vs.  the  potential,  140,  144,  146, 
423  f. 

Adaptation,  480  and  note,  666,  G58  f. 

Acl61ard  of  Bath,  274,  297. 

dfl«£</>opa  in  Stoicism,  168,  173. 

JEgydius,  314. 

JKnosidonras  (the  Sceptic),  ICO,  163; 
his  "tropes,"  200  ;  aporiso,  200. 

"^Bnosidemus,"  see  Schulze. 

./Kons,  Gnostic,  244,  257  f. 

^Escliines,  82. 

Esthetic,  transcendental,  of  Kant,  638- 
541. 

Esthetics  (see  also  Beauty),  beginning 
of,  in  Aristotle,  153  ;  Plotinus,  248  ; 
of  Baumgarten,  484  ;  Diderot,  493  f.  ; 
Bhaftesbury,  510 ;  Home,  510  f.  ; 
Burke,  511  ;  Sulzer,  611  ;  influence 
on  philosophy  of  German  idealism, 
630;  Kant's,  560-564;  Schiller's, 
600-602  ;  Schelling's,  607  ;  of  Ro- 


manticists, 611 ;  Hegel's,  613 ;  Scho- 
penhauer's, 600,  622;  Nietzsche's, 
677  f. 

Agnosticism,  of  Hamilton  and  Mansel, 
638 ;  of  Spencer,  657,  659 ;  see  also 
Negative  Theology  and  cf.  546-550, 
642, 

Agricola,  3541,360. 

Agrippa  (the  Sceptic),  160,  163  ;  his 
tropes,  201. 

Agrippa  of  Nettesheim,  357,  373. 

Alanus,  275. 

Albert  of  Bollstadt  (Albertus  Magnus), 
311,  313,  321,  326,  333,  340,  343  f.. 
487,  090  (313). 

Alchemy,  373  f. 

Alcidamas,  74. 

Alcm&on,  46,  64,  67,  150. 

Alcuin,  273. 

d'Alembert,  442,  477,  652. 

Alexander  Aphrodisias,  161,  234,  338  f., 
359. 

Alexander  of  Hales,  313,  344. 

Alexander,  S.,  630. 

Alexandria,  158, 213  ;  Catechists,  school 
of,  214,  217. 

Alexandrian  Philosophy,  213  ff. ;  see 
also  Neo-Pythagoreanism,  Philo,  Plo- 
tinus, etc. 

Alexandrists,  354  f,,  359. 

Aleximis,  71,  89. 

Aifarabi,  317. 

Alfred  de  Sereshel,  344. 

Algazel,  317. 

Alhacen,  ,'344. 

Alkeudi,  317. 

Allegorical  interpretation,  221  ff. 

dXXoWis  and  ircptfopd  as  kinds  of 
*^<m,  39. 

AHhus,  382,  433  f. 

Altruism,  Cumberland  on,  435;  origi- 
nal or  derived,  508  ff. ;  evolutionary 
view  of,  659,  602 ;  Feuerbach,  671, 
675 ;  see  Egoism. 

Amalric,  Ainalricans,  313,  339,  690 
(313). 


699 


700 


Index. 


Arnelius,  218. 

Ammonius  Saccus,  218. 

Ampere,  627,  636. 

Analogies  of  Experience,  545. 

Analytic,  transcendental,  of  Kant, 
533  1,  538,  542  ff. 

Analytics  of  Aristotle,  104,  132-138. 

avdfj.vri<rLs  (recollection),  with  Plato,  118, 
685  (123)  ;  Augustine,  278. 

Anaxagoras,  life,  30 ;  astronomical  in- 
terest, 684  (30),  41,  54  ;  theory  of  ele- 
ments, 41,  52  ;  of  the  wus,  41  f.,  54, 
62  f .,  684  (42),  185 ;  influence  of  this 
on  Plato,  128 ;  and  on  Stoics,  187  ; 
teleology,  42,  54,  98  note ;  theory  of 
cognition,  60,  62  f.,  65;  cf.  29,  91, 
128,  185. 

Anaximander,  27  ff.,  33  ff.,  49,  60,  688 
(238). 

Anaximenes,  27,  29,  32  f.,  48. 

Ancillon,  627. 

Andronicus,  104,  159, 

Anniceris,  70,  87. 

Anselm,  272,  295 ;  life  and  writings, 
274 ;  ontological  argument,  292  f., 
321,  331. 

Anticipations  of  perception,  545. 

Antinomy,  between  thought  and  ex- 
perience, 11 ;  Zeno's  antinomies,  44, 
55  f . ;  Kant's  doctrine  of,  550. 

Antiochus,  103, 161  f. 

Antisthenes,  70,  72,  83  f.,  94,  96;  see 
also  Cynics. 

Apathy,  Stoic  doctrine  of,  168. 

ti.irei.pov,  see  Infinite. 

Apelles,  258. 

Apollodorus,  162. 

Apollonius,  213,  215. 

Apologists,  214,  217,  222  ff.,  231,  237. 

A  posteriori,  see  A  priori. 

Apperception,  distinguished  from  per- 
ception, by  Leibniz,  463;  transcen- 
dental, of  Kant,  545  ;  Herbart's  doc- 
trine of,  587. 

A  priori^  Leibniz's  conception  of,  398  ; 
Wolff,  4GO  ;  Kant,  533,  note  2 ;  evo- 
lutionary explanation  of,  659,  062. 
Cf.  also  105  ff.  ;  292  f .,  343  ff.,  388  ff., 
538  ff.,  551  ff. 

Apuleius,  213,  216,  228. 

Arabian  Philosophy,  15,  310  f.,  319, 
337  ff.,  690  (316  f.). 

Arcesilaus,  103,  160  f. 

Arehelaus,  7C,  684  (30). 

Archytas,  31,  103, 123,  215. 

Ardigo,  631. 

Aristarchus,  162. 

Aristides,  217. 

Aristippus,  70,  72,  85  ff.,  93,  165,  170 ; 
see  also  Cyrenaics. 

Aristippus  the  Younger,  70,  72,  86. 

Aristobulus,  216,  220  f. 

Aristophanes,  81. 


Aristotelianism  (see  Peripatetics),  in 
Middle  Ages,  269  f.,  288, 302  f.,  311  ff., 
316 f.,  324  ff.,  329,  333,  338;  in  the 
Renaissance,  3531,  357-359,  364. 
Aristotle,  conception  of  philosophy,  2  ; 
coinpleter  of  Greek  science,  25, 1)9  f . ; 
on  Bavfji&fav  and  apxh  31  f- ;  as  source 
for  Sophistic  doctrine,  88 ;  life  and 
writings,  103  f.,  685  (104) ;  logic,  132- 
138,543,085  (135  note),  086(142);  his 
central  principle,  139,  Gf)G ;  doctrine 
of  cause,  141  ff.;  categories,  142;  re- 
lation to  Plato's  Ideas,  139,  142 f.; 
his  personality  compared  with  Plato's, 
685  (104);   doctrine  of  matter,  144; 
of  Being  or  essence,   1391,    1451; 
monotheism,  145  f. ;  cosmology,  147  ; 
cosmical  elements,  CSC  (148);  psy- 
chology, 149;  ethics,  151  ff.;  politics, 
1521;   poetics,  1531;   influence  on 
Stoics,    176,    181 ;   immanence   and 
transcendence  in  his  doctrine,  1781; 
on  freedom,  191 1 ;  on  law  in  nature, 
195 ;  evil  due  to  matter,  190 ;  influ- 
ence of  his  monotheism,  211 ;  recep- 
tion of  his  doctrine  the  decisive  factor 
in  Scholasticism,  200,  311 1;  cf.  also 
229,  236,  255,  320,  33],  340,  354,  398, 
402,  420  ;  see  also  Aristotelianism. 
Aristoxenua,  159,  101. 
Arius  Didymus,  162,  216. 
Arnauld,  381. 
Arnobius,  214,  217,  2241 
Arnold,  445. 
Arrian,  210. 

Ars  inveniendi,  383-387. 
Art,  its  influence  on  philosophy,  530, 
568,  677  1;  for  theories  of  its  origin, 
purpose,  and  function,  see  Esthetics. 
Art  of  Lull ;  see  Lullus. 

t  of  cosmolotfisls,  {J2ff.;  the  Idt'as 
as  fyxtf  with  Plato,  118;  four  princi- 
ples, Aristotle,  1«8,  141. 
Asceticism,  21-10,  020  f . 
Aseity,  of  God,  292  ;  of  substance,  408 ; 

of  individuals,  C7(i. 

Assent,  as  characteristic  of  the  judg- 
ment, 207 ;  394 ;  as  ethical  factor, 
308. 

Association  (see  also  Psychology),  in 
recollection,  Plato,  685  (119);  John 
of  Salisbury,  307 ;  Ilobbes,  41U ;  Hart- 
ley, 455 ;  laws  of,  with  JIume,  473  ; 
explains  ideas  of  substance  and  cau- 
sality, ace.  to  Humo,  473-470 ;  of 
nineteenth  century,  028  f. ;  Mill  and 
Bain,  035;  in  ethics,  002,  000;  in 
Herbart's  Pedagogics,  CSC;  iu  es- 
thetics, 511. 
Astrology,  373  ff. 

Astronomy,  of  the  Pythagoreans,  45, 
56  f. ;  of  Anaxagoras,  64 :  of  Plato, 
1301;  of  Aristotle,  147 1 


Index. 


701 


Ataraxy,  165 ;  of  Epicurus,  166 ;  of 
Sceptics,  167  ;  of  Stoics,  168. 

Atheism,  86,493,641,675. 

Athenagoras,  217,  224. 

Atom,  conception  of,  with  Leucippus, 
43;  of  Democritus,  107,  110  ff.;  with 
Epicurus,  184  ;  compared  with  monad 
of  Bruno,  371  ;  Buffon's,  480. 

Atomism,  of  Leucippus,  42 ;  of  Democri- 
tus, 108,  llOff.;  of  Epicurus,  1831; 
in  Ethics,  see  Individualism. 

Atomists,  29,  42  ff.,  54,  688  (238);  see 
also  Leucippus,  Democritus. 

Attributes,  the  two,  of  Descartes,  405  f. ; 
with  Spinoza,  408  f.,  419. 

Augustine,  204  ff.,  268,  270;  life  and 
works,  273,  689  (273) ;  doctrine,  276- 
287 ;  influence  of  his  theory  of  the 
will,  311  f.,  329  ff.,  394,  416  ;  his  em- 
phasis on  personality  and  inner  ex- 
perience, 303, 340,  344,  364 ;  influence 
on  Reformers,  337,  353,  3(>4  ;  cf.  also 
324,  326,  333,  337,  391,  and  Augus- 
tinianism. 

Augustinianism,  contrasted  with  Aris- 
totelianism,  303  ff.,  324,  326,  329  ft, 
334,  341,  344,  304,  661  note. 

Austin,  029. 

Authority  as  philosophical  principle, 
219  ff.,  502  f.,  514  f. 

Autonomy  of  practical  reason,  553  ;  cf. 
675,  680  ;  see  Will  and  Voluntarism. 

Avempace,  317. 

Avenarius,  633,  651. 

Averroes  and  Averroism,  317ff.,  320, 
323,  029,  331,  830,  338  ff.,  354  f.,  359. 

Avicebron,  :J18,  382,  338  f.,  341. 

Avicenua,  299,  JJ17,  340,  344. 

Axioms  of  perception,  545. 

Baader,  571. 

Babeuf,  52,'J. 

Bacon,  Francis,  379  ;  life  and  writings, 
380,  (>92  (380) ;  his  method,  383-388  ; 
"  idols,"  383;  aim,  38(5  f . ;  attitude 
toward  religion,  400 ;  on  final  causes, 
401 ;  "the  New  Atlantis,"  387,  429. 
Cf,  also  400,  412,  477,  494,  625. 

Bacon,  Roger,  3 14,  319, 338, 341, 344  f., 
307. 

Baer,  von,  658. 

Bahnsen,  675  f. 

Bailtsy,  029. 

Bain,  029,  635. 

Baldwin,  630. 

Ballanche,  628,  649. 

Barbaro,  355. 

Bardesanes,  217,  239. 

Barthez,  627,  035. 

Bartholmess,  627. 

Basedow,  446,  526. 

Basileides,  214,  217,  243,  258  f. 

Basso,  355,  371,  406. 


Batteux,  456. 

Baumgarten,  444,  484. 

Bayle,  439, 442, 477,  491, 494, 495, 504  f. 

Baynes,  629. 

Bazard,  628. 

Beattie,  442,  537. 

Beautiful  soul,  as  ideal,  602. 

Beauty,  its  relation  to  the  good  with 
Plato,  125;  first  treated  indepen- 
dently by  Plotinus,  248  f. ;  of  the 
universe  emphasised  in  Eenaissance, 
358, 367  ff. ;  and  by  Shaftesbury,  489 ; 
factor  in  ethics,  509 ;  Home,  Burke, 
Sulzer  on,  510  f.  ;  Kant,  560-663  ; 
Schiller  on,  600  f.  Cf.  ^Esthetics. 

Beck,  570,  579,696(570). 

Becker,  398. 

Becoming ;  see  Cosmic  processes. 

Bede,  273. 

Being,  early  Greek  conceptions  of,  31- 
47  ;  as  world-stuff  with  Milesians,  32  ; 
as  corporeality  or  space-filling  sub- 
stance, Parmenides,  37  ;  plurality  of, 
assumed,  39  ff. ;  =  atoms,  42  f. ;  plu- 
rality of,  denied  by  Zeno,  44  ;  found 
in  numbers,  Philolaus,  45  ;  identified 
with  the  good  by  Euclid,  96  ;  equiva- 
lent to  atoms  with  Democritus,  108  ; 
to  Ideas  with  Plato,  109,  118;  to 
essence  with  Aristotle,  139 ;  and  fur- 
ther to  pure  thought,  145 ;  to  spirit 
with  Neo-Platonism  and  Patristic 
thought,  232;  with  Plotinus,  245; 
sought  in  the  universal  by  John 
Scotus,  289  ff.;  treated  as  an  attri- 
bute of  varying  intensity,  291  f. ;  and 
by  Descartes,  405;  God  as  infinite, 
bodies  and  minds  as  finite,  405 ;  to 
be  thought  only  as  a  kind  of  con- 
sciousness, 579 ;  comprehensible  only 
as  a  product  of  reason,  Fichte,  581 ; 
Eleatic  conception  of,  in  Herbart, 
584 ;  only  a  means,  Fichte,  595 ;  de- 
rived from  freedom,  Weisse,  633  ;  see 
also  Reality,  Substance. 

Bekker,  401. 

Belief,  Hume's  theory  of,  475,  477. 

Bellarmin,  382. 

Belsham,  628. 

Beneke,  573,  577,  637. 

Bentham,  441,  513,  522,  662-665,  666. 

Berengar,  275,  297. 

Be'rigard,  355. 

Berkeley,  439  f.,  452,  469  f.,  476  note, 

Bernard  of  Chartres,  272,  274,  294, 
302  f.,  357,  089  (274). 

Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  273,  275,  301, 
305, 

Bernhard  of  Tours,  689  (274). 

Bernhard  Silvestris,  689  (274). 

Bertrand,  027. 

Bessarion,  354,  358  f . 

Bias,  24. 


702 


Index, 


Bichat,  627,  635. 

Bilfinger,  444. 

Bion,  686  (103). 

Biran,  Maine  de,  627,  635  f. 

Bodies,  as  portions  of  space,  Pythag- 
oreans, 40f.;  Plato,  129;  Descartes, 
404  j  as  complex  of  ideas,  Berkeley, 
470  ;  as  force,  Leibniz,  421 ;  phenom- 
ena, Kant,  545  f . 

Bodin,  382,  427,  431,  433,  526. 

Body  and  Soul,  301  1;  see  Soul. 

Boehme,  354,  357,  307  f.,  369  f.,  371, 
3741,403,  618. 

Boerhave,  454  f. 

Boethius,  270,  273,  288,  296. 

Bolingbroke,  441,  523, 

Bolzano,  633. 

Bonald,  628,  648. 

Bonatelli,  631. 

Bonaveutura,  313,  333  1,  341. 

Bonnet,  442,  458,  634. 

Boole,  629. 

Bosanquet,  630,  670. 

Bossuet,  486,  527. 

BouilW,  356,  308,  372. 

Bouterwek,  573,  587,  635. 

Bowne,  030. 

Boyle,  380. 

Bradley,  630. 

Broussais,  627,  634,  642  note. 

Brown,  Peter,  440 ;  Thomas,  440. 

Brucker,  10,  445. 

Bruno,  354,  356,  360,  367  ff.,  389,  397, 
402,  409,  422,  592,  691  (356). 

Buchanan,  433. 

Buchez,  628. 

Biichner,  632,  643. 

Buckle,  054. 

Budde,  444. 

Buffon,  442,  480. 

Buisson,  627. 

Buridan,  315,  331,  690  (331). 

Burke,  441,  511. 

Butler,  441,  513  f, 

Cabanis,  442,  627,  634,  642, 

Cabbala,  317,  372. 

Cjesalpinus,  355,  350. 

Caird,  E.,630;  J.,  630. 

Cahlerwood,  629. 

Callicles,  75. 

CaHippus,  147. 

Calvin,  356,  364. 

Cambridge  school,  see  Neo-Platonism, 

English. 
Caiupanella,  356, 370 1,  373,  376 1,  383, 

387,  391,  403,  413,  427,  430,  526,  691 

(357). 

Cantoni,  031. 
Cardaillac,  627, 
Cardanus,  356,  372  f.,  431. 
Carlyle,  629,  654,  663-665,  667,  674. 
Carneades,  103, 160  f.,  194  f.,  201,  207. 


Caro,  627. 

Carpocrates,  217,  258. 

Carriere,  632. 

Cartesians  and  Cartesianism,  414  ff, 
448,  453,  407  ff.,  470,  477,  603. 

Cassiodorus,  270. 

Cataneo,  631. 

Catch  questions  among  the  Sophists 
and  Megarians,  89. 

Categories,  Aristotle's,  142  j  Stoics, 
1981;  of  Plotinus,  245;  natural 
categories  not  to  be  applied  to  God, 
according  to  Augustine,  2791;  of 
Kant,  5421;  reduced  to  causality, 
Schopenhauer,  588 ;  of  nature,  Schel- 
ling,  598 ;  Hegel's  doctrine  of,  611  j 
Hartmaim's,  047  f. 

Causa  sui,  408. 

Cause  and  causality,  Idea  as,  with 
Plato,  128  ;  four  causes  of  Aristotle, 
141 ;  final  and  mechanical,  144 ; 
emphasised  by  Stoics,  181 ;  concep- 
tion of,  criticized  by  Sceptics,  205  1 ; 
God  as  final,  formal,  and  efficient 
with  Bruno,  307  ;  God  as  rational 
ground  and  efficient  cause  with 
Boehrae,  307  ;  formal  causes  empha- 
sised by  Bacon,  384 IT.;  tfiven  a  new 
meaning  by  Galileo  and  his  succes- 
sors, 399  ff.;  final,  rejected  by  Bacon, 
Descartes,  Spinoza,  401 ;  sought  in 
motion,  not  in  substances,  by  Gali- 
leo, 410;  God  the  solo  true  cause, 
Occasionalism,  415  ;  occasional,  415  ; 
the  central  difficulty  in  the  concep- 
tion of  causality,  415 ;  equivalent,  to 
mathematical  consequence  with  Spi- 
nbza,  418 ;  analysed  and  declared 
the  result  of  cuHtom  by  Hume,  474- 
470 ;  re-examined  by  Kaut,  542-640  ; 
Kant's  unjustifiable  use  of,  577  1; 
the  only  category  recognised  by 
Schopenhauer,  688 ;  thing-in-itsolf 
not  cause  of  phenomena,  689;  ex- 
pressed in  principle  of  conservation 
of  energy,  055 1 

Celsus,  210. 

Cerdo,  258. 

Cerinthus,  257. 

Chaignet,  027. 

Chalmers,  029. 

Chance  and  contingent,  with  Aristotle, 
143, 148 ;  in  nature,  with  Hegel,  641  j 
views,  with  Herbart,  586 ;  wee  Contin- 
gency. 

Change,  as  problem  of  philosophy,  47  ff ,; 
law  of,  with  HeracUtuB,  fi() ;  denied  by 
Parmenides,  51 ;  mathematical  analy- 
sis of,  Galileo,  388 ;  as  contradiction, 
Herbart,  684. 

Character,  intelligible  and  empirical, 
555,  589,  670. 

Charron,  365,  3621,  376,  391. 


Index. 


703 


Chasseboeuf,  see  Volney. 

Chateaubriand,  627. 

Chesterfield,  515. 

Christianity,  relation  to  Greek  thought, 
212,  223  f.;  its  view  of  authority  and 
revelation,  221  ff. ;  of  spirit  and  mat- 
ter, 23 Iff.;  of  personality  of  God, 
238,  251 ;  its  view  of  history,  250  ff.; 
the  "true"  of  Deism,  487 ff.;  with 
Schelling,  610  ;  Diihringon,  071 ;  see 
also  Religion,  Revelation,  Theology, 
God. 

Chrysippus,  159,  162,  108,  181,  187, 
193  1,  190,  203. 

Chubb,  441. 

Church,  conceived  as  fellowship,  201 ; 
Thomas,  Dante,  Occam,  320-328  ;  at- 
titude toward  Aristotle,  312,  304  ;  and 
state,  theories  of,  320,  433  f .,  487,  557  ; 
preserves  ancient  civilisation  and  edu- 
cates modern  Europe,  203  ff. ;  one  of 
the  foci  of  Augustine's  thought,  270, 
283  ;  doctrine  definitively  closed,  303 ; 
Catholic,  revives  Thomism,  001  note. 

Cicero,  101  f.,  103,  177,  204,  223,  301, 
080  (163). 

Civilisation,  as  factor  in  history  of 
philosophy,  13  ;  influence  on  anthro- 
pological period  of  Greek  thought, 
06  ff. ;  its  worth  denied  by  Cynics, 
84  :  affirmed  by  Cyrcnaica,  80 ;  the 
Hellenistic,  155  ff.  ;  preserved  by  the 
Church,  2(58  ff. ;  of  the  Renaissance, 
348  ff.  ;  modern,  380  f. ;  problem  of, 
in  Enlightenment,  518  ft,  001  ;  Man- 
deville,  524 ;  Rousseau,  625 ;  Kant 
on,  550 ;  Fichte  on,  005  f.  ;  problem 
of,  in  nineteenth  century,  001  ff.;  goal 
of,  Hartmann,  0731;  individualistic 
views  of,  075  ff. 

Civitas  tffli,  of  Augustine,  285. 

Clarke,  441,  400,  504. 

Clauberg,  381,  415. 

Cleanthes,  159,  102,  188. 

Clearness  and  distinctness,  Descartes, 
302,  308,  450  ;  Leibniz,  398,  402-404. 

CleidemuH,  70. 

Clement  of  Alexandria,  214,  217,  252, 
088  (217). 

Clement  of  Rome,  269. 

Clitomachus,  101. 

Cogan,  029. 

Cofflto  eryo  mm,  of  Descartes,  391  f. 

Goinc.ideMia  appositorum,  of  Nicolaus 
Cumulus,  340 ;  of  Bruno,  308 ;  of 
Boehme,  375  ;  referred  to  by  Schel- 
ling, 55)2. 

Coleridge,  020,  003-005. 

Collective  consciousness,  648,  649. 

Collier,  471. 

Collins,  441 ,  496. 

Combe,  029,  635. 

Comenius,  385. 


Common  sense,  doctrine  of,  460,  482  f., 
590, 649 ;  cf .  203  ;  509 ;  see  also  Scot- 
tish School. 

Communism,  428  f.,  522  f.,  668;  sup- 
posed,  of  Plato,  126. 

Comte,  624,  628,  650-054,  655,  665. 

Conception,  its  importance  with  Socra- 
tes, 95  f. ;  relation  to  Idea  with  Plato, 
118  f.,  121 ;  with  Aristotle,  133, 142 f.  ; 
derived  from  sense  perception  by 
Stoics  and  Epicureans,  203 ;  Abe- 
lard's  theory,  306 ;  Xocke's,  451  ; 
Berkeley's,  452  ;  as  knowledge  of  the 
Absolute,  Hegel,  611. 

Concepts,  Aristotle's  doctrine  of,  137; 
Occam,  342  f.  ;  pure  concepts  of  un- 
derstanding, 542  ff.  ;  see  Concep- 
tion, Universals,  Ideas,  Realism, 
Nominalism,  Terminism. 

Conceptualism,  272  ;  of  Abelard,  298. 

Condillac,  439,  442,  456  ff.,  478  f.,  621, 
527,  034,  650. 

Condorcet,  443,  527. 

Conscience,  234  ;  Abelard's  view  of, 
308;  Thomas,  333;  Butler,  514; 
Smith,  517  ;  as  synteresis,  333 ;  in 
Traditionalism,  048,  and  Eclecticism, 
049 ;  Roe,  003. 

Consciousness,  defined,  234  ;  as  a  uni- 
tary function  with  Aristotle,  1 50 ;  and 
Bonnet,  458 ;  characteristic  of  man, 
with  Alcinseon,  04  note  4  ;  certainty 
of,  as  starting-point  with  Augustine, 
270  f.  ;  with  Descartes,  391 ;  one  of 
the  two  attributes  of  all  reality, 
Descartes,  405  ;  all  minds  modes  of, 
406,  408  ;  modes  of  denied  to  God, 
408  ;  vs.  unconscious,  Leibniz,  462  ; 
"in  general,"  of  Kant,  545,  563; 
with  Beck,  570 ;  self-consciousness 
Fichte's  first  principle,  580  f.,  593  f. ; 
as  intelligible  space,  Herbart,  585  ; 
Mahnon's  doctine  of,  678. 

Consensus  gentium,  204,  430,  449  f. 

Conservation,  of  motion,  411 ;  offeree, 
421  ;  of  substance,  545 ;  of  energy, 
055  f. ;  cf.  37-39. 

ConstiintinuK,  302. 

Oontarmi,  356. 

Contemplation,  300 ;  aesthetic,  250,  661, 
000,  021  f.,  677;  intellectual,  154, 
280,  333. 

Contingency  of  the  finite,  347 ;  in  free- 
dom of  the  will,  330 ;  of  the  individ- 
ual, 341  ;  of  the  particular  laws  of 
nature,  422,  500  ;  of  the  world,  492. 

Contract  theory  of  the  state,  174  1, 
328,  432,  618  ff.,  558 ;  see  also  state. 

Contradiction,  in  the  dialectical  method, 
591  f. ;  real,  676 ;  principle  of,  61, 
88,  138,  398,  683  f.}  691. 

Contrast,  473. 

Copernicus,  369. 


704 


Index. 


Copula,  37. 

Cordemoy,  381,  415. 

Cornutus,  216. 

"  Correspondence  concerning  the  na- 
ture of  the  Soul,1'  454. 

Cosmic  Processes,  early  Greek  concep- 
tions of,  47  ff. ;  Aristotle's  principle 
for  explaining,  140,  144 ;  see  Change. 

Cosmogony,  poetic,  27  ;  emanistic,  249 ; 
early  physical,  47  ff. 

Cosmological  argument,  145,  469,  550. 

Cosmopolitanism,  Stoic  and  Roman, 
176  f. ;  Fichte,  606. 

Cousin,  627,  C36,  649,  652,  661  note. 

Grantor,  103,  164. 

Crates  of  Athens,  103. 

Crates  of  Thebes,  72,  85. 

Cratylus,  70. 

Creation,  opposed  to  evolution  and 
emanation,  252-254. 

Cremonini,  355. 

Creuz,  445. 

Criteria,  of  truth,  197  ff.,  Descartes, 
392 ;  Kant,  543  ff. ;  see  also  Ration- 
alism and  Empiricism  of  true  revela- 
tion, 225  f. ;  moral,  501  ff.,  664  ff. ; 
see  Value. 

Critias,  76. 

Critical  method,  533. 

Criticism,  immanent,  18 ;  of  Kant, 
534  fl.  ;  its  difficulties,  574  ff. ;  as 
task  of  philosophy,  681. 

Critique  or  criticism  of  reason,  Kant's, 
532  ff. 

Crousaz,  444,  478. 

Crusius,  444,  484  f. 

Cud  worth,  382,  401,  435,  449,  503. 

Cumberland,  382,  435  f.,  508,  513. 

Cusanus,  see  Nicolaus. 

Custom,  explains  substance  and  causal- 
ity with  Hume,  475,  476. 

Cynics,  70,  82  ff.,  90,  94,  96,  104,  166, 
169,  171,  684  (96),  686  (163),  687 
(216). 

Cyrenaics,  70,  82,  86  f.,  94,  165. 

Czolbe,  032,  641. 

Daimonion  (or  Dseinon)  of  Socrates,  98. 

Dalgarn,  398. 

Damascius,  215,  218. 

Damiron,  027. 

Dante,  311,  314.  327,  334,  426. 

Darwin,  Ch.,  030,  660  f.,  672. 

Darwinism,  with  Empedocles,  53;  see 

Natural  Selection  and  Survival  of  the 

fittest. 
Daube,  627. 
Daubenton,  443. 
David  of  Dinant,  313,  339,  410. 
Deduction,  Aristotle's  conception  of, 

134;  transcendental,  of  Kant,  544. 
Definition,    Socrates,    95 ;    Aristotle, 

137  f. 


Degfrando,  10,  627,  635. 

Deism  and  Deists,  488-497,  523. 

Deity,  first  used  as  philosophical  prin- 
ciple by  Anaximander,  34 ;  as  Idea 
of  the  Good,  Plato,  128  ;  as  demiurge, 
Plato,  130  ;  as  pure  Form,  with  Aris- 
totle, 145;  as  pneuina,  with  Stoics, 
186  f.  ;  Epicurus'  view  of,  188 ;  as 
infinite,  689  (238)  ;  above  knowledge 
and  Being,  335 ;  distinguished  from 
God,  335 ;  as  natura  naturans,  with 
Eckhart,  335  f. ;  see  also  God. 

Demetrius,  216,  086  (103). 

Demiurge,  Plato's  idea  of,  130 ;  Valen- 
tinus,  254  ;  Gnostics,  257  ff. 

Democritns,  belongs  to  Systematic  Pe- 
riod, 25  f.,  09  f. ;  life  and  writings, 
100  f. ;  grounds  metaphysics  anew, 
105-108  ;  his  system  of  materialism, 
100-116 ;  relation  to  Plato,  105-108, 
118  f.,  130 ;  to  Aristotle,  138  i,  148 
ff.;  to  Epicurus,  165,  183-385,  202; 
to  Stoics,  180  f. ;  revived,  353  ;  influ- 
ence in  Renaissance,  369,  371  f . ;  his 
principle  of  reduction  of  qualitative 
to  quantitative  victorious  with  Gali- 
leo, 388 ;  with  Bacon,  Descartes, 
Hobbes,  401,403  ;  influence  on  Leib- 
niz, 422  ;  compared  with  Kant,  541 ; 
opposed  by  Schelling  and  Goethe, 
598  f. 

Demonax,  213,  210,  080  (163). 

De  Morgan,  629. 

Dependence,  absolute  (Schleiermacher), 
582. 

Derham,  401. 

Descartes,  begins  a  new  development, 
379;  life  and  writings,  ,°>80,  092 
(o80)  ;  method,  389  ff.  ;  cwjitu  ergo 
sum,  391  f. ;  innate  ideas,  fJ92 ; 
proofs  for  existence  of  God,  392  f., 

405  j  on  error,  304 ;  on  sense  quali- 
ties, 403 ;  his  dualism  of  Hubstanccs, 
404  f . ;  conception  of  substance  and 
attribute,  406  j  doctrine  of  bodies, 

406  ;  on  conservation  of  motion,  411  ; 
on  the  passions,  412  ;  on  mind  and 
body,  413  f.  ;  ethics,  414,  092  (413)  ; 
of.  also  400  f.,  410,  407,  036. 

Determinism,  Socrates,  79  f,  ;  Stoics, 
193  f. ;  opposed  by  Carneadcs  and 
Epicurus,  194  f. ;  iiitellectualiKtic, 
330  ;  see  also  Freedom. 

Development,  Aristotle's  central  prin- 
ciple, 139  ff. ;  Thomas,  324  ;  Leib- 
niz, 424 ;  Robinet,  481 ;  Scholling, 
507  ;  Hesel,  Oil  ff. 

Dewey,  630, 069. 

Dexippus,  218. 

Diagoras,  76. 

Dialectic,  of  Zeno,  44,  55  1  ;  of  Soph- 
ists, 69,  88  ff. ;  of  Plato,  120  ;  of  Aris- 
totle, 132  f.,  137  ;  of  Proclus,  251  j  of 


Index. 


705 


Scholasticism,  271 ;  opposed  by  the 
Mystics,  272 ;  of  Abelard,  300 ;  at- 
tacked in  Renaissance,  360 ;  natural, 
of  Ramus,  361;  transcendental,  of 
Kant,  548;  philosophy  as,  Schleier- 
macher,  582 ;  of  Fichte  and  Hegel, 
591,  611  f.;  influence  on  St.  Simon 
and  Comte,  650-652 ;  as  real,  with 
Bahnsen,  676. 

Dicsearchus,  159,  161. 

Diderot,  442,  457,  489,  493,  496,  508. 

Didymus,  see  Arius. 

Dilthez,  633,  660. 

Dio  Chrysostomos,  686  (163). 

Diodorus  Cronus,  71,  89. 

Diogenes  Laertius,  215. 

Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  32,  55,  62  ff., 
70,  150,  187,  684  (55). 

Diogenes  of  Babylon,  162. 

Diogenes  of  Sinope,  70,  72,  84  f.,  94. 

Dionysidorus,  89. 

Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  271,  274. 

Dippel,  445. 

Docta  ignorantia,  with  Nicolaus  Cusa- 
nus,  337,  343,  ,347. 

Dogmatism,  of  Reid,  483 ;  defined  by 
Kant,  534 ;  by  Fichte,  680. 

Dominicans,  313,  340. 

Doubt,  as  Augustine's  starting-point, 
277  ;  of  Descartes,  390  f. 

56£a,  see  Opinion. 

Drobisch,  031. 

Dualism,  of  Pythagoreans,  46 ;  of 
Plato,  120,  130  ;  overcome  by  Aris- 
totle, 133 ;  ethical  and  religious,  in 
Alexandrian  thought,  229  ff.,  235  ff. ; 
of  Gnostics  and  Manichasans,  239  f. ; 
with  Augustine,  285  f.  ;  anthropo- 
logical, of  body  and  soul,  304  ff.  ; 
metaphysical,  403  ff. ;  of  substances, 
with  Descartes,  404  f. ;  exception 
made  in  case  of  the  passions,  413  f. ; 

'  controlling  view  of  Enlightenment, 
448  ;  moral,  of  Kant,  555  f. 

Duclos,  443. 

Duhring,  632,  671  f. 

dtvaijus,  140,  179;  see  also  Potential, 
Power,  Dynamic. 

Duns  Scotus,  personality  and  writings, 
311,  314;  separates  theology  from 
philosophy,  322  f. ;  metaphysical 
psychology,  324  f. ;  mdeterminism, 
330,  332  f.  ;  on  relation  of  intellect 
and  will,  834,  090  (330) ;  on  indi- 
viduality, #41  f. ;  gave  impetus  to 
empirical  science,  344 ;  influence  on 
Bacon,  384;  on  Descartes,  394;  on 
Leibniz,  420,  423. 

Durkheim,  628. 

Duty,  Stoics,  172 ;  Kant,  551. 

Dynamic  conception,  Strato  and  the 
Stoics,  179,  236 ;  Leibniz,  421,  656 ; 
theory  of  matter,  Kant,  546,  656; 


Schelling,    597  ;    recent,   656  ;     cf. 
5tf  PCI/US. 

Eberhard,  446. 

Eckhart,  311,  314,  330,  332,  334  ff., 
340,  365,  375,  583. 

Eclecticism,  ancient,  161,  684  (55),  686 
(163)  ;  French  in  nineteenth  century, 
627,  636,  649,  661  note  ;  see  Scepti- 
cism. 

Economic  basis  of  history,  655;  see 
Political  Economy. 

Ecphantus,  46,  56. 

Ecstasy,  with  Philo,  227  ;  Neo-Platon- 
ism,  228  f.,  250. 

Education,  in  Plato's  Republic,  127  ; 
of  the  human  race  through  revela- 
tion, 226  ;  according  to  Lessing,  498  ; 
in  Rousseau,  526;  see  also  Peda- 
gogics. 

faeiMKKtv,  172,  179,  187,  339. 

Ego,  of  Fichte,  593  ff. 

Egoism,  with  Hobbes,  434  f.;  Lamet- 
trie,  etc.,  615  ;  combined  with  Utili- 
tarianism, 513  ff.,  662  f.,  671  ;  Stir- 
ner'S,  671,  Nietzsche's,  678  f.  ;  see 
Hedonism,  Epicureanism,  Individ- 
ualism. 

dTftuXa,  113-115,  188,  468  ;  cf.  Idols. 

Eiean-Eretrian  School,  70,  82. 

Eleatics,  28,  30,  34  ff.,  61  ff.,  59  ff., 
80  f.,  584  note,  585  note;  see  also 
Xenophanes. 

Elements,  of  Empedocles,  39  f.  ;  as 
homoiomeriai,  with  Anaxagoras,  41  ; 
of  Pythagoreans,  67  ;  with  Aristotle, 
1471 

Emanation,  in  Alexandrianism,  242  f.  ; 
as  eternal  necessity,  249  ;  as  a  logical 
system,  250  f.  ;  with  Erigena,  289-291. 

Emotions,  ancient  conception  of,  165  ; 
Stoics  on,  168;  Descartes  and  Spi- 
noza, 412-414  ;  Hobbes,  413  ;  Ideol- 
ogists, 457. 

Empedocles,  29  f.,  39  f.,  51  ff.,  68  ff., 
92. 

Empiricism,  favoured  by  Nominalism, 
344  ;  in  Renaissance,  360  f.,  362, 
376  f.  379;  Bacon's,  383  ff.;  influ- 
enced by  mathematics,  387  f  .  ;  Locke's, 
450  t;  of  Hume,  476;  Spelling's 
metaphysical,  619. 

Empiric-Criticism,  651. 

IP  /cai  irGiv,  86,  500  ;  cf.  Pantheism. 

Encyclopedists,  439,  442. 

End,  see  Teleology. 

tripycta,  140,  144. 

Energy,  specific  of  the  sense  organs, 
65,  113  ;  principle  of  conservation  of 
energy,  656  f  .  ;  see  Conservation,  and 


Enfantin,  628. 
Engel,  J,  J,,  446. 


706 


Index. 


Engels,  Fr.,  632,  655. 

Enlightenment,  the  Greek,  66  ff.; 
philos.  of,  437  ff. ;  its  meaning,  500  f., 
dominated  by  natural  science,  624 ; 
cf .  also  650. 

Ens  realissimuin,  et  perfectissimwn, 
292,  393,  408. 

Entelechy,  of  Aristotle,  140  ff.;  revived 
by  Leibniz,  420. 

Epicharmus,  66. 

Epictetus,  213,  216,  230. 

Epicurus  and  Epicureanism,  158  f.;  life 
and  writings,  162 ;  ethics  and  theory 
of  life,  105  f.,  170  f.;  theory  of  the 
state,  173  ff.,  686  (174),  328;  view 
of  Nature,  180,  182-186,  687  (204 
note)  indeterminism,  193  f. ;  logic  and 
theory  of  knowledge,  198,  202  f .,  205 ; 
cf.  also  211  f.,  229,  252,  353,  369, 
521. 

Epistemology,  or  theory  of  cognition, 
origin  of  its  problems,  58 ;  of  Greek 
cosinologists,  58-C5 ;  treated  psycho- 
logically by  Protagoras,  91  ff.;  of 
Aristippus,  93  f.;  of  Socrates,  94  ff.; 
made  basis  of  metaphysics,  101, 
104  ff. ;  of  Democritus,  104  ff.,  110  ff. ; 
of  Plato,  104  ff.,  117  ff.;  the  principle 
of  Aristotle's  logic,  133 ;  Stoic,  199, 
207  ff.;  of  Sceptics,  200-202,  205-207 ; 
of  Epicureans,  204  f . ;  of  Augustine, 
277-282;  of  Occam,  325;  of  Mysti- 
cism, 335  ff.;  of  humanistic  Renais- 
sance, 370;  of  Descartes,  392-394, 
403;  of  Spinoza,  390,  408  f.;  of 
Malebranche,  417 ;  made  central  in 
philosophy  of  Enlightenment,  447 ; 
general  character  of  modern  is  to 
emphasise  inner  experience,  460 ;  of 
Locke,  4C7-469 ;  of  Berkeley,  469  ;  of 
Collier,  471;  of  Hume,  472-477; 
of  Condillac  and  Ideologists,  478  ff. ; 
of  Reid,  482  f.;  of  Leibniz,  483; 
Wolff  and  his  successors,  460  ff., 
484  ff.;  of  Kant's  pre-critical  period, 
465  f.,  485  f.;  general  character  of 
his  critical,  533 ;  exposition  of  the 
same,  537-550 ;  of  Kant's  successors, 
573  ff.;  Fichte,  579;  Schleiermacher, 
582;  Herbart,  583  ff.;  Schopen- 
hauer's, 588  f.;  Hamilton,  638; 
Lotze,  644  ;  Comte,  650  f.;  Spencer, 
657-659;  Nietzsche,  679;  see  also 
Knowledge  and  Signs. 

Erasmus,  360. 

Eratosthenes,  162. 

Erdmann,  631. 

Eric  of  Aux.,  273. 

Erigena,  John  Scotus,  271,  274,  289- 
291,  335,  419,  689  (274). 

Eschenmayer,  616. 

jEksfl,  in  intellectu  and  in  re,  293,  393, 
408 ;  objective,  contrasted  with  subjec- 


tive, 325 ;  with  formaliter,  325,  393 ; 
with  nosse  and  velle,  Augustine, 
280 ;  Campaneila,  370. 

Essence,  with  Aristotle,  139,  141  and 
existence,  293  ff.,  393,  408. 

Essenes,  sect  of,  213,  231. 

Eternal  truths,  see  Verites. 

Eternity,  of  the  world,  Aristotle,  144  f.; 
Origen,  253  f.;  Plotinus,  249;  and 
time,  287. 

Ethics,  principle  of,  first  propounded 
by  Heraclitus,  03 ;  problems  raised 
by  Sophists,  72  ff.;  intellectualistic 
and  eudsemonistic  of  Socrates,  77  ff. ; 
of  Democritus,  115  1;  of  Plato, 
123  ff.;  the  basis  of  his  idealism, 
108  f.,  117  f.;  of  Aristotle,  151  ft1.;  of 
the  Stoics,  163  ff.;  of  Epicureans,  1(55 
ff.;  of  Sceptics,  105  ff. ;  of  Augustine, 
287;  of  Abelard,  308;  of  Thomas, 
332  f. ;  of  Descartes  and  Spinoza, 
414 ;  individualistic  of  eighteenth  cen- 
tury, 500  ff.;  three  main  questions, 
501 ;  of  Locke,  502  f, ;  intellectual- 
istic, of  Clarke,  etc.,  503  f.;  Leibniz 
and  Wolff,  505  ft ;  ffisthetic  of  Shaf- 
tesbury  and  Hutcheaon,  508  f. ;  utili- 
tarian, of  Bonthani,  51o,  522,  (IC2- 
664,  (505  ;  of  J.  S.  Mill,  006  ff.;  Butler 
and  Paley,  514 ;  egoistic,  5ir>,  utili- 
tarian, separated  from  egoism,  Hume, 
510  ff.;  of  Smith,  517  L;  of  Kant, 
551-557 ;  as  chief  philos.  discipline, 
Fichte,  505 ;  Schiller's  {esthetic, 
GOO  ff.;  of  geniun,  KomanticwtK,  00;> ; 
branch  of  rusthcticH,  IltTbart,  003 ; 
evolutionary  theory  of,  059,  <!():>,  0(57- 
6CO  ;  Green's,  (KM  f. ;  individualistics 
of  Nietzsche,  070;  sec  also  Virtue1, 
Virtues,  Good. 

Eubulides,  71,  80. 

Eucken,  038,  042. 

Euclid,  70  f.,  89,  96,  102. 

Eudaeinonism,  in  Greek  ethics,  70  ft, 
87,  161 ;  opposed  by  Kant,  552,  559 ; 
in  Utilitarianism,  (102 ;  see  Hedonism, 
Utilitarianism. 

Eudemus,  161,  108. 

Eudorus,  216. 

Eudoxus,  103,  147,  180. 

Euemerus,  70. 

Euripides,  66. 

Eusebius,  216. 

Euthydemus,  89. 

Evil  (see  also  Theodicy)  in  the  world, 
195-197  ;  negative  with  1'lotiuuts  and 
=  matter,  247 ;  Patriotic  doctrine  of, 
252  f. ;  negative  with  Augustine,  280  ; 
reduced  to  metaphysical  and  clue  to 
finiteness,  Leibniz,  491;  "radical," 
Kant,  560. 

Evolution,  as  opposed  to  emanation, 
243 ;  Comte  on,  053  ;  as  principle  in 


Index. 


707 


recent  thought,  655-660;  two  forms 
of,  659,  061;  in  ethics,  659,  662,  667- 
609  ;  in  Hartmann,  674;  see  also  De- 
velopment, Natural  selection,  etc. 

Existence ;  see  Essence,  and  also  God. 

Experience,  in  opposition  to  thought, 
58  f.  ;  Democritus  and  Plato,  105  f., 
110,  114  f.  ;  inner  and  outer,  450  f.  ; 
inner  more  certain  than  outer,  270  ff., 
345,  302  f.,  460  ff.  ;  as  history  of  sal- 
vation, 276  f.,  305;  as  sole  basis  of 
psychology,  605;  as  organised  sys- 
tem of  phenomena  with  Kant,  545  f. ; 
its  conditions  not  themselves  capable 
of  being  experienced,  577 ;  cf.  also 
Empiricism. 

Experiment,  with  Bacon,  384;  with 
Galileo,  388. 

Faculty,  451,  577,  634  1,  637 ;  see  also 
Psychology. 

Faith,  and  reason  (see  Reason),  a  priori 
of  Kant,  554  ff. ;  Jacobi's  doctrine  of , 
574. 

Fearn,  628. 

Fechner,  032,  644  f. 

Foder,  44(5. 

Feeling,  with  Cyrenaics,  86 ;  Victorines, 
305  ;  Ideologists,  457  ;  emphasized  by 
Rousseau,  458  f.  ;  made  basis  of  be- 
lief in  external  world  and  in  causality 
by  Hume,  475-477  ;  Herder,  405'; 
basis  of  morality  with  Protagoras, 
74 ;  Shaftewbury,  500 ;  and  others, 
510 ;  recognized  as  distinct  faculty 
by  Tetens  and  Kant,  512;  a  priori, 
500 ;  immediate  knowing,  Jacobi, 
574;  as  communion  with  the  infinite, 
582  ;  Comtc  on,  053;  aesthetic,  483  f., 
609  f. 

Ferguson,  441,  510. 

Ferrari,  631. 

Forri,  031. 

Fiuwrbach,  032,  640  f.,  010  i,  675,  078. 

Fiohte,  J.  G.,  life  and  writings,  570 ; 
his  character,  COO  (570) ;  concep- 
tion of  philoHOphy  and  starting-point, 
570  f.  ;  dialectical  method,  500  f. ; 
system,  503-50(5 ;  philosophy  of  his- 
tory, 605  f.  ;  latest  doctrine,  610 ;  cf. 
also  432,  035-037,  040,  000,  601  note, 
075,  680. 

Fiohte,  I.  II.,  632,  040. 

Fiofuo,  354,  358. 

Fiffulus,  215. 

Final  caasos ;  soe  Cause. 

Fiorcmtino,  031, 

Fire,  as  first  principle,  Heraclitus,  30, 
50. 

Fischer,  K.,  18,  631,  642,  660. 

Fludd,  357. 

Fontenelle,  410. 

Force,  moving,  Empedocles,  40 ;  An- 


axagoras,  41 ;  conservation  of,  421, 
656 ;  =  the  absolute,  657,  659  ;  to  be 
eliminated,  651  1;  see  also  Con- 
servation. 

Foreknowledge  of  God,  as  argument  of 
determinism,  193. 

de  la  Forge,  381,  416. 

Form,  essential  nature  of  things,  with 
Democritus,  107,  111  ff. ;  with  Plato, 
107-109,  129  (see  also  Idea);  con- 
trasted with  matter  by  Aristotle, 
139  ff.  ;  pure,  144  f. ;  in  psychology 
of  Scholastics,  324  f. ;  with  Averroe's, 
338 ;  individual  Forms  with  Scotus, 
341 ;  used  by  Bacon,  384  f.  ;  distin- 
guished from  content  in  ideas  by 
Lambert,  461 ;  by  Kant,  465  f.  ;  pure 
Forms  of  sensibility,  465  f.,  539-542 ; 
of  the  understanding,  541  f.  ;  fur- 
nished by  the  subject,  Reinhold,  576 ; 
Maimon,  578 ;  from  without,  Her- 
bart,  583. 

Fortlage,  032,  637,  640. 

Foucher,  Sim.,  355. 

Fouiltee,  003. 

Fowler,  029. 

Franck,  A.,  627. 

Frauck,  Seb.,  350,  365,  368. 

Francke,  445,  487,  583. 

Francki,  031, 

Francis  of  Mayro,  315,  342. 

Franciscans,  313  f.,  341. 

Eraser,  030. 

Fraynsinons,  628. 

Freilegisus,  274. 

Frederick  11.  of  Sicily,  319. 

Frederick  II.  of  Prussia,  446,  516. 

Freedom,  ethical,  maintained  by  Socra- 
tes, 101 ;  distinguished  from  freedom 
of  choice  by  Plato,  191 ;  Aristotle's 
conception  of  freedom,  192 ;  Stoics' 
deterministic  views,  193 ;  metaphysi- 
cal freedom  as  indeterminism  of  Epi- 
curus, 194f.;  central  conception  with 
Church  Fathers,  688  (234);  applied 
to  (Jod  by  Patristic  thought,  252 ;  used 
to  explain  origin  of  evil,  252  f.;  both 
maintained  and  denied  by  Augustine, 
282-285  ;  maintained  as  determinism 
by  Thomism,  329  f.;  as  indetermin- 
ism by  Scotus' and  Occam,  330  f.;  as 
ethical,  Buridan,  331,  690  (331);  as 
source  of  error,  Descartes,  394  ;  with 
Malobranche,  407 ;  denied  by  Hobbes 
and  Spinoza,  413  ;  as  postulate,  Kant, 
554  f. 

Free  thought,  448,  486  ff. 

Fries,  573,  575. 

Fulbert,  302, 

Gabler,  040. 

Gala,  Theophilus,  382. 

Gale,  Thomas,  382. 


708 


Index. 


Galen,  216,  316,  687  (216). 

Va\yvi<rv,6$,  166 ;  cf.  116. 

Galileo,  378  f.,  388  1,  398  1,  400,  402  f., 
410,  541,  691  (379). 

Gall,  627,  634,  653. 

Galuppi,  631,  636  note. 

Garat,  443,  522. 

Garve,  446. 

Gassendi,  355,  391, 

Gaunilo,  293. 

Gaza,  Theod.,  354. 

7<^e<ris,  with  Plato,  106, 120. 

Genius,  defined  by  Kant,  564 ;  Schelling, 
607 ;  as  the  end  of  history,  679 ;  in 
morals,  602 f.,  679  f. 

Gennadius,  359. 

Gentilis,  382,  431. 

Geometry  and  geometrical  method  (see 
Mathematics)  made  supreme  by  Car- 
tesians, 395-399 ;  in  philos.  of  law, 
432;  opposed  by  Rudiger,  Crusius, 
and  Kant,  484  f . 

Georgius  of  Trebizond,  354,  359. 

Gerbert,  272,  275,  302. 

Gerson,  315,  323. 

Gersonides,  318. 

Geulincx,  379,  381,  396,  410,  415,  417, 
692  (381). 

Gibieuf,  381,  416. 

Gilbert,  275,  335. 
Gioberti.  631,  661  note. 

Gioja,  631. 

Glanvil,  474. 

Glogau,  633. 

Gnostics,  214,  217,  222,  224,  237,  239, 
243,  257. 

God  (see  also  Deity,  Theology),  first 
philos.  conception  of,  as  matter, 
Anaximander,  34 ;  as  lv  KO.I  irai/, 
Xenophanes,  34 f.;  his  relation  to 
the  world  in  Hellenistic  thought, 
235  ff.;  exalted  above  all  mind  or 
matter,  237  (see  "Negative  Theol- 
ogy"); personality  of,  in  Christian- 
ity, 238,  251 ;  personality  of ,  rejected 
by  Greek  and  Neo-Platonic  thought, 
238 ;  implicit  and  explicit,  290,  346, 
619;  source  of  truth  for  Augustine, 
2781 ;  Anselm's  argument  for  exist- 
ence of,  292  f.,  485;  distinguished 
from  deity  by  Gilbert,  335 ;  the  final, 
formal,  and  efficient  cause  of  universe 
with  Bruno,  36'7;  self-generation  of, 
with  Boehme,  375 ;  Descartes'  proofs 
for,  392 f.;  as  sole  substance  with 
Descartes,  405 ;  as  "  raison  univer- 
selle "  with  Malebranche,  407 ;  as 
"causa  sut,"  Spinoza,  408  ;  as  "na- 
tura  naturans,"  3351,  368,  409;  as 
central  monad,  Leibniz,  424;  his 
existence  demonstratively  certain, 
Locke,  469 ;  arguments  for,  criticised 
by  Kant,  5491;  as  postulate  of  a 


priori  faith,  556;  as  identity  of 
thought  and  Being,  Schleiermacher, 
582 ;  as  moral  world-order,  Fichte, 
595  ;  as  the  Infinite,  Schelling,  609  ; 
as  Idea,  Hegel,  611 ;  personality  of, 
in  Hegelian  School,  639 1 ;  as  general 
consciousness,  Fechner,  645. 

Goethe,  366,  530,  597  flL,  699, 698  (599), 
602,  656. 

Godwin,  522. 

Goring,  633,  651. 

Good,  the,  Socrates  leaves  it  undefined, 
79 ;  virtue  with  Antisthenes,  83 ; 
pleasure  with  Aristippus,  85 ;  Idea 
of,  with  Plato,  1221,  125  ;  happiness 
or  well-being  with  Aristotle,  151; 
pleasure  with  Epicurus,  165 f.,  170; 
virtue  with  Stoics,  108;  absorption 
in  the  deity  with  Neo-Platonists,  250 ; 
contemplation  with  Augustine,  286 1 ; 
and  Thomas,  333  f .;  love  with  Scotus, 
334 ;  intellectual  love  of  God  with 
Spinoza,  435;  recognized  by  GodTs 
wisdom,  ace.  to  Thomas,  332  ;  result 
of  God's  will,  Scptus,  332;  high- 
est good  =  perfection  with  Leibniz, 
505;  Kant's  doctrine  of,  555;  hedo- 
nistic view  of,  602 ;  Carlyle's,  665 ; 
Mill's,  6C7;  Green's,  670;  "  beyond 
good  and  bad,"  6781 

Gorgias,  30,  69,  71,891 

Goschel,  640. 

Gottfried  of  Fontaine,  330. 

Gottsched,  444. 

Grace,  realm  of,  opposed  to  nature, 
318  ff.;  irresistible  with  Augustine, 
282,  284 ;  supported  by  Thomas,  de- 
nied by  Scotus,  304, 

Grammar,  blended  with  logic  with  the 
Sophists,  88,  90;  'feminists,  3421; 
Humanists,  360. 

Gratry,  661. 

Gravitation,  388,  402. 

Green,  T,  H.,  030,  663,  6691 

Gregory  of  Nyssa,  254,  201. 

Grimm,  443. 

Grote,  71. 

Grotius,  382,  427,  4311,  G26, 

Gundling,  520. 

Giinther,  633,  661  note. 

Guyau,  628,  670. 

Haeckel,  632. 

Hall,  630. 

Hamann,  510,  569,  576,  693. 

Hamilton,  624,  629,  638  1 

Hansch,  444. 

Hardenberg,  see  Novalis, 

Harmony,  of  the  world,  according  to 
Heraclitus,  36,  49  f. ;  and  spheres, 
Pythagoreans,  45 ;  Bruno,  367  f .  ; 
Shaftesbury,  489 ;  pre-established  ac- 
cording to  Leibniz,  416  note  1,  424, 


Index. 


709 


483 ;  between  substances,  Geulincx, 
415  ;  the  soul  a,  62. 

Harris,  630. 

Hartley,  440,  455,  480,  513. 

Hartmann,  033,  646-648,  673  f. 

Harvey,  402. 

Haurgau,  627. 

Heaven,  as  realm  of  order  and  perfec- 
tion, according  to  Anaxagoras,  41  f., 
54;  Pythagoreans,  57;  Aristotle, 
147. 

Hedonism  and  Hedonists,  70,  85  ff. ; 
93  f.  ;  of  Epicurus,  105  f.,  170  f. ; 
of  Pyrrho,  107;  of  Lamettrie,  etc., 
515;  of  Bentham,  662-064;  criti- 
cised by  Coleridge  and  Carlyle,  664  f . ; 
by  Green,  670  ;  transcended  by  Mill, 
666  f. ;  of  Spencer,  667  f. ;  see  also 
Cyrenaics,  Egoism,  Epicureanism, 
Ethics,  Utilitarianism  and  Eudte- 
m  on  is  in. 

Hegel,  conception  of  history  of  philoso- 
phy, 10  f.,  18  ;  general  work  as  phil- 
osopher, 530,  509 ;  life  and  writings, 
671  f.,  007  (571);  dialectical  method, 
592,  098  (592);  relation  to  Plato, 
610 ;  system,  011-015,  024,  640,  040  f., 
649,  652,  655,  059  f.,  601,  072,  074, 
677,  681. 

Hegelian  school,  631  i,  639  fl.,  075. 

Hegesias,  70,  87. 

Hellenistic  philosophy,  155  ff. 

Helmholtz,  033,  642,  055. 

Helmont,  857. 

HelvtiUus,  443,  515. 

Hemming,  382. 

Hemstorhuys,  510. 

Ilenads,  251,  070. 

Henry  of  Ghent,  314,  330  f.,  340  f.,  345. 

Hontsch,  445. 

Heraoleicles  Lembus,  101. 

Horaclwdos  of  Poutus,  103. 

Heraclittw,  general  chanictcr  of  his 
thought,  28 ;  life  and  writings,  30 ; 
as  a  reformer,  083  (30) ;  coucopliou 
of  the  universe,  30  ff. ;  of  tho  cosmic 
process,  49  1,  087  (181)  ;  of  cogni- 
tion, 58  f. ;  influence  on  Protagoras, 
02;  on  the  Stoics,  180, 209,  087  (180); 
on  JEnesidemua,  200;  his  principle 
active  in  Fichte,  595,  012  note ;  cf. 
also  72,  118. 

Herbart,  miscalled  a  realist,  509  note ; 
life  and  writings,  572,  097  (572)  ; 
metaphysics,  683-580,  592;  psychol- 
ogy, 677, 680  f. ;  ethics,  003  f. ;  peda- 
gogics, 680  note  3,  698  (580);  life  fol- 
lowers, 031,  637,  649. 

Herbert  of  Cherbury,  379,  882,  436, 
4491,495. 

Herder,  personality  and  writings,  439, 
446,  570;  psychology,  464  1,  influ- 
enced by  Shaftesbury,  489,  607 ;  his 


view  of  history,  527  f.,  694  (527); 
in  literature,  530  ;  influence  on  Kant, 
559 ;  criticises  Kant,  576  ;  influenced 
by  Spinoza,  598. 

Heredity,  656  f. 

Herennius  (Pseudo.),  277. 

Hermes  (Trismegistus),  216. 

Hermes,  Fr.,  633. 

Hermetic  writings,  227,  237. 

Hermippus,  161. 

Herschel,  629. 

Hertz,  651. 

Heteronomy  in  morals,  552  f. 

Hicetus,  56. 

Hickok,  630. 

Hierocles,  218. 

Hiidebert  of  Lavardin,  275. 

Hinrichs,  640. 

Hippasus,  57. 

Hippius,  69,  71,  731,88. 

Hippo,  70. 

Hippodamus,  66,  74. 

Hippocrates,  67,  316. 

Ilippolytus,  214,  217. 

History,  philosophy  of,  19;  its  worth 
first  recognised  by  Cicero,  177 ;  prob- 
lem of,  first  suggested  by  Christi- 
anity, 255  ff.  ;  Patristic  views  of, 
250  ff. ;  with  Augustine,  285  f . ; 
Lessing's  sense  for,  498  f. ;  worth  of, 
examined  by  Rousseau,  625  ;  philoso- 
phy of,  with  Vico,  520 ;  with  Herder, 
T>27,  094  (527);  with  Kant,  559;  with 
Schiller,  004  f . ;  Romanticists,  605  ; 
Mchte,  C05  f.  ;  depreciated  by  Scho- 
penhauer, 021,  054;  Comte's,  650- 
053;  materialistic,  654  1;  Hart- 
mann, 673  ;  as  central  principle  with 
Hegel,  012 ;  economic  basis  of,  655 ; 
contrasted  with  natural  science,  625, 
048  ff.,  094  (527);  its  influence  in 
principle  of  evolution,  626,  655  ff., 
057 ;  Nietzsche's  view  of,  679. 

History  of  Philosophy,  see  Philosophy. 

Ilobbes,  life  and  writings,  381 ;  method, 
389  ;  attitude  toward  religion,  400 ; 
on  teleology,  401 ;  mathematics  the 
only  rational  science,  thought  a 
reckoning,  404 ;  mechanical  concep- 
tion, 412  ;  sensualistic  psychology, 
413;  determinism,  413;  theory  of 
state  and  society,  431-434  ;  opposed, 
4Bf> ;  influence  on  the  Enlightenment, 
44H  f,,  602,  612  f.,  514,  517,  518  f.;  cf. 
alHo  403,  400,  411,  467,  508,  580. 

Hodgson,  630. 

Holbach,  443,  616;  see  also  ffysteme  de 
la  Nature.. 

Home,  441,  510  f. 

Homoiomeriai  of  Anaxagoras,  41. 

Huet,  395. 

Hugo  de  Groot,  see  Grotius. 

Hugo  of  St.  Victor,  275,  305,  324,  334. 


T10 


Index. 


Humboldt,  520. 

Humanism,  849  ft,  352  ff.,  360;  aes- 
thetic in  Germany,  602. 

Humanity,  religion  of,  653. 

Hume,  life  and  writings,  441 ;  charac- 
ter, 693  (441);  "impressions  and 
ideas,"  453,  657 ;  theory  of  knowl- 
edge, 472-477 ;  on  causality,  474-476 ; 
ethics,  5161;  conception  of  "sym- 
pathy," 517,  694  (517);  on  natural 
religion,  4941;  "Natural  History  of 
Religion,"  497;  influence  on  Kant, 
535,  537  note  4,  545 ;  on  Spencer,  657  ; 
cf.  also  415  note  1,  574  note  7,  579, 
635,  650. 

Hutcheson,  441,  509. 

Huxley,  630,  669. 

Huyghens,  380,  421. 

Hylozoism,  of  the  Milesians,  32, 44, 48 ; 
dynamic,  with  Strato,  179 ;  material- 
istic, in  France,  458,  480,  493. 

Ibn  Tofail,  see  Abubacer. 

Ideal,  SBSthetic,  564,  613 ;  moral,  of  Soc- 
rates, 79;  of  Plato,  125;  Aristotle, 
151 ;  of  the  Sage,  104  ff.;  Green  on 
669;  "beyond  good  and  bad,"  678; 
of  Reason,  Kant,  549. 

Idealism,  Plato's  system  of,  116-131; 
psychological  and  epistemological  of 
Occam,  325  f.;  Neo-Platonic  of  Eck- 
hart,  335;  subjective,  of  Berkeley, 
470;  of  Collier,  471;  transcendental 
or  critical  of  Kant,  541,  543;  devel- 
opment by  Kant's  successors,  568  ff. ; 
Fichte's  definition  of,  580;  his  sub- 
jective, 596,  64*2,  COO;  Spelling's 
objective,  597-590 ;  absolute  or  Spino- 
zistic,008;  religious,  0091;  Schiller's 
aesthetic,  600-002;  Hegel's  logical, 
011-015;  recent,  642,  GOO,  680 ;  influ- 
ence on  British  thought,  629, 654, 663, 
665;  teleological  of  Lotze,  643  f.;  see 
also  Ideas,  Neo-Platonism. 

Ideas,  (1)  In  Platonic  or  related  senses: 
with  Plato,  109,  118  ft;  Aristotle's 
criticism  on  Plato's  Ideas,  133 ;  their 
influence  on  him,  142  f.;  Plato's  the- 
ory opposed  by  Stoics  and  Epicureans, 
203 ;  innate,  204 ;  Plato's  Ideas  trans- 
formed to  thoughts  of  God  by  Neo- 
Pythagoreanism  and  Neo-Platonism, 
233;  Philo's  doctrine,  240 f.;  Ploti- 
mis,  245 ;  Augustine,  279 ;  in  mediaeval 
thought  (see  Universals) ;  revived  by 
Kant  as  necessary  problems  of  reason, 
540;  ethical  of  Herbart,  604;  Neo- 
Platonic  of  SchelHng,  009,  617;  as 
God's  intuition  of  himself,  610;  God 
as  Idea,  Hegel,'  Oil;  state  as  Idea, 
613;  Idea  as  object  of  aesthetic  con- 
templation with  Schopenhauer,  621 ; 
=  the  "logical  factor"  in  reality, 


Hartmann,  646 ;  rejected  by  Feuer- 
bach,  641,  675;  see  also  Idealism, 
Plato,  Neo-Platonism,  Conception. 

,  (2)  In  sense  of  a  mental  modifica- 
tion or  content  (Ger.  Vorstellunff) : 
transition  from  Platonic  usage,  203, 
306,  450 ;  Locke  on,  450  f.;  copies  of 
impressions,  Hume,  453,  472  ff. ;  and 
Spencer,  658 f.;  abstract,  how  formed, 
Locke,  451 ;  a  fiction,  Berkeley,  452, 
470  ;  innate,  of  Cicero  and  Eclectics, 
204 ;  of  Descartes,  392,  449 ;  of  Cud- 
worth,  449;  as  virtual  determining 
principles,  with  Leibniz,  403;  with 
Kant,  4651;  with  Tetens,  400. 

Identity,  principle  of,  exaggerated  with 
Sophists,  891;  of  thought  and  being 
with  Parmenidcs,  37  f . ;  with  Schleier- 
macher,  582 ;  system  of,  608. 

Ideology,  457  ff.,  478  ff.,  027,  6341 

Idols,  Bacon's  doctrine  of,  383 1 

Image,  113-115,  188,  450. 

Imagination,  281,  306  1,  644,  547,  603, 
594. 

Imitation,  as  essence  of  art,  153 1, 48;}  f. 

Immanence  and  transcendence  of  (Jod, 
178 1,  235  ff.,  242  ff.,  245,  337  1,  (51 1. 

Immaterialism,  Plato's,  109,  110  11; 
Leibniz,  421  ff. 

Immortality  of  the  soul,  in  myth,  (52 
note  1,  085  (123);  problematic  with 
Socrates,  79;  assorted  with  Plato, 
124, 685  (123);  and  in  Platonism,  232  ; 
with  Aristotle,  1501;  Stoics,  187; 
lost  in  pan-psychism,  ;j39  f. ;  not  de- 
monstrable according  to  Duns  and 
Occam,  322;  maintained  in  Deism, 
4951;  postulate  with  Kant,  5r>51; 
debated  in  Hegelian  School,  (WO  ff. 

Impenetrability,  404,  407. 

Imperative,  categorical,  of  Kant,  551  ff. ; 
of  Fichte,  594 ;  hypothetical,  651 1 

Imperfection,  see  Evil  and  Theodicy. 

Impressions,  source  of  all  ideas,  -with 
Hume,  453,  472 ff.;  Spencer,  057, 

Indeterminism,  1941,  329  ff.;  see  Free- 
dom. 

Indian  Wisdom,  021. 

Indifferentism,  297  ;  theological,  427. 

Individualism,  of  Democritus,  110;  of 
Greek  epigones,  103  IT. ;  of  KpiouniH, 
1701 ;  of  Iteimissance  political  theory, 
432 ;  of  Hobbcs  and  Spinoza,  4:M  f. ; 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  500  f. ;  of 
Leibniz,  423,  507;  of  Shaftenbury, 
5081 ;  of  political  theory  in  eighteenth 
century,  520 ;  of  KoimuitioiHiu,  (503, 
674 ;  of  Bentham,  (ttW  f. ;  of  Spencer, 
668 ;  of  Stirner,  Bahuson,  JNiotwaoho. 
674-080. 

Individuality,  problem  of,  337  ff. 

Induction  with  Socrates,  97 ;  Aristotle- 
on,  137;  Bacon's,  384-380;  con- 


Index. 


711 


trasted  with  Galileo's  method,  388 ; 
Descartes'  theory  of,  390. 

Infinite,  regarded  by  Greeks  as  imper- 
fect, 40  ;  the,  of  Anaximander,  83 ; 
contradictions  involved  in  conception 
of,  Zeno,  44 ;  transformation  in  the 
conception  of,  from  Greek  to  Neo- 
Platonist  and  modern  views,  088  f. 
(238);  attribute  of  the  deity,  Neo- 
Platonism,  230 ;  of  divine  will,  Origen, 
252  ;  of  God  with  Cusanus,  345-347  ; 
of  the  world  in  the  Copernicau  system 
and  with  Bruno,  308  f. ;  of  the  divine 
substance,  with  Descartes,  405  ff. ;  of 
attributes  and  modes,  with  Spinoza, 
400  f. ;  felt  in  religion,  according  to 
Schleiermacher,  582 ;  a«  occasion  of 
the  antinomies,  with  Kant,  550;  of 
the  Ego  and  its  activity,  with  Fichte, 
504 ;  unknowable  according  to  Hamil- 
ton, 038;  opposed  by  Diihring,  071. 

lunateness,  of  ideas,  Cicero  and  Eclec- 
tics, 204  ;  Descartes,  392  ;  Herbert, 
Cudworlh,  440  ff. ;  virtual,  403  f. ;  of 
moral  truths,  503 ;  controverted  by 
Locko,  450  ;  by  Uerbavt,  583  ;  evolu- 
tionary explanation  of,  058  f. 

Intellect,  its  relation  to  ^yill  with 
Thomists  and  Sciolists,  320  i'f. ;  active 
and  passive  with  Alexander  Aphro- 
disiac and  Averroe.s,  330  f. ;  as  finite 
mode,  408;  infinite  mode,  410;  in- 
capable of  knowing  the  world,  070  ; 
see  also  Understanding,  Reason, 
Nous,  Will,  Intellectual  ism. 

Intellectualism,  of  early  science,  02  ; 
of  Socrates,  70  f. ;  of  Diiiuocritus, 
115  f.j  of  Aristotle,  151,  154;  of 
Augustine,  280  f. ;  of  Thomas,  330, 
303  1;  of  EckUart,  334-337;  of 
Clarke,  504;  opposed  by  Comic,  053; 
consisted  with  voluntarism,  054, 
070  IT. ;  united  with  voluntarism  by 
Hartmann,  040  f. ;  see  Voluntarism. 

Intellectual  perception,  5H1,  501  I'f. 

Intuitive  knowledge,  with  Plato,  1 18  f. ; 
Occam,  342  f. ;  Descartes,  392 ;  Locke, 
407  f. ;  Hume,  472  f. 

Intuitive  understanding,  with  Kant, 
547,  507. 

InnuouH,  217,  221  {.,  224,  220,  232,  250, 
201. 

Irony,  with  Socrates,  07 ;  of  the 
Romanticists,  005,  Oil,  020,  OHO. 

Jrrationalism,  015  11;  Soholling's, 
010  ff.;  Schopenhauer's,  020  11,  040, 
072  f. ;  Bahnsen's,  075  f. 

Irwmg,  -145. 

Iselin,  527. 

Isidore  of  Sevilla,  270,  273. 

Jacobi,  500,  571!  ff.,  588,  504>  602,  600 
(500). 


Jamblichus,  31,  215,  218,  2£0,  222,  226, 
250. 

James,  630. 

Janet,  627. 

Jansenists,  416. 

Jaucourt,  443, 

Jesuits,  410,  434,  061  note. 

Jesus,  his  influence,  '223;  as  centre  of 
world's  history,  250  ff. 

Jevons,  029,  060. 

Jewish  philosophy,  317. 

Joachim  of  Floris,  319. 

John  of  Brescia,  320. 

John  of  Damascus,  271,  273. 

John  of  Rochelle,  344. 

John  of  Salisbury,  276,  307,  360. 

Jouffroy,  027,  636. 

Joule,  055. 

Judgment,  Aristotle's  treatment  of, 
135 ff. ;  Stoics,  207  f.;  with  Augustine, 
278-280,  361 ;  Descartes,  394 ;  with 
Ramus,  as  an  equation,  479,  639; 
synthetic  a  priori,  how  possible,  533, 
538,  542 ;  as  a  faculty,  561 ;  Kant's 
Critique  of,  559  ff. ;  see  also  Logic. 

Julian,  218. 

Jung,  381,  397. 

Jus  naturule,  177  ;  see  Law,  and  Right. 

Justice,  as  principle  of  the  state,  with 
Plato,  127  ;  Godwin  on,  522  ;  as  end 
and  criterion,  with  Eentham,  663  f. ; 
Spencer  on,  008. 

Justin  Martyr,  214,  217,  223  f.,  237, 
250,  087  (217). 

Knlokayathia,  Socrates,  79;  Shaftes- 
buiy,'  500. 

Kant,  conception  of  philosophy,  4  ;  life 
and  development,  534-586,  605  (532, 
505) ;  writings  of  pre-critical  period, 
445 ;  of  critical  period,  536,  095  (535, 
530)  ;  his  pro- critical  thought,  465  f., 
474  note  3, 478, 479  f.,485  f.,490 ;  criti- 
cal period,  general  character,  533  ff.  ; 
his  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  537-550, 
005  (537)  ;  of  Practical  Reason,  551- 
550,  095  (551) ;  philos.  of  religion, 
550  f.,  095  (557) ;  of  law,  557  f.  ;  of 
history,  558  f. ;  Critique  of  Judg- 
ment, 500  f.  ;  esthetics,  561  ff.,  095 
(550),  096  (504)  ;  teleology,  490, 
505-507 ;  influence  on  succeeding 
thought,  530,  509,  673 ;  his  doctrine 
of  thing-iu-itself  criticized  and  trans- 
formed, 573-590 ;  cf.  also  198,  432, 
484, 035  f .,  038,  640,  042,  656, 680 ;  see 
also  Neo-Kantians. 

Ktintians,  570,  575  f. 

Kd0ap<rts,  Aristotle's  doctrine  of,  153  f. 

Kepler,  378  f.,  388,  402. 

Kidd,  Benjamin,  662  note. 

Kirchhoff,  65L 

von  Kirchmann,  633. 


712 


Index. 


Knapp,  643  note. 

Knowledge,  as  participation  in  world 
consciousness,  63  f. ;  as  copy  of 
reality,  114,  119,  202,  325,  468,  543 ; 
of.  also  Signs ;  as  recollection,  118  ff,, 
223;  as  impersonal  and  super-per- 
sonal function,  339  f.,  579;  as  rela- 
tion, with  Lotze,  644 ;  as  relation  to 
the  object,  with  Kant,  538  fi.  ;  limits 
of,  with  Socrates,  97  f. ;  with  Locke, 
468;  with  Hume,  476;  with  Kant, 
546  f . ;  with  Maimon,  579  f. ;  with 
Comte,  650  ;  in  agnosticism,  638, 657  ; 
as  end  in  itself,  23,  350 ;  as  set  over 
against  faith,  322  f.,  574 ;  as  power, 
Bacon,  386,  434  f, ;  sovereignty  of, 
650  ;  problems  of,  see  Epistemology. 

Knutzeii,  444. 

Koppen,  569. 

Krause,  569,  571,  610, 

Krug,  573,  581. 

Kriiger,  445. 

Laas,  633. 

Labanca,  631. 

Labriola,  631. 

Labruyere,  515. 

Lactantius,  217. 

Ladd,  630. 

Lamarck,  480,  653,  656. 

Lambert,  445,  401,  480. 

Lamennais,  (ftS,  649.- 

Lamettrie,  442,  455  £.,  479  1,  515,  641. 

Laucelin,  522. 

Lanfranc,  275. 

Lange,  688,  042. 

Language,  bearing  on  philos,  studies 
by  Sophists,  87  f.,  96 ;  by  Abelard, 
306  ;  by  Ramus,  361 ;  Locke  on,  451 ; 
Condillac,  478 ;  Humboldt,  602 ;  de 
Bonald,  648. 

Languet,  433. 

Laplace,  479  f. 

Larochefoucauld,  515. 

Laromiguiere,  627,  034  f. 

Latitudmarians,  486. 

Law,  first  grasped  clearly  by  Heraclitus, 
37,  50 ;  suggested  by  mathematics 
and  astronomy,  Pythagoreans,  56  f. ; 
relation  to  Nature,  73 ;  emphasised 
by  Democritus,  111 ;  by  Stoics,  181 ; 
contrasted  with  fact,  398,  506;  as 
general  fact,  Comte,  651 ;  of  Nature, 
as  moral  authority,  Stoics,  171  f . ; 
Cicero,  177  ;  Abelard,  308  f. ;  Thomas, 
326 ;  Renaissance,  435  ;  Enlighten- 
ment, 503 ;  in  history,  652-054;  see 
Nature  and  Right;  cf.  299  note  2. 

Lazarus,  031,  042. 

Leecliman,  C29. 
Lefevre,  364. 

Leibniz,  writings,  382, 444 ;  life,  443  f.  ; 
character,  003  ([444)  ;  his  method, 


397-399  ;  distinction  between  eternal 
and  contingent  truths,  398  f . ;  prin- 
ciple of  sufficient  reason,  399  ;  atti- 
tude toward  mechanism  and  tele- 
ology, 420-425, 694  (527)  ;  dynamical 
standpoint,  421,  656 ;  monadology, 
422  fie. ;  pre-established  harmony, 
424,  483 ;  anticipation  of  principle 
of  evolution,  421-424,  656 ;  on  innate 
ideas,  462-464  ;  on  knowledge  of  ex- 
ternal world,  483;  theodicy,  4911, 
672  f.  ;  optimism,  492,  673 ;  ethical 
principle  of  perfection,  505 ;  influence 
on  Kant,  465, 535,  538,  6(»0 ;  on  Fries, 
575  ;  Reinhold,  576  ;  Maimon,  578  ; 
contrasted  with  Fichte,  593 ;  influ- 
ence on  Hegelians,  032,  640  ;  cf.  also 
379,  483  f.,  486  f.,  4<JO,  494,  501,  511, 
519,  527,  583. 

Leroux,  (528. 

Lessing,  439,  446,  497,  498  f . 

Leucippus,  29  f.,  42  f.,  52  fl.,  GO,  108, 
111,  128  f. 

Lewes,  11,  030. 

Lewis,  629. 

Liberatore,  631. 

Liebmann,  «3.'J,  642. 

Life,  as  principle  of  explanation  with 
Ionics,  32  ;  with  Aristotle,  141  ;  with 
Leibniz,  422  ;  as  limit  to  mechanical 
theory,  505  ;  as  central  conception  of 
Schellrag's  pliiios.  of  Nature,  598. 

Lips,  355. 

Littrf,  028. 

Locke,  leader  of  English  Enlighten- 
ment, 439;  life  and  writings,  440, 
692  (440)  ;  psychology,  450  f.,  453; 
on  knowledge  of  external  world, 
407  f. ;  on  existence  of  God,  409 ; 
attitude  toward  rationalism,  004  (4fi2 
note)  j  on  toleration,  487 ;  ethics, 
502  f.,  513  ;  on  the  state,  519  ;  influ- 
ence iu  France,  450  ff. ;  developed 
by  Berkeley,  4G9 ;  and  Hume,  472 ; 
criticised  by  Leibuiz,  4C2-4C4 ;  cf. 
also  114,  391,  404,  637. 

Logic,  defined,  20 ;  Sophists,  88  ff, ; 
Socrates,  97  t ;  Plato's,  or  dialectic, 
119  ff.  ;  Aristotle's,  132-m,  080 
(142)  ;  Peripatetics,  197  f. ;  Stoics, 
198  f. ;  hypostatzsation  of  logical  pro- 
cesses by  Porphyry  and  Produs, 
250  f. ;  main  topic  of  Middle  Ages, 
270  f . ;  logical  relations  identified  with 
metaphysical,  290,  080  (142) ;  formal 
logic  the  only  possible  for  empiricism, 
360  f. ;  of  Kamus,  301 ;  termimstic 
of  Occam,  342 ;  Ilobbes,  404 ;  Cou- 
dillac,  478  f. ;  developed  by  Hamilton 
and  others  to  an  algebraic  calculus, 
629,  639;  transcendental,  of  Kant, 
543 ;  this  attacked  by  Ilerbart,  583 ; 
metaphysical,  of  Hegel,  611  fc,  045; 


Index. 


718 


recent  tendencies,  660;  the  logical 
inadequate  to  explain  reality,  143, 
341,  399,  425,  476,  485,  500,  041, 
047  f .,  676 ;  see  also  Dialectic,  Realism. 

Logos,  doctrine  of,  with  Heraclitus, 
30  f.;  Stoics,  180  f.,  186;  influence 
of  Stoic  doctrine  on  Christian,  223  f . ; 
Philo's  doctrine  of,  241  f.;  Origen, 
254. 

Longinus,  218,  233. 

Lossius,  445,  401. 

Lotze,  024,  632,  643  f.,  660,  681. 

Lowndes,  629. 

Lucretius,  162,  686  (162). 

Lullus,  315,  321,  397. 

Luther,  356,  304  f. 

Lyceum,  see  Peripatetic  School. 

Lycophron,  74  f. 

Mably,  443,  523. 

Macchiavelli,  382,  426  f. 

Mach,  651. 

Mackenzie,  630. 

Mackintosh,  020. 

Macrocosm  and  microcosm,  187,  366  fif. 
422  f . 

Magnenus,  365. 

Maieutic,  97. 

Maignanus,  355. 

Maimon,  570,  578,  696  (570). 

Maiinonides,  318  f.,  321. 

Mainlander,  633. 

Maistre,  Jos.  do,  027,  048. 

Malebranchc,  379,  381,  405,  407,  410, 
410  f.,  435,  471,  480,  630,  661  note. 

Mamiani,  031. 

Man,  identified  with  animal  world, 
52 f.,  453  1,  455  f.;  as  measure,  92  ; 
as  centre  of  creation  and  end  of 
history,  201 ;  as  microcosm,  347, 
309  ff.;  reverence  for,  Kant's  ma- 
terial principle,  553;  as  object  of 
religious  veneration,  Comte,  052  f.; 
capacity  for  perfection,  525,  072, 

Mandcwl'k,  441,  515  f.,  524  f. 

Mani  and  Manichseism,  239  f.,  286. 

MaiiHul,  029,  038. 

MarcianuB  Oapella,  273,  290. 

Marcion,  221,  2f>8. 

Marcus  Aurelius,  213,  210,  230. 

Mariana,  382. 

MatHh,  030. 

Marsilius  of  Inghen,  815. 

Marsilius  of  Padua,  345,  426,  432, 

Martin,  027. 

Martincau,  H.,  629. 

Martincau,  Jas.,  630, 

Marx,  032,  065. 

Materialism,  of  Leucippus,  43;  of 
Dcmocritus,  108,  109  ff.;  of  Epicu- 
reans, 183-186;  of  Stoics,  186;  of 
Hobbes,  413 ;  of  Spinoza's  adherents, 
454  ;  of  Hartley,  etc.,  465 1;  French, 


456-458,  479  ff.;  culminates  in  the 
Systeme  de  la  Nature,  481 ;  in  psy- 
chology of  nineteenth  century,  634 ; 
of  Feuerhach,  641,  655  ;  moral,  671  ; 
recent,  6421;  as  philos.  of  history, 
655. 

Mathematics,  with  Pythagoreans,  45- 
47,  56  f.;  in  Plato's  system,  129  ;  in- 
fluence on  modern  philos.,  372  f.,  379, 
387-389,  395-399;  on  Spinoza,  396, 
418;  on  Comte,  651,  653;  distin- 
guished from  philos.  by  Kant,  485 ; 
the  sole  demonstrative  science  with 
Hume,  473;  how  possible,  539  ff.; 
see  also  Geometrical  Method. 

Matter,  cosmic,  of  Ionics,  32 ;  Anaxi- 
mander,  33  r  opposed  to  form  by 
Aristotle,  139  ff.;  accessory  cause, 
144 ;  Non-being  or  space  with  Plo- 
tinus,  246  f.;  evil,  247 ;  regarded  as 
self-moved,  etc.,  by  Averroes,  338; 
identified  with  space  by  Descartes 
and  Spinoza,  406,  410;  Kant's  dy- 
namic theory  of,  546 ;  contradiction 
in  conception  of,  Herbart,  584. 

Maupertuis,  442,  478,  489. 

Maximus  Conf.,  274. 

Maximus  of  Tyre,  216. 

Mayer,  633,  655. 

McCosh,  629. 

Mechanics,  created  by  Galileo,  388  ;  in- 
fluence on  philos.,  400  f.;  lit.  of,  692 
(380)  ;  recent  theories,  651. 

Mechanism  and  mechanical  view  of 
world,  Leucippus,  53 ;  with  Strato, 
179;  Epicurus,  183;  Galileo,  Des- 
cartes, Spinoza,  401 ;  opposed  by 
Cud  worth,  etc.,  401  f,;  reconciled 
with  teleology  by  Leibniz,  420  ff.; 
opposed  by  Schelling  and  Goethe, 
598  f.;  influential  in  this  century, 
024  f.;  in  associational  psychology, 
035 ;  see  also  Materialism,  Natural- 
ism. 

Medici,  Cosmo  d',  354. 

Medicine,  independent  origin,  2 ;  setio- 
logical,  60 ;  magical,  with  Paracelsus, 
373 

Megarians,  70  f.,  82,  89. 

Meier,  F.,  445, 

Meincrs,  440. 

Melancthon,  350,  359,  364,  426. 

Melissus,  28,  30,  44. 

Melito,  217. 

Mendelssohn,  445,  478,  483,  607,  512, 
621. 

Menedemus,  72. 

Metaphysics,  origin  of  name,  19; 
grounded  anew  by  Democritus  and 
Plato,  104 ;  Plato's  teleological,  128 ; 
connected  with  logic,  133 ;  of  Aris- 
totle, 139  f.;  of  Theophrastus,  178; 
of  Stoics,  180;  religious,  214  ff.;  of 


714 


Index. 


logical  genera  and  species,  271  ff.; 
of  inner  experience,  276  ff.;  logical, 
of  Realism,  290  ff.;  of  Nominalism, 
296 ;  of  psychology,  323  f. ;  Boehme's, 
374  f . ;  as  mathematical  physics,  Des- 
cartes, 393 ;  Bacon's  clef,  of,  401 ; 
Spinoza's,  408  ff.;  Leibniz,  420  ff.; 
Wolff,  482 ;  Berkeley,  470 ;  asbasis  for 
morals,  503  f . ;  Kant's  attitude  toward, 
465, 478,  486,  537  ;  of  intellectual  per- 
ception, 592  ;  of  the  irrational,  616  ff. ; 
Lotze's,  644 ;  recent  idealistic,  642; 
historical  with  Comte,  652. 

Method,  rnaieutic  of  Socrates,  97 ; 
modified  by  Plato,  118  f.;  Aristotle's 
deductive,  137  ff. ;  scholastic,  312, 344  ; 
inductive,  97,  118,  137,  344,  384; 
problem  raised  in  Renaissance,  378, 
383  ;  of  Bacon,  383 ;  of  Galileo  and 
Kepler,  388;  of  Descartes,  389  ff.; 
of  Hobbes,  389;  Descartes'  method 
misunderstood  by  his  disciples,  395 ; 
geometrical,  supreme  with  Spinoza, 
396  f.;  continued  by  Wolff,  482; 
criticized  by  Riidiger '  and  Crusius, 
484  1,  exploded  by  Kant,  485;  in- 
adequacy of  psychological,  recog- 
nised by  Kant,  533 ;  critical  of  Kant, 
533 ;  dialectical  of  Fichte  and  Hegel, 
591  f. ;  historical  compared  with  that 
of  natural  science,  648,  651,  653  f., 
657,  660. 

Metrodorus,  76,  684  (30). 

Metrodorus  the  Epicurean,  162. 

Michael  Psellos,  342. 

Microcosm,  see  Macrocosm. 

Milesians,  28  f.,  32  ff.,  48  ff. 

Mill,  James,  629,  665. 

Mill,  ,T.  Stuart,  629,  psychology  and 
method,  635, 054, 660 ;  ethics,  665-667. 

Milton,  433. 

ntWffLs,  47,  120. 

Mind  (see  Spirit,  Soul,  Psychology), 
mode  of  consciousness,  406, 

Minucius  Felix,  214,  217,  224. 

Mode,  all  bodies  and  minds  modes 
of  spatiality  and  consciousness,  Des- 
cartes, 406;  infinite  and  finite  of 
Spinoza,  409  i;  everything  a  mode 
of  both  attributes,  420. 

Moderatus,  215. 

Moleschott,  632. 

Monad,  Bruno's    conception   of,    371, 

Leibniz,  423. 

Monism,  original  presupposition,  32  ff. ; 
metaphysical,  of  the  Eleatics,  37  ff. ; 
of  the  spirit,  in  Neo-Platonism,  240  ff. ; 
in  the  Renaissance,  367  ff. ;  modern 
so-called,  032,  643. 

Monotheism,  pantheistic  with  Xeno- 
phanes,  34 ;  of  Cynics,  85  ;  theistic 
with  Aristotle,  145  f. ;  as  final  form 
of  religion,  497  f. 


Montaigne,  355,  362,  376,  403. 

Montesquieu,  443,  516. 

Moral  law,  with  Kant,  552  ;  see  Ethics. 

Morals,  Plato's,  125  ff.  ;  ascetic,  230  ;  in 
eighteenth  century,  502  ft'. ;  of  master 
and  slaves,  679  ;  see  Ethics. 

"  Moral  sense,"  509,  517. 

More,  Henry,  382, 402, 404, 435, 450,  503. 

More,  Thomas,  882,  427  ff. 

Morell,  629. 

Morelly,  443,  523. 

Morgan,  441. 

Morgan,  Lloyd,  630. 

Moritz,  445. 

Motekallemin,  317. 

Motion,  as  basis  of  mediating  attempts, 
39 ;  the  essence  of  change,  43  ;  early 
theories  of  its  cause,  52  ff.  ;  contra- 
dictions in  conception  of,  Zeno,  55 ; 
basis  of  feelings  with  Cyrenaics,  8(> ; 
of  perceptions  with  Protagoras,  92; 
with  Democritus,  113  f.,  115  f. ;  with 
Aristotle,  147  f. ;  made  cause  of  all 
cosmic  processes  by  Galileo,  1)88, 410  ; 
conservation  of,  Descartes,  411. 

Motives,  Greek  theories,  72,  75,  79  f. ; 
eighteenth  century,  001,  614-517 ; 
Mill,  666  ;  see  Freedom,  and  Will. 

Music,  theory  of  Pythagoreans,  45. 

Musoniua,  216. 

Mutaziliu,  318. 

Mysteries,  124,  685  (123). 

Mystics  and  Mysticism,  source  in  Neo- 
Platonism,  227 ;  a  factor  of  Mod. 
philos.,  260  ff.,  275,  M04  ff.,  S33,  40!), 
487,  583  ;  of  Biran,  G;J(>. 

Myths,  with  the  Sophists,  70  ;  Plato, 
102,  123,  687  (123);  Stoics,  189  f .  j 
Gnostics,  243  f. ;  Schelling,  010. 

Naive  and  sentimental,  004  f . 

Nativism,  539  note  1. 

Naturalism  of  Strato,  179  ;  of  Arabians, 
338 ;  of  Renaissance,  401  IX, ;  of  En- 
lightenment, 479  ff.,  527;  sec  also 
Materialism,  Mechanism. 

Natural  law,  soe  Law,  and  Right. 

Natural  religion,  486  ff. ;  BOO  Deism,  and 
Religion. 

Natural  selection,  53,  656  f.,  672. 

Natural  science,  among  tho  Greeks, 
27  ff. ;  daughter  of  Humanism,  351  ; 
favoured  by  Nominal  ism,  ;J-W  f.,  37<J ; 
its  decisive  influence  on  inodorn 
philos.,  378;  how  possible,  Kant, 
541  ff. ;  influence  iu  nineteenth  cen- 
tury, 624  1,  648  ff. ;  its  method 
comparer!  with  that  of  history,  048, 
651,  653  f.,  657,  060. 

Natura  Naluram  and  Natura  Naturata, 
probably  first  used  by  Avurroism, 
JJ3(J,  :J38  ;  with  Eckhart,  335  f. ;  with 
Bruno,  368  f. ;  with  Spinoza,  400. 


Index. 


715 


Nature,  first  object  of  philosophy,  25, 
27  f .  ;  contrasted  with  statute,  73  ff. ; 
with  Democritus,  116;  Plato's  phi- 
los.  of,  129  f.  ;  Aristotle's,  140  ff.  ; 
Stoic  doctrine  of  life  according  to, 
171  f. ;  regarded  as  equivalent  to  law, 
171 ;  Strato's  view  of,  179 ;  Epicu- 
reans' view  of,  183  ff. ;  Stoics',  180  f.  ; 
spiritualisation  of,  by  Plotinus,  249  ; 
by  Valentinus,  254 ;  return  to,  by 
school  of  Chartres,  302  f. ;  relation 
to  deity  with  Eckhart,  335 ;  return 
to,  in  Renaissance,  350  f.,  300 ;  re- 
garded as  God  made  creatural,  308 ; 
spiritualisation  of,  in  Renaissance, 
373 ;  despiiltualised  again,  401 ;  rec- 
ognised as  one,  402 ;  identified  with 
God,  Spinoza,  409;  opposed  to  in- 
stitution, 435;  Kant's  philos.  of, 
540  ;  purposiveiiessof,  65911,  505  ff.  ; 
specification  of,  500 ;  as  objectifica- 
tion  of  will,  Schopenhauer,  689 ; 
Schelling's  philos.  of,  597  ft. ;  Goethe's 
view,  507,  600  ;  as  realm  of  the  con- 
tingent, 143,  341,  344,  425,  500,  041  ; 
as  esthetic  wtamlard,  493  f  ;  as  ethical 
standard,  73  f.,  85,  110,  435  f.,  024  f., 
008  1,  072  ;  state  of,  with  Cynics, 
83  f . ;  Ilobbes,  view  of,  434  f .  ;  Rous- 
seau, 525 ;  Kant,  558 ;  Schiller,  004  f .  ; 
Jrtchte,  008. 

NauHipluuuis,  105. 

Necessity,  mechanical,  with  Loucippus, 
53;  with  Plato,  130;  logical,  with 
Aristotle,  134 ;  natural,  with  Stoics, 
181 ;  douied  by  Epicurus,  183 ;  two 
kinds,  Leibniz,  399  ;  Spinoza's,  419  ; 
subjective,  Tctons,  400 ;  of  evil,  Leib- 
niz, 492  ;  logical,  identified  with  real- 
ity, 537  ;  of  a  priori  Komw,  5,39  fi.  ; 
feeling  of,  attaching  to  experience, 
Ifichto,  579;  teluological,  of  ideal- 
ism, GOO ;  see  also  Materialism,  Mech- 
anism. 

Negative  theology,  with  Philo,  Apolo- 
gists, and  Neo-Platonists,  2X7  f.,  C89 
(238);  with  Scotun  Krigena,  21)0;  of 
Mokhart,  335  ;  of  Bruno,  30H  ;  of  Spi- 
noza, 408 ;  cf.  Agnosticism. 

Nokkam,  Alex.,  344. 

Neo-Kantianism,  033,  042  f. 

Noo-PUtonism,  dopondwit  on  earlier 
Greek  conceptions,  123,  157  j  per- 
sonality and  writings,  215,  218  ;  phil- 
osophical interpretation  of  mythn, 
222 ;  on  spirit  and  matter,  233  i'f.  ; 
doctrine  of  Ideas,  117  note  0 ;  233 
note  2 ;  on  nature  of  God,  237  ff.,  089 
(238);  on  history,  255;  in  Middle 
Ages,  208  ff.;  influence  on  Augustine, 
270  1,  280  ;  on  John  Scotus,  289  ff.  ; 
on  Bernard  of  Chartres,  294 ;  on 
William  of  Champeaux,  295 ;  on 


Malebranche,  417 ;  on  Schelling,  610  ; 

see  also  Plotinus,  Proclus. 
Neo-Platonists,  English,  of  Cambridge, 

382,  435,  449  f.,  490  note,  502  f.,  694 

(488). 
Neo-Pythagoreans,    117    note   6,    123, 

213,   215,  220  f.,  230  f.,   233,  237, 

689  (238). 
Newman,  630. 
Newton,  378,  380,  691  (380),  402,  421, 

479,490. 

Nicolai,  445,  483,  507,  521. 
Nicolas  d'Oresme,  345. 
Nicolaus  d'Autricuria,  344. 
Nicolaus  Cusanus,  312,  315,  335  f.,  337, 

343,  345  f.,  308  f.,  371,  402,  405,  409, 

419,  422,  648,  592. 
Nicole,  381. 
Nicomachus,  213,  216. 
Nietzsche,  633,  076-680. 
Nifo,  355,  359. 
Nigidius  Figulus,  215. 
Nineteenth    century,    philosophy    of, 

023  ff. 

Nizolius,  355,  360,  370. 
Nominalism,  272 ;   its  origin,  296 ;   of 

Roscellinus,   296  f.  ;    revived,    312, 

342  ;  favours  study  of  natural  science, 

343  f.,  370  ;  influence  on  Descartes, 
Locke,  and  Hobbes,  403  f . ;  on  Locke, 
451  f.,  408 ;  on  Berkeley,  452,  469 ;  of 
Feuerbach,  641;   see  also    Termin- 
ism. 

Norms,  03,  69,  181,  279,  680. 

Norris,  471. 

Noumena,  Kant's  theory  of,  547  f. 
us,  of  Anaxagoras,  42,  684  (42)  54, 
03 ;  as  part  of  soul  with  Plato,  124  ; 
with  Aristotle,  150;  with  Theo- 
phrastus,  178  f. ;  Plotinus,  245 ;  Au- 
gustine, 279,  note  3 ;  see  Reason. 

Novalis,  Fr.  v.  Hardenberg,  571,  599. 

Numbers,  with  Pythagoreans,  46,  47 ; 
with  Plato,  122,  129,  131 ;  in  Alex- 
andrianism,  242  ff.  ;  in  the  Renais- 
sance, 372,  387. 

Numenius,  213,  216,  220,  223,  232. 

Object,  of  knowledge,  Kant,  537  ff., 

674,  676 ;  indifference  of  subject  and 

object;  608. 
Objoctification,  680. 
Objective,  with  Descartes,  =  subjective 

in  modern  sense,  393;  objective  spirit, 

with  Hegel,  613 ;  cf.  JSsse. 
Occam,  see  William  of  Occam. 
Occasionalism,  410  ff.,  474  note  3. 
Odo  (Odardus)  of  Cambray,  295. 
Oinomaos,  216,  086  (163). 
Oken,  671,  698,608,656. 
Oldendorf,  382. 
One  (*?)»  of  Xenophanes,  34  f. ;  with 

Parmenides,  38 ;  with  Neo-Pythago- 


716 


Index. 


reans,  237  f.;  with  Plato,  122;  with 

Proclus,  251. 
Ontological  argument  of  Anselm,  292  f . ; 

restated  by  Descartes,  393. 
Ontologism,  631.  661  n. 
Ontology,  of  the  Stoics,  199 ;  possibility 

of  denied,  646  ff. ;  cf.  Metaphysics. 
Ophites,  258. 
Opinion,  opposed  to  knowledge,  58,  95, 

105-117 ;  to  sense  perceptions,  204 ; 

relativity  of,  201. 
Optimism,  religious,  252;    of  Bruno, 

368 ;  of  Shaftesbury,  489 ;  of  Leibniz, 

492 ;  Voltaire  on,  493 ;  of  Rousseau, 

526  ;  of  utilitarianism  and  positivism, 

670  ff. 
Optimism  and   pessimism,  as  moods, 

676;   united,   Hartmann,  673;    see 

Pessimism. 

Oratory  (Fathers  of),  416. 
Order,  Heraclitus,  36,  49 ;  as  norm,  63 ; 

Anaxagoras,  42,  54 ;  moral,  Kant,  556, 

566  ;  as  G-od,  with  Fichte,  595. 
Ordo  ordinans,  595. 
Or  do  rerum  —  ordo  idearum,  with  Spi- 
noza, 390,  419  f . 
Organism,  as  principle  with  Aristotle, 

141  ;    Buffon's  theory  of,  480 ;    as 

"miracle,"   Kant,   480,    505;    with 

Schelling,  599 ;  as  analogue  of  society, 

655. 
Oiganon,  of  Aristotle,  104,  132  ff. ;  the 

new,  of  Bacon,  380,  383  fl. 
Orient,  its   philosophy,   23  note,  683 

(23);  influence,  on  Greeks,  27,  211, 

213  ff. ;  on  Middle  Ages,  310,  316  ff. 
Origen,  the  Christian,  214,  216  ff.,  222, 

233,  235,  253  f.,  261,  499. 
Origen,  the  Neo-Platonist,  218. 
Osiander,  356,  365. 
Oswald,  442, 
oftrfe,   with    Plato,    106  ff.,    120-123; 

Aristotle,    139   ff.;    Plotinus,   245; 

Origen,  254. 
"  Over-man,71  6791 

Pain,  Schopenhauer's  view  of,  620 ;  -see 
also  Pleasure. 

Paley,  441,  513,  5141,  664  f. 

Panietras,  10 1  f.,  190. 

Panen theism,  of  Krause,  610. 

Pan-psychisin,  340. 

Pantheism,  suggestions  for  in  Eleati- 
cism,  34  f.,  37 ;  Strata's,  179 ;  of 
Stoics,  180 ;  in  conjunction  with  the- 
ism, 236  ;  logical  of  Realism,  295  ;  of 
Averroism,  313,  338  ff. ;  of  Aroal- 
ricans,  339 ;  tendency  of  Renaissance, 
358,  367  ff.  ;  of  Cartesianism,  405  ff. ; 
and  esp.  Spinozism,  408  1,  419; 
Schellmg's,  608 ;  Feuerbach's,  640  f. ; 
alleged,  of  Hegelianism,  639  £.,  661 
note. 


Paracelsus,  357,  368,  370  f.,  373  f.,  403. 

Parallelism,  with  Spinoza,  419 ;  mate- 
rialistic interpretation  of,  453  f. ; 
psycho-physical,  644-646 ;  see  also 
Soul. 

Paralogisms  of  Pure  Reason,  549. 

Parker,  491. 

Parmenides,  28  ff.,  37  fl.,  46,  51,  58  ff., 
90,  118,  129  f. 

irapoucrfa,  120. 

Participation,  of  things  in  the  Ideas  with 
Plato,  120 ;  of  finite  minds  in  God, 
Malebranche,  407. 

Particular,  see  Universal. 

Pascal,  381,  395,  692  (881). 

Passions,  ancient  conception  of,  165; 
Stoics  on,  168 ;  Descartes  .and  Spinoza, 
412-414;  Hobbes,  413;  Nietzsche, 
677 ;  cf.  Emotions. 

Patristics,  214. 

Patrizzi,  354,  360. 

Pedagogy,  of  Humanism,  360 ;  of  Ba- 
conian doctrine,  with  Comenius  and 
Rattich,  385;  Rousseau's,  520;  of 
associational  psychology,  with  Her- 
bart  and  Beneke,  698  (580);  see  also 
Education. 

Perception,  contrasted  with  reflective 
thought  by  cosniologists,  C8  ff. ;  Pro- 
tagoras's  theory  of,  01  ff. ;  Democri- 
tus,  105,  113  ff. ;  Epicurean  theory, 
202 ;  Stoics1,  202 ;  only  of  our  own 
states,  ace.  to  Campanella,  ,370  ;  with 
Leibniz,  462  f. ;  piiro,  with  Kant, 
539  ff. ;  implies  a  synthesis,  5JJ!) ; 
feeling  of  reality  of  sensuous,  Jacobi, 
574  ;  intellectual,  581,  592. 

Peregrinus  Proteus,  216. 

Peripatetic  School,  103,  159,  101,  104, 
178, 180, 229,  411 ;  see  also  Aristote- 
lianisiu. 

Perseitas  Saw*,  332,  416  note  2. 

Persius,  210. 

Personality,  emphasised  in  Hellenistic 
thought,  223 ;  found  in  spirit,  232  ; 
Christian  view  of,  251 ;  omphasised 
by  Christian  thinkers  as  againnt  Ara- 
bian pan-psycliism,  340;  worth  of, 
Kant,  653 ;  conception  of  hi  Hegelian 
School,  040. 

Pessimism,  among  the  Cyreuaics,  87; 
among  Stoics,  100  ;  in  Christian  doc- 
trine, 252  ;  Swift's,  515  ;  Koiissoau'H, 
525 ;  Schopenhauer's,  020  ff.,  073 ; 
opposed  by  Duhring,  071 ;  Gorman 
of  nineteenth  century,  073;  Balm- 
sen's,  670. 

Peter  Lombard,  275. 

Peter  of  Poitiers,  275. 

Petrus  Aureolus,  315. 

Petrus  Hispauus,  316,  342. 
Phsedo,  72. 
Phsedrus,  102. 


Index. 


Ill 


Phaleas,  74. 

Phenomena  and  phenomenal,  objects 
of  sensation  or  perception  as,  92  f., 
106,  110 ;  space  and  time  as,  421  f., 
480,  540  f.,  585,  588  ;  "  impressions," 
453,  472  ff.,  657  ;  opposed  to  true 
reality  as  qualitative  to  quantitative, 
110  f. ;  388  f .;  as  changing  and  particu- 
lar to  changeless  and  universal,  120  ff. ; 
as  spatial  to  the  spiritual  or  dynamic, 
421  and  note  3  ;  as  sensuous  to  intel- 
ligible, 110  f.,  120  ff.,  421  note  3,  483, 
480 ;  as  =  a  priori  and  necessary, 
540  ff.,  opposed  to  things-in-them- 
selves,  541  f .,  646  ff. ;  and  to  the  realm 
of  faith  and  freedom,  554  f. ;  cf.  also 
Thing-in-itself,  Supersensuous,  Ra- 
tionalism, Knowledge. 

Pherecydes,  24,  34. 

Philip,  or  Philippus,  of  Opus,  103,  123. 

Philo  of  Larissa,  103,  161  f. 

Philo  of  Alexandria,  214,  216,  220  ff., 
227,  231,  237,  240  ff.,  200,  319,  687 
(217),  688  (224). 

Philodeums,  102,  198,  342. 

Philolaus,  20,  31,  45,  60  1,  63,  129,  215. 

Philosophy,  various  conceptions  of, 
1  ff.;  relation  to  other  sciences,  5, 
657,  680,  to  civilisation,  6,  13  ;  exter- 
nal position,  7 ;  share  of  different 
peoples  in,  8;  division  of,  18  ff.; 
sources  of,  among  the  Greeks,  23  ff., 
27  ff.;  at  first  cosmological,  27  f.;  then 
anthropological  and  practical,  68  ff. ; 
Aristotle's  division  of,  153 ;  sepa- 
rating of  special  sciences  from,  150  ; 
as  wisdom  for  life,  157  ff. ;  fused  with 
religion,  210  ff.;  relation  to  Chris- 
tianity, 224  ff.;  to  theology  with 
Scholastics,  321 ;  separation  from 
theology,  354,  375,  389;  relation  of 
modern  to  religion,  399  ff.;  under 
control  of  natural  science,  378  ff.; 
as  world-wisdom  in  Enlightenment, 
437  ff.;  as  psychology,  447  ff.;  as 
criticism,  532  ft'. ;  influence  on  litera- 
ture, in  Germany,  094  (530) ;  If  ichte's 
conception  of,  f>79 ;  Hegel's  concep- 
tion of,  Oil,  010;  of  this  century, 
623  ff.;  as  science  of  values,  080  f. 

Philosophy,  history  of,  defined,  9; 
Hegel's  view  of,  10  f.,  12  f.,  014, 
681 ;  Fischer's  view  of,  13 ;  three  fac- 
tors in,  11-14;  tasks  of,  15;  sources 
for,  15  ff.;  its  significance,  681 ;  and 
see  also  each  of  the  periods  and 
writers  treated;  division  of,  21  f.; 
additional  literature  of,  683. 

Philostratus,  215. 

Phrenology,  617. 

<t>fot$)  as  title  of  early  philosophic  writ- 
ings, 29  f.;  as  nature,  Xenophanes, 
34;  as  origin,  or  primal  substance, 


47  ff.;  opposed  to  Bfox,  74  ff.,  435 ; 
harmonized  with  i/6/xos  with  Stoics, 
172,  209 ;  Plotinus,  246. 

Phumutus,  see  Cornutus. 

Physico-theology,  with  Stoics,  195- 
197;  Enlightenment,  489  ff.;  criti- 
cized by  Hume,  494  f. ;  Kant's  early, 
490 ;  his  later  criticism  on,  550 ;  see 
Teleology. 

Pico,  354,  372  f. 

Pierre  d'Ailly,  315,  333,  345. 

Pietism,  445,  487,  583. 

Pinel,  627. 

Pittacus,  24. 

Pity,  see  Sympathy. 

Platner,  445,  693  (445). 

Plato,  as  authority  for  Socrates,  71,  77, 
97 ;  as  systematiser,  99 ;  general 
character  of  philos.,  101;  life  and 
writings,  102  f.,  684  (102),  685  (103); 
grounds  metaphysics  anew,  106-109; 
Ideas,  116  ff.;  doctrine  of  recollec- 
tion, 118,  685  (119);  of  soul,  685 
(123);  logic  and  dialectic,  119  f.; 
Idea  of  Good,  122 ;  his  psychology, 
123 f.;  ethics,  125;  politics,  126  f.; 
on  education,  127;  teleology,  128; 
doctrine  of  space,  129,  687  (238); 
importance  of  mathematics  for,  129 ; 
philos.  of  Nature,  129  f.;  relation  to 
Aristotle,  133,  139  ff.;  on  freedom, 
191 ;  influence  of  his  dualism,  211 ; 


science,  303 ;  influence  on  More's 
Utopia,  428  f. ;  on  Bacon's  New  At- 
lantis, 429 ;  on  Cambridge  Platonists 
(see  Neo-Platonists,  English);  on 
Malebranche,  061  note  ;  on  Mill,  667; 
on  Schelling  throvigh  Neo-Platonism, 
610;  cf.  also  184,  229,  242,  255, 
420,  540. 

Platonism,  as  a  characteristic  of  Alex- 
andrian philosophy,  212;  see  also 
Academy  and  Neo-Platonism. 

Play-impulse,  601. 

Pleasure  and  Pain,  referred  to  differ- 
ences in  motion,  86 ;  as  ethical  crite- 
rian,  166,  170;  measurement  of,  in 
utilitarianism,  513,  0661,  and  pessi- 
mism, 072;  aesthetic  as  function  of  the 
faculty  of  approval  or  judgment  with 
Kant,  600,  562;  see  also  Eudsemo- 
nism,  Hedonism,  Utilitarianism. 

Pleroma,  of  Gnostics,  239. 

Pletho,  354,  358. 

Plotinus,  214 f.,  218,  228, 233  ff.,  237  f., 
244  ff.,  290,  335,  367,  510,  688  (218). 

Ploucquet,  444. 

Plurality,  of  substances,  39  ;  with  Her- 
bart,  584,  cf.;  423  f.;  denied  by  the 
Eleatics,  37  f.,  44;  of  co-existing 
worlds,  in  Atomism,  54 ;  with  Bruno, 


718 


Index. 


Plutarch  of  Cheer.,  175,  213,  216,  221. 
231  f.,  225,  239. 

Plutarch  of  Athens,  215,  234. 

Pneuma,  Stoic  doctrine  of,  186  f. 

Poiret,  381,  395. 

Poleino,  103. 

Political  economy,  517  1,  522  f.,  666. 

Politics,  see  State, 

Polus,  75. 

Polybius,  176. 

Pomponatius  (or  Pomponazzi) ,  355, 
359. 

Pope,  447,  508. 

Porphyry,  31,  215,  218,  250  f.,  288,  688 
(218). 

Porta,  355. 

Posidonius,  161  f.,  230,  687  (189). 

Positive  philosophy,  of  Sehelling,  619  ; 
see  Positivism. 

Positivism,  of  Epicureans,  205;  influ- 
ential in  Renaissance,  361 ;  of  Hume, 
477 ;  of  Bayle  and  the  Ideologists, 
477  ff.;  of  Comte,  650-653;  cf.  628, 
633,  671  f. 

Possibility,  with  Aristotle,  140 ;  with 
Leibniz,  425  ;  as  category,  with  Kant, 
543;  as  eternal  truth,  with  Weisse, 
640  ;  cf.  Potential,  Actual,  Necessity. 

Postulates,  of  empirical  thought,  545 ; 
moral,  554  f. ;  cf .  590. 

Potencies,  Schelling,  009. 

Potential,  140,  144,  140. 

Power,  with  Aristotle,  140  ;  Locke,  404, 
467 ;  will  for,  with  Nietzsche,  678 ; 
see  also  Potential,  Porce;  mental, 
see  Faculty. 

Pragmatic  factor,  in  history  of  philoso- 
phy, 11-13,  083  (12). 

Prantl,  631. 

Predestination,  with  Augustine,  284  f.  ; 
maintained  by  Thomas.,  and  rejected 
by  Scotus,  334. 

du  ijrel,  633. 

Provost,  627. 

Price,  440,  503. 

Priestley,  440,  455,  480,  513. 

Pnndpium  indimduationis,  337,  341, 
589. 

Principle  of  Contradiction,  Zeno,  61  ; 
Protagoras,  88  ;  Aristotle,  138  ;  Leib- 
niz, 308  ;  Herbart,  583  f. 

Principle  of  Identity,  Sophists,  80  f. 

Principle  of  Sufficient  Reason,  399. 

Principles,  pure,  of  the  Understanding, 
541  f.,  645  f. 

Principles,  regulative,  549. 

Probabilism,  with  Carneades,  207  ;  Hu- 
manists,  361;   practical,  of  Hume, 
477,  494. 
Proclus,  215,  218,  220,  222,  226,  228, 

238,  250  f. 

Prodicus,  CO,  71,  73,  70,  88,  96. 
Protagoras,  life,  70;  ethical  and  reli- 


gious views,  74,  70  ;  perception  the- 
ory, 86,  91  f . ;  influence  of  this  on  De- 
mocritus  and  Plato,  104  f.,  117; 
relativism,  92,  105,  117  ;  cf.  60  n?is- 
1,  69,  88. 

Protestant  philosophy,  304  f . ,  426,  433  f . 

Psellos,  see  Michael. 

i/'uX'tf,  see  Soul. 

Psycho-physics,  645. 

Psychology,  at  first  materialistic,  65 ; 
advanced  by  the  Sophists,  09  ;  of  the 
Cyrenaics,  86  ;  of  Protagoras,  91  ff.  ; 
of  Dernocritus,  113-115;  of  Plato, 
123  f. ;  of  Aristotle,  149  f. ;  of  Stoics, 
168,  187  i,  202-204;  of  Epicureans, 
202;  of  Plutarch,  Origen,  etc.,  232; 
of  Neo-Platonism,  234 ;  of  Augustine, 
280-283  ;  studied  in  the  Middle  Ages, 
303  ff. ;  associational,  founded  by 
John  of  Salisbury,  307 ;  metaphysical 
psych,  of  Thomas,  Scotus,  and  Oc- 
cam, 324  1 ;  empirical  psych,  of 
later  Scholastics,  344  f. ;  mechan- 
ical, of  Descartes  and  Spinoza,  412, 
414 ;  associational,  of  llobbes,  41JJ ; 
empirical,  made  authority  for  epis- 
temology,  447  ff . ;  of  Locke,  450  f., 
467  f. ;  of  Berkeley,  452,  409;  of 
Hume,  453,  472  ff. ;  materialistic,  of 
Descartes1  disciples,  454  ;  of  Hartley, 
455  ;  of  Priestley,  455  ;  of  Lamottrk', 
455  f.  ;  sensualLstic  and  associatiomil, 
of  Condillac  and  Ideologists,  450- 
459 ;  as  philosophy  with  ScoUtoU 
School,  459  f. ;  rational  and  empiri- 
cal, of  Wolff,  400;  Lambert,  401; 
Leibniz,  462-404 ;  new  division  of 
faculties,  512 ;  rational,  criticized  by 
Kant,  540;  u faculty"  theory,  criti- 
cized by  Sclmlzo  and  Herbart,  577  ; 
Herbart's,  580  f.  ;  aw  a  contra!  Kub- 
ject  in  this  century,  (WO,  (528  f.,  (JIM  ; 
of  Ideologists  of  this  century,  0;>r>  f.  ; 
"  without  a  soul,"  043  ;  social  or  com- 
parative, 031,  049;  lit.  of,  20,  445, 
693  (445),  028  f.  ;  032. 

Puffendorf,  382,  397,  432. 

Purpose,  see  Teleology. 

Purposiveness,  subjective  and  objective 
=  aesthetic  and  tcloological,  559  ff.  ; 
as  heuristic  principle,  50f>  f. 

Pyrrho,  100, 103,  105  ff.,  200. 

Pythagoras,  24,  JJO  f.,  216,  372. 

Pythagoreans,  29  ff.,  45  IT.,  50  f.,  00  1, 
72,  100  f.,  120,  181,  147,  212  f.,  684 
(40,  02),  088  (238)  ;  BOO  also  Neo- 
Pythagoreanfl. 

Pythagoreanism,  215,  402,  087  (180), 

Qualities,  primary  w.  secondary,  117; 
all  qualitative  reduced  to  quantita- 
tive by  DemoeritUH,  111 ;  thin  opposed 
by  Aristotle,  148 ;  occult  displaced, 


Index. 


719 


372,  402  ;  intellectuality  of,  403  ;  pri- 
mary and  secondary,  with  Descartes 
and  Locke,  404,  407  f. ;  distinction 
denied  by  Berkeley,  460;  absolute, 
of  Herbart,  585. 

Quantification  of  the  predicate,  039. 

Quantitative,  the  only  determinations 
recognised  by  Democritus,  111 ;  this 
shifted  to  cosmic  processes  and  re- 
asserted by  Galileo,  388;  and  by 
Hobbes  and  Descartes,  380,  303, 404  ; 
opposed  by  Schelling  and  Goethe, 
508  f. ;  in  ethics,  513,  GG4,  600  f. 

Quesnay,  443. 

Rabanus  Maurus,  273. 

Ramundus  Lullus,  see  Lull  us. 

Ramuudus  of  Sabunde,  315,  322. 

Ramus,  355,  301. 

Rationalism,  of  Pythagoreans,  45  f. ; 
of  Cosmologists,  00  ;  of  Plato  and 
Democritus,  105,  108,  110 ;  of  tl.e 
Stoics,  207  ft ;  of  Abelard,  300 ;  of 
Descartes,  389-303  ;  of  Spinoza,  3J!0, 
418  f. ;  of  Locke,  GO*  (462) ;  of  Wolff, 
482 ;  theological,  of  Socinians,  487 ; 
of  Clarke,  in  EthicH,  504 ;  of  Bayle, 
504  f. ;  of  Kant,  540. 

Rattich,  385  note  4. 

Ravaisson,  627,  G3G. 

Realism,  medheval,  271  f. ;  of  John 
Scotus,  280  ;  tends  to  pantheism,  205 ; 
modified,  297  ;  criticized  hy  Abolard, 
208 ;  of  Scotus,  341 ;  persists  in  Des- 
cartes, 405  ;  in  Spinoza,  408,  410. 

Reality,  grades  of,  10G,  250  f.,  201  IT. 

Reals,  of  Herbart,  584  t1. 

Reason,  aw  motive-matter  with  Anax- 
agoras,  41  f. ;  active  and  passive  with 
Aristotle4,  150;  Stoic  doctrine  of, 
171  f.,  175,  180,  187  f.,  223 ;  opposed 
to  revelation  hy  Tatian,  Tertullian, 
and  others,  224  f. ;  1'hilo's  doctrine, 
241  f.  ;  and  faith  with  Abelard,  300 
f.  ;  with  Albert  and  Thomas,  321  f.  ; 
with  Scotns  and  Occam,  322  f. ;  ac- 
tive, and  passive  with  Averroes,  330; 
God  as,  with  Malebranohe,  407 ; 
Kant's  criticism  of,  532  i'f. ;  in  nar- 
row Hunuo  at*  a  faculty,  540 ;  practi- 
cal, of  Kant,  551  ff.j'as  immediate 
feeling  of  reality  of,  superRensuous, 
Jncobi,  574 ;  system  of,  HH  Hubject  of 
philos.,  581;  general  clianicter  of, 
COO  f.  ;  Fiolite'H  portrayal  of,  503- 
690,  G05  f. ;  objective  system  of, 
Schelling,  597-509,  (518  f.  ;  asthetic, 
007  f.  ;  Schiller's  iwthetic,  000  f. ; 
Hegel's  system  of,  611-015;  opposed 
to  will,  048,  077  ;  contrasted  with  his- 
torical tradition,  G48  f.  ;  universal, 
049  ;  of.  wOs,  and  Revelation. 

Reciprocity,  543, 540 ;  cf.  414 1,417, 424. 


Recollection,  Plato's  doctrine  of,  118  f. 

Re'e,  603,  678. 

Reflection,  as  source  of  ideas  with 
Locke,  451 ;  as  idealistic  method 
with  Fichte,  581 ;  emotions  of,  509, 
514. 

Reid,  442,  459,  482,  537. 

Reimarus,  445.  489,  496  f . 

lieinhold,  570,  575  ff.,  690  (570). 

Relativity  of  knowledge,  Protagorean, 
92  f . ;  of  Aristippus,  93  f . ;  with  Scep- 
tics, 200  ff. ;  with  Comte,  650  ;  with 
Spencer,  657  ;  relativism  fatal  to  phi- 
los., 680;  see  also  Knowledge  and 
Epistemology. 

Religion,  relation  to  philos.,  in  early 
thought,  27,  683  (24),  685  (123); 
among  Cyrenaics,  80 ;  in  Hellenistic 
thought,  158,  210  ff. ;  Epicurus' atti- 
tude toward,  188;  Stoics1,  189; 
attitude  of  Galileo,  Bacon,  Hobbes, 
Descartes,  Leibniz,  400 ;  natural, 
Herbert  of  Cherbury,  436  ;  Locke  on 
toleration  in,  487  ;  natural  religion  in 
eighteenth  century  (see  Deism);  as 
postulate  for  morality,  496 ;  history 
of,  by  Hume,  497 ;  as  education  of 
human  race,  Lessing,  498  f. ;  Kant's 
philos.  of,  556  f . ;  based  on  feeling 
of  absolute  dependence,  Schleier- 
macher,  582;  Herbart's  philos.  of,  585, 
as  Vorxlclhnuj,  Hegel,  013  ;  as  motif 
iu  Schilling's  philos.,  610  ;  as  organon 
for  philos.,  010 ;  Feuerbach's  expla- 
nation of,  041 ;  of  humanity,  Comte, 
050,  or>2f. ;  see  Revelation,  Chris- 
tianity. 

Romigius,  273. 

Renaissance,  foreshadowing  of,  302, 
307  ;  philos.  of,  349  ff. ;  its  innovat- 
ing impulse,  352  ff.,  387,  429. 

Uenouvier,  028,  03(>. 

Representation,  in  Leibniz's  system, 
422  ff. 

Responsibility,  172,  192-194;  presup- 
poses contingency  of  the  will,  330  f. ; 
cf.  Freedom, 

Heuchlin,  357,  372  f . 

Revelation,  as  tradition  or  ecstasy, 
219  ff. ;  in  relation  to  history,  223, 
250  ff. ;  in  relation  to  reason,  219  ff. ; 
as  equivalent  to  reason,  223  f.,  487 ; 

.  as  opposed  to  reason,  224  f.,  322  f., 
309  f.,  494 ;  in  harmony  with  reason, 
321  f,,  307,  487  ff. ;  above  reason, 
321,  038;  cf.  Religion,  Christianity. 

Revolution,  theory  of,  433,  521  ff.,  648, 
072. 

Ribot,  028. 

Ricardo,  000. 

Kichnrd  of  St.  Victor,  276,  305. 

Richar.l  of  Middletown,  314,  331,  333. 

Rickerl,  040,  600. 


720 


Index. 


Riehl,  629,  633. 

Eight  or  law,  philos,  of,  with  Sophists 
74  f .  ;   Socrates,  80  f. ;   Stoics  and 
Cicero,   177  ;   Thomas,  326 ;  in  Re- 
naissance,   426-436 ;     Macchiavelli 
426 ;  Protestant  and  Catholic,  426 
More,  427  f.  ;  Grotius,  431 ;  Hobbes 
431-435,  692  (425) ;  Thomasius,  520 
Kant,  557  f. ;  Pichte,  595  f . ;  Hegel 
613. 

Rights,  claim  of  equal,  by  Sophists,  74 
based  on  contract,  432  ff. ;  original 
620  f.,  694  (521) ;  Fichte  on,  595  f. . 
significance  of  in  utilitarian  develop- 
ment, 663  f,  ;  Green  on,  670. 

Ritschl,  633,  642. 

Robert  Pulleyn,  275. 

Robinet,  442,481,489. 

Romagnosi,  631. 

Romanes,  630. 

Romantic  and  classic,  605,  613. 

Romanticism  and  Romantic  School, 
571,  603,  605,  609,  611;  of.  650, 
674,  680,  696  (569). 

Roscellinus,  274,  296  i,  298. 

Rosenkrantz,  633. 

Rosenkranz,  631. 

Rosmini,  624,  631,  636  note,  661  note. 

Rothe,  632. 

Rousseau,  life,  443 ;  emphasis  on  feel- 
ing, 439,  458  f.,  510 ;  relation  to  the 
Revolution,  439,  502  ;  contract  the- 
ory, 432,  519,  521  ;  on  civilisation 
and  "nature,"  502,  525  f.,  672;  on 
education,  526 ;  influence  on  Herder, 
527;  Kant,  559;  Schiller,  604;  cf. 
also  Romanticism. 

Royce,  630. 

Royer-Collard,  627. 

Riidiger,  444,  461,  484. 

Ruge,  632,  640. 

Saadjah  Fajjumi,  318. 

St.  Lambert,  443,  522,  527. 

St.  Martin,  459,  528,  618,  648. 

St.  Simon,  628,  650. 

Saisset,  627. 

Sallustius,  a  18. 

Salvation,  by  absorption  into  the  One, 
250 ;  by  grace,  285  ;  as  centre  of  his- 
tory, 256,  261  f. ;  through  art  and 
science,  622;  culture,  073  1;  art, 
677  f . ;  as  starting-point  for  psy- 
chology, 305. 

Sanchez,  355,  362,  376,  383,  403. 

Sanction,  in  morals,  501,  503,  513-517, 
663  f.,  666;  see  Motive. 

Saturninus,  214,  217,  239,  258. 

Satyrus,  161. 

Scaliger,  355. 

Sceptics  and  Scepticism,  ancient,  160, 
163,  165,  170,  200,  205  1,  686  (163) ; 
of  Renaissance,  361,  376;  in  Car- 


tesianism,  394  f . ;  of  Enlightenment, 
403,  478;  Hume's  so-called,  476; 
Schulze's,  577 ;  of  Maimon,  578  f. 
Schelling,  life  and  writings,  571,  696 
(571)  ;  Philos.  of  Nature,  597-599 ; 
Transcendental  Idealism,  607  ;  Sys- 
tem of  Identity,  608;  Neo- Platonic 
Idealism,  C09  f. ;  irrationalistn  and 
theosophy,  616-620;  cf.  also  432, 
646  f.,  649,  656,  659,  673. 
Schematism  of  the  categories,  644. 
Schiller,  as  factor  in  German  idealism, 
530,  568  ;  life  and  writings,  570 ;  doc- 
trine, 600-602,  604  f.,  096  (570)  ; 
influence  on  Hegel,  613 ;  cf.  also  484, 
489,  507,  528,  675. 

Schlegel,  571,  591,  603,  005,  617,  680. 

Schleiermacher,  569,  572,  697  (672), 
582  f.,  603, 675. 

Schmid,  Erh.,'570. 

Schmidt,  Gasp.,  see  Stirner. 

Schmidt,  Lor.,  445. 

Schneider,  063. 

Scholastic  method,  312  f. 

Scholastics,  -cism,  229,  266  ff. 

Schools  of  philosophy,  as  associations, 
6  f.,  66,  70,  100  f.,  103,  159  ff.  ;  see 
also  Academy,  Epicurus,  Elean-Ere- 
trian,  Socratic,  Stoic,  Peripatetic. 

Schopenhauer,  life  and  writings,  572, 
097  (572) ;  theory  of  knowledge,  588 ; 
of  will  as  thing-in-itself,  589  ;  as  un- 
reason, 620 ff.,  673  ;•  pessimism,  620 ff., 
673;  esthetics,  600,  621  1;  ethics, 
590,  C20-622 ;  voluntaristic  influence, 
646  f.,  677. 

Schoppe,  355. 

Schubert,  571,  599. 

Schulze  (jEnesidemus),  569,  577  f. 

Schwenckfeld,  356,  365. 

Science,  as  equivalent  to  philosophy, 
2  ;  created  by  Greeks,  23 ;  its  essen- 
tial nature,  95;  Comte's  system  of 
the  sciences,  050  f. ;  relation  of  to 
philos.,  684  (08),  057  f.,  600  f.;  to 
life,  305,  345,  386  f.,  521  ff.,  625, 
650,  678;  see  Philosophy,  Natural 
Science. 

Science  of  knowledge,  tfichto,  579  ff., 
591  ff. 

Scotism,  see  Duns  Scotus. 

Scottish  School,  442,  693  (442),  459, 
482,  510,  627  f.,  636,  638 ;  cf.  049. 

Scotus  Erigena,  see  Erigena. 

Search,  440. 

Seelye,  630. 

Selection,  natural,  C5C  ff.,  672;  see 
Darwinism,  and  Survival  of  Fittest. 

Self,  a  "  bundle  of  perceptions,"  Hume, 
474;  contradiction  involved  in  con- 
ception of,  Herbart,  684;  as  pre- 
supposition for  consciousness,  TJlrici, 
633. 


Index. 


721 


Self-consciousness,  Aristotle,  145  ;  Neo- 
Platonists,  234  ;  Descartes,  390-302  ; 
Locke,  407  ;  see  Consciousness. 

Self-enjoyment  of  personality,  110, 170, 
500,  003,  077  fl. 

Self-preservation,  as  practical  princi- 
ple, 434  f.,  505;  of  the  reals,  with 
Herbart,  586. 

Self-realisation,  Aristotle,  151 ;  Leib- 
niz, 505  f. ;  Shaftesbury,  508  ;  Fichte, 
594 ;  Romanticist,  001  ff.  ;  Green, 
CG9  f. 

Self-seeking,  as  a  right  of  the  individ- 
ual, 075 ;  see  Egoism,  and  Individ- 
ualism. 

Selfish  system,  434,  502,  513  fi.,  524. 

Semler,  445,  498,  523. 

Seneca,  213,  215,  230. 

Sennert,  355,  371,  400. 

Sensation,  view  of  Cosmologists,  64  f.  ; 
of  Sophists,  91 ;  of  Democritus,  112  f.; 
of  Aristotle,  149  f.  ;  Descartes  on, 
414  ;  Fichte,  593  ;  see  also  Sensibility, 
Sensualism,  Perception,  Psychology. 

Senses,  world  of,  as  a  mixture  of  Being 
and  Non-being,  with  Plato,  129,  with 
Plotinus,  247  ;  as  evil,  229  ff.;  cf.  also 
Sensation. 

Sensibility,  Leibniz's  view  of,  4G3 ; 
space  and  time  as  Forms  of,  with 
Kant,  405  f. ;  faculty  of  receptivity, 
480  ;  separation  of  from  understand- 
ing opposed,  570. 

Sensualism,  of  Protagoras,  01 ;  of  Cyn- 
ics, 90  ;  of  Stoics  and  Epicureans, 
202  f . ;  basis  for  orthodoxy,  225  ;  as 
a  consequence  of  Nominal  mm,  297  ; 
Campanula's,  377;  of  HobbcH,  413, 
449  ;  of  the  Enlightenment,  439,  449, 
452,  450  ff.,  034  ;  sceptical,  450  ;  ma- 
terialistic, 479;  Fouurbach'H,  041, 
071;  in  ethics,  514  f . ,  "supra- nat- 
ural," of  Jacob!,  575* 

Serinonism,  272,  298. 

Servetus,  402. 

Seven  Wise  Men,  24. 

Sextians,  101,  103. 

Sextus  Empiricus,  160,  103,  086  (163). 

Shaftesbury,  441,  488  f.,  601,  608  f., 
510,  51f>,  523,  532,  093  (441). 

Sidgwick,  029. 

Sidney,  433. 

Signs,  theory  of,  326  f.,  343,  403, 461  f., 
4781,  039. 

Sigwart,  033,  060. 

Simon  of  Tournay,  320. 

Simon,  Jul.  027. 

Simplicius,  31  f.,  219,  339. 

Sin,  as  error,  with  Socrates,  80,  191; 
as  a  falling  away,  263 ;  as  problem  of 
theodicy,  197,  491  f. ;  as  radical  evil, 
with  Kant,  656  f. 

jmith,  441,  617  f.,  624,  693  (441). 


Socialism,  428-430,  596,  628,  632,  650; 
its  materialistic  philosophy  of  history, 
655 ;  see  also  State,  and  Communism. 

Social  psychology,  631,  649. 

Society,  utilitarian  theory  of,  among 
Epicureans,  1731;  need  of,  328,  432, 
435,  518  ;  to  be  grounded  on  reason, 
521 ;  see  Sociology,  and  State. 

Socinianism,  487. 

Sociology,  628,  651 1 

Socrates,  general  character  of  his  teach- 
ing, 691;  life,  71,  684  (71);  ethical 
doctrine,  76-82 ;  theory  of  knowledge, 
94-98 ;  influence  on  Plato,  101 1, 107  f., 
116,  118 1 ;  doctrine  of  freedom,  191 ; 
cf.  also  Socratic  Schools. 

Socratic  Schools,  70  ff.,  82  ff.,  89,  96. 

Solger,  571,  611. 

Solipsism,  448,  471,  588,  643,  675. 

Solon,  24,  34. 

Sophists,  25 1, 67  ff.,  73  ff.,  88  ff.,  221. 

Sophocles,  74. 

Sorbiere,  355. 

Sotion,  101,  163;  215. 

Soul  (see  also  Psychology,  Self),  first 
conceived  as  moving  force,  62 ff.; 
with  Democritus,  consists  of  atoms, 
113;  pre-existeuce  of,  119,  123,  685 
(123),  2301,249;  transmigration  of, 
02,  119,  232,  085  (123);  its  twofold 
aspect  with  Plato,  1231,  085  (123); 
immortality  of,  with  Plato,  124 ;  three 
souls  with  Aristotle,  149 1 ;  Stoic  view 
of,  187  1;  Epicurean,  188;  conception 
analysed  by  Alexandrian  thought, 
232 ;  contrasted  with  spirit  and  vital 
force,  232 1;  divided  into  higher  and 
IOWCT  by  Plothms,  240;  unity  of, 
with  Augustine,  278 ;  as  monad,  Leib- 
niz, 424 ;  a  blank  tablet,  Locke,  450; 
with  Berkeley,  see  Spirit ;  with  Hume, 
see  "Self";  substantiality  of,  criti- 
cized by  Kant,  549 ;  immortality  of, 
in  Hegelian  School,  033;  substance 
of,  458,  409,  635 1;  tripartite  division 
of,  512,  534;  faculties  of,  see  Psychol- 
ogy ;  see  also  Immortality. 

Soul  and  body,  301  ff.,  405  ff.,  412  ff., 
420,  453ff.,634ff. 

Sovereignty,  432,  519 ff.;  see  State,  and 
Contract. 

Sozzini  (Lolio  and  Fausto),  356. 

Space,  with  Parmeuides  =  Non-being, 
37 ;  exists,  Leucippus,  42 ;  with  Plato 
=  Non-being,  129 ;  accessory  cause 
of  world,  129,  131 ;  mode  of  ideation, 
with  Hobbes,  404;  space-filling  qual- 
ity or  extension,  one  of  the  two  at- 
tributes of  reality,  Descartes,  405; 
and  Spinoza,  410 ;  a  product  of  sub- 
stance or  order  of  co-existence,  Leib- 
niz, 421  f . ;  pure  Form  of  sensibility 
with  Kant,  466 1,  539-641 ;  product 


722 


Index. 


of  psychical  mechanism,  Herbart, 
585;  as  principium  indimduationis^ 
Schopenhauer,  589. 

Spaventa,  631. 

Species  (logical),  with  Plato,  see  Ideas ; 
with  Aristotle,  142 ;  in  Middle  Ages, 
see  Universals;  intelligibiles,  325, 
343. 

Specification  of  nature,  with  Kant,  566, 
640. 

Spencer,  630,  638,  657-659,  662,  667- 
(509. 

Spener,  445,  487,  583. 

Speusippus,  103,  123,  164,  243. 

Spinola,  486. 

Spinoza,  379;  life,  writings,  381,  C92 
(381) ;  geometrical  method,  396 ;  at- 
titude toward  religion,  400,  428,  433, 
495 ;  toward  teleology,  401 ;  doctrine 
of  substance,  407  f . ;  mysticism  and 
pantheism,  409 ;  modes,  409 ;  causal- 
ity, 418;  parallelism  of  attributes, 
419 ;  on  the  emotions,  412 ;  determin- 
ism, 413;  ethics,  414,  434 f.;  as  one 
centre  of  German  idealism,  568  f,, 
580,  582,  587,  597 ;  esp.of  Spelling's, 
608 f.;  cf.  also  391,  403,  410 f.,  422, 
453,  480,  498,  548,  680. 

Spirit,  not  equivalent  to  immaterial  with 
Plato,  118;  pure  Form  with  Aris- 
totle, 145 ;  opposed  to  matter  by  later 
Stoics,  23');  by  Apologists,  231  f.;  by 
Alexandrian  thought,  231-235 ;  made 
equivalent  to  immaterial,  229;  con- 
trasted with  soul,  232  f.;  the  only  sub- 
stance with  Berkeley,  470;  Hegel's 
objective,  613,  649;  absolute,  615;  as 
illusion,  Feuerbach,  641,  675. 

Spirits,  animal,  187,  411,  414. 

Spiritualism,  Berkeley's,  470;  recent 
French,  627,  636. 

Spiritualisation,  of  the  universe,  249, 
253. 

Spontaneity,  according  to  Kant,  of  the 
understanding,  486 ;  of  the  reason, 
543 ;  controverted  by  Herbart,  583. 

Spurzheim,  627. 

Stages,  the  three,  according  to  Comte, 
652. 

Stapfer,  635  note. 

State:  Cynic  attitude  toward,  84  f. ;  Cy- 
renatc,  86;  Plato's  doctrine  of,  126; 
Aristotle's,  152  f. ;  Epicurean  doctrine 
of,  173  f.;  Stoics,  173-177;  Thomas 
on,  326  f.;  Dante,  327;  Occam,  328; 
Macchiavelli,  420;  Protestant  and 
Catholic  theories,  426  f.,  4331;  Spi- 
noza, 428,  434  f. ;  More,  427-429 ;  Ba- 
con, 429 ;  socialistic,  of  Campanella, 
430 ;  contract  theory  of,  Hobbes  and 
others,  432 f.,  434,  5181;  Rousseau, 
519 ;  Enlightenment  theory  of,  520  ff. ; 
Kant,  558;  Fichte,  596,  606;  Hegel, 


613;  Spencer,  668;  Green,  668;  see 
also  Contract  theory. 
Steffens,  571,  599. 
Steinthal,  031,  649. 
Stewart,  442. 
Stiipo,  71,  90. 
Stirling,  030,  059. 
Stirner,  075  f. 

Stoics  and  Stoicism,  general,  157,  150, 
080    (102),    087    (180)  ;    personality 
and  writings,   102;   ethics,   104  ff., 
167  ff.,  171  ff. ;  view  of  society,  17"> ; 
'     view  of  Nature,  180  11,  087  (180), 
089    (238)  ;   conception  of  law  and 
providence,  180  1,  087  (181)  ;  theory 
of  knowledge,  202  ff.,  207  ff.  ;  in  the 
Renaissance,  304, 402,  091  (302,  IJ07) ; 
in  Shafteslmry,  (503  (441);    ci'.  also 
210  f.,  2-21,  223,  230. 
Strato,  l,r>9,  101,  170,  180,  109,  338. 
Strauss,  032,  (W2. 

Strife,  as  principle,  Ileraclitus,  60. 
Struggle  for  existence,  050,  072, 
Strumpell,  (Ml. 
Sturm,  Job.,  ;J01. 
Sturm,  J.  Chr.,  JJ07. 
Suarez,  305,  £G;J. 
Subject,  008,  Oil. 

Subject ive  =  real,  325;  subjectivity  of 

sense-perception,  (10  note,   92,   105, 

112  f.,  40)3,  407,  409,  540  f. ;  spirit, 

614. 

Sublime,  Longinus  on,  218  :  Burko  on, 

511 ;  Kant,  503  f. 

Subordination,  as  tho  agential  charac- 
teristic of  judgment,  135,  085  (l.'jf>), 
680  (142);  cE.  OM. 

Substance,  two  elements  in  fir«t  con- 
ception of,  85  f.  ;    Aristotle's  con- 
ception,  14.'J;    Stoic,    matter,    100; 
category  of,  not  applicable  to  God, 
Augustine,  279  f.  ;   acquires  a  now 
content  in  RenaiBKance,  309  ff . ;  ( Car- 
tesian dualism  of,  404  fl. ;   God  as 
sole,  405,  410  1 ;   finite  Biitortances 
become  modes,  408 ;    uncliangeablw 
existence  with  Spinoza,  408  f.,  418; 
substance  becomes  force  with  I.db- 
niz,  421 ;  unknowable,  Locke,  408 ; 
no  corporeal  substances,  spirit  the 
sole,  Berkeley,  409  f . ;  idea  of,  duo 
.to  association,  Hume,  473  f.  ;   cate- 
gory of,  Kant,  (M3  ;  permanent,  545  f.  ; 
given  a  new  meaning  by  Fichte,  59f> ; 
restricted  to  investigation  of  Nature, 
Wundt,  040 ;  cf.  Being. 
Suggestion,  455  note. 
ovyicaTdfleo-tt,  207,  308,  304. 
Sulzer,  445,  611 1 
Summists,  275,  313. 
Supersensuous,  117, 323, 48,%  565, 671  f . ; 

cf.  World,  Reason. 
Superstition,  among  the  Stoics,  189  f. ; 


Index. 


723 


systematised  in  magic,  373  1;  com- 
bated, 401 ;  =  religion,  Hobbes,  400, 
433  ;  cf .  Religion. 

Supposition,  325  1,  342  f. 

Survival  of  the  fittest,  63,  185,  656, 
658,  C68  f. 

Suso,  314. 

Suspense,  of  judgment,  among  Sceptics, 
107,  202;  cf.  363,  394. 

Siisfiinilch,  527. 

Swift,  515. 

Syllogism,  Aristotle's  doctrine  of,  135 ; 
criticized  by  Sceptics,  201 ;  regarded 
as  unfruitful  in  the  Renaissance,  360. 

Symbolism,  of  numbers,  see  Numbers. 

Sympathy,  in  tragedy,  153  ;  with  Hume 
and  Smith,  517  1,  004  (517)  ;  Mill, 
660  ;  Schopenhauer,  690,  020  ;  JTeuer- 
bach,  671. 

Syncretism,  161,  580. 

frynergism,  334. 

Synthesis,  333,  600  (333). 

Synthesis,  Neo-Platonist  doctrine  of, 
234 ;  Kant's  conception  of,  638  and 
note  3 ;  his  logic  of,  543 ;  his  prac- 
tical synthesis,  651  ;  of  the  pure  and 
practical  reason,  601. 

Synthetism,  of  Krug,  581. 

Syriamis,  218. 

>SV/,s'^w<3  de  la  Nature,  443,  468,  481, 
'403. 

Syzygies,  of  the  Gnostics,  244. 

Tame,  628,  674. 

Tapparelli,  631. 

Tarde,  628. 

Taste,  tosthetic  and  ethical  principle, 
500,  603  f. ;  critique  of,  602. 

Tatian,  214,  217,  224. 

Tauler,  314. 

Taurellus,  366,  374. 

Teleology,  o£  Anaxagoras,  42,  54;  of 
Socrates,  98 ;  Plato,  128  ;  Aristotle, 
144  ff:,  178  ;  rejected  by  Strato,  170  ; 
maintained  by  Stoics,  181  f.,  196  IT. ; 
opposed  by  Epicureans,  182  f. ;  of 
history,  among  Christian  thinkers, 
200  ff. ;  of  Nature  and  Ijistory  with 
Thomas,  327  ;  Herder,  627  ;  rejected 
by  Descartes,  Bacon,  and  Spinoza, 
401 ;  of  Leibniz,  420-425,  401  f.  ; 
coathctic  of  Shaftesbury,  480;  utili- 
tarian of  Reimarus  and  Wolff,  400 : 
rejected  by  Baylo  and  Holbach,  493  f . ; 
early,  of  Kant,  400  ;  later,  569  ff. ;  as 
principle  in  idealism,  600 ;  with  Schel- 
ling,  508  ff. ;  Herbart,  585  note  2  ; 
Lotze,  644  ;  Harfcraaim,  647,  073.  ' 

Teles,  216,  686  (103). 

Teloflio,  356,  376,  383. 

Terrainism,  of  Occam,  325,  342 ;  of 
Renaissance,  360 f.,  376 ;  influence  on 
Descartes,  Locke,  and  Bacon,  403 f., 


448 ;  of  Hobbes,  448 ;  of  Locke,  468  ; 
see  also  Nominalism. 
Tertullian,  214,  217,  2211,  224  f.,  688 

Testa,  631. 

Tetens,  445,  512. 

Thales,  24,  27,  29,  32  f.,  48  f. 

Themistius,  218. 

Theodicy,  of  Stoics,  196  f. ;  of  Plotinus, 
247 ;  Patristic,  252  f.  ;  of  Augustine, 
280,  283  f .  ;  of  Leibniz,  491  f. ;  of 
Kant,  559;  of  Schopenhauer,  620; 
Hartmann,  673 ;  see  also  Teleology, 
and  Evil. 

Theodoric  of  Chartres,  294,  302. 

Theodorus,  70,  86  f . 

Theogony,  of  tlie  Gnostics,  243  f. ; 
Boehme's,  375 ;  Schelling's,  618 1 

Theology,  combination  with  philosophy, 
Pythagoreans,  Plato,  62,  684  (62 
note),  685  (123)  ;  Aristotle's,  145 f.; 
syncretistic,  687  (180);  natural  and 
revealed,  321  f . ;  theol.,  separated  from 
philosophy  as  u  practical,"  by  Scotus, 
333 ;  separation  completed  in  Renais- 
sance, 354,  375,  389  j  same  task  as 
philosophy,  610 ;  see  also  Religion. 

Theophilus,  217. 

Theophrastus,  103,  159, 161, 164,  178  f., 
198. 

feapfe,  154,  250,  286,  333,  350  f. 

Theosophy,  of  Renaissance,  366  ff.  ; 
Schelling's,  615  ff. 

Theurgy,  250. 

Thing,  as  a  contradiction  according  to 
Herba'rt,  684:  real  and  apparent, 
584  f. 

Thing-in-itself,  with  Kant,  647;  criti- 
cized by  Jacobi,  573;  by  Reinhold, 
575  f. ;  by  Schulze,  677 ;  conception 
of,  modified  by  Maimon,  578 ;  re- 
placed by  Bock,  with  "conscious- 
ness ' '  in  general,  579  ;  coincides  with 
Spinoza's  God,  Schleiermacher,  682  ; 
idealistically  resolved  by  Fichte,  579 ; 
re-shaped  pluralistically  by  Herbart, 
583  ff . ;  found  in  the  will  by  Schopen- 
hauer, 588  f . 

Thomsons,  359. 

Thomas  Aquinas  and  Thomism,  as 
systematise!,  311 ;  life  and  writings, 
3*13  ;  on  faith  and  reason,  321 ;  psy- 
chology, 324 ;  doctrine  of  the  state, 
326  f. ;  on  relation  between  will  and 
intellect,  328 ff.;  determinism,  330; 
God  and  the  good,  332 ;  ethics,  333 ; 
on  problem  of  individuality,  340  f .  ; 
opposed  by  empiricism,  344  f.,  402 ; 
by  Cartesians,  416  ;  by  Crusius,  485 ; 
revival  of,  in  nineteenth  century,  661 
note.  Cf.  also  299,  487,  492. 

Thomasius,  432,  444,  506,  520  f. 

Thought,  opposed  to  perception  by  Cos- 


724 


Index. 


mologists,  58  ff. ;  by  Plato  and  De- 
moeritus,  105 ;  as  object  of  Logic, 
133 ;  as  the  divine  self-consciousness, 
with  Aristotle,  145 ;  conceived  as  a 
reckoning,  404,  478  f .,  639  ;  form  and 
content  of  thought,  461,  541  ff.  ;  as 
" attribute"  with  Spinoza,  see  Con- 
sciousness; see  also  Reason,  and 
Epistemology. 

Thrandorf,  632. 

Thrasyllus,  162,  216. 

Thrasymachus,  75  f . 

Thurot,  627. 

Tiedemann,  10,  445. 

Time,  as  form  of  inner  sense,  with 
Augustine,  283 ;.  as  perception  a, 
priori  with  Kant,  465,  539  ff. ;  Her- 
bart's  view,  585. 

Timon,  160,  167,  200. 

Tindal,  441,  496. 

Tocco,  631. 

Toland,  441,  488,  493,  523,  694  (488). 

Toleration,  367,  427  ff.,  433,  487. 

Tooke,  440. 

Tracy,  Destutt  de,  442,  457,  6341 

Traditionalism,  French,  627  f.,  648  f . 

Tragedy,  denned  by  Aristotle,  153. 

Transcendence,  of  God,  146,  236,  338 ; 
of.  Immanence. 

Transcendental  philosophy,  532  ff. ; 
illusion,  548. 

Transformation  of  values,  661,  679. 

Trendelenburg,  632. 

Trinity,  doctrine  of  Augustine,  280 ;  in 
Realism,  295 ;  above  reason,  321. 

Tropes  of  JEnesidemus,200 ;  of  Agrippa, 
201. 

Troxler,  698  (573). 

Truth  (see  Epistemology),  twofold, 
320  ff.,  494. 

Truths,  Leibniz  on  necessary  and  con- 
tingent, 398  f.,  425  ;  see  Vfritis. 

Tschirnhausen,  382,  391. 

Tucker,  440. 

Turbiglio,  631. 
'Turgot,443,  652. 

Twofold  truth,  doctrine  of,  320  ff,,  494. 

Tyndall,  630. 

Ueberweg,  16,  631. 

Ulrici,  632,  040. 

Unconditioned,  the,  as  Idea,  with 
Kant,  549;  unknowable,  according 
to  Hamilton,  638,  and  Spencer,  657. 

Unconscious,  the,  with  Leibniz,  424, 
462  f.;  with  Fichte,  594  and  note  1 ; 
with  Hartmann,  646  f.,  673. 

Understanding,  differs  from  sensibility 
by  distinctness  of  its  ideas  with 
Leibniz,  463 ;  faculty  of  spontaneity 
with  Kant,  480;  forms  of  synthesis 
of,  642  ;  prescribes  laws  to  Nature, 
542 ;  intuitive,  567 ;  separation  of 


from  sensibility,  opposed  by  Kant's 
critics,  576 ;  principles  of  the,  op- 
posed by  Fichte,  Hegel,  et  al,  591  f. ; 
and  by  Coleridge,  665. 

Uniformity  of  Nature,  understood  in 
astronomy,  57 ;  taught  by  Democri- 
tus,  107  ff.  and  the  Stoics,  180  1, 
194  f.  ;  restricted  by  Aristotle,  142  f. ; 
denied  by  Epicurus,  182  f. ;  affirmed 
in  Renaissance,  401  ff. ;  critical 
theory  of,  541  ff.  ;  see  also  Law  and 
Nature. 

Unity,  the  Eleatics,  38;  Spinoza,  419; 
in  plurality,  422,  424 ;  of  conscious- 
ness, 150,  458 ;  synthetic  of  Kant, 
540,  542 ;  of  human  race,  201 ;  of 
reason  and  nature  as  ethical  princi- 
ple, 604  1;  see  also  One. 

Universal  and  particular  (see  also  Real- 
ism, Nominalism,  and  Conceptional- 
ism),  Socrates,  97;  Plato's  Ideas  as, 
107-109,  119-122;  Aristotle,  133  ff., 
142  f.;  mediaeval  controversy  over, 
287  ff. ;  Abelard,  299  ;  Nizolius,  300  L; 
as  category,  6-±3;  Spinoza,  409; 
Feuerbach  and  Stirner,  041,  675. 

Universe,  as  organism  and  work  of 
art,  ;}07,  489 ;  as  homogeneous,  402 ; 
see  World,  and  Nature. 

Universality,  as  criterion  of  the  a  priori 
with  Kant,  540  ;  see  Validity. 

Unreason,  of  the  world-ground,  015  ft. ; 
673  f.,  076. 

Utilitarianism,  with  Sophists  and  Soc- 
rates, 74  f.,  78  f.  ;  with  Epicurus, 
174  f. ;  in  the  Enlightenment,  490, 
503,  506  f.,  612  ff.  ;  quantitative  with 
Bentham,  513,  522,  flflsWMM,  005  f.  ; 
theological,  1'aloy,  514 ;  of  philoso- 
phy of  law,  522 ;  in  nineteenth  cen- 
tury, 025,  602  f.,  070  ff. ;  of  Mill, 
605  ff. ;  and  evolution,  602,  007  f. 

Utopia,  Bacon's,  887,  429  f. ;  More's, 
427-429 ;  Campanelia'fl,  430  f . ;  of. 
also  126. 

Valentinus,  214,  217,  239,  243,  254.  . 

Vacherot,.627. 

Validity,  universal,  as  problem  of  the 
Sophists  08,  74,  93 ;  postulated  by 
Socrates,  69,  81,  95  ff. ;  as  prob- 
lem of  Kant,  588  and  note  2,  539  IT., 
551  ff.,  500  ff.;  as  true  problem  of 
philosophy,  627,  080  f. 

Valla,  355,  360. 

Values,  conception  of,  introduced  into 
theoretical  consideration  by  Anaxag- 
oras,  42 ;  by  Anaximander,  49 ;  by 
Pythagoreans,  57  ;  by  Plato  and  ])e- 
mocritus,  100 ;  by  Aristotle,  143 ; 
natural  and  artificial,  517 ;  of.  also 
Nature  and  #tf<ris ;  anthropomorph- 
ism of,  rejected  by  Spinoza,  401 ;  by 


Index. 


725 


System*  de  la  Nature,  493  ;  theory  ] 
of,  with  Beneke,  037  ;  problem  of, 
GOO  ft'.  ;  transformation  of,  601,  079 ; 
relativity  of,  70,  080;  universal  va- 
lidity of,  as  problem,  551,  553,  500, 
027,  001,  080  f.  ;  of  civilisation,  523 
ff.,  GOO  ff.  ;  social,  513,  522,  003, 007 ; 
realm  of,  Lotze,  044,  081 ;  measured 
in  terms  of  pleasure,  see  Hedonism ; 
by  other  standards,  see  Good  and 
Worth. 

Van  Helmont,  403. 

Vanini,  309. 

Variability,  of  the  World-ground,  371 ; 
of  organic  matter  in  Darwinism, 
050 1. ;  with  Spencer,  057. 

Varro,  101,  103. 

Vayer,  355. 

Veitch,  029. 

Venn,  020. 

Ventura,  031. 

Vera,  031. 

V&rttes  kternelles,—defait,  with  Leib- 
niz, 308,  422,  425,  405,  491  f. ;  of. 
500,  0-10. 

Vernias,  Nieoletto,  355. 

Vico,  520,  528. 

ViotoriucH,  275,  305,  323,  414. 

Villers,  035. 

Vincent  of  Beauvais,  313,  344. 

Vinci,  Leonardo  da,  387. 

Virtual  innateness,  403-400,  683. 

Vh-tualism  of  Boutorwek,  588,  035. 

Virtue,  ambiguity  of  the  term,  78; 
consists  in  knowledge,  Socrates,  78 
ff. ;  necessarily  results  in  happiness, 
81  ;  the,  sole  good,  Antisthenus,  83 ; 
is  ability  for  enjoymont,  Arisfcippus, 
85 ;  is  knowledge,  104 ;  is  suspense 
of  judgment,  Sceptics,  107;  is  solo 
good  i'or  Stoics,  108;  arisen  only 
through  tho  logM,  Philo,  227;  as 
stimulated  by  beauty,  Plotinus,  250  ; 
relation  to  happiness,  Kant,  f>55  f. ; 
see  also  Ethics  and  Good. 

Virtues,  the  four  cardinal,  of  Plato, 
125  f.  ;  ethical  and  dianoc'tic,  of 
Aristotle,  151,  154;  those,  subordi- 
nated to  the  Christian  by  Augustine, 
287;  dianoe'tic,  above  the  practical, 
with  Thomas,  333 ;  cf.  Kthics. 

Vischer,  031. 

Vives,  355,  300  f.,  370,  883. 

Vo#,  032,  042. 

Void  (see  also  Space),  with  Parmenides, 

38  ;  with  Gnostics,  230. 
VdlkfirpxycJiolocHfii  031,  049. 

Volney,  443,  521; 

Voltaire,  439,  442,  450,  480,  489,  493, 

495  f.,  505,  521,  523,  093  (442). 
Voluntarism,  of  Augustine,  281  ff. ;  of 
Scotus,  328  JSf. ;  of  Descartes,  394 
of  Leibniz,  425 ;  of  Kant,  554  f. ;  of 


Fichte,  580  f.,  594  f.  ;  of  Bouterwek, 
587  f. ;  of  Schopenhauer,  588  f.,  677  ; 
of  Biran,  030  ;  of  recent  psychology, 
037,  040,  654 ;  in  ideals  of  life,  670- 
079  ;  see  Intellectualism,  and  Will, 

Wagner,  J.  J.,  697  (571). 

Wagner,  Richard,  677  f. 

Wiigner,  Rudolph,  632,  642. 

Wallace,  A.,  030. 

Walter  of  Montagne,  274. 

Ward,  030. 

Way  upward  and  downward,  Heracli- 

tus,  36,  50. 

Weber-Feclmer  Law,  645. 
Wedgwood,  029. 
Weigel,  Erhard,  382,  397. 
Weigel,  Valentine,  356,  366,  370,  374, 

3t)7. 

Weiss,  445,  513. 
Weisse,  (532,  040. 
Whewell,  029. 
Wilokins,  398. 

Will  (see  also  Freedom)  with  Augus- 
tine, 281  f . ;  relation  to  intellect, 
328  if. ;  recognised  as  factor  in  judg- 
ment by  Descartes,  394;  the  only 
absolute  good,  551 ;  Bouterwek  on, 
587  ;  as  thing-in-itself  and  source  of 
misery,  Schopenhauer,  588  f.,  020  ff. ; 
as  first  principle,  Maine  de  Biran, 
030 ;  Beneke,  Fortlage,  037  ;  Wundt, 
040 ;  Hartmann,  046,  073  ;  Bahnsen, 
075  f.  ;  Nietzsche,  077 ;  see  Volun- 
tarism. 

William  of  Auvergne,  314,  332,  340. 
William  of  Champeaux,  272,  274,  294, 

208. 

William  of  Conches,  274,  302  f.,  357. 
William  burandus.  315. 
William  de  la  Marre,  314. 
William  of  Occam,  312,  315,  322  f., 
325,  328,  330,  342  ff.,  376,  426,  432, 
001  (342). 
Winkler,  382. 
Wise  man,  Stoic  ideal  of,  109,  171  ff. ; 

Epicurean,  106,  170  f , 
Wise  Men,  the  Seven,  24. 
Wolff,   Ghr.,   life  and  writings,    444; 
aims  to  systematise  the  thought  of 
Leibniz,  400  f. ;  method  and  meta- 
physics, 482 ;  attacked,  478,  484  t ; 
attitude  toward  religion,  487  ;  teleol- 
ogy, 490  ;  ethics,  505  ff. ;  on  the  state, 
Ml)  f.  ;  cf.  also  397,  432,  439,  478, 
520. 

Wolff,  P,,  454. 
Wollaston,  441,  604. 
Woolston,  490, 
Wordsworth,  629. 

World,  early  Greek  views  of,  31  ff . ; 
two  worlds,  of  the  myths,  685  (123) ; 
of  Pythagoreans,  47,  57 ;  of  Plato, 


726 


Index. 


123 ;  of  Middle  Ages,  294,  323 ;  of 
Kant,  555 ;  origin  of,  according  to 
early  Greeks,  48  ff . ;  plurality  of",  49 ; 
a  process,  Heraclitus,  50 ;  incorpo- 
real, of  Plato,  117  f. ;  origin  of,  with 
Plato,  130 ;  Aristotle's  view  of,  147  f . ; 
Epicurus,  184 ;  as  macrocosm,  Stoics, 
187 ;  Bruno  and  Boehme,  366  ff. ; 
product  of  spirit,  235  ;  relation  of  to 
God,  235  ff. ;  eternal,  of  Origen,  254 ; 
intelligible,  290 ;  Copernican  theory 
of.  369;  intelligible  in  God,  Male- 
branche,  417;  the  best,  Leibniz, 
491  f. ;  as  Idea  with  Kant,  549  f . ; 
historical  view  of,  in  German  ideal- 
ism, 612,  625  1,  654  ff. ;  natural 
science  view  of  in  nineteenth  cen- 
•tury,  624  1,  651  f,,  659.  See  also 
Universe,  Nature,  Natural  Science, 
History. 

World-reason,  128, 172, 187.    See  also 
Logos. 

World-soul,  63  note  1, 131 ;  evil  with 
Plato,  231. 


World-staff,  32;   as  water,  as  air,  32, 

55  :  as  fire,  36. 
World-will,  589,  622,  673. 
Worms,  628. 

Worth,  of  the  person,  553 ;  see  Value. 
Wundt,  033,  646. 

Xeniades,  84, 

Xenocrates,   103,   123,   1C4,  243,  C87 

(180). 

Xenophanes,  28,  30,  34  ff.,  40, 146. 
Xenophon,  71,  77  ff.,  82,  U7,  182. 

Zabarella,  355. 

Zeller,  631. 

Zeno  of  Elea,  28,  30,  44,  55  f.,  6], 

80  ff. 

Zeno  of  Sidon,  1(52. 
Zeno  the  Stoic,  15i),  162,  168,  175. 
Ziller,  631. 
Zimara,  355. 
Zimmermann,  631. 
Zorzi,  357. 
Zwingli,  356. 


Works  on   Philosophy 

PUBLISHED   BY 

THE   MACMILLAN  COMPANY, 

ETHICS. -METAPHYSICS. -LOGIC. -PSYCHOLOGY. 

ARISTOTLE :  Outlines  of  the  Philosophy  of  Aristotle.  Compiled  by  EDWIN 
WALLACE,  M,  A.  Third  edition  enlarged.  Pitt  Press  Series.  i6mo.  $i.io,ntt. 

Ethica  Wicomachea.    By  J.  BYWATER.    Svo.    $1.50,  ««?/. 

Ethica  Niconaachea,  Book  V.    Edited  by  HKNRY  JACKSON.    Svo.     $1.60,  net. 

Wicomachean  Ethics.    Translated  by  J.  E.  C.  WELLDON.     $2.00,  net. 

Notes  on  the  Nicomachean  Ethics  of  Aristotle.  By  J.  A.  STEWART,  M.A. 
2  vols.  Svo.  $8.00,  net. 

Ethics.     Bohn  Library.    #1.50,  net. 

Metaphysics.  Book  I.  Translated,  with  Analysis  and  Summary.  Svo. 
#1.25,  net.  .  , 

Metaphysics.    Bohn  Library.    $1.50,  net. 

Psychology.     In  Greek  and  English.     By  E.  WALLACE,  M.A.    $4.50,  net. 

BACON:  Novum  Organon  and  Advancement  of  Learning.     Edited  with  notes 

by  J.  DKVKY,  M.A.     Bohn  Library,    $1.50,  net. 
Novum  Organon.    Translated  by  G.  W.  KITCHIN,  M.A.    Svo.    Bohn  Library. 

$2.50,  net. 

The  Essays.     Edited  by  S.  H.  Reynolds,  M.A.     Svo.    $3.75  net. 
Novum  Organon  (Latin).     Edited  by  T.  FOWLER,  M.A.    Svo.    $3.50,  net. 
Novum  Organon  (Latin).    Edited  by  G.  \V.  KITCHIN,  M.A,    Svo.    $2.50,  net. 

BALFOUR  (A.  J.):  A  Defence  of  Philosophic  Doubt.  An  Essay  on  the  Founda- 
tions of  Belief.  Svo.  #3.50,  net. 

BAX  (E.  B.)  :  A  Manual  of  the  History  of  Philosophy,  for  the  Use  of  Students. 

Bohn-  Library.    #1.50,  net. 
The  Problem  of  Reality.     I2mo.    90  cents,  net. 

BIRKS  (T.  R.) :  First  Principles  of  Moral  Science.    i2mo,    $2.50. 

Modern  Utilitarianism;  or,  the  Systems  of  Paley,  Bentham,  and  Mill  Examined 

and  Compared.     I2mo.    $2,00. 
Modern  Physical  Fatalism  and  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution.     Including  an 

examination  of  Herbert  Spencer's  "First  Principles."     I2mo.    $2.00. 

BONAR  ( J.) :  Philosophy  and  Political  Economy  in  some  of  their  Historical 
Relations.  The  Library  of  Philosophy.  Svo.  $2.75,  net. 

"  We  are  accustomed  to  expect  good  work  from  Mr,  Bonar,  and  this  book  will  add  to  his  reputa- 
tion. .  .  .  He  understands,  and  makes  lii.s  reactor  understand,  the  vital  connection  between  the  great 
subjects  of  which  he  writes.  As  a  book  for  students,  his  work  is  much  to  be  commended;  it  is  full 
•f  instructive  detail;  the  style  is  sober  aud  careful;  and  the  index js  all  that  an ^index  should  be." 


WORKS  ON  PHILOSOPHY. 


BOOLE  (G.) :  A  Treatise  on  the  Calculus  of  Finite  Differences.    Third  edition. 

I2mo.     $2.60,  net. 

BOSANQUET  (B.) :  logic ;  or,  the  Morphology  of  Knowledge.    2  vols.    #5. 25,  net. 
The  History  of  JEsthetics.     The  Library  of  Philosophy.    8vo,    $2.75,  net. 

"In  clearness,  precision,  and  in  power  to  interest  and  stir  his  hearers,  Mr.  Bosanquet  proved  as 
effective  a  teacher  as  England  has  ever  sent  across  the  sea.  His  ability  as  a  thinker  has  been  familiar 
to  American  students  through  his  work  on  Logic,  which  takes  high  rank  as  an  authority."  —  Science. 

BRADLEY  (F.  H.) :  Appearance  and  Reality.  A  Philosophical  Essay.  The 
Library  of  Philosophy.  8vo.  $2.75,  net. 

"The  author  is  a  distinguished  logician  and  thinker,  and  it  can  be  assumed  that  his  book  is 
worthy  the  attention  of  those  interested  in  mental  science."  —  Boston  Transcript. 

BTTRNET  (J.)  :  Early  Greek  Philosophy.    8vo.    $2.50,  net. 

CAIRD(E.):  The  Critical  Philosophy  of  Immanuel  Kant.  2  vols.  Svo.  $7,50,  net. 

The  Social  Philosophy  and  Religion  of  Comte.    Second  edition.    $1.60,  net. 

The  Evolution  of  Religion.    2  vols.    $4.00,  net. 

CALDERWOOD  (H.):  A  Handbook  of  Moral  Philosophy.    Fourteenth  edition. 

I2mo.    $1.50,  net. 

The  Relations  of  Mind  and  Brain.    Second  edition.    Svo.    $4.00. 
Evolution  and  Man's  Place  in  Nature.    $2.00. 
CLIFFORD  (W.  K.) :  Lectures  and  Essays.    Edited  by  LESLIE  STEPHEN  and  F. 

POLLOCK,  with  an  Introduction.    New  edition.    $2.50. 
Seeing  and  Thinking.    With  Diagrams.    Nature  Series.    $1.50. 
COMTE' S  Philosophy  of  the  Sciences,  being  an  Exposition  of  the  Principles  of  the 
Cours  de   Philosophie  Positive.    By  G.    H.   LEWES,  author  of  "The  Life 
of  Goethe,"  "Biographical   History  of  Philosophy,"  etc.     JBohn  Library. 
$1.50,  net. 

DEVEY  (J.) :  Logic  ;  or,  the  Science  of  Inference.  A  Systematic  View  of  the  Prin- 
ciples of  Evidence  and  the  Methods  of  Inference  in  the  Various  Departments 
of  Human  Knowledge.  A  Popular  Manual.  With  Index.  JSohn  Library. 
$1.50,  net. 

ERDM^NN  (J.  E.):  A  History  of  Philosophy.  English  translation  edited  by 
WILLISTON  S.  HOUGH,  Professor  of  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Minnesota. 
The  Library  of  Philosophy.  3  vols.  Svo.  $10.50,  net. 

"  This  is  the  most  satisfactory  history  of  philosophy  now  published  in  the  English  language,  both 
as  a  work  of  reference,  and  as  a  systematic  interpretation  of  the  tendencies  of  speculative  thought  in 
its  successive  periods."  —  T/te  Critic.  _ 

"  To  the  student  who  wishes,  not  simply  a  general  idea  of  the  course  of  philosophy,  nor  a  sum- 
mary of  what  this  and  that  man  has  said,  but  a  somewhat  detailed  knowledge  of  the  evolution  of 
thought,  and  of  what  this  and  the  other  writer  have  contributed  to  it,  Erdmaim  is  indispensable;  there 
is  no  substitute.'/  —  A  tidover  Review. 

"  It  is  certainly  to  the  credit  of  our  country  that  the  two  leading  German  manuals  of  the  history 
of  philosophy  should  be  made  accessible  to  English  readers  by  the  hands  of  American  scholars,  .  .  . 
Erdmann's  '  History  "  and  the  entire  series  should  be  in  the  library  of  every  college  that  pretends  to 
make  senous  work  of  philosophy  or,  indeed,  to  deal  with  it  at  all;  individuals  with  philosophical 
interests  will  need  no  urging,  and  will  be  only  thankful  to  Professor  Hough  and  Professor  Muirhcad 
for  the  rich  treasures  thus  brought,  or  to  be  brought,  to  their  doors."—  The  Dial. 

An  Outline  of  Erdkann's  History  of  Philosophy.    By  HENRY  C.  KING,  Pro- 
fessor of  Philosophy  in  Oberlin  College.    30  cents. 

FOWLER   (T.) :   The  Elements  of  Logic,  Deductive  and  Inductive.    x6mo, 

#1.75,  net. 

Progressive  Morality.    An  Essay  in  Ethics.    I2mo.    $1.50. 
FOWLER  (T.)  and  WILSON  (J.  M.) :  The  Principles  of  Morals.   Svo. 
PART  I.  (Introductory  Chapters.)  $1.25. 

II.  (Being  the  Body  of  the  Work.)   $2.75. 


WORKS  ON  PHILOSOPHY. 


GREEN  (T.  H.) :  Prolegomena  to  Ethics.  Edited  by  A.  C.  BRADLEY,  M.A. 
Third  edition.  8vo.  $3.25,  net. 

HARTMANN  (E.  VON)  :  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious.  Speculative  Results 
according  to  the  Inductive  Method  of  Physical  Science.  Translated  into 
English  by  W,  C.  COUPLAND,  M.A.  3  vols.  8vo.  $7.50,  net. 

HEGEL :   Logic.    Translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia  of  the  Philosophical  Sciences. 

With  Prolegomena  by  W.  WALLACE,  M.A.    2  vols.    8vo. 
VOL.  II.  Translation.    $2.50,  net. 

I.   Prolegomena,     hi  preparation, 

Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  History.     Translated  by  J.  SIBREE,  M.A. 
Bohn  Library.    $  1.50,  net, 

HOFFDING  (Prof.  H.)  :  Outlines  of  Psychology.   Translated  by  M.  G.  LOWNDES. 

I2ino.     $1.50,  net. 
"  Prof.  Holding's  mastery  of  his  materials  is  complete,  his  methods  are  thorough,  and  his  hand- 


whole  candid  presentation  of  the  subject  as  has  thus,  from  a  Danish  original,  through  an  English 
translation  of  a  German  translation,  been  made  accessible  to  the  American  public."  —  New 
Englander  and  Yale  Review. 

JARDINE  (R.):    The  Elements  of  the  Psychology  of  Cognition.     Second 
edition,  revised.     I2mo.    $1.50,  net. 

pEVONS    (W.  S.):    The  Principles  of  Science.     A  Treatise   on  Logic  and 

Scientific  Method.     I2mo.    $2.75,  net. 
Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic:    Deductive  and  Inductive.     With  copious 

Questions  and  Examples,  and  a  Vocabulary  of  Logical  Terms.    New  edition. 

iSmo.    40  cents,  net. 
Studies  in  Deductive  Logic.    A  Manual  for  Students.    Second  edition.    I2mo. 

$1.60,  net. 
Pure  Logic;  and  other  Minor  Works.     Edited  by  ROBERT  ADAMSON,  IS^.A., 

LL.D.,  and  HARRIET  A.  JEVONS.    Preface  by  Prof.  ADAMSON.  Svo.  $2.50,  net. 

KANT :  Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason.  Translated  into  English  by  F.  MAX  MULLER. 
With  an  Historical  Introduction  by  LUDWIG  NOIRE.   2  vols.    Svo.   $8.00. 

The  Translation.    Complete.    Sold  separately.    $3.50. 

Kant's  Critical  Philosophy  for  English  Readers.  By  JOHN  P.  MAHAFFY, 
D.D.,  and  JOHN  II.  BKRNARD,  B,D.  A  new  and  complete  edition. 

VOL.  I.    The  Kritik  of  the  Pure  Reason  Explained  and  Defended.    $1.75,  net. 

II.    Translation  of  the  Prolegomena.   With  Notes  and  Appendices.  $1.50,  net. 

Critique  of  Judgment.    Trans,  by  J.  H.  BERNARD.   Svo.   $3.50. 

Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  Trans,  by  J.  M.  D.  MEIKLEJOHN.  Bohn  Lib. 
#1.50,  net. 

Prolegomena  and  Metaphysical  Foundations  of  Natural  Science.  Trans- 
lated with  Biography  and  Memoir,  by  E.  BELFORT  BAX.  Bohn  Library. 
#1.50,  net. 

The  Philosophy  of  Kant.    As  contained  in  Extracts  from  his  own  Writings. 

Selected  and  translated  by  JOHN  WATSON,  LL.D.    #1.75,  net. 
KEYNES  (J.  N.)  :  Studies  and  Exercises  in  Formal  Logic.    I2mo.    $2.75,  net. 

KING  (Prof.  H.  C,) :  An  Outline  of  ErdmamVs  History  of  Philosophy.     By 
HENRY  C.  KING,  Professor  of  Philosophy,  Oberlin  College.    30  cents. 


WORKS  ON  PHILOSOPHY. 


LAURIE  :  The  Institutes  of  Education.  Comprising  a  Rational  Introduction  to 
Psychology.  By  Dr.  S,  S.  LAURIE,  M.A.,  I.R.S.E.,  Professor  in  the  University 
of  Edinburgh.  $1.00,  rut. 

"  The  author's  reputation  as  professor  of  the  institutes^  and  history  of  education  in  one  of  the 
famous  universities  of  the  world  is  evidence  of  the  value  of  his  book."  —  Boston  Daily  Traveller. 
"  That  book  is  strongest  which  makes  the  reader  think  the  most  keenly,  vigorously,  and  wisely, 
his  seems  to  be  the  most  useful  book  of  the  season.    We  would  put  it  m 
r  more  quickly  than  any  other  book  that  has  come  to  our  desk  for  many 
a  month."  —  Journal  of  Education, 
" 


srog  w  e  ,  ,  , 

and  judged  by  this  standard,  this  seems  to  be  the  most  useful  book  of  the  season.  We  would  put  it  m 
the  hands  of  a  working  teacher 

th."  —  Journal  of  Educ, 

Professor  Laurie  is  well  known  to  students  of  philosophy  by  his  works  on  Metaphysics  and 
Ethics,  and  to  students  of  education  by  his  volumes  of  Addresses,  Lectures,  and  Essays  on  educational 
themes.  His  writings  show  him  to  be  a  man  of  great  independence  and  unusual  originality  of  thought, 
having  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  history  of  educational  theory,  and  no  little  acquaintance  with  the 
educational  practice  of  the  modern  world."  —  School  Review. 

LEIBNITZ:   Critique  of  Locke.     New  Essays  on  the  Understanding.     By  the 

Author  of  the  System  of  Pre-established   Harmony.    Translated  from  the 

French  by  ALFRED  G.  LANGLEY,  A.M.     I2mo.     [In  thepress.~\ 
LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHY  (THE)  :   Edited  by  J.  H.  MUIRHEAD,  M.A. 

A  History  of  Philosophy.    By  JOHANN  EDUARD  ERDMANN,  Professor  of  Phi- 

losophy, University  of  Halle.     English  translation  edited  by  WILUSTON  S. 

HOUGH,  Ph.M.,  Professor  of  Philosophy,  University  of  Minnesota.     3  vols. 

Large  Svo.    $10.50,  net. 
Development  of  Theology.    In  Germany  since  Kant,  and  Great  Britain  since 

1825,    By  OTTO  PFLEIDERER,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Theology  in  the  University 

of  Berlin.    Translated,  under  the  author's  supervision,  by  J.  FREDERICK  SMITH. 

Large  Svo.    $2.75,  net* 
The  History  of  Esthetics.    By  B.  BOSANQUET,  M.A,,  Author  of  "  Logic;   or, 

the  Morphology  of  Knowledge";  Translator  of  Lotze's  "System  of  Philoso- 

phy."   $2.75,  net. 
Philosophy  and  Political  Economy  in  some  of  their  Historical  Relations.    By 

JAMES  BONAR,  M.A.,  LL.D.    Large  Svo.    $2.75,  net. 
Appearance  and  Reality.    A  Metaphysical  Essay.    By  F.  Y.  BRADLEY,  tL.D. 

Large  Svo.    $2.75,  net. 
Irf)CKE:  Philosophical  Works.    With  Preliminary  Discourse,  Analysis  of  Locke's 

Doctrine  of  Ideas,  Notes  by  J.  A.  St.  John,  Index,  and  Portrait  of  the  Author. 

Bohn  Library.    2  vols.,  each  $1.00,  net. 
LOTZE'S  SYSTEM  OF  PHILOSOPHY. 

PART  L    Logic.    In  three  Books.    Of  Thought,  Of  Investigation,  and  Of  Knowl- 

edge.   English  translation  by  BOSANQUET.    2  vols.    I2mo.    $3.00,  net, 
PART  II.    Metaphysic,    In  three  Books.    Ontology,  Cosmology,  and  Psychol- 

ogy.   English  translation  by  BOSANQUET.    2  vols.    I2mo.    $3.00,  net. 
Outlines  of  a  Philosophy  of  Religion.    Edited  by  F,  C.  CONYBEARE.    90  cents, 

net. 

MACKENZIE  :  An  Introduction  to  Social  Philosophy.  By  JOHN  S.  MACKENZIE, 
M.A.,  B.A.,  Assistant  Lecturer  on  Philosophy  in  Owens  College,  Manchester, 
formerly  Examiner  in  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Glasgow.  8vo.  $2.60, 
net. 

t  "  The  philosophic  mind  will  find  here,  if  not  much  novelty  of  original  suggestion,  a  review  of  the 
chief  topics-  of  society,  made  by  a  man  of  fine  and  deep  culture,  who  has  the  rare  merit  of  writing,  com- 
prehension,  strength  and  candor."  —  Literary  World. 

MAEAFFY  (J.  P.)  and  BERNARD  (J.  H.)  :   Kant's  Critical  Philosophy  for 

English  Readers. 
VOL.  I.    The  Kritik  of  the  Pure  Reason  Explained  and  Defended.    (11.75,  *«*• 

II.    Translation  of  the  Prolegomena.   With  Notes,  and  Appendices.   $1.50,  tut. 


WORKS  ON  PHILOSOPHY. 


MARSHALL :  A  Short  History  of  Greek  Philosophy.  By  JOHN  MARSHALL, 
M.A.,  Oxon.,  LL.D.  I2mo.  $1.10,  net. 

MARTINEATJ  (J.)  :  Types  of  Ethical  Theory.  New  and  cheaper  edition.  In 
one  volume.  I2mo.  $2.60,  net, 

"  The  English  reading  world  owes  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  Messrs.  Macmillan  for  bringing  out  in  a 
cheap  and  handy  form  the  very  valuable  ethical  studies  of  Dr.  Martineau.  .  .  .  There  are  few  books 
so  helpful  towards  pointing  the  right  direction,  and  stimulating  the  student  to  pursue  it,  than  Dr. 
Martineau's  '  Types.'" —  Churchman. 

MASSON  (D.)  :  Recent  British  Philosophy.  A  Review  with  Criticisms.  Third 
edition.  $1.75. 

MAUDSLEY  (Henry,  M.D.)  :  Body  and  Mind.  An  Inquiry  into  their  Connection 
and  Mutual  Influence.  Second  edition,  enlarged.  $2.00. 

MAURICE  (F.  D.)  :  Moral  and  Metaphysical  Philosophy.    2  vols.    Svo.    $6.00. 
VOL.  I.    Ancient  Philosophy  from  the  First  to  the  Thirteenth  Centuries. 

II.    Fourteenth  Century  and  the  French  Revolution,  with  a  Glimpse  into 
the  Nineteenth  Century. 

MAYOR  (J.  B.)  :  A  Sketch  of  Ancient  Philosophy  from  Thales  to  Cicero.  Pitt 
Press  Series.  161110.  90  cents,  net. 

MILLER  (Professor) :  History  Philosophically  Illustrated,  from  the  Fall  of  the 
Roman  Empire  to  the  French  Revolution.  Bohn  Library.  4  vols.,  each  $1.00. 

MURPHY  (J.  J.)  :  Habit  and  Intelligence.  Essays  on  the  Laws  of  Life  and  Mind. 
Second  edition,  revised  and  rewritten.  With  Illustrations.  Svo.  $5.00. 

PFLEIDERER  :  The  Development  of  Theology  in  Germany  since  Kant,  and  its 
Progress  in  Great  Britain  since  1825.  By  OTTO  PFLEIDERER,  D.D.  Trans- 
lated, under  the  author's  supervision,  by  J.  FREDERICK  SMITH.  The  Library 
of  Philosophy.  Svo.  #2.75,  net. 

"  The  work  is  unique  for  English  readers.  It  is  as  interesting  as  such  a  volume  can  be  made. 
h  is  designed  especially  for  the  student;  it  will  be  found  chiefly  serviceable  in  its  analysis  of  the 
contributions  of  the  ^rcnt  philosophical  writers  of  Germany.  We  do  not  know  where  to  turn  for  a 
statement  of  their  contributions  to  religious  thought  winch  is  more  scholarly,  and  which  shows 
a  larger  insight  into  the  relations  of  speculative  thought." — Boston  Herald. 

RAY  (P.  K.)  :  A  Text-Book  of  Deductive  Logic  for  Students.    #1,25,  net. 

ftYLAND  (F.)  :  The  Student's  Manual  of  Psychology  and  Ethics.    Cloth,  red 

edges.    5th  edition,  revised  and  enlarged.     I2mo,    $1.00. 
Ethics.    An  Introductory  Manual  for  the  use  of  University  Students.    90  cents, 
net. 

SCHLEGEL  (F.) :  On  the  Philosophy  of  History.    Translated,  with  a  Memoir 

of  the  Author,  by  J.  B.  ROBERTSON,    Balm  Library.    $1.00,  net. 
On  the  Philosophy  of  Life  and  The  Philosophy  of  Language.    Translated 
by  A.  J.  W.  MORRISON,  M.A.    Bohn  Library.    $1.00,  net. 

SCHOPENHAUER:  On  the  Fourfold  Root  of  the  Principle  of  Sufficient 
Reason,  and  On  the  Will  in  Nature.  Translated  from  the  German.  Bohn 
Library,  $1.50,  net. 

Essays.  Selected  and  translated  by  E.  BELFORT  BAX.  Bohn  Library.  $1.50, 
net. 

Essays.  Selected  and  translated  by  T.  BAILEY  SAUNDERS.  Five  volumes  in 
a  box,  $4.50;  or,  90  cents  each:  The  Wisdom  of  Life.  Counsels  and 
Maxims.  Religion:  A  Dialogue.  The  Art  of  Literature.  Studies 
in  Pessimism. 


WORKS  ON  PHILOSOPHY. 


SIDGWICK.    WORKS  BY  HENRY  SIDGWICK,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the 

University  of  Cambridge  : 
The  Methods  of  Ethics.    Fourth  edition.    Svo.    $3.50,  net. 

"  This  book  ranks  with  those  of  Martineau  and  T.  H.  Green  as  one  of  the  three  greatest  ethical 
works  of  the  age.  In  profoundness,  closeness  of  reasoning,  and  general  philosophical  power,  it 
stands  perhaps  foremost  even  in  this  trio  of  giants."  —  Past  Graduate  and  Wooster  Quarterly. 

Outlines  of  the  History  of  Ethics  for  English  Readers.    $1.25,  net. 
SPINOZA  :  A  Study  of.    By  JAMES  MARTINEAU,    $2.00. 

Chief  Works.    Translated,  with  Introduction,  by  R.  H.  M.  ELWES.    2  vols. 
VOL.  I.    Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus  ;  Political  Treatise.    $1.50,  net. 
II.    Improvement  of  the  Understanding  ;  Ethics  ;  Letters.    #1.50,  net. 

STEWART  and  TAIT.    WORKS  BY  PROFESSOR  BALFOUR  STEWART  AND  P.  G. 

TAIT: 
The  Unseen  Universe  :  Physical  Speculations  on  a  Future  State.    Cheaper 

edition.    #1.25. 
Paradoxical  Philosophy  :  A  Sequel  to  "  The  Unseen  Universe."    #1.75. 

THORNTON  (W.  T.,  C.  B.)  :  Old-Fashioned  Ethics  and  Common-Sense  Meta- 
physics. 8vo.  $2.50. 

VENN.    WORKS  BY  JOHN  VENN,  M.A.  : 

The  Logic  of  Chance.    An  Essay  on  the  Foundations  and  Province  of  the 

Theory  of  Probability.    Third  edition.    $2.75,  net. 
Symbolic  Logic.    $2.75,  net. 
Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic.    Svo.    $4.50,  net. 

WARNER  (F.)  :  A  Course  of  Lectures  on  the  Growth  and  Means  of  Train- 
ing the  Mental  Faculty.  Delivered  in  the  University  at  Cambridge.  I2mo. 
Cloth.  90  cents,  net. 


"  A  valuable  little  treatise  on  the  physiological  signs  of  mental  life  in  children,  and  on  the  right 
way  to  observe  these  signs  and  classify  pupils  accordingly.  .  .  .    The  book  has  great  originality,  and 


study  this  book.    Few  works  have  appeared  lately  wl 
such  originality,  vigor,  or  good  sense."  —  Education. 


'hich  treat  the  subject  under  consideration  with 


WATSON  Q.) :  Kant  and  his  English  Critics.    A  Comparison  of  Critical  and 

Empirical  Philosophy.    Svo.    $4.00. 

The  Philosophy  of  Kant,  as  contained  in  Extracts  from  his  own  Writings. 
Selected  and  translated.    #1.75,  net. 

WILLIAMS  (C.  M.) :  A  Review  of  the  Systems  of  Ethics,  founded  on  the 
Theory  of  Evolution.    I2mo.    $2.60,  net. 

"  It  is  an  earnest  and  an  able  exposition  of  evolutional  ethics  by  an  earnest  and  able  writer." 

—  Cincinnati  Commercial  ii 


Williams  is  a  clear  reasoner,  a  sincere  student,  and  an  admirable  writer,    He  possesses  the  rare  power 
of  presenting  abstract  problems  in  an  entertaining  way."—  The  Arena. 

WILSON  (J.  M.)  and  FOWLER  (T.) :  The  Principles  of  Morals.    Svo. 

PART  I.   (Introductory  Chapters.)    $1.25. 

II.    (Being  the  Body  of  the  Work.)    $2.75. 


THE  MACMILLAN1  COMPANY,  66  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York, 


