| Pavel Gurevich : : : 


Se | PIRI PEELS TNT EER oe 

















Pavel Gurevich 


HUMANIGM: 


TRADITIONS 
AND 
PARADOXES 


Wy Novosti Press Agency Publishing House 
ig; Moscow 
1989 


0302030700 
© Novosti Press Agency Publishing House, 1989 


ee ee 


ees 





} CONTENTS 

| 

MAN 10 

| “T count nothing human indifferent to me” 10 

| Real humanism 19 
Nature’s wonder or her stepson? 29 

The “anthropological boom” 38 

MAN AND SOCIETY 47 

} The routes of progress 47 
Ideals and values 56 
Values and ideals 68 
Life here or hereafter? 78 
MAN AND MANKIND 91 
What are we? 91 
Modern Apocalypse 100 
New political thinking 112 
Potential of the human spirit 116 


A few words in conclusion 123 





| he bus reached a fork in the road and headed 

towards the mountain pass. A stony desert 
Stretched out around us, with outlines of rocky 
chains in the distance. The monotonous wormwood 
steppe would occasionally be enlivened by some 
yellow shrubs. Then the road began to climb, and it 
became increasingly difficult to breathe. On rounding 
a bend, the crags suddenly disappeared, as if dis- 
pelled by some magic force, opening a magnificent 
view onto the famous Lake Issyk-Kul, one of 
nature’s finest creations. 

Today, the name of Issyk-Kul evokes response far 
beyond the confines of Soviet Kirghizia—a small 
Central Asian republic situated on the slopes of the 
Tien Shan mountains. 

By invitation from the prominent Soviet author 
Chinghiz Aitmatov, visitors from all over the world 
arrived there in October 1986 to take part in the 
Issyk-Kul Forum. These were: Turkish writer Yashar 
Kemal, President of India’s National Academy of 


5 


Music, Dance and Drama Narayana Menon, Cuban 
prose writer Lisandro Otero, President of the Club of 
Rome Alexander King, American playwright Arthur 
Miller, with his wife artist Inga Miller, Turkish 
composer Omer Livanelli, American prose writer 
James Baldwin, French writer Claude Simon, 
Spanish public activist and writer Federico Mayor, 
member of the UNESCO Secretariat Augusto Forti, 
American futurologist Alvin Toffler and his wife 
philosopher Heidi Toffler, British writer, actor and 
film director Peter Ustinov, Ethiopian artist Afework 
Tekle, American actor David Baldwin. 

The Forum’s participants spent several days in 
Kirghizia. The General Secretary of the CPSU 
Central Committee Mikhail Gorbachev took part in 
the discussion. The discussion covered topics which 
related in one way or another to the problem of the 
purpose and place of eternal values and ideals in the 
cultural and spiritual evolution of mankind, and of 
how to preserve and expand them. The pristine 
beauty of the mountain scapes tuned one to thinking 
about the eternal and topical problems of human 
existence. 

On one occasion, the conversation focused on the 
difference of opinion concerning mankind’s path to 
survival. Some participants pointed to a spiritual 
renovation of the world as the key to survival; others 
emphasized the need to transform and perfect human 
nature; still others called for a revival of archaic 
traditions and mores. Someone intervened by won- 
dering whether the prescriptions for survival were of 
any use, since man, possibly the only intelligent 
inhabitant of the Universe, could perish in a nuclear 
holocaust. 

Peter Ustinov was categorical: 

“T don’t think that humanism can be many-faced. 
It’s like love... It’s either there, or it is not. 


6 





Meanwhile, we are sometimes offered models of 
‘philanthropy’ which smell strongly of misanthropy.” 

“But love is multifarious,” said Narayana Menon. 
‘“‘Being a writer and a film director, you, Peter, must 
be perfectly aware of that.” 

“Oh yes, I agree. But let me give you a historical 
example. In 1945, when President Truman was in 
Potsdam, Germany, he received a coded cable. The 
men in charge of the Manhattan Project were inform- 
ing him about the successful testing of the atomic 
bomb. Very soon, the old people, women and child- 
ren of Hiroshima and Nagasaki felt the lethal impact 
of America’s ‘pacifying hand’. It was those people 
and not Japan’s ruling clique that fell victim to the 
‘retaliation’ for crimes they never committed. Crying 
injustice is often done in the name of love for 
mankind.” 

“But this can’t devalue the very notions of ‘justice’ 
and ‘humanism’.”’ 

“That’s right. But there’s something that keeps 
worrying me. When I think that 200 million children 
worldwide are forced to work... Or, else, that over 
one million Mexican teenagers go hunting for 
seasonal jobs in the United States every year... Can it 
really be recompensed by humanistic rhetoric? What 
I think we need is action and not declarations. 
Humanism should be cleansed of banalities, indiffer- 
ence and hypocrisy.” 

There is a good deal of reason in Peter Ustinov’s 
polemic stance. It is true, that while talking of Man 
we often use abstract and lofty tones. We extoll Man 
as the unique and immune governor of Nature, as an 
incarnation of spirit and as a focus of righteousness. 
A supreme value... 

Yet the most essential thing is missing in such 
revelations, in this unrestrained idealization—the 
problem. Of course, it would be easy to add new, lofty 


7 


paragraphs to the world humanism charter. The 
question would remain, however, as to whether hu- 
manism is backed by a realistic programme of action. 
The question is whether Man has enough intelligence 
to confirm his grand destiny. 

Humanism is a single entity when it comes to 
human values. But, to contradict Peter Ustinov’s 
statement, humanism also exists in a great variety of 
versions and forms; love for man in itself allows for a 
great diversity of nuances. And it is in no way the 
result of ideological self-will. Humanism, as a specific 
system of beliefs and standards, has a long history. It 
has, naturally, absorbed the historically _ pre- 
determined approaches to the problem, as well as the 
concrete and often divergent views on various human 
values. 

The diverse notion of humanism is also a token of 
our times. Alongside the traditional versions, new 
ones emerge, which often shatter the established 
standards. At the same time, there is a clearly felt 
tendency for combining the humanistic standpoints, 
for working out, as it were, a universal, a global 
humanism. 

It seems obvious that without man, a corporeal 
individual possessing intellect and senses, humani- 
tarianism is deprived of its basis. There are, nonethe- 
less, some theoreticians, who maintain that it is 
possible to construct some incorporeal being, which 
will symbolize Reason... 

In correlating the notion of humanitarianism solely 
with a natural individual, a son of the Earth, let us 
not forget, that he does not live in isolation; it is his 
social bonds alone that serve as a measure for hu- 
manism, and define its nature and purposes. It is not 
without reason that a particular culture reflects speci- 
fic values and ideals. It is not simply by proclaiming 
humanistic paragons, but also by trying to translate 


8 





them into life, that a society demonstrates the degree 
of its maturity. 

So, let’s take Man. Man and society. And these 
days, there is an increasingly acute feeling of each 
individual being a particle of mankind as a whole. 

Today’s world is made of many cultures and civili- 
zations. Humanism, however, is not a regional con- 
cept. It reflects the values of the entire human race. 
That is why the historical paths of mankind and 
those of humanism are inseparable. 

What is man? 

What stands behind the man-society relationship? 

Why does humanism represent mankind’s univer- 
sal consciousness? 





MAN 


“]T COUNT NOTHING HUMAN 
INDIFFERENT TO ME” 


I t is the summer of 1983. I am attending a session 
of the 17th World Philosophical Congress in 
Montreal. I have two judgements concerning man 
written down on pieces of paper. I hand them over to 
my Canadian opponent William Dray. 

Here is the first one: “‘...il est une grande gloire 
adorable, image miraculeuse de la vie organique, 
sainte merveille de la forme et de la beaute, et 
l'amour pour lui, pour le corps humain, c’est de 
méme un interét extreémement humanitaire et une 
puissance plus educative que toute la pedagogie du 
monde! Oh, enchantante beaute organique qui ne se 
compose ni de teinture a l’huile ni de pierre, mais de 
matiere vivante et corruptible, pleine du secret febrile 
de la vie et de la pourriture!” (it is the love for this 
great, adorable radiance, this miraculous image of 
organic life, this divine expression of form and 
beauty, the human body, that conveys an extraor- 
dinary humanitarian interest, and provides far 
greater educational opportunities than all the ped- 


10 


———————————— 





agogy in the world! Oh, the enchanting organic 
beauty, created not with paint or stone, but with 
living and corruptible matter, full of the secrets of life 
and decay). 

And here is just the opposite: a conviction that 
man possesses a peculiar kind of “phylogenetic schiz- 
ophrenia’’. This 1s an inborn mental! disorder charac- 
terized by a difficulty in coordinating the emotional 
and the analytical capabilities of the brain, and is a 
result of the pathological evolution of the nervous 
system of primates, which culminated precisely in the 
emergence of homo sapiens... 

Where do these two such diverse statements come 
from? The first one comes from a character created 
by the great German thinker Thomas Mann, and the 
other from an English scholar Arthur Koestler. The 
latter considered himself a Marxist at the beginning 
of his scientific career, but later turned to irrationalist 
concepts, which denied even the faintest hint of the 
harmonized integrity of man as a biological being. 
How can this extreme polarity of views be explained? 
Perhaps these are two incompatible ways of perceiv- 
ing the Universe—one poetic and one sceptical and 
analytical? The writer overflows with admiration, 
and the philosopher displays a sober precision? No. 
In addition to being a philosopher, Koestler was also 
an author and journalist. 

There are only a few decades separating Thomas 
Mann and Arthur Koestler. There is, however, an 
abyss between the two men: the total defamation of 
man, the myth about his “utter destitution”, absolute 
inferiority and sense of doom. 

..We continue the discussion in the corridor, 
whose walls are hung with a long succession of 
portraits of famous thinkers and philosophers, both 
ancient and modern. Quite possibly it is this gallery 
that compels us to refer to different epochs and to 


11 








diverse conclusions. The polarity of views on the 
nature of man can be found in history. Even the 
earliest myths known to us describe man as in- 
alienable from the Universe. Man is a fragment of the 
Universe, or, to be more precise, some kind of an 
imitation, an effigy of “the cosmos’’. The sturdiness 
of this notion has been well illustrated in the works 
by our contemporary philologist and philosopher 
Alexei Losev, whose name is also well known to 
Western science. According to him, the difference here 
is a purely quantitative one: what is specific to the 
cosmos is specific to man, and vice versa: what is 
specific to man is specific to the cosmos. There is no 
disunion, no abyss between the cosmos and man. To 
this we must add that the ancient Greeks simply did 
not possess the sense of personality, nor did the 
majority of the ancient Oriental peoples. 

Isn’t that an exaggeration? Could a people who 
attained such a high degree of culture, be totally 
lacking the “‘sense of personality’? Let’s put it this 
way: the sense was there, but in a very particular 
form. According to ancient notions, the future of any 
human being, and even his behaviour, is predeter- 
mined by fate. In other words, man’s free will merely 
follows his predestined ‘“‘course”’. 

Nonetheless, although aware of what lay in store 
for them, the principal characters of ancient Greek 
mythology such as Achilles, Hercules and 
Prometheus, still acted according to their own free 
will! Isn’t that remarkable? Predestination does not 
rule out freedom of choice; Fate allows an alternative 
for heroic deeds. 

With the emergence of Christianity in the centuries 
that followed, the concept of man underwent a fun- 
damental change. The purpose of human life was 
altered, for there was now within man the “‘creative”’ 
spirit of God, which expressed itself through his or 


12 





her nature. Every person acquired a certain self- 
value, no longer related to cosmological subjects. 
There emerges an idealized conception of man, as of 
a corporeal being, animated by the power of reason 
and spirituality. 

The Hellenist culture is known to have created the 
cult of man’s natural essence, through admiration of 
this outstanding creation of nature. Even the gods in 
the ancient Greek myths took on a human appear- 
ance. Any adornment of an individual’s natural ap- 
pearance was considered impermissible. Nevertheless, 
the worship of some generalized, “‘unshattered”’ ideal 
of the human body prevented ancient philosophy 
from conceiving the idea of personality in its specific 
form, as it occurred in Christianity. 

Yes, it was Christianity that in some ways dis- 
credited the human flesh and gave birth to the idea of 
its “ungodliness”. A contradiction, however, arises: 
Christianity, which debases man as a corporeal being 
wrapped in evil, nonetheless asserts that man was 
created in the image and after the likeness of God. This 
permits us to conclude, that although Christianity 
exposed the ungodliness of the flesh, it never placed 
the goodness of man’s actual biological nature under 
any doubt. 

This is the reason why in my argument with 

William Dray I maintained: 
_ “According to Christianity, God incarnated man 
in a well-made bodily form. But man gave way to the 
temptations of the flesh. That’s his own 
wrongdoing—it has nothing to do with intrinsic 
“defects” in his creation. 

It is a viewpoint my opponent would not accept. 

What makes me argue? Why am I trying to convey 
to him this view on Christianity as a specific cultural 
tradition, the view maintained by Soviet scholars? I 
am doing so because it was Christianity that gave rise 


13 


to the concept of European Personalism, in which 
human personality is treated as an Absolute. 
Meanwhile, the essence of the latest anthropological 
versions of man’s “depravity” boils down to dis- 
crediting his biological origin. Their principal thesis is 
that human life is purposeless, since man, himself, is 
an error of evolution. The paradox, as we can see, lies 
in the fact that this conclusion has today been arrived 
at by scientists, not by theologians. 

Furthermore, ancient thinkers placed a high value 
on human personality. Thus Plato, for example, 
formulated the idea of a harmonized cultivation of 
human merits. Contrary to the Hellenist culture, the 
philosophy of the Middle Ages did everything 
possible to prove the viciousness and bodily per- 
versity of man. When we look at stained glass win- 
dows and sculptures dating back to those times, we 
get the impression that the human race had de- 
generated and its blood was running cold. Saints 
suffering from consumption, ugly martyrs, flat- 
chested maidens... 

At the same time I don’t share the traditional view 
that the Middle Ages were a period of social stag- 
nation. I quite agree with those scholars who main- 
tain just the opposite. Besides, apart from 
Christianity, quite a few Oriental religions despise 
“corporeality’’. 

It goes without saying, that there were many dif- 
ferences in this regard between the East and Europe. 
Oriental teachings denied the value of individual; 
they showed no trace of the idea of human indepen- 
dence or subjectivity. The depersonalized character of 
the Oriental despotism was dissolved in the vastness 
of space. 

The long-established European tradition is a dif- 
ferent matter: man is regarded as an indisputable 
treasure. One could say that this idea lay at the end 


14 








of via dolorosa that had to be travelled by the entire 
history of Western humanistic philosophy. It was 
born of the struggle against alien, non-European 
mentalities, as well as against all kinds of discredit 
that sprouted on the indigenous, Western soil. 
Moreover, it is the European mind that is marked for 
anthropocentrism, i.e. the view that man is the centre 
and the supreme goal of the Universe. 

What is man? What is his nature, his essence? 
What does the purpose and the value of human life 
depend upon? What are the fundamental problems of 
human existence? These questions have long tor- 
mented European thinkers. There is a variety of 
different answers. Nonetheless, I think this multitude 
of views can be classified in some way. I will attempt 
to do this by putting them into three general cate- 
gories. These are: stoicism, hedonism and theology. 
Each of them provides its own specific view on man, 
his nature and on the purpose of human life. 
Founded at the dawn of civilization, they have all 
aes to this day, though, naturally, in a modified 
orm. 

Let’s start with stoicism. The ancient Stoics told 
their disciples that human life was dramatic, often 
with a note of fatalism running through it. In con- 
fronting Fate, man can only count on himself; even in 
the most hopeless situations, such as in the face of 
imminent disaster, catastrophe, destitution or death, 
his lot is to show courage, impassivity, to exalt his 
own will above all things. Only that can make him 
hold out against misfortune. But when it is no longer 
possible to “live and act”, stoically enduring suffer- 
ing, suicide, the intentional taking of one’s own life, 
is justified. 

The philosophical principles of stoicism were 
sharply contrasted by the Greek philosopher 
Epicurus’ view that pleasure was the chief good 


15 


(hédoné). The Epicureans held that man should seek 
contentment not in the serenity of the soul, but in the 
“aversion of pain”. The theory implies that to in- 
dulge in pleasure is the road to happiness and self- 
sufficiency. But how can man enjoy life when it is 
clouded by the imminence of death? The Epicurean 
creed discards this query. It holds that so long as we 
are here, death has not yet come; and when it does 
come, we will no longer be here. The craving for 
existence is the sole indisputable value in which 
“man” and “God” seem to merge together: the 
divine can only be felt in experiencing pleasure. 

The third category is theological. It proceeds from 
the premise that man’s predestination lies beyond his 
earthly existence, such as it is. Hence the Christian 
doctrines of Atonement in the Reign of God, of 
heaven and hell. The Christian believer is thus sup- 
posed to accept his earthly life as a prologue to 
another life, the principal one. It follows from the 
above, that man’s predestination has nothing to do 
with his earthly pursuits. 

Neither the Epicurean creed, nor stoicism, or even 
less so the Christian outlook represent random views 
on the individual. In his work Difference Between the 
Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature, the 
young Karl Marx wrote: “‘Is not their essence so full 
of character, so intense and eternal that the modern 
world itself has to admit them to full spiritual citizen- 
ship?”’! In replying to this question I would reiterate 
that the values created within the three aforemen- 
tioned categories continue to form part of today’s 
spiritual quest. 

The personalistic trend in European culture man- 
ifested itself most blatantly in the spiritual adoles- 
cence of the Renaissance. It was at that time that 


1 K. Marx, F. Engels, Coll. Works, London, 1975, Vol. 1, p. 35. 
16 





ee 


humanism took shape as an independent ideological 
trend. The ideologists of the Renaissance, who can 
justly be referred to as spiritual titans, substituted the 
individual for the abstractions and the ideals of the 
earlier age. They professed the freedom of the in- 
dividual, being vigorously opposed to religious asceti- 
cism and advocating man’s right to earthly delights. 
Those views filtered into science and religion. The 
humanists were confident that human beauty was 
consonant with divine beauty. 

The humanism of Recent and Modern History 
freed European culture’s personalistic trend of its 
religious content. It began to recognize man’s right to 
freedom, happiness, dignified spiritual and physical 
existence, regardless of any religious postulates. In 
the centuries that followed, these views evolved into 
the concepts and ideals of individualism, as a specific 
ethical doctrine having primary regard for the 
individual. 

Such notions as “individual”, “personality”, 
“man’’, had at all times been indications of historical 
progress, whether marking the period of change from 
the Stone Age to civilization, from ancient times to 
the Middle Ages, or from the medieval to the modern 
world—at the time of the Renaissance—because the 
natural essence of man was not contrasted with his 
spiritual entity. This certainly served to enhance the 
humanistic tradition. 

Characterizing the humanism of the Renaissance, 
Frederick Engels wrote: “It was the greatest pro- 
gressive revolution that mankind had so far ex- 
perienced, a time which called for giants and pro- 
duced giants—giants in power of thought, passion 
and character, in universality and learning.”! But 


' K.Marx, F.Engels, Coll. Works, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1987, Vol. 25, p. 319. 





2 1021 17 


even the most outstanding figures of those times felt 
that harmony should exist between man and society. 

The Renaissance virtually urged that individualism 
be replaced with the historically evolving 
collectivism—by no means an impersonal com- 
munity, but one whose strength would lie in its 
diversity, in the individuality of its members. Marx 
and Engels were later to write: “If man is shaped by 
environment, his environment must be made human. 
If man is social by nature, he will develop his true 
nature only in society, and the power of his nature 
must be measured not by the power of the separate 
individual but by the power of society.””! 

It is not without reason that from the time of the 
Renaissance the idea of anthropocentrism began to 
be increasingly focused on man’s creative capabilities; 
the development of science was used by humanism to 
glorify the expansionism of man, his readiness to 
shatter the aura of divinity inherent in nature. These 
views were later on reflected in the humanism of 
post-Renaissance history. 

When William Dray and I spontaneously delved 
into various epochs of European history, we had one 
and the same purpose: to understand why, preceded 
by such a long evolution of humanism in_ the 





European mind, there emerged a pessimistic attitude | 
towards man as a natural being, a notion of his | 


biological and intellectual inferiority. What caused 
this reversal? 

When ancients said ‘I am a man, I count nothing 
human indifferent to me’’, they implied emotions and 
desires, secret intentions and spiritual weakness... We 
are becoming increasingly aware today that the 
boundaries of what is meant by “human” are much | 
more fluid. We still do not fully understand what 


1 [bid., 1975, Vol. 4, p. 131. 
18 





man’s natural predestination is. What is his mission? 
To uncover the mysteries of matter? To reshape the 
world? We have a vague feeling, however, that there 
is in man something fragile, not fully harmonious or 
controllable, which makes him far more interesting 
and significant than, say, a_ perfectly-designed 
machine. 

Pondering about nature, Fyodor Tyutchev, a 19th 
century Russian poet, described it as a Sphinx. He 
attempted to solve its tempting riddle. Then a doubt 
stroke him: What if there were no riddle at all? We 
are trying to solve the riddle of man. To figure up, to 
classify and to comprehend. But man is not the acme 
of creation, and neither is the world around him... 
The formative capabilities of man, the power of his 
thought and spirit are in perpetual motion. Only 
history in its non-stop progress is capable of unveil- 
ing the secrets of the sophisticated interrelationships 
that exist between Man and Nature, Nature and Man. 

It was from this angle that the problem of human- 
ism was viewed by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. 


REAL HUMANISM 


I recall yet another dialogue. This time with John 
Passmore, a prominent Australian philosopher. 

“Why do you Marxists try to understand all the 
problems of the century by turning to Marx? I agree 
he was a great thinker. But he lived a century ago.” 

“So what?” 

“What I mean is that the Victorian Age has long 
sunk into oblivion. Could Marx foresee the cata- 
Strophic destruction of nature, or the nuclear 
threat?... Yet out of habit, you don’t reason in- 
dependently, but always in the name of some flawless 
teaching.” 


19 





i 


“Well, zealousness for learning does not entail 
abandoning one’s own views. You said that Marx 
knew nothing about the future ecological catas- 
trophe, but it was he who drew public attention to 
the degeneration of the Earth, to the threat posed by 
the disastrous depletion of soils. He wrote with 
regard to this: ‘...cultivation when it progresses spon- | 
taneously and is not consciously controlled... leaves | 
deserts behind it’.” 

“Tt don’t doubt that Marx made quite a few pro- 
phetic statements. The question is: Is it appropriate 
to seek a forecast of modern problems from a con- 
temporary of Victorian culture?” 

“Do you know that one of our contemporary 
colleagues said that European philosophy knows 
only one thinker—Socrates. The rest are just com- | 
mentators of his ideas. One may seek the answers to 
today’s problems not only from the Victorian Age, 
but from Socrates as well. Anyway, the very fact of 
the evolution of European philosophy shows that we | 
are continuing to comment on his ideas, doesn’t it?” 

“In this case, permit me to express my dissatisfac- 
tion in a more precise way. We Western philosophers 
argue a great deal about human issues and human- 
ism. We have, however, no rigid axioms. Our system 
of thought is flexible. It is always developing, always 
dynamic. What do you have? Can you put in doubt 
albeit a single statement by Marx? To you it is a 
catechism.” 

Passmore’s words made me wonder. Marx and a 
collection of dogmas... Could anything be more 
absurd? In the first place, Marx himself was a multi- 
farious thinker, considering the trains of thought 
which led him to true knowledge. Frequently, even 
experts claim that he contradicted himself. This is 
because for years, Marx was recognized by the ma- 
jority of European intellectuals solely as the author 


ee 


20 





of Das Kapital. One has to be aware, however, that in 
this gigantic work he was studying the capitalist 
mode of production. Where others confined them- 
selves to certifying the impotence of man in the face 
of alien external forces, Marx discovered objective 
historical laws. He depicted man as a product of 
specific social conditions against a grandiose 
background panorama of social dynamics. 

But when Marx’s early works were made available 
to the European readers, quite a few preconceptions 
about this thinker were shattered. They found out 
that Marx was not a prophet of impersonal forces 
and mechanisms. On the contrary, he had contri- 
buted to the anthropological theory, and more than 
that, it was in man that he saw an immense and 
inexhaustible history-making potential. It was then 
that the Western image of Marx diverged into “Marx, 
the humanist” and ‘Marx, the political scientist’. 
This issue has since been the subject of heated discus- 
sions at various philosophical forums. 

Let us investigate whether Marx indeed backtrack- 
ed on his own original views. Is it true that having 
initially voiced a humanistic stand, he later showed 
indifference to the destiny and mystery of man? I 
take a book from my book-case. It contains term 
papers by graduates of the Trier Gymnasium, which 
Marx attended. These essays offer no theoretical 
revelations. While re-reading the book, I attempt to 
trace Marx’s evolution into a genius, to understand 
the roots of his future philosophical contemplations. 
What is the purpose of life? It was this question that 
worried young Marx and his schoolmates. 

Admittedly, an essay written long ago by a school- 
boy cannot help me today in finding answers to 
tormenting questions. Nonetheless, it gives an idea of 
how Marx’s humanistic thought matured. He writes 
that the difference between a human being and an 


21 





animal lies in man’s ability to choose his aims con- 
sciously and to strive for their realization. Marx the 
teenager associates the purpose of his life and his 
happiness with working for the welfare of mankind. 

I can visualize a sour smile creasing Passmore’s 
face upon reading these lines. He would probably say 
that this was exactly how they write the lives of the 
Saints. But do not a young man’s dreams reveal his 
personality? Marx’s poems, collected in the Book of 
Love, strike a romantic note. The young poet dwells 
upon the infinity of human strivings, upon the 
boundlessness of his own feelings: 


“Drank I all the stars’ bright radiance, 
All the light by suns o’erspilled, 

Still my paints would want for recompense, 
And my dreams be unfulfilled.”? 


In the 1830s, the young Marx disassociated himself 
from the Romantic outlook. Following Byron, Shel- 
ley and Pushkin, he abandoned the Weltschmerz— 
the mood of sentimental sadness, and glorified rather 
than the human personality, the vigorous human self 
opposed to injustice, evil and humiliation, the “rom- 
antic God” and the ‘“‘universal soul” of man. 

In his poem Human Pride, and in the drafts of his 
doctoral thesis, Marx turns to the myth of 
Prometheus. He extolls the ancient god benefector of 
mankind as the worthiest of Saints and a martyr, as a 
humanist hero; not a destroyer, but a reformer of the 
world. Prometheus rebelled against the despotism of 
Zeus in the name of humaneness. 

The young Marx elevates man and human dignity, 
and in so doing he rejects the divine motivation of 
human actions and desires. The supreme divinity is 
within man, in his moral consciousness. Marx’s youth- 





' K. Marx, F. Engels, Coll Works, London, 1975, Vol. 1, p. 523. 
22 





ful ardour centres on a vigorous and god-like man 
with an unquenchable love for humanity. In the years 
that followed, Marx never lost his faith in the 
Prometheus-type personality, in the altruistic hero. 

So much for Marx’s youthful ideals—we shall 
come back to them later on. Let us turn to his 
philosophy of man, and trace its development 
through his theoretical works. What new ideas did he 
contribute to this issue? Why do we and our like- 
thinkers still accept Marx’s concept of humanism as a 
living and dynamic system of views? 

Before proceeding any further, let us recall that 
anthropocentric ideas had become firmly established 
in the post-Renaissance European mind. 
Philosophical anthropology was coming into being 
as the study of man and his nature. Thanks to 
Ludwig Feuerbach (1804-1872), man became the 
chief aim and object of philosophy, though admit- 
tedly, researchers were primarily interested in the 
biological nature of man. 

Indeed, European thinkers viewed man above all 
as the product of nature. By investigation nature’s 
mysteries and riches, they also deduced other 
qualities of the individual. This explains why quite a 
few scientists ventured to identify man’s nature with 
his inner self, with the subjectivity inherent in him. 
This being the case, the personalistic tendency gained 
an increasingly stronger footing in European culture. 
The fact that various human qualities (such as the 
ability to reason, sensual wealth and adequate cor- 
poreality) were put in doubt by some thinkers, in no 
way disorientated the humanistic mainstream. 

Historically, Marx’s philosophy begins with his 
discovery and identification of the contradiction be- 
tween social welfare, the dominance of society over 
natural forces, on the one hand, and the growing 
dependence and poverty (not only in the material 


23 


sense, but also in the sense of one-sided interests, 
needs and abilities) of the individual who builds this 
welfare, on the other. 

Furthermore, whereas the pre-Marx philosophical 
anthropologists attempted to extrapolate some const- 
ant human values, identifiable at all times, Marx 
took a totally different approach. He showed the 
historicity of the human race. And not only in the 
sense that the qualities of the individual were the 
product of the long evolution of man. 

In Marx’s understanding, man is a universal and 
free natural being, who in himself is a reflection of 
the past, present and future, i.e. not only does he 
reconstruct past experience in his present-time ac- 
tivities, but he also changes and perfects his own self. 
This latter point sets Marx’s view of the issue apart 
from the preceding and basically religious theory, 
which regarded man as a product of creation. Marx’s 
interpretation also makes it possible to depart from 
the naturalistic tradition of the past, which claims 
that being a part of Nature, man is subject to all of its 
laws. 

Man is a social being, and his life has meaning only 
in terms of communication between individuals. 
Man’s behaviour, abilities and needs can be ex- 
plained from this angle as predetermined. People 
themselves make history, but do so under the circum- 
stances which have been created by their previous 
development. 

It should be reiterated that, prior to Marx, the 
individual was viewed as the supreme product of the 
natural world, and man’s peculiarities and virtues 
were explained in terms of natural causes. Assessing 
Ludwig Feuerbach’s interpretation of the “abstract 
individual”, Frederick Engels, the political philosoph- 
er, who collaborated with Marx in developing the 
theory of dialectical materialism, wrote that accord- 


24 





ing to Feuerbach, “...man is not born of woman; he 
issues, aS from a chrysalis, from the god of the 
monotheistic religions. He therefore does not live in a 
real world historically come into being and histori- 
cally determined.”? 

According to Marx, the ever-growing influence 
upon the individual of historically established social 
norms, codes of behaviour and cultural standards 
was indisputable. This being so, does the individual 
have any freedom of choice left to him? If the real 
wealth of the human personality is restricted to man’s 
social relations, how can his own free will manifest 
itself? It is not without reason that for many decades, 
many ideological opponents of Marx and Engels kept 
“catching” them over the fact that Marxism is con- 
cerned solely with the general aspect of history. 

Even today, Marxist theory, along with its political 
and ideological practice, is often censured for its 
disregard for what might be called the human dimen- 
sion in history. Allegations are made that Marxists 
adopt the automatism of social renovation as their 
creed (the implication being that they only recognize 
the effect of impersonal laws; whereas the feelings, 
aspirations and efforts of an individual are left un- 
noticed: man’s feelings and aspirations are lost in the 
march of time). 

In reality, this has nothing to do with Marx’s 
philosophical views of history. Marx believed himself 
an upholder of humanism, which he referred to as 
“real” and “practical”. It is not enough to proclaim 
the principles of humanism: ways should be sought to 
realize them, and practical steps taken to make the 
humanitarian programme viable. 

This is why the Marxist idea of human personality 


' K. Marx, F. Engels, Sel. Works, Progress Publishers, Mos- 
cow, 1976, Vol. 3, p. 356. 





25 





combines the view of man as a product of his social 
environment with the recognition of his active role in 
the cognition and transformation of this environ- 
ment. As Marx maintains, “‘... just as society itself 
produces man as man, so is society produced by 
him’’!, As can be seen, Marx combined his humanis- 
tic creed with the work for a communist society; a 
society whereby the elimination of the bases of 
human inequality, such as private property and ex- 
ploitation of man by man, racial discrimination, 
plunderous wars, etc., would put scientific and cul- 
tural achievements to man’s benefit and would create 
the material, social and moral prerequisites for the 
fullest realization of man’s inner potentialities. In a 
strictly scientific way, the idea of a harmoniously 
developed personality was first put forward by Marx 
and Engels. 

The above considerations are, however, not ex- 
haustive in characterizing the humanistic concept of 
Marxism. Marx saw history in its entirety as a 
process of the “humanization of man’’. Herein lies 
the principal distinction of Marx’s humanistic creed. 
Moral striving and the search for perfection are 
inherent in man. The awareness of progress and of 
historical potentialities is therefore associated with 
the liberation of rich and hitherto unidentified poten- 
tialities in man. The human personality gravitates 
towards humanization, towards the refinement of 
mind and the senses. 

In relation to these views, work acquires a broader 
meaning than merely a method of material gain. It 
also appears as a human requirement, a moral act. 
Marx wrote: “Among the ancients, we never come 
across an investigation into which form of landed 


1K. Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1974, pp. 91. 


26 





property, etc., is the most productive, creates the 
greatest wealth. Wealth does not appear as the pur- 
pose of production, although Cato may well in- 
vestigate which way of field cultivation is the most 
profitable, or even Brutus may lend his money at the 
highest rate of interest. The enquiry is always about 
which form of property creates the best citizens.’”? 

So, the impact of production upon man and his 
inner world was given thought way back in ancient 
times. For their part, the bourgeois social sciences 
considered production solely from the profit-making 
angle. This gave Marx sufficient reason to assert: “In 
this way, the old view according to which man always 
appears in however narrowly national, religious or 
political a determination as the end of production, 
seems very exalted when set against the modern 
world, in which production is the end of man, and 
wealth the end of production.” 

The reason why Marx criticized capitalism was not 
that the worker’s development was one-sided (only as 
a producer of goods), but rather that, given the 
inequality of ownership over the means of produc- 
tion, every single person within that system had been 
made “partially human’: not only the materially 
destitute proletarian, but the satiated bourgeois as 
well. 

Recalling my argument with Passmore, I keep 
thinking that the real wealth of Marx’s ideological 
legacy has not yet been fully appreciated. It reaches 
us in a great range of foreshortenings and dimen- 
sions. At various times, Marx amazes us with his 
ability for analytical research, the irrefutable logic of 
a scientist, the courage of a revolutionary, the sob- 
riety and realism of a politician. Did he in fact betray 


1 K. Marx, F. Engels, Coll. Works, Vol. 28, p. 411. 
2 Ibid. 


27 


his early ideals, his basic views on man and on the 
purpose of human life, as is alleged by those scholars, 
who place “early” Marx in opposition to “‘mature” 
Marx? 

No, he did not. 

There have been few people throughout history, 
who would have devoted their entire lives (Marx’s life 
was full of privations, mammoth tasks and suffering), 
to give so flawless a corroboration of their youthful 
ideals, as he did. Normally chary about discussing his 
self-characteristics, on concluding his work on the 
first volume of the Capital, Marx suddenly exposed 
himself to one of his correspondents: ‘“‘Well, why 
didn’t I answer you? Because I was constantly hover- 
ing at the edge of the grave. Hence I had to make use 
of every moment when I was able to work to com- 
plete my book, to which I have sacrificed health, 
happiness, and family. I trust that I need not add 
anything to this explanation. I laugh at the so-called 
‘practical’ men with their wisdom. 

“If one chose to be an ox, one could of course turn 
one’s back on the sufferings of mankind and look 
after one’s own skin. But I should have really re- 
garded myself as impractical if I had pegged out 
without completely finishing my book, at least in 
manuscript.” 

Did Marx go back on his political principles? 
Having sided with the working masses from the 
outstart, he advanced his theoretical studies until, at 
the turn of 1843-1844, it brought him to substantiate 
the view of the historic role of the proletariat and 
ultimately siding with this class, by becoming a 
Communist. 


' K. Marx, F. Engels, Selected Correspondence, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1975, p. 173. 


28 


NATURE’S WONDER 
OR HER STEPSON? 





The American Newsweek carried a short paragraph 
describing a boy dying of electric shock, as a crowd 
of onlookers stood by. The victim could have been 
saved, but nobody made a move—the whole crowd 
froze stiff, watching the horrible scene. All that 
seemed unreal to them: they just stood there staring 
at the happening, like at some kind of gruesome 
performance, one of those many, which are shown on 
their home TV screens. 

Inhuman? Let us refrain from making hasty judge- 
ments. Let us try to sense the atmosphere of the 
accident. Suppose we were among the “frozen” 
crowd. Let’s give it a bit of thought. How would I 
react? Would I be capable of conscious behaviour, or 
would I be rooted to the spot by the hypnotizing 
scene? Would I show compassion, or would I stiffen, 
helpless in the face of imminent disaster? It’s not easy 
to answer... 

Can it be that man is indeed not always capable of 
acting in any given situation with his seemingly 
inherent conviction and responsibility? What is gen- 
erally meant by a personal act of moral decision? 
Can it be—paradoxial as it may sound—that man is 
altogether incapable of conscious behaviour, because 
he is weak, helpless and overburdened with instincts. 
We keep reiterating the formula, devised by the 
ancients: J count nothing human indifferent to me. Can 
we spell it out? As centuries and millennia went by, 
this formula changed its meaning for people. 

“He was a man, take him for all in all” 
(Shakespeare). What does this imply? Is man pre- 
pared to be crucified for the sake of truth, or, 
conversely, is he unrestrainedly driven towards mysti- 
cism and the incomprehensible? Does he strive to 


29 





merge with nature, or is he there to destroy it 
perversely? Does he crave for order, or is he infected 
with incurable anarchy? 

I ask myself again, what I would have done, had I 
been among the shocked crowd of onlookers. Being 
guilty of unintentional murder does not really fit into 
the picture of modern man’s moral quest. This natur- 
ally compels one to assert: no, I wouldn’t have 
followed the egoistic instinct of self-preservation, or 
adopted the mood of the passive crowd—no, I would 
have come out of torpidity and rushed for the master 
switch... For | am a man! 

Is that what man is really like? The millions of TV 
films and movies we watch today try to convince us 
of the opposite. Man is infected with sadistic instincts 
and the drive for destruction, and he has an inherent 
capability of reducing everything to ashes at any 
minute... 

1985 saw the publication of a book 
Dehumanization of Man, written by two American 
authors—sociologist Ashley Montagu and psycho- 
logist Floyd Matson. 

“What is the main theme of your book?” I asked 
the authors. 

“We have discovered evil.” 

“That’s like calling the invention of the wheel the 
latest hi-tech breakthrough.” 

“The problem of evil has puzzled man from the 
earliest days, that’s true. There have been attempts at 
interpreting it by poets and preachers, theologians 
and philosophers, moralists and politicians... But 
until recently the problem of evil did not arouse the 
interest of scientists.” 

“But why?” 

“Because today, suffering humanity is the subject 
of research.” 

The authors told me that their task was to sys- 


30 


tematize all attempts af a scientific explanation of 
evil. According to them, it could help in identifying 
the historical roots and the modern conception of 
this phenomenon. It is just now that we are being 
confronted with the syndrome of dehumanization, 
which manifests itself in the extreme “‘lifelessness”’ of 
man and in the destruction of all human emotions. 
This socio-psychological type of man has been label- 
led in a variety of ways, e.g. “a living corpse’, 
“‘necrophile’’, “‘zombie’’. 

An experiment is being staged at Ashley and 
Floyd’s laboratory in New York, with the purpose of 
demarcating the limits of the individual’s compliance 
with external dictates. A team of volunteers, who 
play the part of <‘teachers”, prescribe a series of 
dummy electric shocks to other volunteers, who per- 
form as ‘‘pupils”’. 

I visited the ‘experimental’ room. A special con- 


trol panel has been fitted with electric switches with 
indications of voltage ranging from 15V to 450V. A 
warning sign has been provided at the notch marked 
375V: Dangerous! Heavy shock. The sign Lethal vol- 
tage marks the edge of the panel. In the adjoining 


999 


“pupils’” room I can see acoustic installations. 
According to the experimenters, these devices are 
capable of imitating human sounds, from a faint 
moan to an agonizing scream. 

The lights have been put on. The experiment has 
begun. I watch the “teachers’”’ facial expressions. 
They are attacking ‘their victims. It is evident that 
some of the “‘controllers” take pleasure in “‘disciplin- 
ing” those who don’t comply readily, but show self- 
control. Moans can be heard from the “pupils’” 
Toom. But what’s going on? The “teachers” are 
increasing the voltage! Some of them appear to be in 
a trance. The button which sets the voltage at the 
limit of endurance has long since been pressed. But 


31 








a 


the “‘executioners”” keep moving closer to their last 
weapon—the “‘lethal voltage” push-button... 


Shocked, I leave the scene of the experiment. Why 
have these ordinary law-abiding citizens, these rank- 
and-file clerks, engineers and others shown such 
cruelty? It was not hatred or extreme hostility that 
made them act like that, in any case. Some hitherto 
hidden instinct transformed them into beasts. 


The syndromes of dehumanization... Given the 
diversity of themes, techniques and artistic styles, the 
literature and arts which gravitate toward such sub- 
jects are, so to say, attracted by two different mag- 
netic poles. One of these “‘poles’? means success, 
mutual understanding and contentment, the other 
means bloodshed, violence and disunity. People at 
the “‘second pole’’, who resent their own social unset- 
tled state, need an outlet to steam off their irritation, 
annoyance and dissatisfaction, which has been ac- 
cumulating. The outlet is readily “prompted” to 
them by way of all sorts of suggested retaliation and 
“fair requital”. No wonder aggressive fanatics 
appear, capable of plunder and violence, of petrol 
bomb attacks on peaceful villages... 


“What a piece of work is a man! How noble in 
reason! How infinite in faculty!” speculates Hamlet. 
Indeed, until recently, man was considered to be the 
“‘acme of creation”, whereas today, he turns out to be 
no more than a sadist and a fiend. Poets have 
glorified “human sanity” throughout the ages. Now 
it turns out that man is fundamentally insane. 


What do Marxist scientists think about this? In 
itself, the fact that the biological supremacy of man is 
being put in doubt, evokes no objection. Man is no 
god and no angel. In the strict sense of the word, man 
is the only murderer, being the only primate who kills 
and tortures members of his own species; the animal 


32 








kingdom, with only rare exceptions, knows no bio- 
logically unmotivated slaughter. 

The immediate impact of this contemporary scien- 
tific conclusion bowls one over. Care should be taken 
not to let oneself think of evolution as a meticulously 
preordained, linear ascent to an absolute harmony. 
Man is the product of a long, natural evolution, 
which cannot be regarded as an accumulation of 
exclusively harmonious instincts and inclinations. A 
sober-eyed study of man’s biological nature helps to 
shatter any abstract, complacent prejudices. A sen- 
sible, shrewd insight into human history makes philo- 
sophers free from the teleological concept of pre- 
ordained purpose (which flies in the end or goal 
towards which all things move), from the ill-advised 
faith in the preordination of the historical process. In 
the same way, the allowance for possible evolutional 
blunders, as regards the Son of Nature, helps to 
eradicate time-honoured conceptions of the acme of 
creation. Indeed, man has no guarantee of absolute 
perfection and harmony. To assume this viewpoint 
would mean to fuse with theology, which has, for 
centuries, been building up the myth of divine 
Providence. 

The biological evolution did not come to an end 
with the emergence of man. Since the “‘enthrone- 
ment” of man as the ruler of nature, other biological 
species have already come into existence. Besides, 
evolution knows many examples of animal and plant 
species which have become extinct, although they 
previously appeared to be pinnacles of biological 
creation. Thus mammoths and mastodons have long 
been extinct and so have other higher mammals. The 
virgin forests of Europe used to be inhabited by apes, 
whose mineralized remains are found in stratified 
rocks. Those animals were creatures of rather high 
Organization but lacked adaptability to changes in 


3 1021 33 


climatic and biological environment. At the same 
time, cockroaches and scorpions demonstrated a far 
stronger adaptability. 

The ultimate results of natural selection are not 
necessarily favourable: unsuccessful projects have 
every now and then been tossed into a “‘wastepaper 
basket”, and the successful ones duplicated in a 
countless number of copies. Is man exempt from 
extinction? Can one be sure that the fantastic sup- 
position that nature has provided all of its creatures 
with some defensive reflex, some safety valve, is 
totally unfounded? To give an example, it has been 
established that the propagation of lemmings is con- 
trolled in an inconceivable way: when their numbers 
become “‘excessive”’, they jump into rivers and perish. 

A West German newspaper flashed a report about 
a preparation being developed in a joint medico- 
biological effort to save the biologically degenerating 
human species. The idea was to rid man of inborn 
defects, stimulate an unheard-of mutation and thus 
present the world with a new living creature, this time 
a biologically adequate one. The publication used 
references from Arthur Koestler’s scientific writings. 

Whenever I come across similar prognostications, I 
can’t help asking myself: When did this fundamental 
re-evaluation of man take place? Was it brought 
about by Mary Shelley’s novel Frankenstein, or the 
Modern Prometheus (1818)? In the novel, a young 
and gifted scientist is obsessed with the idea of 
endowing corpses with life; Frankenstein creates a 
monster in the form of a man, who comes to hate his 
creator and retaliates against him for his loneliness. 

Or, did it occur later, when the premonition of 
extraterrestrial encounters was dreamt up by 
H.G. Wells, the famous science-fiction writer? It was 
he, who wrote about “...a sense of dethronement’’, a 
persuasion that man was no longer a master, but one 


34 


among other living creatures under the sway of the 
Martians, who were devoid of any moral principles. 


It is not the sense of dethronement that causes 
bitter resentment, but rather the prosaic, the des- 
perately dull technological recipes for the revival of 
man. Pills. Hormonal mutation. Shock treatment. 
Brain transplants. Chemical intervention. The age- 
long hopes for elevation of spirit, refinement of 
senses and moral perfection are being shattered in a 
single blow. The potion for mankind’s redemption in 
pharmaceutical wrapping... 


One may agree with Koestler, when he talks of the 
irreducibility of the highest to the lowest orders, of 
the organic and the conscious to the “‘machine-like’”’. 
On the whole, however, his judgements are quite 
controversial. It is important, above all, to trace the 
reasoning which led man to be listed among nature’s 
“freaks” and “‘stepsons’’. 


What is on the list of pathological symptoms, by 
which Koestler illustrates the “‘perverted history of 
our species’’? In the first place, he refers to sacrifice— 
rather a paradoxial rite—practised by human 
societies at the dawn of civilization. He stresses that 
this rite has been practised by many geographically 
and ethnically unrelated peoples, as a manifestation 
of a perverted logic, to which our biological species is 
evidently prone. 

In itself, the rite of sacrifice can certainly be 
regarded as an example of “‘perverted logic’. But to 
what extent does it testify to the viciousness of man’s 
biological nature? Koestler traces this rite to the life- 
destroying motivations, allegedly inherent in man. In 
reality, however, it was rooted in paganism: with the 
extinction of the latter, sacrifice gradually ceased to 
be practised. 


Not only the social sciences, but modern ethology 


35 





(the study of animal behaviour) as well, prove that 
the attribution of man’s aggressiveness to his bio- 
logical nature is groundless. It has been observed in 
quite a few animal species that aggressiveness is 
neutralized by a sequence of actions which can be 
compared to a ritual. 

Thus in wolf-fights, the wolf which feels it is the 
loser will lie down with its throat exposed to the 
enemy. But instead of slaughtering the fallen victim, 
the latter retreats with a howl. 

Records of similar behaviour reach us from the 
early stages of human = society’s evolution. 
Ethnographers have described ritual wars between 
the primitive tribes of central New Guinea, which are 
not fought for any particular purpose, such as seizure 
of territory or booty. Ritual combats, or agons, were 
also practised in ancient Greece. Meanwhile, 
Koestler maintains that man’s ability for killing 
members of his own species is truly unique. The beast 
of prey and its victim are always members of different 
biological species. When attacking a member of its 
own species, an animal often issues a warning or a 
threat, but it never implies killing as the immediate 
sequel. 

Indeed, many human instincts have become 
weaker, because man does not have an inborn na- 
tural programme, which would automatically control 
his behaviour. Does this provide us with sufficient 
grounds to identify the ineradicable viciousness of 
man, or his unrestrained aggressiveness? Even within 
primitive tribes there existed a psychologically dis- 
tinct tendency for overcoming the blood-lust. Certain 
tribes practised so-called token wars. Among human 
beings, those rites probably served the same 
purpose—to avoid bloodshed. Where is the inborn 
cruelty, the fatal drive for self-destruction, suggested 
by Koestler? 


36 


A ETL EE Se 


It would certainly be wrong to ignore the fact that 
wars have accompanied human history from its early 
stages. This enables quite a few anthropologists, 
including social anthropologists, to assert that people 
will never be able to suppress their natural desire for 
mutual extermination. However, the genesis of war 
cannot be reduced to man’s biological nature. It goes 
far back into the pre-class and class history of the 
human race. 

Will reason prevail, after all? Will mankind 
succeed in quenching the “predestination of war’’? 
No prophet will take the liberty of drawing an 
unqualified conclusion. It is a complicated subject, 
and I will come back to it in due course. At this 
point, however, it should be emphasized, that war is a 
social occurrence. And, since nature endowed man 
with the ability to think logically, he is capable 
of a conscious living, of taking wise decisions. There 
iH the whole of historical experience to corroborate 
that. 

Reflecting upon the purpose of human existence, 
Marx asked “...for what is life but activity?” One 
may put up a framework of noble goals and lofty 
precepts, and entertain the idea that for the sole 
treason of being lofty, these ideals must become man’s 
guiding light. There is a different road, however, that 
of activity and struggle. The road leading to the 
realization of the supreme purpose in life—for every 
man. 

A world free of wars and weapons, the preserv- 
ation of nature, the establishment of fair relations 
between nations and individuals—these are goals 
worthy of mankind in their magnitude. By working 
for these goals, the individual becomes aware of his 
Own self and rises to heights which are fitting for the 
Capabilities and purpose of man as an embodiment of 
reason and soul. 


37 





at. ae 


THE “ANTHROPOLOGICAL 
BOOM” 


Reflections about man have always been a key 
element in philosophy. How far has this ancient 
subject been influenced by new developments? What 
new ways of tackling this eternal problem have been 
devised today? The German philosopher Immanuel 
Kant maintained: “Two things fill the mind with 
ever-increasing wonder and awe: ... the starry heaven 
above me and the moral law within me.” 

Let’s follow this approach. The blue vault above us 
still hypnotizes us with its grandeur and infinity. But 
the heavens have changed, all the same. Man has 
already set foot on the surface of the Moon, and 
exploration has extended into outer space. It would 
take an astronomical imagination to comprehend the 
infinity of the Universe. What an “abyss full of stars” 
has opened in front of us! The problem of populating 
distant worlds is being discussed in terms of engineer- 
ing projects. Plans are being made for a 40 year- 
long unmanned thermo-nuclear rocket flight to reach 
the Bernard Star, which is six light-years away from 
the Earth. Soviet and American astronauts are pre- 
paring for a joint flight to Mars. 

But every coin has its reverse. Won’t the cosmic 
void become the arena for galactic battles? Won’t the 
skies be set ablaze, with the light of laser beams? 
Recall Wells’ novel The War of the Worlds. What 
worried the author was the striking incongruousness 
of the size of the impending catastrophe and the 
ordinariness of life’s daily routine. Locomotives 
pulled trains, machines rattled their parts, news- 
papers kept being printed... Meanwhile, the lethal 
weapons had already left their first burn-marks on 
the earth’s surface... The planet was on the verge of 
being plunged into a nameless and indescribable abyss! 


38 





Scientists and philosophers of the past few cen- 
turies were convinced that intelligent beings inhabited 
the whole known Universe, even the Sun. As early as 
the beginning of this century, the same H.G. Wells 
anticipated an early encounter between human beings 
and Selenites. Later there came scientific proof that 
there was no life on the Moon. Astronomers no 
longer consider Mars and Venus as possible sources 
of life within the solar system. Furthermore, as has 
already been mentioned above, they are coming to 
the conclusion that intelligent life is a rare, and 
possibly a unique occurrence. What if we are alone in 
the Universe? The awareness that the Universe is 
infinite and unbounded, and that it is “‘indifferent’’ to 
the welfare and happiness of man, gives rise to a 
tragic outlook. 

It is quite natural that the very awareness of being 
alone in the Universe can result in a diversity of 
outlooks. The optimistic, rationalistic version can be 
roughly formulated as follows. If mankind is unique, 
humanism can be painted in stern, but not at all 
pessimistic colours. If this is so, then the “thinking 
reed”’ (the metaphor used by the 17th century French 
philosopher Blaise Pascal in referring to man), the 
intelligent life-form is absolutely priceless! Its unique- 
ness should be treasured! This immeasurably en- 
hances the value of our cultural accomplishments, 
and particularly the humanistic ones. 

An altogether different train of thought charac- 
terizes proponents of the modern naturalistic school 
of anthropology. Sinister, peremptory statements 
about the biological deficiency of the Son of the 
Earth. Grim predictions and almost hysterical ap- 
peals. If intelligent life is a random occurrence in the 
unbounded vastness of the Universe, who is supposed 
to hear the voice of mankind? Hence the 
disappearance of thinking matter is a more logical 


39 





outcome, than its incomprehensible emergence, let 
alone preservation. On the whole, it is illogical to 
cherish a belief in the happy fate of civilization, 
which has been brought to the brink of disintegra- 
tion. 

Centuries have gone by, but an unflagging philo- 
sophical interest in man has remained. What 1s he? 
Why, in contrast to other living creatures, was he 
endowed with the capacity of knowledge? Are there 
limits to human intelligence? What does man live for? 
There is hardly albeit a major philosophical trend 
today that has not given its views on the problem. 

Generally speaking, the problem of man_ has 
become the focal point for many modern philosoph- 
ers. Long ago, at the beginning of the 19th century. 
Immanuel Kant elucidated the problems of human 
knowledge and human activity basing himself on 
moral principles. His questions—What is the extent 
of my knowledge? What must I do? What can I hope 
for?—are still relevant today. 

Nowadays, one can talk of an unusual “anthropo- 
logical boom” in philosophy. We should perhaps 
repeat that by this we do not merely mean existential- 
ism, personalism and other philosophical theories, 
which see all philosophical questions revolving about 
man, the latter being regarded as the sole object of 
philosophy. Today, everyone wants to theorize about 
man, and everyone regards man as the key-note of all 
philosophical thinking. To give an example, the 18th 
World Philosophical Congress, held in Brighton, 
England, in the autumn of 1988 was totally devoted 
to this subject. 

However, an opposing tendency is also coming to 
light. In particular, the stress is being placed on the 
“death of man”, which allegedly removes this philo- 
sophical problem in principle. Arguments are being 
advanced that the attempts by European thinkers to 


40 





find the answers to all philosophical questions in 
relation to the problem of man, have produced quite 
a few devastating effects. Attempts to identify the 
anthropological theme as omnipresent and omni- 
potent, are said to be fraught with serious miscalcu- 
lations. Criticism is also being brought against the 
anthropological approach concerning prognosti- 
cations about the future of civilization. 

Where lies the “‘insidiousness” and ‘“‘falseness’’ of 
the personalistic position? Above all, in the fact that 
the exaggerated interest in man in the course of the 
European cultural evolution has brought about many 
theoretical distortions. This interest has, in parti- 
cular, “disfigured” the idea of progress. Today, the 
proponents of this theory maintain that man should 
clearly not be trusted, for he harbours numerous 
vices. Hence the mission of philosophy is to foretell 
an existence “cleansed” of man, i.e. of ‘“‘anthropocen- 
trism’’. They claim that by putting man in the centre 
of the world philosophers have probably brought 
about the premonition of danger, and advertize a 
“distraction” from man, and from the humanistic 
subject as such. Approaches are being suggested, 
which no longer have room for personality and in 
which the subjects of scientific studies are 
‘“depersonalized”’. 

Admittedly, at the beginning, these arguments 
were not aimed at bringing public awareness to the 
idea of man’s “complete downfall’. They merely 
fixed the public eye on the known “inadequacy” of 
man, i.e. on some peculiarities of his biological im- 
Perfection. Noting the absence of features ‘‘com- 
pulsory” for a thinking creature, the critics had not 
yet formulated their “final verdict’. On the contrary, 
they voiced the hope that man was capable of com- 
pensating those inadequacies. 

For example, Arnold Gehlen, a West German 


41 





philosopher, maintained that human instincts were 
underdeveloped. He therefore believed that a certain 
“insufficiency” was inherent in man’s biological 
make-up. Or, in simpler terms, that he was not firmly 
“rooted”? in nature. Gehlen, however, was far from 
stating on those grounds that man was doomed and 
was to fall prey to evolution. On the contrary, he 
asserted that man was capable of overcoming his 
inborn “natural patterns’’. 

Gehlen and his adherents saw their mission in 
showing a certain discrepancy between man as a 
social being on the one hand, and nature on the 
other. He nevertheless inclined towards thinking that 
man was predominantly an animal, a direct off- 
spring of nature. This narrowly biological and psy- 
chological approach was in fact corroborative of any 
sociality being alien to human beings: for if man 
belongs to the animal kingdom, there is little chance 
that he will get used to those forms of social organi- 
zation, which draw him into unaccustomed and in- 
creasingly complicated circumstances. 

The philosophical anthropologists seemed to be 
giving a warning: like an iron hoop, sociality has 
clamped man’s animal instincts. Today, this grip has 
not yet become lethal. But should the cultural pattern 
of human society become further ramified, and more 
“external” towards man’s biological features, it may, 
in the long run, lead to a catastrophe. Instincts will 
shatter the social shackles, the overheated steam will 
blow up the boiler. 

The non-acceptance of “‘social man” is not only 
found within the framework of the naturalistic tradi- 
tion. The same idea is being consistently elaborated 
by the structuralists. They maintain that the notion 
of ‘‘man” is fading out, to be replaced by the notion 
of “structure”. Thus Michel Foucault, a French 
philosopher, calls it a blunder to believe that man has 


42 





been and will increasingly remain the focal point of 
scientific knowledge. 

Pondering over the concept of “human death’, I 
am coming to the conclusion that, involuntarily, it 
helps us to understand the phenomenon as a whole. 
The problem cannot be discarded without producing 
arguments which surface during an in-depth study of 
the anthropological theory. In fact, Foucault’s theory 
is but one more fragment of the complex philosophy 
of man. 

Whatever determining characteristics are ascribed 
to man, be it intellect, will, unconscious self, vitality, 
gusts of passion or feeling of alienation, they cannot 
possibly deprive him of his self-value, or of his 
integrity, albeit relative. To the same degree, the 
denigration of qualities imminent in human nature 
does not lead to the devaluation of the anthropolo- 
gical theory as such. On the contrary, it promotes the 
intensive comprehension of the human phenomenon 
and the faculties and abilities inherent in human 
nature. 

It nonetheless seems to be worth investigating the 
specific reasons which underlie so great an interest in 
the problem of man. What is behind it? In my view, it 
is above all the unavoidability of the vital problems 
that constantly beset the individual in the context of 
his everyday life. The catastrophic destruction of the 
natural environment, its intensive contamination 
with nuclear waste, the depletion of the habitual 
landscape, the sudden spreading of new diseases 
which threaten to wipe out the human race—all this 
places man in a highly critical situation, which gives 
him a feeling of total vulnerability and a presenti- 
ment of the possible end of the world. This situation 
Inevitably causes one to think and to make an at- 
tempt at understanding the world around us. 

As is known, modern science has made great 


43 





progress in its study of processes within nature. 
Scientific thought is moving deeper and deeper into 
the mysteries of the Universe, into the enigmas of the 
living and thinking matter. The opportunities offered 
by genetic engineering, the advancement of artificial 
insemination techniques, the emergence of prepar- 
ations capable of changing personality, the transplan- 
tation of body organs, artificial organs in particular... 
Quite naturally, all this shatters the traditional 
notions of man. 

Alternatively, the problem could be formulated as: 
“What is meant by specifically human values, after 
all?” Today, we are already moulding specific fea- 
tures that are bound to become the norm tomorrow. 
This is achieved by intervening in man’s genetic 
processes, and by so doing, we are acting in place of 
the forces of natural selection. In the future, medical 
and general sciences will be gaining still greater 
power over human nature. 

We have evidently reached a stage where, within 
about half a century, or slightly more, man will have 
changed to the same degree as he has done over the 
past eight million years, during which he bridged the 
evolution gap from australopithecus to homo sapiens. 
What human values will he retain? 

An American researcher John Fletcher emphasizes 
that it will take only a few decades before human 
reproduction ceases to be governed by the “law of 
roulette”. People will gain full control over the birth- 
rate and it will be possible to choose the sex of a 
future child and to create human life in lab 
conditions. 

On the other hand, this scientific possibility to 
create “‘new life’ also causes concern. Theories are 
being revived proclaiming some races, social strata 
and human outcasts as genetically inferior. There 
have been suggestions of a social structure whereby 


44 





castes of “slaves” and “‘masters”’ will be formed on 
the basis of new technologies. There is serious ap- 
prehension about the impacts of genetic mutation, 
which may produce bizarre life forms. Consider, for 
example, the hybridization experiments on viruses, in 
which the “‘vehicle”’ of one virus carries the “‘filling”’, 
i.e. the hereditary units, of another virus. The results 
of such experiments are not always predictable. Or, 
take the implantation of ‘‘non-native’’ genes into a 
DNA molecule—the carrier of heredity. Such genetic 
influences may produce foetal abnormalities. 

It is not solely human biology that is being exposed 
to hard-to-avert dangers. The accompanying psycho- 
logical problems are becoming painfully acute. 
Catastrophically, the individual loses confidence in 
the genuineness of his inner self, in his human es- 
sence. The demolition of certain traditional social 
structures, along with habitual forms of social life, 
the rapid change in environmental surroundings, re- 
sulting in a “future shock’’, are reflected in mass 
psychological processes. Plainly speaking, man loses 
contact with himself, and perceives things and or- 
ganizations created by him as deeply alien and hos- 
tile. He frequently indulges in psychological experi- 
ments, in which his own consciousness serves as the 
testing ground. Thus the addiction to psychotropic 
drugs can bring about psychoneurosis, and in the 
long run produce a complete mental disorder, 
whereby a person becomes withdrawn from reality 
into a world of hallucinations. 

Philosophizing about human nature is further 
Stimulated by world-view and social factors. Modern 
biology, ethnography, psychology, culturology, his- 
tory and other branches of science have accumulated 
a wide range of various data, which demand generali- 
zation and philosophical explanation. 

However, the true idea of what man is can only be 


45 


ne 


given by real history, defined by Engels as ‘“‘the 
process of evolution of man himself’, in the course of 
which human values have become fully revealed. 
People are living in a historically concrete and chang- 
ing world. It is therefore the social processes that . 
allow the fullest expression of the ‘‘true human self”’. 





MAN AND SOCIETY 


THE ROUTES 
OF PROGRESS 


A certain automatic production line was being 
operated solely by a robot. In the event of a 
breakdown, the robot would instantly flash a red 
light. In addition, a siren would go off to signal 
interruptions in the supply of raw materials. The 
robot performed splendidly. It did not tire or break 
for a cigarette. The only trouble was that it was being 
handled none too gently by the personnel, and this 
brought about frequent disruptions. The manage- 
ment decided to fence off the production line. What 
happened next was that some “workman” climbed 
the railing and smashed the “wicked” machine with a 
brick. He was irritated by this constantly vigilant 
automatic enthusiast. He was sick of its red light and 
the siren... Frankly speaking, when it boiled down to 
It, the general working atmosphere was far from 
being overenthusiastic. This episode is taken from a 
major Soviet newspaper. The time is the present... 
Here is a common scene I happened to witness at a 
Major’s office in a small township on Honshu island, 


47 











Japan: A young couple were getting married. The 
traditional ceremony was followed with precision, 
including a sermon and the signing of the register. 
The whole thing was however conducted by... a 
robot. Nor did it forget to congratulate the newly- 
weds. But the young couple acted unpredictably: 
having meticulously followed the wedding procedure, 
they thought for a moment, then strolled to a nearby 
church for a repeat wedding. 

Every day, newspapers and radio and TV broad- 
casts tell us about the way new technology and 
machines are changing our lives. Microprocessor and 
computer technologies are changing the nature of 
work, human contacts and daily life. Robots have 
mastered dozens of delicate operations; they are no 
longer merely our neighbours, but colleagues as 
well... But look at the number of social and psycholo- 
gical problems which are brought about in the 
meantime! 

Admittedly, in the age of rapid scientific and 
technological progress we know little about the 
“thinking reed”. We know how to improve a ma- 
chine and to adjust a manufacturing process. But we 
still feel helpless in explaining the riddles of human 
nature. 

Every individual is unique, because since his early 
days man has been constantly involved in situations 
where he has had to act consciously and to choose his 
moral principles and line of conduct. Otherwise, his 
“human self’? would have become meaningless; just 
as being a member of society one cannot be free from 
it, it is impossible to rid oneself of the feeling of 
conscious action, responsibility and intensive inner 
life, given the specification of what is “truly 
personal”. 

The dialectics of individual and social values in 
social progress are quite complicated, for a person- 


48 














ality is formed not only by contemporary culture, but 
by all the preceding history as well. Man is charac- 
terized by the social experience he gains, and by the 
social relations he is involved in. Yet, in a certain 
sense, he is “older” than the specific society he 
belongs to, for he stores up the experience gath- 
ered over the centuries, which is relayed to him 
through culture and traditions. 

History is made by people, classes and nations. It is 
the aggregate outcome of the efforts of the entire 
human race. At the time of major historic changes, 
the role of human conscious activity becomes par- 
ticularly prominent. Furthermore, the historic role of 
man grows with the increasing scale of historical 
action. 

History has witnessed major ideological move- 
ments, religious reforms and periods of social crisis, 
which went hand in hand with fundamental social 
change and destruction of traditional outlook, when 
social dynamics were exposed to their best advantage. 
A qualitative change in the structure of existence 
leads to the transformation of the consciousness, the 
upturn of all the superstructural phenomena. 
Nowadays, these processes assume such a huge 
(almost global) scale, that it makes the role of man 
particularly significant. 

There has been unprecedented growth of the role 
Played by state machinery, political parties and mass 
Organizations, all acting on the basis of various 
Programmes and a specific understanding of social 
processes. The historical machinery is not run by 
some alien power, regardless of the human will. This 
machinery is run by people. 

What inspires people to act for a particular cause, 
to strive for a particular goal? Real interests, ideas 
and orientations. But does this mean that goals can 
be achieved solely on the basis of human enthusiasm, 


4 1021 49 


a 


conviction and energy? Of course not. To give an 
example, there is our experience of building socialism 
in the Soviet Union, a thought-provoking experience, 
too. 

We, in the Soviet Union, refer to our socialism as 
“developing”. Indeed, it has been maturing, both in 
theory and in practice. But it has nothing to do with 
the logic of a smooth evolution. On the contrary, it 
has been a road of dramatic search, serious mis- 
conceptions and sometimes tragic errors. There are 
three models of socialism that we distinguish in our 
history today, and each of them has its own concept 
of man and of humanism. 

The hard years of the Civil War, which broke out 
in 1918 soon after the October socialist revolution, 


brought us a brief experience of War Communism. It © 


was a time when revolutionary enthusiasm, the power 
of the liberated masses was confronted with the harsh 
laws of survival. In order to survive, the state had to 
confiscate any surplus agricultural produce, to 
introduce distribution on an equalitarian basis and 
impose military-like discipline. At that time, the 
revolutionary activists believed that all citizens 
should at once become communists by being turned 
into proletarians, possessing no property except 
workers’ hands. 

There are quite a few misconceptions and para- 
doxes that history keeps to herself. It is common 
knowledge that capitalism had for centuries been 
trying to alienate the worker from property, and had 
made significant progress to that end. Now this 
process was to be completed, but this time on behal 
of the proletariat. The aim of alienating all people. 
from property and turning them into toilers (and in 
no way masters!) was at the core of the Wa 
Communism policy. 

As early as 1921, Lenin saw a different way o 


50 


pen 


reforming society. The early 1920s were marked for 
an upsurge of popular enthusiasm and creative ac- 

{ tivity. Those years became what might be called a 
revolutionary laboratory of social innovation, a 
search for the best forms of union between workers 
and peasants. It was equally important that the entire 
range of the working people’s interests was being 
matched with an adequate social system. 

The idea of the food tax (in which a fixed amount 
of farming produce was requisitioned, the rest being 
left in the full possession of the peasantry), which 
heralded the switchover to Lenin’s New Economic 
Policy, contained broad economic incentives. It dis- 

mantled the existing bureaucratic barriers, which 
impeded the implementation of the fundamental 
principle of socialism: ‘“‘From each according to his 
ability, to each according to his work’’. Lenin’s last 
writings, remarkable for their wisdom and political 
ardour, laid down a system of views and the very 
concept of building socialism in the Soviet Union. 

Lenin’s concept of socialism called for the broadest 
possible promotion of democracy. The new society 
was being built on personal interest, on economic 
accounting. Socialism was being visualized as a 
society of civilized cooperators, whereby property, 
remaining in the hands of the working people, as- 
sumed a variety of bonds with private individuals. 
Such was the concept of the post-revolutionary 
growth of socialism. 

But history is known to be capable of outwitting 
even profound thinkers. Unexpected tendencies can 
make headway contrary to logic and the political 
mainstream, with grim consequences. The attempts 
at radical “demolition” of property ended in failure. 
Not only did it resist abolition, but assumed bizarre 
new forms. A peculiar type of possession came into 

eing—the possession of an administrative post or a 
















2 51 


state administrative function. Paradoxial as it might 
seem, as early as 1921, the country that had just 
emerged from an anti-bureaucratic revolution, was 
being run by four million newborn bureaucrats. 

The inertia of what took place in the 1930s and the 
inertia of the contemporary economic system led to 
the emergence of a third model of socialism (the 
previous two being the “War Communism” and the 
“system of cooperators’’), which, as we see it, can be 
defined as the state-bureaucratic model. The system of 
administrative command, which had begun to take 
shape in the process of industrialization and which 
received a fresh impetus during collectivization, had 
told on the whole socio-political life of the country. 
Once established in the economy, it restricted the 
development of the democratic potential of socialism, 
holding back the progress of socialist democracy. 

In the years of Stalin’s personality cult (1930s- 
1950s) much was being said about humanism. The 
emphasis was, however, being laid on class stratifi- 
cation. All values were supposed to be viewed from 
the angle of class interests. Simultaneously, a ma- 
licious campaign was launched against so-called ‘“ab- 
stract humanism’’. It was being treated as humanism 
“at large’, as an abstract form of love for mankind. 
It brought about a notion that the individual could 
be sacrificed for the sake of averagely-impersonal 
goals. The individual was regarded as a ‘“‘cog” in the 
state machinery, the latter pursuing some sort of lofty 
ideals. 

Today, we know the reverse side of such “human- 
ism’’. An atmosphere of intolerance, hostility and 
suspicion was created in the country. All this had a 
dire effect on the country’s socio-political develop- 
ment and produced grim consequences. But even 
under those conditions, the ideals of true humanism, 
human courage and dignity were not lost. 


52 





A SS a  D 


What was it like, living in the overbureaucratized 
“system of coordinates’? How could a few valiant 
individuals resist the omnipotency of the bureauc- 
ratic monster? I can’t help saying a few words about 
the life of Academician Nikolai Ivanovich Vavilov, 
an outstanding Soviet geneticist, whose centenary 
was marked in 1987. He had great strength of will 
and courage. He walked untravelled, often barely 
penetrable paths on all five continents. He survived 
an encounter with bandits in Ethiopia and a danger- 
ous rock-slide in the Caucasus. He spent a night close 
to a lion’s den in the Sahara desert. He was the first 
European to penetrate a high-altitude mountain area 
in Afghanistan, although he had neither experienced 
guides, nor maps. 

He was a talented researcher, passionately devoted 
to his cause. He strived ardently to unveil the enigma 
of life, in order to bestow it on mankind. He tackled 
tasks which we refer to as “global” today. Vavilov 
was advancing genetics—a science that was com- 
pletely new in those days. Upholding Darwin’s 
theory of evolution, he proved that genetic mutability 
could be formulated into a definite system. Vavilov’s 
law is valid for the entire living world, and is being 
confirmed by detailed modern experiments. 

What has been said about Vavilov so far, charac- 
terizes him as a scientist. What can be said of him as 
a personality, as a fighter for humanism? Those who 
remember him from the town of Saratov (in the 
Volga Region) in the semi-starvation of the post- 
revolutionary years, describe the way he cared for his 
famished students, laid up with typhoid fever. 

Vavilov was already serving a prison term as an 
“enemy of the people” by the time of the German 
blockade of Leningrad in 1941-1942, but his disciples 
who remained in the famine-stricken city never 
touched the huge seed reserves accumulated at his in- 


53 


stitute. It was a collection of cultured plants seeds from 
all over the world, and they knew that Vavilov had 
risked his life to obtain some of these. And so, people 
died of famine next door to a comparative feast. 

In the late 1920s—early 1930s, Vavilov’s attention 
was attracted by a young agronomist Trofim 
Lysenko. Vavilov helped him advance in his career. 
However, the subsequent developments turned out to 
be tragic for Vavilov. Stalin began to show Lysenko 
undeserved attention. The existing bureaucratic 
system made him the country’s leading biologist and 
put him at the head of the All-Union Agricultural 
Academy. Having gained the monopoly in agricul- 
tural science, Lysenko, although lacking the neces- 
sary scientific background, launched a fierce attack 
against genetics. This started off a period of struggle 
between him and Vavilov. 

It was not a clash of personalities, or a contest 
between rivals, but a battle between a humanistic and 
an anti-humanistic outlook, a collision of two irre- 
concilable viewpoints. Vavilov was being urged to 
admit his “errors”, and agree to a compromise in 
exchange for his life and a relatively stable career. 
But he firmly dismissed the possibility and openly 
rose against Lysenko, although aware of the personal 
dangers involved. He was prepared to give his life for 
his convictions. 

Once the non-professionalism, and consequently, 
the adventurism of Lysenko had won the upper hand, 
it became a tragedy not only for Vavilov and for 
genetics, but for Soviet science as a whole. It also 
became a national disaster. Vavilov died in confine- 
ment. He died of malnutrition, but he never sur- 
rendered... He continued working on a monograph, 
and delivered lectures to his inmates. When the death 
sentence was read out to him, he maintained his 
human dignity and stood by his convictions. 


54 








In the period of Stalin’s personality cult there 
developed an approach to people as to merely cogs 
and wheels in the impersonal state machinery. The 
bureaucratic methods of administration in those 
years gravitated towards the simplistic model of 
barrack-like communism, and imposing it ousted 
everything and everyone that was dynamic and un- 
orthodox. Renouncing the complexity and diversity 
of cultural life and human initiative, it proposed 
primitive simplicity instead. 

Bureaucracy is intrinsically anti-humane. But while 
ousting everything original and personal from cul- 
ture, it always refers to supreme common interests, 
claiming to be acting in the interests of the people. 
Yet no common interests are conceivable if they are 
not related to the specific interests of people, or to 
personalities. 

As in Lenin’s time, we talk of bureaucracy today 
unafraid to recognize the evil. On the contrary, 
exposing and unmasking it in public means releasing 
the people’s energy which we need to combat this 
social evil. We are returning to Leninist principles in 
the running of society and the state. And, con- 
sequently, in the life of man, since he does not accept 
a situation where his opinion and views are ignored, 
and where he is seen simply as part of the workforce 
rather than as a citizen, the master of his society and 
his country. The nation is awakening from lethargy 
to become actively involved in the life of society. We 
are perfectly aware that without paying heed to a 
great range of personal, collective and social inter- 
ests, without drawing people into creative activities, it 
will be impossible to solve a single task. Socialism is 
the living creativity of the masses. Given his creative 
diversity, man is the chief maker of history. Hence 
the ultimate goals of perestroika which is underway 
in the Soviet Union: to renovate all aspects of life, to 


55 








render to socialism the most up-to-date forms of 
social organization, to let the humanistic character of 
socialism reveal itself to the fullest extent within all 
its decisive aspects--economic, socio-political and 
moral. The entire intellectual and cultural potential 
of society is being mustered to help in moulding a 
socially-active personality, which is spiritually rich, 
fair and conscientious. 

The chief task today is to elevate man spiritually, 
respecting his inner self and fortifying his moral 
principles. This task is only feasible under socialist 
pluralism. A truly socialist society bases itself on a 
diversity of forms, trends and cultural traditions. 
Nowadays, when more and more nations, at different 
stages of development, are being drawn into the orbit 
of socialism, the multiformity of society’s life is 
increasing. Socialism, therefore, presupposes the 
broadest possible range of human alternatives. 


IDEALS AND VALUES 


An experiment was once staged in France. Three 
specially-prepared programmes were shown simul- 
taneously on three national television channels. One 
was a video-recording of a gripping sports match. 
Another was a feature film, intended for a cultural 
audience. The third channel offered a popular-science 
programme about the Universe. 

Planning the simultaneous televizing of the three 
programmes at a time when nearly every French 
family gathers in front of a TV screen, the sociol- 
ogists and psychologists wanted to know which pro- 
gramme would attract the greatest number of 
viewers. Quite naturally, attempts were made at pre- 
dicting the results of the experiment. In fact, there 
were two alternatives: they would either show a 


56 





a 


desire for a profound effect, resulting from a deep 
artistic impression, or for a psychological switchover 
from the humdrum of everyday life to a superficial, 
nervous excitement. The experiment sponsors wanted 
to prove that the common spectator needed some 
relaxation producing the so-called restorative effect, 
allegedly as the inevitable tribute to modern indus- 
trial civilization. 

We shall not argue about the scientific strictness of 
the experiment. The results of the poll, however, 
shattered both versions suggested by the experimen- 
ters: the spectators gave preference to the popular- 
science programme. 

But why? Can it be that in the age of the infor- 
mation avalanche some people still look for popular 
knowledge? Doesn’t serious art provide a compre- 
hensive picture of existence? Can it be that man of 
today is prepared to give up watching an exciting 
sports game or a highly artistic performance merely 
to be told about what goes on in the depths of the 
| Universe? 

) Man wants to know the distinctions which set him 
apart from the non-human world. He wants to know 
the moral essence of history. He wants to know if 
knowledge is boundless. Whether man is alone in the 
Universe. Whether the world is governed by Reason. 
Whether happiness can be the purpose of social 

) progress... 

People want to grasp what is going on in the world; 
they try to paste together the fragments of their social 
and personal experience. They seek answers to the 
ultimate questions of existence because human life 
needs justification. Where consciousness vanishes 

} and human values deteriorate, vegetable life comes in 
their stead. The drive for an integral, unfragmented 
vision of the world is probably an intrinsic and hard- 
to-satisfy human requirement. 


57 





a 


But have we gone too far in this unjustified ideali- 
zation of man? Does he really lament over the ab- 
sence of world outlook? Does his ever-toiling soul 
really crave for the utmost knowledge of existence? 
And why should it? Modern civilization has provided 
man with everyday amenities, and has surrounded 
him with a great variety of useful things. Drop in 
front of a TV and watch an athletic contest. Switch 
to another channel if you don’t like it. Bach had to 
walk some ten miles to listen to an organ concerto. 
You don’t have to... 

Can it really be that human life is empty without 
satisfaction of moral requirements? In fact, what 
worries a lot of people is not the moral requirements, 
but the bodily desires. I can recall the emphatic shout 
of a formerly notorious hippy: “What the hell do I 
care about your spiritual intricacies, when I’ve got a 
problem with my orgasm?” Can it be that to resolve 
his purely personal problems, man would mobilize 
the boundless spiritual arsenal? Generally speaking, 
does anybody care about abstract metaphysics in the 
age of pragmatic calculations, and narrow engineer- © 
ing solutions? 

It was only a short time ago that we, in our society, 
condemned the ‘‘everyday consciousness”, counter- 
posing it with “scientific views”. But is common 
sense, the reason which governs the individual, really 
so bad? It was common sense that helped many 
agriculturists handle fertile lands with due care, and 
it also governed those who protested against the 
hasty plans for the “conquest of nature’. Obvious 
illusions will always be shattered by the intrinsic 
realism of human intellect. In this sense, Andersen’s 
fairy tale about the naked emperor, which so glar- 
ingly allegorized the controversy between adminis- 
trative stupidity and naive wisdom, can very well be 
retold in the language of modern sociology. 


58 











Indeed, the stability of routine notions often serves 
as a peculiar realistic reaction against the bizarre 
world of pseudo-scientific and ideological assump- 
tions, which reconcile refined fictions, crude al- 
legories and doctrine. It is hardly worth complaining 
that the social consciousness is capable of withstand- 
ing these assumptions, defending itself with “slow- 
wittedness”’. 

Today, we don’t have to resort to methods of 
“hidden passivity”. On the contrary, various sections 
of the population voice their opinion openly in the 
press and succeed in promoting effective decision- 
making. For example, a team of Soviet writers, with 
active support from the general public, raised the 
issue of the danger of pollution in Lake Baikal, the 
ecological dangers in the Baltic Region and of eco- 
logical problems in general. The project to reverse the 
country’s northern rivers was widely debated in the 
press. Scientists proved that despite a certain eco- 
nomic benefit, the realization of the project would 
bring about unpredictable and disastrous ecological 
consequences. As a result, the project was rejected by 
the government. 

Does this mean that democracy has now been fully 
instituted? Can it be claimed that the vigorous socio- 
political campaign has reached everyone? It would be 
premature to assume this. The elimination of social 
indifference is still a problem here. Socialist human- 
ism is non-abstract: it cannot be directed towards 
caring for people at large, leaving children, old 
people or alcoholics, for example, out in the cold. 
Thus a Soviet Children’s Fund has been established 
on the initiative of writer Albert Likhanov. Various 
charity committees and teetotallers’ societies are 
Sprouting up all over the country. We don’t want 
anyone to feel an outcast. 

Until recently, we never admitted that there were 


59 





openly anti-social groups in our society. Today, we 
are writing with increasing frequency about people 
with neurotic tendencies, such as alcoholics and drug- 
addicts. Journalists have adopted a particular ab- 
breviation FIP, which stands for formerly intelligent 
person. It is used to describe persons who have 
turned into lumpen-proletarians. As a rule, these are 
degraded intellectuals, who have dropped out of their 
profession and have become the social dregs. 

The problem of the younger generation has 
become the subject of heated debates. Do youth sub- 
cultures exist in our country? Don’t we have quite a 
few young people lost in social oblivion,-and without 
a sense of purpose? Should anything be done about 
the youngsters’ craze for Western vogue? Different 
opinions can be heard, sometimes highly extremist, 
causing a great deal of controversy. The processes 
which are brewing up among the younger generation 
attract unprecedented interest of sociologists, psy- 
chologists and philosophers, 

...For many centuries in European history there 
were few, if any, differences between the younger and 
the older generations. They held the same views and 
dressed in the same fashion. In Shakespeare’s day, 
for instance, children’s clothes were tailored from the 
adult designs, the only difference being the size. A 
young boy tried to imitate his father’s ways and 
habits, and a young girl, her mother’s. 

The situation, however, has changed drastically 
over the past two centuries. The life expectancy of the 
generation has been raised, and life generally seems 
to be moving faster; children have found themselves 
in different circumstances from those of their parents’ 
youth. Hence the differences in habits, values and 
ideals. As early as the 19th century, for example, 
young romanticists renounced the ideals of the en- 
terprising bourgeoisie. 


60 


ee 








Probably at that time youth subcultures first came 
into being, although the terms “sub-culture” and 
“counter-culture’” were coined much later, some 20 
or 25 years ago. 

As is known, the 1960s were a period of youth 
movements and riots that swept the world from West 
Berlin to Bangkok, and it was then that the young 
students and young intellectuals who led the riots 
first came up with the slogan of an “alternative way 
of life’ for the younger generation. The meaning of 
this was to break away from parents and adults 
generally, and to demolish social institutions which 
shackled moral, intellectual and sexual freedom. 

During the years of stagnation in the Soviet Union 
(1970s-early 1980s), the official ideology and social 
sciences were fuelling an artificial creed that the 
whole of Soviet society was thinking in unison and 
that the models of conduct we had inherited from 
previous generations were being fully accepted by the 
young people. This dogma has done us a great deal 
of harm, because in taking care not to abuse it, we 
for a long time pretended to see our youth in a rosy 
light. 

Things were more or less the same during the 1940s 
and 1950s, when groups of ‘gilded youth” first came 
into existence—the smart youngsters with money to 
spend, who led bohemian lives. The tendency ex- 
tended itself to the 1960s, when the youth culture 
came to oppose scientific officialdom in its own 
specific way. At that time (in the 1960s), the polemics 
between “physicists” and “lyricists” were brought 
into the headlines—set off by a letter to writer Ilya 
Ehrenburg from a young woman who was worried 
about the stone-heartedness of her husband, a physi- 
cist, and his ironic attitude to everything that did not 
yield to concrete analytical calculation. On second 
thoughts, the conflict was not between “physicists” 


61 





and “lyricists”, but between two diametrically op- | 
posed systems of values, two youth subcultures. 

But let us continue. The 1970s, which inaugurated 

an era of grandiose construction projects, at the same 
time promoted an intricate emotional superstructure. 
It was the 1970s that brought the peak of popularity 
to guitar ballad singers Bulat Okudzhava, Vladimir 
Vysotsky and Yuri Vizbor, whose songs dealt with 
the burning issues of the day as seen by the young 
people at that time: their nostalgia for nature, which 
was being subjected to the devastating “‘industriali- 
zation onslaught’’, their loneliness and shabby living 
conditions (living in tent communes soon ceases to be 
a romantic adventure...). 

It was probably the open disregard for the in- 
tricacies of young people’s awareness, for their be- 
haviour, psychology and world outlook, that ex- 
plained the estrangement between the younger and 
the older generations. 

A new generation cannot be raised solely in the 
mould of the previous one. And just as the dif- 
ferences in values and outlook are natura! and un- 
avoidable between different generations, they are 
natural and unavoidable within a single generation. 
Complicated processes are taking place in the 
youngsters’ midst today. Numerous unofficial groups 
are sprouting up here and there. What kind of public 
reaction do they arouse? By no means an unequivocal 
one. For example, there are groups for environmental 
protection and for monument preservation, amateur 
club associations, and a youth initiative foundation, — 
which only help in encouraging the social activity of 
young people. 

There are, however, groups which present quite a 
few problems. Take, for instance, the Heavy Metal 
fans, the “rockers”, the “hippies”, the rock group 
and football fans, the “‘god-seekers”. It must be 


62 








noted that all these movements were cultivated in the 
West prior to taking root in the Soviet Union. 
Various non-traditional religious groups have emer- 
ged today in this country, too. There is an immense 
variety of religious beliefs and practices ranging from 
the ancient Oriental religions to devil worship, mysti- 
cism and miracle healing. All sorts of worshippers, 
such as devotees of Jesus Christ ‘Superstar’, adorers 
of the Hindu warrior-god Krishna and members of 
the Yoga brotherhood, are forming their groups and 
sects in various parts of the country. These worship- 
pers denounce scientific knowledge, claiming to 
possess exceptional wisdom and spirituality. 

We adults ourselves trigger the youngsters’ protest 
merely by imposing upon the younger generation our 
own standards of behaviour and thinking, and by 
forbidding everything which we see as a “‘deviation” 
from ‘the norm’’—be it shaved side-burns, or 
youngsters’ gatherings. In many instances, the unoffi- 
cial groups become something like a testing ground 
for young people, being the only place where they can 
display initiative and enterprise (which doesn’t seem 
to be a bad thing, after all). I believe that if the 
younger generation is not given the chance to have a 
world of its own, this may lead to the elimination of 
the polyphony of our cultural life styles, with all the 
foreseeable and highly undesirable consequences for 
our society. 

We had, until recently, been sticking a label of 
“political indifference” on those who did not show an 
interest in public affairs or took no part in the official 
ideological dogmas and joined unofficial as- 
sociations. Today, we are well aware that the prob- 
lem is far more complicated. “Sluggishness”’, “inert- 
ness’’, “indifference’’ of the routine consciousness in 
fact reflected the desire of specific social groups to 
preserve and express their own interests and con- 


63 





cerns. Characteristically, these groups have been dis- 
playing a vested interest in social affairs under the 
conditions of perestroika. 

Does all this imply that the need for world outlook 
is a rare quality, a unique phenomenon? Or, that it 
comes upon man as a thunderbolt at the moment of 
his spiritual weakness, of his search for new ideals or 
new alternatives? 

“World outlook” means a “world view’. But what 
kind of view in essence? What are its specific charac- 
teristics? To what degree does it govern human 
behaviour? 

World view has been accompanying individuals for 
centuries and even millennia. Suddenly the question 
has been raised in socio-philosophical writings: 
Hasn’t it become a relic? I recall a meeting with 
Daniel Bell, an American sociologist, a founder of a 
number of theories which have become quite popular 
in the West. He rose in the 1960s as the author and 
commentator of the concept of “deideologization’’, 
i.e. of the collapse of the ideological systems. 

“Mr. Bell,” I asked him, “‘are you really suggesting 
that metaphysical searching be replaced with specific 
empirical knowledge?” 

“That’s right. For many centuries people have 
been anxious to get answers to basic questions: What 
does man live for? And what is the meaning of 
human existence? Where would you propose to find 
the answers?” 

“Well, I think they could be the result of philosoph- 
ical thinking, theological revelations, moral 
searching...” 

“By saying this you seem to recognize the specula- 
tive nature of those questions. The answers have been 
much the same. Quite naturally, mythology, religion 
and ideology contained postulates as to what kind of 
life to lead and what purpose in life to pursue. The 


64 


ee 





question is, nonetheless, how scientific and verified 
those postulates were. They all were a product of 
pure speculation, anyway.” 

“But is modern science capable of explaining the 
meaning of human life?” 

“No, it isn’t. But it is moving in that direction 
along an analytical, I’d say a scientifically-verified 
road. This is the essence of my concept. Ideologies 
fade out to give room to expert knowledge.” 

Yet can historic goals in principle be set outside a 
world view? 

Recent developments in the capitalist world have 
| shown us an imposing, although not fully realized 
| experiment. About three decades ago, the leading 
thinkers in the West announced the collapse of a 
whole era in mankind’s development. They pro- 
claimed the downfall of every kind of world view and 
heralded the arrival of a new era, which would 
allegedly liberate man from the dictates of scientifi- 
cally unverifiable social ideas. The masses, according 
to those theoreticians, were infected with consumer’s 
psychology. They gravitated towards prosperity and 
personal welfare. Modern technology gave them every- 
thing they required. 

Hence the conclusion: live a simpler life, without 
cudgelling your brains. Life is short and not worth 
wasting on meaningless pursuits. And you can do 
without moral sermons. They only complicate life. As 
regards spirituality and the search for ideals and an 
integral world view, all this was labelled by the 
technocrats as “intellectual fantasies” and ‘“‘romantic 
drivel”, which only interfered with the mindless and 
pleasant utilization of consumer goods. They re- 
garded world view to be some intellectual whim, a 
} Spiritual exuberance, asserting that the interest to 
abstract problems was pure atavism, a blind dictate 
of the self-destructive belief in ideas. 


————$$ 


5$ 1071 65 





This line of thinking gave rise to relevant social 
practice. A time for doing away with all kinds of 
“highbrow” stuff began. The era of technocratic 
expertise took over. It was announced, in particular, 
that there was not a single human life that could not 
be “adjusted”, “correlated” or “rectified”. The need 
was not for thinkers, but for experts, not for ideas, 
but for prescriptions. 

However, the decades that followed brought in a 
striking revelation. It turned out that the attempt at 
removing ideological approach from public affairs 
was not only unrealistic, but also fraught with un- 
predictable consequences. It created a situation 
whereby the individual's behaviour became socially- 
unmotivated, often affected, excessively emotional 
and even destructive. Society started to disintegrate. 
The absence of a common ideology would give rise to 
numerous problems, which were in fact insolvable, 
for there was nothing with which to compensate or to 
replace a clear-eyed vision of the world. 

There is no doubt that changes in life based on 
informatics, will bring to the fore “‘deideologization”’ 
issues a number of times. The technological and 
informational invasion breeds the illusion that any 
human problem can be solved by way of engineering 
expertise. No more need to study the public mood — 
a computer will print out the answer. 

There are still many people today who, deliberately 
or unconsciously, ““excommunicate” the world view 
as a comprehensive vision of the world and indulge in 
departmental expertise. Yet, this kind of “shop” 
consciousness uses its own world-outlook system of 
argumentation. The “actions” which it provokes are 
after all dictated by a specific world view. This in 


many ways distinctive world view has self-evident | 


inborn defects. It appears flat-footed and shallow 
Primitive reasoning and absence of comprehensive 


66 


rr 















approaches reveal certain shortcomings in human 
mentality. Current ecological problem serves as an 
example. 

A mature world view expresses not only knowledge, 
but also a certain personal system of values, 
demonstrated in the individual’s attitude to the fun- 
damental aspects of his natural and social existence 
and to the meaning of human life. The specificity of 
such a world outlook is that it gives guidance to the 
life of the individual. 

World outlook is universal precisely because it 
bases itself on the totality of mankind’s moral ex- 
perience and reflects the essence of human existence. 
The desire to “blot out” the metaphysics of spirit also 
has a world-outlook character, paradoxial as it may 
seem. Breadth of thought results neither from specu- 
lative knowledge, nor from a diversity of inform- 
ation, nor from a sweeping expertise, but from the 
individual’s stand in life. 

Forming a world view and disseminating know- 
ledge are different things. Human subjectivity is by 
far more fertile. It is not knowledge alone that gives 
man social guidance—for he lives in a world of 
arduous and conflicting goals, strivings and aspir- 
ations. And still, quite often we give astonishingly 
crude explanations for the motives underlying human 
behaviour. Meanwhile, the ancient Greeks already 
knew that man was torn apart by the demons of 
passion, and that he was often the slave of impulse, 
Caprice or chance. 

The three mest important elements in man’s spiri- 
tual life were distinguished by ancient thinkers: 
reason, emotions and will. In the centuries that 
followed, fiction writers pointed to the disharmony 
between these three elements. But in some unwitting 
way, we have since lost possession of these intel- 
lectual and spiritual acquisitions. We have developed 


st 67 





rc 


a notion, that should an individual display insen- 
sibility, spontaneity or contradictoriness, he does so 
for the sole reason of lacking the necessary 
information. 

Some philosophers absolutize the reason inherent 
in man, whereas others altogether dismiss the pos- 
sibility of the rational, i.e. motivated and therefore 
autonomous, behaviour of the individual. But can 
one speak of, say, conscious choice, at a time when 
the ideology based on psycho-analysis is trying to 
prove that human behaviour is “programmed’’ by 
forgotten childhood memories and by repressed im- 
pulses and desires? 

From this point of view, even the most secret and 
purely spontaneous human action can be predicted | 
and explained in advance, just as its inevitability can 
be proved. This being the case, what is left of human 
subjectivity? There are scores of thinkers today who 
assert that man’s inner world has in many ways been 
the product of brainwashing, because it has become 
the object of total manipulation on the part of official 
ideology. 

It is only natural that these and similar concepts 
should see the embodiment of theoretical outlook in 
a state machinery designed to select and tame people. 
History shows, however, that totalitarian systems are 
short-lived: the inner creative potential of an indoc- | 
trinated conformist mind is zero. 


VALUES AND IDEALS 


Our era offers numerous alternatives not only to 
the individual, but also to mankind as a whole. 
Which way is the world developing? Have we chosen 
the correct road? Goals may vary depending on what 
we understand by “progress”. 


68 











Consider a simple and illustrative situation. A 
character in an Arabian tale is to name three magic 
wishes. No more than three—and they will be fulfil- 
led... Let us imagine ourselves in the shoes of this 
Oriental character. Three wishes and the world will 
turn into paradise. But how are we to guess? What 
must we choose? 

Paradoxically enough, modern man is not pre- 
pared to deal with a situation as simple as this. Can it 
be that having been given a chance to get “anything”, 
man is unable to choose the most important? 

Here is a modern tale. The founder of cybernetics 
Norbert Wiener liked to tell a tale about a monkey’s 
paw. It is about a British sergeant, who, on his return 
from India, met his friend, an old English worker. 
The sergeant showed him a talisman—a shrunken, 
mummified monkey’s paw. The legend behind it was 
that some Indian wizard, in his desire to prove the 
folly of tempting fate, endowed the paw with the 
magic power to fulfill any three wishes of its next 
three owners. 

The sergeant said he did not know what the first 
two wishes of the first owner had been, but his last 
wish was to die instantly. Himself being the second 
owner, he refused to disclose his personal experience, 
except to say that it was horrible. He said that he was 
going to burn the monkey’s paw. But the old worker 
snatched it from him. He was eager to test its magic 
power, especially as his financial position had 
become difficult since his retirement. 

His first wish was for 200 pounds. The instant he 
pronounced it, there was a knock at the door and in 
Came a messenger from the firm where the old man’s 
son worked. He told the father that his son had just 
been killed in an accident. The company was not 
liable for the accident, he said, but all the same it was 
offering 200 pounds as compensation. 


69 











cr 


The grief-stricken father made his second wish: let 
his son be home with him again. Immediately, there 
was a knock at the door and in came... his son’s 
ghost. Frozen with horror, the father whispered his 
third wish: let the ghost vanish... 


Is man aware of what he wants? Is he at all capable 
of realizing the meaning of his life and identifying his 
guiding star? 

Suppose that genetic engineering has already made 
it possible to deliberately alter the biological nature 
of man. What kind of genes shall we cultivate? And 
what kind of genes shall we reject? Immediately, there 
emerges the problem of alternative human behaviour. 


The Tree of Purposes. Some people see the source 
of well-being and the meaning of life in hedonistic 
orientations; they think that only the “pleasure cen- 
tres” should be cultivated and enhanced in human 
nature. These ideas give rise to a whimsical fantasy, 
whereby a race of hypersexual humans could settle 
somewhere by the sea and devote themselves untir- 
ingly to the pleasures of natural existence. 


Others think that man’s essence lies in his con- 
sciousness, his intellect. In their view, all the poten- 
tialities of man’s biological nature should be made to 
serve the cognition, the human faculty for analytical 
thinking. This is how various projects for the spiri- 
tual evolution of the “thinking reed” are brought 
into existence, aimed at polishing the human 
mentality. 


The writings of my Western colleagues reveal one 
more version, which provides guidance in the under- 
standing of the “specifically human” values. 
According to these scholars, it is neither the body, 
nor the intellect that are the source of man’s spiritual 
evolution. They place special hopes on the human 
psyche. From this point of view, the huge ocean of 


70 















consciousness can be transformed, if it becomes 
possible to reach the “‘restricted areas” of the psyche 
with the help of special medical drugs which stimu- 
late intuition and imagination; once this is achieved, 
it will be neither the corporeal, nor the intellectual 
powers of man, but his psychic potential that will 
determine the future of humanity. 

Without doubt, there are vast opportunities today 
for influencing man’s biological and spiritual nature. 
But it turns out in the meantime that neither the very 
essence of man, nor his mission in the world, have 
been matched with an adequately profound world 
outlook. What are man’s needs? What is the meaning 
of his existence? 

What are we? Where do we come from? Where are 
we going? Several varying propositions can be identi- 
fied in today’s Western literature (including the 
socio-philosophical Marxist writings). Version one: 
The meaning of human life is generally a far-fetched 
category, for nature knows no purpose; it has created 
man along with other living creatures by pure chance. 
This, however, does not give us proof. Even if an 
individual’s life is unpredictable and devoid of pre- 
determinations. In any event, a conscious renunci- 
ation of a regimented life plan is also a purpose of 
sorts. Nature’s purposelessness in no way means that 
a sense of purpose should be denied to man. The 
social form of human life must, as I see it, be 
matched with a conscious development of human 
values, with a realization of ideals. Consequently, the 
absence of purpose in nature cannot be regarded as 
an argument against the search for such a purpose 
within the world’s established social order. 

Other thinkers maintain that human existence does, 
without doubt, have a meaning, but it is submerged and 
therefore difficult to identify. Today’s scientists do not 
yet have the wisdom to do this. This version is in the 


71 








same order of reasoning as, say, a statement that 
although at present we don’t know the nature of 
elementary particles, or that of fields, or other prim- 
ary substances, we are confident that we will discover 
it. The same applies to the meaning of human life, the 
destiny of human existence. From this point of view, 
the purpose of human civilization is to perfect science 
and intellect. Thinking matter attempts to solve the 
secrets of existence in its entirety. By expanding his 
knowledge of the Universe, man is coming nearer to 
understanding the direction of evolution. I find this 
version optimistic. I am also convinced that it is not 
reason alone that unveils the meaning of life, history 
and progress. Human will, imagination and emo- 
tions are the sum total that serves to express human 
subjectivity and helps man in unravelling the secret of 
the Tree of Purposes. 

There is one more version: the meaning of human 
life is in serving society and the progress of mankind 
(supposing it is on an upward trend). Devotion to the 
ideals of progress helps to unfold human potential, 
and minimizes human suffering, both in the life of 
today and for generations to come. In my view, 
however, this version should be accompanied by a 
clear-cut definition of what is implied by the word 
“progress”. Numerous examples can be cited from 
history, when anti-humane actions were carried out 
in the name of progress, and real human interests 
were simply ignored. 

The meaning of life is in moral self-perfection. This 
is version four. Modern social practice, however, is 
full of instances of mass immorality, in fact, of total 
absence of ethical norms. Social usefulness is often 
the criterion of morality. But it was expounded by 
Hegel, and later by Engels, that with the emergence 
of class-divided society, the worst human qualities, 
such as greed, lust for power and cruelty, had served 


72 


progress in a rather effective way. Evil and immo- 
rality had sometimes been useful. A person who 
“abides by the laws of conscience” often brings 
disappointment not only to himself, but to the people 
around him. 

The aforementioned versions are, without doubt, 
only hypothetical, for they do not fully cover the 
notion of the ‘Tree of Mankind’s Purposes”. I am 
citing them here only to support the proposition that 
people have gone sufficiently far in controlling the 
forces of nature, in manipulating the things they 
create, unravelling the mysteries of the Universe and 
solving the problems of sophisticated technologies. 
But they have been giving too little thought to the 
common, global goals, which integrate mankind into 
a single whole. 

Culture has evolved quite a few systems of human 
values that provide the criteria by which the goodness 
or badness of an action is to be judged. The supreme 
values are, without doubt, the ideals of truth, kind- 
ness and beauty. These absolutes unite the human 
race in the striving for perfection and everlasting 
spiritual kinship. The universal ethical values un- 
dergo trials in the course of historical development. 

To be more accurate, a human value is something 
that holds significance for an individual. For ex- 
ample, everyone is aware of being mortal. 
Psychologically, however, man often refuses to 
accept this truth and turns to things he believes to be 
sacred in order to fill his existence with serenity and 
meaning. Immortality, however, is not solely a value: 
Frederick Engels, for instance, reiterated that at a 
certain stage of development, the idea of immortality 
appeared as a preordained fate. Often enough, as 
among the Greeks, it was accepted not at all as a 
consolation, but as a fate, and often enough, as a 
Positive misfortune. 


73 








True, people show different attitudes to life and its 
intrinsic values, to the transformation of life as the 
meaning of man’s existence, to the joys of living and 
to moral norms. Remarkably, an individual some- 
times develops an illusion that all human values and 
orientations are eternal and history-unrelated, that is, 
that they are always the same. 

Without doubt, people have at all times hankered 
after truth and kindness, the refinement of their 
personal existence. Values, however, do not remain 
unchanged over the span of human history. Let us 
take a mental note of that. What kind of changes 
have these values undergone? What is believed to be 
an indisputable value nowadays? Condemned to 
death, Socrates drank a poisoned potion. It was a 
manifestation of human dignity. Historically about 
the same time, a subject of an Oriental empire did not 
at all believe personal pride and freedom to be 
morally beneficial. On the contrary, guiding himself 
by different cultural standards, he felt happy to 
dissolve his own personality in the grandeur of the 
monarch, kissing the dusty soil on which his emperor 
had set foot. 

The problem of moral values occupies a prominent 
place in modern Western ethics. Philosophers, sociol- 
ogists and aestheticists are trying to comprehend the 
very notion of a human value, to reveal the process 
whereby previous moral orientations are discarded, 
and show the impact that may be had by this process 
upon social consciousness and culture. In so doing, 
some of them believe that the Marxist interpretation 
of history rejects human values as a subjective ca- 
tegory incompatible with the principles of pure 
science. 

I recollect an encounter with Emmanuel Levinas, a 
French philosopher. He speaks Russian quite fluently 
and has studied Marxism rather diligently. Levinas 


74 








has the conviction that Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels were absolutely indifferent to moral values. 

“Did Marx and Engels renounce ideals?” I asked 
my opponent. 

“No. But that’s not the point I’m making. They 
did recognize ideals, of course, but they constantly 
emphasized the priority of scientific knowledge.” 

“Do you believe then that ideals are incompatible 
with scientific knowledge?’ 

“But they identified any moralizing as ‘false 
consciousness”!”’ 

“Pardon me, but it was something very different 
that Marx and Engels referred to as ‘false conscious- 
ness’. They implied a specific type of mentality, 
characterized by fantasizing and a pseudo-scientific 
bent. But they never renounced the part played by 
human value in social dynamics.” 

Indeed, Marxist philosophy combines the objective 
study of historical laws with the recognition of the 
interests, demands and moral orientations, which 
motivate human behaviour. Surveying the numerous 
orientations that have become established in the 
domain of culture, such as hedonistic, ascetic and 
pragmatic, Marxism has always strived to expose 
their social roots. As stated above, the theological, 
hedonistic and stoical creeds do not belong entirely 
to the past; they spring up today too—within the 
context of discussions about the Tree of Purposes. 

..An Alitalia jumbo jet has just landed at 
Sardinia’s airport. We get off the plane and walk 
down the steps. It is scorching hot. We are a team of 
Soviet philosophers, due to meet our colleagues in 
Rome in an hour. 

We see people running from all directions towards 
the airport building. They seem to be very excited 
and they keep their eyes glued on the plane we have 
Just disembarked. The airport clerks leave their seats 


75 


one after the other. Everyone seems to be in a rush. 
The offices become lifeless. People’s postures show 
rapt attention, amazement and anticipation. 

What’s going on? Having got hold of an airport 
clerk, we try to make him understand that there are 
people waiting for us in Rome. Time’s running short 
and we may be late. Why aren’t we leaving?.. At this 
moment a man emerges from our plane. Slowly, he 
comes down the boarding ramp. He is wearing jeans 
and a stately black beard, and has a guitar slung over 
his shoulder. The crowd goes crazy. They lift him off 
his feet and carry him along. All flights have been 
cancelled. The place is overflowing with jubilance: 
the famous rock-star, the idol of the neo-Christian 
cults is in Sardinia! Here and now! It takes only a few 
minutes, but it is enough to mess up the place and to 
make everyone dizzy with excitement. The airport 
clerks drop their ticket punches. Aircraft sit stranded 
on the runways... 

We were soon away, and Sardinia was already a 
mere speck on the horizon. For some reason I re- 
membered Oleg Blokhin, a Soviet football star of 
European rating, who couldn’t score his 200th goal 
no matter how. As if bewitched, the ball would hit 
the goalpost. The player was desperate, and his team 
became highly-strung. He fired a succession of 
penalty-kicks, but alas!... It seemed that the ball 
would never be netted. But at last, the moment of 
triumph came. The jubilation of the coach and the 
fans was beyond description. 

Here is another ambition. While visiting the 
French city of Bordeaux, I was shown Henry 
Weston, a 24-year-old Englishman, who wanted to 
travel the world on foot. 

...My friend Andrei Bakanin, a surgeon, was killed 
in Afghanistan. No sooner had he completed a com- 
plicated operation and peeled off his rubber gloves, 


76 








than there came a burst of machine-gun fire. Andrei 
spread himself over his young patient in an attempt 
to protect the human life, which he had just saved 
with the help of a scalpel. 

Tenghiz Abuladze, a Georgian movie-maker de- 
cided to shoot a film about a tyrant and his atrocities. 
In the period to which we now refer as the years of 
stagnation, this was a reckless venture. But Abuladze 
went on shooting it, believing that the time would 
come when his picture would find a way to the 
public. It was made in a single copy, on a video- 
cassette. Today, the film Repentance has been seen in 
this country and abroad by millions of people. It has 
produced a strong impression on the public, not only 
as an act of the director’s personal courage, but also 
as an artistic creation, throwing light on our recent 
history. 

Last summer I visited the hero-city of Sevastopol. 
While on a sight-seeing tour, the guide took us to the 
foothills of Mt. Sapun. Here, in the southern part of 
the Crimean peninsula, many Soviet seamen were 
killed defending the city during the Second World 
War. On our way back, the guide showed me a 
valley. 

“People who were in the war together meet here 
every year. We don’t know them, but we take care 
not to bother them by taking tourists around. They 
probably look back upon their war experience and 
tell each other about themselves. Before they leave, 
they make an inscription with pebbles: “Onwards for 
the Motherland, not a step back!” 

““Are there many of them?” 

““Fewer each year.” 

Overcome with emotion, I got out of the car. I 
stood there for some time, looking at the mountain 
Slopes, blood-crimson in the rays of the setting sun, 
and then walked slowly down into the valley. In the 


77 





distance I saw the figure of a man. I wanted to go 
back, but all of a sudden the man rose to his full 
height and stared at me. I could make out an empty 
shirt-sleeve. I went up to the old soldier. Beneath his 
feet was seen the beginning of the inscription, 
“Onwards for the Motherland...”. Without a word I 
crouched down beside him and began to lay out the 
pebbles. 


LIFE HERE OR HEREAFTER? 


I look at a respectable grey-haired old man with 
interest. He’s slow-moving, deliberate and his eyes 
radiate good humour. Stretching before us is a pan- 
oramic view of the old part of Budapest. We look at 
the architecture of the St. Mathias Church and of the 
ancient Dominican monastery. A brief rendezvous 
with eternity and its timeless grandeur. 

The old man is a prominent European thinker, the 
well-known Austrian theologian Karl Rahner. We 
made our acquaintance in 1984 as participants in the 
International Conference “Human Responsibility in 
the Modern World”. Participating in the conference 
were Marxist specialists on religion and leading 
theologians from Europe and Asia. It was a long and 
gruelling debate, a search for dialogue. 

I try to make Rahner talk during an interval 
between sessions. A theological thinker, an author of 
dozens of writings, he is sure to have his own view of | 
the “lost personality’—the global phenomenon of 
our times. At the morning session, Rahner spoke of 
man’s inner depths, which are still unknown. Man is 
a particle of the Universe, and as such, he is steadily 
unfolding some incomprehensible and_ grandiose 
programme. 

I recall Teilhard de Chardin, a prominent French 


78 














religious humanist, who believed that the beginnings 
of thinking matter on Earth could not have been the 
result of a happy accident. And hence, life has « 
specific meaning. But what kind of meaning? In 
Chardin’s view, evolution reveals a plan of creation. 
invisible to the human mind. In his book The 
Phenomenon of Man, he unfolds the following hypo- 
thetical picture: supposing there is some Martian, 
capable of reading celestial radiations, watching our 
planet, it is not the blue of the seas or the green of the 
forests that would strike him. What would it be then? 
The phosphorescence of thought... Mankind has ac- 
cumulated an intellectual wealth; the planet Earth 
has become enveloped in a “thinking layer”, an 
ocean of images, codes and revelations. The once- 
dead matter has now assumed a new dimension. The 
glare of thought has closed around the planet. 

It is not the first time that mankind has become 
aware of its intellectuality, of the value contained in 
the canopy woven from truths, ideals and inspi- 
rations. I tell Rahner that Chardin’s idea of creating 
an ocean of intellectual wealth round the Earth as 
one of mankind’s goals has been recognized in my 
country. Vladimir Vernadsky, the outstanding Soviet 
scientist whose works have been translated into many 
foreign languages, suggested that this canopy be 
termed as the ““Noosphere” (from the Greek noos— 
intellect). At present, this term has been adopted 
worldwide. 

The idea of the noosphere unites mankind. But I 
can’t help asking Rahner whether this concept fits 
into the overall theological picture of the Universe. It 
puzzles me because according to religious philosophy 
man’s life on Earth has no meaning of its own, being 
governed by a much more significant, sacred pur- 
pose. This being the case, what's the point in creating 
mankind’s spiritual wealth? 


79 








This leads to an argument. The traditional reli- 
gious philosophy advocates a concept of life, which 
can be explained in terms of the supernatural and the 
eternal. According to this, eternal salvation is not to 
be found in the finite earthly existence. Beyond the 
earthly existence there is another, infinite and 
possibly blessed heavenly life. There were times when 
the church generally advocated contempt towards 
earthly pleasures. But things are different now. It is 
no longer possible to keep theology attractive by 
belittling the significance of earthly life. This is the 
reason why quite a few modern religious concepts 
feature ideas emphasizing the purposefulness of 
human life. Chardin evidently held that mankind as a 
whole is creating spiritual values of a special kind. 

Is there a way of safeguarding the spiritual shroud? 
And is it really all that valuable without man? Won't 
the development of the world become the greatest 
drama, possessing a single flaw: there'll be no one to 
play the leading role. The starry skies above us may 
become a silent witness to the dissolution and dis- 
integration of the spirit. To build up the power of 
spiritual energy, man must survive. It is in man, and 
not in repositories of spirituality, or in the depths of 
the spirit, that the solution to the problem lies. 

Chardin’s hidden train of thought is clear. He 
seems to be denying his own responsibility for the 
future of the world. Social existence may fade away 
and machines and technologies may bring about self- 
destruction. But the thinking spirit must not be 
extinguished, just as the pace of the cosmic evolution 
must not be stopped. Having assumed the dimensions 
of global pathos, this philosophy implicates bound- 
less despair. 

We are standing in front of an engraving The 
Pilgrim’s Progress from This World to That Which Is 
to Come. It features a laughing man, whose foot is 


80 











































dangling over a precipice. He uses his walking stick 
to throw down stones from under his feet. The 
picture is subtitled An Atheist. 

“Just as your doctrine rules out a religious world 
view,” says Rahner, “it renounces the age-old values 
accumulated by mankind.” 

“Does it really follow from our doctrine?” 

“Naturally. You don’t believe in anything, do you? 
So, it’s the logical sequel of your lack of faith.” 

“Lack of faith? Does our doctrine advocate total 
disbelief?”’ 

“But you do reject God, don’t you?” 

“Wait a moment. It was Kant who said there were 
two kinds of prejudice: not to believe anything and to 
believe everything you hear. Both ways are faulty.” 

“Does that mean you profess a creed?” 

“Yes. It is faith that fuels human life. Without it, it 
is not possible either to understand the human origin, 
or to perceive the developments that are yet to 


“You reason like a diligent parishioner.” 

“I appreciate your irony. But you mustn’t excom- 
municate Marxists from faith. We have faith in the 
power of intellect. In man’s cognitive faculties. We 
believe that human reason will discover still more 
amazing things in nature. Incidentally, here I quote 
Lenin, my great compatriot. We have faith in the 
inexhaustible creatrve faculties of people. In the con- 
quest of outer space. In the triumph of man’s untiring 
spirit. In the spirituality of eternal values.” 

“Wait! Where do those eternal values come from? 
In fact, it is religion alone that is capable of being the 
true custodian of spiritual absolutes and sacred 
things. But you keep renouncing these values...” 

At this moment we part, never to meet again. Soon 
after my return to Moscow, I come across a report 
about Karl Rahner’s death. As I write these lines, I 





6 1021 81 





keep thinking about my opponent, and about the 
dialogue we had in front of that picture. And I can’t 
help (by way of bringing up the unused arguments) 
turning to the processes under way in my country, 
including today’s relationships between believers and 
atheists. Those Soviet citizens who profess religious 
beliefs do naturally adhere to the theological version 
of the meaning of life, but they are also concerned 
with earthly issues. Believers are taking part in re- 
forming our life. 

I also think that faith does not necessarily belong 
to the realm of religion. It may originate from human 
conviction in the wisdom of the Universe, in the 
appropriateness of what is going on. In the long run, 
faith is a conviction in the correctness of ideas, which 
according to Karl Marx “have conquered our intel- 
lect and taken possession of our minds, ideas to 
which reason has fettered our conscience, are chains 
from which one cannot free oneself without a broken 
beart...”” 

True, total lack of faith gives rise to the most 
absurd creeds. A broad range of superstitions and 
salvation theories, propagated by preaching pilgrims, 
therapists, poets and prophets, enter into most in- 
credible combinations of vogue, success and oblivion, 
and create a motley picture. On the other hand, one 
cannot possibly accept Rahner’s views that any faith 
has an analogy with religious faith, if considered 
from a psychological rather than a cognitive angle, 
without questioning its substance, correctness and 
objectivity. Any faith can lead to either truth or 
falsehood. Just as it is capable of breathing new life 
into man, it can deprive him of his true self. Man can 
hide his own nature and origin from himself, and 





1K. Marx, F.Engels, Coll. Works, Lawrence & Wishart, 
London, 1975, Vol. 1, p. 221. 


82 















squeeze his consciousness dry, just as he can use faith 
to become his own self again. 

Faith has at all times accompanied man. It em- 
bodies man’s conviction in the correctness of his own 
world view. Historically, however, faith is normally 
associated with a psychological condition that pre- 
supposes divinity. It is true that we Marxists consider 
that on the whole religion produces a distorted world 
view. But at the same time it attempts to meet man’s 
spiritual requirements. On the other hand, the attrac- 
tion of atheism is not at all in its renunciation of 
ideals. Disbelief, lack of moral principles, elevating 
truths and humanistic pathos, are uncreative: these 
can only bring devastation. 

So, the meaning of life to a religious thinker is in 
serving his God, in preparing himself for the life 
hereafter. A different creed is born of modern tech- 
nocratic illusions. 

Seemingly, the technocrats suggest a clear-cut and 
irrefutable pattern of human existence. Man is simply 
striving for pleasure. He seeks happiness in the enjoy- 
ment of all that life can offer: in eating and dressing 
well, in constantly increasing his demands. The 
meaning of life is, therefore, in maximum enjoyment. 

..According to a newspaper legend, Hugh Hefner, 
as a young reporter, demanded that his weekly wages 
be raised five dollars. His request having been denied, 
Hefner left the editor’s office, saying he would start 
his own edition, which would become a “‘life manual”’ 
to millions of people. Hefner did start a magazine— 
the famous Playboy—which gained popularity out- 
side the Western world as well. 

Where does the success of the enterprising pub- 
lisher lie? The best explanation has so far been given 
by Jacques Mousseau, a French sociologist. In his 
book Cing dollars pour un empire. Le phénoméne 
“Playboy”, he tells the story of Hefner’s achievement. 
fe 


83 








I’m sitting in Mousseau’s apartment, looking 
through the material he used while writing his book. 
He shows me diagrams, statistical accounts, slides. 
The front wall of his study is lined with snapshots of 
jolly bunny-girls in skin-tight leotards, fashionable 
interiors and window displays of grand exhibitions. 

“The whole thing is brilliantly ingenious!”’ exclaims 
Mousseau. “To think that it was as far back as 1928 
that Bernays, a prominent American advertizing 
theoretician, recommended publishers to make wide- 
spread use of camouflaged persuasion techniques. He 
urged them to advertize beautiful commodities and 
technological breakthroughs. His advice was not 
given a second thought, however. A quarter of a 
century went by, before Hefner was able to imple- 
ment those behests in mass media practice.” 

“Do you mean to say that Hefner merely revived 
long-forgotten advertizing techniques?” 

“Without question, yes. The mass media tycoons 
thought that publicity could only be effective through 
the written word. But doesn’t a picture leave an 
imprint on the human consciousness? Or a com- 
modity, if it looks attractive?” 

“Undoubtedly so... It would be naive to assume, 
however, that Hefner simply happened to remember 
something that had long been forgotten by others. 
Does this alone make the ‘Playboy phenomenon’?” 

“It does! Hefner is an exemplary entrepreneur.” 

No, I can’t agree with Mousseau. It naturally goes 
without saying that human consciousness is apt to be 
influenced by the surrounding reality. Any particular 
way of life moulds definite standards of behaviour 
and thinking. A pharaoh’s pyramid in Ancient Egypt 
was not merely a royal tomb. Its massive structure 
inspired an impression of the inviolability of the 
ruler’s might. From times immemorial, the Church 
has exerted influence over man other than by word of 


84 

















mouth. A cathedral inspires reverence in the congreg- 
ation by its exterior and interior decor, and this is 
reinforced by religious music. Before the preacher 
reads his sermon, the congregation’s consciousness 
has already been tuned-in to spiritually. In the 
Middle Ages, members of royalty used ceremonial 
processions of horsemen and carriages in order to 
demonstrate their splendour in front of their subjects. 
Great significance was placed on symbols by the 
Nazis, whose leaders’ public addresses were accom- 
panied by torch-light processions and the great music 
of Wagner which created an ecstatic atmosphere. 
Nonetheless, the reason underlying Hefner’s suc- 
cess was not that he had figured out the possibilities 
of advertizing, as Mousseau would have it. The 
source of Playboy’s phenomenal popularity is dif- 
ferent: Hefner was among the first to realize that a 
drastic change in moral principles had taken place 
within American society by the mid-1950s. The old 
values were fading out, whereas new ones had not yet 
become widespread. Hefner reckoned that new ideals 
might find a market. So, he began to advertize them. 
Of course, we know that hedonistic principles were 
not born of modern consumer demands, but go back 
to much earlier times. However, it would be wrong to 
assume that the pleasure-seeking philosophy has ac- 
companied man at all times. We have already spoken 
about stoicism, which contrasted the theological and 
the hedonistic outlooks by giving priority to different 
values, such as the renunciation of the desires of 
flesh, elevation of the spirit and self-denial. Any 
ethical principles ever established by great religious 
thinkers, philosophers and scientists have been con- 
cerned with restraining exaggerated material wants 
and bodily desires. Christian love towards fellowmen 
is incompatible with the unrestrained satisfaction of 
natural impulses, as is the ancient Hindu 


85 








principle of Ahimsa (non-violence). Buddhist ethics 
share similar views. 

One may recall Plato’s tradition, and also 
Diogenes, the Greek philosopher of the Cynic school, 
whose aim was to find happiness and contentment in 
reducing one’s wants to a minimum. Immanuel 
Kant’s central maxim also gravitates towards specific 
stoicism, by claiming that personal conduct should be 
based on principles that would be equally acceptable 
to any other individual who finds himself in similar 
circumstances. 

In particular, “forced asceticism” is found in the 
ideology of medieval West European Christian sects. 
These established the norms of the so-called eco- 
nomic ethics, proposing the renunciation of sensuous 
enjoyment. The Protestant religious-ethical discip- 
linary system inculcated in man such moral values as 
diligence, thrift and prudence. Had the early-stage 
capitalist been socially and psychologically orientated 
towards pleasure-seeking ethics, capitalism would 
have never emerged as an economic formation. 
Indeed, it is impossible to imagine an entrepreneur, 
who makes money in the daytime merely to blow it 
all in the evening. 

According to early bourgeois ethics, work was 
regarded as the aim and ambition in life. The words 
of Paul, the Apostle, “If any would not work, neither 
should he eat,” have become a customary and im- 
perative prescription. If man of property does not 
work, he will not eat either. Multiplication of wealth 
becomes the capitalist’s “professional calling’. He is 
a stranger to ostentatious luxury and extravagance; 
nor does he seek the outward expression of the 
respect that he in fact enjoys in society. 

Early bourgeois ethics is built above all on profit- 
making, on making more and more money, while 
abstaining from the pleasures that money can bring. 


86 





Profit-making is an end in itself; it seems to be 
“abstracted” from the happiness and contentment of 
the individual. It is no longer by accumulating wealth 
that man satisfies his material wants; man’s entire 
existence is governed by wealth-gaining, which now 
becomes the chief purpose in his life. 

Marx and Engels debated the statement that there 
were “eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice, etc., 
that are common to all states of society”. They 
exposed the distorting effect that money had upon 
the formation of concrete moral values, such as the 
attitude to work, women, wealth and material wants. 
At the same time, they revealed the historical and 
cultural factors that lead to a change of ideals, 
traditions and absolutes. 

Every thing has its own utilitarian purpose. We put 
on shoes to keep our feet warm. We put on a raincoat 
to protect ourselves from the rain and wind. In so 
doing, we satisfy direct and justified needs. 

Let’s have a look inside the sitting-room of a 
Victorian home. There is a great clock hung on the 
wall. Its purpose is to indicate the time. But the 
businessman who owns the house is hardly ever 
there. He works in his office. This brings pocket 
watches, and later on, wrist watches into fashion. 
Whatever the modification, however, a clock or a 
watch basically performs a singular function: they are 
time-indicating devices, serving a human need. But 
suppose an individual who already owns a watch 
buys a different one, which being gold-plated, looks 
much smarter. We have there one more function, 
which we may refer to as aesthetic. 

As more and more commodities are brought into 
the market, they begin to perform additional func- 
tions: some commodities are no longer bought be- 
cause of utilitarian considerations. A commodity 
may be bought for the sole reason of being indicative 


87 








of a specific social class. An individual will, for 
example, buy the latest make of a car, not because he 
doesn’t own a car but because many people within his 
social circle have already bought themselves this new 
model. This kind of consumption has been termed by 
sociologists as “‘status-bound”’. 

Thus, the capitalist economy, orientated towards 
the multiplication of commodity supply, itself under- 
mines ascetic ethics. Man becomes a slave to exag- 
gerated needs. “Private property does not know how 
to change crude need into human need. Its idealism is 
fantasy, caprice and whim...” In other words, changes 
occur within the very system of values. 

Upholders of temperance views strived to trans- 
form life and to make the world better. Production 
called for the utmost mobilization of human re- 
sources. The industrialists, therefore, tended towards 
self-restriction. Spontaneity, all-permissiveness and 
egoistic impulses put them in fear. Radical in eco- 
nomic ventures, the bourgeoisie was (and to a certain 
degree continues to be) conservative in handling 
matters of morality and culture. 

The objective tendencies in capitalism’s develop- 
ment led to the collapse of traditional norms and 
standards. The economy could no longer progress 
along the same lines. Advancements in science and 
technology brought about an abundance of cheap 
marketable goods. But the buyers did not rush to 
take advantage of the situation, for they were still 
governed by the principles of Protestant ethics. 

Having entered the state-monopoly phase, how- 
ever, capitalism could not promote development on 
that basis any more. Producers had to urge buyers 
into making more and more purchases, because oth- 
erwise production costs would not be justified and 
the economic process would be disrupted. This 
brought about the emergence of the Keynesian 


88 















theory, which proposed the all-out encouragement 
and stimulation of buyers’ demand. Traditional 
values had been eroded to the extent that labour and 
wealth accumulation ceased to be an end in them- 
selves and were converted into a means of satisfying 
material needs and the desire for entertainment. 

A neo-hedonistic theory, which attempts to give 
comprehensive explanation of the meaning of human 
life, has been vigorously promoted in the West over 
the past several decades. It is now possible to sum up 
some of the results of its propagation. The Epicurean 
philosophy, that was so artfully introduced by 
Hefner, has probably been implemented most con- 
sistently in Sweden which has attained the highest 
consumer standard. It is also the country where the 
so-called sexual revolution has assumed an unprece- 
dented scale. 

At the same time, however, Sweden has astounded 
the world by showing the highest suicide rate. The 
man who has found happiness in consumerism, para- 
doxically takes his own life... But is it really so bad to 
lead a life full of sensuous enjoyment? It is, according 
to many Western thinkers today, who have become 
increasingly aware of the social diseases within the 
consumer society. 

What is thought about it in my country? Above all, 
we consider that mankind’s search for new alterna- 
tives is unthinkable without analyzing the social 
practice that has been introduced by socialism. All 
the more so since our society came into existence 
exactly by way of criticizing the vices of bourgeois 
society. Many Western thinkers today recognize the 
theoretical consistency of such criticism. The task is 
now to think over the alternatives which confront 
mankind today. 

_ Vast amounts of people are nowadays showing an 
Interest in intellectual independence, in understand- 


89 





ing existing moral values. The urge felt by the masses, 
by mankind as a whole, for socially-motivated con- 
duct, for new political thinking is becoming increas- 
ingly acute. Today there is a demand for the convinc- 
ing power of logic and humanitarian values. 


MAN AND MANKIND 





WHAT ARE WE? 


“What are we? Where do we come from? Where 
are we going?” Let us ask these questions again. Over 
the long span of his creative life, up until his death in 
the early 1980s, Erich Fromm, the patriarch of 
American philosophy, had been trying to find the 
answers. We exchanged letters a few times. The 
keynote of Fromm’s philosophical reflections was a 
tormenting and intense attempt to penetrate into the 
enigma of man. By rejecting or correcting various 
other attempts at solving this riddle, Fromm always 
emphasized the intrinsic tragedy of this subject. He 
goes further by trying to define the fundamental 
qualities of the individual in order to answer the 
question: “Is man a God or a monster?” 

The philosophical anthropologists revealed man’s 
biological unsettledness. The existentialists showed 
the tragedy of his social being. Man found himself 
plunged into an outlandish situation. What was he to 
tely upon? Must he move towards his original bio- 
logical self, or, on the contrary, must he realize 


91 


al 


himself by becoming involved in social bonds? In | 
trying to reconcile these two positions, Fromm fur- 
ther aggravated the problem, by demonstrating its 
hopelessness. 

It should be admitted, however, that Fromm’s 
conclusions did not bring us a final verdict. It follows 
from his theory that man can be God and monster, 
prophet and fool, hero and villain, soldier and coward, 
humanitarian and killer. According to Fromm, 
‘human nature” cannot be defined by way of identify- 
ing some sort of stable basis, but by formulating the 
symptomatic and highly dramatized contradiction 
inherent in human existence--including the intel- | 
lectual, the psychological and the biological aspects. | 

True, man remains part of nature; he is inalienable | 
from it. The sternness and the beauty of nature was 
described by Ernest Hemingway in his short master- 
piece The Old Man and the Sea. In it, the old man 
treats his prey, the great fish, as an equal. Man lives 
under the dictates of nature’s stern and merciless 
laws. But at the same time, man is aware that he is 
launched into this world, at a random place and time, 
and he realizes the brevity of his earthly existence. 
There is a kind of curse hanging over him: man will 
never free himself from that contradiction. He cannot 
escape from his own thoughts and sentiments, which 
penetrate his whole inner self. 

So, why do I value Fromm and his concept of the 
meaning of life and humanism? Taking a tragic view 
on man, Fromm was nonetheless convinced that the 
root of all evil should be sought within “sick 
society”, within those forms of its development, 
which he thought were prone to historical change. He 
didn’t bring a verdict on the “thinking reed’’, and he 
repudiated the merciless dictum of Fate. Fromm 
turned to those values and ideals that were free from 
} the power of money, profit-making and exploitation. 





92 














But how can these values be found? Where will the 
spiritualizing ideals come from? In corresponding 
with Fromm, I kept a careful track of the spiritual 
search that was going on in the West. For we Soviet 
philosophers also think about these problems. At all 
levels of our life, starting from its primary social unit, 
the family, and ending in international negotiations, 
we witness, or take part in clashes of conflicting 
views, positions and ways of life, in which the logic of 
parents is countered by the logic of children, the 
judgement of leaders by the judgement of ordinary 
citizens, the conviction of some countries by the 
conviction of other countries. Is there a global truth, 
on which the survival of mankind is hinged? 

There is. But it can only be sought along the lines 
of a peaceful, carefully-considered solution to any 
family, social or international conflict. There is no 
alternative, for otherwise mankind will become en- 
tangled in the intricacies of numerous illusions, some 
of which may turn out to be lethal. 

By what criterion should we judge conflicting ten- 
dencies, regional and group interests? I think we have 
such a criterion. It correlates with the facts and the 
laws governing the history of mankind. Admittedly, 
the realization of being part of a cosmic scheme does 
not come easily to man. The Greeks referred to 
anyone who did not belong to their community as 
“barbarians”. The mentality which divides the world 
into “‘friends” and “‘foes” goes back to ancient times. 
A religion, known as Manichaeism, was founded in 
3rd century Persia, and quickly spread across many 
countries, from Italy to China. It saw the world as 
hopelessly divided into two extremes—Divine Spirit 
and Evil. 

Indeed, there is much good and much evil in the 
world, and they are set against one another. This 
conflict, however, is in no way fatal. In the first place, 


93 


ee 


there are many intermediate stages between the two 
extremes, which are difficult to classify as either one 
or the other. Secondly, these two principles are quite 
fluid. Good may be fraught with bitter losses; pain 
and cruelty may give rise to benevolence. Finally, and 
most importantly, the confrontation of good and 
evil need not necessarily end in a global catastrophe, 
as the Manicheans would have it. 

Regretfully, the Manichaeistic world view spread 
beyond the confines of the ancient Persian religion. It | 
has been accompanying mankind for many centuries. | 
Out of sheer habit, people got used to making judge- 
ments about the surrounding reality from the point 
of view of “us” and “them’”’. “Us” is the incarnation 
of reason, harmony, motivated conduct and benevol- 
ence, whereas ‘“‘them’”’ is the personification of evil, 
absurdity, unmotivated and fatal behaviour. 

Thus, the significance of the West has for centuries 
been exalted in the European consciousness. The 
medieval crusades and travels, which prepared the 
ground for the geographical discoveries of the 
Renaissance; the seizure of hitherto unknown lands 
and cruel colonial wars—all this, in the long run, wa 
the embodiment in real historical actions of a singl 
Eurocentric idea, by which Europe, i.e. the West 
with its traditional ways, policies, religion, cultur 
and arts, represented the unique and unqualifie 
value, in contrast with the “inadequacy” and “‘imma- 
turity” of the rest of the world. 

In the Middle Ages, when Europe’s economic, 
political and cultural ties with other countries of th 
world witnessed a sharp recession, and _ religio 
became the governing factor in spiritual and politic 
life, the notion of “‘the Orient” lost its significance i 
the European’s mind, being something very remo 
and exotic. 

The thinkers of the Enlightenment were confronte 




























94 














by a diversity of human preferences and cultural 
standards. They believed, however, that non- 
European nations were living through a period which 
was already in Europe’s past, and that they would 
inevitably arrive at the point in social dynamics from 
which the Europeans would be departing as they 
advanced into the future. 

The idea to which Voltaire, Montesquieu and 
Herder applied their intellectual talents, concerning 
the gradual commitment of the world nations to a 
“world history’, finally led to identifying an import- 
ant area of research—the search for an incipient 
universal culture. It gave rise to a hypothesis that at 
the dawn of civilization, different nations had no 
intellectual and religious distinctions. They had 
common roots, but with time, their common culture 
ramified into numerous self-sustained trends. 

These conjectures by the 18th century European 
thinkers served to fortify the Eurocentric standpoint. 
It implied that at certain points in its history, Europe 
had absorbed from the East whatever values the 
latter could give. Moreover, a hypothesis took shape, 
Suggesting that the nomadic Indo-European tribes 
had, at the dawn of history, invaded China, India 
and the West from Central Asia. This encounter of 
different cultures allegedly gave birth to a specific 
European civilization, enriched by contacts with va- 
rious religions and mystical creeds. 

It seems paradoxical, but the 19th century and 
even the early 20th century philosophers used the 
term “European mankind”. Many of them believed 
the West to be the birthplace of a unique culture and 
technological civilization, which represented the 
future of the human race. As for the East, it was 
tegarded as an “underdeveloped West”. This makes a 
good background for understanding the significance 
of the contribution Karl Marx made to the cogni- 


95 








zance of the major paths of mankind’s historical 
progress. 

Marx revealed that the development of industries 
and the promotion of economic ties bring about a 
merging of cultures, which leads to the consolidation 
of mankind. Mankind’s supreme task is, therefore, to 
perceive the objective logic of the economic evo- 
lution. This leads to the conclusion that Marx did not 
see the historic mission of the proletariat as world 
domination; its mission, he believed, was to create a 
global civilization. 

A colloquium was held in Montreal in 1983 de- 
dicated to the memory of Karl Marx, in connection 
with the 100th anniversary of his death. One of the 
speakers, the Jerusalem philosopher Shlomo Avineri, 
pointed out the substantial impact Marxism had 
upon modern development. But he also said that 
Marx was a typical Eurocentrist. A sharp debate 
ensued, to which I also contributed. 

Neither Marx nor Engels ever believed Europe to 
be the only place in the world to host the develop- 
ment of true scientific, artistic, philosophical and 
literary values. On the contrary, they slrowed great 
interest in world history with all its diversity. That is 
why they studied the Asian mode of production and 
the cultural peculiarities of the Oriental peoples. 
Marx and Engels maintained that the fruit of cultural 
activity of individual nations would become universal 
property. Their views can therefore be used as a basis 
for criticizing both Eurocentrism and concepts of the 
cultural supremacy of other nations or regions of the 
world. 

According to Avineri, Marx’ interest was exclu- 
sively connected with Europe. That’s not true. As far 
back as the 1850s, Marx turned a watchful eye to the 
developments in the United States, India and China. 
He took a great interest in Russia. While living and 


96 








working in Britain, he made a careful study of the 
Irish problem, maintaining that the total national 
liberation of Ireland was an essential condition for 
the social emancipation of Britain’s entire working 
class. Marx also analyzed Indian history, going into 
detail about peasants’ uprisings in the country’s var- 
ious regions, and also the Tai-ping rebellion in 
China. 

The Marxist concept of the integrity of world 
history does not in any way entail levelling or reject- 
ing, as being of secondary importance, the great 
diversity of real-life situations that history offers to a 
researcher. Marxists display a natural interest in 
studying local historical processes, that is, the off- 
shoots of the overall social process. A vigorous 
process is now under way, whereby the numerous 
cultural traditions are being drawn closer together 
and merged, giving rise to internationalist tendencies, 
which are bound to enrich world culture. 

Vladimir Lenin expressed an extremely profound 
idea about the primacy of social development and the 
values common to mankind over the interests of a 
particular social class. In this nuclear age, the signi- 
ficance of that idea becomes especially poignant. 
Viewed from a spaceship, our planet does not look 
like a huge celestial body. It is small, and possibly 
the only source of intelligent life in the Universe. 
Although mankind is divided into civilizations and 
cultures, it has remained a single whole all the same... 

Marxists are trying to perceive this antagonistic 
world as an interrelated and integral entity. This idea 
goes back to Lenin. “To be an internationalist Social- 
Democrat,” he said, ‘“‘one must not think only of 
one’s own nation, but place above it the interests of 
all nations...1’”” He said this at a time when the 


' V.1. Lenin, Coll. Works, Vol. 22, p. 347. 





1021 97 





NT 


majority of philosophers and politicians regarded the 
concept of world history as some sort of lofty ab- 
straction, having no practical application in the 
socially-divided world. 

The drastic class-based differences and the his- 
torical confrontation between two socio-economic 
systems do not rule out, but rather presuppose the 
intricate dynamics of their interaction. The philosoph- 
ical perception of modern times allows neither for 
denying the fundamental antithesis between the two 
formations, nor for ignoring the essential unity of 
mankind, its common interests and values. 

Contrary to the predictions of many sociologists 
concerning the inevitability of a historic conflict | 
between capitalism and socialism, we hold a different | 
view. Marx expressed a conviction that “the his- 
torical development of the antagonisms, immanent in 
a given form of production, is the only way in which 
that form of production can be dissolved and a new 
form established”!. This implies that the funda- | 
mental processes in any particular country are de- 
pendent above all on internal, and not external, 
antagonisms, and that the people themselves de- 
termine the social future of their country. The people, 
and nothing else. 

There’s no denying that each of the two social 
systems exerts a definite influence upon the other. 
For example, the model of social development, 
devoid of exploitation, unemployment and poverty, 
inspired a number of capitalist-orientated countries 
to switch over to socialist lines of development. This 
has narrowed the sphere and influence of capitalism 
upon the world processes, and continues to do so. On 
the other hand, the arms race has forced the Soviet 
Union and other socialist countries to enhance their 


1 K. Marx, Capital, Progress, 1974, Vol. 1, p. 458. 


98 














defence, incurring huge military expenditure—instead 
of allocating this money for peaceful purposes. This 
also. hampers the immanent potentialities of 
socialism, hindering its progress. The mutual con- 
frontation, however, has its positive impacts: the 
scientific and technological successes of one side 
stimulate the other to progress, ensuring that both of 
them avoid sluggishness and conservatism. 

Meanwhile, no influence or interaction is capable 
of changing the general laws governing the develop- 
ment of either system or the mode of their develop- 
ment. This has been corroborated by the sizeable 
experience of the relations between capitalism and 
socialism. Neither military intervention, nor econ- 
omic blockade, nor trading embargoes could hold 
back the historical advancement of the socialist state 
born of October 1917; and what is more, new coun- 
tries have started following in its wake. It is not an 
accident, but a historical law, which should be real- 
ized and accepted. Socialism is logical and irrever- 
sible to the same degree as was capitalism when it 
emerged to replace feudalism. The new social system 
does not interrupt the historical tendency for the 
internationalization of the world economy; more- 
over, it continues and extends the tendency. 

A sound scientific approach is needed today more 
than ever before. Any attempt to hold back the 
march of history and violate laws of its development 
is fraught with countless misfortunes to mankind. We 
are aware that capitalism has not yet exhausted its 
historical possibilities. But neither has socialism fully 
revealed its potential. The only sensible alternative in 
this situation is peaceful competition between the two 
differing systems in an atmosphere of reciprocity, 
cooperation and goodneighbourliness. 

Lenin said: “I know of no reason why a socialistic 
commonwealth like ours cannot do business indefi- 


ys 





99 





eee 


nitely with capitalistic countries.”! We take these 
words as a behest. He was right many times over, 
with reference to today, when the global problems of 
the modern world demand a global way of handling 
them. This approach suggests constructive cooper- 
ation between countries and nations, for the sake of 
the survival of civilization. 

The same approach will enable every nation to 
cope with its individual domestic problems— 
everybody has them. 

The purpose of the revolutionary process of pere- 
stroika in the Soviet Union is to raise society to a 
higher level of development, and to initiate qualita- 
tive changes based on socialist values, the values 
common to all mankind. The word ‘“‘perestroika” 
does not need translation now, not only because of 
the great international interest in our domestic af- 
fairs, but also because the whole world is in need of 
it. People want to know: what kind of life will they go 
on living? 

We are trying to enrich humanity with new values 
today. The objective of the preservation of the 
human race on Earth is indisputable to us. We want 
to reveal the true essence of humanism, to emphasize 
the significance of mora] principles in life of society. 
lhe formation of human values is, however, being 
y confronted by the egoism of the reactionary forces, 

by the cult of crude violence and by the outdated 
political thinking. 


MODERN APOCALYPSE 


He appeared from behind my back and proffered 
me a handwritten page. without saying a word. I 


' V_I. Lenin, Coll. Works, Vol. 42, p. 177. 
190 





skimmed over the text. A society of anxious philo- 
sophers is worried about the future of mankind... It 
calls public attention to the destructive mechanisms 
of the mind... Expert psychoanalysts are appealing to 
reason and consciousness... 

Having sensed my embarrassment, the stranger ran 
his fingernail across the vacant margin and asked if 
we could all sign it. 

This was in Boston. On that day I was taking my 
turn at the Soviet Literature stand. Foreign col- 
leagues dropped in, picked up the books they wanted 
and discussed their views. But no one asked for 
signatures. Having met my questioning stare, the 
stranger produced a_ visiting card. “Ginsberg, 
Professor of Philosophy, USA’’. I asked him what he 
needed those signatures for. The professor got no- 
ticeably excited: 

“People do not grasp the most important point. 
What really matters is not material damage, nor even 
losses in manpower. The most terrible thing is man’s 
psyche. It is disintegrating. the deep subconscious 
processes are moulding a sinister personality.” 

“‘Aren’t peace campaigners aware of that?” 

“They are, but they fail to see the main link. We 
are creating a new movement. It will unite thinkers in 
various countries. It will be a Mind Protection 
Society.” 

“But war will bring total destruction. Taking care 
to protect the mind, should we worry about the 
preservation of culture?” 

We suddenly found ourselves in the middle of a 
fierce debate. People were interrupting one another. 
War, catastrophe, intimidation... How could culture 
be saved? 

On the following day { went to hear Ginsberg’s 
lecture. It was presented in the spirit of humanism, 
and called for the changeover from militarism and 


101 





— eee 


militance to tolerance and peace. The professor fo- 
cused his lecture on the notion of “unitarian culture’, 
i.e. a humanistic culture of “united mankind”. The 
very idea of suppressing ‘‘alien” cultures (in par- 
ticular, Ginsberg referred to the suppression of the 
Red Indian culture in the USA) sooner or later leads 
to cultural expansion, to war in its most horrible 
“anti-cultural” forms. When the lecture was over, 
Ginsberg presented his listeners with written invi- 
tations to contribute to a series of publications con- 
cerning war and peace issues. 

The publications, prepared by staff at the Institute 
for the Arts and Humanistic Studies of the 
Pennsylvania State University, are on my desk. 
Reading through the pages, I keep thinking about 
how much more influence scientists have had in 
recent years on the mass anti-war movement. It can | 
be briefly summed up as follows: one should be made 
to understand where the threat stems from—is it in 
man’s destructive nature, or in social factors which 
give rise to a perverted, ill-intentioned consciousness? 

The amorality of war was condemned way back in 
ancient times. Chroniclers have brought us 
Herodotus’ speech at the temple of Zeus in Olympus. 
Among other things it states that only an insane man 
can welcome war, for war shatters the very logic of 
human existence: in times of peace children bury their 
parents, whereas in times of war, parents bury their 
children. Admittedly, the ancient philosophers 
! speculated upon ways of avoiding violent clashes 

within civilized communities, by which they meant 
Hellas and the Roman Empire. 

Erasmus of Rotterdam was the first scholar to 
bring up the problem of peace on a global scale. He 
cursed the rulers responsible for bloodshed, and the 
clergymen who gave their blessing to bloodshed con- 
trary to Christ’s commandments. 


102 





Immanuel Kant went much further than that. He 
chought everlasting peace would be attained not 
simply through the volition of good rulers, but 
through impersonal forces, acting independently of 
human will. If mankind does not make peace without 
wars, said Kant, extermination techniques will lead it 
into a peace of entirely different kind, the peace of 
graveyard silence. Nonetheless, there was a note of 
consolation, albeit a faint one, in Kant’s theorizing: 
he was convinced that life would survive, if not on 
Earth, on the other planets within the solar system 
(which he believed to be populated with living 
beings). 

“And what if our planet is the only island amid the 
ocean of cosmic silence?” suggested Arthur 
Schopenhauer. This proposition by a_ pessimistic 
philosopher has been corroborated by modern 
science: there is no evidence of any other inhabited 
planet either within the solar system, or within other, 
much more remote galaxies. Observations by power- 
ful electronic telescopes and radars have so far pro- 
duced only negative results. 

To think that in the course of its existence Earth 
itself could have shared the fate of its lifeless 
neighbours—Venus and Mars! About four and a half 
billion years ago, when our planet’s atmosphere was 
forming, only five degrees centigrade separated it 
from the so-called “greenhouse effect’, which turned 
Venus into a boiling hell. Two million years later, the 
Earth could have become a cosmic iceberg, for it was 
Ee one degree away from totally freezing-up, like 

ars. 

So, today people are capable of doing what Nature 
failed to do. Horrible terms have come into everyday 
use, such as “megadeath”, meaning one million 
deaths, used as a unit in reference to nuclear warfare 
(in analogy with ‘“‘megaton’”’—the explosive force of a 


103 





nuclear charge equivalent to that of a million tons of 
TNT). With electronic infallibility, computers cor- 
roborate the scientific supposition that our planet 
will not survive a global thermonuclear war. 

This realization alone increases the value of the 
earthly concepts of the Universe. Meanwhile, military | 
clashes, economic and financial crises, the irrespon- 
sible aggressiveness of fascists and militarists have 
undermined the faith of many thinkers who stopped 
believing in the objective character of the world’s 
historical development. Their irrational philosophy 
found expression in a formula suggested by 
Raymond Aron, an exponent of Western social 
science: history is a blank page to be filled by anyone 
at his own will. 

Marxists reject this view. They see history as a 
process determined by the general laws of social 
development. But they do not object to its pages | 
being “‘filled”” by anyone according to his tastes and 
understanding. What matters is to come to an agree- 
ment on the fundamental issue: the ‘blank page” of 
history should be filled in such a way that history 
could continue. 

Therefore we all should realize that despite our 
differences, we remain to be children of the same 
Mother-Earth, and that it is our duty to preserve the 
life she has endowed us with. So let us voice our 
concern for the burning problems of today, and seek 
peaceful solutions to them; let us awaken the con- 
science and responsibility of every individual for the 
future of all. People throughout the world are wor- 
ried about the nuclear threat—it has become our 
common concern, regardless of where we live, what 
ideology we profess and what creed we belong to. 

In this nuclear age, is is high time we discarded the 
mentality of the Stone Age, when disputes were 
resolved by means of a cudgel or stone-axe. 


104 





20th-century man has discovered the formula of 
total death. And 20th-century man must return the 
formula of life to mankind or become extinct. 

To say that the responsibility of the present gener- 
ation is great is a gross understatement. History has 
handed us the keys to its past and its future. Whether 
or not we relay the material and spiritual gains to the 
grateful future generations depends solely on us. 
Otherwise, there will be no one to mourn over our 
graves, or to bring a curse upon our ashes. Isn’t it 
time while it is still not too late for everybody to 
realize that no political or philosophical differences 
are worth the risk of self-extermination? The times of 
“crusades” against dissidents are over. This reali- 
zation must become the flesh and blood of our 
civilization. 

Meanwhile the war threat remains real. It is affect- 
ing the human mind. When was the connection 
between a war threat and mass-scale neurotic dis- 
orders first established? It was probably done by 
Sigmund Freud. The Austrian scientist believed that 
the source of impending catastrophe was rooted in 
man’s vile nature. The First World War shattered 
any illusions about the saneness of the Son of Nature. 
How can one count upon the wisdom of man when 
he is literally craving for destruction and fratricide? It 
was not the unprincipled careerists or corrupted 
politicians who triggered the war. Had man possessed 
common sense, he would not have been dragged into 
that butchery. 

It is known, however, that the overwhelming ma- 
jority of psychoanalysts refused to accept those late 
Freudian theories. They associated them not with 
psychology, but rather with those ideas in natural 
philosophy, which could neither be proved, nor re- 
futed. While Freud’s disciples were arguing over the 
theories advanced by their teacher, the mass media 


105 





a 


came up with a stunning discovery: it turned out that 
people were living under the utmost psychological 
strain. Fearful images filled their consciousness. Once 
the release mechanism was activated—a torrent of 
incredible, sinister visions would overflow the mass 
consciousness. The consequences of the mounting 
strain brought on by overwhelming fear were 
unpredictable. 

Almost a year before the Second World War, the 
American director and actor Orson Welles decided to 
stage a radio play based on H. G. Wells’ novel The 
War of the Worlds. To make it sound “live”, and thus 
to give the action greater dynamism, the director 
transferred the play’s setting to the United States. 

The play began with a normal-style news broad- 
cast. Among other items, the announcer told the 
audience about an unidentified flying object, which 
had taken off from Mars and was approaching the 
Earth. This piece of information was soon embel- 
lished with plenty of detail, for astronomers im- 
mediately set out to monitor the unusual flight. After 
a short musical intermission, the announcer told his 
listeners excitedly that the mysterious object had 
reached the Earth. There, it had touched ground! 
Then, another character, the “President”, spoke into 

the microphone, urging his countrymen not to get 
excited and to stand by their radio sets. The tension 
mounted as more news was relayed from the object’s 
landing site. The reporter could see the hatch-door 
fall open, and huge monsters on tripods emerge from 
the flying apparatus. These were Martians. One of 
them walked towards the transmitting station. The 
reporter’s voice dropped dead abruptly, as if the man 
was being strangled by the monster. A tormenting 
pause followed... 

What happened the next moment was that 
thousands of listeners, having taken the make-believe 


106 








for the real thing, rushed out of their apartments and 
run along the ocean coast, in fear of the Martians. 
Nobody wanted a terrible encounter. 

After the panic was over, some prominent 
American psychologists tried to investigate the in- 
cident, in an attempt to understand what made the 
sober-minded listeners take an act for a real event. Is 
man really incapable of distinguishing between fact 
and fantasy? The psychologists concluded that in a 
situation of utmost strain, people can fall prey to any 
hypnotic suggestion, including a most incredible one. 
Anyway, the atmosphere that filled the prewar years 
was full of anxiety, rumours and menace. Had that 
not been the reason why the “Martian put-on” 
produced so great an effect? 

This incident, which has long since gone into the 
annals, did not only cause unrest among the psycho- 
analysts. It showed that man’s inner anxiety and 
troubled state of mind could be used for a specific 
purpose. The demons secreted in the human sub- 
consciousness could be released... One need only 
comprehend the nature of the fears and mould them 
into the desired corporeality. 

So, numerous prophets are today trying to unfold a 
picture of imminent Apocalypse before their adher- 
ents. Scorched land. The torments of hell. And a spe- 
cial punishment for those who remain oblivious, who 
feel albeit a minor doubt about the extinction of man- 
kind. The sceptics will get the heaviest punishment. 

Does it mean one should not give any warnings? 
One certainly should. It is important, however, to 
distinguish between deliberate, conscious attempts to 
instill fear and a sober assessment of the situation. 
Meanwhile, the fear, being a sequel to the nuclear 
build-up, is in itself capable of causing fanatic blind- 
ness, including an unrestrained desire for self- 
extermination. 


107 








The Pentagon is going to spend a trillion dollars on 
SDI. To make this new stupidity record, about a 
million dollars has to be spent every day over the 
next 2,730 years. And this has to be done while about 
44,000 people in the world (according to recent 
statistics) die every day of malnutrition and lack of 
medical aid. How is it possible to pull through 
projects involving such crazy wastefulness? One of 
the reasons for that is the unrestrained build-up of 
fear, i.e. the expectation of something horrible happen- 
ing. Some descriptions of the probable aftermath of a 
thermonuclear war seem to be contributive to build- 
ing up such a mood. 

So, the misgivings voiced by Ginsberg of the USA, 
are not without ground. When phantasmagorical TV 
serials dominate TV screens, when one country or 
another becomes an arena for unheard-of calamities, 
one is bound to assume that the human mind is in 
real danger. 

Of course, a broad conceptual realization of the 
nature of war cannot be based on the mere regist- 
ration of man’s self-destructive nature. What we need 
here is a well-substantiated social approach. Nor it is 
possible, however, to brush aside the mass, halluci- 
natory visions, which virtually ooze from some com- 
mercial productions, made to meet the demand of a 
considerable proportion of viewers. Is it not, in fact, 
a psychological preparation for the final, bloody 
dénouement? 

Many scientists today trace the students’ unrest in 
1960s-1970s to the traumatic impact that the nuclear 
menace had upon the younger generation. Indeed, 
wars have at all times shattered the human mind. As 
long ago as in the !ate 1940s, a prominent American 
psychologist Erik Erikson wrote about the 
population’s large-scale traumatization as sequel to 
the Second World War experience, while Carl Gustav 


108 








Ea 


Jung noted that Europe’s postwar mental health was 
questionable. 

The younger generation’s response to the war 
threat appears to be a mixture of excitement, inten- 
sive anti-militarism and aggressive protest. Erich 
Fromm, whom I mentioned earlier, said that once a 
war of extermination broke out, it would make no 
sense to discuss what proportion of the Earth’s 
population would perish-—30, 60 or 90 per cent. One 
doesn’t need a great imagination, however, to 
visualize the psychological consequences of sudden 
large-scale destruction and the death of thousands 
upon thousands of Americans or Russians. What will 
those few survivors be confronted with? Scorched 
land, mountains of ashes and corpses. The paroxysms 
of panic, fury and despair that are bound to occur 
will overshadow even the mass psychoses which 
accompanied the epidemics of plague during the 
Middle Ages. 

The traumatic effect of such a catastrophe would 
revive the most primitive instincts: the archaic ele- 
ments of the human mind would break loose from 
under the ennobling layers of cultural acquisitions. 
For example, mankind has been known to practise 
cannibalism; couldn’t this monstrous ritual be re- 
vived under the conditions of a mental catastrophe? 
Cruelty is a one-way road: it can produce nothing but 
more cruelty. It is an inescapable psychological fact. 

One cannot, with impunity, peer into a ‘‘bottom- 
less void” for too long, that is, to run a “‘frontline 
syndrome” without a war going on, or else, to live in 
fear of an imminent global holocaust. It is probably 
this nightmare of “expectation” that brings about 
numerous distortions and disorders in the conduct of 
modern man. What note must be struck by human- 
ism today to withstand the ‘frontline mentality’, the 
“bottomless void’? 


109 


————— 





Science has accumulated great empirical experience 
which allows us to assess human conduct against an 
established norm. But these observations have to do 
with everyday life and activities, whereas a war is not 
solely a total catastrophe, but also a tremendous 
blow on the human mind, whereby man is plunged 
into an incredibly extreme environment. And here, 
one must measure things against different standards. 

Is the world living on the threshold of a war? Are 
newspaper lines about the imminent threat of ex- 
termination true? Like yesterday, mothers through- 
out the world today are pushing their prams, people 
are hurrying to work, and children are on their way 
to school. Is it conceivable that a nuclear “mush- 
room’’ could at some sudden moment wipe all this 
out, plunging the world into an indescribable abyss? 

Specialists are familiar with the numerous studies 
of the aftereffects of Hiroshima bombing. These 
works are full of compassion towards the victims of 
the atomic bomb. This natural sentiment, however, 
prevented the writers from making professional jud- 
gements, and even more so from analyzing the psych- 
ological and social impacts produced by the cata- 
strophe in all its complexity. Obviously, investi- 
gations of this kind run into a serious emotional 
obstacle. Yet, there have been reports that totally 
lacked emotionalism, and produced sheer statistical 
and medical data, e.g. information on radioactivity 
doses and other technicalities. 

Today, the world has come to understand that the 
Hiroshima experience is a huge and dreadful social 
experiment, which makes it possible to penetrate the 
depths of the human mind and understand many a 
process underlying human behaviour. In the years 
that followed the Hiroshima explosion, nuclear 
weapons have become more sophisticated. In fact, 
they have been totally ‘“‘perfected”. Today, the ex- 


110 





Ne ee a oe ge 


perience of the nuclear explosion survivors assumes a 
global significance. Moreover, there emerges a need 
for a deeper insight into the psychology of survival in 
conditions of chain-like catastrophes. 

Every historical crisis, as a rule, would produce 
leaders capable of showing other people an escape 
route, and suggesting a goal for existence. In this 
case, however, the totality of the catastrophe, its 
inhuman and purely technological nature prevented 
Hiroshima from producing such leaders. The survival 
from mental extinction, caused by a cataclysm, led to 
a new world view in the wake of the great epidemics 
during the Middle Ages, to give rise to movements 
that heralded the Reformation. Alas, today we have 
no right to rely on the wisdom of those who might 
survive a nuclear catastrophe. Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki have taught us all our final lesson. 

Destruction is the main function of war. Of course, 
there have been occasions in history when a civili- 
zation, having suffered a military and economic 
defeat, has continued to exert a strong influence over 
the conquerors. Thus, the ancient Greeks, conquered 
by Rome, retained their tremendous cultural in- 
fluence over the victors. But there will be no victors 
in modern war. 

During the 1980s, mankind has embarked on a 
decisive stage in its development, to which the whole 
of human history offers no analogy. War was the sole 
reason for the collapse of various empires in the past. 
But it did not so far involve the future of the world, 
human culture in its entirety. Today, the threat of 
war alone affects the human mind in a most destruc- 
tive way. Like the Apocalypse, the impending cata- 
strophe upsets subconscious mental balance of man. 

Meanwhile, among those who refuse to accept the 
prospect of self-extermination, the war threat evokes 
a different feeling, the feeling of solidarity 


111 








and mutual responsibility. The Soviet film Dead 
Man’s Letters portrays the unparalleled ruthlessness 
of those, whose perverted mentality had led to a 
global holocaust. The film culminates in a humanistic 
scene, filled with lofty symbolism. Having buried 
their teacher, who had given them all his spiritual 
strength, the children leave the cellar. They go out 
hand in hand to meet the images of death and chaos. 
This is the symbol of a new human association. They 
are to carry on the torch of life. 


NEW POLITICAL THINKING 


In the middle of the last century, the League of 
Communists entrusted Marx and Engels with the 
preparation of the scientific communism policy docu- 
ment. The Manifesto of the Communist Party written 
in 1848 went further than laying down _ the 
Communists’ goals and tactics. It contained a new 
world outlook. Filled with inspiring truths, the docu- 
ment proclaimed the lofty ideals of life, struggle, 
renewal and constructiveness. 

Today, at the end of the millennium, people have 
come to a turning point, which calls for an in-depth 
realization of a number of world-outlook problems, 
the key ones being the problems of the future of 
civilization. The retention of the traditional mentality 
may prove fatal to its future. 

Some people may find it strange that Communists 
should emphasize the primacy of universal interests 
and values. Indeed, the class-based approach in view- 
ing every social phenomenon is the ABC of Marxism. 
This kind of approach today is still consonant with 
the realities of a class-divided society, as well as with 
the realities of international life, which bears the full 
impact of this confrontation. Nowadays, however, 


112 





SS et 


there is a universal interest which is real and not 

| abstract, immediate and not remote—to avert the 

| catastrophe threatening civilization, as expounds 
Mikhail Gorbachev in his book Perestroika. New 
Thinking for Our Country and the World. 

What will the 21st century’s civilization be like? 
Wuat will become of mankind? The prospects for 
history’s future outrun the boldest imagination. 
During the past few decades mankind has advanced 
technologically farther than during the entire span of 
its history. Apart from the obvious benefits, however, 
the technological advancement is fraught with grave 
dangers to the present-day generation. Being has at 
all times run ahead of consciousness. Will human 
consciousness be able to catch up with the gaining 
realities—this is the question. Mankind’s future de- 

pends on the answer. Will the human race be able to 
adapt itself to the rapidly changing world, to measure 
up to the level of a modern technological civilization, 
to adopt an alternative way of thinking and thus to 
preserve the environment and its own self within it?... 

Despite its importance, technology is only one 
aspect of the matter. The modern world is socially 
sophisticated, diverse and dynamic. It is full of con- 
flicting tendencies and drastic contradictions. There 
are revolutions and there is fierce resistance from 
those sections of society which are unwilling to part 
with their privileges. There are brilliant achievements 
in all spheres of science and art, and there is cultural 
degradation. There is luxury amid poverty, and there 
is hunger amid plentifulness. There is a powerful 
gravitation towards mutual confidence, and there is 
growing estrangement and hostility. 

The civilization of the future is being conceived 
within the vortex of truly revolutionary changes in 
science, technology, culture, psychology, demog- 
raphy and ecology. The competition and confron- 


8 1021 113 





tation between the two social systems, alongside the 
growing tendency for interdependence between 
states, reveal the dialectical complexity of today’s 
world development. The new political thinking that 
we are trying to adopt is a dialectical thinking. It is 
not merely a declaration and plea, but a philosophy 
of action and, if you like, a philosophy of living. 

Many of my foreign colleagues today recognize the 
value of the new political thinking. Some sources say 
that prior to the Communists, the idea of a universal, 
global thinking had been advanced by Bertrand 
Russel. Well, one may argue over the priority. 
Meanwhile the essence of the new political thinking is 
exactly in the recognition of the universal approach, 
in a movement towards the same goal from different 
directions. 

The new political thinking is no abstract notion. It 
is being filled with a concrete content. Politics should 
be fuelled by the intellectual wealth of every par- 
ticular nation and of human civilization as a whole. 
A policy that is not impregnated with concern for 
man’s future is a bad, immoral policy. It is not 
worthy of respect. 

Today’s world is a world of struggle between 
reason and madness, morality and barbarity, life and 
death, within which we have clearly and uncondition- 
ally defined our position. We are on the side of 
reason, morality and life. This is why we are for 
disarmament, above all a nuclear one, for building up 
a global security system. /t is the only possible choice 
which will ensure the survival of mankind. 

Perestroika is necessary in this world satiated with 
nuclear weapons, a world which has serious econ- 
omic and ecological problems, poverty, backward- 
ness and disease. More and more people are coming 
to realize that. It is hoped that crude force in inter- 
national relations will come to be replaced with 


114 





Bement = 


values common to mankind, the values presupposing 
respect for each nation’s interests and for its right to 
make its own choices, the right to be different from 
other nations. 

Our philosophy of humanizing international re- 
lations is based on a careful analysis of the world 
processes based on strict account taken of every 
nation’s interests. Meanwhile, there are certain forces 
in the West which declare this philosophical world 
view to be utopia and try to discredit our policy. But 
can anything be more topical nowadays than the 
humanization of politics? Nuclear disarmament is, in 
essence, and even above all, a humanistic issue. 

The general public is not only becoming increas- 
ingly aware of the need for humanizing international 
policies, but, what’s even more important, it is be- 
coming increasingly involved in these policies. For 
centuries, foreign policy-making has been the pre- 
rogative of the powers that be. Even today, it is still 
in many ways the privilege of government machinery. 
But fortunately, not in every way. The leading social 
tendency—a _ shift towards democratization—is 
increasingly gaining ground in the international 
arena. 

Our time has naturally come to see an increasing 
role being played by universal factors in world af- 
fairs, by the human dimension in politics and by the 
revision of international relations from this point of 
view. The humanistic priorities are winning growing 
recognition. They are concerned not only with main- 
taining peace on Earth, but also with protecting the 
individual. It is crucial for man to be sure that his 
freedoms are real, that society really needs him, his 
work and experience, that it won’t discard him in 
times of trouble, and that it guarantees him a certain 
level of welfare. This is the common denominator 
which unites different approaches towards the issue 


x 115 


Cee yan 


of human rights, and towards the socio-humanitarian 
sphere as a whole. 

Undoubtedly, we have reached a stage in the world 
situation, when we can no longer do without new 
political methods. This has been convincingly cor- 
roborated by the recent signing of the Soviet- 
American INF treaty, which has become the first step 
on the way to establishing a new philosophy of 
international relations. 

Admittedly, the heavy burden of human errors and 
political blunders does not become lighter, as man- 
kind becomes wiser. Moreover, in the course of 
historical development, this burden has openly 
gained weight——probably in the same proportion as 
human activities have grown in scale, whilst the 
succession of increasingly powerful and sophisticated 
technical novelties has proved to be fraught with 
formidable and extraordinary dangers. This has 
always been so. Our age is no exception. The trage- 
dies of the Challenger and Chernobyl shocked the 
world. A previously unheard-of disaster approached 
the world stealthily from the very forefront of man’s 
intellectual activity. But there is a vast historical 
experience to tell us that tragedies go hand in hand 
with human courage: to us, the Chernoby! accident 
meant both—the mobilization of a huge human 
potential and a sobering lesson. 


POTENTIAL 
OF THE HUMAN SPIRIT 


Last year I went to visit my father’s grave. Several 
decades had gone by before I was able to do that. 
Long ago, during the war, my family received a 
sorrowful notification: ‘*... died the death of a hero in 
action on the right bank of River Daugava, buried in 


116 





a common grave”. Four children, myself the young- 
est, became orphans. There were seven thousand 
kilometres separating us from the place where our 
father had met his death. No one at that time had the 
faintest hope that that common grave would weather 
the storm. 

Today, I am much older than my father was at the 
time of his death. So, here I am, walking down a road 
leading to the village of Rogas, near Riga, in the 
Baltic republic of Latvia. A majestic war memorial 
has now been erected there. It is the place where a 
concentration camp was built by the Nazi invaders to 
slaughter and torture people. Huge figures, carved in 
stone, are now telling their painful and bitter story to 
the visitors. These are symbols of suffering and 
agony. It is the bleeding memory of the past. 

I am walking down the road, where once trenches 
were. The place is now covered with a growth of wild 
grasses. ... Soviet troops were breaking through to- 
wards Rogas in order to free the prisoners of the 
Nazi concentration camp, to save survivors from 
torture and extermination. It was here that my father 
took his platoon into attack and was.stopped by a 
German bullet. The grateful memory of those who 
survived lives on to this day. There is a small 
farmstead nearby, where a tombstone has been erec- 
ted with a long list of names carved on it. Those are 
the names of the soldiers who were first buried in a 
common grave and whose remains were later trans- 
ferred to the village cemetery. 

My generation did not take part in the war. But 
the war has left an indelible imprint in our souls. 
Soviet people emerged from the long and dreadful 
bloodshed, having retained their faith in man. In the 
Struggle against the Hitlerite invaders, they renoun- 
ced the laws of vengeance and destruction. In com- 
batting anti-humaneness they fulfilled their duty to 


117 








the country, giving their lives for the sake of the 
generations to come. 

... This young pilot had no idea that in the dogfight 
in the dark Moscow skies he was attacking a German 
ace. But he had a nasty feeling that he might not 
make it. I’m writing this on the basis of an analysis of 
that fight later carried out by expert pilots. There are 
diagrams, charts and the evidence of the fighter pilot. 
The Heinkel wouldn’t let the Soviet fighter man- 
oeuvre at close quarters. It glided away with the 
precision of an aerobatics performer. Admittedly, the 
Heinkel’s right engine began to “cough” (having 
been hit during the first sudden attack by the Soviet 
fighter plane), but despite this, the intruder was still 
out of reach. 

It was a night dogfight, in which the bomber and 
the fighter planes were running more or less the same 
chances. It was 10.55 p.m. when the Soviet fighter 
plane spotted the German bomber, stealthily ap- 
proaching Moscow at an altitude of 4,500 m, by the 
flashing of its exhaust flames. It immediately attack- 
ed, and forced the German bomber to swerve back. 
For the next half an hour the fighter pilot tried to 
engage the intruder in gunfire until his plane ran out 
of ammunition. Only a professional dogfighter can 
fully appreciate the feeling of impotence at the sight 
of a fleeing, but unhurt and triumphant, enemy. 

And then the Soviet pilot brought his plane into a 
ramming attack. Mentally, he calculated a trajectory 
from which to hit the Heinkel’s stabilizer with the 
fighter plane’s propeller. But when there were no 
more than fifteen metres separating the two aircraft, 
the Soviet pilot got hit by a bullet. His left arm hang 
lifeless. A precision hit was now out of the question. 
Having put his foot right down on the accelerator, 
the Soviet pilot brought the entire machine to ram 
the German plane. 


118 


—_—<—— + «i 


The screech was deafening. The fighter plane 
turned over. Having torn away the safety belts, the 
pilot fell out of the blazing aircraft. He went into an 
800 m free-fall jump, waiting for the flaming debris to 
fall past him onto the ground. He landed in a swamp. 
He consulted his watch. It has stopped during the 
collision. The hands were at 23 hours 28 minutes. 


This is the account of the famous ramming attack 
by Soviet air force pilot Viktor Talalikhin, which 
happened one night in August 1941. 


By the end of 1941, Hermann Goering, Com- 
mander of the German Air Force, the Luftwaffe, 
received a regular report about the aviation losses on 
the Eastern front. A special note attached to it added 
that there were many cases when Russian pilots 
would resort to ramming attacks in desperate situ- 
ations. It was causing nervous tension among valiant 
Germany’s air force aces. In answer to this, Goering’s 
aides circulated a statement among the Luftwaffe 
units, whereby, to pacify the German pilots, the 
“unheard-of breach of warfare rules” was interpreted 
as a lack of combat skills. 


The threat of a ramming attack, the most deadly 
method of air warfare, would on some occasions 
make a whole cluster of German bombers disperse at 
the mere sight of an approaching Soviet fighter plane. 
German pilots were perfectly aware of the “weapon” 
at the disposal of Soviet airmen, which had nothing 
to do with the level of technological sophistication, 
or with achievements in aircraft designing. This 
weapon was firmness of spirit. 

Why do I recall the war years today, when the idea 
of peace is winning over the consciousness of every 
nation? Not to glorify the wartime valiance, anyway. 
Not even to underscore that no one except the 
Russians dared to use the ramming technique in 


119 


ae 


those years. The reason why | am writing all this is to 
reiterate that the Soviet people were defending the 
values which had been achieved through great suffer- 
ing in the course of their preceding history, which 
encompassed the triumph of victories, the bitterness 
of defeats, the gains and the losses. 

Alexander Werth, a British journalist, was born in 
1901 in St. Petersburg. Having emigrated to England, 
he later went to Paris to take part in a programme 
sponsored by Columbia University. His book Russia: 
Hopes and Fears was published in 1969. The author, 
who had travelled extensively during his journalistic 
career, told the Western reader about the Soviet 
youngsters who built cities in the taiga during the 
1930s. Werth did not belittle the heroism of the 
Komsomol activists, nor did he praise their creative 
enthusiasm. He claimed to be taking a broader view 
on the subject by formulating a historical verdict on 
the wrongs that were done. Using extensive statistical 
data, and economic estimations, he attempted to 
prove that, viewed from the angle of balanced en- 
gineering calculation, the youngsters’ “venture” had 
been sheer madness. People worked in incredibly 
hard conditions. There were bad shortages of mach- 
inery and food... 

1 met Alexander Werth one year after the appear- 
ance of his book. 

“So, you don’t accept enthusiasm, unless it is 
backed with accurate engineering groundwork?” 

“It doesn’t appeal to me. I think that the meaning 
i, of life is in the living. That’s my credo, if you like...” 
I recalled this conversation quite recently. A youth 
! 


debate was in progress at the Moscow Conservatoire 
Hall. The topic of the discussion had been for- 
mulated somewhat unusually: “Do we live when 
we're alive? Are we dead after we die?” Among other 
controversial issues, there sprang up the subject of 


120 





ee  __ 


heroism. What’s heroism—a momentary spark, a 
bright, but accidental impulse? Or, is it a whole life- 
time, meaningful and worthwhile? Go into the fields 
on an autumn day, listen to the whisper of the great 
mass of golden wheat, look at the crops, tinted with 
silver. The heavy spikes of wheat are the graphic 
illustration of human accomplishment. But long 
before the crops can be harvested, the farmer has to 
worry about irrigation, machines and seeds. That’s 
life. Any feat, even if it seems to be absolutely 
spontaneous, has a solid background. 

..It’s drizzling. It’s nearly noon. We, the Soviet 
delegates to the 16th World Philosophical Congress, 
have arrived in Cologne to see the famous cathedral. 
“And there is one more place of interest in the city,” 
says our guide. “Hurry, before it closes for lunch.” 
We descend into a semi-basement. Long, damp cor- 
ridors. Shopwindows. Stupefied, we look at rags, 
which once were uniforms, Nazi decorations, burnt 
and blood-stained T-shirts, pieces of cloth held to- 
gether by safety pins. It’s a punk shop. One can buy a 
razor blade here and wear it in place of a neck-tie. 

“But where are the customers?” we ask the guide. 

The guide throws a sour glance at the tower clock. 
It’s 1 p.m. “The punks are still asleep at this time. 
They won’t come into the square until night.” 

Western newspapers reported one day, that Elvis 
Presley, the American rock’n’roll superstar, had 
bought a personal Boeing 707 for one and a half 
millon dollars. He ordered it to be equipped with a 
gym and a sauna. Rather a high life for a 20th 
century Philistine, isn’t it? Anyone wishing to excel 
Presley, will have to pay tens of millions of dollars 
for an orbital barber’s shop, or a submarine WC. To 
think how much our ancestors would envy us for 
being able to throw cigarette butts out of a 
spaceship’s porthole! Alas, the ideals of a “modest 


121 


and honest living”, which used to provide sufficient 
mental comfort in the past, have begun to reveal not 
so much honesty and modesty, as the scarcity of 
spiritual energy. The propaganda is telling the 
Philistine, not without success: stay away from po- 
litics (which is total filth and immorality), stay away 
from philosophy (it’s only for egg-heads). The impli- 
cation behind these indoctrinations is: it’s not up to 
you to transform life! What matters is to earn an 
honest living, to help your neighbours, to raise your 
kids. The rest is none of your business, you’re not 
responsible for it. 

I’m convinced that one of the indisputable benefits 
of socialism is the social involvement of the in- 
dividual, the conscientiousness of the personality, the 
meaningfulness and spirituality of human existence. 
Deep personal involvement in everything going on 
around us is extremely helpful in the effort to ac- 
celerate the country’s socio-economic and cultural 
advancement. 

Does this mean there are no serious problems in 
my country? Of course, there are. Take the levelling 
of wages, which has considerably undermine creative 
enthusiasm, the stagnation in various spheres of life, 
the dictates of the bureaucratic machinery. It is our 
firm conviction, however, that the process of per- 
estroika, which is under way in the country, will 
make it possible to fully reveal the true potential of 
socialism. We are concerned about the deformations 
in social orientations and in the structure of everyday 
values, which have taken place over recent years. The 
Soviet press has been recently focusing on such social 
quandaries as indifference and scepticism among 
young people, the spreading of alcoholism, drug 
addiction and crime. 

The “‘no-problem” way of presenting the realities 
of life, which until lately was inherent in our theoret- 


122 





ical and cultural activities, had done us a very bad 
turn. It resulted in a drop in public morals and 
undermined the noble feeling of solidarity, forged 
during the heroic time of the October Revolution, the 
first five-year plan periods, the Great Patriotic War 
against Nazi invaders and the postwar revival. Alien 
stereotypes, imposing vulgarity, poor taste and lack 
of spirituality, increasingly began to penetrate Soviet 
society. 

We are convinced today that man, in his creative 
diversity, is the leading character of history. The 
paramount task of our days is to elevate man cultur- 
ally and spiritually, by respecting his inner self, and 
augmenting his morality. The entire intellectual pot- 
ential of society, with all the opportunities offered by 
culture, is regarded by us as an instrument for 
moulding a socially-involved personality, which is 
spiritually rich, fair and conscientious. 

The democratic process has spurred on perestroika 
as a whole, and made society far more aware of its 
problems. The purpose is to carry out a radical 
renewal of all aspects of the country’s life, while fully 
utilizing the humanistic potential of the socialist 
system in every one of its decisive spheres— 
economic, socio-political and cultural. 


A FEW WORDS IN CONCLUSION 


Various programmes for the humanistic revival of 
mankind can be identified within the panorama of 
the modern world. Many Western philosophers see 
the potentialities for progress, including the human- 
ization of society, in technological advancement. It is 
their conviction that a new wave of cultural innov- 
ations will clear away the contradictions and colli- 
sions inherent in scientific and technological prog- 


123 


$$$ ——————— 


ress, and will harmonize man with the rest of the 
world. It is hoped that social cataclysms, cultural and 
racial problems will be resolved with the help of 
computers. The modern technological revolution is 
therefore interpreted not only as a technological turn- 
about, but also as a harbinger of a totally new 
civilization. 

There is no point in arguing over the concrete 
technological calculations advanced by the adherents 
of this viewpoint. But one should certainly be aware 
that many of them, in fact, disregard the subjective 
factor in history, and the part played by classes and 
social groups in history-making. It is not technology, 
but man that heralds the true humanistic revival. 

A different viewpoint is assumed by the neo- 
conservative version of humanistic renaissance. 
Thinkers of this orientation are nurturing the idea of 
reviving the archaic forms of consciousness, which, as 
they see it, are capable of returning the lost firmness 
of spirit to mankind, along with the capacity for 
imagination and romantic outlook. The neo- 
conservatives are talking of a “‘spiritual revolution”, 
by which they mean the revival of basic moral 
principles. The proponents of this humanistic pro- 
gramme have built a sort of cult out of unconscious, 
spontaneous desires, human impulses, instinctive 
drives and intuitive insights. The neo-conservatives 
have declared war on the dictates of reason, which 
allegedly impoverishes the perception of the world. 
They are calling for the shackles of analytical reason 
to be broken, as being incapable of reflecting the 
fullness of life. The humanistic inspiration is thus 
being taken from the spiritual treasuries of the past. 

Lastly, there are the neo-radicals who advocate 
humanistic renaissance. Their programme of action is 
based on their own historical outlook. According to 
the proponents of this theory, social dynamics are the 


= 


124 





a a 


result of unrelated impulses, stimulated drives and 
spontaneous, antagonistic, strivings. Renouncing the 
notion of the law-governed and objective evolution 
of the historical process, the radicals absolutize social 
cataclysms, cultural mutations and other “social 
landslides”. The starting point of this utopia is the 
criticism of capitalism as a historically-established 
form of civilization. Exposing its deficiencies from | 
abstract ethical and cultural positions, the radical 
thinkers call for “breaking away” from the develop- 
ing historical process, for disrupting the objective 
bonds and relations existing in today’s world in order 
to draw apart the curtains of history and step out 
onto a new cultural and historical scene. | 

The voluntaristic appeals for “disengaging” from 
history come along with “free” actions, leading to the 
setting up of new forms of social community, and to 
the idealization of communal and sectarian living. 
Hence various projects for an “alternative” society 
and a “counter-civilization”. Their designation is 
singular—-to launch man into some other world, in 
which all the vices of “industrialized society” will 
instantly disappear. 

Meanwhile, the height of the radicals’ desires is by 
no means social harmony, but something that may be } 
referred to as “non-society”. They contest the le- 
gitimacy of society as a totality of people, united 
through historically established and stable social 
bonds and relations. The radicals refuse to admit that 
such a community possesses durable features and is 
capable of making collective living inimitably 
singular. 

The Marxists’ ideal is absolutely different. They do 
not attempt to artificially construct an “ideal society 
of the future”, or to break away from the onward 
march of history. Yet in their theory and practice 
they continue to seek answers to many questions. 


125 








Perhaps some readers of this brochure believe that 
socialism implies the certain unification of the people. 
Nothing could be further from the truth. On the 
contrary, socialism suggests searching; it bases itself 
on a multitude of human values. 

Socialist society rests on a broad range of forms, 
tendencies and cultural traditions. The divergence of 
roads leading to Communism is a law of social 
evolution. There is no other way for Marxists to 
understand the problem of human society’s advance- 
ment along the road of social and cultural progress 
or the problem of the humanization of the history of 
mankind. 





Tlanen Cemewonwa Dypenna 
TYMAHH3M: TPAAMLUMH HW MAPAAOKCHI 
Ha axnemaicxom AzviKe 


Lena 45 x. 





