yj< OU 166117 > 5 

^^ I ^~ A) Xv^ 

^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ -^ 

^ CD 



OSMANIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

Call No. / 9^/ H Tfll Accession No. f f jj ^ 




This book shouic* he returned on or before the date last marked below. 



THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

NEW YORK BOlsTON CHICAGO DALLAS 
ATLANTA SAN FRANCISCO 

MACMILLAN & CO , LIMIIED 

LONDON BOMBAY CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE MACMTLLAN COMPANY 
OF CANADA, LIMITED 

TORONTO 



THE IDEALISM 

OF 

GIOVANNI GENTILE 



by 
ROGER W. HOLMES 



NEW YORK 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
1937 



Copyright, /pJ7, by 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

All rights reserved no part of this book may be 
reproduced in any form without permission in writing 
from the publisher, except by a reviewer who wishes 
to quote brief passages in connection with a review 
written for inclusion in magazine or newspaper. 

Set up and printed Published August, 1937. 
First printing 



SET UP BY BJIOWN BROTHERS LINOTYPERS 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

BY THE FERRIS PRINTING COMPANY 



To 
SIR JOHN ADAMS 

in grateful memory 

". . .of all of the men of his time whom I have 
known, he was the wisest and justest and best." 



Man is the measure of all things, of things that arc, that 
they are; and of things that are not, that they arc not. 

PROTAGORAS 



ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The historical material in this book has appeared in Die 
Tatwelt under the title, "Ein Kapitel der modernen italien- 
ischen Philosophic"; and part of the argument on Gentile's 
criteria of truth has been gathered into an article which will 
be printed this month in The Philosophical Review. Permis- 
sion to use this material is acknowledged with gratitude. Har- 
court Brace and Company, Charles Scribner's Sons, The Mac- 
millan Company, and the editors of The Journal of Philosophy 
have kindly authorized the use of quotations from several 
books and articles to which they hold the copyrights. Gentile, 
with generous confidence, has given me permission to translate 
and reproduce the great number of passages from the Sistema 
di logica which are so important a part of this book. I wish 
to express with special gratitude my indebtedness to Harvard 
University for a grant from the Sheldon Fund which gave 
me the opportunity of spending a half-year in Rome, attend- 
ing the inspiring lectures by Gentile at the University of 
Rome, studying his philosophy, and viewing political and edu- 
cational reforms; and a half-year in Berlin studying the Ger- 
man sources of idealism. Professor W. Ernest Hocking gave 
valuable assistance in his criticisms of the early drafts of my 
manuscript, and Professor E. A. Burtt made several sugges- 
tions of major importance which have been incorporated into 
the final revision of the material. Criticisms from Professor 
R. B. Perry with relation to the discussion of the egocentric 
predicament and of Professor C. I. Lewis with regard to the 
discussion of neo-positivism were most helpful. I am deeply 
indebted to these friends and to others at Harvard who will 

vii 



Vlll ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

recognize, I hope with approval, the influence of their thinking 
upon my own. My wife has shared intimately the joys and untir- 
ingly the labors of preparing the manuscript for publication. I 
wish the reader might know as well as I do how much these pages 
owe her for whatever clarity and intelligibility they possess. To 
her my humble and most affectionate gratitude. 

ROGER W. HOLMES. 
South Hadley, Mass. 
June 1, 1937. 



PREFACE 

ITALIAN idealism is older by half a century than German 
idealism. Its birth year is 1730, when Giambattista Vice's La 
scienza nuova was first published. In a period in which Italian 
thought was dominated by the contemplation of clear and dis- 
tinct ideas and the deduction of rational systems therefrom, 
La scienza nuova gave voice to the new concept of human 
knowledge as developing through a self -generative process. 
Vico described his new science as a history of human ideas 
according to which the metaphysics of the human mind ought 
to proceed. He stressed for the first time the subjective activ- 
ity of the individual as the foundation of logic, of the individ- 
ual spirit, and of the spirit of a whole people. To use Spa- 
venta's vivid metaphor, Vico was a comet among the naturalists 
and the mathematicians of the eighteenth century. 

But La scienza nuova became hidden in Italy, hidden even 
to Italians. The main current of idealism has accepted as its 
source the deservedly famous writings of Immanuel Kant. Its 
movement, from Kant through Schelling and Fichte to Hegel, 
was reported in Italy by Galluppi, Rosmini, and Gioberti. 
Pascuali Galluppi (1770-1846) was to Italian idealism what 
Kant was to the German school, the first critical philosopher. 
But he had the benefit of Kant's precedence. Antonio Ros- 
mini (17971855), while a great student and critic of German 
idealism, was more a Catholic philosopher than an idealist. He 
interpreted Galluppi as Hegel interpreted Kant, finding once 
more the concept of Being as a synthesis of the particular of 
sensation and the universal of intellection. But things human 
were to him insufficient: "Truth is not the work of human 

ix 



X PREFACE 

intelligence, but human intelligence the work of truth/' he 
wrote in Del principio supremo. Vincenzo Gioberti (1801- 
1852) raised Italian philosophy near the level of the German 
school. According to Spaventa he was the Fichte and the 
Schelling and the Hegel of Italian philosophy; the true Gio- 
bertian Idea is not Being, it is Creating: it is not the Entity, 
it is the Spirit. 

The later Italian study of German idealism took two dis- 
tinct directions. A youthful pursuit of Rosmini and Gioberti 
led Francesco Fiorentino (1834-1884) to an enthusiasm first 
for Italian and then for German philosophy. The founder of 
Neo-Kantianism, sometimes called the poet of Italian idealism, 
he exerted great influence. At this time there began a devoted 
study of Hegel at the University of Naples. The result was a 
Neapolitan school of Hegelianism of which Augusto Vera 
(1813-1885) and Bertrando Spaventa (1817-1883) were the 
great figures. From this study of Hegel evolved the two con- 
temporary idealistic tendencies in Italy; one through De Sanc- 
tis' (1818-1883) studies in literary criticism, and the other 
through Donato Jaja (1839-1914), a pupil of Spaventa and 
an outstanding teacher of men. The flower of the former move- 
ment is Benedetto Croce's (1866- ) philosophy of the 
spirit, which has expressed itself chiefly in the fields of aesthe- 
tics and the philosophy of history. The flower of the latter 
is the Actual Idealism * of Giovanni Gentile, expressed largely 
in logic, metaphysics, and the philosophy of the state. Croce 
and Gentile have long been associated, because they have 
stood together in defense of idealism, because of Gentile's 
many contributions to Croce's review, La Critica, and because 
they directed jointly the Later za publishing house in Bari. 
Though their roots are in the same Neapolitan Hegelianism 
and Gentile is slightly the younger man, Gentile is not a 

1 Capitalized here to indicate its technical significance. Capitals will be omitted 
in the remainder of the book. 



PREFACE XI 

disciple of Croce. Croce himself has said, "Our work was the 
spontaneous consequence of our spontaneous mental develop- 
ment and of the spontaneous agreement of our minds." a 
An historical comparison of the writings of the two men 
shows both their division of labor in trying to "shake Italy 
out of the doze of naturalism and positivism and back to ideal- 
istic philosophy" and the independence of their thought. 
Gentile was more influenced by Italian thinkers from Vico 
through Gioberti and by Hegel than he was by Croce. Their 
unfortunate break at the time of the Fascist revolution is 
evidence of their difference. 

Giovanni Gentile was born in the Sicilian town of Castel- 
vetrano on the thirtieth of May, 1875. 8 After a study of the 
classics in the R. Liceo at Trapani, he won the opportunity to 
go to the R. Scuola normale superiors at Pisa from 1893 to 
1897. These were decisive years. He and his fellows studied 
philosophy in breathless enthusiasm under the inspired Donato 
Jaja. Gentile took his degree with a thesis on Rosmini e Gio- 
berti which soon made him known as a gifted interpreter of 
Italian philosophy. There followed works of a similar nature; 
La filosofia di Marx and Dal Genovesi al Galluppi. He started 
teaching in the R. Liceo at Campobasso in 1898 and was trans- 
ferred in 1901 to the R. Liceo at Naples. He published in 1900 
L'insegnamento della filosofia nei licei, a defense of the study 
of philosophy in the secondary schools. In 1903 he inaugu- 
rated a course at the University of Naples with a lecture on 
La rinascita dell'idealismo, wherein he made acknowledge- 
ments to his teachers of the past and present and affirmed his 
new idealism as the enemy of naturalism and the inquiry into 

2 This and the following quotation are taken from the Introduction to Dino 
Bigongiari's translation of Gentile's La riforma dell'educazione. (Harcourt Brace, 
New York, 1922), p. vn 

3 For much of the material in this biographical sketch the writer is indebted to 
D'Amato's Gentile (Milano, Athena, 1927). See the Gentile bibliography in the 
Appendix for a more complete list of his writings and for more detailed information 
regarding the books mentioned. 



Xll PREFACE 

the essence of the spirit. Here the paths of Croce and Gentile 
converge. Gentile began a systematic and important study of 
the contemporary philosophy of Italy for La Critica, later pub- 
lished in four volumes under the title Le origini delta filosofia 
contentporanea in Italia. 

Gentile was chosen in 1907 to fill the chair of the history of 
philosophy in the University of Palermo. In this year, at the 
Sixth National Congress of the Federation of Secondary School 
Teachers, he attained national prominence as the defender of 
religion in the schools against the attempts of the positivists 
led by Sig. Salvemini to secularize them. In the next year he 
published Scuola e filosofia, a collection of short writings on 
educational problems, begun in 1900 with the prophetic // 
concetto scientifico della pedagogia. At Palermo Gentile inter- 
ested himself in the relation between religion and philosophy, 
and the result was his // modernismo e i rapporti fra religione 
e filosofia. There followed three important volumes of re- 
search: Bernardino Telesio, republished two years later in / 
problemi della scolastica e il pensiero Italiano, and La rijorma 
della dialettica hegeliana. The work on Hegel is extremely sig- 
nificant for actual idealism. 

While at Palermo Gentile was entrusted with the teaching 
of pedagogy at the University. His meditations on educational 
problems, as a result of this teaching, are responsible for the 
Sommario di pedagogia come scienza filosofica, a masterwork 
in the idealistic philosophy of education. Gentile's actual ideal- 
ism first received concrete expression in an article on L'atto del 
pensiero come otto puro, in the Annuario della Biblioteca filoso- 
fica for 1912. The polemics between Croce and Gentile which 
followed mark the doctrinal difference between these two men. 4 
In 1914 Gentile was called to Pisa to fill Jaja's chair. He 
inaugurated his course with the significant L'esperienza pura 

* For Gentile 's articles see Saggi critici: seconde serie (Firenze, Vallecchi, 1926) : 
Croce 's two articles are republished in Conversazioni critichi (Bari, Laterza, 1927). 



PREFACE Xiii 



e la realta storka. During the period of the World War there 
appeared three important systematic expressions of actual 
idealism: Teoria generate dello spirito come otto puro, Sistema 
di logica come teoria del conoscere, and / jondamenti delta 
filo sofia del diritto. Gentile was an active leader in mind and 
body in the service of his country during the war. His political 
writings of that period and immediately after were collected 
in Guerra e Fede and Dopo la vittoria. He also published an 
important historical contribution of Stttdi Vichiani. In 1918 
he was called to the faculty of the University of Rome as pro- 
fessor of philosophy and has absented himself from that chair 
for only twenty months, to assume public office. 

From 1920 on Gentile published voluminously as a result 
of his researches in Italian philosophy and literature. He also 
published a series of lectures on the philosophy of religion, 
Discorsi di religione, which deserve attention. In the recon- 
struction period he participated in a heated controversy over II 
problema scolastica del dopoguerra. After the revolution, in 
October 1922, Gentile, though at the time not a member of the 
Fascist Party, was called by Premier Mussolini to head the 
Ministry of Public Instruction. He held that position until 
June of 1924, when he was relieved of the work at his own 
request. His writings as minister are collected in Fascismo al 
governo della scuola. The educational laws of 1922 were the 
first new and organic ones Italy had had since the Casati Laws 
of 1859! They have been highly praised and severely con- 
demned, as all good reforms will be. When Gentile left the 
Ministry he had done his work. The rest could be, and was, 
left to his followers. Gentile was more a philosopher than a 
Minister. He made the mistakes that most philosophers would 
make when given the opportunity to be kings. His errors were 
not few, but they were the errors of the amateur politician, the 
sudden changes which stimulate opposition. He was most 
critically attacked on philosophic grounds by positivists and 



XIV PREFACE 

Catholics. The noisiest outcry, however, came from those 
officials whom his introduction of efficient organization had 
relieved of office and from those students denied entrance to 
various institutions by a severe but much needed raising of 
academic standards. Gentile must have been glad to return to 
his chair of philosophy. 

Since 1922 Gentile has been a Senator of the King and a 
member of the Grand Council, a member of the committee on 
the reform of the constitution of the state, has headed numer- 
ous cultural and educational groups, and is now in charge of 
the publication of the Grande Enciclopedia Italiana. In 1920 
he founded his own review, Giornale critico della filosofia ita- 
liana; he was founder of the Institute nazionalc j as cist a dl <~ul- 
tura, and edits its organ, Educazione fascista. He has pub- 
lished several works on political philosophy, notably Che cosa 
& il fascismo, Fascismo e cultura, and Origini e dottrina del 
fascismo. Among his most recent writings is an important book 
in the field of aesthetics. He contributes often to current poli- 
tical, educational, and philosophical discussions. Professor H. 
Wilden Carr said of him, "It is doubtful if there is a more 
influential teacher in the intellectual world today." 5 



* # 

A study of Italian idealism shows two features to be out- 
standing. In the first place, idealistic tendencies seem to find 
a natural home in Italian minds. From the time of Vico they 
have welcomed a type of thinking that has counted the activity 
of the knowing subject among the contributions to knowledge. 
An imaginative and artistic people, they seem to prefer the 
actuality of existence as we interpret it to the bare "givenness" 
of existence objectively considered. Like the Germans, they 

6 Gentile, The Theory of Mind as Pure Act. Trans by H Wilden Carr* (Mao 
millan, London, 1922), p. xix. 



PREFACE XV 

are not afraid to question common sense, as the thinker who 
embraces idealism must do. But unlike most of the Germans, , 
their texts of idealism are characteristically lyrical and poetic, 
the continuous reiteration more or less elaborated of a simple 
and full-hearted point of view. 

Secondly, actual idealism seems to terminate one of the 
major developments of the idealistic position. It has been part 
of Gentile's function to criticize preceding idealisms. He refers 
most often in his historical criticism of idealism to Kant and 
Hegel. Though he rejoices in the tradition set by Vico, has 
been a great scholar of Galluppi and Rosmini and Gioberti, 
and was strongly influenced by Spaventa, one feels that he 
found his greatest stimulation in the German idealists. He 
carries out the idealistic demand for a universal and necessary 
knowledge with unique rigor, and brings the tendency toward 
the exclusive reality of the mind to its logical limit by recog- 
nizing that any division of reality is a product of the act of 
thinking and that if we seek certain knowledge of the real 
we must look toward the act of thinking in its essential unity. 

It is these two features that make a study of actual idealism 
both significant and interesting. One might trace the develop- 
ment of Gentile's idealism from its beginnings in educational 
thought, through the negative criticism of the Teoria dello 
spirito to the constructive contribution of the Sistema di logica 
and thence to his later political philosophy. But for an under- 
standing of the position this course is unnecessary, for Gen- 
tile's philosophic writings, beginning with La rinascita delV 
idealismo and ascending through La riforma della dialettica 
hegeliana and L'atto del pensiero come atto puro to the more 
systematic works, represents a constant development and con- 
tinuous realization. There is no retracing of steps or negation 
of doctrines previously held. The Sistema di logica contains 
the key to all that goes before it and all that follows. Gentile's 
interpretation of art, religion, science, education, government 



XVI PREFACE 

and history is probably best studied in writings bearing di- 
rectly on these subjects. But the validity of this interpretation 
can be studied only in the philosophic judgments, the logic and 
the epistemology and the metaphysics, which underlie it. These 
judgments and the philosophic system which they constitute 
are to be found in the Sistema di logica, which Gentile has him- 
self characterized as the constructive expression of his philos- 
ophy which follows the destructive criticism embodied in the 
Teoria dello spirito* 

Therefore this study of actual idealism will concern itself 
chiefly with an exposition and critical estimate of the doctrines 
contained in the Sistema di logica. To many readers, however, 
a brief historical and systematic description of actual idealism 
will be helpful by way of introduction. It may also be prof- 
itable to consider in words other than Gentile's the metaphy- 
sical and epistemological difficulties with which he finds him- 
self faced and the reasons why the solutions to these difficulties 
given by philosophers of the past are to him not satisfactory. 
Hence Part One will describe Gentile's position and restate 
his argument. For a more detailed account of the destructive 
aspects of this philosophy the reader may refer to Professor 
Carr's translation of the Teoria dello spirit o. 

Sistema di logica; (Bari, Laterza; Vol. 1, 1922; Vol. II, 1923), Vol. II, p. 327. 



CONTENTS 



Chapter One. 
Chapter Two. 



Chapter Three. 
Chapter Four. 



PREFACE HISTORICAL 

PART ONE 
INTRODUCTION 

GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 
THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 

PART TWO 
THE SISTEMA Dl LOGIC A 

THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 
THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 



PART THREE 

THE SISTEMA Dl LOGIC A CRITICALLY 
CONSIDERED 



Chapter Five. 
Chapter Six. 
Chapter Seven. 
Chapter Eight. 
Chapter Nine. 
Chapter Ten. 



THE PROBLEM 

THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 
THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 
THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 
FORM AND MATTER 

THE GENTILIAN METAPHYSICS AND THE 
MEANINGFUL 



PART FOUR 
CONCLUSION 

Chapter Eleven. THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 

APPENDIX 

A GENTILE BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX 



PAGE 

ix 



3 

32 



57 
75 



in 

121 

137 
l62 

185 
203 



225 

249 
259 



PART ONE 
INTRODUCTION 



CHAPTER ONE 
GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 

ACTUAL idealism is essentially a simple doctrine arising out 
of an unusually rigorous interpretation of the function of philos- 
ophy and a persistent endeavor to discover the consequent 
nature of truth. Gentile seeks what philosophers have long 
sought, a universal and necessary knowledge made up of un- 
deniable judgments about the nature of reality. His funda- 
mental point of departure from the philosophies of the past is 
found in a single criticism which he makes of them all. He seeks 
to make an accusation out of the recognized fact that in all of 
|ihem truth and reality are independent of the act of knowing. 
His accusation is that such truths must lack ultimate verity and 
that such realities must be abstract. Philosophers before Gen- 
tile have been aware of the difficulties involved in building a 
system from such truths and describing such a reality, but none 
before have thought these difficulties as great as those involved 
in a doctrine for which all reality is gathered within the unity 
of the act of thinking. 

So far as Gentile is concerned the movement which has cul- 
minated in actual idealism began with Kant. It was Kant who 
understood so thoroughly the necessity of introducing the activ- 
ity of the knowing subject as contributory to a strictly philo- 
sophic knowledge. But Kant's was only a first step. He left unex- 
plained, and inexplicable within his doctrine, the multiplicities 
of sensation and of the categories. Whence these multiplicities? 
They represent one of the clearly recognized difficulties in the 
Kantian idealism. Like many others, Gentile is unwilling to take 



4 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

these multiplicities for granted. Furthermore, the Noumenon 
at the foundation of Kant's doctrine is arrived at by way of a 
judgment which may at least be described as uncertain. An 
entity, separated from and therefore objective to the act of 
knowing, may be guessed at, but can it be known? Finally, 
whence the distinction between knowledge and action implied 
by Kant in the separation of pure and practical reasons? This 
third criticism of Kant is less common than the other two but as 
old as the Gorgias in origin. If knowledge is the only real activ- 
ity, practical action is rather the outward and visible sign of 
knowledge than a result of it. Action cannot belie true knowl- 
edge: to say that a culprit "knows better" loses meaning. It is 
this aspect of Gentile's doctrine that gives it the name actual 
idealism. 

It is curious that Gentile does not refer more often to Fichte, 
for of all German philosophers Fichte is most nearly Gentile's 
spiritual brother. They come at identical points in the histories 
of their respective countries, preach the same political philos- 
ophy, and hold in the same high regard the education given by 
a nation's schools. They make the same criticism of the Noume- 
non, and reach out toward the same concept of the dialectic 
process as the key to necessity and universality in knowledge. 
For both men the morally free function of self-awareness is a 
central concept. For both its activity, rather than the influence 
of independent objects, gives experience. When Gentile char- 
acterizes his system as "actual idealism" he should recognize the 
actualism of the Fichtean philosophy as pioneer work in rela- 
tion to his own. If there is any truth in generalizations about 
the doctrines of Fichte and Gentile, it may be said that while 
Fichte was the discoverer of the dialectic upon which Gentile is 
enabled to build his logic, he did not attach to it the same onto- 
logical significance. He did reduce the multiplicity of Kantian 
categories to the unity of the creative activity of the Ego, as 
Gentile also does. But beyond that point the differences begin 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 5 

to appear. In the first place, for Fichte the dialectic activity 
always rests in the Ego. This Ego, as creative of the world, 
seems in Fichte to possess a real existence previous to that crea- 
tion. We must not at this point define Gentile's Ego, but we 
may say that for Gentile the Ego must find its existence in the 
act of creating the real of which it is a part. Fichte begins with 
a real thinking entity whereas Gentile begins with the act of 
thinking which must be creative even of that entity. Quite 
clearly the difficulties which Gentile must face, and which Fichte 
avoids, are those usually attached to solipsism. In the second 
place, Fichte is removed from solipsism in that he finds a place 
in his metaphysics for the Absolute Ego which he calls God, not 
a personal God but God as the moral order of the world. In the 
Fichtean philosophy it is this moral order, previous to the act 
of thinking about it and to every action, which gives moral sanc- 
tion to the free act. But it is easily seen from what has already 
been said that this way is not open to Gentile. For him the act 
of thinking must somehow contain within itself all moral and 
all truth value. The world order, so characteristic of the Fich- 
tean philosophy as pre-eminently moral, is for Gentile a meta- 
physical impossibility. We may say that Fichte's motives, rising 
out of his interpretation of the function of philosophy, are the 
same as Gentile's, and that the ingredients employed in the dia- 
lectic of Fichte are all that Gentile employs. However Gentile 
carries the metaphysical inquiry beyond either the individual or 
the Absolute Ego to that ultimate stage of one type of idealistic 
thinking at which all existence centers around the act of think- 
ing in and for itself and creative of everything which it thinks. 

The use which Hegel made of Fichte's doctrine is evidence 
that Fichte went only part of the way. Hegel interpreted the 
dialectic as informing us of an Absolute wherein all theses and 
antitheses are gathered. For Hegel the Absolute is the total 
thought of the world which the finite thinking of the individual 
and of the race is ever approaching but which it can never reach. 



6 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

The Absolute is knowable in the sense that it is the ultimate 
reality which gives verity to thinking. But in itself it is un- 
knowable because infinite. Gentile's criticism of Hegel is in 
part similar to his criticism of Kant and Fichte. If the Nou- 
menon and the Ego cannot be known with certainty because 
separated from the act of thinking, the Absolute is in the same 
sense unknowable. How can we find ultimate verity for the 
thinking by which it is initially "known"? The Hegelian meta- 
physics is productive of the norms of the Hegelian logic, but 
what are the norms of the logic by which we first arrive at the 
metaphysics? To Gentile the Absolute is quite as unthinkable 
philosophically as the world order of Fichte. Mr. C. E. M. Joad 
puts the issue with great clarity in his Introduction to Modern 
Philosophy. Hegel taught as Fichte did, he says, that thought 
is a living concrete reality, the only existent of which we have 
certain knowledge, that from which all interpretations of reality 
must issue. Gentile finds it incompatible with this that there 
could be a total concrete unity of thought (the Absolute) which 
gives intelligibility to individual thinking. Later Hegelians in 
England and the United States clung to the latter tenet: Gentile 
holds to the former. And it is out of this former tenet, previ- 
ously asserted by both Fichte and Hegel but taken in more strict 
seriousness by Gentile, that Gentile builds his entire actual 
idealism. 

Gentile's relation to the course of German idealism is clear. 
He starts at the same point at which Fichte did, correcting and 
furthering the initial attempt of Kant to introduce the activity 
of the knower among the contributions to certain knowledge. 
He believes, as Fichte did, that the basis of certain knowledge 
must somehow be contained within the dialectic of the thinking 
process. But he does not fear those difficulties which prevented 
Fichte from arguing that the only philosophic real is the dialec- 
tic in act, alone and unattached, and which today continue to 
prevent a more earnest exploration of the path Gentile has 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 7 

chosen. It was probably Fichte's recognition of these difficulties 
that was responsible for the direction taken by the Hegelian 
school. Hence it is Gentile's position that idealism, defined as 
that school of thought which attempts to find the material of 
thinking within the act of thinking, must retrace its steps from 
Hegel to Fichte and, beginning with the act of thinking, derive 
from it alone a universal and necessary knowledge. Gentile be- 
lieves sincerely that this can be done and with profit. 

In this return to Fichte and "reform" of Hegel, Croce is in 
company with Gentile. The history of the relation of these two 
men's thinking previous to the revolution is given by Croce in 
his Introduction to The Reform of Education: 1 

. . . Our general conception of philosophy as simply philosophy of 
the spirit of the subject, and never of nature, or of the object- 
has developed a peculiar stress in Gentile, for whom philosophy is 
above all that point in which every abstraction is overcome and 
submerged in the concreteness of the act of thought; whereas for 
me philosophy is essentially methodology of the one real and con- 
crete Thinking of historical Thinking. So that while he strongly 
emphasizes unity, I no less energetically insist on the distinction and 
dialectics of the forms of the spirit as a necessary formation of the 
methodology of historical judgment. . . . 

For both Croce and Gentile only the mind is real. But Croce 
makes a division of the activity of the mind into Theoretical 
(intuition and conception) and Practical (economic and ethi- 
cal) moments. As Mr. Joad says, these articulations of experi- 
ence are not the result of the mind's reflection upon or deduction 
about itself, they are assumed or given. They describe the char- 
acter of experience. We have remarked that Gentile carries the 
tendency toward the exclusive reality of the mind to its logical 
limit. Such being the case, even the four-fold division of Croce's 

1 Op. cit , p. x. The relation between Croce and Gentile after the advent of 
Fascism has, unfortunately, been bitter. For Croce's criticism of the Sistema di 
logica see La Critica for the 20th of January, 1924. On Gentile's side see the 
epilogue to the Sistema di logica and the Proemio in the first number of the 
Giornale critico in 1920. 



8 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

must go. Any multiplicity, be it that of the mind and something 
outside of the mind or even a division of the activity of the mind, 
is arbitrary. As in the case of the Noumenon in the begin- 
ning, whence this division? How do we know that there is such 
a division? Croce can give no answer which is universal and 
necessary. 

We have reached the point beyond which we cannot go. First 
we lost the Noumenon, then the Ego, and then the Absolute. 
And now we lose even the activity of the mind in any but its 
essential unity as act of thinking. Obviously we cannot lose the 
act of thinking. Not only is the act of thinking real but it is the 
only real and is indivisible. Everything else is immanent in it. 
This is the stuff out of which the web of actual idealism is spun. 



* * 

Actual idealism suffers appreciably from the difficulty en- 
countered in describing it. Its most essential characteristic is 
that of activity. The familiar example of the oak, used to illus- 
trate the Aristotelian doctrine of development, offers a clear 
parallel. The reality of the oak is the reality of a process of de- 
velopment. It involves various changes of form and of matter 
which, taken together, give the life history of the tree. At no 
single point in that history do we have the real oak. The 
instant yields only a still-life abstraction of the dynamic and 
changing tree; it misses the essential unity of the whole. The 
oak is more than the acorn, more than the gnarled old veteran; 
more than the skeleton holding tenaciously to its withered 
leaves, more than the green foliage of midsummer. And, simi- 
larly, the act of thinking of Gentile, the pensiero pensante, is 
something more than any individual thought once thought, any 
pensiero pens at o. The real for Gentile is the act of thinking, 
not a static concept produced by that act. 

Many commentators in interpreting actual idealism have 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 9 

made the mistake of attaching acts of thinking to some entity 
which might entertain them and thereby give them unity. The 
unity is there and demands adequate explanation. But it is 
essential to an understanding of Gentile's doctrine to realize that 
for him this unity of which we all are aware can be given only 
by the act of thinking in and for itself. Obviously, in a philos- 
ophy for which only thinking is real the empirical individual 
which is so often invoked is not helpful. The errors into which 
commentators have fallen demonstrate that it is not so obvious 
that this unity cannot be given even by a transcendent a Ego. 
Though Gentile does not himself always realize it, the Ego is as 
indefensible within a doctrine of complete immanentism as the 
empirical individual or any other entity taken as prior to the act 
of thinking. Like the empirical individual it is in certain 
respects a convenient abstraction, but it should not claim meta- 
physical significance. No matter how extreme it may seem at 
first, one must constantly remind oneself that over and above 
the act of thinking in and for itself there is for Gentile nothing 
that enjoys real existence. Although idealism is usually de- 
scribed as egocentric, we shall see later that Gentile's doctrine 
is more accurately described as logocentric. The distinction is 
important. The act of thinking, with its self-contained logical 
principles, is all that Gentile has to utilize. No concept for which 
that act is responsible is eligible for metaphysical consideration 
except to be dismissed as an abstraction. This is the root of the 
difficulty in describing actual idealism. It is almost impossible 
to set down Gentile's metaphysics, for even "act of thinking" 
must be entertained not as a fact but as the act itself in which 
it is entertained. This idea is no more difficult than that with 
which we are all familiar which states that happiness is found 
only in the seeking, of it. For Gentile reality, like happiness, is 
found only in the process which seeks it. 

3 This word, which will appear often in the present study, is used in its literal 
sense to describe whatever is considered to lie beyond the bounds of the act of 
thinking. It has no connection with the Kantian meaning. 



10 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Another major point which will be helpful at the beginning 
of any account of actual idealism, though one in seeming con- 
tradiction with what has just been said, is that this doctrine is 
essentially humanistic. This is not to say that human beings as 
such are of major importance, but rather that human thinking 
occupies the central position. Actual idealism is humanistic in 
the sense that the act of thinking as we know it is essentially 
a human phenomenon. It was the non-humanistic aspect of the 
philosophies prevalent in Italy at the turn of the century that 
provided the stimulus for Gentile's work. The Catholic philos- 
ophers had placed great emphasis on the transcendent realities 
of religion, God and moral law. The human had by these men 
been made subordinate to the superhuman. They were followed 
by an unusually militant school of positivists, headed by 
Roberto Ardigo. This second group stressed the importance of 
nature and natural law. They had subordinated human beings 
to the external world and its hierarchy of connexities. Gentile 
has chosen to concern himself with the sense in which God and 
moral law, and nature and natural law, and any other entities 
which have in the history of philosophy been taken as ultimate, 
are themselves the creations of man's thinking. He believes that 
it is in the progress of man's thinking that God has been given a 
place in the realm of value, and nature a place in the cosmos. 
No doctrine could be more thoroughly humanistic than this in 
which man is creator of the worlds in which he lives. This crea- 
tion must, of course, obey certain laws. For Gentile these laws 
come from the very act of thinking itself. That is why the 
fundamental doctrines are to be found in a system of logic. It is 
Gentile's persistent inquiry into the nature of human thinking 
that must be studied with the greatest care. 

The question foremost in the minds of those who study actual 
idealism is that of how the various multiplicities with which 
we are familiar are possible if the only real is the act of thinking 
in its unity. In a sense this entire study will constitute an at- 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM n 

tempt to answer that question. It will be best at this point, how- 
ever, to content ourselves with a bare statement of the status 
which these multiplicities enjoy in the Gentilian metaphysics. 
If only the act of thinking is real what description can we find 
of the individual objects which surround us in a room? Their 
importance to us is obvious. And what about ourselves as indi- 
viduals? What is our status? We speak easily of ourselves, 
scratching our mosquito bites or planning our futures. We 
usually consider ourselves to be more than mere acts of think- 
ing. Also, what of the laws of nature, which carry on whether 
we regard them or not? They are not only vitally important but 
they seem to be essentially independent of our thinking acts. 
What can Gentile say of all of these things while retaining a 
doctrine which in its very beginnings denies them metaphysical 
recognition? Everyone will admit that it would be suicidal for 
the actual idealist to deny a legitimate and meaningful thinking 
about the multiplicity of objects which transcend the act of 
thinking. There are those who on this score dismiss Gentile with 
the charge that he has been indiscreet enough to bring about his 
own destruction by his insistence upon a relentless immanent- 
ism. A moment's generou~ consideration will, however, lead in 
a direction which is probably more fruitful and certainly more 
reasonable. Gentile is an intelligent man, and no intelligent man 
is interested in developing a philosophy which is palpably 
absurd because self-destructive. If Gentile has erred in his 
thinking he is too competent a thinker to have erred so early. So 
much for a certain type of criticism. 

We shall assume it reasonable to suppose that this too-prompt 
denial to actual idealism of the possibility of deriving multiplic- 
ities may be laid to undue haste in interpreting the meaning 
intended when it takes a position which appears to be so extreme. 
Gentile does not mean that there are no objects in our rooms or 
rooms in our houses, nor that there are not men and women in 
the world, nor that there are no natural laws. He does not mean 



12 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

that these things are figments of the imagination. He argues only 
that the demands of logic limit the conclusions that may be 
reached in our thinking about these entities and laws, that they 
may be studied in and for themselves but that such a study will 
not lead to an understanding of reality. And the understanding 
of the real is the problem of philosophy. Perhaps the major dis- 
agreement between Gentile and those who will not go his way 
begins right at this point. When Samuel Johnson defied Bishop 
Berkeley by striking his cane on the pavement he was giving 
utterance to a demand upon philosophers which most of them 
feel called upon to respect. Not so Gentile. Most philosophers 
consider it the function of philosophy to refine, or illuminate, 
common sense. It is common sense to believe in a pluralistic 
universe : it is common sense to believe that other men exist : it is 
common sense to place active reliance on the laws of nature. 
Most philosophers move away from coriimon sense only to ex- 
plain it more clearly. Gentile sees in common sense something 
essentially non-philosophical. He moves away from it in order 
to deny it significance. Furthermore, most philosophers agree 
that the study of parts leads to an understanding of the whole, 
that the study of these multiplicities leads to an understanding 
of the real even though the multiplicities are not in themselves 
real. Gentile is in fundamental disagreement with this position. 
He begins by defining the "real" as the totality of the thinkable, 
and asserts that the only proper metaphysical study of parts 
considers them as parts-of-the-whole. Certainly the multiplicities 
above mentioned are not usually considered in this manner but 
rather as separately existing objects otherwise they would not 
be multiplicities. 

Perhaps we may understand this position better by way of a 
symbolic example. There is a watch on the table before me. It 
may be considered either in its unity as a timepiece or as a multi- 
plicity of parts. I can emphasize the multiplicity by taking the 
watch apart and spreading the parts around on the table. I may 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 13 

now proceed to classify these objects. I may classify them ac- 
cording to material, setting the jewels apart from the metals and 
then subdividing according to metals. I may classify them in a 
number of ways according to weight. I may classify them accord- 
ing to function, separating the moving parts from the stationary 
ones. I may classify the wheels according to the number of 
cogs in each. I may classify the objects according to shape, mov- 
ing even into the aesthetic sphere. And so on ad infinitum. Sup- 
pose I bring a physicist, a chemist, a metallurgist, an artist, and 
a watchmaker to study these parts. Each acting in his peculiar 
junction will make a different study of them. Each of the first 
four will study them without regard to their function in the 
whole, will treat them as abstractions. The watchmaker, in con- 
trast, will study them as parts of a watch; that is, concretely. 
Considered in relation to the watchmaker's art the studies of the 
first four will be partial, each alone unable to account for the 
watch functioning as a timepiece. Although the contributions of 
each of the four are of unquestionable importance to the watch- 
maker they are abstract in the sense that they are as studies 
entirely arbitrary in relation to his work. The assembled watch 
tells time; neither the physical characteristics, nor the chemical 
elements, nor the alloys, nor the shapes as shapes tell time. 

The parallel should be clear. The parts of the watch corre- 
spond to the multiplicities in human experience : the unity of the 
assembled watch corresponds to the unity of the real. As long 
as we study multiplicities as such, whether atoms or stars or 
men or forms or ideas, we are pursuing arts and sciences which 
are partial and abstract in relation to the more comprehensive 
study of philosophy. Although these arts and sciences make 
contributions which are of importance to the philosopher, the 
systems which are developed within them are unimportant be- 
cause they are arbitrary. Gear ratios and coefficients of friction 
and tensile strengths and geometrical shapes exist, in the sense 
that without an understanding of them the watch could not be 



14 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

built. The parts exist in the same sense. But neither these scien- 
tific concepts nor the parts exist, in the sense that none taken by 
themselves will tell time. The telling of time is to the findings of 
these four men as the judgments of philosophy are to the find- 
ings of the arts and sciences. And the watch itself is to its parts 
as reality is to the multiplicities with which we are familiar. 
Gentile chooses to define the real in terms of the unity into which 
all multiplicities are gathered. According to this definition none 
of the multiplicities as such may claim real existence. One other 
point. Surely the watchmaker is not the only one who can tell 
time. Perhaps he has made the accurate telling of time possible, 
but he is not the only man who carries a watch. While the 
philosopher is the man whose function is the study of reality, he 
is not the only one who thinks about it or acts in terms of it. 
The thing that the watchmaker alone can do is to build the 
watch. The thing that the philosopher alone can do is to inter- 
pret reality. The point on which the philosopher may insist is 
that the studies of multiplicities as such will never lead to the 
understanding of reality. 

Consider the application of this doctrine to two of the most 
prominent systems of multiplicities about which we think, 
human beings and the objects of nature. At first acquaintance 
with Gentile's doctrine that only the act of thinking exists one 
is tempted to confine him to the acts of his own thinking, for 
they are the only ones about which he can know with certainty. 
How can he know that other men, if there are any, think? The 
"argument" that he finds all other men like himself in every 
other respect and that therefore they are like him in respect to 
thinking is essentially not an argument but a conjecture. Gen- 
tile has a more defensible answer than that. He consistently 
speaks of "acts of thinking of other men" and of "other men" 
themselves as abstractions. Take, for example, the latter. The 
problem of what we mean by "other men" began early in philos- 
ophy. Do we mean physical objects with certain extensive 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 15 

characteristics? Do we mean the Idea of man? Do we mean a 
biological organism which performs certain definite functions? 
It is not difficult to show that any of these is an abstraction, a 
concept useful only in a limited number of situations. It is not 
difficult to show that no matter how persistently we examine the 
meaning of "other men" we never come upon anything but uni- 
versals, which have a status only in our thinking. And it is not 
difficult to show that the entire group of abstractions about 
"other men" is an abstraction on the level at which men are 
differentiated from animals, inanimate objects, or Ideas. It is in 
this sense that "other men" are denied a real existence. They 
simply cannot be found except in the universals according to 
which we choose to think them. This is not to say that we must 
not think about "other men" or their acts, in fact Gentile is 
among the first to insist that we cannot think without employing 
these multiplicities. Abstractions are necessary and inescap- 
able. But Gentile insists that if we are to give them significance 
it must be within a system of concepts that expresses only an 
arbitrary aspect of that unity of existence into which he gathers 
all multiplicities when he speaks of the metaphysical. 

The same argument holds with reference to the external 
world. No human experience is more common than that which 
tells us that we are surrounded by external objects. Nothing is 
more certain than that it is advisable for us to act in respectful 
consideration of them and of their laws. Natural scientists have 
found many ways of studying them. But each studies them 
according to fixed aspects and each studies them as external 
objects. It would be futile to disapprove these scientific studies, 
indeed Gentile does not wish to do so. But it is not futile to limit 
the scope of their significance. To apply the findings of physics 
to human beings may be quite inadvisable: the concepts of an 
exact science may not be applicable to human beings. Whether 
the object of study is man or the cosmos the principle is the 
same. The natural scientist is seeking an adequate and practical 



l6 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

conceptual system. It is not difficult to show that no one system, 
Ptolemaic or Copernican for example, is more right than an- 
other. But one will usually be more useful in interpreting past 
experience for future action. And whatever the conceptual sys- 
tem, it is founded on certain presuppositions or postulates. It is 
not that Gentile would wave the world of nature out of existence 
in a practical sense, or even that he would ask us to stop think- 
ing in terms of the concepts of natural science; it is only that by 
the character of our study of nature it does not qualify as a 
study of the real, interpreted as he interprets it. The chief differ- 
ence, perhaps, between actual idealism and the metaphysics 
which it is endeavoring to replace is that it limits more rigorously 
the philosophic problem. 

We have said that Gentile's study of the metaphysical prob- 
lem will be essentially a logical one since his real is logocentric. 
It will be a study of the act of thinking. This we shall investigate 
in detail later. Suffice it now to describe the major aspects of 
the logic of thought as Gentile interprets them. Man first devel- 
oped a logic of contradictories; this is the logic of all abstract 
systems, whether empirical or rational, and hence called by 
Gentile the "logic of the abstract." We know the general char- 
acteristics of this logic very well. We know, for example, that 
it is dependent upon initial postulates at both the foundational 
and the post-foundational levels. We know also that no matter 
how high the degree of elaboration nothing is developed that 
was not contained in the initial postulates. We know further 
that in the employment of the logic of contradictories initial 
postulates must be accepted without question. These initial 
postulates transcend the act of thinking in the sense that they 
lie outside of it and lend it validity. This being the case, it is 
obvious that Gentile must reject this logic and seek one which 
shall find the ultimate verity of our thinking within the act 
of thinking itself. This quest is the quest of actual idealism. 

At this point Gentile draws heavily upon the dialectic of 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 17 

Fichte, for it is in this dialectic and the Hegelian logic for which 
it is responsible that he finds the answer to his logical, and 
finally his metaphysical, question. The phrase, "act of think- 
ing," implies mobility and change. To speak simply, that act 
may be described according to stages each of which is an ab- 
straction because only a partial aspect of the whole. The first 
stage is the initial act of thinking, the second is the thought 
which is produced by that act, and the third is the synthesis of 
the two in the new act of thinking which takes cognizance of 
what has gone before. An analysis such as this over-simplifies 
the situation, almost to the point of falsification. Obviously 
these stages merge into one another. But the progress involved 
is one, according to Gentile, which our thinking cannot escape; 
it is the nature of thinking in action. And it suggests an inter- 
pretation of human thought and action which is central to actual 
idealism. 

To these stages correspond the major phases of human activ- 
ity. The first stage is that of self-expression, exemplified in the 
artistic endeavors of man. All men seek self-expression for its 
own sake. When Beethoven wrote a piano sonata he was crea- 
tive for the sake of creation. When my next-door neighbor 
designs a monogram he is creative to the same end. This is 
self-expression because it involves nothing foreign to the pure 
act of thinking and assumes nothing foreign to that act. The 
activity takes place because it is desirable in and for itself as 
an aesthetic achievement. But artistry as such ceases to exist as 
soon as the expression is complete. The Beethoven sonata as it 
appears on paper, in the hands of the publisher let us say, ceases 
to be art. Art is alive. To the publisher the sonata is ink marks 
on paper, a dead thing. It exists once more in the re-creation 
of the pianist, whose interpretation literally creates it anew. 
And the listener if he is a good one also becomes active artisti- 
cally. The sound waves (an abstraction! ) possess only as much 
aesthetic value as the listener gives them. Appreciation is 



l8 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

limited both by the ability of the musician and by the ability 
of the listener. "Beauty" is illusive because an abstraction. All 
artists seek it, but discover that they possess it in the moment 
of creation only to lose it with the completion of their work. 
Beauty is an experience, not an eternal object; but only one 
aspect of human experience. Indeed to speak of artistic activity 
alone is to speak of an abstraction. No man is pure artist and 
nothing more. For one thing, he must work in some objective 
medium, however fleeting, and learn to accept its limitations. 
For another, he must live with his fellow men. The artist who 
seeks absolutely free self-expression can never find it, nor 
should he. Life is more than art, and the judgments of life 
involve more than purely aesthetic considerations. The man 
who seeks only self-expression may be simply ineffectual, like 
Shelley's angel, or he may be a nuisance. He is leading a life 
built around a barren concept. We tend either to ignore him or 
distrust him. His concept is barren, and it may be perilous. The 
great artist is great because he is more than an artist, because he 
has learned the function of art in the larger realm of human 
activity of which art is only a part. 

The artist must work in a medium : art must produce some- 
thing objective. This suggests the second stage in the dialectic 
of thinking. The act of thinking is essentially an act which 
thinks something. It is productive. Thought, when completed, 
becomes object and ceases to be act. There are a number of 
important systems of thought produced by the act of thinking. 
Gentile is concerned chiefly with two of these, religion and 
science. Religion is created by man in answer to problems of 
conduct. The man leading the good life is one who has gone 
outside of himself, who recognizes values which transcend his 
individual desires. God has often been invoked as a^ symbol of 
creation or of omnipotence, but He is also a symbol of a moral 
order. The attitude of prayer conveys eloquently the meaning 
which religion has for Gentile. The man or woman kneeling in 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 19 

prayer is bowed before something not himself which makes for 
righteousness, is expressing the smallness of the individual 
before the vast world of human beings that are and that are yet 
to be. The man who leads the good life is the man who sees 
beyond himself and beyond the present moment toward moral 
values which lead far away from the "here and now." Religion 
nourishes the attainment of this perspective. 

Natural science is created by man in answer to practical prob- 
lems involved in the manipulation of his environment. Whether 
he builds a fire or a suspension bridge he finds aid in scientific 
knowledge. The scientist also is a man who has succeeded in 
getting outside of himself as an individual, a man who recog- 
nizes laws of cause and effect which ignore his individual 
desires. Like the religious man, the scientist is essentially dis- 
interested and impersonal. Galileo dropping his weights from 
the Leaning Tower of Pisa is typical of the scientific attitude. 
The man performing an experiment in the laboratory is express- 
ing the smallness of the individual before the vast world of 
nature which surrounds and compels him. He is trying to find 
out what he must do if he wishes to control his environment. 
He may also be seeking knowledge for its own sake in his field. 
At least these seem to be his functions, if we think of him alone 
and disregard his part in the whole. But we must not think so 
narrowly either of him or of the religious man. 

Religion and science, too, tend to emphasize barren and peril- 
ous abstractions. God and the moral order are concepts, im- 
portant to conduct and necessary as postulates, but given sig- 
nificance by the thinking in which they are produced rather 
than giving it significance. Nature is also a concept, one which 
has undergone many alterations since the early Hylozoists. We 
cannot think of God or of nature without thinking something 
which our own act of thinking has created. Gentile says very 
often that either of the two regarded as independent of our 
thinking is unthinkable. Both religion and science when per- 



20 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

suaded that they are seeking entities which transcend human 
thinking become static and overbearing. They are too ready to 
come forward with the metaphysical "truth" about morality 
and nature. There is no such truth, because the concepts they 
employ, for all that they may seem to be so, are not meta- 
physical ones. We must continually move toward new concepts 
of the good life and toward a newer understanding of our en- 
vironment. At no point in the history of either religion or 
science would it have been wise to call a halt. We must con- 
tinually rethink our problems of conduct and of practice: 
human knowledge is never at an end. Hence at no point in either 
religion or science do we come upon the real. 

Neither the artist nor the religious man nor the scientist, 
when functioning within the limited sphere of his chosen field, 
can attain harmony in thought or in action. If we distrust the 
artist absorbed in the aesthetic quest because he is apt not to be 
either good or practical, we distrust the religious man com- 
pletely immersed in his rituals because he is apt not to be prac- 
tical and the scientist who cannot see beyond his laboratory 
apparatus because he is apt to disregard the fundamental issues 
of conduct, and both because they have ceased to be creative 
and expressive of their own individualities. We can all recall 
examples of these types, limited in their understanding and 
partial in their judgments. Art and religion and science must 
each function in company with the other two. The man who 
has not found adequate self-expression, the man who has not 
learned the meaning of the good life, the man who has not come 
to understand his environment no one of these is fully human 
according to a harmonious concept of humanity. It is in the 
light of considerations such as these that one may legitimately 
speak of actual idealism as a modern form of humanism. In the 
act of thinking, which is self-expressive, creative of moral, 
natural, and social laws, and continuously active in the advance- 
ment of human understanding, one finds a significant definition 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 21 

of humanity. It is almost needless to say that Gentile finds in 
philosophy the fulfillment of these other human activities. It is 
philosophy that interprets art and religion and the sciences, and 
finds for each its rightful place in the unity of the whole. Each 
by itself conflicts with the others; each by itself tells only part 
of the story. Not only does each need to know the others, but 
each needs to participate to some extent in the activities of the 
others. 

Gentile often speaks of his doctrine as essentially moral in 
character. Since there is nothing external to the act of thinking, 
not even the principle of the dialectic development, that act 
must create its own morality. And so it does: according to 
Gentile every man creates himself as a moral being. The free- 
dom upon which this morality is based is obviously a Spinozan 
freedom, the freedom to act according to the principles of one's 
own nature, understood in the sense that the act of thinking 
itself contains the principles according to which it proceeds and 
is not constrained by demands arising elsewhere. Here again 
the humanistic emphasis is evident. The good is not something 
outside of man, to which he must submit himself, but is the 
progress itself of his own development. The duty of man is to be 
man, to carry the development of his thinking and his action to 
the highest possible point. This development, governed by the 
dialectic, is in itself good. Indeed it is the only good. Man, con- 
sidered both historically and individually, is constantly improv- 
ing upon the morality which his thinking has created. The 
"actualism" of this type of idealism comes out very prominently 
at this point. Man always acts in accordance with his thinking, 
and cannot do otherwise. He is no wiser than he acts: greater 
wisdom would command wiser action. Gentile does not recog- 
nize as valid the distinction between theory and practice. If 
action is suspended it is part of thinking that this should be 
the case. To use Gentile's own figure, the philosopher does not 
sit in the second-story window contemplating the hubbub of 



22 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

his fellow men in the street, he joins his fellow men and acts 
with them. Hence the often expressed identification of philos- 
ophy and politics, when the latter is interpreted in the broadest 
sense as being the entire sphere of practical activity. 

Perhaps the clearest expression of Gentile's doctrine of the 
relation between human beings is given in his interpretation of 
society as being in interiore homine rather than inter homines. 
Gentile's objection to the eighteenth century concept of democ- 
racy is that it involves the abstract concept of man as an individ- 
ual separate from other individuals. The man who expresses 
at the polls satisfaction or dissatisfaction as political issues 
affect him personally is both selfish and narrow. Man in society 
must overcome his individuality and express a striving for the 
welfare of the whole. Society exists not for the protection of 
individual interests but rather to express something of which 
the individual is only a part. This thing is national character. 
It appears at that stage in the development of human thinking 
when man begins to see beyond individual concerns to those 
that affect a whole people. In accordance with the Vichian tra- 
dition language is an important factor here, for the reality of the 
nation is found in the thinking which is developed, and thinking 
requires language. Nationality comes from within the citizens 
of a nation in the sense that it is part of the principle by which 
each citizen thinks. Differences in thinking are responsible for 
differences in national cultures. However, though Gentile al- 
most always speaks in terms of the nation, there seems to be 
nothing in the dialectic principle which he describes which could 
limit this development to that level. The Gentilian dialectic 
moves by contrasts : if all nations but one were wiped from the 
face of the earth that one would cease to be a nation. It is not 
difficult to imagine the internationalism that may arise in the 
West in opposition to the East, or the more complete inter- 
nationalism that would appear if Mr. Wells' Martians should 
invade the earth. Internationalism can never be built out of the 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 23 

selfish and narrow desire to save one's own life and property. 
Nor should internationalism destroy the nation any more than 
the nation should destroy the individual; only out of a fully 
realized nationalism can internationalism arise. The very logic 
of our thinking demands it. 

Gentile's identification with Fascism is responsible for an 
understandable misinterpretation of his political philosophy. 
The state is not for him a reality external to the individual in 
which the individual completely loses his identity. Such a con- 
cept is as abstract as the opposing one of the individual as the 
sole reality. "Individual" and "state" are ways of thinking. 
The state is in interior e homine: it is the ethical substance of 
human beings. The state by its nature depends upon authority 
and force, but is interested in neither for its own sake. Author- 
ity and force must ultimately come from the individuals who 
compose the state. The state is founded on the concept of 
discipline, which is essential to the Gentilian dialectic. We are 
familiar with many aspects of that discipline of the individual 
which gives greater freedom rather than less. The discipline of 
a foreign language gives the freedom to explore the literature 
of that language; the discipline of temperance frees us from 
slavery to alcohol. The schoolboy who demands his "freedom" 
to stay away from school, and the imbiber who demands his 
"freedom" to indulge intemperately, are both demanding an 
abstract and unreal freedom. This is the discipline, based upon 
authority and force, for which the Gentilian state stands. It is 
discipline not for its own sake, but for the sake of a super-indi- 
vidual spirituality, 8 as Gentile calls it, in which the individual 
partakes. Without it the individual ceases to be real; without 
the individual it is empty. 

8 For want of a better one, the word "spirit" (and hence, here, "spirituality") 
is employed in this study as a translation of the Italian "spirito." In some transla- 
tions "mind" is used, but "mind" carries a connotation of intellectualism that seems 
foreign to Gentile's doctrine. The Italian "spirito" and the German "Geist" are 
very similar, and convey a meaning for which there is no adequate English 
equivalent. 



24 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Nothing is more basic to actual idealism than the dual char- 
acter here expressed. The individual is opposed to the state, and 
each in itself is an empty abstraction. Liberty is opposed to 
law, and each requires the other in order to achieve real sig- 
nificance. Morality and right are similarly opposed and similar 
in their mutual dependence. Behind it all is the ancient prob- 
lem of particulars and universals, which for Gentile are equally 
abstract and equally empty as interpretations of reality. They 
are abstract and empty because once thought they are given, 
on the one hand by realists and on the other by nominalists, a 
status more fundamental than the thinking by which they are 
entertained. Nothing once thought, objectified and therefore 
static, can be real. The real is act, the act of thinking. A final 
illustration of this may be found in the Gentilian doctrine of 
good and evil. There are no eternal virtues toward which man 
is striving, and no deadly sins which he must seek to avoid. 
Morality is not as clean-cut or as easy as that. We are con- 
stantly improving our moral insight; at no point may we call a 
halt. It is this improvement, this continuous widening of the 
horizon of understanding, that is the good. We cannot devise 
equations of pleasure and pain: we can reach no final judgments 
about eternal verities. Truth is dynamic; it is constantly being 
made. And today's truth is tomorrow's error. Similarly, both 
in the history of the race and in the history of the individual, 
today's good is tomorrow's evil. The only truth is the striving 
for truth; and the only good is striving for good. Good and evil 
are closely linked. The man who is not tempted cannot be good, 
just as the man who knows no fear cannot be courageous. Good- 
ness involves the presence rather than the absence of evil. We 
shall find the application to logic of this general principle of 
duality most important. 

The implications of actual idealism for a philosophy of his- 
tory are quite clear. With so dynamic a reality, one in which 
today's truth is tomorrow's error and today's virtue tomorrow's 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 25 

vice, the very facts of history cease to be important as such. 
The real history is the thinking of the historian in action. Once 
written history becomes dead fact, caught up again in the 
vitality of the real only as part of the thinking of the historian 
who follows. Gentile uses with great fondness the example of 
Plato to illustrate this point. The Plato we know is our own 
creation. He is the man we come to know when we read his 
works and read about him. We do not know him as a fact in 
the past, we know him as a man and a philosopher. Was he born 
in 428 B.C.? There is an historical fact, but in itself entirely 
devoid of significance. It is a typical abstraction. We are apt 
to forget that we can never know Plato directly. Whether we 
know him through the medium of the ancient Greek or through 
a modern commentator, we are always dependent upon an inter- 
pretation. For example, the Timaeus even when read in the 
original is a very different thing to Mr. Whitehead from what 
it was to Jowett. The difference between the Plato of the 
Middle Ages and the Plato of the twentieth century is even 
more apparent. Each is limited by the ideology of its time. Even 
the Plato of his contemporaries was limited. One has only to 
consider varying first-hand judgments about the same person 
today to understand this. The Plato we know is our creation. 
He is one man when we first read The Republic: he is another 
when we have read all of the dialogues. He is one man to the 
sophomore: he is another to the graduate student a few years 
later. He is present only in the act of thinking, and he change? 
with the development of our thinking. 

And so with all history. It is not the bare record of objective 
and indisputable facts : to treat it in this way is to lose its sig- 
nificance in a barren and static chronological system. Consider 
the "bare facts" of the history of modern Europe. There are 
so many of them that no historian ever records them all. He 
makes a selection, and his selection is in terms of what he thinks 
important. In other words, he is interpreting. We are de- 



26 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

pendent for all of the history we know upon the interpretations 
of the historians who have preceded us. A French and a German 
history of modern Europe are quite different. It is not even con- 
ceivable that someone might write a "history" which would 
contain all of the facts about the rise of modern Europe, a 
"history" which would be objectively correct. No man can live 
for a thousand years and see everything that happens at first 
hand. If he did, he would be seeing through his own mind and 
no two minds ever see quite alike. Furthermore, he would be 
dependent on his interpretation of the two thousand years that 
had gone before for what he saw. And how would he choose to 
organize his "history"? What would be his chapter headings? 
Any organization he chose would in itself be an interpretation 
of the "facts." The reality of history is the reality of historical 
thinking which is actually going on. The material which comes 
to us from the historians of the past is only the material of the 
present act of thinking. The histories of today, with their 
emphasis on economic factors, are quite different from the his- 
tories of yesterday. And what will the histories of tomorrow be 
like? We flatter ourselves unduly if we think that the historians 
of the future will not employ interpretations of which we cannot 
even dream. This concept of history gives a clear understand- 
ing of what Gentile means when he says that the act of thinking 
literally creates the world in which we live, whether it be the 
nature which surrounds us, the religion wherein we find guid- 
ance, or the past of which we usually consider ourselves to be 
the product. Only in a narrow sense are we the product of the 
past: the past is far more the product of ourselves. 

No description of actual idealism would be complete without 
some reference to Gentile's philosophy of education. Not only 
has Gentile exerted a great influence in this field, but it was 
through his thinking about pedagogical problems that he arrived 
at actual idealism. The ordinary multiplicity of pupil, teacher, 
and material to be taught, is of course strenuously avoided. 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 27 

Education is not absolutely free self-expression, nor preparation 
for an immortal life, nor training in mental skills and bodily 
habits; it is the development of the spirit. To study the child as 
a physical object, or a psycho-physical apparatus, or a soul, or 
an organism, is to miss the true reality of the child, its act of 
thinking. No one has seen more clearly than Gentile the dangers 
in any attempt to study education scientifically. Gentile's con- 
cept has much in common with the Neuhumanismus of von 
Humboldt and Herder in its reaction against the Aujklamngs- 
zeit. 

The character of the dialectic is most evident in the study 
of the educative situation. The teacher is teacher by virtue of 
an ability to enter the spirit of the child, to understand the 
thinking of the child in all of the verity it has for that child. The 
teacher must not separate himself from the child as a superior, 
intellectual or otherwise, but must meet the child on his own 
ground and stimulate the development of that child's own think- 
ing. He is not the distributor of pre-digested facts. His author- 
ity must be tempered by the spontaneous thinking within the 
child. And, similarly, the child is pupil by virtue of an ability 
to enter the mind of the teacher, to understand the thinking of 
the teacher in all of its verity. The child must not think of 
himself as inferior, but recognize his own thinking as true until 
he himself sees the need for new judgments. In short, pupil and 
teacher are united in the act of education, which is a spiritual act. 
Each by himself represents a partial aspect of education, and 
each considered in himself is an abstraction. Furthermore, the 
curriculum and the books which it prescribes lack reality. 
Education is not to be found in books: it is to be found in think- 
ing. The curriculum lacks life until given it by the thinking of 
pupil and teacher. Are they studying a poem? The poem be- 
comes art when re-created by teacher and pupil in the reading of 
it; until then it is printing, but not poetry. Are they studying 
physics? The phrase is unfortunate. There is no physics-in- 



28 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

itself. There is the child's concept of nature and there is the 
teacher's concept of nature; and the teacher is seeking by a 
definite logical process to develop the pupil's concept, not simply 
to hand down preconceived laws. No teaching is less fruitful 
than that in which the pupil is passive and has poured into him 
an encyclopedic multiplicity of "knowledges." 

It is not difficult to see that in such a concept of the educative 
process there can be no objective goal. The teacher is seeking 
to stimulate the thinking of the pupil in whatever direction its 
principle of action takes it. There is nothing final or absolute 
about the teacher's knowledge; the teacher exerts authority 
only in insuring a steady progress according to the dialectic 
principle. This principle involves, as Gentile interprets it, four 
stages. The child must be artistic, must be encouraged to self- 
expression. The child must learn to submit himself to moral 
principles. The child must learn to submit himself to the imper- 
sonality of natural and social law. And, finally, the child must 
come to an understanding of these phases of his mental develop- 
ment according to a philosophy which shall gather them all into 
a unity. The discipline of education is based on both the author- 
ity of the teacher and the freedom of the child. Both must 
contribute or there is no education. It is not difficult to see that 
such an education will emphasize the humanities. The aim is 
the same as that of the N 'euhumanismus , a Bildung zur Human- 
itdt. In a humanistic endeavor of this kind, the things that man 
has done and thought in the past are most significant. In the 
study of literature the thoughts of the greatest thinkers are 
brought again to life; one discourses with and is stimulated by 
great minds. In history one makes part of one's own thinking 
the significance of the past as we come to know it and are learn- 
ing to interpret it. In the arts one learns of the strivings of sen- 
sitive artists to express the thinking that is going on within them 
as they create. In all of the humanities, in short, we learn about 
man through a study of what he has done and what he has 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 29 

thought. One begins to understand better what it means to be 
fully and harmoniously a man. Through the study of man and 
of the products of his thinking one learns what humanity is. 
One experiences that fullness and vitality of spirit for which 
education strives in promoting development. This development 
is infinite; it leads we know not where, and we must encourage 
it to proceed as long as it is logically sound. But it is a procedure 
according to definite stages; and this definiteness must be pre- 
served. That is why the teacher is part of the process. In the 
philosophy of the act of thinking education finds its meaning 
in promoting the harmony and fullness of human develop- 
ment. Beyond this harmony and this fullness, indeterminate 
as it may seem, there is no goal. This is humanism pure and 
unalloyed. 

The dialectic of the spirit is the thread upon which the entire 
doctrine of actual idealism is strung. We have tried to sum- 
marize here the interpretation of the significance of that dia- 
lectic which Gentile himself makes. It is entirely possible that 
at certain points Gentile has gone astray in his interpretation; 
indeed it has already been suggested that with regard to the 
issue between nationalism and internationalism he fails to see 
the implications for the latter. One feels that in most of his 
political writing his enthusiasm for the new Italy has limited his 
scope. On the other hand there are many points at which his 
interpretations are unusually profound. No teacher who is sen- 
sitive to the educative situation and his relation to his stu- 
dents will doubt the profundity of Gentile's thoughts in that 
field. And there is much in Gentile's interpretation of the func- 
tion of the scientist that would bear emphasis today. But these 
many questions of the interpretation of the metaphysics of 
actual idealism are, relative to certain others, of lesser impor- 
tance in the evaluation of Gentile's philosophy. He may have 
made errors in the application of his fundamental doctrines; 
but an investigation into the existence of such errors is probably 



3O THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

of less significance at the moment than a study of the funda- 
mental doctrines themselves. 

It is obvious, for example, that if the act of thinking in its 
essential unity is the only real, that act must be extremely 
potent metaphysically. A study of the act of thinking will be a 
study in the field of logic. We have given an introductory 
account of the fundamental assumptions upon which Gentile 
builds his doctrine. We must now proceed to a more detailed 
study of his argument. What are his criteria of "truth"? Em- 
ploying these criteria, by what argument does he arrive at his 
characterization of the act of thinking as essentially a dialectic 
process? Is this argument valid? Furthermore, having por- 
trayed the dialectic of the act, does he legitimately find in it 
that self-sufficiency of value, both moral value and truth value, 
that it must contain if it alone is real? The uniqueness of actual 
idealism is that in it logic and metaphysics are combined. A 
study of ultimate logical norms involves a study of reality; and 
a study of reality involves the logic of thinking. Is this com- 
bination legitimate? If it is not there is no ground upon which 
actual idealism can stand. If it is legitimate, the basis of the 
legitimacy will be found in the Sistema di logica. Gentile's 
argument, like that of any philosopher, is based on assumptions 
which cannot be questioned except as they may be found un- 
fruitful. Every philosopher must begin with a definition of the 
real and criteria of truth which may not be doubted except in 
the light of other definitions and other criteria. In the erection 
of any system of concepts a beginning must be made some- 
where. But given these beginnings, are the arguments by which 
the philosopher arrives at his doctrine correct? That is, is the 
doctrine itself without self-contradiction? And, further, does 
it offer an adequate interpretation of human experience? These 
are the questions we shall consider. 

That actual idealism is fruitful is without question. It has 
already been shown that its interpretations within the categories 



GENTILE'S ACTUAL IDEALISM 31 

of human life are significant. It ought not to be too much of an 
anticipation of what is to follow to say at this point that these 
interpretations are not entirely new. It is the combination of 
them that is novel. Actual idealism is a modern version of 
Protagoras' "Man is the measure of all things." It is the Carte- 
sian "I think, therefore I am" made into "I think, therefore 
thinking is." It is the immanentism of Spinoza centered around 
the human act of thinking rather than around God. It is Berke- 
ley's Esse est percipi without his theology. It is the dialectic of 
Fichte made not into a metaphysics of the Absolute but rather 
into a metaphysics of the active spirit. Gentile makes the same 
criticism of the older metaphysicians that the neo-positivists 
are now making. At the same time he makes the same insistence 
upon the importance of metaphysical studies, that the older meta- 
physicians have always made. He is seeking what probably 
has not been so persistently sought before, a metaphysics which 
shall not be subject to the criticism that it is an arbitrary and 
immediate product of the imagination. He is seeking a real 
which need not be taken on faith, and at the same time a norm 
for thinking which shall be an adequate norm and not involve 
merely the question of expediency. If he is successful he will 
have done something which has not been done before. 



CHAPTER Two 
THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 

IT is probably more true of idealism than of any other con- 
temporary philosophy that the great difficulty in understanding 
it lies in its divorcement from the tenets of common sense. It 
is probably also more characteristic of idealism that it rises out 
of what appear to its adherents to be shortcomings in other doc- 
trines. For these reasons it is necessary that an adequate intro- 
duction to actual idealism be composed of two stages. The first 
stage should be that of negative criticism, in which the difficul- 
ties attached to other doctrines are marked and studied. As 
compared with the second stage this first one is easier in the 
proportion that criticism is easier than creation. But when the 
argument leads to so unusual a doctrine as in the case of Gentile, 
there is good reason to believe that the exposition of this argu- 
ment will involve equally unusual difficulties. On the way to 
understanding a philosopher there is no better exercise than 
that of stating his case in one's own words. This we shall 
attempt to do, quoting directly from Gentile's writings only 
when a quotation is particularly apt. 



"The science of logic arises with the distinction between true 
and false thought; or, more precisely, when one begins to dis- 
tinguish between thought as fact and thought which has 
value." 1 The Sistema di logica is the study of thought as 

1 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 45. 

32 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 33 

having value, the study of the true knowledge of Theaetetus 
200E that is distinguished from true opinion. 

It is customary to make a division of the field of logic into 
noetic and relational logics. The former is taken in part as a 
study of ultimate values, of theories, criteria, and definitions of 
truth, etc. It is immediately epistemological and ultimately 
metaphysical. The latter is the study of thought as structure. 
The logic of Gentile falls uncompromisingly within the former. 
The Sistema di logica might well be entitled Sistema di filosofia 
or Sistema della metafisica, indeed for English readers such an 
alteration might obviate confusion. Gentile says in several of 
his most significant passages that he identifies logic and meta- 
physics. There is a definite sense, however, in which this state- 
ment when rendered into English becomes inaccurate. We are 
accustomed to limit "logic" to the field of thought structure. 
Hence we shall react negatively to Gentile's statement about 
logic and metaphysics on the ground that metaphysical con- 
siderations are quite irrelevant to the study of logic. It is agreed 
that when logic and metaphysics are entertained separately, the 
former becomes an abstraction in the sense that the structure of 
thought is abstracted from its content. That it is recognized as 
an abstraction by modern logicians in no way does, nor should 
it, deter them from the pursuit of their object. But when we find 
Gentile saying that logic can never be separated from the meta- 
physical intuition on which from its origin it depends and to 
which it ought to be attached at all times, it should be realized 
that he is referring to logic as noetic and not relational. That 
he does not attach importance to the other, and to us more 
prevalent, use of "logic" is his loss, and to be understood only 
by reference to the fact that he is speaking as a metaphysician. 
His remark cannot accurately be construed as a criticism of 
relational logic; indeed it does not refer to the relational logi- 
cian. 

It does refer to the noetic logician, and as such will find gen- 



34 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

eral acquiescence. This is illustrated by Gentile's use of a con- 
cept which, in modern philosophy, has so fallen into disuse that 
when unqualified it is open to serious misinterpretation. The 
difficulty is due to the fact that great differences of meaning 
have been attached to it in the history of philosophy. The con- 
cept in question is that of the Logos, whence directly Gentile 
derives the meaning which he gives to "logic." According to 
Burnett the earliest use of Logos, 2 to indicate dialectic argu- 
ment in the sense made familiar by Socrates, is found in Par- 
menides. There seems to be some question as to whether or not 
Heraclitus employed it in this sense also, but happily the answer 
is not relevant to our discussion. For the Stoics the Logos was 
World-Being or primitive power, the purposeful determination 
of all cosmic processes, a deified World-Ground and World- 
Mind. Philo and Justin borrowed the word from the Stoics, 
giving it the meaning of Reason revealed in Christ. If we seek 
the fundamental common denominator in the employment of 
the word we find the Logos fulfilling the function of that in 
relation to which thinking is ultimately either true or false. It 
is the norm of thinking. In such a sense, removed strictly from 
rational or theological considerations, Gentile uses the con- 
cept. 

This concept of the Logos rests at the very heart of Gentile's 
thinking. It provides truth value for judgments: hence the 
derivation of the word "logic." The truth values which it pro- 
vides are ultimate in a metaphysical sense which makes the 
Logos synonymous with reality. Hence the concept of the Logos 
contains within itself logical and metaphysical elements which 
it synthesizes in what Gentile terms "philosophy." Relational 
logic is admittedly not a study of ultimate verities. Foundation- 
ally it takes certain postulates as self-evident. It is non-philo- 
sophic. Gentile's entire search, in contrast, is philosophic. It 
seeks the Logos which is at the base of noetic logic. Thus there 

a Early Greek Philosophy. (Black, London, 1920, 3rd edit.), p. 173, ftn. 1. 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 35 

is a sense in which Gentile is quite correct in identifying logic 
and metaphysics. Logic in itself (i.e. relational) proceeds back- 
ward in an infinite regress, finding structure everywhere and 
certainty and necessity nowhere, unless metaphysics is invoked. 
Metaphysics in itself cannot tell us the truth about reality, for 
it does not define "truth." Hence the need for unifying the two. 
But this unity is neither logic nor metaphysics; it is philosophy. 
We are investigating neither the logic nor the metaphysics of 
Gentile, properly speaking, but rather his philosophy. 

Gentile, then, is engaged in a study of the metaphysics of 
truth. We distinguish certain judgments from others by virtue 
of their being "true." According to Gentile 8 there are three 
elements which, when gathered in a judgment, make it true. In 
the first place, a true judgment is distinguished among judg- 
ments by the possession of value. True knowledge is not an 
indiscriminate collection of judgments; it is the valuing of cer- 
tain judgments at the expense of others. One knows that one 
possesses truth and one values it as such. Plato points this out 
in the Theaetetus. For example, one only accepts an intricate 
geometrical proposition as true when one has gone through its 
proof or accepted it upon authority. In the second place, a true 
judgment is distinguished from other judgments in that it is 
necessary. A true judgment is one that could not be thought 
otherwise than as true. If a judgment can be thought as either 
true or false it is without significance as an element of knowl- 
edge. An affirmation is true by virtue of the fact that it cannot 
be thought false if prefaced by "I think. ..." If it could be 
thought false it would not be so prefaced. One would make a 
different assertion. In the third place, a true judgment is dis- 
tinguished from other judgments in that it is universal. It 
constitutes that knowledge common to all as distinguished from 
individual opinion. Two knowing subjects in the same situation 
could not think differently. For example, if it is true for Bishop 

8 Sistema. Vol. I, pp. 45-6. 



36 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Berkeley that to be is to be perceived, it is true for all men of the 
same spiritual background that to be is to be perceived. One 
might be tempted to remove this qualification, but we shall dis- 
cover that it is precisely the wider sense of universality that 
Gentile wishes to avoid. It is the difference in spiritual resources 
that differentiates truths among men. To the man who has 
never been introduced to the demonstrations of the sphericity 
of the earth it is true that the earth is flat. This truth is uni- 
versal among men equally ignorant. And it is sharply distin- 
guished from the non-reflective opinion of any one of these men 
regarding the shape of the earth. 

Consider a judgment from the Monadology. "These Monads 
are the real atoms of nature and, in a word, the elements of 
things.'' As a part of Leibniz's knowledge this is given value, is 
necessary, and universal. If independent of his knowledge, it 
would be described as opinion. Indeed the independence of any 
judgment from active thinking would define it as opinion. As 
mere opinion it would have no more value than its contrary or 
its contradictory. Either could as well be entertained. And it 
would stand on the same level as either a contrary or a contra- 
dictory opinion expressed by another individual. But for Leib- 
niz it is true and therefore subject to no one of the three vagaries 
of opinion, lack of necessity, of universality, or of value. Truth 
seems to attach itself to individual thinking in a sense which will 
be made more clear when we come to discuss the concept of 
error. Philosophers have always sought thoughts that are neces- 
sarily and universally valued as true; it has been their problem 
to bring forth such judgments. 

The history of philosophy has shown but one way of pro- 
viding value, necessity, and universality. A separation has al- 
ways been made between judgments and that about which 
judgments are made, between the knowing and the known. In 
other words, and employing the Gentilian concept of the Logos, 
the Logos has always been outside of or objective to the judg- 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 37 

ments made by the individual. Such a Logos may be called a 
transcendent Logos, for it transcends the act of thinking. We 
say that Edinburgh is north of London because these two cities 
are in that geographical relation previous to our thinking about 
them. The efficacy of such a Logos is obvious. If the Logos 
transcends thought it provides a measure of it, a measure in 
comparison with which thought can be given value, which 
makes it rather than its contradictory necessary, and against 
which the judgments of all individuals can be tested. This may 
well be the case, indeed philosophers have generally been of this 
opinion. Yet if this is the case, certain consequences must be 
accepted. 4 

(1) Since the Logos transcends the act of thinking, the rela- 
tion between the two may be described as accidental. The act of 
thinking is not essential to the Logos; nor is the Logos essential 
to the act of thinking. For example, the relation of correspond- 
ence would in no way affect the Logos. 

(2) Hence truth ceases to be a relation between these two 
terms, for truth value resides in the Logos and the Logos is inde- 
pendent of thinking. Truth comes to be found entirely within 
the measure (Logos) to which judgments may be considered 
as in some manner corresponding, and not at all in the act of 
judging. So far as truth itself is concerned, the Logos alone is 
significant. 

(3) Thus, in the end, instead of bringing truth value to judg- 
ments, the Logos stands alone. It is unchanging Truth. The act 
of thinking must come to it. Truth is fact and in itself has no 
relation to the act of thinking. It must necessarily be presup- 
posed, as we shall discover. Within a doctrine of a transcendent 
Logos it could not be otherwise. 

These consequences explain the presupposed character of the 
norms basic to those philosophies which have sought the neces- 
sity, universality, and value of truth in that which transcends 

* I bid., p. si. 



38 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

thinking. By the very nature of the case, all doctrines which 
grant judgments ultimate verity by virtue of a transcendent 
Logos take that Logos as previous to all judgments about it. 
The contradictory assertion (i.e. that some do not presuppose 
that Logos) has only to be entertained to demonstrate that it is 
untenable, for it contradicts itself in the very process of claiming 
validity. This separation of knowing and its norm has been 
considered the sine qua non of truth. 

So far there is nothing troublesome in the doctrine of the 
transcendent Logos. But advance another step and it may 
become disturbing. What happens when the truth value of the 
Logos is brought into question? If the Logos is presupposed, 
is there left open a way of discovering whether or not our 
description of it (which provides the objective standard for 
the measurement of our judgments) as monistic or pluralistic 
or anything else, is true? The situation we are describing is 
unique among problems of norms, as is easily shown by com- 
paring it with the usual one. Consider the official meter in a 
bureau of standards. How do we know that it is exactly a 
meter? We know because we define the meter in terms of it. 
The important thing to note is that we cannot do the same 
in philosophy without begging the question. We cannot define 
truth in terms of that which is simply assumed to be true. An 
assumption is quite different from a truth. Strictly speaking 
the official meter is not a meter; it is an arbitrary section of 
platinum. But truth, in contrast, cannot be arbitrary. It must 
be universal and necessary. Hence the first of the Gentilian 
conclusions with regard to the philosophic inquiry: 6 "A truth 
transcending the subject is neither a truth nor a knowable 
reality! 9 It is not a truth because presupposed. As presup- 
posed it is neither universal nor necessary: the variety of 
Logos's presupposed by metaphysicians is legion. No meta- 
physician is bound to any one of them: by the nature of the 

6 Ibid., p. 65. The second and third conclusions are also taken from this page. 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 39 

case the choice is arbitrary. They are not knowable because 
to be known they must offer the possibility (denied by their 
lack of universality and necessity) of being assigned truth 
value. That which is presupposed, or assumed, is taken on 
faith. It is Gentile's position that such is not the nature of the 
knowledge toward which philosophy aims. If ultimate knowl- 
edge is arrived at by insight rather than a mediate process 
philosophers become merely the rational interpreters of imme- 
diate intuition. This is hardly an indefensible interpretation 
of the function of philosophy, but it does require a somewhat 
different concept of "truth" than most philosophers employ. 
At the moment it is simply to be noted that Gentile rejects 
this interpretation and pursues his inquiries in another 
direction. 

It would not be fair to say that this dependence upon the 
presupposed, essential to the doctrine of the transcendent 
Logos, has not disturbed thinkers before the time of Gentile. 
Such attempts as have been made to surmount it have been in 
the direction of effecting a reconciliation between the tran- 
scendence of the Logos and the activity of the knowing indi- 
vidual. They have involved the separation of the knowing 
subject from the object known on the one hand, and on the 
other the bridging of the gap between the two in the interest 
of necessity and universality. For example, the Cartesian 
attempt was in terms of innate ideas. In this case a rational 
Logos was united with an active subject. But in the interest 
of universality and necessity truth was here made to transcend 
the act of knowing it. The same bothersome question could 
be asked. Whence the truth of innate ideas? Be they as self- 
evident as could be wished they are true simply because taken 
upon faith. For this reason the seventeenth century ration- 
alism led to dogmatism. Locke's attempt at reconciliation 
erred on the other side. He relied upon the phenomenal char- 

6 See Ibid., pp. 59-62 for Gentile's argument here. 



40 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

acter of simple ideas; but Berkeley and Hume showed that 
this reliance was, empirically speaking, unfounded. And 
empiricism, by turning its back upon the presupposed, faced 
scepticism. Kant tried to effect another reconciliation by com- 
bining perception (the given or transcendent) and conception 
(the activity of the knowing subject). Yet he introduced 
objectivity and the separation of knowing and known, again, 
in the Noumenon. The modern attempt at reconciliation, that 
of contemporary empiricism, in terms of two principles of 
knowledge (intuition and reflection) is no more successful. 
Either the two principles are separated into a duality or they 
form a unity, so far as the acquisition of knowledge is con- 
cerned. If they are separated into a duality, the reflection 
which should produce knowledge does not have intuition upon 
which to build. If they form a unity, reflection becomes 
resolved into intuition so far as the verity of knowledge is 
concerned and knowledge is again based upon presuppositions. 
These attempts to surmount the difficulty found in the doctrine 
of the transcendent Logos have been attempts to bring truth 
within the knowing individual. Gentile makes the same 
attempt. But he contends that each of the others has failed 
for the reason that while the Logos was brought within the 
knowing individual it was nevertheless kept extrinsic to the 
act of knowing. Hence the second of Gentile's conclusions: 
"A truth Immanent in the subject but transcending the act of 
the knowing subject is not truth." It is not truth for precisely 
the same reason that a "truth" transcending the subject is 
not truth. 

Even the epistemological relativism of Protagoras involves 
this difficulty. The reliance placed upon sensation in his doc- 
trine makes Protagoras' man not the true and proper subject 
of knowledge but in fact one of the objects present to the sub- 
ject. In other words, Protagoras' man becomes absorbed in 
a reality which is entirely the object and not at all the subject 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 41 

of knowledge. Hence Gentile's third conclusion: "A truth 
immanent in the subject itself as knowledge, but transcending 
the actuality of this knowledge in a naturalistic conception 
of thought, is not truth." It is not truth, in the case of Pro- 
tagoras, because it depends logically and metaphysically upon 
an intuited (or presupposed) doctrine with regard to sensa- 
tion. If this doctrine is questioned Protagoras' epistemology 
falls like a house of cards. 

In framing a doctrine of truth there is another and much 
less usual point of attack. If it is found desirable to avoid 
completely the difficulty involved in a Logos transcending 
either the knowing individual or the act of knowing, relief 
may be hoped for in a full and complete immanentism. Is it 
possible to establish an adequate philosophic doctrine which 
shall regard the Logos as born in and developing with the act 
of knowing? Or will it be found that in avoiding the difficulty 
we have just been discussing, so extreme an immanentism 
encounters other and even greater difficulties? It is probably 
generally agreed among philosophers that the difficulties 
involved in a full and complete immanentism are greater than 
those of any doctrine of transcendence. And it is precisely this 
question that the Sistema di logic a reopens. It may be said, 
then, that Gentile commences with this requirement of truth, 
that it be immanent in the act of knowing. It will be agreed 
that in so doing he is pursuing his criteria of truth to their 
logical conclusion. The act of knowing is the final refuge of 
an immanent Logos. What will be the characteristics of the 
"truth" which it dictates? 

Its most obvious characteristic is its purity : it is a priori in 
the Kantian sense. 7 As immanent in the act of knowing it is 
not determined by anything extrinsic to that act. If it were 
so determined, that which was extrinsic would become the 
transcendent Logos by which it would be measured. Anything 

7 See Ibid., p. 126. 



42 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

extrinsic would become the known foreign to the act of know- 
ing, and the act of knowing would be true only in relation to 
it. But it is precisely this that the doctrine of the immanent 
Logos endeavors to overcome. The only meaning which the 
known may have for such a doctrine is that it is in itself the 
act of knowing. In other words, the act of knowing becomes 
that act by virtue of the fact that it is its own object. This 
doctrine is admittedly difficult to comprehend. Philosophy 
has so long held to the principle of transcendence, has so 
long assumed the separation of the act of knowing and the 
known, that it is not ready to take this new path or give its 
vistas serious consideration. For example, we soon become 
aware that this a priori truth does not admit the possibility 
of verification. If there is nothing extrinsic to the act of 
knowing, there is nothing against which the judgment given 
in the act may be verified. The act must be norma sui. Gen- 
tile asks us to base a philosophic knowledge upon assertions 
true not because of their relations to entities external to them, 
but because of their intrinsic and essential nature. Gentile 
will not admit even a coherence theory of truth, for even that 
is not norma sui, we shall discover. To take an extreme case, 
Gentile is forced to the position that the affirmation that 
Edinburgh is north of London may be accepted as true only 
on the basis of a final assertion norma sui of what shall be 
accepted as true in its full form, "I think Edinburgh is 
north of London" the truth relation being between "I think" 
and "Edinburgh is north of London." We shall have to exam- 
ine with the greatest care just what Gentile means by taking 
such a position. 

If the most obvious characteristic of the Gentilian truth 
is its purity, its outstanding and most surprising characteristic 
is its morality. 8 The objectivity of truth essential to the doc- 
trine of transcendence excludes moral attribution. If Edin- 

8 See Ibid., p. 110. 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 43 

burgh is north of London it is north of London, we say. Our 
judgment of the relation seems to be limited by the external 
facts of the case. Since it is in its factual character that we 
customarily think of truth, Gentile's description of it as moral 
is perplexing. But this unusual feature follows immediately 
from the requirement of immanence with which the Gentilian 
doctrine commences. If there is nothing transcending the act 
of thinking, then that act is a free act. According to Gentile, 
"I think Edinburgh is north of London" has value only if 
selected by a free choice from among a number of possible 
assertions about Edinburgh's geographical position in rela- 
tion to London. It is this free character, in part, that makes 
it true. If it were transcendently determined it would lose 
this character because forced upon the thinker by something 
external to his thinking. Whatever the grounds of an asser- 
tion, according to Gentile, it is true because we freely so 
think it. Contrary to the customary procedure, he selects the 
free act of thinking rather than the grounds of the assertion 
as the residence of truth. This alone does not make truth 
moral; but it does provide the possibility of morality in the 
act of thinking, for if that act were not free it could in no sense 
be a moral act. What, then, does make the act of thinking 
moral? 

Consider the situation as customarily described. The dis- 
tinction between faith and knowledge is considered to be based 
upon the separation of knowing and known. Faith is the 
blind judgment of the subject, an immediate judgment. 
Knowedge is mediate and governed by an image of the tran- 
scendent object. The former is the realm of religion : the latter 
that of the sciences. A reanalysis of this distinction in the 
light of the argument outlined above has surprising conse- 
quences. An examination of that argument shows that in fact 
judgments about a transcendent object rest upon acts of faith, 

For Gentile's account of this and the following material see Ibid., pp. 74-80. 



44 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

since the basic intuitions are immediate. Hence the "cer- 
tainty" of traditional metaphysics and of the sciences becomes 
transformed into faith, for the basic intuitions are rigid dic- 
tators of the rationally superimposed structure. In other 
words our usual distinction between faith and knowledge is 
false because what we regard as knowledge, metaphysically 
if not practically, is a product of faith. What we regard as 
knowledge is workable and useful, but without metaphysical 
significance. This is not a complete surprise. 

But it is a surprise to discover the faith of traditional meta- 
physics becoming transformed into certainty under Gentile's 
hand. This transformation is extremely important to actual 
idealism. The Cartesian Cogito ergo sum offers a convenient 
example of the certainty at which Gentile is aiming. We are 
not here concerned with what Descartes and later critics took 
to be the metaphysical import of the phrase. That it gives 
decisive knowledge (in the traditional sense) of the existence 
of the self is doubtful. Indeed Gentile considers such a tran- 
scendent self to be an unreal abstraction, as we shall discover. 
The proposition is not one of whose truth we are immediately 
aware as indubitable; if such were the case it would be intui- 
tion (or faith, as opposed to certainty) and not knowledge, 
because immediate. Of such a nature is the famous proposi- 
tion in the Symposium regarding "beauty absolute." But 
Cogito ergo sum is valued as true by a mediate process in 
which cogito and ergo sum are unified in the act of think- 
ing which entertains them. The importance of the Cartesian 
dictum is that the existence of the real is the dictum. It is one 
of the few judgments that does not require the usual form, 
"I think I think, therefore I am." Its truth is inherent in 
itself. I think, therefore I (as thinking} am. This is a propo- 
sition with certainty, because it could not possibly be other- 
wise. No thought may deny the existence of thinking without 
being absurd. The important point is that this dictum is at 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 45 

once a subjective act of thinking and mediate. In the former 
role traditional philosophy would label it as an article of faith: 
in its latter role it would have to be labeled as knowledge. 
The resultant confusion is apparent as long as faith and cer- 
tainty are antonyms. But under Gentile it becomes a clear 
case of certain knowledge, according to a new meaning for 
"certainty." Hence the transformation of the traditional 
faith into the certainty of the actual idealist. To put the argu- 
ment in Gentile's own words, traditional philosophy made an 
antinomy of faith and certainty while he unites the two in the 
certainty of the immanent Logos. Any true assertion is faith 
by virtue of the fact that it is a content immanent in the free 
act of the knowing subject (which is the genuine character 
of faith) : and it is certainty by virtue of the fact that the 
act of thinking involves mediation (which is the genuine char- 
acter of certainty). 

Hence a fuller meaning for the morality of the Gentilian 
truth. The certainty of actual idealism stands in contrast to 
the contingency of the factual. The factual has the character 
of being already realized; it is what it is. Whatever necessity 
is attached to it is a necessity of the past. In the present it 
is contingent; it might have been otherwise. But the Car- 
tesian dictum boasts a certainty given by the necessity of the 
"ought" which accompanies all thinking. In a very real sense 
we ought to think this dictum true. The relation between the 
cogito and the ergo sum is an a priori relation. The 
necessity arises from within thinking itself. In the realm of 
fact there is no such necessity. The one thing that thought 
cannot put asidfc without negating itself is that necessity 
which is the reality in which it realizes itself. This necessity 
accompanies all judgments, by virtue of the "I think. ..." The 
factual relation between Edinburgh and London might be 
otherwise; it is necessary only as we ought to think it. The 
"ought" implies the moral element, and is based on the 



46 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Spinozan freedom essential to the act of thinking. Hence the 
truth is true as a moral act. 

In fixing upon the act of thinking, Gentile seems to have 
found a Logos with certain unique characteristics. Thought 
may be considered in either of two ways; as the object of con- 
templation (pensiero pensato), or as the activity of contem- 
plation (pensiero pensante}. Gentile employs this distinction 
with great effectiveness. The former is the material of an act 
of thinking which has taken place; the latter is the act of 
thinking itself. The former is transcendent; the latter is 
immanent. If in our metaphysics we separate the two, the 
former will always require further explanation. No matter 
what we are thinking, we cannot attain the certainty of truth 
by borrowing that certainty from any act of thinking that 
has already taken place, for pensiero pensato is transcendent 
in relation to pensiero pensante (i.e. takes on the character 
of a presupposition) and according to Gentile's requirements 
has not that certainty to lend. The two are never separated; 
there is no thought without thinking, and no thinking without 
thought. Gentile destroys another antinomy by uniting the 
two. The point is that the act of thinking requires no further 
metaphysical explanation; whatever explanation is attempted 
will itself be an act of thinking. The act of thinking carries 
its own mediation and its own certainty. Thought is a reality 
producing itself, a reality sui generis, an activity. When con- 
sidered as a product of activity it becomes cold and passive 
contemplation, a part of thought abstracted from reality by a 
mistaken intellectualizing intuition. In short, Gentile seems 
to have taken one more step than other metaphysicians. 
They have described a reality divorced from thought in 
action, while Gentile describes the activity of thinking 
itself. 

The assertion of morality in connection with the Gentilian 
concept of truth raises the question as to whether he is in fact 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 47 

concerning himself with truth or with goodness. 10 Its essen- 
tial freedom certainly brings an element of goodness into the 
concept. Not only is this element brought in, but it alone is 
responsible for the possibility of truth value. He seems quite 
aware of this. For him it provides the solution to Kant's prob- 
lem of the relation between pure and practical reason. This 
differentiation was made with regard to an objective reality 
which was external to thought. Kant thought of man as know- 
ing this reality and then acting in it. But there is a sense in 
which doing is doing in so far as it is knowing, and knowing 
is knowing in so far as doing. This sense is particularly clear 
if we accompany Gentile in considering reality as immanent 
in thinking, and labelling anything external as an abstraction. 
Differentiation breeds unity and unification breeds difference; 
such is the nature of thinking. Either by itself is unintelligible. 
Previous metaphysical and logical doctrines have been built 
upon the multiplicity implied in the principle of transcendence. 
Gentile does not deny this multiplicity as an abstraction, but 
he lays ontological emphasis upon the unity of the act of 
thinking. Certainly its unity seems to be the preeminent fea- 
ture of this act. In this unity the good and the true are brought 
together. The good is value applied to action. Since the Gen- 
tilian truth is action, it is at the same time good. In a doctrine 
in which the act of thinking is the only reality there can be 
no real distinction between thinking and doing. And where 
there is no real distinction between thinking and doing, there 
can be no real distinction between truth and goodness. All 
reality is unified in the act of thinking; this unity is one of 
the vital characteristics of actual idealism. 

The final, and perhaps the most important, characteristic 
of truth is one anticipated by the previous discussion of faith 
and certainty. Truth is mediate; that is, it is arrived at by a 
mediate process. 11 If knowledge is to be certain, according 

1 See Ibid , Part I, Chapt. VI. * x See Ibid., Chapt. IV. 



48 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

to Gentile's requirements, it must be distinguished from the 
immediacy of the traditional act of faith. We have seen that 
if the Logos in its metaphysical role transcends the act of 
thinking, it must be presupposed. Presupposition is an imme- 
diate act of intuition or faith. It is something "taken for 
granted." Hence a presupposed reality is a Parmenidean 
immutible: it is what it is. It is only when Being is released 
from its abstractness by the introduction of what Gentile calls 
"Not-Being" that mediation is possible. Gentile goes so far 
as to say that immediate Being is unthinkable except as an 
abstraction because thinking is mediate. By this he means 
that when Being becomes known, the process of thinking pro- 
vides "Not-Being" and thereby introduces that mediation 
through which we come to knowledge and rise above imme- 
diate intuition (faith, in the traditional sense). The difference 
between the immediate and the mediate is the difference 
between a hunch and philosophic knowledge. If "I think man 
is mortal," this is a mediation between "I think" and "man 
is mortal." The latter element, the object of the act, is Not- 
Being in relation to the reality of that act. Any assertion with 
regard to the nature of the real which does not include Not- 
Being relegates the real to the sphere of entities immediately 
apprehended (presupposed) and thus ends, epistemologically 
speaking, by asserting it only as an abstraction. Thus any 
significant assertion in metaphysics will be a unity of Being 
and Not-Being. The general point of view is that thinking 
should not presuppose Being but should labor in the produc- 
tion of it. Which is another way of saying that metaphysical 
thinking (the doctrine refers, of course, only to thinking 
about the real) should, with the wisdom of Socrates, begin 
with the realization of its own ignorance. 

The paradoxical language employed by Gentile is made 
necessary by this concept of the mediacy of truth, for the 
mediacy is introduced by the synthesis of Being and Not- 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 49 

Being. We find Gentile saying that thinking is neither Being 
nor Not-Being, that it is the union of the two. It cannot enter- 
tain Not-Being without being; its doubt is its certainty and 
its negation its affirmation. And it cannot entertain Being 
without not-being; its certainty is its doubt and its affirmation 
its negation. This is not simply to say that Being and Not- 
Being are correlative terms. Such a doctrine is as ancient 
as the Theaetetus. It is rather to say that the assertion of 
Not-Being requires the real act of thinking and the assertion 
of Being requires (if Being is not to be presupposed) the Not- 
Being given by the mediate process of the act of thinking. 
A later discussion of the doctrine of truth and error will illus- 
trate this. The reality of thinking as the unity of Being and 
Not-Being is Becoming, which is the category of universal 
reality understood as thinking, for a reality which is not 
thinking is immediate. Hence the extreme difficulty contained 
in the concept of Becoming. We cannot isolate it in order to 
study it because in doing so we would destroy its mediate 
character as a thinking process. We know it only as the 
process by which we attempt to isolate it. 

There is another paradox which must be entertained. Truth 
is generally looked upon as a static and transcendent thing, 
the very opposite of the developing process which the Gen- 
tilian truth has been pictured to be. And there is an interesting 
sense in which for Gentile truth is eternal, as it is for 
Spinoza. 12 Gentile warns his readers specifically against the 
notion that truth as Becoming leads to the view that every 
thinker should be judged according to the wisdom of his time. 
The profession of such a doctrine leads back to truths of fact 
which have no moral value, for when we say that past thinkers 
should be judged according to the wisdom of their times we 
mean that we should set their thoughts as facts into the back- 
ground of the facts of their time. What happens is that in 



50 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

judging them we relate their judgments to our own, and ours 
undergo a continuous development. Take the specific case of 
Gentile. He relates the judgments of his predecessors to the 
actual idealism (not a static concept) which he finds to be 
true. He judges them as they have come near or remained 
far from the central concept of actual idealism, such as he at 
the time of judging considers it to be. This act of judgment 
is eternal in the sense that it gathers time within itself. In 
its role of establishing a temporal order in that about which 
it thinks (the object of thought given historical perspective), 
the act of thinking is not a part of that which is made tem- 
poral. Future and past are gathered into it because it thinks 
them. It is non-temporal, which is a way of saying that it is 
eternal. If it were not eternal, if it were part of the object 
of thought, it would become part of that pure (i.e. unmixed 
with Not-Being) Being which could ultimately only be enter- 
tained immediately. The history of actual idealism is neither 
the object of thinking nor a succession of facts. It is the 
very process of thinking: it is Becoming. Hence the paradox 
in the phrase, "the eternal truth of Becoming"; a paradox, but 
nevertheless necessary to the expression of Gentile's doctrine. 
Doctrines such as his thrive on paradoxes, for the reason that 
the mediate process of thinking which is the central concept 
is itself paradoxical. 

A concept of truth is never fully understood or capable of 
acceptance unless the contradictory concept, error, has a sig- 
nificant meaning. It is characteristic of the Gentilian concept 
of error that it lends meaning to its contradictory. It should 
be evident that Gentile does not take error in the usual sense, 
as the expression of relations among external entities, ideal or 
otherwise. Descartes saw but did not carry to its conclusion 
the idea that an element of volition is necessary to a doc- 
trine of truth, if error is to have meaning. I must have a free 
choice of judgments if whatever choice I make is to be either 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED $1 

true or erroneous. The argument is similar to that of Kant, 
that freedom of will is necessary if our acts are to have moral 
value. If my knowledge judgments were made for me by 
my participation in a transcendent existence (intellectual, 
material, or otherwise) it would be meaningless to attach value 
to them, for they would be immediately what they were with- 
out my power to alter them. 

Gentile takes the position that error is not positive in the 
sense that truth is positive. 13 Knowledge if it is knowledge 
and insofar as it is knowledge is true. Insofar as it is false 
it is not knowledge. Error is not that ignorance which is a 
gap in knowing; it is that ignorance which parades as knowl- 
edge. It is a knowing which is not knowing. Truth and error 
are interdependent. Error is necessary to truth in the sense 
that it gives significance to it. As Gentile expresses it, error 
is immanent in truth. But this immanence is not to be under- 
stood in a static sense. The truth is not true merely because 
its contradictory is false: to assert this would simply be to 
chase oneself in circles. Gentile means to say that truth 
actually contains error within it. A cognition which was per- 
fect, which did not contain the possibility of further learning, 
would lose its value as knowledge because it would become 
purely objective, susceptible of being known only by an imme- 
diate act of faith. No one has ever had such a cognition. Thus 
we find the reason why Gentile is able to say that truth simply 
as opposed to error is in itself error. It is blind dogma. This 
is precisely the same type of argument as that which inter- 
prets Being abstracted from Not-Being as Not-Being in 
respect to that Being which is Becoming. 

The Gentilian doctrine of truth and error is well illustrated 
by the educative situation. When a child announces the sum 
of two and three as six, his calculation is error in relation to 
the truth of the teacher. But it must be remembered that the 

18 See /&/</., pp. 103-6. 



52 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

answer given by the teacher is not the result of operations 
which the child is in a position to follow and which, therefore, 
constitute the child's knowledge. If it were, the child would 
give the answer desired by the teacher. It is an accurate 
description of the situation to say that the calculation of the 
teacher is for the child in error in relation to the child's own 
truth. The diversity between two knowing subjects provided 
by the educative situation is one of the best examples of the 
abstract opposition between subject (the knowing) and object 
(the known) which allows the false separation of truth from 
error and error from truth. The cleft is not a real one. The 
error which is usually differentiated from the truth, when 
gathered into the act of knowing (i.e. when it ceases to be 
purely objective) ceases to be error because it is no longer 
given credence. An error cannot be erroneous unless it is 
mistaken for truth. Hence the distinction between truth and 
error can arise only between two persons, because one per- 
son cannot find his thinking erroneous without correcting it 
in the very act of finding it erroneous. In other words, one 
always thinks to the best of one's ability and hence one's 
thinking is always true until superseded by later thinking. 
For the individual, error is always in the past. In general, 
each philosopher in solving the problems of philosophy thinks 
his solution (call it Solution A) is the true one. If he did not 
he would be asserting the truth of some other solution (Solu- 
tion B). Not until the child by an act of his own thinking 
recognizes the sum of two and three as five does that sum 
become true for him, no matter how much the teacher may 
speak of the "truth" of it. As a matter of fact the sum of two 
and three as five is true for the teacher only because he has 
by an act of thinking accepted a certain mathematical system. 
The teacher may appeal to a system agreed upon by mankind 
but if the child acquires it parrot-fashion he has not learned 
it. He must build his arithmetic by his own acts of thinking. 



THE ARGUMENT RESTATED 53 

There is an important lesson for educators here. Similarly, 
the philosopher who upholds Solution A upholds it because it 
is a product of his own thinking and not because someone has 
taught it to him as one would teach a parrot. He is only in 
error to others, and then only when he comes into contact 
with men who uphold Solution B (or C or D) and finds a 
difference of thought to exist. Each of us, to other thinkers, 
and all other thinkers to each of us, may err in this way. 
Beyond the error which our thinking contains in the light of 
what we shall think in the future, this is the only meaning 
which Gentile finds for error. 

It should not be concluded from this that Gentile ignores 
the other and more customary meaning. He finds this other 
meaning to be significant, but in another field than that of 
philosophy. The geometrician who deduces a new proposition 
falsely is in error. The scientist who makes an induction 
which his data do not warrant is in error. As we shall see 
when we discuss his concept of the logic of the abstract, Gen- 
tile is far from denying this other significance. But, as we 
shall also see when we come to discuss his logic of the concrete, 
he does not consider this significance to be a philosophic one. 
The customary meaning for error is significant only in the 
sphere of objects or ideas which transcend the act of thinking, 
the sphere of abstractions. In the study of the immanent real it 
is no longer applicable. 

One more point. The case of the child in school for whom 
two plus three equals six illustrates with great clarity the 
necessity which accompanies our thinking and upon which 
Gentile builds the argument that thinking is norma sui. The 
reason why that sum is true for the child is that in the light 
of what he knows he cannot possibly think otherwise. That 
is why he thinks as he does. And nothing else as an answer 
to that sum will be true for him until he does think otherwise. 
Why does he change? Surely not through caprice. He changes 



54 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

because (and if) something new enters the horizon of his 
thinking and literally forces a new understanding of what he 
already knows. We have all at one time or another experienced 
events which have caused complete revolutions in our think- 
ing. This change is literally a revolution for the child. Before 
that moment that child could not possibly think anything 
about the sum of two and three except that it was six. That 
was what "the sum of two and three" meant to him. After 
that moment, for which the teacher should be responsible, the 
child could not possibly think any longer of the sum of two 
and three as six. Something has happened. And that some- 
thing is an act of thinking on the part of the child. We think 
what we think at any moment because to the best of our ability 
that is where our thinking leads us. "The best of our ability" 
is sometimes very poor. We can improve on it by persistent 
analysis; but the logic by which it proceeds is quite beyond 
our control. We must think specific thoughts, not because we 
are automata, but because our thinking is what it is. Make 
any assertion you wish, out of the wealth of your experience, 
be it "Two plus three equals five" or "Man is immortal"; you 
will discover that you are forced to it by an inescapable neces- 
sity, the necessity of the "I think. ..." It will not change 
until a new act of thinking forces a new assertion upon you. 
Were your thinking not subject to this necessity you could 
not make any assertion that would be more than mere opinion; 
which would mean that you had done no thinking. And that 
palpably is not the case. One returns again to Gentile's origi- 
nal contention: if there were no thinking there would be noth- 
ing. The very assertion that there is no thinking constitutes 
a complete denial that there is none. 



PART TWO 
THE SISTEMA Dl LOGICA 



CHAPTER THREE 
THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 

THE exposition of the Gentilian logic which follows in this 
chapter and the next will employ as far as possible a direct 
and accurate translation of the terminology found in the Sis- 
tema di logica. Readers unaccustomed to the technicalities of 
logic should be warned that this material will exceed the 
requirements of the critical examination which the present 
study hopes to make. It will constitute a resume of the major 
doctrines of the Sistema di logica. This resume is offered for 
the reason that the Sistema di logica is not available in English. 
Even so summary a treatment may be profitable to students 
of Gentile who do not read Italian yet desire acquaintance 
with the details of the doctrines contained in the two volumes. 
Only the broad outlines of these doctrines, however, are neces- 
sary to the pursuit of the problem set by this study. 

The reader will immediately be aware of the strenuous 
application which the material in Part Two demands. One 
part of the difficulty is due to the fact that these chapters 
summarize in a few pages what Gentile says in six hundred. 
However, there is so much repetition in those pages that 
greater seriousness may be attached to the second aspect of 
the difficulty, namely Gentile's expression of his doctrines. We 
have tried to modify this while preserving the original char- 
acter of Gentile's thinking. Many of the quotations given will 
demonstrate this to be an almost impossible task. So far we 
have often paraphrased the argument. But in this chapter 
and the next we shall try to present the doctrme^as nearly as 

57 



58 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

possible as Gentile presents it himself. The true modification 
of the difficulty must await the critical discussions of Part 
Three, wherein we seek the thought behind Gentile's extreme 
complexity and esotericism of expression. 

These two chapters on the logics of the abstract and the 
concrete present arguments for which only Gentile is answer- 
able. No additional contribution has been made except by way 
of occasional expository devices. Even where citations and 
quotations are not indicated the content is taken directly from 
Gentile's pages. At many points criticisms will suggest them- 
selves strongly to the reader. The criticisms which we shall 
make are reserved for later chapters, and will be chosen with 
reference to the general problem of evaluating actual ideal- 
ism. We hope that they will include all of the essential ones 
which will occur to the reader. 



"The logic of the abstract is the logic of abstract thought, that 
is of thought insofar as it is its own object. ... It renews within 
thought the point of view of Being as pure Being. " * We have 
differentiated between pensiero pens at o (thought as its own ob- 
ject) and pensiero pensante (the activity of thinking). An 
understanding of the system of pensiero pensato is essential to 
an evaluation of Gentile's philosophy. Pensiero pensato is 
termed "abstract" because it is the product of and therefore is 
separated from the act of thinking; in short, because it is but a 
part of the whole. Its system gives what Gentile believes to be an 
adequate account of pensiero pensato from the point of view of 
noetic logic. By a consideration of the nature of abstract 
thought Gentile is enabled to prepare the way for the con- 
struction of his concrete system. 

1 Sistema. Vol I, p. 153. "Pure" here means the immediate. Gentile also 
employs it to signify the a priori. 



THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 59 

Though this logic is abstract and therefore does not lead to 
a knowledge of the real, the real being defined as the totality 
of the thinkable as distinguished from any part of it (as, for 
example, the object), it is nevertheless essential to a knowledge 
of the real. Concrete thinking, which is for Gentile the nega- 
tion of all immediateness (or abstractness), requires the 
abstract for achievement. 2 This we shall understand more 
clearly later; it will suffice at this point to render only the 
skeleton of the argument. Pure Being is an abstraction (i.e. 
is partial), as we have seen. We have also seen that Not- 
Being is an abstraction. But the dialectic of the two is con- 
crete (i.e. a unified totality). We cannot achieve this dialectic 
without the abstract elements which are its material. In other 
words, the dialectic (concrete thinking) requires an object: 3 

Fuel is essential to the fire of thought, which consumes it in giving 
light and heat. . . . 

If by dialectic we mean the logic of the concrete (i.e. of knowledge, 
a unity of subject and object), in addition to this dialectic it is 
necessary to admit a logic of the abstract (a step toward this same 
dialectic) or of thought as the opposing object without which the 
unity in which concrete thinking resides cannot be actualized. 

Hence the importance of the logic of the abstract, whose 
nature we are about to exposit/ 

A judgment objectively considered is an identity which is a 
unity of differences. If I affirm that virtue is knowledge 
I affirm an identity which unifies the difference between "vir- 
tue" and "knowledge." It may be represented by A=A, the 
^4's not standing for the same entity, as they would in mathe- 

2 Gentile uses "negation" in this concrete sense to express the absorption of the 
immediate in the reality of the mediate by a synthetic process, as we shall see. In 
the logic of the abstract it is used as an antonym to "affirmation." 

8 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 130. 

4 Gentile also calls the logic of the abstract, "organic logic" ; and the logic of 
the concrete, "critical logic." This is similar to the designation of epochs in history 
as organic and critical. 



6O THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

matics, but rather expressing logical identity. The relation 
A=A is the principle of thinkability when thought is objec- 
tively considered. Neither term (A, or =A) may be enter- 
tained in thought outside of the relation; the relation is the 
very condition of thought. And neither term may be enter- 
tained outside of thought: 5 

The nucleus ... of logical thought is the unity of the noun and 
the verb ... a unity in which the noun (A) is the Being which is 
because and insofar as thought by means of the verb (=A). It 
cannot be separated from the latter without disappearing from the 
field of the thinkable. 

In other words, Being as the object of thought (abstract 
Being, pensiero pcnsato) is Being as identical with itself. 
Hence the fundamental law of the logic of the abstract is the 
Principle of Identity. 

There are two ways of considering an affirmation. It is, 
first, the act of the subject in positing its object, the affirma- 
tion by which the knower affirms the known. This is its con- 
crete aspect, affermazione affermante, and will be considered 
later. Secondly, it may be considered proper to the object 
as designating its structure, an affirmation which concerns 
itself exclusively with the nature of the object known. The 
identity of which we are at present speaking is an affirmation 
of the second type, affermazione affermata. This second type 
of affirmation at once designates structure and negates imme- 
diate Being, for it affirms not an A alone but always the rela- 
tion A~A. That it always affirms this relation signifies that 
whatever is thought is thought mediately and not immediately. 
We never think immediate Being except to negate it. 

This second type of affirmation is a negation in still another 
sense, which provides the logical value of the affirmation. Pure 
Being, the abstract noun, could negate nothing. Indeed it 

5 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 155. 



THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 6l 

could affirm nothing. Thought, in contrast, provides an affir- 
mation such that if its contradictory were affirmed it would 
not be, and vice versa. Hence if A A is affirmed, the being 
of A consists as much in its negation of Not-A as in its iden- 
tity with A. Thus the fundamental law of the logic of the 
abstract also has the form of the Principle of Non-Contradic- 
tion, such that to affirm that A= A is the same as affirming 
that A^Not-A. The major distinction between this and the 
logic of Aristotle is that in the latter objective truth (i.e. extrin- 
sic in relation to thought) knows nothing of its negatives, 
whereas for Gentile contradiction is intrinsic to thought: 

He who possesses the truth has the right to repudiate the affirma- 
tions of those who contradict him. This right consists not in the 
incompatibility of the truth and its negation but in the truth of 
this incompatability. 

The Principle of Non-Contradiction is contained in the Prin- 
ciple of Identity. 

In addition to negation, opposition must be considered. 
There are two types of opposition in logic. There is first of 
all that opposition of identicals (their difference) expressed 
in A=A. "A triangle is a three-sided figure" is an example of 
such an opposition. It is internal to a simple judgment. It was 
this opposition that the Eleatics did not appreciate. And 
secondly, there is the opposition of contradictories, called by 
Gentile "absolute opposition." In this second opposition one 
judgment is the negation of another in such a sense that if the 
one is true the other is not. "A triangle is a three-sided figure," 
and its contradictory, "A triangle is not a three-sided figure," 
offer an example of this second type. It is external to a single 
judgment, but internal to pairs of contradictories. The con- 
tradictory negated by every opposition of the first type (i.e. 
within the identity) is the absolutely opposed. This opposi- 

6 Ibid, p. 159. Italics added. 



62 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

tion is not fully expressed in the Principle of Non-Contradic- 
tion. If "A triangle is a three-sided figure," the Principle of 
Non-Contradiction only states that "A triangle is not not-a- 
three-sided figure." We need in addition the statement that 
a triangle either is a three-sided figure or it is not. Such a 
statement is provided by the Principle of Excluded Middle. 
Hence the Principle of Identity in its fullness contains not 
only the Principle of Non-Contradiction but also the Principle 
of Excluded Middle. The Principle of Non-Contradiction tells 
us that there are not opposed truths; the Principle of Excluded 
Middle tells us that there is a linkage within each pair of 
contradictories: 7 

Just as the reason for the distinction between the Principle of 
Identity and the Principle of Non-Contradiction rests in the differ- 
ence between affirmation and the negation whence a concept is 
posited, so the difference between the third principle [Excluded 
Middle] and the first two consists in the unity which it demon- 
strates between affirmation and negation and which does not appear 
in the other two principles inasmuch as they are diverse. 

Each judgment as affirmed involves a negation of its contra- 
dictory : hence the false has a place in the logic of the abstract 
as the negativity immanent in the true affirmation. 

The derivation of these three laws of thought is an old 
story to logicians. The circularity in the progress of thought 
for which they are responsible is no more novel, but it is so 
significant to Gentile's doctrine that we shall describe it as 
he describes it. This circularity is due for the most part to 
the second and third of the principles enunciated above. The 
Principle of Non-Contradiction tells us that every affirmation 
is also a negation; the Principle of Excluded Middle tells us 
what in particular is negated. Thus when we make a judg- 
ment there is in a sense a movement from the affirmation to 
the negation of its contradictory, and from the negated con- 

7 Ibid., p. 163. 



THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 63 

tradictory back to the affirmation. The point is, first, that an 
affirmation's meaning is not restricted to the Identity alone 
but includes the other two principles ; and secondly, that what 
the other two principles negate (falsity) itself negates the 
original Identity (truth). There is no truth without falsity 
and no falsity without truth; there is no complete separation 
of the two. Each is part of the meaning of the other: 8 

Every concept is affirmed insofar as its negation is not, but it is 
affirmed as the negative of the concept which would be its negative. 
It is affirmed therefore as the negation of its negation, with a 
circularity which makes a closed system of the concept. 

This feature is familiar as exhibited in the structure of such 
objective systems of thought as geometry or Boolean algebra. 
In these fields we always end with a detailed statement of that 
with which we began. 9 

It follows from this, according to Gentile, that it is impos- 
sible to conceive of a Being whose essence is not thought 
itself. 10 The impossibility may be expressed in this form: if 
the identity A A were not thought it would be necessary (by 
the Principle of Excluded Middle) to think A=Not-A. But 
if our judgments were expressed in this latter form, thought 
as we know it objectively would be completely destroyed. 

8 Ibid, p 163. 

See the later paragraph on the syllogism. It is neither necessary nor possible 
to break out of the circle of thought by means of a principle of reason. Leibniz 
attempted to break out of it in order to establish the real existence of essences by 
means of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, without realizing that the will of God 
for the best of all possible worlds is no more a sufficient reason m itself than the 
activity of the monads whose reality it was intended to explain Kant attempted 
to break out of the same circle in explaining the connexity of cause and effect by 
the Analogy of Pure Experience, but this too by its presupposition begged the 
question. The mistake comes, according to Gentile, in the abstract separation of 
essence and existence, or of cause and effect Thought is not the subjective affirma- 
tion of existence or of effects Thought is concrete because it coincides with reality ; 
it unifies existence and essence, cause and effect. The problem was a true one to 
both Leibniz and Kant because they both presupposed existence to thought. They 
separated the two irrevocably; whereas for Gentile they are one and the same. 
Thought is the real, as we shall see. 

10 See the criticism in Chapters VII and VIII of this study. 



64 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

"A triangle is not a triangle" is meaningless. In other words, 
if A=A were not necessary, it would be necessary that thought 
be negated. 11 Either thought stands upon its identity-relation 
and repulses the contradiction which would annul it; or it 
abstracts from itself, and establishes, its contradictory (which 
cannot be entertained in thought except as an identity repuls- 
ing Us contradictory!). Hence Gentile gives the necessity of 
A~A an ontological significance. His argument is that if 
Being must be thought according to the identity-relation, it 
cannot be thought as immediate A for A=A is the contra- 
dictory of the negation of thought: 12 

Either Being or thought. Being is the negation of thought, just as 
thought is the negation of Being. 

Gentile means in this passage that immediate Being (A) is 
the negation of thought (A=A) and vice versa. It is for this 
reason, he argues, that immediate Being must be replaced by 
mediate Being, or the act of thinking. This concept of mediate 
Being, however arrived at, marks an important advance in 
metaphysics. Logic arises, according to Gentile, when we 
realize that we do not have to choose between immediate 
Being and thought. Being, as the mediate being of thought, 
receives an entirely new interpretation. And logic contributes 
to metaphysics. 

Consider now the elements of thought-as-object. The analy- 
sis of a judgment is rendered possible by the difference imma- 
nent in the affirmed identity. This difference is essential to 
thought, for the difference makes the identity thinkable. To 
say "A triangle is a triangle" would not be the expression of a 
thought. It means nothing. Difference is necessary; but a 
difference involving a synthesis. Unrelated terms (e.g. A or 
B) form an unthinkable and immediate plurality. Even if 

1 * This conclusion is characterized by Gentile as "philosophic naturalism," 
which defines his use of the word "nature." 
**Sistema. Vol. I, p. 165. 



THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 65 

we try to ignore the synthesis and think of a term in itself we 
are nevertheless compelled to submit to the fundamental law 
of thought. The term enters an identity-relation and hence 
becomes synthesized. Just as we cannot in Euclidean geom- 
etry separate "straight line' 7 and "the shortest distance between 
two points in a single plane," so neither of the terms of thought 
can be thought by itself. Each term is bound to the other. 
Nor can we indulge in an infinite regress of analyses, as might 
be supposed, making each term a new synthesis. Such a per- 
formance would consist in analyzing A A into (a a) 
(atf), and so on ad infinitum. It must be borre in mind that 
we think of A=A insofar as A is a term of the synthesis and 
not a synthesis itself. The term "straight line" is such only as 
it is synthesized predicatively with "is the shortest distance 
between two points in a single plane" or some other predicative 
term. In itself it is nothing but words. There is no analysis 
of this analysis; only the synthesis of the analysis and the 
analysis of the synthesis. 13 The terms in their duality furnish 
the determinedness of thought. And they determine thought 
because they affirm what they affirm and negate the false 
element. 

Hence the judgment is essentially an inviolate whole. Its 
two terms may be distinguished from one another as noun and 
verb, but it is necessary to palliate the distinction by adding 
that this noun and verb, so-called, are not the noun and verb 
of grammar. The grammatical noun and verb are revealed by 
an abstract classification of words. The content of a vocabu- 
lary or a dictionary is such an analysis or classification. Gram- 
mar provides analysis while disregarding synthesis. But we 
are considering vital thought, which is both analysis and syn- 

18 That is, in the logic of the abstract. An analysis of the analysis attempts to 
answer a need for thought development which Gentile thinks should be answered 
by pensiero pensante rather than pensiero pensato As will be seen more clearly 
when we come to the logic of the concrete, pensiero pensato is simply a synthesis 
of an analysis, while pensiero pensante is a synthesis of that synthesis with "I 
think " 



66 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

thesis. The noun and verb of thought are the noun and verb 
of living language, not of the dictionary. We call them subject 
and predicate. In living language there is no subject without 
its predicate and vice versa. The grammar of thought super- 
sedes abstract grammar by recognizing the noun (subject) as 
the noun of the verb (predicate) and the verb as the verb of 
the noun. Gentile gives as an example of this supersession the 
judgment, "God creates." The true noun here is not simply 
"God," but "God creating"; definitely not, for example, a 
God such as that of Epicurus. And the "creates" is the "creat- 
ing of God" and no other. In Gentile's words: 1A 

Judgment is thought insofar as the synthesis of the two terms 
whence Being is mediated in its identity with itself. 

The subject is the term terminated by the synthesis wherein Being 
is mediated in its identity with itself, and the predicate is the ter- 
minating term of the same synthesis. 

So much for one aspect of the relation of the terms of judg- 
ment. 

Their logical function exhibits another significant feature. 
The functional difference implied above is not merely that 
between passivity and activity. The activity of the predicate 
is the source of the two attributes of objective thought, neces- 
sity and universality. 15 The necessity and universality of the 
predicate act upon the contingency and particularity of the 
subject. Immediate Being, external to thought, is particular. 
Its being thought consists precisely in its ceasing to be par- 
ticular and becoming universal. "Straight line" by itself (if 
such were possible within thought) would be particular. But 

14 Sistema. Vol. I, pp 197 and 198. 

15 These two attributes should not be confused with the necessity and univer- 
sality of truth (concrete) The necessity of abstract thought is its distinction from 
immediate Being ; the necessity of truth is that it cannot be thought otherwise than 
as true The universality of abstract thought is the predication of the subject: the 
universality of truth is its value for all thinkers in the same position "Man is 
mortal" possesses the former necessity and universality: "I think man is mortal" 
possesses the latter. See Chapters II and IV of this study. 



THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 67 

it becomes universal when acted upon by "is the shortest dis- 
tance between two points in a single plane/ 7 because it achieves 
the predicate belonging to all straight lines. 16 In the same way 
immediate Being, external to thought, is contingent. "Straight 
line' 7 in itself may exist and may not exist. In its particularity 
it may not be entertained in thought. But "straight line" as a 
term in "A straight line is the shortest distance between two 
points in a single plane" attains the necessity which is char- 
acteristic of knowledge when asserted as truth; that is, as 
opposed to the contingency of the factual. Being as thought 
binds thought to itself or, in the language of logic, becomes 
universal and necessary: 17 

Since Being as thought is that Being which has nothing external 
to itself, thinking may not think anything else. [It constitutes a] 
universality and necessity which are not only relative but absolute, 
if our critique of the principle of reason is true. Virtue [for 
example] is universal as thought not only because there is no virtue 
which is not included in the virtue which is thought nor simply 
because for this reason it cannot be said that virtue is thought if 
the judgment wherein it is thought lets any virtue escape, but also 
because there is nothing (insofar as one thinks virtue), not even 
not-virtue, which exceeds the bounds of Being as thought. Other- 
wise thought (as pensiero pensato, please note) would not be the 
closed system which we have demonstrated to be essential to it, 
but would come to be a thought among thoughts, which is absurd. 

And we may say the same thing with respect to necessity. The 
predicate makes the subject necessary. If the subject became 
fixed in its analytic separation from the predicate it would 
be neither universal nor necessary nor even thought. The sub- 
ject as particular and contingent is abstract. As regards par- 
ticularity, Gentile says: 18 

18 Even a particular judgment is universal in the sense that a judgment must be 
universal to be a part of knowledge The Aristotelian particular judgment is 
barred from the Gentilian logic, because its meaning includes the universal judg- 
ment which it negates. 

17 Sistema. Vol. I, pp. 200-1. 18 Ibid., p. 203. 



68 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

If I say that man is an animal, it is clear that man is particular as 
man (simple subject) with respect to animal, which includes other 
animals that are not men. But this man is an abstraction made 
possible by the analysis of the analysis of the judgment in which 
man is thought by me as precisely that animal which in his uni- 
versality includes not only the animality of human beings but 
animality without reservation, since it is clear that all that animality 
which I can consider common to all animals ought indeed to be 
included in man, assuming that man is also an animal. Thus the 
man thought by me by means of such a judgment is a man who, 
as universality, has all the universality of the predicate whence I 
think him. 

Even simple sensation, the maximum of particularity, is uni- 
versal as it enters into knowledge. 

The forms of judgment outlined by Gentile may quickly be 
given. 19 From the discussion above it should be clear that Gen- 
tile considers a judgment to be in Quality affirmative, negative, 
and disjunctive; by virtue of the principles of Identity, Non- 
Contradiction, and Excluded Middle, respectively. As regards 
Quantity a judgment is at once universal, particular, and indi- 
vidual. By the Principle of Excluded Middle the universal 
judgment "All men are mortal" excludes the particular judg- 
ment "Some men are not mortal," and vice versa. According 
to Gentile these two contradictories form a community which 
is responsible for the individuality of the former. In Modality 
a judgment is at once apodictic, problematic, and assertorial. 
In the same way the necessity of the judgment "All men are 
mortal" as a part of knowledge negates its contingency. Other- 
wise the judgment would be a fact and not a thought. The 
unity of the apodictic and the problematic Gentile calls the 
assertorial nature of the judgment. In each group the third 
form is the only one which, relative to its group, is the "real" 
or "concrete" form of the judgment having logical value. 20 

1 e For this material see the Sistema, Vol. I, Part II, Chapter V. 

2 These words are placed in quotation marks to indicate that although Gentile 
does employ them in this connection we feel that they should be reserved for 
exclusive use in the logic of the concrete. 



THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 69 

Universality, particularity, apodicity, contingency; each taken 
by itself is fact and not thought. In thought they are united 
into individuality and assertion. Of the three groups only the 
third, and in this only the third form expresses the reality of 
the judgment in its logical concreteness as the assertion of 
disjunction and individuality. 21 

It is a significant feature of Gentile's doctrine that it accepts 
the traditional criticism of the syllogism as a petitio principii, 
yet insists on the importance of incorporating the syllogism 
into its logical system. Indeed the criticism supports his doc- 
trine, by illustrating that the logic of the abstract is in its very 
nature circular. Gentile retains the syllogism but reinterprets 
it. He reduces it from the three-termed judgment of Aristotle 
to one of two terms. 22 The reduction is made through the 
Principle of Excluded Middle, which is considered the most 
fundamental of the three principles: 23 

A is A because it is not Not- A, and can only be one of the two: 
either A or Not- A. 

The fundamental form of the syllogism is disjunctive: 

A either is A, or is Not- A. 
A is not Not- A. 
Therefore, A is A. 

But this represents the mere possibility of the syllogism. It 
approaches full expression through the introduction of uni- 
versality and particularity. In the predicates of the disjunc- 
tive form above, replace A by U (Universality) and Not- A 
by P (Particularity) and we have the individual syllogism: 

21 Gentile excludes the Kantian forms of judgment under Relation (subsist- 
ence, causality, and reciprocity) because they are all founded on the presupposition 
of an opposition between Being and thought. Under this presupposition the rela- 
tion between subject and predicate is formulated as a subjective intuition with 
regard to a transcendent Being (i e transcending the knowing subject) experi- 
mented upon in the course of experience with the known Since such a presupposi- 
tion is eliminated by the Gentilian requirements for a philosophic knowledge, these 
forms of judgment would not be legitimate in his system 

22 For this material see the Sistema, Vol. I, Part II, Chapter VI. 
** Ibid., p. 220-23. 



7O THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

A either is U or is P. 
A is not P. 
Therefore, A is U. 

Either it is true that all men are animals (including Socrates), or 
it is true that they are not all animals, [i.e. that some are not 
animals]. 

It is false that they are not all animals. 

Therefore, it is true that all men (including Socrates) are animals. 

In the individual form, replace U by N (Necessity) and P by 
P' (Possibility) and we have the assertorial syllogism, which 
combines Quality and Quantity with Modality: 

A either is N, or is P'. 
A is not P'. 
Therefore, A is N. 

Either it is true that all men (including Socrates) cannot be thought 
except as animals, or it is true that they can also be thought 
not as animals. 

It is false that they can also be thought not as animals. 

Therefore, it is true that all men (including Socrates) must be 
thought as animals. 

Here is the syllogism in its fullness. The syllogism in this form 
appears to contain three terms, but by reference to the original 
disjunctive form it is seen that there are in fact only two. 
The universality (U) and particularity (P) are united by the 
Principle of Excluded Middle; and the necessity (N) and 
possibility (P') by the same principle. To negate the syllo- 
gism is to negate the logic of thought objectively considered; 
for the syllogism has been rewritten in the form of the basic 
two-term judgment which, it was argued above, could not be 
negated without negating thought. The syllogism (and there- 
fore the objective judgment) has its limitations, but they are 
the limitations of pensiero pensato, its circularity or identity. 
We shall consider what Gentile believes to be the only way 



THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT ?I 

of avoiding the closed circle of pensiero pensato when we come 
to the logic of the concrete. 

Gentile identifies valid induction with the syllogism. 24 This 
identification of induction with deduction is familiar to rela- 
tional logicians. The usual distinction assigned to induction of 
opening the way to logically new judgments is doubtful. We 
have described thought as universal, the particular becoming 
universalized. Even in induction the particular is thought as 
universal. For example, when we induce from particular 
instances that man is mortal, either we are proceeding illogi- 
cally or we are assuming one of two things: (1) that the 
instances examined are the only instances covered by the 
induction, or (2) that there is a uniformity in nature which 
assures us that if the instances examined are of mortal men 
all future instances will involve mortal men. In either case the 
particular is universalized. In the second case, in order to 
universalize we invoke a presupposition. In the first case a 
complete induction is necessary in order for the resultant uni- 
versal to be valid. But this is impossible both in time and 
space, in most cases. We shall arrive nowhere by induction if 
we think of the particular as the immediate particular of 
nature. If the particulars of induction were truly particular 
they could offer no ground for the induced universalizing judg- 
ment. As a term of judgment the particular subject is univer- 
salized by the predicate. It never stands by itself, but is 
always the subject of the predicate and therefore universal. 
This universality we have found to be the fundamental char- 
acter of deduction, for it is deductive thought that we have 
been discussing above. Induction necessarily is thought, and 
as thought it acts according to the principles of the syllogism. 
If the particular were not universalized by thought there could 
be no induction. Hence induction no more than deduction 
breaks the circle of thought. 

24 For this material see the Sistema, Vol. I, Part II, Chapter VII. 



72 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Gentile correlates with his doctrine the terminology which 
has been inherited from classical logic. 26 The Gentilian "con- 
cept" is objective thought par excellence. Thought and lan- 
guage must not be confused. A thought is contained in the 
unity of its terms. Linguistically a word is an independent 
element. Logically a word is significant only in its context. 
Logically, according to Gentile, the whole classical theory of 
definition, of genus and differentia, is meaningless. The classi- 
cal theory of definition depends upon entities external to 
thought wherein genus and differentia may reside. But in the 
Gentilian judgment genus (universal) and differentia (par- 
ticular) are united. Only in the syllogism, where the universal 
is the universal of the particular and the particular is the 
particular of the universal, do we find a significance for genus 
and differentia. But this is quite different from the classical 
view. For Gentile genus and differentia do not exist previous 
to thought, but rather are given by thought. This unification 
of universal and particular provides a refutation of all nomi- 
nalism and all realism. Each of these traditional doctrines, 
unfortunately, seeks the "concept" in the terms of thought 
rather than in thought itself. All thought, even that of natural 
science, is conceptual in the Gentilian sense: 20 

The naturalist does not think immediately of a wolf. ... He thinks 
rather of a certain existing animal intuited hie et nunc as a natural 
being, or as given by experience (as he says) insofar as wolf. His 
concept is, like all concepts, a synthesis of subject and predicate; 
an a priori relation between a term terminated and a term termi- 
nating, with that circular movement of thought between the one 
and the other which is expressed by the syllogism. 

But to understand the value of the "concept" we must under- 
stand its limits. Everything that is thinkable as the object of 
thought, not only as possible but as real, is conceptual. But 

25 For this material see the Sistema, Vol. I, Part II, Chapter VIII. 
20 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 242. 



THE LOGIC OF THE ABSTRACT 73 

the concept as object lacks important logical values. We must 
go beyond it. 

Even when the separation between immediate Being and 
thought is once overcome and thinking becomes reality, even 
then the spiritual act productive of thought and giving it value 
as truth may be ignored. In order not to ignore it we must 
recognize pensiero pensato as abstract, and turn to the logic of 
the concrete. But the logic of the abstract must not be 
belittled: 27 

Modern logic is ... preoccupied with the spirit, as the axis around 
which all reality gyrates. It struggles between the concept of reality 
as object of the spirit (nature or idea) and the concept of spiritual 
reality, with a tendency to deny the former in order to affirm the 
latter. In this it runs the risk of making the latter another copy 
of nature, as something presupposed to actual thinking! Hence 
the frequent assertion of many of the most extreme logics that 
nothing can remain standing in the old logic. But the old logic, 
purified and systematized . . . remains secure and vital, ... as 
the plain material of thinking, to use the Aristotelian terminology. 
It is a material separated from the form by abstraction, toward 
which form it aspires and in which alone it finds its reality. 

In other words, the logic of the abstract, which is nothing 
more nor less than a systematization of thought objectively 
considered, we shall always have with us. It is an infinite uni- 
verse to which we are bound; it is the chains which fettered 
Plato's slaves. We cannot think without grinding out a 
material. The objective consideration of this material as pen- 
siero pensato produces the logic of the abstract. But in that 
this material can neither increase and diminish, nor develop, 
nor come into being, it is what it is. It cannot enter into that 
Becoming, that active process, of which we have seen meta- 
physical value to consist: 28 

It cannot, if that same spirit which has made it does not unmake 
it again, as is its habit. Anyone may surprise this habit in its 
2 7 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 244. 2 8 Ibid , p. 245. 



74 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

ingenuousness and free spontaneity in the child, who makes only 
to destroy. He breaks all the idols in which his fancy is momen- 
tarily wrapped. He is eternally dissatisfied with all things which 
are things, because they are nothing compared with the infinite reality 
which grows impetuously within him. He will always be turned 
toward things, and in them be distracted and dissuaded from reflec- 
tion; for the subject lives in the object which it generates and from 
which it is nourished, like mythical Kronos who devoured his sons. 

Thought as abstract, as object, has of value what the concrete 
spirit gives it. Hence we now turn to the logic of the concrete. 



CHAPTER FOUR 
THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 

THINKING may be considered either as the act of thinking 
(pensiero pcnsante) or as objective thought (pensiero pen- 
sato}. The two are very different. But they are obviously 
related by the fact that they spring from the same source. 
They describe the same thinking looked at from different 
points of view. In thinking, an object is necessary; we always 
"think about" something. One of the objects of thinking is 
thought itself. This object is the material of the logic of the 
abstract, as we have seen. The important thing to note about 
this situation is that we cannot have thought without think- 
ing, that thought does not precede thinking: * 

If thinking is free, as it certainly is, nothing can be admitted outside 
of it to negate its infinity. Thinking presupposes nothing; but 
thought definitely presupposes thinking. 

When thinking is considered as objective thought, truth is a 
concept being a judgment, a judgment being a syllogism, and 
a syllogism being an identity, as we have seen. It does not 
have movement or development; it is simply demonstrative. 
But it presupposes the act by which it is produced. And since 
it is objective in relation to this act it is partial or abstract. 
It is, for example, the "All men are mortal" abstracted from 
the concrete "I think all men are mortal." Therefore we shall 
proceed to examine the act of thinking, pensiero pensante, 
"I think ..." plus what I think, noting that it has the unique 
characteristic of presupposing nothing. No matter how far 

1 Sistema. Vol. II, p. 9. 

75 



76 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

we carry our search for Being, the most basic entity found will 
be the act of thinking which constitutes the search. 

Since pensicro pcnsante is at least as much concerned with 
the knowing as with the known, extraordinary difficulties 
appear. The criterion of true thinking must be found in the 
act as distinguished from the fact of thinking. 2 The logic of 
the concrete, based as it is on the act of thinking, cannot 
explain any error or any truth. But it can and proceeds to 
explain my error and my truth. The opposition between me 
and my adversary (let us say Plato) is such only according to 
a concept of the world which is naive. For my antagonist 
is my antagonist, internal to me and real in me: 8 

. . . Plato is not Ariston's son, who has rested underground for 
twenty-four centuries, but the living Plato read by me and under- 
stood and thought together with those who have interpreted him. 
He and his commentators arise again and live in the very life of 
my spirit. 

His error, interpreted as error by me y is a moment in my spirit- 
ual act, overcome in the judgment of which it is the material. 
The act of judging Plato's doctrine as error is my personal 
act by which, first that doctrine is given existence for me (and 
it cannot otherwise be given existence), and secondly that 
particular error is surmounted (as it must be if it is judged 
as error). This principle of the immanence of error in truth is 
expanded to apply to all of the acts of the spirit: 4 

In conclusion, our doctrine says to men: "Take care not to tran- 
scend yourselves, either in search of truth or in search of fantastic 
errors. Good and evil are within you. Liberate yourselves!" 

Truth is within the act of thinking, for there only is it given its 
significance as truth. 

3 See again those earlier parts of this study which deal with the abandonment 
of the transcendent Logos and with truth and error. 

3 Sistema. Vol. II, p. 13. * Ibid 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 77 

Metaphysics and logic are here unified, for the truth of the 
logic of the concrete is provided by the metaphysically ulti- 
mate character of the act of thinking. It is for this reason that 
this logic is termed "concrete," for "concrete" connotes exist- 
ence. Since the distinction between essence and existence is 
possible only in a philosophic doctrine in which existence tran- 
scends thinking about it, Gentile's immanentism is of such a 
character that essence and existence are necessarily identified. 
Gentile defines reality as the "totality of the thinkable/' which 
totality provides a universal and necessary synthesis of all of 
the elements of experience. 5 And the real act of thinking is all 
that exists for human beings, because according to the Gen- 
tilian requirements we cannot have a true knowledge of any- 
thing separated (or abstracted) from that act. 

Being a closed system, the logic of the abstract does not 
provide the motive power to initiate the transition from it to 
the logic of the concrete. Thinking is described by Gentile as 
like a point moving in a circle. The moving point is pensiero 
pcnsante and the circle it generates is pensiero pens at o. And 
what is most important, thinking is like a self-moving point. 
If the motive power were extrinsic the character proper to the 
logic of the abstract would be destroyed. In other words, if 
the necessity and universality of the objective judgment were 
external to the identity-relation, we should no longer have 
that closed system which is typical of pensiero pens at o. We 
should have a system like that of Aristotle, which was criti- 
cized in the preceding chapter. It is the nature of thought as 
object (as it is of the point) to move in a circle: 

Truth for the logic of the abstract pertains not to thinking which 
intrudes upon its object, but to the object. . . . And in the object 
this truth cannot be, and is not, an element or term of thought 
It is element and co-element, term terminating and terminated, 

5 Ibid , Vol I, p 12 See the criticism of this in Chapter IX of this study. 

6 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 16. 



78 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

synthesis, relation. Not only the point, then, but the point together 
with its movement generates the circle. 

This is precisely the delicate stage which provides the transi- 
tion. Just as the point is self-moving and generates the circle, 
so thinking is self-active and generates the identity-relation as 
its object. The identity-relation as thought is given by an act of 
thinking. "Man is mortal" in order to be pensiero pensato 
must first be "I think man is mortal." The whole force of the 
assertion is contained in the "I think. . . ." In other words, the 
Logos is within thinking. If this were not so, if the Logos 
were external to thinking, we should have neither truth ac- 
cording to the Gentilian requirements nor the circularity which 
we have found characteristic of thought. The Logos must be 
free reflection: hence the dissolution and overcoming of the 
abstract: 7 

For he who speaks of free reflection speaks of subjectivity, that 
which is no longer pensiero pensato but pensiero pens ante. This is 
the destiny of what is thought, not to be able to speak of having 
thinking exclusively to itself, except when it itself becomes think- 
ing. 

Otherwise stated, thought as object must be entertained by an 
act of thinking. It cannot be what it is without this act. And 
this act is differentiated from objective thought by its sub- 
jectivity. The logic of the concrete begins with the realization 
of the need of the subjective act to the object described in 
the logic of the abstract. 

We may interrogate the voiceless nature of naturalism. But 
we shall do so without response. Nature (or any immediate 
Being) is nothing before it enters the identity-relation of 
thought. Logic commences when nature enters this rela- 
tion, becomes identical with itself, becomes intelligible as a 
ground on which man can place his feet, and ceases to be im- 

7 Ibid., p. 17. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 79 

penetrable to thought. Gentile's statement of this step is 
difficult: 8 

. . . Nature, become thought, finally responds to thought and says: 
"I am nature." ... It cannot at first respond; "I am thought"; 
because it has not yet acquired consciousness of the profound trans- 
formation of itself produced by its reflection on itself. Its first 
reflection is nothing but this comparison: nature nature, A=A. 

This is the stage in which judgments are made about nature 
as the object of thought. The point which is being emphasized 
here is that the subjective element (the "I") is necessary to 
such judgments because of the fact that if nature (or whatever 
object of thinking) were purely immediate there would be 
no thinking and therefore no judgment. Nature is thought, and 
thought presupposes thinking. Using the "I" (which is rigor- 
ously excluded from the position of abstract logic) nature 
defines itself, becomes judgment, syllogism, system. It mirrors 
itself in its discourse according to the three principles. If it 
did not it could not be thought. Hence the object of thinking, 
no longer a nature impertinent to thinking, becomes the sub- 
ject of thinking. The A=A becomes Ego=Ego: 9 

Thus thinking which is thought can only be the thought of think- 
ing, which thinks itself. 

The subjective act of thinking is necessary to the objective 
thought thought. It is this subjective act that gives it its 
character as an identity-relation. 

With the discovery of the subjective element (the Ego) 
we are already in the logic of the concrete. Ego Ego is the 
concrete form of A=A. The latter exists only through the 
mediation inherent in the thought process, and the thought 
process as act requires the subjective element: 10 

. . . This relation, which exists insofar as it is mediation or free 
reflection (that is, Ego), precisely because it is mediation is, so to 
8 Ibid., p. 17. 9 Ibid., p. 19. 10 Ibid., p. 20. 



8O THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

speak, itself and its opposite, mediation and immediateness, Ego and 
Not-Ego, liberty and mechanism, concrete and abstract logic, in 
one. 

These are other aspects of the subjective and objective ele- 
ments, recognizable from what has gone before. Without the 
synthesis of these elements there would be no Ego, for without 
the object (supplied by the abstract logic) the subject itself 
would be an abstraction and an immediate entity. The act of 
thinking taken in itself would be without an object, providing 
a situation quite as impossible and unreal as that given by the 
consideration of thought as immediate object by itself. This 
constitutes the necessity of the logic of the abstract to that of 
the concrete. It is also the necessity of the latter to the former. 
The act must have an object; the object requires an act. 

This reciprocal necessity introduces an element of progress 
which belongs solely to the logic of the concrete. With the 
subjective act it is possible to provide accretions to thought. 
The act of thinking initially results in a product which be- 
comes the material of a new subjective act, which act in turn 
becomes the material of a third, and so on. Pensicro pensato 
acts as a mirror in which pcnsiero pensantc sees itself and, by 
virtue of this self-conscious seeing of itself, proceeds to a new 
act. Every thinker is aware of this progress in his thinking. 

In contrast, the logic of the abstract being circular is simply 
a repetition of itself. For this reason its material is born in 
our thought as preexisting to it, preexisting because we gen- 
erate it as a concept which is a concept because of its circular- 
ity. This feature of the logic of the abstract is highly signifi- 
cant in the history of philosophy. We all, in greater or less 
degree, depend upon the concept's character of apparent pre- 
existence. Gentile calls it "the desire for the circle" which is 
rooted deep in the human spirit. No object of which we can 
think can be thought otherwise than as an already determined 
reality. We strive toward the summit, where The Concept 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 8l 

resides. Plato first gave outstanding expression to this desire 
in his search for the Good, already existing and waiting to be 
discovered. But this desire is doomed to disappointment, for 
that which thought strives to achieve is altered in the achieve- 
ment of it. We are children grasping at smoke rings. The con- 
tradiction involved is that the whole which we seem to desire is 
already in our possession by virtue of the circularity of the 
concept. It is overcome when we realize that we actually de- 
sire a satisfaction that can never by definition be fulfilled. For 
the new is always received in exchange for the old. Contrary 
to the Platonic myth and in accordance with the metaphysical 
doctrines of those contemporary philosophers who are empha- 
sizing Process, our thinking builds only to destroy. 

The abstract logic is overcome by the realization of its 
abstractness. Scepticism is often the result for those who dis- 
cover that what in thought we desire to possess is already in 
our possession (as in geometry) and count the fact a sig- 
nificant epistemological difficulty. Dogmatism is often the 
result for those who do not recognize a difficulty in this situa- 
tion. For both, knowledge is limited to the intuiting of the 
immediate, a circumstance discouraging or otherwise, depend- 
ing upon one's criteria of truth value. Gentile would conquer 
both scepticism and dogmatism by capitalizing the activity 
of the spirit in constructing the object of thought as its object, 
an object through which it gains consciousness of itself: lx 

... in other words, as that object which it thinks. ... By virtue 
of thinking, it [the spirit] is thought. It realizes itself as thinking 
substance, as Descartes said. 

Thinking thinks itself; therefore it is self-creation, which is liberty. 
Hence value and truth. But to think itself, it must think, and to 
think it must posit itself as object to itself. . . . 

Thus man sees himself in a mirror, which itself sees; he sees in his 
image the eyes with which he sees his image. 

11 Ibid., pp. 35 and 36. 



82 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

In these passages the contrast between the logics of the ab- 
stract and the concrete is made to appear. In the former the 
identity between A and A was emphasized; it gave character 
to pensiero pens at o. In the latter the difference between the 
subjective and objective elements is emphasized, and gives 
character to pensiero pens ante. 

Why do we not have a closed circle in the logic of the con- 
crete, too? Gentile points out that while abstract thought is 
objectively determined, concrete thinking is self-determined. 
The difference is very great. The result of self-determination 
is the development of the spirit or of culture, a process. Active 
thinking utilizes each self-determination as the material of a 
new act productive of a new self-determination. Furthermore, 
since reality cannot transcend the act of thinking, the onto- 
logical distinction between the real and the possible disap- 
pears. Possibility as a predicate may be applied to objects in 
the realm of the abstract (e.g. a phoenix), but it cannot be 
applied to the act of thinking because the very act of thinking 
it would be pensiero pens ante and hence real. The only un- 
reality in our thinking would arise from thoughts that we 
knew contradicted one another. But this is impossible, be- 
cause we do not wittingly think contradictory thoughts. They 
are unreal to my consistent antagonist, but only as gathered 
into the reality of his thinking. The meaning of the Cartesian 
Cogito ergo sum is the identity of esse and cogitatio; it proves 
nothing with regard to the existence of an entity transcending 
actual thought. Kant's great discovery was that nothing can 
be thought except as a determination of the "I think . . ."; 
hence the Copernican revolution in philosophy. 12 

12 But even Kant had his Noumenon, which was responsible for the given in 
sensation And since there was this given, man became an object among Noumenal 
objects. Philosophy was right back at Protagoras' position Kant's naturalism was 
a violation of the foundation of idealism (the synthesis a priori) since it pre- 
supposed its elements. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 83 

One of the most significant features of Gentile's doctrine 
is its identification of the act of thinking with the philosophic 
concept of "form/' and of the object of thinking with the con- 
cept of "matter." Idealism is characterized by Gentile as that 
philosophy which deduces matter from form. Form is the 
active principle productive of experience; matter is the con- 
tent of experience. Plato invented reminiscence in order to 
defeat subjectivism; Aristotle for the same reason reduced 
the role of the subject to an indifferent remirroring of the 
material of cognition preexisting to cognition. The great dis- 
covery of idealism was the creativity of the subject in knowl- 
edge: 18 

Here is the profound criticism of all materialism; a practical and 
not a theoretical criticism. For to think the world as matter in its 
extreme opposition to the spirit which thinks it (but which thinks 
it nevertheless, energetically, rigorously, and with awareness of 
doing so) is to see it vanish before one as a material world in order 
to be resolved without residuum, not into a world thought, but 
into the act or process of thinking. 

Poetry is not material in a book, existing objectively to anyone 
who opens the book. The reader forgets the material book and 
all material surroundings; the materiality of the book becomes 
absorbed in the activity of the subject. The poetry is created 
in the act of knowing it. It is not black marks on a white page, 
a set of physical conditions external to the reader. And so 
with all objects of nature. The mountain is not the same thing 
to the peasant who lives in its shadow that it is to the moun- 
taineer who climbs to its summit. All is within thought, con- 
structed and developed there, through the energy of thought 
in action. Man is in his objects insofar as his objects are in 
him. 

We may pause at this point. Thus far we have described 

13 Sistema. Vol. II, p. 46. 



84 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

the derivation of the logic of the concrete from the logic of the 
abstract. It is made possible by the introduction of the sub- 
jective element provided by the act of thinking. The full sig- 
nificance of this innovation must be borne in mind as one 
proceeds to the detailed discussion of the fundamental law of 
concrete thinking, which follows. 



The logic of the concrete is more complex and difficult than 
that of the abstract. We have said that the former emphasizes 
the difference between subjective and objective elements. The 
expression of this difference, as Gentile renders it, marks it 
off sharply from the identity-relation of pensicro pcmato. It 
might, if we may suggest a parallel terminology, be called a 
"difference-relation." Looking at the Ego concretely, as that 
through which we know any object, we may say Ego=Not- 
Ego: " 

This is the fundamental law of the concrete Logos. It is distin- 
guished from the fundamental law of the abstract Logos because the 
latter, as a principle of identity, expresses the identity of differ- 
entiated thought, while the new law . . . expresses the difference 
in identical thought. It is not a correction of the former but an 
integrating or verifying of it. 

This differentiation within concrete thought, this separation 
between subject and object, is a concept rigidly excluded from 
the logic of the abstract. It is the subjective element that 
makes the difference. The introduction of the subjective ele- 
ment, the act of thinking, renders to pensicro pcnsantc the 
possibility of breaking out of the circle of objective thought 
in the manner already described. Hence Ego~Ego. The dis- 
tinction between subjective and objective elements renders to 

*' Ibid., pp. 49-50. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 85 

pensiero pensante its full expression. Hence Ego=Not-Ego. 
Thus it may be said that the fundamental law of the logic of 
the concrete has two necessary forms, Ego=Ego and Ego= 
Not-Ego. The first arises in distinguishing the logic of the 
concrete from that of the abstract; the second arises in ex- 
pressing what is meant by concreteness as applied to thinking. 
Let us study these two forms more fully. 

Consider the first form. Ego Ego expresses a "subjective 
identity" very different from the objective identity (A=A) 
of the logic of the abstract. The objective concept (e.g. chair) 
is what it is. "A chair is a movable single seat with a back" is 
an example of an objective identity. It fits into an objective 
system and is static within that system. Concepts are un- 
changing in this respect: they are inert. But a person as 
knowing subject himself is changing and developing. A new 
person is born with every new act of knowing. Man as know- 
ing activity is neither in the past nor in the future: 1JS 

But just this is his being, his not being that which he will be the 
actuality of this not being. He is a need and a desire for being. 
. . . The man who does not negate himself, who is fully satisfied 
with himself, who therefore does not labor, or think, or wish, or do 
anything at all he ceases to be a man. 

Hence strictly speaking Ego=Ego expresses not an identity but 
a difference. But it is a difference which involves continuity, 
the continuity of the Ego. It might better be expressed Ego 
makes itself Ego, as Gentile himself admits. The Ego ex- 
presses itself in an affirmation, which is its own affirmation. 
This affirmation, as the affirmation of the Ego, produces an 
alteration in the Ego, and hence raises a difference between 
two terms. But they are both still the Ego. If I assert that 
virtue is knowledge I become a new person because I am now 
the possessor of that assertion and was not before. Whatever 
assertion follows will necessarily take that assertion into ac- 

. S3. 



86 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

count. Although Gentile uses this first form to express the 
fundamental law of concrete logic he realizes its inadequacy 
and allows it to serve only to emphasize the continuous devel- 
opment of the Ego. 

Consider the second form. What would be a contradiction 
in the logic of the abstract is foundational in the logic of the 
concrete. Ego=Not-Ego. The expression of difference here 
symbolized gives life itself to thinking. This second form 
proclaims the full meaning of the first. If there were not 
differentiation between subject and object, and if the latter 
were not denied reality, we should not be in possession of the 
ontologically unique pensiero pensante. If there were no object 
to be negated ontologically by my act of thinking I could not 
think, for to think is to think something. And, more speci- 
fically, if there were no Not-Ego to be negated ontologically by 
the act of the real Ego, there could be no real Ego. 16 I 
would be nothing if the action of my thought did not intervene 
to negate my natural being in order that I might be realized 
in my act of knowing. The abstract Ego which is the point of 
departure of thought is immediate and natural being (tempera- 
ment or nature) ; it is non-thinking and therefore unknowable. 
It is nothing. Pensiero pensante negates this Not-Being by a 
synthesis creative of the concrete Ego, which is the consumma- 
tion of thought. Gentile finds a simile helpful here. Ego is like 
a shining light: Not-Ego is like a shadow. The shadow is the 
negation of the light and dependent upon the light for its 
existence. And the light is the negation of the shadow. The 
two are correlative and must be taken together. Similarly 
Not-Ego must be negated by Ego, and vice versa. We may 
have neither without the other. The Not-Ego is as necessary 
to the Ego as shadow is to light. Gentile's use of the two Ego's 
here, abstract and concrete, is confusing. To put it more 

16 See footnote 2, p. 59 of this study, for the meaning of "negate" in the logic 
of the concrete. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 87 

clearly, "Ego" has two significances : (1) the synthesis of the 
opposed knower and known, according to which both knower 
and known (in themselves abstract) are the content of the 
Ego; and (2) one of the two opposites into which the first 
Ego is dualized, the knower antithetical to the known, the 
original term from which thought alienates itself in order to 
think. Only the first of these is ultimately real and concrete, 
according to Gentile. 17 

This unity of thinking subject (Ego) and thought object 
(Not-Ego), in the dynamic and autogenetic act of thinking, is 
called the Becoming of the dialectic. Becoming is only intelli- 
gible as the law of reality if reality is equivalent to thinking. 
Flux, mutation, evolution in the objective world all are ap- 
pearance, images from vague experience. For the world as 
object is what it is; it is static epistemologically speaking even 
if it be the Heraclitean Fire. Nothing spiritual exists as 
natural objects are thought to exist. The spiritual is always in 
the process of development. The Ego is Becoming, insofar as 
unified with Not-Ego (i.e. insofar as concrete) ; and the Not- 
Ego exists only insofar as the Ego is thus unified. 

Furthermore pensiero pensante is an immanent Becoming, 
an eternal unity which is unique and self-developing. Its unity 
is its characteristic attribute. The attribute of pensiero pen- 
sato, on the other hand, is to be a multiplicity, as we have 
seen. It must be a multiplicity in order to be unified according 
to the laws of abstract thought. We think a multiplicity of 
objects which we unify into a deductive system. The objects 
of thought are legion. But concrete thought is the thought of 
a single consciousness and can have no multiplicity attributed 
to it. Each act of thinking is the act of the entire concrete 
Ego; and as such is unified with and includes all previous 
acts of thinking. If I affirm "Caesar conquered Gaul," as 

1 7 For this material on the fundamental law of the logic of the concrete see the 
Sistema, Vol. II, Part III, Chapter V. 



88 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

pensiero pens at o this is a unification of diverse objects. As 
pensiero pensante it is "I think Caesar conquered Gaul" and 
expresses the totality of my thinking. I cannot think anything 
that does not express this totality. This is the significance of 
the "I think ..." It is highly important to an understanding 
of the Gentilian doctrine. 

It suggests another major distinction between the logic of 
the abstract and that of the concrete. The fundamental law of 
the former is a norm distinct from the thought which it gov- 
erns. 18 The postulates of foundational logic, for example, 
govern the thought structure of post-foundational systems. 
Such is generally the character of a norm. It is usually distin- 
guished from the real as the "ought" from the "is"; as value 
from fact. The fundamental law of pensiero pensato gives 
thought-as-object value, but the value of this norm is presup- 
posed (i.e. is factual) no matter how self-evident. Final value 
must rest on a different basis. The truths of abstract reason 
are truths of fact, stripped of ultimate value. In the logic of 
the concrete we no longer speak of fact, but of act: the situa- 
tion with regard to a norm changes completely: 10 

No distinction between the act and the law of the act is possible 
because of the sui generis nature of the act, to which we must pay 
close attention if we wish to avoid the danger of forfeiting the only 
firm ground on which the value of all truth can be founded. 

The act in its universality cannot be transcended. It must 
provide its own norm, for according to Gentile's requirements 
it can admit no transcendent norm. It is unique. Every act of 
thinking supposes a unique experience and a unique subject. 
There is no man who thinks who does not think with his 

1 8 This does not contradict the description of the logic of the abstract given on 
p 77 of this study The three principles (its fundamental law are within thought 
abstractly considered. But even when thought is concretely considered, in relation 
to its verity that is, it is found to be dependent for its validity upon these prin- 
ciples. It is in this sense that the principles are external to it. 

19 Sistema. Vol. II, p. 67. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 89 

whole thought. The act of thinking is not something which 
happens to be thinking and might not be. It is that which 
is thought and cannot not be thought, thought which is true not 
because it conforms to a transcendent law but because it is 
itself the law of truth. The law of the abstract is law, but only 
as it borrows its value from the ultimate value of the concrete. 
The concrete act must be norma sui. This is the great point 
in Gentile's logic. How Gentile thinks it to be norma sui we 
shall discover a few pages hence. 

Thus all other truth refers back to concrete thought, which 
is truth. The truth lies deep within us. The synthesis, A=A, 
is a fact. The synthesis, Ego=Not-Ego, is radically differ- 
ent. It is act. If we ask the reason for the assertion of A=A, 
this assertion itself gives no answer. But the other assertion is 
vocal. It is thought realizing itself according to the form 
Ego=Not-Ego. It is that self -creation of the concrete Ego 
which provides a progress or development and which must be 
norma sui: 20 

Its being is not simple identity, or simple difference, or simple 
unity of identity and difference. It is this unity as creative of itself, 
autoctisi. It is synthesis as autosynthesis, a synthesis which posits 
its terms in their synthetic relation. 

The synthesis is truly a priori; it presupposes neither nature 
nor an Absolute, nor any other object obscure or otherwise. 
Before the act in which the concrete Ego celebrates its spirit- 
uality there is nothing. A belief in objects determining thought 
would violate the essential dialectic character of the act and 
destroy truth as Gentile defines it. The situation is quite the 
contrary, according to him. When one speaks of such objects 
the Ego is speaking and determining them (as objects) accord- 
ing to the dialectic law of concrete thought. One cannot refer 
to "objects" without calling upon the act of thinking which 
makes them such. Without that act they are not "objects." 

20 Ibid., p. 71, 



90 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Again we may pause. Almost the entire force of the logic 
of the concrete is contained in the two forms of its funda- 
mental law. It asserts two major principles, (1) that the act 
of thinking is self -creative and progressive, and (2) that the 
act of thinking requires the assertion of its object as object 
(by negating its being). What follows comes rapidly and un- 
sparingly. In general it consists in the application of these 
principles to various specific phases of the logic of the abstract 
in building the logic of the concrete. It is extremely complex. 
It is offered mainly for those who may wish to make a detailed 
study of actual idealism. With the exception of (1) the 
description of the necessity of synthetic a priori thinking, and 
(2) the description of the act of thinking as norma sui, the 
demands of the present study require no part of it. 



Just as the synthesis of abstract thought is founded on the 
autosynthesis of the concrete, so the noema (the act of intelli- 
gence which unites subject and predicate) is founded on what 
Gentile calls autonoema. Autonoema is the autogenetic act of 
intelligence, which for Gentile is reality. Any other reality 
(either not autogenetic, or not act of intelligence) would be 
opposed to knowledge: it would be the known opposed to the 
knowing. The Gentilian real knows itself: 21 

I am Ego insofar as I have consciousness of myself as distinct from 
myself, and hence Not-Me; insofar as I know myself knowing 
something. To know something . . . is to judge. But this judging 
is the judgment in which I know myself; and therefore I am myself 
who would not be if I did not know. Thus the judgment may be 
noema only by being at bottom autonoema. 

The point is that in knowing I know myself as the knower and 
thereby produce an alteration in myself in such a sense that I 

ai Sistema. Vol. II, p. 75. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE QI 

(being negated, or synthesized) become a part of the known. 
And, by the same synthesis, the known becomes part of me. 
If I think that virtue is knowledge that knowledge becomes 
part of me as knower. But it can only do so by being negated 
as object (synthesized with the subject). For this reason the 
Socratic "Know thyself" should, in a sense, be the formula for 
all knowledge. To understand things is to understand oneself 
(as concrete act, not as an empirical subject). The theoretical 
judgment of the noema (e.g. "Virtue is knowledge") becomes 
real in the actual judgment of the autonoema (e.g. "I think 
virtue is knowledge."): 22 

. . . The object of the [actual] judgment is a world which con- 
stitutes the objective existence of the subject itself, insofar as the 
subject itself confers this existence. 

... If the flower which shines resplendent in the sunshine attracts 
and moves us, it must already be the object of an appreciation and 
a desire which signify a certain spiritual attitude toward a world. 
This world would never be anything to us if the subject did not 
move itself to action by plucking the flower and enjoying close at 
hand the odor and the possession of it. 

The important thing here is that to know anything demands a 
"spiritual attitude" toward it which, by giving that thing sig- 
nificance, literally creates it. 

We must continuously bear in mind that "I think . . . " is 
a free act, according to Gentile, sharply distinguished from 
fact. Hence the autonoemic act is moral. It presupposes noth- 
ing which might determine it. Its freedom is characterized by 
the unconditional imperative of the law of concrete thought. 
We have found it essential that the concrete Ego actuate it- 
self in objects in general and in itself as object in particular. 28 
If it did not it would be an immediate identity. As immediate 
it would be indifferent and its liberty license. Liberty must be 
accompanied by law. Either alone is abstract: together they 

22 Ibid, p. 77. 23 See p. 86 of this study. 



92 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

constitute freedom. Without our liberty to approve them 
the laws of the state would be tyrannical. Without law our 
liberty would have no significance or usefulness. It is the same 
with the act of thinking. We are free only when we willingly 
obey the laws necessary to our being, so to speak. Liberty and 
law are inalienable in the autonoema. Liberty without law 
would be empty spontaneity. And law without liberty could 
not convey a sense of moral obligation. The law which is our 
highest ideal and our goal is given by the dialectic of pensiero 
pensante in which our personality expresses itself and the spirit 
triumphs. Our personality is the concrete Ego which realizes 
itself in the autonoemic dialectic. 

Just as the noema is insufficient and must be resolved in the 
autosynthesis of the autonoema, so the forms of noemic judg- 
ment 24 are insufficient and need to be resolved in the auto- 
noemic. To the question, "Why?", directed at its judgments, 
we have seen that abstract logic is silent. Only the concrete 
Ego can answer this question (which is its own) with ultimate 
satisfaction. How does it answer it? Why should I, who 
might not assert some judgment, between asserting it and not 
asserting it choose the former alternative? Why not refuse 
the problem? Who imposes it upon me? What necessity binds 
me to the problem and to a solution in terms of the concrete 
dialectic? The concrete Ego is bound necessarily to the dia- 
lectic and to the objects which it creates because only in the 
creation of them through the dialectic does it achieve exist- 
ence. In this way the force of the disjunctive abstract judg- 
ment is derived from that of the disjunctive concrete judg- 
ment. Quantity and Modality have similar derivations which 
the reader may work out for himself: 25 

The "why" of the disjunctive affirmation of judgment is in the 
qualitative disjunctivity of the autonoema. And the same thing, as 
is obvious, may be said of the "why" of the quantitative disjunctiv- 
24 See pp. 68-9 of this study. 2B Sistema. Vol. II, p. 83. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 93 

ity of the individual judgment, and of the modal disjunctivity of 
the assertorial judgment in which is summarized and made poten- 
tial all of the logical energy of the judgment. 

The table of the forms of abstract judgment is the same as the 
table of the forms of concrete judgment. But the first is ulti- 
mately dependent upon the second. The necessity of the ab- 
stract judgment, as we have seen, transcends that judgment. 
Its source is the necessity of the concrete judgment, for the 
concrete judgment being necessary in itself creates as its 
object the abstract judgment. If the latter is necessary its 
genealogy shows that it will be so only insofar as the former 
is. The same argument holds for the other forms of judgment 
outlined in the logic of the abstract. The source of each is in 
the corresponding character of the concrete dialectic. 

Hence there are not really two entities, the noema and the 
autonoema. They are resolved into a unity. The noema is the 
autonocma itself descended from pensicro pensante to pensiero 
pensato. According to Gentile it is a form which has become 
matter in the process of concrete thinking. The act of thinking 
is a subjective form which in functioning is productive of the 
objective matter which the act becomes in the subsequent act 
of thinking about it. The act of thinking "Virtue is knowl- 
edge" is form: the judgment that virtue is knowledge is matter 
to the subsequent act of thinking. It requires a strenuous 
effort to bear in mind that the Gentilian real is not pensiero 
pensante as we think about it, but is the actual thinking about 
it (or about anything). Matter is form determined and con- 
gealed. Form as mediation of itself (or autosyn thesis) is the 
generator of itself as matter. Gentile considers himself to be 
the first to make this unification of form and matter; for him 
it is the goal of all idealistic tendencies. 

The syllogism of abstract logic is dogmatic in the sense that 
it presupposes certain laws of thought. It must therefore be 
referred to what Gentile calls the "autosyllogism," the con- 



94 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

crete counterpart of the syllogism. The validity of the struc- 
ture of deductive thinking must be justified. The syllogism is 
an identity-relation, objective to the act of thinking, as we 
have seen. As object it does not possess ultimate truth value. 
The being of any object, of a stone for example, is not in it 
as object. Its being is its entertainment in the mind as object, 
its partaking of the concrete act of thinking. And so with the 
syllogism. Its reality is founded not on its immediateness as 
object, but on the unique, infinite, absolute, and indivisible 
principle of the Ego. The reality of the syllogism is in the 
autosyllogism. 

The discovery of the autosyllogism enables Gentile to jus- 
tify both the necessity of the synthetic a priori act of thinking 
and its character as norma sui. This justification of the two is 
certainly the most important part of the very complex thought 
contained in the second volume of the Sistcma di logica. It 
arises out of the curious and unique nature of the disjunction 
(which, we remember, as abstract made the syllogism pos- 
sible) in the realm of the concrete: 20 

The Ego says, "Either I am Ego or I am Not-Ego," finding itself 
confronted by the curious alternative either of affirming itself by 
negating itself (as Not-Ego) or of negating itself by affirming itself 
(as Ego). If the Ego is Ego, it affirms itself; but then it is no 
longer Ego, because this empty identity is the negation of the proc- 
ess essential to the Ego (which necessitates a differentiation). And 
vice versa, if it is Not-Ego, it negates itself; but exactly in negating 
itself it succeeds in actualizing its essence. 

The affirmation . . . which the disjunction guarantees in the 
autonoema through Quality, Quantity and Modality, is an affirma- 
tion which is negation; it is not thesis, but autothesis, and hence 
Becoming or dialectic. The autothesis of thinking is a consequence 
even here of a necessity; but of a necessity which is no longer solely 
logical, but logical insofar as metaphysical. 

28 Ibid , pp. 88 and 89. See the criticism of this material in Chapter VII of this 
study. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 95 

This is the rock bottom of the Gentilian doctrine. The Ego 
between being Ego and Not-Ego must choose the second alter- 
native because in the very act in which the Ego proposes the 
disjunction it has already made its response and its alternative 
is taken. This argument is not one which would fit the logic 
of the abstract. Gentile does not argue that if thinking is 
thinking it must be dialectic. This would simply be a syllo- 
gism, an argument in a circle, presupposing the dialectic na- 
ture of all thinking. 27 Gentile argues by the autosyllogism, 
which does not depend upon a postulated reality or even an 
hypothesis. The argument is that quoted above, wherein the 
statement of the problem is the statement of the answer. In 
proposing the question as to whether it is Ego or Not-Ego, the 
Ego establishes the necessity that it be Not-Ego and hence 
establishes the necessity of its dialectic nature. This is the 
necessity of a priori metaphysical thinking. Upon it Gentile's 
philosophy is built. And since this necessity is within the very 
act of thinking the metaphysical problem, and therefore de- 
pends upon no presupposed reality (or Logos') , the norma sui 
character of the act of thinking is also established. In other 
words, the judgments about the dialectic of thinking are in no 
sense empirically attained. If they were they would not be 
necessary and would require a transcendent reality. Thinking 
is the concrete Ego and its law is the dialectic. 

Autosynthesis describes a figure which breaks out of the 
closed circle. The concrete Ego is such by virtue of thinking 

27 In Gentile's form: 

Either it is true that no thinking can be thought except as dialectic; 
or it is true that it can also be thought as not dialectic 
It is false that it can also be thought as not dialectic. 
Therefore, it is true that no thinking can be thought except as dialectic. 

In the classical form: 

All thinking is dialectic 
This thought is thinking. 
Therefore, this thought is dialectic. 

The circular character of both of these arguments is obvious. 



96 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

the Not-Ego. But in order to escape the abstract it also annuls 
the Not-Ego by a new act of thinking which uses this now-old 
Not-Ego as its material in the production of a new Not-Ego. 
In other words, the movement of autosynthesis brings new 
accretions to the Ego at every revolution. In its revolution it 
returns not to the Ego from which it set out, but to the new 
Ego which has been brought into being by the act of de- 
parture. If this were not so, if the Ego always remained the 
same, it would become an abstract object (an idea thought) 
and thinking itself as an act would be annulled. But this 
annulment is quite impossible, because the abstract object (the 
idea thought) must be thought by someone. By whom? In 
answering this question we break out of the circle of the 
abstract and into the territory of the concrete, where the sub- 
jective element resides. Pensiero pcnsante describes not a 
circle but a spiral. 

Hence progress. And this progress is qualitative, modifying 
reality by transforming it, as we have seen. It is never quanti- 
tative. Civilization does not progress by the increase of mate- 
rial goods. It progresses by the growth given in the act of 
thinking. It is a development and not a chain made up of 
many separate links, to change the metaphor. Thus there is 
progress only in the concrete. In one place Gentile asks us 
to think of a flight of stairs, the lower steps of which disappear 
(are negated) and the higher steps come into existence as one 
ascends. There is no multiplicity into whose presence thinking 
is brought. Multiplicity is but a factor necessary to the 
process which denies it existence. It comprises the object of 
thinking which must be thought if there is to be thinking at 
all. By means of the multiplicity of the abstract the activity 
of the concrete Logos is able to pass, maintaining its unity and 
transforming itself internally, into the rhythm of its process. 28 

2 8 The concrete Ego's actualization of itself is the good which includes all 
others. Though the point is not relevant to the present discussion it should be 
noted that it is here that the Gentilian ethics arises. See pp. 219-20 of this study. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 97 

We are now in a position to give more understanding to 
some of the material discussed earlier in this study. It is a 
universal need of man to collect the multiplicity of nature into 
a universe or cosmos, and the multiplicity of thoughts into a 
unity of thinking. Reason has always been invoked as the 
unifying principle. It has been authoritative because one for 
all thoughts and for all thinkers. The whole history of man 
is a history of this unifying principle. The great strength of 
reason has always been considered to be its transcendence or 
objectivity. Gentile's whole effort is bent toward showing 
that, on the contrary, the virtue of reason is its immanence or 
subjectivity. The distinction between heart and brain was 
drawn by the Greeks in an effort to distinguish between sub- 
jective and objective spiritual activity. But according to the 
Gentilian doctrine truth is subjective and the distinction loses 
its point. We endeavored to explain this position earlier. Its 
necessary consequence, the unification of heart and brain, 
should be more clear now that we have described the function 
of the logic of the concrete in giving life to that of the abstract. 
Thinking is homogeneous. It is the dialectic, and allows of no 
distinctions. The brain may conquer in the field of the ab- 
stract, but one cannot conquer the heart of a mother with a 
syllogism, for her heart burns with the spirit that gives life 
to the syllogism. The syllogism gives a truth, but one which 
is weakness itself compared to the concrete truth of the spirit. 

The problem of the categories goes to the center of every 
type of idealism. 20 The Aristotelian (analytic) concept of the 
categories as predicates was followed by the modern concept 
of the categories as functions. For the idealist this signifies 
that the category became a product of thought in action rather 
than an irreducible element or atom of thought. Truth came 
to be the truth of thinking rather than an objective entity, pro- 

2 9 For this material on the categories see the Sistema, Vol. II, Part III, Chap- 
ter VII. 



98 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

viding a revolution in our thinking as counter to common sense 
as was the Copernician revolution. Since certain knowledge 
seemed impossible in a strictly objective view (either ration- 
alistic or empirical), it was sought by introducing the sub- 
jective element. But even Kant's doctrine may be said to be 
but a partial expression of the category as function. Gentile's 
objection to the Kantian position is two-fold. First, what is 
the relation between the multiplicity of sensations and the 
unity of the categories? The category works upon a material 
that it presupposes rather than creates. Secondly, what is the 
relation between the multiplicity of the categories (or of the 
experience which they provide) and the unity of the Tran- 
scendental Ego? The multiplicity of categories receives no legi- 
timate deduction : its elements are presupposed in a haphazard 
fashion. Synthesis a priori suggests the impossibility of sep- 
arating analysis and synthesis, of possessing an analysis which 
is not synthesized in its character as thought. Yet in Kant's 
multiplicity of sensations and of categories we have the former 
without the latter. These multiplicities are posited immedi- 
ately. Accordingly, in view of the Gentilian requirements for 
thought, Kant's doctrine recurs to an unreal thought and an 
unthinkable reality. Nor was the situation improved by the 
abandonment of the Noumenon. In conceiving the Absolute, 
Hegel also brought in a Being previous to the spiritual act of 
thinking. His Logos is the intelligibility of the world accord- 
ing to the rational principle of thesis and antithesis. But it 
none the less transcends the knower in that objective sense 
which had always been demanded of the norm of thinking. In 
this way Hegel's logic is dependent upon his metaphysics, 
indeed his metaphysics is its source. This is precisely where 
Gentile makes his departure from Hegel, and for the reasons 
brought out earlier in this study. In contrast to Hegel's (and 
all others perhaps), Gentile's metaphysics is dependent upon 
his logic. Gentile's doctrine represents the suppression even 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE Q9 

of a spiritual world (waiting to be known previous to our think- 
ing about it) in favor of thinking. Hence whatever category 
Gentile finds will be unique because it will fall within the 
act of thinking, which has been described as essentially a 
unity. 30 

Gentile identifies the category with the autosynthesis of that 
act. It is the common denominator by which we think all that 
is thinkable. If we think, that which we think is concrete Ego, 
the unity of thinking. But it is a unity colored by the pro- 
found concept of diversity. There are two ways of thinking 
the world. We may think it empirically, as the diverse and 
variegated object of our thinking. Or we may think it "tran- 
scendentally" 31 in its original and ultimate virtue as unified 
thinking: 32 

The world, as we see it with the eyes of the body and the mind, is 
a world resulting from a process. It is that empirical world which 
we should transcend in order to think it completely, for a world 

30 "The autosynihetic category is in fact the unity of the predicate-category 
[of Aristotle] and the function-category [of Kantl ; of the former as thought of 
the abstract Logos of the [logic of the] abstract, and of the latter as thought of the 
abstract Logos of the [logic of the] concrete " (Ststema Vol II, p 114) 

The category is predicate as that concrete predicate which makes thought 
possible through the synthesis of subject and object made necessary by our act of 
thinking It is the predicate descriptive of the autosynthesis of Ego~Not-Ego, 
which gives necessity and universality to thinking Autosynthesis is the ultimate 
and fundamental predicate of thinking, according to the description given above 
It is very different from the analytic and partial (epistemologically speaking) 
categories of Aristotle. 

The category is function as the function of judgment itself The category as 
abstract predicate was antecedent to thinking As such it demanded derivation. 
But Gentile describes the problem of its origin as an absurd problem, because the 
answer is given in the act of thinking (a function) which asserts the problem The 
immediacy of the Aristotelian category is absorbed in the mediation of thinking. 
As a function of thinking it is a conditioning of thought. The organ of thought, 
wherein the categories of thought might reside, is not only not antecedent to 
thinking, but it cannot be conceived except as a function of thinking Hence, as 
Gentile says, it creates itself The function is neither particular nor preexisting; 
for then it would create a particular and preexisting organ The true self -creative 
function is the organism in its unity as pensiero pensante Only so conceived can 
it be a total and unconditioned reality. 

8 1 This word is placed in quotation marks to indicate its use in this paragraph 
in the Kantian sense 

82 Sistema. Vol. II, p. 120. 



IOO THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

which is a result of a process is something immediate and hence 
(in a complete sense) unthinkable until it is resolved into the 
process from which it results. To think the world in its process, as 
that principle which develops and is actuated in it, is to think it 
transcendentally. 

The "transcendental" world is the empirical world thought 
ultimately; but the two are not coexistent. The multiplicity 
necessary to the empirical view would wreck the mind if it 
were not unified in the unique reality of thinking. But this 
multiplicity should not be put out of mind. We should only 
put out of mind that absurd multiplicity which is not unified 
in thought, though actually it can never be in mind to be put 
out because whether we realize it or not every multiplicity in 
the mind is also a unity. It is doubly unified; first as the 
abstract object, and secondly as the concrete Ego. As the 
abstract object it is partial, and as partial it attains reality only 
in the unity of the autosynthesis by which it is fused with 
the subjective act of thinking. It is the unity of this act, of the 
"I think . . . ", that is so significant ontologically. Pensicro pen- 
sante (Ego=Not-Ego) determines the Not-Ego as substance, 
accident, cause, contingency, Being, Not-Being, etc. Whether 
the Spinozan substance, the Leibnizian monad, the Platonic 
Idea, or the miser's gold everyone has a currency in which 
he exchanges all forms of reality. But all of the objects of 
thought, even thought itself as object, are unified by the "I 
think . . . " of the concrete act. The greater the determination, 
the more the autosynthetic power of the Ego is realized. All 
thinking shines in its own light, in other words. It is aware of 
itself and in this self-awareness it draws its seemingly transcend- 
ent world within itself, into one organic interpretation: 33 

It can be said in conclusion that the categories are infinite if it be 
said at the same time that the category is unique. 

. 124. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE IOI 

There are infinitely many ways of interpreting this world, but 
ultimately there is only one, that of interpreting it as auto- 
synthesis. 

The category as the act of thinking, being the synthesis of 
itself as Ego and as Not-Ego, provides three moments of 
spiritual development. They are the three aspects of the 
spirit; art, religion and the sciences, and philosophy. Art is 
the subjective moment of the categoric act; religion and 
science the objective moment; philosophy the synthesis into 
which the act collects itself as unity of self and other. These 
are three moments through which the unique act is realized. 
Art and religion and science, however, are sharply to be distin- 
guished from philosophy. All thinking, as dialectic, distin- 
guishes within itself an abstract thought which is solely aesthe- 
tic, and one solely religious and scientific. But there is no art 
concretely and really outside of the thinking which entertains 
it. And so with religion and science. All three depend for their 
interpretation upon the philosophic judgment according to 
which they are entertained. They do not provide concepts of 
reality (that is, they are not ultimate predicates), but rather 
aid in the realization of it. Philosophy, in contrast, must be 
self-interpreting, for it represents the totality of the process 
of understanding: 8i 

Philosophy is always understood (by philosophers, of coursebut 
who speaks of philosophy without being a philosopher?) as the 
most universal and perfect form of the spirit, which understands all 
other forms without being understood by the others in return. 

The artist is one whose spirit is aware of the world of his pure 
and immediate subjectivity. And the religious man or scien- 
tist is one whose spirit is full of an object which is the negation 
of his subjectivity, well betokened by the attitude of prayer 
or that of bending over a microscope. The philosopher comes 

8 */&*<*., p. 129. 



102 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

to know subjective and objective elements in their unity as 
the totality of the thinkable. 

The passage from abstract to concrete logic, wherein we 
think by means of the autosynthetic category, Gentile calls the 
dialecticizing of the concept: 86 

Dialecticizing is the passage from the concept as opposed, to the 
concept as identical with, the category; from the opposition of 
matter and form, to the synthesis a priori through which form is 
generative of itself as matter. 

The dialectic exhibits itself as a developing rather than as an 
immediate Being. "Nature" is not the concept of nature, but 
the nature itself of our concept as act, the life of our spirit: 86 

The concrete Logos is dialectic; the abstract is not. The abstract 
as such cannot be dialecticized, and as such in fact is not dialec- 
ticized. Fix the concept of nature and you will no longer see the 
possibility of returning from it to the spirit; just as it is not possible 
for a heart to beat again which the anatomist separates from the 
organism in order to see how it is made. But the abstract Logos can 
be maintained in its abstractness, and can be resolved in the con- 
creteness of autosynthesis, in which organism it truly participates. 
Insofar as it is resolved it is dialecticized, because it coincides with 
the concrete Logos. But then it is no longer the abstractly con- 
ceived abstract Logos that it was before, but the abstract Logos 
maintained in its original and indelible concreteness. Thus nature 
as nature cannot be spiritualized; as nature it is abstractly con- 
ceived. In the concrete it is the spirit itself. 

If pensiero pensante were a static synthesis there would no 
longer be place for dialecticizing. There would be only the 
closed circle. But pensiero pensante is developing. Its dialec- 
tic is the germ of our entire spiritual life. 

This dialecticizing of the concept provides the last of the 
transformations from the logic of the abstract to that of the 
concrete, the transformation from concept to autoconcept. The 

8 5 Ibid , p. 131. a fl Ibid., pp. 132-3. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 103 

concept is the entertainment of truth as objective to the act of 
thinking it. The autoconcept is the entertainment of truth as 
constituted by the very act of thinking. The distinction is one 
with which the reader should now be familiar. While philos- 
ophy was limited to the concept as its material the inevitable 
result was scepticism, as shown in an earlier part of this 
study. 87 But in the concrete autoconcept awareness is absorbed 
into self-awareness. This is precisely the desideratum. We may 
no longer make the distinction between perception and that 
which is perceived. Perception is ontologically understood (in 
answer to the Gentilian requirements) as part of the material 
created by the formal act of thinking (autoconcept). The 
autoconcept is the only form of cognition. Even the ordinary 
empirical distinction between imagination ("art") and intel- 
lect ("science") is without significance from the point of view 
of a reality which is the totality of the thinkable. Such distinc- 
tions may be of practical use, but they do not belong to philos- 
ophy, for they are raised by the particularizing of something 
considered as previous to thinking. 

However it is not to be supposed that the autoconcept, 
being free from these distinctions, is empty of all content. On 
the contrary, it is more than the traditional concept was. It 
contains the traditional concept and more. The fear of its 
emptiness is due to a realistic prejudice. The richness of 
sensation, for example, is contained in the autoconcept, for 
there is no concept without sensation. But sensation is no 
longer a channel of communication with an outer world. It is 
what the act of thinking creates it to be, an objective richness 
gathered existentially into the act of thinking. This is an 
alteration in the meaning given "sensation," but Gentile con- 
siders the innovation significant and valuable. 

Nor is it to be supposed that the autoconcept is a multiplic- 
ity of concepts; for the multiplicity is unified by thinking into 

87 See pp. 36-41 of this study. 



IO4 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

a dynamic and developing process which is the unity of the "I 
think . . . " To speak of the multiplicity in this way, to say that 
the multiplicity is potential in the autoconcept, is correct; in 
fact outside of the autoconcept there is no development which 
could be the principle of multiplicity. And there must be such 
a principle because of the richness and variety of abstract 
concepts: 88 

The content, then, of the autoconcept is the same as that of the con- 
cept, but dialecticized and thus integrated by the negativity of 
pensiero pens ante. 

This negation of the concept should not be considered a nega- 
tive element in the autoconcept; it is the life of the autocon- 
cept and makes the formation of the concept possible: 89 

That is, the concept is formed in the dialectic of the Ego, insofar 
as the Ego negates itself in its immediateness. Now the Ego, negat- 
ing itself in the concept, is from the first immediate insofar as it is 
the concept. The concept in its immediateness is equivalent to the 
Ego which is negated in it. Hence the Ego turns to immediateness, 
which it must negate according to its law if it is to be Ego. The 
negativity therefore attacks the concept insofar as the latter (al- 
ready formed) is the immediate Ego; that is, it always attacks the 
Ego in order to generate the concept. The negation of the concept, 
in fact, is the negation of that concept that is not the concept and 
is the formation of the true concept, always self-creation or auto- 
synthesis. 

Translated into clearer terms this is to say that the concept in 
order to be a significant element in our thinking must be 
gathered within the self-awareness of the concrete Ego which 
thinks it. It must be given its place in the reality of pensiero 
pensante. The concept is negated in the sense that it is synthe- 
sized with the subjective element; the Ego is negated in the 
other direction by the same synthesis. Indeed this is what 
Gentile means when he speaks of "negation" and "negativity." 

8 8 Sistema, p. 142. 8 Ibid., p. 142. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE IO5 

The point always to bear in mind is that according to the 
Gentilian criteria of truth this synthesis must inevitably be an 
autosyn thesis. Whatever is thought must be attached to the 
act of thinking. Hence truth is not anyone's fact, but the fact 
of him for whom it is true. Since he for whom it is true is he 
who judges it, the truth is ultimately the subject of the judg- 
ment (i.e. is act). It is such if the subject is understood as 
actual judging and not as previous to the judgment. To know 
the world is to construct it in the act of knowing it. Thanks 
to the negativity immanent in the autoconcept, thought has no 
dogmas, no determined determinations, no constructed sys- 
tems. All are ultimately acts and not facts. In this dialectic, 
or autosynthesis of subjective and objective elements, the 
abstract and concrete logics are bound together. 

The greatest obstacle which actual idealism must face is the 
realistic conception of the world which centuries of education 
have ingrained in us. Gentile calls upon us to meet the im- 
plications of actual idealism with courage, feeling the truth in 
the doctrine that the world is ourselves and that Being is 
knowing. The concept, apart from the autoconcept, is not 
real. It is the representation of reality. But fused in the 
logic of the concrete it is reality itself, the only reality we 
can know. Esse est percipi. This paper on which I typewrite 
is only real as negated. I could not typewrite on it if I did not 
see it; and I could not see it if in that act I did not make the 
paper an object significantly entertained in the thinking activ- 
ity by which I know that I see the paper and am typewriting 
on it. The paper does not exist in itself; it exists in my act 
of thinking, which gives it the entire fullness of its meanings. 
Reality is not discovered; it is the very act of discovery. 

The "desire for the circle" (at other times called the 
"regulative ideal") tempts the human spirit too often to enter- 
tain the abstract Logos as giving direction to human activity. 
But its goals are static, rigid and confining. Historically its 



106 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

ideals have led to tyranny and violence. We are prone to wor- 
ship the presupposed, an oppressive system of thoughts 
already completed. But thinking has no conditions, no pre- 
assigned limits, no direction imposed from without. It is a total- 
ity and a system, but as autoconcept. We think the whole. 
And in another sense we never think it for this whole is we 
who think. It is a process which can never be precipitated 
once and for all into a result: 40 

... If the teacher of a concept is conceivable, if a philosophic 
school is possible ... no particular individual, who has already 
thought his thoughts and written his words down and died, is a 
teacher. He is a teacher who is Ego, that unique and immortal Ego 
who has not already uttered but is uttering his words. This is the 
eternal school, one whose heredity is not a concept or a system of 
concepts, but the autoconcept with its inquiet and unfailing nega- 
tivity. It is the school of truth . . . which no scholar will find 
except in the depths of himself, where he is the same Ego as the 
teacher who addresses him and invites him to collaborate in the 
common work. 

This passage has obvious reference to our earlier discussion of 
the doctrine of truth and error. It describes the search for 
philosophic knowledge not as an effort to acquaint oneself with 
that which is in its essence independent of knowing, but as a 
gathering of that which appears to be independent into the 
activity of knowing it (i.e. "negating" it, as Gentile expresses 
it) whereby, by virtue of the creativity of that act, its most 
comprehensive and profound significance is bestowed upon it. 
Is this Gentilian doctrine not itself a concept? Certainly it 
has been analyzed and defined and made to submit to the syn- 
thesis of the spiritual dialectic. Insofar it has conformed to 
the character of the concept. So far as it has been discussed 
in the Sistema di logica it has been an object of thought, and 
hence unreal. It was real as Gentile thought it and as we, the 
readers, think it now. But its reality is not in itself as object, 

. 148. 



THE LOGIC OF THE CONCRETE 107 

rather in our actual thinking about it. If we try to define the 
concept of the autoconcept we shall fall back into the logic of 
the abstract, where the autoconcept is not to be found. In 
other words, we cannot define the autoconcept without violat- 
ing the logic of the concrete which gives it its meaning. This 
new logic is not demonstrable; it admits no measuring rod 
outside of itself for its evaluation. It is the logic by which we 
think whenever there is thinking. It expresses the nature of 
thinking. And it is given value by the acts of thinking of 
every reader of these words. In these ever-new acts it finds 
both its reality and its truth. 



PART THREE 

THE SISTEMA DI LOGICA CRITICALLY 
CONSIDERED 



CHAPTER FIVE 
THE PROBLEM 

IN HIS discussion of the Protagorean doctrine that man is 
the measure of all things, Gentile makes the following arrest- 
ing remarks: 1 

In such a doctrine . . . the concept of a transcendent truth seems 
to have disappeared. Under this semblance Plato combats the 
doctrine, making a joke of it by objecting that truth would become 
what it appears to each of us to be. Protagoras ought to agree, says 
Socrates, that the contrary doctrine is true to his adversary, inas- 
much as it appears as such. This is an objection which Protagoras 
. . . could have deflected beautifully with the same response that 
Gioberti gave to an analogous objection. Gioberti foresaw that to 
his doctrine of the diversity of Catholicism, by which there must be 
admitted as many Catholicisms as there are men who embrace it, it 
would be objected that "the Pope, the bishops, etc., do not under- 
stand Catholicism in this way." He answered: "Those who make 
this objection to my doctrine do not understand it. I reply that if 
they understood it as I do they would not be right but wrong." In 
just admitting that by his account Socrates was right against him, 
Protagoras would demonstrate the superiority of his doctrine over 
that of Socrates. In fact, according to Socrates' doctrine, if Socrates 
is right Protagoras is wrong; while according to that of Protagoras, 
Protagoras is right and therefore Socrates is right also. 

Protagoras 7 subjectivism was based upon a doctrine of the 
relativity of sensation, a crude and early solipsism soon dis- 
missed in the history of subsequent philosophy. Plato's com- 
mentary in the Theaetetus functioned as its reductio ad ab- 
surdum, caused the abandonment of the doctrine of knowl- 

1 Sistema. Vol. I, pp. 63-4. 

Ill 



112 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

edge as purely the acquisition of sensations, and led to the 
conceptualism of Aristotle. Since the time of Protagoras there 
have been other and more broadly founded solipsisms. It is to 
the credit of Plato that in the Theaetetus he provided an argu- 
ment so universal in significance that it not only supplied an 
answer to Protagoras 7 sensationalism but became a prolegom- 
enon to all future doctrines of a similar nature. It pointed 
out in effect that the solipsist must accept the contrary judg- 
ments of others on non-verifiable questions quite as readily as 
his own. For one thing, he must turn metaphysics over to the 
poets and content himself with the consideration of verifiable 
propositions. In short, according to the Theaetetus the solip- 
sist must be a sceptic. Wherever a thinker of solipsistic tend- 
encies has not been willing to accept these limitations the text 
of the Theaetetus has persuaded him to take another direction. 
Hence the arresting quality in the passage quoted above. 
An open and unabashed defense of solipsism is rare today, and 
when this rashness is coupled with an attempt to establish a 
metaphysics it takes on the aspect of recklessness. Gentile is 
a solipsist who, by the very writing of his Sistema di logica, 
has evinced his refusal to accept the Platonic limitations. He 
voices the conviction that he can combine solipsism with the 
teaching of metaphysics. On the face of it, this conviction 
appears of doubtful legitimacy. If it is to be defended success- 
fully Gentile will be required to make an original contribution 
to philosophic thought, for in the past the attempt cannot be 
said to have been successful. In its widest sense solipsism is 
the doctrine that there is no existent except conscious thinking, 
from which it follows as a corollary that thought can know 
nothing but its own modifications and states. 2 Solipsism may 

2 A reader of this manuscript has kindly pointed out the need for further clari- 
fication of "solipsism" as applied to Gentile. It does not differ from either "sub- 
jective idealism" or "mentalism" if mind is considered as a principle of activity 
and not itself a real object known by acts of thinking. But this is not usually the 
case. These names are avoided because of Gentile's insistence not that "only mind 



THE PROBLEM 113 

also be defined as that doctrine which asserts that there is no 
existent except the knowing subject, or Ego. It will be seen 
that Gentile believes, in company with most philosophers but 
for an entirely different reason, that solipsism in this latter 
sense is not defensible. In this connection the distinction be- 
tween the act of thinking and the Ego is extremely important. 
In our use of the word "solipsism" we shall have the first of 
these definitions in mind, that first being more fundamental 
than the second. 

Among contemporary philosophers there are two major atti- 
tudes with regard to solipsism; that of those who dismiss it 
as false, and that of those who dismiss it as meaningless. 
Those who dismiss solipsism as false are very much in the 
majority, probably because their position is more nearly coin- 
cident with common sense than the other. One of their argu- 
ments arises out of a careful examination of what has been 
termed the egocentric predicament. Faced with the realiza- 
tion that no one as a result of thinking is able to mention any- 
thing that is not thought, this argument describes the difficulty 
as a "methodological 7 ' one and adds that while all existing 
things must have a relation to thought in order to be known at 
all it does not follow that they do not also exist in relations 
which transcend and are therefore independent of thought. It 
is contended, in short, that in stating the case for solipsism the 
idealist has voiced but not proved it. His error consists not 



is knowable" or that "mind is the fundamental reality," but rather that mind is 
knowing and its act is reality. Gentile's idealism is actual, not subjective: and, 
contrary to mentalism, it denies the existence of other minds. There is no single 
word which describes his position exactly Although in its very derivation it refers 
to the self, which Gentile finds unreal, "solipsism" has been selected for use in this 
wider meaning because among recent thinkers it has become more than either of 
the other two symbolic of those very obvious difficulties which actual idealism 
must face. If solipsism is untenable because it denies existence to everything but 
the self, actual idealism is even more so and in the same direction because it denies 
existence even to the self If solipsism is a vice, actual idealism is even more 
vicious. In one sense, to go beyond the self to the act of thinking as the only 
existent is to carry the solipsistic trend to its extreme. In this sense Gentile is a 
solipsist. 



114 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

in this statement itself but rather in assigning to it the author- 
ity of a proof. The issues on both sides of this first contro- 
versy over the truth or falsity of solipsism will be compared at 
length. Gentile must definitely answer the argument of this 
group if his unreserved solipsism is to receive adequate or con- 
vincing defense. 

Another of the arguments of those who dismiss solipsism as 
a false doctrine is most emphatically expressed by the critical 
realist. Solipsism seems to be so far out of accord with com- 
mon sense as to be absolutely reckless. If there is no existent 
except conscious thinking, how are we to account for the 
apparent independence of the world of nature? We find 
Gentile saying that thought creates not only the world of 
nature but all of those entities which come under the general 
heading of the not-self. On first acquaintance this appears to 
be pure extravagance. To say that a doctrine does not accord 
with common sense is not necessarily a serious indictment, of 
course. Yet there are manifold daily experiences continually 
dictating a work-a-day common sense which in its practical if 
not its theoretical significance cannot be denied a place in any 
metaphysics. Of such a character is our daily experience with 
nature. It impels us to the belief that in some sense the mani- 
festations of nature are uniform with a uniformity quite inde- 
pendent of thought. Thought might create for itself a world in 
which water ran up hill, but for all its creative power it is in 
some manner compelled to "create" the world in which we live 
as a world in which water runs down hill. We may well believe 
that the order and uniformity of nature are a creation of 
thought, yet the specific character of that order and that uni- 
formity is quite evidently beyond the power of thought to 
alter. So far as the writer is aware, no thinkers previous to 
Gentile who have denied the Noumenon existence have ac- 
counted satisfactorily for the specific character of the order 
and uniformity of nature. Such an accounting seems to re- 



THE PROBLEM 11$ 

quire a force which transcends and acts upon thinking. Such 
attempts as have been made by idealists in this direction have 
usually involved the deduction of the categories of thought, 
yet it is probably safely declared that no deduction has ful- 
filled the requirements of the task at hand. Given solipsism, 
then, as Gentile conceives it, we require that his doctrine 
bestow a meaning upon the phrase, "thought creates the world 
of nature," which shall find a place within it wherein the uni- 
versal experience of men faced with nature fits. If such a 
meaning cannot be found in his doctrine, the doctrine must be 
either renounced or altered. This is perhaps the most serious 
difficulty which Gentile's actual idealism is called upon to 
meet. In its bare elements the demand would seem to be a 
damaging one, yet it should be accompanied by the compara- 
tively safe conjecture mentioned in an earlier chapter that 
Gentile is a man of normal sanity who is as well acquainted 
with our relation to nature as we are and who would be quite 
as unwilling to fly into the face of this common experience as 
we ourselves. We may anticipate either that he has or we 
have overlooked some factor in the logical development of his 
doctrine of nature, or that we have or he has overlooked some 
factor in the statement of the problem. 

Those who dismiss solipsism as a meaningless doctrine, the 
neo-positivists, may nevertheless be called solipsists in a 
limited sense of that word. Their position has resulted from 
an examination of the meaning of meaning. They come to the 
conclusion that metaphysical problems have no meaning be- 
cause these problems involve the use of the word "real," which 
they find to be meaningless. If this is the case it obviously 
follows that they will find Gentile's proposition that the only 
reality is the act of thinking to be a meaningless proposition. 
For them the only meaningful problems are those the answers 
to which are verifiable. Their doctrine is a limited form of scep- 
ticism. They believe that philosophy has too long concerned 



Il6 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

itself with problems the answers to which are pure guess-work 
of the poetic imagination. The issues on both sides of this 
controversy will also receive careful consideration as they bear 
upon the doctrine of actual idealism. Gentile must definitely 
answer this argument, that his metaphysics is meaningless, if 
his system is to receive an adequate and convincing defense. 
But a consideration of the task confronting Gentile is com- 
plete only when we have examined the difficulty inherent in 
solipsism as a philosophy regardless of opposing doctrines. The 
problem which it raises is peculiar to solipsism and must be 
dealt with in the evaluation of any doctrine which moves in 
that direction. This difficulty is most often responsible for the 
contemporary attitude that to describe a doctrine as "leading 
to solipsism" is equivalent to a dismissal of it as absurd. 
Knowledge in the philosophic sense is usually taken to mean 
certain knowledge, a knowledge whose truth may be measured 
by well-defined criteria. If, as Gentile maintains, the act of 
thinking is the only existent, by what criteria may it be evalu- 
ated? The whole spirit of Gentile's writing indicates that 
beyond doubt he considers his philosophy to be more than 
sheer guess-work or the outcome of blind faith. The factor of 
certainty is obviously present; but if we are to take the solip- 
sistic doctrine seriously this factor must be contained in some 
way within the conscious act of thinking itself. In short, it 
would appear that the act of thinking must be its own cri- 
terion. The very fact that Gentile has written his Sistema di 
logica, or that he teaches university classes, indicates his con- 
viction that there is a criterion and that it is both universal 
and necessary. We have seen that the placing of this criterion, 
if one may speak of "placing" in this connection, within the 
act of thinking is the result of a unique attempt both in meta- 
physics and in logic to avoid all presuppositions. Gentile's 
"presupposition" is similar to what is spoken of in philosophic 
discourse as "immediate intuition." Immediate intuition is 



THE PROBLEM II? 

logically previous to reflection upon it, and in this sense is "pre- 
supposed." The "presupposed" of Gentile is not to be identi- 
fied with "givenness," for it is neither the material of thinking 
(sensa) nor unalterable. The relation between the "presup- 
position" and the act of thinking is not, however, logical in a 
strict sense. The "presupposition" is simply previous to the 
act of thinking. As employed in traditional metaphysics it is 
that norm which furnishes truth value to thinking when 
thinking is not norma sui. As previous to the act of thinking 
(which is mediate, as we have seen) it may only be intuited 
immediately and by the nature of the case may only be arbi- 
trarily chosen. The Gentilian "presupposition" might be 
spoken of as an assumption, but we shall reserve that word for 
employment later in a different connection. 3 We shall find 
ourselves needing two words, and hence shall translate Gen- 
tile's II prcsupposto directly and employ it only in the special 
sense outlined above. 

The significance of Gentile's solipsism is contained in his 
conscious and strict effort to avoid presuppositions. Thus the 
general difficulty which he has to face is that of breaking 
through a firmly established philosophic tradition against which 
it is not easy to understand how he can proceed, the presup- 
positional grounds of certainty being removed. This difficulty 
appears in two aspects. The first aspect questions the possi- 
bility of avoiding presuppositions in metaphysics. Gentile is 
undoubtedly running with the current of contemporary thought 
in doubting the certainty of presuppositions, and the reason 
for his doubting should therefore not be difficult to understand. 
There is place at the moment only to point out that one of 
Gentile's problems will occur in persuading us that the cer- 
tainty which he claims to have found without the aid of pre- 
suppositions is itself free from presuppositional support. This 
is the problem of the relation of Gentile's metaphysics to those 

3 See pp. 141-2, 206 and 209 of this study. 



Il8 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

of others who are not sceptics, those who maintain their posi- 
tion firmly against contemporary scepticism; e.g. the neo- 
realists and the absolute idealists. It is difficult to understand 
how any destructive criticism which he levels against the "pre- 
suppositions" so-called of other systems can be turned aside 
in considering his own. If all metaphysics up to this time has 
been based upon metaphysical presuppositions it is certainly 
not to be expected that Gentile's metaphysics can have broken 
out of the line. Yet that is what Gentile explicitly claims for 
actual idealism. If Gentile has succeeded in his attempt the 
contribution to philosophic thought will be evident; if not, to 
know that he has not will be worth the study. 

We discover the second aspect of the difficulty if we look 
at Gentile's problem from another angle. Let us grant for the 
moment that Gentile has succeeded in avoiding all presupposi- 
tions. Then he is faced by the sceptic as a new adversary. 
The sceptic makes the same negative criticism of metaphysical 
presuppositions that Gentile makes, describing them all as 
resting ultimately in the poetic imagination. But the negative 
criticism of the sceptic would apply quite as much to Gentile's 
metaphysics as to any of the others. Hence Gentile is faced 
with the problem of persuading us that his metaphysics is not 
sheer fancy. Here the difficulty is equally apparent. We are 
granting that he has freed himself from presuppositions, and 
we therefore make a demand of the certainty of his meta- 
physical knowledge which must be met in an absolutely new 
manner. This answer should be subject to a most vigorous 
scrutiny. If Gentile has made a contribution this will be its 
most significant phase. 

There are three paths open to the philosopher in his treat- 
ment of metaphysics. First, he can follow tradition and accept 
the foundation of the study of the real as presuppositional. 
Presuppositions are just what they would seem to be, un- 
founded statements concerning reality of so deep an insight as 



THE PROBLEM IIQ 

to produce outstanding metaphysical systems. They are un- 
founded because if they were not their foundations would 
become new presuppositions, and so on ad infinitum. Within 
metaphysical systems, in that of Spinoza for example, the con- 
tribution of the philosopher is considered to be the rational 
and clear development of the presuppositions into systems. 
These systems lay emphasis upon the developmental phase 
and are critical of difficulties involved in the systems devel- 
oped by others, as for example Mr. Santayana is critical of 
Plato. The philosopher, in this view, is a reasoner upon 
poetical intuitions. His metaphysics is a description of reality. 

Secondly, there is the path of those who are embarrassed 
by the intuitional element in metaphysics and who turn from 
all metaphysics lest the philosopher's office become identical 
with that of the poet. Thinkers who follow this path limit 
knowledge to that knowing which is verifiable. These are the 
neo-positivists. In the application of their knowledge they 
work upon presuppositions which are so generally recognized 
that they shed from themselves the uncertainty which usually 
surrounds presuppositions. Neo-positivists accept, for exam- 
ple, the generally recognized doctrines of the objectivity and 
uniformity of nature. They conceive the function of philos- 
ophy as the building and testing of hypothetical judgments, 
knowledge being a tentative product of experience. The 
philosopher is the student of the ways of knowing the world in 
which we live. He is primarily epistemologist and logician. 

The third path, exemplified in the Sistema di logica, will be 
the object of criticism in Part Three. For reasons which we 
have already noted, Gentile would avoid metaphysical presup- 
positions yet would avoid scepticism by remaining a meta- 
physician. In the one effort Gentile is not in conflict with the 
entire history of philosophy up to the present time. There 
have been earlier attempts to avoid presuppositions, notably 
those of Fichte and Avenarius. But his effort has been so 



120 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

strenuous that, having the historical advantage of the others, 
it carries him beyond these previous attempts. It sets him apart 
from all other metaphysicians. In the other effort, that to 
avoid scepticism, he is trying to preserve one of the major 
meanings of philosophy as its history has brought it to us. 
Gentile is, then, both a violator and a defender of the philo- 
sophic tradition. His position is comparatively unique. The 
attempt to develop a complete solipsism is in itself a significant 
contribution to philosophic thought, whether or not it is suc- 
cessful. Whatever the outcome of our inquiry it is clear that 
the measure of Gentile's contribution will be directly deter- 
mined by the thoroughness of his attempt. 

The Sistcma di logica is not a panacea for philosophic ills, 
though undoubtedly Gentile at times gives the impression that 
he thinks it is. It is the labor of an admittedly capable thinker 
in an attempt to shed new light upon one of the oldest of 
philosophic problems, that of the nature of the truth of meta- 
physical judgments. Like the rest of us, Gentile errs at times: 
in discovering his errors we shall be warned not to make the 
same ones. Like all capable thinkers in the field of philosophy, 
he offers the rest of us something new: in finding it there 
should be some profit. 



CHAPTER Six 
THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 

IN ANY systematic study of a man's philosophy it is impor- 
tant to consider the meanings assigned to the words he uses. 
It is true that the words employed by the philosopher are 
to some degree standardized, but it is also true that within 
this standardized usage there is a freedom which is bewilder- 
ing to exact thinking. It is responsible for much needless 
argument and futile debate. One often hears the wish 
expressed that a symbolism might be developed in philosophy 
which would make possible greater precision and swifter 
understanding. For example, the word "real" has at least two 
major meanings. It may connote the pragmatically verifi- 
able or the essential. If one speaks of a "real" oasis one 
uses it in the first of these meanings; if one speaks of the 
"real" man one is probably using it in the other. We may 
assume a critical attitude toward Gentile's doctrine only when 
we have begun by examining the dissimilarities of connotation 
which his terminology exhibits with reference to our own. The 
difference, already noted, between the Gentilian use of the 
word "logic" and the use of it to which we are more accus- 
tomed prompts the expectation of a broad difference in the 
employment of other terms. If there were no explicit recog- 
nition of these differences it would be quite impossible either 
to interpret correctly or to evaluate the philosophic contribu- 
tion made by Gentile. He writes in another language and 
from another culture, but there is a sufficient kinship between 
his language and culture and our own to relieve those factors 

121 



122 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

of the major responsibility for the differences in terminology 
which we are about to discuss. The differences are of the 
nature of those found whenever two philosophers meet, and 
are due to the fact that in his employment of language the 
philosopher must consider both customary usage and the exi- 
gencies of distinctions within his thinking. If he did not con- 
sider the former philosophy would be barren so far as its 
meaning for other men is concerned. If he did not consider 
the latter he would fail to perform the function of the phi- 
losopher. More often than not these considerations conflict. 
Customary usage is inexact and ambiguous, employing too few 
words for the meanings which the philosopher finds. The phi- 
losopher needs a larger vocabulary than the one at his disposal. 
The first word of all, "philosophy" itself, may be taken in 
one of several meanings. Within certain limits, of course, the 
philosopher is free in defining the function of his profession. 
Gentile does not overstep this boundary. He makes the fol- 
lowing definitive statements: * 

Philosophy has always been forced to think not of this thing or that 
thing, but of all things in their unity. 

A philosophy of many problems is mythical; a philosophic phi- 
losophy knows but one. . . . Men will never orient themselves in 
nor render clear account of this world, which is the torment of their 
philosophy because the torment of their lives, unless they become 
accustomed to think of their philosophy, through which their world 
grows, as their own life and their actual personality. From this life 
and personality we can never separate ourselves, even in dreams. 

... By philosophy is always understood ... the most universal 
and perfect form of the spirit, which understands all other forms 
without being understood by them in return. 

These statements do not establish any principle of unity, intel- 
lectual or otherwise, though the principle later established is 
that provided by the act of thinking. Gentile simply means 

1 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 12; Vol. II, pp. 246 and 129; respectively. 



THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 123 

that philosophy is the all-inclusive science, the science of art 
and religion and science, the knowledge of all knowledges. It 
seeks an answer to those universal problems which pervade 
all of our thinking; life, death, the nature of existence, etc. 
A problem to be a philosophic problem must concern the uni- 
fication of the partial phases of understanding into a whole. 
For example, the flower as seen by the artist who is painting 
it is only partially understood, as form and color. The "Flower 
in the crannied wall" is a perfect example of a second type of 
understanding of the flower according to a partial aspect. Even 
the flower studied botanically is but partially understood. But 
this same flower as an element in all existence is philosophi- 
cally understood. The difference in a striking and concrete 
form is that between a scientific treatise on the bee and Maeter- 
linck's The Life of the Bee. Philosophy, since it is a unity of 
all thinking, is ultimate. Since it gathers everything within 
it, it can allow nothing external upon which it might be 
founded. It is ultimate as the unity of the whole, not as bring- 
ing to light an Aristotelian substratum. The difference will be 
found significant. 

Such a definition of philosophy suggests at once the Gen- 
tilian definition of the "real": reality is the totality of the 
thinkable. 2 Here, again, is a legitimate use of terminology. 
It has been employed by those (of whose number Gentile is 
not one, by the way) who have sought a coherence theory of 
truth. The test of a concept of reality is found in the sig- 
nificance of its opposite. In Gentile's doctrine all thoughts 
which are not concepts of the totality are concerned with that 
which is unreal and provide the material of the particular 
sciences rather than of philosophy, which is the universal 
science of thought. Thus, by definition, the entities studied by 
astronomy, physics, chemistry, biology, sociology, etc., are 
unreal in the sense in which Gentile uses that word. Every- 

3 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 12. 



124 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

thing particular studied as particular is abstract and therefore 
unreal. Gentile's definition of the abstract, in fact, is that it 
is that which is separated off from the totality. Philosophy, in 
contrast, is concrete. The two conditions of philosophic 
thought are (1) that its object be particular, and (2) that its 
object at the same time be universal. 3 Either element without 
the other results in an abstraction, merely a part of the whole. 
If we think our objects as particular, they are particular with 
relation to an inclusive unity (universal) : if we do not think 
them as particular, they are (for us) not real. 

The divergence of this meaning for "reality" from the ordi- 
nary one is not indicative of a flaw, though it does represent a 
limitation. The question is entirely one of the use of words. 
Gentile might have reserved "reality" for the entities of the 
natural sciences, and used some other term for the "totality 
of the thinkable." Why did he not do so? There are probably 
two reasons. In the first place, there are no other words eli- 
gible for the position that do not carry connotations equally 
misleading. Even "One" and "Unity" are misleading, for they 
connote a transcendent One and a transcendent Unity. These 
two words are also rendered unfitting by the second reason, 
that in the history of philosophy the "real" has often been 
endowed with an element of value (not present in "One" and 
"Unity") which is exactly what Gentile's concept aims to 
express. From the time of early philosophy the "real" has 
been given significance by its opposition to the "apparent." 
Philosophy seeks to get behind the apparent. It seeks the 
true meaning behind common opinion. It is understandable 
and almost to be expected that in fulfilling this function cer- 
tain words in common use will be selected to express less com- 
mon meanings. Since in spite of the crooked appearance of a 
stick half in water it is customary to say that the "real" stick 

3 Ibid , p 9. This is important to the later discussion See pp. 159 and 212 ff. 
of this study. 



THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 125 

is straight, it is reasonable that philosophers should retain this 
word for their more profound but similar inquiries into the 
latent character either of the objects of experience or of experi- 
ence itself. One might go so far as to say that "real" has 
always had the philosophic meaning but that in the philosophy 
of the mythical man in the street it has always, and perhaps 
naively, been made to signify natural objects as known by the 
natural sciences. 

Knowledge has usually been understood to be the apprehen- 
sion of the real. Gentile makes it explicit that he agrees with 
this definition so long as "apprehension" is taken to be a 
mediate process. 4 Cognition is therefore in his mind sharply 
distinguished from intuition. Nothing of which one is imme- 
diately aware is an object of knowledge. All mysticism is by 
definition denied a place under Gentile's philosophic sun. 
Knowledge must have certainty, whereas that of which one is 
immediately aware has no foundation which could lend it cer- 
tainty. Animal faith renders judgments which are typical of 
those that Gentile will not admit into knowledge. And since 
the real is defined as the totality of the thinkable and knowl- 
edge is the apprehension of the real, only philosophy provides 
knowledge. Art, religion and the sciences rest upon concepts 
which by their particularity (and hence abstractness) cannot 
be termed knowledge. Their basic concepts are immediately 
intuited, and therefore arbitrary. 

A reasonable opponent will probably concede the legitimacy 
of Gentile's interpretations of the words discussed above. Gen- 
tile's interpretation of "truth" and "error" presents a more 
questionable situation, however. A correct understanding of 
his use of these two words will lead far toward an understand- 
ing of the difficulties which actual idealism encounters, and 
toward a criticism of it as it stands in the Sistema di logica. 
Throughout the history of philosophy, as Gentile himself 

4 See pp. 44-5 and 47-9 of this study. 



126 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

admits, the concept of truth has endowed it with the attribute 
of objectivity. In other words, the truth has been true regard- 
less of who possessed it. It has been independent of subjec- 
tive influences. With regard to this problem of the nature of 
truth Gentile seems to be of two convictions. We have para- 
phrased him as saying that one of the three elements of truth 
is that it is distinguished from opinion by its universality; 
it is measured by the Logos common to all thinking and hence 
is distinguished from individual opinion. 6 Other subjects if 
they had the same spiritual background could not think other- 
wise. Yet on the other hand he has been quoted as saying that 
the logic of the concrete can recognize only my truth and my 
error. 6 How are these two positions to be reconciled? 

Gentile speaks of the double significance of "truth," each of 
its two aspects corresponding to a different concept of the 
Logos. There is first of all the objective Logos of which Par- 
menides spoke, presupposed and transcending the individual. 
In the second place there is the subjective Logos of which 
Plato spoke in Cratilus (385B), which may be true or false 
depending on who is speaking. The former is itself nothing 
because immediate: the latter by itself is nothing because not 
universal: 7 

. . . The objective Logos has value as the content of the subjective 
and we can only affirm it at the time when we know it and insofar 
as we know it; and vice versa, the subjective Logos has its truth 
value insofar as it contains within itself the objective. Nevertheless, 
without the distinction between the objective Logos and the true 
but subjective Logos, the logical problem would not arise. 

In fact the Logos, the object of logic, is the true Logos insofar as dis- 
tinguished from the false. But how would this distinction be possible 
if ... there did not intervene a measure superior to this subjective 
Logos, which may be true but may also be false? . . . Nor can the 
measure be other than a Logos absolutely true, removed from the 

5 See p 36 of this study. 

6 See p. Ill of this study; also the Sistema. Vol. II, pp. 12-3. 

7 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 47. 



THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 127 

possibility of being false. But if for the object of logic one wishes 
to assume an absolutely true Logos, or the objective Logos, without 
opposing it to the false, that Logos as such, not having the false 
set against it, would not be true. In the mechanical brutality of its 
being it would descend below thought and not be affirmable by it. 

Logic has for its object thought as the unity of the subjective 
and objective constituents, and as such is true. Thus it may 
be said both that truth is distinguished from opinion by its 
universality and that it is the truth of the subject. "I think 
virtue is knowledge 77 is true because it is the result of a mediate 
synthetic process a priori and thus is differentiated from any 
arbitrary opinion I might utter, and at the same time because 
it is my assertion. This union of the two elements represents 
the uniqueness of the Gentilian "truth." By the method of 
immanentism Gentile brings the Logos within the subject; 
that is, within thought in action: yet makes it, by the nature 
of thought, different from the particular opinion of the sub- 
ject. In this way the truth is given a meaning different from 
its common meaning in that it is no longer measured by a 
Logos external to thought. A judgment is not true for Gentile 
because of structural relations between an entity (or entities) 
external to thought and thought itself. 

In spite of the immanentism involved there are aspects of 
this concept of truth which give it some common ground with 
the usual one. The Gentilian truth is dependent upon a Logos 
which is within thought and norma sui but none the less norma. 
Its criteria are not, in other words, fulfilled by an arbitrary 
whim. Truth is not without a Logos: the difference is that 
Gentile's Logos is provided by thought itself rather than im- 
posed upon thought by a transcendent reality. The point which 
Gentile is trying to make is that if the basis of truth were 
objective, transcending thought, we could never because of its 
very nature know it as truth and differentiate it from error 
without making a judgment which itself requires a norm. 



128 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

What makes truth true is the subjective element which opposes 
it to error. In itself a judgment is neither true nor false. "Vir- 
tue is knowledge" only becomes true or false when asserted 
by the act of thinking, "I think virtue is knowledge." 

There are two kinds of truth. There is first that of the 
natural sciences. This truth is dependent upon an objective 
Logos presupposed to any thinking about natural objects. Of 
such a type is the judgment about the "true" oasis. One inves- 
tigates the verity of this judgment by the simple pragmatic 
expedient of riding toward the visualized oasis to find out if 
it is "really" there. The Logos here is uniform nature. The 
word "truth" is so often employed in this sense that it would 
be seriously inconvenient to use any other. But it is necessary 
to point out that this is not a philosophic "truth," according 
to Gentile, but a "truth" of a particular science. This position 
is no less reasonable than the position that the world of natural 
objects is not the "real" world. The thought of the philosopher 
in this case, as in the other, simply moves beyond what are 
considered to be the naivete and limitations of common sense. 

The second type of truth, philosophic truth, is itself divided 
into two parts. In the first part we find the truth of abstract 
logic, based upon its three principles. It is called philosophic 
because it deals with thought structure, but has objectivity 
in common with the former. In this case the truth value 
depends upon the consistency of the concepts involved. Hence 
that error which is ignorance parading as knowledge, of which 
Gentile speaks. 8 This is the error most often committed by the 
thinker who does not gather his fundamental notions into a 
conceptual system in order to test them for their consistency. 
In the second part there is the truth of the logic of the con- 
crete, which is such only in relation to the error of someone 
else. This latter truth (and its corresponding error) are 
clearly exemplified in the educative situation of teacher and 

8 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 103. 



THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 

pupil face to face. 9 To each of these, and rightly, the other 
represents error. The child's calculation may be wrong accord- 
ing to the laws of arithmetic, but to the child it is right until 
he himself understands that it is wrong. 

It is unfortunate that in Gentile's exposition of actual ideal- 
ism both of these concepts are included under the single word 
"truth," for they are quite different. In applying the first, 
one is judging according to the objective standard provided 
by the fundamental principles of the logic of the abstract. 
Philosophy being defined as concrete thought, this "truth" 
should be excluded from the province of philosophic verity. 
Yet it is this concept which allows Gentile to say that igno- 
rance parading as knowledge is in error. It is in error because 
of inconsistencies involved. Such a concept is both important 
and useful. Gentile himself constantly employs it in his criti- 
cism of materialism as a philosophy. We are all subject to 
inconsistencies and encounter them frequently in arguments 
with others. We employ the second concept of truth also but 
recognize it less often because it appears at that point at which 
most arguments arrive at an impasse. In applying the latter, 
one is judging according to a standard objective to the empiri- 
cal subject (hence universal) but subjective as an act of 
thought (hence my truth and my error). It is with this second 
truth that Gentile is ultimately concerned, and he does not 
always realize that it may not coincide with the first. Accord- 
ing to this second concept the materialist is right and Gentile 
is wrong, for the materialist, and the unique character of the 
Gentilian solipsism appears. According to the first the mate- 
rialist is definitely in error: according to the second he is both 
correct and in error depending upon the point of view. In the 
fullness of his actual idealism Gentile is quite wrong in apply- 
ing "truth" to the first concept. His vehement criticisms of 
opponents are thoroughly out of keeping with the tolerance to 

9 Ibid., p. 106. 



I3O THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

which actual idealism should inevitably lead. At such times 
he is forgetful of the meaning for "truth" which is founda- 
tional to his position. The difficulties which arise in the 
employment of the second concept will be discussed in the 
next chapter. Suffice it now to say that Gentile uses the word 
"truth" in more than one sense and that in a study of actual 
idealism the two must be sharply distinguished. 

The subjective element in the Gentilian "truth" needs fur- 
ther comment. To retrace our steps for a moment, truth value 
has in the history of philosophy been couched in objectivity. 
The meaning of truth has been that its value has been objec- 
tive with relation to the thinking subject. In contrast, Gentile 
finds truth value in the morality of the free act of the think- 
ing subject. This moral value, excluding all entities tran- 
scending thought, makes "truth" something different from what 
philosophers have customarily meant by that term. One may 
reasonably take the position that by the establishment of the 
doctrine of pure immanentism Gentile is concerning himself 
with a concept of truth which is simply not what one means 
by that word. If one takes this position Gentile must be classi- 
fied as a sceptic, for he certainly believes that "truth" as ordi- 
narily defined is not only inaccessible but "unthinkable." But 
before assigning him to this group, consider the form which 
the Gentilian "scepticism" takes. As we shall use the term, 
scepticism asserts the impossibility of a universal and neces- 
sary knowledge of reality. Gentile avoids this position by 
redefining "reality," "knowledge," "universal," and "neces- 
sary." He claims to have found a universal and necessary 
knowledge of reality which does not depend upon a Logos 
transcending thought. 

The nucleus of this claim is found in what Gentile con- 
siders to be the "unthinkability" of the traditional meta- 
physics. 10 It is this sense of unthinkability that leads Gentile 

10 See, for example, the Sistema, Vol. I, p. 164; Vol. II, pp. 193 and 197. 



THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 

to side with the sceptics in their negative criticism of tradi- 
tional views. What is this "unthinkability"? It seems to be 
the error potential to the logic of the abstract. A transcendent 
matter is unthinkable because in the thinking of it one 
encounters an inconsistency. But obviously the materialist 
thinks his materialism, no matter how great its "unthink- 
ability." Gentile must admit this, for he defines "thought" 
implicitly as the entire activity of the spirit whether intellec- 
tual or emotional. 11 Yet according to the Gentilian concept 
of the philosophically true, this which is "unthinkable" must 
be true for the materialist. This looseness of terminology is 
unfortunate and presents difficulties to our understanding of 
which Gentile does not seem to be aware. Of the two meanings 
which may be given to the word "unthinkable" by actual ideal- 
ism only one appears to be defensible. Gentile employs most 
often the meaning which is not. Materialism is "unthinkable" 
in the sense that the fundamental concept, "matter," is an 
immediate product of intuition; in other words, a presupposi- 
tion. Now, thinking being defined as a mediate process, "mat- 
ter" is in a definite sense "unthinkable." Anything tran- 
scending thinking may be interpreted as unthinkable. But 
"materialism" is different. It is a product of thinking and as 
such must be thinkable. Yet we find Gentile saying that the 
"thought" of the materialist is "unthinkable." Such a state- 
ment is in itself quite useless. Indeed according to Gentile's 
own interpretation of the logic of the concrete all acts of the 
spirit are thought regardless of consistency, and all thought is 
true for the thinker who thinks it. What can Gentile mean? 
He is apparently trying to make a distinction between a com- 
paratively narrow "unthinkable" and the all-inclusive "think- 
ing." "Unthinkability" is an adjective which Gentile applies 
to the thought of an opponent. In employing it he means to 

11 See, for example, the Ststcma, Vol II, pp 98-100. See also p. 258 of Carr's 
translation, The Theory of Mind as Pure Act, for a good example of the difficulty 
of this terminology. 



132 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

say that materialism is thinkable to the materialist (obviously, 
or he would not think it) but unthinkable to Gentile (because 
he is an idealist). There is no thinking that is self-contra- 
dictory to the thinker: if it were he would not think it. Mate- 
rialism, for example, is only self-contradictory to someone who 
is not a materialist. Hence the "unthinkability" of the "think- 
able." In fairness to his readers Gentile ought to express this 
in a less bewildering manner. To apply "thinkability" only 
to one's own thinking rules out with a high hand the thinking 
of others. The idea behind this ruling may be legitimate, but 
it is the idea of validity, not of thinkability. To use the latter 
word is to stretch language usage too far. 

We return, then, to the problem of the scepticism of Gentile. 
According to the usual employment of "truth" as involving 
a transcendent Logos Gentile is a sceptic. But using his own 
concept of truth, he is no longer a sceptic if the sceptic be 
defined as one who asserts the impossibility of a necessary 
and universal knowledge of reality. The use of the phrase 
"necessary and universal" introduces one final consideration. 
What does Gentile mean by these terms? 12 By "universal" 
he means in part what all mean by that term. A universal 
truth is one which, while it is my truth, is universal in the 
sense that it is measured by a Logos common to all thinking, 
overcoming the bounds of the empirical individual. But the 
"necessary" part of the phrase is more difficult. For Gentile 
the necessity cannot be a necessity imposed upon thinking 
from without, as is customarily supposed when "necessity" is 
brought to mind. The necessity to which Gentile refers is a 
moral necessity (hence the moral value) based upon the free- 
dom of thinking. When Gentile speaks of the necessity of 
truth he refers to a necessity imposed from within. 18 It is the 
necessity which Gentile claims to find in his examination of 

13 See pp. 35-6 of this study. 

1 * See the following chapter of this study for a criticism of Gentile's account 
of this necessity. 



THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 133 

the logic of the concrete. The freedom involved is the free- 
dom found in the doctrine that there is nothing which can 
condition thought. The necessity involved is the impossibility 
of thinking otherwise than as we must, by the nature of think- 
ing. This necessity, while differing from the necessity of which 
one ordinarily conceives in dealing with problems involving 
truth, nevertheless performs the same function in providing 
value, and cannot be criticized from a terminological point of 
view. 

To summarize this discussion of terminology, when Gentile 
writes of "knowledge," "truth/ 7 "necessity," "universality," 
"thinkability", and even of "philosophy" itself, he is not 
referring to the concepts with whose connotations we are 
familiar by custom. Not only does he use them in a strictly 
philosophic sense, but in a sense further limited within that 
sphere. Having defined "philosophy" and "reality" as he has 
defined them, he retains the essential part of the connotations 
of the other words and rejects that part which is not essential. 
This he has a right to do; but we shall not understand him 
if our connotations are not for the time made coincident with 
his. In two important cases we have found him using the 
same word in more than one sense. First, he uses "truth" (and 
hence "error") in both the philosophic and the non-philosophic 
senses, according to his own interpretation of "philosophic." 
There is the error in the realm of the abstract, arising out of 
logical inconsistency; and there is error in the realm of the 
concrete, arising out of equally consistent (to their thinkers) 
but differing doctrines. And secondly, Gentile uses "unthink- 
able" to describe both immediate presuppositions and the 
thinking of his opponents. In the former case (i.e. that of 
"truth" and "error") there should be two pairs of words if 
language can supply them. We use "truth" and "error" in 
both senses without often enough making the distinction here 
disclosed. It is important in reading Gentile to know which 



134 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

meaning for these words he is using at the time. In the second 
case, one of the uses of "unthinkable" is quite without justifi- 
cation not simply because of the confusion for which it is 
responsible but more precisely because Gentile does not mean 
to deny the quality of "thinkability" when he so uses the word. 
"Thinkability" and "thinking" should be reserved for that 
which is most fundamental to actual idealism, the entire 
activity of the human spirit, whether intellectual, emotional or 
otherwise. This in itself is a clear departure from ordinary 
usage, but is not uncommon among philosophers. 

Gentile's opponent is quite free to charge him with the mis- 
use of any of these concepts, on the ground that he is not suffi- 
ciently respectful of tradition. Concepts are built by tradi- 
tion. If one wishes to say, for example, that thinking is given 
"value" only by that which transcends thought, one is at lib- 
erty to do so. With such an opponent Gentile could only be 
concerned in demonstrating the peculiar nature of that "value" 
when persistently examined. Of this type are many of the 
most frequent and important of the philosopher's functions. 
Concepts are given certain connotations and certain usages. 
The philosopher may discover that in some cases neither the 
connotation nor the usage is adequate. This happens most 
clearly with the word "real." Do only real entities exist, and 
are existent things tangible? Once asserted it is not difficult 
to label the inadequacies which are usually contained in 
such a position. Even if this naiVe position is consistently 
maintained the philosopher can show the peculiar nature of 
the "real" which results from it. He says, "You are welcome 
to this use of the word, for it retains part of the customary 
meaning of it; but what about the other meanings?" Some- 
times new words are needed, but more often the full connota- 
tion of a word should be examined more thoroughly. Gentile 
is disconcerting but instructive. It is his claim that the words 
we have been examining must receive stated alterations in their 



THE GENTILIAN TERMINOLOGY 135 

connotations if that which is essential to these connotations is 
to be preserved. The justification of his position must be 
found, if at all, in his interpretation of what in the connota- 
tions of these words is essential. 

The difficulties found in Gentile's uses of the words "error" 
and "unthinkability" are characteristic of one of the great 
weaknesses of the Sistema di logic a, namely the frequent 
though not constant abuse of words. Such words as "real" 
and "concrete" and "pure" are loosely employed. Others, such 
as "negate" and "mediacy," have one meaning in the logic 
of the abstract and another in the logic of the concrete. This 
double use of words is the source of the difficulties in connec- 
tion with "error" and "unthinkability." When one examines 
the logic of the concrete, furthermore, one meets many terms 
(e.g. autosynthesis, autosyllogism, autoconcept) quite unfa- 
miliar even to a reader trained in philosophic discourse. 
Though it is true that actual idealism is of such a character 
as to prompt at many points the employment of a special ter- 
minology, Gentile leans too heavily on it and thus is prevented 
from conveying the fullness of his meaning to his readers and 
critics. It would have helped him enormously if he had made 
a greater effort to build his metaphysical structure out of 
material more familiar. This weakness is the more annoying 
when the position is taken, as we shall take it, that actual 
idealism is in essence a simpler doctrine than Gentile's elab- 
orate conceptual superstructure allows it to be. Might even the 
seemingly essential "Ego" and "Not-Ego" have been avoided? 
If such is the case Gentile's logic could be greatly clarified. 

This discussion of the Gentilian terminology may be con- 
cluded by indicating two minor foibles contained therein. Gen- 
tile applies the word "dogmatic" to all philosophy which relies 
upon presuppositions; all philosophy that is not actual idealism 
is "dogmatic" as far as the writings of Gentile are concerned. 
This is certainly an abuse of that word. That is usually consid- 



136 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

ered "dogmatic" which disregards reason. This has been the 
traditional use of the word even in the field of philosophy. Kant, 
for example, reserves it in the Critique of Pure Reason for 
those who attack a proposition in itself rather than the proof 
of the proposition. Gentile lends color to his argument by the 
over-use of words. In a strict sense, of course, he is correct in 
this instance; for those who base their proofs of propositions 
upon presuppositions are dealing with presuppositions and not 
with proofs. And this is what he claims that all of those 
who employ a transcendent real are, because of the circularity 
of their thought, doing. But broadly speaking, the dogmatist 
is usually willfully dogmatic. It would be more gracious for 
Gentile to use another word. This weakness for color is found 
throughout the pages of Gentile's writings. Perhaps the most 
obvious example of it is his use of "absurd," which is thrown 
around with evident lack of restraint. It seems sometimes as if 
every doctrine not in agreement with actual idealism is 
"absurd." Perhaps it is to Gentile, and perhaps he wishes in 
this manner to emphasize his full-blown solipsism. But he is 
giving the wrong emphasis, and the effect upon his readers is 
more harmful than otherwise. To see a doctrine which one has 
entertained in all seriousness and intellectual honesty described 
as "absurd" is not an experience conducive to friendship. As 
a matter of fact, Gentile's solipsism should more than any 
other lead to tolerance of other positions. One quotation we 
have already made indicates this most clearly. 14 In his mili- 
tancy Gentile is missing one of the essential elements of his 
doctrine. If we could strike the "absurds" and the "dog- 
matics" alone from Gentile's writings we should gain him more 
profitable consideration from his contemporaries. Of the two 
the former is more serious. Certainly "absurd" is a word which 
one philosopher should use only rarely and with great caution 
in describing the work of another. Better never use it. 

14 p. Ill, of this study. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 
THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 

THE outstanding characteristic of actual idealism is its 
attempt to develop a metaphysics without the use of presup- 
positions. We have seen that if such an attempt is made the 
resultant metaphysics must be based upon a Logos which is 
not previous to thinking but is within the act of thinking itself. 
But can even this extreme immanentism be entirely without 
presuppositions? Is it possible to develop a metaphysics with- 
out presupposing anything? Must not every philosopher start 
with certain concepts which are given as basic, the concepts of 
"philosophy" itself and "reality"? When Gentile writes that 
his philosophy is presuppositionless must we not understand 
him in a definitely limited sense? There is nothing in his writ- 
ings to indicate that he finds it necessary to limit the meaning 
of that statement. He asserts that there can be nothing out- 
side of the act of thinking which could govern it or by which 
it could be measured. But is this synonymous with a state- 
ment that the act of thinking in developing its metaphysics is 
without the benefit of presuppositions? We have selected four 
illustrations from Gentile's writings, the first two of which will 
defend him against obvious criticism in this connection, and 
the latter two serve to explain his meaning with regard to pre- 
suppositions more in detail. The merit of his position will be 
considered in succeeding chapters. 

One of the problems with which idealists are most concerned 
is that of the existence of other selves. Josiah Royce argued 
in his last lectures on metaphysics that the existence of other 

137 



138 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

selves was implied by the existence of the self; the self for its 
fulfillment requires other selves upon which to act. It is true, 
according to a dialectic logic, that the self requires the not- 
self for its existence. But that this not-self need include other 
selves is not so clear. It may be true empirically, but is it true 
a priori? It is at least conceivable that Gentile on a desert 
island, without the benefit of a history of past thought, with- 
out a contemporary exchange of thought, and without any hope 
for future thought, might have written that which is essential 
to the Sistcma di logica. For Gentile the truth has a moral 
value, but this morality does not imply the existence of other 
selves. It is a morality based upon the free act of thinking, 
a Spinozan morality quite different from that involving our 
choice of action in relation to other human beings. Gentile is 
never concerned with the existence of other selves. He neither 
discusses it nor assumes it. To be sure he speaks often of 
other human beings with thought processes similar to his own, 
but they are no more real philosophically than his own empiri- 
cal individuality. He is not concerned with the existence of 
other selves because he takes the position that we can have no 
necessary or universal knowledge of the existence of such 
transcendent entities. The real for him is his own act of think- 
ing, and other selves partake of reality only insofar as they 
are entertained in thinking. 1 Hence the problem of the exist- 
ence of other selves does not arise. This is Gentile's complete 
solipsism appearing again. When he writes of other selves he 
presupposes nothing. 

Gentile does not even presuppose a rational world, as Hege- 
lians do. His world is the world of thinking and partakes of 
the characteristics of thought, rational or otherwise. It is the 
essence of his doctrine that it can contain nothing that does 
not derive from the pure act of thinking, looked at either 
abstractly or concretely. It is from this point of view that 

1 See the criticism of this position in Chapter IX of this study. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 139 

Gentile sets himself the task of building a logic. Having 
renounced presuppositions and allowed as the foundation of 
his system nothing but the act of thinking, whatever we shall 
find there will have to be a priori. 2 Furthermore Gentile's 
logic has one advantage over all other logics with which the 
present writer is acquainted. It is customary for the logician, 
aware that his subject-matter exhibits circularity, to be dis- 
turbed by the fact that the development itself of a formal 
structure for the expression of thought requires a formal struc- 
ture already presupposed, that logic is attained only through 
the medium of logic. Within either Aristotelian or relational 
logic the only escape from this difficulty is by way of renounc- 
ing all metaphysical considerations. Most logicians do this: 
those who do not, find themselves in difficulties even more seri- 
ous. But for Gentile the fundamental aspects of logic are not 
concerned with contradictories. Logic is not something fixed 
once and for all in its circularity. It is the act of thinking, and 
corroborates his metaphysics. If there is nothing external to 
thinking, the thinking itself which is in search of a logic (and 
a real) provides in that search its logical principles (and its 
real). The Logos is found in the act of thinking that investi- 
gates it. 

We come now to two illustrations which will explain more 
in detail the meaning of the Gentilian "presupposition." Gen- 
tile places himself under immediate suspicion in the earliest 
pages of the Sistema di logica by making a full and complete 
statement of the doctrine of internal relations. 3 It appears so 
unheralded that it certainly seems to have the stamp of a pre- 
supposition. But careful examination will show that this state- 
ment is more correctly traced to an effort to avoid all pre- 
suppositions. The metaphysical doctrine of external relations, 
which states that relations make no difference to the entities 

2 See Chapter X of this study for a criticism of the a priori character of the 
Gentilian judgment. 
8 Sistema. Vol. I, p. 6. 



140 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

which they relate, when metaphysically interpreted becomes 
the doctrine that there are entities before thought and inde- 
pendent of it. If their relations to one another and to thought 
make no difference to these entities it must follow that they 
are an-sich and placed so that they can be known by the func- 
tion of thinking, and hence form that metaphysically previous 
to thought which Gentile is so anxious to avoid. In a search for 
the Logos the doctrine of external relations is a begging of the 
metaphysical question. 4 But the doctrine of internal relations 
as employed by Gentile is not a presupposition unless an 
absence of presuppositions is itself considered to be one. It 
arises rather out of the position that any philosophic knowl- 
edge of reality must of necessity come from within thinking 
itself. Such a position must take unto itself the doctrine of 
internal relations, for if all entities are contained within the 
act of thinking they will consist of their relations to one 
another within thought. This position comes from an exact 
statement of the philosophic problem on the basis of the con- 
cepts which we have been examining. It is a statement of the 
function of philosophy and warrants further consideration 
later as such. But for Gentile it must somehow be distin- 
guished from a presupposition if "presuppositionless phi- 
losophy" is to be more than a self-contradictory phrase. As 
will be shown later, the Theory of Types may profitably be 
applied to this situation. 

The situation is also exemplified in a second instance. The 
ontological valuation of the unity of the act of thinking is the 
nearest approach to a presupposition in all of Gentile's phi- 
losophy. 5 Indeed the distinction between such an interpreta- 

* Although in the strict sense in which we are at the moment employing that 
word any doctrine of external relations involves an entity or entities "presupposed," 
there is a sense in which this is not a defensible description of the situation. This 
is an exceedingly important point. Gentile does not give it sufficient attention. We 
neglect it now only to reserve it for later discussion See pp. 180-1 and 199-200 of 
this study. 

6 See the Sistema, Vol. I, pp. 186-91, and Vol. II, Part III, Chapter VI. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 141 

tion of the real and a presupposition is so fine and at the same 
time so important as to be most instructive. If we ask why 
there may be a synthesis of the abstract synthesis, as there is 
in the logic of the concrete, when there may not be an analysis 
of the abstract analysis we receive no definite answer. Gen- 
tile's objection to an analysis of the analysis in the logic of 
the abstract is that the elements found in that analysis have 
meaning only in the whole. 6 This analysis has meaning as such 
only when the analyzed parts are synthesized. But the same 
argument turned in the other direction might hold against 
the synthesis of the synthesis. Has not the concrete synthesis 
meaning as such only when the synthesized parts are ana- 
lyzed? This is a point which Gentile seems to overlook. 7 The 
reason why Gentile is not willing to turn the argument in the 
other direction is that his interpretation of "reality" as the 
totality of the thinkable will not allow it. If one refers to the 
"real" as a totality the unity is, as one would expect, valued 
at the expense of the multiplicity. It has been said that this 
interpretation of the meaning of "reality" arose immediately 
out of the interpretation of the function of philosophy as that 
science which thinks all things in their unity. These last three 
words lend ontological significance to "all things"; "all things," 
each one of which is considered by itself as a part, is a concept 
quite different from "all things" in their unity. We come to 
what is a most important point in the interpretation of actual 
idealism when we realize that it is only this tracing of the 
problem back to the determination of the function of philos- 
ophy that will allow Gentile's emphasis upon the unity of the 
real to escape the charge that it is a presupposition. When 
Gentile speaks of presuppositions he appears to be referring 
to that which involves the Logos, that is he seems to be con- 
cerned only with presuppositions which might affect our char- 

6 See p 65 of this study. 

7 See the fifth criticism made in this chapter, pp. 159-60. 



142 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

acterization of the norm of thinking. But of course there are 
other "presuppositions" in philosophy. When the philosopher 
commences his researches he must make initial interpretations 
of certain basic concepts, "truth/ 7 "reality," and "philosophy" 
itself, which consist of assumptions (so-called to differentiate 
them from Gentile's "presuppositions") as to what presumably 
he is doing. It can probably be argued with profit that these 
initial assumptions are different from that which ultimately 
makes the truth true and the false erroneous. In other words 
these initial assumptions, essential to any philosophy, do not 
dictate the nature of the Logos and for this reason do not 
involve the Gentilian presuppositional. They define the nature 
of "truth," that we may recognize it, but do not provide the 
norm by which "truth" is given value. For example, the defini- 
tion of truth as transcendent (an assumption) leaves open the 
important choice of a norm: both Plato and Aristotle gave 
"truth" the same basic definition but their norms are widely 
different. This distinction, of which more will be said later, 
is nowhere brought out in the Sistema di logica. But it is 
necessary if certain of Gentile's statements are to receive exact 
and serious consideration. 

Hence our first major criticism of the Sistema di logica. It 
does not define accurately the concept of a "presupposition" 
which it employs so fundamentally, and thus neglects an ele- 
ment in actual idealism that is essential to the correct under- 
standing of that philosophy. If there is a legitimate distinction 
between the determination of the function of philosophy and 
the determination of the Logos, Gentile nowhere recognizes it. 
If there is not, his search for a presuppositionless philosophy 
is both confusing and open to telling criticism. Strictly speak- 
ing Gentile has been enabled to avoid presuppositions only if 
that word is given a limitation of meaning which is neither sug- 
gested by its usage nor supplied by the author. For the time 
being we shall leave open the question as to whether or not 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 143 

it may be inferred from the material of the context in the man- 
ner indicated in the preceding paragraph. 

Let us now turn to a more direct consideration of the sub- 
ject of this study. An adequate criticism of Gentile's ideal- 
ism must conduct two major investigations. In the first place, 
does Gentile in the Sistema di logica build validly upon the 
foundation of the act of thinking? Is he able to develop a uni- 
versal and necessary truth thereupon? And in the second 
place, what has he gained when he has developed this system? 
Does it fulfill the requirements of a philosophy, or is it so 
highly specialized in the realm of the ultimate as not to satisfy 
the demands which may properly be made of any philosophy? 
The first of these inquiries we shall endeavor to carry out in 
the remainder of this chapter: to the second we shall devote 
all of the chapters that follow. 



* * 

As its name implies, the logic of the abstract is an abstrac- 
tion, a study of a part only of a more significant whole. It 
gives the structure of thinking considered as pensiero pcnsato. 
It is a circular instrument, expressive simply of the identity 
of subject and predicate. It furnishes no progress in knowl- 
edge, unless knowledge be conceived according to Plato's simile 
of the bird in the bird-cage. Such a knowledge is that pro- 
vided by such systems as Euclidean geometry. Gentile rejects 
this conception. An abstract system depends for its value upon 
the value of immediately accepted postulates. Ultimate value 
is supplied, if at all, from elsewhere. For Gentile ultimate 
value is supplied by the logic of the concrete. Hence the logic 
of the abstract is in itself nothing. Its value rests in the logic 
of the concrete, and in answering our first question, regarding 
the necessary and universal truth value of the Gentilian logic, 
we shall therefore examine exclusively the logic of the concrete. 



144 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Necessity, universality and value are all contained there if 
anywhere, when they are employed in the Gentilian sense. 

But we cannot leave the logic of the abstract without some 
discussion of it per se, for it does suggest two items of interest. 
One remarks quickly the difference between the abstract struc- 
ture outlined by Gentile and that outlined by contemporary 
workers in the field of relational logic. This difference must 
be explained. It is the function of logic to express the struc- 
ture of thought in symbols more exact than ordinary lan- 
guage usage. There are two types of abstract logic corre- 
sponding to two widely separate interests in thought struc- 
ture. 8 They are the noetic and the relational logics. Relational 
logic is non-philosophic. It proceeds by empirical and induc- 
tive methods to extract from the symbolism of ordinary lan- 
guage another symbolism which shall so exhibit a deductive 
systematization that thought and the systems in which it is 
found may be tested for contradictions. The empirical and 
inductive nature of this inquiry indicates that the structure 
of relational logic does not express the essence of the struc- 
ture of thought. It substitutes for the informal symbolism of 
language an exact symbolism which allows more precise 
expression. On the other hand, noetic logic is philosophic in 
that it enters the field of metaphysics and epistemology. It is 
an a priori investigation into the essential nature of thought 
structure. It seeks to discover that structure which thought- 
as-object must exhibit. It is the Gentilian position that the 
essence of thought structure is the unification of subject and 
predicate elements in an identity-relation, governed by the 
three principles, in which the subject is universalized and made 
necessary by the predicate. In its broadest interpretation it 
would be difficult to disagree with this position. It does not 
contradict either relational logic or any other correction of the 

8 For a more detailed discussion of the relation between these two logics see 
the present author's "Classical and Relational Logic" in The Philosophical Review 
of May, 1936, Vol. XLV, No. 3. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 145 

classical from the relational point of view, any more than the 
chemist's description of a suspension bridge is contradicted by 
the description of it given by the civil engineer. The relational 
logician does not attempt the philosophic question: and the 
noetic logician is not concerned with the development of 
thought as a precise instrument. The relational logician stud- 
ies language in connection with the thought it is intended to 
convey and improves upon it : the noetic logician studies think- 
ing to discover the nature of the process. One need not be 
alarmed at the Aristotelian character of the Gentilian logic 
of the abstract: Aristotle's logic is inadequate and awkward 
for the expression of a non-contradictory system, but it does 
possess the virtue of expressing the essence of thought 
structure. 

The second point in connection with the logic of the abstract 
per se, and the one which holds the more serious criticism, has 
to do with Gentile's treatment of the Principle of Excluded 
Middle. He says that it follows from this principle that it is 
impossible for Being not to be thought. 9 If the identity A=A 
were not affirmed it would be necessary according to the Prin- 
ciple of Excluded Middle to affirm that A= Not- A. So much 
is clear. But Gentile argues further that since the identity 
A=A is the essence of pensiero pensato, to deny it would be, 
according to this principle, to deny the reality of thought. 
This we cannot do. Hence the being of A A cannot be denied, 
which is another way of saying that the being of thought can- 
not be denied. This argument is not so clear. Gentile intro- 
duces the concept of Being where it is not relevant. The iden- 
tity A=A, while it represents the mediacy of pensiero pensato, 
affirms nothing about the metaphysical existence of thought. 
Therefore to deny it is not equivalent to denying the mediacy 
of Being. The Principle of Excluded Middle is of the same 
order as the Principle of Identity, not (as Gentile asserts) more 

9 For this entire argument see the Sistema, Vol. I, pp. 162-5. 



146 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

fundamental. Both express the nature of thought considered as 
its own object. In and for themselves, without the logic of the 
concrete, they would have to be considered as presuppositions 
(or postulates), according to the logical tradition. In and for 
themselves they prove nothing; they act as demonstrations, but 
as demonstrations of that which is already presupposed. This 
is the nature of the logic of the abstract according to Gentile's 
own description. Hence he falls into an inconsistency in offer- 
ing one of its principles as a final proof of the non-existence 
of that which is not mediate (i.e. that which is not thought). 
He forgets that there are two mediations in his logic. There is 
first the mediation of the logic of the abstract, whereby the 
subject is always the subject of the predicate and vice versa. 
And secondly there is the mediation of the logic of the con- 
crete, whereby Ego and Not-Ego are necessary each to the 
other. To argue about the nature of reality from the former 
would be to invoke the methodological difficulty that nothing 
of which anyone has thought has been anything but a media- 
tion of the first type. But a methodological difficulty may not 
legitimately be made into an ontological argument. 10 Gentile 
is right in saying that if A= Not- A were established it could 
not be thought except as an identity repulsing its negation 
(/I A} and that the confusion which would result would 
exclude all possibility of logic. But surely this is an argument 
in a circle which, though characteristic of abstract logic, gives 
no necessary or universal truth about the nature of reality. 

We are now in a position to make a second major criticism 
of the Sistema di logica. From the nature of pensiero pensato 
as an abstract mediation there does not follow an ontological 
principle regarding the mediacy of Being. The nature of pen- 
siero pensato does not legislate the nature of Being until some 
connection between thought and Being has been established. 

1 See the following chapter for a criticism of this same ontological argument 
used in connection with the Ego. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 147 

And there is nothing in the logic of the abstract which can 
establish this connection. But this criticism does not affect 
the general procedure of the logic of the abstract: it concerns 
only what is a digression from that logic. In itself the logic 
of the abstract is simply a description of thought considered 
as object. It is a valid description, though not preferable in 
all respects to any other. Relational logic, for example, is 
preferable as an instrument for testing the validity of thinking. 



The transition from the logic of the abstract to the logic 
of the concrete is difficult. The logic of the abstract in itself 
is presuppositional; it is a judgment of identicals which leads 
back to the starting place. Only in the concrete act of think- 
ing does thought progress. The Logos must be found in this 
act if at all. Does Gentile succeed in finding it there? This is 
the problem with which we are most concerned. Whence the 
dialectic expressed in the fundamental law, Ego=Not-Ego? 

By way of contrast, let us examine first the fundamental 
principles of the logic of the abstract. Thought considered 
objectively is found to possess a structure of which identity, 
non-contradiction, and excluded middle are the legislative char- 
acteristics. If this were all there could be no philosophy 
because there would be no thought progress, unless philosophy 
is simply the rational exposition of intuition and hence its 
handmaid. We would always move in circles of deduction. 
These three principles not only limit thought to the presup- 
posed, but in relation to the act of thinking about them they 
are themselves presupposed. They give the character of 
thought considered as object. Why, then, if they give the char- 
acter of thought does that character not legislate for the act 
of thinking by which they are thought? There are two answers 
to this question: the first is the strict answer prompted by the 



148 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Gentilian definition of true knowledge, and the second involves 
an appeal to that element of progress in human thinking 
which it would seem difficult to explain if the contrary answer 
were given. 

As regards the first answer, if the character of pensiero pen- 
sato were to legislate for pensiero pensante we should have 
no way of determining the truth of the former. Thinking when 
considered objectively takes on an entirely different and 
abstract character, which makes its principles inapplicable to 
active thinking, just as the flower when dissected is quite dif- 
ferent from the flower growing in a field. Since pensiero pen- 
sato transcends pensiero pensante (i.e. must, like all objective 
entities, be thought as transcending pensiero pensante) it can- 
not supply a norm which is the norma sui of pensiero pen- 
sante. To take it as a norm would constitute a return to the 
Parmenidean position in which thought is confronted with an 
unexplained and inexplicable Being (pensiero pensato, in this 
case). From a disinterested point of view, of course, there 
is no necessary cause for alarm in such a situation. If this is 
the whole story, and it must be according to most definitions 
of true knowledge, the sceptics are right and there is no uni- 
versal and necessary truth; certainly there is none in the Gen- 
tilian sense. Thought simply moves in circles logically and 
metaphysically speaking. Gentile rejects this solution of the 
logical and metaphysical problem strictly because he does not 
think this is the whole story, because he thinks he can legiti- 
mately set other and more significant requirements for truth 
which will allow him to avoid scepticism. 

What is the rest of the story as Gentile understands it? Let 
us try to retell it in our own words. The act of thinking 
describes a definite progress in which two different ele- 
ments enter, called by him in accordance with the idealistic 
tradition, the "Ego" and the "Not-Ego." Whereas in the 
logic of the abstract he started with an identity of two 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 149 

terms which had meaning only in the identity, in the con- 
crete situation he starts with a difference of two terms which 
have meaning only in the expression of the difference. This 
is the fundamental statement of the fact that we cannot 
think without thinking something. The act of thinking 
thinks something which is not the act of thinking but the 
material of it. Hence it asserts that something is thought, but 
in doing so it must at the same time assert itself as the act of 
thinking by which the thought is thought. The dialectic is 
thus produced. The important element in this dialectic is its 
progress. Each act of thinking becomes the material for a 
new act of thinking. The resultant series is both self-develop- 
ing and infinite. Each thought so alters the spiritual situation 
that the next act of thinking must, by virtue of it, be an 
entirely new act. For example, the concept of a poem is not 
static but rather progressive and infinite. The poem is not a 
spatial object printed in a book, the same for all readers; it 
is a meaningful thing which changes from one year to another 
as it takes its place in a more and more mature ideology. It 
even changes from one reading to another. One reading of it 
becomes part of the next reading by virtue of the self-conscious 
subjective element. This experience with what we habitually 
and obtusely call unchanging objects is known to all of us, 
but seldom understood in its full significance. It is according 
to this mode of development that Gentile pictures the reality 
of the thinking act. We never step twice into the same river; 
indeed we are never twice the same to step two times into 
the river. We ourselves are in a state of flux. It is with this 
account of the nature of thinking that Gentile attempts to 
avoid the Parmenidean impasse. 

If the dialectic of concrete thinking is once established as 
true by the act of thinking in attempting to establish it, the 
balance of the logic of the concrete follows without question. 
That balance is nothing more or less than an elaboration of 



ISO THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

the dialectic principle, which gives a new meaning to the cus- 
tomary concepts of logic. Though the terminology employed 
in the logic of the concrete is exceedingly difficult, the doctrine 
which it expresses may be rendered more simply. Gentile's 
characteristic words are "autogenesis," "autonoema" "auto- 
syllogism," "autosynthesis," "autoconcept," etc. Their deriva- 
tion is clear. The use of the prefix gives expression to the idea 
that thinking is creative of the world. Since the act of think- 
ing is the only real, since there is nothing presupposed to it, 
it must itself be productive of all of the material of thought; 
of the nocma, of the syllogism, of the synthesis, and of the 
concept, in a strictly logical sensed The act of thinking must 
be productive of this material, since metaphysically speaking 
there is nothing else which could produce that matter. As soon 
as one supposes an entity external to thought which might 
produce it one destroys the Gentilian conditions for a universal 
and necessary truth. In the use of these terms in the logic of 
the concrete Gentile seems to be following where his meta- 
physical and logical doctrine leads, though the reader will often 
be justified in believing that that logic might have been 
described with more simplicity. At present we are only inter- 
ested in establishing the fact that he is following that lead 
correctly. 

In order to establish this point each of Gentile's three cri- 
teria of truth must be applied to the establishment in the Sis- 
tema di logica of the foundational concept of the logic of the 
concrete. 12 In doing this we must inquire not simply into the 
truth of the assertion of the dialectic principle, but into the truth 
of the dialectic itself. The former inquiry would involve 
the norma sui character of the dialectic in general: the latter 
is concerned with the norma sui character of every assertion. 
We shall find this distinction to be of the greatest impor- 

1 * This qualification is extremely important. Its significance is discussed in 
Chapter IX of this study. 

12 See pp. 35-6 of this study. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 

tance. 13 The first criterion of truth set by Gentile is that of 
necessity. Is the dialectic necessary? A necessary knowledge 
is one measured by a Logos which gives it necessity regard- 
less, as we found when we examined this question, of the tran- 
scendence or immanence of that Logos. The Logos upon which 
Gentile relies is the dialectic immanent in the act of thinking. 
When one thinks (as one must) will this thinking be neces- 
sary? The nature of the necessity given by the Gentilian 
Logos is different from that which is ordinarily considered to 
be the nature of necessity. It is the necessity that the act of 
thinking be unable under the circumstances to think anything 
else. It is the recognition that when a person thinks anything 
he thinks it to the best of his ability. If the best of his ability 
recommended another possible assertion as true, that would 
be the one he would affirm. This necessity may not be denied: 
the very denial of it would be an assertion of it, for the denial 
would have to be necessary in order to carry weight. In other 
words, anyone who endeavors to deny that assertions contain 
their own necessity is himself making an assertion which ulti- 
mately (and barring the possibility of a transcendent neces- 
sity) can possess necessary value only of that kind which 
it is attempting to deny. The possibility of a transcendent 
necessity is barred, as we have seen, because being transcend- 
ent it is not necessary at all but purely arbitrary. Gentile's 
opponent is caught in a perfect trap. No assertion that any- 
one can state may boast a necessity which is not ultimately 
dependent upon the necessity immanent in the assertion itself. 
Any attempt at denial defeats itself. Hence pensiero pensante 
fulfills the requirement that it be necessary in the Gentilian 
sense. 

The discussion of this criterion introduces, however, a third 
major criticism of the Sistema di logica. In the logic of the 
concrete the necessity of the dialectic is described as two- 

1 8 See the following paragraph. 



152 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

fold. 14 In the first place, it is the necessity that the act of 
thinking think something different from the act itself which 
shall constitute its material. The act of thinking which 
asserted nothing would be nothing. As Gentile phrases it, this 
is the necessity of the Not-Ego for the Ego. The Ego by itself 
is nothing. And secondly, it is the necessity that everything 
be thought by an act of thinking. That which is not thought 
is nothing. This is the necessity of the Ego for the Not-Ego, 
in the Gentilian phraseology. The Not-Ego by itself is nothing. 
But it should be evident that this two-fold necessity is the 
necessity of the dialectic in general, not of any particular act 
of thinking. It establishes the necessity that I think something 
as the material of my every act, plus the necessity that all 
material be that of some act; hence it gives the general meta- 
physical foundation of the logic of the concrete. But it does 
not make it necessary, as it must be if the logic of the concrete 
is to be established, that any particular thought be thought. It 
does not make it necessary, for example, that "I think virtue 
is knowledge" as a specific assertion be thought. The necessity 
of this act of thinking on my part is given not by the dialectic 
nature of the act of thinking in general, but if at all by the 
recognition that I must necessarily think this thought (pen- 
siero pensato) if I indeed think it. This is the only necessity 
that can make that thought true for me. If this thought were 
not necessary for me I would not think it. But in expounding 
the norma sui character of pensiero pensante Gentile invokes 
only the former aspect of necessity, the necessity of the dia- 
lectic in general, which is impotent alone to fulfill his needs. 
He therefore fails to establish the truth of pensiero pensante. 
He has established the necessity of the form of pensiero pen- 
sante but not that of the material of it. We have in the pre- 
ceding paragraph attempted to complete the task. Whatever 

1 4 See the discussion of the fundamental law of the logic of the concrete, pp. 
86-7 of this study. See also the Sistema, Vol. II, pp. 67, 88, 89. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 153 

contribution is made therein must be added to the statement 
in the Sistema di logica in defense of the necessity of pensiero 
pensante. 

The second criterion of truth is that it be universal. Neces- 
sity and universality are so related that one is established in 
the establishment of the other. In what sense is the Gentilian 
dialectic universal? Is it the same for all men? In a sense 
it is, because the act of thinking is a necessary act. Insofar 
as the act of thinking is necessary it follows that it is uni- 
versal. But in still a wider sense this universality is meaning- 
less. One may not even ask the question as to whether or 
not the dialectic is the same for all men. Other men exist 
only in the reality of thought, insofar as they are thought. 
Hence the real does not contain other men, as we have already 
seen; it contains thoughts of them. "Other men" are only 
empirical individuals; even their acts of thought are unreal 
because they partake of reality only insofar as they are 
thoughts created (in the Gentilian sense) by the act of think- 
ing which entertains them. In short, one's dialectic is universal 
not because other men arrive at it independently (if they do!) 
but because in the freedom of one's thinking (in the Gentilian 
sense of being free from presuppositions) one is under the 
necessity of thinking what one thinks. The universality is this, 
that if another man were in Gentile's position he could not 
think otherwise. The very assertion that two men in the same 
spiritual situation might disagree is, by its nature as an 
assertion, a denial of this possibility. Every assertion is the 
assertion of its own universality, or it would not be asserted. 
If metaphysics is to be free from presuppositions this is the 
only universality which knowledge may enjoy. It does not 
preclude Gentile from writing a Sistema di logica any more 
than it would preclude him from applying the principle of the 
lever in moving a boulder simply because physics is unreal to 
him. Even if the not-self is unreal it is necessary to the real. 



154 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

This is the great point in the dialectic. 15 The universality of 
the Gentilian truth, being within the act of thinking, carries 
with it the meaning that the truth for any empirical individual 
must be found within his act of thinking and nowhere else. 
For Gentile himself there is no truth but that which he finds 
within; no one else's knowledge can be truth for him, for he 
so defines truth (in its absence from presuppositions) that only 
his own act of thinking can give it value. It cannot too fre- 
quently be stated that this is a doctrine which is often recog- 
nized, but the metaphysical and logical significance of which 
is seldom considered. One does not accept the thinking of 
another person as true without oneself performing an act of 
sanction (symbolized by the "I think . . ." which accom- 
panies every assertion), which act rather than the thinking of 
the other person is that which ultimately supplies this uni- 
versality. 

This problem of universality may be regarded in either of 
two ways. If an opponent should ask Gentile how he can be 
certain that the nature of his act of thinking is also the nature 
of the acts of thinking of others, he might call the question 
"absurd." Of course it is not an absurd question. What Gen- 
tile means is that within his own doctrine he is unable to 
answer the question because according to that doctrine the 
thinking of other persons has metaphysical existence only in 
his own thinking. One may say, then, both that the Gentilian 
truth is not universal in the usual sense of that word and that 
it is universal in the very special sense made legitimate by its 
necessity, the two being obviously interrelated. 

In the establishment of both the necessity and the uni- 
versality of the act of thinking the third criterion of truth is 
also verified, for in both pensiero pensante is given value. It 
is clearly distinguished from a mere objective fact, for it is 
an assertion. Any assertion that denied it value would be self- 

1 6 See the discussion of this "unreality" in Chapter IX of this study. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 155 

destructive, for being an assertion its whole power is in the 
value with which the assenter endows it in the act. But the 
value is not given by anything objective to thinking. In that 
case the entity which was objective to thinking would con- 
tain the value. It is important to note that our concern here 
is not with the incomplete logical value assigned by the logic 
of the abstract. Only concrete value is ultimate. No asser- 
tion which anyone can make may have a value which does 
not rest finally upon this one. The assertions of the mate- 
rialist for example, do not lack value for Gentile because of 
their inconsistency or "unthinkability." This abstract value 
depends upon something more fundamental. The thought of 
the materialist lacks value for Gentile because it cannot be 
truth for him until it is asserted by his own act of thinking, 
until he himself asserts it as true by a free act. This value is, 
as we have seen, a moral value, made moral by a situation 
in which thinking is bound by nothing but its own act with 
its inherent Logos. 

The consideration of these three criteria as applied to the 
dialectic establishes its truth so far as actual idealism is con- 
cerned. However, one other point in this connection needs dis- 
cussion. We have seen that the deductive systems of the logic 
of the abstract gain their value from the value of the dialectic 
of the logic of the concrete. This point is far from obvious, 
largely because of the unusual nature of the criterion of value 
which we have just considered. It is not contended that the 
logic of the abstract follows deductively once the truth of the 
logic of the concrete is established, as the propositions of 
geometry follow upon its initial postulates and axioms. Con- 
sider, for example, the syllogism. The conclusion " Socrates is 
mortal 77 does not follow from the premises "All men are mor- 
tal" and "Socrates is a man" simply because of an axiom in 
the logic of the concrete which establishes a relation between 
the terms. The logic of the concrete introduces a subjective 



156 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

principle which establishes that this syllogism, or any syllo- 
gism, is ultimately the assertion of an act of thinking. And it 
is its concrete nature as an assertion of an act of thinking that 
gives it truth value. According to the Gentilian requirements 
it could not otherwise have truth value. The truth of the syllo- 
gism about Socrates is contained in the concrete assertion, "I 
think all men are mortal." In this assertion, so far as I think 
it, there is contained the assertion that Socrates is among the 
class of mortals. The abstract form of the syllogism is what 
it is. Its rigidity is expressed by the principles of Identity, 
Non-Contradiction, and Excluded Middle. These are the rules 
of the deductive process, culled from an examination of 
thought taken as object. They give validity to thought. But 
no deduction is ultimately true until its postulates are asserted 
by virtue of an "I think. . . ." This is the meaning of the 
statement that the verity of abstract thought is contained in 
concrete thinking. But the latter would not be able to lend 
verity to the former if the relation between the "I think . . ." 
and what is thought were not necessary, universal, and pos- 
sessed of value. We have tried to show first, that pensiero 
pensante is necessary, and hence that every pensiero pensato, 
being the assertion of pensiero pensante, is necessary; sec- 
ondly, that pensiero pensante is universal, and hence that 
every pensiero pensato, being the assertion of pensiero pen- 
sante, is universal; and thirdly, that pensiero pensante has 
value, and hence that every pensiero pensato, being the asser- 
tion of pensiero pensante, has value. Hence the logic of the con- 
crete, which in itself necessitates that all thoughts be asser- 
tions of the act of thinking, makes these thoughts necessarily 
and universally true. 

If the nature of thinking is concrete, it may be asked how 
we are able to think in terms of the abstract in the rational 
and natural sciences. The answer is that we do not. We only 
succumb to the idea that we do when we entertain the product 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 157 

of the act of thinking without realizing that in actuality pen- 
siero pensato is but part of pensiero pensante. The logic of 
the abstract describes thought from such a point of view that 
it sees the result without seeing the action which produces it. 
It analyzes the deductive procedure, but even that procedure 
must be given life by the concrete assertion. Even the false 
syllogism, "All A is B; Some C is A; Therefore all C is B," is 
true to the asserter until he makes an assertion of its falsity. 
And, on the other side, the true syllogism about Socrates is 
false to the man who finds it false until he makes an assertion 
of its truth. In other words, while we endeavor to apply the 
three principles of abstract logic, our thinking is true ulti- 
mately not by virtue of them but rather by virtue of something 
upon which they rest logically. And that something is the 
concrete assertion symbolized by the "I think. . . ." Meta- 
physically, then, the logic of the abstract is not an accurate 
description of our thinking. In analyzing thought we find cer- 
tain abstract relationships, but they are there only insofar as 
we recognize them by an assertion. It is in this sense that 
Gentile can say that we do not think in terms of abstract logic. 
The logic of the abstract comes after the act of thinking; it is 
immediate, 10 while the act itself is a mediate process. The dis- 
tinction is that between immediate intuition and mediate think- 
ing, both of which are ordinarily called "thought." The former 
is thinking insofar as asserted, and hence true to the asserter, 
but Gentile asks us to bear in mind that such a "thought" in 
the past (as it must be as material in the logic of the abstract) 
is a fixed fact which cannot be revitalized by a mediate process 
and thus given truth value. 

We have refrained when possible from employing the Gen- 
tilian form of the principle of the logic of the concrete, Ego= 
Not-Ego. The use of the Ego to initiate the dialectic leads 

18 We are using this word in the concrete sense, and shall continue to do so. 
Gentile employs it in the abstract sense also. See p. 146 of this study. 



158 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

necessarily to one of two insuperable difficulties. Either one 
starts with an Ego which is presupposed, as it must be if it is 
the beginning of the series; or one begins with a pseudo-Ego 
(as Gentile does) which by the act of creating the Not-Ego 
creates a new Ego which is the only real one. In the first in- 
stance one violates the conditions of a presuppositionless logic; 
in the second, one commences with an entity which is later 
destroyed as unreal, hence invalidating metaphysically the 
argument by which one arrives at its destruction. Either path 
is fatal to the Gentilian idealism, and Gentile by his use of 
that term leaves himself open to attack from those who do not 
realize the basic nature of his argument. 

This is the fourth major criticism we shall make of the 
Sistema di logical If Gentile means more by "Ego" than pen- 
siero pensante connotes, or more by "Not-Ego" than pensiero 
pensato connotes, his derivation of the logic of the concrete is 
in error. If he does not mean more in either case he should not 
employ "Ego" and "Not-Ego," for certainly the connotations 
of the latter words are different from those of the former. In 
either case, then, the Sistema di logica is open to criticism. But 
it should be noted that if pensiero pensante and pensiero pen- 
sato are employed the derivation of the logic of the concrete 
is not open to the same attack. It may be said on the one 
hand that one commences with pensiero pensato, without being 
forced to characterize it as presupposed. It is that with which 
one commences. Or it may be said on the other hand that one 
starts with a pensiero pensante which creates a pensiero pen- 
sato and hence leads to the creation of a new pensiero pen- 
sante. With this latter choice of terms the primary pensiero 
pensante is not a pseudo-concept in the light of the later one ; 
the series is simply expressive of thought as development, the 
act of thinking being real in the moment of action and being 
superseded by the new act. Pensiero pensante thus exhibits 
unique metaphysical and logical properties which justify its 

17 See the following chapter of this study for an enlargement of this criticism. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM 159 

central position in actual idealism. It allows the dialectic upon 
which the derivation of that doctrine is based without the pre- 
supposition necessary to the Ego or to any other metaphysical 
concept. 

There is a fifth major criticism which must be made of the 
Sistema di logical Gentile speaks of the real as the unity 
of the thinkable. How does he justify this emphasis upon 
unity? If the unity is to be concrete (hence real) Gentile him- 
self says that it must contain its particulars. 10 Why, then, 
emphasize the universals rather than the particulars? In other 
parts of the Sistema di logica Gentile says that there is no 
legitimate analysis of the analysis in the logic of the abstract, 20 
yet he allows the synthesis of the synthesis in the logic of the 
concrete. 21 It seems impossible to discover a foundation for 
this partiality. Though a synthesis of the synthesis is possible, 
it is difficult to understand how there can be a synthesis of 
the synthesis without at the same time its being a synthesis 
of an analysis. How could it be a synthesis otherwise than as 
a synthesis of parts, and if it is a synthesis of parts are not the 
parts as important as their synthesis? There appears to be no 
justification for the over-emphasis of the unity. One may say 
that the whole being a whole is more valuable metaphysically 
than its parts being parts (as Gentile does in defining the 
real) but one may not say that the whole as a whole made up 
of parts is more valuable than a part as a part of the whole. 
Probably the origin of this over-emphasis is to be found in the 
EgoNot-Ego formula for the expression of the dialectic. The 
Ego is very often employed by idealists to supply a principle 
of identity for thought which, according to these idealists, could 
not be found external to thought. But the Ego as a principle 
of identity is as much a presupposition as any of those others 

1 8 The implications of this criticism will be found in Chapter IX of this study. 

19 See the Sistema, Vol. I, p. 9. 
20 See/fod., pp. 186 ff. 

21 See the Sistema, Vol. I, pp. 190-1; and Vol. II, Chapters VI and VII of 
Part III. 



l6o THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

of which Gentile is afraid. He, perhaps alone among idealists, 
may not use it. It implies an entity thinking thoughts and 
supplying their unity. The nucleus of the Gentilian dialectic 
is found not in the Ego but in the pure act of thinking which 
creates its own material. At times Gentile recognizes this quite 
clearly. 23 This is one of the factors that distinguishes actual 
idealism from all others. The act of thinking strictly consid- 
ered is a unity, to be sure, but a unity of form and matter. One 
does not find in it that which lends more value to the unity 
than to the parts which are unified; either without the other 
is, according to a principle set by Gentile himself, an abstrac- 
tion. This is a great fault in the development of the Sistema 
di logica. 

The problem which has jeopardized the universality and 
necessity of the knowledges of previous idealisms has been that 
of the deduction of the categories. For Gentile the category is 
the act of thinking. It may be considered in a number of ways, 
as predicate or as function or as any one of a number of deter- 
minations which pensiero pensante places upon the material 
of thought. But fundamentally the category is unique. It has 
no deduction, for it is given by the act of thinking and hence 
is not susceptible of deduction. If it were deducible that from 
which it was deduced would require explanation, and so on 
ad infmitum. The only entity behind which one cannot go is 
the act of thinking itself, for one could hardly speak of the 
unique category as being deduced from the act of thinking 
when that act would be required in the process of making the 
deduction. The category ceases to be an element or atom in 
thought, as Aristotle used it. Hence everything knowable 
reduces to the act of thinking (autosyn thesis) as the ultimate 
category. The category becomes a function, as Kant supposed. 
But the difference between Kant and Hegel, and Gentile is 
that while for the former two a deduction of the categories 

22 See Gentile's comments on Descartes' Cogito ergo sum, and with regard to 
the relation of the self to its future; pp. 39 and 197, and p. S3 respectively of Vol. 
II of the Sistema. 



THE GENTILIAN SYSTEM l6l 

was required for the verity of their philosophies, actual ideal- 
ism needs no such deduction. In fact it is a unique feature 
of actual idealism that it shows the impossibility of such a 
deduction. If the categories are to be deduced they must be 
deduced from something. If that something is not to be pre- 
supposed it can be only the self-creative act of thinking. But 
the act of thinking is the common denominator by which one 
thinks all that is thinkable, and hence is the category. The 
legitimate development of the Gentilian logic succeeds in 
removing from discussion one of the classic and most per- 
plexing of philosophic problems. 

It will be found characteristic of the Gentilian doctrine that 
it removes a number of the classic problems from the arena 
of philosophic argument: the realism-nominalism controversy 
is another example. 23 This is done in general by a redefinition 
of these problems. But it is not done by pragmatic methods. 
It is always performed by a priori methods, the problem under 
consideration being taken as poorly defined not from a prac- 
tical point of view (like the problem, cited by William James, 
of the squirrel going "around" the tree and its observers) but 
from the point of view of the nature of the act of thinking. 
One might suppose that Gentile, by removing these classic 
problems from debate, has done one of two things. Either he 
has put off the evil day when these problems must be faced 
even if in another form; or his a priori considerations have so 
limited his conception of the function of philosophy that by 
being enabled to avoid these problems he has emasculated his 
doctrine. In testing these two suppositions we are confronted 
with the greatest and the last of the problems with regard to 
Gentile's doctrine. Having examined the terminology and the 
system, correcting both where correction seemed necessary, 
what have we as a result? To various phases of this problem 
we shall devote the remainder of this study. 

28 See the Sistema, Vol. I, pp. 240-1. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 
THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 

THE quest of the philosopher is the quest for certainty. The 
history of the metaphysics of logic seems to contain exclusively 
thinkers dependent for certainty upon a norm objective in 
relation to the act of thinking. The Greek atomists provided 
certainty in knowledge by a doctrine of the reliability of sen- 
sation, which depended upon quantitative stuff and its motions. 
For Plato truth was found in the realm of Ideas; the cer- 
tainty being arrived at through the verity of reminiscence. 
Aristotle developed deductive logic and thus allowed thinking 
to derive validity from definition and a logical structure based 
upon the law of non-contradiction. But the ultimate truth cri- 
terion was found in the correspondence of judgments with that 
"known" which transcended the "knower." Modern philosophy 
has attempted two new logics. The first of these was Francis 
Bacon's Novum Organum. His inductive method searches for 
causes, for facts related to facts, and necessarily takes for 
granted a cosmos to which the application of this new method 
will be valid. The second was the logic of the synthesis a 
priori. In Kant the system of the categories lent verity to a 
knowledge of phenomena. And in Hegel the Absolute as a 
metaphysical concept lent verity to the dialectic logic. In other 
words, one stimulus to metaphysical investigation seems to 
have been the point of view that thinking in itself cannot 
have truth or falsity, that value depends upon some norm 
previous to the act of thinking. The search for a foundation 
upon which to build logical principles has always been a task 
of primary importance to the metaphysician. 

162 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 163 

Hence the uniqueness of actual idealism. In basing its logic 
upon a norm inherent in the act of thinking it has shown 
recognition of a predicament prominent in contemporary phil- 
osophical discussion, which has come to be known as the "ego- 
centric predicament." Careful study of the problem which it 
raises has led most philosophers to describe it as a methodo- 
logical predicament and therefore less significant than it is 
generally considered to be by those metaphysicians whose doc- 
trines take their beginning from it. The argument which leads 
to this description is authoritatively presented by Mr. R. B. 
Perry. Although actual idealism is a metaphysical solipsism 
the main tenet of which is clearly criticized by Mr. Perry, no 
attempt is made in the Sistema di logica to meet his argument. 
The wide acceptance of Mr. Perry's study makes it imperative 
that an answer to it be attempted in the name of actual ideal- 
ism if the latter is not to be summarily rejected. Probably 
no other criticism of ontological idealism in recent years has 
been so effective. 

Let us begin by stating the argument by which Mr. Perry's 
criticism proceeds. It should readily be admitted that the 
argument has so much force that if the author be allowed to 
set the stage as he has set it, his conclusions follow necessarily. 
It must therefore receive critical examination in its very incep- 
tion or criticism will be futile. Mr. Perry says that "onto- 
logical idealism ... is a name for the proposition (E) R c 
defines (T)," where E (or Ego) is made to stand for the per- 
sonal pronoun, R c means any form of consciousness that relates 
to an object, and T refers to anything and everything. 1 This 
is probably an accurate definition of most ontological ideal- 
isms. However to assert that this is also a description of actual 
idealism may be open to question for reasons which we must 
consider carefully. What is meant by "anything and every- 

1 "The Ego-Centric Predicament" (Jour, of Phil , Psych , and Sci y Methods, 
Vol. VII, 1910, No. 1), p. 6. 



164 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

thing' 7 ? The phrase has two metaphysical connotations which 
must be treated separately. In the first place, it may mean 
any and all entities considered as objective to the knowing 
process and susceptible of being known. Such are the entities 
studied by every possible science except that of metaphysics 
as defined by Gentile. Gentile must agree with Mr. Perry that 
these entities as objects should be studied independent of 
their thought relation to the knower, and that all arguments 
which try to employ the predicament in rendering an acquaint- 
ance with these objects is false. In the second place, how- 
ever, "anything and everything" may be part of the act of 
knowing. As act rather than fact it no longer refers to enti- 
ties or terms, but to a function. In this case no more than the 
other is it defined by (E) R c (T), but for a reason quite dif- 
ferent than that given by Mr. Perry's argument. It cannot be 
spoken of as being defined by its relation to the Ego, or by its 
relation to the act of knowing interpreted in any way, because 
it is itself the act of knowing. It should be clear that Mr. 
Perry's argument applies only to doctrines defined by the sym- 
bols in which he sets up the predicament. More specifically, 
the use in itself of terms and relations in the description of 
an ontological judgment (as in Mr. Perry's formula) involves 
the presupposition of the separation of the Ego, the act of con- 
sciousness, and the entities to be known by that act. The argu- 
ment is a perfect example of the circular procedure which is 
characteristic of the logic of the abstract, wherein the answer 
to the problem is found in the conditions according to which 
the problem is stated. Mr. Perry states the problem in terms 
of external relations and proceeds to demonstrate the illegiti- 
macy of the argument for internal relations. Human thinking 
is so fallible that clear and undeniable arguments of this type 
are contributions of value in the accurate elaboration of phil- 
osophic concepts. The application of Mr. Perry's argument to 
all of those who accept his premises, which includes most onto- 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 165 

logical idealists, is both valid and important. But Gentile shows 
that these premises are in themselves open to question. 

Royce has pointed out that Mr. Perry's treatment of the 
problem as one to which the canons of induction are applicable 
is open to question. Nevertheless Mr. Perry has demonstrated 
that a methodological characteristic of the process of knowing 
does not import an ontological significance. This is his con- 
tribution to the study of the predicament, and is quite inde- 
pendent of his statement of the problem. In other words, if 
the idealist can only show that no entity can be entertained 
outside of the thought relation, he has not by that fact estab- 
lished an ontological principle. In order to establish one he 
must show that the fact has an ontological significance. In the 
case of Gentile the fact gains ontological significance when it 
is pointed out that the only possible presuppositionless Logos 
is the act of thinking by which all objective entities are 
thought. In this case, there is an emphasis not upon a 
methodological difficulty as such but rather upon the act of 
thinking as the ontological basis of a universal and necessary 
and valuable knowledge. 

This point must be made clear. Although Gentile argues in 
the logic of the abstract that the relation R c is peculiarly indis- 
pensable to every entity, this argument does not hold. 3 His 
best argument comes from the logic of the concrete. Reality 
being defined as the totality of the thinkable, and true thought 
being characterized as necessary, universal, and possessing 
value, it follows that the only reality that can be known truly 
is the act of thinking which is norma sui. If he had only 
argued that whatever reality is known must be entertained as 
thought he would be subject to Mr. Perry's criticism. But he 
starts not from the universal predicament of human beings 
in their effort to know about a world of which they have direct 
apprehension only through their thoughts, but from a funda- 

2 See pp. 145-7 of this study. 



l66 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

mental concept of the nature of true knowledge (not simply 
knowledge, as that of the natural sciences). There may be 
entities independent of the process of knowing, and indeed 
Gentile must agree that there probably are, 8 but we cannot 
know them with philosophic certainty (i.e. universally and 
necessarily) according to Gentile. We can know them 
abstractly (i.e. as objects), and it is this knowledge that the 
other sciences give us. This latter knowledge is based upon 
immediate intuition (presuppositions) : its very entertainment 
in his thinking is evidence that Gentile finds the predicament 
at least unsafe as an ontological argument. This point is 
extremely important. From among our "thoughts" Gentile dis- 
tinguishes those arrived at by mediate acts of thinking from 
those arrived at by immediate intuition. That he takes the 
former as real and the latter as abstractions demonstrates that 
he does not base his ontology on the predicament, for if he did 
it should be clear that so far as the predicament alone is con- 
cerned both would have to be real. Actual idealism asserts that 
reality is thinking not because of a predicament but because 
of an interpretation of "philosophic knowledge"; it does not 
even proceed via the predicament. Thinking is the sole reality 
not because all entities must be thought, but because only in 
the act of thinking is Gentile able to find a final and uncon- 
ditioned norm (or Logos) which will give a concrete (philo- 
sophic) assertion value. The act of thinking is retained not 
because it is the only thing within reach: immediate intuitions 
are equally accessible. The act of thinking is retained because 
it alone, according to Gentile, is that which the philosopher is 
seeking. The very soul of actual idealism is the doctrine that 
the logical search for the ultimate norm of thought ends in 
metaphysics and that the metaphysical search for the real 
ends in logic. 4 
Of the three types of idealism outlined by Mr. Perry, actual 

8 See Chapter IX of this study. 4 See pp. 34-5 and 94-5 of this study. 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 167 

idealism has elements in common with each. According to 
Mr. Perry's terminology, in one E creates T; according to the 
Gentilian terminology the act of thinking creates all entities 
thought as objective to it. Again using Mr. Perry's termi- 
nology, in another E organizes T; in Gentile's terminology 
the act of thinking organizes all entities thought as objective 
to it. Finally, in the third, E is identical with T; the act of 
thinking is identical with all entities thought as objective to 
it. If, ontologically speaking, there is nothing outside of the 
act of thinking, these three conclusions must follow. Gentile 
establishes them by means of the ultimate identification of 
metaphysics and logic. But in another sense it is only fair to 
add that actual idealism has certain distinctive elements which 
differentiate it from the three types of idealism criticized by 
Mr. Perry. It is our task at the moment to discover what these 
elements are. One of them concerns the use of the word "Ego." 
Perhaps Gentile would agree with Mr. Perry's conviction that 
philosophers are all too ready "to assert anything of conscious- 
ness": 6 

It would appear that there is no conception too paradoxical to be 
harbored there. The proposition, gold is gold, is redundant, and the 
proposition, blue is its own other is nonsense; but the propositions, 
I am I, and, the self is its own other, somehow pass for intelligible 
discourse. Similarly, while a planetary system which is identical 
with each planet and prior to them, is clearly a doubtful proposi- 
tion, men nod their heads when they hear of a self which can dis- 
pense with its own parts, and also be wholly present to each of 
them. So long as the self remains obscure and unanalyzed, loosely 
denoted by such terms as "I," "Ego/' or "subject," it will doubt- 
less afford a refuge for logical lawlessness. 

While Gentile is often guilty of the charge here made, he too 
is dissatisfied with the use of the word "Ego." Consider a pas- 
sage from the Sistema di logica in which the immediate Ego 
is negated in its passage through the Not-Ego to the synthesis. 
8 op. tit., p. 12. 



l68 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

This immediate Ego, it should be noted, is exactly the Ego 
against which Mr. Perry is arguing. In speaking of the iden- 
tity, Ego=Ego, Gentile says: 6 

The former is the Ego which is not Ego; and is therefore natural 
being, that obscure and evanescent being which every man feels in 
the depths of his spirit, and which he calls . . . temperament or 
nature. . . . Nothing, in truth. For if we wish to know this nature 
for what it is, how can we do so? ... Natural being, known as 
such, could only be known without the aid of thinking. It is 
nothing. 

Thus the Ego which initiates the dialectic process is an unreal 
entity, an abstraction quite as much as any other presupposed 
entity. So far Gentile goes. But does he go far enough? What 
about the concrete Ego? Is it not obscure and evanescent also? 

Mr. Perry has been quoted at length at this point because 
he expresses a truth which all idealism needs to consider seri- 
ously. It suggests once more a criticism of actual idealism set 
forth in its elements in the preceding chapter. 7 We shall now 
endeavor to follow that criticism to its conclusion. So long as 
Gentile's idealism is considered to be egocentric it is faced with 
the insuperable difficulty (certainly insuperable within Gen- 
tile's basic assumptions) of explaining the initial presence of 
the Ego. Are the Ego and its close relative, the Not-Ego, essen- 
tial to actual idealism? If so they will surely be found unten- 
able because neither can escape its character as a presupposi- 
tion even though Gentile does not recognize this. If actual 
idealism is to be tenable certain alterations, which will dis- 
lodge "Ego" and "Not-Ego" from their key positions, must be 
made. Can we make these alterations and still express the 
metaphysical doctrine basic to Gentile's philosophy? This is 
the problem we must now investigate. 

The Ego first enters the Gentilian expression of the system 
of actual idealism in approaching the logic of the concrete 

8 Sistema. Vol. II, p. 55. Italics mine. 7 See p. 158 of this study. 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 169 

through that of the abstract. If it can be forced to retreat 
from that entrenchment perhaps it can be defeated altogether 
without killing the doctrine behind it. It is first used to express 
the spirituality of the object in the logic of the abstract. 8 
We have seen that according to Gentile logic commences when 
nature is idealized in the identity-relation, becomes thought, 
"and finally responds to thought, saying, 'I am nature' ": 

It responds as nature, calling itself such: but responds by using that 
great word, "I," without which it could not respond and something 
else would have to respond for it. The abstract Logos could not 
do this. . . . 

because of the nature of the logic of the abstract as the expres- 
sion of an identity in the object: 10 

It is necessary, then, that the object speak. ... It speaks, as any- 
one can: it posits itself by expressing itself, making itself knowl- 
edge by means of what it says, and making itself knowledge through 
that which it is in making itself speak. It mirrors itself in its dis- 
course, and hence reveals itself. 

To whom does it reveal itself? He who speaks reveals himself to 
others and to himself, but he would not reveal himself to others if 
he did not first reveal himself to himself. . . . This speaking to 
oneself and thus recognizing oneself, is the reflection proper to the 
Ego, whose only significance is this internal remirroring of itself, 
not to the eyes of others but to its own. . . . The abstract Logos, 
opposite to or object of the Ego, is nothing but the Ego itself. 
A A can only be Ego Ego. The object of thought, if it is not to 
be inaccessible to thought but rather clear and intelligible, must be 
the subject itself of thought. 

And the Ego takes its place in the doctrine. But what is the 
central thought here? And is the Ego essential to it? It is 
that nature, in itself and not idealized by becoming thought, 
is not knowable. By "nature," of course, is meant any object 



8 See the Sistema, Vol II, p. 17; also p. 79 of this study 

9 Sistema, Vol. II, pp. 17 and 18. 1 Ibid., 



.y pp. 18 and 18-9. 



I7O THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

of thinking. However it may seem such, this is not the expres- 
sion of a methodological difficulty; it is the expression of the 
logical fact that any object in itself and not idealized is given 
in advance of thought and therefore neither logically nor meta- 
physically founded. But it seems to be sheer fancy for Gentile 
to expand this into a statement that nature responds to thought 
with the "I am nature. " The basic idea is equally well 
expressed by saying that nature, being an object of thought, is 
made such by an act of thinking. It is given metaphysical and 
logical significance by the act of thinking which entertains it. 
To express this by means of the fairy story that the identity 
A~A becomes Ego=Ego is simply to raise unnecessary diffi- 
culties in the path of actual idealism. Not only does this 
"Ego" become lost in obscurity under persistent examination, 
but it does not express accurately what Gentile is trying to say. 
The introduction of the Ego at this point leads to the logic 
of the concrete, for it places us in possession of an entity 
which requires its contradictory in order to be realized: X1 

It is evident that an Ego without an object is itself an abstraction, 
identically the same abstraction as the abstract Logos; because only 
by mediating itself does the Ego objectify itself. If it did not objec- 
tify itself it would be a pure immediate; that is, a simple object, an 
A=A, which supposes the Ego. . . . 

What Gentile is saying here is that thought without its object 
is immediate, an object of thought which itself requires an act 
of thinking. Thus in passing from the logic of the abstract to 
that of the concrete, according to Gentile, the Ego which is 
introduced to express the idealization of nature must (being 
Ego) give birth to its object, the Not-Ego. 12 In more simple 
language this means nothing more, or should mean nothing 
more, than that the realization of the act of thinking requires 
the introduction of that which the act of thinking thinks : when 
we think we must think something. Up to the present point we 
*., p. 21. ia lbid.,p.21. 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 171 

have been able to express Gentile's doctrine more accurately 
than he does himself by substituting "act of thinking" for 
"Ego." The term "Ego" implies a thinking personality; what 
Gentile should endeavor to stress is the thinking and not the 
personality, for it is the thinking that is central to his doctrine. 
He probably does not mean to say that there is an initial per- 
sonality the self-awareness of which is the beginning of the 
dialectic. Such an entity would be the empirical individual, 
which he finds as unreal as all other abstractions. If there 
were this initial personality it would have to be presupposed, 
for thinking would find its origin in it. On the other hand, if 
"Ego" is replaced by "act of thinking" the new concept not 
only expresses the idealization of nature, but at the same time 
is a concept which is in itself and is not presupposed, because 
it is thinking. That this act of thinking requires its opposite 
(i.e. object) in order that it be realized is also evident, 
although even the use of the word "opposite" is obscure in this 
connection. 

In the full expression of the logic of the concrete its funda- 
mental law is given by the form, Ego~Not-Ego. In spite of 
the tradition already behind this symbolism it certainly has 
extremely unfortunate features. No more fortunate is the con- 
crete interpretation of Ego=Ego. Let us commence with the 
latter. In explaining it Gentile makes the important distinc- 
tion between thinking a thing and thinking a person. 13 A thing 
is what it is, a chair is a chair, and cannot be anything else. 
But a person is the subject of the activity which we identify 
with him. He is always changing, always becoming new; we 
shall always err in judging him because we must judge him 
according to his past: 14 

But just this is his being, his not being that which he will be the 
actuality of this not being. He is a need and a desire for being, a 

** Ibid.,p. 52. "Ibid.,?. S3. 



172 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

burst toward being. . . . The Ego is this being which is not, but is 
by virtue of not being. . . . 

On the face of it an idea such as this one is difficult to express 
with less confusion. The confusion seems to be inherent in the 
idea and not due simply to the mode of- expression. However 
a change in expression ought, in this case, to be helpful. The 
import of this passage is that the concrete meaning of Ego= 
Ego involves a difference rather than an identity. But if it 
expresses a difference it would seem more fitting to use another 
symbolism for it. Gentile himself suggests the use of "Ego 
makes itself Ego," which is an improvement in that it elimi- 
nates the meaningless equality sign. 15 But it does not go far 
enough. Consider for a moment just what Gentile means by a 
"person." He does not mean the empirical individual, for the 
empirical individual is what he is as much as any unconscious 
organism or object. It is the awareness which makes self- 
creation possible that Gentile is trying to emphasize. Onto- 
logically speaking the person as an individual is nothing, and 
his thinking as awareness is not the awareness of self as indi- 
vidual, but rather of self as thought. This is the meaning of 
the Cogito ergo sum as Gentile interprets it. 16 I think there- 
fore thinking is. In terms solely of thought the expression "Ego 
makes itself Ego" becomes an expression of the dialectic of 
thought whereby the act of thinking thinks something, which 
two elements are synthesized in the new act of thinking and 
produce the new pensiero pensato, and so on through an infi- 
nite development. Thinking is self-awareness, and correctly 
understood as such if "self" is taken not to imply personality 
or individuality but rather a reflexive function. Thinking is 
unique in this self -awareness or reflexiveness; this is the impor- 
tant point. Nothing else of which we know is both subject and 
object. It would be like a serpent swallowing itself, if the ser- 
pent could do so indefinitely, growing and developing by feed- 

16 See, for example, Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 54 ff. ie Ibid., Vol. II, p. 57. 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 173 

ing on itself. It is this self-awareness of thinking that makes 
the dialectic possible. Perhaps the mistake on Gentile's part is 
in supposing that there cannot be self-awareness without the 
Ego. But certainly thinking can turn back on itself, pensiero 
pensato can become the material of a new pensiero pensante, 
which is all that is required. 

Turn now to a consideration of the fundamental law of the 
logic of the concrete, Ego=Not-Ego. The contradiction 
expressed here is the very life of thinking, the realization of 
the act of thinking through that which is thought. But whence 
the equality sign, again? Gentile does not actually mean that 
the Ego is equal to the Not-Ego; he means that there cannot 
be Ego without Not-Ego, and not Not-Ego without Ego. He 
is expressing the dialectic principle of the logic of the con- 
crete. He means that the Ego through the realization of the 
Not-Ego becomes by synthesis the new Ego in preparation 
for the new synthesis. Thus there are two Egos, as we have 
seen: 17 

. . . The Ego can be taken in two significances; either as the unity 
of the opposed Ego and Not-Ego (and then the Not-Ego is the con- 
tent of the Ego as one of its moments), or as one of the two oppo- 
sites in which the Ego is dualized (that is, as the antithesis of the 
Not-Ego, that original term from which thought must alienate itself 
in order to think). 

The second of these two was discussed in the paragraph above. 
Can the first also be expressed in terms of the act of thinking? 
Inasmuch as Ego=Not-Ego is but another way of expressing 
what was expressed in Ego=^Ego, it would appear so. The 
arguments of the last paragraph hold for this one also and 
need not be repeated. 

Our criticism of the Gentilian expression of the dialectic 
is two-fold. In the first place, we object to the use of a sym- 
bol of the abstract logic in the logic of the concrete. The 

17 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 57. See pp. 86-7 of this study. 



174 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

equality sign has a definite and useful meaning which involves 
the substitution of one side of the equation for the other in 
any manipulation. It retains this meaning in the logic of the 
abstract. It is quite evident that Gentile is not so employing 
it in the logic of the concrete. The Ego is not equal to the 
Not-Ego. Ontologically speaking the two are necessary the one 
to the other, but for the expression of this idea a different and 
perhaps entirely new symbol should be used. And in the second 
place, we object to the use of the terms "Ego" and "Not-Ego." 
As a matter of fact there are two "Egos" and they should be 
more clearly distinguished from each other by the use of two 
different words if suitable ones can be found. The first Ego 
is that which is opposed to the Not-Ego. Its essence is the 
act of thinking, which involves awareness of self not as a per- 
sonality but as the act of thinking. The "act of thinking" 
defined as reflexive self-awareness is a more precise expression 
of this concept than is "Ego," for the latter connotes a pre- 
supposed personality. The second Ego is the unity of the Ego 
and the Not-Ego, the essence of which is the same "act of 
thinking" involving the same self-awareness. Its only differ- 
ence from the former is that being a synthesis it involves in 
itself the Not-Ego, or pensiero pensato. It, no more than the 
first, is indicative of an underlying personality, for this per- 
sonality would be quite as unaccountable ontologically as the 
other. 

This criticism suggests its own application to all idealistic 
logic, for this logic has since its inception suffered from an 
obscurity and confusion of expression which quite justifies Mr. 
Perry's attack. But we are concerned here only with its appli- 
cation to actual idealism. From one point of view it offers 
nothing more serious than a suggestion of alteration in termi- 
nology. But from another it brings to light a definite contra- 
diction in the Sistema di logica between a concept and its con- 
text. The context suggests a better terminology, one we have 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 175 

tried to introduce, the use of which would change that work 
appreciably. This alteration in terminology would bring con- 
sistency, and it would also obviate the elaborate exposition and 
delimitation of the Sistema di logica which is now required. 
The essence of the "Ego" is thinking; the essence of the 
"development of a man's spirit" is a thought development. No 
man as an individual, not even Gentile, is real. It is only the 
act of thinking which is real; and as such it cannot be 
attached to an unreal thinker. Hence to speak of my thought 
or of Gentile's thought or of anyone's thought is to refer to 
abstract entities. 

It must be admitted that the constant reference to these 
abstract entities, indulged in even by Gentile, is bewildering. 
But this fault cannot be avoided in the most careful expression 
of actual idealism, as has been pointed out earlier. An 
explanation of his use of concepts of these abstract entities 
is offered by Gentile himself. We cannot write or speak with- 
out using them, he says. Even "act of thinking" becomes the 
concept of an abstract entity abstractly considered unless 
excessive care is taken to keep its ontological uniqueness in 
mind. It is not real as an object of thought, but is the act of 
thinking it as object. Whatever we think becomes objective, 
pensiero pensato, and becoming objective ceases to be real. 
Hence the inability to avoid much that is misleading in inter- 
preting actual idealism. Any metaphysics that is significant 
must be interpreted for human living, a function somewhat 
different from the initial propounding of it. The difficulty 
seems to be that in the Sistema di logica propounding and 
interpreting are distractingly intermingled. 

This strict interpretation of actual idealism, which denies 
reality to the thinking personality, strikes against at least 
one considerable difficulty. It seems quite unable to account 
for the universally recognized fact that thinking is attached 
to the human empirical individual. Thinking has a relation 



176 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

to human bodies which it does not have to other empirical 
individual entities. For Gentile the real man is describable 
philosophically only in terms of thought; and equally, the 
real chair is describable only in terms of thought. His posi- 
tion is consistent, to be sure; ontologically speaking and from 
his point of view, the individual man is not to be distinguished 
from the individual chair. But we have the most convincing 
awareness that the act of thinking is some individual's act of 
thinking, and is given significance as indicating the path along 
which an individual must go in the solution even of onto- 
logical problems. Leibniz realized this inability of solipsism 
to account for the individual when he said that everything is 
made up of thinking monads. But in his endeavor to avoid 
presuppositions this way is not open to Gentile. 18 Modern 
idealists have avoided the problem by saying that the real 
entities are individuals (idealistic pluralists) or that there is 
one final real entity which enfolds all of the others (absolute 
idealists). But Gentile belongs to neither of these schools; he 
is left alone. The act of thinking may be the only presuppo- 
sitionless real, but it is somehow connected with an individual 
whose identity is preserved by the Ego to which Descartes in 
fact referred in his Cogito ergo sum. There is the suggestion 
here of a type of criticism of the Gentilian doctrine which will 
appear more fully in a later chapter of this study. Due to his 
use of the "Ego" Gentile has been led to neglect the problem as 
such. We have tried to show that his doctrine should be 
expressed in other terms. But this alteration introduces the 
problem again almost immediately. 

It has been our contention that the arguments against onto- 
logical idealism marshaled by Mr. Perry are not applicable to 
actual idealism, in the first place because his definition of onto- 

1 8 Connected with this is the problem of the continuity of consciousness, which 
the ingenuity of Leibniz helped him to handle, but which seems quite beyond Gen- 
tile's power of explanation with the conceptual tools of his metaphysics. See Chap- 
ter IX of this study for a fuller discussion of this general problem. 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 177 

logical idealism excludes the Gentilian variety, and secondly 
because Gentile in the development of his doctrine is concerned 
not with a methodological difficulty but with the attainment of 
a philosophic knowledge according to an unusually strict defi- 
nition of it. Gentile is concerned chiefly with logic, with the 
realization that in itself deduction is not a proof of deduced 
propositions. Relational logicians recognize that in order to 
give an account of logic we must presuppose and employ logic. 
It is this predicament, the logocentric predicament, rather 
than the egocentric predicament that is Gentile's concern. The 
transfer of the important issue of idealism from egocentricism 
to logocentricism is not new with Gentile. It was brought out 
very clearly in Royce's last course of lectures on meta- 
physics: 10 

Sooner or later, if you are going to take any position about meta- 
physical questions, you find it necessary to face this matter. There 
is no more important issue between realism and idealism than this 
[i.e. that of the relation between existence and essence]. I don't 
think you get a fair view of idealism if you think of its issue with 
realism merely in terms of Professor Perry's egocentric predicament. 
It is not the most important feature of idealism that it appears to be 
committed to an insistence . . . that the being of things, whether 
God or man or the physical world, is a being in the mind of some 
thinker. . . . The really most important feature is exactly the issue 
here concerned: does the existence of anything make any difference 
to its essence? does the essence of anything make any difference 
to its existence? is it any part of the essence of a thing that it 
exists? 

Like Royce's idealism, that of Gentile is logocentric. Hence 
the great issue between Gentile and the traditional metaphy- 
sician brings him, as it brought Royce, against such critical 
realists as Mr. Santayana. The critical realist agrees epis- 
temologically with the doctrines of the actual idealist but states 
that in addition to essence, existence must be predicated of the 

19 Contemporary Idealism in America (Macmillan, New York, 1932), p. 45. 



178 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

real in order that it be real. The issue, then, between the two 
is that of the ontological argument. 

While in their acceptance of the ontological argument Royce 
and Gentile are allied, for the former it is a way of avoiding 
solipsism while for the latter it is not. For Royce the inter- 
play between essence and existence provides the ontological 
argument. There is nothing in experience which cannot be 
taken up into essence; and there is nothing in essence, so far 
as it is apprehended by mind, which does not tend toward 
existence. Essence is given by the interpretation of the exist- 
ent. Royce never renounces the point that: 20 

idealistic metaphysics, like all metaphysics, is concerned with the 
nature of the objective world, the world of reality; that any 
approach to reality, however completely it moves in the realm of 
objects, however "realistic" if you like, if it is capable of reach- 
ing the truth at all, will bring the thinker to the result that the 
world of the reals is a world of spirit. 

On this issue Royce and Mr. Santayana are not so widely 
separated. For both the Logos transcends the act of thinking. 
Gentile's attitude toward the ontological argument is much 
more extreme. His identification of essence and existence is 
not on the basis of interpretation. It is his point that a distinc- 
tion between essence and existence can have no philosophic 
significance. Indeed the distinction which Gentile makes 
between his metaphysics and all others', Royce to the contrary 
notwithstanding, is that they distinguish between the two while 
he unites them. 21 If there is no reality external to the act of 
thinking, every essence in the act of being thought is existent. 
Part of the essence of a horse is that we think of it as having 
objective existence: part of the essence of a phoenix is that 
we think of it as mythical in the objective realm. Hence the 
actual character of Gentile's idealism. We cannot hold thought 

20 Ibid. 

21 See the Sistema, Vol. II, p. 10; and Part III, Chapter IV. 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 

in abeyance. Whenever we suspend judgment that very sus- 
pension is an act of thinking. All acts of thinking not only 
concern the essence of existence but are actually the essence 
of existence. In such a doctrine essence and existence are 
inseparable. It should be noted at this point that the critical 
realist makes a separation between essence and existence in 
order to provide adequately for the given element in experi- 
ence. There seems to be a specific unalterability in the cosmos, 
known to us by its "shocks," which we accept on Mr. San- 
tayana's "animal faith." It is in providing for this givenness 
that the issue between actual idealism and critical realism 
rests, and we shall discuss it in Chapter IX of this study. Epis- 
temologically the two move together: metaphysically they are 
poles apart. 

Although the issue between the realist and the actual idealist 
rests upon grounds other than those of the controversy 
described by Mr. Perry, the former will not excuse the latter 
simply because in a final analysis his doctrine is logocentric 
rather than egocentric. Indeed logocentricism is even farther 
removed from realism. There is a fundamental point of dis- 
agreement between the two. Both agree against the neo-posi- 
tivist that metaphysics is meaningful, but apparently their 
interpretations of its meaningfulness differ. The difference is 
the difference between the "what" and the "that," of which 
Royce was so fond. The realist's metaphysics is descriptive: 
it tells what the real is. The actual idealist's metaphysics is 
normative: it tells that the real is something. The one offers 
a description which it recommends as the most fitting descrip- 
tion, in one sense or another, of the real. But of any one thing 
many descriptions are possible, and the realist finds it difficult 
to show reason why his metaphysical system is better than 
that of his neighbor. Whatever reason he gives will itself be 
a metaphysical judgment and, moving in a circle, get him no 
nearer a conclusive argument. The other, the actual idealist, 



l8o THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

says that the real must be what he thinks it to be. He is more 
decisive, but thereby places on his own shoulders a burden of 
difficulties few have been willing to carry. 

It must be admitted that the realist makes one initial pre- 
supposition. He presupposes that the real is independent of 
the act of thinking. In effect, this seems to be, in part at least, 
his definition of the real. And he has one very persuasive 
argument in his defense. He will say that this presupposition 
is so thoroughly non-committal to an ontology that it is justi- 
fied. It is non-committal in that it tells nothing about reality 
except that it is external to thought. But is it non-committal 
enough? Does not the realist's presupposition determining the 
independence of the real impose a significant limitation? The 
idealist has never proved by any deduction of the categories 
that that which is not thinking must be spatial or temporal, or 
determined, or anything else of a categorical nature. But he 
has argued that the act of thinking provides the concepts 
according to which percepts are thought; in other words he has 
argued that if there is to be a knowledge at all, the act of 
thinking contributes to that knowledge. For the realist the 
real is independent of that act; for the idealist it is created 
by that act. But to say that the real is independent of the act 
of thinking is to take an important step. The phenomenon of 
thinking may be included within the realist's real monistically, 
dualistically, or pluralistically; but the real will always be a 
thing set apart from the act of knowing it. The real in this 
way is given so definite a character that the realist is strictly 
limited to a metaphysics which is purely descriptive and whose 
virtue can only be that it is a better description than any 
other. 22 The arbitrary interpretation of that word, "better," 
makes all the difference between one traditional metaphysician 
and another. Descriptions always have perspective, and the 

2 a The reader will recognize a perfect example of this phenomenon in Mr. Alex- 
ander's Space, Time and Deity. 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT l8l 

perspective of the traditional metaphysician is wholly found in 
the meaning "better" has for him. Hence the many meta- 
physical systems, and hence also the impossibility of choosing 
from among them in a final sense. These metaphysical systems 
lack necessity. That which is external to thinking can never 
give a necessary knowledge that the real exhibits uniformity, 
for example; it can only suggest that a proper and fitting 
description of the external world is that it is uniform. A per- 
sistent examination of "proper and fitting" opens up the entire 
metaphysical question again. The traditional metaphysician 
never gets anywhere. He is one of a group of artists sketching 
from a model. Which of them may say his is the best sketch? 

The idealist can safeguard himself against the obvious retort. 
The realist may not offer in rebuttal the argument that the 
definition of the real as the totality of the thinkable is equally 
limiting. The essence of this definition is that it is non- 
limiting. 23 It necessarily avoids all presuppositions, for any- 
thing presupposed in relation to it would change it to a part 
rather than the whole. The idealist's definition is founded 
upon a logical principle. The logical principle comes first; and 
out of that logical principle by definite steps comes the judg- 
ment that the real must signify the act of thinking. The pre- 
cedence of the logical principle that there shall be no presup- 
positions over the consideration of what the real comes to 
signify according to that principle makes a great difference. 
With respect to the present problem it constitutes the justifica- 
tion of the idealistic doctrine of metaphysics. 

For this reason the only way in which the realist may offer 
a case against the actual idealist is to attack the initial logical 
principle. The one thing that does not appear to enter the 
comprehension of Gentile in considering the ontological prob- 
lem is the realization that an argument which questions this 
principle is possible. The one most effective attack against 

38 See pp. 139-40 of this study. 



182 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

the principle of the avoidance of presuppositions is simply to 
deny its superiority. The realist has the right to say that if a 
metaphysics based upon the strict avoidance of presuppositions 
leads where the Sistema di logica leads, then he does not want 
it. And he is being perfectly consistent in maintaining this 
point of view if he is willing to concede that metaphysics is a 
description of the real and that there may be more than one 
legitimate description of it. His use of "real" is only one 
among many. He may reject actual idealism because its real 
is not adequate, because it is not significant, because it is not 
common sense, or for some other reason. He chooses his mean- 
ing for the "real" according to his interpretation of the func- 
tion of philosophy. 

And thus we reach the court of final appeal. The actual 
idealist may argue day and night that the metaphysics of the 
realist does not give a necessary and universal knowledge of 
the real in any but the objective (and therefore limited) sense, 
but he cannot prevent the realist from being satisfied with a 
metaphysics that exhibits this character. If we accept the real- 
ist's interpretation of the function of philosophy we must neces- 
sarily follow him in his interpretation of the function of meta- 
physics and of the consequent nature of the real. We can only 
caution him that his interpretation is but one among many. 
Many artists see different things in the same model. What is 
important and significant to one is unimportant and insig- 
nificant to another. From his point of view the realist must 
admit the legitimacy of more than one description of the 
nature of reality. In contrast, there is no corresponding leni- 
ency in the metaphysics of Gentile. If one accepts his termi- 
nology and his meanings there can be but one metaphysics. 
Gentile may not have propounded it with complete accuracy, 
but it contains the possibility of an accurate exposition and 
that exposition will be unique. 

Do not these considerations seriously alter the role ascribed 



THE EGOCENTRIC PREDICAMENT 183 

earlier to actual idealism? Realism admits of more than one 
metaphysics, while actual idealism admits of only one. Is this 
not in conflict with Gentile's assertion that truth and error are 
my truth and my error? This point is most illuminating be- 
cause as a matter of fact it represents a confirmation of Gen- 
tile's position rather than a disproof of it. The realist does not 
admit more than one true metaphysics even though he cannot 
say which among many is true. All men agree that truth must 
be necessary and universal. And the meaning which the realist 
gives to "necessary and universal" (in terms of the objective) 
implies that his "Truth" will be single and alone. For him 
there cannot be more than one truth, for there is only one 
model. He allows us to speak of my metaphysics and your 
metaphysics (or should!), each one valid; but not of my truth 
and your truth. The important and significant point is that for 
the actual idealist the position is exactly reversed. He does not 
allow himself to speak of my metaphysics and your meta- 
physics, but he does find it convenient to speak of my truth 
and your truth. The metaphysics of the realist is true for the 
realist, but it is not true for the idealist. Hence the possi- 
bility of more than one truth for the idealist, but of only one 
metaphysics for him. In other words, the metaphysics of the 
actual idealist is determined uniquely by his truth, but his 
truth is determined by nothing. It is an act of thinking. Hence 
it is not unique. It may seem that for the idealist to speak of 
his truth and his error implies the real existence of truth and 
error for others. But this does not follow, as reference to the 
earlier argument with regard to the existence of other selves 
will demonstrate. 24 The truth is true simply because it is my 
truth and does not transcend me. And by the same token, the 
truth is true because it is the realist's truth and does not 
transcend him. But this is not what the realist thinks of when 
he thinks of "truth"; that is the important point. 

24 See pp. 137-8 of this study. 



184 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

It is generally supposed that the issue between idealism and 
realism involves the egocentric predicament. We have tried 
to show that while this may be the case between realism and 
most forms of idealism, the issue between realism and actual 
idealism is a different one. The point may be generalized to 
include a definition of the issue between actual idealism and 
all other philosophies that take the study of metaphysics to 
be meaningful. All other metaphysics contain presuppositional 
limitations upon the meaning of the "real/ 7 and therefore are 
forced to classify themselves as descriptions only. Since the 
fundamental issue involves an interpretation of the function of 
philosophy, the sheer force of numbers in the opposition 
strongly suggests that Gentile rather than the rest of the com- 
pany is out of step. But the nature of this fundamental issue 
makes it impossible to throw the balance in favor of either. 



CHAPTER NINE 
FORM AND MATTER 

THE second of the objections to solipsism noted in the gen- 
eral discussion of the problem raised by the Sistema di logica 
came from another group of those who, like the realists, regard 
solipsism as a false doctrine. They are the critical realists. 
They come forward to ask Gentile how in the name of com- 
mon sense he accounts for the apparent independence of the 
world of nature if the act of thinking is creative of all that 
is thought of as external to it. Their position is well stated by 
Mr. Santayana and presents Gentile with serious difficulties: 

Knowledge is knowledge because it has compulsory objects that 
preexist. 

Matters are ludicrously reversed if it is imagined that a pure spirit 
contemplating essences could invent a body and a world of matter 
surrounding it; the body exists first, and in reacting on its environ- 
ment kindles intuitions expressive of its vicissitudes. 

What I tuck under my pillow at night I find there in the morning. 
Economy increases my possessions. People all grow old. Accidents 
have discoverable causes. There is a possible distinction between 
wisdom and folly. But how should all this be, and how could experi- 
ence, or the shocks that punctuate it, teach me anything to the 
purpose, or lend me any assurance in life not merely a reinforced 
blindness and madness on my part, unless substances standing and 
moving in ordered ways surround me, and I was living in the midst 
of nature? 

This experience with independent objects is too common to 
need further illustration. It is the most difficult of the circum- 
stances which beset actual idealism. The Gentilian doctrine of 

1 Scepticism and Animal Faith (Scribner's, New York, 1929), pp. 172, 204, and 
236 respectively. 

185 



l86 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

form and matter, which is at the root of his philosophy, is most 
forcibly brought into doubt. If the Sistema di logica gives an 
answer to the cosmological question here raised it will be found 
in an examination of that doctrine. 

What is the Gentilian doctrine of form and matter? It is 
that which, according to its interpreter, most clearly distin- 
guishes idealism from all previous philosophy. It had its 
origin in Kant's theory of knowledge. And it is that, second- 
arily and more specifically, which differentiates actual idealism 
from all previous idealisms. Its central role in the mind of 
Gentile cannot be doubted. As for Kant's contribution: a 

. . . Before Kant the conception of knowing had always been 
rigidly materialistic. It reduced all knowing to its matter, of which 
the form was always a mode, an accident, a particular . . . whereas 
the Kantian subject is opposed to all objects, natural or otherwise, as 
the principle productive of all objects of thought. 

Kant introduced into philosophy the serious consideration of 
the subject as a contributor to true knowledge. Previously 
knowledge had always been tested by its objectivity. Plato 
insured objectivity by means of the doctrine of reminiscence: 
Aristotle insured it by reducing the action of the subject to the 
indiscriminate remirroring of the precognitional material of 
cognition. According to Gentile, Kant's concept of the subjec- 
tive element in knowledge makes the true concept of form 
possible: 3 

. . . [Form] is form insofar, not as a coefficient or a mechanical 
completion of matter but rather, as active and productive of experi- 
ence and as that wherein cognition finds its own material. Matter 
confronts form, but as the content of experience; it is nothing but 
the effect of form. 

The entertainment of the concept of form as the activity pro- 
ductive of experience may be taken as Gentile's definition of 
idealism. 

2 Sistema. Vol. II, p. 44. 8 Ibid., p. 45. 



FORM AND MATTER 187 

But to take this step is like leaping onto a stepping stone in 
the middle of a brook: one must go forward or back. And so 
with the Kantian position. Kant himself clearly retraced his 
steps by making the Noumenon the cause behind phenomena. 
The action productive of experience came ultimately from the 
Noumenon. Hence a second step is necessary to the idealistic 
conception of form, that step which leads the philosopher to the 
other side of the brook: 

. . . If in addition to the material inherent in experience, an anteced- 
ent one be admitted, which conditions the activity of the form, then 
this form, placed thus beside matter in a world in which the activity of 
the form productive of the effective experience (in which the other 
matter will be inherent) must intrude and explain itself, could no 
longer value experience as the transcendental form in its proper 
value. 

In the interest of a presuppositionless metaphysics the Kantian 
doctrine must be so far surpassed that the Noumenon is re- 
moved and all that remains is form, the activity which pro- 
duces the matter of thinking. This is the idealistic doctrine 
of form and matter as interpreted by Gentile. "Matter" and 
"form" so employed convey a different meaning than was 
given by Aristotle's conception of them. But in an ontology 
in which the only real is the act of thinking they could have 
no other significance than that of the differentiation of the act 
of thinking (pensiero pensante) from the material thought 
(pensiero pensato). If one looks at the Gentilian conception 
of them from the point of view of matter its legitimacy is more 
readily understood than if one chooses the point of view of 
form. The Aristotelian concept of matter may be interpreted 
to include pensiero pensato as the "matter" of thinking. From 
this it is only a step to the position that "form," as opposed 
to "matter," can only be the act of thinking itself. The cau- 
tion which must be observed in studying Gentile in this con- 

4 Ibid., pp. 45-6. 



l88 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

nection is to remember that when he speaks of form and matter 
he is thinking of neither in the strictly Aristotelian sig- 
nificance of those words. Hence when he speaks of form pro- 
ducing matter, the statement may not be so extravagant as it 
would be in the Aristotelian sense. There is a noteworthy 
parallel here to Gentile's use of the concept of thinking as 
"creative" of the universe. "Creative" is employed in the only 
meaning in which it could be employed consistent with the 
Gentilian metaphysics, as we shall discover. 

What answer does the Sistema di logica give to the cosmo- 
logical question? The question regards the apparent independ- 
ence of the world of nature. The only answer which can be 
given by actual idealism, and one thoroughly characteristic of 
it, is that the question is not a philosophic one. According to 
Gentile the philosopher is concerned exclusively with synthetic 
judgments a priori. Only in such judgments are truth and the 
real found. Thus the world of nature is not the real world; 
knowledge about it is synthetic knowledge a posteriori, arrived 
at by that deductive manipulation of empirical data which is 
usually called induction and which is described in the logic of 
the abstract. It involves that working about of identities ac- 
cording to the three principles of that logic, which acts as a 
practical instrument in the solving of practical problems. The 
world of nature is real only in the concreteness of the totality 
of the thinkable. As the matter rather than the form of think- 
ing, it must be independent of the act of thinking; if it were 
not thus independent it would not be the matter of thinking 
but would be its form. The object of thinking is always 
thought as an independent object: that is its meaning as ob- 
ject. But it is independent only in this sense, that it is not the 
act of thinking: it is none the less dependent upon that act in 
that it must be thought by it. This is a metaphysical depend- 
ence again, not a methodological difficulty, and is made neces- 
sary by metaphysical and logical demands. The independence 



FORM AND MATTER 189 

is cosmological and as such does not belong to the realm of a 
philosophy which is exclusively metaphysical. 

There is an interesting parallel here between the doctrine of 
Gentile and the doctrine of the Plato of the early dialogues, 
as contrasted with the Plato of the Timaeus.* Both draw a 
philosophic circle that leaves out the cosmos. The great differ- 
ence between the two is that Gentile's doctrine is such that it 
promises that he will never write his Parmenides and eventu- 
ally his Timaeus unless he completely renounces his actual 
idealism. For it is the essence of actual idealism that it admits 
of no cosmology, that it admits of no intercourse with the 
universe around us as such. The universe around Gentile is 
of interest to him only insofar as it is logically and meta- 
physically a moment in the dialectic by which the real actual- 
izes itself. The spirit if not the letter of Gentile's idealism 
demands that the Ego, that first moment of the dialectic qua 
moment, be labelled as an abstract concept. The same consid- 
erations dictate this attitude toward cosmology. In itself the 
cosmos is static, identical with itself epistemologically speak- 
ing. 

The point which Gentile is trying to make is not that there 
is no place for cosmology or for natural science. Such a doc- 
trine would be extravagant and foolish. He is trying to say 
that the place of cosmology and of the natural sciences is not 
in the field of philosophy. He appreciates as much as most 
men do the contribution of natural science to the solving of 
many important problems; indeed his writings in the field of 
education show conclusively that for him the study of the 

5 This parallel between the early Plato and the contemporary Gentile is but 
partial, of course. The metaphysics of the two are characteristically impractical; 
depreciatory of the works of empirical investigators. Here the parallel ends. Plato's 
early philosophy avoids most worldly problems, as Mr. Santayana points out in 
Platomsm and the Spiritual Life. In contrast, Gentile in his political writings 
emphasizes the actualism of his idealism. See Che cosa e fascismo. More specifically, 
for another example, see Proemio, the initiatory article of the Giornale critico 
delta filosofia Italiana, Vol. I, fasc. I, 1920. 



THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

natural sciences has its own peculiar value. 6 He is the enemy 
of science only when it tries to tell the philosopher about the 
philosophic "real" and "true." In short, Gentile's quarrel is 
with the scientist turned philosopher, with the scientist who is 
trying to interpret the totality of the thinkable in the termi- 
nology and concepts of natural science. If Gentile appears to be 
bitter in his indictment of scientists, the fact is explained per- 
haps by the almost death-grip which positivism under Roberto 
Ardigo had upon Italian thought before the idealistic move- 
ment arose to combat it. 

But one cannot in this way dismiss Gentile's dispassionate 
statement of the non-philosophic character of natural science. 
In none of Gentile's volumes does he allow himself significant 
recognition of the findings of modern psychology except to 
depreciate them. For one specific instance, the development 
of our knowledge of the subconscious and of complexes is dis- 
counted in his educational writings. 7 The teacher, he argues, 
is concerned with the development of the human spirit, not 
with the objective bodies or minds of men. This development 
is in no sense automatic; it depends upon self -awareness in 
thinking because it is a self-conscious process. It is the con- 
scious exercise of a spiritual freedom. The educational process 
being so defined, neither the complex nor any other subcon- 
scious activity is part of it. Furthermore education is real, for 
it is concerned directly with the act of thinking. Hence it can 
be understood only under the aspects of reality. Neither the 
objective bodies nor the equally objective psycho-physical 
minds of men are real, but rather arbitrary abstractions. The 
study of education is, and cannot be other than, the study of 
philosophy. No study of psychology as it has come to be inter- 
preted by modern psychologists will aid the educator, because 
it is not concerned with the educative process. 

6 See, for example, Sommario di pedagogia, Vol. II, pp. 171 ff., edition of 1925. 

7 Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 37 ff., edition of 1926. 



FORM AND MATTER 

The spirit of our time makes it important to emphasize the 
reasonableness of this position, fatuous as it may appear at 
first acquaintance. 8 Gentile does not have the insanity to deny 
the findings of scientists within their own fields. He does not 
say that these findings are untrue in the objective sense. He 
does not expect more than anyone else that the uniformity of 
nature will be violated, or show a tendency to believe that the 
laws of physics and chemistry may be disregarded. It is not 
difficult to point out that he would not live very long if he 
should act upon such a theory. He takes the position that the 
findings of science are non-philosophic; his definition of phi- 
losophy shows that this must necessarily be so from his point of 
view. It is his argument, to review it once more, that if 
philosophy is to find ultimate truths it must be non-presup- 
positional. And if it is to be non-presuppositional it must not 
be a study of that which is external to thinking. As we shall 
show in a moment, there is a real and legitimate question as to 
the adequacy of such a position ; but it may not be argued that 
it involves either a rejection of the findings of the natural 
sciences or a violation of them. It is concerned with nothing 
more nor less than an unusually persistent effort to preserve a 
valuable interpretation of the function of philosophy. It argues 
that if the natural sciences combined into a cosmology are ac- 
cepted as that science which understands all others and is in 
turn not understood by them, then we are no longer able to 
find that "real" and that "truth" which are universal and 
necessary because they presuppose nothing. 

Perhaps one further consideration will make the position of 
actual idealism in this connection clearer. Postulate for the 
moment that thought is determined by something external to 
it. Postulate that thought is a phenomenon produced by cer- 
tain activities in a realm objective in relation to it. If this, 

8 For a more detailed account of this interpretation of the natural sciences see 
the present author's "The Scope of Natural Science," in The New Humanist, Vol. 
VIII, No. 5, Autumn, 1935. 



IQ2 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

which is in direct contradiction to Gentile's doctrine, is true, 
what is the consequence? The Sistema di logica points out 
that if this is the case, the word "truth" ceases to have the 
value Gentile attaches to it. This may not be serious. But 
Gentile believes that in this same case it also ceases to have 
the value which we all attach to it. The latter situation is more 
grave. If our thoughts are integral parts of external events and 
hence determined by them, then we are no longer free to 
choose between truth and falsehood. Then our thoughts sim- 
ply are what they are, the logic of thinking has no power over 
them (indeed logic is quite useless), and no credit can accrue 
to us for thinking them. 9 Of course these considerations do 
not prevent the postulate which we are entertaining from being 
a truth. Nevertheless, unless this postulate is thought as true 
(which it is, if only momentarily, by its very nature as a 
postulate) it can have no significance in the present discussion. 
And if this postulate is thought as true, it can be thought as 
true only within a metaphysics which is presuppositionless 
(otherwise it would be an arbitrary guess), which is another 
way of saying that there is nothing determining the thought 
by which we arrive at it, and which therefore is a denial of 
the postulate! This paradox is essential to idealism. 

There is a striking similarity between this and the famous 
saying of Gorgias. If thought is necessarily determined by 
some entity external to it, we can never know this fact as a 
truth in the sense in which actual idealism conceives of true 
judgment. Such an argument appears to be quite unanswer- 
able. It legislates the impossibility of any philosophic judg- 
ment in the Gentilian terms to the effect that the cosmos is 
prior to our thinking about it. It asserts that any judgment 
to the effect that the cosmos is prior to our thinking about it 

9 The only escape from this conclusion, short of actual idealism, is by way of a 
rigid dualistic description of reality in which the cosmos and the mind are com- 
pletely independent of each other. This possibility will be considered briefly at 
the end of the chapter. 



FORM AND MATTER IQ3 

can be known only as an arbitrary description. Gentile's posi- 
tion may be attacked in this connection only along the lines 
suggested in the following paragraphs. The distinction, exam- 
ined more fully in the next chapter, between presuppositions 
and undefined concepts (or assumptions) must be borne in 
mind. If there were not this distinction one would be forced 
either to deny the uniqueness of actual idealism or to look 
upon it as gospel. The former would be doing it an injustice; 
the latter would constitute an unhappy and altogether unten- 
able position. Every thinker works with undefined concepts; 
the fact that definition is eventually circular makes this evi- 
dent. A philosophy must be considered on the basis of its 
undefined concepts. Gentile assigns certain meanings to 
"philosophy," "truth," and "reality." If we accept these mean- 
ings it appears that the doctrine of the Sistema di logica, with 
proper emendations, follows quite clearly. But that which 
gives vitality and movement to the study of philosophy is the 
fact that from philosopher to philosopher undefined concepts 
are differently interpreted. Because undefined concepts are 
differently interpreted we are able to criticize the Gentilian 
metaphysics. To this criticism we shall devote the remainder 
of this present chapter, for we believe that a serious and un- 
answerable indictment may be drawn up against Gentile's 
doctrine as it concerns nature. 

To return to the issue upon which this problem rests, may 
it be said in a final analysis that form alone is creative of mat- 
ter? Gentile is justified from his position in saying that form 
(or pensiero pens ante) is creative of an important aspect of 
the metaphysical significance of matter (or pensiero pensato}. 
But is it wise to interpret form as creative of the entire meta- 
physical significance of matter? Why are we compelled to live 
in a world in which the uniformity of nature is observed? This 
seems to be an example of a fact in the material of our thought 
which might have been otherwise. The uniformity of nature 



194 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

might have been rigidly observed on week days but modified 
in some manner on Sundays. For another example, why does 
the circle demand the second power of its radius and the 
sphere the third power? Why not the fourth and the fifth 
powers? There is nothing in the doctrine of Gentile which 
accounts for what appears to be the obvious fact that the 
world in which we as natural beings live is as it is. Our sys- 
tematization of this world may involve a question of choice. 
A given curve may be described with equal accuracy in polar 
or in Cartesian coordinates. But the coordinate system once 
chosen the curve is what it is and can be described only ac- 
cording to a definite equation. And similarly with empirical 
investigation. The scientist exerts his every effort toward the 
exclusion of the personal equation. It is his job not to create 
his material by an act of thinking but to wait and see what the 
results of his experiments will be. Will gravitational force vary 
inversely as the square or as the cube of the distance or ac- 
cording to some other power integral or otherwise? No crea- 
tive act of thinking can tell him that. He is confronted with 
nature and nature tells him what equations to build. It is all 
very well for Gentile to object that these are not metaphysical 
considerations. But there is something of metaphysical im- 
portance there. The point is that any metaphysics which pre- 
tends to embrace the totality of the thinkable must give an 
adequate account of the investigations of the natural scientist. 
And this is precisely what the Gentilian metaphysics does not 
do. The Gentilian metaphysics argues that the Not-Ego is 
essential to the spiritual dialectic, that there must be as one 
of its moments the determined and not- thinking. But this is a 
general and not a specific account. The difference between the 
general and the specific is exactly the difference between the 
"matter" of Gentile and the ordinary concept of "matter." It 
is the specificity of the data thought in the investigation of 
natural objects which is not accounted for in the doctrine of 



FORM AND MATTER IQ5 

actual idealism. Gentile argues that by philosophy he is en- 
deavoring to fit the significance of the knowledge gained from 
the natural sciences into the unity of all particular knowledges. 
It seems obvious that one of the most significant features of 
the particular knowledge of the scientist is its specific inde- 
pendence from the act of thinking. The act of thinking thinks 
it as specific, but the specific data themselves are quite beyond 
the power of the act of thinking to create them in their specific 
character. 10 

The weakness in logic which is responsible for this difficulty 
has already been noted. 11 Gentile places undue emphasis upon 
the unity of the concrete synthesis in his dialectic. There is 
apparently no explanation of the metaphysical evaluation of 
universals at the expense of particulars. This weakness is most 
evident in the extreme value given to the unity of knowledge. 
Gentile is quite within his rights in defining philosophy as the 
knowledge of all particular knowledges, understanding all 
others and not being understood by them. But does it follow 
that the unification of all particular entities in the act of think- 
ing is more real than the particulars which are such necessary 
constituents of it? The act of thinking is ultimate in the sense 
that it presupposes nothing, because it includes everything 
within itself. Nevertheless, if we are to follow Gentile's argu- 
ment precisely, the act of thinking itself is nothing without 
the determined particulars thought. By definition only the act 
of thinking can be called real, but the question we are raising 
now regards the adequacy of that definition. 

We are confronted with the old problem of the duality of 
body and soul in a new form. Gentile's argument in avoidance 
of that duality does away, ontologically speaking, with the 

10 This criticism is not the same as that on pp 151-2 of this study. There the 
problem concerned the necessary character of any individual concrete judgment. 
Here we are concerned with the character of the necessity of the specific material 
of a given judgment about the cosmos. 

11 See pp. 159-60 of this study. 



THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

body. But what is the adequacy of this argument? It gives no 
account of the independence of the cosmological data from the 
act of thinking. This is not all. It is an unquestionable part 
of human experience that the body has an influence upon 
thinking. It has not needed the researches of abnormal psy- 
chology to demonstrate this. We all know the power of a 
good breakfast or of a good night's sleep or of strenuous 
exercise over our thinking. And, in the other direction, it is an 
unquestionable part of human experience that our thinking 
exerts an influence upon the activity of the body. An exam- 
ination of the Sistema di logica shows that no account is taken 
there of these two types of experience except to deny them 
metaphysical significance. Gentile, to be sure, does not deny 
the objective validity of this reciprocal influence. He could not 
very well do that any more than he could deny the objective 
validity of the laws of physics and chemistry. Gentile's meta- 
physics is not destructive, but it is highly selective. Does this 
mean that its limitations deny it adequacy? 

It is instructive to seek common denominators for the unde- 
fined concepts of conflicting philosophies, in order to discover 
the precise nature of their conflict. There are two sharply 
divided realms open to the metaphysician. One is the realm 
internal to thinking; and the other is the realm external to it. 
The actual idealist applies his primitive concept of the real to 
the internal; and his opponents, as he has demonstrated, apply 
their concept of the real to the external. Thus the metaphysics 
of each is limited in the sense that it is exclusive of the other. 
But what is the relative importance of these two limitations? 
The opponent of Gentile, in limiting himself to the external, is 
denying solipsism. He is evincing his refusal to accept the 
Gentilian definitions of "truth" and "reality." He is denying 
the exclusive significance of a region in which metaphysics and 
logic become one. Gentile, on the other hand, is denying not 
undefined concepts but a universal human experience which is 



FORM AND MATTER IQ7 

somehow given to man in his intercourse with the cosmos. In 
this comparison it is difficult to believe that the opponents of 
Gentile are not getting the better of the argument. They find 
it necessary to admit that they need presuppositions, and they 
thereby admit as a corollary that their knowledge is not 
certain knowledge. But Gentile seems to be denying the sig- 
nificance of the undeniably significant. Gentile may have 
found a presuppositionless and certain knowledge. But of 
what? 

It is Gentile's argument that knowledge gained by observa- 
tion, consisting of the results of the natural sciences plus our 
observations of the reciprocal influence of thinking and bodily 
action, is a systematization of data which are based upon pre- 
suppositions. This argument seems to be correct. He rejects 
these observations as contributing to metaphysics because of 
his definition of metaphysics as presuppositionless. This, of 
course, follows. But the point seems to be correctly taken 
against Gentile that whether or not these data from objective 
observation require presuppositions for their systematization 
and use, their specific nature has nothing to do with the pre- 
suppositions involved and so far as we can tell is quite inde- 
pendent of the fact that we think them. For example, Galileo's 
formulation of a physical law to cover the action of falling 
bodies may depend upon certain metaphysical assumptions. It 
undoubtedly does. But the specific character of the law which 
he formulated was such that it was not created by any act of 
thinking but rather was completely determined by the actual 
happenings when various objects were dropped from the Lean- 
ing Tower of Pisa. This is undeniable. And it also appears 
undeniable that there is nothing in the metaphysics of Gentile, 
in his doctrine of form and matter, which would account for 
this situation. 

In the large the question under discussion is whether or 
not a philosophy which does not include cosmology can be ade- 



198 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

quate. The final answer depends upon one's conception of the 
function of philosophy. It is Gentile's claim that the function 
of philosophy is that of coming into possession of a universal 
and necessary knowledge through a mediate process of think- 
ing. He further asserts that this knowledge will include an 
understanding of all particular knowledges without in turn 
being understood by them. If one may speak for those of 
Gentile's opponents who regard his position as false, it is their 
claim that philosophy must be either the rational systematiza- 
tion of immediate intuitions (realists) or a study of the nature 
of knowledge (critical realists). For each, Gentile and his 
opponents, the other is beating in the wrong bush. 

This is more than an academic question. If we accept Gen- 
tile's interpretation of the function of philosophy we are sub- 
scribing to a doctrine which sets the whole direction of man's 
activity toward the dialectic development of the spirit. If we 
accept the interpretation of his opponents we are subscribing 
to a doctrine wherein ultimate values are discarded and the 
whole direction of man's activity is toward living harmoniously 
with the cosmos. For the former the cosmos is a part of the 
act of thinking; for the latter the act of thinking is a part of 
the cosmos. As is always the case, in achieving its particular 
merit, each must give up some other. The fundamental philo- 
sophic merits are mutually exclusive. The opponents of Gentile 
give up the "real" except as it is an article of faith. They also 
give up "truth" as that which involves no presuppositions. 
Gentile gives up that element of significant objectivity in the 
cosmos which has long been a part of our philosophic thinking. 
He gives up the objective "true" and the objective "real." 
The history of philosophy is strong in its support of both 
Gentile and his opponents. But in one sense, at least, Gentile 
has the advantage over the cosmologists, for he gives up not 
the findings of the natural sciences, only their metaphysical 
significance. They, on the other hand, must give up the quest 



FORM AND MATTER 199 

for certain knowledge of the real. In persisting in that quest 
Gentile follows a major tradition of his calling. The search 
for certain knowledge has long and jealously been guarded by 
philosophers. In another sense the cosmologists have the 
advantage, for in giving up the presuppositionless metaphysi- 
cal truth they legitimately claim to be giving up that which 
may not be extremely important. It is their claim that the pre- 
suppositions of their systems of philosophy are ones to which 
we are impelled. We must presuppose the uniformity of na- 
ture, for example. The significant feature is not in the assump- 
tion but in the specific data gathered together into a science 
on the basis of the presupposition. In short it is the claim of 
these opponents that the presuppositions are a means to an 
end and in no significant way determine that end. 

The ultimate issue seems here as in the last chapter to be 
this: What is the function of philosophy? Is it the investiga- 
tion of the presuppositionless "true" and "real" or is it the in- 
vestigation of the objective "true" and "real"? Is it the inves- 
tigation of thinking in and for itself, or is it the investigation of 
the cosmos in and for itself? This, for metaphysics, is the most 
fundamental question. To borrow from James, the answer to 
it gives on the one hand tender-minded philosophies, and 
on the other tough-minded ones. There is no final or conclu- 
sive answer. One cannot attack the question without philos- 
ophizing and thereby determining indirectly what one con- 
siders the function of philosophy to be. Though this is a point 
brought out in the Sistema di logica, Gentile argues erro- 
neously from it that for this reason the real must be the act of 
philosophizing. He does not take into account that the first act 
of philosophizing is carried on by means of thought symbols 
which rest in undefined concepts. He philosophizes in setting 
the very definition of philosophy. In Chapter Eight we indi- 
cated that the actual idealist seemed to have a certain advan- 
tage over the realist because he is not called upon to make any 



200 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

presuppositions. But it is now evident that this is an answer 
given from the already-pitched camp of a tender-minded phi- 
losophy. And, by the same token, whatever the argument 
raised to show that the tough-minded philosophers have the 
advantage will have to be given from their camp. 

The cosmological question, as we have called it, introduces 
the most serious indictment of Gentile's metaphysical doctrine 
in particular and of his philosophy as a whole that can be 
drawn. Its destructive force is undeniable, and its power of 
persuasion is practically universal. But if one chooses to 
move within Gentile's interpretation of philosophy it is not 
fatal. There is an obvious kinship between the fundamental 
issue as we have expressed it and that found in comparing the 
doctrines of internal and of external relations. In comparing 
the two Gentile decides in favor of the former on the basis 
of the fact that it requires no presuppositions. But it is more 
accurate to say that neither the one doctrine nor the other 
gives a final answer, either to this or to the problem of form 
and matter which is allied to it. And there seems to be none in 
the traditions that have been built around the study of philos- 
ophy. The beginnings of Greek philosophy were both meta- 
physical and cosmological. During the late period of Greek 
philosophy the point had been reached at which metaphysics 
was brought seriously into doubt with the rise of various forms 
of metaphysical scepticism. This scepticism seems to be char- 
acteristic of late and sophisticated periods of any philosophic 
epoch. A new scepticism with regard to metaphysics has 
grown to full development in the present day. The difference 
between ancient and modern times, however, is the rise in 
modern times of a new type of metaphysics based upon the 
act of thinking, which should not fall so easily when called by 
its proper name. There is open to the modern philosopher the 
possibility of a metaphysics in the midst of a scepticism which 
is unable to destroy it. This recent metaphysics is made pos- 
sible by a new definition of the function of philosophy, or 



FORM AND MATTER 2OI 

rather by a new rendition of the traditional definition of the 
function of philosophy. To metaphysical values it gives a 
significant meaning based upon the doctrine of internal rela- 
tions. And the only answer to it seems to be the assertion of 
the doctrine of external relations. Yet which of these doctrines 
gives the more correct interpretation of the function of philos- 
ophy is a matter of choice to which an investigation of the 
traditional usage of undefined concepts gives no definite clue. 
One final point. It will occur to the reader to inquire why 
the choice must be made between an act of thinking which in- 
cludes the cosmos and a cosmos which includes the act of 
thinking. Must we choose between the realm external to think- 
ing and the realm internal to it? Can we not set up a dualism 
in which both demands shall be satisfied? Gentile has a reason 
for his summary rejection of metaphysical dualism. It can 
readily be traced back to the statement of the doctrine of inter- 
nal relations contained in his definition of the real as the 
totality of the thinkable. But this by no means constitutes a 
final denial of dualism as a metaphysical doctrine. Indeed the 
advantage dualism affords in retaining both the freedom of 
thinking and the objectivity of the cosmos is responsible for its 
vitality. However, metaphysical dualism is not without major 
difficulties. It has to be complete; any relation between the 
two orders of reality may be interpreted as leading inevitably 
back to monism. The familiar figure of the two clocks shows 
this clearly. The clock of the mind and the clock of the cos- 
mos seem to be synchronized. But how? If they are run by 
the same mechanism, like the four clocks of Big Ben, they are 
parts of the same reality. If someone keeps moving the hands 
forward or backward, as I do with the clocks in my house, 
they are parts of the reality enjoyed by him who sets them. If 
they are perfect timepieces and both of themselves keep accu- 
rate time, even then they are bound together by the reality of 
the time which they both keep. If one insists that the cosmos 
and acts of thinking be synchronized, and even the parallelist 



2O2 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

does this, then one falls with Spinoza back into monism. If 
they are taken to be completely independent, then, since our 
knowledge is composed exclusively of acts of thinking and we 
can have no access to the cosmos, to all intents and purposes 
one is again in monism. Such an independent cosmos has all 
of the disadvantages of the Kantian Noumenon. 

Metaphysical dualism can be maintained, indeed it is char- 
acteristic of the only other type of metaphysics possible in 
addition to the two we have been comparing. But since it 
makes the cosmos so thoroughly inaccessible the line of demar- 
cation which it draws may well be considered unfruitful. It 
will not be a serious departure from our course to outline the 
complex relation of actual idealism to metaphysical dualism. 
Though Gentile does not in fact do so, he should concede it 
a significant and unique place among metaphysical systems. 
It is unique in that it posits a transcendent reality, which 
would account for the independence of the world of nature 
without determining the act of thinking and thus eliminating 
truth value. But this transcendent cosmos must be presup- 
posed and hence, according to Gentile, unknowable. It could 
only be intuited. Since it is unknowable it could not be in- 
cluded among those things entertained by a philosophic knowl- 
edge. Which is another way of saying that dualism must be 
included among the descriptions given us by traditional meta- 
physics. For Gentile, then, metaphysical dualism could be 
asserted as true (because within it judgments are free and 
hence have value) only to be denied as non-philosophic (be- 
cause the cosmological part of it cannot be known with certain 
knowledge): epistemological dualism is a significant and im- 
portant doctrine, but metaphysical dualism contains the seeds 
of its own destruction. With this digression, by no means a com- 
plete statement of Gentile's case against dualism but merely 
an indication of the direction his argument takes, we may close 
the discussion of Gentile's relation to traditional metaphysics. 



CHAPTER TEN 

THE GENTILIAN METAPHYSICS AND THE 
MEANINGFUL 

THE final objection to Gentile's metaphysics, and one quite 
different from those so far considered, comes from the neo- 
positivists and their philosophic kin. It takes the direction of 
questioning the meaningfulness of all metaphysics and hence 
is only incidentally an attack upon Gentile. Outstanding among 
those who find no place for metaphysics in philosophy are 
Messrs. Carnap, Schlick and Wittgenstein. They represent a 
contemporary movement of unquestionable prominence and 
importance. The arguments by which they arrive at their scep- 
ticism toward metaphysics must be examined with great care 
in any attempt to define the status of actual idealism. The 
significance of these neo-positivists should not be underesti- 
mated, for they are endeavoring to redirect the energies of 
philosophers away from metaphysical problems. If successful, 
one cannot doubt that they will change the entire meaning of 
philosophic study. Certainly it is their aim to do so. In this 
sense their criticism of Gentile's doctrine is, of all those we 
shall consider here, the most profound. 

Basic to their point of view is a definition of knowledge. 
In the light of recent developments in factual and formal 
sciences they assert that empirical propositions though syn- 
thetic are a posteriori, and that logical and mathematical 
propositions though a priori are analytic. They maintain as a 
fundamental thesis that there are no synthetic propositions a 

203 



204 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

priori? Hence, for example, Messrs. Carnap and Wittgen- 
stein: 3 

Every proposition in knowledge must establish itself as meaningful 
by logical analysis. Thereby it will be found either that it deals with 
a tautology or a contradiction, or that the proposition is a meaning- 
ful declaration neither tautological nor contradictory. In the first 
case the proposition belongs to the sphere of logic inclusive of 
mathematics. In the second case it is an empirical proposition: it 
is referable to the Given and there may be taken basically as true 
or false. 

In order to discover whether or not the picture is true or false we 

must compare it with reality. 

It cannot be discovered from the picture alone whether it is true or 

false. 

There is no picture which is a priori true. 

The contexts from which these quotations are taken recommend 
the conclusions that the division of judgments into empirical and 
logical is exhaustive, that there is no other type of knowl- 
edge and that therefore metaphysics (which falls within 
neither of the two types mentioned) is not a legitimate part of 
knowledge. It is significant to note that actual idealism, which 
is most interested in questioning this denial of metaphysics, 
moves a considerable distance with neo-positivism in this 
speculation. It is precisely the argument of that part of the 
Sistema di logica on the logic of the abstract that neither fac- 
tual nor analytic knowledge can be metaphysical. The former 
presupposes entities external to thought, which are to be known 
as real: the latter presupposes a code and a principle of 
analysis. The former lacks certainty because hypothetical: 
the latter though certain is tautological. Actual idealism and 

1 The writer wishes to acknowledge here his indebtedness to an excellent sum- 
mary of the neo-positivist position by Messrs. Blumberg and Feigl in "Logical 
Positivism," Journal of Philosophy, May 12, 1931. The article is recommended 
to those who wish to study this doctrine. 

2 Carnap, Die alte und die neue Logik Erkenntnis, ler Band 1930-31, p. 25. 
Wittgenstein, Tractus Logico-Philosophicus (Harcourt, Brace; New York, 1922). 
2.223-5. Quoted in the text in this order. 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 20$ 

neo-positivism move together in their criticism of the tradi- 
tional metaphysics. At the question of the legitimacy of the 
synthetic judgment a priori, however, they part company. 
Idealism has been that philosophy which has harbored the syn- 
thetic judgment a priori; and though Kant was the destroyer 
of the metaphysics of his day, actual idealism has employed 
his synthetic judgment a priori as the basis of a new meta- 
physics. Indeed the actual idealist must agree that if he is 
unable to establish a metaphysics upon such judgments he 
must renounce claim to metaphysics. Hence the first problem 
for consideration in this chapter: Can there be such a knowl- 
edge? 

The major judgment of the logic of the concrete is that the 
real is the act of thinking. This is admittedly an a priori judg- 
ment. No amount of experience in itself could give it. But is it 
clear that it is not an analytic judgment? Neo-positivism and 
actual idealism are agreed that metaphysical propositions, 
whether meaningful or not, are not a posteriori. The important 
question is whether they are analytic or synthetic judgments. 
The analytic judgment is characterized as being part of a 
deductive system which contains undefined terms plus axioms 
or postulates. A code for plane geometry is the most familiar 
example of such a system. The Gentilian logic of the concrete 
is similar in that it contains certain undefined terms, elements 
given a common significance by common usage. Indeed it 
would be impossible to use words at all without employing 
some undefined elements. But it has been found in Chapter 
Seven of this study that the logic of the concrete contains no 
presuppositions. The Gentilian concept of the real determines 
that it shall be the act of thinking; indeed if there were not 
this determination there could be (within actual idealism) 
more than one legitimate metaphysics. But the important and 
crucial point is that this determination is a free determination, 
to employ a paradox. It is not given by any code and is not 



206 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

based upon any presuppositions. If it were, Gentile would 
have to agree that there could be no foundational metaphysics. 
There is nothing in the "real" as such which legislates the 
judgment that it is the act of thinking, as there is that in the 
nature of a triangle which legislates the judgment that the sum 
of its interior angles equals two right angles. The "real" is con- 
ceived as the totality of the thinkable. It is the contention of 
the logic of the concrete that our very act of thinking about 
the "real" leads us to the judgment that it is the act. But the 
sum of the interior angles of a triangle is arrived at by the aid 
of definitions and axioms. This is the character of the analytic 
procedure, and differentiates it from that synthetic procedure 
in the logic of the concrete which provides its own norm. Ac- 
cording to Gentile it is the synthetic judgment a priori that 
makes philosophy possible as a science. In basing his meta- 
physical doctrine upon the act of thinking, which is norma sui, 
Gentile has succeeded in producing a knowledge which is at 
once non-empirical and non-analytic. 

There is no point more crucial than this in the entire doc- 
trine of actual idealism. And it is a point which Gentile does 
not make clear. If the initial interpretation of the function of 
philosophy is considered to be a laying down of presupposi- 
tions, then no philosophy is presuppositionless. 8 But it is pos- 
sible to make a significant distinction between the ifiitial inter- 
pretation of the function of philosophy and the laying down of 
presuppositions. Gentile does not seem to appreciate the im- 
portance of this distinction, but it is essential if his meta- 

8 In this case Gentile's position merges with that of traditional metaphysics and 
we are in possession of a number of metaphysical doctrines verifiable analytically 
and empirically in the sense in which both the Newtonian and the Einsteinian 
physics, for example, are verifiable analytically and empirically. But this is neither 
a final nor a discriminating verification According to this point of view the issue 
between metaphysics and neo-positivism regards the broad meaningfulness of 
ultimately non- verifiable (and hence merely descriptive) judgments. This issue is 
raised on pp. 209-10 of this study in connection with the Gentihan metaphysical 
judgments, but is applicable in the form given to traditional metaphysics vs. neo- 
positivism. 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 2C>7 

physics is to be distinguished from any traditional metaphysics 
and, indeed, if it is to be free from self-contradiction. There is 
no philosophy which, by the very act of naming itself as a 
science, does not appeal to undefined concepts; this we have 
already seen. But by an application of the Theory of Types, 
this appeal may be interpreted as functioning on a different 
level than that of the traditional invocation of philosophic pre- 
suppositions, once the function of philosophy has been inter- 
preted. In the historical chapters of the Sistcma di logica the 
significant point brought out is that previous metaphysicians 
have depended upon entities previous to the act of thinking 
and known through it. But Gentile does not exhibit this de- 
pendence, and it is in this sense that he terms his doctrine 
presuppositionless. Gentile's metaphysical thinking depends 
upon no Logos external to itself for its verity; hence it cannot 
be analytically arrived at because it does not rely specifically 
upon the principles necessary to govern analysis. Analysis 
requires previous principles according to which to proceed: in 
the Gentilian metaphysics there are none, for thinking is 
norma sui. The three principles of the logic of the abstract, 
necessary to any analysis, are logically and ontologically the 
consequence of the synthetic act of thinking. If Gentile's 
metaphysical judgments were analytic they would violate with 
palpable clearness his interpretation of the function of philos- 
ophy. But he does not depend upon analytic principles in the 
development of his metaphysics. The dependence is in the 
other direction. Hence his metaphysical judgments are syn- 
thetic. Since it is admitted by the neo-positivist that they are 
a priori, it may be concluded that they are both synthetic and 
a priori and that the synthetic judgment a priori is possible. 

This point has been given emphasis because it is vital to 
Gentile's doctrine. The question as to whether or not the 
synthetic judgment a priori is possible appears to be answer- 
able only affirmatively or negatively, and these answers appear 



2O8 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

to be contradictory. But inquiry shows that the neo-positivist's 
position is quite as justifiable as that of Gentile, in spite of the 
conclusion reached in the paragraph above. When we consider 
the problem on the initial level at which the function of philos- 
ophy is decided upon, all of the philosophic doctrines about 
reality and truth follow because of the fact that "philosophy" 
and "reality" and "truth" are interrelated concepts, though 
the interrelation is one due to habit of language and not to 
logic. Hence on the initial level there is a sense in which Gen- 
tile's synthetic judgment a priori is "analytic," if we are will- 
ing to consider "analytic" applicable to studies of language 
usage. If it were synthetic on this level (or even logically 
analytic) there could be but one interpretation of the function 
of philosophy. The assertion of so basic a dogmatism is made 
inexcusable by the various meanings which the function of 
philosophy is in fact given. Though Gentile himself does not 
seem to realize it, his description of metaphysical judgments as 
synthetic a priori may refer only to judgments upon that level 
achieved after the function of philosophy has received definite 
interpretation. The whole question depends upon the level at 
which "analytic" is taken and the meaning given it. The neo- 
positivist's doctrine is thus, as a criticism, more a different 
interpretation of knowledge than a destruction of actual ideal- 
ism. And the same relation holds in the other direction. 

This illustrates clearly the difference of approach to philos- 
ophy found in comparing neo-positivism and actual idealism. 
It should be borne in mind that the present discussion is not an 
attempt to show fatal weaknesses in the former which the 
latter has uncovered. The point of this discussion is that neo- 
positivism from its point of view offers definite objections to 
metaphysics. They have been given so much attention that it 
is desirable to indicate the manner in which actual idealism 
meets them. We shall conclude our defense of synthetic judg- 
ments a priori with a final argument in favor of Gentile's posi- 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 2OQ 

tion. If the metaphysical judgments of actual idealism were 
logically analytic it would be possible to show that an analysis 
of "totality of the thinkable' 7 and "act of thinking" would 
bring them together in an identity-relation. But it is rather the 
nature of the act of thinking in itself as act and not its nature 
as defined that is responsible for the keynote of the Gentilian 
metaphysics. Furthermore, to widen the argument, we have 
already shown that some philosophers (e.g. Plato and Aris- 
totle) have started with the same assumptions on the first level 
as to the function of philosophy and the definition of the real 
(i.e. as transcending the act of thinking) and arrived at en- 
tirely different metaphysical systems solely by virtue of their 
choice on the second level of different presuppositions as to the 
nature of the Logos. These presuppositions are not given 
by an analysis of the initial assumptions, for such differences 
in results are not found in an analytic system. They are syn- 
thetic judgments. In Chapter Eight we learned that while the 
metaphysical judgments of traditional philosophy have been 
arbitrary descriptions those of Gentile are universal and neces- 
sary. The highly important question which remains is as to 
whether or not Gentile in preserving the universal and neces- 
sary value of his metaphysical judgments has been able to 
retain at the same time their meaningfulness. As we shall see, 
our investigation of this question will involve the meaningful- 
ness of any metaphysical judgment. 

Even if synthetic judgments a priori are possible, Gentile 
is still faced by the charge that the metaphysics built upon 
them is meaningless. Let us consider it more specifically: 4 

Most propositions and questions, that have been written about 
philosophical matters, are not false, but senseless. We cannot, there- 
fore, answer questions of this kind at all, but only state their sense- 

4 Wittgenstein, Tractus Logico-Philosophicus, 4003. Schlick, Erleben, Erken- 
nen, Metaphystk Kant-Studien. Band XXXI, Heft 2/3, 1926, pp. 156-8. Quoted 
in the text in this order. 



2IO THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

lessness. Most questions and propositions of the philosophers result 
from the fact that we do not understand the logic of our lan- 
guage. . . . 

And so it is not to be wondered at that the deepest problems are 
really no problems. 

. . . The metaphysician will not know things, he will experience 
them. ... All of our knowledge of Being is principally acquired 
through the methods of the particular sciences; every other "ontol- 
ogy" is idle babbling. No matter how many words the philosopher 
seeks for experience, he can hit upon only formal attributes of them. 
The content always escapes him. . . . Metaphysics is impossible 
because contradictory. If the metaphysician seeks only experience, 
his demands may be fulfilled, through poetry and art and life itself. 
. . . But if he wishes thoroughly to experience the transcendent 
he mistakes experience for knowledge and, befogged by double con- 
tradiction, seeks empty shadows. . . . Metaphysical systems con- 
tain much science, and much poetry, but they never contain meta- 
physics. 

This issue is more clearly one of interpretation than was the 
former. The neo-positivists have defined their position so ac- 
curately that their doctrine is unanswerable. Even Gentile 
should agree that according to their definition of the "meaning- 
ful" metaphysics must certainly be defined as meaningless, 
for the meaningful to them is the demonstrable and Gentile 
asserts that his metaphysical doctrine is non-demonstrable. 
He thereby admits it to membership in the class of judgments 
meaningless to the neo-positivist. 6 If it were demonstrable it 
would depend upon a transcendent Logos. 

This agreement clarifies the issue. As it concerns the actual 
idealist and the neo-positivist the problem has passed into a 
sphere in which the neo-positivistic "meaning" is no longer 
applicable. To appeal to it is to beg the question. The neo- 
positivist must fall back on the judgment, which he shares 
with the pragmatist, that the logic of the concrete is without 
meaning in the sense that the answers to the metaphysical 

5 Sistema. Vol. II, p. 222. 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 211 

problems which it sets make no significant difference in order- 
ing one's life. Gentile very evidently believes that certain non- 
demonstrable propositions are meaningful in the sense that the 
assertion of them is important to living itself. This is the rock 
bottom of the difference between the two doctrines. 

Is a synthetic knowledge a priori significant in a broad 
sense? We ask many questions of a metaphysical nature, but 
in answering them do we not rationalize according to a precon- 
ceived value, as Mr. Dewey describes us doing in his Recon- 
struction in Philosophy? What difference does it make to our 
lives whether we are monists or pluralists? Are not metaphy- 
sical questions, like problems in chess, playthings of the intel- 
lect? Gentile would agree with Mr. Dewey that the meta- 
physics of the past has been a rationalization of presupposi- 
tions. But it follows from this neither that metaphysics must 
be of such a character nor that for this reason the solving of 
metaphysical questions necessarily makes no difference to liv- 
ing. Metaphysics has given value to various undertakings and 
thereby lent a direction to human striving, whether justifiably 
or not. Neo-positivism has gone the way of demonstrating 
that the metaphysics of the past has been descriptive, arbi- 
trary, and based upon presuppositions whose plausibility was 
a matter of immediate intuition. Actual idealism has gone this 
distance and, parting company with neo-positivism, proceeded 
further along a path which leads to a denial that metaphysics 
is meaningless in a broad sense. Neo-positivism would have 
to show that metaphysics is necessarily a matter of immediate 
intuition in order to prevent actual idealism from so proceed- 
ing. According to its own standards it has done so. The great 
point of difference is that neo-positivism has taken the position 
that all metaphysics is a matter of presuppositions, while 
actual idealism has invoked the Theory of Types (implicitly 
only, of course) to differentiate between presuppositions and 
assumptions. Gentile has been persistent and, we believe, sue- 



212 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

cessful in his attempt to show that there can be a necessary 
and universal knowledge of the real which is presupposition- 
less. But in what sense is it meaningful? 

One of the definitions of philosophy in the Sistema di logica 
illustrates the broad meaningfulness intended in that work: 

... By philosophy is always understood . . . the most universal 
form of the spirit, which understands all other forms without 
being understood by them in return. 

Philosophy performs the unique function of gathering together 
all of the particular knowledges into a unified system. Is this 
a significant function, or could we do without it? In other 
words, is the "real" in the sense in which Gentile uses it a 
meaningful concept? Must the particular knowledges of the 
various empirical sciences be interpreted as pertaining to the 
whole of human knowledge if they are to be guides for action? 
For example, the fund of knowledge recently produced by the 
field of psychology is a partial knowledge in the sense that all 
empirical knowledge is partial. It limits its field of study very 
strictly; and gives many hypotheses without ever giving cer- 
tain knowledge. It represents a skillful and ingenious tabula- 
tion of data procured in a field limited by the investigation and 
under conditions as nearly as possible objective. These data 
may be expressed according to a formula. A formula is a 
shorthand record of past events, with a hypothetical reference 
to the future which is often of a high degree of probability. It 
may tell us that specific stimuli have been known to be fol- 
lowed by fixed responses in what we are accustomed to call 
"emotion." It may tell us the frequency of types of color- 
blindness. It may tell us the average reaction time of the indi- 
vidual driving a car. It may tell us of the building up of 
activity patterns which it calls conditioned responses. Psychol- 
ogy records events, establishes relationships or functions be- 

6 Op. cit. t Vol. II, p. 129. See also p. 122 of this study. 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 213 

tween events which have already occurred, and tells us with a 
high degree of accuracy what we should do if we wish certain 
future events to occur. But psychology thinks in terms of the 
empirical presuppositions of natural science. What happens 
when a thinker in another field denies the universal validity 
of these presuppositions? Instances of this situation are legion. 
The religious teacher finds the concept of the human soul more 
significant than any psycho-physiological description. Within 
natural science itself there are differences in the interpretation 
of the same phenomena, different significances seen; as, for 
example, the difference between the interpretations of life given 
by chemistry and zoology. Wider perspectives are necessary. 

The crucial point is that while we may widen our perspective 
to include all empirical investigations, and hence coordinate 
the particular sciences without the help of metaphysics, we 
must go still further. Empirical science can tell us all we 
are able to know if we wish certain events to occur in the 
future. Psychology tells us, for example, what to do with the 
highest probability of success if we wish to rear a child so 
that he will be conditioned in one way or another. But there 
is nothing in its entire wealth of research and experiment to 
tell us either how the child should be conditioned or whether 
there is a more desirable way of rearing children than deliber- 
ately setting about to condition their responses. These two 
questions are entirely outside of its sphere. They are not 
empirical questions, yet ones which parents and teachers must 
meet every day. A few years ago when plans were being 
drawn for the building of Radio City a careful empirical in- 
vestigation was made of the plan upon which stores at the 
outer edges should be built in order to bring the greatest num- 
ber of pedestrians to the inner parts of the building. Here is a 
clear example of a factual study. Granted that you want to 
bring the greatest number of pedestrians into Radio City what 
ground plan should be employed? But do we want to bring 



214 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

them into Radio City? Should we build a Radio City? These 
are questions of value, and no empirical science has ever set- 
tled a question of value. Yet we act upon values every day. 
To return to our former example, what should the aim of edu- 
cation be? No science of education has ever been able to tell 
us that. Granted that certain results are desirable, it tells us 
how most practically to go about achieving them. But what 
results do we want to achieve? Every inquiry into cause and 
effect, into usefulness, is important; but there must be an end- 
in-itself for our action. Utility is only useful to some end. The 
ends according to which human beings act are greater than life 
or death or pleasure or pain. Anyone who tries to tell us how 
children should be educated, or how a government should be 
run, or how a family budget should be made out, is dealing 
with values and hence is a philosopher and a metaphysician. 
Indeed with every action man is a metaphysician whether he 
will or no; he is acting to bring nearer something which is 
desirable. We all act upon universal and necessary judgments 
not contributed by empirical knowledge, because it deals with 
the hypothetical and factual; and not given by abstract logic, 
because this logic deals in tautologies. To sum up, no final 
reliance can be placed upon hypothetical knowledge because 
we must have a non-hypothetical standard according to which 
we may judge the merits of our hypotheses. It is true that 
we may go so far as to deal with many values as hypothetical, 
and proceed to test their usefulness; but that test can be only 
in terms of a value which is not hypothetical. Shall we test 
Christianity to see how well it works? But what do you mean 
by "how well"? Ultimate value, hence metaphysics, is ines- 
capable. 

The neo-positivist embraces an interpretation of philosophy 
thoroughly different from this. The case is probably not so 
overwhelmingly against him as the preceding arguments might 
suggest. There is something to be said on his side, and this we 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 215 

must find. His defense seems to lie in his theory of knowledge, 
which comes directly from his characterization of the philos- 
opher's job. When for example, Mr. Wittgenstein says: 7 

The object of philosophy is the logical clarification of thoughts. 

The right method of philosophy would be this. To say nothing 
except what can be said, i.e. the propositions of natural science, i.e. 
something that has nothing to do with philosophy: and then always, 
when someone else wished to say something metaphysical, to demon- 
strate to him that he had given no meaning to certain signs in his 
propositions. 

he certainly limits the philosopher to the role of commentator 
and implies that knowledge can come only from those who 
deal empirically with the facts. This is brought out even more 
clearly in an excellent summary statement by Messrs. Blum- 
berg and Feigl: 8 

As against the coherence theory of truth it is held that the single 
atomic proposition is true or false. It is true when the fact which it 
asserts is the case, false when it is not the case. The truth or falsity 
of propositions is ascertained by comparing them with reality. 

Thus through an analysis of knowledge and symbolism we are led 
to a theory of meaning in terms of facts and propositions. 

The implication here is that reality is factual; the factual func- 
tions as the Logos. It is interesting to note that we are faced 
with the same presupposition which, in Chapter Eight, we 
found the realist employing. 

Both realism and positivism built their doctrines upon that 
which is external to thinking. It has been seen that this pre- 
supposition can be based upon nothing but immediate intui- 
tion, and hence for Gentile does not qualify as knowledge. For 
the realist, who affirms this presupposition with "certainty," it 
is truly a faith; the faith of modern scientific doctrine. But 
for one like the neo-positivist, who takes care to employ only 

7 Op. cit, 4.112 and 6 53. 

8 "Logical Positivism" (Journal of Philosophy, May 21, 1931), p. 288. 



2l6 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

hypothetical judgments, a tentative reliance upon immediate 
intuition in relation to the factual is not so damaging. It is his 
way of solving that problem of describing nature to which no 
philosophy has found a conclusive answer. By substituting 
"factual" for "reality" he thereby shoulders a lighter burden. 
How does he compare propositions with the factual? Always 
by experimentation, the testing of hypotheses. He thus forces 
"knowledge" to play the role he has assigned to it. We cannot 
have knowledge until we have tested our hypotheses. In other 
words, knowledge is only knowledge when it has been put 
into practice. When we face situation A we are equipped with 
an hypothesis as to how to solve the problem involved. We try 
the hypothesis in the situation. If its prediction and the fact- 
ual event are alike the hypothesis becomes knowledge. We then 
face situation B, later than A but as similar to it as one may 
wish. In this second phase the knowledge again becomes an 
hypothesis, because we do not know without making a meta- 
physical assumption that the behavior of the factual has not 
changed. In other words, and for the neo-positivist, the gain- 
ing of knowledge is its own destruction. We possess only hy- 
potheses, and we are allowed them only because of an obviously 
safe initial hypothesis regarding the uniformity of nature. 

But further considerations are necessary in formulating a 
theory of knowledge. We cannot always test our hypotheses 
by means of experimentation, for there are certain propositions 
to which this method is not appropriate. Take the proposition, 
"Love thy neighbor as thyself." This is surely not a mean- 
ingless proposition; it is expressed in the life of Mahatma 
Gandhi. His aim goes no farther than the proposition itself; 
his aim is that loving of one's fellow man which expresses the 
reality of brotherhood. Since this proposition contains its 
value within itself, there could be no gain in experimenting 
with it in the factual realm except in terms of a value even 
more profound, which of course would raise the whole ques- 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 217 

tion again. The neo-positivist will legitimately criticize this 
case as one wherein the direction of conduct is determined by 
a presupposed value rather than one arrived at by the testing 
of hypotheses in experience. Gentile would agree with the 
substance of this criticism, but would nevertheless assert the 
real existence of a non-presupposed value prior to experience. 
Gentile claims to have found a philosophic value, norma sui, 
arrived at through a mediate process giving a universal and 
necessary truth. If the logic of the concrete is without error 
in its execution there is a knowledge which is not determined 
in its truth or falsity by experimentation, and which is at the 
same time significant to the ordering of human living. But 
according to the interpretation of the neo-positivist and in the 
terms in which he describes the epistemological process, even 
this is hypothetical. 

This situation in the realm of value typifies the entire dif- 
ference between the two doctrines. It involves the meaning of 
"I think. . . ." To the neo-positivist this gives a hypothetical 
character to all assertions: to the actual idealist it gives a 
necessary and universal value to them. For the actual idealist, 
man always acts upon a universal and necessary knowledge: 
if it did not for him have these characteristics he would act 
upon whatever knowledge did. Man may act hesitatingly, but 
even his hesitation is an element in a universal and necessary 
knowledge. And philosophy is the science that provides us 
with this knowledge. For the neo-positivist, man always acts 
upon tentative hypotheses, for to him the judgments upon 
which the possibility of a universal and necessary knowledge 
are based are "meaningless." Man may act with assurance, 
but his knowledge is always partial and provisional. And 
philosophy is the study that tells us the nature of this knowl- 
edge. It is true, continues the neo-positivist, that in our ap- 
proach to nature we must hypothesize its uniformity in order 
to build any other hypotheses. And it is true that in our action 



2l8 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

we must assume certain basic values, such as utility and hap- 
piness, in order to direct our activities. But this latter assump- 
tion is so thoroughly endorsed by common sense that the fact 
that it is presuppositional makes no difference to its accept- 
ance. 

What, then, of the meaningfulness of the actual idealist's 
metaphysics? The neo-positivist characterizes it as "mean- 
ingless" because for him it represents a series of hypothetical 
judgments verified in practice if at all. It is the labelling of 
such judgments as "universal" and "necessary" that calls forth 
his criticism. The actual idealist asserts that reality is of such 
and such a character. The neo-positivist asserts that we should 
make tentative plans for action in our world and test them as 
we go along. Such problems as the former finds significant to 
the ordering of life, the latter must also find significant. This 
is not the true point of the disagreement. If it were the neo- 
positivist could easily be driven from combat. They disagree 
in their attitude toward such problems. The former asserts 
answers to these problems which he calls "metaphysical": the 
latter finds the problems unanswerable except by practice. 
But the neo-positivist must accept as part of his initial equip- 
ment a few basic commonsense judgments of value (e.g. 
happiness, physical comfort), judgments accepted generally 
by mankind as representing the goals toward which it is striv- 
ing. Without these there could be no experimentation and no 
testing. Facts in themselves are nothing: their interpretation 
demands value judgments and the most elementary logic will 
show that the basic value judgments may not be hypothetical. 
This brings the argument for a third time to the same funda- 
mental level, that at which we arrived in discussing realism 
and critical realism. For the neo-positivist the function of 
philosophy is the clarification of speculations based upon the 
propositions and experiments of natural science, employing a 
directional undercurrent of generally accepted (because com- 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 2IQ 

mon-sense) ideals. The general acceptance of these ideals 
places them, for him, beyond question and therefore with no 
need of metaphysical sanction. The idealist in his interpreta- 
tion of the function of philosophy questions even these ideals, 
perhaps in part because they are so generally accepted, and 
therefore needs metaphysics as much as earlier philosophers 
have needed it. Behind these interpretations of the function 
of philosophy no philosopher, or anyone else, can go. Are 
the ideals toward which man should strive those generally 
recognized, or are they those known only to a few wise and 
sensitive individuals? We shall never know. 

Since this discussion has led into the field of value, a word 
about the Gentilian ethics is relevant. It is clear that his 
ethics is dependent upon his metaphysics. The good for Gen- 
tile is the development of the human spirit according to the 
dialectic of the logic of the concrete. This doctrine is brought 
out clearly in the Sommario di pedagogia come scienza filo- 
sofica. It appears at first to depend upon an assumption that 
the development of the human spirit is good in itself. But 
more accurately the ontological significance of the dialectic is 
what makes this development good in itself. In other words, 
it is not dependent upon a separate assumption in the field of 
ethics. The value of the development of the human spirit is 
ultimately a metaphysical value, for man insofar as he is real 
is active and developing thought. Ethical value, that is, ulti- 
mately resides in the act of thinking. This act is a free act 
and since it is free it obeys not a transcendent standard or 
ideal, but the law of its being which is its own. Our good con- 
sists in the dialectic development of our thinking. We cannot 
escape this dialectic, but we can either neglect or nourish it. 
It should be our highest aim to do the latter, to improve our 
understanding and hence our action as much as possible. We 
cannot in advance know either the direction or the limits of 
our striving. But we can sustain our striving and value the 



22O THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

progress for which it is responsible. This is the meaning of 
the inclusion of ethics in metaphysics in Gentile's doctrine. 

Before closing this chapter there is one final point which 
ought to be considered. It is suggested by the quotation from 
Messrs. Blumberg and Feigl in which they reject a coherence 
theory of truth. Such a theory belongs to those metaphysics 
which recognize themselves as descriptive. A study of deduc- 
tive systems shows that there are a number equally descriptive 
of given facts. They contain different undefined elements, 
employ different assumptions, and exhibit different structures. 
Yet they are all coherent. The only possible criteria of choice 
among them are adequacy and convenience. This situation is 
exactly that in which traditional metaphysical systems find 
themselves; each depends upon the primitive entities to which 
reality is ascribed and each is built on its own assumptions. 
Coherence is demanded of the Gentilian doctrine, as it would 
be demanded of any doctrine; but Gentile does not offer his 
as true by virtue of its coherence, no matter how much his 
definition of the real may suggest this. 9 The traditional meta- 
physics is perfectly coherent if it admits that knowledge for 
it is based upon immediate intuition. The non-metaphysics 
of the neo-positivist is equally coherent if it admits that it pos- 
sesses hypotheses only. The truth for Gentile is given value 
by the free act of thinking. It is immanent, whereas any truth 
based on coherence would be transcendent. A truth of the lat- 
ter type would be based on the logic of the abstract, and would 
require certain presuppositions with regard to the Logos (the 
three principles) in order to achieve value. The former is 
norma sui: therein is its value. The reality of the act of 
thinking presupposes nothing; hence it must receive its truth 
value from itself. This is both the uniqueness of Gentile's 
position, which differentiates him from all other metaphysi- 

9 That Gentile does not himself always realize this is illustrated by his misuse 
of "truth." See pp. 129-30 of this study. 



METAPHYSICS AND THE MEANINGFUL 221 

cians; and the strength of his solipsism, which separates him 
from the neo-positivists. Whatever recommendation can be 
given actual idealism will find its major force in this unique- 
ness and this strength. 



PART FOUR 
CONCLUSION 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 
THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 

THE most significant features of actual idealism are its 
attempt to establish a new doctrine of metaphysics and the 
reasons which it gives for doing so. Its most interesting fea- 
ture is that it reopens the defense of solipsism against argu- 
ments which, beginning with the Theaetetus, have been almost 
universally accepted. Considering the Sistema di logica in and 
for itself, we found certain major errors in execution. Two of 
these have to do with Gentile's use of words: when rectified 
the alterations ought not to affect the thought which these 
words are intended to express : 

(1) There are two meanings given to the word, "truth"; 
one involving a freedom from self-contradiction, and the other 
concerned with the relation of one man's thinking to that of 
another. The former is a necessary but not sufficient element in 
the latter. My opponent's doctrine will always be free from 
self-contradiction to him, but to me it is error not necessarily 
because it (taken objectively) is self-contradictory to me, but 
perhaps because it does not take into account certain features 
of experience which are integral to my doctrine. 

(2) There is a conflict between "thought" and "thinkable." 
We find Gentile saying that some men's thoughts are not think- 
able. There is a meaning hidden in such a statement, we have 
seen, but it is obviously difficult to find. 

Further errors of this type, resulting from the use of the 
same word in the logic of the abstract and in the logic of the 
concrete, have been noted and footnoted. But an understand- 

225 



226 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

ing of the major ones is essential to clarity in reading the 
Sistema di logica. 

Five other errors, however, are more serious in that they 
affect Gentile's thought development. In the first place, there 
are the metaphysical considerations in the logic of the abstract. 
Inasmuch as Gentile himself demonstrates that this logic is 
not self-contained, that it depends for its value upon the logic 
of the concrete, he should not allow himself to draw meta- 
physical conclusions from any of the three fundamental prin- 
ciples of thinking considered as object. Not only does the argu- 
ment from the Principle of Excluded Middle seem out of place, 
but its invalidity undermines all of the metaphysics built 
thereupon in the logic of the abstract. Strictly speaking, the 
logic of the abstract concerns itself in no way with the nature 
of the Gentilian real. Gentile has fallen into the trap opened 
by the methodological difficulty inherent in any expression 
of the nature of reality. It would be a distinct improvement of 
the Sistema di logica if this argument were removed and the 
entire burden of the metaphysical doctrine allowed to rest, as 
it should, upon the original requirements set for "truth" and 
"reality," which may be satisfied only by the concrete act of 
thinking, pensiero pens ante. 

In the second place, there occurs throughout the logics both 
of the abstract and of the concrete the seemingly central con- 
cept of the Ego. We have tried to show that such a concept 
involves fatal weaknesses. In employing it Gentile is enslaving 
himself to the idealistic tradition which he is so anxious to 
reform. When the full expression of reality comes to be the 
"act of thinking," the Ego must necessarily fall with the Nou- 
menon and the Absolute into disuse. The Sistema di logica 
possesses all of the ingredients necessary to this final step in 
the idealist's progress, but it appears that the metaphysical 
vagueness of "Ego" is not noted by Gentile. The fault is 
undoubtedly explained by the nature of pensiero pensante, for 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 227 

it seems to connote a self-conscious thinking personality. But 
such a connotation would involve a presupposition, and it is 
precisely such presuppositions that pensiero pensante is brought 
forward to overcome. No thinker breaks completely from his 
past; his thinking develops out of his heritage. The "Ego" is 
Gentile's Darwin's Point. 

The third error occurs in establishing the norma sui character 
of pensiero pensante. With regard to this task Gentile's doc- 
trine appears to rest insecurely upon the argument that the 
dialectic in the logic of the concrete is necessary to it. This is 
a necessity established sui generis in the act of thinking and 
gives a metaphysical foundation to Gentile's logic. But it is 
difficult to find a connection between it and the necessity of 
any particular act of thinking. Gentile has established the neces- 
sity of the dialectic in general, but not that of the individual 
act of thinking. 1 We fail to find the relation between the two, 
as Gentile describes it, established by him. It has been necessary 
on our part to introduce new, and more definite, arguments. 

In the fourth place, Gentile makes no explicit recognition 
of the different levels of postulation, assumptions and presup- 
positions, which are necessary to his doctrine if it is to stand. 
The distinction is so obviously essential both to his argument 
that actual idealism is presuppositionless and to the assertion 
of the possibility of synthetic judgments a priori, and hence to 
the entire metaphysical doctrine, that his disregard of it makes 
his position untenable. Gentile may have considered this an 
obvious point, but it becomes apparent only after a mental 
struggle in which he gives little aid. 

Lastly, there is nowhere in the Sistema di logica a justifica- 
tion of the ontological valuation of the unity of the act of 
thinking at the expense of its multiplicity. This is the most 
serious of all of the errors in Gentile's statement. Pensiero 

1 This refers only to the criticism on pp. 151-2 of this study, and should not 
be confused with the material in Chapter Nine. See also footnote 10 on p. 195 of 
this study. 



228 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

pensante is synthetic. As synthetic, it is a synthesis of parts. 
It is true, according to Gentile's interpretation, that the parts 
lack ontological significance without reference to the synthesis. 
But it seems also to be true, and this Gentile does not admit, 
that the synthesis may lack ontological significance without 
reference to the parts. We have tried to show that this error 
seems to be overcome by the force of Gentile's initial concept 
of the nature of "reality." But this correction the reader of 
the Sistema di logica must make for himself. As it stands Gen- 
tile's doctrine is inconclusive in this respect. 

Of these five errors, the first three are errors of commission. 
With regard to the first, the Sistema di logica is saved only 
by virtue of the fact that the erroneous argument is not the 
only one by which the metaphysical doctrine is established. 
The second consists in the employment of a concept that con- 
tradicts its context, but for which a better substitute is sug- 
gested by that context. In the third, Gentile fails in his claim 
to have established the norma sui character of thinking. How- 
ever it probably can, within the Gentilian system, be estab- 
lished. All three call for emendation of the book. 

The last two errors are errors of omission. In both cases we 
seem able out of the material offered to add the arguments 
which are lacking. But Gentile should not have omitted them. 
We may conclude that while actual idealism is a defensible 
doctrine, by virtue of the emendations and additions indicated, 
the Sistema di logica is an imperfect statement of it chiefly 
on these five counts. 



Previous to the Sistema di logica there were but two doc- 
trines with regard to the Logos: that it transcends the act of 
thinking, and that it does not exist. The possibility of its 
being found within the act of thinking was excluded by 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 22Q 

time-honored arguments. The former is the doctrine of tra- 
ditional metaphysics; the latter is the doctrine of scepti- 
cism. Ever since philosophy was old enough to achieve 
scepticism these two doctrines have opposed each other, the 
one claiming to know the real with certain knowledge, the 
other declaring such a knowledge of the real to be impossible. 
The burden of proof has, by the nature of the case, been upon 
those who affirmed the former doctrine. The vitality of the 
issue between the two has proved at least one thing, and that 
is that the traditional metaphysician did not know the truth 
with certain knowledge. It seems, too, to have shown that the 
sceptic could not prove the impossibility of such a knowledge. 
The sceptics could show only that from their point of view the 
quest for certainty in metaphysics has been unsuccessful. 
The importance of the Sistcma dl logica is its suggestion of 
an adequate defense of a third doctrine, one which claims to 
know the real with certain knowledge but differing from for- 
mer claims in relying upon a Logos immanent in the act of 
thinking. It avoids the fallacious argument according to the 
egocentric predicament, which has been the defeat of previous 
doctrines of a similar nature, and finds a meaning for non- 
verifiable judgments. This third doctrine is, in many respects, 
midway between the other two. Actual idealism agrees with 
traditional metaphysics that the Logos is necessary to phil- 
osophic truth: it agrees with the sceptic that this Logos may 
not transcend the act of thinking without renouncing its value- 
giving power. It both agrees and disagrees with the two. Ulti- 
mately there is no choice among the three. The advocacy of 
any one is dependent upon one's interpretation of the function 
of philosophy and, since that interpretation initiates every 
inquiry, it cannot be argued. 

Granted the legitimacy of the development of actual ideal- 
ism, is it valuable and important as a concept of the function 
of philosophy? Is Gentile's contribution in avoiding the pit- 



230 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

falls both of traditional metaphysics and of scepticism a sig- 
nificant one? Granted that he has worked out a metaphysical 
doctrine which is more than an arbitrary description, what has 
he as a result? Is actual idealism strong and vital or is it so 
emasculated by the rigidity of its initial assumptions as not 
to be worth putting to the uses that men put philosophic judg- 
ments? If we need a metaphysics, will Gentile's serve us? 
Granted, on the other hand, that he has avoided scepticism, 
was that worth doing? Do we need a metaphysics, or is it 
necessary only to move forward step by step with the help of 
tentative hypotheses? In short, granted the technical unique- 
ness of actual idealism what is its worth? The traditional 
metaphysician will stand up and say: "If this is the only meta- 
physics that is not purely descriptive, then philosophers must 
still rely upon description." And the sceptic will say in his 
turn: "If this is the only way of avoiding scepticism, then I 
must remain a sceptic." Without question Gentile has shown, 
and to this the traditional metaphysician and the sceptic will 
agree each against the other, both that the traditional meta- 
physician can boast an adequate description but never certain 
knowledge and that the sceptic cannot show us how to answer 
significant metaphysical questions that arise in the conduct of 
life. To this extent both are right and to the same extent both 
are wrong. Gentile has shown that we are not limited in our 
choice to these two philosophies, but can it be shown that the 
third choice, which he recommends, leads to any happier func- 
tion for the philosopher? Indeed, unhappy as each of the 
former two is in some respects, does actual idealism lead to even 
as happy a position? This is the final question. 

Consider first a comparison of the interpretations given by 
the traditional metaphysics and by actual idealism of the func- 
tion of philosophy. The former interprets philosophy as that 
science which gives a rational and self-consistent description 
of the real. There being a number of possible descriptions 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 231 

which fulfill these requirements, the metaphysician will find 
something more than mere self-consistency to recommend his 
particular one. This recommendation may not be on the basis 
of adequacy, for it is also possible to have a number of self- 
consistent descriptions each of which will be adequate. The 
recommendation will be in terms of the brilliancy or discern- 
ment of the insight which is incorporated. The religious man 
walking by the seashore will hear the voice of God upon the 
waters; the scientist will hear sound waves produced by the 
interplay of electronic forces. One man finds in events the 
realization of a high purpose and judges this the best of all 
possible worlds; another links events by a blind concatenation 
and thinks his world as neither good nor bad. Some men con- 
sider themselves pawns in a game which they cannot control; 
others think themselves centers of free action. There are so 
many varieties of descriptive metaphysics that it is difficult 
to make statements broad enough to include them all. But it 
is true for all of them, even for dualism, that the Logos tran- 
scends the act of thinking, and therefore may be known only 
by immediate intuition or insight. All such doctrines consider 
the significant stage in philosophic research to be not the 
intuiting, but the reflecting upon that which is intuited. 
"Truth" and "reality" are given objective meanings. In 
accordance with these meanings there are many possible meta- 
physical systems, each dependent upon its immediate intui- 
tions, each one developed consistently and each presumably 
adequate. But the immediate intuition is highly personal and 
no rational argument recommends it to others. It must be 
admitted that the traditional philosopher is dependent upon the 
insight of the poet, or upon his own insight as poet, for the 
material with which he shall work. 

The actual idealist should not think this situation alarm- 
ing. He must himself admit upon equal grounds three different 
types of philosophy (one his own) resulting from three differ- 



232 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

ent attitudes toward the Logos. And he cannot avoid depend- 
ence upon poetic insight for an interpretation of the function 
of philosophy which shall legislate an attitude toward the 
Logos. But Gentile has been right in pointing out that in the 
case of the traditional metaphysician not only does this thinker 
make an assumption with regard to the function of philosophy 
and the interpretation of its fundamental concepts but, having 
made this assumption, he must again seek poetry to find that 
insight into the nature of things upon which he shall build his 
rational system. His first assumption tells him that the real 
transcends, or is external in relation to, thinking. At this level 
the actual idealist has no advantage over him. But having 
affirmed that "reality" shall connote the external, how, more 
specifically, shall he describe it? And here, unless he is to 
embrace mysticism, which would obviously be to beg the ques- 
tion, his course can only be quite arbitrary. He cannot claim 
a more fundamental insight than his fellow metaphysician 
without appealing to the very insight which he is endeavoring 
to defend. One is not certain that the traditional meta- 
physician, or any metaphysician who depends upon a Logos 
which transcends the act of thinking, always realizes the extent 
to which his doctrines depend upon the poetic rather than the 
rational function in man. 

Although Gentile expresses an unmistakable disapproval of 
such a position, an examination of what he himself has to say 
shows that he simply interprets "philosophy" and "truth" and 
"reality" in a different way. He does not, and could not, con- 
vince his readers either that his is the only way of interpreting 
the philosopher's function or that it is the best way. It is quite 
evident that Gentile does not realize this. What he has done 
has been to demonstrate that he is able to begin by defining 
the fundamental concepts in ways supported by philosophic 
tradition and yet reach a metaphysical doctrine that is not 
dependent upon poetic insight with regard to the specific 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 233 

nature of the Logos and which, once the definitions are 
accepted, is necessarily true a priori. One may not approve 
the system which he has built but one can quarrel only with 
Gentile's interpretation of the key-concepts. Perhaps this is 
not difficult, but no argument arising out of this quarrel will 
be fruitful. In a sense Gentile is led astray by the character 
of the universal and necessary judgments which he employs. 
They are a priori only at the second level. He is never aware 
that the force of these judgments is ultimately dependent upon 
his interpretation of the function of philosophy and that it is 
entirely possible, and indeed to be expected, that discerning 
philosophers will often disagree with his interpretation and 
therefore not find his a priori judgments so forceful as he 
thinks them to be. This is one reason why he should be more 
careful than he is in the use of "absurd" to describe doctrines 
which contradict his. If one plays the philosophic game accord- 
ing to Gentile's rules, doctrines which contradict his are unten- 
able. But they are seldom absurd. There are other rules. 

What will be the result of a comparison of a non-meta- 
physical doctrine with actual idealism? What is the difference 
between the sceptic's and Gentile's interpretations of the func- 
tion of philosophy? Non-metaphysical philosophers interpret 
it chiefly as a study of the nature of knowledge and not at all 
as a study of the nature of reality. It is epistemological, not 
ontological. Indeed "reality" is for them a meaningless term 
in any but its most common significance. This is not to say that 
they have no metaphysics, but rather that their metaphysics 
is instrumental. They take the common-sense point of view 
that human beings as parts of the cosmos are confronted with 
other parts of it which are immediately intuitable. Their 
marked difference from all metaphysicians, traditional or other- 
wise, is illustrated by their assertion that philosophy cannot 
demonstrate any entity which ultimately makes thinking true 
or false. In other words, the Logos is omitted from their doc- 



234 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

trine. Accordingly philosophy is the building of hypotheses 
with regard to the nature of the cosmos and to our acquaint- 
ance with it, and the testing of these hypotheses pragmatically 
as we move forward to new ones. The philosopher, for them, 
does not seek universal and necessary truths. Philosophy is 
not a science of knowledge; it is a method of procedure. 

This doctrine, too, should in many ways be acceptable to 
the actual idealist. Knowledge for the actual idealist has the 
same character of tentativeness and change; philosophy 
involves a procedure in which each thought as pensiero pen- 
sato is born only to die in the act of thinking productive of the 
subsequent thought. But Gentile is right in pointing out that 
even the hypothetical method of the neo-positivist depends 
upon both the presupposition of some type of cosmos (e.g. 
uniform) and the blind acceptance of some value. If there were 
no presupposition as regards the cosmos there could be noth- 
ing on which to base an hypothesis. Even the theory of prob- 
ability is dependent upon a basic principle which is not re- 
garded as a pure probability. However, the cosmological pre- 
supposition of uniformity may without loss be itself regarded 
as an hypothesis. Perhaps there is escape from this first aspect 
of Gentile's charge. The problem of value is a more serious 
one. When we leave the realm of fact and seek guides for con- 
duct a situation similar to that faced by the traditional meta- 
physician arises. That is, not only is it necessary to make an 
initial assumption as to the function of philosophy but there 
must also be the blind acceptance of a value which will give a 
guide for conduct. This value may be as commonplace as one 
could wish, but it is nevertheless accepted blindly and arbi- 
trarily and must be so regarded in a theory of knowledge. We 
have again something on the second level which Gentile is able 
to avoid. One is not certain that the sceptic is always aware 
that he, or anyone who thinks and acts, is dependent upon 
value judgments. His scepticism makes no provision for them. 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 235 

Gentile expresses an unmistakable disapproval of the posi- 
tion of the sceptic, too. In this case, however, the strictness of 
his interpretation of the function of philosophy is more severely 
taxed, for the neo-positivist is himself more strictly critical in 
his interpretation of it than the traditional metaphysician. 
It does not seem difficult to point out that a metaphysical 
hypothesis is necessary as a prelude to any action. Gentile 
does not, and cannot, convince his readers that this meta- 
physical hypothesis is dangerous. He might, though he does 
not, argue that the acceptance of a value which is necessary to 
action does imply a metaphysics that is more than hypothetical. 
If he raises the question of how the hypotheses are to be tested 
(i.e. hypotheses which involve more than mere facts, and there 
must be such if thinking is to be significant for future action) 
the answer he will get will be in terms of " common sense." 
But why common sense? Here, as we have seen, we encounter 
the arbitrary again. Gentile has shown that the function of 
philosophy and its initial concepts may be so interpreted that 
nothing arbitrary enters as regards the Logos. Perhaps the 
gain is doubtful. Gentile has shown persuasive power, but it 
is difficult to compete against the persuasiveness of common 
sense. But on the second level his absence of presuppositions 
gives him a definite advantage over the sceptic, who in spite of 
his caution seems quite clearly not to be entirely without his 
metaphysical doctrines. It may well be argued that common 
sense is an extremely poor guide for humanity. 

Finally, what will be the outcome of a comparison of actual 
idealism with the cosmological doctrines of critical realists? 
Taken in and for itself, actual idealism seems to possess one 
major weakness and one major strength. It is in the consid- 
eration of these that this final comparison may best be made. 
The major weakness of actual idealism is that inherent in any 
solipsism. By its interpretation of the function of philosophy 
as thinking all things in their unity, according to a universal 



236 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

and necessary knowledge, it is forced to deny metaphysical 
significance to the specific and independent shocks and intru- 
sions of the cosmos. This must necessarily be so. If the known 
transcends the knower, as the cosmos is generally supposed 
to transcend the individual philosopher, it follows according 
to arguments already outlined at length that we cannot possess 
any true judgments about it. We may have a philosophically cer- 
tain knowledge about thinking, and in this way create gradu- 
ally a unification of reports from the various fields of human 
activity. But we may not have a philosophically certain knowl- 
edge about the cosmos. We may describe it poetically and we 
may develop hypotheses for action in it, but we may not know 
it philosophically. Hence cosmology plays but a minor role 
in philosophy; it systematizes the findings in the natural sci- 
ences, which are descriptions of the philosophically abstract. 
This is the Gentilian position. But does it not represent a 
serious limitation of the province of the philosopher? It may 
be agreed that the findings of physics with regard to the gravi- 
tational effect of one body on another, or the findings of chem- 
istry with regard to the combination of hydrogen and oxygen 
atoms to form water, are not part of the material of the phi- 
losopher's workshop. Nevertheless it ought to be a part of 
that workshop's raw material that the gravitational effect of 
one body on another is what it is and waits to be discovered 
by the physicist in a sense in which it is not entirely possible 
to say that the law of gravity is created by the physicist. He 
may create the law as a law (the form), but he surely does 
not create the fact that "1/d 2 " is a more accurate symbol in 
the law than "1/d 3 " would be. And the same argument holds 
for any example from the field of chemistry. Yet in the Gen- 
tilian metaphysics there is no possibility of including this 
experience. We may say again that Gentile has so interpreted 
the function of philosophy that on the ground set by his inter- 
pretation we cannot quarrel with him. Yet we must add that 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 237 

this interpretation is found in the end to be so inadequate in 
taking account of one of the most universal and convincing of 
human experiences that, for all its seeming merit in the initial 
stage, it is open to serious doubt. 

This weakness is the direct result of the outstanding 
strength of actual idealism. In philosophy weaknesses and 
strengths are complementary. Whenever the philosopher 
gains a victory on one line of battle he seems to defeat 
himself on another front. Gentile's great strength is found in 
his conception of truth as requiring moral freedom. An un- 
impassioned examination of our relation to truth shows clearly 
what Gentile has pointed out, that in a final analysis we accept 
a judgment as true not because of anything transcending us 
but because we think it true according to standards which we, 
in our own freedom, have selected. Even if we judge "Edin- 
burgh is north of London" as true, we so judge it because we 
are accepting settled standards as true standards. They are 
standards not because they are objective, but because we as 
thinkers have accepted them. Nothing that anyone tells us, 
no matter how great his authority or learning, is true for us 
until we as thinkers have accepted it as true. We would not 
value the truths we have collected if we did not recognize them 
as our own free acts. If we were forced to think them we could 
not value them as judgments. They would be thought regard- 
less of any will on our part to think them. And furthermore, 
since the truth value of a judgment is ultimately dependent 
upon an act of thinking which is within ourselves, in the sense 
that we are free to think it or not to think it and are not forced 
to the judgment by anything transcending us, all universal 
and necessary judgments are in this sense created by the 
act of thinking. We are in a very correct sense the 
creators of that world which we may know universally and 
necessarily. 

It is objected, even by Benedetto Croce, that what is here 



238 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

called a strength is the greatest weakness of actual idealism. 
It seems to open the way to every kind of impulsive and irra- 
tional judgment in the name of truth. Is whatever a man may 
think, or want to think, true? Is it not rather the virtue of 
philosophy that it fosters unimpassioned and impersonal intel- 
lection according to the rules of reason? Gentile has ques- 
tioned this customary attitude by arguing that intellection ac- 
cording to the rules of reason is thinking in a circle, wherein 
one arrives just where one started. He has brought to its most 
fundamental application, in the field of logic, a principle first 
recognized and respected by Plato in ethics, in spite of his 
ridicule of Protagoras' relativism of sensation. Plato con- 
tended that no man desires to act toward evil rather than 
good. Nor did Plato stop there. He even argued, upon occa- 
sion, that no man desires to think the false rather than the 
true. 2 But neither he nor Epictetus, who remembered those 
arguments and approved them, 8 saw the full application of 
the principle to an interpretation of knowledge and of reality. 
They were too busy thinking in terms of presupposed meta- 
physical systems. Just as every man's actions are good to 
himself, so every man's thinking is true to himself. Man's 
thinking is the measure of all things, even of the most funda- 
mental of all things, itself. The realization of this is the back- 
bone of Gentile's philosophy. Whatever a man thinks, he 
thinks as true; there still remains the possibility of distinguish- 
ing truth from opinion. 

The weakness is a product of the strength and the strength 
a product of the weakness. They form a dichotomy which 
prevents our retaining both the strength of actual idealism and 
the strength of a cosmology. Philosophy must renounce either 
its search for a universal and necessary truth according to 
the most strict requirements, or certain knowledge of anything 

a E g., Protagoras 357 and Sophist 230. 

8 The Discourses of Epictetus. Opening of Chapter XXVIII of Book One. 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 239 

transcending the act of thinking. The general nature of this 
crisis is not new to philosophy. It was faced specifically by 
Hume; and he gave the answer from deep in his heart that 
philosophy's pride in a universal and necessary knowledge 
must take a fall. But the crisis is new in this sense, that Gen- 
tile has developed an interpretation of the function of philoso- 
phy, based upon the synthetic judgment a priori, that would 
seem to be the only possible interpretation of it which will 
allow a necessary and universal philosophic knowledge accord- 
ing to the most strict requirements. He has in this sense com- 
pleted the task begun by Kant. Was it worth completing? The 
question that remains is whether or not Gentile's actual ideal- 
ism has enough strength to overcome its weakness, in view of 
its ability to give us that type of knowledge for which philoso- 
phers have continually sought. If we insist on interpreting the 
function of philosophy as giving a strictly universal and neces- 
sary knowledge, then Gentile's Sistema di logica seems to sug- 
gest the only doctrine at present open to human beings. If 
we are prone to accept a philosophy which boasts a cosmology, 
we shall search in another direction. But this problem is one 
to which philosophy itself is not eligible to give any final 
answer. 



This is actual idealism; its nature, its apologia, and its em- 
barrassments. Why give it so much attention? Why try to 
force it upon a world which has been so impatient with it? 
Surely it surpasses all other doctrines in the difficulties en- 
countered in endeavoring to understand it. It is almost impos- 
sible to express it accurately in black and white. It rejects 
summarily every theory of the nature of truth that man has 
thus far devised. It contradicts even the most secure tenets 
of common sense; without so much as excusing itself for doing 



240 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

so it pushes aside every empirical study of the cosmos as non- 
philosophical. It is the black sheep of the family and seems 
to exhibit no qualms of conscience or even alarm at its isola- 
tion. Solipsism! That epithet has been the bogey man of 
every philosopher's tale for many centuries. On rare occa- 
sions the critic in sheer exasperation at the weaknesses of his 
more conventional adversaries has let fall a word in praise of 
the consistency of the solipsist. But these few are the only kind 
words that have ever been said. 

One might picture actual idealism as a cone in unstable 
equilibrium, balanced between the regions of traditional meta- 
physics and the scepticism of neo-positivism. Of no other doc- 
trine can it be said as truly as of actual idealism that it main- 
tains its position out of sheer unwillingness to accept the diffi- 
culties inherent in the doctrines which surround it. Its very 
reason for being is found in these difficulties, and any thor- 
ough history of it or description of it must begin with a consid- 
eration of these other doctrines for, to change the metaphor 
momentarily, it is a modern building built not out of new 
bricks but out of bricks which have already been used to build 
older structures declared to be unsatisfactory. A cone in 
unstable equilibrium can fall to the right, or to the left, or 
directly forward (or backward); or it may remain on its 
point. There are only these possibilities from which to choose. 
The philosopher may be a traditional metaphysician; whether 
realist, critical realist, or objective idealist. Or he may reject 
all metaphysics and think of himself as the logical clarifier of 
empirical hypotheses. Or he may be an actual idealist. Or he 
may find some way of avoiding the first two possibilities which 
has not yet transpired. There is no other choice. Gentile's posi- 
tion is admittedly unstable. Half of his doctrine exerts a force 
which tries to bring him down into the region of the tradi- 
tional metaphysician; the other half tries to make him fall 
among the sceptics. The overhang of the cone represents the 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 241 

elements in his doctrine in common with each, metaphysics and 
scepticism; and the instability of his equilibrium represents 
his apparent vulnerability to the attacks of his adversaries. 
But the forces are equal and opposite and he remains where 
he is. Why this feat of balance? 

The traditional metaphysician is dependent upon immediate 
intuition. As both sceptic and actual idealist charge, he is 
chiefly a poet. He makes an arbitrary and intuitive selection 
from experience of what he thinks to be most significant. Is 
this the best of all possible worlds? Press Leibniz on this point 
and you find only a hunch. Is the world to be explained solely 
in terms of physical entities and the blind forces upon which 
they operate? Again, only a hunch. Is all reality gathered up 
into an Absolute which humans may approach but never fully 
understand? How did Hegel know? All of these descriptions 
come out of initial presuppositions and, when the system is 
complete, we are in possession of nothing that was not there 
at the beginning. And what was there at the beginning? Noth- 
ing but a poetic insight, about which no argument is possible. 
Philosophers have always argued, and they have argued be- 
cause of a conviction that argument fans the flame of knowl- 
edge. But the poet stands alone, inaccessible to other minds; 
and in a significant sense he is the severest solipsist of them 
all. We cannot accept the position of the traditional meta- 
physician because of a conviction that the philosopher deals 
with certain knowledge, not poetry. That is why Gentile does 
not yield to the one side and, after what modern logic has taught 
us about deductive systems, his reason may not be denied 
unless philosophy loses its identity in poetry. And then philos- 
ophy goes out of existence. 

The neo-positivist is dependent upon empirical observation 
and the logical clarification which philosophic argument gives 
it. Upon this observation, and with the aid of logical clarifica- 
tion, the hypotheses of which knowledge consists are built. 



242 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Admittedly this limits knowledge to a consideration of facts; 
past, present, and future. But what are we to do about facts? 
There is a whole sphere in which man seeks answers to ques- 
tions of value, that of the direction of human activity. If the 
logician and scientist take one step out of the laboratory they 
face these questions. Indeed, unless they are playing an intel- 
lectual game which has no real significance, the very fact of 
their remaining in the laboratory means that they are acting in 
terms of values. This is undeniable. No matter how many or 
how ingenious their hypotheses, they must somehow be tested 
in terms of non-hypothetical values. The neo-positivist may 
take the position that problems of value (i.e. any other than 
those of fact) are answerable only by descriptive and arbitrary 
hunches. But this is hardly credible. We do not know very 
much, but we do know that certain standards of value are 
better than others. We know that it is significant whether 
mankind takes this direction or that. We are not like the cat 
that walked by itself. The only other position open to the 
neo-positivist is the appeal to common sense in the selection 
of ultimate value. We want to live, and to live comfortably. 
It is difficult to know how to answer this except by saying that 
eminent men have come along, from Plato to Gentile, and said 
that there are higher goals for man than survival or physical 
comfort. Is mere survival, the being born and the drawing of 
breath and dying, good in itself? Is physical comfort intrin- 
sically desirable? Is not life given us for the valuable things 
we can do with it? Is not physical comfort desirable as that 
condition which makes attainment on another scale possible? 
We are, indeed, coming more and more to the realization that 
survival and physical comfort are conflicting aims, that mod- 
ern civilization is biologically detrimental. In the end it is 
survival that is basic to the neo-positivist's value structure. 
Yet when we think of the lives of Socrates and St. Francis and 
Erasmus and Gandhi mere survival becomes entirely empty. 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 243 

The philosopher must accept the problem of value. This is 
why Gentile does not yield to the other side. 

If this argument is correct, the problem of value is a mean- 
ingful one. The neo-positivist might go so far as to admit this, 
but stand firm nevertheless in the conviction that no matter 
how meaningful the problem of value it must be left to the 
poet. We have said that this seems hardly credible. It has 
been the contribution of actual idealism to demonstrate that 
so complete a scepticism is not tenable. Gentile has accepted 
the problem of value, and shown at the same time that as a 
philosopher, not a poet, he is able to give an answer to it. It 
has been said with almost tiresome repetition from Plato to 
Schlick that it would be imperative for a consistent solipsist 
to preserve an unbroken silence. But is not the situation the 
exact opposite? Is not Gentile the only one who may speak? 
The traditional metaphysician is a poet, expressing his own 
private and immediate intuitions. As a poet he may share 
them with others, but as a philosopher his judgments lack sig- 
nificance for others because these utterances may lay no claim 
to being contributions to knowledge. And the neo-positivist? 
So long as he remains within the narrow sphere of the empiri- 
cal, so long as he is only a laboratory assistant, he may lay 
claim to a limited type of knowledge. But when he faces prob- 
lems in that wider sphere in which we endeavor to know what 
to do with these empirical data, he maintains that there are no 
answers and must resign himself to the silence of the sceptic. 

But can we accept Gentile's doctrine that only thinking is 
real? Are not other men, and external objects, real? Of 
course they are in the usual sense. Actual idealism talks as 
much about the things of which we think as any other doctrine. 
It accepts naive realism, in its place. It enfolds all of the com- 
mon sense that thinkers have for centuries respected. It does 
not deny it its contribution but only tries to bring together this 
contribution and all of the others made by human thinking. 



244 THE IDEALISM OF GIOVANNI GENTILE 

Actual idealism has this advantage over every other solipsism 
that it, while ontologically logocentric, accepts the empirical 
existence of your body, your friends, the chair in which you 
are sitting, and the sun which is shining in at your window. 
Perhaps its greatest strength is its comprehensiveness. The 
traditional metaphysician has always fallen prey to the evil of 
over-emphasis he has run his poetic hunch into the ground 
by trying to describe all of human experience in terms of only 
a part of it. This is probably an accurate account of all tra- 
ditional metaphysics from materialism to absolute idealism. 
But actual idealism brings in all significances, poetic, religious, 
and scientific; and insists that each play its role in the whole. 
But it is only the whole that it has been willing to call philo- 
sophical. The study of the cosmos is not unimportant because 
it represents but one aspect of human thinking. 

The difficulty encountered in thinking of the cosmos as cre- 
ated by the act of thinking is deceptive. We do without revul- 
sion hear it said that the "realities" of religion are so created. 
Since the time of Kant, the philosopher has been willing to 
entertain seriously the idea that God is created by man, rather 
than man created by God. We do not find it hard to under- 
stand what this means. But close consideration of the problem 
will show that the situation in the field of religion is essen- 
tially parallel to that in the natural sciences. Religion would 
be pointless were it not that God and the moral law are taken 
to be objective in relation to us, as representative of some- 
thing to which the individual should submit. But this does not 
prevent our understanding of them as concepts developed in 
the history of human thought, as created by human thinking 
rather than existing in and for themselves. Precisely in the 
same manner the natural sciences would be pointless were it 
not that the cosmos is taken to be objective in relation to us. 
The cosmos is no more real than God, and no less. In this 
latter case, then, it should not be difficult to understand the 



THE CONTRIBUTION OF GENTILE 245 

cosmos as a concept created by the act of thinking. We should 
be quite as willing to entertain seriously the idea that man 
created nature. That we are not willing to do this may be a 
fair indication that we have thought more clearly in the field 
of religion than we yet have in the field of natural science. 

The danger in philosophy has always been, and this actual 
idealism makes more clear than any previous metaphysics has 
done, that one field of study should try to enfold the others. 
When the religious man has tried to deny the scientist his 
work, or the scientist denied the poet his, then man has become 
inexcusably narrow. Actual idealism is humanism par excel- 
lence. Humanism recognizes that all knowledge and all action 
are human knowledge and human action, and constantly en- 
deavors to embrace them all in the common goal of Bildung zur 
Humanitat. The doctrine that only the act of thinking is real 
is the broadest rather than the narrowest of doctrines. Poetry, 
because it is the expression of the inner self, has always been 
human. Since the time of Spinoza and Leibniz we have human- 
ized religion, and the gain to our understanding has been in- 
calculable. When the final fortress has fallen, when science 
has been humanized and taken its true and important place in 
human life and given up the claim to be everything, then 
humanism will be supreme. Then philosophy will exhibit that 
harmony and temperance which are its very soul. 



APPENDIX 
A GENTILE BIBLIOGRAPHY 



APPENDIX 
A GENTILE BIBLIOGRAPHY 

THIS bibliography is an attempt to unite, complete, and 
bring up to date previous bibliographies. Every detail of 
which we are in possession that might aid a student of Gentile 
is included. Many recent articles not listed will be found in 
Gentile's own review, Giornale critico della filosofia italiana. 
Others have appeared in La Critica, Levana, Educazione 
jascista, L'educazione nazionale, Rivista pedagogica, La 
nuova politica liberate (in 1925 changed to Educazione 
politico), La nuova scuola media, and / nuovi doveri. Fratelli 
Treves, in Milan, is undertaking to publish Gentile's complete 
works. 

A. The Writings of Giovanni Gentile 

A star (*) indicates that the work is of interest to the present study. 
A dagger (f) indicates that the work is important to the present study 
A double dagger ($) indicates that the work is essential to the present 
study. 

1. Delle Commedie di Antonjranceso Grazzi, detto "II Lasca" Pisa, 
Nistri, 1896. Extr. from Annali della R. Scuola Normale Superior e di 
Pisa. 

2. Una critica del materialismo storico. Livorno, Studi Storici, 1897 
Extr from Vol VI, fasc 3, of Studi stonci del Prof A Crivellucci. 
Repub. in La Filosofia di Marx. 

* 3. Rosmini e Gioberti Pisa, Annali della R Scuola Norm Pisa, 1898. 

* 4. La filosofia di Marx Studi Critici. Pisa, Orsolini-Prosperi, 1899. 

5. // concetto della storia. Pisa, Rigoli, 1899. Extr from Vol. VIII of 
Studi storici del Prof. A. Crivellucci. Repub. in Frammenti di estetica 
e letteratura. 

249 



250 APPENDIX 

* 6. Uinsegnamento della filosofia nei licei. Palermo, Sandron, 1900. 

Repub. in 1921 under the title, Difesa della filosofia. 

7. II concetto scientifico della pedagogia. From Rendiconti della R. 
Accademia dei Lincei, 1900. Repub. in Scuola e filosofia and in Educa- 
zione e scuola laica. 

8. Della vita e degli scritti di B. Spaventa. Discorso premesso al Scritti 
filosofici di B. Spaventa (Napoli, Morano, 1900). Repub. in 1920 in 
Bertrando Spaventa (Firenze, Vallecchi). 

* 9. Polemica hegeliana. Napoli, Pierro, 1902. Repub. in Saggi critici (I). 

10. Uunita della scuola secondaria e la liberta degli studi. Pa via, 1902. 
Repub. in Scuola e filosofia and in La nuova scuola media. 

*11. Filosofia ed empiricismo. Extr. from Rivista di filosofia e scienze 
affini, 1902. Repub. in Saggi critici (I). 

*12. La rinascita dell'idealismo. Napoli, 1903. Repub. in Saggi critici (I). 

*13. Dal Genovesi al Galluppi Napoli, Edizione della Cntica, 1903. 2nd 
edition, corrected and enlarged (2 vols.), 1930, as Storia della filosofia 
Italiana. Milano, Treves. (Opere complete di G. G.). 

14. Studi sullo Stoicismo romano del I sec. d. C. Trani, Vecchi, 1904. 

15. Riforme liceali. Roma, Tip. dell'Un. Coop. Editr., 1905. Repub in 
Scuola e filosofia and in Educazione e scuola laica, under the title 
Nuove minacce alia liberta e alia filosofia nell'insegnamento liceale. 

16. // figlio di G. B. Vico. Napoli, Pierro, 1905. Extr. from Arch. stor. 
per la prov. napol. Repub. in Studi sul rinascimento and in Studi 
vichiani (2nd edition) 

17. La riforma della scuola media. Roma, Tip. dell'Un. Coop. Editr., 
1906. Extr. from Rivista d'ltalia, gen., 1906. Repub. in Scuola e 
filosofia and in La nuova scuola media. 

18. Le varie redazioni del De Sensu Rerum di T. Campanella. Con Un 
saggio del testo italiano inedito. Napoli, Giannini, 1906. Repub. in 
Studi sul rinascimento. 

19. Giordano Bruno nella storia della cultura. Palermo, Sandron, 1907. 
Repub. in Giordano Bruno e il pensiero del rinascimento. 

20. // primo processo d'eresia di T. Campanella. Napoli, Pierro, 1907. 
Extr. from Arch. stor. per la prov. Napol. Repub. in Studi sul rinasci- 
mento. 

21. Per la scuola primeria allo stato. Palermo, Sandron, 1907. Repub. in 
Educazione e scuola laica. 

22. Vincenzo Gioberti nel primo centenario della sua nascita. Roma, Tip. 
Voghera, 1907. Extr. from Riv. d'ltalia, 1901. Repub. in Albori della 
nuova Italia, Part II. 



A GENTILE BIBLIOGRAPHY 

*23. // concetto delta storia delta filosofia. Extr. from Rivista filosofica, 
Pavia, 1908. Repub. in La ri forma delta dialettica hegeliana. 

24. Vincenzo Cuoco pedagogista. Roma, Tip. dell'Un. Coop. Editr., 1908. 
Repub. in Studi vichiam (1st edition only). Extr. from Riv pedag., 
1908. 

*25. Scuola e filosofia. Palermo, Sandron, 1908. Repub. in part in Educa- 
zione e scuola laica. 

26. Un poeta del pensiero. Cultura di Roma, del 1 marzo, 1911. Repub. 
in Saggi critici (II). 

*2 7. // modernismo e i rapporti fra religione e filosofia. Saggi. Bari, Laterza, 
1909. Bibhoteca di Cultura Moderna. 3rd edition, 1926. 

28. Bernardino Telesio. Bari, Laterza, 1911. Biblio di Cult. Mod Repub. 

in I problemi della scolastica e il pensiero italiano. 
f29. Uatto del pensare come atto puro. Vol. I of Annuario della Biblio. 

Fit. di Palermo, 1912. Repub. in La riforma della dialettica hegeliana. 
30. // programma della Biblioteca Filosofica di Palermo. Vol. I of Annuario 

della Biblio. Fil. di Palermo, 1912. Repub. in Saggi critici (II). 
f31. Intorno all'idealismo attuale: ricordi e confessioni. La Voce dell' 11 

die., 1913. Repub. in Saggi critici (II). 
32. / problemi della scolastica e il pensiero italiano. Bari, Laterza, 1913. 

Biblio. di Cult. Mod. 2nd edition, revised and enlarged, 1923; Lan- 

ciano, Carabba (Scntti vani di G. G., Vol. V). 
$33. La riforma della dialettica hegeliana. Messina, Principato, 1913. 

Studi filosofici diretti da G. G., Vol. I. 2nd edition, 1923. 
$34. Sommario di pedagogia come scienza filosofica. Bari, Laterza. Vol. I, 

1913; 4th edition in 1926: Pedagogia generate. Vol. II, 1914; 3rd edi- 
tion in 1925: Didattica. 

35. // tor to e il diritto del positivismo. Aprutium, fasc. aprile-maggio, 
1914. Repub. in Saggi critici (II). 

36. La filosofia della guerra. Palermo, Ergon, 1914. Conferenza tenuta in 
Palermo Til ottobre, 1914. Repub. in Guerra e fede. 

37. Pascuale Galluppi giacobino? Castello, Lapi, 1914. Repub. in Albori 
della nuova Italia (Lanciano, Carabba). 

38. Documenti pisani della vita e delle idee di V. Gioberti. Pisa, 1915. 
Repub. in Albori della nuova Italia. (Lanciano, Carabba.) 

*39. Donato Jaja. Pisa, Toscana, 1915. Extr. from Annuario R. Univ. di 

Pisa, 1914-5. Repub. in Frammenti di storia della filosofia. 
40. Biblografia delle letter e a stampa di V. Gioberti. Pisa, 1915. 

*41. Studi vichiani. Messina, Principato, 1915. Studi fil. dir. da G. G., 
Vol. III. 2nd edition, 1927, revised and enlarged. 



252 APPENDIX 

f42. L'esperienza pur a e la realta storica. Prolusione al corso di filosofia 
teoretica tenuto nella R. Universita di Pisa, il 14, novembre, 1914. 
Firenze, La Voce, 1915. 

43. Per la nforma deghe msegamenti filosofici. Catania, Battiato, 1916. 
Repub in Educazione e scuola laica. 

44. // concetto dell'uomo nel rinascimento. Torino, 1916. Repub. in 
Giordano Bruno e il pensiero del rinascimento 

f45. / fondamenti della filosofia del diritto. Roma, De Alberti, 1916. Extr. 

from Annali dell' Universita Toscane, Pisa, 1916. 2nd edit , 1923. 
$46. Teoria generate dello spirito come atto puro. Pisa, Spoerri, 1916 4th 

edition in 1924, Bari, Laterza. Trans into English by H. Wildon Carr 

in 1922 (Macmillan, London). Trans, into French by A Lion in 1925 

(Paris, Libraire Felix Ahan) 
$47. Le origini della filosofia contemporanea in Italia. Messina, Principato, 

1917-23. Studi fil dir. da G. G. First appeared in La Critica } from 

1903 on. 

$48. Sistema di logica come teoria del conoscere. Pisa, Spoerri, 1917 2nd 
edition, Bari, Laterza, in 1922 (Vol I) and 1923 (Vol II). 

*49. // carattere storico della filosofia itahana Bari, Laterza, 1918. Pro- 
lusione al corso di storia della filosofia nella R Universita di Roma, 
tenuto il 10, gennaio, 1918. Repub. in 2nd edition of / problemi della 
scolastica e il pensiero itahano. 

*50. Esiste una scuola itahana? Bologna, 1918. Lettera aporta a S. E. 

Bernini Repub in La nuova scuola media and in // problema scolas- 

tico del dopoguerra. 
*51. // Marxismo di Benedetto Croce Res to del Carlmo del 14 maggio, 

1918 Repub in Saggi cntici (II). 

52. // tramonto della cidtura Sicihana. Bologna, Parma, 1919. Extr from 
La Cntica, 1915. 

53. Mazzim. Caserta, Marino, 1919. Repub. in / profeti del Risorgi- 
mento Italiano. 

54. // realismo politico di V. Gioberti. In Politica, 1919 Repub. in I pro- 
feti del Risorgimento Italiano. 

*55. Guerra e jede. Frammenti politici. Napoli, Ricciardi, 1919. 2nd edi- 
tion in 1927 (Roma, de Alberti). 

*56. Dopo la vittoria Nuovi frammenti politici Roma, La Voce, 1920. 

*57. II problema scolastico del dopoguerra. Napoli, Ricciardi, 1920. Repub. 
in La nuova scuola media. 

f58. La n forma dell'educazione. Discorsi ai maestri di Trieste. Bari, 
Laterza, 1920 2nd edition in 1923, Scntti filosofici di G G , Vol. 



A GENTILE BIBLIOGRAPHY 253 

VI. 3rd edition in 1929, Milano, Treves, Opere complete di G G., 
Vol I. Trans, into English in 1922 by Dino Bigongiari (New York, 
Harcourt Brace). 

f59. Discorsi di religione. Firenze, Vallecchi, 1920. 2nd edition in 1924. 
3rd in 1934 (Firenze, Sansoni). 

60. Giordano Bruno e il pensiero del rinascimento. Firenze, Vallecchi, 

1920. 2nd edition in 1925. 

*61. Arte e religione. In Giornale critico; 1920, fasc. IV. Repub. in Dante 
e Manzoni. 

62. Bertrando Spaventa. Firenze, Vallecchi, 1920. See No. 8. 

*63. Difesa delta filosofia. Lanciano, Carabba, 1920. Scritti varii di G. G., 
Vol. IV. See No. 6. 

64. Storia della cultura piedmontese della 2a meta del sec. XIX. In La 
Critica, 1921. 

65. Frammenti di estetica e letteratura. Lanciano, Carabba, 1921. Scritti 
varii di G. G., Vol. I. 

66. Albori della nuova Italia. Varieta e document!, Lanciano, Carabba, 

1921. Scritti varii di G. G., Vols. II and III. 

*67. Educazione e scuola laica. Firenze, Vallecchi, 1921. 3rd edition in 
1927. 4th edition in 1932 (Milano, Treves-Treccani-Tommmelli). 

f68. Saggi critici. Serie prima. Napoli, Ricciardi, 1921. 

69. La filosofia di Dante. In Dante e L f Italia; Roma, Besso, 1921. Repub. 

in Dante e Manzoni. 

f70. // concetto moderno della scienza e il problema universitario. Roma, 
Libreria di Cultura, 1921. 

71. G. Capponi e la cultura toscana nel secolo decimonono. Firenze, Val- 
lecchi, 1922. 2nd edition in 1926. 

72. Studi sul rinascimento. Firenze, Vallecchi, 1923. 

73. Dante e Manzoni, con un saggio su Arte e religione. Firenze, Valecchi, 
1923. 

*74. I profeti del Risorgimento Italiano. Firenze, Vallecchi, 1923. 2nd 

edition in 1928. 
$75. Intorno alia logica del concrete. Giornale critico, 1924, fasc, III. 

76. Preliminari allo studio del janciullo. Roma, De Alberti, 1924. 3rd 
edition in 1929 (Milano, Treves). 4th edition in 1934 (Firenze, 
Sansoni). 

77. a riforma della scuola. Discorso tenuto il 15, novembre, 1923, al 
Consiglio Superiore della P. I. Bari, Laterza, 1924. Repub. in // 
jascimo al governo della scuola. 



254 APPENDIX 

78. // fascismo e la Sicilia. Discorso tenuto nel Teatro Massimo di 
Palermo, il 31. marzo, 1924. Roma, De Alberti, 1924. Repub. in // 
fascismo al governo delta scuola. 

f79. // fascismo al governo della scuola. Discorsi e interviste raccolte e 
ordinate da F. E. Boffi. Palermo, Sandron, 1924. 

f80. Che cosa e fascismo. Discorsi e polemiche. Firenze, Vallecchi, 1925. 

*81. La nuova scuola media. Firenze, Vallecchi, 1925. 

82. Avvertimenti attualisti. Giornale critico, 1926, fasc. I. 
83. Frammenti di storia della filosofia. Lanciano, Carabba, 1926. Scritti 
varii di G. G., Vol. V. 

*84. Saggi critici. Seconda serie. Firenze, Vallecchi, 1926. 
85. L'eredita di Vittorio Alfieri. Venezia, 1926. 

f86. Cultura fascista. Roma, De Alberti, 1926. 

*87. // problema religioso in Italia. In Educazione fascista, 1927, fasc. I. 

*88. // pensiero italiano del secolo XIX. Milano, Treves, 1928. 

f89. Fascismo e cultura. Milano, Treves, 1928. 

*90. La filosofia del fascismo. In Educazione fascista f Nov. 1928. Repub. 
in Origini e dot trine del fascismo. 

*91. La legge del Gran Consiglio. In Educazione fascista, sett., 1928 Re- 
pub, in Origini e dottrina del fascismo. 

92. Manzoni e Leopardi. Saggi critici. Milano, Treves, 1929. Opere 
complete di G. G. 

*93. Origini e dottrina del fascismo. Roma, Libreria del Littorio, 1929. 

*94. La filosofia deWarte. Milano, Treves, 1931. Opere complete di G. G. 

95. Introduzione alia filosofia. Milano, Treves, 1933. 

96. La donna e il fanciullo. Due conferenze. Firenze, Sansoni, 1934. 

97. Origini e dottrina del fascismo. Roma, Instituto Nazionale Fascista di 
Cultura, 1934. 2nd edition of No. 93. 

98. Leonardo da Vinci. Gentile one of contributors. Roma, Istituto deir 
Enciclopedia Italiana, 1935. 

B. Material edited by Gentile 

1. B. Spaventa. Scritti filosofici, raccolte e pubblicati con note e con 
discorso sulla vita e sulle opere dell* A., di G. G. Napoli, Morano, 1900. 

2. B. Spaventa. Principii di etica, ristampati con prefazione e note di 
G. G. Napoli, Pierro, 1904. 

3. B. Spaventa. Da Socrate a Hegel, a cura di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 1905. 

4. F. Fiorentino. Elementi di filosofia ad uso dei licei, a cura di G. G. 
Torino, Paravia, 1907. 2nd edition, 1922. 



A GENTILE BIBLIOGRAPHY 255 

5. G. Bruno. Opere Italiene. I. Dialoghi metafisica. II. Dialoghi morale. 
Con note di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 1907-8. 2nd edition, revised and 
enlarged, 1926. 

6. V. Cuoco. Scritti pedagogici inediti o ran, raccolti e publicati con note 
e appendice di document! da G. G. Roma, Albrighi e Segati, 1909. 

7. B. Spaventa. La filosofia italiana nelle sue relazione con la filosofia 
europea, nuova edizione con note, a cura di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 1909. 
3rd edition in 1926. 

8. I. Kant. Critica della ragione pura. Trad, da G. G. e G. Lombardo- 
Radice. 2 vol. Bari, Laterza, 1910. 2nd edition in 1919-20. 

9. V. Gioberti. Letter e inedite di V. Gioberti e saggio d'una bibliografia 
deWespistolario, a cura di G. G. Palermo, 1910. 

10. B. Spaventa. Logica e metafisica, a cura di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 1911. 

11. B. Spaventa. La politica del Gesuiti nel sec. XVI e nel XIX, a cura di 
G. G. Roma, Albrighi e Segati, 1911. 

12. V. Gioberti. Nuova protologia. Brani scelti da tutta le sue opere e 
ordinati da G. G. 2 vols. Bari, Laterza, 1912. 

13. G. Vico. Le orazioni inaugurali, il De Italorum Sapientia e le polemiche, 
a cura di G. G. e F. Nicolini. Bari, Laterza, 1914. 

14. A. Rosmini. // principio della morale, a cura di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 
1914. 4th edition in 1930. 

15. T. Campanella. Poesie, a cura di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 1915. 

16. B. Spinoza. Ethica, testo latino con note di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 1915. 

17. B. Spaventa. Introduzione alia critica della psicologia empirica, fram- 
menti inediti pubblicata da G. G. Pisa, Toscano, 1915. 

18. C. Landino. De Anima libri tres, a cura di G. G. (negli Annali delle 
Univ. T os cane, 1915, e segg.). 

19. A. Rosmini. Del principio supremo della metodica e Veducazione dell' 
infanzia, con altri scritti pedagogici, a cura di G. G. Torino, Paravia, 
1916. 3rd edition in 1930. 

20. G. Galilei. Frammenti e lettere, con introduzione e note di G. G. 

21. G. Leopardi. Operette morali, con proemio e note di G. G. Bologna, 
Zanichelli 1918. 2nd edition in 1925. 

22. N. Tommaseo. Nove lettere di N. Tommaseo a Silvestro Centofanti, 
pubblicate da G. G. (nella Raccolta di Studi di storia e critica Utter aria 
dedicata a F. Flamini, 1918, pp. 617-34). 

23. F. De Sanctis. Mazzini, cinque lezioni a cura di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 
1920. 

24. B. Spaventa. La liberta d'insegnamento, con introduzione di G. G. 
Firenze, Vallecchi, 1920. 



256 APPENDIX 

25. F. De Sanctis. Manzoni, studi e lezioni a cura di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 
1922. 

26. F. Florentine. Lo stato moderno, a cura di G G. Roma, De Albert!, 
1924. 

27. P. Pomponazzi. De immortalitate anima, a cura di G. G. Messina, 
Principato, 1925. 

28. A. Rosmini. Introduzione alia filosofia, a cura di G. G. Bari, Laterza, 
1925. 

29. C. Cavour. Scritti politici, nuovamente raccolte a pubblicate (con una 
prefazione) da G. G. Roma, 1925. 

30. V. Alfieri. Ueredita di Vittorio Alfieri, a cura di G. G. Venezia, La 
nuova Italia, 1926. 

31. C. Capponi. Le piu belle pagine di Gino Capponi, scelte da G. G. 
Milano, Treves, 1926. 

32. G. Sante Felice. I filosofi delta Rinascenza e le riforma religiosa del sec. 
XVI, a cura di G. G. Roma, De Alberti, 1927. 

33. V. Gioberti. Epistolario Ediz nazionale a cura di G. G e G Balsamo- 
Crivelli. Firenze, Vallecchi. Vols. I, II, III, and IV in 1928. Vol. V 
in 1930. 

34. Enciclopedia Italiana. In corso di stampa. Vol. I in 1928. Roma, 
Fondazione Treccani. 

35. Carlo Alberto. Lettere di Carlo Alberto a Ottavia Tkaon di Revel, 
a cura di G. G. Milano, Treves, 1931. 

36. R. Bonghi. Opere. Vol. I. Scritti politici, a cura di G. G. Milano, 
Mondadori, 1933. 

37. R. Bonghi. Programme politici e partiti, a cura di G. G. Milano, 
Mondadori, 1933. 

38. F. Fiorentino. Ritratti s tor id e saggi critici, raccolti da G. G. Firenze, 
Sansoni, 1935. 

C. Recent Books with Prefaces by Gentile 

1. Sebastiano Maturi. Introduzione alia filosofia, con pref. di G. G. (?) 

2. Alfredo Oriani. La lotta politica in Italia. Pref. di G. G. Bologna, 
1925. 

3. V. Salvestrini. Bibliografia delle opere di Giordano Bruno e degli 
scritti addesso attenenti Pref. di G. G. Pisa, 1926. 

4. E. Loline. Per I'attuazione dello stato fascista, con pref. di G. G. 
Firenze, Vallecchi, 1928. 

5. F. Montalto. Uintuizione e la verita di fatto. Pref. di G. G. Roma, 
Ausonia, 1930. 



A GENTILE BIBLIOGRAPHY 257 

6. Mahatma Gandhi Autobiografia, a cura di C. G. Andrews. Pref. di 
G. G. Milano, Treves, 1931. 

7. A. Franzoni. Metodo Agazzi. Pref. di G. G. Roma, Associazione Edu- 
catrice Italiana, 1931. 

8. G. M. Bertini. Idea di una filosofia della vita. Pref. di G. G. Firenze, 
Le Monnier, 1933. 

9. G Tallarico. La vita degli alimentt. Con pref. di G. G. Firenze, San- 
soni, 1934. 

10. G. Gabriel. Musica a centimetri. Lettera-Pref. di G. G. Roma, 
"Ausonia", 1934. 

ILL. Russo Vita e disciplina militare. Pref. di G. G. Firenze, Le Mon- 
nier, 1934. 

12. L Chiarini Cinematografo. Con pref. di G. G. Roma, Cremonese,, 
1935. 

D. Series Directed by Gentile 

1. Studi filosofici. Messina, Principato. 

2. Filosofici antichi e medievali. Bari, Laterza. 

3. Classici della filosofia moderna (with B. Croce). Bari, Laterza. 



INDEX 



A A, 59ff, 145-6, 169-70. 

Absolute, Hegelian, 5, 6, 8, 98, 162, 
241, also 89, 226. 

Abstract, use of word, 13, 16, 58, 59; 
entities, 175. See Logic. 

Absurd, use of word, 136. 

Act of thinking, the only real, 8-9, 
10-16, 46, 138-9, 171, 201-2, 205, 
243-5, see Nature and Solipsism; 
character of, see Pensiero pensante; 
Fact , Unity 

Actual idealism, advantage of, 244; 
and dualism, 202 ; and empirical in- 
dividual, 175-6; and problem of 
multiplicities, 10; character of, 3, 
8, 24, 31, 137, 166, 167, 225, 239- 
240; comprehensiveness of, 244; 
contribution of, 239 ; historical place 
of x, 3-8; humanism of, 10, 245; 
greatest obstacle facing, 105 ; im- 
manentism of, 9, 41, 127; relation 
to Italians, xiv; morality of, 21; 
most serious difficulty facing, 185; 
place of, 229, 239-45; quest of, 16; 
strength and weakness of, 237-8; 
uniqueness of, 163. See Cone; Criti- 
cal realism; Neo-positivism ; Real- 
ism, Scepticism; Traditional meta- 
physics. 

Actualism, of actual idealism, 4, 21-2, 
178 

Afermazione, affermante and affer- 
mato, 60. 

Affirmation, two ways of considering, 
60 

Alexander, Time, Space and Deity, 
180 n 22 

Analysis, 141, 159-60, 227-8 (sum- 
mary) ; of judgment, 64-7. 

Anything and everything, 163-4. 

A priori, character of truth, 41-2, 45; 
of G's basic judgment, 205-6. 

Ardigo, 10 

Aristotle, categories, 97-9; knowledge, 
83, 112; logic, 139, 145, 162; mat- 
ter, 187-8; also 77, 142, 209. 



Art, a stage in dialectic, 17-18, 101; 

status of, 101-2. See Poet; Poetry. 
Assumptions, and presuppositions, 117, 

142, 227. 
Atomists, 162. 
Aufklarungszeit, 27. 
Autoconcept, 102-3. 
Autonoema, 90, 91, 93. 
Autosyllogism, 934. 
Autosynthesis, 95. 
Avenanus, 119. 

Bacon, Francis, 162. 

Beauty, illusiveness of, 18. 

Becoming, 49, 87. 

Being, 48; and thought, 63; criticism 
of thought as Being in logic of ab- 
stract, 145-6, 226 (summary). 

Berkeley, and G, 31; 12, 40. See 
Esse est percipi. 

Bildung zur Humanitdt, 28, 245. 

Blumberg, 204 n 1, 215, 220. 

Body, problem of, 195-6. 

Brain, 97. 

Burnett, on Logos, 34. 

Carnap, 203, 204. 
Carr, xiv, xvi. 
Categories, 97-101, 160-1. 
Catholic philosophers, and G., 10. 
Certainty, and knowledge, 44-5, 46; 

quest for, 162, 199, 229. 
Circularity of thought, 62-3, 77, 80. 

See Desire for the circle. 
Classic problems of philosophy, 

handled by actual idealism, 161. 
Clocks, example of, 201. 
Cogito ergo sum, 44-5, 82, 172, 176. 

See I think, therefore I am. 
Coherence theory of truth, and G's 

theory, 220. 

Common sense, 12, 114, 218, 235, 242. 
Concept, 72; impossibility of avoid- 
ing, 106-7, 175. 
Concrete, use of word, 13, 59, 68 n. 

20, 77. See Logic. 



259 



260 



INDEX 



Cone, example of, 240-1. 

Copermcan revolution in philosophy, 
82, 98. 

Cosmological question, 188ff; as in- 
dictment of G's metaphysics, 200-1. 

Cosmology, place of, 189, 197, 236. 

Cosmos, reality of, 235-6, 243-5. See 
Nature. 

Cialilus, 126. 

Creativity of subject, 10, 83, 115, 150, 
236, 244; of form, 193. 

Critical realism, 114, 177, 179, 185, 
235-6. 

Criticisms, of Sistema di logica, 142, 
146-7, 151-2, 158-9, 159-60, 226-8 
(summary) ; of G's terminology, 
Chap. VI, 225 (summary) 

Critique of Pure Reason, 136. 

Croce, and G , xi, xh, 7-8 ; criticism 
of G., 237-8. 

Deduction, 156-7. See Circularity. 
Descartes, and G, 31; and error, 50; 

and innate ideas, 39; also 44, 81, 82, 

176. See Cogito ergo sum; I think, 

therefore I am 
Description, philosophy as, 179, 180-1, 

230-1, 241. 

Desire for the circle, 80, 106. 
Dewcy, 211 
Dialectic, criticism of G's, 172-4; 

Fichte and G , 31 ; Hegelian, 5, 162 ; 

logic of, 162, three stages in, 17-20; 

truth of, 150-6 

Dialectizing of concept, 102-3. 
Difference-relation, 84. 
Differentia, 72. 
Discipline, 23. 

Dogmatic, use of word, 135-6. 
Dogmatism, 81. 

Dual character of actual idealism, 24. 
Dualism, 201-2; of body and soul, 

195-6. 

Education, 106; philosophy of, 26-9; 
and concept of truth and error, 51- 
52. 

Ego, compared to light, 86; G's use 
of, 157-8; G's use of criticized, 
168-76, 226 (summary) ; of Fichte, 
5 ; Perry and, 167-8 , two Ego's, 86-7, 
173. 

Ego=Ego, 79, 85, 169-70, 171. 

Ego=Not-Ego, 84-5, 86, 173. 

Egocentric predicament, 113, 163ff.; 



G's avoidance of Perry's charge, 
165-6. 

Ego makes itself Ego, 85, 172. 

Eleatics, 61. 

Empirical individual, 175-6. See 
Other men. 

Empiricism, 40. 

Epictetus, 238. 

Epicurus, 66. 

Erasmus, 242. 

Error, concept of, 50-5, 76; use of 
word, 125-30. 

Esse est per dpi, 31, 105. 

Essence, 177-9. 

Eternity of truth, 49-50. 

Ethics, of G., 219-20. 

Excluded Middle, Principle of, 61-2; 
and syllogism, 69; metaphysical use 
of, 63-4; metaphysical use of criti- 
cized, 145-6, 226 (summary). 

Existence, 177-9. 

External relations, doctrine of, 139- 
140, 201. 

Fact, 9, 25-6, 37, 45, 67, 76, 218. 

Faith, and knowledge, 43-5. 

Feigl, 204 n. 1, 215, 220. 

Fichte, and G., 4-5, 31; also, ix, 6, 7, 
17, 119. 

Fiorentino, x. 

Form, 83, 93, 186ff, 193-5. 

Forms of judgment. See Judgment. 

Freedom, 23, 91-2. See Spinoza. 

Function of philosophy. See Phi- 
losophy. 

Fundamental law of logic of concrete, 
84-5. 

Fundamental principles of logic of 
abstract, 59-62, 147. 

Galileo, 197. 

Galluppi, ix, xv. 

Gandhi, 216, 242. 

Gentile, life of, xi-xiv; problem of, 

119-20. 
Genus, 72. 
German idealism, compared to Italian, 

xiv-xv; and G., 6-7. See Kant; 

Fichte; Hegel. 
Gioberti, x, xi, xv, 111. 
God, concept of, 10, 18, 19, 244; in 

example, 66. 
Gorgias, 192. 
Gorgias, 4. 
Grammar, 65-6. 
Gravitational force, example of, 236. 



INDEX 



26l 



Heart, 97. 

Hegel, and G , 5-6 ; also ix, x, xi, xii, 

xv, 7, 98, 160, 162,241. 

Hegelians, 6, 138 

Heraclitus, 34, 87. 

HeKer, 27. 

History, philosophy of, 24-6 

Human beings, status of, 14-15. See 
Other men. 

Humanism of actual idealism, 10, 20, 
21, 245. 

Human activity, major phases of, 17; 
three stages of development of, 101 
See Art, Religion, Science; Phi- 
losophy. 

Humanities, 28-9. 

Humboldt, von, 27 

Hume, 40, 239. 

Hylozoists, 19. 

Hypothetical knowledge, and neo- 
positivism, 216, and problem of 
value, 214, 216-17, 241-2. 

I am nature, 79, 169-70 

Idealism, characterized by G , 83 ; G's 
definition of, 186; ontological, 163; 
Perry's three types of, 166-7. See 
Actual idealism 

Identity, Principle of, 59-60; subjec- 
tive and objective, 85. 

Identity-relation, 59-60, 64-5. 

Immanent Logos, 41. 

Immanentism, of actual idealism, 9, 
41, 127. 

Immediate, knowledge, 43-5, 166; in- 
tuition, 116-17, 166; use of word, 
157 n 16 See Faith; Mediate; Pre- 
supposition. 

Independence of nature and real. See 
Nature; Real 

Individual, and state, 23-4; unac- 
counted for in actual idealism, 175- 
176 

Induction, 71; logic of, 162. 

In interiore homine, of society and 
state, 22-3 

Internal relations, doctrine of, 139- 
140, 201. 

Internationalism, 22-3. 

Intuition See Immediate 

I think . . . , 35, 45, 48, 88, 156; 
for neo-positivist and idealist, 
217. 

I think, therefore I am, 31, 34. See 
Cogito ergo sum. 



I think, therefore thinking is, 31, 172. 
I think I think, therefore I am, 44. 

Jaja, x, xii. 

James, 161, 199. 

Joad, 6, 7 

Johnson, Samuel, 12. 

Judgment, analysis of, 64; as syn- 
thesis, 66, forms of abstract, 68; 
forms of concrete, 92. 

Justin, 34. 

Kant, and G., 3-4, 239; and the cate- 
gories, 98-9, 160, 162; and knowl- 
edge, 40, 162, 186, dualism of, 202; 
form and matter, 186-7; pure and 
practical reason, 4, 47 ; subjective 
element in, 82 , synthetic judgment 
a priori, 239; religion, 244; also 
ix, xv, 9 n 2, 63 n 9. 

Knowledge, and faith, 43-5; use of 
word, 125; definition of for neo- 
positivist, 203-4. See Philosophy; 
Truth. 

Know thyself, 91. 

La scienza nuova, ix. 

Law, and liberty, 24, 91-2. See Moral 
law; Natural law 

Leibniz, and problem of the individ- 
ual, 176, used as example, 36, 241; 
also 63 n. 9, 100, 245. 

Levels of presuppositions See Pre- 
suppositions 

Liberty, and law, 24, 91-2. 

Logocentric predicament, 9, 177. 

Logos, attempts to avoid transcendent, 
39-40, defined, 34-5, immanent, 
41, 127; transcendent, 36-7; three 
doctrines with regard to, 228-9; 
two types of, 126. 

Logic, abstract, 16, 58-9, 73, 88; ab- 
stract and concrete, 59, 78, 82, 88, 
147-9, 156-7; transition from ab- 
stract to concrete, 77-9, of contra- 
dictories, 16, Hegelian, 17; noetic 
and relational, 33, 144-5; G's defi- 
nition of, 32-3. See Metaphysics 

Maeterlinck, 123. 

Man is the measure of all things, 31, 

111. 
Man's thinking is the measure of all 

things, 238. 
Materialist, and G., 129, 131. 



262 



INDEX 



Matter, 83, 93, 186ff , 193-5. 

Meaningfulness, of metaphysics, 209ff; 
of actual idealism, 218; of real, 212; 
of synthetic judgments a priori, 
211. 

Mediate, knowledge, 43-5, 166; use of 
word, 157 n. 16, 166. 

Mediacy of thinking, 44-5, 48; of 
truth, 47-8. 

Metaphysics, G's not analytic, 208-9; 
uniqueness of G's, 183; meaningful- 
ness of, 209-10, 218, two realms open 
to, 196, and logic identified, 33-5, 
77, 94-5; in logic of abstract, see 
Excluded Middle, and scepticism, 
201. See Traditional metaphysics. 

Metaphysical judgments, synthetic a 
priori character of, 207-9. 

Methodological difficulty, 113, 163, 
164-6. See Egocentric predicament; 
Perry. 

Monadology, 36 

Morality of truth, 42-3, 46-7, 91, 237. 

Moral law, 10, 19, 244. 

Multiplicities, problem of, 10-16. See 
Nature; Cosmos; Unity. 

Mysticism, 125, 232. 

Nationalism, 22-3. 

Natural science, status of, 16, 101, 
189-91, 212-14, 244-5; as a stage 
in dialectic, 18-20, 101 ; neo-positi- 
vism and actual idealism on status 
of, 236, truth for, 128. 

Natural law, 10, 11, 191, 244; neo- 
positivism and actual idealism on 
status of, 236. 

Nature, status of, 10, 15-16, 168, 169- 
170; objects of, 14; independence 
of, 114; 188ff., 193-4, 197; indict- 
ment of G's concept of, 193-7; 
reality of, 243-5; use of word, 
64 n 11. 

Nature= Nature, 79. 

Necessity, a criterion of truth, 35; of 
predicate, 66-7; of synthetic judg- 
ments a priori, 94-5; of dialectic, 
151-2; use of word, 66 n 15, 132. 

Negation, involved in any affirmation, 
60; use of word, 59 n. 2, 104. 

Neo-positivist, and metaphysics, 115, 
203 ff., 210-11; and the function of 
philosophy, 214-15, 233-5; use of 
hypothetical judgments, 215-16; 
and problem of value, 217-18, 243; 



and problem of knowledge, 241-2; 

and actual idealist, 211, 217-18; and 

synthetic judgments a priori, 207- 

208. 

Neuhumanismus, 27, 28. 
Noema, 90, 93. 
Noetic logic, 33-4, 144-5. 
Non-contradiction, Principle of, 61. 
Nor ma sui character of concrete judg- 
ments, 42, 89, 94-5; criticism of, 

151-2, 227 (summary). 
Not-Being, 48. 
Not-Ego, compared to shadow, 86; 

place in dialectic, 168, 170, 173; 

necessity to dialectic, 194; G's use 

of criticized, 174. 
Noumenon, 4, 6, 8, 40, 82 n. 12, 98, 

114, 197, 202, 226. 
Noun, 65-6. 

Oak tree, example of, 8. 

Object, universality of, 124; thought 

as, 64. See Pensiero pensato. 
Official meter, example of, 38. 
Ontological argument, 178. 
Ontological idealism. See Idealism. 
Opinion, 36. 

Opposition, two types in logic, 61. 
Other men, status of, 14-15, 137-8, 

243. 
Ought of thinking, 45. 

Parmenides, 34, 48, 126, 148, 149. 

Parmenides, 189. 

Part, and whole, 12, 159, 228. See 
Analysis 

Particular, universalized in induction, 
71; status of, 195. 

Particular judgments, problem of in 
dialectic, 152; of Aristotle, 66 n. 16. 

Particularity, of object as one condi- 
tion of thought, 124; of subject, 
66-7. 

Pensiero pensante, 46, 58, 75, 148; 
takes place of Ego in dialectic, 158, 
I73ff, 226 (summary) ; norma sui 
character of, 227 (summary) ; neces- 
sity of, 150-3 ; universality of, 
153-4; value of, 154-6; and form, 
187. See Act of thinking. 

Pensiero pensato, 46, 58, 75, 148, 158; 
takes place of Not-Ego in dialectic, 
173ff; necessity and universality 
and value of, 156; and matter, 187. 
See Fact; Nature; Cosmos. 



INDEX 



263 



Perry, and egocentric predicament, 
163, 177; criticism of, 164; G's 
avoidance of his charge, 165-6; 
ontological idealism, 163; and self, 
167; three types of idealism out- 
lined by, 167; also 176, 179. 

Philo, 34. 

Philosopher, three paths open to, 118- 
119, 240. 

Philosophic thought, two conditions 
of, 124 

Philosophy, defined by G, 122-3; 
function of, 12, 124, 245, 238-9; 
realist's concept of function of, 
182, 198; critical realist's concept of 
function of, 198-9, neo-positivist's 
concept of function of, 214-15; tra- 
ditional metaphysician and actual 
idealist on function of, 230-3, neo- 
positivist and actual idealist on 
function of, 233-5; critical realist 
and actual idealist on function of, 
236, a stage in the dialectic, 20-1, 
101-2 ; approach to in neo-positivism 
and actual idealism, 208-9. 

Plato, and theory of knowledge, 35, 
81, 83, 143, 162, 238, and Protag- 
oras, 111-12; and subjective Logos, 
126; early P and G, 189, as an 
historical individual, 25, 76; also 
73, 100, 119, 209, 242, 243. 

Poet, 241, 243 

Poetry, 83, 149. 

Point moving, example in logic of 
concrete, 77 

Positivists, Italian, and G., 10. 

Predicament. See Egocentric predica- 
ment. 

Predicate, necessary and universal, 
66-7. 

Presuppositions, 116-17; none in actual 
idealism, 137-43; criticism of G's 
use of word, 143 ; different levels of, 
141-2, 206-7, 209, 227 (summary), 
232-5; and realism, 181-2. See 
Assumptions; Theory of Types. 

Progress in logic of concrete, 80, 96, 
148-9. 

Protagoras, and G., 31, 40-1; and 
solipsism, 111-12; also 82 n. 12, 238. 

Psychology, status of, 190; and prob- 
lem of knowledge, 212-13. 

Pupil, and teacher, 28, 52-5, 106. 

Pure, use of word, 58 n. 1. 

Purity of truth, 41-2. 



Radio City, 213-14. 

Rationalism, 39. 

Rational world, 138-9. 

Real, use of word, 123-5, 134, 196, 
68 n. 20; and apparent, 124; inde- 
pendence of for realist, 180; mean- 
ingfulness of, 212. See Act of think- 
ing. 

Reality, of external objects, 243-4; 
and the factual, 216. See Cosmos; 
Nature. 

Realist, presuppositions of, 180ff, 198; 
and idealist, 179; and truth, 183-4. 

Reason, 97. See Kant. 

Relational logic, 33-5, 144-5. 

Religion, as stage in dialectic, 18-20, 
101; status of, 101-2, 244-5. 

Rosmmi, ix, x, xv. 

Royce, problem of other men, 137; 
and Perry, 165; logocentricism, 
177; and G. on problem of essence, 
178. 

St. Francis, 242. 

Salvemini, xii. 

Santayana, and G., 177; animal faith 
and cosmos, 179; critical of ideal- 
ism's doctrine of nature, 185; also 
119, 178, 189 n. 5. 

Scepticism, 81; and metaphysics in 
history of philosophy, 200; of G., 
130, 132; and actual idealism, 118, 
229-30. See Neo-positivist. 

Schelling, ix. 

Schlick, 203, 243. 

Science. See Natural science. 

Self, Perry and, 167; also 112 n. 2. 

Self-awareness, importance of, 172-3, 
174. 

Self-determination of concrete thought, 
82. See Norma sui. 

Self-expression, 17-18. 

Sistema di logica, significance of, xv, 
30, 229, 239; criticisms of, 225-8 
(summary). See Criticism. 

Society, 22. 

Socrates, 34, 48, 91, 111, 242. 

Solipsism, of G., 112, 117-18; use of 
word, 112 n. 2; attitudes toward, 
113-16, 240; status of, 243-4; 
strength of G's, 200; weakness in- 
herent in any, 235-6. 

Sommario di pedagogia, 190n. 6 and 
7, 219. 

Spaventa, ix, x. 



264 



INDEX 



Specific judgments in science, 194-5, 
197. 

Spinoza, and G, 31; dualism of, 202; 
also 49, 100, 245. 

Spinozan freedom, 21, 138. 

Spirit, use of word, 23 n 3. 

State and individual, 23-4. 

Stoics, 34. 

Subject, contingent and particular, 
66-7. 

Subjective element, in knowledge, 38- 
41, 186; in concrete logic, 79; 
in truth, 130. 

Syllogism, 69-70, 156. 

Symposium, 44 

Synthesis, 141, 159-60, 227-8 (sum- 
mary) ; of judgment, 66 

Synthetic character of G's metaphysi- 
cal judgments, 207. 

Synthetic judgments a priori, neces- 
sity and norma sui character of, 
94-5; importance to G, 188, 205; 
and knowledge, 203-5; possibility 
of, 207-9, meaningfulness of, 211; 
logic of, 162. 

Teacher, and pupil, 28, 52-5, 106 

Teoria dello s pinto, significance of, 
xvi. 

Theaetetus, 33, 35, 49, 111, 112 

Theory of Types, 140, 207, 211. 

Thinkable, use of word, 225. 

Thought, use of word, 225; and Be- 
ing, 63 ; criticism of thought as Be- 
ing in logic of abstract, 145-6, 226 
(summary) ; postulated as deter- 
mined, 191-2; concreteness of, 
155-6; circularity of abstract, 62- 
63, 77, 80, as object, 64. 

Timaeus, 189. 

Totality of the thinkable as defini- 
tion of reality, 12, 123, 141, 181, 
209 

Traditional metaphysics, 181, 241, 



243; and actual idealism, 117-18, 
229-33. 

Transcendent, use of word, 9 n. 2 ; 
Logos, 36-7; three consequences of 
transcendent Logos, 37. 

Transcendental, Ego, 98; in Kantian 
sense, 99-100. 

Truth, three criteria of, 35; G's three 
conclusions regarding, 38-^1 ; pur- 
ity of, 41-2, mediacy of, 47-8; 
morality of, 42-3 ; eternity of, 49- 
50; and error, 50-5, 76; use of 
word, 125-30, 225 (summary) ; two 
kinds for G, 128-9; criteria of ap- 
plied to dialectic, 151-6; for real- 
ism and idealism, 183-4; coherence 
theory of, 220; concept of as G's 
greatest strength, 237; for natural 
science, 128. 

Undefined concepts, 193 

Unity, of concrete thought, 87, 140- 
141 , criticism of G's emphasis on 
unity of act of thinking, 159-60, 
195, 227-8 (summary). 

Universality, a criterion of truth, 35; 
of particulars in induction, 71 ; use 
of word, 66 n 16, 132 ; of dialectic, 
153-4; of object as one condition 
of thought, 124. 

Unthinkabihty, use of word, 130-2. 

Value, a criterion of truth, 35, 134; of 
dialectic, 154-5; problem of, 214, 
216, 242-3; and neo-positivist, 217- 
218; ethical, 219. 

Vera, x. 

Verb, 65-6. 

Vico, ix, xi, xiv, 22 

Watch, example of, 12-14. 
Wittgenstein, 203, 204, 215. 
Whole, and parts, 12, 159. See Syn- 
thesis. 



