THE  BOOK  WAS 
DRENCHED 


03  p 

OU   160973  >m 


CQ  co 


IMMANUEL   KANT'S 


CRITIQUE   OF   PURE    REASON 


n  C0mnt*m0ratt0tt  0f  %  Cwtwarg  0f  its 

Jtrst 


TRANSLATED    INTO    ENGLISH 


F.   MAX    MULLEB 


WITH    AN    HISTORICAL    INTRODUCTION 


LUDWIG    NOIES 


MACMILLAN    AND    CO. 
1881 

[  All  rights  reserved  ] 


IMMANUEL   KANT'S 


CRITIQUE   OF   PURE   REASON 


Jfirsi 


CONTAINING 

1.  PREFACE   BY    F.    MAX   MULLER 

2.  HISTORICAL   INTRODUCTION   BY   LUDWIG  NOIR& 

3.  SUPPLEMENTS    OP    THE     SECOND    EDITION     OF 

THE    CRITIQUE 


MACMILLAN    AND    CO. 

1881 

[  All  rights  reserved  ] 


OXFORD: 

PRINTED    BY     E.    PICKARD     HALL,    M.A.,    AND    J.    H.    STACY. 
PRINTERS    TO    THE    UNIVERSITY. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE          ......        i-lxii. 

L.  NOIRE'S  HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION  .          .         ,        1-360 

Introduction          .........        i 

Ancient  Philosophy       ........        8 

Medieval  Philosophy     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  67 

Modern  PhilusopJiy        .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .    113 

Descartes       .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .    1 1 3 

The  Materialistic  Tendency         .          .          .          -          .          -158 
Gassendi.     Hobbes         .          .          .          .          .          .          .   158 

The  Idealistic  Tendency     .          .          .          .          .          .          .    171 

Geulinx.      Malebranche.      Berkeley          .          .  .          .    171 

The  Monistic  Tendency      .          .          .          .          .          .          .187 

Spinoza          .          .  .  .          .  -  .  .  .187 

The  Empirical  Tendency   .          .          .          .          .          .          .229 

Locke  .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .229 

The  Individualistic  Tendency     .          .          .          .          .          -265 

Leibniz         .........   265 

I.  The  theory  of  intellectual  perception        .          .          .283 

II.  Physics 299 

III.  Metaphysics        .          .          .          .          .          .          .  313 

The  Skepsis 329 

Hume .          .          .          .          .          .          .          •          .          -329 

VOL.  I.  a  3 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 

PAGJS 

PBINCIPAL  ADDITIONS  MADE  BY  KANT  IN  THE  SECOND  EDITION 
OF  THE  CBITIQUE  OF  PURE  REASON 361 

Supplement  I  .        .         .        .         .        ,  .  .363 

Supplement  If.     Preface  to  Second  Edition  .          .  .  -364 

Supplement  III.     Table  of  Contents  of  Second  Edition  .  .391 

Supplement  IV.  .         .         .         .          .         .         .  .  -398 

Introduction  I.     Of  the  difference  between  pure   and  em- 
pirical knowledge  .         .      »  .          .  398 

ff.  We  are  in  possession  of  certain  cognitions  a  priori, 
and  even  the  ordinary  understanding  is  never 
without  them  .......  400 

Supplement  V.     .........  403 

Supplement  VI.  .         .         .         .         .          .         .         .         -405 

V.  In  all  theoretical  sciences  of  reason  synthetical  judg- 

ments a  priori  are  contained  as  principles         .          .  405 

VI.  The  general  problem  of  pure  reason    ....   408 

Supplement  VII.          .         . 413 

Supplement  VIII.         .         .         .         .          .         .         ,         .  414 

Transcendental  exposition  of  the  concept  of  space        .         .  414 
Supplement  IX.  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .416 

Supplement  X.    .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         -417 

Transcendental  exposition  of  the  concept  of  time          .         .417 
Supplement  XI .418 

Supplement  XII.          .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .424 

Supplement  XIH.        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  430 

> 
Supplement  XIV.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         -432 

Deduction  of  the  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding  .  -432 
Of  the  possibility  of  connecting  in  general .  .  .  -432 
Of  the  original  synthetical  unity  of  apperception  .  •  434 

The  principle  of  the  synthetical  unity  of  apperception  is 
the  highest  principle  of  all  employment  of  the  under- 
Banding  437 


TABLE  OF   CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

What  is  the  objective  unity  of  self -consciousness  ?        .         .  440 

The  logical  form  of  all  judgments  consists  in  the  objective 
unity  of  apperception  of  the  concepts  contained  therein  .  441 

All  sensuous  intuitions  arc  subject  to  the  categories  as 
conditions  under  which  alone  their  manifold  contents 
can  come  together  in  one  consciousness  .  .  .  .442 

The  category  admits  of  no  other  employment  for  the 
cognition  of  tilings  but  its  application  to  objects  of 
experience .  .  -443 

Of  the  application  of  the  categories  to  objects  of  the  senses 
in  general  '.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .448 

Transcendental  deduction  of  the  universally  possible  em- 
ployment of  the  pure  concepts  of  the  understand  ing  in 
experience  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  455 

Results  of  this  deduction  of  the  concepts  of  the  under- 
standing .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .460 

Comprehensive  view  of  this  deduction         .          .          .          .462 
Supplement  XV.  .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .  463 

Supplement  XVI  a.  . 464 

I.  Axioms  of  Intuition  .          .          .          .          .          .          .   464 

•    4 

Supplement  XVI  b 465 

II.  Anticipations  of  Perception 465 

Supplement  XVII 46  7 

III.  Analogies  of  Experience     .          .          .          .         .          -4^7 
Supplement  XVIII.      ........  469 

A.  First  Analogy.     Principle  of  the  permanence  of  sub- 

stance      469 

Supplement  XIX.         .         .         .         .         .         .         •         •  47 ! 

B.  Second  Analogy.  Principle  of  the  succession  of  time, 

according  to  the  law  of  causality       .         .         .         .  471 

Supplement  XX. •  473 

C.  Third  Analogy.  Principle  of  co-existence  according  to 

the  law  of  reciprocity  or  community          .         .         -473 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Supplement  XXI.         . 475 

Refutation  of  Idealism 475 

Theorem.  The  simple  but  empirically  determined  con- 
sciousness of  my  own  existence  proves  the  existence  of 
objects  in  space  outside  myself 476 

Supplement  XXII.       .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .480 

General  note  on  the  system  of  the  principles      .         .         .  480 
Supplement  XXIII.     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .486 

Supplement  XXIV 487 

Supplement  XXV. 490 

Supplement  XXVI .         .         -491 

Supplement  XXVII.    .         .         .         .         .         .         .         -492 

Refutation  of  Mendelsohn's  proof  of  the  permanence  of 
the  soul  .........  497 

Conclusion  of  the  solution  of  the  psychological  paralogism  .  506 

General  note  on  the  transition  from  rational  psychology  to 
cosmology  .........  507 

Supplement  XXVIII 511 


TBANSLATOR'S  PEEFACE. 


Why  I  thought  I  might  translate  Kant's  Critique. 

'  But  how  can  you  waste  your  time  on  a  translation 
of  Kant's  Critik  der  reinen  Vernunft?9  This  question, 
which  has  been  addressed  to  me  by  several  friends,  I 
think  I  shall  best  be  able  to  answer  in  a  preface  to 
that  translation  itself.  And  I  shall  try  to  answer  it 
point  by  point. 

First,  then,  with  regard  to  myself.  Why  should  I 
waste  my  time  on  a  translation  of  Kant's  Critik  der 
reinen  Vernunft  ? — that  is,  Were  there  not  other  per- 
sons more  fitted  for  that  task,  or  more  specially 
called  upon  to  undertake  it? 

It  would  be  the  height  of  presumption  on  my  part 
to  imagine  that  there  were  not  many  scholars  who 
could  have  performed  such  a  task  as  well  as  myself, 
or  far  better.  All  I  can  say  is,  that  for  nearly  thirty 
years  I  have  been  waiting  for  some  one  really  quali- 
fied, who  would  be  willing  to  execute  such  a  task, 
and  have  waited  in  vain.  What  I  feel  convinced  of 
is  that  an  adequate  translation  of  Kant  must  be  the 
work  of  a  German  scholar.  That  conviction  was 
deeply  impressed  on  my  mind  when  reading,  now 
many  years  ago,  Kant's  great  work  with  a  small  class 
of  young  students  at  Oxford — among  whom  I  may 
mention  the  names  of  Appleton,  Caird,  Nettleship, 
and  Wallace.  Kant's  style  is  careless  and  involved, 


VI  TRANSLATORS  PREFACE. 

and  no  wonder  that  it  should  be  so,  if  we  consider 
that  he  wrote  down  the  whole  of  the  Critique  in  not 
quite  five  months.  Now,  beside  the  thread  of  the 
argument  itself,  the  safest  thread  through  the  mazes 
of  his  sentences  must  be  looked  for  in  his  adverbs  and 
particles.  They,  and  they  only,  indicate  clearly  the 
true  articulation  of  his  thoughts,  and  they  alone  im- 
part to  his  phrases  that  peculiar  intonation  which  tells 
those  who  are  accustomed  to  that  bye-play  of  language, 
what  the  author  has  really  in  his  mind,  and  what  he 
wants  to  express,  if  only  he  could  find  the  right  way 
to  do  it. 

When  reading  and  critically  interpreting  Kant's  text, 
I  sometimes  compared  other  translations,  particularly 
the  English  translations  by  Hay  wood  and  Meiklejohn1, 
and  excellent  as  I  found  their  renderings,  particularly 
the  latter,  in  many  places,  I  generally  observed  that, 
when  the  thread  was  lost,  it  was  owing  to  a  neglect 
of  particles  and  adverbs,  though  sometimes  also  to  a 
want  of  appreciation  of  the  real,  and  not  simply  the 
dictionary  meaning,  of  German  words.  It  is  not  my 
intention  to  write  here  a  criticism  of  previous  trans- 
lations ;  on  the  contrary,  I  should  prefer  to  express 
my  obligation  to  them  for  several  useful  suggestions 
which  I  have  received  from  them  in  the  course  of 
what  I  know  to  be  a  most  arduous  task.  But  in 
order  to  give  an  idea  of  what  I  mean  by  the  danger 
arising  from  a  neglect  of  adverbs  »and  particles  in 

1  I  discovered  too  late  that  Professor  Mahaffy,  in  his  translation 
of  Kuno  Fischer's  work  on  Kant  (Longmans,  1866),  has  given  some 
excellent  specimens  of  what  a  translation  of  Kant  ought  to  be.  Had 
I  known  of  them  in  time,  I  should  have  asked  to  be  allowed  to  in- 
corporate them  in  my  own  translation. 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  vii 

German,  I  shall  mention  at  least  a  few  of  the  pas- 
sages of  which  I  am  thinking. 

On  p.  42 1  (484),  Kant  says  :  Da  also  selbst  die 
Auflosung  dieser  Aufgdben  niemals  in  der  Erfdhrung 
vorkommen  Jcann.  This  means,  'As  therefore  even  the 
solution  of  these  problems  can  never  occur  in  expe- 
rience/ i.  e.  as,  taking  experience  as  it  is,  we  have  no 
right  even  to  start  such  a  problem,  much  less  to  ask 
for  its  solution.  Here  the  particle  also  implies  that 
the  writer,  after  what  he  has  said  before,  feels  justified 
in  taking  the  thing  for  granted.  But  if  we  translate, 
'Although,  therefore,  the  solution  of  these  problems 
is  unattainable  through  experience/  we  completely 
change  the  drift  of  Kant's  reasoning.  He  wants  to 
take  away  that  very  excuse  that  there  exists  only 
some  uncertainty  in  the  solution  of  these  problems, 
by  showing  that  the  problems  themselves  can  really 
never  arise,  and  therefore  do  not  require  a  solution 
at  all.  Kant  repeats  the  same  statement  in  the  same 
page  with  still  greater  emphasis,  when  he  says  : 
Die  dogmatische  Auflosung  ist  also  nicht  etwa  un- 
gewiss,  sondern  unmoglich,  i.  e.  '  Hence  the  dog- 
matical solution  is  not,  as  you  imagine,  uncertain, 
but  it  is  impossible/ 

On  p.  421  (485),  the  syntactical  structure  of  the  sen- 
tence, as  well  as  the  intention  of  the  writer,  does  not  al- 
low of  our  changing  the  words  so  ist  es  Tduglich  gehan- 
delt,  into  a  question.  It  is  the  particle  so  which  requires 
the  transposition  of  the  pronoun  (ist  es  instead  of  es  ist\ 
not  the  interrogative  character  of  the  whole  sentence. 

On  p.  42  7  (49  2),  wenn  cannot  be  rendered  by  although, 
which  is  wenn  auch  in  German.  Wenn  beide  nack 


viii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

empirischen  Gesetzen  in  einer  Erfahrung  riclitig  und 
durchgdngig  zusammenhangen,  means,  '  If  both  have 
a  proper  and  thorough  coherence  in  an  experience, 
according  to  empirical  laws;'  and  not,  'Although 
both  have/  etc. 

Sollen  is  often  used  in  German  to  express  what, 
according  to  the  opinion  of  certain  people,  is  meant  to 
be.  Thus  Kant,  on  p.  492  (570),  speaks  of  the  ideals 
which  painters  have  in  their  minds,  and  die  ein  nicht 
mitzutheilendes  Schattenbild  Hirer  Producte  oder  aucJi 
Beitrtheilimgen  sein  sollen,  that  is,  *  which,  according 
to  the  artists'  professions,  are  a  kind  of  vague  shadows 
only  of  their  creations  and  criticisms,  which  cannot 
be  communicated.'  All  this  is  lost,  if  we  trans- 
late, '  which  can  serve  neither  as  a  model  for  pro- 
duction, nor  as  a  standard  for  appreciation/  It  may 
come  to  that  in  the  end,  but  it  is  certainly  not  the 
way  in  which  Kant  arrives  at  that  conclusion. 

On  P-  536  (625),  den  einzigmoglichen  Beweisgrund 
(wofern  uberall  nur  ein  speculativer  Beiveis  statt  findet) 
is  not  incorrectly  rendered  by  'the  only  possible 
ground  of  proof  (possessed  by  speculative  reason) ;' 
yet  we  lose  the  thought  implied  by  Kant's  way  of  ex- 
pression, viz.  that  the  possibility  of  such  a  speculative 
proof  is  very  doubtful. 

The  same  applies  to  an  expression  which  occurs  on 
p.  586  (684),  ein  solches  Schema,  als  ob  es  ein  wirkliches 
Wesen  ware.  Kant  speaks  of  a  schema  which  is  con- 
ceived to  be  real,  but  is  not  so,  and  this  implied  meaning 
is  blurred,  if  we  translate  '  a  schema,  which  requires 
us  to  regard  this  ideal  thing  as  an  actual  existence.' 

In  German,  if  we  speak  of  two  things  mentioned 


TBANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  ix 


together,  we  do  not  use  letzter  in  opposition  to  jener. 
On  p.  256  (295),  Kant  speaks  of  the  place  which  is  to 
be  assigned,  by  means  of  transcendental  reflection,  to 
every  presentation  (Vorstellung),  as  belonging  either 
to  sensibility  or  to  the  understanding, -and  of  the  in- 
fluence which  that  assignation  exercises  on  the  proper 
representation  of  a  given  object.  He  ends  by  saying: 
Wodiirch  jeder  Vorstellung  Hire  Stette  in  der  ilir  ange- 
messenen  Erkenntnisskraft  angewiesen,  mithin  aiicli  der 
Einfluss  der  letzter  en  aiifjene  unterscliieden  wird,  that 
is,  'Whereby  the  right  place  is  assigned  to  each  repre- 
sentation in  the  faculty  of  knowledge  corresponding 
to  it,  and  the  influence  of  the  latter,  i.  e.  of  either 
faculty  of  knowledge,  upon  such  representation  is 
determined  ; '  not,  '  and  consequently  the  influence  of 
the  one  faculty  upon  the  other  is  made  apparent/ 

On  p.  608  (712),  Kant  writes:  Methoden,  die  zwar 
sonst  der  Vernunft,  dber  nur  niclit  liier  wol  anpassen. 

This  has  been  translated :  *  The  methods  which  are 
originated  by  reason,  but  which  are  out  of  place  in 
this  sphere/ 

This,  again,  is  not  entirely  wrong,  but  it  spoils  the 
exact  features  of  the  sentence.  What  is  really  meant 
is :  '  Methods  which  are  suitable  to  reason  in  other 
spheres,  only,  I  believe,  not  here.'  It  is  curious 
to  observe  that  Kant,  careless  as  he  was  in  the 
revision  of  his  text,  struck  out  wol  in  the  Second 
Edition,  because  he  may  have  wished  to  remove  even 
that  slight  shade  of  hesitation  which  is  conveyed  by 
that  particle.  Possibly,  however,  wol  may  refer  to 
anpassen,  i.  e.  pulclire  convenire,  the  limitation  remain- 
ing much  the  same  in  either  case. 


X  TRANSLATORS   PREFACE. 

Dock  is  a  particle  that  may  be  translated  in  many 
different  ways,  but  it  can  never  be  translated  by 
therefore.  Thus  when  Kant  writes  (Suppl.  xiv.  $17, 
note,  vol.  i.  p.  438),  folglich  die  Einheit  des  Bewusst- 
seyns,  als  synthetisch,  aber  dock  ursprunglich  ange- 
troffen  wird,  he  means  to  convey  an  opposition  be- 
tween synthetical  and  primitive,  i.  e.  synthetical,  and 
yet  primitive.  To  say  "nevertheless  synthetical,  and 
therefore  primitive '  conveys  the  very  opposite. 

It  may  be  a  mere  accident,  yet  in  a  metaphysical 
argument  it  must  sometimes  cause  serious  incon- 
venience, if  the  particle  not  is  either  omitted  where 
Kant  has  it,  or  added  where  Kant  has  it  not.  It  is 
of  small  consequence,  if  not  is  omitted  in  such  a  pas- 
sage as,  for  instance,  where  Kant  says  in  the  preface 
to  the  Second  Edition  (vol.  i.  p.  385),  that  the  obscu- 
rities of  the  first  have  given  rise  to  misconceptions 
*  without  his  fault/  instead  of '  not  without  his  fault/ 
But  the  matter  becomes  more  serious  in  other  places. 

Thus  (Supplement  xiv.  §  2  6,  vol.  i.  p.  455)  Kant  says, 
ohne  diese  Tauglichkeit,  which  means,  'unless  the  cate- 
gories were  adequate  for  that  purpose/  but  not, c  if  the 
categories  were  adequate/  Again  (Supplement  xvib. 
vol.  i.  p.  466),  Kant  agrees  that  space  and  time  cannot 
be  perceived  by  themselves,  but  not,  that  they  can  be 
thus  perceived.  And  it  must  disturb  even  an  atten- 
tive reader  when,  on  p.  216  (248),  he  reads  that  'the 
categories  must  be  employed  empirically,  and  cannot 
be  employed  transcendent  ally/  while  Kant  writes  :  Da 
sie  nicJit  von  empirischem  Gebrauch  sein  sollen,  und 
von  transcendentalem  nicht  sein  Jconnen. 

As  regards  single  words,  there  are  many  in  German 


TRANSLATORS   PREFACE.  XI 

which,  taken  in  their  dictionary  meaning,  seem  to 
yield  a  tolerable  sense,  but  which  throw  a  much 
brighter  light  on  a  whole  sentence,  if  they  are  under- 
stood in  their  more  special  idiomatic  application. 

Thus  vorriichen,  no  doubt,  may  mean  'to  place 
before/  but  Jemandem  etwas  vorriicken,  means  'to 
reproach  somebody  with  something/  Hence  (vol.  i. 
p.  386)  die  der  rationalen  Psycjiologie  vorgeruckten 
Paralogismen  does  not  mean  *  the  paralogisms  which 
immediately  precede  the  Eational  Psychology/  but 
'the  paralogisms  with  which  Eational  Psychology 
has  been  reproached.' 

On  p.  41 1  (472),  nachhdngen  cannot  be  rendered  by 
'to  append/  JSr  erlaubt  der  Vermmft  idealisclien  Er- 
Marungen  der  Natur  nachzuhangen  means  '  he  allows 
reason  to  indulge  in  ideal  explanations  of  nature/ 
but  not  4  to  append  idealistic  explanations  of  natural 
phenomena/ 

On  p.  669  (781),  als  ob  er  die  lejahende  Parthei  er- 
griffen  hcitte,  does  not  mean  c  to  attack  the  position/ 
but  '  to  adopt  the  position  of  the  assenting  party/ 

On  p.  727  (847),  Wie  hann  ich  erwarten  does  not 
mean,  '  How  can  I  desire?5  but,  *  How  can  I  expect  V 
which  may  seem  to  be  not  very  different,  but  neverthe- 
less gives  a  very  different  turn  to  the  whole  argument. 

I  have  quoted  these  few  passages,  chiefly  in  order 
to  show  what  I  mean  by  the  advantages  which  a 
German  has  in  translating  Kant,  as  compared  with 
any  other  translator  who  has  derived  his  knowledge 
of  the  language  from  grammars  and  dictionaries 
only.  An  accurate  and  scholarlike  knowledge  of 
German  would,  no  doubt,  suffice  for  a  translation  of 


xii  TRANSLATOB'S  PREFACE. 

historical  or  scientific  works.  But  in  order  to  find 
our  way  through  the  intricate  mazes  of  metaphysical 
arguments,  a  quick  perception  of  what  is  meant  by 
the  sign-posts,  I  mean  the  adverbs  and  particles,  and 
a  natural  feeling  for  idiomatic  ways  of  speech,  seem 
to  me  almost  indispensable. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  am  fully  conscious  of  the 
advantages  which  English  translators  possess  by 
their  more  perfect  command  of  the  language  into 
which  foreign  thought  has  to  be  converted.  Here 
I  at  once  declare  my  own  inferiority  ;  nay,  I  confess 
that  in  rendering  Kant's  arguments  in  English  I 
have  thought  far  less  of  elegance,  smoothness  or 
rhythm,  than  of  accuracy  and  clearness.  What  I 
have  attempted  to  do  is  to  give  an  honest,  and,  as 
far  as  possible,  a  literal  translation,  and,  before  all, 
a  translation  that  will  construe;  and  I  venture  to 
say  that  even  to  a  German  student  of  Kant  this 
English  translation  will  prove  in  many  places  more 
intelligible  than  the  German  original.  It  is  difficult 
to  translate  the  hymns  of  the  Veda  and  the  strains 
of  the  Upanishads,  the  odes  of  Pindar  and  the  verses 
of  Lucretius ;  but  I  doubt  whether  the  difficulty  of 
turning  Kant's  metaphysical  German  into  intelligible 
and  construable  English  is  less.  Nor  do  I  wish  my 
readers  to  believe  that  I  have  never  failed  in  making 
Kant's  sentences  intelligible.  There  are  a  few  sen- 
tences in  Kant's  Critique  which  I  have  not  been 
able  to  construe  to  my  own  satisfaction,  and  where 
none  of  the  friends  whom  I  consulted  could  help  me. 
Here  all  I  could  do  was  to  give  a  literal  rendering, 
hoping  that  future  editors  may  succeed  in  amending 


TRANSLATORS   PREFACE.  Xlll 

the  text,  and  extracting  from  it  a  more  intelligible 
sense. 


Why  I  thought  I  ought  to  translate  Kant's  Critique. 

But  my  friends  in  blaming  me  for  wasting  my 
time  on  a  translation  of  Kant's  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason  gave  me  to  understand  that,  though  I  might 
not  be  quite  unfit,  I  was  certainly  not  specially 
called  upon  to  undertake  such  a  work.  It  is  true, 
no  doubt,  that  no  one  could  have  blamed  me  for  not 
translating  Kant,  but  I  should  have  blamed  myself; 
in  fact,  I  have  blamed  myself  for  many  years  for  not 
doing  a  work  which  I  felt  must  be  done  sooner  or 
later.  Year  after  year  I  hoped  I  should  find  leisure 
to  carry  out  the  long  cherished  plan,  and  when  at 
last  the  Centenary  of  the  publication  of  Kant's 
CritiJc  der  reinen  Vernunft  drew  near,  I  thought 
I  was  in  honour  bound  not  to  delay  any  longer  this 
tribute  to  the  memory  of  the  greatest  philosopher  of 
modern  times.  Kant's  Critique  has  been  my  con- 
stant companion  through  life.  It  drove  me  to  de- 
spair when  I  first  attempted  to  read  it,  a  mere  school- 
boy. At  the  University  I  worked  hard  at  it  under 
Weisse,  Lotze,  and  Drobisch  at  Leipzig,  and  my 
first  literary  attempts  in  philosophy,  now  just  forty 
years  old,  were  essays  on  Kant's  Critique.  Having 
once  learnt  from  Kant  what  man  can  and  what  he 
cannot  know,  my  plan  of  life  was  very  simple, 
namely,  to  learn,  so  far  as  literature,  tradition,  and 
language  allow  us  to  do  so,  how  man  came  to 
believe  that  he  could  know  so  much  more  than  he 


xiv  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 


ever  can  know  in  religion,  in  mythology,  and  in  phi- 
losophy. This  required  special  studies  in  the  field 
of  the  most  ancient  languages  and  literatures.  But 
though  these  more  special  studies  drew  me  away 
for  many  years  towards  distant  times  and  distant 
countries,  whatever  purpose  or  method  there  may 
have  been  in  the  work  of  my  life,  was  due  to  my 
beginning  life  with  Kant. 

Even  at  Oxford,  whether  I  had  to  lecture  on 
German  literature  or  on  the  Science  of  Language, 
I  have  often,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  been 
preaching  Kant ;  and  nothing  I  have  missed  so 
much,  when  wishing  to  come  to  an  understanding 
on  the  great  problems  of  life  with  some  of  my 
philosophical  friends  in  England,  than  the  common 
ground  which  is  supplied  by  Kant  for  the  dis- 
cussion of  every  one  of  them.  We  need  not  be 
blind  worshippers  of  Kant,  but  if  for  the  solution 
of  philosophical  problems  we  are  to  take  any  well 
defined  stand,  we  must,  in  this  century  of  ours,  take 
our  stand  on  Kant.  Kant's  language,  and  by  lan- 
guage I  mean  more  than  mere  words,  has  become 
the  Lingua  franca  of  modern  philosophy,  and  not 
to  be  able  to  speak  it,  is  like  studying  ancient  phi- 
losophy, without  being  able  to  speak  Aristotle,  or 
modern  philosophy,  without  being  able  to  speak 
Descartes.  What  Rosenkranz,  the  greatest  among 
Hegel's  disciples,  said  in  1838,  is  almost  as  true 
to-day  as  it  was  then :  Englander,  Franzosen  und 
Italiener  mussen,  wenn  sie  vorwarts  wollen,  denselben 
Schritt  fhun,  den  Kant  schon  1781  machte.  NUT  so 
konnen  sie  sich  von  ihrer  dermaligen  schlechten  Meta- 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE,  xv 


physik   und   den   aus   einer  solchen  sick  ergebenden 
schlecliten  Consequenzen  lefreien. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  at  the  present  day  to  produce 
any  arguments  in  support  of  such  a  view.  The  num- 
ber of  books  on  Kant's  philosophy,  published  during 
the  last  century  in  almost  every  language  of  the  world1, 
speaks  for  itself.  There  is  no  single  philosopher  of  any 
nofce-,  even  among  those  who  are  decidedly  opposed  to 
Kant,  who  has  not  acknowledged  his  pre-eminence 
among  modern  philosophers.  The  great  systems  of 
Fichte,  Schelling,  Hegel,  Herbart,  and  Schopenhauer 
branched  off  from  Kant,  and  now,  after  a  century  has 
passed  away,  people  begin  to  see  that  those  systems 
were  indeed  mighty  branches,  but  that  the  leading 
shoot  of  philosophy  was  and  is  still — Kant.  No  truer 
word  has  lately  been  spoken  than  what,  I  believe,  was 
first  said  by  Professor  Weisse2,  in  the  Philosophical 
Society  at  Leipzig,  of  which  I  was  then  a  member,  and 
was  again  more  strongly  enforced  by  my  friend  and 
former  colleague,  Professor  Liebmann  of  Strassburg, 
that,  if  philosophy  wishes  to  go  forward,  it  must  go 
back  to  Kant.  II  faut  reculer,  pour  mieux  sauter. 
Lange,  in  his  History  of  Materialism,  calls  Kant  the 
Copernicus  of  modern  philosophy ;  aye,  Kant  himself 
was  so  fully  conscious  of  the  decentralising  character 
of  his  system  that  he  did  not  hesitate  to  compare  his 
work  with  that  of  Copernicus3.  But  if  Kant  was  right 
in  his  estimate  of  his  own  philosophy,  it  cannot  be 

1  During  the  first  ten  years  after  the  appearance  of  the  Critique, 
three  hundred  publications  have  been  counted  for  and  against 
Kant's  philosophy.     See  Vaihinger,  Kommentar,  i.  p.  9. 

2  See  Julius  Walter,  Zum  Gedachtniss  Kant's,  p.  28. 

3  See  Supplement  II,  vol.  i.  p.  370. 


XVI  TRANSLATORS   PREFACE. 

denied  that,  with  but  few,  though  memorable  excep- 
tions, philosophy  in  England  is  still  Ante-Copernican. 
How  little  Kant  is  read  by  those  who  ought  to  read 
him,  or  how  little  he  is  understood  by  those  who 
venture  to  criticise  him,  I  never  felt  so  keenly  as 
when,  in  a  controversy  which  I  had  some  time  ago  with 
one  of  the  most  illustrious  of  English  philosophers,  I 
was  told  that  space  could  not  be  an  a  priori  intuition, 
because  we  may  hear  church-bells,  without  knowing 
where  the  belfry  stands.  Two  philosophers,  ,  who 
both  have  read  Kant's  Critique,  may  differ  from  each 
other  diametrically,  but  they  will  at  least  understand 
each  other.  They  will  not  fire  at  each  other  like 
some  of  the  German  students  who,  for  fear  of  killing 
their  adversary,  fire  their  pistols  at  right  angles,  thus 
endangering  the  life  of  their  seconds  rather  than  that 
of  their  adversaries. 

This  will  explain  why,  for  a  long  time,  I  have  felt 
personally  called  upon  to  place  the  classical  work  of 
Kant  within  the  reach  of  all  philosophical  readers 
in  England,  and  in  such  a  form  that  no  one  could 
say  any  longer  that  he  could  not  construe  it.  I 
thought  for  a  time  that  Professor  Caird's  excellent 
work  c  On  the  Philosophy  of  Kant/  had  relieved  me 
of  this  duty.  And,  no  doubt,  that  work  has  told, 
and  has  opened  the  eyes  of  many  people  in  England 
and  in  America  to  the  fact  that,  whatever  we  may 
think  of  all  the  outworks  of  Kant's  philosophy,  there 
is  in  it  a  central  thought  which  forms  a  real  rest 
and  an  entrenched,  ground  on  the  onward  march  of 
the  human  intellect. 

But  it  is  a  right  sentiment  after  all,  that  it  is 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xvii 

better  to  read  a  book  than  to  read  about  it,  and  that, 
as  my  friend  Stanley  used  to  preach  again  and  again, 
we  should  never  judge  of  a  book,  unless  we  have 
read  the  whole  of  it  ourselves.  I  therefore  pledged 
myself  to  finish  a  new  translation  of  Kant's  Critique 
as  my  contribution  to  the  celebration  of  its  centenary, 
and:  though  it  has  taken  more  time  and  more  labour 
than  I  imagined,  I  do  not  think  my  time  or  my 
labour  will  have  been  wasted,  if  only  people  in 
England,  and  in  America  too,  will  now  read  the 
book  that  is  a  hundred  years  old,  and  yet  as  young 
and  fresh  as  ever. 

So  far  I  have  spoken  of  myself,  and  more  perhaps 
than  a  wise  man  at  my  time  of  life  ought  to  do.  But 
I  have  still  to  say  a  few  words  to  explain  why  I 
think  that,  if  the  time  which  I  have  bestowed  on 
this  undertaking  has  not  been  wasted,  others  also, 
and  not  philosophers  by  profession  only,  will  find 
that  I  have  not  wasted  their  time  by  inducing  them 
at  the  present  time  to  read  Kant's  masterwork  in  a 
faithful  English  rendering. 

Why  a  study  of  Kant's  Critique  seemed  necessary 
at  present. 

It  is  curious  that  in  these  days  when  the  idea  of 
development,  which  was  first  elaborated  by  the 
students  of  philosophy,  language,  and  religion,  and 
afterwards  applied  with  such  brilliant  success  to  the 
study  of  nature  also,  should  now  receive  so  little 
favour  from  the  very  sciences  which  first  gave  birth 
to  it.  Long  before  we  heard  of  evolution  in  nature, 
we  read  of  the  dialectical  evolution  of  thought,  and 

VOL.  i.  b 


xviii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

its  realisation  in  history  and  nature.  The  history  of 
philosophy  was  then  understood  to  represent  the  con- 
tinuous development  of  philosophical  thought,  and  the 
chief  object  of  the  historian  was  to  show  the  necessity 
with  which  one  stage  of  philosophical  thought  led  to 
another.  This  idea  of  rational  development,  which 
forms  a  far  broader  and  safer  basis  than  that  of  natu- 
ral development,  is  the  vital  principle  in  the  study  of 
the  human  mind,  quite  as  much,  if  not  more,  than  in 
the  study  of  nature.  A  study  of  language,  of  my- 
thology, of  religion,  and  philosophy,  which  does  not 
rest  on  the  principle  of  development,  does  not  deserve 
the  name  of  a  science.  The  chief  interest  which  these 
sciences  possess,  is  not  that  they  show  us  isolated  and 
barren  facts,  but  that  they  show  us  their  origin  and 
growth,  and  explain  to  us  how  what  is,  was, the  neces- 
sary result  of  what  was.  In  drawing  the  stemma  of 
languages,  mythological  formations,  religious  beliefs, 
and  philosophical  ideas,  science  may  go  wrong, 
and  often  has  gone  wrong.  So  have  students  of 
nature  in  drawing  their  stemmata  of  plants,  and 
animals,  and  human  beings.  But  the  principle  remains 
true,  for  all  that.  In  spite  of  all  that  seems  to  be 
accidental  or  arbitrary,  there  is  a  natural  and  intelli- 
gible growth  in  what  we  call  the  creations  of  the 
human  mind,  quite  as  much  as  in  what  we  call  the 
works  of  nature.  The  one  expression,  it  may  be  said, 
is  as  mythological  as  the  other,  because  the  category 
of  substance  cannot  apply  to  either  nature  or  mind. 
Both,  however,  express  facts  which  must  be  ex- 
plained ;  nay,  it  is  the  chief  object  of  science  to 
explain  them,  and  to  explain  them  genetically.  Is 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xix 

Aristotle  possible  or  intelligible  without  Plato  1  Is 
Spinoza  possible  or  intelligible  without  Descartes? 
Is  Hume  possible  or  intelligible  without  Berkeley  ? 
Is  Kant  possible  or  intelligible  without  Hume  ? 
These  are  broad  questions,  and  admit  of  one  answer 
only.  But  if  we  have  once  seen  how  the  broad 
stream  of  thought  follows  its  natural  bent,  flows 
onward,  and  never  backward,  we  shall  understand 
that  it  is  as  much  the  duty  of  the  science  of  thought 
to  trace  unbroken  the  course  of  philosophy  from 
Thales  to  Kant,  as  it  is  the  duty  of  natural  science 
to  trace  the  continuous  development  of  the  single 
cell  to  the  complicated  organism  of  an  animal  body, 
or  the  possible  metamorphosis  of  the  Hipparion  into 
the  Hippos. 

What  I  wanted,  therefore,  as  an  introduction  to 
my  translation  of  Kant's  Critique,  was  a  pedigree  of 
philosophical  thought,  showing  Kant's  ancestors  and 
Kant's  descent.  Here,  too,  Professor  Caird's  work 
seemed  to  me  at  one  time  to  have  done  exactly  what 
I  wished  to  see  done.  Valuable,  however,  as  Pro- 
fessor Caird's  work  is  on  all  sides  acknowledged  to  be, 
I  thought  that  an  even  more  complete  list  of  Kantian 
ancestors  might  and  should  be  given,  and  (what 
weighed  even  more  with  me),  that  these  ances- 
tors should  be  made  to  speak  to  us  more  in  their 
own  words  than  Professor  Caird  has  allowed  them 
to  do. 

At  my  time  of  life,  and  in  the  midst  of  urgent 
work,  I  felt  quite  unequal  to  that  task,  and  I  there- ' 
fore  applied  to  Professor  Noir6  who,  more  than  any 
other  philosopher  I  know,  seemed  to  me  qualified  to 

b2 


xx  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

carry  out  that  idea.  Kant's  philosophy,  and  more 
particularly  the  antecedents  of  Kant's  philosophy,  had 
been  his  favourite  study  for  life,  and  no  one,  as  I 
happened  to  know,  possessed  better  materials  than  he 
did  for  giving,  in  a  short  compass,  the  ipsissima  verba 
by  which  each  of  Kant's  ancestors  had  made  and 
marked  his  place  in  the  history  of  thought.  Professor 
Noire  readily  complied  with  my  request,  and  supplied 
a  treatise  which  I  hope  will  fully  accomplish  what 
I  had  in  view.  The  translation  was  entrusted  by  him 
to  one  of  the  most  distinguished  translators  of  philo- 
sophical works  in  England,  and  though  the  exactness 
and  gracefulness  peculiar  to  Professor  Noir^'s  German 
style  could  hardly  have  full  justice  done  to  them  in 
an  English  rendering,  particularly  as  the  constant 
introduction  of  the  verba  ipsissima  of  various  authors 
cannot  but  disturb  the  unity  of  the  diction,  I  hope 
that  many  of  my  English  readers  will  feel  the  same 
gratitude  to  him  which  I  have  here  to  express  for 
his  kind  and  ready  help. 

If,  then,  while  making  allowance  for  differences  of 
opinion  on  smaller  points,  we  have  convinced  our- 
selves that  Kant  is  the  last  scion  of  that  noble  family 
of  thinkers  which  Professor  Noir£  has  drawn  for  us 
with  the  hand  of  a  master,  what  follows  ?  Does  it 
follow  that  we  should  all  and  on  all  points  become 
Kantians,  that  we  should  simply  learn  his  philosophy, 
and  be  thankful  that  we  know  now  all  that  can  be 
known  about  the  Freedom  of  the  Will,  the  Immor- 
tality of  the  Soul,  and  the  Existence  of  God  ?  Far  from 
it.  No  one  would  protest  more  strongly  than  Kant 
against  what  he  himself  calls  '  learning  philosophy/ 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxi 

as  opposed  to  '  being  a  philosopher/  All  I  contend 
for  is  that,  in  our  own  modern  philosophy,  the  work 
once  for  all  done  by  Kant  can  be  as  little  ignored  as 
the  work  done  by  Hume,  Leibniz,  Berkeley,  Locke, 
Spinoza,  and  Descartes.  I  do  not  deny  the  historical 
importance  of  the  Post-Kantian  systems  of  philosophy, 
whether  of  Fichte,  Schelling,  Hegel,  Herbart,  or  Scho- 
penhauer in  Germany,  of  Cousin  in  France,  or  of  Mill 
in  England.  But  most  of  these  philosophers  recog- 
nised Kant  as  their  spiritual  father l.  Even  Comte, 
ignorant  as  he  was  of  German  and  German  philo- 
sophy, expressed  his  satisfaction  and  pride  when  he 
discovered  how  near  he  had,  though  unconsciously, 
approached  to  Kant's  philosophy2.  Some  years  ago 

1  Julius  Walter,  Zum  Gredachtniss  Kant's,  p.  27. 

2  '  J'ai  lu  et  rclu  avec  un  plaisir  infini  le  petit  traite*  de  Kant 
(Idee  zu  einer  allgemeinen  Geschichte  in  weltbiirgerlicher  Absicht, 
1784) ;  il  est  prodigieux  pour  l'£poque,  et  merae,  si  je  Tavais  connu 
six  ou  sept  ans  plus  tot,  il  m'aurait  epargne  de  la  peine.     Je  suis 
churm£  que  vous  1'ayez  traduit,  il  peut  tr^s-efficacement  contribuer 
a  pr^parer  les  esprits  a  la  philosophic  positive.     La   conception 
geii&'ale  ou  au  moins  la  m£thode  y  est  encore  metaphysique,  mais 
les  details  montrent  a  chaque  instant  Tesprit  positif.     J'avais  tou- 
jours  regarde  Kant  non-seulement  comme  une  tres-forte  tete,  mais 
comme  le  m£taphysicien  le  plus  rapproche"  de  la  philosophic  positive. 
....  Pour  moi,  je  ne  me  trouve  jusqu'a  present,  apres  cette  lecture, 
d'autre  valeur  que  celle  d'avoir  systematise*  et  arrete  la  conception 
6bauch6e  par  Kant  a  mon  insu,  ce  que  je  dois  surtout  a  l^ducation 
scientifique ;  et  mcme  le  pas  le  plus  positif  et  le  plus  distinct  que 
j'ai  fait  apres  lui,  me  semble  seulement  d'avoir  d6couvert  la  loi  du 
passage  des  id6es  humaines  par  les  trois  etats  theologique,  m^ta- 
j)hysique,  et  scientifique,  loi  qui  me  semble  6tre  la  base  du  travail 
dont  Kant  a  conseilte  Texecution.      Je  rends  grace  aujourd'hui  a 
mon  d^faut  d^rudition ;  car  si  mon  travail,  tel  qu'il  est  maintenant, 
avait  e"  te"  pr6c6d6  chez  moi  par  T6tude  du  traite*  de  Kant,  il  aurait, 
a  mes  propres  yeux,  beaucoup  perdu  de  sa  valeur.'     See  Auguste 
Comte,  par  6.  Littre",  Paris,  1864,  p.  154;  Lettre  de  Comte  a  M. 
d'Eichthal,  10  Dec.  1824. 


xxii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 


I  ventured  to  point  out  that,  as  far  as  I  could 
judge,  amid  the  varying  aspects  of  his  philosophical 
writings,  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  also,  in  what  he  calls 
his  Transfigured  Realism,  was  not  very  far  from 
Kant's  fundamental  position.  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer, 
however,  has  repudiated  what  I  thought  the  highest 
compliment  that  could  be  paid  to  any  writer  on 
philosophy,  and  I  feel  bound  therefore  to  withdraw 
my  conjecture. 

But  although,  whether  consciously  or  unconsciously, 
all  truly  important  philosophers  have,  since  the  pub- 
lication of  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  been  more  or 
less  under  the  spell  of  Kant,  and  indirectly  of  Hume 
and  Berkeley  also,  this  does  not  mean  that  they 
have  not  asserted  their  right  of  reopening  questions 
which  seemed  to  be  solved  and  settled  by  those 
heroes  in  the  history  of  human  thought.  Only,  if 
any  of  these  old  problems  are  to  be  taken  up  again, 
they  ought  at  least  to  be  taken  up  where  they  were 
last  left.  Unless  that  is  done,  philosophy  will  be- 
come a  mere  amusement,  and  will  in  no  wise  mark 
the  deep  vestiges  in  the  historical  progress  of  the 
human  intellect.  There  are  anachronisms  in  philo- 
sophy, quite  as  much  as  in  other  sciences,  and  the 
spirit  in  which  certain  philosophical  problems  have 
of  late  been  treated,  both  in  England  and  in  Germany, 
is  really  no  better  than  a  revival  of  the  Ptolemaic 
system  would  be  in  astronomy.  No  wonder,  there- 
fore, that  in  both  countries  we  should  meet  with 
constant  complaints  about  this  state  of  philosophical 
anarchy.  Mr.  Challis  in  one  of  the  last  numbers  of 
the  Contemporary  Eeview  (November,  1881),  writes : 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxiii 

'  It  is  another  familiar  fact,  a  much  more  important 
one,  that  the  present  state  of  philosophy  is  exactly 
parallel  to  the  present  state  of  theology, — a  chaos  of 
conflicting  schools,  each  able  to  edify  itself  without 
convincing  any  other,  every  one  regarding  all  the 
rest,  not  as  witnesses  against  itself,  but  as  food  for 
dialectical  powder  and  shot.  The  impartial  by- 
stander sees  no  sign  that  we  are  now  nearer  to 
agreement  than  in  the  days  of  Varro  ;  though  the 
enthusiast  of  a  school  expects  the  world  to  be  all 
some  day  of  his  opinion,  just  as  the  enthusiast  of 
a  sect  believes  vaguely  in  an  ultimate  triumph  of 
his  faith/ 

Exactly  the  same  complaint  reaches  us  from  the 
very  country  where  Kant's  voice  was  once  so  powerful 
and  respected,  then  was  silenced  for  a  time,  and  now 
begins  to  be  invoked  again  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
storing order  where  all  seems  confusion.  *  Since 
the  year  1840,'  writes  Dr.  Vaihinger,  'there  has 
been  hopeless  philosophical  anarchy  in  Germany. 
There  were  the  disciples  of  Schelling,  Hegel,  Her- 
bart,  and  Schopenhauer,  and,  by  their  side,  the 
founders  and  defenders  of  many  unknown  systems 
of  philosophy.  Then  followed  the  so-called  Keal- 
Idealists,  or  Ideal-Realists,  who  distilled  a  philo- 
sophical theism  out  of  the  pantheism  of  greater 
thinkers,  and,  as  their  antipodes,  the  Materialists, 
who  on  the  new  discoveries  of  natural  science 
founded  the  saddest,  shallowest,  arid  emptiest  system 
of  philosophy1/ 

1  Vaihinger,  Zum  Jubilaum  von  Kant's  Kritik  der  reinen 
Vernunft,  p.  n. 


XXIV    .  TRANSLATORS  PREFACED 

In  England  and  America,  even  more  than  in  Ger- 
many, I  believe  that  a  study  of  Kant  holds  out  the 
best  hope  of  a  philosophical  rejuvenescence.  In 
Germany  a  return  to  Kant  is  a  kind  of  Renaissance  ; 
in  England  and  America  K&nt's  philosophy,  if  once 
thoroughly  understood,  will  be,  I  hope,  a  new  birth. 
No  doubt  there  are,  and  there  have  been  in  every 
country  of  Europe  some  few  honest  students  who 
perfectly  understood  Kant's  real  position  in  the 
onward  march  of  human  thought.  But  to  the 
most  fertile  writers  on  philosophy,  and  to  the 
general  public  at  large,  which  derives  its  ideas  of 
philosophy  from  them,  Kant's  philosophy  has  not 
only  been  a  terra  incognita,  but  the  very  antipodes 
of  what  it  really  is.  Mr.  Watson,  in  his  instruc- 
tive work,  'Kant  and  his  English  Critics/  is  per- 
fectly right  when  he  says  that,  till  very  lately, 
Kant  was  regarded  as  a  benighted  a  priori  phi- 
losopher of  the  dogmatic  type,  afflicted  with  the 
hallucination  that  the  most  important  part  of  our 
knowledge  consists  of  innate  ideas,  lying  in  the 
depths  of  consciousness,  and  being  capable  of  being 
brought  to  the  light  by  pure  introspection/  That 
Kant  was  the  legitimate  successor  of  Hume  on  one 
side,  and  of  Berkeley  on  the  other,  was  hardly  con- 
ceived as  possible.  And  thus  it  has  happened  that 
English  philosophy,  in  spite  of  the  large  number 
of  profound  thinkers  and  brilliant  writers  who  have 
served  in  its  ranks  during  the  last  hundred  years, 
has  not  yet  risen  above  the  level  of  Locke  and 
Hume.  No  one  can  admire  more  than  I  do  the 
dabbing  style  in  which  some  of  the  most  popular 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxv 


writers  of  our  time  have  ridden  up  to  the  very 
muzzles  of  the  old  philosophical  problems,  but  if 
I  imagine  Kant  looking  back  from  his  elevated 
position  on  those  fierce  and  hopeless  onslaughts,  I 
can  almost  hear  him  say  what  was  said  by  a  Frencli 
general  at  Balaclava :  C'est  magnifiqiie, — mais  ce  nest 
pas  la  guerre.  Quite  true  it  is  that  but  for  Hume, 
and  but  for  Berkeley,  Kant  would  never  have  been, 
and  philosophy  would  never  have  reached  the  heights 
which  he  occupies.  But,  after  Kant,  Hume  and 
Berkeley  have  both  an  historical  significance  only. 
They  represent  a  position  which  has  been  conquered 
and  fortified,  and  has  now  been  deliberately  left 
behind. 

Professor  Noire,  when  he  had  written  for  this 
work  the  antecedents  of  Kant's  philosophy,  sent 
me  another  most  valuable  contribution,  containing 
a  full  analysis  of  that  philosophy,  considered  not 
only  as  the  continuation,  but  as  the  fulfilment  of 
all  other  philosophical  systems,  and  more  particularly 
of  the  systems  of  Berkeley  and  Hume.  For  that 
work  it  was  unfortunately  impossible  to  find  room  in 
these  volumes ;  but  I  am  glad  to  know  that  it  will 
riot  be  withheld,  in  German  at  least,  from  those  who, 
both  in  England  and  in  Germany,  have  learnt  to 
appreciate  Professor  Noird's  accurate  and  luminous 
statements.  Leaving  therefore  the  task  of  tracing 
minutely  the  intimate  relation  between  Kant  and 
his  predecessors  to  the  more  experienced  hand  of 
my  friend,  I  shall  here  be  satisfied  with  pointing 
out  in  the  broadest  way  the  connection,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  the  diametrical  opposition  between  Kant 


xxvi  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

and  those  two  great  heroes  of  speculative  thought, 
Berkeley  and  Hume. 

Berkeley  holds  that  all  knowledge  that  seems  to 
come  to  us  from  without  through  the  senses  or  through 
experience  is  mere  illusion,  and  that  truth  exists  in 
the  ideas  of  the  pure  understanding  and  of  reason 
only. 

Kant  proves  that  all  knowledge  that  comes  to 
us  from  pure  understanding  and  from  pure  reason 
only  is  mere  illusion,  and  that  truth  is  impossible 
without  experience. 

Hume  holds  that  true  causality  is  impossible, 
whether  in  experience  or  beyond  experience. 

Kant  proves  that  experience  itself  is  impossible 
without  the  category  of  causality,  and,  of  course, 
without  several  other  categories  also  which  Hume 
had  overlooked,  though  they  possess  exactly  the 
same  character  as  the  concept  of  causality1.  The  gist 
of  Kant's  philosophy,  as  opposed  to  that  of  Hume, 
can  be  expressed  in  one  line :  That  without  which 
experience  is  impossible,  cannot  be  the  result  of  ex- 
perience, though  it  must  never  be  applied  beyond  the 
limits  of  possible  experience. 

Such  broad  statements  and  counter-statements  may 
seem  to  destroy  the  finer  shades  of  philosophical 
thought,  yet  in  the  end  even  the  most  complicated 
and  elaborate  systems  of  philosophy  rest  on  such 
broad  foundations ;  and  what  we  carry  about  with  us 
of  Plato  or  Aristotle,  of  Descartes  or  Leibniz,  consists 

1  This  is  Kant's  statement,  though  it  is  not  quite  accurate.  See 
Adamson,  On  the  Philosophy  of  Kant,  p.  202.  That  Kant  knew 
Hume's  Treatise  on  Human  Nature  seems  to  follow  from  Hamann's 
Metdkritik  uber  den  Purismus  der  reinen  Vernunft,  p.  3,  note. 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxvii 

in  the  end  of  little  more  than  a  few  simple  out- 
lines of  the  grand  structures  of  their  philosophical 
thoughts.  And  in  that  respect  no  system  admits  of 
being  traced  in  simpler  and  broader  outlines  than  that 
of  Kant.  Voluminous  and  complicated  it  is,  and  yet 
Kant  himself  traces  in  a  few  lines  the  outcome  of  it, 
when  he  says  (Critique,  p.  712  (830) :  '  But  it  will  be 
said,  is  this  really  all  that  pure  reason  can  achieve,  in 
opening  prospects  beyond  the  limits  of  experience  1 
Nothing  more  than  two  articles  of  faith  ?  Surely 
even  the  ordinary  understanding  could  have  achieved 
as  much  without  taking  counsel  of  philosophers ! 

'  I  shall  not  here  dwell  on  the  benefits/  he  answers, 
*  which,  by  the  laborious  efforts  of  its  criticism,  phi- 
losophy has  conferred  on  human  reason,  granting 
even  that  in  the  end  they  should  turn  out  to  be 
merely  negative.  On  this  point  something  will 
have  to  be  said  in  the  next  section.  But,  I  ask, 
do  you  really  require  that  knowledge,  which  con- 
cerns all  men,  should  go  beyond  the  common  un- 
derstanding, and  should  be  revealed  to  you  by 
philosophers  only  ?  The  very  thing  which  you  find 
fault  with  is  the  best  confirmation  of  the  correct- 
ness of  our  previous  assertions,  since  it  reveals  to  us, 
what  we  could  not  have  grasped  before,  namely, 
that  in  matters  which  concern  all  men  without  dis- 
tinction, nature  cannot  be  accused  of  any  partial 
distribution  of  her  gifts;  and  that,  with  regard  to 
the  essential  interests  of  human  nature,  the  highest 
philosophy  can  achieve  no  more  than  that  guidance 
which  nature  has  vouchsafed  even  to  the  meanest 
understanding/ 


xxviii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

I  hope  that  the  time  will  come  when  Kant's  works, 
and  more  particularly  his  Critique  of  Pure  Reason, 
will  be  read,  not  only  by  the  philosopher  by  pro- 
fession, but  by  everybody  who  has  once  seen  that 
there  are  problems  in  this  life  of  ours  the  solu- 
tion of  which  alone  makes  life  worth  living.  These 
problems,  as  Kant  so  often  tells  us,  are  all  the 
making  of  reason,  and  what  reason  has  made,  reason 
is  able  to  unmake.  These  problems  represent  in  fact 
the  mythology  of  philosophy,  that  is,  the  influence 
of  dying  or  dead  language  on  the  living  thought  of 
each  successive  age  ;  and  an  age  which  has  found  the 
key  to  the  ancient  mythology  of  religion,  will  know 
where  to  look  for  the  key  that  is  to  unlock  the 
mythology  of  pure  reason.  Kant  has  shown  us  what 
can  and  what  cannot  be  known  by  man.  What  re- 
mains to  .be  done,  even  after  Kant,  is  to  show  how 
man  came  to  believe  that  he  could  know  so  much 
more  than  he  can  know,  and  this  will  have  to  be 
shown  by  a  Critique  of  Language1. 

How  strange  it  is  that  Kant's  great  contemporary, 
'  the  Magus  of  the  North/  should  have  seen  this  at 
once,  and  that  for  a  whole  century  that  thought  has 

1  What  I  mean  by  this,  may  be  seen  in  the  last  Lecture  of  the 
Second  Series  of  my  Lectures  on  tJie  Science  of  Language,  delivered 
iii  1867  (ed.  1880,  vol.  ii.  p.  612  seq.) ;  in  my  article  On  the  Origin 
of  Reason,  Contemporary  Review,  February,  1878;  my  Lectures  on 
Mr.  Darwin's  Philosophy  of  Language,  Fraser's  Magazine,  May, 
1873 ;  also  in  Professor  Noire's  works,  Der  Ursprung  der  SpracJie, 
1877;  and  Max  Mutter  and  the  Philosophy  of  Language  (Long- 
mans, 1879).  One  important  problem,  in  the  solution  of  which  I 
differ  from  Kant,  or  rather  give  a  new  application  to  Kant's  own 
principles,  has  been  fully  treated  in  my  Hibbert  Lectures,  1878, 
pp.  30  seq. 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxix 

remained  dormant.  '  Language/  Hamann  writes,  '  is 
not  only  the  foundation  for  the  whole  faculty  of 
thinking,  but  the  central  point  also  from  which  pro- 
ceeds the  misunderstanding  of  reason  by  herself/ 
And  again1:  'The  question  with  me  is  not,  What 
is  Reason?  but,  What  is  Language?  And  here  I 
suspect  is  the  ground  of  all  paralogisms  and  anti- 
nomies with  which  Reason  has  been  charged/  And 
again :  '  Hence  I  feel  almost  inclined  to  believe 
that  OUT*  whole  philosophy  consists  more  of  language 
than  of  reason,  and  the  misunderstanding  of  number- 
less words,  the  prosopopoeias  of  the  most  arbitrary 
abstraction,  the  antitheses  rrj?  ^evScoi/v/mov  ryvuxrew ; 
nay,  the  commonest  figures  of  speech  of  the  sensus 
communis  have  produced  a  whole  world  of  problems, 
which  can  no  more  be  raised  than  solved.  What  we 
want  is  a  Grammar  of  Reason.' 

That  Kant's  Critique  will  ever  become  a  popular 
book,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  is  impos- 
sible ;  but  that  it  will  for  ever  occupy  a  place  in  the 
small  tourist's  library  which  every  thoughtful  travel- 
ler across  this  short  life's  journey  will  keep  by  his  side, 
I  have  no  doubt.  Kant,  it  must  be  admitted,  was  a 
bad  writer,  but  so  was  Aristotle,  so  was  Descartes,  so 
was  Leibniz,  so  was  Hegel ;  and,  after  a  time,  as  in 
climbing  a  mountain,  the  very  roughness  of  the  road 
becomes  an  attraction  to  the  traveller.  Besides,  though 
Kant  is  a  bad  builder,  he  is  not  a  bad  archi- 
tect, and  there  will  be  few  patient  readers  of  the 
Critique  who  will  fail  to  understand  Goethe's  ex- 
pression that  on  reading  Kant,  or  rather,  I  should 

1  Gildemeister,  Hamann's  Leben  und  Schriften,  vol.  iii.  p.  71. 


xxx  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

say,  on  reading  Kant  again  and  again,  we  feel  like 
stepping  into  a  lighted  room.  I  have  tried  hard, 
very  hard,  to  remove  some  of  the  darkness  which  has 
hitherto  shrouded  Kant's  master  work  from  English 
readers,  and  though  I  know  how  often  I  have  failed 
to  satisfy  myself,  I  still  hope  I  shall  not  have 
laboured  quite  in  vain.  Englishmen  who,  in  the 
turmoil  of  this  century,  found  leisure  and  mental 
vigour  enough  to  study  once  more  the  thoughts  of 
Plato,  and  perceived  their  bearing  on  the  thoughts 
of  our  age,  may  well  brace  themselves  to  the  harder 
work  of  discovering  in  Kant  the  solution  of  many 
of  the  oldest  problems  of  our  race,  problems  which, 
with  most  of  us,  are  still  the  problems  of  yester- 
day and  of  to-day.  I  am  well  aware  that  for  Kant 
there  is  neither  the  prestige  of  a.  name,  such  as  Plato, 
nor  the  cunning  of  a  translator,  such  as  Jowett. 
But  a  thinker  who  in  Germany  could  make  him- 
self listened  to  during  the  philosophical  apathy  of 
the  Wolfian  age,  who  from  his  ultima  Thule  of 
Konigsberg  could  spring  forward  to  grasp  the  rudder 
of  a  vessel,  cast  away  as  unseaworthy  by  no  less  a 
captain  than  Hume,  and  who  has  stood  at  the 
helm  for  more  than  a  century,  trusted  by  all  whose 
trust  was  worth  having,  will  surely  find  in  England, 
too,  patient  listeners,  even  though  they  might  shrink, 
as  yet,  from  embarking  in  his  good  ship  in  their 
passage  across  the  ocean  of  life. 

Kant's  Metaphysic  in  relation  to  Physical  Science. 

We  live  in  an  age  of  physical  discovery,  and  of 
complete  philosophical  prostration,  and  thus  only  can 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxxi 


we  account  for  the  fact  that  physical  science,  and, 
more  particularly,  physiology,  should  actually  have 
grasped  at  the  sceptre  of  philosophy.  Nothing,  I 
believe,  could  be  more  disastrous  to  both  sciences. 

No  one  who  knows  my  writings  will  suspect  me  of 
undervaluing  the  progress  which  physical  studies  have 
made  in  our  time,  or  of  ignoring  the  light  which  they 
Irave  shed  on  many  of  the  darkest  problems  of  the 
mind.  Only  let  us  not  unnecessarily  move  the  old 
landmarks  of  human  knowledge.  There  always  has 
been,  and  there  always  must  be,  a  line  of  demarcation 
between  physical  and  metaphysical  investigations,  and 
though  the  former  can  illustrate  the  latter,  they  can 
never  take  their  place.  Nothing  can  be  more  in- 
teresting, for  instance,  than  recent  researches  into 
the  exact  processes  of  sensuous  perception.  Optics 
and  Acoustics  have  carried  us  deep  into  the  inner 
workings  of  our  bodily  senses,  and  have  enabled  us  to 
understand  what  we  call  colours  and  sounds,  as  vibra- 
tions, definite  in  number,  carried  on  from  the  outer 
organs  through  vibrating  media  to  the  brain  and  the 
inmost  centre  of  all  nervous  activity.  Such  observa- 
tions have,  no  doubt,  made  it  more  intelligible,  even  to 
the  commonest  understanding,  what  metaphysicians 
mean  when  they  call  all  secondary  qualities  subjective, 
and  deny  that  anything  can  be,  for  instance,  green 
or  sweet,  anywhere  but  in  the  perceiving  subject. 
But  the  idea  that  these  physical  and  physiological 
researches  have  brought  us  one  inch  nearer  to  the 
real  focus  of  subjective. perception,  that  any  move- 
ment of  matter  could  in  any  way  explain  the  simplest 
sensuous  perception,  or  that  behind  the  membranes 


xxxii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

and  nerves  we  should  ever  catch  hold  of  what  we  call 
the  soul,  or  the  I,  or  the  self,  need  only  to  be  stated  to 
betray  its  utter  folly.  That  men  like  Helmholtz  and 
Du  Bois-Beymond  should  find  Kant's  metaphysical 
platform  best  adapted  for  supporting  their  physical 
theories  is  natural  enough.  But  how  can  any  one 
who  weighs  his  words  say  that  the  modern  physiology 
of  the  senses  has  in  any  way  supplemented  or  im- 
proved Kant's  theory  of  knowledge1  \  As  well  might 
we  say  that  spectrum  analysis  has  improved  our  logic, 
or  the  electric  light  supplemented  our  geometry. 
'  Empirical  psychology/  as  Kant  says,  '  must  be  en- 
tirely banished  from  metaphysic,  and  is  excluded 
from  it  by  its  very  idea2/ 

Metaphysical  truth  is  wider  than  physical  truth, 
and  the  new  discoveries  of  physical  observers,  if  they 
are  to  be  more  than  merely  contingent  truths,  must 
find  their  appointed  place  and  natural  refuge  within 
the  immoveable  limits  traced  by  the  metaphysician.  It 
was  an  unfortunate  accident  that  gave  to  what  ought 
to  have  been  called  pro-physical,  the  name  of  meta- 
physical science,  for  it  is  only  after  having  mastered 
the  principles  of  metaphysic  that  the  student  of 
nature  can  begin  his  work  in  the  right  spirit,  know- 
ing the  horizon  of  human  knowledge,  and  guided  by 
principles  as  unchangeable  as  the  pole  star.  It  would 
be  childish  to  make  this  a  question  of  rank  or 
precedence ;  it  is  simply  a  question  of  work  and 
order. 

It    may  require,   for  instance,   a    greater  effort, 

1  See  Noir£,  in  Die  Gegenwart,  June  23,  1881. 

2  Critique,  p.  728  (848). 


TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.         XXX1U 

and  display  more  brilliant  mental  qualities,  to  show 
that  nature  contains  no  traces  of  repeated  acts  of 
special  creation,  than  to  prove  that  such  a  theory 
would  make  all  unity  of  experience,  and  consequently 
all  science,  impossible.  But  what  are  all  the  negative 
arguments  of  the  mere  observer  without  the  solid 
foundation  supplied  by  the  metaphysician  ?  And 
with  how  much  more  of  tranquil  assurance  would 
the  geologist  pursue  his  observations  and  develop  his 
conclusions,  if  he  just  remembered  these  few  lines  of 
Kant :  *  When  such  an  arising  is  looked  upon  as  the 
effect  of  a  foreign  cause,  it  is  called  creation.  This 
can  never  be  admitted  as  an  event  among  phenomena, 
because  its  very  possibility  would  destroy  unity  of 
experience  V 

What  can  have  been  more  delightful  to  the  un- 
prejudiced observer  than  the  gradual  diminution  of 
the  enormous  number  of  what  were  called  by  students 
of  nature,  who  had  never  troubled  their  heads  about 
the  true  meaning  of  these  terms,  genera  and  species  ? 
But  when  the  true  meaning,  and  thereby  the  true 
origin,  of  genera  and  species  was  to  be  determined,  is 
it  not  strange  that  not  one  word  should  ever  have 
been  said  on  the  subjective  character  of  these  terms  ? 
Whatever  else  a  genus  or  species  may  be,  surely  they 
are,  first  of  all,  concepts  of  the  understanding,  and, 
without  these  concepts,  whatever  nature  might  pre- 
sent to  us,  nothing  would  ever  be  to  us  a  genus  or  a 
species. 

Now  the  genus  and  species,  in  that  restricted 
sense,  as  applied  to  organic  beings,  represent  only 

1  Critique,  p.  180  (206). 
VOL.  I.  C 


XXXIV  TRANSLATORS   PREFACE. 

one  side  of  that  fundamental  process  on  which  all 
thought  is  founded,  namely,  the  conception  of  the 
General  and  the  Special.  Here,  again,  a  few  pages  of 
Kant l  would  have  shown  that  the  first  thing  to  be 
explained  is  the  process  ,by  which  we  conceive  the 
genus  or  the  general,  and  that  the  only  adequate  ex- 
planation of  it  is  what  Kant  calls  its  transcendental 
deduction,  i.e.  the  proof  that,  without  it,  experience 
itself  would  be  impossible  ;  and  that  therefore,  so  far 
from  being  a  concept  abstracted  from  experience,  it 
is  a  sine  qua  non  of  experience  itself. 

If  this  is  once  clearly  understood,  it  will  be  equally 
understood  that,  as  we  are  the  makers  of  all  concepts, 
we  are  also  the  makers  of  genera  and  species,  and 
that  long  before  logicians  came  to  define  and  deface 
these  terms,  they  were  what  we  now  are  anxious  to 
make  them  again,  terms  for  objects  which  have 
either  a  common  origin,  or  a  common  form.  Long 
before  Aristotle  forced  the  terms  yevo?  and  elSo$  to 
assume  a  subordinate  relation  to  each  other,  lan- 
guage, or  the  historical  logic  of  the  human  race,  had 
formed  these  terms,  and  meant  them  to  be  co-ordinate. 

Genos  meant  kin,  and  the  first  genos  was  the  gens 
or  the  family,  comprehending  individuals  that  could 
claim  a  common  ancestor,  though  differing  in  appear- 
ance as  much  as  a  grandfather  and  a  babe.  Eidos  or 
species,  on  the  contrary,  meant  appearance  or  form, 
and  the  first  eidos  was  probably  the  troop  of  warriors, 
comprehending  individuals  of  uniform  appearance, 
nothing  being  asserted  as  to  their  common  origin. 
This  was  the  historic  or  prehistoric  beginning  of  these 
1  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  559  (pp.  652  seq.). 


TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.         XXXV 

two  fundamental  categories  of  thought — and  what  has 
the  theory  of  evolution  really  done  for  them  ?  It  has 
safely  brought  them  back  to  their  original  meaning. 
It  has  shown  us  that  we  can  hold  together,  or  compre- 
hend, or  conceive,  or  classify,  or  generalise  or  speak  in 
two  ways,  and  in  two  ways  only — either  by  common 
descent  (genealogically),  or  by  common  appearance 
(morphologically).  Difference  of  form  is  nothing,  if 
we  classify  genealogically,  and  difference  of  descent 
is  nothing,  if  we  classify  morphologically.  What  the 
theory  of  evolution  is  doing  for  us  is  what  is  done 
by  every  genealogist,  ay,  what  was  done  in  ancient 
time  by  every  paterfamilias,  namely,  to  show  by  facts 
that  certain  individuals,  however  different  from  each 
other  in  form  and  appearance,  had  a  common  ancestor, 
and  belonged  therefore  to  the  same  family  or  kin.  In 
every  case  where  such  proof  has  been  given,  we  gain 
in  reality  a  more  correct  general  concept,  i.  e.  we  are 
able  to  think  and  to  speak  better.  The  process  is  the 
same,  whether  we  trace  the  Bourbons  arid  Valois  back 
to  Hugo  Capet,  or  whether  we  derive  the  Hippos  and 
the  Hipparion  from  a  common  ancestor.  In  both 
cases  we  are  dealing  with  facts  and  with  facts  only. 
Let  it  be  established  that  there  is  no  missing  link 
between  them,  or  between  man  and  monkey,  and 
we  shall  simply  have  gained  a  new  concept,  as  we 
should  gain  a  new  concept  by  establishing  the 
unbroken  continuity  of  the  Apostolic  succession. 
Only  let  us  see  clearly  that  in  physical  and  his- 
torical researches,  too,  we  are  dealing  with  facts, 
and  with  facts  only,  which  cannot  excite  any  pas- 
sion, and  that  the  wider  issues  as  to  the  origin  of 

c  2 


XXXVI         TRANSLATORS  PREFACE. 

genera  and  species  belong  to  a  different  sphere  of 
human  knowledge,  and  after  having  been  debated  for 
centuries,  have  been  determined  once  for  all  by  Kant's 
Critique  of  Pure  Reason. 

If  one  remembers  the  dust-clouds  of  words  that 
were  raised  when  the  question  of  the  origin  of  species 
was  mooted  once  more  in  our  days,  it  is  truly  re- 
freshing to  read  a  few  of  Kant's  calm  pages  on  that 
subject,  written  one  hundred  years  ago.  'Reason1/ 
he  writes,  *  prepares  the  field  for  the  understanding, 

'  ist.  Through  the  principle  of  homogeneousness  of 
the  manifold  as  arranged  under  higher  genera ; 

'  sndly.  Through  the  principle  of  the  variety  of  the 
homogeneous  in  lower  species  ;  to  which, 

'  3rdly,  it  adds  a  law  of  affinity  of  all  concepts, 
which  requires  a  continual  transition  from  every 
species  to  every  other  species,  by  a  gradual  increase  of 
diversity.  We  may  call  these  the  principles  of  homo- 
geneousness,  of  specification  and  of  continuity  of  forms/ 

And  with  reference  to  the  practical  application  of 
these  metaphysical  principles  to  the  study  of  nature,  he 
writes  again  with  true  philosophical  insight2:  'I  often 
see  even  intelligent  men  quarrelling  with  each  other 
about  the  characteristic  distinctions  of  men,  animals, 
or  plants,  nay,  even  of  minerals,  the  one  admitting  the 
existence  of  certain  national  characteristics,  founded 
on  descent,  or  decided  and  inherited  differences  of 
families,  races,  etc.,  while  others  insist  that  nature 
has  made  the  same  provision  for  all,  and  that  all 
differences  are  due  to  accidental  environment.  But 

1  Critique,  p.  564  (657). 

2  Ibid.  p.  572  (667). 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxxvii 

they  need  only  consider  the  peculiar  character  of  the 
matter,  in  order  to  understand  that  it  is  far  too  deeply 
hidden  for  both  of  them  to  enable  them  to  speak  from 
any  real  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  object.  It  is 
nothing  but  the  twofold  interest  of  reason,  one  party 
cherishing  the  one,  another  party  the  other,  or  pre- 
tending to  do  so.  But  this  difference  of  the  two 
maxims  of  maiiifoldness  and  unity  in  nature,  may 
easily  be  adjusted,  though  as  long  as  they  are  taken 
for  objective  knowledge  they  cause  riot  only  disputes, 
but  actually  create  impediments  which  hinder  the 
progress  of  truth,  until  a  means  is  found  of  re- 
conciling the  contradictory  interests,  and  thus  giving 
satisfaction  to  reason. 

'  The  same  applies  to  the  assertion  or  denial  of  the 
famous  law  of  the  continuous  scale  of  created  beings, 
first  advanced  by  Leibniz,  and  so  cleverly  trimmed  up 
by  Bonnet.     It  is  nothing  but  a  carrying  out  of  the 
principle  of  affinity  resting  on  the  interest  of  reason, 
for  neither  observation,  nor  insight   into  the  con- 
stitution of  nature  could  ever  have  supplied  it  as  an 
objective  assertion.     The  steps  of  such  a  ladder,  as 
far  as  they  can  be  supplied  by  experience,  are  far  too 
wide  apart  from  each  other,  and  the  so-called  small 
differences  are  often  in  nature  itself  such  wide  gaps, 
that  no  value  can  be  attached  to  such  observations 
as  revealing  the  intentions  of  nature,  particularly  as 
it  must  always  be  easy  to  discover  certain  similarities 
and  approximations  in  the  great  variety  of  things. 
The  method,  on  the  contrary,  of  looking  for  order  in 
nature,  according  to  such  a  principle,  and  the  maxim 
of  admitting  such  order  (though  it  may  be  uncertain 


xxxviii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

where  and  how  far)  as  existing  in  nature  in  general, 
is  certainly  a  legitimate  and  excellent  regulative 
principle  of  reason,  only  that,  as  such,  it  goes  far 
beyond  where  experience  or  observation  could  follow 
it.  It  only  indicates  the  way  which  leads  to  sys- 
tematical unity,  but  does  not  determine  anything 
beyond/  • 

I  know,  of  course,  what  some  of  my  philosophical 
friends  will  say.  '  You  speak  of  thoughts/  they  will 
say,  '  we  speak  of  facts.  You  begin  with  the  general, 
we  begin  with  the  particular.  You  trust  to  reason, 
we  trust  to  our  senses/  Let  me  quote  in  reply  one 
of  the  most  positive  of  positive  philosophers,  one  wTho 
trusts  to  the  senses,  who  begins  with  the  particular, 
and  who  speaks  of  facts.  Condillac  in  his  famous 
fc  Essai  sur  I'Origine  des  Connaissances  humaines,' 
writes  :  *  Soit  que  nous  nous  elevions,  pour  parler 
metaphoriquement,  jusque  dans  les  cieux,  soit  que 
nous  desceiidions  dans  les  ablmes,  nous  ne  sortons  pas 
de  nous-memes  ;  et  ce  n'est  jamais  que  notre  pensee 
que  nous  apercevons/  This  was  written  in  1746. 

And  what  applies  to  these,  applies  to  almost  all 
other  problems  of  the  day.  Instead  of  being  dis- 
cussed by  themselves,  and  with  a  heat  and  haste  as 
if  they  had  never  been  discussed  before,  they  should 
be  brought  back  to  the  broader  ground  from  which 
they  naturally  arise,  and  be  treated  by  the  light  of 
true  philosophy  and  the  experience  gained  in  former 
ages.  There  is  a  solid  ground  formed  by  the  thoughts 
of  those  who  came  before  us,  a  kind  of  intellectual 
humus  on  which  we  ourselves  must  learn  to  march 
on  cautiously,  yet  safely,  without  needing  those  high 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxxix 

stilts  which  seem  to  lift  our  modern  philosophers 
above  the  level  of  Locke,  and  Hume,  and  Kant,  and 
promise  to  enable  them  to  advance  across  the  un- 
known and  the  unknowable  with  wider  strides  than 
were  ever  attempted  by  such  men  as  Faraday,  or 
Lyell,  or  Darwin,  but  which  invariably  fall  away 
when  they  are  most  needed,  and  leave  our  bold 
speculators  to  retrace  their  steps  as  best  they  can. 

Kant's  Philosophy  as  judged  by  History. 
If  my  translation  of  Kant  were  intended  for  a  few 
professional  philosophers  only,  I  should  not  feel  bound 
to  produce  any  credentials  in  his  favour.  But  the  few 
true  students  of  philosophy  in  England  do  not  want 
a  translation.  They  would  as  little  attempt  to  study 
Kant,  without  knowing  German,  as  to  study  Plato, 
without  knowing  Greek.  What  I  want,  and  what 
I  hope  for  is  that  that  large  class  of  men  and  women 
whose  thoughts,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  are 
still  rooted  in  the  philosophy  of  the  last  century, 
and  who  still  draw  their  intellectual  nutriment 
from  the  philosophical  soil  left  by  Locke  and 
Hume,  shojild  know  that  there  is  a  greater  than 
Locke  and  Hume,  though  himself  the  avowed  pupil 
and  the  truest  admirer  of  those  powerful  teachers. 
Kant  is  not  a  man  that  requires  testimonials ;  we 
might  as  well  require  testimonials  of  Plato  or 
Spinoza.  But  to  the  English  reader  it  may  be 
of  interest  to  hear  at  least  a  few  of  the  utterances 
of  the  great  men  whose  merit  it  is  to  have  discovered 
Kant,  a  discovery  that  may  well  be  called  the  dis- 
covery of  a  new  world. 


xl  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

What  Goethe  said  of  Kant,  we  have  mentioned 
before.-  Schiller,  after  having  declared  that  he  was 
determined  to  master  Kant's  Critique,  and  if  it  were 
to  cost  him  the  whole  of  his  life,  says:  'The  funda- 
mental ideas  of  Kant's  ideal  philosophy  will  remain 
a  treasure  for  ever,  and  for  their  sake  alone  we  ought 
to  be  grateful  to  have  been  born  in  this  age/ 

Strange  it  is  to  see  how  orthodox  theologians,  from 
mere  laziness,  it  would  seem,  in  mastering  Kant's  doc- 
trines, raised  at  once  a  clamour  against  the  man  who 
proved  to  be  their  best  friend,  but  whose  last  years 
of  life  they  must  needs  embitter.  One  of  the 
most  religious  and  most  honest  of  Kant's  contempo- 
raries, however,  Jung  Stilling,  whose  name  is  well 
known  in  England  also,  quickly  perceived  the  true 
bearing  of  the  Critique  of  Pure  Eeason.  In  a  letter, 
dated  March  i,  1789,  Jung  Stilling  writes  to  Kant: 
*  You  are  a  great,  a  very  great  instrument  in  the  hand 
of  God.  I  do  not  flatter, — but  your  philosophy  will 
work  a  far  greater,  far  more  general,  and  far  more 
blessed  revolution  than  Luther's  Eeform.  As  soon 
as  one  has  well  comprehended  the  Critique  of  Keason, 
one  sees  that  no  refutation  of  it  is  possible.  Your 
philosophy  must  therefore  be  eternal  and  unchange- 
able, and  its  beneficent  effects  will  bring  back  the 
religion  of  Jesus  to  its  original  purity,  when  its  only 
purpose  was — holiness.5 

Fichte,  no  mean  philosopher  himself,  and  on  many 
points  the  antagonist  of  Kant,  writes  :  '  Kant's  phi- 
losophy will  in*  time  overshadow  the  whole  human 
race,  and  call  to  life  a  new,  more  noble,  and  more 
worthy  generation/ 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xli 

Jean  Paul  Friedrich  B/ichter  speaks  of  Kant  'not 
only  as  a  light  of  the  world,  but  as  a  whole  solar 
system  in  one/ 

With  more  suppressed,  yet  no  less  powerful  ap- 
preciation Wilhelm  von  Humboldt  writes  of  him  : 
c  Some  things  which  he  demolished  will  never  rise 
again;  some  things  which  he  founded  will  never 
perish  again.  A  reform  such  as  he  carried  through 
is  rare  in  the  history  of  philosophy/ 

Schopenhauer,  the  most  fearless  critic  of  Kant's 
Critique,  calls  it  *  the  highest  achievement  of  hitman 
reflection/  What  he  has  written  of  Kant  is  indis- 
pensable indeed  to  every  student  of  the  Critique, 
and  I  deeply  regret  that  I  could  not  have  added 
to  my  translation  of  Kant  a  translation  of  Schopen- 
hauer's critical  remarks. 

I  must  add,  however,  one  paragraph  :  *  Never/ 
Schopenhauer  writes  in  his  Parerga  (1,183),  'never 
will  a  philosopher,  without  an  independent,  zealous, 
and  often  repeated  study  of  the  principal  works  of 
Kant,  gain  any  idea  of  this  most  important  of  all 
philosophical  phenomena.  Kant  is,  I  believe,  the 
most  philosophical  head  that  nature  has  ever  pro- 
duced. To  think  with  him  and  according  to  his 
manner  is  something  that  cannot  be  compared  to 
anything  else,  for  he  possessed  such  an  amount  of 
clear  and  quite  peculiar  thoughtfulness  as  has  never 
been  granted  to  any  other  mortal.  We  are  enabled 
to  enjoy  this  with  him,  if,  initiated  by  patient  and 
serious  study,  we  succeed,  while  reading  the  pro- 
foundest  chapters  of  the  Critique  of  Pure  Keason, 
in  forgetting  ourselves  and  thinking  really  with 


xlii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

Kant's  own  head,  thus  being  lifted  high  above  our- 
selves. If  we  go  once  more  through  the  Principles 
of  Pure  Reason,  and,  more  particularly,  the  Analogies 
of  Experience,  and  enter  into  the  deep  thought  of 
the  synthetical  unity  of  apperception,  we  feel  as  if 
lifted  miraculously  and  carried  away  out  of  the 
dreamy  existence  in  which  we  are  here  lost,  and 
as  if  holding  in  our  hands  the  very  elements  out 
of  which  that  dream  consists/ 

If,  in  conclusion,  we  look  at  some  of  the  historians 
of  modern  philosophy,  we  find  Erdmann,  though  a 
follower  of  Hegel,  speaking  of  Kant  as  '  the  Atlas 
that  supports  the  whole  of  German  philosophy/ 

Fortlage,  the  Nestor  of  German  philosophers l,  who 
wrote  what  he  calls  a  Genetic  History  of  Philosophy 
since  Kant,  speaks  of  him  in  the  following  terms  : 
'  In  one  word,  Kant's  system  is  the  gate  through 
which  everything  that  lias  stirred  the  philosophical 
world  since  his  time,  comes  and  goes.  It  is  the 
Universal  Exchange  where  all  circulating  ideas  flow 
together  before  they  vanish  again  in  distant  places. 
It  is  the  London  of  philosophy,  sending  its  ships  into 
every  part  of  the  world,  and  after  a  time  receiving 
them  back.  There  is  no  place  in  the  whole  globe  of 
human  thought  which  it  has  not  visited,  explored, 
and  colonised/ 

In  more  homely  language  Professor  Caird  ex- 
presses much  the  same  idea  of  Kant's  philosophy, 
when  he  says  (p.  1 20)  :  '  So  much  has  Kant's  fertile 
idea  changed  the  aspect  of  the  intellectual  world, 
that  there  is  not  a  single  problem  of  philosophy  that 

1  He  died  November,  1881. 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xliii 

does  not  meet  us  with  a  new  face  ;  and  it  is  perhaps 
not  unfair  to  say,  that  the  speculations  of  all  those 
who  have  not  learned  the  lesson  of  Kant,  are  beside 
the  point/ 

Dr.  Vaihinger,  who  has  devoted  his  life  to  the 
stud}7  of  Kant,  and  is  now  bringing  out  a  com- 
mentary in  four  volumes  on  his  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason1,  sums  up  his  estimate  in  the  following 
words :  '  The  Critique  is  a  work  to  which,  whether 
we  look  to  the  grandeur  of  conception,  or  the  ac- 
curacy of  thought,  or  the  weight  of  ideas,  or  the 
power  of  language,  few  only  can  be  compared — 
possibly  Plato's  Republic,  Aristotle's  Metaphysics, 
Spinoza's  Ethics — none,  if  we  consider  their  lasting 
effect,  their  penetrating  and  far-reaching  influence, 
their  wealth  of  thought,  and  their  variety  of  sug- 
gestions V 

Nearly  the  same  judgment  is  repeated  by  Va- 
cherot3,  who  speaks  of  the  Critique  as  'un  livre 
immortel,  comme  TOrganum  de  Bacon  et  le  Discours 
de  la  Methode  do  Descartes/  while  Professor  Noire, 
with  his  wider  sympathies  for  every  sphere  of  intel- 
lectual activity,  counts  six  books,  in  the  literature  of 
modern  Europe,  as  the  peers  of  Kant's  Critique,  viz. 
Copernicus,  De  revolutionibus  orbium  coelestium 
(1543) ;  Descartes,  Meditationes  de  prima  philosophia 

1  Commentar  zu  Kant's  Kritik  der  reincn  Veruunft,  zum  hun- 
dertjahrigen  Jubilaum  derselben,  herausgegeben  von  Dr.  H.  Vai- 
hinger.   Stuttgart,  1 88 1. 

2  Zum  Jubilaum  von  Kant's  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  von 
H.  Vaihinger,  Separatabdruck  aus  der  Wochenschrift,  '  Im  neueii 
Reich/  1881,  No.  23,  p.  14. 

3  Kevue  des  deux  Mondes,  1879,  Aofit. 


xliv  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

(1641);  Newton,  Principia  philosophic  natu  rails  ma- 
thematica  (1687);  Montesquieu,  Esprit  des  Lois 
(i  748);  Winckelmann,  Geschichte  der  Kunst  des  Alter- 
thums  (1764);  and  Adam  Smith,  Inquiry  into  the 
nature  and  causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations  (i  776), — 
but  he  places  Kant's  Critique  at  the  head  of  them  all. 
I  confess  I  feel  almost  ashamed  lest  it  should  be 
supposed  that  I  thought  Kant  in  need  of  these 
testimonies.  My  only  excuse  is  that  I  had  to  defend 
myself  against  the  suspicion  of  having  wasted  my 
time,  and  I  therefore  thought  that  by  pointing  out 
the  position  assigned  to  Kant's  Critique  among  the 
master-works  of  human  genius  by  men  of  greater 
weight  than  I  could  ever  venture  to  claim  for  myself, 
I  might  best  answer  the  kindly  meant  question  ad- 
dressed to  me  by  my  many  friends:  'But  how  can 
you  waste  your  time  on  a  translation  of  Kant's  Critik 
der  reinen  Vernunft?' 

On  the  Text  of  Kant's  Critique  of  Pure  Reason. 

I  have  still  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  German  text 
on  which  my  translation  is  founded. 

I  have  chosen  the  text  of  the  First  Edition,  first  of 
all,  because  it  was  the  centenary  of  that  edition  which 
led  me  to  carry  out  at  last  my  long-cherished  idea  of 
an  English  translation.  That  text  represents  an 
historical  event.  It  represents  the  state  of  philosophy, 
as  it  was  then,  it  represents  Kant's  mind  as  it  was 
then,  at  the  moment  of  the  greatest  crisis  in  the 
history  of  philosophy.  Even  if  the  later  editions  con- 
tained improvements,  these  improvements  would 
belong  to  a  later  phase  in  Kant's  own  development, 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xlv 

and  it  is  this  first  decisive  position,  as  taken  by  Kant 
against  both  Hume  and  Berkeley,  that  more  than 
anything  else,  deserves  to  be  preserved  in  the  history 
of  philosophy. 

Secondly,  I  must  confess  that  I  have  always  used 
myself  the  First  Edition  of  Kant's  Critique,  and  that 
when  I  came  to  read  the  Second  Edition,  I  never 
could  feel  so  at  home  in  it  as  in  the  first.  The  First 
Edition  seems  to  me  cut  out  of  one  block,  the 
second  always  leaves  on  my  mind  the  impression  of 
patchwork. 

Thirdly,  I  certainly  dislike  in  the  Second  Edition 
a  certain  apologetic  tone,  quite  unworthy  of  Kant. 
He  had  evidently  been  attacked  by  the  old  Wolfian 
professors,  and  also  by  the  orthodox  clergy.  He 
kn^ew  that  these  attacks  were  groundless,  and  arose 
in  fact  from  an  imperfect  understanding  of  his  work 
on  the  part  of  his  critics.  He  need  not  have  con- 
descended to  show  that  he  was  as  well-schooled  a 
philosopher  as  any  of  his  learned  colleagues,  or  that 
his  philosophy  would  really  prove  extremely  useful 
to  orthodox  clergymen  in  their  controversies  with 
sceptics  and  unbelievers. 

So  far,  and  so  far  only,  can  I  understand  the  feel- 
ing against  the  Second  Edition,  which  is  shared  by 
some  of  the  most  accurate  and  earnest  students  of 
Kant. 

But  I  have  never  been  able  to  understand  the  ex- 
aggerated charges  which  Schopenhauer  and  others 
bring  against  Kant,  both  for  the  omissions  and  the 
additions  in  that  Second'  Edition.  What  I  can  under- 
stand and  fully  agree  with  is  Jacobi's  opinion,  when 


xlvi  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE, 

he  says x  :  '  I  consider  the  loss  which  the  Second 
Edition  of  Kant's  Critique  suffered  by  omissions  and 
changes  very  considerable,  and  I  am  very  anxious  by 
the  expression  of  my  opinion  to  induce  readers,  who 
seriously  care  for  philosophy  and  its  history,  to  com- 
pare the  first  edition  of  the  Critique  of  Pure  Eeason 
with  the  second  improved  edition.  ...  It  is  not  suffi- 
ciently recognised  what  an  advantage  it  is  to  study 
the  systems  of  great  thinkers  in  their  first  original 
form.  I  was  told  by  Hamann  that  the  very  judicious 
Ch.  J.  Krause  (or  Kraus)  could  never  sufficiently  ex- 
press his  gratitude  for  having  been  made  acquainted 
with  Hume's  first  philosophical  work,  Treatise  on 
Human  Nature,  1739,  where  alone  he  had  found  the 
right  point  of  view  for  judging  the  later  essays/ 

Nor  do  I  differ  much  from  Michelet,  in  his  History 
of  the  later  systems  of  Philosophy  in  Germany  (1837, 
vol.  i.  p.  49),  where  he  says,  'Much  that  is  of  a 
more  speculative  character  in  the  representation  of 
Kant's  system  has  been  taken  from  the  First  Edition. 
It  can  no  longer  be  found  in  the  second  and  later 
editions,  which,  as  well  as  the  Prolegomena,  keep  the 
idealistic  tendency  more  in  the  background,  because 
Kant  saw  that  this  side  of  his  philosophy  had  lent 
itself  most  to  attacks  and  misunderstandings/ 

I  can  also  understand  Schopenhauer,  when  he  states 
that  many  things  that  struck  him  as  obscure  and  self- 
contradictory  in  Kant's  Critique  ceased  to  be  so  when 
he  came  to  read  that  work  in  its  first  original  form. 
But  everything  else  that  Schopenhauer  writes  on  the 
difference  between  the  first  and  second  editions  of  the 

1  Jacobi's  "Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  291  (1815). 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xlvii 

Critique  seems  to  me  perfectly  intolerable.  Kant,  in 
the  Preface  to  his  Second  Edition,  which  was  pub- 
lished six  years  after  the  first,  in  1787,  gives  a  clear 
and  straightforward  account  of  the  changes  which  he 
introduced.  'My  new  representation/  he  writes, 
6  changes  absolutely  nothing  with  regard  to  my  pro- 
positions and  even  the  arguments  in  their  support/ 
He  had  nothing  to  retract,  but  he  thought  lie  had 
certain  things  to  add,  and  he  evidently  hoped  he 
could  render  some  points  of  his  system  better  under- 
stood. His  freedom  of  thought,  his  boldness  of  speech, 
and  his  love  of  truth  are,  if  I  am  any  judge  in  these 
matters,  the  same  in  1787  as  in  1781.  The  active 
reactionary  measures  of  the  Prussian  Government,  by 
which  Kant  is  supposed  to  have  been  frightened,  date 
from  a  later  period.  Zedlitz,  Kant's  friend  and  pro- 
tector, was  not  replaced  by  Wollner  as  minister  till 
1788.  It  was  not  till  1794  that  Kant  was  really 
warned  and  reprimanded  by  the  Cabinet,  and  we 
must  not  judge  too  harshly  of  the  old  philosopher 
when  at  his  time  of  life,  and  in  the  then  state  of 
paternal  despotism  in  Prussia,  he  wrote  back  to  say 
'that  he  would  do  even  more  than  was  demanded 
of  him,  and  abstain  in  future  from  all  public  lec- 
tures concerning  religion,  whether  natural  or  re- 
vealed/ What  he  at  that  time  felt  in  his  heart  of 
hearts  we  know  from  some  remarks  found  after  his 
death  among  his  papers.  "It  is  dishonourable/  he 
writes,  'to  retract  or  deny  one's  real  convictions, 
but  silence,  in  a  case  like  my  own,  is  the  duty  of  a 
subject ;  and  though  all  we  say  must  be  true,  it  is 
not  our  duty  to  declare  publicly  all  that  is  true/ 


xlviii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

Kant  never  retracted,  he  never  even  declared  himself 
no  longer  responsible  for  any  one  of  those  portions 
of  the  Critique  which  he  omitted  in  the  Second 
Edition.  On  the  contrary,  he  asked  his  readers  to 
look  for  them  in  the  First  Edition,  and  only  ex- 
pressed a  regret  that  there  was  no  longer  room  for 
them  in  the  Second  Edition. 

Now  let  us  hear  what  Schopenhauer  says.  He 
not  only  calls  the  Second  Edition  'crippled,  dis- 
figured, and  corrupt/  but  imputes  motives  utterly  at 
variance  with  all  we  know  of  the  truthful,  manly, 
and  noble  character  of  Kant.  Schopenhauer  writes  : 
*  What  induced  Kant  to  make  these  changes  was  fear 
of  man,  produced  by  weakness  of  old  age,  which  not 
only  affects  the  head,  but  sometimes  deprives  the 
heart  also  of  that  firmness  which  alone  enables  us  to 
despise  the  opinions  and  motives  of  our  contempora- 
ries, as  they  deserve  to  be.  No  one  can  be  great 
without  that/ 

All  this  is  simply  abominable.  First  of  all,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  Kant,  when  he  published  his  Second 
Edition,  had  not  yet  collapsed  under  the  weak- 
ness of  old  age.  He  was  about  sixty  years  of  age, 
and  that  age,  so  far  from  making  cowards  of  us, 
gives  to  most  men  greater  independence  and  greater 
boldness  than  can  be  expected  from  the  young,  who  are 
awed  by  the  authority  of  their  seniors,  and  have  often 
to  steer  their  course  prudently  through  the  conflicts 
of  parties  and  opinions l.  What  is  the  use  of  grow- 

1  '  En  g6n6ral  la  vigueur  de  Tesprit,  soit  dans  la  politique,  soit 
dans  la  science,  ne  se  deploie  dans  toute  sa  plenitude  qu'&  Tage  ou 
Tactivit6  vitale  vient  &  s'affaiblir.'  E.  Saisset,  L'Ame  et  la  Vie, 
p.  60, 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xlix 

ing  old,  if  not  to  gain  greater  confidence  in  our 
opinions,  and  to  feel  justified  in  expressing  them  with 
perfect  freedom?  And  as  to  "that  firmness  which 
alone  enables  us  to  despise  the  opinions  and  motives 
of  our  contemporaries/  let  us  hope  that  that  is  neither 
a  blessing  of  youth  nor  of  old  age.  Schopenhauer 
personally,  no  doubt,  had  a  right  to  complain  of  his 
contemporaries,  but  he  would  have  been  greater  if 
he  had  despised  them  either  less  or  more,  or,  at  all 
events,  if  he  had  despised  them  in  silence. 

I  am  really  reluctant  to  translate  all  that  follows, 
and  yet,  as  Schopenhauer's  view  has  found  so  many 
echoes,  it  seems  necessary  to  let  him  have  his  say. 

'  Kant  had  been  told/  he  continues,  'that  his  system 
was  only  a  rechauffe  of  Berkeley's  Idealism.  This 
seemed  to  him  to  endanger  that  invaluable  and 
indispensable  originality  which  every  founder  of  a 
system  values  so  highly  (see  Prolegomena  zu  jeder 
kiinftigen  Metaphysik,  pp.  70,  202  sq.).  At  the  same 
time  he  had  given  offence  in  other  quarters  by  his 
upsetting  of  some  of  the  sacred  doctrines  of  the 
old  dogmas,  particularly  of  those  of  rational  psycho- 
logy. Add  to  this  that  the  great  king,  the  friend 
of  light  and  protector  of  truth,  had  just  died  (1786). 
Kant  allowed  himself  to  be  intimidated  by  all  this, 
and  had  the  weakness  to  do  what  was  unworthy 
of  him.  This  consists  in  his  having  entirely  changed 
the  first  chapter  of  the  Second  Book  of  the  Tran- 
scendental Dialectic  (first  ed.,  p.  341),  leaving  out 
fifty-seven  pages,  which  contained  what  was  in- 
dispensable for  a  clear  understanding  of  the  whole 
work,  and  by  the  omission  of  which,  as  well  as  by 

VOL.  i.  d 


1  TEANSLATOK'S  PREFACE. 

what  he  put  in  its  place,  his  whole  doctrine  becomes 
full  of  contradictions.  These  I  pointed  out  in  my 
critique  of  Kant  (pp.  612-18),  because  at  that  time 
(in  1818)  I  had  never  seen  the  First  Edition,  in 
which  they  are  really  not  contradictions,  but  agree 
perfectly  with  the  rest  of  his  work.  In  truth  the 
Second  Edition  is  like  a  man  who  has  had  one  leg 
amputated,  and  replaced  by  a  wooden  one.  In  the 
preface  to  the  Second  Edition  (p.  xlii),  Kant  gives 
hollow,  nay,  untrue  excuses  for  the  elimination  of 
that  important  and  extremely  beautiful  part  of  his 
book.  He  does  not  confessedly  wish  that  what 
was  omitted  should  be  thought  to  have  been  re- 
tracted by  him.  u  People  might  read  it  in  the  First 
Edition/'  he  says ;  "  he  had  wanted  room  for  new 
additions,  and  nothing  had  been  changed  and  im- 
proved except  the  representation  of  his  system/'  But 
the  dishonesty  of  this  plea  becomes  clear  if  we  com- 
pare the  Second  with  the  First  Edition.  There,  in 
the  Second  Edition,  he  has  not  only  left  out  that 
important  and  beautiful  chapter,  and  inserted  under 
the  same  title  another  half  as  long  and  much  less 
significant,  but  he  has  actually  embodied  in  that 
Second  Edition  a  refutation  of  idealism  which  says 
the  very  contrary  of  what  had  been  said  in  the 
omitted  chapter,  and  defends  the  very  errors  which 
before  he  had  thoroughly  refuted,  thus  contradicting 
the  whole  of  his  own  doctrine.  This  refutation  of 
idealism  is  so  thoroughly  bad,  such  palpable  sophistry, 
nay,  in  part,  such  a  confused  "galimatias,"  that  it  is 
unworthy  of  a  place  in  his  immortal  work.  Conscious 
evidently  of  its  insufficiency,  Kant  has  tried  to  im- 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  li 

prove  it  by  the  alteration  of  one  passage  (see  Preface, 
p.  xxxix)  and  by  a  long  and  confused  note.  But  he 
forgot  to  cancel  at  the  same  time  in  the  Second  Edition 
the  numerous  passages  which  are  in  contradiction  with 
the  new  note,  and  in  agreement  with  what  he  had 
cancelled.  This  applies  particularly  to  the  whole  of 
tfre  sixth  section  of  the  Antinomy  of  Pure  Reason, 
and  to  all  those  passages  which  I  pointed  out  with 
some  amazement  in.  my  critique  (which  was  written 
before  I  knew  the  First  Edition  and  its  later  fate), 
because  in  them  he  contradicts  himself.  That  it  was 
fear  which  drove  the  old  man  to  disfigure  his  Critique 
of  rational  psychology  is  shown  also  by  this,  that  his 
attacks  on  the  sacred  doctrines  of  the  old  dogmatism 
are  far  weaker,  far  more  timid  arid  superficial  than 
in  the  First  Edition,  and  that,  for  the  sake  of  peace, 
he  mixed  them  up  at  once  with  anticipations  which 
are  out  of  place,  nay,  cannot  as  yet  be  understood, 
of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  grounded  on  practical 
reason  and  represented  as  one  of  its  postulates.  By 
thus  timidly  yielding  he  has  in  reality  retracted, 
with  regard  to  the  principal  problem  of  all  philo- 
sophy, viz.  the  relation  of  the  ideal  to  the  real,  those 
thoughts  which  he  had  conceived  in  the  vigour  of 
his  manhood  and  cherished  through  all  his  life.  This 
he  did  in  his  sixty-fourth  year  with  a  carelessness, 
which  is  peculiar  to  old  age  quite  as  much  as 
timidity,  and  he  thus  surrendered  his  system,  not 
however  openly,  but  escaping  from  it  through  a 
back-door,  evidently  ashamed  himself  of  what  he 
was  doing.  By  this  process  the  Critique  of  Pure 
Keason  has,  in  its  Second  Edition,  become  a  self- 


lii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

contradictory,  crippled,  and  corrupt  book,  and  is  no 
longer  genuine/ 

*  The  wrong  interpretation  of  the  Critique  of  Pure 
Keason,  for  which  the  successors  of  Kant,  both  those 
who  were  for  and  those  who  were  against  him,  have 
blamed  each  other,  as  it  would  seem,  with  good 
reason,  are  principally  due  to  the  so-called  improve- 
ments, introduced  into  his  work  by  Kant's  own  hand. 
For  who  can  understand  what  contradicts  itself?' 

The  best  answer  to  all  this  is  to  be  found  in  Kant's 
own  straightforward  statements  in  the  Preface  to  his 
Second  Edition  (Supplement  II.  pp.  364  seqq.).  That 
the  unity  of  thought  which  pervades  the  First 
Edition  is  broken  now  and  then  in  the  Second 
Edition,  no  attentive  reader  can  fail  to  see.  That 
Kant  shows  rather  too  much  anxiety  to  prove  the 
harmlessness  of  his  Critique,  is  equally  true,  and  it 
would  have  been  better  if,  while  refuting  what  he  calls 
Empirical  Idealism,  he  had  declared  more  strongly 
his  unchanged  adherence  to  the  principles  of  Tran- 
scendental Idealism1.  But  all  this  leaves  Kant's 
moral  character  quite  untouched.  If  ever  man  lived 
the  life  of  a  true  philosopher,  making  the  smallest 
possible  concessions  to  the  inevitable  vanities  of  the 
world,  valuing  even  the  shadowy  hope  of  posthumous 
fame 2  at  no  more  than  its  proper  worth,  but  fully 
enjoying  the  true  enjoyments  of  this  life,  an  un- 
swerving devotion  to  truth,  a  consciousness  of 
righteousness,  and  a  sense  of  perfect  independence, 
that  man  was  Kant.  If  it  is  true  that  on  some 

1  See  Critique,  p.  320  (369). 

2  See  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  Supp.  XXVII  p.  508. 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  liii 

points  which  may  seem  more  important  to  others 
than  they  seemed  to  himself,  he  changed  his  mind, 
or,  as  we  should  now  say,  if  there  was  a  later 
development  in  his  philosophical  views,  this  would 
seem  to  me  simply  to  impose  on  every  student  the 
duty,  which  I  have  tried  to  fulfil  as  a  translator 
:also,  viz.  first  of  all,  to  gain  a  clear  view  of  Kant's 
system  from  his  First  Edition,  and  then  to  learn,  both 
from  the  additions  and  from  the  omissions  of  the 
Second  Edition,  on  what  points  Kant  thought  that 
the  objections  raised  against  his  theory  required  a 
fuller  and  clearer  statement  of  his  arguments. 

The  additions  of  the  Second  Edition  will  be  found 
on  pp.  361-512,  of  the  first  volume,  while  the 
passages  omitted  in  the  Second  Edition  have  been 
included  throughout  between  parentheses. 

Critical  Treatment  of  the  Text  of  Kant's  Critique. 

The  text  of  Kant's  Critique  has  of  late  years  be- 
come the  subject  of  the  most  minute  philological 
criticism,  and  it  certainly  offers  as  good  a  field 
for  the  exercise  of  critical  scholarship  as  any  of  the 
Greek  and  Eoman  classics. 

We  have,  first  of  all,  the  text  of  the  First  Edition, 
full  of  faults,  arising  partly  from  the  imperfect  state 
of  Kant's  manuscript,  partly  from  the  carelessness  of 
the  printer.  Kant  received  no  proof-sheets,  and  he 
examined  the  first  thirty  clean  sheets,  which  were 
in  his  hands  when  he  wrote  the  preface,  so  carelessly 
that  he  could  detect  in  them  only  one  essential 
misprint.  Then  followed  the  Second, '  here  arid  there 


liv  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

improved,'  Edition  (1787),  in  which  Kant  not  only 
omitted  and  added  considerable  passages,  but  paid 
some  little  attention  also  to  the  correctness  of  the 
text,  improving  the  spelling  and  the  stopping,  and 
removing  a  number  of  archaisms  which  often  perplex 
the  reader  of  the  First  Edition. 

We  hardly  know  whether  these  minor  alterations 
came  from  Kant  himself,  for  he  is  said  to  have  been 
firmly  attached  to  the  old  system  of  orthography1 ; 
and  it  seems  quite  certain  that  he  himself  paid  no 
further  attention  to  the  later  editions,  published 
during  his  lifetime,  the  Third  Edition  in  1790,  the 
Fourth  in  1 794,  the  Fifth  in  1 799. 

At  the  end  of  the  Fifth  Edition  of  the  Critique  of 
Pure  Heason,  published  in  1 799,  there  is  a  long  list  of 
Corrigenda,  the  authorship  of  which  has  exercised  the 
critical  students  of  Kant's  text  very  much.  No  one 
seems  to  have  thought  of  attributing  it  to  Kant  him- 
self, who  at  that  time  of  life  was  quite  incapable  of 
such  work.  Professor  B.  Erdmann  supposed  it  might 
be  the  work  of  Eink,  or  some  other  amanuensis  of 
Kant.  Dr.  Yaihinger  has  shown  that  it  is  the  work 
of  a  Professor  Grillo,  who,  in  the  PhilosojphiscJie 
Anzeiger,  a  Supplement  to  L.  H.  Jacob's  Anna- 
leu  der  PJiilosopliie  und  des  philosophischen  Geistes, 
1 795,  published  a  collection  of  Corrigenda,  not  only  for 
Kant's  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  but  for  several  other 
of  his  works  also.  Another  contributor  to  the  same 
journal,  Meyer,  thereupon  defended  Kant's  publisher 
(Hartknoch)  against  the  charges  of  carelessness,  re- 
jected some  of  Grillo's  corrections,  and  showed  that 

1  See  Kehrbach,  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  p.  viii. 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  lv 

what  seemed  to  be  misprints  were  in  many  cases 
peculiarities  of  Kant' s  style.  It  is  this  list  of  Professor 
Grillo  which,  with  certain  deductions,  has  been  added 
to  the  Fifth  Edition  of  the  Critique.  Some  of  Grillo' s 
corrections  have  been  adopted  in  the  text,  while  others, 
even  those  which  Meyer  had  proved  to  be  unnecessary, 
.have  retained  their  place  in  the  list. 

With  such  materials  before  him,  it  is  clear  that  a 
critical  student  of  Kant's  text  enjoys  considerable 
freedom  in  conjectural  emendation,  and  that  free- 
dom has  been  used  with  great  success  by  a  number 
of  German  critics.  The  more  important  are  : — 

Rosenkranz,  in  his  edition  of  Kant's  Critique  (text 
of  First  Edition),  1838. 

Hartenstein,  in  his  edition  of  Kant's  Critique  (text 
of  Second  Edition),  1838,  1867. 

Kehrbach,  in  his  edition  of  Kant's  Critique  (text  of 
First  Edition),  1877. 

Leclair,  A.  von,  Kritische  Beitrage  zur  Kategorien- 
lehre  Kant's,  1871. 

Paulsen,  Versuch  einer  Entwickelungsgeschichte 
der  Kantischen  Erkenntnisslehre,  1875. 

Erdmann,  B.,  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunffc  (text  of 
Second  Edition),  1878,  with  a  valuable  chapter  on 
the  Eevision  of  the  Text. 

Many  of  the  alterations  introduced  by  these  critics 
affect  the  wording  only  of  Kant's  Critique,  without 
materially  altering  the  meaning,  and  were  therefore 
of  no  importance  in  an  English  translation.  It  often 
happens,  however,  that  the  construction  of  a  whole 
sentence  depends  on  a  very  slight  alteration  of  the 
text.  In  Kant's  long  sentences,  the  gender  of  the 


Ivi  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

pronouns  der,  die,  das,  are  often  our  only  guide  in 
discovering  to  what  substantive  these  pronouns  refer, 
while  in  English,  where  the  distinction  of  gender 
is  wanting  in  substantives,  it  is  often  absolutely 
necessary  to  repeat  the  substantives  to  which  the  pro- 
nouns refer.  But  Kant  uses  several  nouns  in  a  gender 
which  has  become  obsolete.  Thus  he  speaks l  of  der 
Wachsthum,  der  Wohlgef alien,  der  Gegentheil,  die  Hin- 
derniss,  die  Bediirfniss,  die  Verhaltniss,  and  he  varies 
even  between  die  and  das  Verhaltniss,  die  and  das 
Erkenntniss,  etc.,  so  that  even  the  genders  of  pro- 
nouns may  become  blind  guides.  The  same  applies 
to  several  prepositions  which  Kant  construes  with 
different  cases  from  what  would  be  sanctioned  by 
modern  German  grammar2.  Thus  ausser  with  him 
governs  the  accusative,  wahrend  the  dative,  etc. 
For  all  this,  and  many  other  peculiarities,  we  must 
be  prepared,  if  we  want  to  construe  Kant's  text 
correctly,  or  find  out  how  far  we  are  justified  in 
altering  it. 

Much  has  been  achieved  in  this  line,  and  con- 
jectural alterations  have  been  made  by  recent 
editors  of  Kant  of  which  a  Bentley  or  a  Lachmann 
need  not  be  ashamed.  In  cases  where  these  emenda- 
tions affected  the  meaning,  and  when  the  reasons  why 
my  translation  deviated  so  much  from  the  textus 
receptus  might  not  be  easily  perceived,  I  have  added 
the  emendations  adopted  by  me,  in  a  note.  Those 
who  wish  for  fuller  information  on  these  points,  will 
have  to  consult  Dr.  Vaihinger's  forthcoming  Com- 
mentary, which,  to  judge  from  a  few  specimens  kindly 

1  See  Erdmann,  p.  637.  2  See  Erdmann,  p.  660. 


TRANSLATORS   PREFACE.  Ivii 

communicated  to  me  by  the  author,  will  give  the 
fullest  information  on  the  subject 

How  important  some  of  the  emendations  are  which 
have  to  be  taken  into  account  before  an  intelligible 
translation  is  possible,  may  be  seen  from  a  few 
specimens. 

•'     On  p.  382  (442)  the  reading  of  the  first  edition 
Antithesis  must  be  changed  into  Thesis. 

Page  470  (545),  Noumenon  seems  preferable  to 
Phenomenon. 

Page  420  (484),  we  must  read  keine,  instead  of  eine 
Wahrnehmung. 

Page  295  (340),  we  must  keep  the  reading  of  the 
First  Edition  transcendentalen,  instead  of  transcen- 
dent en,  as  printed  in  the  Second  ;  while  on  p.  578 
(674),  transcendenten  may  be  retained,  though  cor- 
rected into  transcendentalen  in  the  Corrigenda  of  the 
Fifth  Edition. 

On  p.  670  (781),  the  First  Edition  reads,  sind  also 
Jceine  Privatmeinungen.  Hartenstein  rightly  corrects 
this  into  reine  Privatmeinungen,  i.  e.  they  are  mere 
private  opinions. 

Page  714  (832),  instead  of  ein  jeder  Theil,  it  is 
proposed  to  read  kein  TJieil.  This  would  be  neces- 
sary if  we  took  vermisst  werden  kann,  in  the  sense  of 
can  be  spared,  while  if  we  take  it  in  the  sense  of  can 
le  missed,  i.  e.  can  be  felt  to  be  absent,  the  reading  of 
the  First  Edition  ein  jeder  Theil  must  stand.  See  the 
Preface  to  the  First  Edition,  p.  xx,  note  i. 

On  p.  (138)  157,  the  First  Edition  reads,  Weil  sie 
kein  Drittes,  namlich  reinen  Gegenstand  haben.  This 
gives  no  sense,  because  Kant  never  speaks  of  a 


Iviii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

reinen  Gegenstand.  In  the  list  of  Corrigenda  at 
the  end  of  the  Fifth  Edition,  reinen  is  changed  into 
keinen,  which  Hartenstein  has  rightly  adopted,  while 
Eosenkranz  retains  reinen. 

On  pp.  1 6  and  17  of  the  Introduction  to  the 
Second  Edition  (Supplement  VI.  p. 407),  Dr.  Vaihinger 
has  clearly  proved,  I  think,  that  the  whole  passage 
from  Einige  wenige  Grundscitze  to  Konnen  dar- 
gestellt  werden  interrupts  the  drift  of  Kant's  argu- 
ment. It  probably  was  a  marginal  note,  made  by 
Kant  himself,  but  inserted  in  the  wrong  place.  It 
would  do  very  well  as  a  note  to  the  sentence :  Fben  so 
wenig  ist  irgend  ein  Gntndsatz  der  reinen  Geometric 
analytisch. 

With  these  prefatory  remarks  I  leave  my  trans- 
lation in  the  hands  of  English  readers.  It  contains 
the  result  of  hard  work  and  hard  thought,  and  I  trust 
it  will  do  some  good.  I  have  called  Kant's  philosophy 
the  Lingua  Franca  of  modern  philosophy,  and  so  it  is, 
and  I  hope  will  become  so  still  more.  But  that  Lingua 
Franca,  though  it  may  contain  many  familiar  words 
from  all  languages  of  the  world,  has  yet,  like  every 
other  language,  to  be  learnt.  To  expect  that  we  can 
understand  Kant's  Critique  by  simply  reading  it, 
would  be  the  same  as  to  attempt  to  read  a  French 
novel  by  the  light  of  English  and  Latin.  A  book 
which  Schiller  and  Schopenhauer  had  to  read  again 
and  again  before  they  could  master  it,  will  not  yield 
its  secrets  at  the  first  time  of  asking.  An  Indian 
proverb  says  that  it  is  not  always  the  fault  of  the 
post,  if  a  blind  man  cannot  see  it,  nor  is  it  always  the 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  lix 

fault  of  the  profound  thinker,  if  his  language  is  unin- 
telligible to  the  busy  crowd.  I  am  no  defender  of 
dark  sayings,  and  I  still  hold  to  an  opinion  for  which 
I  have  often  been  blamed,  that  there  is  nothing  in 
any  science  that  cannot  be  stated  clearly,  if  only  we 
know  it  clearly.  Still  there  are  limits.  No  man  has 
:a  right  to  complain  that  he  cannot  understand  higher 
mathematics,  if  he  declines  to  advance  step  by  step 
from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  stage  of  that  science. 
It  is  the  same  in  philosophy.  Philosophy  represents 
a  long  toil  in  thought  and  word,  and  it  is  but  natural 
that  those  who  have  toiled  long  in  inward  thought 
should  use  certain  concepts,  and  bundles  of  concepts, 
with  their  algebraic  exponents,  in  a  way  entirely  be- 
wildering to  the  outer  world.  Kant's  obscurity  is 
owing  partly  to  his  writing  for  himself  rather  than 
for  others,  and  partly  to  his  addressing  himself, 
when  defending  a  cause,  to  the  judge,  and  not  to 
the  jury.  He  does  not  wish  to  persuade,  he  tries  to 
convince.  No  doubt  there  are  arguments  in  Kant's 
Critique  which  fail  to  convince,  and  which  have  pro- 
voked the  cavils  and  strictures  of  his  opponents. 
Kant  would  not  have  been  the  really  great  man  he 
was,  if  he  had  escaped  the  merciless  criticism  of  his 
smaller  contemporaries.  But  herein  too  we  perceive 
the  greatness  of  Kant,  that  those  hostile  criticisms, 
even  where  they  are  well  founded,  touch  only  on  less 
essential  points,  and  leave  the  solidity  of  the  whole 
structure  of  his  philosophy  unimpaired.  No  first 
perusal  will  teach  us  how  much  of  Kant's  Critique 
may  safely  be  put  aside  as  problematical,  or,  at  all 
events,  as  not  essential.  But  with  every  year,  and 


Ix  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

with  every  new  perusal,  some  of  these  mists  and 
clouds  seem  to  vanish,  and  the  central  truth  is  seen 
rising  before  our  eyes  with  constantly  increasing 
warmth  and  splendour,  like  a  cloudless  sun  in  an 
Eastern  sky. 

And  now,  while  I  am  looking  at  the  last  lines  that 
I  have  written,  it  may  be  the  last  lines  that  I  shall 
ever  write  on  Kant,  the  same  feeling  comes  over  me 
which  I  expressed  in  the  Preface  to  the  last  .volume 
of  my  edition  of  the  Big- Veda  and  its  ancient  com- 
mentary. I  feel  as  if  an  old  friend,  with  whom  I 
have  had  many  communiiigs  during  the  sunny  and 
during  the  dark  days  of  life,  was  taken  from  me, 
and  I  should  hear  his  voice  no  more. 

The  two  friends,  the  Rig- Veda  and  Kant's  Critique 
of  Pure  Eeason,  may  seem  very  different,  and  yet  my 
life  would  have  been  incomplete  without  the  one  as 
without  the  other. 

The  bridge  of  thoughts  and  sighs  that  spans  the 
whole  history  of  the  Aryan  world  has  its  first  arch  in 
the  Veda,  its  last  in  Kant's  Critique.  In  the  Veda 
we  watch  the  first  unfolding  of  the  human  mind  as 
we  can  watch  it  nowhere  else.  Life  seems  simple, 
natural,  childlike,  full  of  hopes,  undisturbed  as  yet 
by  many  doubts  or  fears.  What  is  beneath,  and 
above,  and  beyond  this  life  is  dimly  perceived,  and 
expressed  in  a  thousand  words  and  ways,  all  mere 
stammerings,  all  aiming  to  express  what  cannot  be 
expressed,  yet  all  full  of  a  belief  in  the  real  pre- 
sence of  the  Divine  in  Nature,  of  the  Infinite  in  the 
Finite.  Here  is  the  childhood  of  our  race  unfolded 
before  our  eyes,  at  least  so  much  of  it  as  we  shall 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  Ixi 

ever  know  on  Aryan  ground, — and  there  are  lessons 
to  be  read  in  those  hymns,  ay,  in  every  word  that 
is  used  by  those  ancient  poets,  which  will  occupy 
and  delight  generations  to  corne. 

And  while  in  the  Veda  we  may  study  the  child- 
hood, we  may  study  in  Kant's  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason  the  perfect  manhood  of  the  Aryan  mind. 
It  has  passed  through  many  phases,  and  every  one 
of  them  had  its  purpose,  and  has  left  its  mark.  It  is 
no  longer  dogmatical,  it  is  no  longer  sceptical,  least 
of  all  is  it  positive.  It  has  arrived  at  and  passed 
through  its  critical  phase,  and  in  Kant's  Critique 
stands  before  us,  conscious  both  of  its  weakness  and 
of  its  strength,  modest,  yet  brave.  It  knows  what  the 
old  idols  of  its  childhood  and  of  its  youth  too  were 
made  of.  It  does  not  break  them,  it  only  tries  to 
understand  them,  but  it  places  above  them  the 
Ideals  of  Eeason — no  longer  tangible — not  even 
within  reach  of  the  understanding — yet  real,  if  any- 
thing can  be  called  real, — bright  and  heavenly  stars 
to  guide  us  even  in  the  darkest  night. 

In  the  Veda  we  see  how  the  Divine  appears  in 
the  fire,  and  in  the  earthquake,  and  in  the  great  and 
strong  wind  which  rends  the  mountain.  In  Kant's 
Critique  the  Divine  is  heard  in  the  still  small  voice — 
the  Categorical  Imperative — the  I  Ought — which 
Nature  does  not  know  and  cannot  teach.  Every- 
thing in  Nature  is  or  is  not,  is  necessary,  or 
contingent,  true  or  false.  But  there  is  no  room  in 
Nature  for  the  Ought,  as  little  as  there  is  in  Logic, 
Mathematics,  or  Geometry.  Let  that  suffice,  and  let 
future  generations  learn  all  the  lessons  contained 


Ixii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

in  that  simple  word,  I  ought,  as  interpreted  by 
Kant. 

I  feel  I  have  done  but  little  for  my  two  friends, 
far  less  than  they  have  done  for  me.  I  myself 
have  learnt  from  the  Veda  all  that  I  cared  to  learn, 
but  the  right  and  full  interpretation  of  all  that  the 
poets  of  the  Vedic  hymns  have  said  or  have  meant 
to  say,  must  be  left  to  the  future.  What  I  could  do 
in  this  short  life  of  ours  was  to  rescue  from  oblivion 
the  most  ancient  heirloom  of  the  Aryan  family,  to 
establish  its  text  on  a  sound  basis,  and  to  render 
accessible  its  venerable  Commentary,  which,  so  long  as 
Vedic  studies  last,  may  be  criticised,  but  can  never 
be  ignored. 

The  same  with  Kant's  Critique  of  Pure  Reason. 
I  do  not  venture  to  give  the  right  and  full  explana- 
tion of  all  that  Kant  has  said  or  has  meant  to  say. 
I  myself  have  learnt  from  him  all  that  I  cared  to 
learn,  and  I  now  give  to  the  world  the  text  of  his 
principal  work,  critically  restored,  and  so  translated 
that  the  translation  itself  may  serve  as  an  explana- 
tion, and  in  some  places  even  as  a  commentary  of  the 
original.  The  materials  are  now  accessible,  and  the 
English-speaking  race,  the  race  of  the  future,  will 
have  in  Kant's  Critique  another  Aryan  heirloom,  as 
precious  as  the  Veda — a  work  that  may  be  criticised, 
but  can  never  be  ignored. 


F.  MAX  MULLER 


OXFOED, 

November  25,  1881. 


THE  CRITIQUE  OF  PURE  REASON 


AS   ILLUSTEATED 


BY  A  SKETCH  OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT 
OF  OCCIDENTAL  PHILOSOPHY 


BY 


LUDWIG  NOffifi. 


INTRODUCTION, 


*  THE  history  of  philosophy  has  ceased/  says  Las- 
salle  ly  *  to  count  as  a  mere  collection  of  curiosities, 
an  assemblage  of  arbitrary  or  accidental  opinions. 
Thought  too  is  seen  to  be  an  historical  product ; 
and  the  history  of  philosophy  a  representation  of  the 
course  of  its  self-development  in  necessary  con- 
tinuity. And  if  the  history  of  philosophy,  like  all 
other  historical  development,  is  governed  by  inner 
necessary  laws,  then  surely,  here  if  anywhere,  in  this 
history  of  knowledge,  the  law  of  the  development  of 
knowledge  must  coincide  with  the  law  of  knowledge 
itself/ 

I  have  taken  these  words  as  the  motto  of  the 
following  historical  introduction,  although  they  are 
not  free  from  the  obscurity  and  confusion  of  thought 
which  flourished  under  the  rule  of  Hegelianism.  For 
tile  'History  of  Philosophy'  and  the  *  History  of 
Knowledge '  are  very  far  from  being  identical.  If  our 
conception  of  philosophy  includes  all  those  reflections 
which  the  human  mind  has  at  different  times  in- 
dulged in  respecting  its  own  nature,  then  the  history 
of  philosophy  will  be  a  history  of  these  reflections, 
and  will  form  only  a  portion,  though  an  important 
one,  of  the  '  History  of  Knowledge/  and  this  only  so 
far  as  it  satisfies  the  true  test  of  value  by  exercising 

1  Die  Philosophic  Herakleitos  des  Dunkeln,  i.  p.  xii, 
VOL.    I.  B 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

a  lasting  influence  upon  the  processes  of  human 
thought.  It  is  however  possible  to  regard  the 
history  of  knowledge  as  the  chief  or  sole  object  of 
philosophical  research,  and  if  such  a  view  has  not 
yet  received  the  adherence  of  the  majority,  it  has  at 
least  been  formulated  by  one  authority  of  weight,  in 
these  terms :  'All  future  philosophy  must  be  a  philoso- 
phy, of  language.' 

Notwithstanding  this  obvious  confusion  of  terms, 
I  have  chosen  the  above  words  of  Lassalle  as  a  motto 
for  the  present  work,  first,  because  of  the  great  truth 
which  they  do  contain,  and,  secondly,  because  of 
their  appropriateness  at  the  present  day,  when,  more 
than  at  any  previous  time,  the  conviction  is  gaining 
ground  that  in  order  to  understand  any  fact  or  phe- 
nomenon, any  manifestation  of  human  opinion,  feel- 
ing or  belief,  we  must  first  familiarise  ourselves  with 
its  origin  and  its  past  development.  And  I  may 
hope  that  the  two  great  camps  in  which  the  men 
of  science  and  the  philosophers — the  empiricists  and 
a-priorists — are  drawn  up  will  be  reconciled  and  meet 
here  as  upon  neutral  ground.  For  the  former,  the 
motto  promises  a  discussion  of  development,  and  of 
development  according  to  natural,  impartial  reason- 
ing :  while  to  the  latter  it  concedes  the  lofty,  mar- 
vellous and  incomprehensible  faculty  distinguishing 
mankind, — reason, — towards  which  no  Darwinian  has 
as  yet  succeeded  in  the  least  degree  in  establishing 
a  bridge  from  out  the  animal  world1. 

Kant's  Critik  der  Reinen  Vernunft  represents  the 
greatest  revolution  which  has  ever  taken  place  in 

1  Instead  of  this,  human  reason  has  been  imported  into  the 
animal  world,  and  the  problem,  so  far  from  being  cleared  up,  has 
thus  been  rendered  doubly  obscure,  as,  for  instance,  by  Sir  J. 
Lubbock  in  his  observations  on  ants. 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

the  realms  of  speculation.  It  has  often  been  com- 
pared, and  among  others  by  the  author  himself,  with 
the  Coper nican  system.  Not  less  truly  it  has  been 
likened  by  Rosenkranz  to  the  head  of  Janus  in  the 
temple  of  philosophy,  concentrating  in  itself  all  the 
conquests  of  preceding  labours,  while  all  further  pro- 
.gress  has  to  take  its  departure  thence.  To  do  full 
justice  to  its  significance  requires  therefore  a  retro- 
spective survey  of  all  that  has  been  done  in  this 
region  from  the  first  existence  of  philosophy. 

Philosophy  begins  when  men  first  begin  to  reflect 
with  curiosity  about  themselves  and  the  world 
around  them  ;  it  begins  therefore  when  primitive 
religion,  which  appears  as  the  earliest  and  most 
natural  interpretation  of  the  universe,  is  no  longer 
able  to  satisfy  them  with  the  imaginative  language 
of  mythology.  They  do  not  guess  that  it  is  their 
own  reason  which  drives  them  to  seek  for  new  ex- 
planations ;  the  double  problem  of  world  and  mind 
still  appears  as  a  simple  one,  and  they  seek  to  attain 
the  desired  explanation  from  the  world  and  in  the 
world. 

An  organic  presentation  of  the  history  of  philoso- 
phy would  therefore  have  to  show  how  reason  first 
takes  the  widest  flights  in  search  of  its  proper 
object,  which  go  on  narrowing  in  the  course  of  cen- 
turies till  at  last  they  only  embrace  a  narrow  spot 
within  which  the  self  and  its  own  nature  appears  to 
the  astonished  gaze  as  the  true  Archimedean  point 
whence  everything  else  is  to  be  explained. 

In  the  following  pages  I  have  endeavoured  to 
trace  in  broad  outline  the  course  which  has  been 
pursued  from  the  earliest  beginnings  to  this  goal. 
In  order  to  carry  out  the  programme  laid  down  I 
have  traced  the  organic  structure  of  this  development 

B  2 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

to  a  single  idea  as  simple  as  the  nature  of  know- 
ledge itself.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  this  sim- 
plicity will  not  prove  a  stumbling-block.  The 
grounds  upon  which  it  rests  will  not  become  ap- 
parent till  we  reach  the  beginning  of  the  sketch  of 
mediaeval  philosophy.  For  the  present  it  is  suffi- 
cient to  observe  in  reference  to  the  ideal  of  pure 
reason  set  up  by  Kant  that  the  essence  of  the  ancient 
philosophy  was  cosmology,  that  of  the  mediaeval, 
theology,,  and  that  of  the  modern,  psychology. 

I  say  the  essence,  meaning  only  the  great  currents 
of  thought,  which  had  received  a  decisive  direction 
towards  a  certain  quarter,  in  each  principal  epoch  of 
development,  notwithstanding  the  apparently  oppo- 
site bent  of  minor  tributaries,  of  isolated  thoughts 
and  opinions  whose  true  value  and  significance  can 
only  be  estimated  at  a  later  date  when  a  new  theory 
of  the  universe  has  been  accepted.  However  high 
the  summit  of  a  tree  may  reach,  its  root  is  in  the  soil 
beneath,  and'  philosophers  too  are  children  of  their 
age  and  can  never  wholly  free  themselves  from  the 
ideas,  convictions,  and  prejudices  which  surround 
them:  their  thoughts  are  borne  along  with  the 
torrent  of  the  general  thought.  ^ 

Yet  it  is  an  interesting  spectacle  to  watch  the 
truths  and  theories  of  a  future  day  germinating  in 
earlier  times  as  on  a  foreign  soil.  And  of  this  we 
need  only  say  that  there  is  no  tendency  of  modern 
thought  which  has  not  its  prototype  in  Greek  philo- 
sophy, none  except  that  which  must  be  called  the 
modern  tendency  /car'  e^o-^v — the  Ego  of  Descartes. 
At  the  same  time  it  must  be  obvious  to  every 
thoughtful  mind  that  it  is  just  this  latest  develop- 
ment which  has  made  all  the  ancient  systems  and 
forecasts  to  appear  in  a  new  light,  so  that  even  when 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

the  original  hue  of  the  stream  remains  to  testify  to 
its  origin,  still  in  the  new  current  with  which  it 
mingles,  it  struggles  onwards  under  quite  different 
conditions  and  in  a  fresh  direction.  The  doctrines  of 
Kant  may  be  recognised,  as  we  shall  see,  in  the 
views  of  Herakleitos  and  Protagoras,  but  in  a  form 
which  bears  the  same  relation  to  his  work  as  the 
guesses  of  the  Pythagoreans  about  the  earth's 
motion  do  to  the  calculations  of  Copernicus,  Galileo, 
and  Newton.  Kant  himself  seems  to  have  foreseen 
the  chance  of  such  insinuations,  for  he  appeals  to 
those  who  take  the  '  History  of  Philosophy ;  for  phi- 
losophy itself,  'to  wait  till  his  investigations  have 
become  historical,  after  which  it  would  be  their  turn 
to  instruct  the  world  as  to  what  had  happened  be- 
fore. Otherwise  nothing  could  ever  be  said  which 
had  not,  in  their  opinion,  been  said  already,  and  in- 
deed this  saying  itself  may  be  a  trustworthy  pro- 
phecy of  what  is  to  be  said  hereafter.  For,  since 
the  human  understanding  has  occupied  itself  for 
many  centuries  with  countless  objects  in  various 
ways,  it  would  be  almost  strange  if  something  old 
could  not  be  found  to  resemble  every  novelty1/ 
Schopenhauer's  answer  to  those  who,  after  ignoring 
his  work  for  a  generation,  professed  to  find  it  fore- 
stalled in  a  sentence  of  Schelling  ('Wollen  ist 
Ursein'),  is  to  the  purpose  here :  '  He  only,  who  has 
discerned  the  reasons  and  thought  out  the  conse- 
quences of  a  truth,  who  has  developed  its  whole 
content  and  surveyed  its  whole  scope,  and  who  has 
then  with  full  consciousness  of  its  worth  and 
weightiness  given  clear  and  coherent  expression  to 
it,  he  and  he  only  is  its  author  and  originator2/ 

1  Prolegomena,  Preface. 

2  Parerga  utid  Paralipomena,  i.  144. 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

.  Kant  then,  who  analysed  the  human  reason  into 
its  ultimate  elements  and  so  first  made  it  fully  in- 
telligible to  itself,  marks  the  close  of  a  period  of 
development,  which  now  lies  spread  out  as  a  whole 
before  our  eyes,  and  which  we  have  to  trace  through 
its  origin  and  its  progress,  its  uncertain  steps  and 
tentative  searchings,  its  confident  struggles  and  its 
anxious  doubts,  its  apparent  retrogression  and  its 
gallant  onward  strides. 

The  palm  of  valour  belongs  to  the  hero  of  thought 
who  has  plunged  into  the  obscurest  abysses  of  the 
human  mind  and,  with  almost  superhuman  calm,  has 
succeeded  in  emerging  with  the  key  to  the  mystery 
in  his  hand.  In  Kant,  in  the  truest  sense  of  the 
words,  reason  has  come  to  herself.  He  has  made  an 
end  for  ever  of  all  mystical  admixtures,  all  un- 
justifiable pretensions,  all  Icarus-like  flights  towards 
forbidden  regions.  If,  as  no  one  has  yet  questioned, 
reason  is  the  true  and  only  tool  and  means  to  which 
man  owes  his  high  place,  his  successes  and  his  inward 
nobility,  Kant  must  be  recognised  with  equal  un- 
reserve as  the  greatest  benefactor  of  humanity.  May 
the  seed  which  he  has  scattered  ripen  everywhere  ; 
may  the  light  of  day  which  rose  with  him  spread 
over  every  region  of  thought  and  conduct ;  and  above 
all,  may  the  broils,  at  once  so  empty  and  embittered, 
and  the  logomachies  of  the  school  which  have  already 
done  so  much  to  damage  philosophy  in  the  estima- 
tion of  some  of  the  good  and  wise,  may  these  at 
length  be  silenced,  and  the  name  of  Kant  become 
a  rallying-point  of  union  for  all  genuine  and  honest 
lovers  of  truth  in  every  science  and  among  every 
nation.  This  is  the  only  worthy  return  which  our 
gratitude  to  this  great  thinker  can  bring  to  celebrate 
the  jubilee  of  his  immortal  work. 


INTRODUCTION.  7 

Perikles  said  that '  the  whole  world  is  the  tomb  of 
the  great/  and  we  may  say  of  Kant,  Time  and  Space 
cannot  limit  the  action  of  great  men.  Of  him,  more 
than  of  any  child  of  man,  the  poet's  words  are  true — 

'  Es  kann  die  Spur  von  meinen  Erclentageu 
Nicht  in  JEonen  untergehn.1 


ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY. 


*Ei/   dvrl  rravTav.' — *OVTG>$  ov. 


TEJE  character  of  ancient  philosophy  is  naively 
objective.  Antiquity  knew  nothing  of  the  important 
distinction,  introduced  by  Descartes,  between  the 
thinking  subject  and  the  object  of  thought,  which 
is  now  recognised  as  the  necessary  starting-point  of 
all  philosophical  enquiry.  What  we  think  and  have 
to  think,  was  still  the  chief  matter:  the  question 
liow  we  think  had  not  yet  presented  itself.  Even 
the  highest  achievement  of  ancient  philosophy,  the 
Platonic  Idealism,  did  not  escape  these  fetters  of 
objectivity;  the  rational  soul  was  conceived  to  be 
capable  of  discerning  ideas  in  their  purity  and  clear- 
ness, but  objective  reality  was  attributed  to  the 
ideas. 

Philosophical  questions  in  antiquity  were  accord- 
ingly ontological ;  in  other  words,  Being  was  every- 
where presupposed  and  further  investigation  was 
directed  only  towards  the  nature  of  being,  and  how 
many  kinds  there  were  of  being,  whether  one  or 
many.  While  we  have  been  in  the  habit,  since  Des- 
cartes, of  starting  from  the  knowing  subject,  and, 
since  Kant,  of  deducing  thence  the  conception  of 
being,  such  an  idea  seldom  presented  itself  to  the 
ancients ;  they  could  only  explain  the  nature  of 
reason  by  assuming  the  mind  to  be  a  real  entity, 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  9 

and  then  enquire  further  whether  it  was  a  special 
kind  of  being,  or  whether  it  was  identical  with 
matter;  whether  it  was  a  kind  of  sensibility,  or 
whether  it  was  a  part  of  the  general  world-soul. 
The  true  path  of  idealism  was  still  undiscovered. 
Reason,  however,  in  obedience  to  its  natural  bent, 
was  striving  everywhere  towards  unity,  little  sus- 
pecting in  its  search  after  unity  that  the  true  source 
thereof  lay  in  itself,  and  that  all  the  while  it  was 
but  projecting  its  own  nature  outwards  into  the 
world  of  Being. 

It  may  be  said  then  of  the  philosophy  of  the  ai> 
cients  that  it  consisted  of  attempts  to  explain  the 
world  by  means  of  a  single  principle  which  was  ex- 
pected to  furnish  an  explanation  of  reason  and  the 
human  soul.  This  is  the  natural  course  of  the  de- 
velopment and  progress  of  knowledge;  the  last 
thing  that  man  discovers  is  his  own  Ego  ;  the  outer 
world  is  always  the  most  certain  and  the  most 
original  in  his  eyes.  In  this  sense  Sokrates  observes 
in  the  Phaedros  :  *  Do  you  then  believe  that  one  may 
understand  the  nature  of  the  soul  without  discern- 
ment of  nature  as  a  whole  V 

The  childish  beginnings  of  philosophy  among  the 
Greeks  therefore  all  take  the  form  of  naturalism. 
The  principles  or  causes  of  the  universe  were  sought 
in  water,  air,  the  aether  or  fire.  The  material  thrust 
itself  in  among  what  was  formal  and  peculiar  to  the 
mind,  and  little  blame  can  be  imputed  to  the  ancients 
for  this ;  seeing  how  many  there  are  at  the  present 
day  who  cannot  emancipate  themselves  from  this 
objective  pressure,  and  persist  in  raising  such  ques- 
tions as  whether  the  soul  is  material,  which  is  about 
as  rational  as  to  ask  if  a  circle  is  quadrangular  or  if 
a  mathematical  triangle  is  green  or  bkie. 


IO  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

The  first  attempt  to  place  the  One  at  the  summit 
of  a  theory  of  the  universe  was  made  by  the  Eleatics. 
They  were  inspired  by  the  dim  consciousness  that 
rational  knowledge  is  impelled  to  strive  after  com- 
pleteness, duration,  and  unchangeableness.  The  op- 
position or  incompatibility  between  this  desired  unity 
and  the  manifold  variety  in  the  outer  world  called  for 
some  compromise  of  conciliation,  and  hence  we  find 
first  in  the  Eleatic  school  the  opposition  between  per- 
ception and  thought,  between  the  Phenomenon  and  the 
Notimenon.  The  latter  alone  is  the  really  existing,  it 
is  unchangeable,  immoveable,  ever  resting ;  the  world 
of  sense,  on  the  contrary,  is  vacillating,  deceptive,  ever 
in  motion.  The  appearances  of  sensibility,  or  pheno- 
mena, must  therefore  be  reconciled  or  corrected  by 
the  really  Existing  which  can  only  be  conceived  in 
thought.  But  the  confusion  between  the  real  and 
the  ideal  is  very  strikingly  apparent  here  when  we 
find  the  greatest  master  of  this  school,  the  univer- 
sally revered  Parmenides,  asserting  that  *  Being 
and  Thought  are  one  and  the  same/  What  may 
pass  for  lofty  wisdom  in  those  early  days  of  the 
laborious  struggles  of  the  reason  towards  self-know- 
ledge, must  be  condemned  as  dull  absurdity  when 
it  appears  after  Kant  and  Descartes  in  the  Hegelian 
Dialectic. 

The  direct  opposite  to  the  Eleatic  school  is  found 
in  Herakleitos ;  in  the  former  we  welcome  the  first 
glimpses  of  the  idea  of  substance,  of  the  principle  of 
the  indestructibility  of  force,  as  well  as  of  the  sub- 
sequent investigations  of  Geulinx  and  Locke  re- 
specting the  difference  between  real  or  primary  arid 
sensibly  perceptible  qualities,  or  between  the  intuitions 
of  sense  and  reason  ;  we  see  too  the  first  conscious- 
ness of  the  antinomies  which  led  to  the  immortal 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  II 

achievements  of  Kant1.  Herakleitos  too  was  seeking 
for  a  secure  and  durable  principle  that  should  be 
applicable  everywhere  and  always,  and  only  need  to 
be  expressed  to  furnish  the  key  to  the  nature  of  the 
woi'ld.  He  finds  this  durable  and  eternal  principle, 
not  like  the  Eleatics  in  rest,  but,  on  the  contrary,  in 
strife,  incessant  flux  and  change.  The  true  Being 
is  an  eternal  Becoming,  a  state  between  being  arid 
not  being.  His  famous  saying  of  the  universal  flux 
of  things  rests  upon  the  self-evident  aptness  of  the 
description  of  a  stream  to  which  he  appeals,  show- 
ing it  to  be  impossible  to  step  twice  into  the  same 
stream,  seeing  that  the  water  composing  it  is  always 
different. 

The  latest  conclusion  which  was  to  be  deduced 
from  this  fruitful  idea  is  that  the  nature  of  substance 
must  remain  eternally  unknowable  by  us,  as  it  will 
always  be  impossible  to  distinguish  whether  the 
phenomenon  before  us  proceeds  from  the  identical 
same  atoms  as  before  or  whether  others  have  taken 
their  place.  Our  reason  is  in  any  case  compelled  to 
picture  matter  as  the  persistent  element,  but  this 
same  matter  remains  for  ever  incomprehensible  to 
us.  For  the  rest,  the  positive  side  of  this  profound 
thinker's  suggestion  is  from  many  points  of  view 

1  Zeno,  the  Eleatic,  whom  Aristotle  called  the  father  of  dialectic, 
was  the  first  to  prove  that  multiplicity  and  motion  were  impossible; 
the  former  because  the  many  must  be  a  particular  number  over  and 
above  which  there  might  be  always  one  more,  the  latter  because  of 
the  well-known  property  of  time  and  space  by  which  they  admit 
of  infinite  division.  The  arrow  in  its  flight  is  always  in  one  in- 
finitely minute  portion  of  space, — it  is  therefore  always  at  rest* 
A  definite  time  cannot  elapse,  a  definite  space  be  traversed,  because 
first  the  half,  and  then  the  half  of  the  half,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum, 
has  to  elapse  or  be  passed  through,  which  gives  an  endless  series 
of  subdivisions. 


12  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

still  clear  and  intelligible.  The  change  of  matter 
which  goes  on  in  organic  structures,  the  circulation 
of  life,  the  principle  of  substitution1,  these  all  point 
towards  that  original  idea  as  to  their  germ.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  Herakleitos  himself  fully  com- 
prehended the  significance  of  his  own  thought,  as 
the  key  to  the  knowledge  of  the  world  and  life. 
This  appears  especially  from  the  fact  that  he  saw 
in  motion,  in  restless  activity  and  change,  the  real 
principle  of  life.  This  is  clear  from  a  passage  that 
runs,  'Herakleitos  banished  rest  and  stability  from 
the  world  ;  for  these  are  the  qualities  of  corpses2.' 

In  reference  to  rational  knowledge  or  percep- 
tion, it  is  in  the  highest  degree  interesting  to  find 
that  Herakleitos  had  a  presentiment  of  its  being 
constituted  by  means  of  two  factors.  At  least,  it  is 
reported  by  Sextus  Empiricus3,  that  according  to 
Herakleitos,  the  soul  attains  to  rational  thought  by 
receiving  into  itself  the  divine  Logos  which  presides 
over  the  outer  world ;  that  in  sleep  this  connection 
with  the  outer  world  ceases,  and  when  so  separated 
the  soul  loses  the  power  of  recollection.  On  waking 

1  An  important  application  of  this  principle,  with  obvious  re- 
ference to  Herakleitos,  occurs  in  Aristotle  (Polit.  iii,  c.  3),  who 
says,  that  we  call  a  city  the  same  as  long  as  one  and  the  same  race 
inhabits  it,  although  there  are  always  some  dying  and  others  being 
born,  as  we  are  accustomed  to  call  rivers  and  springs  the  same, 
although  in  the  one  case  water  is  always  pouring  in  and  in  the 
other  flowing  away.     And  the  remark  is  transferred  by  Seneca  to 
the  human  organism  (Ep.  Iviii) :  *  No  one  is  the  same  as  an  old 
man  that  he  was  as  a  youth,  no  one  is  to-day  what  he  was  yester- 
day.    Our  bodies  change  as  streams  do,  and  everything  flows  away 
as  time  does;  nothing  endures.     This  was  the  opinion  of  Hera- 
kleitos,— the  name  of  the  stream  remains,  the  water  runs  away. 
This  is  clearer  in  all  other  things  than  in  the  case  of  man,  but  we 
too  are  borne  along  in  equally  rapid  course/' 

2  But.  Plac.  Phil.  i.  23.  8  Adv.  Math.  vii.  129. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  13 

however,  looking  forth  through  the  portals  of 
sense  as  through  window  openings,  and  reuniting 
itself  again  with  the  outer  world,  the  soul  recovers 
the  faculty  of  thinking.  Our  nature  is  in  fact  es- 
tranged from  the  universe,  and  only  as  we  approach 
it  again  through  the  paths  of  sense  does  our  nature 
become  anew  assimilated  to  the  All,  as  coals  ap- 
proached to  the  fire  become  fiery  themselves.  All 
truth,  according  to  Herakleitos,  resides  in  this  uni- 
versal and  divine  Logos,  by  which  we-  become 
thinkers  (\oyiKofy  ourselves.  This  is  indeed  still  all 
very  obscure  and  mysterious,  but  we  see  through 
the  dark  abysses  points  where  future  truth  is 
crystallising  already.  We  hail  especially  the  inter- 
mediate relationship  of  sensibility  between  the  soul, 
still  in  a  state  of  rest,  and  the  outer  world  by  which 
it  is  to  be  enkindled.  The  window  apertures  by 
which  the  soul  shines  forth  remind  us  of  the  phrase 
of  Leibniz — the  monads  have  no  windows  through 
which  the  outer  world  can  see  in.  We  also  see  clear 
indications  of  a  perception  that  the  criterion  of  truth 
must  be  objective,  and  it  agrees  with  this  that 
Herakleitos  is  said  to  have  called  our  ears  and  eyes 
liars,  since  the  mere  sensible  appearance  of  things 
always  deceives  us.  It  is  true  the  Logos  lies  in  the 
world  without  (in  the  Trepifyov),  and  our  own  being  is 
too  far  estranged  from  the  world  to  furnish  in  itself 
the  central  starting-point  of  all  knowledge. 

Another  truth  that  in  our  days  is  forcing  its  way 
into  daylight  is  foreshadowed  in  the  thought  ex- 
pressed by  Herakleitos — in  full  harmony  with  his 
fundamental  principle — that  all  things  proceed  from 
fire,  and  will  be  turned  back  into  fire  at  last.  It 
may  be  assumed  as  certain  that  the  philosopher 
arrived  at  this  truth  by  reflecting  upon  organic  life 


14  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

«» 

and  the  degree  to  which  it  is  determined  by  light 
and  heat,  even  though  it  may  not  be  necessary  to 
exclude  all  trace  of  oriental  doctrine  and  influence. 
But  we  recognise  pure  Herakleitean  profundity  in 
the  view  that  the  whole  of  life  is  a  similar  process 
of  opposing  movements  which  are  constantly  being 
transformed  into  their  own  opposites  like  a  flame  or 
river.  One  of  the  Christian  fathers,  Gregory  of 
Nyssa1,  gives  an  interpretation  conceived  in  the  same 
spirit :  '  With  regard  to  the  body,  the  case  is  thus  : 
as  long  as  life  remains  in  it,  there  is  an  unceasing 
up  and  down  flow  of  change ;  rest  only  begins  when 
life  has  left  it.  But  as  long  as  it  is  alive,  there  is 
no  repose,  only  alternate  growth  and  decay,  or  rather 
an  incessant  intermixture  of  the  two/  After  all  its 
progress,  contemporary  physiology  can  v  hardly  givy 
a  better  definition  of  life  than  this  one  couched  in 
Herakleitean  phraseology. 

Now  if  we  assume  that  Herakleitos  only  saw  in  fire 
the  freest  and  most  rapid  form  of  motion,  and  in- 
ferred thence  that  combustion  must  represent  the 
primitive  condition  of  all  things,  so  that  they 
were  always  passing  through  a  course  of  change, 
now  solid  and  at  rest,  then  again  dissolved  into  their 
constituent  elements,  we  shall  certainly  have  to  re- 
cognise in  the  views  of  this  powerful  thinker,  whose 
profundity  met  with  unanimous  recognition  among 
the  ancients,  the  first  expression  of  the  fundamental 
ideas  which  underlie  the  modern  theory  of  the  uni- 
verse, namely, 

(1)  That  the  primitive  condition  of  the  world  is 
a  state  of  motion,  not  of  rest. 

(2)  That  the  material  substratum  of  all  pheno- 
mena is  an  infinitely  subtle  substance,  out  of  which 

1  De  Anim.  et  Resurrect,  p.  138,  ed.  Krab. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  15 

all  others  are  constituted  in  forms  which  pass  back 
again  into  simplicity. 

(3)  That  the  real  objective  Being  is  nothing  but 
motion,  whatever  phenomenal  differences  may  be 
thrust  upon  our  notice  by  the  senses. 

The  latter  view,  which  is  at  the  same  time  the 
foundation  of  contemporary  science  arid  the  essence 
of  Robert  Mayer  s  theories,  is  warranted  by  many 
passages  from  ancient  writers,  including  Aristotle  and 
Plato,  to  be  genuinely  Herakleitean.  Thus  in  the 
Theaetetos  we  read1,  *  That  everything  is  motion, 
and  nothing  else  exists;'  and  again,  'According  to 
Homer  and  Herakleitos  all  thingsjnoye  likje  streams/ 
In  Aristotle  it  is  said,  'That  he  (Herakleitos)  believed 
everything  existing  to  be  in  motion,  and  the  majority 
are  of  the  same  opinion  V 

Again  :  '  Some  say  that  of  existing  things  there 
is  not  one  in  motion  and  another  at  rest,  arid  we 
are  always  merely  deceived  by  our  senses  when  we 
fail  to  perceive  this  V 

The  influence  of  this  powerful  thinker  was  the 
more  considerable  because  all  subsequent  systems 
had  either  to  attach  themselves  to  his  doctrine  or 
to  deal  with  it  in  the  way  of  development  or  cor- 
rection, in  some  eases  retaining  and  exaggerating 
what  was  one-sided  and  so  reaching  the  most 
curious  consequences,  and  in  others  endeavouring  to 
reduce  this  element  to  its  due  proportion. 

Supposing  the  general  estimate  of  the  Herakleitean 
flux  to  be  correct,  in  the  form  in  which  it  has  always 
been  reproduced  by  later  writers, — namely,  that  no- 
thing really  is,  but  rather  is  always  beginning  to 
be  or  to  cease  to  be,  an  eternal  becoming,  a  middle 

1  156  a.  2  De  Anim.  i.  2. 

3  Phys.  Auscult.  viii.  c.  3. 


1 6  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

state  between  being  and  not  being1, — then  reason 
would  be  in  some  danger  of  yielding  to  the  temp- 
tation of  playing  with  its  own  paradoxes,  and  the 
dialectic  trifling  and  tours  de  force  of  the  sophists, 
who  can  prove  of  anything  at  the  same  time  that 
it  is  and  that  it  is  not,  might  seem  nearly  related 
to  the  Herakleitean  doctrine.  Epicharmos  of  Kos 
was  credited  with  the  well-known  subtleties  about 
the  Delian  galley  which  had  been  the  same  since  the 
days  of  Theseus  though  every  fragment  of  its  wood 
had  been  renewed ;  that  the  debtor  was  not  bound  to 
pay  anything  to  his  creditor  because  both  were  no 
longer  the  same  as  when  the  debt  was  incurred,  or  that 
an  invited  guest  is  not  invited,  for  the  same  reason, 
and  the  like.  The  exaggerations  of  Kratylos  belong 
to  the  same  class ;  he  believed  himself  to  surpass 
his  master,  whose  dictum  as  to  the  impossibility  of 
bathing  twice  in  the  same  river  was  improved  upon, 
so  that  he  contended  it  was  impossible  to  bathe  in  it 
even  once,  since  by  the  time  the  rest  of  the  body  had 
followed  the  feet,  the  water  would  have  run  away; 
he  maintained,  finally,  according  to  Aristotle2,  that 
it  is  impossible  to  name  anything,  or  to  maintain 
anything  ;  the  utmost  possible  is  to  point  to  a  thing 
with  the  finger,  for  everything  is  in  a  constant  state 
of  change.  It  is  true  that  Aristotle  gives  this  as 
the  most  extreme  opinion  of  the  0acr/coVra>i>  ^pa/cAem- 
Qiv,  or  '  the  professed  Herakleitizers,' 

However  this  may  be,  the  extreme  insistence  upon 
change  or  motion  &s  the  sole  principle  of  creation 
led  necessarily  to  this  kind  of  exaggeration,  and  hence 

1  Plato,  Theatet.  152  E :  *E*  &  ty  (popas  T€  Kal  KwfiwaK  Kal  Kpd<rca)s 
irpos  a\\rj\a  yiyvcrai  iravra  a  Sr;  <£a/A«>  €iyai  OOK  6p0ws  irposayopcvovrts' 
eon  p.ev  yap  OV&TTOT  ovAc?,  act  $€  ylyvcrat.  KOI  irepl  TOVTOV  irdvrcs  cgr)$  QL 
(To<pol  ir\f)v  Ilap/AcW&ou  ^vp.cj>€p€(r6oVj  Uptorayopas  re  KOI  ' 

2  Metaph.  iii.  c.  5. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  17 

to  the  spontaneous  breaking  up  of  the  Herakleitean 
system  by  the  absurdity  of  the  consequences  deduced 
from  it.  Besides  this,  there  was  a  concealed  contra- 
diction in  the  doctrine  itself  which  made  a  direct 
correction  necessary  by  means  of  the  nature  of  human 
reason,  though  it  is  possible  that  in  his  own  mind 
Herakleitos  had  silently  effected  that  correction.  All 
change  and  transition,  all  alteration  constantly  and 
continuously  beginning,  necessarily  presupposes  a 
something,  some  being  that  changes,  transforms  and 
modifies  itself,  otherwise  all  these  predicates  would 
be  meaningless  and  unreal.  But  if  we  may  trust 
Aristotle,  Herakleitos  had  always  maintained  the 
existence  of  this  One,  underlying  all  change,  al- 
though this  assurance  is  rather  weakened,  in  the 
passage1  referred  to,  by  the  words  'he  seems  to 
wish  to  say/ 

If,  as   many  ancient  writers  bear  witness,  Hera- 
kleitos regarded  fire  as  the  primaeval  being2  under- 

1  De  Caelo,  iii.  I  :   Of  8e  ra  /ne*/  oXXa  Ttavra  yivcvQai  ri  $a<ri  icat  peiv, 
clvai  8c  Trayicos  ovftey,  ti>  8^  n  \L&VQV  uirojj^j'611',  e£  oS  TCLVTCL  iravra  /ierao^iy- 
fumfeo-dai  ntyvW  OTT€/>  eoiKaoa  jSouXeaOcu  \tyew  aXXoi  re  TroXXoi  KOI 
*HpaK\€iTOS  6  'E<j>€(rio$. 

2  The  passage  in  Plutarch  (De  El  apud  Delph.  p.  388)  is  very 
important  in  reference  to  this  view :  Ilvpos  r  avTa^iftea-Bai  iravTa  KM 

yrvp  aTrdvrav,  axnrcp  ^pucrou  p^/zara  KCU  ^prjfJLurop  ^pucroff.  *  Everything 
is  transformed  into  fire  and  fire  transforms  itself  into  everything, 
just  as  gold  is  exchanged  for  goods  and  goods  for  gold/  It  is  cer- 
tainly difficult,  especially  considering  the  fragmentary  form  of  those 
of  his  sayings  which  have  been  preserved,  always  to  know  exactly 
what  was  the  real  opinion,  the  actual  thought  in  the  mind  of  this 
great  ancient ;  yet  such  a  depth  of  insight  is  revealed  by  this  com- 
parison between  the  nature  of  the  world  and  the  national  economy 
of  the  commercial  world  that  I  do  not  hesitate  to  rank  this  notion 
among  the  most  important  ajwrgus  transmitted  us  from  the  philo- 
sophy of  antiquity.  It  is  the  more  remarkable  seeing  that  it  has 
not  been  taken  up  or  developed  by  any  subsequent  philosopher, 
VOL.  I.  C 


1 8  ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY. 

lying  all  appearances,  which  produces 'by  its  trans- 
formations (rpoTrai)  and  its  conversions  into  the  op- 
posite (evavr LOT POTT a/)  all  things  and  their  differences, 
including  life  and  thought,  so  that  the  life  of  one 
thing  is  the  death  of  another 1,  we  should  then  have 
to  honour  in  him  the  first  prophet  of  the  monistic 
theory  of  the  universe,  and  the  ideal  which  modern 
science,  with  its  fundamental  belief  in  the  unity  and 
indestructibility  of  natural  forces,  necessarily  sets 
before  itself.  The  defects  and  incompleteness  of  his 
doctrine  lie  on  the  same  side  as  the  incompleteness 
and  defects  of  contemporary  monistic  naturalism, 
namely  in  what  I  may  call,  with  Schopenhauer,  the 
antinomy  of  matter.  It  is  absolutely  incomprehen- 
sible to  the  human  reason  how  and  whereby,  if  a  single 
primitive  being  or  substance  makes  up  the  content 
of  the  whole  world,  the  changes  or  transformations 
of  this  substance  could  either  first  originate  or  con- 
tinue to  take  place.  Whence  could  the  checks  upon 
the  universal  uniform  motion  be  imposed,  whence 
came  the  Herakleitean  condensation  of  fire  into  air, 
of  air  into  water,  of  water  into  solid  bodies  ?  Or, 
to  use  more  modern  language,  whence  the  number 
and  specialisation  of  natural  forces,  of  light,  of  heat, 
of  electricity,  whence  the  varying  properties  of 
chemical  elements  and  the  like  \  What  more  is 
accomplished  with  the  rpoirai  and  wavTiorpoTral,  the 

notwithstanding  that  it  forms,  as  I  shall  show  in  another  place, 
the  best  bridge  to  or  preparation  for  the  Kantian  truths,  and 
furnishes,  according  to  the  analogy  indicated,  the  easiest  means 
towards  a  comprehension  of  the  Kantian  doctrine. 

1  '  Fire  lives  by  the  death  of  earth  and  air  lives  by  the  death  of 
fire,  water  lives  by  the  death  of  air,  and  earth  by  the  death  of 
water.'  Max.  Tyr.,  diss.  xxv.  p.  230.  Similarly  Plutarch.  De  El 

ap.  Delph.  392  C  I    Hvpus  Qdvaros  depi  y€ve<ris  KCU  dcpos  6avaro$  vS 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  19 

modifications  and  conversions  of  things  into  their 
opposites,  than  the  multiplication  of  phrases  which 
explain  nothing  ?  We  have  no  answer  to  this  ques- 
tion ;  the  utmost  justification  we  can  offer  for  Hera- 
kleitos  and  the  modern  naturalists  is  to  say,  They 
cannot  explain  the  world,  they  cannot  penetrate  to 
its  first  causes,  they  can  only  record  the  fact  that 
it  is  thus  and  thus  only.  They  describe  the  consti- 
tution of  the  world  as  it  reveals  itself  after  attentive 
observation  and  diligent  attempts  at  rational  ex- 
planation, going  beyond  the  obvious  aspect  of  the 
phenomena  of  sense.  And  if  it  is  asked,  after  this, 
for  what  reason  there  is  assumed  to  be  only  one 
primary  substance,  the  answer  must  be,  because  of 
the  nature  of  human  reason,  which  obeys  an  irre- 
sistible natural  impulse  in  its  strivings  after  unity. 
More  than  twenty  centuries  of  fruitless  search  was 
needed  before  this  answer  could  be  found  and 
those  contradictions  reconciled,  before  the  only  true 
and  possible  method — verification  or  criticism  of  the 
reason  itself — was  to  be  discovered  by  an  eminent 
genius  and  pointed  out  to  all  posterity  as  the  en- 
trance porch  to  all  philosophical  research.  If  now, 
by  the  light  of  Kantian  truth,  we  are  enabled  to 
discern  the  grandeur  and  depth  of  the  Herakleitean 
doctrine,  we  shall  find  that  in  the  latter  the  two 
poles  of  all  knowledge,  the  a  priori  and  the  em- 
pirical, unite  to  form  a  kind  of  image  of  the  universe, 
in  which  there  appears,  on  the  one  hand,  as  the 
portion  of  reason,  the  permanent,  eternal,  funda- 
mental essence  of  all  things,  and  on  the  other, 
eternal  change  and  motion,  the  restlessness  of  the 
becoming,  as  the  result  recorded  by  experience.  It 
is  true  this  was  rather  an  intuition  than  a  clear 
perception,  for,  as  might  be  expected,  we  do  not  find 

C  2 


2O  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

in  Herakleitos  much  insight  into  these  opposites  and 
the  roots  from  whence  they  spring. 

His  successors  sought  in  various  ways  to  obviate 
the  one-sidedness  which  the  doctrine  was  but  vaguely 
felt,  not  yet  clearly  known  to  exhibit. 

Among  these  Empedokles  should  be  noticed  first,  as 
a  thinker  of  decision  and  distinction.  He  put  in  the 
place  of  one  fundamental  substance,  four  elements  by 
the  admixture  and  dispersion  of  which  all  things  in 
the  world  were  to  be  constituted.  These  four  elements 
correspond  to  what  we  should  call  at  the  present  day 
rather  conditions  or  aggregate  states,  adding  to  our 
present  classification  of  solid,  fluid,  and  gaseous 
bodies  a  fourth  class,  to  include  what  were  formerly 
called  imponderables.  It  may  be  said  of  this  view, 
by  which  all  later  generations  were  dominated,  that 
the  world  was  made  more  intelligible  by  it,  but  the 
explanation  itself  was  in  the  highest  degree  unphilo- 
Fophical.  The  correction  of  Herakleitos  is  only 
apparent.  The  conclusions  were  taken  for  granted 
in  the  premisses,  and  the  very  point  calling  for  ex- 
planation was  assumed  at  starting  as  self-evident. 
Predicates  of  a  general  nature,  characterising  the 
sensible  qualities  perceived  in  all  things  and  the 
transitions  which  are  also  apparent,  were  assumed  to 
be  original  things,  the  fundamental  essence  of  the 
whole  world,  which  consists  of  these  elements ;  the 
different  varieties  of  things  were  explained  by  the 
different  intermixture  of  the  elements.  This  is 
somewhat  as  if  the  chemists  of  the  present  day  were 
to  say  their  sixty-four  elements  had  existed  from 
eternity,  or  even,  as  an  apostle  of  the  most  modern 
wisdom  has  delivered  himself,  '  In  the  beginning 
there  was  carbon/  A  schoolboy  familiar  with  the 
most  elementary  physical  truths  would  laugh  nowa- 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  21 

days  if  the  doctrine  of  the  four  elements,  which  for  so 
long  succeeded  up  to  a  certain  point  in  satisfying 
the  demands  of  human  reason1,  were  to  be  seriously 
propounded,  and  would  exclaim,  These  are  not  se- 
parate things,  but  only  different  phenomenal  forms 
taken  by  the  same  thing!  How  many  centuries 
will  still  have  to  elapse  before  the  Kantian  doctrine 
becomes  common  property  in  the  same  way,  and  such 
utterances  as  the  above  come  to  be  recognised  as 
palpable  absurdities  only  fitted  to  excite  laughter2? 
This  doctrine  of  Empedokles  may  have  had  a  certain 
scientific  value  for  his  own  age,  as  it  certainly  re- 
ceived— on  account  of  its  simplicity  and  its  agreement 
with  obvious  recurring  facts — widespread  and  long- 
enduring  recognition  :  but  we  should  riot  on  that 
account  attribute  to  it  any  higher  philosophic  value 
or  regard  it  as  a  real  progress  of  philosophic  thought. 

1  Scarcely  anything,  material  or  spiritual,  but  what  lias  been 
deduced  from  and  explained  by  them.     The  doctrine  of  the  four 
temperaments,  in  which  the  moist,  the  dry,  the  cold,  or  the  hot  was 
dominant,  has  been  made  to  explain  innumerable  physiological  and 
psychological  problems,  from  the  days  of  Aristotle  down  to  modern 
times.    And  how  instructive  is  it  to  find  that  scholastic  philosophy 
was  impelled  to  assume  the  presence,  in  single  things,  of  a  quinta 
essentia  over  and  above  the  others,  with  which  the  ingenuity  of  the 
abstracteurs  de  quintessence  might  have  free  scope  ! 

2  It  must  be  said,  to  the  honour  of  England,  that  her  men  of 
science  have  preserved  more  of  their  mental  independence,  and  shown 
more  genuine  philosophic  instinct  even  in  the  realms  of  physics 
and  chemistry,  than  those  of  any  other  country.     It  is  only  neces- 
sary to  name  the  chemical  theories  of  Graham,  and  the  latest  con- 
tributions of  Crookes  and  Norman  Lockyer.     It  should  also  be 
remembered  that  Schopenhauer  and  Robert  Mayer,  so  long  ignored 
or  ridiculed  in  their  own  country,  first  received  due  recognition  of 
their  worth  in  England — the  latter  especially  from  Professor  Tyn- 
dall.     Whatever  the  reasons  of  this  may  have  been,  it  is  right  to 
note  the  fact,  and  thus  to  fulfil  a  duty  which  the  true  patriot 
should  delight  in  fulfilling. 


22  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

Much  greater  significance  must  be  assigned  to  the 
other  chief  doctrine  of  the  same  thinker,  namely, 
that  all  phenomena  are  determined  by  love  and  hate, 
that  by  these  two  principles  all  things  are  formed 
and  effected,  and  that  by  them  the  boundaries  of  the 
whole  phenomenal  world  are  established  and  main- 
tained. This  at  all  events  was  a  profound  aperpu, 
a  transfer  of  the  directly  conscious  but  obscure  do- 
sires  and  impulses  of  man  to  the  rest  of  the  world  ; 
and  the  Greek  is  so  far  a  precursor  of  Schopen- 
hauer, and  receives  his  due  meed  of  praise  from  the 
latter  as  ein  ganzer  Mann  \  Empedokles  does  in- 
deed deserve  credit  for  this  first  discernment  and 
description  of  the  inner  side  of  things,  in  contra- 
distinction to  the  generally  prevailing  naturalism. 
It  is  true  that  Anaxagoras  had  already  done  some- 
thing of  the  same  kind,  when  he  associated  with  the 
active  forces  presiding  in  nature  and  seething  chao- 
tically together,  a  vov?  which  continuously  ordered 
all  things  by  selection,  so  that  separate  existences 
constituted  themselves  from  out  of  the  universal  • 
confusion.  This  was  naturally  most  agreeable  to 
the  Sokratic  school,  which  dwelt  above  all  others  on 
the  spiritual  side  of  things,  and  Aristotle  says  in 
praise  of  Anaxagoras  :  '  When  he  maintained  for  the 
first  time  that  an  intelligence  presided  over  nature 
and  was  the  cause  of  the  order  of  things,  he  seemed 
like  a  man  who  stood  alone  in  possession  of  his 
senses  in  the  midst  of  all  the  rest  and  their  idle 
chatter  V  Neither  Sokrates  nor  Aristotle,  it  is  true, 
were  edified  with  the  way  in  which  Anaxagoras  made 
use  of  his  vov$  or  intelligent  principle.  The  latter 
observes  :  '  He  uses  it  only  like  a  machine ;  when  he 

1  Parerga  und  Paralipomena,  i.  p.  38. 

2  Metaph.  i.  3.  p.  984. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  23 

doubts  what  is  the  cause  of  anything,  he  introduces 
this,  but  otherwise  any  natural  cause  is  preferred 
to  his  yoi/sV  That  consciousness  plays  a  considerable 
part  in  all  natural  change  or  growth  is  an  un- 
questionable truth  involved  in  this  idea,  but  fatal 
errors  were  introduced  by  assimilating  this  mani- 
festation of  it  to  the  human  intellect  and  to  its 
modes  of  operation,  which  even  Plato  and  Aristotle 
themselves  were  not  altogether  able  to  avoid.  Scho- 
penhauer is  right  in  pointing  out2  how  much  more 
important  it  was  to  recognise,  with  Ernpedokles, 
the  obscure,  unintelligent  impulses,  i.e.  the  will,  as 
an  inward  agent,  than  knowledge  or  perception, 
which  is  given  at  a  much  later  stage,  and  falls  to 
the  share  of  comparatively  few  beings. 

The  two  above-named  thinkers  sought  obviously 
to  extend  the  sphere  of  philosophical  speculation, 
while  they  strove  tentatively  to  assign  to  intelli- 
gence its  share  in  the  natural  order.  It  was  reserved 
to  the  Sokratic  school  to  develope  this  aspect  of  the 
truth.  The  other  side  was  developed  with  rigorous 
logic  and  unusual  mental  vigour  into  a  complete 
materialistic-mechanical  system,  which,  at  least  in 
its  main  features,  still  obtains  among  the  students  of 
nature, — the  atomic  theory  of  Demokritos. 

Herakleitos  had  called  the  human  eye  and  ear 
liars,  because  they  represent  before  us  continuous 
being,  whereas  there  is  really  only  change  and 
motion,  an  eternal  flux ;  and  with  regard  to  that 
untrustworthiness  of  our  sense-perceptions,  Demo- 
kritos fully  concurred  with  him,  saying  our  senses 
deceive  us  as  they  suggest  to  us  the  presence  of 
different  qualities  in  things.  In  truth  nothing  ex- 
ists except  atoms  moving  in  vacancy.  Sweetness 

1  Metaph.  i.  3.  p.  985.  2  Parerg.  i.  p.  38. 


24  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

arid  hardness,  heat,  colour  and  the  like,  are  only 
sensible  appearances,  —  in  reality  all  this  is  merely 
a  variously  ordered  assemblage  of  atoms1,  the  move- 
ments of  which  are  rendered  possible  by  the  void 
spaces  interspersed  between  them. 

We  must  admire  the  theory  which  struck  out  at 
once  in  firm  and  decided  outline  a  purely  dynamic 
natural  theory  of  the  world  and  the  powerful  minds  of 
the  one  who  first  conceived  and  the  two  —  Epikuros 
and  Lucretius  —  who  continued  and  carried  out  the 
same.  Here  for  the  first  time  the  demands  of  the 
reason  are  satisfied  with  a  more  or  less  ;  quantitative 
differences  take  the  place  of  the  varied,  uncertain, 
inexplicable  appearances  of  sense,  of  the  strange, 
myriad-formed,  hurriedly  flitting  masquerade  of 
phenomena.  All  subsequent  materialistic,  that  is 
to  say  naturalistic,  explanation  has  always  thus 
reverted  to  the  atomic  theory,  although  the  nature 
and  the  modus  operandi  of  the  atoms  may  appear 
in  a  very  different  light,  as  conceptions  of  this  kind 
have  become  clearer.  But  the  ideal  of  the  man  of 
science,  the  student  of  nature,  is,  and  remains,  to 
reduce  all  the  multiplicity  of  phenomena  to  the 
motion  of  the  minutest  parts. 

Before  dealing  with  the  importance  of  the  Demo- 
kritean  doctrine,  and  its  place  in  the  great  process 
of  the  evolutionary  struggles  of  reason  towards  self- 
knowledge,  I  will  just  point  to  the  opposition  be- 
tween it  and  the  view  of  Herakleitos.  The  two  men 


KOI 


ii  aTOpa  Kal  Kcv6v.  unep  vofiLlffriu  fJL€V  clvai  jtac  8o£afer<u  ra  atcr&fra,  OVK  far* 
8e  Kara  dAq&iai'  raOra,  dXXa  ra  arofia  p.6vov  Kat  TO  KWOV.  Sext.  Empir. 
adv.  Math.  vii.  135.  These  words  contain  the  programme  of  the 
future  views  and  conclusions  of  Locke,  Leibniz,  and  Robert  Mayer. 
TJie  metaphysical  truth  underlying  them,  however,  forms  the  sub- 
stance of  the  immortal  work  of  Kant. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  2$ 

were  often  named  together  in  antiquity  and  that 
in  opposition  to  each  other,  and  there  may  be  a 
deeper  reason  for  this,  which  the  foolish  anecdotes 
about  the  laughing  and  the  weeping  philosopher 
only  serve  to  disguise.  The  root  of  this  antagonism 
must  naturally  be  sought  in  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciple, of  each,  and  this  is  not  hard  to  find  with  the 
philosophers  of  antiquity,  all  of  whom  directed  their 
investigations  towards  the  nature  of  being,  and  con- 
sidered as  their  principal  business  to  discover  being 
under  the  veil  of  appearance,  or  to  distinguish  be- 
tween phenomena  and  noumena,  or,  in  other  words, 
to  discover  by  the  aid  of  reason  the  veritable  being 
(TO  OVTW  6V).  We  have  therefore  to  enquire  what, 
according  to  each  of  these  philosophers,  was  mere 
appearance,  born  of  the  senses,  and  what  was  real 
being  ?  The  answer  would  run  very  differently : 
Herakleitos  would  say,  Change,  transition,  eternal 
motion  is  the  true  reality;  Demokritos,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  which  continues  through  all  transi- 
tions, that  whereby  and  wherein  this  eternal  change 
and  eternal  motion  is  effected,  that  is  to  say,  the 
atoms. 

The  progress  is  unmistakeable,  it  is  the  same  step 
that  in  modern  philosophy  was  taken  by  Leibniz  in 
advance  of  Spinoza. 

For,  as  already  observed,  the  substance  of  Hera- 
kleitos accomplishes  all  its  transformations  without 
any  place  being  allotted  to  the  Why  1  not  the 
questioning  after  a  causa  prima  such  as  is  for  ever 
inaccessible  to  human  reason, — for  this  is  just  what 
the  Herakleitean  substance  with  its  eternal  flux 
presents  us  with, — but  rather  the  wherefore  of  se- 
parate phenomena,  the  ground  of  their  existence, 
and  of  the  connection  subsisting  between  them.  It 


26  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

will  appear  later  on,  after  the  Kantian  doctrine  has 
made  its  revelations,  how  much  of  metaphysical 
truth  nevertheless  underlies  the  doctrine  of  Hera- 
kleitos,  and  how  much  more  depth  there  is  beneath 
his  obscurity  than  behind  the  broad  daylight  of 
materialism. 

Both  philosophers  seem  to  take  their  start  from 
the  same  truth,  to  which  they  give  however  very 
different  expression,  clearly  indicating  their  respec- 
tive standpoints  by  that  difference.  "The  world/ 
says  Herakleitos, '  the  one  which  embraces  all  things, 
was  not  created  by  any  God  or  man,  but  it  was  and 
is  and  will  be  for  ever  a  living  fire  which  is  kindled 
and  extinguished  in  alternate  measure  V  The  saying 
on  which  Demokritos  bases  his  doctrine  is,  on  the 
other  hand  :  '  Nothing  can  proceed  out  of  nothing  and 
nothing  can  be  annihilated/  The  negative  structure 
of  the  sentence  is  of  the  greatest  importance,  for  it  is 
the  narrow  bridge  which  leads  from  the  world  of 
appearance  or  experience  into  the  world  of  a  priori  or 
metaphysical  truth.  This  a  priori  truth  is  indeed 
contained  in  the  Herakleitean  principle,  but  it  had  not 
made  terms,  once  for  all,  with  experience;  and  every- 
thing conceivable  was  supposed  to  be  produced  by 
change,  without  any  firm  foothold  being  given  to 
reason,  whence  it  could  proceed  to  conquer  wider 
realms.  The  sentence  of  Demokritos,  on  the  con- 
trary, promotes  each  single  phenomenon,  even  the 
ipost  ephemeral,  to  metaphysical  honours ;  it  does 
not  proceed  from  and  cannot  pass  away  into  nothing. 
'  This  saying/  observes  Lange 2,  '  which  in  principle 

1  Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  V,  C.  14,  p.  711  Pott.  :   Kovpov  rbv  avrov  dirdv- 
otirc  TIS  Qc&v,  o\JT€  av0po>7rav  enoirjvcv.   aXX'  TJV  Kal  eanv  irvp  aeifao?, 

r6p.fvov  p.erpa  KOI  carocr^vvv^vov  perpa. 

2  Geschichte  des  Materialisrnus,  i.  12. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  27 

contains  the  two  chief  doctrines  of  modern  physics — 
the  principle  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter  and 
the  conservation  of  force,  reappears  in  substance  in 
Kant,  as  the  first  analogy  of  experience:- Through 
all  phenomenal  changes  substance  persists,  and  the 
quantum  of  it  in  nature  neither  increases  nor  di- 
minishes/ Kant  holds  that  at  all  times  the  persist- 
ence of  substance  has  been  assumed,  not  merely  by 
philosophers,  but  by  common  opinion.  The  latter  is 
doubted  by  Lange,  who  thinks  that,  under  the 
guidance  of  the  imagination,  men  have  often  pic- 
tured to  themselves  a  beginning  out  of  nothing. 
And  this  perhaps  is  true ;  but  wherever  men  have 
thought  rationally,  and  collected  and  communi- 
cated the  results  of  their  experience,  the  propo- 
sition has  passed  as  an  axiom,  though  perhaps  an 
unconscious  one,  that  has  not  yet  found  verbal  ex- 
pression. An  experiment  might  be  made  without 
this  proposition  having  been  admitted,  but  it  could 
not  be  utilised  and  brought  into  connection  with 
other  data  of  experience.  Ex  mere  particularibus 
nihil  sequitur ;  there  can  be  no  science  of  particulars. 
Experimental  science  therefore  is  without  philoso- 
phical foundation  until  the  universal  truths  bearing 
on  it  have  been  discovered  and  formulated.  And  it  is 
significant  that  all  the  chief  thinkers  of  late  times, 
who  have  endeavoured  to  deepen  the  foundations  of 
empiricism  and  to  indicate  its  proper  position  in  rela- 
tion to  philosophical  thought,  have  always  reverted 
to  Deinokritos  and  the  foundations  firmly  laid  down 
by  him.  It  was  Bacon  who,  after  a  long  period  of 
neglect,  once  more  drew  attention  to  the  name  of 
Demokritos,  and  awarded  him  the  palm  for  genuine 
scientific  inquiry,  in  contradiction  to  the  current  dei- 
fication of  Aristotle,  It  is  interesting  also  to  learn 


28  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

that  Robert  Mayer,  at  the  time  when  he  was  medi- 
tating on  his  great  and  fruitful  principle,  used  in 
conversation,  according  to  Riimelin,  to  repeat  again 
and  again:  Ex  nihilo  nihil  fit.  Nihil  fit  ad  ni- 
hilum. 

We  might  therefore,  it  seems,  call  Herakleitos  the 
father  of  the  a  priori  philosophy  and  Demokritos  of 
empiricism.  But  as  the  two  principles  are  after  all 
indissolubly  connected,  notwithstanding  the  opposite 
standpoints  of  the  two  thinkers,  they  necessarily  meet 
sometimes  upon  common  ground.  According  to 
Herakleitos  'all  things  change/  according  to  Demo- 
kritos 'all  things  remain/  and  yet  both  mean  the 
same  thing.  Demokritos  started  from  particular 
phenomena  and  brought  these  into  relation  witli  the 
universe  as  a  whole  by  means  of  the  negative  version 
of  the  proposition.  Herakleitos,  on  the  other  hand, 
began  with  the  general  principle,  and  to  bring  this 
into  harmony  with  the  world  of  experience  it  was 
necessary  to  find  a  speculative  ground  for  the  nega- 
tive principle  of  change.  All  the  while  the  mutable 
'all  things'  of  Herakleitos  is  objectively  identical  with 
the  permanent  '  all  things '  of  Demokritos.  Only 
the  starting-points  are  different. 

Demokritos  cut  a  way  through  the  rock  for  the 
spreading  stream  of  empirical  science,  which,  fed  by 
a  thousand  tributaries,  was  to  pursue  its  course 
through  ages  towards  the  great  ocean  of  human 
knowledge,  which  is  called  upon  to  give  an  ever  more 
and  more  faithful  picture  of  the  universe  and  its 
inner  principles  of  coherence.  Two  things  were  ab- 
solutely necessary  for  this  result :  (i)  the  sensible,  dis- 
crete, particular  had  to  be  taken  for  the  starting- 
point,  and  this  alone  could  be  defined  and  fixed  by 
means  of  number,  or  the  mathematical  conception, 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  29 

which  raises  them  into  the  firm  position  of  the  exact 
sciences ;  (2)  the  causal  connection  of  phenomena 
had  to  be  recognised  as  invariable  and  unbroken: 
'Nothing  happens  without  a  cause,  but  everything 
with  a  cause  and  by  necessity/ 

The  atomic  theory  proceeded  from  the  first  re- 
quirement, and  though  modern  science  forms  a  very 
different  conception  of  the  atoms  from  that  of  Demo- 
kritos,  still  all  exact  study  of  nature  points  to  some- 
thing of  this  kind.  The  second  proposition  proclaims 
the  principle  of  natural  causality,  the  invariable  law 
that  every  effect  must  be  preceded  by  a  cause,  as  the 
true  key  to  the  knowledge  of  nature. 

But  the  defects  and  weakness  of  the  atomic  theory 
in  its  original  form  must  not  be  overlooked.  Demo- 
kritos  explained  the  motion  of  the  atoms  by  their 
falling  through  space  ;  he  maintained  that  the  atoms 
were  of  infinitely  varied  form,  and  that  all  changes  in 
the  natural  order  of  things  were  produced  because  the 
larger  atoms  fell  more  rapidly  than  the  smaller  ones. 
This  detracts  nothing  from  the  magnitude  of  his 
main  idea,  that  all  the  qualities  which  are  brought 
before  us  by  sensible  perception  may  be  reduced  to 
quantitative  differences  in  the  atoms,  which  are  only 
distinguishable  by  their  extension  and  weight,  and 
which  act  only  by  way  of  impact  and  pressure.  Des- 
cartes, Leibniz,  and  Locke  will  return  to  this  prin- 
ciple hereafter,  and  Kant  will  submit  it  to  a  searching 
criticism  and  trace  its  justification  home,  namely 
in  the  nature  of  the  pure  reason. 

In  all  this  there  is  an  implicit  assumption  that 
mathematics,  the  theory  of  the  pure  relations  of  space 
and  number,  offers  the  sole  and  exclusive  method 
available  for  the  explanation  of  the  phenomenal 
world.  Yet  ancient  materialism  did  not  rise  to  a 


3<D  ANCJENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

distinct  recognition  and  formularisation  of  this  truth  ; 
still  less  had  it  attained  to  the  application  of  mathe- 
matics to  the  interpretation  of  experimental  science. 
Mathematics  were  still  too  immature,  and  the  circle 
of  experimental  knowledge  too  restricted.  We  must 
wait  for  the  enunciation  of  this  truth  till  the  days 
of  Descartes,  who,  living  among  the  triumphs  of 
the  empirical  method,  was  himself  a  great  mathe- 
matician. But  the  importance  of  mathematics,  their 
exceptional  place  among  the  remaining  sciences,  and 
its  relation  to  them  all,  these  points  at  least  did  not 
escape  the  theoretical  consideration  of  antiquity. 

It  will  be  sufficient  here  to  refer  to  the  Pythago- 
reans, who  may  not  have  been  without  influence  on 
the  views  of  Dernokritos,  a  school  which  had  already 
discerned  the  important  truth  that  number  played 
the  final  and  decisive  part  in  all  things,  and- that  the 
true  ultimate  nature  of  things  could  only  be  ex- 
pressed in  terms  of  number.  I  do  not  know  that, 
even  at  the  present  day,  we  are  in  a  position  to  utter 
anything  more  profound  or  more  true  than  the  say- 
ing attributed  to  Pythagoras  :  *  The  wisest  of  all 
things  is  Number,  and  next  to  this  the  Name-giver/ 
Just  where  the  chemist  fails  to  proceed  any  farther 
in  numerical  description,  i.  e.  at  the  boundary-lines  of 
his  exact  knowledge,  he  necessarily  begins  the  use  of 
words  to  describe  the  problem,  and  meanwhile  re- 
gards the  chemical  elements  thus  indicated  as  so 
many  closed  doors,  through  which  he  knows  however 
that  the  right  way  to  the  ultimate  sources  of  the 
truth  must  lead.  To  him,  as  to  the  physicist,  to 
the  mineralogist,  and  even  to  the  biologist,  a  mental 
ideal  hovers  before  the  mind,  according  to  which  all 
differences  are  to  be  reduced  at  last  into  pure  relations 
of  number,  so  that  the  whole  universe,  at  least  on  its 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  3! 

outer  side,  presents  itself  as  a  mathematico-mechanical 
problem.  We  know  too  little  of  Pythagoras  and  the 
sources  on  which  he  drew  for  his  inspiration.  But 
however  much  he  may  have  owed  to  Egypt,  we  can- 
riot  too  much  admire  the  profound  originality  of  the 
man  who  forestalled  the  ripest  conclusions  of  modern 
science,  and  was  penetrated  by  the  conviction  that 
there  was  the  same  principle  underlying  the  har- 

monies  of  music  and  the  motion  of  the  heavenly 

«/ 

bodies,  and  that  the  essential  element  in  all  things 
was  ever  their  numerical  relation.  It  is  true  that, 
neither  in  ancient  nor  modern  philosophy,  was  any 
one,  before  Kant,  able  to  explain  the  nature  and 
origin  of  number  and  the  possibility  of  its  genesis. 
But  even  among  the  ancients  there  was  some  doubt 
and  hesitation  as  to  the  relation  of  number  to  actual 
things  and  the  real  opinion  of  Pythagoras.  Thus 
we  are  told  :  '  Not  1y  number,  but  according  to 
number,  Pythagoras  maintained  all  things  to  have 
been  originated  V  And  Aristotle  says  :  '  The  Pytha- 
goreans maintain  that  things  exist  only  by  a  kind  of 
imitation  of  the  relations  of  number2/  In  other 
places  he  says,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  Pythago- 
reans considered  number  to  be  the  real  being,  the 
base  of  all  creation  3.  It  is  certain  that  all  Pythago- 
rean thought  was  dominated  by  the  fundamental 
view,  that  the  truth  was  only  to  be  found  in  number, 
and  it  is  also  certain  that  by  the  application  of  this 
principle  to  physical  problems,  the  Pythagoreans 
were  enabled  to  reach  important  discoveries,  which 

1  Stob.  Eel.  i.  p.  302  I     UvBayopas  OVK  e£  api0pov9   Kara  Be  a/>td/ioj> 

iravra  yiyvccrOai. 

2  Metaph.  i.  6  :  Mi/i^(r«  ra  ovra  <fra<T\v  elvai  r£>v  aptd/zwv. 

3  Ibid.  i.  5  :  'Apx"?"  flvai  ical  <5>s  v\rjv  rols  ov<ri.    'Apidpbv  clvai  rffv  ov- 


eray 


32  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

slumbered  through  oblivion  and  neglect  for  ages, 
until  again  brought  to  light  and  confirmed  by  the 
same  method,  matured  and  perfected  in  later  genera- 
tions. It  is  well  known  that  the  Pythagoreans  had 
anticipated  the  Copernican  system.  Copernicus  him- 
self refers  to  Nicetas1  and  Philolaos2.  This  cor- 
rect insight  was  withheld  from  mankind,  for  some 
fifteen  centuries  through  the  authority  of  Aristotle. 
For  the  rest,  the  high  estimation  in  which  mathe- 
matics were  held  by  the  Socratic  school  appears  from 
the  famous  dictum  of  Plato,  MtjSel?  ayeco^erp^To^  eio-ira, 
as  well  as  from  many  other  passages,  among  which 
the  following  is  especially  instructive,  as  it  complains 
of  the  neglect  of  this  science  among  the  Hellenes  and 
praises  its  cultivation  among  the  Egyptians  (Laws, 
vii.  819):  'All  freemen,  I  conceive,  should  learn  as 
much  of  these  various  disciplines  as  every  child  in 
Egypt  is  taught  when  he  learns  his  alphabet.  In 
that  country,  systems  of  calculation  have  been  actually 
invented  for  the  use  of  children,  which  they  learn  as 
a  pleasure  and  amusement ...  I  have  late  in  life 
heard  with  amazement  of  our  ignorance  in  these 
matters ;  to  me  we  appear  to  be  more  like  pigs  than 
men,  and  I  was  ashamed,  not  only  on  my  own  behalf, 
but  on  that  of  all  Hellenes3.' 

It  might  have  been  supposed  that  the  number- 
philosophy  of  the  Pythagoreans  would  have  entered 
into  alliance  with  the  atomic  theory  of  Demokritos, 
and  that  the  empirical  sciences,  on  exact  or  ma- 
thematical principles,  would  have  begun  at  once  to 
flourish  among  the  Greeks.  This  however  was  not 
the  case,  and  Lange  throws  the  responsibility  on  the 

1  As  quoted  by  Cicero,  Quaest.  Acad.  ii.  39. 

2  Plutarch,  De  Placitis  Philos.  iii.  13, 

3  Jowett's  Translation, 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  33 

Socratic  school.  *  Undoubtedly  remarkable  results 
would  have  been  reached  in  this  way  by  classical 
antiquity,  had  it  not  been  for  the  reaction  which 
proceeded  from  Athens  against  the  tendency  of  phi- 
losophy towards  natural  science,  and  which  so  de- 
cidedly obtained  the  upper  hand  V 

This  may  be  true,  netwithstanding  that  the  re- 
action itself  was  a  stage  of  the  utmost  importance  in 
the  development  of  philosophical  thought  and  a 
great  boon  to  mankind. 

The  more  or  less  avowed  hostility  against  Aristotle 
and  his  method  entertained  by  the  philosophical  re- 
presentatives of  empiricism,  from  Bacon  down  to  our 
own  times,  may  have  for  one  of  its  chief  reasons  that 
they  saw  how,  in  more  than  one  way,  he  set  aside  or 
falsified  the  strict  principle  of  natural  necessity,  the 
one  firm  foundation  of  all  empirical  knowledge.  The 
introduction  of  an  immaterial  element,  teleology,  or 
the  doctrine  of  final  causes,,,  which  took  up  so  large  a 
place  in  the  sciences  of  organic  life  founded  by  him,  and 
more  especially  the  dialectical  trifling  and  reasoning 
from  ready-made  formal  propositions,  the  importation 
of  logical  mental  processes  into  the  sober  observation 
of  sensible  perceptions  in  the  phenomenal  world — all 
this  was  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  strictness  of 
scientific  method.  The  salient  point  of  the  stand- 
ing controversy  is  indicated  in  the  following  pas- 
sage of  a  distinguished  anti-Aristotelian,  who  was 
able,  nevertheless,  to  admire  the  intellectual  great- 
ness of  his  adversary 2 : — 

'  In  the  old  world  the  greatest  and  most  merito- 
rious student  of  nature  would  resort  to  utterances  like 

1  Lange,  Geschichte  cles  Muterialismus,  i.  ig. 
*  Robert  Mayer,  Die  Mechamk  der  Warmc,  p.  247. 
VOL.   I.  J> 


34  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

this  to  explain,  e.  g.  the  properties  of  the  lever  :  the 
circle  is  such  a  marvellous  thing  that  it  is  easily  con- 
ceivable how  the  motions  which  produce  a  circle 
should  also  present  the  most  remarkable  phenomena. 
If  Aristotle,  instead  of  applying  his  extraordinary 
talents  to  meditations  upon  the  stationary  point  and 
the  revolving  line,  as  he  called  the  circle,  had  investi- 
gated the  numerical  proportion  between  the  length  of 
the  lever  and  the  pressure  exercised,  he  would  have 
become  the  founder  of  an  important  branch  of  human 
knowledge.  .  .  .  The  rule  which  should  have  been 
followed  in  order  to  lay  the  foundations  of  natural 
knowledge  in  the  shortest  conceivable  space  of  time 
may  be  briefly  stated.  The  most  obvioiis  and  fre- 
quent of  natural  phenomena  should  have  been  sub- 
jected, by  the  help  of  the  senses,  to  a  careful 
investigation,  which  should  have  been  continued 
until  the  chief  conditions,  which  may  be  expressed 
in  numbers,  had  been  elicited/  'These  numbers 
are  the  sought-for  foundation  of  an  exact  study  of 
nature/ 

The  influence  of  Sokrates  is  generally  represented 
as  an  energetic  reaction  against  the  doctrine  and 
practice  of  the  Sophists.  The  Greek  Sophists  bear  a 
striking  family  likeness  to  the  French  revolutionary 
thinkers  of  the  last  century.  The  vital  characteristic 
of  both  is  a  kind  of  intoxicated  self-exaltation  of 
intelligent  reason,  possessed  with  an  overweening 
sense  of  its  own  superiority  as  it  casts  off  the 
bandages  of  the  old  religious  conceptions.  It  is  as 
true  of  the  age  of  the  Greek  Sophists  as  of  that  of 
the  French  Encyclopaedists,  that  the  morals,  which 
had  grown  up  together  with  the  religious  dogmas, 
were  impaired  with  them,  that  individualism,  sen- 
sualism, and  a  superficial  rationalism  put  an  end  to 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  35 

all  sincere  devotion  in  the  search  for  truth  and  in  the 
investigation  of  the  moral  principles  of  life,  until  at 
last  an  all-destroying  scepticism,  a  dialectic  arid  rhe- 
toric to  which  everything  was  mere  sport,  threatened 
to  take  possession  of  the  popular  consciousness.  The 
old  dogmas  had  lost  their  power,  truth  and  morality 
needed  to  be  built  afresh  on  deeper  foundations. 
The  threatening  danger  roused  among  the  Greeks, 
Sokrates,  and  in  the  eighteenth  century,  Kant. 

'Between  Sokrates  and  Kant/  says  Schopenhauer1, 
'  there  are  many  points  of  resemblance.  Both  reject 
all  dogmatism,  both  profess  complete  ignorance  as  to 
things  metaphysical,  and  the  speciality  of  both  lies  in 
their  consciousness  of  this  ignorance.  Both  maintain, 
on  the  contrary,  that  the  practical  question  as  to 
what  men  should  do  or  leave  undone  may  be  ascer- 
tained with  certainty,  and  this  by  themselves  without 
further  theoretical  preparation.  It  was  the  fate  of 
both  to  have  immediate  successors  and  declared  dis- 
ci pies,  who  nevertheless  departed  from  their  prin- 
ciples in  this  very  particular,  and,  cultivating 
metaphysics,  introduced  entirely  dogmatic  systems  of 
their  own ;  and  further,  that  notwithstanding  the 
great  divergence  of  their  several  systems,  all  pro- 
fessed themselves  to  be  derived  respectively  from  the 
doctrine  of  Sokrates,  or  of  Kant/ 

My  plan  only  allows  me  to  deal  with  the  theo- 
retical side  of  the  Sokratic  philosophy,  and  that  of 
his  successors,  in  order  to  show  wherein  the  opposition 
to  the  earlier  doctrine  consists,  together  with  the 
deepening  of  philosophic  thought  and  its  increasing 
tendency  in  the  direction  of  what  is  the  principal 
subject  of  this  work. 

1  Parerga  und  Paralipomena,  i.  46. 
D  2 


36  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

The  substance  of  the  Sokratic  doctrine  is  a  rational 
psychology,  educed  from  the  conviction  that  human 
reason  is  a  principle  that  may  be  opposed  to  the 
powers  of  nature,  which  had  hitherto  received  almost 
exclusive  attention,  or  was  at  least  altogether  distinct 
from  these  ;  that  we  possess  in  it  a  source  of  eternal 
truth,  amid  the  deceptions  of  the  senses,  a  firm  and 
lasting  resting-place  amid  the  eternal  changes  and 
transformations  of  all  things,  and  hence  too  a  secure 
and  irremovable  basis  for  moral  action  and  all  the 
higher  possessions  of  mankind,  the  existence  of  which 
was  questioned  by  the  Sophists,  because  they  derived 
all  such  ideas  from  human  convention  or  ordinances, 
i.e.  subjective  inclination.  This  explains  why  Sokratcs 
occupied  himself  principally  with  definitions  of  moral 
ideas,  and  what  he  meant  by  -  the  often  repeated 
assertion  that  virtue  was  knowledge. 

This  may  be  seen  also  from  particular  illustrations. 
The  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  strict  natural  neces- 
sity of  an  established  external  causal  chain,  appears 
most  clearly  in  the  well-known  passage l  in  which 
Sokrates  speaks  of  Anaxagoras,  who  first  made  the 
modest  attempt  to  introduce  a  rational  principle,  the 
vow,  as  an  explanation  of  the  nature  of  the  world ; 
and  in  which  he  describes  his  disappointment  on 
finding,  instead  of  what  he  expected,  e.  g.  explana- 
tions why  the  earth  is  like  a  dish,  why  it  is  best  for 
it  to  be  .so,  &c.,  only  explanations  from  natural 
causes.  This  was,  according  to  Sokrates,  as  if  some 
one  were  to  be  asked  why  Sokrates  was  sitting  in 
prison  and  then  began  to. explain  the  act  of  sitting 
in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  anatomy  and  phy- 
siology, instead  of  speaking  of  the  condemnation 
which  had  brought  him  there  and  of  the  thoughts 

1  Phaedros,  97. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  37 

which  had  led  him  to  reject  the  means  of  flight  and 
await  his  destiny  where  he  was l. 

The  incompleteness  of  materialism,  or  the  expla- 
nation of  the  world  by  external  mechanical  causes, 
is  here  plainly  visible,  and  hence  proceeds  another 
and  far  more  important  principle,  which  it  becomes 
necessary  to  investigate. 

There  is  hardly  any  mention  in  Plato's  works  of 
Demokiitos  and  the  theory  of  atoms,  but  the  omis- 
sion is  well  supplied  by  Aristotle.  The  latter  fully 
recognised  the  one-sidedness  of  the  materialistic  view 
and  pointed  it  out  with  great  force,  apropos  of  the 
manner  in  which  Demokritos  conceived  the  soul  as 
the  vital  principle  of  the  body.  According  to  this 
explanation,  the  soul  was  to  consist  of  subtle,  smooth, 
round  atoms,  like  those  of  fire  :  these  atoms  were  extra- 
ordinarily mobile,  penetrating  the  whole  universe, 
and  bringing  about  all  the  vital  motions  in  human 
beings.  '  If  this  be  so/  says  Aristotle,  *  then  there 
are  two  bodies  in  every  one,  and  if  the  infinitely 
subtle  atoms  may  be  conceived  as  the  cause  of 
motion,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  same  effect  should 
not  be  ascribed  to  the  larger  and  coarser  parts/  But 
this,  as  he  expressly  insists,  does  not  constitute  the 
essential  nature  of  the  soul,  nay  cannot  so  much  as  be 
an  accident  of  it.  The  essence  of  the  soul  consists  in 
choosing  and  knowing,  and  mechanical  explanations, 
mere  causes  of  motion,  can  never  afford  the  slightest 
explanation  of  the  proper  functions  of  the  soul,  i.e. 

3  The  same  thought  has  been  expressed  by  Leibniz  where  he 
says  one  might  explain  Caesar's  crossing  the  Rubicon  by  the  laws 
of  mechanics,  contraction  of  muscles,  &c.,  whereas  to  the  true  un- 
derstanding of  Caesar's  step,  the  whole  history  of  Rome,  psycho- 
logical insight  into  the  remarkable  personality  of  the  consul,  and 
much  else,  were  indispensable. 


38  ANCIENT  THILOSOPHY. 

of  thought,  perception,  pleasure  and  pain,  or  the 
like1. 

Upon  this  Lange  takes  up  the  cudgels  and  main- 
tains that  Aristotle  failed  to  understand  the  greatness 
of  Demokritos,  which  consisted  precisely  in  the 
rigorous  logic  with  which  he  brought  all  actions  back 
into  the  orderly  chain  of  mechanical  causation.  'Any 
system  of  philosophy  which  aims  seriously  at  com- 
prehension of  the  phenomenal  world  must  return  to 
this  point.  The  special  case  of  those  motions  which 
we  call  rational  must  be  explained  by  the  universal 
laws  of  all  movement,  or  there  is  nothing  really 
explained.  The  failing  of  all  materialism  is  that  it 
ends  with  this  explanation,  just  where  the  highest 
problems  of  philosophy  begin.  But  any  one  who,  re- 
lying on  imaginary  rational  knowledge,  should  dabble 
in  would-be  explanations  of  external  nature,  including 
the  rational  actions  of  mankind,  is  working  to  upset 
the  whole  foundations  of  our  knowledge,  whether  his 
name  be  Aristotle  or  Hegel2/  This  is  an  outbreak 
of  the  animosity  above  referred  to  as  subsisting 
between  positive  and  scientific  thinkers  and  the 
memory  of  Aristotle.  Lange  is  certainly  in  the 
right  from  the  standpoint  of  the  external  contem- 
plation of  things,  but  when  we  are  dealing  with  the 
soul,  with  reason,  in  a  word,  with  consciousness,  the 
mechanical  theory  has  to  submit ;  it  has  a  right  to 
be  heard,  but  it  is  no  longer  dominant,  in  fact  it 
is  dominated  in  accordance  with  its  own  laws.  It 
was  the  merit  of  the  Sokratic  school  to  have  clearly 
seen  and  proclaimed  this. 

A  further  and  more  considerable  merit  may  be 
claimed  for  Aristotle,  in  opposition  to  the  material- 
istic school,  namely,  his  insistence  upon  the  '  final 

1  Arist.  de  Anima,  cap.  5. 

2  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  i.  p.  20. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  39 

causes'  or  adaptation  of  means  to  ends  in  nature. 
A  vast  portion  of  the  whole  realm  of  natural  ex- 
istence and  development  remains  absolutely  closed 
against  those  who  fail  to  recognise  this.  These  things 
can  only  be  understood,  or  indeed  exist,  with  the 
assumption  of  an  intelligent  principle,  which  does 
not,  of  course,  mean  to  sav  that  a  maker  or  creator 

f  t  „ 

outside  the  world  has  made  things  as  they  are,  to 
suit  his  own  purposes  or  the  purposes  of  mankind. 
Schopenhauer  observes :  c  Three  great  men  have 
wholly  rejected  teleology,  or  the  theory  of  "  design," 
and  many  little  men  have  chanted  in  echo  after 
them.  They  are  Lucretius,  Bacon  of  Verulam,  and 
Spinoza.  But  in  all  three  we  see  clearly  the  source 
of  their  denial,  namely,  that  they  imagined  teleology 
to  be  inseparable  from  speculative  theology,  of  which 
they  had  so  great  a  dread  as  to  wish  to  get  out  of 
its  way  when  they  scented  its  approach  from  afar. . . . 
The  attack  of  Lucretius  (iv.  824-858)  upon  teleology 
is  so  crass  and  crude  as  to  answer  itself.  Bacon  does 
not  distinguish  between  organic  and  inorganic  nature 
(which  is  the  point  in  dispute),  but  mixes  them  in 
his  illustrations  indiscriminately  together.  He  then 
banishes  final  causes  from  physics  into  metaphysics, 
which  is  to  him,  as  to  many  even  at  the  present 
day,  almost  synonymous  with  speculative  theology. 
Spinoza  could  think  of  no  other  expedient  to  bar  the 
way  against  the  physico-theological  proof  and  the  view 
based  upon  it,  that  nature  exists  for  the  sake  of  man, 
than  the  desperate  one  of  denying  any  adaptation  in 
the  works  of  nature,  a  contention  which  must  appear 
monstrous  in  the  eyes  of  all  who  have  any  knowledge 
of  organic  nature.  Aristotle  contrasts  very  favourably 
with  these  later  philosophers,  and  indeed  appears  in 
his  most  brilliant  colours  on  this  occasion.  He  goes 


4O  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

straight  to  nature,  and  is  untroubled  by  any  physical 
theology.  The  idea  has  never  entered  his  mind,  and 
it  does  not  occur  to  him  to  look  at  the  world  with  a 
view  to  deciding  whether  it  is  a  bit  of  machinery  or 
no.  But  after  honest  and  diligent  study  of  nature, 
he  discovers  that  she  works  everywhere  towards 
some  purpose,  and  he  concludes,  "Nature  does  no- 
thing in  vain1/'  And  again  in  the  books  De  Partibus 
Animalium,  which  are  his  comparative  anatomy: 
"  Nature  does  all  things  for  some  purpose  or  other. 
At  every  turn  we  say  that  such  a  thing  exists  for 
the  sake  of  such  another,  whenever  we  see  an  end 
towards  which  the  movement  tends.  We  gather 
from  this  that  there  is  something  of  the  kind  that 
we  call  nature.  But  the  body  is  a  tool  (organ),  for 
every  member  is  there  for  some  purpose,  and  so  also 
is  the  whole/5  At  the  end  of  the  books  De  Gene- 
ratione  Animalium  he  expressly  recommends  tele- 
ology, and  blames  Demokritos  for  having  denied  it, 
which  is  just  what  Bacon,  in  his  prejudice,  selects  for 
praise.  In  point  of  fact  any  sane  and  normally  con- 
stituted mind  would  arrive  at  teleology  from  the 
observation  of  organic  nature,  but,  unless  under  the 
influence  of  inherited  opinions,  by  no  means  equally 
at  natural  theology,  nor  at  the  anthropo-teleology 
condemned  by  Spinoza.  With  regard  to  Aristotle,  it 
should  be  noted  that  his  teaching,  so  far  as  it  deals 
with  inorganic  nature,  is  full  of  errors,  as  he  is  guilty 
of  the  most  serious  blunders  in  the  rudimentary  con- 
ceptions of  mechanics  and  physics.  But  it  is  quite 
otherwise  in  his  treatment  of  organic  nature ;  this 
is  his  proper  field,  and  here  we  can  admire  his  wealth 
of  knowledge,  his  keen  observation,  and  his  profound 
insight/ 

1  De  Respir.  c.  10. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  41 

All  this  Aristotle  was  able  to  accomplish :  he 
might  have  become  the  founder  of  Natural  History, 
because  he  saw  and  recognised  the  sway  of  intelli- 
gence in  nature  and  assigned  its  due  place  thereto. 
But  if  we  compare  with  the  above  lucid  exposition 
of  Schopenhauer  the  following  passage  from  a 
generally  sound  and  serious  thinker,  we  shall  see 
what  a  vast  confusion  of  ideas  still  prevails  with 
regard  to  the  interpretation  of  nature,  making  the 
demand  for  serious  inquiry  and  a  return  to  the 
metaphysical  principles  of  knowledge  an  irresistible 
necessity. 

Lange  says  :  'We  find  in  Demokritos  no  trace  of 
that  false  teleology  which  may  be  called  the  arch 
enemy  of  natural  science ;  but  we  also  find  no 
attempt  to  explain  the  development  of  design  ly  the 
blind  sway  of  natural  necessity  (!!).  We  know  that 
this  last  fundamental  proposition,  common  to  all 
materialism,  took  its  rise,  in  a  clear  though  somewhat 
rugged  shape,  from  the  Hellenic  philosophy.  What 
Darwin,  with  all  the  abundance  of  positive  know- 
ledge at  his  command,  has  done  for  the  present 
generation,  was  done  for  antiquity  by  Empedokles,  in 
the  simple  and  momentous  suggestion  that  cases  of 
adaptation  abound,  because  in  the  nature  of  things  it 
happens  that  what  serves  its  purpose  is  preserved, 
and  what  fails  to  do  so  perishes  at  once/ 

What  a  chaos,  a  medley  of  opposite  and  irrecon- 
cilable conceptions1!  And  yet  the  fallacy  here  in- 

1  Still  plainer  and  more  startling  is  the  following  passage 
(loc.  cit.  i.  72)  about  the  materialism  of  the  Stoics:  '  That 
sounds  sufficiently  materialistic,  and  yet  the  decisive  feature  is 
wanting  to  this  materialism — the  pure  material  nature  of  matter ; 
the  origination  of  all  phenomena,  including  adaptation  and  intel- 
ligence, by  the  motion  of  matter  in  accordance  with  universal  laws.9 


42  ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY. 

volved  is  no  other  than  the  very  programme  of  the 
majority  of  contemporary  Darwinians  :  *  To  explain 
everything  without  exception  by  exclusively  me- 
chanical causes/ 

While  Aristotle  had   most  to   sav  about   Demo- 

«/ 

kritos,  we  find  in  Plato  frequent  points  of  connection 
with  Herakleitos,  whose  depth  received  due  recog- 
nition in  a  well-known  utterance  of  Sokrates.  The 
reaction  against  naturalism  and  sensualism,  which 
led  naturally,  under  his  guidance,  to  human  reason  as 
the  true  source  .of  all  knowledge,  roused  his  greatest 
disciple  to  the  conviction  that  it  belonged  to  the 
nature  of  reason  to  be  able  to  separate  and  re- 
tain what  is  durable  and  persistent,  as  a  fixed  pole 
amid  the  universal  flight  of  phenomena.  This 
is  the  first  condition  required  for  the  existence  of 
any  kind  of  knowledge.  For  the  idea  of  change, 
itself  presupposes  that  the  earlier  condition  is  held 
fast  by  the  mind;  the  content  or  matter  of  know- 
ledge is  always  something  new,  but  never  something 
different.  '  We  could  not  take  for  granted  even  the 
possibility  of  knowledge/  says  Sokrates  in  the  Kra- 
tylos1,  *  if  everything  were  changing  and  had  no 
persistence.  For  if,  for  instance,  this  idea,  know- 
ledge, remains  unchanged  in  all  that  constitutes  it 
knowledge,  then  knowledge  has  permanence  arid 
exists.  But  if  the  idea  of  knowledge  itself  is 
changed,  it  becomes  transformed  into  an  idea  other 
than  the  idea  of  knowledge ;  and  it  is  therefore  no 
longer  knowledge.  But  if  it  were  always  changing, 

Let  us  invert  the  terms — the  origination  of  the  motions  of  matter, 
including  weight  and  all  inorganic  movements,  by  intelligent  prin- 
ciples in  accordance  with  the  universal  laws  of  thought, — and  the  * 
whole  absurdity  of  the  proposition  becomes  evident. 
1  Kratylos  (Jowett's  translation),  440. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  43 

there  would  never  be  any  knowledge  at  all1.  And 
for  the  same  reason  there  could  be  neither  an  object 
nor  a  subject  of  knowledge.  If  however  there  exists 
a  subject  and  an  object  of  knowledge,  if  moreover 
the  Beautiful,  the  Good,  and  every  other  kind  of 
being  exists,  these  ideas  obviously  bear  no  resem- 
blance* as  we  maintain  now,  to  the  current  of  motion/ 
We  see  from  this  passage,  which  also  contains  the 
germ  of  the  Platonic  theory  of  Ideas,  that  the  func- 
tion of  the  reason  is  virtually  that  which  Goethe 
characterises  in  the  language  of  poetry — 

*  Und  was  in  schwankeuder  Erscheinung  scliwebt, 
Befestiget  mit  daueriiden  Gedanken/ 

Keason  and  its  conceptions  constitute  the  firm 
starting-point  of  true  knowledge  in  the  whirlpool 
of  the  phenomenal  world,  sensible  impressions,  and 
vicissitudes.  And  this  great  truth  is  of  such  sig- 
nificance that  its  discovery  may  also  be  said  to  have 
opened  the  way  for  the  first  time  to  self-examination 
and  self-knowledge. 

^  Season,  or  the  rational  principle  (TO  votiriKoi'),  is 
possession  of  the  ideas,  e.g.  of  the  good,  the  true, 
the  beautiful;)  this  possession  is  lasting  and  un- 
questionable ;  the  ideas  are  recognisable  everywhere, 
and  always  as  the  property  of  the  reason.  The 
question  is  how  to  find  a  bridge  which  will  unite 
these  ideas  and  the  phenomenal  world  of  sense  and 
matter.  For  as  to  the  latter  Plato  held  the  Hera- 
kleitean  view  of  the  eternal  flux,  alternate  growth 
and  decay,  to  be  unassailable. 

At  this  point  the  antagonism  between  the  Platonic 

1  What  Plato  was  the  first  to  express  clearly  and  convincingly 
was  to  be  thoroughly  established  by  Kant.  'If  time  and  space 
were  not  original  possessions  of  the  intelligent  subject,  there  could 
be  no  such  thing  as  experience.1 


44  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

doctrine  and  materialism  first  presents  itself.  To 
Plato,  reason  is  an  active  faculty  of  the  human  soul. 
Materialism  leads  necessarily  to  sensualism,  as  soon, 
that  is,  as  it  discerns  its  own  incompleteness,  and 
wishes  to  take  the  spiritual  side  of  things  into 
account.  It  explains  the  latter,  like  everything  else, 
as  an  effect.  In  other  words,  the  senses  are  stimulated 
and  agitated  from  without,  they  feel,  and  then  from  out 
of  these  feelings  the  images  of  the  outer  world  form 
themselves,  the  whole  intellectual  life  accomplishing 
itself  mechanically,  of  itself.  Sensible  perception  is 
not  the  source  of  knowledge,  but  knowledge  itself. 
In  the  age  of  Sokrates  this  view  was  represented  by 
Anaxagoras,  and  it  was  subsequently  developed  with 
strict  materialistic  logic  by  Epikuros.  The  images 
in  the  understanding  are  produced  by  a  constant 
emanation  of  irifinitesimally  small  and  subtle  parts 
from  the  surfaces  of  bodies.  In  this  way  copies  of 
the  things  enter  materially  into  us  ;  their  frequent 
repetition  gives  rise  to  the  images  of  memory,  and  so 
the  soul,  without  itself  knowing  how,  attains  to 
thought  and  a  perception  of  universal^,  by  the  sole 
constant  action  of  the  outer  world.  Perception  and 
sensibility  then  remain,  notwithstanding  the  dis- 
tinctly spiritual  (i.  e.  conscious)  character  of  their 
nature,  imprisoned  in  the  circle  of  materialism. 
This  opinion  is  the  more  probable  because  the  organs 
of  sense,  by  means  of  which  perception  is  accom- 
plished, are  themselves  objectively  perceptible,  i.e. 
material.  Hence  even  Plato  ascribes  the  perceptions 
of  sense  directly  to  the  organs,  the  eyes,  ears,  and 
other  bodily  instruments,  while  he  shows  with  vic- 
torious cogency  the  necessity  of  an  intellectual  prin- 
ciple, which  combines,  compares,  and  distinguishes 
the  common  element  in  all  perceptions,  and  so 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  45 

penetrates  to  the  essential  qualities  of  things.  c  For/  < 
says  Sokrates,  'no  one  can  suppose  that  we  are 
Trojan  horses,  in  whom  are  perched  several  uncon- 
nected senses,  not  meeting  in  some  one  nature,  of 
which  they  are  the  instruments,  whether  you  term 
this  soul  or  not,  with  which  through  these  we  per- 
ceive objects  of  sense1.'  Sound  and  colour,  taste  arid 
smell  are  different  things,  but  by  what  .power  or 
instrument,  asks  Sokrates,  docs  that  sense  take  effect 
which  indicates  the  common  qualities  of  things  per- 
ceived by  different  senses,  such  as  being  and  not- 
being,  likeness  and  unlikeness,  sameness  and  differ- 
ence, unity  and  other  numbers,  etc.  Thesetetos  is 
compelled  to  reply  that  there  is  no  separate  organ 
for  these  things,  but  'the  soul  perceives  the  uni- 
versals  of  all  things  by  herself2/  The  soul  perceives 
equally  by  the  touch  the  hardness  of  that  which  is 
hard  and  the  softness  of  that  which  is  soft.  '  But 
their  existence  and  what  they  are,  and  their  oppo- 
sition to  one  another,  and  the  essential  nature  of 
this  opposition,  the  soul  herself  endeavours  to  de- 
cide for  us,  reviewing  them  and  comparing  them 
with  one  another/  'The  simple  sensations  which 
reach  the  soul  through  the  body  are  given  at  birth 
to  men  and  animals  by  nature,  but  their  reflections 
on  these  and  on  their  relations  to  being  and  use  are 
slowly  and  hardly  gained,  if  they  are  ever  gained, 
by  education  and  long  experience/  'No  one  can 
attain  truth  who  fails  of  attaining  being,  and  he 
who  misses  the  truth  of  anything  can  have  no  know- 
ledge of  that  thing ;  therefore  knowledge  does  not 
consist  in  impressions  of  sense,  but  in  reasoning 
about  them,  and  the  two  are  not  identical 3/ 

Starting  from  this  newly-won  point  of  vantage, 

1  Thesetetus  (Jowett's  translation),  184.     2  Ib.  185.     8  Ib.  186. 


46  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

which  Leibniz  and  Kant  were  to  take  as  starting- 
points  hereafter,  Plato  proceeded  towards  fresh  and 
pregnant  discoveries,  a  part  of  which  still  under- 
lies our  whole  mode  of  thought,  whilst  the  one- 
sidedness  of  some  of  his  preconceived  views  has  also 
endured  as  a  legacy  of  hampering  oppression  to 
subsequent  generations. 

The  first  great  truth  for  which  we  are  indebted  to 
him  is  that,  in  order  to  direct  human  knowledge  to 
its  proper  goal  in  the  interpretation  of  the  true 
nature  of  things,  we  must  start  from  knowledge 
itself,  from  the  peculiar  gift  of  reason  which  has 
been  allotted  to  mankind.  The  "Know  Thyself5  of 
the  Delphian  God  is  the  master-key  of  which  in  a 
happy  hour  Sokrates  and  his  great  disciple  have 
possessed  themselves.  The  student's  gaze  is  turned 
inwards  : — 

<Es  ist  nicht  draussen,  da  sucht  es  tier  Thor, 
Es  ist  in  dir,  du  bringst  es  ewig  hcrvor/ 

A  theory  of  knowledge  is  now  possible  and  neces- 
sary; it  was  created  by  Plato  and  completed  by 
Aristotle  with  the  addition  of  Logic. 

This  is  the  positive  side.  On  the  negative  side 
must  be  set  the  premature  conclusion  that  this  reason 
must  be  the  property  of  an  immaterial  substance, 
the  soul,  to  which  pure  thought  belonged  as  its 
speciality.  This  is  again  the  ineradicable  realism  of 
the  whole  ancient  world.  Philosophy  is  striving  after 
being,  it  insists  upon  an  ontology.  As  there  is  a 
pure  thought,  it  introduces  by  hypostasis  a  pure 
thinking  substance.  Plato  indeed  has  an  easy  task 
in  dealing  with  materialism.  For  though  he  could 
not  persuade  the  Giants  and  Gods  who  were  fighting 
about  the  nature  of  essence1,  and  who  '  contended  that 

1  Sophist,  244. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  47 

the  things  only  which  can  be  touched  or  handled  have 
being  or  essence/  yet  all  thinkers  would  certainly  be 
on  his  side  when  he  maintained  that  justice,  reason, 
virtue,  etc.  are  not  material  entities,  and  that  the 
soul  to  which  these  qualities  belong  must  therefore 
also  be  immaterial.  But  it  is  one  thing  for  the  soul 
to  exist  and  another  for  it  to  be  self-existent,  and  the 
problem  had  to  wait  till  Kant  came  to  give  it  its 
due  form.  Plato  exalted  the  soul  into  a  self-sub- 
sisting subject  of  pure  thought,  free  from  all  de- 
lusions of  sense.  He  maintained  its  immortality,  and 
anticipated  that  after  death,  when  released  from  the 
obscuration  and  fetters  of  a  material  body,  it  would 
know  with  far  more  perfect  knowledge  the  true  nature 
of  things.  This  is  set  out  more  at  length  in  the 
Pluiodo  (10)  and  Timocos.  The  summary  of  his  expo- 
sition in  the  latter  dialogue  is  given  by  Sextus  Em- 
piricus  in  these  words :  'It  is  an  old  adage,  accepted 
too  by  the  physicists,  that  like  can  only  be  explained 
by  like.  Plato  has  used  this  argument  in  the  Tirnseos 
to  prove  that  the  soul  is  immaterial.  Light,  he 
says,  which  perceives  light,  is  of  the  nature  of  light, 
hearing  which  catches  the  vibrations  of  the  air  must 
correspond  to  the  nature  of  air,  and  similarly  the 
sense  of  smell  by  which  vapours  are  perceived  must 
be  vaporous,  and  the  sense  of  taste  which  receives 
fluidity  must  partake  of  the  nature  of  fluids.  And 
the  soul  too,  which  conceives  things  immaterial,  such 
as  the  number  and  limitations  within  which  bodies 
are  contained,  must  itself  be  immaterial1/  The 
passage  is  interesting  because  the  reference  here  is 
only  to  the  pure  forms  of  mathematics,  which  Kant 

1  Adv.  Math.  vii.  116,  119.     (See  also  Schopenhauer's  Parerga, 
i.  48.) 


48  ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY, 

will  show  to  be  the   proper  a  priori  material  for 
reason. 

The  second  great  truth  is  that  thought  is  accom- 
plished by  means  of  conceptions  and  ideas,  and  that 
these  always  contain  or  represent  something  uni- 
versal, different  both  from  material  things  and  from 
sensible  perceptions ;  that  these  abstract,  general 
ideas  are  the  true  object  of  rational  thought  or  in- 
tellectual activity,  and  that  in  them  the  reason  dis- 
cerns the  permanent,  essential,  and  eternal  amid  the 
stream  of  appearances.  This  great  truth,  the  doctrine 
of  abstract  ideas,  or  universal^,  sways  the  whole  after- 
time,  remaining  as  an  apple  of  discord  throughout 
the  history  of  mediaeval  philosophy.  It  was  received 
as  an  established  fact  by  all  modern  philosophy, 
and,  as  Locke  was  the  first  to  aee,  it  will  one  day 
yet  come  to  be  of  the  greatest  significance  for  a 
knowledge  of  the  .nature  of  human  reason,  namely, 
when  people  have  become  convinced  that  the  history 
of  the  origin  and  development  of  the  human  reason 
may  be  written  at  last — by  the  help  of  the  philo- 
sophy and  history  of  language. 

The  darker  side  of  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  Ideas, 
which  otherwise  can  hardly  be  overprai»sed,  is  due 
to  the  ontological  ambition  which  here  again  over- 
reaches itself  by  transforming  these  ideas  into  real, 
essential,  self-subsisting  tilings.  We  see  plainly  how 
Plato  was  led  to  this  assertion.  Like  all  the  other 
philosophers  of  antiquity,  he  regarded  as  the  final 
problem  the  question,  What  is  real  Being  in  contra- 
distinction to  appearance,  to  phenomena  ?  He  saw 
the  material  world  with  the  correlated  sensible  per- 
ceptions in  eternal  flux  and  change,  he  felt  that  the 
reason  aspired  after  permanency,  such  as  it  pos- 
sessed within  itself.  And  thus  the  material  world 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  49 

was  degraded  into  a  seeming  existence,  a  darkening 
veil,  while  truth  and  reality  were  attributed  only 
to  the  objects  of  reason,  the  ideas.  '  First/  he  says, 
*  we  must,  determine  what  is  that  which  always  is  and 
has  no  becoming,  and  what  is  that  which  is  always 
becoming  and  has  never  any  being.  That  which  is 
apprehended  by  reflection  and  reason  always  is,  and  is 
the  same  ;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  which  is  conceived 
by  opinion  with  the  help  of  sensation  and  without 
reason,  is  in  a  process  of  becoming  and  perishing, 
but  never  really  is1.3  The  ideas  are  the  eternal 
elements  to  which  true  being  must  be  conceded. 
While  single  beings  or  material  individuals  pass  fleet- 
ingly  by,  arise  and  decay,  we  see  that  their  kind  lasts 
on,  or,  to  express  it  in  the  more  drastic  language 
of  Schopenhauer,  the  ardent  adherent  of  the  doctrine 
of  ideas,  '  It  is  the  same  cat  that  plays  in  your  yard 
to-day  as  played  and  felt  and  was  4000  years  ago/ 
The  ideas  are  the  prototypes  of  things,  disguised 
and  obscured  by  matter  in  the  phenomenal  world, 
which  stands  with  Plato  for  the  manifold,  the  uncon- 
ditioned, indefinite,  fluctuating,  the  relative,  or  in 
fact  for  the  not-being.  Even  the  soul  imprisoned  in 
a  body  may  however  emancipate  itself  from  this  dark- 
ness and  attain  gradually  to  a  comprehension,  or 
rather  a  recollection  of  the  ideas  of  things.  For  all 
knowledge  is  recollection.  The  soul,  in  its  purity, 
luminous  and  immaterial,  dwelling  in  a  former  state 
of  existence  with  the  eternal  gods,  has  beheld  in 
direct  vision  these  ideas  or  prototypes  of  things,  the 
creations  of  the  gods.  We  shall  see  hereafter  how 
much  of  profound  truth  lies  hid  in  this  mythological 
disguise. 

The  next  point  to  be  observed  is,  that  if  meta- 

1  Timseos,  27,  28  (Jowett's  Translation). 
VOL.  I.  E 


50  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

physics  is  the  science  of  the  inconceivable,  upon 
which  rests  all  the  intelligibility  of  things,  and  of  the 
truths  necessarily  presupposed,  which  the  critical 
reason  afterwards  discovers  for  itself,  by  cautiously 
eliminating  all  empirical  knowledge  and  all  logical 
deduction, — then,  it  must  be  admitted,  the  sphere  of 
metaphysics  is  made  too  conveniently  wide  and  com- 
prehensive. To  claim  all  ideas,  that  is  to  say,  every- 
thing which  human  language  designates  by  a  word, 
everything  that  presents  itself  as  a  distinct  being  in 
the  phenomenal  world,  whether  it  be  hairs,  dust  and 
dirt,  or  tables  and  chairs  and  benches,  as  an  a  priori 
possession  of  the  soul,  and  to  foist  it  upon  the  ever- 
lasting gods,  is  tantamount  to  reducing  the  whole 
of  philosophy  to  a  matter  of  religious  faith  ;  whereas 
its  chief  aim  has  always  been  to  attain  independent 
existence,  arid  knowledge  in  the  strength  of  its  own 
nature.  To  avoid  mistakes  and  misjudgmeiits  we 
must  keep  before  our  minds  the  whole  grandeur  of 
the  new  truth  as  it  appeared  for  the  first  time  at  the 
dawn  of  idealism. 

Other  objections  and  qualifications  of  equal  weight 
have  been  urged  even  in  antiquity,  some  of  which 
did  not  escape  Plato  himself,  if  indeed  the  Par- 
menides  is  by  his  hand. 

The  Platonic  dualism  served  to  accentuate  the 
chasm  between  the  world  of  ideas  and  of  phenomena, 
a  difficulty  which  presents  the  real  crux  of  modern 
philosophy.  Plato's  plan  was  to  allow  the  phe- 
nomena to  become  absorbed  in  the  ideas,  while  the 
material  world  was  banished  into  the  realms  of  nou- 
existence.  But  this  is  evading,  not  solving  the 
difficulty,  for  in  all  that  Plato  himself  predicates 
of  matter  we  recognise  qualities  that  only  belong  to 
something  which  has  a  real  existence.  That  matter 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  51 

opposes  itself  to  the  formative  power  of  ideas,  that  it 
is  that  wherein  the  maker  of  the  world  reproduces 
the  ideas  as  a  mechanic  works  upon  his  material, 
that  it  is  not  merely  an  impediment  to  knowledge 
by  its  mutability  and  diffusion  in  space,  but  that 
it  actually  sets  itself  as  a  bad,  ungodly  principle  in 
direct  antagonism  to  the  creative  cosmic  forces — 
these  are  too  grave  accusations  to  be  directed  against 
what  does  not  exist.  Matter  may  be  the  negation 
of  knowledge,  but  on  that  account  to  deny  its  ex- 
istence is  to  identify  being  and  knowing,  a  course 
which  is  easily  accounted  for  by  the  predominance 
of  the  old  ontological  phantom  at  this  as  well  as  at 
every  other  stage  in  the  history  of  ancient  philo- 
sophy. 

This  difficulty  is  brought  out  by  Parmenidcs  in 
the  Dialogue1  when  Sokrates  makes  a  cautious  at- 
tempt to  distinguish  between  ideas  as  thoughts  of 
the  soul,  and  ideas  as  they  constitute  the  unity  of 
things  in  the  phenomenal  world.  Either  the  phe- 
nomenal world  must  bo  endowed  with  intelligence,  so 
that  all  things  think,  or  it  must  be  able  to  bear 
within  it  thoughts,  without  however  thinking.  And 
when  Sokrates  suggests  that  the  ideas  might  be  the 
patterns  existing  in  the  realm  of  being,  and  single 
things  only  copies  of  them,  Parmenides  replies,  with 
justice  :  Copies  exist  because  of  their  resemblance 
to  the  original,  and  if  the  original  pattern  is  an 
idea,  the  copies  cannot  be  anything  different ;  each 
idea  therefore  must  presuppose  another  and  then 
another,  in  an  infinite  series.  And  he  concludes  his 
objections  by  admonishing  Sokrates:  'As  yet  you 
understand  a  small  part  of  the  difficulty  which  is 


1  c.  6. 

E  2 


52  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

involved  in  your  assumption,  that  there  are  ideas  of 
all  things,  which  are  distinct  from  them/ 

The  limits  within  which  logical  idealism  is  con- 
fined have  remained  always  impassable.  If  the  mind 
is  self-existing,  wholly  independent  of  matter,  then 
all  its  functions  and  all  its  objects  may  be  of  an 
intellectual  kind,  and  there  is  no  possible  transition  to 
the  phenomenal  or  the  objective  world.  The  only 
alternatives  are,  either — 

To  attribute  true,  external  reality  to  intellectual 
objects,  i.  e.  to  the  ideas,  as  was  done  by  the  greatest 
representative  of  ancient  idealism,  Plato,  who  left 
ancient  philosophy  as  ontological  as  he  found  it ; 

Or — to  doubt  the  reality  of  external  objects  and 
to  conceive  them  either  as  the  product  of  the  mind 
itself — as  it  were  a  true  kind  of  dream — or,  again, 
to  bring  them  into  relation  with  the  conscious  in- 
telligence by  a  miracle ;  and  this  latter  path  has 
been  followed  by  modern  philosophy  since  it  ac- 
cepted, with  Descartes,  the  intelligent  subject  as  the 
sole  starting-point  of  all  our  knowledge. 

Deliverance  from  the  insoluble  dilemma  was  only 
to  be  brought  to  the  much-tormented  mind  of  man 
by  Kant,  and  by  no  one  before  him. 

The  reality  outside  the  thinking  subject  claimed 
by  Plato  for  the  ideas,  rightly  roused  the  antagonism 
of  his  great  pupil  Aristotle,  whom  we  have  to  re- 
cognise as  the  greatest  representative  in  the  old 
world  of  empiricism  and  the  scientific  method ;  not- 
withstanding the  repudiation  and  hostility  which  he 
has  met  with  from  the  modern  representatives  of  the 
same  tendency, 

He  showed  how  the  ideas  constituted  a  second 
world  by  the  side  of  the  actual  one,  how  they  must 
necessarily  remain  eternally  stationary,  disconnected, 


ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY.  53 

ineffective  and  motionless,  how  there  could  be  no 
causative  power  in  the  bare  idea,  since  the  cause  of 
events  lay  always  in  something  moving,  i.  e.  in  me- 
chanical natural  force;  in  a  word,  all  genesis  of 
things  from  one  another,  all  connection  of  things  one 
with  another,  becomes  impossible  as  soon  as  the 
ideas  are  supposed  to  be  self-subsisting,  individual 
substances. 

While  Plato  had  fairly  thrown  empiricism  over- 
board, Aristotle  accepted  it  as  the  foundation  on 
which  all  knowledge  must  be  rooted.  In  reality 
single  things  do  exist,  this  particular  horse,  this  par- 
ticular tree ;  always  and  under  all  circumstances 
thought  must  proceed  from  the  particular  substance, 
the  roSe  77,  as  to  which  a  general  statement  must  be 
made.  The  real  being  is  that  which  is  and  can  be 
subject  only,  never  predicate. 

At  the  same  time  Aristotle  is  far  from  acquiescing 
in  the  disintegration  of  the  world  according  to  Demo- 
kritos,  and  seeking  for  explanation  among  the  phe- 
nomena alone.  He  is  a  worthy  follower  of  Sokrates, 
and  knows  that  we  must  begin  with  reason  and  its 
functions,  with  general  truths  and  principles.  He 
demands  a  prima  philosophic*,  whence  everything  else 
is  to  be  derived  by  the  mind,  but  which  must  serve 
first  as  a  base  for  the  conception  of  nature  and  its 
general  features.  He  enunciates  the  great  principle 
that  there  can  be  no  science  of  particulars,  and  also 
no  science  of  single  sensations ;  and  that  universals, 
abstract  ideas,  are  the  necessary  factors  of  the  faculty 
of  knowledge.  He  says,  in  agreement  with  his  great 
master,  'A^j/  KCU  WXo?  i/ow1. 

But  as  to  the  origin  of  these  abstract  ideas,  he 
diverges  from  the  latter,  and  enters  upon  an  opposite 
1  Eth.  Nic.  vi.  12. 


54  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

course.  These  ideas  are  not  the  original  possession 
of  reason,  but  the  latter  has  only  poteniia,  a  dis- 
position to  frame  and  to  develope  these  general 
notions.  They  contain,  it  is  admitted,  as  Plato 
rightly  divined,  the  essential  elements  of  things. 
But  the  human  soul  has  a  power  of  grasping  and 
retaining  these  essentials,  which  is  wanting  to  the 
souls  of  brutes.  And,  in  thus  following  the  reasoning 
of  Plato,  Aristotle  ascribes L  separate  existence,  im- 
materialness  and  immortality  to  the  kind  of  soul 
which  is  capable  of  this  special  rational  thought. 
But  he  restricts  this  concession  by  saying  that  if 
thought  is  not  possible  without  perception  and 
imagination,  the  soul  cannot  be  conceived  apart 
from  the  body.  And  Schopenhauer2  says  with  truth, 
that  in  other  passages,  e.g.  De  Anima,  iii.  8,  he  lays 
down  what  has  been  since  formulated  in  the  pro- 
position, '  Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod  non  prius 
fuerit  in  sensibus ;'  so  that  he  denies  the  condition 
according  to  which  the  soul  might  be  conceived  as 
an  independent  being. 

The  relationship  between  Aristotle  and  Plato  may 
be  stated  thus,  in  order  to  do  justice  to  both  : — 
After  Plato  had  accomplished  the  task  of  tracing 
the  organisation  and  functions  of  the  reason  to  a 
certain  depth  and  so  casting  the  light  of  this  one 
spiritual  principle  upon  the  world  as  it  presents 
itself  to  the  human  mind,  Aristotle  next  began  to 
seek,  by  the  light  of  this  knowledge,  for  the  path 
from  Platonic  metaphysics  to  physics  ;  he  sought  to 
vindicate  the  rights  of  the  actual,  of  the  material 
world,  of  sensible  perception,  and  particular  ex- 
istences, and  he  thus  became  the  philosophical 

1  De  Anima,  i.  i.  2  Parerga,  i.  48. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  55 

founder  of  the  inductive  method,  which  starting  from 
the  given  particulars  proceeds  by  abstraction  to  the 
universal  and  regular.  He  allowed  the  rights  of 
reason,  but  demanded  also  due  regard  for  the  actual 
and  sensible,  which,  he  saw,  must  furnish  the  ma- 
terial for  rational  thought ;  he  knew,  as  Schopen- 
hauer points  out,  that  all  pure  and  abstract  thought 
has  borrowed  its  original  substance  from  direct  ex- 
perience or  intuition. 

Arid  what  constituted  in  his  eyes  the  essence  of 
things,  the  universal  which  was  to  be  apprehended 
by  the  reason,  the  TO  rt  nv  e!vat,  which  makes  every- 
thing what  it  is?  His  answer  is,  the  Form; 
a  truth  which  remained  long  as  a  dormant  germ  in 
the  human  mind,  till  at  last  it  unfolded  itself  with 
Kant  in  a  rich  growth  of  philosophic  clearness.*  This 
form  however  clearly  demanded  as  a  preliminary  the 
corresponding  notion  of  matter,  and  Aristotle  has  the 
further  merit  of  having  grasped  the  full  significance 
of  this  important  conception  and  having  assigned 
to  it  its  place  in  the  general  scheme  of  nature. 
Matter  is  the  permanent,  unchangeable  ;  all  changes 
take  place  in  it,  but  they  are  only  changes  in  the 
form  ;  mere  formless  matter  (materia  prima)  and  pure 
form  do  not  exist,  the  two  are  everywhere  united 
(owoXoi/).  "Rational  knowledge  apprehends  pure  form, 
and  it  is  in  so  far  the  form  of  forms.  There  is  a 
series  of  beings,  so  that  the  one  which  from  one  point 
of  view  is  form,  in  another  is  matter. 

The  importance  of  these  luminous  principles  is 
evident,  and  no  less  so  what  was  incomplete  and  con- 
tradictory, and  continued  to  torment  posterity  ac- 
cordingly. To  the  latter  category  belongs  the  con- 
tradiction that  anything  so  external  as  pure  form 
can  constitute  the  essence  of  anything,  the  exaltation 


56  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

of  matter  to  the  dignity  of  self-existence1  (or  false 
realism  again),  and  lastly,  the  conception  of  matter 
as  a  pure,  formless,  passive  substance,  which  must 
receive  its  motive  impulse  and  its  form  from  without, 
i.  e.  from  the  world-creating,  absolute  Intelligence. 
The  latter  is  a  false  conclusion  a  priori,  the  origin 
of  which  must  be  pointed  out. 

The  Universals  or  general  notions  are,  according 
to  Aristotle,  educed  by  the  human  intellect,  which 
is  alone  capable  of  this  kind  of  knowledge,  from 
amongst  the  things  presented;  the  reason  comes  in 
contact  with  the  Divine  Maker,  whose  thoughts  it 
thinks  again  by  conceiving  their  pure  forms.  The 
difference  between  Aristotle  and  Plato  shows  itself 
here  also,  the  former  conceiving  human  reason  more 
as  an  intellectus  ectypus,  the  latter  as  an  intelledus 
archetypus. 

With  the  realisation  of  the  mind  and  its  forms  on 
the  one  hand,  and  of  matter  with  its  forms  on  the 
other,  the  philosophy  of  antiquity  had  reached  its 
utmost  accomplishment.  Plato  and  Aristotle  are  the 
electric  poles  which  gave  this  direction  to  the  current 
of  thought  for  the  next  two  thousand  years. 

The  closing  period  of  ancient  philosophy  may  be 
briefly  characterised  by  a  summary  of  its  results. 
Four  elements  present  themselves  as  the  ultimate 
elements  of  being,  and  must  be  opposed  or  reconciled 
as  realities.  As  it  has  been  the  tendency  of  philoso- 
phy until  Kant  to  set  more  and  more  on  one  side  the 
self-existent,  or  'things  in  themselves,'  the  following 
table  will  show  the  connecting  link  between  ancient 

1  The  effect  of  this  error  meets  us  jarringly  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
Stoics.  Real  existence  is  always  material,  and  therefore,  God, 
the  soul,  the  virtues,  the  affections,  in  a  word  all  ideas,  must  be 
material. 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  57 

and  modern  philosophy  and  the  progress  from  one 
to  the  other. 

THE  THING  IN  ITSELF. 

Idealism.  Realism. 

(Apriorism).  (Empiricism). 

Plato.  Aristotle. 
A.  B. 

a.  The  Mind.  a.  Matter. 

b.  The  Ideas.  b.  Form. 

We  shall  see  how  Descartes  consciously  approached 
the  task  of  eliminating  the  subordinate  members 
Ab  and  Bb,  and  disputing  their  self-subsistence. 
There  remained  then  the  two  chief  opposites,  which 
remained  unreconciled  till  the  advent  of  Kant. 

In  conclusion,  I  will  briefly  attempt  to  show,  by 
the  light  of  a  truer  theory  as  to  the  origin  of  reason, 
how  the  first  attempts  of  this  faculty  at  self-examina- 
tion must  necessarily  have  led  to  these  great  results 
reached  by  Aristotle  and  Plato. 

The  obscure  consciousness  of  this  origin  and  the 
method  conditioned  by  it  served  as  a  guiding  star 
to  these  great  Greeks,  who  succeeded  in  carrying 
to  a  considerable  distance  their  investigation  of 
the  action,  nature,  and  function  of  reason.  Having 
reached  a  certain  limit,  they  were  unable  to  proceed 
further,  and  assumed  some  forms  of  thought  to  exist 
a  priori,  and  to  be  incapable  of  further  solution, 
which  are  known  by  us  to  be  empirical,  i.  e.  capable 
of  historical  explanation.  But  the  Greeks  did  not 
distinguish  between  innate  and  a  priori,  they  took 
for  granted  the  rational  man  with  all  his  gifts,  and 
did  not  dream  of  seeking  for  his  origin,  or  the  stages 
of  his  earlier  incomplete  development.  Epikuros 
alone,  whose  views  concerning  the  gradual  develop- 


58  ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY. 

ment  of  the  human  race  are  contained  in  the  fifth 
book  of  Lucretius'  didactic  poem,  is  an  honourable 
exception  to  this  rule.  But  as  his  explanation  of  the 
origin  of  language  is  throughout  materialistic  and 
sensualistic,  while  the  nature  of  the  reason  was  not 
recognised  as  an  object  of  investigation,  no  further 
progress  was  made  beyond  this  feeble,  though  me- 
ritorious beginning. 

The  profound  study  of  more  extensive  linguistic 
material  and  the  important  results  which  comparative 
philology  has  placed  at  the  service  of  the  philosophy 
of  language  enable  us  to  affirm  that  human  reason 
came  into  existence  with  and  ly  language.  General 
ideas  were  made  possible  by  words,  and  they  originate 
with  sensible  intuitions,  but  they  become  exalted,  per- 
fected, differentiated  and  spiritualised  by  a  gradual 
growth  and  evolution  continued  through  the  ages. 

The  real  point  however  whence  all  language  and 
all  reason  has  sprung  is  the  common  activity  of  men 
and  the  creations  due  thereto.  In  proportion  as  the 
latter  are  multiplied,  light  is  thrown  upon  the  two 
dark  regions,  the  inner  consciousness  of  man,  and  the 
hitherto  uncomprehended  outer  world  which  is  acces- 
sible to  impulses  of  sense  alone. 

The  sensitive,  conscious  subject  is  necessarily  pre- 
supposed in  all  knowledge,  but  for  a  length  of  time 
this  fact  remains  obscure.  By  a  peculiarity  of  human 
reason  the  objective  or  external  world  is  intelligible 
at  an  earlier  stage  than  what  is  within.  The  former 
serves  even  as  a  key  to  the  latter.  Before  the  dawn 
of  reason  the  external  world  itself  is  an  object  of 
desire,  fear,  and  hatred,  but  not  of  knowledge. 

But  what  first  made  Reason  possible  1  The  action 
of  the  feeling  and  conscious  being  upon  the  external 
world.  This  effective  action  marks  the  real  boundary 


ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY.  59 

between  two  otherwise  separate  and  mutually  unin- 
telligible worlds,  the  worlds  of  feeling  and  of  matter. 
This  boundary  is  the  proper  domain  of  reason  and  of 
the  spiritual  formative  will ;  what  is  formed  reappears 
in  consciousness  as  perception,  but  as  something  well 
known,  familiar,  and  intelligible.  This  is  the  origin 
of  the -human  faculty  of  representation  or  imagina- 
tion, which  grows  along  with  reason,  strengthens  it, 
and  continues  uninterruptedly  to  act,  and  to  be  acted 
upon  by  it,  so  that  some  eminent  thinkers  (e.g. 
Berkeley  and  Hume)  have  taken  both  to  be  iden- 
tical, and  have  held  all  conceptions  to  be  the  same 
as  intuitions  or  '  ideas/  in  the  sense  in  which  the 
word  is  used  by  Locke,  i.e.  mental  representations 
of  existing  objects. 

The  formative  activity  of  mankind  had  to  pass 
through  its  period  of  development,  of  slow  and  con- 
tinuous progress  towards  perfection.  And  this  was 
only  possible  by  the  help  of  language.  Language  is 
the  echo  within  of  what  has  been  done  without,  and 
in  this  too  it  serves  to  connect  the  external  and  the 
internal.  But  it  is  much  more  than  this,  it  obeys  the 
authority  of  the  human  will,  it  is  at  the  present  day 
an  instrument  upon  whose  keys  (i.  e.  words)  the 
human  mind  plays  with  marvellous  skill  so  as  to 
bring  out  enchanting  harmonies.  This  power,  which 
now  seems  to  call  for  such  astonished  admiration, 
arose  from  very  trifling  and  apparently  insignificant 
beginnings  :  from  the  circumstance  that  in  the  few 
and  unimportant  pursuits  which  were  carried  on  in 
common  by  primitive  groups  of  men,  certain  sounds 
associated  themselves  with  the  action,  which  dif- 
ferentiated themselves  and  gradually  acquired  the 
power  of  recalling  to  mind  these  actions  and  the 
sensible  image  of  their  phenomenal  effects.  The 


60  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

cries  thus  acquired  a  meaning,  and  so  became  the 
germs  or  roots  whence  all  human  speech  has  been 
regularly  developed,  notwithstanding  all  differences 
of  sound. 

This  is  the  origin  of  words,  and  it  is  at  the  same 
time  the  origin  of  ideas.  For  words  and  ideas  are 
inseparable,  like  body  and  mind ;  they  are  the  same 
thing  under  different  aspects. 

A  spiritual  tradition  becomes  possible  through 
words,  and  the  community  lives  a  common  spiritual 
life.  The  same  capacity  is  developed  and  educated 
in  the  younger  generation,  and  the  life  of  the  com- 
munity continues  on  from  millennium  to  millennium, 
with  heightened  and  perfected  intellectual  vitality. 

We  can  appreciate  now  the  profound  wisdom  of 
Plato  in  the  utterances :  c  In  these  ideas  or  concep- 
tions ' — whose  dependence  upon  language  he  did  not 
conjecture — 'the  whole  work  of  human  reason  is 
accomplished/  What  is  the  lasting,  inalienable  pos- 
session of  this  same  reason  ?  Surely  that  which  it 
can  ever  form  and  produce  again  and  again  at  will, 
its  own  creations,  whereby  the  contemplative  faculties 
too  are  constituted,  so  that  the  mind  learns  gradually 
to  conceive  the  remaining  objects  of  the  outer  world 
also  in  their  appropriate  forms  and  to  designate  them 
by  names.  The  very  word  chosen  by  Plato  points 
to  this  origin  of  his  doctrine  of  ideas. 

That  which  Plato  adds  to  his  doctrine  as  an  appen- 
dix, or  as  something  merely  incidental — namely  that 
human  manufactures  too,  such  as  tables  or  beds,  are 
formed  in  accordance  with  eternal  ideas — appears  to 
us  as  undoubtedly,  what  it  was  unconsciously  with 
him,  the,  starting-point  of  his  theory  of  the  universe. 
This  "appears  too  from  the  expression  which  he  often 
makes  use  of  as  the  equivalent  of  ideas,  patterns 


ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.  6 1 

),  after  which  the  actual  beds  and  tables 
are  supposed  to  be  made ;  and  again  from  what  lie  says 
of  the  relations  between  matter  and  ideas,  showing 
how  the  carpenter  and  the  smith  must  be  able  respect- 
ively to  put  their  idea  of  a  shuttle  or  an  awl  into  the 
iron  or  wood  and  so  realise  it2.  The  iron  and  the  wood, 
i.  e.  the  material,  are  of  little  consequence,  the  idea 
is  the  principal  thing. 

Thus  for  Plato,  as  for  the  human  reason  itself  in 
its  infancy,  the  world  of  human  labour  furnished  the 
key  which  was  to  interpret  the  mysteries  of  the 
world  to  human  reason. 

We  can  now  understand  the  connection  with  the 
universalia  ante  rem,  and  the  recollection  of  a  former 
state  of  existence.  If  we  start,  as  Plato  does,  from 
reason  as  an  ultimate  datum,  as  an  original  property 
of  the  human  soul  admitting  of  no  further  explanation, 
it  follows  necessarily  that  the  smith  produces  his  awl 
and  the  carpenter  his  shuttle  in  accordance  with  the 
idea  that  is  present  to  his  reason.  But  the  question 
remains  how  the  men  of  to-day  have  become  familiar 
with  these  ideas;  how  it  comes  that  they  are  now 
really  creative  so  that  countless  objects  are  formed  in 
accordance  with  them  ?  Certainly  only  because  in 
the  dim  remotest  past,  the  thing  itself  and  the  idea 
of  it  were  formed  at  once  by  our  ancestors,  or  rather 
developed  out  of  some  still  earlier  creation.  This 
being,  when  first  created  and  first  thought,  passes  by 
tradition  into  the  thought  and  action  of  unnumbered 

1  Parmenides,  132  (Jowett's  Translation).     'The  more  probable 
view  of  these  ideas  is  that  they  are  patterns  fixed  in  nature,  and 
that  other  things  are  like  them  and  resemblances  of  them  ;  and  that 
what  is  meant  by  the  participation  of  other  things  in  the  ideas,  is 
really  assimilation-  to  them/ 

2  Kratylos,  389, 


62  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

generations,  and  is  there  constantly  renewed,  and  in 
fact  does  only  become  present  to  the  mind  of  indi- 
viduals through  a  reminiscence  of  the  former  condition 
of  the  race.  In  the  same  way  the  present  generation 
knows  familiarly  all  the  classes  or  orders  of  natural 
beings,  because  from  ancient  times  the  image  of  them 
lias  been  imprinted  on  the  mind  and  thoughts  in  this 
particular  manner  and  under  these  particular  forms. 
Language  has  wrought  this  miracle:  this  much  is 
certain,  and  at  the  present  day  there  is  little  diffi- 
culty in  recognising  the  fact.  But  we  must  concede 
to  Plato  that  this  would  have  been  impossible  with- 
out reminiscence,  and  this  is  exactly  the  chief  and 
most  fruitful  miracle,  that  the  thought  and  feeling  of 
remotest  ages,  borne  along,  as  upon  a  stream,  by 
language,  should  make  its  presence  felt,  on  and  on 
ill  every  member  of  an  ever-growing,  ever- new 
humanity. 

Aristotle  too  shows  clearly  in  all  the  features  of 
his  doctrine  the  impress  which  the  origin  of  reason 
has  stamped  upon  its  whole  later  development. 

As  he  differs  from  Plato  in  removing  the  centre  of 
gravity,  of  being  and  knowledge,  more  towards  the 
objective  or  actual  world,  we  should  expect  him  to 
seek  his  principles  also  on  the  objective  side  of  the 
boundary  we  have  indicated.  And  this  is  in  fact  the 
case.  He  gives  the  name  of  Matter  to  the  unknown 
Somewhat,  lying  in  that  direction,  to  wThich  he  as- 
cribes absolute  being.  The  name  itself  bears  on  its 
forehead  the  tokens  of  its  origin.  f/Y\tj  or  materia  is 
the  timber  out  of  which  human  activity  prepares  the 
most  various  objects  arid  implements.  Generalised  the 
word  comes  to  mean  the  raw  material  which  is  the 
necessary  substratum  of  all  that  is  done  or  wrought. 
That  which  human  intelligence  lends  to  this  material 


ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY.  63 

is  its  form,  which  is  the  second  most  essential  and 
important  principle  for   the   comprehension   of  the 
whole  world.     But  matter  is  not  merely  formed  and 
modified  by  human  energy ;  by  some  force  to  us  un- 
known, it  is  itself  always  active  and  creative  of  new 
objects  and  new  effects,  which  forthwith  distinguish 
themselves  in  form.     This  matter,  which  is  imperish- 
able through  all  the  changes  of  its  form,  appears 
properly  as  a  substance,  though  the  active,  creative, 
and  formative  element  is  the  world-spirit,  the  Deity. 
And  here  we  come  to  the  explanation  of  the  uni- 
versal ia  post  rein.   Human  knowledge  has  first  to  dis- 
cover these  forms  in  nature,  and  to  make  them  its 
own  by  experience,  which  becomes  possible  through 
reason  ;  for  feeling  is  the  form  of  what  is  felt,  but 
the  reason  is  the  form  of  the  forms.     For  the  rest,  it 
may  be  observed  that  our  theory  of  the  origin  of 
reason  goes  as  far  to  justify  the  views  of  Aristotle  as 
those  of  Plato  ;  for  although  the  creations  of  man- 
kind indeed  proceeded  from  obscure  impulses  of  the 
will,  they  only  grew  into  thoughts  and  conceptions 
by  the  sensible  perception  and  contemplation  of  what 
was  created.    They  were  thus  in  the  beginning  more 
post  reni,  and  afterwards  more  frequently  ante  rein. 
In  many  passages  of  Aristotle  we  see  clearly  how  the 
true  germs  of  his  fundamental  principle  lay  in  this 
unconsciousness  of  the  origin  of  human  reason  and 
the  properties  which  it  has  derived  from  its  origin. 
Thus  especially  in  the  famous  passage l :  *  But  the 
soul  may  be  compared  to  the  hand,  for  the  hand  is 
the  tool  of  tools,  as  the  mind  is  the  form  of  forms/ 
There  is  a  profound  reason  for  this  parallel  between 
the  hand  which  shapes  all  things  and  the  mind  which 
comprehends  all  forms.     '  All  things  that  become/  he 
1  De  Anima,  iii.  8. 


64  ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY, 

says  in  another  place,  'must  become  something  as 
something  out  of  something  V  This  is  just  the 
scheme  of  human  action.  But  the  form  is  the 
essential  part  of  the  thing,  as  lie  says  :  '  The  nature 
without  the  matter  is  what  I  call  the  essence  of  a 
thing2/ 

It  has  still  to  be  observed  that  Aristotle,  as  he 
combined  logic  and  a  theory  of  knowledge  with  the 
explanation  from  natural  causes,  reconciled  a  greater 
number  of  principles  than  Plato,  who  never  passed 
beyond  the  sphere  of  rational  thought.  His  classifi- 
cation of  causes  under  four  categories,  which  bears  a 
remote  resemblance  to  Schopenhauer's  '  Fourfold 
Eoot/  is  a  case  in  point.  They  are,  matter,  motion, 
form,  and  purpose ;  but  here  too  the  a  priori  form  of 
human  action  is  unmistakable.  As  form  is  the 
essential  point,  it  becomes  the  aim  of  action,  and  in 
so  far  it  precedes  as  (imagined)  cause  the  real  effective 
action  (or  motive  cause).  I  have  expressed  my 
agreement  with  Schopenhauer  in  reckoning  it  among 
Aristotle's  chief  merits  that  he  introduced  the  con- 
ception of  design  into  the  philosophy  of  nature.  It 
is  self-evident  that  here  also  human  action  could  only 
serve  as  a  type  and  lantern.  He  observes,  with  the 
obvious  intention  of  explaining  one  by  the  other,  *  If 
architecture  were  in  the  wood  itself,  it  would  then 
work  as  nature  does/ 

It  still  remains  to  note  the  false  a  priori  track 
into  which  Aristotle  was  beguiled  by  his  point  of 
departure.  Because  the  idea  of  matter  had  presented 
itself  to  him  in  the  original  scheme  of  human  activity, 
he  was  led  to  conceive  this  as  throughout  passive  and 
without  qualities ;  for  his  highest  ideal  was  naturally 

1  Metaph.  vi.  7. 

2  Loc.  cit.j  Aeyo)  6*  ovcriav  avsv  vXys  TO  ri  yv  cu/ac. 


ANCIENT   PHILOSOPHY.  65 

a  kind  of  matter,  which  the  formative  human  mind 
might  modify  and  work  upon  at  will,  since  the  form 
was  the  essential  part  of  the  thing.  This  separation 
of  the  inseparable  gave  rise  subsequently  to  great 
contradictions  and  confusion  of  thought.  The  ques- 
tion arose  whence  motion  was  imparted  to  matter. 
Aristotle  himself  only  attempted  to  fill  in  the  gap 
by  the  most  forced  and  laboured  explanations,  or 
rather,  he  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  a  deus 
ex  machina,  when  he  assumed  the  existence,  beyond 
the  starry  spheres,  of  God  as  the  primus  motor,  the 
•7rpS>Tov  KIVOVV  aKLvrjTov,  that  maintained  all  things  in 
eternal  motion.  We  shall  see  how  this  funda- 
mental error  of  a  self-subsisting  quality-less  matter 
weighed  upon  Descartes  and  his  successors  until 
Leibniz  at  last  threw  daylight  on  the  point,  by 
showing  that  the  true  essence  of  matter  lay  in 
action  or  force. 

We  have  seen  how  the  two  greatest  philosophers 
of  antiquity  had  sounded  the  problem  of  metaphysics 
to  a  certain  depth,  though  they  were  still  far  from  the 
really  final  question,  considering  that  one  assumed 
those  functions  of  the  reason  which  admit  of  histo- 
rical explanation  to  be  ultimate  truths,  while  the 
other  believed  himself  to  have  attained  the  source  of 
all  reality  and  its  thinkableness  by  the  realisation  or 
hypostasis  of  matter. 

They  had  discerned  the  natural  external  forms  of 
rational  thought,  and  believed  themselves  to  have 
penetrated  its  inmost  nature,  and  so  to  have  drawn 
back  the  veil  which  shrouded  the  mystery  of  being. 
They  took  man  for  granted,  and  after  his  image  made 
the  world. 

They  were  still  in  the  outer  court  of  metaphysics. 
Much  laborious  effort  remained  before  a  mortal  could 

VOL.  I.  F 


66  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY. 

dare  to  boast  of  having  penetrated  to  the  very  sanc- 
tuary and  to  ask  the  decisive  questions  : — 

What  is  the  last  inalienable  and  unquestionable 
possession  of  reason  ? 

And  why  does  it  necessarily  think  in  this  wise,  i.e. 
with  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  matter  and 
form  \ 

And  can  we  after  all  ever  learn  anything  respect- 
ing being  itself?  Are  we  not  rather  confined  within 
the  bounds  of  the  original  forms  of  reason,  and 
doomed  never  to  escape  from  them  ? 


MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY, 


dpxfj   r\v  6   Adyoff  /cat   fobs  rjv  6  Xoyoj*    ndvra   8t    avrov  fytvero,   KOI 
CIVTOV   eyeWro  ovde   <fv. — Ev.  JOH.  i.  I. 


THE  dark  night  of  the  Middle  Ages  has  long  been 
the  subject  of  fable.  There  is  no  word  of  scorn  or 
contempt  which  has  not  been  hurled  at  the  philosophy 
of  the  Schools.  This  lay  in  the  nature  of  things. 
Every  age  in  its  youthful  pride  of  life  thinks  itself 
justified  in  picking  holes  in  the  work  of  its  bygone, 
superannuated  predecessor,  and  in  clearing  the  ground 
for  its  own  new  and  wiser  labours.  A  still  later  day 
does  justice  to  both.  It  sees  that  each  generation 
begins  its  progress  by  riding  on  the  shoulders  of  the 
last,  and  that  even  the  fiercest  opposition  directed 
against  the  past  is  only  a  phase  of  its  continued 
development. 

And  accordingly  it  is  now  freely  admitted  that 
among  the  rnuch-despised  Schoolmen  there  were 
thinkers  of  the  first  rank,  whose  names  may  be  set  by 
the  side  of  the  most  brilliant  philosophers  of  ancient 
or  modern  times.  But  with  this  we  are  not  now  con- 
cerned. Every  age  should  be  measured  by  its  own 
standard.  The  human  mind  was  not,  as  has  been 
imagined,  asleep  during  the  thousand  years  of  medi- 
aevalism;  still  less  was  it  sunk  in  the  rigidity  of  death. 
There  was  development,  albeit  the  slow  development 

F  2 


68  MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

of  autumn,  when  all  the  juices  are  transformed  into 
food  and  garnered  up  to  nourish  in  the  coming  spring 
the  fresh  green,  luxuriant  growth,  and  supply  mate- 
rial for  a  new  and  blooming  world. 

Any  one  who  surveys  with  comprehensive  gaze  the 
development  of  philosophy  as  the  thought  of  the 
world  and  its  relation  to  mankind,  will  see  in  the 
tranquil  intellectual  industry  of  the  Middle  Ages  a 
great  and  significant  mental  crisis,  an  important 
and  indispensable  link  between  ancient  and  modern 
philosophy. 

It  will  be  necessary  to  indicate,  as  has  not  I  think 
been  done  before,  the  boundaries  which  separate 
these  three  great  epochs. 

'  I.  Ancient  philosophy  is  the  philosophy  of  pure 
Objectivism.  This  starting-point  is  natural.  It 
is  the  same  as  repeats  itself  to-day  in  the  growth 
and  development  of  every  human  child  in  its  in- 
dividual existence.  The  objective  is  the  truly  ex- 
isting ;  towards  this  all  thought  and  reflection  are 
directed  as  to  the  pole-star  of  true  philosophy.  The 
Sophists,  who  first  exalted  the  subjective  element  in 
human  knowledge  and  described  man  as  the  measure 
of  all  things,  were  unmasked  by  the  wisest  of  the 
Greeks  as  dangerous,  immoral,  deniers  of  truth  and 
virtue,  deceivers  of  men,  and  given  up  to  ridicule 
as  devisers  of  verbal  snares  and  entanglements. 
The  greatest  achievements  of  ancient  philosophy 
sprang,  characteristically,  from  the  reaction  against 
subjectivism.  The  Beautiful,  the  True,  the  Good, 
are  something  real,  not  mere  thoughts  or  images  of 
human  fancy.  Sensation  is  either  the  means,  the 
tool  by  which  the  thinking  mind  receives  the  actual 
world  into  itself,  or  it  is  itself  thought,  the  im- 
pression or  product  of  reality  in  man.  Even  the 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  69 

highest  discovery  achieved  in  antiquity,  that  all 
knowledge  has  universals,  not  individuals,  for  its 
object,  leads  only  to  the  spreading  out  of  these 
objects  in  the  world  of  reality  either  as  Platonic 
ideas  or  Aristotelian  entelechies.  Language  and 
reason  are  one.  It  occurred  to  no  one  that  the  word 
as  something  audible  should  be  separated  from  the 
idea  as  something  intelligible ;  nor  did  any  one  so 
much  as  guess  at  the  origin  of  ideas,  as  human 
concepts,  and  their  connection  with  sensible  stimuli 
and  perceptions.  The  Lockian  noogony  was  incon- 
ceivable to  antiquity;  on  the  contrary,  the  effort  to 
objectivise,  to  lend  being  and  reality  to  all  things, 
prevailed  everywhere.  The  universals  had  hardly 
been  discovered  to  be  the  true  objects  of  human 
thought,  when  they  themselves  became  realised 
either,  according  to  Plato,  as  specially  existing  en- 
tities, side  by  side  with  the  material  things  of  senise, 
or,  according  to  Aristotle,  as  the  essential  forms  of 
things.  That  anything  should  exist  only  in  the 
human  soul,  only  as  perception,  thought,  or  repre- 
sentative consciousness — such  a  conjecture  never  pre- 
sented itself  to  the  minds  of  the  ancients.  Hence 
all  their  art  too  aims  at  objective  creation. 

All  the  philosophical  systems  of  antiquity  benr 
this  stamp  of  objectivity.  The  Godhead  is,  even  for 
Plato,  the  Demiurgos  by  whom  the  world  is  formed, 
a.nd  for  Aristotle  the  first  motionless  mover  of  the 
spheres.  The  enigmatic  metaphysical  conceptions 
with  which  the  Middle  Ages  tormented  themselves 
were  curtly  set  aside.  Time  is  in  Plato's  eyes 
identical  with  the  motion  of  the  sun  (xpovo?  f\  roO 
ovpavov  Kiwia-i?  or  fjXlov  Kivti<n$9  Tim.  3?)-  And  in  the 
same  way  he  identifies  space  with  matter.  Accord- 
ing to  Aristotle,  space  is  something  like  a  vessel, 


70  MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

separable  from  the  things  which  it  contains,  and 
therefore  neither  matter  nor  form:  it  is  in  matter, 
which  is  therefore  the  place  of  place ;  it  is  that 
which  lies  beyond  the  limits  of  the  terrestrial  sphere. 
Time  is,  to  him,  the  number  of  motion,  considered  as 
earlier  and  later.  He  only  once  observes,  with  deep 
insight,  that  it  might  be  doubted  whether  there  would 
be  any  time,  if  there  were  no  soul  (Phys.  iv.  c.  14),  and 
decides  that  if  soul  or  mind  is  alone  able  to  count, 
there  would  be  no  time  without  mind. 

The  logical  development  of  objectivism  resulted 
on  the  one  hand  in  materialism,  and  on  the  other  in 
individualism.  From  the  first  beginnings  of  Greek 
philosophy  we  see  the  two  tendencies  distinguish- 
ing themselves,  when  Thales  proposes  water  as  the 
base  of  creation  and  at  the  same  time  assumes 
the  whole  world  to  be  filled  with  gods1  ;  for 
the  gods  are  individuals  who  act  in  or  behind  phe- 
nomena. The  two  principles  could  only  lead  to 
irreconcilable  conflicts,  for  the  individual  personal 
powers  were  only  determined  by  their  own  will  and 
therefore  could  never  become  objects  of  scientific 
knowledge,  while  with  the  conception  of  matter 
strict  necessity  or  natural  law  had  been  introduced. 
For  this  reason  Demokritos  and  his  successors  are 
counted  as  mortal  enemies  of  religion.  Hence  too 
the  lofty  enthusiasm  with  which  Lucretius  proclaims 
the  doctrine  of  Epikuros,  and  soars  above  the  re- 
ligious delirium  which  still  enveloped  the  world  in 
its  gloom.  It  was  an  enthusiasm  proceeding  from 
reason's  attainment  of  self-consciousness,  when  it 
first  began  to  recognise  in  the  broad  world  spread 
out  before  it  such  law  and  order  as  constituted  its 
own  very  nature.  Kea&on  for  the  first  time  be* 
yy6t]  ndwa  TrMjpr)  O&v  tlvat.  Arist,  de  Aiiima,  i.  5. 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  71 

held  its  own  image  in  the  mirror  of  objective  ex- 
istence. And  although  the  materialistic  school 
proper  did  little  in  antiquity  to  advance  the  exact 
sciences,  Langc  is  right  in  saying1,  'that  merely  t'> 
refer  the  enigmatic  processes  of  nature,  growth  and 
decay,  the  seeming  disappearance  and  unexplained 
renewal  of  matter,  to  a  single  all-embracing,  so  to 
speak,  tangible  principle  was  itself  something  like 
Columbus's  egg  in  the  natural  knowledge  of  an- 
tiquity. All  the  divine  and  daemonic  goblin  array 
was  set  aside  at  a  single  stroke,  and  whatever 
naturally  profound  minds  might  be  inclined  to  think 
of  what  lay  behind  the  phenomenal  world,  this  world 
itself  now  lay  unclouded  before  the  spectators  gaze. 
Even  genuine  disciples  of  Plato  and  Pythagoras 
experimentalised  or  meditated  on  the  processes  of 
nature  without  confounding  the  world  of  ideas  or 
mystical  numbers  with  the  immediate  data  of  sense. 
This  confusion,  which  has  been  so  marked  in  the 
philosophy  of  some  modern  Germans,  only  began  to 
appear  in  Classical  antiquity  with  the  general  decay 
of  culture  in  the  time  of  the  Neo-Platonic  and  Neo- 
Pythagorean  rhapsodies/  Lange  accounts  for  this 
intellectual  sobriety  by  the  admixture  everywhere  of 
materialistic  elements ;  but  in  my  opinion  it  is  due 
to  the  essential  character  of  the  ancient  mode  of 
thought,  to  the  naive,  unhesitating  objectivity  which 
always  starts  from  and  proceeds  towards  the  actually 
existing. 

The  greatest  achievement  of  the  old  world  in 
moral  or  practical  philosophy,  the  doctrine  of  the 
Stoics,  which  aspired  to  make  men  independent  of 
destiny,  a.nd  by  throwing  them  upon  themselves  to 
raise  them  above  themselves,  bears  throughout  the 
1  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  i.  95. 


72  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

stamp  of  this  character.  Notwithstanding  their  affinity 
with  Christianity,  which  allows  some  Stoical  views  to 
be  called  distinctly  Christian,  the  Stoics  were  unable 
to  free  themselves  from  the  objective  delusion  and  the 
supremacy  of  words ;  and  they  maintained  accord- 
ingly the  material  nature  of  the  Deity,  of  the  human 
soul,  and  even  of  the  virtues  and  abstract  concep- 
tions, relying  on  the  argument  that  everything  real 
must  be  corporeal.  '  Primum  exponam/  says  Seneca, 
'quid  Stoicis  videatur,  turn  dicere  sententiam  au- 
debo.  Placet  nostris  quod  bonum  est,  eese  corpus ; 
quia  quod  bonum  est,  facit ;  quidquid  facit,  corpus 
est.  Quod  bonurn  est  prodest,  faciat  autem  aliquid 
oportet,  ut  possit ;  si  facit,  corpus  est.  Sapieritiam 
bonam  esse  dicunt,  sequitur,  ut  necesse  sit  illam 
corporalern  quoque  esse/  (Epist.  106.)  In  the  same 
way,  justice,  courage,  soul,  virtue,  arts,  errors,  affec- 
tions, discourse,  thoughts,  even  silence  and  walking, 
are  corporeal  things  (Epist.  113).  No  greater  proof 
of  absolute  objectivism  can  be  imagined  than  that 
the  school  which  taught  monotheism,  the  immor- 
tality of  the  soul,  the  universal  brotherhood  of  man, 
and  recognised  virtue  and  wisdom  as  the  only  true 
good,  should  have  been  able  to  conceive  all  human 
conceptions  only  as  corresponding  bodies.  The 
Christian  dogma  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  and 
of  transubstantiation  had  much  in  common  with  this 
doctrine,  and  among  the  Fathers  of  the  Church  we 
accordingly  find  Tertullian  adopting  as  his  own  the 
views  of  the  Stoics,  The  world,  according  to  the 
Stoics,  is  the  embodied,  or  objective  Logos  (\oyucov 
e<rriv  6  /coV/xo?),  an  uninterrupted  causal  mechanism 
presides  everywhere,  and  all  things  accomplish  their 
predestined  work  in  accordance  with  this  order.  It 
is  in  a  sense  an  anticipation  of  Spinoza's  monism. 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  73 

Briefly:  What  has  no  objective  existence  is  no- 
thing. This  is  the  ruling  idea  of  ancient  philo- 
sophy, and  hence  we  see  that  Plato  goes  so  far  as 
to  doubt  the  existence  of  matter  because  of  its 
mutability  and  perishableness ;  while  Aristotle  ridi- 
cules the  Platonic  ideas  as  phantasms,  and  in  all 
his  investigations  into  metaphysical  conceptions,  such 
as  the  infinitude  of  space,  etc.,  always  contrives  to 
state  the  question  in  this  way:  'Is  it  anything  Real 
or  not  ? '  Diksearchos,  his  disciple,  is  thus  quite  con- 
sistent when  he  maintains:  ' Nihil  esse  omnino  ani- 
mum,  et  hoc  esse  nomen  totum  inane  frustraque  ani- 
malia  et  aninmntes  appellari,  neque  in  hoinine  iiiesse 
animuin  vel  animam,  virnque  omnem  earn  qua  vel 
againus  quid  vel  sontiamus  in  omnibus  corporibus  vivis 
oequabiliter  esse  fusam/  etc.  (Cicero,  Tusc.  i.  10.) 

We  have  seen  that  the  most  various  forms  of 
philosophy  are  possible  upon  the  foundation  of  ob- 
jectivity. Materialism,  Idealism,  Realism  or  In- 
dividualism, Monism,  and  all  the  other  systems 
known  to  us  in  later  philosophy,  grow  out  of  this 
soil.  Their  significance  and  their  connection  with  the 
common  principle  of  their  foundation  only  appears 
from  the  fact  that  all  the  different  principles  set  up 
agree  in  possessing  the  character  of  reality :  Matter, 
Ideas,  Forms,  or  Individuals,  spiritualised  bodies,  etc., 
agree  in  having  only  a  real  existence. 

Even  the  Scepticism  of  antiquity  does  not  escape 
from  this  mental  fashion.  When  it  brings  together  the 
conclusions  of  the  different  dogmatic  schools  and  says, 
All  philosophical  wisdom  is  nought,  this  does  not 
mean  that  the  reality  of  things  is  called  in  question, 
but  rather,  on  the  contrary,  that  man  should  content 
himself  with  realities  and  not  dream  of  reaching  a 
satisfactory  explanation  or  true  knowledge  of  the 


74  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

reasons  for  what  exists.  There  is  an  existing 
reality,  but  the  thoughts  of  men  are  error  and  de- 
lusion. The  sceptics  urge  as  a  crushing  argument 
against  objective  dogmatism  the  incongruities  of 
thought  and  reality,  the  relativity  of  knowledge, 
and  so  to  a  certain  extent  the  share  of  the  know- 
ing subject  in  cognition.  With  the  same  weapon  at 
a  later  date  Hume  will  take  up  the  struggle  and  give 
a  decisive  bent  to  the  course  of  modern  philosophy. 

The  objective  points  of  view  had  been  fairly  ex- 
hausted in  the  old  world ;  nothing  new  remained  to 
be  deduced  from  it.  At  the  same  time  it  had  failed 
to  afford  any  satisfaction,  and  rather  left  things  with 
the  antagonism  between  different  views  at  its 
strongest,  and  most  seriously  so  in  the  most  pro- 
found, i.e.  the  Platonic  doctrine,  in  which  scarcely 
any  allowance  was  made  for  the  essential  element 
in  the  objective  theory  of  the  universe,  namely, 
matter  and  individualism. 

II.  With  the  decay  of  the  old  culture  a  new 
doctrine  announced  itself,  which  was  to  start  from 
the  opposite  standpoint  and  thence  attempt  to  com- 
prehend and  explain  the  universe  by  a  single  prin- 
ciple,— the  Christian  philosophy,  namely,  which  is 
properly  speaking  a  pure  Subjectivism,  and  might 
be  best  characterised  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Absolute 
Mind. 

When  I  say  pure  Subjectivism,  this  must  not  be 
understood  in  the  sense  in  which  the  idea  has  been 
made  familiar  to  us  by  Descartes.  There  was  no 
discovery  as  yet  of  the  individual  subject,  the  think- 
ing Ego,  as  the  source  of  all  knowledge,  nor  of  the 
great  truth  which  followed  on  the  discovery  of  the 
Subject  to  supplement  it,  with  its  necessary  com- 
plement the  Object,  nor  therefore  of  the  polarity 


MEDLEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  75 

or  relativity  of  human  knowledge.  But  human 
thought  had  begun  to  turn,  with  an  irresistible  and 
growing  motion  towards  the  other  pole,  in  order  to 
win  there  a  firm  standing-point  from  whence  it  might 
subdue  all  things  to  itself.  The  world  was  made 
subjective  in  the  person  of  a  God  outside  the  world. 
As  formerly  the  objective  outer  world,  so  now  this 
God  is  recognised  as  the  source  of  all  being  and  all 
knowledge.  The  highest  truths  are  revealed  by 
him  to  the  human  mind,  the  latter  must  listen  to 
the  voices  that  speak  within,  he  must  learn  to 
understand  '  Wie  spricht  ein  Geist  znm  andern  Geist! 
Nature  is  still  haunted  by  the  shades  of  the  old 
gods,  and  is  therefore  sinful,  subject  to  evil  spirits, 
and  full  of  snares  and  temptations.  To  turn  away 
from  the  world  and  its  seductions,  to  retire  into  one's 
own  heart,  penance  and  asceticism,  solitary  inter- 
course with  God,  become  the  most  serious  of  duties. 

The  renunciation  of  the  bright  realms  of  the 
objective  world  naturally  leads  to  mystery  and 
mysticism.  We  see  these  accordingly  co-operating 
with  the  first  dawn  of  Christian  philosophy  to  trans- 
form and  translate  the  old  philosophic  doctrine  in 
its  own  sense ;  just  as  at  the  close  of  this  whole 
period,  when  human  wisdom  had  once  more  ex- 
hausted itself  in  vain,  there  was  a  return  to  the 
pure  primitive  spirit  of  Christianity  in  Eckhart, 
Tauler  and  Suso,  proclaiming  the  direct  beholding 
of  all  things  in  God  as  the  source  of  all  enlighten- 
ment and  the  resting  on  his  heart  as  the  sole  and 
highest  wisdom. 

Among  the  philosophic  systems  of  antiquity  there 
were  only  two  that  were  akin  to  the  new  doctrine 
and  *  allowed  themselves  to  be  interpreted  in  its 
spirit :  these  were  the  Platonic  Idealism,  and  the 


76  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

numerical  harmonies  of  the  Pythagoreans.  We  see 
accordingly  Neo-Platonists  and  Neo-Pythagoreans 
rising  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  systems  which  had 
perished  in  the  universal  flood  of  scepticism  and 
erecting  their  new  constructions  upon  the  plan 
and  in  the  spirit  of  the  new  truth  that  is  being 
everywhere  proclaimed.  Enthusiasm,  ecstasy,  subjec- 
tive absorption  in  infinite  depths, — tilings  altogether 
unknown  to  the  old  philosophies, — become  powerful 
Miul  strive  towards  the  ideal  which  the  revolutions 
of  time  have  brought  to  birth  and  before  which  the 
radiance  of  earlier  ideals  is  extinguished  as  stars  in 
the  sunlight,  towards  the  unchangeable,  eternal 
unity,  towards  the  primal  being,  the  pure  Christ, 
whom  it  is  only  possible  to  behold,  to  divine,  to  feel 

immediately,  and  whose  existence  the  dialectic  of  the 
•/  * 

reason  will  in  vain  endeavour  to  deduce  from  the 
fleeting  and  illusory  world  of  phenomena.  The  sen- 
sible and  the  intelligible  world  are  opposed  to  each 
other ;  the  latter  is  alone  true  ;  the  reason  rises  in 
the  world  of  ideas  above  the  changes  of  time  and 
the  differences  of  space.  Everything  has  proceeded 
by  emanation  from  the  eternally  one ;  but  by  sin 
the  souls  have  fallen  into  the  fragmentary  condition 
belonging  to  life  in  the  material  world.  The  soul 
therefore  has  a  longing  to  reunite  itself  to  its  source. 
Schopenhauer  is  certainly  right  in  pointing  out1  the 
traces  of  Oriental,  and  especially  Indian  or  Egyptian 
influences  in  the  dogmas  of  Neo-Platonism  which 
became  associated  with  the  Platonic  doctrine  of 
ideas.  For  the  first  time  in  Western  philosophy,  we 
find  idealism  proper .  in  Plotinos  (Enn.  iii.  7.  10), 
where  he  says,  *  The  only  space  or  place  of  the  world 

1  Parerga,  i.  p.  63. 


MEDIJEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  77 

is  the  soul/  and  '  Time  must  not  be  assumed  to  exist 
outside  the  soul/  The  soul  thus  became  the  creator 
of  all  this  side  of  the  world,  when  it  passed  out  of 
eternity  into  time.  Hence  the  goal  of  all  desire  is  to 
escape  from  this  temporal  birth,  this  metempsychosis, 
by  renunciation  of  the  things  of  sense,  to  take  re- 
fuge in. the  region  where  there  is  no  more  change  or 
transformation,  rising  to  the  pure  world  of  ideas,  and 
thence  to  unite  itself  in  direct  contemplation  with 
God,  the  world-soul,  the  eternally  Perfect  One,  to  be 
lost  in  the  abysses  of  his  being  and  so  elude  the 
bondage  of  imperfect,  ever-restless  individualism. 
On  the  whole,  it  may  be  said  of  Neo-Platonisrn  that 
it  was  completely  dominated  by  the  new  tendency 
of  thought,  the  opposition  of  the  purely  spiritual 
to  everything  material;  a  more  pregnant  sign  of 
which  can  hardly  be  given  than  the  mention  that 
Plotinos  professed  to  be  ashamed  of  having  a  body 
and  would  never  say  from  what  parents  he  was 
descended. 

The  thought  peculiar  to  Hebrew  monotheism, 
*  The  world  is  a  creation  of  the  Spirit/  offered  a 
suitable  channel  into  which  all  the  longing  and 
aspiration  of  the  ages  poured  itself,  thus  determin- 
ing the  whole  mental  development  of  succeeding 
generations. 

Like  the  ancient  materialism,  Christian  mono- 
theism was  now  to  banish  the  daemons  and  magic 
terrors  of  the  natural  world,  which  was  thus  left 
free,  a  region  no  longer  closed  by  fear  or  prejudice 
against  tranquil  investigation  or  aesthetic  contem- 
plation. One  nature  served  the  one  God,  it  was  the 
work  of  his  hands.  *  It  is  a  notable  characteristic/ 
says  A.  v.  Humboldt,  4  of  the  nature  poetry  of  the 
Hebrews  that  by  a  reflection  of  the  national  mono- 


78  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

theism  it  always  embraces  the  whole  universe  in  its 
unity,  the  life  of  earth  as  well  as  the  glittering 
firmament.  It  seldom  dwells  upon  particular  phe- 
nomena, but  rejoices  in  flights  concerning  great 
masses.  One  might  say  that  in  the  iO4th  Psalm 
alone  the  image  of  the  whole  Kosrnos  is  traced  out/ 
A  more  intimate  feeling  for  nature  first  became  pos- 
sible in  Christianity  as  men  allowed  themselves 
to  rejoice  in  the  beauty  of  nature  and  to  imagine 
and  discern  the  providence  and  handiwork  of  the 
Deity  within  it,  until  at  length  when  the  days  are 
fulfilled,  the  time  would  come  when  they  no  more 
needed  to  seek  in  it  for  light  or  knowledge. 

The  latter  was  for  a  long  time  withheld.  The 
Gods  of  nature  had  been  driven  away  from  the  old 
world  by  the  advancing  knowledge  of  nature ;  the 
conflict  between  faith  and  reason  had  resulted,  as  it 
always  does,  in  the  discomfiture  of  faith.  The  heart 
of  man  was  burning  for  a  new  object  of  reverence, 
for  a  new  faith  that  should  lend  true  value  to  this 
fleeting  life  and  bring  it  into  relation  with  the 
Eternal.  It  turned  away  therefore  from  the  cor- 
rupted nature  worship,  and  sought  in  purity  of 
heart,  in  recollection  of  spirit,  in  aspiration  after 
the  Godhead,  for  truth  and  illumination.  From  gene- 
ration to  generation  the  chasm  was  allowed  to  grow 

and  widen  between  mind  and  matter,  and  men  learned 

/ 
thus  to  look  upon  the  whilom  one  and  undivided  as 

two  distinct  Beings  of  different  natures-  The  whole 
of  modern  philosophy  has  been  perplexed  and  tor- 
mented over  the  consequences  of  this  antagonism. 
For  the  Christian  consciousness  the  reconciliation 
was  effected  from  the  first.  Was  it  not  the  Spirit 
which  knows  and  creates  and  produces  all  things  ? 
Poor  Plato,  poor  Aristotle,  say  the  Fathers,  you  were 


MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  79 

forced  laboriously  to  seek  out  the  architect  of  the 
world  behind  the  veil  of  his  works,  whereas  he  reveals 
himself  directly  to  the  soul  of  every  Christian.  For 
a  Christian,  faith  was  knowledge  and  wisdom.  To 
seek  for  knowledge  in  nature  was  to  tread  the  old 
dark  ways,  asking  wisdom  of  devils  instead  of  God. 

As  the  life  of  the  mind  is  hidden  and  can  only  be 
expressed  by  symbols,  i.e.  by  sensible  images  which 
must  be  interpreted  in  another  spirit,  it  is  easy  to 
understand  that  the  first  attempts  at  a  Christian 
philosophy,  which  were  made  by  the  Gnostics,  con- 
sisted of  allegorical  and  phantastical  creations  of 
mystical  ideas  compounded  out  of  oriental  mysticism 
and  adaptations  from  Greek  philosophy.  They  all 
agree  in  one  point,  that  an  invisible,  inconceivable, 
incomprehensible,  immutable,  primaeval  Being  is  the 
cause  and  foundation  of  all  things.  This  primal 
monad  (p.6vas  ayywvrjTos)  has  given  birth  to  all  things. 
He  is  the  Bythos  or  Abyssus  by  whom  the  con- 
substantial  Silence  (<n<y>j)  was  impregnated.  Hence 
proceeded  Knowledge  (1/01/9)  and  Truth,  and  these  four 
compose  the  Pythagorean  rer/x^-m,  the  root  of  all 
things,  etc.  Metaphysical  numbers,  seons,  emana- 
tions, beings  intermediate  between  God  and  the 
world,  but  all  of  a  purely  spiritual  nature,  play  a 
great  part.  And  we  see  clearly  how  a  spiritual 
mythology  might  have  been  developed,  from  the 
unity  of  the  Absolute  Spirit,  at  the  root  of  Chris- 
tianity, which  would  have  differed  radically  from  the 
ancient  one  by  its  allegorical  and  mystical  form  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  objective  and  personal  character 
of  the  former.  Schopenhauer  observes  with  justice1 
that  the  attempt  of  the  Gnostics  to  introduce  middle 

1  Parerga,  i.  65. 


80  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

beings  like  the  Pleroma,  the  ,/Eons,  the  Hyle  or 
Sophia,  between  the  spiritual  first  cause  and  the 
world  was  analogous  to  that  made  afterwards  by 
Descartes  to  attenuate  the  contradictions  which  the 
assumption  of  connection  and  reciprocal  influence 
between  a  material  and  immaterial  substance  carried 
with  it,  ^sucli  as  his  assumption  of  '  animal  spirits, 
nerve-aether/  etc.  Both  disguise  what  they  cannot 
explain. 

The  sound  instinct  of  the  Catholic  Church  rose  in 

resistance  to  this  esoteric  Gnostic  mvsticism.     The 

\i 

Apologists  and  Fathers  of  the  Church  sought  to  pre- 
serve in  its  purity  the  simple  Christian  doctrine,  as 
containing  all  wisdom  in  itself  and  transcending  the 
vain  and  subtle  imaginations  of  the  human  wisdom 
of  ancient  philosophy.  God  is  a  supernatural  being, 
incomprehensible  to  the  reason.  What  we  know  of 
God  we  only  know  from  him,  and  with  this,  which  is 
the  true  Gnosis,  we  should  rest  content.  There  is 
but  one  God  from  whom  all  things  have  proceeded 
and  by  whom  all  were  created.  We  can  under- 
stand how  in  that  age  of  passionate  enthusiasm, 
young  ardour,  and  unbroken  energy,  Tertullian's 
faith  should  have  exclaimed,  in  scorn  of  reason  and 
all  the  wisdom  of  philosophy,  '  Credo  quia  absurdum 
est :  certum  est,  quia  impossibile  est !' 

But  reason  could  not  long  abjure  her  rights,  and 
the  very  fact  that  the  Christian  apologists  were 
obliged  to  represent  the  false  gods  of  antiquity  as 
absurd  and  irreligious,  compelled  them  to  have  re- 
course to  grounds  of  reason  to  make  their  con- 
victions accessible  to  others.  Thus  the  views  of  the 
old  philosophers,  and  especially  of  Plato,  were  re- 
ferred to  to  show  in  how  many  points  they  approached 
to  the  Christian  doctrine.  They  had  striven  by  the 


MEDIEVAL   PHILOSOPHY.  8 1 

light  of  reason  towards  that  which  God  had  made 
known  by  supernatural  revelation  to  Christians. 
They  had  as  it  were  stood  in  the  outer  court  of  the 
temple.  But  everywhere  the  opposition  between 
the  mind  and  body  was  insisted  upon  as  the  most 
important  argument.  Just  as  the  human  mind  is 
one  and  rules  the  body  witli  its  many  members, 
so  there  can  be  but  one  God  to  rule  the  world. 
'Deus  autem  qui  est  seterria  mens  ex  omni  utique 
parte  perfects  consummataeque  virtutis  est ...  Deus 
vero,  si  perfectus  est,  ut  esse  debet,  non  potest  esse 
nisi  unus.5  (Lact.  Tnst.  L  3.) 

It  has  often  been  said,  that  the  great  idea  of 
Descartes  upon  which  modern  philosophy  is  founded, 
is  to  be  met  with  in  St.  Augustine,  who  appeals  to 
the  certainty  of  self-consciousness  in  refutation  of 
scepticism.  '  Tu  qui  vis  te  nosse,  scis  esse  te  ?  Scio. 
Uiide  scis  ?  Nescio.  Moveri  te  scis  ?  Nescio.  Cogi- 
tare  te  scis?  Scio/  (Sol.  ii.  i.)  And  again :  'Onmis 
qui  se  dubitantem  intelligit,  verum  intelligit,  et  de 
hac  re  quam  intelligit  certus  est.  Omnis  igitur  qui 
utrum  sit  veritas  dubitet,  in  se  ipso  habet  verum 
unde  non  dubitet,  nee  ilium  verum  nisi  veritate  verum 
est.  Non  itaque  oportet  eum  de  veritate  dubitare 
qui  potuit  undecumque  dubitare/  (De  Vera  Rel.  73.) 
Doubt  may  prevail  as  to  whether  our  souls  are  fire 
or  air,  but  it  is  impossible  for  men  to  doubt  that 
they  feel,  will,  think  and  judge,  for  doubt  itself  pre- 
supposes all  this.  The  soul  has  no  certain  know- 
ledge except  that  of  itself :  *  Nihil  enim  tarn  novit 
mens  quam  id  quod  sibi  praesto  est,  nee  menti  magis 
quidquam  praesto  est  quam  ipsa  sibi/  (De  Trinit. 
xiv.  7.)  We  can  only  believe  in  the  existence  of 
external  bodies,  and  we  depend  in  the  same  way 
upon  belief  as  to  the  temper,  character,  and  will  of 

VOL.  i.  G 


82  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

other  men.     What  we  know,  we  also  believe ;  belief 
itself  is  a  way  towards  knowledge. 

There  are  certainly  important  and  remarkable 
points  of  agreement  between  these  statements  and 
the  fundamental  principle  and  reasoning  of  Des- 
cartes. It  may  be  said  that  Augustine,  who  so 
emphatically  indicated  the  direct  certitude  of  self- 
consciousness,  and  recognised  it  as  the  foundation 
whence  all  other  certainty  must  be  derived,  is  the 
real  ancestor  of  Christian  philosophy  and  Christian 
Scholasticism,  and  all  that  has  sprung  from  these  roots. 
He  stands  thus  in  opposition  to  the  whole  o^ancient 
philosophy,  in  which  subjectivity  was  synonymous 
with  insecurity  and  deception,  and  which  accordingly 
strove  with  all  its  might  towards  objectivity  or  being. 

But  we  must  not  overlook  the  vast  divergences 
between  the  Augustinian  and  Cartesian  doctrines, 
if  we  are  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  the  course  of 
philosophical  development.  Augustine  uses  his  own 
consciousness  only  as  a  step  from  which  to  raise 
himself  up  to  eternal  truth,  the  certainty  of  God's 
existence.  *  You  doubt  ?'  they  both  begin  ;  '  therefore 
you  think.  Your  thought  and  consciousness  are 
therefore  certain/  But  now  Augustine  continues  : 
As  certainly  as  you  live  and  think,  so  certainly 
God  lives  and  is  a  Single  Being,  a  spirit  like  your- 
self. Descartes  takes  the  reverse  way  and  says  : 
As  certainly  as  God  lives  and  is  eternal  truth, 
so  certainly  is  my  thought  of  an  external  world  not 
delusion. 

The  difference  is  that  mediaeval  philosophy  drew 
from  the  world  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  God ; 
Descartes  deduced  from  the  existence  of  God  the 
certainty  of  the  existence  of  the  world.  This  indeed 
is  certainly  his  weakest  point,  but  we  see  already 


MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  83 

how  with  him  philosophy  which  had  hitherto  be- 
lieved itself  to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  Absolute  In- 
telligence, was  to  become  the  doctrine  of  the  Sub- 
jective Intelligence. 

The  knowledge  of  self  was  first  derived  from  the 
knowledge  of  God.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  im- 
portant and  strongest  point  of  contrast  between  the 
age  of  Christendom  and  the  preceding  ancient  and  sub- 
sequent modern  periods.  In  brief  and  notable  words 
Augustine  expresses  this  thought,  as  at  once  the 
rule  and  the  aim  of  all  spiritual  research  :  'Deum  et 
animam  scire  cupio.  Nihilne  plus  ?  Nihil  omnino.' 
(Soliloq.  i.  7.)  *  Deus  semper  idem,  noverim  me, 
noverim  te.'  (Ib.  ii.  4.)  But  human  reason  must  re- 
cognise a  something  higher  than  itself,  seeing  that  it 
is  changeable,  perishable,  and  subject  to  many  errors. 
This  supreme,  eternal,  unchangeable  truth  is  God,  and 
can  only  be  bestowed  by  him  on  man.  Theology  and 
Theosophy  take  the  place  of  the  ancient  ontology. 
All  the  incomprehensibility  of  the  world  and  our  own 
nature  is  thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  incomprehen- 
sibility of  the  Godhead,  which  embraces  and  includes 
all  that  is,  but  cannot  itself  be  determined  or  con- 
ditioned by  any  name,  number,  space  or  time,  by 
any  knowledge  under  any  attribute.  And  these  ques- 
tions as  to  the  nature  of  the  human  mind — which  by 
its  union  with  the  body  is  confined  within  the  limits 
of  space  and  time,  while  at  the  same  time  it  par- 
ticipates in  the  nature  of  the  unconditioned  eternal 
Deity — assumed  for  the  first  time  a  transcendental 
character.  As  the  one  God  is  present  everywhere 
throughout  the  world,  so  the  one  soul  is  present 
indivisibly  in  every  part  of  the  body.  It  is  there- 
Tore  a  special  spiritual  substance,  which  has  nothing 
in  common  with  the  corporeal  nature.  Questions 

Q  2 


84  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

as  to  the  nature  of  time,  space,  number,  divisibility 
and  the  like,  had  now  become  inevitable ;  their  import- 
ance and  significance  only  revealed  themselves  in  the 
course  of  controversy. 

But  other  contradictions  of  the  highest  importance, 
directly  connected  with  the  fundamental  principle 
of  monotheism  or  the  Absolute  Intelligence,  presented 
themselves  as  well.  As  ancient  objectivism  had  a 
decided  tendency  towards  materialism  as  the  prin- 
ciple of  unity  and  intelligibility,  treating  individualism 
as  the  principle  of  separation  and  incomprehensibility, 
so  Christian  monotheism  leads  conversely  towards  the 
opposite  pole,  and  takes  as  its  standpoint  the  unity 
of  the  mind,  from  which  and  by  which  all  things  are 
created,  governed  and  interpreted,  while  the  foreign 
and  incomprehensible  element  lies  in  the  manifold 
multiplicity,  divisibility,  and  passivity  of  matter. 
The  scholastic  explanation  is  thus  strictly  logical  in 
treating  time  and  space,  in  which  all  things  material 
are  presented,  as  the  real  principle  individuationis. 
Still  more  startling  is  the  contrast  between  the  eternal, 
unchangeable  All  Spirit,  or  God,  and  the  individual 
spirits  which  are  created  and  called  into  being 
by  him  :  although,  in  accordance  with  the  principle 
'  operari  sequitur  esse,'  they  cannot  be  conceived  to 
confront  with  independent  energy  the  abyss  of  Omni- 
potence arid  creative  power  of  the  One.  This  diffi- 
culty becomes  of  the  utmost  importance  because  the 
cardinal  question  of  practical  Christianity  deals  with 
the  responsibility  of  mankind,  which  presupposes 
freedom  and  independent  power.  Antiquity  might 
assert  the  absolute  .determination  of  human  action 
by  conditions l.  Velleius  Paterculus  might  make  the 

1  Thus,  according  to  Aristotle,  Sokrates  said  OVK  i<f?  fjp,w 
ri  mrov&uov?  clvai  fj  <f>av\ovs.  (Eth.  mag.   i.   9.) 


MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  85 

divine  nature  consist  in  its  necessity,  as  when  he 
says  of  Cato  :  '  Homo  virtuti  consimillimus,  et  per 
omnia  geriio  diis  quam  homiriibus  proprior :  qui 
nunquam  recte  fecit,  ut  facere  videretur,  sed  quia 
aliter  facere  non  poterat.'  (ii.  35.)  But  in  a  yet  higher 
degree,  whether  by  his  omnipotence  or  the  irresisti- 
bleness  of  his  working,  the  Christian  God  must  still 
more  inevitably  have  put  an  end  to  all  possibilities 
of  individual  liberty.  The  finest  minds  accordingly 
begin  at  once  to  torment  themselves  over  this  prob- 
lem, how  to  reconcile  the  divine  foreknowledge  with 
the  free  self-determination  of  the  human  agent.  The 
logical  and  candid  ones,  like  Augustine,  Calvin  and 
Luther,  arrive  at  the  impossibility  of  human  freedom. 
While  the  two  first  hold  fast  to  this,  that  a  great  part  of 
the  human  race  'prsedestinati  sunt  in  ooternum  ignem 
ire  cum  diabolo/  the  latter  speaks  without  disguise : 
'Coricessa  praoscientia  et  omnipotentia,  sequitur  na- 
turaliter,  irrefragabili  consequents,  nos  per  nos  ipsos 
non  esse  factos,  nee  vivere,  nee  agere  quid  quam,  sed 
per  illius  omnipotentiam.'  (De  Servo  Arbitrio.)  And 
in  another  place:  c  We  do  not  exist  by  free-will,  but 
of  necessity;  we  ourselves  do  not  act,  but  God  acts 
in  us  in  accordance  with  his  eternal,  infallible,  un- 
alterable wisdom  ;  inevitable  logic  forces  us  to  this 
confession/ 

In  other  words,  Christian  monotheism  has  an  ir- 
resistible tendency  towards  Pantheism  ;  in  both  the 
individual  existence  is  completely  swallowed  in  the 
absolute  mind.  There  is  therefore  no  greater  con- 
trast than  that  between  the  ancient  polytheism  and 
the  pantheism  of  Vanini,  Giordano  Bruno,  and  Spinoza, 
and  only  a  complete  misconception  of  their  nature 
could  lead  to  an  affiliation  or  even  comparison  of  the 
two.  In  the  first  the  individual  will  breaks  through 


86  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

everywhere ;  in  the  latter  it  is  wholly  eliminated. 
The  scientific  knowledge  of  nature,  which  only  be- 
comes possible  by  the  denial  of  the  first,  had  to 
wage  a  bitter  war  against  it  in  antiquity;  the 
latter  was  accepted  and  invoked  in  the  renaissance 
of  natural  science,  as  the  fundamental  principle  of 
the  new  theory  of  the  universe  which  had  become 
necessary.  According  to  antiquity  the  gods  dis- 
played their  power  by  breaking  through  the  laws  of 
causation,  as  when  Jupiter  thunders  and  lightens  from 
a  cloudless  sky :  Pantheism  is  the  definite  expression 
of  a  complete  natural  order,  the  completed  inter- 
penetration  of  mind  and  body,  God  and  the  world. 
The  transition  was  naturally  furnished  by  mono- 
theism, the  belief  in  the  Absolute  Intelligence,  the 
creator  and  ruler  of  the  world,  who  has  ordered  all 
things  well  and  wisely,  whose  thoughts  we  think 
as  we  learn  to  know  the  laws  of  nature,  its  classes 
and  kinds ;  and  whose  power  reveals  itself  there- 
fore not  merely  in  the  mighty  and  terrible  con- 
vulsions of  nature,  —  though  these,  together  with 
the  miraculous  contraventions  of  the  natural  order, 
bear  witness  to  him  too, — but  also  most  profoundly 
and  most  purely  in  the  harmonies  of  things,  in  the 
marvellous  structure  of  every  living  thing,  by  the 
side  of  which  all  human  art  and  skill  seems  the 
coarsest  bungling. 

It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  we  should  be 
encountered  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  Scholastic 
philosophy  by  an  attempt  to  reconcile  Pantheism 
and  Monotheism,  in  the  writings,  namely,  of  Johannes 
Scotus  Erigena,  who .  flourished  in  the  ninth  century, 
and  who  received  his  impulse  from  the  pseudo- 
Dionysius  Areopagita,  whose  works  he  translated 
into  Latin,  so  procuring  for  them  considerable  in- 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  87 

fluence  on  the  philosophy  of  the  West.  In  Diony- 
sius,  who  was  also  a  favourite  authority  with  the 
medieval  mystics,  and  had  himself  been  much  under 
the  influence  of  Neo-Platonism,  attention  was  for  the 
first  time  turned  to  the  formation  of  ideas  and 
logical  forms,  a  subject  the  study  of  which  was 
destined  to  elicit  in  the  future  of  Scholasticism  so 
much  intellectual  acuteness  and  so  much  futile 
wrangling.  According  to  him  there  is  an  affirmative 
theology  (/carat^a-n^)  and  a  negative,  abstract  one 
(cnrfxpaTiKy) :  the  first  descends  from  God  to  created 
things,  which  multiply  and  specialise  as  we  proceed 
(in  which  he  is  approaching  Aristotle) ;  the  latter  pur- 
sues the  opposite  course,  and  by  continuously  think- 
ing away,  attains  to  higher  and  higher  abstractions, 
till  at  last  it  reaches  the  One  which  embraces  all 
things  in  itself,  being  and  not-being  together,  the 
Un-named,  of  which  nothing  may  be  predicated,  the 
highest  knowledge  of  which  consists  in  negations 
and  is  thus  the  ignorance  of  mysticism. 

In  Johannes  Scotus,  who  carried  out  the  ideas  of 
Dionysius  with  closer  logic  and  profounder  genius, 
the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  existence  of  sin  and 
evil  With  the  divine  beneficence  presents  itself  as  a 
source  of  tormenting  doubts,  and  with  infinite  pains 
and  ingenuity  he  seeks  to  lessen  the  difficulty  by 
treating  evil  and  sin  as  properly  nothing : — 'penitus 
incausale  et  insubstantiale !'  The  other  expedient — 
that  God  created  men  free — has  been  shown  by  Scho- 
penhauer in  many  passages l  to  be  a  case  of '  wooden 
iron/  since  liberty  and  createdness  are  essentially 
irreconcilable  notions. 

For  the  rest,  we  find  in  this  remarkable  man's 

1  E.  g.  Parerga,  i.  67. 


88  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

writings  the  germ  of  all  that  Scholasticism  was  sub- 
sequently to  set  forth  at  large,  and  which  was  to  be- 
come the  subject  of  the  most  far-reaching  speculation 
and  the  most  embittered  controversy.  It  is  interest- 
ing to  observe  here  the  first  rise  of  these  questions,  and 
to  see  how  at  that  date  views  were  allowed  expres- 
sion as  harmless  which  the  authority  of  the  Church 
was  to  condemn  and  anathematise  a  little  later.  The 
fact  was  that  in  those  days  of  living  faith  neither 
the  authors  nor  the  Church  had  any  conception  of 
the  danger  of  these  views  and  their  subsequent 
destructive  effect. 

Nothing  could  show  more  plainly  the  naive  cer- 
tainty of  his  belief  that  all  truth  was  given  in  the 
Christian  religion,  than  his  frankly  expressed  con- 
viction that  the  true  religion  was  identical  with  true 
philosophy;  that  accordingly  true  reason  and  au- 
thority could  never  contradict  each  other,  and  that 
whenever  the  authority  of  the  Fathers,  who  had 
themselves  been  guided  by  reason  only,  seemed  to 
conflict  with  the  verdict  of  true  reason,  the  latter  was 
to  be  followed.  *  Auctoritas  ex  vera  ratione  processit, 
ratio  vero  nequaquam  ex  auctoritate.'  The  whole 
world  has  proceeded  from  God ;  his  beholding  is  an 
act,  his  act  a  contemplation ;  God  is  the  substance 
of  all  things.  Man  sums  up  all  preceding  existence, 
spiritual  and  corporeal : — he  is  a  mikrokosm. 

The  conflict  between  ideas  and  things  forms  the  real 
substance  of  the  debates  and  investigations  of  Scholas- 
ticism ;  at  the  same  time  the  Middle  Ages  were  called 
upon  to  serve  as  a  period  of  transition  between 
ancient  and  modern  philosophy,  and  to  prepare  the 
minds  of  men  for  the  momentous  thought,  which  is 
even  yet  hardly  understood,  that  there  is  no  reality 
precisely  corresponding  to  the  notions  of  men,  and 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  89 

that  what  constitutes  our  reality  is  simply  our  own 
mental  representations. 

The  way  could  only  be  prepared  for  this  truth  by 
a  philosophy  which  took  its  start  from  the  absolute 
intelligence.  Aristotle's  doctrine  of  the  Categories 
acquired  the  utmost  importance  in  Scholasticism :  the 
Categories  are  properly  kinds  of  affirmation.  Lange l 
observes  that  instead  of  seeking  for  the  highest 
wisdom  behind  the  Categories,  the  fact  should  have 
been  recognised  '  that  Aristotle  in  establishing  them 
was  endeavouring  to  lay  down  how  many  principal 
ways  there  were  of  saying  about  anything  what  it 
was,  and  that  he  was  misled  by  the  authority  of 
language  into  confusing  kinds  of  propositions  with 
kinds  of  being/  He  then  continues:  'Without  enter- 
ing here  into  the  question  how  far  he  may  have  been 
justified  in  treating  forms  of  thought  and  forms  of 
being  as  parallel,  and  in  assuming  a  more  or  less 
exact  correspondence  between  the  two,  it  must  be 
observed  that  the  confusion  of  objective  and  subjective 
elements  in  our  conception  of  things,  which  became 
in  its  crassest  form  the  very  foundation  of  Scholas- 
ticism, is  among  the  most  characteristic  traits  of 
Aristotelian  thought.  The  confusion  was  not  intro- 
duced into  philosophy  by  him,  on  the  contrary,  he  it 
was  who  legan  to  distinguish  between  what  the 

unscientific   consciousness  wras    always    inclined   to 

•/ 

identify.  But  Aristotle  did  not  get  beyond  the 
very  imperfect  beginnings  of  such  a  distinction ;  and 
exactly  those  elements  in  his  Logic  and  Metaphysics, 
which  in  consequence  of-  this  .were  most  perverse, 
were  seized  upon  by  the  untutored  nations  of  the 
West  as  the  corner-stone  of  wisdom*  just  because  they 

1  Qeschichte  des  Materialismus,  i.  159. 


9O  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

were  most  congenial  to  their  undeveloped  under- 
standings/ 

Truth  and  error  are  most  strangely  intermingled 
in  this  account,  and  the  most  important  problems  and 
achievements  of  philosophy  are  altogether  ignored 
or  treated  as  incidental. 

Aristotle  did  not  distinguish  between  the  objective 
and  subjective  elements  of  knowledge,  because  tins 
distinction  is  the  ripest  fruit  of  modern  philosophy; 
because  the  whole  of  ancient  philosophy  was  essen- 
tially objective ;  and  because  while  the  distinction 
between  sensible  perception  and  thought  (phenomena 
and  noumena)  had  been  established,  that  between 
thought  and  being  was  still  unknown!  On  the 
contrary,  in  the  eyes  of  all  antiquity  the  points  at 
which  thought  was  held  to  aim  was  (and  could  not 
conceivably  have  been  anything  but)  actual  Being 
(TO  oVrw?  Si/).  Logic,  dialectic,  and  the  rest  were  only 
the  sails  and  mill-stones  by  the  help  of  which  the  pure 
flour  of  reality  was  to  be  extracted  unadulterated  from 
the  grain. 

Philosophy  therefore  had  to  pass  through  a  great 
convulsion  before  the  question  of  the  relation  of 
thought  to  being  could  be  stated ;  all  preceding 
problems  had  to  assume  another  aspect,  as  it  were 
turning  their  shadow  side  into  the  light.  This  great 
revolution  was  rendered  possible  by  the  Christian 
philosophy.  Hence  the  interest  and  promise  of  the 
question,  which  provokes  Lange's  shrugs  of  compas- 
sion at  the  outset  of  Scholasticism  :  whether  the  five 
notions l  which  Porphyry  extracted  from  the  logical 
writings  of  Aristotle,  and  his  ten  Categories,  were 
names,  that  is  to  say  forms  of  thought,  or  real 

1  Genus,  differentia,  species,  proprium,  accidens. 


MEDIAEVAL   PHILOSOPHY.  QT 

entities.  The  whole  question  of  the  Universals,  with 
which  the  Middle  Ages  were  to  occupy  themselves 
so  much,  connected  itself  with  this  problem.  Thus 
while  antiquity,  at  its  height,  could  only  discern 
true  copies  of  things  in  the  Platonic  ideas,  it  was 
reserved  for  the  Middle  Ages  to  consider  the  nature 
of  thought  in  itself, — for  the  thoughts  of  God  were 
creative  too, — and  to  formulate  the  problem  'How 
do  we  pass  from  thought  to  being  ? '  After  which 
the  final  question  becomes  possible,  'What  is  the 
relation  of  thought  to  being  V — which  has  been  an- 
swered by  Kant.  Christian  philosophy  is  thus  an 
important  and  indispensable  link  in  the  development 
of  human  thought. 

We  cannot  therefore  agree  with  Lange  in  seeing 
only  a  sign  of 'the  barbarism  of  the  western  nations' 
in  the  disciple  and  follower  of  Alcuin,  Fredegisus,  and 
his  treatise  '  De  Nihilo  et  Tenebris/  when  he  argues 
that  Nothing  cannot  be  a  pure  negation,  but  must 
indicate  something  real,  as  darkness  does,  because 
every  name  means  something,  and  therefore  Nothing 
itself  must  have  some  kind  of  being,  which  is  further 
confirmed  by  the  suggestion  that  Nothing  was  the 
material  out  of  which  God  created  the  world.  We 
shall  rather  see  and  welcome  in  this  the  first  crea- 
tive essays  of  a  healthy  vital  impulse  which  compares 
ideas  and  things,  and  can  therefore  proceed  to  dis- 
tinguish them.  On  this  untrodden  path  then  Erigena 
proceeded  boldly  forward,  explaining  c  darkness/  '  si- 
lence/ and  the  rest  as  conceptions  of  the  thinking 
mind.  Not  less  significant  is  his  contention  that  the 
absentia  of  a  thing  and  the  thing  itself  are  generically 
alike,  as  light  and  darkness,  sound  and  silence. 
Aristotle  had  touched  upon  this  when  he  distin- 
guished the  a7rd<pa<rts  or  logical  negation  from  the 


92  MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

o-repricns  or  real  negation.  Here  the  problem  of  the 
relation  between  thought  .and  being  obtrudes  itself 
already ;  and  this  important  question,  which  here  only 
appears  in  the  form  of  an  aperfu9  will  meet  us  again 
at  the  period  of  its  approaching  solution,  in  the  im- 
portant work  of  Kant,  '  Versuch  den  Begriff  der  ne- 
gativen  Grossen  in  die  Weltweisheit  einzufuhren, 

1763.' 

A  different  hemisphere  from  that  of  ancient  philo- 
sophy has  been  reached  when  we  find  ourselves  sur- 
rounded by  such  questions  as,  '  Nothing  must  be 
something,  because  every  word  must  mean  some- 
thing ;'  or  *  Darkness  and  Silence  are  negative  in 
thought;  there  must  be  some  real  negation  an- 
swering to  them/  We  are  here  at  the  antipodes 
of  the  state  of  mind  which  accepted  as  the  most 
positive  of  certainties  that  there  must  be  some- 
thing in  the  mind,  and  that  no  other  starting-point 
could  lead  towards  the  world  of  things  and  its  re- 
lations. The  new  generation  was  already  accustomed 
to  imagine  the  creative  world-spirit  surrounded  by 
heavenly  beings  of  a  purely  spiritual  nature,  with 
Seraphim  and  Cherubim,  Thrones,  Dominions,  Virtues, 
Powers  and  Principalities,  Angels  arid  Archangels. 
And  as  early  as  Claudianus  Mamertus  (ob.  477)  meta- 
physical enquiries  began  as  to  the  immaterial  nature 
of  the  soul,  to  which  quantity,  in  the  way  of  exten- 
sion, cannot  be  attributed ;  whose  only  magnitude  is 
virtue  and  wisdom,  whose  motion  is  only  in  time 
not  space,  and  so  forth,  in  confutation  of  the  antique 
materialism  of  Tertuliian's  views. 

But  the  most  important  conception  which  me- 
diaeval philosophy  was  to  originate  and  bequeath 
to  modern  times,  was  that  of  the  concept  (con- 
ceptus)  itself;  something  purely  intellectual,  an  object 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  93 

born  of  the  mind  itself,  which  nevertheless  has  mar- 
velloup  unexplained  relations  to  reality,  the  full 
elucidation  of  which  remained  for  a  still  remote 
future.  To  discover  these  relations  began  hence- 
forward to  count  as  the  chief  business  of  philo- 
sophy. All  the  controversies  of  Scholasticism  turn 
upon  the  Universals ;  these  universals  are  repre- 
sented in  modern  philosophy  by  concepts,  or  general 
ideas. 

These  considerations  were  aroused,  as  has  been 
shown,  by  the  doctrines  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  The 
Pantheistic  turn  of  Scotus  Erigena,  for  whom  all 
things  proceed  from  the  Deity  as  the  true  substance, 
and  strive  to  be  reabsorbed  again  in  him,  who  held 
the  highest  abstractions  to  be  the  highest  truths,  who 
understood  by  the  mystical  Nothing  the  supreme 
superessential,  incomprehensible  nature  of  God  him- 
self, whilst  on  the  other  hand  he  makes  God  the  sum 
of  all  beings  and  all  realities — this  Pantheistic  bent 
prevented  the  antagonism  from  becoming  sensible  as 
yet :  it  is  needless  to  add  that  according  to  him  the 
Universals  exist  'before  the  things  (i.e.  in  God)  as 
well  as  in  things. 

The  growing  familiarity  with  the  works  of  Aristotle 
— so  highly  revered  as  an  authority — lent  to  Scholas- 
ticism its  peculiar  character.  The  dialectic  method, 
of  starting  from  ideas  and  thence,  by  continued 
pro  and  contra,  deducing  true  conclusions,  was  the 
favourite.  It  was  congenial  to  an  epoch  which  be- 
lieved knowledge  could  only  be  derived  from  the 
mind,  and  wholly  despised  nature,  reality,  and  ex- 
perience. 

It  is  unquestionable  that  the  discussion  of  the  con- 
tradictions between  Plato  and  Aristotle,  in  the  Chris- 
tian philosophy,  helped  the  latter  to  grasp  its  own 


94  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

problem  with  a  degree  of  unity  and  comprehensive- 
ness which  it  could  not  otherwise  have  attained. 
The  incurable  pluralism  of  Greek  philosophy  was 
really  got  rid  of  by  Christianity.  Instead  of  the 
Aristotelian  substances,  Substance  was  conceived,  its 
attributes  and  accidents  were  investigated,  and  the 
idea  was  actually  so  boldly  generalised  as  to  include 
within  itself  the  worlds  of  matter  and  spirit.  The 
Pluralism  of  the  Platonic  ideas  was  set  aside  when 
for  the  first  time  men  found  themselves  in  a  posi- 
tion to  realise  to  themselves  the  growth  of  ideas 
within  the  human  soul, — a  clue  for  all  future  philo- 
sophy! From  this  point  of  view  a  passage  from  Hen- 
ricus  of  Auxerre  (in  the  Qth  century)  is  of  great 
interest,  as  it  contains  a  kind  of  theory  as  to  the 
origin  of  reason,  and  seems  partly,  though  of  course 
imperfectly,  to  forestall  some  of  the  views  of  Locke 
and  Leibniz  :  '  Sciendum  autem  quia  propria  nomina 
sunt  innumerabilia  ad  quee  cognoscenda  intellectus 
nullus  seu  memoria  sufficit,  haec  ergo  omnia  coartata 
species  comprehendit  et  facit  primum  gradum  qui 
latissimus  est,  scilicet  hominem,  equum,  leonem  et 
species  hujusmodi  omnes  continet;  sed  quia  haec 
rursus  erant  innumerabilia  et  incomprehensibilia, 
alter  factus  est  gradus  angustior  jam,  qui  coristat 
in  genere,  quod  est  animal,  surculus  et  lapis :  iterum 
haec  genera,  in  unum  coacta  nomen,  tertium  fecerunt 
gradum  arctissimum  jam  et  angustissimum,  utpote 
qui  uno  nomine  solum  constet  quod  est  usia  V  This 
is  genuine  Nominalism ;  but  what  a  change  in  the 
standpoint  compared  with  that  of  Aristotle  and  the 
ancients!  The  latter  saw  the  Universal  in  things, 
and  cared  for  nothing  else ;  the  human  soul  had  only 

1  Ueberweg,  Grundriss  der  Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  ii.  p. 
125. 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  95 

a  special  power  of  perceiving  the  Universal ;  but  here 
we  find  Christian  philosophy,  unconcerned  about  the 
nature  of  actual  things, — were  they  not  all  the  work 
of  God  ? — boldly  maintaining  that  the  soul  itself  ori- 
ginates an  orderly  course  of  intuition  and  designation. 
The  Christian  belief  in  an  immortal,  independent, 
divine  soul,  was  also  connected  with  the  avowed  ab- 
solute subjectivity  which  permitted  the  development 
of  extreme  nominalism  and  made  it  possible  to  say : 
'  These  so-called  Universals  or  kinds,  to  which  you 
attribute  true  reality,  are  only  my  own  creations,  or 
in  still  harsher  form,  are  the  sounds  caused  by  my 
own  mouth,  flatus  vocis!  A  passage  quoted  by  Cousin1 
from  the  Commentary  on  Porphyry  attributed  to 
Kabanus  Maurus  is  characteristic  in  this  respect ;  the 
object  of  thought  is  expressly  distinguished  from  the 
actual  things  which  alone  have  real  existence  :  '  Genus 
est  quod  praedicatur.  Res  enim  non  pr&dicatur. 
Quod  hoc  niodo  probaut:  si  res  prsedicatur,  res 
dicitur ;  si  res  dicitur,  res  enuntiatur,  res  profertur; 
sed  res  proferri  non  potest ;  nihil  enim  profertur  nisi 
vox,  neque  enim  aliud  est  prolatio  quam  aeris  plectro 
linguae  percussio/  It  is  true  the  expression  is  crude, 
but  the  thoughtful  reader  will  detect  in  it  the  im- 
plication of  a  great  truth,  which  was  wholly  unknown 
to  the  ancients. 

The  victory  which  the  doctrine  of  the  Eealists — L  e. 
those  who  attributed  true  reality  to  Kinds,  Universals, 
or  (Platonic)  Ideas — gained  by  the  help  of  ecclesias- 
tical authority  on  the  occasion  of  the  public  decision 
of  the  controversy  at  the  Council  of  Soissons  (1092), 
when  the  representative  of  Nominalism  was  compelled 
to  recant,  was  owing  no  doubt  to  a  foreboding  of  the 

1  Ueberweg,  1.  c.  p.  126. 


96  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

relationship  between  Nominalism,  logically  carried 
out,  and  Naturalism  or  Materialism.  The  Church 
felt  that  its  own  strength  lay  in  the  rigid  upholding  of 
the  pure  spiritual  element.  The  Nominalist  doctrine 
had  already  shown  itself  dangerous  to  the  first  and 
highest  doctrine,  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity.  If  only 
single  beings  possess  reality,  tritheism  becomes  un- 
avoidable, and  this  point  excited  universal  notice. 
Every  a.ge  tests  the  truth  of  a  new  doctrine -by  apply- 
ing it  to  that  which  it  has  most  at  heart ;  in  the  ages 
of  faith  this  was  the  Christian  doctrine,  as  in  our  own 
day  we 'ask  whether  the  tendency  of  Darwinism  is 
aristocratic  (as  Haeckel  assures  us),  or  social-demo- 
cratic (as  Virchow  inclines  to  think).  The  arguments 
which  Ansel  in  of  Canterbury  brought  to  bear  against 
nominalism  all  turn  upon  the  impropriety  of  judging 
spiritual  natures  by  the  coarse  standards  of  ordinary 
sense.  He  ridicules  those  dialecticians  who  think 
that  words,  the  flatus  vocis,  exhaust  the  nature  of 
the  univeisal  substances,  who  imagine  that  colour 
must  be  a  body  and  wisdom  a  soul,  who,  wholly 
swayed  by  their  imagination,  can  only  believe  in  the 
existence  of  that  which  is  immediately  before  their 
eyes.  He  calls  them  dialectic  heretics,  pointing  there- 
by to  the  discord  which  was  beginning  to  separate 
reason  and  dogma,  while  earlier  times  had  remained 
unshaken  in  the  belief  that  revelation  was  completely 
in  harmony  with  reason  and  could  be  demonstrated 
by  the  latter.  His  Credo  ut  intelligam  thus  assumes  a 
peculiar  character  :  it  may  be  supplemented  :  I  believe 
things  transcending  my  powers  of  comprehension, 
but  which  show  me.  the  way  by  which  I  may  attain  to 
true  knowledge.  The  existence  of  Universal®  as  pure 
spiritual  entities  is  lighted  up  by  the  mysteries  of 
faith,  for  the  comprehension  of  which  they  are  indeed 


MEDIAEVAL   PHILOSOPHY.  97 

necessary :  '  Qui  enim  nondum  intelligit  quomodo 
plures  homines  in  specie  sint  homo  uiius,  qualiter 
in  ilia  secretissima  natura  comprehendet,  quomodo 
plures  persons,  quarum  singula  quseque  est  per- 
fectus  Deus,  sint  Deus  unus  ?  et  cujus  mens  obscura 
est  ad  discernendurn  inter  equum  suum  et  colorem 
ejus,  qualiter  discernet  inter  unum  Deum  et  plures 
rationes;  denique  qui  non  potest  intelligere  aliud 
esse  hominem  nisi  individuum,  nullatenus  intel- 
liget  hominem  nisi  humanam  personam.'  (De  Fide 
Trin.  c.  2.)  • 

The  very  fact  that  in  the  Middle  Ages  those  whom 
we  now  call  Idealists  were  called  Bealists,  is  signifi- 
cant and  instructive.  It  shows  the  assumption  from 
which  opinion  started.  The  Spiritual  was  taken  for 
granted,  and  from  thence  men  proceeded  towards 
reality,  asking:  Are  these  Beings  conceived  by  the 
mind,  these  Universals,  actual  things  ?  For  Plato 
and  Aristotle  they  were  only  reflections,  e?&/,  ISem,  in 
the  human  soul,  derived  either  from  memory  of  a 
former  state  or  the  direct  contemplation  of  real  beings 
in  the  present.  The  one  view  is  objective,  the  other 
subjective. 

If  the  doctrine  of  Absolute  Intelligence  forms  the 
real  substance  of  mediasval  philosophy,  the  summit 
of  its  unimpaired  existence  was  reached  in  the  well- 
known  cosmological  and  ontological  proof  of  the 
existence  of  a  deity  furnished  by  this  same  Anselm 
of  Canterbury  in  his  Monologium  and  Proslogium  ; 
which,  although  their  weak  points  were  indicated  in 
the  author's  lifetime  by  the  monk  Gaunilo,  yet  stood 
for  centuries,  like  citadels,  commanding  the  whole 
realm  of  philosophy,  until  at  last  the  mine  kindled 
by  Kant  exploded  and  blew  them  into  the  air.  The 
assumption  underlying  this  demonstration  is  that  it 

VOL.  L  H 


98  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

is  possible  to  proceed  by  dialectic  inferences  from 
thought  to  being.  We  think  the  good,  the  lofty,  the 
true,  therefore  these  universals  have  an  existence 
independent  of  things.  But  we  must  then  also  neces- 
sarily think  a  supreme  good,  a  supreme  truth,  a 
supreme  justice,  and  this  is  God,  the  absolute  Being : 
all  individual  existences  are  conditioned,  and  prove 
by  the  very  fact  that  there  must  exist  an  ultimate 
source,  a  causa  prim  a,  with  nothing  superior  to  itself. 
This  Absolute  Intelligence  has  created  the  world,  and 
continues  to  preserve  it  in  existence :  all  things 
existed  first  in  his  thoughts,  before  they  attained 
reality.  In  individuals  nothing  is  just,  good,  or  true, 
except  in  so  far  as  it  participates  in  the  absolute 
Justice,  Goodness,  and  Truth.  This  is  the  cosmolo- 
gical  proof,  which  reasons  from  our  relative  thought 
to  the  Absolute.  The  ontological  proof,  on  the  con- 
trary, derives  its  conclusion  from  the  definition  of 
\he  idea  itself.  It  is  possible  to  think  of  a  Greatest, 
a  Highest,  a  Necessary  Being :  therefore  this  must 
actually  exist.  For  if  it  did  not,  it  would  be  only  in 
intellectu,  it  would  therefore  not  be  really  Greatest, 
Highest, — id  quod  non  cogitari  potest  non  esse.  It  is 
the  same  proof  as  that  which  will  meet  us  again  under 
many  disguises  in  Descartes,  Spinoza,  and  Leibniz, 
whose  dependence  upon  mediaeval  thought  is  shown 
in  nothing  more  clearly  than  in  this.  The  ens  realissi- 
mum,  necessarium,  the  causa  sui,  id  quod  non  cogitari 
potest  nisi  existens,  the  causa  prima,  all  trace  their 
origin  to  the  scholastic  argument  according  to  which 
reality,  like  any  other  predicate,  is  included  in  the 
idea  of  substance,  and  then  by  analytical  judgment 
discovered  to  belong  to  it  of  right.  No  doubt  was 
felt  at  this  period  that  necessary  links  of  connection 
must  lead  from  thought,  mind,  and  idea  to  reality; 


MEDIAEVAL   PHILOSOPHY.  99 

the  impossibility  of  this  was  only  proved  to  the 
world  by  Kant. 

The  first  attempts  at  reconciliation  between  the 
extremes  of  Nominalism  and  Realism  were  made  in 

the  twelfth  century,  bv  Abelard,  so  famous  for  his 

•/  *     •/  > 

eloquence  and  his  ill-fated  love.  11  is  keen  intellect 
was  the  first  to  discern  the  important  distinction  be- 
tween words,  as  mere  sounds,  and  the  conceptual 
content  corresponding  to  them.  Remusat  desciibes 
his  attitude  as  follows J  :  '  Ce  n'est  pas  le  mot,  la 
voix,  mais  le  discours,  sermo,  c'est  &  dire  1'expression 
du  mot  qui  est  attribuable  *t  divers,  et  quoique  les 
discours  soierit  des  mots,  ce  ne  sont  pas  les  mots  mais 
les  discours  (meaning  clearly  the  sense  of  the  words) 
qui  sont  universels*  Quant  aux  choses,  s'il  etait  vrai 
qu'une  chose  put  s'affirmer  de  plusieurs  choses,  une 
seule  et  mcrnc  chose  se  retrouverait  egalemeiit  dans 
plusieurs,  ce  qui  icpugne/  He  had  thus  a  clearer  in- 
sight into  the  nature  of  language  than  any  of  his 
predecessors,  while  he  agreed  with  John  of  Salisbury 
(Metal,  ii.  1 7)  in  thinking,  rem  de  re  prxdicari  rnon- 
strum  esse.  The  essence  of  his  doctrine  is  Concep- 
tualism,  and  it  seems  as  if  the  important  determina- 
tion of  the  meaning  attached  to  conceptus,  notion  or 
idea,  was  also  due  to  him.  It  was  only  in  harmony 
with  the  natural  course  of  things,  and  of  mediaeval 
thought,  that  he  should  first  locate  this  conceptus 
mentis  in  the  Spirit  of  the  Trinity,  where  its  effects 
must  be  creative,  and  so  turn  to  the  universalia  in 
rebus.  If  it  is,  as  we  believe,  one  of  the  most  im- 
portant discoveries  of  modern  philosophy  that  all 
liuman  thought  takes  place  by  means  of  ideas,  that 
these  are  purely  mental  objects,  which  however  have 

1  Aboard,  iL  105  (ap.  Ueberweg,  ii.  152). 
H  2 


IOO  MEDIEVAL   PHILOSOPHY. 

no  other  matter  or  content  than  wha,t  is  derived  from 
the  objective  world  of  sense, — it  will  be  easy  to 
estimate  the  importance  and  the  fruitfulness  of  this 
discovery  of  Abelard's.  In  the  same  way  as  he  dis- 
tinguished the  word  as  sound  from  the  idea,  he 
distinguished  the  latter  also  from  the  things  to  which 
it  refers,  and  gives  it  thus  a  really  intermediate  place 
between  mind  and  ftict,  while  he  also  recognises  in 
words  a  significatio  iritellectualis  and  realis,  and  says 
of  the  definition  'nihil  aliud  est  definitum,  nisi  decla- 
rat'um  secundum  significationem  vocalmlum!  The  pro- 
gress is  undeniable  from  antiquity  which  sought  to 
translate  things  into  ideas,  to  scholasticism  which 
translates  ideas  direct  into  things.  For  the  rest, 
scepticism  was  already  astir  in  Abelard's  mind,  as  is 
shown  by  his  work  '  Sic  et  Non/  in  which  he  brings 
together  all  the  contradictory  propositions  which 
have  emanated  from  authority,  arid  by  the  utterance 
which  is  bold  for  his  age :  '  Dubitando  ad  inquisitio- 
nem  venimus,  inquirendo  veritatem  percipimus/  His 
doctrines  were  condemned  in  two  synods. 

The  great  schoolmen  of  the  next  age,  among  whom 
Albert  of  Bollstadt  (Albertus  Magnus)  and  Thomas 
Aquinas  stand  out  pre-eminent  in  comprehensive 
learning  and  acuteness,  accepted  the  former  versions 
of  the  problem  of  the  Universals,  and  admitted  their 
existence  in  a  threefold  sense,  as  ante  rem  in  the 
mind  of  the  Creator,  as  in  re,  according  to  the  Aristo- 
telian conception,  and  also  as  post  rem  as  ideas  arrived 
at  by  abstraction.  To  Thomas  Aquinas  the  universale 
in  re  is  the  quiddity,  or  substantial  form,  which  is  ab- 
stracted by  the  reason,  and  is  distinguished  from  the 
accidental  forms  or  non-essential  qualities.  For  the 
rest,  the^e  great  thinkers  are  not  unaware  of  the  in- 
compatibility between  reason  and  the  ecclesiastical 


MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY,  101 

dogmas.  Albert  the  Great,  whose  researches  were 
directed  towards  the  hitherto  proscribed  or  despised 
natural  sciences,  passed  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
credo  ut  intelligam  when  he  recognised  that  there 
were  dogmas  inaccessible  to  the  natural  light  of 
reason,  and  therefore  necessarily  objects  of  faith.  He 
distinguished  between  philosophic  and  theological 
truth,  demanding  that  the  former  should  be  con- 
sidered philosophically,  and  professing  in  matters  of 
religion  to  prefer  the  authority  of  Augustine  to  that  of 
Aristotle,  while  in  matters  of  natural  science  Aristotle 
was  to  be  believed  in  preference.  The  antagonism 
appears  still  more  sharply  in  St.  Thomas  of  Aquin, 
who  confesses  most  of  the  dogmas  of  the  Church  to 
be  unattainable  by  natural  reason :  this  can  at  most 
prove  that  they  are  not  contrary  to  reason,  it  can 
never  reach  them  by  its  own  unaided  principles  and 
can  therefore  not  demonstrate  their  truth.  On  that 
very  account  they  are  matter  of  revelation,  and  faith 
becomes  a  merit,  a  virtue,  an  affair  of  will  rather 
than  of  intelligence.  Natural  theology,  as  set  forth 
in  Aristotle,  is,  as  it  were,  only  a  preparation  for 
the  higher  knowledge  of  Christianity,  and  in  the 
same  way  the  light  of  nature  is  a  handmaid  to  faith, 
Here  we  find  demarcations  and  adjustments  where 
a  little  later  irreconcilable  antagonism  will  present 
itself. 

The  contrast  between  the  general  and  the  particular, 
the  one  and  many,  reason  and  sense,  which  lies  at 
the  root  of  all  knowledge,  is  also  at  the  bottom  of 
this  problem  of  the  Universals.  The  ancients  them- 
selves knew  that  there  could  be  no  science  of  par- 
ticulars, nor  therefore  of  affections  of  sense,  and  the 
fact  was  clearly  and  precisely  enuntiated  by  both 
Plato  and  Aristotle.  Each  spoke  only  from  bis  own 


1O2  MEDIEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 


standpoint,  and  under  the  influence  of  the  prevailing 
objectivism.  Plato  attributed  reality  to  ideas  ex- 
ternal to  the  phenomena,  Aristotle  to  forms  within 
the  phenomena.  This  was  the  irreducible  remainder 
of  ancient  philosophy;  what  is  posited  as  real  cannot 
be  reduced  to  other  elements,  it  remains  individual, 
and  pluralism  is  the  result.  The  God  who  orders 
the  world,  the  mover  of  all  things  that  move,  is  a 
mere  expedient. 

It  remains  to  be  seen  what  answer  to  the  question 
regarding  the  individual  was  given  by  the  doctrine  of 
Absolute  Intelligence,  or  Christian  philosophy.  The 
most  logical  reply  would  have  been,  as  has  been  said 
•already,  that  the  individual  should  be  absorbed  in  the 
former,  i.e.  Pantheism.  But  the  profound  ethical 
spirit  of  Christianity  was  opposed  to  this ;  morality 
is  only  possible  with  self-determination,  i.  e.  indivi- 
dualism. The  individual,  or  rather  the  self-subsist- 
ence of  separate  things  by  and  outside  the  general, 
universal  spirit,  is  therefore  what  has  to  be  explained, 
and  of  this  problem  Scholasticism  gives  various 
solutions. 

i.  St.  Thomas,  inspired  by  Aristotle  and  his  com- 
mentator Avicenna,  placed  the  principium  individua- 
tionis  in  matter.  It  is  only  by  this  that  species  turn 
to  individual  beings,  and  assume  material  existence  in 
a  determinate  place  and  time,  hie  et  mine.  Matter  is 
always  undetermined,  and  has  only  a  quantitas  de- 
terminata,  it  is  the  substratum  which  receives  the 
form,  the  V7rora>ei/oi/  or  subject.  There  are,  it  is  true, 
also  immaterial  forms,  formae  separatee,  God,  angels, 
human  souls,  but  everything  perceivable  by  sense  is 
a  form  inseparably  bound  up  with  matter.  These 
views  include  the  antithesis  of  matter  and  mind,  the 
recognition  of  matter  as  the  universal  substance  with 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  IO3 

only  quantitative  differences,  space  and  time  as  tlieir 
essential  conditions,  form  inseparable  from  matter — 
all  rays  of  light  pointing  to  the  path  Descartes  and 
Kant  are  to  follow  in  the  future.  In  Aquinas  too  we 
find  ideas  as  to  the  nature  of  human  knowledge  that 
seem  to  belong  to  a  later  age  than  his.  Human 
knowledge  is  only  possible  by  the  action  of  the  objects 
on  the  knowing  soul :  one  who  is  deprived  of  a  sense, 
like  those  born  blind,  is  without  the  corresponding 
concepts;  the  senses  cannot  grasp  the  nature  of 
things,  but  only  their  external  accidents,  and  yet  the 
human  intellect  requires  the  phantasms  of  them, 
which  it  renders  intelligible  by  its  power  of  abstrac- 
tion. His  criticism  on  the  Platonists  is  as  striking 
as  it  is  profound  and  far-sighted  :  '  Intellect  us  human!, 
qui  est  conjunctus  corporis,  proprium  objectum  est 
quidditas,  sive  natura  in  materia  corporali  existens, 
et  per  hujusmodi  naturas  visibilium  rerum  etiam  in 
invisibilium  rerum  aliqualem  cognitionem  ascend  it, 
de  ratione  autem  hujus  naturae  est  quod  non  est 
absque  materia  corporali.  Si  proprium  objectum 
nostri  intellectus  esset  forma  separata,  vel  si  formse 
rerum  sensibilium  subsisterent  non  in  parti cularibus 
secundum  Platonicos,  non  oporteret,  quod  intellectus 
noster  semper  intelligendo  converteret  ad  phantas- 
inata/  (Sum.  Theol.  i.  qu.  84.) 

2.  In  contradistinction  to  St.  Thomas,  Duns  Scotus 
places  the  essence  of  Individualism  in  form,  rather 
than  matter.  All  beings  except  God  have  a  material, 
and  a  form,  which  is  however  indefinitely  more  ex- 
alted in  the  case  of  spiritual  than  of  corporeal  beings. 
But  from  out  of  this  universal  existence,  the  par- 
ticular existence  of  individual  beings  constitutes  itself 
by  the  accession  of  positive  conditions,  so  that  the 
individual  nature,  the  h&cceitas,  is  superadded  to  the 


IO4  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

universal  nature,  the  quidditas.  We  are  generally 
accustomed  to  regard  these  abstractions  as  the  acme 
of  Scholastical  absurdity.  But  it  should  be  re- 
membered that  this  last  expression  means  no  more 
than  what  Aristotle  had  maintained  against  Plato, 
namely,  that  nothing  really  exists  except  the  in- 
dividual, roSe  n.  Duns  Scotus  has  done  nothing 
but  carry  the  reality  of  Aristotle  into  the  higher 
region  of  ideas,  which  is  surely  an  important  pro- 
gress :  where  else  can  it  belong  ?  When  Kant 
comes  to  explain  the  case  as  to  this  hsecceitas,  will 
he  show  it  to  be  something;  real  ?  The  analysis  of 

CJ  V 

the  idea  as  such  and  its  accurate  investigation  ar$  due 
to  Scholasticism ;  and  without  this  careful  anatomy 
of  mental  processes  modern  philosophy  would  never 
have  become  possible.  Even  Lange  does  not  hesitate 
to  recognise  a  progress  even  in  the  subtleties  of  the 
scholastic  (Byzantine)  logic1:  'Any  one  who  at  the 
present  day  is  still  (!)  inclined  to  identify  grammar 
arid  logic,  would  at  least  derive  some  profit  from  the 
logicians  of  that  century,  for  the  latter  tried  seriously 
to  make  a  logical  analysis  of  the  whole  of  Grammar, 
in  the  course  of  which  they  succeeded  indeed  in 
creating  a  new  language,  the  horrors  of  which  wTerc 
held  to  be  past  exaggeration  by  the  Humanists.  .  .  . 
But  the  fundamental  intention  of  all  this  diligence 
was  perfectly  serious,  and  sooner  or  later  the  whole 
problem  (of  language  and  thought)  will  have  to  be 
reconsidered,  though  it  may  be  with  a  very  different 
bearing  and  purpose/  , 

Duns  Scotus  was  an  acute  but  very  hierarchically- 
minded  man.  He  believed  himself  to  be  serving  the 
authority  of  the  Church  by  restricting  the  rights  of 

1  Geschiclite  des  Materialismus,  i.  p.  177. 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  1 05 

reason  even  more  than  his  predecessors,  and  de- 
claring the  truths  which  had  formerly  been  recog- 
nised as  the  subject  of  natural  theology,  such  as  the 
creation  of  the  world  and  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  to  be  incapable  of  proof.  Knowledge  according 
to  his  view  has  nothing  to  do  with  faith  ;  theology 
has  more  practical  than  theoretical  significance,  the 
will  of  God1  is  the  only  cause  of  the  truths  of  faith ; 
the  duty  of  man  is  to  believe,  i.e.  to  submit  willingly 
to  the  authority  of  the  Church.  The  will  of  man 
is  not  dependent  on  his  knowledge,  but  he  is  able  to 
determine  it  without  rational  grounds :  voluntas  est 
superior  intellects 

The  breach  between  faith  and  knowledge  was  com- 
pleted by  the  Franciscan  William  of  Occam  (d.  1347), 
the  restorer  of  Nominalism.  According  to  him  there 
is  no  truth  of  theology,  not  even  the  existence  of 
God,  that  can  be  proved  by  rational  arguments.  He 
throws  a  new  light  upon  the  enquiry  into  the  nature 
of  Universals  and  of  the  individual.  Tilings  are 
allowed  once  more  to  come  within  the  field  of  vision. 
In  the  golden  age  of  the  Christian  philosophy  the 
Absolute  Intelligence,  God,  is  the  source  of  all  truth, 
the  quint-essence  of  all  reality,  the  only  true  postulate 
needed  for  knowledge,  and  leading  necessarily  there- 
to. Now  however  the  long-despised  and  disregarded 
object  again  rises  on  the  horizon  in  all  its  enigmatic 

1  According  to  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  God  commands  what  is 
good,  because  it  is  good :  according  to  Duns  Scotus,  good  is  good 
because  God  wills  it.  The  domain  of  reason  grows  more  and  more 
restricted.  We  shall  see  how,  in  the  next  period,  its  claims  grew  in 
the  same  matters  in  an  opposite  direction.  According  to  Descartes, 
a  mathematical  proposition  is  true  (an  seterna  veritas)  because  God 
so  wills ;  according  to  Spinoza,  it  is  an  idea  of  God  because  it  is 
in  accordance  with  reason. 


106  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

obscurity,  and  calls  for  a  solution,  which  antiquity  was 
unable  to  give  notwithstanding  its  exclusive  attention 
to"  this  aspect,  and  which  theological  wisdom,  by  re- 
stricting itself  to  the  domain  of  faith,  could  no  longer 
even  attempt.  But  the  return  to  Nominalism  is  by 
no  means  a  simple  resumption  of  the  Aristotelian 
standpoint.  In  the  interval  the  whole  nature  of  the 
question  had  undergone  a  change  corresponding  to 
the  intellectual  work  accomplished,  and  though  the 
aspect  was  the  same  as  from  the  earlier  standpoint, 
the  outlook  was  from  a  higher  elevation  commanding 
a  wider  prospect.  Gradually,  and  perhaps  still  con- 
fusedly and  unconsciously,  the  true  objects  of  the 
mind,  ideas,  had  been  substituted  for  the  Aristotelian 
objects. 

Occam  hits  the  weak  point  of  the  Platonic  doc- 
trine of  ideas,  its  pluralism.  If  we  make  the  Uni- 
versals  into  real  things,  existing  outside  our  thought, 
they  turn  into  single  things,  individuals.  And  it  is 
just  as  impossible  to  attribute  separate  existence  to 
the  Universals  within  the  things,  for  this  would  also 
be  multiplying  them.  It  is  we  ourselves,  our  ab- 
stracting intelligence,  that  so  surveys  the  really  ex- 
isting single  things  that  the  common  element  belong- 
ing to  them  detaches  itself  and  is  conceived  and 
comprehended  by  the  mind,  only  however  as  an  Idea, 
conceptus  mentis  ;  except  in  the  mind,  this  idea  has 
no  existence  save  as  a  word  or  other  conventional 
sign. 

Thus,  according  to  Occam,  the  principle  of  in- 
dividuation  resides  in  the  individual  itself,  which 
exists  independently  and  must  be  accepted  as  a 
preliminary  part  of  the  problem  to  be  solved.  The 
individuals  alone  are  truly  real,  'quselibet  res  ex  eo 
ipso  quod  est,  est  Imc  res/  We  think  and  know 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  IO/ 

by  means  of  universals,  but  it  by  no  means  follows 
that  they  therefore  possess  reality.  The  real  in- 
dividuals are  represented  in  due  order  and  connection 
by  the  corresponding  ideas  :  these  ideas  with  their 
verbal  equivalents  are  called  termini,  and  hence  the 
adherents  of  Occam  were  rightly  called  Terminists,  to 
distinguish  them  from  the  extreme  Nominalists,  who 
saw  in  Universals  mera  nomina  or  arbitrary  signs 1. 
The  change  may  be  hailed  as  the  first  dawning  ray 
of  modern  philosophy,  since  here  for  the  first  time 
the  relation  of  the  subject  to  the  object  is  conceived 
as  the  starting-point  and  fundamental  principle  of 
knowledge.  For  though  the  termini  as  such  exist 
only  in  the  percipient  mind,  they  are  not  arbitrary, 
like  conventional  signs  or.  sounds,  but  they  arise  by 
natural  necessity  out  of  the  intercourse  of  the  mind 
with  things,  i.  e.  as  an  effect  of  the  latter.  Word, 
idea,  and  thing  seem  for  the  first  time  to  be  sharply 
distinguished  and  their  interdependence  shown ;  the 
reason  has  been  forbidden  to  overshoot  herself,  while 
all  that  follows  from  the  distinction  was  reserved  for 
future  philosophy  to  explore.  The  transformation 
of  things  into  concepts,  the  origin  of  concepts,  of 
language  and  similar  problems,  may  henceforward 
be  detected  by  keen  eyes  as  luminous  spots  which 
will  disclose  themselves  after  centuries  as  the  beacons 
towards  which  philosophy  has  been  directing  all  her 
course. 

Abstraction,  the  capacity  the  mind  has  of  forming 
general  ideas,  is  not  an  active  power  of  the  under- 
standing or  the  wrill,  but  it  accomplishes  itself  na- 
turally and  inevitably  as  our  perception  leaves  behind 
it  an  image  in  memory  (habitus  derelictus  ex  primo 

1  See  Prantl,  Gescliiclite  der  Logik  im  Abendlande,  iii.  344  ff. 


108  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

actu  1),  and  thus  the  similar  perceptions  consolidate 
or  melt  in  one.  It  follows  from  this  characteristic  of 
our  knowledge  that  it  is  all  founded  upon  intuition 
or  perception  ;  which  is  of  two  kinds,  external  and 
internal.  This  alone  can  tell  us  that  anything  is  ; 
the  judgment  is  then  completed  by  the  understand- 
ing. Abstract  knowledge  warrants  no  judgment  as 
to  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  a  thing.  The 
senses  give  us  no  certain  knowledge  of  things,  they 
only  acquaint  us  with  certain  signs,  which  have  in- 
dccd  a  certain  relation  to  them — as  smoke  to  fire;  or 
sighs  to  pain.  Just  BO  words  are  vvvQw^  arbitrary, 
conventional  signs  of  ideas,  of  the  conceptus  mentis  ; 
they  are  thus  signs  of  signs,  and  indirectly  of  things. 
Any  one  who  appreciates  the  significance  of  these 
words  will  feel  that  a  new  age  has  begun  since  the 
speculations  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  or  the  words  in 
which  Cicero  summed  up  the  general  theory  of  an- 
tiquity, *  vocabula  sunt  note  rerum  V 

Our  mind  is  most  exposed  to  error  in  the  judg- 
ment respecting  external  things,  suggested  by  the 
external  kind  of  intuition.  The  senses  are  less  to  be 
depended  on  than  the  intuitive  knowledge  of  our 
own  inward  states.  'Intellectus  noster  pro  statu  isto 
non  tantum  cognoscit  sensibilia,  sed  etiam  in  par- 
ticular! et  intuitive  cognoscit  aliqua  intellectibilia 
quso  millo  modo  cadunt  sub  sensu,  cujusmodi  sunt 
intellectiones,  actus  voluntatis,  delectatio,  tristitia 

1  This  expression  is  much  more  just  than  those  current  in  our 
own  Jay,  such  as  '  Zuriickbleiben  von  Hestcn,'  or,  worse  still, c  Nar- 
ben  in  den  Nerven/  and  '  schwingende  Vorstellungen,'  words  without 
any  meaning  in  particular.     Occam  touches  the  two  real  points, 
activity  and  habit — showing  once  more  how  much  we  have  still 
to  learn  from  the  despised  dark  ages  of  medievalism. 

2  Herder,  however,  repeated  this  view  in  the  last  century. 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  ICX) 

et  hujusmodi  quoe  potest  homo  experiri  inesse  sibi, 
quae  tamen  non  svmt  sensibilia  nobis,  nee  sub  aliquo 
sensii  cadunt/  But  it  is  only  the  states,  not  the 
nature  or  essence  of  the  soul  which  is  to  be  known  in 
this  way.  Whether  the  sensations  and  emotions,  the 
acts  of  thought  and  will  proceed  from  an  immaterial 
being- is  uncertain1. 

Granted  that  these  are  only  loose  blocks  rather 
than  a  complete  edifice,  they  are  the  blocks  with 
which  the  greatest  thinkers  of  modern  philosophy, 
Descartes,  Locke,  Hume  and  Kant,  have  constructed 
their  great  erections.  Especially  in  the  two  English 
writers  the  above  argument  will  meet  us  in  almost 
the  same  words.  As  Occam  did  not  shrink  from  the 
ultimate  consequences  of  his  views  and  was  prepared 
to  trace  back  to  principles  which  could  only  be  de- 
rived from  experience,  even  the  syllogistic  thought 
which  was  supposed  to  lead  to  necessary  truth  and 
self-evident  knowledge,  it  may  be  asked  whether 
Locke  and  Hume  are  not  really  restorers  of  his  view, 
according  to  which  experience  was  implicitly  made 
the  sole  source  of  knowledge ;  and  whether  the 
whole  English  philosophy  of  the  present  day,  that 
of  John  Stuart  Mill,  Lewes,  and  the  rest  included, 
is  not  really  standing  at  the  very  same  point  as  the 
Franciscan  monk  of  the  fifteenth  century. 

The  Church  had  thus  renounced  the  attempt  to 
regard  the  truths  of  salvation  as  fitted  for  the  illu- 
mination of  reason,  or  to  seek  proofs  for  them  in 
the  latter.  The  attempt  of  Raymond  ^de  Sabunde, 
which  has  been  immortalised  by  one  X)f  Montaigne's 
most  interesting  essays,  to  prove  the  doctrines  of 
Christianity  by  natural  revelation,  continued  to  stand 

1  TJebenveg,  Grundriss,  ii.  235. 


110  MEDJLE  VAL  PHTLOSOPHY. 

alone.  Religious  faith  drew  back  into  its  original 
starting-place,  the  depths  of  the  human  soul.  Dis- 
gusted with  the  dry  intellectual  refinements  and 
disputes  of  the  Schoolmen,  the  finer  minds  of  the 
age  took  refuge  in  inward  revelations,  the  direct 
intercourse  of  the  soul  with  God,  and  the  holy  calm 
of  mysticism.  The  subject  seeks  with  all  the  powers 
of  the  soul  to  reach  and  mingle  with  the  Absolute 
Intelligence,  to  rest  in  it,  to  know  and  to  behold  the 
supernatural  truth.  The  separation  between  subject 
and  object  had  accomplished  itself  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  age,  arid  modern  philosophy  was  heralded. 
The  aspirations  of  the  whole  preceding  period  con- 
centrated themselves  in  the  souls  of  the  chosen  few. 
In  union  with  the  object,  they  said,  is  true  know- 
ledge only  to  be  found  ;  let  us  become  one  with  God. 
This  longing  finds  its  most  touching  expression  in 
the  exhortation  of  Master  Eckhart,  the  mystib : 
'  Ach  lieber  Mensch,  was  schadet  es  dir,  dass  du 
Gott  vergonnst,  dass  er'in  dir  Gott  sei  V 

To  sum  up  briefly  the  results  of  the  intellectual 
work  accomplished  by  Occidental  humanity  in  the 
Middle  Ages,  we  find : 

1.  By  starting  from  the  Absolute  Intelligence,  the 
chief  cravings  of  the  reason,  after  unity  and  spirit- 
uality, receive  due  satisfaction. 

The  individual  Gods  of  popular  belief,  the  in- 
dividual atoms  of  Demokritos,  the  individual  ideas 
of  Plato,  the  individual  substances  of  Aristotle,  dis- 
appear, and  in  their  place  there  reigns  the  one  God, 
the  one  matter,  the  one  substance. 

2.  Metaphysic,   something   transcending   the   Ob- 
jective,   becomes    possible.     The    material   and   the 
spiritual  are  separated.     The  elements  of  the  former 
are  investigated.    The  way  is  prepared,  for  Descartes' 


MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY.  Ill 

distinction    between    extended    and  thinking    sub- 
stance. 

3.  The  laws  of  the  thinking  mind  are  attentively 
and"  assiduously  observed.  The  place  of  the  objects 
and  Platonic  ideas  is  taken  by  concepts. 

The  special  oriesidedness  of  mediaeval  philosophy 
consisted  in  the  absorption  of  all  individuality  by  the 
Absolute  Intelligence. 

The  crisis  announced  itself  by  the  threatening  re- 
assertion  of  the  objective  world,  as  a  relapse  towards 
the  objectivism  of  antiquity. 

But  the  spiritual  standpoint  was  not  to  be  lost : 
against  the  oppressive  supremacy  of  the  objective 
world,  the  conviction  reared  itself  that  the  true 
point  of  departure  must  be  spiritual ;  but  it  is  not 
the  absolute  but  the  individual  intelligence  that 
Descartes  proclaims  as  the  first  and  only  certainty. 

In  the  Cogito  the  relation  of  subject  and  object  is 
implied  as  the  primary  condition  of  all  knowledge. 
It  is  the  vital  principle  of  modern  philosophy. 

To  investigate  this  relation,  to  lay  down  exactly 
what  belongs  to  the  subject,  what  to  the  object, 
and  how  they  act  upon  each  other,  these  are  the 
problems  for  modern  times.  / 

We  shall  see  grave  oscillations  towards  one  or 
other  extreme,  till  at  last  the  key  to  the  problem  is 
found  by  Kant ;  we  shall  see  the  systems  of  antiquity 
revive  for  a  time  and  then,  one  after  the  other,  pass 
away  for  ever. 

The  true  deliverance  from  error  is  only  reached 
when  the  source  of  the  error  has  been  discovered. 
And  therefore,  in  the  whole  history  of  the  world,  no 
other  intellectual  feat  has  had  the  emancipating 
power  of  that  of  Kant. 

He  will  show  that  there  is  an  element  of  truth 


112  MEDIAEVAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

in  every  system,  but  that  all  are  incomplete ;  lie 
will  show  that  they  have  their  origin  in  the  nature 
of  the  human  reason ;  arid  he  will  lay  bare  the 
nature  of  this  reason  to  its  very  roots,  and  so  put  an 
end  for  ever  to  the  controversies  of  the  schools. 

Thus  the  development  of  modern  philosophy 
stretches  itself  before  us  as  a  clearly  defined  problem 
at  the  outset,  with  a  complete  solution  at  the  close, 
The  Cartesian  Cogito  corresponds  to  the  Kantian 
Dianoiology.  We  have  now  to  trace  the  path  lead- 
ing from  the  one  to  the  other. 


MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

DESCARTES. 

(1596-1650.) 


opa  Kal  vovs  aKovei,  roXXa 
d. — EPICHABMOS. 


DESCAHTES  is  the  Atlas  on  whose  powerful  shoulders 
rests  the  whole  firmament  of  modern  philosophy. 
From  him,  as  from  their  common  root,  proceed  the 
two  most  important  and  most  fruitful  developments 
of  philosophic  thought,  the  idealistic,  which  connects 
Spinoza  and  Leibniz  with  Kant  and  Schopenhauer, 
and  the  mechanico-physical,  which  through  Hobhes, 
Locke,  and  the  French  school  leads  likewise  to  Kant, 
and,  after  being  tested  and  purified  by  him,  has  since 
become  accepted  as  the  only  legitimate  method  of 
all  scientific  observation  and  research. 

No  doubt  even  before  Descartes  Lord  Bacon  must 
be  mentioned  with  due  honour  as  the  reformer  and 
founder  of  a  truly  scientific  method  of  research.  But 
his  methodical  work  is  restricted  to  physical  science. 
Here  he  established  the  inductive  method  as  the 
only  true  one,  which,  beginning  with  facts  and  their 
careful  observation,  should  gradually  proceed  to  rules, 
laws,  and  theorems.  Thus  the  heavy  burden  of  Aristo- 
telian formulas  was  thrown  off,  and  a  new  beginning 
made  for  the  free  observation  and  independent  ap- 
preciation of  facts.  For,  in  spite  of  his  inclination 
to  the  empirical,  Aristotle  started  invariably  from 
cau$&  prim&,  from  principia  et  elementa  rerumy  and 

VOL.  I.  I 


114  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

from  axioms,  while  his  followers,  starting  from  the 
same  ground,  thought  that  they  might  arrive  at 
truth  by  means  of  such  syllogisms  as  Aristotle  had 
taught  in  his  Organum.  In  his  Novum  Organum 
Bacon  traced  and  established  his  method  in  the  very 
opposite  direction,  representing  the  perceptions  of 
the  senses  and  experiment  as  the  real  sources  of 
all  truly  scientific  knowledge,  which  ought  never 
to  follow  preconceived  opinions  or  so-called  idols,  but 
strive  to  become  a  faithful  copy  of  the  real  world. 
*  Science  is  nothing  but  the  image  of  truth,  for  truth 
of  being  and  truth  of  knoiving  are  the  same,  and  do 
not  differ  otherwise  than  as  the  direct  ray  differs 
from  the  reflected  ray/  '  That  alone  will  be  the  true 
philosophy  which  renders  the  voices  of  the  world  as 
faithfully  as  possible,  and  which,  as  it  were,  writes 
down  what  the  world  dictates,  adding  nothing  of  its 
own,  but  only  repeating  and,  so  to  say,  re-echoing/ 
It  is  clear  from  such  passages  that  Bacon  cared  less 
about  a  philosophical  establishment  of  his  method, — 
for,  in  that  case,  he  could  not  have  passed  over  the 
qiiestions  of  the  essence  of  the  mind  and  the  nature 
of  its  knowledge, — than  for  laying  down  certain  rules 
according  to  which  all  scientific  knowledge  should 
proceed.  He  was  therefore  little  quoted  and  dis- 
cussed by  real  philosophers,  while  students  of  natural 
science  often  appealed  to  him  as  the  highest  au- 
thority, he  having,  if  not  opened,  at  all  events  for- 
tified and  secured  the  empirical  method  as  the  true 
method  of  all  scientific  work. 

The  vital  point  of  his  doctrine,  however,  namely, 
that  the  material  .of  all  knowledge  must  be  given  by 
experience,  may  well  claim  philosophical  significance 
also,  for  it  indicates  both  the  legitimate  extent  and 
the  limits  of  empiricism.  That  there  are  grave  diffi- 


DESCARTES.  115 

culties  with  regard  to  the  mere  reflexio,  and  Bacon's 
iterat  et  resonat,  has  to  be  proved  by  real  philosophy, 
which,  in  its  inmost  and  truest  nature,  is  not  merely 
a  doctrine  of  method,  but  Metaphysic.  The  practical 
tendency  of  Bacon  shows  itself  in  his  representation 
of  the  sciences,  both  by  his  giving  advice  as  to  the 
making  of  discoveries,  and  by  his  famous  saying  that . 
'Knowledge  is  Power/ 

Schopenhauer  has  truly  said,  that  what  Bacon  did 
for  physics  was  done  by  Descartes  for  metaphysics, 
namely,  to  begin  at  the  beginning 1. 

To  doubt  everything  became  for  Descartes  as  well 
as  for  Sokrates  and  Kant  the  means  of  discovering 
the  greatest  and-  most  significant  truths.  Doubt  as 
to  the  truth  and  validity  of  existing  explanations  is 
itself  to  be  explained  only  as  the  fermentation  of  a 
new  truth  striving  to  rise  to  the  surface.  Doubt  is  a 
disease  of  privileged  spirits  only,  for  ordinary  mortals 
are  satisfied  with  the  nearest  and  most  trivial  causes, 
such  as,  that  a  man  walks  because  he  has  two  legs. 
If  only  the  power  of  the  intellect  is  sufficient  and 
the  love  of  truth  pure  and  vigorous,  then,  though 
often  after  a  thousand  pains  and  travails,  truth  rises 
to  the  light,  or  rather  becomes  itself  a  light,  illumin- 
ating the  world,  and  changing  the  pale  and  indefinite 
glimmer  of  the  moon  into  the  brightest  splendour  of 
the  sun.  If  this  is  not  so,  if  the  power  of  the  striving 
intellect  fails,  then  a  chasm  remains  open,  philosophy 
succumbs  to  scepticism,  though  always  waiting  and 
watching  for  a  coming  deliverer. 

'I  cannot  understand  how  the  apple  falls  to  the 
ground ' ;  thus  said  Newton.  '  I  cannot  understand 
how  man  can  move  himself;  thus  said  Eobert  Mayer. 

1  Schopenhauer,  Parerga  und  Paralipomena,  i.  72, 
I   2 


116  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

'  I  cannot  understand  how  we  can  assert  any  tiling 
with  certainty5;  thus  said  Descartes. 

And  was  he  not  right  ?  Was  there  not  a  truth 
which  had  lasted  for  many  thousand  years,  which 
had  satisfied  all  requirements,  namely,  testimony  of 
the  senses,  consensus  gentium,  rational  explanation, 
a  truth  that  formed  a  foundation  not  only  of  theo- 
retic speculation,  but  of  all  practical  institutions, 
which  not  long  ago  had  been  completely  wrecked, 
namely,  that  the  sun  and  the  planets  turned  round 
the  earth  ?  Surely,  if  at  any  time,  it  was  then  that 
doubt  in  everything,  even  in  the  most  certain  of 
certainties,  became  justified.  And  yet  there  was 
a  still  voice  that  whispered  that  reason  had  no 
cause  to  despair  of  the  discovery  of  final  truth.  For 
had  she  not  just  achieved  one  of  her  grandest  and 
most  marvellous  triumphs  in  the  establishment  of 
the  Copernican  system  of  the  world  ?  And  did  not 
the  fact  that,  in  spite  of  the  hitherto  universally 
accepted  opposite  view,  men  had  quickly  and  readily 
acknowledged  the  absolute  truth  of  that  new  system, 
confirm  the  conclusion  that  reason  must  possess 
principles  of  certainty  and  criteria  of  truth  which 
have  only  to  be  brought  to  light  from  the  depth 
of  our  inmost  nature  in  order  to  command  universal 
acceptance  ? 

With  the  clearest  insight  into  his  purpose  did 
Descartes  undertake  the  solution  of  this  problem.  He 
wished  to  become  the  Copernicus  of  the  inner  world 
and  to  discover  the  Archimedean  point,  which  by  its 
immovableness  would  allow  the  lever  to  be  brought 
to  bear,  by  means  of  which  everything  else  could  be 
moved.  4 1  might  count  upon  great  things/  he  says, 
'  if  I  could  only  find  something,  be  it  never  so  small, 
which  is  absolutely  certain  and  unassailable/ 


DESCARTES.  1 1  7 

Cogito.  This  was  the  firm  point,  this  the  basis 
on  which  everything  else  had  to  be  built  up.  After 
long  and  energetic  strivings  his  powerful  mind  had 
reached  this  goal,  and  well  it  behoved  him  to  shout 
evprjKa ;  for  he  had  found  the  principle  unknown  to 
the  whole  of  antiquity,  and  which  in  future  should 
become  the  only  starting-point  of  all  philosophy. 
He  had  discovered  the  Ego. 

The  only  immediate  certainty  and  immovable 
truth,  he  thought,  is  our  own  consciousness,  every- 
thing else  being  derivative  and  secondary.  Even  to 
doubt  this  truth  can  only  serve  to  confirm  it. 

The  whole  world  with  all  that  lives  and  moves  in 
it  is  my  representation  only.  What  then  justifies 
me  in  ascribing  to  these  representations,  reality  and 
true  existence?  And  how  does  it  happen  that  besides 
these,  the  only  certain  mental  processes  and  states, 
we  accept  and  believe  in  a  material  world  and  cor* 
poreal  beings,  in  fact  a  world  without  us  ?  SucL 
questions  now  became  possible,  they  could  not  be 
ignored,  and  they  led  of  necessity  to  a  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason. 

In  order  to  appreciate  fully  the  greatness  and 
strength  of  the  position  conquered  or  occupied  by 
Descartes  (alas,  such  is  the  confusion  of  thought  in 
judging  of  this  man,  that  even  Lange  does  not  hesi- 
tate to  speak  slightingly  of  the  notorious  '  Cogito,  ergo 
sum1,')  it  will  be  useful  to  compare  his  doctrine  with 
those  that  preceded  it,  and  especially  his  idealism 
with  that  of  Plato.  We  shall  then  see  the  immense 
progress  that  Descartes  has  made  beyond  Plato,  who, 
it  may  be  objected,  had  likewise  taken  human  reason 
as  the  starting-point  of  his  investigations.  In  reply 
to  this  however  it  may  be  observed  : — 

1  Lange,  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  i.  198. 


Il8  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

1 .  That  Plato,  like  the  other  writers  of  antiquity, 
proceeds  ontologically  and  takes  man  as   a  genus, 
together  with  his  reason  as  a  faculty,  requiring  no 
further  explanation.     In  his  eyes,  this  or  that  man  is 
as  real  as  himself,  and  endowed  with  the  same  facul- 
ties.    Descartes,  on  the  contrary,  proceeds  critically, 
and  concentrates  all  the  rays  of  our  knowledge  tending 
towards  an  outer  world,  till  he  arrives  in  the  end  at 
the  central  point,  the  infinitely  small,  which  he  had 
sought,  and  which  is  the  most  certain  of  all,  and  the 
foundation  of  everything  else,  namely,  his  own  Ego, 
his  self-consciousness,  the  true  subject  of  all  know- 
ledge, before  which  the  whole  outer  world,  with  all 
men   belonging  to    it,  nay,   in   the   end    our   own 
reason,  had  to   produce   their   credentials,  in   order 
to  gain  a  recognition  of  their  existence  and  their 
claims. 

2.  According  to   Plato,  reason  is  the   only  true 
quality  of  the  human  soul,  given  to  it  immediately 
by  the  gods,  and  belonging  to  it  with  her  whole 
apparatus — the  ideas.    The  perceptions  of  the  senses 
are  illusive,  and  through  the  darkness  of  the  organs 
of  sense,  which  are  but  tools  of  sensation,  the  ra- 
tional  soul   sees  the   true   entities,  that  which   is 
universal  and  eternal,  the  ideas.     Descartes,  on  the 
contrary,  though  he  retained -the  word  cogito,  I  think, 
yet  used  it  only  in  this  case  as  a  denominatio  a 
poiiori,  and  wished  it  to  comprehend  all  affections  of 
self-consciousness,  therefore  all  acts  of  the  will,  of 
sensuous  perception,  sensation  and  affection1.   We  can 

1  'Nihil  esse  omnino  in  nostra  potestate  prseter  cogitationes 
nostras,  non  mihi  videtur  figmentum  sed  veritas  a  nemine  neganda; 
saltein  sumendo  vocem  cogitationis  meo  sensu  pro  omnibus  opera- 
tionibus  animse,  ita  ut  non  solum  meditationes  et  volitiones,  sed 
etiam  functiones  videndi  et  audiendi,  determinandi  se  ad  hunc  potius 


DESCARTES.  119 

easily  perceive  the  great  importance  of  this  extension 
of  the  meaning  of  cogito,  through  which  it  is  for  the 
first  time  possible  to  bring  the  mysterious  gift  of 
thinking  in  connection  with  the  lower  functions  of 
the  soul  and  the  perceptions  of  the  senses ;  to  deter- 
mine their  mutual  relations,  and  to  prepare  for  the 
future  a  solution  of  all  the  riddles  attending  the 
nature  and,  it  may  be,  the  origin,  of  thought.  '  My 
self-consciousness  and  all  that  is  contained  in  it,  that 
is  my  true  Ego?  Thus  was  the  great  truth  proclaimed 
which  had  been  discovered  by  Descartes.  With  this 
discovery  the  unity  of  the  spiritual  being  was  re- 
stored, which  had  been  broken  up  by  Aristotle  into  a 
nutritive,  a  sentient,  a  motive,  and  a  thinking  soul. 
It  rouses  our  interest,  nay  even  our  pity,  if  we  see 
what  pains  it  cost  Descartes  to  give  to  his  contem- 
poraries and  friends  a  clear  perception  both  of  the 
truth  and  the  importance  of  his  discovery.  Again 
and  again  he  has  to  repeat  and  to  explain  it,  and  to 
answer  such  silly  objections  as,  why  one  might  not 
as  well  say  respiro  ergo  sum,  ambulo  ergo  sum,  in- 
stead of  cogito  ergo  sum.  It  is  but  another  illustration 
of  the  difficulty  with  which  a  great  and  important 
truth  gains  general  recognition. 

One  of  the  most  fortunate  results  was  the  sharp 
distinction  applied  consistently,  and  everywhere  de- 
terminately  carried  through,  between  self-conscious- 
ness on  one  side  and  the  soulless,  purely  corporeal, 
i.e.  strictly  mechanical  outer  world,  on  the  other.  By 
it  these  two  great  spheres  were  protected  against 
mutual  encroachments:  the  spiritual,  psychological, 
and  logical  questions  were  approached  from  their 
spiritual  side  only,  while  none  but  purely  mechanical 

quam  ad  ilium  motum,  quatenus  ab  ilia  dependent,  sint  cogita- 
tiories/     Cartesii  Epistolse,  ii.  4,  Amstelod.  1682.^ 


120  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

principles  were  applied  to  the  material  world.  Here 
more  than  anywhere  we  see  the  greatness  and 
the  persistent  influence  of  Descartes,  in  his  opposi- 
tion to  ancient  philosophy,  and  still  more  to  that 
weedy  growth,  the  false  definitions  and  quibbles  of 
the  schoolmen,  many  of  whom  in  their  petrified 
dogmatism  knew  little  more  of  Plato  and  Aristotle 
than  their  name. 

Was  it  not  indeed  an  echo  of  Plato's  doctrine 
of  ideas,  this  playing  with  entities  which  repre- 
sented unintelligible  words  and  mere  abstractions  as 
causes  and  explanations  of  the  unintelligible  phe- 
nomena of  the  world,  and  was  satisfied  with  these, 
as  if  the  mind  of  men  required  nothing  more  ?  Was 
it  not  by  the  baneful  influence  of  the  Aristotelian 
dogma,  that  everything  was  imported  into  the  formw 
substantiales,  that  the  concepts  of  substance  and 
accident,  of  the  actual  and  the  potential,  and  all  the 
categories  were  violently  tossed  about,  so  that  in 
this  everlasting  vortex  no  one  could  find  his  way  out 
of  the  mazy  labyrinth  of  his  own  thoughts  ?  Philo- 
sophers were  wandering  round  and  round,  while  they 
imagined  they  were  advancing.  The  real  and  ma- 
terial world  did  not  exist  for  them,  or  was  despised 
by  them  in  the  spiritual  pride  of  their  pompous 
philosophy  and  their  Christian  dogmatism  that 
claimed  everything  for  the  spirit  and  looked  upon 
matter  as  worthless  and  sinful. 

The  sharp  line  of  demarcation,  which  Descartes 
drew  between  consciousness  and  the  material  world 
without,  produced  this  great  advantage,  that  the 
latter  became  completely  unspiritualised  and  ruled 
by  one  principle  only,  namely,  the  mechanical,  that 
of  motion  by  pressure  and  impulse.  For  although 
Aristotle  had  so  defined  matter  as  to  represent  it  in 


DESCARTES.  121 

its  fundamental  nature  as  something  purely  passive, 
as  materia  prima,  nevertheless  the  Greek  thinker 
had  introduced  by  a  back  door  the  entelechies,  the 
potential  powers  or  forms,  and  recognised  in  them 
the  true  essence  of  things,  and  thus  invested  them 
with  substantiality.  It  was  in  this  artificial  forti- 
fication that  Descartes  effected  a  breach,  by  showing 
that  these  very  forms  are  the  unreal,  the  illusive, 
the  purely  phenomenal,  and  that  in  order  to  arrive 
#t  the  true  essence  of  things  the  whole  outer  world 
must  be  conceived  as  one  mechanical  problem,  to  be 
solved  by  mathematics  only  l.  The  different  quali- 
ties must  therefore  in  the  end  be  reducible  to  one, 
in  which  all  depends  on  a  more  or  less,  or  in  other 
words,  on  quantitative  distinctions.  Here  we  per- 
ceive clearly  the  connection  between  Descartes  and 
Locke,  and  the  important  distinction  established  by 
the  latter  between  primary  and  secondary  qualities. 
We  also  perceive  how  the  true"  doctrines  of  Demo- 
kritos  and  the  Pythagoreans  which  were  kept  se- 
parate in  ancient  times, — the  former  upholding  the 
strictly  mechanical  principle,  the  latter  making 
mathematics  the  centre  of  all  knowledge, — were  com- 
bined in  the  mind  of  Descartes,  and  how  the  Aris- 
totelian concept  of  matter  was  thus  enclosed  within 
clear  and  definite  limits,  excluding  all  heterogeneous 
elements.  How  much  new  light  was  thus  thrown 
on  old  problems  may  best  be  seen  by  the  fact  that 
Descartes  admits  no  difference  between  organic  and 
inorganic  beings,  but  perceives  clearly  that,  taken 
simply  as  external  phenomena,  the  whole  material 
world  must  be  conceived  as  a  thoroughly  homo- 
geneous substance,  obeying  mechanical  laws  only,  and 

1  '  Omnis  materise  variatio  sive  omnium  ejus  formarum  diver- 
sitas  pendet  a  motu.'     Cartes.  Princip.  Phil.  ii.  23. 


122  MODEBN   PHILOSOPHY. 

to  be  explained  in  all  its  modifications  by  these  laws. 
How  much  independence  of  thought  was  required  in 
order  to  arrive  at  this  view  and  to  apply  it  con- 
sistently to  an  explanation  of  nature,  we,  who  are 
reaping  the  fruit  of  the  seed  thus  sown  by  Des- 
cartes and  accustomed  to  think  his  thoughts,  can 
hardly  realise.  We  must  transport  ourselves  into  his 
age,  with  its  mystic  and  theosophic  tendencies,  when 
spirits  of  all  kinds,  vital  and  animal,  having  their 
seats  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  sympathies  and 
antipathies,  good  and  evil  demons,  influences  of  the 
stars,  and  similar  fancies  were  running  riot  (all  this 
being  supported  even  by  Bacon  in  submission  to  the 
general  belief),  to  enable  us  to  bow  respectfully  be- 
fore that  strong  mind  which  by  its  own  rays  of  light 
scattered  the  phantoms  of  mysticism,  together  with 
the  whole  rubbish  of  scholastic  formulas,  and  thus 
cleared  the  field  for  the  true  scientific  method  which 
has  since  from  century  to  century  led  to  new  and 
then  unthought  of  triumphs,  and  by  uninterrupted 
and  faithful  labour  collected  both  the  material  and 
the  plans  for  the  gigantic  structure  of  exact  natural 
science. 

We  need  not  wonder  therefore  that  the  strictest, 
materialists,  for  instance  the  French  author  of 
'L'Homme  Machine/  appealed  to  Descartes,  and  pre- 
tended to  be  Cartesians,  because  that  philosopher 
had  been  the  first  to  frame  a  consistent  conception  of 
matter,  and  in  consequence  to  declare  his  conviction 
that  the  life  of  the  plant,  the  body  of  animals 
and  that  of  man,  with  all  its  wonderful  and  delicate 
organs  and  vital  functions,  must  be  solely  and  en- 
tirely explained  as  moved  matter,  that  is,  strictly 
mechanically.  Hence  Descartes  was  one  of  the  first 
to  accept  fully  Harvey's  much  contested  discovery 


DESCARTES.  123 

of  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  Hence  also  we  may 
understand  why  all  great  thinkers  who  advanced  the 
study  of  natural  science  and  rescued  it  from  the 
mazes  in  which  it  had  lost  itself,  drew  their  in- 
spiration from  him.  Even  in  modern  times  what 
was  it  but  a  vigorous  application  of  the  Cartesian 
principle,  when  the  great  discoverer  of  the  mechanical 
equivalent  of  heat,  Eobert  Mayer,  delivered  science 
from  the  old  mystic  Imponderabilia,  in  words  clearly 
reminding  us  of  Descartes,  'there  is  no  immaterial 
matter;'  glorying,  as  he  well  might,  that  in  banishing 
these  Imponderabilia  he  had  banished  the  last  of  the 
Gods  of  Greece  from  the  temple  of  science. 

This  leads  me  back  to  the  grand  continuity  of 
philosophic  thought,  and  I  must  once  more  endeavour 
to  show,  from  this  new  point  of  view,  the  opposition 
and  at  the  same  time  the  development  of  the  views 
of  Plato  and  Aristotle  in  their  relation  to  modern 
truth.  It  is  the  true  object  of  the  history  of  philo- 
sophy to  make  us  see  the  development  of  philosophic 
thought,  and  we  shall  never  be  able  to  understand 
and  appreciate  the  present,  unless  we  fully  and 
clearly  apprehend  the  merits  of  our  own  intellecttial 
ancestors  on  whose  shoulders  we  stand,  arid  on  whose 
thoughts  we  still  feed. 

Plato,  starting  from  a  rational  psychology  and 
looking  into  the  depth  of  the  nature  of  spirit,  per- 
ceived clearly  that  all  which  is  known  by  spirit  can 
only  be  of  a  spiritual  nature.  We  shall  return  to 
this  point  when  treating  of  Descartes,  and  shall  find 
that  it  forms  an  unshaken  conviction  with  all  great 
thinkers,  and  that  they  only  differ  in  the  way  in 
which  they  tried  to  reach  the  material  world,  and  in 
their  endeavours  to  bridge  the  gulf  which  they  had 
made.  Plato  did  not  look  for  that  bridge,  but  pushed 


124  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

forward  the  boundaries  so  far  that  the  whole  ex- 
ternal world  was  included  within  the  spiritual  do- 
main. He  realised  spiritual  objects  only  and  lent  to 
his  ideas  existence  in  reality. 

Descartes  remains  so  far  at  the  same  point  as 
Plato,  that  he  also  recognises  spirit  as  a  substance 
totally  different  from  matter.  But  he  defines  its 
essence  far  more  precisely  by  generalising  spirit  into 
consciousness  and  representing  thought  only  as  a 
special,  though  the  highest  function  of  it.  In  oppo- 
sition to  Plato  the  reality  of  the  ideas  is  completely 
denied.  Descartes  tries  to  show  that  these  ideas 
rather  veil  the  true  nature  of  the  external  world, 
and  keep  our  reason  in  perpetual  self-deception  by 
making  her  believe  that  if  she  has  only  found  a  word 
for  the  explanation  of  phenomena,  these  phenomena 
themselves  have  been  explained.  This  is  the  true 
character  of  the  Cartesian  battle  against  the  empty 
words  of  the  schoolmen,  and  the  true  meaning  of  Ins 
demand  that  the  whole  outer  world  should  be  con- 
ceived as  a  mechanical  problem,  that  is,  as  one  infinite 
natural  force.  Plow  untenable  the  Platonic  ideas 
became  with  such  a  philosophy  was  apparent  as  soon 
as  attention  began  to  be  directed  to  the  origin 
and  formation  of  thoughts  and  their  psychological 
centre,  because  the  subordination  of  special  under 
more  general  concepts  rendered  a  separate  existence 
of  ideas  impossible. 

The  Aristotelian  conception  of  Matter  leads  to  the 
same,  or,  more  accurately,  to  the  opposite  error.  For 
material  substance  is  something  differentiated  and 
self-subsisting,  of  which  Aristotle  himself  required 
that  it  should  be  always  Subject,  and  never  Predicate. 
But  Aristotle  makes  the  conception  of  matter  include 
what  can  properly  only  belong  to  mind,  viz.  the  clas- 


DESCARTES.  125 

sification  of  things  in  ascending  order,  so  that  what 
from  one  point  of  view  is  form,  from  another  again  is 
only  matter ;  as,  for  instance,  hewn  building  stones 
in  themselves  represent  form,  while  in  relation  to  the 
house  to  be  built  with  them  they  are  only  matter. 
Thus  the  conception  of  matter  was  sophisticated  by 
the  intrusion  of  special  and  universal  forms  (i.e.  of 
intellectual  elements)  and  hence  became  incapable  of 
strictly  scientific  treatment.  It  may  be  said  accord- 
ingly that  Plato  turned  the  Predicates,  or  forms  of 
thought,  into  realities,  while  Aristotle  transported 
Predicates  and  mental  concepts  into  the  realms  of 
reality,  whereby  both  became  unfaithful  to  their  own 
principles.  Descartes,  on  the  other  hand,  grnsped 
both  principles  in  their  purity,  renounced  the  ontolo- 
gical  compromises  of  the  Greek  thinkers,  such  as  the 
reality  of  Ideas  and  Forms  (the  scholastic  quiddities 
and  format  substantiates,  and  Essences  or  qualitates 
occults),  and  contrasted  instead  the  two  Substances 
the  substantia  cogitans  and  the  substantial  extensa.  He 
placed  the  two  worlds  of  mind  and  matter  in  direct 
opposition,  in  the  full  conviction  that  each  must  be 
studied  in  itself,  according  to  its  own  special  laws  and 
nature,  and  that  it  only  remains  to  discover  in  what 
way  these  act  one  upon  the  other,  as  our  conscious- 
ness itself  assures  us  that  they  do.  In  other  words, 
Descartes  professed  an  explicit  Dualism,  having  dis- 
cerned that  the  efforts  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  to  break 
down  the  barriers  between  the  two  regions  had  only 
ended  in  over-clouding  them. 

Before  enquiring  how  Descartes  proceeded  to  bring 
these  two  distinct  and  yet  parallel  and  inseparable 
worlds  into  such  a  relation  of  connection  and  inter- 
action as  should  be  comprehensible  to  the  most  com- 
monplace experience,  we  must  first  notice  the  attitude 


126  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

of  this  great  thinker  towards  the  a.ge  which  gave 
him  birth,  and  the  connection  between  his  ideas  and 
the  tide  of  contemporary  thought.  For  as  soil  and 
atmospheric  conditions  determine  the  life  of  plants, 
so,  at  least  in  part,  the  general  conditions  of  the  time 
determine  the  range  and  purport  of  the  greatest 
thinker's  achievements. 

The  mighty  synthesis  completed  in  Descartes' 
mind,  uniting  mathematical  thought  with  the  ex- 
ternal sensible  world  in  the  one  idea  of  matter,  was 
rendered  possible  by  the  revival  of  the  natural 
sciences,  and  especially  by  the  discoveries  of  his 
great  contemporary  Galileo,  who  opened  to  enquiring 
minds  the  prospect  of  penetrating,  by  the  help  of  his 
mathematical  constructions,  into  the  remotest  depths 
of  the  universe,  and  explaining  the  laws  of  its  pheno- 
mena. Consciously,  or  otherwise,  all  study  of  the 
universe  is  grounded  upon  one  or  other  of  two  fun- 
damental views,  the  astronomical  or  that  of  celestial 
phenomena,  and  the  religious  or  that  of  the  spiritual 
world.  Both  are  intimately  concerned  in  the  first 
beginnings  of  the  intellectual  life,  the  latter  however 
predominating,  so  that  the  stars  appear  as  higher 
powers  ruling  the  life  of  men,  as  in  fact  they  did  at 
that  period  in  the  history  of  humanity.  In  propor- 
tion as  the  two  realms  become  separated,  one  assumes 
the  marks  of  the  strictest  necessity,  and  the  other  of 
free  consciousness  determining  all  action.  The  course 
of  the  stars,  unchangeable  from  age  to  age,  the  great 
world-time-piece  which  pursues  its  even  course,  un- 
alterable by  an  outer  will,  and  wholly  inaccessible  to 
the  action  of  any  human  influence — all  these  are 
sources  whence  eternal  nourishment  is  drawn,  as  by 
direct  perception,  for  the  concepts  first  of  necessity, 
of  fate,  and  later,  with  fuller  knowledge  of  enforced 


DESCARTES.  127 

movements, — of  a  vast  mechanism.  Although  all 
motion  becomes  intelligible  to  us  at  first  by  the  light 
of  our  own  movements  (as  the  idea  of  Force,  the 
highest  and  most  general  in  physics,  undoubtedly 
proceeds  from  the  effort  made  by  our  own  bodies  in 
order  to  move  any  object,  so  that  even  at  the  present 
day  we  fail  to  find  any  apter  or  more  expressive 
phrase  to  denote  the  effect  of  force  than  the  genuine 
human  word  work),  yet  those  vast  astronomical  phe- 
nomena supply  a  fixed  and  permanent  ground  of  in- 
terpretation for  the  daily  manifold  motions  of  which 
it  is  not  always  easy  to  recognise  the  permanence 
among  the  variations  of  sensible  appearance.  As  cer- 
tainly as  the  starry  firmament  preaches  to  the  re- 
ligious consciousness  'Credo  in  unum  Deum,'  so  surely 
for  the  astronomical  consciousness  its  utterance  is 
c  Credo  in  unum  motum! 

This  peculiarity  of  astronomy  as  a  preliminary  and 
fundamental  science,  by  which  mathematical  know- 
ledge is  at  the  same  time  tested  and  acquired,  also 
explains  why  this  most  difficult  science  is  yet  the 
first  to  be  vigorously  developed  among  all  races  and 
peoples.  Astronomy  alone  could  supply  the  material 
necessary  for  the  determination  and  measurement  of 
time ;  men  looked  to  it  for  number,  and  learnt  from 
it  to  count — the  first  step  in  calculation.  The  insight 
of  the  Pythagoreans  into  the  great  significance  of 
number  is  connected  with  their  advanced  astrono- 
mical acquirements. 

Astronomical  science  is  thus  distinguished  from  all 
other,  physical  sciences  by  the  fact  that  in  it  alone 
motion  can  be  dealt  with  in  its  purity,  that  is  to  say, 
in  the  simple  forms  of  mathematics,  apart  from  the 
further  circumstance  that  it  admits  of  tranquil  con- 
templation, because  its  objects  are  external  to  the 


128  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY 

sphere  of  the  will  and  affections,  and  thus  final  causes 
do  not  suggest  themselves,  unless  artificially.  We 
can  therefore  scarcely  be  mistaken  in  seeking  the 
stimulus,  to  which  we  owe  Descartes5  great  philoso- 
phical synthesis,  in  the  previous  important  revolution 
effected  in  astronomical  ideas  by  the  Copernican 
system  (all  open  recognition  of  which  however  was 
obliterated  by  Descartes  to  avoid  a  conflict  with  the 
clergy),  and  more  especially  in  the  giant  strides  which 
the  science  had  made  through  the  genius  of  Galileo. 

Wo  shall  see  hereafter  how,  in  precisely  the  same 
way,  the  Newtonian  theory  acted  upon  the  philoso- 
phical consciousness  of  the  succeeding  generation,  and 
what  grave  significance  it  possessed  for  the  intellectual 
development  of  Kant.  And  it  was  also  destined  to 
elucidate  and  complete  the  conception,  which  Des- 
cartes, under  the  influence  of  Aristotle's  definition, 
had  left  imperfect,  namely,  that  of  the  relation  be- 
tween motion  and  matter. 

We  must  not,  however,  omit  to  note  the  im- 
portant influence  exercised  by  the  religious  theory 
upon  the  birth  of  Cartesian  Dualism,  and  derivatively, 
upon  the  luminous  and  fruitful  separation  effected 
between  the  world  of  pure  mechanical  matter  and 
the  spiritual  world.  The  thousand  years'  supremacy 
of  Christianity  had  effected  something  in  the  highest 
degree  favourable  to  this  separation  :  it  had  effected 
a  revolution  in  the  common  consciousness  the  like  of 
which  was  only  possible  to  the  most  enlightened 
minds.  Nature  was  robbed  at  once  of  life  and  of 
divinity,  and  so  became  for  the  first  time  a  possible 
object  of  cold,  sternly  mechanical  investigation.  The 
fundamental  idea  of  Christianity,  a  Creator  whose 
work  the  whole  world  is,  at  once  annihilates  the 
countless  apparitions  of  deities,  living  and  revealing 


DESCARTES.  1 2Q 

themselves  in  nature ;  it  banished  the  play  of  per- 
sonal self-will  and  prepared  the  way  for  the  concep- 
tion of  a  natural  order,  moving  according  to  the  laws 
ordained  from  eternity  by  an  eternal  will.  And  in 
this  the  Christian  theory  agreed  with  the  highest 
conceptions  of  Greek  philosophy.  The  heathen  gods 
took  refuge,  to  prolong  their  days,  in  the  popular 
belierf  in  demons  and  magic,  and  so  continued,  for 
years  to  come,  to  haunt  the  writers  on  natural  philo- 
sophy. It  may  therefore  fairly  be  assumed  that 
Descartes  believed  himself  to  be  strictly  within  the 
lines  of  Christian  dogma,  and  indeed  to  be  supporting 
by  philosophical  arguments  a  dualism  which  lay  at 
the  very  heart  of  Christianity.  This  appears  clearly 
from  the  second  part  of  the  title  of  his  '  Meditationes 
de  prima  philosophia,  in  quibus  Dei  existentia  et 
animte  a  corpore  distinctio  demonstratur/  But  the 
Jesuits  had  a  keen  scent  and  detected  both  the 
dangerous  truth  and  future  consequences  of  the 
arguments.  They  put  his  books  upon  the  Index 
after  they  had  long  embittered  the  author  s  life,  and 
finally  drove  him  into  many  inconsistencies  and  com- 
promises unworthy  of  his  better  judgment  and  con- 
victions. 

The  definition  of  the  two  substances  in  its  grand 
simplicity,  and  their  final  combination  in  a  higher 
unity,  are  thus  seen  to  be  related  to  the  twin  intellec- 
tual tendencies  above  described.  This  highest  unity, 
which  brings  about  the  junction  and  interaction  of 
the  two  substances,— so  that  the  special,  mechanical 
motion  of  our  sense-organs  produces  the  idea  of  an 
external  object  in  the  soul's  consciousness,  while  con- 
versely an  act  of  will  by  the  soul  is  able  to  move  the 
body  consciously  in  a  determined  way, — this  highest 
unity  is  God.  The  miracle  is  worked  by  divine 

VOL.  I.  K 


130  MODEEN  PHILOSOPHY. 

power,  for  without  a  constant,  continuous  miracle, 
renewed  at  every  moment,  this  co-operation  and 
reciprocal  influence  of  two  radically  diverse  sub- 
stances is  wholly  inconceivable. 

And  here  the  question  arises,  whether  by  the  in- 
troduction of  this  idea  the  chain  of  exact  knowledge 
on  which  Descartes  insists  is  broken  and  his  certainty 
thereby  reduced  to  an  illusion,  whether,  after  having 
at  last,  with  much  labour,  discovered  the  first  link  of 
the  chain  in  the  immediate  facts  of  consciousness,  he 
has  forthwith  unaccountably  introduced  a  foreign 
element,  a  mere  hypothesis,  the  creature  of  his  own 
imagination  ?  Or  was  there  some  necessary  connec- 
tion to  be  found  leading  from  the  immediate  certainty 
of  the  individual  consciousness  to  the  assumption  of 
a  supreme  Being,  whose  existence  again  might  serve 
to  explain  what  was  otherwise  inexplicable  ?  We 
owe  it  to  an  intellect  like  that  of  Descartes  not  to 
decide  lightly  that  his  God  is  only  brought  in  as  a 
deus  ex  machina  or  by  way  of  concession  to  the  re- 
ligious feeling  of  his  contemporaries,  or  even  because 
he  himself  was  still  entangled  in  the  network  of  theo- 
logical dogma; — as  a  compatriot  has  said  of  him,  II 
commence  par  douter  de  tout  etfinitpar  tout  croire.  We 
are  at  least  bound  first  to  enquire  seriously  whether 
his  assumption  really  rested  on  substantial  grounds, 
and  whether  we  should  not  see  in  it  the  result  of 
rational  irresistible  conviction  rather  than  a  mere  ex- 
pedient ;  in  which  case  it  would  have  to  be  acknow- 
ledged as  a  natural  phase  in  the  development  of 
subsequent  forms  of  philosophic  thought. 

In  his  argument  in  support  of  the  existence  of  God 
(Meditationes  de  Prima  Philosophia,  iii)  Descartes 
starts  from  the  conception  of  Substance,  and  lays 
down  that  the  ideas  in  our  minds  may  have  more  or 


DESCARTES,  131 

less  reality,  so  that,  e,  g.  ideas  for  which  substances 
supply  the  material  are  obviously  more  real  and 
perfect  than  ideas  which  refer  only  to  qualities  or 
modes  of  substance.  Now  the  greatest  possible  reality 
of  which  an  idea  admits  belongs  to  the  idea  of  an 
infinite,  eternal,  immutable,  omniscient  God.  But 
the  effect  cannot  possibly  possess  more  reality  than 
the  cause:  and  in  so  far  as  the  reality  of  an  idea 
transcends  that  of  my  own  nature,  its  cause  cannot 
lie  in  the  latter,  but  in  something  external,  that  is  to 
say  in  the  being  itself.  It  is  true  these  are  to  some 
extent  argutise  scholastics,  which  remind  us  of  the 
ontological  demonstration  of  St.  Anselm,  and  contain 
the  fallacy  of  arguing  from  conceptual  to  real  exist- 
ence :  indeed  the  argument  ends  in  a  vicious  circle, 
for  the  objective  reality  of  external  things  is  subse- 
quently demonstrated  from  the  existence  of  God, 
while  here  the  existence  of  God  is  proved  from  our 
idea  of  him  as  the  most  perfect  being.  He  then  con- 
tinues: 'Even  though  the  idea  of  a  substance  is  in 
my  mind,  because  I  am  a  substance  myself,  this 
would  not  give  me  the  idea  of  an  infinite  substance, 
because  I  myself  am  finite,  and  this  idea  must  there- 
fore be  derived  from  some  other  substance  that  is 
actually  infinite.  Neither  can  I  believe  that  the 
Infinite  is  conceived,  not  as  a  true  idea,  but  as  the 
mere  negation  of  limit,  as  we  conceive  rest  and  dark- 
ness to  be  the  negation  of  motion  and  light.  On  the 
contrary,  I  declare  openly  that  an  infinite  substance 
possesses  more  reality  than  a  finite  one,  and  therefore 
the  idea  of  the  infinite  in  a  certain  sense  must  pre- 
cede that  of  the  finite,  or  in  other  words,  the  idea  of 
God  is  antecedent  in  me  to  the  idea  of  myself/ 

In  this  sentence,  the  central  point  of  the  argument, 
truth  and  error  are  intermingled ;  its  weakness  arises 

K  2 


132  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

from  the  still  prevailing  idea  of  substance  with  its 
consequent   hypostasis    of  the    Deity.     All   serious 
thinkers  however  will  agree  that  the  idea  of  Infinity 
is  not  negative,  that  it  cannot  possibly  be  derived 
from  any  finite  being,  not  even  by  the  action  of  sense 
and  reason,  which  are  in  their  nature  conditioned,  and 
that  accordingly  the  source  of  the  conception  must  lie 
without  and  beyond  the  limits  of  rational  knowledge. 
It  is  in  harmony  with  this  that  Max  Miiller,  in  his 
important  book  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Re- 
ligion, takes  this  conception  as. the  starting-point  of 
his  explanation,  and  shows  how  religion  arose  with 
the  pressure  of  the  Infinite  upon  the  finite  subject,  and 
how  all  religious  systems  are  but  progressive  phases 
of  the  endeavour  to  give  a  rational  expression,  a  sen- 
sible and  intelligible  garb  to  what  is  super-sensible, 
transcendental,  and  irrational  in  that  consciousness  of 
the  Infinite  which  every  sensible  perception  forces  on 
us.     And  to  this  writer  we  are  indebted  for  the  first 
clear  and  sufficient  light  cast  on  this  obscure  and  dif- 
ficult matter.   This  is  the  point  at  which  metaphysics, 
or  the  doctrine  of  the  inconceivable,  comes  in  con- 
tact with  religion,  or  rather  begins  to  find  there  its 
own  expression,  thus  justifying  Schopenhauer's  dictum 
that  all  religions  alike  only  seek  to  satisfy  men's  own 
metaphysical  cravings. 

Let  us  assume  then — and  the  succeeding  passage 
proves  that  we  are  led  by  our  own  existence,  through 
the  idea  of  causation  and  a  regressus  in  infinitum 
through  infinite  time  to  a  causa  prima,  or  God — let 
us  assume,  I  say,  that  the  idea  of  substance,  as  to 
which  Descartes  .certainly  had  no  doubts,  became  in 
this  way  associated  in  his  mind  with  the  absence  of 
limit  in  time  and  space  (though  to  conceive  the  latter 
transcends  our  powers) ;  still  we  may  perhaps  feel  some 


DESCARTES.  133 

surprise  when  we  find  Cartesian  scepticism  casting 
anchor  at  last  upon  the  thought  of  a  still  unknown 
God  as  the  firm  substratum  of  all  other  existence. 
As  soon  as  the  idea  of  substance  is  reached,  there  is 
no  escape  from  the  logical  consequence  of  a  substance 
without  end  in  space  or  time.  We  shall  meet  this 
again  in  Spinoza's  siibstantia  infinita  seterna,  qu&  per 
se  est  et  per  se  concipitur.  We  shall  find  also  that, 
until  just  before  the  composition  of  the  Critik,  Kant 
himself  had  no  other  explanation  to  offer  of  the  re- 
lation between  individuals  and  the  universal  course 
of  things  than  the  omnipr&sentia  and  wtemitas  rerum 
in  the  Godhead.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that 
Descartes'  substance  should  still  bear  all  the  features 
of  the  Christian  Divinity — wisdom,  goodness,  justice, 
and  truth.  Old  fetters  are  not  to  be  broken  in  a 
moment,  and  as  the  germ  passes  through  slow  and 
strange  transformations  before  the  blossom  opens,  so 
philosophical  thought  passes  slowly  and  painfully 
through  its  stages  of  growing  clearness  towards  the 
fullest  truth. 

It  is  then  by  divine  power  that  the  co-operation 
of  external  or  bodily  substance  with  spiritual  con- 
sciousness is  effected.  Arid  thus  the  reality  of  the 
external  world,  or  its  agreement  with  the  inner 
world  of  thought,  is  proved  by  the  divine  truthfulness, 
which  would  not  suffer  us  to  be  perpetually  deluded 
by  false  and  deceptive  appearances. 

We  may  see  in  this  only  a  desperate  expedient 
for  solving  or  evading  the  final  difficulty  of  the 
system ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  must  be  confessed 
that  the  difficulty  is  one  with  which  all  later  gener- 
ations have  had  to  wrestle,  without  their  labours 
having  hitherto  led  to  any  satisfactory  issue.  At 
the  present  day  it  is  admitted  by  the  ablest  of  our 


134  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

men  of  science  to  be  impossible  by  any  means  at  our 
command  to  span  the  gulf  which  ever  separates  the 
world  of  consciousness,  of  mind,  of  unity,  and  free 
self-determination  from  the  world  of  mechanical  ne- 
cessity, of  subdivision,  of  external  inter-action,  and 
the  strictest  causal  sequence.  The  whole  apparatus 
of  the  most  advanced  natural  science  fails  altogether 
to  explain  the  simplest  and  commonest  sense-per- 
ception, fails,  that  is  to  say,  in  deriving  it  from  the 
mechanical  principles  of  matter  in  motion.  No  arts 
avail  us  here :  we  may  take  refuge  in  the  imagination 
of  such  intermediate  entities  between  matter  and  spirit 
as  'vital  spirits/  'nervous  fluid/  ' nerve-aether/  and 

the  like,  we  mav  attenuate  and  dilute  matter  itself 
7  i/ 

until  it  eludes  the  senses  and  becomes  a  mere  shadow 
or  thing  of  the  mind,  but  matter  continues  matter, 
and  remains  for  evermore  unable  to  create  from  itself 
the  opposite  principle  of  consciousness.  This  is  as 
impossible  as  it  would  be  for  mind  or  consciousness 
to  produce  the  smallest  possible  effect  on  matter, 
for  however  infinitesimal ly  small  its  range,  as  soon 
as  a  place  in  space  is  assigned  to  it  and  the  power  of 
acting  upon  matter,  we  are  forthwith  dealing  with 
matter,  no  longer  with  feeling  or  mind.  As  long  as 
we  are  compelled  by  the  constitution  of  our  minds 
to  conceive  matter  and  mind  as  independent,  self- 
existent  beings,  i.  e.  as  substances,  there  can  be  no 
bridge  to  connect  them,  and  it  is  only  possible  to 
resolve  the  two  principles  into  one,  by  sacrificing 
what  is  essential  to  the  one  or  the  other. 

It  may  thus  be  said,  on  the  one  hand,  as  by  the 
materialists,  We  seem  to  feel,  to  think,  to  will,  we 
seem  to  exist  as  individuals,  but  in  truth  there  is 
nothing  anywhere  except  the  motion  of  minute, 
inter-acting  atoms,  following  strict  and  unvarying 


DESCARTES.  135 

laws :  or,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  said,  as  by 
Bishop  Berkeley  and  the  idealists,  that  the  whole 
seemingly  real  outer  world  can  be  nothing  but  an 
image  proceeding  from  the  mind,  from  the  intellectual 
substance  itself,  which  cannot  possibly  be  generated 
by  anything  so  radically  different  from  itself  as 
matter.  The  whole  outer  world  is  appearance. 

The  only  other  way  across  the  gulf  is  by  a  salto 
mortale,  like  that  accomplished  by  Descartes,  in  the 
assumption  of  divine  intervention  and  a  constant 
continuous  miracle.  It  was  exactly  the  severity  of  his 
logic  and  the  keenness  of  his  insight,  far  in  advance 
of  his  contemporaries,  which  made  him  discern  one 
matter,  one  force,  one  single  mechanism  in  the  whole 
of  nature,  with  its  infinite  variety  and  endless  Pro- 
tean metamorphoses,  in  which  the  same  objects 
assume  a  thousand  forms,  and  appear,  now  freely 
varying,  now  subject  to  law;  and  thus  after  sound- 
ing the  depths  of  the  insoluble  problem  he  was 
forced  into  the  acceptance  of  a  transcendental  com- 
promise. 

Before  proceeding  to  those  points  in  regard  to  which 
Descartes'  inconsistencies  and  one-sided  dogmatism 
required  correction  by  his  successors,  we  may  shortly 
enumerate  those  contributions  to  the  sum  of  knowledge 
which  have  entitled  him  to  the  name  of  a  restorer  of 
philosophy  and  a  precursor  of  the  Kantian  doctrine. 

i.  As  already  observed,  the  greatest  achievement 
of  Descartes  was  to  have  started  from  the  study  of 
the  knowing  subject  without  preliminary  assumptions. 
For  it  is  here  alone,  from  what  is  directly  known 
and  given,  that  light  can  be  cast  either  upon  the 
degree  of  certainty  or  the  legitimacy  of  everything 
else.  The  problem  which  has  occupied  all  philoso- 
phers since,  and  indeed  must  be  regarded  as  lying  at 


136  MODEKN  PHILOSOPHY. 

the  root  of  every  other,  now  comes  into  existence ; 
the  question,  namely,  of  the  relation  between  the 
ideal  and  the  real,  between  what  is  subjective  and 
what  is  objective  in  our  knowledge,  between  what 
belongs  to  our  knowledge  as  such,  i.  e.  in  virtue  of 
its  innate  force,  and  what  must  be  attributed  to 
things  external  to  ourselves,  of  which  the  image  is 
present  to  our  mind.  In  a  word,  it  raises  the  great 
question  of  the  difference  or  agreement  between  the 
world  of  thought  and  the  world  of  things. 

2.  We  have  seen  that  the  weakness  of  ancient 
philosophy  lay  in  its  subjection  to  the  ontological 
delusion  and  the  premature  assumption  of  real 
entities.  *  The  stone  is  not  in  my  mind,  but  only  its 
form/  said  Aristotle,  and,  upon  this,  forms  were 
transformed  into  entities  (ova-lac,  e?&/).  'The  stone  is 
not  in  my  mind,  but  only  the  idea  of  the  stone/  de- 
clared Plato,  and  forthwith  a  separate  reality  was 
assigned  to  '  ideas '  in  the  world  of  things.  It  was 
Descartes'  merit  to  have  conceded  real  existence  only 
to  the  universal  principles  of  matter  and  thought 
advocated  by  both  philosophers,  while  denying  the 
real  separate  existence  of  objects  derived  from  these 
and  their  title  to  the  quality  of  '  things  in  them- 
selves/ The  progress  involved  in  this  step  is  too 
immense  to  need  dwelling  on.  In  this  generalising 
of  the  two  opposites  there  is  involved  the  reconcili- 
ation of  another  opposition  which  confronts  us  irre- 
concilably in  the  future,  from  Leibniz  to  Kant,  that 
namely  between  the  individual  and  the  general.  The 
latter  alone  can  be  the  object  of  reason,  to  which  it 
is  akin,  on  this  alone  can  reason  operate  and  found 
its  corner-stone,  the  principle  of  causality.  It  is 
exactly  their  character  of  generality  or  universality 
which  invests  ideas  or  forms  of  thought  with  their 


DESCARTES,  137 

value  and  significance.  But  reason  must  not  stop 
short  at  these  or  exalt  them  into  special  or  individual 
existences,  it  must  press  on  toward  higher  principles 
of  universality,  from  whence  these  derive  their  true 
nature  and  origin.  And  this  is  what  Descartes 
himself  did,  by  exhibiting  the  two  substances  together 
as  the  true  source  from  whence  all  intellectual  and 
material  forms  derive  their  being1.  There  is  no 
organised  body,  however  elaborate  its  structure,  but 
what  must  be  conceived  as  a  modification  of  extended 
substance,  i.e.  of  matter  working  according  to  strict 
mechanical  laws2.  This  alone  will  serve  to  make 

1  Descartes,  Princ.  Phil.  i.  53  :  'It  is  true  that  a  substance  may 
be  perceived  by  means  of  any  attribute,  but  there  is  always  one 
quality  which  more  especially  constitutes  its  nature  and  essence  and 
to  which  all  others  may  be  referred  *  (the  quality  which  Spinoza 
afterwards  called  par  excellence  '  attribute '  in  contradistinction  to 
'  modes ').     c  Thus  the  nature  of  all  material  bodies  consists  of  ex- 
tension in  three  dimensions,  as  thought  constitutes  the  nature  of 
the  thinking  substance  or  mind.     For  anything  that  can  be  pre- 
dicated of  a  body  presupposes   extension,  and  is  only  a  state  of 
extended  substance ;  and  similarly  whatever  goes  on  in  the  mind  can 
only  be  a  special  condition  of  thought.    Thus  we  can  only  conceive 
figure  as  something  extended,  or  motion  as  taking  place  in  extended 
space;    and  similarly  imagination,  perception,  and  will  can  only 
occur  in  an  intelligent,  i.  e.  a  conscious  being.     On  the  other  hand, 
extension  can  be  conceived  without  figure  or  motion,  and  thought,  or 
consciousness,  without  imagination  or  perception ;  and  the  same  holds 
good  of  the  remainder,  as  every  attentive  reader  will  perceive/ 

2  '  In  the  whole  of  Nature  there  is  thus  only  one  and  the  same 
material,  to  be  known  only  by  the  fact  that  it  is  extended.     All  its 
clearly  recognisable  qualities  thus  reduce  themselves  to  this :  it  is 
divisible,  and  its  parts  are  movable,  and  therefore  it  is  capable  of 
all  the  states  which  may  follow  from  the  movement  of  its  parts. 
For  a  merely  imaginary  division  effects  no  change,  all  the  variety 
and  differentiation  of  its  form  depend  upon  motion.     And  this  has 
been  already  observed  from  time  to  time  by  philosophers,  who  have 
maintained  that  Nature  is  the  principle  of  motion  and  rest.     For 
they   understood   by  Nature,  that  in  accordance  with  which  all 


138  MODEBN  PHILOSOPHY. 

everything  else  conceivable,  even  though  it  remains 
incomprehensible  itself.  Similarly  as  to  ideas.  Ideas 
themselves  are  but  modes  of  the  thinking  substance, 
of  which  the  only  true-  attribute  or  quality  is  thought, 
including  under  that  term  all  forms  of  consciousness.  A 
broader  space  is  cleared  for  the  transition  and  develop- 
ment of  forms,  of  which  Aristotle  could  only  indicate 
the  general  outline,  by  breaking  down  the  wall  of 
separation  between  organic  and  inorganic  being.  As 
Descartes  suggests,  animals  are  mere  machines.  And 
in  the  same  way  it  became  possible  to  trace  the  de- 
velopment of  ideas,  and  the  connection  (by  favour  of 
the  concursus  divinus)  between  them  and  sensations, 
or  the  organs  of  perception ;  a  thought  upon  which 
it  was  possible  to  erect  subsequently  a  system  of 
empirical  psychology,  tracing  the  evolution  of  mind 
and  the  intellectual  faculties,  in  opposition  to  the 
theoretical  psychology  of  Plato. 

3.  Descartes  credits  the  soul  with  the  aboriginal 
possession  of  certain  truths  and  presuppositions  from 
which  all  thought  necessarily  proceeds:  e.g.  Ex 
nihilo  nihil  fit;  impossibile  est  idem  esse  et  noil  esse, 
etc.  These  are  'aeternse  veritates.'  'It  is  also  en- 
dowed with  certain  innate  ideas,  such  as  God,  sub- 
stance, thought,  truth,  extension,  and  the  like  \  There 
is  least  room  for  deception  in  regard  to  the  truths  of 
mathematics,  which  are  not  derived  from  sensible 
experience:  and  the  superior  certainty  universally 

material  bodies  assume  the  forms  under  which  we  perceive  them/ 
Ib.  ii.  23. 

1  These  views  gave  rise  subsequently  to  the  violent  controversy 
directed  against  innate  ideas,  and  Locke — who,  as  a  decided  em- 
piricist, never  leaves  the  ground  of  realism,  and  wishes  to  deduce 
everything  from  sense-perceptions — was  impelled  by  that  very  fact 
towards  the  true  and  very  important  discovery,  that  the  origin  of 
ideas  was  the  point  requiring  investigation. 


DESCARTES.  1 39 

conceded  to  the  conclusions  of  geometry  arises  from 
the  fact  that  geometricians  consider  bodies  only  as 
magnitudes  occupying  space.  'We  enumerate  different 
parts  in  space,  and  ascribe  size,  form,  and  local 
movement  to  the  parts,  and  a  certain  duration  to  the 
movements.  Meanwhile  we  are  not  only  fully 
acquainted  with  all  these  general  conditions;  we 
are  also  able  to  discern,  on  directing  our  attention 
to  them,  innumerable  special  facts  concerning  forms, 
number,  motion,  and  the  like,  the  truth  of  which  is 
so  completely  in  accord  with  our  own  nature  that 
its  discovery  does  not  affect  us  as  something  new, 
but  rather  as  something  formerly  known  and  now 
remembered,  or  as  if  our  attention  had  just  been 
called  to  something  that  was  in  us  before,  though 
the  eyes  of  the  mind  had  not  yet  been  directed  to 
it.  And  the  most  remarkable  thing  is  that  we  find 
in  ourselves  innumerable  ideas  of  things,  which, 
although  not  to  be  observed  without  difficulty,  yet 
cannot  be  treated  as  non-existent ;  and  whatever  we 
may  choose  to  think  of  them,  they  possess  a  true  and 
unchangeable  nature,  and  therefore  cannot  be  the 
creatures  of  our  inventive  fancy.  Thus,  for  instance, 
different  properties  of  a  triangle  may  be  demonstrated 
so  that  we  have  to  admit  their  truth,  although  we 
had  never  thought  of  them  before  as  belonging  to  the 
idea  of  a  triangle/  (Meditationes,  i.)  On  the  whole  we 
must  recognise  in  these  views  of  Descartes  an  im- 
perfect expression  of  the  doctrine,  afterwards  laid 
down  by  Kant,  of  the  a  priori,  or  the  metaphysical 
postulates  of  human  knowledge. 

4.  Everything  in  the  material  world  is  accomplished 
in  accordance  with  mechanical  laws  ;  hence  all  pheno- 
mena must  be  referred  exclusively  to  efficient  causes, 
The  soul  is  powerless  to  effect  any  change,  since  the 


140  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

quantity  both  of  matter  and  motion  in  the  universe 
remains  eternally  the  same  \ 

1  In  this  connection  (Princip.  Philos.  ii.  36)  Descartes  enunciates 
for  the  first  time  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  force  sub- 
sequently developed  and  demonstrated  by  Robert  Mayer :  '  For 
although  this  motion  is  only  a  state  of  the  matter  moved,  it  yet 
forms  a  fixed  and  definite  quantum,  which  may  very  well  remain 
the  same  in  its  totality  throughout  the  world,  notwithstanding  the 
changes  in  single  parts,  as  when  the  rapid  motion  of  a  small  body 
communicates  slower  motion  to  a  large  body,  so  that  in  propor- 
tion to  the  loss  of  motion  in  one  body  is  the  increase  of  impetus 
conveyed  to  another/  .  .  .  And  it  is  altogether  rational  and  in 
accordance  with  the  idea  of  God  as  an  immutable  being  .  .  .  *  that 
God  who  has  allotted  different  motions  to  the  various  portions  of 
matter  at  thoir  creation,  should  also  maintain  the  same  amount  of 
motion  therein,  as  he  maintains  the  matter  itself  of  the  same  kind 
and  in  the  same  relations  as  when  created.7  The  relation  of  motion 
to  rest  was  also  clearly  developed  by  Descartes  (Princip.  Philos. 
ii.  26)  in  the  same  sense  as  the  Leibnizian  formula,  that  rest  is 
only  a  kind  of  motion,  which  has  given  rise  to  the  distinction,  of 
so  much  importance  in  modern  science,  between  vis  viva  and 
tension.  c  For  I  must  observe/  he  says,  '  that  we  labour  under  a 
great  prejudice  when  we  assume  that  more  energy  is  required  for 
a  state  of  motion  than  of  rest.  We  take  this  for  granted  from  child- 
hood onwards,  because  our  own  bodies  are  moved  by  an  act  of  will, 
of  which  we  are  always  conscious,  while  they  are  fixed  to  the 
ground  when  in  a  state  of  rest,  by  their  own  weight,  of  the  action 
of  which  we  are  unconscious.  For  weight  and  other  causes  un- 
perceived  by  us  resist  the  motion  we  wish  to  communicate  to  our 
limbs  and  produce  the  feeling  of  weariness,  and  thus  we  imagine  a 
greater  degree  of  activity  and  force  to  be  required  in  initiating 
motion  than  in  arresting  it,  since  we  attribute  to  other  bodies  the 
same  kind  of  effort  with  action  as  we  are  conscious  of  in  our  own 
members.  But  we  may  easily  disabuse  ourselves  of  this  prejudice 
by  reflecting  that  we  have  to  make  this  effort,  not  merely  in  order 
to  move,  but  also  to  arrest  the  motion,  of  external  bodies.  Thus  it 
requires  no  greater  exertion  to  push  off  a  boat  lying  in  still  water 
than  it  does  suddenly  to  stop  the  same  boat  when  it  is  moving,  or 
at  least  scarcely  any  greater,  for  we  must  allow  for  the  action  of 
gravitation  and  the  resistance  of  the  water,  which  by  themselves 
would  cause  the  motion  to  come  gradually  to  an  end/ 


DESCARTES.  141 

The    mind    however    is   perfectly    well    able    to 
determine  the  direction  of  the  movement,  by  making 
use  of  the  efficient  causes,  under  favour,  of  course,  of 
the  concursus  divinus.     This  is  an  important  truth, 
and  serves  to  explain  both  the  fact  of  organic  develop- 
ment and  the  supremacy  of  man  over  all  other  beings. 
And?  in  proportion  as,  after  continual  experiments 
and  attempts,  men's  technical  capacity  culminated  in 
the  acquisition  of  tools,  whereby,  in  accordance  with 
mathematical  principles,  their  insight  into  the  nature 
of  efficient  causes  was  enlarged ;  in  the  same  pro- 
portion they  were  enabled  increasingly  to  direct  the 
motions  of  nature  towards  their  own  purposes,  and 
to  rule  and  regulate  an  ever  increasing  quantity  of 
natural  force.   But,  at  the  present  day  it  is  hardly  ne- 
cessary to  observe,  that  amidst  the  enormous  changes 
wrought  by  man  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  globe,  no 
particle  of  motive  force  is  either  created  or  destroyed. 
5.   Another  important  and  fruitful   discovery  is 
that  of  the  relativity  of  all  motion :  the   bearing  of 
which  upon  the  Criiik  der  Eeinen  Vernunft  may  be 
indicated  here.     For  if  the  chief  merit  of  the  latter 
work  lies  in  its  having  demonstrated  the  relativity 
of  all  human  knowledge,  and  shown  the  impossibility 
of  passing  thence  to  the  Absolute,  an  important  step 
towards  the  truth  was  surely  won,  when  it  came  to 
be  seen  that  in  the  whole  of  this  objective  outer 
world   no   change   can  be   conceived  by  itself,  but 
only  in  relation  to  something   else.     cln   order  to 
determine  the  place  of  a  thing,  we  must  look  at 
other  bodies  which  we  assume  to  be  stationary,  and 
as  we  look  at  it  in  relation  to  different  bodies  at 
the  same  time,  we  may  say  that  it  is  both  in  motion 
and  at  rest.     If  a  ship  is  sailing  on  the  sea,  a  man 
seated  in  the  cabin  remains  in  the  same  place,  if  he 


142  MODEEN   PHILOSOPHY. 

considers  the  parts  of  the  ship,  to  which  his  re- 
lation has  not  changed,  but  at  the  same  time  he 
is  constantly  changing  his  place  in  relation  to  the 
shores  which  he  is  leaving  and  those  to  which  he 
is  approaching.  And  if  we  assume  further  that  the 
earth  is  in  motion  and  proceeding  just  as  far  from 
west  to  east  as  the  ship  is  sailing  from  east  to  west, 
we  must  say  again  that  the  man  in  the  ship  does 
not  change  his  place,  as  determined  in  relation  to 
fixed  points  in  the  heavens.  If  however  we  further 
assume  that  there  are  no  such  fixed  points  in  the 
universe,  we  may  conclude  that  no  spot  in  any 
object  is  really  motionless,  but  is  only  arbitrarily  so 
considered/  (Princip.  Phil.  ii.  13.) 

6.  We  have  already  observed  that  the  systems  of 
Demokritos  and  Epikuros  show  a  direct  relationship 
to  the  purely  mechanical  conception  of  nature  ;  but  it 
was  also  an  important  advance  upon  their  doctrines 
when  Descartes  dispensed  with  the  idea  of  a  vacuum, 
which  they  had  assumed  as  the  only  other  requisite  for 
the  universal  dance  of  atoms,  and  which  he  showed  to 
rest  on  prejudices  implanted  by  common  experience. 
In  point  of  fact,  the  rarity  or  density  of  bodies  depends 
upon  the  interstices  or  pores  which  are  themselves 
occupied  by  other  matter  of  greater  and  greater 
rarity.  This  conception  requires  one  important  cor- 
rection, which  was  supplied  by  Kant,  that  bodies  are 
really  only  so  many  spaces,  filled  with  force,  but  that 
there  is  no  intellectual  impossibility  in  the  way  of 
our  conceiving  such  force  to  become  gradually  in- 
definitely diffused,  and  consequently  enfeebled.  Still 
Descartes  must  be  allowed  the  merit  of  having  been 
the  first  to  oppose  the  crude  atomic  theory,  which 
was  obviously  derived  from  the  prejudice  above 
referred  to. 


DESCARTES.  143 

We  may  now  turn  to  those  sides  of  the  Cartesian 
system  which  contain  obvious  weaknesses  and  incon- 
sistencies, which  the  future  development  of  philosophy 
was  called  upon  to  reconcile  or  eliminate.  And  of 
these  first  of  all : — 

i.  The  definition  of  body.  According  to  Descartes, 
the  nature  of  body  is  hardly  distinguishable  from 
that  of  the  space  which  it  occupies.  Extension  is  the 
sole  property  of  extended  substance,  or  the  material 
world.  *  We  must  know,3  he  says,  *  that  the  nature 
of  matter  or  body  in  general  does  not  consist  in  hard- 
ness, or  weight,  or  colour,  or  any  other  sensible 
quality,  but  only  in  its  extension  in  length,  breadth, 
and  height.  For  weight,  colour,  and  all  such  qualities 
which  are  perceived  in  matter,  may  be  set  aside,  as 
well  as  hardness,  and  yet  the  material  thing  con- 
tinues to  exist,  and  therefore  its  nature  cannot  be  de- 
termined by  any  of  these  qualities.  (Princ.  Phil.  ii.  4.) 
'  Nothing  obliges  us  to  regard  all  subsisting  bodies  as 
sensibly  perceptible/  (Ib.  7.)  'For  it  is  only  in 
thought,  not  in  reality,  that  magnitudes  are  distin- 
guished from  extended  substance/  (Ib.  8.)  '  We  shall 
easily  see  that  it  is  the  self-same  extension  which 
constitutes  the  nature  of  body  and  the  nature  of 
space,  and  that  one  can  no  more  be  distinguished 
from  the  other  than  the  nature  of  the  species  from 
the  nature  of  individuals,  if  we  abstract,  e.  g.  from 
our  idea  of  a  stone  everything  that  does  not  belong 
to  its  nature  as  a  body.  In  the  first  place  we  may 
eliminate  the  idea  of  hardness,  which  the  stone  loses, 
without  ceasing  to  be  a  body,  if  it  is  fused  by  heat 
or  ground  to  powder.  Colour  may  be  eliminated,  as 
there  are  transparent  or  colourless  stones;  weight,  for 
there  is  nothing  lighter  than  fire,  which  is  nevertheless 
counted  as  a  body;  finally,  cold  and  heat  and  all  other 


144  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

qualities,  because  we  may  not  have  observed  them  in 
the  stone,  or  may  know  that  their  loss  or  change 
would  not  affect  the  material  nature  of  the  stone. 
We  shall  thus  see  that  in  the  idea  of  the  stone, 
scarcely  anything  will  remain  except  -  extension  in 
length,  breadth,  and  depth,  which  exists  equally  in 
space  whether  occupied  by  matter  or  void/  (Ib.  n.) 
Eor  this  reason  too  a  vacuum  is  impossible,  '  because 
the  extension  of  space,  or  a  place  enclosed  by  the  ex- 
tension of  matter,  are  the  same  thing/  and  because  it 
would  be  absurd  to  attribute  extension  to  nothing. 
(Ib.  16.)  "If  God  removed  all  the  bodies  contained  in 
a  vessel,  its  sides  would  touch  because  there  would  be 
nothing  more  between  them/  (Ib.  18.)  In  a  word,  ex- 
tension, space,  and  matter  are  the  same,  or  nearly  the 
same — they  are  substantia  extensa.  It  is  apparent 
how  even  this  lucid  thinker  was  led  to  confuse  sub- 
stance with  its  sole  attribute,  extension,  to  such  an 
extent  as  to  ascribe  reality  to  non-existence — the 
mere  form  or  possibility  of  extension — only  because 
the  same  word  was  used  as  in  characterising  really  ex- 
isting extended  objects.  In  many  passages  however 
he  seems  on  the  verge  of  truth,  as  when  he  discerns 
that  there  is  a  material  difference  between  the  exten- 
sion of  bodies,  of  which  the  forms  may  change  with- 
out involving  more  than  a  change  of  place,  and  the 
extension  of  space,  which  is  always  assumed  to  be 
universally  one  and  unalterable.  (Princ.  Phil.  ii.  10, 1 2.) 
But  he  concludes  the  section  which  is  devoted  to  this 
consideration  with  the  express  declaration,  '  I  recog- 
nise no  other  matter  in  the  bodies  of  things  than  that 
divisible,  figured,  and  moveable  substance  which 
geometers  call  magnitude  and  take  as  the  subject 
of  their  'demonstrations,  and  I  recognise  nothing  as 
real  in  this  matter  except  such  divisions,  figure,  and 


DESCARTES.  145 

motion,  and  whatever  may  be  deduced  with  mathe- 
matical certainty  from  those  universal  ideas.  And  as 
all  natural  phenomena  may  be  explained  from  these, 
I  cannot  consider  any  other  principles  of  natural 
science  as  either  trustworthy  or  desirable/  (Princ. 
Phil.  ii.  64.) 

The  central  truth  is  here  in  view,  scarcely  veiled 
by  the  accompanying  error.  What  cannot  be  ex- 
plained mathematically,  cannot  be  explained  at  all ; 
the  mathematical  is  the  only  method  applicable  to 
reality,  and  to  make  the  use  of  it  possible,  it  must 
have  one  single  universal  quality  to  deal  with :  this 
is  dimension,  a  mode  of  extension. 

If  at  the  present  day  we  have  just  ideas  as  to  the 
nature  of  body,  if  we  have  learnt  to  regard  impene- 
trability and  weight  as  inseparable  from  the  idea  of 
it,  we  are  still  bound  to  remember  that  all  these 
qualities  are  based  in  the  last  resort  upon  the  idea  of 
space,  and  that  the  latest  result  of  the  Critique  of  pure 
reason  applied  to  bodies  is  to  define  the  objective 
world  as  'that  which  moves  in  space/  We  shall  then 
admire  the  vigour  of  the  intellect  which  first  grasped 
the  idea  that  the  true  reality  of  all  existing  things 
must  be  deduced  from  the  ideas  of  space.  The  dif- 
ference may  be  stated  thus  :  Descartes,  starting  from 
the  idea  of  substance,  and  believing  accordingly  in 
the  external  world,  was  compelled  to  look  on  space 
as  something  real,  otherwise  all  those  bodies  which 
existed  as  space-ideas  would  lose  their  reality  also, 
while  Kant,  who  was  deeply  convinced  of  the  ideality 
of  space,  was  compelled  to  transform  the  things 
existing  in  space  also  into  ideal  forms.  Both  how- 
ever saw  clearly  the  prime  necessity  which  made 
'only  one  nature  and  one  science  of  nature '  pos- 
sible. 

VOL.  I.  L 


146  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

2.  The  assumption  of  specific  differences  in  the 
bodies  originally  created  by  God — i.  e.  in  different 
parts  of  extended  substance — was  a  grievous  burden, 
left  by  earlier  schools  of  thought,  and  impaired  con- 
siderably the  simplicity  of  the  mechanical  theory  and 
the  possibility  of  explaining  everything  by  a  single 
principle.  According  to  Descartes  every  body  has  an 
external  superficial  extension  (its  apparent  volume), 
and  an  internal  extension  which  is  limited  by  the  size 
of  its  interstices  or  pores.  As  there  is  no  vacuum, 
each  of  these  spaces  is  again  filled  by  some  thinner 
bodies — how  they  can  be  so  is  not  exactly  explained 
— and  changes  of  form  only  take  place  by  means  of 
changes  in  this  inner  space,  that  is  to  say  by  the  con- 
traction or  expansion  of  the  walls  of  the  pores.  There 
is  thus  given  us  a  multiplicity  of  material  beings, 
even  though  their  differences  may  be  only  modes 
of  extension.  But  this  involves  a  rigid  separation 
of  the  original  substances,  and  the  wholesome  prin- 
ciple of  transition,  of  the  rise  of  one  form  from 
another,  because  of  the  essential  unity  of  matter,  has 
its  action  interfered  with.  A  new  kind  of  pluralism, 
therefore,  is  introduced  in  the  midst  of  the  material 
world,  and  is  left  for  the  future  to  dispose  of.  Accord- 
ing to  Descartes,  the  different  modes  of  extended 
substance  were  created  by  God,  who  at  the  same  time 
set  each  of  them  in  motion.  Both  the  material  sub- 
stances and  the  quantum  of  motion  in  the  whole  re- 
main the  same  for  ever ;  there  are  only  changes  of 
place  and  form,  effected  by  the  communication  of 
motion,  by  pressure  or  impulse.  This  unexplained 
opposition  between  matter  and  motion  arises  from  the 
necessity  of  our  nature  to  imagine  a  subject  for  every 
activity,  and  therefore  also  for  every  motion.  And 
here,  as  has  been  said,  the  path  of  progress  leads  us 


DESCARTES.  147 

past  Leibniz  to  Kant,  who  will  show  us  that  bodies,  in 
relation  to  our  thought,  can  be  nothing  more  than  an  x 
of  which  we  can  only  predicate  one  quality,  viz.  motion, 
or  change  of  place.  But  we  must  not  overlook  the 
fact  that  this  distinction  between  matter  and  motion, 
as  laid  down  by  Descartes,  is  in  a  certain  sense  pre- 
liminary to  the  attainment  of  greater  clearness ;  for 
on  the  one  hand,  the  conception  of  motion  in  its  sim- 
plicity, and  on  the  other  the  conception  of  matter  as 
a  purely  space-idea,  seem  in  a  measure  to  involve  the 
elements  of  Kantian  thought. 

3.  The  unexplained  dualism  of  the  substantia  cogi- 
tans  and  siibstantia  extensa  not  only  jars  upon  the  most 
general  and  wide-spread  convictions,  but  it  results 
also  in  obvious  internal  contradictions.    Not  even  the 
driest  and  dreariest  materialist,  not  the  most  fanatical 
theologian  would  be  willing  at  the  present  day  to  iden- 
tify himself  with  Descartes'  reiterated  view  that  ani- 
mals are  nothing  but  very  skilfully  constructed,  soul- 
less machines.    Further,  the  destruction  of  the  human 
machine,  i.  e.  of  the  human  body,  is  followed  by  death, 
disturbance  or  confusion  in  the  machine  is  followed 
by  abnormal  determinations  of  the  will  and  of  know- 
ledge.    But  if  the  soul  is  dependent  to  this  extent 
upon  the  machine,  it  cannot  well  be  regarded  as  a 
self-subsisting  thing  in  itself,  a  siibstantia  cogitans. 
In  spite  of  this  Descartes  remains  faithful  to  the  great 
truth  that  the  body  can  never  be  conceived  as  the 
cause  of  the  soul,  or  the  latter  explained  by  its  help. 

4.  Notwithstanding  the  simplification   undergone 
by  the  idea  of  '  substance/  it  still  remains  a  heavy 
burden,  imposed  by  the  past  and  acting  as  a  drag  upon 
all  real   progress  towards  the  goal  of  philosophical 
reflection.      The    persuasion   of   antiquity   that  all 
speculation   must  take  its  start  from   Being,   was 

L  2 


148  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

shaken  to  its  roots  by  Descartes'  deep  and  searching 
doubts,  and  in  its  place  the  notion  dawned  that  the 
true  point  of  departure  was  to  be  found  in  the 
thinking  subject,  a  ground  that  has  never  since  been 
abandoned  by  modern  philosophy.  But  as  soon  as 
the  predicate  of  consciousness  was  discovered  as 
something  unquestionable,  the  idea  of  substance 
forth  with  presented  itself,  as  the  existing  support 
and  subject  of  the  predicate,  and  hence  arose  the 
substantia  cogitans.  The  exclusion  of  everything 
external,  manifold,  various,  or  divisible,  as  given  in 
extension  and  space  relations,  from  the  uniform, 
inward,  unextended  region  proper  to  consciousness, 
necessitated  the  assumption  of  a  second  substance, 
having  nothing  in  common  with  the  first :  and  hence 
arose  a  chasm  that  could  neither  be  closed  nor 
bridged.  A  special  difficulty  is  placed  in  our  way  by 
the  substantia  cogitans,  which,  according  to  the  ex- 
pression of  Descartes,  has  dived  into  the  body.  For 
although  it  may  be  easy  to  recognise  in  extended 
matter  stretching  itself  in  all  directions  through 
space  the  one  united  self-sustaining  substance  con- 
ditioned in  all  its  parts  by  unbroken  causal  and 
mechanical  connections,  a  similar  connection  between 
different  minds,  as  parts  of  a  single  substance,  is  abso- 
lutely inconceivable,  the  rather  as  the  minds  must  be 
shown  to  exist  in  definite  places,  while  they  are 
separated  from  each  other  by  intervening  bodies. 
This  spiritualistic  tendency  of  Descartes,  if  logically 
followed  up  and  developed,  led  with  necessity  to 
the  theory  of  Malebranche,  who  speaks  of  God  as  the 
ydace  of  spirits,  and  consequently  adds,  '  Nous  voyons 
tout  en  Dieu/  But  what  is  the  '  place  of  spirits '  ? 
Obviously  only  a  mythological  expression,  suggested 
by  the  idea  of  a  spiritual  substance,  and  serving  to 


DESCARTES.  149 

reinstate  the  inevitable  idea  of  space  at  the  very 
point  from  which  it  had  been  banished. 

The  idea  of  substance,  towards  which  philosophical 
speculation  is  constantly  being  attracted,  labours 
under  one  fundamental  disadvantage,  a  disadvantage 
that  lies  in  the  nature  of  human  thought  and  its 
opposition  to  the  real,  individual  world  which  is  its 
object, — the  chronic  tendency,  in  a  word,  to  raise  the 
predicate  into  a  subject,  to  place  a  corresponding 
thing  by  the  side  of  the  thought.  But  the  lines  of 
demarcation,  the  conditions  of  limitation,  to  which 
ideas  owe  their  origin,  have  no  counterpart  in  nature : 
and  on  the  other  hand  it  is  the  peculiarity  of  general 
ideas  that  in  forming  them  we  disregard  the  differences 
and  demarcations  of  nature,  that  is  to  say,  of  individual 
existence,  and  consider  everything  rather  from  the 
point  of  view  of  universal  qualities  or  predicates. 

By  this  road  of  generalisation,  thought  arrives  at 
an  ultimate  idea  in  which  predicates  disappear  and . 
individual  differences  are  absorbed,  namely  the  idea 
of  Being.  When  this  idea  comes  to  be  realised,  it 
seems  to  include  all  actual  existence,  and  thus 
originates  the  idea  of  substance.  It  is  however 
evident  that  nothing  can  be  .made  of  this  concep- 
tion, for  it  is  only  in  proportion  as  it  becomes  invested 
with  predicates  that  it  acquires  reality  and  interest 
for  the  mind.  Nevertheless  this  seems  to  be  the 
point  of  contact  between  what  is  thought  and  what 
exists,  and  accordingly  the  misguided  reasoning  which 
imagines  it  can  derive  all  knowledge  from  itself,  often 
mystifies  those  who  trust  it  with  empty  tautologies, 
such  as, '  Being  is ;  what  is,  is,  and  it  is  so  because  so 
it  is/  As  soon  as  the  reason  has  recourse  to  Being,  as 
the  necessary  support  of  all  predicates,  it  abdicates 
its  sceptre  in  favour  of  another  source  of  knowledge, 


ISO  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

which  is  able  to  accept  and  deal  with  realities.  For 
bare  Being  can  give  no  food  for  thought;  the  ab- 
sence of  predicates  is  the  absence  of  any  describable 
or  cogitable  nature,  and  here  therefore  the  individual, 
the  perfectly- determined  but  unknowable  existence, 
enters  again  upon  its  rights.  The  individual  alono 
really  is.  Hence  the  development  of  philosophy  con- 
sists in  a  constant  struggle  between  predicates  and 
reality,  or  between  thought  and  words,  in  so  far  as 
the  latter  assume  to  themselves  equivalence  with 
true,  independent  reality 1. 

The  energetic  and  victorious  attack  of  Kant  was 
the  first  which  finally  disposed  of  the  idea  of  sub- 
stance ;  but  it  should  be  remembered  that  Des- 
cartes' view  of  it  marked  an  important  stage  upon 
the  road  to  this  goal.  For  while  he  assigned  to  it 
the  widest  predicates,  which  are  taken  for  granted  in 

1  The  ontological  proof  of  the  existence  of  God,  which  occupied 
men's  minds  for  so  long,  until  its  nullity  was  demonstrated  by  Kant, 
rests  upon  the  delusion  that  existence  in  thought  is  identical  with 
real  existence,  so  that  the  latter  may  be  derived  from  the  former  as 
its  source.  Substance,  the  Absolute,  the  ens  absolute  necessarium, 
the  causa  sui,  cujus  essentia  involvit  existentiam,  are  all  only  so 
many  vain  attempts  to  found  existence  upon  thought,  and  to  dis- 
cover in  the  latter  certain  principles  from  which  the  world  of  reality 
may  be  deduced.  These  circular  windings  of  human  reason, 
this  unprofitable  trifling  with  its  own  creations,  had  been  already 
condemned  by  Aristotle  (Analyt.  Post.  ii.  7),  ri  ffi)  tlvai  MK  ova-la 
ovbevi,  c  Being  cannot  constitute  the  essence  of  any  existing  thing/ 
Yet  Aristotle  himself  believed  that  knowledge  must  start  from 
Being  or  Substance.  Hobbes  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to 
protest  energetically  against  this  idea  (Lev.  cap.  46),  and  to  have 
pointed  to  the  root  of  the  evil  as  lying  in  the  confusion  of 
words  with  things.  '  Hobbes/  observes  Lange,  c  undoubtedly  hits 
the  right  nail  upon  the  head  when  he  regards  the  hypostasising  of 
the  copula  is  as  the  source  of  countless  absurdities.  Aristotle  made 
the  word  "  Be  "  into  a  thing,  as  if  there  were  some  object  in  nature, 
designated  by  the  word  Being!  (Qeschichte  des  Materialismus,  i.  2  4 1 .) 


DESCARTES.  151 

all  thought,  it  became  evident  which  were  the  citadels 
against  which  attacks  would  have  to  be  directed. 
The  multiplicity  of  substances  had  only  confused  the 
mind  and  given  occasion  to  unproductive  struggles ; 
but  when  all  external  phenomena  were  treated  as 
modifications  of  the  one  subsiantia  extensa,  and  all 
internal  affections  as  modes  of  the  one  sulstantia 
cogitans,  a  regular  campaign  became  strategically 
possible  and  secure  of  victory. 

Descartes  himself  betrays  in  one  place  his  con- 
sciousness of  the  emptiness  and  want  of  matter  in 
the  bare  idea  of  substance,  as  well  as  of  the  task 
imposed  on  his  philosophy  of  reducing  still  further 
the  number  of  c  things  in  themselves/  The  passage 
may  be  quoted  on  account  of  the  connection  with  the 
Kantian  doctrine,  which  here  appears  with  especial 
clearness :  *  Thought  and  extension  may  be  con- 
sidered as  that  which  is  constituted  by  the  nature 
of  thinking  and  material  substance.  .  .  .  They  ought 
then  only  to  be  conceived  as  the  actual  thinking  and 
extended  substance,  i.e.  only  as  mind  and  body1 ;  in 
this  way  they  are  most  clearly  and  correctly  con- 
ceived. It  is  also  easier  to  conceive  extended  or 
thinking  substance  than  substance  by  itself  without 
thought  or  extension.  For  it  is  somewhat  difficult 
to  separate  the  idea  of  substance  from  the  ideas  of 
thought  and  extension,  as  the  distinction  can  only 
take  place  in  thought,  and  an  idea  does  not  become 
clearer  by  having  less  included  in  it,  but  only  by 
having  what  is  included  clearly  distinguished  from 
everything  else/ 

1  Kant  says  exactly  the  same,  only  in  inverse  order,  i.e.  mind  and 
body  are  only  ideas  of  the  inward  and  the  outward  sense,  and  there- 
fore respectively,  thought  (or,  according  to  Descartes,  affections  of 
consciousness)  and  extension. 


152  MODEEN   PHILOSOPHY, 

'  Thought  and  extension  may  also  be  regarded  as 
states  of  substance,  in  so  far,  that  is  to  say,  as  the 
same  mind  may  have  different  thoughts,  and  the 
same  body,  without  changing  its  mass,  may  be  vari- 
ously extended,  sometimes  more  in  length,  sometimes 
more  in  breadth  or  depth,  and  again  conversely.  In 
this  case  they  are  modally  different  from  the  sub- 
stance, and  can  be  conceived  as  distinctly  as  it  can, 
provided  only  they  are  not  regarded  as  substances, 
or  tilings  distinct  from  each  other,  but  as  different 
conditions  of  the  same  thing.  For  inasmuch  as  we 
consider  them  in  the  substances  whose  states  they 
are,  we  distinguish  them  from  those  substances,  and 
discern  what  they  truly  are.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
we  attempted  to  consider  them  apart  from  the  sub- 
stances in  which  they  dwell,  we  should  have  to  think 
of  them  as  self-subsisting  things  and  thus  confound 
our  ideas  of  states  and  substances/  (Princ.  Phil.  i. 
63,64.) 

We  see  in  all  this  the  widening  of  the  gulf  be- 
tween individual  existences  and  universal  predicates. 
In  Spinoza  it  is  completed,  and  all  separate  ex- 
istences are  swallowed  up  in  substance.  Leibniz 
will  make  the  attempt  to  reconcile  the  rights 
of  the  former  with  the  postulates  of  reason,  and 
Kant  will  finally  show  that  the  gulf  follows  inevit- 
ably from  the  nature  of  thought,  that  there  is  an 
absolute  distinction  between  the  worlds  of  thought 
and  reality,  and  that  the  two  qualities  assumed  by 
Descartes  to  be  alone  truly  real,  and  which  he  there- 
fore exalted  into  substances,  are  after  all  only  ideas 
of  the  subject,  and  therefore  reducible  to  no  other 
foundation  than  the  Cartesian  cogito. 

5.  We  have  above  noticed  Descartes'  claim  to  re- 
cognition for  having  advocated  the  mathematical  as 


DESCAKTES.  153 

the  only  true  method  of  interpretation  for  the  phe- 
nomena of  the  external  world,  which  in  all  cases  have 
to  be  reduced  to  quantitative  differences.  It  is  well 
known  that  Descartes,  like  Leibniz,  was  a  dis- 
tinguished mathematician;  the  foundation  of  ana- 
lytical geometry  alone  would  have  established  his 
fame.  It  is  not  therefore  surprising  that  his  mind, 
when  dissatisfied  with  the  principles  of  metaphysics, 
should  have  turned  with  longing  to  physics  and 
physiology  for  the  interpretation  of  the  world-me- 
chanism, as  it  appeared  in  his  grand  and  simple  con- 
ception 1.  Here  stern  necessity  rules  with  unbroken 
sway,  and  the  visible  relationship  of  cause  and  effect. 

1  Lange(Geschichte  dcs  Matcrialismus,i.  203) indeed  maintains  that 
Descartes  attached  less  importance  to  the  whole  metaphysical  theory 
usually  associated  with  his  name,  than  to  his  investigations  in 
mathematics  and  natural  science  and  his  mechanical  theory  of 
natural  processes.  I  musfc  confess  that  I  cannot  share  this  opinion, 
which  the  passage  quoted  by  Lange  by  no  means  seems  to  bear  out. 
The  passage  in  question  (Discours  de  la  M6thode,  i.  p.  191,  Cousin) 
runs  as  follows  :  '  Although  I  was  well  pleased  with  my  speculations, 
1  believed  that  others  had  been  not  less  well  pleased  with  theirs. 
But  as  soon  as  I  had  attained  some  general  notions  in  physics  and 
on  applying  them  to  divers  problems  had  observed  how  far  they 
reached  and  how  different  they  were  from  those  commonly  accepted, 
I  thought  I  could  not  allow  them  to  remain  concealed,  without 
a  breach  of  that  law  which  binds  us  to  care  for  the  general  welfare 
of  mankind  so  far  as  in  us  is.  For  these  ideas  have  shown  me  the 
possibility  of  attaining  opinions  of  great  practical  fruitiulness  for 
the  life  of  men,  and  that,  instead  of  the  speculative  scholastic  philo- 
sophy, a  practical  one  may  be  established  whereby  the  forces  of  fire, 
water,  air,  the  stars,  the  heavens,  and  all  other  bodies  around  us 
may  be  known  as  clearly  as  the  work  of  our  own  artificers,  so  that 
we  may  be  in  a  position  to  apply  them,  like  these,  to  our  own  pur- 
poses, and  in  this  way  make  ourselves  lords  and  proprietors  of 
nature/ 

What  Descartes  here  announces  in  prophetic  vein  has  been 
literally  fulfilled.  The  high  station  now  held  by  natural  science, 


154  MODEEN   PHILOSOPHY. 

The  time  had  not  yet  arrived  for  the  idea  of  causa- 
tion to  be  tested  and,  together  with  the  whole  sum 
of  mathematical  knowledge,  to  be  traced  back  to  its 
real  source.  The  idea  of  cause  was  looked  upon  as 
an  unassailable  possession,  and  the  work  of  specu- 
lation seemed  to  be  only  to  discover  the  corre- 
sponding members,  and  to  connect  each  thing  with  its 
cause.  We  know  that  among  the  ancients  Aristotle 
attempted  to  investigate  and  distinguish  the  various 
kinds  of  causes,  but  even  he  failed,  as  Schopenhauer1 
has  pointed  out,  to  reach  a  distinct  consciousness  of 
the  important  difference  between  material  cause  arid 
intelligible  reason.  Aristotle  however  did  good  ser- 
vice by  calling  attention  to  the  matter;  he  con- 
stantly appeals  to  the  nature  of  knowledge,  and 
treats  the  theory  of  perception  as  an  important  part 
of  the  task  of  philosophy.  His  distinction  between 
final  and  efficient  causes  (Svo  rpoiroL  rJfc  air  lag'  TO  ov 
eWa  /ca/  TO  <?£  avdyKys)  remains  a  valuable  possession 
of  human  thought,  and  with  it  the  knowledge  that 
real  necessitating  belongs  only  to  the  latter  of  these. 

the  vast  transformation  of  practical  life  effected  by  its  help,  these 
only  became  possible  through  the  strict  application  of  the  mechanical 
principle.  And  the  latter  is  a  philosophical  idea,  a  fruit  of  Descartes' 
speculation.  What  he  relies  upon  in  this  passage  is  the  scriptural 
saying,  '  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them/  A  philosophy  which 
enables  its  adherents  to  solve  large  and  difficult  problems,  estab- 
lishes thereby  strong  claims  to  acceptance  as  truth.  He  himself  says 
of  explanations  derived  from  his  own  main  principles :  '  Cum  ex- 
perientia  maxiraam  effectuum  istorumpartemcertissimam  esse  arguat, 
causse  a  quibus  illos  elicio  non  tarn  Us  probandis  quam  explicandis 
inserviunt  contraque  ipsce  db  illis  probantur.'  (De  Methodo,  ad  fin.) 
How  vast  has  been  the  influence  of  Kant  upon  all  the  sciences  ! 
How  little  has  the  philosophising  of  Fichte,  Schelling,  Hegel, 
Herbart,  and  the  rest  produced  except — empty  words  ! 

1  Die  vierfache  Wurzel  des  Satzes  vom  zureichenden  Grund, 
p.  8. 


DESCARTES.  155 

The  multiplicity  of  the  forms  to  which  Aristotle 
ascribed  reality,  and  especially  his  increasing  pre-< 
occupation  with  the  organic  world  in  which  adap- 
tation is  the  rule,  naturally  contributed  to  facilitate 
the  reflection. 

It  seerns  as  if  the  mathematico-mechamcal  treat- 
ment .  of  the  phenomenal  world  constrains  the  mind 
to  confess  :  there  is  but  one  kind  of  cause,  or  like 
the  Schoolmen :  '  Non  inquirimus  an  causa  sit,  quia 
nihil  est  per  se  notius/  (Suarez.)  This  belongs  to 
the  special  character  of  this  source  of  knowledge, 
for  in  geometry,  which  starts  with  construction, 
knowledge  and  existence  proceed  at  once  from  the 
same  cause.  The  conception  of  the  world  as  a  single 
extended  moving  substance  accustomed  the  mind  to 
recognise  everywhere  similar  compelling  causes,  ad- 
mitting of  no  further  investigation. 

Fatal  consequences  followed  from  this  promi- 
nent recognition  of  the  mechanical  necessity  of  all 
events,  and  the  equally  stringent  intellectual  neces- 
sity of  mathematics,  both  for  Descartes  himself  and 
his  successors,  especially  Spinoza,  as  the  various 
kinds  of  causes  became  confused  and,  e.g.,  reason  was 
substituted  for  cause, — an  error  of  which  numerous 
and  striking  examples  have  been  taken  by  Schopen- 
hauer from  Spinoza's  works  (loc.  cit.  p.  12-15). 

Hence  too  the  same  kind  of  necessity  which  prevails 
in  mathematical  thought  is  transferred  to  all  other 
reasoning,  and  mathematical  constructions  are  ap- 
plied to  ideas  that  have  a  very  different  origin.  An 
example  is  offered  by  the  '  ontological  proof  and  the 
ens  necessario  existens;  and  as  the  keystone  of  his 
system,  Spinoza  asserts  the  mathematical  necessity  of 
events,  because  it  follows  from  the  idea  of  God  that 
everything  should  necessarily  happen  as  it  does 


156  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

happen,  in  the  same  way  as  it  follows  from  the  nature 
of  a  triangle  that  its  corners  should  be  equal  to  two 
right  angles1.  Hence  too  the  attempt  to  clothe 
philosophical  conclusions  in  mathematical  forms  which 
by  no  means  suit  them,  an  example  set  by  Descartes 
in  the  Appendix  to  the  Meditations,  and  followed, 
importunately,  by  Spinoza  in  his  Ethics,  where  in- 
stead of  allowing  his  ideas  to  express  themselves 
with  natural  freedom,  they  are  imprisoned  in  the 
apparatus  of  propositions,  demonstrations,  scholia, 
and  corollaries. 

For  the  rest,  here  too  Descartes  abandoned  further 
metaphysical  research,  or  investigation  of  the  data 
of  consciousness,  in  favour  of  mathematical  truths, 
which  he  held  to  be  derived,  as  eternal  truths,  from 
the  will  of  God  :  '  I  say  it  would  be  as  possible  for 
God  to  cause  it  not  to  be  true  that  the  radii  of  a 
circle  should  be  equal,  as  it  was  for  him  to  create  the 
world/  (Epist.  i.  no.) 

At  this  point  however  Spinoza,  in  open  opposition 
to  his  predecessor,  energetically  defends  the  rights 
of  reason,  observing  :  '  It  is  held  to  be  certain  that 
the  judgments  of  God  altogether  transcend  human 
comprehension,  and  this  would  suffice  to  make  truth 
eternally  inaccessible  to  mankind,  if  another  norm 
of  truth  were  not  provided  for  them  by  mathe- 
matics, which  do  riot  inquire  after  ends  or  pur- 
poses, but  after  the  properties  and  characteristics 
of  figures2/ 

This  assumption  of  a  single,  universal,  strict  causal 
nexus,  such  as  the  phenomenal  world  suggests  to  the 
reflective  mind,  leads  necessarily  to  a  one-sided  and 
erroneous  conception  of  the  intelligible  principle  in 
the  world.  For  although  in  this  also  laws  and  internal 

1  Spinoza,  Eth.  i.  Prop.  17.  schol.  2  Ib.  i.  Prop.  36. 


DESCARTES.  157 

necessity  prevail,  these  are  of  a  quite  different  kind 
from  the  necessity  of  nature-  Every  intellectual 
force  struggles  after  freedom,  and  attains  the  same 
in  proportion  as  it  develops  and  spiritualises  itself, 
and  hence  the  highest  kind  of  freedom  known  to  us 
is  that  of  human  knowledge.  The  decisive  principle 
then  should  have  been  found  in  this,  and  failing  such 
verification,  the  natural  consequence  was  a  material- 
istic reaction,  denying  mind  and  conceding  only 
natural  necessity,  and  Spinoza's  union  of  a  causally 
determined  substance  at  the  same  time  material  and 
intellectual. 


THE  MATERIALISTIC  TENDENCY, 

GASSENDI.     HOBBES. 

LANGE  rightly  indicates  Gassendi  and  Hobbes  as 
the  revivers  of  the  materialistic  theory  of  the  uni- 
verse1. 

These  two  men,  of  whom  the  first  was  to  some 
extent  an  antagonist  of  Descartes,  while  the  latter 
attached  himself  to  Bacon,  were  yet  powerfully  in- 
fluenced by  the  new  ideas,  so  that  the  materialism 
founded  by  them  bears  clearly  the  imprint  of  Car- 
tesian thought. 

The  doctrines  of  Epikuros  and  Lucretius  were 
brought  up  again  by  Gassendi  (trimmed  with  a  little 
Christianity  as  the  taste  of  the  time  and  his  status  as 
a  Catholic  priest  demanded)  and  opposed  in  their  clear 
simplicity  to  Aristotle  and  the  Schoolmen.  Gassendi 
is  the  founder  of  the  modern  atomic  theory. 

And  wherein,  we  may  enquire,  does  modern  ma- 
terialism differ  from  the  doctrines  of  Demokritos  and 
Epikuros  ? 

To  make  this  clear  we  must  again  revert  to  the 
materialism  of  antiquity  and  its  relation  to  other 
systems,  and  especially  to  the  opposition  between 
Herakleitos  and  Demokritos. 

Herakleitos,  as  we  have  shown,  dwells  upon  the 
eternal  change  and  motion  in  the  One,  which  under- 
lies all  change  (vTroKeljmevov),  and  places  the  rational 

1  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  i.  p.  223  ff. 


GASSENDI.     HOBBES.  159 

principle  of  unity  in  the  foreground,  while  to  nature 
and  experience  he  grants  only  this  eternal  flux  or 
change.  Demokritos,  on  the  other  hand,  conceives 
the  many,  the  infinity,  multiplicity  and  variety,  that 
is  to  say  the  material  principle  of  nature,  —  as  the 
essential..  Philosophically  or  rationally  speaking,  the 
sameness  of  nature  among  the  infinite  and  manifold 
atoms,  that  is  to  say,  weight  and  form,  out  of  which 
all  the  various  appearances  given  by  sense-perceptions 
arise,  is  the  only  thing  explained.  The  individual 
is  the  most  important  postulate  with  Demokritos, 
while  according  to  Herakleitos  and  the  Eleati.cs  it 
is  entirely  swallowed  up  by  the  One.  It  corresponds 
with  this  contrast  that  Demokritos  was  regarded  by 
the  ancients  as  a  great  polyhistor,  and  himself  boasts 
of  the  extent  of  his  travels  and  the  range  of  his  ex- 
perience1, while  the  significant  saying,  iroXvimaOiii 
voov  ov  SiSdo-Kei,  is  ascribed  to  Herakleitos.  A  similar 
contrast  meets  us  in  modern  philosophy,  between 
Spinoza,  the  retired  hermit  who  plunges  into  the 
abysses  of  pure  being  and  despises  the  world  of  ex- 
perience and  empiricism,  and  Leibniz,  the  represen- 
tative of  individualism,  the  travelled  and  accomplished 
man  of  the  world,  and  a  writer  admired  for  his  uni- 
versal genius. 

The  first  expression  of  the  mechanical  theory  of 
nature  is  to  be  found,  as  before  observed,  in  the 
doctrine  of  Demokritos.  All  that  happens  follows 
from  the  pressure  and  impact  of  moved,  i.e.  falling, 
atoms  in  the  void.  A  strict,  unbroken  causal  chain, 
together  with  the  character  of  necessity,  predomin- 
ates in  this  view,  and  hence  in  antiquity  as  now, 
the  absolute  necessarianism  became  associated  with 


de  TU>V  KCT*  epcovrbv  dvtiptoTrcw  yqv  TrXctVriyy  errcTrXai^o-a/A^v  cerro- 

TO  /iqfccora.     Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  i.  p.  304. 


160  MODEEN   PHILOSOPHY. 

materialism  as  its  especial  characteristic,  though  at 
the  same  time  it  was  regarded  as  an  unworthy 
infringement  of  what  we  feel  to  be  highest  in  our- 
selves— our  freedom  and  our  responsibility.  It  is 
however  a  rigidly  logical  consequence  from  the 
thought  that  recognises  only  one  kind  of  cause.  And 
it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  this  same  necessity 
gives  its  only  firm  foundation  to  the  study  of  nature, 
which  lias  always  to  deal  with  appearances,  and  that 
without  it  there  could  only  be  a  wild  dance  of  atoms, 
nowhere  law  and  order. 

What  stood  in  the  way  of  the  development  of 
materialism  in  antiquity  was  that  the  doctrine  of 
atoms  was  not  connected  with  mathematics  and  so 
made  to  serve,  as  it  is  peculiarly  adapted  for  doing, 
as  the  foundation  of  exact  scientific  research.  The 
physical  explanations  of  Demokritos  and  Epikuros 
are  indeed  often  ingenious  and  acute,  and  remind  us 
in  many  ways  of  modern  views,  but  they  remain  in 
the  region  of  hypotheses,  because  they  despise  or 
disregard  observation  and  experiment  and  the  nu- 
merical proportions  to  be  learnt  therefrom.  Larger 
and  smaller  atoms,  collisions  producing  vortices  of 
motion  or  motion  in  the  line  of  impact,  fine,  smooth 
spiritual  atoms  present  in  the  pores  of  all  bodies  and 
emitted  from  every  surface,  hook-shaped  atoms  that 
attach  themselves  and  the  like,  these  are  the  only 
principles  of  explanation  by  which  it  is  sought  to 
elicit  something  general,  that  is  to  say  laws,  from 
something  individual,  which  atoms  certainly  must 
be  considered  to  be. 

Thus  it  befell  that  the  principle  of  necessity,  in 
itself  wholesome,  precious,  and  rational,  became  trans- 
formed into  another,  seemingly  opposite  principle 
— that  of  chance.  Demokritos'  avdKy  was  at  the 


GASSENDI.      HOBBES.  l6l 

same  time  rv^rj l.  And  in  fact  this  desperate  union 
must  be  entered  upon  as  long  as  number  fails  to 
supply  fixed  points  at  which  the  individual  can  be 
brought  under  the  general  law,  as  long  as  falling 
atoms  in  continuous  succession  ofier — it  is  true  a  chain 
of  causes,  but — no  general  principle  of  explanation 
for  the  thread  of  causation.  Like  Taiitalos,  human 
reasori  in  view  of  the  rushing  stream  of  phenomena 
could  only  say:  '  I  see  indeed  necessity,  but  for  me  it 
is  always  accidental ! ' 

As  the  product  of  remote  antiquity  this  theory  of 
atoms  may  claim  our  admiration,  but  important 
transformations  awaited  it  at  the  hands  of  Baconian 
empiricism  before  it  could  come  to  life  again  after  the 
deathlike  rest  of  centuries,  and  then,  in  the  mathe- 
matical era  of  Descartes,  take  its  place  in  the  front 
rank  as  an  ally  against  the  decaying  Scholastic 
philosophy  and  its  unfruitful  trifling  with  ideas  that 
exact  science  showed  to  be  unfounded.  Fertilised  by 
experience,  observation,  and  especially  by  the  strict 
mathematical  theory  of  Descartes,  Atomism  was 
destined  to  become  the  mould  in  which  all  vigorous 
speculation  regarding  the  natural  world  was  to  be 
cast,  and  to  render  the  most  intricate,  evanescent, 
almost  imperceptible  of  phenomena  at  once  clearly 
intelligible  and  comprehensible. 

The  idea  of  material  substance  as  laid  down  by 
Descartes  is  combined  by  Gassendi  with  the  idea  of 
atoms.  They  are  the  permanent  element,  the  form 
of  the  changeable.  Another  great  advance  was 
made  by  Gassendi's  identification  of  the  atoms'  weight 

1  By  both  be  denies  the  existence  of  any  other  than  efficient 
causes,  i.  e.  internal  spiritual  causation  as  well  as  final  causes  or 
ends.  This  should  not  be  overlooked,  as  it  is  the  ground  of  all 
our  knowledge  of  nature. 

VOL.  I.  M 


1 62  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

with  their  proper  motion,  so  that  the  long-lived  error 
of  imponderability,  which  lasted  even  to  our  own  day, 
was  virtually  confuted,  the  erroneous  theory  of  matter 
found  in  Descartes  was  rectified,  and  the  true  essence 
of  all  material  existence,  motion,  was  clearly  appre- 
hended. The  atoms  (created  and  set  in  motion  by 
God)  are  the  seed  of  all  things,  from  them,  by 
generation  and  destruction,  everything  has  been 
formed  and  fashioned  and  still  continues  so  to  be. 
All  growth  and  decay  is  but  the  union  and  separation 
of  atoms.  When  a  fagot  is  burnt,  the  aggregation 
of  atoms  is  dissolved,  and  the  atoms  reappear  in  new 
forms  and  combinations  as  flame,  smoke,  ash,  &c. 
It  is  plain  that  the  preliminary  conditions  of  a  healthy 
system  of  physics  and  chemistry  are  contained  in 
these  views.  It  is  also  interesting  to  observe  that 
Gassendi  explained  the  fall  of  bodies  by  the  earth's 
attraction,  and  yet,  like  Newton  himself,  held  actio 
in  distans  to  be  impossible.  He  assumed  in  all  such 
processes,  as  in  magnetism  &c.,  the  necessary  presence 
of  some  direct  material  intervention,  a  view  which, 
however  much  it  may  run  counter  to  contemporary 
opinion,  will  hereafter  reveal  its  full  truth  and  force 
in  new  and  clearer  ideas. 

And  here,  not  to  overlook  a  transcendental  forecast 
of  Gassendi,  it  may  be  observed  that  he  regarded 
space  and  time  as  something  distinct  from  matter, 
neither  substance  nor  accident.  When  all  things  end, 
Space  extends  into  infinity;  Time  was  before  all 
creation,  and  flowed  on  then  as  now1. 

Hobbes  limited  the  scope  of  philosophy  to  the 
mathematico-physical  interpretation  of  natural  pro- 
cesses. For  him  the  whole  of  philosophy  consists  in 

1  Lange,  Gescliichte  des  Materialismus,  i.  231. 


GASSENDI.      HOBBES.  1 6  3 

that  one  region  of  it,  circumscribed  and  marked  off 
by  Descartes. 

According  to  Hobbes  philosophy  is,  '  Knowledge  of 
effects  or  phenomena  derived  from  correct  conclusions 
about  their  causes,  or  the  same  knowledge  of  causes 
derived  from  their  observed  effects.  The  aim  of 
philosophy  is  to  enable  us  to  predict  effects,  so  that 
we  may  be  able  to  utilise  them  in  life/  Lange  ob- 
serves that  this  use  of  the  word  philosophy  is  so 
deeply  rooted  in  English  that  it  scarcely  corresponds 
to  what  is  understood  by  the  name  in  other  languages. 
A  '  natural  philosopher '  lias  come  to  mean  a  student 
of  experimental  physics. 

Admirable  in  itself,  and  in  full  accord  with  this 
definition  of  philosophy  as  the  mere  interpretation  of 
nature,  is  Hobbes's  discernment  of  the  infinite  simplicity 
of  the  course  of  human  reason.  'All  reasoning  is 
calculation,  and  all  calculation  is  reducible  to  addition 
and  subtraction/  In  other  words,  for  the  human 
reason,  all  qualitative  differences  reduce  themselves 
to  quantitative  ones,  the  question  is  everywhere  only 
of  a  more  or  less;  a  view  agreeing  exactly  with  that 
of  Descartes. 

In  connection  with  the  above  we  may  note  his 
superiority  to  the  danger  of  deception  arising  when 
the  human  reason  is  entangled  in  verbal  fetters,  as 
in  the  case  quoted  above  (p.  150,  note),  where  he 
attacks  the  Aristotelian  Being.  He  says  of  the  Co- 
pernican  theory,  the  truth  and  importance  of  which 
he  unreservedly  admitted,  that  it  had  been  strangled 
in  antiquity  in  a  noose  of  words. 

His  utterances  on  the  subject  of  speculative  theology 
are  also  significant,  and  show  that  he  had  attained  a 
clear  view  of  the  boundary  line  of  transcendentalism. 
The  connection  between  causes  and  effects  leads 

M  2 


164  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

necessarily  to  the  recognition  of  a  causa  prima,  an 
ultimate  source  of  all  motion,  only  the  determination 
of  its  being  remains  altogether  unthinkable,  as  it 
contradicts  the  nature  of  thought,  which  consists  in 
addition  and  subtraction.  At  this  point,  where 
reason  is  arrested,  religious  faith  assumes  her  rights. 

The  oriesidedness  of  materialism — that  is  to  say 
the  introduction  of  mechanical  causation  into  regions 
where  the  mind  has  to  be  taken  into  account — re- 
appears plainly  in  the  political  theories  of  Hobbes,  to 
which  he  attached  the  highest  importance.  One 
cannot  but  admire  the-  iron  consistency  with  which 
the  theory  of  rigidly  mechanical  causation  is  applied, 
and  the  way  in  which  the  statics  and  dynamics  of 
single  forces  alone  are  recognised  in  what  we  are 
accustomed  to  consider  the  highest  intellectual  or- 
ganisation— the  body  politic. 

The  state  arises  immediately  out  of  atomism.  It 
is  remarkable  that  Hobbes  does  not  even  concede 
to  men  the  social  impulses  or  instincts  of  ants, 
bees,  &c.,and  so  rejects  the  £oW  TTO\ITIKOV  of  Aristotle. 
The  state  of  nature  for  mankind  is  one  of  war.  It 
seems  as  if  he  was  dimly  influenced  by  the  thought 
that  the  rational  principle,  which  obtains  in  the  state, 
is  something  far  higher  than  brute  instinct,  and  that 
the  absolute  supremacy  of  the  state,  which  is  his 
ideal,  is  indifferent  to  sympathy,  but  allots  to  each 
his  right,  which  indeed  only  comes  to  be  right 
because  of  the  might  behind  it.  For  right  and  wrong, 
good  and  evil,  virtue  and  vice  have  no  meaning  in 
themselves ;  they  originate  in  the  political  order,  by 
the  supreme  will  of  the  state.  The  Contrat  social 
with  him,  as  with  Eousseau,  supplies  the  original 
foundation  for  the  state's  constitution.  Every  man 
says  to  his  neighbour,  'I  convey  to  that  man  or  this 


GASSENDT.      HOBBES.  1 6  5 

institution  my  rights  of  self-government,  on  condition 
that  you  also  convey  to  it  the  same  rights  over 
yourself/  Thus  the  omnipotent  authority  of  the 
state  rises  out  of  atomism ;  the  sole  will  that  puts 
an  end  to  the  state  of  nature  and  establishes  the 
kingdom  of  reason :  e  haoc  est  generatio  magni  illius 
Leviathan,  vel  ut  dignius  loquar,  mortalis  Dei!  The 
state  only  punishes  in  order  to  maintain  itself;  religion 
or  the  fear  of  invisible  powers  are  only  political 
expedients. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  such  a  positive  relation- 
ship between  might  and  right,  in  which  everything 
which  the  state  ordains  is  good,  reasonable,  and 
sacred,  while  criticism,  in  the  name  of  higher  prin- 
ciples, is  rejected  as  injurious  to  the  commonweal — 
this  view  agrees  perfectly  with  the  simple  materialistic, 
mechanical  theory  of  the  universe  in  which  also  no- 
thing is  recognised  but  the  necessary  working  of  real 
forces. 

And  the  system  of  Hobbes  is  certainly  the  most 
complete  expression  of  rigorous  materialism.  Its 
dependence  on  Descartes  appears  in  the  fact  that  he 
discerned  the  incompleteness  of  the  Baconian  em- 
piricism, and  by  no  means  desired  to  restrict  the 
activity  of  the  mind  to  the  mere  analysis  of  sen- 
sible facts,  but  assumed,  with  Descartes,  that  the 
synthetic  method  should  be  applied  in  all  cases, 
according  the  due  place  of  honour  to  mathematics 
in  the  interpretation  of  nature. 

According  to  Hobbes,  there  is  only  one  substance, 
namely  matter;  an  immaterial  substance  is  a  con- 
tradiction in  terms.  But  matter  as  such,  strictly 
speaking,  does  not  exist,  it  is  properly  bodies  that 
exist ;  realism  and  individualism  thus  meet,  as  they 
do  in  all  genuine  materialism.  The  idea  of  matter 


1 66  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

is  reached  only  by  abstraction,  it  is  only  a  name  for 
the  conception  of  bodies  in  general.  The  accidents 
of  matter  have  no  real  existence,  they  are  only  the 
way  in  which  bodies  are  conceived.  The  only  reality 
is  that  which  fills  space  and  is  coextensive  with  it. 
Extension  and  form  are  the  only  qualities  without 
which  we  are  unable  to  imagine  bodies  as  existing ; 
all  other  accidents,  such  as  motion,  rest,  colour,  hard- 
ness and  the  rest,  may  change.  Such  change  how- 
ever is  only  an  alteration  in  the  representation  given 
by  our  senses,  the  quantum  of  the  body  continues 
unalterable.  Here  however  we  are  constantly  de- 
ceived by  the  counters  of  our  verbal  currency,  which 
lead  us  to  imagine  that  something  quite  different  is 
before  us,  that  from  one  thing  another  quite  different 
has  been  produced.  In  fact  all  change  is  simply 
motion,  or  change  of  place  among  the  component 
parts  of  the  body. 

We  have  here  the  subjective  representation ;  the 
part  of  the  subject  in  the  perception  of  things  is 
set  forth  strongly  for  the  first  time,  an  idea  which, 
rendered  possible  by  Descartes,  leads  through  Locke 
to  the  final  investigations  of  the  Kantian  Critik. 
And  in  this  Hobbes  not  only  rises  above  material- 
ism, he  points,  unconsciously,  to  a  fixed  point  from 
whence  it  will  hereafter  be  upheaved  and  destroyed. 
It  is  only  necessary  to  bring  together  the  various 
conclusions  he  maintains,  and  this  will  become  ir- 
resistibly plain :  'Matter  is  nothing  real,  but  a 
general  notion  derived  from  the  principal  qualities 
of  bodies.  The  accidents  do  not  belong  to  body  as 
such  or  in  itself,  they  have  no  objective  existence, 
but  are  the  ways  in  which  our  senses  are  affected 
ly  bodies.  Even  the  ideas  of  substance  and  accident 
depend  ultimately  only  on  our  arbitrary  conception, 


GASSEND1.      HOBBES.  1 67 

and  the  linguistic  determination  of  ideas,  i.e.  words  : 
they  are  throughout  relative.  If  we  say,  here  a 
new  thing  has  come  into  existence,  we  make  use  of 
the  mental  form  of  substance;  if,  on  the  contrary, 
we  judge  that  a  pre-existing  body  has  acquired  a 
new  quality,  we  still  remain  within  the  limits  of 
the  conception  of  accident/ 

These  few  sentences  are  enough  to  show  the  ad- 
mirable intellectual  vigour  of  the  English  thinker 
and  the  extent  to  which  he  was  in  advance  of  his 
age.  The  knowledge  of  the  dependence  of  thought 
on  words,  the  importance  of  which  is  even  still  too 
generally  neglected,  would  alone  suffice  to  stamp 
him  a  great  thinker.  In  all  the  sentences  above 
quoted  there  are  germs  and  intimations  of  the 
Kantian  Idealism ;  it  may  even  be  said  that  the 
idea  of  substance  was  already  partially  divested 
of  its  reality  and  assigned  to  the  sphere  of  the 
subject ;  but  Hobbes  pursued  his  conquests  no 
further,  he  thought  that  the  task  of  philosophy 
was  accomplished  with  the  completeness  of  realism, 
and  to  him  nothing  was  real  but  bodies  and  their 
motions. 

Thus,  throughout  his  description  of  perception,  he 
does  not  concern  himself  about  what  is  internal  in 
the  process,  i.e.  the  sensitive  subject,  his  only  object 
is  to  bring  this  branch  of  phenomena  to  take  its  place 
logically  in  his  system  of  complete  Realism.  Hence 
he  regards  all  sensible  perceptions  as  movements  of 
infinitely  small  atoms  that  act  upon  the  organs  of 
sense  and  cause  reaction  in  them.  From  this  -re- 
sistance there  arises  the  disposition  to  conceive  the 
object  as  something  external, — '  ex  ea  reactione  all- 
quamdiu  durante  ipsum  existet  phantasma,  quod  prop- 
ter  conatum  versus  externa  semper  videtur  tanquam 


1 68  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

aliquid  situm  extra  organumV  What  a  simple  solu- 
tion is  offered  here  of  the  psychological  problem  of 
the  externalisation  of  our  mental  representations, 
which  in  our  time  has  been  so  obscured  by  mystical 
rhetoric!  Sensible  qualities  thus  do  not  belong  to 
things,  i.e.  bodies  in  themselves,  but  only  exist  sub- 
jectively. Light  and  sound  are  only  motions  of 
minute  particles,  which  are  perceived  by  us,  and 
they  can  only  be  perceived  by  us  because  they  pro- 
duce analogous  movements  in  the  particles  of  our 
organism, — for  like  can  only  act  upon  like,  and  ob- 
jects in  motion  only  upon  moveable  objects, — and  it 
is  only  our  resistance,  reaction  or  counter  movement 
which  leads  us  to  refer  the  effect  to  an  external 
object  as  its  starting-point. 

It  will  be  seen  from  this  explanation  how  much 
Hobbes  assigned  to  the  thinking  and  feeling  subject, 
viz.  the  sensible  affections  with  their  qualitative  vari- 
ations, the  apprehension  of  the  different  accidents  of 
things,  and  of  the  difference  between  substance  and 
accident,  analysis  and  division,  synthetic  conclusions 
and  conjunction  ; — he  passes  by  all  this  indifferently, 
and  so  far  as  appears  treats  it  as  the  plainest  thing 
in  the  world,  while  all  the  time  he  was  on  the  verge 
of  raising  the  question,  how  it  comes  to  pass,  for 
instance,  that  the  subject  takes  the  various  accidents 
of  things  for  essential  qualities  of  things,  if  not 
indeed  for  things  in  themselves. 

This  follows  however  from  the  rigorous  carrying 
out  of  the  ojie  mechanical  principle  from  which 
everything  was  to  be  derived  and  by  which  every- 
thing was  to  be  explained.  Only  one  kind  of  cause 
was  recognised ;  the  old  difference  between  the  phe- 
nomenal and  the  real  world  of  rational  thought  was 
1  De  Corpore,  iv.  25. 


GASSENDI.      HOBBES.  169 

again  brought  out,  and  the  world  of  moveablc  matter 
— or  rather  of  moving  bodies — was  declared  to  be 
the  true  reol  world,  in  so  far  as  its  determination  was 
calculable  arithmetically  or  mathematically,  so  that 
the  highest  product  of  reason  was  necessarily  the 
self-knowledge  of  matter  in  motion. 

It.is  indubitable  that  the  spirit  of  this  doctrine  is 
directly  descended  from  Demokritos  and  Epikuros, 
but  it  is  also  certain  that  the  spirit  of  Cartesianism 
has  penetrated  and  fertilised  it,  so  as  to  make  it  for 
the  first  time  philosophically  productive. 

Modern  materialism  is  mathematical.  While  in 
antiquity  mathematics  were  only  applied  to  astro- 
nomy and  mechanics  proper,  modern  science  has  ex- 
tended this  principle,  as  the  only  valid  one,  to  all 
natural  phenomena,  since  all  have  to  solve  mechan- 
ical problems  ;  so  that  the  prophetic  utterance  of 
Descartes  has  been  fulfilled,  that  the  powers  of  re- 
mote celestial  bodies  and  the  mysteries  of  organic 
nature  might  be  made  as  intelligible  as  the  handi- 
work of  mechanics  and  labourers. 

But  meanwhile  the  law  of  necessity  comes  more 
and  more  into  the  foreground ;  for  in  proportion  as 
the  hidden  mysteries  of  nature  are  laid  bare  to  the 
scientific  eye  and  proved  to  be  mathematically  re- 
ducible to  the  simple  element  of  mere  forms  of  motion, 
in  the  same  proportion  the  mind  learns  to  recognise 
everywhere  order  and  regularity,  •  the  supremacy  of 
simple  natural  laws,  which  are  the  same  in  every 
time  and  place.  It  is  thus  enabled  to  extend  the  chain 
of  causation  forwards  into  the  farthest  corners  of 
space,  backwards  into  the  remotest  past,  by  the  light 
of  science  to  look  forward  into  the  events  of  future 
ages  and  to  determine  confidently  what  befell  millions 
of  years  ago,  before  any  human  spirit  breathed  or 


170  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

the  foot  of  any  rational  being  had  trod  the  face  of 
earth. 

Thus  Demokritos'  chance  (rvyii),  by  means  of 
science  and  for  scientific  purposes,  turns  more  and 
more  clearly  into  necessity  (avdyxtj). 

But  to  see  through  this  necessity  and  to  discern 
that  it  lay  in  the  nature  of  knowledge  itself,  this  was 
reserved  for  the  greatest  of  philosophers,  for  it  re- 
quired the  sagacity  of  a  Kant. 


THE  IDEALISTIC  TENDENCY, 

GEULINX.     MAIiEBBANCHE.     BERKELEY. 

THE  starting-point  of  Cartesian  philosophy  was 
emphatically  idealistic,  its  progress  throughout  real- 
istic. The  transition  from  one  to  the  other  was 
accomplished — not  to  say  necessitated — by  means  of 
the  idea  of  God.  The  keys  of  true  knowledge,  true 
understanding  of  the  universe,  bestowed  by  the 
Deity  upon  mankind  are  the  seternie  veritates,  and 
among  these  we  must  understand  more  especially 
mathematical  knowledge.  Only  what  man  discerns 
in  this  way,  and  with  this  help  dare  et  distincte 
intelligit,  that  alone  bears  the  stamp  of  certainty, 
everything  else  is  exposed  to  the  illusions  of  sense 
and  uncertainty. 

We  have  seen  how  materialism  erected  its  system 
upon  the  base  of  certainty  thus  indicated  by  Des- 
cartes, without  troubling  itself  further  about  the 
premisses  from  which  this  proof  of  certainty  was  de- 
rived by  metaphysical  reasoning. 

It  might  have  been  foreseen  that  other  minds  would 
occupy  themselves  anew  with  these  premisses,  and 
attempt  a  profounder  and  more  consistent  develop- 
ment of  the  foundations  of  the  Cartesian  system. 
Among  these  minds,  Geulinx  and  Malebranche  call 
principally  for  remark. 

One  is  accustomed  to  associate  the  name  of  Geu- 
linx with  the  thought  of  Occasionalism,  the  attempt 
to  overcome,  in  a  way  more  satisfactory  to  the  human 
mind,  the  difficulties  created  by  Descartes  in  his 


172  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

separation  of  mental  and  physical  processes.  For, 
notwithstanding  the  hypothesis  of  divine  co-opera- 
tion, the  mutunl  influence  (influxus  pliysicus)  remains 
incomprehensible.  Hence  nothing  remained  except 
to  make  God  the  real  author  of  all  mental  and 
bodily  changes.  On  the  occasion  of  a  bodily  process, 
God  calls  up  an  idea  in  my  mind  ;  on  the  occasion  of 
an  act  of  will,  God  causes  a  corresponding  movement 
in  my  body. 

But  this  interesting  thinker  really  deserves  most 
attention  for  his  attempt  to  erect  a  new  theory  of 
knowledge  on  Cartesian  principles,  and  to  trace 
direct  to  the  primitive  spring  of  consciousness  some 
things  which  Descartes  had  only  thought  it  possible 
to  explain  by  his  theory  of  divine  intervention  *. 

Descartes  had  derived  the  truths  of  mathematics, 
upon  which  all  clear  and  distinct  knowledge  rests, 
as  Plato  had  derived  his  Ideas,  wholly  and  solely 
from  the  will  of  God.  The  pure  thought,  made 
possible  by  mathematical  ideas,  which  was  contrasted 
with  sensible  representations  (imaginatio),  makes  use 
of  these  ideas  because  it  has  been  so  ordained  by 
God.  Even  in  regard  to  our  most  primary  per- 
ceptions, e.g.  that  2+3  =  5,  we  might  become  the 
victims  of  a  supernatural  delusion  effected  by  a 
malignant  spirit. 

In  the  same  way  that  it  had  been  objected  against 
the  reality  of  the  Platonic  ideas  that  they  stand  to 
each  other  in  a  relation  of  superiority  and  inferiority; 
in  the  same  way  Geulinx  pointed  out  with  regard  to 
mathematical  notions  that  they  stood  in  an  order  of 
logical  dependence,  one  of  them  being  derived  from 
another,  whence  it  followed  that  all  alike  must  be 

1  Cf.  Ed.  Grimm,  Arnold  Geulinx'  Erkenntnisstheorie  und  Oc- 
casionalismus.  Jena,  1875. 


GEULINX.      MALEBRANCHE.      BERKELEY.         173 

deduced  from  the  nature  of  our  thought  itself.  He 
instances  several  truths  which  could  not  be  altered 
in  any  way  by  the  will  of  God,  e.g.  that  A  =  A. 
Such  truths  are  the  foundation  of  all  mathematical 
demonstration.  To  maintain  the  falsehood  of  the 
proposition  2  +  3  =  5  is  to  maintain  that  the  meaning 
of  two  and  three  does  not  equal  the  meaning  of  2 
and  3,  in  other  words,  that  A  is  not  equal  to  A ;  to 
admit  the  possibility  of  the  radii  of  a  circle  not 
being  equal  is  to  admit  that  the  straight  line,  by 
the  revolution  of  which  round  one  end  the  circle  is 
formed,  is  not  equal  to  itself.  Such  truths  as  these 
are  antecedent  to  the  will  of  God ;  they  follow  from 
his  nature  and  his  intellect.  '  These  truths/  says 
Geulinx,  c  have  their  seat  in  our  understanding,  in 
so  far  as  our  understanding  is  in  harmony  with  the 
divine,  when  we  perceive  them  in  God,  and  God 
after  this  manner/  Here  plainly  the  origin  of  innate 
ideas  is  referred  to  the  nature  of  the  intellectual 
faculties,  instead  of  to  the  will  of  God,  which  in 
itself  is  a  material  step  in  advance. 

In  regard  to  the  definition  of  matter  also,  Geulinx 
endeavoured  to  attain  a  higher  degree  of  clearness 
than  Descartes,  whose  weakness  on  this  point  has 
already  been  noticed.  If  space  and  matter  are  the 
same  as  to  their  essence  (extension),  how  can  they 
be  distinguished  by  us  ?  And  how,  on  the  other  hand, 
can  they  be  identical  when  space  is  infinite  and  indivi- 
sible and  matter  finite  and  divisible  ?  There  must  be 
a  certain  process  of  thought  by  which  I  produce  the 
idea  of  matter,  as  a  mode  of  the  innate  idea  of  space, 
from  this  idea  itself.  It  is  accomplished  by  a  kind 
of  abstraction,  the  nature  of  which  Geulinx  professes 
himself  unable  to  define. 

Equally  fine  observations  concerning  the  nature  of 


174  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

consciousness  are  to  be  found  in  Geulinx.  All  the 
definitions  that  may  be  given  of  mental  processes  do 
not  deserve  this  name ;  they  occur  really  by  means  of 
a  figure,  metaphor,  or  comparison.  *  Quid  sit  amor, 
dici  non  debet;  res  ea  nobis  per  conscientiam  et 
intiraam  experientiam  quam  notissima  est.  Et  id 
generatini  obtinet  in  iis  omnibus,  quse  ad  cogitationes 
nostras,  ad  intellectum  atque  sensum,  voluntatem 
item  et  animi  affectus  pertinent;  hsec  enim  omnia 
nobis,  ut  dixi,  per  conscientiam  notissima  sunt,  nee 
possunt  unquam  definitionc  ulla  declarari1/ 

There  is  even  in  Geulinx  a  foreshadowing  of  the 
doctrine  of  Schopenhauer,  that  what  appears  in  our 
imagination  as  external  motion,  is  internally  will : 
'  Hsec  actio  (qua  membra  nostri  corporis  movemus) 
nihil  aliud  est  quam  volitio,  sentimus  nempe  et  cla- 
rissime  nobis  conscii  sumus,  hoc  solo  membra  nostra 
moveri  (in  quorum  scilicet  motibus  imperium  ha- 
bemus)  quod  moveri  ea  velimus,  licet  interim  ignari 
simus  quo  modo  motus  ille  fiat/  Here  occasionalism 
falls  quite  into  the  background,  which  elsewhere  rests 
upon  the  erroneous  assumption  that  an  activity 
can  only  be  exercised  by  one  who  discerns  how  it 
originated,  upon  which  God  is  introduced  as  the 
summus  opifex. 

Another  very  welcome  feature  is  that  Geulinx  is 
the  first  among  philosophers  to  feel  called  upon  to 
vindicate  the  rights  of  the  much  contemned  and 
abused  senses,  which  had  been  degraded  into  mere 
nothingness,  or  at  best  into  a  handmaiden  for  the 
more  distinguished  rational  cognition  with  which, 
as  alone  true  and  valid,  it  was  always  being  con- 
trasted: *  There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  which  is  in 
itself  the  true  world,  the  world  of  pure  thought  or 
1  Ed.  Grimm,  loc.  cit.  p.  14. 


GEULINX.      MALEBRANCHE.      BERKELEY.          175 

that  of  sensible  perception.  Which  however  is  the 
more  beautiful,  the  more  honourable  of  the  two  ?  I 
find  few  qualities  in  that  world  which,  as  the  truly 
existing,  gives  occasion  for  the  existence  of  the  other. 
There  is  no  change  but  that  of  motion.  How  far 
otherwise  in  the  world  of  our  senses !  Here  I  behold 
the  light  of  the  sun,  the  blue  heaven's  vault  above  me  ; 
the  flowers  deck  themselves  out  in  all  the  glory  of 
their  varied  colouring,  I  listen  to  the  soughing  of 
the  waves,  the  murmuring  air,  and  clamour  of  the 
storm.  No  doubt  this  world  is  the  fairest,  the  most 
worthy  of  its  divine  author !  We  gaze  with  admira- 
tion upon  the  Deity,  whose  unspeakable  inagic  takes 
occasion  of  our  bodily  motions  to  call  up  this  world 
in  us ;  and  we  look  up  to  him  with  still  deeper  admi- 
ration when  we  discern  the  spell  running  through 
this  God-created  nature.  The  world  of  ideas  resembles 
a  dry  treatise ;  the  world  of  sense,  on  the  contrary,  a 
poem  of  phantasy1/  (Phys.  "Vera,  Introd.) 

Still  more  important  are  the  investigations  initiated 
by  Geulinx,  in  which,  it  may  really  be  said,  that  he 
approaches  the  Kantian  conception  of  the  problem  of 
knowledge.  Amongst  these  must  be  placed  first  of 
all  the  question,  whether  there  can  be  any  know- 
ledge of  things  apart  from  the  forms  of  our  thought, 
that  is  to  say,  in  Kantian  phrase,  any  knowledge  of 
things  in  themselves  ?  Such  a  question,  uttered  for 
the  first  time,  breathes  the  whole  spirit  of  modern 
philosophy.  Geulinx's  answer  to  the  question  runs 
as  follows  :  *  When  we  think  and  judge — for  judg- 
ment is  the  soul  of  thought — we  use  a  subject  arid  a 
predicate.  The  subject  must  be  conceived,  by  means 
of  a  fundamental  internal  faculty  of  our  mind,  which 
cannot  be  further  defined,  as  a,  Being  (ens).  I  conceive 

1  Ed.  Grimm,  loc.  cit.  p.  48. 


176  MODEEN  PHILOSOPHY. 

the  thing  thus  contemplated  as  one,  by  including 
all  its  parts,  and  excluding  the  thing  itself  from 
everything  else.  This  unity  does  not  belong  to,  e.g. 
a  table  as  it  is  in  itself,  but  is  completed  only  in  our 
mind  (totatio).  We  must  further  ascribe  the  predi- 
cates to  the  subject,  i.  e.  we  must  declare  something 
about  it.  Every  subject  only  becomes  a  subject  when 
it  is  conceived  as  being  (ens).  This  is  the  nota  sul- 
jecti.  When  we  add  this  note  to  an  adjective,  it 
becomes  a  subject  (the  good,  the  sweet) :  when  we 
subtract  this  note  from  a  substantive,  it  becomes  a 
predicate  (the  man  is  a  judge).  The  great  question 
concerning  substance  and  accident  thus  reduces  itself 
to  the  grammatical  distinction  between  substantive 
and  adjective/  Such  a  sense  of  the  dependence  of 
our  thought  upon  the  forms  of  speech  betrays  a  pro- 
found insight  into  the  nature  of  knowledge  and 
perception. 

*  But  how  does  it  happen,'  he  asks  further,  '  that 
certain  qualities  are  chiefly  indicated  by  substantives 
and  others  by  adjectives  ?  The  distinction  seems  to 
have  arisen  because  certain  things  appeared  perma- 
nent and  durable,  such  as  bodies,  and.  others  again 
more  fugitive  and  variable,  such  as  heat  and  cold, 
light  and  darkness,  colour  and  sound.  Out  of  the 
durable  ones  in  the  first  instance  substantives  and 
substances  were  formed,  and  out  of  the  fugitive  and 
changeable  ones  adjectives  or  accidents.  But  the  dis- 
tinction itself  proceeds  wholly  from  sensible  percep- 
tion, by  which  the  human  mind  is  almost  always 
governed,  so  that  the  distinction  is  accepted  in  our 
thought  as  something  actually  existing.  Thus  nothing 
appears  more  permanent  to  our  sensible  perceptions 
than  the  body;  the  mind  however  altogether  eludes 
their  glance.  And  therefore  we  need  not  be  surprised 


GEULINX.      MALEBBANCHE.      BERKELEY.         177 

that  there  have  been  people  who  held  the  soul  to  be 
an  accident  of  the  body,  and  characterised  man  as  a 
corpus  animatum  rationale1.9 

Credit  has  already  been  given  to  Hobbes  for  having 
divined  that  the  true  source  and  form  of  thought  was 
to  be  found  in  language,  and  the  same  praise,  only  in 
yet  higher  measure,  must  be  conceded  to  Geulinx.  It 
was  reserved  for  the  present  age  and  the  rapid  strides 
which  comparative  philology  has  made  in  it  to  discover 
the  immeasurable  importance  of  the  study  of  language 
to  all  sound  philosophy.  But  honour  and  admiration 
are  none  the  less  due  to  the  first  heralds  of  the  scarcely 
dawning  day.  Geulinx  made  use  of  the  new  knowledge 
to  drive  the  countless  categories  and  petrified  notions 
of  scholasticism  out  of  the  field.  The  two  real  forms 
of  thought,  to  which  everything  is  referred,  are  those 
of  Substantive  and  Adjective,  or  Subject  and  Predi- 
cate. He  says  in  express  terms  that  his  opponents 
(the  Aristotelians)  were  indignant  'at  seeing  their 
highly  praised  metaphysical  chrysalis  appear  in  its 
perfect  form  as  pure  Grammar.  But  they  need  not  be 
ashamed  of  this  science  ;  indeed  there  is-  nothing  more 
worthy  of  a  philosopher  than  this  same  grammar,  for 
it  is  the  science  of  the  most  primary  and  universal 
forms  of  thought 2/ 

By  the  help  of  these  premises,  the  main  question, 
as  to  the  possibility  of  a  knowledge  external  to  the 
forms  of  thought,  answers  itself.  Knowledge  neces- 
sarily declares  something  about  things,  and  therefore 
must  be  clothed  in  words.  But  as  soon  as  the  under- 
standing conceives  any  object  as  a  something,  it  has 
already  invested  it  with  the  form  of  its  own  thought, 
that  of  the  subject.  The  predicate  and  copula  are 

1  Ed.  Grimm,  loc.  cit.  p.  61. 

2  Id.,  loc.  cit.  p.  63. 
VOL.  I.  N 


j;8  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

introduced  in  the  same  way,  and  thus  the  forms  of 
two  mental  activities  are  applied  to  the  thing.  In 
other  words,  no  knowledge  of  things  is  possible  out- 
side the  forms  of  thought. 

Heason  is  superior  to  sense.  Knowledge  of  things, 
apart  from  sensible  perception,  only  becomes  possible 
by  means  of  a  higher  faculty,  which  brings  them  be- 
fore us,  namely,  reason.  If  there  were  a  still  higher 
faculty  than  this,  we  could  reject  all  rational  as  well 
as  sensible  knowledge  and  rely  only  upon  it.  But 
no  such  faculty  exists,  arid  we  must  therefore  con- 
ceive things  under  the  mental  forms  of  our  reason ; 
for  things  in  themselves  can  never  become  the  objects 
of  cognition. 

This  view  itself  is  valuable,  and  will  preserve  us 
from  many  errors.  If  I  see  a  stick  in  water  as  bent, 
there  is  no  error  about  the  fact ;  error  only  begins 
when  I  maintain  that  the  external  reality  corresponds 
to  my  sensible  perception.  And  similarly,  men  are 
not  in  error  so  long  as  they  conceive  things  in  the 
forms  of  human  thought,  but  only  when  they  ascribe 
these  same  forms  to  the  things  in  themselves.  To 
conceive  the  things  under  these  forms  is  a  necessity 
which  the  wisest  cannot  escape,  but  he  may  refrain 
from  judging  the  forms  to  pertain  to  the  things  in 
themselves,  and  herein  indeed  his  wisdom  consists  *. 

We  see  in  all  this  a  worthy  prelude  to  the  Kantian 
Critik  of  pure  Eeason ;  the  same  clearness  arid  caution, 
the  same  method,  the  same  insight  that  all  human 
truth  and  certainty  must  be  derived  from  reason,  that 
the  task  of  philosophy  is  to  establish  the  limiting 
conditions  of  this  faculty,  and  that  human  knowledge 
cannot  attain  to  the  discernment  of  things  in  them- 
selves. 

1  Ed.  Grimm,  loc.  cit.  p.  66. 


GEULINX.      MALEBRANCHE.      BERKELEY.         179 

Geulinx  restricts  his  criticism  to  the  forms  of  judg- 
ment, which  in  themselves  are  empty  and  insignifi- 
cant in  his  eyes;  and  side  by  side  with  them  he 
allows  innate  ideas  to  subsist,  treating  these  through- 
out as  substantial.  And  hence  he  repeatedly  maintains, 
that  although  we  can  only  know  in  accordance  with 
the  forms  of  thought,  and  must  translate  everything 
into  these  forms,  still  body  and  mind  are  self-sub- 
sisting objects,  or  substances: — a  contention  which 
enables  us  to  measure  the  depth  of  the  abyss  into 
which  Kant  still  had  to  plunge  to  rescue  truth. 

Malebranche  may  be  dealt  with  more  briefly.  His 
penetrating  mind  too  felt  oppressed  by  the  unmi- 
tigated opposition  of  the  two  substances  as  presented 
by  Descartes.  He  too  rejected  as  inconceivable  the 
influxus  physicus,  since  mind  could  never  act  on 
matter,  nor  matter  on  mind.  Schopenhauer  however 
is  right  in  observing  that  he  forgot  that  the  influxus 
jphysicus  had  already  been  assumed  in  the  creation  and 
government  of  the  material  world  by  a  spiritual  God. 

Malebranche's  attempt  to  reconcile  the  two  oppo- 
sitcs  is  inspired  rather  by  the  spirit  of  Platonism  than 
that  of  mathematical  science.  He  enquires,  how  the 
mind  attains  to  ideas  of  material  things  and  of  an 
external  world  existing  independently  of  itself?  For 
it  is  certain  that  what  is  conceived  by  the  intellectual 
nature  must  itself  be  of  a  spiritual  kind,  belonging  to 
the  forms  of  consciousness  :  the  material  can  never 
act  on  the  immaterial.  But  what  causes  the  soul  to 
ascribe  reality  to  ideas,  or  reality  to  enter  the  soul 
in  the  form  of  ideas?  The  view  is  here  clearly 
that  of  Plato,  combined  with  the  Cartesian  limita- 
tion to  subjective  consciousness  and  the  two  sole 
substances. 

Malebranche  seeks  his  solution  by  regarding  the 

N  2 


l8o  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

substantial  cogitans  as  a  whole,  apart  from  its  connec- 
tion with  the  material  world ;  for  as  the  substantia 
extensa  subsists  throughout  space  in  a  constant,  inde- 
structible relationship  of  material  interaction,  in  the 
same  way  an  inward,  uninterrupted  connection  of 
cause  and  effect  binds  all  intelligences  to  the  causa 
prima,  i.  e.  the  Deity.  The  Deity  then  is  the  Abso- 
lute, Intellectual  Substance,  the  thinking  Principle 
which  bears  and  comprehends  all  ideas  within  itself, 
and  beholds  and  knows  all  things  as  they  essentially 
are.  The  human  soul  only  attains  through  this  me- 
dium to  the  knowledge  of  things,  and  so  to  the 
conception  of  an  external  world.  '  We  see  everything 
in  God  :  God  is  the  place  of  spirits/ 

We  see  here  not  only  the  affinity  with  Plato,  but 
also  a  sincere  attempt  to  reach  a  logical  and  satis- 
factory solution  by  starting  from  the  Cartesian  pre- 
mises. At  the  same  time,  in  a  way  rather  dangerous 
to  the  Christian  opinions  of  the  author,  the  indi- 
viduality of  spirits  is  swallowed  up  in  the  absolute, 
intellectual  abyss  of  the  Godhead ;  the  path  he  has 
entered  upon  could  only  lead,  if  followed  further,  to 
Pantheism. 

In  general  it  may  be  observed  that  Pantheism  was 
not  easily  avoidable  according  to  the  principles  laid 
down  by  Descartes.  In  proportion  as  the  idea  of 
substance  was  extended  and  made  more  and  more  to 
include  all  reality,  it  attained  to  a  unity  of  nature, 
which,  though  it  did  not  indeed  exclude  the  mutual 
determination  of  parts,  postulated  a  complete  un- 
conditionedness  for  the  whole,  from  whence  every- 
thing else  was  to  result  as  from  the  causa  prima. 

The  view  of  Malebrariche  recurs  again  in  the  doc- 
trine of  Spinoza,  and  there,  as  we  shall  see,  leads  that 
generally  profound  thinker  into  a  labyrinth,  where 


GEULINX.      MALEBRANCHE.      BERKELEY.          l8l 

he  wanders  in  obscurity  without  finding  any  outlet 
for  himself.  Thus  he  says,  in  the  fifth  proposition  of 
the  second  part  of  .the  Ethics,  that  the  formal  ex- 
istence of  ideas  has  its  cause  in  God  alone  in  so  far 
aa  his  nature  is  intellectual,  but  not  in  so  far  as  he 
is  conceived  under  any  other  attribute.  '  That  is  to 
say/  he  adds  explanatorily,  'both  the  ideas  of  the 
divine  attributes,  and  those  of  individual  things,  are 
caused,  not  by  their  objects,  or  the  things  represented, 
but  only  by  God  in  so  far  as  he  is  an  intellectual 
being/  This  is  quite  the  course  of  thought  seen  in 
Malebranche  :  c  Nous  voyons  tout  en  Dieu/ 

The  efforts  of  the  two  above-named  thinkers  to 
reconcile  the  idealistic  and  realistic  points  of  view 
broke  down  in  the  same  way  as  Descartes'  explanation. 
There  is  no  method  by  which  we  can  combine  in  the 
idea  at  once  all  that  it  has  been  assumed  as  exclud- 
ing and  as  containing ;  but  there  always  remains 
as  a  last  resource  an  appeal  to  the  Deity  by  whose 
intervention  all  impossibilities  are  rendered  possi- 
ble. Both  Geulinx  and  Malebranche  endeavoured  so 
far  as  possible  to  lighten  the  labours  of  Divinity, 
to  leave  as  few  impossibilities  as  possible  to  be 
so  accounted  for,  and  accordingly  to  allow  more  for 
human  consciousness  and  intelligence.  They  were 
in  this  more  consistent  Cartesians  than  Descartes 
himself,  and  pursued  the  road  he  had  so  boldly 
entered  upon  for  another  long  stage  in  advance, 
before  they  too  gave  way  and  began  to  resort  to  a 
supernatural  explanation  of  the  connection  between 
the  material  and  the  immaterial  world.  The  road  of 
both  was  that  of  Idealism,  but  they  did  not  pursue 
it  to  the  end.  This  was  reserved  for  another  thinker, 
whose  work  must  be  noticed  here  because  of  its 
relation  to  theirs,  although  he  belongs  to  a  later  date 


1 82  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

than  Spinoza,  Locke,  and  Leibniz,  and  was  to  a 
certain  extent  influenced  by  their  speculations.  This 
thinker  is  Bishop  Berkeley  (1684-1753). 

Schopenhauer  observes1:  '  Berkeley,  although  later, 
and  knowing  Locke,  followed  the  track  .of  the 
Cartesians  to  its  furthest  logical  conclusion,  and 
so  became  the  author  of  the  only  real  and  true 
system  of  Idealism,  which  maintains  that  the  ex- 
tended matter  filling  space,  i.  c.  the  sensible  world 
in  general,  can  have  no  existence  as  such  except  in 
our  mind,  and  that  it  is  absurd,  indeed  contradictory, 
to  ascribe  to  it  as  such  an  existence  o\itside  our 
thought  and  independent  of  the  knowing  subject, 
and  consequently  to  assume  the  existence  of  a  self- 
subsisting  matter.  This  profound  and  just  notion 
constitutes  the  sum  and  substance  of  his  philosophy. 
He  has  hit  upon  and  clearly  distinguished  the  ideal 
element,  but  the  real  escaped  him,  indeed  he  con- 
cerned himself  little  about  it,  and  only  offers  occasional, 
partial,  and  incomplete  utterances  on  this  subject. 
The  will  and  omnipotence  of  God  is  the  direct  cause 
of  all  the  phenomena  of  the  perceptible  world; 
that  is  to  say,  the  real  existence  of  all  the  objects  of 
our  thought  is  attributable  to  knowing  and  willing 
beings  only,  such  as  we  are  ourselves,  and  therefore 
these  together  with  (rod  make  up  reality.  They  are 
spirits,  that  is  to  say,  knowing  and  willing  beings ; 
for  he  maintains  will  and  knowledge  to  be  inseparable. 
He  has  also  in  common  with  his  predecessors  the 
belief  that  God  is  better  known  than  the  apparent 
world,  so  that  any  reference  to  him  appears  as  an 
explanation.  It  may  be  that  his  clerical  and  episcopal 
status  imposed  too  heavy  shackles  and  limited  him 
to  a  narrow  range  of  thought,  beyond  which  he  was 
1  Parerga  und  Paralipomena,  i.  p.  14. 


GEULINX.      MALEBRANCHE.      BERKELEY.         183 

on  no  account  to  stray.  Hence  he  could  make  no 
further  way,  and  the  true  and  the  false  had  to  keep 
house  together  in  his  brain  as  best  they  might.  This 
applies  indeed  to  the  works  of  all  these  philosophers, 
with  the  exception  of  Spinoza/ 

The  matter  may  also  Le  stated  in  the  following 
way :  According  to  Descartes,  the  highest  a  priori  idea 
is  that  of  being  or  substance.  He  did  not  originate 
the  contrast  between  thought  and  being,  whence  the 
salutary  distinction  between  objective  and  subjective 
existence  has  been  derived,  but  he  dwells  only  on 
that  between  thought  or  consciousness  and  material 
extension.  He  attributed  being  equally  to  both, 
hence  his  substantia  cogitans  and  extensa.  His  two 
successors,  Geulinx  and  Malebranche,  remnined  at 
the  same  standpoint.  Berkeley  was  the  first  to 
doubt  the  reality  of  extended,  material  substance, 
and  indeed  to  transfer  all  things  into  the  realm  of 
mind,  and  to  explain  all  ideas  of  external  objects  as 
products  or  even  functions  of  the  latter.  And  this 
alone  is  true  idealism,  the  logical  development  of  the 
fundamental  truth  of  Cartesianism  ;  and  at  the  same 
time  the  overthrow  of  Cartesian  dualism,  by  the 
substitution  of  Henism — the  assumption  of  but  one 
kind  of  substance. 

The  salutary  effects  of  the  Berkeleyan  train  of 
thought,  together  with  its  weaknesses  and  onesided- 
ness,  may  be  easily  summed  up.  Its  merits  are: 
i.  That  the  idea  of  substance — at  least  on  one  side — 
was  completely  done  away  with,  and  the  fallaciousness 
of  the  inference  was  shown,  which  concludes  from 
affections  and  representations  of  consciousness  to 
actual  things  existing  outside  consciousness,  and  then 
attributes  equal  reality  to  these.  The  cumbrous 
legacy  of  scholasticism,  the  idea  of  substance,  with 


184  MODEKN   PHILOSOPHY. 

which  Descartes  and  his  successors  were  weighted, 
was  at  least  diminished  by  half. 

2.  Chief  stress  was  laid  upon  the  point  towards 
which  modern  philosophy  was  first  directed  by 
Cartesian  insight,  and  from  whence  alone  sure 
results  are  found  attainable,  namely  consciousness, 
or  the  thinking  mind.  A  criticism  of  the  processes 
of  consciousness  might  lead  ultimately  to  an  ex- 
planation of  how  and  by  what  right  this  consciousness 
assumed  the  existence  at  the  same  time  of  its  own 
ideas  and  of  external  objects  corresponding  to  them. 
And  from  this  point  of  view  Berkeley  also  may  be 
reckoned  among  the  precursors  of  Kant. 

But  the  onesidedness  of  this  theory  is  at  least 
equally  self-evident.  When  Berkeley  makes  con- 
sciousness create  everything  out  of  itself,  and  in  a 
certain  sense,  spin  everything  out  of  its  own  sub- 
stance, the  gates  are  shut  upon  experience.  The 
growth  and  genesis  of  ideas,  which  contradict  them- 
selves, are  in  conflict  with  and  eventually  neutralise 
each  other,  and  yet  all  lay  claim  to  correspond  more 
or  less  with  an  existing  reality  outside  ourselves, — all 
this  becomes  wholly  incomprehensible  and  unintelli- 
gible. Berkeley,  like  all  his  predecessors,  is  obliged 
to  take  refuge  with  the  Deity,  who  is  the  true  author 
of  all  mental  processes,  by  which  these  ideas  are 
called  up  in  our  minds  and  made  to  follow  each 
other  in  orderly  sequence.  The  only  difference  between 
his  doctrine  and  that  of  Geulinx  and  Malebranche  is 
that,  according  to  the  latter,  the  material  world, 
which  by  the  divine  co-operation  we  think  of  as  real, 
does  also  actually  and  really  exist,  while  according 
to  Berkeley  it  is  a  mere  phantasm. 

Berkeley's  theory  is  the  direct  opposite  of  ma- 
terialism. As  the  latter  assumes  matter  to  be  the  only 


GEULINX.      MALEBRANCHE.      BERKELEY.         185 

self-subsisting  reality,  so  Berkeley  assumes  mind  or 
consciousness;  The  being  of  matter  consists  only  in  its 
being  presented  in  thought.  Esse  =  percipi.  And  it 
is  not  to  be  denied  that  if  the  choice  lay  only  between 
these  two  extremes,  the  spirit  of  Cartesianism  and  of 
modern  philosophy  would  allow  the  claims  of  the 
latter  view  to  the  larger  share  of  truth,  for  con- 
sciousness alone  is  directly  given  and  certain. 

And  yet  Berkeley  too  is  unfaithful  to  the  true 
starting-point  of  the  Cartesian  philosophy,  which 
consists  in  the  conscious  Ego,  the  thinking  subject. 
The  idea  of  substance,  from  which  he  has  freed  him- 
self on  the  material  side,  still  holds  hirn  prisoner 
upon  the  other,  immaterial  side,  and  forces  him  into 
illogical  conclusions.  For  if  true  being  consists 
only  in  being  perceived,  by  what  right  can  my  con- 
sciousness assume  the  existence  of  beings  distinct 
from  myself,  but  able  like  me  to  think,  imagine,  and 
will  ?  How  can  I  ascribe  actual  reality  to  them,  or 
even  to  the  Deity,  since  I  have  no  assurance  of  their 
existence  save  from  my  own  thought  and  imagination. 
Must  we  not,  with  strict  remorseless  logic,  apply  also 
to  the  existence  of  these  spiritual  beings  the  doctrine 
that  the* ideas  of  the  conscious  subject  have  no  reality 
outside  his  consciousness  ?  Must  not  the  well-known 
utterance  of  the  mystic  poet  be  recognised  as  full 
and  valid  truth  : — 

'Ich  weiss,  class  ohne  mich  Gott  niclit  ein  Nu  kann  lebcn, 
Werd,  it'h  zu  nicht,  er  muss  von  Noth  don  Geist  aufgeben.' 

ANGELUS  SILESIUS. 

After  all,  Berkeley's  chief  merit  consists  in  his 
having  been  the  first  to  give  utterance  to  the  funda- 
mental truth  of  idealism,  which  Schopenhauer,  at 
the  beginning  of  his  chief  work,  has  formulated  as 
follows:  'The  world  is  my  idea  —  this  is  a  truth 


1 86  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

which  holds  good  of  every  living  and  knowing  being, 
although  man  alone  is  able  to  reach  a  reflective 
abstract  consciousness  of  it :  and  if  he  really  does  so, 
he  has  already  attained  philosophical  discretion.  It 
will  then  be  clear  to  him  that  he  knows  no  sun,  no 
earth,  only  an  eye  which  sees  the  sun,  a  hand  which 
feels  the  earth ;  that  the  world  which  surrounds  him 
is  only  there  as  thought,  that  is  to  say,  only  in  re- 
lation to  something  else,  namely,  the  thinker,  he  him- 
self. If  there  is  any  truth  that  may  be  enunciated 
a  priori  it  is  this.  .  .  .  The  subdivision  into  object 
and  subject  is  the  only  form  under  which  any  kind 
of  mental  representation  whatsoever,  abstract  or 
intuitive,  pure  or  empirical,  is  generally  possible 
or  thinkable.  No  truth  is  therefore  more  certain, 
more  independent  of  any  others,  and  loss  in  need  of 
demonstration,  than  this:  that  everything  which 
exists  for  our  perception,  and  therefore  the  whole 
world,  is  only  object  in  relation  to  the  subject,  in- 
tuition in  relation  to  the  intuitive  mind,  in  one  word, 
Idea/ 

'This  truth  is  in  no  way  new.  It  was  involved 
in  the  sceptical  considerations  from  which  Descartes 
started.  But  Berkeley  was  the  first  to  give  it  de- 
cided utterance ;  he  has  won  thereby  undying  fame 
in  philosophy,  even  though  the  rest  of  his  doctrine 
cannot  be  maintained  V 

1  Schopenhauer,  Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,  i.  p.  i. 


THE  MONISTIC  TENDENCY. 

SPINOZA  (1632—1677). 

WE  have  seen  how  the  unreconciled  and  irrecon- 
cilable elements  in  the  Cartesian  dualism  ended  in 
leading  by  a  double  road  to  Henism,  according  to 
which  either  matter  or  mind,  substantia  extensa 
or  substantia  cogi tans,  had  the  right  to  existence 
alone  conceded  it,  while  the  other  side  was  either 
ignored  or  treated  with  indifference,  as  for  instance 
when  the  mind  was  regarded  as  an  accidental  affec- 
tion of  matter,  or  the  material  world  as  the  product 
of  the  intelligent  consciousness. 

Materialism  reposed  contentedly  upon  the  couch 
prepared  for  it  by  Descartes,  a  strictly  causal,  me- 
chanical theory  of  the  universe  ;  and  its  rest  was 
untroubled  by  the  alarming  certainty  that  matter, 
extension,  number,  cause,  in  short  the  whole  real 
and  palpable  external  world,  necessarily  presupposed 
a  sensitive  and  intelligent  consciousness,  without 
which  it  could  have  no  existence  for  mankind. 

As  soon  as  this  truth  began  to  force  itself  irre- 
sistibly on  the  minds  of  serious  and  conscientious 
thinkers,  they  sought  with  despairing  energy  to  find 
in  their  one  acknowledged  principle  some  point 
d'appui  towards  the  other  side,  an  endeavour  in 
which  they  naturally  shared  the  fate  of  the  arch- 
liar  Munchhausen,  when  he  tried  to  lift  himself  and 
his  horse  out  of  the  morass  by  his  own  pigtail. 
Among  these  impossible  attempts  may  be  reckoned 


1 88  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

the  problem  proposed  by  Hobbes  (simply  repeated 
with  variations  by  Lange1)  and  characterised  by  him 
as  one  of  the  highest  and  most  important  that  can 
occupy  the  human  intelligence,  'What  kind  of  motion 
can  it  be  that  produces  the  feeling  and  imagination 
of  living  creatures?'  One  might  as  well  ask:  'How 

1  Geschichte  dos  Material! smus,  i.  2  3  7.  Cf.  the  passage  quoted  above, 
p.  41,  note.  Whenever  Lange  gives  expression  to  the  opinion  that  the 
processes  of  thought  and  sensation  *  may  be  explained  as  a  special 
occurrence  arising  out  of  universal  mechanical  natural  necessity/ 
he  falls  into  that  same  materialistic  self-deception.  It  must  how- 
ever be  acknowledged  that  in  many,  nay  in  most  passages,  this 
excellent  writer  fully  recognises  the  infinite  difficulty  of  the 
problem,  and  points  to  the  direction  in  which  the  solution  must 
actually  be  sought.  Resolution  to  follow  this  path  indeed  failed 
him.  Thus  when  speaking  in  blame  of  Aristotle,  who  elevated  his 
forms  in  transcendental  fashion  into  causes  of  motion,  and  thus  struck 
a  fatal  blow  at  the  root  of  the  study  of  nature,  while  Demokritos 
had  been  on  his  guard  against  following  these  clues  into  further 
metaphysical  depths,  Lange  observes :  '  Here  the  Kantian  Critik 
of  Reason  was  needed,  to  cast  a  first  faint  ray  of  light  (!)  into  the 
abysses  of  a  secret,  which  is  still,  after  all  the  progress  of  natural 
sciences,  as  profound  to-day  as  it  was  in  the  age  of  Demokritos/ 
(Ib.  i.  p.  19.)  Another  crude  expression  of  the  materialistic  pre- 
judice is  to  be  found  in  Dubois-Heymond's  '  Qrenzen  des  Naturer- 
kennens,'  p.  34:  '  The  theory  of  descent,  taken  together  with  that  of 
natural  selection,  forces  the  idea  upon  the  student,  that  the  soul  has 
come  into  existence  as  the  gradual  product  of  certain  material  com- 
binations! To  exhibit  still  more  clearly  the  helplessness  of  modern 
science  in  the  face  of  the  dualism  which  seems  innate  in  human 
nature,  it  may  be  noted  that  Uebcrweg  is  driven  to  the  assumption 
that  '  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  force  will  reappear  in  psychical 
processes/  until  at  last  in  a  letter  to  Lange  he  resigned  himself  to 
the  despairing  confession :  '  If  you  can  help  me  out  of  the  strait  I 
shall  be  your  debtor  indeed ;  but  it  will  not  be  enough  for  you  to 
show  me  the  improbability  of  what  I  myself  see  to  be  very  little 
probable  in  itself,  but  you  must  open  some  other  outlook  to  me, 
that  shall  at  least  strike  me  as  moderately  plausible.  /  know  no 
such!  (Lange,  loc.  cit.  ii.  p. 


SPINOZA.  189 

much  thought  and  imagination  will  suffice  to  set  a 
mill-wheel  or  a  steam-engine  in  motion  V 

Spiritualism  too  needed  equally  to  be  inspired  by 
a  stronger  faith  than  that  which  removes  mountains, 
in  order,  after  scornfully  rejecting  '  that  stupid 
thoughtless  somewhat'  known  as  matter  into  the 
realm  of  nothingness,  calmly  to  resist  the  stormy 
force  with  which  the  outer  world  proclaims  its  ex- 
istence every  second,  and  to  transform  the  whole 
content  of  knowledge  into  an  airy  appearance,  or  a 
mere  dream  with  which  a  cunning  magician  mocks 
our  slumbers. 

But  the  very  stress  of  compulsion,  which  drove 
such  distinguished  men  to  such  extravagant  ex- 
tremes, shows  of  itself  the  enormous  difficulty  and 
perplexity  of  the  problem,  and  should  lead  us  to 
more  modest  criticism  of  the  Cartesian  dualism  than 
is  usually  indulged  in. 

There  was  only  one  other  path  left  open,  and  this 
was  trodden  by  Spinoza,  that  namely  of  endeavouring 
to  restore  to  its  original  natural  unitv  what  had  been 

£3  •/ 

separated  in  thought.  In  this  human  reason  returned 
to  its  first  instinctive  conviction,  but  the  newly- won 
truth  was  really  something  quite  different.  For 
there  are  always  three  stages  visible  in  the  progress 
of  human  reason,  from  confounding  to  distinguishing,' 
from  distinguishing  to  comparing,  and  from  com- 
parison to  the  establishment  of  a  higher  unity.  On 
this  subject  Geiger  observes1: — 

'The  human  reason  pursues  its  course  forwards 
and  sideways,  and  often  returns  upon  the  point  from 
whence  it  started,  only  with  a  change  :  so  that  when 
its  action  seems  to  have  become  the  same  as  before, 

1  Ursprung  und  Entwickelung  der  menschlichen  Sprache  und 
Vernunft,  i.  p.  91. 


MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

there  is  a  difference  in  its  mode  of  performing  the 
same  operation.  Man  strides  from  belief  through 
doubt-  to  knowledge,  and  often  after  a  long  course 
of  experience  he  reaches  the  goal  of  convictions 
which  were  taken  for  granted  from  the  first  by  the 
unthinking.  And  yet  this  circuitous  course  cannot 
be  looked  upon  as  superfluous,  for  its  accomplish- 
ment leaves  the  mind  enriched  with  the  boon  of 
consciousness.9 

Thus  from  the  earliest  times  mind  and  body  were 
held  to  be  one  and  the  same,  and  if  the  sight  of 
death  made  it  necessary  to  assume  a  separation,  the 
surviving  soul  was  still  imagined  with  a  new  kind 
of  material  existence,  a  body  only  of  a  finer  arid  more 
airy  substance,  in  which  the  spirit  dwelt  as  before, 
and  wrought  good  or  evil  to  those  left  behind.  Hence 
Ancestor  or  Manes  worship.  The  busy  and  fertile  fancy 
of  the  earliest  races  was  also  penetrated  with  the 
conviction,  that  all  the  powers  of  nature,  which  we 
now  class  as  soulless,  such  as  clouds,  storms,  rivers, 
sea  and  sky,  were  all  living,  conscious,  beings  like 
ourselves,  only  immortal  and  furnished  with  superior 
might :  hence  mythology  and  polytheism. 

But  it  was  another  and  far  harder  task  to  reunite 
what  had  been  sharply  separated  and  distinguished 
by  Descartes,  in  conformity  with  the  general  opinion 
of  many  centuries. 

Spinoza  himself  indeed  was  not  altogether  without 
precursors,  and  among  these  has  rightly  been  reckoned 
the  profound  Pantheist,  Giordano  Bruno  (b.  1550, 
burnt  1600),  who  in  high  poetic  flights  divines  again 
a  soul  within  the  universe,  and  instead  of  regarding 
matter  as  something  merely  passive,  or  in  Aristotelian 
phrase,  as  the  bare  possibility  of  becoming,  maintains 
rather  that  everything  proceeds  from  it  and  is  pro- 


SPINOZA.  IQI 

duced  by  separation  and  development :  '  and  there- 
fore matter  is  not  destitute  of  the  forms,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  contains  them  all ;  and  as  it  unfolds  what 
has  secretly  been  borne  within  it,  it  appears  in  truth 
as  the  whole  of  nature  and  the  mother  of  all  that 
lives/ 

But  we  must  not  forget  the  distance  from  these 
essays  in  which  emancipated  thought  first  tried  its 
wings,  under  the  stimulus  of  the  Copernican  theory 
of  the  universe,  between  the  profoundest  conjectures 
of  a  Giordano  Bruno,  a  Campanella  or  the  like,  and 
the  pupil  of  Descartes,  trained  in  the  strictest  dis- 
cipline of  mathematical  thought,  and  fully  conscious 
of  the  difficulty  of  the  problem  before  him ;  recog- 
nising 011  the  one  hand  the  strict  mechanical  depend- 
ence or  irrevocable  antecedents  of  all  material  change, 
and  on  the  other  the  irreconcilability  of  the  latter  with 
that  other  kind  of  causation  which  we  meet  with  in 
our  own  consciousness,  and  which  is  more  certain,  that 
is  to  say  more  primitive,  than  any  other.  No  doubt 
Spinoza  would  have  remained  faithful  to  Cartesian 
dualism  but  for  the  logical  necessity  which  compelled 
him  to  perceive  a  gap  in  his  master's  system,  an 
internal  contradiction,  a  false  deduction  from  imper- 
fectly defined  or  conceived  ideas.  This,  together 
with  the  revolt  of  those  secret  convictions  which 
rest  upon  the  common  sense  of  mankind  and  for 
which  a  philosophical  foundation  had  been  laid  by 
the  Humanists,  and  even  some  free-thinkers  among 
the  Schoolmen,  e.g.  Pomponatius,  who  denied  the 
immortality  of  the  soul  and  disclosed  the  incon- 
sistency between  the  idea  of  the  divine  omnipotence 
and  human  free-will, — this  all  combined  to  show  him 
the  urgent  need  for  some  correction  of  or  some  point 
of  view  beyond  the  former  doctrine. 


MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

It  is  again  tlie  idea  of  substance  from  which  every- 
thing is  to  depart  and  into  which  everything  is  to 
revert.  As  we  see,  this  idea  embraces,  according  to 
Descartes,  the  whole  of  existence  ;  and  by  a  fallacy, 
a  violent  transition  from  the  imagined  to  the  actual, 
the  character  of  necessary  existence  is  added  to  it. 
Now  Spinoza  raises  no  objection  to  this  necessity, 
on  the  contrary,  he  accepts  it  as  a  starting-point,  ob- 
serving :  *  Per  substantial!)  intelligo  id  quod  in  se 
est  et  per  sc  concipitur/  after  this  idea  has  already 
been  introduced  as  causa  sui;  of  which  it  is  said, 
*  per  cuusam  sui  intelligo  id  cujus  essentia  involvit 
existentiam;  sive  id  cujus  natura  non  potest  concipi 
nisi  existens/ 

But  Descartes,  while  including  all  existence  under 
the  idea  of  substance,  at  the  same  time  distinguished 
two  kinds  of  existences,  to  both  of  which  the  honour- 
able name  of  substance  was  to  be  accorded.  The 
philosophical  conscience  of  Spinoza  revolted  against 
this.  It  is  impossible,  he  held,  that  existence  should 
be  one,  and  then  again  at  the  same  time  two ;  there 
can  only  be  one  substance,  which  is  by  nature  eternal, 
infinite,  indivisible,  and  furnished  with  infinite  per- 
fections, i.e.  qualities  or  attributes.  This  substance 
he  too  calls  Deus, — though  most  frequently  with  the 
addition  sive  natura, — and  of  this  it  is  said,  'Prseter 
Deum  nulla  dari,  neque  concipi  potest  substantia' 
(Eth.  i.  Prop.  14);  and  again,  '  Quidquid  est  in  Deo 
est  et  riihil  sine  Deo  esse  neque  concipi  potest' 
(Prop.  15).  This  God  is  the  immanent  cause  of  all 
things ;  his  existence  and  his  essence  are  unum  et 
idem  (Prop.  20). 

Philosophical  speculation  is  here  straining  towards 
the  same  heights  as  the  Eleatics  sought  for,  the 
eternal,  unchangeable  one  (ej/  Kal  nav).  But  here  too 


SPINOZA.  193 

there  is  a  wide  difference.  The  Eleatics  acknow- 
ledged unity  as  the  rational  principle,  but  were 
unable  to  proceed  from  it  to  the  manifoldness  of  the 
world, .  and  hence  the  phenomenal  world  was  dis- 
posed of  offhand  by  Parmenides  as  the  'not-being/ 
while  Zeno  pointed  out  the  inner  contradiction  into 
which  reason  fell  in  conceding  reality  to  the  many. 
Spinoza's  substance  was  the  all-embracing,  all-corn- 
preheriding  reality,  in  which  all  single  existences 
find  their  place  7 ,  and  may  be  conceived  as  grasped 
in  connection  with  the  whole  by  its  necessity  and 
rationality,  while  apart  from  this  connection,  con- 
sidered as  existing  in  themselves,  they  can  only  be 
the  objects  of  erroneous,  i.  e.  imperfect,  incomplete 
perception. 

Imagination  is  the  greatest  foe  to  true  knowledge  ; 
for  while  we  imagine  single  things,  characterise  them 
with  words,  and  withdraw  them  by  abstraction  from 
their  place  in  the  great  general  order,  we  bestow 
the  character  of  substance  upon  accidents,  and  sever 
and  divide  what  in  nature  is  undivided  and  con- 
nected. We  can  only  attain  to  true  knowledge  by 
conceiving  the  universe  as  one,  and  considering  it  as 
existing,  not  in  time  but  sub  specie  seternitatis. 

Descartes'  mistake  was  to  bestow  the  character  of 
self-subsistence  upon  the  two  predicates,  thought  and 
extension.  This  error  revenged  itself  by  making  the 
union  or  interaction  of  the  two  substances  perma- 
nently impossible  and  inexplicable.  In  fact  the  two 
predicates,  extension  and  thought,  are  only  two  attri- 
butes of  one  and  the  same  substance.  The  attributes 
are  the  eternal,  immutable  qualities  of  substance, 

1  This  appears  clearly  from  Etli.  v.  24 :  '  Quo  magis  res  singulares 
intelligimus,  eo  magis  Deum  intelligimus/ 
VOI.  I.  0 


194  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

which  experience  does  not  make  known  to  us,  but 
which  themselves  underlie  all  our  experience  \  Medi- 
tation upon  these  attributes  leads  to  true,  pure  know- 
ledge, which  consists  in  this,  that  everything  is 
brought  into  connection  with  the  prime  source  of  all 
existence,  that  is  to  say,  with  God,  in  whom  all 
things  live  and  move  arid  have  their  being.  Human 
thought  approaches  to  perfection  in  proportion  as  it 
becomes  a  partaker  in  the  divine,  towards  which  its 
upward  struggles  are  directed.  All  separate  exist- 
ences, mankind,  individual  men,  are  only  modifications 
of  the  infinite  substance,  comparable  to  the  curling 
waves,  which  form  and  vanish  again  upon  the  surface 
of  the  ocean.  All  separate  existences,  alike  material 
or  spiritual,  are  held  together  by  the  rigid  iron  bond 
of  causality.  It  is  only  in  the  All  that  freedom  and 
necessity  are  the  same,  for  God  creates  and  causes  all 
things  ex  necessitate  naturae  suae,  for  he  is  infinite, 
untrammelled,  and  hence  cannot  be  determined  bv 

*  V 

anything  else  to  act  or  work.  Omnis  determinatio 
est  negatio. 

The  great  problem  of  matter  arid  mind  is  thus 
solved  by  Spinoza  in  the  simplest,  the  most  startlingly 
simple  way,  to  which  the  saying  simplex  sicjillum  veri 
is  surely  applicable.  As  Goethe,  Spinoza's  greatest 
disciple,  says,  There  is  no  mind  without  body,  no  body 
without  mind.  Both  are  one,  they  are  a  Monon, 
which  our  thought  grasps  by  abstraction  now  on  one 
side,  now  on  the  other,  modo  sub  attributo  extensionis, 

1  *  Nulla  experientia  id  (quod  ad  essentiam  pertinet)  unquam  nos 
edocere  poterit.  Nam  experientia  nullas  reruin  essentias  docet,  sed 
summum,  quod  efficere  potest,  est  mcntem  nostram  determinare,  ut 
circa  certas  tantum  essentias  cogitet.  Quare,  cum  existentia  at: 
tributorum  ab  eorurn  essentia  non  differat,  cam  nulla  experientia 
poterimus  assequi/  Spinoza,  Epistolse,  xxviii. 


SPINOZA.  395 

modo  cogitationis ;  and  then  because  they  are  denoted 
by  different  words,  it  is  hastily  assumed  that  different 
independent  beings  exist  corresponding  to  their  names. 
In  reality  instead  of  one  matter  and  one  mind,  there 
is  a  single  Something,  which  is  both  at  once.  Each 
taken  in  itself  is  imperfect :  the  two  qualities  are 
distinguishable  but  not  separable. 

A  causal  nexus  must  not  however  be  assumed,  con- 
necting the  two  attributes.  We  should  not  ask  if 
and  how  thought  can  act  upon  the  body  or  the  body 
on  thought ;  in  the  world  of  extension  everything 
is  accomplished  in  accordance  with  stern,  mechanical 
laws,  while  the  mind  proceeds  only  by  the  inward 
linking  of  ideas :  only  because  the  two  worlds  are 
one  and  the  same,  there  is  a  mental  change  cor- 
responding to  every  material  one,  and  conversely. 
Hence  the  fundamental  perversity  of  such  questions 
as  are  propounded  as  the  greatest  problems  in  one- 
sided henistic  systems,  e.  g.  How  can  mind  and  con- 
sciousness originate  out  of  bodily  modifications  ?  How 
can  mind  produce  out  of  itself  our  ideas  of  bodies  and 
the  things  themselves  1  In  relation  to  man  the 
essentials  of  the  monistic  view  may  be  formulated  as 
follows.  Our  body  presents  itself  to  us  in  twofold 
.fashion;  first  as  external,  material,  an  object  among 
objects,  and  then  again  as  consciousness,  feeling,  will 
(all  these  expressions  must  be  used  together  to 
characterise  the  nature  of  mind),  or  in  a  word  as  in- 
ternal. It  is  only  himself  that  man  knows  immediately 
in  this  twofold  character :  everything  else  in  nature 
appears  before  him  as  external,  as  object.  But  he 
soon  acquires,  by  intercourse  with  his  kind,  the  obser- 
vation of  kindred  lives,  and  finally,  from  irresistible 
rational  grounds,  the  conviction  that  there  is  life  in  the 
whole  of  nature,  that  this  inward  property  does  not 

o  2 


196  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

belong  to  himself  alone,  but  that,  in  greater  or  less  de- 
gree, all  other  beings  participate  in  the  same.  These 
degrees  of  consciousness  constitute  the  degrees  in 
the  variety  of  things,  and  supply  the  standard  of 
perfection  clearly  laid  down  in  Spinoza's  words  : 
'  plus  realitatis  habere,  i.  e.  plus  agere,  minus  pati/ 
Schopenhauer  himself  was  compelled  to  recognise  the 
latter  truth,  although  with  him  consciousness  was 
only  a  subordinate  variety  of  animal  life,  subject  to 
the  wholly  unconscious  Will.  He  says  in  the  Pa- 
rerga  \  '  Thus  the  degree  of  clearness  in  consciousness, 
or  of  reflection,  may  be  regarded  as  degrees  of  reality 
in  existence.  But  even  in  the  human  race  itself  these 
degrees  of  reflection  or  clear  consciousness  of  personal 
or  other  existence  are  very  numerous  and  gradually 
shaded.  It  must  be  admitted  that  some  men  have 
tenfold  the  intensity  of  being  of  others,  are  ten  times 
as  much.  .  .  The  majority  of  men  only  perceive  things 
as  they  are  in  relation  to  the  will  of  the  moment, 
'  they  do  not  reflect  upon  the  sequence  and  coherence 
in  their  own  existence,  let  alone  that  of  existence  in 
general ;  in  a  certain  sense  they  exist  without  being 
aware  of  it.  Hence  the  existence  of  the  thoughtless 
proletaire  or  slave,  who  lives  from  day  to  day,  ap- 
proaches materially  nearer  to  that  of  brutes,  who  are 
altogether  restricted  to  the  present,  than  our  own 
does.  Or  we  may  compare  it  with  the  life  of  a 
cautions,  intelligent  merchant,  who  spends  his  time 
in  speculation,  in  the  careful  execution  of  maturely 
considered  plans,  who  founds  a  family,  provides  for 
his  wife,  children,  and  posterity,  and  moreover  takes 
an  active  part  in  the .  affairs  of  the  commonwealth. 
Obviously  such  a  man  possesses  far  more  of  conscious 
existence  than  the  former,  that  is  to  say  his  existence 

1  Vol.  ii.  p.  630. 


SPINOZA.  197 

has  a  higher  degree  of  reality.  And  if  we  turn  now 
to  the  student  who  investigates,  let  us  say,  the  history 
of  the  past,  we  find  him  possessing  a  consciousness  of 
existence  as  a  whole  which  extends  beyond  his  own 
person  and  includes  the  course  of  the  universe/  All 
this  is  implied  in  Spinoza's  words  :  *  Quo  unaquaeque 
res  plus  perfectionis  (or  realitatis)  habet,  eo  magis 
agit  et  minus  patitur  et  contra  quo  magis  agit,  eo 
perfectior  est.' 

Everything  seemed  to  show  that  the  monistic 
theory  of  the  universe,  which  first  received  its  clear 
expression  in  the  West  at  the  hands  of  Spinoza  (though 
in  the  East  it  had  spread  long  before),  would  soon 
become  generally  prevalent,  while  dualism  would  be 
wrecked  on  the  rock  of  its  own  inconsistency  and 
irreconcilableness  with  science,  and  Henism,  which  in 
our  day  means  practically  materialism,  would  be  con- 
demned by  its  obvious  incompleteness,  and  denial  of 
the  noblest  and  most  essential  qualities  of  humanity. 
The  only  difficulty  still  left  for  monism  to  surmount 
lies  in  the  inveterate  prejudice,  which  has  grown  in 
the  course  of  ages  into  a  second  nature,  according  to 
which  we  distinguish  between  an  animate  and  in- 
animate world,  or  even  think  of  matter  as  something 
purely  passive.  We  can  only  clearly  and  completely 
comprehend  the  nature  of  any  being,  by  endeavouring 
to  understand,  not  merely  its  outside,  or  the  way  in 
which  it  presents  itself  to  our  imagination  as  an  ob- 
ject in  space,  but  also  its  inner  nature.  But  at  this 
point  we  are  met  by  the  difficulty  that  the  word  inner, 
which  is  derived,  like  all  our  notions,  from  the  ex- 
ternal world,  and  only  applied  metaphorically  to  the 
mind,  is  usually  misunderstood  fcy  those  votaries  of 
natural  science  whose  only  object  of  investigation  is 
this  phenomenal  world,  i.e.  matter;  for  they  imagine 


198  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

themselves  to  penetrate  by  these  processes  into  the 
very  heart  of  organic  things,  and  do  not  consider  that 
all  the  while  they  are  still  only  dealing  with  what  is 
external.  They  must  succeed  first  in  the  laborious 
endeavour  to  ascribe  all  that  they  know  best  and 
most  directly  in  themselves  —  as  consciousness,  feel- 
ing, and  will — to  all  other  existing  things,  and  only 
then  will  the  veil  begin  to  lift  itself  which  conceals 
the  great  secret. 

My  task  is  here  only  to  show  the  place  occupied 
by  Spinoza's  doctrine  in  the  course  of  the  develop- 
ment of  philosophical  thought  down  to  Kant's  doc- 
trine of  knowledge,  and  to  indicate,  as  before,  what 
new  truths  were  contributed  and  what  progress 
made  by  his  help,  as  well  as  what  was  one-sided  and 
incomplete. 

The  gains  were  these : — 

1.  The  establishing  the  idea  of  unity  of  substance, 
which  put  an  end  to  the   unnatural  separation  be- 
tween thought  and  extension.     It  was  now  possible 
to  conceive  every  sensible  process  as  at  the  same  time 
a  material  modification  of  the  organs  of  sense  and  as 
a  variety  or  mode  of  consciousness.     This   salutary 
combination,  arising  out  of  the  former  no  less  salutary 
distinction  or  differentiation,  lends  clearly  a  double 
aspect  to  every  question,  i.  e.  quatenus  res  consideratur 
sub  attributo  extensionis,  or  sub  attributo  cogitationis. 
It  is  only  a  development  of  Spinoza's  thought  that 
leads  Tyndall  to  give  the  characteristic  title  to  his 
valuable  work,  'Heat  considered  as  a  mode  of  motion,' 
i.  e.  according   to   Spinoza,  as  a  modus   extensionis. 
Everybody  always  knew  that  heat  was  also  a  modus 
cogitationis,  i.  e.  a  sensation. 

2.  Besides  this,  the  notion  of  substance,  as  the  last 
residuum  of  the  old  ontology,  tended  to  evaporate 


SPINOZA.  199 

into  a  single  final  unity,  which  strictly  speaking 
amounted  to  nothing  but  pure,  i.  e.  empty  being,  as 
to  which  men  could  know  nothing  whatever,  except 
in  so  far  as  they  themselves  participate  in  that 
being.  A  complete  change  of  front  was  thus  effected. 
Hitherto  the  whole  expenditure  of  strength  had  been 
directed  to  effecting  conquests  from  the  realm  of  one 
or  other  substance,  but  now  it  was  both  possible  and 
necessary  for  the  thoughtful  intelligence  to  bring  all 
its  forces  into  the  field  against  the  idea  of  substance 
itself,  and  to  show  that  this  also  was  the  creation  of 
reason  and  must  have  its  existence  justified  thereby. 
This,  which  was  accomplished  by  Kant,  is  the  turning- 
point  in  the  history  of  philosophy:  before  him  it  was 
ontology,  after  him  and  through  him  it  became  dia- 
noiology,  or  a  theory  of  knowledge. 

3.  It  was  one  of  Spinoza's  merits  to  have  intro- 
duced the  conception  of  an  absolute  and  perfect 
knowledge,  such  as  the  reason  always  aspires  after, 
in  contradistinction  to  that  which  is  limited,  sub- 
ject to  the  course  of  causation  in  space  and  time,  and 
therefore  conditioned  by  the  boundaries  of  advancing 
knowledge.  The  only  absolute  knowledge  is  that 
which  considers  things  in  their  eternal,  infinite  con- 
nection in  God,  i.  e.  sub  specie  aeternitatis,  and  with- 
ont  the  limitations  of  space  and  cause,  and  refers 
them  all  to  the  true  final  ground  of  all  things,  the 
causa  sui  \  Here  are  the  true  principles  of  all  being 
and  all  knowledge ;  here  the  two  flow  into  one.  They 
are  eternal  truths,  which  not  only  explain  and  are 

1  'Intellectus  res  non  tarn  sub  duratione,  quam  sub  qu&dam 
specie  seternitatis  percipit  et  nuinero  infinite ;  vel  potius  ad  res 
percipiendas  nee  ad  numerum,  nee  ad  duratiouem  attendit;  cum 
autem  res  imaginatur  eas  sub  certo  numero,  cleterminata  duratione 
et  quantitate  percipit/  De  Intellectus  Emendatione,  sub  fin. 


200  MODEEN  PHILOSOPHY. 

presupposed  by  appearances  and  modi,  but  also  lead 
us  to  necessary  existence  and  reveal  to  us  its  true 
essentia.  This  true,  perfect  knowledge  is  opposed  to 
the  limited,  which  only  conceives  things  in  their 
component  parts,  as  under  the  limitations  of  time,  and 
space,  and  number.  The  latter  occupies  itself  only 
with  the  affectiones,  the  modi  of  substance,  riot  with  its 
true  essentia*.  Spinoza  overlooked  at  this  point  that, 
according  to  his  own  definition,  man  himself  was  only 
an  ephemeral  modus  of  the  .infinite  substance,  and 
that  it  was  as  impossible  for  a  transitory  intellect, 
hemmed  in  on  every  side  by  limitations,  to  conceive 
infinite  substance  sub  specie  aeternitatis,  as  it  would 
be  to  thrust  out  from  some  rapidly  moving  body  a 
lever  that  was  to  uproot  the  fixed  world  from  its  seat. 
Still  this  contrast  between  true,  absolute,  and  uni- 
versal knowledge,  and  that  which  was  limited  by  time, 
space,  and  causation,  served  to  show  the  way  to 
a  clearer  insight.  It  led  to  the  salutary  recognition 
of  the  limits  of  our  reason,  which  forms  the  real 
task  of  metaphysics.  Starting  from  this  view,  Kant 
was  enabled  to  show  that  the  first  kind,  absolute 
knowledge,  is  the  unattainable  ideal  of  human  reason, 
which  always  strives  after  perfection ;  while  the  latter 

1  'Seriem  rerum  singulariura  mutabiliurn  impossible  foret 
humanae  imbecillitati  assequi,  cum  propter  earum  omnem  numerum 
superantem  multitudinem,  tuin  propter  infinitas  circumstantias  iii 
una  et  eadeni  re,  quarum  unaquseque  potest  esse  causa  ut  res 
existat  aut  non  existat.  Quandoquidem  earum  existentia  nullam 
habet  connexiouem  cum  earundem  essentia  sive  (ut  jam  diximus) 

non   est  seterna  veritas Intima  rerum  essentia  tantum  est 

petenda  a  fixis  atque  seternis  rebus  et  simul  a  legibus  in  iis  rebus 
tanquam  in  suis  veris  codicibus  inscriptis,  secundum  quas  omnia 
singularia  et  fiunt  et  ordinantur;  imo  hsec  mutabilia  singularia 
adeo  intime  et  essentialiter  (ut  ita  dicam)  ab  iis  fixis  pendent,  ut 
sine  iis  nee  esse  nee  concipi  possint.1  De  Tntellectus  Emendat. 


SPINOZA.  2O I 

kind  represents  its  necessary  process,  its  one  final 
possession,  the  forms  into  which  it  must  translate  the 
whole  phenomenal  world. 

4.  In  many  passages,  and  especially  in  his  Trac- 
tatus  de  Intellectus  Emendatione,  Spinoza  displays  a 
clear  and  penetrating  insight  into  the  true  nature  of 
knowledge  and  the  path  by  which  it  must  be  reached, 
namely,  a  criticism  of  the  intellectual  faculties.  He 
is  clearly  feeling  for  what  Kant  subsequently  de- 
signated as  the  a  priori  element  in  human  know- 
ledge. '  In  order  to  distinguish  true  and  false  ideas, 
we  must/  he  says,  '  learn  to  understand  the  pecu- 
liarities of  the  intellect/  True  thought  is  that 
which  embraces  objectively  in  itself  the  essence  of 
a  principle  which  needs  no  cause  and  can  be  known 
in  and  by  itself.  The  form  of  true  thought  must 
hence  be  sought  in  itself,  not  in  its  relation  to  other 
forms ;  and  it  must  not  be  derived  from  its  own 
object,  as  if  it  were  caused  by  that,  but  from  the 
native  force  and  nature  of  the  intellect  itself/  He 
gives  as  an  instance  an  idea  vera,  the  object  of  which 
depends  upon  our  vis  cogitandi  and  is  not  to  be 
sought  in  rerum  natura,  and  naturally  selects  a 
geometrical  figure,  the  circle,  for  the  purpose.  He 
then  adds  :  '  Uiide  sequitur  simplices  cogitationes 
non  posse  non  veras  esse,  ut  simplex  semi-circuli, 
motus,  quantitatis,  etc.,  idea.'  He  speaks  in  the  same 
way,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Tractatus,  of  the  vis 
nativa,  or  native  force  of  the  intellect,  which  he 
explains  as  'illud  quod  in  nobis  a  causis  externis  non 
causatur;'  and  he  characterises  as  an  important  task 
the  attempt  to  enumerate  all  those  ideas  which  are 
derived  from  the  pure  intellect  and  to  separate  them 
from  the  ideas  of  the  imagination.  At  the  same 
time  he  warns  the  student  against  drawing  any  con- 


202  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

elusions  from  abstractions  when  he  is  dealing  with 
actual  things,  and  not  to  confound  what  belongs  to 
the  nature  of  the  intellect  with  the  real  facts  about 
particular  things1.  Finally,  he  insists,  as  upon  the 
foundation  of  all  true  knowledge,  on  the  need  to  seek 
first  the  cognitio  intellectus  ej usque  proprietatum  et 
virium;  and  at  the  same  time  he  points  out  that  in 
everything  else  truth  is  only  reached  by  the  help  of 
correct  definitions,  tested  and  established  by  corre- 
sponding methods,  while  as  to  the  intellect  we  are  left 
without  any  further  test  or  standard,  so  that  the  correct 
definition  must  be  self-evident:  'quod  vel  definitio 
intellectus  per  se  debet  esse  clara  vel  nihil  intclligere 
possumus.'  All  these  are  so  many  finger-posts,  point- 
ing and  preparing  the  way  to  a  future  examination 
of  the  pure  intellect,  or  pure  reason,  its  vis  nativa, 
proprieties,  and  the  like. 

5.  Lastly,  it  should  be  noticed  that  Spinoza,  like 
all  considerable  thinkers,  was  well  aware  of  the 
source  of  error  lying  in  words  and  the  self-deception 
of  the  human  mind,  which,  as  soon  as  it  meets  with  a 
word,  forthwith  imagines  that  some  equivalent  thing 
or  reality  must  exist  to  correspond  with  it.  '  For 
as  much  as  words  are  part  of  imagination,  that  is, 

1  In  the  Appendix  to  the  Cartesii  Principia  Philos.  more 
Geometrico  Demonstrata  (1663)  Spinoza  insists,  almost  in  the  very 
words  of  Kant,  npon  the  difference  between  the  entia  rationis  or 
modi  cogitandi  and  real  things  :  '  Ex  omnibus  supra  dictis  inter  ens 
reale  et  entis  rationis  ideata  nullam  dari  convenientiam  apparet. 
Uncle  etiam  facile  videre  est,  quam  sedulo  sit  cavendum  in  investi- 
gatione  rerum,  ne  entia  realia  cum  entibus  rationis  confundamus. 
Aliud  enim  est  inquirere  in  rerum  naturam,  aliud  in  modos  quibus 
res  a  no  bis  percipiuntur.  Hsec  vero  si  confundantur,  neque  modos 
percipiendi,  neque  naturam  ipsam  intelligcre  poterimus ;  imo  vero, 
quod  maximum  est,  in  causa  erit,  quod  in  magnos  errores  inci- 
demus,  quod  plerisque  hucusque  accidit/ 


SPINOZA.  203 

since  we  form  many  conceits,  according  as  words  are 
framed  in  the  memory,  at  random,  by  reason  of 
some  bodily  state ;  so  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that 
words  like  the  imagination  may  be  the  cause  of  many 
errors  unless  we  guard  ourselves  against, them  with 
much  care.  Add  to  this  that  they  are  constituted  to 
suit  the  taste  and  capacity  of  the  vulgar,  so  that  they 
are  only  signs  of  things  as  they  are  in  the  imagination, 
not  as  they  are  in  the  intellect,  which  is  evident 
from  the  fact  that  on  all  those  things  which  exist 
only  in  the  intellect  and  not  in  the  imagination 
negative  names,  such  as  incorporeal,  infinite,  etc.,  are 
always  imposed  :  and  even  many  things  which  are 
truly  affirmative  men  express  negatively,  such  as  un- 
created, independent,  infinite,  immortal,  etc.,  because 
the  contraries  of  these  are  much  more  easily  imagined; 
therefore  these  occurred  first  to  the  first  men  and 
usurped  the  place  of  positive  names.  We  affirm  and 
deny  many  things  because  the  nature  of  words,  rather 
than  that  of  the  things,  admits  of  the  affirmation  and 
denial,  and  in  ignorance  of  this  we  might  easily  take 
something  false  for  the  truth1/ 

The  principal  defect  of  Spinoza's  system  lies 
naturally  in  his  idea  of  substance  and  the  way  in 
which  it  is  educed ;  so  that  in  the  first  preliminary 
conception  existence  is  tacitly  imputed  to  the  subject, 
and  then  analytically  deduced  from  it,  like  the  con- 
juror's trick  in  which,  to  the  astonishment  of  the 
public,  an  article  is  discovered  where  the  performer 
has  secretly  had  it  placed  beforehand.  This  leap 
from  the  mere  idea,  or  what  is  thought,  into  the 
actual  world  is  the  most  violent  and  break-neck  salta 
mortale  to  be  met  with  in  any  system  of  philosophy. 

If  Spinoza  had  remained  faithful  to  his  demand, 
1  De  Intellectus  Emendatione,  xi.  §  88. 


204  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

conceived  in  the  true  Cartesian  spirit,  that  enquiry 
should  start  with  the  nature  and  properties  of  the 
intellect,  he  could  not  have  failed  to  discover,  that 
just  as  time,  space  and  number,  by  which  all  things 
are  explained,  are  yet  themselves  only  modi  cogi- 
tandi1,  similarly  the  idea  of  cause  or  causality  is  an 
original,  not  to  say  the  only  original  possession  of 
our  reason  ;  and  must  therefore  be  first  investigated, 
iu  all  its  varieties,  ramifications  and  functions,  before 
any  direct  application  may  be  made  of  it  to  the 
world,  or  the  degree  of  its  certainty  or  reality.  He 
ought  therefore,  before  inferring  a  first  cause  of  all 
beings,  and  thence  deducing  his  ideas  of  substance 
or  God,  to  have  verified  the  idea  of  causation  within 
the  subject  itself,  and  then  only  have  proceeded  to 
enquire  whether  and  how  far  this  idea  justifies  a 
transition  to  a  world  of  thought  and  matter,  mani- 
festing itself  in  time  and  space.  But  he  failed  to 
enter  on  this  verification,  and  the  omission  proved 
fatal  at  once  to  the  first  foundations  of  his  system, 
and  (at  least  in  part)  to  its  further  development. 

It  has  been  noticed  already  how  persistently 
Spinoza  confounds  and  identifies  cause  with  reason 
in  the  obvious  intention  of  arguing  from  ideas  to 
realities 2.  In  this  indeed  he  was  only  following  in 
the  wake  of  Descartes,  with  his  ontological  proof  of 
the  existence  of  God.  But  in  Descartes  there  was 
still  some  approach  to  a  rational  sequence,  and  the 
idea  of  God  appears  as  the  reason  of  his  existence. 
Spinoza,  on  the  other  hand,  creates  at  once  a  cause, 
by  describing  God,  or  what  comes  to  the  same  thing, 
substance,  as  causa  sui,  which  is  as  great  a  con- 

1  Cogitata  Metaphys.  cap.  i. 

2  Cf.  Schopenhauer,  Vierfache  "Wurzel  des  Satzes  vom  zureich- 
eiiden  Grande,  p.  1 3,  and  examples  there  collected. 


SPINOZA.  205 

tradiction  or  non-sense,  as  if  it  were  said  that  some- 
one was  his  own  father. 

I  have  already  pointed  out  how  Spinoza  was 
dazzled  by  the  methods  of  mathematics,  or  geometry, 
in  which  objects  and  definitions  have  their  rise 
together,  so  that  lie  began  to  dream  of  applying  the 
same  method  with  equal  results  to  philosophical 
ideas.  Hence  his  frequent  comparison  :  as  it  follows 
from  the  nature  of  the  triangle  that  the  sum  of  its 
angles  equals  two  right  angles1,  so,  with  the  same 
necessity,  it  follows  from  the  idea  of  the  deity  both  that 
it  exists  and  that  it  contains  and  produces  all  things. 
This  is  clearly  expressed  in  the  Ethics  (i.  1 6),  '  Ex 
data  cujuscurique  rei  dejinitwne  plures  proprietates 
intellectus  concludit,  quce  ex  eadem  necessario  sequun- 
tur/  whereupon,  ex  necessitate  divinse  naturse,  infinite 
attributes  may  be  deduced.  At  the  same  time,  the 
Deity  is  also  the  efficient  cause  of  all  things.  That 
mathematical  certainty  is  the  norm  of  truth,  that  its 
decisions  are  eternal  truths,  equally  valid  in  all  times 
and  places,  that  its  laws  supply  the  firmest  founda- 
tion for  all  other  knowledge,  as  in  mathematics  itself 
everything  is  deduced  from  a  few  postulates,  axioms, 
and  definitions, — all  this  contributed  to  make  it 
Spinoza's  ideal  of  true  knowledge. 

Spinoza's  relationship  to  Descartes  may  also  be 
characterised  in  this  way.  The  .latter  took  refuge 
in  the  transcendental  idea  of  the  Deity,  to  whom  all 
things  are  possible,  in  order  to  prove  the  reality  of 
the  material  world  and  the  equivalence  of  the  two 
substances.  Spinoza  took  this  equivalence  seriously, 

1  'Cum  attendimus  ad  naturam  trianguli,  invenimus  ejus  tres 
angulos  esse  sequales  duobus  rectis ;  si  talem  habemus  cognitionem 
Dei  qualem  habemus  trianguli,  turn  omnis  dubitatio  tollitur.'  De 
Intellectus  Emendatione.  . 


2O6  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

and  wished  to  show  how  the  possibility  became 
actual.  He  realised  the  transcendental  idea  and  made 
the  Deity  into  an  immanent  cause,  by  identifying 
God  and  the  world  and  combining  extension  and 
thought  in  the  same  substance.  However  much  of 
truth  there  mav  have  been  in  the  fundamental 

V 

thought,  its  execution  was  laboured  and  confused ; 
all  the  more  so  because  Spinoza,  while  postulating 
the  idea  of  causation,  everywhere  assumed  the  ex- 
istence of  only  one  kind  of  causation,  and  en- 
deavoured in  consequence  to  represent  thought  as 
subject  to  the  same  kind  of  strict  causal  sequence 
as  material  changes,  both  being  independent  in 
themselves,  and  yet  held  together  in  necessary  re- 
lationship. A  thought  can  only  be  limited  by  a 
thought,  a  body  by  a  body ;  each  thought  must  be 
deduced  from  another  thought,  and  so  on  to  infinity, 
while  a  body  can  only  be  determined  to  rest  or 
motion  by  another  body. 

Spinoza's  attempt  to  make  it  clear  to  himself  and 
others  how  these  two  attributes,  extension  and 
thought,  in  complete  causal  independence  of  each 
other,  can  yet  be  so  joined  together  in  the  same  being 
as  to  be  regarded  as  qualities  of  it — this  attempt 
must  be  held  to  have  failed  altogether  ;  and  again  for 
the  same  reason ;  namely  because  it  did  not  start  from 
a  thorough  and  exhaustive  theory  of  knowledge,  but 
only  aimed  at  translating  everything  into  '  reality/ 

Attention  should  be  paid  more  especially  to  the 
contradiction  involved  in  assuming  extension  to  be 
a  quite  special  quality,  altogether  independent  from 
thought,  when  in  fact  we  can  never  know  anything 
about  this  extension  except  what  is  contained  in 
our  thought  concerning  it,  so  that  at  last  every- 
thing must  be  referred  to  that  one  quality.  Spinoza 


SPINOZA.  207 

himself  says1,  '  Sic  etiam  modus  extensionis  et  idea 
illius  modi  una  eademque  est  res/  which,  as  Scho- 
penhauer well  observes,  can  only  mean  that  our  idea 
of  bodies  and  the  bodies  themselves  are  one  and  the 
same  thing.     And  all  the  while  no  proof  is  given  of 
the  existence  outside  our  thought  of  something  real, 
answering  to  our  idea,  but  distinct  from  it.  *  We  have 
thus/  Schopenhauer  continues2,  '  a  complete  realism  in 
Spinoza's  doctrine,  so  far  as  the  existence  of  things 
corresponds  to  the  idea  of  them  in  our  minds,  for  the 
two  are  one ;  and  therefore  we  know  things  as  they 
are  in  themselves.     They  are  extended  in  themselves 
(extensa)   just  as   they  present   themselves   in  our 
minds,  when  they  become  the  objects  of  thought  (co- 
gitata).  .  .  .  Spinoza   draws   the   line   altogether   on 
the  ideal  side,  and  stops  short  at  the  world  as  pre- 
sented  in  thought ;  the  latter,  as  characterised  by 
its  form,  extension,  he  holds  to  be  the  real,  which 
exists  moreover  independently  of  its  presentation  in 
thought.    He  is  thus  certainly  justified  in  saying  that 
what  is  extended  and  what  is  thought  of,  i.e.  our 
idea  of  bodies  and  the  bodies  themselves,  are  one  and 
the  same.     For  things  are  only  extended  as  they  are 
thought  and  only  thought  of  as  extended ;  the  world 
as  idea  and  the  world  in  space  are  una  eademque 
res.     We  have  no  difficulty  in  conceding  this.     If 
extension  were   a  quality  of  things  in  themselves, 
then  our  perception  of  it  would  be  a  knowledge  of 
things  in  themselves ;    he  assumes  this,  and  herein 
consists   his   realism.     But   as   he  has   not  laid  its 
foundations  by  showing  how  a  world  of  space  exists, 
corresponding  to  the  independent  world  thought  of 
as  extended,  the  fundamental  problem  remains  un- 
solved. .  .  .  Spinoza's    bias   towards   the   ideal    side 
1  Ethics,  ii.  Prop.  7,  Scliol,  2  Parerga,  i.  pp.  10-13. 


208  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

shows  itself  in  his  readiness  to  believe  that  reality 
was  to  be  found  in  the  extension  pertaining  thereto, 
and  the  consequent  acceptance  of  the  perceptible 
world  as  the  only  reality  outside  ourselves,  apd  the 
knowing  subject  (cogitans),  as  the  only  reality  within 
us.  And  in  the  same  way,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
reduces  the  only  true  reality,  the  will,  into  an  ideal,  by 
making  it  a  mere  modus  cogitandi,  and  indeed  iden- 
tifying it  with  the  judgment.  (Eth.  ii.  Prop.  48, 
49,  "per  vohtntatem  intelligo  affirmandi  et  negandi 
facultatem;"  and  again,  "concipiamus  siiigularem  ali- 
quain  volitioncm,  nempe  modum  cogitandi,  quo  meris 
affirmat,  tres  angulos  trianguli  sequales  essc  duobus 
rectis;"  which  is  followed  by  the  corollary,  "Voluntas 
et  intellectus  unum  et  idem  sunt ")/ 

This  severe  criticism,  which  is  just  enough,  so  far 
as  it  refers  to  the  object  of  knowledge,  must  be 
qualified  by  the  consideration  that  Spinoza  was  the 
first  to  venture  upon  treating  things,  which  presented 
themselves  to  our  faculties  of  perception  as  alto- 
gether heterogenous,  as  qualities  of  one  and  the  same 
being ;  and  to  say,  this  thinking  subject  is  at  the  same 
time  matter  and  mind,  these  two  are  therefore  only 
properties,  not  independent  things.  All  drawbacks 
notwithstanding,  this  was  an  important  progress. 

Great  confusion  and  obscurity  lias  been  caused 
by  the  adoption  among  the  successors  of  Descartes  of 
the  use  of  the  term  c(,gitatio,  which,  as  has  been 
shown,  was  used  by  himself  to  characterise  all  the 
modifications  of  consciousness,  in  the  widest  possible 
sense.  The  point  becomes  clearer  exactly  in  pro- 
portion as  we  approach  the  question,  What  is 
thought,  strictly  speaking,  and  how  is  it  distinguished 
.from  other  forms  of  consciousness  ?  a  question  first 
fully  and  lucidly  dealt  with  by  Locke. 


SPINOZA.  2O9 

Spinoza  indeed  contrasts  reason  and  imagination, 
and  says  that  the  interchange  of  words  and  images 
with  rational  ideas  is  the  cause  of  most  errors,  and 
accounts  for  this  in  the  following  words l :  '  Verborum 
namque  et  imaginum  essentia  a  solis  motibus  cor- 
poreis  constituitur  qui  cogitationis  conceptum  minime 
involvmit :'  but  he  makes  no  attempt  to  investigate 
the  connection  between  the  ideas  of  reason  and  the 
imagination  and  sensible  perception,  contenting  him- 
self with  the  most  superficial  explanations.  The 
nature  of  ideas  at  least  should  have  been  clearly  set 
forth,  but  on  this  point  too  he  remains  thoroughly 
obscure.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  passage  quoted  above 
(p.  201),  these  ideas  are  identified  with  the  simplest 
and  most  general  conceptions,  such  as  time,  space, 
motion,  mathematical  figures,  &c.  Sometimes  he  tells 
us  'ideam  quatenus  est  idea  affirmationem  aut  ne- 
gationem  involvere  V  which  puts  the  idea  on  the  same 
level  as  judgment.  Then  again  he  speaks  of  an  idea 
'  rei  singularis  actu  existentis 3/  Sometimes  mind  is 
the  'idea  corporis4;'  sometimes  'mentis  idea5  and 
'mens'  are  'una  eademque  res5;'  sometimes  the  'idese 
affectionum  corporis '  are  what  the  mind  perceives 6, 
and  sometimes,  in  his  own  words,  '  idea  mentis  (hoc 
est  idea  idese)  niliil  aliud  est  quam  forma  ideas  quate- 
nus haec  absque  relatione  ad  objectum  consideratur ; 
simulac  quis  aliquid  scit  eo  ipse  scit  se  scire  et  simul 
scit  se  scire  quod  scit,  et  sic  iri  infinitum.'  In  short 
the  word  is  used  with  the  most  fatal  want  of  pre- 
cision, and  resembles  anything  rather  than  an  idea 
clara  et  disfincta. 

The  reason  of  all  this  confusion  is  that  the  boundary 

1  Eth.  ii.  Prop.  49,  Schol.  2  Loc.  cit. 

3  Ib.  Prop.  9.  4  Tb.  Prop.  12,  13. 

6  Tb.  Prop.  21.  6  Ib.  Prop.  22,  23. 

VOL.  I.  P 


2IO  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

line  is  not  sharply  drawn  between  the  Ideal,  as  the 
intelligent  principle  in  the  subject,  and  the  Keal,  as 
the  objective  world,  or  matter  of  thought.  Do- 
minated by  his  leading  idea,  that  the  worlds  of 
extension  and  thought  are  parts  of  the  same  sub- 
stance, Spinoza  insists  upon  this  truth,  repeating  it 
sometimes  of  the  thinking  subject,  sometimes  of  the 
matter  of  thought,  i.  c.  the  material  world.  The  only 
result  of  which  is  increasing  confusion  as  to  the 
notion  idea,  which  sometimes  denotes,  as  in  the 
Platonic  theory,  the  intellectual  plan  in  accordance 
with  which  the  material  form  of  things  is  realised, 
sometimes  the  representation  which  the  intelligent 
subject  has  of  this  plan,  and,  finally,  sometimes  the 
inner  spiritual  side  of  the  siibject,  i.  e.  consciousness 
and  thought.  If  the  mind  is  the  idea  of  the  human 
body,  it  makes  a  considerable  difference  whether  I 
understand  by  this  mind,  the  living  active  principle 
which  finds  its  adequate  expression  in  the  body,  or 
the  thinking  being  itself,  or,  lastly,  the  conscious- 
ness that  this  mind  has  of  itself  and  of  the  affections 
of  the  body.  This  continuous  interchanging  of  ob- 
jective and  subjective  constrained  Spinoza  to  have 
recourse  always  to  his  God,  as  the  sole  possessor  of 
adequate  ideas  of  all  things,  whose  ideas  are  com- 
pletely realised  in  the  material  world,  so  that  it 
is  plainly  in  this  connection  that  the  proposition  is 
laid  down  (Eth.  3.  7),  'Ordo  et  connexio  idearum 
idem  est  ac  ordo  et  connexio  rerutn/  Geometrical 
figures,  i.  e.  those  objects  which  come  into  existence 
by  being  thought,  supply  the  illustrations  here  also. 
A  really  existing  circle  and  the  idea  of  this  circle, 
which  is  in  God,  are  one  and  the  same.  The  circle,  in 
so  far  as  it  is  an  extended  thing,  must  be  explained 
solely  from  the  divine  attribute  of  extension;  the 


SPINOZA.  2  1 1 

idea  of  the  circle,  on  the  other  hand,  must  be  derived 
from  the  next  idea,  and  this  again  from  another  idea, 
and  so  ad  infinitum,  but  always  from  something  con- 
tained within  the  intellectual  nature  of  the  Deity. 
Here  we  should  be  justified  in  asking  Spinoza  to  ex- 
plain how  it  comes  to  pass  that  two  quite  different 
causal  series,,  the  ordo  et  connexio  idearum  and  the 
ordo  totius  naturae  per  extensionis  attributum,  con- 
tinue to  subsist  in  complete  parallelism,  and  why 
they  can  only  be  attributes  of  the  same  being. 
But  we  are  told  only,  'iiec  in  pnesentiarum  hsec 
clarius  possum  explicare/  (Eth.  ii.  7,  Schol.) 

This  fundamental  obscurity  necessarily  becomes 
increasingly  obvious  when  human  thought  has  to 
be  explained.  The  true  principle  indeed  is  laid  down 
(Eth.  ii.  19)  that  the  human  mind  is  not  conscious 
of  its  own  body,  and  only  knows  it  in  so  far  as  it  is 
affected  by  other  bodies.  But  instead  of  deducing 
thence  the  difference  between  thought  or  objective 
knowledge  and  mere  dim  consciousness  or  impulse, 
we  are  simply  referred  again  to  the  Deity  in  whom, 
as  an  intellectual  being,  the  true  idea  of  our  body 
and  its  modifications  is  to  be  found. 

In  general,  notwithstanding  Spinoza's  zeal  against 
the  application  of  human  ideas  to  the  universe, 
notwithstanding  his  protestations  that  good  and  bad, 
perfect  and  imperfect,  ideas  of  design  and  such  like, 
are  absolutely  inapplicable  to  the  world  as  such, 
notwithstanding  his  care  to  eliminate  altogether  the 
idea  of  personality  from  his  God,  there  is  still  an 
undeniable  touch  of  anthropomorphism  in  his  re- 
presentation of  God  as  a  thinking  being,  and  the 
whole  perceptible  world  as  a  manifestation  of  his 
nature  or  a  realisation  of  his  ideas.  He  has  quite 
omitted  to  observe  that  human  thought — the  only 

!>  2 


212  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

kind  from  which  we  can  draw  any  inferences  as  to  the 
nature  of  other  thought — necessarily  presupposes  an 
individual  being,  and  an  external  world  contrasted 
therewith,  by  which  it  is  affected  and  supplied  with 
the  material  for  its  thought.  In  the  One,  which  is  at 
the  same  time  the  All,  difference  and  consequently 
consciousness  and  thought  necessarily  disappear. 
Thought  is  not  a  fundamental  property  of  the  world; 
human  thought  and  human  reason  have  been  pro- 
duced as  an  accident  of  this  world ;  our  reason  itself 
is  finite,  its  duration  exists  in  time,  it  had  a  beginning, 
and  will  not  endure  for  ever ;  it  would  be  pre- 
sumptuous to  ask  what  may  come  after  it.  But 
Spinoza  attributes  infinite  thought  to  his  God- World  ; 
his  God  is  like  an  architect,  whose  living  stones  are 
individual  beings,  men  included ;  each  single  being  cor- 
responds accordingly  to  an  idea  of  the  Deity,  though 
but  imperfectly  informed  itself  as  to  its  nearest  re- 
lations, and  only  able  to  attain  adequate  ideas  of 
things  by  thinking  them  in  their  relation  to  God. 
Confused  and  imperfect  ideas  only  arise  from  our 
having  a  partial  consciousness  of  consequences  apart 
from  their  premisses l. 

Before  closing  this  section  it  will  be  well  to 
enumerate  once  more  the  points  of  most  value  to 
later  generations  of  thinkers,  which  have  been  be- 
queathed to  us  by  this  seemingly  obscure  and  per- 
plexing doctrine.  And  of  these,  first,  the  conception 
of  nature  as  something  living.  There  is  nowhere 

1  Eth.  ii.  28,  29.  Cf.  De  Intellectus  Emendatione:  c  Quod  si  de 
natura  entis  cogitantis  sit,  uti  prima  fronte  videtur,  cogitationes 
veras  sive  adsequatas  formare,  certum  est,  ideas  inadsequatas  eo 
tantum  in  nobis  oriri,  quod  jpars  sumus  alicujus  entis  cogitantis, 
cujus  qusedam  cogitationes  ex  toto,  qusedam  ex  parte  tantum 
nostram  mentem  constituunt.' 


SPINOZA.  213 

l)are  matter  or  passive  machinery.  All  things,  in- 
cluding apparently  inanimate  matter,  have  some  inner 
quality.  The  degrees  of  consciousness  may  be  thought 
of  as  infinitely  various  ;  there  is  no  consciousness  so 
faint  but  what  it  might  become  still  fainter,  no  clear 
reflectiveness  but  what  may  aspire  after  still  higher 
clearness.  It  is  true  Spinoza  should  have  placed  this 
doctrine,  which  seems  so  incompatible  with  our  re- 
ceived notions,  in  the  foreground,  instead  of  only  re- 
ferring to  it  occasionally  arid  as  it  were  by  the  way: 
*  omnia,  quamvis  diversis  gradibus  animata,'  &c.  (Eth. 
ii.  13.)  The  fundamental  principle  of  Monism  should 
be,  the  more  exclusion  or  isolation,  the  less  conscious- 
ness. This  idea  was  indeed  first  made  possible  by 
Leibniz,  who  made  due  allowance  for  what  is  in- 
dividual, and  made  that  his  starting-point,  while 
Spinoza's  '  thinking  substance/  in  spite  of  his  efforts 
to  the  contrary,  by  its  assimilation  to  the  thinking 
man,  necessarily  tended  to  personify  and  individualise 
the  All. 

2.  The  Monistic  idea  casts  an  especially  clear  ray 
of  light  upon  the  great  mystery  of  human  thought. 
While  antiqxiity  failed  to  recognise  any  distinction 
between  words  and  ideas  or  thought  and  speech,  the 
epoch-making  generalisation  of  Descartes  has  enabled 
us  to  distinguish  between  a  word,  the  utterance  of 
which  is  only  a  bodily  change  or  motion,  and  its 
spiritual  content,  the  idea.  Both  Descartes  and 
Spinoza  showed  the  general  and  not  yet  extinct 
belief  that  thought  is  antecedent  to  speech,  and  that 
the  soul  is  thus  first  in  possession  of  ideas  which  it 
subsequently  denotes  or  expresses  in  words.  Down 
to  the  second  half  of  the  present  century  we  meet 
with  no  trace  of  a  perception  of  the  dependence  of 
thought  on  language,  which  must  be  called  not  only 


214  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

the  fulcrum  and  adminiculum,  but  the  very  body  of 
thought.  And  yet  it  is  a  thought  quite  in  harmony 
with  the  spirit  of  Spinozism,  that  language  and 
thought  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  only  viewed 
from  different  sides,  i.  e.  once  quatenus  res  est  ex- 
tensa,  and  once  qnatenus  res  est  cogitans,  or  as  ex- 
ternal and  internal ;  that  the  two  are  distinguishable, 
but  not  separable;  that  it  is  just  as  impossible  to 
have  thought  without  language,  as  language  without 
thought. 

Not  less  certain  is  it  that  the  object  of  speech  and 
thought,  i.  e.  that  which  we  are  in  the  habit  of 
characterising  as  the  matter,  or  content  of  thought, 
could  have  no  existence  without  this  two-sidedness 
of  the  material  and  the  mental  elements.  For  there 
is  no  external  world  capable  of  being  grasped  at  once 
by  our  thought,  without  a  preliminary  idealising 
transformation,  so  that  all  external  existence  must 
undergo  a  kind  of  transsubstantiation  ;  just  as  every- 
thing internal  or  spiritual,  before  it  can  be  spoken  or 
thought,  must  be  converted  into  something  material 
or  sensibly  perceptible.  This  proceeding  of  language, 
which  is  known  as  the  metaphorical  or  tropical,  used 
to  be  generally  regarded  as  a  mere  rhetorical  ornament, 
although  a  glance  at  any  dictionary  would  have 
sufficed  to  prove  that  it  constitutes  the  real  essence 
of  language.  The  idea  of  matter  has  as  much  of  an 
ideal  character  as  the  idea  of  spirit  has  of  a  material 
and  sensible  origin  (spiritus,  anima,  ruach).  Neither 
are  things  in  themselves,  but  both  objects  of  thought ; 
and  in  this  the  philosophy  of  language  agrees  entirely 
with  the  Transcendental  philosophy. 

3.  Objects,  says  Spinoza  (Eth.  ii.  5),  are  not  the 
cause  of  ideas ;  the  enchainment  of  ideas  depends 
wholly  and  solely  upon  the  intellectual  nature  of  the 


SPINOZA.  2  I  5 

Deity,  so  that  one  idea  follows  and  springs  from  a 
preceding  idea,  and  so  on  in  infinite  succession.  An 
element  of  profound  truth  must  be  recognised  here, 
however  strange  and  repugnant  it  may  seem  to  us 
to  assume  strict  causation  between  ideas,  without  any 
reference  to  their  objects.  I  will  not  insist  here  upon 
its  transcendental  result,  that  thought  must  necessarily 
contain  within  itself  the  principles  of  truth,  since  it 
cannot  possibly  receive  them  from  external  objects, 
which  virtually  establishes  the  independence  of  the 
intellectual  principle  from  the  external  material 
world.  Neither  will  I  point  out  here  that  the  whole 
development  of  the  universe,  in  which  one  form 
always  proceeds  from  a  kindred  form,  can  never 
be  made  intelligible  by  means  of  mechanical  causes 
pertaining  to  the  world  of  extension ;  but  must  be 
regulated  by  the  intelligent  principle,  though  indeed 
neither  the  Platonic,  nor  the  immanent  ideas  of 
Spinoza  adequately  elucidate  the  problem.  It  will  be 
enough  to  show  the  validity  of  this  proposition  of 
Spinoza's  in  regard  to  the  creative  energy  of  the 
human  mind,  and  especially  the  development  of  lan- 
guage and  concepts.  For  the  activity  of  mankind,  the 
revolutions  effected  by  men  on  the  world's  surface,  are 
not  caused  by  external  objects,  but  wholly  and  solely 
by  the  inner,  active  intellectual  nature  of  mankind  ; 
their  origin  is  traceable  through  an  immeasurable 
chain  of  past  races,  during  whose  transitory  existence 
in  like  manner  thought  has  proceeded  from  thought 
and  creation  from  creation  in  a  spiritual  sequence  of 
the  same  continuous  causal  character  as  the  illimitable 
generations  of  animal  species.  It  is  also  one  of  the 
most  certain  discoveries  of  the  science  of  language 
that  never,  in  the  whole  course  of  linguistic  develop- 
ment, has  a  word  or  notion  been  educed  from  an 


2l6  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

external  object,  but  always  uninterruptedly  an  idea 
from  an  idea,  as  in  the  outward  activity  of  men 
creation  follows  creation, — a  literal  confirmation  of 
Spinoza's  proposition,  'Kerum  sirigularium  idese  nori 
ipsa  ideata,  sive  res  perceptas  pro  causa  efficiente 
agnoscunt,  sed  ipsumDeum,  quatenus  est  res  cogitans,' 
in  which  we  have  only  to  read  the  intellectual  prin- 
ciple, or  human  reason,  instead  of  Deus.  Geiger  ob- 
serves, in  agreement  with  Spinoza,  '  Language  and 
thought  are  only  made  intelligible  to  us  when  we 
discern  that  our  will  is  not  a  contemporary  offspring 
of  a  given  stimulus,  nor  our  belief  of  an  intuition,  our 
conception  of  a  phenomenon,  or  our  thought  of  an 
object ;  but  that  it  is  the  past, — from  the  beginning 
when  the  All  emerged  from  primaeval  nothingness, 
down  to  the  present  moment,  when  an  atom  of  the 
eternal  world-force  has  constituted  this  ego  of  ours, 
— which  lives,  believes,  thinks  and  feels  in  us;  and 
that  therefore  it  is  behind,  not  around  us,  that  we 
must  look  for  the  key  to  the  riddle  within  and  with- 
out and  the  source  and  origin  of  all  true  being. . . .  The 
forms  of  thought  do  not  proceed  either  from  us  or 
from  things — from  field  and  wood,  as  the  poet  has 
it ;  but  each  one  of  them  had  its  rise  and  origin  from 
a  preceding  form,  as  one  animal  generation  gives 
birth  to  another1/  Thus  the  nature  of  thought  consists 
not  in  perceptions  of  objects,  but  in  conceptions,  re- 
ceding in  unbroken  filiation  through  an  immeasurable 
past,  in  an  order  which  science  must  trace  back  to 
the  hoar  antiquity  in  which  thought  and  language 
had  their  beginning.  This  holds  good  not  only  of 
all  thought,  but  of  the  perceptive  faculties  as  well, 
which  have  become  so  highly  developed  in  mankind 

1  L.  Geiger,   Ursprung   und   Entwickelung    der  menschliclieii 
Sprache  und  Vernunft,  i.  p.  108. 


SPINOZA.  217 

as  a  consequence  of  this  mental  activity.  The  same 
truth  must  even  be  applied  to  the  sensible  perceptions 
of  the  lower  animals,  which  are  also  impossible  with- 
out some  germs  of  thought.  We  and  they  perceive 
things  as  we  do,  because  of  the  immeasurable  suc- 
cession of  intuitions  and  perceptions  which  has  gone 
before  us  in  the  past,  and  which  is  being  continued, 
through  the  present  generation  to  future  ages  and 
races.  Mind  begets  mind,  consciousness  consciousness, 
perceptio  ex  perceptione,  concept  us  ex  conceptu,  idea 
ex  idea.  Isolated  mechanical  existences  afford  us  no 
explanation ;  we  can  only  admit  that  such  and  such 
mental  phenomena  would  be  impossible  without  such 
and  such  material  ones.  And  it  is  easv  to  see  what 

V 

tragical  results  must  follow,  from  the  confusion  and 
interchange  of  the  two  elements,  if  we  glance  at  the 
numerous  and  ill-fated  theoiies  of  the  origin  of 
language,  which  have  attempted  to  establish  a  causal 
connection  between  the  mental  content  of  ideas  and 
the  audible  sounds  of  words. 

4.  It  appears  from  many  passages,  both  in  the  Ethics 
and  in  his  letters,  that  Spinoza  was  fairly  on  the  way 
towards  Transcendental  Idealism,  and  therefore  to  the 
Kantian  doctrine,  according  to  which  phenomena  must 
be  distinguished  from  things  in  themselves.  In  the 
interests  of  clearness  he  should  at  this  point  have 
freed  himself  from  the  Cartesian  ideas  of  substance, 
cause,  &c.,  or  rather  have  subjected  them  to  careful 
investigation.  He  says  (Eth.  ii.  16)  that  the  way  in 
which  we  are  affected  by  external  things  depends 
much  more  upon  the  constitution  of  our  body  than  on 
the  nature  of  the  external  things.  In  the  Scholium 
to  the  seventeenth  Proposition  he  adds:  'Corporis 
humani  affectiones  quarum  idese  corpora  externa 
velut  nobis  prsesentia  repraesentant,  rerum  imagines 


2l8  MODEBN   PHILOSOPHY. 

vocabimus,  tametsi  rerum  figuras  non  referunt ; '  and 
continues  that  the  mind  does  not  err  so  long  as  it 
stops  short  at  imagination ;  error  only  begins  when 
these  things  are  assumed  to  exist  objectively.  He 
even  admits  that  the  self-knowledge  of  the  mind  can- 
not proceed  further  than  a  conception  of  the  affections 
of  the  body  (prop.  23).  Similarly  he  observes  (prop.  25) 
that  an  adequate  knowledge  of  the  foreign  bodies 
acting  on  our  own  cannot  be  derived  from  the  affec- 
tions of  the  latter,  which  is  an  admission  that  a  true 
kno\vledge  of  things  in  themselves  is  impossible,  for 
(prop.  26)  'mens  humana  nullum  corpus  extcrnum,  ut 
actu  existens  percipit,  nisi  per  ideas  affectionum  sui 
corporis/  And  in  the  corollary  to  prop.  29,  the  con- 
clusion of  the  whole  matter  is  summed  up,  that  the 
human  soul,  in  so  far  as  it  contemplates  things  accord- 
ing to  the  common  order  of  nature,  cannot  attain  to 
adequate  but  only  to  confused  and  partial  knowledge 
either  of  itself,  its  own  body,  or  external  things. 

In  reference  to  Space  and  Time,  Spinoza  also  gives 
expression  icy  views  which  seem  like  a  faint  fore- 
shadowing of  the  Kantian  doctrine.  Even  in  the 
Cogitata  Metaphysica  he  says  (cap.  4)  that  the  duration 
of  a  thing  is  non  nisi  ratione  distinguishable  from 
its  existence,  and  that  this  accordingly  is  a  token  of 
its  existence,  but  by  no  -means  of  its  essence.  In 
like  manner  he  observes  in  the  passage  above  quoted 
(p.  202,  note)  that  there  can  be  no  real  agreement 
between  actual  things  and  the  modi  imaginandi; 
and  he  includes  among  these  entia  rationis,  '  tempus, 
numerus,  mensura  et  si  quae  alia  sunt/ 

He  expresses  himself  most  clearly  in  the  29th 
Letter  19  where  he  distinguishes  the  knowledge  which 
is  limited  by  space  and  time  from  the  true  knowledge 
1  Opera,  ed.  princ.  p.  467. 


SPINOZA.  219 

which  deals  with  the  eternal,  infinite,  and  indivisible 
substance l :  '  Moreover  since  we  can  determine  du- 
ration and  quantity  at  will,  conceiving  the  latter 
apart  from  substance,  and  the  former  apart  from  its 
relation  to  things  eternal,  time  and  measure  (space) 
come  into  being ;  time  to  determine  duration,  and 
measure  to  determine  quantity,  in  order  that  we  may 
imagine  tlrcm  as  easily  as  possible.  Then  because  we 
separate  the  affections  of  substance  from  the  substance 
itself,  and  classify  them,  in  order  that  we  may  imagine 
them  the  more  easily,  number  originates,  whereby 
wo  determine  the  same.  From  which  is  clearly  to 
be  seen  that  measure,  time,  and  number  are  nothing 
but  modes  of  thought,  or  rather  of  imagination  (i.  e. 
according  to  Kant,  forms  of  sensibility).  Where- 
fore it  is  not  strange  that  all  who,  by  the  help  of 
similar  notions,  and  these  moreover  badly  under- 
stood, have  attempted  to  interpret  the  course  of 
nature,  entangled  themselves  marvellously  in  such 
wise  as  to  be  unable  to  extricate  themselves  without 

violence  and  the  admission  of  absurdities,  vea  of  the 

*  »/ 

very  utmost  absurdity.  For  there  are  many  things 
which  are  not  accessible  to  the  imagination,  but  to 
the  intellect  alone,  such  as  substance,  eternity,  and 
others.  And  if  any  one  endeavours  to  explain  such 
things  l>y  means  of  notions  which  are  only  auxiliaries 
of  the  imagination,  he  is  only  as  it  were  labouring  to 
make  his  imagination  run  mad.  For  even  these 

1  '  Quantitas  duobus  modis  a  nobis  concipitur  :  abstracte  scilicet, 
sive  superficialiter,  prout  ope  sensuum  earn  in  imaginatione  habe- 
mus,  vel  ut  substantia,  quod  non  nisi  a  solo  intellectu  fit.  Itaque 
si  ad  quantitatem  prout  est  in  imaginatione  attendimus,  quod  ssepis- 
sime  et  facilius  fit,  ea  divisibilis,  finita,  ex  partibus  composita  et 
multiplex  reperitur.  Sin  ad  earidem,  prout  est  in  intellectu,  at- 
tendamus,  et  res  ut  in  se  est,  percipiatur,  quod  difficillime  fit^  turn 
ut  satis  dcinonstravi,  infinita,  indivisibilis  et  unica  reperietur.' 


220  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

modes  of  substance  can  never  be  rightly  understood, 
if  thev  are  confounded  with  these  entia  rationis  or 

4/ 

auxiliaries  of  the  imagination.  For  when  we  do 
this  we  separate  them  from  substance  and  the  mode 
in  which  they  have  proceeded  from  eternity,  without 
which  they  cannot  be  rightly  understood. 

*  For  the  clearer  apprehension  of  which,  lake  this 
example : — If  any  one  were  conceiving  duration  in 
the  abstract1,  and  then,  confounding  it  with  time, 
proceeded  to  divide  it  into  parts,  he  would  never 
understand  how  e.  g.  an  hour  could  pass  away.  For 
in  order  that  an  hour  should  pass  away,  first  the  half 
must  pass  and  then  the  half  of  the  remainder,  and 
then  the  half  of  that  remainder,  and  if  one  continues 
thus  dividing  to  infinity  one  will  never  come  to  the  end 
of  the  hour.  Therefore  many  who  are  not  accustomed 
to  distinguish  the  things  of  the  mind  from  realities 
maintain  duration  to  be  composed  of  moments,  and'  so 
fall  into  Scylla  in  their  desire  of  avoiding  Charybdis. 
For  to  make  duration  consist  of  moments  is  the 
same  as  to  make  number  consist  of  the  addition  of 
noughts. 

'But  from  what  has  been  said  it  appears  sufficiently 
that  neither  number,  nor  measure,  nor  time,  since 
they  are  but  aids  to  the  imagination,  can  be  infinite 
(for  otherwise  number  would  not  be  number,  nor 
measure  measure,  nor  time  time) ;  hence  too  is  clearly 
to  be  seen  why  many  who  confound  these  three  with 
actual  things,  because  they  are  ignorant  of  the  true 
nature  of  things,  actually  deny  the  existence  of  the 
Infinite/ 

It  only  remains  now  to  indicate  summarily  the 
great  stride  in  the  progress  of  philosophical  thought 
marked  by  Spinoza's  doctrine.  It  is  true  that  his 

1  i.  e.  in  itself,  apart  from  its  relation  to  eternity. 


SPINOZA.  22  T 

conception  of  substance  seems  on  the  one  hand  to 
make  all  knowledge  impossible,  and  on  the  other  to 
make  all  experience  superfluous;  for  if  our  appre- 
hension of  things  in  time  and  space  is  only  an  illusion 
of  the  senses,  if  all  determination  is  negation,  by  what 
ladder  can  the  human  mind,  which  has  no  resource 
but  in  these  forms,  scale  the  height  from  which  it  is 
to  view  the  universe  sub  specie  seternitatis  ?  But  all 
this  notwithstanding,  it  should  be  remembered  that 
Spinoza  was  the  first  to  realise  that  ideal  of  Eeason 
towards  the  unity  and  completeness  of  which  others 
had  aspired  in  vain,  and  that  thus  through  him 
scientific  linoioledge,  in  the  special  sense  of  the  word, 
first  became  possible. 

It  is  certain  that  all  pluralism  is  a  shock  to  reason, 
and  that  a  multiplicity  of  fundamental  principles 
represents  only  so  many  unsolved  and  incomprehen- 
sible riddles.  As  in  religion  primitive  polytheism 
naturally  passes  into  monotheism,  so  philosophical 
speculation,  after  having  tentatively  brought  toge- 
ther the  most  various  principles  as  constituting  the 
nature  of  things,  must  end  by  attaining  to  a  unity 
in  which  all  these  principles  meet  and  harmonise. 
This  is  the  way  in  which  human  reason  is  compelled 
by  its  nature  to  proceed.  Its  endeavours  can  only  be 
arrested  if  it  pauses  on  its  course  to  consider  and  ex- 
amine its  own  nature,  and  so  makes  the  discovery 
that  this  unity  really  lies  only  in  itself1,  and  that  the 

1  *  The  order  and  regularity  in  phenomena,  which  we  call  nature, 
is  supplied  by  ourselves,  and  we  should  not  find  them  there  unless 

we  had  first  imported  them Extravagant  and  absurd  as  it  may 

seem  to  say  that  the  understanding  is  the  source  of  the  laws  of 
nature,  and  therewith  of  the  formal  unity  of  nature,  such  an  as- 
sertion is  as  correct  as  it  is  conformable  to  its  object,  namely  ex- 
perience/ Kant,  Critik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  pp.  112,  114. 


222  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

world  can  never  offer  it  what  it  seeks  ;  in  other  words, 
if  it  discovers  that  the  work  of  philosophy  consists 
in  tracing  out  the  limits  of  human  knowledge  and  in 
teaching 

'Quid  valeant  humeri,  quid  ferre  recusent.' 
Spinoza  represents  the  culminating  point  in  this 
endeavour  to  find  unity  in  the  world  of  reality.  It 
is  undeniable  that  ancient  philosophy  ended  in  plural- 
ism. The  Platonic  ideas  stand  in  no  such  relation  to 
each  other  as  that  one  generates  or  conditions  another 
in  any  way  that  would  enable  them  to  be  combined 
in  a  regular  system,  explanatory  of  the  actual  order 
of  the  world.  In  like  manner  the  Aristotelian  Forms, 
or  Entelechies,  have  an  unavowcd  multiplicity,  which 
cannot  receive  the  slightest  elucidation  from  the  con- 
ception of  matter,  from  which  they  were  all  formed. 
These  ideas  only  cease  to  be  unintelligible,  as  the 
human  mind  comes  to  be  recognised  as  the  native 
soil  whence  they  naturally  originate,  growing  up  in 
constant  causal  coherence.  The  memorable  turning- 
point  after  which  this  knowledge  became  possible  was 
reached  on  the  day  when  Descartes  consigned  to  philo- 
sophy, as  a  secure  and  inalienable  possession,  the  one 
word  Cogito.  I  say  it  became  possible,  for  everything 
else  had  still  to  be  accomplished  by  the  philosophy 
of  the  future.  The  other  principle  introduced  by 
Descartes  is  far  more  perfect,  indeed  almost  entirely 
complete — the  one  namely  by  which  he  swept  away 
the  Aristotelian  formae  substantiales,  the  occult 
qualities,  quintessences,  &c.,  and  established  once  for 
all  a  solid  base  for  science — the  principle  of  mechani- 
cal causality. 

Something  however  of  the  unsatisfactory  incom- 
pleteness belonging  to  pluralism  still  adhered  to  the 
surviving  unqualified  dualism.  The  labours  of  the 


SPINOZA.  223 

mind  were  lessened,  but  not  wholly  relieved.  The 
mathematical  method  had  introduced  the  strict  rule 
of  law  in  the  external  world,  but  where  were  the 
laws  of  the  immaterial  substance  to  be  found  ?  The 
mind  was  supposed  to  be  in  possession  of  certain 
eternal  truths,  and  it  was  maintained  that  whatever 
was  dare  et  distincte  discerned  by  the  mind  had  a 
claim  to  certainty;  but  where  was  the  criterion  of 
certainty,  where  the  system  which  is  to  deduce  every- 
thing here  from  the  uniform  nature  of  thought  and 
consciousness,  as  elsewhere  from  the  single  principle  of 
extension  and  motion  ?  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the 
seternse  veritates,  the  universal  a,  were  an  unfounded 
a  priori,  i.e.  a  concealed  pluralism.  Geulinx  alone, 
by  attending  to  the  form  of  judgments,  endeavoured 
for  the  first  time  to  trace  the  operations  of  the  mind, 
i .  e.  the  nature  of  thought,  and,  as  wo  have  seen, 
disclosed  the  real  lurking-place  of  the  notion  of 
substance. 

Another  weakness  on  the  same  side  of  the  Cartesian 
dualism  must  also  be  noted.  The  only  thing  which 
is  really  us,  which  is  in  our  own  power,  is  our  thought, 
by  which  Descartes  understands  all  forms  of  con- 
sciousness, knowledge,  will,  imagination,  sensible  per- 
ception, &c.  This  is,  from  one  point  of  view,  the  great 
truth  of  idealism,  that  the  source  of  all  direct  know- 
ledge is  to  be  found  in  consciousness ;  but  from  another 
— latet  anguis  in  herba.  Are  our  thoughts  really  so 
much  in  our  own  power  \  Or  are  we  not  rather,  in  re- 
lation to  them,  conditioned  and  overruled  by  countless 
influences  which  have  their  source  in  the  thought  of 
our  contemporaries  and,  still  more,  in  that  of  an- 
tiquity ?  And  even  if  thought  were  really  thus  inde- 
pendent, if  furthermore  the  will  were  subject  to  its 
dominion,  what  does  that  prove  concerning  this 


224  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

spiritual  substance?  Does  it  not  tend  to  become  a 
mythological  entity,  which  so  far  from  being  and 
working  in  subjection  to  universal  laws,  would  just 
think  and  act  because  it  chooses  ?  In  other  words, 
in  spite  of  the  apparent  simplicity  of  the  two  prin- 
ciples, is  not  the  purely  individual  element  introduced 
here,  on  one  side,  which  is  quite  as  incapable  of 
becoming  the  object  of  knowledge  as  isolated  sense- 
impressions  ? 

Thus  the  Cartesian  dualism  is  not  only  divided 
against  itself ;  even  on  the  one — the  intellectual — side 
there  are  numerous  gaps  and  inconsistencies.  This 
is  especially  obvious  in  the  traces  of  its  effects  upon 
contemporary  thought.  The  two  substances,  which 
have  nothing  in  common  with  each  other  and  there- 
fore cannot  act  on  each  other,  are  mutually  indif- 
ferent and  may  subsist  tranquilly  side  by  side,  so 
long  as  neither  takes  any  notice  of  the  other.'  But 
as  this  is  not  easily  carried  out,  each  time  that  they 
approach,  .great  confusion  and  excitement  is  produced. ' 
The  born  man  of  science,  a  mathematician  and  me- 
chanician, is  distracted  when  reminded  that  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  immaterial  causation,  and  cries  out, 
'  Noli  turbare  circulos  meos !  There  is  but  one 
causal  chain — the  mechanical.  There  is  no  excep- 
tion to  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  force/  The 
genuine  philosopher,  on  the  other  hand,  to  whose 
share  the  higher  problems  of  the  mind  have  fallen 
(not  an  apprentice  escaped  from  the  surgery  or  the 
chemist's  laboratory),  vexes  his  soul  continuously 
over  this  stupid,  lumpish  matter,  which  notwith- 
standing its  phantasmal  nothingness  persists  in 
thrusting  itself  staggeringly  upon  him  at  every  turn. 

Spinoza  delivered  the  human  mind  once  and  for 
ever  from  these  perplexing  torments,  and  any  mortal, 


SPINOZA.  225 

who  suffers  from  them  still,  may  turn  confidently  to 
his  writings  as  a  healing  fontaine  dejouvence.  The 
universe  has  no  outlaws  ;  strict  causality  rules  every- 
where ;  as  much  in  the  world  of  mind  and  thought 
and  conscience  as  in  the  material  world  where  its 
presence  is  already  generally  assumed.  Why  should 
this  seem  an  unwelcome  infringement  of  the  freedom, 
of  the  will  ?  Does  not  all  rational  and  moral  con- 
duct obey  an  internal  compulsion  ex  necessitate 
natura)  suse,  while  fools  and  wild  beasts  own  no 
such  law  and  therefore  seem  in  one  sense  more  free  ? 
Science  only  becomes  possible  by  this  means,  since 
the  succession  of  things  and  events  can  only  be 
explained  if  they  are  referred  to  the  causal  bond. 

Only  between  thought  or  consciousness  and  the 
attribute  of  extension  in  the  material  world  no  causal 
connection  is  conceivable  ;  they  are  two  quite  different 
properties,  and  there  is  no  reducing  them  to  an  equa- 
tion, so  as  to  allow  of  reciprocal  causation.  All  serious 
thinkers,  such  as  Descartes,  Geulinx,  Malebranche, 
and  soon  afterwards  Leibniz,  saw  this  plainly,  and 
sought  for  a  third  and  higher  cause  which  might  be 
the  common  condition  of  the  unquestionable  parallel- 
ism between  the  two  worlds.  They  all  agreed  in 
having  recourse  to  the  Deity  as  this  third  cause, 
while  they  overlooked  or  disregarded  the  simplest 
solution  of  the  problem,  namely,  that  the  differing 
elements  were  one  and  the  same.  Why  should  they 
not  be  so  ?  Are  not  we  ourselves  walking  instances 
of  a  similar  possibility  ?  Have  we  not  all  an  inward 
and  an  outward  property — the  former  will  and  con- 
sciousness, the  latter  motion  1 

Daylight  dawns  upon  the  widening  prospect ;  the 
sunrise  crimsons  the  far  horizon ;  the  old  error  has 
been  explained  away,  and  the  forms  of  thought 

VOL.  I.  Q 


226  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

suggested  by  false  views  of  causal  connection 1  are  dis- 
carded. How  can  an  idea  be  the  cause  of  a  material 
creation  ?  Because  the  Being  that  thinks  is  also  at 
the  same  time  an  extended  or  material  one,  able  to 
act  upon  the  outer  world  in  accordance  with  me- 
chanical laws.  How  can  the  mind  be  reflected  in 
strange  material  elements  ?  Because  the  sensitive 
being  is  at  the  same  time  provided  with  bodily 
organs,  which  are  moved  by  strange  bodies,  and  by 
their  own  sensitiveness  act  as  intermediaries  of  per- 
ception. Thus  there  are  creative  ideas  answering 
to  natura  naturans,  and  ideas  which  reproduce  and 
reflect  creation,  natura  naturata.  There  is  no 
strange  ghostly  guest  lodging  in  the  world ;  every- 
thing partakes  rather  of  its  own  nature,  is  flesh  of 
its  flesh  and  soul  of  its  soul.  Hence  sensible  per- 
ceptions have  their  place  in  the  material  world,  and 
motion  its  significance  for  the  world  of  spirits. 

The  points  where  Spinoza's  doctrine  needed  to 
be  continued,  developed,  and  corrected  by  his  im- 
mediate successors  may  be  enumerated  as  fol- 
lows : — 

i.  In  the  first  place,  Spinoza's  substance,  or  God- 
world,  had  swallowed  up  all  difference  and  multi- 
plicity in  its  own  unity ;  it  was  therefore  necessary 
to  re-extract  the  really  existing  manifoldness  and 
allot  its  proper  place  in  the  general  order  to  each 
separate  and  special  existence.  This  is  done  by  the 

1  E.g.  I  move  my  arm  because  I  will.  Because  we  think,  we 
speak — clothe  our  thoughts  in  words.  We  first  perceive  an  object 
and  then  project  it  externally.  The  mind  is  the  cause  of  the 
development  of  the  world,  the  world  is  the  cause  of  the  develop- 
ment of  the  mind,  and  so  on.  In  all  these  examples,  the  applica- 
tion of  the  causal  idea  is  erroneous,  for  in  each  case  there  is  not 
causation  but  identity. 


SPINOZA.  227 

recognition  of  Individualism,  which  constitutes  the 
true  essence  of  all  separate  existence.  The  propo- 
sition that  all  determination  is  negation  is  thus  only 
partially  true.  (Leibniz.) 

2.  Spinoza's  uniform  application  of  the  notion  of 
cause  to  the  world   of  thought   and   matter   alike 
without  distinction,  must  be  set  aside ;  object  and 
subject   melt   into  one   with  him,  and  hence  arises 
the   frequent   interchange   of  causa  and   ratio,  the 
material  cause  and  the  mental  reason.    This  essential 
distinction   must   be    restored   and   clearly   defined. 

V 

(Leibniz.) 

3.  The  beginning  made  by  Spinoza,  in  recognising 
the  causal  dependence  of  spiritual  phenomena,  cleared 
the  way  for  an  attempt  to  examine  more  closely  into 
the  nature  of  human  knowledge  and  its  connection 
with   sensible    perception,    an   attempt   which   will 
throw  light  upon  the  importance  and  necessity  of 
Empiricism.  (L ocke. ) 

4.  Upon  this  the   necessary   distinction  between 
subject  arid  object  becomes  self-evident,  and  a  criti- 
cism of  sensible  perceptions  becomes  possible  in  its 
turn,  as  we  ask,  what,  in  the  last  resort,  is  purely 
subjective,  and  what  qualities  belong  to  the  object 
as  such.    The  distinction  between  qualitates  primarke 
and  secundarise  is  contributed  by  Locke. 

5.  The  superiority  of  human  knowledge  is  due  to 
its  possession  of  a  special  class  of  objects  which  we 
call  ideas  or  conceptions.     By  and  with  their  help 
all  human  thought  is  accomplished.     In  order  there- 
fore to  decide  upon  their  substance  and  reliability, 
the  origin  of  ideas  must  necessarily  be  investigated, 
since  they  have  neither  existed  from  eternity  nor  been 
implanted  by  a  miracle  in  man.  (Locke.) 

6.  Spinoza's  idea  that  the  existence  of  individuals 

Q  2 


228  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

was  but  partial  and  apparent  needs  to  be  further 
carried  out.  His  recognition  of  the  greater  and  less 
degree  of  reality  possessed  by  these  beings  must  be 
joined  on  to  the  perception,  in  all  things,  of  gradual 
development  and  transition,  by  which  the  infinite 
variety  and  lavish  ness  of  natural  forms  is  to  be 
accounted  for  and  explained.  This  principle  of  the 
continuity  of  forms  must  be  applied  also  to  the 
causal  sequence  and  will  serve  to  verify  its  pre- 
tensions. In  this  way  the  origin  of  man,  his  higher 
liberty  and  intellectual  superiority,  becomes  for  the 
first  time  the  object  of  investigation  and  a  not  in- 
soluble problem.  (Leibniz.) 

7.  The  definition  of  material  substance,  as  laid 
down  by  Descartes,  suffers  from  one  grave  imper- 
fection. According  to  Spinoza  the  universe  is  life 
and  activity;  plus  agere,  minus  pati  is  his  measure 
of  perfection,  and  thus  he  nowhere  gives  us  anything 
really  passive ;  the  true  essence  of  things  consists 
rather  'in  their  effective  activity.  Hence  the  mere 
empty  idea  of  extension  is  insufficient — some  other 
must  be  put  in  its  place ;  and  for  material  sub- 
stances the  only  other  possible  is  the  idea  of  Force. 
(Leibniz.) 


THE  EMPIKICAL  TENDENCY. 

LOCKE    (1632—1704). 


1  The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man/ 


WE  have  seen  that  Geulinx  was  the  first  to  for- 
mulate the  demand  which  it  is  the  great  merit  of 
the  Kantian  Criticism  to  have  satisfied ;  and  this 
demand,  that  philosophy  should  ascertain  and  trace 
the  limits  of  human  knowledge  and  understanding, 
was  now  clearly  and  expressly  repeated  by  Locke. 

He  says  in  the  Introduction  to  his  Essay  concern- 
ing human  understanding  :  *  I  thought  the  first  step 
towards  satisfying  several  enquiries,  the  mind  of  man 
was  very  apt  to  run  into,  was  to  take  a  survey  of  our 
own  understandings,  examine  our  own  powers,  and  see 
to  what  things  they  were  adapted.  Till  that  was 
done,  I  suspected  we  began  at  the  wrong  end,  and 
in  vain  sought  for  satisfaction.  .  .  .  Thus  men,  ex- 
tending their  enquiries  beyond  their  capacities,  and 
letting  their  thoughts  wander  into  those  depths  where 
they  can  find  no  sure  footing  ;  'tis  no  wonder  that  they 
raise  questions  and  multiply  disputes,  which  never 
coming  to  any  clear  resolution  are  proper  only  to 
continue  and  increase  their  doubts,  and  to  confirm 
them  at  last  in  perfect  scepticism.  Whereas,  were 
the  capacities  of  our  understandings  well  considered^ 
the  extent  of  our  knowledge  once  discovered,  and  the 
horizon  found,  which  set  the  bounds  between  the 


230  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

enlightened  and  dark  parts  of  things,  between  what 
is  and  what  is  not  comprehensible  by  us ;  men  would 
perhaps  with  less  scruple  acquiesce  in  the  avowed 
ignorance  of  the  one,  and  employ  their  thoughts 
and  discourse  with  more  advantage  and  satisfaction 
in  the  other/ 

Although  it  was  plain  that  the  Cartesian  starting- 
point,  the  Cogito,  must  lend  ultimately  to  this  view, 
we  must  grant  to  Locke  the  same  kind  of  praise  as 
that  accorded  by  Aristotle  to  Anaxagoras  for  having 
first  recognised  intelligence  (vov?)  in  the  world,  since 
he  first  distinguished  reason,  as  a  special  faculty  in 
the  mind,  and  thought  proper,  from  the  other  so- 
called  modi  cogitandi,  will,  feeling,  imagination,  etc. 
He  saw  plainly  that  the  essence  of  human  superiority 
lay  in  this  point,  and  that  on  it  must  rest  the  lever 
by  which  all  the  rest  was  to  be  upheaved. 

'  Since  it  is  the  understanding  that  sets  man  above 
the  rest  of  sensible  beings,  and  gives  him  all  the 
advantage  and  dominion  which  he  has  over  them, 
it  is  certainly  a  subject,  even  for  its  nobleness,  worth 
our  labour  to  enquire  into/ 

A  certain  degree  of  mysticism  or  illuminism  always 
lurked  among  the  opinions  of  Descartes  and  his  suc- 
cessors, since  the  seternsa  veritates,  and  the  '  clear 
and  distinct'  understanding,  which  are  assumed  with- 
out foundation,  can  only  be  finally  explained  by  a 
participation  in  the  divine  reason. 

Reason  as  a  natural  gift,  operating  by  natural 
means,  and  explicable  by  natural  processes — this 
conception  constitutes  an  undying  title  of  honour  for 
Locke,  even  when  due  weight  is  given  to  his  obli- 
gations to  Descartes,  whose  conception  of  the  unity 
of  all  consciousness  under  the  general  idea  '  Cogito  ' 
had  paved  the  way  for  a  juxtaposition  of  sense  and 


LOCKE.  231 

reason,  in  which  the  latter  could  appear  as  lineally 
descended  from  the  former. 

Now  at  last  Empiricism  had  found  the  true  course. 
The  material  world  is  no  longer  the  only  object  of 
observation  and  intelligent  examination:  the  con- 
nection between  it  and  immaterial  nature,  the  in- 
creasing volume  of  the  latter  as  it  is  fed  by  all  the 
streams  of  sensibility,  in  a  word  the  growth  and 
development  of  the  mind  itself,  has  become  an  open 
secret,  of  which  any  who  will  may  henceforward 
master  the  key. 

Descartes  had  chased  the  meagre  ghosts  of  scho- 
lasticism out  of  the  field,  and  had  rebuked  the  pre- 
sumptuous claims  of  the  reason  to  contain  within 
itself  a  treasure  of  facts  and  conclusions  fit  to  solve 
all  problems  presented  from  without.  Locke  rendered 
the  same  service  to  the  inner  world. 

'  No  Innate  Ideas '  was  the  device  under  which  he 
fought,  repelling  numerous  and  vigorous  assaults. 
As,  before  Descartes,  all  matter  was  occupied  by 
spirits,  qualitates  occultas  and  formae  substantiales, 
scaring  from  their  entrenchments  all  reasonable  ex- 
planations, so,  before  Locke,  innate  ideas  held  un- 
disputed sway  over  the  minds  of  men.  The  attack 
had  to  be  directed  against  these,  and  only  a  life  and 
death  struggle  could  decide  whether  rational  ex- 
planation or  mysticism  was  to  have  the  right  of 
explaining  the  nature  of  reason  itself.  Compromise 
was  impossible,  and,  as  we  know,  Locke  emerged 
victorious  from  the  affray. 

If  ideas  are  innate  they  are  a  mystery,  not  to  be 
investigated  or  explained.  Throughout  the  con- 
troversy Locke  follows  the  same  route  as  nature,  and 
begins  by  appealing  to  what  is  known  of  children. 
God,  Liberty,  Immortality — are  these  ideas  innate, 


232  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

already  existing  in  the  infant  that  can  do  nothing 
but  scream  when  it  is  uncomfortable  ?  If  however 
it  is  said  that  these  ideas  and  truths  are  outlined 
already  in  the  soul  and  pass  into  consciousness  as 
the  reason  ripens,  this  is  virtually  saying  that  reason 
makes  men  know  what  they  knew  already. 

And  then,  where  is  the  limit  to  be  drawn?  If 
mathematical  truths  are  innate,  all  relations  of  space 
and  number  must  be  so  equally;  if  all  self-evident 
propositions  are  innate,  such  truths  as  that  sweet  is 
not  bitter,  black  is  not  white,  &c.,  must  be  innate 
also. 

It  did  not  occur  to  Locke  to  deny  that  much  in 
the  child  was  really  innate,  but  everything  upon 
which  past  philosophy  had  laid  most  stress,  ideas, 
eternal  truths  of  the  understanding,  as  well  as  reli- 
gion and  morality,  in  a  word,  rational  thought  and 
the  highest  peculiar  faculties  of  humanity,  are  not 
innate,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  product  of  develop- 
ment and  individual  acquisition,  subject  of  course 
to  the  influence  of  education,  without  which  indeed 
man  can  scarcely  grow  up  human. 

If  however  the  human  child  does  not  come  into  the 
world  with  an  inborn  treasure  of  certainties,  truths, 
and  conceptions,  where  then  is  the  true  origin,  the 
sole  prime  source  of  all  our  ideas  and  knowledge,  to 
be  sought  ?  In  experience  alone,  which  we  receive 
by  the  gates  of  the  senses :  '  nihil  est  in  intellectu 
quod  non  piius  fuerit  in  sensu.'  The  soul  is  originally 
a  tabula  rasa,  a  blank  sheet  upon  which  experience 
and  sensation  write  at  will. 

On  account  of  this  empirical  bent,  Locke  has  been 
treated  as  a  mere  disciple  of  Bacon,  while  the  views 
of  the  French  materialistic  school,  and  more  par- 
ticularly of  Condillac,  have  been  represented  as  the 


LOCKE.  233 

logical  outcome  of  his  doctrine.  In  both  these  cases 
injustice  is  done  to  the  philosopher.  The  external 
connection  indeed  cannot  be  denied,  but  by  the  philo- 
sophical substance  of  his  doctrine,  Locke  belongs 
to  the  group  of  leading  thinkers  who  approached 
seriously  the  greatest  problems  of  nature  and  rnind. 
The  method  of  observation  and  experiment  advocated 
by  Bacon  dealt  only  with  nature,  Locke's  doctrine 
endeavours  by  the  same  method  to  solve  the  mystery 
of  the  Cogito.  lie  is  thus  a  worthy  successor  of 
Descartes,  from  whom  he  had  learnt  much.  As  to 
the  French  materialists,  our  estimate  of  their  in- 
significance is  shown  sufficiently  by  the  fact  that  it 
seems  unnecessary  to  give  them  any  place  at  all  in 
this  historical  sketch,  since  their  work  consisted 
simply  of  wire-drawn  reproductions  of  a  few  scraps 
and  fragments  of  Lockian  doctrine.  Coudillac's  ex- 
planation of  thought  as  une  sensation  transformer 
and  the  ingenious  allegory  of  the  animated  statue 
have  no  claim  to  originality.  French  materialism 
was  simply  a  logical  development  of  one  side  of 
Cartesian  thought,  combined  with  Epicurean  sensual- 
ism and  Lockian  empiricism.  All  hinges  on  the  two 
ideas  of  Tliomme  machine  and  penser  cest  sentir1. 
Cabanis  (1757-1808),  Destutt  de  Tracy  (1754-1836), 
and  Maine  de  Biran  (i  766-1824)  were  the  first  of  the 

1  Diderot  and  Voltaire  are  exceptions ;  the  first  too  profound, 
the  latter  too  clear-headed  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  empty  hollow- 
ness  of  materialism.  The  former  was  by  conviction  a  monist,  the 
latter  inclined  to  the  same  view,  although  it  was  not  his  nature  to 
lose  himself  in  philosophical  depths.  '  Je  suis  corps  et  je  pense : 
voil&  tout  ce  que  je  sais,'  Voltaire  writes  in  his  Letters  from  Eng- 
land, and  he  expressly  declares  that  'any  one  who  maintains 
mere  material  movements  to  be  sufficient  to  produce  feeling  and 
thinking  beings,  must  have  lost  all  traces  of  sound  human  under- 
standing/ Rousseau  stands  apart  in  his  century. 


234  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

French  school  whose  efforts  call  for  recognition.  As 
a  whole  the  school  remained  unfruitful,  stopping  short 
of  the  all-important  truth,  the  connection  between 
thought  and  language. 

The  greatness  of  Locke  is  shown  by  his  recognising 
this  truth  so  much  in  advance  of  his  age,  even  though 
the  true  source  of  the  dependence,  the  identity  of 
thought  and  speech,  had  not  yet  dawned  on  him. 
But  his  eagerness  to  probe  the  nature  of  human 
reason  to  the  bottom,  and  the  analytical  skill  needed 
to  found  this  chief  human  gift  upon  a  scientific  basis, 
led  him  naturally  into  investigations  of  the  nature 
of  language,  and  these  sections  of  his  famous  work 
are  full  of  new  and  luminous  points  of  view  which 
contain  some  truth  already,  and  the  promise  of  more. 
Locke  states  it  as  his  purpose  "to  enquire  into  the 
original  certainty  and  extent  of  human  knowledge, 
together  with  the  grounds  and  degrees  of  belief, 
opinion  and  assent, .  .  .  and  to  consider  the  discerning 
faculties  of  a  man,  as  they  are  employed  about  the 
objects  (i.  e.  ideas)  which  they  have  to  do  with.  .  .  . 
And  I  shall  imagine,  I  have  not  wholly  misemployed 
myself  in  the  thoughts  I  shall  have  on  this  occasion, 
if  in  this  historical,  plain  method,  I  can  give  any 
account  of  the  ways,  whereby  our  understandings 
come  to  attain  those  notions  of  things  we  have,  and 
can  set  down  any  measures  of  the  certainty  of  our 
knowledge  on  the  grounds  of  those  persuasions  which 
are  to  be  found  amongst  men,  so  various,  different 
and  wholly  contradictory/ 

Locke  reckons  sensible  perceptions  among  simple 
ideas.  The  organs  are  the  channels  leading  them  to 
the  mind.  The  soul  is  as  little  able  to  create  ideas 
out  of  nothing  or  to  destroy  those  which  have  been 
framed  as  a  man  is  to  create  or  to  destroy  the 


LOCKE.  235 

smallest  mote  in  thd  sunbeam.  No  idea  of  colour  can 
be  given  to  the  blind,  nor  of  sound  to  the  deaf. 

Reflection  is  opposed  to  sensation.  The  latter  is 
experience  of  the  external  world,  the  former  of  the 
inner  one,  i.  e.  the  states  of  the  soul.  The  mind  in 
this  is  sometimes  active,  sometimes  passive.  Per- 
ception is  the  representation  of  things  external  given 
by  sensible  impressions.  The  mind  in  this  is  purely 
passive,  it  is  as  powerless  to  escape  or  alter  these  im- 
pressions as  a  mirror  to  change  the  objects  reflected  in 
it.  Retention  is  the  revival  of  former  representations, 
the  important  power  of  memory  and  recollection,  and 
the  mind  in  this  is  not  wholly  passive.  There  is  a 
natural  defect  of  the  human  mind,  associated  with 
the  faculty  of  recollection,  namely,  that  the  latter 
only  recalls  its  objects  in  succession  :  f  Whereas  we 
can  conceive  some  superior,  created,  intellectual  beings 
which  in  this  faculty  may  so  far  excel  man  that  they 
may  have  constantly  in  view  the  whole  scene  of  all 
their  former  actions,  wherein  no  one  of  the  thoughts 
they  have  ever  had  may  slip  out  of  their  sight/  All 
these  functions  belong  also  to  the  lower  animals. 
The  highest  property  of  the  reason  is  the  power  to 
compare,  distinguish,  unite,  and  separate ;  and  in 
this  the  human  mind  far  surpasses  that  of  brutes,  in 
virtue  of  the  gift  of  abstraction,  or  universal  notions, 
which  he  alone  possesses,  and  of  which  anon. 

In  all  this  we  see  a  general  outline  of  the  analysis 
of  mental  operations,  and  their  dependence  011  the 
world  of  sense,  subsequently  carried  out  with  so  much 
clearness  and  precision  by  Kant.  Kant  will  modify 
and  correct ;  he  will  show  that  even  in  mere  percep- 
tion or  representation  some  active  co-operation  of  the 
mind  is  necessary,  such  as  is  still  more  apparent  in 
reproduction  or  recollection ;  but  the  main  outline  was 


238  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

increased,  and  it  leads  thus  to  the  idea  of  infinity. 
Th^  position  of  an  object  can  only  be  determined  in 
relation  to  something  else  ;  the  place  of  the  universe 
cannot  be  determined,  it  is  identical  with  formless,  im- 
measurable space.  Without  space  naturally  neither 
solidity  nor  motion  are  possible,  but  the  latter,  the 
true  qualities  of  matter,  differ  toto  csdo  from  space. 
Material  atoms  may  be  divided  and  moved  in  various 
ways  :  it  is  as  impossible  to  divide  space  in  reality  as 
in  imagination ;  to  consider  portions  of  it  apart  is 
not  separation.  The  parts  of  space  are  likewise  im- 
moveable.  But  to  the  question,  whether  space  then 
is  substance  or  accident,  there  is  no  shame  in  replying, 
We  do  not  know.  Only  let  all  beware  of  the  mislead- 
ing sophistries  in  which  one  is  entangled  if  one 
begins  to  take  words  for  things. 

It  is  equally  hard  to  say  what  time  is.  St.  Augus- 
tine's answer  to  the  question  is  clever :  *  Si  rogas  quid 
sit  tempus,  nescio,  si  non  rogas,  intelligo.'  We  reach 
the  conception  by  reflecting  upon  our  feelings  and 
thoughts  in  the  order  in  which  they  succeed  each 
other  in  the  mind :  without  enduring  perceptions,  we 
should  not  have  the  idea  of  duration  or  time.  The 
idea  of  succession  cannot  be  derived  from  motion;  on 
the  contrary,  the  latter  has  to  be  translated  into 
a  mental  sequence.  The  succession  of  feelings  or 
thoughts  always  occupies  a  perceptible  portion  of 
time,  even  when  its  rapid  passage  leaves  us  uncon- 
scious of  the  fact,  while  the  movement  of  the  hour- 
hand  or  the  growing  grass  is  too  slow  for  us  to  ob- 
serve. Time  and  its  measurement  are  something 
different.  Time  in  itself  always  follows  the  same 
even,  uniform  course.  But  we  can  never  say  of  any 
particular  measure  that  we  adopt,  that  its  parts  or 
periods  are  perfectly  equal.  Certain  irregularities 


LOCKE.  237 

is  sweet,  blue  or  warm  in  idea,  is  but  the  certain 
bulk,  figure  and  motions  of  the  insensible  parts  in 
the  bodies  themselves  which  we  call  so/  We  see 
here  how  Locke  bridged  the  passage  from  the  sub- 
jective or  represented  to  the  real  world l.  And  this 
separation  also  was  a  prelude  to  the  great  leading 
idea  of  the  Kantian  Criticism. 

The  ideas  of  space  and  time  are  carefully  weighed 
by  Locke,  and  the  fundamentally  erroneous  identifi- 
cation of  matter  with  space  extension,  introduced  by 
Descartes,  is  set  aside.  Locke  substitutes  for  it  the 
idea  of  solidity 2,  which  cwe  receive  by  our  touch,  and 
which  arises  from  the  resistance  wiiich  we  find  in 
body,  to  the  entrance  of  any  other  body  into  the  place 
it  possesses,  till  it  has  left  it.  There  is  no  idea,  which 
we  receive  more  constantly  from  sensation,  than 
solidity. .  .  This,  of  all  other,  seems  the  idea  most 
intimately  connected  with  and  essential  to  body/ 
But  space  and  solidity  are  distinct  ideas,  as  are  body 
and  extension.  Space  therefore  may  be  imagined 
'  either  as  filled  with  solid  parts,  so  that  another  body 
cannot  come  there,  without  displacing  and  thrusting 
out  the  body  that  w^as  there  before,  or  else  as  void  of 
solidity,  so  that  a  body  of  equal  dimensions  to  that 
empty  or  pure  space  may  be  placed  in  it,  without  the 
removal  or  expulsion  of  anything  that  was  there/ 

Space,  time,  and  number  are  three  simple  stock 
ideas,  capable  of  endless  modifications,  from  which 
accordingly  innumerable  modal  ideas  can  be  derived. 
We  obtain  the  idea  of  space  by  means  of  sight  and 
touch ;  every  measure  within  it  may  be  conceivably 

1  '  Solidity,  extension,  figure,  motion,  and  rest  would  be  really  in 
the  world,  as  they  are,  whether  there  were  any  sensible  being  to 
perceive  them  or  not/    Essay  ii.  cap.  21.  §  2. 

2  Ib.  cap.  4.  §  i;  cap.  13.  §  n. 


238  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

increased,  and  it  leads  thus  to  the  idea  of  infinity. 
Th^  position  of  an  object  can  only  be  determined  in 
relation  to  something  else  ;  the  place  of  the  universe 
cannot  be  determined,  it  is  identical  with  formless,  im- 
measurable space.  Without  space  naturally  neither 
solidity  nor  motion  are  possible,  but  the  latter,  the 
true  qualities  of  matter,  differ  toto  csdo  from  space. 
Material  atoms  may  be  divided  and  moved  in  various 
ways  :  it  is  as  impossible  to  divide  space  in  reality  as 
in  imagination ;  to  consider  portions  of  it  apart  is 
not  separation.  The  parts  of  space  are  likewise  im- 
moveable.  But  to  the  question,  whether  space  then 
is  substance  or  accident,  there  is  no  shame  in  replying, 
We  do  not  know.  Only  let  all  beware  of  the  mislead- 
ing sophistries  in  which  one  is  entangled  if  one 
begins  to  take  words  for  things. 

It  is  equally  hard  to  say  what  time  is.  St.  Augus- 
tine's answer  to  the  question  is  clever :  *  Si  rogas  quid 
sit  tempus,  nescio,  si  non  rogas,  intelligo.'  We  reach 
the  conception  by  reflecting  upon  our  feelings  and 
thoughts  in  the  order  in  which  they  succeed  each 
other  in  the  mind :  without  enduring  perceptions,  we 
should  not  have  the  idea  of  duration  or  time.  The 
idea  of  succession  cannot  be  derived  from  motion;  on 
the  contrary,  the  latter  has  to  be  translated  into 
a  mental  sequence.  The  succession  of  feelings  or 
thoughts  always  occupies  a  perceptible  portion  of 
time,  even  when  its  rapid  passage  leaves  us  uncon- 
scious of  the  fact,  while  the  movement  of  the  hour- 
hand  or  the  growing  grass  is  too  slow  for  us  to  ob- 
serve. Time  and  its  measurement  are  something 
different.  Time  in  itself  always  follows  the  same 
even,  uniform  course.  But  we  can  never  say  of  any 
particular  measure  that  we  adopt,  that  its  parts  or 
periods  are  perfectly  equal.  Certain  irregularities 


LOCKE.  239 

have  been  detected  in  the  motion  of  the  sun,  which 
passed  for  so  long  as  the  most  reliable  measure  of 
time.  The  movements  of  the  pendulum  also  are 
subject  to  variations  arising  from  unknown  causes. 
It  is  not  possible  to  prove  with  absolute  certainty  the 
exact  equality  of  two  immediately  successive  periods, 
and  we  have  to  rest  satisfied  with  apparent  equality. 
The  idea  of  time,  like  that  of  space,  conducts  us  ne- 
cessarily to  that  of  infinity,  i.  e.  to  the  idea  of  eternity. 
The  idea  of  time,  then,  also  springs  from  the  two 
universal  sources  of  knowledge,  feeling  and  reflection. 
The  disappearance  and  return  of  ideas  in  the  mind 
gives  us  the  notion  of  succession ;  the  perception  of 
identical  existence,  by  the  abstraction  of  these  repre- 
sentations, gives  us  the  idea  of  duration,  while  by 
unrestrained  addition  and  multiplication  of  this 
given  duration  we  attain  the  idea  of  eternity1. 

Time  and  space  have  much  in  common :  both  are 
infinite  and  cannot  be  limited  by  the  world  of  matter. 
It  is  always  possible  to  think  away  bodies  and  motion, 
but  the  most  perfect  mind  would  be  unable  to  con- 
ceive limits  to  space  and  time.  I  can  imagine  space 
without  bodies,  but  I  cannot  imagine  the  non-existence 
of  space.  The  portions  of  time  and  space  which  we 
assign  for  the  measurement  of  things  are  only  dis- 
tances in  the  boundless  uniform  ocean  of  eternity 
and  infinity.  Everything  has  its  when  and  where, 
in  relation  only  to  other  known  existences.  Time 
and  space  consist  indeed  of  parts,  but  are  reckoned 
as  throughout  of  similar  nature  and  as  simple  ideas  : 
each  portion  of  time  is  itself  time,  each  portion  of 
space,  space.  We  have  as  little  conception  of  their 
smallest  atoms  as  of  their  limits,  we  can  always 
diminish  or  increase  the  unit  thought  of.  The  parts 

1  Essay  ii.  cap.  14  and  17. 


240  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

of  both  are  absolutely  indivisible ;  continuity  is  a 
necessary  property  of  space  and  time. 

The  differences  are  that  space  extends  itself  in  all 
directions,  while  time  has  only  one  dimension.  The 
present  moment  is  the  same  for  all  things,  while  no 
two  things  occupy  the  same  space.  As  the  parts  of 
time  arc  incapable  of  permanence,  so  are  the  parts  of 
space  of  succession1. 

But  of  all  ideas,  there  is  none  so  simple,  so  familiar, 
and  so  peculiar  to  humanity  as  that  of  unity  and 
number.  Angels  and  men,  objects,  thoughts,  things 
temporal  and  extended,  all  are  united  in  number. 
Everything  that  the  senses  and  the  ideas  derived 
from  them  are  unable  to  grasp,  on  account  of  its  im- 
perceptible or  overwhelming  size,  becomes  fixed  and 
definite  as  soon  as  it  is  conceived  numerically,  and 
here  no  limit  is  assigned.  Numeration  consists  only 
of  addition  and  subtraction,  and  both  operations  may 
be  continued  to  infinity.  Words  seem  even  more 
necessary  and  indispensable  for  numerical  combina- 
tions than  for  the  formation  of  any  of  our  other  ideas  : 
to  a  tribe  that  has  no  word  for  six,  everything  above 
five  appears  as  an  indefinite  many,  and  the  difficulty, 
which  children  have  in  learning  to  reckon,  arises 
partly  from  inability  to  group  their  ideas  in  the 
strict  logical  order  which  has  to  be  established  among 
ideas  of  number 2. 

The  infinity  of  space  and  time  and  the  infinite 
divisibility  of  matter  depend  upon  this  unbounded 
power  of  addition  and  subtraction.  Such  infinity 
transcends  all  human  comprehension.  Hence  the 
existence  of  God,  who  fills  the  infinite  space  and  en- 
dures throughout  eternity,  is  an  object  of  faith  only. 
For  our  reason  eternity  and  infinity  are  negative  ideas, 

1  Essay  ii.  cap.  15,  2  Ib.  cap.  16. 


LOCKE.  241 

and  the  attempt  to  give  them  positive  significance 
has  only  resulted  in  controversy  and  contradictory 
opinions,  since  our  limited  powers  of  comprehension 
fail  before  the  overwhelming  elevation  of  the  object l. 

In  regard  to  the  idea  of  Force,  Locke  was  still 
much  under  the  influence  of  the  Cartesian  distinction. 
The  modifications  of  things  lead  us  to  assume  every- 
where active  and  passive  potentialities.  Properly 
speaking,  matter  is  wholly  passive,  while  the  supreme 
infinite  mind  is  everywhere  active.  .  We  cannot  ac- 
quire the  idea  of  action  from  sensation,  but  from 
reflection,  for  there  are  in  general  two  kinds  of  action 
only,  motion  and  thought.  The  idea  of  thought 
cannot  possibly  be  derived  from  bodies,  and  as  for 
motion,  bodies  always  receive  it  from  without ;  it  is 
therefore  passive  rather  than  active.  For  even  when 
one  body  imparts  to  another  the  movement  it  has 
itself  received,  this  only  spreads  and  communicates 
what  the  body  had  passively  received.  Sensation 
gives  us  therefore  a  very  obscure  impression  of  the 
first  beginning  of  action,  as  the  origin  of  motion.  If 
we  attend  to  the  processes  of  our  own  mind,  we  see 
much  more  clearly  and  accurately  that  it  is  we  our- 
selves that  originate  and  continue  thought,  that  we 
ourselves  produce  or  arrest  various  kinds  of  motion,  in 
accordance  with  our  thoughts,  in  other  words,  accord- 
ing to  our  arbitrary  choice. 

The  understanding  is  the  faculty  of  perception  and 
intelligence,  but  the  power  of  self-determination 
towards  motion  or  rest,  thought  or  no  thought,  is 
called  will.  We  must  however  be  on  our  guard 
against  assuming  the  existence  of  separate  activities 
or  regions  of  the  mind,  corresponding  to  these  names. 
The  power  of  acting,  in  accordance  with  one's  own 

1  Essay  ii.  cap.  17. 
VOL.1.  R 


242  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

choice  or  mental  inclination,  is  called  liberty.  Its 
opposite  is  not  necessity,  but  the  want  of  freedom  :  for 
if  I  will  what  is  necessary,  I  am  free.  The  soul,  when 
awake,  is  always  thinking  something ;  it  is  free  in  so 
far  as  it  is  able  to  direct  and  concentrate  its  thoughts 
and  order  them  in  regular  sequence  towards  what  is 
agreeable  to  it.  So  far  as  a  man's  power  of  acting  or 
not  acting,  in  accordance  with  his  own  thought  and 
choice,  extends,  so  far  extends  his  freedom.  Freedom 
thus  concerns  action  only,  not  will.  It  is  a  direct  con- 
tradiction to  speak  of  the  freedom  of  the  will.  What 
manner  of  thing  could  that  be  which  had  equal  free- 
dom to  will  and  not  to  will  ?  Clearly  a  monstrosity, 
a  chimsara.  On  the  contrary,  the  more  precisely  the 
will  is  determined  or  conditioned,  the  more  it  struggles 
after  freedom  and  the  less  it  submits  to  be  determined 
from  without  \ 

Locke  also  wrestled  gallantly  with  the  idea  of 
substance,  showing  it  to  be  an  obscure,  unknown 
something,  in  which  we  combine  a  particular  aggre- 
gate of  qualities  or  predicates.  If  any  one  inquired 
what  is  the  subject  in  which  this  weight  and  that 
colour  reside,  and  was  told,  These  solid  and  extended 
parts — he  might  ask  again,  What  is  the  subject  of 
these  extended  parts  ?  which  would  place  us  in  the 
same  difficulty  as  the  Indian,  who,  after  saying  that 
the  world  rested  on  the  great  elephant  and  the  elephant 
upon  a  great  tortoise,  could  only  suppose  the  tortoise 
to  rest  on  '  Something,  I  know  not  what/  We  are  like 
children,  and  always  seek  some  substitute,  when  clear 
ideas  fail  us. 

' Material  substance*  and  ' immaterial  substance 
are  something  which  we  imagine  underlying  and  sup- 
porting, now  the  sensible,  perceptible  properties  of 
1  Essay  ii.  cap.  21. 


LOCKE.  243 

external  objects,  now  the  forms  of  consciousness  which 
we  perceive  in  ourselves.  But  what  this  thing  may 
be,  we  know  as  little  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other. 
Forces  and  effects  constitute  the  major  part  of  our 
ideas  of  substance :  the  magnet  draws  the  iron,  the 
fire  melts  the  gold ;  and  the  simple  ideas  of  thought, 
will,  etc.  are. as  clear  as  those  of  solidity  arid  extension. 
But  we  know  as  little  about  the  nature  of  material 
substance  as  of  the  substance  of  mind.  The  qualities 
of  bodies,  such  as  cohesion  and  weight,  are  just  as  in- 
comprehensible as  the  thought  and  will  of  the  mind ; 
and  the  simplest  mechanical  principle  of  the  com- 
munication of  motion  by  impulse  from  one  body  to 
another,  is  equally  incomprehensible.  On  the  other 
side,  however,  though  we  cannot  possibly  conceive 
the  production  of  the  effect,  we  have  constant  ex- 
perience of  all  our  voluntary  motions,  as  produced 
in  us,  l)y  the  free  action  or  thought  of  our  own  minds 
only1.  It  should  therefore  be  considered,  whether 
it  is  not  the  nature  of  spirits  to  be  active,  and 
of  matter  to  be  passive.  And  as  all  created  spirits 
are  at  once  active  and  passive,  it  might  be  con- 
jectured that  'created  spirits  are  not  totally  separate 
from  matter2/ 

In  a  word,  all  our  ideas  of  substance  are  but  'col- 
lections of  simple  ideas  with  a  supposition  of  some- 
thing to  which  they  belong  and  in  which  they  sub- 
sist/ and  most  of  the  simple  ideas  that  make  up  our 
complex  ideas  of  substances,  are  not  positive  qualities, 
but  '  powers/  a  fitness  or  capacity  to  operate  and  be 

1  An  easy  leap  across  the  gulf  created  by  Descartes,  which 
sounds  at  least  like  a  relapse  into  the  old  errors. 

2  Essay  ii.  cap.  23.  §  28.     The  Leibnizian   doctrine  of  monads 
is  clearly  anticipated  here. 

E  2 


244  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY, 

operated  on  by  various  other  substances  (relativity, 
causal  relation). 

These  short  extracts  will  suffice  to  mark  Locke  as 
a  worthy  fore-runner  of  Kant.  He  led  vigorous  on- 
slaughts against  the  strongholds  of  the  ancient  dog- 
matism, and  that  at  the  veiy  points  where  Kant  was 
to  force  an  entrance  afterwards.  Locke  shook  the 
walls,  Kant  laid  them  in  ruins. 

Locke  proclaimed  the  impossibility  of  forming  any 
clear  idea  of  substance  in  general ;  he  insisted  upon 
space,  time,  and  causality  as  the  most  important 
elements  of  human  knowledge,  a  recognition  which 
virtually  establishes  the  relativity  of  knowledge ;  and 
he  proceeded  lastly  to  trace  back  all  our  knowledge 
to  sensation  and  reflection,  and  to  propose  the  origin 
of  ideas  as  the  chief  problem  of  philosophy.  In  all 
this  he  was  reintroducing  into  philosophy  a  principle 
which  had  threatened  to  disappear  altogether  before 
the  doctrine  of  substance,  and  especially  of  the  una 
sulstantia  of  Spinoza,  namely,  the  principle  of  indi- 
vidual existence.  It  is  not  substance  that  thinks, 
but  the  individual  being,  opposed  to  the  whole  re- 
maining universe,  and  receiving  it  into  his  conscious- 
nogs  by  sensation  and  reflection — man  himself. 

The  Self  of  a  thing  is  that  proper  particular  exist- 
ence of  it  in  space  and  time  whereby  it  is  absolutely 
separated  and  distinguished  from  other  things ;  as  a 
unit.  This  applies  to  finite  things.  The  existence 
of  God,  without  beginning  or  end  or  limit,  can  have 
no  relation  to  space  or  time.  But  everything  except 
God,  whether  bodies  or  spirits,  must  have  a  definite 
beginning  in  time  and  space,  permanence,  unity,  con- 
ditioned throughout  in  time  and  space,  an  untransfer- 
able existence  of  their  own  :  all  this  is  the  principium 
individuationis.  In  the  case  of  composite  things  it  is 


LOCKE.  245 

necessary  to  distinguish  carefully  what  it  is  that  pro- 
perly constitutes  their  unity.  A  mere  mass  consists 
simply  of  so  many  material  atoms,  and  continues  the 
same  however  differently  they  may  be  intermingled, 
but  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  the  unity  of  organisms, 
plants,  or  animals.  In  these  the  material  particles 
change  continuously,  there  is  continuity  and  com- 
munity of  life,  of  organic  movements  or  functions. 

Personal  identity  consists  of  continuity  of  con- 
sciousness, whereby  a  rational  being  can  bring  his 
present  existence  into  connection  with  his  former 
action  and  thoughts,  and  consider  itself  as  itself,  the 
same  thinking  thing  in  different  times  and  places. 
The  question  about  substance  is  thus  quite  indif- 
ferent. Continuous  consciousness,  whether  it  sub- 
sists in  one  and  the  same  undivided  substance,  or  in 
several  substances,  received  successively  into  the 
organisation,  this  alone  is  the  essence  of  personal 
identity.  Just  as  animal  identity  exists,  notwith- 
standing the  continuous  change  and  succession  of  the 
material  particles  which  compose  the  animal  body,  so 
personal  identity  may  be  preserved  through  similar 
succession  and  change  of  substance.  Besides,  why 
may  not  several  particular  spirits  unite  together  to 
make  up  one  single  consciousness,  as  many  particular 
bodies  are  united  to  build  up  a  common  life.  Person 
is  a  judicial  term,  and  personality  the  foundation  of 
all  responsibility.  Every  action  outside  the  present 
moment  must,  in  so  far  as  the  doer  is  to  be  held 
accountable  for  it,  be  brought  into  the  unity  of  con- 
sciousness, and  be  recognised  by  himself  as  belonging 
to  him,  and  so  united  with  his  actual  self1.  This  im- 
portant and  new  manner  of  view  is  completed  and 
developed  in  the  philosophy  of  Leibniz. 
1  Essay  ii.  cap.  27. 


246  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

We  now  come  in  conclusion  to  Locke's  highest  and 
most  admirable  merit,  his  insight  into  the  nature  of 
general  ideas,  and  the  connection  between  the  latter 
and  language. 

The  faculty  of  abstraction  and  the  general  ideas 
arising  from  it  are  proper  to  man  alone  and  form  the 
true  nature  of  his  reason. 

Abstraction  is  the  faculty  of  generalising  under  a 
certain  name  the  ideas  received  from  single  things. 
Everything  that  has  to  do  with  the  real  existence  of 
these  single  things,  such  as  time  and  place  and  other 
concomitant  qualities,  must  be  separated,  and  the 
idea  alone  presented  to  the  understanding  apart,  and 
made  applicable,  under  a  particular  name,  to  all  the 
things  in  which  it  is  met.  The  same  colour  which 
I  perceive  here  in  milk,  there  in  snow,  becomes  under 
the  name  white  a  general  idea  for  all  things  in  which 
this  colour  may  at  any  time  be  found.  Even  if  it 
might  b,e  doubted  whether  animals  do  not,  up  to  a 
certain  point,  combine  and  extend  their  perceptions, 
this  faculty  of  abstraction  at  all  events  constitutes  a 
great  advantage  or  superiority  possessed  by  man. 
As  animals  have  never  been  known  to  make  use 
of  words  or  other  signs  to  express  any  kind  of 
general  idea,  it  is  impossible  to  conclude  otherwise 
than  that  they  are  destitute  of  the  power  of  forming 
general  ideas  by  abstraction.  Imperfection  of  the 
organs  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  want  of  speech,  for 
many  animals  can  articulate  several  words  quite 
clearly,  and  a  man  who,  through  imperfection  of  the 
organs,  is  unable  to  speak,  finds  means  of  expressing 
certain  general  ideas  by  the  use  of  other  signs. 

Perhaps  the  true  and  peculiar  distinction  between 
the  human  species  and  other  animals  consists  in  this 
faculty  of  abstraction.  Among  other  animals  the 


LOCKE.  247 

activity  of  the  mind  is  restricted  within  the  narrow 
circle  of  isolated  impressions  from  external  objects,  and 
their  ideas  are  incapable  of  widening  by  abstraction. 

But  the  origin  of  all  general  ideas  is  to  be  found 
in  sensible  perceptions1.  The  simple  ideas  thence  de- 
rived cannot  be  defined.  No  explanation  will  convey 
any  idea  of  .colour  to  the  blind.  Words  cannot  help, 
for  they  are  only  sounds.  To  endeavour  with  words 
to  make  any  one,  who  has  not  had  experience  of  the 
sensations,  realise  the  taste  of  an  apple,  or  its  red 
and  white  colour,  is  the  same  as  trying  to  make  sound 
visible  and  colour  audible,  or  rather  to  make  hearing 
a  substitute  for  all  the  other  senses,  so  that  we  should 
taste,  smell,  and  see  with  our  ears.  All  immaterial 
ideas  are  originally  taken  by  metaphor  from  ideas  of 
sensible  perception2. 

The  things  themselves,  and  the  ideas  which  we 
have  of  them  and  which  we  characterise  by  general 
names,  are  naturally  altogether  different.  The  former 
are  real,  the  latter  nominal  essences.  Gold  is  to  us 
something  yellow,  heavy,  solid, — but  we  are  far  from 
exhausting  its  inner  qualities  by  this  conception.  How 
different  is  our  idea  of  man  from  the  real  being.  If  I 
had  such  an  idea  of  man  as  the  divine  Artificer,  who 
beholds  all  the  inmost  springs  of  his  bodily  and 

1  Essay  ii.  cap.  2.     Of.  Schopenhauer  (Welt  als  Wille  und  Vor- 
stellung,  i.  p.  48) :  'Although  conceptions  differ  fundamentally  and 
materially  from  sensible  intuitions,  they  stand  in  a  necessary  re- 
lation to  the  latter,  without  which  they  could  not  exist,  a  relation 
which  accordingly  makes  their  whole  nature  and  essence.    Reflection 
is  necessarily  an  imitation,  a  repetition  of  the  primitive  images  of 
the  world  .of  intuition,  though  an  imitation  of  an  unique  kind  in  a 
wholly  heterogeneous  material.   The  whole  world  of  reflection  rests 
upon  that  of  intuition  as  its  base/ 

2  Essay  iii.  cap.  3  and  4.    Compare  with  this  the  observations  of 
MaxMiiller  (Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,  ii.  372,  ninth  ed.). 


248  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

spiritual  nature,  this  would  bear  the  same  sort  of 
relation  to  my  present  notion  as  the  conception  of 
the  artist  who  executed  the  Strassburg  clock  does  to 
that  of  the  peasant  who  stands  gaping  at  it  from 
below.  The  true  reality  of  things,  the  so-called 
form&  substantiates  themselves  must  always  remain 
incomprehensible  to  us.  In  nature  herself  there  are 
innumerable  transitional  links  connecting  different 
species,  which  escape  us,  but  which  make  a  con- 
tinuous chain  from  the  lowest  inorganic  being  up 
to  man.  We  only  classify  them  according  to  the 
predicates  and  qualities  which  we  regard  as  belong- 
ing to  the  essence  of  each,  without  knowing  whether 
they  are  so  really.  A  question  which  has  to  be 
answered  in  reference  to  all  classification  according 
to  genera  and  species  is  this:  Was  it  the  intention 
of  nature  to  elaborate  her  works  according  to  a 
definite  number  of  unalterable  forms  or  types,  and 
is  this  number  really  continuously  maintained 
throughout  the  production  of  things  ?  As  long 
as  this  question  remains  unanswered,  our  classi- 
fications cannot  be  founded  upon  realities,  but  are 
only  arranged  in  accordance  with  certain  sensible 
phenomena. 

The  difference  between  real  and  nominal  essence 
is  indicated  by  language.  I  can  say,  An  extended 
solid  body  moves,  but  I  cannot  say,  Extension  and 
solidity  move,  though  my  conception  of  body  includes 
no  other  predicates  than  these.  Similarly  I  can  say, 
A  rational  animal  is  capable  of  sociability  and  speech, 
but  not,  Reason  and  animality  are  capable  of  sociabi- 
lity and  speech1.  Our  thought  therefore,  as  embodied 
in  language,  distinguishes  itself  between  the  abstract 
and  the  concrete. 

1  Essay  iii.  cap.  6. 


LOCKE.  249 

Things  are  held  together  in  nature  by  the  unity 
of  their  essence,  as  their  different  qualities  are  held 
together  by  our  conception  in  the  unity  of  thought. 
The  things  themselves,  too,  are  types  which  we  en- 
deavour to  embrace  in  our  general  ideas,  without 
however  succeeding  in  ever  reaching  their  individual- 
ity. Ideas  .of  mixed  modes,  on  the  other  hand,  may 
include  the  utmost  variety  of  objects,  furnished  by 
the  widest  experience.  'What  a  vast  variety  of 
different  ideas  does  the  word  triumphus  hold  toge- 
ther and  deliver  to  us  as  one  species !'  and  so  of 
procession,  inquisition,  and  other  words  of  the  same 
kind1. 

The  following  acute  remark,  if  logically  followed 
out,  would  have  led  to  very  important  conclusions : 
'From  what  has  been  before  said,  we  may  see  the 
reason  why,  in  the  species  of  artificial  things,  there 
is  generally  less  confusion  and  uncertainty  than  in 
natural  species.  Because  an  artificial  thing,  being 
the  production  of  a  man,  which  the  artificer  designed, 
and  therefore  weH  knows  the  idea  of,  the  name  of  it 
is  supposed  to  stand  for  no  other  idea,  nor  to  import 
any  other  essence,  than  what  is  certainly  to  be  known 
and  easy  enough  to  be  apprehended.  .  .  .  Why  should 
we  not  think  a  watch  and  pistol  as  distinct  species 
one  from  another  as  a  horse  and  a  dog,  they  being 
expressed  in  our  minds  by  distinct  ideas,  and  to 
others  by  distinct  appellations2?'  The  conclusion 
that  the  earliest  and  most  natural  ideas  of  men,  and 
so  also  their  earliest  vocal  expressions,  must  have 
originated  from  their  own  creations  might  have  been 
deduced  from  this  observation.  In  another  passage 
too  Locke  seems  to  skirt  unconsciously  the  edge  of  the 
discovery  that  language  originated  from  action,  and 
1  Essay  iii.  cap.  5.  2  Ib.  cap.  6.  §  40,  41. 


250  MODEEN   PHILOSOPHY. 

more  particularly  from  common  action.  '  It  is  worth 
our  observing/  he  says, *  which  of  all  our  simple  ideas 
have  been  most  modified,  and  had  most  mixed  modes 
made  out  of  them,  with  names  given  to  them ;  and 
those  have  been  these  three ;  thinking  and  motion 
(which  are  the  two  ideas  which  comprehend  in  them 
all  action)  and  power,  from  whence  these  actions  are 
conceived  to  flow-  .  .  .  For  action  being  the  great 
business  of  mankind,  and  the  whole  matter  about 
which  all  laws  are  conversant,  it  is  no  wonder  that 
the  several  modes  of  thinking  and  motion  should  be 
taken  notice  of,  the  ideas  of  them  observed,  and  laid 
up  in  the  memory,  and  have  names  assigned  to 
them ;  without  which  laws  could  be  but  ill  made,  or 
vice  and  disorder  repressed.  Nor  could  any  com- 
munication be  well  had  amongst  men,  without  such 
complex  ideas  with  names  to  them1/ 

The  following  remark  is  equally  profound,  that 
'many  words  which  seem  to  express  some  action, 
signify  nothing  of  the  action  or  modus  operandi  at  all, 
but  barely  the  effect.  .  .  .  When  a  countryman  says  the 
cold  freezes  water,  though  the  word  freezing  seems 
to  import  some  action,  yet  truly  it  signifies  nothing 
but  the  effect,  viz.  that  water,  that  was  before  fluid, 
is  become  hard  and  consistent 2/ 

Locke  begins  by  professing  his  own  ignorance 
'  how  the  ideas  of  our  minds  are  framed,  of  what 
materials  they  are  made,  whence  they  have  their 
light,  and  how  they  come  to  make  their  appearances/ 
and  appeals  to  experience  as  his  only  guide ;  but  this 
initial  doubt  prevailed  on  him  to  direct  the  illumina- 
ting power  of  his  genius  towards  this  obscure  region, 
in  which  he  cast  new  and  important  light  upon 
the  origin  of  ideas,  or  the  function  of  the  thinking 
1  Essay  ii.  cap.  22.  §  10.  2  Ib.  §  u. 


LOCKE.  251 

faculty,  so  furnishing  at  once  guidance  and  material 
for  future  enquirers. 

Language  and  ideas  are  thus  the  two  inestimable 
means  of  all  human  knowledge.  But  in  them  too 
and  their  imperfection  the  true  causes  of  most 
errors,  false  or  premature  opinions,  and  endless  em- 
bittered and  profitless  controversies,  are  to  be  found. 

Among  these  causes  the  first  and  most  important 
is,  that  the  majority  of  men  imagine  that  whenever 
a  word  has  been  given  them,  a  sufficient  explanation 
has  been  given  also.  Instead  therefore  of  subjecting 
the  content  of  the  idea  to  a  careful  examination, 
they  utter  like  parrots  the  words  they  have  glibly 
learnt  from  childhood,  and  do  not  think  at  all. 
To  tliis  must  be  added  the  difficulty,  not  to  say 
impossibility,  of  securing  that  two  men  shall  think 
the  same  thing,  when  using  the  same  words.  No 
man  has  the  power  to  make  others  have  exactly  the 
same  ideas  in  their  minds  that  he  has,  when  they 
use  the  same  words  that  he  does.  In  regard  to 
the  most  important  ideas,  those  of  morals,  do  not 
we  learn  the  words  before  we  have  the  least  con- 
ception of  the  things,  and  then  afterwards  join  to 
them  some  idea  as  best  we  can  ? 

Hence  the  endless  disputes  about  religion,  faith, 
grace,  etc.,  while  every  one  believes  he  must  make 
his  own  ideas,  clear  or  hazy  as  the  case  may  be,  the 
standard  of  the  meaning  of  the  words.  Most  of  those 
who  are  readiest  to  dispute  about  religion  and  con- 
science, church  and  creed,  might  and  right,  would  be 
silenced  if  they  were  summoned  to  keep  to  the 
matter  and  not  to  words  with  which  they  perplex 
themselves  and  others.  Most  controversies  are  mere 
logomachies,  in  which  each  side  thinks  something 
different  or  nothing  at  all  apropos  of  the  words  they 


252  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

agree  in  using.  By  paying  close  attention  to  the 
meaning  and  the  matter  itself,  without  attaching 
themselves  to  words  and  names,  men  would  soon 
come  to  an  understanding,  were  it  not  that  passion 
and  interest  withhold  them  from  confessing  the  truth. 
Language  ought  to  serve  for  the  acquisition  of  know- 
ledge and  its  ready  communication.  Words  without 
clear  and  definite  ideas  are  empty  sound.  And  he 
who  did  but  fill  folios  with  obscure,  unintelligible 
words,  would  gain  as  little  knowledge  as  any  one  who 
studied  the  titles  and  not  the  contents  of  the  books 
in  a  large  library.  Language  and  ideas  belong  es- 
sentially to  one  another.  'He  that  has  complex 
ideas,  without  particular  names  for  them,  would  be 
in  no  better  case  than  a  bookseller,  who  had  in  his 
warehouse,  volumes,  that  lay  there  unbound,  and  with- 
out titles  which  he  could  therefore  make  known  to 
others  only  by  showing  the  loose  sheets,  and  can 
communicate  them  only  by  tale1/  The  man  is  un- 
able to  communicate  his  complex  ideas  for  want  of 
words,  and  therefore  has  to  use  words  for  all  the 
simple  ideas  which  go  to  make  up  the  complex  one. 

Locke  also  pronounces  a  severe  sentence  of  con- 
demnation upon  'the  obscure  and  unintelligible 
discourses  and  disputes'  of  scholastic  philosophy, 
words  of  righteous  indignation  which  are  just  as 
crushingly  applicable  to  modern  scholasticism  as  to 
that  of  the  Middle  Ages.  He  speaks  of  the  practical 
inutility  of  the  "curious  and  inexplicable  web  of 
perplexed  words '  with  which  these  profound  doctors 
win  commendation,  all  the  more  because  they  could 

1  Essay  iii.  cap.  10.  §  27.    Kant  has  used  the  same  image  to 
illustrate  the  relationship  of  ideas  and  intuitions.     The  same  idea 
was  clearly  floating  in  Locke's  mind,  though  he  thought  of  ideas 
.  instead  of  intuitions,  and  words  instead  of  ideas. 


LOCKE.  253 

not  be  understood,  and  continues :  '  Nevertheless, 
this  artificial  ignorance,  and  learned  gibberish,  pre- 
vailed mightily  in  these  last  ages,  by  the  interest 
and  artifice  of  those,  who  found  no  easier  way  to 
that  pitch  of  authority  and  dominion  they  have 
attained  than  by  answering  the  men  of  business  and 
ignorant  with  hard  words,  or  employing  the  ingenious 
and  idle  in  intricate  dispute  about  unintelligible 
terms,  and  holding  them  perpetually  entangled  in 
that  endless  labyrinth :  .  .  .  retreats  more  like  the 
dens  of  robbers  or  holes  of  foxes,  than  the  fortresses 
of  fair  warriors ;  which  if  it  be  hard  to  get  them  out 
of,  it  is  not  for  the  strength  that  is  in  them,  but  the 
briars  and  thorns,  and  the  obscurity  of  the  thickets 
they  are  beset  with.  For  untruth  being  unacceptable 
to  the  mind  of  man,  there  is  no  other  defence  left  for 
absurdity,  but  obscurity  V 

One  of  the  greatest  and  commonest  sources  of 
error,  which  seems  almost  unavoidable  as  long  as 
human  thought  is  associated  with  words  and  ideas, 
lies  in  the  confusion  of  words  with  things,  i.  e.  the 
illusion  that  there  must  necessarily  be  a  self-subsisting 
reality  corresponding  to  the  word.  Thus  the  Peri- 
patetics take  their  substantial  forms,  their  vegetative 
souls,  the  horror  vacui,  and  even  the  categories  for 
actual  beings,  while  the  Platonists  did  the  same  with 
their  ideas,  and  the  other  sects  with  their  fundamental 
principles.  '  How  many  intricate  disputes  have  there 
been  about  matter,  as  if  there  were  some  such  thing 
really  in  nature,  distinct  from  body!'  and  yet  this 
distinction  only  exists  in  our  imagination,  for  *  body 
stands  for  a  solid,  extended,  figured  substance,  whereof 
matter  is  but  a  partial  and  more  confused  conception, 
leaving  out  extension  and  figure/  The  principal 
1  Essay  iii.  cap.  10.  §  8,  9. 


254  MODEKN   PHILOSOPHY. 

cause  of  this  eternal  error  is — as  Locke  acutely 
saw — tradition.  It  would  be  difficult  to  persuade 
any  one  that  the  words  which  were  used  by  his  father 
or  schoolmaster,  the  parson  of  the  parish  or  some 
reverend  doctor,  signified  nothing  that  really  existed 
in  nature1. 

The  method  of  the  schools,  to  lay  down  the  most 
general  principles,  and  then  to  deduce  the  rest  from 
these,  as  from  eternal  truths,  is  uncongenial  to  Locke. 
Nothing,  he  holds,  can  be  inferred  from  these  proposi- 
tions; everything  turns  upon  the  correctness  of  the 
ideas  involved  in  them.  The  principle  of  identity  (what 
is,  is)  and  of  contradiction  (the  same  thing  cannot  at 
the  same  time  both  be  and  not  be)  may  lead  in  that 
way  to  the  most  contradictory  results.  If  any  one 
agrees  with  Descartes  in  defining  body  to  be  nothing 
but  extension,  he  may  easily  demonstrate  that  there 
is  no  vacuum  (i.  e.  no  space  void  of  body)  by  the 
maxim  what  is,  is ;  but  if  the  note  of  solidity  is  added 
to  the  conception  of  body,  the  existence  of  space 
without  body  will  be  as  easily  demonstrated  as  the 
contrary  was  by  Descartes2.  All  these  principles, 
which  are  extolled  as  the  bulwarks  of  truth,  can 
afford  no  protection  against  errors  arising  from  the 
careless  or  confused  use  of  ideas. 

Locke's  endeavour  was  to  give  in  all  cases  a  fixed 
and  definite  sense  to  the  ideas  which  have  been  handed 
down  to  us  by  the  tradition  of  generations  and  by 
means  of  language,  and  which  have  been  so  far 
obscured  and  confused  by  the  countless  accidents 
attendant  on  their  origin  as  to  be  unavailable  for 
philosophic  use  without,  such  revision.  A  profound 
insight  into  the  nature  of  speech  and  reason  must 
convince  us  that  this  is  impossible  to  a  single  mind, 

1  Essay  iii.  cap.  10.  §  15,  16.          2  Essay  iv.  cap.  7.  §  n,  14. 


LOCKE.  255 

that  in  fact  our  whole  thought  is  bound  up  with 
these  forms,  and  accomplishes  itself  according  to 
them  by  a  kind  of  natural  necessity,  so  that  it  is 
only  a  matter  of  development,  of  slowly  ripening  in- 
telligence, when  the  human  mind  frees  itself  grad- 
ually from  the  prejudices  and  conceptions  of  the  past, 
and  substitutes  for  its  former  childish  Logic,  which 
contained  all  the  truth  then  accessible,  a  purified, 
more  adequate,  self-conscious  logic  of  ideas.  The 
solar  wheel  which,  revolving  in  or  with  the  heavens, 
was  for  long  millenniums  among  the  most  certain 
facts  of  the  primitive  races, — the  chariot  of  the  sun, 
driven  by  Helios  above  the  brazen  vault,  succeeded 
it; — then  a  vast  fiery  disk,  and,  lastly,  a  huge  central 
body  round  which  our  earth  revolves,  held  by  the 
invisible  band  of  attraction.  And  now  we  have  to 
confess  that  this  last  power,  attraction,  is  no  more 
intelligible  to  us  to-day  than  the  divinities  of  the 
past,  and  will  have  no  doubt  in  time  to  make  way 
for  a  clearer  and  more  complete  conception.  Thus 
the  growth,  reformation,  and  transformation  of  ideas, 
constitutes  itself  the  very  process  of  rational  develop- 
ment. We,  however,  whether  we  choose  or  no,  are 
subject  to  this  rule,  and  the  sum  and  substance  of  all 
the  ideas  of  a  period  is  only  the  expression  of  the 
prevailing  view  as  to  the  world  at  large. 

The  great  problem  of  the  connection  and  relation 
between  the  spiritual  and  the  material  world  is 
likewise  touched  upon  by  Locke  and  expounded  upon 
Cartesian  principles :  '  All  power  relating  to  action, 
and  there  being  but  two  sorts  of  action,  whereof  we 
have  any  clear  idea,  viz.  ihinldng  and  motion ;  let  us 
consider  whence  we  have  the  clearest  ideas  of  the 
powers  which  produce  these  actions.  Of  thinking, 
body  affords  us  no  idea  at  all,  it  is  only  from  reflection 


256  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

we  have  that  V  c  There  are  but  two  sorts  of  beings 
in  the  world,  that  man  knows  or  conceives.  First, 
such  as  are  purely  material,  without  sense,  perception 
or  thought.  Secondly,  sensible,  thinking,  perceiving 
beings,  such  as  we  find  ourselves  to  be.  ...  It  is  as 
impossible  to  conceive,  that  ever  bare,  incogitative 
matter  should  produce  a  thinking  intelligent  being, 
as  that  nothing  should  of  itself  produce  matter.  .  .  . 
Matter  by  its  own  strength  cannot  produce  in  itself 
so  much  as  motion  :  the  motion  it  has  must  also  be 
from  eternity,  or  else  be  produced  and  added  to 
matter,  by  some  other  being  more  powerful  than 
matter;  .  .  .  yet  matter,  incogitative  matter  and 
motion,  whatever  changes  it  might  produce  of  figure 
and  bulk,  could  never  produce  thought.  ...  If  we 
suppose  bare  matter,  without  motion  eternal ;  motion 
can  never  begin  to  be ;  if  we  suppose  only  matter 
and  motion  first,  or  eternal ;  thought  can  never 
begin  to  be  V  But  if  we  suppose  matter  itself  to  be 
cogitative,  fresh  difficulties  arise,  for  the  question 
presents  itself,  whether  every  particle  of  matter 
thinks?  And  if  this  is  denied,  the  unanswerable 
question  remains,  "how  a  composition  of  particles 
of  matter,  each  whereof  is  incogitative/  is  to  form  a 
whole,  possessing  the  faculty  of  thought.  The  only 
remaining  hypothesis  is  that  of  an  eternal  intelligent 
Being,  who  has  created  matter  out  of  nothing.  If 
it  is  objected  that  we  cannot  conceive  this,  he  replies, 
neither  can  we  conceive  how  our  bodily  limbs  are 
moved  by  our  own  will.  '  This  is  matter  of  fact  which 
cannot  be  denied  :  explain  this  and  make  it  intelligible, 
and  then  the  next  step  will  be  to  understand  creation. 
For  the  giving  a  new  determination  to  the  motion  of 
the  animal  spirits  (which  some  make  use  of  to  explain 
1  Essay  ii.  cap.  21.  §  4.  2  Essay  iv.  cap.  10.  §  9,  10. 


LOCKE.  257 

voluntary  motion)  clears  not  the  difficulty  one  jot. . . . 
If  you  do  not  understand  the  operations  of  your  own 
finite  mind,  that  thinking  thing  within  you,  do  not 
deem  it  strange  that  you  cannot  comprehend  the 
operations  of  that  eternal,  infinite  mind,  who  made 
and  governs  all  things,  and  whom  the  heaven  of 
heavens  cannot  contain  V 

Here  Locke,  like  all  other  philosophers,  resorts  to 
the  Deity,  who  accomplishes  the  miracle  which  to  us 
is  incomprehensible.  But  in  another  passage  which 
has  called  forth  loud  and  repeated  eulogy  from 
Voltaire,  and  violent  attacks  from  bigots,  he  admits 
the  possibility  of  matter  being  endowed  by  God  with 
the  property  of  thought :  *  We  have  the  ideas  of 
matter  and  thinking,  but,  possibly,  shall  never  be 
able  to  know  whether  any  mere  material  being  thinks, 
or  no.  .  .  .  We  know  not  wherein  thinking  consists, 
nor  to  what  sort  of  substances  the  Almighty  has  been 
pleased  to  give  that  power,  which  cannot  be  in  any 
created  being,  but  merely  by  the  good  pleasure  and 
bounty  of  the  Creator.  For  I  see  no  contradiction 
in  it  that  the  first  eternal  thinking  being  should,  if 
he  pleased,  give  to  certain  systems  of  created  matter, 
put  together  as  he  thinks  fit,  some  degree  of  sense, 
perception,  and  thought.  .  .  .  What  certainty  of 
knowledge  can  any  one  have  that  sense-perceptions, 
such  as  e.  g.  pleasure  and  pain,  should  not  be  in  some 
bodies  themselves,  after  a  certain  manner  modified 
and  moved,  as  well  as  that  they  should  be  in  an 
immaterial  substance  upon  the  motion  of  the  parts 
of  body  ?  Body  as  far  as  we  can  conceive,  being 
able  only  to  strike  and  affect  body;  and  motion 
according  to  the  utmost  reach  of  our  ideas,  being  able 
to  produce  nothing  but  motion;  so  that  when  we 

1  Essay  iv.  cap,  10.  §  18,  19. 
VOL.  I.  s 


258  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

allow  it  to  produce  pleasure,  or  pain,  or  the  idea  of 
a  colour  or  sound,  we  are  faiii  to  quit  our  reason,  go 
beyond  our  ideas,  and  attribute  it  wholly  to  the 
good  pleasure  of  our  Maker.  ...  It  becomes  the 
modesty  of  philosophy  not  to  pronounce  magisterially, 
where  we  want  that  evidence,  that  can  produce 
knowledge.  And  therefore  it  is  not  of  such  mighty 
necessity  to  determine  one  way  or  the  other,  as  some 
over-zealous  for  or  against  the  immateriality  of  the 
soul  have  been  forward  to  make  the  world  believe. 
Who  either,  on  the  one  side,  indulging  too  much 
their  thoughts,  immersed  altogether  in  matter,  can 
allow  no  existence  to  what  is  not  material ;  or  who 
on  the  other  side,  finding  not  cogitation  within  the 
natural  powers  of  matter,  examined  over  and  over 
again,  by  the  utmost  intention  of  mind,  have  the 
confidence  to  conclude  that  omnipotency  itself  cannot 
give  perception  and  thought  to  a  substance  which 
has  the  modification  of  solidity.  He  that  considers 
how  hardly  sensation  is,  in  our  thoughts,  reconcileable 
to  extended  matter ;  or  existence  to  anything  that 
hath  no  extension  at  all,  will  confess  that  he  is  very 
far  from  certainly  knowing  what  his  soul  is.  It  is  a 
point  which  seems  to  me  to  be  put  out  of  the  reach 
of  our  knowledge.  .  .  .  Since  on  whichever  side  he 
views  it,  either  as  an  unextended  substance,  or  as  a 
thinking,  extended  matter ;  the  difficulty  to  conceive 
either,  will,  whilst  either  alone  is  in  his  thoughts, 
still  drive  him  to  the  contrary  side.  An  unfair  way 
which  some  men  take  with  themselves  who,  because 
of  the  unconceivableness  of  something  they  find  in 
one,  throw  themselves  violently  into  the  contrary 
hypothesis,  though  altogether  as  unintelligible  to  an 
unbiassed  understanding  V 

1  Essay  iv.  cap.  3,  §  6. 


LOCKE.  259 

This  argument  serves  Locke  as  an  illustration  to 
prove  that  our  knowledge  is  limited,  not  only  by  the 
scanty  number  and  imperfect  nature  of  our  ideas, 
but  also  by  its  failure  to  come  up  even  to  these. 
On  the  contrary,  in  the  attempt  at  their  application 
we  become  entangled  in  doubts,  difficulties,  and  con- 
tradictions.. Locke  might  have  drawn  hence  the 
conclusion  that  the  merely  empirical  origin  of  our 
ideas  was  not  to  be  accepted  unreservedly,  since  mere 
experience,  even  in  the  condensed  form  of  ideas,  can 
never  fall  into  self-contradictions.  Some  other  ele- 
ment must  therefore  enter  into  the  formation  and 
comparison  of  ideas,  some  interpreting  and  explaining 
faculty  must  co-operate,  the  unconscious  postulates 
of  which  are  the  subject  of  metaphysics.  The  in- 
compatibility of  the  ideas  dealt  with  here  may 
however  be  easily  explained.  It  proceeds  from  the  fact 
that  something  has  been  included  in  each  of  the  con- 
ceptions which  the  other  absolutely  excludes.  Locke 
conceived  matter  as  extended,  consisting  of  parts, 
moveable,  passive,  and  mind  as  alone  conscious, 
thinking,  perhaps  also  moving,  in  any  case  active. 
Such  ideas  must  naturally  and  for  ever  exclude  each 
other.  Truth  can  only  be  reached  when  it  is  seen  that 
thought  has  separated,  by  abstraction,  what  in  reality 
never  appears  as  separate,  or  in  other  words,  that 
not  one  of  our  ideas  corresponds  to  a  true  reality,  but 
that  all  are  woven  with  a  woof  of  ideality.  Locke 
did  not  go  beyond  this  modest  attempt  to  assert  the 
possibility  that  a  material  being  might  at  the  same 
time  be  a  sensitive  one.  Indeed  he  seems  to  have 
looked  with  surprise  at  his  own  audacity,  for  in  the 
tenth  chapter  of  the  same  book  he  weakens  the  force 
of  his  argument  by  proving  the  opposite. 

To  sum  up  once  more  the  great  achievements  of 

S  2 


26O  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

this  fertile  and  vigorous  thinker,  we  have  to  reckon 
as  real  and  novel  additions  to  the  store  of  philosophic 
consciousness, — 

1.  The  empirical,  observant  study  of  the  human 
reason,  as  the  gift  most  characteristic  of  mankind 
and  the  source  of  all  higher  knowledge.     The  per- 
ception that  general  ideas  are  the  true  objects  of 
the  reason ;   that  they  originate  naturally,  and  are 
perfected  in  men  by  abstraction ;    an  intimation  of 
the  connection   between   them   and   language;    the 
statement  of  the  problem  as  to  the  origin  of  these 
ideas ;  the  tracing  them  back  to  sensible  impressions, 
and  the  indication  of  the  connection  between  sense 
and  reason. 

2.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  follows  that  the 
individual  thinking  man  is  the  true  subject  of  all 
knowledge.      All    his  ideas   and  thoughts  proceed 
equally  from  individual  perceptions  or  contact  with 
the  external  world.     The  necessary  limitation  of  all 
knowledge  follows. 

To  appreciate  the  new  truths  at  both  these  points 
it  needs  but  to  contrast  the  undeterminate  sub- 
stantia  cogitans  with  its  innate  ideas  and  eternal 
•truths.  The  reality  of  the  individual  is  maintained 
in  contradistinction  to  the  mere  mode  of  Spinoza. 
The  idea  of  development  becomes  possible,  as  the 
reason  obviously  passes  through  a  course  of  develop- 
ment. And  thought,  represented  by  Spinoza  as  ac- 
complishing itself  by  the  same  strict  causal  laws  as 
everything  else  in  mind  and  body,  was  fertilised  and 
vivified  by  the  recognition  of  laws  and  functions  pro- 
per to  itself. 

3.  The  idea  of  substance  was  shown  to  be  in- 
accessible to  human  knowledge,  and  its  origin  was 
referred  to  the  nature  of  thought. 


LOCKE.  26l 

4.  The  distinction  between  our  sensible  impres- 
sions and  the  true  qualities  of  objects,  between  qiiali- 
tates  jprimarise  and  secundarise,  points  the  way  to 
the  future  distinction  between  things  as  thought  or 
imagined,  and  things  by  themselves. 

The  gaps  and  imperfections  of  the  Lockian  doctrine 
are  : — 

1.  The  hesitation  between  individualism  pure  and 
simple,  which  can  only  conceive  things  as  they  are 
given  by  the  senses  and  imagination1,  and  can  there- 
fore never  go  beyond  its  subjective  standpoint,  and 
the  assumption  of  an  objective  world,  actually  existing 
in  itself  in  space  and  time. 

2.  This  indecision  prevented  Locke  from  entering 
upon  a  more  thorough  investigation  of  the  nature 
of  reason,  and  showing  what  is  originally  proper  to 
reason   and   what  nature   and   characteristics    have 
grown  up  and  been  developed  through  the  reception 
of  sense-impressions.    To  Locke  the  mind  appeared  as 
an  originally  dark  room,  into  which  rays  of  light  from 
the  outer  world  penetrate  by  certain  rifts  and  cracks, 
and  so  increase  and  complete  the  thinking  faculty. 
The   active  side  of  this  faculty,  however,  is  much 
neglected   and   often  wholly  overlooked,  while  the 
analysis  of  reason   has   obviously   to   occupy   itself 
most  with  this ;  the  nature  of  the  senses  and  conjec- 
tures as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  outer  world  being 
of  comparatively  little  consequence. 

3.  Thus  the  whole  function  of  thought  and  rational 

1  ( I,  as  an  individual,  am  fixed  and  determined  as  the  subject  of 
knowledge,  and  it  is  impossible  that  I  should  know  the  finite  object 
in  itself,  much  less  the  infinite.  I  can  only  know  either  of  these 
indirectly,  in  so  far  as  they  come  within  the  range  of  my  con- 
sciousness, in  so  far  as  they  are  represented  in  my  sensations  and 
my  thoughts.' 


262  MODEKN  PHILOSOPHY. 

knowledge  appears  as  a  process  effected  from  and  by 
the  world  of  sense  without.  'According  to  Locke, 
the  real,  i.e.  matter,  generates  images  or  the  ideal 
in  the  knowing  mind  by  impulse  or  shock.  We 
have  thus  here  a  fine  massive  realism,  which,  pro- 
voking contradiction  by  its  very  exorbitance,  occa- 
sioned the  idealism  of  Berkeley1/  And  as  Locke,  in 
accordance  with  his  strict  empiricism,  represented  the 
law  of  causality  itself  as  a  discovery  from  experience, 
he  suggested  Hume's  doubt,  who  declared  the  whole 
causal  conception  to  be  unreal  and  naught,  and  so 
in  his  turn  gave  occasion  directly  to  the  profound 
investigations  of  Kant. 

4.  Locke's  profound  and  important  view  that  general 
ideas  are  the  true  objects  of  thought  was  not  as  much 
utilised  and  developed  by  him  as  the  importance  of 
the  subject  and  the  simplicity  of  the  principle  allowed 
and  required.  It  was  necessary,  and  he  himself  held 
it  to  be  the  chief  task  of  philosophy,  to  examine 
carefully  into  the  origin  of  ideas,  and  that  not  only 
by  means  of  sensible  perceptions  or  self-observation  ; 
the  origin  of  ideas  from  preceding  ideas  as  revealed 
in  the  history  of  human  language  should  have  been 
set  forth  too.  It  is  true  that  in  the  age  of  Locke 
such  an  undertaking  would  have  been  difficult,  not 
to  say  impracticable,  as  the  Science  of  Language  as 
yet  was  not.  Otherwise  Locke  would  have  had  to 
surrender  his  erroneous  belief  that  man  can  form 
ideas  without  words,  and  that  the  latter  are  only 
conventional  signs  for  ideas  already  existing  in 
thought2. 

Clearer  knowledge  on  this  point  would  have  en- 
abled Locke  to  define  the  concepts  of  thought  and 

1  Schopenhauer,  Parerga,  i.  p.  16. 

2  See  Max  MUller,  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,  ii.  p.  75. 


LOCKE.  263 

of  ideas  far  more  sharply,  and  he  would  not  then 
have  ascribed  to  mere  sense-impressions  the  character 
and  value  of  ideas.  '  It  is  certain  that  the  mind  is 
able  to  retain  and  receive  distinct  ideas  long  before 
it  has  the  use  of  words,  or  comes  to  that,  which  we 
commonly  call  the  use  of  reason.  For  a  child  knows 
as  certainly,  before  it  can  speak,  the  difference  be- 
tween the  ideas  of  sweet  and  bitter  (i.  e.  that  sweet- 
is  not  bitter),  as  it  knows  afterwards  (when  it  comes 
to  speak)  that  wormwood  and  sugar- plums  are  not 
the  same  thing1/  The  discovery  that  the  key  to  the 
mystery  of  thought  lies  hid  in  language  was  not  to 
ripen  till  a  much  later  day.  The  first  clear  indication, 
besides  those  given  by  Geulinx  and  Locke,  is  to  be  met 
with  in  Schopenhauer,  in  various  passages  of  his  chief 
work,  Die  Welt  als  Wille  und  Yorstellung,  especially 
vol.  i.  pp.  566-70,  where  he  hazards  the  conjecture 
that  the  real  categories  of  thought  will  be  found 
in  the  partes  orationis,  that  is  to  say  in  grammar. 
Very  true  and  pertinent  is  his  observation  about 
Locke  (ib.  p.  45) :  '  It  is  very  surprising  that  no 
philosopher  has  yet  traced  all  the  various  mani- 
festations of  reason  back  to  one  simple  function, 
which  might  be  recognised  in  them  all,  by  which 
they  might  all  be  explained,  and  which  would  there- 
fore be  seen  to  constitute  the  proper,  inner  nature 
of  reason.  The  admirable  Locke,  indeed,  describes 
abstract  universal  ideas  quite  rightly,  as  marking 
the  distinction  between  man  and  beast,  and  Leibniz 
repeats  this  with  complete  assent.  But  when 
Locke  comes,  in  his  fourth  Book,  to  the  explana- 
tion of  reason  itself,  he  loses  sight  of  this  chief 
characteristic  altogether,  and  falls  into  an  hesitating, 

1  Locke,  Essay  i,  cap.  i.  §  15.   Cf.  the  admirably  clear  refutation 
of  this  view  by  Max  Miiller,  loc.  cit.  p.  77. 


264  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

indefinite,  fragmentary  expression  of  incomplete  and 
second-hand  opinion,  and  the  same  must  on  the 
whole  be  said  of  Leibniz  in  the  corresponding  passage 
of  his  work/ 

At  the  same  time,  Locke's  intellectual  greatness, 
and  the  extent  of  his  influence  upon  the  subsequent 
development  of  philosophy,  is  duly  recognised  by  Scho- 
penhauer, in  the  following  passage  :  '  Locke  was  the 
first  to  proclaim  the  great  doctrine,  that  a  philosopher 
who  wishes  to  prove  or  derive  anything  from  ideas 
must  first  investigate  the  origin  of  these  ideas,  as 
their  content  and  everything  thence  deducible  must 
be  determined  by  their  origin,  as  the  source  of  all  the 
knowledge  attainable  through  them/ 

The  history  of  the  development  of  human  ideas  is  in 
fact  the  most  important,  if  not  the  only  task  of  the 
philosophy  of  the  future1. 

1  As  this  truth  is  still  only  just  beginning  to  dawn  upon  the 
general  consciousness,  the  following  utterances  of  a  distinguished 
thinker,  who  obviously  had  some  perception  of  its  truth,  may  be 
quoted  here :  'Locke's  Critique  of  Reason  eventuates, accordingly,  in 
a  criticism  of  language,  which,  according  to  its  leading  idea,  is  of 
higher  value  than  any  other  part  of  his  system.  The  important 
distinction  between  the  purely  logical  and  the  psychologico-his- 
torical  elements  in  language  had  the  way  prepared  for  it  by  Locke ; 
but  apart  from  the  preparatory  labour  of  philologists,  little  material 
progress  has  been  made  since.  And  yet  by  far  the  greater  number 
of  the  conclusions  which  are  applied  in  philosophic  science  only 
go,  as  it  were,  upon  all  fours  because  ideas  and  words  are  being  con- 
tinuously interchanged/  Lange,  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  i.  2  7 1 . 


THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  TENDENCY. 

LEIBNIZ     (1646—1716). 

1  Le  grand  secret  de  la  vie  est  la  permanence  des  forces 
et  la  mutation  coutinuellc  de  la  mati&re/  Flourens,  De 
la  Vie  et  de  1'Intelligence. 

WE  have  seen  how  in  Locke  the  individual  was 
reinstated  in  his  rights,  the  Cartesian  starting-point 
renewed,  and  the  cogito  referred  with  increased  clear- 
ness and  precision  to  human  thought  properly  so 
called.  Our  study  of  the  individual  thinking  man 
is  the  source  whence  all  information  respecting 
the  value,  limits,  and  origin  of  knowledge  must  be 
derived.  Though  the  matter  of  knowledge  proceeds 
from  particulars,  i.e.  from  single  perceptions,  enquiry 
only  confirmed  the  truth  enunciated  by  Aristotle, 
that  thought  depends  upon  general  conceptions,  and 
that  accordingly  predicates  and  their  combinations 
constitute  the  essence  of  all  our  intellectual  opera- 
tions. 

The  task  which  Leibniz  proposed  to  himself  was 
to  give  the  individual  a  place  in  the  self-subsisting 
world  outside  our  knowledge,  and  to  attempt  an 
interpretation  of  the  universe  in  which,  starting  from 
individuals  and  particulars,  whose  dependence  from 
and  co-operation  with  the  whole  should  be  recognised, 
a  certain  independence  and  self-subsistence  should  also 
be  recognised  as  constituting  their  true  essence. 

The  individual  separate  existence  of  things  finds 


266  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

its  first  expression  in  the  atomic  theory  of  De- 
mokritos  and  Epikuros.  This  corresponds  to  the 
natural  course  uniformly  taken  by  the  human  reason, 
which  always  begins  by  looking  for  its  principles  in 
the  objective  world,  and  only  discovers  at  a  later 
time  their  true  source  within  itself.  It  is  there- 
fore nothing  strange  that  the  multiplicity  of  sense- 
perceptions  should  receive  their  first  explanation 
from  the  objective  unity  of  the  external  world.  But 
what  lends  its  real  philosophical  value  to  this  idea 
is  the  unity  of  nature,  unconsciously  underlying  the 
multiplicity  of  individuals  and  recognised  by  the 
process  of  abstraction,  in  which  reality  is  conceded 
only  to  those  sensible  qualities  of  things  which  admit 
of  quantitative  determination,  such  as  form,  position, 
motion,  weight.  And  these  are  the  same  qualities 
which  constitute  the  base  of  the  mathematical  view 
of  nature,  and  form,  in  other  words,  the  true  nature, 
the  qualitates  prim  arise  of  matter,  recognised  by  all 
true  science  and  all  later  philosophy,  including  that 
of  Descartes,  Spinoza,  Locke,  Leibniz,  and  Kant 

A  thinker  like  Leibniz,  who  early  recognised  the 
profound  significance  of  individual  existence,  was 
naturally  attracted  towards  the  atomic  theory,  while 
yet  he  could  not  fail  to  discern  its  incompleteness,  and 
its  collapse  at  the  very  point  where  the  real  diffi- 
culties of  the  philosophic  problem  begin.  From  this 
point  of  view  his  own  account  of  his  earlier  days, 
given  in  a  letter  to  Remond  de  Montmort1,  is  inter- 
esting :  4 1  remember  that,  for  days  together,  I  used 
to  walk  up  and  down  in  a  little  wood  near  Leipzig, 
called  the  Rosenthal,  considering  whether  I  should 
retain  the  substantial  forms.  The  mechanical  view 
gained  the  upper  hand  at  last,  and  led  me  to  mathe- 

1  Leibnitii  Opera  Philosophica,  ed.  Erdmann,  p.  702, 


LEIBNIZ.  267 

matics.  But  when  I  sought  for  the  ultimate  prin- 
ciple of  the  mechanism  in  the  laws  of  motion  I 
returned  to  metaphysic,  from  the  material  to  the 
formal,  to  the  assumption  of  Entelechies,  and  at  last 
discerned,  after  often  revising  and  developing  my 
ideas,  that  monads,  or  simple  substances,  are  the  only 
real  substances,  and  that  individual  things  are  but 
phenomena,  though  indeed  well-founded  arid  mutually 
dependent  phenomena/ 

It  is  difficult  for  the  present  generation  to  realise 
the  significance  of  the  Leibnizian  system.  We  must 
recall  the  vast  contradictions  and  inconsistencies  in 
which  human  thought  had  landed  itself  before  him, 
in  order  to  do  justice  to  his  philosophy  as  the  last 
vigorous  attempt  at  a  reconciliation  of  the  real  and 
the  ideal  worlds,  instead  of  regarding  it  as  a  laborious 
concatenation  of  self-made  difficulties. 

The  antagonism  between  individualism  and  uni- 
versalism  gives  birth  to  opposites,  which  may  be 
tabulated  as  follows  : — 

Freedom  and  self-determination  Omnipotence  and  predestination 

of  the  individual  being.  of  the  Divine  Creator. 

Activity,  inuer  consciousness  and  Passivity  of  matter. 

intelligence. 

Unity   and   indestructibility  of  Infinite  divisibility  of  matter. 

substance  properly  so  called. 

Intellectual     perception,     final  Absolute,  invariable  mechanism, 

causes.  efficient  causes. 

Atoms,  according  to  Demokritos.  Substance,  according  to  Spinoza. 

<t 
Leibniz  was  an  exceptionally  many-sided  thinker, 

entering,  and  always  with  some  degree  of  creative 
power,  upon  every  field  of  human  knowledge.  His 
attachment  to  Aristotle  has  its  root  in  a  certain  in- 
tellectual affinity.  The  resemblance  lies  in  the  rest- 
less genius  which  illuminates  the  darkness  with  its 


268  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

flashes  and  reveals  new  views  and  possibilities,  but 
never  endures  long  enough  for  a  complete  structure 
to  be  developed  out  of  a  single  principle.  Hence 
with  him,  as  with  Aristotle,  repetitions  are  frequent, 
and  abrupt  transitions  which  disappoint  expectation 

at  the  most  critical  moment.     Kant   savs  of  him : 

•/ 

*  The  celebrated  Leibniz  possessed  real  insight,  by  the 
help  of  which  the  sciences  were  enriched,  but  he  was 
still  more  fertile  in  conceptions  for  the  complete 
execution  of  which  the  world  looked  in  vain/  With 
such  a  temperament  it  is  not  surprising  if  his  pre- 
mises were  often  vacillating  and  insecure.  He  says 
himself  in  a  letter  to  Thomas  Burnct,  after  describing 
his  struggles,  before  deciding  between  Aristotle  and 
Demokritos:  '  Cependant  j'ai  changd  et  rechangd  sur 
de  nouvelles  lumieres  et  ce  n'est  que  depuis  douze 
ans  environ  que  je  me  trouve  satisfait/ 

The  name  of  Leibniz  is  however  indissolubly  as- 
sociated with  two  ideas,  in  his  own  eyes  the  in- 
separable parts  of  a  single  whole,  namely,  the 
doctrine  of  Monads  and  the  ^re-established  Harmony. 
The  former,  though  only  a  germ,  is  a  lasting  and 
valuable  philosophical  possession,  of  which  we  shall 
hardly  see  the  full  development  until  vajious  an- 
tiquated prejudices  have  passed  away.  The  latter,  on 
the  contrary,  is  a  mere  dogmatic  artifice  for  evading 
a  question  which  has  been  so  stated  as  not  to  admit 
of  solution.  As  however  often  happens,  the  father 
was  most  attached  to  his  least  hopeful  offspring,  and 
'he  was  wont,  especially  in  his  later  years,  to  return 
again  and  again  to  this  favourite  error,  when  in  his 
controversy  with  English  philosophers  he  wished  to 
accentuate  the  agreement  between  his  doctrine  and 
the  dogmas  of  Christianity. 

Leibniz,  who  was  committed  to  a  reconstruction 


LEIBNIZ.  269 

of  the  real  world,  logically  starts,  like  Spinoza,  from 
the  idea  of  substance.  He  summarily  dismisses  the 
doubt  suggested  by  Locke  as  to  the  justice  of  this 
conception.  'The  idea  of  substance  is  not  so  obscure, 
he  thinks,  as  people  imagine.  What  is  necessary- 
may  be  known  of  it  as  much  as  of  other  things ; 
nay  the  knowledge  of  the  concrete  always  precedes 
that  of  the  abstract ;  and  people  learn  to  know  hot 
things  much  earlier  than  heat  V 

This  passage  would  suffice  by  itself  to  show  that 
the  essential  characteristic  of  substance,  that  is  to 
say  existence,  was  educed  from  concrete  particulars, 
or,  in  other  words,  from  the  individual  existence  of 
the  human  mind,  and  must  consequently  reside  also 
in  single  things. 

Descartes  had  laid  down  that  it  was  necessary  in 
explaining  things  to  revert  always  to  les  natures 
simples  ;  Leibniz  discerns  the  true  substances  simples 
in  individual  units  whose  true  nature  consists  in 
their  existence  and  determination,  or,  as  he  puts  it 
in  his  first  Dissertation,  in  the  language  of  the 
Schoolmen,  '  Omne  individuum  tota  sua  entitate 
individuatur/  He  is  thus,  according  to  Scholastic 
ideas,  a  decided  Nominalist,  and  holds  that  the  par- 
ticular has  a  claim  to  actual  real  existence. 

These  original  units  are  the  monads.  The  monads 
are  each  its  own  independent  world,  simple,  inde- 
structible, and  exclusive  of  all  remaining  existence : 
their  qualities  are  described  as  follows. 

They  must  be  immaterial,  for  matter  is  infinitely 
divisible,  that  is,  destructible,  and  moreover  matter 
is  altogether  passive :  for  action  and  intelligence  to 
result,  it  must  be  penetrated  by  these  infinitesimal, 
unextended,  infinitely  numerous  units  of  which  per- 

1  Nouveaux  Essais  sur  Tentendement  humain,  p.  238,  Erdmann. 


270  MODEEN  PHILOSOPHY. 

ception  and  will  are  properties.  For  it  is  impossible 
that  merely  mechanical  causes  should  produce  any- 
thing like  consciousness  and  perception.  The  monads 
might  also  be  called  entelechies  or  souls,  but  the  latter 
idea  is  by  far  the  most  perfect.  The  dim  conscious- 
ness which  veils  our  perceptions  in  syncope  may 
serve  as  an  image  of  the  simple  monad \ 

It  is  certain  that  Leibniz  conceived  the  whole 
world  to  be  penetrated  with  these  immaterial  monads, 
and,  pro  tanto,  as  organic,  so  that  nothing  could  exist 
without  secret  properties,  individual  character,  and 
self-determination.  This  at  least  follows  from  his 
expression,  '  II  faut  rdunir  Democrite  et  Spinoza ; ' 
that  is  to  say,  everything  is  individualised  and  every- 
thing is  animated.  He  says  in  a  letter  to  De  Mai- 
zeaux 2,  '  You  do  not  understand  what  other  bodily 
substances  there  are  besides  animals,  whose  complete 
annihilation  has  hitherto  been  erroneously  assumed. 
But  if  there  are  in  nature  other  living  organised 
bodies  besides  the  lower  animals,  as  is  very  probable, 
as  the  example  of  plants  may  show,  these  bodies  must 
also  have  simple  substances  or  monads,  which  give 
them  life,  i.  e.  perception  and  will,  although  this  per- 
ception need,  not  be  sensation.  There  are  obviously 
an  infinite  number  of  possible  degrees  of  perception, 
and  that  also  among  living  beings/ 

Similarly  in  the  Monadologie,  he  says 3 :  '  There  is 
a  world  of  creatures,  of  living  things,  animals,  ente- 

1  Moiiadologie,  Erdmann,  p.  706. 

2  Opera,  ed.  Erdmann,  p.  676.     He  expresses  his  views   still 
more  clearly  in  the  letter  to  Wagner,  Erdmann,  p.  466  :  '  Natura 
ubique  organica  est,  et  a  sapientissimo   auctore  ad  certos   fines 
ordinata,  nihilque  in  natura  incultum  censeri  debet,  etsi  interdum 
non  nisi  rudis  massa  nostris  sensibus  apparet.' 

8  Monadologie,  §§  66-70, 


LEIBNIZ.  271 

lechies,  souls  in  the  minutest  particle  of  matter. 
Every  part  of  matter  may  be  considered  as  a  garden 
full  of  plants,  or  a  tank  full  of  fishes.  But  every 
branch  of  the  plant,  every  member  of  the  animal, 
every  drop  of  its  juices  is  again  a  similar  garden  and 
a  similar  tank.  There  is  thus  nothing  uncultivated, 
nothing  unfruitful,  nothing  dead  in  the  universe,  no 
chaos,  no  disorder.  Every  living  body  has  a  central 
monad  or  ruling  entelechy,  but  the  members  of  the 
living  body  are  full  of  living  things,  plants,  animals, 
each  of  which  again  has  its  own  entelechy/ 

When  the  time  comes  for  describing  the  connection 
or  concomitance  of  the  monads  and  the  material  world, 
the  same  obscurity  appears  in  Leibniz  as  in  Spinoza, 
when  he  attempts  to  explain  at  once  the  unity 
and  the  independence  of  the  two  causal  series,  of 
mind  and  matter  (p.  206  ante).  The  monads  with 
their  unextended  immaterial  nature,  endued  with 
perception  and  appetite,  contain  the  true  indestruct- 
ible essence  of  substance,  and  so  far  Leibniz  starts 
upon  the  original  line  of  Descartes,  according  to 
whom  consciousness  is  the  most  certain  and  primitive 
of  qualities,  while  matter  and  extension  sink  into  the 
rank  of  phenomena.  Leibniz  frequently  expresses 
himself  in  this  sense,  and  so  to  some  extent,  as  Scho- 
penhauer observes  \  anticipates  both  his  own  and  the 
Kantian  doctrine,  'quas  velut  trans  nebulam  vidit/ 

Thus  much  is  certain,  that  there  can  be  no  direct 
action  of  monads  upon  matter  or  of  matter  upon 
monads,  and  accordingly  an  appeal  to  the  Deity  as  the 
central  monad  becomes  necessary  here.  This  power 
has  so  ordered  everything  in  both  worlds  from  the 
beginning,  that  through  the  whole  course  of  time  the 
correspondence  between  the  two  is  unfailingly  exact, 

1  Parerga,  i,  80. 


272  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

and  every  thought  or  act  of  will  is  attended  by  a 
modification  of  material  substance,  answering  to  it  as 
if  the  connection  between  the  two  were  causal.  There 
are  three  alternative  explanations,  as  in  the  case  of 
Leibniz's  well-known  illustration  of  two  clocks  keep- 
ing exact  time  together,  i.  That  the  same  mechanism 
regulates  the  motion  of  both  ;  2.  that  some  one  from 
time  to  time  readjusts  their  works  so  as  to  bring  them 
again  into  agreement ;  or  3.  that  both  were  from  the 
first  so  perfectly  constructed  as  to  make  divergence 
impossible.  The  influxus  pJiysicus  would  correspond 
to  the  first  case,  but  is  inadmissible,  since  it  is  incon- 
ceivable that  mind  should  act  upon  matter  or  matter 
upon  mind.  The  second  hypothesis  corresponds  to 
the  occasional  causes  of  Malebranche  and  Geulinx, 
which  presuppose  continuous  divine  intervention;  the 
third  hypothesis  alone  is  worthy  of  the  Deity,  and 
this  is  the  doctrine  of  the  pre-established  harmony. 

The  points  of  contact  between  Leibniz  and  Des- 
cartes and  Spinoza,  as  well  as  those  of  divergence, 
are  easily  visible.  The  Cartesian  cogito  involves  the 
purely  subjective,  individual  standpoint  of  the  ego, 
an  intellectual  being  whose  original  properties  are 
thought,  feeling,  and  will.  As  Leibniz,  and  subse- 
quently Schopenhauer,  used  this  ego  as  a  key  to  inter- 
pret the  universe,  they  necessarily  attributed  to  the 
innumerable  other  egos  the  same  attributes  that  they 
had  met  with  in  their  own.  Leibniz  is  thus  to  a 
certain  extent  at  one  with  Descartes  and  his  sub- 
jective method,  and  with  Spinoza's  broad  universalism. 
The  latter  brings  the  manifold  into  unity,  treating  it 
as  a  mere  ripple  on  the  surface,  while  Leibniz  saw 
always  the  component  units  within  the  manifold1. 

1  The  metaphor  used  by  Leibniz  is  characteristic  of  his  opposition 
to  Spinoza — that  the  monads  are  rays  (fulgwations)  of  the  Deity. 


LEIBNIZ.  273 

The  Leibnizian  theory  may  thus  be  described  as  an 
exaggerated  individualism,  Spinoza's  doctrine  as  an 
extreme  universalism.  Human  thought  is  carried  on 
within  the  universe,  and  is  only  to  be  explained  by 
the  help  of  abstraction  and  opposition,  i.  e.  by  indi- 
vidualism. Hence  human  thought  can  never  succeed 
in  looking  at  the  world  from  without,  still  less  has  it 
the  right  to  impose  its  own  nature  upon  existence 
and  say  Deus  e§t  res  cogitans.  But  it  is  a  no  less 
capital  error  to  reduce  everything  to  individual  ex- 
istence, and  to  assume  the  latter  to  subsist  as  an 
unchangeable  entity  through  all  eternity,  as  if  all 
ideas,  strivings,  and  effects  crystallised  in  unex- 
tended  points,  without  considering  that  this  indivi- 
duality itself  is  a  product, — however  mysterious  and 
unfathomable  one  of  its  elements  may  be, — of  an  im- 
measurable world  of  forces  around,  and  an  equally 
immeasurable  duration  of  forms  of  consciousness 
and  intellectual  effort,  which  must  be  taken  to- 
gether to  account  for  the  present  constitution  of  the 
individual,  its  thought,  and  will,  as  actually  existing. 
It  may  be  said:  Spinoza  represents  the  world  as 
if  there  were  no  individuals,  Leibniz,  on  the  other 
hand,  as  if  there  were  no  universals.  The  former 
leaves  unexplained  the  way  in  which  particular 
things  detach  themselves  from  the  universal  sub- 
stance and  assume  an  independent  existence,  while 
Leibniz  is  compelled  to  resort  to  miracles  to  explain 
the  coexistence  and  interaction  of  the  monads  or  in- 
dividual existences l.  It  is  the  old  quarrel  between 
Herakleitos  and  Demokritos. 

1  Monadologie,  §51:'  Mais  dans  les  substances  simples  ce  n'est 
qu'une  influence  ideale  d'une  monade  sur  Pautre  qui  ne  peut  avoir 
son  effet  que  pas  rintervention  de  Dieu,  en  tant  que  dans  les  id6es 
de  Dieu  une  monade  demande  avec  raison  que  Dieu  en  r^glant  les 

VOL.    I.  T 


274  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

The  opposition  between  matter  and  mind  is  worked 
out  much  more  profoundly  by  Leibniz  than  by  Des- 
cartes. According  to  the  latter,  matter  is  identified 
with  extension,  and  becomes,  together  with  motion, 
the  object  of  purely  mechanical  explanation.  Leib- 
niz, on  the  contrary,  discerns  that  although  motion, 
as  associated  with  matter,  appears  to  us  as  passive 

and  mechanical,  vet.  viewed  in  itself  and  traced  to  its 

*  •/     ' 

true  source  or  fons  mechanismi,  there  is  also  an  element 
of  activity  in  it,  the  interpretation  of  which  is  to  be 
sought  in  our  own  consciousness,  and  not  without. 
Hence  he  distinguishes  the  materia  prima,  to  which 
form  is  properly  opposed,  from  the  mater  ia  secunda, 
which  is  already  moulded.  'Materia  est  quod  consistit 
in  antitypia  seu  quod  penetranti  resistit,  atque  ideo 
nuda  materia  mere  passiva  est1/  Bodies  possess  a 
certain  vis  activa  apart  from  matter ;  their  nature 
includes  some  entelechy,  soul,  or  something  analogous 
to  a  soul,  Every  monad  has  an  organised  body,  but 
there  are  endless  grades  of  animation,  and  the  lowest 
escape  our  observation  as  infinitely  slight  movements 
do.  '  Les  corps  agissent  selon  les  lois  des  causes  6ffici- 
entes  ou  des  mouvements.  Les  &mes  agissent  selon 
les  lois  des  causes  finales  par  appetitions,  fins  et 
moyens.  Et  les  deux  r&gnes,  celui  des  causes  effici- 
entes  et  celui  des  causes  finales,  sont  harmoniques 


autres  d&s  le  commencement  des  choses  ait  regard  &  elle.  Car  puis- 
qu'une  monade  cr££e  ne  saurait  avoir  une  influence  physique  sur 
Pinterieur  de  1'autre,  ce  n'est  que  par  ce  moyen  que  Tune  peut 
avoir  de  la  d^pendance  de  1'autre.  §  56.  Or  cette  liaison  ou  cet 
accommodement  de  toutes  les  choses  er66es  ii  chacune  et  de  chacune 
&  toutes  les  autres,  fait  que  chaque  substance  simple  a  des  rapports 
qui  expriment  toutes  les  autres  et  qu'elle  est  par  consequent  un 
miroir  vivant  perp^tuel  de  Punivers.' 

1  Epistola  ad  Bierling,  Erdmann,  p.  678. 


LEIBNIZ.  275 

entre  eux V  Everything  occurs  in  the  world  of  mind 
as  if  there  were  no  bodies,  and  in  the  world  of 
matter  as  if  there  were  no  soul. 

We  may  discern  here  a  foreshadowing  of  the  truth 
that  in  the  slightest  and  most  rudimentary  modifica- 
tions of  material  phenomena  an  immaterial  principle 
is  involved,  which  naturally  never  becomes  apparent 
to  the  senses,  but  to  which  we  have  a  key  in  ourselves, 
where  we  know  the  same  power  as  consciousness  or 
will. 

In  this  way  the  order  of  beings,  according  to  their 
degree  of  animation,  or  in  other  words,  according  to 
the  elaborateness  of  their  organisation,  with  its  attend- 
ant of  heightened  consciousness,  becomes  intelligible 
to  us.  Leibniz  is  clear  on  this  point  in  the  letter 
to  Wagner  (Erdmann,  p.  466)  :  4  The  modifications  of 
the  antitypy  (impenetrability)  are  only  changes  of 
place,  the  modifications  of  extension  are  only  changes 
of  magnitude  and  form :  in  all  this  matter  appears 
as  purely  passive ;  but  in  motion  itself  there  must 
reside  an  internal  principle  which  is  quite  different 
from  the  matter  that  is  moved.'  Schopenhauer  calls 
this  principle  Will,  and  does  not  ascribe  consciousness 
to  it ;  Leibniz,  after  Aristotle,  calls  it  Entelechy,  and 
sees  in  it  something  analogous  to  the  human  soul, 
and  therefore  some  kind  of  consciousness,  which  may 
be  conceived  at  many  degrees  of  illumination ;  and, 
with  far  more  justice  than  Schopenhauer,  he  gives  it 
accordingly  the  name  of  perception.  *  I  reply,  thirdly/ 
he  says,  '  that  this  active  principle,  this  prime  Ente- 
lechy, is  in  truth  also  an  indestructible  vital  principle, 
endued  with  the  faculty  of  perception.  It  is  this 
which,  in  the  case  of  animals,  I  regard  as  their  souls. 
In  assuming  matter  to  be  in  all  cases  attended  with 

1  Monadologie,  §  79. 
T  2 


276  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

principles  of  activity,  I  assume  also  everywhere  vital 
principles  which  perceive,  or  monads,  so  to  speak 
metaphysical  atoms,  which  are  indivisible  and  inde- 
structible/ €  As  to  what  regards  the  soul,  this  may 
be  taken  either  in  a  wider  or  a  narrower  sense.  In 
the  first  sense,  it  is  the  same  as  life  itself,  a  principle 
of  inward  activity  existing  in  a  simple  thing  or  monad 
and  corresponding  to  its  external  activity.  This 
parallelism  between  the  outward  and  the  inward,  or 
representation  of  the  former  in  the  latter,  of  the  com- 
plex in  the  simple;  of  the  many  in  the  one,  really 
constitutes  perception,  and  this  is  not  the  exclusive 
possession  of  animals,  but  is  shared  by  all  perceiving 
beings.  In  the  more  restricted  sense,  the  soul  is  a 
more  noble  kind  of  life,  a  life  of  feeling,  not  the  bare 
capacity  for  perception,  but  conscious  feeling,  with 
which  attention  is  associated.  The  third  and  high- 
est kind  of  soul  is  the  human,  the  anima  rationalis/ 
whose  essence  consists  in  the  power  of  drawing  gene- 
ral conclusions:  ut  ergo  mens  est  anima  rationalis, 
ita  anima  est  vita  sensitiva  et  vita  est  principium 
perceptivum.  There  is  also  a  percepiio  insensibilium, 
as  I  should  be  unable  e.  g.  to  perceive  green,  unless  I 
could  at  the  same  time  perceive  yellow  and  blue,  by 
a  mixture  of  which  colours  it  is  made.  A  soul  or  an 
animal  before  its  birth  and  after  its  death  differs  from 
those  now  living,  not  in  its  nature,  but  only  in  its 
place  in  the  order  of  things  and  its  degree  of  perfec- 
tion. Matter,  or  the  outer  garment,  changes  con- 
tinuously; it  is  a  natural  mechanism,  always  in  flux  ;- 
the  organism  is  like  the  ship  of  Theseus,  of  which 
every  part  had  been  renewed;  the  organic  form  is 
constantly  renewed  from  the  monads.  Genii  cannot 
exist  without  bodies,  but  have  far  more  perfect  ones, 
and  perhaps  have  the  power  of  changing  their  bodies. 


LEIBNIZ.  277 

The  same  analogies  run  through  the  whole  of  nature, 
and  it  is  easy  to  distinguish  the  finer  from  the  coarser 
elements,  both  of  which  follow  the  same  kind  of 
course.  God  alone  is  true  substance,  without  material 
admixture,  since  he  is  always  actus  purus,  not  like 
matter,  endowed  with  the  power  of  suffering.  All 
created  substances  are  clothed  with  matter,  they 
have  the  property  of  the  antitypy,  which  effects 
by  natural  means  that  one  thing  shall  always  be 
external  to  another  and  not  penetrated  by  the 
other/  He  speaks  in  the  same  way  in  his  Com- 
mentatio  de  Anima  Brutorum  (Erdmann,  p.  463) : 
4  No  one  will  believe  that  there  is  any  power  of 
perception  in  a  mill,  a  watch,  or  similar  artificial 
machines.  However  delicate  the  organic  mechanism 
may  be,  we  can  still  imagine  it  indefinitely  en- 
larged, so  that  we  could  move  about  among  its 
parts  as  we  do  in  a  mill,  and  still  we  should  find 
everywhere  parts  only,  not  perception.  Hence  it 
follows  certainly  that  it  would  be  impossible  to 
deduce  either  perception,  activity,  or  motion  from 
mere  mechanism  or  materia  nuda.  It  is  therefore 
necessary  to  assume  something  in  addition  to  matter 
which  shall  serve  to  explain  at  once  the  inner  ac- 
tivity or  perception,  and  the  outer  activity  or  mo- 
tion. We  call  this  principle  substantial,  vis  pri- 
mitiva,  Entelechy — in  a  word,  soul.  This  active 
element  must  be  conjoined  with  the  passive  to  con- 
stitute sulstantia  completa? 

These  passages  show  us  the  salient  points  of  the 
Leibnizian  theory.  One  admires  the  intellectual 
application  expended  in  separating  what  is  naturally 
united,  so  that  throughout  motion  represents  the 
fleeting,  ephemeral,  purely  passive  aspect  of  matter, 
while  nevertheless  a  kind  of  consciousness  is  associated 


278  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

with  this,  having  nothing  in  common  with  the  motion 
to  which  it  corresponds, — but  so  perfectly  regulated 
by  the  Divine  watchmaker  that  the  two  continue  in 
perfect  correspondence  throughout  eternity.  And 
human  freedom  is  to  be  preserved  at  the  same  time, 
notwithstanding  the  regular  course  of  the  world  on 
its  mechanical  side  alone  makes  all  divergence  from 
the  prescribed  course  impossible !  Schopenhauer, 
who  is  seldom  quite  just  to  Leibniz,  speaks  on  this 
point  with  great  severity1:  *  The  monstrous  absurdity 
of  his  assumption  was  promptly  pointed  out  by  a 
contemporary,  Bayle,  who  placed  the  necessary  con- 
sequences in  the  clearest  light/  But  he  adds  :  c  Yet 
the  very  absurdity  of  the  hypothesis  which  a  thought- 
ful mind  was  brought  to  accept,  itself  proves  the 
magnitude,  the  intricacy,  and  the  difficulty  of  the 
problem  attempted,  and  how  impossible  it  is  to  evade 
the  difficulty  by  mere  denial  of  its  existence,  as  has 
been  attempted  in  our  days/ 

The  premisses  upon  which  Leibniz  based  his 
system  were  partly  errors  which  have  since  his  day 
become  exploded,  and  partly  truths  which  have  not 
even  yet  received  due  recognition.  I  reckon  among 
the  former : — 

1.  The  view  established  by  Locke  arid  Newton, 
with  the  concurrence  of  the  Cartesians,  that  matter 
is  something  purely  passive,  which  received  its  first 
impulse  from  the  divine  hand  and  continues  to  re- 
volve soul-lessly,  retaining  always  the  same  quantum 
of  motion  as   at  first,  and  forming  thus  an  invari- 
able mechanism   explicable  according  to  mathema- 
tical rules. 

2.  That  mind  is  necessarily  simple,  and  therefore 
cannot  be  a  quality  of  extended  matter.     It  is  thus 

1  Parerga,  i.  p.  8. 


LEIBNIZ.  2  79 

exalted  into  a  substance,  a  '  thing  in  itself,1  and  the 
old  dualism  is  accordingly  revived- 

3.  That  because  the  individuality  of  things  con- 
stitutes their  essence,  these  are  the  Absolute,  and  the 
individuals  characterised, — like  the  Platonic  ideas, 
only  in  countless  numbers, — must  all  continue  to 
exist  throiigh  eternity.  It  is  true  that  continuity 
of  individual  consciousness  is  only  attributed  to  man, 
both  on  account  of  the  higher  dignity  whereby  he 
enters  into  communion  with  the  spirits  who  have 
intercourse  with  God,  and  because  of  the  theological 
dogma  of  rewards  and  punishments. 

The  truths  are : — 

1.  The  animation  of  all  things;   the  recognition 
of  an  inner  active  principle  co-operating  or  rather 
operating  in  everything  which  stirs  or  moves. 

2.  The  emphasising  of  the  individual,  as  to  which 
we  feel  arid  are  taught  by  nature  that  it  constitutes 
the  true  essence  and  differentia  of  all  things,  which 
are  ever  striving  not  only  after  subsistence,  but  after 
heightened   and   developed   being.     Two   prevalent 
errors  were  herewith  corrected : — 

(a)  That  of  Spinoza,  whose  one  substance  swallowed 
up  all  particular  existences  and  made  them  incom- 
prehensible. This  is  disproved,  as  Schopenhauer 
observes,  by  the  unspeakable  sufferings  of  the  world 
and  the  ruthlessness  of  nature. 

(&)  The  error  that  universal s,  the  elements  of 
thought,  can  ever  include  or  express  what  is  indivi- 
dual. This  error  flourished  down  to  our  own  day  in 
the  natural  sciences,  where  it  was  assumed  that  all 
so-called  natural  forces  were  entities,  things  in  them- 
selves, until  the  pregnant  word  was  spoken  by  Robert 
Mayer,  '  Forces  are  concretes/  Just  as  Leibniz  had 
said :  '  On  a  raison  de  r6futer  les  Cartesiens  quand 


280  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

ils  dusent  quc  I'&uie  n'est  a,utre  chose  quo  la  pensee, 
commo  a,ussi  quand  ils  disent  que  la  matiere  n'est 
autre  chose  que  I'etendue.  Car  l'£me  est  un  sujot, 
ou  Concretum  qui  pense,  et  la  matibre  est  un  sujct 
dtcndu  ou  doue  d'dtendue.  L'Ecole  a  raison  do 
distinguer  les  Concrets  et  les  Abstraifs,  lorsqu'il  s'agit 
d'exactitude  1.' 

3.  The  problem  of  sensible  perception  and  the 
inner  structure  of  the  organism  can  only  be  solved 
by  assuming  universal  and  particular  animation,  ex- 
tending throughout  the  most  minute  material  atoms, 
i.  e,  by  the  perceptions  infiniment  petites  of  Leibniz. 
The  so-called  '  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious/  which 
has  been  proclaimed  in  our  days  with  oracular  preten- 
tiousness and  a  bombastic  waste  of  crude  phraseology, 
contains  a  slender  kernel  of  truth,  long  ago  discovered 
by  Leibniz  and  clearly  traced  out  into  all  its  ramifying 
consequences.  There  are  innumerable  infinitely  small 
perceptions  of  the  body  which  do  not  attain  the 
clearness  of  the  intellectual  principle  which  attends 
principally  to  the  action  of  the  chief  organs  of  sense 
(the  central  monad  of  the  rational  human  mind),  arid 
they  remain  therefore  in  the  obscurity  of  an  apparent 
unconsciousness.  Leibniz  correctly  uses  these  dim  per- 
ceptions to  explain  not  only  the  vegetative  functions 
of  the  body,  but  also  the  so-called  mechanical  or 
instinctive  actions  of  men,  i.  e.  those  which  have 
come  from  habit  to  be  performed  unconsciously.  It 
is  impossible  to  close  our  eyes  to  the  presence  of  a 
perceptive  element  in  such  acts  as  walking,  dancing, 
writing,  or  playing  the  piano,  quite  independent  of 
the  central  consciousness,  and  indeed  only  liable  to 
have  its  accuracy  disturbed  by  having  the  attention 
of  the  latter  directed  towards  it.  This  idea,  which, 
1  Lettre  &  Remond  de  Montmort,  p.  736,Erdmann. 


LEIBNIZ.  28l 

so  far  as  I  am  aware,  has  never  received  its  due  con- 
sideration, should  be  associated  with  the  Darwinian 
doctrine  of  development  as  one  of  the  most  important 
principles  of  explanation. 

4.  This  idea  is  closely  connected  with  the  thought 
of  those  continuous,  gradual  transitions  which  meet 
us  everywhere  in  nature,  and  laugh  at  the  rigid  lines 
of  demarcation  which  men  lay  down  for  their  own 
guidance  in  dealing  with  isolated  kinds  or  species. 
Leibniz's  two  favourite  and  fundamental  axioms  are 
Natura  non  facit  saltus,  and  Non  datur  vacuum 
fonnarum.  All  changes  are  effected  upon  the 
infinitely  little,  and  a  natural  order  in  which  all  is 
organisation  supplies  material  for  an  infinite  multi- 
plicity of  living  beings.  The  same  gradation  obtains 
in  the  case  of  minds  as  in  the  material  world.  There 
is  a  great  difference  between  the  feeling  of  animals  and 
the  reflection  of  human  thought.  'II  est  raisonnable 
aussi  qu'il  y  ait  des  substances  capables  de  perception 
au-dessous  de  nous,  comme  il  y  en  a  au-dessus,  et  que 
notre  &me,  bien  loin  d'etre  la  derni&re  de  toutes,  se 
trouve  dans  un  milieu  dont  on  puisse  descendre  et 
monter ;  autrement  ce  serait  un  defaut  d'ordre  V  '  E 
believe,  at  least/  he  says  elsewhere, c  that  there  is  this 
analogy  between  minds  and  bodies,  that  as  there  is  no 
vacuum  in  the  material  world,  so  the  greatest  possible 
multiplicity  and  variety  exists  amongst  reasonable 
creatures.  There  is  a  complete  series  or  gradation 
of  beings  from  ourselves  downwards,  each  variety 
only  infinitesimally  inferior  to  the  last,  until  we 
reach  the  lowest  of  natural  objects  with  the  least 
possible  measure  of  organisation  V  Especially  interest- 
ing is  the  passage  in.  a  letter  to  his  friend  Hermann, 

1  Sur  le  Principe  de  Vie,  Erdmann,  p.  431. 

2  Nouveaux  Essais  sur  TEntendemeut  Huinain,  iii.  6.  §  12. 


282  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

in  which  the  subsequent  discovery  of  zoophytes  and 
polypi  is  forestalled  :  '  I  should  marvel  less  at  the 
discovery  of  such  animal  plants,  because  I  am  con- 
vinced that  such  things  must  have  an  existence  in 
creation.  They  will  perhaps  in  time  be  discovered 
by  naturalists,  when  the  infinite  hosts  of  living 
creatures,  that  escape  ordinary  observation  by  their 
minute  size  or  their  concealment  in  the  recesses  of 
earth  and  water,  come  to  be  investigated.  Observa- 
tion is  a  thing  of  yesterday :  how  then  can  we  deny 
a  priori  the  existence  of  that  which  we  have  as  yet 
had  no  -opportunity  of  seeing  1 '  Another  striking 
observation  refers  to  the  much  debated  question  of 
essentiw  reales,  which  in  fact  includes  the  important 
problem  of  the  nature  of  kinds  and  species,  and  by 
which  throughout  the  middle  ages  philosophers  were 
divided  into  the  two  camps  of  Nominalism  and 
Realism:  'If  the  essentiae  reales  are  taken  to  be 
only  substantial  patterns,  or  types — such  as  a  body 
and  nothing  else,  an  animal  without  other  special  qual- 
ities, a  horse  without  individual  characteristics — one 
might  fairly  condemn  them  as  chimeras1.  And  I 
believe  that  no  one,  even  of  the  chief  realists,  has  main- 
tained that  there  are  as  many  purely  generic  sub- 
stances, as  there  are  genera.  But  this  does  not  prove 
that  the  essentiee  reales  were  mere  signs.  I  have  often 
pointed  out  that  there  are  possibilities  of  resemblance. 
.  .  .  One  cannot  form  too  vast  an  image  of  nature's 
liberality,  it  transcends  all  human  thought,  and  all 
conceivable  possibilities  find  themselves  realised  upon 
her  great  theatre.  There  were  formerly  two  axioms 
in  philosophy:  that  of  the  Realists  made  nature  a 
spendthrift,  that  of  the  Nominalists  a  miser.  The 

1  That  is  to  say,  if  reality  is  attributed  to  Universals,  or  to 
Platonic  Ideas  as  such,  as  was  done  by  the  Realists. 


LEIBNIZ.  283 

former  asserted  Nature's  horror  of  a  vacuum,  the 
latter  that  Nature  did  nothing  in  vain.  Rightly 
understood  both  principles  are  true.  Nature  is  lavish 
in  her  effects,  and  economical  in  the  means  or  causes 
which  produce  them  V 

One  asks  oneself  involuntarily  how  it  was  that 
Leibniz  failed  to  formulate  the  Darwinian  theory  of 
development,  when  his  sketch  of  the  processes  and 
action  of  nature  was  so  entirely  in  harmony  with  the 
modern  theory  of  descent,  and  one  might  even  say 
based  on  more  profound  insight  than  our  short- 
sighted estimate  of  '  living '  things,  and  their  type, 
the  primeval  cell.  He  starts  from  the  idea  that  all 
nature  is  animated  and  organised.  The  only  ex- 
planation of  his  having  stopped  short  where  he  did, 
seems  to  be  his  preoccupation  (i)  with  the  religious 
dogma  that  the  world  and  all  living  creatures  were 
created,  and  (2)  with  the  dogma  of  the  Pre-established 
harmony,  derived  from  the  former,  and  the  conviction 
of  the  impossibility  of  union  between  mind  and 
matter. 

After  this  cursory  abridgement  of  the  Leibnizian 
philosophy  we  may  proceed  to  consider  his  important 
suggestions  in  isolated  fields  of  thought,  and  to  begin 
with  his  contributions  to 

I.  The  theory  of  intellectual  perception. 

i.  The  first  point  to  notice  is  his  addendum  to  the 
Lockiaii  'Nihil  est  in  iritellectu  quod  non  prius  fuerit 
in  sensu  :'  to  which  Leibniz  adds  the  significant  words 
nisi  intellectus  ipse.  We  might  almost  believe  this 
to  mean  that  Leibniz  had  undertaken  to  champion 
the  cause  of  the  'innate  ideas/  which  Locke  had 

1  Nouveaux  Essuis,  iii.  6.  §  32.  p.  320,  Erdmann. 


284  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

struggled  so  hard  and  so  successfully  to  banish  from 
philosophy.  The  rdsume  which  he  gives,  in  a  letter 
to  Bierling,  of  his  criticism  on  Locke  in  the  Nouveaux 
Essais  would  warrant  such  a  view :  '  Locke  wanders 
far  from  the  truth  in  the  chief  matter,  and  he  has 
failed  to  discern  the  nature  of  the  mind  and  of  truth. 
If  he  had  rightly  weighed  the  difference  between 
necessary  truths  and  those  which  we  reach  to  a 
certain  extent  by  the  way  of  induction,  he  would 
have  seen  that  necessary  truths  can  only  be  de- 
monstrated by  principles  implanted  in  the  mind, 
the  so-called  innate  ideas  ;  for  the  senses  teach  truly 
what  happens,  but  not  what  happens  necessarily. 
lie  has  also  omitted  to  consider  that  the  idea  of 
Being,  of  Substance,  of  Ideality,  of  the  True  and 
the  Good  must  have  been  innate  in  our  mind,  be- 
cause it  is  itself  innate,  and  comprehends  all  these 
things  in  itself/ 

In  reality  however  Leibniz  approaches  steadily 
towards  the  Kantian  doctrine  of  a  priori  elements  in 
knowledge,  as  when  he  shows  that  mere  experience 
cannot  reveal  necessary  or  universal  truths,  in  which 
there  is  always  something  contributed  from  our  own 
inner  nature x :  '  The  senses,  though  necessary  for  all 
our  actual  knowledge,  are  not  sufficient  to  have  given 
the  necessary  or  universal  truths,  since  the  senses 
give  only  instances,  that  is  to  say,  particular  or 
individual  truths.  But  the  examples,  which  con- 
firm a  general  truth,  do  not  suffice  to  establish  the 
universal  necessity  of  this  same  truth ;  for  it  does 
not  follow  that  what  has  happened,  will  always 
happen  in  the  same  way.  .  .  .  Whence  it  appears 
that  necessary  truths,  such  as  we  find  in  pure 
mathematics  and  especially  in  arithmetic  and  geo- 
1  Nouveaux  Essais,  Avant-propos,  Erdmann,  p.  195. 


LEIBNIZ.  285 

metry,  must  have  principles  of  which  the  truth  does 
not  depend  on  the  examples,  nor,  therefore,  on  the 
evidence  of  the  senses,  though  without  the  senses  no 
one  would  have  begun  to  think  of  them.  This 
distinction  must  not  be  neglected,  as  was  seen  by 
Euclid,  who  demonstrates  by  reason  what  is  sufficiently 
evident  by  experience  and  sensible  images.  Logic, 
morals,  and  metaphysics  .  .  .  are  full  of  such  truths, 
and  their  proof  can  only  proceed  from  internal 
principles  which  arc  called  innate.  It  is  true  that 
it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  these  eternal  laws  of 
reason  can  be  read  in  the  soul,  as  in  an  open  book, 
as  the  praetor's  edict  may  be  read  in  his  album 
without  trouble  or  research ;  but  it  is  sufficient  that 
they  can  be  discovered  in  us  by  dint  of  attention, 
of  which  the  senses  furnish  occasions.  The  success 
of  experiments  serves  to  confirm  the  conclusions  of 
reason,  as  in  arithmetic  a  sum  is  proved,  to  avoid 
the  risk  of  error  in  a  long  calculation.' 

In  answer  to  the  objection  that  particular  pro- 
positions axe  accepted  as  indubitable  truths  by  those 
who  have  no  knowledge  of  more  general  maxims,  he 
observes1:  'It  is  true  that  we  begin  by  perceiving 
particular  truths,  as  we  begin  with  the  coarsest 
and  most  composite  ideas  ;  but  this  does  not  prevent 
its  being  a  fact,  that  the  order  of  nature  begins 
with  what  is  simplest,  and  that  the  reason  of 
the  most  particular  truths  depends  upon  the  more 
general  ones,  of  which  they  are  only  examples. 
And  when  any  one  desires  to  consider  what  is 
in  us  virtually,  and  prior  to  all  apperception,  he 
is  right  to  begin  with  what  is  most  simple.  For 
general  principles  enter  into  our  thoughts,  of  which 
they  form  the  soul  and  the  connection.  They  are 
1  Nouveaux  Essais,  Avant-propos,  Erdinann,  p.  211. 


286  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

as  necessary  there  as  muscles  and  tendons  are  in 
walking,  though  we  do  not  think  of  them.  The 
mind  rests  constantly  upon  these  principles,  though 
it  is  not  able  easily  to  disentangle  and  represent 
them  to  itself  distinctly  and  separately,  because 
that  requires  close  attention,  and  most  people,  being 
little  accustomed  to  meditation,  have  none  to  give. 
Have  not  the  Chinese  articulated  sounds  as  we 
have,  and  yet,  having  adopted  another  manner  of 
writing,  it  has  not  yet  occurred  to  them  to  make  an 
alphabet  of  these  sounds.  Thus  it  is  we  possess  many 
things  without  knowing  it/  The  opponents  of  this 
view  understand  by  innate  truths  those  which  would 
be  instinctively  approved,  and  these  ought  not  to  be 
confounded  .  .  .  '  But  what  is  called  the  light  of  na- 
ture supposes  distinct  knowledge,  and  very  often  the 
consideration  of  the  nature  of  things  is  nothing  else 
than  the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  our  mind  and 
of  those  innate  ideas  which  have  not  to  be  sought 
for  without/  When  challenged  to  produce  a  pro- 
position of  which  the  ideas  are  innate,  *I  should 
name  the  propositions  of  arithmetic  and  geometry, 
and  there  are  no  others  to  be  found  of  necessary 
truths/  .  .  .  But,  if  there  are  innate  truths,  must 
there  not  be  innate  thoughts  ?  Not  at  all :  '  Car  les 
pensees  sont  des  actions,  et  les  connoissances  ou  les 
v6rit&3,  en  tant  qu'elles  sont  en  nous,  quand  m6me 
on  n'y  pense  point,  sont  des  habitudes  ou  des  dis- 
positions; et  nous  savons  bien  des  choses  auxquelles 
nous  ne  pensons  gubre  V  '  In  a  certain  sense  it  may 
be  said  that  all  arithmetic  and  geometry  are  innate, 
since  we  can  realise  their  truths  without  any  re- 
ference to  experience,  as  Plato  has  shown  in  a 
Dialogue,  when  he  introduces  Sokrates  leading  a 
2  Nouveaux  Essais,  Avant-propos,  Erdmann,  p.  212. 


LEIBNIZ.  287 

child  to  abstruse  truths  by  questions  only,  without 
ever  teaching  him  anything.  A  man  might  therefore 
form  these  sciences  in  his  library,  and  even  with 
closed  eyes,  without  learning  by  sight  or  even  by 
touch  the  truths  he  needed;  though  it  is  true  that 
these  ideas  would  never  be  considered  at  all,  if  we 
had  not  seen  and  touched  things  V  As  to  the  eternal 
truths,  it  should  be  remembered  that  they  are  always 
at  bottom  hypothetical,  and  only  say,  If  the  first  is  so, 
then  the  other  is  (necessarily)  so  also. 

These  passages  are  sufficient  to  show  that  Leibniz 
did  not  await  the  sanction  of  experience  to  maintain 
those  truths  which  the  mind  derived  c  de  son  propre 
fonds,'  or  to  point  to  a  source  of  knowledge  which 
indeed  required  the  stimulus  of  the  senses,  but  was 
essentially  separate  from  them.  His  propositions  are 
laid  down  apodictically,  as  necessary,  in  the  confidence 
that  the  human  reason  must  originally  have  some- 
thing of  its  own  :  something  which  experience  and 
the  continual  influence  of  the  outer  world  through 
the  senses  may  strengthen  and  develope,  and  which 
meanwhile  grows  into  clearer  consciousness  of  itself. 
Kant's  great  discovery  of  the  a  priori  possessions  of 
the  human  reason,  which  make  experience  possible, 
has  the  ground  prepared  for  it  here. 

As  Kant  introduced  mathematics  as  the  most 
powerful  ally  and  the  most  brilliant  confirmation  of 
his  doctrine,  and  assigned  to  it  its  proper  place  in  the 
great  classification  of  human  knowledge,  so  Leibniz 
proved  for  the  first  time,  what  had  been  only  guessed 
by  the  great  thinkers  of  the  past,  from  Pythagoras 
to  Aristotle  and  from  Descartes  to  Locke,  viz.  that 
the  peculiar  character  of  mathematical  knowledge 
must  furnish  the  key  to  the  ultimate  and  most  secret 
1  Nouveaux  Essais,  Avant-propos,  Erdmann,  p.  208. 


288  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

conditions  of  human  reason,  to  its  true  nature  and 
to  its  true,  natural  boundaries. 

2.  Leibniz  laid  down  as  the  primary  logical  prin- 
ciples those  of  identity,  of  contradiction,  arid  of  the 
sufficient  reason. 

6  In  all  demonstrations/  he  says,  'I  make  use  of 
two  principles,  of  which  one  is  that  everything  is 
false  which  involves  a  contradiction  ;  the  second,  that 
every  truth,  so  far  as  it  is  not  immediate  or  identical, 
must  always  have  a  sufficient  reason,  that  is  to  say, 
the  idea  of  the  predicate  must  be  expressly  or  im- 
plicitly contained  in  the  idea  of  the  subject ;  and  this 
holds  good  of  demonstrations  referring  to  things 
external  as  well  as  to  internal  ones,  to  contingent 
as  well  as  necessary  truths1/ 

The  difference  between  necessary  and  contingent 
truths  is  very  much  the  same  as  that  between  measur- 
able and  immeasurable  magnitudes.  As  we  can  reduce 
commensurable  numbers  to  a  common  measure,  so  a 
demonstration  or  reduction  to  identical  propositions 
takes  place  in  the  case  of  necessary  truths.  In  the 
case  of  surd  numbers,  on  the  other  hand,  the  solution 
may  be  indefinitely  approached,  but  the  figures  re- 
peat themselves  in  a  circular  series  without  end. 
In  the  same  way,  contingent  truths  require  a  pro- 
gressus  in  infinitum,  an  infinitesimal  analysis  which 
only  God  can  complete.  Hence  they  are  only  known 
with  certainty  and  a  priori  by  God.  For  the  reason 
of  the  consequence  is  always  to  be  found  in  its  an- 
tecedent, which  follows  from  another  antecedent,  and 
so  in  infinite  succession.  But  this  progressus  in  in- 
finitum is  a  reason  in  itself,  as  this  must  be  found, 

1  At  this  rate  all  thought  would  be  an  analysis  of  composite 
conceptions,  which  would  reach  its  goal  when  it  had  arrived  at 
simple  notions.  Identical  truths  are  excepted ;  vide  next  note. 


LEIBNIZ.  289 

outside  the  series,  in  God,  the  author  of  all  things,  on 
whom,  much  more  than  on  their  own  causal  con- 
nection, the  earlier  as  well  as  the  later  must  be 
assumed  to  depend.  All  truths  therefore  that  do 
not  admit  of  complete  analysis,  cannot  be  demon- 
strated by  reasons  of  their  own,  but  derive  their 
ultimate  reason  and  certainty  from  the  divine  spirit, 
and  have  not  the  character  of  necessity.  All  these  I 
call  truths  of  fact ;  and  this  is  the  real  root  of  con- 
tingency, which  has  not,  I  believe,  been  pointed  out 
before1/ 

In  this  statement  the  human  mind  seems  to  be 
landing  on  unknown  and  undiscovered  shores,  and  a 
distinction  is  perceived  for  the  first  time  between  the 
principles  of  thought,  its  inner  logical  form,  and  its 
contents,  as  originating  from  elsewhere. 

The  new  truths  set  forth  are — 

a.  All  knowledge  of  fact  has  an  empirical,  con- 
tingent side,  which  can  never  be  referred  back  to 
necessity. 

&.  All  certainty  rests,  in  the  last  resort,  upon  the 
proposition  of  identity ;  that  is  to  say,  reason  is  only 
fully  satisfied  when  its  operations  end  with  a  judg- 
ment of  identity,  and  when  the  different  elements 
under  consideration  are  at  last  expressed  in  terms  of 
each  other,  so  that  A  =  A2. 

c.  All  exclusion  and  difference  rests,  on  the  con- 
trary, on  the  principle  of  contradiction ;  what  is  A, 
cannot  at  the  same  time  be  not-A.  This  propo- 

1  De  Scientia  Universal!,  p.  83,  Erdmann. 

2  Direct  experience,  such  as  that  of  our  own  existence,  feeling, 
&c.,  and  a  priori  truths,  rest  on  the  proposition  of  identity,  these 
because  subject  and  predicate  agree  directly,  those  because  subject 
and  object  are  the  same.     Both  kinds  are  therefore  independent 
of  demonstration.     Nouveaux  Essai?,  iv.  cap.  9.  §  2. 

VOL.  I,  U 


2QO  MODEEN  PHILOSOPHY. 

sition,  according  to  Leibniz,  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
all  mathematical  or  necessary  truths. 

d.  The  only  principle  of  union  between  the  thought 
which  is  on  the  one  hand  striving  after  unity  and 
necessity,  and  on  the  other  gathering  in  the  mani- 
fold and  diverse,  is  afforded  by  the  principle  of  the 
sufficient  reason,  the  clearest  and  most  certain  pos- 
session of  the  human  mind.  *  Ce  principe  est  celui 
du  besoin  d'une  raison  suffisante  pour  quune  chose 
existe,  un  dvbnement  arrive,  quune  verite  ait  lieu. 
Est-ce  un  principe  qui  ait  besoin  de  preuves1?' 

The  perception  is  dawning  more  and  more  clearly 
that,  what  has  hitherto  been  sought  in  the  world, 
such  as  unity  and  multiplicity,  cause  and  effect,  really 
lies  at  the  root  of  the  mental  operations  themselves, 
and  must  be  sought  out  anatomically  from  the  nature 
of  the  thinking  mind  and  its  primitive  conditions. 
Philosophical  investigation  tends  more  and  more  to 
withdraw  from  what  is  objective  and  to  take  the 
Cartesian  anchorage,  the  Cogito,  for  the  starting-point 
of  rational  thought ;  to  see,  in  fact,  more  and  more 
clearly  that  not  Ontology,  but  Dianoiology  is  the 
thing  required.  This  is  true  in  regard  to  the  pro- 
positions of  identity  and  contradiction  as  well  as  to 
that  of  the  sufficient  reason,  if  we  compare  them  with 
their  doubles,  the  seternee  veritates,  set  up  by  Des- 
cartes himself: — 

<Ex  nihilo  nihil  fit.' 

'Impossibile  est  idem  esse  et  non  esse.' 

These  predicate  being,  while  identity  and  contra- 
diction refer  to  the  reason  itself  and  its  elements, 
i.e.  ideas.  Three  great  thinkers  repeat  the  same 
ontological  proof  of  the  existence  of  God,  but  we  can 

1  Lettres  entre  Leibniz  et  Clarke,  p.  778,  Erdmann. 


LEIBNIZ. 

still  see  in  their  definitions  of  substance  or  Deity,  as 
the  first  and  last  cause  of  all  being,  the  progress 
that  has  been  made  from  objective  being  to  the 
source  of  thought.  The  reader  will  feel  this  by  com- 
paring the  following  three  propositions : — 

Descartes :  '  Per  substantiam  nihil  aliud  intelligere 
possumus  quam  rem  quse  ita  existit,  ut  nulla  alia  re 
indigeat  ad  existendum.9 

Spinoza :  '  Per  substantiam  intelligo  id  quod  in  se 
est  et  per  se  concipitur,  hoc  est,  id  cujus  conceptus 
non  indiget  concepts  alterius  rei  a  quo  formari  debeat' 
(idea  of  being). 

Leibniz :  CI1  faut  chercher  la  raison  de  Texistence  du 
monde  qui  est  1'assemblage  entier  des  choses  con- 
tingentes,  et  il  faut  la  chercher  dans  la  substance  qui 
porte  la  raison  de  son  existence  avec  elle,  et  laquelle 
par  consequent  est  necessaire  et  eternelle'  (the  reason 
of  being). 

Descartes  holds  fast  to  the  cause,  Spinoza  separates 
cause  and  reason,  but  allows  them  to  be  inter- 
changed ;  Leibniz  alone  attains  to  the  conception  of 
the  reason  or  the  rational  ground. 

Leibniz  is  still  far  from  equalling  the  depth  of  the 
Kantian  researches.  He  still  considers  the  analytic 
method  as  the  only  one  proper  to  human  thought ; 
he  does  not  realise  that  in  every  judgment,  even  the 
most  ordinary  one,  synthesis  and  a  priori  certainty 
are  involved  as  well.  But  the  way  on  which  he  had 
entered  led  surely  in  the  direction  where  the  deepest 
mysteries  of  thought  lay  hid.  The  way  was  opened 
for  the  distinction  between  necessary  and  empirical 
knowledge :  for  the  first  time  that  which  is  the 

O       ' 

mind's,  was  given  to  mind,  in  contradistinction  to 
what  belongs  to  the  world  or  to  reality. 

But  the  most  important  and  most  pregnant  dis- 

U  2 


292  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

tinction  is  that,  contained  in  the  principle  of  the 
sufficient  reason,  between  reason  and  cause.  We  saw 
above  in  the  philosophy  of  Spinoza,  how  much  error 
and  deception  followed  and  could  not  but  follow  from 
the  use  of  these  principles  as  convertible.  The  prin- 
ciple of  causality,  upon  which  all  earlier  systems  built 
blindly  and  unconditionally, — which  is  indeed  the 
sole  possession  of  human  reason,  and  yet  broke  down 
whenever  it  was  to  be  applied  to  the  last  problems, 
so  that  recourse  had  to  be  had  to  the  causa  sui,  the 
causa  prima,  the  Deus  sive  natura, — this  principle  re- 
ceives now  for  the  first  time  philosophic  considera- 
tion, and  becomes  itself  an  object  of  investigation. 
The  latter  indeed  was  first  entered  on  by  Hume, 
whose  doubt  as  to  the  reliability  of  the  causal  law 
made  him  act  as  the  awakener  of  Kant.  But  the 
mere  proclamation  of  this  principle,  as  the  primitive 
property  of  reason,  was  a  progress  not  to  be  exagger- 
ated in  the  history  of  philosophic  thought,  of  which 
the  aim,  since  Descartes,  has  been  to  emancipate  itself 
more  and  more  from  the  external  world,  and  to  seek  its 
sources  within,  where  alone  they  are  to  be  found, 
since  what  is  given  directly,  i.e.  in  consciousness,  must 
be  more  certain  than  what  is  given  mediately  through 
the  other,  viz.  matter,  or  the  external  world. 

The  self-deception  of  reason,  in  regarding  objec- 
tive existence  as  the  most  certain  and  self-sufficing, 
takes  effect  here  also.  The  causal  relation  pre- 
sents itself  as  a  process  accomplishing  itself  in  the 
outer  world  and  given  thereby,  so  that  at  last  the 
mind  falls  into  the  fundamental  error  of  empiricism, 
in  which  Locke  has  shared,  namely,  that  reason 
learns  the  fact  of  causality  from  the  frequent  re- 
petition of  successive  occurrences.  It  cannot  indeed 
be  ignored  that  reason  itself  plays  an  influential 


LEIBNIZ.  293 

part  in  combining  and  uniting  the  causal  links, 
since  its  most  important  task  is  to  throw  light  upon 
the  steps  of  practical  conduct  to  be  taken  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  conclusions  regarding  the  future, 
based  upon  a  knowledge  of  the  causal  series  of  the 
past.  Thus  its  own  proper  name,  ratio,  ragione, 
raison,  reason,  is  characteristic  of  the  only  case  of  its 
activity,  i.e.  the  causal  relation,  which  it  applies  to 
any  fact  or  act  before  it.  But  it  is  long  before  it 
learns  to  distinguish  correctly  between  cause  and 
reason,  arid  indeed,  as  we  have  seen,  it  continues 
still  inclined  to  confound  the  two. 

It  is  only  necessary  to  look  closely  at  the  analysis 
of  the  idea  of  cause,  as  bequeathed  by  antiquity,  and 
held  fast  in  the  Middle  Ages,  to  convince  ourselves 
that  the  preponderance  of  the  objective  element 
made  it  impossible  to  conceive  causality  under  the 
most  important  aspect  of  the  rational  ground  (causa 
or  principium  cognoscendi).  The  classification  into 
efficient  causes  and  final  causes  (to  which  '  formal ' 
and  'material'  causes  may  be  added)  leaves  the 
real  ground  of  reason  quite  unconsidered,  and 
assumes  with  naive  unconcern  (i)  that  things  act 
causally  upon  each  other,  (2)  that  man  can  change 
things  in  accordance  with  his  intention.  In  the 
latter  case,  that  of  the  final  causes,  a  certain  place 
is  indeed  allotted  to  reason,  and  scholasticism  ap- 
proaches to  a  real  insight :  Causa  finalis  non  movet 
secunduin  suum  esse  reale,  sed  secundum  suum  esse 
cognitum  ; — but  of  the  causa  or  the  causse  cognoscendi, 
there  is  never  any  mention.  This  most  important 
point  of  view  was  only  reached  by  Descartes,  when, 
starting  from  the  intelligent  subject,  the  root  and 
ground  of  the  knowledge  of  this  subject  came  to  be 
investigated,  and  were  shown  to  lie  necessarily  within, 


294  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

and  not  without  it.  The  verification  of  our  reason, 
as  a  special  gift,  necessarily  presupposed  in  all  know- 
ledge, led  to  a  more  attentive  consideration  of  its 
operations,  and  this  again  could  not  but  result  in 
bringing  into  view  what  was  everywhere  silently  as- 
sumed, viz.  the  principle  of  the  sufficient  reason. 

The  Leibnizian  principle  of  the  sufficient  reason 
thus  for  the  first  time,  albeit  somewhat  tentatively, 
relegates  the  principle  of  causality  to  the  realm  of 
the  knowing  subject,  or  to  reason.  The  old  pro- 
position, Everything  in  the  world  must  have  a  cause, 
will  read  now,  In  virtue  of  the  principle  of  the  suffi- 
cient reason  no  fact  will  be  admitted  as  true  or  really 
existing,  no  judgment  as  correct,  unless  a  sufficient 
reason  is  forthcoming  why  it  is  thus  and  not  other- 


wise1. 


'Leibniz/  says  Schopenhauer2,  ' proclaims  this  pro- 
position with  great  solemnity  in  many  passages  of  his 
works  ;  and  gives  himself  airs  of  great  importance,  as 
if  it  was  he  who  had  invented  it ;  and  yet  he  has 
nothing  more  to  say  about  it  than  that  each  and  all 
things  must  have  a  sufficient  reason — which  the  World 
knew  already/  This  sneer,  however,  does  not  hit  the 
mark,  for  we  have  not  to  do  with  the  invention  of 
a  rational  principle,  but  with  the  discovery  of  its  true 
place  and  importance.  That  man  thinks,  and  is  con- 
scious of  himself,  was  known  long  before  Descartes; 
that  everything  is  perceived  in  space  and  time  was 
known  long  before  Kant;  and  similarly  the  principle 
of  the  sufficient  reason  has  always  been  made  use  of 
in  thought,  just  as  we  use  our  bones  and  muscles  in 
walking.  But  that  it  was  one  of  the  fundamental 

1  Monadologie,  §  32. 

2  Die  vierfache  Wurzel  des  Satzes  vom  zureichenden  Grunde, 
p.  16. 


LEIBNIZ.  295 

and  indeed  the  most  important  of  rational  principles, 
since  the  knowledge  that  one  ball  forces  away  another 
was  first  derived  from  it — this  was  not  known  before 
Leibniz,  and  his  great  merit  is  to  have  put  the  fact 
in  its  proper  light. 

*  Causality  is  in  us,'  this  is  the  gist  of  Leibniz's 
thought.  Hume  will  add,  c  Causality  is  in  us  alone, 
and  ought  not  to  be  transferred  to  the  outer  world/ 
*  Causality  is  in  us  and  is  of  value  and  significance 
only  in  so  far  as  it  is  applied  to  experience  and  reality/ 
will  be  the  conclusion  of  Kant. 

3.  According  to  Leibniz  there  are  three  kinds  of 
knowledge:  (i)  intuitive,  which  has  a  priori  or 
innate  truths  for  its  object ;  (2)  demonstrative, 
which  is  reached  by  the  principle  of  the  sufficient 
reason * ;  (3)  sensible,  which  he  characterises  as  an 
obscure  or  confused  kind  of  knowledge.  For  this 
latter  heresy  Leibniz  is  again  severely  reprimanded 
by  Schopenhauer2.  'All  abstract  knowledge/  he 
says,  *  flows  from  intuition,  and  all  its  value  and 
significance  lies  only  in  its  relation  to  intuitive  per- 
ception. For  this  reason  the  natural  man  always 
attaches  much  more  value  to  what  is  known  by  direct 
intuition  than  to  abstract  ideas,  or  what  is  merely 
thought ;  he  prefers  empirical  to  logical  knowledge. 
But  those  who  live  more  among  words  than  deeds, 
who  look  more  into  books  and  papers  than  the  real 
world,  are  of  the  opposite  mind,  and  in  their  worst 
degeneracy  turn  into  pedants  and  slaves  of  the  letter. 

1  'La  Raison  consistant  dans  1'enchainement des  v6rit6s  a  droit  de 
lier  encore  celles  que  Inexperience  lui  a  fournies  pour  en  tirer  des 
conclusions  mixtes :    mais  la  Raison  pure  et  nue,  distingu6e  de 
Inexperience,  n'a  &  faire  qu'&  des  v6rit6s  ind^pendantes  des  sens/ 
Discours  de  la  conformity  de  la  foi  avec  la  raison,  Erdmann,  479. 

2  Schopenhauer,  Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,  i.  p.  101. 


296  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

This  is  the  only  explanation  of  how  Leibniz,  together 
with  Wolf,  and  all  their  successors,  could  go  so  far 
astray  as,  like  Duns  Scotus,  to  pronounce  intuitive 
knowledge  only  a  confused  form  of  abstract  know- 
ledge. To  the  honour  of  Spinoza  it  must  be  said, 
that  his  juster  mind,  on  the  contrary,  declared  all 
general  ideas  to  have  arisen  by  the  confusion  of  what 
was  intuitively  known/  (Eth.  ii.  Prop.  40.  Schol.  i.) 
This  criticism  too  is  unjust,  and  the  passage  cited 
from  Spinoza  refers  only  to  the  first  and  original  way  in 
which  genera]  ideas  were  formed,  as  appears  clearly 
from  the  scholium  immediately  following,  where  he 
says,  in  complete  agreement  with  Leibniz,  'Ex  his 
omnibus,  clare  apparet  nos  multa  percipere  et  no- 
tiones  universales  formare  primo  ex  singularibus  nobis 
per  sensus  mutilate,  confuse  et  sine  ordine  ad  iniel- 
lectum  reprsesentatis/  When  Leibniz  represents 
sensible  knowledge  as  confused,  he  is  placing  it  in 
opposition  to  that  which  Spinoza,  in  the  last-named 
scholium,  calls  c  scientia  intuitiva,  quod  cognoscendi 
genus  procedit  ab  adsequata  idea  essentise  formalis 
quorundam  Dei  attributorum  ad  adsequatam  cogni- 
tiodem  essentise  rerurn.'  The  relation  of  sensible 
perceptions  to  the  true  nature  of  the  things  which 
excite  them  is  conceived  in  exactly  the  same  way  by 
Leibniz.  *  Sensible  ideas  are  dependent  on  single 
forms  and  motions,  and  express  these  exactly,  al- 
though we  are  unable  to  recognise  the  particular 
elements  in  the  confusion  of  the  infinite  number  and 
minute  details  of  mechanical  actions.  But  if  we 
could  really  behold  all  the  inner  constitution  of  the 
body  (i.  e.  according  to  Locke  its  qualitates  prima- 
rise),  we  should  have  a  clear  knowledge  of  its  pro- 
perties, which  might  then  be  traced  back  to  it  by 
intelligible  reasons ;  even  though  we  might  never  be 


LEIBNIZ.  297 

in  a  position  actually  to  perceive  them  with  our 
senses.  A  rapidly  revolving  wheel  with  long  teeth 
presents  a  kind  of  transparency  to  the  view  at  its 
periphery;  such  is  confused  sensible  knowledge,  while 
intellectual  intuition,  the  clear  conception  of  the  thing 
itself,  easily  distinguishes  the  teeth  V 

Schopenhauer's  criticism  is  so  far  justified  that 
Leibniz  does  not  expressly  distinguish  between  ra- 
tional and  sensible  knowledge,  but  regards  both  as 
generically  alike,  the  latter  being  only  a  less  perfect 
variety  of  the  former.  But  notwithstanding  all  this, 
an  important  truth  was  beginning  to  dawn  at  this 
point  upon  the  mind  of  Leibniz,  namely,  that  our 
sensible  perceptions,  considered  objectively,  are  no- 
thing but  unconscious  numeration.  This  idea,  like 
the  Lockian  primary  qualities,  is  only  a  natural  conse- 
quence of  the  doctrines  alike  of  Atoms  and  of  Monads, 
but  Leibniz  seems,  as  was  not  unnatural,  to  have 
first  been  led  to  it  by  his  reflections  on  the  na- 
ture of  music,  which  consists  in  rhythmic  intervals, 
or  harmonic  successions.  He  describes  listening  to 
music  as  an  'exercitium  arithmeticum  nescientis  se 
numerare  animi,'  and  says:  *  Music  delights  us,  although 
its  beauty  consists  only  in  regularity  of  ntimbers  and 
in  a  numeration  (of  which  we  are  not  conscious)  of 
the  vibrations  of  resonant  bodies,  following  each  other 
at  regular  intervals.  The  pleasure  of  sight  from  pro- 
portion is  of  the  same  nature,  and  that  of  the  remain- 
ing senses  no  doubt  will  be  reducible  to  something 
similar,  though  we  cannot  so  easily  explain  them 2/ 
If  the  pleasure  which  we  receive  by  the  senses,  the 
Agreeable  and  the  Beautiful,  only  rests  upon  the  un- 
conscious numbers  of  regular  rhythm,  it  necessarily 

1  Nouveaux  Essais,  p.  358,  Erdinann. 

2  Principes  de  la  Nature  et  de  la  Grace,  p.  718,  Erdmann. 


298  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

follows  that  sensations  in  general  can  be  nothing  but 
a  similar  unconscious  numeration,  a  view  in  perfect 
harmony  with  that  above  developed,  respecting  the 
infinitely  little  and  therefore  uriperceived  mechanical 
motions.  'For  the  nature  of  the  mind  consists  of 
perceptions,  and  as  we  perceive  the  body  as  a  whole, 
but  do  not  perceive  the  infinitely  little  parts  of  which 
it  consists,  so  the  infinitely  slight  perceptions  which 
arc  caused  by  the  latter  do  not  attain  to  the  clearness 
of  consciousness1/  'When  we  perceive  colours  or 
odours,  it  is  only  a  perception  of  infinitely  small  forms 
and  motions,  so  that  our  mind  cannot  possibly  per- 
ceive the  same  distinctly,  and  so  does  not  observe  that 
its  perception  is  made  up  of  infinitely  small  percep- 
tions; just  as  in  a  mixture  of  yellow  arid  blue  powder, 
the  separate  particles  are  not  seen,  but  the  whole 
appears  to  us  as  green,  so  that  we  believe  we  see  a 
new  thing  (ens)  V  Natural  science,  it  is  well  known, 
has  given  brilliant  confirmation  to  Leibniz's  conjec- 
ture, so  far  as  colour  is  concerned,  since  the  latter  has 
been  explained  by  vibrations  of  different  duration : 
but  as  to  the  two  more  deeply-rooted  senses,  taste  and 
smell,  the  empirical  proof  has  still  to  be  given,  and 
undoubtedly  will  be  given  in  due  time. 

The  theory  of  sensible  perceptions  as  unconscious 
numeration,  which  was  at  least  first  imagined  and 
suggested  by  Leibniz,  is  of  very  great  metaphysical 
significance.  Some  ultimate  and  decisive  questions 
naturally  attach  themselves  to  it.  If  the  perceptions 
of  sense  are  the  original  material  of  all  further  know- 
ledge, is  this  numeration  the  last  point  at  which  we 
can  arrive  ?  Is  analytic  empiricism  therefore,  which 
still  consciously  grasps  the  units  in  their  vanishing 

1  Epistola  ad  Bierling,  p.  678,  Erdmann. 

8  Meditat.  de  Cognit.  verit.  et  ideis,  p.  81,  Erdmann. 


LEIBNIZ.  299 

minuteness,  the  last  and  only  goal  of  the  enquiring 
human  mind  ?  Hume  will  answer  in  the  affirmative. 
Kant,  on  the  other  hand,  will  penetrate  much 
further  at  this  very  point,  and  show  that,  in  this  very 
primary  and  original  form  of  knowledge,  in  number, 
or  perceptions  in  time,  synthesis  and  the  a  priori  form 
of  time  is  presupposed,  and  by  it  alone  experience 
rendered  possible.  Thus  the  ultimate  boundary,  the 
ne  plus  ultra  of  all  knowledge,  will  be  fixed. 

II.  Physics. 

i.  The  conception  of  Force.  It  is  indisputably  one 
of  the  chief  merits  of  Leibniz  to  have  elucidated  this 
idea  and  to  have  laid  it  down  as  the  fundamental 
conception  for  the  study  of  nature.  If  the  student  of 
nature  at  the  present  day,  in  all  his  experiments  and 
inferences,  starts  from  and  returns  to  this  idea,  if  in 
all  the  varying  phenomena  and  manifold  magic  of  the 
outer  world,  his  endeavour  is  always  to  grasp  the 
one  natural  force  and  to  bring  it  into  subjection  to 
thought  and  law,  this  mode  of  viewing  things  traces 
its  origin  to  Leibniz.  He  founded  the  dynamic 
conception  of  nature,  which  has  since  continued  to 
prevail. 

Descartes,  as  we  have  seen,  placed  the  nature  of 
matter  in  bare  extension,  so  that  formally  it  became 
identified  with  space,  and  the  most  curious  contra- 
dictions ensued.  Locke,  seeing  these  contradictions, 
introduced  the  idea  of  solidity  as  the  primary  quality 
of  matter,  to  which  all  other  primary  qualities  were 
attached.  Leibniz,  on  the  other  hand,  put  forward  the 
one  correct  conception  of  force,  maintaining  that  it 
is  only  in  action  that  being  makes  itself  felt,  and 
reveals  its  existence  :  quod  non  agit,  non  existit. 


300  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY, 

*  Nothing  is  purely  passive — id  quod  passivum  est, 
nunquam  solum  reperitur  aut  per  se  subsistit ; — any- 
thing that  was  so  would  be  unable  even  to  receive  or  to 
retain  an  impulse  of  motion  from  without1/  'We  only 
perceive  motion,  and  so  far  everything  happens  only 
in  accordance  with  mechanical  laws,  but  the  cause  of 
the  motion,  tl&fons  mechanismi,  i.e.  the  active  Force, 
must  always  be  presupposed,  and  this  is  not  to  be 
explained  mechanically,  but  metaphysically  V  '  I  was 
delighted  with  the  fine  methods  of  mathematicians 
for  explaining  everything  mechanically,  and  I  justly 
despised  the  methods  of  those  who  explained  all  things 
by  forms  and  faculties,  from  which  nothing  was  to  be 
learnt.  But  as  soon  as  I  sought  to  understand  the 
principles  of  mechanics  themselves,  I  saw  at  once  that 
mere  extended  magnitude  would  not  suffice  to  enable 
me  to  comprehend  the  laws  of  nature  shown  by  ex- 
perience, but  that  the  conception  of  Force  must  be 
invoked,  which  is  very  intelligible,  although  it  belongs 
to  the  region  of  metaphysics 3/  4  The  most  important, 
hitherto  little  known  or  little  understood  truths  are 
associated  with  the  idea  of  substance,  the  true  nature 
of  which  can  only  be  conceived  by  starting  from  the 
idea  of  force.  This  I  propose  to  set  forth  in  a  sepa- 
rate work  on  the  science  of  dynamics.  For  there  is  a 
great  difference  between  active  force  and  the  so-called 
potentia  activa  or  facultas  of  scholasticism ;  the  latter 
of  which  is  a  mere  possibility  of  acting,  if  an  external 
influence  is  brought  to  bear.  But  the  vis  activa  is 

1  Epistola  ad  Hoffmannum,  p.  161,  Erdmann. 

2  '  Mea  semper  fait  sententia  omnia  in  corporibus  fieri  mechanice, 
etsi  non  semper  distincte  explicare  possimus  singulos  mechanismos  : 
ipsa  vero  principia  mechanismi  generalia  ex  altiore  fonte  profluere/ 
Ib.  p.  1 6 1. 

8  Systfcme  Nouveau  de  la  Nature,  p.  124,  Erdmann. 


LEIBNIZ.  3O1 

an  Entelecliy,  intermediate  between  the  mere  facultas 
agendi  and  the  actus  itself,  and  needs  no  further  in- 
citement to  action  than  the  removal  of  hindrances  in 
the  way.  It  is  thus  with  the  stone  hanging  by  a 
strained  rope,  or  a  bent  bow.  The  ultimate  source  of 
all  motion  is  the  original  force  lying  in  all  bodies, 
which  may  be  limited  or  restricted  in  various  ways 
by  the  conflict  or  collision  of  other  bodies.  This  force 
lies  in  all  substances,  and  a  certain  action  always  arises 
from  it.  No  bodily  substance  ever  ceases  to  act,  and 
this  has  not  been  sufficiently  recognised  by  those  who 
have  supposed  its  nature  to  consist  of  extension 
and  impenetrability  only,  and  have  imagined  that  it 
was  possible  for  a  body  to  be  ever  entirely  at  rest. 
Thus  no  created  substance  can  ever  receive  the  vis 
agendi  from  another,  but  only  conditions  and  limita- 
tions of  its  own  action1/ 

It  was  through  Leibniz  that  the  conception  of 
matter  first  became  clear  and  serviceable  for  men  of 
science,  after  its  chief  quality  had  been  compared  and 
assimilated  with  what  was  best  known  and  most 
familiar  to  man,  namely  his  own  bodily  force,  which 
is  the  measure  of  everything  else.  This  step  must 
have  shed  a  degree  of  light  in  the  days  of  Leibniz 
comparable  to  that  thrown  in  our  own  days  by  the 
discovery  that  force  can  only  be  measured  by  its  effect, 
and  the  consequent  estimate  of  natural  forces  by  the 
work  done. 

It  is  interesting,  and  helps  to  explain  the  develop- 
ment of  the  most  important  conceptions  in  natural 
science,  to  compare  the  utterances  of  Descartes  and 
Leibniz  on  the  subject  of  matter  and  its  nature.  We 
shall  see  from  this  more  clearly  how  fluctuating  and 
indefinite  the  idea  continues,  so  that  Descartes  at 
1  De  Prim®  Philosophise  Emendatione,  p.  122,  Erdmann. 


302  MODEKN  PHILOSOPHY. 

times  speaks  the  language  of  Leibniz,  while  Leibniz 
continues  to  hamper  himself  with  the  Cartesian 
definition.  Descartes  :  '  Qui  autem  dicunt,  actionem 
omnem  ab  agente  auferri  posse,  recte  dicunt,  si 
per  actionem  motum  solum  intelligant,  non  autem 
si  omnem  vim  sub  nomine  actionis  velint  compre- 
hendere,  ut  longitudo,  latitudo,  profunditas  et  vis 
recipiendi  omnes  figuras  et  motus  a  materia  sive  quan- 
titate  tolli  non  possunt/  (Epistolae,  i.  86.)  Leibniz : 
'Principium  activum  non  tribuitur  a  me  materiae 
nudge  sive  primse,  quse  mere  passiva  est,  et  in  sola 
antitypia  et  extensione  consistit/  (Epist.  ad  Wagnerum, 
Erd.  466.) 

Here,  where  we  can  observe  the  intermingling  of  the 
conceptions  of  force  and  extension,  where  Descartes 
speaks  of  the  power  of  extension,  while  Leibniz  calls 
resistance,  its  antitypy,  something  purely  passive,  we 
can  see  too  the  difficulty  of  the  birth-struggles  of  clear 
ideas,  and  how  everywhere  the  new  is  entangled  with 
the  old,  how  it  developes  with  slow  but  steady  growth, 
and  how  something  of  the  earlier  impression  is  always 
carried  on  into  the  new.  For  even  Leibniz  himself, 
who  first  yielded  to  the  conviction  that  the  nature  of 
matter  must  be  sought  in  force  alone,  still  retained 
some  remnants  of  the  former  view.  He  still  separated 
in  thought  the  traditional  conception  of  matter  as  the 
subject,  the  support  of  force,  as  that  in  which  force 
appears,  and  thus  he  ascribed  a  real — or  at  least  a 
phenomenal — existence  to  a  mere  thing  of  the  mind, 
materia  nuda,  or  prima.  Hence  it  came  to  pass  that 
he  was  obliged  to  attribute  to  it  certain  qualities 
which  he  derived  from  the  dominant  opinions;  in 
other  words,  his  clear  insight  was  obscured,  and  much 
which  should  have  been  deduced  from  the  nature 
of  force  alone,  as  extension,  impenetrability,  resist- 


LEIBNIZ.  303 

ance,  still  seemed  to  him  an  original  property  of 
matter,  which  in  itself  was  purely  passive.  Hence 
contradictory  expressions  and  assertions,  snch  as : 
'  Matter  is  that  which  resists  penetration ;  the  first 
matter  is  therefore  purely  passive 1 ; '  the  vis  inertioe 
which  is  defined  as  '  vis  passiva  resistendi  et  impene- 
trabilitatem  et  aliquid  amplius  involvens  V  ami  the 
like. 

The  fact,  however,  remains  that  the  idea  of  Force, 
which  is  so  exclusively  and  so  effectively  made  use 
of  in  modern  physics,  because  by  it  alone  the  two 
qualities  of  mutability  (the  transitional)  and  per- 
manence can  be  reconciled  without  contradiction,  had 
its  first  origin  in  the  mind  of  the  great  Leibniz. 

2.  The  conservation  of  force.  With  the  growing 
prominence  of  the  idea  of  force,  and  the  increasing 
tendency  to  deduce  all  changes  revealing  themselves 
in  matter  from  it,  as  a  phenomenon  bene  fundatum, 
the  discovery  of  the  great  law  of  the  indestructibility 
of  energy  was  coming  nearer  and  nearer.  The  primi- 
tive conviction  which  had  always  instinctively  assumed 
the  presence  of  something  permanent,  that  law  which 
was  first  formulated  in  the  materialistic  doctrine  of 
Demokritos  and  Epikuros  (ex  nihilo  nihil  fit  and  nihil 
fit  ad  nihilum),  was  now  advancing  rapidly  towards 
the  clear  and  definite  expression  which  in  our  days 
it  has  begun  to  reach,  as  the  last  cloudy  remnants 
of  the  idea  of  matter  were  absorbed  in  the  concep- 
tion of  force,  or,  more  accurately,  of  motion. 

The  definition  above  quoted  (p.  300),  according  to 
which  force  itself  is  inseparable  from  the  idea  of 
matter,  so  that  motion  is  by  no  means  always  to 
be  looked  on  as  something  communicated,  tended  to 

1  Epist.  ad  Bierling,  p.  678,  Erdmann. 

2  De  Ipsa  Natura,  ib.  p.  157. 


304  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

accelerate  the  conclusion  according  to  which  (appa- 
rent) rest  is  only  a  restriction  of  the  innate  force 
within  the  body,  which  only  awaits  the  removal  of 
these  obstacles  in  order  to  manifest  itself  in  life* 

Leibniz  knew  very  well  that  this  law  must  exist 
a  priori;  that  it  could  not  possibly  proceed  from 
experience,  a  view  which  seems  not  as  yet  to  have 
dawned  upon  the  majority  of  our  men  of  science,  who 
lose  themselves  in  such  phrases  as  that  Natural  science 
has  proved  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  force  !  As 
if  anything  could  be  proved  by  experience,  which  has 
to  be  taken  for  granted  before  the  slightest  experience 
can  be  acquired  !  The  universal  mechanism  of  nature 
is  the  firm  and  indispensable  base  of  all  natural 
knowledge,  and  what  is  mechanism  but  the  trans- 
mission of  force  ?  Leibniz  says,  with  great  point : 
'  Spinoza  (I  am  not  afraid  of  quoting  him  when  he 
says  what  is  true)  in  a  letter  to  Oldenburg  makes  a 
similar  remark  about  a  work  of  Sir  Eobert  Boyle, 
who,  to  tell  the  truth,  delays  too  long  over  a  number 
of  fine  experiments  without  drawing  from  them  any 
other  conclusion  than  that  which  he  might  have 
taken  as  his  premiss,  namely,  that  everything  in  na- 
ture is  accomplished  mechanically,  a  principle  which 
can  only  be  proved  by  reason,  and  never  by  experi- 
ments, however  numerous  they  may  be  V 

I  can  only  briefly  mention  the  controversy  as  to 
the  measure  of  force,  which  was  so  long  connected 
with  the  names  of  Descartes  and  Leibniz,  dividing  the 
learned  world  into  two  camps,  and  to  which  Kant  him- 
self contributed  in  one  of  his  youthful  works 2.  Des- 
cartes said  that  the  measure  of  force  is  the  quantity  of 

1  Nouveaux  Essais,  iv.  12. 

2  Gedanken  von  der  wahren  Schatzung  der  lebendigen  Krafte, 

1747- 


LEIBNIZ.  305 

motion,  mv9  i.e.  mass  multiplied  by  velocity.  Leibniz 
said  forces  were  proportioned  as  the  square  of  the 
velocities  mv'2.  Descartes  also  maintained  that  the 
motion  or  quantum  of  movement  in  the  universe 
always  remains  the  same ;  while  Leibniz  asserted, 
on  the  contrary,  that  it  was  not  the  quantity  of 
motion  but  that  of  vis  viva  which  remained  the  same. 
Descartes  took  the  imparted  motion  as  the  unit 
of  measurement,  and  this  agrees  with  his  funda- 
mental view,  according  to  which  matter  is  something 
self-subsisting  (extended)  to  which  the  determined 
motion  is  communicated  from  without  by  God1. 
Leibniz,  on  the  contrary,  placed  the  cause  of  motion 
in  matter  itself,  of  which  the  true  property  is  just 
this  force  motrice2.  He  therefore  took  as  the  sole 
standard  the  most  universal  manifestation  of  force, 
the  one  which  underlies  all  natural  science,  gravity, 
and  the  free  fall  of  bodies.  '  According  to  my  view/ 
he  says,  c  forces  stand  in  the  proportion  of  the  heights 
from  which  the  heavy  bodies  must  fall  to  attain 
their  velocity.  But  as  the  force  in  the  universe 
remains  the  same  and  is  sufficient  to  ascend  to  a 
corresponding  height  or  produce  any  other  similar 
effect,  it  follows  thence  that  the  amount  of  living 
force  in  the  universe  is  maintained  unimpaired  V 

1  Epistol.  ii.  25,  cPrimo  statui  csse  in  tota  materia  creata  certain 
quantitatem  motus  quee  neque  augeatur  neque  minuatur  unquam ; 
atque  ita,  quum  corpus  unum  movet  aliud,  tantundem  motus  sui 
ipsius  decedere  quantum  in  aliud  transfert/     Motion  for  Descartes 
is  not  a  real  quality,  only  a  mode. 

2  '  Je  ne  connais  point  ces  masses  vaines,  inutiles  et  dans  Tinaction 
dont  on  parle.     11  y  a  de  faction  partout,  et  je  T6tablis  plus  que 
la  philosophic  re$ue :  parceque  je  crois  qu'il  n'y  a  point  de  corps  sans 
mouvement,   ni   de    substance   sans   effort/      Eclaircissement    du 
Nouveau  Syst&me,  Erdmann,  132. 

3  Lettre  &  M,  Bayle,  Erdmann,  p.  193. 
VOL.   I.  X 


306  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

I  will  here  only  observe  that  in  modern  science 
the  Leibnizian  standard  °2-  has  been  accepted  as  the 
base  of  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  force  in 
the  formula,  '  The  sum  of  the  vis  viva  and  static 
force  in  the  world  remains  the  same  always/  Leibniz 
has  expressed  this  principle  more  or  less  clearly  in 
many  passages  of  his  works  : — 

'  The  idea  of  Force  is  very  different  from  that  of 
motion,  the  latter  of  which  is  more  relative.  One 
must  measure  the  force  by  the  quantity  of  its  effects 
[in  modern  English,  work].  There  is  an  absolute,  a 
directing,  and  a  respective  force.  All  maintain  them- 
selves in  the  universe,  or  in  any  machine  which  does 
not  communicate  with  others ;  the  two  latter  together 
compose  the  first,  absolute  force.  But  the  same 
quantity  of  motion  is  not  maintained,  otherwise  the 
perpetuum  mobile  would  be  found,  and  the  effect 
would  be  greater  than  its  cause1/ 

*  Descartes  believed  that  the  same  quantity  of 
motion  was  preserved  in  bodies.  It  has  been  shown 
that  he  was  in  error  in  this;  but  I  have  proved  that 
it  is  true  that  the  same  amount  of  moving  force 
is  preserved,  which  is  what  he  confounded  with  the 
quantity  of  motion  V 

A  passage  in  the  correspondence  between  Leibniz 
and  Clarke  is  very  interesting  for  its  bearing  on  this 
subject,  as  we  gather  from  it,  (i)  the  difficulty  which 
this  idea  of  the  conservation  of  force  met  with  at  its 
birth,  since  even  so  clear-headed  a  man  as  Clarke 
could  not  disabuse  himself  of  the  common  prejudice 
as  to  the  genesis  of  force ;  (2)  how  Leibniz,  first  of  all 
mortals,  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  great  truth  which 

1  Lettre  i  M.  Arnauld,  Erdmarm,  p.  108. 

2  Eclaircissement  du  Nouveau  Syst&me,  p.  132,  Erdmann. 


LEIBNIZ.  307 

ranks  among  the  chief  discoveries  of  Robert  Mayer, 
viz.  the  conversion  of  molecular  into  collective  motion, 
and  conversely. 

Clarke  writes1 :  '  I  have  shown  that  the  active  force 
in  the  world  naturally  suffers  constant  diminution. 
It  is  obvious  that  this  is  not  a  mistake,  it  is  a 
consequence  of  the  inertness  of  matter.  For  this 
inertness  not  only  causes  the  diminution  of  velocity 
in  proportion  as  the  quantity  of  matter  increases 
(which  indeed  is  no  diminution  of  the  quantity  of 
motion),  but  it  also  causes  solid  bodies  which  are 
quite  hard  and  xm-elastic  to  lose  all  their  motion  and 
active  force,  if  they  encounter  an  equal  and  opposing 
force;  another  cause  is  therefore  needed  to  impart 
new  motion  to  them '  (i.  e.  reparation  by  means  of 
the  great  Artificer). 

Leibniz  replies :  c  I  had  maintained  that  the  vis 
viva  in  this  universe  continues  the  same.  It  is 
objected  that  two  inelastic  bodies  if  they  come  into 
collision  will  lose  some  or  all  of  their  force.  I  say, 
No.  It  is  true  that  the  wholes  lose  it  in  relation  to 
their  collective  movements,  but  the  parts  receive  this 
as  they  are  moved  internally  by  the  shock.  The 
forces  are  not  destroyed,  but  distributed  amongst 
the  particles.  The  effect  is  the  same  as  when  one 
changes  large  coins  into  small2/ 

The  application  of  these  ideas  to  heat  is  found 
in  the  Nouveaux  Essais3:  'With  regard  to  the  opera- 
tion of  most  natural  substances,  analogy  is  the  great 
rule  of  probability.  What  cannot  be  verified  can 
only  appear  probable  in  so  far  as  it  agrees  more 
or  less  with  established  truths.  Since  the  violent 
friction  of  two  bodies  produces  heat  and  even  fire, 

J  Erdmann,  p.  785.  2  Ib.  p.  775. 

8  iv.  16.  §  12. 
X  2 


308  MODEEN  PHILOSOPHY. 

since  refractions  of  transparent  bodies  cause  colours 
to  appear,  we  judge  that  fire  consists  in  a  violent 
agitation  of  imperceptible  particles  V  &c. 

I  have  shown  above  that  Descartes  was  penetrated 
with  the  sense  of  the  unchangeableness  and  invari- 
ability of  the  mechanical  principle  in  the  world  of 
matter ;  he  expresses  the  great  truth  that  the  soul 
is  not  in  a  position  to  produce  or  to  destroy  the  least 
atom  of  motion.  He  sought  some  way  of  giving 
a  foundation  to  the  universal  and  positive  certainty 
that  by  means  of  and  in  consequence  of  our  feeling, 
thought,  and  will,  we  can  move  our  limbs  in  ac- 
cordance with  our  conscious  purpose  :  and  he  found 
the  right  way,  which  makes  freedom  possible  within 
the  bounds  of  an  invariable  mechanism ;  for  he  saw 
that  given  forces,  combined  by  superior  intelli- 
gence, would  be  able  to  make  other  forces  subject  to 
them,  by  giving  them  the  desired  and  serviceable 
direction.  This  is  the  true  solution  of  the  famous 
antinomy,  which  Kant  himself  maintained  to  be 

1  Intimations  of  this  idea,  which  was  destined  to  effect  a  revolu- 
tion in  the  whole  theory  of  nature,  are  to  be  met  with  in  antiquity 
also ;  the  whole  doctrine  of  Herakleitos  appears  to  us  to-day  as 
a  kind  of  anticipatory  divination  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat. 
Plato  is  clearly  reproducing  Herakleitean  ideas  in  the  following 
remarkable  passage  of  the  Thesetetos  (ix.  1 53)  : — 

1  Sok.  For  fire  and  warmth,  which  are  supposed  to  be  the  parent 
and  nurse  of  all  things,  are  born  of  friction,  which  is  a  kind  of 
motion ; — is  not  that  the  origin  of  fire  ? 

'Thecet.  Yes. 

c  Sok.  And  the  race  of  animals  is  generated  the  same  way  1 

i  Thecet.  Certainly/ 

It  is  also  especially  interesting  that  Sokrates- Plato  interprets 
the  Homeric  golden  chain  by  which  all  the  gods  failed  to  move 
Zeus,  as  the  sun  by  whose  motion  in  the  heavenly  space  all  life  on 
earth  and  heaven  was  preserved,  while  its  arrest  would  bring  the 
destruction  of  all  things. 


LEIBNIZ.  309 

soluble,  viz.  how  liberty  can  subsist  in  the  midst 
of  universal  natural  necessity.  It  is  true  this  so- 
lution did  not  agree  with  Descartes'  assumption 
of  two  substances,  having  nothing  in  common  with 
each  other.  And  it  agreed  equally  little  with  the 
Monism  of  Spinoza,  with  the  una  substantia,  for  it 
is  only  possible  with  individual  beings  which  act 
upon  each  other,  i.e.  with  relative  forces  ;  it  is  in- 
applicable to  the  All.  Spinoza  accordingly,  consist- 
ently with  his  own  assumptions,  assumes  everywhere 
the  strictest  necessity,  while  Descartes  gave  expres- 
sion to  the  truth  which  forced  itself  upon  his  con- 
sciousness, though  in  doing  so  he  became  unfaithful 
to  his  own  principles;  he  had  recourse  to  the  spiritus 
animales,  an  infinitely  subtle  material  which  (not 
indeed  without  divine  assistance)  is  moved  direct 
from  the  soul,  i.  e.  is  directed  by  its  own  proper 
motion,  and  causes  the  motion  of  our  members  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  will,  i.  e.  gives  them  their  direction. 
This  inconsistency  did  not  escape  Leibniz's  pene- 
tration, and  it  was  easy  to  him  to  vanquish  Descartes 
with  his  own  weapons.  He  says  in  a  letter  to  Ber- 
nouilli  (i696)3:  'Not  only  the  same  absolute  force, 
but  also  the  same  directing  force  (vis  directiva) 
or  quantity  of  direction  (quantitas  directionis  ad 
easdem  partes,  or  quantitas  progressus)  is  preserved 
in  the  universe;  and  this  is  not  measured  as  the 
square,  but  as  the  simple  product  of  the  mass  and  the 
velocity.  JFor  when  two  bodies  moving  from  opposite 
directions  meet  together,  the  Cartesian  law  only  says 
of  the  quantity  of  motion  that  the  two  motive  forces 
must  be  added  together,  whereas  it  is  only  from  the 
difference  between  the  two  that  the  quantity  of 
progress  or  direction  can  be  ascertained/ 
1  Erdmann,  p.  108. 


310  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

In  another  passage  he  says l :  '  Descartes  was  per- 
plexed about  the  bodily  changes  which  follow  upon 
modifications  of  the  soul,  because  these  do  not  obey 
his  law.  He  hit  accordingly  upon  a  very  ingenious 
invention,  and  said,  one  must  distinguish  between 
the  motion  and  the  direction.  The  soul  is  unable 
to  alter  the  motive  force  in  any  way,  but  it  can 
change  the  determination  or  direction  of  the  vital 
spirits,  and  it  is  thus  that  our  arbitrary  movements 
are  produced.  It  is  true  he  was  careful  not  to  explain 
how  the  soul  could  change  the  course  of  the  body, 
since  this  is  quite  as  incomprehensible  as  its  im- 
parting motion  to  the  body,  since  he  does  not,  like 
me,  refer  to  the  pre-established  harmony  as  an  ex- 
planation. But  there  is  another  important  natural 
law,  which  I  have  discovered  and  of  which  Descartes 
was  not  aware,  namely,  that  not  only  is  the  same 
quantity  of  vis  viva  always  preserved,  but  also  the 
same  quantity  of  direction,  in  whatever  direction  we 
may  turn.  That  is  to  say,  if  one  draws  a  straight 
line  and  assumes  such  and  so  many  bodies  moving 
in  that  direction,  we  shall  find  that  the  quantity  of 
progress  on  all  the  lines  parallel  to  this  straight  line 
will  always  remain  the  same  ;  so  that  one  can  calcu- 
late the  quantum  of  progress  by  deducting  the  force 
of  the  bodies  tending  in  the  opposite  direction  from 
that  of  the  bodies  moving  in  the  direction  of  the 
line  2.  This  law,  which  is  as  beautiful  and  universal 

1  ^claircissement  du  Nouveau  Systbme,  p.  132,  Erdmann. 

2  This  permanence  of  the  direction  in  the  universe  follows  from 
the  principle  'Actio  par  est  reaction!/  which  holds  good  for  the 
Cartesian  measure  of  force  (mv)  of  each  movement  beginning  in 
the  universe.    Newton  expresses  the  principle  as  follows :  '  Action! 
contrariam  semper   et  sequalem  esse  reactionem  sive  corporum 
duorum  actiones  in  se  mutuo  semper  sequales  esse  et  in  partes 
contrarias  dirigi/     (Princ.  Phil.  Nat.  Math.  Axiomata,  lex  iii,) 


LEIBNIZ.  311 

as  the  other,  is  equally  incapable  of  being  violated,  and 
this  is  the  case  in  my  system  only,  which  establishes 
the  conservation  of  force  and  of  direction.' 

If  one  contemplates  the  vast  multiplicity  of  motions, 
the  play  of  vital  forces  on  our  own  small  planet,  if  one 
sees  on  the  one  hand  how  winds  and  waves  seem  in 
their  motions  subject  to  no  law  but  chance,  while, 
on  the  other,  in  the  animal  world,  movements  seem  to 
originate  by  unrestrained  arbitrary  choice,  and  both 
determine  themselves  in  every  possible  direction, — 
we  shall  cease  to  wonder  at  the  error  of  which 
Epikuros  furnishes  the  most  striking  example  in 
antiquity,  the  error  of  supposing  that  the  direction 
of  motion  is  determined  without  cause,  by  mere 
arbitrary  will,  and  so  escapes  the  sequence  of  strict 
mechanical  causation.  If  this  were  conceivable,  men 
might  fly  without  wings,  or  birds  without  a  resisting 
medium,  i.  e.  without  air.  According  to  Epikuros, 
the  atoms  fall  with  equal  velocity  in  parallel  direc- 
tions, in  absolutely  vacant  space.  In  this  he  has 
the  advantage  of  Demokritos,  whose  atoms  have 
different  velocities  because  of  their  different  weights. 
Whence  then  is  the  multiplicity,  the  vortex  of  com- 
binations and  separations  ?  Epikuros  helps  himself 
out  of  the  difficulty — as  modern  Darwinism  with  the 
cell  hypothesis — with  an  apparently  small  and  insig- 
nificant petiiio  principii.  '  Once,  at  some  undeter- 
mined time,  certain  atoms  found  themselves  induced 
to  take  a  trifling  lateral  motion 1 !'  Lucretius  indeed, 
like  Descartes,  refers  to  the  arbitrary  movements  of 
men  and  other  animals.  But  Leibniz's  keen  gaze 
discerned  all  this  to  be  so  much  contraband  in  the 
strictly  knit  system  of  physical  causation. 

*  Every  thing  in  the  human  body/  he  writes,  'down 
1  Lucretius,  de  Her.  Nat.  ii.  251,  293. 


312  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

to  the  least  detail  of  its  phenomena,  happens  just  as 
if  the  false  doctrine  of  Epikuros  and  Hobbes,  which  as- 
sumes the  soul  to  be  a  material  being,  were  true ;  that 
is,  as  if  man  were  only  a  body,  an  automaton.  The  view 
of  Descartes  concerning  animals  (that  they  are  only 
machines)  has  been  transferred  to  men  and  attempts 
made  to  show  that  the  latter,  with  all  their  reason, 
are  only  the  passive  playthings  of  images  and  mo- 
tions. Arid  the  endeavour  to  refute  this  error  only 
served  to  prepare  a  triumph  for  it,  for  upon  this  side 
it  is  unanswerable.  The  Cartesians  were  almost  as 
unlucky  as  Epikuros  with  the  declension  of  atoms, 
of  which  Cicero  makes  such  fun,  when  they  tried  to 
make  out  that  though  the  soul  was  unable  to  impart 
motion  to  the  body,  it  was  able  to  give  it  direction. 
In  fact  it  can  do  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  and 
the  materialists  need  not  return  to  the  subject,  for 
there  is  nothing  external  to  man  capable  of  refuting 
their  doctrine  V 

According  to  Leibniz  there  was  but  one  issue  from 
these  difficulties  and  unavoidable  contradictions  be- 
tween the  direct  consciousness  and  the  a  priori  cer- 
tainty of  mathematical  and  physical  axioms ;  and  this 
was  the  assumption  of  his  pre-established  harmony, 
which  on  that  very  ground  seemed  to  acquire  more 
irrefragable  certainty  in  his  eyes.  He  believed  him- 
self to  have  been  the  first  to  solve  the  eternal  op- 
position between  matter  and  mind.  He  failed  to  see 
that  he  himself  too  had  given  his  system  a  dogmatic 
base  in  his  divine  Creator,  that  he  had  made  the 
elephant  stand  upon  the  tortoise,  while  he  had  no 
answer  to  the  objection  already  referred  to,  addressed 
to  him  by  Clarke  in  his  last  letter  (1716,  imme- 
diately before  Leibniz's  death) :  *  On  dit  qu'il  n'est  pas 
1  E^plique  aux  Beflexions  de  Bayle,  Erdmann,  p.  185. 


LEIBNIZ.  313 

possible  de  concevoir  comment  une  substance  imma- 
t&ielle  agit  sur  la  matikre.  Mais  Dieu  n'est-il  pas 
une  substance  immatdrielle  et  n'agit-il  pas  sur  la 
mat&re l  ? ' 

III.     Metaphysics. 

In  answer  to  his  Lockian  opponent,  who  pro- 
nounces metaphysics  to  be  mere  empty  chaffering 
with  words,  which  experimental  knowledge  is  destined 
to  supersede,  Leibniz  declares  *  that  we  are  now  only 
at  the  beginning  of  the  foundation  of  true  meta- 
physics ;  and  we  find  already  many  truths  founded 
in  reason  and  confirmed  by  experience  which  refer 
to  substances  in  general.  I  hope  myself  to  have 
contributed  something  to  the  general  knowledge  of 
the  soul  and  of  spirits.  Such  a  metaphysic  was 
demanded  too  by  Aristotle ;  it  is  the  science  which 
he  calls  ^j/Toi/juei/i?,  the  Sought,  which  must  stand  to 
the  theoretical  sciences  in  the  same  relation  as  the 
science  of  happiness  does  to  those  arts  of  which  it 
makes  use,  and  as  the  architect  to  the  masons.  There- 
fore it  is,  said  Aristotle,  that  the  other  sciences  must 
depend  on  metaphysics  as  the  most  general,  and  ought 
to  borrow  from  her  the  principles  which  she  has  de- 
monstrated2/ 

Leibniz  was  thus  clearly  aware  of  the  nature  and 
function  of  metaphysics  ;  if  he  failed  to  penetrate  to 
its  source,  it  was  because  he  looked  for  this  upon  the 
opposite  side,  starting,  not  like  Kant,  from  the  sub- 
ject, but,  like  Aristotle  and  the  Schoolmen,  from 
Being,  or  Substance.  '  Metaphysica  agit  turn  de  entey 
turn  de  entis  affectionibus ;  ut  autem  corporis  natur- 
alis  affectiones  non  sunt  corpora,  ita  entis  affectiones 

1  Erilmann,  p.  787. 

2  Nouveaux  Essais,  Erdmann,  p.  372. 


314  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

non  sunt  entiaV  The  close  bearing  of  the  mathe- 
matical sciences  on  metaphysics,  due  to  the  former 
being  occupied  with  the  most  general  relations  was 
clearly  established  by  him.  Scholasticism  had  main- 
tained that  number  was  only  an  interruption  of 
continuity,  and  therefore  did  not  apply  to  immaterial 
substances.  This  Leibniz  denied,  for  number  is  also, 
as  it  were,  an  immaterial  figure,  formed  by  the  com- 
bination of  the  most  various  beings.  God,  angels, 
man,  motion  are  four  things.  As  number  is  there- 
fore something  universal,  it  certainly  belongs  to 
metaphysics.  We  may  thus  call  metaphysics  the 
doctrine  of  all  that  is  common  to  all  kinds  of 
Beings. 

This  was  approximately  the  standpoint  of  Scho- 
lasticism. Leibniz,  like  Descartes  and  Spinoza,  was 
of  the  opinion  that  all  knowledge  should  be  proved 
mathematically,  and  so  reduced  to  mathematical  cer- 
tainty. He  blames  those  who  measure  heaven  and 
earth  by  this  method  and  do  not  apply  it  to  the 
more  important  knowledge  of  God,  the  Soul  and  the 
Good.  '  Sunt  qui  mathernaticum  vigorem  extra  ipsas 
scientias  quas  vulgo  mathematicas  appellamus,  locum 
habere  non  putant.  Sed  illi  ignorant,  idem  esse 
mathematice  scribere  quod  in  forma,  ut  logici  vo- 
cant,  ratiocinari 2/  Yet  Leibniz  seems  to  have  under- 
stood by  this  a  higher  kind  of  mathematics,  to  which 
arithmetic  and  geometry  stand  in  the  relation  of 
parts  to  a  whole,  a  method  of  calculation  which  was 
to  deal  with  the  analysis  of  ideas  and  from  which  he 
hoped  great  things :  '  J'ai  insinud  ailleurs  qu'il  y  a 
un  calcul  plus  important  que  ceux  de  rarithmdtique 
et  de  la  g^ometrie  et  qui  depend  de  Tanalyse  des 

1  De  Arte  Combinatoria,  Erdmann,  p.  8. 

2  De  Vera  Methodo  Philosophic  et  Theologies,  Erdmann,  p.  no. 


LEIBNIZ.  315 

iddes.  Ce  serait  une  caract^ristique  universelle  dont 
la  formation  me  parait  une  des  plus  importantes  choses 
qu'on  pourrait  entreprendrc  1.J 

In  regard  to  metaphysical  conceptions,  in  the  cEpi- 
stola  ad  Thomasium'(i669)  Leibniz  still  reckoned  four 
kinds  of  Entities,  namely,  Mens,  Spatium,  Materia, 
and  Motus.  Space  is  with  him  mathematical  exist- 
ence or  mere  extension,  while  matter  has  the  further 
qualities  of  resistance,  occupation  of  space,  and  im- 
penetrability 2. 

But  in  his  later  writings  he  had  reached  a  much 
greater  depth  of  metaphysical  insight,  Thus  he 
says  in  the  *  Edplique  aux  Eeflexions  de  M.  Bayle 3 ' 

1  K£pliqne  aux  "Reflexions  do  Bayle,  p.  191,  Erdmann.    Leibniz's 
idea  was  to  introduce  a  new  art,  which  was  to  reduce  everything  to 
exact  mathematical  terms  and  characters — ad  expressionem  cogita- 
tionum  per  characteres  (De  Scicntia  Universal!  seu  Calculo  philo- 
sophico,  p.  83,  Erdmann) — as  the  only  method  for  putting  an  end 
to  the  controversies  of  the  schools  and  the  barren  outcry  of  the  sects. 
All  paralogisms  would  then  be  shown  to  be  mere  errors  of  calcula- 
tion, and  the  disputes  of  philosophers  would  be  ended  by  their  sitting 
down  to  a  table  and  saying  :  Calculemus.     It  is  true  this  art,  like 
geometry,  is  only  available  in  so  far  as  it  starts  from  data,  but  these 
will  be  provided  for  it  by  all  the  sciences,  medicine,  jurisprudence, 
politics,  &c.     He  promises  that,  with  the  help   of  this  novum 
organum,  the  range  of  human  knowledge  will  be  as  far  increased 
as  the  range  of  vision  has  been  by  the  telescope  and  microscope. 
This  'scientia  universalis'  was  thus  to  accomplish  for  knowledge  in 
general  what  geometry  and  mechanics  do  for  physics.     This  great 
plan  of  a  Characteristica  universalis,  which  was  associated  with  the 
idea  of  a  universal  language,  was  a  favourite  dream  of  Leibniz,  but 
it  remained  only  a  project.    At  the  present  day,  when  we  know  the 
dependence  of  thought  on  language  and  the  impossibility  of  re- 
ducing human  thoughts  by  mere  analysis  to  mathematical  precision, 
we  can  see  the  impossibility  of  its  execution.     The  attempt  made 
by  Bishop  Wilkins  (1668)  to  found  a  universal  language  failed,  as 
all  others  of  a  similar  nature  since  made  have  done  also. 

2  p.  53,  Erdmann.  8  Ib.  p.  189. 


3l6  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

(1702) :  'I  admit  that  time,  space,  motion  and  con- 
tinuity in  general,  as  assumed  by  mathematicians,  are 
only  ideal  entities,  that  is  to  say,  they  express  possi- 
bilities, as  numbers  do.  Hobbes  has  even  defined 
space  as  a  phantasma  existentis.  But,  to  speak 
more  precisely,  extension  is  the  order  of  possible  co- 
existences, as  time  is  the  order  of  possible  changes, 
which,  however,  are  so  definitely  connected,  that 
these  orders  refer  not  only  to  real  but  also  to  pos- 
sible things,  such  as  may  take  their  place,  just  as 
number  stands  in  a  relation  of  absolute  indifference 
to  the  res  numerata.  And  although  we  never  meet 
in  nature  with  such  absolutely  identical  changes  as 
mathematics  assume  in  dealing  with  motion,  or  with 
absolutely  regular  figures,  such  as  geometry  supposes ; 
yet  there  will  be  found  nothing  in  nature  in  the  least 
contrary  to  the  law  of  continuity  or  any  other  exact 
rule  of  mathematics  ;  indeed  it  is  only  by  these  rules 
that  all  things  can  become  generally  intelligible.  .  .  . 
Although  mathematical  considerations  are  only  ideal, 
their  application  is  to  things  actual,  which  are  per- 
manently subject  to  these  rules/ 

In  the  Nouveaux  Essais1  he  gives  the  same  de- 
finition of  space :  '  It  is  a  relation,  an  order,  not  only 
of  existing  things,  but  of  those  which  possibly  might 
exist.  But  its  truth  and  reality  are  founded  on  God, 
like  all  eternal  truths/  Similarly  he  says  of  time 2, 
in  reference  to  Locke's  observation  that  the  succession 
of  ideas  gives  us  the  conception  of  time :  *  A 'succes- 
sion of  perceptions  rouses  in  us  the  idea  of  duration, 
but  does  not  create  it.  Our  perceptions  never  have 
a  sufficiently  constant  and  regular  succession  to 
correspond  to  that  of  time,  which  is  a  uniform  and 

1  ii.  13.  §  17.  p.  240,  Erdmann. 

2  Ib.  ii.  14.  §  16.  p.  241,  Erdmann. 


LEIBNIZ.  317 

simple  continuum,  like  a  straight  line.  The  change 
in  our  perception  gives  occasion  to  think  of  time,  and 
we  measure  it  by  uniform  changes ;  but  if  there  were 
nothing  uniform  in  nature,  time  would  not  therefore 
cease  to  be  determined,  just  as  space  would  still  be 
determined  though  there  were  no  fixed  or  motionless 
bodies.  It  is  because  we  know  the  rules  of  multiform 
motions  that  we  can  refer  these  to  uniform,  intelli- 
gible movements,  and  so  predict  what  will  follow 
by  taking  these  different  movements  together  V  A 
characteristic  instance  of  the  superior  insight  of  Leib- 
niz as  compared  with  the  standpoint  of  Lockian 
empiricism  is  furnished  by  the  objection  of  Phila- 
lethes  (Locke):  'It  is  very  strange  that,  as  men 
visibly  measure  time  by  the  motion  of  the  celestial 
bodies,  they  should  nevertheless  define  time  as  the 
measure  of  motion 2'  and  its  refutation. 

We  see  clearly  that  Leibniz  had  entered  upon  the 

1  Newton's  definitions  approach  very  closely  to  those  of  Leibniz, 
and  point  also  towards  the  coming  light  of  Kantian  truth.     *  Tern- 
pus  absolutum,  verum  et  mathematicum  in  se  et  natura  sua  absque 
relatione  ad   externum  quodvis  sequabiliter  fluit  alioque  nomine 
dicitur  Duratio.     Relativum,  apparens  et  vulgare  cst  sensibilis  et 
externa  qusevis  Durationis  per  motum  mensura  (scu  accurata  seu 
inaequabilis)  qua  vulgus  vice  veri  temporis  utitur,  ut  Hora,  Dies, 
Mensis,  Annus  .  .  .  Accelerari  et  retardari  possunt  motus  omnes, 
sed  fluxus  temporis  absoluti  mutari  nequit.'     Philos.  Nat.  Princ. 
Math.  Defin.  viii.  Schol.     He  says  similarly  of  space :  '  Absolute 
space,  in  itself  and  without  regard  to  anything  external,  remains 
eternally  the  same  and  immoveable.  Relative  space  is  any  moveable 
dimension  or  measure  of  absolute  space  determined  by  our  senses 
by  the  position  of  bodies/     Nothing  need  be  said  of  the  attack 
subsequently  made  upon  Newton  by  Leibniz  because  the  former 
maintained  Space  to  be  the  sensorium  of  the  Deity,  for  Newton 
either  used  the  word  metaphorically  to  signify  the  Omnipresence  of 
G-od  or  attached  no  very  definite  idea  to  it. 

2  Nouveaux  Essais,  ii.  14.  §  22,  p.  242,  Erdmann. 


318  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

true  metaphysical  path  at  the  end  of  which  the  great 
discovery  of  the  ideality  of  space  and  time  was  to  be 
reached.  A  letter  to  des  Bosses  (1709)  shows  still 
more  clearly  the  severance  of  the  ideal  space  from 
reality.  '  Space,  like  time,  is  a  certain  order  (i.  e.  the 
order  of  coexistence)  which  embraces  not  only  the 
real  but  also  the  possible.  It  is  therefore  indeter- 
minate, like  every  continuum.,  the  parts  of  which  are 
thought  arbitrarily,  not  in  reality,  like  the  parts  of 
unity  or  fractions.  If  there  were  other  subdivisions 
of  real  things  in  the  world,  there  would  be  other 
monads,  other  masses,  but  space  would  remain  the 
same.  For  space  is  a  continuum,  but  an  ideal  one. 
The  mass  is  something  divided,  an  actual  number, 
an  aggregate  of  infinite  units.  But  in  real  things 
tbe  units  exist  before  the  grouping,  in  ideal  ones  on 
the  contrary  the  whole  is  before  the  parts.  The 
neglect  of  this  consideration  has  always  led  into  an 
endless  labyrinth  V 

*  The  parts  of  time  and  space/  said  Leibniz  in  his 
correspondence  with  Clarke2,  'taken  in  themselves 
are  ideal  things,  they  are  therefore  perfectly  similar,  . 
like  two  abstract  units.    But  this  is  not  the  case  with 
two  concrete  units,  two  real  periods  of  time,  two  real 
portions  of  occupied  space, — these  are  actual/ 

*  I  have  shown  that  space  is  nothing  but  the  order 
of  the  existence  of  things,  which  are  considered  a£' 
existing  together.     Thus  the  fiction  of  a  finite,  mate- 
rial universe,  moving  through  infinite  space  cannot 
be  admitted.     It  is   unreasonable   and  useless,  for 
apart  from  the  fact  that  there  is  no  real  space  outside 
the  universe,  such  an  activity  would  be  entirely  pur- 
poseless, it  would  work  without  having  anything  to 
do,  agendo  nihil  agere.     These  are  the  fancies  of 

1  p.  461,  Erdmann.  2  p.  766,  Erdraann. 


LEIBNIZ.  319 

philosophers  with  imperfect  conceptions,  who  make 
space  an  absolute  reality/ 

Leibniz  had  thus  clearly  grasped  the  ideality  of 
space  and  time ;  but  instead  of  remaining  faithful  to 
this  principle  and  relegating  the  ideal  to  its  true 
dwelling-place,  in  the  feeling  and  thinking  subject, 
he  transferred  these  two  forms  or  categories  to  the 
world  or  substance  unconditionally  presupposed  by 
himself,  and  explained  space  as  the  order  of  coexist- 
ing things  and  time  as  the  order  of  changes  in  things. 
But  here  the  question  had  first  to  be  asked,  how  such 
an  idea  as  order  in  general  came  into  existence, 
whether  it  is  an  original  possession  of  human  thought 
— for  it  is  certainly  only  an  abstract  or  intellectual 
idea — or  whether  the  forms  of  space  and  time  are 
not  rather  much  the  earlier  and  more  primitive  and 
serving  rather  to  make  the  other  conception  possible. 
The  same  kind  of  vicious  circle,  or  rather  petitio  prin- 
cipii,  meets  us  here  as  in  the  pseudo-definitions  of 
post-Kantian  philosophers,  who  explain  space  as  the 
measure  of  contiguous  and  time  as  the  measure  of  suc- 
cessive things, — and  then  imagine  themselves  to  have 
told  us  something, — as  if  measure,  contiguity,  and  suc- 
cession were  possible  without  the  primary  forms  of 
space  and  time. 

Order  can  only  exist  for  a  mind.  The  principle  of 
the  order  of  things  can  therefore  be  sought  or  found 
in  the  thinking  mind  alone.  If  Leibniz  had  fami- 
liarised himself  with  this  thought,  instead  of  assuming 
an  order  of  things  imposed  from  without,  he  would 
have  remained  within  the  true  field  of  inquiry  and 
woi^ld  perhaps  have  forestalled  Kant.  He  would  then 
have  enquired  what  primary  possession  unites  the  mind 
through  the  senses  with  a  real  or  outer  world,  and 
thence  first  deduced  the  order  of  things  in  the  mind. 


320  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

Clarke  was  right  in  objecting  that  there  was  nothing 
about  quantity  in  the  idea  of  order.  In  his  last 
letter  he  observes l :  '  The  author  says  now  that 
space  is  not  an  order  or  place,  but  an  order  of  places, 
[so  that  space  again  is  taken  for  granted].  That  does 
not  prevent  the  same  objection  from  holding  good, 
that  the  order  of  places  is  no  quantity.  And  when  he 
says,  time  is  only  the  order  of  successive  things,  and 
at  the  same  time  maintains  that  it  is  the  quantity 
of  duration  existing  between  the  single  successive 
things,  this  is  obviously  contradictory/ 

For  the  rest,  in  his  later  works  Leibniz  clearly 
shows  his  insight  into  the  nature  of  metaphysics  and 
the  distinction  beween  them  and  mathematics  and 
their  respective  methods.  Thus  he  says 2 :  'To  ap- 
ply the  geometric  method  to  metaphysical  objects  is 
praiseworthy,  but  the  attempt  has  met  with  little 
success.  Descartes,  in  spite  of  his  powerful  in- 
tellect, has  never  accomplished  less  than  when  he 
made  use  of  it  in  his  answers  to  objectors.  For 
one  gets  off  more  easily  in  mathematics,  because 
numbers,  figures,  and  calculations  are  a  protec- 
tion against  the  errors  lurking  in  words ;  but  in 
metaphysics,  where  this  aid  is  wanting,  the  strict- 
ness of  the  reasoning  and  the  exact  definition  of 
ideas  should  supply  the  want ;  but  here  is  to  be 
found  neither  of  these  requisites/  '  According  to  the 
usual  expression,  mathematical  principles  are  those 
which  we  meet  with  in  pure  mathematics,  such  as 
numbers,  arithmetic,  geometry.  But  metaphysical 
principles  refer  to  general  ideas,  such  as  cause  and 
effect.  Especially  that  great  principle  belongs  here, 

1  Erdmann,  p.  785. 

2  Remarques  sur  la  Sixikme  Lettre  Philosophique,  p.  684,  Erd- 
mann. 


LEIBNIZ.  321 

that  nothing  happens  without  a  sufficient  reason  for 
its  happening  thus  and  not  otherwise1/ 

Hume  will  attach  his  metaphysical  investigations  to 
this  highest  possession  of  human  thought  or  reason, 
and  from  this  point  of  departure  establish  his  own 
Skepsis,  thus  connecting  Leibniz  and  Kant. 


If  now  we  review  the  achievements  of  the  Leib- 
nizian  philosophy  and  its  place  in  the  development 
of  philosophic  thought,  we  shall  find  in  it  a  peculiar 
agreement  with  the  philosophy  of  Locke,  and  at 
the  same  time  a  direct  opposition  to  the  same.  The 
agreement  lies  in  the  insistence  upon  the  individual. 
Locke  started  from  the  individual  thinking  being, 
and  asked,  How  does  this  being  attain  knowledge  ? 
His  theme  is  cAn  enquiry  into  the  nature  of  under- 
standing/ Nature  means,  like  its  Greek  equivalents, 
Physis  or  Genesis,  the  becoming,  and  the  becoming  of 
knowledge  was  to  enlighten  Locke  as  to  its  being. 
His  answer  ran :  All  knowledge  is  derived  from  sen- 
sation. Now  sensation  always  presents  things  mani- 
fold, which  the  human  understanding  has  to  arrange 
in  classes.  It  does  so  by  means  of  general  ideas,  which 
constitute  the  great  distinction  of  human,  as  compared 
with  all  other  knowledge.  But  instead  of  examining 
more  closely  into  this  contrast  of  conceptions  and  per- 
ceptions, Locke  contented  himself  with  having  pointed 
it  out :  dazzled  by  the  discovery  that  all  the  mate- 
rial of  knowledge  is  derived  from  without  by  means 
of  sensibility,  he  conceived  all  knowledge  to  be  as 
it  were  a  mechanical  product,  and,  like  his  great  pre- 
decessor in  Empiricism,  Bacon,  he  turned  the  reflec- 
tive faculty  into  an  automatic  mirror,  which,  without 
1  R6ponse  &  Mr.  Clarke,  p.  751,  Erdmann. 

VOL  I.  Y 


322  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

further  inner  principles,  just  Herat  et  resonat  at  the 
stimulus  of  reality.  Metaphysical  principles  lie  out- 
side the  scope  of  human  knowledge.  We  learn  by 
experience  to  know  time,  space,  and  infinity.  If  any 
one  asks  What  is  space  \  the  true  answer  is :  I  do 
not  know. 

Leibniz  too  starts  from  the  individual  being. 
While  Locke  raises  sensation  or  the  passive  re- 
ceptive element  into  a  universal  principle  from 
which  all  subsequent  knowledge  is  to  be  derived, 
Leibniz  on  the  contrary  places  the  active  element 
in  the  foreground  everywhere.  Like  Descartes,  he  is 
penetrated  with  the  great  truth  that  thought,  con- 
sciousness, will  are  We  ourselves ;  all  the  rest  is 
only  indirect  knowledge.  Instead  of  the  one  sub- 
stantia  cogitans  of  Descartes,  he  accordingly  as- 
sumed an  infinity  of  small  substances,  to  which  this 
property  of  thought  essentially  belonged.  The  in- 
ternal or  representative  faculty  thus  constitutes  the 
proper  nature  of  all  substances.  Kant  points  out 
that  Leibniz  attributed  everything  exclusively  to  the 
conceptions  of  the  understanding  and  Locke  to  sen- 
sation, whereas  these  are  the  two  sources  of  knowledge 
which  have  to  unite,  before  we  can  know  anything 
at  all.  He  shows  that  the  fundamental  error  of  the 
Leibnizian  doctrine  was  (i)  his  treating  the  concep- 
tions of  the  understanding  as  the  true  matter  of 
thought,  and  sensible  intuitions  as  a  similar,  only  less 
perfect  and  confused,  kind  of  knowledge,  and  (2)  his 
regarding  phenomena  as  things  in  themselves,  which 
could  be  comprehended  by  means  of  these  conceptions. 
The  important  remarks  on  this  subject  in  Kant's 
Critik  der  reinen  Vernunfi l  are  as  follows : 

1  On  the  Amphiboly  of  reflective  concepts.  Transl.  vol.  ii.  p.  2  3 1 . 


LEIBNIZ.  323 

'We  only  know  'substances  in  space  through  the 
forces  which  are  active  in  space,  by  either  drawing 
others  near  to  it  (attraction)  or  by  preventing  others 
from  penetrating  into  it  (repulsion  and  impenetra- 
bility). Other  properties  constituting  the  concept 
of  a  substance  appearing  in  space,  and  which  we 
call  matter,  are  unknown  to  us.  As  an  object  of  the 
pure  understanding,  on  the  contrary,  every  substance 
must  have  internal  determinations  and  forces  bearing 
on  the  internal  reality.  But  what  other  internal  acci- 
dents can  I  think,  except  those  which  my  own  internal 
sense  presents  to  me,  namely,  something  which  is 
either  itself  thought,  or  something  analogous  to  it  ? 
Hence  Leibniz  represented  all  substances,  as  he  con- 
ceived them  as  noumena,  even  the  component  parts 
of  matter  (after  having  in  thought  removed  from 
them  everything  implying  external  relation,  and  there- 
fore composition  also),  as  simple  subjects  endowed  with 
powers  of  representation,  in  one  word,  as  monads! 

'  Leibniz  therefore  first  assumed  things  (monads), 
and  within  them  an  internal  power  of  representation, 
in  order  afterwards  to  found  thereon  their  external 
relation,  and  the  community  of  their  states,  that  is, 
their  representations.  In  this  way  space  and  time 
were  possible  only,  the  former  through  the  relation 
of  substances,  the  latter  through  the  connection  of 
their  determinations  among  themselves,  as  causes 
and  effects.  And  so  it  would  be  indeed,  if  the  pure 
understanding  could  be  applied  immediately  to  ob- 
jects, and  if  space  and  time  were  determinations  of 
things  by  themselves.  But  if  they  are  sensuous 
intuitions  only,  in  which  we  determine  all  objects 
merely  as  phenomena,  then  it  follows  that  the  form 
of  intuition  (as  a  subjective  quality  of  sensibility) 
comes  before  all  matter  (sensations),  that  space 

Y  2 


324  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

and  time  therefore  come  before  all  phenomena,  and 
before  all  data  of  experience,  and  render  in  fact  all 
experience  possible.  As  an  intellectual  philosopher 
Leibniz  could  not  endure  that  this  form  should  come 
before  things  and  determine  their  possibility,  a  cri- 
ticism quite  just  when  he  assumed  that  we  see  things 
as  they  are  V 

'  He  compared  all  things  with  each  other  by  means 
of  concepts  only,  and  naturally  found  no  other  differ- 
ences but  those  by  which  the  understanding  distin- 
guishes its  pure  concepts  from  each  other.  ...  In 
one  word,  Leibniz  intellectualised  phenomena,  just  as 
Locke,  according  to  his  system  of  Noogony  (if  I  may 
use  such  an  expression),  sensualised  all  concepts  of  the 
understanding,  that  is,  represented  them  as  nothing 
but  empirical,  though  abstract,  reflective  concepts. 
Instead  of  regarding  the  understanding  and  sensibi- 
lity as  two  totally  distinct  sources  of  representations, 
which,  however  can  supply  objectively  valid  judg- 
ments of  things  only  in  conjunction  with  each  other, 
each  of  these  great  men  recognised  but  one  of  them, 
which  in  their  opinion  applied  immediately  to  things 
by  themselves,  while  the  other  did  nothing  but  to 
produce  either  disorder  or  order  in  the  representations 
of  the  former  V 

In  these  passages  the  relation  of  Kant  to  all 
preceding  philosophy,  as  well  as  to  these  special  pre- 
decessors, is  clearly  manifested  :  the  keynote  is  the 
elimination  of  the  idea  of  substance,  to  which  these 
like  all  the  rest  return,  after  attempted  flights,  as 
to  the  only  sure  and  certain  foothold.  This  contrast 
alone  shows  the  eagle  strength  of  wing  with  which 
Kant's  genius  was  to  bear  him  into  the  pure  heights 
of  idealism,  where  gravity  no  longer  chains  his  flight. 

1  LOG.  cit,  p,  232,  2  Loc.  cit.  p.  235. 


LEIBNIZ.  325 

To  sum  up  once  more  the  connection  between 
modern  philosophy  and  these  its  two  great  repre- 
sentatives :— 

I.  The  cogito  of  Descartes  determines  (i)  the  sub- 
jective (individual),  (2)  the  idealistic  starting-point. 
The  material  world  presents  itself  as  substantia  ex- 
tensa,  as .  one  uniform  system,  while  the  substantia 
cogitans  is  a  complete  enigma. 

II.  Materialism  and  idealism  build  on  the  founda- 
tion of  one  or  other  substance.    Subjectivity  and  indi- 
viduality threaten  to  disappear  (the  spiritual  through 
the  atoms,  the  material  by  means  of  ideas) ;  they  will 
be  completely  absorbed 

III.  By  means   of  the   una   substantia,   Monism 
itself. 

IV.  After  the  idea  of  unity,  a  fruit  of  the  Car- 
tesian idealism,  has  been  sufficiently  invigorated  by 
the  revision  and  development  of  the  idea  of  sub- 
stance, the  rights  of  the  manifold  assert  themselves 
again,  and  individualism  revives  in  a  new  and  more 
perfect  form. 

LOCKE  LEIBNIZ 

Founds  it  upon  the  renewed  Starts  from  the  multiplicity 

cogito,  enquires  after  the  origin  of  substances  to  which  he  at- 

of  ideas,   and  finds   it   in  the  tributes  thought.     As  they  are 

multiplicity    of    sense  -  impres-  things  in  themselves  and  inde- 

sions.  The  understanding  is  only  structible,  it  is  the  task  of  reason 

orderly  sensation.  to  distinguish  them.  Sensation  is 

only  imperfect  understanding. 

The  reader  will  see  from  the  above  contrasts  how 
the  standpoints  are  changed  in  the  course  of  deve- 
lopment, how  irreconcilable  opposites  melt  into  one, 
and  how  after  the  first  introduction  of  idealism  by 
Descartes,  its  tone  and  character  were  borrowed  by 
the  most  realistic  of  systems.  For  there  can  be  no 


326  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

doubt  that  Locke,  the  realist  and  empiricist,  here 
combines  Platonic  and  Herakleitean  ideas,  the  eternal 
flux  and  change  of  sense-impressions  with  the  dura- 
tion and  permanence  of  ideas :  and  yet  he  is  all  the 
while  a  genuine  modern,  i.e.  idealistic  philosopher, 
and  assigns  that  which  Plato  and  Herakleitos  be- 
lieved themselves  to  see  in  the  objective  world  to  its 
true  birthplace,  the  feeling  and  thinking  subject 

Leibniz,  on  the  contrary,  the  pure  idealist,  for  whom 
the  material  world  and  space  were  but  phenomena, 
incapable  of  any  interaction  with  spiritual  substances, 
combines,  as  he  himself  says,  Demokritos  and  Aris- 
totle, by  spiritualizing  the  atoms  of  the  former  into 
monads  and  retaining  the  formao  substantiales  of  the 
latter,  which  come  into  existence  by  means  of  the 
monads  and  their  organic  power,  for  every  organism 
has  a  central  monad. 

Locke  accordingly  represents  the  share  of  sensa- 
tion in  the  genesis  of  ideas,  Leibniz  that  of  the 
intellectual  element,  which  is  present  in  even  the 
most  trifling  and  meagre  perception.  This  opposi- 
tion proceeds  from  the  difference  of  the  starting- 
points,  and  a  higher  unity  had  to  be  discovered  to 
reconcile  the  two.  Locke  represents  everything  as 
coming  into  the  understanding  from  without,  Leibniz 
represents  everything  as  developing  from  within. 
Both  are  obviously  right ;  both  see  the  same  object, 
but  from  opposite  sides. 

The  errors  and  narrowness  of  great  -men  reveal 
themselves  most  clearly  in  their  successors  and  in 
the  schools  which  found  a  system  on  their  principles. 
Locke's  empiricism  led  De  Condillac  to  the  sensation 
transformee,  to  the  axiom,  Denser  cest  sentir,  and  the 
extreme  consequences  of  French  materialism,  which 
may  be  passed  by  in  silence,  notwithstanding  recent 


LEIBNIZ.  327 

ephemeral  attempts  to  exalt  them  as  the  ripest  fruits 
of  modern  wisdom, 

Non  ragioniam'  di  lor,  ma  guarcla  e  passa. 

The  school  of  Wolff,  which  for  a  long  time  pos- 
sessed universal  popularity  on  account  of  its  in- 
telligibility, its  self-confidence,  and  its  apparent  con- 
clusiveness,  was  thoroughly  realistic  in  character.  It 
was  the  philosophy  of  enlightenment,  and  this  was 
its  title  to  recognition  and  victory.  Eeason  and  its 
process  is  the  highest  type  of  judgment  concerning 
truth.  It  has  been  pointed  out  often  enough  that 
Wolff's  philosophy  degenerated  into  a  dry  and  empty 
formalism,  that  he  was  the  founder  of  a  new  scholasti- 
cism, dogmatising  unintelligently  over  the  profound- 
est  metaphysical  ideas  of  Leibniz,  and  illustrating 
the  most  trivial  matters  at  length  with  the  whole 
methodical  apparatus  of  philosophy.  The  idea  of 
Leibniz,  that  the  reason  develops  everything  out 
of  itself,  is  established  as  a  principle  ;  then  the  true 
possession  of  the  reason,  ideas,  are  taken  as  the 
starting-point,  and  then,  by  the  help  of  the  principle 
of  the  sufficient  reason,  (which  is  to  correspond  to 
the  principle  of  identity),  and  the  principle  of  contra 
diction,  everything  is  developed  by  analysis  out  of 
these  ideas.  There  is  no  question  as  to  the  origin  or 
authority  of  these  ideas ;  they  are  there,  and  every- 
thing that  was  in  them  already  is  evolved  from  them 
at  leisure.  Things  in  themselves  and  ideas  are  treated 
as  exactly  equal,  for  nihilum  est  cui  nulla  respondet 
notio,  and  aliquid  est  cui  dliqua  respondet  notio,  are 
Wolffs  ontological  starting-points.  As  however,  in 
spite  of  the  distinction  between  a  priori  and  a  post- 
eriori truths,  which  he  inherited  from  Leibniz,  the 
important  distinction  between  empirical  and  a  priori 
knowledge  was  not  made,  his  whole  philosophy  ran 


328  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

to  seed  with  empty  tautologies,  circular  reasoning, 
and  unfounded  dogmatism.  The  latter  fell  into  three 
chief  divisions,  rational  psychology,  rational  cosmo- 
logy, and  rational  theology,  the  great  objects  of  which 
— God,  the  world,  the  soul  and  its  ideas, — were  to 
be  demonstrated  thence.  The  dogmatic  confidence 
with  which  the  victorious  reason  proclaimed  its 
oracles  in  syllogisms,  arguments,  axioms,  and  defi- 
nitions received  a  violent  shock  from  the  scepti- 
cism of  Hume,  which  supplied  the  arms  with  which 
Kant  penetrated  into  the  citadel  that  had  so  long 
been  held  impregnable,  and  destroyed  the  whole  in- 
genious fabric  by  showing  that  it  consisted  entirely 
of  the  self-created  illusions  of  reason,  travelling  beyond 
her  proper  boundaries. 


THE   SKEPSIS. 

HUME  (1711—1776). 


'Nasce  per  quello,  a  guisa  di  rampollo, 
Appik  del  vero  il  dubbio ;    ed  &  natura 
Ch'  al  somino  pinge  noi  di  collo  in  eollo/ 

DANTE. 


DAVID  HUME  was  one  of  the  most  earnest,  pro- 
found, and  honest  thinkers  who  have  ever  occupied 
themselves  with  the  great  problem  of  the  universe 
and  the  human  mind.  The  *  honest  doubt/  which 
gave  so  much  scandal  to  his  contemporaries,  was 
more  helpful  and  productive  than  thousands  of  folios 
filled  with  the  dogmatism  that  had  passed  for  ages 
as  the  highest  wisdom,  and  with  the  fullest  and  most 
confident  accounts  of  God,  the  world,  and  the  human 
soul,  which  reason,  operating  upon  its  own  manu- 
factured notions,  could  construct.  When  it  occurred 
to  reason  to  inquire  into  the  grounds  for  these 
notions  and  to  test  its  own  assumptions,  the  dog- 
matic tower  of  Babel  fell  to  pieces,  like  a  house 
of  cards. 

It  has  often  been  observed  that  Hume's  scepticism 
instigated  Kant's  Critique  of  Pure  Eeason.  Kant 
himself  says * :  '  I  confess  frankly,  it  was  the  warning 
voice  of  David  Hume  that  first,  years  ago,  roused  me 
from  dogmatic  slumbers,  and  gave  a  new  direction 

1  Prolegomena,  Vorwort. 


330  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

to  my  investigations  in  the  field  of  speculative  philo- 
sophy. I  was  far  from  yielding  assent  to  his  con- 
clusions, which  came  from  his  not  having  conceived 
his  task  as  a  whole,  but  having  addressed  himself 
to  a  single  portion,  as  to  which  no  satisfactory  result 
could  be  reached  without  reference  to  the  whole. 
When  one  starts  from  a  thought  that  has  been  es- 
tablished, but  not  carried  out  to  all  its  consequences, 
by  another,  one  may  reasonably  hope  by  continued 
meditation  to  carry  it  a  step  further  than  the  man  to 
whose  genius  we  owe  the  first  spark  of  such  light/ 

Hume's  attack  was  directed  against  the  central 
point  of  reason,  its  true  and  sole  possession  —  the 
idea  of  causation.  This  idea  makes  science  pos- 
sible, which,  without  it,  would  be  a  mere  aggregate 
of  observations  and  curious  inquiries.  'Even  true 
opinions,'  says  Plato,  c  are  of  little  value  when  they 
are  not  based  upon  reasons  which  hold  them  together 
in  the  mind/  And  Aristotle  says  :  '  The  empiricists 
know  'that  something  is,  but  they  do  not  know  the 
wherefore  ;  theorists  on  the  contrary  know  the  why 
and  the  cause  V  And  Schopenhauer  calls  Why  ? 
'  the  mother  of  all  the  sciences/ 

Schopenhauer  says  of  Hume  :  *  Before  this  serious 
thinker  no  one  had  doubted  that  the  principle  of  the 
sufficient  reason,  in  other  words,  the  law  of  caus- 
ality, stood  first  and  foremost  in  earth  and  heaven. 
For  it  was  an  "  eternal  truth/'  subsisting  independ- 
ently, superior  to  the  gods  or  destiny  :  everything 
else,  the  understanding  which  apprehends  the  prin- 
ciple, as  well  as  the  world  at  large  and  whatsoever 
there  may  be  which  is  the  cause  of  the  world,  such 
as  atoms,  motion,  a  creator,  or  the  like,  exists  only 


1    Of  fJ,€V  €fJL7T€lpOt  T&  OTl  fJL€V  laTCUTl,  dl6n  8'   OVK    IvaVW*    ol  &€  T^VLTai  T& 

KCU  rrjv  alriav  yva>pl£ov(ri.     Metaph.  i.  I. 


HUME.  331 

in  conformity  with  and  in  virtue  of  this.  Hume 
was  the  first  to  whom  it  occurred  to  ask  whence 
this  law  of  causality  derived  its  authority,  ,and  to 
demand  its  credentials  V 

Let  us  now  consider  whether  the  time  had  come 
to  formulate  this  question  and  to  disturb  reason  in 
its  citadel  by  calling  its  securest  possession  in  ques- 
tion, arid  threatening  to  declare  all  its  knowledge 
self-delusive. 

Locke,  in  tracing  all  knowledge  to  experience,  had 
deduced  the  causal  relation  from  the  same  root; 
he  laid  down  that  the  effect  of  the  will  upon  the 
members  of  the  body  and  the  resistance  of  bodies 
to  our  pressure  were  the  origin  of  the  idea  of  cause. 
All  knowledge,  including  this  most  important,  is 
therefore  purely  empirical. 

Leibniz,  on  the  other  hand,  accorded  its  due  place 
in  the  system  of  human  knowledge  to  the  idea  of 
cause,  or  rather  to  the  principle  of  the  sufficient 
reason.  He  indicated  it  as  one  of  the  most  important 
duties  of  metaphysics  to  investigate  and  explain  the 
primary  ideas  from  which  human  thought  takes  its 
start,  and  notably  this  idea  of  cause.  Besides  this, 
Leibniz  had  established  the  important  distinction 
between  necessary  and  accidental  truths,  and  had 
referred  the  latter,  which  include  all  actual  matters 
of  fact,  to  an  endless  causal  series,  while  the  former 
may  be  reduced  to  simple,  and  in  the  last  resort,  to 
identical  propositions. 

It  was  this  opposition  between  empirical  or  con- 
tingent, and  necessary  or  identical  truths,  that  the 
penetrating  glance  of  Hume  decided  to  be  irre- 
concilable, whence  he  concluded  that  causation  and 
experience  were  incompatible,  and  that  our  as- 
1  Vierfachc  Wurzel  des  Satzes  vom  zureichenden  Grunde,  p.  20. 


332  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

sumption  of  things  happening  necessarily — which 
still  meant  their  happening  because  of  something  else 
— rested  accordingly  on  self-deception. 

Here  too  it  is  really  the  eternal  contrast  between 
the  manifoldness  of  the  world  and  the  craving  of  our 
reason  after  unity  which  encounters  us  as  we  get  to 
the  root  of  the  difficulty.  Necessity  only  reveals 
itself  to  our  thought  by  the  perception  of  identity,  and 
this  therefore,  as  formal  and  logical  certainty,  under- 
lies all  the  most  elementary  truths.  But  whence 
comes  the  assumption  that  this  formal  logical  equi- 
valence corresponds  to  the  worJd  of  fact  and  will  find 
its  application  there  1  If  sensible  and  rational  know- 
ledge is  nothing  more  than  a  highly  improved  method 
of  analysis,  then  there  remains  at  last  nothing  but  the 
infinite  multiplicity  of  individual  existences,  whose 
co-existence  and  co-operation  can  only  be  explained 
by  a  miracle,  i.e.  the  monads  and  the  pre-established 
harmony.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  reason  assumes, 
with  vain  self-sufficiency,  that  its  notions  correspond 
exactly  to  the  nature  of  existing  things,  it  will  ima- 
gine itself  able  to  explain  the  latter  by  merely  ana- 
lysing its  own  conceptions ;  and  it  must  soon  become 
apparent  that  any  such  reasoning  revolves  in  a  never- 
ending  circle. 

Empiricism  can  never  lead  to  unity  and  necessity, 
for  experience  is  only  of  the  manifold,  whether  within 
ourselves  or  in  the  external  world.  No  artifices  of 
reason  can  convince  us  that  different  things  are 
one,  i.  e.  that  the  different  is  the  same.  And  nothing 
less  than  this  is  claimed  for  the  idea  of  cause ;  it 
requires  us  to  assume  that  because  A  is,  therefore  B 
must  be  too.  And  this  is  more  than  rational  thought 
can  ever  know  or  admit  concerning  the  self-subsisting 
things  of  the  outer  world. 


HUME.  333 

On  the  other  hand,  a  priori  truths  furnish  no  road 
to  the  multiplicity  and  diversity  of  real  things  ;  for 
all  these  truths  are  at  bottom  merely  identical  pro- 
positions ;  and  what  store  of  knowledge  can  be  derived 
from  identical  propositions  ? 

The  idea  of  cause  and  effect  involves  fundamentally 
incompatible  assumptions  regarding  our  reason,  by 
applying  the  formal  logical  unity  to  the  multiplicity 
of  sense  perceptions,  and  by  attributing  universality 
and  necessity  to  things  which  are  by  nature  single, 
and  accidental  or  contingent. 

Hume  was  not,  as  Schopenhauer  says,  in  the  pas- 
sage quoted  above,  the  first  to  contest  the  validity 
of  the  causal  law  in  the  objective  world.  The 
sceptics  of  antiquity  had  recognised  the  importance 
of  the  question  and  pointed  out  some  of  the  in- 
consistencies involved,  and  had  deduced  thence  the 
impossibility  of  any  certain  knowledge  grounded  on 
necessity.  In  the  old  world  naturally  this  was  done 
mainly  in  the  form  of  aperpus,  while  in  modern 
philosophy,  which  had  found  the  true  starting-point 
of  all  knowledge  in  the  thinking  subject,  this  on- 
slaught of  Hume's  dealt  a  home  thrust. 

Among  the  earlier  sceptics  ^Enesidemus  denied 
the  possibility  of  making  the  sequence  of  one  thing 
from  another  intelligible  to  the  reason,  saying  that 
nothing  is  the  cause  of  anything  else,  and  they  who 
seek  after  causes  delude  themselves  l. 

The  later  sceptics  gave  five  reasons  which  should 
determine  suspense  of  judgment  (CTTOX^). 

i.  ctTro  Sta(pwvia$9  the  uncertainty  of  words;  there 
is  no  criterium  either  in  sense  or  thought  by  which 


1  M)?§ei/  p,tv  p,rjdevbs    alnov   eiwu,    jjTrariJa&u    Se    TOVS 
<3M<rica>v.     Phot.  Bibl.  212;  cf.  also  Sext.  Empir,  Hyp.  Pyrrhon.  i. 
1  80, 


334  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

we  can  be  assured  that  the  same  thoughts  are  at- 
tached by  different  persons  to  the  same  word. 

2.  airo  TW  €i$  aireipov  F£7TTft)(rew, — the  progressus  ill 

iiifinitum, — the   fact  that  every  cause  has  a  cause, 
and  this  another  and  yet  another  ad  inimitum. 

3.  CCTTO  rov  Trio's  TI,  the  relativity  of  all  things ; 
we  know  in  what  relations  a  thing  stands  towards 
other  things,  we  cannot  know  what  it  is   in  itself 

irpog  rv\v  (pvortv. 

4.  <?£  vTroOccrew,  because   dogmatists   always  start 
from  something  that  has  been  taken  for  granted. 

5.  The   argument  in  a  circle,   when   the  conclu- 
sion  sought  for   is   presupposed   in  the  arguments 
leading  to  it  *,  as,  for  instance,  when  one  says,  man 
has  language  because  he  has  reason,  while  reason  is 
impossible  without  language. 

Other  reasons  against  causality  preserved  for  us 
by  Sextus  Empiricus  (Adv.  Mathem.  ix.  207)  are 
interesting,  as  they  agree  with  those  brought  forward 
by  Hume,  thus  giving  one  more  proof  of  the  im- 
possibility of  finding  any  thought  that  has  not  been 
at  least  partially  and  accidentally  forestalled.  '  Cause/ 
say  the  sceptics,  '  is  a  relation.  The  cause  of  the  cut- 
ting of  meat  is  a  knife ;  the  knife  and  the  meat  are 
real,  but  the  cause  is  not  real,  only  a  Trpo?  n,  a  thing 
of  the  mind/  There  are  three  conceivable  causal 
relations : — 

4  i.  That  contemporary  things  should  cause  each 
other  (TO  apa  ov  rov  a/u.a  oi/ro?).  This  is  perfectly 
unthinkable,  for  if  two  things  exist  at  the  same 
time,  one  cannot  be  thought  of  as  originating  (yev vy- 
riicov)  the  other. 

'  2.  That  the  earlier  should  cause  the  latter  (TO  TTJOO- 
repov  rov  vvrepov  irotyrtKov).  As  long  as  A  stands  alone, 
1  Sext.  Emp.  Pyrrh.  Hyp.  i,  164. 


HUME.  335 

it  is  not  a  cause,  for  the  effect  is  wanting  to  complete 
the  relation;  as  soon  as  B  has  appeared,  A  is  no 
longer  there,  and  the  cause  is  absent. 

'3.  That  the  later  should  be  the  cause  of  the 
earlier  is  inconceivable  both  on  the  ground  just 
alleged,  and  according  to  every  other  principle  of 
sane  judgment. 

6  Moreover  a  true  cause,  a  causa  agens,  properly 
so  called,  must  always  produce  the  effect  out  of 
itself ;  it  does  not  require  the  co-operation  of  matter 
or  something  passive  (TO  iraayov).  The  dogmatist 
who  assumes  cause  to  be  a  relation,  a  7rp6$  n,  ac- 
cording to  which  the  cause  may  be  known, by  the 
nature  of  the  passive  effect  and  the  effect  by  the 
nature  of  the  cause,  commits  the  error  of  using  two 
words  to  designate  the  same  thing  (/x/a  eWom  Svoiv 
fr  dvojudrcov  rei^erou)1 ;  for  how  can  there  be  a  doing 
without  a  suffering,  or  a  suffering  without  a  doing  V 

From  these  acute  and,  in  fact,  reasonable  argu- 
ments, we  see  two  things,  viz.  the  incomplete,  na'ive 
objectivism  of  antiquity,  which  saw  and  sought  for 
everything  in  the  external  world,  in  the  unquestioned 
reality  of  things  ;  and  secondly,  the  scepticism  which 
naturally  sprang  from  the  incompleteness  of  this 
standpoint,  and  so  led  to  a  presentiment  of  the 
ideality  of  causation,  while  it  was  supposed  to  be 
relegated  to  the  regions  of  nothingness.  Such  con- 
siderations can  only  serve  to  illustrate  the  real  great- 
ness of  Descartes  and  his  work. 

1  The  ancients  used  the  illustration  of  a  chariot  and  its  driver, 
the  latter  of  whom  at  the  same  time  moves  and  is  moved  by  the 
former.  And  though  at  the  present  day  we  need  not  be  perplexed 
by  this  difficulty,  there  remain  other  similar  ones  undisposed  of, 
e.  g.  in  a  moving  mass  what  is  to  be  regarded  as  active  or  impart- 
ing motion,  and  what  as  passive  or  moved  1 


336  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

The  significance  and  force  of  Hume's  scepticism 
could  only  be  appreciated  by  an  intellectual  equal, 
while  others  raised  the  cry  of  heresy  and  appealed 
to  c  common  sense/  It  is  amusing  to  note  how  most 
of  his  adversaries  imagined  themselves  to  have  de- 
molished Humo,  when  they  had  shown  how  in  one 
chapter  (Essay  vii)  he  denies  the  necessity  of  the 
causal  sequence,  and  hence  inferred  the  uncertainty 
of  knowledge,  while  in  the  following  chapter  human 
freedom  is  called  in  question,  because  everything 
happens  by  way  of  cause  and  effect.  They  forgot 
that  a  similar  inconsistency  had  lurked  for  centuries 
in  human  thought  itself,  which  assumed  at  the  same 
time  the  strict  necessity  of  all  cognition,  and  the 
unlimited  freedom  of  all  action,  so  that  it  was  a  real 
service  to  reverse  the  point  of  view,  as  it  was  ob- 
viously fair  to  do,  and  so  rouse  the  slumbering  reason 
from  its  lethargy. 

Kant  says  with  great  force  and  justice l :  '  Since 
the  attempts  of  Locke  and  Leibniz,  or  indeed  since 
the  origin  of  metaphysics,  as  far  back  as  we  can 
trace  its  history,  there  has  been  no  incident  so 
decisive  of  the  possible  fate  of  the  whole  science  as 
the  onslaught  of  David  Hume.  He  brought  no  new 
light  to  this  branch  of  knowledge,  but  he  kindled  a 
spark  whence  light  might  have  been  derived,  if  it 
had  fallen  upon  fitting  tinder/ 

'Hume  took  his  start  principally  from  a  single 
but  important  metaphysical  conception,  namely  that 
of  the  connection  of  cause  and  effect  (together  with 
the  consequent  conception  of  force  and  action) ;  and 
he  summoned  the  reason,  which  professed  to  be  its 
author,  to  give  an  answer  for  herself  and  declare  by 

1  Prolegomena,  Vorwort. 


HUME.  337 

what  right  she  supposes  that  anything  of  such  a 
nature  can  exist,  that  whenever  it  exists,  something 
else  necessarily  exists  forthwith ;  for  this  is  what  the 
cpnception  of  cause  involves.  He  proved  conclusively 
that  it  was  impossible  for  the  reason  to  construct  a 
priori  such  a  connection  which  involves  necessity; 
for  it  is  impossible  to  see  how  because  one  thing 
is,  another  thing  should  necessarily  also  be,  or  how 
the  conception  of  such  a  connection  should  have 
been  introduced  a  priori.  He  concluded  from  this 
that  the  reason  was  entirely  deceived  as  to  this  idea, 
was  in  error  in  regarding  it  as  its  own  offspring, 
seeing  that  it  was  really  a  bastard  child  born  of 
the  imagination  and  experience.  From  this  alliance 
sprang  certain  ideas  which  were  brought  under 
the  law  of  association,  and  the  subjective  neces- 
sity arising  thence,  i.e.  habit,  is  treated  as  the  ob- 
served objective  necessity.  From  this  he  inferred 
that  the  reason  possessed  no  power  of  thinking  such 
connections,  even  in  a.  general  form,  because  its  con- 
ceptions would  then  be  pure  fictions,  and  that  all  its 
vainly  subsisting  a  priori  knowledge  was  nothing 
but  common  experience  under  a  false  brand,  which  is 
much  the  same  as  saying  there  neither  is  nor  can  be 
such  a  thing  as  metaphysic  l! 

1  '  Hume  himself,  however,  gave  the  name  of  metaphysic  to  this 
destructive  philosophy,  and  attached  a  great  value  to  it.  '  Meta- 
physic and  morals/  he  says,  '  are  the  most  important  branches  of 
knowledge ;  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  are  not  half  so 
valuable/  With  all  his  acuteness,  Hume  in  this  looked  only  at  the 
positive  help  to  be  derived  from  moderating  the  exaggerated  claims 
of  speculative  reason,  so  as  to  do  away  with  the  endless,  intolerant 
disputes  which  perplex  the  human  race ;  he  lost  sight  of  the  posi- 
tive injury  arising  when  the  most  important  truths  are  taken  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  reason,  which  has  nothing  left  to  propose  to  the 
will  as  the  highest  goal  of  its  efforts.'  Kant's  note. 

VOL.  L  25 


338  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

'  However  premature  and  incorrect  his  conclusion 
may  have  been,  it  was  at  least  based  upon  investiga- 
tions which  deserved  the  co-operation  of  the  ablest 
minds  of  his  generation  in  the  attempt  to  solve 
the  problem  in  the  sense  he  indicated,  an  attempt 
which  must  have  resulted  in  a  complete  intellectual 
reform. 

'  But  unfortunately  the  malevolent  fate  which  seems 
to  watch  over  metaphysics  had  decreed  that  no  one 
should  be  able  to  understand  him.  One  cannot  ob- 
serve without  a  certain  degree  of  pain  how  all  his  op- 
ponents— Tteid,  Oswald,  Beattie,  and  even  Priestley, 
— all  without  exception  miss  the  point  of  his  con- 
tention by  taking  for  granted  the  very  thing  which 
he  is  calling  in  question,  at  the  same  time  that  they 
demonstrate  with  great  violence  and  hardihood  points 
which  it  had  never  occurred  to  him  to  doubt,  and  so 
misunderstood  his  invitation  to  improvement  that 
everything  remained  just  as  it  was  before.  The  ques- 
tion was  not  whether  the  conception  of  cause  was  just, 
serviceable,  and  indispensable  in  relation  to  all  na- 
tural sciences,  for  this  had  never  been  disputed  by 
Hume ;  but  whether  it  could  be  conceived  a  priori 
by  the  reason,  and  thus  possessed  an  internal  truth 
independent  of  experience  which  would  make  it  admit 
of  more  extended  application,  not  limited  to  matters 
of  experience.  This  was  the  point  as  to  which  Hume 
demanded  information.  The  question  was  only  as  to 
the  origin  of  the  conception,  not  as  to  its  practical  in- 
dispensableness ;  if  only  the  former  point  were  cleared 
up,  the  conditions  and  limitations  of  its  validity  would 
follow  of  themselves. 

'His  opponents,  to  deal  satisfactorily  with  their 
task,  would  have  had  to  penetrate  deeply  into  the 
nature  of  reason,  in  so  far  as  it  is  occupied  with 


HUME.  339 

pure  thought,  and  this  they  found  inconvenient; 
it  was  easier  to  assume  a  defiant  bearing  and  simply 
refer  the  matter  to  *  common  sense/  Sound,  or  as 
it  is  sometimes  called,  plain  common  sense,  is  in  fact 
a  very  rare  and  precious  gift  of  heaven.  But  its 
possession,  must  be  proved  by  deeds,  by  deliberation 
and  reasonableness  in  thought  and  speech,  not  by 
appealing  to  it  as  an  oracle,  when  the  speaker  has 
nothing  else  sensible  to  allege. 

'  To  appeal  to  human  common  sense  just  when — 
and  not  before — knowledge  and  insight  begin  to 
fail,  is  one  of  the  most  ingenious  inventions  of  our 
age,  and  one  which  enables  any  shallow  babbler  to 
hold  his  own  against  thinkers  of  depth  and  thorough- 
ness. So  long,  however,  as  any  fragment  of  insight 
remains,  this  expedient  need  not  be  resorted  to  ;  and 
looked  at  in  the  right  light,  such  an  appeal  is  simply 
a  reference  to  the  judgment  of  the  masses,  a  kind  of 
sanction  which  makes  philosophers  blush,  while 
popular  witlings  boast  of  it  triumphantly.  I  should 
have  thought  that  the  claims  of  Hume  to  a  healthy 
common  sense  were  as  strong  as  those  of  Beattie, 
while  he  certainly  possessed,  what  the  other  as  cer- 
tainly did  not,  the  critical  reason  by  which  common 
sense  is  held  in  check,  and  not  allowed  to  lose  itself 
in  speculations  or  to  seek  to  decide  upon  questions 
involving  principles  which  it  is  unable  to  verify;  for  in 
this  way  only  can  it  continue  to  deserve  the  name  it 
claims.  Chisel  and  mallet  may  suffice  for  a  job  of  car- 
pentry, but  the  engraver  requires  a  needle  for  his  art. 
Thus  both  common  sense  and  speculative  intelligence 
are  useful  in  their  way,  the  former  when  we  have  to 
do  with  judgments v with  a  direct  practical  application, 
the  latter  when  general  conclusions  have  to  be  de- 
duced from  abstract  conceptions,  as,  for  instance,  in 

Z  2 


340  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

metaphysics,  where  the  self-styled  (sometimes  by 
antiphrasis)  common  sense  has  no  jurisdiction  at 
all/ 

Notwithstanding  this  crushing  attack  upon  the 
opponents  of  Hume,  there  still  seem  to  be  some 
writers  who  do  not  understand  what  is  the  issue 
involved-  This  appears  from  the  irrelevant  remarks 
with  which  Mr.  Lewes,  in  his  Problems  of  Life  and 
Mind  (ii.  pp.  408-412),  aims  at  controverting  Hume, 
which  should  serve  as  a  warning  to  all  those  who  oc- 
cupy themselves  with  philosophy,  without  having  first 
penetrated  into  the  spirit  of  Kant's  writings,  and 
having  learnt  from  them  what  must  be  accepted  as 
the  foundation  and  starting-point  of  all  true  philo- 
sophy in  the  future.  To  neglect  Kant  is  the  same 
thing  as  to  amuse  oneself  after  Lavoisier  with  expe- 
riments in  alchemy,  or  after  Bopp  with  the  ancient 
etymological  trifling  based  on  casual  resemblances  of 
sound, 

I  will  now  proceed  to  reproduce  in  brief  outline 
the  simple  and  yet  convincing  course  of  Hume's  ar- 
guments. 

'  Surely/  he  says,  '  if  there  be  any  relation  among 
objects,  which  it  imports  to  us  to  know  perfectly, 
it  is  that  of  cause  and  effect.  On  this  are  founded 
all  our  reasonings  concerning  matter  of  fact  or  ex- 
istence. By  means  of  it  alone  we  attain  any  assur- 
ance concerning  objects  which  are  removed  from  the 
present  testimony  of  our  memory  and  senses.  The 
only  immediate  utility  of  all  sciences  is  to  teach  us 
how  to  control  and  regulate  future  events  by  their 
causes.  Our  thoughts  and  enquiries  are  therefore, 
every  moment,  employed  about  this  relation ;  yet  so 
imperfect  are  the  ideas  which  we  form  concerning  it, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  give  any  just  definition  of 


HUME.  341 

cause   except  what  is  drawn  from  something  ex- 
traneous and  foreign  to  it1/ 

Most  writers  on  the  subject  either  c  employ  un- 
intelligible terms  or  such  as  are  synonymous  to  the 
term  which  they  endeavour  to  define.  Thus,  if  a 
cause  be  defined  that  which  produces  anything,  it  is 
easy  to  observe,  that  producing  is  synonymous  to 
causing.  In  like  manner,  if  a  cause  be  defined  that 
by  which  anything  exists,  this  is  liable  to  the  same 
objection.  For  what  is  meant  by  these  words  by 
which  ?  Had  it  been  said  that  a  cause  is  that  after 
which  anything  constantly  exists,  we  should  have 
understood  the  terms.  For  .  .  .  this  constancy  forms 
the  very  essence  of  necessity,  nor  have  we  any  other 
idea  of  it2/ 

We  get  here  at  the  root  of  the  whole  enquiry. 
Our  inner  consciousness  tells  us  that  we  are  not 
satisfied  with  mere  succession  in  time  as  an  account 
of  the  idea  of  cause.  The  question  accordingly  arises 
whether  in  the  above  definition  we  may  substitute 
the  word  necessarily  for  constantly.  Hume  denies 
this  positively,  and  from  the  empirical  standpoint 
occupied  by  himself  and  Locke,  no  other  answer  was 
possible. 

If  everything  is  derived  from  experience,  the  idea 
of  cause  must  be  so  derived  also.  If  there  were  nothing 
but  change  and  uncertainty  in  nature,  the  idea  of 
causality  would  never  have  arisen.  But  instead  of 
this  we  do  actually  observe  a  certain  uniformity  in 
the  sequences  of  events.  We  do  not  find  any  power 
or  necessary  connection  binding  the  effect  to  the 
cause,  we  only  find  that  the  one  does  in  fact  follow 
the  other.  Hence  it  is  that  men  '  acquire  by  long 

1  Enquiry  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  sect.  vii.  pt.  2. 

2  Ib.  sect.  viii.  i. 


342  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

• 

habit  such  a  turn  of  mind,  that  upon  the  appearance 
of  the  cause  they  immediately  expect  with  assurance 
its  usual  attendant,  and  hardly  conceive  it  possible 
that  any  other  event  could  result  from  it. 

*  But  were  the  power  or  energy  of  any  cause  dis- 
coverable by  the  mind,  we  could  foresee  the  effect 
even  without  experience,  and  might  at  first  pro- 
nounce with  certainty  concerning  it,  by  the  mere  dint 
of  thought  and  reasoning.  In  reality,  there  is  no 
•part  of  matter  that  does  ever,  by  its  sensible  qualities, 
discover  any  power  or  energy,  or  give  us  ground  to 
imagine  that  it  could  produce  anything,  or  be  fol- 
lowed by  any  other  object,  which  we  could  deno- 
minate its  effect^  .  .  .  The  scenes  of  the  universe  are 
continually  shifting,  and  one  object  follows  another 
in  an  uninterrupted  succession ;  but  the  power  or 
force  which  actuates  the  whole  machine  is  entirely 
concealed  from  us,  and  never  discovers  itself  in  any 
of  the  sensible  qualities  of  body. 

'  We  have  no  idea  of  this  connexion,  nor  even  any 
distinct  notion  what  it  is  we  desire  to  know,  when 
we  endeavour  at  a  conception  of  it.  We  say,  for 
instance,  that  the  vibration  of  this  string  is  the  cause 
of  this  particular  sound.  But  what  do  we  mean  by 
that  affirmation  ?  We  either  mean  that  this  vibration 
is  followed  by  this  sound,  and  that  all  similar  vibra- 
tions have  been  followed  by  similar  sounds ;  or,  that 
this  vibration  is  follo'tved  by  this  sound,  and  that  upon 
the  appearance  of  one  the  mind  anticipates  the  senses, 
and  forms  immediately  an  idea  of  the  other.  We 
may  consider  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  in  either 
of  these  two  lights,  but  beyond  these  we  have  no 
idea  of  it. 

"But  there  still  remains  one  method  of  avoiding 
this  conclusion. ,  .  .  When  any  natural  object  or  event 


HUME.  343 

is  presented,  it  is  impossible  for  us,  by  any  sagacity 
or  penetration,  to  discover  or  even  conjecture,  with- 
out experience,  what  event  will  result  from  it,  or  to 
carry  our  foresight  beyond  that  object  which  is  im- 
mediately present  to  the  memory  and  senses.  Even 
after  one  instance  or  experiment,  where  we  have 
observed  a  particular  event  to  follow  upon  another, 
we  are  not  entitled  to  form  a  general  rule  or  foretell 
what  will  happen  in  like  cases,  it  being  justly  es- 
teemed an  unpardonable  temerity  to  judge  of  the 
whole  course  of  nature  from  one  single  experiment, 
however  accurate  or  certain.  But  when  one  par- 
ticular species  of  event  has  always,  in  all  instances, 
been  conjoined  with  another,  we  make  no  longer  anj 
scruple  of  foretelling  one  upon  the  appearance  of  the 
other,  and  of  employing  that  reasoning  which  car 
alone  assure  us  of  any  matter  of  fact  or  existence. 
We  then  call  the  one  object,  Cause  ;  the  other,  Effect. 
We  suppose  that  there  is  some  connexion  between 
them  ;  some  power  in  the  one  by  which  it  infallibly 
produces  the  other,  and  operates  with  the  greatest 
certainty  and  strongest  necessity. 

*  Shall  we  then  assert  that  we  are  conscious  of  a 
power  or  energy  in  our  own  minds,  when,  by  an  act 
or  command  of  our  will,  we  raise  up  a  new  idea,  fix 
the  mind  to  the  contemplation  of  it,  turn  it  on  all 
sides,  and  at  last  dismiss  it  for  some  other  idea,  when 
we  think  that  we  have  surveyed  it  with  sufficient 
accuracy  ? .  . .  But  do  we  pretend  to  be  acquainted 
with  the  nature  of  the  human  soul  and  the  nature  of 
an  idea,  or  the  aptitude  of  the  one  to  produce  the 
other  ?  This  is  a  real  creation,  a  production  of  some- 
thing out  of  nothing l ;  which  implies  a  power  so 

1  And  therefore  the  realization  of  the  idea  of  cause  ;  cf.  ante,  the 
view  of  the  Greek  sceptics. 


344  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

great  that  it  may  seem  at  first  sight  beyond  the 
reach  of  any  being  less  than  infinite.  At  least  it 
must  be  owned  that  such  a  power  is  not  felt,  nor 
known,  nor  even  conceivable  by  the  mind.  We  only 
feel  the  event,  namely  the  existence  of  an  idea  con- 
sequent to  a  command  of  the  will ;  but  the  manner 
in  which  this  operation  is  performed,  the  power  by 
which  it  is  produced,  is  entirely  beyond  our  com- 
prehension. 

*  The  command  of  the  mind  over  itself  is  limited, 
as  well  as  its  command  over  the  body/  The  latter 
(which  Locke  had  brought  forward  as  the  prototype 
of  the  idea  of  Cause)  eludes  our  discernment  as  much 
as  all  the  rest.  '  The  influence  of  volition  over  the 
organs  of  the  body  is  a  fact.  .  .  .  But  the  means  by 
which  this  is  effected,  the  energy  by  which  the  will 
performs  so  extraordinary  an  operation,  of  this  we 
are  so  far  from  being  immediately  conscious,  that  it 
must  for  ever  escape  our  most  diligent  enquiry.  .  .  . 
Is  there  any  principle  in  all  nature  more  mysterious 
than  the  union  of  soul  with  body,  by  wliich  a  sup- 
posed spiritual  substance  acquires  such  an  influence 
over  a  material  one,  that  the  most  refined  thought 
is  able  to  actuate  the  grossest  matter?  Were  we 
empowered  by  a  secret  wish  to  remove  mountains 
or  control  the  planets  in  their  orbits,  this  extensive 
authority  would  not  be  more  extraordinary  nor  more 
beyond  our  comprehension.  .  .  .  The  immediate  ob- 
ject of  power  in  voluntary  motion  is  not  the  mem- 
ber itself  which  is  moved,  but  certain  muscles  and 
nerves  and  animal  spirits,  and  perhaps  something 
still  more  minute  and  unknown,  through  which 
the  motion  is  successively  propagated.  .  .  .  That  the 
motion  of  the  limbs  follows  the  command  of  the  will 
is  a  matter  of  common  experience  like  other  natural 


HUME.  345 

events/  And  as  the  vulgar  do  in  the  case  of  what  is 
apparently  miraculous,  so  philosophers  think  them- 
selves obliged  in  all  cases  to  have  resort  to  some 
invisible  intelligent  principle  as  the  immediate  cause 
of  what  is  unexplained.  '  Our  authority  over  our 
sentiments  and  passions  is  much  weaker  than  that 
over  our  ideas ;  and  even  the  latter  authority  is  cir- 
cumscribed within  very  narrow  boundaries.  Will 
any  one  pretend  to  assign  the  ultimate  reason  of 
these  boundaries,  or  show  why  the  power  is  deficient 
in  one  case  and  not  in  another  1  This  self-command 
too  is  very  different  at  different  times.  A  man  in 
health  possesses  more  of  it  than  one  languishing 
with  sickness.  We  are  more  master  of  our  thoughts 
in  the  morning  than  in  the  evening;  fasting  than 
after  a  full  meal.  Can  we  give  any  reason  for  these 
variations  except  experience  V  In  short,  the  will 
by  itself  has  no  knowledge  of  its  own  powers  or 
their  source.  c  It  requires  as  certain  experience  as 
that  of  which  we  are  possessed  to  convince  us  that 
such  extraordinary  effects  do  ever  result  from  a 
simple  act  of  volition/ 

To  sum  up  the  argument  in  his  own  words  : 
'  Every  idea  is  copied  from  some  preceding  impres- 
sion or  sentiment;  and  when  we  cannot  find  any 
impression  we  may  be  certain  that  there  is  no  idea. 
In  all  single  instances  of  the  operation  of  bodies  or 
minds,  there  is  nothing  that  produces  any  impression 
nor  consequently  can  suggest  any  idea  of  power  or 
necessary  connexion.  But  when  uniform  instances 
appear,  and  the  same  object  is  always  followed  by 
the  same  event,  we  then  begin  to  entertain  the 
notion  of  cause  or  connexion.  We  then  feel  a 
new  sentiment  or  impression,  to  wit,  a  customary 
connexion  in  the  thought  or  imagination  between 


346  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

one  object  and  its  usual  attendant ;  and  this  sen- 
timent is  the  original  of  that  idea  which  we  seek 
for/ 

But  the  regularity  of  the  course  of  nature  up  to 
a  certain  point  supplies  no  logical  ground  for  the 
expectation  that  the  regularity  must  continue.  Ex- 
perience can  tell  us  nothing  of  the  inner  nature  of 
bodies,  which  might  change  without  any  change  in 
their  sensible  qualities.  It  is  useless  to  say  that  my 
own  conduct  invalidates  the  doubt ;  as  a  practical 
agent  I  may  have  no  such  difficulties,  but  as  a 
philosopher  I  am  justified  in  expressing  the  doubt, 
though  I  may  have  little  hope  of  seeing  it  removed. 
'It  is  certain  that  the  most  ignorant  and  stupid 
peasants,  nay  infants,  nay,  even  brute  beasts,  improve 
by  experience,  and  learn  the  qualities  of  natural 
objects  by  observing  the  effects  which  result  from 
them.  When  a  child  has  felt  the  sensation  of  pain 
from  touching  the  flame  of  a  candle,  he  will  be  care- 
ful not  to  put  his  hand  near  any  candle  ;  but  will 
expect  a  similar  effect  from  a  cause,  which  is  similar 
in  its  sensible  qualities  and  appearance.  If  you 
assert  therefore  that  the  understanding  of  the  child 
is  led  into  this  conclusion  by  any  process  of  argu- 
ment and  ratiocination,  I  may  justly  require  you  to 
produce  that  argument,  nor  have  you  any  pretence 
to  refuse  so  equitable  a  demand.  You  cannot  say 
that  the  argument  is  abstruse  and  may  possibly 
escape  your  enquiry,  since  you  confess  that  it  is 
obvious  to  the  capacity  of  a  mere  infant1/ 

But  there  is  a  connection  of  cause  and  effect  met 

with  in  the  animal  world  and  ministering  to  the 

preservation  of  the   organism,  which   is  not  based 

upon  practice  or  experience  :    '  These  we  denominate 

1  Enquiry  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  sect.  iv. 


HUME.  347 

instincts,  and  are  so  apt  to  admire  as  something  very 
extraordinary  and  inexplicable  by  all  the  disquisi- 
tions of  human  understanding.  But  our  wonder  will, 
perhaps,  cease  or  diminish  when  we  consider  that  the 
experimental  reasoning  itself,  which  we  possess  in 
common  with  beasts  and  on  which  the  whole  conduct 
of  life  .depends,  is  nothing  but  a  species  of  instinct 
or  mechanical  power  that  acts  in  us  unknown  to 
ourselves,  and  in  its  chief  operations  is  not  directed 
by  any  such  relation  or  comparison  of  ideas  as  are  the 
proper  objects  of  our  intellectual  faculties.  Though 
the  instinct  be  different,  yet  still  it  is  an  instinct, 
which  teaches  a  man  to  avoid  the  fire  as  much  as 
that  which  teaches  a  bird  with  such  exactness  the 
art  of  incubation,  and  the  whole  economy  and  order 
of  its  nursery  V 

Both  our  practical  and  our  speculative  antici- 
pations of  natural  events  thus  display  '  a  kind  of 
pre-established  harmony  between  the  course  of  na- 
ture and  the  succession  of  our  ideas  ;  and  though 
the  powers  and  forces  by  which  the  former  is  go- 
verned be  wholly  unknown  to  us,  yet  our  thoughts 
and  conceptions  have  still,  we  find,  gone  on  in  the 
same  train  with  the  other  works  of  nature.  Custom 
is  that  principle  by  which  this  correspondence  has 
been  effected,  so  necessary  to  the  subsistence  of  our 
species  and  the  regulation  of  our  conduct  in  every 
circumstance  and  occurrence  of  human  life.  Had  not 
the  presence  of  an  object  instantly  excited  the  idea 
of  these  objects  comnlonly  conjoined  with  it,  all  our 
knowledge  must  have  been  limited  to  the  narrow 
sphere  of  our  memory  and  senses  ;  and  we  should 
never  have  been  able  to  adjust  means  to  ends,  or 
employ  our  natural  powers  either  to  the  producing 
1  Enquiry  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  sect,  ix. 


348  MODEKN  PHILOSOPHY. 

of  good  or  avoiding  of  evil .  .  .  This  operation  of  the 
mind,  by  which  we  infer  like  effects  from  like  causes, 
and  vice  versa,  is  so  essential  to  the  subsistence  of 
all  human  creatures,  it  is  not  probable  that  it  could 
be  trusted  to  the  fallacious  deductions  of  our  reason, 
which  is  slow  in  its  operations;  appears  not,  in 
any  degree,  during  the  first  years  of  infancy;  and 
at  best  is,  in  every  age  and  period  of  human 
life,  extremely  liable  to  error  and  mistake.  It  is 
more  conformable  to  the  ordinary  wisdom  of  nature 
to  secure  so  necessary  an  act  of  the  mind  by  some 
instinct  or  mechanical  tendency,  which  may  be  in- 
fallible in  its  operations,  may  discover  itself  at  the 
first  appearance  of  life  and  thought,  and  may  be  in- 
dependent of  all  the  laboured  deductions  of  the  un- 
derstanding. As  nature  has  taught  us  the  use  of  our 
limbs,  without  giving  us  the  knowledge  of  the  muscles 
and  nerves  by  which  they  are  a-ctuated,  so  has  she 
implanted  in  us  an  instinct  which  carries  forward  the 
thought  in  a  correspondent  course  to  that  which  she 
has  established  among  external  objects,  though  we 
are  ignorant  of  those  powers  and  forces  on  which 
this  regular  course  and  succession  of  objects  totally 
depends1/ 

Hume  had  thus  reached  the  same  result  as  the 
Greek  sceptics,  that  the  purpose  of  knowledge  was 
the  preservation  of  human  existence,  and  that  it 
should  therefore  never  venture  beyond  its  proper 
boundaries  and  presume  to  fathom  the  eternal  truths 
of  metaphysics,  among  which  the  investigation  of 
causes  was  to  be  reckoned,  as  this  idea,  in  and  by 
itself,  is  simply  incomprehensible  to  man,  besides 
being  never  realised  in  fact.  The  true  business  of 

1  Enquiry  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  sect.  v. 


HUME,  349 

man  is  to  reproduce  in  thought  the  sequences  given 
by  experience  in  a  corresponding  order,  and  not  to 
meddle  with  the  tedious  methods  of  logical  inferences 
or  deduction.  The  Greek  sceptics  had  substantially 
the  same  meaning  when  they  contested  the  signum  de- 
monstrativum  and  accepted  and  extolled  the  signum 
memoriale.  In  the  latter,  according  to  them,  the 
whole  force  of  human  knowledge  was  to  be  found, 
and  beyond  this  it  cannot  go;  smoke  brings  fire, 
wounds  death  into  remembrance.  The  mistake  of 
the  dogmatists  is  to  see,  in  all  these  things,  signs, 
which  are  to  enable  them  to  pierce  into  the  im- 
penetrable nature  of  things.  The  germ  of  Hume's 
theory  is  thus  contained  in  this  fundamental  view  of 
theirs.  But  it  is  very  interesting  that  the  Greek 
sceptics  should  have  been  right  in  placing  the  seat  of 
human  superiority  over  brutes  in  these  signa  memo- 
rialia,  and  thus,  perhaps,  for  the  first  time,  virtually 
indicating  the  importance  of  language  to  thought  l. 

Human  thought  could  reach  no  other  than  these 
negative  results,  from  the  starting-point  of  mere  em- 
piricism. If,  as  Locke  assumed,  the  idea  of  cause,  as 
well  as  everything  else,  was  derived  from  without, 
then  this  idea  itself  is  contingent,  not  necessary,  and 
is  therefore  self-destructive.  The  scepticism  of  Hume 
in  fact  determined  the  disintegration  of  empiricism, 
and  so  prepared  the  way  for  profounder  knowledge. 

We  must  now  follow  him  into  these  realms  of 


fie 

Krj  (pavrao-ia  Kal  tv  rj)  aKoXovflia,  aXX'  ouroi  ye  /cat  iv  rots  dfiqXois  KCU 
8ian€^)G)vr]^vois  ffvyxvpfia-opw  avrov  tlvai  TOIOVTOV,  €V  fie  rols 
<pcu.vofJLcvois  rrjpr)TiKr)v  nva  e^ft^  atoXovQtav,  Kaff  fjv  /xw?fioi/et5a>i>  TWO,  fiera 
rivav  T€0€&prjTcu9  Kal  riva  irpb  rivM,  Kai  riva  /xera  riVa,  eVe  rrjs  T£>V  7rpoT€- 
pa>i>  vTTOTrraxreax  avavcovrai.  ra  XoiTrd.  Sext.  Empir.  Adv.  Math.  viii. 
288. 


350  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

higher  knowledge  which  lie  outside  experience,  and 
deal  therefore  with  a  priori  truths,  with  speculative 
and  metaphysical  knowledge  claiming  to  impart  dog- 
matic instruction  concerning  the  nature  of  things. 

Hume  has  rendered  some  services  to  the  doctrine 
of  knowledge,  in  pursuing  the  path  opened  by  Locke, 
and  further  developing  the  relation  of  sensible  per- 
ceptions to  the  formation  of  ideas.  Locke  called  the 
ordinary  affections  of  sense,  as  well  as  the  inner 
movements  of  the  feelings,  i.  e.  the  passions,  by  the 
name  of  ideas.  Hume  saw  what  was  erroneous  in 
this  view,  and  distinguished  between  impressions  of 
sense, — the  expression  is  his  own, — and  the  thoughts 
which  are  formed  thence.  He  had  thus  taken  a  step 
which  might  have  led  him  far  in  advance  if  he  had 
followed  the  admirable  advice  of  Locke,  to  inves- 
tigate the  origin  of  ideas.  But  instead  of  doing  this, 
he  assumed,  as  appears  from  the  foregoing  passage,  a 
mysterious  incomprehensible  mechanism  within  the 
soul,  which  produces  ideas,  as  our  body  moves  by  its 
nerves  and  muscles.  Everything  supplied  food  for 
his  scepticism. 

6  All  the  objects  of  human  reason  or  enquiry  may 
naturally  be  divided  into  two  kinds,  to  wit,  Relations 
of  Ideas,  and  Matters  of  Fact.  Of  the  first  kind  are 
the  sciences  of  Geometry,  Algebra,  and  Arithmetic.  .  . 
Propositions  of  this  kind  are  discoverable  by  the  mere 
operation  of  thought,  without  dependence  on  what 
is  anywhere  existent  in  the  universe.  Though  there 
never  were  a  circle  or  triangle  in  nature,  the  truths 
demonstrated  by  Euclid,  would  for  ever  retain  their 
certainty  and  evidence. 

*  Matters  of  fact  are  not  ascertained  in  the  same 
manner,  nor  is  our  evidence  of  their  truth,  however 
great,  of  a  like  nature  with  the  foregoing.  The  con- 


HUME.  351 

trary  of  every  matter  of  fact  is  still  possible ;  because 
it  can  never  imply  a  contradiction  .  .  .  That  the  sun 
will  not  rise  to-morrow  is  no  less  intelligible  a  propo- 
sition, and  implies  no  more  contradiction,  than  the 
affirmation  that  it  will  rise1;'  there  is  no  logical 
necessity  affecting  matters  of  fact. 

If  we:  turn  to  abstract  and  a  priori  knowledge,  we 
find  ourselves  entangled  in  so  many  contradictions 
that  we  are  in  danger  of  falling  into  scepticism.  Ask 
a  mathematician  what  he  means  when  he  pronounces 
two  quantities  to  be  equal,  and  he  will  appeal  from 
reasoning  to  intuition.  The  principles  deduced  from 
the  ideas  of  space  and  time  seem  full  of  absurdity 
and  contradictions.  c  No  priestly  dogmas,  invented  on 
purpose  to  tame  and  subdue  the  rebellious  reason 
of  mankind,  ever  shocked  common  sense  more  than 
the  doctrine  of  the  infinite  divisibility  of  extension 
with  its  consequences,  as  they  are  pompously  dis- 
played by  all  geometricians  and  metaphysicians  with 
a  kind  of  triumph  and  exaltation/ 

All  men  and  even  animals  take  for  granted  the 
reality  of  the  external  world  and  regulate  their  acts 
and  wishes  upon  the  assumption.  Yet  philosophy 
furnishes  the  most  unquestionable  proof  that  all  this 
imaginary  external  reality  is  and  can  be  nothing  more 
than  modification  of  our  consciousness,  i.  e.  forms  of 
sensibility.  And  the  Cartesian  appeal  to  the  veracity 
of  the  Deity  to  prove  the  veracity  of  our  senses  is  of 
little  avail,  seeing  that  we  are  certainly  in  many  cases 
deceived  by  our  senses.  Indeed,  'it  is  universally 
allowed  by  modern  enquirers,  that  all  the  sensible 
qualities  of  objects,  such  as  hard,  soft,  hot,  cold,  white, 
black,  etc.,  are  merely  secondary,  and  exist  not  in  the 
objects  themselves,  but  are  perceptions  of  the  mind, 

1  Enquiry  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  sect.  iv. 


352  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

without  any  external  archetype  or  model,  which  they 
represent.  If  this  be  allowed,  with  regard  to 
secondary  qualities,  it  must  also  follow,  with  regard 
to  the  supposed  primary  qualities  of  extension  and 
solidity ;  nor  can  the  latter  be  any  more  entitled  to 
that  denomination  than  the  former.  The  idea  of  exten- 
sion is  entirely  acquired  from  the  senses  of  sight  and 
feeling  ...  an  extension  that  is  neither  tangible  nor 
visible  cannot  possibly  be  conceived/  so  the  assertion 
that  the  ideas  of  these  primary  qualities  are  attained 
by  abstraction  is  unintelligible,  and  even  absurd. 

The  best  course  is  to  acquiesce  in  'the  limitation  of 
our  enquiries  to  such  subjects  as  are  best  adapted  to 
the  narrow  capacity  of  human  understanding. . .  While 
we  cannot  give  a  satisfactory  reason  why  we  believe, 
after  a  thousand  experiments,  that  a  stone  will  fall, 
or  fire  burn,  can  we  ever  satisfy  ourselves  concern- 
ing any  determination  which  we  may  form,  with 
regard  to  the  origin  of  worlds,  and  the  situation  of 
nature,  from,  and  to  eternity  \ ' 

By  keeping  within  narrow  and  reasonable  limits 
we  shall  find  what  are  the  proper  subjects  of  science 
and  enquiry.  *  The  only  objects  of  the  abstract  sciences 
or  of  demonstration  are  quantity  and  number,  and  all 
attempts  to  extend  this  more  perfect  species  of  know- 
ledge beyond  these  bounds  are  mere  sophistry  and 
illusion.  As  the  component  parts  of  quantity  and 
number  are  entirely  similar,  their  relation  becomes 
intricate  and  involved;  and  nothing  can  be  more 
curious,  as  well  as  useful,  than  to  trace,  by  a  variety 
of  mediums,  their  equality  or  inequality,  through  their 
different  appearances.  But  as  all  other  ideas  are 
clearly  distinct  and  different  from  each  other,  we  can 
never  advance  further,  by  our  utmost  scrutiny,  than 
to  observe  this  diversity,  and,  by  an  obvious  reflection, 


HUME.  353 

pronounce  one  'thing  not  to  be  another.  ., .  All  those 
pretended  syllogistical  reasonings,  which  may  be 
found  in  every  other  branch  of  learning,  except  the 
sciences  of  quantity  and  number,  are  indeed  nothing 
but  imperfect  definitions,  and  those  sciences  may 
safely,  I  think,  be  pronounced  the  only  proper  objects 
of  knowledge  and  demonstration. 

'  All  other  enquiries  of  men  regard  only  matter  of 
fact  and  existence ;  and  these  are  evidently  incapable 
of  demonstration.  Whatever  is  may  not  le.  No  ne- 
gation of  a  fact  can  involve  a  contradiction  ...  it  is 
only  experience,  which  teaches  us  the  nature  and 
bounds  of  cause  and  effect.  .  .  When  we  run  over 
libraries,  persuaded  of  these  principles,  what  havoc 
must  we  make  1  If  we  take  in  our  hand  any  volume, 
of  divinity  or  school  metaphysics,  for  instance,  let  us 
ask,  Does  it  contain  any  abstract  reasoning  concern- 
ing quantity  or  number  ?  No.  Does  it  contain  any 
experimental  reasoning  concerning  matter  of  fact  and 
existence  ?  No,  Commit  it  then  to  the  flames ;  for 
it  can  contain  nothing  but  sophistry  and  illusion1/ 

The  conclusion  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired  in 
point  of  clearness. 

1.  On  the  one  hand  we  have  mathematics,  intel- 
lectual processes  in  the  realm  of  the  a  priori,  whereby 
truth  is  developed,  step  by  step,  sometimes  in  a  highly 
complicated  manner.    The  matter  of  reasoning  is  only 
the  relation  of  ideas  referring  to  quantity  and  number. 
We  are  reminded  of  Hobbes  saying  that  all  thought 
is  addition  and  subtraction. 

2.  On  the  other  hand,  the  empirical  sciences,  where 
all  syllogistic    procedure,   all  the  refinements   and 
artifices  of  subtle  thought  are  out  of  place  :  for  it  is 

1  Enquiry  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  feect.  xii. 
VOL.  1.  A  a 


354  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

not,  reason,  but  experience  alone  that  can  teach  us 
anything  about  causes  and  effects.  Who  could  have 
discovered  a  priori  the  explosive  power  of  gunpowder, 
the  direction  of  the  magnetic  needle,  and  the  like  ? 
Even  in  the  case  of  complicated  mechanism,  experi- 
ence alone  can  enlighten  us.  Who  would  ever  attempt 
to  derive  from  first  principles  the  fact  that  milk  arid 
bread  are  proper  nourishment  for  a  man,  and  not  for 
a  lion  or  tiger-? 

We  may  regard  the  empirical  enthusiasm  which 
breathes  in  all  Hume's  writings,  as  the  last  outbreak 
of  a  concentrated  animosity  against  the  scholastic 
method,  which  imagined  that  it  had  established  a 
claim  to  the  explanation  of  reality,  when  it  had 
simply  first  separated  and  then  recombined  its  own 
forms  of  thought  in  various  shapes.  The  example 
of  such  eminent  thinkers  as  Descartes,  Spinoza,  and 
Leibniz,  shows  that  in  theological  and  philosophical 
writings  this  method  still  largely  prevailed,  notwith- 
standing the  light  already  won.  They  all  sought  to 
bridge  the  interval  between  thought  and  fact  with 
the  ens  maxime  necessarium,  which  was  also  the  ens 
realissimum.  Hume's  fundamental  idea  and  profound 
conviction  is,  on  the  contrary,  that  no  ens  reale  is 
necessarium,  let  alone  maxime  necessarium,  except 
indeed  for  those  who  are  entangled  in  the  circular 
revolutions  of  the  syllogism,  and  in  all  their  labour 
fail  to  light  upon  any  road  to  reality,  since  they  cannot 
see  or  value  its  one  true  source — experience. 

We  have  already  spoken,  apropos  of  Spinoza's 
Ethics,  of  the  perverse  attempt  to  apply  mathematical 
methods  to  other  conceptions.  One  example  taken 
from  Wolff's  works  may  suffice  to  show  what  a  fruit- 
less and  unintelligent  use  is  made  of  it  in  the  writings 
of  ordinary  mediocre  men.  In  the  '  Anfangsgrtinde 


HUME.  355 

der  Baukunst '  we  find  the  proposition :  A  window 
must  be  wide  enough  for  two  persons  to  lie  comfort- 
ably in  it.  Demonstration.  People  frequently  wish 
to  lie  in  a  window  with  one  other  person  to  look  out 
of  it  and  as  ($  i)  the  architect  ought  in  all  things  to 
consult  the  wishes  of  the  landlord,  he  ought  to  make 
the  windows  wide  enough  for  two  persons  to  lie  com- 
fortably side  by  side  in  it.  Q.  E.  D.1 

Kant's  relation  to  Hume  is  clearly  indicated  in  the 
passage  quoted  above  from  the  Prolegomena,  and  the 
same  passage  shows  plainly  wherein  the  great  philo- 
sopher conceived  the  gist  of  Hume's  scepticism,  which 
he  characterises  as  incontrovertible,  to  consist. 

Since  the  acceptance  of  the  Cartesian  cogito  as  the 
starting-point  of  philosophy,  the  chief  preoccupation 
both  of  its  author  and  all  his  successors  has  been  to 

1  This  kind  of  professorial  philosophy,  which  lay  like  an  incubus 
on  humanity,  was  in  Goethe's  mind,  when  he  made  Mephistopheles 
describe  the  nature  of  logic  in  the  well-known  verses  which  tell  how 
to  what  seemed  so  simple  as  eating  and  drinking, '  One,  two,  three '  was 
necessary.  Schiller  laughs  at  the  same  philosophy,  when  he  writes  : — 

'Doch  wer  Metaphysik  studirt, 
Der  weiss  dass  wer  verbrennt,  nicht  friert, 
Und  dass  das  Helle  leuchtet, 
Und  dass  das  Nasse  feuchtet/ 

Lichtenberg's  persiflage  supplies  an  excellent  pendant — it  can 
hardly  be  called  a  parody — to  the  above  passage  of  Wolff:  '  When  a 
house  is  on  fire,  the  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  cover  the  right  side 
of  the  house  on  the  left  hand,  and  the  left  side  of  the  house  on  the 
right  hand.  Demonstration :  For  supposing  on  the  contrary  one 
were  first  to  cover  the  right  side  of  the  right-hand  house  and  the 
left  side  of  the  left-hand  house,  the  right  side  of  the  left-hand 
house  and  the  left  side  of  the  right-hand  house  are  nearer  to  the 
flames  than  the  left  side  of  the  left-hand  house  and  the  right  side 
of  the  right-hand  house.  If,  then,  one  were  to  cover  the  latter 
rather  than  the  former,  one  would  be  protecting  what  is  further 
from  the  flames  sooner  than  what  is  nearest  them,  which  is  mani- 
festly contrary  to  reason.'  Ergo  &c.,  Q.  E.  D. 

A  a  2 


356  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY. 

discover  some  explanation  or  excuse  for  the  assump- 
tion of  a  real  external  world,  when  everything  is  only 
thought,  ideal,  a  mode  or  modes  of  consciousness. 

The  only  thinkers  who  have  affected  a  real  recon- 
ciliation of  the  two  opposites,  Spinoza  and  Leibniz, 
go  beyond  the  Cartesian  standpoint  and  construct  a 
world,  it  is  true  in  strict  accordance  with  the  rules 
and  method  of  Cartesian  idealism,  but  dogmatically, 
without  further  proof  or  foundation. 

The  rest  throw  themselves  resolutely  upon  one  or 
other  opposite,  either  ignoring  or  peremptorily  deny- 
ing the  existence  of  the  other.  The  most  consistent 
of  all,  is  Bishop  Berkeley,  whose  idealism  may  stagger 
us,  but  is  not  to  be  confuted.  It  is  of  him  that  Hume 
says  :  '  Most  of  the  writings  of  that  very  ingenious 
author  form  the  best  lessons  of  scepticism  which  are 
to  be  found  either  among  the  ancient  or  modern 
philosophers,  Bayle  not  excepted.  He  professes, 
however,  in  his  title-page,  to  have  composed  his 
book  against  the  sceptics  as  well  as  against  the 
atheists  and  free-thinkers.  But  that  all  his  argu- 
ments, though  otherwise  intended,  are,  in  reality, 
merely  sceptical,  appears  from  this,  that  they  admit  of 
no  answer,  and  produce  no  conviction.  Their  only 
effect  is  to  cause  that  momentary  amazement  and 
irresolution  and  confusion,  which  is  the  result  of 
scepticism/ 

The  place  and  importance  of  Hume  in  the  stream 
of  philosophical  thought  may  be  estimated  from  this. 
Both  standpoints,  he  said,  the  idealistic  and  the 
realistic,  are  unassailable.  But,  instead  of  endeavour- 
ing, like  all  his  predecessors,  to  combine  or  reconcile 
them,  or  to  subordinate  one  to  the  other,  he  admitted 
the  claims  of  both,  and  recognised  both  as  completely 
in  harmony  with  rational  thought.  But  he  added, 


HUME.  357 

they  contradict  each  other,  and  there  is  no  higher 
court  of  appeal  to  decide  the  controversy,  nothing 
therefore  remains  for  mankind  but — Doubt. 

If  we  continue  within  the  realms  of  the  ideal,  we 
have  before  us  the  magnificent  spectacle  of  human 
thought  proceeding  by  way  of  premisses  and  conclu- 
sion in  Mathematics.  Thought  there  arrives,  by  an- 
alysing itself,  at  necessary  truths,  which  hold  good 
everywhere  and  always,  and  require  no  experience  to 
verify  or  confirm  them.  But  what  do  we  see  underlying 
this  analysis  as  its  ultimate  foundation  ?  An  abyss  of 
paradoxes,  paralogisms,  and  contradictions,  exceeding 
anything  that  has  ever  been  hatched  by  the  craziest 
human  imagination.  In  this  abyss  madness  may  be 
found  to  lurk,  but  certainly  not  a  metaphysical  solu- 
tion of  the  nature  of  things. 

In  mathematics,  where  the  relation  only  of  our 
ideas  is  concerned,  there  is  so  much  clearness,  be- 
cause we  are  dealing  there  with  quantity  alone,  the 
most  abstract  of  conceptions,  with  a  more  or  less,  in 
fact,  and  not  with  anything  real,  which  would  neces- 
sarily presuppose  some  quality  by  which  it  is  deter- 
mined. The  simplest  consideration,  however,  will 
suffice  to  show  that  there  is  no  road  leading  from 
mathematical  ideas  to  the  reality  of  things  ;  that  in 
consequence  this  ideal  region  is  altogether  isolated 
and  cut  off  from  actual  fact,  although  it  is  not 
improbable,  as  hinted  by  Hume,  that  these  ideas 
themselves  are  derived  from  sensible  perception  and 
experience.  (The  latter  view  again  destroys  the 
universality  and  necessity  of  mathematical  science.) 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  betake  ourselves  to  the 
region  of  realism,  we  are  referred  to  experience  alone ; 
and  here  everything  remains  for  ever  a  riddle  to  the 
analytic  reason.  Our  reason  seems  to  recognise  causes 


35^  MODERN   PHILOSOPHY. 

and  effects  while  experience  can  only  present  to  us  con- 
tingencies, casual  or  accidental  coincidences.  All  an- 
alysis of  our  own  mental  processes  is  then  of  no  avail; 
the  practician  alone  who  transforms  a  series  of  em- 
pirical facts  into  an  equivalent  series  of  ideas,  meets 
with  success.  Even  the  formation  of  ideas,  which 
takes  places  in  our  mind,  and  is  in  harmony  with  the 
things  of  the  outer  world,  is  as  great  and  insoluble  a 
mystery  to  us  as  the  nature  of  our  soul.  It  is  as  in- 
conceivable to  our  reason  as  the  mysterious  mechanism 
of  our  bodies,  of  which  we  seem  to  make  use  through 
the  will. 

It  follows  thence  that  the  ideal  is  just  as  incom- 
prehensible as  the  real ;  we  can  give  no  explanation, 
but  the  superficial  empirical  one,  when  we  say,  there 
is  the  effect  of  habit,  here  a  certain  regularity  of  suc- 
cession. With  the  coordination  of  these  two  prin- 
ciples human  knowledge — which  for  practical  pur- 
poses is  sufficient  and  complete  —  takes  its  rise. 
The  wherefore  of  ideas,  the  wherefore  of  real  se- 
quences, the  wherefore  of  the  harmony  between  the 
real  and  the  ideal, — this  remains  for  ever  unknown 
and  inconceivable. 

Thus  rational  thought  had  destroyed  the  claims  of 
reason,  and  reason  itself  seemed  to  have  committed 
suicide.  The  Cartesian  Dubito  was  reinstated  in  all 
its  rigour  and  severity.  All  the  conclusions  of  past 
philosophic  speculation  were  called  in  question.  The 
systems  built  up  with  so  much  labour  and  acuteness 
by  the  dogmatists  were  arrayed  against  each  other, 
and  had  met  in  a  mutually  destructive  shock.  Organic 
structures  had  been  reduced  to  chaotic  elemental 
forces.  Dark  clouds  and  gloomy  mist  overhang  the 
intellectual  world,  and  seem  to  hinder  every  outlook 
towards  the  lights  of  certain  knowledge.  But  this 


HUME.  359 

twilight  gray  announced  the  morning  glow  of  the 
approaching  day.  A  star  was  to  rise  from  above  the 
philosophic  horizon,  whose  radiance  was  to  obscure 
all  previous  achievements.  It  was  reserved  for  Kant 
to  sound  the  furthest  depths  of  human  reason,  and  so 
for  ever  to  disperse  the  anxious  doubts  by  which  it 
was  beset,  to  establish  its  just  and  inalienable  claims, 
as  well  as  to  determine  for  all  time  the  boundaries 
beyond  which  it  must  not  venture,  under  penalty  of 
losing  itself  upon  the  shoreless  ocean  of  vain  imagina- 
tions and  wild  and  empty  speculation. 

He  was  to  show  why  all  earlier  speculation  had 
broken  down,  and  must  have  broken  down ;  he  alone 
succeeded  in  solving  all  the  contradictions  and  para- 
doxes in  which  the  reason  was  entangled  and  in  ex- 
plaining them  completely  in  accordance  with  their 
own  nature,  as  he  dropped  the  sounding  line  into 
depths  which  as  yet  no  mortal  mind  had  dared  to 
fathom,  and  brought  up  from  thence  to  the  light  of 
day  news  of  the  primary  conditions  and  eternal  pos- 
tulates of  reason. 

It  is  therefore  not  too  much  to  say  that  Kant  is 
the  greatest  philosophical  genius  that  has  ever  dwelt 
upon  earth,  and  the  *  Critique  of  Pure  Reason '  the 
highest  achievement  of  human  wisdom. 


SUPPLEMENTS. 


THE  PEINCIPAL  ADDITIONS  MADE  BY 
KANT  IN  THE  SECOND  EDITION 


OP  THIS 


CEITIQUE  OF  PUKE  SEASON, 

PUBLISHED  IN  1787. 


SUPPLEMENT  I. 

MOTTO  TO  SECOND  EDITION, 

BACO  DE  VERTJLAMIO. 
Instauratio  magna:  Pr&fatio. 

DE  nobis  ipsis  silemus :  de  re  autem,  quae  agitur, 
petimus,  ut  homines  earn  non  opinionern,  sed  opus 
esse  cogitent ;  ac  pro  certo  habeant,  non  sectae  nos 
alicujus  aut  placiti,  sed  utilitatis  et  amplitudinis 
humanae  fundamenta  moliri.  Deinde  ut  suis  com- 
modis  aequi  ...  in  commune  consulant, .  .  .  et  ipsi  in 
partem  veniant.  Prseterea,  ut  bene  sperent,  neque 
Instaurationem  nostram  ut  quiddam  infmitum  et 
ultra  mortale  fingant,  et  animo  concipiant;  quum 
revera  sit  infiniti  erroris  finis  et  terminus  legitimus. 


SUPPLEMENT  II. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.    1787.    [p.vii] 

WHETHER  the  treatment  of  that  class  of  know- 
ledge with  which  reason  is  occupied,  follows  the 
secure  method  of  a  science  or  not,  can  easily  be 
determined  by  the  result.  If,  after  repeated  prepar- 
ations, it  comes  to  a  standstill,  as  soon  as  its  real 
goal  is  approached,  or  is  obliged,  in  order  to  reach 
it,  to  retrace  its  steps  again  and  again,  and  strike 
into  fresh  paths ;  again,  if  it  is  impossible  to  produce 
unanimity  among  those  who  are  engaged  in  the 
same  work,  as  to  the  manner  in  which  their  common 
object  should  be  obtained,  we  may  be  convinced  that 
such  a  study  is  far  from  having  attained  to  the 
secure  method  of  a  science,  but  is  groping  only  in 
the  dark.  In  that  case  we  are  conferring  a  great 
benefit  on  reason,  if  we  only  find  out  the  right 
method,  though  many  things  should  have  to  be 
surrendered  as  useless,  which  were  comprehended  in 
the  original  aim  that  had  been  chosen  without  suf- 
ficient reflection. 

That  Logic,  from  the  earliest  times,  has  [p.  viii] 
followed  that  secure  method,  may  be  seen  from  the 
fact  that  since  Aristotle  it  has  not  had  to  retrace  a 
single  step,  unless  we  choose  to  consider  as  improve- 
ments the  removal  of  some  unnecessary  subtleties, 
or  the  clearer  definition  of  its  matter,  both  of  which 
refer  to  the  elegance  rather  than  to  the  solidity 
of  the  science.  It  is  remarkable  also,  that  to  the 
present  day,  it  has  not  been  able  to  make  one  step 


SUPPLEMENT  II.  365 

in  advance,  so  that,  to  all  appearance,  it  may  be  con- 
sidered as  completed  and  perfect.  If  some  modern 
philosophers  thought  to  enlarge  it,  by  introducing 
'psychological  chapters  on  the  different  faculties  of 
knowledge  (faculty  of  imagination,  wit,  &c.),  or  meta- 
physical chapters  on  the  origin  of  knowledge,  or 
the  different  degrees  of  certainty  according  to  the 
difference  of  objects  (idealism,  scepticism,  &c.),  or 
lastly,  anthropological  chapters  on  prejudices,  their 
causes  and  remedies,  this  could  only  arise  from  their 
ignorance  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  logical  science. 
We  do  not  enlarge,  but  we  only  disfigure  the  sciences, 
if  we  allow  their  respective  limits  to  be  confounded : 
and  the  limits  of  logic  are  definitely  fixed  by  the 
fact,  that  it  is  a  science  which  has  nothing  to  do  but 
fully  to  exhibit  and  strictly  to  prove  all  formal  [p.  ix] 
rules  of  thought  (whether  it  be  a  priori  or  empirical, 
whatever  be  its  origin  or  its  object,  and  whatever 
be  the  impediments,  accidental  or  natural,  which  it 
has  to  encounter  in  the  human  mind). 

That  logic  should  in  this  respect  have  been  so 
successful,  is  due  entirely  to  its  limitation,  whereby 
it  has  not  only  the  light,  but  the  duty,  to  make 
abstraction  of  all  the  objects  of  knowledge  and  their 
differences,  so  that  the  understanding  has  to  deal 
with  nothing  beyond  itself,  and  its  own  forms.  It 
was  far  more  difficult,  of  course,  for  reason  to  enter 
on  the  secure  method  of  science,  considering  that  it 
has  to  deal  not  with  itself  only,  but  also  with  objects. 
Logic,  therefore,  as  a  kind  of  preparation  (pro- 
paedeutic) forms,  as  it  were,  the  vestibule  of  the 
sciences  only,  and  where  real  knowledge  is  concerned, 
is  presupposed  for  critical  purposes,  while  the  acqui- 
sition of  knowledge  must  be  sought  for  in  the  sciences 
themselves,  properly  and  objectively  so  called. 


366  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

If  there  is  to  be  in  those  sciences  an  element  of 
reason,  something  in  them  must  be  known  a  priori, 
and  knowledge  may  stand  in  a  twofold  relation  to 
its  object,  by  either  simply  determining  it  and  [p.  x] 
its  concept  (which  must  be  supplied  from  elsewhere), 
or  by  making  it  real  also.  The  former  is  theoretical, 
the  latter  practical  knowledge  of  reason.  In  both 
the  pure  part,  namely,  that  in  which  reason  de- 
termines its  object  entirely  a  priori  (whether  it  con- 
tain much  or  little),  must  be  treated  first,  without 
mixing  up  with  it  what  comes  from  other  sources ; 
for  it  is  bad  economy  to  spend  blindly  whatever 
comes  in,  and  not  to  be  able  to  determine,  when  there 
is  a  stoppage,  which  part  of  the  income  can  bear  the 
expenditure,  and  where  reductions  must  be  made. 

Mathematics  and  physics  are  the  two  theoretical 
sciences  of  reason,  which  have  to  determine  their 
objects  a  priori ;  the  former  quite  purely,  the  latter 
partially  so,  and  partially  from  other  sources  of 
knowledge  besides  reason.  Mathematics,  from  the 
earliest  times  to  which  the  history  of  human  reason 
can  reach,  has  followed,  among  that  wonderful  people 
of  the  Greeks,  the  safe  way  of  a  science.  But  it 
must  not  be  supposed  that  it  was  as  easy  for  mathe- 
matics as  for  logic,  in  which  reason  is  concerned  with 
itself  alone,  to  find,  or  rather  to  make  for  itself  that 
royal  road.  I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  [p.  xi] 
there  was  a  long  period  of  tentative  work  (chiefly 
still  among  the  Egyptians),  and  that  the  change  is  to 
be  ascribed  to  a  revolution,  produced  by  the  happy 
thought  of  a  single  man,  whose  experiment  pointed 
unmistakably  to  the  path  that  had  to  be  followed,  and 
opened  and  traced  out  for  the  most  distant  times  the 
safe  way  of  a  science.  The  history  of  that  intellectual 
revolution,  which  was  far  more  important  than  the 


SUPPLEMENT   II.  367 

discovery  of  the  passage  round  the  celebrated  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  and  the  name  of  its  fortunate  author, 
have  not  been  preserved  to  us.  But  the  story  pre- 
served by  Diogenes  Laertius,  who  names  the  reputed 
author  of  the  smallest  elements  of  ordinary  geometrical 
demonstration,  even  of  such  as,  according  to  general 
opinion,  do  not  require  to  be  proved,  shows,  at  all 
events,  that  the  memory  of  the  revolution,  produced 
by  the  very  first  traces  of  the  discovery  of  a  new 
method,  appeared  extremely  important  to  the  mathe- 
maticians, and  thus  remained  unforgotten.  A  new 
light  flashed  on  the  first  man  who  demonstrated  the 
properties  of  the  isosceles  triangle1  (whether  his  name 
was  Tholes  or  any  other  name),  for  he  found  that  he 
had  not  to  investigate  what  he  saw  in  the  [p.  xii] 
figure,  or  the  mere  concept  of  that  figure,  and  thus 
to  learn  its  properties  ;  but  that  he  had  to  produce  his 
knowledge  by  means  of  what  he  had  himself,  accord- 
ing to  concepts  a  priori,  placed  into  that  figure,  and 
represented  (by  construction),  so  that,  in  order  to 
know  anything  with  certainty  a  priori,  he  must  not 
attribute  to  that  figure  anything  beyond  what  neces- 
sarily follows  from  what  he  has  himself  placed  into 
it,  in  accordance  with  the  concept. 

It  took  a  much  longer  time  before  physics  entered 
on  the  high  way  of  science  :  for  no  more  than  a  cen- 
tury and  half  has  elapsed,  since  the  ingenious  proposal 
of  Bacon  partly  initiated  that  discovery,  partly,  as 
others  were  already  on  the  right  track,  gave  a  new 
impetus  to  it, — a  discovery  which,  like  the  former,  can 
only  be  explained  by  a  rapid  intellectual  revolution. 

1  Kant  himself  in  a  letter  to  Schiitz  (Darstellung  seines  Lebens 
von  seinem  Sohn,  Halle,  1835,  Band.  II.  S.  208)  pointed  out  the 
mistake  which  appears  in  the  preface  to  the  2nd  edition,  namely, 
gleichseitig  (equilateral),  instead  of  gleichschenkelig  (isosceles). 


368  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

In  what  I  have  to  say,  I  shall  confine  myself  to 
natural  science,  so  far  as  it  is  founded  on  empirical 
principles. 

When  Galilei  let  balls  of  a  particular  weight, 
which  he  had  determined  himself,  roll  down  an  in- 
clined plain,  or  Torricelli  made  the  air  carry  a  weight, 
which  he  had  previously  determined  to  be  equal  to  that 
of  a  definite  volume  of  water ;  or  when,  in  later  times, 
Stahl x  changed  metal  into  lime,  and  lime  again  into 
metals,  by  withdrawing  and  restoring  some-    [p.  xiii] 
thing,  a  new  light  flashed  on  all  students  of  nature. 
They  comprehended  that  reason  has  insight  into  that 
only,  which  she  herself  produces  on  her  own  plan, 
and  that  she  must  move  forward  with  the  principles 
of  her  judgments,  according  to  fixed  law,  and  compel 
nature  to  answer  her  questions,  but  not  let  herself  be 
led  by  nature,  as  it  were  in  leading  strings,  because 
otherwise,  accidental  observations,  made  on  no  pre- 
viously fixed  plan,  will  never  converge  towards  a 
necessary  law,  which  is  the  only  thing  that  reason 
seeks  and  requires.     Reason,  holding  in  one  hand  its 
principles,  according  to  which  concordant  phenomena 
alone  can  be  admitted  as  laws  of  nature,  and  in  the 
other  hand  the   experiment,  which  it  has  devised 
according  to  those  principles,  must  approach  nature, 
in  order  to  be  taught  by  it :  but  not  in  the  character 
of  a  pupil,  who  agrees  to  everything  the  master  likes, 
but  as  an  appointed  judge,  who  compels  the  witnesses 
to  answer  the  questions  which  he  himself  proposes. 
Therefore  even  the  science  of  physics  entirely  owes 
the  beneficial  revolution  in  its  character  to  the  happy 
thought,  that  we  ought  to   seek  in  nature    [p.  xiv] 

1  I  am  not  closely  following  here  the  course  of  the  history  of  the 
experimental  method,  nor  are  the  first  beginnings  of  it  very  well 
known. 


SUPPLEMENT  II.  '  369 

(and  not  import  into  it  by  means  of  fiction)  what- 
ever reason  must  learn  from  nature,  and  could  not 
know  by  itself,  and  that  we  must  do  this  in  accordance 
with  what  reason  itself  has  originally  placed  into 
nature.  Thus  only  has  the  study  of  nature  entered 
on  the  secure  method  of  a  science,  after  having 
for  many  centuries  done  nothing  but  grope  in  the 
dark. 

Metaphysic,  a  completely  isolated  and  speculative 
science  of  reason,  which  declines  all  teaching  of  expe- 
rience, and  rests  on  concepts  only  (not  on  their  ap- 
plication to  intuition,  as  mathematics),  in  which  reason 
therefore  is  meant  to  be  her  own  pupil,  has  hitherto 
not  been  so  fortunate  as  to  enter  on  the  secure  path 
of  a  science,  although  it  is  older  than  all  other  sciences, 
and  would  remain,  even  if  all  the  rest  were  swallowed 
up  in  the  abyss  of  an  all-destroying  barbarism.  In 
metaphysic,  reason,  even  if  it  tries  only  to  under- 
stand a  priori,  (as  it  pretends  to  do,)  those  laws  which 
are  confirmed  by  the  commonest  experience,  is  con- 
stantly brought  to  a  standstill,  and  we  are  obliged 
again  and  again  to  retrace  our  steps,  because  they  do 
not  lead  us  where  we  want  to  go ;  while  as  to  any 
unanimity  among  those  who  are  engaged  in  [p.  xv] 
the  same  work,  there  is  so  little  of  it  in  metaphysic, 
that  it  has  rather  become  an  arena,  specially  destined, 
it  would  seem,  for  those  who  wish  to  exercise  them- 
selves in  mock  fights,  and  where  no  combatant  has,  as 
yet,  succeeded  in  gaining  an  inch  of  ground  that  he 
could  call  permanently  his  own.  It  cannot  be  denied, 
therefore,  that  the  method  of  metaphysic  has  hitherto 
consisted  in  groping  only,  and,  what  is  the  worst,  in 
groping  among  mere  concepts. 

What  then  can  be  the  cause  that  hitherto  no 
secure  method  of  science  has  been  discovered  I  •  Shall 

VOL*  i.  B  b 


37O  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

we  say  that  it  is  impossible  ?  Then  why  should 
nature  have  visited  our  reason  with  restless  aspira- 
tion to  look  for  it,  as  if  it  were  its  most  important 
concern  ?  Nay  more,  how  little  should  we  be  justified 
in  trusting  our  reason  if,  with  regard  to  one  of  the 
most  important  objects  we  wish  to  know,  it  not  only 
abandons  us,  but  lures  us  on  by  vain  hopes,  and  in 
the  end  betrays  us!  Or,  if  hitherto  we  have  only 
failed  to  meet  with  the  right  path,  what  indications 
are  there  to  make  us  hope  that,  if  we  renew  our 
researches,  we  shall  be  more  successful  than  others 
before  us  ? 

The  examples  of  mathematics  and  natural  science, 
which  by  one  revolution  have  hecome  what  [p.  xvi] 
they  now  are,  seem  to  me  sufficiently  remarkable 
to  induce  us  to  consider,  what  may  have  been  the 
essential  element  in  that  intellectual  revolution  which 
has  proved  so  beneficial  to  them,  and  to  make  the 
experiment,  at  least,  so  far  as  the  analogy  between 
them,  as  sciences  of  reason,  with  metaphysic  allows 
it,  of  imitating  them.  Hitherto  it  has  been  supposed 
that  all  our  knowledge  must  conform  to  the  objects  : 
but,  under  that  supposition,  all  attempts  to  establish 
anything  about  them  a  priori,  by  means  of  concepts, 
and  thus  to  enlarge  our  knowledge,  have  come  to 
nothing.  The  experiment  therefore  ought  to  be  made, 
whether  we  should  not  succeed  better  with  the  pro- 
blems of  metaphysic,  by  assuming  that  the  objects 
must  conform  to  our  mode  of  cognition,  for  this 
would  better  agree  with  the  demanded  possibility  of 
an  a  priori  knowledge  of  them,  which  is  to  settle 
something  about  objects,  before  they  are  given  us. 
We  have  here  the  same  case  as  with  the  first  thought 
of  Copernicus,  who,  not  being  able  to  get  on  in  the 
explanation  of  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies, 


SUPPLEMENT  II.  371 

as  long  as  he  assumed  that  all  the  stars  turned  round 
the  spectator,  tried,  whether  he  could  not  succeed  bet- 
ter, by  assuming  the  spectator  to  be  turning  round, 
and  the  stars  to  be  at  rest.  A  similar  experiment 
may  be  tried  in  metaphysic,  so  far  as  the  in-  [p.  xvii] 
tuition  .of  objects  is  concerned.  If  the  intuition  had 
to  conform  to  the  constitution  of  objects,  I  do  not 
see  how" we  could  know  anything  of  it  a  priori;  but 
if  the  object  (as  an  object  of  the  senses)  conform  to 
the  constitution  of  our  faculty  of  intuition,  I  can  very 
well  conceive  such  a  possibility.  As,  however,  I  can- 
not rest  in  these  intuitions,  if  they  are  to  become 
knowledge,  but  have  to  refer  them,  as  representations, 
to  something  as  their  object,  and  must  determine  that 
object  by  them,  I  have  the  choice  of  admitting, 
either  that  the  concepts,  by  which  I  carry  out  that 
determination,  conform  to  the  object,  being  then 
again  in  the  same  perplexity  on  account  of  the  manner 
how  I  can  know  anything  about  it  a  priori ;  or  that 
the  objects,  or  what  is  the  same,  the  experience  in 
which  alone  they  are  known  (as  given  objects),  must 
conform  to  those  concepts.  In  the  latter  case,  the 
solution  becomes  more  easy,  because  experience,  as 
a  kind  of  knowledge,  requires  understanding,  and 
I  must  therefore,  even  before  objects  are  given  to 
me,  presuppose  the  rules  of  the  understanding  as 
existing  within  me  a  priori,  these  rules  being  ex- 
pressed in  concepts  a  priori,  to  which  all  objects  of 
experience  must  necessarily  conform,  and  with  which 
they  must  agree.  With  regard  to  objects,  so  [p.  xviii] 
far  as  they  are  conceived  by  reason  only,  and  con- 
ceived as  necessary,  and  which  can  never  be  given  in 
experience,  at  least  in  that  form  in  which  they  are 
conceived  by  reason,  we  shall  find  that  the  attempts 
at  conceiving  them  (for  they  must  admit  of*  being 

B  b  2 


372  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

conceived)  will  furnish  afterwards  an  excellent  test 
of  our  new  method  of  thought,  according  to  which 
we  do  not  know  of  things  anything  a  priori,  except 
what  we  ourselves  put  into  them T. 

This  experiment  succeeds  as  well  as  we  could 
desire,  and  promises  to  metaphysic,  in  its  first  part, 
which  deals  with  concepts  a  priori,  of  which  the 
corresponding  objects  may  be  given  in  experience, 
the  secure  method  of  a  science.  For  by  thus  [p.  xix] 
changing  our  point  of  view,  the  possibility  of  know- 
ledge a  priori  can  well  be  explained,  and,  what  is 
still  more,  the  laws  which  a  priori  lie  at  the  founda- 
tion of  nature,  as  the  sum  total  of  the  objects  of 
experience,  may  be  supplied  with  satisfactory  proofs, 
neither  of  which  was  possible  with  the  procedure 
hitherto  adopted.  But  there  arises  from  this  deduc- 
tion of  our  faculty  of  knowing  a  priori,  as  given  in 
the  first  part  of  metaphysic,  a  somewhat  startling 
result,  apparently  most  detrimental  to  the  objects  of 
metaphysic  that  have  to  be  treated  in  the  second 

1  This  method,  borrowed  from  the  student  of  nature,  consists  in 
our  looking  for  the  elements  of  pure  reason  in  that  which  can  be 
confirmed  or  refuted  by  experiment.  Now  it  is  impossible,  in  order 
to  test  the  propositions  of  pure  reason,  particularly  if  they  venture 
beyond  all  the  limits  of  possible  experience,  to  make  any  experi- 
ment with  their  objects  (as  in  natural  science) ;  we  can  therefore 
only  try  with  concepts  and  propositions  which  we  admit  a  priori, 
by  so  contriving  that  the  same  objects  may  be  considered  on  one 
side  as  objects  of  the  senses  and  of  the  understanding  in  expe- 
rience, and,  on  the  other,  as  objects  which  are  only  thought, 
intended,  it  may  be,  for  the  isolated  reason  which  strives  to  go 
beyond  all  the  limits  of  experience.  This  gives  us  two  different 
sides  to  be  looked  at;  and  if  we  find  that,  by  looking  on  things 
from  that  twofold  point  of  view,  there  is  an  agreement  with  the 
principle  of  pure  reason,  while  by  admitting  one  point  of  view 
only,  there  arises  an  inevitable  conflict  with  reason,  then  the  ex- 
periment decides  in  favour  of  the  correctness  of  that  distinction. 


SUPPLEMENT   II.  373 

part,  namely  the  impossibility  of  going  with  it  beyond 
the  frontier  of  possible  experience,  which  is  precisely 
the  most  essential  purpose  of  metaphysical  [p.  xx] 
science.  But  here  we  have  exactly  the  experiment 
which,  by  disproving  the  opposite,  establishes  the 
truth  of  our  first  estimate  of  the  knowledge  of  reason 
a  priori,  namely,  that  it  can  refer  to  phenomena  only, 
but  must  leave  the  thing  by  itself  as  unknown  to  us, 
though  as  existing  by  itself.  For  that  which  impels 
us  by  necessity  to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  experience 
and  of  all  phenomena,  is  the  imconditioned,  which 
reason  postulates  in  all  things  by  themselves,  by 
necessity  and  by  right,  for  everything  conditioned,  so 
that  the  series  of  conditions  should  thus  become  com- 
plete. If  then  we  find  that,  under  the  supposition  of 
our  experience  conforming  to  the  objects  as  things  by 
themselves,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  the  uncondi- 
tioned without  contradiction,  while,  under  the  suppo- 
sition of  our  representation  of  things,  as  they  are 
given  to  us,  not  conforming  to  them  as  things  by 
themselves,  but,  on  the  contrary,  of  the  objects  con- 
forming to  our  mode  of  representation,  that  contra- 
diction vanishes,  and  that  therefore  the  unconditioned 
must  not  be  looked  for  in  things,  so  far  as  we  know 
them  (so  far  as  they  are  given  to  us),  but  only  so  far 
as  we  do  not  know  them  (as  things  by  themselves),  we 
clearly  perceive  that,  what  we  at  first  assumed  tenta- 
tively only,  is  fully  confirmed l.  [  p.  xxi] 

1  This  experiment  of  pure  reason  has  a  great  similarity  with 
that  of  the  chemists,  which  they  sometimes  call  the  experiment  of 
reduction,  or  the  synthetical  process  in  general.  The  analysis  of 
the  metaphysician  divided  pure  knowledge  a  priori  into  two  very 
heterogeneous  elements,  namely,  the  knowledge  of  things  as  phe- 
nomena, and  of  things  by  themselves.  Dialectic  coinbyies  these 
two  again,  to  bring  them  into  harmony  with  the  necessary  idea  of 


374  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

But,  after  all  progress  in  the  field  of  the  supersen- 
suous  has  thus  been  denied  to  speculative  reason,  it  is 
still  open  to  us  to  see,  whether  in  the  practical  know- 
ledge of  reason  data  may  riot  be  found  which  enable  us 
to  determine  that  transcendent  concept  of  the  uncon- 
ditioned which  is  demanded  by  reason,  in  order  thus, 
according  to  the  wish  of  metaphysic,  to  get  beyond 
the  limits  of  all  possible  experience,  by  means  of  our 
knowledge  a  priori,  which  is  possible  to  us  for  prac- 
tical purposes  only.  In  this  case,  speculative  reason 
has  at  least  gained  for  us  room  for  such  an  extension 
of  knowledge,  though  it  had  to  leave  it  empty,  so 
that  we  are  not  only  at  liberty,  but  are  really  called 
upon  to  fill  it  up,  if  we  are  able,  by  practical  data  of 
reason1.  [p.  xxii] 

The  very  object  of  the  critique  of  pure  speculative 
reason  consists  in  this  attempt  at  changing  the  old 
procedure  of  metaphysic,  and  imparting  to  it  the 

the  unconditioned,  demanded  by  reason,  and  then  finds  that  this 
harmony  can  never  be  obtained,  except  through  the  above  distinc- 
tion, which  therefore  must  be  supposed  to  be  true. 

1  In  the  same  manner  the  laws  of  gravity,  determining  the 
movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  imparted  the  character  of 
established  certainty  to  what  Copernicus  had  assumed  at  first  as 
an  hypothesis  only,  and  proved  at  the  same  time  the  invisible 
force  (the  Newtonian  attraction)  which  holds  the  universe  together, 
which  would  have  remained  for  ever  undiscovered,  if  Copernicus 
had  not  dared,  by  an  hypothesis,  which,  though  contradicting  the 
senses,  was  yet  true,  to  seek  the  observed  movements,  not  in  the 
heavenly  bodies,  but  in  the  spectator.  I  also  propose  in  this 
preface  my  own  view  of  metaphysics,  which  has  so  many  analogies 
with  the  Copernican  hypothesis,  as  an  hypothesis  only,  though,  in 
the  Critique  itself,  it  is  proved  by  means  of  our  representations  of 
space  and  time,  and  the  elementary  concepts  of  the  understanding, 
not  hypothetically,  but  apodictically ;  for  I  wish  that  people  should 
observe  the  first  attempts  at  such  a  change,  which  must  always  be 
hypothetical. 


SUPPLEMENT   II.  375 

secure  method  of  a  science,  after  having  completely 
revolutionized  it,  following  the  example  of  geometry 
and  physical  science.  That  critique  is  a  treatise  on 
the  method  (Traite  de  la  methods),  not  a  system  of  the 
science  itself ;  but  it  marks  out  nevertheless  the  whole 
plan  of  that  science,  both  with  regard  to  its  limits, 
and  to  its  internal  organisation.  For  pure  [p.  xxiii] 
speculative  reason  has  this  peculiar  advantage  that  it 
is  able,  nay  bound  to  measure  its  own  powers,  accord- 
ing to  the  different  ways  in  which  it  chooses  its  own 
objects,  and  to  completely  enumerate  the  different 
ways  of  choosing  problems  ;  thus  tracing  a  complete 
outline  of  a  system  of  metaphysic.  This  is  due  to  the 
fact  that,  with  regard  to  the  first  point,  nothing  can 
be  attributed  to  objects  in  knowledge  a  priori,  except 
what  the  thinking  subject  takes  from  within  itself; 
while,  with  regard  to  the  second  point,  reason,  so  far 
as  its  principles  of  cognition  are  concerned,  forms  a 
separate  and  independent  unity,  in  which,  as  in  an 
organic  body,  every  member  exists  for  the  sake  of  all 
others,  and  all  others  exist  for  the  sake  of  the  one,  so 
that  no  principle  can  be  safely  applied  in  one  relation, 

unless  it  has  been  care  full  v  examined  in  all  its  rela- 

«.< 

tions,  to  the  whole  employment  of  pure  reason.  Hence, 
too,  metaphysic  lias  this  singular  advantage,  an  ad- 
vantage which  cannot  be  shared  by  any  other  science, 
in  which  reason  has  to  deal  with  objects  (for  Logic 
deals  only  with  the  form  of  thought  in  general,)  that, 
if  it  has  once  attained,  by  means  of  this  critique,  to 
the  secure  method  of  a  science,  it  can  completely 
comprehend  the  whole  field  of  knowledge  [p.  xxiv] 
pertaining  to  it,  and  thus  finish  its  work  and  leave  it 
to  posterity,  as  a  capital  that  can  never  be  added  to, 
because  it  has  only  to  deal  with  principles  and  the 
limits  of  their  employment,  which  are  fixed  by  those 


376  SUPPLEMENT   II. 

principles  themselves.  And  this  completeness  becomes 
indeed  an  obligation,  if  it  is  to  be  a  fundamental 
science,  of  which  we  must  be  able  to  say,  '  nil  actum 
reputans,  si  quid  superesset  agendum/ 

But  it  will  be  asked,  what  kind  of  treasure  is  it 
which  we  mean  to  bequeath  to  posterity  in  this 
metaphysic  of  ours,  after  it  has  been  purified  by  criti- 
cism, and  thereby  brought  to  a  permanent  condition  ? 
After  a  superficial  view  of  this  work,  it  may  seem  that 
its  advantage  is  negative  only,  warning  us  against 
venturing  with  speculative  reason  beyond  the  limits 
of  experience.  Such  is  no  doubt  its  primary  use: 
but  it  becomes  positive,  when  we  perceive  that  the 
principles  with  which  speculative  reason  ventures 
beyond  its  limits,  lead  inevitably,  not  to  an  extension, 
but,  if  carefully  considered,  to  a  narrowing  of  the 
employment  of  reason,  because,  by  indefinitely  ex- 
tending the  limits  of  sensibility,  to  which  they  [p.  xxv] 
properly  belong,  they  threaten  entirely  to  supplant  the 
pure  (practical)  employment  of  reason.  Hence  our 
critique,  by  limiting  speculative  reason  to  its  proper 
sphere,  is  no  doubt  negative,  but  by  thus  removing  an 
impediment,  which  threatened  to  narrow,  or  even 
entirely  to  destroy  its  practical  employment,  it  is  in 
reality  of  positive,  and  of  very  important  use,  if  only 
we  are  convinced  that  there  is  an  absolutely  necessary 
practical  use  of  pure  reason  (the  moral  use),  in  which 
reason  must  inevitably  go  beyond  the  limits  of  sensi- 
bility, and  though  not  requiring  for  this  purpose  the 
assistance  of  speculative  reason,  must  at  all  events  be 
assured  against  its  opposition,  lest  it  be  brought  in 
conflict  with  itself.  To  deny  that  this  service,  which 
is  rendered  by  criticism,  is  a  positive  advantage, 
would  be  the  same  as  to  deny  that  the  police  confers 
upon  us  any  positive  advantage,  its  principal  occupa- 


SUPPLEMENT  II.  377 

tion  being  to  prevent  violence,  which  citizens  have  to 
apprehend  from  citizens,  so  that  each  may  pursue  his 
vocation  in  peace  and  security.  We  had  established 
in  the  analytical  part  of  our  critique  the  following 
points : — First,  that  space  and  time  are  only  forms  of 
sensuous  intuition,  therefore  conditions  of  the  exist- 
ence of  things,  as  phenomena  only ;  Secondly,  that 
we  have  no  concepts  of  the  understanding,  and  there- 
fore nothing  whereby  we  can  arrive  at  the  knowledge 
of  things,  except  in  so  far  as  an  intuition  cor-  [p.  xxvi] 
responding  to  these  concepts  can  be  given,  and  conse- 
quently that  we  cannot  have  knowledge  of  any  object, 
as  a  thing  by  itself,  but  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  an  object 
of  sensuous  intuition,  that  is,  a  phenomenon.  This 
proves  no  doubt  that  all  speculative  knowledge  of 
reason  is  limited  to  objects  of  experience ;  but  it 
should  be  carefully  borne  in  mind,  that  this  leaves 
it  perfectly  open  to  us,  to  think  the  same  objects  as 
things  by  themselves,  though  we  cannot  know  them  *. 
For  otherwise  we  should  arrive  at  the  absurd  conclu- 
sion, that  there  is  phenomenal  appearance  [p.  xxvii] 
without  something  that  appears.  Let  us  suppose  that 
the  necessary  distinction,  established  in  our  critique, 
between  things  as  objects  of  experience  and  the  same 
things  by  themselves,  had  not  been  made.  In  that 

1  In  order  to  know  an  object,  I  must  be  able  to  prove  its  possi- 
bility, either  from  its  reality,  as  attested  by  experience,  or  a  priori, 
by  means  of  reason.  But  I  can  think  whatever  I  please,  pro- 
vided only  I  do  not  contradict  myself,  that  is,  provided  my  con- 
ception is  a  possible  thought,  though  I  may  be  unable  to  answer 
for  the  existence  of  a  corresponding  object  in  the  sum  total  of  all 
possibilities.  Before  I  can  attribute  to  such  a  concept  objective 
reality  (real  possibility,  as  distinguished  from  the  former,  which  is 
purely  logical),  something  more  is  required.  This  something  more, 
however,  need  not  be  sought  for  in  the  sources  of  theore^cal  know- 
ledge, for  it  may  be  found  in  those  of  practical  knowledge  also. 


SUPPLEMENT  II. 

case,  the  principle  of  causality,  and  with  it  the  mecha- 
nism of  nature,  as  determined  by  it,  would  apply  to 
all  things  in  general,  as  efficient  causes.  I  should 
then  not  be  able  to  say  of  one  and  the  same  being, 
for  instance  the  human  soul,  that  its  will  is  free,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  subject  to  the  necessity  of  nature, 
that  is,  not  free,  without  involving  myself  in  a  pal- 
pable contradiction  :  and  this  because  I  had  taken 
the  soul,  in  both  propositions,  in  one  and  the  same 
sense,  namely,  as  a  thing  in  general  (as  something  by 
itself),  as,  without  previous  criticism,  1  could  not  but 
take  it.  If,  however,  our  criticism  was  true,  in  teach- 
ing us  to  take  an  object  in  two  senses,  namely,  either 
as  a  phenomenon,  or  as  a  thing  by  itself,  arid  if  the 
deduction  of  our  concepts  of  the  understanding  was 
correct,  and  the  principle  of  causality  applies  tc 
things  only,  if  taken  in  the  first  sense,  namely  so  far 
as  they  are  objects  of  experience,  but  not  to  things,  if 
taken  in  their  second  sense,  we  can,  without  any  con- 
tradiction, think  the  same  will  as  phenomenal  (in 
visible  actions)  as  necessarily  conforming  to  [p.  xxviii] 
the  law  of  nature,  and  so  far,  not  free,  and  yet,  on  the 
other  hand,  if  belonging  to  a  thing  by  itself,  as  not  sub- 
ject to  that  law  of  nature,  and  therefore  free.  Now  it 
is  quite  true,  that  I  may  not  know  my  soul,  as  a  thing 
by  itself,  by  means  of  speculative  reason  (still  less 
through  empirical  observation),  and  consequently  may 
not  know  freedom  either,  as  the  quality  of  a  being  to 
which  I  attribute  effects  in  the  world  of  sense,  because, 
in  order  to  do  this,  I  should  have  to  know  such  a 
being  as  existing,  and  yet  as  not  determined  in  time 
(which,  as  I  cannot  provide  my  concept  with  any 
intuition,  is  impossible).  This,  however,  does  not 
prevent  me  from  thinJcitog  freedom  ;  that  is,  my  repre- 
sentatioli  of  it  contains  at  least  no  contradiction  within 


SUPPLEMENT  II.  379 

itself,  if  only  our  critical  distinction  of  the  two  modes 
of  representation  (the  sensible  and  the  intelligible), 
and  the  consequent  limitation  of  the  concepts  of  the 
pure  understanding,  and  of  the  principles  based  on 
them,  has  been  properly  carried  out.  If,  then,  morality 
necessarily  presupposes  freedom  (in  the  strictest  sense) 
as  a  property  of  our  will,  producing,  as  a  priori  data 
of  it,  practical  principles,  belonging  originally  to  our 
reason,  which,  without  freedom,  would  be  absolutely 
impossible,  while  speculative  reason  proves  [p.  xxix] 
that  such  a  freedom  cannot  even  be  thought,  the 
former  supposition,  namely,  the  moral  one,  wcfuld 
necessarily  have  to  yield  to  another,  the  opposite  of 
which  involves  a  palpable  contradiction,  so  that/m?- 
dom,  and  with  it  morality  (for  its  opposite  contains 
no  contradiction,  unless  freedom  is  presupposed), 
would  have  to  make  room  for  the  mechanism  of 
nature.  Now,  however,  as  morality  requires  nothing 
but  that  freedom  should  only  not  contradict  itself, 
and  that,  though  unable  to  understand,  we  should  at 
least  be  able  to  think  it,  there  being  no  reason  why 
freedom  should  interfere  with  the  natural  mechanism 
of  the  same  act  (if  only  taken  in  a  different  sense),  the 
doctrine  of  morality  may  well  hold  its  place,  and  the 
doctrine  of  nature  may  hold  its  place  too,  which  would 
have  been  impossible,  if  our  critique  had  not  previously 
taught  us  our  inevitable  ignorance  with  regard  to 
things  by  themselves,  and  limited  everything,  which 
we  are  able  to  know  theoretically,  to  mere  phenomena. 
The  same  discussion  as  to  the  positive  advantage 
to  be  derived  from  the  critical  principles  of  pure 
reason,  might  be  repeated  with  regard  to  the  concept 
of  God,  and  of  the  simple  nature  of  our  soul ;  but,  for 
the  sake  of  brevity,  I  shall  pass  this  by.  We  have  seen, 
therefore,  that  I  am  not  allowed  even  to  *  [p.  xxx] 


380  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

assume,  for  the  sake  of  the  necessary  practical  em- 
ployment of  my  reason,  God,  freedom,  and  immortality, 
if  I  cannot  deprive  speculative  reason  of  its  preten- 
sions to  transcendent  insights,  because  reason,  in 
order  to  arrive  at  these,  must  use  principles  which 
are  intended  originally  for  objects  of  possible  experi- 
ence only,  and  which,  if  in  spite  of  this,  they  are 
applied  to  wbnt  cannot  be  an  object  of  experience, 
really  change  this  into  a  phenomenon,  thus  rendering 
all  practical  extension  of  pure  reason  impossible. 
I  had  therefore  to  remove  knowledge,  in  order  to 
make  room  for  belief.  For  the  dogmatism  of  meta- 
physic,  that  is,  the  presumption  that  it  is  possible  to 
achieve  anything  in  metaphysic  without  a  previous 
criticism  of  pure  reason,  is  the  source  of  all  that 
unbelief,  which  is  always  very  dogmatical,  and  wars 
against  all  morality. 

If  then,  it  may  not  be  too  difficult  to  leave  a  be- 
quest to  posterity,  in  the  shape  of  a  systematical 
metaphysic,  carried  out  according  to  the  critique  of 
pure  reason,  such  a  bequest  is  not  to  be  considered 
therefore  as  of  little  value,  whether  we  regard  the 
improvement  which  reason  receives  through  the 
secure  method  of  a  science,  in  place  of  its  groundless 
groping  and  uncritical  vagaries,  or  whether  [p.  xxxi] 
we  look  to  the  better  employment  of  the  time  of  our 
enquiring  youth,  who,  if  brought  up  in  the  ordinary- 
dogmatism,  are  early  encouraged  to  indulge  in  easy 
speculations  on  things  of  which  they  know  nothing, 
and  of  which  they,  as  little  as  anybody  else,  will  ever 
understand  anything  ;  neglecting  the  acquirement  of 
sound  knowledge,  while  bent  on  the  discovery  of  new 
metaphysical  thoughts  and  opinions.  The  greatest 
benefit  however  will  be,  that  such  a  work  will  enable 
us  to  put  an  end  for  ever  to  all  objections  to  morality 


SUPPLEMENT   II.  381 

and  religion,  according  to  the  Socratic  method,  namely, 
by  the  clearest  proof  of  the  ignorance  of  our  oppo- 
nents. Some  kind  of  metaphysic  has  always  existed, 
and  will  always  exist,  and  with  it  a  dialectic  of  pure 
reason,  as  being  natural  to  it.  It  is  therefore  the  first 
and  most  important  task  of  philosophy  to  deprive 
metaphysic,  once  for  all,  of  its  pernicious  influence, 
by  closing  up  the  sources  of  its  errors. 

In  spite  of  these  important  changes  in  the  whole 
field  of  science,  and  of  the  losses  which  speculative 
reason  must  suffer  in  its  fancied  possessions,  all 
general  human  interests,  and  all  the  advan-  [p.  xxxii] 
tages  which  the  world  hitherto  derived  from  the 
teachings  of  pure  reason,  remain  just  the  same  as 
before.  The  loss,  if  any,  affects  only  the  monopoly  of 
the  schools,  and  by  no  means  the  interests  of  humanity. 
I  appeal  to  the  staunchest  dogmatist*  whether  the 
proof  of  the  continued  existence  of  our  soul  after  death, 
derived  from  the  simplicity  of  the  substance,  or  that 
of  the  freedom  of  the  will,  as  opposed  to  the  general 
mechanism  of  nature,  derived  from  the  subtle,  but 
inefficient,  distinction  between  subjective  and  objec- 
tive practical  necessity,  or  that  of  the  existence  of  God, 
derived  from  the  concept  of  an  Ens  realissimum  (the 
contingency  of  the  changeable,  and  the  necessity  of 
a  prime  mover),  have  ever,  after  they  had  been  started 
by  the  schools,  penetrated  the  public  mind,  or  exer- 
cised the  slightest  influence  on  its  convictions?  If 
this  has  not  been,  and  in  feet  could  not  be  so,  on 
account  of  the  unfitness  of  the  ordinary  understand- 
ing for  such  subtle  speculations  ;  and  if,  on  the  con- 
trary, with  regard  to  the  first  point,  the  hope  of  a 
future  life  has  chiefly  rested  on  that  peculiar  cha- 
racter of  human  nature,  never  to  be  satisfied  by  what 
is  merely  temporal  (and  insufficient,  therefore^  for  the 


382  SUPPLEMENT   II. 

character  of  its  whole  destination) ;  if  with  regard  to 
the  second,  the  clear  consciousness  of *  freedom  [p.  xxxiii] 
was  produced  only  by  the  clear  exhibition  of  duties, 
in  opposition  to  all  the  claims  of  sensuous  desires ;  and 
if,  lastly,  with  regard  to  the  third,  the  belief  in  a  great 
and  wise  Author  of  the  world  has  been  supported  en- 
tirely by  the  wonderful  beauty,  order,  and  providence, 
everywhere  displayed  in  nature,  then  this  possession  re- 
mains not  only  undisturbed,  but  acquires  even  greater 
authority,  because  the  schools  have  now  been  taught, 
not  to  claim  for  themselves  any  higher  or  fuller 
insight  on  a  point  which  concerns  general  human 
interests,  than  what  is  equally  within  the  reach  of 
the  great  mass  of  men,  and  to  confine  themselves  to 
the  elaboration  of  these  universally  comprehensible, 
and,  for  moral  purposes,  quite  sufficient  proofs.  The 
change  therefore  affects  the  arrogant  pretensions  of 
the  schools  only,  which  would  fain  be  considered  as 
the  only  judges  and  depositaries  of  such  truth  (as 
they  are,  no  doubt,  with  regard  to  many  other  subjects), 
allowing  to  the  public  its  use  only,  and  trying  to 
keep  the  key  to  themselves,  quod  mecum  nescit,  solus 
vult  scire  videri.  At  the  same  time  full  satisfac- 
tion is  given  to  the  more  moderate  claims  [p.  xxxiv] 
of  speculative  philosophers.  They  still  remain  the 
exclusive  depositors  of  a  science  which  benefits  the 
masses  without  their  knowing  it,  namely  the  critique 
of  reason.  That  critique  can  never  become  popular, 
nor  does  it  need  to  be  so,  because,  if  on  the  one  side 
the  public  has  no  understanding  for  the  fine-drawn 
arguments  in  support  of  useful  truths,  it  is  not 
troubled  on  the  other  by  the  equally  subtle  objections. 
It  is  different  with  the  schools  which,  in  the  same 
way  as  every  man  who  has  once  risen  to  the  height 
of  speciilation,  must  know  both  the  pro's  and  the  con's, 


SUPPLEMENT  II.  383 

and  are  bound,  by  means  of  a  careful  investigation  of 
the  rights  of  speculative  reason,  to  prevent,  once  for 
all,  the  scandal  which,  sooner  or  later,  is  sure  to  be 
caused  even  to  the  masses,  by  the  quarrels  in  which 
metaphysicians  (arid,  as  such,  theologians  also)  become 
involved,  if  ignorant  of  our  critique,  and  by  which 
their  doctrine  becomes  in  the  end  entirely  perverted. 
Thus,  fti id  thus  alone,  can  the  very  root  be  cut  off  of 
materialism,  fatalism,  atheism,  free-thinking  unbelief, 
fanaticism,  and  superstition,  which  may  become  uni- 
versally injurious,  arid  finally  of  idealism  and  scepticism 
also,  which  are  dangerous  rather  to  the  schools,  and  can 
scarcely  ever  penetrate  into  the  public.  If  [p.  xxxv] 
governments  think  proper  ever  to  interfere  with  the 
affairs  of  the  learned,  it  would  be  far  more  consistent 
with  their  wise  regard  for  science  as  well  as  for  society, 
to  favour  the  freedom  of  such  a  criticism  by  which 
alone  the  labours  of  reason  can  be  established  on  a  firm 
footing,  than  to  support  the  ridiculous  despotism  of 
the  schools,  which  raise  a  loud  clamour  of  public  dan- 
ger, whenever  the  cobwebs  are  swept  away  of  which 
the  public  has  never  taken  the  slightest  notice,  and 
the  loss  of  which  it  can  therefore  never  perceive. 

Our  critique  is  not  opposed  to  the  dogmatical  pro- 
cedure of  reason,  as  a  science  of  pure  knowledge  (for 
this  must  always  be  dogmatical,  that  is,  derive  its  proof 
from  sure  principles  a  priori),  but  to  dogmatism  only, 
that  is,  to  the  presumption,  that  it  is  possible  to  make 
any  progress  with  pure  (philosophical)  knowledge, 
consisting  of  concepts,  and  guided  by  principles,  such 
as  reason  has  long  been  in  the  habit  of  employing, 
without  first  enquiring  in  what  way,  and  by  what 
right,  it  has  come  possessed  of  them.  Dogmatism  is 
therefore  the  dogmatical  procedure  of  pure  reason, 
without  a  previous  criticism  of  its  own  powers ;  and 


384  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

our  opposition  to  this  is  not  intended  to  defend  either 
that  loquacious  shallowness  which  arrogates    [p.  xxxvi] 
to  itself  the  good  name  of  popularity,  much  less  that 
scepticism  which  makes  short  work  with  the  whole  of 
metaphysic.  On  the  contrary,  our  critique  is  meant  to 
form  a  necessary  preparation  in  support  of  a  thoroughly 
scientific  system  of  metaphysic,  which  must   neces- 
sarily be  carried  out  dogmatically  and  strictly  syste- 
matically, so  as  to  satisfy  all  the  demands,  not  so  much 
of  the  public  at  large,  as  of  the  schools,  this  being  an 
indispensable  condition,  as  it  has  undertaken  to  carry 
out  its  work  entirely  a  priori,  and  thus  to  the  complete 
satisfaction  of  speculative  reason.     In  the  execution 
of  this  plan,  as  traced  out  by  the  critique,  that  is,  in 
a  future  system  of  metaphysic,  we  shall  have  to  follow 
in   the   strict   method  of  the  celebrated  Wolf,  the 
greatest  of  all  dogmatic  philosophers,  who  first  showed 
(and  by  his  example  called  forth,  in  Germany,  that 
spirit  of  thoroughness,  which  is  not  yet  extinct)  how 
the  secure  method  of  a   science  could  be  attained 
only  by  a  legitimate  establishment  of  principles,  a 
clear  definition  of  concepts,  an  attempt  at  strictness 
of  proof,  and  an  avoidance  of  all  bold  combinations  in 
concluding*     He  was  therefore  most  eminently  quali- 
fied to  raise  metaphysics  to  the  dignity  of  a  science, 
if  it  had  only  occurred  to  him,  by  criticism  of  the 
organum,  namely  of  pure  reason  itself,  first  to  prepare 
his  field, — an  omission  to  be  ascribed,  not  so    [p.  xxxvii] 
much  to  himself  as  to  the  dogmatical  spirit  of  his 
age,  and  with  regard  to  which  the  philosophers  of  his 
own,  as  well  as  of  all  previous  times,  have  no  right 
to  reproach  each  other.     Those  who  reject,  at  the 
same  time,  the  method  of  Wolf,  and  the  procedure  of 
the  critique  of  pure  reason,  can  have  no  other  aim 
but  tou  shake  off  the  fetters  of  science  altogether, 


SUPPLEMENT  II.  385 

and  thus  to  change  work  into  play,  conviction  into 
opinion,  and  philosophy  into  philodoxy. 


With  regard  to  this  second  edition,  I  have  tried,  as 
was  but  fair,  to  do  all  I  could  in  order  to  remove,  as 
far  as  possible,  the  difficulties  and  obscurities  which, 
not  perhaps  without  my  fault,  have  misled  even 
acute  thinkers  in  judging  of  my  book.  In  the  pro- 
positions themselves,  and  their  proofs,  likewise  in  the 
form  and  completeness  of  the  whole  plan,  I  have 
found  nothing  to  alter,  which  is  due  partly  to  the 
long-continued  examination  to  which  I  had  subjected 
them,  before  submitting  them  to  the  public,  and 
partly  to  the  nature  of  the  subject  itself.  For  pure 
speculative  reason  is  so  constituted  that  it  forms 
a  true  organism,  in  which  everything  is  organic,  the 
whole  being  there  for  the  sake  of  every  [p.  xxxviii] 
part,  and  every  part  for  the  sake  of  the  whole,  so  that 
the  smallest  imperfection,  whether  a  fault  or  a  defi- 
ciency, must  inevitably  betray  itself  in  use.  I  venture 
to  hope  that  this  system  will  maintain  itself  un- 
changed for  the  future  also.  It  is  not  self-conceit 
which  justifies  me  in  this  confidence,  but  the  experi- 
mental evidence  produced  by  the  identity  of  the 
result,  whether  we  proceed  progressively  from  the 
smallest  elements  to  the  whole  of  pure  reason,  or 
retrogressively  from  the  whole  (for  this  also  is  given 
by  the  practical  objects  of  reason)  to  every  single 
part ;  the  fact  being,  that  an  attempt  at  altering  even 
the  smallest  item  produces  at  once  contradictions, 
not  only  in  the  system,  but  in  human  reason  in 
general.  With  regard  to  the  style,  however,  much 
remains  to  be  done ;  and  for  that  purpose,  k  have 

VOL.  I.  c  c 


386  SUPPLEMENT  JL 

endeavoured  to  introduce  several  improvements  into 
this  second  edition,  which  are  intended  to  remove; 
first,  misapprehensions  in  the  ^Esthetic,  especially  with 
regard  to  the  concept  of  time :  secondly,  obscurities 
in  the  deduction  of  the  concepts  of  reason :  thirdly, 
a  supposed  want  of  sufficient  evidence,  in  proving 
the  propositions  of  the  pure  understanding  :  fourthly, 
the  false  interpretation  put  on  the  paralogisms  with 
which  we  charged  rational  psychology.  To  this  point 
(only  to  the  end  of  the  first  chapter  of  transcendental 
Dialectic)  do  the  changes  of  style  and  repre-  [p.  xxxix] 
sentation1  extend,  and  no  further.  Time  was  too 

1  The  only  thing  which  might  be  called  an  addition,  though  in 
the  method  of  proof  only,  is  the  new  refutation  of  psychological 
idealism,  and  the  strict  (and  as  I  believe  the  only  possible)  proof 
of  the  objective  reality  of  external  phenomena  on  p.  275  (Suppl. 
XXI).  That  idealism  may  be  considered  entirely  innocent  with 
respect  to  the  essential  aims  of  metaphysic  (though  it  is  not  so 
in  reality),  yet  it  remains  a  scandal  to  philosophy,  and  to  human 
reason  in  general,  that  we  should  have  to  accept  the  existence  of 
things  without  us  (from  which  we  derive  the  whole  material  of 
knowledge  for  our  own  internal  sense)  on  faith  only,  unable  to 
meet  with  any  satisfactory  proof  an  opponent,  who  is  pleased  to  doubt 
it.  (See  p.  476.)  It  will  probably  be  urged  against  this  proof  that, 
after  all,  I  am  immediately  conscious  of  that  only  which  is  within  me, 
that  is,  of  my  representation  of  external  things,  and  that  consequently 
it  must  still  remain  uncertain  whether  there  be  outside  me  any- 
thing corresponding  to  it,  or  not.  But  by  internal  expe-  [p.  xl] 
rience  I  am  conscious  of  my  existence  in  time  (consequently  also,  of 
its  deter minability  in  time) ;  and  this  is  more  than  to  be  conscious 
of  my  representation  only,  and  yet  identical  with  the  empirical 
consciousness  of  my  existence,  which  can  be  itself  determined  only 
by  something  connected  with  my  existence,  yet  outside  me.  This 
consciousness  of  my  existence  in  time  is  therefore  connected  as 
identical  with  the  consciousness  of  relation  to  something  outside 
me ;  so  that  it  is  experience,  and  not  fiction,  sense,  and  not  ima- 
gination, which  iudissolubly  connects  the  external  with  my  internal 
sense.  The  external  sense  is  by  itself  a  relation  of  intuition  to 
something  real  outside  me ;  and  its  real,  in  contradistinction  to  a 


SUPPLEMENT  II.  387 

short  for  doing  more,  nor  did  I,  with  regard  to  the 
rest,  meet  with  any  misapprehensions  on  the  [p.  xl] 
part  of  competent  and  impartial  judges.  These,  [p.  xli] 

purely  imaginary  character,  rests  entirely  on  its  being  indissolubly 
connected  with  internal  experience,  as  being  the  condition  of  its 
possibility.  This  is  what  happens  here.  If  with  the  intellectual 
consciousness  of  my  existence  in  the  representation,  /  am,  which 
accompanies  all  my  judgments  ana  all  acts  of  my  understanding, 
I  could  at  the  same  time  connect  a  determination  of  that  existence 
of  mine  by  means  of  intellectual  intuition,  then  that  determination 
would  not  require  the  consciousness  of  relation  to  something  out- 
side me.  But  although  that  intellectual  consciousness  comes  first, 
the  inner  intuition,  in  which  alone  any  existence  can  be  deter- 
mined, is  sensuous  and  dependent  on  the  condition  of  time  ;  and 
that  determination  again,  and  therefore  internal  experience  itself, 
depends  on  something  permanent  which  is  not  within  me,  con- 
sequently on  something  outside  me  only,  to  which  I  must  consider 
myself  as  standing  in  a  certain  relation.  Hence  the  reality  of  the 
external  ^ense  is  necessarily  connected,  in  order  to  make  experience 
possible  at  all,  with  the  reality  of  the  internal  Fense ;  that  is,  I  am 
conscious,  with  the  same  certainty,  that  there  are  things  outside 
me  which  have  a  reference  to  my  sense,  as  that  I  exist  myself  in 
time.  In  order  to  ascertain  to  what  given  intuitions  objects  out- 
side me  really  correspond,  (these  intuitions  belonging  to  the  external 
sense,  and  not  to  the  faculty  of  imagination)  we  must  in  each  single 
case  apply  the  rules  according  to  which  experience  in  general  (even 
internal)  is  distinguished  from  imaginations,  the  proposition  that 
there  really  is  an  external  experience,  being  always  taken  for  granted. 
It  may  be  well  to  add  here  the  remark  that  the  representation  of 
something  permanent  in  existence  is  not  the  same  as  a  permanent 
representation ;  for  the  latter  can  change  and  alternate,  as  all  our 
representations,  even  those  of  matter,  and  may  yet  refer  to  some- 
thing permanent,  which  must  therefore  be  something  external,  and 
different  from  all  my  representations,  the  existence  of  which  is 
necessarily  involved  in  the  determination  of  my  own  existence,  and 
constitutes  with  it  but  one  experience,  which  could  never  take 
place  internally,  unless  (in  part)  it  were  external  also.  The  fiow 
admits  here  of  as  little  explanation  as  the  permanent  in  time  in 
general,  the  co- existence  of  which  with  the  variable  produces  the 
concept  of  change. 

C  C  2 


388  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

even  though  I  must  not  name  them  with  that  praise 
which  is  due  to  them,  will  easily  perceive  in  the 
proper  place,  that  I  have  paid  careful  attention  to 
their  remarks.  [p.  xlii] 

These  improvements,  however,  entail  a  small  loss 
to  the  reader.  It  was  inevitable,  without  making  the 
book  too  voluminous,  to  leave  out  or  abridge  several 
passages  which,  though  not  essential  to  the  complete- 
ness of  the  whole,  may  yet,  as  useful  for  other  pur- 
poses, be  missed  by  some  readers.  Thus  only  could 
I  gain  room  for  my  new  and  more  intelligible  repre- 
sentation of  the  subject  which,  though  it  changes 
absolutely  nothing  with  regard  to  propositions,  and 
even  to  proofs,  yet  deviates  so  considerably  from  the 
former,  in  the  whole  arrangement  of  the  argument, 
that  mere  additions  and  interpolations  would  not 
have  been  sufficient.  This  small  loss,  which  every 
reader  may  easily  supply  by  reference  to  the  first 
edition,  will  I  hope  be  more  than  compensated  for 
by  the  greater  clearness  of  the  present. 

I  have  observed  with  pleasure  and  thankfulness  in 
various  publications  (containing  either  reviews  or 
separate  essays),  that  the  spirit  of  thoroughness  is  not 
yet  dead  in  Germany,  but  has  only  been  silenced  for  a 
short  time  by  the  clamour  of  a  fashionable  and  [p.  xliii] 
pretentious  licence  of  thought,  and  that  the  difficul- 
ties which  beset  the  thorny  path  of  my  critique,  which 
are  to  lead  to  a  truly  scientific  and,  as  such,  permanent, 
and  therefore  most  necessary,  study  of  pure  reason, 
have  not  discouraged  bold  and  clear  heads  from 
mastering  my  book.  To  these  excellent  men,  who  so 
happily  blend  thorough  knowledge  with  a  talent  for 
lucid  exposition  (to  which  I  can  lay  no  claim),  I  leave 
the  task  of  bringing  my,  in  that  respect  far  from 
perfect,  work  to  greater  perfection.  There  is  no 


SUPPLEMENT   II.  389 

danger  of  its  being  refuted,  though  there  is  of  its 
being  misunderstood.  For  my  own  part,  I  cannot 
henceforth  enter  on  controversies,  though  I  shall  care- 
.  fully  attend  to  all  hints,  whether  from  friends  or 
opponents,  in  order  to  utilise  them  in  a  future  elabor- 
ation of  the  whole  system,  according  to  the  plan 
traced  out  in  this  propaedeutic.  As  during  these 
labours  I  have  advanced  pretty  far  in  years  (this 
very  month,  into  my  sixty-fourth  year),  I  must  be 
careful  in  spending  my  time,  if  I  am  to  carry  out  my 
plan,  of  furnishing  a  metaphysic  of  nature,  and  a 
metaphysic  of  morals,  in  confirmation  of  the  truth  of 
rny  critique  both  of  speculative  arid  of  practical 
reason,  and  must  leave  the  elucidation  of  such  obscu- 
rities as  could  at  first  be  hardly  avoided  [p.  xliv] 
in  such  a  work,  and  likewise  the  defence  of  the  whole, 
to  those  excellent  men  who  have  made  it  their  own. 
At  single  points  every  philosophical  treatise  may  be 
pricked  (for  it  cannot  be  armed  at  all  points,  like 
a  mathematical  one),  while  yet  the  organic  structure 
of  the  system,  considered  as  a  whole,  has  not  there- 
fore to  apprehend  the  slightest  danger.  Few  only 
have  that  pliability  of  intellect  to  take  in  the  whole 
of  a  system,  if  it  is  new ;  still  fewer  have  an  inclina- 
tion for  it,  because  they  dislike  every  innovation. 
If  we  take  single  passages  out  of  their  connection, 
and  contrast  them  with  each  other,  it  is  easy  to  pick 
out  apparent  contradictions,  particularly  in  a  work 
written  with  all  the  freedom  of  a  running  speech. 
In  the  eyes  of  those  who  rely  on  the  judgment  of 
others,  such  contradictions  may  throw  an  unfavour- 
able light  on  any  work ;  but  they  are  easily  removed, 
if  we  ourselves  have  once  grasped  the  idea  of  the 
whole.  And,  if  a  theory  possesses  stability  in  itself, 
then  this  action  and  reaction  of  praise  an 


39°  SUPPLEMENT  II. 

which  at  first  seemed  so  dangerous,  serve  only  in  time 
to  rub  off  its  superficial  inequalities :  nay,  secure  to 
it,  in  a  short  time,  the  requisite  elegance  also,  if  only 
men  of  insight,  impartiality,  and  true  popularity  will 
devote  themselves  to  its  study, 

Konigsberg,  April  1787. 


SUPPLEMENT  III. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 
OF  THE  Second  Edition  (1787),  WITH  THE  PAGING 

OF  THAT  EDITION. 

PAGE 

Introduction 1-30 

L  Of  the  difference  between  pure  and  em- 
pirical knowledge i 

II.  We  are  in  possession  of  certain  cognitions 
a  priori,  and  even  the  ordinary  under- 
standing is  never  without  them  .  .  3 

III.  Philosophy  requires  a  science,  to  deter- 

mine a  priori  the  possibility,  the  prin- 
ciples, and  the  extent  of  all  cognitions    .      6 

IV.  Of  the  difference  between  analytical  and 

synthetical  judgments     .        .        .        .10 
V.  In  all  theoretical  sciences  of  reason  syn- 
thetical judgments  a  priori  are  contained 

as  principles 14 

VI.  The  general  problem  of  pure  reason          .     19 
VII.  Idea  and  division  of  an  independent  science 

under  the  name  of  Critique  of  Pure  Reason    24 

I.  ELEMENTS  OF  TEANSCENDENTALISM      .     31-732 

First  Part.    Transcendental  ^Esthetic  ,       33~73 

Introduction.  I  i 33 

First  Section.    Of  Space.    {2,3        .        .37 
Second  Section.    Of  Time.    }  4-7     .        .    46 
General  Observations  on  transcendental  ^Es- 
thetic.   1 8 •    .    59 


SUPPLEMENT  III. 

PAGE 

Conclusion  of  transcendental  ^Esthetic  .  73 

Second  Part.    Transcendental  Logic     .  74-732 
Introduction.     The  idea  of  a  transcendental 

Logic 74-88 

I.  Of  Logic  in  general      .         .         .  -74 

II.  Of  transcendental  Logic       .         .  -79 

III.  Of  the  division  of  general  Logic  into 

analytical  and  dialectical   .         .         .     ,82 

IV.  Of  the  division  of  transcendental  Logic 

into  transcendental  Analytic  and  Dia- 
lectic          87 

First  Division.     Transcendental  Analytic        89-349 
First  Book.     Analytic  of  concepts         .      90-169 
First  Chapter.     Method  of  discovering  all 
pure  concepts  of  the  understanding       .         -91 
First  Section.     Of  the  logical  use  of  the 

understanding  in  general  .         .         .92 

Second  Section.     Of  the  logical  function 

of  the  understanding  in  judgments.    $  9    .     95 
Third  Section.     Of  the  pure  concepts  of 
the  understanding,  or  of  the  Categories. 

§  10-12 102 

Second  Chapter.     Of  the  deduction  of  the 
pure  concepts  of  the  understanding       .         .116 
First  Section.    Of  the  principles  of  a  tran- 
scendental deduction  in  general.    $  13        .116 
Transition  to  a  transcendental  deduction  of 
the  Categories.    $14        .         .         .         .124 
Second  Section.     Transcendental  deduc- 
tion of  the  pure  concepts  of  the  under- 
standing.   §  15-27 129 

Second  Book.  Analytic  of  principles  (tran- 
scendental doctrine  of  the  faculty  of  judg- 
ment) .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  169-349 


SUPPLEMENT   III.  393 

PAGE 

Introduction.    Of  the  transcendental  faculty 

of  judgment  in  general          .         .         .         .   171 
First  Chapter.     Of  the  schematism  of  the 

pure  concepts  of  the  understanding       .         .  1 76 
Second  Chapter.     System  of  all  principles 
of  the  pure  understanding    .         .         .         .187 
First  Section.     Of  the  highest  principle 

of  all  analytical  judgments        *         .         .189 
S  e  c  o  n  d  S  e  c  t  i  o  n.    Of  the  highest  principles 

of  all  synthetical  judgments      .         .         .  193 
Third  Section.     Systematical  representa- 
tion of  all  synthetical    principles  of  the 
pure  understanding  .          .         .     197-294 

1.  Of  the  Axioms  of  intuition  .         .         .  202 

2.  Anticipations  of  perception  .         .         .   207 

3.  Analogies  of  experience        .         .         .218 

First  Analogy.  Principle  of  the  per- 
manence of  substance  .  ,  .224 

Second  Analogy.  Principle  of  the  suc- 
cession of  time,  according  to  the  law 
of  causality  .  .  .  ,  .  232 

Third  Analogy.  Principle  of  coexist- 
ence, according  to  the  law  of  re- 
ciprocity .  .  ,  .  .256 

4.  Postulates    of    empirical    thought    in 

general       .         .         .  .         .   265 

General  note  on  the  system  of  the  prin- 
ciples         ......  288 

Third  Chapter.    On  the  ground  of  distinction 

of  all  subjects  into  phenomena  and  noumena    294 
Appendix.     On  the  amphiboly  of  reflective 
concepts  owing  to  the  confusion  of  the  em- 
pirical with  the  transcendental  use  of  the 
understanding      .         .         .         .  * .  316 


394  SUPPLEMENT  III. 

PAGE 

Second  Division.     Transcendental  Dialectic   349-732 
Introduction         .....    349-366 
I.  Of  transcendental  illusion         .         .         .  349 
II.  Of  pure  reason  as  the  seat  of  transcendental 

illusion 355 

A.  Of  reason  in  general        .         .         -355 

B.  Of  the  logical  use  of  reason     .         -  359 

C.  Of  the  pure  use  of  reason        .         .  362 
First  Book.     Of  the  concepts  of  pure  reason     366 

First  Section.     Of  ideas  in  general    .         .  368 
Second  Section.     Of  transcendental  ideas    377 

Third  Section.     System  of  transcendental 

•/ 

ideas    ........  390 

Second  Book.     Of  the  dialectical  conclusions 

of  pure  reason 396-732 

First  Chapter.     Of  the  Paralogisms  of  pure 
reason          .         ......  399 

General  note  on  the  transition  from  rational 
psychology  to  cosmology      .         .         .         .428 

Second  Chapter.     The   Antinomy  of  pure 
reason          .         .         .         .         .         .         -432 

First  Section.  System  of  cosmologic'al  ideas  435 
Second  Section.    Antithetic  of  pure  reason  448 

First  Antinomy 454 

Second  Antinomy 462 

Third  Antinomy 472 

Fourth  Antinomy 480 

Third  Section.    Of  the  interest  of  reason  in 

these  conflicts 490 

Fourth  Section.  Of  the  transcendental 
problems  of  pure  reason  and  the  absolute 
necessity  of  their  solution  ....  504 
Fifth  Section.  Sceptical  representation  of 
the  cosmological  questions  in  the  four  tran- 
scendental ideas 513 


SUPPLEMENT   III.  395 

PAGE 

Sixth    Section.      Transcendental    idealism 
as  the  key  to  the  solution  of  cosmological 
Dialectic    .         .          .         .         .         .         .518 

Seventh  Section.     Critical  decision  of  the 

cosmological  conflict  of  reason  with  itself     .  525 
Eighth  Section.     The  regulative  principle 
of"  pure  reason  with  regard  to  the  cosmo- 
logical ideas        .         .         .         .         .         .536 

Ninth   Section.     Of  the  empirical  use  of 
the  regulative  principle  of  reason  with  re- 
gard to  all  cosmological  ideas      .          .         -543 
I.  Solution  of  the  cosmological  idea  of  the 
totality  of  the  composition  of  phe- 
nomena of  an  universe        .          .          .   545 
II.  Solution  of  the  cosmological  idea  of  the 
totality   of  the   division  of  a  whole 
given  in  intuition       .          .          .          .   551 

Concluding  remarks  on  the  solution  of 
the  transcendental  mathematical  ideas, 
and  preliminary  remarks  for  the  solu- 
tion of  the  transcendental  dynamical 
ideas  .  .  .  .  .  .  556 

III.  Solution  of  the  cosmological  ideas  of  the 

totality  of  the  derivation  of  cosmical 
events  from  their  causes    .         .         .560 
Possibility  of  causality  through  freedom  566 
Explanation  of  the  cosmological  idea  of 
freedom  in  connection  with  the  general 
necessity  of  nature    .         .         .         .  570 

IV.  Solution   of  the  cosmological  idea  of 

the  totality  of  the  dependence  of  phe- 
nomena with  regard  to  their  exist- 
ence in  general  .         .         .         -587 
Concluding  remarks  on  the  whole  an- 
tinomy of  pure  reason        .         .         •  593 


396  SUPPLEMENT   III. 


PAGE 


Third  Chapter.  The  ideal  of  pure  reason  .  595 
First  Section.  Of  the  ideal  in  general  .  595 
Second  Section.  Of  the  transcendental 

ideal 599 

Third  Section.  Of  the  arguments  of  specu- 
lative reason  in  proof  of  the  existence  of  a 
Supreme  Being  .  .  .  .  .611 

Fourth  Section.     Of  the  impossibility  of 
an  ontological  proof  of  the  existence  of  God  620 
Fifth  Section.     Of  the  impossibility  of  a 

cosmologieal  proof  of  the  existence  of  God  .  631 
Discovery  and  explanation  of  the  dialectical 
illusion  in  all  transcendental  proofs  of  the 
existence  of  a  necessary  Being    .         .         .642 
Sixth  Section,     Of  the  impossibility  of  the 
physico-theological  proof    ....  648 
Seventh  Section.    Criticism  of  all  theology 

based  on  speculative  principles  of  reason     .  659 
Appendix  to  the  transcendental  Dialectic      .  670 
Of  the  regulative  use  of  the  ideas  of  pure 

reason 670 

Of  the  final  aim  of  the  natural  Dialectic  of 

human  reason 697 

II.  TRANSCENDENTAL  DOCTRINE  OF  METHOD.  733-884 

Introduction 735 

First   Chapter.      The    discipline    of   pure 
reason  .......    736-823 

First  Section.      The  discipline   of  pure 

reason  in  its  dogmatical  use      .         .         .  740 
Second  Section.     The  discipline  of  pure 
reason  in  its  polemical  use         .         .        .766 
Of  the  impossibility  of  a  sceptical  satisfac- 
tion of  pure  reason  in  conflict  with  itself  .  786 
Third  Section.     The  discipline  of  pure 
reason  with  regard  to  the  hypotheses        .  797 


SUPPLEMENT  III.  397 


PACK 


Fourth  Section.     The  discipline  of  pure 

reason  with  regard  to  its  proofs         .         .810 
Second    Chapter.      The    canon    of    pure 

reason 823-884 

First  Section.     Of  the  ultimate  aim   of 

the  pure  use  of  our  reason         .         .         .825 
Second    Section.      Of  the   ideal   of  the 
Summum  Bonum,  as  determining  the  ulti- 
mate aim  of  Pure  Eeason  .         .         .         .832 

Third  Section.    Of  trowing,  knowing,  and 
believing  ......  848 

Third   Chapter.    The  architectonic  of  pure 
reason          .         .         .         .         .         .         .860 

Fourth   Chapter      The   History   of    pure 
reason      .         .         ,         .         .         .         .880 


SUPPLEMENT  IV,     ^  vol.  a.  P. ,] 


INTRODUCTION. 
I. 

Of  the  Difference  between  pure  and  empirical 
Knowledge. 

THAT  all  our  knowledge  begins  with  experience 
there  can  be  no  doubt.  For  how  should  the  faculty  of 
knowledge  be  called  into  activity,  if  not  by  objects 
which  affect  our  senses,  and  which  either  produce  repre- 
sentations by  themselves,  or  rouse  the  activity  of  our 
understanding  to  compare,  to  connect,  or  to  separate 
them  ;  'and  thus  to  convert  the  raw  material  of  our 
sensuous  impressions  into  a  knowledge  of  objects, 
which  we  call  experience  ?  In  respect  of  time,  there- 
fore, no  knowledge  within  us  is  antecedent  to  ex- 
perience, but  all  knowledge  begins  with  it. 

But  although  all  our  knowledge  begins  with  ex- 
perience, it  does  not  follow  that  it  arises  from  experi- 
ence. For  it  is  quite  possible  that  even  our  empirical 
experience  is  a  compound  of  that  which  we  receive 
through  impressions,  and  of  that  which  our  own  faculty 
of  knowledge  (incited  only  by  sensuous  impressions), 
supplies  from  itself,  a  supplement  which  we  do  not 
distinguish  from  that  raw  material,  until  long  practice 
has  roused  our  attention  und  rendered  us  capable  of 
separating  one  from  the  other. 

It  is  therefore  a  question  which  deserves  at  least 


SUPPLEMENT  IV.  399 

closer  investigation,  and  cannot  be  disposed  of  at  first 
sight,  whether  there  exists  a  knowledge  independent 
of  experience,  and  even  of  all  impressions  of  the 
senses  1  Such  knowledge  is  called  a  priori,  and  dis- 
tinguished from  empirical  knowledge,  which  has  its 
sources  a  posteriori,  that  is,  in  experience. 

This  -term  a  priori,  however,  is  not  yet  definite 
enough  to  indicate  the  full  meaning  of  our  question. 
For  people  are  wont  to  say,  even  with  regard  to 
knowledge  derived  from  experience,  that  we  have  it, 
or  might  have  it,  a  priori,  because  we  derive  it  from 
experience,  not  immediately,  but  from  a  general  rule, 
which,  however,  has  itself  been  derived  from  ex- 
perience. Thus  one  would  say  of  a  person  who 
undermines  the  foundations  of  his  house,  that  he 
might  have  known  a  priori  that  it  would  tumble 
down,  that  is,  that  he  need  not  wait  for  the  ex- 
perience of  its  really  tumbling  down.  But  still  he 
could  not  know  this  entirely  a  priori,  because  he 
had  first  to  learn  from  experience  that  bodies  are 
heavy,  and  will  fall  when  their  supports  are  taken 
away. 

We  shall  therefore,  in  what  follows,  understand 
by  knowledge  a  priori  knowledge  which  is  absolutely 
independent  of  all  experience,  and  not  of  this  or  that 
experience  only.  Opposed  to  this  is  empirical  know- 
ledge, or  such  as  is  possible  a  posteriori  only,  that  is, 
by  experience.  Knowledge  a  priori,  if  mixed  up 
with  nothing  empirical,  is  called  pure.  Thus  the 
proposition,  for  example,  that  every  change  has  its 
cause,  is  a  proposition  a  priori,  but  not  pure  :  because 
change  is  a  concept  which  can  only  be  derived 
from  experience. 


400  SUPPLEMENT  IV. 

II. 

We  are  in  possession  of  certain  Cognitions  a  priori, 
and  even  the  ordinary  understanding  is  never 
without  them. 

All  depends  here  on  a  criterion,  by  which  we  may 
safely  distinguish  between  pure  and  empirical  know- 
ledge.    Now  experience  teaches  us,  no  doubt,  that 
something  is  so  or  so,  but  not   that  it  cannot  be 
different.     First,   then,    if  we    have   a   proposition, 
which  is   thought,  together  with  its   necessity,  we 
have  a  judgment  a  priori ;  and  if,  besides,  it  is  riot 
derived  from  any  proposition,  except  such  as  is  itself 
again  considered  as  necessary,  we  have  an  absolutely 
a  priori  judgment.     Secondly,  experience  never  im- 
parts to  its  judgments  true   or  strict,  but  only  as- 
sumed or  relative  universality  (by  means  of  induc- 
tion), so  that  we  ought  always  to  say,  so  far  as  we 
have  observed  hitherto,  there  is  no  exception  to  this 
or  that  rule.     If,  therefore,  a  judgment  is  thought 
with  strict  universality,  so  that  no  exception  is  ad- 
mitted as  possible,  it  is  not  derived  from  experience, 
but  valid  absolutely  a  priori.   Empirical  universality, 
therefore,  is  only  an  arbitrary  extension  of  a  validity 
which  applies  to  most  cases,  to  one  that  applies  to 
all :   as,  for  instance,  in  the  proposition,  all  bodies 
are  heavy.     If,  on  the  contrary,  strict  universality  is 
essential  to  a  judgment,  this  always  points  to  a  special 
source  of  knowledge,  namely,  a  faculty  of  knowledge 
a  priori.    Necessity,  therefore,  and  strict  universality 
are  safe  criteria  of  knowledge  a  priori,  arid  are  in- 
separable one  from  the  other.    As,  however,  in  the 
use  of  these  criteria,  it  is  sometimes  easier  to  show 
the  empirical   limitation  than    the  contingency  of 


SUPPLEMENT  IV.  40 1 

judgments,  and  as  it  is  sometimes  more  convincing 
to  prove  the  unlimited  universality  which  we  attri- 
bute to  a  judgment  than  its  necessity,  it  is  advisable 
to  use  both  criteria  separately,  each  being  by  itself 
infallible. 

That  there  really  exist  in  our  knowledge  such 
necessary,  and  in  the  strictest  sense  universal,  and 
therefore,  pure  judgments  a  priori,  is  easy  to  show. 
If  we  want  a  scientific  example,  we  have  only  to 
look  to  any  of  the  propositions  of  mathematics ;  if 
we  want  one  from  the  sphere  of  the  ordinary  under- 
standing, such  a  proposition  as  that  each  change 
must  have  a  cause,  will  answer  the  purpose ;  nay,  in 
the  latter  case,  even  the  concept  of  cause  contains  so 
clearly  the  concept  of  the  necessity  of  its  connection 
with  an  effect,  and  of  the  strict  universality  of  the 
rule,  that  it  would  be  destroyed  altogether  if  we 
attempted  to  derive  it,  as  Hume  does,  from  the 
frequent  concomitancy  of  that  which  happens  with 
that  which  precedes,  and  from  a  habit  arising  thence, 
— therefore  from  a  purely  subjective  necessity  of  con- 
necting representations.  It  is  possible  even,  with- 
out having  recourse  to  such  examples  in  proof  of 
the  reality  of  pure  propositions  a  priori  within 
our  knowledge,  to  prove  their  indispensability  for 
the  possibility  of  experience  itself,  thus  proving  it 
a  priori.  For  whence  should  experience  take  its 
certainty,  if  all  the  rules  which  it  follows  were  always 
again  and  again  empirical,  and  therefore  contingent 
and  hardly  fit  to  serve  as  first  principles  ?  For  the 
present,  however,  we  may  be  satisfied  for  having 
shown  the  pure  employment  of  the  faculty  of  our 
knowledge  as  a  matter  of  fact,  with  the  criteria  of  it. 

Not  only  in  judgments,  however,  but  even  in 
certain  concepts,  can  we  show  their  origin  a  priori. 

VOL.  i.  D  d 


402  SUPPLEMENT  IV. 

Take  away,  for  example,  from  the  concept  of  body, 
as  supplied  by  experience,  everything  that  is  em- 
pirical, one  by  one;  such  as  colour,  hardness,  or 
softness,  weight,  and  even  impenetrability,  and  there 
still  remains  the  space  which  the  body  (now  entirely 
vanished)  occupied :  that  you  cannot  take  away. 
And  in  the  same  manner,  if  you  remove  from  your 
empirical  concept  of  any  object,  corporeal  or  in- 
corporeal, all  properties  which  experience  has  taught 
you,  you  cannot  take  away  from  it  that  property  by 
which  you  conceive  it  as  a  substance,  or  inherent 
in  a  substance  (although  such  a  concept  contains  more 
determinations  than  that  of  an  object  in  general). 
Convinced,  therefore,  by  the  necessity  with  which 
that  concept  forces  itself  upon  you,  you  will  have  to 
admit  that  it  has  its  seat  in  your  faculty  of  know- 
ledge a  priori. 


SUPPLEMENT  V.    |>e  vol.  u.  P.  7] 

EMPIRICAL  judgments,  as  such,  are  all  synthetical ; 
for  it  would  be  absurd  to  found  an  analytical  judg- 
ment on  experience,  because,  in  order  to  form  such 
a  judgment,  I  need  not  at  all  step  out  of  my  concept, 
or  appeal  to  the  testimony  of  experience.  That  a 
body  is  extended,  is  a  proposition  perfectly  certain 
a  priori,  and  not  an  empirical  judgment.  For,  before 
I  call  in  experience,  I  am  already  in  possession  of  all 
the  conditions  of  my  judgment  in  the  concept  of 
body  itself.  I  have  only  to  draw  out  from  it,  ac- 
cording to  the  principle  of  contradiction,  the  required 
predicate,  and  I  thus  become  conscious,  at  the  same 
time,  of  the  necessity  of  the  judgment,  which  ex- 
perience could  never  teach  me.  But,  though  I  do  not 
include  the  predicate  of  gravity  in  the  general  concept 
of  body,  that  concept,  nevertheless,  indicates  an  object 
of  experience  through  one  of  its  parts  :  so  that  I 
may  add  other  parts  also  of  the  same  experience, 
besides  those  which  belonged  to  the  former  concept. 
I  may,  first,  by  an  analytical  process,  realise  the 
concept  of  body,  through  the  predicates  of  extension, 
impermeability,  form,  &c.,  all  of  which  are  contained 
in  it.  Afterwards  I  expand  my  knowledge,  and 
looking  back  to  the  experience  from  which  my  con- 
cept of  body  was  abstracted,  I  find  gravity  always 
connected  with  the  before  mentioned  predicates, 
and  therefore  I  add  it  synthetically  to  that  ""concept 
as  a  predicate.  It  is,  therefore,  experience  on  which 
the  possibility  of  the  synthesis  of  the  predicate  of 


404  SUPPLEMENT  V. 

gravity  with  the  concept  of  body  is  founded :  be- 
cause Doth  concepts,  though  neither  of  them  is  con- 
tained in  the  other,  belong  to  each  other,  though 
accidentally  only,  as  parts  of  a  whole,  namely,  of 
experience,  which  is  itself  a  synthetical  connection  of 
intuitions. 


SUPPLEMENT  VL    [see  vol.  u.  P.  9] 
V. 

In  all  theoretical  Sciences  of  reason  synthetical  Judg- 
ments a  priori  are  contained  as  principles. 

i.  ALL  mathematical  judgments  are  synthetical. 
This  proposition,  though  incontestably  certain,  and 
very  important  to  us  for  the  future,  seems  to  have 
hitherto  escaped  the  observation  of  those  who  are 
engaged  in  the  anatomy  of  human  reason :  nay,  to 
be  directly  opposed  to  all  their  conjectures.  For  as 
it  was  found  that  all  mathematical  conclusions  pro- 
ceed according  to  the  principle  of  contradiction  (which 
is  required  by  the  nature  of  all  apodictic  certainty), 
it  was  supposed  that  the  fundamental  principles  of 
mathematics  also  rested  on  the  authority  of  the  same 
principle  of  contradiction.  This,  however,  was  a 
mistake  :  for  though  a  synthetical  proposition  may 
be  understood  according  to  the  principle  of  contra- 
diction, this  can  only  be  if  another  synthetical  pro- 
position is  presupposed,  from  which  the  latter  is 
deduced,  but  never  by  itself.  First  of  all,  we  ought 
to  observe,  that  mathematical  propositions,  properly 
so  called,  are  always  judgments  a  priori,  and  not 
empirical,  because  they  carry  along  with  them  neces- 
sity, which  can  never  be  deduced  from  experience. 
If  people  should  object  to  this,  I  am  quite  willing  to 
confine  my  statement  to  pure  mathematics,  the  very 
concept  of  which  implies  that  it  does  not  contain 
empirical,  but  only  pure  knowledge  a  priori. 

At  first  sight  one  might  suppose  indeed  that  the 
proposition  7  +  5  =  12  is  merely  analytical,  following, 
according  to  the  principle  of  contradiction,  from  the 
concept  of  a  sum  of  7  and  5.  But,  if  we  look  more 


406  SUPPLEMENT  VI. 

closely,  we  shall  find  that  the  concept  of  the  sum 
of  7  and  5  contains  nothing  beyond  the  union  of 
both  sums  into  one,  whereby  nothing  is  told  us  as  to 
what  this  single  number  may  be  which  combines  both. 
We  by  no  means  arrive  at  a  concept  of  Twelve,  by 
thinking  that  union  of  Seven  and  Five  ;  and  we  may 
analyse  our  concept  of  such  a  possible  sum  as  long 
as  we  will,  still  we  shall  never  discover  in  it  the 
concept  of  Twelve.  We  must  go  beyond  these  con- 
cepts, and  call  in  the  assistance  of  the  intuition  cor- 
responding to  one  of  the  two,  for  instance,  our  five 
fingers,  or,  as  Segner  does  in  his  arithmetic,  five 
points,  and  so  by  degrees  add  the  units  of  the  Five, 
given  in  intuition,  to  the  concept  of  the  Seven.  For 
I  first  take  the  number  7,  and  taking  the  intuition 
of  the  fingers  of  my  hand,  in  order  to  form  with 
it  the  concept  of  the  5,  I  gradually  add  the  units, 
which  I  before  took  together,  to  make  up  the  number 
5,  by  means  of  the  image  of  my  hand,  to  the  number  7, 
and  I  thus  see  the  number  12  arising  before  me. 
That  7  should  be  added  to  5  was  no  doubt  implied 
in  my  concept  of  a  sum  7  +  5,  but  not  that  that  sum 
should  be  equal  to  12.  An  arithmetical  proposition 
is,  therefore,  always  synthetical,  which  is  seen  more 
easily  still  by  taking  larger  numbers,  where  we 
clearly  perceive  that,  turn  and  twist  our  conceptions 
as  we  may,  we  could  never,  by  means  of  the  mere 
analysis  of  our  concepts  and  without  the  help  of  in- 
tuition, arrive  at  the  sum  that  is  wanted. 

Nor  is  any  proposition  of  pure  geometry  analytical. 
That  the  straight  line  between  two  points  is  the 
shortest,  is  a  synthetical  proposition.  For  my  concept 
of  straight  contains  nothing  of  magnitude  (quantity), 
but  a  quality  only.  The  concept  of  the  shortest  is, 
therefole,  purely  adventitious,  and  cannot  be  deduced 


SUPPLEMENT  VI.  407 

from  the  concept  of  the  straight  line  by  any  analysis 
whatsoever.  The  aid  of  intuition,  therefore,  must 
be  called  in,  by  which  alone  the  synthesis  is  possible. 

[It  is  true  that  some  few  propositions,  presupposed 
by  the  geometrician,  are  really  analytical,  and  depend 
on  the.  principle  of  contradiction:  but  then  they 
serve  only,  like  identical  propositions,  to  form  the 
chain  of  the  method,  and  not  as  principles.  Such 
are  the  propositions,  a  =  a,  the  whole  is  equal  to 
itself,  or  (a  +  l)>a,  that  the  whole  is  greater  than 
its  part.  And  even  these,  though  they  are  valid 
according  to  mere  concepts,  are  only  admitted  in 
mathematics,  because  they  can  be  represented  in  in- 
tuition1.] What  often  makes  us  believe  that  the 
predicate  of  such  apodictic  judgments  is  contained  in 
our  concept,  and  the  judgment  therefore  analytical, 
is  merely  the  ambiguous  character  of  the  expression. 
We  are  told  that  we  ought  to  join  in  thought  a 
certain  predicate  to  a  given  concept,  and  this  ne- 
cessity is  inherent  in  the  concepts  themselves.  But 
the  question  is  not  what  we  ought  to  join  to  the 
given  concept,  but  what  we  really  think  in  it,  though 
confusedly  only,  and  then  it  becomes  clear  that  the 
predicate  is  no  doubt  inherent  in  those  concepts  by 
necessity,  not,  however,  as  thought  in  the  concept 
itself,  but  by  means  of  an  intuition,  which  must  be 
added  to  the  concept. 

2.  Natural  science  (physica)  contains  synthetical 
judgments  a  priori  as  principles.  I  shall  adduce,  as 
examples,  a  few  propositions  only,  such  as,  that  in 
all  changes  of  the  material  world  the  quantity  of 
matter  always  remains  unchanged:  or  that  in  all 

, l  This  paragraph  from  It  is  true  to  intuition  seems  to  have  been 
a  marginal  note,  as  shown  by  Dr.  Vaihinger.  See  Translator's 
Preface,  p.  lii.  * 


408  SUPPLEMENT  VI. 

communication  of  motion,  action  and  reaction  must 
always  equal  each  other.  It  is  clear  not  only  that 
both  convey  necessity,  and  that,  therefore,  their 
origin  is  a  priori,  but  also  that  they  are  synthetical 
propositions.  For  in  the  concept  of  matter  I  do  not 
conceive  its  permanency,  but  only  its  presence  in  the 
space  which  it  fills.  I  therefore  go  beyond  the  con- 
cept of  matter  in  order  to  join  something  to  it 
a  priori,  which  I  did  not  before  conceive  in  it.  The 
proposition  is,  therefore,  not  analytical,  but  syntheti- 
cal, and  yet  a  priori,  and  the  same  applies  to  the 
other  propositions  of  the  pure  part  of  natural  science. 
3.  Metaphysic,  even  if  we  look  upon  it  as  hitherto 
a  tentative  science  only,  which,  however,  is  indispens- 
able to  us,  owing  to  the  very  nature  of  human  reason, 
is  meant  to  contain  synthetical  knowledge  a  priori. 
Its  object  is  not  at  all  merely  to  analyse  such  con- 
cepts as  we  make  to  ourselves  of  things  a  priori,  arid 
thus  to  explain  them  analytically,  but  to  expand  our 
knowledge  a  priori.  This  we  can  only  do  by  means 
of  concepts  which  add  something  to  a  given  concept 
that  was  not  contained  in  it ;  nay,  we  even  attempt, 
by  means  of  synthetical  judgments  a  priori,  to  go  so 
far  beyond  a  given  concept  that  experience  itself 
cannot  follow  us :  as,  for  instance,  in  the  proposition 
that  the  world  must  have  a  first  beginning.  Thus, 
according  at  least  to  its  intentions,  metaphysic  con- 
sists merely  of  synthetical  propositions  a  priori. 

VI. 

The  general  Problem  of  pure  Reason. 

Much  is  gained  if  we  are  able  to  bring  a  number 
of  investigations  under  the  formula  of  one  single 
problem*-  For  we  thus  not  only  facilitate  our  own 


SUPPLEMENT  VI.  409 

work  by  defining  it  accurately,  but  enable  also  every- 
body else  who  likes  to  examine  it  to  form  a  judg- 
ment, whether  we  have  really  done  justice  to  our 
purpose  or  not.  Now  the  real  problem  of  pure  reason 
is  contained  in  the  question,  How  are  synthetical  judg- 
ments a  priori  possible  ? 

That  metaphysic  has  hitherto  remained  in  so  vacil- 
lating a  state  of  ignorance  and  contradiction  is 
entirely  due  to  people  not  having  thought  sooner  of 
this  problem,  or  perhaps  even  of  a  distinction  be- 
tween analytical  and  synthetical  judgments.  The 
solution  of  this  problem,  or  a  sufficient  proof  that  a 
possibility  which  is  to  be  explained  does  in  reality 
not  exist  at  all,  is  the  question  of  life  or  death  to 
metaphysic.  David  Hume,  who  among  all  philoso- 
phers approached  nearest  to  that  problem,  though  he 
was  far  from  conceiving  it  with  sufficient  definite- 
ness  and  universality,  confining  his  attention  only 
to  the  synthetical  proposition  of  the  connection  of  an 
effect  with  its  causes  (principium  causalitatis),  arrived 
at  the  conclusion  that  such  a  proposition  a  priori 
is  entirely  impossible.  According  to  his  conclu- 
sions, everything  which  we  call  metaphysic  would 
turn  out  to  be  a  mere  delusion  of  reason,  fancying 
that  it  knows  by  itself  what  in  reality  is  only  bor- 
rowed from  experience,  and  has  assumed  by  mere 
habit  the  appearance  of  necessity.  If  he  had  grasped 
our  problem  in  all  its  universality,  he  would  never 
have  thought  of  an  assertion  which  destroys  all  pure 
philosophy,  because  he  would  have  perceived  that, 
according  to  his  argument,  no  pure  mathematical 
science  was  possible  either,  on  account  of  its  certainly 
containing  synthetical  propositions  a  priori;  and 
from  such  an  assertion  his  good  sense  would  probably 
have  saved  him. 


410  SUPPLEMENT   VI. 

On  the  solution  of  our  problem  depends,  at  the 
same  time,  the  possibility  of  the  pure  employment  of 
reason,  in  establishing  and  carrying  out  all  sciences 
which  contain  a  theoretical  knowledge  a  priori  of 
objects,  i.e.  the  answer  to  the  questions 

How  is  pure  mathematical  science  possible  ? 

How  is  pure  natural  science  possible  ? 
As  these  sciences  really  exist,  it  is  quite  proper  to 
ask,  HOIV  they  are  possible  ?  for  that  they  must  be 
possible,  is  proved  by  their  reality1. 

But  as  to  metapliysic,  the  bad  progress  which  it 
has  hitherto  made,  and  the  impossibility  of  asserting 
of  any  of  the  metaphysical  systems  yet  brought  for- 
ward that  it  really  exists,  so  far  as  its  essential  aim 
is  concerned,  must  fill  every  one  with  doubts  as  to 
its  possibility. 

Yet,  in  a  certain  sense,  this  kind  of  knowledge  also 
must  be  looked  upon  as  given,  and  though  not  as  a 
science,  yet  as  a  natural  disposition  (metaphysica  natu- 
ralis)  metaphysic  is  real.  For  human  reason,  without 
being  moved  merely  by  the  conceit  of  omniscience,  ad- 
vances irresistibly,  and  urged  on  by  its  own  need,  to 
questions  such  as  cannot  be  answered  by  any  empirical 
employment  of  reason,  or  by  principles  thence  derived, 
so  that  we  may  really  say,  that  all  men,  as  soon  as 
their  reason  became  ripe  for  speculation,  have  at  all 
times  possessed  some  kind  of  metaphysic,  and  will 

1  One  might  doubt  this  with  regard  to  pure  natural  science  ; 
but  one  has  only  to  consider  the  different  propositions  which  stand 
at  the  beginning  of  real  (empirical)  physical  science,  those,  for 
example,  relating  to  the  permanence  of  the  same  quantity  of  matter 
to  the  vis  inertise,  the  equality  of  action  and  reaction,  &c.,  in  order 
to  become  convinced  that  they  constitute  a  physcia  pura,  or  ratio- 
nalis,  wtych  well  deserves  to  stand  by  itself  as  an  independent 
science,  in  its  whole  extent,  whether  narrow  or  wide. 


SUPPLEMENT   VI.  411 

always  continue  to  possess  it.  And  now  it  will  also 
have  to  answer  the  question, 

How  is  metaphysic  possible,  as  a  natural  disposition  ? 
that  is,  how  does  the  nature  of  universal  human 
reason  give  rise  to  questions  which  pure  reason  pro- 
poses  to  itself,  and  which  it  is  urged  on  by  its  own 
need  to  answer  as  well  as  it  can  ? 

As,  however,  all  attempts  which  have  hitherto  been 
made  at  answering  these  natural  questions  (for  in- 
stance, whether  the  world  has  a  beginning,  or  exists 
from  all  eternity),  have  always  led  to  inevitable  con- 
tradictions, we  cannot  rest  satisfied  with  the  mere 
natural  disposition  to  metaphysic,  that  is,  with  the 
pure  faculty  of  reason  itself,  from  which  some  kind  of 
metaphysic  (whatever  it  may  be)  always  arises ;  but 
it  must  be  possible  to  arrive  with  it  at  some  cer- 
tainty as  to  our  either  knowing  or  not  knowing  its 
objects ;  that  is,  we  must  either  decide  that  we  can 
judge  of  the  objects  of  these  questions,  and  of  the 
power  or  want  of  power  of  reason,  in  deciding  any- 
thing upon  them, — therefore  that  we  can  either 
enlarge  our  pure  reason  with  certainty,  or  that  we 
have  to  impose  on  it  fixed  and  firm  limits.  This 
last  question,  which  arises  out  of  the  former  more 
general  problem,  would  properly  assume  this  form, 

How  is  metaphysic  possible,  as  a  science  ? 

The  critique  of  reason  leads,  therefore,  necessarily,  to 
true  science,  while  its  dogmatical  use,  without  criticism, 
lands  us  in  groundless  assertions,  to  which  others, 
equally  specious,  can  always  be  opposed,  that  is,  in 
scepticism. 

Nor  need  this  science  be  very  formidable  by  its 
great  prolixity,  for  it  has  not  to  deal  with  the  objects 
of  reason,  the  variety  of  which  is  infinite,  but  with 
reason  only,  and  with  problems,  suggested  by  reason 


4T2  SUPPLEMENT  VI. 

and  placed  before  it,  not  by  the  nature  of  things, 
which  are  different  from  it,  but  by  its  own  nature ; 
so  that,  if  reason  has  only  first  completely  understood 
its  own  power,  with  reference  to  objects  given  to  it 
in  experience,  it  will  have  no  difficulty  in  determining 
completely  and  safely  the  extent  and  limits  of  its 
attempted  application  beyond  the  limits  of  all 
experience. 

Wo  may  and  must  therefore  regard  all  attempts 
which  have  hitherto  been  made  at  building  up  a 
tuetaphysic  dogmatically,  as  non-avenu.  For  the 
mere  analysis  of  the  concepts  that  dwell  in  our 
reason  a  priori,  which  has  been  attempted  in  one  or 
other  of  those  metaphysical  systems,  is  by  no  means 
the  aim,  but  only  a  preparation  for  true  metaphysic, 
namely,  the  answer  to  the  question,  how  we  can 
enlarge  our  knowledge  a  priori  synthetically;  nay,  it 
is  utterly  useless  for  that  purpose,  because  it  only 
shows-  what  is  contained  in  those  concepts,  but 
not  by  what  process  a  priori  we  arrive  at  them,  in 
order  thus  to  determine  the  validity  of  their  employ- 
ment with  reference  to  all  objects  of  knowledge  in 
general.  Nor  does  it  require  much  self-denial  to 
give  up  these  pretensions,  considering  that  the  unde- 
niable and,  in  the  dogmatic  procedure,  inevitable  con- 
tradictions of  reason  with  itself,  have  long  deprived 
every  system  of  metaphysic  of  all  authority.  More 
firmness  will  be  required  in  order  not  to  be  deterred 
by  difficulties  from  within  and  resistance  from  without, 
from  trying  to  advance  a  science,  indispensable  to 
human  reason,  (a  science  of  which  we  may  lop  off 
every  branch,  but  will  never  be  able  to  destroy  the 
root,)  by  a  treatment  entirely  opposed  to  all  former 
treatments,  which  promises,  at  last,  to  ensure  the  suc- 
cessful and  fruitful  growth  of  metaphysical  science. 


SUPPLEMENT   VII.  [Seevol.ii.P.rr] 

STILL  less  ought  we  to  expect  here  a  criticism  on 
the  books  and  systems  treating  of  pure  reason,  but 
only  on  the  faculty  of  pure  reason  itself.  It  is  only 
if  we  are  in  possession  of  this,  that  we  possess  a  safe 
criterion  for  estimating  the  philosophical  value  of  old 
and  new  works  on  this  subject.  Otherwise,  an  un- 
qualified historian  and  judge  does  nothing  but  criticise 
the  groundless  assertions  of  others  by  means  of  his 
own,  which  are  equally  groundless. 


SUPPLEMENT  VIII.  [s^  ™i.  a.  p.  23] 

4.  SPACE  is  represented  as  an  infinite  given  quan- 
tity. Now  it  is  quite  true  that  every  concept  is  to 
be  thought  as  a  representation,  which  is  contained  in 
an  infinite  number  of  different  possible  representations 
(as  their  common  characteristic),  and  therefore  com- 
prehends them :  but  no  concept,  as  such,  can  be 
thought,  as  if  it  contained  in  itself  an  infinite  number 
of  representations.  Nevertheless,  space  is  so  thought, 
(for  all  parts  of  space  exist  simultaneously  ad  infini- 
tum).  Consequently,  the  original  representation  of 
space  is  an  intuition  a  priori,  and  not  a  concept. 

$3. 
Transcendental  Exposition  of  the  concept  of  space. 

I  understand  by  transcendental  exposition  (JEror- 
terung),  the  explanation  of  a  concept,  as  of  a  principle 
by  which  the  possibility  of  other  synthetical  kinds 
of  knowledge  a  priori  can  be  understood.  For  this 
purpose  it  is  necessary,  i.  That  such  kinds  of  know- 
ledge really  do  flow  from  the  given  concept.  2.  That 
they  are  possible  only  under  the  presupposition  of  a 
given  mode  of  explanation  of  such  concept. 

Geometry  is  a  science  which  determines  the  pro- 
perties of  space  synthetically,  and  yet  a  priori.  What 
then  must  be  the  representation  of  space,  to  render 
such  a  knowledge  of  it  possible  ?  It  must  be  origi- 
nally intuitive;  for  it  is  impossible  from  a  mere 
conceptfco  deduce  propositions  which  go  beyond  that 


SUPPLEMENT  VIII.  415 

concept,  as  we  do  in  geometry  (Introduction  V.  See 
Supp.  VI).  That  intuition,  however,  must  be  a  priori, 
that  is,  it  must  exist  within  us  before  any  perception 
of  the  object,  and  must  therefore  be  pure,  not  empi- 
rical intuition.  For  all  geometrical  propositions  are 
apodictic,  that  is,  connected  with  the  consciousness  of 
their  necessity,  as  for  instance  the  proposition,  that 
space  has  only  three  dimensions ;  and  such  proposi- 
tions cannot  be  empirical  judgments,  nor  conclusions 
from  them  (Introduction  II.  See  Suppl.  IV.  n). 

How  then  can  an  external  intuition  dwell  in  the 
mind  anterior  to  the  objects  themselves,  and  in  which 
the  concept  of  objects  can  be  determined  a  priori  1 
Evidently  not  otherwise  than  so  far  as  it  has  its  seat 
in  the  subject  only,  as  the  formal  condition  under 
which  the  subject  is  affected  by  the  objects,  in  receiv- 
ing an  immediate  representation,  that  is,  intuition  of 
them ;  therefore  as  a  form  of  the  external  sense  in 
general. 

It  is  therefore  by  our  explanation  only  that  the 
possibility  of  geometry  as  a  synthetical  science  a  priori 
becomes  intelligible.  Every  other  explanation,  which 
fails  to  account  for  this  possibility,  can  best  be  dis- 
tinguished from  our  own  by  that  criterion,  although 
it  may  seem  to  have  some  similarity  with  it. 


SUPPLEMENT  IX,  [see  w.  u.  P.  25] 

WITH  the  exception  of  space  there  is  no  other  sub- 
jective representation,  referring  to  something  external, 
that  could  be  called  a  priori  objective.  For  from 
none  of  them  can  we  derive  synthetical  propositions 
a  priori,  as  we  can  from  the  intuition  in  space  f  3. 
(See  Suppl.  VIII).  Strictly  speaking,  therefore,  they 
can  claim  no  ideality  at  all,  though  they  agree  with 
the  representation  of  space  in  this,  that  they  belong 
only  to  the  subjective  nature  of  sensibility,  for 
instance,  of  sight,  of  hearing,  and  feeling,  through 
the  sensations  of  colours,  sounds,  and  heat.  All  these, 
however,  being  sensations  only,  and  not  intuitions,  do 
not  help  us  by  themselves  to  know  any  object,  least 
of  all  a  priori. 


SUPPLEMENT    X.       [S-id.fi,  p.  .8] 

§5- 
Transcendental  Exposition  of  the  concept  of  time. 

I  CAN  here  refer  to  No.  in.  p.  2  7,  where,  for  the  sake 
of  brevity,  I  have  placed  what  is  properly  transcen- 
dental under  the  head  of  metaphysical  exposition. 
Here  I  only  add  that  the  concept  of  change,  and  with 
it  the  concept  of  motion  (as  change  of  place),  is  possible 
only  through  and  in  the  representation  of  time ;  and 
that,  if  this  representation  were  not  intuitive  (inter- 
nal) a  priori,  no  concept,  whatever  it  be,  could  make 
us  understand  the  possibility  of  a  change,  that  is,  of 
a  connection  of  contradictorily  opposed  predicates  (for 
instance,  the  being  and  not-being  of  one  and  the 
same  thing  in  one  and  the  same  place)  in  one  and 
the  same  object.  It  is  only  in  time  that  both  con- 
tradictorily opposed  determinations  can  be  met  with 
in  the  same  object,  that  is,  one  after  the  other.  Our 
concept  of  time,  therefore,  exhibits  the  possibility  of 
as  many  synthetical  cognitions  a  priori  as  are  found 
in  the  general  doctrine  of  motion,  which  is  very  rich 
in  them. 


VOL.  i.  E  e 


SUPPLEMENT  XL    [see  vol.  1^.43] 

II.  As  a  confirmation  of  this  theory  of  the  ideality 
both  of  the  external  and  of  the  internal  sense,  and 
therefore  of  all  objects  of  the  senses  as  mere  pheno- 
mena, we  may  particularly  remark,  that  everything 
in  our  knowledge  which  belongs  to  intuition  (exclud- 
ing therefore  the  feelings  of  pain  and  pleasure,  and 
the  will,  which  are  no  knowledge  at  all),  contains 
nothing  but  mere  relations,  namely,  of  the  places  in 
an  intuition  (extension),  change  of  places  (motion), 
and  laws,  according  to  which  that  change  is  deter- 
mined (moving  forces).  Nothing  is  told  us  thereby 
as  to  what  is  present  in  the  place,  or  what,  besides 
the.  change  of  place,  is  active  in  the  things.  A  thing 
by  itself  however  cannot  be  known  by  mere  relations, 
and  we  may,  therefore,  fairly  conclude  that,  as  the 
external  sense  gives  us  nothing  but  representations 
of  relations,  that  sense  can  contain  in  its  representa- 
tion only  the  relation  of  an  object  to  the  subject,  and 
not  what  is  inside  the  object  by  itself.  The  same 
applies  to  internal  intuition.  Not  only  do  the  repre- 
sentations of  the  external  senses  constitute  its  proper 
material  with  which  we  fill  our  mind,  but  time,  in 
which  these  representations  are  placed,  and  which 
precedes  even  our  consciousness  of  them  in  experience, 
nay,  forms  the  formal  condition  of  the  manner  in 
which  we  place  them  in  the  mind,  contains  itself 
relations  of  succession,  co-existence,  and  that  which 
must  be  co-existent  with  succession,  namely,  the  per- 
manent. Now  that  which,  as  a  representation,  can 


SUPPLEMENT  XI.  419 

precede  every  act  of  thinking  something,  is  the  intui- 
tion :  and,  if  it  contains  nothing  but  relations,  then 
the  form  of  intuition.     As  this  represents   nothing 
except  what  is  being  placed  in  the  mind,  it  can  itself 
be  the  manner  only  in  which  the  mind,  through  its 
own  activity,  that  is,  by  this  placing  of  its  representa- 
tion, is  affected  by  itself,  in  other  words,  an  internal 
sense  with  respect  to  its  form.     Whatever  is  repre- 
sented by  a  sense  is  so  far  always  phenomenal,  and 
we  should  therefore  have  either  to  admit  no  internal 
sense  at  all,  or  the  subject,  which  is  its  object,  could 
be  represented  by  it  as  phenomenal  only,  and  not,  as 
it  might  judge  of  itself,  if  its  intuition  were  spon- 
taneous only,  that  is,  if  it  were  intellectual.     The 
difficulty  here  lies  wholly  in  this,  how  a  subject  can 
have  an  internal  intuition  of  itself:  but  this  difficulty 
is  common  to  every  theory.     The  consciousness  of 
self  (apperception)  is  the  simple  representation  of  the 
ego,  and  if  by  it  alone  all  the  manifold  (representa- 
tions) in  the  subject  were  given  spontaneously,  the 
inner  intuition  would  be  intellectual.     In  man  this 
consciousness   requires   internal    perception    of   the 
manifold,  which  is  previously  given  in  the  subject, 
and  the  manner  in  which  this  is  given  in  the  mind 
without  spontaneity,  must,  on  account  of  this  dif- 
ference, be  called  sensibility.     If  the  faculty  of  self- 
consciousness  is  to  seek  for,  that  is,  to  apprehend, 
what  lies  in  the  mind,  it  must  affect  it,  and  can  thus 
only  produce  an  intuition  of  self.     The  form  of  this, 
which  lay  antecedently  in  the  mind,  determines  the 
manner  in  which  the  manifold  exists  together  in  the 
mind,  namely,  in  the  representation  of  time.     The 
intuition  of  self,  therefore,  is  not,  as  if  it  could  repre- 
sent itself  immediately  and  as  spontaneously  and  in- 
dependently active,  but  according  to  the  manner  in 

E  e  2 


420  SUPPLEMENT  XI. 

which  it  is  internally  affected,  consequently  as  it 
appears  to  itself,  not  as  it  is. 

III.  If  I  say  that  the  intuition  of  external  objects 
and  tho  self-intuition  of  the  mind,  represent  both  (viz. 
the  objects  and  the  mind)  in  space  and  time,  as  they 
affect  our  senses,  that  is,  as  they  appear,  I  do  not  mean, 
that  these  objects  are  mere  illusion.  For  the  objects, 
as  phenomena,  nay,  even  the  properties  which  we  as- 
cribe to  them,  are  always  looked  upon  as  something 
really  given  :  and  all  we  do  is,  that,  as  their  quality 
depends  only  on  the  manner  of  intuition  on  the  part  of 
the  subject  in  relation  to  a  given  object,  we  distinguish 
the  object,  as  phenomenon,  from  itself,  as  an  object  by 
itself.  Thus,  if  I  assert  that  the  quality  of  space  and 
time,  according  to  which,  as  a  condition  of  their  exist- 
ence, I  accept  both  external  objects  and  my  own  soul, 
lies  in  my  manner  of  intuition  and  not  in  these  objects 
by  themselves,  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  bodies  seem 
only  to  exist  outside  me,  or  that  my  soul  seems  only 
to  be  given  in  my  self-consciousness.  It  would  be 
my  own  fault,  if  I  changed  that,  which  I  ought  to 
count  as  phenomenal,  into  mere  illusion  \ 

1  Phenomenal  predicates  can  be  attributed  to  the  object  in  its 
relation  to  our  sense :  as  for  instance  to  the  rose  its  red  colour,  and 
its  scent.  But  what  is  merely  phenomenal  can  never  be  attributed 
to  an  object  as  a  predicate,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  phenomenal 
attributes  to  the  object  by  itself  something  which  belongs  to  it  only 
in  its  relation  to  the  senses,  or  to  a  subject  in  general':  as  for 
instance  the  two  handles,  which  were  formerly  attributed  to  Saturn. 
That  which  is  never  to  be  found  in  the  object  itself,  but  always  in 
its  relation  to  a  subject,  and  is  inseparable  from  its  representation 
by  a  subject,  is  phenomenal,  and  the  predicates  of  space  and  time 
are  therefore  rightly  attributed  to  objects  of  the  senses,  as  such. 
In  this  there  is  no  illusion.  If,  on  the  contrary,  I  were  to  attribute 
to  the  rose  by  itself,  redness,  handles  to  Saturn,  and  extension  to 
all  external  objects,  without  restricting  my  judgment  to  the  rela- 
tion of  these  objects  to  a  subject,  we  should  have  illusion. 


SUPPLEMENT   XL  421 

This  cannot  happen,  however,  according  to  our 
principle  of  the  ideality  of  all  sensuous  intuitions  ;  on 
the  contrary,  it  is  only  when  we  attribute  objective 
reality  to  those  forms  of  intuition,  that  everything  is 
changed  inevitably  into  mere  illusion.  For  if  we  take 
space  and  time  as  properties  that  ought  to  exist  in 
things  by  themsel  ves,  in  order  to  make  them  possible, 
and  then  survey  the  absurdities  in  which  we  should 
be  involved  in  having  to  admit  that  two  infinite 
things,  which  are  not  substances,  nor  something- 
inherent  in  substances,  but  nevertheless  must  be 
something  existing,  nay,  the  necessary  condition  of 
the  existence  of  all  things,  would  remain,  even  if  all 
existing  things  were  removed,  we  really  cannot 
blame  the  good  Bishop  Berkeley  for  degrading 
bodies  to  mere  illusion.  Nay,  it  would  follow  that 
even  our  own  existence,  which  would  thus  be  made 
dependent  on  the  independent  reality  of  such  a 
non-entity  as  time,  must  become  a  mere  illusion,  an 
absurdity  which  hitherto  no  one  has  been  guilty  of. 

IV.  In  natural  theology,  where  we  think  of  an 
object  which  not  only  can  never  be  an  object  of 
intuition  to  us,  but  which  even  to  itself  can  never  be 
an  object  of  sensuous  intuition,  great  care  is  taken 
to  remove  all  conditions  of  space  and  time  from  its 
intuition  (for  all  its  knowledge  must  be  intuitive, 
and  not  thought,  which  always  involves  limitation). 
But  how  are  we  justified  in  doing  this,  when  we 
have  first  made  space  and  time  forms  of  things  by 
themselves,  such  as  would  remain  as  conditions  of  the 
existence  of  things  a  priori,  even  if  the  things  them- 
selves had  been  removed  ?  If  conditions  of  all  exist- 
ence, they  would  also  be  conditions  of  the  existence  of 
God.  If  we  do  not  wish  to  change  space  and  time 
into  objective  forms  of  all  things,  nothing  renl&ins  but 


422  SUPPLEMENT  XL 

to  accept  them  as  subjective  forms  of  our  external  as 
well  as  internal  intuition,  which  is  called  sensuous, 
for  the  very  reason  that  it  is  not  originally  spon- 
taneous, that  is  such,  that  it  could  itself  give  us  the 
existence  of  the  objects  of  intuition  (such  an  in- 
tuition, so  far  as  we  can  understand,  can  belong  to 
the  First  Being  only),  but  dependent  on  the  exist- 
ence of  objects,  and  therefore  possible  only,  if  the 
faculty  of  representation  in  the  subject  is  affected  by 
them. 

It  is  not  necessary,  moreover,  that  we  should  limit 
this  intuition  in  space  and  time  to  the  sensibility  of 
man ;  it  is  quite  possible  that  all  finite  thinking 
beings  must  necessarily  agree  with  us  on  this  point 
(though  we  cannot  decide  this).  On  account  of  this 
universal  character,  however,  it  does  not  cease  to  be 
sensibility,  for  it  always  is,  and  remains  derivative 
(intuitus  derivatives),  not  original  (intuitus  origina- 
rius),  and  therefore  not  intellectual  intuition.  For 
the  reason  mentioned  before,  the  latter  intuition 
seems  only  to  belong  to  the  First  Being,  and  never 
to  one  which  is  dependent,  both  in  its  existence  and 
its  intuition,  (which  intuition  determines  its  existence 
with  reference  to  given  objects).  This  latter  remark, 
however,  must  only  be  taken  as  an  illustration  of  our 
aesthetic  theory,  and  not  as  a  proof, 

Conclusion  of  the  Transcendental  JEsihetic. 

Here,  then,  we  have  one  of  the  requisites  for  the 
solution  of  the  general  problem  of  transcendental 
philosophy,  How  are  synthetical  propositions  a  priori 
possible  ?  namely,  pure*  intuitions  a  priori,  space  and 
time.  In  them  we  find,  if  in  a  judgment  a  priori 
we  want"  to  go  beyond  a  given  concept,  that  which 


SUPPLEMENT   XI.  423 

can  be  discovered  a  priori,  not  in  the  concept,  but  in 
the  intuition  corresponding  to  it,  and  can  be  con- 
nected with  it  synthetically.  For  this  very  reason, 
however,  such  judgments  can  never  go  beyond  the 
objects  of  the  senses,  but  are  valid  only  for  objects  of 
possible  experience. 


SUPPLEMENT  XII.    [see**,  a,  p.  74] 
fn. 

THIS  table  of  categories  suggests  some  interesting 
considerations,  which  possibly  may  have  important 
consequences  with  regard  to  the  scientific  form  of  all 
knowledge  of  reason.  For  it  is  clear  that  such  a 
table  will  be  extremely  useful,  nay,  indispensable,  in 
the  theoretical  part  of  philosophy,  in  order  to  trace 
the  complete  plan  of  a  whole  science,  so  far  as  it  rests 
on  concepts  a  priori,  and  to  divide  it  mathematically 
according  to  fixed  principles,  because  that  table  con- 
tains all  elementary  concepts  of  the  understanding  in 
their  completeness,  nay,  even  the  form  of  a  system 
of  them  in  the  human  understanding,  and  indicates 
therefore  all  the  momenta  of  a  projected  speculative 
science,  nay,  even  their  order.  Of  this  I  have  given 
an  example  elsewhere1.  Here  follow  some  of  the 
considerations. 

The  first  is,  that  this  table,  which  contains  four 
classes  of  the  concepts  of  the  understanding,  may, 
in  the  first  instance,  be  divided  into  two  sections, 
the  former  of  which  refers  to  objects  of  intuition 
(pure,  as  well  as  empirical),  the  latter  to  the  exist- 
ence of  those  objects  (either  in  their  relation  to  each 
other,  or  to  the  understanding). 

The  first  section  I  shall  call  that  of  the  mathe- 
matical, the  second,  that  of  the  dynamical  categories. 
The  first  section  has  no  correlates,  which  are  met 
with  in  the  second  section  only.  Must  not  this 

*  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Natural  Science. 


SUPPLEMENT   XII.  425 

difference  have  some  ground  in  the  nature  of  the 
understanding  ? 

Our  second  remark  is,  that  in  every  class  there 
is  the  same  number  of  categories,  namely  three, 
which  again  makes  us  ponder,  because  generally  all 
division  a  priori  by  means  of  concepts  must  be 
dichotomy.  It  should  be  remarked  also,  that  the 
third  category  always  arises  from  the  combination 
of  the  second  with  the  first  Thus  totality  is  nothing 
but  plurality  considered  as  unity ;  limitation  nothing 
but  reality  connected  with  negation ;  community  is 
the  causality  of  a  substance  as  determining  another 
reciprocally ;  lastly,  necessity,  the  existence  which 
is  given  by  possibility  itself.  It  must  not  be  sup- 
posed, however,  that  therefore  the  third  category  is 
only  a  derivative,  and  not  a  primary  concept  of  the 
pure  understanding.  For  the  joining  of  the  first  and 
second  concepts,  in  order  to  produce  the  third,  re- 
quires an  independent  act  of  the  understanding, 
which  is  not  identical  with  the  act  that  produces  the 
first  and  second  concepts.  Thus  the  concept  of  a 
number  (which  belongs  to  the  category  of  totality), 
is  not  always  possible  when  we  have  the  concepts  of 
plurality  and  unity  (for  instance,  in  the  concept  of 
the  infinite) ;  nor  can  we  understand  by  simply  com- 
bining the  concept  of  a  cause  and  that  of  a  substance, 
the  influence,  that  is,  how  a  substance  can  become 
the  cause  of  something  in  another  substance.  This 
shows  that  a  separate  act  of  the  understanding  is 
here  required,  and  the  same  applies  to  all  the 
rest. 

Third  observation.  With  regard  to  one  category, 
namely,  that  of  community,  which  is  found  in  the 
third  class,  its  accordance  with  the  form  of  a  dis- 
junctive judgment,  which  corresponds  to  it  in  the 


426  SUPPLEMENT  XII. 

table  of  logical  functions,  is  not  so  evident  as  else- 
where. 

In  order  to  become  quite  certain  of  that  accord- 
ance, we  must  remark  that  in  all  disjunctive  judg- 
ments their  sphere  (that  is,  all  that  is  contained  in 
them)  is  represented  as  a  whole,  divided  into  parts 
(the  subordinate  concepts),  arid  that,  as  one  of  them 
cannot  be  contained  under  the  other,  they  are  con- 
ceived as  co-ordinato,  not  as  subordinate,  determining 
each  other,  not  in  one  direction  only,  as  in  a  series, 
but  reciprocally,  as  in  an  aggregate  (if  one  member 
of  the  division  is  given,  all  the  rest  arc  excluded, 
and  vice  versa). 

A  similar  connection  is  conceived  in  a  whole  of 
things,  in  which  one,  as  effect,  is  not  subordinated 
to  another  as  the  cause  of  its  existence,  but  is  co- 
ordinated with  it, .  simultaneously  and  reciprocally, 
as  cause  of  the  determination  of  the  other  (as,  for 
instance,  in  a  body  of  which  the  parts  reciprocally 
attract  and  repel  each  other).  Tfiis  is  a  kind  of  con- 
nection totally  different  from  that  which  exists  in 
a  mere  relation  of  cause  to  effect  (of  ground  to  con- 
sequence), for  here  the  consequence  does  not  recipro- 
cally determine  the  ground  again,  nor  (as  in  the  case 
of  the  Creator  and  the  creation)  constitute  with  it 
a  whole.  The  process  of  the  understanding,  in  repre- 
senting to  itself  the  sphere  of  a  divided  concept,  is 
the  same  as  that  by  which  it  thinks  a  thing  as 
divisible :  and  in  the  same  manner  in  which,  in  the 
former,  the  members  of  a  division  exclude  each  other, 
and  are  yet  connected  in  one  sphere,  the  understand- 
ing represents  to  itself  the  parts  of  the  latter  as 
existing  (as  substances),  each  independent  of  the  rest, 
and  yet  united  in  a  whole. 


SUPPLEMENT  XII.  427 

§   12. 

In  the  transcendental  philosophy  of  the  ancients 
there  is  another  chapter  containing  concepts  of  the 
understanding  which,  though  they  are  not  counted 
among  the  categories,  are  yet  considered  by  them  as 
concepts  a  priori  of  objects.  If  so,  they  would 
increase  the  number  of  the  categories,  which  cannot 
be.  They  are  set  forth  in  the  famous  proposition  of 
the  Schoolmen,  'quodlibet  ens  est  unum,  verum, 
bonum/  Now  although  the  inferences  to  be  drawn 
from  this  principle  (yielding  nothing  but  tautological 
propositions)  were  very  meagre,  so  that  modern 
metaphysicians  mention  it  almost  by  courtesy  only, 
a  thought  which  has  maintained  itself  so  long,  how- 
ever empty  it  may  seem,  deserves  an  investigation 
with  regard  to  its  origin,  nay,  leads  us  to  suspect 
that  it  may  have  its  foundation  in  some  rule  of  the 
understanding  which,  as  often  happens,  has  only  been 
wrongly  interpreted.  What  are  supposed  to  be  trans- 
cendental predicates  of  things,  are  nothing  but  logical 
requirements  and  criteria  of  all  knowledge  of  things 
in  general,  whereby  that  knowledge  is  founded  on  the 
categories  of  quantity,  namely,  unity,  plurality,  and 
totality.  Only,  instead  of  taking  them  as  materially 
belonging  to  the  possibility  of  things  by  themselves, 
they  (the  predicates,  or  rather  those  who  employed 
them)  used  them,  in  fact,  in  their  formal  meaning 
only,  as  forming  a  logical  requisite  for  every  kind  of 
knowledge,  and  yet  incautiously  made  these  criteria 
of  thought  to  be  properties  of  the  things  by  them- 
selves. In  every  cognition  of  an  object  there  is 
unity  of  concept,  which  may  be  called  qualitative 
unity,  so  far  as  we  think  by  it  only  the  unity  in  the 
comprehension  of  the  manifold  material  of  (fhr  know- 


428  SUPPLEMENT   XII. 

ledge :  as,  for  instance,  the  unity  of  the  subject  in  a 
play,  or  a  speech,  or  a  fable.  Secondly,  there  is  truth, 
in  respect  to  the  deductions  from  it.  The  more  true 
deductions  can  be  made  from  a  given  concept,  the 
more  criteria  are  there  of  its  objective  reality.  This 
might  be  called  the  qualitative  plurality  of  criteria, 
which  belong  to  a  concept  as  their  common  ground 
(but  are  not  conceived  in  it),  as  quantity.  Thirdly, 
there  is  completeness,  which  consists  in  this,  that  the 
plurality  together  leads  back  to  the  unity  of  the 
concept,  according  completely  with  this  and  with  no 
other  concept,  which  may  be  called  the  qualitative 
completeness  (totality).  This  shows  that  these  logical 
criteria  of  the  possibility  of  knowledge  in  general 
do  nothing  but  change  the  three  categories  of  quan- 
tity, in  which  the  unity  in  the  production  of  the 
quantum  must  throughout  be  taken  as  homogeneous, 
for  the  purpose  of  connecting  heterogeneous  elements 
of  knowledge  also  in  one  consciousness,  by  means  of 
the  quality  of  the  cognition  as  the  principle  of  the 
connection.  Thus  the  criterion  of  the  possibility  of 
a  concept  (but  not  of  its  object)  is  the  definition  of 
it,  in  which  the  unity  of  the  concept,  the  truth  of  all 
that  may  be  immediately  deduced  from  it,  and  lastly, 
the  completeness  of  what  has  been  deduced  from  it, 
supply  all  that  is  necessary  for  the  constitution  of  the 
whole  concept.  In  the  same  manner  the  criterion 
of  an  hypothesis  consists,  first,  in  the  intelligibility 
of  the  ground  which  has  been  admitted  for  the  sake 
of  explanation,  or  of  its  unity  (without  any  auxiliary 
hypothesis) ;  secondly,  in  the  truth  of  the  conse- 
quences to  be  deduced  from  it  (their  accordance  with 
themselves  and  with  experience) ;  and  lastly,  in  the 
completeness  of  the  ground  admitted  for  the  explana- 
tion of  these  consequences,  which  point  back  to 


SUPPLEMENT  XII.  429 

« 

neither  more  nor  less  than  what  was  admitted  in  the 
hypothesis,  and  agree  in  giving  us  again,  analytically 
a  posteriori,  what  had  been  thought  synthetically 
a  priori.  The  concepts  of  unity,  truth,  and  perfec- 
tion do  not  supplement  the  transcendental  table  of 
the  categories,  as  if  it  were  imperfect,  but  they  serve 
only,  after  the  relation  of  these  concepts  to  their 
objects  has  been  entirely  set  aside,  to  bring  their 
employment  under  general  logical  rules,  for  the 
agreement  of  knowledge  with  itself. 


SUPPLEMENT    XIII,      [Seevol.ii,P.84] 

LOCKE,  for  want  of  this  reflection,  and  because  he 
met  with  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding  in  expe- 
rience, derived  them  also  from  experience,  and  yet 
acted  so  inconsistently  that  he  attempted  to  use  them 
for  knowledge  which  far  exceeds  all  limits  of  experi- 
ence, David  Hume  saw  that,  in  order  to  be  able  to 
do  this,  these  concepts  ought  to  have  their  origin 
a  priori ;  but  as  he  could  not  explain  how  it  was 
possible  that  the  understanding  should  be  constrained 
to  think  concepts,  which  by  themselves  are  not  united 
in  the  understanding,  as  necessarily  united  in  the 
object,  and  never  thought  that  possibly  the  under- 
standing might  itself,  through  these  concepts,  be  the 
author  of  that  experience  in  which  its  objects  are 
found,  he  was  driven  by  necessity  to  derive  them  from 
experience  (namely,  from  a  subjective  necessity,  pro- 
duced by  frequent  association  in  experience,  which  at 
last  is  wrongly  supposed  to  be  objective,  that  is,  from 
habit).  He  acted,  however,  very  consistently,  by 
declaring  it  to  be  impossible  to  go  with  these  con- 
cepts, and  with  the  principles  arising  from  them, 
beyond  the  limits  of  experience.  This  empirical 
deduction,  which  was  adopted  by  both  philosophers, 
cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  reality  of  our  scientific 
knowledge  a  priori,  namely,  pure  mathematics  and 
general  natural  science,  and  is  therefore  refuted  by 
facts.  The  former  of  these  two  celebrated  men 
opened  a  wide  door  to  fantastic  extravagance,  because 
reason,  if  it  has  once  established  such  pretensions, 


SUPPLEMENT  XIII.  43! 

can  no  longer  be  checked  by  vague  praises  of  moder- 
ation ;  the  other,  thinking  that  he  had  once  discovered 
so  general  an  illusion  of  our  faculty  of  knowledge, 
which  had  formerly  been  accepted  as  reason,  gave 
himself  over  entirely  to  scepticism.  We  now  intend 
to  make  the  experiment  whether  it  is  not  possible  to 
conduct  reason  safely  between  these  two  rocks,  to 
assign  to  her  definite  limits,  and  yet  to  keep  open  for 
her  the  proper  field  for  all  her  activities  1 

I  shall  merely  premise  an  explanation  of  what 
I  mean  by  the  categories.  They  are  concepts  of  an 
object  in  general  by  which  its  intuition  is  defined 
through  one  of  the  logical  functions  in  judgments. 
Thus  the  function  of  the  categorical  judgment  was 
that  of  the  relation  of  the  subject  to  the  predicate ; 
for  instance,  all  bodies  are  divisible.  Here,  however, 
with  reference  to  the  pure  logical  function  of  the 
understanding,  it  remained  undetermined  to  which  of 
the  two  concepts  the  function  of  the  subject,  or  the 
predicate,  was  to  be  assigned.  For  we  could  also  say, 
some  divisible  is  body.  But  by  bringing  the  concept 
of  body  under  the  category  of  substance,  it  is  deter- 
mined that  its  empirical  intuition  in  experience  must 
always  be  considered  as  subject  and  never  as  predi- 
cate only.  The  same  applies  to  all  other  categories. 


SUPPLEMENT     XIV.    [SeevoUi,p.84] 

OF   THE    DEDUCTION   OF    THE   PURE   CONCEPTS   OF 
THE   UNDERSTANDING. 

Second  Section. 

Transcendental  deduction  of  the  pure  Concepts  of  the 
Understanding. 

f  15. 

Of  the  possibility  of  connecting  (conjunctio)  in  general. 

THE  manifold  of  representations  may  be  given  in 
an  intuition  which  is  purely  sensuous,  that  is,  nothing 
but  receptivity,  and  the  form  of  that  intuition  may 
lie  a:  priori  in  our  faculty  of  representation,  without 
being  anything  but  the  manner  in  which  a  subject  is 
affected.  But  the  connection  (conjunctio)  of  anything 
manifold  can  never  enter  into  us  through  the  senses, 
and  cannot  be  contained,  therefore,  already  in  the  pure 
form  of  sensuous  intuition,  for  it  is  a  spontaneous  act 
of  the  power  of  representation  ;  and  as,  in  order  to  dis- 
tinguish this  from  sensibility,  we  must  call  it  under- 
standing, we  see  that  all  connecting,  whether  we  are 
conscious  of  it  or  not,  and  whether  we  connect  the 
manifold  of  intuition  or  several  concepts  together,  and 
again,  whether  that  intuition  be  sensuous  or  not  sen- 
suous, is  an  act  of  the  understanding.  This  act  we 
shall  call  by  the  general  name  of  synthesis,  in  order  to 
show  that  we  cannot  represent  to  ourselves  anything 
as  connected  in  the  object,  without  having  previously 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  433 

connected  it  ourselves,  and  that  of  all  representations 
connection  is  the  only  one  which  cannot  be  given 
through  the  objects,  but  must  be  carried  out  by  the 
subject  itself,  because  it  is  an  act  of  its  spontaneity. 
It  can  be  easily  perceived  that  this  act  must  be  ori- 
ginally one  and  the  same  for  every  kind  of  connection, 
and  that  its  dissolution,  that  is,  the  analysis,  which 
seems  to  be  its  opposite,  does  always  presuppose  it. 
For  where  the  understanding  has  not  previously  con- 
nected, there  is  nothing  for  it  to  disconnect,  because, 
as  connected,  it  could  only  be  given  by  the  under- 
standing through  the  faculty  of  representation. 

But  the  concept  of  connection  includes,  besides  the 
concept  of  the  manifold  and  the  synthesis  of  it,  the 
concept  of  the  unity  of  the  manifold  also.  Connection 
is  representation  of  the  synthetical  unity  of  the  mani- 
fold1. 

The  representation  of  that  unity  cannot  therefore 
be  the  result  of  the  connection  ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
concept  of  the  connection  becomes  first  possible  by 
the  representation  of  unity  being  added  to  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  manifold.  And  this  unity,  which 
precedes  a  priori  all  concepts  of  connection,  must  not 
be  mistaken  for  that  category  of  unity  of  which  we 
spoke  on  p.  68;  for  all  categories  depend  on  logical 
functions  in  judgments,  and  in  these  we  have  already 
connection,  and  therefore  unity  of  given  concepts. 
The  category,  therefore,  presupposes  connection,  and 
we  must  consequently  look  still  higher  for  this  unity 

1  Whether  the  representations  themselves  are  identical,  and 
whether  therefore  one  can  be  thought  analytically  by  the  other,  is 
a  matter  of  no  consequence  here.  The  consciousness  of  the  one 
has  always  to  be  distinguished  from  the  consciousness  of  the  other, 
so  far  as  the  manifold  is  concerned  ;  and  everything  here  depends 
on  the  synthesis  only  of  this  (possible)  consciousness.  * 

VOL.  I.  F  f 


434  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

as  qualitative  (see  Suppl.  XII.  §  1 2),  in  that,  namely, 
which  itself  contains  the  ground  for  the  unity  of 
different  concepts  in  judgment,  and  therefore  of  the 
very  possibility  of  the  understanding  in  its  logical 
employment. 

.f  16. 

TJie  original  synthetical  unity  of  Apperception. 

It  must  be  possible  that  the  /  think  should  accom- 
pany all  my  representations :  for  otherwise  something 
would  be  represented  within  me  that  could  not  be 
thought,  in  other  words,  the  representation  would 
either  be  impossible  or  nothing,  at  least  so  far  as 
I  am  concerned.  That  representation  which  can  be 
given  before  all  thought,  is  called  intuition,  and  all  the 
manifold  of  intuition  has  therefore  a  necessary  relation 
to  the  J  think  in  the  same  subject  in  which  that 
manifold  of  intuition  is  found.  That  representation, 
however  (intuition),  is  an  act  of  spontaneity ,  that  is, 
it  cannot  be  considered  as  belonging  to  sensibility. 
I  call  it  pure  apperception,  in  order  to  distinguish  it 
from  empirical  apperception,  or  original  apperception 
also,  because  it  is  that  self-consciousness  which  by 
producing  the  representation,  J  think,  which  must 
accompany  all  others,  and  is  one  and  the  same  in 
every  act  of  consciousness,  cannot  itself  be  accom- 
panied by  any  other.  I  also  call  the  unity  of  it  the 
transcendental  unity  of  self-consciousness,  in  order  to 
indicate  that  it  contains  the  possibility  of  knowledge 
a  priori.  For  the  manifold  representations  in  any 
given  intuition  would  not  all  be  in  my  representa- 
tions, if  they  did  not  all  belong  to  one  self-conscious- 
ness. What  I  mean  is  that,  as  my  representations 
(even  though  I  am  not  conscious  of  them  as  such), 
they  must  be  in  accordance  with  that  condition,  under 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  435 

which  alone  they  can  stand  together  in  one  common 
self-consciousness,  because  otherwise  they  would  not 
all  belong  to  me.  Much  may  be  deduced  from  this 
original  connection. 

Thus  the  unbroken  identity  of  apperception  of  the 
manifold  that  is  given  in  intuition  contains  a  syn- 
thesis of  representations,  and  is  possible  only  through 
the  consciousness  of  that  synthesis.  The  empirical 
consciousness,  which  accompanies  various  representa- 
tions, is  itself  various  and  disunited,  and  without 
reference  to  the  identity  of  the  subject.  Such  a  rela- 
tion takes  place,  not  by  my  simply  accompanying 
every  relation  with  consciousness,  but  by  my  adding 
one  to  the  other  and  being  conscious  of  that  act  of 
adding,  that  is,  of  that  synthesis.  Only  because  I  am 
able  to  connect  the  manifold  of  given  representations 
in  one  consciousness,  is  it  possible  for  me  to  represent 
to  myself  the  identity  of  the  consciousness  in  these 
representations,  that  is,  only  under  the  supposition  of 
some  synthetical  unity  of  apperception  does  the  ana- 
lytical unity  of  apperception  become  possible l. 

1  This  analytical  unity  of  consciousness  belongs  to  all  general 
concepts,  as  such.  If,  for  instance,  I  think  red  in  general,  I  re- 
present to  myself  a  property,  which  (as  a  characteristic  mark)  may 
be  found  in  something,  or  can  be  connected  with  other  repre- 
sentations;  that  is  to  say,  only  under  a  presupposed  possible 
synthetical  unity  can  I  represent  to  myself  the  analytical.  A  re- 
presentation which  is  to  be  thought  as  common  to  different  repre- 
sentations, is  looked  upon  as  belonging  to  such  as  possess,  besides 
it,  something  different.  It  must  therefore  have  been  thought  in 
synthetical  unity  with  other  (though  only  possible)  representations, 
before  I  can  think  in  it  that  analytical  unity  of  consciousness  which 
makes  it  a  conceptus  communis.  The  synthetical  unity  of  apper- 
ception is,  therefore,  the  highest  point  with  which  all  employment 
of  the  understanding,  and  even  the  whole  of  logic,  and  afterwards 
the  whole  of  transcendental  philosophy,  must  be  connected;  ay, 
that  faculty  is  the  understanding  itself. 

Ff  2 


436  SUPPLEMENT  XIV. 

The  thought  that  the  representations  given  in  intu- 
ition belong  all  of  them  to  me,  is  therefore  the  same 
as  that  I  connect  them  in  one  self-consciousness,  or 
am  able  at  least  to  do  so  ;  and  though  this  is  not  yet 
the  consciousness  of  the  synthesis  of  representations, 
it  nevertheless  presupposes   the  possibility  of  the 
latter.     In  other  words,  it  is  only  because  I  am  able 
to  comprehend  the  manifold  of  representations  in  one 
consciousness,  that  I  call  them  altogether  my  repre- 
sentations, for  otherwise,  I  should  have  as  manifold 
and  various  a  self  as  I  have  representations  of  which 
I  am  conscious.     The  synthetical  unity  of  the  mani- 
fold of  intuitions  as  given  a  priori  is  therefore  the 
ground  also  of  the  identity  of  that  apperception  itself 
which  precedes  a  priori  all  definite  thought.     Con- 
nection, however,  does  never  lie  in  the  objects,  and 
cannot  be  borrowed  from  them  by  perception,  and 
thus  be  taken  into  the  understanding,  but  it  is  always 
an  act  of  the  understanding,  which  itself  is  nothing 
but  a  faculty  of  connecting  a  priori,  and  of  bringing 
the  manifold  of  given  representations  under  the  unity 
of  apperception,  which  is,  in  fact,  the  highest  principle 
of  all  human  knowledge. 

It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  this  principle'  of  the 
necessary  unity  of  apperception  is  itself  identical, 
and  therefore  an  analytical  proposition ;  but  it  shows, 
nevertheless,  the  necessity  of  a  synthesis  of  the  mani- 
fold which  is  given  in  intuition,  and  without  which  it 
would  be  impossible  to  think  the  unbroken  identity  of 
self-consciousness.  For  through  the  Ego,  as  a  simple 
representation,  nothing  manifold  is  given;  in  the 
intuition,  which  is  different  from  that,  it  can  be  given 
only,  and  then,  by  connection,  be  thought  in  one  con- 
sciousness. An  understanding  in  which,  by  its  self- 
consciousness,  all  the  manifold  would  be  given  at  the 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  437 

same  time,  would  possess  intuition ;  our  understand- 
ing can  do  nothing  but  think,  and  must  seek  for  its 
intuition  in  the  senses.  I  am  conscious,  therefore, 
of  the  identical  self  with  respect  to  the  manifold  of 
the  representations,  which  are  given  to  me  in  an  in- 
tuition, because  I  call  them,  altogether,  my  repre- 
sentations, as  constituting  one.  This  means,  that  I  am 
conscious  of  a  necessary  synthesis  of  them  a  priori, 
which  is  called  the  original  synthetical  unity  of  ap- 
perception under  which  all  representations  given  to 
me  must  stand,  but  have  to  be  brought  there,  first, 
by  means  of  a  synthesis. 


I  17- 

The  principle  of  the  synthetical  unity  of  Apperception 
is  the  highest  principle  of  all  employment  of  the 
Understanding. 

The  highest  principle  of  the  possibility  of  all  in- 
tuition, in  relation  to  sensibility,  was,  according  to 
the  transcendental  Esthetic,  that  all  the  manifold  in 
it  should  be  subject  to  the  formal  conditions  of  space 
and  time.  The  highest  principle  of  the  same  possi- 
bility in  relation  to  the  understanding  is,  that  all 
the  manifold  in  intuition  must  be  subject  to  the  con- 
ditions of  the  original  synthetical  unity  of  apper- 
ception *. 

1  Space  and  time,  and  all  portions  thereof,  are  intuitions,  and 
consequently  single  representations  with  the  manifold  for  their 
content.  (See  the  Transcendental  JSsthetic.)  They  are  not,  there- 
fore, mere  concepts,  through  which  the  same  consciousness,  as 
existing  in  many  representations,  but  through  which  many  repre- 
sentations, as  contained  in  one,  and  in  its  consciousness  (therefore 
as  compounded)  are  brought  to  us ;  thus  representing  ffie  unity  of 


438  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

All  the  manifold  representations  of  intuition,  so 
far  as  they  are  given  us,  are  subject  to  the  former, 
so  far  as  they  must  admit  of  being  connected  in  one 
consciousness,  to  the  latter ;  and  without  that  nothing 
can  be  thought  or  known,  because  the  given  repre- 
sentations would  not  share  the  act  of  apperception 
(I  think)  in  common,  and  could  not  be  comprehended 
in  one  self-consciousness. 

The  understanding  in  its  most  general  sense  is 
the  faculty  of  cognitions.  These  consist  in  a  definite 
relation  of  given  representations  to  an  object ;  and 
an  object  is  that  in  the  concept  of  which  the  manifold 
of  a  given  intuition  is  connected.  All  such  connection 
of  representations  requires  of  course  the  unity  of  the 
consciousness  in  the  synthesis :  consequently,  the 
unity  of  consciousness  is  that  which  alone  constitutes 
the  relation  of  representations  to  an  object,  that  is, 
their  objective  validity,  and  consequently  their  be- 
coming cognitions,  so  that  the  very  possibility  of  the 
understanding  depends  on  it. 

The  first  pure  cognition  of  the  understanding, 
therefore,  on  which  all  the  rest  of  its  employment  is 
founded,  arid  which  at  the  same  time  is  entirely  in- 
dependent of  all  conditions  of  sensuous  intuition,  is 
this  very  principle  of  the  original  synthetical  unity 
of  apperception.  Space,  the  mere  form  of  external 
sensuous  intuition,  is  not  yet  cognition :  it  only  sup- 
plies the  manifold  of  intuition  a  priori  for  a  possible 
cognition.  In  order  to  know  anything  in  space,  for 
instance,  a  line,  I  must  draw  it,  and  produce  syn- 
thetically a  certain  connection  of  the  manifold  that 
is  given,  so  that  the  unity  of  that  act  is  at  the  same 
time  the  unity  of  the  consciousness  (in  the  concept 

consciousness  as  synthetical,  but  yet  as 'primitive.     This  character 
of  singleness  in  them  is  practically  of  great  importance  (see  §  25). 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  439 

of  a  line),  and  is  thus  only  known,  for  the  first  time, 
as  an  object  (a  determinate  space).  The  synthetical 
unity  of  consciousness  is,  therefore,  an  objective  con- 
dition of  all  knowledge;  a  condition,  not  necessary 
for  myself  only,  in  order  to  know  an  object,  but  one 
to  which  each  intuition  must  be  subject,  in  order  to 
become  "an  object  for  me,  because  the  manifold  could 
not  become  connected  in  one  consciousness  in  any 
other  way,  and  without  such  a  synthesis. 

No  doubt,  that  proposition,  as  I  said  before,  is 
itself  analytical,  though  it  makes  synthetical  unity 
a  condition  of  all  thought,  for  it  really  says  no  more 
than  that  all  my  representations  in  any  given  in- 
tuition must  be  subject  to  the  condition  under  which 
alone  I  can  ascribe  them,  as  my  representations,  to 
the  identical  self,  and  therefore  comprehend  them,  as 
synthetically  connected,  in  one  apperception  through 
the  general  expression,  I  think. 

And  yet  this  need  not  be  a  principle  for  every 
possible  understanding,  but  only  for  that  which  gives 
nothing  manifold  through  its  pure  apperception  in 
the  representation,  /  am.  An  understanding  which 
through  its  self-consciousness  could  give  the  mani- 
fold of  intuition,  and  by  whose  representation  the 
objects  of  that  representation  should  at  the  same 
time  exist,  would  not  require  a  special  act  of  the 
synthesis  of  the  manifold  for  the  unity  of  its  con- 
sciousness, while  the  human  understanding,  which 
possesses  the  power  of  thought  only,  but  not  of  in- 
tuition, requires  such  an  act.  To  the  human  under- 
standing that  first  principle  is  so  indispensable  that 
it  really  cannot  form  the  least  concept  of  any  other 
possible  understanding,  whether  it  be  intuitive  by 
itself,  or  possessed  of  a  sensuous  intuition,  different 
from  that  in  space  and  time.  * 


440  SUPPLEMENT  XIV. 

I  18. 

What  is  the  objective  unity  of  Self-consciousness  ? 

The  transcendental  unity  of  apperception  connects 
all  the  manifold  given  in  an  intuition  into  a  concept 
of  an  object  It  is  therefore  called  objective,  and 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  subjective  unity  of 
consciousness,  which  is  a  form  of  the  internal  sense, 
by  which  the  manifold  of  intuition  is  empirically 
given,  to  be  thus  connected.  Whether  I  can  be- 
come empirically  conscious  of  the  manifold,  as  either 
simultaneous  or  successive,  depends  on  circumstances, 
or  empirical  conditions.  The  empirical  unity  of  con- 
sciousness, therefore,  through  the  association  of  repre- 
sentations, is  itself  phenomenal  and  wholly  contin- 
gent, while  the  pure  form  of  intuition  in  time,  merely 
as  genera]  intuition  containing  the  manifold  that  is 
given,  is  subject  to  the  original  unity  of  the  con- 
sciousness, through  the  necessary  relation  only  of 
the  manifold  of  intuition  to  the  one,  I  think, — that 
is,  through  the  pure  synthesis  of  the  understanding, 
which  forms  the  a  priori  ground  of  the  empirical 
synthesis.  That  unity  alone  is,  therefore,  valid  ob- 
jectively; the  empirical  unity  of  apperception,  which 
we  do  not  consider  here,  and  which  is  only  derived 
from  the  former,  under  given  conditions  in  concreto, 
has  subjective  validity  only.  One  man  connects  the 
representation  of  a  word  with  one  thing,  another 
with  another,  and  the  unity  of  consciousness,  with 
regard  to  what  is  empirical,  is  not  necessary  nor  uni- 
versally valid  with  reference  to  that  which  is  given. 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  441 

$19- 

The  logical  form  of  all  Judgments  consists  in  the  ob- 
jective unity  of  Apperception  of  the  concepts 
contained  therein. 

I  could  never  feel  satisfied  with  the  definition 
of  a  judgment  in  general,  given  by  our  logicians, 
who  say  that  it  is  the  representation  of  a  relation 
between  two  concepts.  Without  disputing  with  them 
in  this  place  as  to  the  defect  of  that  explanation, 
which  may  possibly  apply  to  categorical,  but  not  to 
hypothetical  and  disjunctive  judgments  (the  latter 
containing,  not  a  relation  of  concepts,  but  of  judg- 
ments themselves),  —  though  many  tedious  conse- 
quences have  arisen  from  this  mistake  of  logicians, — 
I  must  at  least  make  this  observation,  that  we  are 
not  told  in  what  that  relation  consists  \ 

But,  if  I  examine  more  closely  the  relation  of  cog- 
nitions in  every  judgment,  and  distinguish  it,  as 
belonging  to  the  understanding,  from  the  relation 
according  to  the  rules  of  reproductive  imagination 
(which  has  subjective  validity  only),  I  find  that  a 
judgment  is  nothing  but  the  mode  of  bringing  given 
cognitions  into  the  objective  unity  of  apperception. 
This  is  what  is  intended  by  the  copula  is,  which  is 
meant  to  distinguish  the  objective  unity  of  given 

1  The  lengthy  doctrine  of  the  four  syllogistic  figures  concerns 
categorical  syllogisms  only,  and  though  it  is  really  nothing  but 
a  trick  for  obtaining  the  appearance  of  more  modes  of  concluding 
than  that  of  the  first  figure,  by  secretly  introducing  immediate 
conclusions  (consequently  immediate)  among  the  premisses  of  a 
pure  syllogism,  this  would  hardly  have  secured  its  great  success, 
had  not  its  authors  succeeded,  at  the  same  time,  in  establishing  the 
exclusive  authority  of  categorical  judgments,  as  those  to  which 
all  others  must  be  referred.  This,  as  we  showed  iu  §  9,  p.  62,  is 
wrong. 


442  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

representations  from  the  subjective.  It  indicates 
their  relation  to  the  original  apperception,  and  their 
necessary  unity,  even  though  the  judgment  itself  be 
empirical,  and  therefore  contingent ;  as,  for  instance, 
bodies  are  heavy.  By  this  I  do  not  mean  to  say 
that  these  representations  belong  necessarily  to  each 
other,  in  the  empirical  intuition,  but  that  they  belong 
to  each  other  by  means  of  the  necessary  unity  of 
apperception  in  the  synthesis  of  intuitions,  that  is, 
according  to  the  principles  of  the  objective  deter- 
mination of  all  representations,  so  far  as  any  cog- 
nition is  to  arise  from  them,  these  principles  being 
all  derived  from  the  principle  of  the  transcendental 
unity  of  apperception.  Thus,  and  thus  alone,  does 
the  relation  become  a  judgment,  that  is,  a  relation 
that  is  valid  objectively,  and  can  thus  be  kept 
sufficiently  distinct  from  the  relation  of  the  same 
representations,  if  it  has  subjective  validity  only,  for 
instance,  according  to  the  laws  of  association.  In 
the  latter  case,  I  could  only  say,  that  if  I  carry  a 
body  I  feel  the  pressure  of  its  weight,  but  not,  that 
it,  the  body,  is  heavy,  which  is  meant  to  say  that 
these  two  representations  are  connected  together,  in 
the  object,  whatever  the  state  of  the  subject  may  be, 
and  not  only  in  a  perception,  however  often  it  may 
be  repeated. 

?  20. 

All  sensuous  Intuitions  are  sulject  to  the  categories  as 
conditions  under  which  alone  their  manifold  con- 
tents can  come  together  in  one  Consciousness.  . 

The  manifold  which  is  given  us  in  a  sensuous  in- 
tuition is  necessarily  subject  to  the  original  unity  of 
apperception,  because  by  it  alone  the  unity  of  intu- 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  443 

ition  becomes  possible  (J  7).  That  act  of  the  under- 
standing, however,  by  which  the  manifold  of  given 
representations  (whether  intuitions  or  concepts)  is 
brought  under  one  apperception,  is  the  logical  func- 
tion of  a  judgment  (§  19).  The  manifold,  therefore, 
so  far  as  it  is  given  in  an  empirical  intuition, 
is  determined  with  regard  to  one  of  the  logical 
functions  of  judgment,  whereby  alone  it  can  become 
consciousness.  The  categories,  however,  are  nothing 
but  these  functions  of  judgment,  so  far  as  the  mani- 
fold of  a  given  intuition  is  determined  with  respect 
to  them  ($  13,  see  p.  84).  Therefore  the  manifold 
in  any  given  intuition  is  naturally  subject  to  the 
categories. 

§21. 
Note. 

The  manifold,  contained  in  an  intuition  which  I 
call  my  own,  is  represented  through  the  synthesis 
of  the  understanding,  as  belonging  to  the  necessary 
unity  of  self-consciousness,  and  this  takes  place 
through  the  category1. 

This  category  indicates,  therefore,  that  the  empirical 
consciousness  of  the  manifold,  given  in  any  intuition, 
is  subject  to  a  pure  self-consciousness  a  priori,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  empirical  intuition  is  subject  to 
a  pure  sensuous  intuition  which  likewise  takes  place 
a  priori. 

In  the  above  proposition  a  beginning  is  made  of  a 
deduction  of  the  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding. 
In  this,  as  the  categories  arise  in  the  understanding 

1  The  proof  of  this  rests  on  the  represented  unity  of  intuition, 
by  which  an  object  is  given,  and  which  always  includes  a  synthesis 
of  the  manifold  which  is  given  for  an  intuition,  and  contains  the 
relation  of  the  latter  to  the  unity  of  apperception. 


444  SUPPLEMENT  XIV. 

only,  independent  of  all  sensibility,  I  ought  not  yet  to 
take  any  account  of  the  manner  in  which  the  mani- 
fold is  given  for  an  empirical  intuition,  but  attend 
exclusively  to  the  unity  which,  by  means  of  the  cate- 
gory, enters  into  the  intuition  through  the  under- 
standing. In  what  follows  ($  26)  we  shall  show,  from 
the  manner  in  which  the  empirical  intuition  is  given 
in  sensibility,  that  its  unity  is  no  other  than  that 
which  is  prescribed  by  the  category,  (according  to 
§  20)  to  the  manifold  of  any  given  intuition.  Thus 
only,  that  is,  by  showing  their  validity  a  priori  with 
respect  to  all  objects  of  our  senses,  the  purpose  of  our 
deduction  will  be  fully  attained. 

There  is  one  thing,  however,  of  which,  in  the  above 
demonstration,  I  could  not  make  abstraction :  namely, 
that  the  manifold  for  an  intuition  must  be  given  ante- 
cedently to  the  synthesis  of  the  understanding,  and  in- 
dependently of  it ; — how,  remains  uncertain.  For  if  I 
were  to  imagine  an  understanding,  itself  intuitive  (for 
instance,  a  divine  understanding,  which  should  not 
represent  to  itself  given  objects,  but  produce  them  at 
once  by  his  representation)  the  categories  would 
have  no  meaning  with  respect  to  such  cognition. 
They  are  merely  rules  for  an  understanding  whose 
whole  power  consists  in  thinking,  that  is,  in  the  act  of 
bringing  the  synthesis  of  the  manifold,  which  is  given 
to  it  in  intuition  from  elsewhere,  to  the  unity  of  ap- 
perception ;  an  undertaking  which  therefore  knows 
nothing  by  itself,  but  connects  only  and  arranges  the 
material  for  cognition,  that  is,  the  intuition  which 
must  be  given  to  it  by  the  object.  This  peculiarity 
of  our  understanding  of  producing  unity  of  apper- 
ception a  priori  by  means  of  the  categories  only, 
and  again  by  such  and  so  many,  cannot  be  further 
explained;  any  more  than  why  we  have  these  and  no 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  445 

other  functions  of  judgment,  and  why  time  and  space 
are  the  only  forms  of  a  possible  intuition  for  us. 

I  22. 

The  category  admits  of  no  other  employment  for  the 
cognition  of  Things,  but  its  application  to  objects 
of  Experience. 

We  have  seen  that  to  think  an  object  is  not  the 
same  as  to  know  an  object.  In  order  to  know  an 
object,  we  must  have  the  concept  by  which  any 
object  is  thought  (the  category),  and  likewise  the 
intuition  by  which  it  is  given.  If  no  corresponding 
intuition  could  be  given  to  a  concept,  it  would  still  be 
a  thought,  so  far  as  its  form  is  concerned:  but  it 
would  be  without  an  object,  and  no  knowledge  of 
anything  would  be  possible  by  it,  because,  so  far  as 
I  know,  there  would  be  nothing,  and  there  could  be 
nothing,  to  which  my  thought  could  be  referred. 
Now  the  only  possible  intuition  for  us  is  sensuous 
(see  ^Esthetic) ;  the  thought  of  any  object,  therefore, 
by  means  of  a  pure  concept  of  the  understanding,  can 
with  us  become  knowledge  only,  if  it  is  referred  to  ob- 
jects of  the  senses.  Sensuous  intuition  is  either  pure 
(space  and  time),  or  empirical,  i.e.  if  it  is  an  intui- 
tion of  that  which  is  represented  immediately  through 
sensation,  as  real  in  space  and  time.  By  means  of 
pure  intuition  we  can  gain  knowledge  a  priori  of 
things  as  phenomena  (in  mathematics),  but  only  so 
far  as  their  form  is  concerned  :  but  whether  there  are 
things  which  must  be  perceived,  according  to  that 
form,  remains  unsettled.  Mathematical  concepts,  by 
themselves,  therefore,  are  not  yet  knowledge,  except 
under  the  supposition  that  there  are  things  which 
admit  of  being  represented  by  us,  according  to  the 


446  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

form  of  that  pure  sensuous  intuition  only.  Conse- 
quently, as  things  in  space  and  time  are  only  given  as 
perceptions  (as  representations  accompanied  by  sen- 
sations), tliat  is,  through  empirical  representations, 
the  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding,  even  if 
applied  to  intuitions  a  priori,  as  in  mathematics,  give 
us  knowledge  in  so  far  only  as  these  pure  intuitions, 
and  therefore  through  them  the  concepts  of  the 
understanding  also,  can  be  applied  to  empirical  intui- 
tions. In  the  same  manner  the  categories,  by  means 
of  intuition,  do  not  give  us  any  knowledge  of  things, 
except  under  the  supposition  of  their  possible  appli- 
cation to  empirical  intuition  ;  they  serve,  in  short,  for 
the  possibility  of  empirical  knowledge  only,  which  is 
called  experience.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  cate- 
gories admit  of  no  other  employment  for  the  cogni- 
tion of  things,  except  so  far  only  as  these  are  taken 
as  objects  of  possible  experience. 

I  23- 

The  foregoing  proposition  is  of  the  greatest  impor- 
tance, for  it  determines  the  limits  of  the  employment 
of  the  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding  with 
reference  to  objects,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Tran- 
scendental ./Esthetic  determined  the  limits  of  the 
employment  of  the  pure  form  of  our  sensuous  in- 
tuition. Space  and  time  are  conditions  of  the  pos- 
sibility of  how  objects  can  be  given  to  us,  so 
far  only  as  objects  of  the  senses,  therefore  of  experi- 
ence, are  concerned.  Beyond  these  limits  they 
represent  nothing,  for  they  belong  only  to  the  senses, 
and  have  no  reality  beyond  them.  Pure  concepts  of 
the  understanding  are  free  from  this  limitation,  and 
extend  to  objects  of  intuition  in  general,  whether  that 
intuition  be  like  our  own  or  not,  if  only  it  is  sensuous 


SUPPLEMENT  XIV.  447 


and  not  intellectual.  This  further  extension, 
ever,  of  concepts  beyond  our  sensuous  intuition,  is  of 
no  avail  to  us ;  for  they  are  in  that  case  empty  con- 
cepts of  objects,  and  the  concepts  do  not  even  enable 
us  to  say,  whether  such  objects  be  possible  or  not. 
They  are  mere  forms  of  thought,  without  objective 
reality:  because  we  have  no  intuition  at  hand  to 
which  the  synthetical  unity  of  apperception,  which 
alone  is  contained  in  the  concepts,  could  be  applied, 
so  that  they  might  determine  an  object.  Nothing 
can  give  them  sense  and  meaning,  except  our  sensuous 
and  empirical  meaning. 

If,  therefore,  we  assume  an  object  of  a  non-sensuous 
intuition  as  given,  we  may,  no  doubt,  determine  it. 
through  all  the  predicates,  which  follow  from  the 
supposition  that  nothing  belonging  to  sensuous  intui- 
tion belongs  to  it,  that,  therefore,  it  is  not  extended, 
or  not  in  space,  that  its  duration  is  not  time,  that  no 
change  (succession  of  determinations  in  time)  is  to  be 
met  in  it,  &c.  But  we  can  hardly  call  this  knowledge, 
if  we  only  indicate  how  the  intuition  of  an  object  is 
not,  without  being  able  to  say  what  is  contained  in 
it,  for,  in  that  case,  I  have  not  represented  the  possi- 
bility of  an  object,  corresponding  to  my  pure  concept 
of  the  understanding,  because  I  could  give  no  intui- 
tion corresponding  to  it,  but  could  only  say  that  our 
intuition  did  not  apply  to  it.  But  what  is  the  most 
important  is  this,  that  not  even  a  single  category 
could  be  applied  to  such  a  thing ;  as  for  instance,  the 
concept  of  substance,  that  is,  of  something  that  can 
exist  as  a  subject  only,  but  never  as  a  mere  predicate. 
I  should  not  know,  therefore,  whether  there  could  be 
anything  corresponding  to  such  a  determination  of 
thought,  unless  empirical  intuition  supplied  the  case 
for  its  application.  Of  this  more  hereafter.* 


448  SUPPLEMENT  XIV. 

I    24. 

Of  the  application  of  the  Categories  to  objects  of  the 
senses  in  general. 

The  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding  refer, 
through  the  understanding,  to  objects  of  intuition, 
whether  it  be  our  own,  or  any  other,  if  only  sensuous 
intuition,  but  they  are,  for  that  very  reason,  mere 
forms  of  thought,  by  which  no  definite  object  can  be 
known.  The  synthesis,  or  connection  of  the  manifold 
in  them,  referred  only  to  the  unity  of  apperception, 
and  became  thus  the  ground  of  the  possibility  of 
knowledge  a  priori,  so  far  as  it  rests  on  the  under- 
standing, and  is  therefore  not  only  transcendental, 
but  also  purely  intellectual.  As  there  exists  in  us 
a  certain  form  of  sensuous  intuition  a  priori,  which 
rests  on  the  receptivity  of  the  faculty  of  representa- 
tion (sensibility),  the  understanding,  as  spontaneity, 
is  able  to  determine  the  internal  sense  through  the 
manifold  of  given  representations,  according  to  the 
synthetical  unity  of  apperception,  and  can  thus  think 
synthetical  unity  of  the  apperception  of  the  manifold, 
in  sensuous  intuition  a  priori,  as  the  condition  to 
which  all  objects  of  our  (human)  intuition  must 
necessarily  be.  subject.  Thus  the  categories,  though 
pure  forms  of  thought,  receive  objective  reality,  that 
is,  application  to  objects  which  can  be  given  to  us  in 
intuition,  but  as  phenomena  only;  for  it  is  with 
reference  to  them  alone  that  we  are  capable  of 
intuition  a  priori. 

This  synthesis  of  the  manifold  of  sensuous  intuition, 
which  is  possible  and  necessary  a  priori,  may  be 
called  figurative  (synthesis  speciosa),  in  order  to  dis- 
tinguish it  from  that  which  is  thought  in  the  mere 
category/^with  reference  to  the  manifold  of  an  intuition 


SUPPLEMENT  XIV.  449 

in  general,  and  is  called  intellectual  synthesis  (syn- 
thesis intellectualis).  Both  are  transcendental,  not 
only  because  they  themselves  are  carried  out  a  priori, 
but  because  the}7  establish  also  the  possibility  of 
other  knowledge  a  priori. 

But  this  figurative  synthesis,  if  it  refers  to  the 
original' synthetical  unity  of  apperception  only,  that 
is,  to  that  transcendental  unity  which  is  thought  in 
the   categories,  must  be   called  the   transcendental 
synthesis  of  the  faculty  of  imagination,  in  order  thus 
to  distinguish  it  from  the  purely  intellectual  synthesis. 
Imagination  is  the  faculty  of  representing  an  object 
even  without  its  presence  in  intuition.     As  all  our 
intuition   is   sensuous,   the    faculty   of    imagination 
belongs,  on  account  of  the  subjective  condition  under 
which  alone  it  can  give  a  corresponding  intuition  to 
the  concepts  of  the  understanding,  to  our  sensibility. 
As  however  its  synthesis  is  an  act  of  spontaneity, 
determining,  and  not,  like  the  senses,  de terminable 
only,  and  therefore  able  to  determine  a  priori  the 
senses,  so  far  as  their  form  is  concerned,  according  to 
the  unity  of  apperception,  the  faculty  of  imagination 
is,  so  far,  a  faculty  of  determining   our   sensibility 
a  priori,  so  that  the  synthesis  of  the  intuitions,  ac- 
cording to  the  categories,  must  be  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  the  faculty  of  imagination.     This  is  an 
effect,  produced  by  the  understanding  on  our  sensi- 
bility, and  the  first  application  of  it  (and  at  the  same 
time  the  ground  of  all  others)  to  objects  of  an  intui- 
tion possible  to  us.     As  figurative,  it  is  distinguished 
from  the  intellectual  synthesis,  which  takes  place  by 
the  understanding  only,  without  the  aid  of  the  faculty 
of  imagination.     In  so  far  as  imagination  is  sponta- 
neity, I  call  it  occasionally  productive  imagination : 
distinguishing  it  from  the  reproductive,  which  in  its 
VOL.  I.  G 


450  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

synthesis  is  subject  to  empirical  laws  only,  namely 
those  of  association,  and  which  is  of  no  help 
for  the  explanation  of  the  possibility  of  knowledge 
a  priori,  belonging,  therefore,  to  psychology,  and  not 
to  transcendental  philosophy. 


This  is  the  proper  place  for  trying  to  account  for 
the  paradox,  which  must  have  struck  everybody  in 
our  exposition  of  the  form  of  the  internal  sense 
($  6,  see  p.  28) ;  namely,  how  that  sense  represents 
to  the  consciousness  even  ourselves,  not  as  we  are 
by  ourselves,  but  as  we  appear  to  ourselves,  because 
we  perceive  ourselves  only  as  we  are  affected  in- 
ternally. This  seems  to  be  contradictory,  because 
we  should  thus  be  in  a  passive  relation  to  ourselves ; 
and  for  this  reason  the  founders  of  the  systems  of 
psychology  have  preferred  to  represent  the  internal 
sense  as  identical  with  the  faculty  of  apperception, 
while  we  have  carefully  distinguished  the  two. 

What  determines  the  internal  sense  is  the  under- 
standing, and  its  original  power  of  connecting  the 
manifold  of  intuition,  that  is,  of  bringing  it  under 
one  apperception,  this  being  the  very  ground  of  the 
possibility  of  the  understanding.  As  in  us  men  the 
understanding  is  not  itself  an  intuitive  faculty,  and 
could  not,  even  if  intuitions  were  given  in  our  sensi- 
bility, take  them  into  itself,  in  order  to  connect,  as 
it  were,  the  manifold  of  its  own  intuition,  the  syn- 
thesis of  the  understanding,  if  considered  by  itself 
alone,  is  nothing  but  the  unity  of  action,  of  which 
it  is  conscious  without  sensibility  also,  but  through 
which  the  understanding  is  able  to  determine  that 
sensibility  internally,  with  respect  to  the  manifold 
which  fiiay  be  given  to  it  according  to  the  form  of 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  45! 

its  intuition.  The  understanding,  therefore,  exercises 
its  activity,  under  the  name  of  a  transcendental  syn-* 
thesis  of  the  faculty  of  imagination,  on  the  passive 
subject  to  which  it  belongs  as  a  faculty,  and  we  are 
right  in  saying  that  the  internal  sense  is  affected  by 
that  activity.  The  apperception  with  its  synthetical 
unity  is  so  far  from  being  identical  with  the  internal 
sense,  that,  as  the  source  of  all  synthesis,  it  rather 
applies,  under  the  name  of  the  categories,  to  the 
manifold  of  intuitions  in  general,  that  is,  to  objects 
before  all  sensuous  intuition  ;  while  the  internal  sense, 
on  the  contrary,  contains  the  mere  form  of  intuition, 
but  without  any  connection  of  the  manifold  in  it, 
and  therefore,  as  yet,  no  definite  intuition,  which 
becomes  possible  only  through  the  consciousness  of 
the  determination  of  the  internal  sense  by  the 
transcendental  act  of  the  faculty  of  imagination  (the 
synthetical  influence  of  the  understanding  on  the 
internal  sense)  which  I  have  called  the  figurative 

synthesis. 

«/ 

This  we  can  always  perceive  in  ourselves.  We 
cannot  think  a  line  without  drawing  it  in  thought  ; 
we  cannot  think  a  circle  without  describing  it ;  we 
cannot  represent,  at  all,  the  three  dimensions  of 
space,  without  placing,  from  the  same  point,  three 
lines  perpendicularly  on  each  other ;  nay,  we  cannot 
even  represent  time,  except  by  attending,  during  our 
drawing  a  straight  line  (which  is  meant  to  be  the 
external  figurative  representation  of  time)  to  the 
act  of  the  synthesis  of  the  manifold  only  by  which 
we  successively  determine  the  internal  sense,  and 
thereby  to  the  succession  of  that  determination  in 
it.  It  is  really  motion,  as  the  act  of  the  subject  (not 
as  the  determination  of  an  object1),  therefore  the 

1  Motion  of  an  object  in  space  does  not  belong  to  a  pure  science, 

Off  2 


45 2  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

synthesis  of  the  manifold  in  space,  (abstraction  being 
made  of  space,  and  our  attention  fixed  on  the  act 
only  by  which  we  determine  the  internal  sense,  ac- 
cording to  its  form)  which  first  produces  the  very 
concept  of  succession.     The  understanding  does  not, 
therefore,  find  in  it  such  a  connection  of  the  mani- 
fold, but  produces  it  by  affecting  the  internal  sense. 
It  may  seem  difficult  to  understand  how  the  think- 
ing Ego  can  be  different  from  the  Ego  which  sees 
or  perceives  it»self  (other  modes  of  intuition  being  at 
least  conceivable),  and  yet  identical  with  the  latter 
as  the  same  subject,  and  how,  therefore,  I  can  say: 
I,  as  intelligence  and  thinking  subject,  know  myself 
as  an  object  thougJtt,  so  far  as  being  given  to  myself 
in  intuition  also,  like  other  phenomena  only,  not  as 
I  am  to  the  understanding,  but  as  I  appear  to  my- 
self.    In  reality,  however,  this  is  neither  more  nor 
less  difficult  than  how  I  can  be,  to  myself,  an  object, 
and  an  object  of  intuition  as  well  as  of  internal  per- 
ceptions.  But  that  this  must  really  be  so,  can  clearly 
be  shown, — if  only  we  admit  space  to  be  merely  a 
pure  form  of  the  phenomena  of  the  external  senses, — 
by  the  fact  that  we  cannot  represent  to  ourselves 
time,  which  is  no  object  of  internal  intuition,  in  any 
other  way  than  under  the  image  of  a  line  which  we 
draw,  a  mode  of  representation  without  which  we 
could  not  realise  the   unity   of  its   dimension;    or 
again  by  this  other  fact  that  we  must  always  derive 
the  determination  of  the  length  of  time,  or  of  points 

consequently  not  to  geometry,  because  the  fact  that  a  thing  is 
movcable  cannot  be  known  a  jyriori,  but  from  experience  only. 
Motion,  however,  considered  as  describing  a  space,  is  a  pure  act  of 
successive  synthesis  of  the  manifold  in  external  intuition  in  general 
by  means  of  productive  imagination,  and  belongs,  therefore,  by  right, 
not  only^fro  geometry,  but  even  to  transcendental  philosophy. 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  453 

i  • 

of  time,  for  all  our  internal  perceptions,  from  that 
which  is  represented  to  us  as  changeable  by  external 
things,  and  have  therefore  to  arrange  the  determina- 
tions of  the  internal  sense  as  phenomena  in  time,  in 
exactly  the  same  way  in  which  we  arrange  the  de- 
terminations of  the  exten  al  senses  in  space.  If, 
then,  with  regard  to  the  latter,  we  admit  that  by 
them  we  know  objects  so  far  only  as  we  are  affected 
externally,  we  must  also  admit,  with  regard  to  the 
internal  sense,  that  by  it  we  only  are,  or  perceive 
ourselves,  as  we  are  internally  affected  by  ourselves, 
in  other  words,  that  with  regard  to  internal  in- 
tuition we  know  our  own  self  as  a  phenomenon  only, 
and  not  as  it  is  by  itself1. 

§  25- 

In  the  transcendental  synthesis,  however,  of  the 
manifold  of  representations  in  general,  and  therefore 
in  the  original  synthetical  unity  of  apperception,  I 
am  conscious  of  myself,  neither  as  I  appear  to  my- 
self, nor  as  I  am  by  myself,  but  only  that  I  am. 
This  representation  is  an  act  of  thought,  not  of  in- 
tuition. Now,  in  order  to  know  ourselves,  we  require, 
besides  the  act  of  thinking,  which  brings  the  mani- 
fold of  every  possible  intuition  to  the  unity  of  ap- 
perception, a  definite  kind  of  intuition  also  by  which 
that  manifold  is  given,  and  thus,  though  my  own 
existence  is  not  phenomenal  (much  less  a  mere  illu- 

1  I  do  not  see  how  so  much  difficulty  should  be  found  in  ad- 
mitting that  the  internal  sense  is  affected  by  ourselves.  Every  act 
of  attention  gives  us  an  instance  of  it.  In  such  an  act  the  under- 
standing always  determines  the  internal  sense,  according  to  the 
connection  which  it  thinks,  to  such  an  internal  intuition  as  cor- 
responds to  the  manifold  in  the  synthesis  of  the  understanding. 
How  much  the  mind  is  commonly  affected  thereby  anybody  will 
be  able  to  perceive  in  himself.  * 


454  SUPPLEMENT   XIV, 

sion),  yet  the  determination  of  my  existence l  can 
only  take  place  according  to  tlie  form  of  the  internal 
sense,  and  in  that  special  manner  in  which  the  mani- 
fold, which  I  connect,  is  given  in  the  internal  intuition. 
This  shows  that  I  have  no  knowledge  of  myself  as 
I  am,  but  only  as  I  appear  to  myself.  The  con- 
sciousness of  oneself  is  therefore  very  far  from  being 
a  knowledge  of  oneself,  in  spite  of  all  the  categories 
which  constitute  the  thinking  of  an  object  in  general, 
by  means  of  the  connection  of  the  manifold  in  an 
apperception.  As  for  the  knowledge  of  an  object  dif- 
ferent from  myself  I  require,  besides  the  thinking  of 
an  object  in  general  (in  a  category),  an  intuition  also, 
to  determine  that  general  concept,  I  require  for  the 
knowledge  of  my  own  self,  besides  consciousness,  or 
besides  my  thinking  myself,  an  intuition  also  of  the 
manifold  in  me,  to  determine  that  thought.  I  exist, 
therefore,  as  an  intelligence,  being  simply  conscious 
of  my  power  of  connection  :  but  with  respect  to  the 
manifold  that  has  to  be  connected,  I  am  subject  to  a 
limiting  condition  which  is  called  the  internal  sense, 

1  The  I  think  expresses  the  act  of  determining  my  own  ex- 
istence. What  is  thus  given  is  the  existence,  but  what  is  not  yet 
given,  is  the  manner  in  which  I  am  to  determine  it,  that  is,  in 
which  I  am  to  place  within  me  the  manifold  belonging  to  it. 
For  that  purpose  self-intuition  is  required,  which  depends  on  an 
a  priori  form,  that  is,  on  time,  which  is  sensuous,  and  belongs  to  our 
receptivity  of  what  is  given  to  us  as  determinable.  If,  then,  I  have 
not  another  self-intuition  which,  likewise  before  the  act  of  de- 
termination, gives  the  determining  within  me,  of  the  spontaneity 
of  which  I  am  conscious  only,  as  time  gives  the  determinable,  I 
cannot  determine  my  existence  as  that  of  a  spontaneously  acting 
being,  but  I  only  represent  to  myself  the  spontaneity  of  my 
thinking,  that  is,  of  the  act  of  determination,  my  existence  re- 
maining sensuous  only,  that  is,  determinable,  as  the  existence  of 
a  phenomenon.  It  is  on  account  of  this  spontaneity  that  I  call 
myself  &u**ntettigence. 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  455 

according  to  which  that  connection  can  only  become 
perceptible  in  relations  of  time,  which  lie  entirely 
outside  the  concepts  of  the  understanding.  Such  an 
intelligence,  therefore,  can  only  know  itself  as  it  ap- 
pears to  itself  in  an  intuition  (which  cannot  be 
intellectual  and  given  by  the  understanding  itself), 
and  not  as  it  would  know  itself,  if  its  intuition 
were  intellectual. 


Transcendental  Deduction  of  the  universally  possible 
employment  of  the  pure  Concepts  of  the  Under- 
standing in  Experience. 

In  the  metaphysical  deduction  of  the  categories 
their  a  priori  origin  was  proved  by  their  complete 
accordance  with  the  general  logical  functions  of 
thought,  while  in  their  transcendental  deduction  we 
established  their  possibility  as  knowledge  a  priori 
of  objects  of  an  intuition  in  general  ($  20,  21).  Now 
we  have  to  explain  the  possibility  of  our  knowing 
a  priori,  by  means  of  the  categories,  whatever  ob- 
jects may  come  before  our  senses,  and  this  not  ac- 
cording to  the  form  of  their  intuition,  but  according 
to  the  laws  of  their  connection,  and  of  our  thus,  as 
it  were,  prescribing  laws  to  nature,  nay,  making 
nature  possible.  Unless  they  were  adequate  to  that 
purpose,  we  could  not  understand  how  everything 
that  may  come  before  our  senses  must  be  subject  to 
laws  which  have  their  origin  a  priori  in  the  under- 
standing alone. 

First  of  all,  I  observe  that  by  the  synthesis  of 
apprehension  I  understand  the  connection  of  the 
manifold  in  an  empirical  intuition,  by  whioh  percep- 


456  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

tion,  that  is,  empirical  consciousness  of  it  (as  phe- 
nomenal), becomes  possible, 

We  have  a  priori  forms  of  the  external  as  well 
as  the  internal  intuition,  in  our  representations  of 
space  and  time:  and  to  these  the  synthesis  of  the 
apprehension  of  the  manifold  in  phenomena  must 
always  conform,  because  it  can  take  place  according 
to  that  form  only.  Time  and  space,  however,  are 
represented  a  priori,  not  only  as  forms  of  sensuous 
intuition,  but  as  intuitions  themselves  (containing  a 
manifold),  and  therefore  with  the  determination  of 
the  unity  of  that  manifold  in  them  (see  Transcen- 
dental ^Esthetic1).  Therefore  unity  of  the  synthesis 
of  the  manifold  without  or  within  us,  and  conse- 
quently a  connection  to  which  everything  that  is  to 
be  represented  as  determined  in  space  and  time 
must  conform,  is  given  a  priori  as  the  condition  of 
the  synthesis  of  all  apprehension  simultaneously  with 
the  intuitions,  not  in  them,  and  that  synthetical 
unity  can  be  no  other  but  that  of  the  connection  of 
the  manifold  of  any  intuition  whatsoever,  given  in  an 
original  consciousness,  according  to  the  categories, 
only  applied  to  our  sensuous  intuition.  Consequently, 

1  Space,  represented  as  an  object,  (as  required  in  geometry) 
contains  more  than  the  mere  form  of  intuition,  namely,  the  com- 
prehension of  the  manifold,  which  is  given  according  to  the  form 
of  sensibility,  into  a  perceptible  (intuitable)  representation,  so  that 
the  form  of  intuition  gives  the  manifold  only,  while  the  formal 
intuition  gives  unity  of  representation.  In  the  ^Esthetic  I  had 
simply  ascribed  this  unity  to  sensibility,  in  order  to  show  that  it 
precedes  all  concepts,  though  it  presupposes  a  synthesis  not  be- 
longing to  the  senses,  and  by  which  all  concepts  of  space  and  time 
become  first  possible.  For  as  by  that  synthesis  (the  understanding 
determining  the  sensibility)  space  and  time  are  first  given  as  in-, 
tuitions,  the  unity  of  that  intuition  a  priori  belongs  to  space  and 
time,  and  nt£  to  the  concept  of  the  understanding.  (See  §  24.) 


SUPPLEMENT  XIV.  457 

all  synthesis,  without  which  even  perception  woufd 
be  impossible,  is  subject  to  the  categories ;  and  as 
experience  consists  of  knowledge  by  means  of  con- 
nected perceptions,  the  categories  are  conditions  of 
the  possibility  of  experience,  and  valid  therefore 
a  priori  for  all  objects  of  experience. 

3JC  5JJ  2]C  5JC  5|C 

If,  for  instance,  I  raise  the  empirical  intuition  of  a 
house,  through  the  apprehension  of  the  manifold  con- 
tained therein,  into  a  perception,  the  necessary  unity 
of  space  and  of  external  sensuous  intuition  in  general 
is  presupposed,  and  I  draw,  as  it  were,  the  shape  of 
the  house  according  to  that  synthetical  unity  of  the 
manifold  in  space.  But  this  very  synthetical  unity, 
if  I  make  abstraction  of  the  form  of  space,  has  its 
seat  in  the  understanding,  and  is  in  fact  the  category 
of  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous  in  intuition  in 
general :  that  is,  the  category  of  quantity,  to  which 
that  synthesis  of  apprehension,  that  is,  the  perception, 
must  always  conform l. 

Or  if,  to  take  another  example,  I  perceive  the 
freezing  of  water,  I  apprehend  two  states  (that  of 
fluidity  and  that  of  solidity),  and  these  as  standing 
to  each  other  in  a  relation  of  time.  But  in  the 
time,  which  as  internal  intuition  I  make  the  founda- 
tion of  the  phenomenon,  I  represent  to  myself  neces- 
sarily synthetical  unity  of  the  manifold,  without  which 
that  relation  could  not  be  given  as  determined  in  an 
intuition  (with  reference  to  the  succession  of  time). 

1  In  this  manner  it  is  proved  that  the  synthesis  of  apprehension 
must  necessarily  conform  to  the  synthesis  of  apperception,  which 
is  intellectual,  and  contained  in  the  category  entirely  a  priori. 
It  is  one  and  the  same  spontaneity,  which  there,  under  the  name  of 
imagination,  and  here,  under  the  name  of  understanding,  brings 
connection  into  the  manifold  of  intuition. 


458  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

That  synthetical  unity,  however,  as  a  condition  a  priori, 
under  which  I  connect  the  manifold  of  any  intuition, 
turns  out  to  be,  if  I  make  abstraction  of  the  perma- 
nent form  of  my  intuition,  namely,  of  time,  the 
category  of  cause,  through  which,  if  I  apply  it  to  my 
sensibility,  I  determine  everything  that  happens,  ac- 
cording to  its  relation  in  time.  Thus  the  appre- 
hension in  such  an  event,  and  that  event  itself  con- 
sidered as  a  possible  perception,  is  subject  to  the 
concept  of  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  The  same 
applies  to  all  other  cases. 

x  #  #  *  * 

Categories  are  concepts  which  a  priori  prescribe 
laws  to  all  phenomena,  and  therefore  to  nature  as 
the  sum  total  of  all  phenomena  (natura  materialiter 
spectata).  The  question  therefore  arises,  as  these 
laws  are  not  derived  from  nature,  and  conform  to  it 
as  their  model  (in  which  case  they  would  be  empiri- 
cal only),  how  we  can  understand  that  nature  should 
conform  to  them,  that  is,  how  they  can  determine 
a  priori  the  connection  of  the  manifold  in  nature, 
without  taking  that  connection  from  nature.  The 
solution  of  that  riddle  is  this. 

It  is  no  more  surprising  that  the  laws  of  phe- 
nomena in  nature  must  agree  with  the  understand- 
ing and  its  form  a  priori,  that  is,  with  its  power  of 
connecting  the  manifold  in  general,  than  that  the 
phenomena  themselves  must  agree  with  the  form  of 
sensuous  intuition  a  priori.  For  laws  exist  as  little 
in  phenomena  themselves,  but  relatively  only,  with 
respect  to  the  subject  to  which,  so  far  as  it  has 
understanding,  the  phenomena  belong,  as  phenomena 
exist  by  themselves,  but  relatively  only,  with  respect 
to  the  same  being  so  far  as  it  has  senses.  Things 
by  themselves  would  necessarily  possess  their  con- 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  459 

formity  to  the  law,  independent  also  of  any  under- 
standing by  which  they  are  known.  But  phenomena 
are  only  representations  of  things,  unknown  as  to 
what  they  may  be  by  themselves.  As  mere  repre- 
sentations they  are  subject  to  no  law  of  connection, 
except  that  which  is  prescribed  by  the  connecting 
faculty.  Now  that  which  connects  the  manifold  of 
sensuous  intuition  is  the  faculty  of  imagination, 
which  receives  from  the  understanding  the  unity  of 
its  intellectual  synthesis,  and  from  sensibility  the 
manifoldness  of  apprehension.  Thus,  as  all  possible 
perceptions  depend  on  the  synthesis  of  apprehension, 
and  that  synthesis  itself,  that  empirical  synthesis, 
depends  on  the  transcendental,  and  therefore  on  the 
categories,  it  follows  that  all  possible  perceptions, 
everything  in  fact  that  can  come  to  the  empirical 
consciousness,  that  is,  all  phenomena  of  nature,  must, 
so  far  as  their  connection  is  concerned,  be  subject  to 
the  categories.  On  these  categories,  therefore,  nature 
(considered  as  nature  in  general)  depends,  as  on  the 
original  ground  of  its  necessary  conformity  to  law  (as 
natura  formaliter  spectata).  Beyond  the  laws,  on  which 
nature  in  general,  as  a  lawful  order  of  phenomena  in 
space  and  time  depends,  the  pure  faculty  of  the  under- 
standing is  incapable,  by  means  of  mere  categories, 
of  prescribing  a  priori  laws  to  phenomena.  Special 
laws,  therefore,  as  they  refer  to  phenomena  which  are 
empirically  determined,  cannot  be  completely  de- 
rived from  the  categories,  although  they  are  all 
subject  to  them.  Experience  must  be  superadded 
in  order  to  know  such  special  laws :  while  those 
other  a  priori  laws  inform  us  only  with  regard  to 
experience  in  general,  and  what  can  be  known  as 
an  object  of  it. 


460  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

I  27- 

Results  of  this  Deduction  of  the  Concepts  of  the 
Understanding. 

We  cannot  think  any  object  except  by  means  of 
the  categories ;  we  cannot  know  any  subject  that  has 
been  thought,  except  by  means  of  intuitions,  corres- 
ponding to  those  concepts.  Now  all  our  intuitions 
are  sensuous,  and  this  knowledge,  so  far  as  its  object 
is  given,  is  empirical.  But  empirical  knowledge  is 
experience,  and  therefore  no  knowledge  a  priori  is 
possible  to  us,  except  of  objects  of  possible  experience 
only1. 

This  knowledge,  however,  though  limited  to  objects 
of  experience,  is  not  therefore  entirely  derived  from 
experience,  for  both  the  pure  intuitions  and  the  pure 
concepts  of  the  understanding  are  elements  of  know- 
ledge which  exist  in  us  a  priori.  Now  there  are 
only  two  ways  in  which  a  necessary  harmony  of 
experience  with  the  concepts  of  its  objects  can  be 
conceived ;  either  experience  makes  these  concepts 
possible,  or  these  concepts  make  experience  possible. 
The  former  will  not  hold  good  with  respect  to  the 

3  Lest  anybody  should  be  unnecessarily  frightened  by  the  dan- 
gerous consequences  of  this  proposition,  I  shall  only  remark  that 
the  categories  are  not  limited  for  the  purpose  of  thought  by  the 
conditions  of  our  sensuous  intuition,  but  have  really  an  unlimited 
field.  It  is  only  the  knowledge  of  that  which  we  think,  the  de- 
termining of  an  object,  that  requires  intuition,  and  even  in  the 
absence  of  intuition,  the  thought  of  the  object  may  still  have 
its  true  and  useful  consequences,  so  far  as  the  subjective  use  of 
reason  is  concerned.  That  use  of  reason,  however,  as  it  is  not 
always  directed  to  the  determination  of  the  object,  that  is  to 
knowledge,  but  also  to  the  determination  of  the  subject,  and  even 
its  volition,  <£>nnot  be  treated  of  in  this  place. 


SUPPLEMENT   XIV.  461 

categories,  (nor  with  pure  sensuous  intuition)  for 
they  are  concepts  a  priori,  and  therefore  independent 
of  experience.  To  ascribe  to  them  an  empirical 
origin,  would  be  to  admit  a  kind  of  generatio  acqui- 
voca.  There  remains  therefore  the  second  alternative 
only  (a  kind  of  system  of  the  epigenesis  of  pure 
reason),  namely,  that  the  categories,  on  the  part  of  the 
understanding,  contain  the  grounds  of  the  possibility 
of  all  experience  in  general.  How  they  render  expe- 
rience possible,  and  what  principles  of  the  possibility 
of  experience  they  supply  in  their  employment  on 
phenomena,  will  be  shown  more  fully  in  the  following 
chapter  on  the  transcendental  employment  of  the 
faculty  of  judgment. 

Some  one  might  propose  to  adopt  a  middle  way 
between  the  two,  namely,  that  the  categories  are 
neither  self-produced  first  principles  a  priori  of  our 
knowledge,  nor  derived  from  experience,  but  subjec- 
tive dispositions  of  thought,  implanted  in  us  with  our 
existence,  and  so  arranged  by  our  Creator  that  their 
employment  should  accurately  agree  with  the  laws 
of  nature,  which  determine  experience  (a  kind  of 
system  of  ^reformation  of  pure  reason).  But,  in  that 
case,  not  only  would  there  be  no  end  of  such  an 
hypothesis,  so  that  no  one  could  know  how  far  the 
supposition  of  predetermined  dispositions  to  future 
judgments  might  be  carried,  but  there  is  this  decided 
objection  against  that  middle  course  that,  by  adopt- 
ing it,  the  categories  would  lose  that  necessity  which 
is  essential  to  them.  Thus  the  concept  of  cause, 
which  asserts,  under  a  presupposed  condition,  the 
necessity  of  an  effect,  would  become  false,  if  it  rested 
only  on  some  subjective  necessity  implanted  in  us  of 
connecting  certain  empirical  representations  according 
to  the  rule  of  causal  relation.  I  should  got  be  able 


462  SUPPLEMENT   XIV. 

to  say  that  the  effect  is  connected  with  the  cause  in 
the  object  (that  is,  by  necessity),  but  only,  I  am  so 
constituted  that  I  cannot  think  these  representations 
as  connected  in  any  other  way.  This  is  exactly  what 
the  sceptic  most  desires,  for  in  that  case  all  our 
knowledge,  resting  on  the  supposed  objective  validity 
of  our  judgments,  is  nothing  but  mere  illusion,  nor 
would  there  be  wanting  people  to  say  they  knew 
nothing  of  such  subjective  necessity  (which  can  only 
be  felt);  and  at  all  events  we  could  not  quarrel 
with  anybody  about  what  depends  only  on  the 
manner  in  which  his  own  subject  is  organised. 

Comprehensive  View  of  this  Deduction. 

The  deduction  of  the  pure  concepts  of  the  under- 
standing (and  with  them  of  all  theoretical  knowledge 
a  priori)  consists  in  representing  them  as  principles 
of  the  possibility  of  experience,  and  in  representing 
experience  as  the  determination  of  phenomena  in  space 
and  time, — and,  lastly,  in  representing  that  determi- 
nation as  depending  on  the  principle  of  the  original 
synthetical  unity  of  apperception,  as  the  form  of  the 
understanding  applied  to  space  and  time,  the  original 
forms  of  sensibility1. 


1  Kant  does  not  carry  the  division  into  paragraphs  in  his  second 
edition  further,  because,  as  he  says,  he  has  to  treat  no  more  of 
elementary  concepts,  and  prefers,  in  representing  their  employment, 
to  adopt  a  continuous  treatment  without  paragraphs. 


SUPPLEMENT    XV.        [SeevoLiL 

All  conjunction  (coiijunctio)  is  either  composition 
(compositio)  or  connection  (nexus).  The  former  is  the 
synthesis  of  a  manifold  the  parts  of  which  do  not 
belong  to  each  other  necessarily.  The  two  triangles,  for 
instance,  into  which  a  square  is  divided  by  a  diagonal, 
do  by  themselves  not  necessarily  belong  to  each  other. 
Such  is  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous,  in  every- 
thing that  can  be  considered  mathematically,  and 
that  synthesis  can  be  divided  again  into  aggregation, 
and  coalition,  the  former  referring  to  extensive,  the 
latter  to  intensive  qualities.  The  latter  (conjunction 
nexus)  is  the  synthesis  of  a  manifold,  in  so  far  as 
its  elements  belong  to  each  other  necessarily.  Thus 
the  accident  belonging  to  a  substance,  or  the  effect 
belonging  to  a  cause,  though  heterogeneous,  are  yet 
represented  as  a  priori  connected,  which  connection, 
as  it  is  not  arbitrary,  I  call  dynamical,  because  it 
concerns  the  connection  of  the  existence  of  the  mani- 
fold. This  may  again  be  divided  into  the  physical 
connection  of  phenomena  among  each  other,  and  their 
metaphysical  connection  in  the  faculty  of  cognition 
a  priori.  (This  forms  a  note  in  the  2nd  Edition.) 


SUPPLEMENT  XVI  a.     [see  vol.  a.  P.  ,43] 

In  the  2nd  Edition  the  title  is 

I. 

AXIOMS    OF   INTUITION. 

Their  principle  is  :  all  intuitions  are  extensive 
quantities. 

Proof. 

ALL  phenomena  contain,  so  far  as  their  form  is  con- 
cerned, an  intuition  in  space  and  time,  which  forms 
the  a  priori  foundation  of  all  of  them.  They  cannot, 
therefore,  be  apprehended,  that  is,  received  into  empi- 
rical consciousness,  except  through  the  synthesis  of 
the  manifold,  by  which  the  representations  of  a  defi- 
nite space  or  time  are  produced,  i.e.  through  the 
synthesis  of  the  homogeneous,  and  the  consciousness 
of  the  synthetical  unity  of  that  manifold  (homoge- 
neous). Now  the  consciousness  of  the  manifold  and 
homogeneous  in  intuition,  so  far  as  by  it  the  repre- 
sentation of  an  object  is  first  rendered  possible,  is  the 
concept  of  quantity  (quantum).  Therefore  even  the 
perception  of  an  object  as  a  phenomenon  is  possible 
only  through  the  same  synthetical  unity  of  the  mani- 
fold of  the  given  sensuous  intuition,  by  which  the  unity 
of  the  composition  of  the  manifold  and  homogeneous 
is  conceived  in  the  concept  of  a  quantity,  that  is,  phe- 
nomena are  always  quantities,  and  extensive  quan- 
tities ;  because  as  intuitions  in  space  and  time,  they 
must  be  represented  through  the  same  synthesis 
through  which  space  and  time  in  general  are  deter- 
mined. 


SUPPLEMENT  XVI  b.     O  ™L  a.  P.  147] 
II. 

ANTICIPATIONS  OF  PERCEPTION. 

Their  principle  is  :  In  all  phenomena  the  Real,  which 

is  the  object  of  a  sensation,  has  intensive  quantity, 

that  is,  a  degree. 

Proof. 

Perception  is  empirical  consciousness,  that  is,  a 
consciousness  in  which  there  is  at  the  frame  time 
sensation.  Phenomena,  as  objects  of  perception,  are 
not  pure  (merely  formal)  intuitions,  like  space  and 
time  (for  space  and  time  can  never  be  perceived  by 
themselves).  They  contain,  therefore,  over  and  above 
the  intuition,  the  material  for  some  one  object  in 
general  (through  which  something  existing  in  space 
and  time  is  represented) ;  that  is,  they  contain  the 
real  of  sensation,  as  a  merely  subjective  representation, 
which  gives  us  only  the  consciousness  that  the  subject 
is  affected,  and  which  is  referred  to  some  object  in 
general.  Now  there  is  a  gradual  transition  possible 
from  empirical  to  pure  consciousness,  till  the  real  of 
it  vanishes  completely  and  there  remains  a  merely 
formal  consciousness  (a  priori)  of  the  manifold  in 
space  and  time ;  and,  therefore,  a  synthesis  also  is 
possible  in  the  production  of  the  quantity  of  a  sen- 
sation, from  its' beginning,  that  is,  from  the  pure  intui- 
tion =  o,  onwards  to  any  quantity  of  it.  As  sensation 
by  itself  is  no  objective  representation,  and  as  in  it 
the  intuition  of  neither  space  nor  time  can  be  found, 
it  follows  that  though  not  an  extensive,  yet  some 

VOL.  i.  H  h 


466  SUPPLEMENT  XVI  b. 

kind  of  quantity  must  belong  to  it  (and  this  through 
the  apprehension  of  it,  in  which  the  empirical  con- 
sciousness may  grow  in  a  certain  time  from  nothing 
=  o  to  any  amount).  That  quantity  must  be  inten- 
sive, and  corresponding  to  it,  an  intensive  quantity, 
i.e.  a  degree  of  influence  upon  the  senses,  must  be 
attributed  to  all  objects  of  perception,  so  far  as  it 
contains  sensation. 


SUPPLEMENT  XYIL     OCVOL  H.  P.  x55] 


in. 

ANALOGIES  OP  EXPERIENCE. 

Their  principle  is  :  experience  is  possible  only  through 
the  representation  of  a  necessary  connection  of 
perceptions. 

Proof. 

Experience  is  empirical  knowledge,  that  is,  know- 
ledge which  determines  an  object  by  means  of 
perceptions.  It  is,  therefore,  a  synthesis  of  perceptions, 
which  synthesis  itself  is  not  contained  in  the  percep- 
tion, but  contains  the  synthetical  unity  of  the 
manifold  of  the  perceptions  in  a  consciousness,  that 
unity  constituting  the  essential  of  our  knowledge  of 
the  objects  of  the  senses,  i.e.  of  experience  (not 
only  of  intuition  or  of  sensation  of  the  senses).  In 
experience  perceptions  come  together  contingently 
only,  so  that  no  necessity  of  their  connection  could  be 
discovered  in  the  perceptions  themselves,  apprehen- 
sion being  only  a  composition  of  the  manifold  of 
empirical  intuition,  but  containing  no  representation 
of  the  necessity  of  the  connected  existence  of  phe- 
nomena which  it  places  together  in  space  and  time. 
Experience,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  knowledge  of  objects 
by  perceptions,  in  which  therefore  the  relation  in  the 
existence  of  the  manifold  is  to  be  represented,  not  as 
it  is  put  together  in  time,  but  as  it  is  in  time,  objec- 
tively. Now,  as  time  itself  cannot  be  perceived,  the 

TT  h  2 


468  SUPPLEMENT  XVIL 

determination  of  the  existence  of  objects  in  time 
can  take  place  only  by  their  connection  in  time  in 
general,  that  is,  through  concepts  connecting  them 
a  priori.  As  these  concepts  always  imply  neces- 
sity, we  are  justified  in  saying  that  experience  is 
possible  only  through  a  representation  of  the  necessary 
connection  of  perceptions. 


SUPPLEMENT  XVIIL     [*•  ™i.  a.  P. 

A.    FIBOT  ANALOGY. 

Principle  of  the  Permanence  of  Substance. 

In  all  changes  of  phenomena  the  substance  is  perma- 
nent, and  its  quantum  is  neither  increased  nor 
diminished  in  nature. 

Proof. 

All  phenomena  exist  in  time,  and  in  it  alone,  as 
the  substratum  (as  permanent  form  of  the  internal 
intuition)  can  simultaneousness  as  well  as  succession  be 
represented.  Time,  therefore,  in  which  all  change  of 
phenomena  is  to  be  thought,  does  not  change,  for  it  is 
that  in  which  simultaneousness  and  succession  can  be 
represented  as  determinations  of  it.  As  time  by 
itself  cannot  be  perceived,  it  follows  that  the  substra- 
tum which  represents  time  in  general,  and  in  which 
all  change  or  simultaneousness  can  be  perceived  in 
apprehension,  through  the  relation  of  phenomena  to  it, 
must  exist  in  the  objects  of  perception,  that  is,  in  the 
phenomena.  Now  the  substratum  of  all  that  is  real, 
that  is  of  all  that  belongs  to  the  existence  of  things, 
is  the  substance,  and  all  that  belongs  to  existence 
can  be  conceived  only  as  a  determination  of  it.  Con- 
sequently the  permanent,  in  reference  to  which  alone 
all  temporal  relations  of  phenomena  can  Jbe  deter- 


470  SUPPLEMENT   XVIII. 

mined,  is  the  substance  in  phenomena,  that  is,  what 
is  real  in  them,  and,  as  the  substratum  of  all  change, 
remains  always  the  same.  As  therefore  substance 
cannot  change  in  existence,  we  were  justified  in  say- 
ing that  its  quantum  can  neither  be  increased  nor 
diminished  in  nature. 


SUPPLEMENT  XIX.     [&»  ™i.  H.  P.  ,66] 

B.    SECOND  ANALOGY. 

Principle  of  the  Succession  of  Time,  according  to  the 
Law  of  Causality. 

All  changes  take  place  according  to  the  law  of 
connection  between  cause  and  effect. 

Proof. 

(It  has  been  shown  by  the  preceding  principle, 
that  all  phenomena  in  the  succession  of  time  are 
changes  only,  i.e.  a  successive  being  and  not-being 
of  the  determinations  of  the  substance,  which  is  per- 
manent, and  consequently  that  the  being  of  the  sub- 
stance itself,  which  follows  upon  its  not-being,  and 
its  not-being,  which  follows  on  its  being, — in  other 
words,  that  an  arising  or  perishing  of  the  substance 
itself  is  inadmissible.  The  same  principle  might 
also  have  been  expressed  thus  :  all  change  (succession) 
of  phenomena  consists  in  modification  only,  for  arising 
and  perishing  are  no  modifications  of  the  substance, 
because  the  concept  of  modification  presupposes  the 
same  subject  as  existing  with  two  opposite  determin- 
ations, and  therefore  as  permanent.  After  this  pre- 
liminary remark,  we  shall  proceed  to  the  proof.) 

I  perceive  that  phenomena  succeed  each  other,  that 
is,  that  there  is  a  state  of  things  at  one  time  the 
opposite  of  which  existed  at  a  previous  time.  I  am 
therefore  really  connecting  two  perceptions  in  time. 
That  connection  is  not  a  work  of  the  sense%  only  and 


472  SUPPLEMENT  XIX. 

of  intuition,  but  is  here  the  product  of  a  synthetical 
power  of  the  faculty  of  imagination,  which  determines 
the  internal  sense  with  reference  to  relation  in  time. 
Imagination,  however,  can  connect  those  two  states 
in  two  ways,  so  that  either  the  one  or  the  other  pre- 
cedes in  time :  for  time  cannot  be  perceived  by  itself, 
nor  can  we  determine  in  the  object  empirically  and 
with  reference  to  time,  what  precedes  and  what 
follows.  I  am,  therefore,  conscious  only  that  my 
imagination  places  the  one  before,  the  other  after,  aod 
not,  that  in  the  object  the  one  state  comes  before  the 
other.  In  other  words,  the  objective  relation  of  phe- 
nomena following  upon  each  other  remains  unde- 
termined by  mere  perception.  In  order  that  this 
may  be  known  as  determined,  it  is  necessary  to  con- 
ceive the  relation  between  the  two  states  in  such 
a  way  that  it  should  be  determined  thereby  with 
necessity,  which  of  the  two  should  be  taken  as  coming 
first,  and  which  as  second,  and  not  conversely.  Such 
a  concept,  involving  a  necessity  of  synthetical  unity, 
can  be  a  pure  concept  of  the  understanding  only, 
which  is  not  supplied  by  experience,  and  this  is,  in 
this  case,  the  concept  of  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect, 
the  former  determining  the  latter  in  time  as  the 
consequence,  not  as  something  that  by  imagination 
might  as  well  be  antecedent,  or  not  to  be  perceived  at 
all.  Experience  itself,  therefore,  that  is,  an  empirical 
knowledge  of  phenomena,  is  possible  only  by  our 
subjecting  the  succession  of  phenomena,  and  with  it 
all  change,  to  the  law  of  causality,  and  phenomena 
themselves,  as  objects  of  experience,  are  consequently 
possible  according  to  the  same  law  only. 


SUPPLEMENT  XX.     [see  vol.  a.  P.  i84] 

C.    THIRD  ANALOGY. 

Principle  of  Coexistence,  according  to  the  Law  of 
Reciprocity  or  Community. 

All  substances,  so  far  as  they  can  be  perceived  as 
coexistent  in  space,  are  always  affecting  each  other 
reciprocally. 

Proof. 

Things  are  coexistent  when,  in  empirical  intuition, 
the  perception  of  the  one  can  follow  upon  the  percep- 
tion of  the  other,  and  vice  versa,  which,  as  was 
shown  in  the  second  principle,  is  impossible  in  the 
temporal  succession  of  phenomena.  Thus  I  may  first 
observe  the  moon  and  afterwards  the  earth,  or,  con- 
versely also,  first  the  earth  and  afterwards  the  moon, 
and  because  the  perceptions  of  these  objects  can 
follow  each  other  in  both  ways,  I  say  that  they  are 
coexistent.  Now  coexistence  is  the  existence  of  the 
manifold  in  the  same  time.  Time  itself,  however, 
cannot  be  perceived,  so  that  we  might  learn  from  the 
fact  that  things  exist  in  the  same  time  that  their 
perceptions  can  follow  each  other  reciprocally.  The 
synthesis  of  imagination  in  apprehension  would, 
therefore,  give  us  each  of  these  perceptions  as  exist- 
ing in  the  subject,  when  the  other  is  absent,  and 
vice  versa  :  it  would  never  tell  us  that  the  objects  are 
coexistent,  that  is,  that  if  the  one  is  there^the  other 


474  SUPPLEMENT   XX. 

also  must  be  there  in  the  same  time,  and  this  by 
necessity,  so  that  the  perceptions  may  follow  each 
other  reciprocally.  Hence  we  require  a  concept  of 
the  reciprocal  sequence  of  determinations  of  things 
existing  at  the  same  time,  but  outside  each  other,  in 
order  to  be  able  to  say,  that  the  reciprocal  sequence 
of  the  perceptions  is  founded  in  the  object,  and  thus 
to  represent  their  coexistence  as  objective.  The  rela- 
tion of  substances,  however,  of  which  the  first  has 
determinations  the  ground  of  which  is  contained  in 
the  other,  is  the  relation  of  influence,  arid  if,  con- 
versely also,  the  first  contains  the  ground  of  deter- 
minations in  tho  latter,  the  relation  is  that  of  coin- 
muiiity  or  reciprocity.  Hence  the  coexistence  of 
substances  in  space  cannot  be  known  in  experience 
otherwise  but  under  the  supposition  of  reciprocal 
action :  and  this  is  therefore  the  condition  also  of 
the  possibility  of  things  as  objects  of  experience. 


SUPPLEMENT  XXI.     [see vol.  u.  P.  I97] 

An  important  protest,  however,  against  these  rules 
for  proving  existence  mediately  is  brought  forward 
by  Idealism,  and  this  is  therefore  the  proper  place 
for  its  refutation. 

***** 

Refutation  of  Idealism. 

Idealism  (I  mean  material  idealism)  is  the  theory 
which  declares  the  existence  of  objects  in  space, 
without  us,  as  either  doubtful  only  and  not  demon- 
strable, or  as  false  and  impossible.  The  former  is 
the  problematical  idealism  of  Descartes,  who  declares 
one  empirical  assertion  only  to  be  undoubted, 
namely,  that  of  I  am ;  the  latter  is  the  dogmatical 
idealism  of  Berkeley,  who  declares  space  and  all 
things  to  which  it  belongs  as  an  inseparable  con- 
dition, as  something  impossible  in  itself,  and,  there- 
fore, the  things  in  space  as  mere  imaginations. 
Dogmatic  idealism  is  inevitable,  if  we  look  upon 
space  as  a  property  belonging  to  things  by  them- 
selves, for  in  that  case  space  and  all  of  which  it  is  a 
condition,  would  be  a  non-entity.  The  ground  on 
which  that  idealism  rests  has  been  removed  by  us  in 
the  Transcendental  ^Esthetic.  Problematical  idealism, 
which  asserts  nothing,  but  only  pleads  our  inability 
of  proving  any  existence  except  our  own  by  means  of 
immediate  experience,  is  reasonable  and  in  accordance 
with  a  sound  philosophical  mode  of  thought,  which 
allows  of  no  decisive  judgment,  before  ^sufficient 


476  SUPPLEMENT  XXL 

proof  has  been  found.  The  required  proof  will  have 
to  demonstrate  that  we  may  have  not  only  an  ima- 
gination, but.  also  an  experience  of  external  things, 
and  this  it  seems  can  hardly  be  effected  in  any  other 
way  except  by  proving  that  even  our  internal  ex- 
perience, which  Descartes  considers  as  undoubted,  is 
possible  only  under  the  supposition  of  external  ex- 
perience. 

Theorem. 

The  simple,  but  empirically  determined  Consciousness 
of  my  own  existence,  proves  the  Existence  of  objects 
in  space  outside  myself. 

Proof. 

I  am  conscious  of  my  own  existence  as  determined 
in  time,  and  all  determination  in  time  presupposes 
something  permanent  in  the  perception1.  That 
permanent,  however,  cannot  be  an  intuition  within 
me,  because  all  the  causes  which  determine  iny  exist- 
ence, so  far  as  they  can  be  found  within  me,  are 
representations,  and  as  such  require  themselves  some- 
thing permanent,  different  from  them,  in  reference 
to  which  their  change,  and  therefore  my  existence 
in  the  time  in  which  they  change,  may  be  deter- 
mined. The  perception  of  this  permanent,  therefore, 
is  possible  only  through  a  thing  outside  me,  and  not 
through  the  mere  representation  of  a  thing  outside  me, 
and  the  determination  of  my  existence  in  time  is,  conse- 
quently, possible  only  by  the  existence  of  real  things, 
which  I  perceive  outside  me.  As  therefore  the  con- 

1  This  passage  has  been  translated  as  amended  by  Kant  himself 
in  the  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition  (p.  386). 


SUPPLEMENT  XXL  477 

sciousness  in  time  is  necessarily  connected  with  th'e 
consciousness  of  the  possibility  of  that  determination 
of  time,  it  is  also  necessarily  connected  with  the 
existence  of  things  outside  me,  as  the  condition  of 
the  determination  of  time.  In  other  words,  the  con- 
sciousness of  my  own  existence  is,  at  the  same  time, 
an  immediate  consciousness  of  the  existence  of  other 
things. 

NOTE  i. — It  will  have  been  perceived  that  in  the 
foregoing  proof  the  trick  played  by  idealism  has  been 
turned  against  it,  and  with  greater  justice.  Idealism 
assumed  that  the  only  immediate  experience  is  the 
internal,  and  that  from  it  we  can  no  more  than  infer 
external  things,  though  in  an  untrustworthy  manner 
only,  as  always  happens  if  from  given  effects  we  infer 
definite  causes  :  it  being  quite  possible  that  the  cause 
of  the  representations,  which  are  ascribed  by  us,  it 
may  be  wrongly,  to  external  things,  may  lie  within 
ourselves.  We,  however,  have  proved  that  external 
experience  is  really  immediate l,  and  that  only  by 
means  of  it,  though  not  the  consciousness  of  our  own 
existence,  yet  its  determination  in  time,  that  is,  in- 
ternal experience,  becomes  possible.  No  doubt  the 

1  The  immediate  consciousness  of  the  existence  of  external 
things  is  not  simply  assumed  in  the  preceding  theorem,  but  proved, 
whether  we  can  understand  its  possibility  or  not.  The  question 
with  regard  to  that  possibility  would  come  to  this,  whether  we 
have  an  internal  sense  only,  and  no  external  sense,  but  merely  an 
external  imagination.  It  is  clear,  however,  that,  even  in  order  to 
imagine  only  something  as  external,  that  is,  to  represent  it  to  the 
senses  in  intuition,  we  must  have  an  external  sense,  and  thus  dis- 
tinguish immediately  the  mere  receptivity  of  an  external  intuition 
from  that  spontaneity  which  characterizes  every  act  of  imagination. 
For  only  to  imagine  an  external  sense  would  really  be  to  destroy 
the  faculty  of  intuition,  which  is  to  be  determined  by  the  faculty 
of  imagination.  o 


478  SUPPLEMENT  XXI. 

representation  of  I  am,  which  expresses  the  con- 
sciousness that  can  accompany  all  thought,  is  that 
which  immediately  includes  the  existence  of  a  sub- 
ject :  but  it  does  not  yet  include  a  knowledge  of  it, 
and  therefore  no  empirical  knowledge,  that  is,  ex- 
perience. For  that  we  require,  besides  the  thought 
of  something  existing,  intuition  also,  and  in  this  case 
internal  intuition,  in  respect  to  which,  that  is,  to 
time,  the  subject  must  be  determined.  For  that 
purpose  external  objects  are  absolutely  necessary,  so 
that  internal  experience  itself  is  possible,  mediately 
only,  and  through  external  experience. 

NOTE  2. — This  view  is  fully  confirmed  by  the 
empirical  use  of  our  faculty  of  knowledge,  as  applied 
to  the  determination  of  time.  Not  only  are  we  un- 
able to  perceive  any  determination  of  time,  except 
through  a  change  in  external  relations  (motion)  with 
reference  to  what  is  permanent  in  space  (for  instance, 
the  movement  of  the  sun  with  respect  to  terrestrial 
objects),  but  we  really  have  nothing  permanent  to 
which  we  could  refer  the  concept  of  a  substance,  as 
an  intuition,  except  matter  only :  and  even  this  per- 
manence is  not  derived  from  external  experience,  but 
presupposed  a  priori  as  a  necessary  condition  of  all 
determination  of  time,  and  therefore  also  as  the  de- 
termination of  the  internal  sense  with  respect  to  our 
own  existence  through  the  existence  of  external 
things.  The  consciousness  of  myself,  in  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  ego,  is  not  an  intuition,  but  a 
merely  intellectual  representation  of  the  spontaneity 
of  a  thinking  subject.  Hence  that  ego  has  not  the 
slightest  predicate  derived  from  intuition,  which,  as 
permanent,  might  serve  as  the  correlate  of  the  de- 
terminaticjn  of  time  in  the  internal  sense :  such  as 


SUPPLEMENT  XXI.  479 

impermeability,  for  instance,  is  with  regard  to  matter, 
as  an  empirical  intuition. 

NOTE  3. — Because  the  existence  of  external  objects 
is  required  for  the  possibility  of  a  definite  conscious- 
ness of  ourselves,  it  does  not  follow  that  every  in- 
tuitional representation  of  external  things  involves, 
at  the  same  time,  their  existence;  for  such  a  repre- 
sentation may  well  be  the  mere  effect  of  the  faculty 
of  imagination  (in  dreams  as  well  as  in  madness), 
and  is  possible  only  through  the  reproduction  of 
former  external  perceptions,  which,  as  we  have  shown, 
is  impossible  without  the  reality  of  external  objects. 
What  we  wanted  to  prove  here  was  only  that  internal 
experience  in  general  is  possible  only  through  ex- 
ternal experience  in  general.  Whether  this  or  that 
supposed  experience  be  purely  imaginary,  must  be 
settled  according  to  its  own  particular  determina- 
tions, and  through  a  comparison  with  the  criteria  of 
all  real  experience. 


SUPPLEMENT  XXII,     0  vol.  a.  „  204] 


General  note  on  the  System  of  the  Principles. 

IT  is  something  very  remarkable  that  we  cannot 
understand  the  possibility  of  anything  from  the 
category  alone,  but  must  always  have  an  intuition 
in  order  to  exhibit  by  it  the  object  of  reality  of  the 
pure  concept  of  the  understanding.  Let  us  take, 
for  instance,  the  categories  of  relation.  It  is  im- 
possible to  understand,  from  mere  concepts  alone : 

First,  how  something  can  exist  as  subject  only, 
and  not  as  a  mere  determination  of  other  things,  that 
is,  how  it  can  be  a  substance  :  or, 

Secondly,  how,  because  something  is,  something 
else  must  be,  that  is,  how  something  can  ever  be  a 
cause:  or, 

Thirdly,  how,  when  there  are  several  things,  some- 
thing could  follow  from  the  existence  of  one  of 
them  as  affecting  the  rest,  and  vice  versa,  so  that 
there  should  exist,  in  this  way,  a  certain  community 
of  substances.  The  same  applies  to  the  other  cate- 
gories, as,  for  instance,  how  a  thing  could  be  of  the 
same  kind  as  many  others,  and  thus  be  a  quantity. 
So  long  as  there  is  no  intuition,  we  do  not  know 
whether  by  the  categories  we  conceive  an  object, 
nay,  whether  any  object  can  at  all  belong  to  them : 
and  thus  we  see  again  that  by  themselves  the  cate- 
gories are  not  knowledge,  but  mere  forms  of  thought, 
by  which  given  intuitions  are  turned  into  knowledge. 


SUPPLEMENT   XXII.  481 

It  likewise  follows  from  this,  that  no  synthetical 
proposition  can  be  made  out  of  mere  categories,  as, 
for  instance,  if  it  is  said  that  in  everything  existing 
there  is  substance,  i.  e.  something  that  can  exist 
as  subject  only,  and  not  as  a  mere  predicate ;  or, 
everything  is  a  quantum,  &c.  Here  we  have  really 
nothing  whatever  which  would  enable  us  to  go 
beyond  a  given  concept,  and  to  connect  with  it 
another.  Hence  no  one  has  ever  succeeded  in  prov- 
ing a  synthetical  proposition  by  pure  concepts  of  the 
understanding  only :  as,  for  instance,  the  proposition 
that  everything  which  exists  contingently,  has  a 
cause.  All  that  could  be  proved  was,  that,  without 
such  a  relation,  we  could  not  conceive  the  existence 
of  what  is  contingent,  that  is,  that  we  could  not 
know  a  priori  through  the  understanding  the  exist- 
ence of  such  a  thing ;  from  which  it  does  not  follow 
in  the  least  that  the  same  condition  applies  to  the 
possibility  of  things  themselves.  If  the  reader  will 
go  back  to  our  proof  of  the  principle  of  causality,  he 
will  perceive  that  we  could  prove  it  of  objects  of 
possible  experience  only,  by  saying  that  everything 
which  happens  (every  event)  presupposes  a  cause. 
We  could  prove  it  only  as  the  principle  of  the  possi- 
bility of  experience,  that  is,  of  the  knowledge  of  an 
object,  given  in  empirical  intuition,  but  not  by  means 
of  mere  concepts.  It  is  perfectly  true,  that  never- 
theless this  proposition,  that  everything  contingent 
must  have  a  cause,  carries  conviction  to  everybody 
from  mere  concepts  :  but  it  should  be  observed,  that 
in  this  case  the  concept  of  the  contingent  contains 
no  longer  the  category  of  modality  (as  something  the 
non-existence  of  which  can  be  conceived),  but  that  of 
relation  (as  something  which  can.  only  exist  as  the 
consequence  of  something  else).  It  thus  becomes  in 


482  SUPPLEMENT   XXII. 

reality  an  identical  proposition,  namely,  that  that 
which  can  exist  as  a  consequence  only  has  its  cause. 
And  thus,  when  we  have  to  give  examples  of  con- 
tingent existence,  we  have  always  recourse  to  changes, 
and  not  only  to  the  possibility  of  conceiving  the  op- 
posite 1.  Change,  however,  is  an  event  which,  as  such, 
is  possible  through  a  cause  only,  and  the  non-exist- 
ence of  which  is  therefore  possible  in  itself.  We 
thus  mean  by  contingency,  that  something  can  exist 
as  tho  effect  of  a  cause  only;  and  if  therefore  a  thing 
is  assumed  to  be  contingent,  it  becomes  a  merely 
analytical  proposition  to  say  that  it  has  a  cause. 

It  is  still  more  remarkable,  however,  that,  in  order 
to  understand  the  possibility  of  things  according  to 
the  categories,  and  thus  to  establish  the  objective 
reality  of  the  latter,  we  require  not  only  intuitions, 
but  always  external  intuitions.  Thus,  if  we  take, 
for  instance,  the  pure  concepts  of  relation,  we  find 
that: 

First,  in  order  to  give  something  permanent  in  in- 
tuition, corresponding  to  the  concept  of  substance 
(and  thus  to  show  the  objective  reality  of  that  con- 

1  It  is  easy  enough  to  conceive  the  non-existence  of  matter,  but 
the  ancients  did  not  infer  from  this  its  contingency.  Not  even 
the  change  of  being  and  not-being  of  any  given  state  of  a  thing, 
which  constitutes  all  change,  can  prove  the  contingency  of  that 
state,  as  if  from  the  reality  of  its  opposite.  The  rest  of  a  body,  for 
instance,  following  on  its  motion,  does  not  yet  prove  the  contingency 
of  that  motion,  because  the  former  is  the  opposite  of  the  latter. 
The  opposite  here  is  opposed  to  the  other,  not  realiter,  but  logically 
only.  In  order  to  prove  the  contingency  of  the  motion  of  a  body, 
we  should  have  to  prove  that  instead  of  the  motion  at  the  ante- 
cedent point  of  time,  it.  would  have  been  possible  for  the  body 
to  have  been  at  rest  at  that  very  time,  not  that  it  is  at  rest 
afterwards;  for  in  this  case  both  opposites  are  quite  consistent 
with  each  tother. 


SUPPLEMENT   XXII.  483 

cept),  we  require  an  intuition  in  space  (of  matter)) 
because  space  alone  can  determine  anything  as  per- 
manent, while  time,  and  therefore  everything  that 
exists  in  the  internal  sense,  is  in  a  constant  flux. 

Secondly,  that  in  order  to  exhibit  change,  as  the 
intuition  corresponding  to  the  concept  of  carnality, 
we  must  use  motion  as  change  in  space  for  our 
example,  nay,  can  thus  only  gain  an  intuition  of 
changes  the  possibility  of  which  no  pure  under- 
standing can  ever  conceive.  Change  is  the  connec- 
tion of  contradictory  opposites  in  the  existence  of 
one  and  the  same  thing.  Now,  how  it  is  possible 
that  from  a  given  state  another  state,  opposed  to  it, 
should  arise  in  the  same  thing,  no  reason  can  com- 
prehend without  an  example  ;  nay,  without  an  intui- 
tion, it  cannot  even  render  intelligible  to  itself.  That 
intuition,  however,  is  that  of  the  motion  of  a  point 
in  space,  the  presence  of  which  in  different  places  (as 
a  consequence  of  opposite  determinations)  gives  us, 
for  the  first  time,  an  intuition  of  change  :  so  that,  in 
order  to  make  even  internal  changes  afterwards  con- 
ceivable to  ourselves,  we  must  make  time,  as  the 
form  of  the  internal  sense,  figuratively  comprehen- 
sible to  ourselves  by  means  of  a  line,  and  the  in- 
ternal change  by  means  of  the  drawing  of  that  line 
(motion) :  in  other  words,  the  successive  existence  of 
ourselves  in  different  states,  by  means  of  an  external 
intuition.  The  real  reason  of  this  lies  in  the  fact 
that  all  change  presupposes  something  permanent  in 
intuition,  in  order  that  it  may  itself  be  perceived  as 
change,  while  no  permanent  intuition  is  to  be  found 
in  the  internal  sense. 

Thirdly,  and  lastly,  the  category  of  community 
cannot,  so  far  as  its  possibility  is  concerned,  be  con- 
ceived by  mere  reason  alone :  and  the  objectrstf  reality 


484  SUPPLEMENT   XXII. 

of  that  concept  cannot  therefore  be  possibly  under- 
stood without  intuition,  and  without  external  in- 
tuition in  space.  For  how  should  we  conceive  the 
possibility  that,  when  several  substances  exist,  some- 
thing (as  an  effect)  could  follow  from  the  existence 
of  one  of  them  as  affecting  reciprocally  the  .exist- 
ence of  the  other,  and  that,  therefore,  because  there 
is  something  in  the  former,  something  must  also  be 
in  the  latter,  which,  from  the  existence  of  the  latter 
alone,  could  not  be  understood?  For  this  is  neces- 
sary to  establish  community,  though  it  is  utterly  in- 
conceivable among  things,  each  of  which  completely 
isolates  itself  through  its  substantiality.  Leibniz, 
therefore,  as  he  attributed  community  to  the  substances 
of  the  world,  as  conceived  by  the  understanding 
alone,  required  the  interference  of  a  Deity ;  because,  as 
he  justly  perceived,  such  community  would  have  been 
inconceivable  from  the  existence  of  such  substances 
only.  We,  on  the  contrary,  can  render  the  possibility 
of  such  a  communion  (of  substances  as  phenomena) 
perfectly  conceivable  to  ourselves,  if  we  represent 
them  to  ourselves  in  space,  that  is,  in  external  in- 
tuition. For  space  contains,  even  a  priori,  formal 
external  relations,  as  conditions  of  the  possibility  of 
the  real  relations  of  action  and  reaction,  that  is,  of 
community. 

It  is  easy  to  show,  in  the  same  manner,  that  the 
possibility  of  things  as  quanta,  and  therefore,  the  ob- 
jective reality  of  the  category  of  quantity,  can  be 
exhibited  in  external  intuition  only,  and,  by  means 
of  it  alone,  be  afterwards  applied  to  the  internal 
sense.  But,  in  order  to  avoid  prolixity,  I  must 
leave  it  to  the  reflection  of  the  reader  to  find 
the  examples  of  this. 

The  Y7hole  of  these  notes  is  of  great  importance, 


SUPPLEMENT   XXII.  485 

not  only  as  confirming  our  previous  refutation  of 
idealism,  but  even  more,  when  we  come  to  treat  of 
self-knowledge  by  mere  internal  consciousness,  and  the 
determination  of  our  own  nature,  without  the  help 
of  external  empirical  intuitions,  in  order  to  show  us 
the  limits  of  the  possibility  of  such  knowledge. 

The  last  result  of  the  whole  of  this  section  is 
therefore  this  :  All  principles  of  the  pure  understand- 
ing are  nothing  more  than  a  priori  principles  of  the 
possibility  of  experience  ;  and  to  experience  alone  do 
all  synthetical  propositions  a  priori  relate  :  nay,  their 
possibility  itself  rests  entirely  on  that  relation. 


SUPPLEMENT    XXTTI,        [See  vol.  u.  P.  ai3] 

IN  one  word,  none  of  these  concepts  admit  of  being 
authenticated,  nor  can  their  real  possibility  be  proved, 
if  all  sensuous  intuition  (the  only  one  which  we 
possess)  is  removed,  and  there  remains  in  that  case 
a  logical  possibility  only,  that  is,  that  a  concept  (a 
thought)  is  possible.  This,  however,  does  not  con- 
cern us  here,  but  only  whether  the  concept  refers  to 
an  object  and  does  therefore  signify  anything. 


SUPPLEMENT  XXIV      [»»  vol.  u.  P.  2l6] 

WE  are  met  here  by  an  illusion  which  is  difficult 
to  avoid.  The  categories  do  not  depend  in  their 
origin  on  sensibility,  like  the  forms  of  intuition,  space 
and  time,  and  seem,  therefore,  to  admit  of  an  applica- 
tion extending  beyond  the  objects  of  the  senses. 
But,  on  the  other  side,  they  are  nothing  but  forms  of 
tlwuglit,  containing  the  logical  faculty  only  of  com- 
prehending a  priori  in  one  consciousness  the  mani- 
fold that  is  given  in  intuition,  and  they  would  there- 
fore, if  we  take  away  the  only  intuition  which  is 
possible  to  us,  have  still  less  significance  than  those 
pure  sensuous  forms  by  which  at  least  an  object  is 
given,  while  a  peculiar  mode  of  our  understanding  of 
connecting  the  manifold  (unless  that  intuition,  in 
which  the  manifold  alone  can  be  given,  is  added), 
signifies  nothing  at  all. 

Nevertheless,  it  seems  to  follow  from  our  very 
concept,  if  we  call  certain  objects,  as  phenomena, 
beings  of  the  senses,  by  distinguishing  between  the 
mode  of  our  intuition  and  the  nature  of  those  objects 
by  themselves,  that  we  may  take  either  the  same 
objects  in  that  latter  capacity,  though  they  cannot 
as  such  come  before  our  intuition,  or  other  possible 
things,  which  are  not  objects 'of  our  senses  at  all,  and 
place  them,  as  objects  conceived  by  the  understanding 
alone,  in  opposition  to  the  former,  calling  them  beings 
of  the  understanding  (noumena).  The  question  then 


488  SUPPLEMENT   XXIV. 

arises,  whether  our  pure  concepts  of  the  understand- 
ing do  not  possess  some  significance  with  regard  to 
these  so-called*  beings  of  the  understanding,  and  con- 
stitute a  mode  of  knowing  them  ? 

At  the  very  outset,  however,  we  meet  with  an 
ambiguity  which  may  cause  great  misapprehension. 
The  understanding,  by  calling  an  object  in  one  aspect 
a  phenomenon  only,  makes  to  itself,  apart  from  that 
aspect,  another  representation  of  an  object  l>y  itself, 
and  imagines  itself  able  to  form  concepts  of  such  an 
object.  As,  then,  the  understanding  yields  no  other 
concepts  but  the  categories,  it  supposes  that  the 
object  in  the  latter  aspect  can  be  conceived  at  least 
by  those  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding,  and  is 
thus  induced  to  take  the  entirely  indefinite  concept 
of  a  being  of  the  understanding,  as  of  a  something 
in  general  outside  our  sensibility,  as  a  definite  con- 
cept of  a  being  which  we  might  know  to  a  certain 
extent  through  the  understanding. 

If  by  noumenon  we  mean  a  thing  so  far  as  it  is 
not  an  object  of  our  sensuous  intuition,  and  make 
abstraction  of  our  mode  of  intuition,  it  may  be  called 
a  noumenon  in  a  negative  sense.  If,  however,  we 
mean  by  it  an  object  of  a  non-sensuous  intuition,  we 
admit  thereby  a  peculiar  mode  of  intuition,  namely, 
the  intellectual,  which,  however,  is  not  our  own, 
nor  one  of  which  we  can  understand  even  the  possi- 
bility. This  would  be  the  noumenon  in  a  positive 
sense. 

The  doctrine  of  sensibility  is  at  the  same  time 
the  doctrine  of  noumena  in  their  negative  sense ; 
that  is,  of  things  which  the  understanding  must  con- 
ceive without  reference  to  our  mode  of  intuition,  and 
therefore,  not  as  phenomena  only,  but  as  things  by 
themselve^,  but  to  which,  after  it  has  thus  separated 


SUPPLEMENT   XXIV.  489 

them,  the  understanding  knows  that  it  must  not,  in 
this  new  aspect,  apply  its  categories ;  because  these 
categories  have  significance  only  with  reference  to 
the  unity  of  intuitions  in  space  and  time,  and  can 
therefore  a  priori  determine  that  unity,  on  account 
of  the  mere  ideality  of  space  and  time  only,  by 
means  of  general  connecting  concepts.  Where  that 
unity  in  time  cannot  be  found,  i.e.  in  the  nou- 
menon,  the  whole  use,  nay,  the  whole  significance  of 
categories  comes  to  an  end :  because  even  the  possi- 
bility of  things  that  should  correspond  to  the  cate- 
gories, would  be  unintelligible.  On  this  point  T  may 
refer  the  reader  to  what  I  have  said  at  the  very 
beginning  of  the  general  note  to  the  previous  chapter 
(Suppl.  XXII).  The  possibility  of  a  thing  can  never 
be  proved  from  the  fact  that  its  concept  is  not  self- 
contradictory,  but  only  by  being  authenticated  by 
an  intuition  corresponding  to  it.  If,  therefore,  we 
attempted  to  apply  the  categories  to  objects  which 
are  not  considered  as  phenomena,  we  should  have  to 
admit  an  intuition  other  than  the  sensuous,  and  thus 
the  object  would  become  a  noumenon  in  a  positive 
sense.  As,  however,  such  an  intuition,  namely,  an 
intellectual  one,  is  entirely  beyond  our  faculty  of 
knowledge,  the  use  of  the  categories  also  can  never 
reach  beyond  the  limits  of  the  objects  of  experience. 
Beings  of  the  understanding  correspond  no  doubt  to 
beings  of  the  senses,  and  there  may  be  beings  of  the 
understanding  to  which  our  faculty  of  sensuous  in- 
tuition has  no  relation  at  all ;  but  our  concepts  of 
the  understanding,  being  forms  of  thought  for  our 
sensuous  intuition  only,  do  not  reach  so  far,  and 
what  is  called  by  us  a  noumenon  must  be  understood 
as  such  in  a  negative  sense  only. 


SUPPLEMENT  XXV.    [*•  ™i.  u.  P.  223] 

WE  must  not  speak,  as  is  often  done,  of  an  in- 
tellectual world,  for  intellectual  and  sensitive  apply 
to  knowledge  only.  That,  however,  to  which  the  one 
or  the  other  mode  of  intuition  applies,  that  is,  the 
objects> themselves,  must,  however  harsh  it  may  sound, 
be  called  intelligible  or  sensible. 


SUPPLEMENT  XXVI.     [see  vol.  a.  P.  293] 

METAPHYSIC  has  for  the  real  object  of  its  investi- 
gations three  ideas  only,  God,  Freedom,  and  Im- 
mortality;  the  second  concept  connected  with  the 
first  leading  by  necessity  to  the  third.  Everything 
else  treated  by  that  science  is  a  means  only  in  order 
to  establish  those  ideas  and  their  reality.  Metaphysic 
does  not  require  these  ideas  for  the  sake  of  natural 
science ;  but,  in  order  to  go  beyond  nature,  a  right 
insight  into  them  would  make  theology,  morality,  and, 
by  the  union  of  both,  religion  also,  therefore  the 
highest  objects  of  our  existence,  dependent  on  the 
speculative  faculty  of  reason  only,  and  on  nothing 
else.  In  a  systematical  arrangement  of  those  ideas 
the  above  order,  being  synthetical,  would  be  the  most 
appropriate;  but  in  their  elaboration,  which  must 
necessarily  come  first,  the  analytical  or  inverse 
order  is  more  practical,  enabling  us,  by  starting 
from  what  is  given  us  by  experience,  namely,  the 
study  of  the  soul  (psychology),  and  proceeding  thence 
to  the  study  of  the  world  (cosmology),  and  lastly,  to 
a  knowledge  of  God  (theology),  to  carry  out  the  whole 
of  our  great  plan  in  its  entirety. 


SUPPLEMENT  XXVII.     [&»  vol. «.  P.  3o3] 

WE  shall  therefore  follow  it  with  a  critical  eye 
through  all  the  predicaments  of  pure  psychology;  but 
we  shall,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  let  their  examina- 
tion proceed  uninterruptedly. 

The  following  general  remark  may  at  the  very 
outset  make  us  more  attentive  to  this  mode  of 
syllogism.  I  do  not  know  any  object  by  merely 
thinking,  but  only  by  determining  a  given  intuition 
with  respect  to  that  unity  of  consciousness  in  which 
all  thought  consists  ;  therefore,  I  do  not  know  myself 
by  being  conscious  of  myself,  as  thinking,  but  only 
if  I  am  conscious  of  the  intuition  of  myself  as  de- 
termined with  respect  to  the  function  of  thought. 
All  modes  of  self- consciousness  in  thought  are  there- 
fore by  themselves  not  yet  concepts  of  objects 
(categories),  but  mere  logical  functions,  which  present 
no  object  to  our  thought,  and  therefore  do  not  pre- 
sent myself  either  as  an  object  to  be  known.  It  is 
not  a  consciousness  of  the  determining,  but  only  that 
of  the  determinable  self,  that  is,  of  my  internal  in- 
tuition (so  far  as  the  manifold  in  it  can  be  connected 
in  accordance  with  the  general  condition  of  the  unity 
of  apperception  in  thought)  which  forms  the  object. 

i.  In  all  judgments  I  am  always  the  determining 
subject  only  of  the  relation  which  constitutes  the 
judgment.  That  I,  who  think,  can  be  considered  in 
thinking  as  subject  only,  and  as  something  not  simply 
inherent  in  the  thinking,  as  predicate,  is  an  apodictical 
and  even  identical  proposition ;  but  it  does  not  mean 
that,  as  an  object,  I  am  a  self-dependent  being  or  a 


SUPPLEMENT   XXVII.  493 

substance.  The  latter  would  be  saying  a  great  deal, 
and  requires  for  its  support  data  which  are  not 
found  in  the  thinking,  perhaps  (so  far  as  I  consider 
the  thinking  subject  as  such)  more  than  I  shall  ever 
find  in  it. 

2.  That  the  Ego  of  apperception,  and  therefore  the 
Ego  in,  every  act  of  thought,  is  a  singular  which 
cannot  be  dissolved  into  a  plurality  of  subjects,  and 
that  it  therefore  signifies  a  logically  simple  subject, 
follows  from  the  very  concept  of  thinking,  and  is 
consequently   an   analytical   proposition.      But   this 
does  not  mean  that  a  thinking  Ego  is  a  simple  sub- 
stance, which  would  indeed  be  a  synthetical  proposi- 
tion.    The  concept  of  substance  always  relates  to  in- 
tuitions which,  with  me,  cannot  be  other  but  sensuous, 
and  which  therefore  lie  completely  outside  the  field 
of  the  understanding  and  its  thinking,  which  alone  is 
intended  here,  when  we  say  that  the  Ego,  in  thinking, 
is  simple.     It  would  indeed  be  strange,  if  what  else- 
where requires  so  great   an   effort,  namely,  to  dis- 
tinguish in  what  is  given  by  intuition  what  is  sub- 
stance, and  still  more,  whether  that  substance  can  be 
simple  (as  in  the  case  of  the  component  parts  of 
matter),  should  in  our  case  be  given  to  us  so  readily 
in  what  is  really  the  poorest  of  all  representations, 
and,  as  it  were,  by  an  act  of  revelation. 

3.  The  proposition  of  the  identity  of  myself  amidst 
the    manifold    of   which   I   am    conscious,  likewise 
follows  from  the  concepts  themselves,  and  is  there- 
fore analytical ;  but  the  identity  of  the  subject  of 
which,  in  all  its  representations,  I  may  become  con- 
scious, does  not  refer  to  the  intuition  by  which  it  is 
given  as  an  object,  and  cannot  therefore  signify  the 
identity  of  the  person,  by  which  is  understood  the 
consciousness  of  the  identity  of  one's  owi^  substance,/ 


494  SUPPLEMENT   XXVII. 

as  a  thinking  being,  in  all  the  changes  of  circum- 
stances. In  order  to  prove  this,  the  mere  analysis  of 
the  proposition,  I  think,  would  avail  nothing :  but 
different  synthetical  judgments  would  be  required, 
which  are  based  on  the  given  intuition. 

4.  To  say  that  I  distinguish  my  own  existence,  as 
that  of  a  thinking  being,  from  other  things  outside 
me  (one  of  them  being  my  body)  is  likewise  an 
analytical  proposition;  for  other  things  are  things 
which  I  conceive  as  different  from  myself.  But,  whether 
such  a  consciousness  of  myself  is  even  possible  with- 
out things  outside  me,  whereby  representations  are 
given  to  me,  and  whether  I  could  exist  merely  as  a 
thinking  being  (without  being  a  man),  I  do  not  know 
at  all  by  that  proposition. 

Nothing  therefore  is  gained  by  the  analysis  of  the 
consciousness  of  myself,  in  thought  in  general,  to- 
wards the  knowledge  of  myself  as  an  object.  The 
logical  analysis  of  thinking  in  general  is  simply  mis- 
taken for  a  metaphysical  determination  of  the  object. 

It  would  be  a  great,  nay,  even  the  only  objection  to 
the  whole  of  our  critique,  if  there  were  a  possibility 
of  proving  a  priori  that  all  thinking  beings  are  by 
themselves  simple  substances,  that  as  such  (as  a  con- 
sequence of  the  same  argument)  personality  is  in- 
separable from  them,  and  that  they  are  conscious  of 
their  existence  as  distinct  from  all  matter.  For  we 
should  thus  have  made  a  step  beyond  the  world  of 
sense  and  entered  into  the  field  of  noumena,  and 
after  that  no  one  could  dare  to  question  our  right  of 
advancing  further,  of  settling  in  it,  and,  as  each  of  us 
is  favoured  by  luck,  taking  possession  of  it.  The 
proposition  that  every  thinking  being  is,  as  such,  a 
simple  substance,  is  synthetical  a  priori,  because, 
(£rst,  it  goes  beyond  the  concept  on  which  it  rests, 


SUPPLEMENT   XXVII.  495 

and  adds  to  act  of  thinking  in  general  the  mode  °of 
existence ;  and  secondly,  because  it  adds  to  that  con- 
cept a  predicate  (simplicity)  which  cannot  be  given 
in  any  experience.  Hence  synthetical  propositions  a 
priori  would  be  not  only  admissible,  as  we  maintained, 
in  reference  to  objects  of  possible  experience,  and  then 
only  as  principles  of  the  possibility  of  that  experience, 
but  could  be  extended  to  things  in  general  and  to 
things  by  themselves,  a  result  which  would  put  an  end 
to  the  whole  of  our  critique,  and  bid  us  to  leave  every- 
thing as  we  found  it.  However,  the  danger  is  not  so 
great,  if  only  we  look  more  closely  into  the  matter. 

In  this  process  of  rational  psychology,  there  lurks 
a  parakgism,  which  may  be  represented  by  the  fol- 
lowing syllogism. 

That  which  cannot  be  conceived  otherwise  than  as 
a  subject,  does  not  exist  otherwise  than  as  a  subject, 
and  is  therefore  a  substance. 

A  thinking  being,  considered  as  such,  cannot  be 
conceived  otherwise  than  as  a  subject. 

Therefore  it  exists  also  as  such  only,  that  is,  as  a 
substance. 

In  the  major  they  speak  of  a  being  that  can  be 
conceived  in  every  respect,  and  therefore  also  as  it 
may  be  given  in  intuition.  In  the  minor,  however, 
they  speak  of  it  only  so  far  as  it  considers  itself  as 
a  subject,  with  respect  to  the  thinking  and  the  unity 
of  consciousness  only,  but  not  at  the  same  time  in  re- 
spect to  the  intuition  whereby  it  is  given  as  an  object 
of  thinking.  The  conclusion,  therefore,  has  been  drawn 
by  a  sophism,  that  is,  by  sophisma  figurae  dictionis l. 

1  The  thinking  is  taken  in  each  of  the  two  premisses  in  a 
totally  different  meaning : — in  the  major,  as  it  refers  to  an  object 
in  general  (and  therefore  also  as  it  may  be  given  in  intuition),  but 
in  the  minor,  only  as  it  exists  in  its  relation  to  self-  onsciousness, 


496  SUPPLEMENT   XXVII. 

That  we  arc  perfectly  right  in  thus  resolving  that 
famous  argument  into  a  paralogism,  will  be  clearly 
seen  by  referring  to  the  general  note  on  the  syste- 
matical representation  of  the  principles,  and  to  the 
section  on  the  noumciia,  for  it  has  been  proved  there 
that  the  concept  of  a  thing,  which  can  exist  by  itself 
as  a  subject,  and  not  as  a  mere  predicate,  carries  as 
yet  no  objective  reality,  that  is,  that  we  cannot  know 
whether  any  object  at  all  belongs  to  it,  it  being 
impossible  for  us  to  understand  the  possibility  of  such 
a  mode  of  existence.  It  yields  us  therefore  no  know- 
ledge at  all.  If  such  a  concept  is  to  indicate,  under 
the  name  of  a  substance,  an  object  that  can  be  given, 
and  thus  become  knowledge,  it  must  be  made  to  rest 
on  a  permanent  intuition,  as  the  indispensable  condi- 
tion of  the  objective  reality  of  a  concept,  that  is,  on 
that  by  which  alone  the  object  can  be  given.  In 
internal  intuition,  however,  we  have  nothing  perma- 
nent, for  the  Ego  is  only  the  consciousness  of  my 
thinking  ;  and  if  we  do  not  go  beyond  this  thinking, 
we  are  without  the  necessary  condition  for  applying 
the  concept  of  substance,  that  is  of  an  independent 
subject,  to  the  self,  as  a  thinking  being.  Thus  the 
simplicity  of  the  substance  entirely  disappears  with 
the  objective  reality  of  the  concept :  and  is  changed 

where  no  object  is  thought  of,  but  where  we  only  represent  the 
relation  to  the  self  as  the  subject  (as  the  form  of  thought).  In  the 
former,  things  are  spoken  of  that  cannot  be  conceived  otherwise 
than  as  subjects ;  while  in  the  second  we  do  not  speak  of  things, 
but  of  the  thinking  (abstraction  being  made  of  all  objects),  wherein 
the  Ego  always  serves  as  the  subject  of  consciousness.  The  con- 
clusion, therefore,  ought  not  to  be  that  I  cannot  exist  otherwise 
than  as  a  subject,  but  only,  that  in  thinking  my  existence  I  can 
use  myself  as  the  subject  of  a  judgment  only.  This  is  an  identical 
proposition,  and  teaches  us  nothing  whatever  as  to  the  mode  of 
our  existence. 


SUPPLEMENT   XXVII,  497 

into  a  purely  logical  qualitative  unity  of  self-con- 
sciousness in  thinking  in  general,  whether  the  subject 
be  composite  or  not 

Eefutation  of  Mendelssohn  s  proof  of  the  Permanence 

of  the  Soul. 

This  acute  philosopher  perceived  very  quickly  how 
the  ordinary  argument  that  the  soul  (if  it  is  once 
admitted  to  be  a  simple  being)  cannot  cease  to  exist 
by  decomposition,  was  insufficient  to  prove  its  neces- 
sary continuance,  because  it  might  cease  to  exist  by 
simply  vanishing.  He  therefore  tried,  in  his-PhaBclon, 
to  prove  that  the  soul  was  not  liable  to  that  kind  of 
perishing  which  would  be  a  real  annihilation,  by 
endeavouring  to  show  that  a  simple  being  cannot 
cease  to  exist,  because  as  it  could  not  be  diminished, 
and  thus  gradually  lose  something  of  its  existence, 
and  be  changed  into  nothing  (it  having  no  parts,  and 
therefore  no  plurality  in  itself),  there  could  be  no  time 
between  the  one  moment  in  which  it  exists,  and  the 
other  in  which  it  exists  no  longer ;  and  this  would  be 
impossible. 

He  did  not  consider,  however,  that,  though  we 
might  allow  to  the  soul  this  simple  nature,  namely, 
that  it  contains  nothing  manifold,  nothing  by  the  side 
of  each  other,  and  therefore  no  extensive  quantity,  yet 
we  could  not  deny  to  it,  as  little  as  to  any  other  exist- 
ing thing,  intensive  quantity,  i.  e.  a  degree  of  reality 
with  respect  to  all  its  faculties,  nay,  to  all  which 
constitutes  its  existence.  Such  a  degree  of  reality 
might  diminish  by  an  infinite  number  of  smaller 
degrees,  and  thus  the  supposed  substance  (the  thing, 
the  permanence  of  which  has  not  yet  been  established), 
might  be  changed  into  nothing,  not  indeed  through 

VOT,_  T.  K  k 


49**  SUPPLEMENT   XXVII. 

decomposition,  but  through  a  gradual  remission  of  its 
powers,  or,  if  I  may  say  so,  through  elanguescence. 
For  even  consciousness  has  always  a  degree,  which 
admits  of  being  diminished x,  and  therefore  also  the 
faculty  of  being  conscious  of  oneself,  as  well  as  all 
other  faculties. 

The  permanence  of  the  soul,  therefore,  considered 
merely  as  an  object  of  the  internal  sense,  remains 
undemonstrated  and  undemonstrable,  though  its 
permanence  in  life,  while  the  thinking  being  (as  man) 
is  at  the  same  time  to  itself  an  object  of  the  external 
senses,  is  clear  by  itself.  But  this  does  not  satisfy 
the  rational  psychologist,  who  undertakes  to  prove, 
from  mere  concepts,  the  absolute  permanence  of  the 
soul,  even  beyond  this  life 2. 

1  Clearness  is  not,  as  the  logicians  maintain,  the  consciousness 
of  a  representation;  for  a  certain  degree  of  consciousness,  though 
insufficient  for  recollection,  must  exist,  even  in  many  dark  repre- 
sentations, because  without  all  consciousness  we  should  make  no 
distinction  in  the  connection  of  dark  representations,  which  yet  we 
are  able  to  do  with  the  notoe  of  many  concepts  (such  as  those  of 
right   and  justice,  or  as  the  musician  does  who  in  improvising 
strikes  several  keys  at  once).     A  representation  is  clear  in  which 
the  consciousness  is  sufficient  for  a  consciousness  of  its  difference 
from  others.     If  the  consciousness  is  sufficient  for  distinguishing, 
but  not  for  a  consciousness  of  the  difference,  the  representation 
would  still  have  to  be  called  dark.     There  is,  therefore,  an  infinite 
number  of  degrees  of  consciousness,  down  to  its  complete  vanishing. 

2  Those  who,  in  establishing  the  possibility  of  a  new  theory, 
imagine  that  they  have  done  enough  if  they  can  show  triumphantly 
that  no  one  can  show  a  contradiction  in  their  premisses  (as  do 
those  who  believe  that  they  understand  the  possibility  of  thinking, 
of  which  they  have  an  example   in  the  empirical  intuitions   of 
human  life  only,  even  after  the  cessation  of  life)  can  be  greatly 
embarrassed  by  other  possible  theories,  which  are  not  a  whit  bolder 
than  their  own.     Such  is,  for  instance,  the  possibility  of  a  division 
of  simple  substance  into  several,  or  of  the  coalition  of  several  sub- 
stances into  one  simple  substance.     For  although  divisibility  pre- 


SUPPLEMENT   XXVII.  499 

If  now  we   take  the  above  propositions  in  syn- 
thetical connection,  as  indeed  they  must  be  taken  in 

supposes  a  composite,  it  does  not  necessarily  require  a  composite 
of  substances,  but  of  degrees  only  (of  the  manifold  faculties) 
of  one  and  the  same  substance.  As,  then,  we  may  conceive  all 
powers  and  faculties  of  the  soul,  even  that  of  consciousness,  as 
diminished  by  one-half,  the  substance  still  remaining,  we  may  also 
represent  to  ourselves,  without  any  contradiction,  that  extinguished 
half,  though  not  within  it,  but  outside  it,  so  that  as  the  whole  of  what 
is  real  in  it  and  has  a  degree,  and  therefore  the  whole  existence 
of  it,  without  any  rest,  has  been  halved,  another  separate  substance 
would  arise  apart  from  it.  For  the  plurality,  which  has  been 
divided,  existed  before,  though  not  as  a  plurality  of  substances, 
yet  of  every  reality  as  a  quantum  of  existence  in  it,  and  the  unity 
of  substance  was  only  a  mode  of  existence,  which  by  mere  division 
has  been  changed  into  a  plurality  of  substantiality.  In  the  same 
manner  several  simple  substances  might  coalesce  again  into  one,  no- 
thing being  lost  thereby,  but  merely  the  plurality  of  substantiality ; 
so  that  one  substance  would  contain  in  itself  the  degree  of  reality  of 
all  former  substances  together.  We  might  suppose  that  the  simple 
substances  which  give  us  matter  as  a  phenomenon  (not  indeed 
through  a  mechanical  or  chemical  influence  upon  each  other,  but 
yet,  it  may  be,  by  some  unknown  influence,  of  which  the  former 
is  only  a  manifestation),  produce  by  such  a  dynamical  division 
of  parental  souls,  taken  as  intensive  quantities,  what  may  be 
called  child -souls,  while  they  themselves  repair  their  loss  again 
through  a  coalition  with  new  matter  of  the  same  kind.  I  am 
far  from  allowing  the  slightest  value  or  validity  to  such  vague 
speculations,  and  I  hope  that  the  principles  of  our  Analytic  have 
given  a  sufficient  warning  against  using  the  categories  (as,  for 
instance,  that  of  substance)  for  any  but  empirical  purposes.  But 
if  the  rationalist  is  bold  enough  to  create  an  independent  being 
out  of  the  mere  faculty  of  thought,  without  any  permanent  in- 
tuition, by  which  an  object  can  be  given,  simply  because  the  unity 
of  apperception  in  thought  does  not  allow  him  to  explain  it  as 
something  composite,  instead  of  simply  confessing  that  he  can 
not  explain  the  possibility  of  a  thinking  nature,  why  should  not 
a  materialist,  though  he  can  as  little  appeal  to  experience  in  support 
of  his  theories,  be  entitled  to  use  the  same  boldness,  and  use  his 
principle  for  the  opposite  purpose,  though  retaining  the  formal 
unity  on  which  his  opponent  relied  i 

K  k  2 


5OO  SUPPLEMENT  XXVII. 

a 'system  of  rational  psychology,  as  valid  for  all 
thinking  beings,  and  proceed  from  the  category  of 
relation,  with  the  proposition,  all  thinking  beings,  as 
such,  are  substances,  backwards  through  the  series 
till  the  circle  is  completed,  we  arrive  in  the  end  at 
their  existence,  and  this,  according  to  that  system, 
they  are  not  only  conscious  of,  independently  of  ex- 
ternal things,  but  are  supposed  to  be  able  to  de- 
termine it  even  of  themselves  (with  respect  to  that 
permanence  which  necessarily  belongs  to  the  charac- 
ter of  substance).  Hence  it  follows,  that  in  this 
rationalistic  system  idealism  is  inevitable,  at  least 
problematical  idealism,  because,  if  the  existence  of 
external  things  is  not  required  at  all  for  the  deter- 
mination of  one's  own  existence  in  time,  their  existence 
is  really  a  gratuitous  assumption  of  which  no  proof 
can  ever  be  given. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  we  proceed  analytically,  taking 
the  proposition,  I  think,  which  involves  existence 
(according  to  the  category  of  modality)  as  given,  and 
analyse  it,  in  order  to  find  out  whether,  and  how,  the 
Ego  determines  its  existence  in  space  and  time  by  it 
alone,  the  propositions  of  rational  psychology  would 
not  start  from  the  concept  of  a  thinking  being,  in 
general,  but  from  a  reality,  and  the  inference  would 
consist  in  determining  from  the  manner  in  which  that 
reality  is  thought,  after  everything  that  is  empirical  in 
it  has  been  removed,  what  belongs  to  a  thinking  being 
in  general.  This  may  be  shown  by  the  following  Table. 

i. 

I  think, 

2.  3. 

as  Subject,  as  simple  Subject, 

4- 

as  identical  Subject, 
in  every  state  of  my  thought. 


SUPPLEMENT   XXVII.  50 1 

As  it  has  not  been  determined  in  the  second  pro- 
position, whether  I  can  exist  and  be  conceived  to 
exist  as  a  subject  only,  and  not  also  as  a  predicate  of 
something  else,  the  concept  of  subject  is  here  taken 
as  logical  only,  and  it  remains  undetermined  whether 
we  are  to  understand  by  it  a  substance  or  not.  In 
the  third  proposition,  however,  the  absolute  unity  of 
apperception,  the  simple  I,  being  the  representation  to 
which  all  connection  or  separation  (which  constitute 
thought)  relate,  assumes  its  own  importance,  although 
nothing  is  determined  as  yet  with  regard  to  the 
nature  of  the  subject,  or  its  subsistence.  The  ap- 
perception is  something  real,  and  it  is  only  possible, 
if  it  is  simple.  In  space,  however,  there  is  nothing 
real  that  is  simple,  for  points  (the  only  simple  in 
space)  are  limits  only,  and  not  themselves  something 
which,  as  a  part,  serves  to  constitute  space.  From 
this  follows  the  impossibility  of  explaining  the  nature 
of  my  self,  as  merely  a  thinking  subject,  from  the 
materialistic  point  of  view.  As,  however,  in  the  first 
proposition,  my  existence  is  taken  for  granted,  for  it 
is  not  said  in  it  that  every  thinking  being  exists  (this 
would  predicate  too  much,  namely,  absolute  necessity 
of  them),  but  only,  I  exist,  as  thinking,  the  proposi- 
tion itself  is  empirical,  and  contains  only  the  deter- 
minability  of  my  existence,  in  reference  to  my 
representations  in  time.  But  as  for  that  purpose 
again  I  require,  first  of  all,  something  permanent, 
such  as  is  not  givei\to  me  at  all  in  internal  intuition, 
so  far  as  I  think  myself,  it  is  really  impossible  by 
that  simple  self-consciousness  to  determine  the  man- 
ner in  which  I  exist,  whether  as  a  substance  or  as  an 
accident.  Thus,  if  materialism  was  inadequate  to 
explain  my  existence,  spiritualism  is  equally  insuffi- 
cient for  that  purpose,  and  the  conclusion  ^s,  that,  in  < 


5O2  SUPPLEMENT  XXVII. 

no  way  whatsoever  can  we  know  anything  of  the 
nature  of  our  soul,  so  far  as  the  possibility  of  its 
separate  existence  is  concerned. 

And  how  indeed  should  it  be  possible  by  means 
of  tha,t  unity  of  consciousness  which  we  only  know 
because  it  is  indispensable  to  us  for  the  very  possi- 
bility of  experience,  to  get  beyond  experience  (our 
existence  in  life),  and  even  to  extend  our  knowledge 
to  the  nature  of  all  thinking  beings  in  general,  by 
the  empirical,  but,  with  reference  to  every  kind  of 
intuition,  undetermined  proposition,  I  think. 

There  is,  therefore,  no  rational  psychology,  as  a 
doctrine,  furnishing  any  addition  to  our  self-knowledge, 
but  only  as  a  discipline,  fixing  impassable  limits  to 
speculative  reason  in  this  field,  partly  to  keep  us 
from  throwing  ourselves  into  the  arms  of  a  soulless 
materialism,  partly  to  warn  us  against  losing  our- 
selves in  a  vague,  and,  for  this  life,  baseless  spi- 
ritualism. It  reminds  us  at  the  same  time  to  look  upon 
this  refusal  of  our  reason  to  give  a  satisfactory  answer 
to  such  curious  questions,  which  reach  beyond  the 
limits  of  this  life,  as  a  hint  to  turn  our  self-knowledge 
away  from  fruitless  speculations  to  a  fruitful  prac- 
tical use — a  use  which,  though  directed  always  to 
objects  of  experience  only,  derives  its  principle  from 
a  higher  source,  and  so  regulates  our  conduct,  as  if 
our  destination  reached  far  beyond  experience,  and 
therefore  far  beyond  this  life. 

We  see  from  all  this,  that  rational  psychology 
owes  its  origin  to  a  mere  misunderstanding.  The 
unity  of  consciousness,  on  which  the  categories  are 
founded,  is  mistaken  for  an  intuition  of  the  subject 
as  object,  and  the  category  of  substance  applied  to  it. 
But  that  unity  is  only  the  unity  jn  thought,  by  which 
alone  no  ojyect  is  given,  and  to  which  therefore  the 


SUPPLEMENT   XXVII.  503 

category  of  substance,  which  always  presupposes 'a 
given  intuition,  cannot  be  applied,  and  therefore  the 
subject  cannot  be  known.  The  subject  of  the  cate- 
gories, therefore,  cannot,  by  thinking  them,  receive 
a  concept  of  itself,  as  an  object  of  the  categories ;  for 
in  order  to  think  the  categories,  it  must  presuppose 
its  pure  self-consciousness,  the  very  thing  that  had  to 
be  explained.  In  like  manner  the  subject,  in  which 
the  representation  of  time  has  its  original  source, 
cannot  determine  by  it  its  own  existence  in  time ; 
and  if  the  latter  is  impossible,  the  former,  as  a  deter- 
mination of  oneself  (as  of  a  thinking  being  in  general) 
by  means  of  the  categories,  is  equally  so  \ 

v'c  *  *  4c  ft  * 

1  The  *  I  think '  is,  as  has  been  stated,  an  empirical  proposition,  and 
contains  within  itself  the  proposition,  I  exist.  I  cannot  say,  how- 
ever, everything  which  thinks  exists ;  for  in  that  case  the  property 
of  thinking  would  make  all  beings  which  possess  it  necessary  beings. 
Therefore,  nay  existence  cannot,  as  Descartes  supposed,  be  considered 
as  derived  from  the  proposition,  I  think  (for  in  that  case  the  major, 
everything  that  thinks  exists,  ought  to  have  preceded),  but  is 
identical  with  it.  It  expresses  an  indefinite  empirical  intuition, 
that  is,  a  perception  (and  proves,  therefore,  that  this  proposition, 
asserting  existence,  is  itself  based  on  sensation,  which  belongs  to 
sensibility),  but  it  precedes  experience,  which  is  meant  to  determine 
the  object  of  perception  through  the  categories  in  respect  to  time. 
Existence,  therefore,  is  here  not  yet  a  category,  which  never  refers 
to  an  indefinitely  given  object,  but  only  to  one  of  which  we  have 
a  concept,  and  of  which  we  wish  to  know  whether  it  exists  also 
apart  from  that  conception.  An  indefinite  perception  signifies 
here  something  real  only  that  has  been  given  merely  for  thinking 
in  general,  not  therefore  as  a  phenomenon,  nor  as  a  thing  by  itself 
(noumenou),  but  as  something  that  really  exists  and  is  designated 
as  such  in  the  proposition,  I  think.  For  it  must  be  observed,  that 
if  I  have  called  the  proposition,  I  think,  an  empirical  proposition, 
I  did  not  mean  to  say  thereby  that  the  ego  in  that  proposition  is 
an  empirical  representation ;  it  is  rather  purely  intellectual,  because 
it  belongs  to  thought  in  general.  Without  some  empirical  repre-, 


504  SUPPLEMENT   XXVII. 

1  Thus  vanishes,  as  an  idle  dream,  that  knowledge 
which  was  to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  possible 
experience,  and  was  connected  no  doubt  with  the 
highest  interests  of  humanity,  so  far  at  least  as  specu- 
lative philosophy  was  to  supply  it.  Yet  no  unimpor- 
tant service  has  thus  been  rendered  to  reason  by  the 
severity  of  our  criticism,  in  proving,  at  the  same  time, 
the  impossibility  of  settling  anything  dogmatically 
with  reference  to  an  object  of  experience,  beyond  the 
limits  of  experience,  and  thus  securing  it  against  all 
possible  assertions  to  the  contrary.  This  can  only  be 
done  in  two  ways,  either  by  proving  one's  own  propo- 
sition apodictically,  or,  if  that  does  not  succeed,  by 
trying  to  discover  the  causes  of  that  failure,  which,  if 
they  lie  in  the  necessary  limits  of  our  reason,  must 
force  every  opponent  to  submit  to  exactly  the  same 
law  of  renunciation  with  reference  to  any  claims  to 
dogmatic  assertion. 

Nothing  is  lost,  however,  by  this  with  regard  to  the 
right,  nay  the  necessity  of  admitting  a  future  life, 
according  to  the  principles  of  practical,  as  connected 
with  the  speculative  employment  of  reason.  It  is 
known  besides,  that  a  purely  speculative  proof  has 
never  been  able  to  exercise  any  influence  on  the  ordi- 
nary reason  of  men.  It  stands  so  entirely  upon  the 
point  of  a  hair,  that  even  the  schools  can  only  keep 
it  from  falling  so  long  as  they  keep  it  constantly 
spinning  round  like  a  top,  so  that,  even  in  their  own 
eyes,  it  yields  no  permanent  foundation  upon  which 
anything  could  be  built.  The  proofs  which  are  useful 
for  the  world  at  large  retain  their  value  undiminished, 
nay,  they  gain  in  clearness  and  natural  power,  by  the 

sentation,  however,  which  supplies  the  matter  for  thought,  the  act, 
I  think,  would  not  take  place,  and  the  empirical  is  only  the  condition 
of  the  application  or  of  the  use  of  the  pure  intellectual  faculty. 


SUPPLEMENT   XXVII.  505 

surrender  of  those  dogmatical  pretensions,  placing 
reason  in  its  own  peculiar  domain,  namely,  the  system 
of  ends,  which  is,  however,  at  the  same  time  the 
system  of  nature ;  so  that  reason,  as  a  practical  faculty 
by  itself,  without  being  limited  by  the  conditions  of 
the  latter,  becomes  justified  in  extending  the  former, 
and  with  it,  our  own  existence,  beyond  the  limits  of 
experience  and  of  life.  According  to  the  analogy  with 
the  nature  of  living  beings  in  this  world,  in  which 
reason  must  necessarily  admit  the  principle  that  no 
organ,  no  faculty,  no  impulse,  can  be  found,  as  being 
either  superfluous  or  disproportionate  to  its  use,  and 
therefore  purposeless,  but  that  everything  is  adequate 
to  its  destination  in  life,  man,  who  alone  can  contain 
in  himself  the  highest  end  of  all  this,  would  be  the 
only  creature  excepted  from  it.  For,  his  natural  dispo- 
sitions, not  only  so  far  as  he  uses  them  according  to  his 
talents  and  impulses,  but  more  especially  the  moral  law 
within  him,  go  so  far  beyond  all  that  is  useful  and 
advantageous  in  this  life,  that  he  is  taught  thereby,  in 
the  absence  of  all  advantages,  even  of  the  shadowy 
hope  of  posthumous  fame,  to  esteem  the  mere  con- 
sciousness of  righteousness  beyond  everything  else, 
feeling  an  inner  call,  by  his  conduct  in  this  world  and 
a  surrender  of  many  advantages,  to  render  himself  fit 
to  become  the  citizen  of  a  better  world,  which  exists 
in  his  idea  only.  This  powerful  and  incontrovertible 
proof,  accompanied  by  our  constantly  increasing 
recognition  of  a  design  pervading  all  that  we  see 
around  us,  and  by  a  contemplation  of  the  immensity 
of  creation,  and  therefore  also,  by  the  consciousness  of 
an  unlimited  possibility  in  the  extension  of  our  know- 
ledge, and  a  desire  commensurate  therewith,  all  this 
remains  and  always  will  remain,  although  we  must 
surrender  the  hope  of  ever  being  able  to  ijnderstand, 


506  SUPPLEMENT   XXVIT. 

from  mere  theoretical  speculation,  the  necessary  con- 
tinuance of  our  existence. 


Conclusion  of  the  solution  of  the  Psychological 
Paralogism. 

The  dialectical  illusion  in  rational  psychology 
arises  from  our  confounding  an  idea  of  reason  (that  of 
a  pure  intelligence)  with  the  altogether  indefinite 
concept  of  a  thinking  being  in  general.  What  we 
are  doing  is,  that  we  conceive  ourselves  for  the  sake 
of  a  possible  experience,  taking  no  account,  as  yet,  of 
any  real  experience,  and  thence  conclude  that  we  are 
able  to  become  conscious  of  our  existence,  indepen- 
dently of  experience  and  of  its  empirical  conditions. 
We  are,  therefore,  confounding  the  possible  abstraction 
of  our  own  empirically  determined  existence  with 
the  imagined  consciousness  of  a  possible  separate 
existence  of  our  thinking  self,  and  we  bring  ourselves 
to  believe  that  we  know  the  substantial  within  us  as 
the  transcendental  subject,  while  what  we  have  in 
our  thoughts  is  only  the  unity  of  consciousness,  on 
which  all  determination,  as  the  mere  form  of  know- 
ledge, is  based. 

The  task  of  explaining  the  community  of  the  soul 
with  the  body  does  not  properly  fall  within  the 
province  of  that  psychology  of  which  we  are  here 
speaking,  because  that  psychology  tries  to  prove  the 
personality  of  the  soul,  apart  also  from  that  commu- 
nity (after  death),  being  therefore  transcendent,  in 
the  proper  sense  of  that  word,  inasmuch  as,  though 
dealing  with  an  object  of  experience,  it  deals  with  it 
only  so  far  as  it  has  ceased  to  be  an  object  of  experience. 
According  to  our  doctrine,  howev^f,  a  sufficient  answer 
may  be  returned  to  that  question  also.  The  difficulty 


SUPPLEMENT   XXVII.  507 

of  the  task  consists,  as  is  well  known,  in  the  assumed 
hetcrogeneousness  of  the  object  of  the  internal 
sense  (the  soul),  and  the  objects  of  the  external 
senses,  the  formal  condition  of  the  intuition  with 
regard  to  the  former  being  time  only,  with  regard  to 
the  latter,  time  and  space.  If  we  consider,  however, 
that  both  kinds  of  objects  thus  differ  from  each  other, 
not  internally,  but  so  far  only  as  the  one  appears 
externally  to  the  other,  and  that  possibly  what  is  at 
the  bottom  of  phenomenal  matter,  as  a  thing  by 
itself,  may  not  be  so  heterogeneous  after  all  as  we 
imagine,  that  difficulty  vanishes,  and  there  remains 
that  one  difficulty  only,  how  a  community  of  sub- 
stances is  possible  at  all ;  a  difficulty  which  it  is  not 
the  business  of  psychology  to  solve,  and  which,  as  the 
reader  will  easily  understand,  after  what  has  been 
said  in  the  Analytic  of  fundamental  powers  and 
faculties,  lies  undoubtedly  beyond  the  limits  of  all 
human  knowledge. 

General  note  on  the  transition  from  Rational 
Psychology  to  Cosmology. 

The  proposition,  I  think,  or,  I  exist  thinking,  is  an 
empirical  proposition.  Such  a  proposition  is  based 
on  an  empirical  intuition,  and  its  object  is  pheno- 
menal :  so  that  it  might  seem  as  if,  according  to  our 
theory,  the  soul  was  changed  altogether,  even  in 
thinking,  into  something  phenomenal,  and  our  con- 
sciousness itself,  as  merely  phenomenal,  would  thus 
indeed  refer  to  nothing. 

Thinking,  taken  by  itself,  is  a  logical  function 
only,  and  therefore  pure  spontaneity,  in  connecting 
the  manifold  of  a  merely  possible  intuition.  It  does 
not  represent  the  ^ubject  of  consciousness,  as  pheno- 
menal, for  the  simple  reason,  that  it  takes  no  account 


5<D8  SUPPLEMENT   XXVII. 

whatsoever  of  the  manner  of  intuition,  whether  it  be 
sensuous  or  intellectual.  I  do  not  thereby  represent 
myself  to  myself,  either  as  I  am,  or  as  I  appear  to 
myself,  but  I  only  conceive  of  myself,  as  of  any  other 
object,  without  taking  account  of  the  manner  of 
intuition.  If,  us  subject  of  my  thoughts,  I  also 
represent  myself  as  the  ground  of  thinking,  these 
modes  of  representation  are  not  the  categories  of 
substance  or  cause,  because  these  are  functions  of 
thought  (judgment)  as  applied  already  to  our  sen- 
suous intuition,  such  sensuous  intuition  being  neces- 
sary, if  I  wish  to  know  myself.  But  I  only  wish  to 
become  conscious  of  myself  as  thinking,  and  as  I  take 
no  account  of  what  my  own  self  may  be  as  a  pheno- 
menon, it  is  quite  possible  that  it  might  be  a 
phenomenon  only  to  me,  who  thinks,  but  not  to  rne, 
so  far  as  I  am  thinking.  In  the  consciousness  of 
myself  in  mere  thinking  I  am  the  substance  itself, 
but  of  that  substance  nothing  is  thus  given  me  for 
thinking. 

The  proposition  I  think,  if  it  means  I  exist 
thinking,  is  not  merely  logical  function,  but  deter- 
mines the  subject  (which  then  is  at  the  same  time 
objec't)  with  reference  to  its  existence,  and  is  im- 
possible without  the  internal  sense,  the  intuition  of 
which  always  supplies  the  object,  not  as  a  thing  by 
itself,  but  as  phenomenal  only.  Here,  therefore,  we 
have  no  longer  mere  spontaneity  of  thinking,  but 
also  receptivity  of  intuition,  that  is,  the  thinking  of 
myself  applied  to  the  empirical  intuition  of  the  same 
subject.  In  that  empirical  intuition  the  thinking 
self  would  have  to  look  in  the  categories  of  substance, 
cause,  <&c.  for  the  conditions  of  the  employment  of 
its  logical  functions,  in  order  not  only  to  distin- 
guish itself  as  an  object  by  itself,  through  the  Ego, 


SUPPLEMENT  XXVII.  509 

but  to  determine  the  mode  of  its  ekistence  also,  that 
is,  to  know  itself  as  a  noumenon.  This,  as  we  know, 
is  impossible,  because  the  internal  empirical  intuition 
is  sensuous,  and  supplies  us  with  phenomenal  data 
only,  which  furnish  nothing  to  the  object  of  the  pure 
consciousness  for  the  knowledge  of  its  own  separate 
existence,  but  can  serve  the  purpose  of  experience 
only. 

Supposing,  however,  that  we  should  hereafter  dis- 
cover, not  indeed  in  experience,  but  in  certain  (not 
only  logical  rules,  but)  a  priori  established  laws  of 
pure  reason,  as  applied  to  our  existence,  some  ground 
for  admitting  ourselves,  entirely  a  priori,  as  determin- 
ing and  ruling  our  own  existence,  there  would  then  be 
a  spontaneity  by  which  our  reality  would  be  deter- 
mined without  the  conditions  of  empirical  intuition, 
and  we  should  then  perceive  that  in  the  consciousness 
of  our  existing  a  priori  there  is  contained  something 
which  may  serve  to  determine  our  existence,  which 
otherwise  can  be  determined  sensuously  only,  with 
respect  to  some  inner  faculty,  related  to  an  intelligible, 
though  of  course,  only  an  ideal  world. 

This,  however,  would  not  in  the  least  benefit  the 
attempts  of  rational  psychology.  For  though  through 
that  wonderful  faculty,  which  becomes  first  revealed 
to  myself  by  the  consciousness  of  a  moral  law,  I 
should  have  a  principle,  purely  intellectual,  for  a  de- 
termination of  my  existence,  what  would  be  its 
determining  predicates  ?  No  other  but  those  which 
must  be  given  to  me  in  sensuous  intuition ;  and  I 
should  therefore  find  myself  again  in  the  same  situa- 
tion where  I  was  before  in  rational  psychology, 
requiring  sensuous  intuitions  in  order  to  give  signifi- 
cance to  the  concents  of  my  understanding,  such  as 
substance,  cause,  &c.,  by  which  alone  I  can  gain  at 


510  SUPPLEMENT   XXVII. 

knowledge  of  myself;  and  these  intuitions  can  never 
carry  me  beyond  the  field  of  experience.  Nevertheless, 
for  practical  purposes,  which  always  concern  objects 
of  experience,  I  should  be  justified  in  applying  these 
concepts,  in  analogy  with  their  theoretical  employ- 
ment, to  liberty  also  and  to  the  subject  of  liberty,  by 
taking  them  only  as  logical  functions  of  subject  and 
predicate1,  of  cause  and  effect.  According  to  them, 
acts  or  effects,  as  following  those  (moral)  laws,  would 
be  BO  determined  that  they  may  together  with  the 
laws  of  nature  be  explained  in  accordance  with  the 
categories  of  substance  and  cause  ;  though  arising  in 
reality  from  a  totally  different  principle.  All  this  is 
only  meant  to  prevent  a  misunderstanding  to  which 
our  doctrine,  which  represents  self-intuition  as  purely 
phenomenal,  might  easily  be  exposed.  In  what  fol- 
lows we  shall  have  occasion  to  make  good  use  of  it. 

1  It  is  necessary  to  put  a  comma  after  Pradicats. 


SUPPLEMENT  XXVITI.     [see  vol.  u.  P.  426] 

I  have  sometimes  called  it  formal  idealism  also,  in 
order  to  distinguish  it  from  the  material  or  common 
idealism,  which  doubts  or  denies  the  very  existence 
of  external  tilings.  In  some  cases  it  seems  advisable 
to  use  these  terms  rather  than  those  in  the  text,  in 
order  to  prevent  all  misunderstanding.  (This  is  an 
additional  note  in  the  Second  Edition.) 


