THE  BOOK  WAS 
DRENCHED 


55 


166138 


£= 


OSMANIA  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

Call  No.  f  <?  3  # //?3  /  k  ,  ¥•£       Ac  c  cv  i»n  No    '  C  ? 


\uiho. 


This  hook  slKjul'  •  >>e  rotuntcJ  «ir  i-fort-  tin-  tl.ur  last  nuikrd  In-low 


library  of  pbiloeopbi? 

EDITED  BYJ.  H.  MUIRIIEAD,  LL.D. 


KANT'S  METAPHYSIC 
OF  EXPERIENCE 


By  the  Same  Author 

THE  GOOD  WILL 

A  STUDY  IN  THE  COHERENCE  THFORY 
OF  GOODNESS 

(Library  of  Philosophy) 

"An  extremely  valuable  and  suggestive  contribution 
to  ethical  philosophy  " — Iltbbe rt  Journal 

"A  philosophical  work  of  outstanding  strength  and 
wide  thinking  ...  A  remarkable  piece  of  thinking  and 
of  expression  " — Birmingham  Post 


KANT'S  METAPHYSIC 
OF 

EXPERIENCE 

A  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  FIRST  HALF  OF  THE 
KRITIK  DER  REINEN  VERNUNFT 

By 
H.  J.  PATOM,M.A.,D.LiTT.(OxoN) 

Professor  of  Logic  and  Rhetoric  in  the  I  'nnemlv  of  Gla^mn, 
sonttinic  Felloe  of  7  fit  Qucm'*  Collet,  ,nthe  I'nnenity  of  0\ford 

IN  Two  VOLUMES 

VOLUME    TWO 


LONDON 

GEORGE  ALLEN  &  UNWIN  LTD 
MUSEUM  STREET 


FIRST    PUBLISHED    IN     1936 


All  rights  reserved 

PRINTED    IN    GREAT    BRITAIN    BY 
UNWIN    BROTHERS    LID,    WOKING 


CONTENTS 


VOLUME     TWO 


BOOK   VII 
THE     SCHEMATISM     OF     THE 


CHAPTER 

XXXII 


XXXIII 


XXXIV 


CATEGORIES 

.   \  * 


3. 
4. 
5. 


CATEGORY   AND    SCHEMA 

1.  A  summary  of  Kant's  argument  17 

2.  Importance  of  the  chapter  on  Schematism  20 
The  transcendental  Doctrine  of  Judgement  21 
Subsumption  under  the  categories  24 
The     difficulty    of    subsumption     under    the 

categories  25 

6.  The  transcendental  schema  28 

7.  The   restriction   of  the   category   through   the 

schema  3  1 

8.  The  schema  in  general  32 

9.  Special    characteristics    of    the    transcendental 

schema  37 

10.   Summary  of  conclusions  39 

THE   TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA 

1.  Category  and  schema  42 

2.  The  schema  of  quantity  44 

3.  The  schema  of  quality  48 
4  .  The  schemata  of  relation  52 

5.  The  schemata  of  modality  56 

6.  Kant's  summary  60 

7.  The  number  of  the  schemata  63 

THE   SIGNIFICANCE   OF  THE   SCHEMA 

i.  Subsumption  and  syllogism  66 

Category  and  schema  68 

The  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  71 

The  schematism  of  the  understanding  73 

Value  of  Kant's  doctrine  75 

6.  The  possibility  of  reconstruction  77 


2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 


CHAPTER 

XXXV 


CONTENTS 

BOOK  VIII 

THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  THE 
UNDERSTANDING 

PAGE 

THE  SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  OF  SYNTHETIC 
JUDGEMENTS 

1.  The  nature  of  Kant's  argument  81 

2.  The  principle  of  analytic  judgements  83 

3.  Different  kinds  of  synthetic  judgement  84 

4.  The  *  third  thing'  86 

5.  The  possibility  of  experience  90 

6.  The  principle  of  all  synthetic  judgements  94 


XXXVI    THE     PRINCIPLES     OF     THE     UNDER- 
STANDING 

1.  Different  kinds  of  principle  97 

2.  The  Principles  of  the  Understanding  98 

3.  Intuitive  and  discursive  certainty  100 

4.  The  proof  of  the  Principles  103 

5.  Modern    science    and    the    Principles  of   the 

Understanding  106 

BOOK   IX 
THE     MATHEMATICAL    PRINCIPLES 


XXXVII    THE  AXIOMS   OF   INTUITION 

1 .  The  Principle  of  the  Axioms  1 1 1 

2.  The  proof  in  the  first  edition  112 

3.  The  proof  in  the  second  edition  1 14 

4.  Successiveness  of  synthesis  117 

5.  Intuition  and  object  119 

6.  The  doctrine  of  the  Aesthetic  12 1 

7.  The  axioms  of  geometry  124 

8.  Quantitas  and  quantum  125 

9.  The  formulae  of  arithmetic  129 
10.  The    application    of    mathematics    to    objects 

of  experience  131 


CONTENTS  9 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XXXVIII  THE  ANTICIPATIONS  OF  SENSE-PERCEP- 
TION 

1.  The  Principle  of  the  Anticipations  134 

2.  The  proof  in  the  first  edition  139 

3.  The  proof  in  the  second  edition  141 

4.  Intensive  quantity  144 

5.  The  synthesis  of  quality  147 

6.  The  causality  of  the  object  150 

7.  The  doctrine  of  continuity  152 

8.  Empty  space  and  time  154 

9.  Kant's  conclusion  155 

BOOK   X 
THE   ANALOGIES   OF   EXPERIENCE 

XXXIX    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES 

1.  The  formulation  of  the  Principle  159 

2.  The  argument  in  the  first  edition  161 

3.  The  modes  of  time  163 

4.  The  argument  in  the  second  edition  167 

5.  The  assumptions  of  the  argument  170 

6.  The  conclusion  of  the  argument  173 

7.  The  general  character  of  the  proof  175 

XL    THE     SPECIAL     CHARACTER     OF     THE 
ANALOGIES 

1.  The  Analogies  are  regulative  178 

2.  The  first  meaning  of  *  Analogy*  179 

3.  The  second  meaning  of  *  Analogy'  180 

XLI    THE  FIRST  ANALOGY 

1.  The  Principle  of  permanence  184 

2.  The  argument  of  the  first  edition  186 

3.  The  argument  of  the  second  edition  190 

XLI  I     SUBSTANCE 

1.  In  what  sense  is  apprehension  successive?  192 

2.  The  permanent  and  time-determination  195 

3.  The  permanence  of  time  199 
VOL.  II                                                                                       A* 


io  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XLII     SUBSTANCE— continued 

4.  Substratum  and  substance  201 

5.  Can  substance  be  perceived?  204. 

6.  The  quantum  of  substance  »     207 

7.  Material  substance  209 

8.  The  conservation  of  matter  213 

9.  The  empirical  criterion  of  substance  215 

10.  The  concept  of  change  217 

1 1 .  Science  and  experience  218 

XLIII    THE   SECOND  ANALOGY 

1 .  The  Principle  of  causality  22 1 

2.  The  six  proofs  of  causality  224 

3.  The  first  proof  225 

4.  The  object  and  its  temporal  relations  230 

5.  The  second  proof  238 

XLIV    THE   SECOND  ANALOGY  (CONTINUED) 

1.  The  third  proof  245 

2.  Origin  of  the  concept  of  causality  248 

3.  The  fourth  proof  249 

4.  The  fifth  proof  253 

5.  The  sixth  proof  257 

XLV    THE  ARGUMENT   FOR   CAUSALITY 

1.  Kant's  presuppositions  262 

2.  Kant's  argument  263 

3.  Objective  and  subjective  succession  265 

4.  The  conditions  of  experience  268 

5.  The  process  to  experience  271 

6.  Causality  and  time  273 

7.  Particular  causal  laws  275 

8.  The  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination          278 

XLVI     CAUSALITY  AND   CONTINUITY 

1.  Kant's  concept  of  causality  281 

2.  The  successiveness  of  cause  and  effect  283 

3.  The  continuity  of  change  284 

4.  The  law  of  continuity  288 

5.  Continuity  as  the  formal  condition  of  appre- 

hension 289 


CHAPTER 

XLVII 


XLVIII 


THE 


CONTENTS  ii 

PAGE 

THE  THIRD   ANALOGY 

1.  The  Principle  of  interaction  294 

2.  The  meaning  of  coexistence  297 

3.  The  proof  in  the  second  edition  298 
THE  THIRD   ANALOGY   (CONTINUED) 

1.  The  proof  in  the  first  edition  310 

2.  Interaction  and  sense-perception  316 

3.  Interaction  and  the  unity  of  apperception  319 

4.  Interaction  and  coexistence  324 

5.  Kant's  proof  of  interaction  329 

BOOK   XI 

POSTULATES     OF    EMPIRICAL 
THOUGHT 


XLIX    POSSIBILITY 

1.  The   Principles   of   possibility,   actuality,    and 

necessity 

2.  The    interdependence    of    the    categories    of 

modality 

3.  Thought  and  its  object 

4.  The  First  Postulate 

5.  Possibility   in   relation   to    different   types    of 

concept 

6.  The  possibility  of  experience 

L     ACTUALITY  AND   NECESSITY 

1.  The  Second  Postulate 

2.  The  Third  Postulate 

3.  Some  traditional  conceptions 

4.  Leibnizian  possibility 

5.  The  meaning  of  the  word  'Postulate* 

6.  The  competence  of  Kant's  exposition 

BOOK   XII 
TRANSCENDENTAL     IDEALISM 

LI     EMPIRICAL  REALISM 

1.  Problems  of  the  Critical  Philosophy 

2.  Descartes  and  Berkeley 

3.  The  Refutation  of  Idealism 


335 

339 

342 
345 


354 

357 
362 

364 
366 
368 
370 


375 
376 

377 


12  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

LI     EMPIRICAL  REALISM— continued 

4.  Turning  the  tables  on  idealism  381 

5.  Empirical  realism  and  transcendental  idealism  384 

6.  Sense  and  imagination  '  385 

LIT     INNER   SENSE  AND   SELF-KNOWLEDGE 

1.  The  paradox  of  inner  sense  387 

2.  Understanding,  imagination,  and  inner  sense  390 

3.  Illustrations  of  Kant's  doctrine  393 

4.  Inner  sense  and  the  phenomenal  self  398 

5.  Apperception  and  self-knowledge  401 

LIII     SELF-KNOWLEDGE    AND    KNOWLEDGE 
OBJECTS 

1.  The  existence  of  the  self  404 

2.  The  existence  of  the  object  406 

3.  Reality  of  inner  and  outer  sense  410 

4.  Ideality  of  inner  and  outer  sense  411 

5.  Time  and  inner  sense  413 

6.  Inner  sense  and  the  phenomenal  self  415 

7.  Appearance  and  illusion  416 

8.  Difficulties  of  inner  sense  418 

9.  A  rough  analogy  424 

LIV    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  USE  OF  CON- 
CEPTS 

1.  Empirical  realism  and  transcendental  idealism  426 

2.  The  empirical  use  of  concepts  427 

3.  The  transcendental  use  of  concepts  429 

4.  Mathematical  concepts  431 

5.  The  categories  432 

6.  Kant's  conclusion  435 

LV    NOUMENON    AND     TRANSCENDENTAL 
OBJECT 

1.  Phenomena  and  noumcna  439 

2.  Alleged  knowledge  of  noumena  440 

3.  The  transcendental  object  442 

4.  Origin  of  belief  in  noumcna  445 

5.  Kant's  conclusion  in  the  first  edition  447 


CONTENTS  13 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

LVI  PHENOMENA  AND  NOUMENA 

1.  Categories  and  knowledge  of  noumena  450 

2.  The     positive     and     negative     meaning     of 

'noumcnon'  452 

3.  Can  we  know  the  thmg-m-itself  ?  453 

4.  Thought  and  intuition  455 

5.  The    concept    of    'noumenon'    as    a   limiting 

concept  456 

6.  Understanding  not  limited  by  sensibility  458 

7.  The  union  of  understanding  and  sensibility  459 

8.  The  limits  of  knowledge  460 

EPILOGUE  463 

GENERAL   INDEX  465 

•INDEX   OF   ANNOTATED   PASSAGES  505 


BOOK   VII 

THE    SCHEMATISM 
OF   THE    CATEGORIES 


CHAPTER     XXXII 
CATEGORY  AND   SCHEMA 

§  i.  A  Summary  Account  of  Kant's  Argument 

Kant  believes  himself  to  have  proved  generally  that  all 
objects  of  experience  must  conform  to  the  pure  categories; 
that  is  to  say,  the  given  manifold  must  be  combined  in  accor- 
dance with  the  principles  of  synthesis  present  in  judgement  as 
such.  He  believes  himself  to  have  shown  also,  though  still  in 
the  most  general  way,  that  the  required  combination  is  imposed 
upon  the  given  manifold  by  the  transcendental  synthesis  of 
imagination  through  the  medium  of  the  pure  manifold  of  time. 
We  should  now  expect  him  to  show  that  the  transcendental 
•synthesis  of  imagination,  if  it  is  to  hold  together  the  given 
manifold  in  one  time,  must  combine  the  manifold  in  certain 
definite  ways,  and  that  each  of  these  ways  conforms  to,  or  is 
an  example  of,  the  principle  of  synthesis  conceived  in  one  of 
the  pure  categories.  Until  this  is  done,  we  have  had  no  account 
of  the  details  which  alone  can  make  his  general  doctrine  fully 
intelligible. 

In  a  sense  this  task  is  performed  in  the  Analytic  of  Principles, 
with  which  we  have  now  to  deal.  Kant,  however,  treats  the 
whole  question  primarily  from  the  side  of  the  object,  and  tells 
us  what  are  the  characteristics  which  objects  must  have  if  the 
manifold  is  combined  in  one  time :  his  references  to  the  subjec- 
tive machinery  of  cognition,  and  especially  to  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination,  are  only  incidental.1  His  complicated 
explanation  is  certainly  careless  in  terminology,  and  possibly 

1  He  assumes  that  the  unity  of  time  is  imposed  by  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination,  and  simply  asks  what  characteristics  objects 
in  time  must  have,  if  time  is  to  have  unity.  In  the  Aesthetic  Kant 
already  argued  that  time  must  be  one,  but  the  unity  of  time  is  possible 
only  through  synthesis,  as  is  indeed  implied  in  the  Aesthetic  itself, 
though  not  made  explicit;  compare  B  160  n.  I  take  it  that  apart  from 
the  unity  of  the  time  in  which  all  objects  are,  the  unity  of  apperception, 
and  consequently  experience  itself,  would  be  impossible. 


1 8  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  i 

confused  in  thought.  The  difficulties  in  following  it  are  very 
great;  and  it  may  perhaps  help  the  reader,  if  I  try  to  give 
first  of  all,  with  special  reference  to  one  particular  category, 
a  summary  and  very  rough  account  of  what  he  is  doing.  , 

We  are  supposed  to  know  that  every  object  of  experience 
must  conform  to  the  pure  category  of  ground  and  consequent ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  given  manifold  must  be  combined  as  grounds 
and  consequents.  We  manifestly  do  not  apprehend  grounds 
and  consequents  by  sense;  but  Kant  believes  we  can  find 
something  corresponding  to  ground  and  consequent  in  the 
objects  of  our  experience,  if  we  consider  that  all  objects  must 
be  combined  in  one  time.  What  he  finds  is  'necessary  succes- 
sion'; that  is,  invariable  succession  in  accordance  with  a  rule 
— such  that  if  A  is  given  in  time,  B  must  follow. 

The  difficulties  of  this  view  and  the  question  of  its  truth 
or  error  do  not  at  the  moment  concern  us.  'Necessary  succes- 
sion' is  supposed  to  be  the  characteristic,  or  way  of  combination, 
which  must  be  found  in  all  objects  so  far  as  their  qualities 
change  in  one  objective  time.  This  characteristic  is  called  the 
'transcendental  schema',1  and  it  is  imposed  upon  the  manifold 
by  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination.2  In  virtue 
of  the  transcendental  schema  we  can  apply  the  pure  category 
of  ground  and  consequent  to  objects  of  experience;  for  if  A 
must  always  be  followed  by  B,  we  can  regard  A  as  the  ground 
and  B  as  the  consequent. 

If  this  is  so,  we  can  understand  how  the  pure  category 
must  have  objects  to  which  it  applies ;  for  all  objects  must  be 
in  one  time.  The  pure  category  of  ground  and  consequent 

1  It  should  be  noted  that  Aristotle  also  spoke  of  rd  a ^r\ /tat a  ra>v 
KaTiyyoptcov,  and  this  may  possibly  have  suggested  Kant's  employment 
of  the  word;  but  I  do  not  think  that  Aristotle's  usage  throws  any 
light  on  that  of  Kant. 

2  See  A  142  =  B  81 :  *  The  transcendental  schema  is  a  transcendental 
product  of  the  imagination*.  In  this  preliminary  statement  I  ignore 
the  difficulty  that  Kant  sometimes  speaks  as  if  a  schema  were  a  rule 
of  imagination  rather  than  a  characteristic  imposed  by  imagination. 
What  I  describe  as  'characteristics'  imposed  by  the  transcendental 
synthesis  are  characteristics  belonging  to  the  manifold  as  combined 
in  certain  ways  which  are  necessary  if  time  is  to  possess  unity. 


XXXII  §  x]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  19 

is  by  itself  empty:  we  cannot  understand  by  mere  examination 
of  the  category  whether  there  are  any  objects  given  to  which 
it  must  apply.  Only  when  we  consider  it  in  the  light  of  the  fact 
that  all  objects  must  be  in  one  time,  can  we  understand  that 
it  must  apply  to  objects  so  far  as  the  qualities  of  these  objects 
change  in  time.  In  so  doing  we  find  that  the  category  as  applied 
to  objects  in  time  has  a  more  limited  and  also  a  more  precise 
significance ;  for  it  then  becomes  the  concept  of  a  ground  which 
always  precedes  its  consequent  in  time.  In  other  words  it 
becomes  the  schematised  category  of  cause  and  effect.1 

Kant  will  argue  in  the  Second  Analogy  that  all  change  in 
objects  is  necessary  change,  or  necessary  succession,  and  so 
must  fall  under  the  category  of  cause  and  effect.2  In  the  chapter 
entitled  'The  Schematism  of  the  Pure  Concepts  of  the  Under- 
standing' he  is  not  concerned  with  showing  that  necessary 
succession,  or  any  other  transcendental  schema,  is  a  necessary 

"  characteristic  of  objects.  His  aim  is  merely  to  tell  us  what 
is  the  transcendental  schema  corresponding  to  each  pure 
category ;  and  he  expects  us  to  recognise  that  the  transcendental 

schema  described  does  fall  under  the  pure  category.  Such 
recognition  is  a  matter  of  judgement. 

Thus  for  Kant  the  transcendental  schemata3  are  universal 
characteristics  which,  he  hopes  to  show  later,  must  belong  to 

all  objects  as  objects  in  time.  These  universal  characteristics 

belong  to  objects,  not  as  given  to  sensation,  but  as  combined1 

1 1  discuss  later  whether  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  the  schematised 
category — a  phrase  which  Kant  himself  never  uses — from  the  transcen- 
dental schema.  See  Chapter  XXXIV  §  2,. 

2  If  so,  it  must  fall  also  under  the  pure  category  of  ground  and 
consequent — the  genus  of  which  cause  and  effect  is  a  species. 

3  The  schemata  are  transcendental  (i)  as  imposed  by  the  mind, 
and  (2)  as  universal  and  necessary  conditions  of  all  objects  in  time. 
It  should  be  understood,  as  always,  that  such  a  condition  is  not  any- 
thing temporally  prior  to  the  object:  it  is  rather  an  element  in,  or 
characteristic  of,  the  object,  and  without  it  the  object  would  not  be 
an  object  for  us. 

4  This  combination  is  not  only  a  combination  of  the  manifold  of 
each  object:  it  is  also  a  combination  of  different  objects  with  one 
another  m  the  system  of  nature. 


20  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  2 

by  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  in  one  time. 
What  we  have  to  do  at  present  is  to  learn  what  these  tran- 
scendental schemata  are,  and  to  see,  if  we  can,  whether 
each  transcendental  schema  falls  under  its  corresponding 
category. 

§  2.  Importance  of  the  Chapter  on  Schematism 

In  considering  Kant's  account  of  the  transcendental  sche- 
mata we  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  put  off  by  the  obscurity 
of  his  exposition.  However  artificial  his  view  may  appear  to 
be,  it  is  an  essential  part  of  his  argument.1  If  we  assume  pro- 
visionally that  the  pure  categories  really  are  derived  from  the 
form  of  thought,  it  is  absolutely  vital  to  discover  whether 
objects,  as  combined  by  imagination  under  the  form  of  time, 
must  possess  characteristics  which  fall  under  the  categories. 
If  we  reject  ab  initio  such  derivation  of  the  pure  categories, 
we  must  still  discover  what  plausibility  there  is  in  his  view 
of  the  relation  between  the  necessary  characteristics  of  objects 
in  time  and  the  pure  categories ;  otherwise  we  shall  fail  to  under- 
stand why  Kant  thought  as  he  did,  not  merely  in  this  particular 
chapter,  but  throughout  the  Kritik. 

Even  at  the  worst  the  chapter  on  Schematism  has  more 
than  the  value  of  throwing  light  on  Kant's  errors.  If  we  reject 
his  derivation  of  the  categories,  this  chapter  acquires  a  new 
and  special  importance:  it  suggests  the  possibility  of  making  a 
fresh  start,  and  of  justifying  the  categories  from  the  nature 
of  time  without  any  reference  to  the  forms  of  judgement. 
The  Kantian  doctrine  might  perhaps  be  reformed  and  re- 
established, if  we  could  show  that  the  categories  are  implicit 
in  our  knowledge  of  time,  and  are  principles  of  synthesis 
without  which  no  object  could  be  known  to  be  an  object  in 
time. 

Whatever  be  our  view  of  the  derivation  of  the  categories, 

1  Kant  himself  says  with  justice  that  it  is  an  important,  and  indeed 
absolutely  indispensable,  though  extremely  dry,  investigation;  and 
he  connects  it,  as  I  do  in  Chapter  XXXIII,  with  the  account  of 
Phenomena  and  Noumena  in  the  Kritik.  See  Prol.  §  34  (IV  316). 


XXXII  §3]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  21 

the  chapter  on  Schematism  is  essential  to  an  understanding 
of  the  Critical  Philosophy.1 

§3.  The  Transcendental  Doctrine  of  Judgement 

Formal  Logic  in  dealing  with  concepts,  judgements,  and 
inferences  considers  only  their  form,  and  is  concerned  with 
the  conditions  of  formal  validity.  It  does  not,  and  it  cannot, 
give  us  instructions  about  how  we  can  make  true  judgements, 
and  still  less  does  it  tell  us  what  true  judgements  we  can  make.2 
If  by  the  power  of  judgement3  we  mean  the  power  of  deciding 
whether  or  not  particular  objects  fall  under  the  concepts  we 
possess,  this  power  is  a  special  gift  which  cannot  be  taught, 
though  it  can  be  improved  by  exercise  and  helped  by  examples.4 

Transcendental  Logic  is  in  a  different  position.  The  concepts 
or  categories  with  which  it  deals  are  a  priori,  and  therefore 
the  objective  validity,  not  only  of  the  categories  in  general, 
but  of  each  separate  category,  must  be  established  a  priori. 
We  must  be  able  to  show  not  only  what  are  the  pure  categories, 
but  also  what  is  the  'case'6  to  which  each  applies.  This  means 

1  As  it  is  far  from  easy  to  follow  Kant's  general  account  of  the 
transcendental  schema,  the  reader  who  wishes  to  get  on  with  the 
argument  in  detail  may  find  it  advantageous  to  omit  the  rest  of  this 
chapter  on  a  first  reading. 

2  If  concepts  are  supposed  to  be  given,  Formal    Logic  can  tell  us 
how  to  make  analytic  judgements,  but  these  are  true  only  if  there 
is  an  object  corresponding  to  the  given  concepts. 

3  It  is  unfortunate  that  in  English  we  have  only  one  word  for 
'Urteir  (judgement)  and  '  Urteilskraft*  (the  power  of  judging). 

4  Kemp  Smith,  Commentary,  p.  333,  asserts    that  Kant  is  taking 
advantage  of  the  popular  meaning  of  judgement.  However  popular 
this  meaning  may  be,  it  has  a  philosophical  history  going  back,  I 
believe,  to  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  opoi  (ev  rfj  alaOrjaei  r\  Kplaig. 
Eth.  NIC.  noQb.).  It  is  in  any  case  one  of  the  most  widespread  and 
essential  doctrines  of  the  Critical  Philosophy.  Compare,  for  example, 
Anthr.  §§  40-4  (VII  196-^01);  K.d.U.  Ill,  IV,  §  35,  §  77,  etc.  (V  177, 
1 79, 2 86-7, 407,  etc.) ;  K.d.p.  V.  (V  67) ;  Met.  d.  Sitten,  Tugendlehre  §  1 3 
(VI 438) ;  Log.  §  81  (IX  131) ;  Letter  to  Prince  von  Belozelsky  (XI  331). 

6Ai35  —  1*174.  The  word  'case1  (Fall)  seems  to  imply  a  reference 
to  individual  objects ;  but  since  the  case  is  to  be  shown  a  priori,  it 
must  be  shown,  not  by  an  appeal  to  empirical  sense-perception,  but 
by  an  appeal  to  the  conditions  under  which  objects  must  be  given. 


22  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  3 

that  we  must  be  able  to  exhibit  in  universal  but  adequate 
marks1  the  conditions  under  which  objects  can  be  given2 
in  conformity  with  the  categories. 

These  'conditions'  may  be  described  as  universal  charac- 
teristics3 which  must  belong  to  all  objects  known  by  means 
of  our  senses.  These  characteristics  are  supposed  to  be  found 
in  objects  as  given  to  sense,  and  for  this  reason  they  are  called 
'sensuous  conditions'4  or  'conditions  of  sensibility'.5  Strictly 
speaking,  these  characteristics  are  not  to  be  found  in  the 
manifold  merely  as  given  to  sense  under  the  form  of  time. 
They  belong  to  the  manifold  as  given  to  sense  under  the  form 
of  time  and  as  combined  in  one  time  by  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination.6  In  his  statement  of  the  problem 
Kant  insists  only  that  certain  necessary  characteristics  must 
belong  to  objects  as  sensed,  if  the  pure  categories  are  to  apply 
a  priori  to  sensible  objects. 

These  universal  and  necessary  characteristics  of  sensible 
objects  are  the  transcendental  schemata.  Apart  from  these 

1 ' Kennzcichen1 ;  see  A  136  —  B  175.  I  do  not  think  that  the  'marks' 
are  to  be  regarded  as  separate  from  the  Conditions'  exhibited  m  the 
marks. 

2  A  136  —  B  175.  This  is  a  relative  use  of  the  word  'given'.  Objects 
are  given  absolutely  under  the  form  or  condition  of  time.  They  are 
given  relatively  to  the  understanding  so  far  as  the  given  manifold 
is  combined  in  one  time  through  the  transcendental  synthesis  of 
imagination.  Compare  Chapter  XXVIII  §  n. 

3  Compare  A  147  =  B  186  where  the  'sensuous  determination  of 
permanence*  is  given  as  an  example  of  such  a  'sensuous  condition*. 
These  necessary  and  universal    characteristics  of    objects  are  also 
conditions  of  objects,  for  without  them  there  could  be  for  us  no 
objects  at  all. 

4  A  136  =  B  175. 

6  A  139  =  B  179 ;  compare  also  A  140  =  B  179  and  A  146  =  B  186. 
They  are  conditions  of  sensibility  because  they  are  necessary  to  the 
unity  of  time  (and  space),  time  (and  space)  being  the  more  ultimate 
conditions  of  sensibility. 

6  Kant  is  contrasting  the  object  as  thought  abstractly  in  the  pure 
category  with  the  concrete  individual  object  which  is  given;  and  at 
the  moment  he  postpones  all  reference  to  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination,  and  concentrates  on  the  fact  that  the  object  must 
be  sensed. 


XXXII  §  3]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  23 

the  pure  categories  would  be  without  content1  or  meaning;2 
that  is  to  say,  they  would  not  refer  to  any  assignable  object. 

Transcendental  Logic  must  therefore  be  able  to  give  us 
what  Kant  calls  a  Transcendental  Doctrine3  of  Judgement. 
It  must  tell  us  what  are  the  transcendental  schemata,  the  neces- 
sary and  universal  characteristics  of  sensible  objects  in  virtue 
of  which  the  pure  categories  can  be  applied.4  It  must  also 
tell  us  what  are  the  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  which  arise 
when  we  apply  the  pure  categories  to  sensible  objects  in  virtue 
of  the  transcendental  schemata.  These  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements  are  called  the  'Principles  of  the  Pure  Understand- 
ing'— and  they  are  the  conditions  of  all  other  a  priori  knowledge. 
In  order  to  justify  these  judgements  we  must  show  that  the 
transcendental  schemata  really  are  universal  and  necessary 
characteristics  of  all  objects  given  to  our  senses. 

"  *A  136  =  B  175. 

2  A  147  =  B  1 86.  The  content  or  meaning  of  concepts  involves 
for  Kant  a  reference  to  actual,  or  at  least  possible,  objects,  and  in 
the  case  of  a  priori  concepts  a  necessary   reference  to  such  objects. 
Apart  from  this  the  pure  category  is  merely  a  logical  form,  a  concept 
of  the  form  of  judgement  or  of  the  unity  of  ideas  in  j'udgement.  If  we 
regarded  the  pure  category  as  somehow  applying  to  objects,  we  could 
not  indicate  the  determinations  of  the  thing  to  which  the  category 
was  supposed  to  apply.    Compare  A  88  —  B  120,    A  247  =  B  304, 
and  many  other  places. 

3  'Doktrin';  see  A  136  =  B  175.  It  might  also  be  called  a  'canon* 
(A  132  =  B  171)  or  a  'Kritik*  (A  135  --=--  B  174)  of  Judgement.  A 
*  doctrine'  seems  to  aim  at  the  extension  (Erweiterung)  of  our  cognitions, 
a  Kntik  at  their  correction  (Benchtigung)\  see  A  12  — -  B  26  and 
A  135  —  B  174.  I  suppose  Kant  uses  the  word  'doctrine'  here  because 
we  can  point  out,  not  merely  the  conditions  of  our  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements,  but  the  actual  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  which  we 
can  make:  he  does  not  mean  that  we  can  extend  the  use  of  under- 
standing beyond  the  limits  of  possible  experience.  Perhaps  the  word 
is  used  more  loosely  for  'a  demonstrated  theory*  in  which  everything 
is  certain  a  priori;  see  Log.  Einl.  I  (IX  14-15)  and  A  54  =  B  78.  In 
A  796  =  B  824  a  'canon*  is  defined  as  'the  sum  total  of  the  a  priori 
principles  of  the  correct  employment  of  certain  powers  of  knowledge* ; 
compare  Log.  Einl.  I  (IX  13). 

4  Kant  says  'the  sensuous  condition*  under  which  alone  the  cate- 
gories can  be  used.  The  following  clause  shows  that  he  has  in  mind 
all  such  conditions. 


24  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  4 

The  whole  Transcendental  Doctrine  of  Judgement  may  also 
be  called  the  Analytic  of  Principles,  since  the  judgements 
with  which  it  is  primarily  concerned  are  the  Principles  of  the 
Pure  Understanding.  It  is  divided  into  two  parts.  The  first 
part  is  concerned  with  the  transcendental  schemata,  and  is 
entitled  'The  Schematism  of  the  Pure  Concepts  of  the  Under- 
standing*. The  second  part  gives  us  the  proof  of  the  Principles, 
and  is  entitled  'The  System1  of  all  Principles  of  Pure  Under- 
standing'.2 

§  4.  Subsumption  under  the  Categories 

The  power  of  judgement  is  a  power  to  subsume  under 
rules,  that  is,  to  decide  whether  anything  stands  under  a  given 
rule  or  not.3  All  concepts,  according  to  Kant,  serve  as  rules,4 
and  we  can  say  that  in  subsumption  we  decide  whether  anything 
stands  under  a  given  concept  or  not ;  indeed  this  is  the  ordinary 
meaning  of  subsumption.5  Formal  Logic  manifestly  cannot 

1  The  word  'system*  implies  an  organic  whole,  not  a  mere  aggregate ; 
compare  A  832  =  B  860. 

2  The  proof  of  the  Principles  is  in  the  main  directed  to  show  that 
the  transcendental  schemata  must  be  characteristics  of  all  objects 
which  are  known  to  be  in  one  time. 

3A  132  =  B  171  and  A  133  =  B  172.  Kant's  reference  in  brackets 
— 'casus  datae  legis* — suggests  that  he  has  in  mind  the  procedure  of 
the  law-courts.  4  A  106. 

5  Kant,  in  his  Formal  Logic,  extends  the  meaning  of  the  word 
subsumption  to  cover  the  minor  premise  of  hypothetical  and  disjunc- 
tive, as  well  as  of  categorical,  syllogisms.  The  minor  premise  is  said 
to  subsume  a  cognition  under  the  condition  of  the  universal  rule 
asserted  in  the  major  premise;  see  Log.  §  58  (IX  120-1)  and  A  304 
=  B  360.  Kemp  Smith,  Commentary,  p.  336,  seems  to  base  on  this 
the  view  that  Kant  is  really  concerned  with  subsuming  under  rules  as 
opposed  to  concepts.  I  do  not  think  this  is  so.  In  the  categorical 
syllogism,  All  men  are  mortal,  Caius  is  a  man,  therefore  Cams  is 
mortal,  we  subsume  in  the  minor  premise  our  cognition  Caius  under 
the  concept  of  man,  which  is  the  condition  of  mortality.  Compare 
A  322  =  B  378,  which  is,  however,  obscure.  Kemp  Smith  translates 
as  if  we  subsumed  the  predicate  (mortal)  under  its  condition  (man). 
This  seems  to  me  impossible;  and  I  agree  with  Erdmann  that  we 
subsume  Caius  under  the  condition  'man*  which  is  taken  in  its  whole 
extension  in  the  judgement  'All  men  are  mortal'.  Further  remarks 
on  the  syllogism  will  be  found  below;  see  Chapter  XXXIV  §  i. 


XXXII  §  5]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  25 

teach  us  how  to  do  this,  since  it  ignores  the  matter  given  to 
thought.  Transcendental  Logic  can,  however,  show  that  objects 
must  fall  under  the  categories,  since  it  takes  into  account  the 
pure  ijianifold  of  time  and  the  transcendental  synthesis  of 
imagination  whereby  the  given  manifold  must  be  combined 
in  one  time.1 

Granted  Kant's  pre-suppositions,  it  seems  to  me  correct 
to  speak  either  of  applying  the  categories  to  objects  or  of  sub- 
suming objects  under  the  categories.  The  main  objection  to 
this  usage  seems  to  rest  on  the  view  that  a  category  cannot  be 
used  as  a  predicate  and  cannot  have  instances.2  But  if  the  cate- 
gories could  not  be  predicates  of  possible  judgements,  and 
could  not  apply  to  instances,3  they  would  not  be  concepts  at 
all.  Such  a  view  seems  to  me  remote  from  the  Kantian 
doctrine. 

I  need  hardly  add  that  if  Kant  had  used  the  word  'sub- 
sumption'  for  the  activity  of  the  transcendental  imagination  in 
combining  the  given  manifold  in  accordance  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  synthesis  conceived  in  the  pure  categories,  he  would 
indeed  be  guilty  of  misusing  a  technical  term.  I  see  no  trace 
of  such  a  usage  in  the  chapter  on  Schematism.  Kant  is  here 
concerned  with  sensible  objects  as  described  in  the  Transcen- 
dental Deduction,  that  is,  as  combined  in  one  time  (and  space).4 

§  5.  The  Difficulty  of  Subsumption  under  the  Categories 

Whenever  we  subsume  an  object  under  a  concept,  that  is, 
whenever  we  judge  the  object  to  be  an  instance  of  a  universal, 
there  must  be  a  certain  homogeneity  between  the  object 

1  Compare  A  55  -«  B  79-80  and  A  76-7  =  B  102. 

2  See  Chapter  XV  §  3,  and  compare  Kemp  Smith,  Commentary, 
P-  335,  etc. 

3  The  concepts  of  the  forms  of  judgement  have  of  course  instances 
in  the  judgements  which  manifest  these  forms ;  compare  A  239  —  B  298. 
But  the  pure  categories  are  concepts  whose  instances  must  be  objects 
— objects  whose  manifold  is  combined  in  accordance  with  the  principles 
of  synthesis  present  in  the  forms  of  judgement;  compare  B  128. 

4  Further  difficulties  in  regard  to  subsumption  will  be  dealt  with 
later.  See  Chapter  XXXIV  §  i. 


a6  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  5 

and  the  concept.  This  is  obvious  enough  in  the  case  of  empirical 
concepts,  which  are  due  to  abstraction  from  given  intuitions; 
in  them  we  conceive  or  think  common  marks  belonging  to  this 
and  other  objects  given  in  intuition.  It  is  also  obvious  even  in 
the  pure  concepts  of  mathematics :  the  mathematical  concept  of 
circle,  for  instance,  can  have  an  example  constructed  in  pure 
intuition;  and  since  this  pure  intuition  is  homogeneous  (as 
regards  its  circularity)  with  the  empirical  intuitions  from  which 
we  abstract  the  concept  of  plate,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  saying 
that  a  plate  is  an  imperfect  instance  of  a  mathematical 
circle.1 

There  may  be  some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  interpretation  of 
this  example ;  but  Kant's  main  point  is  that  whether  a  particular 
concept  is  empirical  or  pure — whether  it  is  derived  by  abstrac- 
tion from  empirical  intuition,  or  whether  pure  intuitions  are 
constructed  in  accordance  with  it — there  is  always  a  corre- 
sponding intuition  which  entitles  us  to  apply  the  concept  to 
objects  of  sensuous  experience.  In  the  case  of  the  categories 
there  is  no  corresponding  intuition,  whether  empirical  or  pure.2 
Hence  the  categories  appear  not  to  be  homogeneous  with  the 
sensible  objects  subsumed  under  them,  inasmuch  as  none  of 

1  A  137  =  B  176.  I  have  here  expanded — in  the  light  of  what 
follows — a  statement  which  is  too  brief  to  be  clear.  Kant  says  that  the 
circularity  which  is  thought  m  the  empirical  concept  of  plate  can 
be  intuited  in  the  pure  concept  of  circle,  and  gives  this  as  his  reason 
for  the  homogeneity  of  the  two  concepts.  His  statement  is  obscurely 
expressed,  and  he  seems  to  make  no  difference  between  'an  object' 
and  'the  idea  (or  even  the  concept)  of  an  object';  but  I  take  his  point 
to  be  that  even  a  pure  mathematical  concept  has  a  corresponding 
intuition',  the  category,  as  he  goes  on  to  show,  has  none.  Hence  the 
pure  mathematical  concept  can  have  a  certain  homogeneity  with 
objects  given  to  empirical  intuition,  and  with  the  empirical  concepts 
of  these  objects;  see  A  138  =  B  177. 

Vaihmger  emends  Kant's  statement  about  circularity,  by  transposing 
'thought'  and  'intuited*.  This  does  not  remove  the  obscurity,  and  it 
makes  the  distinction  between  the  empirical  concept  of  plate  and  the 
pure  mathematical  concept  of  circle  here  irrelevant;  but  in  any  case 
Kant's  main  point  is  that  there  must  be  homogeneity  between  the 
concept  and  the  object  (or  concept  of  the  object)  which  is  subsumed 
under  it.  2  Compare  Chapter  XVI  §§  8-9. 


XXXII  §  5]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  27 

the  intuitions  through  which  objects  are  given  corresponds  in 
any  way  to  the  categories.1 

In  spite  of  the  objections2  raised  to  this  doctrine  Kant's 
contention  seems  to  me  to  be  sound.  It  is  obviously  so,  if  we 
remember  that  for  him  the  pure  categories  are  the  forms  of 
judgement  as  applied  to  intuitions ;  but  even  if  we  ignore  this, 
and  consider  the  categories  only  as  schematised,  it  is  hardly 
less  obvious,  at  any  rate  as  regards  the  categories  of  relation 
and  modality.  We  can  see  plates  in  empirical  intuition,  and  we 
can  construct  circles  a  priori  in  pure  intuition,  but  we  cannot 
see  causes  as  causes,3  nor  can  we  construct  them  a  priori.41 

This  is  a  real  difference  which  it  seems  to  me  idle  to  deny. 
Nor  is  the  problem  solved  by  saying  that  the  category  is  the 
form  and  the  intuition  the  matter,  and  that  these  have  no 
existence  apart  from  one  another.  The  forms  of  intuition  are 
.space  and  time,  and  the  categories  are  forms,  not  of  intuition, 
but  of  thought.  No  doubt  it  is  absurd  to  suggest  that  we  are 
first  of  all  aware  of  unrelated  sensations,  and  then  subsume 
them  under  the  categories;  but  to  interpret  Kant's  doctrine 
as  asserting  such  a  temporal  succession  seems  to  me  unjusti- 
fiable. The  categories  are  present  whenever  we  are  aware  of 
an  object  (as  opposed  to  a  mere  sensation) ;  but  this  fact  does 
not  do  away  with  Kant's  problem.  Indeed  it  is  just  this  fact 
which  raises  the  problem  how  the  categories  as  forms  of  thought 
can,  and  must,  determine  all  objects  given  to  sensuous  intuition. 

1  In  order  to  avoid  misconceptions  it  may  be  said  at  once  that 
although  the  intuitions,  considered  as  given  intuitions,  are  not  homo- 
geneous with  the  category,  yet  the  intuitions  as  combined  to  form 
objects  in  one  time  are  homogeneous  with  the  category. 

2  Some  of  these  objections  rest  on  the  view  that  Kant  supposed 
us  to  be  aware  of  the  pure  categories  and  the  sensuous  intuitions  in 
separation  before  we  are  aware  of  them  in  conjunction.  Supported 
though  this  is  by  many  even  of  the  best  commentators — for  example 
by  Caird  and  even  at  times  by  Riehl — I  do  not  believe  that  Kant 
entertained  such  an  idea  for  a  moment.     3  Compare  A  137  =  B  176. 

4  The  difference  is  not  so  sharp  in  the  case  of  the  categories  of 
extensive  and  intensive  quantity,  where  Kant  himself  insists  we  have 
'intuitive  evidence';  see  A  160-1  =  B  200,  A  162  —  B  201,  A  180 
=  B  223. 


*8  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  6 

If  we  are  to  understand  Kant  we  must  allow  him  to  state 
his  problem  in  his  own  way,  and  we  must  try  to  see  what  the 
problem  is.  We  must  also  remember  that  Kant  tends  to  state 
his  problems  sharply  without  giving  any  indication  /)f  his 
proposed  solution.1  In  this  case  we  already  know  the  general 
lines  which  his  solution  must  take;  for  we  know,  from  the 
Transcendental  Deduction,  that  the  categories  must  apply 
to  all  objects  because  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagina- 
tion combines  the  manifold  in  one  time.  This  does  not  mean 
that  the  chapter  on  Schematism  is  superfluous.  We  have  still 
to  show — the  argument  cries  out  for  it — that  the  combination 
of  the  manifold  in  one  time  imposes  on  all  objects  certain 
universal  characteristics  corresponding  to  the  separate  categories. 

§  6.  The  Transcendental  Schema 

Kant  puts  forward  the  suggestion  that  there  must  be  a  third' 
thing  to  connect  the  category  and  the  intuition.  This  mediating 
idea  must  be  pure,  for  otherwise  the  connexion  would  be 
empirical ;  and  it  must  be  homogeneous  both  with  the  category 
and  with  the  intuition.  To  be  homogeneous  with  the  category, 
it  must  be  intellectual;  that  is,  it  must  be  a  product  of  spon- 
taneity or  synthesis  (which  is  the  general  characteristic  of  the 
understanding).2  To  be  homogeneous  with  the  intuition,  it 
must  be  sensuous;  and  to  be  both  sensuous  and  yet  pure,  it 
must  be  connected  with  the  form  of  intuition.  This  mediating 
idea  is  the  transcendental  schema.3 

In  his  search  for  the  transcendental  schema  Kant  turns, 
as  we  should  expect,  to  time  as  the  form  of  intuition.4  The 

1  Compare  Chapter  XVII  §  i. 

2  Kant's  phrase  is  obscure,  and  the  meaning  seems  to  me  uncertain. 
What  he  says  in  the  following  paragraph  suggests  that  to  be  homo- 
geneous with  the  category,  it  must  be  universal  and  must  rest  on 
an  a  priori  rule.  It  can  be  this  only  if  it  is  the  product  of  the  trans- 
cendental synthesis  of  the  imagination. 

3  A  138  =  B  177.  This  description  connects  it  with  the  transcen- 
dental synthesis  of  imagination.  Compare  especially  6151  and  B  162  n. 

4  The  reason  why  Kant  neglects  space  m  this  chapter  is  no  doubt 
that  for  him  space  is  only  the  form  of  outer  intuition,  while  time, 
though  it  is  the  immediate  condition  (or  form)  of  inner  intuition, 


XXXII  §  6]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  29 

pure  category  is  a  concept  of  the  pure  synthetic  unity  of  a 
manifold  in  general]1  and  consequently  the  pure  synthetic 
unity  of  the  manifold  of  time  must  fall  under  it,2  as  the  species 
must  fall  under  the  concept  of  the  genus.3  Time,  however, 
not  only  contains  in  itself  a  manifold  of  pure  intuition;  it  is 
also  the  form  of  inner  sense,  and  so  is  the  formal  condition  of 
the  combination  of  all  ideas  whatsoever.4  I  take  Kant  to  mean 
that  the  empirical  manifold,  whatever  else  it  is,  must  be  temporal 
and  must  have  the  general  characteristic  of  being  combined 
in  such  a  way  that  it  accords  with  the  unity  of  time.5 

This  doctrine  Kant  develops  with  reference  to  what  he  calls 
a  'transcendental  time-determination'.6  Unfortunately  he  does 
not  explain  this  phrase ;  it  must,  I  think,  mean,  not  a  deter- 
mination or  characteristic  of  time  itself,  but  a  characteristic 
which  must  belong  to  objects  so  far  as  they  are  temporal  and 
are  combined  in  one  time. 

A  transcendental  time-determination  is  said  to  be  homo- 
geneous with  the  category  inasmuch  as  it  is  universal  and 
rests  on  an  a  priori  rule.  Its  universality  is  presumably  the 
complete  universality  of  the  categories  inasmuch  as  it  must 
belong  to  all  objects ;  for  all  objects  of  human  experience  are 

is  also  the  mediate  condition  of  outer  intuition,  and  so  can  be  described 
as  'the  formal  a  priori  condition  of  all  appearances  in  general';  see 
A  34  =  B  50  and  compare  Chapter  VII  §  a.  But  space  as  well  as 
time  must  have  its  part  in  the  schematisation  of  the  categories,  and 
Kant  has  to  take  space  into  account  when  he  deals  with  the  Principles. 

1  A  138  =  B  177.  In  itself  it  has  no  reference  to  the  manifold  of 
human  intuition  as  such,  nor  even  to  the  pure  manifold  of  space  and 
time,  but  the  synthetic  unity  of  space  and  time  must  be  a  particular 
case  of  the  synthetic  unity  of  intuition  in  general ;  compare  B  144-5. 

2  Kant  says   in  A    138  =  B    177   that  the   category  'constitutes* 
(ausmacht)  the  unity  of  time  (or  the  unity  of  the  transcendental 
time-determination — which,  I  take  it,  amounts  to  pretty  much  the 
same  thing).  In  B  144  the  unity  is  said  to  come  into  the  intuition 
by  means  of  the  category  through  understanding — intuition   here 
being  intuition  in  general.  See  also  B  160-1. 

3  Compare  Chapter  XIII  §  6.  4  Compare  A  99. 

5  The  most  obvious  example  of  this  is  that  if  time  has  extensive 
quantity  the  manifold  in  time  must  also  have  extensive  quantity. 

6  ' Zeitbestimmung*  \  A  138  =  B  177. 


30  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  6 

in  time.1  A  transcendental  time-determination  is  also  homo- 
geneous with  appearances,  or  empirical  intuitions  of  objects,2 
inasmuch  as  every  empirical  intuition  occurs  in  time  and  lasts 
through  time.3 

Hence  the  transcendental  time-determination  is  the  mediating 
idea  which  enables  us  to  subsume4  appearances  (or  objects) 
under  the  category.  As  such  it  is  identified  with  the  transcen- 
dental schema  which  we  have  been  seeking. 

All  this  is  difficult  and  is  hardly  intelligible  apart  from  the 
examples  which  follow ;  but  I  think  we  can  understand  that  if 
time — and  I  would  add  space — is  to  be  known  as  a  unity, 
certain  ways  of  combination  must  be  found  in  objects  the 
manifold  of  which  is  combined  in  one  time  (and  space).5 
We  can  also  understand  that  such  a  way  of  combination  might 
be  an  example  of  a  more  general  way  of  combination,  or 
principle  of  synthesis,  thought  in  the  pure  category.  We  may 
be  able  to  find  something  homogeneous  with  the  categories,* 
not  in  intuitions  themselves,  but  in  the  ways  in  which  intuitions 
must  be  combined  so  as  to  form  objects  in  one  time  (and  space), 
or  in  the  characteristics  which  objects  must  have  if  intuitions 
are  combined  in  these  ways. 

1  The  sense  in  which  it  rests  on  an  a  priori  rule  is  more  difficult ; 
perhaps  Kant  means  that  it  is  a  product  of  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination,  such  synthesis  being  governed  by  an  a  priori  rule. 
The  categories  themselves,  it  should  be  noted,  cannot  be  said  to  rest 
on  a  priori  rules:  on  the  contrary  they  may  be  described  as  the  a 
priori  rules  in  accordance  with  which  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination  works. 

2  Kant,  I  think,  has  in  mind,  not  the  isolated  appearance  such  as 
'this  red',  but  the  whole  appearance  or  intuition  of,  for  example, 
a  house. 

3  Kant  says  time  is  'con tamed*  in  every  empirical  idea. 

4  This  suggests  that  it  is  the  middle  term  in  the  categorical  syllogism ; 
but  see  Chapter  XXXIV  §  i. 

5  We  may  put  it  m  this  way :  that  the  empirical  synthesis  of  appre- 
hension must  be  subjected  to  a  transcendental  unity — the  unity  of 
time — and  ultimately  to  the  unity  of  apperception ;  compare  A  108. 


XXXII  §  7]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  31 

§  7.  The  Restriction  of  the  Category  through  the  Schema 

The  transcendental  schemata  enable  us  to  apply  the  cate- 
gories to  sensible  objects  given  under  the  form  of  time,  but 
they  also  restrict  the  application  of  the  categories  to  such 
objects.  The  Transcendental  Deduction  has  already  shown 
us  that  the  categories  admit  only  of  an  empirical,  and  not  of 
a  transcendental,  use;1  that  is  to  say,  they  apply  only  to  objects 
of  possible  experience,  not  to  things  as  they  are  in  themselves. 
Kant  reminds  us2  that  concepts  can  have  no  meaning3  unless 
an  object  is  given  for  them,  or  at  any  rate  for  the  elements 
of  which  they  are  composed;  hence  we  cannot  legitimately 
apply  concepts  to  things  as  they  are  in  themselves  without 
considering  whether  such  things  are  given  to  us  and  how  they 
are  given.  For  human  beings  things  are  given  only  as  they 
modify  or  affect  our  sensibility  and  so  appear  to  us  under 
the  forms  of  sensibility,  that  is  to  say,  as  temporal  and  spatial. 
The  categories,  if  they  are  to  apply  to  given  objects,  must  con- 
tain within  themselves  more  than  the  principles  of  synthesis 
present  in  the  form  of  thought  as  such ;  for  the  form  of  thought 
has  in  itself  nothing  to  do  with  the  way  in  which  objects  are 
given.  The  categories  must  also  contain  in  themselves  formal 
conditions  of  sensibility,  which  Kant  identifies  with  the  formal 
conditions  of  inner  sense.  Only  so  can  they  contain  the  universal 
condition  under  which  alone  the  categories  can  be  applied  to 
objects.  Such  is  the  general  teaching  of  the  Transcendental 
Deduction ;  and  we  have  now  only  to  indicate  what  are  these  a 
priori  or  formal  conditions  of  sensibility,  to  which  Kant  has 
given  the  name  of  transcendental  schemata. 

These  conditions,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,4  are  ways  in 
which  the  given  manifold  is  combined  in  one  time  by  the  tran- 

1  Compare  Chapter  XI  §  4  and  Chapter  LIV. 

2  A  I39-B  178. 

3  'Meaning*,  as  usual,  may  be  equated  with  'objective  reference*. 
The  remark  about  the  'elements' — compare  also  A  96 — suggests  that 
a  fictitious  concept,  such  as  the  concept  of  'chimaera',  may  have  a 
kind  of  meaning,  since  the  elements  of  which  it  is  composed  have 
objective  reference.  4  Compare  §  3  above  and  the  end  of  §  6. 


32  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  8 

scendental  synthesis  of  imagination,  or  characteristics  which 
objects  must  have  in  virtue  of  the  given  manifold  being  so 
combined.  The  main  difficulty  is  to  know  the  sense  in  which 
the  category  'contains*  these  conditions.  Every  pure  category 
contains  a  principle  of  synthesis  derived  from  the  form  of 
judgement;  and  the  way  in  which  the  manifold  is  combined 
in  one  time  is,  on  Kant's  view,  a  species  which  falls  under  the 
genus  conceived  in  the  pure  category.  If  the  category  contains 
the  condition  of  sensibility  in  a  more  intimate  sense,  if  it 
is  the  specific  concept  of  this  particular  way  of  combining 
the  manifold  in  one  time,  then  Kant  has  in  mind,  not  the  pure 
category,  but  the  schematised  category.1  The  schematised 
category  does  contain  in  itself  the  transcendental  schema, 
in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  concept  of  that  schema.  Thus — to  take 
the  example  given  already2 — the  schematised  category  of  cause 
and  effect  may  be  described  as  the  concept  of  the  necessary 
succession  of  grounds  which  precede  their  consequents  in  time.'3 
This,  however,  raises  difficult  questions  as  to  the  relation 
between  the  schematised  category  and  the  transcendental 
schema  which  can  be  better  examined  when  we  have  studied 
the  details  of  Kant's  doctrine. 

§  8.  The  Schema  in  General 

The  schema, Kant  goes  on  to  say,  is  a  product  of  imagination.4 
It  must  not,  however,  be  confused  with  a  picture  or  image, 
which  is  also  a  product  of  the  imagination.  A  picture  or  image 

1  Compare  Chapters  XII  §  7  and  XIII  §  6.  2  See  §  i  above. 

8  It  is  possible  that  Kant  is  referring  to  the  way  in  which  the  category 
contains  the  schema,  when  he  says — in  A  132  =  B  171 — that  the 
category  contains  the  condition  of  a  priori  rules,  and  again — in 
A  135  =  B  174 — that  the  universal  condition  of  rules  is  given  in 
the  category.  Compare  also  the  statement — in  A  159  —  6  198 — that 
the  Principles  alone  supply  the  concept  (presumably  the  category) 
which  contains  the  condition,  and  as  it  were  the  'exponent*,  of  a  rule 
in  general.  I  feel  too  doubtful  of  Kant's  precise  meaning  in  these 
passages  to  commit  myself  to  any  interpretation. 

4  A  140  =  B  179.  Kant  says  'the  schema  in  itself*  in  opposition, 
I  think,  to  the  schema  as  brought  under  the  pure  category  by  the 
procedure  (or  schematism)  of  the  understanding. 


XXXII  §  8]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  33 

is  an  individual  intuition.  The  schema  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  an  individual  intuition  inasmuch  as  the  synthesis  of 
imagination,  in  producing  the  schema,  aims  only  'at  unity 
in  the, determination  of  sensibility'.1  This  accords  with  the 
view  that  the  schema  is  a  way  of  combination  or  a  characteristic 
resulting  from  combination.2 

So  far  Kant  is  presumably  concerned  with  the  transcendental 
schema,  but  he  proceeds  to  illustrate  the  difference  between 
a  schema  and  an  image  with  reference,  not  to  the  categories, 
but  to  particular  concepts.  There  is  here  a  difficulty;  for  the 
transcendental  schema  was  introduced  as  an  idea  mediating 
between  the  category  and  intuitions,  and  there  was  said  to  be 
no  necessity  for  such  a  mediating  idea  between  particular 
concepts  and  intuitions.3  Nevertheless  all  concepts  might  have 
schemata  which  were  necessary  for  other  purposes  than  such 
mediation.  If  so,  a  description  of  what  may  be  called  the 
schema  in  general  might  throw  additional  light  on  the  nature 
of  the  transcendental  schema:  it  might  show  us  what  the 
transcendental  schema  has  in  common  with  other  schemata.4 

Unfortunately,  Kant's  account  of  the  schema  in  general, 
while  it  is  interesting  in  itself,  raises  difficulties  rather  than 
removes  them.  He  deals,  as  usual,  firstly  with  the  pure  concepts 
of  mathematics,  and  secondly  with  ordinary  empirical  concepts. 

If  we  take  'triangularity*  as  our  example  of  a  mathematical 
concept,  we  must,  according  to  Kant,  distinguish  carefully 
three  things:  (i)  the  concept  of  triangularity  itself,  (2)  the 
image  of  an  individual  triangle,  and  (3)  the  schema.  The 
concept  of  triangularity  is  a  concept  of  the  marks  common  to 
all  triangles:  the  schema  is  a  rule  for  constructing  the  image 

1  Compare  also  A  118,  A  123. 

2  One  might  perhaps  call  it  a  characteristic  of  combination.   It 
might  also  be  called  a  kind  of  synthetic  unity. 

3  Compare  K.d.U.  §  59  (V  351),  where  examples  are  for  empirical 
concepts  what  schemata  are  for  categories. 

4  Unless  it  has  something  in  common  with  these  schemata,  the 
only  reason  for  introducing  these  schemata  must  be  by  way  of  contrast. 
But  Kant's  account  hardly  bears  this  out,  though  he  does  make  a 
contrast  later.  In  any  case  unless  there  really  is  something  in  common, 
it  is  unfortunate  that  the  two  things  should  have  the  same  name. 

VOL.  II  B 


34  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  8 

a  priori  in  intuition,  or  in  other  words  a  rule  of  imaginative 
synthesis.  The  schema,  therefore,  does  in  a  way  mediate 
between  the  concept  and  the  individual  image.  We  know 
what  triangularity  is  when  we  know  how  to  construct  a  tyiangle 
a  priori  in  imagination.  We  know  that  this  figure  drawn  on 
paper  is  an  imperfect  instance  of  triangularity,  when  our 
imagination,  in  apprehending  the  given  appearances  as  a  triangle, 
performs,  and  is  known1  to  perform,  the  same  synthesis  as 
is  necessary  to  construct  a  triangle  a  priori  in  imagination.2 

In  the  case  of  simple  objects  like  triangles,  we  might  suppose 
that  we  recognise  them  merely  from  their  common  marks, 
that  is,  from  their  observed  resemblance  to  one  another.  Even 
in  this  case  we  do  not  know  that  the  objects  seen  are  triangles, 
unless  we  know  the  principle  upon  which  they  can  be  con- 
structed ;  but  Kant's  doctrine  is  more  obvious  when  we  consider 
objects  of  a  greater  complexity.  We  have,  for  example,  no 
image  of  the  number  a  thousand,  but  we  know  what  a  thousand 
is,  if  we  know  how  to  construct  such  an  image.  And  we  know 
that  we  have  a  thousand  dots  before  us,  if  in  counting  the 
given  dots  we  have  performed  the  same  synthesis  as  would  be 
necessary  to  construct  a  thousand  a  priori? 

The  same  principle  holds  of  empirical  concepts,  although 
in  this  case  our  power  of  constructing  an  image  in  imagination 
depends  upon  previous  experience  of  the  object.  We  know 
what  a  dog  is,  when  we  know  from  experience  how  to  construct 
an  image  of  dog  in  imagination.  The  schema,  or  rule  of  con- 
struction, admits  of  great  variety  in  detail  and  so  is  adequate 
to  the  concept,  while  any  individual  image  that  we  construct, 
or  any  actual  dog  that  we  see,4  falls  far  short  of  the  universality 

1  Such  knowledge  may  have  different  degrees  of  'clarity*. 

2  Compare  A  224  =  B  271 :  'The  figurative  synthesis  by  which  we 
construct  a  triangle  in  imagination    is   wholly   identical  with   that 
which  we  exercise  in  the  apprehension  of  an  appearance  in  order  to 
make  for  ourselves  an  empirical  concept  of  it*.  See  also  Chapter  VI  §  8. 

3  For  example,  we  combine  ten  sets  of  ten  ten  times  over. 

4  Kant,  I  believe,  is  here  distinguishing  images  from  objects,  not 
as  Pnchard  suggests,  treating  them  as  if  they  might  be  mentioned 
indifferently;  see  Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  251  n.  4, 


XXXII  §  8]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  35 

of  the  concept.  This  is  true  even  in  the  case  of  a  simple  mathe- 
matical concept.  The  concept  of  triangularity  (and  the  rule 
for  constructing  triangles)  involves  the  possibility  of  being 
equilateral  or  isosceles  or  scalene,  but  any  individual  image  of  a 
triangle  realises  only  one  of  these  possibilities. 

All  this  is  sound  enough,  and  it  is  in  accordance  with  what 
we  have  already  learned  about  concepts.1  But  the  question 
inevitably  arises  whether  we  can  really  distinguish  the  concept 
from  the  schema  along  these  lines.  Kant  always  regards  a 
concept,  not  merely  as  a  concept  of  the  marks  common  to  a 
number  of  objects,  but  as  a  concept  of  the  synthesis  of  these 
marks,2  and  this  means  that  every  concept  is  the  concept  of 
a  rule  of  synthesis.  We  might  indeed  regard  the  schema  as  the 
rule  of  synthesis  unreflectively  at  work  in  imagination,  and  the 
concept  as  the  concept  of  the  rule,  when  the  synthesis  is,  in 
Kant's  phrase,  brought  to  concepts.3  This  seems  to  me  a  possible 
distinction,  and  one  which  may  have  been  at  the  back  of  Kant's 
mind.  His  language,  however,  prevents  us  from  taking  this  as 
his  express  theory ;  for  he  says  that  the  schema  can  exist  only  in 
thought*  and  he  speaks  of  it  as  the  idea  (or  representation)  of  a 
method  and  of  a  universal  procedure  of  imagination.5  If  this  is  to 
be  taken  literally,  it  destroys  the  distinction  I  have  suggested. 

Another  interpretation  is  possible — that  the  schema,  in  spite 
of  what  Kant  has  said,  is  really  regarded  by  him  as  a  kind  of 
schematic  image.  This  is  suggested  by  his  statement  that  the 
schema  of  sensuous  concepts6  (as  of  figures  in  space)  is  a 
product,  and  as  it  were  a  monogram,  of  pure  a  priori  imagination, 

1  Compare  Chapters  XIII  §  5  and  XX  §§  4-6. 

2  I  pass  over  difficulties  in  regard  to  simple  concepts  like  'redness', 
though  I  imagine  that  Kant  regards  the  concept  of  redness  as  involving 
the  concept  of  its  synthesis  with  possible  red  objects;  see  B  133-4  n. 

3A  78  —  B  103.  The  rule  or  schema  is  then  what  is  contained  or 
conceived  in  the  concept.  4A  141  =  B  180. 

6  A  140  =  B  179.  An  'idea'  here  is  presumably  a  concept. 

8  He  must  mean  'pure  sensuous  concepts',  unless  the  schema  of 
an  empirical  concept  is  confined  to  the  mathematical  properties 
thought  in  the  concept.  A  'sensuous  concept'  is  one  which  has  a 
corresponding  intuition.  If  it  is  empirical,  the  concept  is  derived 
from  the  intuition  by  analysis  and  abstraction.  If  it  is  pure,  the 


36  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  8 

through  which,  and  in  accordance  with  which,  images  them- 
selves first  become  possible.1  A  monogram  is  now  commonly 
regarded  as  a  series  of  letters  so  interwoven  as  to  constitute 
a  whole:  sometimes,  though  not  always,  it  is  composed  of  the 
initial  letters  of  a  name,  and  as  such  it  may  suggest  the  plan 
or  rule  of  a  procedure  in  spelling  out  a  name.  But  there  is  an 
older  usage  in  which  'monogram*  meant  a  sketch  or  outline, 
and  Kant  himself  seems  to  use  it  in  this  sense.2  There  is  an 
interesting  passage  where  Kant  compares  certain  creations 
of  the  imagination  to  monograms  in  this  respect — that  they 
offer  us  only  individual  strokes,3  determined  by  no  assignable 
rule,  and  constitute  as  it  were  a  wavering  sketch  or  a  shadowy 
outline4  rather  than  a  determinate  picture.5  Some  of  the 
points  made  here  may  be  due  to  the  context,  but  the  passage 
suggests  that  if  the  schema  is  like  a  monogram,  it  is  some  sort 
of  wavering  and  schematic  image.  Such  a  wavering  image 
.might  be  the  imaginative  embodiment  of  the  rule  in,  accordance 
with  which  the  synthesis  of  imagination  works. 

These  considerations,  inconclusive  as  they  are  in  themselves, 
throw,  I  fear,  little  light  on  the  nature  of  the  transcendental 
schemata.  They  tend  to  suggest  that  the  transcendental 
schemata  may  share  with  the  schema  in  general  the  common 
characteristic  of  being  a  rule,  rather  than  a  product,  of  the 
imagination.6  In  his  detailed  account  of  the  transcendental 

intuition  is  constructed  a  priori  in  accordance  with  the  concept. 
A  category,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  purely  intellectual  concept  derived 
from  the  nature  of  thought. 

1 A  141-2  =  B  181.  Kant  adds  that  these  images  are  connected 
with  the  concept  through  the  schema — which  means  that  the  schema 
in  general,  like  the  transcendental  schema,  is  a  mediating  idea.  The 
necessity  for  mediation  arises  here  because  no  image  can  be  fully 
congruent  with  the  concept.  2  See  A  833  =  B  86 1. 

8  'Zuge.'  This  may  mean  'features',  but  I  think  it  is  at  any  rate 
more  precise  than  'qualities',  which  is  Kemp  Smith's  translation. 

4 ' Schattenbild.'  This  may  mean  a  silhouette,  unless  it  is  intended 
to  suggest  something  uncertain  and  changing.  5  A  570  —  B  598. 

6  I  do  not  deny  that  a  rule  may  be  regarded  as  a  product  of  the 
imagination,  if  the  imagination  works  in  accordance  with  that  rule; 
but  it  is  a  different  kind  of  product  from  a  picture  on  the  one  hand 
and  a  combination  on  the  other. 


XXXII  §  9]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  37 

schemata  Kant  speaks  in  places  as  if  the  transcendental  sche- 
mata were  rules,  and  even  as  if  they  were  syntheses;  but  I 
think  he  can  be  most  satisfactorily  interpreted  if  we  take  the 
transcendental  schema  to  be  a  way  of  combination,  or  a  charac- 
teristic of  combination,  which  is  produced  by  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination. 

§  9.  Special  Characteristics  of  the  Transcendental  Schema 

The  transcendental  schema  must  in  any  case  differ  in  certain 
respects  from  other  schemata ;  and  this  difference  Kant  attempts 
to  make  clear  in  one  of  those  closely  packed  sentences  which 
he  is  apt  to  produce  at  the  most  crucial  stage  of  an  argument. 

His  first  point  is  obvious.  Let  us  suppose  that  a  particular 
schema — if  this  term  may  be  used  for  the  schema  of  a  particular 
concept  (as  opposed  to  a  universal  concept  or  category) — is  a 
rule  of  the  imagination  in  constructing  an  image  or  an  object1 
in  accordance  with  a  particular  concept.  Since  no  intuition  or 
image  can  correspond  to  a  category,  the  transcendental  schema 
cannot  be  a  rule  for  constructing  an  image,  or  in  Kant's  phrase 
it  cannot  be  brought  into  an  image.2 

An  image  corresponding  to  the  categories  would  have  to  be 
constructed  in  pure  intuition,  and  the  nearest  approach  to 
such  an  image  would  be  time  itself.  Kant  himself  points  out 
that  the  pure  image  of  all  objects  of  the  senses  in  general  is 
time.3  But  it  would  be  artificial  to  say  that  time  is  the  image 
corresponding  to  the  categories.  It  is  better  to  say  that  there  is 
no  corresponding  image. 

We  now  come  to  Kant's  second  point.  Instead  of  saying — 
as  we  might  expect  in  view  of  his  account  of  the  schema  in 
general — that  the  transcendental  schema  is  the  rule  of  the 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination,  he  says  that  it  is  the 

1  The  same  process  is  at  work  whether  we  are  constructing  an 
image  in  mere  fancy,  or  whether  we  start  from  a  given  sensation  or 
sensations  and  construct  an  actual  object  of  perception. 

2  A  142  =  B  181. 

3  A  142  =  B  182.  Time  and  space  are  constructed  by  the  transcen- 
dental synthesis  of  imagination.    Space   is   the   pure   image   of  all 
quantities  for  outer  sense. 


38  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §9 

transcendental  synthesis  itself.  The  transcendental  schema  is 
'simply  the  pure  synthesis  in  conformity  with  a  rule  of  unity 
in  accordance  with  concepts  in  general,1  which2  the  category 
expresses'.3 

Such  a  use  of  terms  seems  at  first  sight  calculated  to  reduce 
the  reader  to  despair.  We  may  be  tempted  to  affirm — and 
perhaps  this  is  the  best  way  to  interpret  him — that  if  Kant 
means  anything,  he  must  mean  that  the  transcendental  schema 
is  the  rule  of  the  pure  synthesis.  Certainly  the  schema  is  not 
to  be  regarded  as  an  act  of  pure  synthesis  ;4  but  I  think  Kant 
may  conceivably  mean  here  that  the  schema  is  that  specific 
kind  of  a  priori  combination  which  is  produced  by  the  pure 
synthesis  of  imagination  and  is  in  conformity  with  the  principle 
of  synthesis  (or  rule  of  unity)  conceived  in  the  category.  If 
this  is  a  possible  interpretation,  it  accords  with  that  hitherto 
given.5 

Kant's  third  point  is  also  put  obscurely.  His  statement 
is  so  complicated  that  it  may  be  divided  into  three  parts.  The 
transcendental  schema  is  (i)  a  transcendental  product  of  the 
imagination;  (2)  it  is  concerned  with6  the  determination  of 
inner  sense  in  general  as  regards  conditions  of  its  form  (time) 
with  respect  to  all  ideas;  (3)  it  is  so  concerned  with  respect  to 

1  *  Concepts  in  general'  must  be  opposed  to  categories.  The  rule 
of  unity  is  a  principle  of  synthesis  involved  in  conception  or  judge- 
ment as  such. 

2  The  reference  of  'which*  is  uncertain.  The  pure  category  might 
be  said  to  express  either  the  pure  synthesis  (compare  A  78  =  B  104) 
or  the  unity  of  the  pure  synthesis  (compare  A  79  —  B  105).  It  might 
also,  I  think,  be  said  to  express  the  rule.  Whichever  interpretation 
we  adopt,  the  general  doctrine  remains  the  same. 

3  A  142  —  B  181. 

4  Nevertheless  Kant  (in  A  143  =  B  183)  speaks  of  the  schema  of 
reality  as  'the  continuous  and  uniform  production  of  reality  in  time', 
where  'production'  (Erzeugung)  certainly  looks  like  an  act. 

5  I  am  assuming  here  that  the  a  priori  combination  may  be  identified 
by  Kant  with  the  characteristic  which  results  from,  or  is  manifested 
in,  such  combination. 

8  'betrifft.'  The  expression  of  Kant's  doctrine  here  bears  a  close 
resemblance  to  his  account  of  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagina- 
tion in  B  150  and  B  152. 


XXXII  §  ic]  CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  39 

all  ideas  so  far  as  these  must  be  connected  a  priori  in  one 
concept  in  conformity  with  the  unity  of  apperception. 

The  first  part  is  just  what  we  should  expect.  The  third  part 
is  an  ejpborate  way  of  saying  that  the  ideas  in  question  must  be 
ideas  of  an  object.1  The  second  part,  which  is  the  most  impor- 
tant one,  I  take  to  mean,  not  that  the  transcendental  schema 
is  itself  a  determination  or  characteristic  of  inner  sense  or  of 
time,  but  that  it  is  a  determination  or  characteristic  of  all  our 
ideas  of  objects — or,  more  simply,  of  all  objects — so  far  as  they 
are  known  to  be  combined  in  one  time.2 

§  10.  Summary  of  Conclusions 

The  obscurity  of  Kant's  exposition  places  great  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  the  interpreter.  The  main  burden  of  his  doctrine 
is  that  the  transcendental  schema  is  a  product  of  the  transcen- 
dental synthesis  of  imagination ;  but  the  account  given  of  the 
schema  in  general  suggests  that  the  transcendental  schema 
might  be  a  rule  of  the  transcendental  synthesis;3  and  the 
transcendental  schema  is  even  described  in  one  place  as  if  it 
were  the  transcendental  synthesis  itself. 

In  spite  of  these  difficulties  I  have  little  doubt  that  the 
transcendental  schema  is  best  regarded  as  a  product  of  the 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination.  This  product  is  a 
necessary  characteristic  which  sensible  objects  must  have 
because  the  given  manifold  must  be  combined  by  the  transcen- 
dental synthesis  in  one  time. 

It  is  not  easy  to  state  Kant's  doctrine  in  a  simple  way ;  and 
yet  I  think  that  what  he  is  trying  to  describe  is  itself  compara- 

1  The  'concept  in  conformity  with  the  unity  of  apperception*  must 
be  a  concept  of  an  object,  and  may  be  a  category.  Ideas  of  objects 
may,  I  think,  be  identified  here  with  objects  themselves  so  far  as 
these  are  known. 

a  The  references  to  inner  sense  are,  as  usual,  a  source  of  difficulty, 
and  I  think  it  unfortunate  that  Kant  ignores  space;  but  we  must 
not  forget  that  for  Kant  all  ideas  are  ideas  of  inner  sense  and  so  fall 
under  the  form  of  time.  'Determination*  may  mean  'determining'. 

3  The  rule  of  the  transcendental  synthesis  may  be  regarded  as  in 
a  sense  the  product  of  the  transcendental  synthesis. 


40  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXII  §  10 

lively  simple,  if  only  we  can  be  brought  to  concentrate  upon  it 
rather  than  on  the  words  in  which  it  is  described. 

The  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  is  supposed 
to  combine  the  pure  manifold  of  time  into  a  unity,  ajnd  this 
unity  is  supposed  to  be  necessary  for,  and  as  it  were  demanded 
by,  the  unity  of  apperception,  without  which  knowledge  is 
impossible.  This  implies  that  the  empirical  manifold  must  be 
combined  in  one  time,  and  as  so  combined  it  must  exhibit 
certain  characteristic  ways  of  combination  which  all  objects, 
as  temporal,  must  have. 

Such  a  view  is  at  least  intelligible,  but  if  it  is  to  have  any 
importance,  we  must  make  it  more  definite:  we  must  show 
what  are  the  characteristic  ways  of  combination  belonging  to 
all  objects  as  temporal.  Kant  believes  that  the  unity  of  apper- 
ception is  manifested  in  the  forms  of  judgement,  or  of  thought, 
considered  as  principles  of  synthesis ;  and  he  believes  that  the 
characteristic  ways  of  combination  belonging  to  all  objects 
as  temporal  must  correspond  to  the  principles  of  synthesis 
present  in  the  forms  of  judgement — or  in  other  words  they 
must  fall  under  the  pure  categories  in  the  sense  that  they  must 
be  a  species  of  which  the  pure  category  gives  the  genus.  He 
claims,  as  I  understand  him,  to  have  proved  generally  in  the 
Transcendental  Deduction  that  this  must  be  so;  but  mani- 
festly his  proof  can  carry  little  conviction  unless  he  can  show 
us  in  all  temporal  objects  those  characteristic  ways  of  combina- 
tion which  he  alleges  must  fall  under  the  pure  categories. 
These  characteristic  ways  of  combination  are  the  transcendental 
schemata  and  are  the  product  of  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination.  They  may  also  be  described  as  the  necessary 
temporal  characteristics  of  objects,  characteristics  without 
which  objects  would  not  be  sensible  objects  in  time;1  and 
they  must  in  some  sense  be  revealed  to  sense-perception,  if 
we  recognise  that  imagination  is  a  necessary  ingredient  in  sense- 
perception.2 

We  are  not  likely  to  get  a  clearer  view  of  the  transcendental 

1  Hence  they  are  described  too  as  'formal  conditions  of  sensibility.' 

2  Compare  A  120  n.  and  B  151. 


XXXII  §  ID]         CATEGORY  AND  SCHEMA  41 

schemata  until  we  have  examined  each  of  them  in  detail,  but 
one  further  complication  must  be  added.  The  pure  category 
as  applied  and  restricted  to  its  corresponding  schema  becomes 
the  schematised  category:  for  example  the  pure  category  of 
ground  and  consequent  as  applied  and  restricted  to  the  transcen- 
dental schema  of  necessary  succession  becomes  the  schematised 
category  of  cause  and  effect.  This  no  doubt  raises  the  question 
whether  the  schematised  category  is  really  different  from  the 
transcendental  schema.  Kant,  although  he  does  not  use  the 
term  'schematised  category',  gives  to  the  schematised  categories 
names1  which  differ  from  the  names  given  to  the  transcendental 
schemata.  Hence  it  is  all-important  that  at  the  outset  we  should 
distinguish  both  the  pure  category  and  the  schematised  category 
from  the  transcendental  schema. 

1  He  generally  uses  what  I  have  called  the  name  of  the  schematised 
category  even  when  he  refers  to  the  pure  category,  as  for  example 
in  the  Metaphysical  Deduction,  where  the  category  derived  from  the 
hypothetical  form  of  judgement  is  called  by  anticipation,  not  the 
category  of  ground  and  consequent,  but  the  category  of  cause  and 
effect. 


VOL.  II  B* 


CHAPTER    XXXIII 
THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA 

r 

§  i.  Category  and  Schema 

We  must  now  examine  the  different  transcendental  schemata 
which  correspond  to  the  pure  categories.  I  propose  to  state 
in  each  case  (i)  what  is  the  pure  category,  (2)  what  is  the 
schematised  category,  and  (3)  what  is  the  transcendental 
schema.  It  will  be  necessary  to  supplement  Kant's  own  account 
by  information  derived  from  other  parts  of  the  Kritiky  and 
also  to  introduce  some  measure  of  tidiness ;  for  his  description 
is  unfortunately  incomplete  and  careless  where  we  are  most 
in  need  of  precision. 

Every  pure  category  may  be  described1  as  the  concept  of 
the  synthesis2  of  x,  where  x  serves  to  indicate  the  special  nature 
of  the  synthesis.  The  principle  of  the  synthesis  is  supposed 
to  be  implicit  in  the  form  of  judgement.3  The  manifold  syn- 
thetised  is  the  manifold  of  intuition  m  general,  and  the  pure 
category  has  in  itself  no  reference  to  space  and  time.  Unless 
the  given  manifold  is  synthetised  in  accordance  with  the 
category,  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of  objects.  These  general 
considerations  are  always  applicable  and  need  not  be  repeated 
in  each  case. 

The  schematised  category  may  be  described  as  the  concept 

1  Kant  says  that  the  pure  categories  cannot  be  defined — see  A  241 
and  A  245  and  compare  B  300 — but  this  means  that  their  definition 
is  not  a  'real  definition';  that  is,  it  does  not  show  that  there  is  any 
real  object  to  which  the  pure  categories  apply. 

2  Or  'the  synthetic  unity'.   So  far  as  the  category  is  the  concept 
of  an  object,  the  synthesis  must  be  regarded,  not  as  the  act  of  combin- 
ing, but  as  the  combination  made  by  the  act  and  supposed  to  be  present 
in  the  object.  The  category  might  be  described  as  the  concept  of 
an  object  in  general  so  far  as  the  manifold  of  the  object  is  combined 
in  a  certain  way.  Nevertheless  all  combination  is  the  result  of  an  act 
of    synthesis,  and  Kant  tends  to  treat  the  concept  of  the  act  and 
the  concept  of  the  combination  produced  by  the  act  as  if  they  were 
the  same  concept.  3  See  especially  for  details  Chapter  XIV  §  4. 


XXXIII  §  i]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA         43 

of  the  synthesis^  of  x  in  time.  The  principle  of  synthesis  is 
the  same  as  that  of  the  pure  category,  but  its  application  is 
restricted  to  a  manifold  of  intuition  given  under  the  form 
of  time  and  space.2 

The  transcendental  schema  is  the  product  which  results 
from  the  synthesis  conceived  in  the  schematised  category:3 
as  such  it  is  a  necessary  characteristic  of  all  temporal  objects 
and  is,  I  think,  revealed  to  us  (at  least  in  part)4  through  sensuous 
intuition,  provided  that  we  understand  intuition  to  involve 
imagination  as  well  as  sense. 

This  general  framework  may  be  difficult  to  work  out  in 
all  details,  and  it  may  not  do  justice  to  the  subtlety  of  Kant's 
thought ;  but  it  is  far  better  to  have  even  an  inadequate  frame- 
work  which  may  subsequently  be  corrected  than  to  be  faced 
with  a  chaos  of  unrelated  assertions. 

I  would  again  insist  that  we  shall  understand  Kant  only 
if  we  interpret  him  as  giving  an  analysis  of  what  is  present 
in  all  instances  of  knowing  an  object.  Every  object6  must 
exhibit  all  the  transcendental  schemata,  and  must  fall,  as 

1  Or  'the  synthetic  unity*.  The  schematised  category  may  be  de- 
scribed as  the  concept  of  an  object  in  time  and  space  so  far  as  the  mani- 
fold of  the  object  is  combined  in  a  certain  way.  When  Kant  deals 
with  the  synthesis  in  time,  his  tendency  to  identify  the  concept  of 
the  act  of  synthesis  and  the  concept  of  the  combination  produced 
by  the  act  of  synthesis  is  particularly  noticeable. 

2  I  think  it  necessary,  in  the  light  of  the  Principles,  to  bring  in 
space  as  well  as  time  for  the  understanding  of  Kant's  view.  In  his 
account  of  the  schematism  he  himself  avoids  references  to  space. 

8  If  so,  it  is  also  conceived  in  the  pure  category  as  the  'higher 
concept*  under  which  the  schematised  category  falls. 

The  transcendental  schema,  it  should  be  noted,  is  the  product  of 
the  act  of  synthesis,  but  it  may  also  be  regarded  as  resulting  from, 
or  manifested  in,  the  combination  produced  by  the  act.  In  the  definition 
of  the  categories  'synthesis*  is  taken  most  naturally  as  'the  combination 
made  by  the  act  of  synthesis* :  in  the  definition  of  the  schema  'synthesis' 
is  most  naturally  taken  as  'the  act  which  produces  this  combination*. 
I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  comment  on  this  in  the  separate 
definitions,  and  I  do  not  think  Kant  makes  a  sharp  distinction. 

4  The  schemata  of  relation  are  perhaps  confirmed,  rather  than 
revealed,  by  sensuous  intuition. 

5  We  should,  I  think,  confine  our  attention  to  physical  objects — 
the  objects  which  Kant  has  primarily  in  view. 


44  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §2 

regards  its  different  aspects,  under  all  the  categories.  We 
must  not  be  misled  into  supposing  that  Kant  describes  a 
whole  series  of  syntheses  which  take  place  at  different  times. 
There  is  only  one  synthesis  which  combines  the  given  manifold, 
whatever  be  its  empirical  character,  in  one  time  and  space, 
although  that  synthesis  has  different  aspects  and  imposes 
different  characteristics  on  the  objects  combined.  And  similarly 
there  is  only  one  form  of  judgement,  or  one  principle  of  syn- 
thesis in  judgement,  though  this  too  has  different  aspects, 
which  Kant  treats  with  an  excessive  formalism  when  he  finds 
them  embodied  in  the  different  forms  of  judgement  as 
described  by  the  traditional  logic. 

Throughout  this  chapter  I  am  trying  to  make  Kant's  position 
clear,  rather  than  to  criticise  it.  Even  so,  some  of  the  details 
must  remain  obscure  till  we  come  to  the  further  exposition 
in  the  Principles. 

§  2.  The  Schema  of  Quantity 

Under  the  head  of  quantity  the  pure  category  is  derived 
from  the  universal  form  of  judgement  'All  S  is  P'.1  The  name 
of  the  category  is  'totality9,  though  it  is  usually  referred  to  as 
'quantity* ;  and  it  may  be  described  as  the  concept  of  the  synthesis 
of  the  homogeneous?  The  ground  for  this  description  is  that 

1  The  order  in  which  the  categories  are  given  in  A  80  =  B  106 
suggests  that  the  category  of  totality  is  derived  from  the  singular 
judgement.  Although  the  same  parallelism  holds  in  the  Prolegomena 
(IV  302-3),  I  believe  that  this  is  a  slip,  and  is  due  to  the  fact  that  in 
the  list  of  the  forms  of  judgement  Kant  follows  the  traditional  order 
(universal,  particular,  singular),  while  in  the  list  of  the  categories 
he  follows  the  order  by  which  the  third  can  be  compounded  of  the 
first  two  (unity,  plurality,  totality),  because  (B  in)  totality  is  plurality 
considered  as  unity.  It  is  only  natural  to  derive  unity  from  the  singular 
judgement,  as  Kant  himself  implies  that  he  does  in  A  71  —  B  96, 
in  the  Prolegomena  §  20  (IV  302  n.),  and  in  A  245-6,  where  he  refers 
to  judicium  commune.  His  argument  would  be  more  plausible  if  he 
derived  the  three  categories  of  unity,  plurality,  and  totality  from  the 
fact  that  every  judgement  makes  use  of  common  concepts ;  compare 
Chapter  X  §  5  and  Chapter  XIV  §  8. 

2  It  might  be  described  as  the  concept  of  'the  unity  of  the  synthesis 
of  the  manifold  of  a  homogeneous  intuition  in  general* ;  see  A  142-3 
=  B  182,  and  compare  B  162,  B  203,  A  242  =  B  300,  and  A  245-6. 


XXXIII  §2]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          45 

in  the  universal  judgement  the  objects  referred  to  by  the 
subject-concept  are  considered  to  be  homogeneous  with 
one  another. 

The 'schematised  category  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis 
of  the  homogeneous  in  time  and  space,  and  may  be  described 
as  the  category  of  extensive  quantity.  The  transcendental 
schema  which  is  the  product  of  this  synthesis  is  number 
(numerus),  called  also  quantity  as  a  phenomenon  (quantitas 
phaenomenori).1 

The  synthesis  of  imagination,  starting  from  given  sensations 
and  attempting  to  determine  an  object  in  time  and  space, 
determines  the  homogeneous  space  which  the  object  occupies 
and  the  homogeneous  time  through  which  it  endures.  This 
gives  the  object  shape  (which  seems  to  include  size)  and  dura- 
tion.2 What  we  are  concerned  with  here  is,  however,  something 
more  general,  something  common  to  size  and  to  duration. 
This  something  Kant  describes  as  number. 

We  might  have  expected  it  to  be  described  rather  as  extensive 
quantity,  which  appears  to  be  more  obviously  sensuous  than 
number.3  Kant,  however,  asks  himself  what  is  the  common 
characteristic  of  every  synthesis  which  produces  the  different 
kinds  of  extensive  quantity.  His  answer  is  that  every  synthesis 
which  produces  extensive  quantity4  (whether  in  time  or  space) 
must  be  a  successive  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous.5  In  holding 
this  he  is  assuming  that  in  order  to  determine  any  line,  however 

1  A  146  =  B  1 86.  The  synthesis  is  here  taken  as  an  act  of  synthesis 
and  is  successive. 

2  Compare  A  724  =  B  752,  'Gestalt'  and  'Dauer'. 

3  Compare  A  162  =  B  203  ff.  Perhaps  Kant's  desire  to  connect  the 
schema  specially  with  successive  synthesis  in  time  is  the  reason  why 
he  describes  the  schema  as  number:  sensuous  extensive  quantity  is 
indeterminate  apart  from  measurement. 

4  I  think  we  must  take  'extensive  quantity*  throughout  to  be  deter- 
minate extensive  quantity,  that  is,  a  quantity  which  is  measured  or 
specified  mathematically.  Kant  does  not  deny  that  we  can  be  aware 
of  an  indeterminate  quantity  or  quantum  without  successive  synthesis ; 
see  the  important  footnote  to  A  426  =  B  454. 

6  A  163  =  B  204  and  A  242  —  B  300.  The  successiveness  of  the 
synthesis  (in  the  sense  that  we  must  take  each  unit  separately  one 
after  another)  is  the  mark  of  extensive  quantity. 


46  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §2 

small,  we  must  apprehend  its  parts  one  after  the  other,  and  add 
them  together,  or  synthetise  them  into  a  whole  j1  and  the  same, 
he  maintains,  is  equally  true  of  even  the  smallest  period  of 
time.2  To  determine  the  quantity  of  anything  is  to  determine  how 
many  units  it  contains,  and  these  units  (whatever  they  may  be) 
must  be  successively  added,  if  the  thing  is  to  be  measured.3 

The  successive  addition  of  homogeneous  units  is  counting, 
and  what  it  produces  is  number.  Since  space  and  time  are 
homogeneous,  and  since  all  objects  are  in  a  common  space 
and  time,  all  objects  are  known  (so  far  as  they  are  spatial 
and  temporal)  through  a  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination 
which  successively  synthetises  the  homogeneous  parts  of 
space  and  time.  Hence  every  object  must  have  number,  or, 
perhaps  it  would  be  better  to  say,  must  be  numerable. 

Kant's  own  account4  is  intelligible  only  in  the  light  of  his 
Axioms  of  Intuition,  and  it  is  obscured  by  the  fact  that  he 
makes  no  reference  to  space.  Thus  he  does  not  explain  that 
intuitions  must  have  homogeneity  because  they  are  spatial 
and  temporal.  His  description  of  number  is  misleading;  for 
he  says  that  number  is  an  idea  which  comprehends  the  succes- 
sive addition  of  homogeneous  units.5  This  would  identify 
'number*  with  'counting'  (unless  he  means  that  number  is 
the  idea  which  comprehends  in  a  total  the  homogeneous 
units  successively  added).  He  concludes  that  number  is  there- 
fore the  unity  of  the  synthesis  of  the  manifold  of  a  homogeneous 
intuition  in  general  in  that9  I  generate7  time  itself  in  the 

1  See  A  162-3  —  B  203.   Every  line  is  made  up  of  parts,  not  of 
points,  and  mathematical  measurement  may  choose  any  part  it  pleases 
as  the  unit  of  measurement;  see  K.d.U.  §  26  (V  254). 

2  A  163  =  B  203.  3  A  242  =  B  300.          4  A  142-3  =  B  182. 
6  Compare  what  he  says  about  number  in  A  140  =  B  179. 

6  'dadurch  dass.'  The  first  half  of  this  sentence  is  a  definition  of 
the  pure  category  of  quantity,  and  it  is  only  what  is  added  that  makes 
it  a  definition  of  number — unless  indeed  'intuition  in  general*  (as  in 
A  724  =  B  752  and  perhaps  in  B  203)  indicates  only  that  the  difference 
between  time  and  space  may  be  ignored;  see  Chapter  XXXVII  §  3. 

7  Apart  from  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  there  would 
be  no  time  and  no  succession;  compare  A  99-100,  A  101-2,  A  107, 
B  154-5,  and  B  1 60  n.  It  must  be  remembered  that  for  Kant  time 
has  reality  only  in  relation  to  the  human  mind. 


XXXIII  §  2]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          47 

apprehension  of  the  intuition.1  This  is  so  difficult  as  almost 
to  bar  comment;  and  it  remains  doubtful  whether  Kant  is 
regarding  number  as  the  act  of  counting  or  not.2  Number 
may  perhaps  be  a  synthetic  unity  (or  combined  manifold) 
produced  by  the  successive  addition  of  homogeneous  units;3 
but  it  cannot  be  either  the  act  of  counting  or  the  unity  of  the 
act  of  counting.4 

If  we  reinterpret  Kant's  doctrine  by  bringing  in  space, 
as  I  have  done  and  as  he  himself  does  later,  his  account  of 
the  schema  appears  to  be  sound.  It  may  seem  hardly  necessary 
to  ask  whether  the  schema  has  also  a  connexion  with  the 
universal  form  of  judgement ;  but  there  is  always  a  possibility 
that  more  than  mere  formalism  lies  behind  Kant's  seemingly 
artificial  expressions.  The  demand  of  all  judgement,  and 
indeed  of  all  conception,  is  that  a  plurality  of  homogeneous 
units  should  be  conceived  as  a  totality:  this  is  not  confined 
to  the  form  'All  S  is  P'.  Kant's  doctrine  may  be  interpreted 
as  asserting  that  because  sensible  objects  are  in  space  and  time 
and  so  can  be  measured,  there  must  be  objects  which  have 
sufficient  homogeneity  to  be  conceived  (or  to  be  judged  by 
the  form  'All  S  is  P'),  and  that  even  complete  homogeneity 

1  If  this  implied  that  the  homogeneity  of  intuitions  is  derived  from 
the  fact  that  the  apprehension  of  them  is  successive,  such  an  implication 
would  be  mistaken.  There  is  no  such  implication  in  the  Axioms, 
and  I  do  not  think  we  should  impute  this  to  Kant  here.  The  homo- 
geneity of  objects  belongs  to  them  in  virtue  of  the  time  through 
which  they  last  and  the  space  which  they  occupy,  not  in  virtue  of 
the  time  which  we  require  to  apprehend  them.  Nevertheless  for  Kant 
there  is  neither  time  nor  space  except  in  so  far  as  they  are  (directly 
or  indirectly)    apprehended   inasmuch  as   the   objects  in  time  and 
space  are  (directly  or  indirectly)  apprehended.  And  if  we  are  to 
determine  any  past  time  or  any  unperceived  space,  we  can  do  so 
only  by  taking  up  successively  and  combining  the  units  by  which 
we  measure  it. 

2  Compare  A  103  (and  also  A  78  =  B  104  and  A  724  =  B  752). 

3  Compare  Kant's  own  description  of  number  in  the  Dissertation 
— §  15  Cor.  (II  406) — as  'multitudo  numerando,  h.e.  in  tempore  dato 
successive  unum  uni  addendo,  dtstmcte  cognita*. 

4  This  description  of  number  is  perhaps  an  example  of  Kant's  ten- 
dency to  identify  the  concept  of  an  object  with  the  concept  of  the 
synthesis  by  which  the  object  is  constructed. 


48  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §  3 

would  not  render  these  objects  indistinguishable  from  one 
another.1  More  simply,  in  knowing  sensible  objects,  and  indeed 
in  knowing  any  individual  sensible  object,  there  must  be  a 
synthesis  of  the  homogeneous.  The  pure  category  of  quantity 
is  therefore  shown  to  have  objective  validity ;  and  at  the  same 
time  it  ceases  to  be  a  mere  empty  form  of  judgement  and 
acquires  'sense  and  significance'  as  the  schematised  category 
of  extensive  quantity.  Even  if  we  cannot  accept  Kant's  deriva- 
tion of  the  category,  we  need  not  deny  that  his  view  has  more 
plausibility  than  is  commonly  recognised. 

§  3.  The  Schema  of  Quality 

Every  sensible  object,  since  the  synthesis  through  which 
it  is  known  is  also  a  synthesis  of  time  and  space,  must  have 
extensive  quantity;  that  is,  it  must  have  homogeneous  parts 
external  to  one  another  which  can  be  successively  countecf. 
But  every  sensible  object,  if  it  is  to  be  a  real  object  (and  not 
merely  the  form  of  an  object),  must  involve  more  than  a 
synthesis  of  time  and  space.  Its  matter  must  be  synthetised 
with  the  forms  of  time  and  space,  and  only  so  can  it  be 
real.  Hence  the  next  schema  is  referred  to  as  the  schema  of 
reality. 

In  spite  of  this  it  is  clear  from  Kant's  account  that  the  pure 
category  which  has  to  be  schematised  would  be  better  called 
the  category  of  limitation,  that  is,  of  reality  combined  with 
negation?  It  may  be  described  for  our  present  purpose  as 
the  concept  of  the  synthesis  of  being  and  not-being.  This  category 
is  connected  by  Kant  with  the  infinite  judgement  'S  is  non-P'. 
The  artificiality  of  the  form  should  not  obscure  the  fact — as  I 

1  It  should  be  noted  that,  according  to  Kant,  objects  which  were 
entirely  homogeneous  could  nevertheless  be  distinguished  from  one 
another,  and  so  could  be  counted,  because  as  sensible  (and  not  merely 
conceivable)  they  would  have  different  positions  in  space.  See  A  263 
=  B  319;  A  272  =  B  328;  A  281  =  B  337-8.  So  far  as  I  know  Kant 
does  not  discuss  this  problem  with  reference  to  time. 

2  See  B  in.     It  may  also  be  called  the  category  of  quality ;   see 
A  145  =  B  184. 


XXXIII  §  3]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          49 

believe  it  to  be — that  every  judgement  both  affirms  and  denies,1 
and  in  so  doing  delimits,  or  determines,  reality.  It  therefore 
demands  that  its  object  should  somehow  be  characterised 
by  a  combination  of  being  and  not-being. 

The  schematised  category  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis  of 
being  and  not-being  in  time  and  space,  and  may  be  described 
as  the  category  of  reality  (or  limitation)  in  time  and  space.2 
The  transcendental  schema  which  is  the  product  of  this 
synthesis  is  properly  called  degree? 

Kant's  own  account4  of  this  schema  is  obscure  and  inaccurate, 
and  it  is  intelligible  only  in  the  light  of  the  Anticipations  of 
Sense  Perception.5  He  believes  that  the  mere  forms  of  time 
and  space  are  nothing  real,  and  that  if  we  are  to  have  a  real 
object  of  experience,  these  empty  forms  must  be  filled  with  a 
given  matter,  which  is  in  the  first  instance  sensation.6  Being 
in  time  and  space  is  to  be  found  only  in  sensation  (or  the  sensum) 
and  its  correlate  not-being  is  empty  time  and  space.  The 
synthesis  of  sensation  with  the  forms  of  time  and  space,  or 

1  It  may  be  said  that  an  affirmative  judgement  implies  a  negative 
judgement  and  vice  versa,  but  the  negative  judgement  is  another  and 
a  different  judgement.  This  is  true  of  the  judgement  taken  abstractly 
as  a  proposition,  but  I  believe  that  the  affirmative  judgement,  taken 
concretely,  denies  as  well  as  affirms,  while  the  negative  judgement, 
taken  concretely,  affirms  as  well  as  denies;  and  this  does  not  mean 
that  there  is  no  difference  between  an  affirmative  and  a  negative 
judgement. 

2  It  may  be  described  also  as  the  category  of  quality.  If  we  could 
call  it  the  category  of  intensive  quantity  we  should  get  a  parallel  with 
extensive  quantity  (compare  B  202) ;  but  Kant  seems  to  treat  intensive 
quantity  as  equivalent  to  degree.  As  generally  in  this  chapter,  he 
ignores  space. 

3  Kant  calls  it  sensatio  or  reahtas  phaenomcnon  (A  146  =•  B  186). 
This  is,  I  think,  misleading.  He  means,  not  mere  sensation,  but  degree 
of  sensation,  or  sensation  as  having  degree.  He  means  also  degree  of 
what  corresponds  to  sensation  as  well  as  degree  of  sensation  itself. 

4 Degree*  appears  to  be  identified  with  'intensive  quantity'.  Intensive 
quantity  is  given  in  sensation  at  a  moment:  we  do  not  apprehend 
each  of  its  parts  separately  and  successively  in  order  to  combine 
them  into  a  total  (see  A  168  =  B  210). 

4  A  143  =  B  182-3.  6  B  207  ff. 
6  We  may  for  the  present  ignore  'what  corresponds  to  sensation*. 


50  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §  3 

of  being  with  not-being,  alone  gives  us  a  determinate  object. 
And  according  to  Kant  this  synthesis,  which  fills  time  and 
space  with  sensation,  must  do  so  in  different  degrees.1  Any 
sensation  that  we  care  to  take  (for  example,  the  sensation  of  a 
red  colour),2  however  faint  it  may  be,  is  never  the  faintest 
possible  sensation:  there  is  always  possible  a  still  fainter 
sensation  between  any  given  sensation  and  complete  absence 
of  sensation.  This  means  that  in  what  fills  time  and  space 
there  is  always  a  more  or  less  which  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  more  or  less  of  time  and  space  which  is  filled.  A 
colour  may  be  brighter  than  another,  though  it  lasts  for  a 
shorter  time  and  covers  a  smaller  surface.  Thus  every  sensible 
object  must  have  a  degree  of  its  sensed  qualities,  and  such 
degree  is  a  necessary  characteristic  of  reality  in  time  and 
space. 

This  very  difficult  doctrine  will  have  to  be  considered  in. 
detail  later.3  Here  it  need  only  be  observed  that  the  connexion 

1  Kant  seems  to  infer  from  this  that  when  we  know  an  object, 
time  and  space  are  neither  completely  filled  nor  completely  empty, 
so  that  an  object  must  always  exhibit  in  itself  a  determinate  combina- 
tion of  being  and  not-being.  2  See  A  169  =  Ban. 

3  See  Chapter  XXXVIII.  Kant's  own  definition  of  the  schema  is 
'the  continuous  and  uniform  production  of  reality  in  time,  as  we 
descend  in  time  from  the  sensation  which  has  a  definite  degree  to  its 
complete  disappearance,  or  gradually  mount  from  negation  to  such 
a  degree*.  Here  the  schema  is  described  as  if  it  were  the  syn- 
thesis itself,  though  we  might  expect  it  to  be  the  product  of  the 
synthesis. 

Kant  explains  that  'what  corresponds  to  a  sensation*  is  that  whose 
concept  indicates  being  (in  time).  He  asserts  that  this  is  what  is 
thought  in  the  pure  concept  of  the  understanding;  but  the  pure 
category  conceives  being  without  any  relation  to  time,  and  it  is  the 
schematised  category  which  refers  to  being  in  time.  For  the  schema- 
tised category  being  is  what  fills  time,  and  not-being  is  empty 
time. 

He  also  says,  if  the  reading  is  correct,  that  because  time  is  the 
form  of  objects  only  as  appearances,  what  corresponds  to  sensation 
is  the  transcendental  matter  of  objects  as  things-in-themselves !  This 
contradicts  the  statement  that  it  is  'being  m  time*,  unless  he  uses 
the  phrase  'things-in-themselves*  in  its  physical,  and  not  in  its  meta- 
physical, sense  (see  A  45  =  B  63) ;  but  in  that  case  he  would  hardly 
call  the  matter  'transcendental*.  There  is  here  some  looseness  of 


XXXIII  §3]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          51 

of  this  schema  with  the  quality  of  judgements  seems  the  most 
artificial  of  all  Kant's  connexions;  for  it  is  a  pure  accident 
that  the  difference  of  affirmation  and  negation  is  said  to  deter- 
mine the  quality  of  judgements.  Nevertheless  it  is  only  fair 
to  Kant  to  recognise  that  this  connexion  does  not  depend 
merely  on  the  accidental  use  of  the  word  'quality'  for  two  very 
different  things.  Every  judgement  affirms  or  denies  objective 
reality.  This  has  in  itself  nothing  to  do  with  time  or  space, 
but  when  we  translate  it — in  Caird's  phrase1 — into  terms  of 
time,  then  what  it  affirms  or  denies  is  objective  existence 
or  reality  in  time  and  space.  What  exists  in  time  and  space 
is  the  sensible  object,  whose  reality  is  known,  in  the  first 
instance,  through  sensation.  Furthermore,  what  sensation 
gives  us  is  a  quality  of  the  object,  and  this  quality  (whereby 
it  fills  time  and  space)  always  has  degree  or  intensive  quantity. 
In  this  case  also,  if  we  were  convinced  that  some  schema 
must  correspond  to  the  form  of  judgement,  it  would  not  be 
unreasonable  to  regard  the  schema  in  question  as  the  degree 
of  qualities  given  in  sensation.2  We  know  that  it  must  be 
possible  to  determine  real  objects  by  combined  affirmation 
and  negation,  because  if  there  is  to  be  experience  at  all,  some- 
expression.  The  matter  of  things-in-themselves  is  unknown;  com- 
pare A  366.  What  Corresponds'  in  the  phenomenal  object  to  our 
sensations  is  the  matter  of  the  phenomenal  object;  this  matter  (whose 
inner  nature  is  unknown)  we  refer  to  a  source  beyond  the  mind; 
and  it  is  this  same  matter  which  constitutes  the  phenomenal  object 
an  empirical  reality  (compare  A  720  =  B  748). 

The  emendation  of  Kant's  statement  by  inserting  the  word  'not* 
(which  Kemp  Smith  accepts  from  Wille)  is  not  very  convincing. 

1  Compare  Caird,  The  Philosophy  of  Kant,  p.  407,  and  also  The 
Critical  Philosophy  of  Kant ,  Vol.  I,  p.  441. 

2  It  may  be  objected  that  extensive  quantity  is  itself  a  quality  of 
things.  Kant  himself  recognises  extension  to  be  a  primary  quality 
of  bodies;  see  ProL  §  13  Anm.  II  (IV  289).  He  also  describes  spatial 
quanta  as  having  the  quality  of  shape  (A  720  =  B  748),  and  quantity 
itself  as  having  the  quality  of  continuity  (A  176  —  B  218).  But  in 
connexion  with  the  schema  he  is  using  the  word  *  quality*  in  the 
sense  in  which  it  is  opposed  to  extensive  quantity.  Quality  in  this 
sense  is  given  in  sensation,  while  extensive  quantity  is  determined 
by  the  time  and  space  which  is  filled  by  the  given  quality. 


52  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII 

thing  must  be  given  in  sensation1  and  synthetised  in  time  and 
space.2  Every  object  must  therefore  exhibit  in  itself  that 
combination  of  being  and  not-being  which  is  known  as  degree, 
a  combination  demanded  by  all  judgement  so  far  as  it  delimits 
objects  by  affirmation  and  negation. 

§  4.  The  Schemata  of  Relation 

An  actual  object  of  experience  must  have  more  than  quantity 
and  quality.  It  must  have  a  definite  position3  in  one  common 
time  and  space,  and  this  position  is  determined  by  its  relation 
to  other  objects.  Kant  gives  us  three  schemata  of  relation 
corresponding  to  the  three  pure  categories  derived  from  the 
categorical,  hypothetical,  and  disjunctive  forms  of  judgement; 
and  these  schemata  are  concerned  with  the  necessary  relation 
of  sensible  objects  to  one  another  in  a  common  time  and  space.4 
Here  there  is  no  suggestion  that  a  schema  is  either  a  synthesis 
or  a  rule  of  synthesis.  Each  schema  is  defined  as  the  characteristic 
which  is  the  product  of  the  synthesis.5 

The  first  pure  category  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis  of 
subject  and  predicate.  In  the  categorical  form  of  judgement 
subject  and  predicate  are  for  Formal  Logic  interchangeable; 
but  for  Transcendental  Logic,  since  the  pure  category  is  the 
form  of  judgement  as  used  to  determine  sensible  objects, 

1  By  affirmation  and  negation  we  delimit  or  determine  time  and 
space  as  well  as  what  is  in  time  and  space.  But  space  and  time  are 
not  real  things,  and  we  determine  real  things  only  when  we  determine 
what  is  given  in  time  and  space.  Even  time  and  space  are  real  only 
when  they  are  filled. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Plato  as  well  as  Kant  identified  space 
with  TO  fit}  ov,  although  for  Plato  space  was  matter  (vA^),  not  form. 

2  The  very  difficult  question  as  to  the  necessity  of  different  degrees 
of  reality  in  time  and  space  must  be  dealt  with  later;  see  Chapter 
XXXVIII. 

8  lDasem\  which  is  a  being  there  (or  then)  and  is  equivalent  to 
existence,  that  is,  existence  in  space  and  time.  An  imaginary  object 
may  have  quantity  and  quality  in  a  sense,  but  only  an  actual 
object  has  existence  in  our  common  space  and  time. 

4  Kant,  as  usual  in  this  chapter,  ignores  space,  but  his  account 
is  not  intelligible  apart  from  space,  and  must  be  supplemented  from 
the  doctrine  of  the  Analogies.  5  A  143-4  =  B  183-4. 


XXXIII  §  4]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          53 

the  subject  is  regarded  as  a  subject  which  can  never  be  a  pre- 
dicate.1 Apart  from  empirical  sensation  we  cannot  know 
whether  anything  corresponds  to  the  thought  of  such  a 
subjeqj:.2 

The  schematised  category  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis 
of  the  permanent  and  the  changing  in  time,  where  the  permanent 
is  the  unchanging  subject  (or  substance)  to  which  the  changing 
predicates  (or  accidents)  belong:  the  permanent  is,  in  short, 
the  unchanging  substratum  of  all  change,  and  the  schematised 
category  is  the  category  of  substance  and  accident  (or  of 
subsistence  and  inherence).  The  transcendental  schema  which 
is  the  product  of  the  synthesis  is  permanence.  Kant  ignores 
the  fact  that  the  category,  and  presumably  the  schema,  involves 
two  correlative  terms,3  and  he  is  content  to  refer  to  the  schema 
indifferently  as  'permanence1  or  'the  permanent'.4 

The  second  pure  category  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis 
of  ground  and  consequent.  Kant  habitually  describes  it  as  the 
category  of  cause  and  effect,  but  it  has  no  reference  to  time. 
He  himself  says  that  if  we  leave  out  all  reference  to  temporal 
succession,  the  category  of  cause  is  merely  the  concept  of 
something  from  which  we  can  make  an  inference  to  the  existence 
of  something  else.5  This  would  not  enable  us  to  distinguish 

*B  129;  A  147  =  B  1 86;  A  242-3  —  B  300-1.  I  suppose  Kant 
holds  that  unless  this  is  so,  there  is  no  real  distinction  between  subject 
and  predicate.  His  argument  might  be  more  satisfactory  if  he  merely 
insisted  that  thought  demands  something  to  think  about  by  means 
of  its  concepts. 

2  B  149;  A  243  =  B  301. 

8  See  B  no.  Kant  perhaps  ignores  change  as  a  correlate  of  per- 
manence, because  change  is  dealt  with  in  connexion  with  the  second 
schema  of  relation,  and  all  three  schemata  must  be  considered  together. 

4  Kant  is  careless  in  his  account  of  substance.  He  says  (i)  that  it 
is  permanence,  the  permanence  of  the  real  in  time,  (2)  that  it  is  the 
idea  of  the  real  as  a  substratum  which  endures  while  everything  else 
changes;  and  (3)  that  it  is  the  permanent  or  unchanging.  The  Latin 
name  is  constans  et  perdurabile  rerum,  or  substantia  phaenomenon 
(A  146  =  B  1 86). 

6  A  243  =  B  301.  I  think  the  words  'the  existence  of  should  be 
omitted  from  this  statement,  but  even  so  the  definition  would  be 
unsatisfactory. 


>4  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §4 

between  cause  and  effect,1  nor  have  we  any  right  to  suppose 
that  there  is  any  object  corresponding  to  the  concept. 

The  schematised  category  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis 
of  ground  and  consequent  where  the  consequent  succeeds  the 
ground  in  time,  and  it  is  to  be  described  as  the  category  of 
cause  and  effect.  The  transcendental  schema  which  is  the  pro- 
duct of  the  synthesis  is  necessary  succession,  or  succession 
in  accordance  with  a  rule.2  This  means,  not  that  an  event  A 
must  always  be  succeeded  by  some  other  event,  but  that  it 
must  (other  conditions  remaining  the  same)  be  succeeded 
by  the  event  B.3 

The  third  pure  category  is  more  difficult.  In  the  disjunctive 
judgement  we  think  of  a  whole  whose  parts  mutually  exclude, 
and  so  mutually  determine,  one  another  in  the  whole.4  Hence 
the  pure  category  of  communion  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis 
of  a  whole  whose  parts  mutually  exclude  and  determine  one 
another.  It  has  of  course  no  reference  to  time. 

1  Perhaps  Kant  has  in  mind  the  fact  that  such  an  inference  can 
in  special  cases  work  in  both  directions;  for  example,  we  can  argue 
either  from  the  three  sides  of  a  triangle  to  its  three  angles  or  vice 
versa.  Or  perhaps  he  means  that  inference  is  sometimes  from  effect  to 
cause — if  there  is  a  footprint,  a  man  has  passed. 

2  Kant  says  also  that  the  schema  of  cause  is  'the  real  upon  which, 
whenever  posited,  something  else  always  follows.'  The  word  'posited* 
(gesetzt)  is  always  puzzling.  Here  it  seems  to  mean  'has  a  position 
in  time',  'occurs'.  The  schema  of  effect  would  then  presumably  be 
'the  real  which  always  follows  upon  a  given  event'.  Causality  applies, 
not  to  the  succession  of  times,  but  to  the  succession  of  appearances 
in  time. 

8  Whether  rightly  or  wrongly,  Kant  always  assumes  that  causality 
implies  regular  succession;  and  what  I  call  'necessary  succession'  is 
to  be  taken  as  meaning  'regular  succession'.  Necessary  regularity, 
like  permanence,  is  something  whose  presence  can  be  confirmed  by 
observation,  although  it  cannot  be  established  by  observation. 

4  Compare  A  73-4  =  B  98-9  and  B  112-13.  We  may  consider  this 
to  be  implied  in  the  form  of  judgement  'A  is  either  B  or  C  or  D.' 
In  the  judgement  'a  triangle  is  either  equilateral  or  isosceles  or  scalene', 
we  divide  what  Kant  calls  the  'sphere'  of  triangularity  into  the  mutually 
exclusive  parts  which  constitute  the  whole  sphere.  It  is  irrelevant  to 
object  that  this  bears  no  analogy  to  simultaneity  because  a  triangle 
cannot  be  both  equilateral  and  isosceles  at  the  same  time;  for  all 
reference  to  time  is  excluded  from  the  pure  category. 


XXXIII  §4]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          55 

This  statement  is,  however,  too  simple  for  the  full  under- 
standing of  Kant's  view.  He  himself  gives  a  description  of 
what  purports  to  be  the  pure  category,  but  (as  in  the  case 
of  causality)  he  does  not  distinguish  it  from  the  schematised 
category.  He  says  that  it  is  'the  reciprocal  causality  of  sub- 
stances in  relation  to  one  another'.1  It  would  be  more  exact 
to  say  that  it  is  'the  reciprocal  causality  of  substances  in  regard 
to  their  accidents'.2  If  we  exclude  all  reference  to  time  and  to 
terms  implying  time,  we  must  say  that  the  pure  category 
of  communion3  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis  of  ultimate  subjects 
such  that  the  predicates  of  the  one  subject  have  their  ground 
in  the  other,  and  vice  versa.4 

The  schematised  category  is  the  concept  of  the  synthesis 
of  permanent  substances  such  that  the  changing  accidents  of 
the  one  substance  have  their  cause  in  the  other,  and  vice  versa:5 
it  may  be  called  the  category  of  interaction.  The  transcendental 
schema  which  is  the  product  of  the  synthesis  is  the  necessary 
simultaneity  of  the  accidents  of  one  substance  with  those 
of  another,  or,  as  Kant  says,  simultaneity  in  accordance  with 
a  universal  rule.6 

It  may  be  added  that  Kant  finds  permanent  substances 
only  in  space,  and  he  believes  that  the  different  spatial  parts 
of  a  substance  are  themselves  substances.7 

1  See  A  244  =  B  302.  2  Compare  A  144  =  B  183. 

3  It  would  be  well  to  use  the  term  'communion'  (Gemetnschaft  or 
commumo)  for  the  pure  category,  and  'interaction'  (Wechselwirkung 
or  commercium)  for  the  schematised  category.  Compare  A2I3  =  62 60 
(although  commumo  is  there  restricted  to  commumo  spatu)  and  A  2 14 
=  6261. 

4  Compare  B  257-8.  This  is  implied  in  the  form  of  judgement 
'Either  A  is  B  or  C  is  D*.  This  second  statement  does  not  contradict 
the  first,  but  it  adds  to  it  that  the  parts  of  the  whole  are  themselves 
subjects  which  determine  one  another  in  regard  to  their  predicates. 
For  the  significance  of  this  see  n.  7  below. 

6  Compare  B  257-8. 

6  A  144  ~  B  183-4.  I  propose  to  use  'necessary  simultaneity*  as 
the  parallel  to  'necessary  succession*. 

7  M.A.d.N.  (IV  503  and  542).  Hence  the  parts  of  a  whole  substance 
are  themselves  substances  which  determine  one  another  in  regard  to 
their  accidents.  Compare  n.  4  above. 


56  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §5 

The  schemata  of  relation  are  (with  the  exception  of  the 
schema  of  interaction)  more  plausibly  connected  with  the 
corresponding  form  of  judgement  than  are  the  schemata 
of  quantity  and  quality.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  not  so  clear 
that  the  characteristics  imposed  by  the  synthesis  of  relation 
must  be  found  in  all  sensible  objects.  The  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  manifestly  imposes  extensive  quantity 
on  objects,  and  I  think  we  may  agree  that  it  involves  a  synthesis 
of  quality  also,  and  even  that  quality  must  necessarily  have 
a  degree.  But  it  is  certainly  not  obvious  why  the  transcendental 
synthesis  should  impose  necessary  permanence,  necessary 
succession,  and  necessary  simultaneity. 

This  fact  is  explicitly  recognised  by  Kant.  In  the  Principles 
he  will  attempt  to  show  that  sensible  objects  must  have  all 
the  categorial  characteristics  specified,  but  in  the  case  of 
quantity  and  quality  wre  are  said  to  have  intuitive  certainty 
or  evidence,  while  in  the  other  cases  we  have  only  discursive 
certainty.  Nevertheless  in  all  cases  we  have  certainty.1 

§  5.  The  Schemata  of  Modality 

We  have  now  seen  that  for  Kant  the  one  synthesis  of  imagina- 
tion by  which  we  construct  objects  in  time  and  space  has 
three  necessary  aspects:  (i)  it  is  a  synthesis  of  time  and  space 
(the  forms  of  intuition),  and  so  involves  extensive  quantity 
or  number ;  (2)  it  is  a  synthesis  of  appearances  given  to  sensation 
(the  matter  of  intuition)  in  time  and  space,  and  so  involves 
intensive  quantity  or  degree;  (3)  it  is  a  synthesis  which  com- 
bines different  appearances  in  one  common  time  and  space, 
and  so  (Kant  will  prove)  involves  permanence,  necessary 
succession,  and  necessary  simultaneity,  or  the  reciprocal 
causality  of  permanent  substances  in  regard  to  their  changing 
accidents.2 

1  See  A   161-2  =  B  200-1    and  A   180  =  B  223;  and  compare 
Chapter  XXXVI  §  3  where  this  point  will  be  discussed. 

2  We  may  speak  of  (i)  as  the  synthesis  of  mere  intuition,  of  (2)  as 
the  synthesis  of  sense-perception,  and  of  (3)  as  the  synthesis  of 
experience;  see  A  180  =  B  223.  The  synthesis  of  experience,  I  think, 
includes  the  first  two.  This  should  be  compared  with  Kant's  summary 


XXXIII  §  5]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          57 

These  syntheses,  or  aspects  of  the  one  synthesis,  determine 
different  categorial  features  of  the  object  of  experience.  The 
first  two  determine  the  object  itself,  the  third  determines 
the  object  in  its  relation  to  other  objects.  When  we  come 
to  the  schemata  of  modality,  we  are  concerned,  not  with 
features  belonging  to  the  object,  but  rather  with  its  relation 
to  the  mind  which  knows  it.1  Hence  we  have  no  longer  to 
discover  new  aspects  of  the  one  synthesis  which  determines 
objects  in  time  (and  space):  we  have  to  observe  (if  we  may 
simplify  matters  provisionally)  that  the  first  aspect  of  the 
synthesis  which  we  have  already  described  is  the  condition 
of  our  knowing  an  object  to  be  possible;2  the  second  is  the 
condition  of  our  knowing  it  to  be  actual;  and  the  third  is 
the  condition  of  our  knowing  it  to  be  necessary.  Possibility, 
actuality,  and  necessity  add  nothing  to  the  content  of  the 
object;  but  every  object  may  be  said  to  be  known  as  possible, 
actual,  and  necessary,  according  to  the  different  ways  in  which 
it  is  related  to  time.3 

Kant  connects  the  pure  categories  of  modality  with  the 
distinction  between  problematic,  assertoric,  and  apodeictic 
judgements.  This  distinction  does  not  concern  the  content 
of  the  judgement,  that  is,  does  not  concern  the  way  in  which 
different  cognitions  are  united  in  the  judgement.  It  concerns 
only  the  way  in  which  the  judgement  (whatever  be  its  content) 
is  thought.4  If  we  entertain  the  judgement  as  a  logical  possibility, 
it  is  problematic.5  If  we  affirm  its  truth,  it  is  assertoric.  If 

in  A  145  —  B  184.  There  we  have  (i)  the  synthesis  of  time  itself  or 
the  production  of  time,  (2)  the  synthesis  of  sensation  or  sense- 
perception  with  the  idea  of  time,  or  the  filling  of  time,  (3)  the  synthesis 
of  different  sense-perceptions  relatively  to  one  another  in  the  whole 
of  time.  1  Compare  A  233-5  =  B  286-7. 

2  Compare  A  180  —  B  223.  This  statement  must  be  taken  as 
provisional  and  as  simplifying  Kant's  position  unduly.  The  condition 
of  the  possibility  of  objects  is  agreement  with  the  forms  of  space 
and  time  and  also  with  the  categories;  see  A  218  =  B  265.  See  also 
Chapter  XLIX  §  2. 

8  Compare  A  145  =  B  184.  The  schema  of  modality  is  concerned 
with  'whether  and  how  the  object  belongs  to  time*. 

4  A  74  =  B  100.  Compare  Chapter  X  §  i. 

6  We  merely  conceive  or  suppose  it. 


58  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §  5 

we  must  think  it  because  of  the  laws  of  thought,  then  it  is 
apodeictic.1 

The  pure  categories  which  are  implicit  in  these  forms  of 
judgement  are  possibility,  actuality  or  existence,  and  necessity.2 
Kant  seems  to  hold  that  they,  even  more  than  the  other  pure 
categories,  can  be  explained  only  by  a  tautology.3  If  we  omit 
all  reference  to  time  and  space,  we  are  left  only  with  logical 
possibility,  which  means  the  mere  absence  of  contradiction 
in  our  ideas ;  logical  actuality  or  truth,4  which  seems  to  mean 
no  more  than  affirmation  by  the  mind;  and  logical  necessity, 
which  would  appear  to  be  present  when  what  we  affirm  is 
inferred  from  given  concepts  or  judgements  in  accordance 
with  the  formal  laws  of  thought.5  In  all  this  we  are  concerned 
only  with  the  characteristics  of  our  own  thinking,  and  not 
with  qualities  of  objects. 

The  pure  categories  of  modality  are  therefore  merely  corj- 
cepts  of  the  synthesis  which  is  present  in  every  judgement. 
The  pure  category  of  possibility  is  a  concept  of  that  synthesis 
as  self-consistent  in  accordance  with  the  formal  law  of  thought. 
The  pure  category  of  actuality  is  a  concept  of  the  same  synthesis 
as  professing  to  determine  a  real  object.6  The  pure  category 

1  A  75-6  =  B  10 1.  Kant  finds  a  parallel  to  this  in  understanding 
which  conceives,  judgement  which  affirms  an  actual  case  falling  under 
the  conception,  and  reason  which  infers  a  logical  necessity  (A  130  = 
B  169).  Logical  necessity,  however,  would  seem  to  cover,  not  only 
the  conclusion  of  a  syllogism,  but  also  immediate  inference,  and  even 
analytic  judgements.  Compare  A  304  =  B  361. 

2  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  we  may  ignore  their  correlates  impossi- 
bility,  non-existence,   and   contingency.    Kant  docs   not  appear  to 
distinguish  between  existence    (Dasein    or  Existenz)    and  actuality 
(Wirkhchkeit).  We  have  Dasein  in  A  80  -  -  B  106,  Existenz  in  B  in, 
and  Wirkhchkeit  in  A  145  =  B  184.  It  might  be  well  to  use  actuality 
for  the  category,  and  existence  (as  having  a  reference  to  time)  for 
the  schema.  3  A  244  =  B  302. 

4  It  seems  to  be  a  claim  to  truth  rather  than  truth  itself.  Kant 
himself  bases  the  assertonc  judgement  in  the  principle  of  sufficient 
reason,  while  he  bases  the  problematic  judgement  on  the  principle 
of  non-contradiction,  and  the  apodeictic  judgement  on  the  principle  of 
excluded  middle;  see  Log.  EmL  VII  (IX  52-3).  I  confess  that  I  find 
his  view  here  very  difficult  to  understand.  5  A  75-6  =  B  101. 

6  This  seems  to  be  involved  in  its  claim  to  truth. 


XXXIII  §  5]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          59 

of  necessity  is  a  concept  of  the  same  synthesis  as  following 
logically  from  other  concepts  or  judgements  in  accordance 
with  the  formal  laws  of  thought.1  Even  these  pure  categories 
must,  towever,  as  categories  be  supposed  to  determine  somehow 
all  objects  in  their  relation  to  the  mind. 

The  schematised  category  of  possibility  is  the  concept  of 
the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination,  so  far  as  that  synthesis 
involves  the  forms  of  intuition.  The  transcendental  schema 
which  is  the  product  of  this  synthesis  may  be  said  to  be  the 
agreement  of  the  synthesis  of  different  ideas  with  the  conditions 
of  time  in  general?  An  object,3  as  opposed  to  an  idea,  is  possible, 
if  it  is  compatible  with  the  nature  of  time,  or  can  be  conceived 
as  existing  at  some  time  or  other.4 

The  schematised  category  of  actuality  is  the  concept  of  the 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination,  so  far  as  that  synthesis 
involves  the  matter  of  intuition  given  at  a  determinate  time.  The 
transcendental  schema  which  is  the  product  of  this  synthesis 
is  existence  at  a  determinate  time.*  An  object  is  actual,  if  it 
is  bound  up  with  the  material  conditions  of  experience,  that 
is  with  sensation.6 

The  schematised  category  of  necessity  is   the  concept  of 


1  Compare  A  75-6  =  B  101. 

2  A  144  =  B  184.   We  might  add  'and  of  space  in  general*.  We 
have  to  add  also  that  in  A  218  =  E  2  65  Kant  asserts  that  agreement 
with  the  formal  conditions  of  thought  is  also  necessary,  if  an  object 
is  to  be  possible.  This  completes  what  is  said  here,  for  the  synthesis 
of  time  and  space  is  a  synthesis  in  accordance  with  the  categories 
or  the  forms  of  thought. 

3  The  example  which  Kant  gives  is  the  fact  that  an  object  may 
have  contradictory  characteristics  in  succession.  The  possibility  that 
the  same  thing  could  have  contradictory  characteristics  is  unintelligible 
to  a  thought  which  ignores  time. 

4  Kant  says  that  the  schema  is  'the  determination  of  the  idea  of 
a  thing  at  some  time  or  other*.    This  might  be    taken  to  mean  that 
if  we  can  imagine  the  thing  as  existing  in  time  and  space,  then  it  is 
possible.   But  this  question  is  complicated  and  difficult,  for  Kant 
holds  that  the  sphere  of  the  possible  is  not  wider  than  that  of  the 
actual;  see  A  230  =  B  282  ff. 

5  A  145  =  B  184.  Existence  at  a  determinate  time  always  involves 
a  connexion  with  sensation.  6A2i8  =  62  66. 


60  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §  6 

the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  as  determining  the 
given  manifold  with  reference  to  the  whole  of  time.  The  trans- 
cendental schema  which  is  the  product  of  this  synthesis  is 
existence  in  relation  to  the  whole  of  time.1  An  object  is  necessary 
when  the  material  conditions  with  which  it  is  bound  up  are 
determined  in  accordance  with  the  universal  laws,  or  formal 
conditions,  necessary  for  the  unity  of  time.2 

All  this  is  difficult,  and  must  be  taken  as  a  summary  and 
provisional  preparation  for  the  Postulates  by  reference  to 
which  alone  it  can  be  understood. 

§  6.  Kant's  Summary 

Having  described  the  schemata  in  detail  Kant  proceeds 
to  sum  up  the  results  which  are  supposed  to  flow  from  this 
description.  Each  schema  is  said  to  'contain  and  to  make 
representable'3  certain  things.  I  do  not  know  what  Kant 
means  by  'make  representable'.4  I  should  like  it  to  mean 
that  the  schema  is  a  sensuous  characteristic  or  mark  in  virtue 
of  which  something  can  be  known. 

The  schema  of  the  category  of  quantity  contains  and  makes 


1  A  145  =  B  184.  The  schema  is  said  to  be  aeternitas  or  necessitas 
phaenomenon;  see  A   146  —  B   186.  We  know  the  necessity  of  an 
object  when  we  know  the  chain  of  causes  which  produced  it. 

2  Compare  A  218  =  B  266. 

8  A  145  =  B  184,  'enthalte  und  vorstellig  mache.'  This  phrase  should 
be  repeated  each  time,  and  I  doubt  whether  it  is  satisfactory  to 
substitute  for  it  the  word  'is',  as  in  Kemp  Smith's  translation.  I 
also  doubt  the  propriety  of  adding  fnur  eine  Zeitbestimmung*  (only 
a  time-determination)  as  is  done  by  Adickes  and  accepted  by  Kemp 
Smith.  The  text  as  it  stands  is  unsatisfactory,  but  I  question  whether 
it  is  improved  by  making  Kant  say  that  the  schema  (which  is  a 
transcendental  time-determination)  not  only  contains,  but  also  makes 
representable,  a  time-determination.  Kant  not  uncommonly  equates 
'is*  and  'contains',  but  it  would  be  strange  if  the  schema  made  itself 
representable. 

4  This  phrase  is  also  used  in  A  143  =  B  183;  but  there  it  is  applied 
to  a  'transition'  (Vbergang)  from  reality  to  negation  which  makes 
every  reality  representable  as  a  quantum — so  that  the  sense  seems 
to  be  rather  different. 


XXXIII  §  6]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          61 

representable  the  generation  (or  synthesis)  of  time  itself  in 
the  successive  apprehension  of  an  object.1 

The  schema  of  the  category  of  quality  contains  and  makes 
representable  the  synthesis  of  sensation  (or  sense-perception) 
with  the  idea  of  time ;  that  is,  it  contains  and  makes  represent- 
able the  filling  of  time.2 

The  schema  of  the  category  of  relation  contains  and  makes 
representable  the  relation  of  sense-perceptions  to  one  another 
in  the  whole  of  time,3  that  is,  according  to  a  rule  of  time- 
determination.4 

The  schema  of  the  category  of  modality  contains  and  makes 
representable  time  itself  as  the  correlate  of  the  determination 
of  an  object?  that  is,  it  indicates  whether  and  how  the  object 
belongs  to  time.6 

These  statements,  it  must  be  recognised,  are  obscure, 
and  they  repeat  rather  than  clarify  what  has  already  been 
said.  Thus  there  is,  under  the  heads  of  quantity  and  quality, 
the  same  tendency  to  connect  the  schema  with  the  synthesis 

1  Number  (or,  perhaps  better,  extensive  quantity)  is  the  product 
of  such  a  synthesis  of  homogeneous  times  (and  spaces)  in  appre- 
hending an  object.  It  may  perhaps  also  be  a  mark  of  this  synthesis> 
if  we  do  not  regard  the  product  as  separable  from  the  synthesis. 

2  Degree  of  sensation  (or  of  what  corresponds  to  sensation)  is 
what  fills  time  (and  space).  It  is  the  product,  and  perhaps  the  mark, 
of  the  synthesis  which  combines  sensation  with  time. 

3  (zu  alter  Zeit.' 

4  The  permanence,  succession,  and  simultaneity  of  sense-perceptions 
or  appearances  are,  according  to  Kant,  a  product  (and  perhaps  a 
mark)  of  the  synthesis  which  combines  all  sense-perceptions  in  one 
time  (and  space).  They  enable  us  to  distinguish  the  relations  of 
substance  and  accident,  cause  and  effect,  and  interaction. 

5  It  may  be  noted  that  we  can  know  times  (and  spaces)  empirically 
only  by  knowing  the  objects  in  these  times  (and  spaces);  see  A  216 
=  B  264. 

6  The  object  is  possible,  if  it  is  compatible  with  the  form  of  time, 
and  so  can  exist  at  some  time  or  other.  It  is  actual,  if  its  matter  is 
given  at  some  determinate  time.  It  is  necessary,  if  its  existence  is 
determined  in  relation  to  the  whole  of  time  in  accordance  with  the 
Analogies.  These  are  the  ways  in  which  the  object  can  belong  to  time, 
or  the  ways  in  which  time  is  the  correlate  of  the  determination  of 
an  object. 


6a  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §  6 

of  imagination,  while  under  the  head  of  relation  (and 
perhaps  also  under  the  head  of  modality)  the  schema  is 
connected  rather  with  the  product  of  the  synthesis.1  Whatever 
be  the  difficulties  of  Kant's  exposition,  I  cannot  see  any  other 
way  of  understanding  his  doctrine  except  on  the  supposition 
already  adopted — that  the  schemata  are  sensuous  characteristics 
which  must  belong  to  all  objects  so  far  as  the  manifold  of 
these  objects  is  combined  in  one  time  (and  space). 

This  view  is,  I  think,  borne  out  by  Kant's  conclusion.2 
The  schemata  are  a  priori  time-determinations3  in  accordance 
with  rules ;  and  these  time-determinations  (following  the  order 
of  the  categories)  concern  (i)  the  time-series,  (2)  the  time- 
content,  (3)  the  time-order  (or  the  order  of  what  is  in  time), 
and  (4)  the  totality  of  time  in  its  relation  to  all  possible  objects. 
All  objects  must  have  extensive  quantity  so  far  as  they  extend 
through  a  series  of  homogeneous  times.  They  must  have 
intensive  quantity  so  far  as  they  fill  time.  They  must  be  sub'- 
stances  interacting  causally  with  one  another  so  far  as  there 
is  an  objective  order  of  events  in  time.  And  they  must  be 
possible,  actual,  and  necessary  in  virtue  of  their  various  re- 
lations to  time  as  a  whole.  The  first  two  assertions  Kant  regards 
as  intuitively  certain;  the  third  requires  something  that  may 
be  called  proof;  while  the  fourth  requires  only  explanation 
or  elucidation  after  the  first  three  have  been  established. 

The  last  paragraphs4  of  Kant's  discussion  explain  very 
clearly  his  view  that  the  schemata  give  'meaning'  or  objective 
reference  to  the  categories,  and  at  the  same  time  restrict  their 
application  to  objects  of  sense  alone.5  We  may  be  tempted 

1  This  difference  may  be  connected  with  the  fact  that  under  the 
first  two  headings  we  have  intuitive  evidence':  Kant  may  therefore 
be  more  inclined  to  lay  emphasis  on  the  synthesis,  since  the  product 
is  evident  to  all,  but  the  synthesis  is  not. 

2  A  145  =-  B  184-5. 

3  It  should  now  be  clear  that  these  are  not  determinations  of  time 
itself,  but  temporal  determinations  of  objects. 

4  A   145-7  =  B   185-6.  The  obscure  sentence  with  which  these 
paragraphs  begin  is  discussed  in  Chapter  XXXIV  §  4. 

6  Compare  Chapter  XXXII  §  7  and  also  Chapter  LIV. 


XXXIII  §  7]    THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          63 

to  suppose  that  when  we  abstract  from  the  schemata  which 
restrict  the  application  of  the  categories  to  things  as  they 
appear  to  our  senses,  we  shall  then  have  pure  categories  which 
will  apply  to  things  as  they  are  in  themselves.1  Kant  does  not 
deny  that  we  must  think  things-in-themselves  by  means  of 
the  pure  categories — we  have  indeed  no  other  way  of  thinking. 
He  does  deny  that  such  thinking  can  give  us  knowledge ;  for 
knowledge  always  demands  intuition  as  well  as  conception. 
The  pure  categories  in  abstraction  from  the  schemata  have 
still  what  he  calls  a  'logical'  meaning:  they  are  concepts  of 
the  unity  (or  synthesis)  of  ideas  which  is  implicit  in  the  forms 
of  judgement.  But  no  object  is  given  for  them,  and  they  have 
no  'meaning' — in  the  sense  that  we  cannot  indicate  the  nature 
of  any  object  to  which  they  apply;  and  consequently  they  are 
not  a  source  of  knowledge.2 

§  7.  The  Number  of  the  Schemata 

If  we  hold  that  the  categories  cannot  be  derived  from  the 
forms  of  judgement,  it  is  clear  that  a  large  part  of  Kant's 
doctrine  must  be  arbitrary  or  artificial,  comparable  in  some 
ways  to  the  many  attempts  which  have  been  made  to  square 
the  circle.  Nevertheless  it  is  unwise  not  to  recognise  the  in- 
genuity and  plausibility  of  his  attempt,  concealed  though 
it  is  by  the  untidiness  of  his  expressions.  On  the  whole  I 
must  admit  for  myself  that  what  surprises  me  most  is  the  way 
in  which  his  efforts  approximate  to  something  very  like  success. 

It  may  be  thought  that  there  is  one  very  marked  failure, 
since  we  are  offered  only  one  schema  for  the  three  categories 
of  quantity  and  quality,  whereas  for  each  of  the  categories 
of  relation  and  modality  there  is  a  separate  schema.  Yet 
even  here  it  should  be  observed  that  Kant  can  speak  as  if 
there  were  only  one  schema  for  the  three  categories  of  relation, 
and  one  for  the  three  categories  of  modality.3  He  does  not 

1A  147  =  B  186. 

2  In  the  text  Kant  says  that  they  have  no  'meaning*  which  might 
yield  a  concept  of  the  object.  He  corrects  'concept*  to  'knowledge* 
in  Nachtrage  LXI.  3  A  145  =  B  184;  compare  §  6  above. 


64  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIII  §  7 

regard  the  difference  between  one  schema  and  three  schemata 
as  the  sharp  distinction  which  it  appears  to  be  at  first  sight. 
How  is  this  to  be  explained  ? 

We  must  remember  that  every  category  is  involved  in  Jcnowing 
any  object.  Hence  there  is  only  one  ultimate  synthesis  involved 
in  all  knowledge,  although  this  synthesis  is  complex  and  has 
different  aspects  concerned  with  quantity,  quality,  relation, 
and  modality.  If  we  treat  these  aspects  separately,  and  speak 
of  a  synthesis  of  quantity,  a  synthesis  of  quality,  and  so  on, 
each  of  these  syntheses  in  turn  may  be  regarded  as  having 
three  different  aspects.  Where  these  aspects  are  of  greater 
complexity,  as  in  the  case  of  relation  and  modality,  Kant 
gives  them  special  treatment ;  where  they  are  of  less  complexity, 
as  in  the  case  of  quantity  and  quality,  he  treats  them  all  together. 
His  carelessness  of  expression1  should  not  obscure  the  presence 
of  three  different  aspects  in  every  case. 

It  should,  for  example,  be  clear  that  in  determining  the 
existence  of  any  object,  we  must  determine  it,  not  only  as  a 
permanent  substance  with  changing  accidents,  but  also  as 
having  the  succession  of  these  accidents  causally  determined, 
and  as  acting  and  reacting  simultaneously  with  all  other  sub- 
stances. Unless  all  three  relations  are  present,  Kant  believes 
that  we  cannot  determine  the  existence  of  any  object  in  time 
and  space. 

So  too  in  the  case  of  quantity.  We  are  given  only  one  schema, 
namely  number,  but  in  numbering  or  measuring  any  object 
all  three  categories  are  present.  Every  number  is  a  plurality 
of  units  taken  as  a  totality,  and  number  is  said  to  belong  to 
the  category  of  totality  only  because  totality  is  plurality  regarded 
as  unity.2  The  schema  of  quality  in  a  similar  way  involves 
reality,  negation,  and  limitation.  Indeed  it  is  only  in  this  case 
that  Kant  even  attempts  to  show  the  interconnexion  of  the 

1  For  example,  the  suggestion  that  quantity  is  concerned  only 
with  the  category  of  totality,  and  that  quality  is  concerned  only  with 
the  category  of  reality. 

*B  in.  A  plurality,  it  may  be  added,  is  always  a  plurality  of 
units. 


XXXIII  §  7]     THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  SCHEMATA          65 

categories,  although  this  becomes  a  little  clearer  when  we 
come  to  consider  the  Principles  as  a  whole. 

The  difference  between  one  schema  and  three  is  merely 
an  indication  of  the  less  or  greater  difficulty  of  making  clear 
what  is  involved  in  one  aspect  of  synthesis;  and  we  shall 
never  understand  the  Analogies  and  the  Postulates,  unless 
we  realise  that  in  them  we  are  dealing  with  a  synthesis  which 
is  essentially  one. 


VOL.   II 


CHAPTER    XXXIV 
THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  SCHEMA 

§  i.  Subsumption  and  Syllogism 

In  the  light  of  what  we  have  learned  about  the  schemata, 
we  may  be  tempted  to  suppose  that  Kant's  argument  in  the 
Analytic  of  Principles  takes  the  form  of  a  series  of  syllogisms 
in  which  the  transcendental  schema  is  the  middle  term.  In 
the  major  premise  we  subsume  the  schema  under  its  corre- 
sponding category;  in  the  minor  premise  we  subsume  the 
object  under  the  schema;  and  in  the  conclusion  we  subsume 
the  object  under  the  category.1 

Even  if  this  were  so,  the  Analytic  of  Principles  wo 
be  properly  called  the  Doctrine  of  Judgement;  for  it 
the  two  premises  which  Transcendental  Logic  has  to  e 
and  both  of  these  premises  are  for  Kant  matters  of  ju 
in  the  technical  sense.2  The  fact  that  the  conclusion 
by  the  ordinary  rules  of  Formal  Logic  does  not  n 
chapter  a  treatise  on  the  syllogism. 

Nevertheless  a  syllogism  of  this  kind  seems  an  oc 

1  For  example,   'All  necessary  succession  exhibits  the  relation  of 
ground  and  consequent. 

All  objective  succession  is  necessary  succession. 

.'.All  objective  succession  exhibits  the  relation  of  ground  and 
consequent/ 

The  major  premise  is  given  in  the  chapter  on  Schematism,  and 
the  minor  in  the  Second  Analogy.  Both  premises  are  supposed  to 
be  matters  of  judgement  in  the  technical  sense. 

2  See  Chapter  XXXII  §  3.  Incidentally  the  view  of  Adickes— that 
Kant  arbitrarily  invented  the  whole  doctrine  of  schematism  in  order 
to  have  a  chapter  corresponding  to  the  chapter  on  judgement  in 
Formal  Logic — is  the  more  unnecessary  because  Kant  requires  in 
any  case  such  a  chapter  for  his  Principles.  I  have  great  respect  for 
the  later  work  of  Adickes,  but  this    suggestion,  like  some    others 
made  in  his  edition  of  the  Kntik,  seems  to  me  to  require  no  refutation. 
The  only  excuse  for  it  is  the  youth  of  the  writer  at  the  time,  and  I 
think  it  unfortunate  that  Kemp  Smith  should  have  followed  him 
in  exaggerating  the  influence  of  Kant's  so-called  'architectonic*. 


XXXIV  §  i]    THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  SCHEMA        67 

of  syllogism  to  use  in  the  circumstances.  It  is  a  syllogism 
whose  conclusion  is  known  before  we  begin;1  for  we  are 
supposed  to  have  proved  in  the  Transcendental  Deduction 
that  the  categories  generally  must  apply  to  objects.2  We  are 
not  arriving  at  a  conclusion  by  the  elimination  of  a  middle 
term;  we  are  rather  making  intelligible  the  conclusion  by 
discovering  the  precise  nature  of  the  middle  term  on  which 
it  rests.3 

Kant's  way  of  stating  his  doctrine  lends  colour  to  the  view 
that  he  is  engaged  in  a  syllogistic  argument,  but  I  doubt  whether 
this  is  the  correct  interpretation.  For  one  thing  the  conclusion 
of  such  a  syllogism  is  not  really  the  conclusion  at  which  we 
wish  to  arrive.  His  real  aim  is  not  to  show  that  the  object 
falls  under  the  pure  category,  but  to  show  that  it  falls  under 
the  schematised  category ;  and  we  cannot  do  this  by  eliminating 
the  middle  term  in  the  syllogism.  This  view  is  perhaps  con- 
firmed by  the  fact  that  in  this  chapter,  as  indeed  elsewhere, 
he  consistently  describes  the  categories  as  if  they  were 
schematised  categories. 

The  categories  with  which  Kant  is  really  concerned  are 
the  schematised  categories.  In  the  chapter  on  schematism 
he  is  dealing  in  detail  with  that  element  in  the  categories 
which  has  hitherto  been  left  vague,  namely  the  condition  of 
sensibility  which  each  contains.  In  abstraction  from  such 
a  condition  or  schema  the  pure  categories  are  without  'sense 

1  Compare  the  statement  in  A  322  —  B  378. 

2  Perhaps  we  are  even  supposed  to  have  proved  generally  that 
the  schema  is  the  middle  term  by  which  this  conclusion  is  reached. 
Thus  Kant  says  expressly  (in  A  139  =--  B  178-9)  'we  have  seen  in 
the  Transcendental  Deduction  .  .  .  that  pure  a  priori  concepts  contain 
besides  the  function  of  understanding  (that  is,  the  form  of  thought) 
in  the  category,  also  formal  conditions  of  sensibility',  or  in  other  words 
schemata.  He  also  says  that  the  categories  contain  the  general  condition 
for  rules  (see  A  135  =  B  174  and  A  159  =  B  198);  and  this  condition 
may  be  the  schema. 

3  We  are  also  indicating  the  aspect  of  the  object  which  falls  under 
the  category.  It  is  one  thing  to  know  that  an  object  must  somehow 
exhibit  the  relation  of  ground  and  consequent,  and  quite  another 
thing  to  know  that  it  is  the  succession  of  changes  in  the  object  which 
exhibits  this  relation. 


68  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXIV  §  2 

and  significance1.1  As  restricted  to  their  only  legitimate  use, 
that  is,  as  applied  to  objects  in  virtue  of  the  transcendental 
schemata,  the  categories  are  schematised.  The  schematised 
categories  'contain'  the  transcendental  schemata;  and  the 
transcendental  schemata  are  exhibited  in  all  objects  so  far 
as  the  manifold  of  these  objects  is  combined  by  imagination 
in  one  time  and  space. 

If  this  is  the  correct  interpretation,  Kant's  argument  is 
wrongly  viewed  as  a  syllogism,  and  consists  rather  of  two 
judgements.  In  the  first  judgement  we  recognise  the  schema 
contained  in  a  particular  category — we  recognise,  for  example, 
that  the  category  of  cause  and  effect  contains,  not  only  grounds 
and  consequents,  but  the  necessary  succession  of  grounds  and 
consequents;  and  only  so  can  it  be  regarded  as  the  category 
of  cause  and  effect.  In  the  second  judgement  we  recognise 
that  all  objects,  so  far  as  they  are  substances  whose  accidents 
succeed  one  another  in  time,  fall  under  the  category  of  cause 
and  effect ;  or  in  other  words  that  all  changes  happen  in  accor- 
dance with  the  law  of  cause  and  effect.2 

There  is  manifestly  nothing  artificial  in  making  a  distinction 
between  the  concept  of  ground  and  consequent  and  the  concept 
of  cause  and  effect.  It  is  vital  to  Kant's  argument  to  specify 
the  transcendental  schema  which  is  contained  in  each  category 
and  thereby  distinguishes  the  category  from  the  concept  of  an 
empty  form  of  judgement  supposed  somehow  to  determine 
objects. 

§  2.  Category  and  Schema 

On  this  view  the  pure  category  is  an  abstraction :  the  only 
category  which  we  can  legitimately  apply  to  objects  is  the 
schematised  category.  This  I  believe  to  be  Kant's  own  doctrine,3 
and  he  habitually  insists,  especially  in  the  second  edition, 

1  Compare  A  246  where  they  are  said  to  have  absolutely  no  relation 
to  any  determinate  object. 

2  We  shall  have  to  consider  later  whether  this  is  properly  described 
as  a  judgement  in  the  technical  sense;  see  Chapter  XXXVI  §  4. 

3  Compare  A  145-6  =  B  185. 


XXXIV  §  2]    THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  SCHEMA        69 

that  the  pure  category  is  obtained  when  we  abstract  from 
the  references  to  time  and  space  contained  in  the  schematised 
category.1 

It  may  be  suggested  that  if  this  is  so,  Kant's  paraphernalia 
of  pure  categories,  schematised  categories,  and  transcendental 
schemata  is  unnecessarily  elaborate.  All  we  require  is  the 
schematised  category,  and  the  schematised  category  can  be 
identified  with  the  transcendental  schema.2 

This  suggestion  has  some  value  as  indicating  a  possible 
way  of  reconstructing  Kant's  doctrine,  if  we  are  unable 
to  accept  his  derivation  of  the  categories  from  the  forms  of 
judgement.3  It  has  no  value  as  an  interpretation  of  Kant's 
own  thought. 

We  may  indeed  say  with  propriety  that,  on  Kant's  view,  the 
transcendental  schema  is  revealed  concretely  to  sense  and 
imagination4  and  is  conceived  or  'contained'  in  the  schematised 
category.  There  is  a  minor  difficulty  even  in  this;  for  the 
schematised  category  may  be  said  to  be  a  concept  of  the  com- 
bination of  the  manifold  in  time,  while  the  transcendental 
schema  is  rather  the  sensuous  characteristic  which  results 
from  such  combination.5  If  we  set  this  aside  as  an  unnecessary 
complication,  we  must  not  forget  that  for  Kant  more  is  con- 
tained in  the  schematised  category  than  is  given  in  the  trans- 

1  Sec,  for  example,  B  162  and  B  163. 

2  Compare  Kemp  Smith,  Commentary ',  pp.  339-40.  Kemp  Smith 
even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  'what  Kant  means  when  he  speaks  of 
the  categories  are  the  schemata';  but  it  should  be  noted  that  the 
names  by  which  Kant  alludes  to  the  different  schemata  are  other 
than  the  names  by  which  he  alludes  to  the  schematised  categories. 

3  See  §  6  below. 

4  Kant  himself  sometimes  speaks  as  if  the  transcendental  schema 
were  a  concept;  see  A   146  =  B   186.  The  transcendental  schema 
can  of  course  be  conceived,  like  any  other  sensuous  characteristic; 
but  the  concept  of  the  transcendental  schema  *  con  tains'  less  than 
the  schematised  category. 

6  As,  for  example,  beauty  may  be  said  to  result  from  harmony  or 
coherence  in  the  object.  I  believe  myself  that  such  language  is  too 
external.  Beauty  is  neither  the  logical  consequence  nor  the  practical 
effect  of  harmony  or  coherence;  and  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that 
beauty  is  manifested  or  embodied  in  such  harmony  or  coherence. 


70  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIV  §  2 

cendental  schema ;  for  the  category  is  enriched  by  its  connexion 
with  the  form  of  judgement.  This  is  true  at  any  rate  in  regard 
to  the  categories  of  substance  and  cause — the  two  categories 
which  we  may  not  unreasonably  conjecture  to  have  been 
the  starting-point  of  Kant's  thought. 

Thus,  in  the  traditional  doctrine  which  Kant  inherited, 
substance  is  regarded  (i)  as  the  ultimate  subject  of  all  predicates 
and  (2)  as  the  permanent  substratum  of  change.  Both  of  these 
are  conceived  in  the  schematised  category.  The  first  Kant 
derives  from  the  form  of  judgement.  The  second  is  given 
in  the  transcendental  schema  and  is  derived  from  the  synthesis 
of  the  manifold  in  time  and  space.  If  the  schematised  category 
were  a  concept  of  the  transcendental  schema  and  nothing 
more,  then  the  category  of  substance  would  for  Kant  be 
impoverished. 

This  consideration  is  more  important  when  we  consider 
the  category  of  cause  and  effect.  For  Kant  causality  means 
(i)  that  the  succeeding  event  has  its  ground  in  the  preceding 
event,  and  (2)  that  the  succeeding  event  follows  upon  the 
preceding  event  in  accordance  with  a  rule  of  necessary  succes- 
sion. Here  again  (i)  is  derived  from  the  form  of  judgement, 
and  (2)  is  derived  from  the  synthesis  of  the  manifold  in  time 
and  space.  The  schematised  category,  if  it  contained  only 
the  transcendental  schema  without  the  principle  of  synthesis 
present  in  the  form  of  judgement  and  conceived  in  the  pure 
category,  would  for  Kant  be  impoverished. 

No  doubt  it  may  be  thought  to-day  that  if  causality  is  to 
be  admitted  at  all,  it  must  be  reduced  to  necessary,  that  is, 
invariable,  succession;  but  the  plain  man,  and  for  this  purpose 
Kant  is  a  plain  man,  believes  that  the  effect  is  really  grounded 
in  the  cause,  so  that  such  a  modification  of  the  Kantian  doctrine 
would  mean  for  him  a  definite  loss.1 

1  The  same  considerations  apply  to  the  category  of  interaction.  I 
feel  more  doubt  in  regard  to  the  categories  of  quantity,  quality,  and 
modality. 


XXXIV  §  3]    THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  SCHEMA        71 

§  3.  The  Transcendental  Synthesis  of  Imagination 

So  far  we  have  considered  Kant's  doctrine  with  reference 
to  categories  and  schemata.  We  must  now  consider  it  in  relation 
to  the  active  synthesis  necessary  for  knowledge. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  all  judgement  involves  the  unification 
or  synthesis  of  ideas,1  and  that  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination  involves  the  unification  of  ideas  in  time  and 
space.  Granted  that  the  second  (or  concrete)  synthesis  might 
be  a  species  of  the  first  (or  abstract)  synthesis,  we  have  still  to 
ask  what  is  the  relation  between  them.  Does  the  synthesis 
present  in  judgement  control  and  determine  the  synthesis 
whereby  the  given  manifold  is  combined  in  one  time  and  space  ? 
Kant  clearly  holds  that  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagina- 
tion maintains  the  unity  of  time  and  space  in  response  to  the 
general  demand  of  thought  for  unity  in  the  object :  the  unity 
of  apperception  is  Original'  and  the  unity  of  objects  is  'de- 
rivative'. But  there  still  remains  the  question  whether  the 
different  aspects  of  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination 
are  determined  and  controlled  by  the  different  aspects  of 
synthesis  present  in  the  form  of  judgement  as  such. 

I  do  not  find  that  Kant  is  wholly  clear  on  this  point,  and 
perhaps  we  should  keep  open  the  possibility  that  he  believed 
the  different  forms  of  synthesis  present  in  judgement  to  follow, 
rather  than  to  control,  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagina- 
tion.2 Nevertheless  it  seems  difficult  to  understand  his  view 
except  on  the  supposition  that  the  forms  of  judgement  determine 

1  Compare     Kant's     statement     that     the     categories,     even    in 
abstraction  from  all  sensible  conditions,  have  a  logical  meaning — 
they  are  concepts  of  the  abstract  unity  (der  blossen  Einheit)  of  ideas ; 
see  A  147  =  B  186. 

2  This  is  suggested  chiefly  by  some  obscure  statements  in  Kant's 
casual  jottings.  Thus  he  distinguishes  the  real  function  of  ideas  from 
their  logical  function,  and  seems  to  suggest  that  the  former  are  the 
ground  of  the  latter;  sec  Nachlass  4631  (XVII  615).  He  even  says 
that  the  sensitive  function  is  the  ground  of  the  intellectual  function ;  see 
Nachlass  4629  (XVII  614)  and  compare  Nachlass  4635    (XVII  619). 
His  statements  are,  however,  so  puzzling  that  I  am  not  sure  whether 
they  arc  relevant  to  the  present  question. 


72  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIV  §  3 

and  control  the  different  aspects  of  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination. 

In  certain  instances  this  is  perhaps  not  so  impossible  as 
it  might  seem  to  be  at  first  sight.  Granted  that  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  must  impose  some  sort  of  permanence 
on  the  manifold  in  order  to  maintain  the  unity  of  time,  it 
might  be  because  of  the  demand  of  thought  that  we  regard 
the  permanent  as  the  substratum  of  change  and  the  ultimate 
subject  of  all  predicates.  Granted  also  that  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  must  impose  necessary  or  regular 
succession  upon  the  given  manifold,  it  might  be  because 
of  the  demand  of  thought  for  grounds  that  we  regard  the  first 
event  in  a  regular  succession  as  the  cause  and  the  second  as 
the  effect.  Even  so  I  do  not  see  how  the  demand  of  thought 
could  control  or  determine  the  imposition  of  permanence 
and  regular  succession  by  the  transcendental  synthesis  qf 
imagination.  Still  less  do  I  see  how  the  homogeneity  of  the 
times  and  spaces  combined  by  imagination  could  be  due  to 
the  demand  of  thought  for  homogeneous  objects — unless 
indeed  Kant  holds  that  there  is  in  time  and  space  as  given 
to  us  by  the  perception  of  temporal  and  spatial  objects  nothing 
which  suggests  homogeneity  apart  from  the  demands  of 
thought.1  Above  all,  I  can  see  not  the  slightest  ground  for 
believing  that  the  degree  of  intensive  quantity  given  to  us  in 
sensation  is  due  to  a  combination  made  by  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  in  response  to  the  demand  of  thought 
that  we  should  be  able  to  affirm  and  deny  and  thereby 
delimit. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  Kant  has  not  given  us  more  help 
on  these  difficult  questions,  but  I  think  they  should  be  asked 
even  if  we  are  unable  to  answer  them.  All  we  can  say  with 
confidence  is  that  on  his  view  each  aspect  of  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  falls  under  an  aspect  of  the  synthesis 
present  in  judgement  as  such:  the  former  gives  the  species 
of  which  the  latter  is  the  genus. 

1  Time,  for  example,  seems  sometimes  to  race  and  sometimes  to 
drag;  yet  we  think  that  its  parts  are  homogeneous. 


XXXIV  §4]    THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  SCHEMA        73 

§  4.  The  Schematism  of  the  Understanding 

Kant  may  have  thought  that  questions  of  the  type  I  have 
raised  are  too  difficult  to  answer.  Thus  he  asserts  that  the 
schematism  of  our  understanding,  in  its  relation  to  appearances 
and  their  mere  form,  is  a  hidden  art  in  the  depths  of  the 
human  soul:  its  true  operations  we  shall  hardly  ever  divine 
from  nature  and  lay  open  to  our  gaze.1 

This  is  one  of  the  statements  which  have  been  used  in 
support  of  the  view  that  Kant  believed  the  syntheses  which 
are  the  conditions  of  experience  to  be  necessarily  unconscious 
and  even  noumenal.  I  do  not  believe  that  it  can  be  properly 
interpreted  in  this  way,2  but  here  I  wish  to  ask  only  what 
Kant  meant  by  the  phrase  'schematism  of  the  pure  under- 
standing'. 

This  schematism  is  said  to  be  the  procedure  of  the  pure 
understanding  with  the  transcendental  schemata.3  This  pro- 
cedure is  a  kind  of  'exhibition'4 — that  is,  an  exhibiting  of  the 
object  to  which  the  pure  category  applies.  We  are  said  to 
'exhibit*  the  object  of  a  concept,  or  more  commonly  to  'exhibit* 
the  concept,  when  we  supply  the  intuition  to  which  the  concept 
applies.  When  we  exhibit  an  empirical  concept,  we  provide 
the  corresponding  empirical  object  or  intuition.  When  we 
exhibit  a  mathematical  concept,  we  construct  the  corresponding 
object  in  pure  intuition.  When  we  exhibit  a  pure  category, 
we  supply  the  sensuous  condition  or  schema  under  which 
alone  the  pure  category  can  be  employed.5  This  exhibition 
of  the  pure  category  is  what  Kant  calls  the  schematism  of 
the  pure  understanding.  In  this  way  we  give  objective  reality, 
or  sense  and  significance,  to  the  pure  categories.6 

1  A  141  —  13  180-1.  Compare  A  78  —  B  103. 

2  The  fact  that  we  have  to  divine  the  schematism  from  nature 
suggests  that  it  is  not  noumenal.  3  A  140  —  B  179. 

4  'Exhibitio*  or  ' Darstellutig* ;  see  Fortschntte  der  Metaphysik  (Phil. 
Bib.  460,  pp.  106-7,  iSJ*  and  J65).  Compare  A7i3  —  B74i  and  also 
(for  perhaps  a  rather  different  usage)  A  727  =  B  755. 

6  Compare  A  136  --  B  175. 

6  In  the  case  of  the  Ideas  of  Reason  there  is  no  schematism,  but 
only  a  symbohsation  by  analogy  (sometimes  called  analogical  or 

VOL.  II  C* 


74  THE   SCHEMATISM  [XXXIV  §  4 

I  take  it  that  by  'schematism*  Kant  means  primarily,  not 
the  reflective  exhibition  of  the  pure  category  which  takes 
place  in  the  Krittk  itself,  but  the  unreflective  exhibition  which 
takes  place  in  ordinary  experience.  It  is  this  unreflective  pro- 
cedure which  is  'a  hidden  art  in  the  depths  of  the  human  soul'. 

There  is  one  other,  and  rather  obscure,  passage  to  be  men- 
tioned.1 The  schematism  of  the  understanding  through  the 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  is  said  to  result  in2 
the  unity  of  all  the  manifold  of  intuition  in  inner  sense,  and 
so  indirectly  in  the  unity  of  apperception  as  a  function  which 
corresponds  to  inner  sense  (a  receptivity).3  Kant  must  mean, 
I  think,  that  the  schematism  of  the  understanding  supplies 
us,  not  with  intuitions  corresponding  to  the  pure  category,4 
but  with  kinds  of  unity  (or  combination)  in  intuitions;  and 
that  it  is  these  kinds  of  unity  (or  combination)  of  the  temporal 
and  spatial  manifold  which  correspond  to  the  pure  categories. 
We  may  regard  these  different  kinds  of  unity  as  aspects  of 
the  one  necessary  synthetic  unity  of  all  the  manifold  in  inner 
sense ;  and  the  one  necessary  synthetic  unity  of  all  the  manifold 
in  inner  sense  corresponds  to  the  necessary  synthetic  unity 
of  apperception.  Indeed  the  necessary  synthetic  unity  of 
apperception  finds  its  concrete  embodiment  only  in  the  neces- 
sary synthetic  unity  of  the  manifold  given  in  time  and  space.5 

symbolic  schematism),  an  indirect  (as  opposed  to  a  direct)  exhibition 
of  the  concept;  compare  the  passages  in  the  Fortschritte  der  Meta- 
physik  given  above  and  also  K.d.U.  §  59  (V  351). 

XA  145  =  Bi85. 

2thinauslaufe.'  This  word  seems  obscure  in  the  present  passage: 
it  can  hardly  have  its  more  common  meaning  of  *  being  equivalent  to'. 

3  Compare  statements  about  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagina- 
tion in  A  118,  A  123,  and  B  151;  also  A  119.  See  especially  Chapter 
XXXVI  §  7. 

4  Other  kinds  of  exhibition  supply  us  with  intuitions  corresponding 
to  the  concept. 

6  Hence  the  schematism  may  be  said  'to  result  in'  the  unity  of 
apperception  'indirectly'.  Compare  Kant's  statement  that  the  schema- 
tism is  'the  synthesis  of  the  understanding  when  it  determines  inner 
sense  in  accordance  with  the  unity  of  apperception';  see  Nachtrage 
LVII.  Compare  also  the  statement  that  the  schematism  concerns 
appearances  and  their  mere  form ;  see  A  141  —  B  180. 


XXXIV  §  5]    THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  SCHEMA        75 

The  schematism  of  the  understanding,  it  appears,  must 
work  'through  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination*. 
So  far  as  it  differs  from  this  synthesis,  it  must  do  so  in  virtue 
of  the  fact  that  it  involves  a  judgement  (however  'obscure') 
that  the  product  of  the  transcendental  synthesis  is  an  instance 
or  'case'  to  which  the  pure  category  applies.  It  must  be  present 
whenever  we  judge  that  A  is  the  cause  of  B,  and  indeed  when- 
ever we  make  any  judgement  of  experience.  Needless  to  say, 
it  is  not  made  explicit  in  ordinary  experience.  What  Kant 
is  attempting  to  give  is  an  analysis  of  elements  which  must 
be  present  in  experience  as  such,  not  a  description  of  experience 
as  it  appears  to  the  unreflective  mind,  and  still  less  a  description 
of  the  successive  stages  which  precede  experience  or  are 
found  in  experience. 

§^5.  Value  of  Kant's  Doctrine 

Kant's  doctrine,  if  we  view  it  as  a  whole,  has  little  or  nothing 
of  that  perversity  commonly  attributed  to  him  by  his  critics. 
His  fundamental  contention  that  judgement  as  such  requires 
a  synthesis  of  the  given  manifold  is  perfectly  sound,  and  it 
is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  judgement  as  such  requires 
certain  definite  kinds  of  synthesis.  To  accept  the  forms  of 
judgement  in  Formal  Logic  as  giving  us  an  infallible  clue 
to  these  definite  kinds  of  synthesis  is  certainly  a  trifle  ingenuous. 
Yet  even  here  it  is  possible  to  maintain  that  the  principles 
of  synthesis  which  Kant  finds  by  this  method  are  really  involved 
in  all  judgement  as  such;  and  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that 
we  are  justified  in  taking  this  as  the  correct  expression  of  his 
own  view.  The  theory  that  the  forms  of  judgement  are  forms 
of  analytic  judgements  only,  and  are  nevertheless  the  source 
of  principles  of  synthesis,  is  undoubtedly  perverse;  but  this 
perversity  is  entirely  the  creation  of  the  commentators  and 
has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  Immanuel  Kant.  To  treat 
the  derivation  of  the  categories  from  the  forms  of  judgement 
as  wrong-headed  and  inexcusable  pedantry  indicates,  to  my 
mind,  only  the  failure  of  the  critic  to  think  himself  into  Kant's 
point  of  view. 


76  THE    SCHEMATISM  [XXXIV  §  5 

In  any  case  if  we  start  from  this  derivation  of  the  categories, 
an  account  of  the  transcendental  schemata  is  absolutely  essential 
to  the  consistent  development  of  the  theory.  Kant  would 
merely  display  incompetence  as  a  thinker,  if  his  account  of 
the  schemata  had  no  relation  to  his  derivation  of  the  categories, 
however  perverse  that  derivation  might  be.  It  is  unreasonable 
to  blame  a  man  twice  over  for  the  same  mistake ;  and  to  con- 
demn him  because  his  argument  is  consistent  with  his  premises 
is  wholly  unjustifiable. 

The  doctrine  of  the  schemata  is  not  the  result  of  formalism 
or  of  a  so-called  'architectonic':  it  is  a  necessary  part  of  his 
argument.  Indeed  even  if  we  attribute  his  derivation  of  the 
categories  to  formalism  in  a  bad  sense,  we  ought  to  recognise 
that  in  his  account  of  the  schemata  and  of  the  Principles 
Kant  is  breaking  away  from  mere  formalism.  He  is  deriving 
the  categorial  characteristics  of  objects  from  the  fact  that 
all  objects  must  be  temporal;  and  in  this  there  is  surely  a 
considerable  measure  of  truth.  The  connexion  of  the  categories 
with  the  synthesis  of  imagination  and  the  form  of  time  is  the 
most  important,  and  the  least  artificial,  part  of  the  Critical 
Philosophy.  We  must  not  allow  the  difficulties  of  an  unfamiliar 
and  antiquated  terminology  to  obscure  the  real  significance 
of  the  argument. 

My  own  complaint  about  this  chapter  is  not  that  it  follows 
too  closely  the  pedantic  methods  of  the  schools,  but  on  the 
contrary  that  it  is  too  brief,  and  is  lacking  in  clarity  and  pre- 
cision. The  schemata  are  obscurely  described,  and  their  con- 
nexion with  the  corresponding  category  receives  no  elucidation. 

If  we  have  patience  with  Kant's  elaborate  terminology, 
which  is  the  terminology  of  his  time  and  not  of  ours,  and  if 
we  make  allowances  for  a  carelessness  at  least  partly  excused 
by  the  circumstances  in  which  he  wrote,  I  think  we  shall  see 
that  it  is  the  connexion  between  form  of  judgement  and  category 
and  schema  which  clamps  together  his  whole  argument  into 
the  firmly  knit  structure  which  it  was  intended  to  be.  One 
part  of  that  structure — the  account  of  the  forms  of  judgement 
given  by  Formal  Logic — has  now  crumbled,  and  the  whole 


XXXIV  §  6]    THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  SCHEMA        77 

edifice  may  therefore  seem  to  be  in  ruins,  unless  we  admit 
the  possibility  of  reconstruction  on  the  lines  I  have  suggested. 
But  even  at  the  worst  we  ought  to  recognise  that  ruin  has 
resulted,  not  because  the  building  was  so  loosely  put  together, 
but  because  the  different  parts  were  so  closely  and  firmly 
joined.  The  failure,  if  it  be  a  failure,  is  due  not  so  much  to 
the  incompetence  of  the  architect  as  to  the  use  of  materials, 
hitherto  believed  to  be  sound,  which  have  proved  unable  to 
withstand  the  march  of  time. 

§  6.  The  Possibility  of  Reconstruction 

Kant's  doctrine  rests  upon  two  main  foundations,  firstly 
the  forms  of  judgement,  and  secondly  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  space  and  time.  It  is  possible  that  the  second 
may  stand,  even  if  the  first  has  been  undermined.  The  trans- 
cendental schemata  are  not  deduced  from  the  forms  of  judge- 
ment, but  from  the  nature  of  time. 

If  we  cease  to  lay  stress  upon  the  different  forms  of  judge- 
ment, and  refuse  to  admit  the  possibility  that  these  forms 
may  be  involved  in  judgement  as  such,  we  shall  certainly 
lose  something  which  Kant  believed  to  be  of  importance, 
particularly,  as  I  have  pointed  out,1  in  regard  to  the  category 
of  cause  and  effect.  Yet  on  the  other  hand  there  might  still 
be  much  which  we  could  retain.  We  might  still  retain  the  view 
that  judgement  is  necessary  in  order  that  there  may  be  objects 
for  us,  and  that  judgement  presupposes  the  unity  of  apper- 
ception and  demands  a  corresponding  unity  in  the  empirical 
manifold.  If  we  accept  this,  we  may  still  hold  also  that  the 
required  unity  is  imposed  by  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  the  imagination,  which  combines  the  given  manifold  in 
one  time  in  accordance  with  the  demand  of  thought.  It  seems 
to  me  obvious  that  this  implies  the  necessity  of  certain  categorial 
characteristics  in  all  objects:  we  have  only  to  await  a  further 
description  of  these  characteristics  and  a  satisfactory  proof 
that  without  them  the  world  as  known  to  us  would  be  in- 

1  See  §  2  above. 


78  THE  SCHEMATISM  [XXXIV  §  6 

compatible  with  the  unity  of  time.  Hence  we  can  still  approach 
Kant's  Principles  in  the  hope  of  discovering  a  proof  of  the 
necessity  of  certain  categorial  characteristics;  for  his  proofs 
rest,  not  upon  the  forms  of  judgement,  but  upon  the  unity 
of  time.  The  appeal  made  to  the  forms  of  judgement  serves 
only  to  enrich  some  of  the  categories  and  to  guarantee  the 
completeness  of  Kant's  list ;  and  the  latter  point  is  quite  cer- 
tainly a  mistake. 

It  must  be  added,  however,  that  Kant  is  hampered  through- 
out by  his  attempt  to  restrict  the  schemata  to  the  form  of 
time.  This  attempt  is  based  on  the  view  that  space  is  the  form 
of  outer  sense  only,  while  time  as  the  form  of  inner  sense  is 
the  ultimate  condition,  not  merely  of  inner,  but  also  of  outer, 
intuition.  If  we  are  to  make  a  satisfactory  doctrine,  we  shall 
have  to  work  with  space  and  time  (or  perhaps  space-time), 
and  it  is  clear  that  Kant's  owrn  mind  was  steadily  working 
in  this  direction:  space  is  not  wholly  neglected  even  in  the 
first  edition,  and  it  becomes  much  more  prominent  in  the 
second.  Such  a  development  of  Kant's  view  will  certainly 
give  rise  to  new  difficulties;  for  it  may  tempt  us  to  regard 
the  mind  itself  as  spatial,  and  this  will  have  consequences 
which  Kant  at  least  is  not  prepared  to  accept.  But  even  in 
Kant's  own  doctrine  there  are  many  puzzles  about  the  mind, 
which  it  is  doubtful  if  he  ever  solved.1 

1  Professor  Alexander's  derivation  of  the  categories  in  Space,  Time, 
and  Deity  is,  I  think,  partly  an  attempt  to  improve  and  develop 
Kant's  doctrine  along  the  lines  suggested  by  the  second  edition  of 
the  Kntik.  He  accepts  the  theory  that  the  mind  is  spatial  as  well  as 
temporal,  but  I  think  that  this  leads  to  views  of  freedom  and  immor- 
tality which  are  fundamentally  opposed  to  the  views  of  Kant. 


BOOK  VIII 

THE   PRINCIPLES 
OF   THE    UNDERSTANDING 


CHAPTER    XXXV 

THE   SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  OF  SYNTHETIC 
JUDGEMENTS 

§  i.  The  Nature  of  Kant's  Argument 

The  Principles  of  the  Understanding  set  forth  the  main 
positive  conclusions  of  Kant's  metaphysic  of  experience;  that 
is  to  say,  they  are  the  ultimate  synthetic  a  priori  judgements 
which  we  are  entitled  to  make  about  objects  of  experience.  To 
estimate  their  value  we  must  understand,  not  only  the  nature 
of  the  proof  by  which  they  are  established,  but  also  their  place 
in  Kant's  argument  as  a  whole. 

The  Metaphysical  Deduction  has  shown,  according  to  Kant, 
that  the  categories  are  derived  from  the  forms  of  judgement; 
and  the  Transcendental  Deduction  on  its  objective  side  has 
demonstrated  the  objective  validity  of  categories  so  derived. 
The  Transcendental  Deduction  on  its  subjective  side  showed 
generally  that  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination 
imposes  the  principles  of  synthesis  thought  in  the  pure 
categories  upon  appearances  given  under  the  form  of  time; 
but  no  attempt  was  made  to  deal  with  the  separate  categories, 
or  to  determine  the  special  nature  of  the  link  which  connected 
each  category  with  objects.  This  link  has  been  treated  in  the 
chapter  on  Schematism,  where  Kant  has  maintained  that 
corresponding  to  each  category  there  is  a  sensuous  condition, 
or  schema,  which  entitles  us  to  apply  the  category  to  objects 
in  a  synthetic  a  priori  judgement.1  It  is  now  our  task  to 
establish  such  a  synthetic  a  priori  judgement  for  each  category. 
Each  of  these  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  is  called  a  Principle 
of  the  Understanding. 

The  argument  is  complicated  by  the  difference  between 
the  pure  category  and  the  schematised  category.  If  we  look  at 
Kant's  Principles  we  see  that  what  they  affirm  of  objects  is  the 

1  A  148  =  B  187. 


82  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXV  §  i 

schematised  category.1  Kant  himself  says2  that  appearances 
must  be  subsumed,  not  directly3  under  the  categories,  but 
under  their  schemata  ;4  and  the  lack  of  homogeneity  between 
appearance  and  category  indicates  that  the  subsumption — 
that  is,  the  direct  subsumption — of  appearances  under  the 
categories  is  impossible.5  The  very  fact  that  the  Principles  are 
principles  of  the  empirical  use  of  the  categories  implies  that 
they  are  concerned  with  the  schematised,  and  not  with  the 
pure,  categories.6 

For  reasons  already  given  I  do  not  think  that  subsumption 
under  the  category  by  means  of  the  schema  involves  a  syllogism.7 
Kant's  exposition  is  not  sufficiently  clear,  but  the  easiest  inter- 
pretation seems  to  be  that  the  chapter  on  Schematism  shows 
how  the  categories  must  be  schematised,  while  the  Principles 
show  how  the  schematised  categories  must  apply  to  all  objects 
of  experience.8 

There  is  an  obvious  difficulty  in  the  fact  that  the  Principles 
have  to  be  'proved'.  The  assertion  of  the  Principles  is  the 
work,  not  of  reason,  but  of  judgement;  and  the  Principles, 
although  they  are  grounds  of  other  judgements,  are  not 
themselves  grounded  in  higher,  or  more  general,  judge- 

1  This  fact  is  obscured  by  Kant's  use  of  'substance*  and  'cause 
and  effect*  as  names  for  the  pure  categories;  but  the  pure  categories 
have  strictly  no  reference  to  time,  and  the  categories  proved  in  the 
Analogies,  as  in  all  the  other  Principles,  must  have  a  reference  to  time. 

2  A  181  =  B  223 ;  compare  Chapter  XL  §  3.  3  ' schlechthin.' 
4  This   applies   to    all    the   Principles,    but    preeminently    to    the 

Analogies.  Kant  adds  that  in  the  Principle  we  do  indeed  make  use 
of  the  category,  but  in  its  application  to  appearances  we  set  the  schema 
in  its  place,  or  rather  set  the  schema  alongside  the  category  as  a 
restricting  condition  (A  181  -  B  224).  In  other  words  the  Principles 
use  the  category  only  as  schematised.  5  A  137  ==  B  176. 

6  Compare  A  180-1  —  B  223.  The  empirical  use  of  the  categories 
is  their  use  with  regard  to  objects  of  experience ;  see  Chapter  XI  §  4. 
In  A  161  -  B  200  the  Principles  are  said  to  be  rules  for  the  objective 
use  of  the  categories.  The  only  legitimate  objective  use  of  the  categories 
is  their  empirical  use.  7  See  Chapter  XXXIV  §  i. 

8  Hence  the  Analytic  of  Principles  is  not  concerned  with  the  prin- 
ciples laid  down  in  the  Aesthetic  in  regard  to  space  and  time ;  still 
less  is  it  concerned  with  the  principles  of  mathematics.  See  A  149  -= 
B  188-9  and  A  159-60  —  B  198-9,  and  compare  Chapter  XXXVI  §  i. 


XXXV  §  2]  THE  SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  83 

ments.1  Hence  the  'proof'  of  the  Principles  must  have  a  very 
special  character.  A  Principle  cannot  be  inferred  from  some- 
thing else  that  we  know  about  objects :  it  is  itself  the  basis  of 
all  our  knowledge  of  objects.  The  proof  of  it  depends  on  our 
seeing  that  without  it  all  knowledge  of  objects  would  be  im- 
possible;2 and  Kant  very  properly  feels  himself  obliged  to 
explain  the  nature  of  his  proof,  and  to  set  forth  what  he  calls 
'the  supreme  principle  of  all  synthetic  judgements'. 

§  2.  The  Principle  of  Analytic  Judgements 

In  order  to  avoid  misunderstanding3  Kant  first  of  all  explains 
the  supreme  principle  of  analytic  judgements.  This  is  the  law 
of  non-contradiction,  which  he  expresses  in  the  form  'Nothing 
can  have  a  predicate  which  contradicts  it'.4 

The  purpose  of  this  formula  is  to  avoid  reference  to  time, 
stjch  as  is  found  in  the  statement  that  a  thing  cannot  both  be 
and  not  be  at  the  same  time,5  or  that  A  cannot  at  the  same 
time  be  both  B  and  not-B.6  A  statement  of  this  kind  is  defective; 
for  a  logical  principle  is  not  restricted  to  temporal  relations. 
The  reason  for  a  formulation  which  refers  to  time  is  the  fact 
of  change,  which  means  that  the  same  thing  can  have  contra- 
dictory predicates,  not  at  the  same  time,  but  successively. 
In  such  a  case,  however,  the  predicates  are  incompatible  with 
one  another,  but  not  with  the  concept  of  the  subject  to  which 
they  apply.  It  is  only  because  both  predicates  are  separated 
from  the  subject-concept  that  we  have  to  say  they  cannot  be 
attributed  to  the  subject  at  the  same  time.  If  the  first  predicate 
is  really  a  part  of  the  subject-concept,  the  second  predicate 
cannot  be  attributed  to  the  subject  at  all.7 

1  A  148  =  B  1 88.  The  German  word  for  Principles  (Grundsatze) 
is  itself  an  indication  of  this. 

2  A  149  =  B  1 88.  The  proof  cannot  be  carried  further  Objectively', 
and  must  be  derived  from  'the  subjective  sources  of  the  possibility 
of  knowledge  of  an  object  in  gcnerar.  To  say  this  is  to  say  that  it 
must  be  a  transcendental  proof.  3  A  150  --  B  189. 

4  A  151  =  B  190.  8A  152  =  B  191.  °A  152  =  B  192. 

7  Thus  we  can  say  'No  unlearned  man  is  learned',  while  we  can 
say  only  'No  man  can  be  both  learned  and  unlearned  at  the  same 
time'.  See  A  153  --  B  192. 


84  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXV  §  3 

All  judgements,  whether  analytic  or  synthetic,  must  conform 
to  the  principle  of  non-contradiction,  which  is  a  universal, 
though  negative,  condition  of  truth.1  If  a  judgement  is  not  in 
conformity  with  this  principle,  it  is  false ;  but  if  it  is  in  con- 
formity with  this  principle,  it  need  not  be  true.2 

In  the  special  case  of  analytic  judgements  conformity  of 
the  judgement  to  the  principle  of  non-contradiction  is  a 
guarantee  of  truth.3  Given  a  subject-concept,  we  can  make 
analytic  judgements  by  the  principle  of  non-contradiction  alone. 
Hence  the  principle  of  non-contradiction  is  a  sufficient  prin- 
ciple of  all  analytic  judgements.  It  is  their  highest  or  supreme 
principle,  because  we  require  no  other.4 

§  3-  Different  Kinds  of  Synthetic  Judgement 

The  primary  concern  of  Transcendental  Logic,  as  indeed 
of  the  wrhole  Critical  Philosophy,  is  with  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements,  whose  origin,  objective  validity,  extent,  and  limits 
it  seeks  to  determine.5  Nevertheless  Kant  attempts  to  formulate 
the  supreme  principle  of  all  synthetic  judgements,  and  we  must 
suppose  that  this  principle  is  meant  to  cover  a  posteriori,  as 
well  as  a  priori,  synthetic  judgements.  He  is,  however,  less 
interested  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter,  and  this  makes  it 

1  A  151  =-  B  190.  Compare  A  152  —  13  191  for  synthetic  judgements. 

2  Compare  Chapter  IX  §  2,. 

3  A  151  =-  B  190-1.  It  should  be  noted  that  Kant  js  assuming  the 
subject-concept  to  refer  to  an  object.  Compare  also  A  736  -    B  764. 

4  This  doctrine  offers  not  the  slightest  justification  for  supposing 
that  the  laws  of  thought  or  the  forms    of   judgement  belong  for 
Kant  only  to  analytic  judgements.  On  the  contraiy  the  law  of  non- 
contradiction, as  he  points  out  in  A  150  --  B  189  and  A  152  -=-  B  191, 
applies  to  all  judgements  (including  synthetic  judgements);  and  so 
docs  his  account  of  the  forms  of  judgement.  Kant,  it  should  be  noted, 
asserts  in  A  154  — -=  B  193  that  Formal  Logic  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the  problem  of  explaining  the  possibility  of  synthetic  judgements, 
and  should  not  even  know  the  name  of  such  judgements  This  implies, 
and    I   think  correctly,   that   the   distinction   between   analytic   and 
synthetic  judgements  does  not  arise  for  Formal  Logic  at  all.  Kemp 
Smith  takes  the  'name*  to  be  the  name  of  the  problem,  but  the  general 
result  is  much  the  same. 

6  Compare  A  XII,  A  10,  B  23,  A  57  —  B  81,  A  154  —  B  193. 


XXXV  §  3]  THE   SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  85 

difficult  to  disentangle  his  exposition.  It  is  not  always 
certain  whether  he  is  speaking  of  all  synthetic  judgements 
or  only  of  synthetic  a  priori  judgements;  and  his  view 
of  synthetic  a  posteriori  judgements  is  not  made  sufficiently 
clear. 

We  should  naturally  expect  to  find  a  common  principle  at 
work  in  all  synthetic  judgements,  just  because  they  are  synthetic ; 
but  Kant  regards  the  different  kinds  of  synthetic  judgement  as 
connected  by  something  more  than  being  species  of  the  same 
genus. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  his  first  account  of  synthetic 
judgements  he  suggested  that  the  problem  of  synthetic  a 
posteriori  judgements  was  capable  of  a  simple  solution.1  Such 
judgements  are  dependent  upon  further  intuition  of  the  object 
referred  to  in  the  subject-concept,  and  so  are  justified  by  our 
complete  experience  of  the  object.  I  see  no  sign  that  Kant  ever 
modified  this  belief,  which  is  obviously  true ;  but  we  have  since 
learnt  that  such  experience  of  objects  is  impossible  apart  from 
the  application  of  the  categories  to  given  intuitions.2  The 
justification  of  such  application  is  to  be  found  only  in  the 
Principles  of  the  Understanding,  which  are  themselves  synthetic 
a  priori  judgements ;  and  Kant  believes  that  synthetic  a  posteriori 
judgements  presuppose  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding 
and  consequently  presuppose  the  ultimate  principle  which  is 
embodied  in  them. 

The  Principles  of  the  Understanding  are  not  the  only  syn- 
thetic a  priori  judgements,  and  here  again  it  is  at  times  uncertain 
whether  Kant  is  speaking  of  all  synthetic  a  priori  judgements 
or  only  of  the  Principles.  I  think  we  can  say  both  that  the 
Principles  are  presupposed  by  all  other  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements,  and  also  that  one  and  the  same  general  principle 
is  at  work  in  the  Principles  and  in  other  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements,  such  as  those  of  mathematics. 

1  A  8,  B  12.  Compare  Chapter  III  §  8. 

2  When  we  judge  that  this  white  sugar  is  also  sweet,  we  are  pre- 
supposing that  we  have  before  us  an  object  which  is  a  substance 
with  accidents  and  so  on. 


86  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXV  §4 

To  sum  up — Kant's  account  deals  mainly,  but  not  entirely,1 
with  the  principle  of  synthetic  a  priori  judgements ;  and  he  is 
concerned  above  all  with  the  way  in  which  this  principle  is 
manifested  in  those  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  which  he 
calls  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding.  Nevertheless  his 
account  is,  I  think,  intended  to  give  the  supreme  principle,  not 
only  of  all  synthetic  a  priori  judgements,  but  of  all  synthetic 
judgements  without  exception. 

§4.  The  'Third  Thing9 

Kant  begins  his  account  by  a  general  statement  which  does 
apply  to  synthetic  judgements  of  every  kind.  In  all  synthetic 
judgements  the  predicate-concept  falls  outside  the  subject- 
concept,  and  we  must  pass  beyond  the  subject-concept,  which 
is  supposed  to  be  given.2  In  order  so  to  pass  we  require  'some- 
thing else',  or  a  'third  thing',  to  justify  our  synthesis  of  subject 
and  predicate.3  We  have  consequently  to  ask  what  is  the  'third 
thing'  which  is  the  'medium'  of  all  ynthetic  judgements. 

The  key  to  the  problem  is  to  be  found  in  the  Transcendental 
Deduction.  Kant  therefore  begins  his  enquiry  by  a  summary 
statement  of  his  previous  conclusions.4  There  is  only  one 
whole5  in  which  all  our  ideas  are  contained.  This  whole  is  inner 
sense  and  its  form,  which  is  time.  The  synthesis  of  our  ideas  in 
time  depends  on  imagination,  and  the  unity  of  this  synthesis6 

1  In  A  155  =  B  194,  where  he  asserts  that  the  possibility  of  synthetic 
judgements  is  to  be  found  in  sense,  imagination,  and  apperception, 
he  is  manifestly  referring  to  all  synthetic  judgements,  and  not  only 
to  synthetic  a  priori  judgements ;  for  he  adds  that  the  possibility  of 
pure  synthetic  judgements  is  also  to  he  found  in  sense,  imagination, 
and  apperception,  because  these  are  sources  of  a  priori  ideas.  There 
are  also  other  passages  which  refer  to  all  synthetic  judgements,  but 
there  is  no  attempt  to  deal  with  synthetic  a  posteriori  judgements 
by  themselves.  2  Compare  A  6  =  B  10  and  Chapter  III  §  5. 

3  A  155  =  B  194.  Here  we  have  a  'third  thing*  which  manifestly 
does  not  involve  a  syllogism.  4A  155  =  B  194. 

5  'Es  tst  nur  em  Inbegnff.'  Mellm's  emendation  'Es  gibt  nur  einen 
Inbegnff'  seems  to  me  unnecessary. 

6  The  word  'derselbert  refers,  I  think,  to  'the  synthesis  of  ideas* 
rather  than  to  'ideas*  as  in  Kemp  Smith's  translation.  Compare  A  158 
=  B  197. 


XXXV  §  4]  THE   SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  87 

(a  unity  which  is  required  for  judgement)  depends  upon  the 
unity  of  apperception.  Hence  it  is  by  reference  to  the  three 
powers  of  inner  sense,  imagination,  and  apperception  that  we 
must  seek  to  explain  the  possibility  of  all  synthetic  judgements. 
And  since  all  three  powers  are  the  sources  of  a  priori  ideas,1 
it  is  by  reference  to  these  powers  that  we  must  seek  to  explain 
the  possibility  of  synthetic  a  priori  judgements.  Indeed  synthetic 
a  priori  judgements  basedon  these  sources2  are  not  only  possible, 
but  also  necessary,  if  we  are  to  have  a  knowledge  of  objects 
which  rests  solely  on  the  synthesis  of  ideas.  Such  a  knowledge 
of  objects  is  synthetic  a  priori  knowledge  :3  it  can  take  no  account 
of  the  empirical  matter  of  experience,  but  only  of  its  form,  that 
is,  of  its  synthetic  unity.4 

The  implication  of  these  statements  is  that  in  order  to  make 
synthetic  judgements  we  require,  in  addition  to  the  subject- 
concept,  a  knowledge  of  the  object5  to  which  the  subject- 
concept  refers.  Such  knowledge,  as  Kant  has  pointed  out, 
depends  on  the  three  powers  of  inner  sense,  imagination,  and 
apperception.  He  now  proceeds  to  examine  this  knowledge  from 
the  side  of  the  object. 

If  any  cognition  is  to  have  what  Kant  calls  'objective  reality',6 
that  is,  if  it  is  to  be  knowledge  of  an  object,  the  object  must 

1  Inner  sense  is  the  source  of  the  pure  intuition  of  time,  imagination 
is  the  source  of  the  transcendental  schemata,  and  apperception  is 
the  source  of  the  pure  categories ;   compare  A  94.  All  three  powers 
are  involved  in  every  synthetic  a  priori  judgement,  and  indeed  in 
every  synthetic  judgement. 

2  Note  that  it  is  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  (and  not  the  three 
powers,  as  in  Kemp  Smith's  translation)  which  are  necessary.  The 
phrase  *aus  diesen  Grunden*  is  puzzling.  I  incline  to  take  'Grunden* 
not  as  'reasons',  but  as  the  'grounds'  or  'sources'  (Quellen)  of  a  priori 
ideas.    If  we  interpret  the  phrase  as  signifying  'for  these  reasons', 
it  must  mean  'because  these  three  powers  arc  sources  of  a  priori  ideas'. 

3  Knowledge  which  rests  on  the  synthesis  of  ideas  is  synthetic 
knowledge.  Knowledge  which  rests  solely  (ledighch)  on  the  synthesis 
of  ideas  is  synthetic  a  priori  knowledge:  it  does  not  rest  partly  on 
given  sensations,  but  contains  'nothing  except  what  is  necessary  for 
synthetic  unity  of  experience  in  general'  (A   158  =  B   197).   Such 
synthetic  unity  involves  the  three  powers  which  arc  said  to  be  sources 
of  a  priori  ideas.  4  Compare  A  156-7  —  B  196. 

5  Compare  A  157  -=  B  196.  a  A  155  =  B  194. 


88  THE   PRINCIPLES  [XXXV  §  4 

be  capable  of  being  given  in  some  way  or  other.  Apart  from 
given  objects  our  concepts  are  empty;  and  although  we  can 
think  by  means  of  such  concepts,  thinking  of  this  kind  is  not 
knowledge  but  a  mere  play  of  ideas.  The  difficulty  is  to  explain 
the  exact  sense  in  which  objects  are  'given'. 

Kant's  explanation  is  too  compressed  to  be  clear.  To  be 
given,  an  object  must  be  immediately  exhibited  in  intuition: 
it  is  not  enough  that  it  should  be  given  mediately.1  Apart 
from  immediate  intuition  no  object  can  be  given;  but  Kant 
is  seeking  a  general  formula  which  will  cover  the  way  in  which 
objects  are  given  both  when  we  make  synthetic  a  posteriori, 
and  when  we  make  synthetic  a  priori,  judgements.  He  therefore 
says  that  to  give  an  object  is  to  relate  the  idea2  of  the  object  to 
experience,  either  to  actual  or  to  possible  experience. 

We  may  take  the  'idea'  of  the  object  to  be  the  concept  of  the 
object.  Where  this  concept  is  empirical,  it  must  be  related  to 
actual  experience.  Where  the  concept  is  a  priori,  it  must  be 
related  to  possible  experience.  Only  in  this  way  can  we  show 
that  a  concept  is  the  concept  of  an  object  which  is,  or  can  be, 
given. 

In  what  sense  is  the  concept  'related'  to  experience?  An 
empirical  concept  is  related  to  experience  when  it  is  borrowed 
or  derived  from  experience,3  when  in  short  we  can  indicate  an 
object  of  experience  containing  the  combination  of  marks  which 
is  thought  in  the  concept.4  An  a  priori  concept  is  related  to 
experience  when  it  is  a  concept  of  the  conditions  (or  the  form) 

1  Kant  docs  not  explain  what  he  means  by  'given  mediately'.  I  take 
it  that  an  object  might  be  said  to  be  given  mediately  in  a  concept: 
for  example,  the  concept  of  chimaera  refers  to  a  descnbable  object, 
but  unless  the  object  can  be  given  immediately  to  intuition,  the  concept 
does  not  refer  to  a  real  object,  and  the  use  of  the  concept  in  mere 
thinking  cannot  give  us  knowledge. 

2tVorstellung.'  Kant  must  have  in  mind  primarily  concepts,  but 
the  wider  word  'idea*  may  be  used  because  he  is  thinking  also  of  the 
ideas  of  space  and  time,  which  are  intuitions  although  he  describes 
them  as  concepts.  3  Compare  A  220  -  B  267. 

4  We  need  not  have  actually  experienced  the  object  ourselves :  it  is 
sufficient  if  it  is  connected,  by  means  of  the  Analogies,  with  objects 
we  have  actually  experienced. 


XXXV  §  4]  THE   SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  89 

of  experience.  In  this  case  the  concept  is  related  to  possible 
experience;  for  experience  is  possible  only  if  it  conforms  to 
such  conditions.1  Although  the  concept  of  such  conditions  is 
a  priori,  it  nevertheless  'belongs'  to  experience,  because  its 
object  can  be  found  in  experience  alone.2 

Kant's  main  point  is  that  a  priori  concepts  can  have  objective 
reality  or  validity  only  if  we  can  prove  that  they  must  neces- 
sarily apply  to  all  objects  of  experience  ;3  and  we  can  prove  this 
only  by  showing  that  they  contain  or  express  the  necessary 
conditions  of  experience,  to  which  all  objects  of  experience 
must  conform.  He  illustrates  his  point  by  the  examples  of  space 
and  time,  which  strictly  speaking  are  not  pure  concepts  but 
pure  intuitions.4  Even  in  their  case  his  principle  holds.  Our 
ideas  of  space  and  time  have  objective  validity,  because  we 
can  show  that  objects  must  be  spatial  and  temporal  ;5  for  space 
and  time  as  conditions  (or  forms)  of  intuition  are  conditions 
of  experience.  He  adds  that  our  idea  of  space  and  time  is  in 
itself  a  mere  schema:  it  is  dependent  on  the  reproductive  imagi- 
nation which  calls  up  the  objects  of  experience,  and  apart  from 
them  it  would  have  no  meaning.6 

We  may  conclude  provisionally  that  the  'third  thing'  which 
makes  synthetic  judgements  possible  is  experience — actual 
experience  if  the  judgement  is  empirical,7  and  possible  experi- 
ence if  the  judgement  is  a  priori. 

1  Compare  Chapter  XLIX  §  6. 

2  See  A  220  -    13  267.  Its  object  is  an  'object  in  general'  so  far  as 
that  object  conforms  to  the  conditions  of  experience. 

3  Mathematical  concepts,  however,  apply  necessarily  only  to  some 
objects  of  experience ;  but  they  too  express  a  possibility  contained  in 
the  conditions  of  experience. 

4  A  156  —  B  195.  5  Compare  B  147. 

6  This  statement  should  be  taken  as  qualifying  the  doctrine  pro- 
visionally stated  in  A  24    =•  B  38-9  and  A  31    —  B  46.  Although  our 
intuitions  of  space  and  time  are  completely  a  priori,  we  can  separate 
them  from  experience  only  by  an  act  of  abstraction,  and  apart  from 
their  relation  to  experience  they  would  be  mere  'phantoms  of  the 
brain*. 

7  Compare  A  8  and  B  12.  Even  this,  as  we  shall  see  later,  pre- 
supposes the  forms  or  conditions  under  which  alone  is  experience 
possible. 


90  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXV  §  5 

§  5.  The  Possibility  of  Experience 

Although  Kant  is  professedly  dealing  with  all  synthetic 
judgements,  his  main  interest  is  directed  to  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements.  He  sums  up  his  position  by  saying  that  it  is  the 
possibility  of  experience  which  gives  objective  reality  to  all 
our  a  priori  cognitions.1 

The  phrases  'possible  experience*  and  'possibility  of  experi- 
ence' are  thus  treated  as  equivalent,  but  Kant  indicates  that  it  is 
the  second  phrase  which  best  expresses  his  meaning.2  The 
'third  thing*  is  not  just  some  experience  or  other  which  we  might 
possibly  have :  it  is  rather  the  form  of  experience  itself  or  the 
necessary  conditions  without  which  no  experience  is  possible. 
We  should  indeed  get  into  logical  puzzles  if  we  identified 
the  possibility  of  experience  with  the  form  (or  the  conditions) 
of  experience  ;3  but  we  can  say  that  so  far  as  experience  has 
the  form  of  experience  it  is  possible,  and  so  far  as  it  is  possible 
it  has  the  form  of  experience. 

What  then  is  the  form  upon  which  experience  depends  for 
its  possibility  ?  The  form  of  experience  is  the  synthetic  unity  of 
appearances,  and  experience  is  possible  only  if  it  'rests1  on 
a  synthesis  which  conforms  to  the  categories4  and  to  the  unity 
of  apperception.  Without  this  there  would  be  no  experience 
or  knowledge,  but  a  mere  'rhapsody*  of  sense-perceptions. 

Hence  experience  has  certain  principles  as  the  a  priori 
basis  of  its  form.5  These  are  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding, 
and  they  are  universal  rules  of  unity  in  the  synthesis  of  appear- 

1  A  156  —  B  195.  For  the  possibility  of  experience  see  also  Chapter 
XLIX§6.  2A  157  =-  B  196. 

3  Compare  such  questions  as  whether  beauty  can,  or  can  not,  he 
identified  with  coherence  (or  harmony). 

4  The  categories  are  here  called  'concepts  of  the  object  of  appearances 
in  general'.  This  description  may  be  intended  to  indicate  that  the 
categories  in  question  are  the  schematised  categories.  Similarly  the 
synthetic  unity  of  appearances  is  a  synthetic  unity  in  space  and  time. 

5  A  156  —  B  196.  'Form',  I  think,  does  not  go  with  'principles', 
as  in  Kemp  Smith's  translation,  but  rather  with  'a  priori  zum  Grunde 
hegen\  These  principles  are  the  a  priori  basis  of  the  form  of  experience 
because  they  express  the  conditions  of  experience  and  of  its  objects. 


XXXV  §  5]  THE  SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  91 

ances,  rules  which  state  the  ways  in  which  appearances  must  be 
combined  in  all  experience.  Inasmuch  as  these  rules  state  the 
necessary  conditions  of  experience,  their  objective  reality  can 
always  be  shown  in  experience,  and  indeed,  in  the  very  possi- 
bility of  experience.1 

The  same  doctrine  holds,  not  only  for  the  Principles  of  the 
Understanding,  but  for  all  synthetic  a  priori  judgements. 
Unless  they  were  related  to  possible  experience  (in  the  sense  of 
describing  the  conditions  of  experience),  they  would  be 
impossible;  for  they  would  have  no  'third  thing',  that  is,  no 
object,2  in  relation  to  which  the  synthetic  unity  of  concepts 
(which  is  affirmed  in  the  judgement)  can  exhibit  objective 
reality.3 

Kant  illustrates  his  point  by  the  example  of  mathematical 
judgements.4  We  do  not  need  experience  to  make  synthetic 
a  .priori  judgements  about  space  in  general5  or  about  the 
figures  which  productive  imagination  describes  in  it.  Neverthe- 
less we  should  be  occupying  ourselves  with  a  mere  phantom  of 

1  Kemp   Smith's  translation  wrongly  attaches  'the  possibility  of 
experience*  to  'conditions'.  For  the  idiom  compare  'auf  diescr  ihre 
Moghchkeit*  a  few  lines  further  down. 

2  The  conditions  of  experience  are  also  conditions  of  the  objects 
of  experience. 

3  The   German  is  'an  dem  die  synthctische  Einheit  ihrer  Begnffe 
objektive  Realitat  dartun  konnte*.  Vaihinger's  emendation  (accepted 
by  Kemp  Smith)  substitutes  after  Einheit  'die  objektive  Realitat  ihrer 
Begrtffe*.  This  misses  the  whole  point  of  the  argument.  We  are  here 
concerned,  not  with  the  objective  reality  of  the  separate  concepts 
employed  in  the  judgement,  but  with  the  objective  reality  of  their 
union  which  is   affirmed  in   the  judgement.    Compare   below   'the 
objective  validity  of  their  synthesis',  that  is,  of  the  synthesis  present 
in  pure  synthetic  judgements. 

4  A  157  =  B  196;  compare  A  159-60  =  B  198-9. 

5 1  take  these  to  be  such  judgements  as  'Space  has  three  dimensions'. 
Kant  may  have  in  mind  also  the  judgements  m  the  Aesthetic,  but 
it  is  unsafe  to  hold  this  in  the  absence  of  an  explicit  statement.  The 
judgements  in  the  Aesthetic  are  synthetic  a  pnoii  judgements;  but 
I  am  not  sure  whether  Kant  would  say  of  them,  as  he  does  of  mathe- 
matical judgements,  that  they  relate  mediately  to  experience,  unless 
he  means  that  they  relate  immediately  to  outer  intuition  (which  is 
only  an  element  in  experience).  If  he  had  in  mind  the  Aesthetic,  we 
should  expect  a  reference  to  time  also. 


92  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXV  §  5 

the  brain,  unless  we  could  regard  space  as  the  condition  of 
appearances,  and  so  of  outer  experience.  Hence  these  synthetic 
a  priori  judgements  also  are  related  to  possible  experience, 
or  rather  to  the  possibility  of  experience,1  and  on  this  alone 
do  they  base  the  objective  validity  of  their  synthesis ;  but  this 
relation  is  mediate,  since  the  mathematician  deals  with  space 
in  abstraction  and  need  not  judge  that  it  is  the  condition 
of  outer  intuition  and  so  of  all  outer  experience.2  In  the  case  of 
the  Principles  this  relation  is  immediate,  since  they  affirm 
directly  what  are  the  necessary  conditions  of  experience. 

The  conclusion  of  this  discussion  can  now  be  formulated. 
Experience,  as  empirical  synthesis,  is  in  its  possibility  the  only 
kind  of  knowledge  which  can  give  reality  to  every  other  syn- 
thesis'.3 This  must  mean  that  the  possibility  of  empirical 
experience  alone  can  give  objective  validity  to  every  other 
synthesis.  We  may  take  'every  other  synthesis'  to  mean  'every 
a  priori  synthesis';4  but  in  view  of  what  follows5  I  am  inclined 
to  think  it  means  'the  synthesis  of  concepts  in  judgements'.6 
When  this  synthesis  is  an  a  priori  cognition,  that  is,  when 
it  is  a  synthetic  a  priori  judgement,  it  has  truth7  (or  agreement 
with  the  object)  only  so  far  as  it  contains  nothing  save  what  is 
necessary  for  the  synthetic  unity  of  experience  in  general.8 

1  Notice  Kant's  preference  for  the  latter  phrase. 

2  Kant  does  not  explain  what  he  means  here  by  'mediate'.  lie 
explains  later  that  mathematics  depends  primarily  upon  pure  intuition ; 
hut  its  application  to  experience,  and  therefore  its  objective  validity, 
depends    upon    pure  understanding;    see  A  160  =    B  199.   If  so,  it 
depends  upon  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding,  and  not  merely 
upon  the  Aesthetic.  Compare  also  A  149  ~  B  189,  where  the  possi- 
bility of  mathematical  judgements  is  said  to  be  made  intelligible  by 
the  principles  of  the  Understanding.  3  A  157  —  B  196. 

4  This  is  Kemp  Smith's  view  in  his  translation. 

6  The  formulation  of  the  principle  of  all  synthetic  judgements. 

6  Compare  'the  synthetic  unity  of  concepts'  and  'the  objective 
validity   of   their    synthesis'    above.    Every   synthetic  judgement  is 
a  synthesis  of  concepts;  and  Kant  is  saying  that  experience  in  its 
possibility  gives  reality  to  all  synthetic  judgements. 

7  This  is  equivalent  to  'objective  reality'  or  'objective  validity'. 

8  Compare  A  118,  A  123,  B  151,  and  A  145  =  Bi8s ;  also  Chapter 
XXIX  §  7.  It  may  be  objected  that  mathematical  judgements  contain 
more  than  this ;  for  they  state  the  conditions  of  a  particular  experience, 


XXXV  §  si  THE   SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  93 

In  other  words  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  have  objective 
validity  only  in  so  far  as  they  express  the  necessary  conditions 
(or  form  )  of  experience  and  are  thus  related  to  the  possibility 
of  experience. 

If  I  am  right  in  interpreting  the  phrase  'every  other  synthesis' 
to  cover  synthetic  a  posteriori  as  well  as  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements,  then  Kant  is  maintaining  that  tor  all  synthetic 
judgements  without  exception,  the  possibility  of  experience  is 
the  'third  thing'  which  gives  them  objective  validity.  The  actual 
experience  which  justifies  our  synthetic  a  posteriori  judgements 
does  so,  not  in  virtue  of  mere  sensation,  but  in  virtue  of  those 
conditions  of  synthetic  unity  without  which  no  experience  is 
possible.1 

It  is  unfortunate  that  Kant  does  not  deal  more  explicitly 
with  synthetic  a  posteriori  judgements.  It  is  also  unfortunate 
that  he  does  not  give  separate  treatment  to  the  judgements 
of  the  Aesthetic2  as  well  as  to  the  judgements  of  mathematics 
and  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding.  There  too  we  have 
synthetic  a  priori  judgements  which  depend  upon  the  possibility 
of  experience.  They  do  so  in  the  obvious  sense  that  they  affirm 
space  and  time  to  be  forms  of  sensibility  and  necessary  condi- 
tions of  intuition,  and  so  of  experience.  But  I  think  they  do  so 
also  in  a  deeper  sense ;  for  they  depend  upon  the  necessary 
synthetic  unity  of  experience  which  is  expressed  in  the  Prin- 
ciples of  the  Understanding.3  This  could  not  be  made  clear 
in  the  Aesthetic,4  because  Kant  was  considering  pure  intuition 
in  abstraction  from  the  rest  of  experience,  and  because  a  com- 
plicated system  of  philosophy  cannot  be  explained  in  a  few 
pages.  Nevertheless  even  the  judgements  of  the  Aesthetic, 
since  they  depend  upon  the  possibility  of  experience,  depend 

that  of  triangles,  circles  and  so  on.  Nevertheless  their  objective 
validity  for  Kant  depends  only  on  the  fact  that  the  space  with  whose 
particular  determinations  they  deal  is  a  condition  of  experience  in 
general. 

1  Compare  B  142. 

2  They  are  mentioned  in  A  149  =  B  188,  but  only  in  order  to  mark 
them  off  from  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding. 

3  Compare  A  149  =  B  188-9.  4  Compare  B  160-1  n. 


94  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXV  §  6 

upon  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding,  which  set  forth  the 
form,  or  the  necessary  synthetic  unity,  of  experience  in  general.1 
We  do  well  to  remember  that  the  Principles  of  the  Understand- 
ing are  formulated  in  the  light  of  all  that  has  gone  before. 
In  setting  forth  the  necessary  form  of  experience  they  are  con- 
cerned, not  only  with  the  pure  categories,  but  also  with  the 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  and  the  forms  of  space 
and  time.2  They  state  the  conditions  of  the  possibility  of 
experience  and  so  have  themselves  objective  validity.  And 
all  other  synthetic  judgements  without  exception  have  objective 
validity  in  virtue  of  the  possibility  of  experience  whose  con- 
ditions are  adequately  and  explicitly  expressed  in  the  Principles 
alone. 

§  6.  The  Principle  of  All  Synthetic  Judgements 

In  the  light  of  these  considerations  Kant  formulates  the 
supreme  principle  of  all  synthetic  judgements:  Every  object 
stands  under  the  necessary  conditions  of  the  synthetic  unity 
of  the  manifold  of  intuition  in  a  possible  experience? 

This  formula  expresses  Kant's  supreme  principle  from  the 
side  of  the  object.  It  is  another  way  of  saying  that  synthetic 
judgements  can  have  objective  validity  only  from  their  relation 
to  the  possibility  of  experience. 

It  should  now  be  clear  that  this  formula  applies  to  synthetic 
a  posteriori  judgements.  These  are  made  in  virtue  of  actual 

1  A  156-7  =  B  195-6.  For  this  reason  it  is,  I  think,  possible,  but 
not  certain,  that  Kant  has  in  mind  the  judgements  of  the  Aesthetic, 
as  well  as   those   of  mathematics,  when  he  speaks  of  judgements 
which  are  related  mediately  to  the  possibility  of  experience. 

2  Compare  A  158  -=  B  197  and  also  A  155  =  B  194. 

3  A  158  =  B  197.  We  may  be  tempted  to  abbreviate  the  formula 
and  say,   more    simply,  that   every  object  must  stand    under  the 
necessary  conditions  of  a  possible  experience.  Kant,  however,  wishes 
to  indicate  that  these  conditions  are  all  involved  in  the  necessary 
synthetic  unity  of  the  manifold  of  intuition,  a  necessary  synthetic 
unity  which   constitutes    the   essential   character  of  all   objects   of 
experience;  compare  A  105,  A  109,  B  137,  etc.  The  paragraph  which 
follows  in  regard  to  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  shows  that  these 
conditions  are  not  to  be  taken  in  abstraction  from  one  another. 


XXXV  §  6]  THE  SUPREME  PRINCIPLE  95 

experience  of  an  object,  as  Kant  never  ceases  to  hold ;  but  in 
them  we  presuppose  that  their  object  stands  under  the  neces- 
sary conditions  of  a  possible  experience  as  formulated  in  the 
Principles  of  the  Understanding.  Apart  from  such  a  presup- 
position we  should  have  before  us,  at  the  most,  a  stream  of 
momentary  appearances,  and  we  should  be  unable  to  make  any 
synthetic  judgements  at  all. 

Kant  himself  makes  no  special  reference  to  synthetic  a 
posteriori  judgements.  His  attention  is  concentrated  on  synthetic 
a  priori  judgements.  Since  every  object  must  stand  under  the 
conditions  of  possible  experience,  we  can  see  that  synthetic 
a  priori  judgements  have  objective  validity1  so  far  as  they  express 
the  necessary  conditions  of  a  possible  experience. 

No  attempt  is  here  made  to  distinguish  between  the  synthetic 
a  priori  judgements  of  mathematics,  of  the  Aesthetic,  and 
of  the  Analytic;  and  I  need  not  raise  again  the  questions 
already  discussed.  1  take  Kant  to  refer  to  all  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements  without  exception,  though  he  may  have  in  mind 
primarily  the  judgements  of  the  Analytic.  If  we  are  to  under- 
stand the  objective  validity  of  any  kind  of  synthetic  a  priori 
judgement,  we  must  'relate  the  formal  conditions  of  a  priori 
intuition,  the  synthesis  of  imagination,  and  the  necessary  unity 
of  this  synthesis  in  a  transcendental  apperception  to  a  possible 
experiential  knowledge2  in  general';  that  is  to  say,  we  must 
perform  that  analysis  of  the  conditions  of  experience  which 
has  been  set  forth  by  Kant  in  the  Kritik  and  especially  in 
the  Analytic.  More  simply,  we  must  recognise  that  the  con- 
ditions of  the  possibility  of  experience  in  general  are  also  conditions 
of  the  possibility  of  objects  of  experience.  This  is  the  principle 
upon  which  the  whole  of  the  Transcendental  Philosophy 
rests.  It  is  the  basis  of  the  Transcendental  Deduction3  as  it  is 

1  In  this  passage — A  158  =  B  197 — when  Kant  says  that  synthetic 
a  priori  judgements  'are  possible*,  he  is  clearly  referring  not  to  their 
logical,  but  to  their  real  possibility,  that  is,  to  their  objective  validity. 

2  'Erfahrungserkenntms. ' 

3  This  is  stated  expressly  in  A  in  (compare  also  A  93  =  B  125-6 
and  A  125-6),  and  it  applies  equally  to  the  arguments  in  the  first 
and  second  editions. 


96  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXV  §  6 

the  basis  of  the  separate  proofs  given  for  the  Principles  of  the 
Understanding.  And  indeed  it  is  the  basis  of  all  synthetic 
a  priori  judgements  without  exception;  for,  as  we  have  seen, 
such  judgements  can  have  objective  validity  only  so  far  as  they 
express  the  necessary  conditions  of  possible  experience.1 

1  The  judgements  of  the  Analytic  do  so  directly.  The  judgements 
of  the  Aesthetic  perhaps  do  so  also  directly,  but  their  full  implication 
is  made  intelligible  only  in  the  Analytic;  and  it  may  be  that  they  do 
so  only  indirectly,  since  (if  we  speak  strictly)  while  they  show  space 
and  time  to  be  conditions  of  intuition,  it  is  only  in  the  Analytic  that 
we  understand  space  and  time  to  be  conditions  of  experience  in  general. 
The  judgements  of  mathematics  do  so  indirectly:  they  deal  with 
determinations  of  space  and  time,  but  it  remains  for  philosophy  to 
show  that  space  and  time,  and  the  synthesis  of  the  given  manifold 
in  space  and  time,  are  conditions  of  experience. 


CHAPTER    XXXVI 
THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  THE  UNDERSTANDING 

§  i .  Different  Kinds  of  Principle 

The  discussion  of  the  principle  of  synthetic  judgements 
is  intended  primarily  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  proof  which 
must  be  given  for  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding.  The 
proof  of  these  Principles  is  a  matter  of  judgement',  but  Kant 
declines  to  regard  them  as  self-evident.1  They  are  proved, 
when  they  are  shown  to  express  the  conditions  of  experience ; 
and  we  can  judge  that  they  do  express  these  conditions,  only 
when  we  understand  the  part  played  by  sense,  imagination, 
and  understanding  as  sources  of  knowledge.2 

The  Principles  to  be  proved  are  concerned  with  the  appli- 
cation of  the  categories,  and  this  narrows  the  range  of  our 
present  enquiry.  Needless  to  say,  it  excludes  all  empirical 
principles.  An  'empirical  principle'  is  a  contradiction  in  terms, 
for  it  is  derived  by  generalisation  from  experience;  and  such 
generalisations,  however  universal  they  may  be,  are  totally 
lacking  in  necessity,  and  particularly  in  that  'necessity  according 
to  concepts'  which  is  the  mark  of  the  Principles  of  the  Under- 
standing.3 The  principles  of  the  Aesthetic  are  also  excluded, 
for  they  are  concerned,  not  with  the  application  of  the  cate- 
gories, but  with  the  conditions  or  forms  of  intuition.4  And  finally 
the  principles  of  mathematics  must  be  excluded,  because 
they  pass  from  intuitions  to  concepts  and  not  from  concepts 
to  intuitions.5  Nevertheless  the  possibility  and  objective  validity 

1  Compare  A  149  —  13  188.  The  self-evident  is  commonly  regarded 
as  intelligible  itself  without  reference  to  anything  beyond  itself,  but 
the  Principles  are  intelligible  only  in  relation  to  experience.   If  we 
could  not  *  prove*  the  Principles  by  showing  their  relation  to  experience, 
they  would  incur  the  suspicion  of  being  surreptitiously  introduced. 

2  The  pi  oof  is  'from  the  subjective  sources  of  the  possibility  of  a 
knowledge  of  the  object  in  general'.  See  A  149  —  B  188. 

3  A  159  =  B  198.  A  principle,  as  an  aprf  or  Grundsatz,  cannot 
be  derived  from  anything  else.  4  A  149  =  B  188. 

6  A  149  =-  B  188-9,  A  159-60  =  B  198-9,  and  A  712  =  B  740  ff. 
Compare  Chapter  V  §  8. 

VOL.  II  D 


98  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXVI  §2 

of  the  principles  of  mathematics  depends  upon  the  Principles 
of  the  Understanding.1 

In  all  this  Kant  is  assuming  that  the  categories  are  derived 
from  the  forms  of  judgement,  and  so  are  products  of  pure 
understanding.2  Even  if  we  reject  this  derivation,  the  distinction 
between  the  different  kinds  of  principle  will  still  remain. 
The  proof  of  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding  cannot  be 
intuitive  like  a  mathematical  proof,3  but  must  be  conceptual 
or  discursive,  as  we  shall  see  below.4 

§  2.  The  Principles  of  the  Understanding 

Kant  divides  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding  into 
(i)  Axioms  of  Intuition,  (2)  Anticipations  of  Sense-Perception, 
(3)  Analogies  of  Experience,  and  (4)  Postulates  of  Empirical 
Thought.5  These  correspond  to  the  headings  of  quantity, 
quality,  relation,  and  modality,  under  which  the  categories 
are  arranged.6 

1  A  149  =  B  189  and  A  160  —  B  199.  The  relevant  Principles  of 
the  Understanding  are  primarily  the  Axioms  of   Intuition  and  the 
Anticipations  of  Sense-Perception. 

2  Note  Kant's  repetition  of  the  distinction  between  undei  stand  ing 
as  a  lawgiver  and  understanding  as  a  discoverer  of  laws.  See  A  126-7 
and  compare  A  114  and  B  165;  also  Chapter  XXVII  §  4.  What  arc 
ordinarily  called  the  laws  of  nature  are  all  subject  to  the  Principles 
of  the  Understanding,  and  this  is  why  they  convey  a  suggestion  of 
necessity. 

3  See  especially  A  719-20  -     B  747-8   The  difficulty  that  some  of 
the  Principles  have  immediate  or  intuitive  ceitainty  (or  'evidence') 
— see  A  1 60  =  B  1 99-200  and  A  1 80  •=  B  223 — is  discussed  in  §  3  below. 

4  In  §  3  ;  compare  also  Chapter  XXXII  §  5.  At  present  it  is  sufficient 
to  say  that  we  cannot  construct  an  object  in  a  priori  intuition  for  the 
categories,  as  we  can  for  mathematical  concepts. 

5  These  titles  must  not  be  thought  to  describe  the  Principles.  We 
have  a  Principle  of  Axioms,   a  Principle  of  Anticipations,   and  a 
Principle  of  Analogies,  but  this  does  not  mean  that  one  Principle  is 
an  axiom,  another  an  anticipation,  and  another  an  analogy ;  compare 
Chapter  XXXVII  §  7. 

6  A  161  —  B2oo.  There  is,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  nothing  artificial 
in  the  correspondence  between  the  categories  and  the  Principles.  If 
there  were  not  such  a  correspondence,  the  whole  of  Kant's  argument 
would  be  absurd.  The  fact  that  the  Axioms  and  Anticipations  have 
only  one  Principle  each,  while  there  are  three  Principles  both  for  the 


XXXVI  §  2]  PRINCIPLES   OF  THE   UNDERSTANDING     99 

The  categories  of  quantity  and  quality  are  concerned  with 
the  objects  of  intuition  (both  pure  and  empirical),  while  those 
of  relation  and  modality  are  concerned  with  the  existence 
of  these  objects  in  relation  either  to  one  another  or  to  the 
understanding.1  The  categories  of  quantity  and  quality  are 
called  mathematical  categories,  and  the  corresponding  Prin- 
ciples (the  Axioms  and  Anticipations)  are  called  the  Mathe- 
matical Principles.  The  categories  of  relation  and  modality 
are  called  dynamical  categories,  and  the  corresponding  Prin- 
ciples (the  Analogies  and  Postulates)  are  called  the  Dynamical 
Principles.2 

It  must  not  be  thought  that  the  Mathematical  Principles 
are  principles  of  mathematics,  or  that  the  Dynamical  Principles 
are  principles  of  dynamics.  All  the  Principles  of  the  Under- 
standing are  supposed  to  be  general,  and  are  not  restricted, 
as^  are  the  principles  of  geometry  and  dynamics,  to  objects 
of  outer  sense.3  They  are  called  Mathematical  and  Dynamical, 
because  they  account  respectively  for  the  possibility  of  mathe- 
matics and  (physical)  dynamics.4 

Analogies  and  for  the  Postulates,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Principles 
are  concerned  primanly  with  the  schematised  categories.  The  reason 
why  there  is  only  one  schematised  category  of  quantity  and  one  of 
quality  I  have  already  explained  in  Chapter  XXXIII  §  7. 

1E  1 10.  In  A  160  -=  B  199  Kant  asserts  that  the  mathematical 
principles  concern  mere  intuition,  and  the  dynamical  principles 
concern  the  existence  of  an  appearance  in  general.  For  reasons  to  be 
stated  later,  I  think  this  way  of  expressing  the  distinction  to  be  less 
satisfactory.  See  Chapter  XXXVII  §  5. 

2  See  B  no  and  A  162  =  B  201. 

3  This  is  what  Kant  means  when  he  says  in  A  162  =  B  202  that  the 
Principles  are  those  of  pure  understanding  in  relation  to  inner  sense 
(without  regard  to  the  difference  in  the  ideas  given  in  inner  sense).  The 
Principles  do  not  exclude  objects  of  outer  sense,  for  all  our  ideas, 
even  those  of  physical  objects,  belong  as  modifications  of  the  mind 
to  inner  sense;  see,  for  example,  A  98-9.  Time  and  inner  sense  are 
in  the  first  edition  stressed  unduly  at  the  expense  of  space  and 
outer  sense,  but  even  in  the  first  edition  the  Principles  are  concerned 
primarily  with  objects  in  space. 

4  A  162  =  B  202.  They  are  the  presuppositions,  rather  than  the 
principles,  of  mathematics  and  dynamics,  and  they  find  their  chief 
application  in  these  sciences.  In  the  Nachtrage  LXIV-LXV,  as  given 


ioo  THE   PRINCIPLES  [XXXVI  §  3 

In  the  second  edition1  Kant  added  a  footnote,  which  is 
important  as  a  statement  of  his  technical  terms.  The  Mathe- 
matical Principles  deal  with  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous, 
a  synthesis  of  homogeneous  elements  which  do  not  necessarily 
belong  to  one  another.  Such  a  synthesis  is  divided  into  aggre- 
gation (the  synthesis  of  extensive  quantity)  and  coalition  (the 
synthesis  of  intensive  quantity).  The  Dynamical  Principles 
deal  with  the  synthesis  of  the  heterogeneous,  a  synthesis  of 
different  elements  which  necessarily  belong  to  one  another, 
such  as  substance  and  accident,  or  cause  and  effect. 

All  this  will  become  clearer  when  we  study  the  Principles 
themselves. 

§  3.  Intuitive  and  Discursive  Certainty 

Kant  asserts  that  the  Mathematical  Principles  possess 
intuitive  certainty,  while  the  Dynamical  Principles  possess 
only  discursive  certainty.2 

by  Benno  Erdmann,  Kant  seems  to  express  dissatisfaction  with  this 
division.  The  Mathematical  Principles  are  divided  into  formal  (the 
Axioms)  and  real  (the  Anticipations).  The  formal  Principles  are  con- 
nected with  pure  and  applied  mathematics,  and  also  according  to 
Erdmann  with  dynamics;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  this  must  be  a 
misunderstanding  of  Kant's  note,  and  that  Kant  must  have  intended 
to  connect  the  real  Principles  (the  Anticipations)  with  dynamics,  as 
he  does  in  Nachtrage  LXV  and  in  the  Metaphysiithe  Anfang\t>rnnde 
der  Naturwissenschaft.  The  Analogies  and  Postulates  are  called  physio- 
logical, and  are  divided  into  physical  (the  Analogies)  and  metaphysical 
(the  Postulates),  as  in  the  footnote  added  in  the  second  edition  of 
the  Kntik  (B  201-2  n.).  Rational  'physiology'  is  the  philosophical 
science  of  nature  (whether  corpoieal  or  spiritual) ,  sec  A  846  —  B  874, 
and  Metaphysiky  p.  12. 

1  B  201-2  n.  Kant's  Latin  terms  often  throw  light  on  the  ordinary 
German  expression. 

2  A  162  =  B  201 ;  compare  A  160  —  B  199-200  and  A  180  —  B  223. 
Intuitive  or  mathematical  certainty  (intuitive  Gewissheit  or  anschauende 
Gewissheit)  is  called  'evidence*  (Evidens).  See  Log.  Eml.  IX  (IX  70) 
and  A  734  =  B  762.  'Evidenz'  seems  to  be  used  in  a   more  general 
sense  in  A  180  =  B  223,  but  'evident'  is  used  in  the  technical  sense 
in  A  733   -  B  761.  'Certainty*  is  here  'objective  certainty*  (certainty 
for  everyone) :  that  is  to  say,  the  ground  (Erkenntmsgrund)  of  these 
Principles  is  objectively  (and  not  merely  subjectively)  adequate.  See 
A  823  =  B  850,  A  820  =  B  848,  and  Log.  Eml.  IX  (IX  70). 


XXXVI  §3]  PRINCIPLES   OF  THE   UNDERSTANDING   101 

In  spite  of  this  assertion  intuitive  certainty  is  usually  said 
by  Kant  to  belong  to  mathematics  only,  while  philosophical 
certainty  is  always  discursive.1  Philosophical  knowledge  is 
rational  knowledge  from  concepts;  mathematical  knowledge  is 
rational  knowledge  from  the  construction  of  concepts?  A  philo- 
sophical proof  is  always  a  proof  by  means  of  concepts,  and  so 
is  discursive;  a  mathematical  proof  is  by  the  construction 
of  concepts  and  is  intuitive.3  Kant  even  says  that  axioms  are 
synthetic  a  priori  principles  which  possess  immediate  cer- 
tainty, and  that  philosophy  has  no  principles  which  deserve 
the  name  of  axioms.4  In  other  words,  the  synthetic  a  priori 
principles  of  philosophy  never  possess  intuitive  or  immediate 
certainty.5 

Unless  I  have  overlooked  one  of  Kant's  subtle  distinc- 
tions, we  have  here  a  contradiction,  at  least  in  words.  At  the 
same  time  there  is  a  real  difference  between  the  proof  of  the 
Mathematical,  and  the  proof  of  the  Dynamical,  Principles,  and 
it  is  this  real  difference  which  Kant  is  trying  to  express.  Per- 
haps the  contradiction  can  be  at  least  partly  explained,  if  we 

1  Log.  Eml.  Ill  and  IX  (IX  23  and  70-1).  Compare  A  734-5  ==- 
B  762-3. 

2  A  713  —  B  741.  Compare  Log.  Eml.  Ill  (IX  23).  Rational  know- 
ledge  is   opposed   to   empirical   knowledge :   it  is   grounded  not  on 
experience,   but  on  reason.  To  'construct  a  concept*  is  to    exhibit 
a  pnon  the  intuition  which  corresponds  to  the  concept.  We  cannot 
const! uct  an  object  lor  the  categories  in  pure  intuition:  we  can  only 
show   that,   although   they  arc  not  derived  from  experience,   they 
express  the  necessary  conditions  of  a  possible  experience. 

J  A  734-5  -  B  762-3.  Compare  Log.  Eml.  Ill  and  IX  (IX  23  and 
70-1).  A  philosophical  proof  is  also  said  to  be  'acroamatic'  because 
it  uses  woids,  not  intuitions.  Only  a  mathematical  proof  can  be  called 
a  'demonstration';  for  'demonstration*  implies  the  use  of  intuition. 
This  doctrine  has  a  close  affinity  with  Plato's  account  of  the  mathe- 
matical sciences  and  dialectic  in  the  Republic. 

Compare  also  A  714  =  B  742 :  'Philosophical  knowledge  considers 
the  particular  only  in  the  universal ;  mathematical  knowledge  considers 
the  univeisal  in  the  particular,  or  rather  in  the  individual,  yet  always 
a  priori  and  by  means  of  reason'.  The  whole  passage  should  be 
consulted.  4  A  732  =  B  760. 

6  Kant  says  expressly  in  A  733  --.  B  761  that  even  the  principle 
of  the  Axioms  of  Intuition  is  not  itself  an  axiom,  but  a  principle 
derived  from  concepts. 


102  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXVI  §  3 

remember  the  difference  between  the  category  and  the  schema. 
The  schema  of  extensive  quantity  (i.e.  number1),  and  perhaps 
even  the  schema  of  intensive  quantity  (i.e.  degree2),  can  be 
constructed  in  intuition  a  priori,  and  this  may  be  the  reason 
why  Kant  says  that  the  Mathematical  Principles  have  intuitive 
certainty.3  I  presume  that  the  categories  of  quantity  and 
quality  cannot  be  so  constructed,  and  so  far  as  these  are 
involved  in  the  Mathematical  Principles,  the  Mathematical 
Principles,  like  all  other  Principles  of  the  Understanding,  have 
only  discursive  certainty.  In  the  case  of  the  Dynamical  Principles 
there  is  no  possibility  of  constructing  even  the  transcendental 
schemata,  let  alone  the  categories. 

Kant  himself  implies  that  we  are  not  yet  in  a  position  to 
understand  his  doctrine  in  regard  to  this  point.4  He  bases 
this  contention  on  the  view  that  the  Dynamical  Principles 
exhibit  an  a  priori  necessity  only  under  the  condition  of  empiri- 
cal thinking  in  an  experience:  the  Mathematical  Principles  are 
unconditionally  necessary.5  The  emphasis  in  this  statement 
appears  to  rest  on  the  word  'thinking'  (which  I  have  italicized) ; 
but  the  difficulty  remains  that  even  the  Mathematical  Principles 
must  be  necessary  only  in  relation  to  experience.  Kant  appears 
to  recognise  this,  and  to  suggest  that  a  necessity  in  relation  to 
experience  can  be  absolute  or  unconditioned;  for  he  asserts 
that  the  a  priori  conditions  of  intuition  (with  which  the  Mathe- 
matical Principles  deal,  and  from  which  they  derive  their 
character)  are  absolutely  (durthaus)  necessary  m  relation  to  a 
possible  experience.  The  Dynamical  Principles  have  their 
conditional  necessity  (in  relation  to  empirical  thinking),  because 
they  deal  with  the  conditions  of  the  existence  of  objects  of  a 
possible  empirical  intuition,  and  these  conditions  are  in  them- 
selves contingent.6  This  is  obscure,  and  I  am  uncertain  of  its 

1  For  the  construction  of  number,  see  A  724  ==  B  752. 

2  Such  at  least  is  Kant's  own  view  in  A  179  =  13  221. 

3  As  I  have  pointed  out  in  Chapter  X  §  7,  this  does  not  mean  that 
there  is  no  discursive  or  conceptual  element  present. 

4  A  161  =  B  200.  6  A  160  =  B  199. 
6  'Contingent*  does  not  mean  'due  to  mere  chance,'  but  'necessary 

under  a  condition'.  See  also  A  766  —  B  794. 


XXXVI  §  41  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE   UNDERSTANDING   103 

precise  meaning;  but  we  can  perhaps  say  at  present  that  the 
unconditional  necessity  of  the  Mathematical  Principles  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  these  are  concerned  with  objects  primarily 
as  appearances  given  to  intuition,  while  the  conditional  necessity 
of  the  Dynamical  Principles  is  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are 
concerned  with  objects  primarily  as  judged  to  exist  in  time  and 
space.  The  factor  of  intuition  is  dominant  in  the  first  case*  the 
factor  of  thought  in  the  second;  but  in  both  cases  the  necessity 
is  derived  from  the  relation  of  the  Principles  to  a  possible 
experience,  which  is  always  a  combination  of  intuition  and 
thought.1 

§  4.  The  Ptoof  of  the  Principles 

What  then  are  we  to  say  of  the  proof  of  the  Principles? 
Whatever  be  the  intuitive  element  involved  in  some  cases, 
the  proof  is  always  a  discursive  proof,  a  proof  from  concepts, 
like  all  other  proofs  in  philosophy  ;2  but  it  is  not  for  this  reason 
either  illegitimate  or  uncertain. 

The  Principles  of  the  Understanding  are  synthetic  a  priori 
judgements  and  cannot  be  derived  from  mere  analysis  of 
concepts.3  They  cannot  be  proved  by  mathematical  methods 
of  construction,  nor  can  they  be  proved  directly  from  concepts, 
for  in  that  case  they  would  be  mere  dogmas.4  If  they  can  be 
proved  at  all,  they  must  be  proved  indirectly  from  concepts. 

1  For  the  subsequent  development  of  this  doctrine,  see  A  178  = 
6220  if.,  and  also  A  216-17  =  6263-4.  It  may  be  added  that  the 
schemata  of  number  and  degree  can  be  constructed  because  of  their 
close  connexion  with  intuition.  Number  and  perhaps  degree  seem 
to  be  necessary  for  knowledge  of  time  and  space:  the  categories  of 
relation  have  no  meaning  apart  from  change,  which  is  simply  an 
empirical  fact ,  compare  B  3.  This  is  why  the  proposition  'Every  change 
has  its  cause',  although  it  is  a  priori,  is  not  a  pure  a  priori  proposition. 

2  Compare  especially  A  719-20  =  B  747-8  and  A  722  =  B  750. 

3 1  have  shown  in  Chapter  X  §  7  that  discursive  judgements  are 
not  necessarily  analytic.  Compare  A  733  —  B  761. 

4  A  736  -  -  B  764.  The  philosophy  which  Kant  condemns  as  dog- 
matic offers  us  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  which  arc  supposed  to 
arise  directly  from  concepts  and  to  apply  to  thmgs-in-themselves. 
The  only  judgements  which  we  can  be  j'ustified  in  proving  directly 
from  concepts  are,  I  take  it,  analytic  judgements. 


104  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXVI  §  4 

An  indirect  proof  depends  upon  the  relation  of  concepts 
to  something  wholly  contingent,  namely  possible  experience. 
The  Principles  of  the  Understanding  can  be  apodeictically 
certain  only  if  possible  experience  (or  'something'  as  an  object 
of  possible  experience)  is  presupposed.1  They  are  nevertheless 
properly  called  'principles'  (Grundsatze),  because  they  have  the 
peculiar  property  that  they  make  possible  the  very  experience 
which  is  their  own  ground  of  proof,  and  in  experience  itself 
they  are  always  presupposed.2 

This  is  the  clearest  expression  in  Kant  of  the  doctrine 
which  has  already  been  set  forth.  Such  a  doctrine  must  always 
raise  the  question  whether  Kant's  method  of  proof  is,  or  is  not, 
circular.  To  take  the  most  important  case,  the  case  of  causation, 
it  would  be  (as  I  have  already  pointed  out3)  a  vicious  circle, 
if  Kant  argued  that  because  we  commonly  assume  causation 
in  ordinary  experience,  therefore  causation  is  a  necessary  con- 
dition of  experience ;  and  that  because  causation  is  a  necessary 
condition  of  experience,  therefore  we  are  justified  in  our  com- 
mon assumption. 

Kant's  argument,  whether  it  be  right  or  wrong,  does  not 
merely  accept  our  common-sense  assumptions,  and  then  argue 
that  because  these  are  present  in  experience,  they  must  be  the 
conditions  of  experience.  What  he  assumes  in  his  proof  of  the 
Principles  is  that  for  experience  of  objects  (i)  there  must  be 
sensuous  intuitions  given  under  the  forms  of  time  and  space ; 

1  A  736-7  =--  B  764-5.  To  say  this  is  only  to  repeat  what  has  already 
been  said.  We  establish  the  Principles,  not  directly  from  the  concepts 
which  they  employ,  but  by  showing  that  these  concepts  express  the 
conditions  of  possible  experience,  and  consequently  must  apply  to 
all  objects  of  experience. 

It  may  be  observed  that  when  Kant  says  that  a  proposition  is 
apodeictically  certain,  he  means  that  it  is  universally  and  objectively 
necessary  (valid  for  all).  It  can  be  this  only  if  its  ground  (Erkenntms- 
grund)  is  objectively  adequate.  Apodeictic  certainty  is  connected  with 
rational  certainty,  the  certainty  of  mathematics  or  of  philosophy. 
But  certainty  can  be  rational  and  empirical  at  the  same  time,  when, 
that  is  to  say,  we  know  an  empirically  certain  proposition  from  a 
priori  principles.  There  may  therefore  be  apodeictic  certainty  even 
in  connexion  with  an  empirical  truth.  Sec  Log.  Einl.  IX  (IX  66  and  71). 

2  A  737  -  B  765.  3  Chapter  XXX  §  5. 


XXXVI  §4]  PRINCIPLES   OF  THE   UNDERSTANDNG     105 

(2)  there  must  be  an  imaginative  synthesis  of  such  sensuous  in- 
tuitions in  one  time  and  space;  (3)  there  must  be  judgement.1 
These  assumptions,  I  suggest,  are  all  sound,  as  is  also  the 
assumption  that  if  different  objects  are  judged  to  belong  to 
one  and  the  same  objective  world,  they  must  be  judged  by 
one  and  the  same  self.2  The  one  doubtful  assumption  which  he 
makes  is  that  all  the  forms  of  judgement,  including  the  hypo- 
thetical, are  essential  to  judgement  as  such ;  but  this  assumption 
— although  it  undoubtedly  increases  his  confidence  in  the 
argument  of  the  second  Analogy  and,  as  I  have  suggested  above,3 
is  probably  regarded  as  enriching  his  conclusion — does  not  play 
any  part  in  that  portion  of  his  argument  which  seeks  to  show 
that  all  objective  succession  is  necessary  or  regular  succession. 

If  the  principle  of  causality  (in  the  sense  of  necessary  succes- 
sion) could  be  established  on  the  basis  of  the  assumptions 
which  I  have  asserted  to  be  sound,  I  do  not  think  that  the 
argument  could  be  described  correctly  as  a  vicious  circle.4 
Whether  his  more  doubtful  assumption  can  be  so  interpreted  as 
to  justify  us  in  regarding  causality  as  more  than  necessary 
succession  can,  for  the  present,  be  left  an  open  question. 

Kant  has  given  us  his  general  analysis  of  what  must  be 
involved  in  every  human  experience,  and  has  explained  what 
the  categories  are  and  how  they  are  schematised.  lie  now 
asks  us  to  judge  whether  the  Principles,  which  affirm  the 
necessary  application  of  the  schematised  categories  to  objects, 
state  the  conditions  necessary  for  any  experience  of  the  kind 
he  has  analysed.  His  'proof  is,  as  he  says,  a  judgement  made  in 

1  Compare  A  158  =  B  197.  Hence  our  proof  is  said  in  A  149  = 
B    1 88  to  be  a  proof  from  the  subjective  sources  of  a  knowledge 
of  the  object  in  general. 

2  This  is  the  simplest  way  of  asserting  the  necessity  of  the  unity 
of  apperception,  and  has  to  be  understood  in  the  light  of  Kant's 
doctrine  of  the  self. 

3  See  Chapter  XXXIV  §2. 

4  The  argument  for  the  assumptions  themselves  might  still  be  a 
vicious  circle,  but  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  so.  We  must  always  remember 
that  for  Kant  the  conditions  of  experience  are  not  merely  necessary 
m  relation  to  experience,  but  have  an  intelligible  necessity  in  them- 
selves when  considered  in  isolation ;  see  Chapters  VII  §  4  and  XXX  §  5. 

VOL.  II  D* 


106  THE  PRINCIPLES  [XXXVI  §  5 

the  light  of  his  previous  analysis,  and  not  a  syllogistic  inference 
from  the  truths  which  he  claims  to  have  established. 

§  5.  Modern  Science  and  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding 

It  should  be  clearly  understood  that  Kant's  main,  although 
not  his  sole,  object  in  the  Analytic  of  Principles  is  to  establish 
the  ultimate  philosophical  basis  of  mathematics  and  the 
physical  sciences.1  He  is  attempting  to  justify  the  application 
of  a  priori  mathematical  thinking  to  the  actual  world  of  physical 
objects  and  to  establish  the  principle  of  the  uniformity  of 
nature.  The  problems  which  he  attempts  to  solve  are,  I  believe, 
no  less  important  now  than  they  were  in  the  eighteenth  century, 
but  his  solutions  must  be  judged  in  the  light  of  the  science  of 
his  time.2 

In  recent  years  we  have  been  informed  that  science  has  no 
need  for  the  category  of  substance  nor  even — what  is  muqh 
more  remarkable — for  the  category  of  cause  and  effect.  If  this 
is  true,  cadit  quaestio:  Kant's  proof  of  substance  and  causality — 
and  these  are  in  some  ways  the  most  important  of  his  categories 
— can  be  no  more  than  a  squaring  of  the  circle.  I  must  confess, 
however,  to  some  sympathy  with  the  view  that  these  categories, 
and  especially  the  category  of  cause  and  effect,  are  not  to  be 
lightly  set  aside.  Some  of  the  distinguished  exponents  of  the 
philosophy  of  modern  physics  seem  to  take  a  delight,  a  delight 
which  is  certainly  human  and  probably  also  useful,  in  stressing 
the  paradoxes  of  modern  theory  rather  than  in  showing  the 
continuity  of  its  development.  The  plain  man,  and  even,  if 
I  may  use  the  phrase,  the  plain  philosopher,  is  merely  foolish 
when  he  attempts  to  criticise  the  physicist  in  his  own  domain ; 
but  physics  cannot  be  identified  with  the  whole  of  human 
experience,  nor  can  the  practical  devices  which  it  uses  at  a 
particular  moment  claim  to  be  accepted  without  further  exami- 

1  The  more  special  principles  of  these  sciences  he  seeks  to  establish 
in  the  Metaphysische  Anfangsgrunde  dcr  Naturwnsensthaft. 

z  1  must  confess  that  1  feel  myself  handicapped  in  this  matter, 
since  my  acquaintance  alike  with  past  and  present  science  is  that 
of  an  outsider. 


XXXVI  §s]  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  UNDERSTANDING  107 

nation  as  eternal  philosophical  truths.  It  seems  to  me  probable 
that  when  the  historian  looks  back  upon  the  present  age,  he 
will  see  our  modern  theories  developing  continuously  out  of  the 
old,  and  will  perhaps  be  surprised  that  they  appeared  so 
paradoxical  and  so  revolutionary.  It  is  clear  enough  to-day — 
was  it  ever  really  doubtful  ?— that  the  traditional  theories  of 
space  and  time  are  in  need  of  modification ;  and  if  Kant  were 
right  in  holding  that  experience  of  a  world  in  space  and  time 
is  impossible  apart  from  substance  and  causation,  we  should 
expect  that  the  traditional  theories  of  substance  and  causation 
would  also  require  to  be  modified.  Nevertheless  modification 
is  very  different  from  mere  blank  rejection,1  and  I  doubt 
whether  we  are  at  present  obliged  to  say  that  the  category  of 
substance,  and  still  more  the  category  of  causality,  must  be 
abolished  for  ever  from  the  sphere  of  human  thought. 
§  It  would  be  futile  upon  my  part  to  discuss  the  ways  in  which 
Kant's  doctrine  of  the  categories  must  be  modified.  He 
assumed  Euclidean  space,  and  if  we  are  to  understand  his 
argument,  we  must  do  the  same.  It  is  our  task  to  estimate  the 
value  of  his  argument  as  it  stands ;  and  if  we  conclude  that  it 
is  sound  on  the  basis  of  his  assumptions,  1  see  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  it  is  now  wholly  without  value,  or  that  the  method 
of  his  proof  (as  opposed  to  the  details)  could  not  be  of  use  for 
the  modern  theory  of  science. 

1  Professor  Alexander,  who  has  done  so  much  to  modify  Kant's 
doctrine,  says  (Space,  Time,  and  Deity,  Vol.  I,  p.  191):  'I  cannot 
think  that  this  part  of  Kant's  doctrine  is  so  innocently  inadequate 
as  is  often  believed'. 


BOOK    IX 

THE    MATHEMATICAL    PRINCIPLES 


CHAPTER    XXXVII 
THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION 

§  i .  The  Principle  of  the  Axioms 

The  Principle  of  the  Axioms  of  Intuition  is:  All  intuitions 
are  extensive  quantities. 

This  is  the  formula  of  the  second  edition.1  Both  here  and 
in  the  Anticipations  and  Analogies  Kant  seems  to  have  been 
dissatisfied  with  his  original  formulation  of  the  Principle.  In 
each  case  he  offers  us  a  new  formula  in  the  second  edition,  and 
the  reason  for  the  change  is  not  always  easy  to  see.  In  each 
case  he  offers  us  also  a  new  proof  in  the  second  edition,  which 
he  places  immediately  in  front  of  the  first  proof.  The  obscurity 
of  the  original  proof,  obscurity  complained  of  from  the  publi- 
cation of  the  Krihk  to  the  present  time,  is  the  reason  why  he 
attempts  what  he  believes  to  be  a  better  version.2 

In  the  first  edition  Kant  very  properly  began  his  proof  by 
defining  his  terms.  In  the  second  edition  these  definitions 
are  retained  in  their  original  position ;  and  the  placing  of  the 
second  proof  before  the  first  has  the  unfortunate  result  that 
if  we  are  reading  the  second  edition,  we  have  to  face  Kant's 
most  important  argument  before  we  have  learned  the  exact 
meaning  of  the  terms  employed.3 


1  B  202.  In  A  162  the  Principle  is:  All  appearances  are,  as  regards 
their  intuition,  extensive  quantities.  It  is  difficult  to  say  why  in  the 
second  edition  Kant  should  have  altered  this  formula,  especially  as 
the  conclusion  of  the  argument  in  the  second  edition  conforms  more 
closely  to  the  formula  of  A  than  to  that  of  B.  Mellin  believed  that 
in  the  formula  of  B  Kant  really  intended  to  assert  that  all  appearances 
(not  all  intuitions)  are  extensive  quantities.  This  is  supported  by 
the  conclusion  of  the  argument  in  B,  and  Kant  is  not  speaking  of 
intuition  qua  intuition,  but  of  intuition  qua  appearance  of  an  object. 

a  Compare  B  XXXVIII. 

J  For  this  reason  the  reader,  or  at  any  rate  the  beginner,  is  well 
advised  to  consider  the  A  proof  with  its  definitions  before  he  examines 
the  B  proof. 


ii2  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §2 

§  2.  The  Proof  in  the  First  Edition 

In  the  Principle  of  the  Axioms  the  argument  turns  on  the 
nature  of  extensive  quantity.  Extensive  quantity  is  defined 
as  that  in  which  the  representation  of  the  parts  makes  possible 
(and  therefore  necessarily  precedes)  the  representation  of  the 
whole.1  This  definition  is  by  no  means  clear,  and  Kant  does 
not  give  us  any  further  elucidation  of  its  details  except  such 
as  may  be  extracted  by  inference  from  his  argument.  His  main 
point  appears  to  be  that  an  extensive  quantity — and  by  this,  I 
think,  he  must  mean  a  determinate  extensive  quantity2 — is  one 
which  can  be  known  only  by  a  successive  synthesis  of  the  parts.3 

1  A  1 62  =  B  203 . 1  use  the  word  'representation*  here  for  *  Vorstellung9 
(rather  than  the  word  'idea')  because  Kant  may  mean  'the  representing* 
or — since  the  word  'represent*  is  full  of  ambiguities — 'the  knowing*. 
Here,  as  always,  we  are  handicapped  in  English,  because  we  have  no 
satisfactory  word  which  covers  indifferently  'sensing*  and  'conceiving* 
or  'thinking*.  The  word  'precedes*  must,  I  think,  be  used  in  a  temporal 
sense ;  for  Kant's  point  appears  to  be  that  the  synthesis  of  the  parts 
must  be  successive. 

2  We  can  intuit  an  indeterminate  quantum  as  a  whole,  if  it  is  enclosed 
within   limits,   without  requiring  to   construct  its   totality  through 
measurement,  that  is,  through  the  successive  synthesis  of  its  parts; 
see  A  426  n.  -=  B  454  n.  Furthermore  we  can  recognise  that  something 
is  a  quantum — here,   I  take  it,  an  indeterminate  quantum — from  the 
thing  itself  without  any  comparison  with  others  (as  units  of  measure- 
ment), namely  when  a  multiplicity  of  the  homogeneous  constitutes 
one  whole.  To  decide  how  great  it  is,  we  always  require  something 
else  (which  is  also  a  quantum)  as  its  measure ;  see  K.d.U.§2$  (IV 248). 
When  we  measure,  we  must  have  a  successive  synthesis,  and  only 
thus  can  we  have  a  determinate  extensive  quantum. 

3  Compare  A  163  —  B  204  and  A  167    -  B  209.  It  might  be  objected 
that  this  statement  (if  true)  is  rather  a  consequence  than  a  definition 
of  the  nature  of  extensive  quantity — the  synthesis  must  be  successive 
because  the  parts  of  an  extensive  quantity  are  external  to  one  another ; 
but  Kant,  I  imagine,  holds  that  the  proper  definition  of  an  extensive 
quantity  is  a  statement  of  the  way  in  which  it  can  be  constructed, 
and  that  a  determinate  extensive  quantity  can  be  known  (and  so  can 
be  an  object)  only  through  successive  synthesis. 

The  argument  of  the  second  edition  suggests  that  an  extensive 
quantity  is  one  which  can  be  known  only  by  a  (successive)  synthesis 
of  homogeneous  parts ;  and  this  is  implied  in  the  category  of  quantity 
itself.  Nevertheless  homogeneity  is  not  the  distinguishing  mark  of 
extensive  quantity;  for  according  to  B  201  n.  it  belongs  to  intensive 
quantity  as  well. 


XXXVII  §2]    THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  113 

Since  space  and  time  are  extensive  quantities,  Kant's  defini- 
tion makes  explicit  a  presupposition  which  runs  through  the 
whole  of  his  argument1 — the  presupposition  that  the  parts  of 
space,  like  those  of  time,  can  be  known  only  one  after  another. 
He  concerns  himself  first  of  all  with  pure  space  and  time,  the 
space  and  time  which  we  study  in  mathematics  in  abstraction 
from  sensible  objects  ;2  and  he  maintains  that  any  space  and 
time  about  which  we  think  must  be  constructed  by  an  act 
which  is  a  successive  synthesis  of  parts.  In  geometrical  thinking 
we  must  construct  in  pure  intuition  a  figure  corresponding  to 
our  concept,  and  the  construction  must  be  a  successive  synthesis. 
The  same  principle  applies  when  we  think  of  any  determinate3 
stretch  of  time. 

From  this  general  principle  Kant  proceeds  to  draw  conclu- 
sions as  to  the  necessary  character  of  all  objects  as  appearances. 
Empirical  appearances  are  commonly  regarded  by  him  as 
intuitions,  but  here4  he  distinguishes  within  appearances  what 
he  calls  'mere  intuition',5  that  is,  intuition  in  abstraction 
from  sensation.  Such  'mere  intuition*  is  intuition  of  the  space 
or  time  occupied  by  the  appearance,  the  form  of  the  appear- 
ance as  opposed  to  its  matter.6  Since  every  appearance  contains 
this  element  of  mere  intuition,  it  must  be  known  in  appre- 
hension through  the  successive  synthesis  of  parts;7  that  is 

1  It  is  present  throughout  the  Transcendental  Deduction. 

2  This  is  true  also  of  B  154  where  it  is  said  that  we  must  think 
a  line,  a  circle,  and  even  time  itself,  by  means  of  a  successive  spatial 
construction  or  synthesis. 

a  The  word  'determinate*  is  important,  I  hclievc,  in  the  argument 
of  both  editions. 

4  A  163  =  B  203;  compare  A  167  —  B  208-9. 
6  'bhsse  Anschauung.9 

6  The  'mere  intuition*  is  presumably  the  empirical  form  of  the 
appearance,  namely,  that  determination  of  space  or  time  (or  both) 
which  belongs  to  the  appearance :  the  matter  of  the  appearance  is 
what  is  given  in  sensation.  Compare  A  128,  B  207,  and  also  Chapter 
VI  §  8. 

7  Compare  A  224  =  B  271:  'The  figurative  synthesis  by  which 
we    construct  a   triangle  in   imagination   is   wholly   identical    with 
that   which   we   exercise  in  the  apprehension  of  an   appearance  in 
order  to  make  for  ourselves  an  empirical  concept  of  it*. 


ii4  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §3 

to  say,  it  must  be  an  extensive  quantity.  In  other  words  every 
appearance  is  intuited  as  an  aggregate,  that  is,  a  plurality  of 
previously  given  parts.  As  we  shall  see  in  the  following  chapter, 
there  is  another  kind  of  quantity  to  which  such  a  description 
does  not  apply. 

It  should  be  noted  that  we  must  synthetise  the  spatial, 
as  well  as  the  temporal,  element  in  appearances,  and  so  far 
space  is  as  important  as  time.1  The  special  importance  of  time 
arises  from  the  fact  that  the  synthesis  must  be  a  successive 
synthesis.  This  necessary  successiveness  of  the  synthesis  is 
the  special  mark  of  extensive  (as  opposed  to  intensive)  quantity. 
It  also  enables  us  to  find  by  abstraction  a  common  element, 
namely  number,  which  is  present  whether  extensive  quantity 
be  spatial  or  temporal ;  for  number  is  produced  by  a  successive 
synthesis  (or  addition)  of  homogeneous  units,  whatever  these 
units  may  be.2 

The  proof  given  in  the  first  edition  is  in  some  ways  defective. 
In  spite  of  the  fact  that  number  was  said  to  be  the  schema  of 
quantity,  there  is  no  explicit  reference  to  number,  or  even  to 
the  successive  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous  with  which  number 
has  been  connected.3  Kant's  proof  in  the  second  edition  is 
more  elaborate;  and  although  it  does  not  refer  to  number,  it 
does  refer  to  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous.4 

§  3.  The  Proof  in  the  Second  Edition 

In  the  second  edition  Kant  again  regards  appearances  as 
'containing'  form  and  matter,  the  form  being  an  intuition  of 
space  and  time,  the  matter  being  given  in  sensation.  Hence5 

1  Like  time  it  may  be  the  source  of  the  homogeneity  of  the  parts. 

2  The  internal  character  of  the  units  synthetised  is  for  arithmetic 
a  matter  of  indifference ;  compare  A  720  ---  13  748  and  A  724  =  B  752. 

3  A  142  -  B  182. 

4  Curiously  enough,  he  does  not  in  the  second  edition  assert  this 
synthesis  to  be  successive,  but  the    omission  seems  to  be  a  mere 
oversight. 

5  B  202 ;  compare  B  207.  Kant  says  that  'all  appearances  contain, 
as  regards  their  form,  an  intuition  in  space  and  time'.  I  take  this  to 
be  an  intuition  of  the  determinate  space  or  time  referred  to  immediately 


XXXVII  §3]     THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  115 

if  we  are  to  apprehend  appearances,1  there  must  be  a  synthesis 
of  the  manifold2  whereby  the  idea  of  a  determinate  space 
or  time  (namely,  of  the  determinate  space  or  time  occupied 
by  the  appearance)  is  produced.3  This  means  that  there  is  a 
combination  of  the  homogeneous  manifold  of  space  or  time,  and 
consciousness  (clear  or  obscure)  of  the  synthetic  unity  of  the 
homogeneous  manifold. 

Now  consciousness  of  the  synthetic  unity  of  the  homogeneous 
manifold  of  intuition  in  general  is  consciousness  of  the  pure 
category  of  quantity  (or  totality).  Consciousness  of  the  synthetic 
unity  of  the  homogeneous  manifold  of  space  or  time  is  con- 
sciousness of  the  schematised  category  of  extensive  quantity.4 

thereafter,  the  space  or  time  which  the  appearance  occupies.  If  so, 
it  is  identical  with  the  'mere  intuition'  of  the  first  argument. 

An  appearance  can  hardly  be  said  to  contain  the  intuition  of  all 
space  and  time;  and  the  fact  that  the  intuition  is  said  to  be  in  space 
ami  time  suggests  that  it  is  an  intuition  of  a  part  of  space  and  time. 
The  phrase  'space  and  time1  may  imply  that  Kant  is  thinking  primarily 
of  physical  objects ;  but  it  may  perhaps  be  due  to  the  greater  importance 
attached  to  space  in  the  second  edition — we  always  require  outer 
intuition  to  show  the  objective  reality  of  the  categories  (B  291). 

Kant  adds  that  an  intuition  in  space  and  time  is  the  a  priori  condition 
of  all  appearances.  This  need  not,  I  think,  imply  that  he  is  immediately 
concerned  with  intuitions  of  space  and  time  as  infinite  wholes;  but 
it  must  imply  that  in  knowing  the  determinate  space  and  time  of  an 
object  we  are  knowing  these  as  parts  of  the  one  infinite  space  and 
time. 

1  'Apprehension*  is  used,  as  generally  by  Kant,  to  mean  'the  taking 
up  into  empirical  consciousness' ;  compare  A  99  ff  and  A  120.  Here, 
as  usual,  it  is  a  successive  synthesis  (in  which  reproduction  plays  a 
necessary  part). 

2  This  manifold  I  take  to  be  the  pure  homogeneous  manifold  of 
space  or   time,  the  synthesis  of  this  manifold  conditions  the  con- 
current synthesis  of  the  empirical  manifold  in  space  or  time. 

3  This  is  the  doctrine  of  all  the  versions  of  the  Transcendental 
Deduction,  whatever  their  differences  in  terminology.  Note  that  Kant 
speaks  here  of  'space  or  time',  not  'space  and  time',  presumably 
because  the  synthesis  need  not  be  concerned  with  spatial  appearances. 

4  See  Chapter  XXXI II  §  2.  Kant  himself  says  that  the  consciousness 
is  the  category.  The  name  he  gives  to  the  category — the  concept  of 
a  quantum — suggests  that  he  has  in  mind  the  schematised  category, 
as  we  should  anticipate ;  but  the  reference  to  intuition  in  general  may 
suggest  that  he  has  in  mind  the  pure  category.  Perhaps  'intuition 
in  general'  is  not  intended  to  have  the  usual  technical  sense  (which 


n6  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §3 

It  is  not  wholly  clear  whether  Kant  is  concerned  primarily 
with  the  pure  category  or  the  schematised  category.  If  we 
take  him  to  be  concerned  with  the  schematised  category,1 
the  argument  is  relatively  simple.  We  can  have  sense-per- 
ception of  an  object  as  an  appearance  only  by  synthetising  the 
pure  and  homogeneous  manifold  of  the  determinate  space  or 
time  which  it  occupies.  Hence  one  condition  of  the  sense- 
perception  of  an  object  is  the  synthetic  unity  of  the  pure  and 
homogeneous  manifold  of  a  determinate  space  or  time.2  But 
synthetic  unity  of  the  pure  and  homogeneous  manifold  of  space 
or  time  is  precisely  what  is  thought  in  the  category  of  extensive 
quantity.  Therefore  all  objects  as  appearances  must  fall  under 
this  category,  or  in  other  words  they  must  be  extensive  quan- 
tities.3 


associates  it  with  the  pure  category) :  it  may  indicate  only  that  the 
difference  between  space  and  time  can  be  ignored.  Such  a  usage 
seems  to  be  found  in  A  724  -  B  752  (and  perhaps  in  A  142-3  =  B  182) 
in  speaking  of  number,  but  there  it  indicates  that  we  are  concerned 
with  a  quantitas  (see  §  8  below),  not  with  a  quantum.  Furthermore 
the  category  is  identified  with  consciousness  of  the  synthetic  unity 
of  the  homogeneous  manifold  of  intuition  in  general  only  so  far  as 
thereby  the  idea  of  an  object  first  becomes  possible;  and  this  perhaps 
suggests  that  the  category  in  question  is  schematised. 

Kant,  it  should  be  noted,  does  not  in  this  passage  use  the  phrase 
'the  synthetic  unity  of,  which  has  been  introduced  by  Vaihmger 
(and  is  accepted  by  Kemp  Smith).  The  insertion  of  the  phrase  makes 
for  clarity,  but  I  am  not  sure  that  it  is  necessary. 

1  If  we  take  him  to  be  concerned  with  the  pure  category,  there 
is  no  real  difficulty,  but  in  that  case  the  reference  to  the  schematised 
category  is  introduced  only  when  he  comes  to  deal  with  extensive 
quantity  at  the  end. 

2  Kant  himself  speaks  of  'the  synthetic  unity  of  the  manifold  of 
the  given  sensuous  intuition'.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  I  take  the 
'given  sensuous  intuition*  to  be  'mere  intuition*  as  opposed  to  sensation. 
If  we  take  'intuition*  to  be  used  in  the  ordinary  sense,  we  must  add 
that  its  synthetic  unity  is,  as  we  have  shown,  also  the  synthetic  unity 
of  a  pure  and  homogeneous  manifold. 

3  Note  that  appearances  or  intuitions  in  space  or  time  'must  be 
represented  through  the  same  synthesis  as  that  whereby  space  and 
time  in  general  are  determined*.  This  suggests,  I  think,  that  in  deter- 
mining the  space  or  time  of  an  object  we  arc  determining  a  part  of 
a  wider  whole  which  must  be  determined  in  the  same  way. 


XXXVII  §4]    THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  117 

§  4.  Successiveness  of  Synthesis 

There  are  many  minor  difficulties  in  following  Kant's 
argument.  These  arise  mainly  from  his  failure  to  make  clear 
whether  he  means  'intuition1  to  be  taken  as  'pure  intuition', 
and  whether  he  means  'the  concept  of  a  quantum'  to  be  the  pure 
category  or  the  schematised  category.  Such  difficulties  are 
more  in  the  expression  than  in  the  thought;  and  I  do  not 
believe  we  need  take  seriously  his  omission  to  state,  in  the 
argument  of  the  second  edition,  that  the  synthesis  of  extensive 
quantity  is  necessarily  a  successive  synthesis. 

The  more  philosophical  difficulties  centre  in  the  successive- 
ness of  the  transcendental  synthesis.  If  we  accept  this  succes- 
siveness as  necessary  to  mathematical  construction,  its  presence 
in  all  empirical  apprehension  requires  a  more  detailed  defence 
than  Kant  has  given  us.  When  we  know  how  to  construct  a 
triangle  or  a  circle,  we  can  recognise  at  sight  that  a  figure 
drawn  on  paper  is  an  example  of  what  we  are  thinking  about; 
and  although  such  a  recognition  takes  time,  it  seems  impossible 
to  believe  that  (for  example)  we  construct  each  side  of  the  seen 
triangle  by  running  successively  through  its  parts.  Neverthe- 
less it  may  fairly  be  said  that  if  there  were  any  doubt  on  the 
subject,  we  should  test  the  figure  by  considering  whether  it 
could  be  constructed  in  this  way;  and  that  a  successive  syn- 
thesis is  the  basis  on  which  our  recognition  rests.  Indeed,  if 
Kant  is  right,  to  recognise  this  figure  as  a  triangle  is  to  recognise, 
however  'obscurely',  that  it  is  the  product  of  such  a  construction. 

If  Kant  were  going  further  than  this,  and  were  maintaining 
that  when  we  see  a  triangle,  we  always  do  construct  what  we 
see  by  running  our  eye  successively  along  the  three  sides,1 
then  I  think  we  should  have  to  say  that  he  is  mistaken.  When 
I  look  at  the  rafters  on  the  ceiling  I  see  a  series  of  parallel 
lines,  and  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  I  must  follow  suc- 
cessively the  contour  of  each  line  before  I  can  see  such  a  series. 

1  To  maintain  this  is  like  maintaining  that  when  we  judge  three 
people  to  be  approaching,  we  must  count  them  in  succession.  For 
a  further  discussion  of  this  point  see  Chapter  XLII  §  i. 


n8  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §4 

Kant's  language  may  in  places  suggest  that  he  took  the  more 
extreme  view,  though  I  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  he  could 
have  advanced,  without  any  attempt  at  argument,  a  doctrine 
which  on  the  face  of  it  finds  no  corroboration  in  experience. 
The  psychological  question  whether  we  can,  in  the  case  of 
familiar  figures,  recognise  wholes  at  a  glance  is  in  any  case 
irrelevant.  Kant  is  maintaining  that  we  must  think  of  any  space 
and  time,  however  small,  as  a  whole  to  be  constructed  by  the 
successive  synthesis  of  parts.  He  is  also  maintaining  that  in 
the  case  of  any  spatial  or  temporal  intuition  we  must  traverse 
the  parts  successively,  if  we  are  to  make  the  intuition  deter- 
minate.1 If  we  take  him  to  be  concerned  only  with  determinate 
extensive  quantities,  his  contention  seems  to  me  to  be  true 
— it  is  certainly  true  when  we  are  concerned  with  determination 
by  measurement — and  it  is  sufficient  for  his  argument. 

If  we  grant  the  necessity  of  construction  in  all  mathematical 
thinking,  Kant's  insistence  on  the  successiveness  of  the  syn- 
thesis is  not  to  be  dismissed  as  manifestly  irrelevant.  There 
is  a  successiveness  also  in  our  thinking  and  in  our  sensing; 
but  such  successiveness  does  not  constitute  the  essential  nature 
of  thought  as  such  or  sensation  as  such.2  From  the  Critical 
standpoint,  which  refuses  to  accept  the  view  that  the  pheno- 
menal world  exists  in  its  own  right  independently  of  thought, 
successiveness  of  synthesis  is  essential  to  the  presence  of 
determinate  (though  not  of  indeterminate)  extensive  quantity; 
and  it  is  the  successiveness  of  the  synthesis  of  apprehension 
(so  far  as  this  is  concerned  with  space  and  time)  which  guaran- 
tees the  applicability  of  the  mathematics  of  extension  to  the 
phenomenal  world.  I  do  not  wish  to  dogmatise  on  these  difficult 
matters,  but  Kant's  view  is  not  to  be  refuted  merely  by  assuming 
the  transcendental  realism  which  he  denies.  It  is  also  to  be 

1 1  find  some  difficulty  in  understanding  how  far  Kant  regards 
shape  or  figure  as  kind  of  quantity.  Broadly  speaking,  he  is  concerned 
in  this  chapter  with  determinate  quantity,  quantity  determined  by 
measurement,  and  for  this  we  do  require  a  successive  synthesis. 

2  Compare  A  143  -  B  183,  B  208,  A  168  -=  B  210,  for  the  gradual 
changes  in  degree  of  sensation.  This  will  be  considered  in  the  follow- 
ing chapter. 


XXXVII  §5]     THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  119 

noted  that  the  intuitionist  school  of  mathematicians,  who  have 
rejected  the  Kantian  view  of  space,  attempt  to  base  the  whole 
structure  of  mathematics  on  a  doctrine  which,  so  far  as  I  under- 
stand it,  appears  to  follow  Kant's  view  pretty  closely  in  this 
respect.1 

The  successive  synthesis  of  extensive  quantity,  so  far  as  it 
is  concerned  with  the  pure  manifold  of  time  or  space,  is  a 
continuous  synthesis2.  The  fact  that  we  must  run  through  all 
the  parts  in  order  to  know  the  whole  does  not  mean  that  the 
whole  has  a  finite  number  of  parts.  In  measuring  we  choose 
a  unit  (such  as  a  foot)  arbitrarily,  and  interrupt  our  synthesis 
whenever  we  have  traversed  the  length  of  the  unit.3  The  possi- 
bility of  such  interruption  in  a  continuous  synthesis  does  not 
make  the  object  measured  a  discrete  quantity;  and  Kant  would 
have  been  very  much  surprised  to  learn  that  his  view  was 
incompatible  with  the  continuity  of  space  and  time.4 

§  5.  Intuition  and  Object 

It  may  be  thought  that  the  Principle  of  which  Kant  has 
offered  a  proof  applies  to  intuitions  as  intuitions,  and  not 
to  intuitions  only  so  far  as  they  are  intuitions  of  an  object. 
Kant's  own  language  supports  this  view  when  he  says  that  the 
Mathematical  Principles  arc  concerned  only  with  intuition? 

1  See  Black,   The  Nature  of  Mathematics,  especially  pp.   186  ff.  1 
must,  however,  add  that  Mr.  Black's  account  of  Kant's  doctrine  is 
so  astonishingly  inaccurate  as  to  disturb  my  confidence  in  him  when 
he  deals  with  other  matters  on  which  he  is  doubtless  better  informed. 

2  A  169-70  -=  B  211-2. 

3  For  Kant's  view  of  measurement  see  KdU.  §   26  (V  251  if). 
The  unit  must  be  taken  as  the  product  of  a  continuous  synthesis. 
I  think  Kant  means  to  assert  this  in  A  171    -  B  212,  when  he  says 
that  appearance  as  a  unity  (or  unit)  is  a  quantum  and  so  a  continuum. 

4  See   Sidgwick,   The  Philosophy  of  Kant,  p.   92.   It  is  of  course 
true  that  by  means  of  number  we  can  represent  any  quantum  as 
discrete,  but  we  must  distinguish  a  quantum  which  is  discrete  in 
itself  fiom  a  quantum  which  is  continuous  in  itself,  but  represented 
by  us  as  discrete.  See  Metaphyuk,  p.  31. 

5  A  1 60   -  B  199.  In  B  1 10  he  says,  more  correctly,  that  the  mathe- 
matical categories  are  concerned  with  objects  of  intuition  (as  opposed 
to  the  existence  of  these  objects).  Even  in  A  160  =  B  199  he  adds 


120  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §  5 

If  these  words  were  to  be  taken  literally,  the  Principle  of  the 
Axioms  would  be  out  of  place  here — as  many  commentators 
have  held — and  ought  to  be  relegated  to  the  Aesthetic. 

This  view,  it  seems  to  me,  in  spite  of  the  support  given  by 
some  of  Kant's  looser  expressions,  is  incompatible  with  the 
argument  of  the  second  edition ;  and  it  fails  to  recognise  the 
interconnexion  of  the  different  Principles  of  the  Understanding, 
all  of  which  without  exception  are  directed  towards  establishing 
the  necessary  characteristics  of  every  object  of  experience. 
In  the  Mathematical  Principles  we  consider  the  object  in 
abstraction  from  its  relation  to  other  objects,  and  we  find  that 
the  object  in  such  abstraction  must  have  extensive  and  inten- 
sive quantity;  but  these  categorial  characteristics  are  products 
of  the  one  transcendental  synthesis  which  also  imposes  upon 
objects  the  categories  of  relation  and  modality.  We  must  not 
imagine  that  because  we  can  consider  in  abstraction  aspects 
of  what  is  essentially  one  synthesis,  we  are  therefore  concerned 
with  something  other  than  an  object  of  experience. 

It  is  true  that  every  intuition,  and  even  that  every  image 
of  our  fancy  and  our  dreams,  is  spatial  and  temporal,  and 
may  therefore  be  described  in  a  loose  sense  as  an  extensive 
quantity ;  but  if  it  is  to  be  an  extensive  quantity  in  the  strict 
sense,  it  must  occupy  a  determinate*  space  and  time.  Kant 
means,  I  think,  that  it  must  be  determined  by  measurement, 
and  so  must  be  a  determinate  part  of  the  one  space  and  time 
in  which  all  objects  are.  When  we  perceive  an  object,  the 
appearance  given  in  intuition  occupies  such  a  determinate 
space  and  time,  and  can  be  measured  exactly.  The  images  or 

that  the  a  priori  conditions  of  intuition  arc  absolutely  necessary  in 
relation  to  a  possible  experience.  In  the  Analytic  \ve  arc  concerned, 
not  with  conditions  of  intuition  in  abstraction,  but  with  conditions 
of  intuition  as  conditions  of  a  possible  experience  and  its  objects; 
and  one  of  these  conditions  is  the  successive  synthesis  of  the  pure 
and  homogeneous  manifold  of  our  common  time  and  space. 

1  B  202  ,  compare  'a  determinate  quantity  of  time*  in  A  163  —  B  203. 
The  infinity  of  time  is  said  to  mean  that  every  determinate  quantity 
of  time  is  possible  only  through  limitation  of  the  one  individual 
whole  of  time;  sec  A  32  =  B  47-8. 


XXXVII  §6]     THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  121 

pseudo-objects  of  our  imagination  and  our  dreams  cannot  be  so 
measured,1  because  they  do  not  occupy  such  a  determinate 
space  and  time.  What  Kant  is  trying  to  show  is  that  all 
objects  of  sense  must  be  exactly  measurable  or  numerable — 
and  this  means  (although  the  momentary  abstraction  fails  to 
bring  this  out)  measurable  in  relation  to  all  other  objects  of 
experience.  It  is  only  as  intuitions  (or  appearances)  of  objects 
that  our  intuitions  are  measurable  as  extensive  quantities ;  and 
it  is  only  as  appearances  of  objects  that  they  must  be  repre- 
sented by  the  same  synthesis  which  determines  time  and  space 
in  general?,  and  must  be  subject  to  the  category  of  quantity 
without  which  no  object  can  be  thought.3 

§  6.  The  Doctrine  of  the  Aesthetic 

For  these  reasons  I  regard  it  as  an  error  to  maintain  that  Kant 
is»  repeating  unnecessarily  the  doctrine  of  the  Aesthetic,  and 
that  he  does  so  through  the  influence  of  an  artificial  plan 
described  by  some  commentators  as  'architectonic'.  The  doc- 

1  They  arc  indeterminate  quanta. 

2  B  203.  Time  and  space  in  general  are  the  one  time  and  space 
in  which  all  objects  are 

n  I  cannot  here  enter  into  the  more  elaborate  aspects  of  this  conten- 
tion. To  determine  the  size  of  anything  we  always  require  thought 
as  well  as  sense,  and  \ve  always  presuppose  that  it  occupies  a  deter- 
minate part  of  our  common  space.  This  is  obvious  when  we  deter- 
mine the  size  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  but  it  is  equally  true,  although 
less  obvious,  when  we  determine  the  size  of  a  table.  An  image  has 
no  measurable  size,  unless  we  assign  to  it,  however  arbitianly,  a 
position  in  space  at  a  definite  distance  from  ourselves;  and  to  do 
this  is  to  make  it  a  sort  of  pseudo-object  When  we  imagine  castles 
in  Spain  or  dream  of  marble  halls,  these  edifices  have  no  exact 
dimensions;  and  if  we  find  that  dream-measurements  are  assigned 
to  them,  we  may  equally  find  that  they  are  dream-substances  and 
the  product  of  dream-causes.  There  is  no  difference  in  this  respect 
between  the  Mathematical  Principles  and  the  Analogies.  Both  are 
concerned  with  objects  in  a  common  time  and  space,  and  both  find 
a  sort  of  imitation  of  themselves  in  the  world  of  dreams  and  fancy. 

We  can  of  course  measure  the  time  through  which  an  image  or 
a  dream  lasts,  but  to  do  this  is  to  measure  the  time  of  our  apprehension, 
and  to  make  our  apprehension  itself  an  object.  Similarly  we  can 
explain  the  causes  of  our  dreams,  but  then  we  arc  no  longer  dreaming; 
we  are  making  our  acts  of  dreaming  into  objects  of  thought. 


122  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §  6 

trine  of  the  Aesthetic  is  in  manifest  need  of  the  additions  here 
supplied,  and  it  is  all-important  to  recognise  that  when  we 
determine  an  object,  there  must  be  present  the  same  synthesis 
of  a  homogeneous  space  and  time  as  is  necessary  for  the  deter- 
mination of  space  and  time  in  general.  This  is  a  matter,  not  of 
mere  intuition,  but  of  thought  by  means  of  the  categories. 

There  is  a  greater  show  of  plausibility  in  the  criticism  that 
Kant,  so  far  from  repeating  the  doctrine  of  the  Aesthetic,  is 
actually  contradicting  it.  The  charge  of  contradiction  can 
be  repelled  only  when  we  realise  that  in  the  Aesthetic  Kant  is, 
as  he  says,  abstracting  from  the  element  of  thought;  and  that 
consequently  the  doctrine  of  the  Aesthetic  is  provisional,  and 
must  be  supplemented  and  corrected  by  what  comes  later.1 

In  the  Aesthetic  it  was  argued  that  times  and  spaces  are 
known  only  as  limitations  of  one  infinite  time  and  space ;  and 
consequently  the  'original'  idea  of  infinite  space  and  time  must 
be  a  pure  intuition,  from  which  the  concepts  of  temporality 
and  spatiality  are  derived.  Kant  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  of 
space  that  it  is  represented  as  an  infinite  given  quantity.2  The 
Aesthetic,  in  short,  regards  the  idea  of  the  whole  as  making 
possible  the  idea  of  the  parts ;  whereas  we  have  now  been  told 
that  it  is  of  the  essence  of  extensive  quantity  for  the  idea  of 
the  parts  to  make  possible  the  idea  of  the  whole.3 

The  contradiction  is  due  partly  to  the  fact  that  in  the 
Aesthetic,  since  Kant  abstracts  from  the  element  of  thought, 
he  is  bound  to  ignore  the  presence  of  synthesis.4  Hence  he 
has  to  speak  as  if  the  unity  of  space  and  time  were  dependent 
merely  upon  intuition,  and  as  if  the  pure  intuitions  of  space  and 
time  were  given  as  one  and  even  as  infinite  (or  at  least  were 
'represented'  as  an  infinite  given  quantity).  He  has  now 

1  Compare  Chapter  V,  especially  §  8. 

2  B  39.  Compare  A  24  and  see  Chapter  V  §  8. 

3  A  162  =  B  203.  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  if  the  whole 
precedes  the  parts  logically  (or  objectively)  and  the  parts  precede 
the  whole  temporally  (or  subjectively)  there  is  no  contradiction.  The 
whole  makes  possible  the  parts  in  a  sense  different  from  that  in  which 
the  parts  make  possible  the  whole. 

4  Except  in  so  far  as  it  is  presupposed  by  synthetic  judgements. 


XXXVII  §  6]     THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  123 

explained  that  although  the  ideas  of  space  and  of  time  must 
be  intuitions,  since  they  are  ideas  of  one  infinite  whole,  the 
unity  of  these  intuitions,  like  the  unity  of  every  intuition 
of  an  object,  depends  on  a  synthesis  of  imagination  in  con- 
formity with  categories  and  the  unity  of  apperception.1  When 
we  are  told  that  space  is  represented  as  an  infinite  given  quantity, 
we  must  add  that  it  can  be  so  represented  only  because  the 
manifold  is  combined  or  synthetised  by  the  understanding,2 
although  Kant  makes  no  reference  to  synthesis  in  the  Aesthetic.3 
In  this  way  at  least  some  part  of  the  contradiction  can  be 
explained,  but  there  remains  an  element  of  truth  in  the 
Aesthetic  which  Kant  fails  to  express  in  the  Analytic.  The 
synthesis  which  constructs  space  and  time  by  the  addition  of 
part  to  part  is  itself  dominated  by  an  idea  of  the  whole,  and  this 
fact  is  here  ignored  by  Kant,  except  in  so  far  as  he  implies 
that  the  synthesis  of  quantity,  like  every  other,  must  accord 
with  the  unity  of  apperception.  To  understand  fully  his  view 
of  space  and  time  we  must  supplement  the  doctrine  of  the  Aes- 
thetic and  the  Analytic  by  the  doctrine  of  the  Dialectic.4 

1  Compare  13  160-1  n.  and  A  107. 

2  Sec  B  130,  B  134,  B  161,  and  compare  A  105. 

J  In  A  24  space  was  said  to  be  represented  as  an  infinite  given 
quantity  because  of  the  absence  of  limits  in  the  advance  of  intuition. 
This  advance  manifestly  requires  synthesis,  but  Kant  makes  no 
attempt  to  emphasise  this.  lie  omits  the  passage  in  the  second  edition. 
Compare  Chapter  V  §  7. 

4  Especially  in  the  Antinomies  Kant's  doctrine  is  elaborated  further 
in  the  Metaphysische  Anfangsqrunde  der  Naturwissenschaft  (IV  481-2). 
There  he  recognises  a  relative  or  material  space  which  is  movable 
and  is  capable  of  being  perceived  or  sensed,  that  is,  can  be  symbolised 
(bezeichnet)  through  that  which  can  be  sensed.  Such  a  relative  or 
movable  space,  if  its  movement  is  to  be  perceived,  presupposes  a 
wider  relative  space  in  which  it  moves,  and  so  on  ad  infimtum.  Absolute 
space  on  the  other  hand  is  not  material  and  cannot  be  perceived; 
it  means  only  a  wider  space  which  is  relative  to  every  other,  a  space 
which  I  can  always  think  as  outside  others  and  extend  indefinitely. 
Such  a  wider  space  is  still  in  a  sense  material,  but  as  I  know  nothing 
of  the  matter  which  symbolises  it,  I  abstract  from  the  matter  and 
represent  it  as  a  pure  and  absolute  space,  an  immovable  space  in 
which  other  spaces  move.  To  regard  it  as  an  actual  thing  is  a  mistake, 
and  a  misunderstanding  of  reason  in  its  Idea.  For  Kant's  doctrine 
of  Bezeichnung  (signatid)  see  Anthr*  §  38  (VII  191). 


i24  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES     [XXXVII  §  7 

Such  an  investigation  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the  present 
book,  but  I  believe  that  his  theory  is  more  coherent  than  many 
of  his  critics  are  prepared  to  admit. 

§  7.  The  Axioms  of  Geometry 

Although  Kant's  primary  aim  is  to  establish  the  applicability 
of  the  categories  to  objects  of  experience,  he  regards  the 
Principle  of  the  Axioms  as  the  basis  of  the  objective  validity 
of  pure  mathematics,  that  is,  of  its  application  to  physical 
objects.  He  discusses  briefly  (i)  geometry,  (2)  arithmetic,  and 
(3)  the  application  of  these,  but  especially  of  geometry,  to  objects 
of  experience.  The  discussion  does  not  profess  to  be  other  than 
elementary,  and  on  that  level  it  must  be  judged.1 

The  mathematics  of  extension  (that  is,  geometry)  rests  on 
the  successive  synthesis  of  the  productive  imagination  in  the 
construction  of  figures.  This  is  true  in  particular  of  the  axioms 
of  geometry,  and  consequently  the  Principle  is  called  the 
Principle  of  the  Axioms.2  Axioms,  we  must  remember,  are 
a  priori  synthetic  principles  which  are  immediately  certain, 
and  this  immediate  certainty  is  due  to  the  possibility  of  'con- 
structing* concepts,  that  is,  of  'exhibiting'  a  priori  in  intuition 
an  object  corresponding  to  the  concept.3  As  principles,  the 
axioms  of  geometry  express  or  formulate  the  conditions  of 
a  priori  intuitions  of  space  and  of  spatial  figures,  the  conditions, 
that  is  to  say,  of  our  rules  for  constructing  geometrical  figures.4 

1  For  further  remarks  on  this  point,  see  Chapter  VII  §§  5-8.  In 
the  present  chapter  I  ignore  the  many  difficulties  raised  by  the  develop- 
ments of  modern  mathematics. 

2  Compare  A  733  ==  B  761.  As  distinguished  critics  have  objected 
that  this  Principle  is  not  an  axiom,  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  that 
although  Kant  in  A  161  —  B  200  speaks  loosely  of  the  Principle  as 
if  it  were  an  axiom,  when  he  comes  to  formulate  it,  he  describes  it, 
not  as  an  Axiom,  but  as  a  Principle  of  Axioms. 

3  See  A  732  -  B  760  and  Log.  Einl.  Ill  (IX  23). 

4  A  163  =  B  204.  Kant  says  they  formulate  the  conditions  under 
which  alone  the  schema  of  a  pure  concept  of  outer  appearance  can 
arise.  The  schema  would  seem  to  be  the  rule  for  constructing  a  triangle, 
square,  and  so  on;  see  A  141  —  B  180.  It  may  possibly  be  space 
itself  (see  A  156  —  B  195),  though  space  is  also  referred  to  as  the  pure 
image  (Bild)  of  the  quanta  of  outer  sense  (see  A  142  =•=  B  182). 


XXXVII  §  8]     THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  125 

Such  axioms  are  that  between  two  points  there  can  be  only  one 
straight  line,  and  that  two  straight  lines  cannot  enclose  a  space. 
In  the  Aesthetic  Kant  had  already  presumed  such  axioms 
to  be  intuitively  certain.1  He  now  adds  that  this  intuitive 
certainty  depends  on  an  imaginative  construction  which, 
in  conforming  to  the  particular  concept  involved,  conforms 
also  to  the  category  of  quantity.  He  makes  no  reference  to  the 
axioms  concerned  with  time  which  he  mentioned  in  the 
Aesthetic,  but  the  same  considerations  would  apply  in  this 
case  also.2  All  these  axioms  are  concerned  with  extensive 
quantities  which  Kant  calls  quanta,  which  we  may  here  take 
to  be  figures  in  space  and  durations  in  time.3 

§  8.  Quantitas  and  Quantum 

At  this  point4  Kant  makes  a  distinction  between  'quanta' 
and  'quantitas\  This  distinction  raises  problems  of  Kantian 
terminology  through  which  it  is  not  easy  to  thread  one's  way. 
In  English  we  can  distinguish  between  'quantum'  and  'quan- 
tity', although  the  words  are  often  used  ambiguously  and 
without  precision.  The  ambiguity  in  German  is  increased  by 
the  fact  that  the  same  word5  has  to  do  duty  for  both. 

The    pure    category   of   quantity    (or   totality6) — which    I 

1  See  13  41.  The  example  there  given  is  that  space  can  have  only 
three  dimensions   The  presence  of  intuitive  ceitamty  does  not  imply 
the  absence  of  thought;  compare  Chapters  X  §  7  and  XXXVI  §  3. 

2  See  A  3 1    -  B  47.  The  axioms  are  that  time  has  only  one  dimension, 
and  that  different  times  are  not  simultaneous  but  successive. 

3  Time,  it  may  be  noted,  is  sometimes  descnbed  as  'protensive1 
instead  of  'extensive'  (see  Metaphysik,  p.  37),  and    Kant  has    here 
confined  the  mathematics  of  extension  to  geometry. 

4  A  163  —  B  204. 

5  'Grossed  Strictly  speaking,  quantitas  is  'die  blosse  Grosse  or  'Grosse 
uberhaupt'  ;  compare  A  717  —  B  745  and  A  242  -—  B  300. 

6  Totality  includes  in  itself  the  moments  of  plurality  and  unity, 
and  is  definitely  said  to  be  the  category  to  which  number  belongs 
(as  a  schema) ;  see  Bin.  Curiously  enough  in  the  Prolegomena  §21 
(IV  303),  when  Kant  gives  the  three  moments  of  quantity  (Quantitat), 
he  speaks  of  unity  as  the  measure  or  unit  (das  Mass),  plurality  as 
quantity  (die  Grosse),  and  totality  as  the  whole  (das  Ganze).  Similarly 
in  Metaphysik,  pp. 3 1-2,  he  connects  'quantum'  primarily  with  plurality 


126  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §  8 

have  defined  as  the  concept  of  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous1 
— may  be  called  'quantitas'?  The  schematised  category  I  have 
called  the  category  of  extensive  quantity,  and  defined  as  the 
concept  of  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous  in  time  and 
space.3  Though  Kant,  so  far  as  I  know,  does  not  employ  the 
phrase,  the  schematised  category  might  be  called  'quantitas 
extensive?* 

The  concrete  instances  in  which  quantitas  is  manifested 
are  naturally  called  quanta,  and  the  word  'quantum'  is  applied 
by  Kant  both  to  space  and  time  (the  only  original  quanta5) 
and  to  empirical  objects  so  far  as  these  are  extended  in  space 
and  time.  We  might  indeed  express  the  Principle  of  the  Axioms 
itself  by  saying  that  all  appearances  are  extensive  quanta.6 

As  I  have  already  pointed  out,7  Kant  habitually  uses  concrete 
words  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  concepts ;  and  the  category 
may  be  referred  to  indifferently  as  the  concept  of  quantitas 
or  the  concept  of  quanta  in  general  or  even  as  the  concept  of  a 
quantum* 

So  far  there  is  no  real  difficulty.  But  quantitas  may  also  be 
used  for  a  special  kind  of  instance  in  which  quantitas  (the 

(multitude).  Perhaps  this  is  part  of  his  doctrine  that  the  infinite  is 
a  quantum  without  being  a  whole;  see  Chapter  XV  §  2.  Perhaps 
(like  the  use  of  'reality*  for  the  category  of  quality)  it  has  no  special 
significance. 

1  See  Chapter  XXXIII  §  2. 

2  See  A  142  =  B  182.  The  same  usage  is  implied  in  A  146  -=  B  186. 

3  Kant  does  not  distinguish  the  schematised  category  from  the  pure 
category  with  sufficient  precision,  but  it  is  manifestly  the  schematised 
category  with  which  he  is  concerned  in  the  present  passage.  The 
'homogeneous  in  time  and  space*  is  here  the  pure  homogeneous 
manifold  of  time  and  space. 

4  In  Metaphysik,  p.  32,  he  speaks  of  quantitates  as  extensive  and 
intensive,  but  there  the  usage  is  concrete,  not  abstract. 

6  A  725  =-  B  753. 

6  The  word  is  sometimes  translated  as  'magnitude*.  This  tends 
to  obscure  its  connexion  with  the  category  of  quantity,  and  Kant 
uses  'magnitude*  in  a  different  sense;  see  K.d.U.  §  25  (V  248). 

7  Chapter  IX  §  4. 

8  The  last  usage  is  the  one  employed  in  B  203.  We  can  add  the 
word  'extensive*  to  make  clear  that  we  are  dealing  with  the  schematised 
category. 


XXXVII  §  8]     THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  127 

category)  is  present,  and  we  can  speak  of  quantitates  in  the 
plural.  We  must  distinguish  between  such  quantitates  and 
quanta*  although  they  have  the  common  characteristic  that 
they  can  be  constructed  a  priori  in  mathematics.  Examples  of 
quanta  are  the  spatial  figures  of  geometry2  and  also  durations.3 
These  have  a  quality  as  well  as  mere  quantity — in  the  case  of 
spatial  figures  that  quality  is  shape  or  figure.4  When  we  abstract 
entirely  from  the  quality,5  then  we  have  quantitates,  which 
Kant  identifies  with  numbers  6  These  I  take  to  include  the 
constants  and  variables  of  algebra  as  well  as  the  numbers  of 
arithmetic.7 

The  only  source  of  difficulty  here  is  the  use  of  the  word 
'quantitas'  both  for  the  universal  and  for  certain  special 
instances  of  the  universal,  namely  numbers;  but  there  is,  I 
fear,  still  a  further  complication.  I  will  put  it  in  my  own  way 
by  saying,  although  Kant  does  not  use  the  phrase,  that  we  can 
treat  any  quantum  (even  an  empirical  object)  as  itself  a 
quantitas.  We  do  so  by  abstracting  from  all  its  qualities,  and 
this  happens  when  we  measure  it,  that  is,  when  we  ask  how  big 
it  is.8  This  question  can  be  answered  only  by  saying  how  many 
units  it  contains,  and  the  answer  must  be  by  means  of  numbers.9 
Such  a  quantitas,  although  not  a  number,  always  involves 

1We  may  ignore  the  cases  where  these  words  are  used  without 
being  distinguished.  E.g.  in  Metaphysik,  p.  32,  quantitates  clearly 
covers  quanta. 

2  A  717  -  B  745.  3  A  720  --=  B  748,  A  724  =  B  752. 

4  'GestalV ';  see  A  720  —  B  748.  Kant  does  not  say  what  the  corre- 
sponding quality  is  for  durations,  m  which  he  is  less  interested;  but 
I  suppose  that  every  duration  has  the  quality  of  being  one-dimensional. 

*'Quahtaty  or  'Bcsthajfenheit';  see  A  720  =  B  748  and  A  717 
=  B  745. 

6  A  717  =  B  745  and  A  720  =  B  748.  Compare  Chapter  VII  §  6. 

7  In  K.d.U.  §  26  (V  251)  Kant  speaks  of  the  estimation  of  quantity 
as  mathematical  if  it  is  by  means  of  number-concepts  or  their  signs 
in  algebra.  In  A  146  =  B  186  number  is  quantitas  phacnomenon. 

8  A  163  =  B  204.  In  Metaphysik,  p.  32,  Kant  speaks  of  things  as 
quantitates. 

9  We  may  of  course  have  to  be  satisfied  only  with  approximations 
obtained  by  means  of  number-series  which  progress  ad  infimtwn\ 
see  K.d.U.  §26  (V  251). 


i28  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §  8 

number  and  comparison  with  a  standard  or  unit  of  measure- 
ment: I  think  it  is  better  called  a  determinate  quantum.  A 
quantum  can  be  recognised  at  sight  and  need  not  be  compared 
with  anything,1  but  it  is  then,  I  think,  an  indeterminate 
quantum. 

Every  determinate  quantum,  since  it  is  the  product  of  a  con- 
tinuous and  successive  synthesis,  can  (as  I  have  already  pointed 
out2),  be  measured  by  interrupting  the  synthesis  whenever 
we  have  traversed  the  length  of  the  unit  chosen  as  our  standard 
of  measurement.3  We  may  ignore  for  the  present  the  difference 
between  continuous  and  discrete  quanta,4  and  we  may  also 
ignore  the  fact  that  there  are  some  quanta  which  are  not  exten- 
sive.5 Granting  Kant's  presuppositions,  we  may  take  him  to 
have  proved  that  every  object  must  (in  one  aspect  of  it)  be  a 
determinate  continuous  extensive  quantum;  we  can  always 
determine  its  objective  quantity  by  numbers  or  measurement. 

This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  essence  of  Kant's  doctrine. 
If  we  take  the  schematised  category  to  be  concerned  only 
with  determinate  extensive  quantity,6  we  can  understand  why 
he  insists  on  the  successiveness  of  the  synthesis  and  on  the 
presence  of  number.  It  is  only  by  counting  or  measuring — a 
procedure  which  is  necessarily  successive — that  we  can  deter- 
mine the  extensive  quantity  of  any  object.  In  this  as  in  all 
other  cases  (though  Kant  does  not  make  his  view  too  clear) 

1  K  d  U.  §§  25  and  26  (V  248  and  251)  and  compare  again  A  426  n. 
=  B  454  n.  All  estimate  of  quantitas  is  relative  to  the  unit  we  take, 
and  in  the  last  resoit  this  is  a  quantum  which  is  not  itself  estimated 
mathematically  as  a  quantitasy  but  only  aesthetically  in  mere  intuition 
by  the  eye  (or  I  suppose  by  touch).  Compare  also  A  240  —  B  299. 

2  See  §  4  above. 

3  The  quantitas  of  anything  may  be  described  as  the  quantitas  of 
my  progression  in  space  and  time ;  see  Metaphysik,  p.  39. 

4  See  A  526-7  -=  B  554-5. 

5  See  A  143  =  B  183  and  A  170  =^  B  212. 

0  I  think  Kant  is  entitled  to  define  his  technical  terms  as  he  pleases ; 
and  it  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  too  paradoxical  to  say  that  we  have 
extensive  quantity  only  so  far  as  we  have  exact  measurement.  I 
confess  that  I  discovered  this  only  at  the  last  moment — partly  from 
reading  the  Master  of  BalhoFs  book  on  Kant — but  it  seems  to  me 
to  solve  many  difficulties. 


XXXVII  §  9]     THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  129 

the  schema  has  to  be  established  if  we  are  to  justify  our  appli- 
cation of  the  pure  category.  The  schematised  category  combines 
in  itself  the  pure  category  and  the  schema:  it  is  not  only  a 
concept  of  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous,  but  a  concept  of 
that  successive  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous  manifold  of  time 
and  space  whereby  alone  an  object  can  be  quantitatively 
determined  in  regard  to  its  extent.1 

Needless  to  say,  we  do  not  require  to  measure  an  object 
before  we  can  regard  it  as  an  object ;  but  in  regarding  it  as  an 
object  we  presuppose  that  it  can  be  measured.  We  know  a 
priori  that  an  object  must  have  extensive  quantity,  but  we  do 
not  know  a  priori  what  extensive  quantity  an  object  must 
have.  Its  actual  measurements  are  to  be  determined  by  empirical 
methods  alone.2 


§  9.  The  Formulae  of  Arithmetic 

Arithmetic  (under  which  we  may  include  algebra)  is  a 
more  abstract  science  than  geometry  and  is  concerned,  not  with 
quanta,  but  with  quantitates,  which  may  be  described  generally 
as  numbers.3 

Arithmetical  propositions  have  intuitive  certainty,4  and 
depend  upon  a  construction;  they  are  synthetic  and  not 
analytic.  In  the  judgement  7  +  5  =  12  the  left-hand  side  of 
the  equation  gives  us  the  idea  of  7,  the  idea  of  5,  and  the  idea 
of  an  operation  (namely  adding) ;  but  we  have  to  perform  that 
operation  by  means  of  a  construction  before  we  can  get  the 

1  I  still  have  difficulties  as  to  the  distinction  between  the  schematised 
category  and  the  schema,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  waste  time  on  subtleties. 

2  These  general  considerations  are  true  as  regards  all  the  categories. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  Nachtrage  LXX  Kant  explains 
that  the  homogeneous  manifold  must  be  taken  together  in  accordance 
with  concepts  of  quantity,  because  we  cannot  intuit  space  and  time 
for  themselves.  The  fact  that  we  cannot  intuit  empty  or  absolute 
space  and  time  is  a  reason  which  he  repeatedly  gives  for  the  necessity 
of  employing  all  the  categories. 

3  See  A  163  ~  B  204,  A  717  =  B  745,  A  724  =  B  752,  and  compare 
K.d.U.  §§  25-6  (V  248  ff.).  Compare  also  A  146  -  B  186. 

4  A  164  —  B  205.  They  are  Evident'  in  the  technical  sense.  See 
Chapter  XXXVI  §  3. 

VOL.  II  E 


i3o  THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §  9 

right-hand  side  of  the  equation.1  Such  a  construction  Kant  calls 
symbolic,  and  believes  to  be  impossible  apart  from  intuition.2 

According  to  Kant  there  can  be  no  axioms  in  arithmetic, 
only  formulae.3  Arithmetic,  like  geometry,  does  presuppose 
certain  general  principles — if  we  may  call  them  so4 — of  a  purely 
analytic  character,  for  example  that  if  equals  be  added  to, 
or  subtracted  from,  equals,  the  results  are  equal;5  but  axioms, 
strictly  speaking,  are  synthetic.  On  the  other  hand  the  pro- 
positions of  arithmetic — such  as  7  +  5  =  12 — although  they  are 
synthetic,  are  not  universal,  and  an  axiom  must  be  universal. 
Such  propositions  are  therefore  called  by  Kant  'number- 
formulae'.6 

The  proposition  7  +  5  =  12  Kant  regards  as  a  singular 
synthetic  a  priori  proposition.  He  must  mean  that  the  pro- 
position is  concerned  originally  with  this  7  and  this  5,  although 
he  admits  that  the  use  of  these  numbers  afterwards  is  universal. 
I  take  his  view  to  be  that  when  we  have  seen  this  7  and  this  5 
to  be  equal  to  12,  we  can  affirm  that  the  sum  of  any  7  and  any  5 
is  equal  to  12 :7  we  do  not  require  to  repeat  the  operation  of 
adding  the  separate  units  in  every  case. 

1  Here  again,  as  in  the  case  of  recognising  a  triangle,  we  need  not 
go  through  the  process  of  adding  7+1  +  1  +  1  -hi    ]-i,  but  our 
addition   of  7  +  5    rests   ultimately   upon   such   a   process.    In   the 
Nachtrage  LXXI  Kant  proposed  to  omit  this  insistence  on  the  synthetic 
character  of  the  judgement  in  view  of  the  discussion  introduced  in  B  16. 

2  Compare  Chapter  VII  §§  6  and  7.  3  A  164  —  B  204-5. 

4  Kant  himself  calls  them  principles  (Grundsatze)  in   B   16,   but 
immediately  denies  that  they  serve  as  principles  (Pnnzipieri). 

5  The  examples  given  in  B  1 7  for  geometry  are :  the  whole  is  equal 
to  itself  or  a  —  a ;  and  the  whole  is  greater  than  the  part  or  (a  +  b)  >  a. 
These  'principles'  are  said  to  be  valid  even  in  mere  conception  (nach 
blossen  Begnffen);  they  are  admitted  in  mathematics  because  they 
can  be  'exhibited'  in  intuition.  This  is  another  case  where  analytic 
judgements  are  not  'about'  concepts — as  is  maintained  by  Kmkel 
and  Hermann  Cohen — but  'about'  objects. 

6 ' Zahlformeln.'  Schulz  (Prufung  der  Kantischen  Kntik,  Vol.  I, 
p.  2 19)  argued  in  1789  that  there  are  two  axioms  in  arithmetic,  namely 
a  +  b  =  b  +  a  and  c  +  (a  +  b)  =  (c  -\  a)  +  6. 

7  It  may  be  objected  that  there  is  only  one  7  (the  number  7)  although 
there  are  many  groups  of  7  things.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  an  error 
which  is  refuted  every  time  we  say  that  7  +  7  =  14.  There  is  only 


XXXVII  §  IG]      THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  131 

On  the  other  hand  we  have  to  remember  that  the  axioms 
of  geometry,  although  they  are  stated  as  universal  propositions, 
also  rest  according  to  Kant's  theory  on  the  construction  of 
individual  instances,  as  do  all  mathematical  propositions 
without  exception.  Mathematics  as  such  deals  with  the  universal 
in  the  particular,  or  rather  in  the  individual  j1  and  the  difference 
between  geometry  and  arithmetic  on  which  Kant  is  here 
insisting  seems  to  be  little  more  than  a  difference  in  expression.2 
On  his  view  both  sciences  deal  with  individual  instances; 
both  sciences  construct  these  instances  a  priori  in  accordance 
with  a  principle;  and  both  sciences  extend  their  conclusions 
to  all  other  individual  instances  constmcted  on  the  same 
principle.  This  is  possible  because  we  can  see  in  the  individual 
instance  that  the  conclusion  follows  only  because  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  construction  employed.3 

§  10.  The  Application  of  Mathematics  to  Objects  of  Experience 
The  Principle  of  the  Axioms  is  intended  to  show  the  objective 
validity  of  pure  mathematics :  it  is  our  justification  for  applying 
pure  mathematics  to  objects  of  experience.  Kant's  contention 
is  general,  but  his  argument  is  confined  to  geometry.4  He 
states  his  case  first  of  all  in  terms  of  the  Aesthetic:  empirical 

one  seven-ness,  but  it  has  many  instances.  Such  is  the  doctrine  which 
I  believe  to  have  been  held  by  Plato  in  the  Republic.  It  is  certainly 
attributed  to  him  by  Aristotle;  see  Metaphysics,  A  6,  gSyb,  14  ff.  But 
these  matters  arc  highly  controversial,  and  I  have  no  wish  to  speak 
dogmatically  on  a  matter  where  I  have  no  claim  to  expert  knowledge. 

1  Sec  A  714  =  B  742  and  also  A  734  =  B  762. 

2  The  fact  that  we  can  construct  a  triangle  in  different  ways  and 
a  number  in  only  one  way  has  surely  no  direct  connexion  with  the 
difference  between  an  axiom  and  a  number-formula  (or  between  a 
universal  and  a  singular  proposition).  The  variation  in  triangles  rests 
on  the  fact  that  they  are  figures  of  two  dimensions;  and  it  may  be 
true  that  we  require  axioms  in  geometry  because  space  is  a  continuum 
of  more  than  one  dimension. 

Kant's  further  objection — that  if  we  call  number-formulae  axioms, 
there  will  be  an  infinite  number  of  axioms  in  arithmetic — is  valid 
only  if  we  assume  that  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  number  of  axioms. 

3  Compare  A  715-16  =  B  743-4  and  Chapter  VII  §  7. 

4  His  failure  to  deal  with  arithmetic  is  very  remarkable,  since  the 
schema  of  quantity  is  number. 


132        THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVII  §  10 

intuition  is  possible  only  through  the  pure  intuition  of  time  and 
space,  and  what  geometry  asserts  of  pure  intuition  must 
undoubtedly  apply  to  empirical  intuition.1  For  the  full  under- 
standing of  his  doctrine  it  must  be  added  that  the  synthesis 
which  is  necessary  for  knowledge  of  empirical  objects  must 
involve  a  synthesis  of  time  and  space,  and  this  point  he  duly 
proceeds  to  make.  The  synthesis  of  spaces  and  times,  which  arc 
the  essential  forms  of  all  intuition,  is  what  makes  apprehension, 
and  therefore  outer  experience,  and  therefore  all  knowledge  of 
physical  objects,  possible;  and  what  pure  mathematics  proves 
about  space  (by  means  of  its  a  priori  constructions)  must  be 
valid  of  objects  in  space.2  It  is  mere  sophistry,  he  maintains, 
to  suggest  that  though  mathematical  lines  are  infinitely  divisible, 
the  actual  lines  in  nature  might  be  made  of  simple  parts  or 
physical  points.3 

All  such  sophistical  doctrines  rest  on  the  supposition  that 
physical  objects  are  things-in-themselves,  and  consequently 
cannot  be  known  a  priori  to  conform  to  theories  which  have 
been  proved  independently  of  experience.  Granted  this 
supposition,  Kant  believes  the  doctrine  to  be  true,  and  adds 
that  on  this  supposition  geometry  itself  would  be  impossible4 
— presumably  upon  the  ground  that  it  would  deal  only  with 
the  creations  of  our  own  fancy.5 

Such  an  argument  would  manifestly  have  no  weight  with 
those  who  hold  that  mathematics  does  deal  only  with  a  world 
of  fancy,  and  that  there  is  no  known  reason  why  it  should 
sometimes  apply  to  actual  things.  For  those  who  hold  such  a 
view  Kant's  argument  is  a  petitio  principii?  and  in  any  case  it 

1 A  165  =  B  206.  2  A  165-6  =  B  206. 

3  Compare  Prol.  §  13  Anmerk.  I  (IV  288). 

4  A  1 66  —  B  207.  Yet  Kant  admits  that  mathematics  is  possible 
on  the  Newtonian  view. 

6  Prol.  §  13  Anmerk.  I  (IV  287).  In  A  165  ==  B  206  Kant  says  we 
should  deny  objective  validity  to  space  and  consequently  to  all 
mathematics,  and  should  not  know  why  or  how  far  mathematics 
could  be  applied  to  appearances. 

6  He  assumes  that  we  can  construct  only  Euclidean  space,  and 
consequently  that  the  space  of  the  actual  world  and  of  physics  must 
be  Euclidean. 


XXXVII  §  IQ]  THE  AXIOMS  OF  INTUITION  133 

is  too  elementary  to  meet  the  difficult  problems  of  the  present 
day.  Nevertheless  I  cannot  believe  it  to  be  a  mere  accident 
that  geometry — whether  Euclidean  or  any  other — should  be 
developed  a  priori,  and  yet  should  be  found  to  apply  to  the 
actual  world.  There  must  be  an  intelligible  connexion  between 
the  development  of  pure  mathematics  and  its  application  to 
the  physical  world,  and  the  reasons  for  that  connexion  ought 
to  be  found  in  an  analysis  of  experience  such  as  Kant  has 
offered.  We  cannot  afford  to  ignore  the  fact  that  our  experience 
depends  essentially  upon  an  imaginative  construction  based 
upon  sensation  and  controlled  by  thought,  and  that  this  imagi- 
native construction  is  always  a  synthesis  of  space  and  time 
or  of  space-time.  However  much  Kant's  doctrine  may  be  in 
need  of  modification,  it  is  by  no  means  merely  to  be  set  aside. 


CHAPTER    XXXVIII 
THE  ANTICIPATIONS  OF    SENSE-PERCEPTION 

§  i .  The  Principle  of  the  Anticipations 

The  Principle  of  the  Anticipations  is :  In  all  appearances  the 
real,  which  is  an  object  of  sensation,  has  intensive  quantity,  that 
is,  a  degree. 

This  is  the  formulation  of  the  Principle  in  the  second  edition.1 
In  the  first  edition  the  Principle  is  formulated  thus:  In  all 
appearances  sensation,  and  the  real  which  corresponds  to  it  in 
the  object  (realitas  phaenomenon),  has  intensive  quantity,  that 
is,  a  degree*  Since  the  argument  added  in  the  second  edition 
conforms  to  the  formulation  of  the  Principle  in  the  first  edition, 
the  change  in  expression  would  seem  to  imply  no  change  in 
the  thought,  and  I  can  see  no  reason  for  it  other  than  a  desire 
for  brevity.3 

There  is  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  terms 
employed  by  Kant,  and  these  must  be  considered  before  we  can 
estimate  his  proof. 

The  word  'Anticipation*  might  be  applied  to  all  the  Principles4 
(and  indeed  to  all  synthetic  a  priori  judgements):  they  all 
anticipate  experience  and  inform  us,  before  any  particular 
experience,  what  necessary  characteristics  an  object  of  that 
experience  must  have.  The  word  is,  however,  peculiarly 
appropriate  to  the  Principle  we  are  about  to  consider.  It  is 
most  remarkable  that  we  should  be  able  to  anticipate  experience 
on  its  empirical  side  and  to  have  a  priori  knowledge  of  its 
matter,  a  matter  which  must  be  given  through  empirical 
sensation  .5 

1  B  207.  2A  166. 

3  The  brevity  both  here  and  in  the  Axioms  is  secured  at  the  expense 
of  details  which  do  not  cease  to  be  parts  of  Kant's  doctrine. 

4  A    166-7  =  B   208.    For   a   similar   statement   about   the   word 
*  Analogy',  see  A  180-1  —  B  223. 

5  A  167  —  B  208-9.  The  Principle  of  the  Axioms  dealt  only  with 
the  form,  as  opposed  to  the  matter,  of  appearances.  The  Principle 


XXXVIII  §  i]  THE  ANTICIPATIONS  135 

Since  all  the  Principles  are  concerned  with  the  application 
of  the  categories  (or  the  schematised  categories)  to  objects, 
I  think  we  may  take  'appearances'  to  mean  appearances  as 
determinate  objects.  In  the  Anticipations1  we  consider  one 
characteristic  which  must  belong  to  every  determinate  object — 
Kant  is  thinking  primarily  about  physical  objects — and  although 
we  consider  this  in  abstraction  from  the  other  characteristics 
which  every  object  must  have,  we  must  understand  this 
Principle  in  the  light  of  the  others,  and  we  are  certainly  not 
examining  the  nature  of  sensation  in  itself  without  regard  to  the 
fact  that  it  is  sensation  of  an  object.2 

'Intensive  quantity'  is  identified  by   Kant  with   'degree'.3 

of  the  Anticipations  may  be  said  to  deal  with  the  foim  of  the  matter 
of  appearances,  an  essential  characteristic  which  belongs  to  the  matter 
as  such  (and  to  sensation  as  such)  apart  from  the  time  and  space 
which  it  fills;  compare  A  176  —  6  218.  Every  Principle  must  be 
foVmal,  and  the  present  Principle  is  no  exception.  In  A  161  —  B  201 
Kant  himself  indicates  that  the  Anticipations  are  concerned  only 
with  the  form  of  quality. 

1  I   use   this   as   a   shorter  way   of  saying   'the   Principle   of  the 
Anticipations'. 

2  Compare  Chapter  XXXVII  §  5  for  further  development  of  this 
general  view. 

3  See  A  1 68  =  B  210.  Degree  is  degree  (or  intensive  quantity)  of 
a  quality,  and  by  quality — which  is  not  here  defined — Kant  means 
such  things  as  colour,  taste,  heat,  weight,  and  resistance.  See  A  176 
—  B  218  and  (for  the  particular  qualities)  A  168  =  B  210,  A  169  = 
Ban,  A  174  =  6216,  and  also  Prol.  §24  (IV  306).  In  A  173  =  6215 
impenetrability  t>eems  also  to  be  regarded  as  a  quality  comparable 
with  weight;  this  is  presumably  the  same  quality  as  resistance    It  is 
not  made  clear  whether  all  these  qualities  are  on  the  same  level. 
Colour  and  taste  are  said  to  be  qualities  of  sensation  in  A  175  —  6217, 
and  are  contrasted  with  the  real  which  corresponds  to  sensation ;  in 
A   176    -  B  218  quality  is  identified  with  'the  real  of  appearances* 
(rcahtas  phae nomenon) ;  and  in  A  1 73  —  B  215  impenetrability  and 
weight  (the  result  of  the  forces  of  repulsion  and  attraction)  are  implied 
to  be  identical  with  the  real  in  space.  For  the  purposes  of  dynamics 
Kant  identifies  the  'real'  or  the  'matter'  of  objects  of  outer  sense 
with  'moving  forces'  (betoegende  Krafte),  that  is,  with  a  combination 
of  the  forces  of  repulsion  and  attraction.  See  M  A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck 
(IV  523)  and  compare  A  265  =  B  320-1.  We  must  remember  that 
for  Kant  the  primary  qualities  are  in  a  special  sense  objective,  and 
to  these  impenetrability — see  Prol.  §  13  Anmerk.  II  (IV  289) — and 
presumably  weight  belong.  Compare  Chapter  II  §  i. 


i36         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  i 

It  is  defined  as  'that  quantity  which  is  apprehended  only  as 
unity,  and  in  which  plurality  can  be  represented  only  through 
approximation  to  negation  =  o'.1  An  extensive  quantity 
is  made  up  of  parts  (quantities)  outside  one  another  in  space  or 
time,  while  an  intensive  quantity  is  given  as  a  whole  and  all 
at  once.  A  foot  is  made  up  of  so  many  inches  and  an  hour  of 
so  many  minutes,  and  it  is  because  we  have  separate  ideas  of 
the  parts  that  we  can  have  an  idea  of  the  whole  ;2  but  when  we 
experience  a  degree  of  heat  we  have  an  idea  of  the  whole  without 
having  separate  ideas  of  its  parts.3 

The  chief  difficulty  of  Kant's  account  is  to  be  found  in  the 
words  'real*  and  'sensation*.  Are  these  meant  to  be  the  same  or 
are  they  meant  to  be  different  ?  The  formula  in  the  first  edition4 
distinguishes  them  explicitly,  and  so  does  the  argument  in 

1  A  1 68  —  B  210.  This,  I  think,  explains  what  Kant  says  in  A  99 
— that  every  idea,  as  contained  in  one  moment  (that  is,  in  abstraction 
from  the  synthesis  of  spaces  and  times),  can  be  nothing  but  absolute 
unity.  Compare  Chapter  XIX  §  i.  Extensive  quantity  is  also  a  unity, 
but  its  plurality  is  represented  by  parts  outside  one  another.  The 
plurality  of  intensive  quantity  is  not  represented  by  parts  outside 
one  another,  but  every  degree  contains  a  plurality,  because  it  contains 
all  lesser  degrees  down  to  zero.  This  is  what  Kant  means  by  saying 
that  its  plurality  is  represented  through  approximation  to  negation. 

2  See  A  162  =  B  203. 

8  Kant  believes  that  in  experiencing  a  degree  of  heat  we  pass 
successively  and  continuously  fiom  our  starting-point  through  the 
intermediate  degrees  to  the  final  degree;  but  at  every  stage  we  have 
before  us  a  degree  which  is  one  and  indivisible. 

Prichard  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  262)  points  out  that 
this  is  true  of  velocity.  *A  mile  can  be  said  to  be  made  up  of  two 
half-miles,  but  a  velocity  of  one  foot  per  second,  though  comparable 
with  a  velocity  of  half  a  foot  per  second,  cannot  be  said  to  be  made 
up  of  two  such  velocities;  it  is  essentially  one  and  indivisible/  Kant 
does  not  use  velocity  as  an  illustration — I  think  because  it  is  not  directly 
sensible — but  he  recognises  it  elsewhere  as  an  intensive  quantity, 
pointing  out  that  its  parts  are  not  outside  one  another  as  are  the  parts 
of  space.  See  M.A.d.N.  i.  Hauptstuck  (IV  493-4). 

4  The  formula  in  B  says  only  that  the  real,  which  is  an  object  of 
sensation,  has  intensive  quantity,  and  does  not  say  that  sensation 
has  intensive  quantity;  yet  even  here  the  real  seems  to  be  distinct 
from  the  sensation,  if  it  is  the  object  of  sensation.  Sensation  is  essen- 
tially subjective,  although  we  use  it  for  knowledge  of  objects — see 
K.d.U.  Einl.  VII  (V  189). 


XXXVIII  §  i]  THE  ANTICIPATIONS  137 

both  editions.1  The  real  is  what  corresponds  to  sensation,  and 
what  corresponds  to  sensation  must  be  different  from  sensation 
itself.  Nevertheless  the  carelessness  of  Kant's  language,  together 
with  the  fact  that  he  is  keeping  in  the  background  some  of  his 
doctrines  as  unsuited  to  Transcendental  Philosophy,2  makes  it 
difficult  to  determine  the  precise  meaning  of  'sensation'  and  'real' 
and  the  precise  sense  in  which  the  real  'corresponds  to'  sensation. 
There  would  seem  to  be  three  possibilities:  (i)  that  sensation 
is  our  sensing  and  the  real  is  the  sensum  ;3  (2)  that  sensation  is 
the  sensum  considered  as  a  modification  of  the  mind,  while 
the  real  is  the  quality  of  the  object  revealed  or  given  in  the 
sensum,4  and  (3)  that  sensation  is  the  sensum  considered  as 
revealing  a  quality  of  the  object,  while  the  real  is  the  moving 
forces  (bewegende  Krdfte)  of  repulsion  and  attraction  which 
fill  space  and  constitute  the  solid  bodies  of  common  sense  and 
the  substances  of  physical  science.5 

1  In  the  argument  of  the  second  edition  Kant  does  not  speak  of 
the  real  corresponding  to  sensation;  but  he  does  speak  of  'the  real 
of  sensation' ,  and  he  says  that  corresponding  to  the  degree  of  sensation 
we  must  ascribe  a  degree  to  objects  of  sense-perception,  so  far  as 
sense-perception  contains  sensation.  The  distinction  is  also  supported 
by  his  ascribing  to  objects  a  degree  of  influence  upon  sense. 

2  In  opposition  to  'Rational  Physiology'  (the  a  priori  science  of 
corporeal  and  spiritual  nature).  Compare  A  171  =  B  213;  A  846-7 

—  13  874-5  >  an(l  also  §  7  below. 

3  This  receives  some  support  from  A  172  — -  B  214.  There  every 
reality  in  sense-perception  has  a  degree,  and  every  sense  (Sinn)  has 
also  a  determinate  degree  of  the  receptivity  of  sensations. 

4  When  we  are  actually  perceiving  an  object,  the  sensum  and  the 
quality  would  seem  to  be  the  same  thing  regarded  from  different 
points  of  view,  but  the  sensum  is  thought  to  be  only  at  the  moment 
of  sensing,  while  the  quality  has  a  semi-independent  existence  (in 
space  and  time)  which  we  determine  by  thought.  When  we  see  white 
sugar,  we  think  that  it  is  sweet,  even  although  we  are  not  tasting  it. 
Such  is  the  simple  statement  of  Kant's  view.  It  has  to  be  modified 
by  the  further  doctrine  that  secondary  qualities  exist  only  in  relation 
to  the  individual,  while  primary  qualities  are  the  same  for  all  men. 
All  these  statements  anticipate  the  doctrine  of  the  Analogies. 

6  Compare  A  265  =  B  320-1,  A  273  —  B  329,  A  277  =  B  333, 
A  284  =-  B  340.  Note  particularly  that  realitas  phaenomenon  is  identified 
with  moving  forces  in  A  265  -  B  320-1,  and  in  A  273  -^=  B  329 
with  the  obstacles  and  reactions  in  nature  (Hmdermsse  and  Gegen- 
wirkungen)  which  are  due  to  such  forces. 

VOL.  II  E* 


138         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  i 

Of  these  possibilities  the  first  is  unimportant  and  may  be 
neglected ;  the  third  is  a  statement  of  Kant's  dynamical  theory 
of  matter  and  has  strictly  no  place  in  a  Kritik  of  Pure  Reason ; 
the  second  alone  must  be  adopted  for  the  interpretation  of 
Kant's  argument.1  The  Anticipations  can  tell  us  only  that 
the  quality  of  objects  must  have  a  degree  corresponding  to  the 
degree  of  our  sensations.2  This  is  the  universal  principle  of 
which  the  dynamical  theory  of  matter  is  a  particular  applica- 
tion.3 

The  Principle  of  the  Anticipations  is  concerned  with  the 
matter  as  opposed  to  the  form  of  objects,  and  here  also  there 
is  an  ambiguity.  Sensation  is  itself  spoken  of  as  the  matter, 
but  usually  as  the  matter  of  intuition  (or  sense-perception  or 
experience);4  the  matter  of  the  object  is  what  corresponds  to 
sensation.5  Kant  has  in  mind,  at  least  partly,  matter — or  the 
qualities  of  matter — as  it  is  known  to  physical  science;6  but 

1  If  we  take  this  interpretation,  we  can  understand  why  Kant  does 
not  maintain  a  sharp  distinction  between  'sensation'  and  'the  rear: 
to  say  that  there  are  degrees  in  sensation  is  also  to  say  that  there  are 
degrees  in  the  qualities  of  the  objects  revealed  in  sensation. 

2  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  second  possibility  suggested  above ; 
but  we  must  add  that  while  some  qualities  are  revealed  directly  in 
sensation,  others  are  known  indirectly  by  inference  from  sensation. 

3  In  M  A.dN.  (IV  523)  the  following  is  said  to  be  the  universal 
principle  of  dynamics — that  all  the  real  of  objects  of  outer  sense, 
which  is  not  merely  determination  of  space  (place,  extension,  and 
shape),  can  be  regarded  only  as  moving  force.  This  abolishes  the  notion 
of  the  solid,  or  absolute  impenetrability,  and  sets  in  its  place  the 
forces  of  repulsion  and  attraction  which  are  necessary  for  the  idea 
of  matter. 

4  In  A  42  =  B  60  and  A  167  ---  B  209  sensation  is  the  matter  of 
sense-perception ;  in  A  50  =  B  74  the  matter  of  sensuous  knowledge ; 
in  A  267  =  B  323  the  matter  of  intuition;  and  again  in  A  167  = 
B  209    the    matter    of   experience.   It  will  be  remembered  that  in 
A  146  =  B  1 86  reahtas  phaenomenon  is  itself  identified  with  sensatio. 

6  A  20  —  B  34,  A  143  =  B  182.  I  concern  myself  here  only  with 
the  matter  of  the  phenomenal  object.  The  inner  nature  of  that  matter 
as  it  is  in  the  thmg-in-itsclf  is  to  us  unknown. 

8  Matter  is  identified  by  Kant  with  substance,  and  perhaps  the 
real  should  be  regarded  as  the  qualities  of  matter.  In  A  176  —  B2i8 
quality  is  identified  with  the  real  of  appearances  (reahtas  phaenomenon) , 
and  it  is  quality  which  has  a  degree.  In  A  186-7  =  B  229-30  Kant 


XXXVIII  §2]        THE  ANTICIPATIONS  139 

on  the  whole  the  matter  of  an  object  as  treated  in  the  Antici- 
pations is  its  sensed  qualities,  which  are  distinguished  from  its 
extensive  quantity,  that  is,  from  its  size  and  duration  and 
perhaps  its  shape.1 

Broadly  speaking,  Kant  is  about  to  argue  that  an  object  is 
more  than  the  space  which  it  occupies  and  the  time  through 
which  it  lasts.  It  is  real  as  filling  a  determinate  space  and  time, 
and  what  fills  space  and  time  must  have  intensive  quantity 
or  degree. 

§  2.  The  Proof  in  the  First  Edition 

We  have  seen  that  'apprehension*  involves  a  successive 
synthesis  of  what  is  given  in  sensation,  and  therefore  a  synthesis 
of  the  times  and  spaces  occupied  by  what  is  given;  and  that 
consequently  every  object  must  have  extensive  quantity. 
But  apprehension  is  more  than  a  successive  synthesis  of  times 
and  spaces ;  and  we  can  abstract  from  the  successive  synthesis 
and  consider  apprehension  as  a  mere  momentary  'taking  up' 
of  the  given.  We  can  therefore  say  that  in  the  appearance,  or 
object,  there  is  something  the  apprehension  of  which  is  not  a 
successive  synthesis  producing  a  whole  by  the  addition  of  part 
to  part.  What  is  apprehended  in  this  way  can  have  no  extensive 
quantity. 

So  far  at  least  Kant  would  seem  to  be  right.  He  does  not 
mean  that  we  can  sense  something  in  a  mere  point  of  time  and 
space  without  reference  to  anything  else;2  that  is  utterly 

points  out  that  the  determinations  or  accidents  (and  so  presumably 
the  qualities)  of  a  substance  are  always  real',  but  he  warns  us  against 
the  danger  of  separating  the  accident  from  the  substance,  and  reminds 
us  that  the  accident  is  only  the  way  in  which  the  substance  exists. 

1  Shape  is  not  an  extensive  quantity,  but  (like  extension  and  also 
position)  it  is  a  determination  of  space  rather  than  of  the  real  con- 
sidered in  abstraction  from  the  space  which  it  fills;  see  M.A.d.N. 
(IV  523). 

2 1  do  not  think  Kant  holds  that  we  cannot  be  aware  of  the  colour 
red  as  extended  without  running  successively  through  its  parts :  he 
does  hold  that  we  cannot  determine  its  extent  except  by  running 
successively  through  its  parts;  see  A  426  n.  =  B  454  n. 


i4o         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  2 

opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Second  Analogy.  He  does  mean 
that  when  we  are  aware  of  anything  in  space  and  time,  it  must 
have  a  quality  distinct  from  being  spatial  and  temporal.  We 
are  aware  of  colour,  taste,  or  resistance ;  and  whether  we  regard 
these  as  sensa  (that  is,  modifications  of  our  mind)  or  as  qualities 
of  objects,  they  fill  time  and  space,  and  their  complete  absence 
would  mean  that  time  and  space  were  empty.1  When  time 
(and  space)  is  filled,  we  have  reality  (realitas  phaenomenori)\ 
when  it  is  empty  we  have  negation  =  o. 

Now,  Kant  asserts,  every  sensation  is  capable  of  diminution 
so  that  it  can  decrease  and  gradually  vanish.  Therefore  between 
reality  (realitas  phaenomenorif  and  negation,  or  between  any 
given  sensation  and  complete  absence  of  sensation,  there  is  a 
continuous  sequence3  of  possible  intermediate  sensations.4 
This  means  that  the  difference  between  any  given  sensation 
and  such  an  intermediate  sensation  is  always  less  than  the 
difference  between  the  given  sensation  and  zero.5  Hence 
there  is  a  more  and  a  less  of  what  fills  time  and  space,  and  this 
is  distinct  from  the  more  or  less  of  time  and  space  which  is 
filled.  That  is  to  say,  sensation  (and  the  real  corresponding 
to  sensation)  has  intensive  quantity  or  degree.6 

There  is  in  this  proof  no  reference  to  synthesis,  but  \\c 

1  Kant  docs  not  of  course  suggest  that  we  can  perceive  empty 
space  and  time;  his  whole  argument  throughout  the  Principles  rests 
on  the  view  that  we  cannot.  Empty  time  and  space  is  a  mere  limit 
at  the  most. 

2  What   Kant  calls   Reality  in  the    appearance'    (Reahtat  in    der 
Enchemung)  is  equivalent  to  'realitas  phaenomenon*. 

3  A  168  ~  B  210,  ' Zusammenhang* . 

4  The  continuous  sequence  or  gradation  is  present  both  in  the 
sensation  and  in  the  quality  of  the  object. 

5  If,  for  example,  we  see  a  red  colour,  there  is  always  possible  a 
less  red  colour  which  is  still  red.  See  A  169  -=  B  211. 

6  This  should  be  compared  with  the  argument  in  A  143  =  B  182-3. 
There  Kant  points  out  that  a  sensation  can  fill  the  same  length  of 
time  more  or  less,  until  it  ceases  altogether.  There  is  therefore  a 
sequence  (Zusammenhang),  or  rather  a  continuous  transition  (Obergang), 
from  reality  to  negation ;  and  this  means  that  reality  must  be  recognised 
as  a  quantum  quite  apart  from  the  quantum  of  time  (or  space)  which 
it  fills. 


XXXVIII  §  3]        THE  ANTICIPATIONS  141 

already  know  that  the  schema  of  quality  'contains  and  makes 
rcpresentable*  the  synthesis  of  sensation  (or  sense-perception) 
with  the  idea  of  time.1  This  point  is  brought  out  later.2  Needless 
to  say,  unless  there  were  an  act  of  synthesis  involved,  it  would 
be  impossible  on  Kantian  principles  to  have  any  a  priori 
knowledge  in  regard  to  sensation. 

§  3.  The  Proof  in  the  Second  Edition 

Sense-perception  is  empirical  consciousness,  and  must 
contain  sensation.3  Appearances,  since  they  are  objects  of 
sense-perception,4  are  not  merely  pure  intuitions  like  space 
and  time,  which  indeed  can  never  be  perceived  in  the  strict 
sense.5  The  spatial  and  temporal  form  of  appearances  cannot 
be  known  apart  from  pure  intuition,  but  appearances  themselves 
contain  matter  as  well  as  form,  the  matter  for  some  object  in 
general.6  This  matter  is  described  as  that  through  which  we 
represent  something  as  existing  in  space  and  time,7  and  is 
said  to  be  the  real  of  sensation;8  it  would  seem  to  be  a 

1  A  145  =  B  184. 

2  A  175-6  =  B  217-8.  It  is  also  brought  out  in  the  proof  added 
in  B  207-8. 

3  B  207.   Strictly  speaking,  empirical  consciousness  of  an  object 
need  not  contain  actual  sensation  of  the  object,  but  sense-perception 
must. 

4  To  be  such  objects,  they  must  be  known  by  thought  as  well  as 
by  sense-perception. 

6  That  is,  'wahrgenommen',  which  is  the  verb  corresponding  to  sense- 
perception  (Wahrnehmung).  This  point  about  space  and  time  was 
not  brought  out  in  the  first  proof;  it  is  repeated  again  and  again 
throughout  the  Principles. 

6  Kant  says  'the  matters'  (Mater ten).  I  suppose  he  is  referring  to 
the  different  qualities  of  the  object.  He  is  referring  also  to  his  view 
that  every  individual  object  is  thought  under  the  concept  of  an  object 
in  general. 

7  The  existence  or  actuality  of  a  thing  depends  on  its  connexion 
with  the  material  conditions  of  experience,  namely  sensation;  see 
A  218  =  6266. 

8  Kant  here  explains,  though  obscurely,  what  he  means  by  matter 
as  the  real  of  sensation.  He  speaks  of  it  (i)  as  a  subjective  idea  which 
gives   us  only  the  consciousness   that  the   subject  is   affected,   and 


142         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  3 

quality  given  to  us  in  sensation1  and  attributed  by  us  to  an 
object. 

Now  a  continuous  change  is  possible  from  empirical  con- 
sciousness (or  sense-perception)  to  pure  consciousness  (or 
pure  intuition);  the  real  (the  sensed  quality  in  time  and  space) 
might  diminish  and  finally  disappear  from  our  consciousness, 
so  that  nothing  would  be  left  but  a  formal  or  a  priori  conscious- 
ness of  the  pure  manifold  of  time  and  space.  Hence  there  is 
possible  a  synthesis  which  is  the  production  of  a  quantity  (a 
more  or  less)  of  sensation,  beginning  from  pure  intuition 
(=•==  o  or  complete  absence  of  this  sensation)  and  arriving  at 
any  particular  quantity.2 

Sensation  has  therefore  a  quantity  peculiar  to  itself,  and  this 

(2)  as  related  by  us  to  an  object  in  general.  Both  these  things  arc 
necessary  if  we  are  to  have  the  real  of  sensation;  compare  Benno 
Erdmann,  Beitrage  zur  Geschnhte  und  Revision  des  Tc\tcs  von  Kants 
Kntik  der  remen  Vernunft,  p.  56.  On  this  view  sensation,  or  rather 
the  sensum,  can  be  regarded  in  abstraction  as  a  mere  modification 
of  the  mind ;  but  as  related  to  an  object  and  brought  under  the  categories 
it  is  the  real  of  sensation,  a  real  quality  of  a  phenomenal  object  When 
we  see  a  red  colour,  we  see  it  as  the  colour  of  an  object  in  space ;  this 
is  not  due  merely  to  sense,  but  to  the  transcendental  synthesis  of 
imagination  by  which  we  complete  the  object  in  accordance  with 
the  categories. 

1  Qualities  are  given  to  us  directly  in  sensation,  but  physical  science 
is  able  to  infer  other  qualities  not  given  directly  in  sensation ;  compaie 
A  226  -  =  B  273. 

2  Kant  is  stating  only  a  possibility.  Time  and  space  cannot  be 
perceived  in  themselves,  but  only  as  filled,  and  we  do  not  begin 
with  empty  space  and  time  and  then  proceed  to  fill  them.  On  the 
other  hand  I  think  Kant  does  believe   that  when  we  open  our  eyes 
and  look  at  a  red  colour,  we  pass  from  complete  absence  of  colour 
through  various  degrees  up  to  that  particular  shade  of  red;  and 
again  that  if  we  are  looking  at  the  colour  on  a  dull  day,  and  the  sun 
suddenly  shines  on  it,  we  pass  continuously  through  different  degrees 
from  the  dull  to  the  bright  colour. 

It  should  be  noted  that  there  can  be  a  transition  from  reality  to 
negation  as  well  as  a  transition  from  negation  to  reality,  but  the 
transition  from  negation  to  reality  is  the  one  which  is  described  by 
Kant  as  a  synthesis.  If  this  is  a  synthesis,  the  transition  from  reality 
to  negation  looks  more  like  omitting  elements  from  a  synthesis,  but 
there  is  still  a  synthesis  of  the  elements  retained. 


XXXVIII  §  3]        THE  ANTICIPATIONS  143 

quantity  is  not  extensive,  since1  in  sensation  qud  sensation2 
there  is  no  intuition  of  time  or  space,  and  so  no  parts  outside 
one  another.  It  is  therefore  an  intensive  quantity,  and  it  arises 
because  in  apprehension  empirical  consciousness  can3  pass 
in  a  certain  time4  from  absence  of  the  sensation  to  the  given 
amount  of  sensation.  Since  sense-perception  of  objects  always 
involves  sensation  (in  addition  to  intuitions  of  time  and  space), 
we  must  ascribe  a  corresponding  intensive  quantity  to  such 
objects.5 

We  should  expect  Kant  to  mean  by  this  that  the  sensed 
qualities  of  objects — colour,  sound,  taste,  etc.,  and  especially 
resistance  and  weight,  if  these  can  be  said  to  be  sensed  qualities 
— must  have  intensive  quantity.  I  believe  this  is  what  he  does 
mean,  but  he  suddenly  asserts6  that  this  intensive  quantity  is  a 
degree  of  influence7  on  sense.  Such  a  statement  may  suggest 
that  Kant  has  at  the  back  of  his  mind  a  doctrine  of  physical 
matter  as  the  cause  of  sensation8.  But  this  doctrine  is  here 


1  Kant  gives  as  another  reason  that  'sensation  qud  sensation  is  not 
an  objective  idea.'   I  do  not  see  why  the  subjectivity  of    sensation 
should  be  a  ground  for  saying  either  that  it  involves  no  intuition 
of  space  or  time  or  that  it  must  be  an  intensive  quantity — unless 
indeed  Kant  means  that  sensation  as  subjective  can  be  nothing  more 
than  a  consciousness  of  being  'affected';  compare  B  207. 

2  B  208,  'an  sick*.  Here  again  we  are  dealing  with  sensation  in 
abstraction.  3  Kant  again  is  speaking  of  a  possibility. 

4  The  fact  that  it  takes  time,  however  brief,  to  pass  from  absence 
of  sensation  to  a  given  degree  shows  it  is  only  by  abstraction  that  we 
separate  intensive  from  extensive  quantity.  At  every  moment  during 
the  period  of  transition  we  have  a  different  degree  before  us. 

6 'Such  objects'  seems  to  be  an  abbreviation  for  'the  qualities  of 
such  objects',  but  it  is  a  legitimate  abbreviation  which  it  would  be 
pedantic  to  avoid. 

8  This  may  be  compared  with  his  equally  sudden  assertion  in 
B  225  that  the  quantum  of  substance  in  nature  can  neither  be  increased 
nor  diminished. 

7  'Influence'  (Emfluss,  influ\us  or  actio  transiens)  is  the  technical 
term  for  the  action  of  one  substance  on  another,  and  so  indicates 
a  particular  kind  of  causality.    Compare  Baumgarten,  Metaphystca 
§211  (XVII  71). 

8  The  same  doctrine  is  present  in  the  first  proof,  if  we  regard  that 
proof  as  continuing  to  the  end  of  the  first  paragraph  of  B  2 1 1 .  It  is, 


144         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  4 

irrelevant,  and  on  the  whole  it  seems  better  to  suppose  that 
these  words  arc  used  without  any  very  precise  or  definite 
significance.1 


§  4.  Intensive  Quantity 

Let  us  set  aside  for  the  moment  the  view  that  our  sensations 
are  caused  by  physical  objects.  Even  so,  Kant's  Principle 
requires  working  out  in  detail,2  and  the  exact  bearing  of  his 
argument  is  not  always  certain.  Nevertheless  we  may  say  that 
he  is  directing  attention  to  an  important  element  in  experience, 
and  to  one  which  has  at  least  some  appearance  of  being  known 
a  priori? 

Needless  to  say  we  cannot  tell  a  priori  that  any  particular 
shade  of  colour  must  be  found  in  nature.  The  most  we  can 
say  a  priori  is  that  in  passing  from  a  paler  to  a  darker  shacje, 
we  must  pass  through  all  the  intermediate  shades.  If  a  psy- 
chologist informs  us  that  there  is  no  such  transition  and  that 
our  sensations  are  discontinuous,  I  certainly  do  not  feel  myself 

however,  there  touched  upon  only  in  passing,  because  (as  Kant 
points  out  correctly  in  A  169  =  B  210)  this  Principle  has  nothing 
to  do  with  causality. 

1  If  we  consider  the  quality  of  the  object  to  be  directly  given  in 
sensation,  it  is  not  unnatural  to  say  loosely  that  the  quality  is  the 
cause  of  the  sensation,  and  that  objects  have  different  degrees  of 
influence  on  sense. 

2  Thus  sound,  for  example,  has  loudncss,  pitch,  and  timbre.  Do 
all  of  these  have  degrees  or  only  the  first?  A  similar  distinction  can 
be  made  in  colour,  and  possibly  in  other  sensible  qualities.  It  seems 
best  to  suppose  that  Kant  is  here  concerned  only  with  degrees  of 
loudness  in  sound  and  of  depth  in  colour;  but  there  are  other  con- 
tinuous gradations — such  as  higher  and  lower  in  pitch — the  relation 
of  which    to    gradations  of   intensive    quantity  ought   to    be    con- 
sidered. 

3  Curiously  enough,  this  was  partially  admitted  by  Hume,  who 
asserted — contrary  to  the  central  principle  of  his  philosophy — that 
if  there  were  a  man  who  had  never  seen  a  particular  shade  of  blue, 
and  if  all  other  shades  were  put  before  him,  'descending  gradually 
from  the  deepest  to  the  lightest',  he  would  be  able  to  have  an  'idea* 
of  the  missing  shade,  even  although  it  had  never  been  conveyed  to 
him  by  his  senses.  See  Treatise,  Book  I,  Part  I,  Section  i. 


XXXVIII  §  4]        THE  ANTICIPATIONS  145 

in  a  position  to  contradict  him.1  Yet  I  find  it  hard  to  think 
my  belief  in  degrees  of  sensible  qualities  due  merely  to  gene- 
ralisation from  experience.  No  doubt  I  could  not  have  such  a 
belief  apart  from  experience ;  but  just  as  I  know,  when  I  see 
a  line,  that  a  shorter  line  is  possible,  so  I  seem  to  know,  when 
I  see  a  shade  of  colour,  that  a  paler  shade  is  possible,2  and  that 
the  paler  shade  could  fill  the  same  area  and  last  for  the  same 
time.  And  it  seems  as  reasonable  to  say  that  there  is  an  infinity 
of  possible  paler  shades  between  any  given  shade  and  zero, 
as  it  is  to  say  that  there  is  an  infinity  of  possible  shorter  lines 
between  any  given  line  and  zero.  We  may  well  hesitate  nowadays 
to  assert  that  we  know  anything  a  priori^  but  is  there  any  ground 
for  saying  that  one  of  these  statements  is  known  a  priori  and 
the  other  not  ?  And  can  we  really  maintain  that  either  of  these 
statements  rests  on  precisely  the  same  basis  as  the  statement 
that  forget-me-nots  are  blue  ? 

Kant  believes  that  the  Principle  of  the  Anticipations,  like 
that  of  the  Axioms,  has  immediate  or  intuitive  certainty,3 
and  we  must,  I  think,  agree  that  if  it  has  certainty  at  all,  the 
certainty  must  be  intuitive.  But  for  Kant  such  intuitive  cer- 
tainty implies  the  possibility  of  constructing  in  intuition  an 
object  corresponding  to  a  concept,  and  this  at  once  raises 
difficulties.  His  own  doctrine  is  that  qualities  cannot  be  con- 
structed a  priori*  and  yet  he  asserts  that  I  can  determine 

1  The  physical  stimulus  can  be  gradually  increased  for  some  time 
before  we  recognise  any  change  in  the  sensible  quality,  but  I  doubt 
whether  that  proves  change  of  sensation  to  be  discontinuous.  The 
sensation  may  vaiy  continuously  with  the  stimulus  even  when  the 
variation  is  not  perceptible.  The  fact  that  we  can  watch  a  moving 
body  for  some  time — for  example,  the  sun  or  the  hands  of  a  watch — 
without  recognising  that  there  is  a  change  of  position  does  not  prove 
that  motion  is  discontinuous;  and  the  same  principle  may,  I  think, 
hold  also  of  change  in  the  perceived  qualities  of  objects. 

2  This  seems  to  be  all  that  is  necessary  to  justify  Kant's  contention, 
even  if  he  himself  thought  he  could  go  further.  He  believes  that  the 
continuity  of  all  change — including  change  of  degree — can  be  proved; 
but  the  fact  that  he  excludes  such  a  proof  from  Transcendental  Philo- 
sophy (see  A  171  =  -  B  2 13)  suggests  that  continuity  of  change  may  not 
be  necessary  to  his  present  argument.  3  A  160-2  —  B  199-201. 

4  See  A  714-5  =-  B  742-3,  and  compare  Log.  Einl.  Ill  (IX  23). 


i46         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  4 

a  priori,  that  is,  construct,  the  degree  of  the  sensation  of  sun- 
light by  combining  some  200,000  illuminations  of  the  moon.1 
We  may  perhaps  admit,  with  Hume,  that  we  could  in  imagi- 
nation fill  up  a  gap  in  the  shades  of  one  colour ;  but  if  we  were 
acquainted  only  with  the  degree  of  brightness  produced  by  one 
moon,  we  manifestly  could  not  create  in  imagination  the 
brightness  which  would  be  produced  by  200,000  moons,  nor 
could  \\e  know  a  priori  that  such  a  degree  of  brightness  would 
not  be  blinding.  Such  considerations  are,  however,  irrelevant. 
Kant  is  not  concerned  with  the  extent  to  which  we  can  create 
images  in  imagination,  a  question  to  be  settled  only  by  empirical 
psychology.  He  is  concerned,  as  he  says,  with  the  rules  of  a 
mathematical  synthesis.2  If  we  are  given  a  foot,  we  know  how 
to  construct  a  line  200,000  feet  long,  but  we  do  not  know 
what  such  a  line  would  look  like  without  actual  experience.3 
Similarly  it  may  be  maintained,  not  that  we  could  construct 
a  priori  the  actual  appearance  of  the  sun,  but  that  we  know 
the  principle  (or  schema)  of  such  a  construction.4  Kant  must 
mean  only  that  we  can  construct  the  degree  in  abstraction, 
giving  it  a  place  in  the  scale  of  degrees  and  so  making  it  numer- 
able— not  that  we  can  imagine  every  possible  degree  of  a  given 
quality.5 

1A  179  -•=  B  221.  This  seems  to  imply  that,  given  a  particular 
quality,  I  can  construct  its  different  degrees  a  priori. 

2  A  178  ~-  B  221 ;  compare  the  difference  between  the  mathematical 
and  the  aesthetic  estimate  of  quantity  in  K.d.U.  §  26  (V  251  ff.). 

3  Compare  A  140  — -  B  179. 

4  This  is  supported  by  Kant's  assertion  in  A  175-6       B  217  that 
the  real  means  merely  the  synthesis  in  an  empirical  consciousness  in 
general;  and  again  in  A  723  —  B  751  that  we  can  have  a  priori  only 
indeterminate  concepts  of  the  synthesis  of  possible  sensations  (so  far 
as  they  belong  to  the  unity  of  apperception).  Compare  A  143  =  B  183 
where  the  schema  of  reality,  as  the  quantity  of  something  so  far  as 
it  fills  time,  is  the  continuous  and  uniform  production  of  reality  in 
time;  and  see  also  A  720  =  B  748. 

6  Compare  again  Kant's  statement  mAi6i—  B2Oi  that  in  the 
a  priori  determination  of  appearances  we  are  concerned  only  with 
the  form  of  a  quality  (or  a  quantity).  In  A  176  —  B  218  he  says  that 
about  the  qualities  of  appearances  we  know  a  priori  only  that  they 
have  a  degree — all  else  is  left  to  experience. 


XXXVIII  §  5]        THE  ANTICIPATIONS  147 

A  fuller  account  of  the  intuitive  certainty  claimed  for  the 
proof  of  this  Principle,  and  also  a  more  elaborate  treatment 
of  the  details,  would  have  been  welcome.  In  particular  we 
require  to  know  a  great  deal  more  about  the  relation  between 
the  concrete  constructions  of  imagination  and  the  abstract 
constructions  of  mathematics.1  Nevertheless  if  we  know  that 
there  is  possible  a  continuous  transition  from  any  given  degree 
of  intensity  to  zero  (just  as  there  is  possible  a  continuous 
transition  from  any  given  line  or  area  or  volume  to  zero),  we 
know  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  measuring  such  a  degree 
(just  as  there  is  a  possibility  of  measuring  a  line  or  area  or 
volume),  and  that  such  measurements  can  be  expressed  in 
numbers.  It  is  this  point  alone — the  applicability  of  mathematics 
to  appearances — which  Kant  is  attempting  to  establish.2  He 
has  not  adequately  brought  out  the  differences  of  the  two 
cases,3  but,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  his  doctrine  is  sound.4 

§  5.  The  Synthesis  of  Quality 

It  may  be  thought  that  Kant  has  no  right  to  use  the  word 
'synthesis'  for  our  apprehension  of  degree,  and  that  he  has 
failed  to  connect  this  kind  of  synthesis  with  the  nature  of 
time  and  space. 

The  first  objection  seems  to  me  one  of  terminology,  and  if 
synthesis  means  the  holding  together  of  a  plurality  in  unity, 
there  certainly  is  a  synthesis  of  degrees  as  well  as  of  extensions ; 
every  degree  is  a  plurality  in  unity,  since  although  it  is  an 
indivisible  whole,  it  contains  all  the  lesser  degrees  between  it 
and  zero. 

1  We  coulcl  not  know  how  to  construct  a  line  200,000  feet  long 
unless  we  could  actually  construct  short  lines  in  imagination,  and  the 
same  principle  must,  I  think,  hold  in  regard  to  degree. 

2  See  A  178  =  B22i. 

3  One  of  the  most  important  differences  is  that  in  measuring  a 
degree  of  intensity,  for  example  of  heat  or  weight,  we  translate  it 
into  terms  of  extensive  quantity;  we  use  a  thermometer  in  the  one 
case  and  a  pair  of  scales  in  the  other. 

4  For   a  defence  of  this  doctrine  see  Cassirer,  Kants  Lcbcn  und 
Lehre,  pp.  191-4. 


i48         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  5 

The  second  objection  is  more  weighty.  We  can  say  at  the 
most  that  time  and  space  must  be  filled  with  the  real  which  is 
given  to  sense,  if  we  are  to  be  aware  of  real  objects,  or  even 
to  be  aware  of  an  actual  determinate  part  of  space  or  time.1 
We  can  hardly  assert  a  priori  that  this  reality  must  have  degrees 
if  it  is  to  fill  space  and  time.2 

The  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  by  which  we 
construct  our  phenomenal  world  in  space  and  time  is  not 
merely  a  synthesis  of  empty  times  and  spaces,  but  a  filling  of 
time  and  space  with  what  is  given  to  us  in  sensation,  or  a 
synthesis  of  sensation  with  time  and  space.  The  actual  intensity 
of  the  object's  qualities,  like  its  actual  size  or  duration,  is  known 
to  us  through  experience  alone.3  Nevertheless  since  experience 
always  involves  a  transcendental  synthesis,  every  object  must 
have  both  extensive  and  intensive  quantity  of  some  sort,  and 
our  knowledge  that  it  must  do  so  is  no  generalisation  from 
experience,  liable  at  any  moment  to  be  contradicted,  but  is 
rather  a  synthetic  a  priori  judgement  affirming  the  necessary  con- 
ditions apart  from  which  human  experience  would  be  impos- 
sible. Such  is  the  Kantian  doctrine,  and  I  do  not  think  it  can  be 
dismissed  as  obviously  untenable. 

As  regards  the  connexion  between  degree  and  the  categories 
of  reality,  negation  and  limitation,4  I  have  already  offered 
such  defence  as  is  possible — see  Chapter  XXXIII  §  3.  There 
are,  however,  one  or  two  further  points  to  be  noticed.  Reality 

1  This  is  why  Kant  can  speak  of  the  schema  of  quality  as  a  time- 
determmation    We  determine  actual  spaces  and  times  only  through 
the   synthesis   of    sensation    (or  reality)   in   time     Nevertheless    the 
character  of  this  synthesis  (as  imposing  degrees  upon  reality)  seems 
to  be  proved  independently  of  the  nature  of  time  (or  space). 

2  The  theory  of  atoms  and  the  void  (which  Kant  never  claims  to 
disprove  on  a  priori  grounds)  seems  to  offer  an  alternative  view — 
unless  we  hold  that,   inasmuch  as  it  presupposes  that  parts  of  space 
are  empty,  it  is  not  a  theory  of  how  space  is  filled. 

3  Compare  A   176  =--  B  218.   Like  the  actual  size  or  duration  of 
objects,  it  depends  on  the  thing-m-itself.  The  character  of  our  minds 
determines  only  that  the  thmg-m-itself   must  appear  to  us   to  have 
some  size  and  duration  and  to  have  qualities  of  some  degree. 

4  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  proof  of  the  Anticipations  is  directed 
primarily  to  the  schema,  not  to  the  schematised  category. 


XXXVIII  §  5]        THE  ANTICIPATIONS  149 

(when  schematised)  is  the  given  quality  which  fills  time  (and 
space),  while  negation  is  the  empty  time  (and  space)  which  is 
filled.  For  a  determinate  object  we  require  the  combination 
of  the  two.  I  think  Kant  holds  that  the  object  both  fills  and 
does  not  fill  time  (and  space),  so  far  as  its  qualities  have  a  degree 
and  have  not  a  greater  degree ;  so  that  there  are  different  degrees 
in  wrhich  we  combine  reality  and  negation  (or  quality  and  time) 
in  order  to  have  a  determinate  object  under  the  category  of 
limitation. 

The  full  meaning  of  his  doctrine  is,  however,  apparent 
only  when  we  understand  his  dynamical  theory  of  matter.  He 
believes  that  there  is  a  real  opposition  of  moving  forces  which 
is,  as  it  were,  logical  opposition  translated  into  terms  of  time 
and  space,  just  as  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  the  logical 
relation  of  ground  and  consequent  translated  into  these  terms. 
What  fills  space  is  matter,  which  Kant  identifies  with  the 
movable;1  and  matter  fills  space  through  a  combination  of 
the  moving  forces  of  repulsion  and  attraction.2  It  is  the  real 
opposition  of  these  opposing  forces  which  explains  how  space 
can  be  filled,  and  yet  filled  in  different  degrees.  This  is  an 
empirical  illustration — it  is,  of  course,  not  a  deduction  possible 
in  pure  philosophy — of  Kant's  principle  that  a  real  object 
must  be  thought  under  the  category  of  limitation,  which  involves 
a  combination  of  reality  and  negation.3 

1  'das  Beweghche.' 

2  For  this  reason  Kant  attaches  special  importance  to  the  quality 
which  he  calls  resistance  or  impenetrability,  and  also  to  the  quality 
which  he  calls  weight.  The  former  reveals  the  power  of  repulsion 
in  bodies,  while  the  latter  reveals  the  power  of  attraction.  It  is  primarily 
through  the  resistance  of  bodies  (both  to  our  own  body  and  to  other 
bodies)  that  we  became  aware  of  what  is  assumed  by  common  sense 
to  be  solidity. 

3  The  whole  doctrine  can  be  understood  only  by  an  examination 
of  Kant's  Metaphysische  Anfangsgrunde  der  Naturwissenschaft,  but  a 
sort  of  summary  is  to  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  Dynamics — the 
'general  appendix*  (IV  523  ff.).  There  the  real  in  space  (commonly 
called  the  solid)  fills  space  through  the  force  of  icpulsion;  the  force 
of  attraction  is  negative  in  relation  to  the  real  (the  proper  object  of 
outer  sense),  for  it  penetrates  space  and  thereby  cancels  or  negates 
the  solid  (or  the  impenetrable);  the  limitation  of  the  first  force  by 


i5o         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  6 

§  6.  The  Causality  of  the  Object 

When  Kant  maintains  that  because  our  sensations  must 
have  a  degree,  the  qualities  of  objects  must  have  a  degree,  he 
is  to  some  extent  anticipating  his  doctrine  of  substance  and 
accident ;  but  this  is  at  least  partly  justified  by  his  analysis  of 
the  concept  of  an  object,  when  he  argued  that  our  ideas  (includ- 
ing sensa)  refer  to  an  object,  or  are  appearances  of  an  object, 
inasmuch  as  they  are  synthetised  or  united  in  accordance  with 
the  necessary  unity  of  apperception.  To  say  that  our  sensa 
reveal  the  qualities  or  accidents  of  substances  is  only  an  elabora- 
tion of  this  doctrine  and  a  translation  of  it  into  terms  of  time ; 
and  Kant  is  perhaps  entitled  in  his  present  argument  to  keep 
the  doctrine  of  the  First  Analogy  in  the  background.1 

On  the  other  hand  the  doctrine  that  physical  substances 
are  the  causes  of  our  sensations  is  as  irrelevant  to  the  Antici- 
pations as  is  the  doctrine  that  physical  substances  are  the 
causes  of  changes  in  each  other.2  We  completely  misunderstand 
Kant,  if  we  imagine  him  to  be  arguing  that  we  first  of  all  have 
a  sensation,  and  then  infer  that  the  sensation  must  be  caused 
by  some  quality  in  an  object.3  He  is  not  maintaining  that  the 
cause  of  that  which  has  degree  (namely,  sensation)  must  itself 
also  have  degree.4  He  is  maintaining  that  the  qualities  of  objects 

the  second  determines  the  degree  in  which  space  is  filled.  Kant 
believes  that  either  of  these  forces  by  itself  would  result  in  the  emptying 
of  space.  The  modern  theories  in  regard  to  positive  and  negative 
electricity  would  be  equally  welcome  to  him  as  an  illustration. 

1  This  shows  again  how  all  the  Principles  are  bound  up  together 
and  must  not  be  considered  in  isolation,  although  they  have  to  be 
expounded  in  succession. 

2  A  169  =  B  210.  The  first  kind  of  causality  is  called  by  Professor 
Price  Vertical  causality*  and   the  second  'horizontal  causality',  see 
Perception,  p.  86. 

3  Here  as  always  any  attempt  to  interpret  Kant  as  trying  to  explain 
the  temporal  development  of  experience  results  in  error. 

4  The  statement  about  'the  degree  of  influence  on  sense*  in  B  208 
ought  not  to  be  interpreted  in  this  sense.  Kant  does  maintain — see 
A  168  —  62-10 — that  reality  in  time  and  space  may  be  regarded  as  a 
cause,  and  says  that  the  degree  of  reality  as  a  cause  is  called  a  'moment' 
as    being   apprehended,    not   successively,    but   instantaneously,    for 
example,  in  the  'moment  'of  gravity.  To  say  this  is  not  to  say  that 


XXXVIII  §6]        THE  ANTICIPATIONS  151 

as  given  or  revealed  to  us  in  sensation  must  have  degree. 
Whether  scientific  thought  is  able  to  infer  other  qualities 
which  are  not  revealed  directly  in  sensation  we  need  not  here 
discuss.1 

Nevertheless  Kant  does  believe  that  human  sensations 
are  caused  by  a  physical  stimulus,2  although  in  his  view  this 
cannot  be  known  a  priori:  we  know  a  priori  only  that  every 
event  must  have  a  cause.  The  cause  of  any  particular  event 
can  be  discovered  by  experience  alone ;  and  it  is  by  experience 
alone  that  we  discover  certain  physical  stimuli  to  be  the  causes 
of  our  sensations. 

The  exact  method  of  this  discovery  it  is  not  Kant's  business 
to  explain,  nor  does  he  attempt  to  do  so ;  but  granted  that  we 
possess  the  concept  of  causality  and  are  aware  of  a  world  of 
physical  objects,  the  fact  that  when  we  fall  we  invariably  hurt 
ourselves,  and  when  we  approach  the  fire  we  invariably  feel 
warm,  is  itself  enough  to  suggest  a  causal  connexion  between 
physical  bodies  and  inner  states.  There  is  no  reason  why  Kant 
should  not  accept  any  empirical  account  (such  as  is  offered 
by  physiology  or  by  psychology)  that  explains  the  nature  of 
the  stimuli  causing  our  sensations  or  the  method  of  determining 
the  character  of  these  stimuli.3 

the  extensive  quantity  of  an  object  is  irrelevant  to  causation,  or  even 
to  the  causation  of  degrees  of  sensation.  One  brilliantly  illuminated 
surface  may  cause  the  same  degree  of  sensation  as  many  less  bnlliantly 
illuminated  surfaces  of  the  same  extent;  see  A  176  =  B  217  and 
compare  A  179  •=  B  221.  In  this  illustration  we  are  of  course  not 
supposed  to  be  looking  at  the  direct  source  of  the  light,  but,  for 
example,  at  a  wall  illuminated  alternately  by  one  lamp  or  six  candles. 

1  Compare  his  view  that  there  is  a  magnetic  matter  pervading  all 
bodies,  and  that  this  could  be  perceived,  if  our  senses  were  finer 
(A  226  -  B  273). 

2  Compare,  for  example,  A  213  =  B  260.  The  ultimate  cause  or 
ground  is  the  thmg-m-itself ;  see  Chapter  II  §§  2-3. 

J  A  valuable  discussion  of  this  problem  is  to  be  found  in  Price, 
Perception,  Chapter  X.  We  must  not  imagine  that  accounts  of  the 
kind  indicated  explain  how  we  come  to  know  physical  bodies:  they 
presuppose  that  we  already  have  this  knowledge. 


1 52          THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES     [XXXVIII  §  7 

§  7.   The  Doctnne  of  Continuity 

The  rest  of  Kant's  exposition1  elaborates  the  details,  and 
indicates  the  applications,  of  his  general  theory.  It  offers  little 
difficulty  in  the  way  of  interpretation. 

Quantities  are  said  to  be  continuous,  if  no  part  of  them  is  the 
smallest  possible  part,  that  is,  if  no  part  is  simple.2  However 
small  the  quantity  may  be,  there  is  always  a  smaller  quantity 
between  it  and  zero.  Kant  believes  he  has  shown  that  intensive 
quantity  is  characterised  by  such  continuity,  because  there  is  a 
continuous  gradation  between  any  given  intensive  quantity 
(or  degree)  and  zero.  He  now  maintains  that  since  no  part  of 
time  or  space  is  the  smallest  possible  part,  space  and  time  are 
continuous  (extensive)  quantities.  It  follows  that  points  and 
moments  are  not  parts  of  space  and  time,  but  only  limits  or 
boundaries.  Every  part  of  space  is  itself  a  space,  and  every  part 
of  time  is  itself  a  time,  so  that  space  and  time  are  made  up  of 
spaces  and  times,  not  of  points  or  instants.3  We  cannot  say, 
for  example,  that  any  two  points  on  a  line  are  next  to  one 
another;  either  they  are  the  same  point,  or  else  there  is  a  line 
between  them  in  which  an  intermediate  point  can  be  taken. 

Continuous  quantities  as  so  described,  whether  extensive 
or  intensive,  are  the  product  of  a  continuous  and  uninterrupted 
synthesis,  for  which  reason  they  can  be  called  'flowing'.4 
When  the  synthesis  is  interrupted,  that  is,  stopped  and  then 
repeated,  what  is  produced  is  an  aggregate.  Thus  if  'thirteen 
dollars'  means  a  particular  measure  (a  mark)  of  fine  silver,  it 
constitutes  a  continuous  quantity,  or  quantum5,  for  no  part  of 
it  is  the  smallest  possible.6  If  it  means  thirteen  silver  coins, 
it  is  an  aggregate,  or  a  number,  of  coins ;  for  it  is  composed  of 
so  many  discrete  units,  each  of  which  is  the  smallest  possible 
part  of  the  sum  of  thirteen  dollars.7 

1  A  169-176  -=  B  211-218.  2  A  169  -  Ban. 

3  I  believe  that  even  this  doctrine,  like  so  much  else,  is  questioned 

by  modern  mathematics.  *  A  170  =  B  211-12,  'Jhessend.' 

5  Kant  seems  to  imply  here — as  also  in  A  171  -=  B  212 — that  a 
quantum  is  necessarily  a  continuous  quantity,  but  in  A  526-7 --B  554-5 
he  speaks  of  quanta  continua  and  quanta  discreta. 

6  Kant  believes  that  matter,  like  space,  must  be  infinitely  divisible. 

7  Kant  adds  that  each  unit  is  a  quantum,  since  unity  is  at  the  basis 


XXXVIII  §7]        THE  ANTICIPATIONS  153 

Kant  maintains  that  all  appearances  or  objects  are  necessarily 
continuous  quantities,  both  as  regards  their  extensive  quantity 
(determined  by  the  synthesis  of  the  space  or  time  which  they 
occupy),  and  also  as  regards  their  intensive  quantity  (the  degree 
of  the  qualities  determined,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  the  synthe- 
sis of  sensation).1  He  maintains  also — what  is  a  much  more 
difficult  proposition — that  it  is  easy  to  prove,  with  mathematical 
evidence,  the  necessary  continuity  of  all  change  (all  transition 
of  a  thing  from  one  state  to  another).2  Such  a  proof  he  does  not 
here  offer — on  the  ground  that  it  presupposes  empirical  prin- 
ciples, and  so  lies  outside  the  limits  of  Transcendental  Philo- 
sophy, and  belongs  to  what  he  calls  'the  universal  science  of 
nature'.3  Nevertheless  in  the  Second  Analogy  he  does  set  forth 
what  professes  to  be  such  a  proof.4 

of  every  number.  He  means,  I  presume,  that  in  counting  objects  we 
ignore  their  internal  differences,  and  treat  them  as  homogeneous  or 
continuous.  The  identification  of  number  with  an  aggregate  seems  to 
treat  number  as  discrete,  and  looks  like  treating  numbers  as  if  they 
were  only  integers. 

1  A  170  -—  B  212  ;  A  171  =  B  212.  2  A  171  =  B  212-3. 

3  A  171  --  6213.  The  science  referred  to,  since  it  is  opposed  to 
Transcendental  Philosophy,  is  presumably  Rational  Physiology  (physio- 
logiaratwnahs),sofaras  that  is  immanent  and  not  transcendent.  Both 
sciences  are  part  of  speculative  metaphysics;  but  Transcendental 
Philosophy  (which  covers  the  Kntik  of  Pure  Reason)  deals  only  with 
concepts  and  principles  which  apply  to  objects  in  general,  while 
Rational  Physiology  deals  with  nature,  and  since  nature  is  divided  into 
corporeal  and  spiritual  nature,  the  science  is  divided  into  Rational 
Physics  and  Rational  Psychology  (physica  rationahs  and  psychologia 
rationally).  Rational  Physics  is  so  much  more  important  than  Rational 
Psychology  that  it  is  at  times  regarded  as  the  only  metaphysical  science 
of  nature — although  Kant  believes  that  there  is  an  immanent  Rational 
Psychology  as  well  as  the  transcendent  Rational  Psychology  repudiated 
in  the  Paralogisms.  Rational  Physics  is  said  to  realise,  that  is,  to  give 
'sense  and  significance'  to  Transcendental  Philosophy.  Sec  A  845-6 
=  B  873-4;  B  17-18;  B  20  n. ;  and  compare  M.A.dN.  Vor.  (IV  467) 
and  the  final  remark  to  the  third  mam  part  which  deals  with  mech- 
anics (IV  552-3). 

The  difficulty  of  all  this  is  that  Rational  Physics  and  Rational  Psy- 
chology are  particular,  and  not  universal,  sciences,  and  the  discussion 
of  change  in  general  cannot  be  confined  to  either.  For  this  reason  Kant 
refuses  it  a  place  in  his  discussion  of  Rational  Physics;  see  M.A.d.N. 
(IV  553).  *  A  206  =  B  252  fT.  See  also  Metaphysik,  pp.  54  ff. 


154         THE  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES    [XXXVIII  §  8 

§  8.  Empty  Space  and  Time 

If  it  be  granted  that  there  is  an  infinity  of  degrees  alike  in 
our  sensa  and  in  the  qualities  of  objects  which  our  sensa  reveal, 
sense-perception,  and  consequently  experience  (which  is  know- 
ledge through  combined  sense-perceptions1),  can  offer  no 
proof  of  empty  space  or  time.  We  cannot  perceive  empty 
space  or  empty  time,  since  sense-perception  always  involves 
sensation;  and  Kant  believes  we  cannot  infer  empty  space  or 
time  either  from  the  objects  we  perceive  or  from  the  fact  that 
the  qualities  of  perceived  objects  have  different  degrees — he 
even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  we  ought  not  to  assume  empty 
space  or  time  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  phenomena.  By  this 
he  means  only  that  wre  ought  not  to  assume  empty  space  and 
time  to  be  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  phenomena. 

We  find  by  experience  that  when  two  bodies  have  the  same 
volume,  one  may  be,  for  example,  heavier  than  the  other. 
We  argue  from  this  that  one  contains  more  matter  than  the 
other,  and  we  are  tempted  to  assume  that  the  lighter  body  must 
therefore  contain  more  empty  space.  This  was  the  doctrine  of 
the  atomists,  who  maintained  that  everything  was  composed  of 
atoms  and  the  void.  Such  a  doctrine  was  supposed  to  rest 
upon  experience,  but  it  really  rests  on  an  unexamined  meta- 
physical assumption — the  assumption  that  what  fills  space 
can  differ  only  in  extensive  quantity,  so  that  if  a  body  is  lighter, 
it  must  contain  fewer  atoms,  and  therefore  more  empty  space. 
Once  we  admit  that  the  same  reality  can  fill  space  in  greater 
or  less  degree,  a  smaller  degree  of  reality  may  completely  fill 
the  same  volume  as  is  filled  by  a  greater  degree.  Hence  the 
inference  which  argued  to  empty  space  from  differences  in 
the  qualities  of  bodies  of  the  same  volume  was  illegitimate. 

Kant's  contention  is,  as  he  says,  to  be  taken  only  as  an  illus- 
tration of  his  more  general  doctrine  that  the  real  which  fills 
determinate  times  and  spaces  differs,  not  only  in  extension,  but 
in  degree.  When  we  discuss  the  nature  of  weight  or  resistance 
or  heat,  we  are  passing  beyond  pure  philosophy,  and  dealing 

1  B  161.  Compare  B  219. 


XXXVIII  §  9]          THE  ANTICIPATIONS  155 

with  problems  which  must  be  settled  by  experience.  The  theory 
of  the  atomists  was  a  mechanical  theory  of  matter,  which 
Leibniz  and  Kant  opposed  with  a  dynamical  theory.  Kant  is  not 
arguing  that  pure  philosophy  can  decide  between  these  two 
theories,  but  only  that  the  dynamical  theory  ought  not  to  be 
excluded  on  the  basis  of  what  is  really  a  metaphysical  assumption. 
In  this  he  is  undoubtedly  right. 

§  9.  Kant's  Conclusion 

As  usual,  Kant  finishes  with  a  short  summary  of  his  argument. 
He  stresses  once  more  the  surprising  fact  that  we  can  anticipate 
sensation,  which  is  the  empirical  element  of  sense-perception, 
although  we  can  do  so  only  in  regard  to  its  degree.  He  points 
out — what  with  his  usual  carelessness  he  failed  to  make  explicit 
in  the  argument  of  the  first  edition — that  degree  involves  a 
synthesis  of  the  given,  a  synthesis  which  we  can  consider  in 
abstraction  from  the  synthesis  of  extensive  quantity  and  regard 
as  complete  in  every  moment.1  Finally  he  remarks  about 
quantities  in  general  that  we  know  a  priori  only  one  quality 
which  they  must  possess,  namely  continuity;2  about  quality 
we  know  a  prioj  i  only  that  it  must  have  intensive  quantity  or  a 
degree. 

1  This  is  consistent  with  the  view  that  we  pass  gradually  in  time 
from  a  lesser  degree  to  a  greater  or  vice  versa ,  see  B  208.  All  the  lesser 
degrees  previously  experienced  are  held  together,  or  synthetised,  at 
any  moment  in  an  indivisible  unity. 

2  I  do  not  see  how  Kant  reconciles  this  with  his  recognition  of 
aggregates,  which  are  discrete  quantities,  although  the  units  of  which 
they  are  composed  arc  continuous  quantities;  see  A  170-1  —  B  212. 


BOOK  X 

THE   ANALOGIES   OF   EXPERIENCE 


CHAPTER    XXXIX 
THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES 

§  i .   The  Formulation  of  the  Principle 

Just  as  there  is  one  Principle  of  the  Axioms  and  one  Principle 
of  the  Anticipations,  so  there  is  one  Principle  of  the  Analogies ; 
but  because  the  synthesis  described  in  the  Principle  of  the 
Analogies  is  more  complicated  than  the  synthesis  described 
in  the  other  two  Principles,  Kant  finds  it  necessary  first  to 
state  the  general l  Principle  of  the  Analogies,  and  then  to  deal 
in  detail  with  the  three  separate  rules  or  laws  or  Principles 
in  which  the  general  Principle  is  manifested.  It  must  not 
be  forgotten  that  in  this  case,  as  in  the  others,  there  is  only 
one  synthesis  (or  one  aspect  of  the  universal  synthesis),  and 
that  this  one  synthesis  involves  three  categories.2 

In  the  second  edition  the  Principle  is  formulated  as  follows : 
Experience  is  possible  only  through  the  representation3  of  a 
necessary  connexion  of  sense-perceptions* 

This  necessary  connexion,5  or  nexus,  is  imposed  upon  the 
given  manifold  by  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination, 
and  is  a  connexion  of  correlated,  but  heterogeneous,  elements; 
the  relations  involved  are  those  of  substance  and  accident, 
of  cause  and  effect,  and  of  reciprocal  causality  (or  interaction) 
between  substances.6  The  Analogies  are  therefore  concerned 

1  'allgememe';  see  A  176  and  A  177  ---  B  220. 

2  Compare  Chapter  XXXIII  §  7. 

3  *  Vorstellung. '  This  means  the  'representing'  or  'conceiving*  or 
'thinking*. 

4  B  218.  'Sense-perceptions'  (Wahrnehmungen)  are  here  equivalent 
to  'appearances'  (Erschemungcn).  Compare  B  160. 

5  '  Verknupfung.'   This  is  identified  with  nexus  in  B  201  n.    It  is  a 
special  case  of  combination  (Vcrbmdung),  combination  of  the  manifold 
as  regards  its  time-relations.  The  necessity  of  'connexion'  should  not 
be  confused  with  the  general  necessity  of  'combination'  proved  in  the 
Transcendental  Deduction.  Compare  Baujngarten,  Metaphysica  §  14 
(XII  27). 

6  The  first  two  are  the  examples  given  by  Kant  in  B  201  n.  The 
relation  of  interaction  (reciprocal  causality  or  influence)  combines 
both.  Compare  Bin. 


160  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §  i 

with  relations  of  heterogeneous  elements  which  necessarily 
belong  to  one  another,  while  the  Axioms  and  Anticipations 
were  concerned  with  homogeneous  elements  which  do  not 
necessarily  belong  to  one  another.1 

The  Principles  of  the  Understanding  are  proved  by  showing 
that  they  express  the  conditions  of  experience,  through  which 
alone  experience  is  possible.2  The  general  Principle  of  the 
Analogies  as  formulated  in  the  second  edition  professes  to 
state  such  a  condition,  but  it  omits  to  state — perhaps  in  the 
interests  of  brevity — that  the  'necessary  connexion'  which 
is  the  condition  of  experience  is  a  necessary  connexion  in  time, 
and  is  concerned  with  the  existence3  of  appearances  in  time. 
This  point  is  emphasised  in  the  formula  of  the  first  edition, 
which  is  as  follows:  All  appearances  are  subject,  as  regards 
their  existence,  to  a  priori  rules  in  accordance  with  which  their 
relation  to  one  another  in  time  is  determined.1 

The  main  point  of  these  formulae  is  a  simple  one.  Kant 
believes  that  every  object  of  experience  must  have  a  definite 
or  determinate  position  in  a  common  objective  time;5  and  that 
it  can  have  such  a  definite  position  only  if  it  is  subject  to  the 
rules  of  necessary  connexion  in  time  laid  down  in  the  three 

1  Sec  B  20 1  n.  Two  extensive  quantities  or  two  degrees  are  homo- 
geneous, and  we  cannot  say  that  where  one  is,  the  other  must  be. 
Accident  is  not  homogeneous  with  substance  nor  effect  with  cause, 
and  we  can  say  that  where  one  is,  the  other  must  be. 

2  Compare   Chapter   XXXV  §§   5-6     Necessary   *  connexion*   is   a 
special  element  in,  or  condition  of,  that  synthetic  unity  of  appearances 
through  which  alone  experience  is  possible;  see  especially  A   156 
=  B  195  and  A  158  —  B  197. 

3  'Dasein.'  See  A  178  =  6221;  also  A  179  —  6221-2,  A  160  ^=  6199 
and  B  201-2  n.  To  exist  is 'to  be  there',  to  have  a  definite  position  in 
time  or  in  time  and  space. 

4  A  176-7    Kant  says  'a  priori  rules  of  the  determination  of  their 
relation  to  one  another  in  one  time*.  These  'rules'  are  the  Analogies. 

6  The  theory  of  Relativity  demands  a  rcmterpretation  of  the  word 
'definite';  for  the  time  of  an  event  may  be  measured  differently  by 
different  observers.  Nevertheless  if  the  measurements  can  all  be 
translated  into  terms  of  one  another,  and  if,  knowing  one  measure- 
ment, we  can  say  a  priori  what  the  others  must  be,  we  are,  I  think, 
still  entitled  to  say  that  every  event  has  a  definite  position  in  a  common 
time  (or  a  common  space-time). 


XXXIX  §2]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES        161 

Analogies.  As  usual,  his  formula  ignores  space,  although  his 
main  concern  in  the  Analogies  is  with  physical  objects.  The 
combination  of  a  theoretical  insistence  on  time  (at  the  expense 
of  space)  and  a  practical  concern  with  objects  in  space  (to  the 
neglect  of  mental  events  in  time)  is  a  source  of  difficulty  in  his 
argument. 

§  2.  The  Argument  in  the  First  Edition 

The  argument  of  the  first  edition  is  obscurely  expressed. 
There  is,  first  of  all,  a  short  introduction  l  explaining  why 
there  must  be  three  rules  to  determine  all  the  relations  of 
appearances  in  time.  These  rules  are  the  three  Analogies ;  and 
the  general  principle  of  the  Analogies,  like  that  of  all  other 
Principles,  rests  on  the  necessary  unity  of  apperception  in  one 
of  its  different  manifestations  or  aspects.  It  rests  on  the  fact 
that  the  unity  of  apperception,  in  respect  of  all  possible  em- 
pirical consciousness  or  sense-perception,  is  necessary  at  every 
time.2  Hence  it  rests  on  the  necessary  synthetic  unity  of  all 
appearances  as  regards  their  relation  in  time?  Unless  all  appear- 
ances (or  objects)  were  related  in  one  common  objective  time, 
the  unity  of  apperception,  and  so  experience,  would  be  im- 
possible. 

If  we  grant  its  presuppositions — that  the  unity  of  appercep- 
tion is  the  condition  of  the  thought  necessary  for  experience, 
and  time  is  the  condition  of  the  intuitions  necessary  for  experi- 

1  A  177    --   B  219.  This  is  dealt  with  at  the  end  of   the  present 
subsection. 

2  A  177     -  B  220.  The  unity  of  apperception  is  not  limited  to  a 
particular  time,  but  applies  to  all  times.  Compare  Chapter  XXI  §  5. 

3  The  main  difficulty  of  this  inference  is  the  reason  obscurely  added 
by  Kant:  'because  the  unity  of  apperception  is  the  a  priori  condition 
of  all  possible  empirical  consciousness*  (da  jene  a  priori  zum  Grunde 
liegt).  What  rests  on  something  as  a  condition  need  not  rest  on  what 
that  something  conditions.  The  unity  of  apperception  and  the  unity 
of  appearances,   however,   may   be   said   to   condition   one   another 
mutually ,  and  indeed  Kant  often  speaks  as  if  they  were  the  same  thing; 
compare,  for  example,  B  134  and  A  108.  If  'jcne'  could  refer  forward 
to  the  synthetic  unity  of  appearances,  the  argument  would  be  easier, 
but  I  doubt  whether  this  is  possible. 

VOL.  II  F 


i62  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §2 

ence — there  seems  to  be  little  difficulty  in  this  contention; 
but  Kant  supports  it  by  a  brief  defence.  Original  apperception 
is  related  to  inner  sense  (the  totality  of  all  ideas),  and  indeed 
is  related  a  priori  to  its  form.  We  should  expect  this  form 
to  be  time,  but  Kant  describes  it  as  'the  relation  of  the  manifold 
empirical  consciousness  in  time9.  Time  as  the  form  of  inner 
sense  is  made  up  of  relations1  and  seems  to  be  identified  here 
with  the  temporal  relations  of  our  ideas,  though  usually  it  is 
regarded  as  the  condition  of  these  relations.2  In  any  case  the 
fact  that  original  apperception  is  related  to  time,  as  the  form 
of  inner  sense,  implies  that  all  our  ideas  must  be  united, 
as  regards  their  time-relations,  in  original  apperception.3  I  think 
we  may  add  that  Kant  means  'as  regards  their  objective  time- 
relations'  ;  for  he  makes  his  contention  depend  on  the  fact  that 
everything  must  be  subject  to  the  transcendental  unity  of 
apperception,  if  it  is  to  belong  to  my  knowledge  and  to  be  an 
object  for  me.4 

There  must,  then,  be  synthetic  unity  in  the  time-relations 
of  all  appearances  or  sense-perceptions,5  a  synthetic  unity 
which  is  determined  a  priori  and  is  a  necessary  condition 
of  experience.  This  synthetic  unity  is  expressed  in6  the  law 

1  Compare  B  67,  where  time  is  said  to  'contain*  the  relations  of 
succession  and  simultaneity  and  (curiously  enough)  of  the  permanent, 
and  to  'contain*  nothing  but  relations. 

2  See  A  30  =  B  46.  It  should,  however,  be  remembered  that  Kant 
has  considered  (in  the  Axioms  and  Anticipations)  the  time-series  and 
the  time-content ;  and  he  is  now  expressly  concerned  only  with  time- 
order  or  time-relations;  see  A  145   --=  B  184. 

3  Compare  A  99,  B  150-1,  B  152,  and  B  160-1,  all  of  which  prepare 
us  for  the  present  argument.  Compare  also  A  142  —  B  181. 

4  This  is  the  general  argument  of  the  Transcendental  Deduction 
applied  to  the  special  case  of  temporal  relations;  compare  B  139-40. 
Such  difficulties  as  it  has  are  the  difficulties  of  the  general  argument. 

6  'Synthetic  unity  in  the  time-relations  of  appearances'  is  for  Kant 
the  same  thing  as  'synthetic  unity  of  appearances  as  regards  their 
time-relations'.  The  simplest  statement  is  that  appearances  must  be 
related  to  one  another  in  one  common  objective  time. 

6  Kant  says  it  is  the  law.  This  law  is  more  general  and  ultimate 
than  the  a  priori  rules  which  are  its  embodiments — namely  the 
Analogies. 


XXXIX  §  3]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES        163 

that  all  empirical  time-determinations  must  stand  under  the 
a  priori  rules  of  time-determination  in  general,  these  rules 
being  the  three  Analogies.1 

The  reason  why  there  are  three  Analogies  is  stated  in  the 
introduction.2  There  are  only  three  modes  of  time — perman- 
ence, succession,  and  simultaneity.  Hence  we  require  three 
rules  for  all  the  time-relations  of  appearances ;  and  in  accord- 
ance with  them  we  can  determine  the  existence  of  every  appear- 
ance in  regard  to  the  unity  of  all  time.3  These  rules  are  prior 
to  experience  and  state  the  necessary  conditions  under  which 
alone  experience  is  possible. 

The  three  modes  of  time,  it  should  be  noted,  appear  to  be 
identical  with  the  three  transcendental  schemata  of  the  cate- 
gories of  relation  :4  they  arc  a  priori  time-determinations  which 
concern  the  time-order,  that  is,  the  order  of  appearances 
in  time.5 

§3.  The  Modes  of  Time 

The  word  'mode'  as  used  in  modern  philosophy  has  no  very 
precise  meaning  and  is  frequently  a  source  of  confusion. 
In  the  time  of  Kant  a  mode  of  anything  was  sharply  distin- 
guished from  its  essence,  its  attributes,  and  its  relations.  The 
essence  consists  of  certain  primitive  and  constitutive  marks 
called  strictly  essentialia.  The  attributes  are  not  part  of  the 
essence,  but  they  have  their  sufficient  ground  in  the  essence 

1  A  177-8  =  B  220;  compare  A  217  -  B  264.  Compare  also  the 
formula  of  the  first  edition  in  A  176-7;  this  is  the  formula  \\hich  he 
here  professes  to  prove.  If  we  are  to  determine  the  time  at  \\hieh 
any  particular  appearance  exists,  we  must  do  so  in  conformity  with 
those  a  priori  rules  apart  from  which,  according  to  Kant,  there  could 
be  no  unity  in  time  or  in  temporal  relations.  2  A  177  —  B  219. 

3  I  should  prefer  to  say  'in  one  common  objective  time'.  Kant  seems 
on  the  whole  to  avoid  such  a  usage,  perhaps  because  it  suggests  that 
time  is  a  thing  in  itself  and  is  something  complete  and  whole. 

4  See  A  143-4  -~-  B  183-4  and  also  Chapter  XXXIII  §7.  Kemp 
Smith  translates  'Bcharrluhkeit*  as  'permanence'  in  A  143  =  B  183 
and  as  'duration'  in  A  177  ~  6219.  This  fails  to  bring  out  the  identifi- 
cation of  the  mode  of  time  and  the  schema. 

5  See  A  145  -  B  184-5. 


164  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §3 

and  are  derivative  from  it.  The  modes  are  inner  determinations 
which  have  not  their  sufficient  ground  in  the  essence  and  are 
not  derivative  from  it.1  Relations,  which  are  regarded  as 
external,  have  likewise  no  sufficient  ground  in  the  essence  and 
are  not  derivative  from  it.  Thus  a  man  may  be  rational  (an 
essential)  without  being  either  learned  (a  mode)  or  a  master 
(a  relation).2 

According  to  this  usage  a  mode  is  clearly  a  characteristic 
or  determination  of  that  of  which  it  is  the  mode.  There  is  an 
older  usage  in  which  a  mode  is  not  such  a  characteristic  or 
determination,  but  is  dependent  on  that  of  which  it  is  the 
mode.3  Thus  Descartes  speaks  of  rest  and  motion  as  modes 
of  space. 

We  have  already  seen4  that  Kant,  when  he  speaks  of  the 
transcendental  schemata  as  time-determinations,  does  not  mean 
that  they  are  determinations  or  characteristics  of  time  itself,5 
but  rather  that  they  are  determinations  or  characteristics 
which  must  belong  to  objects  so  far  as  these  are  temporal  and 
are  combined  in  one  time.  The  same  considerations  must 
apply  when  he  speaks  of  permanence,  succession,  and  simul- 
taneity as  modes  of  time.  He  could  not  possibly  mean  by  this 
that  it  is  of  the  essence  of  time  to  be  permanent,  successive, 
and  simultaneous;  and  equally  he  could  not  mean  that  time 
may  be,  but  need  not  be,  permanent,  successive,  and  simul- 
taneous. He  must  mean  on  the  contrary  that  only  in  time  can 

J  Hence  the  German  for  'mode'  is  'zufalhge  Bcschaffenhcit*  (a  con- 
tingent characteristic).  A  mode  is  'contingent',  because  we  tan  have  the 
essence  without  the  mode,  although  we  cannot  have  the  mode  without 
the  essence. 

2  Compare  also  Chapter  III  §  6. 

3  Compare   Spinoza's  definition  of  a  mode:   Per  modum  intclltgo 
substantiae  affectiones,  sivc  id,  quod  in  alio  est,  per  quod  etiam  conctpitur. 
Time  is  not  a  substance,  but  the  temporal  characteristics  of  every 
object  are  dependent  on  time:  they  can  be,  or  be  conceived,  only 
through  that  of  which  they  are  the  modes,  namely,  time,  and  yet 
they  are  not  characteristics  of  time  itself. 

4  See  Chapter  XXXI I  §6. 

5  The  definitions  of  the  transcendental  schemata  are  in  any  case 
sufficient  proof  of  this  contention. 


XXXIX  §  3]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES       165 

appearances  be  conceived  as  permanent,  successive,  and 
simultaneous.1 

Thus  he  can  say  that  change  (or  succession)  does  not  affect 
time  itself,2  but  only  appearances  in  time;3  and  even  that 
simultaneity  is  not  a  mode  of  time  itself,4  because  the  parts 
of  time  are  not  simultaneous  but  successive.5  At  the  very 
moment  when  succession  and  simultaneity  are  said  to  be 
modes  of  time,  they  are  also  said  to  be  ways  in  which  the 
permanent  exists.6 

It  is  confusing  to  be  told  both  that  certain  characteristics 
are  modes  of  time,  and  that  they  are  not  modes  of  time  itself. 
Kant  ought  to  have  explained  clearly  what  he  meant  by  'a 
mode  of  time'  and  'a  mode  of  time  itself;  but  I  can  see  no 
real  inconsistency  in  his  thought  and  no  very  great  difficulty  in 
understanding  what  he  means.7 

From  the  first  mention  of  modes  of  time8  Kant  seems 
to  regard  them  as  equivalent  to  'time-relations  of  appear- 

1  This  usage  approximates  to  the  usage  of  Descartes.   Compare 
A  30  —  B  46  where  the  idea  of  time  is  spoken  of  as  the  condition  of 
simultaneity  and  succession. 

2  Time  itself  (Zeit  selbst,  Zeitfur  suh,  Zcit  an  sich  selbst)  is  habitually 
treated  as  equivalent  to  absolute  or  empty  time,  particularly  in  the 
statement  that  it  cannot  be  perceived.  Compare  B  207,  A  172  =  B  2 14, 
6219,  6225,  A  183  =-  B226,  A  188  =  11231,  6233,  A  192  -=  6237, 
A  200  ==  B  245,  B  257,  A  215  =  B  262.  3  A  183       B  226. 

4  Kant  is  either  using  'mode*  here  loosely  for  a  'characteristic',  or 
else  he  means  (what  would  be  more  consistent)  that  the  modes  of  time 
are  not  modes  of  empty  or  absolute  time,  but  of  time  as  filled. 

5  A  183    -  B  226.  Kant,  it  should  be  observed,  immediately  adds  to 
this  that  there  can  be  no  succession  in  time  itself,  so  we  must  not  take 
this  to  mean  that  succession  is  a  mode  of  time  itself.  Nevertheless 
succession  has  a  particularly  close  connexion  with  time,  since  the  parts 
of  time  are  themselves  successive. 

6  A  182  =  B  226.  This  is  apparently  equivalent  to  being  modes  of 
the  existence  of  the  permanent  (A  183  -    B  227). 

7  Adickes  (followed  by  Kemp  Smith)  finds  here  a  flat  contradiction 
to  be  explained  only  on  the  view  that  Kant  tacked  together  notes 
written  at  different  times  without  observing  their  inconsistency. 

8  It  should,  ho\\ever,  be  noted  thatm  A  81    =  B  107  quando,  ubt,  situs, 
and  also  pnus  and  simul,  are  said  to  be  modes  of  pure  sensibility,  by 
which  Kant  means  modes  of  time  and  space.  Here  again  he  seems  to 
use  'mode*  in  a  sense  approximating  to  that  of  Descartes. 


1 66  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §  3 

ances'.1  He  says  expressly  of  succession  and  simultaneity,  just 
after  mentioning  them  as  modes  of  time,  that  they  are  the 
only  relations  in  time.2  Later  on  he  again  equates  the  three 
modes  of  time  with  time-relations:  (i)  the  relation  to  time 
itself  as  a  quantity  (the  quantity  of  existence,  i.e.  duration)? 
(2)  the  relation  in  time  as  a  series  (succession);  and  (3)  the 
relation  in  time  as  a  sum  or  totality4  of  existence  (simul- 
taneity)^ These  statements  show  that  the  modes  of  time  are 
not  modes  of  time  itself. 

From  all  this  we  may,  I  think,  conclude  that  when  Kant 
affirms  permanence,  succession,  and  simultaneity  to  be  modes 
of  time,  he  does  not  mean  that  time  itself,  speaking  strictly, 
is  permanent  or  successive  or  simultaneous — and  this  he 
expresses  by  saying  that  permanence,  succession,  and  simul- 
taneity are  not  modes  of  time  itself.  He  does  mean  that 
the  permanence,  succession,  and  simultaneity  of  objects 
is  possible  only  in  time,  and  is  inconceivable  apart  from  time. 
Permanence,  succession,  and  simultaneity  are  the  three  funda- 
mental temporal  relations  which,  Kant  believes,  must  be  found 
in  all  objects  (so  far  as  they  are  objects  in  time). 

Permanence  is  not  quite  on  the  same  footing  as  succession 
and  simultaneity,  since  succession  and  simultaneity  may  be 
described  as  modes  of  the  existence  of  the  permanent  or  ways 
in  which  the  permanent  exists.6  But  this  doctrine  must  be 

1  A  177  --    B  219. 

2  A  182  -     6226.  Compare  also  A  179  =    6222  where 'time-relation* 
and  'mode  of  time'  appear  to  be  equated. 

3  Duration  seems  here  equivalent  to  permanence.  4  'InbegnffS 
6A2i5  -=  1*262.  This  passage  explains  why  Kant  says  that  succes- 
sion and  simultaneity  are  the  only  relations  in  time,  since  permanence  is 
a  relation  to  time.  The  words  in  the  last  two  brackets  are  'nacheinander* 
and  'auglcuh',  which  I  have  translated  as  'succession'  and  'simultaneity* 
respectively.  Kemp  Smith  eliminates  the  brackets. 

6  A  183  -  B  227;  A  182  =---  B  226.  Again,  as  we  have  seen  above, 
permanence  is  described  as  a  relation  to  time,  rather  than  a  relation 
in  time.  If  this  were  taken  strictly,  permanence  would  be  a  relation 
and  not  a  mode;  but  obviously  permanence  is  not  merely  a  relation 
between  time  and  something  non-temporal,  for  the  permanent  must 
endure  in,  or  through,  time.  Further,  the  category  of  substance  is  said 
to  stand  under  the  head  of  relation,  more  as  a  condition  of  relation 


XXXIX  §4]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES        167 

reserved  till  we  consider  Kant's  account  of  substance.  Here 
we  are  concerned  only  with  the  general  character  of  Kant's 
argument  in  the  three  Analogies.  What  he  proposes  to  maintain 
is  roughly  this — that  since  all  objects  of  experience  must  exist 
in  time,  they  must  be  characterised  by  permanence,  succession, 
and  simultaneity;  and  that  these  temporal  characteristics 
of  objects,  if  they  are  objective  characteristics,  must  be  neces- 
sary, or  must  be  determined  in  accordance  with  an  a  priori 
rule.  Whether  we  accept  or  reject  his  view,  we  must  at  least 
recognise  that  he  is  attempting  to  apply  the  general  principle 
of  the  Transcendental  Deduction:  that  what  distinguishes 
ah  object  from  a  succession  of  subjective  appearances  is  just 
the  necessary  combination  of  these  appearances  imposed  by 
the  nature  of  our  thought  and  by  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination  working  through  the  medium  of  time.  The 
application  of  that  general  principle  in  the  Analogies  is  by  far 
the  most  important  part  of  his  doctrine;  and  although  Kant 
regards  his  argument  as  strengthened  and  enriched  by  the 
connexion  between  the  categories  of  relation  and  the  categorical, 
hypothetical,  and  disjunctive  forms  of  judgement,  the  argu- 
ment itself  rests  upon  the  three  modes  of  time  and  the  general 
principle  that  objectivity  involves  necessary  combination,1  or 
necessary  synthetic  unity,  in  accordance  with  the  transcen- 
dental unity  of  apperception. 

§  4.  The  Argument  in  the  Second  Edition 

In  the  first  edition  Kant,  as  we  have  seen,  lays  most  stress 
on  the  unity  of  apperception,  although  he  makes  it  clear 
enough  that  the  necessary  synthetic  unity  of  the  time-relations 
of  appearances,  in  accordance  with  the  unity  of  apperception, 
is  the  condition  of  all  objects  of  experience.2  In  the  proof  added 
in  the  second  edition  he  concentrates  his  attention  on  the 

than  as  itself  containing  a  relation  (A  187  —  B  230).  Even  apart  from 
these  statements,  it  is  in  itself  obvious  that  permanence  differs  from 
succession  and  simultaneity. 

1  Necessary  'connexion*  is,  as  I  have  said,  a  special  case  of  such 
necessary  *  combination'.  2  A  177  =  B  220. 


168  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §  4 

necessary  synthetic  unity  which  is  the  condition  of  objects,  and 
leaves  it  to  us  to  remember  that  all  synthetic  unity  is  grounded 
on  the  unity  of  apperception.1  Furthermore  he  treats  the 
argument  generally,  without  repeating  the  details  about  the 
different  modes  of  time. 

Experience  is  empirical  knowledge:  it  determines  an  object 
through  empirical  sense-perceptions.  Since,  however,  it  deter- 
mines an  object,  there  must  be  more  in  experience  than  em- 
pirical sense-perception ;  there  must  be  a  synthesis  of  sense- 
perceptions.  As  we  know  from  the  Transcendental  Deduction, 
what  is  essential  to  experience  as  knowledge  of  objects  (and  not 
mere  intuition  or  sensation)  is  the  synthetic  unity  of  the  given 
manifold  in  one  consciousness.2  This  synthetic  unity  is  the 
necessary  synthetic  unity  which  is  grounded  on  the  unity 
of  apperception  and  is  the  condition  of  there  being  an  object. 

Synthesis,  Kant  insists,  is  not  to  be  found  in  sense-percep- 
tions, and  still  less  can  wre  find  in  sense-perceptions  necessary 
synthetic  unity.  This  is  the  general  principle  in  which  Kant 
agrees  with  Hume;  but  here  he  is  thinking  primarily  (if  not 
exclusively)  of  the  necessary  synthetic  unity  which  is  to  be 
found  in  the  connexion,  or  nexus,  of  heterogeneous  elements 
which  necessarily  belong  to  one  another,  as  for  example  cause 
and  effect.  Sense-perceptions,  considered  in  themselves,  come 
to  us  in  an  order  in  which  we  can  descry  no  necessity.  Appre- 
hension— here  as  always  closely  connected,  if  not  identified, 
with  sense-perception — is  a  mere  taking  up  and  putting 
together  the  given  manifold;  it  contains  in  itself  no  idea  that 
the  given  appearances  are  necessarily  connected  in  space 
and  time.3 

1  B  218-19.  It  would  be  absurd  to  regard  this  change  of  emphasis  as 
an  inconsistency.  In  the  changes  added  in  the  second  edition  Kant 
generally  lays  more  stress  upon  the  object,  I  presume  because  the 
unity  of  apperception  was   liable  to   be    misunderstood    as  merely 
subjective.  Compare  B  139-40  and  B  142. 

2  This  is  a  clear  reference  to  the  unity  of  apperception. 

3  Apprehension — if  we  may  judge  by  Kant's  general  view  of  it — 
involves  more  than  a  taking  up  and  holding  together  of  appearances 
in  the  order  in  which  they  are  given.  It  arranges  the  given  appearances 


XXXIX  §4]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES        169 

So  far  Kant  is  merely  summing  up  the  doctrine  of  the 
Transcendental  Deduction.  He  now  proceeds  to  develop  his 
theory  in  two  sentences,  the  first  of  which  exhibits  that  curious 
compression  and  complexity  usually  to  be  found  at  the  crux 
of  his  arguments. 

First  of  all  he  applies  his  general  principle  to  what  he  calls 
'relation  in  the  existence  of  the  manifold'.  By  existence1  he 
means  being  in  time,  and  for  simplicity's  sake  we  may  say 
that  'relations  in  existence'  are  the  relations  of  succession  and 
simultaneity.2  An  object  exists  either  before  or  after  or  along 
with  another.  Since  experience  is  experience  of  objects,  experi- 
ence of  the  temporal  relations  of  objects  is  an  experience 
of  objective  temporal  relations.  In  experience  we  know  the 
objective  order  of  objects  or  events ,  not  merely  the  order  in 
which  we  come  to  know  these  objects  or  events,  or  the  order 
in  which  we  can  arrange  them  by  the  exercise  of  uncontrolled 
imagination.3 

in  space  and  time,  so  that  we  can  apprehend,  not  merely  a  succession 
of  given  appearances,  but  an  empirical  object  such  as  a  house.  What 
apprehension  cannot  give  us  is  the  necessity  of  these  arrangements  or 
combinations,  and  apart  from  necessity  there  is,  according  to  Kant, 
no  difference  between  an  objective,  and  a  merely  subjective  or 
imaginary,  combination.  Furthermore  this  necessary  connexion  (which 
is  the  mark  of  objectivity  or  existence  in  space  and  time)  is  not  merely 
necessary  connexion  within  the  object  apprehended,  but  necessary 
connexion  with  other  objects  to  which  it  is  related  in  space  and  time. 

1  'Dasem'  or  'there-being'. 

2  Permanence,  as  I  have  said,  is  on  a  slightly  different  footing. 

3  Kant  says  that  in  experience  we  have  to  know  'the  relation  in  the 
existence  of  the  manifold,  not  as  it  is  put  together  in  time,  but  as  it  is 
objectively  in  time'.  The  word  'it'  presumably  refers  grammatically  to 
the  manifold,  and  the  words  'put  together'  (zusantmengestellt)  suggest 
a  connexion  with  'apprehension',  which  was  said  above  to  be  a 
'putting  together'  (Zusammcnstellung)  of  the  manifold.  The  general 
sense  is,  I  think,  that  though  in  apprehension  wre  'put  together'  the 
given  manifold  in  certain  temporal  relations — whether  in  the  order 
in  which  the  manifold  is  given  to  us  or  in  an  order  which  we  create 
in  imagination — in  experience  we  know  that  the  manifold  is  in  these 
iclations,  and  not  merely  that  we  have  put  it  together  in  these  relations ; 
compare  A  191  =  B  236. 

Kemp  Smith  translates  ' Zusammenstellung'  as  'placing  together'  and 
' zusammcHgestellt'  as  'constructed'. 

VOT     rr  F* 


170  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §5 

In  view  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Transcendental  Deduction — 
that  objectivity  implies  necessity,  and  that  objective  unity  (or 
combination)  is  necessary  unity  (or  combination) — we  might 
expect  Kant  to  assert  straight  away  that  an  objective  temporal 
order  is  a  necessary  temporal  order  (or  a  temporal  order 
in  accordance  with  a  rule).  He  prefers  to  take  a  longer  way 
round  to  arrive  at  this  conclusion,  and  indicates  that  if  we 
could  perceive  time  itself — that  is,  empty  or  absolute  time 
apart  from  the  events  in  it—this  conclusion  would  not  follow. 
There  is,  however,  no  possibility  of  determining  the  objective 
order  of  events  through  the  direct  perception  of  a  time  which 
is  objective  and  absolute,  for  time  itself  cannot  be  perceived 
by  sense.1 

Kant  thus  makes  two  assumptions:  (i)  that  in  experience 
we  are  aware  of  the  objective  order  of  events;  and  (2)  that 
we  cannot  perceive  time  itself.  He  argues  that  therefore  we 
can  determine  the  existence,  or  the  temporal  position  of 
objects,  only  through  their  combination  in  time  in  general, 
and  therefore  only  through  concepts  that  connect  them  a  priori. 
Since  such  concepts  always  involve  necessity,  experience 
is  possible  only  through  representation  of  the  necessary  con- 
nexion,2 or  nexus,  of  sense-perceptions  or  appearances.3 

§  5.  The  Assumptions  of  the  Argument 

Kant's  exposition  is  a  summary  statement  of  the  general 
principles  which  are  at  work  in  the  detailed  proofs  of  sub- 

1  There  is  indeed  an  empirical  or  relative  space  which  is  an  object 
of  experience,  and  can  be  called  sensible,  inasmuch  as  it  is  symbolised 
(bezeichnet)  by  what  can  be  sensed ;  and  presumably  the  same  must  be 
true  of  time.  But  m  that  case  we  are  considering  individual  spaces  and 
times  as  filled   (and,  I  think,  as  indeterminate),  not  the  one  absolute 
and  infinite  space  and  time  which  we  construct  in  thought  and  treat 
as  a  whole  in  which  all  relative  spaces  and  times  have  a  determinate 
position.  See  M.A  d.N.  i  Hauptstuck  (IV  481-2). 

2  The  different  forms  of  that  necessary  connexion  are  (i)  the  con- 
nexion of  permanent  substance  and  changing  accident,  (2)  the  con- 
nexion of  cause  and  effect,  and  (3)  the  connexion  of  substances  acting 
causally  upon  one  another. 

8  I  take  sense-perceptions  to  be  here  equivalent  to  appearances. 


XXXIX  §  5]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES        171 

stance,  causality,  and  interaction.  It  can  hardly  be  judged  till 
we  have  followed  the  arguments  of  the  Analogies;  but  since 
it  professes  to  be  a  proof,  it  deserves  to  be  examined  as  if  it 
were  relatively  self-sufficient. 

Firstly  as  to  its  assumptions — are  we  entitled  to  assume  (i) 
that  we  are  aware  of  the  objective  order  of  events  in  time,  and 
(2)  that  time  itself  cannot  be  perceived  ? 

The  second  assumption,  which  is  repeated  again  and  again 
throughout  Kant's  argument,1  is  surely  sound.  What  we 
perceive  is  not  time  itself,  but  changes  in  time,  and  we  measure 
time,  not  in  itself,  but  by  the  changes  which  take  place  in  it. 
Are  we  entitled  also  to  assume  that  we  are  aware  of  an  objective 
order  of  events  in  time  ? 

I  think  it  will  hardly  be  denied  that  we  at  least  seem  to 
distinguish  the  order  of  events  from  the  order  in  which  we 
come  to  know  them ;  and  Kant's  statement  is  true  as  an  analysis 
of  our  experience,  even  if  it  is  nothing  more.  For  myself, 
I  cannot  even  see  how  we  could  be  aware — as  Hume  admits 
we  are  aware — of  a  succession  of  appearances  in  time,  unless 
we  distinguished  the  time  of  our  knowing  from  the  time 
of  what  we  know.  To  be  aware  of  any  succession  is  to  be  aware 
now  of  what  is  past. 

Even  in  the  simplest  kind  of  experience  which  we  can 
imagine — an  experience  in  which  the  object  is  only  a  succession 
of  appearances  in  time — we  can  distinguish  the  objective 
order  of  the  appearances  from  the  subjective  order  of  our 
knowings.  The  order  of  the  appearances  is  in  such  a  case  the 
same  as  the  order  of  our  perceivings,  but  it  is  not  the  same 
as  the  order  of  our  rememberings;  for  we  can  remember 
a  later  event  and  then  remember  an  earlier  event.  Memory 
is  not  merely  the  recalling  of  a  past  event,  but  the  recollecting 

1  B  225,  A  183  --=  B  226,  A  188  =  B  231,  B  233,  A  192  =  B  237, 
A 200  =  B 245,  8257,  A2i5  —  B 263.  The  same  assumption  is  found 
in  the  Anticipations,  see  B  207  and  compare  A  172  =  B  214.  It  is  not 
found  in  the  Axioms,  but  Kant's  marginal  jottings  suggest  that  it 
might  be  used  there  also;  see  Erdmann,  Nachtrdge  LXX.  We  must 
use  the  category  of  quantity  because  we  cannot  intuit  space  and 
time  in  themselves. 


172  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §  5 

of  it  as  past,  that  is,  as  having  a  position  more  or  less  definite 
in  past  time,  and  therefore  (since  we  cannot  perceive  time 
itself)  as  coming  before  some  events  and  after  others.  To  have 
memory  is  to  be  able,  as  it  were,  to  move  backwards  and 
forwards  in  the  past. 

It  may  be  objected  that  the  order  of  our  rememberings 
or  knowings  is  just  as  much  an  objective  order  as  the  order 
of  given  appearances.  This  is  true,  but  it  means  merely  that 
we  can  make  our  own  knowings  an  object  to  ourselves;  and 
this  truth  Kant  (in  spite  of  some  careless  statements  suggesting 
the  contrary)  can,  and  does,  hold  as  part  of  his  doctrine. 
It  remains  none  the  less  necessary  to  distinguish  the  order 
of  our  knowings  from  the  order  of  what  we  know,  and  there 
is  no  impropriety  in  using  the  words  'subjective'  and  'objec- 
tive* for  the  purposes  of  this  distinction. 

Kant  may  have  in  mind  also  the  fact  that  we  can  imagine,1 
and  even  think,  events  to  be  in  an  order  different  from  that 
in  which  they  actually  occurred.  Here  too  we  have  a  subjective 
order  opposed  to  an  objective  order,  and  to  deny  this  distinc- 
tion is  to  make  nonsense  of  human  experience.  In  the  main, 
howrever,  the  subjective  order  is  for  Kant  the  order  of  events 
occurring  in  the  subject,  while  the  objective  order  is  the  order 
of  events  occurring  in  the  object. 

I  suggest  then  that  the  assumption  which  Kant  makes 
is  legitimate  and  necessary,  since  apart  from  it  there  could 
be  no  experience,  even  of  the  most  elementary  kind.2  Con- 
sideration of  the  details  which  Kant  takes  to  be  implied  in  the 
assumption  must  be  reserved  till  later. 

1  Compare  B  233  and  also  B  140. 1  take  it  that  this  second  distinction, 
the  distinction  between  the  real  and  the  imagmaiy,  might  be  made  with 
reference  either  to  the  order  of  events  occurring  in  the  subject  or  to 
the  order  of  events  occurring  in  the  object.  We  can  construct  an 
imaginary  account  of  our  own  mental  history  as  well  as  of  the  history 
of  objects. 

2  The  same  assumption  is  made  in  the  Transcendental  Deduction 
(see  especially  B  139-40  and  B  141-2). 


XXXIX  §  6]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES       173 

§  6.  The  Conclusion  of  the  Argument 

Kant's  conclusion  is  asserted  in  three  stages.  Of  these  the 
first  is  not  likely  to  be  denied.  Granted  that  we  are  aware 
of  an  objective  order  in  time,  and  granted  that  we  cannot 
perceive  time  itself,  the  position  of  objects  in  time1  can  be 
determined  only  through  'their  combination  in  time  in  general*. 
The  time  at  which  objects  exist  is  determined  only  by  their 
relation  to  other  objects  which  they  precede,  succeed,  or 
accompany  in  a  time  which  is  one  and  the  same  for  all  objects. 

Kant's  second  contention  is  this — that  to  determine  the 
position  of  objects  in  time  'through  their  combination  in  time 
in  general'  is  to  determine  it  through  concepts  connecting2 
objects  a  priori. 

This  is  the  Critical  solution  of  the  problem,  and  Kant 
believes  it  is  the  only  possibility  that  remains;  for  we  have 
rejected  the  view  that  sense-perception  can  by  itself  determine 
the  temporal  position  of  objects,3  and  we  have  also  rejected  the 
view  that  we  have  a  direct  perception  of  absolute  time  itself. 
Neither  empirical  nor  pure  intuition  can  account  for  our 
experience  of  objective  relations  in  time,  and  we  must  seek 
for  an  explanation  elsewhere.  If  we  are  to  determine  objective 
temporal  position  through  the  combination  of  objects  in  time 
in  general,  we  can  do  so  only  through  concepts  which  are  not 
derived  either  from  empirical  or  from  pure  intuition;  and 
these  concepts  must  connect  objects  a  priori ,  that  is,  inde- 
pendently of  experience. 

The  sense  in  which  these  concepts  connect  objects  (or  the 

1  B  2 19  Kant  says  the  Existence  of  objects*,  but  existence  is  position 
in  time. 

2  Note  the  transition  from  the  more  general  term  'combination' 
(Verbtndung)    to    the    more    specific    term    'connexion',    or    *  nexus* 
(Verknupfung).  I  take  it  that  Kant  is  thinking  of  'connexion*  in  both 
cases,  in  spite  of  the  variation  in  terminology.  The  'connexion*  is  a 
connexion  in  time,  and  might  be  described  equally  as  an  objective 
connexion  of  the  manifold  in  time ;  compare  'the  relation  in  the  existence 
of  the  manifold*  in  B  219  a  little  earlier. 

3  Apart  altogether  from  Kant's  special  views  about  synthesis,  it 
should  be  obvious  that  the  order  of  our  sense-perceptions  is  not  the 
order  of  what  we  ordinarily  take  to  be  objective  events  in  time. 


174  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §  6 

manifold  of  objects)  a  priori  is  not  here  explained.  I  take  it  that 
not  only  do  we  think  (rather  than  intuit)1  the  connexion  of 
objects  in  accordance  with  these  concepts:  the  connexion 
is  actually  imposed  on  the  manifold  by  the  thinking  mind. 

Kant's  view  is  that  objective  temporal  connexions  (which 
we  all  claim  to  experience)  are  found  in  experience  only  because 
they  are  imposed  by  the  understanding.  More  precisely,  these 
connexions  are  imposed  by  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination  which  combines  given  appearances  in  one  time 
and  space  in  accordance  with  the  categories  of  the  under- 
standing.2 For  example,  in  all  experience  we  synthetise  given 
sensible  qualities3  as  accidents  of  permanent  substances  in 
time  and  space.  We  do  so  in  accordance  with  the  demands 
of  thought,  not  in  accordance  with  the  deliverances  of  sense; 
and  if  we  did  not  do  so,  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  experi- 
ence, nor  could  'objective  temporal  position'  have  any  meaning 
for  us. 

We  do  not  make  explicit  to  ourselves  the  nature  of  such 
concepts  as  'substance'  and  'accident'  till  experience  is  highly 
developed;  and  still  less  do  we  ascribe  their  origin  to  the 
demands  of  thought.  These  facts  (which  are  neither  ignored 
nor  denied  by  Kant)  have  no  relevance  as  criticisms  of  his 
doctrine.  Even  when  I  make  so  simple  a  judgement  as  'This 
apple,  which  was  green,  is  now  red',  I  have  not  only  combined 
the  given  manifold  in  accordance  with  the  category  of  sub- 
stance and  accident  by  a  transcendental  synthesis  of  the 
imagination:  I  have  also  presupposed  the  category  in  my 
judgement  itself. 

1  Compare  Chapter  XXXII  §  5 ;  and  also  (for  the  relation  of  con- 
cepts and  intuitions)  Chapters  V  §  8  and  IX  §  5. 

2  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  the  unity  of  apperception  involves  the 
unity  of  time  and  of  all  objects  in  time,  and  that  this  unity  might  be 
impossible  unless  objects  were  combined  in  certain  ways  by  the  trans- 
cendental synthesis  of  imagination.  The  main  difficulty  is  to  see  how 
these  different  ways  of  combination  can  be  imposed  in  response  to  the 
demands  of  thought.  For  these  demands  of  thought  under  the  head 
of  relation  see  Chapter  XIV  §  8  and  also  Chapter  XXXIV  §  3. 

3  Or  at  any  rate  sensible  qualities  given  to  outer  sense. 


XXXIX  §7]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES       175 

Kant's  third  contention  is  that  concepts  which  thus  connect 
objects  (or  the  manifold  of  objects)  a  priori  involve  necessity ; 
and  therefore  experience  (as  experience  of  an  objective  order 
in  time)  is  possible  only  through  representation  of  the  necessary 
connexion,  or  nexus,  of  appearances.1 

This  third  contention  is  little  more  than  an  expansion  of 
what  has  already  been  said.  An  a  priori  connexion  must  be 
universal  and  necessary :  the  very  concept  of  such  a  connexion 
involves  necessity.2  Kant  does  not  consider  the  possibility 
that  the  connexion  might  be  purely  arbitrary.  If  it  were,  there 
could  be  no  objective  connexion  in  time,  and  so  no  experience. 
And  indeed  Kant  already  claims  to  have  shown  generally 
in  the  Transcendental  Deduction  that  objectivity  involves 
necessity.  In  the  sequel  he  will  argue  that  the  different  forms 
of  objective  connexion  in  time  must  involve  necessity.3 

It  may  be  observed  that  in  this  case  the  argument  of  the 
second  edition,  as  of  a  more  general  character,  is  rightly  placed 
before  the  argument  of  the  first  edition.  It  maintains  only  that 
the  necessary  connexion  of  appearances  in  time  is  a  condition 
of  experience.  The  fact  that  there  are  three  forms  of  such 
necessary  connexion,  and  different  rules  for  each  of  these 
forms,  is  a  further  development  of  the  general  argument. 

§  7.  The  General  Character  of  the  Proof 

It  must  never  be  forgotten  that  the  proof  of  the  Analogies, 
like  that  of  the  other  Principles,  rests  upon  the  possibility 
of  experience,  experience  being  regarded  as  'knowledge  in 
which  all  objects  must  in  the  last  resort4  be  capable  of  being 
given,  if  the  idea  of  them  is  to  have  objective  reality  for  us'.5 
Kant  says  expressly  that  the  Analogies  could  never  be  proved 

1  B  219.  'Representation*  (Vorstellung)  is  here  conception. 

2  Compare  A  2  and  B  3-4. 

3  See  especially  B  233-4,  where  we  find  a  parallel  to  the  present 
argument. 

4  'zuletzt.'  Does  this  qualification  refer  to  the  fact  that  some  objects, 
e.g.  electrons,  are  too  small  to  be  given  directly  to  our  senses?  See 
A  226  =  B  273  and  compare  Price,  Perception,  p.  297. 

6  A  217  =  6264. 


176  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XXXIX  §  7 

in  regard  to  objects  which  were  things-in-themselves.1  He 
says  also  that  it  would  be  utterly  useless  to  attempt  a  dogmatic 
proof  of  the  Analogies,  that  is,  a  direct  proof  from  concepts.2 
We  may  analyse  our  concepts  of  objects  as  we  will,  but  we  can 
never  pass  by  mere  concepts  from  an  object  and  its  existence 
to  the  existence,  or  mode  of  existence,  of  anything  else;3  we 
could  never  prove,  for  example,  by  an  analysis  of  the  concept 
of  'event',  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause.  In  Kant's 
opinion  the  proof  of  the  Analogies  is  incompatible  with  both 
realism  and  rationalism;  and  indeed  realism  and  rationalism 
can,  he  believes,  offer  no  proof  either  of  substance  or  of  caus- 
ality or  of  interaction. 

Just  because  Kant's  proof  rests  upon  the  possibility  of 
experience,  it  is  to  him  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  he 
argues  from  the  unity  of  apperception  or  from  the  unity 
of  objective  time-relations;  for  the  synthetic  unity  which 
is  necessary  for  any  kind  of  objectivity  is  grounded  on  the 
unity  of  apperception,  and  the  unity  of  apperception  is  mani- 
fested only  in  the  synthetic  unity  of  objects,  and  preeminently 
in  the  synthetic  unity  of  their  time-relations.  He  appeals 
to  experience  and  its  possibility  as  the  'third  thing'  which 
alone  can  justify  synthetic  a  priori  judgements  ;4  and  because 
the  essential  form  of  experience  consists  in  the  synthetic 
unity  of  the  apperception  of  all  appearances,5  he  can  discover 
the  a  priori  conditions  of  the  necessary  time-determination 
of  all  existence  in  the  phenomenal  wrorld,  conditions  apart 
from  which  all  empirical  time-determination  would  be  im- 
possible.6 These  conditions  are  expressed  in  rules  of  synthetic 
unity  a  priori?  rules  through  which  alone  the  existence  of 

1  A  181  =  6223. 

2  A  216-7  =  B  263-4.  Compare  A  736  =  B  764. 

3  A  217  =  6264. 

4  Ibid.  Compare  A  155  =  B  194  and  A  259  =  B  315. 

6  I  think  he  ought  to  add  here  a  reference  to  the  fact  that  time  is 
the  ultimate  form  of  all  our  intuitions.  Time  and  the  unity  of  apper- 
ception are  the  ultimate  conditions  through  which  alone  experience 
is  possible.  fl  A  217  =  B  264.  Compare  also  A  177-8  =  B  220. 

7  A  217  =  6264. 


XXXIX  §  7]    THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  ANALOGIES       177 

appearances  can  acquire  synthetic  unity  as  regards  their  time- 
relations.1 

The  Analogies  in  short  are  rules  which  must  govern  all 
appearances,  if  they  are  to  be  appearances  of  objects  in  one 
and  the  same  objective  time.  The  unity  of  the  time  in  which 
all  objects  exist  is  grounded  on  the  unity  of  apperception, 
which  is  manifested  only  in  synthesis  according  to  rules.2 
The  particular  character  of  the  rules  of  synthesis  in  regard 
to  existence  in  time  seems,  however,  to  be  determined,  partly 
at  least,  by  the  fact  that  absolute  time  cannot  be  perceived. 
If  it  could  be  so  perceived,  we  could  apparently  determine 
the  temporal  position  of  objects  immediately,3  and  'as  it  were 
empirically',4  by  reference  to  absolute  time.  As  absolute  time 
cannot  be  perceived,  we  determine  the  temporal  position 
of  objects  only  by  their  relations  to  one  another  in  time,  and 
the  rules  in  accordance  with  which  we  do  this  are  a  priori 
rules  which  are  valid  for  any  and  every  time.5 

We  shall  be  in  a  better  position  to  estimate  the  value  of  this 
doctrine  when  we  have  considered  the  proofs  in  detail.  Here 
I  would  only  say  that  Kant  has  at  least  a  genuine  and  important 
problem;  for  even  if  we  reject  the  concepts  of  substance  and 
causality,  we  ought  to  give  some  account  of  what  we  mean 
by  an  objective  order  of  events  which  is  distinct  both  from 
the  order  of  our  knowing  and  from  the  order  created  by  mere 
imagination. 

1  A  215  —  B  262.  This  means,  for  example,  that  there  can  be  no 
objective  succession  apart  from  the  law  of  cause  and  effect.  I  take 
'rule*  in  nil  these  passages  to  refer  to  the  Analogies,  and  not  to  the 
empirical  laws  of  nature,  which  we  discover  in  conformity  with  the 
Analogies. 

2  Compare  A  216  =  B  263.  3  A  215  =  B  262. 

4  B  233.  I  presume  this  means  in  a  way  analogous  to  empirical 
observation. 

5  A  216  —  B  263.  I  take  'rules'  throughout  this  paragraph  also  to 
mean  the  Analogies. 


CHAPTER    XL 
THE  SPECIAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  ANALOGIES 

§  i.   The  Analogies  are  Regulative 

Kant's  further  account1  of  the  special  character  of  the 
Analogies  is  little  more  than  an  elaboration  of  what  we  already 
know.2 

The  Mathematical  Principles  wrere  concerned  with  appear- 
ances, or  more  precisely  with  the  synthesis  of  time  and  space 
and  the  synthesis  of  sensation  necessary  for  knowledge  of 
appearances  as  appearances  of  objects.3  The  Analogies  are 
concerned  with  the  existence  of  appearances  as  objects,  that 
is,  with  their  relation  to  one  another  in  respect  of  their  exis- 
tence.4 Kant  asserts  that  we  can  construct  a  priori  not  only 
the  extensive  quantity,  but  also  the  degree  of  appearances.5 
We  cannot  construct  the  existence  of  appearances  not  given 
to  us,  although  we  can  infer  some  kind  of  existence  from  what 

1  A  178  =  B22off. 

2  See  A  1 60  -=  B  199  ff.  and  Chapter  XXXVI  §  2. 

3  For  the  reference  to  objects,  see  Bui  and  Chapters  XXXVI  §  2  and 
XXXVII  §  5. 

4  A  178  =  B  220.  This  seems  to  be  the  same  as  their  position  relative 
to  one  another  in  time. 

5  A   178-9  -=  B  220-1;  compare   Chapter  XXXVIII  §4.   Kant's 
statement  in  A  178  -=  B  220-1  is  particularly  obscure.  'The  way  in 
which  something  is  apprehended  in  appearance  can  be  so  determined 
that  the  rule  of  synthesis  can  at  once,  in  every  empirical  example  that 
comes  before  us,  give  this  intuition  a  priori,  that  is,  can  bring  it  into 
existence  from  the  example.'  The  words  a  priori  must,  I  think,  go 
with  'give'  and  not  (as  Kemp  Smith  takes  them)  with  'intuition'.  The 
word  'darans*  I  translate  as  'from  the  example' :  it  is  omitted  in  Kemp 
Smith's  translation. 

Kant  is  here  concerned  with  the  possibility  of  constructing  a  priori 
both  the  extensive,  and  the  intensive,  quantity  of  an  empirical  intui- 
tion. I  do  not  understand  his  references  to  the  empirical  example; 
but  I  think  he  must  intend  to  say,  not  that  we  can  construct  the 
empirical  intuition  a  priori,  but  that  we  can  so  construct  the  quantity 
and  the  degree  (and  consequently  the  number)  involved  in  the  intui- 
tion. Compare  A  714-15  =  B  742-3. 


XL  §2]  SPECIAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  ANALOGIES    179 

is  given;  for  example,  we  can  know  that  a  given  event  must 
have  some  cause,  but  apart  from  experience  we  cannot  say 
what  that  cause  must  be.1 

For  this  reason  the  Mathematical  Principles  are  said  to  be 
'constitutive';  to  be  constitutive  always  implies  for  Kant  the 
possibility  of  construction.2  The  Analogies  are  merely  'regula- 
tive'; they  tell  us  what  we  must  look  for  in  experience,  but 
they  do  not  enable  us  to  construct  it  a  priori. 

§  2.  The  First  Meaning  of  'Analogy* 

Hence  there  is  a  difference  between  a  mathematical  analogy 
(or  proportion)  and  Kant's  Analogies  of  Experience,  although 
both  are  concerned  with  what  he  elsewhere  calls  an  agreement 
in  relation.3  Mathematical  analogies  are  formulae  which 
express  the  equality  of  two  quantitative  relations  (or  ratios); 
and  just  because  we  can  construct  quantities,  we  can  determine 
the  fourth  term  in  a  proportion  when  three  are  given.4  The 
Analogies  of  Experience  are  concerned  with  two  qualitative 
relations;  and  since  quality  cannot  be  constructed,  we  are 
unable  to  construct  the  fourth  term,  when  the  other  three  are 
given.5  All  we  have  is  a  rule  for  seeking  the  fourth  term  in 

1  This  statement  is  elaborated  in  A  766  =  B  794.  We  cannot  know 
a  priori  that  sunlight  will  melt  wax  and  harden  clay;  but  we  can  know 
a  priori  that  if  wax  melts,  something  must  have  preceded  upon  which 
the  melting  has  followed  in  accordance  with  a  fixed  law — the  law,  I 
take  it,  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause. 

2  Construction  again  implies  the  possibility  of  immediate  certainty 
or  'evidence*.  See  Chapter  XXXVI  §  3. 

3  'Analogia'  is  equated  with  'eine  Obereinstimmung  des  Verhaltmsses* ; 
see  Metaphysiky  p.  90. 

4  If  2  :  4  =  3  :  x,  we  can  say  what  x  must  be. 

6  The  Analogies  are  no  doubt  concerned  with  qualitative  relations, 
but  the  factor  of  quantity  cannot  be  ignored,  as  is  shown  by  Kant's 
insistence  that  the  quantum  of  substance  can  neither  be  increased  nor 
diminished  (B  224).  It  is  curious  that  he  does  not  discuss  the  quanti- 
tative equivalence  of  cause  and  effect,  perhaps  he  thinks  this  is 
sufficiently  indicated  in  his  account  of  substance.  References  to 
quantity  (both  extensive  and  intensive)  in  connexion  with  causation 
are  to  be  found  in  A  168-9  —  B  210,  A  176  =  B  217,  and  A  179 
=  B  222.  In  the  last  of  these  passages  he  appears  to  imply  that,  for 


i8o  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE         [XL  §  3 

experience,  and  a  mark1  whereby  it  can  be  detected.  We 
know,  for  example,  that  effect  is  to  cause  as  the  melting  of 
wax  is  to  x:2  we  cannot  say  a  priori  what  x  must  be,  but  we 
know  that  it  must  have  the  mark  of  invariably  preceding  such 
melting. 

§  3.  The  Second  Meaning  of  'Analogy* 

There  is  a  further  sense  in  which  the  term  'Analogy' 
is  applicable  to  the  Principles  with  which  we  are  at  present 
concerned.  Kant  leads  us  up  to  this  sense  by  a  remark  which, 
he  declares,  applies  to  all  the  Principles,  but  preeminently 

example,  if  we  are  given  an  effect,  we  can  say  that  it  must  have  a 
preceding  cause,  but  we  can  tell  a  priori  neither  what  that  cause  is 
nor  what  its  quantity  is.  I  do  not  know  how  he  would  deal  with  the 
objection  that  we  can  know  the  cause  to  be  quantitatively  equivalent 
to  the  effect.  It  might  almost  be  said  that  we  are  capable  of  construct- 
ing both  the  existence  of  the  cause  and  its  quantity,  but  not  its  empirical 
quality.  Kant  is  of  course  right  in  holding  that  although  we  might  be 
able  to  infer  some  existent  or  other  a  priori ,  we  could  not  know  it 
determmately ;  that  is,  we  could  not  anticipate  the  difference  between 
it  and  other  existents,  this  difference  being  revealed  to  empirical 
intuition  alone.  See  A  178  =  B  221. 

1  I  presume  that  the  'marks*  are  permanence,  regular  succession, 
and  regular  simultaneity — the  three  transcendental  schemata.  Com- 
pare A  136  ~  B  175.  Kant  suggests  later — in  A  203  —  B  249 — that 
sequence  in  time  is  the  sole  empirical  criterion  by  which  we  distinguish 
cause  from  effect.  In  that  case  he  is  concerned  with  two  events  known 
to  be  causally  connected,  and  the  only  question  there  is  which  is  the 
cause  and  which  is  the  effect.  We  may  nevertheless  take  the  mark  of 
a  cause  to  be  that  it  invariably  precedes  the  effect.  Needless  to  say,  this 
by  itself  is  not  sufficient  to  determine  the  cause  of  anything;  night, 
for  example,  is  not  the  cause  of  day.  If  Kant  were  writing  a  treatise 
on  induction,  he  would  be  obliged  to  discuss  in  detail  the  conditions 
under  which  we  are  entitled  to  say  that  A  is  the  cause  of  B.  He  is, 
however,  concerned  with  something  much  more  general,  with  the 
justification  for  believing  the  world  to  be  governed  by  causality.  To 
treat  the  Analogies  as  an  essay  in  inductive  logic  can  lead  to  nothing 
but  misunderstanding. 

2  The  fact  that  the  melting  of  wax  is  taken  to  be  an  instance  of 
'effect',  and  x  to  be  an  instance  of  'cause',  means  that  the  relation 
between  them  is  an  instance  of  the  causal  relation.  Perhaps  it  might 
be  better  to  say  that  the  melting  of  wax  is  to  x  as  other  events  are  to 
their  causes. 


XL  §3]  SPECIAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  ANALOGIES   181 

to  the  Analogies.1  The  Analogies  have  meaning  and  validity 
only  in  their  empirical,  and  not  in  their  transcendental,  use; 
that  is  to  say,  they  have  meaning  and  validity  only  as  applied 
to  objects  of  a  possible  experience,  not  as  applied  to  things- 
in-themselves.2  Hence  our  proof  of  them  can  have  reference 
only  to  their  empirical  use,  and  appearances  must  be  sub- 
sumed, not  directly3  under  the  categories,  but  under  their 
schemata. 

This  doctrine  is  already  familiar  to  us  from  the  discussion 
of  the  transcendental  schemata,4  but  Kant  deals  with  it  here 
in  an  extremely  elaborate  and  complicated  way.5  His  main 
point  is,  however,  comparatively  clear.  When  we,  for  example, 
say  that  effect  is  to  cause  as  the  melting  of  wax  is  to  xy  we  do 
so  only  in  virtue  of  the  schema  of  necessary  succession ;  and 
in  so  doing  we  treat  the  relation  of  the  necessarily  succeeding 

1  A  1 80  —  B  223.  Kant  makes  a  similar  statement  about  the  term 
*  Anticipations'  in  A  166-7  =  B  208-9. 

a  Sec  A  139=  B  178  and  A  146  -  B  185 ;  and  compare  Chapter  XI 
§  4  for  a  fuller  statement  and  also  Chapter  LIV  §  3. 

1  'schlechthin*  (A  181  -     B  223);  compare  A  138-9  =  B  177-8. 

4  Compare  especially  Chapter  XXXIV  §§  1-2  and  also  Chapter 
XXX  V§  i. 

6  Sec  A  181  =  B  223-4.  Kant's  statement  is  unusually  full  of  relative 
pronouns  which  may  refer  to  many  different  nouns.  The  commentators 
take  different  views  of  these  references,  and  even  feel  compelled 
(perhaps  not  without  reason)  to  make  emendations.  It  is  perhaps 
impossible  to  determine  the  precise  meaning  of  Kant's  words,  but 
Kemp  Smith's  translation — apart  from  two  sentences — gives  what 
seems  to  me  an  adequate  statement  of  Kant's  thought.  Of  the  two 
sentences  beginning  'But  such  unity  can  be  thought  .  .  .'  the  first 
seems  to  me  doubtful,  and  the  second  seems  to  me  impossible.  Of 
the  correct  translation  I  am  uncertain,  but  Kant,  I  think,  means  some- 
thing like  this :  The  synthesis  of  appearances  can  be  thought  only  in 
the  schema ;  the  pure  category  contains  the  form  (function  of  unity)  of 
this  synthesis  in  abstraction  from  all  restricting  sensuous  conditions; 
that  is,  it  contains  the  form  of  this  synthesis  as  a  synthesis  of  the 
manifold  in  general  (not  as  a  synthesis  of  appearances  in  time). 
Compare  Chapter  XXXII  §§  6-7.  I  take  'synthesis  in  general'  to  be 
equivalent  to  'synthesis  of  the  manifold  in  general  \  compare  B  129-30, 
B  144-5,  and  B  150-1.  For  what  the  pure  category  contains,  see 
A  138  =  B  177:  for  what  the  schematised  category  contains,  see 
A  139-40  —  B  178-9. 


182  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE         [XL  §  3 

to  the  necessarily  preceding  as  analogous  to  the  relation  of 
consequent  and  ground  which  is  thought  in  the  pure  category.1 
The  ways  in  which  we  combine  appearances  in  time  in  accor- 
dance with  the  Analogies  of  Experience  is  analogous  to  the  ways 
in  which  the  manifold  in  general  is  combined  in  the  categorical, 
hypothetical,  and  disjunctive  forms  of  judgement,  and  so  in 
the  pure  categories  of  relation.2 

To  say  this  is,  I  think,  to  say  that  the  schemata  are  analogues 
of  the  pure  categories:  the  synthetic  unity  of  the  manifold 
of  appearances  in  time  (which  is  thought  in  the  schema)  is 
analogous  to  the  synthetic  unity  of  the  manifold  of  in- 
tuition in  general  (which  is  thought  in  the  pure  category).3 
In  this  doctrine  there  is  nothing  really  novel,  but  only  a  new 
way  of  expressing  what  Kant  has  taught  all  along.4  Since  the 
Principles  can  be  proved  only  in  their  empirical  use,  and 
since  appearances  can  be  subsumed  directly  only  under  the 
schemata,  we  must,  in  applying  the  Principles  to  appearances, 
substitute  the  schema  for  the  category  as  the  key  to  its  use, 
or  rather  we  must  set  the  schema  alongside  the  category 
as  its  restricting  condition.5 

I  take  it  that  this  doctrine  holds  of  all  the  Principles,  although 

1  We   may   expand   our   previous    Analogy'   into   the   form   'The 
melting  of  wax :  x  —  the  necessarily  succeeding :  the  necessarily  pre- 
ceding   -  consequent:  ground*. 

2  'By  these  Principles  we  are  justified  in  combining  appearances 
only  according  to  an  analogy  with  the  logical  and  universal  unity  of 
concepts',    A    181  ==  B   224.    Compare  also    A    147  =  B     186    and 
A  142  -=  B  181. 

3  For  example,  the  (ultimate)  subject  is  to  its  predicates  as  the 
unchanging  or  permanent  is  to  the  changing  in  time ;  the  consequent 
is  to  the  ground  as  the  necessarily  preceding  is  to  the  necessarily 
succeeding  in  time ;  and  so  on. 

4  Kemp  Smith's  statement  (Commentary,  p.  358)  that  'it  implies 
that  it  is  only  in  the  noumenal,  and  not  also  in  the  phenomenal,  sphere 
that  substantial  existences  and  genuinely  dynamical  activities  are  to 
be  found'  seems  to  me  due  to  misunderstanding.  It  is  sufficiently 
refuted  by  Kant  in  A  146-7  -=  B  186. 

5  A  181  —  B  224.  There  are  difficulties  here  in  Kant's  text  into 
which  I  need  not  enter,  but  he  is  manifestly  saying  that  only  schema- 
tised categories  can  be  applied  to  objects. 


XL  §3]  SPECIAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  ANALOGIES   183 

it  is  preeminently  true  of  the  Analogies.1  Whether  it  is  a  par- 
ticularly valuable  way  of  expressing  Kant's  general  doctrine 
is  another  question.  It  is  perhaps  not  unreasonable  to  suppose 
that  the  title  *  Analogies  of  Experience'  was  chosen  by  Kant 
primarily  because  of  the  first  sense  which  he  ascribes  to  the 
word  Analogy'  in  this  connexion. 

1  Compare  Kant's  statement  at  the  beginning  of  the  paragraph 
(A  1 80  — =  B  223).  This  statement  need  not  cover  the  whole  of  the 
paragraph,  but  there  is  nothing  in  the  argument  to  suggest  restriction 
to  the  Analogies.  Kant's  doctrine  would  not  apply  to  the  Mathematical 
Principles,  if  the  categories  must  in  themselves  possess  correlates — 
see  B  no — in  order  to  enter  into  an  Analogy;  but  I  see  no  indication 
of  this  in  the  argument.  I  presume  that  the  analogy  between  category 
and  schema  is  more  obvious  in  the  categories  of  relation,  partly 
because  both  categories  and  schemata  have  correlates,  and  partly 
because  there  is  less  likelihood  of  our  identifying  the  category  and  the 
schema. 


CHAPTER    XLI 
THE  FIRST  ANALOGY 

§  i.  The  Principle  of  Permanence 

'In  all  change  of  appearances  substance  is  permanent,  and  its 
quantum  in  nature  is  neither  increased  nor  diminished. ' 

This  is  Kant's  formula  in  the  second  edition.  The  reference 
to  the  quantum  of  substance  is  commonly  condemned  to-clay ; 
but  it  at  least  attempts  to  make  Kant's  doctrine  precise,  and 
it  deserves  to  be  considered  on  its  own  merits. 

The  formula  of  the  first  edition  makes  no  reference  to  the 
quantum  of  substance.  'All  appearances  contain  the  permanent 
(substance)  as  the  object  itself,  and  the  transitory  as  its  mere 
determination,  that  is,  as  a  way  in  which  the  object  exists.' 

The  two  traditional  views  of  substance  are  (i)  that  it  is  the 
ultimate  subject  of  all  predicates,  and  (2)  that  it  is  the  per- 
manent substratum  of  change.  Kant  accepts  the  first  view  as 
involved  in  the  very  idea  of  substance,  and  suggested  by  the 
categorical  form  of  judgement.  When  we  translate  it  into 
terms  of  time,  substance  becomes  the  permanent  subject 
of  changing  predicates,  or  the  permanent  substratum  of 
change.  What  Kant  has  now  to  prove  is  that  there  is  a  per- 
manent substratum  of  change,  and  only  so  can  the  concept 
of  substance  have  objective  validity. 

Kant  believes  that  substance  (as  a  permanent  substratum) 
belongs  only  to  objects  of  outer  sense;  and  it  is  with  these 
that  his  proof  is  really  concerned,  although  he  professes  to 
deal  with  all  changing  appearances.  Since  substance  is  essenti- 
ally spatial,  and  since  the  parts  of  space  are  outside  one  another, 
Kant  holds  that  there  must  be  many  substances,  and  that 
every  substance  is  made  up  of  substances.  Hence  he  rejects 
a  third  traditional  view  of  substance,  which  defines  substance 
as  the  self-sufficient.1 

1  This  is  explicitly  stated  in  Metaphysik,  p.  34.  He  rejects  the 
definition  of  Descartes :  per  substantiam  nihil  altud  intelligere  possumus 


XLI  §  i]  THE  FIRST  ANALOGY  185 

It  must  not  be  forgotten — Kant  himself  repeats  it  again 
and  again — that  he  is  concerned  only  with  substance  as  appear- 
ance (substantia  phaenomenon).  We  have  no  reason  to  regard 
ultimate  reality,  or  the  thing-in-itself,  as  either  spatial  or 
temporal,  either  permanent  or  changing,  although  it  appears 
to  human  beings  as  a  phenomenal  world  of  permanent  sub- 
stances in  space  causally  interacting  with  one  another.  The 
fact  that  in  our  phenomenal  world  we  recognise,  and  must 
recognise,  permanent  spatial  substances  whose  changes  are  not 
to  be  identified  with  the  changes  in  our  sensations ;  and  even 
the  fact  that  we  can  find  the  causes  of  our  sensations  in  the 
movements  of  bodies,  and  especially  of  our  own  bodies — all 
this  offers  not  the  slightest  ground  for  supposing  Kant  to  have 
wavered  for  a  moment  from  his  belief  that  both  the  physical 
world  and  our  own  mental  history  are  nothing  more  than 
an  appearance  to  human  minds.  Here,  as  always,  his  empirical 
realism  and  transcendental  idealism  are  not  conflicting  ten- 
dencies whose  nature  he  fails  to  understand :  they  are  on  the 
contrary  essential  and  interdependent  parts  of  his  philosophical 
system.1  On  his  view  we  can  have  a  priori  knowledge  of  per- 
manent spatial  substances  only  in  so  far  as  the  whole  physical 
world  is  dependent  on  human  sensibility  and  thought.  Even 
if  we  cannot  accept  his  view,  even  if  we  deny  that  it  can  be 
worked  out  consistently  in  detail,  we  must  recognise  that 
it  has  at  least  an  initial  consistency. 

quam  rem  quae  ita  existit  ut  nulla  alia  re  indigeat  ad  existendum  (Princ. 
Phil.  I,  51).  He  adds  that  Spinoza  held  the  same  view,  and  that  this 
was  the  source  of  his  error. 

Kant  himself  (in  B  407,  B  413,  and  B  417  n.)  speaks  of  substance 
(in  connexion  with  the  self)  as  meaning  a  self-subsistent  essence  (em 
fur  sich  bestehendes  Wescn).  But  'self-subsistent'  for  Kant  is  not 
equivalent  to  *  self-sufficient ' :  it  means  only  that  which  does  not 
'inhere*  as  an  accident  in  something  else,  and  is  compatible  with  being 
'grounded*  in  something  else. 

1  Compare  Chapter  II  §  2  and  Chapter  XXXI  §  10. 


1 86  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLI  §2 

§  2.  The  Argument  of  the  First  Edition 

I.  Our  apprehension  of  the  manifold  of  appearance  is  always 
successive,  and  is  therefore  always  changing.1 

From  this,  according  to  Kant,  it  follows  (i)  that  by  mere 
apprehension  we  could  never  distinguish  objective  succession 
from  objective  simultaneity;  (2)  that  if  we  are  to  make  this 
distinction,  and  indeed  if  we  are  to  determine  objective  rela- 
tions in  time  at  all,2  our  experience3  must  have  as  its  ground 
or  condition  something  which  always  is,  that  is,  something  abiding 
and  permanent',  and  (3)  that  all  objective  change  and  simul- 
taneity must  be  simply  so  many  ways  (modes  of  time4)  in 
which  this  permanent  exists.5 

II.  Since  simultaneity  and  succession  are  the  only  relations 
in  time,  and  since  we  can  determine  objective  simultaneity  and 
succession  only  as  ways  in  which  the  permanent  exists,  we 
can  say  that  only  in  the  permanent*  are  time-relations  possible. 

1  A  182  =  6225. 

2  Succession  and  simultaneity  are  the  only  relations  in  time.  See 
A  182  =•=  8226. 

3  The  emendation  suggested  by  Erdmann  ('an  ihnC  for  'an  thr') 
means  that  for  'our  experience*  we  must  substitute  'the  manifold  as 
an  object  of  experience*.  I  do  not  think  the  emendation  is  necessary, 
and  Erdmann  himself  suggests  it  only  as  a  doubtful  possibility.  'Our 
experience*  is  equivalent  to  'our  experience  so  far  as  it  is  an  experience 
of  objective  temporal  relations*. 

4  For  modes  of  time,  see  Chapter  XXXIX  §  3. 

5  Some  explanation  of  this  conclusion  would  have  been  an  advantage. 
Even  if  the  permanent  is  the  ground  or  condition  of  our  experiencing 
change  (or  succession)  and  simultaneity,   and  so  is  the  ground  or 
condition  of  change  and  simultaneity,  does  it  follow  that  change  and 
simultaneity  are  ways  in  which  the  permanent  exists  ? 

The  clause  is  loosely  constructed  in  German : '. .  .  something  abiding 
and  permanent,  of  which  all  change  and  coexistence  are  only  so 
many  ways  (modes  of  time)  in  which  the  permanent  exists*  is  Kemp 
Smith's  translation,  which  follows  the  German  very  closely.  The  'of 
which'  hangs  very  loosely  to  the  clause  as  a  whole,  unless  Kant  means 
'all  change  and  coexistence  of  which' ;  but  this  would  merely  assume 
that  change  and  coexistence  were  change  and  coexistence  of  the 
permanent. 

6  The  phrase  'in  the  permanent*  seems  to  mean  no  more  than  'in  re- 
lation to  the  permanent*.  The  equivalent  statement  below  (in  A  183  = 
B  226)  is  that  'without  this  permanent  there  is  no  time-relation*. 


XLI  §2]  THE  FIRST  ANALOGY  187 

So  far  Kant's  argument  is  clearly — what  on  his  principles 
it  ought  to  be — an  argument  from  the  conditions  of  experience 
to  the  conditions  of  objects  of  experience.  We  could  not 
experience  any  objective  time-relations  apart  from  the  per- 
manent, and  therefore  there  can  be  no  objective  time-relations 
apart  from  the  permanent. 

This  conclusion  is  then  restated  in  other  terms.  The  per- 
manent is  the  substratum  of  the  empirical  idea  of  time  itself,1 
and  it  is  only  by  reference  to  this  substratum  that  time-rela- 
tions are  possible. 

III.  Kant's  conclusion  so  far  rests,  as  I  have  said,  on  what 
he  believes  to  be  the  condition  of  experiencing  objective  time- 
relations.  He  now  attempts  to  reinforce  that  conclusion  by  an 
argument  resting  upon  the  nature  of  time. 

Permanence  is  in  a  special  sense  an  expression2  of  the  nature 
of  time,  for  time  is  the  constant  correlate*  of  all  existence  of 
appearances,  of  all  change  and  all  concomitance* 

The  reasons  for  this  special  connexion  between  permanence 
and  time  would  seem  to  be  as  follows : 

1  This  clause — though  it  professes  only  to  re-state  what  has  already 
been  said — is  difficult.  'Substratum*  is  not  defined — it  seems  to  mean 
that  by  reference  to  which  we  distinguish  objective  simultaneity  and 
succession,    and   consequently   (according   to    Kant)   that   of  whose 
existence  succession  and  simultaneity  are  modes;  compare  A   183 
=  B  227.  Kant  no  doubt  has  in  mind  the  traditional  doctrine  which 
emanates  from  Aristotle.   According  to  Aristotle  change  implies  a 
succession  of  states  in  a  substratum.  This  substratum  is  sometimes 
called  ovalu,  and  seems  to  be  an  element  in  the  doctrine  of  sub- 
stance. 

'Time  itself  is  not  empirical,  and  cthe  empirical  idea  of  time  itself* 
seems  to  mean  the  empirical  time-determinations  of  objects.  This  is, 
I  think,  confirmed  by  the  clause  which  follows.  Compare  M.A.d.N. 
(IV  481)  where  Kant  equates  'empirical  space*  with  the  totality  of 
outer  objects. 

2  A  183  =  B  226,  'ausdruckt*.  In  B  225  the  (permanent)  substratum 
is  said  to  'represent*  time  in  general  (vorstellt). 

3  'das  bestandige  Korrelatum.'  The  word  'bestandig*  suggests  per- 
manence. In  B  224-5  time  is  said  to  be  the  permanent  form  of  inner 
intuition,  and  it  is  even  said  that  time  abides  and  does  not  change. 

4  ' Begleitung.'  This  is  equivalent  to  coexistence  or  simultaneity. 


1 88  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE        [XLI  §  2 

(1)  Change  is  not  a  change  of  time  itself,  but  of  appearances 
in  time. 

(2)  Simultaneity  is  not  a  simultaneity  of  time  itself,1  for  the 
parts  of  time  are  successive,  not  simultaneous.2 

(3)  Although  the  parts  of  time  come  one  after  another,  this 
does  not  entitle  us  to  attribute  succession  to  time  itself; 
for  if  we  did  so  we  should  have  to  think  of  another  time 
in  which  this  succession  took  place. 

All  these  arguments  seem  intended  to  suggest,  if  not  that 
time  itself  is  permanent,  at  any  rate  that  permanence  is  more 
closely  connected  with  time  than  are  succession  and  simul- 
taneity.3 Kant  adds  a  fourth  argument  connected  with  dura- 
tion4 in  time.  This  argument  is  of  a  somewhat  different  char- 
acter. It  does  not  suggest  that  time  itself  is  permanent,  but 
rather  that  apart  from  the  permanent  there  can  be  no  duration 
in  time  any  more  than  there  can  be  succession  or  simultaneity. 

(4)  It  is   only  through  the  permanent  that  existence  in 
different  parts  of  the  time-series5  acquires  that  kind  of 
quantity  which  is  called  'duration'.  If  we  consider  bare 
succession  in  itself,  existence  is  continually  ceasing  and 
coming  to  be,  and  has  absolutely  no  quantity  at  all.6 

1  Kant  says  that  simultaneity  is  not  a  mode  of  time  itself.   See 
Chapter  XXXIX  §3. 

2  He  might  have  added  for  the  sake  of  parallelism  that  it  is  not  time, 
but  appearances  in  time,  which  are  simultaneous. 

3  Kant  does  not  ask  whether,  if  time  endures  or  is  permanent,  we 
should  require  to  think  of  another  time  in  or  through  which  it  endures. 

4  'Dauer.' 

5  The  time-series  is  the  series  of  times  (or  of  parts  of  time),  the 
time-order  is  the  order  of  what  is  in  time.  See  A  145  =  B  184. 

8  It  has — or  is — mere  position  in  an  atomic  'now'.  The  past  does 
not  exist  nor  does  the  future.  Permanence,  in  the  strict  sense,  involves 
existence  through  all  time,  while  duration  is  existence  through  some 
time  (A  185  —  B  228-9).  If  a  duration  is  objective,  it  is  in  a  determinate 
relation  to  all  other  objective  durations,  and  so  presupposes  perman- 
ence. In  the  abstract  moment  there  can  be  no  duration  (or  quantity 
of  existence),  for  a  moment  is  not  a  part,  but  a  limit,  of  time  (see 
Ai  69  =6211  and  A2o8  =8253).  There  can,  however,  be  a  quantity 
or  degree  of  reality  m  the  abstract  moment;  see  A  168  =  B  210. 


XLI  §2]  THE  FIRST  ANALOGY  189 

All  four  arguments  are  intended  to  reinforce  Kant's  original 
conclusion1  from  the  conditions  of  experience — that  without 
the  permanent  no  objective  time-relations  are  possible. 

IV.  Time  in  itself  cannot  be  perceived. 

V.  Therefore  the  permanent  must  be  present  in  appearances,21 
and  must  be  the  substratum*  of  all  time-determinations. 

It  follows  (i)  that  the  permanent  in  appearances  is  a  con- 
dition of  the  possibility  of  the  synthetic  unity  of  appearances 
in  one  objective  temporal  order;4  and  therefore  (2)  that  it  is 
a  condition  of  experience  and  so  demonstrably  necessary. 

VI.  Therefore  in  all  appearances  the  permanent  is  the  object 
itself f    that    is,    substantia    phaenomenon,    the    ultimate    and 
unchanging  subject  to  which  all  changing  accidents  are  attributed 
as  predicates. 

Everything  that  changes,  or  can  change,  belongs  only  to  the 

1  Stated  in  II  above  in  the  form  'only  in  the  permanent  are  time- 
relations  possible*. 

2  Note  that  this  conclusion  follows  from  the  fact  that  time  cannot 
be  perceived.  In  the  earlier  stage  of  the  argument — see  I  above — it 
was  presumably  still  an  open  question  whether  the  permanent  required 
might  not  be  found  in  time  itself. 

3  This  again  seems  to  mean  more  than  the  'condition'  or  'ground'. 

4  Kant  says  it  is  the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  the  synthetic 
unity  of  all  sense-perceptions  (where  'sense-perception'  is  equivalent 
to   'appearance');   but  there   are  other  synthetic  unities  and  other 
conditions  (the  unity  of  extensive  quantity,  the  unity  of  degree,  and 
so  on).  The  permanent  in  appearances  is  not  even  the  only  condition 
of  an  objective  temporal  order,  for  causality  and  interaction  are  so  also. 

The  clause  added — that  with  reference  to  this  permanent  all 
existence  and  change  in  time  can  be  regarded  only  as  a  mode  of  the 
existence  of  what  abides  and  is  permanent — adds  nothing  to  what 
has  been  already  said,  and  is  loosely  expressed  Existence  (Dasem) 
cannot  be  a  mode  of  existence  (E\ntens).  Perhaps  Kant  intended  to 
write  'simultaneity'  (or  'duration'). 

6  The  object  was  formerly  regarded  as  the  necessary  synthetic 
unity  of  a  group  of  appearances.  Here  it  is  regarded  as  the  permanent 
substratum  of  these  appearances.  This  doctrine  is  not  repeated  in  the 
proof  added  in  the  second  edition.  Strictly  speaking,  the  object  is 
the  substance  with  its  accidents,  not  the  substance  in  abstraction  from 
its  accidents.  The  synthetic  unity  of  substance  and  accident  is  perhaps 
the  most  fundamental  unity  which  characterises  an  object. 


1 90  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLI  §  3 

way  in  which  this  substance  or  these  substances1  exist;  that 
is,  it  belongs  to  the  determinations  of  substance. 

§  3.  The  Argument  of  the  Second  Edition 

I.  All  appearances  are  in  time,  and  it  is  only  in  time  as 
a  substratum2  (or  as  a  permanent  form  of  inner  intuition)  that 
objective3  succession   and    simultaneity  of  appearances  can 
be  known.4 

II.  Therefore  time  (in  which  we  have  to  think  all  objective 
succession  and  simultaneity  of  appearances)  abides  and  docs 
not  change;  because  we  can  know  objective  succession  and 
simultaneity  only  as  determinations  of  time.5 

III.  Time  itself  cannot  be  perceived. 

IV.  Therefore  there  must  be  found  in  the  objects  of  sense- 
perception  (that  is,  in  appearances  as  appearances  of  an  object) 
the  permanent6  as  a  substratum  which  represents7  time.  All 

1  Kant  ought  to  have  explained  how  there  must  be  many  substances. 
The  reason  is  that  substances  fill  space,  and  that  every  part  of  a 
substance  is  a  substance,  just  as  every  part  of  space  is  a  space    See 
Chapter  XLII  §  7. 

2  Here  again  we  should  like  to  know  whether  'substratum*  means 
more  than  'condition*  or  'ground'.  Compare  A  30  =  B  46.  To  say  that 
appearances  are  simultaneous  is  to  say  they  are  in  the  same  time  (or 
part  of  time);  and  to  say  they  are  successive  is  to  say  they  are  in 
different  times  (or  parts  of  time). 

3  I  have  introduced  the  word  'objective*. 

4  B  224.  I  translate  'represented*  (vorgestellf)  as  'known*. 

6  It  is  typical  of  Kant  to  introduce  a  statement  with  a  'therefore* 
and  follow  it  up  with  a  'because*,  confusing  us  with  a  superabundance 
of  reasons.  The  'because*  would  seem  intended  only  to  repeat  the 
reason  given  in  I  above,  but  it  adds  that  simultaneity  and  succession 
are  determinations  of  time,  presumably  on  the  ground,  and  in  the 
sense,  that  they  cannot  be  apart  from  time  (as  their  substratum  or 
condition  or  ground). 

The  bold  statement  that  'time  abides  and  does  not  change*  seems  to 
go  even  further  than  the  first  edition  in  ascribing  permanence  to  time. 

0  Kant  omits  to  say  that  this  substratum  is  the  permanent  until  two 
sentences  later — he  supposes  we  are  intelligent  enough  to  infer  this 
from  what  has  gone  before. 

7  'represents*  (vorstellt)  corresponds  to  'expresses*   (ausdruckt)  in 
A  183  -=  6226. 


XLI  §  3]  THE  FIRST  ANALOGY  191 

change  and  simultaneity  must  be  capable  of  being  perceived 
or  apprehended1  only  through  the  relation  of  appearances 
to  this  permanent.2 

V.  The  permanent  substratum  of  appearances  (or  of  the 
real3)  is  substance,  and  appearances  (as  appearances  of  objects) 
can  be  thought  only  as  determinations  of  substance.  In  other 
words,  the  permanent  by  reference  to  which  alone  can  the 
objective    time-relations    of    appearances    be    determined    is 
substantia  phaenomenon    (substance    in    the    appearances).    It 
remains  always  the  same  and  is  the  substratum  of  all  change. 

VI.  Since    phenomenal    substance    cannot    change    in    its 
existence,  its  quantum  in  nature  can  neither  be  increased  nor 
diminished.4 

1  'apprehended',  as  usual,  is  to  be  taken  in  the  technical  sense  in 
which  it  is  connected  with  sense-perception  and  involves  a  synthesis 
of  the  successively  given. 

2  This  clause  corresponds  roughly  to  I  in  the  argument  of  the  first 
edition. 

3  The  real  is  what  fills  time  or  the  time-content  (realttas  phaeno- 
menon); see  A  143    -  B  183,  A  145  =  B  184,  A  168  —  B  209.    It  is 
here  described  as  'what  belongs  to  existence',  for  to  exist  is  to  be  in 
time  or  to  have  a  determinate  position  in  time.  Its  duration  is  the 
quantity  of  its  existence,  which  is  to  be  distinguished  from  its  intensive 
quantity  (or  degree  of  reality).  It  can,  I  think,  be  identified  with  the 
changing  appearances  of  which  substance  is  the  substratum,   as  is 
implied   by  the  statement  above,   although   Kant  in  the  following 
sentence  speaks  of  substance  itself  as  the  real  of  appearances,  thereby 
identifying   substantia  phaenomenon   and   reahtas  phaenomenon     The 
real  may  cover  substance  as  well  as  the  accidents  of  substance,  but  it 
cannot  be  substance  as  opposed  to  its  accidents. 

4  It  should  be  noted  that  although  there  arc  six  stages  in  the  argu- 
ment of  both  first  and  second  editions,  they  do  not  exactly  correspond ; 
foi  I  in  the  first  argument  has  no  corresponding  stage  in  the  second 
argument,   and  VI   in  the  second  argument  has  no  corresponding 
stage  in  the  first  argument.  The  series  II,  III,  IV,  V,  and  VI  of  the 
first  argument  corresponds  very  roughly  with  the  series  I,   II,  III, 
IV,  and  V  of  the  second  argument.  The  correspondence  is  closer  in 
the  last  three  numbers  of  these  series  than  in  the  first  two. 


CHAPTER    XLII 
SUBSTANCE 

§  i .  In  what  Sense  is  Apprehension  Successive  ? 

The  main  differences  in  Kant's  two  proofs  of  substance 
are  to  be  found  in  the  earlier  stages.  The  argument  of  the 
second  edition  starts  from  the  permanence  of  time  as  the  con- 
dition of  determining  succession  and  simultaneity:  the  argu- 
ment of  the  first  edition  maintains  first  that  the  permaneni 
is  the  condition  of  determining  succession  and  simultaneity, 
and  then  connects  permanence  with  the  nature  of  time.  Both 
proofs  maintain  that  because  time  (with  such  permanence 
as  it  may  possess)  cannot  be  perceived,  the  permanent  which 
is  necessary  in  order  to  determine  time-relations  must  be 
found  in  objects  or  appearances  as  their  substratum  or  sub- 
stance. 

Hie  main  peculiarity1  of  the  first  edition  is  Kant's  assertior 
that  apprehension  is  always  successive;  and  it  is  from  thij 
that  he  infers  the  necessity  of  a  permanent  (as  the  condition  o 
determining  objective  succession  and  simultaneity)  before  h< 
connects  this  permanent  either  with  the  nature  of  time  or  wit! 
the  substratum  of  appearances. 

Our  apprehension — that  is,  the  taking  up  and  holding  to 
gether  of  the  given  in  sensation — is  obviously  successive 
in  the  sense  that  it  takes  time;  but  Kant  has  been  thought  t< 
mean2  that  our  apprehension  is  merely  successive,  or  tha 

1  In  B  XXXVII  Kant  says  expressly  that  he  found  nothing  whicl 
required  alteration  in  his  proofs ,  but  any  argument  which  is  not  use* 
in  the  second  edition  can  scarcely  be  legarded  as  essential  to  th 
proof 

2  This  view  is  expressed  most  clearly  in  Ewing,  Kant's  Treatmct 
of  Causality,  see  especially  pp.  82  if.  and   105  ff.  Ewing  holds  thi 
'Kant   confused   the   true   statement   that   our   experience   is   alway 
successive  with  the  false   statement  that  our  experience   is   merel 
successive*.  He  takes  'merely  successive*  to  mean  that  experience  ca 
in  itself  give  us  no  glimpse  of  the  coexistent. 


XLII  §  i]  SUBSTANCE  193 

we  can  never  apprehend  different  things  at  the  same  time. 
I  am  very  reluctant  to  accept  such  a  view,  not  only  because 
it  is  manifestly  at  variance  with  common  sense,  but  also  because 
it  seems  inconsistent  with  Kant's  most  central  doctrines.  The 
mere  fact  that  apprehension  is  a  synthesis  of  the  manifold 
means  that  it  is  a  holding  together  of  different  elements  in  one 
moment  before  the  mind,  and  Kant  himself  makes  it  clear  that 
all  analysis  presupposes  such  a  synthesis.  He  does,  however, 
hold  that  as  contained  in  one  moment — which  is  of  course 
a  mere  abstraction — an  idea  can  be  nothing  but  absolute  unity, 
and  this  means  at  least  that  it  has  no  extension  either  in  time 
or  in  space.1  He  maintains  also  that  we  cannot  know  a  line, 
however  small,  without  drawing  it  in  thought,  a  process  which 
he  regards  as  definitely  successive,  however  short  be  the  time 
which  it  requires.2  He  might  therefore  believe  that  although 
we  can  in  one  moment  hold  together  different  elements  before 
our  mind,  yet  in  so  far  as  apprehension  is  reduced  theoretically 
to  a  mere  taking  up  (as  opposed  to  a  holding  together)  of  the 
given,  it  is  a  taking  up  of  what  is  one  and  indivisible;  for 
example,  that  in  an  abstract  moment  of  time  we  can  'take  up' 
only  an  abstract  point  of  space. 

It  is  difficult  to  be  sure  of  the  precise  meaning  intended 
to  be  conveyed  by  such  a  doctrine,  but  Kant  is  quite  certainly 
dealing  with  abstractions  which  are  the  product  of  analysis. 
He  does  not  believe  that  any  part  of  an  appearance  can  be  given 
to  us  in  a  moment  of  time.  On  the  contrary,  he  maintains  that 
every  part  of  an  appearance  is  apprehended  in  a  part,  and  not 
in  a  moment,  of  time;3  and  he  argues  that  every  part  of  an 
appearance  must  be  infinitely  divisible,  since  the  part  of  time 
in  which  it  is  apprehended  must  be  infinitely  divisible. 
Because  it  takes  some  time  to  apprehend  any  part  of  an 
appearance,  therefore  it  must  be  possible  to  'go  through' 

1  A  99.  Even  in  this  case  he  admits  that  what  is  apprehended  has  a 
degree,  in  which  plurality  is  represented  by  approximation  to  zero. 
See  A  168  =  6210. 

2  A  162  -  B  203.  Compare  B  154  and  Chapter  XXXVII  §  4. 

3  A  moment  is  not  a  part,  but  a  limit,  of  time. 

VOL.  II  G 


194  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE        [XLII  §  i 

or  'expose11  successively  any  part  of  an  appearance,  however 
small  it  may  be;  and  an  appearance  cannot  be  made  up  of 
simple  parts,  any  more  than  time  can  be  made  up  of 
moments  or  space  of  points.2 

Kant  must  not  be  supposed  to  mean  that  in  each  moment 
of  time  we  apprehend  a  simple  indivisible  appearance,  and 
then  join  together  these  simple  indivisible  appearances  into  a 
complex  appearance  or  sensum.3  He  is  considering  only  ideal 
limits,  and  I  see  little  or  no  ground  for  believing  that  he  re- 
garded apprehension  as  merely  successive  in  this  sense.  Such 
a  view  fails  to  recognise  that  for  Kant  an  indeterminate  quan- 
tum or  whole  can  be  intuited  without  successive  synthesis.4 
In  the  case  of  substance  I  am  not  sure  whether  Kant  means 
more  than  that  the  different  accidents  of  a  substance  must 
be  successively  apprehended;5  and  this  is  manifestly  true.  We 
cannot  'take  up'  all  the  accidents  of  a  substance  simultaneously. 

If  we  take  his  statements  to  mean  that  apprehension  is 
merely  successive,  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  his  doctrine 
is  false.  Even  apart  from  the  amount  of  space  occupied  by 
a  momentary  sensation,  I  can  at  the  same  time  feel  a  twinge 
of  pain,  hear  the  barking  of  a  dog  a  quarter  of  a  mile  away, 
and  see  the  shining  of  a  star  which  has  been  extinguished  for 
a  million  years.  No  doubt  all  these  processes  take  time,  but 
they  occur  together;  and  a  cross-section  of  them,  such  as  is 
present  in  an  atomic  now,  would  contain  elements  of  all  three. 
It  would  be  impossible  to  regard  such  a  cross-section  as  an 
absolute  unity,  if  by  that  is  meant  a  unity  which  contains 
no  differences. 

The  point  I  wish  to  emphasise,  however,  is  that  this  error — 

1  To  'go  through*  (durchgehen)  is  here  equivalent  to  'expose'  or 
'set  out*  (expomeren).   For  the  widest  sense  of  the  'exposition'  of 
appearances,  see  A  416  =  B  443. 

2  For  the  whole  argument,  see  Metaphysik,  pp.  55-6. 

3  To  maintain  this  Kant  would  have  to  maintain  that  time  was  made 
up  of  moments — a  doctrine  he  consistently  denies. 

4  See  A  426  n.  ~—  B  454  n. 

6  It  may  be  added  that  so  far  as  anything  is  a  determinate  quantum, 
its  parts  must  be  successively  apprehended. 


XLII  §  2]  SUBSTANCE  195 

even  if  we  were  justified  in  attributing  it  to  Kant — does  not 
affect  his  argument :  firstly  because  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
many  things  which  we  apprehend  successively  (for  example 
the  sides  of  a  house)  are  believed  to  be  coexistent,  and  this 
admission  is  all  that  Kant  requires:  and  secondly  because 
we  can  never  determine  objective  simultaneity  merely  from  the 
simultaneity  of  our  sensations.  In  the  example  above,  although 
the  sensations  are  simultaneous,  the  objective  events  are  not; 
for  the  dog  may  have  barked  a  little  before  my  pain,  and  the 
star  shone  ages  before  the  dog  was  born.  Even  when  the 
events  perceived  are  simultaneous,  we  cannot  determine  this 
by  mere  sensation  apart  from  thought.  Kant  is  quite  right 
in  saying  that  by  mere  sensation  or  mere  apprehension  we  can 
determine  neither  objective  simultaneity  nor  objective  succession . 
The  special  conditions  or  presuppositions  necessary  for 
determining  objective  succession  are  dealt  with  in  the  Second 
Analogy;  those  for  determining  objective  simultaneity  are 
dealt  with  in  the  Third  Analogy.  Kant  is  at  present  concerned 
with  something  more  general,  the  ultimate  condition  of  de- 
termining any  kind  of  objective  time-relation  (whether  of 
succession  or  of  simultaneity).  This  general  condition  he 
asserts  to  be  the  permanent. 

§  2.  The  Permanent  and  Time-determination 

It  is  obvious  that  the  position  of  any  appearance  in  time 
cannot  be  determined  merely  by  reference  to  the  permanent; 
for  just  because  the  permanent  is  permanent,  because  it  is  the 
same  at  all  times,1  there  is  nothing  in  it  to  indicate  any  difference 
in  temporal  position.  Kant  himself  holds  that  differences  in 
temporal  position  are  determined  by  the  relations  of  appear- 
ances to  one  another  (before  and  after  and  along  with),  these 
relations  being  objective  when  they  are  necessary,  that  is, 
determined  by  causal  law.  What  he  is  arguing  at  present 

1  We  shall  find  later  (see  §  8  below)  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the 
permanent  alone  can  change.  I  do  not  think  that  this  affects  my  point ; 
and  it  may  be  observed  that  Kant  refers  to  substance  as  the  unchanging 
(das  Unwandelbare  im  Dasein)\  see  A  143  =  B  183. 


ig6  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §  2 

is  that  apart  from  the  permanent  we  could  never  experience 
such  relations.  The  permanent  is,  as  it  were,  the  background 
against  which  we  are  aware  of  temporal  relations. 

In  everyday  experience  we  are  aware  of  change  against 
a  background  of  the  relatively  permanent.  To  take  the  simplest 
(and  according  to  Kant  the  most  fundamental)  case,  that  of 
movement,  we  are  aware  that  the  sun  is  moving  in  relation 
to  objects  on  the  earth.1  Hence  the  obvious  objection  may 
be  raised  that  for  the  perception  of  movement  we  require 
something  relatively,  not  absolutely,  permanent;  and  some 
commentators,2  supposing  Kant  to  be  concerned  with  the 
question  of  measuring  durations,  point  out  that  our  measure- 
ments depend,  not  on  the  permanent  or  unchanging,  but  on 
the  supposedly  uniform  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 

The  question  of  how  we  measure  durations  seems  to  me 
irrelevant.  Kant  is  asking  how  there  can  be  any  durations  for 
us  to  measure,  how  we  can  be  aware  of  changes  which  involve 
objective  succession  and  simultaneity;  and  I  see  no  reason  for 
attributing  to  him  the  view  that  changes  are  measured  by  the 
unchanging  and  not  by  their  relations  to  one  another.  Indeed 
it  would  surely  be  impossible  to  measure  a  change  by  its 
relation  to  the  unchanging.  The  question  is  simply  how  we 
can  perceive  change  at  all. 

Kant  is  perfectly  well  aware  that  objects  on  the  earth  are 
themselves  moving;3  and  his  statement  about  the  movement 
of  the  sun  4  is  meant  only  as  a  pictorial  and  popular  illustration 
of  his  doctrine,  from  which  he  passes  to  the  assertion  that  the 
permanent  of  which  he  speaks  can  be  found  only  in  matter. 
Another  illustration  is  given  in  his  lectures  on  Metaphysics,5 
where  he  says  that  a  sailor  could  never  be  aware  of  the  ship's 
motion,  if  the  sea  were  moving  along  with  it,  unless  there  were 
something  permanent,  as  for  example  an  island,  in  relation 

1  See  B  277-8.  2  E.g.  Paulsen,  Immanuel  Kant,  p.  182. 

3  In  a  similar  context  Kant  points  out  expressly  that  we  can  have 
no  experience  of  absolute  rest  or  absolute  motion.  See  M.A.d  N. 
i.  Hauptstutk  (IV  487-8),  where  the  point  is  worked  out  in  detail, 
and  compare  4.  Hauptstucky  Allgemeine  Anmerkung  fur  Phanome- 
nologie  (IV  559).  4  B  277-8.  6  p.  37. 


XLII  §2]  SUBSTANCE  197 

to  which  the  ship's  motion  could  be  observed.  He  there  states 
expressly  that  this  is  to  be  taken  only  as  a  crude  comparison. 

It  is,  however,  much  easier  to  be  sure  of  what  he  does  not 
mean  than  of  what  he  does  mean.  The  permanent  of  which 
he  speaks  is  the  quantity  of  matter,  and  he  certainly  believes 
— as  I  imagine  was  believed  generally  at  the  time — that  apart 
from  the  conservation  of  matter  physics  is  impossible.1  But 
it  is  not  enough  to  say  that  the  permanent  in  this  sense  is 
a  necessary  presupposition  of  physics.  Kant  is  arguing  that 
it  is  a  necessary  presupposition  of  our  experience  of  change; 
yet  no  one  could  maintain  that  we  are  directly  aware  of  a 
constant  amount  of  matter  in  all  our  perception  of  change. 
What  Kant  seems  to  hold  is  that  our  perception  of  change 
presupposes  something  permanent,  although  only  by  experience 
can  we  discover  what  that  something  permanent  is.2  The 
relatively  permanent  as  against  which  we  do  perceive  change 
is  at  first  taken  to  be  the  absolutely  permanent,  but  it  fails 
to  withstand  scientific  criticism.  With  the  advance  of  know- 
ledge we  are  compelled  to  substitute  something  more  satis- 
factory, such  as  mass  or  energy.  But  unless  we  presuppose 
something  absolutely  permanent,  the  unity  of  experience 
would  be  impossible.3 

On  this  point  at  least — whatever  be  his  justification  for  it — 
Kant  is  perfectly  clear.  The  coming  into  being  of  some  sub- 
stances and  the  passing  away  of  others  wrould  destroy  the  one 
condition  of  the  empirical  unity  of  time.4  It  would  mean  that 

1  See  Metaphysik,  p.  34. 

2  Just  as  our  perception  of  an  event  presupposes  a  cause,  although 
only  by  experience  can  we  determine  what  that  cause  is. 

3  Similarly  experience  always  presupposes  causality,  though  our 
empirical  determination  of  actual  causes  may  be  imperfect. 

4  A  1 88  —  B  231-2.  This  I  take  to  be  the  unity  of  the  time  in 
which  the  world  is  actually  experienced.  The  same  point  is  made 
also,  even  more  forcibly  in  A  186  =  B  229.  If  new  substances  were 
to  come  into  being — and  the  same  principle  holds  if  existent  substances 
were  to  disappear — the  unity  of  experience,  the  unity  of  time,  and  the 
unity  of  change  would  be  gone.   Kant's  doctrine  is  fundamentally 
opposed  to  the  Cartesian  doctrine  that  all  conservation  is  creation, 
that  in  every  moment  the  world  is  created  afresh. 


i98  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §  2 

appearances  were  related  to  two  different  and  unconnected 
times  in  which  existence  flowed  as  it  were  in  parallel  streams  l 
— which  is  nonsense.  But  there  is  only  one  time  in  which  all 
different  times  must  be  placed,  not  as  coexistent,  but  as  succes- 
sive.2 This  argument  is  the  one  which  becomes  predominant 
in  the  second  edition,  and  we  are,  I  think,  entitled  to  regard 
it  as  the  primary  ground  of  Kant's  theory.  Indeed,  since  all  the 
Principles  are  supposed  to  rest  on  the  nature  of  time,  the  proof 
of  permanence  must  find  its  basis  in  the  nature  of  time. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  important  to  observe,  both  here  and 
throughout  the  Analogies,  that  if  Kant  follows  his  theory 
consistently,  he  cannot  argue  directly  from  the  nature  of  time 
(or  space)  to  the  nature  of  what  is  in  time  (or  space).  He  must 
on  the  contrary  argue  indirectly,  that  is,  he  must  argue  from 
the  relation  of  time  (or  space)  to  possible  experience,3  and  so 
must  endeavour  to  establish  the  conditions  of  experience.4 

We  may  put  this  point  in  a  different  way.  The  time  with 
which  Kant  is  concerned,  since  it  is  a  condition  of  experience, 
is  the  one  time  in  which  all  objective  time-determinations  are. 
All  objective  time-determinations,  whether  of  succession  or 
simultaneity,  must  be  found  in  an  object,  that  is,  must  be 
constituted  by  referring  appearances  to  an  object  in  which  they 
are  related ;  and  only  so  can  they  be  distinguished  from  merely 
subjective  or  imaginary  time-relations.  Since  time  itself  cannot 
be  perceived,  experience  requires  a  permanent  object  and 
ultimately  one  permanent  substratum  for  the  whole  objective 
and  phenomenal  world.5 

1  'neben  emander',  side  by  side. 

2  A  188-9  =  6231-2.  Kant  is,  I  think,  assuming  that  since  absolute 
time  cannot  be  perceived,  there  can  be  for  us  one  time  only  if  there  is 
one  permanent  substance  (or  set  of  substances)  in  time. 

3  Compare  A  184  -=  B  227-8,  and  A  736-7  =  B  764-5.  If  he  fails 
to  do  this,  his  proof  is  'dogmatic'  and  to  be  rejected. 

4  Naturally  enough,   Kant  does  not  make  this  point  explicit  in 
every  sentence,  but  we  must  not  attribute  to  him  a  direct  or  dogmatic 
argument  when  he  leaves  it  to  us  to  fill  in  the  necessary  qualifications. 

6  This  argument,  stated  here  in  a  summary  manner,  is  to  be  dis- 
tinguished from  a  dogmatic  argument  which  simply  asserts  that  change 
is  a  succession  in  the  states  of  a  substratum. 


XLII  §  3]  SUBSTANCE  199 

§  3.  The  Permanence  of  Time 

We  get  into  new  difficulties  when  we  attempt  to  argue  from 
the  permanence  of  time.  It  is  no  easier  to  regard  time  as  per- 
manent than  to  regard  it  as  successive — if  we  suppose  time 
to  endure,  must  there  not  be  another  time  through  which 
it  endures  ?  Nevertheless  Kant  is  right  in  maintaining  that  the 
time  in  which  events  occur  must  be  a  unity.  We  must  be  able 
to  determine  the  position  of  all  events  in  relation  to  one  another 
in  one  and  the  same  time,  and  this  means  that  we  must  be  able 
to  hold  successive  parts  of  time  before  us  in  one  time.  Kant's 
ascription  of  permanence  to  time  seems  to  mean  no  more  than 
this.  Furthermore,  we  cannot  regard  existence  as  an  indivisible 
point  between  a  non-existent  past  and  a  non-existent  future.1 
Existence  must  have  quantity  or  duration  in  time,  if  experience 
is  to  be  possible;  but  once  we  admit  any  duration  at  all,  it 
seems  difficult  to  deny  a  continuous  and  permanent  duration.2 

Kant,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  believed  that  permanent  sub- 
stances are  to  be  found  only  in  space.3  No  permanent  object 
is  given  to  us  in  inner  sense,  and  for  this  reason  he  rejects 
all  attempts  to  prove  that  the  soul  is  a  substance.  It  would 
therefore  seem  more  satisfactory  to  rest  the  proof  of  substance 
on  the  nature  of  space.  Space  is  permanent  amid  all  the  changes 
in  time;  and  permanent  substance,  on  Kant's  view,  might 
be  regarded  as  necessary  to  'represent'  or  'express'  the  perma- 
nence of  a  space  which,  like  time,  cannot  be  perceived.4  Some- 
thing like  this  view  is  expressed  in  the  Metaphysische  Anfangs- 
grunde  der  Naturwissenschaft?  and  Kant's  notes  on  his  own 

1  Dr.  Broad  even  goes  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  the  past  is  'real*. 
See  Scientific  Thought,  p.  66. 

2  I  suppose  the  modern  doctrine  avoids  this  by  taking  events  as 
ultimate,  but  I  think  Kant  would  want  to  carry  further  the  analysis  of 
an  event. 

3  This  view  is  already  present  in  the  first  edition,  e.g.  in  A  349-50. 

4  The  space  and  time  which  cannot  be  perceived  are  the  absolute 
space  and  time  in  which  all  things  are,  not  the  relative  spaces  and 
times  which  we  are  immediately  aware  of  through  sensation.  Compare 
M.A.d.N.  (IV  481). 

6  Compare  e.g.  (IV  503)  and  §  7  below. 


200  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §  3 

copy  of  the  first  edition  of  the  Kritik  I  show  that  at  one  time 
he  intended  to  re- write  the  argument  in  terms  of  space  (or  of 
space  and  time).  Such  re-writing  could  not  be  confined  to  the 
First  Analogy — it  obviously  demands,  for  instance,  a  re-writing 
of  the  chapter  on  the  schematism  of  the  categories.  Perhaps 
for  this  reason  Kant  changed  his  mind,  and  made  the  proof 
of  the  second  edition  rest,  even  more  than  that  of  the  first, 
on  the  permanence  of  time.  Nevertheless  he  indicates  that  the 
proof  ought  to  bring  in  space  as  the  permanent  in  time;  for 
he  takes  our  breath  away  by  a  later  assertion  that  space  alone 
is  permanently  determined,  while  time,  and  therefore  every- 
thing in  inner  sense,  is  in  constant  flux  !2 

To  bring  in  space  would  make  the  proof  of  substance  more 
complicated,  but  I  think  also  more  plausible.  We  must  be  able 
to  hold  time  together  as  a  unity,  if  we  are  to  be  aware  of  space 
as  permanent  through  time3 — to  state  this  is  to  state  a  necessary 
condition  of  human  experience.  And  Kant's  argument  might 
be  that  since  we  can  perceive  neither  absolute  space  nor  abso- 
lute time,  there  must  be  a  permanent  in  the  spatial  objects 
of  experience  to  'represent'  or  'express'  the  permanence 
of  space  in  time. 

It  may  be  thought  that  on  idealist  principles  we  require 
no  more  for  Kant's  purpose  than  a  permanent  knowing  self. 
This  might  perhaps  explain  our  knowledge  of  the  succession 
of  our  own  ideas,  though  I  doubt  whether  it  could  explain  our 
knowledge  of  the  world  of  spatial  objects  enduring  through 
an  infinite  time.  But  for  Kant  the  history  of  the  individual 
mind  is  only  a  succession  of  appearances  among  other  known 
successions,  and  we  could  not  be  aware  even  of  our  own  mental 
history  except  against  a  background  of  the  permanent  in 
space.4  There  is  nothing  permanent  in  the  empirical  self 

1  See  Erdmann,  Nachtrage  LXXVII-LXXXIV,  especially  LXXX. 
'Here  the  proof  must  be  so  expressed  that  it  applies  only  to  substances 
as  phenomena  of  outer  sense.  Hence  it  must  be  derived  from  space 
which  (with  its  determinations)  is  at  every  time.' 

2  B  291 ;  contrast  A  143  —  B  183  and  B  224-5. 

8  Or  to  experience  objects  in  a  space  which  must  be  the  same  at 
all  times.  4  See  B  275  ff. 


XLII  §  4]  SUBSTANCE  201 

as  it  is  known  through  inner  sense ;  and  to  suppose  that  we  can 
pass  from  the  unity  of  apperception  to  the  knowledge  that 
the  soul  is  a  permanent  substance — this,  according  to  Kant, 
is  nothing  but  a  paralogism  of  reason.  The  permanent  which 
is  the  condition  of  our  experience  is  to  be  found  in  objects 
of  outer  sense  and  in  them  alone.1 

§  4.  Substratum  and  Substance 

Kant's  argument  amounts  to  this — that  since  time  (or 
space)  is  permanent,  there  must  be  something  permanent 
given  in  experience  to  represent  or  express  an  unperceivable 
time  (or  space).  The  argument  from  time  by  itself  has  the 
disadvantage  that  we  can  decide  only  empirically  whether  the 
given  permanent  is  to  be  found  in  objects  of  inner  or  outer 
sense.  If  we  argued,  as  I  have  suggested,  from  the  permanence 
of  space  in  time,2  we  might  perhaps  reasonably  infer  that  the 
permanent  is  to  be  found  only  in  objects  of  outer  sense,  which 
occupy  space  and  last  through  time. 

Even  if  we  admit  the  validity  of  this  argument  for  the 
permanent,  it  may  be  objected  that  the  permanent  need  not 
be  the  substratum  of  appearances:  all  that  we  require  is  a 
permanent  appearance  among  the  changing  appearances.  If 
Kant  means  more  than  this — and  surely  he  does  mean  more 
than  this — what  is  his  justification  for  saying  that  the  per- 
manent must  be  in  objects  or  appearances  as  their  substratum  ? 

This  seems  to  me  the  most  difficult  point  in  the  whole 
of  Kant's  argument.  In  the  first  edition  he  asserts  straight 
away  that  if  we  can  determine  objective  succession  and  simul- 
taneity only  by  relation  to  the  permanent,  succession  and 
simultaneity  must  be  ways  in  which  the  permanent  exists, 
and  that  the  permanent  must  be  the  substratum  of  the  empirical 

1  See  the  Paralogisms  of  Pure  Reason,  A  341  =  B  399  ff.,  and  also 
the  Refutation  of  Idealism. 

2  This  seems  to  me  the  correct  presupposition  of  Kant's  argument. 
By  appealing  to  the  permanence  of  space  we  do  not  do  away  with  the 
reference  to  time,   nor  do  we  eliminate  the  necessity  for  holding 
successive  times  together  in  the  unity  of  one  time. 

VOL.   II  G* 


202  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §  4 

idea  of  time.1  In  the  second  edition  he  takes  time  as  the  sub- 
stratum of  succession  and  simultaneity,2  and  he  seems  to  imply 
that  the  permanent,  as  representing  or  expressing  time,  must 
therefore  be  the  substratum  of  successive  and  simultaneous 
appearances.3  It  is  for  this  reason  that  he  calls  it  substance, 
and  asserts  that  the  real  (that  is,  the  given  appearances)  can 
be  thought  only  as  its  determinations. 

In  all  this  one  thing  at  least  is  clear.  Kant  is  not  arguing 
from  the  pure  category  (or  the  form  of  categorical  judgement) 
that  the  permanent  must  be  the  subject  of  all  predicates  and 
therefore  the  substratum  of  all  change.  He  is  arguing,  on  the 
contrary,  that  because  the  permanent  is  the  substratum  of  all 
change,  therefore  it  is  (in  the  world  of  phenomena)  the  ulti- 
mate subject  of  all  predicates.4  If  this  interpretation  is  sound, 
his  argument  for  a  permanent  substratum  of  change  is  inde- 
pendent of  the  derivation  of  the  categories  from  the  forms 
of  judgement,  although  he  doubtless  thinks  that  when  sub- 
stance is  described  as  the  ultimate  subject  of  predicates, 
something  is  added  to  the  view  that  it  is  the  permanent  sub- 
stratum of  change. 

About  this  problem  it  is  very  easy  to  talk  nonsense,  but  Kant 
seems  to  believe  that  in  order  to  represent  the  unity  of  time 
(or  the  permanence  of  space  in  time)  we  require  more  than  the 
continuous  ceasing  to  be  and  coming  into  existence  of  a  quali- 
tatively identical  appearance.  We  require  something  which 
neither  comes  into  existence  nor  ceases  to  be.  Coming  into 
existence  and  ceasing  to  be,  or  in  one  wrord  change,  is  nothing 
other  than  a  way  in  which  the  permanent  exists,  and  the 
permanent  is  not  merely  one  among  many  appearances,  but 
is  the  substratum  of  all  appearances. 

1  A  182-3  =  B  22  5-6. 

2  B  224.  Substratum  in  this  sense  is  equated  with  the  permanent 
form  (or  condition)  of  inner  intuition ;  compare  also  A  30  --  B  46. 

3  It  should,  however,  be  observed  that  simultaneity  and  succession 
are  not  related  to  time  as  accidents  are  to  a  substance;  for  they  are 
not  'modes  of  time  itself. 

4  That  is  to  say,  he  is  arguing,  as  we  should  expect,  from  the  schema 
to  the  category. 


XLII  §  4]  SUBSTANCE  203 

This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  general  account  given  of 
substance.  Kant  distinguishes  sharply  between  a  substance  and 
its  accidents.  The  latter  are  only  ways  in  which  substance 
exists,1  or  ways  in  which  the  existence  of  a  substance  is  posi- 
tively determined.2  We  do  indeed  distinguish  the  existence 
of  the  accidents  as  inherence  from  the  existence  of  the  sub- 
stance (which  is  subsistence)'?  but  this  is  only  a  method — and 
a  rather  misleading  method — of  asserting  that  the  accidents  are 
the  ways  in  which  substance  exists.  Kant  says  it  is  inevitable 
that  if  we  distinguish  inherence  and  subsistence,  we  shall  come 
to  think  of  the  substance  as  existing  apart  from  its  accidents, 
and  the  accidents  as  existing  apart  from  the  substance.  The 
whole  history  of  the  doctrine  of  substance  bears  out  the  truth 
of  this  assertion,  and  he  rightly  rejects  such  a  view  as  turning 
a  logical  distinction  into  a  real  separation.4  He  is  always  clear 
that  we  know  a  substance  only  through  its  accidents,  just 
as  it  is  the  condition  of  human  knowledge  that  we  know  a 
subject  only  through  its  predicates.5 

If  a  substance  is  known  only  through  its  accidents,  it  cannot 
be  merely  one  appearance  among  others  and  distinguished 
from  them  solely  by  the  fact  that  it  is  unchanging  or  perma- 
nent. Such  permanence,  I  take  it,  would  in  any  case  be  for  Kant 

1  A  186  =r.  6229. 

2  A  187  =  B  230.  Even  negations  are  determinations  of  substance — 
they  express  the  not-being  of  something  in  substance,  not  the  not- 
being  of  substance  itself.  See  A  186  =  B  229.  3  A  186  =  B  230. 

4  He  seems  even  to  deny  that  we  can  rightly  speak  of  a  relation 
between  substance  and  accident;  and  for  this  reason  he  maintains 
that  the  category  of  substance  and  accident  is  placed  under  the  head 
of  relation,  not  because  it  itself  is  a  concept  of  relation,  but  because 
it  is  the  condition  of  relations — that  is,  of  time-relations,  namely 
succession  and  simultaneity. 

6  See  Metaphysiki  p.  33.  In  this  place  he  approves  the  view,  which 
he  attributes  to  Locke,  that  substance  is  a  support  (Trager)  of  accidents, 
and  asserts  that  when  we  think  of  a  substance  as  existing  apart  from 
its  accidents,  we  think  of  something  quite  unknown.  He  calls  this 
'the  substantial'  (das  Substanxiale)  and  identifies  it  with  'something  in 
general'  (etwas  uberhaupt)  or,  in  other  words,  with  the  transcendental 
object  (when  that  is  regarded  as  other  than  the  unity  of  its  appearances). 
The  same  view  is  present  in  A  414  —  6441. 


204  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §  5 

only  the  continuous  ceasing  to  he  and  coming  into  existence 
of  a  qualitatively  identical  appearance;  and  this  would  not 
be  sufficient  for  his  theory.  Whatever  be  the  precise  meaning 
of  'substratum',  and  whatever  be  the  adequacy  of  the  Critical 
proof,  the  view  that  substance  is  the  permanent  substratum 
of  all  appearances  must  be  regarded  as  an  essential  part  of 
his  doctrine. 

§  5.  Can  Substance  be  Perceived? 

If  substance  is  the  permanent  substratum  of  appearances 
and  is  known  only  through  its  accidents,  we  are  faced  with 
a  further  difficulty.  How  can  we  know  that  substance  possesses 
a  permanence  which  its  accidents  do  not?  Is  the  permanence 
of  substance  something  which  cannot  be  perceived,  although 
it  has  to  be  presupposed  as  a  condition  of  our  experience 
of  objective  change?  Such  a  doctrine  would  be  very  peculiar; 
for  the  reason  why  the  permanent  had  to  be  presupposed 
as  the  substratum  of  appearances  was  that  time  itself  cannot 
be  perceived.  If  the  permanent  equally  cannot  be  perceived, 
what  are  we  to  make  of  Kant's  argument  ? 

It  seems  clear  enough  that  on  Kant's  view  we  must  be  able 
in  some  sense  to  perceive,  not  only  substance,  but  also  the 
permanence  of  substance ;  the  problem  is  to  determine  exactly 
what  that  sense  is.  The  permanence  of  substance  is  presupposed 
by  experience,  and  so  is  known  a  priori]  but  we  must  be  able 
to  find  the  permanent  in  actual  experience  and  to  discover 
examples  of  it  by  ordinary  observation.1 

That  permanence  can  in  some  sense  be  observed  is  stated 
or  implied  by  Kant  in  several  passages.  For  example,  he 
asserts  explicitly  that  the  permanence  of  matter  as  appearance 
can  be  observed.2  We  can  apparently  seek  for  permanence 

1  The  same  doctrine  holds  of  causality. 

2  A  366  This  is  implied  also  in  A  350.  Kant  also  implies  that  we  can 
find  by  outer  sense  a  permanent  appearance  (or  intuition)  in  space: 
see  A  364  and  B  412.  We  must  not,  however,  take  this  to  mean  that 
substance  is  only  one  (permanent)  appearance  among  many  other 
(changing)  appearances. 


XLII  §  5]  SUBSTANCE  205 

by  a  comparison  of  sense-perceptions,  though  this  is  not  the 
usual  method  for  determining  the  presence  of  substance,  nor 
could  it  be  carried  out  with  sufficient  completeness :  no  amount 
of  observation  can  establish  the  strict  universality  which 
belongs  to  an  a  priori  concept.1 

We  are  given  little  help  for  the  detailed  working  out  of  this 
problem,  but  manifestly  it  has  to  be  considered  from  the 
point  of  view  of  common  sense  and  of  science  as  well  as  from 
the  point  of  view  of  philosophy. 

It  is  always  difficult  to  describe  the  point  of  view  of  common 
sense  or  ordinary  experience;  for  the  plain  man  does  not 
make  his  presuppositions  explicit  to  himself,  but  simply  takes 
certain  things  for  granted.  We  all  observe  the  motion  of  the  sun 
in  relation  to  the  unmoving  earth,  the  motion  of  the  ship 
in  relation  to  the  unmoving  island,  and  so  on.  More  funda- 
mentally, we  all  take  it  for  granted  that  a  thing  remains  the 
same  while  its  qualities  change,  and  even  that  the  physical 
world  is  abiding  or  permanent  amid  its  changes. 

What  is  taken  to  be  permanent  may  vary  at  different  times 
and  for  different  purposes,  although  permanence  is  always 
assumed  and  also  to  some  extent  observed.  But  it  seems  not 
unreasonable  to  assert  that  what  is  taken  to  be  permanent 
is  in  general  what  fills  space,2  and  above  all  what  may  be 
described  as  the  solid.3  Observed  qualities  are  taken  to  be 
qualities  of  a  solid  which  fills  space,  and  even  to  occupy  an  area 
which  is  identical  with  the  surface  of  the  solid.4  The  perma- 
nence of  the  solid  is  partly  taken  for  granted  and  partly  revealed 
in  its  observed  qualities.  We  all  assume  that  a  chair  remains 

1  Compare  A  205  —  B  250-1.  The  example  of  the  weight  of  smoke 
in  A  185  =  B  228  at  least  suggests  that  we  could  find  empirical  con- 
firmation for  our  a  priori  presupposition. 

2  'To  fill  space*  is  'emen  Raum  erfitllen\  A  mathematical  triangle 
may  be  thought  to  occupy  space  (einnehmen),  but  not  to  fill  it.  See 
M.A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck  (IV  497). 

3  I  do  not  of  course  wish  to  suggest  that  for  common  sense  there  is 
nothing  permanent  in  water,  fire,  or  air;  but  the  solid  is  the  most 
typical  case. 

4  Compare  Price,  Perception,  p.  143.  This  view  cannot  be  maintained 
on  reflexion. 


206  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §  5 

the  same  when  we  are  out  of  the  room,  and  that  on  our  return 
we  see  the  same  chair  and  not  another  chair  with  precisely 
identical  qualities.  We  do  so  even  if  we  find  that  the  chair  has 
changed ;  for  example,  if  it  is  in  a  different  position  or  has  been 
broken. 

We  get  into  difficulties  only  when  we  begin  to  ask  what 
it  is  that  is  permanent ;  for  so  many  of  the  observed  qualities 
manifestly  are  not.  We  discover,  for  example,  that  there  is  no 
permanence  of  position:  our  geocentric  theory  of  astronomy 
must  be  given  up  in  favour  of  one  that  is  heliocentric,  and 
ultimately  in  favour  of  one  that  is  relativistic.  We  discover  also 
that  our  solid  bodies  are  lacking  in  the  permanence  which 
we  at  first  ascribe  to  them:  even  their  most  fundamental 
qualities  change,  and  we  try  to  find  permanence  in  something 
more  ultimate,  in  the  elements  of  which  they  are  composed, 
in  atoms,  in  mass  or  energy,  and  so  on.  This  is  the  work  of 
science,  but  the  principles  at  work  seem  to  be  still  those  which 
were  at  work  in  our  ordinary  experience.  Always  the  permanent 
seems  to  be  presupposed,  and  its  presence  is  at  least  partially 
confirmed  by  observation.  Further  knowledge  produces  fresh 
dissatisfaction,  and  our  view  of  what  is  permanent  has  to  be 
altered.  We  may  even  be  tempted  to  ascribe  permanence  to 
'a  supposed  I-know-not-what',  which  is  a  'support'  of  acci- 
dents;1 and  this  is  not  very  far  from  abandoning  the  idea  of 
permanent  substance  altogether. 

On  Kant's  view  we  must  necessarily  employ,  whether 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  the  concept  of  permanent 
substance  in  space;  for  otherwise  we  shall  destroy  the  unity 
of  time  and  the  unity  of  experience,  and  we  shall  be  incapable 
of  making  any  distinction  between  objective  change  and  a 
subjective  succession  of  ideas.  Permanent  substance  in  space 
he  appears  to  identify  with  mass — the  matter  of  the  time; 
but  we  must  distinguish  his  general  philosophical  principle 
from  its  special  application  at  a  particular  stage  in  the  develop- 
ment of  science.  There  would  be  nothing  inconsistent  with  his 
general  principle,  if  mass  should  turn  out  to  be  unsatisfactory, 
1  Compare  Locke,  Essay,  Book  II,  Chap.  XXIII,  sect.  15. 


XLII  §  6]  SUBSTANCE  207 

and  if  we  were  compelled  to  put  something  else,  for  example, 
energy,  in  its  place. 

On  this  interpretation  what  is  present  alike  in  common 
sense,  in  science,  and  in  the  Critical  Philosophy  is  the  pre- 
supposition that  there  must  be  a  permanent  in  space,  and  that 
this  permanent  is  essentially  what  fills  space:  its  presence 
in  space  is  thought  to  be  confirmed,  at  all  the  different  levels, 
by  actual  empirical  experience. 

How  do  we  know  this  permanent  which  fills  space?  We 
know  it,  as  we  know  everything  else,  by  the  co-operation  of 
thought  and  intuition.  In  all  experience  we  combine  or  syn- 
thetise  given  appearances  in  time  and  space  in  accordance  with 
certain  a  priori  concepts,  and  we  regard  these  appearances,  thus 
necessarily  combined,  as  appearances  of  a  permanent  spatial 
object.1  The  permanence  of  what  fills  space  is  always  pre- 
supposed; but  the  character  of  what  fills  space  is  revealed,  and 
its  permanence  verified,  most  conspicuously  in  our  observations 
of  impenetrability  or  resistance — not  only  impenetrability  to 
our  own  bodies,  but  also  impenetrability  to  other  bodies. 
These  observations  give  us  our  original  unscientific  conception 
of  solidity.  They  also  give  us,  especially  in  conjunction  with 
observations  of  weight,  the  conception  of  matter  (which  Kant 
himself  accepts)  as  that  which  fills  space  by  its  powers  of 
repulsion  and  attraction,  and  is  identified  in  a  special  sense 
with  'the  real'. 

§  6.  The  Quantum  of  Substance 

In  the  Kntik  of  Pure  Reason  Kant  is  not  entitled  to  take  into 
account  empirical  principles  derived  from  observation.2  All  he 
can  hope  to  prove  is  that  in  the  real  which  fills  space3  and  time 
there  must  be  a  permanent  substratum  of  change.  Any  attempt 

1  Causality  is  presupposed  as  well  as  substance,  but  this  must  be 
considered  later. 

2  Compare   the   opposition  between   'Transcendental  Philosophy 
and  'the  universal  science  of  nature'  in  A  171  ~  6213. 

3  The  argument  as  stated  by  Kant  cannot  be  said  to  justify  us  in 
ascribing  this  importance  to  space,  but  I  can  see  no  other  way  of 
giving  a  satisfactory  account  of  his  doctrine. 


208  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §  6 

to  discover  the  empirical  character  of  this  permanent  sub- 
stratum, or  to  identify  it  with  matter  or  mass  or  energy  as 
kno\\n  to  physical  science — any  such  attempt  belongs  to 
another  enquiry,  which  may  be  called  Rational  Physiology.1 

On  the  other  hand  if  we  eliminate  all  reference  to  physical 
matter,  his  doctrine  may  appear  to  be  empty  and  unimportant. 
Is  it  possible  for  us  to  determine  a  priori  any  assignable  char- 
acteristic of  the  permanent  which  is  the  substratum  of  change  ? 
Kant  appears  to  think  that  it  is  possible  to  do  so,  and  in  this 
way  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  vagueness ;  for  in  the  second 
edition  he  puts  fon\ard  a  more  precise  and  definite  statement 
of  his  meaning.2  He  asserts  that  the  quantum  of  substance 
in  nature  can  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished;  and  he 
regards  this  as  following  directly  from  the  fact  that  substance, 
as  the  permanent  substratum  of  all  change,  cannot  itself  change 
in  existence.3 

It  is  far  from  easy  to  estimate  the  value  of  such  a  contention. 
We  do  well  to  exhibit  caution  in  accepting  what  may  appear 
to  be  facile  claims  to  a  priori  knowledge,  and  such  caution 
is  fully  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  Kant  himself.4  Most 
commentators  are  inclined  to  dismiss  this  more  concrete 
assertion  as  an  unhappy  addition  to  Kant's  general  doctrine; 
and  they  may  be  right  in  so  doing.  Certainly  his  statement 
is  much  too  summary,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  further  elucida- 
tion or  expansion  it  is  perhaps  hazardous  to  offer  any  explana- 
tion or  defence. 

Nevertheless  I  have  come  to  feel  some  doubt  about  the 
usual  way  of  interpreting  this  passage,  and  I  am  no  longer 
so  sure  that  Kant  is  making  a  hurried  and  unjustifiable  leap 

1  Compare  A  845-6  ----  B  873-4  and  A  848  =  B  876. 

2  B  225    This  is  also  expressed  in  the  very  formula  of  the  Analogy 
itself  in  B  224. 

3  It  is  difficult  to  be  sure  of  the  significance  to  be  attached  to 
'existence'  in  this  connexion.  Substance  must  exist  at  all  times — sec 
A  185  =  B  228 — and  so  presumably  must  have  at  all  times  a  constant 
and  abiding  character,  however  much  its  accidents  may  change.  This 
constant  character,  so  far  as  it  can  be  known  a  priori,  can  only  be  its 
quantum.  4  Compare  A  175  =  B  217. 


XLII  §7]  SUBSTANCE  209 

to  the  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  mass  as  accepted  by  the 
science  of  his  time.  No  doubt  he  found  in  this  the  empirical 
embodiment  of  what  he  claimed  to  be  a  priori  knowledge;1 
but  his  alleged  a  priori  knowledge  ought  to  be  of  a  character 
so  general  that  different  embodiments  might  be  found  for 
it  as  science  continues  its  progress  by  its  own  empirical  methods. 
I  can  sec  nothing  in  Kant's  statement  which  justifies  us 
in  refusing  to  interpret  it  in  the  most  general  way  possible 
so  that  it  might  apply  to  any  empirical  reality,  whether  mass 
or  energy  or  anything  else,  which  science  may  discover  to  be 
permanent  in  space.  What  he  claims  is  that  there  must  be  a 
permanent  which  fills  space,  and  which  must  be  permanent 
in  respect  of  its  quantity.  I  have  no  wish  to  be  dogmatic  on 
this  question ;  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  if  we  can  know 
a  priori  that  the  real  in  space  is  permanent,  we  can  know  this 
only  in  respect  of  that  in  the  real  of  which  alone  we  have 
a  piiori  knowledge,  and  there  is  nothing  \vhatever  in  the  real 
of  which  we  have  a  priori  knowledge  except  its  quantity.2 
If  such  be  the  presupposition  of  Kant's  argument,  I  do  not 
say  that  his  argument  is  sound;  for  there  are  far  too  many 
pitfalls  in  the  \vay.  But  I  think  \\e  can  affirm  that  his  argument 
is  not  to  be  summarily  dismissed,  and  even  that  without  some 
addition  of  this  kind  his  general  doctrine  \vould  be  so  vague 
as  to  be  almost  useless. 

§  7.  Material  Substance 

If  \\e  are  to  understand  Kant's  theory  we  must  look  at  it 
in  its  concrete  form,  even  although  this  involves  an  empirical 
side  which,  strictly  speaking,  has  no  place  in  the  Kntik  of  Pure 
Reason.  He  identifies  substance  with  matter  as  known  to  the 
science  of  his  time,  and  finds  in  the  contemporary  doctrine 
of  the  conservation  of  matter  the  empirical  confirmation 
of  his  more  general  principle  that  the  quantum  of  substance 
in  nature  can  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished. 

1  This  is  evident  even  in  the  first  edition ;  see  A  185  =  B  228. 

2  Compare  A  176  =  B  218.  The  quantity  of  the  real  as  such  is 
intensive. 


210  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §7 

This  is  shown  by  his  account  of  the  philosopher  who  was 
asked  the  weight  of  smoke.1  The  answer  given  was  that  the 
weight  of  smoke  could  be  determined  by  subtracting  the 
weight  of  the  ashes  from  the  original  weight  of  the  fuel  which 
had  been  burned.2  If,  however,  we  wish  to  follow  Kant's  theory 
in  detail  we  must  go  to  the  Metaphysiche  Anfangsgrunde  der 
Naturwissenschaft,  a  work  which  attempts  to  combine  the 
principles  of  the  Critical  Philosophy  with  a  bare  minimum 
of  material  derived  from  empirical  observation.3  It  is  con- 
cerned only  with  objects  of  outer  sense  and  in  particular  with 
the  matter  of  which  they  are  composed. 

In  this  work  material  substance  is  described  as  that  in  space 
which  is  movable  in  itself  —  that  is,  in  separation  from  every- 
thing else  which  exists  outside  it  in  space.4 

It  must  be  remembered  that  Kant's  account  of  matter 
presupposes  the  truth  of  all  the  Principles  of  the  Under- 
standing and  especially  of  the  three  Analogies.  When  he 
proves  matter  to  be  substance,  he  starts  from  substance,  not 
as  meaning  the  permanent,5  but  as  meaning  the  ultimate 
subject  of  existence  —  the  addition  of  the  words  'of  existence' 


1  A  185  =  6228.  For  the  origin  of 

/^/oc  (Vol.  II,  p.  203,  of  Tcubner  edition). 

2  On  the  margin  of  his  copy  of  the  Kntik  Kant  added  'How  did  he 
know  this?  Not  from  experience*.  See  Nachtrage  LXXXV. 

3  This  work  was  published  in  1786  just  before  the  publication  of 
the  second  edition  of  the  Kntik.  There  Kant  deals  with  matter  under 
the  heads  of  quantity,  quality,  relation,  and  modality  —  these  four  heads 
giving  us  respectively  (i)  phoronomy  (the  pure  theory  of  motion), 
(2)  dynamics,  (3)  mechanics,  and  (4)  phenomenology.  He  starts  from 
the  empirical  fact  that  the  fundamental  determination  of  any  object 
of  outer  sense  must  be  motion  ;  for  it  is  by  motion  alone  that  outer 
sense  can  be  affected  (IV  476).  Matter  is  described  under  the  four 
heads  as  follows*  (i)  matter  is  the  movable  in  space;  (2)  matter  is  the 
movable  so  far  as  it  fills  space  ;  (3)  matter  is  the  movable  so  far  as,  qua 
movable,  it  possesses  moving  force  ;  and  (4)  matter  is  the  movable  so 
far  as,  qua  movable,  it  can  be  an  object  of  experience.  See  M.A.d.N. 
(IV  480,  496,  536,  554). 

4  M.A.d.N.  (IV  502). 

8  Perhaps  the  reason  for  this  is  that  the  doctrine  of  the  conservation 
of  matter  is  to  be  proved  later. 


XLII  §  7]  SUBSTANCE  2 1 1 

is  unusual1 — which  is  never  a  predicate.  'Matter  is  the  subject 
of  everything  which  can  be  reckoned  to  the  existence  of  things 
in  space;  for  apart  from  matter  no  subject  could  be  thought 
except  space  itself.  The  concept  of  space,  however,  is  not  the 
concept  of  any  existent,  but  is  merely  the  concept  of  the 
necessary  conditions  of  the  external  relations  of  possible 
objects  of  outer  sense.  Therefore  matter,  as  the  movable  in 
space,  is  substance  in  space'.2 

Kant  then  argues  that  all  the  parts  of  material  substance, 
so  far  as  they  are  themselves  subjects,  and  not  merely  predi- 
cates of  other  matters,  must  themselves  be  substances.  The 
parts  are,  however,  subjects,  if  they  are  themselves  movable3 
and  are  consequently  something  existing  in  space  independently 
of  their  combination  with  other  adjacent  parts  of  material 
substance.4  Therefore  the  movability  of  matter,  or  of  any  part 
of  it,  is  a  proof  that  the  movable,  and  every  movable  part 
of  it,  is  substance.5 

To  speak  more  generally — Kant's  view  is  that  since  material 
substance  is  spread  out  in  space,  its  parts  must  be  outside  one 
another.  These  parts,  since  they  can  be  moved,  or  separated 
from  the  whole  of  which  they  are  parts,  must  themselves 
be  substances.6 

Kant  clearly  regards  the  scientific  idea  of  matter  as  develop- 
ing from  the  commonsense  idea  of  solidity  or  impenetrability 
which  is  revealed  to  us  by  the  sense  of  touch.7  Matter  is  the 
movable  which  fills  space,  and  it  does  so,  not  in  the  sense 
in  which  a  mathematical  triangle  may  be  thought  to  occupy8 

1  Kant  wishes  to  refer  to  a  real,  and  not  merely  a  logical,  subject. 
Sec  B  129. 

2  M.A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck  (IV  503).  Compare  the  argument  I  have 
suggested  in  §  3  above. 

3  'wenn  siefiir  sich  beweghch  .  .  .  smd.' 

4  fausser  threr  Vcrbmdung  mil  under  en  Nebenteilen.' 

5  M.A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck  (IV  503). 

6  M.A.dN.  3.  Hauptstuck  (IV  542).  This  explains  how  Kant  can 
pass  from  Substance'  to  'substances'  in  A  184  =  B  227. 

7  M.A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck  (IV  510). 

8  'ewnehmen.'  To  fill  space  is  'einen  Raum  erfullen'.  See  M.A.d.N. 
2.  Hauptstuck  (IV  497). 


212  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §7 

space,  but  by  resisting  the  penetration  of  other  movables.1 
To  penetrate  into  space  is  a  motion — in  the  initial  moment 
it  may  be  called  a  tendency  to  penetrate— and  to  resist  this 
motion  is  to  cause  its  diminution  or  reduction  to  rest.  Resist- 
ance— for  reasons  into  which  I  need  not  enter — is  therefore 
to  be  regarded  as  itself  a  cause  of  motion,  and  a  cause  of  motion 
is  called  a  moving  force.2  Hence  matter  fills  space  through 
moving  force,3  and  the  fundamental  moving  forces  by  which 
it  does  so  are  those  of  repulsion  and  attraction.4 

The  quantity  of  matter  is  the  aggregate5  of  the  movable 
in  a  determinate  space.  So  far  as  all  its  parts  are  considered 
as  working  (moving)  together  in  the  same  direction,  it  is  called 
'mass'.  A  mass  of  determinate  shape  is  called  a  'body'  (in  the 
mechanical  sense).6  The  quantity  of  matter  is  measured 
through  the  quantity  of  motion  at  a  given  velocity.7  The 
quantity  of  motion  of  a  body  (that  of  a  point  consists  only 
in  a  degree  of  velocity)  at  the  same  velocity  is  measured  through 
the  quantity  of  the  matter  moved.  These  two  statements 
do  not  constitute  a  vicious  circle;  one  explains  the  meaning 
of  a  concept,  the  other  its  application  to  experience.  The 
quantity  of  the  movable  in  space  is  the  quantity  of  matter ;  but 
the  quantity  of  matter  (the  aggregate  of  the  movable)  shows 
itself  in  experience  only  through  the  quantity  of  motion  at  an 
equal  velocity  (for  example,  through  equilibrium).8 

I  mention  these  details — which  I  do  not  profess  to  under- 
stand, and  which  are  perhaps  themselves  not  wholly  intelligible 
apart  from  the  whole  argument  from  which  they  have  been 
extracted — in  order  to  show  the  background  for  Kant's  view 

1  M.A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck,  Erkl.  i  (IV  496). 

2  'bewegende  Kraft.' 

3  This  presupposes  the  doctrine  of  the  Second  Analogy. 

4  M.A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck  (IV  497  ff.).  This  is  simply  an  empirical 
fact. 

6  'die  Menge*.  This  is  a  whole  whose  parts  are  outside  one  another. 
See  A  163  —  B  204  and  compare  M.A.d.N.  3.  Hauptstuck  (IV  539). 

6  M.A.d.N.  3.  Hauptstuck,  Erkl.  2  (IV  537). 

7  M.A.d.N.  3.  Hauptstuck,  Lehrsatz  i  (IV  537).  I  omit  the  proof  of 
this.  8  M.A.d.N.  3.  Hauptstuck  (IV  540). 


XLII§8]  SUBSTANCE  213 

that  the  necessary  permanence  of  substance  is  realised  in  the 
conservation  of  matter.  The  quantity  of  matter  is,  according 
to  Kant,  the  quantity  of  substance  in  the  movable,  and  is  not 
the  quantity  (or  degree)  of  a  quality  of  substance  (such  as 
repulsion  or  attraction).1  The  quantity  of  substance  is  the  mere 
aggregate  of  the  movable,  the  movable  being  what  constitutes 
matter;  for  it  is  only  this  aggregate  of  the  moved  which,  with 
the  same  velocity,  can  give  a  difference  in  the  quantity  of 
motion.  For  reasons  into  which  again  I  do  not  enter,  the 
quantity  of  substance  in  matter  can  be  estimated  only  mechan- 
ically (that  is,  through  the  quantity  of  the  motion  belonging 
to  the  matter),  and  not  dynamically  (that  is,  through  the 
quantity  of  the  originally  moving  forces.)2 

§  8.  The  Conservation  of  Matter 

From  this  Kant  goes  on  to  establish  the  three  laws  of  mech- 
anics, the  first  of  which  is  especially  germane  to  the  First 
Analogy.3  '//*  all  changes  of  corporeal  nature  the  quantity  of 
matter  in  the  whole  remains  the  same,  unmcreased  and  undi- 


Kant's  proof  presupposes  it  to  have  been  proved  in  the 
Kntik  that  amid  all  the  changes  of  phenomenal  nature  sub- 
stance is  permanent,  which  he  here  takes  to  mean  that  no 
substance  can  come  into  being  or  pass  away.  Here,  as  he  says, 

1  M.A.d.N.   3    Hmiptstuck  (IV  540).  This  shows  clearly  that  the 
permanent  is  not  for  Kant  one  appearance  among  others,  although  it 
*  shows  itself  in  experience'. 

2  M.A.d.N.  3   Hauptstuck  (IV  541).  The  quantity  of  the  originally 
moving  forces  is  a  degree. 

J  The  second  law  is  that  all  change  of  matter  has  an  outer  cause  — 
every  body  endures  in  its  state  of  rest  or  motion,  in  the  same  direction 
and  with  the  same  velocity,  if  it  is  not  compelled  through  an  outer 
cause  to  abandon  this  state.  See  M.A  d.N.  (IV  543). 

The  third  law  is  that  in  all  imparting  of  motion  action  and  reaction 
are  always  equal.  See  M.A.d.N.  (IV  544). 

The  second  and  third  laws  are  intended  to  stand  to  the  Second  and 
Third  Analogies,  as  the  first  law  stands  to  the  First  Analogy. 

4  M.A.d.N.  3.  Hauptstucky  Lehrsatz  2  (IV  541). 


214  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §8 

he  has  to  show  only  what  substance  in  matter  is.  The  proof 
runs  as  follows. 

In  all  matter  the  movable  in  space  is  the  ultimate  subject1 
of  all  the  accidents  which  inhere  in  matter ;  and  the  aggregate 
of  this  movable,  whose  parts  are  outside  one  another,  is  the 
quantity  of  substance.  Therefore  the  quantity  of  matter,  as 
regards  its  substance,  is  simply  the  aggregate  of  the  substances 
of  which  it  consists.  Therefore  the  quantity  of  matter  cannot 
be  increased  or  diminished,  unless  a  new  substance  comes 
into  being  or  passes  out  of  being.  But  amid  all  change  of  matter 
substance  never  comes  into  being  or  passes  out  of  being. 
Therefore  the  quantity  of  matter  can  neither  be  increased  nor 
diminished,  but  remains  always  the  same  in  the  whole;  that 
is,  it  endures  somewhere  in  the  world  in  the  same  quantity, 
although  this  or  that  matter  can  be  increased  or  diminished 
through  addition  or  subtraction  of  its  parts.2 

This  proof  (which  concerns  substance  only  as  an  object  of 
outer  sense)  rests  upon  the  view  that  the  quantity  of  an  object 
in  space  must  consist  of  parts  outside  one  another ;  that  these 
parts,  so  far  as  they  are  real  (that  is,  movable),  must  necessarily 
be  substances;  and  that  consequently  the  quantity  of  spatial 
substance  cannot  be  increased  or  diminished  without  the  creation 
or  extinction  of  substance,  which  is  impossible.3 

1  He  ought,  I  think,  to  say  *  substance*. 

2  M.A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck,  Lehrsatz  2,  Beweis  (IV  541-2).  Pnchard 
(Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  273)  maintains,  following  Cook  Wilson, 
that  Kant's  doctrine  implies  that  there  may  be  creation  and  extinction 
of  substances.  I  cannot  see  the  justification  for  this  view,  if  a  substance 
is  made  up  of  substances,  and  its  parts  can  move  independently.  For 
Kant  constant  quantity  is  a  consequence  of  the  permanence  of  sub- 
stances, not  an  equivalent  expression  for  it. 

3  This  argument,  Kant  believes,  would  not  hold  if  we  supposed 
the  soul,  an  object  of  inner  sense,  to  be  a  substance ;  for  such  a  sub- 
stance could  have  a  quantity  (that  is,  an  intensive  quantity)  which  did 
not  consist  of  parts  outside  one  another,  and  since  its  parts  would  not 
therefore  be  substances,  it  could  increase  or  diminish  without  trans- 
gressing the  principle  of  the  permanence  of  substance.  Kant  uses  this 
doctrine  in  order  to  refute  attempts  to  prove  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  on  the  ground  that  the  soul  is  a  simple  substance.  Compare 
B4i3ff. 


XLII§9]  SUBSTANCE  215 

§  9.  The  Empirical  Criterion  of  Substance 

I  set  forth  this  proof,  not  in  order  to  defend  its  validity, 
but  to  show  where  Kant  finds  in  experience  the  permanent 
whose  necessity  he  believes  he  has  proved.  The  doctrine  of 
substance,  like  that  of  causality,  is  confirmed  by  empirical 
observation,  and  receives  concrete  meaning  only  in  experience. 
Its  necessity  can  never  be  proved  by  experience,  but  must  be 
proved,  if  at  all,  by  reference  to  the  conditions  of  possible 
experience  (particularly  the  unity  of  time  and  space). 

Kant  himself  points  out  that  to  establish  the  permanence 
of  any  substance  by  comparing  our  different  sense-perceptions 
would  be  a  very  inadequate  method.1  We  do  not  use  observed 
permanence  as  our  empirical  criterion  of  substance.  A  better 
and  easier  empirical  criterion  of  substance  is  action.2  This 
is  mentioned  by  Kant,  not  in  the  First  Analogy,  but  in  the 
Second,  because  it  presupposes  the  truth  of  causality. 

Causality  leads  to  the  concept  of  action,  and  action  to  the 
concept  of  force,  and  thereby  to  the  concept  of  substance.3 
Kant  excuses  himself  from  working  this  out  in  detail  as  inappro- 
priate to  a  mere  Kritik  of  pure  reason,  but  he  asks  himself 
how  we  can  make  an  inference  from  action  to  the  permanence 
of  what  acts.4 

This  question  can,  Kant  believes,  be  easily  answered  by  his 

1  A  205  ~  B  251. 

2  'Handlung.'  A  204  =  B  249;  A  205  =  B  250. 

3  A  204  =  B  249.  Causality  is  the  quality  of  a  substance,  in  so  far 
as  substance  is  regarded  as  the  cause  of  accidents.  Action  (which  can 
be  ascribed  only  to  substances)  is  the  determination  of  the  force  of  a 
substance  as  a  cause  of  a  certain  accident,  and  it  must  have  a  real 
effect  (unlike  power  or  Vermogen,  by  which  we  represent  the  possibility 
of  force).  'Force*  (Kraft)  is  used  for  the  relation  (respectus)  of  substance 
to  the  existence  of  accidents,  in  so  far  as  substance  contains  the  ground 
of  these  accidents.  We  know  forces  only  through  our  observation  of 
changes,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  science  to  reduce  forces  to  as  few  funda- 
mental forces  (Grundkrafte)  as  possible. 

I  take  these  definitions  from  Metaphysik,  pp.  34-5,  but  it  must  be 
remembered  that  these  lectures  are  printed  from  students'  notes,  and 
their  accuracy  (from  internal  evidence)  is  not  always  to  be  relied  upon. 

4  A  205  =  B  250. 


2i6  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLII  §9 

Critical  method.  Action  means1  the  relation2  of  the  subject 
of  causality  to  its  effect.  Every  effect  consists  in  an  event,  and 
therefore  in  the  transitory;3  hence  the  ultimate  subject  of  the 
event  or  the  effect  is  the  permanent  which  is  the  substratum 
of  everything  that  changes.  The  reason  alleged  for  this  is  that 
— according  to  the  principle  of  causality — actions  are  always 
the  first  grounds  of  all  change4  (or  exchange)  of  appearances,  and 
cannot  therefore  lie  in  a  subject  which  itself  changes5  in  the 
sense  in  which  appearances  change ;  for  then  it  would  be  neces- 
sary to  have  other  actions  and  another  subject  which  determined 
this  change.6 

This  argument  is  not  clear  without  an  explanation  of  what 
is  meant  by  the  'subject  of  causality'  and  its  relation  to  the 
permanent  substratum  of  change.  Kant,  however,  affirms  as 
his  conclusion  that  the  first  subject  of  the  causality  of  all 
coming  into  being  and  passing  away  (in  the  field  of  appear- 
ances) cannot  itself  come  into  being  or  pass  away.7  Hence  the 
presence  of  action  gives  a  sure  ground  for  asserting  the  presence 
of  empirical  necessity8  and  permanence  in  existence,  and  there- 

1  'bedeutet.' 

2  If  this  relation  is  identified  (Metaphyiik,  p.  34)  with  force,  action 
(as  a  determination  of  force)  ought  to  be  a  determination  of  that 
relation,  not  that  relation  itself. 

3  The  transitory  'signifies'  (bezeichnet)  time  considered  as  successive, 
just  as  the  permanent  in  appearances  'expresses'  or  'represents'  time 
considered  as  permanent. 

4  The  word  here  is  '  WechseV,  which  implies  an  exchange  of  states  of 
a  substance.  See  §  10  below.  6  'wechselt.' 

6  '  Wechsel.'  Kant's  argument  in  certain  respects  bears  a  resemblance 
to  the  argument  that  motion  piesupposes  a  prime  mover  which  is  not 
itself  moved.  This  argument  was  used  by  St.  Thomas  as  a  proof  of 
the  existence  of  God  (see  Sum  Theol  1,11,3,  and  compare  Sum.  c.  Gen. 
XIII),  and  appears  to  be  of  the  type  rejected  by  Kant  m  the  Anti- 
nomies.  No  doubt  there  are   differences  in  the  two    cases,    but    I 
feel  so  uncertain  of  the  present  argument  that  I  prefer  to  make  no 
comment. 

7  A  205  =  B  251.  This  statement  is  equivalent  to  the  statement 
that  the  first  subject  of  causality  does  not  admit  of  change  in  the  sense 
of  exchange  (Wechsel). 

8  'Empirical  necessity'  would  seem  to  be  the  necessity  which  is  to 
be  found  in  the  phenomenal  world  of  experience. 


XLII§io]  SUBSTANCE  217 

fore  the  presence   of  substance  as  an  appearance  (substantia 
phaenomenon).1 

§  10.  The  Concept  of  Change 

The  concept  of  change  has  to  be  interpreted2  in  the  light  of 
the  doctrine  that  succession  can  be  determined  only  in  relation 
to  the  permanent.3  Coming  into  being  and  passing  away  are 
not  to  be  taken  as  changes  of  what  comes  into  being  and 
passes  away.  A  change  is  a  way  of  existing4  which  follows  upon 
another  way  of  the  same  thing's  existing.  That  is  to  say  there 
is  an  exchange,  or  substitution,5  of  one  state6  of  a  thing  for 
another  state  of  that  thing,  but  the  thing  itself  must  remain  the 
same  thing.  We  cannot  say  that  a  thing  has  changed,  unless 
it  remains  the  same  thing;  and  we  can  put  this  paradoxically 
by  saying  that  it  is  only  the  permanent,  or  substance,  which 
changes,  while  the  transitory,  or  the  accidents,  do  not  change, 
but  rather  are  exchanged,  for  one  ceases  to  be  and  another 
takes  its  place.7 

1  A  206    -  B25i. 

2  A  187  =  B  230.  The  correction  or  interpretation  (Beruhtigung) — 
not  the  'justification'  (Berechtigung)  as  Pilchard  translates  it — of  the 
concept  of  change  rests  upon  this  doctrine  of  permanence.  Prichard 
maintains  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  274)  that  Kant's  method 
here  is  a  dogmatic  argument  which  proves  the  necessity  of  a  permanent 
substratum  by  an  analysis  of  the  nature  of  change.  I  do  not  sec  how 
the  passage  can  he  so  interpreted  in  view  of  its  context,  for  Kant  is 
here  explaining  how  change  is  to  be  understood  in  the  light  of  the 
doctrine  that  has  been  established.  His  previous  argument  does  not 
rest  on  a  definition  of  change,  but  on  the  contention  that  there  can 
be  no  experience  of  objective  succession  unless  objective  succession  is 
taken  to  be  a  change  in  or  of  the  permanent.  If  the  argument  rested  on 
a  definition  of  change,  it  would  be  open  to  Lord  Balfour's  objection 
that  we  may  very  well  be  content  with  'alternation'  in  place  of  'change' ; 
see  A  Defence  of  Philosophic  Doubt,  p.  114. 

3  The  permanent  is  only  one  of  the  conditions  of  determining 
succession,  but  it  is  a  necessary  condition. 

4  'ewe  Art  zu  existieren.*  6  'Wechsel.' 

6  'Zustand.'  This  word  has  a  temporal  significance.  See  Metaphysik, 
PP-  34~5-  A  timeless  object  has  no  states. 

7  This  point  is  difficult  to  put  clearly  owing  to  the  ambiguity  of 
words.  Kemp  Smith  uses  the  word  'alteration'  for  what  I  call  'change', 


2i8  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLII  §  n 

In  the  light  of  this1  we  can  say  that  when  we  perceive  a 
change,  we  perceive  a  change  in  a  permanent  substance,  and 
never  an  absolute  coming  into  being  or  passing  away.  In  our 
empirical  knowledge  it  is  always  the  permanent  which  makes 
possible  the  idea  of  a  transition  from  one  state  to  another, 
or  from  not-being  to  being ;  and  these  states  are  always  recog- 
nised as  being  exchanged  for  one  another  in  the  permanent. 
This  is,  I  think,  empirically  true;  what  we  perceive — or  seem 
to  perceive — is  a  thing  changing  colour,  not  one  colour  and  then 
another.  Kant  reinforces  this  statement  by  insisting  that  since 
we  cannot  perceive  an  empty  time,  we  cannot  see  a  coming 
to  be  except  by  reference  to  what  was  before;  and  he  argues 
that  if  we  attach  what  comes  to  be  to  what  was  before— as 
we  must — we  are  obliged  to  regard  what  was  before  as  enduring 
up  to  the  coming  to  be,  and  what  comes  to  be  can  be  regarded 
only  as  a  determination  of  what  was  before,  that  is,  of  the 
permanent.  The  same  is  equally  true  as  regards  passing  away, 
for  we  cannot  perceive  an  empty  time  after  such  a  passing 
away.2 

§  ii.  Science  and  Experience 

Kant  believes — if  I  may  attempt  to  summarise  the  results 
of  this  difficult  discussion — that  his  doctrine  of  permanent 
substance  is  a  necessary  presupposition,  not  only  of  Newtonian 
physics,  but  of  ordinary  everyday  experience.  At  first  sight 
this  seems  difficult  to  accept,  but  perhaps  the  scientific  notion 
of  substance,  like  the  scientific  notion  of  causality,  is  the  result 
of  clarifying  a  concept  which  is  assumed  without  question  by 
common  sense.  The  world  which  is  revealed  to  us  in  experience 

and  'change'  for  what  I  call  'exchange*.  The  German  words 
are  'Veranderung*  and  'WechseV.  Watson  translates  them  as  'change* 
and  'alternation1,  which  seems  to  me  better  than  Kemp  Smith's 
terminology. 

1  A  i88  =  B23i. 

2  All  this  confirms  the  view  that  Kant  is  not  arguing  from  a  definition 
of  change,  or  from  an  analysis  of  the  concept  of  change,  but  from  the 
conditions    of    our    experiencing    an    objective    temporal    order    or 
succession. 


XLII§u]  SUBSTANCE  219 

certainly  seems  very  different  from  the  succession  of  unrelated 
impressions  and  ideas  to  which  it  is  reduced  by  the  analysis  of 
Hume.  What  we  seem  to  perceive  is  not  a  colour,  but  a  coloured 
surface  or  a  coloured  body ;  and  when  we  are  aware  of  a  change 
of  colour,  we  seem  to  be  aware  not  merely  of  one  colour  and 
then  another  colour,  but  of  a  permanent  body  which  changes  in 
colour.1 

No  doubt  such  bodies  are  regarded  by  common  sense  as 
only  relatively  permanent,  and  the  common-sense  concept  of 
body  is  extremely  crude  in  comparison  with  that  of  science. 
Nevertheless  the  solid  bodies  which  for  common  sense  possess 
the  changing  qualities  revealed  to  our  senses  are  essentially 
what  fills  space;2  and  science  in  determining  more  precisely, 
the  character  of  what  fills  space,  not  only  refines — and  perhaps 
even  refines  away — the  concept  of  body,  but  gives  a  new  and 
precise  meaning  to  the  permanence  which  bodies  are  supposed 
to  possess. 

If  Kant  could  be  said  to  have  proved  that  the  permanence 
of  what  fills  space  is  a  necessary  condition  of  our  experience 
of  succession  in  time,  he  would  have  given  an  answer  to  Hume; 
and  the  importance  of  his  principle  would  be  enormously 
increased  if  he  were  justified  in  deducing  as  a  consequence  that 
the  quantum  of  substance  in  nature  can  neither  be  increased 
nor  diminished.  Further  than  this,  as  Kant  recognises,  it 
is  impossible  to  go  without  calling  in  the  aid  of  empirical  facts ; 
it  belongs  to  science  alone  to  determine  the  accidents  of  sub- 
stance, as  it  belongs  to  science  alone  to  determine  the  cause  of 
any  given  effect. 

1  Most  changes  in  the  spatial  world  we  regard  as  changes  of  bodies, 
and  perhaps  this  might  be  extended  to  all  changes,  although  there  is 
clearly  need  of  a  separate  discussion  for  such  changes  as  are  observed 
in  a  flash  of  lightning  or  in  a  bird's  song. 

2  In  all  experience,  as  we  combine  the  given  appearances  in  one 
space  and  time  by  means  of  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagina- 
tion, we  combine  our  given  sensa  as  accidents  or  qualities  of  what  is 
supposed  to  fill  space ;  and  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  the  view  that 
such  acts  of  combination  are  a  priori,  that  is,  they  do  not  depend  on  the 
particular  character  of  the  given  sensa. 


220  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLII  §  n 

Kant's  science  is  now  superseded,  and  we  need  attach  no 
importance  to  the  detailed  theories  which  he  accepted.  What 
we  have  to  consider  is  his  central  doctrine — that  if  science  is 
to  be  science,  and  if  experience  is  to  be  experience,  it  must 
necessarily  employ  the  concept  of  substance  and  accident  as 
well  as  the  concept  of  cause  and  effect.1  I  confess  that  in  the 
present  condition  of  science  it  is  difficult  for  one  who  is  not  a 
scientist — and  perhaps  impossible  for  one  who  is— -to  share 
Kant's  belief;  but  I  think  it  not  unreasonable  to  ask  whether 
these  concepts  are  being  definitely  abandoned  in  favour  of 
others,  or  whether  they  are  being  modified  and  corrected  with 
the  advance  of  knowledge.  That  Kant's  conclusions  are  not  yet 
wholly  superseded  is  shown  by  a  statement  of  Emile  Meyerson, 
himself  not  the  least  distinguished  among  modern  exponents 
of  the  philosophy  of  science,  in  which  he  asserts  of  the  attitude 
of  the  most  advanced  physicists  that  it  'confirme  nettement  la 
supposition  que  la  science,  la  raison  scientifiquey  aspire  profondement 
d  concevoir  un  reel  de  substances  en  tant  que  substrat  et  explication 
des  phenomenes  changeants.  Tout  pas  accompli  dans  la  direction 
opposee  apparait  au  savant  comme  un  sacrifice,  un  renoncemenf? 
If  language  so  Kantian  can  be  used  of  the  fundamental  concepts 
of  modern  science,  it  is  still  worth  enquiring  into  the  reasons 
by  which  the  Critical  Philosophy  attempted  to  establish  the 
necessity  of  these  concepts. 

1  I  think  we  must  take  this   to  imply,  not  only  the  permanence  of 
substance,  but  its  permanence  in  regard  to  quantity;  and  this  means 
that  the  quantum  of  the  real  which  fills  space  cannot  be  increased  or 
diminished.  If  we  reject  this  addition,  Kant's  doctrine  loses  much  of 
its  importance. 

2  Quoted  in  Mind,  N.S.  Vol.  XLI,  No.  163,  July  1932,  p.  382. 


CHAPTER    XLIII 
THE  SECOND  ANALOGY 

§  i.  The  Principle  of  Causality 

In  the  second  edition  the  Principle  established  by  the  Second 
Analogy  is  called  cthe  principle  of  temporal  succession  in 
accordance  with  the  law  of  causality'.  In  the  first  edition  it 
is  called  'the  principle  of  production',1  where  production 
seems  to  be  equivalent  to  'causation*. 

The  formula  of  the  second  edition  is  as  follows:  All 
changes*  take  place  in  conformity  with  the  law  of  the  connexion? 
of  cause  and  effect* 

The  law  of  cause  and  effect  has  for  long  appeared  to  be 
one  of  the  most  fundamental,  if  not  indeed  the  most  funda- 
mental, of  all  the  presuppositions  accepted  alike  by  science  and 
by  ordinary  experience ;  and  although  its  universality  even  in 
the  physical  world  appears  to  be  questioned  to-day  by  physicists, 
as  it  has  in  the  past  been  questioned  by  theologians,  neverthe- 
less to  set  it  aside  altogether,  without  putting  something  in 
its  place,5  would  deprive  us  of  the  main  clue  by  which  we  have 

1  'Erzeuguiig.'  This  word,  I  think,  like  the  English  word  'production', 
implies  force  or  activity  in  the  cause. 

2  'Veranderungen  *  This  has  been  explained  in  A  187  —  B  230  as 
involving  the  exchange  (or  succession)  of  the  determinations  of  a 
permanent  substance. 

3  'Verknupfung.'    Connexion,    or    nexus,    involves    a    synthesis   of 
heterogeneous   elements   which  necessarily  belong   to   one   another. 
See  B  201  n. 

4  B  232.  In  the  first  edition  the  formula  is:  Everything  that  happens 
(that  is,  begins  to  be)  presupposes  something  upon  which  it  folloivs  in 
accordance  with  a  rule.  See  A  189.  'To  happen'  is  to  be  an  objective 
event. 

5  It  is  not  always  easy  to  draw  a  sharp  distinction  between  inter- 
preting an  old  concept  in  a  more  satisfactory  way  and  putting  a  new 
one  in  its  place.  We  must  in  any  case  hold  to-day  that  the  concept  of 
causality  requires  remterprctation,  or  at  the  very  least  that  the  mean- 
ing of  the  concept  cannot  be  taken  as  obvious  and  in  need  of  no  further 
analysis. 


222  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §  i 

sought  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  world.  Hence  it  would 
be  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  a  valid  proof  of 
causality,  which  quite  certainly  can  never  be  given  us  by 
ordinary  inductive  methods,  since  in  such  methods  causality 
(or  something  akin  to  causality)  is  already  presupposed.  It 
wTould  also  be  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  importance  which 
Kant's  proof  has  in  the  system  of  the  Critical  Philosophy; 
for  it  is  here,  more  than  anywhere  else,  that  we  must  find  the 
answer  to  Hume,  and  it  is  here  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Trans- 
cendental Deduction  attains  its  most  characteristic  and  most 
fundamental  application.1 

In  such  a  case  we  are  entitled  to  demand  that  the  argument 
offered  us  should  be  water-tight.  There  ought  to  be  no  doubt 
about  its  interpretation,  and  it  ought  to  be  capable  of  with- 
standing a  cool  and  sceptical  scrutiny  such  as  Hume  brought  to 
bear  on  everything  which  claimed  to  be  a  priori  knowledge. 
Unfortunately  there  is  a  real  difficulty  in  understanding 
some  of  Kant's  statements,  and  a  still  greater  difficulty  in 
understanding  the  relation  of  his  statements  to  one  another. 
To  unsympathetic  critics  it  may  easily  seem  that  he  is  one  of 
those  philosophers  who  conceal  the  weakness  of  their  argument 
under  a  cloud  of  words.  I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  his 
obscurity  is  due  to  the  fact  that  he  is  struggling  with  new  and 
difficult  thoughts.  I  believe  also  that,  even  if  he  is  in  error, 
there  is  much  in  his  view  which  is  worthy  of  serious  considera- 
tion. 

One  point  is  perfectly  clear.  Kant  is  arguing  that  if  we  are  to 
distinguish  the  objective  succession  of  events  in  the  phenomenal 
world  from  the  subjective  succession  of  our  ideas,  we  must 
regard  the  former  succession  as  necessarily  determined,  that 
is  to  say,  as  governed  by  the  law  of  cause  and  effect.  This  con- 
tention he  does  not  claim  to  be  self-evident.  It  depends  on 

1  This  claim  may  be  made  also  for  the  Third  Analogy  (as  combining 
in  itself  the  First  and  Second  Analogies),  but  the  Third  Analogy 
seems  in  some  ways  little  m6re  than  an  application  or  extension  of  the 
principles  already  established,  and  the  number  of  arguments  brought 
forward  in  the  Second  Analogy  shows  that  for  Kant  the  real  crux  of 
his  doctrine  is  to  be  found  here. 


XLIII  §  i]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  223 

Critical  doctrines  which  have  already  been  established;  and 
what  we  want  to  know  is  the  precise  nature  of  the  Critical 
doctrines  presupposed  and  their  precise  relation  to  the  con- 
tention which  we  have  now  to  consider. 

It  might  be  thought  that  objectivity  has  already  been  shown 
to  involve  necessity,  and  that  consequently  objective  succession 
must  be  necessary  succession.  But  in  that  case  Kant's  elaborate 
proof  would  be  superfluous.  All  that  Kant  claims  to  have  shown 
is  that  appearances,  to  be  appearances  of  an  object,  must  be 
united  in  the  synthetic  unity  of  apperception,  or  must  have 
that  necessary  synthetic  unity  without  which  they  cannot  be 
thought  by  one  mind.1  This  necessary  synthetic  unity  must 
indeed  for  Kant  be  such  that  it  can  be  thought  in  all  the  forms 
of  judgement;  for  the  forms  of  judgement  are  the  forms  of 
synthesis  without  which  thought  is  impossible,  and  there  are 
no  objects  apart  from  thought.  But  Kant  is  not  arguing  that 
because  we  must  be  able  to  judge  any  object  under  the  form 
'if  A,  then  BJ,  therefore  every  object  must  be  governed  by  the 
law  of  cause  and  effect.2  On  the  contrary,  the  hypothetical  form 
of  judgement  is  for  him  an  empty  form  awaiting  an  object ; 
and  what  we  now  have  to  prove  is  that  all  objects  given  to  us 
under  the  forms  of  space  and  time  must  have  a  characteristic 
which  enables  them  to  be  judged  by  the  hypothetical  form  of 
judgement.  That  characteristic  is  necessary  succession,  and  the 
proof  of  necessary  succession  must  be  a  proof  independent  of 
the  form  of  judgement. 

Kant  is  certainly  presupposing  that  space  and  time  are  forms 
of  sensibility,  and  that  appearances  given  under  the  forms  of 
space  and  time  are  therefore  not  things-in-themselves,  but 
appearances  of  things-in-themselves  to  human  minds.  There 
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  he  regards  this  presupposition 
as  essential  to  his  argument.  He  also  believes  all  objective  com- 

1  I  have  already  pointed  out  in  Chapter  XXX  §  3  that  this  contention 
remains  extremely  vague  unless  we  can  describe  this  synthetic  unity 
in  detail. 

2  Such  an  argument  would  be  manifestly  invalid,  since  the  hypo- 
thetical form  of  judgement  involves  no  reference  to  time. 


224  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §2 

hination  and  connexion  of  appearances  to  be  determined  by  a 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  working  through 
the  medium  of  time.1  What  he  has  to  show  is  that  if  we  are  to 
experience  objective  changes  in  one  common  homogeneous  time 
whose  parts  succeed  one  another,  there  must  be  a  succession 
of  appearances  which  is  necessary,  and  so  is  governed  by  the 
law  of  cause  and  effect. 

§  2 .  The  Six  Proofs  of  Causality 

Kant  shows  his  sense  of  the  importance  of  the  present 
argument  by  a  multiplication  of  proofs  \\hich  recalls  the  method 
of  the  Transcendental  Deduction.  We  have,  as  usual,  a  proof 
added  in  the  second  edition,  \\hile  in  the  first  edition  \\e  have 
what  are  commonly  regarded  as  five  successive  proofs.2  Thus 
\\e  have: 

Proof  I     B  232-4  (t\\o  paragraphs). 

Proof  II     A  189-94  —  ^  234~39  (four  paragraphs). 

Proof  III  A  194-5  —  B  239-40  (two  paragraphs).  This  is 
followed  by  a  third  paragraph  of  a  more  general  character 
(A  195-6  —  B  240-1),  which  cannot  be  considered  as  belonging 
specially  to  Proof  III. 

Proof  IV    A  196-9  —  B  241-4  (three  paragraphs). 

Proof  V     A  199-201  -=  B  244-6  (three  paragraphs). 

Proof  VI     A  201-2  --  B  246-7  (one  paragraph). 

This  multiplicity  of  proofs  has  given  rise  to  the  theory  that 
they  \\ere  composed  at  different  times  and  represent  different 
levels  of  Kant's  thought.  As  such  theories  of  origin  are,  in  my 
opinion,  of  no  help  for  the  understanding  of  the  argument,  I 

1  No  doubt  he  believes  also  that  this  transcendental  synthesis  of  the 
imagination  is  itself  determined  by  the  pure  categories,  and  in  par- 
ticular by  the  pure  category  of  ground  and  consequent ,  but  I  do  not 
think  this  is  one  of  the  premises  of  his  argument.  On  the  contrary, 
this  doctrine  is  fully  established  in  regard  to  ground  and  consequent 
only  when  it  has  been  proved  that  all  objective  succession  is  necessary 
succession. 

2  This  division  I  take  from  Adickes  in  his  edition  of  the  Kritik.  It  ia 
accepted  by  Kemp  Smith. 


XLIII  §  3]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  225 

propose  to  ignore  them.  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that 
these  proofs  are  not  to  be  regarded  merely  as  different  versions 
of  the  same  proof  added  arbitrarily  to  one  another.  If  we  con- 
sider the  first  edition  by  itself  we  have  at  least  some  appearance 
of  development.  Proof  II  (the  first  in  the  first  edition)  develops 
the  argument  as  a  whole ;  Proof  III  is  an  indirect  proof  stating 
the  impossible  consequences  which  follow  if  the  principle  of 
causality  is  denied ;  Proof  IV  at  least  professes — if  it  does  not 
altogether  carry  out  its  professions — to  appeal  to  actual  experi- 
ence for  confirmation;  Proof  V  brings  out  and  elaborates  the 
dependence  of  the  argument  on  the  nature  of  time ;  while  Proof 
VI  is  intended  to  be  a  summary,  and  a  much-needed  summary, 
of  the  main  points  or  'moments'  of  the  argument.  I  can  see  no 
reason  wrhy  Kant — whose  method  of  writing  is  very  different 
from  that  of  Professor  Moore  or  Professor  Prichard — should 
not  have  composed  this  series  of  arguments  in  the  order  in 
which  they  are  printed,  and  Proof  IV  is  the  only  one  which 
in  my  opinion  can  reasonably  be  regarded  as  superfluous.1 

§3.  The  First  Proof 

The  proof  added  in  the  second  edition2  begins  with  an 
introduction  which  is  clearly  intended  to  suggest  that  the 
Second  Analogy  rests  on  the  First  Analogy  as  a  necessary 
presupposition.  This  is  not  made  explicit  in  the  proofs  them- 
selves; but  Kant  presumably  held  that  only  a  belief  in  per- 
manent substances  filling  space  entitled  him  to  assume,  as  he 
does,  a  contrast  between  the  simultaneous  characteristics  of 
a  house  and  the  successive  characteristics  of  a  moving  ship. 

The  introduction  is  a  'reminder'3  of  what  we  have  already 

1  It  may  be  observed  that  this  multiplication  of  proofs  is  not  only 
known  to  have  been  a  feature  of  Kant's  teaching :  it  is  also  explicitly 
present,  though  not  to  the  same  extent,  in  such  an  early  work  as  the 
Nova  Dilucidatw,  see  Sectio  III  (I  410-11). 

2  B  232-4.  In  the  case  of  the  Second  Analogy  I  deal  first  with  the 
proof  given  in  the  second  edition  because  its  importance  might  fail 
to  be  appreciated,  if  it  were  considered  as  the  last  of  six  proofs.  As 
the  terms  employed  have  been  already  defined,  this  course  does  not 
suffer  from  the  usual  disadvantages.  Compare  Chapter  XXXVII  §  i. 

8  B  233,  *  Vorerinnerung*. 

VOL.  II  H 


226  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §  3 

learnt1 — that  succession  (or  exchange)  of  appearances  is  only 
a  'change*  of  permanent  substances,  that  is,  a  successive 
being  and  not-being  of  the  determinations  of  a  substance 
which  does  not  itself  either  come  into  being  or  pass  away, 
but  whose  existence  is  positively  determined  in  different 
ways  at  different  times.2 

Kant's  proof  runs  as  follows : 

I.  I  perceive  that   appearances   follow   one   another;   and 
this  means  that  at  different  times  I  perceive  different  states 
of  the  same  thing  or  things.3  Hence  in  sense-perception  of 
this  kind  I  am  connecting4  two  different  sense-perceptions 
or  appearances5  in  time. 

II.  Connexion  (or  nexus)  is  a  species   of  combination  or 
synthesis  necessary  for  knowledge  of  objects.  It  is  never  the 
work  of  mere  sense  or  intuition,  but  is  the  product  of  a  syn- 
thetic powrer  of  imagination*  which  determines  inner  sense 
in  regard  to  its  time-relations.7 

1  In  A  187-8  =  B  230-1.  See  Chapter  XLII  §  10. 

2  Kant's  argument  may  seem  'dogmatic*  in  this  passage,  because  he 
says  that  the  concept  of  change  presupposes  one  and  the  same  subject 
as  existing  with  two  opposite  determinations,  and  therefore  as  endur- 
ing   I  think,  however,  that  this  analysis  of  the  concept  of  change  is 
for  Kant  a  consequence  of  establishing  the  necessity  of  permanent 
substance,  and  not  a  premise  from  which  such  a  necessity  is  proved. 

3  B  233.  The  reference  to  'things*  shows  that  Kant  considers  himself 
now  entitled  to  assume  more  than  Hume  admitted.  Hume  admitted 
only  consciousness  of  a  succession  of  appearances.    Kant  believes 
himself  to  have  proved  that  we  are  justified  in  ascribing  successive 
states  to  a  permanent  substance  or  substances. 

The  'opposition*  attributed  to  states  of  the  same  thing  I  take  to  be 
manifested  in  difference. 

*  'verknupfe.'  This  is  used  in  the  technical  sense  to  indicate  'con- 
nexion* or  'nexus'.  See  B  201  n. 

6  I  take  'sense-perceptions*  to  be  here  equivalent  to  'appearances*. 

6  Here  as  so  often  sense-perception  is  connected  (if  not  identified) 
with  the  synthesis  of  apprehension,  which  is  the  work  of  imagination. 

7  This  last  clause  might  seem  to  imply  that  the  connexion  so  far 
is  subjective.  Inner  sense  is  determined  so  far  as  imagination  succes- 
sively  brings   different   appearances    before    the   mind.    Kant   may, 
however,  have  in  mind  an  objective  connexion.  In  that  case  he  goes 
on  to  explain  that  it  involves  more  than  imagination. 


XLIII  §  3]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  227 

III.  Imagination  uncontrolled  by  thought  can  combine 
appearances  in  different  ways,  either  B  after  A  or  A  after  B. 
As  far  as  mere  imagination  is  concerned,  although  we  are 
aware  that  we  are  imaginatively  putting  appearances  in  a 
particular  temporal  order,  we  cannot  be  aware  that  the  appear- 
ances are  states  of  an  object  and  occur  in  that  order  independently 
of  our  imagination.  Hence  sense-perception,  so  far  as  it  is 
a  synthesis  of  the  given  by  means  of  mere  imagination,  does 
not  determine  the  objective  temporal  relation  of  successive 
appearances.1 

Whatever  be  the  difficulties  in  this  assertion,  Kant  is  clearly 
right,  if  he  is  saying  that  neither  by  mere  sense  nor  by  mere 
imagination,  nor  by  any  combination  of  the  two,  can  we 
determine  the  objective  order  of  events. 

Kant's  reason  for  this  assertion  is  the  doctrine  which  lies 
at  the  root  of  all  the  Analogies — that  time  itself  cannot  be 
perceived.  If  time  itself  could  be  perceived,  we  could,  he 
believes,  determine  in  relation  to  it  the  order  of  appearances 
in  the  ob;ect  itself,  and  this  process  of  determining  would  be 

1  There  is  a  whole  series  of  subjective  orders  distinct  from  the 
order  which  we  believe  to  be  objective.  Thus  the  subjective  order  of 
our  sensing*  is  different  from  the  objective  order;  for  what  we  sense 
successively  we  may  believe  to  be  simultaneous  The  subjective  order 
of  our  imaginings  may  also  be  different  from  the  objective  order,  when 
what  we  imagine  is  real  events — I  can  imagine  the  death  of  Caesar 
after  imagining  the  battle  of  Actium.  Again  I  can  imagine  an  order  of 
fictitious  events,  and  even  this  order  (while  still  a  subjective  order 
dependent  on  my  imagination  alone)  may  be  different  from  the  order 
of  my  imaginings ,  for  I  may  choose  to  imagine  first  a  fictitious  event 
and  then  the  fictitious  events  which  led  up  to  it.  Even  in  imagining 
real  events  I  can  imagine  them  to  take  place  in  an  order  different  from 
their  attual  order,  and  I  can  do  this  without  asserting  that  imaginary 
order  to  be  real.  For  example  I  can  imagine  America  to  have  declared 
war  on  Germany  when  the  Lusitama  was  sunk,  and  can  try  to  estimate 
the  probable  consequences.  Of  course  if  I  imagine  that  America 
actually  did  declare  war  on  Germany  when  the  Lusitama  was  sunk, 
that  is  not  mere  imagination  but  erroneous  thinking.  Even  in  the  case 
when  I  imagine  real  events,  there  is  an  element  of  thought  present  in 
the  recognition  that  the  events  are  real;  and  there  is  also  an  element 
of  thought  present,  if  I  recognise  that  the  order  in  which  they  are 
imagined  to  be  is  not  their  actual  or  objective  order. 


228  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §  3 

akin  to  empirical  perception.  The  death  of  Julius  Caesar  would, 
I  suppose,  be  actually  given  to  perception  with  the  mark  upon 
it  of  a  particular  moment  on  the  Ides  of  March,  6.0.44,  an^  a^ 
subsequent  efforts  to  recall  his  death  in  imagination  would 
necessarily  recall  that  particular  mark  as  an  inseparable  part 
of  the  whole  event  recalled.1  Because  this  is  not  so,  we  are 
compelled  in  experience  to  determine  the  objective  temporal 
order  of  events  by  their  necessary  connexion  with  one  another. 

IV.  This  last  point  is  the  point  which  Kant  duly  proceeds 
to  make.  If  we  are  to  know  the  objective  relation2  of  appear- 
ances to  one  another  in  time,  we  must  not  only  imagine,  but 
think,  the  temporal  relation  of  the  appearances  (that  is,  of  the 
successive  states  of  substance),  and  we  must  do  so  in  a  particular 
way — our  thought  of  it  must  be  such  that  'thereby*  it  is  deter- 
mined as  necessary  which  of  the  appearances  must  be  placed 
(or  posited*)  before  and  which  after9.5 

1  We  should,  I  suppose,  know  that  the  successive  appearances  of  a 
house  were  objectively  simultaneous,  because  each  appearance  would 
have  the  mark  of  the  whole  time  through  which  it  endured.  But 
perhaps  it  is  a  mistake  to  render  too  precise  an  alternative  which  is 
admittedly  impossible. 

2  B  234.     Kant  says  'If  we  are  to  know  the  objective  relation  of 
appearances  as  determined' ,  but  this  seems  to  be  equivalent  to  know- 
ing it,  or  knowing  it  as  objective.  For  sense-perception  without  thought 
this  objective  relation  is  undetermined  or  unknown  (as  objective); 
for  thought  it  is  known  (as  objective).   'Determined'  here  cannot 
mean  'necessarily  determined'.  In  Metaphysik,  p.  23,  Kant  says  that 
'to  determine'  is  of  two  opposites  to  posit  (setzeri)  one,  and  this  may 
be  relevant,  since  by  'positing'  we  must  understand  the  absolute 
positing  of  thought,   not  the   arbitrary  and  subjective   positing  of 
imagination.  3  'dadurch.' 

4  'gesetzt'y  'placed*  or  'posited*.  This  word  is  especially  prominent 
in  the  second  edition.  Actuality  is  absolute  position,  so  that  the  object 
is  posited  (gesetzt)  in  itself,  and  not  relatively  to  my  understanding 
(Metaphystk,  pp.  27-8;  compare  A  598  =  B  626  and  also  B  142). 
Existence  is  also  said  to  be  positio  absoluta  (Metaphysik,  p.  25). 

6  More  simply — if  we  are  to  know  that  AB  is  an  objective  succession, 
we  must  not  only  sense  A  and  then  B  and  combine  them  in  that  order 
in  imagination :  we  must  also  think  that  B  necessarily  follows  A.  Such 
thinking  may  of  course  be  'obscure':  perhaps  we  should  say  that  we 
(consciously  or  unconsciously)  'assume*  or  'presuppose*  that  B 
necessarily  follows  A. 


XLIII  §  3]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  229 

It  is  on  this  statement  that  the  whole  of  Kant's  argument 
turns.  What  comes  before  it  is,  I  suggest,  clearly  sound.  What 
follows  merely  renders  explicit  the  consequences  of  this 
assertion;  for  a  temporal  succession  which  is  determined  as 
necessary  is  a  succession  determined  in  accordance  with  the 
law  of  cause  and  effect. 

V.  The  thought  or  concept  involved  is  therefore  a  concept 
of  necessary  synthetic  unity  ^  and  consequently  a  pure  concept 
of  the  understanding,2  not  a  concept  derived  from  sense- 
perception  by  the  ordinary  method  of  abstraction.  The  pure 
concept  in  question  is  called,  with  unusual  elaborateness, 
the  concept  of  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  which  relation 
is  such  that  the  cause  determines  the  effect  as  its  consequence 
or  sequel  in  time*  This  means  that  the  later  event  could  not 
precede  the  earlier  event,5  as  it  can  for  imagination  uncontrolled 
by  thought.  It  means  also  that  if  the  earlier  event  occurs,  it 
must  be  possible  to  perceive  the  later  immediately  thereafter ; 
whereas  if  two  events  are  merely  imagined  as  successive,  the 
perception  of  the  first  event  does  not  imply  that  the  later  event 
can  also  be  perceived  immediately  thereafter — or  indeed  at  all.6 

1  It  is  a  concept  of  a  particular  kind  of  necessary  synthetic  unity, 
the  necessary  unity  (or  causal  nexus)  of  appearances  whose  succession 
is  an  objective  succession. 

2  It  will  be  remembered — see  Chapter  XXXIX  §  6 — that  in  B  219 
Kant  argued  from  the  a  priori  connexion  imposed  by  the  concept  to 
necessity.  Here  he  argues  from  the  necessity  of  the  connexion  to  the 
a  priori  character  of  the  concept. 

3  Kant  believes  that  all  necessary,  and  indeed  all  objective,  succession 
is  causally  determined,  but  not  that  the  earlier  event  is  necessarily  the 
cause  of  the  later.  Night,  for  example,  is  not  the  cause  of  day. 

4  The  reference  to  temporal  sequence  distinguishes  the  schematised 
category  of  cause  and  effect  from  the  pure  category  of  ground  and 
consequent. 

6  This  is  naturally  subject  to  the  proviso  that  Bi  (the  effect  of  Ai) 
can  precede  A2  (the  cause  of  62). 

6  I  think  that  this  is  Kant's  meaning — not  that  if  two  events  are 
merely  imagined  as  successive,  the  second  event  may  be  something 
which  need  not  be  perceivable  at  all  (as  when  I  imagine  that  a  par- 
ticular incantation  of  Circe  might  cause  men  to  turn  into  swine).  But 
the  statement  is  obscure. 


230  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §4 

VI.  Hence  it  is  only  because  we  subject1  the  succession  of 
appearances  (and  so  all  'change'2)  to  the  law  of  causality  that 
experience  (as  empirical  knowledge  of  appearances  and  their 
objective  succession)  is  possible.  Since  the  conditions  of  the 
possibility  of  experience  are  necessarily  the  condition  of  the 
possibility  of  phenomenal  objects,3  phenomenal  objects,  or 
objects  of  experience,4  are  necessarily  subject  to  the  laws  of 
cause  and  effect. 


§  4.  The  Object  and  its  Temporal  Relations 

The  first  proof  in  the  first  edition5  also  begins  with  an  intro- 
duction. This  introduction  reaffirms  Kant's  general  account 
of  the  nature  of  an  object  and  prepares  the  way  for  the  special 
case  of  objective  succession.6 

One  great  difficulty  in  following  Kant's  argument  is  the 
ambiguity  of  his  terms.  Thus  in  the  argument  of  the  second 
edition  'appearance'  was  used  primarily  for  the  different  states 
of  a  substance,  states  which  succeed  one  another  in  the  object.7 
In  the  present  argument  'appearance'  is  used  for  a  whole 

1  'unterwerfen.'  I  do  not  think  Kant  means  that  we  first  have  a 
subjective  succession  of  appearances,  and  then  make  it  objective  by 
bringing  it  under  the  law  of  cause  and  effect.  Rather  in  being  aware 
of  an  objective  succession  we  are  necessarily  considering  it  as  deter- 
mined by  the  law  of  cause  and  effect.  Kant  may,  however,  be  arguing 
from  the  necessity  in  the  order  of  apprehension  to  necessity  in  the 
order  of  events  in  the  object.  See  §  5  IV  below. 

2  It  must  be  remembered  that  'change*  is  succession  (or  exchange) 
of  the  states  of  a  substance.  Kant  is  here  talking  of  objective  change  or 
succession. 

3  If  the  objects  we  know  were  things-in-themselves,  we  could  never 
know,  according  to  Kant,  that  they  were  governed  by  causal  law. 

4  Kant   says   'appearances   themselves   as   objects   of  experience'. 
He  may  mean  'appearances  so  far  as  we  know  them  to  be  successive 
states  of  objects'.  5  A  189-94  =.  B  234-9. 

6  For  the  general  account  see  A  104  ff.  and  B  137,  and  compare  also 
A  197  =  B  242  ff.  Kant  uses  the  phrase  'transcendental  object*  in 
A  191  =  B  236,  a  phrase  not  used  in  the  additions  made  in  the  second 
edition,  but  I  believe  the  general  doctrine  of  the  object  to  be  the  same 
in  both  editions.  See  Chapters  XX  §  2,  XXII  §§  1-2,  and  LV  §  3. 

7B233. 


XLIII  §4]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  231 

object,  such  as  a  house.1  It  is  not  easy  to  be  sure  whether  this 
usage  is  maintained  consistently  throughout:  in  some  places 
it  may  seem  more  natural  to  take  'appearance*  to  be  a  part  or 
state  of  the  object.  Let  us,  however,  say  broadly  that  the  appear- 
ance is  the  whole  object,  and  that  its  parts  or  states  are  'the 
manifold  of  the  appearance'.  We  can  then  say  that  the  appre- 
hension of  the  manifold  of  the  appearance  is  always  successive ; 
and  this  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  our  ideas  of  the  parts 
follow  one  another.2 

I  need  not  consider  again  the  precise  sense  in  which  Kant 
regards  apprehension  as  always  successive.3  If  Kant's  view 
were  that  we  never  directly  apprehend  even  the  subjectively 
coexistent  or  simultaneous,  he  would  be  wrong,  and  his 
argument  would  so  far  be  weakened.  There  can,  however,  be 
no  doubt  that  we  commonly  regard  as  coexistent  what  has  been 
successively  apprehended,  for  example,  the  different  parts  of 
a  house ;  and  this  is  a  sufficient  basis  for  the  argument.  We  must 
remember  that  the  whole  appearance  and  its  parts  may  alike 
be  described  as  'ideas':  they  are  not  things-in-themselves. 
The  whole  appearance,  it  may  be  said,  is  made  up  of  parts 
which  are  successively  apprehended;  and  it  is  thus  a  sum  or 
aggregate  of  ideas,4  which,  so  far  as  our  apprehension  is 
concerned,  may  be  described  as  following  one  another. 

The  question  then  arises  whether  these  ideas  (or  parts) 
follow  one  another  in  the  object  (or  the  total  appearance). 
In  order  to  answer  it  we  must  consider  what  we  mean  by 
'object'. 

Every  idea,  so  far  as  we  are  aware  of  it,  may  be  called  an 
object ;  but  this  clearly  is  not  the  sense  required  here.  We  want 
to  know  the  meaning  of  'object',  when  we  speak  of  our  ideas, 

1  A  190  =  B  236.  In  A  192  =  B  237  it  is  used  for  a  moving  ship. 

2  A  189  =  B  234. 

3  See  Chapter  XLII §  i.  If  by  the  manifold  of  (or  in)  the  appearance 
Kant  means  the  parts  of  such  an  object  as  a  house — and  this  is  the 
example  he  himself  gives  m  A  190  —  6235  and  A  192  =  -  B  237-8 — his 
statement  is  true  in  the  sense  that  we  could  never  perceive  all  the 
parts  of  a  house  simultaneously. 

4  Compare  A  191  =  B  236. 


232  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §  4 

not  as  objects,  but  as  'designating*  or  'symbolising'1  an 
object.2 

If  we  take  our  ideas  to  be  objects  merely  in  the  sense  that  we 
are  aware  of  them,  then,  Kant  says,  they  do  not  differ  from 
apprehension  (which  is  the  'taking  up*  of  the  given  into  the 
synthesis  of  imagination).3  I  believe  he  means  by  this  that  they 
do  not  differ  as  regards  their  time-relations*  The  time  of  an 
idea  qud  idea  present  to  consciousness  is  the  time  of  its  appre- 
hension; and  since  our  apprehendings  are  successive,  we  can 
say  that  our  ideas  are  always  produced  successively  in  the  mind. 
This  means  that  the  manifold  of  appearances5  is  always  produced 
successively  in  the  mind  as  it  is  taken  up  by  our  acts  of  appre- 
hension. 

Kant  asserts  that  if  appearances  were  things-in-themselves, 
we  could  never  decide  from  the  succession  of  our  ideas  how 
the  manifold  (that  is,  the  parts)  of  these  appearances  is 
combined  in  the  object.  The  reason  he  gives  is  that  we  have 
to  deal  only  with  our  ideas  and  the  character  of  things-in- 
themselves  is  quite  outside  our  sphere  of  knowledge.6  But 
obviously  if  appearances  were  things-in-themselves — and 
such  is  the  hypothesis  he  is  considering — this  would  not 
be  the  case. 

The  argument  is  badly  expressed ;  but  I  take  Kant  to  mean 

1  'bezeichnen* ;  A  190  =  B  235.  Kant  here  seems  to  mean  that  our 
idea  (for  example,  a  seen  colour)  is  taken  as  characterising  the  total 
object  (for  example,  a  house). 

2  In  this  passage  (A  189-190  —  B  234-5)  Kant  seems  to  use  'appear- 
ances*, not  for  the  total  object,  but  for  the  parts  or  ideas  of  which 
it  is  made  up.  This  might  perhaps  be  questioned;  for  in  A  190-1 
=  B  236  the  whole  appearance  is  described  as  an  idea  whose  trans- 
cendental object  is  unknown.  For  the  sake  of  clearness  I  have  avoided 
the  use  of  the  word  'appearance*  here. 

3  This  is  the  usual  technical  sense  of  'apprehension*. 

4  Compare  A  194  =  B  239.  I  cannot  believe  that  Kant  means  to 
identify  the  manifold  apprehended  with  the  act  of  apprehending  it; 
and  the  'differences*  of  which  he  speaks  in  the  Second  Analogy  are 
to  be  understood  as  differences  in  temporal  position. 

6  I  take  Kant  to  mean  that,  for  example,  the  parts  of  a  house  are 
produced  successively  in  the  mind. 
6  A  190  =  6235. 


XLIII  §4]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  233 

that  if  we  regarded  an  appearance,1  for  example,  a  house,  as  a 
thing-in-itself,  then  we  could  never  pass  from  the  succession 
of  our  ideas  (in  which  the  parts  of  the  house  are  given  one 
after  another)  to  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  these  parts 
were  combined  in  the  house  itself.2  All  we  have  given  us  is 
the  succession  of  our  ideas.  If  by  means  of  imagination  we 
combined  these  ideas  (or  what  is  given  in  them)  in  one  and  the 
same  time  and  regarded  them  as  coexistent,  we  could  never 
know  that  this  combination  represented  anything  in  the 
thing-in-itself.  For  we  know  nothing  of  things-in-themselves 
except  that  they  are  supposed  to  'affect'  us  through  our  ideas.3 
If  we  grant  this,  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  the  Critical 
problem.  We  are  assuming  that  appearances,  such  as  houses,4 
are  not  things-in-themselves.  We  are  also  assuming  that  nothing 
is  given  to  us  except  our  ideas :  the  whole  house  is  a  given  idea 
in  the  sense  that  it  is  given  to  us  in  parts  (or  ideas)  which  are 
always  successive.5  Can  we  then  explain  how  the  parts  (or  the 
manifold)  of  the  appearance  have  a  temporal  combination— 
for  example,  as  coexisting — in  the  appearance  itself?  On  Critical 

1  If  we  take  Appearance'  here  to  mean  the  parts  of  the  whole  object, 
the  argument  runs  on  the  same  lines.  We  could  never  know  from  these 
successively  given  parts  how  they  were  really  combined  in  the  object. 

2  Strictly  speaking,  we  should  not  know  that  there  was  anything 
which  could  be  called  a  'house':  we  should  only  know  that  certain 
given  ideas  succeeded  one  another. 

3  If  we  take  this  as  the  proper  interpretation  of  Kant's  argument, 
we  may  doubt  whether  it  is  intended  to  stand  on  its  own  feet:  the 
language  used  seems  to  imply  that  Critical  principles  are  already  pre- 
supposed.   If  time  is  a  form  of  our  sensibility,  we  can  never  be 
justified   in   ascribing   temporal   relations   to   things   as   they   are   in 
themselves.  Kant  hopes  to  show  later  that  objective  succession  and 
coexistence   could  never  be  known   except  as  necessary  succession 
and   coexistence,   and   he    believes   that   if   objects  were   thmgs-in- 
themselves  we  could  have  no  knowledge  of  necessity. 

4  A  190  =  B  235.  Here  again  it  is  quite  easy  to  restate  the  problem, 
if  we  take  appearances  to  be  the  successively  given  parts  of  a  whole 
object,  and  not  the  whole  object  itself;  but  I  prefer  to  suppose  that 
Kant  is  using  'appearance'  in  the  latter  sense,  as  he  does  m  what 
immediately  follows. 

5  Note  that  mAi9i=B236  the  whole  appearance  (of  a  house)  is 
said  to  be  given  and  to  be  an  aggregate  of  ideas. 

VOL.  II  H* 


334  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §4 

principles  a  house  is  an  appearance,  or  object,  which  is  neither 
a  thing-in-itself  not  a  succession  of  ideas  in  us.  How  on  such 
a  basis  can  we  justify  our  belief  that  although  the  parts  of  the 
house  are  apprehended  successively  they  are  nevertheless 
coexistent  in  the  object?  As  Kant  says,  'How  can  the  manifold 
be  combined  in  the  appearance  itself,  when  the  appearance  is 
nothing  in  itself?'1 

Kant  himself  emphasises  the  difficulty  of  this  question  for 
the  Critical  Philosophy.2  From  the  point  of  view  of  ordinary 
experience  or  of  science  a  house  is  quite  properly  regarded  as 
a  thing-in-itself.3  From  the  Transcendental  point  of  view  it 
is  only  an  appearance,  that  is,  an  idea  whose  transcendental 
object  (here  clearly  equal  to  the  thing-in-itself)  is  unknown.4 
Yet  we  are  trying  to  make  a  distinction  between  the  succession 
of  ideas  (in  which  the  parts  of  the  object  are  given)  and  the 
given  appearance  as  a  whole.  We  are  regarding  the  whole 
given  appearance  as  the  object — the  phenomenal  object — 
of  these  ideas  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  is  only  a  sum  or  aggre- 
gate of  these  ideas.  And  we  are  supposing  that  our  concept  of 
'house',  which  is  presumably  extracted  by  analysis  from  the 
successive  ideas  of  our  apprehension,5  must  be  in  agreement 
with  this  object,  if  we  are  to  have  truth.  How  can  this  be 
possible  ? 

At  this  stage  Kant  offers  us  his  general  solution  of  the  problem. 
He  stresses  the  fact  that  the  agreement  of  our  concept  with  the 
object  is  empirical  truth  ;6  and  he  implies  that  if  we  can  state  the 
conditions  under  which  alone  a  concept  can  agree  with  its  object, 
that  is,  if  we  can  state  the  formal  conditions  of  empirical 

1  A  191  =  6236.  That  is,  when  the  appearance  is  not  a  thing-in- 
itself  at  all. 

2  Prichard  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  pp.  280  ff.)  argues  that  this 
difficulty  is  insuperable. 

3  Compare  A  45-6  =  B  63.  4  A  190-1  =  B  236. 
6  It  can  be  so  extracted  only  because  our  ideas  have  been  combined 

in  accordance  with  the  categories;  m  particular  because  they  are 
regarded  as  states  of  a  substance,  states  whose  relative  position  in  time 
is  determined  by  causal  law. 

6  Compare  A  58  =  B  82  ff.,  A  157-8  =  B  196-7,  A  237  =  B  296, 
A  451  =  B  479,  and  Log.  EM.  VII  (IX  50-1). 


XLIII  §  4]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  235 

truth,1  then  we  can  answer  the  question,  'How  can  the  manifold 
be  combined  in  the  appearance  itself?' 

The  formal  conditions  of  empirical  truth  must  be  formal 
conditions  of  experience  (and  so  of  objects).2  Kant,  however, 
has  in  mind,  not  the  Mathematical  Principles  (which  are  con- 
cerned with  intuition  as  such),  but  the  Dynamical  Principles, 
and  in  particular  the  Analogies ;  for  these  are  concerned  with 
the  existence  of  objects,  and  are  necessary  only  under  the 
conditions  of  empirical  thinking  in  an  experience.3  When  we 
speak  of  'the  manifold  as  it  is  combined  in  the  appearance 
(or  in  the  object)  itself,'  we  mean  the  manifold  as  it  is  combined 
in  accordance  with  the  Analogies,  and  not  as  it  is  combined 
arbitrarily  in  imagination  or  as  it  is  given  to  us  successively 
in  apprehension.  The  object  can  be  distinguished  from  the 
ideas  successively  given  in  apprehension,  because  (although 
it  is  itself  only  an  appearance,  and  indeed  a  complex  of  ideas) 
'it  stands  under  a  rule  which  distinguishes  it  from  every  other 
apprehension  and  makes  a  particular  kind  of  combination  in 
the  manifold  necessary.'4  The  'rule'  under  which  the  object 
stands  is  most  naturally  taken  to  mean  one  of  the  Analogies.5 
Kant  adds  'That  in  the  appearance  which  contains  the  condition 
of  this  necessary  rule  of  apprehension  is  the  object'. 

In  this  passage  there  are  many  difficulties  of  interpretation. 
Kant's  argument  is  quite  general;  and  if  he  means  the  'rule' 
to  be  'a  formal  condition  of  empirical  truth'  (as  I  think  he  must), 
then  the  rule  cannot  be  confined  to  the  Second  Analogy.6 

1  We  are  not  asking,  c  Under  what  conditions  does  this  concept  of 
house  agree  with  this  house?' — that  depends  on  the  details  thought 
in  the  concept  and  given  in  sensation.  We  are  asking  *  Under  what 
conditions  is  it  possible  for  any  concept  to  agree  with  any  object?' 
— or  perhaps  better  'How  on  Critical  presuppositions  is  it  possible 
that  there  can  be  any  object  with  which  our  concept  may  agree?' 

2  Compare  A  202  =  B  247  and  A  62-3  =  B  87. 

3  A  160  —  B  199.  *  A  191  —  B  236. 

5  The  fact  that  Kant  speaks  of  a  'rule',  and  not  of  a  'law'  or  'principle', 
does  not  exclude  the  Analogies ;  see  for  example  A  177-8  =  B  220  and 

A  1 80  =  B222. 

6  Still  less  could  it  be  a  particular  causal  law  except  in  the  sense 
that  to  stand  under  the  general  law  of  causality  is  always  to  stand  under 
a  particular  law. 


236  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §  4 

The  'rule'  might  equally  well  be  the  Third  Analogy:  indeed 
the  only  case  which  Kant  has  so  far  considered  is  the  case  of 
objective  coexistence,  which  is  governed  by  the  Third  Analogy.1 
Nevertheless  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  we  need  consider  only 
the  case  of  objective  succession,  in  which  case  the  rule  would  be 
the  Second  Analogy.2 

The  Second  Analogy  may  certainly  be  described  as  a  rule 
which  makes  a  particular  kind  of  combination  in  the  manifold 
necessary.  But  can  we  say  that  'it  distinguishes  an  appearance 
from  every  other  apprehension'?3  Above  all  can  we  describe 
it  as  'a  rule  of  apprehension'?  We  shall  find  similar  puzzles 
in  what  follows.4  At  present  I  think  we  need  only  say  that 
whatever  we  may  make  of  Kant's  terminology,  the  applicability 
of  the  law  of  cause  and  effect  does,  on  his  view,  mark  out  an 
objective  succession  from  a  merely  subjective  succession, 
and  does  render  it  necessary  that  our  apprehension  should 
follow  a  certain  order.5 

There  are  special  difficulties  in  the  final  statement :  'That  in 
the  appearance  which  contains  the  condition  of  this  necessary 
rule  of  apprehension  is  the  object.'6  We  may  compare  with 
this  the  statement  that  the  object  is  regarded  as  'that  which 

1  It  is  true  that  the  proof  of  the  Third  Analogy  does  not  make  use 
of  the  term  'rule',  hut  we  must  remember  that  the  schema  of  com- 
munion is  the  coexistence  of  the  determinations  of  different  substances 
'in  accordance  with  a  universal  rule';  see  A  144  =  B  183-4.  Compare 
also  A  217  —  B  264. 

2  Compare  the  parallel  passage  in  A  202  =  B  247.  The  schema  of 
causality,  it  may  also  be  recalled,  is  the  succession  of  the  manifold  so 
far  as  that  succession  is  subjected  to  a  rule;  see  A  144  =  B  183. 

3  We  should  expect  him  to  say  either  (i)  that  it  distinguishes  an 
appearance  as  object  from  every  other  idea  apprehended  or  (2)  that  it 
distinguishes  the  apprehension  of  an  appearance  as  object  from  every 
other  kind  of  apprehension.   It  is  hard  to  be  sure  whether  Kant's 
language,  when  he  thus  seems  to  equate  apprehension  and  its  object 
(or  content),  is  due  to  carelessness  or  not ;  there  seems  to  be  a  kind  of 
method  in  it,  but  without  further  justification  or  explanation  it  is  a 
source  of  confusion.  Compare  the  difficult  assertion  already  noted 
(A  190  =  B  235)  that  our  ideas  as  objects  of  consciousness  are  not 
different  from  apprehension.         4  See  especially  A  193-4  =  B  238-9. 

6  So  far  it  might  be  called  loosely  'a  rule  of  apprehension', 
6  A  191  =  6236. 


XLIII  §  4]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  237 

prevents  our  cognitions  from  being  haphazard  or  arbitrary;'1 
and  again  that  'all  appearances,  in  so  far  as  through  them 
objects  are  to  be  given  to  us,  must  stand  under  a  priori  rules 
of  synthetic  unity'.2  I  have  already  argued3  that  Kant  in  these 
passages  does  not  suggest  that  necessary  synthetic  unity  (which 
is  the  essential  characteristic  of  a  phenomenal  object)  is  due  to 
the  transcendental  object  regarded  as  a  thing-in-itself.  Similarly 
heae  there  is  no  ground  for  thinking  that  he  is  speaking  of  the 
transcendental  object.4 1  take  it  that  in  this  passage,  as  elsewhere, 
he  is  identifying  the  object  with  the  necessary  synthetic  unity 
of  the  manifold.5  This  necessary  synthetic  unity  contains  in 
particular  a  necessary  synthetic  unity  of  time-determinations6 
or,  more  simply,  a  necessary  time-order7 ;  and  it  is  this  necessary 
time-order  in  the  appearance  which  is  the  condition  of  a  neces- 
sary rule  of  apprehension,8  notably  in  the  case  of  objective 
succession.9 

1  See  A  104. 

2  See  A  1 10.  Compare  B  137,  'Object  is  that  in  the  concept  of  which 
the  manifold  of  a  given  intuition  is  united';  and  also  A  158  =  B  197. 

3  See  Chapter  XXII  §2. 

4  It  would  be  strange  indeed  to  speak  of  the  transcendental  object 
as  'in  the  appearance',  if  by  the  transcendental  object  is  meant  the 
thing-m-itself. 

5  Strictly  speaking,  the  object  is  the  manifold  so  far  as  that  manifold 
possesses  necessary  synthetic  unity. 

6  Compare  A  177-8  =  B  220,  where  the  necessary  synthetic  unity 
in  time-relations  (or  time-determinations)  is  clearly  the  unity  of  the 
time-order. 

7  In  A  145  =  B  184-5  the  schemata  of  relation  are  concerned  with 
the  time-order  in  regard  to  all  possible  objects. 

8  Here  Kant  is  concerned  with  the  rule  as  a  rule  of  apprehension, 
and  he  finds  its  condition  in  the  object,  although  he  spoke  previously  of 
the  appearance  as  an  object  in  so  far  as  it  (and  not  the  apprehension) 
stood  under  the  rule.  Difficulty  again  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  rule 
governing  the  appearance  and  the  rule  of  apprehension  seem  to  be  both 
distinguished  and  identified. 

9  The  case  of  objective  coexistence  is  more  complicated.   If  we 
consider  only  objective  succession,  Kant's  doctrine  is  expressed  more 
clearly  in  A  193  =  B  238,  where  he  says  that  objective  succession 
consists  in  the   order  of  the  manifold  of  appearance,  an  order  in 
accordance  with  which  one  apprehension  follows  another  in  con- 
formity with  a  rule. 


238  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §  5 

If  we  take  the  'rules'  of  which  Kant  speaks  to  be  the  Analo- 
gies, he  appears  to  regard  them  both  as  rules  governing  objects 
and  also  as  necessitating  thereby  the  order  of  our  apprehensions.1 
The  phrase  'condition  of  a  rule*  is  puzzling  wherever  it  occurs, 
but  on  this  interpretation  it  may  not  unreasonably  be  taken  to 
mean  a  transcendental  schema.2  It  is  natural  enough  to  speak 
of  an  object  as  'containing'  the  transcendental  schemata;3 
and  the  schemata  of  relation  as  a  whole  are  concerned  with 
the  necessary  time-order,4  which  I  have  assumed  to  be  what 
Kant  describes  here  as  the  condition  of  a  rule.5  It  is  in  any  case 
the  transcendental  schemata  of  relation  which  Kant  must  show 
to  be  present  in  objects,  if  he  is  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  Analo- 
gies.6 Indeed  he  has  to  show  that  an  object  exists  as  an  object 
only  so  far  as  there  are  present  in  it  the  transcendental  schemata 
of  relation.  His  immediate  task  is  to  show  that  succession  in 
the  object  must  be  necessary  succession. 

§5.  The  Second  Proof 

I.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  get  on  with  our  task  and  to 
consider  the  special  case  of  objective  succession.7  Kant  insists 
that  we  could  not  perceive  an  objective  event  or  change  without 

1  In   the   latter  sense  he  appears   to   describe   them   as   rules   of 
apprehension. 

2  It  should  be  noted  that  Kant  speaks  of  the  categories  as  containing 
the  condition  or  conditions  of  a  priori  rules;  see  A  132  --  B  171, 
A  135  =  B  174,  and  also  A  140  =  B  179.  In  these  contexts  the  'con- 
ditions of  a  rule*  seem  to  be  the  transcendental  schemata;  and  this 
suggests  that  we  should  at  least  ask  ourselves  whether  the  phrase  can 
have  the  same  meaning  here. 

3  This  seems  to  be  implied  in  A  139  =  B  178,  where  Kant  says 
that  time  is  contained  in  every  empirical  representation  of  the  manifold. 
The  whole  passage  should  be  consulted. 

4  See  A  145  =  B  184.  The  'time-order*  is  the  objective  and  necessary 
order  of  the  manifold  in  time.  Where  the  Second  Analogy  is  the  rule, 
the  condition  is  the  schema  of  'necessary  succession';  and  necessary 
succession  in  the  object  is  the  condition  of  necessary  succession  in  our 
apprehension. 

6  The  phrase  occurs  also  in  A  193  =  B  238-9,  where  it  is  a  source  of 
new  difficulties. 

6  Compare  A  181  =  B  223-4.  7  A  191-4  =  B  236-9. 


XLIII  §  5]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  239 

perceiving  something  else  immediately  before  it ;  for  we  can  no 
more  perceive  something  happening  after  an  empty  time  than 
we  can  perceive  empty  time  itself.  But  in  perceiving  the  front 
and  back  of  a  house  our  apprehension  is  just  as  successive  as 
it  is  when  we  perceive  an  objective  change,  so  that  the  mere 
successiveness  of  our  apprehension  does  not  prove  the  succes- 
siveness of  what  is  apprehended.1 

II.  There  is,  however,  another  point  to  be  noted.  Suppose 
that  we  are  aware  of  an  objective  succession,  that  is,  of  an  event 
a  followed  by  an  event  /?.  Let  our  sense-perception  of  a  be 
called  a  and  our  sense-perception  of  /?  be  called  b.  Then  if  the 
succession  is  objective,  that  is,  if  a  is  followed  by  /?  in  the  objective 
world,  a  must  precede  and  cannot  follow  b,  and  b  must  succeed 
and  cannot  precede  a.  If  a  ship  is  moving  down  stream,2  we  cannot 
first  see  it  lower  down  and  then  see  it  higher  up,  whereas  in 
the  case  of  a  house  (where  there  is  no  such  objective 
succession)  we  can  see  first  the  front  and  then  the  back  or  vice 
versa.3 

It  is  absolutely  vital  not  to  misunderstand  this  crucial 
statement.  Kant  is  not  arguing  from  the  observed  irreversibility 
of  my  sense-perceptions  to  an  objective  succession.  He  is  on 
the  contrary  arguing  from  an  assumed  objective  succession  to 
the  irreversibility  of  my  sense-perceptions.  He  is  not  saying 
that  I  find  I  cannot  reverse  the  order  of  my  sense-perceptions, 

1  In  this  passage  Kant  speaks  of  distinguishing  one  synthesis  of 
apprehension  (or  sense-perception)  from  others,  as  I  think  he  ought 
to  have  done  above,  instead  of  speaking  about  distinguishing  an  object 
from  other  apprehensions. 

2  It  should  be  noted  that  the  earlier  position  of  the  ship  is  not  the 
cause  of  the  later.  Kant's  doctrine  is  that  every  objective  succession 
must  be  causally  determined,  not  that  it  must  be  a  sequence  of  cause 
and  effect. 

3  No  doubt  the  order  of  the  appearances  of  the  house  to  me  is 
determined  by  the  movements  of  my  body,  but  it  is  not  determined 
by  any  change  in  the  object,  that  is,  in  the  house.  If  I  make  my  mental 
history  an  object  to  myself,  the  successive  appearances  of  the  house 
are  actual  objective  events,  and  as  such  they  are  as  much  determined 
as  any  other  objective  events. 


240  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §  5 

and  then  conclude  I  must  be  dealing  with  an  objective  succes- 
sion. Such  a  statement,  even  if  it  were  true — and  I  think  it  is 
false1 — could  never  justify  us  in  affirming  any  kind  of  necessity ; 
we  could  only  say  that  we  had  hitherto  found  our  sense- 
perceptions  to  occur  in  a  particular  order  and  no  other.  Kant 
starts  with  the  assumption  that  we  are  aware  of  an  objective 
succession,  and  asserts  that,  if  so,  our  sense-perceptions  must 
occur  in  a  particular  order.  The  order  in  the  succession  of 
sense-perceptions  is  in  this  case  determined  by  the  order  of 
events.2  There  is  a  rule  governing  our  apprehension,  a  rule 
which  is  always  to  be  found  when  we  are  perceiving  objective 
events,  and  it  makes  the  order  of  our  successive  sense-percep- 
tions (in  the  apprehension  of  these  successive  events)  a  necessary 
order.3 

III.  In  this  case4  therefore— that  is,  in  the  case  where  we 
are  ex  hypothesi  perceiving  an  objective  succession — we  must 
derive  the  subjective  succession  in  our  apprehension  from  the 

1  Unless  we  already  assume  that  we  are  perceiving  objects,  and 
indeed  that  the  objects  perceived  are  substances.  I  think  Professor 
Pnchard  is  right  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  294)  in  saying  that 
we  do  not  begin  by  knowing  a  subjective  succession  and  then  pass  to 
a  knowledge  of  objective  succession  either  by  finding  that  the  sub- 
jective succession  is  irreversible  or  in  any  other  way.  Indeed  is  there 
any  meaning  in  talking  about  the  irreversibihty  (or  for  that  matter  the 
reversibility)  of  a  subjective  succession,  unless  we  are  already  pre- 
supposing the  existence  of  an  objective  world  in  time  ?  In  a  subjective 
succession  considered  solely  by  itself  we  could  say  only  that  our  ideas 
had  occurred  in  the  order  in  which  they  had  occurred. 

2  Compare  A  192  =  B  237:  'The  order  in  which  the  sense-percep- 
tions succeed  one  another  in  apprehension  is  in  this  instance  determined, 
and  to  this  order  apprehension  is  bound/ 

8  A  193  =  B  238.  In  the  above  paragraph  I  am  not  denying  that 
on  Kant's  view  the  irreversibihty  of  our  sense-perceptions  may 
entitle  us  to  assert  objective  succession,  if  we  already  assume  that  we 
are  perceiving  objects  whose  states  must  be  either  successive  or 
coexistent:  I  deny  only  that  such  an  observed  irreversibihty  can  by 
itself  give  us  necessity.  The  necessity  which  Kant  attributes  to  the 
subjective  order  of  our  sense-perceptions  is  not  known  by  observation, 
but  is  a  consequence  of  its  *  derivation'  from  an  objective  order.  And 
indeed  for  Kant  necessity  can  never  be  known  by  mere  observation. 

4  'in  unserem  Fall.' 


XLIII  §  5]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  241 

objective  succession  of  appearances*  If  the  subjective  succession 
is  not  derived  from  an  objective  succession,2  it  is  arbitrary  and 
undetermined,3  and  does  not  enable  us  to  distinguish  one 
appearance  from  another  as  regards  the  time  of  its  occurrence 
in  the  objective  world.  In  short  it  proves  nothing  about  the 
temporal  connexion  of  the  manifold  in  the  object.4 

IV.  The  objective  succession  of  appearances  is  then  said 
— and  this  seems  to  be  a  mere  expansion  of  what  has  been  said 
before — to  consist  in  that  order  of  the  manifold  of  the  appear- 
ance according  to  which5  the  apprehension  of  the  preceding 

1  The  appearances  in  question  are  events  or  changes  in  the  pheno- 
menal world.  In  this  much-quoted  sentence  Kant,  as  so  often,  confuses 
his  readers  by  beginning  with  a  'therefore'  and  following  it  up  with  a 
*  because*. 

2  Kant's  own  expressions  are  very  abbreviated,  but  I  take  'jene  sonst* 
to  mean  'the  subjective  succession  when  it  is  not  derived  from  an 
objective  succession*  and  'jene  alleiny  to  mean  practically  the  same. 

3  Kant  may  be  here  repeating  what  he  has  already  said  about  the 
house,  that  where  there  is  not  a  series  of  objective  events  or  changes, 
there  is  nothing  to  make  our  apprehension  begin  at  one  point  rather 
than  at  another  in  its  synthesis  of  the  manifold.  His  statement  that 
in  such  a  case  the  subjective  order  is  'wholly  arbitrary'  and  'wholly 
undetermined'  seems  to  be  exaggerated.  It  is  perhaps  possible  for  him 
to  mean  that  when  we  set  aside  all  considerations  about  objective 
succession  (or  coexistence),  when  in  short  we  consider  the  subjective 
order  of  our  sense-perceptions  in  complete  abstraction  from  any  kind 
of  objective  order,  the  subjective  order  is  undetermined  and  arbitrary 
in  the  sense  that  it  is  a  given  order  for  which  we  can  see  no  reason  and 
in  which  we  can  find  no  necessity.  Such  a  statement  I  believe  to 
be  true. 

4  The  difficulty  of  this  is  that  it  is  an  indication,  if  not  a  proof,  of 
the  coexistence  of  the  manifold.  Hence  there  is  something  to  be  said 
for  the  alternative  interpretation  suggested  in  note  3  above,  since  the 
subjective   order,   considered   in   abstraction  from   the   objective,   is 
always  (according  to  Kant)  successive  and  does  prove  nothing  about 
the  temporal  connexion  of  the  manifold  in  the  object. 

6  'according  to  which'  surely  implies  that  the  subjective  succession 
is  derived  from,  or  determined  by,  the  objective  succession.  The 
passage  may  be  compared  with  that  in  A  191  =  B  236,  where  Kant 
speaks  of  'that  in  the  appearance  which  contains  the  condition  of  the 
necessary  rule  of  apprehension'.  Kant  seems  to  me  to  regard  the 
subjective  and  objective  successions  as,  so  far,  distinct,  not,  as  Pro- 
fessor Pnchard  suggests  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge  >  p.  289),  as 
identical.  The  identification,  I  think,  comes  later. 


242  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIII  §  5 

event  follows  the  apprehension  of  the  succeeding  event  in 
accordance  with  a  rule.1  Here  the  rule  is  clearly  what  Kant 
calls  a  rule  of  apprehension — a  rule  that  (in  virtue  of  the  objec- 
tive succession  a/?)  sense-perception  a  must  be  followed  by 
sense-perception  b.  And  Kant  goes  on  to  say  that  it  is  only 
because  of  this  rule2  that  I  am  entitled  to  say  of  the  appearance, 
or  object,  itself  (and  not  merely  of  my  apprehension)  that  there 
is  in  it  a  succession.  He  even  adds  that  to  assert  a  succession  in 
the  object  is  the  same  thing  as  to  say3  that  I  cannot  arrange  my 
apprehension  otherwise  than  in  just  this  succession. 

The  interpretation  of  this  is  a  matter  of  the  greatest  difficulty. 
Kant  is  not,  I  think,  merely  repeating  what  he  has  already 
said — that  when  I  am  aware  of  an  event  a  followed  by  an 
event  ]8,  the  sense-perception  a  must  be  followed  by  the 
sense-perception  b,  and  that  such  a  necessary  succession 
of  sense-perceptions  must  always  be  present  whenever  there  is 
awareness  of  an  objective  succession.  He  is  passing  beyond 
what  is,  on  the  face  of  it,  an  affirmation  of  common  sense  to 
its  interpretation  on  Critical  principles.  If  the  event  a  and  the 
event  /?  were  things-in-themselves,  it  is  manifest  that  wre  could 
never  pass  from  the  common-sense  assertion  that,  in  perceiv- 
ing the  objective  succession  ajS,  sense-perception  a  must  be 
followed  by  sense-perception  b  to  the  quite  different  assertion 
that  the  objective  succession  ajS  is  itself  causally  determined. 
Kant  appears  to  be  arguing  that  since  the  event  a  and  the 
event  j3  are,  on  Critical  principles,  only  the  content  of  sense- 
perceptions  a  and  b,  the  attribution  of  necessary  succession  to 
a  and  b  (on  the  ground  of  the  objectivity  of  the  succession  aj3) 
is  ipso  facto  an  attribution  of  necessary  succession  to  a  and  /?; 

1  This,  for  Kant,  is  the  same  as  'necessarily  follows*. 

2  'dadurch.'  The  following  sentence,  I  think,  supports  this  inter- 
pretation, but  it  is  possible  that  'dadurch*  should  be  translated  more 
loosely  as  equivalent  to  *m  this  way*,  that  is,  'where  there  is  an  order 
in  the  manifold  which  necessitates  a  succession  of  apprehensions  in 
accordance  with  a  rule*. 

3  'so  viel  bedeutet  als.y  It  is  in  this  sentence,  I  think,  that  we  get  the 
identification   of  the   objective   order  with   the   necessary  subjective 
order,  an  identification  which  Professor  Prichard  maintains  has  already 
been  made.  See  note  5  on  previous  page. 


XLIII  §  5]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  243 

and  the  necessary  succession  is  in  both  cases  identified  with 
succession  in  accordance  with  a  rule. 

This  contention  seems  to  me  to  be  the  crux  of  Kant's  argu- 
ment. 

V.  My  interpretation  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  what  fol- 
lows. In  accordance  with  such  a  rule  (which  hitherto  has  been 
spoken  of  as  a  rule  of  apprehension)  there  must  therefore  be 
present  in  what  precedes  an  event  the  condition  of  a  rule1 
in  accordance  with  which2'  this  event  always  and  necessarily 
follows,  so  that,  the  first  event  having  been  given,  I  must 
always  be  able  to  go  on  and  apprehend  or  perceive  the  second 
event.3  This  process  cannot  be  reversed,  for  when  the  second 
event  is  given  I  cannot  go  back  and  apprehend  the  first  event.4 

1  Kant  seems  to  mean  here  that  in  the  total  state  of  affairs  which 
precedes  the  event  there  must  be  present  something  upon  which  the 
event  must  follow.  He  does  not  mean  that  the  cause  of  the  lower 
position  of  the  ship  is  its  previous  position  higher  up  the  stream. 
The  presence  of  this  Something*  is  'the  condition  of  a  rule*. 

In  A  191  —  6236  'the  condition  of  a  rule*  seemed  to  be  the  trans- 
cendental schema,  and  it  may  appear  that  the  present  use  of  the 
phrase  is  entirely  different;  but  it  should  be  noted  that  the  trans- 
cendental schema  of  causality  is  described,  not  only  as  succession  in 
accordance  with  a  rule,  but  also  as  'the  real  upon  which,  whenever 
posited,  something  else  always  follows*  (A  144  —  B  183).  This  is  the 
condition  of  the  applicability  of  the  category  or  law  or  rule  of  cause 
and  effect.  It  is  thereby  of  course  also  the  condition  of  the  applicability 
of  a  particular  causal  law — the  general  law  is  manifested  only  in 
particular  applications. 

*  'Which*,  I  take  it,  refers  to  'rule*. 

3  I  have  introduced  this  last  clause,  because  its  introduction  seems 
to  be  assumed  by  the  following  sentence,  which  says  that  I  cannot 
'conversely*  go  back  from  the  event  and  determine  (by  apprehension) 
what  precedes  it. 

4  This  statement  seems  obvious  enough,  but  Kant  thinks  it  necessary 
to  support  it  with  a  reason.  'For  no  appearance  goes  back  from  the 
succeeding  point  of  time  to  the  preceding,  although  it  must  be  related 
to  some  preceding  point  of  time\  on  the  other  hand,  the  advance  (of 
appearances  presumably)  from  a  given  time  to  the  determinate  suc- 
ceeding time  is  necessary*.  This  contrast  of  the  determinate  succeeding 
time  with  the  indeterminate  preceding  time  seems  to  rest  on  the  fact 
that  the  succeeding  time  is  given  with  its  content  in  perception, 
whereas  the  preceding  time  can  (unless  we  remember  what  happened 


244  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLIII  §  5 

Hence  because  an  event  is  essentially  something  which  follows 
upon  something  else,1  I  must  necessarily  relate  it,  when 
perceived,  to  something  else  in  general2  which  precedes  it 
and  upon  which  it  follows  in  accordance  with  a  rule,  that  is, 
necessarily.  In  this  way  the  event,  as  the  conditioned  in  time, 
gives  a  sure  indication  that  there  is  some  preceding  condition 
or  cause.  The  preceding  condition  or  cause  does  not  merely 
indicate  that  there  is  some  event  which  must  follow  as  effect; 
it  actually  determines*  the  event  (in  the  sense,  I  take  it,  that  it 
must  necessarily  be  followed  by  an  effect  which,  if  we  knew 
what  to  look  for,  we  could  actually  perceive).4 

Kant's  insistence  that  we  cannot  go  on  to  perceive  the  cause 
which  we  presuppose  whenever  we  are  aware  of  an  objective 
event — a  point  which  seems  almost  too  obvious  to  state — is 
presumably  due  to  the  fact  that  for  him  all  events  are  in  the  last 
resort  ideas  or  appearances  to  human  minds.  He  has  to  insist 
that  nevertheless  we  can  and  do  place  or  *  posit'  unperceived 
(and  now  unperceivable)  events  in  a  time  which  is  past. 

in  it)  be  imagined  only  in  abstraction,  for  we  cannot  'construct*  its 
content  by  our  knowledge  of  the  general  law  of  cause  and  effect. 

All  this  bears  a  certain  external  resemblance  to  what  I  have  called 
the  Fifth  Proof  of  causality.  See  below,  Chapter  XL  IV  §  4. 

1  Literally  'since  there  certainly  is  something  which  follows'. 

2  I  do  not  know  what  its  cause  is,  but  I  do  know  it  must  have  some 
cause.  Hence  the  phrase  'something  else  in  general',  which  perhaps 
also  indicates  that  what  precedes  is  an  object. 

3  For  the  word  'determines*  (bestimmt)  see  also  A  199=6  244  and 
Chapter  XLIV  §  4. 

4  Provided  our  senses  were  adapted  to  it.  See  A  226  =  B  273. 


CHAPTER    XL  IV 
THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  (continued) 

§  i.  The  Third  Proof 

The  third  proof1  is  commonly  described  as  the  indirect2 
proof,  but  it  might  be  regarded  as  a  mere  appendix  to  the 
previous  proof. 

Kant  starts  with  the  hypothesis  that  what  the  previous 
argument  has  proved  is  untrue.  Suppose  that  a  perceived 
event  is  not  preceded  by  something  on  which  it  must  follow 
in  accordance  with  a  rule.  In  that  case  all  succession  of  sense- 
perceptions  would  be  merely  subjective — through  the  sub- 
jective succession  of  sense-perceptions  in  apprehension  it 
would  not  be  'objectively  determined*  which  of  these  sense- 
perceptions  must  precede  and  which  succeed.3  To  say  this  is 
to  say  that  we  should  have  a  mere  play  of  ideas4  unrelated  to 
any  object.  More  precisely,  our  sense-perceptions  could  not 
distinguish  the  objective  time-relations  of  one  appearance 
from  those  of  another — the  time  of  every  appearance  would 
simply  be  the  time  of  its  apprehension. 

The  reason  given  for  these  assertions  is  Kant's  fundamental 

1  A  194  —  B  239  fF.  (two  paragraphs). 

2  It  must  be  remembered  that  every  Critical  proof  is  in  a  sense 
indirect.  The  Principles  of  the  Undei standing  are  not  established 
directly  from   concepts,    but  indirectly  from   the   relation   of  these 
concepts  to  possible  experience.  See  A  737  =  B  765  and  compare 
Log.  Einl    IX  (IX  71).  The  method  of  the  third  proof,  if  it  is  an 
independent  proof,  is  reductio  ad  absurdum. 

3  A  194  =  B  239.  Note  that  it  appears  to  be  the  succession  of  our 
sense-perceptions  which  is  objectively  determined  only  if  events  are 
governed  by  causal  law.  Compare  the  statement  in  A  193  =  B  238 
that  the  subjective  succession  of  our  apprehension  is  undetermined 
unless  it  is  derived  from  the  objective  succession  of  appearances. 
Compare  also  what  I  take  to  be  the  statement  mA2Oi  ^  1*246  that 
'in  apprehension  there  is  an  order  of  successive  synthesis  which  an 
object  determines';  and  again  (in  A  191  =  B  236)  'that  in  the  appear- 
ance which  contains  the  condition  of  this  necessary  rule  of  apprehension 
is  the  object*. 

4  Compare  A  101,  A  201  =  B  247,  and  also  §  5,  below. 


246  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIV  §  i 

doctrine  that  whether  we  apprehend  the  successive  or  the 
coexistent,  our  apprehension  considered  in  itself  is  always 
successive:  in  his  own  phrase  'the  succession  in  apprehension 
is  always  of  the  same  kind'.1  I  take  this  to  imply  that,  so  far  as 
mere  apprehension  is  concerned,  the  appearance  given  to  us 
is  nothing  but  a  succession  of  ideas.  If  so,  'there  is  nothing  in 
the  appearance  which  determines  the  succession  in  appre- 
hension2 in  such  a  way  that  thereby  a  certain  succession  as 
objective  is  rendered  necessary'.3 

This  last  statement  appears  to  be  expressed  more  clearly 
when  Kant  says  that  'the  mere  succession  in  my  apprehension, 
if  it  is  not  determined  through  a  rule  in  relation  to  something 
that  precedes,  does  not  entitle  us  to  assert  any  succession  in 
the  object'.4  Whatever  be  the  obscurity  in  this  statement, 
Kant  is  clearly  not  asserting  that  by  examining  the  subjective 
succession  of  our  apprehensions,  we  can  sometimes  find  in  it 
irreversibility  and  infer  therefrom  an  objective  succession. 
He  is,  on  the  contrary,  maintaining  that  from  the  subjective 
succession  of  our  apprehensions,  taken  by  itself,  we  could 
never  pass  to  objective  succession. 

It  is  more  difficult  to  be  certain  about  the  positive  doctrine 

1  A  194  =  B  239.  This  way  of  stating  the  doctrine  again  opens  up 
the  question  whether  there  may  not  be  apprehension  of  the  coexistent 
over  a  limited  area.  If  it  were  so,  this  might  help  to  explain  how  we 
come  to  regard  as  coexistent  what  is  successively  apprehended:  for 
the  content  of  our  successive  apprehensions  may  partly  overlap. 

2  The  German  is  simply  'it'  (sie\  which  I  take  to  mean  'the  suc- 
cession   in    apprehension*.    Grammatically  'it*    might   refer   to  'the 
appearance*. 

3  A  194  =  B  239-40.  I  have  translated  literally,  but  most  of  the 
commentators  regard  the  text  as  corrupt.  If  'as  objective*  could  mean 
'as  objectively  determined',  it  would  give  good  sense ;  for  the  subjective 
succession  is  rendered  necessary  if  it  is  objectively  determined.  Or 
again,  if  Kant  is  identifying  the  succession  in  the  appearance  (or  object) 
with  the  succession  in  apprehension,  a  succession  which  is  objective 
is  a  necessary  succession  in  our  apprehension.  On  the  other  hand  the 
explanatory  passage  which  follows  suggests  that  Kant  meant  to  say 
'thereby  a  certain  succession  is  rendered  necessary  and  so  objective*. 

4  A  195  ==  B  240.  Note   that  here   the    rule   which   governs    the 
succession  of  events  is  supposed  to  determine  the  succession  in  my 
apprehension. 


XLIV  §  i]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  247 

asserted.  Kant  appears  to  hold  that  unless  we  believe  something 
in  the  appearance  to  make  the  succession  of  our  apprehensions 
a  necessary  succession,  we  cannot  speak  of  an  objective  succes- 
sion. This  seems  to  me  obviously  true.  The  peculiarity  of  his 
doctrine  is  the  view  that  the  succession  in  the  appearance  (or 
in  the  object)  must  itself  therefore  be  a  necessary  succession. 
This,  I  think,  follows  for  him  from  the  fact  that  the  object  is 
only  an  appearance,  and  not  a  thing-in-itself.1 

Kant  sums  up  his  conclusion  thus :  *  When  we  experience  an 
objective  event,2  we  always  presuppose  it  to  be  preceded  by 
something  on  which  it  follows  in  accordance  with  a  rule'.3  Apart 
from  this  presupposition  we  could  not  speak  of  a  succession  in  the 
objective  world,  but  only  of  a  succession  in  our  apprehension. 

Because  Kant  is  an  empirical  realist,  he  believes  that  an 
objective  succession  may  be  directly  present  to  my  successive 
apprehensions.  Because  he  is  a  transcendental  idealist,  he 
believes  that  such  an  objective  succession,  though  not  confined 
to  my  apprehension,  is  nothing  apart  from  a  possible  human 
experience.4  When  we  perceive  an  objective  succession,  the 
objective  succession  of  appearances  is  identical  with  the  sub- 
jective succession  of  my  ideas ;  and  the  necessity  which  marks 
the  subjective  succession  in  such  a  case  must  mark  also  the 
objective  succession.  If  we  distinguish  the  two  successions,  the 
necessity  in  the  objective  succession  may  be  said  to  be  the  source 
of  the  necessity  in  the  subjective  one.  If  we  take  it  that  there  is 
only  one  succession,  we  consider  that  succession  to  be  a  neces- 
sary succession,  and  only  so  do  we  regard  it  as  objective.5 

The  main  difficulty,  as  throughout  the  Second  Analogy, 
is  that  Kant  speaks  at  times  as  if  there  were  only  one  succession 
and  at  other  times  as  if  there  were  two.  The  succession  of  events 

1  Compare  Chapter  XLIII  §  5,  IV. 

2  Literally  'when  we  experience  that  something  happens*. 
8  A  195  =  B  240. 

4  There  is  something  which  is  its  ground  in  thmgs-m- themselves, 
but  that  ground  is  beyond  our  knowledge. 

5  Kant  says,  not  too  happily,  'I  make  my  subjective  succession  (in 
apprehension)  objective*  in  virtue  of  the  rule  which  governs  events; 
see  A  195  =  B  240. 


248  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLIV  §  2 

is  a  much  wider  series  than  the  succession  of  my  sense-percep- 
tions, and  there  may  be  a  succession  of  my  sense-perceptions 
when  there  is  no  succession  of  events.1  It  is  only  when  I  per- 
ceive an  objective  succession  that  the  two  series  so  far  coincide. 
It  may  be  asked  why  I  should  decide  in  some  cases  and  not 
in  others  that  the  succession  in  my  apprehension  is  necessary 
and  consequently  objective.  We  should  never  be  justified  in 
doing  so  if  we  considered  the  succession  in  my  apprehension 
merely  in  itself.  Kant  is  assuming  that  we  are  regarding  the 
colours,  shapes,  sizes,  and  so  on  (which  we  perceive  and  which 
are  consequently  called  our  ideas  or  our  sense-perceptions) 
as  states  of  permanent  substances  in  space.2  Once  that  is  assumed 
it  is  easy  to  discover  whether  our  sense-perceptions  are  in  a 
necessary  succession  or  not,  whether,  for  example,  we  can  see 
the  positions  of  a  ship  in  the  reverse  order  or  not.  Only  thus 
can  we  decide  whether  the  succession  is  in  the  ship  as  well  as 
in  our  apprehension.  Kant  is  not  inferring  objectivity  in 
general  from  an  observed  necessity  in  the  succession  of  sense- 
perceptions  taken  to  be  merely  subjective — such  a  transition 
would  be  quite  impossible,  as  he  himself  asserts.  He  is  assuming 
objectivity,  as  we  all  must,  from  the  start.  Only  on  the  presup- 
position of  objectivity  (or  of  permanent  substances  in  space) 
can  we  find  that  necessity  in  the  succession  of  our  sense-per- 
ceptions which  entitles  us  to  assert  objectivity  in  the  succession 
or  to  attribute  succession  to  the  object. 

§  2.  Origin  of  the  Concept  of  Causality 

At  this  stage  Kant  interposes  a  reply  to  those  who  maintain 
that  the  concept  of  causality  is  acquired  by  observing  the  repe- 
tition of  similar  series  of  events.3  His  answer  is  firstly  that  a 
concept  so  acquired  could  never  have  universality  and  necessity ; 
and  secondly  that  this  view  makes  the  common  mistake  of 

1  When  I  perceive  successively  the  coexistent.    2  Compare  B  232-3. 

3  A  195-6  =  B  240-1.  This  view  contradicts  Kant's  theory,  not 
only  because  it  derives  the  concept  of  causality  from  experience,  but 
primarily  because  it  supposes  we  could  be  aware  of  objective  events 
without  having  a  concept  of  causality,  however  obscure.  Kant  is 
concerned  here,  not  so  much  with  Hume  (who  derives  the  concept 


XLIV  §  3]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  249 

supposing  that  the  process  by  which  a  concept  becomes  'clear'1 
to  our  consciousness  is  the  source  (or  origin)  of  the  concept 
itself.  The  concept  of  causality  cannot  acquire  logical  clarity 
except  as  a  result  of  experience,  but  it  is  at  work  in  experience 
from  the  first.2 

§  3.  The  Fourth  Proof 

The  fourth  proof3  professes  to  appeal  for  confirmation  to 
experience.  Our  task  is  to  show4  that  we  never,  even  in  experience, 
ascribe  succession  to  an  object  except  when  there  is  a  rule  which 
compels  us  to  observe  this  order  of  sense-perceptions — here 
equivalent  to  appearances — rather  than  another.5  But  although 
Kant  makes  some  attempt  to  restrict  himself  to  analysis  of  the 
facts,  the  general  line  of  the  argument  can  hardly  be  said  to  differ 
in  any  important  way  from  the  argument  of  the  first  proof. 

He  even  begins  by  repeating  his  introductory  account  of 

from  awareness  of  a  succession  of  ideas  or  impressions)  as  with  the 
popular  views  which  have  'always*  been  held. 

When  Kant  speaks  of  an  'event*  (BegebenJieit)  or  of  'what  happens' 
(was  da  geschieht),  he  means  an  objective  event  or  happening.  See 
especially  A  198  =  B  243. 

1  For  'clear*  and  'obscure*  ideas  see  Chapter  XIX  §  8. 

2  Similarly  all  thinking  presupposes  the  law  of  non-contradiction 
from  the    first,  but  that  law  acquires  'logical  clarity*  only  when  we 
begin  to  think  about  thinking,  that  is,  when  we  study  logic. 

3Ai96  =  B24ifT.  (three  paragraphs). 

4  Kant  says  to  show  €im  Beispiele\  which  Kemp  Smith  translates 
'in  the  case  under  consideration*.  I  take  this  to  mean  'the  case  where 
we  experience  an  objective  succession* ;  for  Kant  does  not  here  offer 
any   concrete   examples   of  what  we   are   considering.    Compare   'in 
unserem  Fair  in  A  193  —  B  238;  but  the  phrase  seems  peculiar,  and 
perhaps   suggests   that  an   example   was   at  one   time   supplied    and 
subsequently  removed. 

5  Kant  adds  that  it  is  precisely  this  necessitation  which  'first  of  all* 
makes  possible  the  idea  of  a  succession  in  the  object.  If  we  interpret 
this  'first  of  all*  in  a  temporal  sense,  we  must  take  Kant  to  hold  that 
we  are  first  of  all  aware  of  a  merely  subjective  succession,  then — 
Heaven  knows  how — we  become  aware  of  its  necessity,  and  finally 
we  infer  an  objective  succession.  The  absurdity  of  this  doctrine  has 
been  sufficiently  exposed  by  Professor  Prichard,  but  I  do  not  believe 
it  should  be  attributed  to  Kant  if  any  other  interpretation  is  possible. 

In  this  passage  I  take  the  'rule*  to  be  the  Second  Analogy  considered 
as  determining  the  order  of  our  apprehensions  inasmuch  as  it  deter- 
mines the  order  of  events  apprehended. 


25o  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIV  §  3 

what  is  meant  by  'object'.1  He  insists  that  our  ideas  are  only 
modifications  or  determinations  of  the  mind  occurring  in  a 
particular  temporal  order,  and  that  they  cannot  possess  refer- 
ence to  an  object  (or  objective  significance)  merely  by  being 
related  to  another  idea  which  is  regarded  as  in  a  special  sense 
an  idea  of  the  object  ;2  for  this  idea  would  be  just  as  subjective 
as  the  ideas  which  referred  to  it.  He  then  states  the  Critical 
doctrine.  The  relation  of  ideas  to  an  object  merely  imposes  upon 
them  a  particular  kind  of  necessary  combination,  and  so  sub- 
jects them  to  a  rule  or  law.3  And  conversely  it  is  only  the 
necessity  in  the  temporal  order  of  our  ideas  which  gives  them  a 
relation  to  an  object.4 

Kant  then  proceeds  to  deal  explicitly  with  the  case  of  objective 
succession.  Since  our  apprehension  is  always  successive, 
succession  in  our  apprehension  does  not  by  itself  establish 
succession  in  the  object  apprehended.5  But  as  soon  as6  I  per- 
ceive, or  rather  presuppose,7  that  in  the  succession  of  my 
apprehensions  an  idea  follows  in  accordance  with  a  rule  from 

1  See  A  189-91  =  B  234-6  and  Chapter  XLIII  §  4. 

2  The  text  is  obscure  and  perhaps  corrupt,  but  Kant  seems  to 
affirm  that  when  we  say  ideas  are  ideas  of  an  object,  we  do  not  mean 
that  the  object  to  which  they  refer  is  only  a  particular  idea  'object* 
to  be  found  among  the  other  ideas.  When  we  say  'the  object  is  hard, 
white,  and  sweet*,  we  are  not  referring  these  ideas  to  the  idea  of 
'object',  but  to  the  object  itself. 

3  Kant  is  presumably  here  thinking  of  the  law  of  causality,  although 
what  he  says  is  true  of  all  the  Analogies,  which  are  concerned  with 
the   existence   of  objects  and  not  merely  with  the  character  of  the 
intuitions  through  which  objects  are  given.  Compare  A  1 60  -  -  B  199 
and  A  179  =  B  222. 

4  These  two  statements  together  ought  to  make  it  clear  that  when 
Kant   talks   of  objectivity  making   necessity,   and   necessity  giving 
objectivity,  he  does  not  intend  to  imply  that  we  have  first  necessity 
and  then  objectivity,  or  vice  versa.  This  combination  seems  to  me 
very  important,  because  otherwise  the  second  sentence,  like  so  many 
others,  could  be  taken  to  imply  that  there  is  a  process  from  subjective 
ideas  to  a  world  of  objects.  This  encourages  me  to  deny  the  same 
implication  when  it  seems  to  be  present  in  similar  sentences  taken 
by  themselves.  5  A  198  --  B  243. 

6  This  must  not  be  taken  to  imply  that  I  am  first  aware  of  a  necessary 
succession  in  what  is  subjective,  and  then  infer  an  objective  succession. 

7  The  second  expression  would  appear  to  be  a  correction  of  the  first. 


XLIV§3]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  251 

the  state1  which  precedes  it,  I  am  aware  of  an  event  or  objective 
happening ;  that  is  to  say,  I  know2  an  object  which  I  am  com- 
pelled to  place  or  'posit'  in  a  determinate  position  in  time, 
a  position  which  it  must  be  given  in  view  of  the  preceding 
state.3  This  is  unhappily  expressed,  because  it  may  seem  to 
suggest  that  there  is  a  psychological  process  by  which  we  pass 
from  awareness  of  the  subjective  to  knowledge  of  the  objective. 
I  believe  on  the  contrary  that  Kant  is  really  trying  to  analyse 
the  act  of  perception  into  its  elements,  as  becomes  clearer  in 
what  follows. 

When  I  perceive  an  event,  my  perception  contains  or  involves 
a  judgement4  that  something  precedes  the  event  (for  we  cannot 
know  that  anything  is  an  event  unless  we  know  that  there 
was  a  preceding  time  in  which  it  did  not  exist,  and  we  cannot 
perceive  a  preceding  time  unless  it  is  filled).  This  would, 
I  think,  be  generally  admitted;  but  Kant  goes  farther,  and 
asserts  that  the  event  can  acquire5  a  determinate  or  objective 
position  in  time  only  if  we  presuppose  that  there  is  in  the 
state6  which  precedes  it  something  upon  which  it  always 

1  I  use  Kant's  word  'state*  (Zustand).  This  'state*  must  be  in  some 
sense  an  idea,  like  the  idea  which  follows  it,  but  Kant  believes  it  may 
also  be  a  state  of  affairs.  'In  accordance  with  a  rule*  always  implies 
necessity. 

2  'erkenne.'  Kemp  Smith  translates  'apprehend*,  but  I  think  it  is 
better  to  distinguish  'apprehension'  from  'knowledge',  since  apprehen- 
sion is  only  one  factor  in  knowledge. 

3  Here  again  we  have  the  same  word  'state',  which  may  be  a  state 
of  mind  or  a  state  of  affairs — it  seems  to  me  that  Kant  is  leaving  its 
character  vague — but  the  objectivity  now  ascribed  to  what  follows 
must  belong  equally  to  what  precedes. 

4  Kant  says  literally  'in  this  idea  there  is  contained  that  something 
precedes*  (so  ist  in  dieser   Vorstellung  ersthch  enthalten:  dass  etwas 
vorhergehe).  From  this  it  would  seem  he  means  that  the  perception  not 
only  implies  a  fact,  but  also  contains  a  judgement,  though  this  judge- 
ment may  be  'obscure*  at  any  rate  as  regards  the  details  judged.  In 
A20i  -=  62  46  the  perception  is  said  to  contain  knowledge  (Erkenntnis) 
of  an  event.  But  perhaps  I  am  reading  too  much  into  the  word  'idea*. 

6  The  word  Kant  uses  is  'acquire*  (bekommeri),  but  I  do  not  think 
he  means  that  the  event  first  of  all  has  no  such  position  and  subse- 
quently acquires  it. 

6  Here  again  'state*  is  evidently  used  to  cover  the  whole  state  of 
affairs  of  which  the  cause  is  a  part. 


252  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIV  §  3 

follows  in  accordance  with  a  rule.1  Here  again  we  have  Kant's 
central  contention  that  objective  succession  must  be  necessary 
succession,  or  succession  in  accordance  with  a  rule. 

This  point  is  elaborated  by  the  assertion  of  what  Kant 
describes  as  consequences.2  Firstly  I  cannot  reverse  the  series, 
that  is,  I  cannot  place  or  'posit*  the  events  in  the  reverse  order  ;3 
and  secondly  if  the  preceding  state  is  posited,4  this  determinate 
event  necessarily  and  inevitably  follows. 

Finally  Kant  sums  up  his  position.5  There  is  in  our  ideas6 
an  order  in  which  the  present7  (so  far  as  it  is  an  event8) 
refers  to  some  preceding  state  as  its  indeterminate  correlate, 
while  the  correlate  stands  to  the  event  in  a  determining  relation 
(the  relation  of  cause  to  effect)  and  necessarily  connects9  the 
event  with  itself  in  the  time-series.10 

I  cannot  think  that  this  proof  adds  anything  to  what  has 
already  been  stated.  Its  language  is  unfortunate,  so  far  as  it 
suggests  in  places  that  Kant  is  describing  a  process  of  passing 

1  I  think  this  already  implies  necessity;  and  when  Kant  says  that 
necessary  succession  follows  from  this,  he  is  not  making  an  inference, 
but  restating  his  contention  in  other  terms. 

2  'woraus  sic/i  denn  ergibt.' 

3  Note  that  in  this  case  irreversibility  very  definitely  follows  from 
objectivity,  and  not  objectivity  from  irreversibility. 

4  The  word  'posited'  here  clearly  implies  existence — to  exist  is  to 
have  a  position  in  time.  6  A  198-9  =--  B  244. 

6  Here  the  causal  order  is  expressly  stated  to  be  an  order  in  our 
ideasy  an  order  in  which  they  are  'posited*. 

7  das  GegenwartigeS  This  must  be  an  appearance,  and  so  far  an  idea. 

8  I  take  this  to  be  the  meaning  of  'sofern  es  geworderf  ('so  far  as  it 
has  come  to  be'). 

9  The  usual  technical  sense  of  'connects'  (verknupft). 

10  This  difference  in  the  relations  of  effect  to  cause  and  cause  to 
effect  was  elaborated  in  A  193-4  —  B  238-9.  Compare  Chapter  XLIII 
§  5,  V.  The  cause  determines  the  effect,  but  the  effect  does  not  determine 
the  cause.  This  means  for  Kant  that  when  we  perceive  the  cause  we 
can  go  on  to  perceive  the  effect,  but  not  vice  versa.  I  can  find  no 
evidence  that  this  use  of  the  word  'determines*  is  also  intended  to 
express  the  common -sense  view  (so  hard  to  analyse)  that  the  cause 
'produces'  the  effect,  and  does  not  merely  precede  it.  Kant's  list  of 
what  he  calls  the  'predicables' — see  A  82  =  B  108 — and  other  passages 
suggest  that  he  regarded  causality  as  more  than  mere  necessary 
succession. 


XLIV  §4]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  253 

from  awareness  of  the  subjective  to  knowledge  of  the  objective. 
The  grounds  for  its  central  contention — that  objective  succes- 
sion must  be  necessary  succession — are,  I  think,  stated  less 
clearly  than  in  the  second  proof.  What  appears  to  me  to  be 
manifest — and  I  regard  it  as  an  essential  part  of  the  Critical 
Philosophy — is  that  for  Kant  objective  events  are  only  appear- 
ances to  human  minds,  and  may  even  be  described  as  ideas. 
The  difficulty  of  his  exposition  lies  in  the  fact  that  these  ideas 
are  regarded  as  being  in  a  subjective  succession  so  far  as  they 
are  successively  apprehended,  and  in  an  objective  succession 
so  far  as  they  are  posited,  or  given  a  position  by  thought,  in 
one  homogeneous  time.  When  we  are  actually  perceiving 
events,  these  two  successions  are  asserted  to  coincide,  and  it  is 
not  always  certain  which  of  the  two  successions  Kant  has  in 
mind. 

§  4.  The  Fifth  Proof. 

The  fifth  proof1  is  commonly  regarded  as  totally  different 
from  all  the  others.2  It  is  an  argument  from  the  nature  of  time, 
and  it  might  be  put  in  the  form  that  there  must  be  necessary 
succession  in  appearances  in  order  to  represent  in  experience 
the  necessary  succession  of  the  parts  of  time3 — just  as  there 
must  be  a  permanent  substratum  of  appearances  in  order  to 
represent  or  express  the  unity  of  the  one  time  of  which  all 
times  are  parts.4  This  argument  closely  resembles  the  argument 
for  permanent  substance,  and  it  rests,  as  all  Kant's  proofs 
do,  on  the  supposition  that  time  itself  cannot  be  perceived. 

1  A  199-201  =  B  244-6  (three  paragraphs). 

2  It  seems  to  me  just  possible  that  Kant  may  have  regarded  it  as  an 
elaboration  of  what  is  obscurely  hinted  at  in  A  194  =  B  239  at  the  end 
of  the  second  proof.  There  he  points  out  that  the  passage  of  appearances 
in  time  is  always  in  one  direction,  and  this  follows  upon  the  distinction 
made  between  the  relation  of  effect  to  cause  and  the  relation  of  cause 
to  effect.  The  present  proof  follows  immediately  upon  the  same  dis- 
tinction, but  it  deals  explicitly  with  the  direction  of  the  passage  of 
time  as  well  as  with  the  direction  of  the  passage  of  appearances  in  time. 

3  Compare  A  205  =  B  250  where  the  transitory  is  said  to  designate 
or  symbolise  (bezeichnet)  time,  as  regards  its  succession. 

4  See  B  225  and  A  183  =  B  226. 


254  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIV  §  4 

The  preceding  time  necessarily  determines  the  succeeding 
time — in  the  sense  that  I  cannot  get  to  the  succeeding  time  except 
through  the  preceding.1  This  is  regarded  by  Kant  as  a  necessary 
law  of  our  sensibility,  because  time  is  only  a  form  of  our  sensi- 
bility. He  holds  that  for  this  reason  it  is  also  an  indispensable 
law  of  our  empirical  knowledge*  of  the  time-series  that  appear- 
ances in  past  time  determine  all  existence  in  succeeding  time, 
and  that  subsequent  appearances,  as  events?  take  place  only 
so  far  as  their  existence  is  determined4  by  previous  events. 
The  ultimate  ground  for  this  contention  is  that  only  by  reference 
to  appearances  can  we  know5  empirically  this  continuity6  in 
the  sequence7  of  times. B 

Kant  goes  on  to  insist  once  more  on  the  presence  of  under- 

1  This  seems  also  to  be  the  sense  in  which  the  cause  'determines* 
the  effect.  Compare  Kant's  definition  of  continuity  m  A  209  =  B  254. 

2  The  word  is  '  Vorstellung*  (idea),  but  this  must  here  mean  know- 
ledge. The  knowledge  is  empirical,  because  we  distinguish  different 
times  only  by  the  events  in  them. 

3  The  phrase  'as  events'  seems  to  imply  that  we  may  have  subjective 
appearances  (the  images  of  imagination)  which  are  not  events  in  the 
objective  world.  As  events  in  our  mental  history  they  also  are  deter- 
mined by  past  events. 

4  This  determining  of  the  existence  of  events  is  regarded  as  equiva- 
lent to  'fixing'  it  (fcstsetzeri)  in  accordance  with  a  rule.  The  word 
'festsetzen*   is   commonly   used   for   fixing   a   time — making,    in    the 
American  phrase,  a  'date' — and  suggests  that  'to  determine'  is  'to 
posit'  or  'to  give  a  definite  position'  in  time. 

5  Here  again  I  think  it  essential  to  note  that  Kant  is  speaking  of 
'knowledge*  (which  involves  understanding)  and  not  of  apprehension 
(which  does  not). 

6  It  is  important  to  observe  that  Kant  uses  the  word  'continuity* 
for  this  'determination'  of  later  by  earlier  time.  This  'continuity'  is 
'transferred*   to   appearances,   for   Kant  speaks   of  the   'continuous* 
sequence  in  the  series  of  possible  sense-perceptions  (A  200  -=  B  245). 
Continuity  is  discussed  later  in  A  207  =  B  253  fF ,  and  at  the  end  of 
the  discussion  (A  210-11  —  B  256)  Kant  seems  to  reassert  something 
like  the  fifth  proof.  7  'Zusammenfiang.' 

8  Dr.  Ewmg  (Kant's  Treatment  of  Causality,  pp.  74-6)  seems  to  me 
to  ignore  this  point,  and  to  treat  Kant's  argument  as  if  it  were  a 
dogmatic  argument  from  the  nature  of  time  to  the  nature  of  what  is 
in  time.  He  also  suggests  that  a  period  of  time  considered  as  pure  time 
is  as  much  determined  by  the  succeeding  as  by  the  preceding  period. 
This  Kant  would  deny  to  be  the  case  in  the  sense  in  which  he  uses 
the  word  'determine*.  Compare  A  412  =  B  439. 


XLIV  §  4]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  255 

standing  in  such  empirical  knowledge.  It  is  understanding 
which  makes  experience  possible,  for  apart  from  understanding 
we  cannot  know  objects  at  all;  and  the  analysis  by  which  it 
makes  our  ideas  of  objects  distinct'1  presupposes  the  transcen- 
dental synthesis — also  at  least  partly  the  work  of  understanding 
— by  which  alone  we  can  have  such  ideas  to  analyse.2  In  the 
particular  case  we  are  considering — the  case  of  objective  suc- 
cession— understanding  is  said  to  transfer3  the  time-order 
to  appearances  and  their  existence.4  It  does  so  by  adjudging 
to  each  a  temporal  position  determined  a  priori  in  relation  to 
previous  appearances,  and  to  do  this  is  to  judge  each  appearance 
to  be  an  effect.  Unless  appearances  had  such  a  temporal  posi- 
tion determined  a  priori,  they  would  not  accord  with  time  itself, 
since  all  the  parts  of  time  have  such  a  position  determined 
a  priori?  The  necessity  for  this  activity  of  the  understanding 
— an  activity  which  involves  an  a  priori  synthesis  of  appear- 
ances— is  due  to  the  fact  that  we  cannot  determine  the  temporal 
position  of  appearances  by  reference  to  absolute  time  (for 
absolute  time  cannot  be  perceived)  but  only  by  their  relations 
to  one  another. 

This  argument  is  difficult  and  liable  to  misunderstanding.6 
If  we  assume — in  spite  of  modern  physics — that  time  must 

1  See  Chapter  XIX  §  8. 

2  Compare  A  103-4  and  also  A  77-8  =  B  103.  3  'ubertragt.' 
4  I  take  it  that  understanding  does  so  in  the  sense  of  ascribing  to 

appearances,  as  events,  a  position  relative  to  one  another  in  one 
homogeneous  time.  This  seems  to  be  implied  by  the  clause  which 
follows. 

6  This  looks  like  a  dogmatic  argument  from  the  nature  of  time  to 
the  nature  of  what  is  in  time,  but  in  the  light  of  the  context  we  must 
take  Kant  to  mean  that  under  the  condition  stated  they  would  not 
accord  with  time  in  our  experience. 

6  The  remainder  of  the  argument  (A  200-1  =  B  245-6)  only 
elaborates  in  difficult  language  what  has  been  already  said.  Kant,  it 
should  be  noted,  explicitly  says  that  to  regard  an  appearance  as  having 
a  determinate  position  in  time  is  to  regard  it  as  an  object :  only  so  can 
it  be  said  to  'exist1.  He  also  speaks  of  the  principle  of  causality  as  'the 
principle  of  sufficient  reason*.  This  seems  to  me  mere  carelessness, 
and  I  cannot  believe  that  at  the  time  he  wrote  the  argument  he 
identified  the  principle  of  causality  with  that  of  sufficient  reason. 


256  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIV  §4 

have  a  direction,  we  are  entitled  to  say  that  if  we  are  to  be 
empirically  aware  of  a  succession  of  times,  we  must  be  aware 
of  a  succession  of  events  in  time ;  and  that  an  event  which  is 
past  in  relation  to  another  event  cannot  also  be  present  or  future 
in  relation  to  the  same  event.1  It  may  seem  that  Kant  is  con- 
fusing the  assertion  that  there  must  be  a  succession  of  events 
with  the  quite  different  assertion  that  there  must  be  a  necessary 
succession  of  events,  that  is,  a  succession  determined  by  causal 
law.  Nevertheless  I  doubt  whether  he  is  guilty  of  so  elementary 
a  fallacy.  He  seems  to  be  arguing,  not  merely  from  the  fact 
that  wre  must  be  empirically  aware  of  the  succession  of  parts  of 
time,  but  from  some  special  characteristic  of  that  succession. 
This  characteristic  he  describes  by  saying  that  we  can  get  to  a 
part  of  time  only  by  going  through  the  previous  parts,  and  he 
identifies  it  with  continuity.  The  continuity  of  time  means  that 
no  part  of  it  is  the  smallest  possible  part,  and  that  in  order  to 
get  from  any  point  of  time  to  any  subsequent  point  we  must  pass 
through  a  part  of  time  which  is  infinitely  divisible.2  Kant 
maintains  that  if  we  are  to  experience  time  as  continuous, 
we  must  experience  change  as  continuous,  and  he  seems  to 
regard  this  continuity  of  change  as  implying  (if  not  as  being 
identical  with)  causation.3  If  so,  his  argument  cannot  be  con- 
sidered apart  from  his  account  of  the  continuity  of  change.4 

The  whole  subject  is  full  of  pitfalls,  but  it  seems  to  me  that 
we  are  far  too  apt  to  take  time,  and  the  continuity  of  time,  for 
granted,  and  to  ignore  the  question  about  what  this  must  imply 
in  regard  to  our  perception  of  events.5  If  we  do  ignore  this 
question,  are  we  not  assuming  that  we  can  perceive  absolute 

1  This  is  all  that  Dr.  Ewing  (Kant's  Treatment  of  Causality,  p.  74) 
will  allow  to  be  a  legitimate  inference.  It  is,  I  think,  only  another  way 
of  saying  that  there  must  be  a  succession  of  events.  Dr.  Ewing,  it 
should  be  added,  recognises  also  the  possibility  of  arguing  from  the 
continuity  of  time  to  the  necessity  of  a  causal  connexion  in  objects  of 
experience,  but  he  does  not  recognise,  as  I  think  he  ought,  that  this 
contention  is  an  essential  part  of  Kant's  argument. 

2  See  A  209  =  B  254. 

8  Compare  Alexander,  Space,  Time,  and  Deity  (Vol.  I,  pp.  279  ff.). 

•See  A  207  ==  B253ff. 

6  Compare  Laird,  Hume's  Philosophy  of  Human  Nature,  p.  109. 


XLIV  §  5]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  257 

time,  which,  as  Kant  says,  is  impossible?  The  brevity  of  his 
exposition,  and  the  uncertainty  which  I  at  least  feel  in  regard  to 
its  precise  meaning,  are  grounds  for  suspending  judgement 
about  the  validity  of  the  argument  ;  but  I  am  far  from  accepting 
the  view  that  we  have  here  an  elementary  fallacy,  and  not  a 
serious  problem  which  requires  to  be  faced. 

§  5.  The  Sixth  Proof 

The  sixth  proof1  is  only  a  summary.  It  states  what  Kant 
regards  as  the  'moments'  of  an  argument  which  is  certainly  in 
need  of  simplification.  I  will  attempt  to  separate  the  'moments' 
from  one  another,  although  it  is  not  altogether  easy  to  do  so. 

I.  In  all  empirical  knowledge  there  is  a  synthesis  of  the 
manifold  by  means  of  imagination,  and  this  synthesis  is  always 
successive;  that  is  to  say,  our  ideas  (whether  their  content  is 
judged  to  be  successive  or  coexistent)  are  always  successive. 

II.  The  succession  of  ideas  has  in  imagination  no  deter- 
minate order  —  it  is  not  necessary  that  one  idea  should  precede 
and  another  follow. 

We  should  expect  Kant  to  be  still  talking  about  imagination 
as  it  is  present  in  empirical  knowledge  generally.  In  that  case 
the  succession  of  ideas,  if  we  consider  it  in  its  subjective 
aspect  only,  has  simply  the  order  which  it  has,  and  we  can 
see  no  necessity  in  it.2  But  Kant  goes  on  to  say  that  the  series 
of  successive  ideas  can  be  taken  either  backwards  or  forwards. 
This  is  what  he  has  hitherto  asserted  to  occur  when  we  are 
apprehending  the  objectively  coexistent.3  Since  this  seems 
irrelevant  here,  he  may  be  talking  about  a  free  play  of  the 
imagination,  which  can  put  ideas  in  any  order  we  please.  If 


B246  (one  paragraph). 

2  Compare  the  statement  that  the  subjective  succession  by  itself  is 
arbitrary  and  undetermined  (A  193  =  B  238).  For  the  ambiguities  of 
this  see  Chapter  XLIII  §  5,  III. 

3  See,  for  example,  A  192-3  =  B  237-8.  Such  reversibility  is  not 
universal,  but  is  confined  to  a  special  case. 

VOL.  II  I 


258  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIV  §  5 

so,  this  is  a  new  point  in  the  first  edition,  though  it  appears 
to  be  made  in  the  argument  added  in  the  second  edition.1 

Fortunately  the  ambiguities  of  Kant's  statement  do  not 
here  affect  seriously  the  nature  of  the  argument.2  It  is  otherwise 
when  we  come  to  the  ambiguities  of  the  following  'moment'. 

III.  If  the  synthesis  is  a  synthesis  of  apprehension  (that  is, 
a  synthesis  of  the  manifold  of  a  given  appearance),  then  the 
order  is  determined  in  the  object. 

Here,  although  Kant  does  not  make  his  meaning  clear,3 
he  is  considering  only  the  case  where  what  is  apprehended 
is  an  'event*.  When  this  is  so,  the  object  determines  the  order 
in  which  ideas  are  taken  up  or  apprehended.4  Kant  himself 
puts  this  more  precisely  when  he  says  that  'in  apprehension5 
there  is  an  order  of  successive  synthesis  which  an  object  deter- 
mines'.6 In  accordance  with  this  order,  he  adds,  something  must 
necessarily  precede,  and  when  this  'something'  is  posited?  the 
other  (that  is,  the  event)  must  necessarily  follow* 

Here  again  I  can  only  suppose  Kant's  argument  to  be  that 
when  we  apprehend  an  objective  succession,  the  succession  of 
ideas  in  our  apprehension  is  necessary;  and  since  we  are 

1  B  233.  For  the  ambiguities  of  this  see  Chapter  XLIII  §  3,  III. 

2  Imagination   (whether   considered   as    'taking   up*   the   manifold 
successively  or  as  combining  the  manifold  in  imaginary  successions) 
does  not  by  itself  determine  the  objective  order  of  events. 

3  Unless  indeed  the  phrase  'given  appear ance'  is  intended  to  indicate 
that  the  appearance  in  question  is  an  'event'  (Begebeiihett). 

4  Compare  A  193  —  B  238  where  the  subjective  succession  is  said 
to  be  derived  from  the  objective.  Compare  also  the  statement  about 
the  object  in  A  191  =  B  236. 

6  'dann.*  This  might  conceivably  refer  to  'object'. 

6  Grammatically  the   sentence  may  also   be  translated  as   'which 
determines  an  object'.  Kemp  Smith  translates  it  thus,  and  we  can 
find  a  parallel  in  B  218  when  experience  is  said  to  determine  an  object 
through  sense-perceptions.    I   think  either  statement  would   fit  the 
argument.  Compare  'objectively  determined'  in  A  194  =  B  239  and 
the  corresponding  footnote  in  §  i  of  the  present  Chapter.  It  is,  as 
usual,  difficult  to  be  ceitain  whether  Kant  is  identifying  or  distinguish- 
ing the  subjective  and  objective  successions. 

7  'Posited*  as  usual  implies  position  in  time  and  so  existence. 

8  Compare  A  193  =  B  238-9,  A  195  =  B  240,  A  198  —  B  243. 


XLIV  §  5]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  259 

concerned  not  with  things-in-themselves,  but  with  appearances 
as  possible  sense-perceptions,  the  necessary  succession  of  our 
ideas  is  ipso  facto  a  necessary  succession  in  the  object.1  If  so, 
objective  succession  is  necessary  succession,  and  this  is  what 
Kant  has  to  prove. 

If  I  am  right,  this  'moment'  contains  the  crux  of  Kant's 
argument.  What  follows  is  only  explanatory:  it  brings  out  his 
view  that  apprehension  or  perception — if  it  is  to  be  perception 
of  an  event  or  an  objective  succession — involves  judgement. 

IV.  If  my  perception2  is  to  contain  knowledge  of  an  objective 
event,3  it4  must  be  an  empirical  judgement.  We  must  think 
that  the  succession5  is  determined;6  that  is,  that  the  event  pre- 
supposes another  appearance  in  time,  upon  which  it  follows 
necessarily,  or  in  accordance  with  a  rule. 

V.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I  did  posit7  the  preceding  event, 
and  the  subsequent  event  did  not  follow,8 1  should  be  compelled 
to  regard  as  a  mere  subjective  play  of  my  imagination  what  I 
had  hitherto  taken  to  be  an  event  in  the  objective  world.9  If 

1  Compare  Chapter  XLIII  §  5,  IV. 

2  *  Wahrnehmung1  or  'sense-perception'.  As  we  have  so  often  seen, 
sense-perception  and  apprehension  are  always  closely  connected  by 
Kant,  and  sometimes  even  identified. 

3  This  is  what  Kant  ought  to  have  said  above,  when  he  said  'if  the 
synthesis  is  a  synthesis  of  apprehension*. 

4  Grammatically  this  must  apply  to  'perception*.  If  it  could  apply 
to   'knowledge',   we  should   avoid   the   loose  statement  that  sense- 
perception  is  judgement. 

6  'die  Folge.'  This  perhaps  might  mean,  not  'the  succession',  but 
'the  event  which  succeeds*.  This  would  fit  in  better  with  Kant's 
grammatical  construction.  If  we  take  Kant  to  mean  'succession',  he 
must  now  mean  the  objective  succession. 

6  Compare  B  234  for  a  similar  insistence  on  the  necessity  for  thought. 

7  Here  again  'posit*  very  clearly  implies  thought  of  the  existence  or 
occurrence  of  what  is  'posited*  at  a  determinate  time. 

8  Kant  says   'did  not  follow  necessarily',   but  'necessarily*   adds 
nothing  to  the  statement.  In  this  place,  as  in  A  193  =  B  239,  Kant 
clearly  implies  that  if  the  event  follows,  it  can  be  perceived. 

9  This    statement    should    be    compared    with    the    third    proof 
(A  194  -=  B  239).  It  suggests  that  the  third  proof  is  intended  only  as 
a  'moment*  in  the  second  proof. 


260  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLIV  §  5 

I  regarded  it  as  somehow  objective,  I  should  call  it  a  dream, 
that  is,  an  event  in  my  mental  history. 

This  statement  obviously  requires  qualification — I  might 
for  example  come  instead  to  the  conclusion  that  I  had  been 
mistaken  about  the  cause.  Nevertheless  Kant  seems  to  me  to 
be  correct  in  saying  that  we  distinguish  appearances  in  dreams 
and  fancy  from  events  in  the  objective  world  by  the  fact  that 
they  do  not  accord  with  a  world  which  is  governed  throughout 
by  causal  law.1 

VI.  The  relation  of  cause  and  effect2  is  thus  the  condition 
of  the  objective  validity  of  our  empirical  judgements3  in  rela- 
tion to  the  series  of  sense-perceptions,  and  consequently  is 
the  condition  of  the  empirical  truth  of  these  judgements,  and 
therefore  the  condition  of  experience. 

This  may  seem  an  unnecessarily  elaborate  way  of  saying 
that  the  principle  of  cause  and  effect  is  the  condition  of  our 
knowledge  or  experience  of  objective  succession.  The  reference 
to  empirical  truth  shows,  however,  that  Kant  is  referring  us 
back  to  his  general  solution  of  the  problem  of  objectivity  (or 
of  the  existence  of  objects).4 

1  Compare  A  451  =  B  479,  and  also  Laird,  Hume's  Philosophy  of 
Human  Nature,  p.  115. 

2  This  is  elaborately  described  as  'the  relation  of  appearances  (as 
possible  sense-perceptions)  in  accordance  with  which  what  follows 
(the  event)  has  its  existence  determined  necessarily  and  according  to 
a  rule  by  something  which  precedes*.  It  is  important  to  observe  that 
appearances  are  described  explicitly  as  'possible  sense-perceptions'. 
Kant  clearly  regards  all  events  as  possible  sense-perceptions,  not  as 
things-in-themselves,  nor  again  as  actual  sense-perceptions:  he  is  in 
short  a  transcendental  idealist.  Needless  to  add,  he  is  not  saying  that 
in  every  succession  known  to  be  objective,  the  earlier  event  is  the 
cause  of  the  later ;  nor  is  he  saying  that  we  cannot  know  a  succession 
to  be  objective  until  we  know  its  cause.  He  is  saying  that  when  we 
know  or  assume  any  succession  to  be  objective,  we  presuppose  that 
each  objective  event  has,  in  the  total  state  of  affairs  which  precedes  it, 
'something*  which  determines  it  or  is  its  cause.  As  this  presupposition 
need  not  be  'clear*  to  ourselves,  we  may  say  more  simply  that  objective 
succession  implies  necessary  succession. 

3  This  looks  back  to  'moment*  IV. 

4  See  A  191  =  B  236  and  compare  Chapter  XLIII  §  4.  See  also 
A  1 60  =  B  199  at  the  end. 


XLIV  §  5]  THE  SECOND  ANALOGY  261 

VII.  All  succession  or  change  in  objects  of  experience  must 
therefore  be  governed  by  causal  law.1 

It  is  very  evident  that  the  whole  argument  turns  on  what 
I  have  marked  as  'moment1  III.  It  is  also  evident  that  Kant 
was  careless  in  writing  his  summary;  for  he  seems  to  bring  in 
one  point  which  has  not  previously  been  raised,  and  he  ignores 
another  point  of  importance,  namely,  the  doctrine  that  absolute 
time  cannot  be  perceived.  There  is  no  reference  to  the  argument 
of  Proof  V. 

1  On  the  principle  that  the  necessary  conditions  of  experience  are 
necessary  conditions  of  objects  of  experience.  See  A  in  and  A  158 
=  B  197- 


CHAPTER     XLV 
THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY 

§  i .  Kant's  Presuppositions 

If  we  are  to  understand  Kant's  argument,  we  must  first 
of  all  be  clear  as  to  the  presuppositions  which  he  believed  to  be 
necessary.  These  seem  to  be  as  follows:  (i)  an  object  is  a  set 
of  appearances  (which  may  also  be  called  ideas  or  possible 
sense-perceptions)  bound  together  by  necessity  or  possessing 
necessary  synthetic  unity ;  (2)  the  successiveness  of  our  appre- 
hensions is  not  by  itself  sufficient  to  justify  the  assertion  that 
there  is  succession  in  the  object;1  (3)  absolute  time  cannot 
be  perceived;  and  (4)  we  possess  knowledge  of  objective 
successions. 

The  first  of  these  presuppositions  is  the  outcome  of  Kant's 
discussion  in  the  Aesthetic  and  in  the  Transcendental  Deduction ; 
and  we  must  assume  it  for  the  purposes  of  the  argument.  The 
other  three  seem  legitimate  assumptions  on  any  philosophical 
theory.2 

Kant  himself  in  the  second  edition3  stresses  a  further  pre- 
supposition— that  all  successions  (and  he  is  thinking  primarily 
of  objective  successions)  are  a  successive  being  and  not-being 
of  the  determinations  of  permanent  substances.4  I  believe 
that  this  presupposition  is  as  essential  to  the  arguments  of  the 
first  edition  as  it  is  to  the  argument  added  in  the  second  edition. 

1  I  adopt  this  form  of  statement  as  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of 
Kant's  argument. 

2  The  fourth  assumption  may  be  denied  by  philosophers  of  the 
school  of  Berkeley  and  Hume,  but  even  they  cannot  deny  that  we 
seem  to  possess  knowledge  of  objective  successions.  An  analysis  which 
is  compatible  with  what  experience  seems  to  reveal  is  (so  far)  pre- 
ferable to  one  which  is  not.  3  B  232-3. 

4  It  may  be  objected  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  the  first  pre- 
supposition given  above;  but  we  have  to  remember  that  for  Kant,  if 
given  appearances  or  ideas  are  to  constitute  an  object,  one  of  the  ways 
in  which  they  must  necessarily  be  bound  together  is  as  states  of  a 
permanent  substance  in  space. 


XLV  §  2]         THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  263 

Indeed  it  is  only  because  we  take  given  appearances  (or  ideas) 
to  be  states  of  permanent  substances  that  we  can  speak  of  their 
order  in  our  apprehension  either  as  necessary  or  as  reversible 
and  irreversible.  If  we  fail  to  recognise  this  as  essential  to  the 
argument,  we  are  almost  bound  to  fall  into  the  error  of  supposing 
that  Kant  is  trying  to  explain  how  we  can  pass  from  knowledge 
of  necessity  in  the  subjective  order  of  our  apprehension  to 
knowledge  of  objects.  Kant's  view  is,  on  the  contrary,  that  we 
can  discover  necessity  in  the  subjective  order  only  if  we  already 
assume  that  there  are  permanent  objects  or  substances  of  which 
given  appearances  are  states.  And  this  view  seems  to  me 
obviously  correct. 

In  addition  to  these  fundamental  assumptions,  there  appear 
to  be  two  minor  ones:  (i)  when  we  arbitrarily  imagine  events 
in  a  particular  order,  we  are  not  entitled  to  affirm  that  the 
events  are  in  that  order ;  and  (2)  when  we  know  that  a  succession 
is  objective,  thought  must  be  involved  as  well  as  sense  and 
imagination.  On  these  points  Kant's  doctrine  is,  I  suggest, 
absolutely  sound. 

§  2.  Kant's  Argument 

Kant's  main  argument  seems  to  reduce  itself  to  the  assertion 
that,  granted  these  assumptions,  the  experience  of  objective 
succession  must  be  experience  of  necessary  succession;  and 
contrariwise,  if  the  successions  we  experience  were  not  governed 
by  necessity,  there  would  be  no  experience  of  objective  suc- 
cession, nothing  but  a  blind  play  of  ideas  which  we  could  not 
consider  to  be  experience  at  all. 

This  may  seem  to  be  mere  assertion  and  unworthy  of  the 
name  of  argument.  The  impatient  reader  may  be  tempted  to 
reply  that  if  the  Critical  doctrine  be  accepted,  it  is  indeed 
impossible  to  understand  how  we  can  have  knowledge  of 
objective  succession;  and  that  Kant,  without  any  pretence  at 
argument,  merely  asserts  objective  succession  to  be  necessary 
because,  on  his  presuppositions,  he  cannot  think  of  anything 
else  which  could  reasonably  be  put  forward  as  a  ground  for 
regarding  a  succession  as  objective.  The  difficulty  in  which 


264  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLVj   2 

he  finds  himself,  it  may  be  said,  is  obvious,  but  we  have  no 
reason  to  accept  his  baseless  assertion  of  necessity  as  the  only 
possible  way  to  escape  from  it.  A  simpler  solution  is  the  denial 
of  his  fundamental  presupposition,  namely,  that  an  object  is  a 
set  of  appearances  to  the  human  mind  and  not  a  thing-in-itself . 
This  cavalier  method  would  not  go  far  to  solve  the  real 
difficulty  to  which  Kant  has  called  attention — that  when  we 
apprehend  appearances  successively,  we  sometimes  affirm 
objective  succession  and  at  other  times  we  affirm  objective 
coexistence ;  nor  would  it  help  us  towards  a  proof  of  causality, 
if  such  a  proof  be  possible.  And  although  I  think  it  is  true  that 
Kant's  argument  is  simply  an  assertion,  in  the  sense  that  it  is 
an  appeal  to  what  he  calls  'judgement',  I  do  not  believe  that 
the  assertion  is  made  for  no  other  reason  than  the  impossibility 
of  finding  any  other  solution. 

As  I  understand  Kant's  argument,  he  is  offering  us  an 
analysis  of  what  is  necessarily  involved  in  experience,  and 
particularly  in  experience  of  objective  succession.  Whenever 
we  perceive  an  objective  succession  in  which  event  j3  follows 
event  a,  our  perception  b  must  follow  our  perception  a.  But 
since,  on  Critical  principles,  the  events  a  and  ft  are  only 
appearances  to  us,  and  are  in  this  case  identical  with  the  per- 
ceptions a  and  6,  this  means  that  where  our  experience  is  of 
objective  succession,  event  j3  must  follow  event  a.1  The  suc- 
sion  of  perceptions  and  the  succession  of  events  are  in  this  case 
not  two  successions,  but  only  one.  I  can  see  no  other  way  of 
interpreting  the  argument. 

Now  it  seems  true  to  say  that  when  we  perceive  an  objective 
succession,  our  perceptions  must  come  in  a  certain  order  and 
no  other.  The  central  question  is  whether  the  recognition  of 
this  is  legitimate  on  Kant's  view  of  objects,  or  whether  it  rests 
on  the  supposition  that  objects  are  things -in-themselves.  If 
we  adopt  the  second  alternative,  we  must  regard  his  whole 
argument  as  an  elementary  fallacy — we  must  say  that  he  first 
of  all  affirms  necessity  in  the  succession  of  our  perceptions 

1  This  need  not  mean  that  a  is  the  cause  of  /?,  but  only  that  (i  must 
follow  upon  a  in  accordance  with  causal  law. 


XLV  §  3]     THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  265 

on  the  ground  that  our  perceptions  are  distinct  from,  and  deter- 
mined by,  objective  events ;  and  that  he  then  goes  on  to  infer 
necessity  in  the  succession  of  objective  events  on  the  ground 
that  when  we  perceive  an  objective  succession,  there  is  no 
distinction  between  our  perceptions  and  objective  events.  If 
on  the  other  hand  he  is  entitled  to  hold  both  that  when  we  per- 
ceive events,  these  events  are  identical  with  our  perceptions, 
and  that  when  we  perceive  events,  our  perceptions  must  come 
in  a  certain  order  and  no  other,  then,  it  seems  to  me,  he  is 
entitled  to  his  conclusion. 

Kant's  argument  here,  it  should  be  noted,  bears  a  resemblance 
to  the  more  general  argument  of  the  Transcendental  Deduction : 
it  is  in  fact  a  special  application  of  that  argument.  There  he 
asserted1  that  when  we  have  knowledge  of  an  object,  necessity 
is  always  implied — the  object  is  regarded  as  that  which  prevents 
our  cognitions  from  being  arbitrary  or  which  imposes  upon 
our  cognitions  a  necessary  synthetic  unity.  He  then  argued 
that  we  are  concerned  only  with  our  own  ideas,  and  that  the 
concept  of  the  object  is  simply  the  concept  of  the  necessary 
synthetic  unity  of  ideas,  a  unity  which  is  really  imposed  by  the 
nature  of  the  mind.  A  study  of  the  Transcendental  Deduction 
will,  I  think,  confirm  my  interpretation  of  the  present  argument. 

§3.  Objective  and  Subjective  Succession 

Such  an  argument  is  not  to  be  lightly  or  easily  accepted ;  but 
we  ought  to  ask  whether  the  distrust  which,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
it  inevitably  arouses  is  based  on  reason  or  is  due  to  the  diffi- 
culty of  the  human  mind  in  adjusting  itself  to  a  revolutionary 
hypothesis.  Even  if  the  doctrine  seems  to  verge  on  madness, 
there  is  at  least  a  method  in  the  madness.  If  the  interpretation 
I  have  put  forward  be  accepted,  we  can  understand  how  the 
whole  argument  hangs  together — why,  for  example,  Kant  finds 
it  necessary  to  insist  that  an  object  is  only  a  complex  of  ideas ; 
why  he  asserts  that  the  presence  of  succession  in  the  object 
means  only  that  I  cannot  arrange  my  apprehension  otherwise 
than  in  this  succession;2  why  he  appears  to  identify  what  he 

1  See  especially  A  104-5.  2A  193  —  B  23  8. 

VOL.  II  I* 


266  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLV  §  3 

calls  'the  rule  of  apprehension'  with  the  causal  law  of  the  objec- 
tive succession;  and  why,  having  once  made  his  point,  he  is 
content  to  assert,  as  if  it  were  something  quite  obvious,  that 
an  objective  succession  must  be  a  necessary  succession.1 

In  any  case  it  seems  to  me  beyond  question  that  for  Kant 
when  we  perceive  an  objective  succession,  the  objective  suc- 
cession is  identical  with  the  subjective  succession  of  our 
ideas,  and  the  same  ideas  or  appearances  are  successive  both 
as  ideas  in  my  mind  and  as  states  of  the  object  known.2  To 
some  this  may  seem  sufficient  ground  for  rejecting  his  whole 
theory,  but  we  must  ask  ourselves  whether  such  a  theory 
is  self-contradictory  or  impossible. 

It  is  clearly  impossible  for  any  believer  in  representative 
idealism ;  and  representative  idealism,  though  the  least  defensible 
of  philosophies,  seems  to  be  the  natural  assumption  of  the  human 
mind.  But  Kant  is  not  a  representative  idealist,  except  in  so 
far  as  he  believes  that  the  phenomenal  world  is  only  an  appear- 
ance to  us  of  unknown  things-in-themselves.  As  regards  the 
phenomenal  world  he  is  an  empirical  realist,  and  his  whole 
philosophy  is  a  rejection  of  representative  idealism.  If  the 
phenomenal  world  is  only  an  appearance  to  human  minds, 
why  should  it  be  impossible  that  a  succession  of  states  in  a 
phenomenal  object3  should  also  be  a  succession  of  ideas  in  my 
mind  ? 

No  doubt  even  in  that  case  what  is  apprehended  cannot  be 
identified  with  my  act  of  apprehending,  but  I  do  not  think 
Kant  maintains  that  it  is.4  If  an  idea  is  a  content  apprehended, 

1  He  does  so  even  in  the  argument  added  in  the  second  edition, 
although  this  is  placed  before  his  more  detailed  exposition. 

2  In  this  I  agree  with  Professor  Pnchard,  Kant's  Theory  of  Know- 
ledge, p.  281. 

3  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Kant  believes  himself  to  have  proved 
that  a  phenomenal  object  is  a  permanent  substance  with  changing 
attributes,  although  it  is  only  an  appearance  to  human  minds  of  an 
ultimate  reality  which  we  have  no  reason  to  regard  as  either  permanent 
or  changing. 

4  In  A  1 90  =  B  235  Kant  does  say  that  an  idea  differs  not  at  all 
from  my  act  of  apprehension ;  but  I  believe  from  the  context  he  means 
only  that  it  does  not  differ  from  my  act  of  apprehension  as  regards  its 
time-relations. 


XLV  §  3]     THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  267 

it  can  surely  be  both  an  event  in  my  mental  history  and  an 
event  in  the  objective  world.  An  idea  in  a  dream  may,  as  a 
content,  differ  in  no  way  from  a  content  apprehended  in  waking 
life.  We  regard  it  as  an  event  in  a  mental  history,  but  we  refuse 
to  regard  it  as  an  event  in  the  objective  world ;  and  our  reason 
for  so  refusing  is  that  it  does  not  fit  into  the  necessary  succession 
of  contents  which  for  us  constitutes  the  objective  world.  The 
fact  that  the  content  apprehended  in  waking  life  fits  into  the 
necessary  succession  which  we  regard  as  objective  does  not 
imply  that  such  a  content  is  not  also  an  event  in  our  mental 
history.  Kant's  theory  may  be  mistaken,  but  I  do  not  see 
that  it  is  self-contradictory.  Indeed  some  such  theory  seems 
to  be  necessary,  if  we  hold  that  in  waking  life  what  we  are 
aware  of  is  objective  reality,  and  not  merely  an  idea  which 
represents  objective  reality. 

I  do  not  think  we  can  avoid  this  by  saying  that  the  events 
in  my  mental  history  are  mere  apprehendings.  An  event  in  my 
mental  history  is  a  whole  in  which  the  apprehending  and  the 
apprehended  are  combined.  And  I  do  not  think  that  this 
doctrine  means  the  absolute  identity  of  the  subjective  and  the 
objective.  Starting  from  the  contents  successively  apprehended 
in  waking  life  we  construct  in  imagination,  and  in  accordance 
with  the  categories,  a  whole  world  of  possible  contents  or 
appearances  (or  what  Kant  calls  possible  sense-perceptions), 
and  these  appearances  we  regard  as  states  or  determinations 
of  permanent  substances,  which  fill  time  and  space.  We  dis- 
tinguish the  order  of  events  in  the  world  so  constructed  from 
the  order  of  our  actual  perceptions  and  our  actual  thinkings ; 
and  we  distinguish  this  world  and  its  events  from  the  events 
which  appear  to  us  in  dreams  or  are  invented  arbitrarily  by 
our  fancy.  The  order  of  events  and  the  order  of  perceptions 
are  identical  only  in  the  case  where  we  are  directly  perceiving 
events. 

It  is  on  the  identification  of  the  two  successions  in  this 
particular  case  that  Kant's  main  argument  for  causality  rests. 
It  would  be  ludicrous  to  suppose  that  events  were  things-in 
themselves,  and  to  argue  that  because  the  succession  of  our 


a68  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLV  §  4 

perceptions  is  necessary  when  we  perceive  events,  therefore 
the  succession  of  the  events  is  determined  by  causal  law. 
And  whether  Kant  is  right  or  wrong,  his  argument  is,  as  he 
says,  a  Critical  proof  which  seeks  to  establish  the  conditions 
of  our  experience  of  objective  succession,  and  it  is  not  a  dogmatic 
proof  from  an  analysis  of  the  concept  of  event.1 

§  4.  The  Conditions  of  Experience 

An  analysis  of  the  conditions  of  experience  is  to  be  sharply 
distinguished  from  a  treatise  on  the  methods  of  induction. 
Kant  believes  that  experience  is  essentially  and  always  an 
experience  of  objective  succession,2  and  he  is  arguing  that  it 
must  therefore  be  an  experience  of  necessary  succession.  His 
argument  is  of  a  purely  general  character  intended  to  establish 
the  principle  of  causality.  It  is  no  part  of  his  business  to  describe 
in  detail  the  methods  by  which  we  decide  whether  a  succession 
is  objective,  and  still  less  to  describe  the  methods  by  which  we 
determine  the  precise  cause  of  a  particular  event.3  The  criti- 
cisms brought  against  him  for  failing  to  do  this  seem  to  me 
irrelevant.  A  proof  of  causality  would  in  itself  be  an  important 
contribution  to  philosophy,  and  it  is  absurd  to  blame  anyone 

1  Pnchard  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  300)  maintains  that  such 
a  dogmatic  proof  is  possible,  and  that  there  can  be  no  other. 

2  Even  where  we  perceive  an  objective  coexistence  (as  in  perceiving 
the  different  parts  of  a  house)  what  we  perceive  is,  I  suggest,  recognised 
as  an  object  whose  characteristics  remain  the  same  amid  change. 
Kant  indeed  seems  to  hold  that  change  is  merely  an  empirical  fact 
whose  necessity  cannot  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  world  is  in 
time ;  but  it  is  hard  to  see  how  apart  from  change  of  some  sort  we 
could  be  aware  of  time,  and  Kant  himself  speaks  of  the  transitory  as 
'symbolising'  the  successiveness  of  time.  Without  such  'symbolising*  I 
do  not  think  we  could  be  aware  of  time  or  of  its  successiveness.  See 
A  205  —  B  250  and  compare  A  452  n.  =  B  480  n. 

3  When  Kant  says  m  A  203  =  B  249  that  temporal  succession  is  the 
only  empirical  criterion  of  the  effect,  he  obviously  means  that  this  is 
the  only  empirical  criterion  by  which  we  can  distinguish  effect  from 
cause,  when  we  already  know  that  two  phenomena  are  causally  con- 
nected. It  is  most  unreasonable  to  separate  this  statement  from  its 
context,  and  then  to  blame  Kant  for  the  inadequacy  of  his  theory  of 
induction. 


XLV  §  4]     THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  269 

because  he  deals  with  his  own  problem  and  does  not  deal  with 
ours. 

The  modern  interest  in  inductive  methods  has  led  to  an 
altogether  disproportionate  interest  in  Kant's  statement  that 
when  we  perceive  objective  events  the  order  of  our  sense- 
perceptions  is  irreversible.1  It  is  far  too  commonly  supposed 
that  Kant  is  trying  to  infer  objectivity,  or  even  causality, 
from  the  irreversibility  of  our  sense-perceptions.  Yet  it  is 
surely  obvious  that  we  could  not  know  the  succession  of  our 
perceptions  to  be  irreversible,  unless  we  knew  that  we  were 
perceiving  an  object  and  indeed  a  substance;  we  could  only 
know  that  our  perceptions  came  to  us  in  the  order  in  which 
they  came.  What  Kant  himself  maintains  is  that  when  we 
perceive  an  objective  event,  our  sense-perceptions  must  be 
irreversible — not  that  when  we  find  our  sense-perceptions  to  be 
irreversible,  we  infer  that  we  are  perceiving  objective  events. 
The  word  'irreversibility'  is  not  even  used  by  Kant  himself. 
It  is  only  our  shorthand  method  of  describing  that  necessity 
which  he  finds  in  the  succession  of  our  perceptions  when  we 
are  aware  of  objective  events. 

It  should  be  noted  that  when  we  assume  what  we  are  perceiv- 
ing to  be  a  real  object,  we  can  by  experiment2  discover  whether 
or  not  it  is  possible  to  receive  sense-perceptions  (or  appearances) 
in  the  reverse  order;  and  from  this  we  can  determine  whether 
the  successively  given  appearances  are  coexistent  or  successive 
in  the  object.  If,  for  example,  we  find  that  we  are  unable  to  get 
certain  sense-perceptions  (or  appearances)  in  the  reverse  order, 
we  conclude  that  a  particular  succession  in  our  apprehension 
is  also  a  succession  in  the  object.  But  this  manifestly  presup- 
poses from  the  beginning  that  we  are  perceiving  an  object; 
and  indeed  we  have  no  right  to  assert  that  the  order  of  our  sense- 
perceptions  is  a  necessary  order,  unless  we  are  assuming  that 

1A  1 92  —  623  7.  Professor  Loewenberg,  for  example  (University  of 
California  Publications  in  Philosophy,  Vol.  15,  p.  9)  takes  Kant's 
formula  for  causality  to  be  'irreversible  succession',  although  he  adds, 
very  rightly,  that  Kant's  full  meaning  of  causality  cannot  be  expressed 
by  this  formula. 

2  For  example,  in  the  cases  of  a  house  and  of  a  moving  ship. 


270  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLV  §4 

what  we  perceive  is  a  succession  in  the  object.1  We  can  never 
reach  necessity  by  observation,  and  least  of  all  by  observation 
of  the  order  of  our  own  ideas  as  such;  and  even  if  we  could, 
we  could  never  be  justified  in  inferring  objectivity  from  a  merely 
subjective  necessity. 

I  cannot  see  why  Kant  should  be  expected  to  describe  in 
detail  the  empirical  methods  by  which  we  learn  to  distinguish 
an  objective  succession  from  an  imaginary  succession  or  from 
a  set  of  coexistent  appearances  successively  apprehended. 
Such  a  study  lies  presumably  in  the  field  of  empirical  psychology, 
and  Kant  is  free  to  accept  any  reasonable  account  that  psycho- 
logy may  offer.  There  is,  for  example,  no  reason  why  he  should 
deny  that  in  asserting  the  existence  of  real  objects  we  depend 
very  largely  upon  what  Hume  describes  as  the  firmness  or 
solidity  or  force  or  vivacity  or  steadiness  of  our  ideas.  All  he 
maintains  is  that  where  objectivity  is  asserted,  there  necessity 
is  presupposed ;  and  that  where  we  are  convinced  that  appear- 
ances to  us  will  not  fit  into  the  world  as  a  system  governed  by 
causal  laws,  there  we  deny  the  objectivity  of  the  appearances. 
This  is  obvious  in  the  case  of  hallucinations,  mirages,  and 
even  dreams,  which  may  lack  nothing  in  vivacity  or  force 
or  steadiness.2 

Again  it  is  no  real  objection  to  Kant's  doctrine  to  say  that  on 
his  theory  night  must  be  the  cause  of  day.3  He  has  nowhere 
asserted  that  when  we  experience  successive  events,  the  first 
must  be  the  cause  of  the  second.  He  has  asserted  only  that  such 
a  succession  must  be  causally  determined,  and  that  in  the  total 
state  of  affairs  preceding  any  event  there  is  to  be  found  some- 
thing, 'some  as  yet  indeterminate  correlate',4  which  is  the  cause 

1  Compare  Pnchard,  Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  pp.  288-9. 

2  Compare  A  45 1  =.  B  479. 

A  The  denial  of  this  is  explained  by  Dr.  Montz  Schhck  (University 
of  California  Publications  in  Philosophy ,  Vol.  15,  p  102).  'Day'  and 
'night',  he  points  out,  are  really  not  names  for  'events'  in  the  sense 
in  which  this  word  is  used  in  science.  'And  as  soon  as  we  analyse 
day  and  night  into  the  scries  of  natural  events  for  which  these  names 
stand,  we  find  that  the  sequence  of  these  events  must  be  regarded  as  a 
very  good  example  of  "causal  connection".'  4  A  199  =  B  244. 


XLV  §  5]     THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  271 

of  that  event.  Nor  has  he  asserted  that  in  order  to  know  that 
an  event  is  objective,  we  must  first  of  all  know  its  cause.  His 
doctrine  is,  on  the  contrary,  that  when  we  judge  an  event  to  be 
objective,  our  judgment  presupposes  that  the  event  is  governed 
by  the  general  law  of  causality,  and  therefore  that  its  cause 
is  to  be  found  in  some  previous  event.  The  determination  of 
the  cause  is  a  matter  for  science  alone,  and  the  discussion  of 
the  methods  by  which  science  determines  the  cause  is  a  matter 
for  Inductive,  and  not  for  Transcendental,  Logic.  Kant's 
doctrine  on  all  these  matters  seems  to  me  to  be  sound.  The  only 
question  is  whether  he  has  succeeded  in  proving  that  necessary 
succession  is  a  condition  of  experience. 

§  5.  The  Process  to  Experience 

It  may  be  thought  that  some  of  the  objections  have  been 
too  lightly  dismissed ;  for  if  Kant  is  describing  the  process  by 
which  we  pass  from  awareness  of  a  succession  of  ideas  to  know- 
ledge of  the  objectively  successive  and  objectively  coexistent, 
he  is  surely  obliged  to  give  some  account  both  of  the  methods 
by  which  we  do  so  and  of  the  reasons  by  which  these  methods 
can  be  justified. 

My  answer  to  this  criticism,  which  raises  a  question  of 
fundamental  importance  for  the  interpretation  of  the  Kritik, 
is  that  Kant  is  not  attempting  to  describe  any  process  of  this 
kind.  What  he  is  doing  is  to  determine  the  necessary  conditions 
or  presuppositions  of  all  experience;  and  this  task  is,  as  he 
himself  states,1  entirely  different  from  the  task  of  describing 
how  experience  develops  or  comes  to  be.  I  do  not  deny  that 
sometimes  language  is  used  which  may  seem  to  describe  a 
process  of  development,  but  allowance  must  be  made  for  the 
difficulty  of  avoiding  such  language  in  an  abstract  analysis. 
And  I  refuse  to  believe  that  Kant  is  attempting  to  describe 
how  experience  develops,  not  only  on  the  ground  that  he  him- 
self denies  this  whenever  the  question  is  raised,  but  on  the  more 

1  See  especially  Prol.  §  2ia  (IV  304):  'Ilier  nicht  von  der  Entstehen 
der  Erfahrung  die  Rede  set,  sondern  von  dem,  was  in  thr  hegt\  Compare 
also  Chapters  III  §  3,  VI  §  7,  and  XVI  §  5 


272  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLV  §  5 

fundamental  ground  that  such  an  interpretation  makes  Kant's 
argument  so  \\eak  that  it  is  hardly  too  much  to  describe  it  as 
nonsense,  while  my  interpretation,  I  submit,  makes  it  sense.1 
It  is,  in  the  first  place,  impossible  to  believe  that  there  is  a 
development  from  awareness  of  the  subjective  to  knowledge  of 
the  objective.2  We  can  recognise  the  subjective  only  when  we 
distinguish  it  from  the  objective  (this  is  Kant's  own  view); 
for  'subjective*  and  'objective*  are  correlative  terms  which 
mean  nothing  except  in  relation  to  one  another.  And  if  we 
started  with  awareness  of  something  merely  subjective,  it 
would,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  be  impossible  to  pass  to  knowledge 
of  the  objective. 

In  any  case — and  this  is  my  second  point — Kant's  argument 
for  causality  does  not  offer  us  even  a  plausible  account  of  such 
a  transition.  First  of  all,  according  to  this  interpretation,  we 
are  aware  of  a  subjective  succession,  which  in  some  inex- 
plicable manner  we  recognise  to  be  subjective.  Then  we 
become  aware  in  a  still  more  inexplicable  manner  (for  we 
cannot  have  empirical  knowledge  of  necessity)  that  a  particu- 
lar subjective  succession  is  necessary  or  irreversible.  Finally 
we  conclude — on  what  grounds  and  by  what  right? — that  we 
are  aware  of  an  objective  succession.3  The  harshest  criticisms 

1  This  is   the  central  matter  on  which  my  interpretation  differs 
consistently  from  Professor  PnchartTs  penetrating  analysis  in  Kant's 
Theory  of  Knoivledge.  He  interprets  Kant  as  explaining  how  experience 
of  the  objective  comes  to  be,  and  I  entirely  accept  his  criticisms  of  the 
view  he  ascribes  to  Kant,  but  I  do  not  believe  that  what  he  is  here 
attacking  is  Kant's  view. 

2  We  may  of  course  be  in  doubt  whether  a  particular  appearance 
is  subjective  or  objective  and  we  may  resolve  that  doubt;    but  this 
process   occurs  when  we   have   already  distinguished  the   objective 
world  from  the  subjective  succession  of  our  ideas.    There  must  also 
be  a  process  in  infancy  (perhaps  repeated  whenever  we  awake  from 
sleep)  whereby  we  pass  from  an  awareness  in  which  the  subjective 
and  objective  are  not  distinguished  to  a  knowledge  in  which  they  are. 
It  may  be  possible  for  psychology  to  describe  such  a  process,  but  this 
has  nothing  to  do  with  Transcendental  Logic. 

3  The  further  conclusion  that  the  objective  succession  must  there- 
fore be  a  necessary  succession  merely  adds  a  crowning  absurdity  to 
this  absurd  series. 


XLV  §  6]     THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  273 

of  Kant's  doctrine  would  be  altogether  too  kind,  if  this  were  the 
proper  interpretation  of  his  argument ;  but  such  an  interpreta- 
tion (and  I  cannot  see  one  that  is  more  plausible,  if  Kant 
is  describing  a  process  from  subjectivity  to  objectivity)  seems 
to  me  to  refute  itself. 

§  6.  Causality  and  Time 

I  have  attempted  to  make  clear  what  I  regard  as  the  inner 
core  of  Kant's  argument — the  contention  that  if  we  accept 
the  Critical  presuppositions,  objective  succession  must  be 
necessary  succession.  There  is,  however,  a  danger  that  in  so 
doing  we  may  fail  to  recognise  the  importance  of  the  part 
which  time  plays  in  the  argument.  Kant's  doctrine  of  time 
forms  a  strand  which  runs  through  his  whole  discussion, 
although  it  finds  its  clearest,  and  in  some  ways  its  most 
difficult,  expression  in  the  special  argument  which  deals  with 
the  continuity  and  irreversibility  of  time.1 

We  must  remember  that  for  Kant  an  object  may  be  said 
to  exist,  and  so  to  be  a  real  or  actual  object,  only  if  it  has  a 
determinate  position  in  one  common  homogeneous  time 
(and  space).  The  same  doctrine  applies  to  the  special  case  of 
succession,  or  change,  in  the  object,  the  case  to  be  considered 
in  the  Second  Analogy.  If  a  succession  is  objective,  then  the 
changes  which  take  place  in  objects  (changes  which  may  be 
called  simply  'events')  must  have  a  determinate  position  in 
one  common  homogeneous  time  (and  space).  Kant's  argument 
all  through  is  that  time  itself  (or  absolute  time)  cannot  be 
perceived,  and  therefore  events  can  have  a  determinate 
position  in  time  only  from  their  relation  to  one  another.  This 
determinate  position  cannot  be  given  to  mere  apprehension, 
since  apprehension  may  be  successive  where  there  is  no  succes- 
sion of  events.  On  this  he  bases  his  doctrine  that  when  we 
experience  a  succession  of  events  as  objective,  we  presume 
that  the  succession  is  necessary — the  position  of  events 
relatively  to  one  another  can  be  determined  in  one  common 
homogeneous  time  only  if  it  is  presupposed  that  they  follow 
1  A  199  =  B  244  ff.  See  Chapter  XLIV  §  4. 


274  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLV  §  6 

one  another  in  accordance  with  a  universal  rule.  Unless  they 
do  so,  the  whole  distinction  between  objective  succession  and 
a  succession  which  is  merely  subjective  or  imaginary  must 
disappear.  We  are  no  longer  in  a  position  to  make  an  appeal 
to  things-in-themselves  as  a  way  of  avoiding  this  conclusion, 
and  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  would  be  any  help  to  us 
even  if  we  could. 

This  line  of  argument — whether  it  be  sound  or  unsound — 
is  certainly  fundamental  to  Kant,  and  it  is  borne  out  by  his 
general  account  of  the  Analogies.1  All  three  Analogies  are 
concerned  with  necessary  connexion  in  time;  the  Second 
Analogy  is  concerned  with  that  rule  of  necessary  connexion 
which  relates  to  succession  as  one  of  the  three  modes  of 
time.2 

We  may  even  say  that  the  Analogies,  and  in  particular 
the  Second  Analogy,  express  the  rules  of  necessary  connexion 
in  time  in  general?  they  are  derived,  not  from  given  sensations, 
but  from  the  nature  of  time  as  such  and  the  necessary  unity 
of  apperception.  We  must  not  indeed  imagine  Kant  to  treat 
time  as  a  thing-in-itself ,  a  kind  of  receptacle  which  determines 
everything  in  it  in  certain  ways.  Such  a  view,  apart  from  its 
inherent  absurdity,  would  not  help  us  in  any  way ;  for  time  itself 
cannot  be  perceived.4  Kant's  view  on  the  contrary  is  that  given 
appearances  must  conform  to  certain  rules,  if  we  are  to  be 
aware  of  objects  in  one  time,  and  so  to  have  empirical  knowledge 
of  time  itself. 

It  is  only  a  step  from  this  doctrine  to  the  special  argument 
which  rests  on  the  continuity  and  irreversibility  of  time:5 
this  special  argument  does  little  more  than  bring  out  details 
which  have  not  been  made  explicit.  I  need  not  enter  into  its 
difficulties  again;  but  it  is  all-important  to  recognise  that 
Kant  is  concerned  with  the  conditions  of  experiencing  events 
in  one  common  homogeneous  time,  which  is  here,  as  elsewhere, 
regarded  as  continuous  and  irreversible.  We  could  not,  according 

1  Sec  B  218-19  and  A  176-7  ff.  2  A  177-8  =  B  219-20. 

3  Compare  B  219.  4  Compare  A  452  n.  =  B  480  n. 

6  A  199  —  B  244  ff.  Compare  Chapter  XLIV  §  4. 


XLV  §  7]     THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  275 

to  Kant,  experience  events  in  such  a  time,1  we  could  not  even 
have  empirical  knowledge  of  the  continuity  of  time,2  unless 
appearances  conformed  to  causal  law. 

The  general  principle  of  this  contention  is  already  familiar 
to  us  from  the  Transcendental  Deduction.  The  reason  why 
the  causal  law  prevails,  and  must  prevail,  throughout  the 
objective  world  as  known  to  us  is  that  this  world  consists  only 
of  appearances,  and  that  the  human  mind  (for  which  alone 
this  world  exists)  must  'posit'  appearances  in  one  common 
homogeneous  time:  to  do  so  is  to  subject  appearances  to  the 
universal  law  of  causality ;  for  without  this  the  unity  of  time, 
and  so  the  unity  of  apperception,  would  disappear,  and  there 
could  be  no  experience  and  no  objective  world.3 

However  little  we  may  like  Kant's  doctrine,  there  seems  to 
me  no  reason  to  doubt  that  this  is  what  his  doctrine  is. 

§  7.  Particular  Causal  Laws 

It  cannot  be  too  often  repeated  that  for  Kant  what  the  mind 
thus  imposes  upon  objects  is  the  universal  law  of  necessary 
succession  or  causation.  Particular  causal  laws  can  be  known 
only  as  a  result  of  experience.4  All  such  laws  are  only  particular 
determinations  of  the  one  universal  law  which  is  imposed 
by  the  human  mind ;  but  they  are  not  themselves  imposed  by 
the  mind,  nor  can  they  be  known  a  priori.  Their  particularity 
belongs  to  the  matter  of  experience,  not  to  its  form.  As  such 
it  must  be  due  to  things-in-themselves  and  not  to  the  knowing 
mind.5 

This  doctrine  taken  in  its  widest  scope — the  doctrine, 
namely,  that  the  universal  form  of  all  objects  is  imposed 
by  the  mind  on  a  matter  given  by  things-in-themselves — seems 
to  be  a  possible  hypothesis  involving  no  internal  contradiction. 
There  may  be  special  difficulties  as  regards  causation,6  but 
these  difficulties  do  not  affect  the  general  principle. 

1  A  199-200  ~  B  244-5.  2  A  *99  =  B  244. 

3  See  especially  the  conclusion  of  the  Transcendental  Deduction  in 
both  editions.  This  type  of  argument  is  used  in  all  the  Analogies. 

4  Compare  A  126,  A  127-8,  B  165,  A  159  --  B  198,  and  A  216  ~ 
B  263.  5  Compare  Chapter  VI  §  8.  6  See  §  8  below. 


276  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLV  §  7 

Although  particular  causal  laws  cannot  be  known  a  priori, 
Kant  always  assumes,  as  we  all  do,  that  it  is  possible  for  us  to 
discover  particular  causal  laws.  He  assumes,  that  is  to  say, 
that  we  can  separate  out  particular  chains  of  cause  and  effect 
which  will  be  found  to  repeat  themselves.  This  is  seen  most 
clearly  in  his  continual  insistence  that  given  the  cause  the  effect 
must  always  and  necessarily  follow.  It  is,  I  think,  seen  even  in 
the  frequent  assertion  that  the  effect  must  follow  'in  accordance 
with  a  rule';  for  a  'rule'  seems  to  imply  regularity  and  repe- 
tition. I  believe  Kant  recognises  the  whole  state  of  affairs 
which  precedes  any  event  to  be  the  condition  of  the  occurrence 
of  that  event ;  but  he  appears  to  assume  that  there  is  always  one 
event,  or  series  of  events,  which  can  be  described  as  in  a  special 
sense  the  cause  of  any  given  effect.1 

So  far  as  I  can  see,  such  assumptions  are  not  a  consequence 
of  the  principle  of  causality,  nor  have  they  been  justified  by 
any  argument.2  It  is  theoretically  possible  that  in  a  universe 
governed  throughout  by  causal  law  there  might  be  no  repeti- 
tions. Kant  himself  recognises  in  another  connexion  that, 
in  spite  of  the  formal  and  universal  laws  by  which  nature  must 
be  governed,  the  given  matter  might  be  such  that  in  nature  no 
similarities  could  be  found;3  and  clearly  if  we  could  find  no 
similarities  in  nature,  we  could  equally  find  no  repetitions.4 

This  is  not  the  place  to  examine  Kant's  solution  of  this 
problem,  which  concerns,  not  the  categories,  but  the  Ideas 
of  Reason.5  I  doubt  whether  he  faced  its  implications  as  regards 

1  In  Metaphysik,  p.  42,  he  says  explicitly  that  an  event  has  many 
concausae,  but  of  many  coordinate  concausae  one  is  the  principal  cause, 
and  the  others  are  secondary.  This  doctrine  is  clearly  implied  m  his 
account  of  the  continuity  of  change  and  of  causation ;  see  for  example 
A  2io-i     -  B  256. 

2  For  a  different  view,  see  Evving,  Kant's  Treatment  of  Causality, 
p.  102.  If  there  is  any  proof  of  the  separability  of  particular  causal 
series,  it  must,  I  think,  lie  in  the  fact  that  causal  events,  like  substances, 
are  spread  out  in  space,  and  that  the  transition  from  cause  to  effect 
is  continuous.  3  See  A  653-4  =  B  681-2. 

4  I  do  not  think  Kant  faced  this  problem  sufficiently  till  he  wrote 
the  Kntik  of  Judgement]  see  especially  Erste  Einlettung  V. 

5  See  especially  A  657-8  .=  B  685-6. 


XLV  §  7]     THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  277 

causality;  but  if  we  follow  the  general  line  of  his  thought,  we 
may,  I  think,  say  that  it  is  in  the  nature  of  human  reason  to 
isolate,  so  far  as  it  can,  relatively  separate  chains  of  causes  and 
effects,  and  always  to  seek  a  further  cause  beyond  the  proximate 
cause  which  has  been  found.  The  possibility  of  doing  so  depends 
on  the  repetition  of  similar  causal  series  in  nature;  and  this 
repetition  in  turn  depends,  not  upon  the  nature  of  the  human 
mind,  but  upon  the  nature  of  things-in-themselves  or,  if  we 
prefer  it,  on  the  grace  of  God.  I  imagine  that  in  this  case,  as 
in  the  case  of  teleology,  our  reason  bids  us  to  examine  nature 
as  if  it  were  the  creation  of  an  all-wise  spirit  and  were  adapted 
to  the  needs  of  human  understanding.1 

It  may  be  said  that  unless  there  were  repetitions  of  similar 
series  in  nature,  we  could  never  make  the  concept  of  cause  and 
effect  'clear'  to  ourselves;2  and  indeed,  if  Kant's  argument 
is  sound,  we  could  never  become  aware  of  objective  succession, 
and  so  we  could  never  have  anything  which  could  be  described 
as  human  experience.  May  not  such  repetition  be  regarded  as  a 
necessary  condition  of  experience,  and  is  not  such  repetition 
therefore  established  by  precisely  that  method  of  argument 
by  which  Kant  seeks  to  establish  the  universal  law  of  causality 
itself? 

The  answer  to  this  question  is  most  emphatically  in  the 
negative.  We  can  indeed  determine  empirically  certain  con- 
ditions which  are  necessary  to  experience,  and  among  these 
conditions  is,  I  think,  a  certain  amount  of  regularity  or  repetition 
in  nature,  and  perhaps  even  the  repetition  of  chains  ot  causes 
and  effects.  But  we  cannot  say  a  priori  that  these  conditions 
must  be  fulfilled.  As  I  understand  Kant,  in  the  case  of  the 
universal  law  of  causality  (as  in  the  case  of  all  Principles  of 
the  Understanding)  if  we  grant  the  unity  of  apperception 
and  time  as  a  form  of  our  sensibility,  the  application  of  the 
law  to  all  events  whatsoever  in  the  phenomenal  world  follows 
as  an  inevitable  consequence.3  He  is  not  saying  that  unless  the 
phenomenal  world  conforms  to  the  law  of  causality,  we  could 

1  Compare  A  686  =  B  714  ff.  2  See  A  196  —  B  241. 

3  Compare  A  216  =  B  263  and  A  217  =  B  264. 


278  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLV  §  8 

have  no  experience  of  it.  He  is  saying  that  there  could  be  no 
phenomenal  world  unless  it  so  conformed. 

I  would  add  that  in  this  discussion  Kant  makes  no  mention 
of  other  kinds  of  causality,  such  as  the  possibility  of  free  actions 
or  final  causes:  these  questions  have  to  be  dealt  with  later. 
But  so  far  as  I  can  see,  the  admission  of  such  possibilities  later 
demands  no  modification  or  qualification  of  his  present  doctrine 
which  is  concerned  only  with  mechanical  (or  efficient)  causation. 
If  a  succession  is  to  be  objective,  it  must  conform  to  the  universal 
law  of  cause  and  effect  as  here  explained,  although  in  particular 
cases  it  may  conform  also  to  further  laws  with  which  we  are 
not  here  concerned.1 

§  8.  The  Transcendental  Synthesis  of  Imagination 

I  have  attempted  to  set  forth  the  reasonableness  of  Kant's 
doctrine,  but  I  must  confess  that  I  still  find  great  difficulty 
in  the  fact  that  causal  law  is  for  Kant  imposed  upon  appearances 
by  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination. 

One  side  of  this  doctrine  is  easy  enough  to  understand. 
The  concept  of  causation,  while  we  do  not  become  consciously 
aware  of  it  till  experience  has  developed,  seems,  like  the  law 
of  non-contradiction,  to  be  presupposed  at  a  very  early  stage; 
and  in  fact,  if  Kant  is  right,  to  be  presupposed  as  soon  as 
we  can  be  said  to  be  aware  of  changes  in  physical  objects. 
It  is  in  the  nature  of  the  human  mind  to  think  in  terms  of  causes 
and  effects  long  before  it  is  consciously  aware  that  it  docs 
so.  In  our  everyday  experience  we  cannot  restrict  ourselves, 
unless  possibly  by  an  effort  of  will,  to  the  apprehension  of 
given  appearances,  but  starting  from  this  frail  basis  we  have 
before  us  at  every  moment  a  world  which  we  construct  in 
memory  and  in  imagination  controlled  by  thought.  In  this 
construction  the  concept  of  causality  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously plays  a  leading  part,  and  only  by  its  help  can  we  know 

1  When  we  fail  to  find  a  teleological  connexion  and  have  to  be 
satisfied  with  a  merely  mechanical,  we  are  said  only  to  miss  an 
additional  unity  (cine  Einheit  mehr)\  see  A  687-8  =  B  715-16. 


XLV  §  8]     THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  CAUSALITY  279 

an  objective  world  extending  through  space  and  time  as  an 
ordered  and  systematic  whole. 

So  far  Kant's  doctrine  offers  little  difficulty,  and  seems  to 
me  manifestly  true,  at  least  as  a  prima  facie  description  of  the 
facts.  But  there  is  another  side  to  this  which  is  very  hard  to 
believe.  The  orderly  world  which  we  construct  on  the  basis 
of  our  sense-perceptions  is  confirmed  at  every  moment  by  these 
continually  changing  sense-perceptions  themselves.  Our  sense- 
perceptions  must  occur  in  an  order  compatible  with  the  causal 
order  of  the  objective  world;1  and  Kant's  doctrine  is  that  in  the 
last  resort  the  causal  order  is  imposed  upon  our  sense- 
perceptions  by  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination. 

This  difficulty  I  cannot  attempt  to  discuss  adequately  here.2 
It  may  be  that  the  difficulty  is  partly  due  to  our  tendency  not 
to  take  the  Copernican  revolution  seriously,  and  not  to 
recognise  that  time  is  only  a  form  of  our  sensibility  which 
has  nothing  to  do  with  things-in-themselves.  I  do  not  find 
it  difficult  to  suppose  that  our  minds  are  such  that  to  them  reality 
must  appear  as  physical  bodies  in  space  which  must  conform  to 
the  laws  of  geometry ;  but  for  some  reason  I  do  find  it  difficult 
to  suppose — and  I  imagine  that  many  share  this  difficulty — 
that  our  minds  are  such  that  to  them  reality  must  appear, 
not  only  as  a  succession  of  changes  in  time,  but  as  a  succession 
of  changes  in  time  which  must  conform  to  causal  law. 

There  are  two  ways  of  avoiding  this  difficulty.3  One  is  to 

1  By  this  I  mean  that  when  we  perceive  an  objective  succession, 
our  sense-perceptions,  as  contents,  are  for  Kant  events  in  the  pheno- 
menal world,  and  their  succession  is  causally  determined.  It  is  much 
harder  to  believe  that  the  transcendental  synthesis  determines  the 
order  of  actual  sense-perceptions  (or  given  appearances)  than  that  it 
determines  the  order  of  possible  sense-perceptions.  There  is  a  further 
difficulty  in  the  fact  that  our  sensations  are  caused  by  physical  objects, 
and  that  while  primary  qualities  of  objects  are  the  same  for  all  men, 
the  secondary  vary  from  individual  to  individual.  The  first  difficulty 
concerns    what    Price    (in    Perception)    calls    ' horizontal'    causality, 
while  the  second  difficulty  concerns  what  he  calls  Vertical'  causality. 

2  It  is  connected  with  the  doctime  of  double  affection,  and  was  one 
of  the  problems  which   Kant  attempted  to  work  out  in  the   Opus 
Postumum.  a  Compare  Chapter  XXXI  §§  4-5. 


a8o  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLV  §8 

assert  that  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  which  Kant  speaks 
is  a  pre-conscious  and  noumenal  synthesis  which  somehow 
constructs  the  whole  physical  world  for  us  before  we  begin 
to  know  it.  For  this  view  I  can  find  no  basis  in  Kant,  nor  does 
it  seem  to  me  to  have  the  least  plausibility  as  a  metaphysical 
theory.  The  other  way  is  simply  to  assert  that  Kant's  doctrine 
of  transcendental  synthesis  is  a  mistaken  kind  of  psychological 
doctrine  which  need  not  be  taken  seriously.  I  feel  sure  that 
this  view  is  wrong;  for  it  seems  to  me  quite  clear  that  there  is, 
and  must  be,  a  transcendental  synthesis  by  which  we  construct 
one  time  and  one  space,  and  that  this  construction  does 
necessarily  impose  certain  characteristics  on  the  world  which 
we  experience.  The  difficulty  is  to  understand  how  it  can  impose 
a  causal  order  on  the  succession  of  my  actual  sense-perceptions.1 

1  I  do  not  think  Kant  would  claim  that  we  have  'insight*  (Emsicht) 
— that  is,  the  insight  of  reason — in  a  matter  of  this  kind;  see 
A  171  -=  B  213. 


CHAPTER     XLVT 
CAUSALITY  AND   CONTINUITY 

§  i.  Kant's  Concept  of  Causality 

Kant  offers  us  no  detailed  analysis1  of  the  concept  of  causality 
such  as  we  are  familiar  with  in  philosophical  studies  of  science 
to-day.  What  he  attempts  to  prove  is  no  more  than  necessary 
succession,  which  he  interprets  as  succession  in  accordance 
with  a  rule.  If  the  event  a  occurs,  then  the  event  /3,  other 
conditions  being  the  same,  must  always  follow. 

I  think  it  is  a  mistake  to  infer  from  this  that  by  causality 
Kant  meant  necessary  succession  and  nothing  more.  His 
business  is  to  prove  what  he  calls  the  schema  of  necessary 
succession ;  but  in  so  doing  he  believes  himself  to  show  both 
that  phenomenal  objects  must  conform  to  the  pure  category 
of  ground  and  consequent,  and  that  the  pure  category  receives 
'sense  and  significance'  when  it  is  translated  into  terms  of 
time  and  so  is  transformed  into  cause  and  effect .  He  regards 
the  cause  as  a  ground  of  the  effect,  but  as  a  ground  which 
must  precede  the  effect,2  while  a  merely  logical  ground  does 
not  precede  its  consequence.  More  precisely,  the  cause  is 
(or  contains)  the  ground  of  the  existence  of  the  effect,  it  is  a 
principium  fiend  i  ? 

The  cause  of  which  Kant  speaks  is  the  efficient  or  effective 
cause.  He  defines  it  as  a  cause  through  acting  force.4  The 

1  Some  blight  attempt  at  analysis  is  made  in  Mcfuphysik,  pp   41  fT. 

2  Compare  A  91        B  124,  13  234,  A  202  —  B  247 — and  many  other 
places. 

3  Sec  Metaphysiky  p.  41.  The  logical  ground  (tat to)  is  there  said  to 
be   the   ground   of  possibility  or  the  pimcipium  cssendi.  The   three 
straight  lines  in  a  triangle  are  its  ground,  but  not  its  cause.  The  ground 
of  knowledge,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  principtum  cognoscendi.  Compare 
also  dc  Vleeschauwer,  La  deduction  transcendentale,  I,  p.  106. 

4  'eine  Ursache  durch  cimvirkende  KrajtS  Metaphystk,  p.  42.  Kant 
regards  the  habit  of  appealing  to  final  causes  alone  as  'the  cushion  of 
a    lazy    philosophy*    (em    Polstcr   dcr  faulen   Philosophic);    compare 
A  689  -=  B  717. 


282  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLVI  §  i 

'predicates'  of  causality  are  force,  action  and  passion.1  Causality 
leads  to  the  concept  of  action  or  activity,  the  concept  of  action 
leads  to  the  concept  of  force,  and  so  to  the  concept  of  substance.2 
The  relations  dealt  with  in  the  Analogies  are  essentially  dyna- 
mical relations.3  Kant,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  simply  accepts  the 
concepts  of  Newtonian  physics  in  this  connexion,  and  makes 
no  attempt  to  alter  or  modify  the  concept  of  causality.  I  do  not 
think  it  will  be  denied  that  for  Newton  the  cause  was  supposed 
to  'produce'  the  effect.4 

It  is  indeed  often  maintained5  that  for  Kant  causality  can 
be  nothing  more  than  regular  succession,  because  for  him 
objects  and  events  are  only  appearances  or  ideas,  and  there 
can  be  no  activity  or  causal  efficacy  in  ideas.6  Such  a  contention 
seems  to  me  unconvincing.  The  fact  that  the  world  is  only 
an  appearance  to  human  minds  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not 
appear  to  human  minds  as  made  up  of  substances  acting  causally 
upon  one  another  and  displaying  real  efficacy  or  dynamical 
causality.  The  only  difficulty  is  to  know  what  can  be  meant 
by  'real  efficacy' ;  but  this  difficulty  is  not  confined  to  the  Critical 
Philosophy.  Kant  quite  certainly  believed  that  his  doctrine 
was  compatible  with  the  physics  of  his  time,  and  indeed  was 
the  only  possible  justification  for  the  scientific  concepts  which 
were  actually  in  use. 

It  may  be  added  that  for  Kant  causality  implies  the  possi- 

1  A  82  =  B  108. 

2  A  204  -    B  249.  In  A  648  --  B  676  force  is  identified  with  the 
causality  of  a  substance. 

3  A  2 15  —  B  262.  The  distinction  between  commumo  and  commercium 
in  A  213-14     -  B  260-1  also  serves  to  emphasise  the  same  point. 

4  Compare  Lenzen,  University  of  California  Publications  in  Philo- 
sophy',  Vol.  15,  p.  72.  Kant  himself  uses  the  word  'produce1  (erzeugcn) 
in  connexion  with  causality;  see,  for  example,  A  208  --  B  254  and 
A  474  =  B  502  ;  also  the  heading  in  A  1 89. 

6  E.g.  by  Paulsen,  Immanucl  Kanty  sixth  edition,  p.  189. 

6  Kemp  Smith,  Commentary,  p.  373,  also  accepts  this  contention, 
but  maintains  that  on  Kant's  phenomenalist  (as  opposed  to  his 
subjectivist)  views  he  is  able  to  recognise  genuinely  dynamical  activities. 
He  has,  however,  to  admit  that  Kant's  phenomenalist  view  of  the 
causal  relation  'receives  no  quite  definite  formulation  either  in  this 
section  or  elsewhere  in  the  Critique*. 


XLVI  §2]       CAUSALITY  AND  CONTINUITY  283 

bility  of  prediction.  We  can  state  the  causal  relation  in  the 
form  'if  A,  then  B',  or  'if  A  is  posited,  B  must  follow'.  This 
analogy  with  the  form  ot  judgement  does  not,  however,  mean 
that  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  in  any  concrete  instance 
intelligible  to  us  a  priori.  In  this  respect  Kant  agrees  with  Hume. 
We  can  discover  the  cause  of  a  given  effect,  or  the  effect  of  a 
given  cause,  only  by  means  of  empirical  experience.1  Our 
a  priori  knowledge  is  confined  to  the  statement  that  every 
event  must  have  a  cause. 

§  2.  The  Successiveness  of  Cause  and  Effect 

The  three  main  questions  in  regard  to  causality  discussed 
by  Kant  in  the  observations  which,  as  usual,  he  appends  to 
his  proofs  are  (i)  the  successiveness  of  cause  and  effect,  (2)  the 
connexion  between  substance  and  causal  activity,  and  (3)  the 
continuity  of  change.  The  second  of  these  questions  has 
already  been  discussed.2  We  must  now  consider  the  other  two. 

Kant  has  expressed  the  Principle  of  causality  in  the  first 
edition3  by  the  formula:  'Everything  that  happens  (that  is, 
begins  to  be)  presupposes  something  upon  which  it  follows 
in  accordance  with  a  rule*.  In  simpler  language,  every  event 
has  a  cause  upon  which  it  necessarily  follows.  Kant  thinks 
it  necessary  to  meet  the  objection  that  in  some  cases  the  effect 
does  not  follow  the  cause,  but  is  simultaneous  with  it.4  The 
heat  of  the  room,  for  example,  is  simultaneous  with  the  heated 
stove  which  is  its  cause.  It  may  even  be  urged5  that  this  is  true 
of  most  causes  and  effects.6  We  fail  to  notice  this  because  it 
takes  some  time  for  the  cause  to  have  its  full  effect,  but  the 
beginning  of  the  effect  is  always  simultaneous  with  the  cause. 

1  A 206-7  =  6252.  Compare  A  171  —  6213  and  also  A  41  =  B  58. 

2  See  Chapter  XLII  §  9.  3  A  189.  4  A  202  =  B  247-8. 
6  I  take  it  that  Kant  is  still  expounding  the  objection  with  which  he 

has  to  deal.  Kant's  reply  begins  later  with  the  words  'Now  we  must 
not  fail  to  note  .  .  .'. 

0  If  Kant  were  speaking  in  his  own  person  I  think  he  would  have 
said  'all'.  That  he  says  'most*  suggests  that  he  is  still  thinking  of  a 
rather  crude  objection.  He  says  in  the  next  sentence  that  the  beginning 
of  the  effect  is  always  simultaneous  with  the  cause. 


284  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLVI  §  3 

Kant's  reply  is  obvious  enough.  When  we  say  that  the  effect 
follows  the  cause,  we  do  not  mean  that  the  cause  comes  to 
an  end,  and  there  is  then  an  interval  of  time  after  which  the 
effect  begins.  What  \ve  are  dealing  with  is  the  order  of  cause 
and  effect  in  time,  and  this  does  not  mean  that  there  is  a  passage 
or  interval  of  time  between  them.  On  the  contrary,  although 
the  time  between  the  causality1  of  the  cause  and  the  effect 
is  a  vanishing  quantity,  and  cause  and  effect  are  simultaneous 
in  the  sense  that  there  is  no  gap  between  them,  this  does  not 
alter  the  fact  that  cause  and  effect  are  in  a  temporal  succession. 
It  means  only  that  the  temporal  succession  is  continuous.2 

This  discussion  is,  I  think,  intended  to  prepare  the  way  for 
the  doctrine  of  the  Third  Analogy. 

§  3 .  The  Continuity  of  Change 

Kant's  account  of  the  continuity  of  change  is  both  more 
difficult  and  more  important.3  It  is  difficult  in  itself,  and  it 
seems  to  contradict  the  doctrine  set  forth  in  the  Anticipations.4 

1  This  phrase  is  used  because  a  cause  may  in  a  sense  be  present 
without  producing  the  effect,   if  there  is  some   impediment  which 
prevents  it  from  doing  so.  Compare  Metaphysik,  p.  43. 

2  Kant  gives  two  illustrations  to  show  that  in  cases  of  seeming 
simultaneity  we  distinguish  effect  from  cause  by  order  in  time.  These 
are  (i)  the  popular  one  that  if  we  lay  a  bullet  on  a  cushion,  there 
follows  a  hollow  in  the  cushion,  but  if  there  is  a  hollow  in  the  cushion, 
it  is  not  followed  by  the  presence  of  a  bullet;  and  (2)  the  experiment 
of  surface-tension  made  first  by  Segner  in  1751,  who  was  led  thereby 
to  the  discovery  of  capillary  attraction.  If  we  fill  a  nanow  glass  by 
dipping  it  into  a  large  vessel  of  water,  the  surface  of  the  water  becomes 
concave  in  the  glass.  3  A  206  -=  B  252  ff. 

4  A  171-2  —  B  212-13;  compare  Chapter  XXXVIII  §  7.  The  con- 
tradiction lies  in  the  fact  that  the  continuity  of  change  was  there 
asserted  to  belong  to  universal  natural  science  (which  I  take  to  be 
Rational  Physiology  or  Rational  Physics),  and  not  to  Transcendental 
Philosophy;  here  it  is  discussed  without  any  apology  or  explanation, 
whether  because  Kant  had  changed  his  mind  on  the  subject  or  because 
he  was  unable  to  keep  away  from  the  problem  in  spite  of  recognising 
that  it  ought  to  be  dealt  with  in  another  place.  It  is  true  that  in  the 
present  passage  he  reaffirms  his  earlier  doctrine  that  we  have  not  the 
slightest  a  priori  conception  of  the  way  in  which  anything  can  be 
changed;  but  I  cannot  see  that  there  is  any  real  difference  between 
dealing  with  the  form  of  change  (which  he  now  proceeds  to  do)  and 


XLVI  §  3]        CAUSALITY  AND  CONTINUITY  285 

It  is  important  because  of  its  bearing  on  the  special  proof  of 
causality  from  the  nature  of  time  (Proof  V),  and  also  because 
of  the  light  it  throws  on  the  doctrine  of  the  Anticipations. 

We  have  not  the  slightest  conception  of  how  change  is  pos- 
sible, but  are  entirely  dependent  upon  experience.1  This, 
however,  applies  to  change  as  something  concrete,  the  succession 
(or  exchange)  of  given  states  of  a  substance.  We  can  abstract 
from  the  content  of  these  states  and  consider  a  priori  the  form 
or  condition  of  change  in  general,  and  we  do  so  in  relation  to 
the  law  of  causality  and  the  conditions  of  time.  The  form  or 
condition  of  change  seems  to  be  identified  with  the  bare 
successiveness  of  change;2  and  Kant  is  asking  'What  can  be 
said  a  priori  about  change  on  the  sole  ground  that  it  is  a 
succession  in  time  (in  complete  abstraction  from  the  empirical 
character  of  the  states  of  which  it  is  a  succession)?' 

When  a  substance  passes  from  state  a  to  state  /?,  t^  (the 
moment  at  which  j3  occurs)  differs  from  and  is  subsequent 
to  tl  (the  moment  at  which  a  occurs).  Between  these  two 
moments  there  is  always  a  time,  however  short,  which  may  be 
represented  by  A,  —  tL. 

State  j8  differs  from  and  is  subsequent  to  state  a.  The 
difference  must  be  regarded  as  a  difference  only  in  quantity, 
that  is,  in  degree,3  since  we  arc  ignoring  the  qualitative  differ- 

dealmg  with  the  causality  of  change  in  general  (which  he  there  excluded 
from  Transcendental  Philosophy).  The  reference  to  causality  does  not 
imply  any  difference,  for  heie  the  form  of  change  is  considered  'in 
accordance  with  the  law  of  causality'.  If  the  statement  in  the  Anticipa- 
tions were  concerned  only  with  motion  and  the  present  statement  with 
change,  the  contradiction  would  disappear. 

1  It  should   be  observed   (i)   that   Kant  identifies  knowledge   of 
moving  forces  with  knowledge  of  the  successive  appearances  which 
'designate'  these  forces;  (2)  it  is  as  motions  that  the  appearances 
designate  moving  forces ;  and  (3)  he  is  concerned  only  with  change  as 
change  of  state  (not  of  relative  position).  Thus  a  change  of  velocity  is 
a  change  of  state,  but  motion  (change  of  place)  at  a  uniform  velocity 
is  not  a  change  of  state  but  simply  a  state  (of  motion). 

2  The  form  or  condition  of  change  is  equated  with  the  succession 
(or  happening)  of  the  states. 

3  A  reference  to  degree  seems  to  be  called  for  here,  though  it  is 
not  made  explicit  by  Kant  till  A  208  =  B  254.  Kant  gives  as  his  reason 
(in  A  208  —  B  253)  for  asserting  difference  in  quantity  the  fact  that  all 


286  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLVI  §  3 

ences  or  empirical  content  of  the  states  which  are  exchanged.1 
a  may  then  be  taken  as  zero  in  relation  to  )3,  and  the  change  is 
a  coming  into  existence  of  j3  —  a.2 

Hence  just  as  there  is  always  a  time  between  two  moments, 
so  between  the  two  states  in  these  moments  there  is  always  a 
difference  of  quantity.3  The  transition  or  passage  from  one  state 
to  another  takes  place  in  a  time  which  is  contained  between 
two  moments  (the  moment  at  which  a  occurs  and  the  moment 
at  which  j8  occurs).  The  two  moments  are  the  limits  of  the  time 
of  the  change,  and  therefore  the  limits  of  the  intermediate 
state4  between  state  a  and  state  j3.  As  such  limits  they  belong 
to  the  whole  change ;  they  mark  its  starting-point  and  its  finish. 

Kant  takes  this  as  proving  that  the  continuity  of  change, 
which  in  the  Anticipations  he  asserted,  on  the  ground  of 
intuitive  evidence,5  to  be  possible,6  is  necessarily  present  in  all 
actual  change.7 

the  parts  of  an  appearance  are  always  quantities ;  but  presumably  he  is 
not  speaking  of  parts  which  are  outside  one  another,  and  the  statement 
seems  to  presuppose  the  doctrine  of  the  Anticipations.  This  is  con- 
firmed by  the  fact  that  he  refers  to  states  as  'reality  in  the  appearance* 
(reahtas  phaenomenon). 

1  This  would  seem  to  imply  that  when  litmus  paper  changes  from 
red  to  blue,  the  change  can  be  treated  as  a  change  in  degree  (of  colour) ; 
but  perhaps  Kant  has  in  mind  only  primary  qualities. 

2  This  quantity  may  be  either  positive  or  negative.  If  the  change  is 
from  70°  F.  to  80°  F.,  what  has  happened  is  the  addition  of  10°  F. 
(80°  F.  -  70°  F.    -  10°  F.).   If  the  change  is  from  70°  F.  to  60°  F. 
what   has  happened   is   the   subtraction  of   10°  F.    (60°  F.  —  70°  F. 
=  -  10°  F.). 

3  This  of  course  applies  only  when  the  two  states  are  assumed  to  be 
different  states. 

4  I  suppose  the  existence  of  an  intermediate  state  is  assumed  on  the 
ground  that  time  must  be  filled.       °  A  162  -=  B  201,  A  180  =  B  223. 

6  B  208,  A  168  =  B  210.  Compare  A  143  =  B  182-3. 

7  Kant  gives  two  other  versions  of  this  proof  in  Metaphysik,  pp.  54 
and  56. 

(i)  Nothing  passes  out  of  one  state  into  another  immediately,  that 
is,  per  saltum,  but  the  transition  from  one  state  to  another  happens 
in  such  a  way  that  the  thing  must  pass  through  all  the  intermediate 
states.  Thus  one  can  say  generally  'Omnis  mutatio  est  continual. 

Every  state  ( ?  change)  has  two  termini :  a  quo  and  a d  quern.  Each  of 
these  two  states  is  distinguished  as  in  a  different  moment.  In  every 
transition  the  thing  is  in  two  different  moments.  The  moment  in 


XLVI  §  3]       CAUSALITY  AND  CONTINUITY  287 

So  far  Kant  has  dealt  only  with  the  continuity  of  change. 
He  now  proceeds  to  bring  in  causation.  Every  change  has  a 
cause  which  shows  its  causality  in  the  whole  time  in  which  the 
change  takes  place.  Hence  the  cause  does  not  bring  about  the 
change  suddenly,  all  at  one  moment,  but  in  a  period  of  time, 
so  that  just  as  the  time  increases  from  the  initial  moment  ^  to 
the  final  moment  J2,  the  quantity  of  reality  (which  is  equal  to 
j8— a)  is  produced  through  all  the  intermediate  grades  between 
a  and  )3. 

Kant's  answer  to  the  question  'What  can  be  said  a  priori 
about  change?' — or  in  his  own  language  'How  can  a  thing  pass 
from  state  a  to  state  /??' — is  (i)  that  the  change  must  be  con- 
tinuous, and  (2)  that  its  continuity  must  be  due  to  the  continuity 
of  causal  activity.1 

which  the  thing  is  in  one  state  is  different  from  the  moment  in  which 
it  comes  into  the  other  state.  But  between  two  moments  there  is  a 
time,  just  as  between  two  points  there  is  a  space.  Hence  the  transition 
occurs  in  time;  for  in  the  moments  in  which  it  passes  from  A  to  B, 
there  is  a  time  in  which  it  is  neither  in  A  nor  in  B,  but  is  in  mutation 
or  transition  between  the  two. 

The  conclusion  stated  above  is  then  said  to  follow. 

(2)  There  is  no  state  which  follows  immediately  upon  another.  For 
if  a  body  passes  from  one  state  into  another,  there  must  be  a  moment 
in  which  it  goes  out  of  the  first  state  and  a  moment  in  which  it  comes 
into  the  second  state.  Between  these  two  moments  there  is  a  time  in 
which  it  is  neither  in  the  one  state  nor  in  the  other.  Therefore  it  is  in 
an  intermediate  state,  which  is  a  ground  why  it  passes  over  into  the 
second  state. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  lectures  on  Metaphysics — the  style 
of  which  differs  so  much,  especially  m  the  use  of  short  sentences, 
from  the  Kntik — are  printed  from  the  notes  of  students,  and  are  not 
free  from  the  inaccuracies  to  be  expected.  I  have  modified  the  language 
in  places.  I  cannot,  for  example,  believe  that  Kant  said  'Alle  mulatto 
ist  continual 

1  He  adds  that  a  causal  activity,  so  far  as  it  is  uniform,  is  called  a 
'moment',  and  that  the  change  does  not  consist  of  'moments'  but  is 
produced  by  moments  as  their  effect.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in 
A  168-9  —  B  210  he  called  the  degree  of  reality  as  a  cause  a  'moment', 
e.g.  the  'moment*  of  weight,  and  suggested  that  it  was  called  a 
moment  because  the  apprehension  of  degree  was  not  successive  but 
momentary.  According  to  Adickes  (Kant  als  Natutforscher,  Vol.  I, 
p.  25)  Kant  uses  'moment*  in  seven  different  senses,  but  on  this  I 
offer  no  opinion. 


288  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE       [XLVI  §  4 

§  4.  The  Law  of  Continuity 

It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  proof  just  given  there  is  no 
attempt  made  to  derive  causation  from  the  continuity  of  time 
as  there  was  in  Proof  V,  and  that  Kant  argues  directly  from  the 
continuity  of  time  to  the  continuity  of  change.  He  is  not  arguing 
(or  at  any  rate  not  arguing  explicitly)  that  change  must  be  con- 
tinuous, if  we  are  to  perceive  it  in  a  time  which  is  continuous. 

This  argument  is  followed  up  by  what  is  generally  regarded 
as  a  second  argument.1  I  think  it  is  intended  rather  to  be  a 
summary  or  explanation  of  what  has  been  already  set  forth. 
Like  Kant's  summaries  in  general,  it  ignores  points  previously 
made  (it  makes  no  reference  to  causation),  and  it  makes  explicit 
what  was  previously  only  implicit. 

The  ground  of  the  law  of  continuity  in  change  is  this:  that 
neither  time  nor  the  appearance  in  time  is  composed  of  smallest 
possible  parts;2  and  that  in  change  a  thing  passes  from  one 
state  to  another  through  all  the  infinite  parts  (or  degrees) 
intermediate  between  the  two  states.3  This  seems  a  statement 
of  the  law  of  continuity  rather  than  of  its  ground,  and  can 
hardly  be  called  an  attempt  at  proof.4 

The  utility  of  this  doctrine  in  science  is,  as  Kant  says,  a 
question  outside  the  scope  of  the  Kritik.  But  he  believes,  as 
regards  motion,  that  nothing  can  move  from  one  place  to 
another  without  passing  through  all  the  intermediate  places; 
that  nothing  can  pass  from  rest  to  a  degree  of  motion,  or  from 

1  A  209  —  B  254. 

2  That  is,  it  is  not  composed  of  simple  parts  incapable  of  further 
division;  or,  as  Kant  says  in  the  following  sentence,  no  difference 
(in  degree)  of  a  state,  and  no  difference  in  the  quantity  of  times,  is  the 
smallest  possible  difference. 

3  Kant,  in  popular  language,  speaks  of  the  state  of  the  thing  as 
passing  through  the  parts  to  the  second  state,  and  of  the  second 
state  as  growing  out  of  the  first;  but  a  state  does  not  pass  or  grow  at 
all,  it  is  only  exchanged  for  another  state.  Incidentally  it  may  be  noted 
that  when  Kant  speaks  of  differences  in  degree  as  always  smaller  than 
the  difference  between  a  and  zero,  he  is  referring  to  absolute  zero 
(and  not  to  a  as  the  relative  zero  from  which  the  change  starts). 

4  It  may  perhaps    be  intended  to  make  explicit  a  principle  pre- 
supposed in  the  previous  argument. 


XLVI  §  5]       CAUSALITY  AND  CONTINUITY  289 

a  degree  of  motion  to  rest,  without  passing  through  the  infinite 
intermediate  degrees  of  motion;  and  that  nothing  can  change 
its  direction  without  either  coming  to  rest  and  starting  afresh 
or  else  moving  continuously  through  a  curved  line  (and  not  an 
angle).1 

§  5.  Continuity  as  the  Formal  Condition  of  Apprehension 

Kant  himself  warns  us  of  the  danger  of  accepting  such  proofs 
too  easily,  a  danger  of  which  we  are  acutely  conscious  in  the 
present  state  of  science.  He  seems  to  feel  that  the  proof  above 
given  is  especially  to  be  distrusted,  because  it  is  a  dogmatic 
proof,  that  is,  as  I  have  said,  a  direct  proof  from  the  nature  of 
time  to  the  nature  of  change  in  time.  For  this  reason  he  supple- 
ments the  dogmatic  proof  by  a  Critical  explanation.2  He  attempts 
to  show  that  the  distrust  of  the  previous  argument  is  not  really 
justified,  because  in  spite  of  appearances  we  are  only  antici- 
pating our  own  apprehension.  He  assumes,  as  always,  that  it 
must  be  possible  for  us  to  have  an  a  priori  knowledge  of  the 
conditions  of  our  own  apprehension  or  our  own  experience. 
His  argument  is  interesting,  because  it  throws  light  on  the 
continually  repeated  doctrine  that  what  understanding  deter- 
mines is  inner  sense. 

All  increase  in  empirical  knowledge,  and  every  advance 
in  sense-perception,  is  nothing  but  an  extension  of  the  deter- 
mination of  inner  sense,  that  is,  an  advance  in  time.3  This 
is  true  whatever  be  the  character  of  the  objects  known,  whether 
we  are  concerned  with  empirical  objects  or  with  pure  intuitions. 

1  Metaphysiky  pp.  56-7.  Changes  of  velocity  or  direction  are  changes 
of  state,  although  uniform  motion  in  one  direction  is  not  a  change 
of  state. 

2A2io-'B255.  This  also  is  commonly  regarded  as  a  separate 
and  independent  proof,  and  the  supposed  repetition  of  the  same  proof 
'with  unessential  variations'  is  said  to  imply  a  composite  origin  for 
these  paragraphs.  See  Kemp  Smith,  Commentary,  p.  380.  I  think  that 
an  understanding  of  the  relation  between  the  paragraphs  diminishes 
the  force  of  this  contention. 

3  Yet  many  commentators  insist  that  for  Kant  knowledge  is  timeless, 
and  even  noumenal. 

VOL.  II  K 


290  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  p;XPERIENCE    [XLVI  §  5 

This  advance  in  time — the  advance  of  our  experience — deter- 
mines everything,  and  is  determined  by  nothing  other  than 
itself.  It  determines  even  the  time  in  which  it  itself  takes  place.1 

Hence,  Kant  goes  on,  every  transition  in  sense-perception 
to  something  which  follows  in  time  is  a  determination  of  time 
through  the  production  of  this  sense-perception ;  and  since  time 
is  always  and  in  all  its  parts2  a  quantity,  the  production  of 
a  sense-perception,  considered  as  an  intensive  quantity,  must 
pass  through  all  the  degrees  (of  which  none  is  the  smallest 
possible  degree)  from  zero3  up  to  the  determinate  degree  of  the 
sense-perception  in  question. 

From  this  Kant  concludes  that  it  is  possible  to  understand 
how  we  can  have  a  priori  knowledge  of  the  law  of  change  (so 
far  as  the  form  of  change  is  concerned).  All  such  knowledge 
does  is  to  anticipate  our  own  apprehension,  whose  formal 
condition,  as  present  in  us  prior  to,  and  independently  of ,  given 
appearances,  must  be  intelligible  a  priori. 

It  seems  to  me  obvious  that  Kant  intends  this  argument  to 
supplement,  and  be  supplemented  by,  his  original  contention 
that  different  states  (or  sense-perceptions)  as  occupying 
different  moments  must  have  a  filled  time  between  them. 

1  This,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  following  sentence,  seems  to  be 
the  general  sense  of  the  very  obscure  statement :  'die  Tede  desselben  smd 
nur  in  der  Zeit,  und  durch  die  Synthesis  dersclben,  sie  aber  mcht  vor 
thr  gegeben*.  The  last  six  words  are  especially  obscure,  and  Vaihmger 
emends  lsiey  to  'siW,  while  Wille  emends  'ihr*  to  'ihnen*. 

To  discuss  all  the  possibilities — none  of  which  is  certain — would 
take  too  much  time.  I  should  like  the  sentence  to  mean  that  while 
the  parts  of  experience  are  given  only  in  time  and  through  the  synthesis 
of  time,  nevertheless  time  is  not  given  prior  to  (or  independently  of) 
the  synthesis;  compare  A  452  n.  =  B  480  n.  Although  the  advance  of 
experience  is  an  advance  in  time,  time  itself  is  determined,  and  indeed 
produced  (see  A  143  —  B  182),  by  the  advance  of  experience,  which  is 
essentially  a  synthetic  act.  Compare  the  statement  about  the  concept 
of  succession  in  B  155. 

2  This  phrase  seems  intended  to  imply  that  no  part  of  time  is  the 
smallest  possible,  for  every  part  of  time  is  a  quantity  of  time  and  not 
a  point  of  time. 

3  To  judge  by  A  208  --•=  B  253,  zero  here  is  the  starting-point  of  the 
transition  and  may  be  represented  by  a,  the  sense-perception  from 
which  the  transition  starts. 


XLVI  §  5]        CAUSALITY  AND  CONTINUITY  291 

Taken  by  itself  it  would  hardly  be  intelligible ;  and  if  the  original 
argument  is  rejected,  this  one  is  entirely  without  force. 

This  doctrine  is  closely  connected  with  the  Anticipations. 
It  seems  intended  to  show,  not  only  that  between  a  sensation 
and  zero  there  is  an  infinity  of  different  degrees  of  the  same 
sensation — this  is  supposed  to  have  been  proved  already — 
but  also  that  we  must  necessarily  pass  through  these  degrees 
to  arrive  at  the  required  sensation.  Furthermore  it  is  based  on 
the  nature  of  time,  and  such  a  basis  is  absolutely  essential  for 
the  proof  of  Principles,  although  in  the  Anticipations  the 
connexion  between  time  and  degree  was  by  no  means  made 
sufficiently  clear. 

Kant's  argument,  so  far  as  I  understand  it,  takes  it  to  be 
already  proved  that  no  part  of  time  is  the  smallest  possible 
part  of  time  and  no  degree  is  the  smallest  possible  degree ;  or, 
in  other  words,  whatever  two  points  of  time  we  take  there  will 
always  be  another  point  between  them,  and  whatever  two 
degrees  we  take  there  will  always  be  another  degree  between 
them.  He  then  maintains  that  since  any  two  degrees  occupy 
two  different  points  of  time,  any  intermediate  point  of  time 
must  be  occupied  by  an  intermediate  degree  and  so  ad  infinitum. 
The  continuity  of  time  implies  the  continuity  of  change. 

This  doctrine  he  regards  as  worthy  of  acceptance  because 
the  states  which  possess  these  degrees  are  possible  or  actual 
sense-perceptions  and  because  time  is  the  form  of  our  sensi- 
bility. If  time  were  a  thing-in-itself,  and  if  states  belonged  to 
things-in-themselves,  such  a  proof  would  not  be  acceptable.1 
Kant  rightly,  I  think,  refuses  to  take  time  for  granted,  and 
(insisting  that  time  is  determined  only  through  the  advance 
in  our  sense-perception  by  means  of  the  synthesis  which  is 
experience)  he  seems  to  argue  (although  his  statement  is  not 

1  It  would  contradict  Kant's  central  principle  that  we  cannot  have 
a  priori  knowledge  of  thmgs-in-themselvcs.  But  the  objection  may  be 
raised  that  Newton's  time  (apait  from  its  inconceivability)  would  give 
us  ground  for  a  similar  proof,  and  I  find  it  difficult  to  be  certain  of 
Kant's  answer  to  such  an  objection;  compare  Chaptei  VIII  §  6. 
Perhaps  his  answer  here  would  be  that  absolute  time  cannot  be 
perceived. 


292  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLVI  §  5 

sufficiently  explicit)  that  this  empirical  determination  of  time 
as  a  continuous  extensive  quantity  is  impossible  unless  the 
succession  of  sense-perceptions  by  which  time  is  filled  is  itself 
a  continuous  change  in  intensive  quantity  or  degree. 

The  resemblance  of  this  argument  to  the  fifth  proof  of 
causality  is  obvious,  although  in  the  present  passage  it  is  not 
causality,  but  continuity  of  change,  which  is  inferred  directly 
from  the  continuity  of  time,  and  the  continuity  of  causality 
(causality  being  taken  as  proved)  is  inferred  from  the  continuity 
of  change. 

This  latter  inference  is  set  forth  in  the  long  and  intricate 
sentence  which  constitutes  Kant's  final  paragraph.  Just  as 
time  contains  the  a  priori  condition  of  the  possibility  of  a  con- 
tinuous advance  of  the  existing  to  what  follows,  so  under- 
standing (in  virtue  of  the  unity  of  apperception)1  contains  the 
a  priori  condition  of  the  possibility  of  a  continuous  determination 
of  all  appearances  (as  regards  their  temporal  position)  by  means 
of  the  law  of  cause  and  effect.  It  is  only  because  of  this  possi- 
bility, only  because  of  the  inevitable  sequence  of  causes  and 
effects,  that  our  empirical  knowledge  of  time-relations  is  valid 
for  all  time,  and  is  therefore  universally  or  objectively  valid. 

Here  again  we  come  to  Kant's  central  contention — that 
objective  succession  is  essentially  necessary  succession.  If  we 
are  to  know,  not  merely  that  appearances  have  been  appre- 
hended by  us  in  succession,  but  that  they  succeed  one  another 
in  a  common  objective  world,  then  their  relative  position  in 
one  homogeneous  and  continuous  time  must  be  determined 
by  understanding  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  cause  and 
effect. 

The  whole  of  Kant's  argument  rests,  I  believe,  on  the  suppo- 
sition that  absolute  time  cannot  be  perceived  and  that  events 
in  the  physical  world  are  only  appearances  (possible  or  actual) 
of  a  reality  which  in  itself  we  have  no  reason  to  regard  either  as 
changing  or  as  unchanging  or  as  having  any  kind  of  temporal 
predicate.  The  difference  between  the  special  proof  from  time 

AA  2IO-H  =  B  256.  Note  that  here  we  have  one  of  the  few 
passages  in  which  an  appeal  appears  to  be  made  to  the  pure  category. 


XLVI  §  5]        CAUSALITY  AND  CONTINUITY  293 

(Proof  V)  and  the  others  is  not  so  great  as  is  commonly  supposed. 
In  all  his  arguments  Kant  is  maintaining  that  unless  succession 
were  necessary,  we  could  not  experience  a  world  which  changes 
in  one  homogeneous  and  continuous  time,  and  that  experience 
which  is  not  experience  of  such  a  world  could  not  be  called 
human  experience  at  all.  Whatever  be  the  obscurities  in  his 
exposition,  and  however  doubtful  be  the  validity,  and  even  in 
some  cases  the  meaning,  of  the  different  steps  of  his  advance, 
I  cannot  help  thinking  that  at  the  very  least  he  has  called  atten- 
tion to  a  problem  whose  very  existence  is  too  commonly  ignored, 
and  that  the  solution  he  suggests  has  not  yet  been  superseded 
by  any  other. 


CHAPTER     XLVII 
THE   THIRD   ANALOGY 

§  i.   The  Principle  of  Interaction 

The  Principle  formulated  in  the  Third  Analogy  is  called  in 
the  first  edition  'the  principle  of  communion'.1  In  the  second 
edition  it  is  described  more  elaborately  as  'the  principle  of 
coexistence  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  interaction2  or 
communion'. 

The  two  formulations  of  the  Principle  are  as  follows : 

I.  First  edition — All  substances,  so  far  as  they  are  coexistent, 
stand  in  thorough-going  communion  (or  mutual  interaction).* 

II.  Second  edition — All  substances,  so  far  as  they  can  be 
perceived  in  space  as  coexistent,  are  in  thorough-going  interaction* 

The  second  formula  has  two  advantages  over  the  first.  By 
the  reference  to  perception  it  brings  out  the  Critical  character  of 
the  Principle;  and  by  the  reference  to  space  it  makes  explicit 
Kant's  view  that  the  substances  of  whose  interaction  he  speaks 
are  spatial  substances. 

By  'communion'  or  'interaction'  Kant  means  the  reciprocal 
or  mutual  causality  of  substances  in  regard  to  their  accidents. 
This  is  explicitly  stated  by  Kant  both  in  the  first  and  in  the 
second  edition.5  The  third  category  of  relation  (like  the  third 
category  of  other  classes)  springs  from  a  combination  of  the 

1  'Gemeinschaft.'The  Latin  translation  is  'comtnumo*  or  'commercium'. 
Kant  is  speaking  of  a  real  or  dynamical  communion  (tanimercmm).  See 
A  213  —  B  260  and  A  214  —  B  261. 

2  'Wechselwirkung.'   The    Latin    translation    is    'actio    mutua\    See 
M.A.d.N.    2.   Hauptstuck   (IV    545).    *  Interaction'   and   'communion* 
are    here    equivalent   terms,    but   it   would    be    more    convenient   if 
'communion*  were  used  for  the  pure  category  and  'interaction1  for 
the  schematised  category;  compare  Chapter  XXXIII  §  4. 

3  A  211.  'Mutual  interaction1  may  be  thought  a  superfluous  reitera- 
tion, but  Kant's  words  are  'Wechselwirkung  untcreinander\       4  B  256. 

6  See  B  in,  B  112,  A  144  -=  B  183,  A 221  =  B26g,  A 244  =  B  302 
et  passim.  This  is  involved  even  in  the  description  of  the  category  given 
in  A  80  —  B  1 06,  where  communion  is  equated  with  interaction 


XLVII  §  i]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  295 

first  two  categories;  but  it  is  nevertheless  not  a  derivative 
concept.1  Even  if  we  can  show  that  substance  and  causality 
are  necessary  conditions  of  experience,  it  does  not  follow  that 
substances  'influence*  one  another.  Leibniz,  for  example, 
maintained  that  they  did  not. 

The  empirical  illustration  which  Kant  gives  of  interaction 
is  the  fact  that  in  a  body  the  different  parts  (which  are  of  course 
substances)  mutually  attract  and  repel  one  another;  and 
the  outstanding  example  of  what  he  means  is  the  law  of  gravi- 
tation. Kant  also  says  expressly  that  the  third  law  of  mechanics — 
in  all  communication  of  motion  action  and  reaction  are  always 
equal — is  an  application  of  the  category  of  interaction  to 
matter.2  These  illustrations  all  serve  to  confirm  the  view 

between  agent  and  patient.  Compare  also  letter  to  Schulz  in  1784 
(X  344),  translated  by  Kemp  Smith,  Commentary,  p.  199. 

Kemp  Smith  (Commentary,  pp.  387  ff.)  denies  that  the  category  of 
communion  can  be  reduced  to  'a  dual  application  of  the  category 
of  causality'.  So  far  as  this  denial  is  directed  against  the  mis- 
understandings of  Schopenhauer,  it  is  legitimate,  but  Kemp  Smith 
appears  to  reject  the  view  that  communion  is  to  be  equated  with  the 
mutual  or  reciprocal  causality  of  substances;  for  his  language  seems 
to  imply  that  the  terms  'cause'  and  'causality'  ought  to  be  excluded 
from  the  description  of  the  category.  For  this  doctrine  he  offers  no 
evidence  fiom  Kant  other  than  the  fact  that  in  the  second  edition  'Kant 
is  careful  to  employ  the  terms  ground  and  influence  in  place  of  the 
terms  cause  and  causality'. 

To  this  it  may  be  replied:  (i)  that  Kant  expressly  describes  com- 
munion as  mutual  causality  in  the  second  edition  (B  111-12);  (2)  that 
(as  Ewmg  has  pointed  out)  in  what  is  alleged  to  be  the  earliest 
of  Kant's  proofs  (A  214  ---  B  261)  the  terms  'ground'  and  'influence* 
are  already  used;  and  (3)  that  Kant  always  regards  a  cause  as  a  real 
(but  not  a  logical)  ground,  while  'influence'  (influ\us)  is  a  technical 
term  for  transitive  causal  action,  the  action  of  one  substance  upon 
another  outside  itself.  Compare  Bin,  and  also  Baumgarten,  Meta- 
physica§zii  (XVII  71)  'mjluxm  (actio  transiens)  est  actio  substanttae 
in  substantiam  e\tra  se.  Actio,  quae  non  est  mfluens,  est  immanens'. 

There  may  be  grounds  for  maintaining  that  Kant  was  mistaken  in 
regarding  the  interaction  of  substances  as  equivalent  to  their  reciprocal 
causality,  but  I  can  see  no  giounds  for  denying  that  this  was  his 
doctrine;  nor  am  I  able  to  understand  what  Kemp  Smith's  alter- 
native explanation  of  the  category  is.  1  B  in. 

2  M.A.d.N.  2.  Hauptstuck  (IV  544-5  and  551).  The  words  used 
are  'Wirkung*  and  ' Gegenwtrkung' ',  which  latter  is  equated  by  Kant 


296  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLVII  §  i 

that  for  Kant  communion  or  interaction  is  what  he  asserts  it 
to  be — namely  the  reciprocal  causality  of  substances. 

Professor  Prichard  gives  another  vivid  illustration  of  Kant's 
meaning.  *  Suppose  two  bodies,  A,  a  lump  of  ice,  and  B,  a  fire, 
close  together,  yet  at  such  a  distance  that  they  can  be  observed 
in  succession.  Suppose  that  A  passes  through  changes  of 
temperature  al  a2  a3  .  .  .  in  certain  times,  the  changes 
ending  in  states  c^  a2  a3  .  .  .,  and  that  B  passes  through 
changes  of  temperature  bt  b2  b3  .  .  .  in  the  same  times, 
the  changes  ending  in  states  &  j82  j83  .  .  .  Suppose  also, 
as  we  must,  that  A  and  B  interact,  i.e.  that  A  in  passing  through 
its  changes  conditions1  the  changes  through  which  B  passes, 
and  therefore  also  the  states  in  which  B  ends,  and  vice  versa, 
so  that  a2  and  a2  will  be  the  outcome  not  of  al  and  ax  alone, 
but  of  #!  and  a19  and  b±  and  /?x,  jointly.  Then  we  can  say, 
(i)  that  A  and  B  are  in  the  relation  of  influence,  and  also  of 
interaction  or  reciprocal  influence,  in  the  sense  that  they 
mutually  (not  alternately)  determine  one  another's  states'.2 

The  general  character  of  the  doctrine  which  Kant  seeks  to 
establish  seems  to  me  sufficiently  clear.  And  if  he  is  able  to 
prove  that  phenomenal  reality  must  consist  of  substances  in 
interaction,  and  cannot  consist  of  substances  whose  states 

(as  also  by  Baumgarten,  Metaphysica  §  213)  with  '  react  w'.  Kant  in 
Metaphysiky  p.  61,  distinguishes  ' Ruckwirkung*  as  'reactio'  from 
'Gegenwirkung'  which  is  'resistentia*  or  'reactio  rcststens' ;  but  this 
seems  to  be  a  refinement  which  is  not  applied  in  the  present  case. 

Kant  is  particularly  interested  in  motion;  and  attraction  and 
repulsion  are  for  him  moving  forces.  lie  does  not  discuss,  as  I  think 
he  ought,  the  position  of  secondary  qualities  in  this  connexion,  but 
they  are  caused  by  motion. 

1  I  should  prefer  to  say  'causes'  or  'influences',  but   I  suppose 
Prichard  says  'conditions',  not  to  deny  the  causality  of  A,  but  to  imply 
that  A  is  not  the  only  cause. 

2  Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  303.  The  detailed  working  out  of 
this  illustration  ought  to  be  studied,  but  it  is  too  long  to  quote  here.  I 
would  only  add  further  from  the  same  passage  '(4)  that  if  we  perceive 
A  and  B  alternately,  and  so  only  in  the  states  ax  a:i  .  .  .  /A2  //4  .  .  . 
respectively,  we  can  only  fill  m  the  blanks,  i.e.  discover  the  states 
a2  a4  .  .  .  /fj  /J3  .  .  .  coexistent  with  /?2  [\  .  .  .  and  a±  u3  .  .  .  respectively, 
if  we  presuppose  the  thought  of  interaction'. 


XLVII  §2]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  297 

succeed  one  another  (according  to  causal  law)  in  complete 
independence  of  all  other  substances  and  all  other  similar  causal 
successions — then  manifestly  his  doctrine  is  of  importance 
and  adds  a  great  deal  to  what  he  has  hitherto  professed  to  prove.1 
The  question  is  whether  he  is  able  to  prove  it. 

§  2.  The  Meaning  of  Coexistence 

Interaction  is  the  condition  of  our  knowledge  of  objective 
coexistence — such  is  the  thesis  which  Kant  has  to  prove.  But 
the  definitions  which  he  gives  of  such  coexistence  give  rise  to 
difficulties.  In  the  first  edition  Kant's  definition  is  as  follows: 
'Things  are  coexistent,  so  far  as  they  exist  in  one  and  the  same 
time'.2  In  this  definition — since  all  things  exist  in  one  and  the 
same  time — -Kant  must  mean  by  'time'  either  an  instant  of 
time  or  a  part  of  time.3  The  latter  would  appear  to  be  the  mean- 
ing with  which  he  is  chiefly  concerned ;  and  perhaps  the  word 
'simultaneity'  should  be  reserved  for  existence  in  the  same 
instant. 

There  is  a  further  difficulty  about  the  meaning  of  'thing' 
in  this  definition.  A  'thing'  like  the  earth  or  the  moon  (the 
examples  given  in  the  second  edition)  comes  into  being  and 
passes  away;  and  so  it  might  be  regarded  as  only  a  temporary 
determination  of  permanent  substance  (or  as  a  substance4 
only  so  far  as  determined  for  a  certain  length  of  time  in  a 
particular  way).  In  that  case  WTC  could  speak  of  things  as 
coexisting,  just  as  we  can  speak  of  states  or  determinations 
or  accidents  of  substance  as  coexisting.  Kant  himself,  however, 
seems  to  identify  thing  and  substance ;  for  he  goes  on  to  speak 

1  Compare  Lindsay,  Kant,  pp.  128-9.  Apart  from  the  principle  of 
interaction  we  should  be  reduced,  as  he  says,  to  *a  streaky  view  of 
causation' — the  world  might  be  'made  up  of  a  lot  of  quite  independent 
chains  of  causation'.  2  A  211  ~-  B  258. 

3  I  suppose  that  to  be  simultaneous  is  to  exist  at  the  same  instant 
of  time,  while  to  coexist  is  to  exist  cither  at  the  same  instant  or  through 
the  same  part  (or  period)  of  time.  Coexistence  is  a  wider  term  than 
simultaneity. 

4  Such  a  substance  is  composed  of  parts  which  are  themselves 
substances. 

VOL.  II  K* 


298  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLVII  §  3 

of  the  coexistence  of  substances  as  if  it  were  identical  with 
the  coexistence  of  things.1  But  since  all  substances  are  perma- 
nent, it  immediately  follows  that  all  substances  coexist  always, 
both  in  every  moment  of  time,  and  in  every  part  of  time, 
and  in  all  time  taken  as  a  whole.  When  we  know  that  any 
substance  exists,  we  know  that  it  coexists  with  all  other  sub- 
stances, if  indeed  it  is  proper  to  ascribe  temporal  predicates 
to  substances  at  all.2 

It  is  possible  that  a  way  out  of  this  difficulty  is  to  be  found  in 
the  technical  use  of  'existence'.  We  speak  of  the  existence  of 
accidents  as  'inherence',  and  of  the  existence  of  substances  as 
'subsistence';  but  this  distinction  is  misleading,  for  we  are 
apt  to  imagine  that  the  substance  exists  in  one  way  and  the 
accident  in  another.3  If  we  refuse  to  make  the  separation,  and 
if  we  say  that  the  accidents  are  the  ways  in  which  substance 
exists,  then  by  the  coexistence  of  substances  Kant  may  mean 
coexistence  in  respect  of  certain  accidents.  And  this,  I  think, 
is  what  we  must  take  him  to  mean. 

In  the  second  edition  Kant  defines  coexistence  as  the  existence 
of  the  manifold  in  the  same  time.4  The  reference  to  the  manifold 
would  seem  to  imply  that  it  is  the  accidents  of  substance  which 
coexist,5  and  so  perhaps  may  be  taken  to  support  our  inter- 
pretation. At  any  rate  I  can  see  no  other  interpretation  which 
will  make  sense. 

§  3 .  The  Proof  in  the  Second  Edition 

The  proof  added  in  the  second  edition6  may  be  considered 
first.  It  is  clearly  meant  to  run  parallel  to  the  proof  of  causality 
which  was  added  in  the  second  edition  (Proof  I).7 

'6258. 

2  Pochard  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  306)  denies  that  we  can 
properly  do  so.  -*  A  186-7  ~  B  230.  4  B  257. 

5  Such  a  series  of  accidents  of  one  substance  (or  set  of  substances) 
as  constitutes  the  life  or  history  of  a  'thing'  may  also  be  taken  to 
coexist  with  another  series  of  the  same  kind.  The  earth  and  the  moon 
coexist  in  this  sense. 

6  B  256-8.  7  B  233-4.  Compare  Chapter  XLIII  §  3. 


XLVII  §  3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  299 

I.  Kant  starts  out  from  the  assertion  that  'things'  are  coexistent 
when  the  sense-perception  of  the  one  can  follow  reciprocally  on 
the  sense-perception  of  the  other.  By  'reciprocally*  he  means 
that  we  can  either  see  A  and  then  B,  or  B  and  then  A,  as  we 
please.  We  can  see  first  the  moon  and  then  the  earth,  or  vice 
versa  (just  as  we  can  see  first  the  top  and  then  the  bottom  of 
the  house,  or  vice  versa1).  And  because  our  sense-perceptions 
of  these  objects  can  thus  follow  one  another  reciprocally,  we 
say  that  the  objects  are  coexistent. 

In  this  assertion  Kant  would  seem  to  be  considering  'things' 
whose  states  are  taken  to  be  constant ;  or  at  least  he  is  ignoring 
the  possibility  that  the  things  in  question  may  be  changing  their 
states.  He  has  already  pointed  out,  in  the  Second  Analogy, 
that  where  there  is  an  objective  succession  (as  in  the  case  where 
the  boat  is  moving  downstream),  this  reciprocal  succession 
cannot  occur.  We  can  see  the  boat  first  higher  up  and  then 
lower  down,  but  we  cannot  see  it  first  lower  down  and  then 
higher  up.2 

Such  a  doctrine  seems  plain  and  obvious  enough,  but  there 
may  seem  to  be  a  certain  amount  of  obscurity  on  one  point. 
Is  Kant  maintaining  that  when  things  are  coexistent,  a  reciprocal 
succession  of  sense-perceptions  must  be  possible?  Or  is  he 
maintaining  that  when  a  reciprocal  succession  of  sense-percep- 
tions does  take  place,  then  the  things  must  be  coexistent  ? 

I  may  here  seem  to  be  making  too  much  of  a  very  small 
point,  but  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in  speaking  of  objective  suc- 
cession (which  ought  to  be  an  exact  parallel)  the  inference  is 
from  the  objective  succession  to  the  impossibility  of  reciprocal 
succession  (or  reversibility)  in  the  sense-perceptions,  and  not 
vice  versa.3  Furthermore,  in  the  passage  which  immediately 
follows,  'from  the  fact  that  things  arc  posited  in  the  same  time* 

1  A  190  =  B  235  and  A  192  =  B  237-8.  In  Pochard's  example 
we  can  see  first  the  ice  and  then  the  fire  or  vice  versa.  A  reciprocal 
succession  can  also  be  described  (perhaps  more  clearly)  as  a  reversible 
succession.  2  A  192  -=  B  237. 

3  B  234.  Compare  also  A  192  =  B  237,  where  the  inference  s  m  the 
same  direction. 


300  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLVII  §  3 

we  conclude1  'that  the  perceptions  of  them  can  follow  one  another 
reciprocally'.  Here  the  inference  is  from  objective  coexistence 
to  the  reciprocal  succession  (or  reversibility)  of  sense-percep- 
tions, and  not  vice  versa. 

We  are  clearly  entitled  to  argue  from  the  coexistence  of  objects 
to  the  reversibility  of  our  sense-perceptions  of  these  objects. 
If  we  wish  to  argue  in  the  reverse  direction,  we  can  do  so  only 
under  certain  assumptions ;  for  we  have  no  right  to  describe 
our  sense-perceptions  as  reversible  (or  as  irreversible),  unless 
we  assume  that  these  sense-perceptions  reveal  to  us  (or  are 
identical  with)  the  states  of  real  objects  which  are  permanent 
substances.2  Apart  from  this  assumption  we  could  say  only  that 
our  sense-perceptions  come  to  us  in  the  order  in  which  they  do 
come:  there  could  be  no  ground  for  saying  that  this  order 
was  reversible,  and  still  less  for  saying  that  it  must  be  reversible. 
The  argument  of  the  Third  Analogy  (like  that  of  the  Second) 
manifestly  rests  on  the  First  Analogy  as  its  presupposition.3 
Once  \v  e  assume  our  sense-perceptions  to  be  sense-perceptions 
of  objects  (or  substances),  then,  as  Kant  asserts,  we  are  entitled 
to  say  that  because  the  sense-perceptions  of  these  objects  can 
follo\v  one  another  reciprocally,  the  objects  are  coexistent. 
We  can  discover  the  reversibility  of  our  sense-perceptions  by 
experiment — but  only  on  the  supposition  that  the  objects 
of  our  sense-perception  arc  permanent  substances. 

If  we  fail  to  see  this,  we  may  wrongly  imagine  that  Kant  is 
trying  to  state  the  criterion  whereby  we  pass  from  awareness 
of  a  merely  subjective  succession  to  knowledge  of  objective 
coexistence.  Such  a  process  of  transition  from  the  merely 
subjective  to  the  objective  docs  not  and  cannot  take  place: 
on  that  point  I  agree  with  Professor  Prichard.  I  do  not,  however, 
believe  that  Kant  is  attempting  to  describe  such  a  process; 
and  if  he  were,  his  attempt  would  be  manifestly  unsuccessful. 

Kant,   as    always,    is   taking   experience   for   granted    and 

1  B  257,  ( :abzunehmcn\  Kant  says  we  have  no  perception  of  absolute 
time  by  \vhich  to  conclude  this,  but  he  implies  that  we  do  conclude 
it  by  means  of  a  pure  concept  of  the  understanding. 

2  Compare  Chapter  XLV  §  4.  3  Compare  B  232-3. 


XLVII  §  3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  301 

attempting  an  analysis,  not  of  its  growth,  but  of  its  necessary 
presuppositions.  Here  he  is  taking  for  granted  what  he  claims 
to  have  proved  in  the  First  Analogy,  namely  that  we  experience 
real  objects  as  permanent  substances ;  and  this  implies  (what  we 
all  accept"  by  common  sense)  that  we  can  experience  coexistent 
objects.1  If  we  assume  that  we  experience  coexistent  objects, 
then  (and  then  alone)  can  we  say  that  our  sense-percep- 
tions of  these  objects  must  be  reversible.  And  we  can  also 
say  that  if  by  experiment  we  discover  our  sense-perceptions 
to  be  reversible  (on  the  supposition  that  we  are  perceiving 
real  objects),  then  the  objects  must  be  coexistent.  The  rever- 
sibility of  our  sense-perceptions  is  then  a  criterion  by  which 
we  can  distinguish  objective  coexistence  from  objective  suc- 
cession. It  is  not,  and  it  could  not  be,  a  mark  whereby  we  are 
entitled  to  go  beyond  a  merely  subjective  succession  and  affirm 
an  objective  coexistence. 

There  is  another  point  to  be  noted.  Even  in  cases  where  we 
arc  perceiving  an  objective  succession,  it  is  possible  for  imagina- 
tion to  place  the  sense-perceptions  in  an  order  different  from 
that  in  which  they  are  'taken  up'.2  Hence  by  a  combination 
of  imagination  and  sense-perception  \ve  could,  although 
doubtless  with  difficulty,  make  a  reciprocal  succession  of 
appearances  such  as  Kant  describes.3  This  possibility  borders 
on  the  fantastic,  and  Kant  does  not  discuss  it ;  but  it  is  worth 
mentioning,  since  it  suggests  that  in  ordinary  circumstances 
we  have  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing,  by  simple  inspection, 
an  appearance  to  sense-perception  from  an  appearance  to  mere 
imagination.4 

1  This  does  not  mean  that  we  can  perceive  two  coexistent  objects  in 
one  moment  of  time,  but  that  when  we  see  first  the  moon  and  then 
the  earth,  or  vice  versa,  we  assume  that  we  are  experiencing  two 
coexistent  objects. 

2  B  233.  Compare  A  201  —  B  246. 

3  We  could  see  the  ship  lower  down,  and  then  imagine  it  higher  up, 
and  see  it  lower  down  again,  and  then  imagine  it  higher  up,  and  so  on. 
This  does  not  justify  us  in  supposing  that  the  ship  occupies  all  these 
positions  at  the  same  time. 

4  This  possibility  is  mentioned  by  Professor  Kemp  Smith  (Com- 
mentary, p.  386).  Another  suggestion  which  he  makes  on  the  same 


302  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLVII  §  3 

II.  We   cannot  perceive     time    itself,    so    as     to    conclude 
(from  the  fact  that  things  are  placed  or  posited  in   the  same 
time)    that    the  perceptions   of  them   can  follow   one   another 
reciprocally. 

The  statement  that  we  cannot  perceive  time  itself  (or  absolute 
or  empty  time)  is  the  usual  doctrine  which  lies  at  the  root  of  all 
the  Analogies.  It  should,  however,  be  observed  that  the  con- 
clusion which  we  cannot  make  with  the  help  of  a  perception 
of  absolute  time  is  nevertheless  the  conclusion  which  we  do 
make,  and  upon  which  Kant's  argument  rests. 

It  is  not  clear  how  the  perception  of  absolute  time,  if  that  were 
possible,  could  help  us  to  this  particular  conclusion,  which 
(in  the  absence  of  such  perception)  we  must  make  by  means  of 
the  concept  of  interaction.  Even  if  the  appearances  of  A  and  B 
were  given  to  us  with  the  moment  of  their  occurrence  in 
absolute  time  as  it  were  stamped  upon  them,  we  should  still 
have  before  us  only  the  series  at  /?2  a3  j34  a5  j86  .  .  .  (or  what- 
ever the  series  was),  and  we  should  not  have  before  us  what 
we  really  require,  the  series  a^  a2/?2  a3j33  .  .  .  and  so  on. 
Perhaps  Kant  means  that  if  we  could  perceive  the  series 
ai  d3  as  •  •  •  in  relation  to  absolute  time,  we  could  fill  in  the 
gaps  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  continuity;  and  similarly 
in  the  case  of  the  series  /?2  /J4  j86  .  .  .l 

III.  Since  we  do  not  perceive  empty  time,   the  synthesis 
of  apprehension  taken  by  itself  enables  us  to  say  only  that  in  the 
subject  there  is  a  sense- perception  a  zvhen  there  is  no  seme-percep- 

pagc  is  less  happy.  lie  asserts  that  we  might  have  'a  reversible  con- 
tinuous series*  which  did  not  justify  an  inference  to  coexistence.  The 
example  he  gives  is  that  of  playing  a  series  of  notes,  and  then  playing 
it  backwards.  This  is,  however,  not  a  reversible  series  at  all,  but  a 
reversed  series — which  is  a  very  different  thing.  A  reversible  series  is 
one  which  can  be  taken  up  or  perceived  in  any  order  at  any  time,  while 
the  series  in  question  can  be  taken  up  only  in  one  order,  the  order  in 
which  it  is  played  (whether  it  is  played  backwards  or  forwards  makes 
no  difference).  It  might  as  well  be  objected  that  a  boat  can  reverse  its 
engines  and  go  upstream. 

1  It  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  Kant's  meaning  in  further  detail,  since 
the  whole  supposition  is  put  forward  only  to  be  rejected. 


XLVII  §  3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  303 

tion  b  and  vice  versa.1  By  mere  apprehension  we  could  not  say 
that  the  objects  A  and  B  coexist,  nor  could  we  say  that  they 
must  coexist  in  order  that  the  sense-perceptions  may  be  able  to 
follow  one  another  reciprocally.2 

This  statement  seems  to  me  obviously  true.  Mere  appre- 
hension, apart  from  the  element  of  thought,  cannot  give  us 
objects,  and  still  less  can  it  give  us  coexistent  objects:  it  can 
give  us  at  the  most  mere  ideas.3 

There  is,  however,  a  further  point.  Kant  appears  to  imply 
— and  surely  he  is  right — that  where  we  have  what  we  take  to 
be  a  reversible  series  of  sense-perceptions,  we  assume,  not 
only  that  we  arc  perceiving  coexistent  objects,  but  that  these 
objects  must  coexist,  if  the  series  of  our  sense-perceptions  is 
to  be  reversible.  We  cannot  derive  such  an  assumption  from 
mere  apprehension;  but  it  is  an  assumption  which  we  all 
make.  Furthermore  it  is  an  assumption  of  necessity,  and  it 
appears  to  me  that  here,  as  always,  Kant  is  endeavouring  to 
discover  the  element  of  necessity  which  is  involved  in  objectivity. 
He  is  in  fact  trying  to  determine  the  element  of  necessity  which 
is  involved  in  our  experience  of  objective  coexistence ;  and  it  is 
the  presence  of  this  element  of  necessity  which  alone  entitles 
him  to  assert  the  presence  of  a  pure  concept  of  the  under- 
standing.4 

1  B  257.  We  could  not,  in  my  opinion  and  I  believe  in  the  opinion  of 
Kant,  say  (on  the  basis  of  sense-perception  in  abstraction  from  thought) 
even  that  the  series  was  reversible.  We  could  say  only  that  it  took  place 
in  the  order  in  which  it  did  take  place,  and  even  this  would  require  some 
element  of  thought. 

2  Here  again  this  is  just  what  we  can,  and  must,  say,  if  we  presuppose 
that  in  sense-pel ccption  states  of  objects  are  given  to  us.  This,  however, 
is  a  presupposition  of  thought,  to  which  alone  is  to  be  ascribed  the 
concept  of  an  object  in  general. 

a  When  we  regard  given  ideas  as  appearances  of  an  object,  we  are 
employing  the  category  of  substance  and  accident,  and  this  cannot 
be  given  in  mere  apprehension. 

4  This  seems  to  be  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  Kant  begins  his  next 
sentence  by  saying  that  consequently  a  pure  concept  of  the  understand- 
ing is  required;  but  he  complicates  this,  as  so  often,  by  adding  a 
further  reason  why  it  is  required,  namely  in  order  to  say  that  the 
reciprocal  succession  of  sense-perceptions  is  grounded  in  the  object. 


304  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLVII  §3 

If  this  is  correct,  the  argument  is  parallel  to  the  argument 
of  the  Second  Analogy.  In  the  Second  Analogy  it  was  easy  to 
discover  the  element  of  necessity  implied  or  presupposed  in 
objectivity ;  for  if  the  succession  we  perceive  is  objective,  then 
the  succession  of  our  sense-perceptions  must  be  necessary. 
Here  it  is  not  so  easy;  but,  as  Kant  implies,1  when  we  take 
ourselves  to  have  an  experience  of  coexistent  objects,  zee  assume 
that  the  objects  must  coexist  in  order  that  the  reciprocal  succession 
of  our  sense-perceptions  may  be  possible.  I  take  this  to  mean  only 
that  we  assume  the  reciprocal  succession  of  our  sense-perceptions 
to  be  necessarily  grounded  in,  or  conditioned  by,  the  coexistence 
of  objects? 

Such  an  assumption  cannot  be  based  on  mere  sense- 
perception  (\\hich  can  never  give  us  necessity);  nor  can  it 
be  based  on  a  perception  of  absolute  time  (since  we  have  no 
such  perception). 

IV.  Kant  then  proceeds  to  assert  that  we  consequently 
require  a  certain  concept  of  the  understanding  in  order  to  say 

1  I  think  this  is  implied;  for  the  failure  of  apprehension  to  shov 
that  the  objects  must  coexist  (in  order  that  the  reciprocal  succession 
of  our  sense-perceptions  may  be  possible)  seems  to  be  his  justification 
for  affiimmg  the  presence  of  the  category  of  interaction  in  experience. 

2  Kant  cannot  mean,  at  this  stage  of  the  argument,  that  the  objects 
themselves  coexist  necessarily,  or  that  the  coexistence  of  the  objects 
(or  of  their  states)  is  determined  by  a  necessary  law. 

I  interpret  Kant's  statement  in  this  way,  both  because  this  seems  to 
be  implied  by  the  following  sentence,  and  because,  if  interpreted  as 
asserting  more  than  this,  the  statement,  taken  on  the  level  of  common 
sense,  \vould  be  manifestly  false.  This  is  clear  enough,  if  we  think  of 
objects  as  things-m-themselves.  Consider  first  the  case  of  objective 
succession  on  that  hypothesis.  We  can  say  that  if  wre  are  perceiving 
events,  or  if  the  succession  of  our  sense-pciceptions  is  necessary,  there 
must  he  succession  in  the  obj'ects;  but  it  would  be  ludicrous  to 
infer  from  this  that  we  knew  the  actual  succession  in  the  objects  to 
be  a  necessary  succession,  that  is,  one  determined  by  causal  law.  All 
that  is  necessary  is  a  matter-of-fact  succession  in  the  objects  and 
nothing  more.  Similarly  (on  the  same  hypothesis)  we  can  say  that  if 
there  can  be  a  reciprocal  succession  in  our  sense-perceptions,  there 
must  be  coexistence  in  the  objects ;  but  it  would  he  idle  to  pretend,  on 
such  grounds,  that  we  knew  this  coexistence  to  be  necessary  in  the 
sense  of  being  determined  by  a  necessary  law. 


XLVII  §  3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  305 

that  the  reciprocal  succession  of  sense-perceptions  is  grounded 
in  the  object1  and  in  this  way  to  know  that  the  coexistence  is 
objective? 

Let  us  leave  over  for  the  moment  the  nature  of  this  concept, 
and  consider  only  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  required.  This 
purpose  seems  to  be  merely  a  variation  of  what  has  already  been 
said :  we  have  to  justify  our  assumption  (which  cannot  be  derived 
from  mere  apprehension)  that  the  objects  must  necessarily 
coexist  if  the  reciprocal  succession  of  our  sense-perceptions  of 
these  objects  is  to  be  possible.  We  arc  considering  the  question 
now  from  the  side  of  the  reciprocal  succession  of  our  sense- 
perceptions  ;  and  we  are  asserting  that  where  the  order  of  our 
sense-perceptions  is  taken  to  be  reversible,  we  say  or  assume 
that  this  reversibility  must  have  its  ground  in  the  coexistence 
of  the  objects  perceived.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  true ;  according 
to  Kant  it  can  be  justified  only  in  virtue  of  a  certain  concept 
of  the  understanding.3 

V.  We  now  come  to  the  crux  of  Kant's  argument.  If  we  are 
to  justify  the  common-sense  assumptions  which  we  all  make, 
we  require  a  pure  concept  of  the  understanding^  a  concept  of  the 

1  We  should  expect  him  to  say  'objects'  (or  'coexistence  of  the 
objects'),  unless  he  means  merely  'objectively  grounded'.  Compare 
A  214  --    B  261,  where  a  subjective  succession  is  said  to  rest  on  an 
objective  ground,  and  this  in  turn  is  equated  with  'being  referred  to 
appearances  as  substances'. 

2  'und  das  Zugleichsein  dadurch  ah  objektiv  vorziistellenS 

3  In  the  Second  Analogy  Kant  maintains  that  if  there  is  an  objective 
succession  perceived,  the  subjective  succession  of  our  sense-percep- 
tions must  be  irreversible ;  and  if  the  subjective  succession  of  our  sense- 
perceptions  is  irreversible,   there  must  be   an  objective   succession 
perceived.   In  the  Third  Analogy  he  maintains  that  if  the  objects 
perceived  coexist,  the  subjective  succession  must  be  reversible;  and 
if  the  subjective  succession  is  reversible,  then  the  objects  perceived 
must  coexist.  None  of  these  statements  has  any  meaning  except  on 
the  assumption  that  what  we  perceive  is  an  object  or  permanent 
substance;  but  if  we  accept  this  assumption,  together  with  the  view 
that  a  permanent  substance  is  not  a  thing-m-itself,  we  require  the 
category  of  causality  to  justify  our  assumptions  in  the  Second  Analogy, 
and  we  require  the  category  of  interaction  to  justify  our  assumptions 
in  the  Third  Analogy.  Such  I  take  to  be  Kant's  view  in  brief. 


3o6  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLVII  §  3 

reciprocal  succession  of  the  determinations  of  those  things  which 
coexist  outside  one  another  in  space* 

It  will  be  observed  that  whereas  previously  we  were  con- 
cerned with  a  reciprocal  succession  of  sense-perceptions,  the 
succession  of  which  Kant  now  speaks  is  a  reciprocal  succession 
of  'determinations'  or  'states'  of  the  things  themselves.2  On 
Professor  Prichard's  view  this  transition  from  sense-perceptions 
to  states  of  a  thing  is  a  mere  confusion.  I  believe  on  the  contrary 
that  it  is  a  deliberate  identification,  and  that  (whether  the 
identification  be  possible  or  not)  what  is  present  in  sense- 
perception  is,  on  Critical  principles,  the  state  of  the  object. 
If  we  take  the  Critical  Philosophy  seriously  and  set  aside  all  our 
natural  prejudices,  we  must  recognise  that  for  it  a  sense-per- 
ception is  not  something  which  lies  between  us  and  the  object,3 
but  is  a  state  of  the  object  immediately  present  to  our  minds. 
As  Kant  everywhere  insists,  the  object  is  composed  of  such 
possible  or  actual  sense-perceptions  bound  together  in  a  neces- 
sary synthetic  unity.4 

The  method  of  argument  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Second 
Analogy,  although  less  clearly  expressed.  Kant  first  of  all 
asserts  a  necessity  which  must  govern  our  sense-perceptions, 
if  our  knowledge  is  to  be  objectively  valid ;  and  then  he  reminds 
us  that  since  our  sense-perceptions  are  identical  with  the 
states  of  objects,  that  necessity  must  govern  these  states,  if 
our  knowledge  is  to  be  objectively  valid.  I  need  not  here 
repeat  the  comments  which  I  formerly  made.5 1  would,  however, 
again  insist  that  all  this  has  no  meaning  unless  we  presuppose, 
in  accordance  with  the  First  Analogy,  that  in  genuine  percep- 

1  13  257    I  have  added  'in  space',  which  seems  to  be  implied.  Kant 
himself  brings  in  space  a  few  lines  further  down.  The  need  for  a  pure 
concept — it  can  hardly   be    too    often    repeated — arises    because    we 
cannot  know  objective  coexistence  by  means  of  mere  apprehension 
or  by  a  perception  of  absolute  time. 

2  It  is  perhaps  possible  that  Kant  considers  this  transition  to  have 
been  already  made  or  implied  in  IV  above,  but  I  do  not  think  so. 

3  That  is,  it  is  not  a  so-called  Zwischendtng. 

4  This  necessary  synthetic  unity  implies  (among  other  things)  that 
the  sense-perceptions  are  regarded  as  states  of  a  permanent  substance. 

5  See  Chapters  XLIII  §  5,  IV,  and  XLV  §  2. 


XLVII  §  3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  307 

tion  we  are  immediately  aware  of  the  states  of  permanent 
substances  in  space.  Kant's  problem  in  the  Second  and  Third 
Analogies  is  to  determine  the  conditions  under  which  our 
experience  of  succession  and  coexistence  in  the  states  of 
permanent  substances  can  be  valid,  it  being  assumed  throughout 
that  such  permanent  substances  are  not  things-in-thcmselves. 

It  is  more  difficult  in  the  case  of  interaction  to  state  the  nature 
of  the  necessity  involved,1  when  we  cease  to  regard  appear- 
ances as  sense-perceptions  and  regard  them  instead  as  states  of 
the  objects.  What  we  have  seen  is  that  in  experience  of  objective 
coexistence  we  assume  the  reciprocal  succession  of  our  sense- 
perceptions  to  be  grounded  on  the  coexistent  objects,  and  only 
so  can  we  have  knowledge  of  such  objects.  We  are  now  re- 
minded that  the  sense-perceptions  (whether  actual  or  possible) 
are  themselves  states  of  permanent  substances,  and  that 
consequently,  if  our  common-sense  assumption  is  to  be 
justified,  the  reciprocal  succession  of  the  states  must  be  grounded 
on  the  coexistent  objects. 

The  question  then  arises  how  we  are  to  interpret  the  phrase 
'reciprocal  succession'.  I  do  not  think  that  Kant  can  mean  by  this 
only  the  succession  actually  perceived.  When  we  say  that  there 
can  be  a  reciprocal  succession  of  sense-perceptions,  we  mean 
that  there  is  a  possibility  both  of  the  succession  a±  b»  a3  i4  .  .  . 
and  of  the  succession  b1  a*  b3  #4.  .  .  ,2  We  can  have  either 
succession  of  sense-perceptions,  though  we  cannot  have  both. 
If  we  now  remember  that,  on  Critical  principles,  actual  and 
possible  sense-perceptions  are  to  be  regarded  as  states  of 
permanent  objects  (or  substances),  we  can  say  that  there  is  a 
possibility  both  of  perceiving  the  series  of  states  ax  |32  a3  j34  .  .  . 
and  of  perceiving  the  series  of  states  ^  a2  j83  a4.  .  .  .  We  can 
perceive  either  series,  but  not  both  together. 

I  take  it  that  when  Kant  asserts  the  reciprocal  succession  of 

1  Kant's  own  statement  quoted  above  is  too  vague,  and  must  be 
supplemented  in  the  light  of  what  follows. 

2  There  is  a  possibility  of  taking  the  rt's  and  6's  in  any  order  we 
please,  for  example,  aL  62  ^3  a\  •  •  •»  but  this  we  may  ignore.  It  is 
assumed  in  this  notation  that  a   and  b   are  simultaneous. 


3o8  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLVII  §  3 

sense-perceptions  to  be  grounded  in  the  coexistent  objects, 
he  has  in  mind  both  the  possible  successions  of  sense-percep- 
tions. Similarly  when  he  speaks  of  the  reciprocal  succession 
of  the  states  of  things  coexisting  outside  one  another  in  space, 
he  must  have  in  mind  both  the  series  a1  j32  a3  j84  .  .  .  and  the 
series  Pl  a2  /J3  a4.  .  .  .  These  must  have  their  ground  in  the 
things  A  and  B. 

It  seems  legitimate  enough  to  infer,  as  Kant  appears  to 
infer,  that  the  whole  series  a^  a^o  a3/?3  a4/?4  .  .  .  must  have 
its  ground  in  the  things  A  and  B.1  There  is  more  difficulty 
in  the  inference  that  the  whole  series  is  determined  by  A  and  B 
together?  and  that  the  series  c^a,,  a3  a4  .  .  .  is  not  determined 
separately  by  A,  nor  the  series  ^  ^82  j83  ^  determined  separately 
by  B.  I  presume  this  is  supposed  to  follow  from  the  fact  that  the 
reciprocal  succession  of  sense-perceptions  (and  so  of  states) 
must  have  its  ground  in  the  coexistent  objects  (or  in  the  co- 
existence of  the  objects). 

I  confess  that  I  should  have  liked  to  see  a  fuller  justification 
of  this  inference.  Manifestly  if  the  objects  were  things-in- 
themselves,  it  would  (on  a  common-sense  view)  follow  from 
their  coexistence  that  the  order  of  our  sense-perceptions  must 
be  reversible ;  but  it  could  not  follow  that  the  states  of  the  two 
coexistent  objects  must  be  determined  by  the  two  objects 
jointly.  Kant's  inference,  if  it  is  legitimate,  depends  on  the 
doctrine  that  objects  are  not  things-in-themselves. 

Whatever  we  may  think  of  this  inference,  Kant  is  clearly 
maintaining  that  coexistent  objects  must  mutually  determine 
one  another's  states,  and  that  unless  this  is  presupposed, 

1  We  must  remember  that  possible,  as  well  as  actual,  sense-percep- 
tions arc  to  be  regarded  as  states  of  objects.  It  is,  I  think,  a  matter  of 
indifference  whether  the  states  «1  «2  a3  a4  have  the  same  degree  or  a 
different  degree  of  the  quality  «,  and  whether  the  states  //x  /f2  fi3  /?4 
have  the  same  degree  or  a  different  degree  of  the  quality  /?.  When 
the  degree  is  the  same,  we  have  a  continuance  of  the  objects  in  the 
same  state — the  case  of  the  earth  and  the  moon.  Where  the  degree  is 
different,  we  have  a  change  in  the  states  of  the  objects — the  case  of 
the  fire  and  ice. 

2  The   exact  significance   of  this   must   be   considered   later;   see 
Chapter  XLVII  I  §  4. 


XLVII  §  3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  309 

we  could  not  know  that  the  order  of  our  sense-perceptions 
must  be  reversible,  and  we  could  not  know  that  the  objects 
coexist.  The  doctrine  stated  is  a  necessary  presupposition  of 
our  experience  of  objective  coexistence,  provided  we  accept  the 
view  that  objects  are  possible  and  actual  sense-perceptions 
(or  ideas)  combined  together  in  necessary  synthetic  unity.  If 
we  suppose  that  objects  are  things-in-themselves,  we  could 
never  infer  from  their  coexistence  that  they  must  necessarily 
interact. 

Such  is  Kant's  argument.  Its  difficulty  is  obvious,  but 
before  we  reject  it,  we  must  be  sure  that  we  are  not  rejecting 
it  on  the  basis  of  an  unconscious  transcendental  realism. 
Kant  is  entitled  to  have  his  argument  evaluated — at  least 
in  the  first  instance — on  the  basis  of  his  own  presuppositions. 

VI.  The  rest  of  the  argument  offers  no  difficulty.  The  concept 
which  Kant  has  asserted  to  be  necessary  is  a  concept  of  the 
relation    of   substances,    in    which    one    substance1    contains 
determinations  or  states  whose  ground  is  contained  in  the 
other.  This  relation  is  a  relation  of  'influence',  or  of  the  causal 
action  of  one  substance  upon  another.  When  this  relation  of  influence 
is  mutual  or  reciprocal?  as  Kant  has  argued  that  it  is,  the  concept 
of  the  relation  is  the  concept  of  communion  or  interaction. 

VII.  The  concept  of  interaction  is  therefore  a  necessary  con- 
dition of  our  experience  of  objective  coexistence. 

VIII.  It  is  therefore  a  necessary  condition  of  all  objects  of 
experience,  so  far  as  these  objects  coexist. 

1  The  object  is  assumed  to  be  a  substance  on  the  basis  of  the  First 
Analogy.  As  we  have  seen,  this  is  assumed  throughout. 

2  B  258.  The  sentence  in  which  this  is  stated  seems  to  be  corrupt, 
but  the  general  sense  is  clear. 


CHAPTER     XLVIII 
THE   THIRD   ANALOGY   (Continued) 

§  i.   The  Proof  in  the  First  Edition 

Kant's  argument  in  the  first  edition1  is  of  a  looser  texture. 
Curiously  enough  space  plays  a  more  prominent  part  than 
in  the  argument  of  the  second  edition.  As  we  have  seen,2  in 
the  interval  between  the  two  editions  space  was  recognised  by 
Kant  to  be  of  vital  importance  for  the  proof  of  substance; 
but  apparently  when  the  new  edition  was  about  to  be  published, 
he  decided  that  he  must  rest  his  case  primarily  upon  the 
character  of  time. 

I.  Kant  asks  what  is  the  criterion  or  mark  by  which3  one 
recognises  the  coexistence  of  things.  His  answer  is  'By  the 
fact  that  the  order  in  the  synthesis  of  apprehension  is  reversible, 
or  (as  he  here  says)  indifferent'.  If  A,  B,  C,  D,  and  E  are  co- 
existent, we  can  see  them  in  any  order,4  while  if  they  occur 
successively,  we  can  see  them  only  in  the  order  in  which  they 
occur.5 

Here  although  A,  B,  C,  D  and  E  may  be  'things',  they 
cannot  be  substances,  for  substances  cannot  come  into  existence 
or  pass  away. 

II.  At  this  stage  Kant  adopts  the  method  used  in  the  so-called 
indirect  proof  of  the  Second  Analogy  (Proof  III) — he  supposes 
that  the  conclusion  which  he  wishes  to  prove  is  false.   The 

1A2ii  =  B  258  fF.  (three  paragraphs). 

2  See  Chapter  XLII  §  3. 

3  tWoran*  not  *wie\  Compare  the  ordinary  German  idiom  *Woran 
erkennen  Sie  thri?'  ('By  what  do  you  recognise  him?'). 

4  It  is  also  true  that  if  we  can  see  A,  B,  C,  D,  and  E  in  any  order, 
they  must  be  coexistent. 

6  Note  that  the  inference  is,  in  this  case,  from  the  fact  that  the 
succession  is  objective  to  necessity  in  the  order  of  apprehension,  and 
not  vice  versa.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  what  belongs  to  past  time 
cannot  be  'apprehended*  in  the  technical  sense  of  *  apprehension*. 


XLVIII  §i]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  311 

supposition  he  makes  is  that  substances  coexist  without  inter- 
acting, and  he  asserts  that  in  that  case  their  coexistence  could 
not  be  perceived.  He  still  regards  the  substances  as  spatial 
substances,  and  he  suggests  (without  offering  any  reason) 
that  if  the  substances  did  not  interact,  they  would  be  separated 
by  completely  empty  spaced  If  they  were  so  separated,  then — 
presumably  on  the  assumption  that  our  apprehensions  of  them 
must  always  be  successive — we  could  recognise  that  the 
appearances  perceived  existed  at  the  time  we  perceived  them, 
but  we  could  not  decide  whether  the  appearances2  (considered 
as  appearances  of  objects)  were  themselves  successive  or 
co-existent.3 

Kant  does  not  explain  why  on  such  a  hypothesis  we  could 
not  distinguish  objective  coexistence  from  objective  succession ; 
nor  does  he  explain  whether  this  is  obvious  on  the  basis  of 
ordinary  experience  (or  contemporary  science),  or  whether  it 
is  obvious  only  on  Critical  presuppositions.  His  conclusion, 
however,  seems  in  any  case  to  follow  directly  from  the 

1  Perhaps  he  is  assuming  that  they  are  separated  in  space  (for  if  they 
were  combined  in  space  they  would  be  one  substance).  If  the  substances 
so  separated  interact,  then  apparently  the  intervening  space  is  filled — 
one  would  like  to  be  told  with  what  (compare  §  z  below).  If  they  do 
not  interact,  the  intervening  space  is  empty. 

2  Here  Kant  seems  to  be  thinking  of  a  series  of  states  of  substance 
such  as  constitutes  a  thing  or  an  object.  It  appears  to  be  irrelevant 
whether  such  a  series  is  composed  of  states   that  are  qualitatively 
different  or  qualitatively  alike. 

3  Kant's  conclusion  would  follow  from  the  fact  that  we  cannot 
peiceive  absolute  time  and  that  the  synthesis  of  apprehension  by  itself 
(as  always  successive)  cannot  give  us  either  objective  succession  or 
objective  coexistence.  Furthermore  there  is  no  possibility  of  knowing 
that  the  succession  of  our  sense-perceptions  is  reversible  (or  irre- 
versible),  unless  we   take   these   sense-perceptions   to   be   states   of 
permanent  substances;  and  permanent  substances  fill  space  by  their 
matter  (their  powers  of  repulsion  and  attraction) ;  but  the  peculiarity 
of  the  present  argument  is  that  Kant  appears  to  rest  his  conclusion 
solely  on  the  assumption  that  apart  from  interaction  substances  would 
be  separated  by  empty  space.  I  presume  that  the  conclusion  is  supposed 
to  follow  from  this  assumption  because  empty  space  cannot  be  per- 
ceived and  the  chain  of  our  sense-perceptions  would  be  interrupted; 
compare  A  213-14  =  B  260-1. 


3i2  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLVIII  §  i 

general  account   of   apprehension   with   which   we  are  now 
familiar. 

III.  Since,  however,  we  do  distinguish  objective  coexistence 
from  objective  succession,1  there  must  be  more  in  experience 
than  mere  apprehension,  which  (although  it  does  indicate 
the  existence  of  what  is  apprehended)  cannot  by  itself  make 
this  distinction.2  In  addition  to  the  bare  existence  of  A  and  B 
(which  we  know  through  apprehension3)  there  must  be  something 
through  which  A  determines  Exposition  in  time  and  B  reciprocally 
determines  A's  position  in  time*  Only  so  can  we  have  empirical 
knowledge  that  A  and  B  coexist.5 

The  difficulty  here  is  to  know  in  what  sense  A  and  B  'deter- 
mine' each  other's  position  in  time.  If  we  are  to  know  that 
A  and  B  coexist,  the  position  of  A  must  be  determined  rela- 
tively to  B  and  the  position  of  B  relatively  to  A.  Consequently 
their  relative  position  is,  I  take  it,  on  Kant's  view  necessarily 
determined6 — in  the  sense  that  it  is  not  imaginary  or  arbitrary: 
we  cannot  regard  A  and  B  as  other  than  coexistent.  This 
again  implies  that  they  necessarily  coexist,  since  they  are  not 
things-in-themselves,  but  only  appearances  to  us.  Objective 
coexistence  must,  for  Kant,  be  necessary  coexistence ;  but  it  is 
not  easy  to  decide  whether  he  is  saying  this  or  something  more 
in  the  present  passage.  We  have  to  remember  that  in  the  case 
of  objective  succession,  although  the  succession  must  be 

1  This  is  clearly  the  supposition  on  which  Kant's  argument  rests. 

2  This  depends  on  the  supposition   that  apprehension  is  always 
successive.  See  Chapter  XLII  §  i. 

3  This  is  implied  in  what  precedes,  though  strictly  speaking  we 
require  more  than  apprehension  if  we  are  to  know  the  existence  of  an 
object  (as  opposed  to  a  mere  idea). 

4  This  Something*  is  not  absolute  time,  for  absolute  time  cannot  be 
perceived',  compare  A  200  =  B  245.  This  important  qualification  is 
here  omitted  by  Kant,  no  doubt  because,  after  having  repeated  it  so 
many  times,  he  expects  it  to  be  understood. 

6  At  this  point  Kant  speaks  of  A  and  B  as  substances,  but  when  he 
speaks  of  them  as  coexisting,  he  clearly  means,  not  coexisting  as 
substances  (for  all  substances  coexist),  but  coexisting  as  substances  in 
the  possession  of  certain  perceivable  determinations,  coexisting,  for 
example,  as  earth  and  moon.  °  Compare  B  234. 


XLVIII  §  i]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  313 

necessarily  determined,  it  is  the  cause  which  determines  the 
effect,  not  the  effect  which  determines  the  cause.1  In  the  case 
of  objective  coexistence  does  he  wish  to  assert,  not  only  that 
the  coexistence  is  necessarily  determined,  but  that  in  some 
further  sense  the  coexistent  objects  determine  each  other's 
position  in  time,  and  that  this  determination  is  in  some  ways 
analogous  to  the  determination  of  effect  by  cause?  At  this 
stage  he  can  scarcely  intend  to  identify  such  temporal  deter- 
mination with  causation;  for  he  goes  on  to  explain  in  the  next 
sentence  that  such  temporal  determination  can  take  place  only 
by  means  of  causation.  If  we  are  to  distinguish,  even  temporarily, 
between  determination  of  position  in  time  and  causal  action, 
I  cannot  see  that  A  and  B  determine  each  other's  position  in 
time  except  in  the  sense  that  their  coexistence  is  taken  to  be 
necessary.2 

IV.  Now  when  one  thing  determines  the  position  of  another 
in  time,  it  can  do  so  only  by  being  the  cause  of  that  thing,  or 
of  the  determinations  of  that  thing.3 

It  is  on  this  assertion  that  the  whole  argument  of  the  first 
edition  turns.  It  deserves — to  say  the  least — a  fuller  discussion 
than  it  receives. 

The  principle  appears  to  be  stated  quite  generally:  it  is 
not  restricted  to  the  case  of  coexistence.  The  difficulty,  as 
before,  concerns  the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  'determining 
the  position  of  another  thing  in  time'.  If  we  take  this  to  mean 
'causing'  or  'acting  causally  upon',  the  statement  is  tautologous. 

1  B  234,  A  194     =  B  239,  A  199  —  B  244.  Even  as  regards  parts  of 
time,  it  is  the  earlier  time  which  determines  the  later  (in  the  sense  that 
we  can  get  to  the  later  only  through  the  earlier);  see  A  199        B  244. 

2  If  Kant  does  intend  to  identify  'determining  position  in  time*  with 
'causing',  what  is  the  ground  for  saying  that  coexistent  objects  must 
act  causally  on  one  another?  No  doubt  if  A  affects  and  is  affected  by  B, 
then  A  and  B  must  be  coexistent.  But  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  say 
that  if  they  arc  coexistent,  each  must  affect,  and  be  affected  by, 
the  other. 

3  What  Kant  himself  says  is  this :  'Now  only  that  which  is  the  cause 
of  another  thing  or  of  its  determinations  determines  the  position  of  the 
other  thing  in  time*. 


3i4  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLVIII  §  i 

If  Kant  means  by  it  merely  that  the  temporal  position  of  one 
thing  is  determined  relatively  to  the  position  of  another,  then 
the  inference  to  causality  seems  to  be  invalid.  If  we  consider 
two  successive  events  X  and  Y,  their  position  relatively 
to  one  another  may  be  determined,  and  indeed  •  necessarily 
determined,  without  X  being  the  cause  of  Y.  If  the  succession 
XY  is  objective  and  therefore  necessary,  then  according  to 
Kant  it  is  causally  determined ;  but  the  fact  that  it  is  causally 
determined  need  not  mean  that  X  is  the  cause  of  Y,  for  Y  may 
be  caused  by  something  else.  Similarly,  one  would  imagine, 
we  might  hold  that  A  and  B  can  coexist  only  if  their  coexistence 
is  necessary  and  so  is  causally  determined ;  but  the  fact  that  it 
is  causally  determined  need  not  imply  that  A  and  B  must  act 
causally  on  one  another. 

If  Kant's  argument  rests  on  what  he  has  proved  in  the  Second 
Analogy,  then  his  conclusion  does  not  follow.  Even  if  we  could 
get  over  this,  there  is  still  a  further  difficulty.  The  Second 
Analogy  dealt  with  objective  succession,  whereas  here  we  are 
concerned  with  objective  coexistence,  and  coexistence  seems, 
at  any  rate  at  first  sight,  to  be  incompatible  with  causation; 
for  the  effect  must  succeed  the  cause.  We  may  perhaps  be  able 
to  avoid  this  difficulty  by  maintaining  that  the  transition  between 
cause  and  effect  is  continuous,  and  that  there  is  no  interval 
of  time  between  them  j1  but  at  the  very  least  the  question  ought 
to  have  been  raised,  especially  as  the  causality  with  which  we 
are  here  concerned  is  reciprocal  causality. 

Perhaps  Kant  does  not  mean  to  state  his  principle  generally 
and  is  concerned  only  with  things  which  coexist,  and  whose 
position  in  time  must  therefore  be  determined  relatively  to 
each  other.  He  appears  to  hold  that  our  experience  of  such 
coexistence  presupposes  the  coexistence  to  be  necessary,2 
or  presupposes  that  this  relative  determination  is  necessary 


1  A  203  =  B  248.  Compare  §  4  below. 

2  This  is  supposed  to  hold  only  on  the  supposition  (i)  that  objects 
are  not  things-m-themselves,  (2)  that  experience  is  more  than  arbitrary 
imagination  or  immediate  sense-perception,  and  (3)  that  we  have  no 
direct  perception  of  absolute  time. 


XLVIII  §  i]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  315 

determination.  If  so,  we  have  established  the  schema1  which 
entitles  us  to  apply  the  category  of  reciprocal  causality  or 
interaction.  But  this  contention  is  much  more  complicated 
than  the  similar  contention  in  regard  to  cause  and  effect,  and 
a  fuller  discussion  of  its  grounds  and  implications  would  have 
been  of  immense  advantage. 

V.  One  substance  cannot  be  the  cause  of  another  substance ; 
for  no  substance  comes  into  being,  but  is  permanent.  Hence 
if  one  substance  acts  causally  on  another,  it  can  be  the  cause 
only  of  the  determinations  or  states  of  the  substance  on  which 
it  acts.2 

VI.  Therefore  (i)  if  A  and  B  are  two  substances  known  to 
coexist  (in  the  sense  that  each  of  them  is  in  a  certain  state, 
or  series  of  states,  during  the  same  period  of  time),  (2)  if  know- 
ledge of  such  coexistence  is  possible  only  on  the  presupposition 
that  A  determines  B's  position  in  time  and  B  determines  A's 
position  in  time,  and  (3)  if  such  determination  must  be  causal 
determination — then  each  substance  must  contain  in  itself  the 
causality  of  certain  determinations  in  the  other,  and  also  certain 
effects  of  the  causality  of  that  other? 

This  sums  up  the  whole  argument  of  the  first  edition.  We 
may  put  the  conclusion  more  simply  by  saying  that  the  two 
substances  must  stand  in  dynamic  interaction  (whether  immediately 
or  mediately)* ,  if  their  coexistence  is  to  be  known  in  any  possible 
experience. 

VII.  The  rest  of  the  argument  is  only  the  common  form  by 
which  all  Kant's  Critical  arguments  can  be  ended.  The  condition 

1  This  schema  is  described  as  the  coexistence  of  the  determinations 
of  one  substance  with  those  of  the  other  in  accordance  with  a  universal 
rule;  see  A  144  -  B  183-4. 

2  It  is  of  course  not  the  only  cause  of  these  determinations,  but  it 
may  be  the  principal  cause,  as  when  the  fire  causes  the  ice  to  melt. 

3  We  could,  I  think,  say  more  simply  that  each  substance  must  cause 
certain  states  in  the  other  and  that  each  substance  must  have  certain 
of  its  own  states  caused  by  the  other. 

4  Kant  gives  some  indication  later  of  the  meaning  of  the  clause  m 
brackets,  which  by  itself  is  obscure.  Compare  §  4  below. 


316  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE      [XLVIII  §2 

of  experience  is  necessarily  the  condition  of  objects  of 
experience,  and  therefore  substances  can  coexist  only  if  they 
interact. 

§  2.  Interaction  and  Sense-Perception 

In  accordance  with  his  usual  method  Kant  adds  two  further 
paragraphs  to  the  proof.  These  are  commonly  regarded  as 
two  additional  and  independent  proofs.  The  first  paragraph1 
seems  to  me  to  be  merely  an  appendix,  wrhich  seeks  to  find 
confirmation  of  the  theory  of  interaction  in  the  ordinary  facts 
of  sense-perception.  The  second  paragraph2  has  more  claim 
to  be  considered  as  an  independent  proof,  but  Kant  himself 
says  that  it  is  meant  to  elucidate  what  he  has  already  said.3 
It  should  be  regarded  as,  at  the  most,  a  supplementary  state- 
ment of  the  original  proof,  intended  to  bring  out  points  not 
made  sufficiently  clear. 

Kant  begins  by  explaining  that  he  uses  the  German  \\ord 
'Gcmeinschaf?  in  the  sense  of  'cotmnercium'  (dynamical  com- 
munion or  interaction),  and  not  in  the  sense  of  'commwiio* 
(mere  togetherness  in  space);  and  he  asserts  that  together- 
ness in  space  could  not  be  empirically  known  apart  from 
interaction.4 

For  confirmation  of  this  assertion  he  appeals  to  the  facts 
of  sense-perception  as  revealed  by  empirical  psychology. 

1  A  213-14  —  B  260-1.  2  A  214-15  =  B  261-2. 

3  *Zur  Erlauterung  kann  folgendes  dienen.' 

4  When  Professor  Pnchard  says  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  307) 
that 'the  apprehension  of  a  body  in  space  in  itself  involves  the  apprehen- 
sion that  it  exists  together  with  all  other  hodics  in  space',  he  is  (i)  using 
the  \\ord  'apprehension*  in  a  non-Kantian  sense,  for  however  loose 
may  be  Kant's  use  of  'apprehension',  it  is  never  taken,  as  here,  to  mean 
a  priori  knowledge  of  what  is  not  directly  present  to  the  senses;  (2)  he 
is  using  the  word  'body'  as  equivalent  to  'substance'  (which  in  strict 
parlance  should  be  avoided);  and  (3)  he  is  treating  'togetherness'  in 
space  as  something  quite  general,  whereas  Kant  is  thinking  of  it  as 
involving  a  definite  position  in  space  of  one  body  relatively  to  other 
bodies.  It  is  in  the  latter  sense  that  Kant  maintains  we  cannot  have 
empirical  knowledge  of  togetherness  in  space  (or  coexistence  in  time) 
apart  from  interaction. 


XLVIII  §2]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  317 

In  one  of  his  long  and  complicated  sentences  he  propounds 
a  variety  of  theories  whose  meaning  and  interconnexion  is 
not  altogether  clear. 

(i)  Only  continuous  ' influences'  in  all  parts  of  space  can  lead 
our  senses  from  one  body  to  another;  (2)  light,  which  plays 
between  our  eye  and  the  heavenly  bodies,  causes  a  mediate 
interaction1  between  us  and  them,  and  thereby  establishes 
their  coexistence ;  (3)  we  cannot  change  our  position  empirically, 
or  rather  we  cannot  be  empirically  aware  of  our  changes  of 
position,  unless  matter  everywhere  makes  perception  of  our 
position  possible;  and  (4)  it  is  only  through  their  reciprocal 
influence  (or  interaction)  that  the  parts  of  matter  in  different 
places  can  exhibit  their  coexistence,2  and  so  exhibit  (although 
only  mediately)  the  coexistence3  of  the  most  remote  objects. 

All  this  is  difficult.  It  has  been  suggested  or  implied  by  Kant 
that  if  substances  did  not  interact,  the  space  between  them 
would  be  completely  empty.4  We  are  now  given  some  hints 
as  to  what  does  fill  space,  and  this  appears  to  be  identified 
(i)  with  continuous  'influences',  (2)  with  light,  and  (3)  with 
matter.  A  possible  conclusion  would  seem  to  be  that  when 
space  is  filled  with  'continuous  influences',  it  is  filled  with 
'matter  in  interaction',  one  example  of  which  is  light.  This 
accords  with  the  theory  that  'what  fills  space'  is  matter. 

1  'Genieinschaft*,  in  view  of  the  previous  sentence,  must  be  inter- 
preted as  equivalent  to  'cammercium?  or  'interaction*. 

2  ' Zugleichsem9     (translated     by    Kemp     Smith    as    'simultaneous 
existence'). 

3  'Koexislenz*    (translated    by    Kemp    Smith    as    'coexistence').    I 
presume  that  there  is  no  difference  in  sense  between  'Zuglcichsem9 
(the  word  usually  used  by  Kant)  and  lKoe\istcuz9  (which  is  only  the 
Latin  translation).  The  sentence  is  obscure;  but  I  do  not  think  Kant 
is  suggesting  that  the  parts  of  matter  establish  their  'simultaneous 
existence*  by  interaction  and  thereby  establish  their  'coexistence',  as  if 
these  two  things  were  different.  Nor  can  I  see  what  he  does  mean, 
unless  he  means  that  the  parts  of  matter  actually  perceived  establish 
their  coexistence  through  interaction  with  one  another  and  with  our 
bodies,  and  thereby  establish  the  coexistence  of  remote  objects  which 
we  do  not  perceive,  although  only  mediately  through  their  interaction 
with  the  bodies  we  do  perceive. 

4  See  A  212  ---  B  259  and  §  i,  II,  above. 


3i8  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLVIII  §2 

Furthermore  we  have  the  doctrine  (based  on  empirical 
evidence)  that  sense-perception  involves  interaction  between 
our  bodies  and  the  bodies  perceived,1  and  that  remote  bodies 
interact  with  our  bodies  mediately  through  their  interaction 
with  the  intervening  matter.2  Hence  sense-perception  is 
possible  only  because  all  parts  of  matter  (and  therefore  all 
substances)  are  in  interaction. 

These  statements  seem  to  me  to  be  meant  not  as  a  proof, 
but  as  an  illustration,  or  perhaps  a  confirmation,  of  the  doctrine 
ot  interaction. 

Kant  goes  on  to  maintain  that  without  interaction  every 
sense-perception  of  spatial  objects  would  be  broken  off  from 
every  other,  and  the  chain  of  ideas  which  constitutes  experience 
would  have  to  begin  afresh  with  every  new  object.3  It  would 
in  fact  cease  to  be  a  chain;  for  every  link  in  it  would  lack 
connexion  with  previous  links,  and  so  would  fail  to  stand 
in  time-relations  at  all.4  He  adds  that  he  does  not  profess  to 
refute  the  possibility  of  empty  space  by  this  doctrine,  but  only 
to  show  that  it  can  be  no  object  of  experience.5 

1  This  doctrine  is  here  stated  without  the  slightest  element  of 
ambiguity — especially  in  what  is  said  about  light  and  the  eye — and  I 
believe  with  Adickes  that  it  is  an  essential  part  of  the  Critical  Philo- 
sophy. Compare  Metaphysik,  p.  1 1 1  and  also  p  77. 

2  We  can  say  that  the  intervening  space  is  filled  with  continuous 
influences,  if  the  causal  action  of  a  body  is  transmitted  from  one  part 
of  matter  to  another  until  it  affects  our  sense-organs.  I  take  it  that 
the  ether  would  be  regarded  as  matter  on  this  view. 

3  I  take  this  to  rest  on  the  view  that  if  substances  did  not  interact, 
they  would  be  separated  by  an  empty  space  which  we  could  not 
perceive;  compare  A  212  =  B  258-9. 

4  We  must,  I  think,  take  this  to  mean  objective  time-relations.  This 
would  be  obvious  on  Kant's  theory,  because  apart  from  interaction 
we  should  be  unable  to  distinguish  objective  coexistence  from  objective 
succession. 

6  Compare  Chapter  XXXVIII  §  8.  Kant  always  displays  a  proper 
caution  in  his  attitude  to  the  mechanical  theory  of  'atoms  and  the 
void*.  All  that  he  maintains  is  that  it  cannot  be  established  by  empirical 
evidence,  but  is  a  metaphysical  assumption  of  a  highly  doubtful  kind. 


XLVIII  §3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  319 

§3.  Interaction  and  the  Unity  of  Apperception 

Kant's  final  'elucidation'1  of  his  position  brings  in  the 
doctrine  of  apperception,  upon  which  all  the  Critical  proofs 
necessarily  rest.2 

All  appearances,  as  contained  in  one  possible  experience, 
must  be  combined  under  the  unity  of  apperception.  This — 
the  central  doctrine  of  the  Transcendental  Deduction — is 
here  expressed  in  an  unusual  form,  for  Kant  says  that  all 
appearances  must  stand  in  communion  of  apperception.3 
This  might  perhaps  mean  that  all  appearances  are  parts  of  a 
whole  which  mutually  exclude  and  determine  one  another, 
and  so  are  subject  to  the  pure  category  (as  opposed  to  the 
schematised  category)  of  communion.  But  it  seems  more 
likely  to  mean  merely  that  they  must  possess  that  necessary 
synthetic  unity  which  is  implied  in  the  unity  of  apperception 
and  articulated  in  the  whole  scheme  of  categories. 

Hitherto  Kant  has  been  speaking  of  all  appearances  (so 
far  as  they  are  combined  by  thought  into  objects).  lie  now 
proceeds  to  deal  with  objects  which  are  combined  by  thought 
in  a  special  way — namely,  as  standing  to  one  another  in  a  rela- 
tion of  coexistence.  When  thought  combines  objects  in  this 
way  (or,  more  simply,  when  we  think  of  objects  as  coexisting), 
the  objects  must  reciprocally  or  mutually  determine4  their 

1  A  214-15  —  B  261-2. 

2  Similarly  the  unity  of  apperception  is  referred  to  at  the  close  of  the 
section  dealing  with  the  Second  Analogy.  See  A  210  =  B  256  and 
compare  A  2 16  --  B  263  and  A  2 17  =  B  264. 

3  The  word  used  is  'Gemeimchajt*  in  the  sense  of  communio,  which, 
as  we  have  seen,  does  not  involve  dynamical  connexion.  A  comtnumo 
of  apperception  seems  to  mean  only  'togetherness'  in  apperception,  as 
communio  spatri  means  'togetherness'  in  space.  The  word  'Gemewschaft' 
might  here  refer  to  the  pure  category  of  communion,  which  is  the 
concept  (of  the  synthesis)  of  a  whole  whose  parts  mutually  exclude  and 
determine  one  another;  see  Chapter  XXXIII  §  4.  But  I  think  we  shall 
be  on  safer  ground,  if  we  interpret  it  in  a  much  more  general  sense. 

4  Here  'determine'  can  scarcely  mean  'causally  determine';  but  it  is 
difficult  to  sec  what  it  does  mean,  unless  it  means  that  they  are  mutually 
exclusive  parts  of  a  spatial  whole  and  that  their  temporal  position  or 
date  is  determined,  not  by  their  relation  to  absolute  time,  but  by  their 
relation  to  one  another.  The  same  kind  of  difficulty  was  encountered 
in  A  212  =  B  259 — see  §  i,  III,  above. 


32o  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE     [XLVIII  §  3 

position  in  one  time,  so  as  to  constitute  a  whole.  This  is  a  par- 
ticular kind  of  subjective  communion,1  in  the  sense  that  it  exists 
for  thought. 

If  this  subjective  communion  (or  the  togetherness  of  appear- 
ances at  one  time  as  a  whole  for  thought)  is  to  rest  on  an  objec- 
tive ground,  if  in  other  words  the  appearances  thought  of  as 
together  in  one  time  are  to  be  regarded  as  coexistent  objects 
in  space2  (and  not  merely  as  combined  together  in  one  time 
by  an  arbitrary  act  of  the  mind),3  there  is  necessary  a  certain 
condition,  which  Kant  goes  on  to  state.  The  sense-perception 
of  one  of  the  coexistent  objects*  must,  as  a  ground,  make  possible 
the  sense-perception  of  the  others^  and  vice  versa.  Only  on  this 
condition  can  we  avoid  attributing  to  the  objects  the  succession 
which  is  always  present  in  our  sense-perceptions  (considered, 
not  as  states  of  an  object,  but  as  elements  in  our  successive 
apprehension) ;  and  only  on  this  condition  can  we  say  that  the 
objects  coexist. 

The  whole  argument  turns  on  the  'condition'  which  I  have 
put  in  italics,  but  unfortunately  the  interpretation  of  Kant's 

1  'Gememschaft.'   All  ' togetherness'   for   thought  has   been  called 
communion,  which  as  existing  for  thought  is  so  far  subjective.  Here 
we  arc  dealing  with  the  special  case  where  togetherness  for  thought  is 
togetherness  in  one  part  of  time.  Kant  docs  not  mean  by  this  merely 
that  we  think  of  them  together  at  one  time,  but  that  we  think  of  them 
as-bemg-together-at-one-time.  He  probably  means  also — although  he 
does  not  say  so — that  we  think  of  them  as-bemg-together-m-one- 
space-at-one-time. 

2  Kant's  own  expression  is  'If  this  subjective  communion  is  to  rest 
on  an  objective  ground  or  be  referred  to  phenomenal  substances'. 
Here  again  he  seems  to  be  thinking  of  substances  as  coexisting,  but  by 
Coexisting'  he  means  *  being  in  a  certain  state  during  the  same  period 
or  part  of  time.'  We  might  say:  '//  the  objects  thought  of  as  together  are 
to  be  regarded  as  coexisting  substances',  provided  we  understand  'coexist- 
ing' in  the  sense  I  have  explained. 

3  Such  an  act  would  be  an  act  of  imagination  rather  than  of  thought, 
for  thought  always  involves  assertion  of  an  object;  but  this  side  of 
thought  Kant  has  here  so  far  ignored. 

4  Or  coexisting  substances  in  the  sense  suggested  in  the  last  note 
but  one. 

5  The  plural  seems  the  most  natural  interpretation  of  'der  andcrcn' 
here,  but  it  may  be  singular,  as  Kemp  Smith  takes  it.  This  certainly 
gives  the  simpler  case. 


XLVIII  §3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  321 

statement  is  perhaps  even  more  difficult  than  usual.  I  take  what 
Kant  calls  the  'ground*  to  be  equivalent  to  'cause'.  One  sense- 
perception  considered  as  an  element  in  our  apprehension  can 
hardly  be  the  cause  of  another,  so  we  must  assume  that  the 
sense-perceptions  in  question  are  to  be  regarded  as  states  of 
an  object.  Even  so  there  is  still  an  element  of  uncertainty. 
If  we  take  the  simple  case  of  two  objects  A  and  B  with  states 
ax  a2  a3  a4  .  .  .  and  ft  ft  ft  ft  .  .  .,  does  Kant  mean  that 
ax  must  be  the  partial  cause  of  ft,  ft  must  be  the  partial  cause 
of  a3,  a3  must  be  the  partial  cause  of  ft,  and  so  on  ?  Or  does  he 
mean  that  the  two  simultaneous  states  ax  and  ft  are  related  to 
one  another  partly  as  cause  and  partly  as  effect  P1 

The  two  interpretations  may  not  in  the  end  be  so  different 
as  they  look  at  first  sight,  but  the  second  one  seems  to  be  the 
most  natural  way  of  taking  Kant's  words.  In  either  case  we 
have  at  every  moment  the  reciprocal  causality  of  coexistent 
substances  ;2  and  in  either  case  we  have  to  face  great  difficulties 
in  the  argument. 

In  the  first  case,  while  the  objects  are  coexistent,  the  states 
which  are  causally  connected  are  successive  ;3  and  the  causality 
of  the  states  is  reciprocal  only  in  the  sense  that  #2  is  partly 
caused  by  av  and  a2  is  partly  caused  by  ft.  Even  this  could 
not  be  established  on  the  basis  of  the  Second  Analogy;  for 
the  Second  Analogy  professes  to  prove  only  that  the  succession 
dj  )82  must  be  causally  determined,  not  that  ax  must  be  the 
cause  of  ft.  We  must  have  a  new  argument  resting,  not  on 
succession,  but  on  simultaneity,  and  unless  we  have  such  an 
argument,  Kant's  conclusion  seems  unjustifiable. 

1  The  fact  that  aA  and  /Jj  cannot  be  perceived  simultaneously  does 
not  exclude  this  interpretation,  since  for  Kant  the  states  of  an  object 
are  not  only  actual,  but  also  possible,  sense-perceptions. 

2  In  the  first  case  not  only  is  /*2  the  joint  product  of  ax  and  pv 
but  also  a2  is  the  joint  product  of  /^  and  ax :  we  are  not  confined  to 
the  states  which  we  actually  perceive,  but  are  concerned  also  with  the 
states  which  ex  hypothesi  we  could  have  perceived.  I  am  assuming  that 
a  substance  'acts'  as  a  cause  in  virtue  of  its  states. 

3  Even  this  is  true  only  where  the  objects  are  changing,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  fire  and  the  ice.  When  the  objects  are  unchanging,  there  is 
no  objective  succession  in  the  states. 

VOL.  II  L 


322  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLVIII  §  3 

This  suggests  that  we  must  accept  the  second  interpretation, 
which  seems  in  any  case  to  be  the  more  natural.  If  so,  the  rela- 
tion of  reciprocal  causality  must  hold,  not  only  between 
coexistent  substances,  but  also  between  simultaneous  states 
of  these  substances.  Our  actual  sense-perceptions-are  always 
in  a  succession,  and  even  if  we  regard  them  as  states  of  an 
object,  they  cannot  be  in  a  reciprocal  relation  of  cause  and 
effect.  Kant  must  have  in  mind  the  possible,  as  well  as  the  actual, 
sense-perceptions ;  and  he  appears  to  be  saying  that  if  we  are 
to  perceive  two  objects  A  and  B  as  coexistent  in  space,  we  must 
presuppose  that  the  simultaneous  states  c^  and  j3x  are  in  a 
relation  of  reciprocal  causality,  and  so  too  with  a2  and  j82, 
and  with  a3  and  ]83.  Only  so  can  a  reversible  series  of  states, 
which  we  take  up  successively  in  apprehension,1  be  regarded 
as  revealing  coexistent  objects. 

What  is  the  reason  for  Kant's  assertion?  We  must  assume 
that  the  simultaneous  states  cannot  be  perceived  together,2 
and  also  that  we  cannot  perceive  an  absolute  time  in  reference 
to  which  each  perceived  state  could  be  dated.3  If  so,  the  simul- 
taneity of  states  can  be  objectively  determined  only  if  it  is 
necessarily  determined ;  or  in  other  words  we  can  claim  to  know 
that  the  states  are  simultaneous  in  the  object  only  on  the 
presupposition  that  they  are  necessarily  simultaneous.  This 
seems  to  be  a  particular  case  of  Kant's  more  general  principle 
that  the  temporal  position  of  states  relatively  to  one  another 
can  be  objectively  determined  only  if  it  is  necessarily  deter- 
mined; but  he  appears  to  assume  that  because  we  are  here 
concerned  with  necessary  simultaneity  (and  not  with  necessary 
succession),  the  necessity  must,  so  to  speak,  work  equally  in 

1  We  take  up,  for  example  c^  //2  0$  />4  . . .,  but  if  the  series  is  reversible 
we  could  equally  take  up  //j  «2  /'a  "4-  •  •  •  If  so>  *t  seems  legitimate  to 
hold  that  ctj  and  /?t  are  simultaneous.  Compare  reciprocal  succession 
in  Chapter  XLVII  §  3,  V. 

2  Even  if  they  could,  there  would  still,  I  think,  be  a  question  whether 
the  states  were  simultaneous  in  the  objects. 

3  If  this  could  be  done,  presumably  we  should  be  entitled  to  fill  in 
the  gaps,  that  is,  to  assume,  on  the  ground  of  continuity,  the  existence 
and  character  of  the  states  which  we  had  not  perceived. 


XLVIII  §  3]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  323 

both  directions  (and  not  in  one  direction  only).  At  any  rate, 
just  as  objective  succession  must  be  necessary  succession,  so 
objective  simultaneity  must  be  necessary  simultaneity ;  and  just 
as  we  are  entitled  to  apply  the  schematised  category  of  cause 
and  effect  where  we  find  necessary  succession,  so,  Kant  appears 
to  hold,  we  are  entitled  to  apply  the  schematised  category 
of  interaction  where  we  find  necessary  simultaneity.  Without 
this  presupposition  the  empirical  relation  of  coexistence  cannot 
be  met  with  in  experience.1 

This  argument,  if  correctly  interpreted,  is  full  of  difficulty, 
and  even  its  conclusion  raises  serious  problems.  It  suggests  that 
not  only  must  coexistent  things  mutually  determine  the  simul- 
taneous states  of  one  another,  but  that  the  simultaneous  states 
must  themselves  mutually  determine  one  another  in  the  sense 
of  being  reciprocally  cause  and  eifect — a  relation  which  many 
philosophers  since  Schopenhauer  have  maintained  to  be 
impossible.  Clearly  if  there  is  interaction  between  simul- 
taneous states,  there  is  interaction  between  coexistent  sub- 
stances, as  Kant  immediately  goes  on  to  assert.2  It  is  not  so 
clear  that  interaction  between  coexistent  substances  implies 
a  relation  of  interaction  (or  reciprocal  causality)  between  their 
simultaneous  states. 

There  is  a  further  manifest  difficulty  in  the  conclusion. 
Even  if  we  accepted  this  doctrine  in  the  case  of  a  fire  melting 


1Aai4-i5  —  Ba6i.  I  take  'coexistence*  here  to  be  the  coexistence 
of  substances  or  things,  which  of  course  implies  that  they  must  have 
simultaneous  states. 

2  A  214- 1 5  -  6261.  Kant  speaks  of  a  reciprocal  influence  or  real 
commcrcium  of  substances.  He  adds  that  this  commercium  makes  the 
appearances  a  composition  reale.  A  compositum  is  a  whole  which  is 
possible  only  through  its  parts:  it  is  opposed  to  a  totum,  where  the 
parts  are  possible  only  in  the  whole  (A  438  =  B  466).  This  accords 
with  the  statement  (A  218  n.  =-  B  265  n.)  that  the  unity  of  the  world 
whole  is  a  mere  consequence  of  the  tacitly  assumed  principle  of  inter- 
action. A  compositum  reale  is  opposed  to  a  compositum  ideale,  such,  for 
example,  as  space  would  be,  if  it  were  not,  strictly  speaking,  a  totum ; 
see  A  438  —  B  466. 

'Compositio*  in  B  201  n  is  used  in  a  different  sense;  for  it  concerns 
the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous  manifold  only. 


324  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLVIII  §  4 

ice,1  there  seem  to  be  other  cases  where  it  does  not  apply. 
When  I  look  at  the  earth  and  then  at  the  moon,  I  do  not  assume 
that  the  colour  or  brightness  or  shape  or  size  which  I  see  in  the 
one  is  the  cause  of  the  colour  or  brightness  or  shape  or  size 
which  I  see  in  the  other.  It  is  not  possible  to  regard  every 
perceived  state  of  a  substance  as  causing  and  caused  by  all 
simultaneous  states  of  another  substance — at  any  rate  if  we 
are  concerned  with  principal  causes.  The  states  with  which 
Kant  is  concerned  appear  to  be  states  of  motion  or  of  moving 
forces,  states  in  virtue  of  which  matter,  and  so  substance, 
may  be  said  to  fill  space.  If  so,  the  doctrine  requires  a  more 
detailed  exposition  than  it  receives. 

§  4.  Interaction  and  Coexistence 

I  do  not  think  it  can  reasonably  be  doubted  that  the  concept 
of  interaction  is  the  most  fundamental  concept  of  science. 
Scientific  laws  are  not  expressed  in  the  form  'A  is  the  cause 
of  B',  but  in  the  form  of  equations;2  and  the  world  as  known 
to  science  is  not  a  series  of  causal  successions  parallel  to,  and 
independent  of,  one  another,  but  is  rather  a  system  of  functional 
relations  between  measurable  quantities.3  Kant's  description 
of  the  concept  of  interaction  in  terms  of  'substance'  and  'cause1 
may  be  antiquated;  but  I  imagine  that  it  could  be  restated 
in  more  modern  terms,  or  at  least  that  the  concept  which  must 
take  its  place  will  be  regarded  by  the  future  historian  of  science 
as  in  the  direct  line  of  evolution  from  the  concept  described 
by  Kant. 

If  we  look  at  the  question  from  the  standpoint  of  Kant's 
own  period,  it  seems  clear  enough  that  the  isolated  concepts 

1  Even  this  is  perhaps  a  case  of  mediate  interaction,  if  it  takes  time 
for  the  heat  of  the  fire  to  reach  the  ice.  Gravitation  is  presumably  a 
case  of  immediate  interaction. 

2  For  example,  the  law  of  gravitation,  of  which  Kant  is  thinking,  is 
expressed  in  the  equation 


d* 

3  Compare  Schlick,  University  of  California  Publications,  Vol.  15, 
p.  in. 


XLVIII  §  4]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  325 

of  substance  and  causation  require  to  be  combined  into  the 
concept  of  interaction  between  substances,  and  that  by  such 
combination  we  have  a  new  and  independent  concept.  Indeed 
had  the  argument  not  been  so  complicated,  there  would  have 
been  only  'one  Principle  of  the  Analogies — the  Principle  of 
Interaction — just  as  there  is  only  one  Principle  of  the  Axioms 
and  one  Principle  of  the  Anticipations. 

A  knowledge  of  eighteenth-century  science  would,  I  think, 
help  to  make  clear  much  that  seems  to  be  obscure  in  Kant's 
exposition — notably  the  empirical  examples  which  he  gives  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  argument  in  the  first  edition.1  Lacking 
such  knowledge,  I  am  compelled  to  make  my  criticisms  in  a 
way  that  may  be  naive.  I  can  only  hope  that  for  this  very  reason 
they  may  be  useful  to  those  whose  ignorance  in  these  matters 
is  as  great  as  my  own. 

As  we  have  seen,  Kant  generally  speaks  of  interaction  as 
taking  place  between  coexistent  substances ;  but  he  is  concerned 
primarily  with  the  substances  of  which  we  have  empirical 
knowledge,  substances  whose  accidents  remain  relatively 
constant  so  that  they  can  be  spoken  of  as  'things'  (like  the  earth 
and  the  moon).  Coexistent  substances  in  this  sense  are  said 
to  be  cordinated  in  such  a  way  that  each  is  simultaneously  and 
reciprocally  a  cause  in  relation  to  the  determinations  or  states 
of  the  other.2  Such  a  description  appears  to  be  justified  in 
Professor  Prichard's  example  of  the  fire  and  the  ice,  or  again 
in  Kant's  own  example  of  the  parts  of  a  body  which  reciprocally 
attract  and  repel  one  another.3  We  know  that  for  Kant  substances 
are  'the  first  subject'  of  all  causality,4  and  that  'action'  is  a 
sufficient  empirical  criterion  of  substantiality.5  Every  substance 
must  contain  in  itself  the  'causality'  of  certain  determinations 
in  the  other  substance,  and  at  the  same  time  the  effects  of  the 
causality  of  that  other.6  The  reciprocal  causality  of  coexistent 
substances  in  respect  of  their  determinations  is  clearly  implied 

1  A  213  ^B  260.  2  See  B  112. 

3  Sec  B  112.  It  should  be  remembered  that  all  parts  of  a  body  are 

themselves  substances.  4A2O5  =  B25i. 

5  A  205  =  B  250.  6  A  212  =  B  259. 


326  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLVIII  §  4 

in  all  such  phrases  as  'dynamical  communion',  'interaction', 
'commercium',  and  'reciprocal  influence'.  On  this  point  I  have 
no  doubt  at  all. 

Without  enquiring  closely  into  the  nature  of  the  causality 
exercised  by  substances  we  may,  I  think,  say  that  a  substance 
exercises  causality  in  virtue  of  its  accidents  or  states.1 1  presume 
that  we  have  to  discover  empirically  the  state  of  a  substance 
in  virtue  of  which  it  exercises  causality  upon  the  state  of  another 
substance.  This  is  always  Kant's  view  in  regard  to  particular 
applications  of  the  principle  of  causality;  and  manifestly 
(if  we  are  concerned  with  principal  causes)  we  cannot  take  one 
state  of  a  substance  at  random,  and  say  that  in  virtue  of  this 
state  the  substance  exercises  causality  upon  all  the  states  of 
other  coexisting  substances.  It  is  not,  for  example,  in  virtue 
of  its  shape  or  colour  that  fire  reduces  the  temperature  of 
ice.2 

If  we  take  the  simple  case  when  two  substances  A  and  B 
interact  in  virtue  of  their  states  a  and  j8,  we  may  suggest  that 
on  Kant's  view  a2  is  caused  by  j8j  and  a±  jointly,  and  similarly 
]82  is  caused  by  ax  and  jSj  jointly.3 

This  appears  to  be  a  plausible  interpretation  of  Kant's 
doctrine.  Nevertheless  the  question  arises  whether  he  does  not 
mean  more  than  this.  On  this  view  it  might  be  said  that  in  the 

1  Kant,  I  think,  is  primarily  concerned  with  the  'moving  forces'  in 
virtue  of  which  matter  fills  space — particularly  those  of  attraction  and 
repulsion. 

2  I  do  not  mean  to  deny  that  a  substance  may  exercise  causality  in 
regard  to  all  the  states  of  coexisting  substances — perhaps  Kant  holds 
that  it  does.  But  clearly  there  is,  so  to  speak,  a  main  line  of  causation. 
The  heat  of  the  fire  causes  the  ice  to  melt,  and  thereby  it  may  cause 
the  ice  to  change  its  colour  and  shape;  but  although  the  colour  and 
shape  of  the  fire  may  be  connected  with  its  heat,  the  colour  of  the  fire 
does  not  cause  the  ice  to  change  its  colour,  nor  does  the  shape  of  the 
fire  cause  the  ice  to  change  its  shape ;  and  still  less  does  the  colour  of 
the  fire  cause  the  ice  to  change  its  shape  or  the  shape  of  the  fire  cause 
the  ice  to  change  its  colour.  I  imagine  that  for  Kant  all  interaction  of 
substances  is  due  to  moving  forces,  but  the  relation  of  these  to  other 
qualities  of  substance  stands  in  need  of  elucidation. 

3  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  am  taking  «1  and  /^  to  be  the  simul- 
taneous states  of  A  and  B  which  immediately  precede  the  stages  a2 
and  /?2. 


XLVIII  §4]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  327 

coexistent  substances  A  and  B  the  states  which  are  simultaneous1 
arc  not  in  a  relation  of  cause  and  effect ;  and  on  the  other  hand 
the  states  which  are  in  a  relation  of  cause  and  effect  are  not 
simultaneous,  but  successive.  Clearly  at  every  instant  the 
coexistent  substances  are  in  a  relation  of  interaction  or  reciprocal 
causality;  for  at  every  instant  each  contains  in  itself  a  state 
which  is  partly  caused  by  the  action  of  the  other.  But  does 
Kant  mean  also  that  the  simultaneous  states  are  themselves  in  a 
relation  of  reciprocal  causality  so  that  each  is  at  once  the  cause 
and  effect  of  the  other  ?2 

If  Kant  holds  the  latter  doctrine,  it  must  be  because  the 
action  of  causality  is  continuous.3  The  time  between  the 
causality  of  the  cause  and  its  immediate  effect  can  be  a 
vanishing  quantity,  so  that  cause  and  effect  can,  in  a  sense,  be 
regarded  as  simultaneous.4  For  this  view  Kant's  previous 

1  By  *  simultaneous'  I  mean  'occurring  at  the  same  instant  of  time*. 

2  In  symbols,  can  we  say  that  a2  is  partly  the  effect  of  /?2,  and  /?2 
partly  the  effect  of  a2?  3  A  208  =  B  254. 

4  A  203  —  B  248.  Let  us  represent  the  interaction  of  two  things  A 
and  B  thus : 


If  we  remember  that  the  series  at  a2  a3  a4  afi  .  .  .  and  the  scries 
Pi  !'<>  /'a  1^  /s  -  .  .  ate  really  continuous  series,  and  if  we  remember 
also  that  there  is  no  passage  of  time  between  cause  and  effect,  we  may, 
so  to  speak,  close  up  the  above  diagram  like  a  concettina,  and  in  the 
limiting  case  we  seem  to  have  something  like  this  : 

al  «  -----  >  Pi 


/36 


328  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLVIII§4 

discussion1  has  prepared  us;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that 
although  there  is  no  interval  or  passage  of  time  between  cause 
and  effect,  the  temporal  relation  or  order  still  remains  ;2  and 
it  is  difficult  to  reconcile  this  with  the  reciprocal  causality  of 
simultaneous  states.3  I  am  not  prepared  to  say  that  it  is 
impossible. 

So  far  as  I  can  see,  the  text  of  the  Third  Analogy  is  not  con- 
clusive on  this  point.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Kant  is 
primarily  concerned  with  the  reciprocal  causality  of  coexistent 
substances,  not  with  the  reciprocal  causality  of  simultaneous 
states.  There  is,  I  think,  only  one  passage4  which  seems  to 
point  clearly  to  the  latter  view.  Kant  says  that  the  perception 
of  the  one  substance  must  as  ground  make  possible  the  percep- 
tion of  the  other,  and  vice  versa.  If  we  take  'perception',  as  I 
have  done,  to  be  equivalent  to  state  of  a  substance,  this  appears 
to  indicate  that  there  is  a  relation  of  reciprocal  causality  between 
simultaneous  states.  But  even  here  it  is  perhaps  barely  possible 
for  him  to  mean  only  that  ax  is  the  ground  of  /J2,  and  $>  the 
ground  of  a3,  although  in  that  case  it  is  difficult  to  see  how 
this  assertion  could  be  justified.5 

This  problem,  I  imagine,  could  be  settled  with  comparative 
ease  in  the  light  of  eighteenth-century  science  and  perhaps 
of  Kant's  own  scientific  writings.6  I  must  confine  myself  to 
raising  the  question,  and  I  do  not  think  it  should  be  really 
difficult  to  answer. 

Connected  with  this  problem  is  the  difference  between 
immediate  and  mediate  interaction.  Repulsion  and  attraction 
I  imagine  to  be  for  Kant  examples  of  immediate  interaction, 

1  A  202-4  =  B  247-9.  2  A  203  =  B  248. 

3  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  difficulty  about  the  reciprocal  causality 
of  coexistent  substances. 

4  A  214  =  B  261.  It  must  be  remembered  that  ' Erschetnung*  need 
not  mean   a   perceived   state,    but  may   be   a   thing   or   substance. 
1  Wahrnehmung'  (sense-perception)  might,  I  think,  be  used  as  equivalent 
to  ' Erscheinung'  in  this  sense,  but  I  find  it  difficult,  or  even  impossible, 
to  suppose  that  it  is  so  used  in  this  passage. 

6  Compare  §  3  above. 

6  See  especially  for  the  third  law  of  motion  M.A.d.N.  3  Haupt- 
stuck,  Lehrsatz  4.  (IV  544  ff.). 


XLVIII  §  5]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  329 

and  he  may  here  suppose  that  there  is  reciprocal  causality 
between  simultaneous  states  of  coexistent  substances.  In  the 
case  of  mediate  interaction  there  appears  to  be  a  lapse 
of  time  involved.  He  certainly  regards  light  as  producing 
a  mediate*  communion  or  interaction  between  the  heavenly 
bodies  and  the  human  eye  ;x  and  although  this  is  a  very  special 
case,  it  would  seem  to  imply  that  a  period  of  time  may  be 
required  for  mediate  interaction  to  take  place. 

In  such  a  case,  although  the  bodies  which  interact  are 
coexistent,  the  determining  state  of  the  one  body  is  not  neces- 
sarily coexistent  with  the  determined  state  of  the  other.  The 
star  may  have  ceased  to  shine  before  I  see  its  light.  Indeed 
it  may  be  said  that  not  even  the  bodies  need  coexist;  for  the 
star  which  I  now  see  may  have  been  broken  up  before  I  was 
born.  If  so,  it  is  only  the  substances  which  coexist,  and  hence 
it  may  be  thought  that  Kant's  principle  tells  us  nothing;  for 
we  know  a  priori  that  all  substances  coexist,  since  they  are 
necessarily  permanent.  This  criticism  is  not,  I  think,  valid. 
Kant's  principle  tells  us  that  a  particular  substance  which 
had  at  one  time  the  empirical  characteristics  of  a  star  coexists 
with  another  substance,  namely  my  body,  in  a  form  which, 
if  we  had  sufficient  knowledge,  we  could  now  describe.  This 
remains  true,  even  if  the  star  has  been  broken  up  into  several 
substances  now  distributed  throughout  space. 

§5.  KanCs  Proof  of  Interaction 

On  the  method  of  Kant's  proof  I  need  add  little  to  what 
I  have  already  said.  The  arguments  in  the  first  edition  are  by 
themselves  insufficiently  clear,  and  even  the  argument  of  the 
second  edition  leaves  much  to  be  desired.  Nevertheless  the 

1  I  confess  I  do  not  understand  what  is  the  action  of  the  human  eye 
upon  the  heavenly  bodies;  but  perhaps  the  following  passage  from 
Professor  Broad  (Scientific  Thought,  p.  172)  gives  some  indication  of 
what  Kant  means.  'When  a  beam  of  light  from  the  sun  strikes  upon 
any  surface  on  the  earth  it  produces  a  pressure  on  that  surface.  If 
there  be  any  reaction  from  the  earth,  it  will  be  exerted  primarily  on 
the  surface  of  the  ether  next  to  the  earth,  and  will  not  be  conveyed 
back  to  the  sun  in  less  time  than  light  takes  to  travel  between  the  two.' 

VOL.  II  L* 


330  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  EXPERIENCE    [XLVIII  §  5 

method  employed  is  the  same  as  the  method  of  the  Second 
Analogy.  Kant  holds  that  (if  it  be  granted  that  we  experience 
objective  coexistence)  there  is  a  presupposition  of  necessity 
in  our  sense-perceptions,  and  this  necessity  must  belong  to 
the  states  of  the  objects  we  perceive,  provided  we  accept  the 
Critical  doctrine  supposed  to  have  been  already  established — 
that  an  object  is  made  up  of  possible  or  actual  sense-perceptions 
combined  in  a  necessary  synthetic  unity.  He  is  quite  right  in 
maintaining  that  such  a  proof,  if  it  is  possible  at  all,  is  possible 
only  on  Critical  presuppositions.  There  is  more  danger  of 
falling  into  incidental  fallacies  in  the  proof  of  interaction, 
because  the  concept  of  interaction  involves  greater  complication 
than  the  concept  of  cause  and  effect;  but  the  fundamental 
method  employed  would  seem  to  be  valid  either  in  both  cases 
or  in  neither.  Although  I  feel  much  uncertainty  as  regards  the 
details,  the  whole  argument  seems  to  me  essentially  Critical; 
and  it  is  concerned,  not  with  an  alleged  process  by  which  we 
pass  from  the  subjective  ro  the  objective,  but  with  the  conditions 
which  are  presupposed  by  our  experience.  I  hope  I  have  at 
least  persuaded  the  reader  that  Kant  is  putting  forward  a  novel 
argument  with  a  definite  meaning,  and  not  merely  deceiving 
himself  with  words. 

On  questions  of  detail  I  would  add  only  two  points.  In  the 
first  place  I  do  not  think  that  Kant's  argument  must  rest  upon 
the  doctrine  that  we  cannot  directly  perceive  coexisting  states 
of  bodies,  but  the  fact  that  he  seems  to  hold  this  view  of  per- 
ception is  apt  to  arouse  suspicion  in  his  readers.  Thus  he  does 
not  even  raise  the  question  whether  we  cannot  actually  see 
the  earth  and  the  moon  at  the  same  time,  as  seems  obvious, 
at  least  when  the  moon  is  rising  or  setting.  In  the  second 
place  Kant  might  have  given  to  space  a  more  prominent  part 
in  his  argument  without  departing  from  his  Critical  method. 
He  himself  recognised,  at  any  rate  after  the  publication  of  the 
first  edition,  that  it  is  space  which  makes  interaction  possible;1 
and  if  substance  and  causation  are  necessary  to  represent 
empirically  the  unity  and  successiveness  of  time,  interaction 
1  See  Erdmann,  Nachtrdge  LXXXVI. 


XLVIII  §5]  THE  THIRD  ANALOGY  331 

would  seem  to  be  necessary  to  represent  empirically  the 
unity  of  space.  If  Kant  had  been  living  to-day,  I  think  he  would 
have  held  that  interaction  (which  combines  the  concepts  of 
substance  and  causality)  is  necessary  to  represent  the  unity 
of  space-time. 

The  whole  argument  raises  further  questions  which  cannot 
be  discussed  here — notably  the  coexistence  of  minds  or  ideas 
and  the  unity  of  the  world- whole.  These  questions  belong  to 
the  Dialectic,  and  it  need  only  be  said  at  present  (i)  that  since 
for  Kant  souls  are  not  permanent  substances,  it  looks  as  if  our 
ideas  must  be  regarded  empirically  as  states  of  our  bodies  (which 
are  substances)  and  their  coexistence  determined  like  that  of 
any  other  states  of  substance;1  and  (2)  that  the  unity  of  the 
world-whole  is  a  consequence  of  the  principle  of  interaction 
and  not  a  presupposition  of  it.2 

1  This  may  be  questioned,  but  it  seems  to  me  the  inevitable  outcome 
of  Kant's  doctrine. 

2  See  A  218  n.  =  B  265  n.,  and  compare  A  215  —  B  261-2. 


BOOK  XI 

THE    POSTULATES    OF   EMPIRICAL 
THOUGHT 


CHAPTER    XLIX 
POSSIBILITY 

§  i.  The  Principles  of  Possibility,  Actuality ,  and  Necessity 

Kant's  account  of  the  Postulates  of  Empirical  Thought1 
is  simpler  and  easier  than  the  proofs  of  the  Analogies.  It  does 
little  more  than  set  out  in  systematic  form  the  presuppositions 
upon  which  the  whole  argument  has  hitherto  proceeded. 
Hence  it  is  called  an  'explanation*  or  'elucidation'2  and  not 
a  'proof;  and  its  business  is  to  explain  what  is,  in  the  Critical 
Philosophy,  the  meaning  of  the  three  categories  of  modality, 
namely,  possibility,  actuality,  and  necessity.  Kant  found 
it  unnecessary  to  restate  his  explanation  in  the  second  edition, 
as  he  restated  the  proofs  of  the  other  Principles.  He  does, 
however,  add  a  new  section  on  the  Refutation  of  Idealism, 
which  will  be  reserved  for  separate  consideration.3 

The  formulation  of  the  three  Postulates  is  as  follows : 

(1)  That  which  agrees  with  the  formal  conditions  of  experience 
(as  regards  intuitions  and  concepts)  is  possible* 

(2)  That  which   is  connected5  with   the   material  conditions 
of  experience  (sensation)  is  actual. 

(3)  That  of  which  the  connexion*  with  the  actual  is  determined 

1  A  218  =  B  265  ff.  Compare  also  Chapter  XXXVI  §  2. 

a  'Erlauterung.'  3  See  Chapter  LI. 

4  We  may  put  this  more  clearly  by  saying  that  what  agrees  with  the 
formal  conditions  of  experience,  that  is,  with  the  conditions  of  intuition 
(space  and  time)  and  with  the  conditions  of  thought  (the  unity  of  apper- 
ception and  the  categories),  is  possible.  5  'zusammenha'ngt.' 

6  ' ZusammenJiang.'  ' Zusammenhang*  here  (and,  as  a  verb,  in  the 
definition  of  actuality)  is  equivalent  to  *  Verkniipfung\  or  'nexus',  the 
technical  term  for  'connexion' ;  see  B  201-2  n.  The  word  'Verkniipfung* 
is  used  in  A  227  =  B  279.  The  connexion  spoken  of  is  by  means  of  the 
Analogies,  and  it  seems  to  me  a  mistake  to  blame  Kant,  as  Kemp 
Smith  does  (Commentary,  p.  397),  for  defining  actuality  without 
reference  to  the  Analogies.  Compare  the  formulation  in  A  376 :  'What 
is  connected  with  a  sense-perception  in  accordance  with  empirical 
laws  is  actual*.  Empirical  laws  presuppose  the  Analogies. 


336  THE   POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  i 

according  to  universal  conditions  of  experience  is  necessary  (or 
exists  necessarily). 

These  three  statements  are  intended  to  be  definitions  of 
the  possible,  the  actual,  and  the  necessary,  and  we  are  entitled 
to  convert  them  simply.  They  are  concerned  with  real  (and 
not  with  merely  logical)  possibility,  actuality,  and  necessity. 
That  is  to  say,  they  are  concerned,  as  is  indicated  by  the 
parenthesis  in  the  Third  Postulate,  with  possible,  actual, 
and  necessary  existence,  or  with  the  possibility,  actuality, 
and  necessity,  not  of  thoughts,  but  of  objects* 

Hitherto  we  have  been  attempting  to  prove  that  if  an  object 
is  to  be  an  object  of  a  spatio-temporal  human  experience, 
it  must  have  in  itself  certain  necessary  characteristics  or  deter- 
minations; it  must  have  extensive  and  intensive  quantity,  and 
be  a  substance  (with  changing  accidents)  in  causal  interaction 
with  all  other  similar  substances.  Possibility,  actuality,  and 
necessity  are  not  characteristics  of  objects  in  the  same  sense, 
and  they  are  not  contained  in  the  concept  of  the  object  con- 
sidered only  in  itself.  Our  concept  of  an  object  may  be  com- 
plete,2 and  yet  we  may  still  ask  whether  the  object  itself  is 
only  possible,  or  whether  it  is  also  actual;  and  if  it  is  actual, 
we  may  ask  whether  it  is  also  necessary.  These  questions, 
Kant  believes,  are  concerned,  not  with  the  content  of  the 
object,  but  with  its  relation  to  our  mind  or  with  the  way  in 
which  we  cognise  it. 

1  Compare  Metaphysik,  p.  28.  Real  possibility  is  agreement  with 
the  conditions  of  a  possible  experience.  The  connexion  of  a  thing 
with  experience  is  actuality.  This  connexion,  so  far  as  it  can  be  known 
a  priori,  is  necessity. 

2  Kant's  discussion  of  definitions  (in  A  727  —  B  755  ff.)  suggests 
that  completeness  is  never  found  in  empirical  concepts,  but  only  in 
factitious  and  mathematical  concepts.  In  his  lectures  on  Logic  inner 
completeness  is  attributed  also  to  pure  concepts  of  reason ;  Log.  EinL 
VIII  (IX  62-3).  Outer  completeness  (Ausfuhrhchkeit)  is,  however, 
denied  to  these  in  A  728-9  =  B  756-7;  and  if  so,  inner  completeness 
should  presumably  be  denied  also.  Outer  (or  extensive)  completeness 
involves  the  clarity  of  the  coordinate  marks  in  a  concept:   inner  (or 
intensive)  completeness  involves  the  clarity  of  the  subordinate  marks  in 
a  concept. 


XLIX  §  i]  POSSIBILITY  337 

Just  as  Kant  connected  logical  possibility,  actuality,  and 
necessity  with  understanding,  judgement,  and  reason  in  their 
logical  use?  so  he  here  connects  what  we  may  call  real  or 
material  possibility,  actuality,  and  necessity2  with  under- 
standing, judgement,  and  reason  in  their  empirical  use,  that 
is,  as  applied  to  experience.3  In  his  final  summary4  he  expresses 
the  same  view  without  the  use  of  these  technical  terms.  The 
Postulates  add  to  the  concept  of  an  object  only  the  cognitive 
power  in  which  it  originates  and  has  its  seat.  If  the  concept 
is  merely  in  the  understanding,5  and  agrees  with6  the  formal 
conditions  of  experience,  then  its  object  is  possible;  if  it  is 
connected  with  sense-perception  or  sensation  (that  is,  with  the 
matter  of  the  senses)  and  is  determined  through  the  senses 
by  means  of  understanding,7  then  its  object  is  actual;  if  it  is 
determined  through  the  connexion  of  sense-perceptions  in 

1  Sec  A  75  n.       B  100  n.  Sec  also  A  130-1  =  B  169  and  A  304 
—  B  360-1  and  compare  Chapters  IX§  2  and  XXXIII §  5.  The  logical 
use  is  the  general  (or  formal)  use,  studied  by  Formal  Logic  in  abstrac- 
tion from  all  differences  in  objects. 

2  That  is,  the  possibility,  actuality,  and  necessity  of  objects,  not  of 
thoughts 

1  If  an  object  is  to  be  possible,  it  must  be  conceived  by  understanding 
in  accordance  \\  ith  the  formal  conditions  of  experience ;  if  it  is  to  be 
actual,  it  must  be  asserted  by  the  power  of  judgement  on  the  basis  of 
sense-perception ;  if  it  is  to  be  necessary,  it  must  be  inferred  by  reason 
to  be  determined  in  accordance  with  the  universal  laws  of  experience, 
that  is,  in  accordance  with  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding,  and 
especially  the  Analogies. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  power  of  judgement  (which  subsumes 
an  actual  case  under  a  concept)  rests  either  on  pure  or  on  empirical 
intuition.  Kant  refers  expressly  in  the  present  passage  to  the  empirical 
power  of  judgement  to  show  that  \\e  are  concerned  with  empirical 
intuition  or  sense-perception. 

4  A  234  =-=  BaS6. 

6  Here  taken  in  the  nanow  sense  (as  opposed  to  judgement  and 
reason) 

6  Kant  says  'is  in  connexion  with'  (Verknupfung),  but  this  is  not  the 
technical  meaning  of  iVeiknuf>fung\ 

1  Here,  I  think,  *  understanding'  is  that  form  of  understanding  (in 
the  wider  sense)  which  is  called  the  power  of  judgement.  The  reference 
to  understanding  shows  that  for  Kant  existence  is  not  to  be  found  by 
sense  apait  from  thought. 


338  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  i 

accordance  with  the  categories,1  then  its  object  is  necessary.2 
The  content  of  the  concept  is  the  same  in  all  these  cases, 
but  its  relation  to  the  mind  is  different. 

It  will  be  seen  that  Kant  is  explaining  real  possibility, 
actuality,  and  necessity  by  reference  to  experience.-  Possibility 
depends  on  the  form  of  experience,  actuality  primarily  on 
the  matter  of  experience,  and  necessity  on  the  combination 
of  the  two.  His  doctrine  therefore  differs  expressly  from  any 
rationalist  doctrine  which  maintains  that  by  pure  reason 
apart  from  experience  we  can  know  the  possibility,  the  actuality, 
and  even  the  necessity,  of  things.3  In  particular  he  is  in  these 
definitions  restricting  all  the  categories  to  a  merely  empirical 
use  and  excluding  their  transcendental  use4  by  means  of  pure 
reason  alone.  The  categories  in  their  purely  logical  significance 
are,  as  we  have  so  often  seen,  identical  with  the  empty  forms 
of  judgement.  If  they  are  taken  as  concepts  of  an  object  in 
general,  then  they  have  'sense  and  significance'  only  as  concepts 
of  an  object  ot  possible  experience.5  They  do  not  give  us 

1  This  is  the  work  of  reason  in  its  empirical  use — I  presume  in 
seeking  higher   conditions   for   the   conditioned   (A   309  —  B    365), 
although  this  work  can  never  be  completed.  The  Concepts'  of  which 
Kant  speaks  are  the  categories. 

2  I  feel  some  difficulty  about  the  use  of  the  word  'determined*  in 
the  statements  about  the  actual  and  the  necessary.  A  concept  is 
determined,  if  it  is  related  to  given  intuition,  and  intuition  is  deter- 
mind,  if  it  is  brought  under  a  concept.  The  first  of  these  senses  seems 
to  be  used  as  regards  the  actual;  but  as  regards  the  necessary  there 
must  be,  in  addition  to  the  determination  of  the  concept,  a  determina- 
tion of  the  object  (or  of  its  connexion  with  sense-perception)  through 
the  categories. 

3  Such  possibility,  actuality,  and  necessity  may  be  called  absolute, 
as  opposed  to  the  possibility,  actuality,  and  necessity  of  Kant  which 
is  hypothetical  and  relative  to  experience;  compare  A  232  --  B  285. 

4  See  Chapters  XI  §  4    and  LIV.    If  we   can   regard  objects  as 
possible,  actual,  and  necessary  only  by  reference  to  experience,  this 
must  apply  to  the  objects  thought  by  means  of  the  categories. 

6  The  categories  of  quantity  are  concerned,  as  we  have  seen  in 
Chapter  XXXIII  §  5,  with  the  synthesis  of  the  form  of  intuition; 
the  categories  of  quality  are  concerned  with  the  synthesis  of  the  matter 
of  intuition ;  the  categories  of  relation  are  concerned  with  the  synthesis 
of  the  form  and  matter  of  intuition.  We  must  not,  however,  think  that 
there  are  three  syntheses;  for  there  is  only  one  synthesis  with  dis- 


XLIX§z]  POSSIBILITY  339 

absolute  knowledge  of  things  in-themselves ;  indeed  as  applied 
to  things-in-themselves  they  are  empty. 

The  necessity  for  a  discussion  of  the  Postulates  should 
be  manifest.  Throughout  the  Principles  an  appeal  has  been 
made  to  the  possibility  of  experience,  and  so  of  objects  of 
experience.  In  the  Analogies  Kant  has  argued  that  the  objective 
or  the  actual,  as  opposed  to  the  subjective  or  imaginary,  must 
be  governed  by  necessity.  Without  some  explanation  of  the 
use  of  these  terms,  the  argument  would  be  incomplete.  To 
say  that  the  Postulates  are  due  merely  to  what  Professor 
Adickes  calls  Kant's  ' Systematic ',  and  to  what  Professor  Kemp 
Smith  calls  Kant's  'architectonic',  seems  to  me  erroneous.1 
Kant  has  shown  what  objects  must  be,  if  they  are  given  to 
intuition  and  if  they  exist  in  relation  to  one  another  in  a  common 
space  and  time.  He  has  still  to  show  what  relations  they  must 
have  to  the  mind  which  knows  them. 

§  2.  The  Interdependence  of  the  Categories  of  Modality 

The  categories  of  modality,  like  all  other  categories,  neces- 
sarily apply  to  all  objects  of  experience,  so  that  every  object 
of  experience  is  both  possible,  actual,  and  necessary.  Possibility 

tmguishable  aspects.  By  supposing  that  there  are  three  separate 
syntheses,  we  take  far  too  seriously  abstractions  which  are  necessary 
only  for  purposes  of  analysis,  and  attribute  to  Kant  all  sorts  of  errors 
and  distortions  which  seem  to  me  remote  from  his  actual  doctrine. 

Perhaps  it  should  be  added  that  the  synthesis  with  which  a  category 
is  concerned  is  always  itself  a  formal  synthesis.  Whether  the  synthesis 
deals  with  the  form  (that  is,  with  the  pure  manifold)  of  intuition,  or 
whether  it  deals  with  the  matter  (that  is,  with  the  empirical  manifold) 
of  intuition,  or  with  both  form  and  matter,  the  category  is  the  concept 
of  the  synthesis  in  general  and  ignores  differences  dependent  on 
differences  in  the  given  matter. 

1  Adickes  in  his  commentary  even  asserts  that  the  Postulates  are 
not  Principles,  because  they  do  not  make  experience  possible.  The 
Postulates,  like  other  Principles,  state  conditions  apart  from  which 
experience  is  impossible ;  for  the  objects  of  experience  must  be  possible, 
actual,  and  necessary,  not  absolutely,  but  in  relation  to  our  minds. 
Adickes'  further  objection,  that  men  have  experience  without  any 
idea  of  the  way  in  which  the  possible  and  necessary  depend  upon  the 
powers  of  the  mind,  shows  a  curious  blindness  to  what  Kant  meant 
by  the  a  priori  conditions  of  experience. 


340  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  2 

is  no  wider  than  actuality,1  and  actuality  no  wider  than  necessity. 
The  category  of  necessity,  like  the  third  category  in  every 
class,  combines  in  itself  the  other  two  categories:  it  combines, 
in  short,  possibility  and  actuality.2 

The  fact  that  the  three  categories  of  modality  must  apply 
to  any  and  every  object  does  not  make  it  superfluous  to  dis- 
tinguish these  categories  from  one  another;  we  might  as 
well  suggest  that  it  is  superfluous  to  distinguish  any  category 
from  any  other,  since  they  must  all  apply  (if  they  are  to  be 
categories  at  all)  to  any  and  every  object.  It  may,  however, 
be  thought  that  the  other  categories  apply  to  objects  in  virtue 
of  distinguishable  aspects  in  the  objects,  while  this  cannot 
be  so  in  the  case  of  the  categories  of  modality,  since  they 
are  concerned  only  with  the  different  relations  of  the  total 
object  to  the  knowing  mind.3 

I  do  not  think  that  this  criticism  is  sound.  We  are  no  doubt 
considering  the  object  in  its  relation  to  the  mind ;  but  Kant's 
whole  point  is  surely  that  the  object  has  different  relations 
to  the  mind  in  virtue  of  different  aspects  in  it  which  we  have 
already  discussed.  Every  object  has  a  form  imposed  by  the 
mind,  and  in  virtue  of  that  form  the  object  is  possible.  Every 
object  has  a  matter  given  to  the  mind  and  synthetiscd  under 
that  form;  and  in  virtue  of  the  matter  so  given  and  synthetised, 
the  object  is  actual.4  Finally  every  object  is  a  combined  whole 
of  form  and  matter,  which  means  that  it  is  a  substance  whose 
accidents  are  causally  determined ;  and  in  virtue  of  this  deter- 
mination the  object  is  necessary. 

1  See  A  231  =  6284. 

2  Compare  B  in.  I  must  confess  that  I  still  find  obscure  Kant's 
statement  in  this  passage  that  necessity  is  simply  existence  which  is 
given  through  possibility  itself.  When  we  infer  the  necessary  existence 
of  the  effect  from  the  cause,  existence  is  given  through  the  formal 
conditions  of  experience,  but  we   must  always  start  from  what  is 
actual. 

3  I  think  this  is  what  Professor  Kemp  Smith  must  mean  when  he 
says  (Commentary »,  p.  393)  that  'one  and  the  same  definition  adequately 
covers  all  three  terms  alike1. 

4  The  matter  need  not  be  given  directly,  it  may  be  inferred  in  virtue 
of  known  causal  laws. 


XLIX  §2]  POSSIBILITY  341 

It  is  tempting  to  suggest1  that  the  synthesis  of  quantity 
gives  us  the  possibility  of  the  object,  the  synthesis  of  quality 
its  actuality,  and  the  synthesis  of  relation  its  necessity.  This 
has  the  great  merit  of  simplicity ;  and  it  makes  an  object  possible 
in  virtue  of  its  conformity  to  the  nature  of  time  and  space,  a 
doctrine  not  without  a  certain  plausibility,  Nevertheless  the 
teaching  of  the  Postulates  is  more  complicated  than  this; 
for  possibility  is  said  to  involve  conformity  with  the  formal 
conditions,  not  of  intuition,  but  of  experience  in  general; 
and  these  formal  conditions  (the  objective  form  of  experience 
in  general)  are  said  to  contain  all  synthesis  demanded  for 
knowledge  of  objects.2  This  is  a  clear  allusion  to  the  categories, 
and  confirms  the  definition  of  possibility  in  the  First  Postulate 
itself. 

We  must,  I  think,  take  Kant  to  mean  that  an  object  is  possible 
so  far  as  it  conforms,  not  only  to  space  and  time,  but  also  to 
the  categories — that  is,  to  all  the  formal  conditions  of  experience. 
An  object  is  actual  so  far  as  it  is  connected  with  the  material 
conditions  of  experience,  that  is,  with  sensation.  The  fact 
that  this  'connexion'  must  be  in  accordance  with  the  categories, 
and  in  particular  with  the  categories  of  relation,  manifestly 
docs  not  mean  that  the  actuality  of  an  object  is  the  same  thing 
as  its  possibility:  possibility  and  actuality  are  still  distinct 
from  one  another.  It  may,  however,  be  maintained  that  there 
is  no  real  difference  between  actuality  and  necessity;  for 
when  we  say  that  an  object  is  necessary,  or  exists  necessarily, 
so  far  as  its  connexion  with  the  actual  is  determined  in  accor- 
dance with  the  universal  conditions  of  experience,  we  are  saying 
no  more  than  has  already  been  said  in  our  definition  of  the 
actual. 

The  reference  to  the  universal  conditions  of  experience 
(in  distinction  from  the  formal  and  material  conditions)  can 
hardly  constitute  the  difference  between  actuality  and  necessity ; 

1  I  did  so  provisionally  in  Chapter  XXXIII  §  5.  There  is  some 
support  for  this  in  A  180  =-  B  223,  if  what  is  called  'the  synthesis  of 
mere  intuition  (that  is,  of  the  form  of  appearance)*  can  be  identified 
with  the  synthesis  of  pure  intuition  (which  I  have  called  above  the 
synthesis  of  quantity).  *  A  220  =  B  267. 


342  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  3 

for  these  universal  conditions  appear  to  be  only  the  formal 
and  material  conditions  taken  together;  and,  as  we  have  seen, 
formal  as  well  as  material  conditions  are  necessary  to  actuality.1 
At  the  most  the  reference  to  universal  conditions  could  indicate 
only  a  difference  of  emphasis;  when  we  consider  an  object 
as  actual,  we  emphasise  the  material  conditions  of  experience, 
and  when  we  consider  it  as  necessary  we  emphasise  the  com- 
bination of  formal  and  material  conditions.  A  difference  of 
emphasis  is  hardly  enough  to  establish  a  distinction  between 
categories. 

This  criticism  appears  to  me  sound  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  it 
fails  to  notice  the  word  'determined*.  An  object  possesses 
actuality,  if,  for  example,  it  is  connected  as  a  cause  with  what 
is  given  as  an  effect.  It  does  not,  however,  possess  necessity, 
except  in  so  far  as  it  is  determined  as  the  effect  of  a  given  cause.2 
Kant's  distinction  is  not  stated  too  clearly,  but  it  is  there 
none  the  less,  and  it  is  brought  out  in  his  discussion  of  the 
Third  Postulate. 

The  categories  of  modality  (like  those  of  quantity,  quality, 
and  relation)  are  interdependent;  but  this  is  no  reason  why 
we  should  regard  them  as  indistinguishable.3 

§  3.  Thought  and  its  Object 

If  Kant  had  confined  himself  to  elucidating  the  meaning 
of  the  categories  of  modality,  his  exposition  would  have  been 
more  simple.  It  would  have  been  clear  that  every  object  must 
be  possible,  actual,  and  necessary,  and  that  the  three  categories 
must  apply  to  every  object  of  experience.  Kant,  however, 

1  I  think  the  reference  to  material  conditions  (not  merely  to  matter) 
itself  indicates  the  presence  of  something  else,  namely  form. 

2  Compare  A  194  =  B  239  and  many  other  passages  in  the  Second 
Analogy. 

3  The  difficult  account  of  the  schemata  of  modality  (in  A  144-5 
=  B  184)  suggests  that  to  know  the  possibility  of  a  thing  we  must 
know  that  it  is  at  some  time  or  other;  to  know  its  actuality  we  must 
know  that  it  is  at  a  definite  time ;  to  know  its  necessity  we  must  know 
its  relation  to  the  whole  of  time  (presumably  by  knowing  the  chain  of 
causes  through  which  it  is  produced). 


XLIX  §  3]  POSSIBILITY  343 

concerns  himself  also  with  a  wider  question — whether  the 
categories  of  modality  (and  consequently  all  the  categories) 
apply  to  objects  beyond  experience. 

Even  on  Kant's  view,  as  I  have  so  often  insisted,  the  pure 
categories  have  a  prima  facie  claim  to  apply  to  objects  beyond 
experience;  for  in  themselves  (as  derived  from  the  nature 
of  understanding)  they  have  no  reference  to  sensuous  intuition. 
On  the  ordinary  rationalist  view  there  is  a  still  wider  claim 
that  by  means  of  concepts  we  can  know  objects  not  given  to 
sensuous  experience.  Such  claims  raise  the  whole  question 
of  the  relation  of  thought  to  its  objects.  They  also  raise  the 
question  whether  we  are  entitled  to  regard  objects  as  possible 
in  some  sense  other  than  that  which  Kant  has  ascribed  to 
real  possibility. 

If  the  claim  to  know  objects  by  means  of  concepts  apart 
from  sensuous  intuition  is  maintained,  then  clearly  such  know- 
ledge must  be  a  priori  knowledge.  On  Kant's  view  a  priori 
knowledge  can  be  justified  only  by  reference  to  the  forms 
or  conditions  of  experience,  and  in  particular  by  reference 
to  the  forms  or  conditions  of  sensuous  intuition ;  but  in  con- 
nexion with  the  First  Postulate  he  takes  it  upon  himself  to 
examine  the  main  types  of  concept,  and  to  consider  whether 
by  themselves  they  can  give  us  knowledge  of  possible  objects 
and  so  possess  objective  reality.  This  is  a  source  of  complication 
in  his  exposition. 

These  complications  we  shall  discuss  in  due  course.  At 
present  we  must  keep  it  clear  in  our  own  minds  that  for  Kant, 
as  I  have  said,  possibility  is  no  wider  than  actuality,  and  actuality 
is  no  wider  than  necessity.  The  latter  contention  seems  to 
me  to  be  established  beyond  a  doubt  by  the  doctrine  of  the 
Analogies,  which  alone  is  concerned  with  existence.  It  may  be 
suggested  that  the  former  contention  is  more  doubtful;  for 
if  we  can  think  an  object  without  knowing  it — and  Kant 
habitually  makes  this  distinction — then  it  would  seem  that 
on  his  theory  the  sphere  of  possible  objects  must  be  wider 
than  that  of  actual  objects. 

Such  a  suggestion  would  be  erroneous:  we  cannot  make 


344  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  3 

an  object  possible  by  mere  thinking.  I  can  think  what  I  will, 
so  long  as  I  do  not  contradict  myself;  but  in  such  a  case  although 
the  thought  is  a  (logically)  possible  thought,  it  does  not  follow 
that  a  corresponding  object  is  (really)  possible.1  Such  a  thought 
or  conception  is  a  problematic  judgement;  and  for  Kant  a 
problematic  judgement  is  one  in  which  affirmation  or  denial 
is  taken  as  possible  (optional):2  it  is  accompanied  by  con- 
sciousness of  the  mere  possibility  of  the  judgement.3  For  the 
real  possibility  of  the  object  (or  the  objective  validity  of  the 
thought)  more  is  required  than  consistent  thinking.4  The 
fact  that  we  can  think  what  we  do  not  know  does  not  extend 
the  range  of  possible  objects  beyond  that  of  actual  objects. 

It  may  be  objected  that  a  thinking  or  conceiving  thus  divorced 
from  the  affirmation  of  reality  exists  only  by  a  kind  of  abstraction 
from  our  whole  experience  of  the  actual  or  the  real.  I  do  not 
see  why  Kant  should  deny  this :  it  is  his  central  doctrine  that 
our  concepts  are  empty  apart  from  reference  to  the  matter 
of  intuition.  Nevertheless  in  conception  the  matter  given 
to  sense  can  be  combined  in  ways  which  we  do  not  know 
to  be  possible,  and  we  must  still  ask  whether  such  a  concept 
refers  to  a  possible  object.  We  can  also  entertain  a  concept 
without  affirming  its  objective  reality — this  is  involved  in 
what  is  called  'supposing'  and  even  in  the  making  of  hypotheses. 
Such  supposing  no  doubt  cannot  occur  independently  of 
experience  of  the  actual,  but  Kant  nowhere  asserts  that  it  can. 

Kant  is  surely  right  in  saying  that  although  we  can  conceive 
the  existence  of  God  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  we  are 
not  thereby  entitled  to  assert  straight  away  that  God's  existence 
is  either  possible  or  actual  or  necessary,  and  that  the  soul  is 
possibly  or  actually  or  necessarily  immortal.  It  may  be  held 
that  these  are  not  instances  of  genuine  conceiving  or  thinking; 
but  once  we  begin  to  distinguish  genuine  thinking  from  what 

1  B  XXVI  n.  2  A  74  -  B  100. 

3  Log.  §  30  (IX  108-9).  Compare  also  A  286-7    -  B  343,  where  it  is 
said  that  the  concept  of  a  noumcnon  (as  the  object  of  a  non-sensuous 
intuition)  is  problematic,  that  is,  is  the  idea  of  a  tiling  of  which  we 
can  neither  say  that  it  is  posbib'e  nor  that  it  is  impossible. 

4  A  220  -  B  268. 


XLIX  §  4]  POSSIBILITY  345 

only  seems  to  be  thinking,  we  have  to  face  a  scries  of  difficulties 
which,  so  far  as  I  know,  have  never  been  satisfactorily  solved. 
Whether  Kant  is  using  the  most  suitable  terminology  or  not 
is  a  matter  of  minor  importance.  He  is  calling  attention  to  a 
real  problem,  and  I  do  not  think  we  can  put  his  doctrine 
out  of  court  on  the  ground  that  if  we  know  a  thing  to  be  possible, 
we  know  it  to  be  actual  and  necessary. 

§  4.  The  First  Postulate 

The  First  Postulate  insists  that  if  things  are  to  be  possible, 
the  concept  of  these  things  must  agree  with  the  formal  conditions 
of  an  experience  in  general;1  in  other  words,  the  concept 
must  agree  with  the  forms  of  intuition  (space  and  time)  and 
with  the  unity  of  apperception. 

It  should  be  noted  that  Kant  is  dealing  with  the  possibility 
of  things.  Here  the  thing  is  said  to  be  possible  if  its  concept 
agrees  with  the  formal  conditions  of  experience,  whereas 
it  was  implied  in  the  original  formula  that  the  possible  thing 
itself  must  agree  with  the  formal  conditions  of  experience. 
In  this  there  is  no  contradiction ;  for  if  the  concept  of  a  thing 
agrees  with  the  formal  conditions  of  experience,  the  thing 
conceived  must  agree  with  the  formal  conditions  of  experience. 
When  Kant  attributes  this  agreement  to  the  concept,  he  means 
that  what  is  conceived  (the  content  of  the  concept)  must  agree 
with  the  formal  conditions  of  experience;  but  his  language 
indicates  that,  apart  from  such  agreement,  what  is  conceived 
might  be,  not  a  thing,  but  a  mere  phantom  of  the  mind. 

Strictly  speaking,  the  thing  is  possible,  while  the  concept 
of  a  possible  thing  is  said  to  have  objective  reality  or  (in  the 
case  of  a  priori  concepts)  transcendental  truth.2  Such  is  Kant's 

1  A  220  =  B  267.  Compare  A  234  =  B  286. 

2  A  220  .=  B  268  and  A  221-2       B  269.  A  concept  has  objective 
reality  (or  validity),  if  it  refers  to  a  possible  object  of  experience.  It 
has  no  objective  reality,  if  it  refers  to  a  mere  ' Hirngespmst*  or  phantom 
of  the  mind.  When  Kant  says  that  it  has  transcendental  truth,  he  is 
thinking  only  of  concepts  whose  objects  are  known  a  priori  to  be 
possible,  as  is  manifest  from  the  context.  An  empirical  concept  can 
have  objective  reality,  but  not  transcendental  truth :  an  a  priori  concept 
can  have  both,  and  if  it  has  one,  it  has  the  other. 


346  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  5 

exact  terminology,  to  which  he  adheres  when  he  is  being 
careful ;  but  at  times1  he  speaks  of  the  possibility  of  a  concept, 
implying  that  the  concept  of  a  possible  object  is  itself  a  possible 
concept. 

This  more  careless  usage  has  a  real  disadvantage,  because 
for  Kant  the  possibility  of  a  concept  is  mere  logical  possibility, 
and  a  concept  is  logically  possible,  if  it  is  consistent  with 
itself  (whether  its  object  is  a  possible  object  or  not).2  Never- 
theless the  usage  is  natural  enough.  It  indicates  no  change 
of  doctrine  or  confusion  of  thought ;  and  the  intelligent  reader, 
if  he  were  not  examining  Kant  with  great  care,  would  probably 
fail  to  notice  the  difference  in  terminology,  and  would  make 
the  necessary  adjustments  unconsciously.3 

§  5.  Possibility  in  Relation  to  Different  Types  of  Concept 

Kant  recognises  four  types  of  concept.4  There  are  empirical 
concepts,  pure  concepts,5  factitious  concepts,  and  mathematical 

1  E.g.  in  A  222  —  B  269.  In  B  XXVI  n.  Kant  equates  the  real  (as 
opposed  to  the  logical)  possibility  of  a  concept  with  its  objective 
validity.  2  Compare  B  XXVI  n. 

3  It  is  because  of  this  carelessness  of  terminology  that  Professor 
Adickes  in  his  edition  charges  Kant  with  inconsistencies  which  can  be 
explained   only  by   an   application  of  the   patchwork  theory.   The 
elaborate  structure  which  he  erects  on  this  frail  foundation — even 
Professor  Kemp  Smith  (Commentary,  p.  397)  seems  to  ha\  e  some  mild 
qualms  about  it — is  an  admirable  illustration  of  the  fantastic  lengths  to 
which  the  patchwork  theory  has  been  carried. 

Adickes'  services  to  Kantian  studies  have  been  so  great  that  one 
wishes  to  avoid  harsh  judgements  about  him  of  the  type  which  he  too 
often  passed  on  other  people.  I  think  it  can  be  said  that  he  grew 
wiser  as  he  grew  older,  though  he  certainly  never  lost  the  defects  of 
his  qualities.  But  one  is  sometimes  tempted  to  say  of  his  edition  of  the 
Kntik  (and  of  his  other  early  works)  what  he  himself  says  about 
Simmers  Dissertation  on  the  Monadologia  Physica  (in  Kant  als 
Naturforscher,  p.  165  n.):  'He  repeatedly  charges  Kant  with  obscurity, 
but  the  alleged  obscurities  have  first  of  all  been  introduced  by 
himself. 

4  See  A  727  =  B  755  ff.  and  Log.  §§  3-5,  and  compare  Chapter  IX  §5. 
6  Pure  concepts  in  the  strictest  sense  are  concepts  (or  categories)  of 

the  understanding — we  may  for  the  present  purpose  ignore  the  Ideas 
of  Reason. 


XLIX  §  5]  POSSIBILITY  347 

concepts.1  It  is  necessary  to  consider  Kant's  theory  of  possibility 
in  regard  to  all  these  types  of  concept.  We  must  remember 
that  for  Kant  to  conceive  an  object  is  to  hold  together  or 
synthetise  different  elements,  and  (since  to  conceive  involves 
a  consciousness,  clear  or  obscure,  that  we  are  conceiving)  a 
concept  is  always  a  concept,  not  only  of  the  object,  but  also 
of  the  synthesis  by  which  the  different  elements  in  the  object 
are  held  together.2 

I.  With  the  possibility  of  objects  of  empirical  concepts 
Kant  is  not  really  concerned.3  Empirical  concepts  are  general- 
isations from  experience,  and  we  know  that  their  objects  are 
possible  only  because  we  know  that  they  are  actual.4  As  general- 
isations from  experience,  empirical  concepts  must  inevitably 
conform  to  the  formal  conditions  of  the  experience  from 
which  they  are  derived ;  but  if  we  know  that  there  are  actual 
dogs  in  the  world,  we  know  that  dogs  are  possible  without 
enquiring  into  the  relation  between  the  concept  of  dog  and 
the  formal  conditions  of  experience;  and  we  cannot  know 
that  dogs  are  possible,  except  by  knowing  that  they  are  actual.6 

1  Mathematical  concepts  are  a  kind  of  factitious  concept,  but  their 
objects  can  be  constructed  a  priori  in  pure  intuition,  and  they  are  often 
regarded  as  pure  concepts,  although  not  as  pure  concepts  of  the 
understanding  (in  the  strict  sense). 

2  Compare  A  220  =  B  267.  The  synthesis  thought  in  a  non -factitious 
concept  belongs  to  experience,  either  as  borrowed  from  experience 
(empirical  concepts)  or  as  grounded  on  the  form  of  experience  (pure 
concepts).  The  form  of  experience  is  said  to  contain  every  synthesis 
necessary  for  knowing  an  object. 

3  Nevertheless  I  take  it,  when  we  say  that  they  are  possible,  we 
mean  that  they  are  possible  in  the  sense  explained  by  the  First 
Postulate. 

4  A  223  --  B  270.  Compare  A  220  =  B  267.  Both  of  these  passages 
show  that  Kant's  concern  is  with  the  possibility  of  things  known 
through  a  priori  concepts. 

5  Compare  A  451  =  B  479,  where  Kant  asserts  that  if  we  did  not 
know  by  experience  that  change  is  actual,  we  could  never  know  a  priori 
that  it  was  possible. 

It  may  be  objected  that  we  can  know  a  dog  to  be  possible  in  the 
sense  of  the  First  Postulate,  because  it  is  conceived  as  a  substance  and 
so  on.  Kant  seems  to  me  to  deny  this,  and  to  be  right  in  denying  it.  A 
dog,  simply  so  far  as  it  is  a  substance,  must  be  a  possible  object,  if  a 


348  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  5 

What  Kant  is  concerned  with  is  the  possibility  of  objects 
known  independently  of  experience  and  therefore  through 
a  priori  concepts;  and  his  doctrine  is  that  we  cannot  know 
such  objects  to  be  possible  merely  by  an  examination  of  the 
concepts.  We  must  always  consider  whether  the  concept 
agrees  with  or  expresses  the  formal  conditions  of  experience.1 

Under  a  priori  concepts  Kant  seems  here  to  include  not 
only  the  categories  (pure  concepts  in  the  strictest  sense)  and 
mathematical  concepts  (pure  concepts  in  a  looser  sense), 
but  also  factitious  concepts.  At  any  rate  he  considers  the 
problem  of  possibility  in  relation  to  all  three. 

II.  As  regards  the  categories,  he  points  out  that  the  mere 
possession  of  the  concepts  of  substance,  causality,  and  inter- 
action does  not  by  itself  prove  that  there  are  possible  things 
to  which  these  concepts  apply.2  We  know  the  objective  reality 
or  transcendental  truth  of  such  concepts,  or  in  other  words 
we  know  that  their  objects  are  possible,  only  because  we 
know  that  they  express  a  priori  the  necessary  relations  of  sense- 
perceptions  in  every  experience.  We  know  this  independently 
of  experience  (although  not  of  course  before  experience); 
but  we  do  not  know  it  independently  of  all  relation  to  the 
form  of  experience  in  general  and  to  the  synthetic  unity  in 
which  alone  objects  can  be  empirically  known.3  That  is  to  say, 
we  know  that  if  there  is  any  experience  at  all,  it  must  be  ex- 
perience of  such  objects;  for  if  we  grant  that  experience  is 
always  experience  of  objects  which  are  in  one  time  and  space, 
and  which  must  be  conceived  by  one  and  the  same  mind, 
then  we  have  proved  (or  so  Kant  believes)  that  the  objects 

substance  is  a  possible  object;  but  what  we  are  concerned  with  is  the 
possibility,  not  of  substances  in  general,  but  of  that  special  kind  of 
substance  which  is  known  as  a  dog.  Apait  from  experience  of  dogs 
(or  of  their  causes  or  effects),  we  could  never  know  that  a  dog  was  a 
possible  object. 

1  A  223  -  B  270-1.  I  have  retained  the  original  formula  with  the 
addition  'or  expresses',  since  Kant  regards  the  categories  as  being 
themselves  formal  and  objective  conditions  of  an  experience  in  general. 
The  categories  may  be  said  to  express,  as  well  as  to  agtee  with,  such 
conditions.  2  A  221  —  B  268-9.  3  A  222  —  B  269. 


XLIX  §  5]  POSSIBILITY  349 

must  be  permanent  substances  which  possess  changing  acci- 
dents and  interact  causally  with  one  another.  Apart  from 
relation  to  the  form  of  experience,  that  is,  to  time  and  space 
and  the  unity  of  apperception,  we  could  have  no  such  know- 
ledge. The-  same  principle  of  course  holds  for  the  categories 
of  quantity  and  quality.1 

III.  As  regards  factitious  concepts,  there  would  seem  to 
be  two  main  types — if  we  exclude  mathematical  concepts — 
although  Kant  does  not  himself  say  so.  All  factitious  concepts 
are  in  a  sense  independent  of  experience ;  for  the  combination 
of  the  elements  thought  in  them  is  an  arbitrary  product  of 
the  mind  and  is  not  found  in  experience  itself.  But  in  some 
factitious  concepts  the  elements  combined  are  primarily 
empirical,  as  when  we  talk  of  a  ship's  clock  (Kant's  own  rather 
surprising  example2)  or  of  chimaeras  and  centaurs.  Kant  seems 
here  to  have  in  view  mainly  the  factitious  concepts  which  we  make 
by  combining  elements  that  are  primarily  a  pi  iori,  and  which 
therefore  have  some  show  of  being  a  priori  concepts  themselves  .3 

Once  \ve  have  pure  concepts  such  as  substance,  force,4 
and  interaction,  \\e  can  use  the  stuff  given  to  us  in  sense- 
perception  for  the  purpose  of  making  new  concepts;  but  the 
objects  so  conceived  are  mere  phantoms  of  the  brain,5  unless 
the  combination  of  their  elements  is  found  in  actual  experience.6 
The  examples  given  are  the  concept  of  a  substance  which  is 
permanent  in  space  without  filling  space,7  the  concept  of  a 

1  Note  also  that  we  cannot  know  the  objects  thought  in  the  categories 
to  be  possible  apart  from  intuition,  or  even  apart  from  outer  intuition ; 
see  B  288  and  B  291.  a  A  729  =  B  757. 

3  I  do  not  mean  to  assert  that  this  distinction  could  be  philo- 
sophically maintained,  but  only  that  it  seems  to  be  at  the  back  of 
Kant's  mind.  The  same  tendency  is  present  in  A  96.  The  examples 
there  given  were  'spirit'  and  'God*. 

4  This    is    connected    with    causality    (as    a    'predicable').     See 
A  82  =  B  1 08.  5  'Hirngespinste.' 

6  A  222  =  B  269.  Compare  also  A  729  =  B  757 :  'For  if  the  concept 
depends  on  empirical  conditions  (for  example,  a  ship's  clock),  the 
object  and  its  possibility  is  not  yet  given  through  this  arbitrary  concept.1 

7  This  was  apparently  something  invented  as  intermediate  between 
matter  and  mind. 


350  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  5 

power1  of  foreseeing  the  future  (and  not  merely  predicting 
it  by  means  of  inference),  and  the  concept  of  spiritual  inter- 
action (or  some  form  of  telepathy).  Such  concepts,  in  spite 
of  the  a  priori  character  of  their  elements,  cannot  be  shown, 
like  the  categories,  to  have  possible  objects  on  the  ground 
that  they  express  necessary  conditions  of  experience.  The 
possibility  of  objects  of  this  kind  must  either  be  shown  by 
the  actual  existence  of  these  objects  in  experience  or  it  cannot 
be  shown  at  all.  Kant  believes  that  in  these  particular  cases 
it  cannot  be  shown  at  all,  and  the  concepts  are  mere  arbitrary 
combinations  of  thought  with  no  claim  to  objective  reality.2 

We  may  sum  up  Kant's  position  with  regard  to  factitious 
concepts  by  saying  that  (whatever  be  the  character  of  the 
elements  which  are  arbitrarily  combined  in  them)  they  are  to 
be  treated  as  empirical  concepts,  and  the  possibility  of  their 
objects  can  be  proved  only  by  showing  that  such  objects  are 
experienced  (directly  or  indirectly).  Possibility  in  such  cases 
is  known  only  as  an  inference  from  actuality. 

IV.  The  remaining  case  is  the  case  of  mathematical  con- 
cepts, which  are  sometimes  taken  to  be  a  special  class  of  facti- 
tious concepts.  They  are  arbitrary  constructions  of  the  mind 
and  are  independent  of  experience,  but  they  have  the  special 

1  Kant  calls  it  a  'ground-force*  (Grundkraft),  which  is  more  than  a 
mere  'power*  though  less  than  an  'action*. 

2  Kant  adds,  somewhat  obscurely :  'As  regards  reality,  it  is  obviously 
out  of  the  question  to  think  this  in  concrete  without  calling  experience 
to  our  aid :  for  reality  is  connected  only  with  sensation,  the  matter  of 
experience,    and    does   not   concern   the   form   of   relations    .    .    .' 
(A  223  =  B  270).  He  may  mean  that  the  factitious  concepts  with  which 
he  has  dealt  are  concerned  with  the  form  of  relation — substances, 
powers,  interactions.  Factitious  concepts  which  are  more  concrete  in 
that  they  are  concerned  with  reality  or  sensation — such  as  concepts 
of  centaurs  and  chimaeras — need  not  be  discussed;  for  it  is  obvious 
in  their  case  that  the  mere  possession  of  the  concept  does  not  show 
the  thing  to  be  possible  in  abstraction  from  actual  experience.  Or  he 
may,  and  I  think  he  does,  mean  that  even  in  the  case  of  the  concepts 
discussed,  since  their  possibility  must  be  shown  a  posteriori,  an  appeal 
to  reality  is  involved,  and  this  must  involve  sensation  and  not  a  mere 
play  of  invented  concepts. 


XLIX  §  5]  POSSIBILITY  351 

characteristic  that  they  can — in  Kant's  terminology — be 
constructed  a  priori,  or  in  other  words  the  intuition  corre- 
sponding to  them  can  be  'exhibited*  a  priori}-  For  this  reason 
they  are  also  described  as  a  kind  of  pure  concept. 

There  is  some  plausibility  in  the  view  that  by  simple  in- 
spection of  a  mathematical  concept  we  can  tell  that  its  object 
is  possible.2  Even  here,  however,  we  must  distinguish  between 
the  logical  possibility  of  the  concept,  which  (since  it  depends 
only  on  the  absence  of  self-contradiction)  can  be  known  from 
the  concept  itself,  and  the  real  possibility  of  the  object,  which 
cannot  be  so  known.  Thus  the  concept  of  a  figure  enclosed 
by  two  straight  lines  is  logically  possible ;  for  there  is  no  logical 
contradiction  between  the  concept  of  a  figure  and  the  concept 
of  two  straight  lines  and  their  combination.3  But  there  is  no 
corresponding  object  possible,  for  such  a  figure  cannot  be 
constructed  in  space.4 

Even  if  we  take  a  concept  like  that  of  triangle,  we  do  not 
know  that  its  object  is  possible  merely  from  the  fact  that  it 
can  be  constructed  a  priori  in  space.  Such  a  construction 
gives  us,  not  an  object  in  the  strict  sense  (for  that  must  always 
have  an  empirical  matter),  but  merely  the  form  of  an  object.6 
Such  a  pseudo-object  might  be  a  mere  product  of  the  imagina- 
tion, and  we  must  have  other  grounds  for  saying  a  priori 
that  objects  such  as  triangles  are  possible  objects  of  experience. 
Our  real  ground  for  asserting  a  priori  the  possibility  of  triangles 
is  that  space  is  a  formal  a  priori  condition  of  outer  experience, 
and  that  the  same  figurative6  synthesis  whereby  we  construct 
a  triangle  a  priori  in  imagination  is  therefore  identical  with  the 

1  A  713  =  B  741.  Compare  A  719  =  B  747  and  also  Log.  Eml.  Ill 
and  §  1 02  (IX  23  and  141).  We  can  also  say  that  their  object  can  be 
*  exhibited',  or  'constructed'  a  priori  in  intuition. 

2  A  223  =  B  271.  3  A  220  =  B  268. 

4  On  the  supposition  that  space  is  Euclidean. 

5  A  22 3  =  -  6271.  The  same  doctrine  is  expressed  in  B  147;  compare 
A  156  -  B  195. 

6  lbildende.y  This  is  the  synthesis  speciosa  (or  figurative  synthesis) 
opposed  to  the  synthesis  intellectual!*  of  the  concept  or  judgement 
in  B  151. 


352  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  5 

synthesis  exercised  in  the  apprehension  of  appearances  for 
the  purpose  of  making,  not  a  mathematical,  but  an  empirical, 
concept  of  triangle.1 

The  same  principle  holds  for  the  possibility  of  continuous 
quantities  and  indeed  for  quantities  in  general.  The  concepts 
of  such  quantities  are  known  to  have  objective  reality,  not  from 
the  character  of  the  concepts  in  themselves,  but  because 
they  express  the  formal  conditions  of  experience  as  found 
in  time  and  space. 

Kant  is  surely  right  in  saying  that  if  we  take  Euclidean 
space  to  be  a  necessary  condition  of  human  experience,  we 
know  a  priori  that  triangles,  squares,  circles,  and  hyperboloids 
are  possible  objects  of  experience.  This  knowledge  is  inde- 
pendent of  our  having  actually  seen  or  touched  figures  of  this 
kind.  It  rests  only  on  our  knowledge  of  space  and  our  know- 
ledge that  space  is  a  condition  of  experience.2 

If  there  is  any  doubt  on  this  matter,  it  must  be  based  on 
the  view  that  to  know  the  possibility  even  of  a  mathematical 
figure,  we  must  know,  not  only  that  it  is  compatible  with 
the  nature  of  space,  but  also  that  it  is  in  accordance  with 
the  causal  laws  of  experience.  These  laws  might  be  such 
that  nature  never  could  produce  hyperboloids  (or  approxi- 
mations to  them);  and  we  know  that  it  can  do  so  only  if  we 
have  actually  experienced  hyperboloids,  or  if  wre  have  experi- 
enced objects  which  we  know  to  be  connected  with  hyperboloids 

1  This  is  simply  a  statement  of  Kant's  central  doctrine  that  every 
empirical  synthesis  of  apprehension  (which  combines  the  matter  of 
intuition)  is  also  an  a  priori  synthesis  of  imagination  (which  combines 
the  form  of  intuition).  I  think  it  would  be  more  exact  to  say  that  the 
a  priori  synthesis  is  present  in  the  empirical  synthesis  than  to  say  that 
it  is  identical  with  it. 

2  If  Euclidean  space  is  not  a  necessary  condition  of  experience,  Kant's 
doitimc  must  be  modified;  but  even  so,  if  space-time  is  a  necessary 
condition  of  experience,  we  can  still  say  a  priori  that  some  concepts 
refer  to  possible  objects  of  experience  and  others  do  not. 

It  may  be  objected  that  in  this  sense  we  can  equally  know  a  piiori 
that  chimaeras  are  possible  objects.  This  is,  however,  true  only  if  we 
take  'chimaera'  to  mean  a  body  of  a  certain  shape.  It  is  not  true,  if  we 
take  'chimaera'  to  mean  a  living  organism. 


XLIX  §  5]  POSSIBILITY  353 

either  as  effects  or  as  causes.  In  such  a  case  we  should  know 
hyperboloids  to  be  not  only  possible,  but  also  actual  and 
even  (in  the  last  case)  necessary. 

There  is,  I  think,  something  to  be  said  for  this  view,  and 
it  has  the  advantage  of  making  the  possible  no  wider  than  the 
actual  and  necessary.  Perhaps  Kant  would  hold  that  if  we 
know  a  hypcrboloid  to  be  compatible  with  the  nature  of  space, 
we  know  that  we  could  ourselves  construct  an  actual  hyper- 
boloid,  and  therefore  know  that  it  is  a  possible  object  of  experi- 
ence.1 The  whole  criticism,  however,  suggests  that  we  should 
concern  ourselves  with  the  possibility,  not  of  pure  mathematical 
figures  (which  are  only  pseudo-objects),  but  of  the  imperfect 
approximations  to  them  in  nature ;  and  in  that  case  the  concepts 
in  question  are  empirical.2 

Kant's  doctrine  is  relatively  simple  and,  I  think,  sound.  He 
is  not  offering  us  an  elaborate  analysis  of  the  meaning  of  real 
possibility,  but  only  asking  how  far  we  can  have  a  priori  know- 
ledge of  the  possibility  of  objects.  He  declares  it  futile  to 
imagine  that  because  we  can  invent  concepts  which  are  not 
self-contradictory,  therefore  objects  corresponding  to  these  con- 
cepts must  be  possible.  We  can  say  that  a  concept  must  have 
possible  objects  only  if  the  concept  expresses  the  necessary 
conditions  of  experience,  either  as  a  category  or  as  a  mathe- 
matical concept ;  in  the  case  of  all  other  concepts  we  can  know 
their  objects  to  be  possible  only  if  we  know  them  to  be  actual. 
Since  the  categories  have  sense  and  significance  only  by  refer- 
ence to  space  and  time,  and  since  all  mathematical  concepts 
depend  on  pure  intuitions  of  space  and  time,  our  a  priori 
knowledge  of  the  possibility  of  objects  depends  on  the  fact 
that  space  and  time  are  conditions  of  experience,  and  the 
Leibnizian  discussions  in  regard  to  possible  worlds  other  than 
the  world  we  know  are  nothing  but  a  waste  of  breath. 

Time  and  space  are  separable  from  empirical  intuition 
only  by  an  act  of  abstraction  or  elimination;  and  in  a  general 
remark  added  in  the  second  edition3  Kant  insists,  not  only 

1  The  difficulty  is  that  in  that  case  the  possible  seems  to  be  wider  than 
the  actual.  2  Compare  A  239-40  =  B  299.  3  B  288  ff. 

VOL.  II  M 


354  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  6 

that  we  cannot  comprehend  the  possibility  of  a  thing  by  means 
of  the  mere  category  (apart  from  the  reference  to  conditions 
of  experience),  but  also  that  we  require  to  have  at  hand  an 
intuition,  and  indeed  an  outer  intuition.  I  take  this  intuition 
to  be  empirical.1  The  reference  to  outer  intuition  is  important 
for  the  Refutation  of  Idealism. 

§  6.  The  Possibility  of  Experience 

I  confess  I  should  have  liked  Kant  to  explain  also  in  this 
connexion  how  the  phrase  'possible  experience '  is  related  to 
the  present  account  of  possibility.  Can  we  say  that  experience 
(like  an  object)  is  possible  because  it  agrees  with  the  formal 
conditions  of  experience  ?  Is  the  possibility  ascribed  to  experi- 
ence of  the  same  nature  as  the  possibility  ascribed  to  objects  ? 

It  may  be  thought  that  the  possibility  of  experience  must 
be  something  different  from  the  possibility  ascribed  to  objects 
within  experience.  The  subject  is  a  difficult  one,  but  I  suggest 
that  the  close  connexion  between  experience  and  its  object 
makes  it  almost  impossible  to  uphold  this  view  of  Kant's 
doctrine.  We  can  know  an  experience  to  be  possible  only  if 
it  conforms  to  the  formal  conditions  of  experience  which  our 
argument  professes  to  have  established. 

The  difficulty  of  this  is  that  it  appears  to  involve  us  in  a 
vicious  circle.  Are  we  to  maintain  that  the  categories  must 
apply  to  objects  because  they  express  the  conditions  of  a 
possible  experience,  and  then  to  maintain  that  experience  is 
possible  because  it  (or  its  concept)  is  in  conformity  with  the 
categories  ? 

The  argument  would  be  a  vicious  circle,  if  Kant  had  merely 
asserted  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  categories  are  assumed 
in  experience,  and  are  therefore  conditions  of  experience, 
and  therefore  experience  is  possible  only  through  conformity 
to  them.  But  this,  as  I  have  pointed  out  already,2  is  not  his 

1  Compare  A  156  =  B  195,  where  the  idea  of  space  and  time  is  said 
to  be  a  mere  schema  which  would  have  no  meaning,  unless  the  repro- 
ductive imagination  called  up  objects  of  experience. 

8  Compare  Chapter  XXX  §  5,  and  also  Chapters  XXXVI  §  4  and 
XLV§7- 


XLIX  §  6]  POSSIBILITY  355 

argument  at  all.  What  Kant  has  maintained  is  that  if  we  analyse 
experience  into  its  elements,  we  can  understand  that  it  must 
involve  both  intuition  and  thought.  We  can  understand  that 
space  and  time  are  the  necessary  forms  (or  conditions)  of 
intuition,  not  only  because  we  can  have  no  intuition  apart 
from  them,  but  also  because  we  have  a  priori  knowledge 
of  their  own  nature  when  we  eliminate  the  element  of  empirical 
intuition.  We  can  also  understand  that  the  thought  involved 
in  experience  must  have  unity  (the  unity  of  apperception), 
and  that  this  unity  must  manifest  itself  in  certain  necessary 
forms  (the  forms  of  thought).  Starting  from  these  ultimate 
principles,  he  claims  to  have  proved  that  the  categories  express 
the  necessary  conditions  of  experience  and  must  apply  to  any 
and  every  object  of  experience.1 

What  Kant  claims  in  the  last  resort  is  that  experience  is 
possible  only  if  it  is  experience  by  one  thinking  mind  of  objects 
given  to  intuition  in  one  time  and  space:  all  the  rest  of  his 
doctrine  is  supposed  to  be  derived  from  this.  Such  a  view  of 
experience,  however  supported  by  insight  into  the  necessary 
character  of  space  and  time  and  discursive  thinking,  is  taken 
to  be  an  ultimate  fact  beyond  which  it  is  impossible  for  us 
to  go.2  To  talk  of  other  kinds  of  possible  experience  is  empty 
and  meaningless  speculation.  Other  forms  of  intuition  and 
thought  cannot  be  conceived  by  us;  and  even  if  they  could 
be  conceived,  they  would  not  belong  to  our  experience  as  the 
only  kind  of  knowledge  in  which  objects  are  given  to  us.3 
We  have  to  do  only  with  the  synthesis  by  human  thought  and 
imagination  of  the  matter  given  to  us  under  the  forms  of  space 
and  time.  The  a  priori  knowledge  which  we  possess  has  no 
claim,  on  Kant's  view,  to  be  knowledge  of  ultimate  reality:  it 
is  all  relative  to  the  human  experience  we  actually  enjoy.  By 
analysis  of  that  experience  we  can  discover  certain  conditions 
which  have  a  kind  of  intelligible  necessity  in  themselves  and 

1  The  pure  categories  are  derived  from  the  forms  of  thought,  and 
their  schemata  are  derived  from  the  necessity  of  synthetismg  the  given 
manifold  in  one  space  and  time. 

2  B  145-6.  3  A  230  =  B  283.  Compare  B  139. 


356  THE  POSTULATES  [XLIX  §  6 

in  relation  to  experience  in  general.  For  this  reason  we  regard 
them  as  conditions  of  experience,  and  we  claim  that  we  know 
experience  to  be  possible  if  it  conforms  to  these  conditions. 
An  experience  which  does  not  conform  to  these  conditions 
we  cannot  conceive  at  all,  and  still  less  can  we  know  it  to  be 
possible.  From  these  ultimate  conditions  the  categories  are 
supposed  to  be  derived;  and  it  is  not  a  vicious  argument  to 
assert  that  therefore  the  categories  are  objectively  valid  as 
expressing  necessary  conditions  of  a  possible  experience, 
and  experience  itself  is  possible  only  if  it  is  in  conformity 
with  them. 


CHAPTER     L 
ACTUALITY  AND   NECESSITY 

§  i.  The  Second  Postulate 

The  Second  Postulate  affirms  that  what  is  connected  with 
the  material  conditions  of  experience  (namely  sensation)  is 
actual.  This  means  that  for  knowledge  of  the  actuality1  of 
things,  we  must  have  sense-perception,  here  explained  to 
be  sensation  of  which  one  is  conscious.2  To  say  this  is  not 
to  say  that  we  rmist  have,  or  even  that  we  must  have  had, 
an  immediate  sense-perception  of  the  thing  which  we  affirm 
to  be  actual.  We  can  say  that  a  thing  is  actual,  if  it  is  connected 
with  any  actual  sense-perception  in  accordance  with  the 
Analogies.  The  back  of  the  house  which  we  do  not  see  is  as 
actual  as  the  front  of  the  house  which  we  do  see,  and  so  are 
the  unseen  atoms  of  which  it  is  composed.  The  example  Kant 
himself  gives3  is  a  magnetic  matter  penetrating  all  bodies; 
and  if  modern  science  is  right  in  asserting  that  protons  and 
electrons  arc  necessary  to  explain  the  phenomena  perceived  in 
the  laboratory,  then  we  may  say  that  on  Kant's  principles  such 
protons  and  electrons  exist.  They  exist  just  as  much  as  the  houses 
and  trees  which  we  see,  and  they  could  be  perceived  if  our 
senses  were  finer.  The  crudity  of  our  senses  is  not  to  be  taken 
as  determining  the  form  of  a  possible  experience  in  general.4 

1  lWirkluhkeit.'  'Existence',  it  will  be  remembered,  is  the  term 
used  for  the  being  in  lime  of  substances  and  their  accidents,  while 
'reality'  is  the  term  used  for  the  qualitative  matter  given  in  sensation. 
I  do  not  think  there  is  any  essential  difference  between  existence  and 
actuality — Kant  uses  the  two  terms  as  equivalent  even  in  the  present 
passage — but  reality,  although  necessary  to  existence,  is  not  identical 
with  it.  There  are  degrees  of  reality,  but  there  are  no  degrees  of 
existence ;  for  a  thing  either  exists  or  does  not  exist. 

2  A  225  =  B  272.   Compare  A  120,  B  147,  and  B  160;  also  A  116, 
6207,  and  A  374.  Sensation  must  be  'taken  up*  into  consciousness, 
or  be  'apprehended',  in  order  to  be  sense-perception. 

3  See  A  226  —  B  273,  and  compare  A  492-3  =  B  521. 

4  This  accords  with  Kant's  description  of  the  possible,  in  which 
no  reference  is  made  to  the  limitations  of  our  organs  of  sense. 


358  THE  POSTULATES  [L  §  i 

Kant  does  not  restrict  existence  to  the  present,  and  he 
believes  that  the  cause  exists  jus't  as  much  as  the  effect.  Hence 
from  the  present  existence  of  fossils  we  are  entitled  to  affirm 
the  past  existence  of  animals  now  extinct.  Whether  Kant 
believes  we  can  know  existence  in  the  future  is  perhaps  more 
doubtful.  He  says  that  we  can  know  things  before  perceiving 
them,  and  therefore  we  can  know  them  comparatively  a  priori* 
This  may  be  compared  with  another  statement2  that  if  we 
undermine  our  house,  we  can  know  a  priori,  although  not 
entirely  a  priori,  that  it  will  fall  in.  In  the  present  passage, 
however,  he  may  be  speaking  only  about  things  at  present 
existing  which  we  have  not  yet  perceived. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  this  doctrine  applies  only 
to  the  world  of  appearances,  and  not  to  things-in-themselves, 
with  reference  to  which  'existence'  in  time  has  no  meaning. 
By  sense-perception  and  thought  we  have  before  us  a  world  of 
appearances  spread  out  in  infinite  time  and  space  and  connected 
by  the  law  of  interaction.  But  this  world  is  still  only  a  world 
of  appearances  (actual  and  possible),  as  Kant  is  careful  to 
remind  us.  With  the  clue  of  the  Analogies  we  can  pass  from 
our  actual  sense-perception  to  the  thing  in  the  series  of  possible 
sense-perceptions  ,3 

Kant's  central  contention  is  that  unless  we  have  a  starting- 
point  in  sense-perception,  we  can  say  nothing  about  the  existence 
of  things.  The  concept  of  a  thing  contains  absolutely  no  mark 
of  its  existence.4  However  complete  the  concept  may  be, 
however  fully  we  may  be  able  to  think  a  thing  with  all  its 
inner  determinations,  we  can  never  justifiably  pass  from  the 
concept  to  an  affirmation  of  the  existence  of  the  thing  con- 
ceived. We  have  seen  that  in  some  cases  we  can,  by  considering 
the  conditions  of  experience,  pass  from  the  concept  to  the 
affirmation  that  the  thing  conceived  is  possible5;  but  nothing 

1  A  225  =  6273.  2  B  2. 

3  A  226  =  B  273.  Compare  also  A  493  =  B  521. 

4  A  225  =  B  272. 

5  Even  this  we  cannot  do  without  intuition,  and  even  outer  intuition ; 
see  B  288  and  B  291. 


L  §  i]  ACTUALITY  AND  NECESSITY  359 

except  sense-perception  can  entitle  us  to  affirm  its  actual 
existence. 

This  doctrine  is  a  preparation  for  Kant's  attack  on  the 
Ontological  Proof  of  God's  existence.1  Without  prejudging 
this  question,  or  considering  the  ultimate  issues  which  it 
raises,  we  may  say  that  at  least  as  regards  the  existence  of 
finite  things  Kant's  position  is  fundamentally  sound. 

Kant  is  not  asserting  that  existence  belongs  only  to  the 
matter  in  complete  separation  from  the  form  of  experience; 
and  the  suggestion  that  he  is  making  such  an  assertion  seems 
to  me,  in  view  of  the  references  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Analogies,2 
to  be  untenable.  When  Kant  says  that  sense-perception  is 
the  only  mark  of  actuality,  we  have  no  right  to  separate  this 
statement  from  its  context,  and  to  suppose  that  for  Kant 
sense-perception  by  itself,  apart  from  thought,  can  give  us 
knowledge  of  existence.3  The  most  we  can  say  is  that  this  is  a 
rather  loose  way  of  asserting  that  all  our  categories  and  all 
our  concepts  will  never  give  us  the  mark  of  actuality  which 
sense-perception  alone  can  supply.4  Kant's  doctrine  is  not 
so  easy  that  we  need  add  unnecessarily  to  its  difficulties. 

1  A  592  =  B  620  ff.  2  Compare  p.  335  n.  6. 

3  Compare  also  A  234  -=  B  286,  where  the  object  is  said  to  be  actual, 
if  it  is  connected  with  perception  (sensation  as  matter  of  the  senses), 
and  is  thereby  determined  by  means  of  the  understanding.  Kant's  account 
of  the  difference  between  dreams  and  waking  experience  also  bears 
out  the  view  that  actuality  or  existence  is  known  through  a  combina- 
tion of  sense-perception  and  thought:  indeed  to  deny  this  is  to  give 
up  the  whole  Critical  doctrine.  Compare  B  233-4,  A  201-2  =  B  246-7, 
A  376,  A  451  =  B  479,  A  492  =  B  520-1,  A  493  =  B  521,  and  ProL 
§  iiAnmerk.  Ill  (IV  290). 

4  Kemp   Smith  (Commentary,  p.  398)   also  attributes  to  Kant  the 
corresponding  doctrine  that  there  are  'mere  concepts'  which  have  no 
reference  to  the  contingently  given.  This  is  based  on  Kant's  statement 
that  'in  the  mere  concept  of  a  thing  no  mark  of  its  existence  can  be 
found*  (A  225  =  B  272).  Kant's  statement  is  obviously  true,  if  we  can 
in  any  way  (and  surely  we  can)  consider,  or  entertain,  a  concept  with- 
out having  knowledge  that  a  corresponding  object  exists ;  and  I  cannot 
see   any  ground  for   taking  it  to   involve  a   theory  of  the  concept 
incompatible  with  the  Critical,  or  indeed  with  any  other,  philosophical 
view.  Still  less  can  I  see  in  it  any  reason  for  the  assertion  that  Kant's 
thinking  is  'perverted*  by  the  influence  of  Leibmzian  rationalism. 


360  THE  POSTULATES  [L  §  i 

It  should  be  sufficiently  clear  from  what  has  been  said, 
and  indeed  from  the  doctrine  of  Kant  throughout  the  Kritik, 
that  while  the  essential  mark  of  the  actual  is  a  connexion 
with  sense-perception,  the  connexion  (which  is  a  necessary 
connexion  in  accordance  with  the  Analogies)  is  a's  essential 
to  knowledge  of  the  actual  as  is  sense-perception  itself.1  Indeed 
Kant's  very  formula  shows  this ;  for  he  does  not  say  that  the 
actual  is  either  what  is  given  in  sensation  or  what  is  connected 
with  sensation.  He  says  on  the  contrary  that  the  actual  is  what 
is  connected2  with  sensation.  The  merely  given  in  sensation 
is  of  all  things  the  most  subjective,  unless  it  is  connected  with 
a  substance  as  one  of  its  accidents ;  and  what  exists — in  the 
technical  sense — is  not  a  mere  sensation,  but  the  substance 
of  accidents  connected  with  the  sensation.  The  accidents 
are  the  ways  in  which  the  substance  exists;  and  to  recognise 
them  as  accidents  of  an  existing  substance  is  to  recognise, 
however  'obscurely',  that  they  are  parts  of  a  system  which  is 
causally  determined  throughout. 

It  follows  that  the  actual  is  also  the  necessary.  This  does 
not  excuse  us  from  the  obligation  of  distinguishing  actuality 
from  necessity,  although  the  two  are  so  closely  bound  up 
together  that  we  can  distinguish  them  only  by  abstraction. 
Furthermore  we  must  remember  that  it  is  one  thing  to  recog- 
nise that  every  object  must  be  possible,  actual,  and  necessary, 
and  quite  another  thing  to  recognise  the  possibility,  actuality, 
and  necessity  of  any  particular  object.  The  general  doctrine 
of  the  categories  does  not  free  us  from  the  duty  of  looking 
for  empirical  evidence  when  we  seek  to  apply  the  categories, 
and  even  the  categories  of  modality,  to  particular  objects. 

1  It  may  be  objected  that  our  knowledge  of  the  actual  is  pnmanly 
by  means  of  perception,  and  that  when  we  know  the  actual  in  virtue 
of  connexion,  our  knowledge  is  indirect.  This  is  in  a  sense  true,  but 
even  in  direct  perception  we  must  connect  what  is  given  with  a 
substance,  if  we  are  to  be  aware  of  an  object ,  and  we  must  (however 
'obscurely')  regard  the  given  accidents  as  having  a  place  in  an  ordered 
world,   and   therefore   as   determined   by   causation   and   interaction 
(although  we  need  not  know  the  actual  cause  empirically). 

2  This  connexion,  as  I  pointed  out  above,  is  connexion  by  means 
of  the  Analogies.  Compare  also  A  374  and  A  376. 


L  §  i]  ACTUALITY  AND  NECESSITY  361 

Thus,  although  we  know  a  priori  that  if  an  object  exists,  it 
must  be  necessary  (in  the  sense  of  being  causally  determined), 
we  do  not  understand  the  necessity  of  this  particular  object 
till  we  have  discovered  empirically  the  chain  of  causes  by  which 
this  particular  object  is  determined. 

One  more  point  must  be  added  for  the  sake  of  completeness. 
Kant  does  not  here  distinguish  logical  from  real  actuality,1 
as  he  distinguishes  logical  possibility  and  necessity  from  real 
possibility  and  necessity.  Logical  actuality  is  a  characteristic 
of  asscrtoric  judgements,  and  is  identified  by  Kant  with  (logical) 
truth:2  truth  in  this  sense  seems  to  involve  (i)  assertion  (or 
reference  to  an  object)  and  (2)  agreement  with  the  formal 
laws  of  understanding;3  hence  it  might  be  described  as  a 
claim  to  truth  rather  than  truth  itself.  For  real  actuality  we 
require  something  more:  we  require  that  the  object  asserted 
should  be  connected  with  sense-perception  in  accordance 
with  the  Analogies.  Although  for  Kant  such  real  actuality 
or  existence  in  time  is  impossible  apart  from  human  minds 
and  human  judgements,  it  is  not  made  by  mere  thinking, 
and  depends  on  sense  as  well  as  thought.  This  is  the  doctrine 
against  which  Caird,  from  his  Hegelian  standpoint,  consistently 
protests;4  but  I  think  that  modern  philosophy  as  a  whole 

1  Or  formal  from  material  actuality. 

2  See  A  75-6  —  B  101 ;  compare  Log.  §  30  (IX  108)  and  EinL  II 
(IX  1 6  and  20).  I  take  it  this  truth  is  logical  truth,  or  the  general 
form  of  truth,  with  which  alone   Formal  Logic  is  concerned  (see 
A  59  —  B  84  and  compare  A  151-2  —  B  191  and  A  191  —  B  236): 
what  we  may   call  material   truth   involves  correspondence  with   a 
particular  object;  but  Formal  Logic  ignores  the  differences  between 
objects,  and  cannot  tell  us  whether  a  proposition  is  true  in  the  sense 
of  corresponding  with  its  object. 

3  This  second  point  I  take  from  A  59  =  B  84,  which  seems  to  give 
a  clearer  statement  of  what  is  said  obscurely  in  A  76  --=  B  101.  Kant's 
illustration   is   taken   from   a   hypothetical   syllogism   in   which   the 
antecedent   (which   is   only    problematic   in   the   major   premise)   is 
assertoric  in  the  minor.  When  it  is  assertoric,  it  is  said  to  indicate 
that  the  proposition  is  bound  up  with  the  understanding  in  accordance 
with  its  laws.  I  confess  that  the  precise  meaning  of  this  statement  is 
not  to  me  wholly  clear :  it  is  not  repeated  in  the  lectures  on  Logic. 

4  For  example,  see  The  Critical  Philosophy  of  Kant,  Vol.  I,  p.  596  (if 
I  have  understood  it  aright). 

VOL.  II  M* 


362  THE  POSTULATES  [L  §2 

is  on  this  subject  more  inclined  to  agree  with  Kant  than  with 
Hegel.1 

§  2.  The  Third  Postulate 

The  Third  Postulate2  asserts  that  the  necessary  is  that  whose 
connexion  with  the  actual  is  determined  in  accordance  with 
the  universal  conditions  of  experience.  These  conditions  are 
the  Analogies.  Actual  things,  that  is,  the  bodies  which  con- 
stitute the  physical  world,  are  themselves  actual  only  so  far 
as  they  are  connected  through  the  Analogies  with  their  appear- 
ances revealed  to  us  in  sense-perception,  so  that  it  is  not 
to  be  thought  that  the  actual  can  be  known  to  us  apart  from 
the  Analogies.  Nevertheless  we  now  take  the  actual  for  granted, 
and  consider  what  is  implied  by  our  knowledge  of  necessity. 
We  are  concerned,  not  with  the  logical  or  formal  necessity 
to  be  found  in  the  connexion  of  concepts  and  judgements  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  of  thought,3  but  with  the  real  or 
material  necessity  for  the  existence  of  objects  in  accordance 
with  the  Analogies. 

We  have  seen  that  the  actual  existence  of  objects  can  never 
be  known  a  priori  by  mere  concepts  apart  from  sense-perception, 
any  more  than  it  can  be  known  by  mere  sense-perceptions 
apart  from  concepts,  and  in  particular  apart  from  the  Analogies. 
The  same  is  true  of  the  necessary  existence  of  objects.  We 
cannot  know  such  necessary  existence  merely  from  concepts. 
The  knowledge  that  objects  necessarily  exist  is  dependent 
on  their  connexion  with  the  actually  perceived,  a  connexion 
which  must  be  in  accordance  with  the  universal  laws  of  ex- 
perience. 

The  only  kind  of  existence  which  we  can  know  to  be  necessary 
in  accordance  with  these  laws  is  the  existence  of  the  effects 
of  causes  which  are  given  to  us  and  taken  as  actual.  It  may 
seem  odd  of  Kant  to  assert  only  that  given  the  cause  we  know 
the  effect  to  be  necessary,  and  not  also  that  given  the  effect 
we  know  the  cause  to  be  necessary.  I  think  Kant's  reason 

1  Meyerson,  for  example,  seems  to  accept  the  Kantian  antithesis. 

2  A  226  ==  B  279  ff.  3  Compare  A  76  =  B  101. 


L  §  2]  ACTUALITY  AND  NECESSITY  363 

is  that  the  cause  makes  the  effect  necessary,  but  not  vice  versa}- 
Although  the  cause  is  no  doubt  necessary  (for  everything 
actual  is  necessary),  it  is  not  necessary  qud  cause,  but  only  qua 
effect  of  something  else.2 

Since  substances,  as  permanent,  cannot  be  the  effect  of 
anything,  we  can  have  no  insight  into  the  necessity  for  the 
existence  of  substances.3  We  can  know  only  that  their  states 
must  exist;  and  this  we  can  know,  in  accordance  with  the 
empirical  causal  laws  discovered  by  science,  only  from  a 
knowledge  of  preceding  states  (given  to  us  in  sense-perception) 
which  are  the  causes  of  their  existence. 

The  criterion  of  necessity  is  therefore  the  causal  law  expressed 
in  the  Second  Analogy,4  and  this  is  a  law  of  experience  and 
of  experience  alone.  It  applies  only  to  the  phenomenal  world, 
and  in  the  phenomenal  world  it  applies  only  to  the  states 
of  substance  and  not  to  the  substances  themselves.  Real  necessity 
is  therefore  not  absolute,  but  hypothetical,  necessity.5  That  is 
to  say,  we  cannot  by  mere  concepts,  not  even  by  the  concept 
of  'God',  know  a  priori  that  the  object  must  exist;  but  by  the 

1  We  know  that  if  the  effect  is  actual,  the  cause  is  actual,  but  this 
does  not  enable  us  to  understand  the  ground  of  the  existence  of  the 
cause.  The  effect  in  relation  to  the  cause  is  only  a  causa  cognoscendi, 
while  the  cause  in  relation  to  the  effect  is  a  causa  essendi  or  a  causa 
fiendi. 

2  Compare     the     repeated     assertion     (found,     for    example,     in 
A  194  —  B  239)  that  the  event  (or  effect),  as  the  conditioned,  gives  a 
sure  indication  of  some  condition,  but  the  condition  determines  the 
event.  All  this  seems  to  me  to  imply  that  for  Kant  causation  is  more 
than  uniform  succession;  for  if  it  were  mere  uniform  succession,  the 
cause  would  be  as  necessary  in  relation  to  the  effect  as  the  effect  in 
relation  to  the  cause. 

3  We  know  a  priori  that  substances  must  be  possible  (A  220-1 
=  B  268-9);  for  if  there  is  to  be  experience  of  objects  in  one  time 
and  space,  it  must  be  an  experience  of  the  states  of  permanent  sub- 
stances. We  may  also  be  said  to  know  a  priori  that  all  substances  must 
be  permanent.  To  say  this  is  not  to  say  that  we  know  the  grounds  or 
causes  why  particular  substances  exist,  and  so  why  these  particular 
substances  are  necessary:  our  knowledge  of  necessity  is  confined  to 
their  accidents. 

4  Kant  might  equally,  or  perhaps  even  better,  have  said  the  Third 
Analogy.  5  A  228  =  B  280.  Compare  Metaphysik,  p.  27. 


364  THE  POSTULATES  [L  §  3 

aid  of  experience  we  can  say  that,  granted  the  cause  is  actual, 
the  effect  must  exist.  We  can  therefore  affirm  the  necessary 
existence  of  objects  by  thought  and  without  actual  experience 
of  these  objects,  but  we  can  do  so  only  if  we  have  experience 
of  their  cause. 

In  this  respect  also  Kant's  doctrine  would  appear  to  be 
sound.  I  do  not  think  he  should  be  taken  to  mean  that  only 
when  we  are  actually  experiencing  the  cause  can  we  say  that 
the  existence  of  the  effect  is  necessary.  On  such  a  principle 
necessary  existence  would  be  confined  to  the  future.  I  take 
the  principle  to  be  more  general,  and  to  mean  that  wherever 
we  know  a  cause  to  be  actual,  whether  that  cause  is  present 
or  past,  there  we  can  say  that  its  effect  is  necessary.  We  can 
do  so  of  course,  not  in  virtue  of  our  a  priori  knowledge  of  the 
general  causal  principle,  but  in  virtue  of  the  empirical  causal 
laws  discovered  by  science  in  accordance  with  that  principle. 
Apart  from  such  empirical  laws,  while  we  could  know  that  the 
cause  must  have  some  effect,  we  could  not  know  what  its 
effect  was. 

§3.  Some   Traditional  Conceptions 

In  his  usual  manner  Kant  adds  some  general  observations 
after  his  main  task  is  accomplished. 

The  first  is  only  of  historical  interest.  Of  the  four  traditional 
principles  (in  mnndo  non  datur  hiatus,  non  datur  saltus,  non 
datur  casus,  non  datur  fatum)*  Kant  asserts  the  third  to  be  a 
consequence  of  the  Second  Analogy,  since  the  affirmation 
of  the  universal  principle  of  causality  is  a  denial  of  blind 
chance.  The  fourth,  he  declares,  belongs  to  the  Principles 
of  Modality,  since  the  doctrine  of  the  Third  Postulate — that 
the  necessary  is  the  conditionally  or  hypothetically  necessary — 
is  a  denial  of  blind  fate  or  unconditioned  necessity.  He  hints 
further  that  the  denial  of  discontinuity  (saltus)  is  connected 

1  A  229  —  B  282.  'Casus*  is,  I  think,  equivalent  to  'Cluck'  and 
'faturn*  to  ' SchicksaV ',  which  are  said  to  be  'usurpterte  Begiiffe'(pscudo- 
concepts)  in  A  84  -=  B  117.  In  A  74  —  B  99  the  word  for  'casus*  is 
fZufall\ 


L  §  3]  ACTUALITY  AND  NECESSITY  365 

with  the  assertion  of  continuity  in  the  Anticipations  (although 
the  proof  of  this  was  given  in  the  Second  Analogy1) ;  and  that 
the  denial  of  the  void  (hiatus  or  vacuum)  is  connected  with  the 
account  of  quantity  in  the  Axioms  (although  he  himself  dis- 
cussed it  in  the  Anticipations  and  in  the  Third  Analogy2).  I 
think  he  derives  some  pleasure  from  the  affirmation  that  the 
question  of  empty  space  is  a  matter  for  'ideal  reason',  which 
goes  beyond  the  sphere  of  possible  experience.  He  is  always 
anxious  to  insist  that  the  materialists  who  believe  in  atoms 
and  the  void  are  speaking,  not  as  scientists,  but  as  unconscious 
metaphysicians.3 

We  can  afford  to  smile  at  Kant's  preoccupation  with  phrases 
which  have  no  longer  a  living  part  in  our  tradition,  at  his 
desire  to  fit  these  phrases  into  the  framework  of  the  categories, 
and  at  the  ingenuity  and  plausibility  which,  to  my  mind  at 
least,  he  displays  in  doing  so.  But  the  suggestion  that  his 
attempt  is  a  grotesque  example  of  pedantry  seems  to  me  much 
more  grotesque  than  the  attempt  itself.  We  must  look  at 
Kant's  work  in  the  setting  of  a  formahstic  age,  where  he  stands 
as  a  giant  shaking  off  the  chains  which  weighed  men  down. 
It  is  natural  that  he  should  adjust  his  doctrine  to  traditional 
conceptions ;  and  it  is  obvious  that  if  his  discovery  of  the  com- 
plete list  of  categories  were  sound,  then  all  true  traditional 
doctrines  must  fit  into  that  list  of  categories  and  ought  to  be 
shown  to  do  so.  We  can  see  to-day  that  he  was  mistaken; 
but  we  ought  to  see  also  that  he  was  not  unreasonable,  and 
that  what  is  regarded  as  mere  pedantry  is  a  proper  attempt  to 
work  out  his  conclusions  to  their  logical  end. 


1  A  207  —  0253  ff. 

2  A  172  ----  B  214  ff.  and  A  214  =  B  261.  There  is  a  certain  plausi- 
bility in  saying  that  discontinuity  is  primarily  discontinuity  in  the 
qualitative  matter  of  intuition  (as  treated  in  the  Anticipations) ;  and 
that  the  void  is  a  question  of  the  nature  of  space,  which  is  the  quanti- 
tative form  of  intuition  dealt  with  in  the  Axioms. 

3  Compare  A  173  —  B  215. 


366  THE  POSTULATES  [L  §  4 

§  4.  Leibniz  fan  Possibility 

When  we  turn  to  his  remarks  on  Leibniz's  doctrine  of  possi- 
bility, we  are  faced  with  matters  of  more  importance.1  The 
question  is  asked  whether  the  field  of  the  possible  is  wider 
than  that  of  the  actual,  and  the  field  of  the  actual  wider  than 
that  of  the  necessary.2 

Kant  regards  these  as  questions  not  for  understanding 
but  for  reason,  not  for  the  Analytic  but  for  the  Dialectic. 
He  takes  them  to  be  asking  whether  phenomena  can  fit  only 
one  system  of  experience3  or  whether  they  might  fit  into  several 
different  systems  of  experience.  To  such  a  question  under- 
standing can  give  no  ans\\er,  since  it  is  concerned  only  with 
the  rules  which  govern  the  one  experience  that  we  have  and 
the  one  world  that  we  know.  It  has  to  do  only  with  the  synthesis 
of  what  is  given,  not  with  the  other  possible  worlds  of  which 
this  is  alleged  to  be  the  best.  We  cannot  conceive  other  forms 
of  intuition  or  of  thought;  and  if  we  could,  such  forms  of 
intuition  and  thought  would  have  no  place  in  the  human  experi- 
ence in  which  alone  understanding  plays  its  part. 

Nevertheless  Kant  finds  it  impossible  to  refrain  at  this 
stage  from  some  remarks  about  the  Leibnizian  doctrine.  He 
points  out  that  in  any  case  the  poverty  of  the  conclusions 
reached,  on  the  basis  of  a  supposed  wide  realm  of  possibility 
extending  beyond  the  world  we  know,  is  obvious  enough  in 

1  A  230  =  6282. 

2  Here  again  the  charge  is  brought  against  Kant  that  he  suddenly 
uses  the  word  'possible'  in  a  difTeient  sense.  But  this  question  was 
perfectly  familiar  to  the  audience  for  which  he  was  writing,  and  he  has 
to  discuss  it  in  order  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  it  presupposes  a  false 
meaning  of  ' possibility'.  I  do  not  think  his  method  of  exposition  here 
would  offer  any  difficulty  to  contemporary  readers.  It  certainly  indicates 
no  confusion  on  the  part  of  Kant. 

3  It  is  very  clear  from  what  he  says  here  and  a  little  later  that  he 
regards  the  phenomenal  world  as  one  experience,  not  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  all  present  to  one  all-embracing  mind,  but  in  the  sense  that 
it  forms  one  system  of  actual  and  possible  sense-perceptions  of  which 
my  actual  sense-perceptions  are  a  necessary  part.  He  calls  it  a  'series* 
of  appearances   and   identifies   it   with   a   single    all-comprehensive 
experience  in  A  231-2  —  B  284.  Compare  A  no. 


L  §4]  ACTUALITY  AND  NECESSITY  367 

itself.  He  suggests  that  because  we  can  say  'All  the  actual  is 
possible*  and  can  convert  this  proposition  into  'Some  possible 
is  actual',  we  therefore  imagine  that  there  must  be  many  things 
possible  which  are  not  actual.  Finally  he  turns  to  a  more  serious 
argument."  It  may  seem  that  the  possible  must  be  wider  than 
the  actual,  because  something  must  be  added  to  the  possible 
if  it  is  to  become  actual. 

This,  however,  is  precisely  what  Kant  denies.1  Actuality 
is  not  another  quality  added  to  things  which  are  already 
possible.  If  anything  were  to  be  added  to  the  possible,  it 
would  itself  be  impossible.  What  is  added  is  not  an  additional 
quality  in  the  object,  but  a  relation  to  the  knowing  mind.  A 
thing  is  possible,  on  Kant's  doctrine,  if  it  agrees  with  the 
possible  conditions  of  experience.  What  can  be  added  for 
my  understanding2  is  connexion  with  some  sense-perception  ;3 
but  if  any  possible  object  has  such  a  connexion,  it  is  not  only 
possible,  but  actual  (whether  I  perceive  it  immediately  or  not). 

On  the  basis  of  what  is  given  to  sense-perception  I  can, 
by  means  of  understanding  and  with  the  aid  of  the  Analogies, 
arrive  at  wider  knowledge  of  the  actual  objects  in  the  one 
phenomenal  world  or  all-embracing  system  of  human  experi- 
ence. On  this  basis  of  the  given  I  have,  however,  no  means  of 
deciding  whether  my  sense-perceptions  could  fit  into  a  quite 
different  phenomenal  world  and  a  quite  different  system  of 
experience ;  and  if  I  am  to  work  without  this  basis  of  the  given 
I  have  still  less  means  of  deciding  such  a  question,  for  apart 
from  given  matter  thinking  is  quite  impossible.4 

What  is  possible  under  conditions  which  are  themselves 


1  A  231  =  1*284. 

2  Kant  says  this  is  added  'zu  meinem  Verstande*.  Does  this  mean 
'to  my  understanding'  or  'for  my  understanding'  ? 

3  Kemp  Smith  (Commentary,  p.  402)  asserts  that  Kant  is  here  giving 
'the  correct  Critical  definition  of  the  possible  by  combining  the  two 
first  postulates'.  It  would  be  odd  indeed  if  this  were  so,  but  (as  Kant 
himself  points  out)  when  the  addition  is  made  we  are  defining,  not 
the  possible,  but  the  actual.  What  the  passage  does  show — if  it  needed 
any  showing — is  that  for  Kant  the  actual  is  not  the  matter  apart  from 
the  form  of  experience.  4  Compare  A  96. 


368  THE  POSTULATES  [L  §  5 

only  possible1 — and  this  is  the  only  sense  of  the  possible  which 
Kant  recognises — is  not  possible  absolutely  or  in  all  respects. 
We  can  ask  and  answer  the  question  'What  is  possible  under 
conditions  of  possible  experience  ?'  If  we  ask  whether  the  possi- 
bility of  things  extends  beyond  experience,  we  are  asking  a 
question  about  absolute  possibility,  which  we  have  no  possible 
means  of  answering.  This  question  has  been  raised  here  only 
because  of  the  common  belief  that  the  concept  of  absolute 
possibility  is  one  of  the  concepts  of  the  understanding.2  The 
problem  must  at  present  be  left  in  obscurity,  since  its  discussion 
really  belongs  to  the  Dialectic. 

§5.  The  Meaning  of  the  Word  'Postulate' 

Kant  in  conclusion  explains  why  he  uses  the  word  'postulate' 
for  the  Principles  of  Modality. 

He  does  not  use  the  word  'postulate',  as  was  apparently 
done  at  the  time,  for  propositions  which  are  immediately 
certain  or  self-evident.  He  believes  that  such  propositions, 
although  they  cannot  be  'deduced'  in  the  ordinary  sense  of 
'inferred' — the  Principles,  as  we  have  seen,  are  a  matter  for 
the  power  of  judgement,  and  not  for  reason — can  be  'deduced' 
in  the  Kantian  sense,  that  is,  'justified'  by  showing  their 
relation  to  possible  experience.  Merely  to  accept  self-evidence 
at  its  face  value  is  fundamentally  opposed  to  the  whole  spirit 
of  Criticism;  Kant  regards  it  as  legitimate  in  science,  but  not 
in  philosophy.  Once  we  admit  self-evidence  as  ultimate,  we  are 
faced  with  a  whole  host  of  audacious  pretensions  claiming 
such  self-evidence;  and  nothing  is  more  usual  than  for  the 
deliverances  of  common  sense  or  tradition  (in  themselves  no 
guarantee  of  truth)  to  be  mistaken  for  axioms,  that  is,  for 
propositions  which  have  a  genuine  measure  of  self-evidence. 

1  I  think  that  by  'conditions  which  are  themselves  only  possible 
Kant  may  mean  'conditions  of  possible  experience' ;  only  if  conditions 
are  conditions  of  possible  experience  can  we  show  them  to  be  really 
possible  (or  objectively  valid);  but  the  phrase  is  obscure.  In  A  374 
space  (the  condition  or  form  of  outer  intuition)  is  said  to  be  the  idea 
of  a  mere  possibility  of  togetherness  (Beisammensetns). 

2  A  232  -=  B  284-5. 


L  §  5]  ACTUALITY  AND  NECESSITY  369 

All  synthetic  a  priori  propositions  demand,  if  not  a  proof,  at 
least  a  deduction  or  justification.  In  Kant's  language  we  must 
answer  the  question  how  they  are  possible,  before  we  can  admit 
their  claims  to  philosophical  acceptance.1 

What  Kint  has  called  the  Postulates  are,  however,  in  a  special 
position.  Although,  like  the  other  Principles,  they  are  synthetic, 
they  add,  as  we  have  seen,  nothing  to  the  necessary  character- 
istics of  the  object.  What  they  add  to  the  concept  of  the  thing 
is  not  a  necessary  quality  of  the  thing  itself,  but  a  necessary 
relation  to  the  mind  which  knows  it;  or,  in  other  words,  they 
refer  to  the  action  of  the  mind  by  which  the  concept  is  produced.2 

It  is  because  of  this  reference  to  the  mind's  action  that  Kant 
chooses  the  word  'postulate'  for  the  Principles  of  Modality. 
In  mathematics  a  postulate  is  a  practical  pro  position.  It  concerns 
only  the  synthesis  by  which  we  construct  an  object  and  produce 
the  concept  of  an  object.  It  tells  us,  for  example,  with  a  given 
line  to  describe  a  circle  from  a  given  point.  Such  a  proposition 
cannot  be  proved,  because  the  procedure  which  it  enjoins  is 
the  very  act  through  which  we  first  of  all  produce  the  concept 
of  a  circle.3 

In  the  same  way  the  Postulates  of  Modality  are  concerned 
with  the  synthesis  (or  aspects  of  synthesis)  through  which 
alone  the  concepts  of  possibility,  actuality,  and  necessity 
can  arise;  and  they  add  nothing  to  the  concept  of  the  thing 
other  than  its  relation  to  the  mind  which  knows  it. 

We  need  not,  I  think,  quarrel  with  Kant  either  about  his 
terminology  or  about  his  reasons  for  it.  It  is  true  that  his 
Postulates,  like  the  mathematical  postulates  (if  his  account 
of  the  latter  is  correct),  are  concerned  with  the  activities  of 

1  Compare  A  148-9  =  B  188. 

2  A  234  =  B  287.  This  action  is  the  synthesis  of  the  mind  which 
imposes  form  or  unity  on  the  given  matter  and  is  necessary  for  know- 
ledge of  the  object.  It  produces  the  concept  in  the  sense  that  the  concept 
is  the  principle  at  work  in  the  synthesis,  and  to  be  conscious  of  the 
principle    of    the    synthesis    is    to    know    the    concept.    Compare 
A  220  =  B  267. 

3  The  concept  is  produced  through  the  act  in  the  sense  explained 
by  the  previous  note. 


370  THE  POSTULATES  [L  §  6 

the  mind  through  which  an  object  is  constructed  and  a  concept 
produced.  This  resemblance  is  not  destroyed  by  the  presence 
of  differences  in  the  two  cases,  differences  which  are  obvious 
enough,  since  the  mathematical  postulate  determines  the 
character  of  the  object  through  and  through,  whereas  Kant's 
Postulates  determine  the  inner  character  of  the  object  not  at 
all.  Yet  even  this  difference  is  by  no  means  so  profound  as 
it  appears ;  for  the  synthesis  of  form  and  matter,  in  whose 
different  subjective  aspects  Kant  finds  the  origin  of  possibility, 
actuality,  and  necessity,  is  also,  when  viewed  from  another 
angle,  the  synthesis  which  imposes  the  categories  of  quantity, 
quality,  and  relation  upon  the  matter  given  to  sense,  and  so 
determines  through  and  through  the  character  of  'an  object 
in  general'.  The  term  'postulate'  in  Kant's  sense  may  be  said 
— as  he  himself  said  both  of  the  term  'anticipation'1  and  of  the 
term  'analogy'2 — to  apply  in  some  degree  to  all  Principles  of 
the  Understanding,  but  to  apply  in  a  preeminent  degree  to 
one  particular  group  of  Principles,  in  this  case  to  the  Principles 
of  Modality. 

§  6.  The  Competence  of  Kant's  Exposition 

Kant's  exposition  of  the  Postulates  is,  as  I  have  already 
suggested,  comparatively  simple  and  straightforward.  I  do  not 
say  that  it  is  elegantly  written,  or  that  it  is  well  arranged,  or 
that  it  is  a  model  of  exact  and  careful  expression — such  merits 
are  not  to  be  found  in  the  later  works  of  Kant.  Again  I  admit 
that  difficulties  can  be  found  in  the  doctrine  and  that  these 
difficulties  are  real — it  has  not  been  my  good  fortune  to  discover 
any  philosophical  writing  of  which  the  same  could  not  be  said. 
But  I  do  say  that  Kant's  exposition  can  be  understood  by  any 
intelligent  reader  of  good  will  who  has  mastered  the  arguments 
for  the  preceding  Principles  and  is  prepared  to  assume — 
provisionally — that  these  Principles  have  been  proved. 

When  I  turn  to  the  Commentary  of  Professor  Kemp  Smith, 

1  A  166-7  —  B  208-9.  Compare  A  210  =  B  256. 

2  A  180-1  =  B  223-4. 


L  §  6]  ACTUALITY  AND  NECESSITY  371 

I  find  here,  as  elsewhere,  that  on  almost  every  page  he  applies 
to  Kant's  exposition  words  like  'ambiguous',  'one-sided', 
'misleading',  'obscure',  'confused',  perverted',  and  'perverse'; 
that  on  his  view  the  'so-called'  principles  are  not  really  prin- 
ciples at  all — in  spite  of  the  admitted  fact  that  they  state 
characteristics  which  necessarily  belong  to  every  object  of 
experience  in  its  relation  to  the  mind;  and  even  that  the  'com- 
plicated and  hazardous'  patchwork  theory  of  Adickes  receives 
at  least  a  qualified  approval.  Such  an  estimate,  the  more 
striking  because  of  the  comparative  clarity  of  the  passage  in 
question,  seems  to  me,  like  so  much  of  Mr.  Kemp  Smith's 
writing,  to  do  less  than  justice  to  the  ability  of  Kant :  so  far 
from  helping  the  student,  it  places  additional  difficulties 
in  his  way.  The  impression  which  I  get  throughout — I  do  not 
know  whether  it  is  the  impression  which  Mr.  Kemp  Smith 
intended  to  give — is  that  Kant  was  grossly  incompetent;  that 
he  had  a  wholly  imperfect  grasp  ot  what  he  was  trying  to  say ; 
and  that  the  Critical  Philosophy,  which  in  the  Kritik  is  partly 
embedded  in  a  mass  of  non- Critical  doctrine  and  partly  not 
even  expressed  at  all,  is  known  in  its  full  stature  only  to  a 
few  choice  spirits  of  whom  Kant  certainly  was  not  one.  For 
such  an  attitude  in  a  Hegelian  like  Caird — although  Caird 
seems  to  me  to  do  greater  justice  to  the  merits  of  the  Kritik — 
some  justification  could  be  found;  for  a  Hegelian  is  in  the 
happy  position  of  knowing  that  all  other  philosophies  are 
imperfect  attempts  to  express  the  philosophy  of  Hegel,  and 
that  Kant  in  particular  only  marks  an  important  stage  on  the 
way  towards  the  final  goal.  But  Mr.  Kemp  Smith  is  no  Hegelian ; 
and  his  account  of  the  philosophy  which  Kant  was  unsuccess- 
fully trying  to  expound,  for  me  at  least,  carries  no  conviction 
and  awakens  no  response.  The  modern  tendency  to  treat 
Kant  with  condescension  seems  to  me  based  on  no  rational 
grounds ;  and,  paradoxical  though  it  may  appear  to  the  present 
age,  I  will  venture  to  express  the  opinion — an  opinion  which 
grows  ever  firmer  the  more  I  study  the  Kritik — that  Immanuel 
Kant  had  a  far  better  understanding  of  the  Critical  Philosophy 
than  any  commentator  who  ever  lived. 


BOOK  XII 

TRANSCENDENTAL   IDEALISM 


CHAPTER    LI 
EMPIRICAL  REALISM 

§  i.  Problems  of  the  Critical  Philosophy 

We  have  now — to  borrow  Kant's  expression — explored 
and  surveyed  the  land  of  pure  understanding  or  of  truth,1 
and  I  do  not  at  present  propose  to  embark  with  him  upon  the 
stormy  sea  of  illusion.  Nevertheless  as  we  look,  on  his  sug- 
gestion,2 at  the  map  of  the  area  we  have  left,  we  cannot  but  be 
conscious  that  the  character  of  certain  regions  is  still  regrettably 
vague,  or  at  any  rate  that  we  have  concentrated  more  upon  the 
physical  features  than  upon  the  spiritual  life  of  the  country. 
More  simply,  we  have  dealt  in  some  detail  with  the  objects  of 
outer  sense,  but  the  study  of  inner  sense  and  its  objects  has 
been  comparatively  slight.  Kant  himself  was  obviously  con- 
scious of  this  weakness,  for  in  the  second  edition  he  attempts 
to  deal  more  fully,  although  not  fully  enough,  with  the  problem 
of  inner  sense  and  with  the  cognate  problem  of  the  relation 
between  inner  and  outer  sense. 

These  two  problems,  together  with  a  third,  namely  the 
meaning  of  the  distinction  between  phenomena  and  noumena, 
must  be  touched  upon  before  our  task  is  finished.  All  of  them 
raise  fundamental  questions  as  to  the  nature  of  Kant's  trans- 
cendental idealism  and  its  combination  with  what  he  calls 
empirical  realism.  In  the  second  edition  the  emphasis  on 
empirical  realism  becomes  much  stronger,  because  his  con- 
temporaries tended,  naturally  enough,  to  assimilate  his  idealism 
to  doctrines  which  they  already  knew,  such  as  the  idealism  of 
Berkeley.  In  reply  to  such  a  tendency  Kant  is  forced  to  insist 
that  objects  in  space  are  for  him  as  real  as  the  succession  of 
our  ideas ;  they  are  not  known  by  an  uncertain  inference  from 
the  succession  of  our  ideas  in  inner  sense;  for  apart  from 
knowledge  of  bodies  in  space  we  could  not  be  aware  of  the 

1  A  235  =  B  294.  2  A  23$  =  B  295. 


376  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LI  §2 

succession  of  our  ideas.  This  doctrine  is  set  forth  in  the  Refu- 
tation of  Idealism,  and  before  we  examine  inner  sense  itself, 
we  must  first  examine  the  Refutation.1 

§2.  Descartes  and  Berkeley 

The  idealism  which  Kant  wishes  to  refute  is  what  he  calls 
material  idealism  as  opposed  to  his  own  formal  or  Critical 
idealism.2  It  might  also  be  called  empirical  idealism3  as  opposed 
to  transcendental  idealism.  This  material  or  empirical  idealism 
is  of  two  types — the  problematic  idealism  of  Descartes  and  the 
dogmatic  idealism  of  Berkeley.  The  former  view  regards  the 
existence  of  bodies  in  space  as  doubtful  and  incapable  of  proof; 
it  is  essentially  a  kind  of  representative  idealism  which  admits 
the  certainty  of  self-knowledge,  but  accepts  the  existence 
of  bodies  only  by  a  kind  of  faith.  The  latter  view  explicitly 
denies  the  existence  of  bodies,  and  asserts  (according  to 
Kant)  that  things  in  space  are  only  fictions  or  products  of 
imagination.4 

As  Kant  is  clearly  not  a  believer  in  representative  idealism, 
it  was  natural  that  his  doctrine  should  be  regarded  as  akin 
to  Berkeley's.  His  anxiety  to  deny  this  perhaps  explains  a 
certain  animus  which  he  shows  against  that  philosopher, 
whom  he  refers  to  as  'the  good  Berkeley',5  while  other  thinkers 
are  referred  to  as  'the  illustrious'  so  and  so.6  It  may  be 
doubted  whether  Kant  had  a  very  exact  knowledge  of  Berkeley's 
philosophy ;  for  he  appears  to  suggest  that  Berkelcyan  idealism 
rests  on  the  alleged  impossibility  of  space  and  therefore  of 

1  B  274  ff.  The  Refutation  is  a  substitute  for  the  Fourth  Paralogism 
of  the  first  edition,  which,  in  dealing  with  the  existence  of  bodies  in 
space,  laid  itself  open  (by  its  insistence  that  we  know  the  existent 
equally  through  outer  and  inner  sense)  to  mistaken  charges  of  sub- 
jective idealism.  It  is  introduced  into  Kant's  discussion  of  the  Second 
Postulate,  inasmuch  as  idealism  is  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Second  Postulate — that  on  the  basis  of  sense-perception  our  thought 
can  know  objects  actually  existing  in  space.  2  B  274. 

3  A  369,  A  371.  In  B  XXXIX  n.  it  is  called  psychological  idealism. 

4  *Einbildungen.y  This  assertion  suggests  that  Kant's  knowledge  of 
Berkeley  was  very  imperfect. 

5  See  B  71.  fl  E.g.  (der  beruhmte  Locke'  in  B  127. 


LI  §  3]  EMPIRICAL  REALISM  377 

things  in  space.  Kant  maintains  that  this  is  an  inevitable 
result  of  taking  space  as  a  quality  of  things-in-themselves ; 
to  treat  space  in  this  way  is  to  make  it  a  non-entity  or  'unthing',1 
whose  contradictions  infect  all  spatial  things  with  unreality. 
He  therefore  holds  that  this  type  of  idealism  is  refuted  by  the 
doctrine  of  the  Transcendental  Aesthetic,  which  showed  that 
space  is  neither  a  thing-in-itself  nor  a  quality  of  things-in- 
themselves,  but  only  a  form  of  intuition.  Whether  this  is 
really  relevant  to  a  refutation  of  Berkeley,  we  need  not  here 
consider.2 

For  the  view  of  Descartes  he  has  a  much  greater  respect.  He 
believes  that  it  is  the  inevitable  consequence  of  transcendental 
realism,  that  is,  of  the  view  which  starts  by  holding  that  our 
knowledge  is  of  things-in-themselves  which  are  independent 
of  our  senses  ;3  for  on  such  a  theory  we  can  never  pass  from 
our  sensuous  ideas  to  their  supposed  corresponding,  but 
independent,  objects.  The  great  merit  of  Descartes's  position 
is  that  it  refuses  to  assert  the  existence  of  objects  in  space 
until  adequate  grounds  have  been  shown  for  doing  so.  It  is 
a  scandal  to  philosophy  that  such  a  proof  has  not  yet  been 
given,4  and  this  proof  Kant  now  proposes  to  supply.  He  will 
show  that  the  inner  experience  which  Descartes  regarded  as 
indubitable  is  itself  possible  only  under  the  presupposition 
of  outer  experience. 

§3.  The  Refutation  of  Idealism 

The  theorem5  which  Kant  seeks  to  prove  is  stated  as  follows : 

The  mere,  but  empirically  determined,  consciousness  of  my 
own  existence  proves  the  existence  of  objects  in  space  outside  me. 

There  are  two  points  to  be  noted  in  regard  to  the  meaning 
of  this  theorem.  The  consciousness  of  my  own  existence,  since 

1  'Undmg.'  The  concept  of  such  an  object  is  self-contradictory;  see 
A  291  =  B  348. 

2  The  same  type  of  argument  is  used  against  Berkeley  in  B  71. 

3  A  371.  4  B  XXXIX  n.  6  'Lehrsatz.* 


378  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LI  §  3 

it  is  said  to  be  empirically  determined,  is  not  pure  apperception, 
but  involves  consciousness  of  the  succession  of  thoughts,  ideas, 
feelings,  desires,  and  volitions  present  to  inner  sense.1  The 
existence  of  objects  in  space  outside  me  can  mean  only  phe- 
nomenal objects,  and  not  things-in-themselves.  The  words 
'outside  me*  are  indeed  ambiguous2 — they  may  refer  either 
to  a  thing-in-itself  different  from,  and  independent  of,  the 
knower,  or  they  may  refer  to  phenomenal  things  in  space — 
but  here  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  refer  to  phenomenal 
things  in  space.3 

I.  Kant's  argument  starts  from  two  premises:  (i)  that  I  am 
aware  of  my  own  existence  as  determined  in  time\  and  (2)  that 
all    time-determination    presupposes    something    permanent    in 
sense-perception.  Of  these  premises  the  first  is  taken  for  granted 
by  Descartes  and  by  idealists  generally;4  the  second  we  must 
assume  to  have  been  proved  by  the  First  and  Third  Analogies. 

II.  Now  this  'something  permanent'  cannot  be  an  intuition 
in  me?  An  intuition  in  me  is  simply  one  of  the  ideas  which 
are  grounds  for  determining  my  existence  in  time,  one  of  the 
events  in  my  changing  mental  history.  If  the  succession  of 
my  ideas  can  be  determined — as  is  implied  by  our  second 
premise — only  by  reference  to  the  permanent,  it  is  obvious 
that  the  permanent  cannot  be  one  of  the  ideas  whose  place  in 
the  succession  has  to  be  determined. 

Kant  is  assuming  that  in  inner  sense  we  have  only  a  succession 
of  ideas   and  nothing  permanent   in   relation  to   which  the 

1  Compare  A  357-9  and  B  XL  n.  2  A  373. 

3  This  is  one  of  the  few  points  on  which  there  seems  to  be  general 
agreement  among  modern  commentators.   Professor  Pnchard  does 
indeed  urge  (Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge,  p.  321)  that  the  argument 
implies  spatial  objects  to  be  things-m-themselves,  but  he  recognises 
that  Kant  himself  is  unaware  of  this  implication. 

4  It  is  taken  for  granted  by  Berkeley  also.  This  doctrine  could  not 
be  attributed  to  Hume,  but  I  think  that  Kant's  argument  would  apply 
equally  to  any  view  which  holds,  as  Hume  did,  that  we  are  aware  of  a 
succession  of  ideas  in  time. 

6  I  follow  the  correction  given  by  Kant  in  B  XXXIX  n. 


LI  §  3]  EMPIRICAL  REALISM  379 

succession  can  be  determined.  This  doctrine  he  holds  con- 
sistently— it  is  indeed  at  the  very  root  of  his  argument  in  the 
Paralogisms.  I  think  that  the  doctrine  is  true,  but  the  grounds 
for  holding  it  ought  to  have  been  stated.1  We  ought  to  be  told 
whether  the  absence  of  the  permanent  from  inner  sense  is 
only  an  empirical  fact  or  whether  it  rests  on  a  priori  grounds. 
If  Kant  had  rested  his  proof  of  substance  on  the  nature  of  space, 
his  position  would  have  been  stronger. 

III.  His  conclusion  is  that  the  sense-perception*  of  the  per- 
manent (which  is  necessary  if  we  are  to  be  aware  of  a  succession) 
is  possible  only  through  a  thing  outside  me  in  space,  and  not 
through  the  mere  idea  of  a  thing  outside  me?  By  a  'thing'  Kant 
means  a  permanent  phenomenal  substance  in  space  (substantia 
phaenomenon).  Such  a  'thing'  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  one 
idea  among  other  ideas  and,  like  them,  present  in  our  mind 
at  one  time  and  absent  at  another.  It  is  the  permanent  substratum 
in  space  to  which  we  refer  all  the  changing  states  perceived  by 
us  in  succession,  and  as  such  it  is  a  necessary  condition  of  our 
experience  of  objects  in  one  space  and  one  time ;  but  it  is  none 
the  less  phenomenal. 

Whatever  difficulty  may  be  found  here  is  certainly  not 
new :  it  is  simply  the  difficulty  of  the  First  Analogy ;  and  this 
again  is  only  a  particular  example  of  the  general  difficulty 
that  for  Kant  an  object — though  it  is  not  one  idea  among 

1  Such  grounds  as  are  stated  by  Kant  are  to  be  found  in  Note  2 
(B  277-8).  There  he  insists  that  all  time-determination  depends  on 
motion  in  relation  to  the  permanent  in  space  (compare  B  291);  that 
the  only  permanent  given  to  us  in  intuition  is  matter;  that  the  per- 
manence of  matter  is  not  known  by  mere  generalisation,  but  is  an 
a  priori  condition  of  time-determination;  and  that  there  is  no  per- 
manent ego  in  inner  sense  known  through  intuition  as  matter  is 
known  through  our  intuitions  of  impenetrability. 

2  It  should  be  noted  that  the  permanent  in  sense-perception  which 
was  said  in  the  premise  to  be  'presupposed'  is  here  said  to  be  'per- 
ceived*. There  are  difficulties  as  to  the  sense  in  which  the  permanent 
is  perceived.  See  Chapter  XLII  §  5. 

3  The  same  doctrine  is  stated  in  A  197  =  B  242,  where  it  is  said 
that  an  idea  cannot  have  objective  significance  merely  by  being  related 
to  another  idea,  the  idea  'object'. 


380  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LI  §  3 

other  ideas — is  a  combination  of  our  ideas  in  a  necessary 
synthetic  unity.  If  we  cannot  accept  this  possibility,  we  must 
say  with  Mr.  Prichard  that  Kant's  argument  really  implies 
the  existence  of  things-in-themselves ;  and  we  can  then  accept 
the  argument  (Mr.  Prichard  himself  accepts  it)  only  if  we 
consider  ourselves  entitled  to  hold  that  the  existence  of  per- 
manent substances  in  space  as  things-in-themselves  is  a  condition 
of  our  awareness  of  change.  On  Kant's  view,  however,  the 
existence  of  permanent  substances  in  space  can  never  be 
proved  unless  these  permanent  substances  are  phenomenal 
substances  dependent,  like  time  and  space,  on  the  constitution 
of  the  human  mind.  Hence  he  is  not  departing  in  the  slightest 
degree  from  his  own  doctrine ;  and  we  must,  I  think,  recognise 
this,  even  if  we  hold,  with  Mr.  Prichard,  that  his  doctrine  is 
untenable  and  that  a  permanent  phenomenal  substance  (or  a 
phenomenal  object  which  can  be  distinguished  from  our 
ideas)  is  a  contradiction  in  terms. 

IV.  The  rest  of  the  argument  offers  no  difficulty.  It  follows 
at  once  that  the  determination  of  my  own  existence  in  time  (or 
knowledge  of  the  succession  of  my  ideas)  is  possible  only  through 
the  existence  of  actual  things*-  which  I  perceive  in  space. 

V.  My  consciousness  (or  my  existence — for  I  exist  as  con- 
sciousness) is  essentially  consciousness  (or  existence)   in  time? 
and  so  knowledge  of  my  existence  necessarily  involves  the  possi- 
bility of  determining  existence  in  time. 

VI.  Hence   knowledge   of  my   existence   is  necessarily  bound 
up  with  the  existence  of  permanent  spatial  things;  or  in  other 
words  knowledge  of  my  own  existence  is  at  the  same  time  an 
immediate*    knowledge   of  the   existence   of  permanent   spatial 
things. 

1  These  actual  things  must  here  be  permanent  substances. 

2  Here  again  we  may  note  a  clear  statement  that  for  Kant  knowing 
is  not  timeless  or  noumenal. 

3  I  feel  some  difficulty  as  to  the  use  of  the  word  immediate'.  See 
§  4  below. 


LI  §4]  EMPIRICAL  REALISM  381 

§  4.  Turning  the  Tables  on  Idealism 

Kant  insists  that  the  usual  argument  ot  idealism  is  here 
turned,  with  greater  justification,  against  itself.1  Problematic 
idealism  rested  its  case  on  the  certainty  of  immediate  experi- 
ence, and  assumed  that  the  only  immediate  experience  is  inner 
experience?  On  this  view  our  knowledge  of  things  in  space 
is  inferential :  it  depends  upon  an  inference  from  our  ideas  as 
supposed  effects  to  bodies  as  their  supposed  causes.  Such  an 
inference  from  given  effects  to  determinate  causes  is  always 
uncertain,  although  we  can  know  a  priori  that  every  effect 
must  have  some  cause.  In  this  particular  case  it  is  possible 
that  we  are  ourselves  unconsciously  the  cause  of  our  ideas  when 
we  perceive,3  just  as  we  are  consciously  the  cause  of  our  ideas 
when  we  indulge  in  arbitrary  imagination.  Hence  the  existence 
of  bodies  in  space  is  a  matter,  not  of  knowledge,  but  of  faith. 

Kant  has  turned  the  tables  on  this  argument  by  proving  (as 
he  believes)  that  outer  experience  is  really  immediate  experience, 
and  that  inner  experience  is  possible  only  if  we  have  immediate 
experience  of  bodies  in  space.  This  proof  depends  on  the 
assumption  that  inner  experience  is  more  than  pure  apper- 
ception, more  than  the  'I  think'  which  must  accompany  all 
our  ideas  of  objects.  The  sense  in  which  Kant  believes  that  this 
*I  think' — here  identified  with  'I  am' — immediately  includes 
in  itself  the  existence  of  a  subject  cannot  be  discussed  here.4 
Knowledge  of  my  existence  in  time  requires  more  than  pure 
apperception,  more  than  the  mere  thought  or  concept  that 
something  or  some  subject  exists.  We  must  have  intuition, 

1  Note  i,  B  276. 

2  Inner  experience  is  experience  of  the  self  and  its  states,  these 
states  being  thoughts,  feelings,  and  volitions. 

3  This  possibility  is  recognised  by  Descartes  himself,  as  is  also  the 
hypothesis  of  Berkeley — that  God,  and  not  bodies  or  matter,  is  the 
cause  of  our  ideas;  see  Meditation  III  and  Meditation  VI. 

4  It  involves  consciousness,  not  of  how  I  appear  to  myself  or  how  I  am 
in  myself,  but  only  that  I  am.  This  consciousness  is  conception  and 
not  intuition,  a  mere  intellectual  idea  of  the  activity  of  a  thinking  sub- 
ject. See  B  278  and  compare  B  157  and  B  XL-XLI  n.  as  well  as 
the  Paralogisms.  Compare  also  Chapters  LI  I  and  LI  1 1. 


382  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LI  §  4 

and,  indeed,  inner  intuition  under  the  form  of  time,  if  we 
are  to  have  determinate  empirical  knowledge  of  the  existence 
of  the  subject  in  time.1  In  short,  inner  experience  is  empirical 
knowledge  of  the  succession  of  my  ideas  or  states  in  time,  and 
we  have  proved  that  such  knowledge  is  impossible  apart  from 
immediate  experience  of  permanent  objects  in  space. 

Kant  insists  in  a  footnote  that  he  has  proved,  and  not  merely 
presupposed,  the  immediate  consciousness  of  the  existence  of 
spatial  things.  This  proof  holds  whether  we  have  insight  into 
the  possibility  of  this  consciousness  or  not.2  Kant's  discussion 
of  this  possibility  might  suggest  that  he  believes  us  to  have 
such  insight,3  but  this  does  not  appear  to  be  the  case.4 

I  confess  I  always  find  difficulty  in  proofs  that  knowledge 
of  some  particular  kind  is  immediate ;  for  if  the  knowledge  is 
immediate,  what  need,  and  indeed  what  possibility,  is  there 
of  proving  its  immediacy  ?  I  confess  also  that  I  think  Kant  is 

1  Compare  also  B  135.  In  B  XL  n.  we  are  told  that  if  apperception 
were  itself  intellectual  intuition,  the  argument  would  not  hold. 

2  Compare  A  171  =  B  213,  where  'insight*  is  said  to  fail  us  m 
many  cases  of  a  priori  knowledge.  Insight  ('einsehen9  or  'perspicere') 
belongs  to  reason,  not  understanding,  and  we  possess  insight  in  regard 
to  very  few  things.  See  Log.  Eml  VIII  (IX  65). 

3  B  276-7  n.  The  question  as  to  the  possibility  of  such  immediate 
outer  experience  Kant  identifies  with  the  question  whether  we  could 
have  an  inner  sense  and  no  outer  sense,  that  is,  whether  objects  of 
outer  sense  could  be  products  of  mere  imagination.  He  answers  that 
our  imagination  of  objects  of  outer  sense  would  be  impossible,  and 
that  we  could  not  'exhibit'  such  objects  imaginatively  in  intuition, 
unless  we  already  had  an  outer  sense.  He  even  suggests  that  we  must 
distinguish    immediately    the    receptivity    of   outer   sense    from    the 
spontaneity  of  imagination ;    for  merely  to  imagine  an  outer  sense 
would  be  to  destroy  the  very  power  of  intuition  which  we  were  trying 
to  determine  by  means  of  imagination.  I  do  not  understand  how  the 
immediacy  of  this  distinction  is  established  by  this  obscure  reason,  nor 
how  it  can  be  reconciled  with  Kant's  general  doctrine.  Compare  §  6 
below,  and  ProL  §  13  Anmerk.  Ill  (IV  290),  where  Kant  deals  with 
the  cognate  problem  of  the  distinction  between  truth  and  dream. 

4  In  B  XLI  n.  we  are  told  that  it  is  as  impossible  to  explain  how  the 
existence  of  a  permanent  spatial  thing  different  from  all  my  ideas  is 
necessarily  involved  in  the  determination  of  my  existence  ('m  der 
Bestimmung  meines  eigenen  Daseins  notwendig  mit  eingeschlossen  wird')y 
as  it  is  to  explain  how  we  think  the  permanent  in  time. 


LI  §4]  EMPIRICAL  REALISM  383 

carried  away  by  his  zeal  when  he  asserts,  not  only  that  inner 
experience  is  impossible  apart  from  outer,  but  also  that  it  is 
itself  possible  only  mediately — does  he  intend  to  deny  that 
inner  experience  is  as  immediate  as  outer  experience?  If  so, 
he  must,  I  .think,  be  using  'immediate'  as  equivalent  to  'self- 
sufficient'.  He  does  appear  to  hold  that  outer  sense  is  possible 
apart  from  inner  and  not  vice  versa,  for  he  attributes  outer 
sense,  but  not  inner,  to  animals  j1  but  animal  consciousness 
(Erlebms)  is  not  strictly  experience  (Erfahrung).  Experience 
of  bodies  in  space  certainly  involves  thought  and  imagination ; 
and  even  although  consciousness  of  thinking  (or  pure  apper- 
ception) is  not  experience  of  our  existence  in  time,  I  find  it 
hard  to  believe  that  pure  apperception  (which  is  a  condition 
of  outer  experience)  can,  on  Kant's  view,  be  found  apart  from 
experience  of  our  existence  in  time  and  of  the  succession  of  our 
ideas.  Furthermore  experience  of  bodies  in  space  is  experience 
of  bodies  moving ;  and  since  this  is  impossible  apart  from  time, 
inner  experience  would  seem  to  be  the  condition  of  outer, 
just  as  much  as  outer  experience  is  the  condition  of  inner, 
unless  we  are  to  abandon  the  doctrine  of  the  Aesthetic  that  time 
is  the  immediate  condition  of  inner  appearances  and  the  mediate 
condition  of  outer  appearances.2 

I  would  suggest  that  (granted  the  validity  of  the  argument 
in  the  First  Analogy)  Kant  has  shown  inner  experience  to  be 
conditioned  by  outer  experience,  but  not  that  outer  experience 
can  be  independent  of  inner  experience.  The  two  types  of 
experience  cannot  be  separated  from  each  other ;  and  although 
an  element  of  immediacy  must  be  allowed  to  both  in  so  far  as 
both  involve  direct  intuition,  neither  can  be  regarded  as  imme- 
diate in  the  sense  of  being  self-sufficient. 

I  would  suggest  also  that  Kant  is  right  in  saying  that  the 
Refutation  of  Idealism  does  not  add  anything  new  to  his 
doctrine,  but  only  to  his  method  of  proof.3  He  has  already 
proved  that  all  awareness  of  change  presupposes  the  existence 

1  See  Metaphysiky  p.  129. 

2  See  A  34  —  B  50.  To  abandon  this  doctrine  would,  I  think,  be 
inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Analogies.  8  B  XXX IX  n. 


384  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LI  §  5 

of  permanent  substances  in  space.  What  he  now  adds  is  only 
that  awareness  of  subjective  change  presupposes  the  existence 
of  permanent  substances  in  space.  Furthermore  he  has  always 
insisted  that  consciousness  of  the  objective  is  inseparable 
from  consciousness  of  the  subjective  and  vice  versa ;  and  although 
consciousness  of  the  subjective  was,  in  the  Transcendental 
Deduction,  primarily  a  consciousness  of  the  synthetic  activity 
of  the  self  rather  than  of  its  changing  states,  I  do  not  think 
that  these  two  aspects  of  self-consciousness  can  exist  apart 
from  one  another,  and  I  see  no  reason  to  believe  that  Kant 
ever  thought  they  could. 

§  5.  Empirical  Realism  and  Transcendental  Idealism 

The  strength  of  the  expressions  which  Kant  uses  in  his 
desire  to  distinguish  his  doctrine  of  transcendental  idealism 
and  empirical  realism  from  problematic  idealism  must  not 
mislead  us  into  thinking  that  he  is  going  back  upon  his  doctrine 
that  the  world  we  know  is  a  world  which  (although  it  is  an 
appearance  of  things-in-themselves)  is  essentially  relative  to 
human  minds.  I  do  not  think  we  need  feel  any  difficulty  when 
he  says,  with  obvious  truth,  that  the  idea  of  something  per- 
manent is  not  the  same  as  a  permanent  idea,1  but  may  be  very 
variable  like  all  our  other  ideas  (including  the  idea  of  matter).2 
We  may  feel  more  doubt  when  he  asserts  that  this  permanent 
must  be  an  external  thing  which  is  different  from  all  my  ideas, 
but  I  think  that  on  reflexion  we  shall  see  that  this  is  only  a 
particular  application  of  the  doctrine  which  Kant  has  always 
preached  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  object.3 

1  In  B  412  Kant  speaks  as  if  we  required  *a  permanent  intuition  for 
knowledge  of  substance',  but  this  seems  to  be  a  loose  phrase  for  'intui- 
tion of  the  permanent'.  There  are  not  the  same  objections  to  the  phrase 
'a  permanent  appearance'  in  A  364.  In  Chapter  XLII  §  5  I  have  dis- 
cussed the  difficulty  of  Kant's  repeated  statements  that  we  not  only 
presuppose,  but  also  observe  or  perceive,  the  permanent. 

2  B  XLI  n. 

3  The  object  is  indeed  only  a  totality  of  ideas  (possible  and  actual) 
— compare  A  191  —  B  236 — but  it  possesses  a  necessary  synthetic 
unity,  and  one  condition  (or  manifestation)  of  this  necessary  synthetic 


LI  §  6]  EMPIRICAL  REALISM  385 

Consciousness  of  my  own  empirical  existence  is  more  than 
consciousness  of  an  idea  of  my  existence;  it  is  consciousness, 
not  of  a  present  idea,  but  of  that  succession  of  thoughts,  feelings, 
and  volitions  in  time1  which  constitutes  my  existence  as  a 
thinking  being;  and  I  can  determine  or  know  such  existence 
only  in  relation  to  a  permanent  spatial  world.  Hence  Kant 
holds — and  surely  he  is  right — that  consciousness  of  my  exis- 
tence is  impossible  apart  from  consciousness  of  a  spatial  world 
of  substances  which  are  permanent  amid  change;  and  such 
consciousness  in  turn  is  consciousness,  not  of  a  present  idea,  but 
of  a  world  spread  out  in  space  and  time.  The  fact  that  the  self 
we  know  and  the  world  we  know  are  to  be  distinguished  from 
our  momentary  idea  of  them  does  not  mean  that  either  the  self 
or  the  world  ceases  to  be  phenomenal — Kant  is  still  a  transcen- 
dental idealist.  But  he  is  also  an  empirical  realist;  and  he 
believes,  not  that  we  have  ideas  to  which  the  world  and  the  self 
correspond,2  but  that  the  phenomenal  world  and  self  are 
directly  present  to  our  minds  through  thought  and  sense.  The 
fact  that  they  are  so  present  is  compatible  with  (and  indeed 
on  Kant's  theory  inseparable  from)  the  doctrine  that  they  are 
determined  by  the  forms  of  thought  and  intuition. 

§  6.  Sense  and  Imagination 

We  must  not  suppose  Kant's  doctrine  to  involve  the  absurd 
consequence  that  every  idea  of  spatial  objects  which  bears  the 
character  of  intuition  involves  the  existence  of  these  objects.3 
Such  an  idea,  for  example  in  dreams  or  in  madness,  may  be 
the  product  of  imagination.  It  is  nevertheless  possible  only 
through  the  reproduction  and  combination  of  past  perceptions 
of  spatial  objects;  and  what  has  been  shown  is  that  these 

unity  is  that  these  ideas  must  be  regarded  as  states  or  accidents  of  a 
permanent  substance  in  space.  We  must  also  remember  that  the  inner 
nature  of  the  object  is  the  thing-m-itself,  but  is  to  us  unknown. 

1  Compare  B  XL  n. 

2  Although   Kant  uses   the   word   Correspond'   sometimes   rather 
loosely,  it  is  only  the  concept  considered  in  abstraction  from  its 
object  which  corresponds  to  the  object  presented  to  us  in  intuition 
and  thought.  3  Note  3,  B  278-9. 

VOL.  II  N 


386  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LI  §  6 

past  perceptions  were  possible  only  through  the  existence  of 
actual  spatial  objects.  Kant's  argument  is  quite  general;  it 
asserts  only  that  inner  experience  in  general  presupposes  outer 
experience  in  general.  Whether  a  particular  supposed  experi- 
ence is  experience  or  mere  imagination  must  be  decided  in 
accordance  with  the  ordinary  criteria,  or  in  other  words  by 
means  of  the  Analogies.  These  Analogies  (and  especially  the 
Second  Analogy)  are  the  rules  by  which  we  distinguish  ex- 
perience in  general  (including  experience  of  the  self)  from  mere 
imagination.1 

Kant  appears  to  assume,  and  with  justice,  that  we  have 
usually  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing  the  products  of  our 
waking  imagination  from  actual  objects  in  space.  The  chief 
difficulty  for  sane  men  is  to  be  found  in  the  case  of  dreams. 
Kant's  clearest  statement  in  regard  to  them  is  to  be  found  in 
the  Prolegomena?  The  difference  between  truth  and  dream 
does  not  lie  in  the  character  or  constitution3  of  the  ideas  in  the 
two  cases,  for  the  ideas  are  of  the  same  character  in  both. 
We  deny  that  dream-objects  are  real,  because  they  do  not 
conform  to  the  rules  necessary  for  determining  an  object, 
and  because  they  cannot  cohere  with  other  objects  in  an 
experience  which  rests  throughout  upon  causal  law. 

1  B  XLI  n.  Compare  A  201-2  =  B  246-7.  In  A  376  Kant  applies  the 
same  principle  to  the  'illusion  of  sense'  (Betrug  dcr  Sinnc).  The  rule 
which  he   there  gives  is  the  Second  Postulate — 'What  is  connected 
with  a  sense-perception  in  accordance  with  empirical  laws  is  actual'. 
The  empirical  laws  in  question  are,  however,  primarily  causal  laws. 

In  ProL  §  13  Anmerk.  Ill  (IV  290-1)  Kant  again  discusses  illusions 
of  sense,  and  maintains  that  strictly  speaking  illusion  is  due,  not  to 
the  senses,  but  to  the  understanding  which  makes  false  judgements 
on  the  basis  of  given  appearances. 

2  §  13  Anmerk.  Ill  (IV  290).  3  'Bcscliqffenlicit.9 


CHAPTER    L  I  I 
INNER  SENSE  AND   SELF-KNOWLEDGE 

§  i.  The  Paradox  of  Inner  Sense 

After  a  period  of  comparatively  easy  going  we  must  unfor- 
tunately turn  to  one  of  the  most  difficult  aspects  of  the  Critical 
Philosophy — the  nature  of  inner  sense.  I  have  deliberately 
kept  this  topic  to  the  end.1  Kant's  primary  concern  throughout 
the  Kritik  is  with  physical  objects ;  and  if  we  can  first  of  all 
understand  his  account  of  our  knowledge  of  the  physical  world, 
we  may  at  least  hope  that  we  shall  be  in  a  better  position  to 
understand  his  acco\mt  of  self-knowledge.  Nevertheless  it 
cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  that  the  Kritik  professes  to  give 
an  account  of  all  knowledge  and  all  experience,  not  merely 
of  the  knowledge  or  experience  of  physical  objects ;  and  indeed 
that  the  account  of  time  as  the  form  of  inner  sense  is  an  integral 
and  essential  part  of  the  whole  Critical  Philosophy. 

The  full  treatment  of  this  question  demands  a  detailed 
discussion  of  the  Paralogisms,  which  is  outside  the  scope  of 
this  book.  Here  we  must  be  content  to  examine  only  what 
Kant  calls  the  'paradox'  of  inner  sense,  as  it  is  expounded  in 
the  Transcendental  Deduction  of  the  second  edition.2  I  feel 
far  from  confident  that  I  have  mastered  this  doctrine,  and 
I  am  not  sure  whether  my  difficulties  are  due  to  my  own 
incapacity  in  following  Kant's  complicated  expressions,  or 
whether  they  are  partly  due  to  a  real  obscurity  in  his  thought ; 
but  at  least  it  may  be  possible  to  bring  out  certain  aspects  of 
his  teaching  which  are  implicit  in  what  we  have  already  learned. 

Kant  takes  the  paradox  to  be  that  by  inner  sense  we  know 
ourselves,  not  as  we  are  in  ourselves,  but  only  as  we  appear 
to  ourselves.  In  view  of  his  doctrine  that  time,  like  space,  is 
only  a  form  of  our  sensibility,  this  paradox  may  seem  not  to 

1  Inner  sense  has  been  discussed  briefly  in  Chapters  II  §  3,  IV  §  4, 
and  VII  §  2.  For  the  discussion  of  apperception  see  the  Transcendental 
Deduction,  especially  Chapters  XXI-XXXI.  2  B  152  fT. 


388  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LII  §  r 

be  so  very  great.  Kant  himself  has  dismissed  an  analogous 
objection  somewhat  lightly — perhaps  too  lightly — in  his 
first  edition.1  The  special  difficulty  of  his  theory  seems  to  be 
found  in  the  reasons  which  lie  behind  it — namely  that  we  can 
intuit  ourselves  only  as  we  are  affected  internally.  This  appears 
self-contradictory ;  for  it  means  that  we  stand  to  ourselves  in 
a  passive  relation.2  This  difficulty  may,  I  think,  be  put  more 
clearly  by  saying  that  the  self  both  affects  and  is  affected  by 
itself.  Inner  sense,  since  it  is  sense,  must  be  passive — that  is 
the  differentia  of  sense.  Yet  to  give  us  knowledge  of  the  self, 
it  must  be  affected  by  the  self.3  More  precisely,  inner  sense, 
which  is  a  passive  capacity  of  the  self,  must  be  affected 
by  apperception,  which  is  an  active  power  of  the  same 
self.4 

For  this  reason  Kant  carefully  distinguishes  inner  sense 
from  apperception,  although  they  are  commonly  identified.5 

It  does  appear  a  trifle  paradoxical  that  the  self  should  have 
two  powers  of  self-consciousness,  one  active  and  the  other 
passive ;  and  that  it  should  have  to  act  upon,  or  affect,  its  own 
passivity  in  order  to  produce  a  self-knowledge  which  in  the 
end  will  be  knowledge  of  the  self  only  as  it  must  appear,  not 
as  it  really  is. 

Part  of  the  difficulty  lies,  I  think,  in  the  fact  that  when  Kant 
speaks  of  the  self  as  'affecting*  inner  sense,  he  is  not  using  the 
word  'affects'  in  the  same  way  as  when  he  speaks  of  physical 
objects,  or  things-in-themselves,  as  affecting  outer  sense.  The 
self  affects  itself  through  the  transcendental  synthesis  of 
imagination,  and  this  kind  of  affection  is  clearly  necessary  even 
for  our  knowledge  of  the  external  world.  The  difference 

1  A  36  —  B  53  ff.  Compare  Chapter  VIII  §  9,  and  also  B  155-6. 
2Bi53.  3B  15611. 

4  I  take  this  to  be  the  implication  of  Kant's  distinction  between 
inner  sense  and  the  active  faculty  or  power  (Vermbgcn)  of  apperception. 
It  is,  I  think,  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  he  goes  on  to  speak  of  under- 
standing as   determining  inner  sense.   This   of  course   takes   place 
through  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination. 

5  Compare  A  107  when  what  is  commonly  called  inner  sense  is 
equated  with  empirical  apperception.  Compare  also  B  139-40. 


LII  §  i]     INNER  SENSE  AND  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  389 

between  outer  and  inner  sense  appears  to  lie  in  this — that  outer 
sense  might  receive  external  impressions  (though  it  could 
never  give  us  knowledge  of  an  external  world)  apart  from 
the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  and  the  unity 
of  apperception ;  but  apart  from  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination  and  the  unity  of  apperception  nothing  could 
be  received  by  inner  sense  at  all,  and  there  could  be  no  con- 
sciousness of  the  stream  of  our  ideas  under  the  form  of  time. 
This  seems  to  be  implied  by  Kant's  references  to  the  con- 
sciousness of  animals,  who  are  said  to  have  outer  sense  but  not 
inner,  intuitions  but  not  concepts.1  Yet  it  may  also  be  held 
that  outer  sense  is  really  in  the  same  position  as  inner  sense, 
if  we  take  Kant's  view  to  be  that  in  order  to  intuit  any  line 
however  short  there  must  be  a  successive  synthesis  of  the  parts, 
and  consequently  a  transcendental  synthesis  which  holds 
together  the  past  and  the  present.2 

In  any  case,  if  inner  sense  involves  a  direct  awareness  of  my 
ideas  as  succeeding  one  another  in  time,  and  if  a  transcendental 
synthesis  holding  together  the  past  and  the  present  is  necessary 
for  such  awareness,  then  clearly  the  mind  must  'affect'  itself 
by  this  transcendental  synthesis,  and  only  so  can  there  be 
inner  sense  at  all.  Such  'affection'  does  not  supply  a  matter 
to  inner  sense  as  the  affection  by  objects  (whether  phenomenal 
or  transcendental)  supplies  matter  to  outer  sense ;  for  the  ideas 
of  the  outer  senses  are  said  to  constitute  the  proper  stuff 
or  matter  of  inner  sense.3  On  the  contrary,  the  affection  of  the 
self  by  itself  seems  to  be  concerned  rather  with  determining 
inner  sense  as  regards  its  form,  which  is  time. 

Once  we  have  grasped  this  principle,  the  paradox  of  Kant's 
doctrine  will  be  diminished,  and  his  account  of  self-knowledge 
will  approximate,  in  spite  of  real  differences,  to  his  account  of 
knowledge  ot  physical  objects.  I  take  it  for  granted  that  however 

1  See  Metaphysiky  p.  129,  and  compare  Chapter  XVI  §  13. 

3  This  is  the  commonly  accepted  view,  but  I  think  that  Kant 
holds  it  only  for  experience  or  measurement,  not  for  mere  intuition. 
Compare  A  426  n.  --  B  454  n. 

3  B  XXXIX  n.  and  B  67.  Compare  Chapter  IV  §  4. 


390  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LII  §z 

unsatisfactory  the  terms  'inner'  and  'outer'  may  be,  what 
Kant  attempts  to  describe  is  really  an  element  in  our  experience : 
we  have  a  direct  and  immediate  awareness,  which  must  there- 
fore be  intuitive  and  not  conceptual,  of  what  is  present  to  our 
minds  at  any  moment  j1  and  our  immediate  awareness  is  always 
awareness  of  the  time  at  which  a  sensum  or  idea  is  given,  not 
awareness  of  the  time  at  which  objects  exist  and  change.2 
Such  immediate  awareness  is  called  by  Kant  (whether  appro- 
priately or  not)  inner  intuition,  and  is  ascribed  to  inner  sense, 
the  form  of  which  is  time.  Pure  apperception,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  consciousness  of  the  necessary  unity  of  our  thought 
and  of  the  necessary  forms  in  which  this  unity  is  manifested. 
In  abstraction  this  implies  the  necessary  unity  of  some  sort 
of  intuition  (intuition  in  general)}  for  thought  apart  from 
intuition  is  empty.  It  does  not  imply  any  particular  kind  of 
intuition,  and  it  has  in  itself  no  reference  to  time.3 

§  2.  Understanding,  Imagination,  and  Inner  Sense 

Understanding  is  said  to  determine  inner  sense.4  'Determine 
inner  sense'  seems  to  mean  here  'hold  together  the  manifold 
of  inner  sense  in  necessary  synthetic  unity' ;  for  understanding 
performs  this  task  in  virtue  of  its  original5  power  to  combine 
the  manifold  of  intuition,  and  to  combine  is  to  bring  under 
an  apperception,6  which  always  implies  necessary  synthetic 
unity. 

1  See  Chapter  IV  §  4. 

2  See  Chapter  VII  §  2.  An  object  may  change  as  our  scnsa  do  (when 
we  perceive  an  objective  succession),  but  it  may  not;  for  we  may  per- 
ceive successively  the  coexistent  states  of  the  object.  The  time  of  the 
states  of  the  object  we  must  determine  by  thought,  not  by  intuition; 
but  the  time  of  our  own  ideas  is  known  as  immediately  as  anything 
can  be.  3  Compare  B  150-1.  4  B  153. 

5  *  Original'  in  the  sense  of  being  wholly  independent  of  anything 
else  and  particularly  of  intuition. 

6  Apperception  appears  to  be  the  act  here  rather  than  the  power ; 
see  Chapter  XXI  §  i.  As  a  power  appeiception  and  understanding 
appear  to  be  identical  (though  'apperception'  indicates,  not  only  a 
power  of  thinking,  but  a  power  of  thinking  which  is  in  some  degree 
self-conscious).  Apperception  in  B  154  is  the  source  of  all  combination, 


LII  §2]     INNER  SENSE  AND  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  391 

The  question  then  arises,  as  usual,  how  understanding,  as  a 
po\ver  of  thinking  by  means  of  concepts,  can  be  said  to  combine 
the  manifold  of  intuition.  It  is  not  itself  a  power  of  intuiting; 
nor,  even  if  intuitions  are  given,  can  it  take  them  up  directly 
into  itself  (as  a  power  of  conceiving)  and  make  them,  as  it  were, 
its  own  intuitions. 

If  we  consider  the  synthesis  of  understanding  in  complete 
abstraction  from  what  is  synthetised,  all  we  are  left  with  is 
the  unity  of  the  act  of  thought.  Of  this  act  understanding 
is  said  to  be  conscious  even  apart  from  sensibility,  but  this  is 
only  by  abstraction;  for  without  sense-data  there  could  be 
no  such  thing  as  thought.1  The  unity  of  the  act  of  thought,  it 
may  be  added,  manifests  itself  in  the  forms  of  judgment,  which 
are  the  same  whatever  be  the  matter  thought.  The  act  of 
thought  (with  its  necessary  unity  and  its  necessary  forms), 
although  having  a  nature  in  no  way  determined  by  sensibility,2 
is  able  to  determine  sensibility  inwardly  in  regard  to  the  mani- 
fold which  may  be  given  to  understanding ;  but  this  determina- 
tion is  concerned  with  the  manifold  only  so  far  as  it  is  given  in 
accordance  with  a  form  of  intuition,  namely  time.3  The  under- 
standing can  impose  the  principles  of  synthesis  native  to  itself 
upon  the  pure  manifold  of  time,  and  so  upon  all  appearances 
to  inner  sense.4 

How  can  it  do  so  ?  It  can  do  so  only  through  a  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  which  combines,  as  Kant  has  all 
along  insisted,  the  pure  manifold  of  time,  and  consequently 

while  in  B  130  (and  indeed  in  the  present  passage)  all  combination  is 
ascribed  to  understanding. 

The  possibility  of  understanding  is  said  to  rest  on  apperception. 
I  do  not  know  whether  this  means  more  than  that  understanding  is 
manifested  only  in  acts  of  apperception.  In  A  97-8  the  three  subjective 
sources  of  knowledge  are  said  to  make  understanding  possible  (as  a 
power  of  knowing),  but  I  am  not  sure  whether  this  is  relevant. 

1  Compare  A  96  and  A  86  -  -  B  118. 

2  In  the  sense  that  it  is  always  the  same  whatever  be  the  nature  of 
given  intuitions — the  differences  in  acts  of  thought  are  here  irrelevant, 

3  Compare  B  150  and  A  99.  Space  may  be  involved  as  well — perhaps 
must  be  involved ;  sec  B  155. 

4  Compare  A  76-7  --  B  102  and  A  79  =  B  104-5. 


392  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LII  §2 

the  empirical  manifold  given  in  time,  in  accordance  with  the 
unity  or  apperception.1  Indeed  Kant  speaks  here  as  if  the 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  were  the  work  of 
understanding  at  a  lower  level  (or  of  understanding  considered, 
not  as  a  power  of  pure  thinking,  but  as  a  power  of  a  priori 
knowledge). 

In  this  way  the  understanding  can  be  said  to  exercise  its 
activity  on  the  passive  or  receptive  self  of  which  it  is  an  active 
faculty ;  and  thus  the  active  faculty  may  be  said  to  affect  inner 
sense. 

There  is  therefore  a  complete  contrast  between  apperception 
and  inner  sense. 

Apperception  and  its  synthetic  unity  is  the  source  of  all 
combination.2  As  involving  the  forms  of  judgment  it  applies  to 
a  manifold  in  general \  for  whatever  manifold  may  be  given,  if 
it  is  to  be  judged  and  known,  it  must  be  combined  in  accordance 
with  the  forms  of  judgment  or  the  categories.  And  this  means 
that  the  categories,  as  principles  of  synthesis  involved  in  the 
very  nature  of  understanding,  arc  independent  of  all  differences 
in  sensuous  intuition,  and  apply  a  priori  to  all  objects  in  general. 

Inner  sense,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  eliminate  the  given 
impressions  which  are  its  matter,  contains  only  the  form  of 
time,  which  is  the  form  of  all  inner  intuition,  and  so  of  all 
intuition  without  exception.3  Such  a  form,  however — and  this 
is  a  doctrine  stressed  specially  in  the  second  edition4 — contains 
in  itself  no  combination  of  the  manifold,  and  so  contains  no 
determinate  intuition.  This  is  obvious,  if  combination  is  due 


1  We  must  remember  that  conception  is  always  consciousness  of  the 
general  principle  at  work  in  a  synthesis  of  imagination,  and  that  the 
categories  are  ultimate  principles  of  synthesis  necessary  to  all  concep- 
tion and  imposed  upon  imagination  by  understanding  itself. 

2  I  would  again  remind  the  reader  that  Kant  is  speaking  of  the 
ultimate  principles  of  combination  which  condition  empirical  com- 
bination. We  must  always  combine  the  given  as  accidents  of  a  sub- 
stance, for  example,  but  it  is  a  matter  of  empirical  observation  that 
the  accidents  of  sugar  are  to  be  hard  and  white  and  sweet. 

3  Every  intuition  'taken  up*  into  consciousness  is  thereby  an  inner 
intuition  (whatever  else  it  may  be).  4  Compare  B  160  n. 


LII  §  3]     INNER  SENSE  AND  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  393 

only  to  understanding  working  through  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination;  but  apart  from  such  combination 
the  form  of  time  is  a  mere  abstraction. 

In  order  that  time  may  be,  not  only  a  form  of  intuition,  but 
also  a  pure  and  determinate  intuition,  there  must  be  a  deter- 
mination or  combination  of  the  pure  manifold  through  the 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination  (which  Kant  has  called 
the  synthesis  speciosa1  as  opposed  to  the  synthesis  intellectualis}. 
There  must  also  be  a  consciousness  of  this  determination  (or 
of  the  principle  of  this  determination),  and  such  consciousness 
is  a  conceptual  consciousness  of  the  understanding.  Indeed 
the  ultimate  principle  of  this  determination  is  not  merely  one 
which  the  understanding  finds  in  the  transcendental  synthesis 
of  imagination,  but  one  which  it  imposes  a  priori  upon  the 
transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination.2  Hence  we  are  entitled 
to  speak  of  the  synthetic  influence  of  the  understanding  upon 
inner  sense.3 

§3.  Illustrations  of  Kant's  Doctrine 

Kant  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  we  always  perceive  this  in 
ourselves.4  Such  an  assertion  is  an  overstatement;  for  our 
knowledge  of  the  synthetic  activities  of  the  self  may  be  what  he 
calls  'obscure'.5  It  nevertheless  serves  to  bring  out  sharply 
how  far  Kant  was  from  regarding  the  transcendental  synthesis 
as  necessarily  unconscious.  His  subsequent  statement  that  the 
act  of  synthesis  successively  determines  inner  sense  shows 
also  how  far  he  was  from  regarding  the  transcendental  synthesis 
as  timeless.  There  could  be  no  more  explicit  contradiction 
of  the  fantastic  and,  in  my  opinion,  baseless  interpretation 
of  Vaihinger  so  widely  accepted  at  the  present  time. 

Kant's  illustrations  are  interesting,  and  they  bear  out  the 
view  that  the  matter  of  inner  sense  is  derived  from  outer  sense. 

1  See  B  151.  2  Compare  Chapters  XIV  §  3  and  XXXIV  §  3. 

3  This  is  another  way  of  saying  that  inner  sense  is  affected  by  the 
synthetic  activity  of  understanding.  4  B  154. 

6  Compare  A  103,  A  117  n.,  and  B  414-15  n. 
VOL.  II  N* 


394  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LII  §  3 

We  cannot  think  a  line  without  drawing  it  in  thought.1  We 
cannot  think  a  circle  without  describing  it.  We  cannot  repre- 
sent the  three  dimensions  of  space  save  by  setting  three  lines 
at  right  angles  to  one  another  from  the  same  point.  How  little 
are  these  illustrations  concerned  with  the  unconscious,  the 
timeless,  or  the  noumenal !  Here  indeed  we  are  concerned  with 
the  synthetic  influence  of  understanding  by  means  of  mathe- 
matical concepts,  though  at  least  the  category  of  quantity  is 
necessarily  involved.  It  may  seem  strange  that  the  illustrations 
are  concerned  with  the  objects  of  outer  sense,  if  we  forget 
that  the  matter  of  inner  sense  is  derived  from  outer  sense; 
but  Kant  goes  on  to  explain  how  the  determination  of  outer 
sense  is  a  determination  of  inner  sense  as  well,  and  indeed  how, 
in  accordance  \vith  the  doctrine  of  the  second  edition,  the 
determination  of  inner  sense  must  also  be  a  determination  of 
outer  sense. 

In  order  to  think  time— and  here,  as  in  the  previous  cases, 
the  thinking  is  manifestly  a  knowing,  and  involves  intuition 
as  well  as  concepts — in  order  to  think  time  we  must  draw  a 
straight  line  (which  has  to  serve  as  the  spatial  image  of  time).2 
Kant's  main  point,  however,  is  that  we  must  attend  only  to 
the  act  of  synthesis  whereby  we  determine  inner  sense  succes- 
sively (or  successively  combine  the  manifold  in  inner  sense). 
In  other  words  we  must  attend  to  the  succession  of  our  acts  of 
combining  the  manifold  and  so  determining  inner  sense.3 

1  Here  thought  is  manifestly  equivalent  to  imagination. 

2  Compare  B  156.  I  suppose  other  spatial  representations  might  be 
possible,  but  they  would  be  less  appropriate;  for  a  straight  line  alone 
has  one  dimension.  I  am  not  so  sure  as  Kant  seems  to  be  that  we 
could  not  adequately  represent  time  coneretely  hy  a  tune;  but  if  all 
change  is  relative  to  the  permanent  in  space,   his  doctrine  is  not 
groundless. 

3  Kant  says  we  must  attend  'to  the  succession  of  this  determination 
in  inner  sense'  rather  than  'of  inner  sense'  (which  we  should  expect).  I 
suppose  that  the  act  of  determination,  so  far  as  it  is  an  act  of  adding  a 
new  manifold  to  what  we  already  have,  may  be  said  to  be  in  inner  sense. 
Strictly  speaking,  I  take  it,  it  is  the  new  manifold  or  the  combined 
manifold  which  is  present  in  inner  sense  through  our  act.  For  aware- 
ness of  the  act  in  the  full  sense,  I  should  imagine  that  we  require,  not 
only  inner  sense,  but  also  empirical  as  well  as  pure  apperception 


LII  §  3]     INNER   SENSE  AND  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  395 

The  act  of  combination  or  synthesis  is  here  regarded  as  a 
synthesis  of  the  manifold  in  space.  It  is  again  seen  to  be  suc- 
cessive; for  it  is  described,  perhaps  a  little  misleadingly,  as 
'motion' — motion  as  an  act  of  the  subject,  not  as  the  character 
of  an  object.  The  subject  may  be  said  to  'move'  only  in  the 
sense  that  it  successively  describes  a  spatial  figure  in  imagina- 
tion: this  is  a  pure  act  of  successive  synthesis  of  the  manifold 
in  outer  intuition  in  general,  an  act  of  the  productive  imagina- 
tion. When  we  regard  this  act  in  abstraction  from  the  spatial 
elements  involved,  when  we  consider  it,  in  short,  only  as  deter- 
mining inner  sense  in  accordance  with  the  form  of  time — then, 
and  apparently  then  only,  have  we  the  concept  of  succession. 
This  concept,  it  should  be  noted,  is  a  concept  of  a  mode  of 
time1:  it  should  be  sharply  distinguished  from  the  concept 
of  change,  which  is  empirical.2 

The  concept  of  succession,  on  Kant's  view,  is  the  concept  of 
a  principle  at  work  in  the  synthesis  of  imagination.  In  this  it 
resembles  other  concepts ;  for  in  concepts  we  conceive  a  prin- 
ciple at  work  in  the  synthesis  of  imagination  whereby  an  object 
is  produced.3  Kant  is  attempting,  whether  successfully  or  not, 
to  connect  our  concept  of  time  with  that  of  space;  and  even 
the  mere  attempt  was,  I  imagine,  an  advance  on  the  accepted 
views  of  his  own  period.  The  subject  is,  howrever,  full  of 
difficulty.  It  is  not  altogether  clear  why  for  our  concept  of  suc- 
cession, and  apparently  even  of  time,4  \ve  must  have  in  mind 
the  synthesis  of  a  spatial  manifold  in  a  straight  line ;  for  we  must 
immediately  consider  the  synthesis  in  abstraction  from  the 
spatial  elements  involved.  Partly  no  doubt  it  is  in  order  to  have 
an  image  whereby  we  can  indicate  that  time  is  of  one  dimension  ;5 
but  is  this  due  to  more  than  the  accidental  prominence  of 

(consciousness  of  the  special  as  well  as  the  universal  nature  of  our 
activity);  unless  indeed,  which  seems  to  me  very  unlikely,  acts  of 
imagination  (as  opposed  to  acts  of  thought)  are  themselves  known 
through  inner  sense.  Compare  Chapter  XXI  §  3. 

1  See  Chapter  XXXIX  §3. 

2  B  3,  A  171  =  B  213,  A  206-7  -=  B  252. 

3  The  exceptions  to  this  rule,  if  any,  need  not  be  here  considered. 

4  B  156.  5  Ibid. 


396  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LII  §  3 

sight  in  our  experience?  Partly  perhaps  it  is  that  we  may  be 
able  to  understand  the  successiveness  of  time  as  against  the 
non-successiveness  of  space.1 

Furthermore  the  successiveness  of  our  act  of  synthesis 
seems  already  to  presuppose  time.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
no  time  apart  from  the  act  of  synthesis  whereby  past  and 
present  are  held  together  before  the  mind.  Hence  Kant  can 
speak  of  producing  time  itself  in  apprehension,2  and  can  say 
that  the  ideas  of  a  determinate  time  (or  space)  are  produced 
through  the  synthesis  or  combination  of  a  homogeneous 
manifold.3  It  is  a  little  surprising  that  he  here  makes  no  refer- 
ence to  the  synthesis  of  the  pure  manifold  of  time  itself;  but 
perhaps  he  thinks  it  unnecessary  to  do  so,  since  in  the  pre- 
ceding paragraph  he  has  said  that  there  is  no  determinate 
intuition  of  time  apart  from  the  transcendental  synthesis  of 
imagination.4  The  successive  synthesis  of  the  manifold  of  space 
in  the  imaginative  construction  of  a  straight  line  must  also  be 
a  successive  synthesis  of  the  manifold  of  time  in  which  the 
parts  of  the  line  are  successively  present  to  inner  sense.5 
Otherwise  we  could  not  be  aware  of  the  line  (as  a  determinate 
quantity).6 

Kant  may  have  this  point  in  mind  when  he  adds  that  under- 
standing does  not  find  in  inner  sense  such  a  combination  of 
the  manifold,7  but  produces  it,  in  that  it  affects  that  sense. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  in  all  apprehension  of  appear- 
ances in  space  and  time  there  must  be  present  a  transcendental 
synthesis  of  the  space  and  time  in  which  these  appearances 

1  This  is  suggested  by  the  statement  that  we  can  be  conscious  of 
inner  changes  only  against  a  permanent  in  space;  see  B  292. 

2  A  143  -    B  182. 

3  B  202.  Compare  also  A  210   -=  B  255.  4  B  154. 

5  There  is  no  question  here  of  a  synthesis  of  points  or  instants.  The 
synthesis  is  continuous. 

6  Compare  (in  spite  of  differences)  A  99-100,  A  102,  and  A  103. 
The  reader  may   also  be  referred  again  to  the  difference  between 
a   determinate,    and   an   indeterminate,    quantity   (or    quantum)    in 
A  426  n.  =  B  454  n. 

7  It   is   perhaps   possible   that   the   combination   of  the   manifold 
referred  to  is  the  combination  of  the  manifold  in  space. 


LII  §  3]     INNER  SENSE  AND  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  397 

are.  Nevertheless  I  should  have  liked  to  see  here  a  few  of  the 
empirical  illustrations  which  Kant  so  sternly  denies  himself.1 
It  is,  however,  clear  enough  that — leaving  aside  the  question 
of  desires  and  volitions  which  are  also  present  to  inner  sense — 
the  appearances  given  to  inner  sense  are  the  same  as  the 
appearances  given  to  outer  sense.  All  appearances,  so  far  as  we 
are  conscious  of  them,  or  at  least  so  far  as  we  are  conscious  of 
them  as  present  to  our  minds,  are  appearances  to  inner  sense — 
even  a  line  or  a  circle  which  we  construct  a  priori  in  imagination. 
Understanding,  through  the  imagination,  affects  inner  sense 
by  bringing  these  appearances  successively  before  the  mind, 
and  by  holding  them  together  before  the  mind  in  one  time.2 
This,  I  presume,  is  true,  whether  we  are  imagining  objects 
like  mathematical  circles  or  are  actually  perceiving  physical 
bodies. 

I  cannot  think  that  Kant  is  nearly  so  confused  or  so  obscure 
on  this  side  of  his  doctrine  as  is  commonly  alleged.  Many  of 
the  confusions  attributed  to  him  arise,  as  it  seems  to  me,  from 
reading  into  his  words  meanings  which  they  cannot  possibly 
have.  And  I  believe  that,  however  much  his  account  requires 
expansion  and  modification,  he  is  at  least  dealing  with  a  very 
real  problem,  and  that  he  is  right  in  saying  that  all  our  ideas, 
whatever  their  origin,  may  be  regarded  as  modifications  of  the 
mind  and  so  as  belonging  to  inner  sense.3  Kant  always  dis- 
tinguishes our  own  mental  history  from  the  history  of  the  world 
we  know.  Indeed  we  can  regard  our  own  mental  history — and 
I  think  Kant  does  so  regard  it — as  only  a  part  of  the  history  of 
the  world  which  we  know.  But  from  another  point  of  view  we 
can  regard  the  whole  world  known  to  us  as  a  succession  of 
appearances  revealed  to  us  in  inner  sense  under  the  form  of 
time.4 

Nevertheless  Kant's  doctrine  requires  a  much  fuller  working 
out  than  it  has  received.  Our  knowledge  of  time,  like  that  of 

1  See  A  XVIII.  2  Compare  B  156  n.  3  A  98-9- 

4  The  effort  to  do  this  seems  to  me  rather  like  the  effort  to  see  a 
picture  (or  the  contents  of  a  mirror)  in  one  plane.  When  we  do  this  we 
are  not  looking  at  anything  different  from  what  we  were  before. 


3p8  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LII  §4 

space,  is  primarily  intuitional  and  not  conceptual.1  We  do 
not  make  time  out  of  nothing  either  by  understanding  or  by 
imagination.  Time,  like  space  and  even  like  sensation,  is 
something  given,  however  much  it  may  be  given  through 
the  nature  of  our  own  sensibility.  Our  concept,  as  opposed 
to  our  intuition,  of  time  is  derived  by  abstraction  as  are  empirical 
concepts,  although  like  them  it  presupposes  a  synthesis  in 
accordance  with  the  categories.  It  does  not,  like  the  pure 
categories,  have  its  origin  in  the  understanding;  and  its  content 
is  a  given  manifold,  although  that  manifold  is  pure  and  in  this 
respect  unlike  the  contents  of  empirical  concepts.  All  this 
seems  to  me  to  suggest  that  Kant's  theory  must  be  supple- 
mented by  something  like  the  modern  doctrine  of  the  specious 
present,  though  I  do  not  think  that  that  doctrine,  even  as 
expounded  by  the  most  able  modern  philosophers,  is  wholly 
immune  from  criticism.2 

§  4.  Inner  Sense  and  the  Phenomenal  Self 

Having  attempted  to  explain  the  way  in  which  the  mind  is 
internally  affected  by  itself  Kant  returns  to  the  paradox  that 
in  this  way  we  can  know  the  mind  only  as  it  appears  to  itself, 
and  not  as  it  really  is  in  itself.3 

The  problem  is  this.  How  can  there  be  one  and  the  same 
self  or  subject,  if  we  distinguish  the  I  which  thinks4  (apper- 
ception) from  the  I  which  intuits  itself  (inner  sense)?5  If  I 

1  See  Chapter  V  §  8. 

2  Compare  my  article  in  Mind,  Vol.  XXXVIII,  N.S.  No.  151. 

3  B  155. 

4  It  seems  to  me  unnecessary  to  change,  as  Vaihinger  does,  sdas  Ichy 
der  ich  denke*  into  ldas  Ichy  das  denkt*.  This  is  the  ordinary  Kantian 
idiom;  see  B  407  and  B  429.  Other  examples  could  be  found  in 
other  works. 

6  Kant  adds  in  parenthesis  'for  I  can  think  of  another  kind  of 
intuition  as  at  least  possible*.  Strictly  speaking,  we  have  on  Kant's 
view  no  means  of  deciding  whether  another  kind  of  intuition  is  possible, 
and  it  is  at  least  doubtful  whether  we  can  even  conceive  another  kind 
of  intuition;  compare  A  230  -  =  B  283.  Setting  aside  this  difficulty  in 
terminology,  I  find  it  difficult  to  see  the  point  of  the  observation,  unless 
he  means  that  the  self  which  thinks  might  be  identical  with  a  self 


LII  §  4]     INNER  SENSE  AND  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  399 

am  an  intelligence  and  a  thinking  subject,  how  can  I  know 
myself  as  a  thought  object,  so  far  as  (in  addition  to  being  a 
thinking  subject)  I  am  given  to  myself  in  intuition  P1  And  how 
can  such  knowledge  be  knowledge  of  myself  only  as  I  appear 
to  myself  "in  intuition,  and  not  as  I  really  am  in  myself  for 
understanding  ?2 

Kant  answers  that  this  question — and  he  appears  to  have 
in  mind  especially  the  last  question — has  no  more  and  no  less 
difficulty  than  the  question  how  I  can  be  an  object  to  myself 
at  all,  and  indeed  an  object  of  intuition  and  of  inner  perception.3 
That  I  can  know  myself  only  as  I  appear  to  myself  in  intuition, 
can,  he  claims,  be  shown  clearly,  provided  only  we  accept  the 
view  that  space  is  merely  a  pure  form  of  appearances  to  outer 
sense.  His  argument  rests  primarily  on  the  contention  that  time 
is  on  the  same  footing  as  space.  This  doctrine  he  develops 
in  a  sentence  of  very  great  length. 

Time,  he  insists,  while  it  is  no  object  of  outer  intuition,4 
cannot  be  represented  by  us  except  under  the  image  of  a  line, 
in  so  far  as  we  produce  it;  for  apart  from  this  we  could  not 
know  that  time  has  only  one  dimension.  Similarly,  we  can 
determine  the  periods,  and  even  the  moments,  of  our  inner 
intuitions  only  in  relation  to  changes  in  spatial  objects.  Con- 
sequently we  must  order  or  arrange  the  determinations  of 
inner  sense  as  appearances  in  time  in  precisely  the  same  way 
that  we  order  or  arrange  the  determinations  of  outer  sense  as 
appearances  in  space.  Now  we  have  admitted  that  we  know 
objects  through  the  determinations  of  outer  sense  only  so  far 
as  we  are  externally  affected  (presumably  by  things-in-them- 

which  intuited  itself  in  some  other  way  (for  example,  by  intellectual 
intuition),  and  so  would  be  different  from  a  self  which  intuited  itself 
sensuously  under  the  form  of  time ;  compare  B  68. 

1  I  think  Kant  must  mean  this,  though  the  language  is  obscure.  I  am 
here  differing  from  Kemp  Smith's  translation. 

2  Understanding  involves  a  kind  of  self-consciousness  or  apper- 
ception, but  this  (as  Kant  shows  in  the  Paralogisms)  does  not  give  us 
determinate  knowledge  of  the  self  except  in  so  far  as  the  form  of  our 
thinking  receives  a  content  from  the  intuitions  of  inner  sense. 

3  Compare  B  68.  4  B  156;  compare  A  23  =  B  37. 


400  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LII  §  4 

selves).  We  must  also  admit  that  we  can  know  ourselves  through 
the  determinations  of  inner  sense  only  so  far  as  we  are  inter- 
nally affected  by  ourselves.  And  just  as  we  can  know  objects, 
not  as  they  are  in  themselves,  but  only  as  they  appear  to  us  in 
space,  the  form  of  our  outer  intuition ;  so  we  can  know  ourselves, 
not  as  we  are  in  ourselves,  but  only  as  WTC  appear  to  ourselves 
in  time,  the  form  of  our  inner  intuition. 

I  have  pointed  out  above1  that  there  is  a  difference  between 
the  two  cases,  since  the  affection  by  outer  objects  gives  us  the 
matter  of  intuition,  whereas  the  affection  by  ourselves  does  not 
give  us  a  new  matter,  but  merely  combines  the  given  matter 
under  the  form  of  time.  This  Kant  himself  seems  to  support 
in  a  footnote  ;2  for  he  mentions  attention  as  an  example  of  the 
kind  of  affection  or  influence  he  has  in  mind.  This  would  be 
simple  enough,  if  he  had  merely  said  that  by  attention  we 
bring  new  objects  or  appearances  before  the  mind,  and  so  add 
to  the  content  of  inner  sense,  not  indeed  by  giving  something 
new  (as  is  done  in  sensation),  but  by  bringing  into  conscious- 
ness what  is  already  gi\en  in  sensation.  Kant  himself  gives  a 
much  more  complicated  account  of  attention.  In  attention, 
he  suggests,  the  understanding  always  determines  inner  sense 
to  inner  intuition.  That  is  to  say,  in  attention  understanding, 
through  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination,  combines 
a  given  matter  under  the  form  of  time,  and  does  so  in  accordance 
with  the  categories  of  thought.3  In  so  doing  it  gives  rise  to  an 
inner  intuition  ;4  and  this  intuition  corresponds  to  the  manifold 
thought5  in  the  synthesis  of  the  understanding  (or,  as  I  should 
prefer  to  say,  corresponds,  as  regards  its  combination,  to  the 
synthesis  of  the  manifold  of  intuition  in  general  which   is 
thought  in  the  pure  category  of  the  understanding).6 

I  can  hardly  help  thinking  that  Kant  weakens  the  effect  of 
his  illustration  by  describing  it  in  such  highly  abstract  and 
1  See  §  i  above.  2  g  T^  n 

3  Kant  says  According  to  the  combination  which  it  thinks'. 

4  Intuition  here  is  a  combination  of  form  and  matter. 
6  I  have  introduced  the  word  'thought'. 

6  It  is  perhaps  possible  for  Kant  to  have  in  mind  empirical  concepts 
as  well  as  (or  in  place  of)  categories. 


LII  §  5]     INNER  SENSE  AND  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  401 

general  terms;  but  I  suppose  that  the  allusion  to  an  activity 
with  which  the  plain  man  is  familiar  may  perhaps  help  him  to 
understand  what  is  being  talked  about,  even  if  he  fails  to  under- 
stand what  is  being  said  about  it. 

§  5«  Apperception  and  Self-Knowledge 

Kant  has  now  shown  that  inner  sense  as  affected  by  apper- 
ception gives  us  knowledge  of  the  self,  not  as  it  is,  but  only 
as  it  appears.  He  proceeds  to  show  that  apperception,  taken 
by  itself,  does  not  give  us  knowledge  of  the  self  either  as  it  is 
or  as  it  appears.1  In  apperception  we  are  conscious  only  of  the 
necessary  synthetic  unity  of  thought.2  This  consciousness 
Kant  describes — perhaps  in  reminiscence  of  Descartes — as  a 
consciousness  that  I  am.  It  is  not,  however,  consciousness 
of  what  I  am  (either  in  myself  or  as  an  appearance).  It  is  a 
mere  thinking  and  not  an  intuiting:  it  gives  us  no  object. 
For  knowledge  of  the  self  as  an  object  we  require  more  than 
the  act  of  thought  which  brings  the  manifold  of  every  possible 
intuition  (or  of  intuition  in  general)  to  the  unity  of  apperception 
— even  although  this  act  is  in  some  ways  transparent  to  itself  or 
self-conscious.  We  require  a  definite  kind  of  intuition,  intuition 
given  under  an  assignable  form,  such  as  time ;  and  this  must  take 
the  place  of  the  manifold  of  intuition  in  general,  which  is  all 
that  we  can  combine  in  pure  thought. 

Hence  my  own  existence  as  known  through  thinking  is  not 
appearance,  and  still  less  is  it  illusion.  We  may  be  tempted  to 
imagine  Kant  means  by  this  that  consciousness  of  thought 
presupposes  the  I  as  a  thing-in-itself,  just  as  an  appearance 
presupposes  the  thing-in-itself  of  which  it  is  the  appearance.3 
I  am  inclined  to  believ^  he  means  that,  by  thinking,  my  o\\n 
existence  is  known  only  as  an  act  of  thinking,4  or  perhaps  even 

1  I*  i57. 

2  I  have  simplified  the  statement  here.  What  I  am  conscious  of  is 
said  to  be  myself  in  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  the  manifold  of 
ideas  in  general  (that  is,  in  the  intellectual  synthesis,  not  the  synthesis 
speiwsa).  3  Compare  B  XXVII  and  A  251-2. 

4  He  asserts  in  B  422  n.  that  *I  am*  cannot  be  inferred,  as  Descartes 
maintained,  from  the  proposition  'I  think',  but  it  is  identical  uith  it. 


402  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LII  §  5 

that  it  is  known  only  as  a  form  of  thought.1  In  any  case  my 
existence  as  known  through  thinking  is  completely  indeter- 
minate :  in  order  to  determine  my  existence  I  must  know,  not 
only  that  I  think,  but  what  I  think,  and  this  is  impossible 
apart  from  inner  sense.2  'The  determination  of  my  existence 
can  happen  only  in  conformity  with  the  form  of  inner  sense, 
according  to  the  special  way  in  which  the  manifold  which  I 
combine3  is  given  in  inner  intuition.'  I  can  know  my  own 
existence,  not  as  a  thinking  subject  in  abstraction,  but  only  as 
thinking  this  and  that  concretely  in  a  temporal  succession.  If 
so,  then  (granting  that  time  is  a  form  of  my  sensibility)  I  can 
know  my  existence  determinately  only  as  I  appear  to  myself  in 
time,  and  not  as  I  am  in  myself. 

The  self-consciousness  of  thought,  considered  in  abstraction, 
is  far  from  giving  us  knowledge  of  the  self.  It  involves  indeed 
thought  of  the  categories ;  for  the  categories  are  the  necessary 
forms  of  thought  in  which  the  unity  of  apperception  is  mani- 
fested. As  Kant  says,  they  constitute  the  thought  of  an  object 
in  general:  they  are  indeed  concepts  of  the  combination  of  a 
manifold  of  intuition  in  general  in  one  act  of  apperception,  and 
it  is  this  combination  which  constitutes  the  essential  nature 
of  an  object  qua  object.  But  in  themselves  the  categories  do  not 
give  us  knowledge  of  any  object.  To  know  an  object  different 
from  myself,  I  require  more  than  the  concept  of  an  object  in 
general  (which  I  think  in  the  categories):  I  require  also  an 

1  Compare  B  133  and  B  138.  In  B  423  n.  'existence*  in  this  sense  is 
said  not  to  be  a  category,  it  is  related,  not,  like  the  category,  to  an 
indeterminately  given  object,  but  only  to  an  object  of  which  we  have 
a  concept  without  yet  knowing  whether  such  an  object  is  also  'posited* 
apart  from  the  concept.  A  form  of  thought  has  no  objective  validity 
apart  from  the  known  possibility  that  there  may  be  a  corresponding 
intuition. 

2  I  take  it  that  for  Kant  we  cannot,  except  by  pure  abstraction,  be 
conscious  of  the  nature  of  our  thinking  apart  from  what  is  thought; 
and  there  is  no  awareness  of  what  is  thought  apart  from  inner  sense. 

3  In  pure  thought  I  may  be  said  to  combine  the  manifold  of  intuition 
in  general;  but  in  order  to  determine  my  existence,  a  corresponding 
combination  of  the  manifold  in  time  must  be  given  to  inner  sense 
through  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination. 


LII  §  5]     INNER  SENSE  AND  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  403 

outer  spatial  intuition  to  give  content  and  determination  to  my 
concept.  Similarly  for  knowledge  of  myself,  besides  self- 
consciousness  or  the  mere  thought  of  myself  (as  a  subject 
thinking  in  accordance  with  the  categories)  I  require  an  inner 
temporal 'intuition  to  give  content  and  determination  to  the 
thought  of  myself.  I  exist  indeed  as  intelligence,  which  is 
conscious  only  of  its  own  power  of  synthesis  (in  accordance 
with  the  categories) ;  but  for  the  manifold  that  I  must  thereby 
combine  in  order  to  have  self-knowledge  I  am  subject  to  a 
limiting  condition,  namely,  that  the  manifold  must  be  given 
to  inner  sense  under  the  form  of  time.  Hence  the  combination 
or  synthesis  in  question  can  be  a  combination  of  intuitions 
only  if  it  is  in  accordance  with  relations  in  time  which  lie 
entirely  outside  the  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding.1  Such 
an  intelligence  can  know  itself  only  in  relation  to  an  intuition 
which  is  not  intellectual  (or  which  cannot  be  given  through 
understanding  itself).  Consequently  it  can  know  itself  only  as 
it  appears  in  intuitions  given  under  the  form  of  time.  It  cannot 
know  itself  as  it  is,  nor  as  it  would  know  itself  if  it  were  possessed 
of  intellectual  intuition. 

1  The  text  seems  to  he  corrupt :  I  give  the  general  sense. 


CHAPTER     LIII 
SELF-KNOWLEDGE  AND  KNOWLEDGE  OF  OBJECTS 

§  i.  The  Existence  of  Self 

We  have  now  seen  that  self-knowledge  is  more  than  con- 
sciousness of  the  universal  nature  of  thought.  To  know  ourselves 
A\e  must  not  only  think  and  be  conscious  of  thinking:  our 
thought  must,  through  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagina- 
tion, 'affect*  inner  sense  in  respect  of  its  form,  which  is  time. 
In  this  \\ay  alone  can  our  thinking  receive  a  content,  or 
manifold,  without  which  there  can  be  no  determinate  exist- 
ence or  knowledge  of  determinate  existence.  But  such 
existence  is  existence  in  time,  and  therefore  is  phenomenal. 
Consequently  we  can  know  our  existence  determinately  only 
as  we  appear  to  ourselves  in  time,  and  not  as  we  are  in 
ourselves. 

Such  is  the  essence  of  Kant's  doctrine,  but  we  have  still  to 
consider  some  of  its  further  implications.  These  concern,  not 
only  the  existence  and  knowledge  of  the  self,  but  also  the 
existence  and  knowledge  of  objects ;  for  apart  from  objects  the 
self  could  neither  exist  as  a  thinking  being  nor  be  aware  of  its 
own  existence. 

We  must  first  of  all  examine  the  difficult  footnote1  in  which 
Kant  summarises  his  general  doctrine  in  regard  to  the  existence 
of  the  self. 

The  judgement  'I  think*  expresses  the  act  whereby  I  deter- 
mine my  existence.  Therefore  in  this  judgement  existence, 
Kant  maintains,  is  given.2  But  such  existence  is  indeterminate, 
and  the  way  in  which  I  am  to  determine  it  is  not  given;  for 
the  way  in  which  1  am  to  determine  it  is  not  merely  a  way  in 
which  I  think,  but  a  way  in  which  I  have  to  posit  or  arrange 

1B  1 57-8  n. 

2  *  I  think'  expresses,  it  may  be  noted,  the  act  whereby  any  existence 
is  determined;  but  apparently  it  is  only  my  existence  that  is  given  in 
the  act.  Ib  this  because  1  can  think  without  knowing? 


LIII  §  i]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  405 

in  myself  a  manifold1  belonging  to  my  existence.  This  manifold 
is  not  given  to  thought  in  abstraction,  but  to  inner  sense  or 
self-intuition ;  self-intuition  presupposes  time,  as  a  form  which 
is  given  a  priori;  and  this  form  is  sensuous,  not  intellectual,  a 
form,  not  of  the  active  thought  which  determines,  but  of  the 
passive  sensibility  which  receives  the  manifold  to  be  determined. 
For  knowledge  of  self  (as  for  knowledge  of  anything  else) 
we  require  a  determining  activity  of  thought  and  a  determinable 
manifold.  We  have  an  intellectual  conceptual  consciousness  of 
the  nature  of  our  determining  activity  in  abstraction  from 
what  it  determines,  but  we  must  not  imagine  that  we  have  an 
intellectual  intuition  of  it.  We  should  have  such  an  intellectual 
intuition  only  if  all  the  manifold  in  the  nature  of  the  subject 
were  given  by  the  mere  activity  of  thought.2  Kant  even  implies 
here  that  intellectual  intuition  would  give  us  not  a  mere  con- 
sciousness of  the  general  character  of  our  activity — we  have 
that  in  any  case — but  the  actual  determining  factor  itself;  and 
it  would  give  us  this  determining  factor  prior  to  the  act  of 
determination,3  just  as  time  gives  us  the  determinable  manifold 
prior  to  its  actual  reception.4  The  precise  character  of  this 
intellectual  intuition  is  obscure,  but  Kant's  main  point  is 
clear  enough:  there  is  no  such  intellectual  intuition  in  human 
experience.  That  is  to  say,  my  consciousness  of  my  thought 
(or  of  my  activity  of  determining)  is  purely  conceptual ;  it  is  not 
intellectual  intuition ;  it  gives  us  no  manifold,  and  consequently 
no  determinate  existence.  By  such  conceptual  consciousness  of 
my  thought  I  cannot  determine  the  existence  of  myself  as  a 

1  Kant  is  assuming  that  existence  cannot  be  determined  by  mere 
conception,  but  only  through  connexion  with  a  manifold;  compare 
A  218  =^  B  266.  2  Compare  B  68. 

3  I  am  not  sure  what  Kant  means  by  this,  unless  he  means  that  it 
would  give  us  understanding  in  its  real  nature  as  a  thmg-m-itself 
independently  of  its  manifestation  in  successive  acts  of  determination 
or  thought. 

4  I  have  added  'prior  to  its  actual  reception*.  I  take  Kant  to  mean, 
not  that  time  gives  us  a  pure  manifold  to  be  determined,  but  that 
time,  in  virtue  of  containing  a  manifold  of  pure  intuition,  enables  us 
to  know  a  priori  (in  its  necessary  temporal  relations)  the  empirical 
manifold  of  which  time  is  the  form. 


4o6  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §  2 

spontaneously  active  being.  I  can  determine  my  existence  as  a 
thinking  being  only  by  reference  to  a  given  manifold:  I  can, 
in  short,  determine  my  own  existence  only  so  far  as  my  thought 
determines  under  the  form  of  time  a  manifold  given  passively 
to  sense.  Hence  my  existence  cannot  be  determined  other  than 
sensuously;  and  this  means  that  it  is  determinable  only  as  the 
existence  of  an  appearance  in  time.  The  fact  that  I  can  call 
myself  intelligence  in  virtue  of  my  conceptual  consciousness  of 
my  own  activity  does  not  mean  that  thereby  I  can  determine 
my  existence  as  it  is  in  itself  for  understanding  alone. 

All  this  is  complicated  and  difficult,  as  Kant  puts  it ;  but  I 
am  inclined  to  think  he  is  trying  to  state  something  which  is 
both  simple  and  true.  If  we  are  to  know  the  existence  of  the 
self  we  must  pass  beyond  a  mere  conception  of  the  formal 
nature  of  thought.  The  self  is  known  to  exist  only  as  thinking 
something  given  to  it  in  time ;  and  we  cannot  have  knowledge 
of  our  own  existence  apart  from  our  knowledge  of  our  existence 
as  a  succession  of  definite  thoughts,  with  definite  objects,  in 
time.  But  if  time  is  the  form  of  our  sensibility,  it  follows  that 
we  can  know  ourselves  only  as  an  appearance  in  time,  not  as  a 
thing-in-itself.1 

§  2.  The  Existence  of  the  Object 

In  all  this  we  have  little  more  than  a  restatement  of  what 
we  have  already  learned.  The  determination  of  my  own  existence 
cannot  take  place  by  a  mere  thinking  which  is  conscious  only 
of  the  nature  of  thought:  it  must  always  have  reference  to  a 
manifold  given  to  inner  sense  under  the  form  of  time.  But  this 
manifold,  although  it  is  given  as  a  manifold  of  inner  sense  in 
time  because  of  the  synthetic  activity  of  the  imagination,  is  not 
itself  given  through  that  activity.  The  activity  of  imagination 
merely  takes  up  and  combines  in  time  what  is  given,  according 
to  Kant,  from  without.2  The  given  which  is  thus  taken  up  and 
combined  is  given,  primarily  at  least,  to  outer  sense  under  the 

1  Compare  A  37  --  B  54. 

2  This   statement   may    require  some  modification   in    regard  to 
emotions  and  desires. 


LIII  §2]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  407 

form  of  space ;  and  even  the  synthesis  whereby  it  is  combined 
in  time  as  a  modification  of  inner  sense  is  also  (or  at  any  rate  is 
accompanied  by)  a  successive  synthesis  of  the  manifold  in 
space. 

Whether  I  am  observing  physical  objects,  or  constructing 
mathematical  figures  in  space,  or  determining  the  past  history 
of  the  physical  universe,  or  of  the  human  race,  with  the  aid  of 
present  evidence  supplemented  by  causal  law,  I  am  always,  not 
only  successively  synthetising  a  manifold  in  space,  but  also 
determining  inner  sense;  for  I  am  successively  bringing  a 
manifold  before  the  mind,  and  I  am  immediately  aware  of  the 
presence  of  this  manifold  to  the  mind.1  Hence  in  being  aware 
of  physical  objects  and  their  changes  I  am  also — from  another 
point  of  view — aware  of  a  succession  of  ideas  in  my  mind,  this 
succession  of  ideas  being  (as  we  have  seen  from  the  Analogies) 
by  no  means  necessarily  identical  with  the  succession  of  changes 
in  the  objects  which  we  know.2  Kant  also  holds  that  we  can 
make  such  a  succession  of  ideas  in  inner  sense  intelligible  only 
by  representing  time  imaginatively  as  a  line,  and  representing 
inner  change  through  the  drawing  of  a  line:  in  fact  we  can 
make  the  successive  existence  of  the  self  in  different  states 
imaginatively  comprehensible  only  through  outer  intuition. 
The  reason  for  this  is  that  we  can  be  aware  of  changes,  and 
consequently  of  change  in  our  ideas,  only  over  against  something 
permanent;  and  the  permanent  is  given  to  us  only  in  space.3 

This  permanent,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  Refutation  of 
Idealism,4  cannot  be  an  intuition  in  me.  I  can  determine  the 
change  in  my  ideas,  and  consequently  can  determine  my 
existence  during  the  time  in  which  these  ideas  succeed  one 
another,  only  by  reference  to  a  permanent  which  is  different 
from  my  ideas.5 

There  is  an  obvious  objection  to  this  theory.  I  am  supposed 

1  Compare  A  210  =  B  255. 

2  The  identity  between  the  succession  of  our  ideas  and  the  succession 
of  changes  in  the  objects  takes  place  only  when  we  are  directly  observ- 
ing an  objective  change.  3  See  B  292  ;  compare  Chapter  LI  I  §  4. 

4  Compare  Chapter  LI  §  3,  II.  6  B  XXXIX  n. 


4o8  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §2 

to  be  immediately  aware  only  of  what  is  in  me,  namely,  my 
idea  of  outer  things.  It  must  therefore  remain  uncertain  whether 
there  can  be  anything  corresponding  to  my  idea,  and  in  par- 
ticular whether  there  can  be  in  space  permanent  substances 
which  can  be  distinguished  from  my  changing  ideas.  This 
objection  Kant  endeavours  to  meet.1 

Through  inner  experience,  he  says,  I  am  aware  of  more  than 
my  ideas.  I  am  aware  of  my  own  existence  in  time,  and  con- 
sequently I  am  aware  that  my  own  existence  can  be  determined 
in  time — by  which  I  take  him  to  mean  that  my  existence  can 
be  known  to  be,  not  merely  at  some  time  or  other,  but  at  a 
definite  time.2  Such  determination  of  my  existence  in  time  is 
possible  only  in  relation  to  something  which,  while  it  is  bound 
up  with  my  existence,  is  nevertheless  external  to  myself.  To 
be  conscious  of  my  existence  in  time  is  to  be  conscious  of  a 
relation  to  something  which  is  external  to  myself;  and  only  so 
is  it  experience  and  not  invention,  sense  and  not  imagination. 
This  implies  that  what  is  external  to  myself  is  inseparably 
bound  up  with  inner  sense. 

As  we  have  seen,3  the  words  'inner'  and  'outer',  'internal'  and 
'external*,  are  by  no  means  clear  in  such  a  context.  If  we  are 
speaking  of  an  empirical  or  phenomenal  object,  to  say  that  it 
is  an  outer  or  external  object  is  to  say  only  that  it  is  in  space. 
To  say  that  it  is  an  inner  or  internal  object  is  to  say  that  it  is 
only  in  time  or  possesses  only  temporal  relations.4  The  word 
'outer'  is,  however,  sometimes  employed  to  indicate  something 
which  exists  as  a  thing-in-itself  and  is  different  from  us.  Since 
such  a  thing-in-itself  cannot  be  known  at  all,  and  still  less  can 
be  known  to  be  permanent,  there  can  be  no  question  of  such 
a  usage  in  the  present  context.  Kant  does  indeed  speak  here  of 
the  permanent  as  'external  to  myself ;  but  by  this  he  appears 
to  mean  only  that,  as  permanent,  it  must  be  different  from  the 
successive  and  transitory  ideas  in  which  it  is  temporarily 

1  BXLn. 

2  Compare  A  145  —  B  184  for  the  schema  of  actuality. 

3  Compare  Chapter  IV  §  4. 

4  A  372-3.  Compare  for  space  Chapter  VII  §  i. 


LIII  §a]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  409 

revealed:  it  is  in  short  the  permanent  spatial  substance  to 
which  we  refer  our  changing  ideas  as  states  or  accidents.  Kant 
doubtless  believes  that  the  inner  nature  of  such  a  substance  is 
a  thing-in-itself  which  is  different  from  me  and  wholly  inde- 
pendent of  my  knowing;  but  this  inner  nature  is  unknown  to 
me,  and  I  have  no  ground  whatever  for  regarding  it  either  as 
spatial  or  as  permanent. 

The  phenomenal  character  of  the  permanent  substance 
external  to  myself  is  shown,  not  only  by  the  statement  that  it  is 
inseparably  bound  up  with  inner  sense,  but  also  by  the  further 
implication  that  it  is  revealed  to  outer  sense.  Unfortunately 
what  Kant  says  about  outer  sense  in  this  connexion  is  obscure. 
He  appears  to  be  giving  a  further  reason  why  what  is  external 
to  myself  is  inseparably  bound  up  with  inner  sense.1  The  reason 
is  that  what  is  external  to  myself  is  revealed  to  outer  sense, 
and  outer  sense  depends  for  its  reality  (presumably  its  objective 
reality  or  validity)  upon  the  fact  that  it  (as  outer  sense  and  not 
mere  outer  imagination)  is  a  condition  of  inner  experience. 

This  argument,  which  I  have  simplified  and  abbreviated, 
offers  considerable  difficulty  in  detail.  Kant  says  that  outer 
sense  is — I  should  prefer  to  say  'involves' — in  itself  a  relation 
of  intuition  to  something  actual  outside  me.  He  must,  I  think, 
mean  that  a  spatial  intuition  is  distinguished  from  a  mere 
spatial  image  (such  as  we  can  invent  in  imagination)  by  the 
fact  that  it  is  regarded  as  a  state,  or  accident,  of  a  permanent 
substance  in  space.2  In  this  way  a  spatial  intuition  given  to 
outer  sense  has  a  reality,  or  an  objective  validity,  which  a  mere 
image  has  not.  In  the  Analogies  Kant  claims  to  have  shown 
that  spatial  intuitions  must  be  referred  to  permanent  substances 
in  space,  if  \ve  are  to  have  experience  of  objects  in  one  time 
Here  he  asserts  that  spatial  intuitions  must  be  referred  to 
permanent  substances  in  space,  and  so  must  have  objective 
reality,  because  this  is  a  condition  of  the  possibility  of  inner 

1  B  XL  n.  As  often  in  Kant,  this  appears  both  to  be  a  conclusion 
from  what  precedes,  and  to  receive  support  from  what  follows. 

2  The  fact  that  it  is  also  the  appearance  to  us  of  a  thmg-m-itself 
is,  I  think,  here  irrelevant. 


4io  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §  3 

experience  as  an  experience  of  change  or  succession  in  our 
ideas.  In  other  words — if  there  is  to  be  inner  experience  at  all, 
outer  sense  must  be  genuine  outer  sense  (not  mere  imagination) : 
it  must,  that  is  to  say,  reveal  to  us  permanent  substances  in 
space,  and  so  possess  reality  or  objective  validity. 

Whatever  be  the  difficulties  of  Kant's  argument  in  detail,  his 
general  position  is  clear.  We  can  be  aware  of  the  succession  of 
our  ideas  in  inner  sense  only  if  we  set  this  succession  over 
against  something  permanent  in  space.  Permanent  spatial 
substances  are  presupposed  as  a  condition  of  outer  and  inner 
experience  alike.  We  therefore  know  a  priori  that  there  must  be 
such  permanent  spatial  substances ;  but  their  nature  must  be 
revealed  empirically  to  outer  sense,  and  even  their  permanence 
must,  I  think,  find  some  confirmation  in  what  is  revealed 
empirically  to  outer  sense.1 

§  3 .  Reality  of  Innw  and  Outer  Sense 

Kant  adds  some  further  considerations,  which  are  com- 
paratively simple.2 

If  the  intellectual  consciousness  of  my  existence,  in  the 
thought  'I  am'  (or  'I  think'),  were  an  intellectual  intuition  by 
which  my  existence  could  be  determined,  consciousness  of  a 
relation  to  something  external  to  myself  would  be  unnecessary.3 
In  human  experience  such  intellectual  consciousness,  while 
independent  of  inner  intuition,  requires  to  be  supplemented 
by  inner  intuition,  and  only  so  can  my  existence  be  determined. 
Inner  intuition  is  sensuous  (or  passive)  and  subject  to  the  form 
of  time.  The  determination  of  my  existence,  and  consequently 
inner  experience  itself,  is  therefore  a  determination  in  time; 
and  since  determination  in  time  is  impossible  except  by  reference 
to  something  permanent  over  against  myself,  inner  experience 
depends  on  the  existence  of  such  a  permanent  something  or 
substance.  Apart  from  the  curious  statement  that  because  the 
permanent  something  is  not  in  me,  it  must  be  in  something 

1  Compare  Chapter  XLII  §  5.  2  B  XI^-XLI  n. 

3  There  would  be  no  need  to  introduce  inner  sense  and  time  and 
the  permanent.  Compare  Chapter  LII§  5. 


LIII§4]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  411 

outside  me,  all  this  adds  nothing  to  what  we  are  already 
supposed  to  know. 

Kant's  conclusion  is  that  for  the  possibility  of  experience 
in  general  the  reality  of  outer  sense  is  necessarily  bound  up 
with  the  reality  of  inner  sense.  In  other  words,  I  can  know  that 
I  exist  determinately  in  time  only  if  I  know  that  there  are 
permanent  substances  in  space  which  are  revealed  to  outer 
sense.  Both  of  these  kinds  of  knowledge — knowledge  of  the 
self  as  thinking  and  knowing  (as  well  as  feeling  and  willing) 
in  time,  and  knowledge  of  physical  objects  existing  permanently 
in  space — are  equally  necessary  to  what  we  call  experience. 
This  seems  to  me  to  be  true ;  and  it  is  a  refutation  of  what  is 
ordinarily  called  idealism — the  view  that  we  have  an  immediate 
knowledge  of  our  own  ideas  or  our  own  states,  but  that  our 
knowledge  of  spatial  objects  is  at  best  inferential.  It  is  not, 
however,  a  refutation  of  transcendental  idealism,  which  holds 
that  the  existence  of  physical  objects  and  the  self  is  alike 
phenomenal  and  is  only  an  appearance  to  finite  minds  of  a 
deeper  reality  which  lies  beyond. 

Two  minor  points  are  added.  We  have  still  to  distinguish  the 
images  and  illusions  of  imagination  from  genuine  intuitions  of 
objects  (not  only  physical  objects  but  also  ourselves):  this  we 
do  by  means  of  the  Analogies.1  And  we  must  not  confuse  our 
idea  of  something  permanent  in  existence  with  a  permanent 
idea.  We  have  no  permanent  idea.2  Our  idea  of  the  permanent 
and  even  of  matter  is  liable  to  change ;  but  it  always  refers  to 
something  permanent  in  space,  whose  existence  is  necessarily 
involved  in  the  determination  of  my  own  existence.  Inner  and 
outer  experience  constitute  only  one  experience;  and  there 
could  be  no  inner  experience  unless  it  was  at  the  same  time 
also  partly  an  outer  expeiience,  that  is,  an  experience  of 
permanent  objects  in  space. 

§  4.  Ideality  of  Inner  and  Outer  Setisc 

The  doctrine  we  have  just  examined  may  be  described  as 
Kant's  empirical  realism.  It  establishes  what  he  calls  the  'reality' 

1  Compare  Chapter  LI  §  6.  2  Compare  B  292 


4i2  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §  4 

of  inner  and  outer  sense.1  The  one  experience  which  we  have 
consists  of  more  than  mere  ideas :  it  reveals  to  us  both  a  pheno- 
menal self  whose  ideas  succeed  one  another  in  time  and  a  world 
of  permanent  phenomenal  substances  in  space.  We  must  now 
turn  to  that  aspect  of  his  doctrine  which  may  be  described  as 
transcendental  idealism,  the  doctrine  that  the  self  and  the 
world  so  revealed  are  only  phenomenal:  we  cannot  penetrate 
into  their  inner  nature  as  they  are  in  themselves.  With  this 
doctrine  and  its  grounds  we  arc  familiar;  but  we  have  still  to 
consider  some  additional  arguments  which  he  added  in  the 
second  edition  in  order  to  confirm  the  theory  of  the  'ideality' 
alike  of  inner  and  of  outer  sense.'2 

If  we  set  aside  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  and  also  the 
will,  and  consider  only  knowledge,  everything  that  belongs  to 
outer  intuition  is  said  to  contain  nothing  but  relations.  These 
relations  are  identified  with  extension  (relations  of  place), 
motion  (or  change  of  place),  and  moving  forces  (described 
rather  strangely  as  la\\s  in  accordance  with  which  change  of 
place  is  determined).  In  this  obviously  more  than  mere  intui- 
tion is  involved.  What  Kant  has  in  mind  are  the  primary 
qualities  revealed  by  means  of  outer  intuition,  and  it  is  these 
primary  qualities  which  he  reduces  to  mere  relations. 

Although  we  know  these  relations,  \\e  do  not  know  what  it  is 
that  is  present  in  a  place3  or  what  (apart  from  change  of  place)  is 
really  at  work  in  the  things  as  they  are  in  themselves.  Position, 
motion,  and  force,  in  so  far  as  they  are  bound  up  with  space, 
which  is  only  a  form  of  our  sensibility,  can  reveal  reality  only 
as  it  appears  to  us,  not  as  it  is  in  itself;  but  Kant  reinforces 
his  established  doctrine  by  the  further  contention  that  these 
things  are  all  relational,  and  through  mere  relations  we  cannot 
know  a  thing  as  it  is  in  itself.  In  order  to  do  this  we  should 
require  to  know  what  it  is  that  is  related:  we  should  require 
to  know  the  inner  character  of  the  object  itself. 

If  Kant's   premises   are  correct,   the   conclusion  seems  to 

J  Compare  B  XLI  n.  2  B  66  ff. 

3  Strictly  speaking,  a  thing-m-itself  is  not  piesent  in  a  place,  though 
it  appears  to  us  as  present  in  a  place. 


LIII§s]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  413 

follow.  He  may,  I  think,  even  be  right  in  saying  that  if  outer 
sense  gives  us  only  relations  (and  not  the  inner  nature  of  the 
thing  which  appears  in  these  relations),  then  it  gives  us  only 
the  relation  of  the  object  to  the  subject ;  for  this  seems  to  mean 
that  it  gives  the  object  only  as  it  appears  to  the  subject,  or  as 
it  is  in  relation  to  the  subject,  not  as  it  is  in  itself. 

If  this  is  true  of  outer  sense,  it  must  equally  be  true  of  inner 
sense ;  for  in  the  first  place  the  ideas  of  outer  sense  constitute 
the  proper  stuff  of  inner  sense;  and  in  the  second  place  we 
may  assume  that  if  outer  sense  gives  us  only  relations  which 
are  in  some  way  spatial,  inner  sense  will  give  us  only  temporal 
relations,  and  the  same  general  argument  will  apply. 

The  second  contention  Kant  expresses  in  a  very  elaborate 
form,  and  his  reference  to  relations  is  not  developed  in  the 
same  direct  way  as  it  is  in  regard  to  space.  Instead  it  is  used  to 
support  the  view  that  time  is  only  a  form  of  intuition,  and 
from  this  the  required  conclusion  follows.  But  \\e  must  examine 
the  argument  in  more  detail. 

§  5.  Time  and  Inner  Sense 

According  to  Kant  we  'posit'  the  ideas  of  outer  sense  in 
time.  I  am  not  sure  whether  he  means  only  we  must  take  up 
and  combine  these  ideas  successively  and  be  aware  of  the  suc- 
cession in  our  minds,  or  whether  he  means  also  (as  the  word 
'posit'  suggests)  that  we  must  assign  to  these  ideas  a  position 
in  what  we  take  to  be  the  development  of  the  physical  world. 
In  any  case  he  insists  that  time  is  a  prior  condition  of  our 
consciousness  of  spatial  ideas  in  experience — though  apparently 
it  is  not  so  in  a  purely  animal  Erkbnis.  As  such  a  prior  and 
formal  condition,  time  conditions  the  way  in  which  \\e  posit 
spatial  ideas  in  the  mind  j1  and  it  contains  in  itself  the  relations 
of  succession,  simultaneity,  and  permanence — the  permanent 
being  what  coexists  with  a  succession.2  These  relations  are 

1  B  67.   The  words   'in  the   mind'   perhaps   support  the  former 
alternative  mentioned  above. 

2  The  reference  to  the  permanent  (which  is  not  in  the  mind)  supports 
the  second  alternative  mentioned  above. 


4H  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIU  §  5 

identical  with  what  he  calls  elsewhere  the  'modes'  of 
time.1 

Instead  of  going  straight  on  to  assert  that  inner  sense,  as 
concerned  only  with  temporal  relations,  cannot  give  us  reality 
as  it  is  in  itself,  Kant  proceeds  to  (what  I  take  to  be)  a  descrip* 
tion  of  time.  That  which  as  an  idea  can  be  prior  to  all  activity 
of  thinking  any  object2  is  intuition;  and  if  it  contains  only 
relations,  is  the  form  of  intuition.3  The  inseparability  of  such 
a  form  from  the  matter  of  which  it  is  the  form  is  shown  by 
Kant's  statement  that  this  form  represents  nothing  except  in 
so  far  as  something,  presumably  outer  intuition,  is  posited  in 
the  mind.4 

From  this  last  assertion  Kant  makes  an  inference  which  is 
curiously  expressed.  This  intuition  or  this  form  of  intuition 
(which,  I  take  it,  can  only  be  time)  is  nothing  other  than  the 
way  in  which  the  mind  is  affected  through  its  own  activity, 
namely,  through  this  positing  of  its  idea,5  and  therefore  through 
itself.  He  further  describes  this  'way'  in  which  the  mind  is 
affected  through  itself  as  'an  inner  sense  in  respect  of  the  form 
of  that  sense'.6  This  seems  an  unnecessarily  elaborate  method 
of  saying  what  we  know  already — that  time  is  the  form  of 
inner  sense. 

1  A    177  —  B  219.    Compare   A    182-3  =~=  B  225-6   and   Chapter 
XXXIX  §3. 

2  Sueh  priority  need  not  be,  and  probably  is  not,  temporal  priority; 
but  it  is  less  objectionable  to  ascribe  temporal  priority  to  intuition 
than  it  is  to  ascribe  temporal  priority  to  thought  (or  to  the  form  of 
intuition  in  relation  to  intuition  itself).  For  Kant  intuition  is  given 
independently  of  thought  (A  90  ^-  B  122). 

3  Compare  B  160-1  n.,  where  the  form  is  said  to  contain  only  a 
manifold  without  unity.  Incidentally  this  passage  also  suggests  that  if 
unity  is  necessary  for  intuition,  then  intuition  cannot  be  given  apart 
from  thought.  This  would  not  imply  that  the  manifold  of  intuition 
could  not  be  given  apart  from  thought.  Sec  also  A  107. 

4  Compare  A  452  n.  =  B  480  n. 

5  B  67-8.  I  should  have  expected  'ideas'  in  the  plural. 

6  This  seems  to  mean  that  the  mind  is  affected  passively  from 
within,  and  that  such  affection  is  necessarily  under  the  form  of  time : 
it  necessarily  produces  a  succession  of  ideas.  A  little  later  he  says 
that  the  way  m  which  the  manifold  is  given  in  the  mind  apart  from 
spontaneity  must  be  called  sensibility. 


LIII§6]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  415 

Kant's  main  point  appears  to  be  that  inner  sense,  or  at  least 
time  as  the  form  of  inner  sense,  can  arise  only  because  the 
mind  is  affected  by  the  activity  which  posits  ideas  in  the  mind.1 
But  if  he  is  adding  anything  to  what  we  have  already  learned, 
I  must  confess  I  do  not  know  what  it  is.  I  am  not  even  certain 
what  he  means  by  'positing/  unless  he  means  'taking  up'  and 
'combining'. 

§  6.  Inner  Sense  and  the  Phenomenal  Self 

Kant  insists  that  everything  known  through  sense  is  so  far 
always  appearance.2  The  reason  for  this  I  take  to  be  that  sense 
is  always  conditioned  by  a  form  of  sensibility.  In  any  case,  if 
we  accept  the  premise,  we  must  either  deny  inner  sense,  or 
else  admit  that  the  subject  known  through  inner  sense  can  only 
be  the  subject  as  an  appearance  or  phenomenon — not  the  subject 
as  it  really  is,  and  as  it  would  be  knowrn  to  itself  if  it  possessed 
an  intellectual  or  active  (as  opposed  to  a  sensuous  or  passive) 
intuition.  Assuming  that  we  do  not  possess  an  intellectual 
intuition,  Kant  insists  that  the  only  difficulty  is  to  understand 
how  a  thinking  subject  can  have  an  inner  sensuous  intuition  of 
itself.  This  we  cannot  explain  ;3  but  it  is  simply  a  fact,  and  so 
is  a  difficulty  common  to  every  theory. 

On  Kant's  view  we  admittedly  possess  an  active  intellectual 
consciousness  of  the  self  in  apperception,  which  he  identifies 
here  with  the  simple  idea  T  (equivalent  to  'I  am'  or  'I  think'). 
If  through  this  idea  alone  all  the  manifold  in  the  subject  were 
given  by  means  of  its  own  activitity,  we  should  have  an  inner 
intellectual  intuition,  and  nothing  more  would  be  required.  In 
human  beings,  and  indeed  in  all  finite  beings,  determinate 
knowledge  of  the  self  (which  always  involves  a  manifold) 
requires,  in  addition  to  apperception,  an  inner  perception  of 
a  manifold  which  is  given  in  the  subject  independently  of 
thought.4  Such  an  inner  perception  must  therefore  be  sensuous 

1  Compare  A  2 10  =  B  255.  2  B  68.          3  Compare  B  XLI  n. 

4  This  is,  I  think,  already  implied  in  the  fact  that  the  manifold  is 
not  given  in  thought. 


4i  6  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §  7 

and  passive;  or  (in  Kant's  elaborate  terminology)  the  way  in 
which  the  manifold  is  given  in  the  mind  apart  from  spontaneity 
must  (because  the  manifold  is  given  apart  from  spontaneity)  be 
called  sensibility. 

All  this  is  common  form  and  offers  no  difficulty.  His  method 
of  stating  his  conclusion  is  not  so  simple.  If  the  active  intel- 
lectual faculty  of  self-consciousness  (here  manifestly  including 
imagination  as  well  as  thought)  is  to  seek  out,  that  is,  to  appre- 
hend or  take  up,  what  lies  in  the  mind,  it  must  so  far  affect  the 
mind,  and  only  in  this  way  can  it  produce  an  intuition  of  itself. 
The  form  (or  a  priori  condition)  of  this  intuition,  however, 
has  its  origin  in  the  mind  as  passive,  and  it  determines,  in  the 
idea  of  time,  the  way  in  which  the  manifold  is  together  in  the 
mind.1  Hence  the  mind  intuits  itself,  not  as  it  would  if  it 
knew  itself  by  an  active  intellectual  intuition,  but  in  accordance 
with  the  way  in  which  the  mind  is  affected  by  its  own  activity 
from  within.  In  other  words,  the  mind  intuits  itself,  not  as  it  is 
in  itself,  but  only  as  it  appears  to  itself. 

Kant's  conclusion  is  obvious  enough  on  his  premises;  but 
the  details  of  the  \vay  in  which  the  mind  affects  itself,  I  am 
sorry  to  say,  still  elude  me,  though  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  is 
trying  to  say  something  of  real  importance.  The  general  direc- 
tion of  his  thought  is  clear  enough. 

§7.  Appearance  and  Illusion 

We  must  guard  against  a  possible  misunderstanding  of  all 
this.2  We  have  seen  that  by  outer  intuition  we  know  spatial 
objects  only  as  they  affect  the  mind,  and  by  inner  intuition  we 
know  the  self  only  as  it  affects  the  self.  That  is  to  say,  since 
such  affection  is  conditioned  by  space  and  time,  which  are  only 
forms  of  our  sensibility,  we  know  objects,  and  we  know  the 
self,  only  as  they  appear,  and  not  as  they  are  in  themselves. 

1  I  think  the  togetherness  of  the  manifold  in  the  mind  must  be  the 
result  of  the  activity,  not  (like  the  manifold  and  the  form  of  time) 
given  in  the  mind  as  passive ;  but  the  kind  of  togetherness  (as  temporal) 
is  conditioned  by  the  fact  that  the  nature  of  time  depends  on  the 
passivity  or  sensibility  of  the  mind.  2  B  69. 


LIII  §  7]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  41? 

This  must  not  be  taken  to  imply  that  objects  and  the  self,  as 
known,  are  alike  illusions.1  In  appearances,  as  opposed  to 
illusion  or  mere  seeming,  the  objects  are  regarded  as  something 
really  given ;  and  this  is  true  even  of  the  characteristics  which 
we  attribute  to  them,  but  with  this  qualification — that  in  the 
relation  of  the  given  object  to  the  knowing  subject  the  charac- 
teristics in  question  depend  (for  their  universal  form)  upon  the 
kind  of  intuition  possessed  by  the  subject.  That  is  to  say,  the 
characteristics  of  the  object  are  transmuted  in  so  far  as  they 
must  be  intuited  by  a  subject,  the  forms  of  whose  sensibility 
are  space  and  time.  For  this  reason  we  must  distinguish  the 
object  as  appearance  from  the  same  object  as  it  is  in  itself. 

There  could  hardly  be  a  clearer  statement  of  Kant's  view 
that  an  appearance  is  not  a  mere  product  of  our  own  mind  taken 
as  a  reality;  if  it  were,  it  would  be  an  illusion.2  An  appearance 
is  always  the  appearance  of  a  thing  wholly  independent  of  our 
mind  and  existing  in  its  own  right.  Even  the  spatial  and  temporal 
characteristics  which  it  possesses  are  appearances  of  real 
characteristics  of  the  thing  as  it  is  in  itself.  Because  of  the 
nature  of  our  mind  things  must  appear  to  us  as  spatial  and 
temporal ;  but  it  is  because  of  the  character  of  the  thing-in-itself 
that  we  see  one  object  as  round  and  another  as  square.3  We  do 
not  know  what  this  character  is,  but  we  cannot  regard  it  as 
roundness  or  squareness,  because  we  cannot  regard  it  as  spatial 
at  all.  Indeed  we  know  the  thing  only  as  it  appears  to  us,  or 
as  it  is  in  relation  to  our  minds  ;4  and  consequently  we  do  not 
know  whether  we  can  rightly  speak  of  it  as  'existing'  or  possess- 
ing 'characteristics/  since  for  us  these  terms  must  imply  a 
reference  to  time  and  space. 

Hence  Kant  does  not  say  that  bodies  merely  seem  to  be 
outside  us,  or  that  the  soul  merely  seems  to  be  given  in  my  self- 
consciousness.  This  would  imply  that  a  body  and  a  soul  might 
be  a  mere  illusion,  and  not  the  appearance  ot  an  independent 
reality.  For  Kant  such  a  doctrine  is  unthinkable.  What  he  holds 
is  this:  that  the  spatial  and  temporal  character  of  bodies  and 

1  Compare  B  XL  n.  and  A  396.  2  Compare  A  396. 

3  Compare  Chapter  Vi  §  8.  4  Compare  B  67  and  B  70  n. 

VOL.  II  O 


4i8  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §  8 

souls,  the  'quality'  of  space  and  time  in  accordance  with  which, 
as  a  condition  of  their  existence  for  me,  I  must  posit  the  one 
and  the  other — this  lies  wholly  in  the  nature  of  my  intuition, 
and  not  in  the  thing  as  it  is  in  itself.  It  would  be  my  own  fault, 
if  out  of  that  which  ought  to  be  reckoned  as  appearance,  I  made 
a  mere  illusion. 

Such  an  error  is  not  the  result  of  recognising  the  ideality  of 
space  and  time,  and  so  of  all  our  sensuous  intuitions.  On  the 
contrary,  this  error  arises  from  regarding  space  and  time  as 
characteristics  of  things-in-themselves — a  doctrine  producing 
so  many  absurdities  and  contradictions  that  the  whole  world  of 
space  and  time  becomes  a  mere  illusion,  as  Kant  imagined 
that  it  did  in  that  philosophy  of  the  'good'  Berkeley  of  which  he 
appears  to  have  had  so  little  exact  knowledge. 

§  8.  Difficulties  of  Inner  Sense 

It  will  be  observed  that  our  examination  of  inner  sense  rests 
primarily  on  passages  added  in  the  second  edition.  This  is 
partly  due  to  the  fact  that  in  the  first  edition  this  problem  was 
treated  chiefly  in  the  Paralogisms,  which  lie  outside  the  scope 
of  the  present  book.  It  is  also  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  in  the 
second  edition  Kant  was  attempting  to  dispel  misunderstandings 
of  his  theory,  and  felt  obliged  to  articulate  more  fully  his  doctrine 
of  inner  sense  and  its  relation  to  permanent  substances  in 
space.  These  two  doctrines  are  closely  bound  up  together.  A 
fuller  discussion  of  them  is  impossible  without  trenching  upon 
the  argument  of  the  Dialectic.  Here  I  can  only  register  my 
opinion  that  both  these  doctrines  are  essential  to  the  Critical 
Philosophy,1  and  that  what  is  added  in  the  second  edition  is 
not  a  correction,  but  a  development,  of  what  Kant  has  held 
all  along. 

When  I  say  this,  I  have  no  wish  to  deny  that  Kant's  whole 
theory  is  difficult,  and  in  some  of  its  details  very  difficult.  But 
I  find  in  it  no  trace  of  the  contradictions  and  the  muddle  so 
commonly  attributed  to  him  by  his  critics.  Kant  suffers  from 

1  I  am  glad  to  have  at  least  the  partial  support  of  the  Master  of 
Balhol  on  this  point;  see  Lindsay,  Kant,  p.  53. 


LIII  §  8]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  419 

the  weakness  common  to  all  human  thinking,  especially  where 
that  thinking  is  not  content  to  achieve  clarity  at  the  expense  of 
being  superficial.  Some  of  the  difficulty  in  his  thought  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  he  is  dealing  with  a  difficult  problem,  and  I  am 
far  from  suggesting  that  he  has  given  a  final  solution.  I  think 
it  is  true  to  say  that  a  fuller  working  out  of  his  doctrine  is 
urgently  required.  But  the  alleged  muddle  seems  to  me  largely 
the  invention  of  critics,  who  too  often  continue  to  repeat  charges 
which  rest  on  little  or  no  evidence  and  sometimes  on  complete 
misunderstanding. 

If  we  are  to  know  our  own  thinking  and  thereby  to  determine 
our  existence  as  thinking  beings,  it  is  not  enough  that  we  should 
conceive  the  necessary  unity  of  thought  or  even  the  necessary 
forms  of  judgement  in  which  that  unity  is  manifested.  The 
universal  nature  of  our  thinking,  if  we  separate  it  from  what 
we  think,  does  not  by  itself  give  us  grounds  for  describing  the 
kind  of  existence  which  we  as  thinking  beings  possess:  it  is 
only  by  Paralogisms  of  Reason  that  we  claim  on  this  basis  to  be 
substances,  immaterial,  incorruptible,  personal,  and  therefore 
spiritual.1  We  can  determine  the  existence  of  our  thought,  and 
of  ourselves  as  thinking  beings,  only  as  we  have  a  direct  aware- 
ness of  what  we  think  and  know — a  direct  awareness  that  such 
and  such  is  present  to  our  minds.  Such  a  direct  awareness  is 
inner  sense,  and  what  is  present  to  our  minds  is  thereby  revealed 
to  us  under  the  form  of  time  as  a  succession  of  ideas. 

On  Kant's  view  all  our  thinking  involves,  at  least  ultimately, 
an  imaginative  synthesis  of  a  manifold  passively  received  by 
sense.2  So  far  as  this  thinking  can  claim  to  be  knowing  and 
to  have  an  object  which  is  more  than  its  own  creation,  there 
must  be  a  transcendental  synthesis  of  the  imagination  which 
combines  the  given  manifold  in  one  space  and  time.  This 
combination,  on  Kant's  theory,  must  always  be  in  accordance 
with  the  categories  of  the  understanding ;  but  the  crucial  con- 

1  Compare  A  345  =  B  403. 

2  Compare  A  19  =  B  33,  A  51  =  B  75,  A  77-8  =  B  103.  We  need 
not  here  consider  the  complications  involved  in  highly  abstract  thinking 
such  as  Kant's  own  thinking  in  the  Kritik. 


420  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §  8 

tention  for  our  present  purpose  is  specially  concerned  \vith  the 
category  of  substance.  If  we  are  to  know  a  world  in  one  time 
and  space,  our  outer  intuitions  must  be  referred  to  permanent 
spatial  substances  as  their  accidents.  This  we  are  doing  at 
every  moment:  Kant  insists  that  our  awareness  of  our  own 
thinking  and  knowing  is  always  an  awareness  of  ourselves  as 
thinking  and  knowing  a  permanent  spatial  world ;  and  indeed 
that  it  must  be  so ;  for  if  it  were  not  so,  we  could  not  even  be 
aware  of  the  succession  of  our  own  ideas .  This  is  the  precise  con- 
trary of  an  idealism  which  claims  that  we  know  only  the  succes- 
sion of  our  own  ideas  and  make  doubtful  inferences  to  a  world 
of  bodies  in  space. 

Taken  thus,  Kant's  doctrine  seems  to  me  to  be  true.  He  is 
also  surely  correct  in  saying  that  what  is  directly  revealed  to 
us  as  before  our  minds  and  so  as  our  idea  is,  and  must  be, 
revealed  successively  in  time  (just  as  the  objects  which  we 
distinguish  from  ourselves  are,  and  must  be,  revealed  to  us  as 
external  to  one  another  in  space).  We  know  immediately  only 
the  time  at  which  objects  appear  to  us  or  are  our  ideas:  the 
time  which  we  ascribe  to  them  as  objects  we  know,  not  imme- 
diately, but  as  a  result  of  thought.  I  have  immediate  knowledge 
of  the  fact  that  I  am  thinking  about  the  Critical  Philosophy  now. 
I  can  have  no  such  immediate  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  the 
Critical  Philosophy  was  produced  before  I  was  born.1 

If  Kant  is  right  in  holding  that  because  time  is  necessary 
and  universal,  it  is  therefore  only  a  form  of  our  sensibility,  his 
conclusion  immediately  follows  that  the  self  (and  indeed  any 
object)  revealed  to  us  as  temporal  cannot  be  revealed  to  us  as 
it  is  in  itself.2 

1  The  fact  that  when  I  watch  a  moving  body,  the  motions  take 
place  in  the  same  time  (at  least  approximately)  as  I  perceive  them  is 
no  exception  to  this  principle.  It  is  only  by  thought  I  can  know  that 
what  I  experience  is  an  objective  succession ;  for  the  succession  of  my 
perceptions  is  equally  compatible  with  objective  coexistence. 

2  Or,  more  strictly,  we  cannot  know  that  it  is  in  itself  as  it  is  revealed 
to  us ;  but  the  possibility  that  time  should  be  both  a  form  of  sensibility 
and  a  character  of  things-m-themselves  is  not  worth  considering,  when 
there  can  be  no  grounds  whatever  known  to  us  why  this  should  be  so. 
Compare  Chapter  VIII  §  8. 


LIII  §  8]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  421 

The  most  difficult  part  of  Kant's  doctrine  is  his  account  of 
the  way  in  which  the  self  is  affected  by  itself  from  within. 
The  self  in  its  direct  awareness  of  its  own  thinkings  and 
knowings — it  is  not  the  place  here  to  consider  its  feelings  and 
volitions — must  be  passive,  though  it  must  also  have,  in  the 
act  of  thinking  itself,  an  active  conceptual  awareness,  however 
obscure,  of  the  necessary  unity  and  form  of  thought.  The 
manifold  or  content  of  our  thought  must  be  given  to  a  mind 
which  receives  it  passively  and  perceives  it  immediately:  our 
awareness  of  what  we  think  and  know  is  not  a  creating  of  what 
we  think  and  know.  It  is  here  that  the  complications  begin ;  for 
the  manifold  must  originally  be  given  to  outer  sense.  If  the 
manifold  is  given  to  outer  sense,  docs  not  this  imply  that  we 
are  aware  of  it  ?  And  if  we  are  aware  of  it,  are  we  not  aware  of 
it  as  before  our  minds  ?  And  if  so,  is  it  not  given  to  inner  sense 
as  well  ? 

On  this  point  Kant  gives  us,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  clear 
statement;  but  his  account  of  animal  Erlebnis  (which  cannot 
strictly  be  called  experience)  suggests  that  awareness  of  spatial 
intuitions  is  possible  apart  from  inner  sense.  Such  an  awareness 
would  be,  I  take  it,  momentary:  it  would  not  be  awareness  of  a 
succession,  and  still  less  of  an  object  distinct  from  the  self.  To 
be  aware  of  a  succession  I  must  take  up,  run  through, 
reproduce,  and  hold  together,  or  in  one  word  synthetise,  the 
manifold.  This  synthesis  must  be  also  a  synthesis  of  space  and 
time,  and  it  is  so  far  a  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination 
without  which  there  could  be  for  us  no  succession  and  no 
time,  and  perhaps  (though  this  is  more  doubtful)  no  space.1 

According  to  Kant,  when  the  mind  is  affected  by  itself,  inner 
sense  is  affected  by  this  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination 
and  so  ultimately  by  the  understanding;  for  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  combines  the  manifold  in  accordance 
with  the  principles  of  synthesis  involved  in  thinking  itself. 

The  general  direction  of  Kant's  thought  seems  to  me  sound, 
and  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  or  unreal  about  his  problem,  but 
there  are  many  difficulties.  Time  is  not  a  product  of  the  trans  - 
1  There  could  certainly  be  no  physical  measurable  space. 


422  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §  8 

cendental  synthesis,  but  is  the  form  of  inner  sense.  It  originates, 
like  space,  in  the  nature  of  the  mind,  but  of  the  mind  as  passive : 
in  this  respect  it  is  given  to  thought  and  imagination,  not 
created  by  them.  Yet  without  the  synthetic  activity  of  thought 
and  imagination,  it  could  not  have  unity,  and  it  could  not  be  an 
intuition  (or  object  of  intuition).  Furthermore,  since  the  synthetic 
activity  of  thought  and  imagination  is  itself  successive,  it  clearly 
presupposes  time ;  and  this  is  perhaps  another  reason  why  time 
must  belong  to  inner  sense.  Kant  will  certainly  not  allow  us  on 
this  ground  to  maintain  that  time  must  be  something  real.1  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  suggest  that  our  synthetic  activity  is 
timeless,  unconscious,  and  noumenal,  we  not  only  contradict 
Kant's  express  statements,2  but  \ve  contradict  ourselves;  for 
we  are  claiming  to  describe  in  detail  what  we  assert  to  be 
unknown  and  unknowable ;  and  we  are  describing  as  timeless  a 
synthesis  \\hich  is  intelligible  to  us  only  because  it  is,  and  must 
be,  successive.3 

Whatever  be  the  difficulties  in  regard  to  time — and  these  are 
not  peculiar  to  Kant — he  is  surely  right  both  in  maintaining 
that  time,  like  space,  must  be  given,  and  yet  that  we  can  be 
aware  of  it,  and  of  succession  in  it,  only  by  an  act  of  synthesis 
which  holds  together  the  past  and  the  present.4  We  can  also, 
I  think,  understand  how  the  synthetic  activity  of  the  mind 
working  upon  a  given  manifold,  not  only  constructs  the 
phenomenal  world  which  we  know  (a  world  extended  in  space 
and  lasting  through  time),  but  also  gives  to  our  inner  sense 
that  whole  world  as  a  succession  of  ideas  in  us ;  for  all  awareness 
of  that  world  is  also  an  immediate  awareness  of  it  as  present 
to  our  own  minds. 

In  this  again  there  are  difficulties  of  which  Kant  gives  no 
detailed  discussion.  In  knowing  the  world  we  are,  so  to  speak, 

1  See  Chapter  VIII  §  9. 

*  The  mere  fact  that  our  thoughts  are  said  to  be  objects  of  inner 
sense — compare  A  342  =  B  400  and  A  357 — shows  how  far  Kant  is 
from  regarding  our  thinking  as  timeless  or  unconscious.  Compare  also 
B  154  and  B  156.  See  Chapter  XXXI  §§  4-6.  3  Compare  B  292. 

4  This  certainly  holds  for  any  determinate  measurable  time,  and  I 
am  inclined  to  think  that  it  holds  even  for  the  specious  present. 


LIII  §  8]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  433 

making  our  own  mental  history;  and  nothing  that  we  know, 
or  have  known,  is  without  its  place  in  that  history.  Furthermore, 
since  knowing  is  conscious,  in  knowing  our  world  we  are  aware 
of  our  mental  history.  Nevertheless  we  can  turn  back  and  reflect 
upon  our  mental  history,  and  treat  it  as  only  a  part,  and  a  very 
small  part,  of  the  world  which  we  know.  This  is  recognised  by 
Kant,  and  is  indeed  regarded  by  him  as  an  essential  element  in 
all  experience ;  for  he  holds  that  all  consciousness  of  the  succes- 
sion of  our  ideas,  and  still  more  all  determination  of  the  time 
at  which  our  ideas  occur,1  is  possible  only  in  relation  to  a  world 
of  permanent  substances,  whose  accidents  change  in  an  objective 
time  which  must  be  distinguished  from  the  time  in  which  we 
perceive  them. 

In  the  Analogies  Kant  has  given  an  account  of  the  principles 
in  accordance  with  which  we  determine  the  time  of  objective 
events.  He  has  omitted  to  give  a  similar  account  of  the  way  in 
which  we  determine  the  time  of  our  own  thinkings  and  per- 
ceivings. No  doubt  he  holds  that  there  too  the  same  principles 
are  at  work;2  but  in  the  absence  of  greater  detail  some  critics 
have  thought  that  the  categories  cannot  apply  to  the  self.  This 
seems  to  me  to  be  a  mistake  except  in  regard  to  the  category 
of  substance ;  and  here,  although  the  question  is  full  of  difficulty, 
I  am  inclined  to  think  that  from  one  point  of  view  Kant  must 
regard  our  thoughts  as  the  accidents  of  our  body ;  but  this  is  a 
conclusion  which,  for  whatever  reason,  he  certainly  fails  to  make 
explicit.3 

The  difficulties  which  we  have  to  face  may  legitimately  raise 
the  question  whether  it  is  possible  to  think  out  Kant's  system 
consistently.  An  attempt  to  solve  these  difficulties  would  demand 
a  book  to  itself;  and  I  must  be  content  if  I  have  made  com- 
paratively clear  what  his  problem  is.  I  should  like  to  think  that 

1  Sec  B  156  and  Chapter  LI  I  §  4. 

2  See  Chapter  LI  §  6  and  §  3  above. 

3  The  best  discussion  of  the  application  of  the  categories  to  the  self 
is  to  be  found  in  Ewmg,  Kant's  Theory  of  Causality,  Chapter  VI. 
This  is  perhaps  the  most  valuable,  as  it  is  the  most  independent,  part 
of  a  too  much  neglected  book,  which  has  the  great  merit  of  being 
clear  even  where  (m  my  opinion)  it  is  mistaken. 


424  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIII  §  9 

I  have  shown  it  to  be  a  real  problem,  and  that  the  difficulties 
in  his  doctrine  are  at  least  partly  difficulties  which  arise  from 
the  very  nature  of  human  experience  itself. 

§  9.  A  Rough  Analogy 

It  is  no  part  of  the  philosopher's  task  to  substitute  images 
or  parables  for  thinking.  Such  images  and  parables  are  bound 
to  be  inadequate,  and  likely  to  be  misleading.  Nevertheless  it 
may  perhaps  help  the  beginner,  at  least  a  little,  if  I  develop 
very  briefly  the  analogy  of  which  I  have  already  made  use.1 

I  suggested2  that  Kant  probably  regarded  reality  as  made 
up  of  monads.  The  mind  of  man  is,  however,  not  a  windowless 
monad,  but  looks  out  through  its  windows  at  reality.  We  may 
consider  the  colour  or  distortions  in  the  glass  of  these  \\  indows 
as  imposing  certain  universal  characteristics  upon  the  objects 
we  see ;  and  this  is  parallel  to  the  imposition  of  a  spatial  character 
on  all  objects  by  the  nature  of  our  sensibility. 

We  have  now  to  add  that  for  experience  it  is  not  enough  that 
our  windows  should  be  affected  from  without:  they  must  also 
be  affected  from  within.  There  is,  as  it  were,  a  film  of  steam 
continually  forming  on  our  windows ;  and  it  is  only  as  we  remove 
this  film,  now  from  one  part  and  now  from  another,  that  we 
can  see  different  parts  of  the  outside  reality.  It  is  this  internal 
action  on  our  part  which  makes  us  see  the  outside  reality  as  a 
succession ;  and  it  is  also  this  internal  action  which  enables  us 
to  see  our  own  inner  nature,  and  to  regard  the  appearances  of 
the  outside  world  as,  from  one  point  of  view,  changes  on  the 
surface  of  the  windows  of  our  own  mind. 

We  might  perhaps  also,  and  in  some  ways  better,  regard  the 
windows  of  our  mind  as  photographic  plates.  They  must  be 
acted  upon  from  without,  if  anything  is  to  be  seen  on  them. 
But  they  must  also  be  treated  chemically  trom  within;  and 
this  successive  affection  from  within  brings  out  successively 
the  different  results  of  the  affection  from  without.  This  image 

1  Sec  Chapter  VIII  §§  3,  8,  and  10. 

2  Chapter  VIII  §  10. 


LIII  §  9]  SELF-KNOWLEDGE  425 

perhaps  does  more  justice  to  Kant's  use  of  the  word  'affection'; 
but  it  fails  to  bring  out  what  I  believe  to  be  the  heart  of  Kant's 
doctrine — that  what  we  are  aware  of  in  intuition  is  no  mere 
effect  of  an  outside  reality,  but  is  a  direct  appearance  to  us, 
through  the  medium  of  our  own  sensibility,  of  that  very 
reality  itself. 


VOL.  II 


CHAPTER     LIV 
THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  USE  OF  CONCEPTS 

§  i .  Empirical  Realism  and  Transcendental  Idealism 

The  philosophy  of  Kant  is  always  to  be  conceived  as  empirical 
realism  and  transcendental  idealism.  These  two  main  aspects  of 
his  doctrine  are  so  closely  inter-related  that  neither  is  intelligible 
apart  from  the  other;  but  in  the  last  three  chapters  we  have 
considered  primarily  his  empirical  realism — the  theory  that 
we  have  direct  knowledge  both  of  a  self  \\hich  thinks  and  feels 
and  wills  in  time  and  of  permanent  physical  bodies  which 
interact  in  space.  These  two  kinds  of  knowledge  constitute  one 
single  human  experience.  We  must  not  imagine  that  our 
knowledge  of  bodies  is  merely  inferential:  if  we  had  no  direct 
knowledge  of  permanent  physical  substances  in  space,  we  could 
have  no  knowledge  of  our  own  successive  mental  states. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  other  side  of  Kant's  doctrine — 
his  transcendental  idealism.  The  self  and  the  bodies  which  we 
know  are  in  themselves  realities  which  are  not  created  by  our 
knowing:  Kant  never  doubts  that  they  are  what  they  are, 
whether  we  know  them  or  not.  On  the  other  hand  we  do  not, 
and  we  cannot,  know  them  as  they  are  in  themselves.  We  know 
them  only  as  they  are  in  relation  to  us,  or  as  they  must  appear 
to  finite  minds  whose  knowledge,  or  experience,  is  made  up  of 
two  elements — thought  and  intuition.  All  objects  known  to  us 
must  be  given  to  intuition  under  the  forms  of  time  and  space, 
and  must  be  thought  by  means  of  categories  which  spring  from 
the  nature  of  thought  itself.  Things  as  objects,  or  as  known  to 
us,  have  therefore  a  universal  form1  imposed  upon  them  which 
has  its  origin  in  human  sensibility  and  human  understanding. 
Hence  Kant's  doctrine  may  be  called  formal  idealism — the 
universal  form  of  the  objects  we  know  is  due  to  the  human 

1  It  is  only  the  universal  form  which  is  imposed.  All  differences 
between  objects  are  due  to  differences  in  the  matter,  and  the  matter  is 
not  imposed  but  given. 


LIV§2]     TRANSCENDENTAL  USE  OF  CONCEPTS       427 

mind,  and  not  to  things.  The  self  and  the  world  as  known  to 
us  is  therefore  only  phenomenal :  apart  from  human  experience 
there  would  be  no  space  and  time,  and  no  spatial  and  temporal 
world.  What  would  remain  would  be  the  thing  as  it  is  in  itself, 
but  we  have  no  reason  to  regard  this  as  spatial  or  temporal,  and 
consequently  no  reason  to  describe  it  as  either  changing  or 
permanent. 

The  limitation  of  our  knowledge  to  phenomena  and  our 
ignorance  of  the  thing-in-itself  is  the  one  problem  which  has 
still  to  be  discussed.  This  problem  Kant  claims1  he  has  already 
solved  in  the  course  of  the  Analytic.  All  we  require  now  is  a 
summary  statement  of  our  solution,  a  bird's-eye  view  which 
may  strengthen  our  conviction.  We  shall  see  that  we  can,  and 
must,  be  content  with  our  knowledge  of  the  phenomenal  world, 
since  we  have  no  means  of  other  knowledge;  and  we  shall 
understand  more  clearly  the  title  under  which  we  possess  what 
knowledge  we  have. 

To  any  one  who  has  understood  Kant's  argument  the  present 
exposition,  if  wre  except  the  passage  omitted  in  the  second 
edition,  is  so  easy  that  it  hardly  requires  a  commentary.  The 
first  part  especially2  is,  as  he  says,  little  more  than  a  summary 
of  his  previous  argument ;  but  he  gives  in  it  a  clearer  indication 
than  he  has  yet  given,  at  least  in  the  first  edition,  of  what  he 
means  by  a  pure  category,  and  he  also  deals  with  the  nature 
of  the  pure  categories  separately.  In  the  second  part,3  although 
he  is  still  working  out  the  implications  of  his  doctrine,  he 
breaks  what  is  to  some  extent  new  ground  in  his  discussion  of 
phenomena  and  noumena,  although  here  also  there  is  more 
preparation  for  this  discussion  in  the  second  edition  than  there 
was  in  the  first. 

§  2.  The  Empirical  Use  of  Concepts 

We  have  seen  that  the  understanding  derives  from  itself 
certain   pure   concepts   or   categories.4   These   are   not,   like 

1  A  236  --  B  295  ff.  2  A  235-48  =  B  294-305. 

3  A  248-60  =  B  305-15.  4  A  236  =  B  295. 


428  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIV  §2 

empirical  concepts,  merely  borrowed  from  experience  by 
abstraction.  Nevertheless  they  can  be  applied  only  in  experience. 
That  is  to  say,  they  are  only  of  empirical  use  or  application: 
they  have  as  objects  only  what  is  given  to  intuition  under  the 
forms  of  space  and  time. 

The  universal  application  of  the  categories  to  all  objects  of 
experience  is  formulated  in  the  Principles  of  the  Understand- 
ing. These  Principles,  whether  mathematical  or  dynamical,  are 
said  to  contain,  as  it  were,  only  the  pure  schema  of  possible 
experience.  They  state  the  general  framework  into  which  the 
given  manifold  must  be  fitted  (or,  less  metaphorically,  the 
principles  of  combination  to  which  the  manifold  must  conform), 
if  experience  is  to  be  one.  The  unity  of  experience  is  that 
necessary  synthetic  unity  which  the  understanding,  from  its 
own  nature,  contributes  to  the  synthesis  of  imagination  so  far 
as  that  synthesis  is  determined  by  apperception  and  not  by  the 
given  manifold.1  The  unity  of  thought,  without  which  there 
could  be  no  experience,  demands  that  the  given  manifold, 
whatever  it  may  be,  must  be  combined  by  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  in  one  space  and  time;  and  Kant 
claims  to  have  proved  that  such  a  combination  of  the  manifold 
in  one  space  and  time  must  be  in  conformity  with  the  pure 
categories  of  the  understanding.  Hence  appearances,  as  data 
for  a  possible  experience,  must  possess  the  necessary  synthetic 
unity  which  is  thought  in  the  categories  and  articulated  in  the 
Principles. 

It  may  be  suggested  that  all  this  is  of  comparatively  little 
importance.  No  doubt  these  Principles  express  the  rules  by 
which  understanding  is  actually  guided.  They  are  not  only  a 
priori  truths  themselves,  but  the  source  of  all  truth.  Apart 
from  them  there  can  be  no  truth,  that  is,  no  correspondence 
between  knowledge  and  its  object,  since  apart  from  them  there 
can  be  no  object;  in  Kant's  language  they  contain  the  ground 
of  the  possibility  of  experience  (as  the  totality  of  all  know- 
ledge) in  which  objects  can  be  given  to  us.2  Yet  when  all  is  said 

1  Compare  A  118.  The  synthesis  of  imagination  as  so  determined 
is  transcendental.  2  A  237  —  B  296. 


LIV  §  3]      TRANSCENDENTAL  USE  OF  CONCEPTS      429 

and  done,  we  have  learnt  no  more  than  we  actually  presuppose 
and  apply  in  our  ordinary  empirical  thinking.  Has  it  really  been 
worth  all  the  trouble  we  have  taken  ? 

Kant  protests — apparently  forgetting  that  the  reader  has 
followed  him  all  this  weary  way — that  no  kind  of  inquisitiveness 
is  more  detrimental  to  the  extension  of  human  knowledge  than 
that  which1  asks  what  is  the  use  of  an  enquiry  before  we  have 
undertaken  the  enquiry,  and  before  we  are  in  a  position  to 
understand  that  use,  even  if  it  were  clearly  explained.  There  is, 
however,  one  use  of  our  transcendental  enquiry  which  can  be 
made  intelligible,  and  even  important,  to  the  most  reluctant 
student.  An  understanding  which  occupies  itself  only  in 
ordinary  empirical  thinking,  without  reflecting  on  the  sources 
of  its  knowledge,  can  get  on  very  well  in  its  own  way;  but  it 
can  never  determine  the  limits  of  its  own  knowledge.  It  can 
never  know  what  is  inside  and  what  is  outside  its  own  sphere. 
Consequently  without  the  difficult  enquiries  \\e  have  made,  it 
can  never  be  sure  of  the  soundness  of  its  claim  to  possess 
knowledge;  and  it  must  expect  to  meet  humiliating  reproof 
when,  as  is  inevitable,  it  steps  beyond  its  own  boundaries  and 
wanders  in  error  and  illusion. 

Hence  the  doctrine  that  the  Principles  of  the  Understand- 
ing, and  indeed  all  concepts  without  exception,  have  only  an 
empirical  application  is  one  which,  when  it  is  really  known  and 
understood,  carries  with  it  the  most  important  consequences. 

§3.  The  Transcendental  Use  of  Concepts 

Against  the  empirical  use  of  concepts  we  must  set  their 
transcendental  use.2  In  the  empirical  use  the  concept  is  applied 
only  to  appearances,  that  is,  to  objects  of  a  possible  human 
experience.  In  the  transcendental  use  it  is  applied  to  things  in 
general,  that  is,  to  things-in-themselves.  These  things-in- 
themselves  may  be  described,  in  accordance  with  one  of  Kant's 

1  I  differ  here  from  Kemp  Smith's  translation. 

2  A  238-9   =   B  297-8.     Compare    A  56   =*  B  81    and  ;  Chap- 
ter XI  §  4. 


430  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIV  §  3 

own  notes  in  his  copy  of  the  Kritik,  as  objects  given  to  us  in 
no  intuition,  and  consequently  not  sensible  objects.1 

It  is  commonly  held  that  Kant  should  have  termed  this  use 
'transcendent'  rather  than  'transcendental'.  Such  terminology 
would,  however,  be  at  variance  with  his  own  distinction  between 
a  'transcendent'  and  a  'transcendental'  use.2  The  point  is  of  no 
great  importance,  and  Kant  may  mean  by  a  transcendental  use 
merely  one  which  transcends  the  limits  of  experience  by  accident 
or  by  lack  of  criticism,  whereas  a  transcendent  use  is  one  which 
transcends  the  limits  of  experience  by  a  kind  of  necessity.  But 
it  seems  to  me  possible  that  by  a  transcendental  use  he  means 
one  in  which,  not  only  the  origin  of  a  concept,  but  its  actual 
application,  may  be  entirely  a  priori.  Such  an  application  is 
always  illegitimate,  and  strictly  speaking  there  is  no  trans- 
cendental use  of  concepts  at  all. 

If  a  concept  is  to  give  us  knowledge  of  objects,  two  things 
are  necessary.  First,  the  concept  must  have  the  logical  form  of 
a  concept  in  general,  and  this  Kant  identifies  with  the  form  of 
thought.  By  this,  I  think,  he  means  more  than  that  the  concept 
must  not  be  self-contradictory.  He  means  that  it  must  possess 
universality ;  and  this  it  can  possess  only  as  the  predicate  of  a 
possible  judgement.3  To  conceive  is  to  judge,  and  if  so  every 
concept  must  have  the  form  of  thought.4 

The  important  point,  however,  is  the  second  one:  we  must  be 


1  Nachtrage  CXVII.          2  Sec  A  296  -=  B  352.         3  A  69  =  B  94. 

4  Hence  it  must  either  be  a  category  or  presuppose  the  categories. 
This  is  the  reason  why  all  concepts  are  a  source  of  necessity:  see 
A  105-6  and  compare  B  142. 

Kant  also  says  that  every  concept  must  contain  the  logical  function 
of  making  a  concept  out  of  some  kind  of  data — data  in  general.  The 
function  (or  form)  here  looks  like  the  function  of  making  concepts 
by  analysis  and  abstraction:  see  A  68  =  B  93,  A  76  =  B  102, 
A  78  —  B  104.  But  we  have  seen  that  the  same  function  which  gives 
unity  to  different  ideas  (or  objects)  in  a  judgement  by  that  act  of  analysis 
whereby  concepts  are  made  also  gives  unity  to  the  bare  synthesis  of 
different  ideas  in  an  intuition :  see  A  79  —  B  104.  Hence  every  concept 
is  the  concept  of  a  synthesis,  and  the  categories  are  concepts  of  the 
universal  synthesis  which  is  present  in,  and  presupposed  by,  all 
empirical  synthesis  and  all  empirical  concepts. 


LIV§4]     TRANSCENDENTAL  USE  OF  CONCEPTS       431 

able  to  show  that  there  can  be  given  an  object  to  which  the 
concept  may  be  related.  Apart  from  this  the  concept  contains 
only  the  form  of  thought  and  nothing  more.  But  for  human 
beings  an  object  can  be  given  only  to  sensuous  intuition. 

We  haVe  indeed  pure  sensuous  intuitions  (of  time  and  space) 
which  arc  logically  prior  to  given  objects;  but  even  they  can 
have  objective  validity,  or  application  to  an  object,  only  if  the 
object  is  given  to  empirical  intuition.1 

It  follows  that  all  concepts,  and  consequently  all  Principles, 
however  a  priori  they  may  be,  must  in  the  last  resort  be  related 
to  empirical  intuition.  Without  this  they  have  no  objective 
validity,  but  arc  a  mere  play  of  imagination,  or  of  understanding, 
with  the  ideas  that  belong  to  them  respectively.2 

A  transcendental  use  of  concepts,  therefore,  inasmuch  as  it 
affects  to  have  no  need  of  empirical  intuition,  is  quite  incapable 
of  giving  us  knowledge  of  any  object. 

§  4.  Mathematical  Concepts 

This  doctrine  is  illustrated  by  examples.  Let  us  consider 
the  case  of  mathematical  concepts,  taking  them  first  of  all  'in 
their  pure  intuitions'.3  This  phrase  is  difficult,  unless  Kant 
means  that  they  have  a  secondary  reference  to  empirical 
intuitions.4 

Space  has  three  dimensions :  between  two  points  there  is  only 
one  straight  line.  Such  are  the  principles,  or  axioms,  on  which 

1  Strictly  speaking,   I  think  it  is  the  concepts  of  spatiahty  and 
temporality,  rather  than  the  intuitions  of  space  and  time,  which  have 
objects  given  to  empirical  intuition. 

2  The    elements    or   marks    in    empirical   factitious    concepts    are 
arbitrarily  combined  by  imagination.   In  applying  the  categones  to 
things-m-themselves,  we  have  an  arbitrary  play,  not  of  imagination, 
but  of  understanding.  J  A  239  =  B  298-9. 

4  The  examples  given  seem  to  be  what  Kant  calls  axioms ;  com- 
pare A  163  =  B  204  and  A  31  =  -  B  47.  This  may  not  have  any  par- 
ticular significance,  and  I  do  not  see  that  it  can  have  any  special 
:onnexion  with  the  phrase  'in  their  pure  intuitions*.  It  shows,  how- 
ever, clearly  enough  that  Kant  believes  a  combination  of  thought  and 
ntuition  to  be  necessary,  if  we  are  to  know  space  and  time  as  objects. 
Compare  Chapter  V  §  8  and  also  B  160  n.  and  A  107. 


432  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIV  §  5 

Euclidean  geometry  rests.  Their  object  I  take  to  be  space  as 
such,  and  according  to  Kant  our  idea  of  it  is  produced  a  priori 
in  the  mind.  Yet  although  these  principles  are  thus  entirely 
a  priori,  they  would  have  no  significance — that  is  to  say,  we 
could  not  know  that  they  referred  to  a  possible  object — unless 
we  could  exhibit  their  significance  in  appearances  (or  empirical 
objects). 

Hence  if  we  take  a  concept  in  abstraction  from  its  object,  and 
wish  to  make  certain  whether  it  is  the  concept  of  an  object,  we 
must  make  the  concept  sensuous;1  that  is,  we  must  exhibit  an 
object  corresponding  to  it  in  intuition.  Apart  from  this,  a 
concept  is  without  sense2  or  objective  significance. 

This  requirement  mathematics  fulfils  by  the  construction  of 
a  figure.  Such  a  figure  is  constructed  a  priori  in  accordance 
with  a  concept;  but  it  is  nevertheless,  whether  constructed  in 
imagination  or  on  paper,  an  appearance  present  to  the  senses. 
In  mathematical  reasoning  we  attend  only  to  the  elements  in 
it  which  are  the  necessary  consequences  of  construction  in 
accordance  with  the  concept:  its  merely  accidental  features  are, 
or  at  least  ought  to  be,  entirely  ignored.3 

§  5.  The  Categories 

Kant's  main  concern  is  with  the  categories.  He  turns  naturally 
to  the  category  of  quantity,4  the  fundamental  category  of  mathe- 
matics, and  so  makes  a  transition  to  categories  in  general. 

The  category  of  quantity  finds  its  sense  and  significance  in 
number,  which  is  its  schema.  Number  is  employed  in  arithmetic, 

1  Compare  A  51  --  B  75. 

2  It  seems  to  me  quite  clear  that  Kant  is  playing  on  the  ambiguity 
of  the  word  'sense*. 

3  Compare  A  713-14  •-  B  741-2.   It  is  commonly  said  that  in  the 
first  proposition  of  his  first  book  Euclid  failed  to  do  so ;  for  he  assumed 
from  looking  at  the  diagram  that  two  circles  could  intersect  only  in 
two  points,  and  this  requires  to  be  proved.  If  this  cannot  be  seen 
directly  to  follow,  without  proof,  from  the  very  nature  of  a  circle  as 
defined,  then  he  made  the  mistake  of  mixing  up  empirical  with  a  priori 
evidence.  The  fact  that  he  made  this  mistake  is  taken  by  modern 
mathematical  theorists  to  show  that  Euclidean  geometry  is  empirical. 
This  appears  to  me  to  be  an  error.  4  A  240  =  B  299. 


LIV  §  5]     TRANSCENDENTAL  USE  OF  CONCEPTS       433 

and  Kant  seems  to  regard  it  as  the  basis  of  all  mathematics.1 
Number  in  turn  finds  its  sense  and  significance  in  the  fingers, 
in  the  beads  of  the  abacus,  or  in  strokes  and  points  written 
on  paper. 

In  all  'this  Kant  is  very  insistent  that  however  much  a 
concept  may  be  a  priori  (and  however  much  the  universal  syn- 
thetic principles — that  is,  axioms — or  the  individual  formulae2 
based  upon  it  may  be  a  priori),  its  use  or  application,  and  its 
reference  to  objects,  can  be  sought,  in  the  last  resort,  only  in 
experience:  indeed  these  a  priori  concepts  are  said  to  'contain* 
the  possibility  of  experience  in  the  sense  that  they  are  concepts 
of  its  form  or  necessary  conditions.3 

The  same  principle  applies  to  all  the  categories.4  This  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  we  cannot  give  a  real  definition  to  any 
category  (that  is,  a  definition  showing  that  it  applies  to  a 
possible  object)  without  a  reference  to  its  schema,  and  so  to 
space  and  time  as  conditions  of  sensibility,  or  forms  of 
appearances.3  Consequently  the  categories  must  be  limited 
to  appearances.  If  we  remove  the  reference  to  conditions  of 
sensibility,  the  whole  significance  of  the  concept,  that  is,  its 
reference  to  an  object,  disappears.  We  cannot  give  any  example 
which  would  enable  us  to  grasp  what  kind  of  thing  could 
possibly  be  thought  by  such  a  concept. 

In  a  passage  omitted  in  the  second  edition,  this  contention  is 
further  elaborated.6 

In  his  earlier  discussion7  Kant  stated  that  although  he  had 
in  mind  definitions  of  the  categories,  he  deliberately  omitted 
them  on  the  ground  that  they  were  not  required  for  his  limited 
purposes  and  might  rouse  doubt  and  opposition.  He  promised 
to  articulate  them  later  so  far  as  was  necessary,  but  not  in  the 
detail  demanded  by  a  complete  system  of  pure  reason,  of  which 

1  Compare  its  relation  to  spatial  figures  and  temporal  durations  as 
described  in  A  724  B  752.  2  Compare  A  165  —  B  205-6. 

3  Compare  Chapter  XL1X  §  5.  4  A  240  =  B  300. 

5  The  phrase  'forms  of  appearances'  suggests  that  Kant  means 
space  and  time  by  'conditions  of  sensibility';  but  'conditions  of 
sensibility'  might  equally  mean  the  transcendental  schemata  (see 
A  140  -  B  179).  6  A  241-2.  7  A  82-3  =  B  108-9. 


434  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIV  §  5 

his  work  is  only  an  outline.1  He  now  asserts  that  there  was  a 
deeper  reason  for  his  procedure. 

The  earlier  discussion,  strictly  speaking,  is  concerned  only 
with  pure  categories,  though  the  names  applied  to  them  are, 
in  some  cases  at  least,  the  names  of  schematised  categories. 
If  we  remove — as  for  pure  categories  we  must  remove — all 
reference  to  those  conditions  of  sensibility  which  mark  out  the 
categories  as  concepts  whose  use  is  empirical,  if  in  short  we 
regard  the  categories  as  concepts  of  things  in  general  and  so 
as  having  a  transcendental  use,2  what  are  we  left  with?  Only 
the  logical  forms  of  judgement  considered  as  somehow  con- 
ditions of  the  possibility  of  things  themselves.3  But  in  such  a 
case  we  have  not  the  slightest  idea  of  how  they  could  apply  to 
any  object,  and  consequently  we  are  unable  to  give  any  real 
definition  of  them. 

It  will  be  observed  that  for  Kant — and  we  shall  see  this 
more  clearly  in  the  sequel — the  pure  categories,  as  having 
their  origin  in  the  understanding,  are  so  far  not  restricted  to 
sensible  objects,  but  have  zprima  facie  claim  to  apply  to  things- 
in-themselves.  It  will  also  be  observed  that  there  is  no  difficulty 
in  saying  what  a  pure  category  is.  Kant  himself  has  just  done 
so,  and  he  is  about  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  separate  pure 
categories.  The  only  reason  why  this  is  not  regarded  as  a 
definition  is  that  such  a  description  cannot  show  that  there  is 
any  possible  object  to  which  a  pure  category  can  apply.  A  little 
later4  Kant  adds  as  a  further  reason  that  the  forms  of  judgement, 
and  so  the  pure  categories,  cannot  be  defined  without  a  circular 
definition;  for  the  definition  would  itself  be  a  judgement,  and 
therefore  would  already  contain  these  forms.5  This  does  not 
prevent  us  from  recognising  that  every  pure  category  is  a 
form  of  judgement  considered  as  determining  the  combination 
of  a  manifold  of  intuition  in  general,  and  so  as  the  concept  of 
an  object  in  general*  Kant  would  have  made  the  Kritik  much 

1  Compare  A  13-14  =  B  27-8.  2  Sec  A  238  =  B  298. 

3  Compare  Chapter  XIV  §  8.  4  A  245. 

5  This  suggests  that  all  the  forms   of  judgement  are  for  Kant,  as 

they  ought  to  be,  present  in  every  judgement.        fl  Compare  A  245-6. 


LIV  §  6]     TRANSCENDENTAL  USE  OF  CONCEPTS       435 

easier  to  understand,  if  he  had  given  this  explanation  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Analytic,  instead  of  at  the  end.  He  himself 
does  so,  if  not  too  clearly,  in  the  second  edition.1 

Kant's  discussion  of  the  separate  categories,  both  as  pure 
and  schematised,  has  already  been  examined  and  elaborated 
in  my  account  of  the  transcendental  schemata.2  I  need  add  no 
more  here.3 

§  6.  Kant's  Conclusion 

It  follows  that  the  use  of  the  categories  is  always  empirical, 
and  never  transcendental.4  The  Principles  of  Pure  Under- 
standing must  apply  only  to  objects  of  the  senses,  and  never  to 
things  in  general  or  things-in-theinselves ;  for  apart  from  the 
universal  conditions  of  a  possible  sensuous,  and  indeed  human,5 
experience,  the  categories  have  for  us  no  reference  to  any  object 
known  to  be  possible. 

Kant's  conclusion  is  therefore  that  understanding  can  antici- 
pate only  the  form  of  a  possible  experience  in  general.  In  so 
doing,  it  can  never  go  beyond  the  limits  of  sensibility,  within 
which  alone  can  objects  be  given  to  us.  We  must  give  up  the 
proud  name  of  Ontology — a  science  which  professes  to  give 
us  a  priori  synthetic  knowledge  of  things  in  general,  and  so  of 
things-m-themselves.  This  supposed  science  must  give  place 
to  a  modest  Analytic  of  the  pure  understanding. 

Kant  reinforces  his  conclusion  by  referring  to  the  doctrine 
of  the  transcendental  schema,  a  doctrine  which  lies  at  the 
root  of  all  his  arguments  throughout  this  chapter. 

Thinking,  he  says,  is  the  act  of  relating  a  given  intuition  to 
an  object.6  This  may  seem  to  contradict  his  view  that  there  is 
a  kind  of  thinking  which  gives  us  no  knowledge  of  an  object 

1  B  128-9.  2  See  Chapter  XXXIII. 

8  The  passage  omitted  in  the  second  edition  (A  244-6)  is  repetitive, 
and  is  probably  omitted  for  this  reason.  4  A  246  =  B  303. 

6  The  pure  categories  would  apply  to  any  finite  experience  which 
had  a  manifold  given  to  it  under  forms  of  intuition  other  than  time 
and  space ;  but  of  such  an  experience  we  have  no  real  conception. 

6  A  247  —  B  304.  Compare  the  definition  of  judgement  in  B  141. 


436  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIV  §  6 

but  is  merely  problematic,  the  entertaining  of  a  possible 
concept  without  enquiring  whether  its  object  is  also  possible. 
Even  such  thinking,  however,  has  for  him  a  vague  reference  to 
some  sort  of  object — how  otherwise  could  we  ask  whether  its 
object  is  possible  ?  It  has  even  a  vague  reference  to  some  sort 
of  manifold  of  intuition  in  general — though  we  do  not  ask 
ourselves  how  such  an  intuition  could  be  given.  Indeed,  as 
we  shall  see,  it  is  this  kind  of  problematic  thinking  which  he 
has  here  primarily  in  view,1  although  his  description  is  intended 
to  cover  all  thinking,  including  problematic  thinking. 

This  is  borne  out  already  by  his  statement  that  if  the  kind 
of  intuition  in  question  is  in  no  way  given,2  then  the  object  is 
merely  transcendental :  it  is  just  an  unknown  something  —  X.3 
The  concept  entertained  must  be  a  concept  of  the  understand- 
ing, since  all  other  concepts  have  reference  to  some  sort  of 
intuition  or  combination  of  intuitions;  and  its  use  must  be 
transcendental  in  the  sense  that  the  application  of  the  concept 
so  far  makes  no  claim  to  rest  on  an  intuition  which  could  be 
described  as  given  to  sense. 

At  this  stage  Kant, rather  loosely, identifies  the  transcendental 
use  with  'the  unity  of  the  thought  of  a  manifold  of  a  possible 
intuition  in  general'.4  He  must,  I  think,  mean  that  the  concept 
in  this  transcendental  use  can  'contain'  only  the  unity  imposed 
by  thought  on  a  manifold  of  intuition  in  general.5  This  mani- 
festly is  no  determinate  object,  and  such  thinking  by  itself 

1  Compare  A  255  ==  B  310. 

2  He  may  mean  'if  the  form  of  this  intuition  is  in  no  way  given',  but 
perhaps  his  statement  is  meant  to  be  more  general. 

3  Compare  A  104  and  A  109. 

4  I  follow  Kant's  own  obvious  emendation  (Nachlragc  CXXV). 
Kemp  Smith  translates  the  actual  text  thus:  'The  concept  of  the 
understanding  has  only  transcendental  employment,  namely,  as  the 
unity  of  the  thought  of  a  manifold  in  general'.  I  am  not  sure  whether 
the  cas'  can  thus  be  understood  without  amending  the  German,  but 
the  general  sense  seems  right.  Incidentally  the  transcendental  object 
itself  might  almost  be  defined  in  the  same  way;  see  A  105. 

6  If  so,  this  accords  with  the  doctrine  of  A  105  and  A  109,  and 
indicates  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  give  any  sort  of  definite 
meaning  to  the  transcendental  object. 


LIV  §  6]     TRANSCENDENTAL  USE  OF  CONCEPTS       437 

gives  us  no  knowledge.  As  Kant  says,  through  a  pure  category 
(in  abstraction  from  every  condition  of  sensuous  intuition — the 
only  kind  of  intuition  that  is  possible  to  us)  no  object  is  deter- 
mined, and  nothing  is  known.1  All  we  have  is  the  thought  of  an 
object  in'  general  expressed  according  to  different  forms  of 
judgement.2 

For  the  use  of  a  concept — if  it  is  to  give  us  knowledge — we 
require  more  than  conception  or  problematic  thinking:  we 
require  also,  as  we  have  seen  in  connexion  with  the  trans- 
cendental schemata,3  a  function  of  judgement  (in  the  technical 
sense).  Only  so  can  an  object  be  subsumed  under  the  concept. 
For  such  judgement  we  must  have  at  least  the  formal  condition 
under  which  something  can  be  given  in  intuition.  The  formal 
condition  in  question  is  the  transcendental  schema. 

If  we  do  not  have  this  schema,  which  is  the  condition  of 
judgement,  all  subsumption  under  the  category  is  impossible; 
for  there  is  simply  nothing  given  which  can  be  subsumed  under 
the  category.  Hence  the  transcendental  use  of  the  category, 
which  professes  to  have  no  reference  to  sense  or  conditions  of 
sense,  is  in  fact  no  use  at  all;  or  at  any  rate  no  use  whereby 
anything  can  be  known.4  It  applies  to  no  determinate  object, 
not  even  to  the  form  (or  schema)  of  an  object  which  could  be 
determined.5 

Kant  therefore  sums  up  his  position  as  follows.  Apart  from 
the  formal  conditions  of  sensibility — by  which  he  might  mean 

1  Here  again  I  follow  Kant's  own  emendation  (Nachtrdge  CXXVI) 

2  'naih  vcruhiedenen  modis.y 

J  A  132  -  B  172  ff.  There  the  power  of  judgement  (Urteilskraft)  is 
opposed  to  understanding  and  reason. 

4  Again  I  follow  Kant's  emendation  (Nachtraqe  CXXVI  I). 

5  Literally,  *it  has  no  even  merely  (as  regards  its  form)  determin- 
ablc  object*.  This  is  obscurely  expressed,  but  I  ean  hardly  think  Kant 
means  'it  has  not  even  a  determmable  object  in  the  sense  of  a  manifold 
of  intuition  which  remains  to  be  determined  by  being  brought  under 
a  form  (or  schema)'.  I  think  he  must  mean  that  it  has  not  even  a 
determmable  object  in  the  sense  of  a  form  (or  schema)  which  could 
be  determined  by  receiving  under  it  a  particular  manifold  of  intuition. 
For  Kant  both  the  form  and  the  matter,  the  concept  and  the  intuition, 
are  'determmable'  in  relation  to  each  other. 


438  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LIV  §  6 

space  and  time,1  but  more  probably  means  the  transcendental 
schemata2 — the  pure  categories  have  a  merely  transcendental 
significance:3  they  profess  to  apply  to  an  object  given  to  no 
sensuous  intuition.  They  have  no  transcendental  use.  A  trans- 
cendental use  is  in  itself  impossible;  for  in  it  all  the  conditions 
of  using  the  categories  in  judgements  disappear,  namely  the 
formal  conditions4  for  subsuming  an  alleged  object  under  the 
categories.  Hence  if  we  take  the  categories  as  pure  categories 
alone,  and  not  as  schematised  categories,  they  are  not  supposed 
to  have  an  empirical  use,  and  they  cannot  have  a  transcendental 
use.  In  short,  they  are  of  no  use  at  all.  That  is  to  say,  in  abstrac- 
tion from  all  sensibility  they  cannot  be  applied  to  any  alleged 
object.  They  are  merely  the  pure  form5  of  the  use  of  under- 
standing (or  the  pure  form  of  thought)  in  relation  to  objects  in 
general;  but  through  this  pure  form  alone  they  cannot  think 
(in  the  sense  of  'determine')  any  object. 

The  whole  of  this  elaborate  discussion  is  little  more  than  an 
expansion  of  Kant's  doctrine  of  the  transcendental  schemata.6 

1  Compare  A  138  =  B  177.  2  Compare  A  140  —  B  179. 

3  Yet  Kant  might  equally  have  said  they  have  no  significance  at  all ; 

see  A  240  =  B  299  and  A  242.  4  Here  clearly  the  schemata. 

5  Perhaps  it  would  be  better  to  say  'concepts  of  the  pure  form*. 

6  See  especially  A  139-40  —  B  178-9. 


CHAPTER    LV 
NOUMENON  AND  TRANSCENDENTAL  OBJECT 

§  i.  Phenomena  and  Noumena 

In  their  empirical  use  concepts  are  applied  to  sensible  objects, 
which  may  be  described  as  appearances,  or,  more  technically, 
phenomena.  In  their  transcendental  use  concepts  are  applied — 
or  such  at  least  is  the  intention — to  things  as  they  are  in  them- 
selves and  as  they  can  be  grasped  by  understanding  without 
the  aid  of  sense.  Such  objects  are  called  'noumena',  that  is, 
understandable  or  intelligible  (and  not  sensible)  objects.  Thus 
the  opposition  between  phenomena  and  noumena  corresponds 
to  the  opposition  between  the  empirical  and  the  transcendental 
use  of  concepts. 

We  have  now  seen  that  there  is  no  transcendental  use  of 
concepts.  It  is  therefore  natural  enough  to  conclude  that  there 
are  no  such  things  as  noumena,  and  even  that  there  are  no 
things-in-themselves.  A  doctrine  of  this  kind  is  often  read  into 
Kant's  discussion  of  phenomena  and  noumena:1  it  chimes  in 
with  certain  idealistic  predilections,  and  it  has  also  been  wel- 
comed by  minds  of  a  more  realistic  tendency.  To  abolish  the 
thing-in-itself  may  be  to  improve  Kant's  theory,  though  I  do 
not  feel  so  confident  about  this  as  I  did  when  my  ignorance 
was  greater  than  it  is  to-day.  What  seems  to  me  to  be  certain 
is  that  this  improvement  was  never  made  by  Kant  himself. 
His  discussion  of  phenomena  and  noumena  is  an  attempt  to 
show  that  things-in-themselves  can  never  be  known  by  human 
minds.  This  is  a  very  different  thing  from  an  attempt  to  show 
that  there  are  no  things-in-themselves;  and  I  doubt  whether 
Kant  even  envisaged  a  hypothesis  so  revolutionary.  Belief  in 
the  reality  and  independent  existence  of  things-in-themselves 
seems  to  me  to  be  the  presupposition  of  his  present  discussion, 

1  I  think  this  is  roughly  the  view  of  Hermann  Cohen  and  his  fol- 
lowers, but  I  find  traces  of  it  almost  everywhere. 


440  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LV  §  2 

as  it  is  of  the  whole  Critical  Philosophy.1  This  is  a  complicated 
and  controversial  question  which  can  be  settled  only  by  careful 
analysis.  Unfortunately,  for  part  of  the  discussion  a  new 
version  is  substituted  in  the  second  edition,  and  this  means 
that  we  have  to  cover  more  or  less  the  same  ground  twice 
over. 

The  rest  of  this  chapter  will  be  an  examination  of  the  argu- 
ment peculiar  to  the  first  edition.  This  argument  is  difficult, 
mainly  because  it  occupies  itself  with  the  distinction  between 
the  noumenon  and  the  transcendental  object.  It  repeats  some 
of  the  complicated  theories  which  we  have  already  studied  in 
the  provisional  exposition  of  the  Transcendental  Deduction. 
The  reader  who  is  anxious  to  grasp  Kant's  main  doctrine 
without  the  study  of  unnecessary  detail  will  be  well  advised  to 
devote  himself  to  the  very  much  clearer  account  given  in  the 
second  edition,  an  account  which  will  be  examined  in 
Chapter  LVI. 

§  2.  Alleged  Knowledge  of  Noumena 

In  the  first  edition2  Kant  begins  by  explaining  the  ground 
on  which  we  may  be  tempted  to  claim  that  we  have  knowledge 
of  noumena. 

He  defines  phenomena  very  clearly:  they  are  'appearances  so 
far  as  these  are  thought  as  objects  in  accordance  with  the  unity 
of  the  categories'.  If  he  had  only  used  the  word  'phenomenon' 
consistently  for  the  appearance  as  an  object  (or  for  the  pheno- 
menal object),  we  should  have  been  saved  many  difficulties  of 
interpretation;  for  he  habitually  uses  the  word  'appearance' 
without  making  clear  whether  by  that  he  means  the  whole 
object  or  only  a  partial  and  temporary  aspect  of  it. 

Appearance  for  Kant  is  always  an  appearance  to  sensuous 
intuition.  We  may  suppose  that  there  are  things  which  are 
not  appearances  in  this  sense,  but  are  mere  objects  of  the 
understanding.  Such  objects,  since  they  are  not  given  to  sense 

1  On  this  point  compare  Adickes,  Kant  und  das  Ding  an  sich.  This 
work  seems  to  me  of  great  importance.  2  A  248-9. 


LV§2]  TRANSCENDENTAL  OBJECT  44* 

and  cannot  be  given  to  discursive  thinking,1  would  have  to  be 
given  to  some  sort  of  active  intellectual  intuition.  They  would 
then  be  called  'noumena'2  or  'intelligibilia\ 

It  might  be  thought  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Transcendental 
Aesthetic,  justifies  a  belief  in  the  objective  reality  of  such 
noumena.  The  doctrine  of  the  Aesthetic  limits  appearances  to 
sensible  appearances  given  to  us  passively  under  the  forms  of 
our  sensibility — space  and  time.  Since  it  separates  passive 
sensibility  from  active  understanding,  the  understanding  is 
manifestly  in  no  way  confined  to  sensible  appearances;  and 
this  suggests  the  possibility  of  a  distinction  between  pheno- 
mena and  noumena,  between  a  sensible  and  an  intelligible 
world. 

This  implication  was  accepted  by  Kant  himself  in  the 
Dissertation  of  1770,  though  I  am  inclined  to  doubt  whether 
even  then  he  was  so  confident  about  it  as  he  appeared  to  be. 
It  was  in  any  case  a  new  possibility  which  had  not  been  open 
to  the  followers  of  Leibniz.  According  to  Leibniz  the  same 
object  is  known  indistinctly  by  sense  and  distinctly  by  thought, 
the  difference  between  sense  and  thought  being  only  a  difference 
between  indistinctness  and  distinctness  in  our  knowledge.3  This 
means  that  the  object  as  thought  and  the  object  as  sensed  differ 
only  in  the  degree  of  distinctness  with  which  they  are  known : 
there  is  no  difference  in  kind.  But  if  sense  and  understanding 
are  two  fundamentally  different  powers,  and  if  objects  may  be 
given  independently  to  these  different  powers,  then  there  may 
be  a  distinction  in  kind  between  the  object  as  sensed  and  the 
object  as  understood,  between  the  phenomenon  and  the 
noumenon. 

The  possibility  that  an  object  which  is  not  given  to  sense 
at  all  might  be  given  to  understanding4  is  not  here  discussed 
by  Kant.  He  takes  instead  the  case  where  the  same  object  is 

1  Discursive  thinking  is  always  a  thinking  about  something  given  to 
it  from  without,  not  given  by  the  act  of  thinking  itself. 

2  The  word  'vovc;'  or  'rdj/ff/f*  is  used  for  the  faculty  whereby  we 
have  direct  intellectual  vision  of  reality  without  any  help  from  the 
senses  such  as  is  present  even  in  buivoia;  compare  Plato,  Republic, 
p.  51  id.  3  Sec  Chapter  XIX  §  8.  4  Compare  B  306. 


442  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LV  §  3 

given  independently  to  sense  and  understanding.  If,  as  Kant 
has  proved  in  the  Aesthetic,  the  senses  can  represent  something 
only  as  it  appears  under  the  human  forms  of  time  and  space, 
the  something  which  appears  must  be  a  thing-in-itself  ;*  and  if 
it  is  given  to  understanding,  it  must  be  an  object  of  some  kind 
of  non-sensuous  intuition — Kant  assumes  that  conception  (by 
which  we  merely  think  about  given  objects)  cannot  itself  give 
us  an  object  to  think  about. 

Hence  we  seem  to  have  established  the  possibility  of  a  kind 
of  knowledge  in  which  there  is  no  sensibility.  This  knowledge 
has  by  itself,  apart  from  sensibility,  an  absolutely  objective 
reality  or  validity:  by  it  we  know  objects  as  they  are,  and  not 
merely  as  they  appear. 

If  we  use  our  understanding  empirically,  if  we  apply  our 
concepts  only  to  appearances  given  under  conditions  of  sensi- 
bility, we  can  know  objects  only  as  they  appear.  This  follows 
at  once  from  Kant's  theory  of  space  and  time.  But  now  we 
seem  to  have  a  whole  new  field  of  knowledge  opening  before 
us,  a  world  of  things-in-themselves  which  we  can  think  by 
means  of  our  pure  categories2  and  in  some  sense  apparently 
intuit,  a  far  nobler  object  for  the  exercise  of  our  pure  under- 
standing. 

If  this  were  really  true,  it  would  contradict  everything  that 
we  have  said  before. 

§  3.  The  Transcendental  Object 

Kant  discusses3  this  difficulty  in  the  light  of  his  previous 
account  of  the  transcendental  object.4 

All  our  ideas  are  in  fact  referred  by  understanding  to  some 
object.  Appearances,  since  they  are  ideas,  are  thus  referred  to 
a  'something';  that  is,  they  are  regarded  as  appearances  of 
something;  and  this  'something'  may  be  described  as  the 
transcendental  object.5  It  is  called  transcendental,  because  it 

1  Compare  B  XXVI-XXVII. 

2  All  other  concepts  contain  an  element  derived  from  sense. 

3  A  250.  *  A  104  ff. 
6  In  a  note  Kant  describes  it  as  'something  as  object  of  an  intuition 

in  general1 ;  see  Nachtrage  CXXXIV. 


LV  §  3]  TRANSCENDENTAL  OBJECT  443 

manifestly  cannot  be  given  to  sense  ;  for  if  it  could,  it  would  be 
only  another  appearance.  Hence  it  must  be  known  a  priori,  if 
at  all. 

Unfortunately,  if  our  previous  argument  is  correct,  it  is  not, 
and  it  cannot  be,  known  at  all.  Kant  therefore  proceeds  to 
argue,  exactly  as  he  did  in  the  Transcendental  Deduction,  that 
it  can  only  be  a  correlate  to  the  unity  of  apperception:  it  has  to 
serve  as,  or  to  be  identified  with,  that  unity  of  the  manifold 
whereby  the  understanding  unites  the  manifold  in  the  concept 
of  an  object.1 

On  this  view  the  transcendental  object,  so  far  as  it  is  known, 
must  be  identified  with  that  necessary  synthetic  unity  which  is 
the  only  assignable  and  universal  mark  of  objectivity,  a  unity 
which  is  itself  imposed  upon  the  manifold  of  intuition  by  the 
understanding.2  As  Kant  says,  the  transcendental  object  in  this 
sense  cannot  be  separated  from  sensuous  data  —  if  it  is,  nothing 
is  left  over  by  which  it  can  be  thought.  It  is  no  object  of  know- 
ledge in  itself.  I  take  this  to  mean  it  is  not  an  object  which  we 
can  know  (by  pure  understanding)  as  it  is  in  itself. 

The  double  meaning  of  transcendental  object  is  confusing, 
though  we  can  understand  how  one  meaning  grows  out  of  the 
other.3  The  passage  affirms  that  we  cannot  know  the  trans- 
cendental object  as  a  thing-in-itself.  It  might  be  interpreted  as 
asseiting  that  there  is  no  transcendental  object,  and  therefore 
by  inference  no  thing-in-itself.  I  do  not  see  that  this  interpreta- 
tion is  necessary,  nor  that  if  it  were  necessary  in  regard  to  the 
transcendental  object,  it  would  therefore  hold  of  the  thing  as 
it  is  in  itself. 

Kant  adds  that  the  transcendental  object  is  'only  the  repre- 
sentation of  appearances  under  the  concept  of  an  object  in 
general,  a  concept  which  is  determinable  through  the  manifold 
of  appearances'.  I  do  not  know  what  this  means,  unless  the 
transcendental  object  is  being  identified  with  the  act  of  thinking 


2  For  this  reason  it  would  properly  be  called  transcendental;  see 
Chapter  XXII  §2. 

3  Compare  Chapter  XXII  §  2. 


444  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LV  §  3 

or  the  unity  of  apperception.1  I  do  not  think  this  is  very 
intelligible  in  itself;  but  if  this  is  the  meaning,  it  can  apply  only 
to  the  transcendental  object  in  its  second  sense.  I  should 
require  very  much  more  evidence  before  I  could  accept  the 
view  that  Kant  was  here  retracting  his  whole  doctrine  about 
things-in-themselves. 

The  doctrine  of  the  transcendental  object  is  then  applied  to 
the  categories,  which  are  concepts  of  an  object  in  general,  and 
consequently,  at  least  in  their  pure  form,  concepts  of  something 
in  general.2  We  think  the  object  in  general,  or  the  transcendental 
object  in  its  second  sense,  by  means  of  the  categories.  This 
does  not  mean  that  by  them  we  have  knowledge  of  some 
special  object  given  to  the  understanding  by  itself.  The 
categories  merely  serve  to  determine  the  transcendental  object 
— here  apparently  equated  with  the  concept  of  something  in 
general — through  what  is  given  in  sensibility  in  order  thereby 
to  know  appearances  under  concepts  of  objects.3 

The  ambiguity  of  so  many  of  the  terms  makes  the  interpre- 
tation of  this  difficult.  The  general  sense  is  that  the  pure 
categories  give  us  no  knowledge  of  things-in-themselves.  Their 
only  use  is  empirical.  How  they  determine  the  transcendental 
object  or  its  concept  is  not  so  clear ;  but  by  their  reference  to 
the  transcendental  schemata  they  supply  a  matter  for  the 
ultimate  concept  of  something  in  general,  and  so  enable  us  to 
apply  this  ultimate  concept  to  an  empirical  manifold  charac- 
terised by  the  transcendental  schemata.  In  this  way  we  can 

1  A  251.  It  would  be  much  simpler  to  say  that  it  is  merely  the 
universal  form  of  an  object  and  can  be  determined  only  by  receiving 
an  appropriate  matter  from  sense.  Kant  later  identifies  it  with  the 
concept  of  something  in  general,  which  complicates  matters.  Perhaps 
this  is  what  he  means  here — compare  §  5  below — although  if  so,  he  has 
expressed  himself  loosely. 

2  It  is  not  clear  whether  Kant  intends  to  identify  or  to  distinguish 
concepts    of  an   object  in   general  and   concepts   of  something  in 
general.  Strictly  speaking,  an  object  in  general  should  be  an  object 
of  sense,  though  the  concept   of  it  is  not  always  confined  to  this 
usage.  Something  in  general'  should   be  equivalent  to  'a  thing  in 
general',  and  the  concept  of  it  should  be  wider  in  its  application  than 
the  concept  of  an  object  in  general. 

3  A  251.  'Concepts  of  objects'  here  may  mean  'empirical  concepts'. 


LV  §  4]  TRANSCENDENTAL  OBJECT  445 

know  appearances  through  empirical  concepts  of  objects, 
empirical  concepts  which  presuppose  the  categories  and  the 
concept  of  the  transcendental  object  itself. 

This  is  a  very  elaborate  way  of  describing  phenomenal 
objects  and  explaining  the  use  of  the  categories  in  relation 
to  them. 

§  4.  Origin  of  the  Belief  in  Noumena 

Kant  endeavours  to  explain  further  why  we  refuse  to  be 
satisfied  with  phenomena  and  insist  on  adding  noumena  thought 
only  by  the  pure  understanding.1 

The  Transcendental  Aesthetic  has  shown  that  since  space 
and  time  are  forms  of  our  sensibility,  we  can  by  means  of 
sensibility  know  things  only  as  they  appear  to  us,  not  as  they 
are  in  themselves.  This  means  that,  so  far  as  concerns  sensi- 
bility, we  are  confined  to  knowledge  of  appearances  only:  it 
consequently  implies  a  contrast  with  things-in-themselves.  But 
even  apart  from  this  the  concept  of  appearance  itself  implies 
some  correlative  which  is  not  an  appearance.  An  appearance  is 
nothing  in  itself;  it  must  be  an  appearance  to  something  and  an 
appearance  of  something.2  The  latter  point  is  the  one  with 
which  Kant  is  especially  concerned.  The  very  word  'appearance' 
implies  a  reference  to  'something'  in  itself,  that  is,  to  an  object 
independent  of  our  sensibility.3  The  fact  that  the  appearance 
itself  (or  our  immediate  idea  of  the  object)  is  sensible  does  not 
affect  this  contention  in  the  least. 

From  the  limitation  of  our  sensibility  springs  the  concept 
of  a  noumenon.  This  concept  Kant  in  the  first  edition  treats 

1  A  251;  he  has  already  explained  it  in  A  248-9.  He  says  here 
that  we  are  not  satisfied  with  the  'substratum*  of  sensibility.  This  is  a 
curious  phrase  for  the  transcendental  object,  yet  I  feel  it  hard  to  see 
what  else  he  can  mean.  Appearances  possessing  the  unity  thought  in 
the  concept  of  the  transcendental  object  are  phenomena  (or  phenomenal 
objects). 

2  Compare  B  XXVI-XXVII.  If  the  word  'appearance'  is  appro- 
priately applied — a  large  question — this  contention  is  true.  And  it 
seems  impossible  to  believe  that  an  appearance  can  be  an  appearance 
of  an  appearance,  and  so  ad  infimtum. 

3  This  is  what  distinguishes  an  appearance  from  an  illusion. 


446  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LV  §  4 

as  negative  i1  it  gives  us  no  determinate  knowledge  of  anything. 
This  concept  is  merely  the  thought  of  something  in  general, 
and  in  this  thought  there  is  complete  abstraction  from  any 
reference  to  the  forms  of  sensuous  intuition.2  But  if  the  nou- 
menon  is  to  be  a  genuine  object  distinct  from  phenomena,  it  is 
not  enough  that  in  the  concept  of  it  there  should  be  abstraction 
from  all  the  conditions3  of  sensuous  intuition.  I  must  have  a 
positive  ground  for  assuming  a  non-sensuous  intuition  to  which 
such  an  object  could  be  given.  Otherwise  my  concept,  though 
it  may  not  be  self-contradictory,  will  be  empty — in  the  sense 
that  I  cannot  know  that  it  applies  to  a  possible  object. 

Now  we  cannot  prove  that  sensuous  intuition  is  the  only 
possible  kind  of  intuition.  But  equally  we  cannot  prove  that 
there  is  any  other  kind  of  intuition.  The  fact  that  in  thinking 
we  can  entertain  a  concept  in  abstraction  from  sensibility  is 
quite  inconclusive.  It  still  remains  an  open  question  whether 
our  concept  is  not  the  mere  form  of  a  concept,  whether  in 
abstraction  from  sensibility  it  can  have  any  object,  and  indeed 
whether  in  such  abstraction  any  possible  intuition  remains 
at  all.4 

So  far  as  words  are  concerned,  this  question  may  be  still  open ; 
but  for  Kant  it  is  really  closed.  The  concept  of  a  noumenon  is 
only  the  form  of  a  concept,  and  we  are  quite  unable,  in  abstrac- 
tion from  sensibility,  to  apply  it  to  any  object  at  all.  This  does 
not  necessarily  mean  that  Kant  is  entitled  to  assert,  or  that  he 
wishes  to  assert,  the  unreality  of  noumena,  and  still  less  the 
unreality  of  things-in-themselves.  It  may  mean  only  that  we 
have  no  way  of  knowing  them;  and  this  is  what  I  believe  it 
does  mean. 

1  In  the  second  edition  he  distinguishes  between  positive  and  nega- 
tive meanings  of  the  word ;  see  B  307. 

2  The  concept  of  a  thing  in  general  or  something  in  general  stands 
to  the  concept  of  an  object  in  general  as  the  pure  category  stands  to 
the  schematised  category;  but  unfortunately  Kant  does  not  always 
adhere  consistently  to  this  usage,  and  at  times  his  statements  are 
ambiguous.  3  'Conditions'  are  equivalent  to  'forms'. 

4  The  last  point  is  added  from  Kant's  own  note ;  see  Nachtrage 
CXXXVII. 


LV  §  5]  TRANSCENDENTAL  OBJECT  449 

§  5.  Kant's  Conclusion  in  the  First  Edition 

The  last  section  has  been  comparatively  straightforward,  but 
for  the  conclusion1  we  must  turn  again  to  the  complications  of 
the  transcendental  object. 

The  object  to  which  I  relate  appearances  is  always  the  trans- 
cendental object.  This  Kant  identifies  with  the  thought,  the 
wholly  indeterminate  thought,  of  something  in  general — I  should 
prefer  to  say  it  is  the  content  of  that  thought.  It  cannot  be 
called  the  noumenon,  by  which  we  mean  a  thing  known,  by 
pure  understanding,  as  it  is  in  itself.  In  the  case  of  the  trans- 
cendental object  we  do  not  know  what  it  is  in  itself.2  Our  only 
concept  of  it  is  the  thought  of  the  object  of  a  sensuous  intuition 
in  general,  an  object  which  is  therefore  the  same  for  all 
appearances.3 

1  cannot   think   the   transcendental    object4   through    the 
categories;  for  these  apply  only  to  phenomenal  objects:  they 
serve  to  bring  empirical  intuitions  under  the  concept  of  an 
object  in  general.  No  doubt  a  pure,  or  rather  a  transcendental, 
use  of  the  categories  is  logically  possible;  that  is,  it  can  be 
thought  without  contradiction;  but  it  has  no  objective  validity, 
for  we  cannot  know  that  it  has  a  possible  object.    More 
elaborately,  we  cannot  know  that  it  has  reference  to  any 
non-sensuous  intuition  which  could  thereby  acquire  the  unity 

^253. 

2  This  at  least  leaves  it  an  open  question  whether  the  transcendental 
object  (in  the  first  sense)  may  not  be  a  thmg-m-itself. 

3  It  is  not  clear  in  this  statement  whether  Kant  is  thinking  of  the 
transcendental  object  in  its  first  sense  (as  the  unknown  something  to 
which  any  appearance  must  be  referred)  or  in  its  second  sense  (as  the 
unity  of  the  manifold  of  any  phenomenal  object).  I  incline  to  think 
he  means  the  latter.  Compare  A  109. 

4  Here  clearly  the  transcendental  object  in  its  first  sense.  In  the 
second  sense  the  transcendental  object  is  that  necessary  synthetic 
unity  which  is  articulated  in  the  categories,  and  is  *  determined'  by 
them  through  what  is  given  m  sensibility  (see  A  251).  In  this  second 
sense  we  could,  I  imagine,  be  said  to  think  the  transcendental  object 
through  the  categories ;  for  it  is  through  them  that  we  think  the  neces- 
sary synthetic  unity  of  the  phenomenal  object. 


TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LV  §  5 

which  characterises  an  object.1  The  category  is  a  mere  function 
(or  form)  of  thought.  Through  it  no  object  is  given.  The  object 
which  we  think  through  the  categories  must  be  given  as  a 
manifold  of  intuition  and  combined  by  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  imagination  in  one  time  and  space. 

We  must  recognise  that  in  the  conclusions  so  stated  there  is  a 
certain  amount  of  ambiguity  due  to  the  intrusion  of  the  trans- 
cendental object.  As  in  the  Transcendental  Deduction,  Kant 
first  of  all  treats  the  transcendental  object  as  the  unknown 
'something'  to  which  we  refer  the  manifold  of  appearances, 
and  then  reduces  it,  so  far  as  it  can  be  known,  to  the  necessary 
synthetic  unity  of  the  appearances  themselves.  This  seems  to 
me  to  leave  the  question  open  whether  we  must  still  think  that 
there  is  an  unknown  'something',  a  thing-in-itself,  a  reality  of 
which  we  know  only  the  appearances  to  us.  As  I  understand 
Kant,  he  has  no  intention  whatever  of  giving  up  his  belief  in 
the  unknown  thing-in-itself  or  of  the  noumenon  in  this  negative 
sense.  What  he  is  anxious  to  assert  is  that  by  means  of  the  pure 
categories  we  can  have  no  knowledge  of  such  a  thing-in-itself, 
though  even  this  he  leaves  as  a  logical  possibility.  If  we  take 
the  noumenon  in  a  positive  sense,  that  is,  as  a  reality  intelligible 
by  means  of  our  pure  categories  alone,  he  certainly  means  to 
deny  that  we  are  justified  in  claiming  to  know  any  such  reality. 
His  position  can  be  made  clear  only  if  we  distinguish  between 
a  positive  and  a  negative  sense  of  the  word  'noumenon',  and 
this  distinction  is  made  explicit  only  in  the  second  edition. 

I  need  hardly  add  that  Kant  has  no  intention  here,  any  more 
than  in  the  Transcendental  Deduction,  of  giving  up  his  doctrine 
of  the  phenomenal  object.  The  reduction  of  the  transcendental 
object  to  the  necessary  synthetic  unity  of  the  manifold  of 
appearances  is  in  fact  a  way  of  insisting  that  the  only  objects 
we  know  are  necessarily  phenomenal. 

There  is  a  further  source  of  difficulty  in  Kant's  habit  of 
identifying  the  concept  with  what  is  conceived,  the  thinking  with 

1  At  times  Kant  says  roundly  that  our  categories  could  apply  only 
to  sensuous  or  passive  intuitions  and  not  to  intellectual  or  active 
intuitions;  see  B  145. 


LV  §  5]  TRANSCENDENTAL  OBJECT 

what  is  thought,  the  unity  of  thinking  with  the  unity  of  the 
object,  and  so  on.  There  was  a  time  when  I  believed  that  this 
was  due  to  mere  carelessness  and  perhaps  to  confusion.  I  still 
find  it  puzzling,  but  I  have  an  uneasy  suspicion  that  if  I  under- 
stood Kant  better,  these  difficulties  might  disappear. 


VOL.    II 


CHAPTER     LVI 
PHENOMENA  AND   NOUMENA 

§  i.  Categories  and  Knowledge  of  Nonmena 

The  account  given  of  the  noumenon  in  the  second  edition 
is  more  brief,  and  also  more  clear,  than  that  given  in  the  first. 

Kant  begins  with  the  categories.1  These  originate  in  the 
understanding,  not  (like  the  forms  of  time  and  space)  in  sensi- 
bility. Hence  there  seems  no  reason  why  they  should  be  applied 
only  to  sensible  objects :  they  have  a  prima  facie  claim  to  apply 
to  objects  other  than  those  of  sense. 

This  claim,  however,  is  an  illusion.  The  categories  in  them- 
selves are  mere  forms  of  thought  or  of  judgement.  They  contain 
no  matter  or  manifold  in  themselves,  and  so  cannot  by  them- 
selves give  us  knowledge  of  any  object.  All  that  they  contair 
is  the  logical  power  of  uniting2  a  priori  in  one  consciousness 
a  manifold  which  must  be  given  in  intuition.  If  we  considei 
them  in  abstraction  from  the  only  kind  of  intuition  possibk 
to  us — namely,  sensuous  intuition  under  the  forms  of  time  anc 
space — then  they  are  empty:  they  have  no  meaning,  in  tht 
sense  that  they  refer  to  no  assignable  object.  They  have  ever 
less  meaning  than  the  pure  forms  of  sense  (time  and  space) 
for  through  these  at  least  some  sort  of  manifold,  and  so  some 
sort  of  object,  is  given.3  In  the  categories  all  we  think  is  a  waj 
of  combining  the  manifold,  a  way  proper  to  understanding 
and  involved  in  the  very  nature  of  thought  itself.  If  we  se 

1  B  305. 

2  Kant  here  seems  to  be  thinking  of    the  categories  as  acts  (sci 
A$7  —  B8i)oras  forms  (or  functions)  of  acts  of  the  understaiidmj 
(see  A  69  =  B  94).  If  we  take  them  as  concepts,  what  they  'contain 
(or  what  is  thought  in  them)  is  necessary  synthetic  unity  in  one  of  it 
aspects.  This  necessary  synthetic  unity  is  the  unity  of  a  manifold  o 
intuition  in  general',  but  it  remains  an  empty  form  till  we  consider  i 
as  the  necessary  synthetic  unity  of  a  manifold  given  under  the  forn 
of  time. 

3  The  object  given  is  only  the  form  of  an  object;  see  B  147. 


LVI  §  i]  PHENOMENA  AND  NOUMENA  45* 

aside  entirely  the  sensuous  intuitions  in  which  alone  a  manifold 
can  be  given  to  us,  then  the  mere  way  of  combining  by  itself 
has  no  meaning.  We  can  still  of  course  consider  it  as  a  form  of 
thought,  but  it  tells  us  nothing  about  any  object. 

Hence,  as  has  been  said,  the  claim  of  the  categories  to  apply 
to  objects  not  given  to  sense  is  an  illusion.  We  must,  however, 
try  to  understand  how  this  illusion  arises. 

The  ordinary  objects  which  we  know  may,  as  appearances 
to  us,  be  called  phenomena  (or  sensible  entities).  This  ter- 
minology implies  a  distinction  between  the  objects  as  they 
appear  to  us  (or  are  intuited  by  us)  and  the  objects  as  they  are 
in  themselves  with  a  character  independent  of  our  sensibility.1 
For  example,  the  table  which  we  know  appears  to  us  as  occupy- 
ing space  and  lasting  through  time;  but  this  is  only  because 
space  and  time  are  the  forms  of  our  sensibility,  and  so  we  must 
distinguish  the  character  of  the  table  as  it  appears  to  us  from 
its  character,  or  inner  nature,  as  it  is  in  itself. 

Consequently  if  we  regard  tables  and  similar  objects  as 
phenomena,  we  are  bound  to  set  over  against  them  the  same 
objects  in  their  own  character  as  they  are  in  themselves, 
although  in  this  character  we  cannot  intuit  them;  for  we  can 
intuit  them  only  as  they  appear  under  the  forms  of  time  and 
space.  We  are  also  bound  to  suppose  that  there  may  be  other 
things  which  have  their  own  character  in  themselves,  even 
although  they  are  never  intuited  by  us  as  phenomena  at  all. 
These  things  as  they  are  in  themselves,  whether  they  are 
intuited  by  us  as  phenomena  or  not,  we  are  obliged  to  regard 
as  objects  which  we  think  by  mere  understanding  apart  from 
sense.  We  call  these  objects  noumena  (or  intelligible  entities). 

The  question  then  arises  whether  the  pure  categories  may 
not  be  applied  to  these  noumena  ?  Can  the  pure  categories  be 
said  to  have  meaning  as  applying  to  noumena,  and  can  we 
regard  them  as  giving  us  knowledge  of  such  noumena?2 

1  Compare  B  XXVII  and  A  251. 

2  B  306.  Note  that  Kant  does  not  even  ask  the  question  whether 
we  should  give  up  our  belief  in  these  noumena.  The  only  question  is 
whether  we  can  know  them. 


,^2  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LVI  §2 

§  2.  The  Positive  and  Negative  Meaning  of  'Noumenon' 

To  answer  these  questions  we  must  distinguish  two  different 
meanings  of  the  word  'noumenon'.1 

The  understanding  when  it  thinks  of  an  object  as  a  pheno- 
menon in  its  relation  to  our  senses,  also  thinks  of  an  object  as 
it  is  in  itself  apart  from  this  relation.  It  supposes  further — else 
how  could  it  think  of  them? — that  it  must  be  able  to  make 
concepts  of  these  objects  as  they  are  in  themselves.  The  only 
concepts  which  the  understanding  can  produce  out  of  itself 
without  the  aid  of  sensibility  are  the  pure  categories.  Hence  it 
is  only  natural  to  believe  that  by  means  of  these  pure  categories 
(if  by  no  other  concepts)  we  must  be  able  to  think  objects  as 
they  are  in  themselves. 

In  this  argument  we  are  misled.  We  are  confusing  the  quite 
indeterminate  concept  of  a  noumenon  as  a  mere  'something  in 
general'  which  is  what  it  is  independently  of  our  senses — we 
are  confusing  this  indeterminate  concept  of  a  noumenon  with 
the  determinate  concept  of  a  noumenon  as  an  entity  that  admits 
of  being  known  by  understanding  in  a  purely  intellectual  way. 

Here  then  are  clearly  two  different  meanings  of  'noumenon'. 
If  by  'noumenon'  we  understand  a  thing  so  far  as  it  is  not  the 
object  of  our  sensuous  intuition,  this  is  a  noumenon  in  the 
negative  sense.  Its  concept  is  derived  by  making  complete 
abstraction  from  our  sensuous  intuitions  under  the  forms  of 
time  and  space.2  But  if  we  understand  by  'noumenon'  a  thing 
so  far  as  it  is  the  object  of  a  non-sensuous  (or  intellectual)  intuition, 
this  is  a  noumenon  in  the  positive  sense.  We  are  then  not  merely 
making  abstraction  from  our  own  sensuous  intuitions:  we  are 
supposing  that  there  is  another  kind  of  intuition  (an  intellectual 
intuition  through  which  the  noumenon  can  be  known),  although 
we  neither  possess  such  an  intuition  nor  have  any  insight  into 
the  possibility  of  such  an  intuition. 

The  concept  of  'noumenon'  in  the  negative  sense  is  an 

1  B  306-7. 

2  Such  abstraction  gives  us  the  pure  concept  of  an  object  in  general, 
or  (better)  the  pure  concept  of  a  thing  in  general. 


LVI  §  3]  PHENOMENA  AND  NOUMENA  45  $ 

indeterminate  concept:  it  gives  us  no  knowledge,  unless  a 
manifold  can  be  supplied  for  it.1  The  concept  of  'noumenon' 
in  the  positive  sense  professes  to  be  a  determinate  concept; 
but  in  the  absence  of  an  intellectual  intuition  it  must  fail  to 
make  good  its  claim. 

§  3.  Can  We  Know  the  Thing-in-Itself? 

We  must  now  draw  our  conclusions  from  this  distinction. 
Kant  does  so  in  a  passage  which  is  one  of  the  most  important, 
as  it  is  one  of  the  clearest,  in  the  whole  Kritik?  In  it  he  shows 
beyond  any  reasonable  doubt,  not  only  that  he  holds  the  thing- 
in-itself  to  be  unknowable,  but  also  that  he  has  not  the  remotest 
intention  of  giving  up  his  belief  in  things-in-themselves.  His 
incidental  account  of  our  knowledge  of  phenomena  is  also  one 
of  the  most  precise  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  and  is  in  full 
accordance  with  the  interpretation  which  I  have  attempted  to 
give  throughout. 

The  theory  of  sensibility  as  expounded  in  the  Kritik  is  at  the 
same  time  a  doctrine  of  noumena  in  the  negative  sense.  It 
implies  that  we  must  think  of  things  as  they  are  in  themselves, 
not  merely  as  they  appear  to  us,  or  as  they  are  in  relation  to 
our  sensibility.  Yet  as  we  think  of  things  in  abstraction  from 
our  sensibility,  we  understand  that  in  considering  them  thus 
we  can  make  no  use  of  the  categories.  The  categories  have 
meaning  (or  objects)  only  in  relation  to  the  unity  of  our  intui- 
tions in  time  and  space;  and  they  can  determine  this  unity 
a  priori,  through  universal  concepts  of  combination,  only 
because  of  the  ideality  of  time  and  space. 

This  seems  to  me  to  indicate — what  I  have  argued  for 
consistently — that  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination 
can  impose  unity  on  objects  in  accordance  with  the  pure 
categories  only  because  time  and  space  are  at  once  pure  intui- 
tions and  necessary  forms  of  all  appearances.  And  the  categories, 
as  we  have  demonstrated,  can  have  objective  validity  only 

1  No  manifold  can  be  supplied  for  it,  and  it  cannot  become  deter- 
minate without  a  manifold.  2  B  307-9. 


,454  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LVI  §  3 

because  all  our  intuitions,  and  all  our  objects,  must  be  united 
in  one  time  and  one  space.1 

If  this  unity  of  all  intuitions  in  time  (and  space)  is  lacking, 
as  it  must  be  ex  hypothesi  in  the  case  of  noumena,  then  the 
whole  use  of  the  categories,  and  their  objective  validity  or 
meaning,  entirely  ceases.  The  very  possibility2  of  things  to 
which  the  categories  might  apply  can  never  be  comprehended3 
by  us.  We  can  never  determine  the  possibility  of  a  thing  from 
the  mere  fact  that  the  concept  of  it  is  not  self-contradictory  : 
we  can  do  so  only  by  showing  that  there  is  an  intuition 
corresponding  to  the  concept.  If  we  wish  to  show  that  the 
categories  apply  to  objects  otherwise  than  as  phenomena,  we 
must  base  this  on  an  intellectual  intuition;  and  in  that  case 
the  object  would  be  a  noumenon  in  the  positive  sense.  Since 
such  an  intellectual  intuition  has  no  place  in  our  cognitive 
powers,  our  use  of  the  categories  cannot  go  beyond  objects 
of  sensuous  experience. 

Nevertheless  Kant  does  not  doubt  that  corresponding  to 
phenomena  there  are  intelligible  entities :  every  appearance  is 
an  appearance  to  us  of  a  thing-in-itself .  He  does  not  even  doubt 
that  there  may  be  intelligible  entities  which  never  appear  to  us 
in  intuition  at  all.4  All  he  asserts  is  that  our  categories  cannot 
be  applied  to  such  entities;  for  our  categories  are  mere  forms 
of  thought  awaiting  a  manifold  given  in  sensuous  intuition. 
When  we  speak  of  a  noumenon,  we  must  interpret  it  only  in 
the  negative  sense  as  a  thing  which  is  no  object  of  our  sensuous 
intuition. 

We  can  see  how  this  passage  may  be  taken,  by  Hegelians 
and  others,  as  showing  that  Kant  ought  to  have  given  up  a 
belief  in  things-in-themselves.5  On  that  point  I  offer  no  opinion, 
beyond  saying  that  if  this  is  really  so,  Kant  would  have  to 


1  This  applies  especially  to  the  Analogies,  but  also  to  the  other 
Principles. 

2  B  308.  Compare  also,  as  Kant  himself  suggests,  B  288  ff. 

3  The  word  used  is  'einsehen',  which  is  especially  connected  with 
reason.  *  B  309. 

6  Fichte  is  perhaps  to  be  regarded  as  the  originator  of  this  view. 


LVI  §4]  PHENOMENA  AND  NOUMENA  455 

re-write  his  entire  philosophy.  To  assert  that  Kant  has  explicitly 
given  up  his  belief  in  things-in-themselves  seems  to  me  a 
manifest  contradiction  of  his  express  statements. 

§  4.  Thought  and  Intuition 

The  rest  of  Kant's  argument1  is  little  more  than  an  amplifi- 
cation of  what  has  already  been  said;  but  it  contains  some 
points  which  are  of  interest  in  themselves,  and  others  which 
are  of  interest  because  of  the  misunderstandings  to  which  they 
have  given  rise.  The  main  contention  may  be  said  to  be  the 
central  contention  of  the  Critical  Philosophy — that  although 
we  must  always  distinguish  thought  and  intuition,  neither  can 
give  us  knowledge  of  objects  apart  from  the  other. 

Merc  intuition  by  itself  is  blind.2  The  fact  that  there  is  an 
affection  of  sensibility  in  me — and  even  this  could  not  be  known 
as  a  fact  without  thought — does  not  constitute  a  reference  of  the 
idea  so  received  to  an  object.  To  know  that  this  appearance 
given  to  me  is  the  appearance  of  an  object,  I  must  think,  and 
think  through  the  categories:  I  must,  for  example,  regard  this 
appearance  as  the  state  of  a  permanent  substance;  and  it  is 
only  on  this  presupposition  that  I  can  apply  empirical  concepts 
of  objects. 

Mere  thought  by  itself  is  empty.  If  I  leave  out  all  intuition, 
I  am  left  only  with  the  form  of  thought.  Such  a  form  of  thought 
is  simply  a  principle  of  synthesis,  a  way  of  combining  some 
sort  of  manifold,  and  so  a  way  of  determining  an  object  for 
the  manifold  of  a  possible  intuition.  The  categories,  as  such 
principles  of  synthesis,  contain,  however,  no  reference  to 
sensibility  as  the  special  way  in  which  the  manifold  (and  con- 
sequently the  object)  may  be  given.  Elsewhere3  Kant  appears 
to  suggest  that  the  very  nature  of  the  categories  implies  that 
the  manifold  must  be  given  passively  and  therefore  to  a 
sensuous  intuition;  but  in  any  case  the  categories  contain  no 

1  A  253  —  B  309  fT.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  this  passage  occurs  in  both 
editions,  and  the  passage  peculiar  to  the  first  edition  must  be  inter- 
preted in  the  light  of  this. 

2  A  51  =•=  B  75.  3  Sec  B  145  and  compare  B  149. 


456  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LVI  §  5 

reference  to  time  and  space  as  the  only  forms  of  human 
sensibility.  Therefore  the  categories,  as  concepts  of  objects  in 
general,  do  have  a  prima  facie  claim  to  apply  beyond  the  realm 
of  sensuous  intuition,  or  at  least  beyond  the  realm  of  human 
sensuous  intuition.  Nevertheless  they  do  not  give  us  determinate 
knowledge  of  any  objects  other  than  sensible  phenomena ;  for 
we  cannot  assume  that  such  objects  would  be  given  except  by 
presupposing  a  non-sensuous  or  intellectual  intuition ;  and  this 
we  are  not  entitled  to  do.1 

§  5.  The  Concept  of  'Noumenon'  as  a  Limiting  Concept 

Kant  next  proceeds  to  examine  the  concept  of  'noumenon', 
and  asserts  that  it  is  a  limiting  concept.  This  contention  has 
often  been  misunderstood. 

The  concept  of  a  noumenon  (or  of  a  thing  as  it  is  in  itself 
and  as  it  is  known  to  be  by  pure  understanding)  is,  in  the 
first  place,  not  self-contradictory;  for  there  is  no  contra- 
diction in  assuming  a  non-sensuous  intuition,  as  is  done  in 
this  description  of  the  concept.  Secondly  this  concept  coheres 
with  the  rest  of  our  knowledge  as  setting  a  limit  to  other 
concepts,  particularly  the  concept  of  sensibility:  it  is  a  concept 
of  what  is  beyond  sensibility.  Thirdly  we  have  no  means  of 
showing  its  objective  reality  or  validity.  On  these  grounds 
Kant  calls  it  a  problematic  concept.2 

The  concept  of  a  noumenon  is  more  than  this :  it  is  also  a 
necessary  concept.  It  is  necessary  in  order  to  limit  the  objective 
validity  of  our  sensuous  knowledge,  that  is,  to  prevent  us  from 
thinking  that  our  sensuous  intuitions  give  us  knowledge  of 
things  as  they  are  in  themselves. 

It  is  hard  to  see  how  Kant  could  have  held  this  unless  he 
believed  in  things-in-themselves,  and  unless  he  believed  that 
we  must  think — though  we  can  never  know — things-in- 
themselves.  Yet  when  all  is  said  and  done,  we  can,  he  insists, 
have  no  insight  into  the  possibility  of  noumena.  The  area 

1  We  arc  not  even  entitled  to  assume  sensuous  intuitions  with  forms 
other  than  time  and  space.  2A254  =  I33io. 


LVI  §  5]  PHENOMENA  AND  NOUMENA  4157 

outside  the  realm  of  appearances  is  empty — empty,  he  is 
careful  to  add,  for  us.  Our  understanding  does  extend  prob- 
lematically beyond  the  realm  of  appearances — how  otherwise 
could  it  know  the  limits  of  that  realm  ?  But  we  have  no  intui- 
tion— wt  have  not  even  any  concept  of  an  intuition — by  which 
objects  beyond  the  range  of  sensibility  could  be  given  to  us. 
Hence  our  understanding  cannot  be  used  assertorically  beyond 
the  limit  of  sensuous  appearances. 

All  this  seems  to  me  to  mean  that  we  must  think  there  really 
are  things-in-themselves  beyond  the  realm  of  appearances  (and 
even  perhaps — though  the  thought  is  empty — that  these 
things-in-themselves  could  be  known  only  by  an  intelligence 
different  from  our  own).  All  Kant  is  denying  is  that  we  can 
have  any  positive  knowledge  of  such  things-in-themselves.  His 
whole  thought  seems  to  me  utterly  remote  from  the  doctrine 
that  the  thing-in-itself  is  to  be  reduced  to  a  mere  concept  of 
the  mind. 

Hence  he  concludes  that  the  concept  of  a  noumenon  is  a 
limiting  concept.1  Its  use  is  only  to  limit  the  pretensions  of 
sensibility,  and  is  therefore  negative,  not  positive.  The  concept, 
however,  is  far  from  arbitrary.  It  is  bound  up  necessarily 
with  the  limitation  of  sensibility,  although  it  can  give  us  no 
positive  knowledge  of  the  inner  nature  of  that  which  lies 
beyond  sensibility.  It  is  to  me  extraordinary  that  this  passage 
should  be  used  to  show  that  Kant  is  consciously  reducing  the 
thing-in-itself  to  a  mere  concept.  It  should  be  noted  that  Kant 
does  not  assert  the  noumenon  to  be  a  limiting  concept — he  is 
sometimes  quoted  as  saying  this:  he  asserts  only  that  the 
concept  of  a  noumenon  is  a  limiting  concept  (or  the  concept  of 
a  limit).  To  say  this  is  to  say  only  that  it  is  a  concept — an 
indeterminate  concept  no  doubt — of  what  lies  beyond  the 
limits  of  our  sensibility;  for  on  Kant's  theory  that  which  limits 
must  be  different  from  that  which  it  limits.2  In  the  absence  of  a 
non-sensuous  intuition  we  can  never  know  what  lies  beyond 
the  limits  of  our  sensibility.  But  Kant  does  not  doubt  that 
something  which  is  not  an  object  of  sensuous  intuition  does 

1  A  255  =  B  310-11,  'GretusbegtiJT.  2  See  A  515  =  B  543. 

VOL.  II  P* 


4^8  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LVI  §  6 

lie  beyond  these  limits — otherwise  there  would  be  no  sense  in 
talking  about  limits  at  all.1 

§  6.  Understanding  not  Limited  by  Sensibility 

In  a  further  paragraph2  Kant  elaborates  his  doctrine  without 
adding  anything  really  new. 

He  insists  that  the  division  of  objects  into  phenomena  and 
noumena,  and  the  distinction  between  a  mundus  sensibilis  and  a 
mundus  intelligibility  cannot  be  admitted  in  the  positive  sense. 
The  latter  phrase  is  added  in  the  second  edition;  and,  I  suggest, 
it  indicates  that  the  distinction  between  noumenon  in  the 
positive,  and  noumenon  in  the  negative,  sense  has  been 
introduced  mainly  to  guard  against  the  interpretation  that 
Kant  is  giving  up  the  thmg-in-itself  instead  of  merely  denying 
that  we  have  knowledge  in  regard  to  it. 

His  further  distinction  between  sensuous  and  intellectual 
concepts,  and  his  insistence  that  the  categories  give  us  no 
knowledge  unless  we  can  indicate  a  possible  intuition  to  which 
they  can  apply — all  this  calls  for  no  comment.3  The  same 
applies  to  his  contention  that  the  concept  of  a  noumenon  as 
a  problematic  concept4  is,  not  only  admissible,  but  inevitable: 
nevertheless  we  must  not  interpret  the  concept  positively,  or 
suppose  that  thereby  our  understanding  acquires  a  determinate 
object  known  by  means  of  pure  thought.  An  understanding 
which  knew  reality  in  this  way,  not  discursively  by  categories 

1  I  think  some  commentators  have  been  misled  by  the  modern 
associations  of  a  'limiting  concept'.  Kant  does  not  mean  by  it  the 
concept  of  something  to  which  we  can  get  closer  and  closer  approxi- 
mations. He  does  not  mean  to  imply  by  it — as  has  been  suggested,  for 
example,  by  the  Master  of  Balhol,  Kant,  p.  284 — that  we  can  come  to 
know  reality  more  and  more  as  it  is.  He  means  to  imply,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  we  can  never  come  to  know  reality  as  it  ib. 

2  A255  =    B  311. 

8  Except  perhaps  the  qualification  that  the  intellectual  concepts  (or 
categories)  can  be  valid,  and  must  be  valid,  of  objects  of  empirical 
intuition :  Kant's  language  might  suggest  that  this  is  not  so.  When  he 
says  that  we  cannot  determine  any  object  for  intellectual  concepts,  he 
must  mean  'so  long  as  they  remain  purely  intellectual'  (that  is, 
.unschematised).  4  Sec  A  254  —  B  310. 


LVI  §  7]  PHENOMENA  AND  NOUMENA  45$ 

which  await  an  intuition  given  to  sense,  but  intuitively  in  a 
non-sensuous  intuition,  is  for  us  itself  a  problem:  we  have  no 
means  of  showing  that  such  an  understanding  is  possible. 

By  the  concept  of  a  noumenon  our  understanding  acquires 
an  extension  that  is  purely  negative :  it  is  not  limited  by  sensi- 
bility, but  rather  limits  sensibility;  for  it  must  think  that 
beyond  sensibility  and  beyond  appearances  there  is  the  thing 
as  it  is  in  itself,  which  it  calls  a  noumenon  in  distinction  from 
phenomena.  But  it  also  immediately  sets  limits  to  itself;  for  it 
recognises  that  it  cannot  know  these  things-in-themselves  by 
any  of  its  categories.  It  can  only  think  them  under  the  name  of 
an  unknown  something. 

In  all  this  there  is  no  denial  of  the  thing-in-itself.  There  is 
only  an  insistence  that  while  we  must  think  things-in- 
themselves,  and  thereby  recognise  the  limits  of  our  experience, 
we  must  never  delude  ourselves  into  the  belief  that  we  can 
know  these  things-in-themselves  by  pure  understanding. 

§  7.  The  Union  of  Understanding  and  Sensibility 

The  distinction  between  the  sensible  and  the  intelligible 
world  is  not  to  be  identified  with  the  distinction  between  the 
world  as  known  by  observational  astronomy  and  the  world  as 
known  by  theoretical  (or  mathematical)  astronomy.1  We  can 
of  course  apply  understanding  and  reason  to  appearances ;  but 
the  phrase  'an  intelligible  world*  should  be  confined  to  a  world 
known  by  understanding  alone.  To  ask  whether  we  know  such 
an  intelligible  world  is  to  ask  whether  there  is  a  transcendental, 
as  well  as  an  empirical,  use  of  understanding ;  and  this  question 
we  have  answered  in  the  negative.2 

Therefore  if  we  say  that  the  senses  represent  objects  as  they 
appear,  while  understanding  represents  them  as  they  are,  we 
must  use  the  latter  phrase  only  in  the  empirical  sense.  To 
know  things  as  they  are  is  simply  to  know  them  as  objects 
of  experience — that  is,  as  appearances  bound  together  in  one 
system  in  accordance  with  the  categories.  We  cannot  know 

1  A 256-7  =  B  312-13.  a  A257  =  6313. 


TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  [LVI  §  8 

them  as  they  may  be  apart  from  their  relation  to  possible 
experience,  and  so  we  cannot  know  them  as  objects  of  mere 
understanding  apart  from  sense.  We  cannot  even  know  whether 
such  a  knowledge  is  possible — at  least,  Kant  adds,  if  it  is  to 
stand  under  our  human  categories. 

The  last  phrase  may  suggest  speculations  always  at  the  back 
of  Kant's  mind,  but  never  regarded  as  more  than  speculations. 
A  finite  understanding  must  receive  a  given  manifold  from 
without,  and  must  combine  it  in  accordance  with  the  categories 
which  originate  in  itself — how  then  can  it  possibly  know  reality 
as  it  is  in  itself?  Surely  this  is  the  prerogative  of  an  infinite 
mind  which  would  have  no  reality  beyond  itself.  Such  an 
infinite  mind  might  perhaps  know  all  reality  in  its  own  intel- 
lectual, and  yet  intuitive,  activity.  In  such  knowledge  our 
categories  could  have  no  place,  but  we  have  certainly  no  means 
of  knowing  that  such  a  divine  knowledge  is  possible. 

If  we  confine  ourselves  to  experience  which  we  know  to  be 
possible,  we  must  say  that  for  us  understanding  and  sensibility 
can  determine  objects  only  in  conjunction.^  If  we  separate  them, 
we  may  indeed  have  intuitions  without  concepts,  or  concepts 
without  intuitions,  but  neither  of  these  by  itself  can  give  us  a 
determinate  object.  The  Analytic  ends  as  it  began.2  The  funda- 
mental distinction  and  the  necessary  co-operation  of  sense  and 
understanding,  intuition  and  thought,  in  all  our  knowledge — 
this  is  the  central  and  all-important  doctrine  of  the  Kritik. 

§  8.  The  Limits  of  Knowledge 

If  we  are  still  unconvinced  by  this  doctrine  and  reluctant  to 
give  up  the  transcendental  use  of  the  categories,  Kant  asks  us 
to  try  the  experiment  of  making  synthetic  judgements  by  means 
of  the  categories  alone.3  We  may  be  able  to  make  analytic 
judgements  by  means  of  the  categories  alone,  but  in  that  case 
we  are  only  making  explicit  what  is  thought  in  the  category: 
we  do  not  show  that  the  category  applies  to  an  object,  and  it 
may  be  merely  a  principle  of  synthesis  involved  in  the  nature 

1  A  258  =  6314.  2A5i=B75.  8  A  258  ==6314. 


LVI  §  8]  PHENOMENA  AND  NOUMENA  4<y 

of  thought.  If  we  try  to  make  synthetic  judgements — if,  for 
example,  starting  merely  from  the  concept  of  substance  and 
accident,  we  say  that  everything  which  exists,  exists  as  substance 
or  accident — how  can  we  justify  our  assertion  ?  Such  a  judge- 
ment professes  to  apply  to  things-in-themselves  as  objects 
known  by  pure  understanding.  Where  then  is  the  third  thing, 
or  the  necessary  intuition,1  which  alone  can  carry  us  beyond 
our  concept  ?  We  can  never  prove  such  a  proposition  except  by 
appealing  to  something  other  than  our  original  concept.  This 
third  thing  can  only  be  possible  experience ;  but  if  we  appeal  to 
possible  experience  with  its  necessary  forms,  we  thereby 
renounce  our  claim  to  make  a  priori  judgements  free  from  all 
reference  to  sense. 

We  have  therefore  no  principles2  by  which  we  can  apply  the 
concept  of  a  merely  intelligible  object,  if  we  regard  that  concept 
as  positive3  and  as  a  source  of  possible  knowledge;  for  we 
cannot  think  of  any  way  in  which  such  objects  could  be  given. 
We  must  treat  the  concept  as  problematical  or  negative.  It 
then  leaves  open  a  place  for  such  intelligible  objects;4  but  it 
serves  only,  like  an  empty  space,  to  limit  the  empirical  Principles 
of  the  Understanding.  We  can  say  that  the  Principles  of  the 
Understanding  (such  as  the  law  of  causality),  together  with 
the  sciences  based  on  them,  can  be  applied  only  to  the  pheno- 
menal world.  We  must  not  delude  ourselves  into  the  supposition 
that  this  negative  and  necessary  limitation  is  at  the  same  time 
positive  knowledge  of  a  world  beyond. 

In  Kant's  whole  discussion  of  phenomena  and  noumena  I 
can  see  no  suggestion  that  he  gave  up  for  a  moment  his  belief 
in  things-in-themselves.  The  passages  in  regard  to  the  trans- 
cendental object  might  indeed  with  a  certain  plausibility  be 
interpreted  in  this  sense ;  but  I  do  not  believe  that  either  here 

1  Compare  Nachtrage  CXXXIX. 

2  'Everything  which  exists,  exists  as  substance  or  accident'  would  be 
such  a  principle,  if  it  could  be  established. 

3  Compare  Nathtrage  CXL. 

4  It  is  absolutely  vital  to  Kant's  philosophy  that  such  a  place  should 
be  left  open. 


^62  TRANSCENDENTAL  IDEALISM  LVI  §  8 

or  in  the  Transcendental  Deduction  such  an  interpretation  is 
necessary,  nor  do  I  believe  that  it  could  express  the  intention 
of  Kant's  thought.  These  passages  are  in  any  case  withdrawn 
in  the  second  edition,  perhaps  because  they  are  susceptible  of 
this  interpretation.  There  can  at  least  be  no  reasonable  doubt 
that  in  the  second  edition  Kant's  position  in  this  matter  is 
perfectly  clear.  Nor  can  there  be  any  reasonable  doubt  that 
without  the  presupposition  of  things-in-themselvcs — whether 
we  regard  it  as  justified  or  not — the  whole  of  the  Critical 
Philosophy  falls  to  pieces. 


EPILOGUE 

As  I  look  back  on  the  long  and  difficult  road  that  we  have 
traversed,  I  feel  compelled  to  ask  whether  it  has  been  worth 
while.  For  myself  at  least  I  must  answer  emphatically,  Yes. 
I  think  I  can  now  see  Kant's  theory  as  a  whole,  and  even  as  a 
comparatively  simple  whole,  so  far  as  a  theory  which  deals 
with  the  most  ultimate  questions  possible  to  the  human  mind 
can  ever  be  called  simple.  I  think  I  can  see  also  that  the  intricacy 
of  his  exposition  is  not  due  to  incompetence,  but  mainly  to 
the  complications  of  his  subject ;  and  I  have  found  not  rarely 
that  my  own  first  simplifications  of  his  argument  were  erroneous, 
and  that  his  more  intricate  statement  was  the  only  one  that 
was  correct.  His  exposition  would  have  been  clearer,  if  it  had 
been  better  arranged;  and  there  are  passages,  unfortunately 
too  often  crucial  passages,  where  there  is  unnecessary  obscurity 
due  presumably  to  excessive  haste.  Nevertheless  on  the  whole 
Kant  seems  to  me  both  to  have  a  consistent  philosophy  and  to 
have  expressed  it  as  it  ought  to  be  expressed.  I  have  convinced 
at  least  myself  that  the  prevalent  charges  of  pedantry,  formalism, 
incoherence,  and  confusion  are  wide  of  the  mark:  so  far  as  they 
are  true  at  all,  they  deal  only  with  the  surface  of  things;  and 
they  are  bound  to  be  set  aside,  in  their  present  exaggerated 
form,  as  soon  as  men  can  acquire  that  internal  understanding 
apart  from  which  no  great  philosophy  can  be  intelligible. 

Such  an  internal  understanding  it  is  the  business  of  every 
commentator,  within  the  limits  of  his  own  capacity,  to  acquire 
and  to  communicate.  In  my  belief  this  can  be  done  only  by  a 
patient  study  of  the  details,  by  an  attempt  to  follow  the 
intricate  workings  of  an  author's  mind,  provided  always  we 
remember  that  there  is  a  whole  which  we  seek  to  know  and  in 
the  light  of  which  all  the  details  are  to  be  interpreted.  This  at 
any  rate  is  the  method  which  I  have  tried  to  follow.  I  could, 
I  think,  have  written  an  easier,  and  certainly  a  shorter,  book, 
had  I  attempted  only  to  set  forth  my  own  views  of  Kant's 
philosophy.  For  such  books  there  is  certainly  an  urgent  need, 


464  EPILOGUE 

and  at  times  I  have  felt  the  desire  to  try  my  hand  at  writing 
one  of  them.  But,  at  the  best,  works  of  this  kind  do  not  enable 
the  student  to  check  the  statements  which  they  make ;  and  no 
book,  however  good,  can  be  a  substitute  for  the  direct  under- 
standing of  Kant  himself. 

My  hope  is  that  by  the  method  I  have  chosen  the  student  may 
be  helped  in  the  reading  of  the  Kiitik  itself  and  may  be  enabled 
thereby  to  form  his  own  judgements.  In  no  other  way  can  Kant 
be  restored  to  his  real  position  in  the  history  of  philosophy,  a 
position  which,  in  my  opinion,  is  generally  misjudged  at  the 
present  time.  This  seems  to  me  particularly  important  when 
the  modern  idealisms  to  which  he  gave  rise  appear  to  have 
worked  themselves  out,  at  least  for  the  moment,  and  when 
thinkers  everywhere  are  approaching  the  same  problems  from  a 
different  point  of  view.  I  believe  that  the  attitude  of  Kant  is 
much  nearer  to  the  modern  attitude  than  was  that  of  his  imme- 
diate successors;  and  I  believe  that  a  real,  as  opposed  to  a 
superficial,  knowledge  of  the  Kritih  may  help  to  save  modern 
philosophy  from  unnecessary  errors  and  to  keep  it  in  the  path 
of  progress. 

The  edifice  which  we  have  studied  in  detail  is  little  more 
than  the  portico  of  that  extraordinary  structure  which  is  called 
the  Critical  Philosophy.  Nevertheless  I  believe  that  if  we  have 
mastered  the  principles  of  its  architecture,  we  have  already 
acquired  the  necessary  clue  for  the  understanding  and  apprecia- 
tion of  the  whole.  No  philosopher  is  truly  great  whose  work 
does  not  cover  the  whole  range  of  human  experience ;  and  by 
this  negative  test  at  least  Kant's  prima  facie  claim  to  greatness 
cannot  be  questioned.  I  believe  myself  that  Kant  stands  out 
among  the  greatest  thinkers  by  all  the  tests  which  can  reasonably 
be  applied  to  men  who  share  the  common  weaknesses  of 
humanity.  If  I  can  persuade  others  to  acquire,  by  patient  study 
of  the  Kritiky  some  of  that  respect  and  admiration  for  Kant 
which  has  grown  upon  me  the  more  I  have  examined  his  work, 
I  shall  feel  that  my  long  and  at  times  depressing  labours  have 
not  failed  to  find  an  appropriate  reward. 


GENERAL     INDEX 


abgeleitet,.!  118  n.  2,  512  n.  r. 

abstraction,  I  200,  200  n.  6,  267;  see  also  comparison. 

different  kinds  of,  I  124-6. 

accident,  see  substance. 

accurate,  I  266  n.  4. 
acquaintance,  I  334,  334  n.  9. 
act,  and  function,  I  413. 

identity  of,  see  function,  identity  of. 

actio  mutua,  I  297  n.  4,  II  294  n.  2. 
action,  II  215,  215  n.  3,  216,  282,  325. 
activity,  causal,  see  substance. 

continuity  of,  II  287. 

actual,  see  possible. 

the,  and  the  necessary,  II  360. 

actuality,  II  57,  228  n.  4;  sec  also  existence. 

and  necessity,  II  341 ;  see  also  necessity;  possibility. 

logical  and  real,  II  361. 

no  wider  than  necessity,  II  340,  343. 

pure  category  of,  II  58. 

schematised  category  of,  II  59. 

sense-perception  the  mark  of,  II  359. 

transcendental  schema  of,  II  59. 

Adam,  I  15,  159  n.  i. 

Adickes,  I  38,  40  n.  3,  41,  41  n.  T,  42  n.  i,  53  n.  2,  61  n.  2,  66  n.  4, 
70  n.  2,  237  n.  4,  301  n.  2,  308  n.  i  and  n.  2,  320  n.  2, 
373  n.  2,  378  n.  3,  421,  421  n  2,  424  n.  3,  426  n.  6, 
429  n.  2,  486  n.  i,  490  n.  4,  492  n.  7,  520  n  6,  II  60  n.  3, 
66  n.  2,  165  n.  7,  224  n.  2,  287  n.  i,  318  n.  i,  339, 
339  n.  i,  346  n.  3,  371,  440  11.  i. 

Aesthetic,  the  Transcendental,  I  52,  73,  93,  98,  II  93,  96  n   i,  445. 

doctrine  of  the,  II  121-4,  441. 

principles  of  the,  II  97. 

affection,  by  ourselves,  II  400. 

by  outer  objects,  II  400. 

double,  I  520  n.  6;  see  also  causality,  double. 

of  the  self  from  within,  II  421. 

affects,  meaning  of,  II  388. 

affinity,  I  366,  367,  369,  480  n.  6;  see  also  appearances. 

and  association  of  ideas,  I  448,  480. 

and  object,  I  445. 

association  by,  I  366,  367  n.  2. 

transcendental,  I  367-71,  395,  481-4. 

transcendental  and  empirical,  I  446-9. 


*66  GENERAL  INDEX 

aggregate,  II  152. 

Alexander,  S.,  I  49,  112  n.  4,  152  n.  i,  175  n.  i,  305  n.  i,  II  78  n.  i, 

107  n.  i,  256  n.  3. 
algebra,  I  157-8. 

Amphiboly,  of  Concepts  of  Reflexion,  I  308. 
Analogies,  Principle  of  the,  II  159-61. 

proof  of  the,  II  175-6. 

the,  regulative,  II  178-9. 

analogy,  cognition  by,  I  67  n.  2. 

mathematical,  II  179. 

Analogy,  first  meaning  of,  II  179-80. 

second  meaning  of,  II  180-3. 

analysis,  I  200-1,  250. 

and  conception,  I  267. 

and  synthesis,  I  81,  87,  266-9,  437,  505. 

confusion  between  two  kinds  of,  I  219. 

of  concepts,  I  160,  172. 

Analytic,  the  Transcendental,  I  52,  73,  234,  236-8. 
animals,  I  330  n.  i,  376  n.  3. 

consciousness  of,    II   389;   see  also  consciousness,   animal; 

Erlebnis. 

Anschauung,  I  94  n.  5,  477  n.  i,  II  284-6,  291. 
Anticipations,  of  Sense-perception,  Principle  of  the,  II  134-9. 
appearance,  I  339,  339  n.  i. 

and  illusion,  II  416-18. 

and  phenomenon,  I  96  n.  7. 

meaning  of,  II  230,  445. 

necessary  synthetic  unity  of  the,  and  necessary  unity  of 

consciousness,  I  419. 
appearances,  affinity  of,  I  444-6. 

and  objects,  I  488. 

change,  or  exchange  of,  II  216,  217. 

forms  of,  I  102,  109,  131,  135. 

given,  I  476-8. 

necessary  synthetic  unity  of,  I  369,  482. 

outer,  time  the  mediate  condition  of,  II  383. 

relation  of,  to  reality,  I  61-3. 

substance,  the  permanent  substratum  of,  II  191. 

appercepho,  I  332  n.  7,  333  n.  i. 

apperception,  I  345-6,  II  87,  415;  see  also  imagination;  self- 
consciousness;  sense,  inner;  space  and  time;  unity. 

ancj  categories,  I  432-4;  and  form  of  judgement, 

I  521-3;  and  objects  of  knowledge,  I  516-18; 
and  self-consciousness,  I  398,  511,  512;  and 
self-knowledge,  II  401-3;  and  space  and  time, 
I  462;  and  synthesis,  I  465;  and  transcendental 
object,  I  417-20;  and  understanding,  I  469-71, 
515 ;  and  unity  of  time,  I  486. 


GENERAL  INDEX  4$7 

apperception  as   an    act,    I    397;    as   the    condition    of  experience, 

I  408-11 ;  as  a  power,  I  397. 
communion  of,  II  319. 

empirical,  I  402;  and  inner  sense,  I  399-403. 

empirical  and  transcendental,  I  379-81,  398-9. 

1 inner  sense  affected  by,  II  388. 

original,  I  346,  397;  and  time,  II  162. 

pure,  the  act  of,  I  403,  408,  see  also  experience,  inner. 

transcendental,  I  403-5. 

apperception,  the  unity  of,   I  207,  405-8,  458-9,  482,  483,  570-1, 

II  161. 

and  timc  ant}  space,  I  420,  462,  516; 

and  unity  of  the  manifold,  I  512, 
515;  sec  aho  interaction ;  time ;  under- 
standing. 

—  analytic  and  synthetic,  I  513;  empirical, 

I  519;  objective,  I  518-21,  522; 
original  transcendental,  I  520;  syn- 
thetic, I  510-16;  synthetic,  ultimate 
principle  of,  1 517-18;  transcendental, 
I  512,  520. 

apprehensio,  or  Aitffassung,  I  359  n.  7. 

brnta,  I  333  n.  i. 

apprehension,  I  262  n.  2,  355,  489,  II  139,  168,  186,  232. 

and  inner  sense,   I   355,   360;  and  sense-perception, 

I  361 ;  and  space  and  time,  I  539-40. 

continuity  as  the  formal  condition  of,  II  289-93. 

mere,  II  303,  312. 

production  of  time  in,  II  396. 

pure  synthesis  of,  I  360. 

reversible  and  irreversible  order  in,   II  263;  see  also 

sense-perceptions. 

rule  of,  II  236-7,  242-3,  266. 

successiveness  of,  II  192-5,  231,  239,  246,  250. 

synthesis  of,  I  264,  354~5,  35&,  359~63,  447,  4?8-9, 

538-9,  542-3,  H  258,  352. 
a  priori,  comparatively,  II  358. 

meaning  of,  I  76. 

two  senses  of,  I  154,  166,  191,  322  n.  2. 

Archimedes,  I  580. 

architectonic,  I  54,  235-7,  308,  II  66  n.  2,  76,  121,  339. 
argument,  analytic  or  regressive,  I  457. 

indirect,  II  198;  see  aho  proof. 

progressive  and  legressive,  I  130. 

synthetic  and  analytic,  I  130. 

synthetic  or  progressive,  I  457. 

Aristotle,  I  159  n.  i,  187,  190,  246  n.  i,  257,  578,  II  18  n.  i,  130  n.  7, 
187  n.  i. 


4,158  GENERAL  INDEX 

arithmetic,  I  160;  see  also  geometry. 

formulae  of,  II  129-31. 

association,  I  367  n.  2,  368,  489;  see  also  ideas;  reproduction. 

astronomy,  observational  and  theoretical,  II  459. 

atomism,  of  Hume,  I  138,  354  n.  3. 

atoms,  and  the  void,  II  148  n.  2,  154,  318  n.  5,  365. 

attention,  II  400. 

attraction,  see  repulsion. 

attributes,  I  85,  II  163. 

analytic  and  synthetic,  I  86  n.  i. 

Auffassungy  or  apprehensio,  I  359  n.  7. 
axioms,  I  127,  218  n.  6,  II  101,  124,  130,  431. 
Axioms,  of  Intuition,  Principle  of  the,  I  218,  II  in. 


Balfour,  Lord,  II  217  n.  2. 
Barker,  H.,  I  20,  280  n.  i. 
Baumgartcn,  I  47,  48  n.  2,  85  n.  3,  100  n.  2,  138,  204  n.  5,  257,  257 

n.  3  and  n.  4,  307,  332  n.  7,  365,  522  n.  2,  II  294  n.  5, 

295  n.  2. 
begreifen,  I  263  n.  4,  376  n.  2. 

or  comprehendere,  I  334  n.  8. 

Begnff9  I  94  n.  5,  108  n.  i,  115  n.  i,  376  n.  2. 
Begnffe,  usurpierte,  I  197  n.  2,  315  n.  i,  II  364  n    i. 
Beloselsky,  Prince  von,  I  332  n.  5,  II  21  n.  4. 
Berechtigiing,  see  Benchtigung. 

Benchtigung,  and  Beretlitigung,  II  217  n.  2. 

Berkeley,  1 48,  67,  71,  II  262  n.  2,  375,  376-7,  3?8  n.  4,  381  n.  3,  418. 

Bestimmungeriy  I  107  n.  4,  112  n.  3,  133  n.  6,  171  n.  i. 

Bewusstsein,  I  332  n.  7,  333. 

bezeichnen,  II  232  n.  i. 

bezeichnety  I  141  n.  5,  158  n.  2,  II  123  n.  4,  170  n.  i,  216  n.  3,  253  n.  3. 

Bezeichnung,  II  123  n.  4. 

Blester,  I  45  n.  4. 

Black,  II  119  n.  i. 

blind,  I  96,  98,  170  n.  i,  269,  270,  270  n.  i,  321,  434,  455,  574- 

bodies,  I  561. 

body,  II  212. 

the  concept  of,  II  219. 

Borowski,  I  40,  46. 
Bradley,  I  252. 

brain,  phantoms  of  the,  II  349. 
Braithwaite,  I  162  n.  i. 
Broad,  I  514  n.  2,  II  199  n.  i,  329  n.  i. 
Brown,  George,  I  20. 


Caesar,  Julius,  II  227  n.  i,  228. 


GENERAL  INDEX  46^ 

Caird,  E.,  I  17,  213  n.  5,  260  n.  3,  290  n.  i,  300  n.  4,  349  n.  1,422  n.  i, 
513  n.  3,  560  n.  2,  581  n.  i,  II  27  n.  2,  51,  51  n.  i,  361, 

3?i. 

canon,  I  189,  II  23  n.  3. 
capacities,  original  or  underivative,  I  345. 
capacity,  -I  94,  345  n.  4. 
Cassirer,  Ernst,  I  49  n.  i,  II  147  n.  4. 
Cassirer,  Heinnch,  I  20. 
casust  I  197  n.  2,  II  364. 
categories,  I  225,  226,  426,  488-91,  II  432-5;  see  also  apperception; 

concepts;  intuition;  mind,  infinite;  revolution,  Coper- 

nican;  space  and  time. 
and  formal  conditions  of  sensibility,  II  31;  and  forms  of 

judgement,   I  259,  293-7,  299,  341,  475,  524;  and 

forms  of  thought,  I  430-2;  and  the  form  of  time, 

I  532-5;  and  generic  concepts,  I  306-7;  and  human 
experience,  I  526-7;  and  knowledge  of  noumena,  II 
450-1 ;  and  the  manifold,  II  455 ;  and  non-human  in- 
telligence, I  531-2 ;  and  the  self,  II 423 ;  and  synthesis, 

II  338  n.  5 ;  and  the  transcendental  object,  II  444. 

as  acts  of  pure  thought,  I  224,  II  450  n.  2. 

as  conditions  of  the  unity  of  self-consciousness,  I  426. 

as  predicates  of  possible  judgements,  II  25. 

claim  of  the,  II  450-1,  456. 

clue  to  the  discovery  of,  I  169,  239,  297-300. 

completeness  of  list  of,  I  308-9. 

Deduction  of  the,  sec  Deduction. 

definitions  of  the,  I  256-60,  303,  II  433,  434. 

derivation  of  the,  II  75. 

discovery  of  the,  I  299. 

limits  of  knowledge  through,  I  530-1. 

names  of  the,  I  298. 

objective  reality  of,  II  348. 

objective  validity  of,  I  321,  II  453-4. 

pure,  I  260,  298,  304,  320,  325,  526,  532,  555,  II  63,  343, 

434- 

pure,  without  sense  and  meaning,  I  304  n.  2. 

schematised,  I  260-1,  304. 

schematised  and  pure,  II  82. 

subsumption  under,  II  24-5;  difficulty  of,  II  25-8. 

table  of,  I  297. 

trichotomy  of  the,  I  305-6. 

use  of,  empirical  and  transcendental,  I  231,  II  338. 

use  of,  transcendental,  II  438,  460. 

category,  and  schema,  II  42-4,  68-70,  76,  102,  182. 

pure,  II  42. 

pure  and  schematised,  II  41,  42,  67-8. 

transcendental  use  of  the,  II  436-7. 


470  GENERAL  INDEX 

category,   two  senses  of,  I  66  n.  4. 
causa  cognoscendiy  II  363  n.  i. 
causa  essendiy  II  363  n.  i. 
c ausa  fiendi ,  II  363  n.  i. 
causality,  I  308,  445-6,  II  106. 

analysis  of  the  concept  of,  II  281-3. 

and  time,  II  273-5. 

argument  for,  'moments'  of  the,  II  257;  presuppositions  of 

the,  II  262. 

category  of,  I  544~5- 

continuity  of,  II  292. 

double,  I  64,  96  n.  i ;  see  also  affection,  double. 

kinds  of,  II  278. 

origin  of  the  concept  of,  II  248-9. 

predicables  of,  II  282. 

Principle  of,  II  221-4,  283. 

reciprocal,   II  314;  of  co-existent  substances,   II   327;  of 

simultaneous  states,  II  327. 

six  proofs  of,  II  224-5. 

subject  of,  II  216. 

transcendental  schema  of,  II  54,  236  n.  i,  243  n.  i. 

vertical  and  horizontal,  II  150  n.  2,  279n.  i. 

causation,  and  continuity  of  time,  II  288. 

streaky  view  of,  II  297  n.  i. 

cause,  and  effect,  I  326-8,  II  70,  362-3;  the  law  of,  II  221;  quanti- 
tative equivalence  of,  II  179  n.  5;  the  schematised  category 
of,  II  54;  simultaneity  of,  II  283-4,  327;  successiveness  of, 
II  283-4. 

causality  of  the,  II  284. 

concept  of,  I  433. 

determines  effect,  II  244. 

efficient  or  effective,  II  281 

causes,  final,  II  278. 

certainty,  II  100  n.  2. 

intuitive,  II  125,  145,  147. 

intuitive  and  discursive,  I  545  n.  4,  II  56,  100-3. 

change,  I  148,  152,  II  188,  216,  226,  268  n.  2. 

and  exchange,  II  216,  217. 

and  motion,  I  101,  128. 

and  the  permanent,  II  407. 

a  way  in  which  the  permanent  exists,  II  202. 

the  concept  of,  II  217-18,  395. 

the  continuity  of,  II  153,  256,  284-7,  291-2. 

experience  of,  II  196-7. 

the  form  of,  II  285,  290. 

the  law  of  continuity  in,  II  288-9. 

subjective,  awareness  of,  II  384. 

changes,  measurement  of,  II  196. 


GENERAL  INDEX  471 

T/  • 

chimaera,  I  193. 

Cicero,  I  255  n.  3. 

cinnabar,  I  368. 

Circe,  II  229  n.  6. 

clear,  I  266  n.  4. 

clock,  ship's,  I  197  n.  i,  II  349. 

coexistence,  see  also  interaction. 

meaning  of,  II  297-8. 

necessary,  II  314. 

objective,  II  301,  305,  307,  309 

objective  and  necessary,  II  312. 

objective,  and  causation,  II  314. 

objective,  and  objective  succession,  II  264,  301,  311-12. 

cogmtio  discursivay  I  216. 
cognition,  different  grades  of,  I  334. 

subjective  sources  of,  I  353. 

cognitions,  a  priori,  origin  of,  I  223 ;  see  also  origin. 
cognoscere,  see  erkennen. 

Cohen,  Hermann,  I  84  n.  2,  422  n.  i,  II  130  n.  5,  439  n.  i. 

Coleridge,  I  13. 

colours,  totality  of,  I  117. 

combination,  see  also  connexion. 

or  synthesis,  I  503-10. 

subjective  and  objective,  I  504. 

commeraum,  I  297  n.  3,  II  55  n.  3,  294  n.  i,  316,  326. 
communw,  I  297  n.  3,  II  55  n.  3,  294  n.  i,  316,  319  n.  3. 
communion,  II  55  n.  3,  294,  294  n.  2,  309;  see  also  apperception. 
dynamical,  II  326. 

subjective,  II  320. 

subjective,  objective  ground  of,  II  320. 

communion,  pure  category  of,  II  54-5. 
comparison,  reflexion,  and  abstraction,  I  199,  249. 
composition,  Kant's  method  of,  I  45,  53. 
composituniy  and  totum,  II  323  n.  2. 

composition  realey  and  compost  turn  ideale,  II  323  n.  2. 

comprehetiderey  see  bcgreifen. 

comprehemiOy  see  Zusammenfassung. 

comprehension,  I  334. 

conceiving,  and  judging,  I  201-2. 

form  of,  I  203. 

concept,  see  also  concepts;  synthesis. 

and  existence,  II  358;  and  imaginative  synthesis,  I  272,  465; 

and  intuition,  I  94,  115,  II  26;  and  rule,  I  388-90;  and 
rule  of  imaginative  synthesis,  I  273;  and  schema,  II  35. 

a  priori  factitious,  I  197. 

arbitrary  or  factitious,  I  196. 

different  types  of,  I  196-8,  II  343,  346-  54. 

empirical,  I  196,  473. 


^72  GENERAL  INDEX 

concept,  empirical  factitious,  I  197. 

form  of  the,  I  196. 

'in  a',  I  195. 

intellectual,  or  notion,  I  196. 

limiting,  II  457,  458  n.  i. 

logical  form  of  a,  II  430. 

mathematical,  I  197,  389,  473,  II  26. 

mathematical,  and  schema,  II  33. 

nature  of  the,  I  94,  192,  249-51. 

of  body,  I  391,  II  219;  of  circle,  II  26;  of  dog,  I  273  n.  2; 

of  God,  I  352;  of  object  in  general,  I  417;  of  objec- 
tivity, I  424;  of  spirit  or  soul,  I  351 ;  of  tree,  I  199;  of 
triangle,  I  272,  388-9. 

possibility  in  relation  to  different  types  of,  II  346-54. 

pure,  two  types  of,  I  317. 

recognition  in  the,  I  375. 

'under  a',  I  195. 

universality  of  the,  I  196. 

conception,  II  344;  see  also  analysis;  intuition. 

concepts,  see  also  concept;  imagination. 

analysis  of,  I  160,  172,  238. 

a  prwny  I  497;  objective  reality  of,  II  89. 

bringing  the  pure  synthesis  to,  I  278. 

bringing  the  synthesis  to,  I  263,  271-3,  388. 

clear  knowledge  of,  I  200. 

completeness  in,  II  336  n.  2. 

complex,  I  268. 

construction  of,  I  160. 

content  or  matter  of,  I  267. 

empirical,  I  197,  390-2,  430,  II  26,  445 ;  and  universal,  1 139 ; 

and  necessary  synthetic  unity,   I  430;  and  schemata, 
II  35;  objective  reality  of,  II  347. 

factitious,  I  198,  II  349. 

•  form  of,  I  198-203,  249,  267;  made  and  not  given,  I  198. 

general,  I  1 1 5  n.  i . 

generic,  see  categories. 

higher  or  wider,  I  254  n.  4. 

intellectual,  or  notions,  I  197;  see  also  concepts,  sensuous. 

logical  origin  of,  as  regards  their  form,  I  199. 

mathematical,  I  161  n.  3,  197,  304  n.  2,  II  347  n.  i,  431-2; 

and  the  categories,  I  277;  objective  reality  of,  II  350. 

matter  of,  I  192-6,  268. 

origin  and  acquisition  of,  1316. 

partial,  I  194. 

predicates  of  possible  judgements,  I  251. 

pure,  I  225 ;  see  also  intuition,  pure. 

pure,  and  acts  of  pure  thought,  I  224 ;  see  also  categories. 

sensuous  and  intellectual,  II  458. 


GENERAL  INDEX  473 

concepts,    simple,  I  194. 

synthesis  in  accordance  with,  I  442. 

unity  in  accordance  with,  I  429-30. 

universal  and  particular,  I  303. 

usurpatory,  I  197  n.  2. 

.use  of,  empirical,  II  427-9;  empirical  and  transcendental, 

II  439;  transcendental,  II  429-31. 
Concepts,  the  Analytic  of,  I  236,  238-9. 
conceptus  communis,  I  201. 
conccptus  dati,  I  196  n.  5. 

factitn,  I  196  n.  5. 

condition,  see  form. 

confused,  I  266  n.  4 ;  see  also  distinct. 

and  distinct,  I  133. 

connexion,  II  226,  335  n.  6. 

and  combination,  II  159  n.  5,  173  n.  2. 

necessary,   II   159,   170;  and  existence,   II  360;  see  also 

experience. 

objective,  I  464. 

teleological,  II  278  n.  i. 

connotation,  I  193  n.  i,  195. 
conscientia,  I  332  n.  7,  398  n.  i. 
consciousness,  I  332;  see  also  synthesis. 

animal,  I  332-5,  II  383;  see  also  animals. 

categories  not  the  conditions  of,  I  334. 

empirical,  I  463. 

empirical  and  transcendental,  I  460-2,  483. 

mediate  and  immediate,  I  377. 

possible,  I  477-8. 

consciousness,  unity  of,  I  378-9;  analytic,  I  201,  202,  289  n.  i,  514 

n.  2 ;  formal,  I  385-7 ;  necessary  synthetic,  1 461-2 ; 

subjective,  I  519;  see  also  appearance,  unity  of; 

manifold,  unity  of;  object,  unity  of. 
conservation,  the  Cartesian  doctrine  of,  II  197  n.  4. 
constitutive,  II  179. 
construction,  II  351,  432. 

a  priori,  the  necessity  of,  I  158-60. 

symbolical  and  os tensive,  I  158. 

content,  transcendental,  I  289,  291-2,  301. 
contingent,  the,  I  519  n.  5,  II  102  n.  6. 

continuity,  the    doctrine    of,    II    152-3;     see   also    activity,    causal; 
causality;  change;  space  and  time;  time. 

the  formal  condition  of  apprehension,  II  289-93. 

Cook  Wilson,  I  405  n.  i,  II  214  n.  2. 
co-operation,  of  mind  and  reality,  I  581-2. 
Copernicus,  I  75. 
copula,  I  522. 
correspondence,  see  truth. 


474  GENERAL  INDEX 

counting,  I  374. 

Cousin,  D.  R.,  I  20,  280  n.  i. 

Croce,  I  563  n.  i. 

crude,  I  266  n.  4. 

Darstellung,  II  73  n.  4. 

day,  see  night. 

Dasein,  I  297  n.  5,  II  52  n.  3,  58  n.  2. 

Dauer,  II  45  n.  2. 

deduced,  meaning  of,  II  368. 

deduction,  meaning  of,  I  313. 

Deduction,  of  the  Categories,  the,  I  220. 

Metaphysical,  the,  I  239,  280,  325  n.  5,  521,  538,  538  n.  i, 

553 ;  divisions  of,  I  245 ;  sec  also  Deductions. 

Objective,  the,  I  240,  350-2,  523-5;  method  of,  I  342-4; 

summary  of,  I  502-3. 

Subjective,  the,  I  240,  352~3>  54*-2;  aim  of  the,  I  537-8; 

and  the  Objective,  I  527  (see  also  Deductions); 
framework  of,  I  529-30;  method  of,  I  344-7. 

deduction,  transcendental,  in  general,  I  314;  necessity  for,  I  319-21; 
principle  of,  I  344;  principles  of,  I  313-14. 

transcendental,  of  the  categories,  difficulty  of,  I  322-3 ;  of 

the  categories,  difficulty  of,  illustration  of,  I  326-7 ;  of 
the  categories,  difficulty  of,  reasons  for,  I  322-3. 

transcendental,  of  space,  I  321 ;  of  space  and  time,  I  109, 

319  n.  2. 

Deduction,  Transcendental,  the  I  316,  552,  II  40,  275,  443;  argument 
of,  I  558-61,  II 265 ;  authoritative  exposition  of,  1313, 
348,  457-8;  divisions  of,  I  313;  in  the  first  and  second 
editions,  I  499-501 ;  progressive  exposition  of,  I  457; 
provisional  exposition  of,  I  53,  313,  322  n.  5,  348, 
364,  365  n.  3,  457;  regressive  exposition  of,  I  476; 
subjective  and  objective  sides  of,  I  555-8. 

deductions,  empirical  and  transcendental,  I  314-16. 

Deductions,  Metaphysical  and  Transcendental,  I  239-41. 

Subjective  and  Objective,  I  241-2,  473,  501-2,  528-9. 

definition,  real,  I  303-4,  II  433. 

definitions,  in  philosophy,  151. 

degree,  II  49~5°>  i35>  r4°,  i49>  285;  see  also  time. 

Demonax,  II  210  n.  i. 

demonstration,  II  101  n.  3. 

denotation,  I  195. 

derivative,  I  118  n.  2. 

Descartes,  I  398  n.  i,  II  164,  165  n.  8,  184  n.  i,  381  n.  3,  401,  401 

n.  4;  and  Berkeley,  II  376-7. 
determmately,  I  541. 

determination,  II  176;  temporal,  II  313;  see  also  Bestimmung ;  time- 
determination. 


GENERAL  INDEX  4^ 

determine,  meaning  of,  II  244,  252  n.  10,  254,  313,  319  n.  4,  338  n.  2, 

342,  363  n.  2,  390- 
deuthch,  I  266  n.  4. 

development,  psychological,  in  time,  I  317. 
de  Vleeschauwer,  I  18,  53  n.  3,  365  n.  2,  II  281  n.  3. 
dialectic,. Hegelian,  I  306. 

Dialectic,  Transcendental,  the,  I  74,  170  n.  i,  235,  237,  II  366. 
dichotomy,  I  306. 

differences,  empirical,  due  to  things,  I  140. 
discontinuity,  II  364. 
discursive,  I  216  n.  3. 

distinct,  I  266  n.  4;  and  indistinct  or  confused,  I  377. 
distinctness,  see  indistinctness, 
doctrine,  Kant's,  novelty  of,  I  46-8. 

rationalist,  I  336. 

DoktriHy  II  23  n.  3. 

dream,  I  434. 

dreams,  145911.  i,  539  n.  9,  54*>  II  121  n.  3,267,270,  359  n.  2,  385-6. 

dunkely  I  266   n.  4. 

duration,  II  45,  166,  188;  see  also  permanence. 


Eddy,  Mrs.,  I  55. 
effect,  see  cause. 

empirical  criterion  of  the,  II  268  n.  3. 

efficacy,  real,  II  282. 

Eindrucky  1  97  n.  3,  477  n.  3. 

etnfliessen,  and  Ewfluss,  I  458  n.  5. 

Etnfluss,  see  etnfliessen. 

einsehen,  or  perspicere,  I  334  n.  7. 

Einstein,  I  162  n.  2. 

elements,  heterogeneous  and  homogeneous,  II  160. 

Empfindungy  I  477  n.  i,  539  n.  2. 

empty,  I  222  n.  2. 

energy,  II  207,  209. 

England,  I  213  n.  5. 

epigenesis,  I  578. 

equation,  7  +  5  =  12,  I  160,  II  129. 

Erdmann,  Benno,  I  100  n.  2,  418  n.  4,  II  24  n.  5,  99  n.  4,  141  n.  8, 

186  n.  3,  200  n.  i. 
Erdmann,  J.  E.,  I  377  n.  2. 
Erfahrungy  II  383. 
Erfahrungsbegnffy  I  196  n.  4. 
erkenneriy  or  cognoscere,  I  334  n.  5. 
Erkenntnisgrund,  I  195  n.  3. 
ErlebntSy  II  383,  413,  421. 
Erzeugung,  II  221  n.  i. 
essence,  I  85,  II  163. 


^6  GENERAL  INDEX 

essentialia,  I  85,  II  163. 

Euclid,  I  159,  432  n.  3. 

events,  the  objective  order  of,  II  169-71,  227. 

evidence,  intuitive,  II  62  n.  i ;  see  also  certainty. 

Evidenz,  II  100  n.  2. 

Ewing,  I  398  n.  4,  529  n.  2,  573  n.  2,  II  192  n.  2,  254  n.  8,  256  n.  i, 

276  n.  2,  294  n.  5,  423  n.  3. 
exact,  I  266  n.  4. 

exchange,  II  216,  217;  see  also  change, 
exhibition,  II  73. 
existence,  II  169,  178,  298;  see  also  actuality;  concept;  connexion. 

and  actuality,  II  357  n.  i ;  and  matter,  II  359. 

determinate  and  indeterminate,  II  404. 

my,  consciousness  of,  II  385;  my,  determination  of,  II  402, 

406,  408,  410;  my,  knowledge  of,  II  380-1. 
of  other  men,  I  179. 


—  necessary,  II  362. 

not  restricted  to  the  present,  II  358. 


E\istenz,  II  58  n.  2. 
experience,  I  318,  331,  426,  431,  489,  531,  II  169-71,  175;  see  also 
science ;  synthesis,  pure. 

advance  of,  in  time,  II  290. 

analysis  of,  I  547~9>  575 »  579- 

and  necessary  connexion,  II  175. 

conditions  of,  II  268-71,  272. 

development  of,  I  577-9,  II  272. 

divine,  I  178,  427,  559- 

form  of,  II  90,  338. 

formal  conditions  of,  II  335,  337,  341,  345,  348. 

formal  and  material  conditions  of,  II  341. 

human,  I  178-80,  526-7;  all-embracing  system  of,  II  367; 

empirical  and  a  priori  within,  I  559. 

immediate,    II    381;    see    also    inner    experience;    outer 

experience. 

inner,  II  382,  408;  and  permanent  substances  in  space, 

II  410;  and  pure  apperception,  II  381;  and  outer, 
I  147,  II  386;  immediacy  of,  II  383;  space,  mediate 
condition  of,  I  147. 
judgements  of,  I  270  n.  3. 

material  conditions  of,  II  335. 

matter  of,  II  338. 

matter  and  form  of,  I  78. 

metaphysic  of,  I  72. 

one  all-embracing,  I  427-9,  450-3 ;  the  phenomenal  world 

as,  II  366  n.  3,  367. 

outer,  immediacy  of,  II  381. 

possible,  I  350,  531,  II  89,  461 ;  the  pure  schema  of,  II  428. 

possibility  of,  I  472,  II  90-5,  i?5,  354-6. 


GENERAL  INDEX  47^ 

experience,  process  to,  II  271-3. 

unity  of,  I  427-9. 

universal  conditions  of,  II  336,  341-2. 

experiences,  of  different  individual  men,  I  428. 
exposition,  II  194  n.  i. 

»-  Kant's  method  of,  I  348,  382,  488  n.  4;  the  competence  of, 

II  370-1,  463- 
metaphysical,  I  108;  see  also  space  and  time. 

transcendental,  I  108,  108  n.  4 ;  see  also  space  and  time. 

extension,  II  412. 

extension,  see  denotation, 
extent,  I  225,  228,  240. 


Fdhigkeit,  I  94  n.  4,  345  n.  4. 

fate,  I  197  n.  2,  315. 

fatum,  I  197  n.  2,  II  364. 

force,  II  215  n.  3,  282. 

forces,  moving,  II  135  n.  3,  137,  138  n.  3,  149,  212,  324,  326  n.  i, 

412;  see  also  repulsion  and  attraction, 
form,  and  condition,  I  103,  103  n.  4,  137. 

and  matter,  I  97,  137-43. 

empirical,  I  140,  142  n.  3. 

intellectual,  I  497. 

freedom,  I  66,  74. 

function,  I  250,  281,  413 ;  see  also  mind. 
and  act,  I  413. 

and  power,  I  419. 

definition  of,  I  247. 

identity  of,  and  identity  of  act,  I  440. 

meaning  of,  I  245-8,  434-8. 

functions,  see  synthesis. 

of  unity,  I  246,  247,  248. 


Galileo,  I  75. 
Garve,  I  45  n.  4. 
Gegenstand,  I  193  n.  i. 
Gegenwirkung,  II  295  n.  2. 

Gemeinsthaft,  I  297  n.  3,  II  55  n.  3,  294  n.  i,  316,  319  n.  3. 
Gemut,  I  95  n.  4. 
genau,  I  266  n.  4. 
general,  and  universal,  I  77. 
geometries,  modern,  I  160-3. 
geometry,  I  126,  319-20;  and  arithmetic,  II  131. 
axioms  of,  II  124-5  \  see  a^so  axioms. 


—  Euclidean,  I  159,  161. 

—  pure,  I  1 06,  127. 


478  GENERAL  INDEX 

GesctZy  and  gesetzt,  I  446  n.  i. 
gesetzt,  II  228  n.  4;  see  also  Gesetz. 
Gestalt,  II  45  n.  2,  127  n.  4. 
given,  I  506  n.  i,  515,  541,  580,  II  88. 

ambiguity  of  the  word,  I  525. 

Gtock,  II  364  n.  i. 

gravitation,  the  law  of,  II  295,  324  n.  2. 

gravity,  the  moment  of,  II  150  n.  4. 

Green,  T.  H.,  I  386  n.  5. 

ground  and  consequent,  the  pure  category  of,  II  18,  53. 

Grundkraft,  II  350  n.  i. 


Hardy,  I  155  n.  i. 

harmony,  pre-established,  I  181,  556,  574. 

Heath,  I  130  n.  i. 

Hegel,  I  65,  386  n.  5,  II  362,  371. 

Herz,  I  44  n.  6,  46  n.  i,  321  n.  i. 

hiatus,  II  364. 

Hirngespinst,  I  220. 

Hirngespinste,  II  349  n.  5. 

history,  mental,  II  423. 

homogeneous,  synthesis  of  the,  II  44. 

Hume,  I  43,  44,  46, 48,  67,  138,  354  n.  3,  373,  444  n.  3,  571,  II 144  n.  3, 

146,  168,  171,  219,  222,  226  n.  3,  248  n.  3,  262  n.  2,  270, 

283,  378  n.  4. 


'!',  constant  and  unchanging,  I  486. 

—  the  idea,  I  463. 

idea,  I  334;  see  also  ideas;  object;  representation;  thing;  Vorstellung. 

contained  in  one  moment,  I  358,  II  193. 

discursive,  I  198  n.  4. 

of  the  permanent,  and  permanent  idea,  II  411. 

Idea,  I  238  n.  i ;  see  also  reason, 
idealism,  and  science,  I  68-70. 

Berkeleyan,  and  space,  II  376. 

dogmatic,  II  376. 

empirical  and  transcendental,  II  376. 

formal,  II  426. 

material  and  formal,  II  376. 

problematic,  II  376,  381. 

representative,  II  376. 

transcendental,  I  143  n.  3,   144  n.  2,  453,  II  411,  412;  see 

also  realism,  empirical. 

turning  the  tables  on,  II  381-4. 

Idealism,  Refutation  of,  II  377-80. 
idealisms,  modern,  II  464. 


GENERAL  INDEX  479 

ideality,  transcendental ;  see  reality,  empirical, 
ideas,  a  priori,  I  80;  and  object,  I  338. 

association  of,  I  480;  see  also  affinity;  association. 

clear  and  obscure,  I  377-9,  463-4. 

co-existence  of,  II  331. 

empirical,  I  337-8. 

innate,  I  377. 

objective  unity  of,  I  523. 

of  space  and  time  not  empirical,  but  a  priori,  I  110-14. 

play  of,  I  434,  II  245,  263. 

Ideas,  see  reason. 

illusion,  see  appearance. 

image,  I  477,  479,  II  37. 

image,  and  time,  II  37. 

imagination,  I  263,  269,  345,  363,  536,  II  87,  301,411;  see  also  sense. 

and  concepts,  I  465;  and  judgement,  II  71-2;  and  sensi- 

bility, I  488 ;  and  understanding,  1 269  n.  3,  488,  503, 
536,  II  392. 

associative,  I  366. 

plastic,  I  366. 

play  of,  II  257,  259,  43i. 

productive,  I  484,  II  395. 

reproductive,  I  114,  II  89,  354  n.  i. 

reproductive  and  productive,  I  365. 

three  kinds  of,  I  366-7. 

transcendental,  and  apperception,  I  486-8. 

transcendental,  and  experience,  I  484-5. 

transcendental  power  of,  I  364. 

uncontrolled  by  thought,  II  227. 

imagination,  synthesis  of,  I  572,  II  257;  formal  unity  in,  I  490; 
necessary  aspects  of,  II  56 ;  principle  of  the  necessary 
transcendental  unity  of  the  pure  (productive),  I  465 ; 
pure,  I  464-6;  reproductive,  I  464,  536  n.  2. 

imagination,  transcendental  synthesis  of,  I  413,  431,  440-1,  467,  475, 
4^3-5,  529,  535-7,  540,  SS^,  558,  576,  581,  II  71-2, 
77,  174,  278-80,  388-9,  392;  and  necessary  synthetic 
unity,  I  485;  and  time,  I  536,  II  421. 

productive,  I  536  n.  2;  re- 
productive, I  364;  tran- 
scendental unity  of,  I 
468-9. 

immanent,  I  232. 

immediacy,  proof  of,  II  382. 

immediate,  meaning  of,  II  383. 

impenetrability,  I  391  n.  4,  II  135  n.  3,  207. 

impression,  I  97,  477. 

Indiscermbles,  Identity  of,  I  180,  452  n.  2. 

indistinct,  T  266  n.  4 ;  see  also  distinct. 


480  GENERAL  INDEX 

« 

indistinctness,  and  distinctness,  II  441. 
infinity,  I  305. 

influence,  I  62,  65,  II  143  n.  7,  294  n.  5,  295,  309;  see  also  things-in- 
themselves. 

reciprocal,  II  326. 

influences,  continuous,  II  317. 
Inhalt,  I  195  n.  5. 
inherence,  II  203. 

and  subsistence,  II  298. 

inner  and  outer,  meaning  of,  II  408. 
inside,  and  outside,  I  100. 
insight,  I  334,  II  382. 
intelligence,  an  infinite,  I  527. 

non-human,  see  categories. 

intelligere,  see  verstehen. 
intelligibilia,  II  441. 

intension,  I  193  n.  i,  195. 

interaction,  II  294,  294  n.  2,  295-6,  309,  317,  326. 

and  co-existence,  II  324-9;  and  sense-perception,  II  316- 

18;  and  space,  II  330;  and  the  unity  of  apperception, 
II  319-24. 

concept  of,  II  324-5,  330. 

dynamic,  II  315. 

matter  in,  II  317. 

mediate,  II  318. 

mediate  and  immediate,  II  315,  328. 

Principle  of,  II  294-7. 

proof  of,  II  329-31. 

schematised  category  of,  II  55,  323. 

transcendental  schema  of,  II  55,  315. 

intuition,  I  73,  93-8,  458;  see  also  concept;  intuitions;  possibility; 
thought. 

and   conception,    I    122-4;   an<i   object,    II    119-21;    and 

thought,  I  431,  II  460;  and  understanding,  I  329-32. 

by  itself,  blind,  II  455 ;  see  also  intuitions,  blind. 

categories  independent  of,  I  122. 

empirical,  see  validity,  objective. 

form  of,  I  101-3,  H  4J4' 

form  of,  and  pure,  I  104,  109. 

in  general,  I  284  n.3,  287,  289-92,  528,  534,  538,  542. 

in  general,  and  human  intuition,  I  260. 

intellectual,  I  178,  217,  217  n.  3,  532,  II  403,  405,  410,415, 

441,  452,  454,  456. 

matter  of,  II  138. 

mere,  II  113. 

mere,  synthesis  of,  II  341  n.  i. 

outer,  see  time. 

outer,  and  relations,  II  412. 


GENERAL  INDEX  481 

intuition,  permanent,  II  384  n.  i. 

pure,  I  103-6. 

pure,  in  two  senses,  I  105. 

pure,  and  the  categories,  I  262 ;  and  form  of  intuition,  I  104, 

109;  and  pure  concepts,  I  338-40. 
intuitions,  blind,  I  96,  98. 

in  general,  I  526  n.  i. 

intellectual,  I  249,  5^7>  53°- 

pure,  I  no. 

space  and  time  not  concepts  but,  I  114-15. 

unconscious,  I  458. 

investigation,  psychological  or  physiological,  I  200. 
irreversibility,  II  246 ;  see  also  sense-perceptions. 
'I  think*,  I  463,  518-20. 

the  idea,  I  510. 


Jachmann,  I  349  n.  i. 

Joseph,  I  204. 

judgement,  I  251-6,  548,  II  337;  see  also  imagination;  judgements. 

acts  of  understanding  can  be  reduced  to,  I  251. 

analysis  in  all,  I  219,  283. 

analysis  and  synthesis  in,  I  265,  269. 

analytic,  I  201,  549  n.  i. 

apodeictic,  I  202  n.  3. 

a  priori  synthesis  in  all,  I  516. 

definition  of,  I  206,  220,  522. 

form  of,  I  288. 

form  of,  one  ultimate,  I  207 ;  see  also  apperception. 

forms  of,  I  204-6,  209,  246,  248-9,  294,  435;  see  also 

categories ;  judgement,  moments  of. 
forms  of,  and  the  categories,  I  259,  260,  293-7,  299,  341, 

475,  524. 

forms  of,  as  moments,  I  211,  294. 

forms  of,  classification  of,  I  204. 

forms  of,  common  to  all  judgements,  I  215. 

forms  of,  table  of  the,  I  204,  568. 

forms  of,  universal  and  necessary,  I  206-8. 

functions  of,  I  246. 

hypothetical  form  of,  II  223. 

infinite,  I  205,  208  n.  2,  212  n.  2. 

metaphysical,  I  89. 

moments  of,  I  211,  294. 

moments  and  forms  of,  I  208. 

power  of,  II  21. 

problematic,  I  202  n.  3,  II  344. 

singular,  I  205,  208  n.  2. 

synthesis  in  every,  I  220,  509. 

VOL.  II  Q 


f.te  GENERAL  INDEX 

judgement,  synthetic,  different  kinds  of,  II  84-6. 

two  aspects  of,  I  280,  287. 

unity  in,  I  281-3. 

Judgement,  the  Transcendental  Doctrine  of,  I  236,  II  21-4. 
judgements,  analytic,  I  84-6,  189  n.  8,  214,  300  n.  5,  II  84. 

analytic,  principle  of,  II  83-4. 

analytic,  truth  of,  I  214,  214  n.  3,  II  84. 

analytic  and  synthetic,  I  81,  82-4,  220,  300-2,  508,  II 460. 

analytic  and  synthetic,  analogy  between,  I  301. 

copulative,  I  204. 

of  physical  science,  I  89. 

logical  forms  in  all  possible,  I  213. 

mathematical,  I  87,  89,  II  91. 

matter  of,  I  206. 

metaphysical,  I  89. 

modality  of,  I  205. 


—  problematic,  assertonc,  and  apodeictic,  II  57. 

—  quality  of,  II  51. 

—  simple  and  complex,  I  204. 
— -  synthetic,  I  86-7,  II  86,  461. 

—  synthetic  a  posteriori,  I  88,  II  85,  94-5. 

—  synthetic  a  priori,  I  81-2,  87,  II  91. 

—  synthetic,  different  kinds  of,  11  84-6. 

—  synthetic,  form  of,  1213-15. 

—  synthetic,  principle  ot  all,  II  94-6. 
synthesis  in  all,  I  509. 


judging,  see  conceiving. 


Kanthteratur,  I  18. 

Kemp  Smith,  I  19. 

Commentary,  I  37  n.  i,  38,  43  n.  i,  49  n.  2,  75  n.  3,  201 

n.  4,  213  n.  5,  216  n.  2,  217  n.  5,  250  n.  6,  300  n.  4, 
305  n.  4,  307  n.  i,  323  n.  4,  329-30,  332~3,  339  n.  5, 
345  n.  2,  346  n.  6,  382,  397  n.  i,  413  n.  i,  421-5, 
421  n.  7,  423  n.  i  and  n.  2,  424  n.  3,  425  n.  4 
and  n.  5,  490  n.  2  and  n.  3,  516  n.  2,  529  n.  2, 
573  n.  2,  583  n.  i,  II  21  n.  4,  24  n.  5,  25  n.  2, 
66  n.  2,  69  n.  2,  165  n.  7,  182  n.  4,  224  n.  2,  282 
n.  6,  289  n.  2,  294  n.  5,  301  n.  4,  335  n.  6,  339, 
340  n.  3,  346  n.  3,  359  n.  3,  367  n.  3,  37<>-i- 

Translation,  1  147  n.  2,  195  n.  6,  339  n.  5,  371  n.  3, 

378  n.  2,  n.  3,  and  n.  5,  391  n.  i,  418  n.  4,  444  n.  4, 
458  n.  5,  462  n.  3,  463  n.  2,  492  n.  7,  495  n.  2, 
512  n.  i,  528  n.  6,  531  n.  5,  534  n.  2,  537  n.  i, 
540  n.  i,  II  24  n.  5,  36  n.  3,  50  n.  3,  60  n.  3,  84  n.  4, 
86  n.  6,  87  n.  2,  90  n.  5,  91  n.  i  and  n.  3,  92  n.  4, 
115  n.  4,  163  n.  4,  166  n.  5,  169  n.  3,  178  n.  5, 


GENERAL  INDEX  483 

181  n.  5,  186  n.  5,  217  n.  7,  249  n.  4,  251  n.  2,  258 
n.  6,  317  n.  2  and  n.  3,  399  n.  i,  429  n.  i,  436  n.  4. 

kennen,  or  nose  ere,  I  334  n.  4. 

Kinkel,  I  84  n.  2,  213  n.  5,  232  n.  3,  II  130  n.  5. 

klar,  I  266  n.  4. 

knowing,  see  thinking. 

knowledge,  I  334,  354,  582  n.  i. 

acquired  and  innate,  I  78. 

a  priori,  I  76-7. 

a  priori,  comparatively,  II  358. 

a  priori,  conditions  of,  I  278-9 ;  double  character  of,  I  564 ; 

types  of,  I  80-2 ;  see  also  a  priori. 

empirical,  an  advance  in  time,  II  289. 

limits  of,  II  429,  460-2. 

mathematical,  I  170  n.  i,  530. 

mathematical,  intuitive,  I  218. 

philosophical  and  mathematical,  I  218,  II  101. 

pure  a  priori,  I  76. 

pure,  synonymous  with  a  priori,  I  77. 

subjective  sources  of,  I  345,  354,  401. 

synthetic  a  priori,  I  561-3. 

transcendental,  I  226-30 ;  see  also  theory,  transcendental. 

two  factors  in,  I  269-71. 

use  of,  transcendental,  I  230-2. 


Krdfte,  bewegende,  II  137. 
Kntik,  II  23  n.  3. 


Laird,  II  256  n.  5,  260  n.  i. 
Lambert,  I  182  n.  i. 
language,  Kant's  use  of,  I  50-4. 
Laughland,  Miss  Elizabeth,  I  20. 
law,  see  rule. 

causal,  and  the  transcendental  synthesis  of  imagination,  II  278-80. 

definitions  of,  I  495. 

laws,  see  rules. 

causal,  empirical,  II  363;  causal,  particular,  II  275-8. 

empirical  and  universal,  I  139-40. 

of  nature,  I  450,  496,  II  98  n.  2. 

of  nature,  empirical,  I  496. 

particular  empirical,  I  494. 

particular  necessary,  I  494. 

ultimate  and  universal,  I  496. 

universal,  I  546. 

lecturing,  Kant's  method  in,  I  349. 

Leibniz,  I  43,  78,  107,  125,  125  n.  2,  138,  145,  161,  171,  173,  175,  183, 
235  n.  2,  309,  359  n.  6,  377  n.  2,  398  n.  i,  458,  477  n.  4, 
562,  563  n.  4,  564  n.  2,  II  295,  353,  366,  441. 


^84  GENERAL  INDEX 

Leibniz,  arguments  against,  I  171-5. 

Lenzen,  II  282  n.  4, 

Levett,  Miss  M.  J.,  I  20. 

light,  I  64,  II  317,  328. 

limitation,  II  48,  149. 

limits,  I  228,  240. 

Lindsay,  I  135  n.  3,  138  n.  3,  142  n.  3,  576  n.  i,  II  128,  297  n.  i,  418 

n.  i,  458  n.  i. 
line,  intuition  of  a,  II  389. 

knowledge  of  a,  I  372,  II  193. 

Locke,  I  48, 100  n.  2,  315  n.  3,  317,  377,  II  203  n.  5,  206  n.  i,  376  n.  6. 

Loewenberg,  II  269  n.  i. 

logic,  applied,  I  1 88;  general,  I  187;  mathematical,  I  188,  210;  modem, 

I  172;  philosophical,  I  188;  special  or  particular,  I  187. 
Logic,  Formal,  I  187-8,  521,  525. 

Formal,  divisions  of,  I  188-90. 

Transcendental,  I  223-6,  487  n.  5. 

Transcendental  and  Formal,  I  222-3,  232-3,  278,  293. 

Transcendental,  and  time,  I  261. 

Transcendental,  divisions  of,  I  233-5. 

Lucian,  II  210  n.  i. 

luck,  I  197  n.  2,  315. 


Maimon,  I  321  n.  i. 
Malebranche,  I  132  n.  7,  321  n.  5. 
manifold,  as  a  manifold,  I  357,  359. 

empirical,  and  pure  synthesis,  I  466. 

given,  and  the  categories,  II  455. 

homogeneous,  II  115. 

in  general,  I  507  n.  5. 

necessary  synthetic  unity  of  the,  I  462,  515. 

synthetic  unity  of  the,  I  551. 

transcendental  principle  of  the  necessary  synthetic  unity  of 

the,  I  459-60. 
unity  of  the,  I  459-60,  512. 


mark,  I  125,  194. 
marks,  I  119  n.  2,  549. 
mass,  II  206,  209,  212. 

conservation  of,  II  209. 

mathematical  theory,  modern,  I  155. 
mathematicians,  the  intuitionist  school  of,  II  119. 
mathematics,  I  73,  160,  218. 

application  of,  to  objects  of  experience,  II  131-3. 

principles  of,  II  97. 

pure,  I  81,  530  n.  4. 

matter,  I  96  n.  2,  II  135  n.  3,  138  n.  4  and  n.  6,  149,  210  n.  3,  317;  see 
also  existence;  form. 


GENERAL  INDEX  485 


matter  and  substance,  II  211. 

-  conception  of,  II  207. 

-  conservation  of,  II  197,  209,  213-14. 
dynamical  theory  of,  II  155. 


—  magnetic,  II  357. 

—  mechanical  theory  of,  II  155. 

—  permanence  of,  II  204. 
quantity  of,  II  212. 


Mattmgly,  Miss  Lilian,  I  20. 
meaning,  II  31  n.  3. 
mechanics,  third  law  of,  II  295. 

three  laws  of,  II  213. 

Meier,  G.  F.,  I  47,  85  n.  3,  190  n.  3,  200  n.  5,  257  n.  3,  309,  332  n.  7, 

522  n.  2. 

Mellm,  I  221,  247,  247  n.  6,  332  n.  7,  II  86  n.  5,  in  n.  i. 
memory,  I  401,  II  171-2. 
Mendelssohn,  I  44,  45  n.  4,  182  n.  i. 
Merkmal,  I  194  n.  2 
McrkmalCy  I  119  n.  2. 
metaphysics,  as  a  natural  disposition,  I  82. 

as  a  science,  I  82. 

claim  made  hy,  I  80. 

first  part  of,  I  76. 

Meyerson,  II  220,  362  n.  i. 
Milky  Way,  I  267  n.  2. 

mind,  infinite,  and  our  categories,  II  460. 

common  function  of  the,  I  441. 

object  in  relation  to  our,  II  336. 

windows  of  the,  I  183,  II  424. 

minds,  co-existence  of,  II  331. 

modality,  interdependence  of  categories  of,  II  339-42. 

schema  of  the  category  of,  II  61. 

schemata  of,  II  56-60,  342  n.  3. 

mode,  II  163. 

modes,  I  85,  II  164;  see  also  sensibility,  pure;  space;  time. 

moment,  I  211,  II  287  n.  i. 

monads,  I  183. 

monogram,  II  36. 

Moore,  G.  E.,  II  225. 

morality,  I  72. 

More,  Henry,  I  321  n.  5. 

motion,  I  148,  II  210  n.  3,  288,  412;  sec  also  change;  synthesis. 

and  change,  empirical,  I  101 ;  see  also  change,  and  motion. 

general  doctrine  of,  I  128. 

movable,  the,  II  149,  210  n.  3,  211. 

the,  and  substance,  II  211. 

Muirhead,  J.  H.,  I  20,  216  n.  3. 

mundus  sensibilis,  and  mundus  intelhgibilis,  II  458. 


486  GENERAL  INDEX 

natura  formaliter  spectata,  I  412  n.  4,  491  n.  i,  545  n.  7. 
natura  materialiter  spectata,  I  412  n.  4,  545  n.  7. 
nature,  I  450,  491. 

laws  of,  I  450,  496,  II  98  n.  2. 

uniformity  of,  I  445. 

unity  of,  I  411-16,  449-50. 

necessary,  the,  see  actual,  the,  and  the  necessary, 
necessity,  II  57;  sec  also  actuality;  objectivity;  possibility. 

actuality  no  wider  than,  II  340,  343. 

and  substances,  II  363. 

ancj  universality,  I  77,  135,  146. 

category  of,  II  340,  340  n.  2. 

criterion  of,  II  363. 

empirical,  II  216  n.  8. 

logical  or  formal,  and  real  or  material,  II  362. 

pure  category  of,  II  58-9. 


real,  not  absolute,  but  hypothetical,  II  363. 

schematised  category  of,  II  59-60. 

subjectivity  and  knowledge  of,  1  169-71. 

transcendental  schema  of,  II  60. 

negation,  see  reality. 
neo-Kantians,  English,  I  65. 

Newton,  I  106,  113,  132,  144,  171,  174,  175,  176,  56711.  i,  II  13211.  4, 
291  n.  i. 

arguments  against,  I  171-5,  176. 

nexus,  II  159,  170,  226. 

Ntchtsem,  I  297  n.  5. 

night,  and  day,  II  270,  270  n.  3. 

non-contradiction,  the  law  of,  II  83-4. 

noscere,  see  kennen. 

nota,  I  194  n.  2. 

notion,  see  concept,  intellectual. 

notions,  see  concepts,  intellectual. 

noumena,  II  441 ;  see  also  phenomena. 

alleged  knowledge  of,  II  440-2;  see  also  categories. 

in  the  negative  sense,  II  453. 

origin  of  the  belief  in,  I  445-6. 

noumenon,  and  the  transcendental  object,  II  440. 

concept  of,  II  445-6;  as  a  limiting  concept,  II  456-8; 

determinate,   II  452;  indeterminate,  II  452;  neces- 
sary, II  456;  problematic,  II  456,  458,  461. 
in  the  positive  sense,  II  454. 

positive  and  negative  meaning  of,  II  448,  452-3. 

number,  I  375,  II  45-7,  114,  432. 

numbers,  II  127. 

object,  I  193,  325,  337  n.  2,  34°-i,  3 82-5*  5J6,  II  235-6,  306;  see  also 
affinity ;  intuitions ;  objectivity ;  objects ;  thinking ;  thought. 


GENERAL  INDEX  487 

object,  actual,  II  337. 

and  idea,  I  337. 

and  its  temporal  relations,  II  330-8. 

as  an  unknown  something,  I  384,  418. 

causality  of  the,  II  150-1. 

characteristics  of  the,  II  417. 

definition  of,  I  387,  396  n.  5,  516-17,  II  235,  236. 

determinate,  I  341. 

determinate  and  indeterminate,  I  326. 

existence  of  the,  II  406-10. 

form  and  matter  of  the,  II  340. 

immanent  and  transcendent,  I  421. 

indeterminate,  I  51,  95-6. 

in  general,  the  concept  of  an,  I  259,  341-2,  417,  II  265,  402. 

in  relation  to  our  mind,  II  336. 

knowledge  of,  II  265. 

knowledge  of,  and  knowledge  of  subject,  I  361. 

matter  of  the,  II  138,  340. 

meaning  of,  II  231,  250. 

necessary,  II  338. 

phenomenal,  I  51,  96,  151,  424,  425,  II  234,  266. 

possible,  II  337. 

reference  of  ideas  to  an,  II  250. 

succession  m  the,  II  242. 

transcendental,  I  420-5,  II  234,  237,  436,  442-5,  447~8,  461; 

see  also  apperception ;  categories. 

transcendental,  and  thing-m-itself,  I  420-5. 

under  all  the  categories,  I  226. 

unity  of  the,  I  571. 

unity  of  the,  and  unity  of  consciousness,  I  386. 

the  word,  I  50,  95. 

objects,  sec  appearances  and  objects. 

as  they  appear  and  as  they  are,  II  459. 

differences  m,  ignored  by  Formal  Logic,  I  191,  191  n.  i. 

in  general,  concepts  of,  I  342. 

phenomenal,  I  422. 

Objektj  I  193  n.  i. 

objective,  and  object,  I  193  n.  i. 
objectivity,  and  necessity,  II  270. 

concept  of,  I  424-5. 

obscure,  I  266  n,  4. 
obscurity,  I  45. 

Ontology,  I  257,  II  435. 

handbooks  of,  I  307. 

opposition,  real  and  logical,  II  149. 
order,  objective,  II  173. 

subjective  and  objective,  II  172. 

orders,  subjective,  II  227  n.  i. 


488  GENERAL  INDEX 

organon,  I  189. 

origin,  I  223,  225,  227,  228,  316. 

original,  I  118  n.  2. 

outer,  I  99  n.  2. 

outside,  and  inside,  I  100. 

'outside  me1,  meaning  of,  II  378. 

Pacius,  I  15. 

Pappus,  I  130  n.  i. 

Partialvorstellungcn,  I  H9n.2,  194  n.  3. 

passion,  II  282. 

patchwork  theory,  the,  I  38-40,  328-9,  498,  II  346  n.  3. 

the,  consequences  of,  I  42-3. 

Paulsen,  II  196  n.  2,  282  n.  5. 
perception,  judgements  of,  I  270  n.  3. 
perceptions,  petites,  I  477  n.  4. 
percipere,  see  wahrnehmen. 
perfection,  logical,  I  309,  390  n.  3. 
permanence,  II  53,  163,  166-7,  4*3- 

and  duration,  II  188  n.  6. 

the  Principle  of,  II  184-5. 

permanent,  the,  II  378;  see  also  change;  substance. 

the,  and  time-determination,  II  195-8. 

the  idea  of  something,  II  384. 

the,  sense-perception  of,  II  379. 

perspicere,  see  einsehen. 

phenomena,  and  noumena,  II  439-40,  451,  458,  461. 

definition  of,  II  440. 

outer,  time  the  mediate  condition  of,  I  149. 

phenomenon,  see  appearance  and  phenomenon, 
phenomenalism,  see  subjectivism. 

philosophy,  definitions  in,  I  51. 

discursive  knowledge,  I  218. 

Philosophy,  Critical,  central  contention  of  the,  II  455. 

Critical,  problems  of  the,  II  375-6. 

Transcendental,  II  145  n.  2,  153,  207  n.  2,  284  n.  4. 

Transcendental,  and  Physiology,  Rational,   II   137,   137 

n.  2,  153  n.  3. 

physical  science,  judgements  of,  I  89. 
physics,  I  73;  pure,  I  81 ;  modern,  I  162. 

Newtonian,  II  218,  282. 

Physics,  Rational,  II  284  n.  4. 

Rational,  and  Psychology,  Rational,  II  153  n.  3. 

Physiology,  Rational,  II  208,  284  n.  4;  see  also  Philosophy,  Trans- 
cendental. 

Plato,  I  54,  60  n.  i,  159  n.  i,  160  n.  2,  203  n.  2,  216  n.  3,  246  n.  i, 
347  n.4,  405  n.  i,  562,  II  52  n.  i,  101  n.  3,  130  n.  7, 
441  n.  2. 


GENERAL  INDEX  489 

play,  of  ideas,  I  434,  II  245,  263. 

polytomy,  I  306. 

posit,  meaning  of,  II  413. 

posited,  II  54  n.  2,  228,  252  n.  4. 

position,  see  shape. 

.absolute,  II  228  n.  4. 

temporal,  II  255. 

possibility,  II  57,  345. 
absolute,  II  368. 

actuality,  and  necessity,  II  57. 

actuality,  and  necessity,  absolute,  II  338  n.  3;  real,  II  338; 

real  and  logical,  II  336,  344;  real  or  material,  II  337. 

actuality,  and  necessity,  the  Principles  of,  II  335-9. 

and  actuality,  II  341,  350;  see  also  necessity. 

and  intuition,  II  354. 

and  outer  intuition,  II  354. 

Leibnizian,  II  366-8. 

logical  and  real,  I  66,  II  344,  346,  351. 

no  wider  than  actuality,  II  339-40,  343,  366-7. 

pure  category  of,  II  58. 

real,  II  95  n.  i,  336  n.  i,  353. 

schematised  category  of,  II  59. 

transcendental  schema  of,  II  59. 

possible,  the,  and  the  actual,  II  366-7. 
Postulate,  the  First,  II  345-6. 

the  meaning  of  the  word,  II  368-70 

the  Second,  II  357-62. 

the  Third,  II  362-4. 

postulates,  mathematical,  II  369-70. 
power,  I  94 ;  see  also  function, 
powers,  I  345,  345  n.  4. 
predicables,  the,  I  307-8. 
predicates,  universal,  I  257. 
prediction,  II  283. 

present,  the  specious,  I  366,  II  398. 

Price,  I  584  n.  i,  II  150  n.  2,  151  n.  3,  175  n.  4,  205  n.  4,  279  n.  i. 

Prichard,  I  17,  77  n.  2,  80  n.  i,  177,  177  n.  2,  213  n.  5,  277  n.  i,  290 
n.  3,  337  n-  2,  405  n.  i,  500  n.  7,  565  n.  2,  581  n.  i, 
582  n.  i,  II  34  n.  4,  136  n.  3,  214  n.  2,  217  n.  2,  225, 
234  n.  2,  240  n.  i,  241  n.  5,  242  n.  3,  249  n.  5,  266  n.  2, 
268  n.  i,  272  n.  i,  296,  298  n.  2,  299  n.  i,  300,  306, 
316  n.  4,  325,  378  n.  3,  380. 

principle,  different  kinds  of,  II  97-8. 

empirical,  a  contradiction  in  terms,  II  97. 

Kant's  ultimate,  an  analytic  proposition,  I  518. 

principles,  synthetic,  discursive,  I  218. 

Principles,  I  226,  234,  493~4- 

Analytic  of,  I  236,  II  24. 

VOL.  II  Q* 


490  GENERAL  INDEX 

Principles,  Dynamical,  the,  II  99-100,  235. 

Mathematical,  the,  II  99-100,  178-9. 

Mathematical  and  Dynamical,  the,  I  101-3. 

of  the  Understanding,  see  Understanding. 

proof  of  the,  II  82-3. 

prior,  objectively,  I  80. 
priority,  logical,  I  177. 

temporal,  I  77-80,  136-7,  177,  II  122  n.  3. 

problem,  the  Critical,  II  233. 

reality  of  Kant's,  I  89-90. 

procedure,  analytic,  I  283. 

proof,  indirect,  II  104,  244,  244  n.  2;  see  also  argument. 
Proof,  the  Ontological,  II  359. 
proofs,  multiplicity  of,  II  224. 

multiplication  of,  II  225  n.  i. 

proportion,  II  179. 

proposition,  kinds  of,  I  210;  see  also  judgement, 
propositions,  arithmetical,  II  129. 

enumerative  and  universal,  I  209. 

pro  tensive,  and  extensive,  II  125  n.  3. 
psychology,  I  318. 
pure,  I  77. 


qualities,  primary,  I  391  n.  4,  II  135  n.  3,  412. 
primary  and  secondary,  I  59-61. 

secondary,  I  167  n.  3. 

quality,  and  quantity,  II  155. 

pure  category  of,  II  48. 

schema  of,  II  48-52. 

schema  of  the  category  of,  II  61. 

schematised  category  of,  II  49. 

synthesis  of,  II  147-9,  341. 


quanta,  I  157,  II  125. 

examples  of,  II  127. 

quantitas,  I  157. 

and  quantum,  II  125-9. 

quantitas  phaenomenon,  II  45. 
quantitatesy  II  127. 
quantities,  continuous,  II  152. 

determinate  extensive,  II  118. 

in  general,  II  352. 

quantity,  see  quality. 

category  of,  I  543,  II  432. 

extensive,  II  45,  112,  114,  116. 

extensive  and  intensive,  II  136,  148. 

extensive,  schematised  category  of,  I  275,  II  45,  115,  126. 

extensive,  synthesis  of,  II  100. 


GENERAL  INDEX  40.1 

quantity,  intensive,  II  49  n.  3,  135,  140,  143-7;  synthesis  of,  II  100. 

pure  category  of,  I  275-6,  II  44,  115,  125. 

schema  of,  II  44-8. 

schema  of  the  category  of,  II  60- 1. 

synthesis  of,  I  576,  II  341. 

quantum^  see  quantitas. 

and  aggregate,  II  152. 

determinate  and  indeterminate,  II  45  n.  4,  128. 

indeterminate,  II  112  n.  2,  194. 


Ramus,  Peter,  I  190  n.  4. 
rationalism,  II  176. 

Leibmzian,  II  359  n.  3. 

rationalists,  I  323 ;  see  also  doctrine. 
reactioy  II  295  n.  2. 

real,  the,  II  207. 

the,  and  sensation,  II  136-8. 

realism,  I  337,  II  176. 

empirical,  I  143  n.  3,  II  375,  411. 

empirical,  and  transcendental  idealism,  I  582-3,  II  185,  247, 

384-5,  426-7. 

transcendental,  II  377. 

realistic  tendencies,  Kant's,  I  70-1. 

realitas  phaenomenon,  II  49  n.  3,  134,  135  n.  3,  137  n.  5,  138  n.  4  and 

n.  6,  140,  191  n.  3,  285  n.  3. 
reality,  II  48. 

and  existence,  II  357  n.  i. 

and  negation,  II  149. 

empirical,  and  transcendental  ideality,  I  143-5. 

objective,  II  87,  345. 

quantity  of,  II  287. 

relation  of  appearances  to,  I  61-3. 

reason,  I  73,  II  337. 

Ideas  of,  I  198  n.  i,  II  73  n.  6. 

Reason,  Paralogisms  of,  II  419. 

reason,  sufficient,  the  principle  of,  II  255  n.  6. 
recognition,  I  489. 

synthesis  of,  I  354,  356,  374-7,  379,  420,  488. 

red,  the  idea,  I  514  n.  2. 

redness,  I  125  n.  3,  268  n.  i,  II  35  n.  2. 

reflexion,  I  200 ;  see  also  comparison. 

regularity,  and  repetition,  II  276-7. 

regulative,  II  179. 

Reicke,  I  289  n.  i,  464  n.  3. 

relation,  determining,  II  252. 

schema  of  the  category  of,  II  61. 

schemata  of,  II  52-6. 


492  GENERAL  INDEX 

relation,  synthesis  of,  II  341. 

systems  of,  I  172. 

relations,  I  85,  II  163,  164;  see  also  intuition,  outer. 

logical  system  of,  I  173. 

spatial  and  temporal,  given,  I  135. 

temporal,  see  object. 

Relativity,  theory  of,  II  1 60  n.  5. 
religion,  I  72. 

repetition,  see  regularity. 

repetitions,  I  349-50. 

repraesentatio  per  notas  communes,  I  94,  194. 

repraesentatio  singularis,  I  94. 

representations,  partial,  I  119,  194. 

reproducible,  necessarily,  I  415. 

reproduction,  I  489. 

and  association,  I  485  n.  4,  489  n.  i. 

necessary,  I  388,  391,  393~5- 

synthesis  of,  I  354,  356,  363-6,  479-81. 

synthesis  of,  pure  transcendental,  I  354,  371-4. 

repulsion,  and  attraction,  II  137,  138  n.  3,  149,  212,  295,  326  n.  i,  328. 

and  attraction,  moving  forces  of,  II  137  n.  3,  149,  212,  295, 

326  n.  i. 

resistance,  II  135  n.  3,  212;  see  also  impenetrability. 
resistentia,  II  295  n.  2. 

reversibility,  II  305 ;  see  also  sense-perceptions, 
revolution,  Copermcan,  I  75-6,  169,  176,  336-7,  344,  561-5. 

Copernican,  and  the  categories,  I  567-9. 

Riehl,  I  299  n.  4,  533  n.  i,  II  27  n.  2. 

rohy  I  266  n.  4. 

Ross,  W.  D.,  I  190  n.  2,  257  n.  i  and  n.  4. 

roundness,  and  squareness,  I  134,  139. 

Ruckwirkungy  II  295  n.  2. 

rule,  see  concept. 

and  law,  I  446  n.  i,  495. 

condition  of  a,  II  238,  243,  243  n.  i. 

definitions  of,  I  495. 

rules,  and  laws,  I  493-4. 
Russell,  Bertrand,  I  55,  156  n.  i. 


St.  Thomas,  II  216  n.  6. 
saltus,  II  364. 
Schattenbild,  II  36  n.  4. 
schema,  see  category ;  concept. 

in  general,  II  32-7. 

mere,  the  idea  of  space  and  time  a,  I  114,  II  354  n.  x. 

restriction  of  the  category  through  the,  II  31-2. 

transcendental,  II  18,  28-30,  39,  43,  435,  437. 


GENERAL  INDEX  4J3 

schema,  transcendental,  special  characteristics  of  the,  II  37-9. 
schemata,  see  concepts,  empirical. 
the  number  of  the,  II  63-5. 

transcendental,  I  542,  II  19,  22,  40,  62,  181,  238;  see  also 

time,  modes  of. 
schematism,  analogical  or  symbolic,  II  73  n.  6. 

importance  of  the  chapter  on,  II  20-1. 

of  the  understanding,  I  170  n.  i,  II  73-5. 

Schicksal,  II  364  n.  i. 

Schhck,  II  270  n.  3,  324  n.  3. 

Schmidt,  Raymund,  I  253  n.  3,  378  n.  3,  495  n.  i. 

school,  empirical,  of  philosophy,  I  67. 

rationalistic,  of  philosophy,  I  67. 

Schopenhauer,  I  44  n.  3,  II  294  n.  5,  323. 

Schulz,  I  158  n.  6,  182  n.  i,  305  n.  4,  306  n.  i,  II  130  n.  6,  294  n.  5. 
science,  see  idealism. 

and  experience,  II  218-20. 

modern,  and  the  Principles  of  the  Understanding,  II  106—7. 

physical,  I  89. 

Seele,  I  95  n.  4. 
Scgner,  II  284  n.  2. 
self,  see  categories. 

empirical,  nothing  permanent  in  the,  II  200. 

existence  of  the,  II  404-6. 

phenomenal,  see  sense,  inner. 

self-consciousness,  I  376,  512,  570-1,  575;  see  also  apperception. 

ancl  apperception,  I  512. 

conditions  of,  categories  as,  I  426. 

self-evidence,  II  368. 
self-evident,  the,  II  97  n.  i. 
self-knowledge,  see  apperception, 
self-subsistent,  II  184  n.  i. 
sensa,  I  167. 
sensatio,  II  49  n.  3. 

sensation,  I  97,  539,  II 49,  136-8,  138  n.  4,  141  n.  8,  337;  see  also  sense- 
perception. 

degree  of,  construction  of,  II  146. 

the  real  of,  II  141 ;  matter  as,  II  141  n.  8. 

synthesis  of,  II  141. 

what  corresponds  to  a,  II  50  n.  3. 

sense,  I  345,  531  n.  5;  and  imagination,  II  385-6;  and  understanding, 
I  98,  II  441. 

and  meaning,  I  304  n.  2. 

illusion  of,  II  386  n.  i. 

influence  on,  degree  of,  II  143. 

inner,  I  99,  357,  II  87,  397;  see  also  apperception,  empirical; 

apprehension ;  time ;  understanding. 

inner,  and  apperception,  I  519,  II  388,  392. 


4?4  GENERAL  INDEX 

sense,  inner  and  outer,  ideality  of,  II  411-13. 

inner  and  outer,  reality  of,  II  410-11. 

inner,  and  the  phenomenal  self,  II  398-401,  415-16. 

inner,  and  pure  apperception,  II  390. 

inner,  and  time,  I  148,  II  413-15. 

inner,  determination  of,  II  38-9,  289,  390,  394. 

inner,  difficulties  of,  II  418-24. 

inner,  matter  of,  I  99,  II  389,  393-4. 

inner,  no  permanent  ego  in,  II  379  n.  i. 

inner,  paradox  of,  II  387-90. 

inner,  stuff  of,  I  99,  II  389,  413. 

inner,  time  the  form  of,  I  100. 

inner,  to  determine,  meaning  of,  II  390. 

outer,  I  99  n.  2. 

outer  and  inner,  I  99-101,  II  382  n.  3,  389,  410-13. 

outer  and  inner,  determination  of,  II  394. 

passive,  I  362. 

senses,  crudity  of  the,  II  356. 

matter  of  the,  II  337. 

sense-impressions,  atomic,  I  358. 

sense-perception,  I  334,  359,  477,  538;  see  also  apprehension;  inter- 
action. 

ancl  scnsation,  II  141,  143. 

connexion  with,  II  367. 

degree  of,  II  290. 

sense-perceptions,  actual  and  possible,  II  307,  308  n.  i,  309. 

irreversibihty  of,  II  239,  240  n.  3,  269. 

possible,  II  260  n.  2,  267,  358. 

reciprocal  succession  of,  II  299-300,  304-8. 

reversibility  of,  II  299-301,  305,  310. 

synthesis  of,  II  168. 

sensibility,  I  94 ;  see  also  space  and  time ;  understanding. 

conditions  of,  II  22. 

form  of,  I  137. 

formal  conditions  of,  see  categories. 

forms  of,  I  102,  131,  134. 

knowledge  apart  from,  II  442. 

limitation  of  our,  II  445 ;  by  understanding,  II  459. 

pure,  modes  of,  II  165  n.  8. 

understanding  not  limited  by,  II  458-9. 

series,  causal,  repetition  of,  II  277. 

reversible,  II  301  n.  4. 

shape,  II  127,  139. 

shape  and  position,  apparent,  I  151 ;  real,  1151. 

sich  etwas  vorstellen,  I  334  n.  2. 

Sidgwick,  II  119  n.  4. 

Simmel,  II  346  n.  3. 

simultaneity,  II  163,  166-7,  297,  413. 


GENERAL  INDEX 


4^5 


simultaneity,  necessary,  II  55,  322-3. 

objective,  II  195. 

simultaneous,  meaning  of,  II  297  n.  3,  327  n.  i. 

Sinn,  I  304  n.  2,  531  n.  5. 

size,  II  45. 

Smith,  J..  A.,  I  190  n.  4. 

smoke,  the  weight  of,  II  210. 

solid,  the,  II  205. 

solidity,  II  2ii ;  see  also  impenetrability. 

space,  I  262,  II  310,  323  n.  2,  368  n.  i ;  see  also  idealism,  Bcrkeleyan ; 
interaction ;  substances. 

absolute,  II  123  n.  4. 

and  synthesis,  I  123. 

condition,  mediate,  of  inner  experience,  I  147. 

empirical  or  relative,  II  170  n.  i. 

empty,  II  318,  365;  and  interaction,  II  311,  317,  318  n.  3. 

Euclidean,  I  161,  II  132  n.  6,  352. 

knowledge  of  things  in,  II  381. 

modes  of,  II 164. 

necessity  of,  I  152-5. 

permanent  substances  in,  II 199, 384, 408-9 ;  see  also  experience, 

inner. 

relative  or  material,  II  123  n.  4. 

represented  as  an  infinite  given  quantity,  I  123,  II  122. 

sensible,  I  141. 

to  fill,  II  205  n.  2,  2ii  n.  8. 

to  occupy,  II  205  n.  2,  211-12. 

transcendental  deduction  of,  I  321. 

universality  of,  I  146-8,  151-2. 

use  of,  transcendental  and  empirical,  I  231. 

space  and  time,  I  107,  322,  324,  4™,  4^6,  474,  557,  567  n.  i,  II  78, 
89,  113,  223,  353;  see  also  apperception;  apper- 
ception, the  unity  of;  apprehension;  schema. 

absolute,  I  174,  II  123  n.  4,  170  n.  i. 

ancj  the  categories,  I  316-17,  431,  527. 

and  the  synthetic  unity  of  apperception,  I  516. 

as  concepts,  I  317  n.  2. 

as  conditions  of  God's  existence,  I  174. 

as  forms  of  intuition,  I  540. 

as  pure  intuitions,  I  540. 

as  real  things,  I  174. 

conclusions,  I  130-1. 

connexion  with  sensibility,  I  164-5. 

continuity  of,  II  119. 

determinate,  II  120. 

empty,  I  113,  II  154-5. 

ideality  of,  II  418,  453. 

individuality  of,  I  173. 


GENERAL  INDEX 

space  and  time,  infinite,  I  124. 

infinity  of,  I  118-22. 

involve  unity,  I  410,  540-1. 


Kantian  view  of,  I  134-6. 

knowledge  of,  intuitional,  I  172. 

Leibnizian  view  of,  I  133-4. 

Metaphysical  Exposition  of,  I  109-10. 

Metaphysical  and  Transcendental  Expositions  of, 

I  107-9. 

necessity  of,  I  152-5. 

Newtonian  view  of,  I  132-3. 

not  concepts  but  intuitions,  I  114-15. 

not  empirical,  but  a  priori,  ideas,  I  110-14. 

oneness  of,  I  115-17. 

relation  to  things-m-thcmselves,  I  180-1. 

subjectivity  of,  I  165-7. 

three  possibilities,  I  107,  132. 

transcendental  deduction  of,  I  109,  319  n.  2. 

Transcendental  Exposition  of,  I  127-30. 

transcendental  ideality  of,  I  131. 

ultimate  facts,  I  152. 

universality  of,  I  151-2. 

without  unity  in  themselves,  I  503. 

space-time,  I  147,  162,  163,  175. 

pure  intuition  of,  I  161-2. 

spatiahty,  I  116,  120,  122,  125,  165  n.  i,  193,  198  n.  i. 

spectacles,  blue,  I  143  n.  2,  166,  168,  180,  581. 

sphaera,  I  195  n.  6. 

Sphare,  I  283  n.  i. 

Spinoza,  I  132  n.  7,  321  n  5,  II  164  n.  3,  184  n.  i. 

spirit,  or  soul,  concept  of,  I  351. 

squareness,  see  roundness. 

state,  II  217  n.  6. 

change  of,  II  285  n.  i. 

states,  coexisting,  direct  perception  of,  II  330. 

exchange  of,  II  217. 

mental,  I  63-7. 

simultaneous,  interaction  of,  II  323;  reciprocal  causality  of,  II 

322,  327-8. 

subjective,  I  521. 

Stebbmg,  I  155,  156  n.  2,  157  n.  i,  158  n.  4,  210  n.  2. 
stimuli,  physical,  II  151. 
subject,  knowledge  of,  see  object. 

relation  of  object  to  the,  II  413. 

subjective,  and  objective,  II  272. 

subjectivism,  and  phenomenalism,  I  583  n.  i. 

subsistence,  II  203 ;  see  also  inherence. 

substance,  II  70,  106;  see  also  movable,  the;  substances;  substratum. 


GENERAL  INDEX  497 

substance,  and  accident,  concept  of,  II  220. 

and  accidents,  II  203. 

and  causal  activity,  II  283. 

and  substances,  II  211,  214. 

empirical  criterion  of,  II  215-17. 

^-  made  up  of  substances,  II  184. 

material,  II  209-13. 

perception  of,  II  204-7. 

permanent  phenomenal,  II  380. 

pure  category  of,  II  52. 

quantum  of,  II  184,  207-9,  219. 

schematised  category  of,  II  53. 

traditional  views  of,  II  184. 

transcendental  schema  of,  II  53. 

substances,  see  necessity. 

causality  of,  II  315. 

coexistence  of,  II  298. 

coexistent,  II  325. 

coexistent,  reciprocal  causality  of,  II  321,  327-8. 

permanent,  II  225,  262-3,  300-1,  307,  384;  see  also  space. 

permanent,  change  of,  II  226. 


permanent  spatial,  II  420. 

substantia  phaenomenon,  II  53  n.  4,  185,  189,  191,  217,  379. 

substantial,  the,  II  203  n.  5. 

substantiality,  empirical  criterion  of,  II  325. 

Substanzmle,  dasy  II  203  n.  5. 

substratum,  II  187  n.  i,  189. 

and  substance,  II  201-4. 

subsumption,  II  24  n.  5 ;  see  also  categories. 

and  syllogism,  II  66-8,  82. 

succession,  II  163,  166-7,  4X3»  see  also  sense-perceptions;  things. 

the  concept  of,  II  395. 

necessary,  I  327,  II  54,  223,  281. 

objective,  II  195,  238-40,  247-8,  250,  252,  255,  258. 

objective,  and  objective  coexistence,  II  264,  301,  311-12. 

objective  and  necessary,  II  263,  292. 

objective  and  subjective,  II  222,  236,  246,  253,  265-8. 

objective,  experience  of,  II  264. 

reciprocal,  II  307. 

regular,  II  54  n.  3. 

subjective,  and  objective  coexistence,  II  300. 

subjective,  derived  from  objective,  II  240-1. 

Sulzer,  I  182  n.  i. 

supposing,  II  344. 
syllogism,  see  subsumption. 
synopsis,  I  330  n.  i,  347,  358  n.  4. 

and  syntheses,  I  355. 

and  synthesis,  I  346,  354. 


498  GENERAL  INDEX 

r 

synthesis,  I  262,  347,  584;  see  also  analysis;  apprehension;  categories; 

combination;  imagination;  recognition;  reproduction; 

synopsis ;  unity. 

and  the  concept,  I  271-4. 

and  concepts,  I  387. 

and  consciousness,  I  514. 

and  motion,  II  395. 

a  priori,  in  all  judgement,  I  516. 

concept  of  the,  I  376. 

conscious  or  unconscious,  I  572-5. 

figurative,  I  141,  535,  537,  II  351. 

formal,  II  338  n.  5. 

function  of,  I  388. 

functions  of,  I  432,  435,  438~43- 

imaginative,  see  concept. 

in  general,  I  258,  263,  284,  II  338  11.  5. 

intellectual,  I  533,  535,  537,  552  n.  i. 

judgement  is,  I  219-21,  509. 

mathematical,  II  146. 

mere,  I  283-4,  291. 

nature  of,  I  263-6. 

necessity  of,  I  579-81. 

pre-conscious  and  noumenal,  I  577,  II  280. 

productive  and  reproductive,  I  464. 

pure,  I  266,  276;  and  the  category,  I  259,  274-7;  and  the 

empirical  manifold,  I  466 ;  and  experience,  I  466. 

successive,  I  358,  II  112-14,  257. 

successiveness  of,  II  117-19,  128,  257. 

threefold,  I  353-6,  357-81. 

timeless  and  noumenal,  II  422. 

transcendental,  definition  of,  I  467. 

transcendental,  example  of,  I  576-7. 


transcendental,  is  productive,  I  536. 

unconscious  and  timeless,  II  393. 

universal  functions  of,  I  432,  441. 

various  kinds  of,  I  504,  II  56  n.  2. 


synthesis  intellectuality  I  535,  II  393. 
synthesis  speciosa,  I  535,  II  393. 


Teilbegnffe,  I  119  n.  2,  194  n.  3. 

Tedvorstellungen,  I  119  n.  2,  194  n.  3. 

telepathy,  II  350. 

temporality,  I  119,  125,  198  n.  i. 

terminology,  Kant's,  I  47. 

Tetens,  I  100  n.  2,  138,  365  n.  2. 

theory,  transcendental,  definition  of,  I  228. 

thing,  and  idea,  II  379. 


GENERAL  INDEX  4^9 

thing,  the  meaning  of,  II  297. 

the  third,  I  88,  91,  II  28,  86-9,  90,  91,  93,  176,  461. 

thing-m-itself,  II    417,    439,    457;  see   also    object,   transcendental; 
things-m-themselves. 

unknowabihty  of  the,  I  180-1,  583,  II  453-5,  457. 

things, -reciprocal  succession  of  *  determinations'  or  'states'  of,  II  306. 

reciprocal  succession  of  the  states  of,  II  308. 

things -m-themselves,  I  64,  70,  167  n.  3,  II  461-2;  see  also  space  and 
time ;  time. 

belief  in,  II  454. 

influence  of,  I  139. 

thinking,  and  knowing,  I  65,  405  n.  i,  II  343. 

and  object,  II  436. 

creative,  I  217  n.  5. 

definition  of,  II  435. 

discursive  and  analytic,  I  216-19. 

finite,  I  526. 

problematic,  II  436-7. 

synthetic,  I  217  n.  5. 

thought,  see  intuition. 

and  intuition,  II  455-6,  460. 

•  and  its  object,  II  342-5. 

by  itself,  empty,  I  455. 

content  of,  I  193. 

the  demand  of,  I  549-52. 

demands  of,  I  295-6,  553-4,  II  174. 

forms  of,  I  552-5;  see  also  categories. 

laws  of,  I  191,  192,  378. 

pure,  acts  of,  see  categories ;  concepts,  pure. 

self-consciousness  of,  II  402. 

unity  imposed  by,  I  285. 

thoughts,  empty,  I  98. 

time,  II  28-9,  291-2,  421-2;  see  also  apperception,  original;  image; 
imagination ;  Logic,  Transcendental ;  sense,  inner. 

abides  and  does  not  change,  II  190. 

absolute,  II  165  n.  2,  177,  302;  see  also  time  itself. 

absolute,  cannot  be  perceived,  II  255,  261,  292,  312  n.  4,  322. 

advance  of  experience  in,  II  290. 

and  degree,  II  291. 

and  inner  sense,  I  100,  II  413-15. 

and  outer  intuition,  I  121-2,  II  399. 

and  space,  see  space  and  time. 

and  things-m-themselves,  I  181-3. 

and  the  unity  of  apperception,  I  500,  II  161. 

as  a  substratum,  II  190. 

awareness  of,  II  390. 

awareness  in,  I  182. 

cannot  be  outwardly  intuited,  I  148. 


5oo  GENERAL   INDEX 

time,  concept  of,  II  398;  see  also  temporality. 

condition,  mediate,  of  outer  phenomena,  I  149,  II  383. 

continuity  of,  II  256,  288,  291. 

continuity  and  irreversibihty  of,  II  274. 

determinate  intuition  of,  II  393. 

determinate  position  in,  II  273. 

determination  of,  II  38-9,  290. 

direction  of,  II  256. 

empirical  idea  of,  II  187  n.  r. 

empirical  knowledge  of,  II  274. 

empirical  unity  of,  II  197. 

empty,  II  165  n.  2,  218. 

existence  in,  II  358. 

form  of,  I  529;  see  also  categories. 

importance  of,  I  357-9. 

in  constant  flux,  II  200. 

infinity  of,  I  123. 

in  general,  II  173. 

itself,  II  165. 

itself,  cannot  be  perceived,  II  165  n.  2,  170-1,  189-90,  227,  253, 

273-4,  302. 

mode  of,  I  395 

modes  of,  II  163-7,  274,  414;  and  time-relations,  II  166;  and 

transcendental  schemata,  II  163. 

nature  of,  argument  from,  II  253. 

necessary  connexion  in,  II  274. 

necessary  succession  of  the  parts  of,  II  253. 

parts  of,  successive,  II  188. 

permanence  of,  II  199-200. 

position  in,  II  252  n.  4,  258  n.  7;  objective,  II  251. 

psychological  development  in,  I  317-18. 

relation  in,  II  161-2. 

spatial  image  of,  II  394~5,  399,  4°7- 

totality  of,  II  62. 

unity  of,  II  253 ;  see  also  apperception. 

universality  of,  I  148-51. 


time-content,  II  62. 

time-determination,  II  176,  379  n.  i ;  see  also  permanent,  the. 

a  priori,  rules  of,  II  163,  176-7. 

empirical,  II  176. 

transcendental,  II  29-30. 

time-determinations,  II  62,  164. 

a  priori,  II  62. 

empirical,  II  163. 

• substratum  of,  II  189. 

time-order,  II  62. 

time-relations,  II  162,  165,  186;  see  also  time,  modes  of, 

empirical  knowledge  of,  II  292. 


GENERAL   INDEX  501 

time-relations,   objective,  II  187,  245. 
time-series,  II  62. 

empirical  knowledge  of  the,  II  254. 

times,  continuity  in  the  sequence  of,  II  254. 
Todd-Naylor,  Miss  Ursula,  I  20. 
Torricelli,  I  75. 

totality,  I  44,  47. 
totumy  see  composittim. 
transcendent,  I  230,  232,  232  n.  2. 

and  transcendental,  II  430. 

transcendental,  I  129  n.  4;  see  also  transcendent. 

the  word,  I  229  n.  3,  230;  see  also  theory. 

transcendenlalia,  I  230  n.  i . 

transcendentia,  I  230  n.  i. 
triangle,  I  272. 

empirical  concept  of,  I  141,  II  352. 

mathematical  and  empirical,  I  140-1,  II  34,  113. 

triangularity,  II  33. 

trichotomy,  I  306. 
truth,  II  92. 

and  correspondence,  I  189,  193,  549. 

empirical,  II  234. 

empirical,  condition  of,  II  260. 

empirical,  formal  conditions  of,  II  234-5. 

logical  and  material,  II  361,  361  n.  2. 

transcendental,  II  345,  348. 


Umfang,  I  195  n.  6,  283  n.  i. 

understanding,  I  73,  94,   190,  334,   II  337;  see  also  apperception; 
imagination;  intuition;  sense. 

and  appearances,  I  472-3;  and  categories,  I  471-2; 

and  imagination,  1 473-5 ;  and  inner  sense,  II  397; 
and  objects,  II  255 ;  and  reason,  I  366. 
ancj  sensibility,  the  union  of,  II  459-60. 

as  faculty  of  knowledge,  I  470 ;  as  faculty  of  thought, 

I  470 ;  as  law-giver,  I  496-7,  545-6 ;  as  power  of 
knowing,  I  352 ;  as  power  of  rules,  I  492-3 ;  as 
power  of  thinking,  I  352. 

descriptions  of,  I  492,  515. 

finite,  II  460. 

functions  of,  I  249. 

imagination,  and  inner  sense,  II  390-3. 

imagination   as   a  lower  form  of,   I  269  n.  3,  503, 

536-7. 

inner  sense  determined  by,  II  289,  390. 

intuitive,  1217,  2i7n.5,  527. 


502  GENERAL   INDEX 

understanding,  limits  sensibility,  II  459. 

necessary  synthetic  unity  imposed  by,  I  507. 

not  limited  by  sensibility,  II  458-9. 

pure,  and  the  unity  of  apperception,  I  470-1. 

pure  concept  of  the,  I  286-7,  351. 

pure  concepts  of  the,  I  279,  474. 

schematism  of  the,  I  170  n.  i,  II  73-5. 

synthesis  of,  II  391. 

use  of,  logical,  I  245  n.  i,  510  n.  i,  II  337;    use  of, 

transcendental  and  empirical,  II  459. 

Understanding,  Principles  of  the,  I  462,  II  81,  90,  94,  98-100,  428-9; 
see  also  science,  modern. 

proof  of  the  Principles  of  the,  II  82-3,  98,  103-6. 

Pure,  Principles  of  the,  II  23. 

undeutlichy  I  266  n.  4. 

Unding,  I  132  n.  5,  II  377  n.  i. 

Undinge,  I  132,  174. 

unity,  analytic,  I  256,  288-9,  293. 

analytic  and  synthetic,  I  287-8,  294,  437,  513  n.  4. 

and  synthesis,  I  283-6. 

apperception  the  source  of  all,  I  459. 

necessary  synthetic,  I  258,  372,  385,  394,  415,  429-30,  482, 

II  229;  see  also  appearances;  consciousness;  imagination, 
transcendental  synthesis  of;  manifold. 

necessary  synthetic,  and  apperception,  I  396-  7. 

necessary  synthetic,  imposed,  I  372,  438,  507. 

objective,  I  460. 

objective,  the  purest,  I  410. 

synthetic,  I  289-93. 

synthetic,  a  priori  rules  of,  I  420. 

synthetic,  nature  of,  I  509. 

universal,  and  general,  I  77. 
universality,  see  necessity, 
'unthing*,  II  377. 

'unthmgs',  I  132;  see  also  Undinge. 
unum,  verum,  bonum,  I  230  n.  i,  308-9. 
urspninglich,  I  118  n.  2,  512  n.  i. 
Urteil,  and  Urteilskraft,  II  21  n.  3. 
Urwesen,  I  217  n.  3. 

use,  empirical,  of  categories,  I  231 ;  of  understanding,  judgement,  and 
reason,  II  337. 

empirical  and  transcendental,  I  232,  II  181;  see  also  categories; 

concepts;  knowledge;  space;  understanding. 

empirical  and  transcendental,  of  powers,  I  346. 

logical,  of  understanding,  judgement,  and  reason,  II  337. 

transcendent  and  immanent,  I  232. 

transcendent  and  transcendental,  II  430. 

transcendental,  of  powers  of  the  mind,  I  231  n.  4. 


GENERAL  INDEX  503 

f 

Vaihinger,  I  15,  38-40,  40  n.  3,  41  n.  i,  53  n.  2  and  n.  3,  70  n.  2, 
93  n.  5,  116  n.  5,  122  n.  2,  123  n.  9,  126  n.  3,  140  n.  4, 
153  n.  3,  182  n.  i,  194  n.  5,  326  n.  i,  328,  330  n.  i, 
345  n.  2,  346  n.  6,  347  n.  5,  354,  356,  364  n.  5,  376  n.  7, 
380,  380  n.  4,  382,  410  n.  5,  413  n.  i  and  n.  4,  421,  424 
n.  3,  486  n.  i,  489  n.  7,  498  n.  i  and  n.  2,  512  n.  3,  516 
n.  2,  528  n.  2,  573  n.  2,  574,  II  26  n.  i,  91  n.  3,  115 
n.4,  290  n.  i,  393,  39811.4. 

validity,  objective,  I  225,  228,  240. 

objective,  and  empirical  intuition,  II  431. 

velocity,  II  136  n.  3,  285  n.  i. 

Veranderungy  and  Wechsel,  II  217  n.  7. 

Verbindungy  II  159  n.  5,  173  n.  2. 

Verknupfungy  II  159  n.  5,  160,  173  n.  2,  335  n.  6. 

Vermdgen,  I  94  n.  4,  345  n.  4. 

verstehen,  or  intelhgete,  I  334  n.  6. 

Verwandtschafty  I  366  n.  6. 

verworren,  I  266  n.  4. 

void,  the,  II  365 ;  see  also  atoms. 

Vorstellungy  I  94  n.  5,  108  n.  i. 

Vorstellungsfdhigkeity  I  95  n.  4. 


wahrnehmen,  or  percipeie,  I  334  n.  3. 

Ward,  I  578  n.  3. 

Watson,  II  217  n.  7. 

Wechsely  Il2i6n.  4,  2i7n.5;  see  also  Verandetung. 

Wechselwirkung,  I  297  n.  4,  II  55  n.  3,  294  n.  2. 

weight,  II  135  n.  3,  207. 

Weitlaufigkeity  I  44  n.  7. 

Whitehead,  I  49. 

Wille,  II  50  n.  3,  290  n.  i. 

Wirklichkeity  II  58  n.  2. 

Wolff,  Casper,  I  578. 

words,  concrete  and  abstract,  I  193. 

world,  phenomenal,  as  one  experience,  II  366  n.  3. 

the  sensible  and  the  intelligible,  II  459. 

worlds,  possible,  II  353. 

possible,  the  best  of  all,  II  366. 

world-whole,  unity  of  the,  II  331. 


Zufally  II  364  n.  i. 
ziifalligy  I  519  n.  5. 
zusammenfasseriy  I  263  n,  4. 
Zusammenfassung,  or  comprehensio,  I  359  n.  7. 
Zustand,  II  217  n.  6,  251  n.  i. 


INDEX    OF    ANNOTATED    PASSAGES 


The  left-hand  references  in  each  column  (e.g.  A  4  —  B8)  indicate  the  page  where 
the  passage  annotated  occurs  in  the  first  and  second  editions  of  the  Kntik. 
The  right-hand  references  (eg  I  81)  indicate  the  volume  and  page  where  the 
annotation  is  to  be  found  in  the  present  commentary. 


A  XVII 

I    44 

B 

34 

102 

A 

34  *- 

B 

5i 

I  149 

BXVI 

I    75 

A 

20 

-=  B 

34 

94 

A 

36- 

B 

53 

I  181 

B  XVIII 

I    65 

95 

A 

37  - 

B 

53 

I  181 

72 

96 

A 

37  - 

B 

54 

I    63 

BXIX 

65 

97 

I  181 

72 

A 

20 

=  B 

35 

104 

A 

38- 

B 

54 

Ii8i 

BXXIIn 

75 

A 

21 

-  B 

35 

102 

A 

38- 

B 

55 

Ii8i 

B  XXVII 

70 

104 

A 

39"= 

B 

56 

Ii32 

B  XXXVIII 

54 

A 

22 

-  B 

36 

52 

I  174 

B  XXXIX  n   ] 

[    99 

A 

23 

=  B 

37 

IOO 

A 

40  =. 

B 

56 

I  133 

I] 

[378 

107 

I  174 

I] 

^383 

A 

23 

13 

38 

no 

A 

40  -. 

B 

57 

I  132 

I] 

[407 

in 

I  133 

BXLn         11 

378 

125 

I  174 

11 

[382 

153 

Ii76 

I] 

[3*5 

A 

24 

127 

A 

4i    - 

B 

58 

I  148 

I] 

[408 

B 

38 

108 

A 

43  - 

B 

60 

I  133 

I] 

[409 

A 

24 

T> 

39 

U5 

I  171 

11 

410 

A 

25 

123 

A 

43  ~ 

B 

61 

I  171 

B  XLI  n       11 

[382 

B 

39 

123 

A 

45  - 

B 

62 

I    60 

I] 

384 

A 

25 

-  B 

39 

"5 

A 

45  =" 

B 

63 

I    60 

11 

[386 

116 

A 

46 

B 

63 

I    60 

I] 

410 

B 

40 

108 

A 

48- 

B 

66 

I  167 

I] 

[  412 

B 

4i 

127 

A 

49  - 

B 

66 

I  167 

B  XLIV         ] 

[    48 

A 

26 

-  B 

42 

102 

II  412 

49 

A 

27 

-  B 

43 

104 

B 

67 

II4I2 

A      i 

77 

A 

28 

60 

II4I3 

B      i 

77 

A 

29 

60 

11414 

B       2 

76 

B 

44 

60 

B 

68 

I  217 

B     3 

76 

A 

30 

-  B 

46 

125 

II  399 

77 

153 

II  412 

B     4ff 

77 

A 

31 

-  B 

47 

IO9 

11414 

80 

A 

32 

B 

47 

109 

H4i5 

A     4  -  B     8 

81 

H5 

B 

69 

II4I2 

A      5  -  B     9 

81 

123 

II  416 

A     6  -  B    10 

81 

A 

32 

-  B 

48 

118 

B 

70 

I  174 

83 

119 

II4I2 

A     8 

88 

120 

B 

70  n 

II4I7 

B     12 

88 

123 

B 

7i 

I  174 

B    i4ff 

81 

B 

48 

119 

I  178 

B    22 

82 

127 

II  412 

A    19  =  B    33 

73 

B 

49 

127 

B 

72 

In8 

A    19  =  B    34 

95 

A 

32 

=  B 

49 

132 

1178 

A     20 

102 

A 

34 

-  B 

50 

ISO 

II4i2 

5o6 


INDEX  OF  PASSAGES 


B  73 

II4I2 

A  79 

=  6105 

1286 

A  99 

A  5o  = 

B  74 

I  73 

290 

A  51  -= 

B  75 

I  96 

A  80 

-  Bio6 

297 

A  52  - 

B  76 

1187 

A  81 

=  B  107 

307 

A  54  = 

B  78 

I  188 

A  82 

-  B  108 

3°7 

A  100 

A  55  - 

B  79 

I  222 

B  110 

305 

A  101 

A  55  - 

B  80 

I  222 

B  in 

1305 

A  56  - 

B  80 

I  223 

II340 

A  102 

1226 

A  84 

-  B  116 

I  3H 

A  103 

A  56  - 

B  81 

1226 

A  84 

-  B  117 

I  3H 

I  23I 

I  3*5 

A  104 

A  57  - 

B  81 

I  224 

A  85 

-  B  117 

I  3J5 

I  225 

I  316 

A  105 

A  60  -- 

B  84 

I  189 

A  85 

--  B  118 

I  200 

A  61  = 

B  85 

I  190 

1317 

A  61  - 

B  86 

I  190 

A  86 

-  Bii8 

I  200 

A  106 

A  62  = 

B  86 

I  190 

I  3l6 

A  62  = 

B  87 

I  233 

A  86 

--=  B  119 

I  200 

A  63  --- 

B  87 

I  235 

1317 

A  107 

A  63 

B  88 

I  235 

A  87 

-  B  119 

316 

A  64  - 

B  89 

1234 

317 

1237 

319 

A  65  ~ 

B  90 

I238 

A  87 

--  B  120 

319 

A  66  - 

B  90 

I238 

A  88 

—  B  120 

320 

A  108 

A  68  - 

B  93 

I2l6 

A  89 

B  122 

322 

I  217 

324 

1247 

A  90 

--  B  122 

325 

A  109 

1248 

A  90 

-  B  123 

324 

A  no 

1252 

325 

A  69  - 

B  93 

1253 

327 

A  69  - 

B  94 

I  202 

A  91 

B  123 

325 

A  in 

I  247 

328 

I248 

A  91 

B  124 

328 

A  70  — 

B  95 

I  204 

A  92 

--  B  124 

337 

I2II 

A  92 

B  125 

337 

A  71  = 

B  96 

I  205 

A  93 

B  125 

339 

A  112 

A  71  =• 

B  97 

I  205 

341 

A  72^- 

B  97 

I  205 

A  93 

B  126 

339 

A  74- 

B  100 

I  205 

341 

A  76 

B  102 

I  200 

343 

A  113 

1267 

A  94 

B  126 

344 

A  77  - 

B  102 

1262 

A  94 

345 

A  77- 

Bio3 

1263 

A  95 

345 

A  78  -=- 

B  103 

1263 

350 

A  78  - 

B  104 

1267 

A  96 

197 

I  274 

350 

A  1  14 

1276 

35i 

A  79  - 

B  104 

I256 

A  97 

350 

1277 

352 

I  281 

1354 

A  115 

A  79  - 

B  105 

I  202 

A  98 

I  53 

I256 

1348 

Aii6 

I28l 

II397 

I  357 
1358 
I  359 
II  397 
1368 
1369 
I37i 
1363 
I  375 
1376 
1378 
1383 
I  386 
I  388 
I  393 
1391 
I  393 
1396 
1398 
1399 
1403 
I  406 
1408 
I  412 
1417 

1439 
1441 

1305 
1426 
1427 
1305 
1426 

1430 
1432 
1441 

1433 
1441 

I  442 
1444 
1308 
1444 
1446 
1450 
I452 

1495 
I  308 

1447 
1449 

1450 
1308 
1448 
1308 
I  448 


INDEX  OF  PASSAGES 


507 


A  116 

1460 

Bi37 

I5i7 

8167 

1578 

1458 

Bi38 

I  113 

A  131  •= 

B  170 

I  237 

A  117 

1460 

I  518 

A  132  -= 

B  171 

II    24 

A  11711 

I  460 

6139 

I  518 

Ai33n=^ 

B  173  n 

I  190 

An8 

I464 

I  5*9 

A  135  *~ 

Bi74 

II     21 

I467 

B  140 

I  5i9 

A  136  -- 

Bi75 

II     22 

I  468 

8141 

1522 

II    23 

I  535 

Bl42 

I  520 

II    73 

A  119 

I470 

II    93 

A  137  - 

8176 

II    26 

A  J2O 

1476 

Bi43 

1524 

A  138  - 

Bi77 

II    28 

1478 

6144 

1527 

II    29 

A  121 

I  481 

Bi45 

1528 

A  139  =• 

6178 

II    31 

A  122 

1481 

II448 

A  140  =- 

6179 

II    32 

1483 

B  146 

1530 

II    73 

A  123 

1483 

Bi47 

1530 

A  141  — 

Bi8o 

II    35 

I484 

Bi48 

I  178 

II    73 

I  486 

I  531 

A  141  - 

B  181 

II    36 

A  124 

I  486 

B  150 

1532 

II    73 

1487 

1534 

A  142  -- 

Bi8i 

II    37 

1488 

B  151 

1535 

II    38 

A  125 

I489 

B  152 

1536 

A  142   - 

Bi82 

II    44 

1490 

1537 

II    46 

A  126 

1492 

II387 

A  143  =- 

B  182 

II    44 

1495 

Bi53 

H388 

II    46 

I  496 

II39o 

II    49 

A  127 

I  140 

Bi54 

II  393 

II  140 

1492 

Bi55 

A  143  -- 

Bi83 

II    49 

I  496 

Bi56 

II  395 

II    52 

A  128 

I  140 

H399 

II  140 

1497 

A  144  - 

Bi83 

II    55 

A  129 

1497 

B  15611 

II400 

A  144    - 

B  184 

II    55 

A  130 

1497 

Bi57 

II40I 

II    56 

Bi29 

1503 

B  i57n 

II404 

H    59 

Bi3o 

I  503 

B  15811 

II  404 

II342 

I  504 

Bi59 

I  240 

A  145  - 

B  184 

H    56 

505 

1538 

II    57 

6131 

507 

B  160 

1538 

H    59 

510 

1539 

II    60 

6131  n 

220 

1540 

II    62 

Bl32 

51° 

B  i6on 

I    98 

II    63 

511 

I  103 

II342 

512 

I  541 

A  145  = 

6185 

II    62 

Bi33 

511 

11414 

II    68 

513 

Bi6i 

I54i 

II    74 

B  J33« 

194 

1542 

A  146  - 

Bi85 

II    62 

2OI 

Bi6m 

I54i 

II    68 

Bi34 

1515 

II4i4 

A  146  - 

Bi86 

II    45 

B  13411 

I  2OI 

B  162 

1543 

II    62 

I  SIS 

1544 

II    69 

B  135 

I  SIS 

Bi63 

I  545 

A  147  = 

Bi86 

II    23 

I  518 

Bi64 

1545 

II    62 

Bi36 

1516 

Bi65 

I  139 

II    63 

B  137 

I  113 

1545 

II    71 

5o8 


INDEX   OF   PASSAGES 


A  148  -  B  188  II  83 

A  166  =  6206  II  132 

A  181  =  B  223  II  176 

A  149  =  B  188  II  82 

A  166  —  B  207  II  132 

II  181 

II  83 

B  207  II  134 

Ai8i  =  8224  II  181 

A  149  -  B  189  II  82 

II  141 

II  182 

A  150  =  B  189  I  189 

A  166  =  B  208  II  134 

8224  11190 

II  83 

A  167  •=  B  208  II  134 

II  202 

A  150  =  B  190  I  189 

A  167  =  B  209  II  134 

A  182  =  8225  IIi86 

A  151  =  B  190  1214 
II  83 

Ai68  =  B2io  II  135 
Hi36 

II  202 

A  182  -  B  226  II  166 

II  84 

II  140 

II  202 

A  151  =  B  191   I  214 

A  169  =  8210  II  150 

A  183  -  B  226  II  165 

II  84 

A  169  =  B2ii  II  14° 

II  186 

A  153  ^  8192  II  83 

IIiS2 

II  187 

A  154  ^  B  193  II  84 
A  155  -  B  194  II  86 

A  170  -  B2ii  II  152 
A  170  —  B  212  II  152 

II  202 

A  183  -  B  227  II  166 

II  87 

II  155 

A  184  --  B  227   I  86 

A  156  -  B  195  II  89 
II  90 

A  171  =  B2I2  II  H9 

II  153 

II  211 

A  185  =-  B  228  II  208 

A  156  -  B  196  II  90 

II  155 

II  209 

A  157   B  196  II  91 

11284 

11  210 

II  92 

A  171  -  6213  II  145 

A  186  =-  B  229  II  197 

A  158  -  B  197  II  94 

II  153 

II  203 

II  95 

11284 

A  186  --  B  230  II  203 

A  159  -  B  198  II  97 

A  172  -  B2i3  11284 

A  187  -•=  B23Q  11203 

A  160  -  B  199  II  92 

A  172  --  6214  II  13? 

II  217 

II  99 

A  173  -  8215  II  135 

A  188  -  B  231  II  197 

II  102 

A  175  -  8217  II  135 

II  198 

A  161  =-  8200  II  98 

IIi46 

II  218 

A  162  —  B  201  II  99 

A  176  -  B  217  II  146 

A  188  --  B  232  II  197 

II  100 

A  176  -  B2i8  II  135 

II  198 

A  162  —  B  202  II  99 

II  148 

A  189        II  221 

II  120 

A  176        II  1  60 

A  189  -  B  232  II  198 

A  162        II  in 

A  177        II  1  60 

6232  II  221 

B20in  II  zoo 

8218  II  159 

11225 

II  xsg 

IIi68 

6233  II  225 

B  202  II  in 

8219  IIi68 

II226 

II  114 

Hi73 

B  234  II  225 

II  120 

II  175 

II228 

6203  II  121 

II  229 

A  189  -  B  234  11  230 

11126 

A  177  —  B  219  II  161 

11231 

A  162  =  8203  11  112 

IIi63 

A  190  -  B235  H230 

II  122 

IIi66 

II232 

A  163  -  Bao3  II  113 

A  177  ---  B  220  II  161 

II  233 

II  120 

11167 

A  191  =  B  236  II  230 

A  163  -=  B  204  II  124 

A  178  -  6220  IIi78 

11231 

II  125 

A  178  «  8221  II  147 

11233 

II  127 

IIi78 

11234 

II  129 

IIiSo 

II  235 

A  164  -  B  204  II  130 

A  179  —  B22I   II  102 

Il236 

A  164  =--  B  205  II  129 

IIl46 

II24I 

IIi30 

III78 

11242 

A  165  =  8206  II  132 

Ai8o  -  8223  II  181 

II  243 

A  166        II  134 

Ai8i  =  8223  II  82 

A  192  =  8237  11230 

INDEX  OF  PASSAGES                              509 

A  192  =  8237    11240 

A  208  =  B  253    II  285 

A  220  =  B  268     II  351 

11241 

II  290 

A  221   =  8269     II  348 

11242 

A  208  -  B  254    II  285 

A  222   =  B  269     II  346 

11243 

A  209  --  B  254    II  288 

II348 

A  193  =•-  8238    11230 

A  210  -  8255    11289 

H349 

II  240 

A  210  =  8256    11276 

A  223  =  B  270    II  347 

11241 

11292 

II348 

11242 

A  211                           II294 

II350 

II  243 

B  256    II  294 

A  223  =  B  271    II  348 

II245 

Il298 

II  351 

A  194  ^  8239    11230 

A  211  =-  8256    11276 

A  224  —  B  271      I  141 

Il24o 

II292 

A  225  ^-'  B  272    II  357 

11241 

8257    II298 

II358 

11242 

II  300 

II  359 

Il243 

11  302 

A  225  -  8273     II358 

II  245 

II303 

A  226  --  B  273    II  357 

11246 

II  306 

II358 

II253 

A  2ii  =-  8258    II  297 

8274    II376 

A  194  =-  8240    11246 

II  310 

B  275    II  376 

A  195  —  B  240    II  246 

8258    11298 

B  276      I  147 

Il247 

11309 

II376 

11248 

A  212    =•  8258     II  310 

II  381 

A  196  --  8241    11248 

A  212  =-  8259    II  310 

B  2760    II  382 

Il249 

A  213  -=  8260    II  151 

B  277    II  196 

A  197  -^  B  242    II  249 

II  311 

II376 

A  198  --  B  243    II  250 

II  316 

II379 

A  198  --  8244    11252 

A  214  --  8260    II  311 

B  277  n  II  382 

A  199  --  B  244    II  252 

II  316 

B  278    II  196 

II  253 

A  214       8261    II  311 

II376 

II  273 

II  316 

II379 

A  199  --=-  6245    11253 

II3i9 

II  381 

II273 

H323 

II385 

A  200  --  B  245    II  253 

II328 

8279    II385 

II254 

A  215  --  8261    II  316 

A  226  —  B  279    II  362 

II255 

Il3i9 

A  228  --  B  280    II  363 

A  200  -  B  246    II  253 

II323 

A  229  -  B  282    II  364 

II255 

A  215  ---=  8262    II  166 

A  230  =  B  282    II  366 

A  201  •=  B  246    II  253 

II  177 

A  231  -=  B  284    II  367 

II255 

II  316 

A  232  =  B  284    II  368 

II  257 

II3i9 

A  232  -  B  285    II  368 

A  202  -  B  247    II  283 

A  216  ----  8263    II  177 

A  234  -  B  286    II  337 

A  202  -  B  248    II  283 

A  217  =  6264    II  175 

H359 

A  203  -  B  249    II  268 

II  176 

A  234  =  B  287    II  369 

A  204  -=  8249    11215 
II282 

A  218  -8265    II335 
A2i8n=  826511  II  323 

8288    II353 
8289    II353 

A  205  =  8250    II  215 
A  205  —  B  251    II  216 

II33i 
A  218  -  8266    11335 

B  291    II  200 
A  235  =  8294    "427 

A  206  -=  8251    II  217 
A  206  -  B  252    II  283 

A  219  -8267    11335 
A  220  =  B  267    II    88 

A  236  -^  8295    II427 
A  237  =  B  296    II  428 

11284 

II    89 

A  238  --  B  297    II  429 

A  207  -  B  252    II  283 
11284 

II34I 
A  220  =  B  268    II  344 

A  238  -  B  298    II  429 
A  239  =  B  298    II  429 

A  207  -  B  253    II  284 

II  345 

II  43  1 

INDEX  OF 


A  239  - 

6299 

Il43i 

6306 

II  451   A  257  = 

B  313 

II459 

A  240  - 

6299 

I  113 

H452 

A  258  - 

B  313 

II  455 

I  159 

6307 

II452 

A  258  - 

B  314 

II  455 

H432 

IU53 

11460 

A  240  - 

B3oo 

II  433 

B3o8 

II453 

A  292  -= 

B348 

I  174 

A  241 

II433 

II454 

B  412 

I1384 

A  241  n 

I  3°3 

B  309 

II453 

I 

}  423  n 

II  402 

6300 

I  303 

II454 

A  42611-^ 

B  45411 

II  112 

A  242  n 

I  303 

A  253 

"  B  309 

II455 

II  128 

A  242 
A  245 
A  246  - 

6303 

II433 
II  434 
II  435 

A  254 
A  254 

-  6309 

-  B  310 

II  455 
II  455 

II  4*6 

A  570  -- 

648011 
B598 

II  139 
I  80 
II  36 

A  247  -- 
A  248  - 
A  248 
A  249 
A  250 

6304 
6305 

II  435 
II427 
II440 

II  442 

UAA1 

A  255 
A  255 

-  B3io 

AA  TO^ 
II455 

II  457 
II  455 
II  457 
II458 

A  581  -- 
A  713  -- 
A  714  - 
A  717  - 
A  720  — 

6609 
B74i 

B745 

I  140 

I  160 

II  101 

II  127 
II  127 

A  2  C  T 

443 

A  256 

-  B  311 

11455 

A  729  ^ 

B7S7 

I  197 

**  *•>  j  • 

II  444 

A  256 

6312 

II  455 

A  734  - 

6762 

II  101 

II  445 

II  459 

A  735  - 

B  763 

II  101 

A  252 

I  70 

A  257 

-  6312 

II  455 

A  736 

B7<H 

II  103 

A  253 

II447 

II459 

II  104 

6305 

II450 

A  257 

B3'3 

II  455 

A  737  ~- 

6765 

II  104 

GEORGE  ALLEN  &   UNWIN   LTD 

LONDON      40    MUSEUM    STREET,    W.C.I 

LEIPZIG     (F.    VOLCKMAR)    HOSPITALSTR     10 

CAPE     TOWN       73     ST.     GEORGE'S     STREET 

TORONTO.     91    WELLINGTON    STREET,    WEST 

BOMBAY       15     GRAHAM     ROAD,     BALLARD     ESTATE 

WELLING-I ON,    N.Z.      8  KINGS    CRESCENT,    LOWER    HUTT 

SYDNEY,    N.S  W. :    AUSTRALIA    HOUSE,    WYNYARD    SQUARE 


